ORIGINAL NARRATIVES
OF EARLY AMERICAN HISTORY

REPRODUCED UNDER THE AUSPICES OF THE
AMERICAN HISTORICAL ASSOCIATION

General Editor, J. FRANKLIN JAMESON, Ph.D., LL.D.

DIRBCTOR OF THB DBPARTMBNT OF HISTORICAL RBSBARCH IN THB
CARNBGIB INSTITUTION OF WASHINGTON

NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES

1648 — 1706

ORIGINAL NARRATIVES
OF EARLY AMERICAN HISTORY

NARRATIVES OF THE
WITCHCRAFT CASES

1648—1706

BDITKD BY

GEORGE LINCOLN BURR, LL.D., Litt.D,

norssioK or msdhval histokv in couiku. umivbhsitt

HTlTff THREE FACSIMILES

CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS
NEW YORK . - . - . 1914

A1ID0VER-HAS?A1(0

Tbbxxxucal lukabt

FEB 2 81915

ANDOVER
THEQLOQICAL SBMIRART

(ll>5,156

COPYRIGHTy 19x4, BY
CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS

PUBUSHSD BiAY, Z914

YST3

m

CONTENTS

NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES

EOITKD BT GaOBOK L. BUBB

From "An Essay for the Recobdino of Illustrious PBoviDKNCBg"

(BETTEB known as "ReMABXABLB PitOVIDKNCB8")» BT InCRKASB

Mathee, 1684 1

iNTBODUCnON 3

TheFrdace 8

Chapter V: P^tematural Happenings in New EngUuid ... 17

Case of Ann Cole, of Hartfcnd, 1662 18

Case of Elizabeth Knap, of Groton, 1671 21

Case of the Morses, at Newbuiy, 167^1681 23

The Tedworth Case, in En^^and, 1661-1663 32

Case of Nicholas Desborough, of Hartford, 1683 33

Case of George Walton, at P<»tsinouth, 1682 34

Case of the Hortados, at Salmon Falls, 1682-1683 . • • • 37

The New Yobk Cases of Hall and Habbison, 1665, 1670 . . 39

Intbodxtction 41

due of Ralph and Msry Hall, of Setauket, 1665 .... 44

due of Katharine Harrison, 1670 48

''Ijthobolia, ob the Stone-thbowino Devil," bt Richabd ChambebLiUN, 1698 53

Intboduction 55

Dedicatory Letter and Verses 58

Why the Author relates this Stone throwing and why he believes it

Witchcraft 60

Tlie Quaker George Walton and his Neighbors at Great Island (Portsmouth) 61

The Beginning of the Stone throwing (June, 1682) .... 62

The Author himself a Victim 64

His Serenade and its Sequel; the Black Cat 66

The Deviltries at Great Bay 67

Notable l/Titnesses 60

The Author again an Object of Attack 70

Injuries to Others, in House and Fidd 72

The Lull in August; the Final Stone throwing in September 76

The Author's (Dondusions . • 76

V

vi CONTENTS

Thb Pknnbtlvania Casbb of Mattson, Bbxdbickboih, and Guabd, 1684,

1701 79

iNTBODUCnON 81

Case of Margaret Mattson and Gertrude Hendrictaon, 1684 85

Case of Robert Guard and his Wife, 1701 88

^BiElfORABLB PlBOVIDKNCESy BEIATINO TO WnCBCBAFTB AND POSBIS8ION8/' BT Cotton Mather, 1689 89

Intboduction 91

Dedicatory Epistle to the Hon. Wait 1/^throp 93

The Boston Ministers "to the Reader" 95

The Introduction 97

Case of the Goodwin Children, at Boston, 1688-1689 • ... 99

The Goodwin Family 99

The TVouble with the Laundress and her Mother . 100

The Strange Makdy of the Children 101

The Appeal to the Ministers and to the Magistrates; Arrest and Tnal

of Goody Glover 103

Her Condemnation and Execution 105

The Continued Fits of the Children 107

Efforts of the Ministers to help them 109

The Author takes the Eldest Girl to his Home; her Bdiavior . 110

His E3q)eriments with her 112

Her Imaginary Journeys 114

Strange Power over her of the Author's Studly 115

The Ministers' Day of PhQrer and its Effect 118

The Author tests the Linguistic Powers of the Demons . 119

And the Power of Scripture and Ph^rer to quell them . 120

Their Gradual Departure 121

What the Author has learned from it all 122

Postscript: the Devils return, but are again diqielled by Pkayer . 124

Goodwin's Account (^ his Children's Bewitchment . . • • 126

Case of Deacon PhiUp Smith, of Hadley, 1684 131

Case of Mary Johnson, of Hartfcnd, 1648 135

Case of the Boy at Tocutt (Branfcnd) 136

Other Bewitchments 141

''A Bbibf and True Narrativb of WrrcHCRAir at Salxm Villaos," bt

DxoDAT Lawbon, 1692 145

iNTBODUCnON 147

"The Bookseller to the Reader" 152

The Author's Visit to Salem Village 152

The Antics of "the Afflicted" 153

Examination of Goodwife'Corey 154

Goodwife Putnam's Afflictions 157

Examination of Goodwife Nurse 158

Tales told by Elisabeth Parris, Dorcas Good, Abigail WUliams, Mmy

Lewis 160

CONTENTS vii

Goodwife Cicyae aUms the Meeting-lio||Be Door 161

Eictraordinaiy Tliiiigs about the Afflicted ^ 161

About the Accused 162

Letter of Thomas Brattle, F.ItS., 1692 165

iNTRODUCnON 167

His Reasons for writing frankly 169

The Procedure at Salem; the "Afflicted" and thar Evidence . . 170

The "Confessors" 173

Indictment and Trial 174

"Spectre Evidence" 176

The Executions 177

Tilings to wonder at 177

The Troubles at Andover 180

Zeal of the Judges 182

The Doubters and their Reasons 184

Extent of the Convictions; Hope from the impending General Court • 185

Efforts of certain Ministers to chedc the Matt» 186

Further Reasons for Hesitation 187

Why the Confessions cannot be trusted 189

Letters of (jovesnor Pibips to the Home (jOvermicemt, 1692, 1693 . 191

Imtroduction .193

Letter of October 12, 1692: the Witch Panic as he found it, and what

he did about it 196

Letter of February 21, 1693: Beo^itulation of his Eariier Report; how

the Panic was brought to an End 198

From "The Wonders of the Invibiblb Wchuld/' bt Cotton Mather, ,

1698 203

iMTRODUCnON 205

The Author's Defence 210

His Rdation to the Salem IVials 213

Tlie IVial of George Burrou^ • 215

The Trial of Bridget Bishop 223

The Trial of Susanna Martin 229

The TKal of Elisabeth How 237

The Trial of Martha Carrier 241

"Curiosities": I. The Devil's Imitation of Divine Things ... 245

n. The Witches' making themselves and their Toob invisible • . 246

m. The Bewitched ddiveied by the Execution of the Witdies • . 248

IV. Apparitions reveal (Md Murders by the Witdm .... 249

Certificate of the Judges to the Truth of this Account ... 250

''A Brand plucx'd out of the Burnxno/' by Cotton Mather. 1693 . 253

Introduction 255

The Story of Mercy Short 259

Her Bewitchment 260

Hofw the Devil and his Spectres appeared to her 261

CONTENTS

FAOB

How thQr tormeoted her 263

Her Diaoounes to them • . 267

How her Tortures were turned into FVolics 271

The Shapes worn l^ the Spectres • . 274

Her Benuttkdble Answers and Strange KnoiHedge ol ScfipUire . . 275

The Methods used for her Ddiveranoe . 276

Her Deliverance (m New Year's Eve 277

The Renewal of her Troubles after Seven Weeks .... 278

The Strange Books brought l^ the ^lectres for her signing . 280

Tlie Bdoks osed at thar IT^^tdi-ineetuigs 282

The Helpful Spirit, and how he aided her against the Others . 283

The Pftiyer^neetings and her Final Driivenmce 285

If "Mors Wondkbs of the Invibiblb Wobid/' bt Robebt Calst 289

Imtboi^uction 291

The Epistle to the Reader: the Author's Reasons lor his Book . . 296

HbMaterials 306

Cotton Blather's Letter of Endosme 307

His AKomnt Bbaiid pluckt out of the Bubnino (the Story ol MargaietRuk) 308

Introductofy Anecdote ol the Devil's Appearance to an Indian • • 308

Who Margaret Rule was; the Beginning ol her Bewitchment . 310

How she was tortured by ^Metres 311

AndbytheDevfl 312

Her Remaikable Fastings; how she was further tormented • 313

Her Strange Revelations as to the ^lectres ....•• 314

The White Spirit and hb Comfortings 316

Her Ptetor's Efforts for her 317

Her Tonnentors' Attempt with Popqiets 318

The Author's Re[^ to his Revilers 320

The Good that has come of the Affair 322

Bart H: Cakfs Correspondence with Mather 324

His Letter ol Jan. 11, 1694, enclosing his Journal of hb Visit to Margaret Rule on Sept 13 324

And on Sept 19 327

And rehearsing hb eariier Letters of Sept 29 and Nov. 24 . . 329

Mather's Reply (J«n< 15) 333

Endosed Certificates of Witnesses to Margaret Rule's Levitation . 337

CaleTs Rejoinder (Jan. 18) 338

Bart V: The Salem 1/^tchcraft 341

The Rev. Mr. Parris and the Divisions at Salem \^]lage . 341
The Strange Behavior ol Divers Young Persons and its Ascription to

Witdicraft 342

Mr. Lawson's ^^sit and hb Account; the Examinations of the Accused 343

Mr. Lawson's Sermon; the Solemn Fast at Salem .... 345
The "White Man"; Goodwife Ck^yse and the Slammed Door; the

Public Examination of April 11 346

The Lord's Phiyer as an Ordeal; Specimen ol a MHUfmut . . 347

CX)NTENTS is

Aimal ol Goveniar Pbips; the Politick Events leftdiiig to it . . ^4S

Mn. Caiy's Commitiiwiit and Escape 349

Captain John Alden's Nsmtiye 353

C^iening of the Special Court at Salem (June 2) 355

Bridget Bishop's Fate; Advice of the Boston Bfinisters . 356

Tlie Trials of June aO; Fate of Sarah Good; ol Rebecca Nurse . . 357
Tlie August TViab and Executions; Geofge Bunrougfas, John WiDaidy

thePhM:ters 360

IVocter's Letter to the Ministers 362

Old Jacobs and hb Grand-dau^ter; her Conl^asioQ and Retraction . 364

Tlie September Triab 366

Hie Cofeys; Wardwell; Mary Esty and her Letter . .367

Mrs. Hale accused; Mr. Hale's Change of View • . • . 360

Seisure of the Property of Fugitives 370

Flight of George Jacobs and Fate of his Family 371

Hie Andover Witchcraft 371

Hie Gloucester Witdicraft . 373

End of the Special Court; Summary of its Woric .373

How the Accused were brought to confess; Phytestation of the AndoverWcmien 374

Criticism of Cotton Mather's Account of the TViab . . • • 378

Hie Laws in Force against Witchcraft 381

Hw new Superior Court and how it dealt with the Witdi Cases

(Jan.-April, 1693) 382

Governor Phips's General Pardon 384

Hie Benham Case in Connecticut (1607); the Massachusetts Plrookmation of a General Fast (Dec., 1696) 385

Judge Sewall's Public Penitence 386

Hie Penitence of the Jurors 387

Criticism of Cotton Mather's 1^0 qf PAtpt (1697) .... 388

And of its Author's Teaching as to Witchcraft 389

Cakfs o?n[i (Convictions as to the MattCT 391

FbOM "A MODIST InQUIRT into the NaTUBB of WlTCHCR4fT/' BT JORN

HAUB,17(tt 395

Introduction 397

Ak Efutlb to the Reader, by John Higginson .... 399

Mr. Hale's "PMace to the Christian Eeader" 402

Hie Origin and Nature of Devils 406

Summaiy of New England Witdi Cases, 1648-1692 .... 408

Margaret Jones; Mrs. Lake 408

Mrs. Kendal 409

Mrs. Hibbins; Mary Johnson 410

Hie Principles acted on in these Convictions 411

Mrs. Morse; Goody Glover 412

Hie Salem l/Titchcraft; its Beginnings 413

Htuba's Confession 415

Conscientiousness of the Judges; the Authorities used by them . . 415

X CONTENTS

FAOi

Inflaenoe ol the Confeaaoos; thar Agreement with the AcciiMtions

and with each other; their Circumstaiitiality 416

Spedmen ConfcaBions: Ddiveranoe Hobbs's 417

Ann Foater's; Maiy Lacy'a 418

iraiiAm Bttker'a 419

Tlieir Teadmony againat themaelvea and againat each odier . 420

How Doubt at last waa atizral 421

Wherein lay the Error 422

Like Miatakea in Other Flaoea 424

The ApplicatioQ ol the Whole 425

Thb Vibginia. Cabs of Grace Shkbwo(», 1706 433

iNTBODUCnON 435

Her Firat Trial; the Jury of Women 438

The Appeal to the Governor and GNmcfl; the County Court inatnicted to make Further Inquiry 439

Her Second TVial; the Ducking .441

The Verdict; her Detention for TVial by the General Court . . 442

Imdez • 443

FACSIMILE REPRODUCTIONS

PAOB

A Bband plucx'd out of the Bttknino. First i>age of the original manuscript, in the possession ol the Am^ican Antiquarian Society . • 259

AxnocuuPHB or Robert Calbf and of ma Son Robebt. From various

292

PKTinoN OF Mabt Estt. lYom the original at the Essex G>unty Court
House, Salem 368

NOTE

The first of the illustrations is a facsimile of the first page of
the original manuscript of Cotton Mather's narrative of the case
of Mercy Short, A Brand plvck'd aid of the Burning. For the
privilege of printing both the facsimile and the text we are indebted to the American Antiquarian Society, in whose library at
Worcester the manuscript is preserved, and to Mr. Clarence S.
Brigham, librarian of the society. The facsimile is slightly reduced.

The second plate is intended to elucidate the question whether
More Wanders of the Invisible World was written by Robert Calef
the elder or by his son Robert Calef the younger. Most writers
hitherto have attributed it to the younger Calef; Professor Burr
may be regarded as having settled the question (pp. 291-295) in
favor of the elder. The plate shows facsimiles of the following: (1)
from the Mather-Calef paper of 1694-1695 (see p. 306, note 1), the
last three or four lines of Mather's text, with the marginalia of
Robert Calef at the side, and the first three or four lines of Calef 's
marginalia beneath — ^lines unquestionably penned by the author of
More Wonders; (2) from the letter written to Lord Bellomont by
that author, accompanying a copy of the book (see p. 292, note 1,
below), the first three lines and the last, with signature; (3) from
the appraisers' report of 1693 (ibid.), the signature; (4) from the
coroner's verdict of 1696, the signature; (5) from the arbitrators'
report of 1697, the first three or four lines and the signature — all
these of the elder Robert; (6) from the selectman's report of 1717 (?),
the lines showing it the elder Robert's as a selectman of Roxbury,
with the lines at the end and the signature; (7) signature of Robert
Calef the younger, 1708; (8) signature of Robert the younger, 1719,
with the words adjoining it in the receipt. For the second of these
we are indebted to Mr. Wilberforce Fames of the New York Public
Library, for the others to Mr. Worthington C. Ford of the Massazm

XIV NOTE

chusetts Historical Society and to the official custodians of the various documents^ in Boston.

The third illustration is a facsimile, slightly reduced, of the petition of Mary Esty, preserved at Salem, Massachusetts, in the files
of the Superior Court for Essex County. By the kindness of the
clerk, and of Mr. George Francis Dow, secretary of the Essex Institute, it is here reproduced in such a manner as to show both pages

of the original.

J. F. J.

PREFACE

These narratives of witchcraft are no fairy tales. Weird though
they seem to us, they were to thousands of men and women in
seventeenth-century America the intensest of realities. They were
the bulletins of a war more actual, more cruel, more momentous,
than any fray of flesh and blood. Nor were they bulletins alone,
these messages of each latest skirmish in that age-long war of Heaven
with Hell. To those enlisted in that war they were instruction,
encouragement, appeal, as well; and as, in our day, to men once
fascinated by world-politics, so in that to those awakened to these
vaster interests of a universe, all pettier concerns seemed trivial and
provincial. To count the matter a panic local to New England, or
even a passing madness of the Christian world, is to take a narrow
view of history.

But to the modem student there is danger of a graver error.
For to count that witch-panic a something incident to human
nature, and common to all lands and times, is to repudiate history
altogether. Whatever in universal human experience anthropology
or folk-lore may find akin to it, the witchcraft our fathers feared and /
fought was never universal, in place or time. It belonged alone to
Christian thought and modem centuries; and dear as day to the
historian of ideas is its rise, its progress, its decline.

It was not till the later thirteenth century that the theologians
worked out their theory of human relations with Satan. Not till
the fourteenth did the Holy Inquisition draw witchcraft fully into
its own jurisdiction and, by confusing it with heresy, first make the
witches a diabolic sect and give rise to the notion of the witchsabbath. It was in the fifteenth that the theory and the procedure
spread to the secular courts, and that in these, as in the ecclesiastical,
the torture began to prove an inexhaustible source of fresh accusations, fresh delusions. In the sixteenth the Reformation for a little
distracted attention to heresy; but soon Protestant was vying with
Catholic in the quest of the minions of Satan, and it was in the later

XV

xvi PREFACE

sixteenth century and the earlier seventeenth that panic and persecution readied their height. Italy, Spain, France, which earliest
had suffered, were earliest to listen to reason. Gomany, long hesitant to begin, passed aD other lands in thoroughness and in persistence. How many were the victims is even here a matt^ tor guesswork; but they counted by many, many thousands. At Qsnabriidc
121 were burned in 1583, 133 in 1589; at Ellwangen 167 in 1612; at
Wurzburg a careful list in Fd>ruary, 1629, names 158 burned since
1627, and the burnings were still going briskly on. Not even Sootland could rival this Goman zeal; and Scotland was later to b^;in.

England, lacking both the Inquisition and the torture, long escaped; but the religious exiles who flocked back from the Continent
at the accession of Ellizabeth brought the epidemic with them, and
protest was hushed when in 1603 there mounted the English throne
the king, a Scot and a Calvinist, whose own royal hand had plied
against the witches both torture and the pen. The advent ot James
was followed, in 1604, by the enactment of a stamer statute, which,
like those of Scotland and the Continent, embodied the ti^aching of
the theologians and subordinated the crime to the sin. But, though
for a time English sseal against witches was quickened, it was not
till the Civil Wars threw the courts into the hands of men more
prone to religious excitement that England knew a witch-panic like
those of neighbor lands. Then, in 1645-1647, her Puritan Eastern
counties, having found in enforced sleeplessness a substitute for the
torture, sent witches to death by the score; and then it was, in 1647
and 1648, that in her New England colonies witch-trials first appear. Of their story there our narratives will tell us. In the home
land the superstition slowly waned, and, despite the able protests of
its advocates and the occasional zeal of a pious judge, En^and saw
her last witch-execution in 1682. Triab, indeed, there were till 1717,
and in Scotland till the very eve of the act of Pariiament which in
1736 ended the matter in British lands. On the Continent the triab
dribbled on till the eighties.

But let it not be thought that there were ever wanting those who
doubted and protested. We shall find them in seventeenth-century
America; and, happily, they too have left us narratives.

Though, all told, the number of America's contributions to this

PREFACE xvu

eerie literature is not great, not aD could find a jdace in the present
volume. The general editor of the series has, however, included all
that can be counted dassical — ^those most quoted in their day or in
ours. Narratives, not documents, have of course been preferred for
the volume; but, for those r^ons where no narrative of witchcraft
exists (t. e.j outside New England), court records have had to take
thdr place. And since, even in New England, the narratives rest
often on such records and by the critical student must be compared
with these, the notes attempt to point out where these records, if
printed, may be foimd.

Not a few of the narratives here reprinted have now grown
cnstly or even unprocurable; but only one is here for the first time
published — Cotton Mather's A Brand plucked otU of the Burning
(1693). A full account of its source and history will be found in the
prefixed introduction (pp. 247^.). As in the other volumes of
this series, the order of the narratives is chronological — though often
with much overlapping. Where there is a connection between their
themes, and especially where (as with the Salem witchcraft) the narratives deal with the same events, the introductions and notes aim to
make the connectbn dear and to invite a parallel study. Of course,
however, the present volume is not a history, and must pass in silence
much that should interest the student of witchcraft in America.

Besides aiding the narratives to explain each other and guiding
the student to the further materials for their critical study, it has
been the editor's aim to dear up whatever is obscure; but he has
nowhere attempted to set forth the theory underlying the belief in
witchcraft or to discuss the questions which still divide scholars.^ His
effort has been only to put before the reader, with fairness and exactness, what can throw light on these American q>isodes.

It remains but to add a word of gratitude to those into whose

^ To those who need such bdp the editor may venture to name an older
study of hu own on Th$ LUeraiure cf Wiichcraft (in the Pampers o/ the American
Hidoneai AMociaHon, TV,), whidi undertakes a surv^ of the development of
that theoiy. Further light may be had from the familiar chi^ters of Lecky
and of Lea, and from Dr. Wallace Notestein's History of Witchcraft in England,
now an indiq;>en8able guide to the English background of American dealings with
witchcraft And, for a discussion of certain fundamental issues, he may add two
p^>er8 (by Phyfessor G. L. Kittredge and himself) in the Proceedings (n. s.,
XVm., XXI.) of the Ammcan Antiquarian Society.

zviii PREFACE

labors he has entered. Most of these are adequately dted in the
introductions or the notes; but certain whose help has been more
general should find mention here. Samuel G. Drake's Annals cf
Witchcraft in New England and elsewhere in the United States (Boston, 1869) is stin the best clew to American witch-episodes as a
whole. Justin Winsor's chatty paper on The Literature cf Witch'
craft in New England (American Antiquarian Society, Proceedings,
n. s., X.) is a convenient introduction to that literature, and George
H. Moore's Notes on the Bibliography cf Witchcraft in Massachusetts
(in the same society's Proceedings, n. s., V.) is, like every word written
on this subject by that acute scholar, a precious aid in its study.
Quite indispensable as a conspectus of the literature as a whde is now
the lAst of Works in the New York Public Library relating to Wiich"
craft in the United States, prepared in 1908 for that library by Mr.
George F. Black, a scholar from whose studies in the history of
witchcraft other fruit is to be h<^ed.

The thanks of the reader as well as the editor's are due to the
American Antiquarian Society, at Worcester, for the generous courtesy with which it has permitted the printing here of the unpublished
narrative of Cotton Mather — a courte^ enhanced by help received
from its librarians. Warm gratitude, too, is due to the Massachusetts Historical Society, to the Boston Public Library, to the
New York Public Library, and to the custodians of the public records
at Boston, for the use of the autographs which figure in our plate
devoted to the identification of Robert Calef. But, should mention
be made of all those to whom this volume is in debt for personal
help, the list would be too long. Yet the editor cannot lay down his
pen without a word of gratitude to his old teacher and lifelong friend,
ex-President Andrew D. White, of Cornell, who first inspired him
with an interest in this subject and a sense of its importance, and
whose unflagging generosity has made possible the gathering of that
library on witchcraft, now perhaps unequalled, which has been a
chief source of the present volume.

George L. Bubr.

CoBiiXLL UmvsBsrnr, March, 1914.

FROM "AN ESSAY FOR THE RECORDING OF ILLUSTRIOUS PROVIDENCES," BY INCREASE
MATHER. 1684

INTRODUCTION

Increase Mather (1639-1723), divinei IiifitoriaDi college
president, colonial statesman and diplomat, is a familiar figm« to the student of American history. Bom the youngest
son of a religious leader known in Old England as well as
New, and graduated from Harvard in 1656, while Puritanism
was still dominant in the mother land, he had choice of two
worlds for his career, and at first elected for the old, where
two of his brothers were already prospering. First a student
for his master's degree at Dublin, then a preacher in England and in the Channel Islands, he would gladly have remained beyond sea, but for the religious restrictions of the
Restoration, which drove him home in 1661 — ^though not
until he had come into a permanent closeness of touch with
British thought and feeling. In Boston he speedily became the minister of the new North Church, and he retained this pastorate throughout his life, though from 1685
to 1701 he added to its duties those of the presidency of
Harvard.*

But not his diligence as a student nor his devotion to his
influential pulpit could blind him to the larger affairs of New
England and of the Christian world. It was he who in 1679
stirred up his colleagues and the General Court to the convening of a synod of the clergy, which should consider what
evils had "provoked the Lord to bring His Judgments on

^ As to his career see especially the careful study of Sibley, in his Biographical
SkdehiBM cf the OradwUes qf Harvard Vrwmrtiiy (henceforward to be dted as
Harvard Oraduates), I. 410-470, and the authorities there named.

3

4 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES

New-England" and what was to be done 'Hhat so these Evils
may be Reformed"; and it was he who put into form the
result of their deliberations. Some of the "judgments" —
King Philip's war, the small-pox, the two great fires — ^he felt
to call for lay activity as well as clerical; but the others complained of, the decay of piety and the departure from the
fathers' ways, were ills for pastoral healing, and in 1681, the
year that followed the final session of that "reforming synod,"
another general meeting of the ministers took, at his instance,
that action for "the recording of illustrious providences"
which is recounted in the following pages.

Such a method of arousing men to religion was nothing
new in Christian history. So, a thousand years before. Pope
Gr^ory, culling (precisely as did now the New England leader)
the experiences of his fellow clerics, had compiled those
Dialoffues whose tales of vision and apparition served for
centuries to make the invisible world as real as that of sight
and touch; and from his day onward such "providences" had
been to clerical historians the tissue of their story. In the
later Middle Ages there multiplied collections of these exerrvpla. Nor did the Reformation interrupt their use. Luther's own sermons and table talk were for Protestants a mine
of "modem instances" ; and out of such materials a Hondorff,
a Lonicer, a Philip Camerarius, compiled their treasuries for
the Lutheran pulpit, while their Zwinglian and Calvinistic
neighbors were yet better equipped by the industry of Theodor
Zwinger and Simon Goulart. Puritan England had found
such purveyors in Beard and Taylor and Samuel Claike.
But it was of the nature of these attempts to keep abreast
of the warnings of Heaven that they speedily went out of
date. Only an enterprise like that devised by Matthew
Poole for their continual registry could meet the needs of
callous and foi^tful man.

But the suggestion of Poole was twenty years old, and

INTRODUCTION 5

even the draft found in John Davenport's papers must for
some years have been in Mather's hands: what new impulse
stirred him now to action? It is not hard to guess. The
group of Platonists who at Cambridge, the mother of New )
England Puritanism, had now inherited the spokesmanship
of positive religion, laid the emphasis of their teaching on
what they called " the spiritual world " ; and since the Restoration they had found a notable ally. Joseph Glanvill, a
young Oxford theologian, one of the keenest of English philosophic minds, and withal one of the most rational, had taken
a brief for the defence, and in a brilliant essay on "the vanity of dogmatizing" had in 1661 turned the guns of the rationalists upon themselves. It was not the dogmatizing of
theology, but that of the audacious rising science of things
natural and hmnan, whose premises he attacked and seemed
to sweep away; and great was the applause of all conmiitted
to the "eternal verities." But he speedily discerned that the
strength of his skeptical adversaries lay in their denial and
ridicule of what they counted the "old wives' tales" of
religion. "Atheism is begun in Sadducism. And those that
dare not bluntly say. There is no God, content themselves
(for a fair step, and Introduction) to deny there are Spirits,
or Witches." Wherefore, with astounding boldness, he came
in 1666 to the defence of ghosts and witches in an essay, oft
reprinted, whose most teUing title was A Blow at Modem Sadducism. He had now adopted to the full the tenets of the Cambridge Platonists, whose leader, Henry More, became his correspondent, almost his colleague, and like them he championed
all old tales; but his keen sight discerned that "things remote, or long past, are either not beheved, or forgotten,"
whereas "Modem Relations," "being fresh, and near, and attended with all the curcumstances of credibility, it may be>s
expected they should have more success upon the obstinacy^
of Unbelievers." To his essay he therefore now appended,

6 NARRATIVES OP THE WITCHCRAFT CASES

and swelled with each successive editioiii a ''collection of
modem rdations/' which should demonstrate from picsent
experience ''the real existence of apparitions, spintM and
witches." This was indeed to carry the war into Africa, and
the Africans rallied to their guns. John Wagsta£Fe in 1669
and 1671, the anonymous author of The Doctrine of DemU
in 1676, John Webster in 1677, came to the defence of challenged incredulity. Glanvill died in 1680, leaving unfinished
that enlaiged edition which should foe his reply; but in 1681
it was published by his friend Henry More (with additions
of his own, including a mass of new "relations'') under the
aggressive title of SoMvcismus TriumphcUus.^

It was for a share in this battle royal, to which his book
makes many allusions, that Increase Mather now marshalled
the hosts of New England orthodoxy. Their broadside, delivered in 1684, was this Essay for the Recording of lUustrious
Providences* Almost at the same time (1685) George Sinclar,
professor at Glasgow, brought out in Scotland the "choice
collection of modem relations" which he called Satan^s Invisible World Discovered. How English Puritanism echoed we
shall see betimes.

Mather's book was forthwith welcome. It went through
two or three impressions in 1684 — at least the title-page was
thus often reprinted — and a part of the copies went to the
London market, equipped with the imprint of an English
bookseller. The book is best known, not by the long title
of its title^age, but by its running caption of "Remaikable
Providences" — already his son quotes it by this name — and
it was under this title, Remarkable Providences illustrative of
fhe Earlier Days of American Colonisation^ that a convenient

^ "Saddudsm Triumphed Over.^ More spells it Sadueismus; but this was
not Glanvill's usage, and the kter editions have a double (L

' It is true the book of Mather is not wholly on "the world of ^irits" : other
"providences" fill half the volume. But it is more largely so than ai^ earlier
ooUectioD of its sort, and in this the author's interest deariy centres.

INTRODUCTION 7

little reprint, "with introductory preface by George Oflfor/*
was published at London in 1856 (as a volume in John
Russell Smith's "Library of Old Authors ")> t^d again in
1890.

AN ESSAY FOR THE RECORDING OF ILLUSTRIOUS PROVIDENCES

An Essay For the Recording of Illustrious Providences, Wherein
an Account is given of many Remarkable and very Memorable Events, which have happened in this last Age; EspeciaUy in New-England.

By Increase Mather, Teacher of a Church at Boston in NewEngland. Psal. 107. 5. Oh that men would praise the
Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the
Children of Men. Psal. 145. 4. One Generation shall
praise thy works to another, and shaU declare thy mighty
acts.

Boston in New-England, Printed by Samuel Green for Joseph
Browning, And are to he sold at his Shop at the comer of
the Prison Lane. 1684,*

The Preface.

About six and twenty years ago, a Design for the Recording of illustrious Providences was under serious consideration among some eminent Ministers in England and in
Ireland.* That motion was principally set on foot by the
Learned Mr. Matthew Pool, whose Synopsis Criticorum, and
other Books by him emitted, have niade him famous in the
World.' But before any thing was brought to effect, the

> This is the wording of what is believed the eaiiiest impressioa of the
title-page. It has a misprint in the first citation of Scripture: "PsaL 107. 5''
should be Psal. 107. 8.

' As the author signs his preface on January 1, 1684 (and he used our present
calendar), the design of twenty-six years before must bdong to 1658 or thereabouts. At that time he was himself in the British Isles and in dose toudi with
their leading Puritan divines : it b highly probable that he speaks of the project
from personal knowledge.

* Matthew Pode (1624-1679) was one of the ablest scholars among the
English Presbyterians. Educated at Enmianuel College, Cambridge like so

8

1658] L MATHER, REMARKABLE PROVIDENCES 9

Persons to have been imployed, had their thoughts diverted
another way. Nevertheless, there was a MSS. (the Composer
whei«of is to me unknown) then written, wherein the Subjects proper for this Record, and some Rules for the better
managing a design of this nature, are described. In that
MSS. I find notable Stories related and attested, which else*
where I never met with. Particularly, the Story of Mr. Earl
of Colchester, and another mentioned in our subsequent Essay.*
And besides those, there are some very memorable Passages
written, which have not as yet been published, so far as I
imderstand. There are in that MSS. several Remarkables
about Apparitions, e. g. It is there said, that Dr. Frith,
(who was one of the Prebends belonging to Windsor) lying
on his Bed, the Chamber Doors were thrown open, and a
Corps with attending Torches brought to his Bed-side upon
a Bier; The Corps representing one of his own Family: After
some pause, there was such another shew, till he, the said
Dr., his Wife and all his Family were brought in on the Bier
in such order as they all soon after died. The Dr. was not
then sick, but quickly grew Melancholly, and would rising at
Midnight repair to the Graves and monimients at Eaton'
CoUedge; saying, that he and his must shortly take up their
habitation among the Dead. The Relater of this Story (a
Person of great integrity) had it from Dr. Frith's Son, who
also added. My Fathers Vision is already Executed upon all
the Family but my self, my time is next, and near at hand.
In the mentioned MSS. there is also a marvelous Relation
concerning a yoimg Scholar in France: For, it is there affirmed, that this prophane Student, having by extravagant
courses outrun his means, in his discontent walking soUtarily,
a Man came to him, and enquired the cause of his sadness.
Which he owning to be want of Money, had presently a supply
given him by the other. That being quickly consumed upon

many of the religious leaders of New England, he was at first a pastor in London,
but, ejected in 1662 by the Act of Uniformity, devoted himself to sch<^arship,
and is best known l^ the Synopsis Criticarum, into whose five huge folios (16691676) he ccKidensed the substance of earlier commentators on the Scriptures. Of
his scheme for the leeoiding of illustrious providences we know only what is
here told us.

^ These stories are told in the chapter on " ApparitiimSy" not here reprinted.

>£ton.

1

10 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1666

his Lusts, as soon as his Money was gone his Discontent returned; and in his former Walk, he met with his former ReUever, who again offered to supply him; but askt him to contract with hirn to be hiS; and to sign the contract with his
Blood. The woful wretch consent^: but not long after,
considering that this contract was made with the Devil, the
terrors of his Conscience became insupportable; so as that he
endeavoured to kill himself to get out of them. Some Ministers, and other Christians, being iixformed how matters were
circumstanced; kept dayes of Prayer for him and with him:
and he was carefully watched that so he might be kept from
Self-Murder. Still he continued imder Terror, and said he
should do so, as long as the Covenant which he had signed,
remained in the hands of the Devil. Hereupon, the Ministers
resolve to keep a day of Fasting and Prayer in that very
place of the Field where the distressed creature had made
the woful Bargain, setting him in the midst of them. Thus
they did, and being with special actings of Faith much enlarged to pray earnestly to the Lord to make known his power
over Satan, in constraining him to give up that contract, after
some hours continuance in Prayer, a Cloud was seen to spread
it self over them, and out of it the very contract signed with
the poor creatures Blood was dropped down amongst them;
which being taken up and viewed, the party concerned took
it, and tore it in pieces. The Relator had this from the mouth
of Mr. Beaumond,^ a Minister of Note at Caon* in Normandy, who assured him that he had it from one of the Ministers that did assist in carrying on the Day of prayer when
this memorable providence hapned. Nor is the Relation impossible to be true, for Luther speaks of a providence not
unlike imto this, which hapned in his Congregation.'

This MSS. doth also mention some most Remarkable
Judgments of God upon Sinners, as worthy to be Recorded

^Jean de Baillehache, seigneur de Beaumont. Two of the name, fatlier
and son, held in suooession the Huguenot pastorate at Caen, and were of Hke
oninenoe.

•Caen.

*The "providence" he means is diat rdated by Samud Clarice (Mirwur
. . . qf Examples, fourth ed., London, 1671 — the edition used by Mather— I. 34)
of a young man at Wittenberg whose contract the Devil threw in at the church
window.

1658] I. MATHER, REMARKABLE PROVIDENCES 11

for Posterity to take notice of. It is there said, that when
Mr. Richard Jnxon was a Fellow of Kings CoUedge in Cambridge, he led a most vicious life: and whereas such of the
Students as were serious in matters of Religion, did endeavour
by solemn Fasting and Prayer to prepare themselves for the
Communion which was then (this was about the year 1636)
on Easter-Day, This Juxon spent all the time of preparation in Drunken wild Meetings, and was up late and Drunk
on the Saturday night. Nevertheless, on ihe Lords day, he
came with others to the Conmiunion, and sat next to the
Relator, who knowing his Disorder the night before, was
much troubled: but had no remedy; Church-Disciphne not
being then so practised as ought to have been. The Communion being ended, such of the Scholars as had the fear of
God in their hearts, repaired to their Closets. But this Juxon
went immediately to a Drunken-meeting, and there to a Cockfight, where he fell to his accustomed madness, and potiring
out a volley of Oaths and Curses; while these were between
his lips, God smote him dead in the twinkle of an eye. And
though Juxon were but young, and of a comely person, his
Carcase was immediately so corrupted as that the stench of
it was insufiferable, insomuch that no house would receive it;
and his Friends were forced to hire some base Fellows to
watch the Carcase till night; and then with Pitch and such
like Gums covered him in a CoflSn, and so made a shift to endure his Interment. There stood by a Scholar, whose name
was Geoi^ HaU, and who acted his part with Juxon in his
prophaneness: but he was so astonidked with this amazing
Providence of God, as that he fell down upon his knees, b%-
ging pardoning mercy from Heaven, and vowing a Reformation; which vow the Lord enabled him to keep, so as that
afterwards he became an able and famous Minister of the
Gospel.

One strange passage more I shall here relate out of the
MSS. which we have thus far made mention of. Therein I
find part of a Letter transcribed; which is as followeth:

iMmore, Octob. 2. 1658. In another part of this Countrey, a
poor man being suspected to have stollen a Sheep was questioned
for it; he forswore the thing, and wished that if he had stollen it,

\

12 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES (1681

God would cause the Horns of the Sheep to grow upoD him. This
man was seen within these few dayes by a Minister of great repute
for Piety, who saith, that the Man has an Horn growing out of one
comer of his Mouth , just like that of a sheep: from which be hath
cut seventeen Inches, and is forced to keep it tyed by a string to
his Ear, to prevent its growing up to his eye: This Minister not
only saw but felt this Horn, and reported it in this Family this week,
as also a Grentleman formerly did, who was himself an eye-witness
thereof. Surely such passages are a Demonstrative evidence that
there is a God, who judgeth in the Earth, and who though he stay
long, will not be modced alwayes.

I shall say no more concerning the MSS. only that it was
sent over to Reverend Mr. Davenport/ by (as I suppose)
Mr. Hartlib.' How it came to lie dormient in his hands I
know not: though I had the happiness of special Intimacy
with that worthy Man, I do not remember that ever I heard
him speak any thing of it. But since his Death, looking over
his MSS's I met with this, and conmiunicated it to other
Ministers, who highly approved of the noble design aimed at
therein. Soon after which, some Proposals in order to the
reviving of this work were drawn up, and presented at a general Meeting of the Ministers in this Colony, May 12, 1681,
whichit may not be unsuitable here to recite.

Same Proposals concerning the Recording of lUtutrious Promdenoes.

I. In Order to the promoving * of a design of this Nature, so
as shall be indeed for Grods Glory, and the good of Posterity^ it is

1 John Davenport (1597-1670), one of the most eminent of the Puritan
vines, who, after a career as preacher in London and in Amsterdam, came in 1637
to New England and became the founder and leader of the New Haven theocracy.
When at last that colony was merged in that of Connecticut he accepted (1668)
the call of the conservative First Church in Boston, and there died.

> Samuel Hartlib (c. IQOO-c. 1670), son of a Polish merchant of German
extraction and of an English mother, was bom in Prussia, but spent most of hta
life in En^and. He is perhaps best known as the friend of Milton; but "ewybody knew Hartlib." By business a merchant, he was deeply interested in religious affairs, and had a wide correspondence with Protestant scholars throoghout Christendom, laboring for their union and incidentally carrying on at London
a sort of general news agency. Writing September 3, 1661, to (jovenior Wiathrop of Connecticut, Hartlib sends therewith "a small padcet" for Mr. Davodport, to whom he "cannot write for the present." (Mass. Hist. Soc, Proceedingtf
1878, p. 212.) •

1681] I. MATHER, REMARKABLE PROVIDENCES 13

necessary that utmost care shall be taken that All, and Only Remarkable Providences be Recorded and Published.

II. Such Divine Judgements, Tempests, Floods, Earth-quakes,
Thunders as are unusual, strange Apparitions, or what ever else ^
shall happen that is Prodigious, Witchcrafts, Diabolical Possessions, (\
Remarkable Judgements upon noted Sinners, eminent Deliverances,
and Answers of Prayer, are to be reckoned among Illustrious Providences.

III. Inasmuch as we find in Scripture, as well as in Ecclesiastical History, that the Ministers of God have been improved^ in
the Recording and Declaring the works of the Lord; and since they
are in divers respects under peculiar Advantages thereunto: It is
proposed, that each one in that capacity may diligently enquire into,
and Record such Illustrious Providences as have hapned, or from
time to time shall happen, in the places whereunto th^ do belong:
and that the Witnesses of such notable Occurrents* be likewise set
down in Writing.

IV. Although it be true, that this Design cannot be brought
unto Perfection in one or two years, yet it is much to be desired
that something may be done therein out of hand, as a Specimen of
a more large Volunm, that so this work may be set on foot, and
Posterity may be encouraged to go on therewith.

V. It is therefore Proposed that the Elders may concurre in
desiring some one that hath Leisure and Ability for the management
of such an undertaking, with all convenient speed to begin therewith.

VI. And that therefore other Elders do without delay make
Enquiry concerning the Remarkable Occurrents that have formeriy
fallen out, or may fall out hereafter, where they are concerned, and
transmit them unto the aforesaid person, according to the Directions above specified, in order to a speedy Publication.

Vn. Tluit Notice be given of these Proposals unto our Brethren,
the Elders of the Neighbour Colonies, that so we may enjoy their
Concurrence, and Assistance herein.

VIII. V^^hen any thing of this Nature shall be ready for the
Presse, it appears on sundry Grounds very expedient, that it should
be read, and approved of at some Meeting of the Elders, before
Publication.

These things being Read and Considered, the Author of
this Essay was desired to begin the work which is here done;

^ Made good uae of: the usual meaning of "improve*' in these nairatives.
'OccurrenoQS*

14 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES (1658

and I am Engaged^ to many for the Materials and Informar
tions which the following Collections do consist of. It is not
easie to give an Accomit of things, and yet no circumstantial
mistakes attend what shall be related. Nor dare I averr,
that there are none such in what follows. Only I have been
careful to prevent them; and as to the substance of each
passage, I am well assured it is according to Truth. Tliat
rare accident about the Lightning which caused a wonderful
change in the Compasses of a Vessel then at Sea, was as is
in the Book expressed, Page 91, 92. Only it is imcertain
whether they were then exactly in the Latitude of 38. F<»
they had not taken an Observation for several dayes, but the
Master of the Vessel affirms that to be the Latitude so near
as they could conjectiuie. Since the Needle was changed by
the Lightning, if a lesser Compass be set over it, the Needle
therein (or any other touched with the Load-stone) will alter
its polarity and turn about to the South, as I have divera
times to my great admiration experimented. There is near
the Northpoint a dark spot, like as if it were burnt with a
drop of Brimstone, supposed to be caused by the Lightning.
Whether the Magnetic impressions on that part of the Needle
being dissipated by the heat of the Lightning, and the effluvia
on the South end of the Needle only remaining untouched
thereby, be the true natural reason of the marvelous alteration ; or whither it ought to be ascribed to some other cause,
the Ingenious may consider.

There is another Remarkable Passage about Li^tning
which hapned at Duxborough* in New-England, concerning
which I have lately received this following Account.

September 11, 1653, (being the Lords Day) There were smaD
drizling Showers, attended with some seldome and scarce perceivable rumbling Thunders until towards the Evening; at what time
Mr. Constant Southworth of Duxbury returning home after evening
Exercise, in company with some Neighbours, Discoursing of some
extraordinary Thunder-claps with Lightning, and the awful effects
and consequents thereof, (being come into his own House) there
were present m one room himself, his Wife, two Children, viz. Thomas
(he was afterwards drowned) and Benjamin, (he was long after thb

^ Indebted. * Duxbury, Massachusetts.

1053] L MATHER, REMARKABLE PROVIDENCES 15

killed by the Indians) with Philip Delano (a Servant^ there broke
perpendicularly over the said House and Room a most awful and
amazing dap of Thunder, attended with a violent flash, or rather
flame of Lightning; which brake and shivered one of the Needles of
the Katted or Wooden Chimney, carrying divers Splinters seven or
eight Rods distance from the House: it filled the Room with Smoke
and Flame. Set fire in the Thatch of a Leanto which was on the
backside of a Room adjoyning to the former, in which the five persons abovementioned were. It melted some Pewter, so that it ran
into drops on the out-side, as is often seen on Tin ware; melted
round holes in the top of a Fire-shovel proportionable in quantity to
a small Goose-shot; struck Mrs. Soutliworths Arm so that it was
for a time benummed; smote the young Child Benjamin in his
Mothers Arms, deprived it of Breath for a space, and to the Mothers
apprehension squeased it as fiat as a Planck; smote a Dog stone-dead
which lay within two foot of Philip Delano, the Dog never moved
out of hb place or posture, in which he was when smitten, but giving
a small yelp, and quivering with his toes, lay still, blood issuing
from his Nose or Mouth. It smote the said Philip, made his right
Arm senseless for a time, together with the middle finger in special
(of his right hand) whidi was benummed, and turned as white as
Chalk or Lime, yet attended with little pain. After some few hours
that finger began to recover its proper colour at the Knuckle, and
ao did gradually whiten unto its extremity; And although the said
Delano felt a most violent heat upon his body, as if he had been
scorched in the midst of a violent burning fire, yet his Clothes were
not singed, neither had the smell of fire passed thereon.

I could not insert this stoiy in its proper place, because
I received it after that Chapter about lliimder and Lightning
was Printed. Some credible persons who have been Eyewitnesses of it, inform me, that the Lightning in that House
at Duxborough did with the vehemency of its flame, cause
the Bricks in the Chinmey to melt like molten lead: which
particular was as Remarkable as any of the other mentioned
in the Narrative, and therefore I thought good here to add it.

In this Essay, I design no more than a Specimen; And having (by the good hand of God upon me) set this Wheel a
going, I shall leave it imto others, whom God has fitted, and
shall incline thereto, to go on with the undertaking.^

^ We shall see how this suggestion fruited in the MemorahU Prondencet
and the Wonders of his son Cotton; and in 1694 the President and Fellows of

16 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES U684

Some Digressions I have made in distinct Chapters, handling several considerable Cases of Conscience, supposing it not
improfitable, or improper so to do; since the tlungB related
gave the occasion: both Leisure and Ebcercise of Judg^nent
are required in the due performance of a Service of this Nature: There are some that have more leisure, and many that
have greater Abilities than I have: I expect not that thqr
should make my Method their Standani; but they may
follow a better of their own, as they shall see cause. The
Addition of Parallel Stories is both pleasing and edifying:
Had my reading and remembrance of things been greater, I
might have done more that way, as I hope others will in the
next Essay.

I could have mentioned some very memorable Passage
of Divine Providence, wherein the Countrey in general hath
been concerned. Some Remarkables of that kind are to be
seen in my former Relations of the Troubles occasioned by
the Indians in New-England.^ There are other particulars
no less worthy to be Recorded, but in my judgement, this is
not so proper a season for us to divulge them. It has been
in my thoughts to publish a Discourse of Miscellaneous observations, concerning things rare and wonderful, both as to
the works of Creation and Providence, which in my small
Readings I have met with in many Authors: ' But this must
suffice for the present. I have often wished, that the Natural
History of New-England might be written and published to
the World; the Rules and method described by that Learned
and excellent person Robert Boyle Esq.* being duely observed

Harvard College (Increase Mather being himself the President, and Cotton one
of the eight fellows) addressed once more to the ministers of New En^^and an
appeal for the recording and reporting of "remarkables." It may be found in
bk. VI. of Cotton Mather's Moffnalia (1702), at the head of his coUectioD of such
providences, into which he incorporated many of those already related by his
father.

1 He doubtless means both his A Bruf History (^ the War with the Indiiuu
in New-England (Boston, 1676) and his ^ Relation cf the TrmdfUi wkidk ham
hapned in New-England (Boston, 1677).

' This project was never carried out.

s Robert Boyle (1627-1691) was then the glory of En^^ scieiioe. But be
was also governor of the Corporation for the Spread of the Gospel in New RngJMML
His "Heads for the Natural History of a Country" may be found in v6L HI.
(pp. &-14) of his PkOoaophioal Works (London, 1725).

1684] I. MATHER, REMARKABLE PROVIDENCES 17

therein. It would best become some Scholar that has been
bom in this Land, to do such a service for his Countrey.
Nor would I my self decline to put my hand (so far as my
small capacity will reach) to so noble an undertaking, did
not manifold diversions and employments prevent me from
attending that which I should account a profitable Recreation.
I have other work upon me, which I would gladly finish before I leave the World, and but a very little time to do it in:
Moreover, not many years ago, I lost (and that's an afflictive
loss indeed!) several Moneths from study by sickness. Let
every God-fearing Reader jojm with me in Prayer, that I
may be enabled to redeem the time, and (in all wayes wherein
I am capable) to serve my Generation.

Increase Mather.
Boston in New-England,
Janvary 1, 168f .

CHAP. V.

Concerning (kings preternatural which have hapned in NewEngland. A Remarkable Relation about Ann Cole of
Hartford. Concerning several Witches in that Colony. Of
the Possessed Maid at Groton. An account of the House in
Newberry latdy troubled vrith a Damum. A parallel Story
of an House at Tedworth in England. Concerning another
in Hartford. And of one in Portsmouth in New-England
lately disquieted by Evil Spirits. The Relation of a Woman
at Barwick in NeuhEngland molested xvith Apparitions, and
sometimes tormented by invisible Agents.

Inasmuch as things which are prsetematural, and not ac- /
complished without (tiiabolicai operation, do more rarely hap- ^
pen,* it is pitty but that they should be observed. Several

^ More rarely, that is, than those aupenuLtanl wonders that proceed from
God. It is of these — of "remarkable seardeliverances," of "other remarkable
preservations," of "remarkables about thunder and lightning" — that earlier
chi4>ter8 have told. In du^yter IV., however, the author argues that thunderBtonns are sometimes the wcvk of Satan, and he is now ready to take up Satanic
marvels.

18 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [iee2

Accidents of that kind have hapned in New-England; which
I shall here faithfully Relate so far as I have been able to
come unto the knowledge of them.

Very Remarkable was that Providence wherein Ann CJole
of Hartford in New-England was concerned.^ She was and
is accounted a person of real Piety and Int^rity. Nevertheless, in the Year 1662; then living in her Fathers House (who
has likewise been esteemed a godly Man) She was taken
with very strange Fits, wherein her Tongue was improved by
a Dffimon to express things which she her self knew nothing
of. Sometimes the Discourse would hold for a considerable
time. The general purpose of which was, that such and sudi
persons (who were named in the Discourse which passed from
her) were consulting how they might carry on mischievous
designs against her and several others, mentioning sundry
wayes they should take for that end, particularly that they
would afflict her Body, spoil her Name, etc. The general
answer made amongst the Dsemons, was. She runs to the
Rock. This having been continued some hours, the Dsemons
said. Let us confound her Language, that she may tell no
more tales. She uttered matters imintelligible. And then
the Discourse passed into a Dutch-tone (a Dutch Family* then

1 This story was reported by the Rev. John Whiting, from 1660 a putor
at Hartford, the home of his family, in a letter of December 4, 1682, now in the
keeping of the Boston Public Library and published (1868) in the Mather Papgn
(Mass. Hist Soc, CoUectiom, fourth series, VIU.) at pp. 466-469. The incidents
occurred in 1662. This was by no means the earliest of Connecticut's witdi cases*
On these in general see the sane and ludd study of C. H. Levermore, in the Nem
EngUxnder, XLIV. (1885), 788-817, and, condensed, in the New England Magaaime^
new series, VI. (1892), 636-644; also F. Morgan's in Connedieui a$ a Cohn^ ami
as a State (Hartford, 1904), I. 205-229, and in the American Hutarieal Magamnep
I. (1906), 216-238; and J. M. Taylor's little monograph. The WUekert^ DeUuum
in Colonial ConnedietU (New York, 1908). On this episode in particular and the
surviving records see also C. J. Hoadly, "A Case of Witchcraft in Hartfofd,'* in
the Connecticut Magazine, V. (1899), 557-560.

* The name of this Dutch family, as appears from a letter of Governor Stiiyvesant of New Amsterdam addressed October 13, 1662, to the authorities at
Hartford, was Varleth, or Varlet Stuyvesant accredits his brother'Jn4aw
(Capt Nicholas Varleth), now "necessitated to make a second voyage" to aid
"his distressed sister Judith Varleth," imprisoned on the charge of witchcraft,
and urges on her behalf "her well known education, life, conversation and profession of faith" — and with success, for this Judith, becoming at her father's
death his heiress, repaired to New Netheriand and there (1666) marrying Stiqr1662] I. MATHER, REMARKABLE PROVIDENCES 10

lived in the Town) and therein an account was given of some
afflictions that had befallen divers; amongst others, what
had befallen a Woman that Uved next Neighbour to the Dutch
Family, whose Arms had been strangely pinched in the nighti
declaring by whom and for what cause that course had been
taken with her.* The Reverend Mr. Stone (then Teacher of
the Church in Hartford)* being by, when the Discourse
hapned, declared, that he thought it impossible for one not
familiarly acquainted with the Dutch (which Ann Cole had
not in the least been) should so exactly imitate the Dutchtone in the pronimciation of English. Several Worthy Persons, (viz. Mr. John Whiting, Mr. Samuel Hooker, and Mr.
Joseph Hains)* wrote the intelligible sayings expressed by
Ann Cole, whilest she was thus amazingly handled. The
event was that one of the persons (whose Name was Greensmith) being a lewd and ignorant Woman,^ and then in
Prison on suspicion for Witch-craft, mentioned in the Discourse as active in the mischiefs done and designed, was by
the Magistrate sent for; Mr. Whiting and Mr. Haines read
what they had written; and the Woman being astonished

vesant's able iiq>hew, Nicholas Bayard, shared with him his notable r6Ie in the
life of that colony. See Walker, Hiaiory of the First Church in Hartford (Hartford, 1884), p. 177, note; Taylor (as above), pp. 151-152; CormecUctU Colonial
Beeordi, 1636-1665, p. 387; Documents relating to the Colomal History qf New
York, XIV. 518; Records rf New Amsterdam (New York, 1897), V. 130, 137;
New York Genealogieal and Biographical Record, X. (1879), 35-36.

^ She was, says Mr. Whiting, a sister of one of the ministers in Hartford.
Of Mr. Whitmg himself?

* Samuel Stone (1602-1663), educated at Cambridge, came to Massachusetts
in 1633 with Cotton and Hooker, became the latter's associate in the pastorate,
and took part with him in 1636 in the founding of Hartford, where he remained
a minister till his death. As to both Stone and Whiting (and as to this episode)
see tspedeJly Walker, History qf the First Church in Hartford (Hartford, 1884).

* By "Mr. John Whiting" (see preceding notes) is of course meant Mather's
informant himself; but in his letter he says that he "came into the house some
time after the discourse b^^." Hooker, a son of the founder of the Connecticut
colony and, like Whiting, of the Harvard class of 1653, had in 1662 Just become
pastor at the neighboring Farmington. Haynes (1641-1679), son of the governor,
was an incipient divine, destined in 1664 to succeed Stone as Whiting's fellowpastar at Hutford.

^ "Considerably aged," adds Whiting. She had twice been married before
she became the wife of Nathaniel Greensmith, and by her first husband, Abraham
Elson, had two daughters, who were now aged about seventeen and fifteen.

20 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1662

thereat, confessed those things to be true, and that she and
other persons named in this preternatural Discourse, had had
familiarity with the Devil : Being asked whether she had made
an express Covenant with him, she answered, she had not,
only as she promised to go with him when he called, which
accordingly die had sundiy times done; and that the Devil
told her that at Christmass they would have a merry Meeting, and then the Covenant between them should be subscribed. The next day she was more particularly enquired
of concerning her Guilt respecting the Crime she was accused
with. She then acknowledged, that though when Mr. Hains
b^an to read what he had taken down in Writing, her isgjd
was such that she could have torn him in pieces, and was as
resolved as might be to deny her guilt (as she had done before),
yet after he had read awhile, she was (to use her own espiession) as if her flesh had been pulled from her bones, ami so
could not deny any longer: She likewise declared, tiiat the
Devil first appeared to her in the form of a Deer or Fawn,
skipping about her, wherewith she was not much affrighted,
and that by d^rees he became very familiar, and at last
would talk with her. Moreover, she said that the Devil
had frequently the carnal knowledge of her Body. And that
the Witches had Meetings at a place not far from her House;
and that some appeared in one shape, and others in another;
and one came flying amongst them in the shape of a Crow.
Upon this Confession, with other concurrent Evidence, the
Woman was Executed; so likewise was her husband, though
he did not acknowledge himself guilty.^ Other persons accused in the Discourse made their escape.' Thus doth the

^ Nathaniel Greensmith and Rebecca his wife were hanged at Hartfoid in
January, 1663. They seem to have been well-to-do, but not over-reputable,
people. The Greensmiths, Whiting tells us, lived next door to the Coles. "Tlie
instance of the witch executed at Hartford," says Math^ in his next duster,
"considering the circumstances of that confession, is as oonvictive a proof as
most single examples that I have met with." And of Ann Cde he daewhere
adds (Providences, ch. IV.): "I am informed, that when Matthew Cole was
killed with the lightning at North-Hampton, the daemons which disturbed his
sister, Ann Cole (forty miles distant), in Hartford, spoke of it, intimating their
concurrence in that terrible accident."

* Beside the Greensmiths and perhaps Judith Varlet there was implicated
by Ann Cole a "Goodwife Seager," and Goodwife Greensmith is known to have

1662] L MATHER, REMARKABLE PROVIDENCES 21

Devil use to serve his Clients. After the suspected Witches
were either executed or fled, Ann Cole was restored to health,
and has continued well for many years, approving her self a
serious Christian.

There were some that had a mind to try whither* the
Stories of Witches not being able to sink under water, were
true; and accordingly a Man and Woman mentioned in Ann
Cole's Dutch-toned discourse, had their hands and feet tyed,
and so were cast into the water, and they both apparently
swam after the manner of a Buoy, part imder, part above
the Water. A by-stander imagining that any person bound
in that posture would be so bom up, offered himself for trial,
but being in the like matter gently laid on the Water, he
immediately sunk right down. This was no legal Evidence
against the suspected persons; nor were they proceeded
against on any such account; However doubting that an
Halter would choak them, though the Water would not, they
very fairly took their flight, not having been seen in that
part of the World since. Whether this experiment were lawful, or rather Superstitious and Magical, we shall {aw O^y
enquire afterwards.*

Another thing which caused a noise in the Countrey, and
wherein Satan had undoubtedly a great influence, was that
which hapned at Groton.^ There was a Maid in that Town

mentioned several as accomplices, among them Judith Varlet and Goodwife
Ayres. The latter and her husband are believed to be the "Man and Woman'*
tc^ of in the next paragraph.

» Whether. • " With God/' t. e., God willing.

• Tliis was, oi course, the well known "water test" for witches. Its origin
in witch procedure is obscure; but it gained vogue in the later sixteenth century,
finding its chief spokesman in the German schoolmaster Scribonius. As administered OD. the Continent, the witch was "cross-bound," t. «., with right thumb
made fast to left great-toe and left thumb to right great-toe, and then flung, or
let down, supine into the water (usually thrice in succession), and was counted
guilty on failure to sink whoUy under the water. The theory was that the pure
element refused to receive a witch into its bosom or tiiat dealing with Satan made
the witch too light to sink — reputed phenomena which found many explanations.
Rejected by the majority, both of jurists and theologians, the practice eventually
lived an only as an illegal procedure of the mob. In pages not here reprinted
Increase Mather discusses it and sharply condemns it as superstitious.

« This case was reported by the Rev. Samuel Willard (1640-1707), who had
witnessed it as pastor at Groton, but who from 1678 to his death was the eminent

22 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES pen

(one Elizabeth Knap)^ who in the Moneth of October, Anno
1671 y was taken after a very strange manner, sometimes weeping; sometimes laughing, sometimes roaring hideously, with
violent motions and agitations of her body, crying out Money,
Money, etc. In November following, her Tongue for many
hours together was drawn like a semicircle up to the roof of
her Mouth, not to be removed, though some tried with their
fingers to do it. Six Men were scarce able to hold her in
some of her fits, but she would skip about the House yelling
and looking with a most frightful Aspect. December 17, Her
Tongue was drawn out of her mouth to an extraordinaiy
length; and now a Dsmon b^an manifestly to speak in her.
Many words were uttered wherein are the Labial Letters,
without any motion of her Lips, which was a dear demonstration that the voice was not her own. Sometimes Words
were spoken seeming to proceed out of her throat, when her
Mouth was shut. Sometimes with her Mouth wide open,
without the use of any of the Organs of speech. The tlungp
then uttered by the Devil were chiefly RaiUngis and Revilings of Mr. Willard (who was at that time a Worthy and
Faithful Pastor to the Church in Groton.) Also the E^emon
belched forth most horrid and nefandous Blasphemies, exalting himself above the most High. After this she was taken
speechless for some time. One thing more is worthy of Remark concerning this miserable creature. She cried out in
some of her Fits, that a Woman, (one of her Neighbouis)
appeared to her, and was the cause of her AflSiction. The
Person thus accused was a very sincere, holy Woman, who
did hereupon with the Advice of Friends visit the poor Wretch;
and though she was in one of her Fits, having her Eyes shut.

minister of the Old South Church in Boston. The exceedingly minute and
account b not a letter to Mather, but an indosure in one, and is clearly a contemporary journal completed in January, 1672, when the episode was bardy at an
end. It is printed in full in the Mather Papers (Mass. Hist. Soc., Cottedkmi,
fourth series, VIII.) at pp. 555-570, and with yet greater care by Dr. S. A. Green,
in his GroUm in the Witchcraft Times (Groton, 1883), pp. 7-21. No document is
more fundamental to the study of New England witchcraft. Mather's brief
summary is but a hint of its contents; but he must have used other sources as
well (perhi^M a lost letter of inclosure and doubtless Willaid's sermon on the
subject, printed in 1673 with others in his Useful Instructions).
^ A girl of sixteen — bom April 21, 1655 (Careen, Groton, p. 6).

1679] L MATHER, REMARKABLE PROVIDENCES 23

when the innocent penson impeached by her came in; yet
could she (so powerful were Satans Operations upon her) declare who was there, and could tell the touch of that Woman
from any ones else. But the gracious Party thus accused and
abused by a maUcious Devil, Prayed earnestly with and for
the Poss^sed creature; after which she confessed that Satan
had deluded her, making her beUeve evil of her good Neighbour without any cause. Nor did she after that complain of
any Apparition or Disturbance from such an one.^ Yea, she
said, that the Devil had himself in the likeness and shape
of divers tormented her, and then told her it was not he but
they that did it.

As there have been several Persons vexed with evil Spirits,
80 divers Houses have been wofully Haimted by them. In
the Year 1679, the House of William Morse in Newberry* in
New-England, was strangely disquieted by a Dsemon. After
those troubles b^an, he did by the Advice of Friends write
down the particulars of those unusual Accidents. And the
Account which he giveth thereof is as foUoweth;

On December 3, in the night time, he and his Wife heard
a noise upon the roof of their House, as if Sticks and Stones
had been thrown against it with great violence; whereupon
he rose out of his Bed, but could see nothing. Locking the
Doors fast, he returned to Bed again. About midnight they
heard an Hog making a great noise in the House, so that the
Man rose again, and foimd a great Hog in the house, the door
being shut, but upon the opening of ti^e door it ran out.

(hi December 8, in the Morning, there were five great
Stones and Bricks by an invisible haad thrown in at the west

1 Very different as to this kernel of the story is Willard's MS. : "She declared
that if the party were I4>prehended shee should forthwith bee well, but never till
then; whereupon her father went, and procured the coming of the wonum impeached by her, who came downe to her on Thursday night, where (being desired
to be present) I observed that she was violently halidled, and lamentably tormented by the adversarye, and uttered unusual ^iriekes at the instant of the persons coming in, though her eyes were fast closed : but having experience of such
former actings, wee made nothing of it, but waited the issue : God therefore was
sought to, to signifye something whereby the innocent might bee acquitted, or
the guilty discovered, and hee answered our prayers, for by 2 evident and cleere
mistakes she was deered, and then all prejudices ceased, and she never more to
this day hath impeached her of any i^parition."

• Newbury.

24 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1679

end of the house while the Mans Wife was making the Bed,
the Bedstead was lifted up from the floor, and the Bedstaff ^
flung out of the Window, and a Cat was hurled at her; a
long Staff danced up and down in the Chimney; a burnt
Brick, and a piece of a weatherboard were thrown in at the
Window: The Man at his going to Bed put out his Lamp,
but in the Morning found that the Saveall of it was taken
away, and yet it was imaccoimtably brought into its former
place.' On the same day, the long Staff but now spoken
of, was hang'd up by a line, and swung to and fro, the Man's
Wife laid it in the fire, but she could not hold it there, inasmuch as it would forcibly fly out; yet after much ado with
joynt strength they made it to bum. A shingle flew from the
Window, though no body near it, many sticks came in at «the
same place, only one of these was so scragged that it could
enter the hole but a little way, whereupon the Man puaht it
out, a great Rail likewise was thrust in at the VS^dow, so as
to break the Glass.

At another time an Iron Crook that was hanged on a
Nail violently flew up and down, also a Chair flew about, and
at last lighted on the Table where Victuals stood ready for
them to eat, and was likely to spofl all, only by a nimble
catching they saved some of their Meal with the loss of the
rest, and the overturning of their Table.

People were sometimes Barricado'd out of doors, when
as yet there was no body to do it : and a Chest was removed
from place to place, no hand touching it. Their Keys being
tied together, one was taken from the rest, and the remaining two would fly about making a loud noise by knocking
against each other. But the greatest part of this Devils feats
were his mischievous ones, wherein indeed he was sometimes
Antick enough too, and therein the chief sufferers were, the
Man and his Wife, and his Grand-Son. The Man especiaUy
had his share in these Diabolical Molestations. For one while

^ A "bedstaff" was a stick used to help in making a bed which stood in a
recess, and the same name was given to the stick then fixed to the side of a bed
to keep the bed-clothes from falling off: doubtless the same staff served bodi
purposes. Later in this account we shall find it called a "bed4xMrd" : at least
Cotton Mather, repeating the tale in hb Magnolia, identifies the two.

s The "lamp" was of course a candle, and the "saveall" was a ocmtrivmnoe
at the base enabling the wick to bum to the very bottom without waste.

1680] I. MATHER, REMARKABLE PROVmENCES 26

they could not eat their Suppers quietly, but had the Ashes
on the Hearth before their eyes thrown into their Victuals;
yea, and upon their heads and Clothes, insomuch that they
were forced up into their Chamber, and yet they had no
rest there; for one of the Man's Shoes being left below, 'twas
filled with Ashes and Coals, and thrown up after them. Their
Light was beaten out, and they being laid in their Bed with
their little Boy between them, a great stone (from the Floor
of the Loft) weighing above three pounds was thrown upon
the mans stomach, and he turning it down upon the floor,
it was once more thrown upon him, A Box and a Board
were likewise thrown upon them all. And a Bag of Hops
was taken out of their Chest, wherewith they were beaten,
till some of the Hops were scattered on the floor, where the
Bag was then laid, and left.

Li another Evening, when they sat by the fire, the Ashes
were so whirled at them, that they could neither eat their
Meat, nor endure the House. A PeeP struck the Man in the
face. An Apron hanging by the fire was flung upon it, and
singed before they could snatch it off. The Man being at
Prayer with his Family, a Beesom* gave him a blow on his
head behind, and fell down before his face.

On another day, when they were Winnowing of Barley,
some hard dirt was thrown in, hitting the Man on the Head,
and both the Man and his Wife on the back; and when they
had made themselves clean, they essayed to fill their half
Bushel but the foul Com was in spite of them often cast
in amongst the clean, and the Man being divers times thus
abused was forced to give over what he was about.

On January 23 (in particular) the Man had an iron Pin
twice thrown at him, and his Likhom was taken away from
him while he was writing, and when by all his seeking it he
could not find it, at last he saw it drop out of the Air, down
by the fire: a piece of Leather was twice thrown at him;
and a shoe was laid upon his shoulder, which he catching at,
was suddenly rapt from him. An handful of Ashes was
thrown at his face, and upon his clothes: and the shoe was

^ A fire-ehovel; or a aiimlar implement for getting things into an oven or
out of it.

' A broom.

24 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1679

end of the house while the Mans Wife was making the Bed,
the Bedstead was lifted up from the floor, and the Bedstaff ^
flung out of the Window, and a Cat was hurled at her; a
long Staff danced up and down in the Chinmey; a burnt
Brick, and a piece of a weatherboard were thrown in at the
Window: The Man at his going to Bed put out his Lamp,
but in the Morning found that the Saveall of it was taken
away, and yet it was imaccoimtably brought into its former
place.' On the same day, the long Staff but now spoken
of, was hang'd up by a line, and swung to and fro, the Man's
Wife laid it in the fire, but she could not hold it there, inasmuch as it would forcibly fly out; yet after much ado with
joynt strength they made it to bum. A shingle flew from the
Window, though no body near it, many sticks came in at *the
same place, only one of these was so scragged that it could
enter the hole but a little way, whereupon the Man pusht it
out, a great Rail likewise was. thrust in at the Window, so as
to break the Glass.

At another time an Iron Crook that was hanged on a
Nail violently flew up and down, also a Chair flew about, and
at last lighted on the Table where Victuals stood ready for
them to eat, and was likely to spofl all, only by a nimble
catching they saved some of their Meal with the loss of the
rest, and the overturning of their Table.

People were sometimes Barricado'd out of doors, when
as yet there was no body to do it: and a Chest was removed
from place to place, no hand touching it. Their Keys being
tied together, one was taken from the rest, and the remaining two would fly about making a loud noise by knocking
against each other. But the greatest part of this Devils feats
were his mischievous ones, wherein indeed he was sometimes
Antick enough too, and therein the chief sufferers were, the
Man and his Wife, and his Grand-Son. The Man especially
had his share in these Diabolical Molestations. For one while

^ A "bedstaff" was a stick used to help in making a bed which stood in a
recess, and the same name was given to the stick then fixed to the side of a bed
to keep the bed-clothes from falling off: doubtless the same staff served both
purposes. Later in this account we shall find it called a "bed4xMrd" : at least
Cotton Mather, repeating the tale in hb Magnolia, identifies the two.

* The "lamp" was of course a candle, and the "saveall" was a oontrivanoe
at the base enabling the wick to bum to the very bottom without waste.

1680] I. MATHER, REMARKABLE PROVTOENCES 25

they could not eat their Suppers quietly, but had the Ashes
on the Hearth before their eyes thrown into their Victuals;
yea, and upon their heads and Clothes, insomuch that they
were forced up into their Chamber, and yet they had no
rest there; for one of the Man's Shoes being left below, 'twas
filled with Ashes and Coals, and thrown up after them. Their
Light was beaten out, and they being laid in their Bed with
their Uttle Boy between them, a great stone (from the Floor
of the Loft) weighing above three poimds was thrown upon
the mans stomach, and he turning it down upon the floor,
it was once more thrown upon him. A Box and a Board
were likewise thrown upon them all. And a Bag of Hops
was taken out of their Chest, wherewith they were beaten,
till some of the Hops were scattered on the floor, where the
Bag was then laid, and left.

In another Evening, when they sat by the fire, the Ashes
were so whirled at them, that they could neither eat their
Meat, nor endure the House. A PeeP struck the Man in the
face. An Apron hanging by the fire was flung upon it, and
singed before they could snatch it off. The Man being at
Prayer with his Family, a Beesom' gave him a blow on his
head behind, and fell down before his face.

On another day, when they were Winnowing of Barley,
some hard dirt was thrown in, hitting the Man on the Head,
and both the Man and his Wife on the back; and when they
had made themselves clean, they essayed to fill their half
Bushel but the foul Com was in spite of them often cast
in amongst the clean, and the Man being divers times thus
abused was forced to give over what he was about.

On Janvary 23 (in particular) the Man had an iron Pin
twice thrown at him, and his Inkhom was taken away from
him while he was writing, and when by all his seeking it he
could not find it, at last he saw it drop out of the Air, down
by the fire: a piece of Leather was twice thrown at him;
and a shoe was laid upon his shoulder, which he catching at,
was suddenly rapt from him. An handful of Ashes was
thrown at his face, and upon his clothes: and the shoe was

^ A fire-shovel; or a aiimlar implement for getting things into an oven or
out of it.

* A broom.

26 NARRATU'ES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES (IM)

then dapt upon his head, and upon it he dapt his hand,
holding it so fast, that somewhat unseen puUed him with it
backward on the floor.

On the next day at ni^t, as they were gping to Bed, a
lost Ladder was thrown against the Door, and their U^t
put out; and when the Man was a bed, he was beaten with an
heavy pair of Leather Breeches, and puU'd by the Hair of his
Head and Beard, Pinched and Scratched, and his Bed-board^
was taken away from him; yet more in the next ni^t^ when
the Man was likewise a Bed; his Bed-board did rise out of
its place, notwithstanding his putting forth all his strength
to keep it in; one of his Awls' was brought out of the next
room into his Bed, and did prick him; the clothes wherewith
he hoped to save his head from blows were violently pluckt
from thence. Within a night or two after, the Man and his
Wife received both of them a blow upon their heads, but it
was so dark that they could not see the stone which gave it;
the Man had his Cap puUed off from his head while he sat
by the fire.

The night following, they went to bed undressed, because
of their late disturbances, and the Man, Wife, Boy, presently
felt themselves pricked, and upon search foimd in the Bed a
Bodkin, a knitting Needle, and two sticks picked' at both
ends. He received also a great blow, as on his Thigh, so on
his Face, which fetched blood: and while he was writing a
Candlestick was twice thrown at him, and a great piece d
Bark fiercely smote him, and a pail of Water turned up without hands. On the 28 of the mentioned Moneth, frozen clods
of Cow-dung were divers times thrown at the man out of
the house in which they were; his Wife went to milk the
Cow, and received a blow on her head, and sitting down at
her Milking-work had Cow-dung divers times thrown into her
Pail, the Man tried to save the Milk, by holding a Piggin^
side-wayes under the Cowes belly, but the Dung would in
for all, and the Milk was only made fit for Hogs. On that
night Whes were thrown int^ the porridge wUch they had
made ready for their Supper, so as that they could not eat

> See p. 24, note 1. ' Morse was a shoemaker.

* Pointed, sharpened.

* A small wooden pail, with one stave long, to serve as a handle.

16801 I. MATHER, REMARKABLE PROVIDENCES 27

it; Ashes were likewise often thrown into the Man's Eyes,
as he sat by the fire. And an iron Hammer flying at him,
gave him a great blow on his back; the Man's Wife going into
the Cellar for Beer, a great iron Peel^ flew and fell after
her through the trap-door of the Cellar; and going afterwards on the same Errand to the same place, the door shut
down upon her, and the Table came and lay upon the door,
and the man was forced to remove it e're his Wife could be
released from where she was; on the following day while he
was Writing, a dish went out of its place, leapt into the pale,
and cast Water upon the Man, his Paper, his Table, and disappointed his procedure in what he was about; his Cap jumpt
off from his head, and on again, and the Pot-lid leapt off from
the Pot into the Kettle on the fire.

February 2. While he and his Boy were eating of Cheese,
the pieces which he cut were wrested from them, but they
were afterwards found upon the Table imder an Apron, and
a pair of Breeches: And also from the fire arose little sticks
and Ashes, which flying upon the Man and his Boy, brought
them into an imcomiortable pickle; But as for the Boy, which
the last passage spoke of, there remains much to be said
concerning him, and a principal sufferer in these afflictions:
For on the 18 of December, he sitting by his Grandfather,
was hurried into great motions and the Man thereupon took
him, and made him stand between his Legs, but the Chair
danced up and down, and had like to have cast both Man
and Boy into the fire: and the Child was afterwards flimg
about in such a manner, as that they feared that his Brains
would have been beaten out; and in the evening he was
tossed as afore, and the Man tried the project of holding
him, but ineffectually. The Lad was soon put to Bed, and
they presently heard an huge noise, and demanded what was
the matter? and he answered that his Bednstead leaped up and
down: and they {i. e. the Man and his Wife) went up, and
at first found sJl quiet, but before they had been there long,
they saw the Board* by his Bed trembling by him, and the
Bed-clothes flying off him, the latter they laid on immediately,
but they were no sooner on than off; so they took him out
of his Bed for quietness.

^See p. 25, note 1. <See p. 24, note 1.

28 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1679

December 29. The Boy was violently thrown to and fro,
only they carried him to the house of a Doctor m the Town,
and there he was free from disturbances, but returning home
at night, his former trouble b^an, and the Man taking him
by the hand, they were both of them almost tript into the
fire. They put him to bed, and he was attended with the
same iterate loss of his clothes, shaking off his Bed-board,
and Noises, that he had in his last conflict; they took him
up, designing to sit by the fire, but the doors clattered, and
the Chair was thrown at him, wherefore they carried him
to the Doctors house, and so for that night all was well. The
next morning he came home quiet, but as they were doing
somewhat, he cried out that he was prickt on the back, they
looked, and found a three-tin'd Fork sticking strangely there;
which being carried to the Doctors house, not only the Doctor himself said that it was his, but also the Doctors Servant
affirmed it was seen at home after the Boy was gone. The
Boys vexations continuing, they left him at the Doctors,
where he remained well till awhile after, and then he complained he was pricked, they looked and found an iron Spindle
sticking below his back; he complained he was pricked still,
they looked, and found Pins in a Paper sticking to his skin;
he once more complained of his Back, they looked, and found
there a long Iron, a bowl of a Spoon, and a piece of a Pansheard. They lay down by him on the Bed, with the light
burning, but he was twice thrown from them, and the second
time thrown quite under the Bed; in the Morning the Bed
was tossed about with such a creieJdng noise, as was heard
to the Neighbours; in the afternoon their knives were <Hie
after another brought, and put into his back, but pulled out
by the Spectators; only one knife which was missing seemed
to the standers by to come out of his Mouth : he was bidden
to read his Book, was taken and thrown about several times,
at last hitting the Bojrs Grandmother on the head. Anoth^
time he was thrust out of his Chair and rolled up and down
with out cries, that all things were on fire; yea, he was three
times very dangerously thrown into the fire, and preserved
by his Friends with much ado. The Boy also made for a
long time together a noise like a Dog, and like an Hen with
her Chickens, and could not speak rationally.

1680] L MATHER, REMARKABLE PROVIDENCES 29

Particularly, on December 26. He barked like a Dog, and
clock't like an Hen, and after long distraining to speak, said,
there's Powel, I am pinched; his Tongue likewise hung out
of his mouth, so as that it could by no means be forced in tiU
his Fit was over, and then he said 'twas forced out by Powel.*
He and the house also after this had rest till the ninth of
Januaiy : at which time because of his intolerable ravings, and
because the Child lying between the Man and his Wife, was
pulled out of Bed, and knockt so vehemently against the Bedstead Boards,^ in a manner very perillous and amazing. In
the Day time he was carried away beyond all possibility of
their finding him. His Grandmother at last saw him creeping on one side, and drag'd him in, where he lay miserable
lame, but recovering his speech, he said, that he was carried
above the Doctors house, and that Powel carried him, and
that the said Powel had him into the Bam, throwing him
against the Cart-wheel there, and then thrusting him out at
an hole; and accordingly they found some of the Remainders
of the Threshed Barley which was on the Barn-floor hanging
to his Clothes.

At another time he fell into a Swoon, they forced somewhat Refreshing into his mouth, and it was turned out as fast
as they put it in; e're long he came to himself, and expressed
some willingness to eat, but the Meat would forcibly fly out
of his mouth; and when he was able to speak, he said Powel
would not let him eat : Having f oimd the Boy to be best at a
NeighboiUB house, the Man carried him to his Daughters,
three miles from his own. The Boy was growing antick as
he was on the Journey, but before the end of it he made a
grievous hollowing, and when he lighted, he threw a great
stone at a Maid in the house, and fell on eating of .A^es.
Bdng at home afterwards, they had rest awhile, but on the
19 of January in the Morning he swooned, and coming to
himself, he roared terribly, and did eat Ashes, Sticks, Rugyam. The Morning following, there was such a racket with

^ This sentenoe is deariy of the nature of an interpolation; for the "rest"
mentioned in the following danae must date from the events narrated in the
preceding paragraph. The "Powd" meant was of course Caleb Powell — see
p. 31, note 1.

* See p. 24, note 1; yet head4x)aid and foot4)oaitl may here be meant

30 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [leso

the Boy, that the Man and his Wife took him to Bed to them.
A Bed-staff was thereupon thrown at them, and a Chamb^
pot with its Contents was thrown upon them, and they were
severely pinched. The Man being about to rise, his Clothes
were divers times pulled from them, himself thrust out of his
Bed, and his PiUow thrown after him. The Lad also would
have his clothes plucked off from him in these Winter Nights,
and was wofully dogg'd with such fruits of Devilish spite,
till it pleased God to shorten the Chain of the wicked Ds^
mon.

All this while the Devil did not use to appear in any visible
shape, only they would think they had hold of the Hand that
sometimes scratched them; but it would give them the slip.
And once the Man was discemably beaten by a Fist, and an
Hand got hold of his Wrist which he saw, but could not catch;
and the likeness of a Blackmore^ Child (tid appear from under
the Rugg and Blanket, where the Man lay, and it would rise
up, fall down, nod and slip under the clothes when they endeavoured to clasp it, never speaking any thing.

Neither were there many Words spoken by Satan all this
time, only once having put out their Light, they heard a
scraping on the Boards, and then a Piping and Dnunming
on them, which was followed with a Voice, singing. Revenge!
Revenge! Sweet is Revenge! And they being wdl terrified
with it, called upon God; the issue of which was, that suddenly
with a moumfiU Note, there were six times over uttered sudi
expressions as, Alas! Alas! me knock no more! me knock no
more! and now all ceased.

The Man does moreover affirm, that a Seaman (being a
Mate of a Ship) coming often to visit him, told him that they
wronged his Wife who suspected her to be guilty of Witchcraft; and that the Boy (his Grandchild) was the cause oi
this trouble; and that if he would let him have the Boy one
day, he would warrant him his house should be no more
troubled as it had been ; to which motion he consented. The
Mate came the next day betimes, and the Boy was with him
imtil night; after which his house he saith was not for some
time molested with evil Spirits.

Thus far is the Relation concerning the Dsemon at William

^ Bladuunoor, negro.

16801 L MATHER, REMARKABLE PROVIDENCES 31

Morse his House in Newbeiy.^ The true Reason of these
strange disturbances is as yet not certainly known : some (as
has been hinted) did suspect Morse's Wife to be guilty of
Witchcraft.

One of the NeighboiUB took Apples which were brought
out of that house and put them into the fire; upon which they
say, their houses were much disturbed. Another of the Neighbours, caused an Horse-shoe to be nailed before the doors,
and as long as it remained so, they could not perswade the
suspected person to go into the house; but when the Horseshoe was gone, she presently visited them. I shall not here
inlarge upon the vanity and superstition of those Experiments,

^ This "relation" was undoubtedly reodved from the Rev. Joshua Moodey,
then minister at Portsmouth, in a letter of August 23, 1683 (Mather Papers,
pp. 361-362); for a postscript speaks of its enclosure and says that he had it
from William Morse himself, lliat Morse was its author we know only from
Mather. Happily, there exist also many documents of the two witch-triala
arising from the affair — those of Caleb Powell and Mrs. Morse. Some of these,
preserved in the court records at Salem, were printed by Joshua Coflin in hb
History qf Newbury (Boston, 1S45), at pp. 122-134; and again, more carefully,
with others, by W. E. Woodward in his Records cf Salem Wiiehcraft (Boston, 1864),
n. 251-261. Others, which had strayed from public keeping, were published by
8. 6. Drake, then their owner, in an appendix (pp. 258-296) to his Annals cf
Wiiohercfi (Boston, 1869), in which he summarizes the story (pp. 141-150).
Two (her conviction at Boston and her release) have been printed in the Records
qf the Court qf AssistanU, I. (Boston, 1901), pp. 159, 189-190. Others still are
in the Massachusetts ardiives (vd. dXXXV., fol. 11-19), where they have been
used l^ Mr. W. F. Poole (see, in the N. E. Hist, and Gen. Register, XXIV., his
note, p. 386, to an unpublished draft of (jovemor Hutchinson's account). These
documents supplement, and sometimes correct, the relation of Motsc. Thus,
from sworn statements of December, 1679 (Coffin, Newlmry, pp. 124, 131-133), it
b dear that the events above ascribed to December 3 belong to November 27,
that the grandson's name was John Stiles, that the "seaman" who charged him
with the mischief was Caleb Powell, that the day the boy was in his keeping was
December 2, 1679, and that on the very next day Morse instituted proceedings
against Powell, who was indicted for witchcraft on December 8 (the day on which
the disturbances were resumed) and was tried at Ipswich in March. He succeeded
in clearing himsdf , but at the cost of Goodwif e Morse. She was a midwife, and
had long been suspected of witchcraft by some of her neighbors. Indicted in
Biaidi, she was tried at Boston in May before the magistrates of the coloi^,
was found guilty and sentenced to death, but was reprieved by the magistrate^
and in June, 1681, after more than a year's imprisonment, permitted, though
without acquittal, to return to her home, "provided she goe not above sixteen
rods from hv oune house and land at any time except to the meeting house."
For the end of her pitiful stoiy see p. 412, below.

32 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES 11662

reserving that for another place: All that I shall say at present is, that the Demons whom the blind Gentiles of old worshipped, told their Servants, that such things as these would
very much affect them; yea, and that certain Characters,
Signs and Charms would render their power ineffectual; and
accordingly they would become subject, when their own directions were obeyed. It is sport to the Devils when they
see silly Men thus deluded and made fools of by them. Others
were apt to think that a Seaman^ by some suspected to be a
Conjurer, set the Devil on work thus to disquiet Morse's
Fannly. Or it may be some other thing as yet kept hid in
the secrets of providence might be the true original of all this
Trouble.

A Disturbance not much unlike to this hapned above
twenty years ago, at an house in Tedworth, in the Coimty
of Wilts in En^and, which was by wise men judged to proceed from Conjuration.

Mr. Mompesson of Tedworth being in March 1661, at Lungershall,* and hearing a Drum beat there, he demanded of the Bailiff of
the Town what it meant, who told him, they had for some dayes
been troubled with an idle Dnmmier, pretending Authority, and a
Pass under the hands of some Gentlemen. Mr. Mompesson reading
his Pass, and knowing the hands of those Gentlemen, whose Names
were pretended to be subscribed, discovered the Cheat, and commanded the Vagrant to put off his Drum, and ordered a Constable
to secure him : but not long after he got clear of the Constable. In
April following, Mr Momposson's house was much disturbed with
Knoddngs, and with Drummings; for an hour together a Daemon
would beat Round-heads and Cuckolds, the Tattoo and several other
points of War as well as any Drummer. On November 5, The
Daemon made a great noise in the House, and caused some Boards
therein to move to and fro in the day time when there was an whole
room full of People present. At his departure, he left behind him
a Sulphurous smell, which was very offensive. The next night.
Chairs walked up and down the Room; the Childrens Shoes were
hurled over their heads. The Minister of the Town being there, a
Bed-staff was thrown at him, and hit him on the Leg, but without
the least hurt. In the latter end of December, 1662, They heard a
noise like the jingling of Money, the occasion of which was thought
to be, some words spoken the night before, by one in the Family;

1 Caleb Powell. * Ludgershall.

1683] I. MATHER, REMARKABLE PROVIDENCES 33

who said that Fairies used to leave money behind them, and they
wished it might be so now. In January Lights were seen in the
House, which seemed blue and glinmiering, and caused a great stiffness in the eyes of them that saw them. One in the room (by what
Authority I cannot tell) said, ''Satan, if the Drunmier set thee a work
give three knocks and no more", which was done accordingly. Once
when it was very sharp severe Weather, the room was suddenly fiUed
with a Noisome smell, and was very hot though without fire. This
Daemon would play some nasty and many ludicrous foolish tricks.
It would empty Chamber-pots into the Beds; and fiU Porringers
with Ashes. Sometimes it would not suffer any Ught to be in the
room, but would carry them away up the Chimney. Mr. Mompesson coming one morning into his Stable, found his Horse on the
ground, having one of his hinder legs in his mouth, and so fastened
there, that it was difficult for several men with a Leaver to get it
out. A Smith lodging in the House, heard a noise in the room, as
if one had been shoeing an Horse, and somewhat come as it were
with a Pincers snipping at the Smith's Nose, most part of the night.
The Dnunmer was under vehement suspicion for a Conjurer. He
was condemned to Transportation. All the time of his restraint and
absence, the House was quiet. See Mr. Glanvil's Collection of Modem ReUUions, P. 71, etc.*

But I proceed to give an account of some other things
lately hapning in New-England, which were undoubtedly praetematural; and not without Diabolical operation. The last
year did afford several Instances, not unlike unto those
which have been mentioned. For then Nicholas Desborough
of Hartford in New-England was strangely molested by stones,
pieces of earth, cobs of Indian Corn, etc., falling upon and
about him, which sometimes came in through the door, sometimes through the Window, sometimes down the Chimney,
at other times they seemed to fall from the floor of the Chamber, which yet was very close; sometimes he met with them
in his Shop, the Yard, the Bam, and in the Field at work.
In the House, such things hapned frequently, not only in the
night but in the day time, if the Man himself was at home,
but never when his Wife was at home alone. There was no

1 This famous relation was first printed in 1668 as an appendix to the third
edition of GlanviU's essay on witchcraft (see above, pp. 5-^), and was much
enlarged in the edition of 1681. What is here printed is not the briefer original
form but an abridgment of Mather's own.

34 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1683

great violence in the motion^ though several persons of the
Family and others also were struck with the things that were
thrown by an invisible hand; yet they were not hurt thereby.
Only the Man himself had once his Arm somewhat pained by
a blow given him ; and at another time, blood was dmwn from
one of his Legs by a scratch given it. This molestation b^an
soon after a Controversie arose between Desborough and another person, about a Chest of Clothes which the other said
that Desberough did unrighteously retain: and so it oonr
tinned for some Moneths (though with several intermissions).
In the latter end of the last year, when also the Man's Bam
was burned with the Com in it; but by what means it came
to pass is not known. Not long after, some to whom the
matter was referred, ordered Desberough to restore the Clothes
to the Person who complained of wrong; since which he hath
not been troubled as bef oro. Some of the stones hurled were
of considerable bigness; one of them weighed four pounds,
but generally the stones wero not great, but very small ones.
One time a piece of Clay came down the Chimney, falling on
the Table which stood at some distance from the Chimney.
The People of the House throw it on the Hearth, where it
lay a considerable time: they went to their Supper, and
whilest at their Supper, the piece of Clay was lifted up by an
invisible hand, and fell upon the Table; taking it up, they
found it hot, having lain so long beforo the firo, as to cause
it to be hot.^

Another Providence no less Remarkable than this last
mentioned, hapned at Portsmouth in New-England, about
the same time : concerning which I have receiv^ the following account from a Worthy hand.'

^ These experiences of Nicholas Desborough were reported by the Bcr.
John Russell, of Hadley, in a letter of August 2, 1683, which may be found in the
Mather Papers (pp. 86H88). Russell says he received the account from ''Capt
Allyn, a neer neighbour to Disborough." John Allyn, long secretary of the
colony, was one of the foremost men in Connecticut.

* The "worthy hand" was again that of the Rev. Joshua Mood^, of Portsmouth. Hb earliest letter about the matter does not i^pear in the MaUm
Papere; but in a later one (July 14, 1083— Mather Papers, pp. 359-360) he imies
thus: "About that at G. Walton's; because my Interest runs low with the Secre>
taiy, I have desired Mr. Woodbridge to endeavour the obtaining it, aixl if I can
get it shall send it per the first; Though if there should bee any di£Bciilty then1682] I. MATHER, REMARKABLE PROVIDENCES 35

On June 11, 1682, Being the Lords Day, at night showers of
stones were thrown both against the sides and roof of the house of
George Walton:^ some of the People went abroad, found the Gate
at some distance from the house, wrung off the Hinges, and stones
came thick about them: sometimes falling down by them, sometimes touching them without any hurt done to them, though they
seemed to come with great force, yet did no more but softly toudi
them; Stones flying about the room the Doors being shut. The
Glass-Windows shattered to pieces by stones that seemed to come
not from without but within; the Lead of the Glass Casements,
Window-Bars, etc. being driven forcibly outwards, and so standing
bent. While the Secretary* was walking in the room a great Hammer came brushing along against the Chamber floor that was over
his head, and fell down by hun. A Candlestick beaten off the Table.
They took up nine of the stones and marked them, and lud them on
the Table, some of them being as hot as if they came out of the fire;
but some of those market stones were found flying about again. In
this manner, about four hours space that night : The Secretary then
went to bed, but a stone came and broke up his Chamber<ioor, being
put to (not lockt), a Brick was sent upon the like Errand. The
abovesaid Stone the Secretary lockt up in his Chamber, but it was

about, you may doe pretty well with what you have already." And writing
again on August 23 (Mather Papers, pp. 360-361), he says his endeavors have not
been wanting to obtain it, but he finds it difficult. "If more may bee gotten,
you may expect when I come, or else must take up with what you had from
mee at first, which was the summe of what was then worthy of notice, only many
other particular actings of like nature had been then and since. It began of a
Lofd's day, June 11th, 1682, and so continued for a long time, only there was
acHBie nspite now and then. Hie last sight I have heard of was the carrying away
of aeverall Axes in the night, notwithstanding they were laied up, yea, lockt up
very safe, as the owner thought at least, which was done this spring." The
"Secretary" (t. «., of the province) was that Richard Chamberlain from whose
own pen we have the fuller account of the episode printed later in this volume
(pp. 58-77); and there can be littie doubt that what Mather gave to the press
rests on the basis of hb journal. As to "Mr. Woodbridge" see p. 65, note 1.

^ Walton (1615-1686) was a prosperous Quaker, "(jeorge Walton, and his
wife Alice, and Daughter, Abishag . . . lived on the great Island in Piscataqua,
and this Alice was one of the most accounted of the Women, for Profession in the
Island, whom it troubled them to lose; but Truth took her, and overturned the
Priest" (Bishop, New-Enffland Judged, pp. 466-467.) Great Island (now Newcasde), then a part of the township of Portsmouth, was often the seat of the
provincial government, and the secretary lodged at Walton's house. As to
Wahon's family and estate see his will (Probate Records qf the Province qf New
Bampehire, I. 299, and N, E. Hist, and Gen. Register, IX. 57).

* Richard (Chamberlain, secretary of the province. See preceding notes.

36 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1682

fetched out, and carried with great noise into the next Chamber.
The Spit was carried up Chimney, and came down with the pcnnt
forward, and stuck in die Back-log, and being removed by one of
the Company to one side of the Chimney, was by an unseen hand
thrown out at Window. This trade was driven on the next day,
and so from Day to Day, now and then there would be some intermission, and then to it again. The stones were most frequent wha«
the Master of the house was, whether in the Field or Bam, etc. A
black Cat was seen once while the Stones came and was shot at, but
she was too nimble for them. Some of the Family say, that they
once saw the appearance of an hand put forth at the Hall Window,
throwing stones towards the Entry, though there was no body in
the Hall the while : sometimes a dismal hollow whistling would be
heard; sometimes the noise of the trotting of an horse, and snorting
but nothing seen. The Man went up the great Bay in his Boat to
a Farm he had there, and while haling Wood or Timber to the Boat
he was disturbed by the Stones as before at home. He carried a
stirrup iron from the house down to the Boat, and there left it; but
while he was going up to the house, the iron came jingling after him
through tke Woods, and returned to the house, and so again, and at
last went away, and was heard of no more. Their Anchor leapt overboard several times as they were going home and stopt the boat. A
Cheese hath been taken out of the Press and crumbled all over the
floor. A piece of Iron with which they weighed up the Cheese-press
stuck into the Wall, and a Kittle hung up thereon. Several Cocks
of English-hay^ mowed near the house were taken and hung upon
Trees; and some made into small whisps, and put all up and down
the Kitchin, Cum multis aliis,* etc. After this manner, have they
been treated ever since at times; it were endless to particularize.
Of late they thought the bitterness of Death had been past, bring
quiet for sundry dayes and nights: but last week were some Retumings again; and this week (Aug. 2, 1682) as bad^or worse than ever.
The Man is sorely hurt with some of the Stones that came on him,
and like to feel the effects of them for many dayes.

Thus far is that Relation.

I am moreover informed, that the Dsemon was quiet all
the kC3t Winter, but in the Spring he began to play some ludicrous tricks, carrying away some Axes that were locked up

^ Doubtless what is now known as "timothy." In 1807 Kendall found this
still called "English grass" in Connecticut.
« "With many other things."

1682] I. MATHER, REMARKABLE PROVIDENCES 37

safe. This last Summer he has not made such disturbances as
formerly. But of this no more at present.^

There have been strange and true Reports concerning a
Woman now living near the Salmon Falls in Barwick* (formerly called Kittery) unto whom Evil Spirits have sometimes
visibly appeared; and she has sometimes been sorely tormented by invisible hands: Concerning all which, an Intelligent Person has sent me the following Narrative.'

A Brief Narrative of sundry Apparitions of Satan unto and Assaults
at sundry times and places upon the Person of Mary the Wife of
Antonio Hortado, dwelling near the Salmon Falls: Taken from
her ovm nunUh, Aug, 13, 1683.

In June 1682 (the day forgotten) at Evening, the said Mary
beard a voice at the door of her Dwelling, saying. What do you here?
about an hour after, standing at the Door of her House, she had a
blow on her Eye that settled her head near to the Door post, and
two or three dayes af tef , a Stone, as she judged about half a pound
or a pound weight, was thrown along the house within into the Chimney, and going to take it up it was gone; all the Family was in the
house, and no hand appearing which might be instrumental in throwing the stone. About two hours after, a Frying-pan then hanging
in the Chimney was heard to ring so loud, that not only those in
the house heard it, but others also that lived on the other side of
the River near an hundred Rods distant or more. Whereupon the
said Mary and her Husband going in a Cannoo over the River, they

^ "As for Walton, the Quaker of Portsmouth, whose house has been so
strangely troubled," adds Mather in the following chapter, "he suspects that one
of his neighbours has caused it by witchcraft; she (being a widow-woman) chargeth
him with injustice in detaining some land from her. It is none of my work to reflect upon the man, nor will I do it; only, if there be any late or old guilt upon his
conscience, it concerns him by confession and repentance to give glory to that God
who is able in strange wayes to discover the sins of men " — and see also p. 214.

> Berwick, on the Maine side of the river.

* This narrative too came from the Rev. Joshua Moodey (see his letters of
July 14 and August 23, 1G8»— Mather Papers, pp. 359-361), but at Mather's
instance. "I was very earnest with Mr. Emerson," writes Moodey, "and at
length obtained the endosed, which I transcribed from Mr. Tho. Broughton, who
read to mee what he took from the mouth of the woman and her husband, and
judge it credible, though it bee not the half of what is to be gotten. I expect
from him a fuller and farther account before I come down to the Conmienoement" John Emerson, the schoolmaster, we shall meet again at Salem (see p.
377, note). Thomas Broughton was a well known Boston merchant, then sojourning in New Hampshire.

38 NARRATIVES OP THE WITCHCRAFT CASES 11683

saw like the head of a man new-shom, and the tail of a white Cat
about two or three foot distance from each other, swimming over
before the Cannoo, but no body appeared to joyn head and tail together; and they returning over the River in less than an hours time,
the said Apparition followed their Cannoo back again, but disappeared at Tending. A day or two after, the said Mary was stricken
on her head (as she judged) with a stone, which caused a Swelling
and much soreness on her head, being then in the yard by her house,
and she presently entring into her house was bitten on both Arms
black and blue, and one of her Breasts scratched; the impressions of
the Teeth being like Mans Teeth, were plainly seen by many : Whereupon deserting their House to sojourn at a Neighbours on the other
side of the River, there appeared to said Mary in the house of her
sojourning, a Woman dodied with a green Safeguard, a short blue
Qoak, and a white Cap, making a profer to strike her with a firebrand, but struck her not. The Day following the same shape appeared again to her, but now arrayed with a gray Gown, white Apron,
and white Head-clothes, in appearance laughing seva^ times, but
no voice heard. Since when said Mary has been freed from those
Satanical Molestations.

But the said Antonio being returned in March last with his
Family, to dwell again in his own house, and on his entrance there,
hearing the noise of a Man walking in his Chamber, and seeing the
boards buckle under his feet as he walked, though no man to be seen
in the Chamber (for they went on purpose to look) he returned with
his Family to dwell on die other side of the River; yet planting his
Ground though he forsook his House, he hath had five Rods of good
Log-fence thrown down at once, the feeting of Neat Cattle plainly to
be seen almost between every Row of Com in the field yet no Cattle
seen there, nor any damage done to his Com, not so much as any
of the Leaves of the Com cropt.

Thus far is that Narrative.

I am further informed, that some (who should have been
wiser) advised the poor Woman to stick the House round with
Bayes, as an effectual preservative against the power of Evil
Spirits. This Counsel was followed. And as long as the
Bayes continued green, she had quiet; but when they b^an
to wither, they were all by an unseen hand carried away, and
the Woman again tormented.

It is observable, that at the same time three Houses in
three several Towns should be molested by Daemons, as has
now been related.

THE NEW YORK CASES OF HALL AND

HARRISON, 1665, 1670

i

INTRODUCTION

It is not strange that in the Dutch colony of New Netherland we hear nothing of witches. The home land of the Dutch
had, beyond all others, outgrown the panic. It was a physician of Netherlandish birth, Johann Weyer, who in the later
sixteenth century first wrote effectively against its cruelties.
When his English pupil, Reginald Scot, protested yet more
boldly, it was in Holland alone his book found reimpression.
So far as is known, the seventeenth century saw there no
executions for witchcraft, and after 1610 no trials. If the
leaders of Dutch Calvinism were content with silence, the
most eloquent spokesman of their Arminian rivals, Episcopius,
was a frank disbeliever in the witch-pact and the witch-confessions. It was his fellow Arminian, Grevius, who first demonstrated the iniquity of torture, the fruitful source of such
confessions throughout Christendom; and that other Dutchman, Balthasar Bekker, who in 1691 struck at the root of the
terror by doubting the Devil himself, was but the last of a
long line of such bold thinkers. These were of course in advance of their fellows; but that Holland was throughout the
century a refuge for the victims and the foes of witch-persecution in neighbor lands would seem to point to a general
skepticism, and how cautious, with all their credulity, even
Calvinist divines had grown in such an atmosphere. New
England learned in 1692 when she asked an opinion from her
New York neighbors.^

No wonder, then, that (as Mrs. Van Rensselaer tells us)
"the one and only sign of the delusion ... to be found in the

^ Mass. Hist Soc., Proceedings, second ser., I. 348-358. See p. 195, below.

41

42 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES

annals of the Dutch province is a fear expressed by Governor
Kief t that the Indian medicine-men were directing their incantations against himself." ^ Accusations of witchcraft the
New York jurisdiction did not wholly escape; but they followed the Knglish occupation and were^ in di£fering ways, a
l^acy from New England. Even the Dutch dominion had
included towns peopled from New England; and it was to
these that in 1662 (the same year in which, as we have seen,
he was interceding with the Connecticut government for his
young kinswoman Judith Varlet)' Governor Stuyvesant
found it wise, while granting them their own magistrates and
their own courts, to prescribe that ''in dark and dubious
matters, especially in witchcrafts, the party aggrieved might
appeal to the Governor and Council." ' But when in 1664
the English king bestowed upon his brother, the Duke of
York, the territoiy occupied by the Dutch colony and equipped
him with the means to take it by force, he added to the gift
that greater eastern half of Long Island which had not only
been settled, but tiU now had been governed, by the New
Englanders. There, from the first, witchcraft was in thought;
for the earliest settlement, at Southampton, had adopted for
its code the law of Moses as codified by the Rev. John Cotton, with the death penalty both for witchcraft and for consulting a witch.^ Already in 1658 Elizabeth Garlick, of
Easthampton, had been indicted for witchcraft and sent to
Connecticut for trial.* It is intelligible, therefore, that in

» Hidory qf ike City rf New York in ike Seeenteenik CenJtufy, I. 203.

•Seep. 18, note 2.

> Bolton, HiiUrry qf the Cwady qf WeMieder (revised ed., New York, 1881),
n. 280, quoting vol. XXI. 233-238 of tbe "Albany Records."

« Howell, SouthampUm, pp. 47, 465; The Fini Book qf Records qf ike Town
qf Southampton (Sag Harbor, 1874), p. 18 ff.

* Tbe evidence against her may be found in the Records qf ike Town cf EastHampton (Sag Harbor, 1887 ff.), 1. 128-140, 152-155, the record of the ConnectiGut court (she was acquitted) in the Historical Magazine, VI. 53, and a letttf of
Governor Winthrop to the Easthamptonians in the PMie Records qf Connecticut,

INTRODUCTION 43

1665^ the very first year of English control at New York^
there came up from Seatalcott, or Setauket, the later Brookhaven^ whose settlers had been drawn from the region of
Bostoni a case of witchcraft for trial by the supreme court
of the colony, the "Court of Assizes." ^

The two documents which make up the extant record of
this case^ with those relating to a woman who crossed the
border after trial for witchcraft in Connecticut, form, so far
as is known, the entire witch-annals of the New York province. They must serve us here in Ueu of a narrative.

The documents of the Hall case, first printed perhaps in
the New York National Advocate (August 2, 1821) and thence
borrowed by Niles's Weekly Register (August 11), were indoded by Yates (with a part of the Harrison papers) in the
^q)endix to his edition of Smith's History of New York (Albany^ 1814), and more fully printed by O'Callaghan in his
Documentary History of New York (quarto ed., IV. 85-88;
octavo ed., IV. 133-138). Those of the Harrison case, more
fully ferreted out by Mr. Paltsits, are printed by him with
eqpedal care and with valuable notes, in the Minutes of the
Execviive CauncU of New York (Albany, 1910), I. 390-395, II.
52-55. The originals of the Hall documents perished in the
fire which befell the State Capitol at Albany on March 29,
1911 ; the Harrison documents were but slightly damaged.

L 572-573. That Mary Wright, of Qyster Bay, who in 1660 was punished for
QnakfTtnm in Boston, was sent thither on a charge of witchcraft, as has been
itated, seems contradicted by what we know of her case (see Hutchinson, History
tf Matmtekutetts, I., ch. I., wb anno 1660; Bishop, New-England Judged, ed. of
1703, pp. 220, 340, 461; N. Y. Gen. and Biog. Record, III. 37 ff.)

^This colonial "Court of Assizes" was made up of the governor and his
eooncil, with the sheri£F of the colony and the justices of the three "ridings." It
was a new creation, and, having come together on September 28 for its first annual
feaaion, it found this among its earliest cases. It was, however, with the aid of
menibers of this court that in the preceding winter Governor Nicolls had drawn
the code — "the Duke's Laws," as they were to be called — which now governed
tfe colony.

THE CASES OF HALL AND HARRISON

At the Court of Assizes held in New Yorke
the 2d day of October 1665 etc.
The TryaU of Ralph Hall and Mary his wife, upon suspicion

of Witchcraft

The names of the Persons who served on the Grand Jury.*

Thomas Baker, Foreman of the Jury,

of East Hampton.
Capt John Symonds of Hempsteed.
Mr Hallet

Anthony Waters

Jamaica

^Thdr troubles antedated the change in government, and it would aeem
that at first their neighbors were on their side; for, under date of June 9, 1664,
the town records recite that "The magistrates haveing Considdered the C<»nplaintes of Hall and his wife against mr. Smith, doo judge the sayde mr. Smith
hath not suffitienly made good what he hath sd. of her, and therefore mr. Smith
is orderred to pay the woman five markes." (Records, Town qf BrooklUnen, up
to 1800, Patchogue, 1880, p. 38.) But they had made a dangerous foe, for at
Setauket "Mr." Smith could then hardly have meant any other than that wellknown Long Island character, Richard Smith, the founder of Smithtown, who
had himself at Boston and at Southampton experienced impriscmment and
banishment for Quakerism or Quakerly behavior, but was now a man of note in
his region — ^the "Bull" Smith of local legend. (Bishop, New England Judged,
ed. of 1703, p. 11; HoweU, Early History qf Southampton, £. /., second ed.,
Albany, 1887, p. 438; EaHy Long Island WiUs, New York, 1897, p. 78 ff.)

'Of this jury only the foreman was from the part of Long Island just
gained from New England. The four next named, Uiough English, were from
those western townships which under Dutch rule had been a place of refuge for
sectaries of every sort "Mr. Hallet" was probably William Hallett, the sheriff
who in 1656 had lost his place by opening his house to Baptist preaching. Most
puzzling is "Mr. Nicdls of Stamford" — ^for Stamford was not even claimed by
the New York province. Can it be that William NicoUs (son of Matthias Nicolls,
now secretary of the province and a member of the court), who was later to have
so large a place in New York history, had temporarily established himself at
Stamford, on the border? Notable among the six New Yorkers is the name of
Jacob Leisler, later to play so strange a r61e.

44

of New Yorke.

1666] NEW YORK CASES 45

Thomas Wandall of Marshpath^ Kills.

Mr Nicolls of Stamford

Balthazer de Haart

John Garland

Jacob Leisler

Anthonio de Mill

Alexander Munro

Thomas Searle
The Prisoners being brought to the Barr by Allard Anthony, Sheriflfe of New Yorke, This following Indictmt was
read, first against Ralph Hall and then agst Maiy his wife,
vizt.

The Constable and Overseers of the Towne of Seatallcott,
in the East Riding of Yorkshire* upon Long Island, Do Present for our Soveraigne Lord the King, That Ralph Hall of
Seatallcott aforesaid, upon the 25th day of December, being
Christmas day last was Twelve Monthes,* in the 15th yeare
of the Raigne of our Soveraigne Lord, Charles the Second,
by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith etc, and severall other dayes
and times since that day, by some detestable and wicked
Arts, commonly called Witchcraft and Sorcery, did (as is suspected) maliciously and feloniously, practice and Exercise at
the said towne of Seatalcott in the East Riding of Yorkshire
on Long Island aforesaid, on the Person of George Wood, late
of the same place, by wch wicked and detestable Arts, the
said Geoi*ge Wood (as is suspected) most dangerously and
mortally sickned and languished, And not long after by the
aforesaid wicked and detestable Arts, the said George Wood
(as is likewise suspected) dyed.

Moreover, The Constable and overseers of the said Towne
of Seatalcott, in the East Riding of Yorkshire upon Long
Island aforesaid, do further Present for our Soveraigne Lord
the King, That some while after the death of the aforesaid

iMaspeth.

■When, in honor of its new proprietor, New Amsterdam became New
York, Long Island was for the same reason named "Yorkshire." Its "East
Riding" was the portion, now Suffolk county, which had hitherto been New
England's.

• /. e,, a year ago last Christmas — December 25, 1663 : the years of Charles
II.'s reign were reckoned from the death of his father.

46 NARRATIVES OF THE WTTCHCRAPT CASES [1665

Geoi^ Woodi The said Ralph Hall did (as is suspected)
divers times by the like wicked and detestable Arts, commonly
called Witchcraft and Sorcery, Maliciously and feloniously
practise and Exercise at the said Towne of Seatalcott, in the
East Riding of Yorkshire upon Long Island aforesaid, on the
Person of an Infant Childe of Ann Rogers, widdow of the
aforesaid Geoi*ge Wood deceased, by wh wicked and detestable Arts, the said Infant C!hilde (as is suspected) most dangerously and mortally sickned and languished, and not long
after by the said Wicked and detestable Arts (as is likewise
suspected) dyed, And so the said Constable and Overseers
do Present, That the said George Wood, and the sd Infante
sd^ Childe by the wayes and meanes aforesaid, most wickedly
maliciously and feloniously were (as is suspected) murdered
by the said Ralph Hall at the tunes and places aforesaid,
agst the Peace of Our Soveraigne Lord the King and against
the Laws of this Government in such Cases Provided.'

The like Indictmt was read, against Maiy the wife of
Ralph Hall.

There upon, severall Depositions, accusing the Prisonrs
of the fact for which they were endicted were read, but no
witnesse appeared to give Testimony in Court viva voce.

Then the Clarke* calling upon Ralph Hall, bad him hold
up his hand, and read as followes.

Ralph Hall thou standest here indicted, for that having
not the feare of God before thine eyes. Thou did'st upon the
25th day of December, being Christinas day last was 12
Moneths, and at sev'all other times since, as is suspected, by
some wicked and detestable Arts, conunonly called witehcraft
and Sorceiy, maliciously and feloniously practice and Exer1 This repetitioa of "fl4" is deariy accidental.

* "The Laws of this Govemment" — ^"the Duke's laws," as they were later
called — had been drawn up in the preceding winter by Governor NicoUs himself,
with the aid of other members of this court; and, though baaed on those of the
New England colonies, they omitted all mention of witchcraft. That was significant; but it meant only that there was no provision for its punishment per je,
as insult to the majesty of Heaven: harm wrought by witchcraft, whether to
person or propvty, was covved by the general statutes, and where, as in this
case, the harm charged was death, the offense (as the indictment shows) was
accounted murder.

•Thederk.

1<M»] NEW YORK CASES 47

cise, upon the Bodyes of Geoi^ Wood, and an Infant Childe
of Ann Rogers, by which said Arts, the said George Wood and
the Infant Childe (as is suspected) most dangerously and mortally fell sick, and languisht unto death. Ralph Hall, what
dost thou say for th3rselfe, art thou guilty, or not guilty?

Maiy the wife of Ralph Hall was called upon in lO^e manner.

They both Pleaded not guilty and threw themselves to
bee Tryed by God and the Country.

Where upon, their Case was referred to the Jury, who
brought in to the Court, this following verdict vi2i.^

Wee having seriously considered the Case committed to
our Chaiige, against the Prisonrs at the Barr, and having well
weighed the Evidence, wee finde that there are some suspitions by the Evidence, of what the woman is Charged with,
but nothing considerable of value to take away her Ufe. But
in reference to the man wee finde nothing considerable to
charge him with.

llie Court there upon, gave this sentence. That the man
should bee bound Body and Goods for his wives Apperance,
at the next Sessions, and so on from Sessions to Sessions as
long as they stay wthin this Government, In the meane while,
to bee of their good Behavior. So they were retmu'd into
the Sheriffs Custody, and upon Entring into a Recognizance,
according to the Sentence of the Court, they were released.

A Release to Ralph HaU and Mary his wife from the Recog^

nizance they enired into at the Assizes.

These Are to Certify all whom it may Conceme That
Ralph Hall and Maiy his wife (at present living upon Great
Minifords Island)' are hereby released and acquitted from
any and all Recognizances, bonds of appearance or othr obligations— entred into by them or either of them for the peace
or good behavior upon account of any accusation or Indictemt upon suspition of Witch Craft brought into the Cort
of Assizes against them in the year 1665. There haveving
beene no duect proofes nor furthr prosecucion of them or

1 Viddieel, "to wit": we now abbreviate it by ''viz."

* Now ''City Island" — in Long Island Sound, at its western end.

48 NARRATIVES OP THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1«70

eithr of them sinoe. — Given undr my hand at Fort James in
New Yorke this 21th day of August 1668.

R. NlCX)LL8.

At the Fort July 7th 1670.
Before the Governor.

Upon the Ck)mplaint of Thomas Hunt SenV and Edward
Waters on behalf e of the Towne of West Chester against a
Woman suspected for a Witch who they desire may not live
in their Towne; The Woman appeares with Capt. Ponton^
to justify her selfe; her Name is Katharine Har^rson.'

Their Petidon, as also another from Jamaica against her
settling there were read.

Shee saith shee hath lived at Wethersfield 19 yearesi and
came from England thither; Shee was in Prison 12 Months.

Shee was tryed for Witchcraft at Hartford in May last,
found guilty by the Jury, but acquitted by the Bendi, and
released out of Prison, putting her in minde of her Promise
to remove.'

^ Captain Richard Pantoiiy of West Chester, in whose home she had found
shdter.

* Katharine Harrisoii was the widow of John Harrison, of Wethenfidd,
who died in 1666, leaving her an ample estate and three daughters. Rebecca,
the ddest (bom February 10, 1654), became at some time before June 28, 1671,
the wife of Josiah Hunt of West Chester, or Westchester, scm of that Thomas
Hunt who now (July 7) is named as a complainant against her on behalf of that
town, but in a following document (August 24) appears on her behalf. It is
possible that this marriage antedated her coming to West Chester and explains
it, but more likdy that it was a result of it and explains the changing attitude of
Thomas Hunt (See Adams and Stiles, Hidory <jf Ancient Wdkersfidd, New
Yoric, 1904, 1. 682, II. 416; N. E, Hist, and Gen. RegiMer, XVIH. 58; N. Y. Oen.
and Biog. Record, XLIH. 117; N. Y, ExeeuUte CotmcU Mwides, I. 53, note.)

'There then follows a transcript, from the records of the Connecticut
Court of Assistants, of this action in her case^-^ its session of May 20, 1670.
The documents of her trial, still extant at Hartford in the records of the county
court and in those of the Court of Assistants (1. 1-7), and in part printed in tbe
Connecticut Colonial Records (II. 118, 132), in Adams and Stiles, Ancient Wdken^
fiM (I. 682-684), and in Taylor, The Wiichcnfi Ddueion in Colonial ConneeHcut
(New York, 1908), pp. 47-61, show that she was imprisoned and indicted in May,
1669, tried in October and found guilty by a jury, but by a special (Dourt of Assistants, to which the General Assembly had referred the matttf with power,
was in May, 1670, dismissed, as stated above, with a reminder of her promise to
leave Wethersfield.

1070] NEW YORK CASES 49

An Ordr for Katherine Harrison to Remove from Westchestr.

Whereas Ck)mplaint hath beene made unto me by the Inhabitants of Westchestr agt Katherine Harrison late of Wethersfeild in his Ma'ties Colony of Conecticott widdow. That
contrary to the consent and good liking of the Towne she
would settle amongst them and she being reputed to be a
person lyeing undr the Supposicion of Witchcraft hath given
some cause of apprehension to the Inhabitants there, To the
end their Jealousyes and feares as to this perticuler may be
removed, I have thought fitt to ordr and appoint that the
Constable and Overseers of the Towne of Westchestr do give
warning to the said Katherine EEarrison to remove out of their
precincts in some short tyme after notice given, and they are
likewise to admonish her to retome to the place of her former
abode, that they nor their neighboiu^ may receive no furthr
disturbance by her. Given undr my hand at Fort James in
New Yorke this 7th day of July 1670.

[Francis Lovelace].

An Ordr for Katherine Harrison and Captn Richard Pardon to

appeare at the Fort before the Governor.

Whereas Complaint hath beene made unto me by the
Inhabitants of Westchestr agt Katherine Harrison widdow
That she doth neglect or refuse to obey my late Ordr concerning her removall out of the said Towne, These are to require you that you give notice unto the said Katherine Harrison as also unto Captn Richard Panton at whose house she
resydeth. That they make their personall appearance before
me in this place on Wednesday next being the 24th of this
Instant month, when those of the Towne that have ought to
object agt them doe likewise attend, where I shall endeavor
a Composure of this difference betweene them. Given undr
my hand at Fort James in New Yorke this 20th day of August 1670.

DFrancis Lovelace.]
To the Constable of Westchestr.

60 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES 11870

Preset At the Fort. Aug: 24th 1670.

The Govemour "^i

Mr. Delavall

The Secretary

The Matt'r to bee considered of is the Complaint of the
Towne of West-chester against Katharine Harryson Widdow
suspected of Witch-craft etc :

> They being all appointed to appeare before the Govemour
this day;

There appeared for the Towne Edward Waters Constable
and John Quinby;

For the Woman Capt. Ponton, Thomas Hunt Senr, and
Junr, Roger Townsend, and one More.^

Capt. Ponton produced a Letter from Capt. Talcott' to
him in Justification of the Womans Innocency, and another
Letter from John Allen Secretary of Connecticott Govemm't,
in excuse of not sending the Womans Papers.

Josiah Willard' being desired to say what hee knew concerning the Woman, making Relation of what is certifyed by
Mr. Allen, hee is one of that Govemm't that knew of her
Arraignment, and was spoken to (that hee would bee present)
by the Constable, but hath nothing to say further.

It being taken into Consideracion, It is Ordered that the
Discussion of this Matter bee ref errd to the next Gen[er]al Court
of Assizes; In the meane time that shee give Security for her
good Behaviour, diuing the time of her Abode amongst them
at West-Chester.

A vxxmxnt to the Constable of Westchestr to take an Account of

the Goods of Katherine Harrison.

These are to require you to take an Account of such Goods
as have lately beene brought from out of his Ma'ties Colony of
Conecticott unto Katherine Harrison, and having taken a

^ /. e., one more appeared.

* Captain John Talcott, then treasurer of the Connecticut cc^ony, was one of
its foremost men. Hewasamemberof the Court of Assistants, and was doubtless
largdy responsible for its action. He was well known at West Chester, for in 1663
at the head of a troop from Connecticut he had taken the place from the Dutdi.

' Of Wethersfield — a trader, and doubtless here on some mercantile errand.
He was a brother of the Rev. Samud Willard, whom we have met (pp. 21-22) and
shall meet again.

1670] NEW YORK CASES 51

Note of the perticulers that you retome the Same unto me for
the doeing whereof this shall be yor warrant. Given undr my
hand at Fort James in New Yorke this 25th day of August 1670.

[Francis Lovelace.]
To the present Constable of Westchester.

An Ordr concerning Kalherine Harrison.

Whereas severall Adresses have beene made unto me by
some of the Inhabitants of Westchestr on behalf e of the rest
desiring that Katherine Harrison late of Wethersfeild in his
Ma'ties Colony of Connecticott widdow at present residing
in their Towne may be ordered to remove from thence and not
permitted to stay wthin their Jmisdiction upon an apprehension they have of her grounded upon some troubles she hath
layne undr at Wethersfeild upon suspition of Witchcraft, the
reasons whereof do not so clearly appeare unto me, Yett notwthstanding to give as much satii^action as may be to the
Complts^ who pretend their f eares to be of a publique Concerned I have not thought fitt absolutely to determyne the
mattr at present, but do suspend it untill the next Genrll
Cort of A£»izes, when there wiU be a full meeting of the Couneell and Justices of the peace to debate and conclude the
same. In the meane tyme the said Katherine Harrison wth
her Children may remaine in the Towne of Westchestr where
she now is wthout disturbance or molestation, she having
given sufficient security for her Civill carriage and good behaviour. Given undr my hand at Fort James in New York
this 25th day of August in the 22th yeare of his Ma'ties
Raigne Amioq.« Domini 1670. ^^^^^ Lovelace.]

Anno 1670.
Appeals, Actions f Presentmis etc. Eniredfor Hearing and TryaU
at ^ Gen[er]aU Cort of Assizes to bee held in New Yorke beginning on the first Wednesday of Octobr 1670.

E[atherine Harryson bound over to appeare upon the
Complt of the Inhabitants of Westchester upon suspicion of
Witch-craft.

> Complainants.

* /. e., "and in the year of Our Lord " : the q stands for the enclitic que, and.

i

62 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1670

In the case of Katherine Harryson Widdow, who was
bound to the good Behaviour upon Complt of some of the
Inhabitants of Westchester untill the holding of this Court,
It is Ordered, that in r^ard there is nothing appears against
her deserving the continuance of that obligacion shee is to bee
releast from it, and hath Liberty to renudne in the Towne of
Westchester where shee now resides, or any where else in the
Govemmt dining her pleasure.^

[Francis Lovelace.]

^ Alas, it is to be feared that her neighbon did not make her life hi^py.
Certain documents as to her property (printed in the N. Y, ExecuHte Council
Mimdes, II. 3d3-d95) make it probable that she left Westchester in May; and
an entry of May 9, 1672, in the records (yet unpublished) of the Connecticut
^ Court of Assistants — ^"The court upon aoc'^ of work done by Katherin Harrison
for Danid Gerrad doe see cause to remit of the five pounds Katherin Harrison
is to pay Danll Gerrad Twenty Shillings" — may mean that she was permitted
to return to Hartford, though perhaps it refers to work done while she was in
custody. In any case, she was in New York later, for, "during the temporary
occupation of New Yoric by the Dutch in 1673, an accusation was brought against
her before Governor Colve, but was promptly and contemptuously dismissed"
(Drake, AnnaU cf Wikkcfofi, Boston, 1869, pp. 133-134; Levermore. "1/^tchqnk in Coiiiiectfcut»" in the iVaw En$Uadn, XLiy.812).

LITHOBOLIA, BY RICHARD CHAMBERLAIN,

1698

INTRODUCTION

That the "R. C. Esq." who in 1698 published at London
the following narrative was Richard Chamberlain, sometime
secretary of the province of New Hampshire, is beyond all
doubt. His own statement that he was in that province in
His Majesty's service, and lodged at George WaJton's, in a
year easily recognized by internal evidence as 1682, would
suffice to identify him; for not only was there no other '^R.
CJ* in that well-known circle, but the Puritan pastor at Portsmouth, writing at that very time of this very episode (see p. 35,
above), makes the secretary a lodger at Geoige Walton's and
a source of information as to these happenings. Nor can
this story be any bookseller's expansion of the narrative then
published; for its mass of added detail squares not less perfectly with every local tradition. If "the Contents hereof"
are not now to be found in the records of His Majesty's
"Council-Court held for that province," where Chamberlain
himself doubtless inscribed them, it is amply explained by
the mutilation and scattering of those records; and enough
remains (see p. 31, note) to show the affair matter of record.

There was reason, too, why precisely Richard Chamberlain should have been one of the objects of such wrath, human
or infernal, as found utterance in this "stonery." It was the
very crisis of a dispute that for half a century had disturbed
the peace of New Hampshire. John Mason, to whom in 1629
that r^on had been granted and who in 1631 had undertaken its settlement, had died in 1635 without making adequate provision for its administration. The multiplying col66 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES

onists, who even before and diuing his personal control had
occupied lands by other title than his grant, now ignored his
claims; and the widow and infant grandchildren who were
his heirs soon left them wholly to their own devices. The
growing Puritan element leaned on the neighboring Massachusetts, and that colony discovered that its own charter
could be interpreted to include the territory now settled in
New Hampshire. Lands were thenceforward often granted by
the Boston government, and oftener by the town authorities
set up by it in New Hampshire; and the feeble protests of
the Mason heirs found little hearing, the political changes in
England making it impossible to enforce them. But witii the
Restoration, in 1660, matters changed, and by 1680 Robert
Mason had not only won from a venal court the rejection of
the Massachusetts daim and full recognition of his proprietorship in New Hampshire, but was given a seat in the Council
of the royal province into which the colony was now reconstituted and was permitted to nominate its governor and secretary. A governor was not at once found; but as its secretary he named Richard Chamberlain.

Of Chamberlain's history we know little. The Lords of
Trade had stipulated that Hie new secretary should be ''well
versed m the law,'' and there can be little doubt that he was
that ''Richard Chamberlayne, son and heir of William C, of
London, gent.," who in May, 1651, was admitted to Gray's
Inn (not six months after Mason's all-powerful kinsman and
adviser, Edward Randolph), who was " called to the bar 11 Nov.
1659, ancient 17 April 1676," and whose daughter Elizabeth
was in 1695 wedded to that "much Honoiued Mart. Lumley,
Esq.," to whom he dedicates this booklet. If so he was of a
good f amfly, whose pedigree can be traced for several generations in the visitations of the heralds. Perhaps already an
acquaintance of Mason, he soon became his intimate friend.
They crossed the sea together, arriving in New Hampshire

INTRODUCTION 67

in Decemberi 1680, and at once entering on their functions in
the government. Though outvoted in the Council, Mason
proceeded to the enforcement of his territorial claims, and
soon by his demands, however legal, earned fear and hate not
only for himself but for Chamberlain, who was believed to
have instigated them. The colonists were left their improved
lands, on payment of a moderate quit-rent; but all wild lands,
including their pastures and their woodlands. Mason counted
his, to grant at wiU. But the colonists, except a few Quakers,
stoutly held out, and Mason returned to England to ui*ge his
case, leaving Chamberlain to bear the brunt. The latter had
his abode on Great Island, under the guns of the fort, at the
house of the Quaker George Walton; and it is there, in the
summer of 1682, that the following narrative has its scene.

The booklet is now very rare, and this is probably the first
complete reunpression of it. With the exception of the pref*
atoiy matter it was, however, reprinted in 1861 in the His^
tarical Magazine, V. 321-327.

LITHOBOLIA

lAtheholia: cr, the Stane-Throwing DevU. Being an Exact and
True Account {by way of Jowmdt) of the various Actions
of Infernal Spirits, or {Demls Incarnate) Witches, or both;
and the great Disturbance and Amazement they gave to
George Waltons Family, at a place caWd Great Island in
the Province of New-Hantshire in New-England, chiefly in
Throwing about {by an Invisible hand) Stone, Bricks, and
Brich4xits of all Sizes, with several other things, as Hammers,
Mavis, IronrCrows, Spits, and other Domeslick Utensils,
as came into their Hellish Minds, and this for the space of
a Quarter of a Year.

By R. C. Esq; who was a Sojourner in the same Family
the whole time, and an Ocular Witness of these Diabolido
Inventions.

The Contents hereof being manifestly known to the Inhabitants
of that Province, and Persons of other Provinces, and is upon
Record in his Majesties CouncilrCourt held for that Province.

London, Printed, and are to be Sold by E. Whitlook near
Stationers-Hall, 1698.^

To The much Honoured Mart. Lundey, Esq;^
Sir,

As the subsequent Script deserves not to be called a Book,
so these precedent Lines presume not to a Dedication : But,
Sir, it is an occasion that I am ambitious to lay hold on, to
discover to You by this Epitome (as it were) the propension

^Htle-page of the original.

s Martin Lumley, Esq. (1662-1710), son of Sir Martin Luml^, of Great
Baidfieldy Essex, himaelf suooeeded to that baronetcy in 1702. When LUhoboHa
was written he had probably just become a kinsman of the author; for in 1695
he married for his second wife "Elixabeth, daughter of Ridiaitl Chamberlayn of
Gray's Inn." (See artide of J. W. Dean, in N. E. HuL and Gen. Regiiter, XUII.
183-185.)

58

1606] UTHOBOLIA 69

and inclination I have to give a more full and perfect demonstration of the Honour, Love, and Service, I own (as I think
my self oblig'd) to have for You. To a Sober, Judicious, and
well Principled Person, such as yovu* Self, plain Truths are
much more agreeable than the most charming and surprising
Romance or Novel, with all the strange turns and events.
That this is of the first sort, (as I have formerly upon Record
attested) I do now aver and protest ; yet neither is it less strange
than true, and so may be capable of giving you some Diveraon for an hoiu* : For this interruption of your more serious
ones, I cannot doubt your candor and clemency, in pardoning
it, that so well know (and do most sensibly acknowledg) your
hi^ Worth and Goodness; and that the Relation I am Dignifi^ with, infers a mutual Patronization.

Sir, I am

Your most Hiunble Servant,

R. \j*

To the much Horumred R. F. Esq;^

To tell strange feats of Dsemons, here I am;
Strange, but most true they are, ev'n to a Dram,
Hio' Sadduceans cry, 'tis all a Sham.

Here's Stony Arg'iunents of persuasive Dint,
They'l not believe it, told, nor yet in Print :
What should the Reason be? The Devil's in't.

And yet they wish to be convinc'd by Sight,

Assur'd by Apparition of a Sprite;

But Learned Brown' doth state the matter right :

Satan wiU never Instrumental be

Of so much Good, to' Appear to them; for he

Hath them sure by their Infidelity.

But you, my Noble Friend, know better things;

Your Faith, mounted on Religions Wings,

Sets you above the Clouds whence Error springs.

1 "R. F., Esq./' has not been identified.

* Sir Tlioiiias Browne. See his Rdigio Medici, pt. I., { 30.

60 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1662

Your Soul reflecting on this lower Sphear,

Of froth and vanity, joys oft to hear

The Sacred Ora'des, where all Truths i^(^pear,

Which will Conduct out of this Labyrinth of Night,
And lead you to the source of Intellectual light.

Which is the Hearty Prayer of

Your most faithful Humble Servant,

LUhcbolia: cr^ the SUme4hrowing Dml, etc.

Such is the Sceptical Humoiu* of this Age for Incredulity,
(not to say Infidelity,) That I wonder they do not take up
and profess, in tenns, the Pyrrhonian Doctrine of disbelieving
their very Senses. For that which I am going to relate happening to cease in the Province of New-Hampshire in America,
just upon that Govemour's Arrival and Appearance at the
Council there, who was informed by my self, and several other
Gentlemen of the Council, and other considerable Persons, of
the true and certain Reality hereof, yet he continued tenacious
in the Opinion that we were all imposed upon by the waggery
of some unlucky Boys;^ which, considering the Circumstances
and Passages hereafter mentioned, was altogether impossible.

I have a Wonder to relate; for such (I take it) is so to be
termed whatsoever is Prsetematural, and not assignable to,
or the effect of. Natural Causes : It is a Lithobolia,^ or Stonethrowing, which happened by Witchcraft (as was supposed)
and maliciously peipetrated by an Elderly Woman, a Neighbour suspected, and (I think) fonnerly detected for such kmd
of DiaboUcal Tricks and Practises;' and the wicked Instiga-

> Edward ' Cranfield, first royal goveraor of New Hampshire. He arrived
in October, 1682, and left in June, 1685. Though Mason's nominee, he for some
time leaned to the side of the colonists against the methods of Mason and Chamberiain.

' " LUhabolia" is, of course, only Greek for "stone-throwing."
' Who she was it is not hard to guess. On July 4, 1682, Hannah Jones
begged the "advice and relief" of the President and Council "in regard of George
Walton's dealing with her, who falsely aocuseth her of what she is dear of, and
hath so far prevailed that upon that account your humble petitioner is bound in
a bond of the peace; since which sakl Walton's horse breaks into her pasture and

1682] UTHOBOLIA 61

tion did arise upon the account of some small quantity of
Land in her Field, which she pretended was unjustly taken
into the Land of the Person where the Scene of this Matter
lay, and was her Right; she having been often very clamorous about that Affair, and heard to say, with much Bitterness,
that her Neighbour {innuendo^ the fore-mentioned Person,
his Name Geoi^ Walton)* should never quietly injoy that

doth her damage." (Provincial Records, in New Hampshire Hist Soc., CoUeeiiofUf Vni. d9.) Of her being "formerly detected" in witchcraft there is no
record; but she was a daughter of Thomas Walford, and her mother, Jane Walfofd, had in 1656 been tried for witchcraft, and, though cleared, found it necessary
in 1669 to bring an action for slander against a physician who again accused her.
(N. H. Hist Soc., CoUecUons, I. 255-257; Documents and Records relating to the
Promnoe qf New Hampshire, I. 217-219; Probate Records of the Province of New
Hampshire, I. 87-92, 222-22^.) Jane Walford was now dead (Probate Records,
I. 92); but there was reason enough for George Walton to fear the malice of her
daughter. For Thomas Walford, a blacksmith who in 1623 had come with
Gorges to Weymouth, who had later become the earliest settler inCharlestown, and
who in 1631, expelled from the Bay for his Anglican tenets, had found a refuge
at Portsmouth, had prospered at last, and at his death in 1666 left to his heirs
broad acres. But these lands were among those forfeit to the Mason claim, and
Walton was a buyer. (Probate Records, 1. 299, and cf. p. 37, above, note 1.) Now
that the government was passing into the hands of the Mason party, what hope
was there except from Heaven or Hell? ' ' Your petitioner," prayed Hannah Jones,
''being under bond, knows not what to do to help herself." It was doubtless
Secretary Chamberlain who as a justice had put her under bond; but the planters
still had a majority in the Council, and Goodwife Jones was ordered to complain
to Captain Stileman "if she be at any time, during her being bound to the good
briiavior, injured by the said Geo. Walton." Her complaint came: on August 31
Elisabeth Clark, aged forty-two, made affidavit to Deputy-President Stileman
"that she heard George Walton say that he believed in his heart and conscience
that Grandma Jones was a witch, and would say so to his dying day." But WaltoOf too, had evidence to offer: on September 4 Samuel Clark testified "that he
was present when Goody Jones and Geo. Walton were talking together, and he
heard the said Goody Jones call the said Walton a wizzard, and that she said, if
he told her of her mother, she would throw stones at his head, and this was on
FViday, the 25th of August, 1682." And other witnesses testified that on that
day "they saw several stones to fly," though they "saw no hand or person to
throw them," and that "the said George Walton was hit several times." (Provincial Records, in N. H. Hist Soc, Collections, VIII. 99-100.) But this is to
anticipate the relation.

» "Hinting at"

* As to Walton see introduction and p. 35, note 1, above. A letter from
the Rev. Lucius Alden, of Newcastle, printed in 1862 in the Historical Magazine,
VI. 159, describes his house and its site and identifies other people and places
mentioned in this narrative.

62 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES 11682

piece of Ground. Which^ as it has confirmed my self and others
in the Opinion that there are such things as Witches, and the
Effects of Witchcraft, or at least of the mischievous Actions
of Evil Spirits; which some do as little give Credit to, as in
the Case of Witches, utterly rejecting both their Operations
and their Beings, we having been Eye-Witnesses of this Matter
almost eveiy Day for a quarter of a Year together; so it may
be a means to rectifie the depraved Judgment and Sentiments
of other disbelieving Persons, and absolutely convince them
of their Error, if they please to hear, without prejudice, the
plain, but most true Narration of it; which was thus.

Some time ago being in America (in His then Majesty's
Service) I was lodg'd in the said Geoige Walton's House, a
Planter there, and on a Sunday Night,* about Ten a Clock,
many Stones were heard by my self, and the rest of the Famfly,
to be thrown, and (with Noise) hit against the top and all
sides of the House, after he the said Walton had been at his
Fence-Gate, which was between him and his Neighbour one
John Amazeen an Italian,' to view it; for it was again, as
f onnerly it had been (the manner how being unknown) wrung
off the Hinges, and cast upon the Ground; and in his being
there, and return home witii several Persons of (and frequenting) his family and House, about a flight shot distant from
the Gate, they were all assaulted with a peal of Stones, (taken,
we conceive, from the Rocks hard by the House) and this by
unseen Hands or Agents. For by this time I was come down
to them, having risen out of my Bed at this strange Alarm of
all that were in the House, and do know that they all look'd
out as narrowly as I did, or any Person could (it being a bright
Moon-light Night), but cou'd make no Discovery, Thereupon, and because there came many Stones, and those pretty
great ones, some as big as my Fist, into the Entiy or Porch
of the House, we withdrew into the next Room to the Porch,

^ June 11, 1682. See p. 35, above, and Mather Papen, p. 361.

* "John the Greek," as he was called, the illiterate constable of Great Island,
was one of the most stubborn in refusing to pay dues to Mason. He had married
the widow of Jeremiah Walfofd (Hannah Jones's brother) and was the guardian
of his son and estate. (Probate Records, I. 222-224; IVovindal Reooids, in
N. H. Hist Soc., CoUecHone, I. 71, 118.)

1682] LITHOBOLIA 63

no Person having received any Hurt, (praised be Almighty
Providence, for certainly the infernal Agent, constant Enemy
to Mankind, had he not been over-ruled, intended no less than
Death or Maim) save only that two Youths were lightly hit,
one on the Leg, the other on the Thigh, notwithstanding the
Stones came so thick, and so forcibly against the sides of so
narrow a Room. Whilst we stood amazed at this Accident,
one of the Maidens imagined she saw them come from the
Hall, next to that we were in, where searching, (and in the
Cellar, down out of the Hall,) and finding no Body, another
and my self observed two little Stones in a short space successively to fall on the Floor, coming as from the Ceiling close
by us, and we concluded it must necessarily be done by means
extraordinary and prsetematural. Coming again into the
Room where we first were (next the Porch), we had many of
these lapidaiy Salutations, but unfriendly ones; for, shutting
the Door, it was no small Siuprise to me to have a good big
Stone come with great force and noise (just by my Head)
against the Door on the inside; and then shutting tiie other
Door, next the Hall, to have the like Accident; so going out
again, upon a necessary Occasion, to have another very near
my Body, clattering against the Board-wall of the House;
but it was a much greater, to be so near the danger of having
my Head broke with a Mall, or great Hammer brushing along
the top or roof of the Room from the other end, as I was walking in it, and lighting down by me; but it fell so, that my
Landlord had the greatest damage, his Windows (especially
those of the first mention'd Room) being with many Stones
miserably and strangely batter'd, most of the Stones giving
the Blow on the inside, and forcing the Bars, Lead, and hasps
of the Casements outwards, and yet falling back (sometimes
a Yard or two) into the Room ; only one little Stone we took
out of the glass of the Window, where it lodg'd its self in the
breaking it, in a Hole exactly fit for the Stone. The Pewter
and Brass were frequently pelted, and sometimes thrown down
upon the Ground; for the Evil Spirit seemed then to affect
variety of Mischief, and diverted himself at this end after he
had done so much Execution at the other. So were two Candlesticks, after many hittings, at last struck off the Table where
they stood, and hkewise a large Pewter Pot, with the force of

64 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES U682

these Stones. Some of them were taken up hot, and (it seems)
immediately coming out of the Fire ; and some (which is not
unremarkable) having been laid by me upon the Table along
by couples, and numbred, were found missing; that is, two
of them, as we retum'd immediately to the Table, having
tum'd our backs only to visit and view some new Stone-charge
or Window-breach ; and this Experiment was four or five times
repeated, and I still found one or two missing of the Niunber,
which we all mark'd, when I did but just remove the Light
from off the Table, and step to the Door, and back again.

After this had continued in all the parts and sides of the
first Room (and down the Chinmey) for above four hours, I,
weary of the Noise, and sleepy, went to Bed, and was no
sooner fallen asleep, but was awakened with the unwelcome
disturbance of anotlier Battery of a different sort, it issuing
with so prodigious a Noise against the thin Board-wall of my
Chamber (which was within another) that I could not imagin
it less thaji the fracture and downfall of great part of the
Chamber, or at least of the Shelves, Books, Pictures, and other
things, placed on that side, and on the Partition-Wall between
the Anti-Chamber and the Door of mine. But the Noise
immediately bringing up the Company below, they assured
me no Mischief of that nature was done, and shewed me the
biggest Stone that had as yet been made use of in this unaccountable Accident, weighmg eight pound and an half, that
had burst open my Chamber Door with a rebound from the
Floor, as by the Dent and Bruise in it near the Door I found
next Morning, done, probably, to make the greater Noise,
and give the more Astonishment, which would sooner be
effected by three Motions, and consequently three several
Sounds, viz. one on the Ground, the next to and on the Door,
and the last from it again to the Floor, then if it had been one
single Blow upon the Door only; which ('tis probable) wou'd
have split the Door, which was not permitted, nor so much as
a square of the Glass-Window broken or crack'd (at that time)
in iJl the Chamber. Glad thereof, and desiring them to leave
me, and the Door shut, as it was before, I endeavoured once
more to take my Rest, and was once more prevented by the
like passage, with another like offensive Weapon, it being a
whole Brick that lay in the anti-Chamber Chimney, and used

1682] LITHOBOUA 65

again to the same malicious purpose as before^ and in the same
manner too, as by the mark in the Floor, whereon was some
of the dust of the Brick, broken a little at the end, apparant
next Morning, the Brick it self lying just at the Door. However, after I had lain a while, harkmng to their Adventiu^
below, I dropM asleep again, and receive no further Molestation that Night.

In the Morning (Monday Morning) I was informed by several of the Domesticks of more of the same kind of Trouble;
among which the most signal was, the Vanishing of the Spit
which stood in the Chimney Comer, and the sudden coming
of it again down the same Chimney, sticking of it in a Log
that lay in the Fireplace or Hearth; and then being by one
of the Family set by on the other side of the Chimney, presently cast out of the Window into the Back-side. Also a
pressing-Iron lying on the ledge of the Chimney back, was
conveyed invisibly into the Yard. I should think it (too) not
unworthy the Relation, that, discoursing then with some of
the Family, and others, about what had past, I said, I thought
it necessary to take and keep the great Stone, as a Proof and
Evidence, for they had taken it down from my Chambers;
and so I carried it up, laid it on my Table in my Chamber,
and lock'd my Door, and going out upon occasions, and soon
returning, I was told by my Landlady that it was, a little
while after my going forth, removed again, with a Noise,
which they all below heard, and was thrown into the antiChamber, and there I found it lying in the middle of it ; thereupon I the second time carried it up, and laid it on the Table,
and had it in my Custody a long time to show, for the Satisfaction of the Ciuious.

There were many more Stones thrown about in the House
that Morning, and more in the Fields that Day, where the
Master of the House was, and the Men at Work. Some more
Mr. Woodbridge,^ a Minister, and my self, in the Afternoon

^The Rev. Benjamin Woodbridge, who had begun in 1680 at Bristol,
Rhode Island, his career as a preacher, but had dissatisfied a part of his flock
(Moiher Papers, pp. 605-696), and seems to have been seeking a fresh one in the
north. It was through him that Pastor Moodey of Portsmouth sought, for
Increase Mather's Providences, an account of the happenings on Great Island.
(See above^ p. 34, note 2, and Mather Papers, p. 360.)

66 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES 11682

did see (but could not any Hand throwing them) lighting near,
and jumping and tiunbling on the Grass: So did one Mrs.
Clark, and her Son, and several others; and some of them felt
them too. One Person would not be perswaded but that the
Boys at Work might throw them, and strait her little Boy
standing by her was struck with a Stone on the Back, which
caused him to fall a crying, and her (being convinced) to carry
him away f orth-with.

In the Evening, as soon as I had sup'd in the outer Boom
before mine, I took a little Musical-Instrument, and b^an to
touch it (the Door indeed was then set open for Air), and a
good big Stone came rumbling in, and as it were to lead the
Dance, but upon a much different account than in the days
of Old, and of old fabulous Inchantments, my Musick being
none of the best. The Noise of this brought up the DeputyPresident's Wife,^ and many others of the Neighboiu*hood
that were below, who wonder'd to see this Stone followed (as
it were) by many others, and a Pewter Spoon among the r^,
all which fell strangely into the Room in their Presence, and
were taken up by the Company. And beside all this, there
was seen by two Youths in the Orchard and Fields, as they
said, a black Cat, at the time the Stones were toss'd about,
and it was shot at, but missed, by its changing Places, and
being immediately at some distance, and then out of sight,
as they related : Agreeable to which, it may not be improper
to insert, what was observed by two Maids, Grand-Children
of Mr. Walton, on the Sunday Night, the beginning of this
Lithoboly. They did affirm, that as they were standing in
the Porch-Chamber Window, they saw, as it were, a Person
putting out a Hand out of the Hall Window, as throwing Stones
toward the Porch or Entry; and we all Imow no Person was
in the Hall except, at that instant, my self and another, having
search'd diligently there, and wondring whence those should
come that were about the same time drop'd near us; so far
we were from doing it o\u* selves, or seeing any other there to
do it.

On Monday Night, about the Hoiu* it first b^an, there
were more Stones thrown in the Kitchin, and down the Chim-

^Mrs. Elias StQeman. TQI the arrival of Governor Cranfield P^esidoit
WaldroQ and Deputy-Pkesideiit Stilemaii remained in power.

1682] UTHOBOLIA 67

ney, one Captain Barefoot/ of the Council for that Province,
b^ng present, with others; and also (as I was going up to
Bed) in an upper Chamber, and down those Stairs.

Upon Tuesday Night, about Ten, some five or six Stones
were severally thrown into the Maid's Chamber near the
Kitchin, and the Glass-Windows broke in three new places,
and one of the Maids hit as she lay. At the same time was
heard by them, and two young Men in the House, an odd,
dismal sort of Whistling, and thereupon the Youths ran out,
with intent to take the suppos'd Thrower of Stones, if possible; and on the back-side near the Window they heard the
Noise (as they said) of something stepping a little way before
them, as it were the trampling of a young Colt, as they fancied, bift saw nothing; and going on, could discover nothing
but that the Noise of the stepping or trampling was ceas'd,
and then gone on a little before.

On Saturday Morning I found two Stones more on the
Stairs; and so some were on Sunday Night conveyed into the
Room next the Kitchin.

Upon Monday followhig Mr. Walton going (with his Men)
by Water to some other Land, in a place called the Great Bay,
and to a House where his Son was placed, they lay there that
Night, and the next Morning had this Adventure. As the
Men were all at work in the Woods, felling Wood, they were
visited with another set of Stones, and they gathered up near
upon a Hat-full, and put them between two Trees near adjoining, and returning from carrying Wood, to the Boat, the Hat
and its contents (the Stones) were gone, and the Stones were
presently after thrown about again, as before ; and after search,
found the Hat press'd together, and lying under a square piece
of Timber at some distance from thence. They had them
again at yoimg Walton's House, and half a Brick thrown into
a Cradle, out of which his yoimg Child was newly taken up.

Here it may seem most proper to inform the Reader of a
parallel passage, (viz.) what happened another time to my
Landlord in Us Boat; wherein going up to the same place

^The bluff and jovial Walter Barefoot, physidaii, politician, speculator,
leacuer of Quakers and horror of Puritans, soon to be commandant, judge, acting
garveencft, and at this moment as deputy collector especially obnoxious to the
Massadiuaetts party, is well known to idl students of New Hampshire history.

68 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES 11682

(the Great Bay) and loading it with Hay for his use at his own
House, about the mid-way in the River (Pascataqua)^ he found
his Boat began to be in a sinking Condition, at which being
much surpriz'd, upon search, he discovered the cause to be
the puUing out a Plug or Stopple in the bottom of the Boat,
being fixed there for the more convenient letting out of the
Rain-Water that might fall into it; a Contrivance and Combination of the old Serpent and the old Woman, or some other
Witch or Wizard (in Revenge or innate Enmity) to have
drown'd both my good Landlord and his Company.

On Wednesday, as they were at work again in the Woods,
on a sudden they heard something gingle like Glass, or Metal,
among the Trees, as it was fallmg, and being fallen to the
Ground, they knew it to be a Stirrup which Mr. Walton had
carried to the Boat, and laid under some Wood; and this being
again laid by him in that very Boat, it was again thrown after
him. The third time, he having put it upon his Girdle or
Belt he wore about his Waste, buckled together before, but
at that instant taken off because of the Heat of the Weather,
and laid there again buckled, it was fetch'd away, and no more
seen. Likewise the Graper, or little Anchor of the Boat, cast
over-board, which caus'd the Boat to wind up; so staying
and obstructing their Passage. Then the setting-Pole was
divers times cast into the River, as they were coming back
from the Great Bay, which put them to the trouble of Padling,
that is, rowing about for it as often to retrieve it.

Being come to his own House, this Mr. Walton was charg'd
again with a fresh Assault in the out-Houses; but we heard of
none within doors tmtil Friday after, when, in the Kitchin,
were 4 or 5 Stones (one of them hot) taken out of the Fire, as
I conceive, and so thrown about. I was then present, being
newly come in with Mr. Walton from his middle Field (as he
call'd it), where his Servants had been Mowing, and had six
or seven of his old troublesome Companions, and I had one
fall'n down by me there, and another thin fiat Stone hit me on
the Thigh with the fiat side of it, so as to make me just feel,
and to smart a little. In the same Day's Evening, as I was
walking out in the Lane by the Field before-mentioned, a
great Stone made a rusling Noise in the Stone-Fence between

^ The Piscataqua.

1682] LITHOBOLIA 69

the Field and the Lane^ which seem'd to me (as it caus'd me
to cast my Eye that way by the Noise) to come out of the
Fence, as it were pull'd out from among those Stones loose,
but orderly laid close together, as the manner of such Fences
in that Country is, and so fell down upon the Ground. Some
Persons of Note being then in the Field (whose Names are
here imder-written) to visit Mr, Walton there, are substantial Witnesses of this same Stonery, both in the Field, and
afterward in the House that Night, viz. one Mr. Hussey, Son
of a Coimsellour there.^ He took up one that having first
alighted on the Ground, with rebound from thence hit him on
the Heel; and he keeps it to show. And Captain Barefoot,
mentioned above, has that which (among other Stones) flew
into the Hall a little before Supper; which my self also saw as
it first came in at the upper part of the Door into the middle
of the Room; and then (tho' a good flat Stone, yet) was seen
to rowl over and over, as if trundled, under a Bed in the same
Room. In short, these Persons, being wonderously affected
with the Strangeness of these Passages, offer'd themselves
(desiring me to take them) as Testimonies; I did so, and
made a Memorandum, by way of Record, thereof, to this
effect. Viz.

These Persons imder-written do hereby Attest the Truth of
their being Eye-Witnesses of at least half a score Stones
that Evening thrown invisibly into the Field, and in the
Entry of the House, Hall, and one of the Chambers of
George Walton's. Viz.

Samuel Jennings, Esq; Govemour of West-Jarsey.

Wampbr Clark, Esq; Deputy-Govemour of Road-Island.

Mr. Arthur Cook.

Mr. Matt, Borden of Road-Island.

Mr. Oliver Hooton of Barbados, Merchant.

Mr. T. Maul of SaJem in New-England, Merchant.

Captain Walter Barefoot.

Mr. John Hussey.

And the Wife of the said Mr. Hussey.*

1 Of Christopher Hussey, of Hampton.

' The governors of West Jersey and Rhode Island are sufficiently identified by;
theirtitles. Both were Quakers, as were all the others excepting Barefoot. Cook

70 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES 11682

On Saturday, Jvly^ 24, One of the Family, at the usual
hour at Night, observ'd some few (not above half a dozen)
of these natural (or rather unnatural) Weapons to fly into the
Eitchin, as formerly; but some of them in an imusual manner
lighting gently on him, or coming toward him so easily, as
that he took them before they fdl to the Ground. I think
there was not any thing more that Night remarkable. But
as if the malicious Daemon had laid up for Stmday and Monday,
then it was that he b^an (more furiously than formerly)
with a great Stone in the Eitchin, and so continued with
throwing down the Pewter-Dishes, etc. great part of it all at
once coming clattering down, without the stroke of a Stone,
little or great, to move it. Then about Midnight this impious Operation not ceasing, but trespassing with a corUinuando,^ 2 very great Stones, weighing above 30 pound a piece
(that used to lye in the Kitchin, in or near the Chimny) were
in the former, wonted, reboimding manner, let fly against my
Door and Wall in the ante-Chamber, but with some little
distance of time. This thimdring Noise must needs bring
up the Men from below, as before, (I need not say to wake me)
to tell me the Effect, which was the beating down several
Pictures, and displacing abimdance of things about my Chamber: but the Bq)etition of this Cannon-Play by these great
rumbling Engines, now ready at hand for the purpose, and the
like additional dist\u*bance by four Bricks that lay in the
outer-Room Chimney (one of which having been so imploy'd
the first Simday Night, as has been said) made me despair
of taking Rest, and so forced me to rise from my Bed. Then
finding my Door burst open, I also found many Stones, and
great pieces of Bricks, to fly in, breaking the Glass-Windows,
and a Paper-Light, sometimes inwards, sometimes outwards:
So hitting the Door of my Chamber as I came through from
the ante-Chamber, lighting very near me as I was fetching
the Candlestick, and afterward the Candle being struck out,
as I was going to light it again. So a little after, coming up

was a Philadelphian; Thomas Maule, the Salem merchant who was later (1695)
to stir such fury in Massadiusetts by his arraignment of the Puritan regime.
What Maule thou^t of j witchcraft must be gathered not only from his own
book, but from that of Ws Beverly neighbor, the Rev. John Hale, pp. 155-161.
1 June. s A "to be continued."

16821 LITHOBOLIA 71

for another Candle, and being at the Stare-foot door, a wooden
Mortar with great Noise struck against the Floor, and was
just at my Feet, only not touching me, moving from the other
end of the Eitchin where it used to lye. And when I came up
my self, and two more of the same House, we heard a Whistling,
as it were near us in the outer Room, several times. Among
the rest of the Tools made use of to disturb us, I f oimd an old
Card for dressing Flax in my Chamber. Now for Monday
Night, {June 26) one of the severest. The disturbance began
in the Kitchin with Stones; then as I was at Supper above in
the ante-Chamber, the Window near which I sate at Table
was broke in 2 or 3 parts of it inwards, and one of the Stones
that broke it flew in, and I took it up at the further end of the
Room. The manner is observable; for one of the squares
was broke into 9 or 10 small square pieces, as if it had been
regularly mark'd out into such even squares by a Workman,
to the end some of these little pieces might fly in my Face
(as they did) and give me a surprize, but without any hurt. In
the mean time it went on in the Kitchin, whither I went
down, for Company, all or most of the Family, and a Neighbour, being there; where many Stones (some great ones)
came thick and threefold among us, and an old howing Iron,^
from a Room hard by, where such Utensils lay. Then, as if
I had been the design'd Object for that time, most of the Stones
that came (the smaller I mean) hit me (sometimes pretty hard)
to the number of above 20, near 30, as I remember, and whether
I removed, sit, or walkM, I had them, and great ones sometimes
lighting gently on me, and in my Hand and Lap as I sate,
and falling to the Grotmd, and sometimes thumping against
the Wall, as near as could be to me, without touching me.
Then was a- Room over the Kitchin infested, that had not
been so before, and many Stones greater than usual lumbring
there over our Heads, not only to ours, but to the great Disturbance and Affrightment of some Children that lay there.
And for Variety, there were sometimes three great, distinct
Knocks, sometimes five such soimds as with a great Maul,
reiterated divers times.

On Tuesday Night {June 28) we were quiet; but not so
on Wednesday f when the Stones were play'd about in the House.

* A hoeing-iron — the metal part of a hoe.

72 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES 11682

And on Thursday Morning I found some things that hung on
Nails on the Wall in my Chamber, viz. a Spherical Sun-Dial,
etc. lying on the Ground, as knock'd down by some Brick or
Stone in the ante-Chamber. But my Landlord had the worst
of that Day, tho' he kept the Field, being there invisibly hit
above 40 times, as he afl&rm'd to me, and he received some
shrowd^ hurtful Blows on the Back, and other Parts, which
he much complained of, and said he thought he should have
reason to do, even to his dying day; and I observ'd that he
did so, he being departed this Life since.*

Besides this. Plants of Indian Com were struck up by the
Roots almost, just as if they had been cut with some edged
Instrument, whereas re vercf they were seen to be eradicated,
or rooted up with nothing but the very Stones, altho' the injurious Agent was altogether imseen. And a sort of Noise,
like that of Snorting and Whistling, was heard near the Men
at Work in the Fields many times, many whereof I my self,
going thither, and being there, was a Witness of; and parting
thence I receiv'd a pretty hard Blow with a Stone on the Calf
of my L^. So it continued that day in two Fields, where
they were severally at Work: and my Landlord told me, he
often heard likewise a humming Noise in the Air by him, as
of a Bullet discharg'd from a Gim; and so said a Servant of
his that work'd with him.

Upon Saturday {July 1), as I was going to visit my Neighbour Capt. Barefoot, and just at his Door, his Man saw, as
well as my self, 3 or 4 Stones fall just by us in the Field, or
Close, where the House stands, and not any other Person near
us. At Night a great Stone fell in the Kitchin, as I was going
to Bed, and the Pewter was thrown down; many Stones flew
about, and the Candles by them put out 3 or 4 times, and the
Snorting heard; a N^ro Maid lut on the Head in the Entry
between the Kitchin and Hall with a Porringer from the
Kitchin : also the pressing-Iron clattered against the Partition
Wall between the Hall and a Chamber beyond it, where I lay,
and Mr. Randolph,^ His Majesty's OflScer for the Customs, etc.

Some few Stones we had on Sunday Morning, {July 2)

» Shrewd, i. e., sharp. « Early m 1686. » "In fact"

* Edward Randolph, arch-foe of the Massachusetts theocracy and for more
than a doaen years (1676^1689) chief in^nrer of the royal policy as to the colonies.

1682J LITHOBOLIA 73

none at Night. But on Monday Morning (the Zd) both Mr.
Walton, and 5 or 6 with him in the Field, were assaulted with
them, and their Ears with the old Snorting and Whistling.
In the Afternoon Mr. Walton was hit on the Back with Stones
very grievously, as he was in his Boat that lay at a Cove
side by his House. It was a very odd prank that was practised by the Devil a little while after this. One Night the
Cocks of Hay, made the Day before in the Orchard, was
spread all abroad, and some of the Hay thrown up into the
Trees, and some of it brought into the House, and scattered.
Two Logs that lay at the Door, laid, one of them by the
Chimny in the Kitchin ; the other set against the Door of the
Boom where Mr. Walton then lay, as on purpose to confine
him thdll^ein: A Form that stood in the Entry (or Porch)
was set along by the Fire side, and a joint Stool upon that,
with a Napking spread thereon, with two Pewter Pots, and
two Candlesticks: A Cheese-Press likewise having a Spit
thrust into one of the holes of it, at one end; and at the other
end of the Spit hung an Iron Kettle; and a Cheese was taken
out, and broke to pieces. Another time, I full well remember
'twas on a Sunday at Night, my Window was all broke with
a violent shock of Stones and Brick-bats, which scarce miss'd
my self ; among these one huge one made its way through the
great square or shash of a Casement, and broke a great hole
in it, thix)wing down Books by the way, from the Window to a
Picture over-against it, on the other side of the Chamber^
and tore a hole quite through it about half a foot long, and the
piece of the Cloth hung by a little part of it, on the back-side
of the Picture.

After this we were pretty quiet,^ saving now and then a
few Stones march'd about for Exercise, and to keep (as it
were) the Diabolical hand in use, till Jidy 28, being Friday,
when about 40 Stones flew about, abroad, and in the House
and Orchard, and among the Trees therein, and a Window
broke before, was broke again, and one Room where they
never used before.

AugiLst 1. On Wednesday the Window in my ante-Chamber
was broke again, and many Stones were plaid about, abroad,

^ It will be remembered that about this time Hannah Jones was put under
bond. See pp. 60-61, note 3.

74 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1682

and in the House^ in the Day-time, and at Night. The same
Day in the Morning they tried this Ebq)eriment; they did set
on the Fire a Pot with Urin, and crooked Pins in it, with
design to have it boil, and by that means to give Punishment
to the Witch, or Wizard (that might be the wicked Procurer
or Contriver of this Stone A£3iction) and take off their own;
as they had been advised. This was the Effect of it : As the
Liquor b^un to grow hot, a Stone came and broke the top or
mouth of it, and threw it down, and spilt what was in it;
which being made good again, another Stone, as the Pot grew
hot again, broke the hancUe off; and being recruited and fill'd
the t£ird time, was then with a third Stone quite broke to
pieces and split; and so the Operation became frustrate and
fruitless.

On Avffust 2, two Stones in the Afternoon I heard and saw
my self in the House and Orchard; and another Window in
the Hall was broke. And as I was entring my own Chamber,
a great square of a Casement, being a foot square, was broke,
with the Noise as of a big Stone, and pieces of the Glass flew
into the Room, but no Stone came in then, or could be found
within or without. At Night, as I, with others, were in the
Eitchin, many more came in; and one great Stone that lay
on a Spinning-Wheel to keep it steady, was thrown to the other
side of the Room. Several Neighbours then present were
ready to testifie this Matter.

Upon August 3, On Thursday the Gate between my said
Landlord and his Neighbour John Amazeen was taken off
again, and thrown into Amazeen's Field, who heard it fall,
and averr'd it then made a Noise like a great Gun.

On Friday the 4tfe, the Fence against Mr. Walton's Neighbour's Door, (the Woman of whom formerly there was great
Suspicion, and thereupon Examination had, as appears upon
Record;) this Fence being maliciously pull'd down to let in
their Cattel into his Ground ; he and his Servants were pelted
with above 40 Stones as they went to put it up again ; for she
had often threatned that he should never injoy his House and
Land.^ Mr. Walton was hit divers times, and all that Day
in the Field, as they were Reaping, it ceas'd not, and their
fell (by the Mens Computation) above an himdred Stones.

^ See p. 37, note 1. Walton had doubtless fenced in the land in controversy.

1682] LITHOBOLIA 75

A Woman helping to Reap (among the rest) was hit 9 or 10
times, and hurt to that degree, that her left Arm, Hip, Thigh,
and Leg, were made black and blue therewith; which ghe
showd to the Woman,^ Mrs. Walton, and others. Mr. Woodbridge,* a Divine, coming to give me a Visit, was hit about
the Hip, and one Mr. Jefferjrs a Merchant,' who was with him,
on the Leg. A Window in the Kitchin that had been much
battered before, was now quite broke out, and unwindow'd,
no Glass or Lead at all being left: a Glass Bottle broke to
pieces, and the Pewter Dishes (about 9 of them) thrown down,
and bent.

On Saturday the bth, as they were Reaping in the Field,
three Sickles were crack'd and broke by the force of these
lapidaiy Instruments of the Devil, as the Sickles were in the
Refers hands, on pmpose (it seems) to obstruct their Labour,
and do them Injury and Damage. And very many Stones
were cast about that Day; insomuch, that some that assisted
at that Harvest-Work, being struck with them, by reason of
that Disturbance left the Field, but were follow'd by their
invisible Adversaries to the next House.

On Sunday, being the 6th, there fell nothing considerable,
nor on Monday, (7tfe) save only one of the Children hit with a
Stone on the Back. We were quiet to Tuesday the Sth. But
on Wednesday (9ih) above 100 Stones (as they verily thought)
repeated the Reapers Disquiet in the Com-Field, whereof
some were affirmed by Mr. Walton to be great ones indeed,
near as big as a Man's Head; and Mrs. Walton, his Wife
being by Curiosity led thither, with intent also to make some
Discovery by the most diligent and vigilant Observation she
could use, to obviate the idle Incredulity some inconsiderate
Persons might irrationally entertain concerning this venefical*
Operation; or at least to confirm her own Sentiments and
Belief of it. Which she did, but to her Cost; for she received
an tmtoward Blow (with a Stone) on her Shoulder. There
were likewise two Sickles bent, crack'd, and disabled with them,
beating them violently out of their Hands that held them;
and tins reiterated three times successively.

^ /. e,, to Hannah Jones. ' See p. 65, note 1.

* George Jeffrey, or Jaffrey, of Great Island.

* Soroerous — from the Latin venefica, a witch.

76 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1682

After this we injoy'd our former Peace and Quiet, unmolested by these stony Disturbances, that whole month of
August, excepting some few times; and the last of all in the
Month of September, (the b^inning thereof) wherein Mr.
Walton himself only (the Ori^nal perhaps of this strange
Adventure, as has been declar^) was the designed concluding Sufferer; who going in his Canoo (or Boat) from the Great
Idand, where he dwelt, to Portsmouth, to attend the Coimcil,
who had taken Cognizance of this Matter,^ he being Smnmoned
thither, in order to his and the Suspect's Examination, and the
Courts taking Order thereabout, he was sadly hit with three
pebble Stones as big as ones Fist ; one of which broke his Head,
which I saw him show to the President of the Council; the
others gave him that Pain on the Back, of which (with other
like Strokes) he complained then, and afterward to his Death.*

Who, that peruses these prsetematural Occurrences, can
possibly be so much an Enemy to his own Soul, and irrefutable
Reason, as obstinately to oppose himself to, or confusedly
fluctuate in, the Opinion and Doctrine of Daemons, or Spirits,
and Witches? Certainly he that do's so, must do two things

'See pp. 00-61, note 3.

' What order the courts took thereabout does not appear from the extant
records; but that Hannah Jones was not punished may be inferred from our
author's siknoe. As to the land dilute, it is recorded that in December, 1682,
John Amaseen, the constable, with his step-son Jeremiah Walford and others,
came with a warrant from Captain Stileman and arrested George Walton and his
helpers for wood-cutting on the lands granted him by Mason; and that, though
Walton carried it to the courts and offered evidence that some of the wood cut
for him had been seen in John Amaseen's yard, the jury found for the defendants'
cost of court. Waltcm appealed to the Kmg in Council — ^Walf oid and Amaieen,
so wrote Secretary Chamberlain, claiming by a town grant of 1658 and "the jury
being aO of them possessed of lands by virtue of town grants"; but, though he
gave Edward Randolph power of attorney to prosecute, the i4>peal was in 1684
dismissed. (Provincial Records, in N. H. Hist. Soc., CoUecUons, VIII. 118, and
Calendar of State Papers, America and West Indiee, 1681-1685, passim,) At
home, however, John Amaieen saw himself made an example of, his live-stodc
levied on, and himself thrown into prison for his refusal of dues to Mason. Chamberiain lost his secretaryship with the change of government in 1686, but renuuned
as clerk of the courts till 1689, when, with the collapse of the Andros administration, he seems to have returned to England. (Vaughan's Journal, in N. H. Hist
Soc, CoUeetions, VIII. 187; N. H. Prm. Papers, I. 590, 600; Mass. Hist Soc,
Proceeding, XVU. 227.)

1682] LTTHOBOUA 77

more: He must temerariously mihinge, or midermine the
Fundamentals of the best Religion in the World; and he must
disingenuously quit and abandon that of the Three Theologick
Virtues or Graces, to which the great Doctor of the Gentils
gave the Precedence, Charity, through his Unchristian and
Uncharitable Incredulity.

Finis.

THE PENNSYLVANIA CASES OF MATTSON,
HENDRICKSON, AND GUARD, 1684, 1701

INTRODUCTION

At a fiist glance the utterances of the early Friends in
Europe and America do not suggest a difference^ in their beliefs as to witchcraft^ from those of the Puritan world about
them. George Fox thought himself endowed with a divine
power for the detection of witches^ and tells us himself how he
turned from his path to tell a group of women that they were
in the spirit of witchcraft or rebuked in open meeting those
he discerned to be under the power of an evil spirit.^ Richard
Famworth^ long his chief lieutenant, put forth in 1655 a
printed discourse ''as a Judgment upon Witchcraft, and a
deniall, testimony, and dedication against Witchcraft from
those that the world reproachfuUy calleth Quakers/'^ and
Fox himself in 1657 devoted one largely to ''the groimd of
Inchantings and seducing Spirits" and "of Nicromancy,
which doth defile Witches and Wizards."' We have just
met a New England Quaker as an accuser, and more than
(me gave testimony against the Salem witches. Even those

>See pp. 20-21 of the WUehcnfi and Quakerim (Philadelphia, 1908) of
Mn. Amdia Mott Gummere, who quotes from the original MS. of Fox's journal.

* His anonymously published WUehcnfi Cad out from the ReUgiow Seed and
Inad cf God (London, 1055).

* His A Dedaratum of ihB Qrofund of Error . . . and the Ground of Inehani'
m§9 and Seducing Spirits, and the Doctrine of DeviU, the Sons of Sorcerers, and the
Seed of the AduUerer, and the Ground of Nieromancy, which doth defile Witches and
Wiwards (London, 1657). But this book, like Famworth's, is mainly a dissuasive
from fortune-telling or the use of it How slow was Fox's spirit to the darker
■Mpidons of the witch-haters may best be gathered from his i^peal "to the
liasten of Ships and Seamen" (1676), wherein he dissuades them from the hasty
aacription of storms to witchcraft; "and let New En^^and professors [of religion]

whether or no th^ have not sometimes cast some poor simple people into the
on pretence of being witches."

81

82 NARRATIVES OP THE WITCHCRAFT CASES

Bishop, a Whiting — ^who reviled their Puritan foes taunt
them with Satan's besetments as if these were undoubted.
It is only William Sewel, bom and reared in Holland, whom
we find translating into Dutch an English attack on the
superstition.^

But at bottom, from the first, their gentle mysticism had
in its universe no place for the arch-fiend of Orthodoxy. What
Richard Famworth so fiercely repudiates is only fortunetelling. If George Fox exclaims ^' Arise, children of God, and
suffer not the Witch to live," it appears in a moment that by
''the Witch" he means only the sin of divination, and that
''every one that dwells in the spirit of God doth cut it off."

As for William Penn, bom to wealth and cultiu^, son of a
Dutch mother and in closest touch with the enlightened
mjrstics of the Continent, there is in his writings scarce a
trace of the current demonology; and the motley crowd of
heretics and free-thinkers whom his tolerant prospectus
tempted to join his Quakers for the peopling of his colony on
the Delaware were perhaps as little prone to faith in Satan.
In the laws agreed upon in England between the proprietor
and his colonists, in May of 1681, the long list of "Offences
against God" which "draw his wrath upon magistrates" and
"provoke his indignation against a country" contains no mention of those dealings with Satan so long deemed the direst insults to his majesty;^ and the "Great Law" enacted by the

> The Dodrine qf DefnU pnmd to be the Onmd Apoetae^ qf tkeee LUer
Timet (London, 1676). The En^iah original bears no author^s name, but its
Dutch title-page ascribes it to "N. Orchard, Fkedikant in Nieuw-Engeland.'*
There is, however, nothing in the work to suggest an American authorship, unless
it be the passage (p. 189) where, q)eaking of the vogue in Christendom of legends
of the supernatural, the writer si^ that "the most part of Europe, Asia, and
Africa resounded with them (and now yet too-taking in America)." If the author
came to America, it was doubtless after writing it, and more probably to the
middle or southern colonies, then often included by Europeans under the name
of New England.

itfincw, "the gravest and greatest of all crimes is treason against God," s^rs

INTRODUCTION 83

provincial assembly^ under Penn's presidency, in the winter
of 1682-1683, though it regulates minutely the morals of the
colonists, has never a word as to witchcraft. The charter
indeed prescribed, as in the other colonies, that colonial laws
should be agreeable, ''so far as conveniently may be," with the
laws of England; but this implied no validity for English
statutes unless expressly adopted by the provincial legislature;
and, as for witchcraft, it was not till 1717, with the fall of
Fenn's power, that under Governor Keith the statute of
James I. was with other English criminal laws, by formal
action of the Pennsylvania assembly, ''put in execution in
this province."

But the Swedish peasants who long before the arrival of
Penn's colony had established themselves on the farther bank
of the Delaware, and now came with their lands beneath his
rule, knew little enough of the growing rationalism of the
seventeenth century; and it was these (speaking still among
themselves their own vernacular, and needing, as we shall see,
an interpreter between them and their new landlord) who,
during Penn's first visit, brought in his court at Philadelphia
the one action for witchcraft known to Pennsylvania records.'
The indictment, unhappily, is not preserved; but, as harm
wrought by witchcraft to person or to property could of course,

Damhouder, the great Flemish jurist whose handbook of criminal law had been
the prescribed authority in the colony on the Delaware until that colony fell into
the hands of the En^ish; and witchcraft he makes the culmination of this crime.
^ The nationality of the accused is dear from their names, and "Lasse Cock/'
the oooncilman who served them as interpreter, is well known as a Swede. Of the
witnesses named, "Vanculin" ("Coolin/' "Cooling") was of course of Dutch
stock, and Drystreet, Sanderlin, Ashcom, of English. All these names are
fkmiliar to the records of the "Court at Upland" (Chester), the tribunal for this
district prior to Penn's coming; and its entries show these families established
on the west bank of the Delaware a little above Chester. (See Record of Upland
Court, 1676-1681, in vol. VTI. of the Memoirs of ike Historical Society of PennsyU
flonuiy pp. 91-125.) As to the extraction of these colonists and the superstitions
prevalent among them, see Amandus Johnson, The Swedish Settlements on the
Delaware, passim, and especially pp. 28, 543-545.

84 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES

like harm by any other means, be punished, if provable, under
the general statutes, it must be assumed that these, and not
the semi-religious law of James, were the basis of the prosecution. It is the extant records of this case,^ with that of a
more trifling later episode, which here must serve us for a
Pennsylvania narrative.

^ Here reprinted from ihe'Mimttet <if tke Promneial CawncU of Pmingj^Uama^
L (Philaddphia, 1852)» pp. Oa-OS. Ynm this source th^ hmve been boROwed
by Smith, Hutary qf Ddawan Cmaty, PmmnUnma (Philadelphia, 1862), pp.
152-153, and doubtless by othefs.

THE CASES OF MATTSON, HENDRICKSON,

AND GUARD

Att a CaundU held at Philaddphia the 7th 12th Mo., 1683.^

Present :

Wm. Penn, Prop'or* and Govt.

Lasse Ck>ck^ Jno. Symcock, Tho. Holmes.

Wm. Clajrton.

Margaret Mattson and Yeshro' Hendrickson, Examined
and about to be proved Witches; whereupon, this board Or*
dered that Neels Matson should Enter into a recognizance of
fifty pounds for his Wiff's appearance before this board the
27tli Instant. Hendrick Jacobson^ doth the same for his Wife.

Adjourned till the 20th 12th Mo., 83.

AU a CotmciU hdd at Philadelphia the 27th of the 12th month,

1683.»

Present:

Wm. Penn, Prop'or and Govr.

James Harrison, Wm. Haigue, Wm. Clayton,

Wm. Biles, Chris. Taylor, Tho: Hohnes.

LasseCock,

The Grand Jury being attested, The Govr gave them their
Charge, and the Attumey Gen[er]all attended them with the
presentmt; their names are as followed:
Robt Euer, foreman. Rich. Ome, Tho: Mosse,

Samll Carpenter, Jno. Day, Tho: Ducket,

Andrew Griscom, Jno. Fisher, Denis lince,

Benj. Whitehead, Jno. Barnes. Tho: Philljrps,

>/. e., February 7, 1684: March had by formal enactment been made
"First Month."

* Fh>prietor. * /. e., Gertrude. Qf. p. 87.

*/. e., Jacob Heodrickaon— see p. 87. * February 27, 1684.

85

86 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES U6M

Jno. Barnes, Gunner Rambo, Tho: Millard,

Samll Allen, Enock Flower, Jno. Yattman,

Jno. Parsons. Henn Drjrstreet. Bamaby Wilcox.

Post Meridiem.

The Grand Jury made their retume, and found the Bill.

Ordered that those that were absent of the Petty Jury
should be fined 408 each man.

Maigarit Matson's Indictmt was read, and she pleads not
Guilty, and will be tryed by the Countrey.

Lasse Cock attested Interpriter between the Prop'or and
the Prisoner at the Barr.

The Petty Jury Impanndd; their names are as followed :
Jno. Hasting, foreman. Albertus Hendrickson, Robt Piles,
Robt Wade, Nath. Evans, Edwd Darter,

Wm Hewes, Jer. Collet, Jno. Kinsman,

Jno. Gibbons, Walter Martin, Edw Bezac.

Henry Drystreet attested, Saith he was tould 20 years agoe,
that the prisoner at the Barr was a Witch, and that severall
Cows were bewitcht by her; also, that James Saunderling's
mother tould him that she bewitcht her cow, but afterwards
said it was a mistake, and that her Cow should doe well againe,
for it was not her Cow but an Other Person's that should dye.

Charles Ashcom attested, saith that Anthony's Wife being
asked why she sould her Cattle, was because her mother had
Bewitcht them, having taken the Witchcraft of ^ Hendrick's*
Cattle, and put it on their Oxon; She myght Keep' but noe
Other Cattle, and also that one night the Daughter of the
Prisoner called him up hastely, and when he came she sayd
there was a great light but Just before, and an Old woman
with a Knife in her hand at the Bedd's feet, and therefore shee
cryed out and desired Jno. Symcock to take away his Calves
or Else she would send them to Hell.

James Claypoole attested Interpritor betwixt the Prop'or
and the Prisoner.

The affidavid of Jno. Vanculin read, Charles Ashcom being
a Witness to it.

1 Off. * HendridcaoQ's.

* Clearly a woid is here omitted — perhaps "oows."

1684] PENNSYLVANIA CASES 87

Annakey Coolin attested^ saith her husband tooke the
Heart of a Calfe that Dyed, as they thought, by Witchcraft,
and Boyled it, wherupon the Prisoner at the Barr came in and
asked them what they were doing; they said boy ling of flesh;
she said they had better they had Boyled the Bones, with
severall other unseemly Expressions.

Magaret Mattson saith that she Vallues not Drystreet's
Evidence; but if Sanderlin's mother had come, she would have
answered her; also denyeth Charles Aschom's Attestation at her
Soul, and Saith where is my Daughter; let her come and say so.

Annakey Cooling's attestation concerning the Gees, she denyeth, saying she was never out of her Conoo,^ and also that
she never said any such things Concerning the Calve's heart.

Jno. Cock attested, sayth he Knows nothing of the matter.

Tho: Balding's attestation was read, and Tho: Bracy attested, saith it is a True coppy.

The Prisoner denyeth all things, and saith that the Witnesses speaks only by hear say.

After wch the Govr gave the jury their Charge concerning
the Prisoner at the Barr.

The jiuy went forth, and upon their Retume Brought hier
in Guilty of haveing the Comon fame of a witch, but not guilty
in manner and forme as Shee stands Indicted.^

Neels Mattson and Antho. Neelson' Enters into a Recognizance of fifty poimds apeice, for the good behavior of Margaret Matson for six months.

Jacob Hendrickson Enters into the Recognizance of fifty
pounds for the good behavior of Getro Hendrickson for six
months.

Adjourned till the 20th day of the first Mo., 1684.*

* Canoe.

'The tact and quiet humor of this verdict should need no pointing out;
but it has sometimes been oddly misunderstood.

* "Antho. Neelson" was very probably a son of Neels and Margaret Mattson: here still, as in the home-land, Scandinavian surnames were often not
hereditary, but changed with every generation, so that a son of Neels (Cornelius)
Mattson might be sumamed, not Mattson, but Neelson (the Swedish Nilsson,
English Ndton). The assumption of Smith {History of Delaware County, pp. 153,
488) that he was a son-in-law is perhaps due only to ignorance of this usage.

^ Thus ended in the colony, so far as Penn^lvania records show, the criminal prosecution of witches. But in 1696 a young Quaker who had incurred the

88 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1701

At a CaimcU held at PkOaddphia the 2l8( ofSMo,^ 1701.

Present:

The Propritaiy and Govemour.*

Edwd. Shippen, | ThoB. Story, |

Saml. Carpenter, \ Esq'rs. Humpry Murray, Esq'rs.

Griffith Owen, J Caleb Pusey, J

A Petition of Robt. Guard and his Wife being read, setting
forth That a Certain Strange Woman lately arrived in this
Town being Seized with a very Sudden illness after she had
been in th^ Company on the 17th Instant, and Several Pins
being taken out of her Breasts, One John Richards, Butcher,
and his Wife Aim, charged the Petitrs with Witchcraft, and as
being the Authors of the Said Mischief; and therefore. Desire
their Accusers might be sent for, in Order either to prove their
Charge, or that they might be acquitted, they Suffering much
in their Reputation, and by that means in their Trade.

Ordered, that the Said John and Ann Richards be sent for;
who appearing, the matter was inquired into, and being found
triffing, was Dismissed.*

diadpline of hb Quarterily Meeting for pncdsing dtvinatioD wms presented l^
the grand jury to the county court, fined by the court, and fbrlndden to repeat
hiB magical practices (see Smith, Hutory cf Ddawan County^ pp. 102-194; Gummere, Wiiehcnfi and QuakeriMm, Philaddphia, 1906, pp. 40-47). And m 1701,
while Penn was once more in the colony (November, 1099-November, 1701),
there occurred the episode next to be narrated. It is reprinted from the Mimdn
cf ike Pwmncial Council cf Pemui/imnua, II. 20.

iMay21. * William Penn.

* That even in Pem^ylvania there came a time when, under less calm guidance, a witch-panic was possible, is suggested by the following news item sent
from Philaddphia on July 21, 1787, and puUished in the MauaekutetU Centind
of August 1 : "It must seriously affect every human mind that in consequence
of the barbarous treatment lately suffered by the poor old woman, called a witch,
she died on Wednesday last It is to be hq;)ed that every step will be taken to
bring the offenders to punishment in justice to the wretched victim, as well as
the violated laws of reason and society." The item is pointed out to the editor
by a colleague just as this volume goes to press.

MEMORABLE PROVIDENCES, RELATING TO
WITCHCRAFTS AND POSSESSIONS, BY
COTTON MATHER, 1689

INTRODUCTION

Much less than even his illustrious father does the Rev.
Ck>tton Mather (1662-1728) need here an introduction. His
name and his personality are a commonplace in American history and literature. Opinion r^arding him has indeed gone
widely asunder; but, if he has found severe critics, he has also
found able defenders. One of these, Mr. Barrett Wendell,
has told his story almost wholly in his own words;^ and the
little book is not only of rare charm, but, though apology, of
no small degree of frankness. It may be conmiended to all
who would see Cotton Mather with his own eyes. His relations with witchcraft have been debated at especial length
and with a wealth of knowledge by Mr. C. W. Upham and Mr.
W. F. Poole.^ But the reader of this volume hardly needs
such help: the evidence in almost all its fullness lies before
him.

The setting of Cotton Mather's life may be sketched in a
word. Son of Increase Mather, grandson of John Cotton,
precocious both in learning and in piety, he was from boyhood
— ^if ever he had a boyhood — ^the rising hope of Massachusetts
orthodoxy. All his life of answering to that hope was cpent

1 CiiUm Maiher: ike Puritan PrieH (Boston, 1891).

>By Mr. Upham in his Salem WUehcnfi (Boston, 1867) and his "Salem
Witdicraft and Cotton Mather" {Hietorieal Maganne, V.); Mr. Poole in his
"Cotton Mather and Salem Witchcraft" (North American Renew, CVUl.) and
hb chapter <m "^tchcraft at Boston" {Memorial Hidory qf BoeUm, II.). To
these should perhaps be added Mr. George H. Moore's pungent Nalee on the
Bibliograpky of Wiicheraft in MaseachueetU (American Antiquarian Society,
Proceedinge, new series, V.); and of prime importance to the student is the
Diary €f Cotton Maiher (Mass. Hist. Soc, CoUectione, seventh series, VII., VIII.),
with the able notes of its editor, Mr. Worthington C. Ford.

91

92 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [lese

in one long pastorate, that of the North Church, his father's
church, his father his associate almost to the end. But pastor
to him meant also student, politician, much besides.

The Memorable Pramdences was among his earliest books:
he was only twentynaeven at its publication. It was twice
reprinted — ^in 1691 at London, under the chang^ title of Late
Memorable Providences, with an added " reconmiendation "
by Richard Baxter, and in 1697 at Edinbui]^, under the old
title.*

1 Whftt seems m the list of Sibley {Hwnmd Graduateg, IIL fiO) and in Ssbm
a reimpffession of the book in 1690 with his Speedy Repentanee Urged fHoves (on
conation kindly made by the librarians of the John Carter Brown library) to be
only a copy of the latter work boond up somewhat confusedly with a defective
copy of the MemorabU Fnmdemeee (1689).

MEMORABLE PROVIDENCES

Memorable Pramdences, Rdating to WUchcrafla And Possessions.
A Faithful Account of many Wonderful and Surprising
Things f that have hef alien several BewUched and Possessed
Persons in New-England. Particularly, A Narrative of
the marvellous Trouble and Rdeef Experienced by a pious
Family in Boston, very lately and sadly molested with EvU
Spirits.

Whereunto is added, a Discourse delivered urUo a Congregation
in Boston, on the Occasion of that Illustrious Providence.
As also a Discourse delivered unto the same Congregation;
on the occasion of an horrible Self -Murder Committed in the
Town. With an Appendix, in vindication of a Chapter in
a hie Book of Remarkable Providences, from the Calumnies
of a Quoker at Pen-sUvania.

Written hy Cotton Mather, Minister of the Gospel, and Recovnr
mended hy the Ministers of Boston and Charleston.^

Printed at Boston in N. England hy R. P. 1689. Sold hy
Joseph Brunning, at his Shop at the Comer of the PrisonLane next the Exchange.^

To the Honourable Wait Winthrop Esq;*

Sr.

By the special Disposal and Providence of the Ahnighty
God, there now comes abroad into the world a little History

^Chariestown.

* Title-page of the original.

• Wait Winthrop (1643-1717), son of Governor John ^/\^throp of Connecticat and grandson of Governor John ^l^throp of Massachusetts, was himself a
man of weight in New En^and — jurist, member of the Massachusetts council,
noajor-general of the provincial forces. We shall meet him as a member of the
oourt at the Salem trials of 1692.

93

94 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1689

of several very astonishing Witchcrafts and Possessions, which
partly my own Ocular Observation, and partly my imdoubted
Information, hath enabled me to offer imto the publick Notice
of my Neighbours. It must be the Subject, and not the Manner or the Author of this Writing, that has made any people
desire its Publication; For there are such obvious Defects in
Both, as would render me veiy unreasonable, if I should wish
about This or Any Composure of mine, 0 That it were printed
in a book! But tho there want not Faults in the Discourse,
to give me Discontent enough, my Displeasure at them will be
recompensed by the Satisfaction I take in my Dedication of it ;
which I now no less properly than cheerfuUy make imto Your
Self; whom I reckon among the Best of my Friends, and the
Ablest of my Readers. Your Knowledge has Qualified You
to make those Reflections on the following Relations, which
few can Think, and tis not fit that all should See. How far the
J Platonic Notions of Daemons which were, it may be, much
more espoused by those primitive Christians and Scholars that
we call The Fathers, than they seem coimtenanced in the ensuing Narratives, are to be allow'd by a serious man, your
Scriptural Divinity, join'd with Your most Rational Philosophy, will help You to judge at an unconunon rate. Had
I on the Occasion before me handled the Doctrin of Dsemons,
or lanched forth into Speculations about magical Mysteries,
I might have made some Ostentation, that I have read something and thought a little in my time; but it would neither
have been CJonvenient for me, nor Profitable for those plain
Folkes, whose Edification I have all along aimed at. I have
therefore here but briefly touch't every thing with an American
Pen; a Pen which your Desert likewise has further Entitled
You to the utmost Expressions of Respect and Honour from.
Though I have no Commission, yet I am sure I shall meet with
no Crimination, if I here publickly wish You all manner of
Happiness, in the Name of the great Multitudes whom you
have laid under everlasting Ob^gations. Wherefore in the
name of the many hundred Sick people, whom your charitable
and skilful Hands have most freely dispensed your no less
generous than secret Medicines to; and in the name of Your
whole Coimtrey, which hath long had cause to believe that
you will succeed Your Honourable Father and Grandfather,

1689] C. MATHER, MEMORABLE PROVIDENCES 9&

in successful Endeavours for our Welfare; I say, In their
Name, I now do wish you all the Prosperity of them that love
J^-usalem. And whereas it hath been sometimes observed,
That the Genius of an Author is commonly Discovered in the
Dedicatory Epistle, I shall be content if this Dedicatory
Epistle of mine, have now discovered me to be,
(Sir) Your sincere and very humble Servant,

C. Matheb.

To the Reader.

The old Heresy of the sensual Sadducees, denying the
Being of Angels either good or evil, died not with them; nor
will it, whiles men (abandoning both Faith and Reason) coimt
it their wisdom to credit notlung but what they see and feel.
How much this fond opmion has gotten ground in this debauched Age is awfully observable; and what a dangerous
streak it gives to settle men in Atheism, is not hard to discern.
God is therefore pleased (besides the witness bom to this
Truth in Sacred Writ) to suffer Devils sometimes to do such
things in the world as shall stop the mouth of gainsayers, and
extort a Confession from them.

It has also been made a doubt by some, whether there are
any such things as Witches, i. e.. Such as by Contract or Ex* w
pUcit Covenant with the Devil, improve, or rather are improved V\
by him to the doing of things strange in themselves, and besides their natural Course. But (besides that the Word of
God assures us that there have been such, and gives order
about them) no Age passes without some apparent Demonstration of it. For, Though it be Folly to impute every dubious Accident, or imwonted Effect of Providence, to Witchcraft; yet there are some things which cannot be excepted
against, but must be ascribed hither.

Ad^Is and Men not being made for civil Converse together
in this world; and all Commimion with Devils being interdicted us; their Nature also being spiritual, and the Word of
God having said so little in that particular concerning their
way of Acting; hence it is that we can disclose but a Uttle of
those Mysteries of Darkness; all reports that are from themsdves, or their Instruments, being to be esteemed as Illusions,

». 1

96 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES (1089

or at least covered with Deceit; filled with the Impostures of
the Father of lies; and the efifects which come under our
consideration being Mysterious, rather Posing than Informing us.

The Secrets also of God's Providence, in permitting Satan
and his Instruments to molest His children, not in their Estates only, but in their Persons and their Posterity too, are
part of His Judgments that are unsearchable, and His Wayes
that are past finding out; only this we have good Assurance
for, that they are among the AJl things that work together for
their good. Their Graces are hereby tried, their Upri^tness
is made known, their Faith and Patience have their perfect
woric.

Among the many Instances that have been of this kind.
That which is Recorded in this Narrative, is worthy to be
conmiended to the Notice of Mankind, it being a thing in
it self full of Memorable passages, and faithfully recoided,
according to the Truth in Matter of Fact, scarce any Instance
being asserted in it, but what hath the Evidence of many
credible Witnesses, did need require. Among others who had
frequent Occasions to observe these things, the Reverend
Author of this short History, was spirited to be more than
ordinarily engaged in attending, and making particular Remarks upon the several passages occurring therein, and hath
accordingly written very little besides what EGmself was an
eye-witness of, together with others, and the rest was gathered
up with much Accuracy and Caution.

Its needless for us to insist upon the Conmiendation either
of the Author or the Work; the former is known in the Churches,
the latter will speak suflSciently for it self. All that we shall
o£fer to stay the Reader from passing over to satisfy himself in
that which follows, is only thus much, Viz.^ ^That the foUow-
. ; ing Accoimt will afiford to him that shall read ^th Observation,
\ a further clear Confirmation, That, There is both a God, and
a Devil, and Witchcraft: That, There is no out-ward Affliction, but what God may (and sometimes doth) permit Satan
to trouble His people withal : That, The Malice of Satan and
his Instruments, is very great against the Children of God:
That, The clearest Gospel-Light shining in a place, will not
keep some from entring hellish Contracts with infernal Spirits :

1689] C. MATHER, MEMORABLE PROVIDENCES 97

That; Prayer is a powerful and effectual Remedy against the
malicious practises of Devils and those in Covenant with them :
That, They who will obtain such Mercies of God, must pray
unto Perseverance : That, God often gives to His people some
apparent Encouragements to their Faith in Prayer, tho
He does not presently perfect the Deliverance sought for:
That, God's Grace is able to support His Children, and preserve their Grace firm, under sorest and Continuing Troubles :
That, Those who refuse the Temptation to use doubtful or
Diabolical Courses, to get the Assaults of the Devil and his
Agents removed. Choosing to Reconmiend all to God, and
rather to endure Affliction, than to have it Removed to
His Dishonour, and the woimding of their own Consciences,
never had cause to repent of it in the end.

And if these observations, together with the solemn Improvement made of this stupend* Providence, in the pertinent and Judicious Sermons annexed, may but obtain a due
Impression on the hearts of such as shall peruse them, whether
young or old; as therein will be their profit, so shall their
Labour turn to the Praise of God, fully satisfie the Author for
all his Care and Industry, and answer his sincere Aims: for
which good Success we Conunend it to the Blessing of God, to
be followed with the importimate Prayers of us, who have
been Eye- and Ear-witnesses of many of the most considerable
things Related in the ensuing Narrative.

Charles Morton.

James Allen.

Joshua Moodey.

Samuel Willard.*

The Iviroduclion.

It was once the Mistake of one gone to the Congregation
of the Dead, concerning the Survivers, // one went unto them

> Stupendous: this shorter spelling (qf. "reverend'') was then current.

* Morton was minister of Charlestown, Allen of the First Church in Boston/
where Moodey, driven from Portsmouth (see pp. 31, 34, and 187, note 3), was
now his associate, and Willard (see pp. 21, 22, 184, and 186, note 3) of the
South Church. The North Church, the only other, was Mather's own; and hia
father, who was his colleague there, was now in England. Moodey had himself,
in a letter to Increase Mather of October 4, 1688 (Mather Papers, pp. 367368), written a brief account of the bewitchment of the Goodwin children.

98 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1689

from the deady they wiU repent. The blessed God hath made
some to come from the Damned, for the Conviction (may it
also be for the Conversion) of us that are yet alive. The
^ Devils themselves are by Compulsion come to confute the
^Atheism and Sadducism, and to reprove the Madness of ungodly men. Those condemned prisoners of our Atmosphere
have not really sent Letters of Thanks from Hell, to those that
are on Earth, promoting of their Interest, yet they have been
forced, as of old, To confess that Jesus was the Holy one of
God, so of late, to declare that Sin and Vice are the thing?
which they are delighted in. But should one of those hideous
Wights appear visibly with fiery chains upon him, and utter
audibly his roarings and his warnings in one of our Congr^ations, it would not produce new Hearts in those whom ^e
Scriptiu-es handled in our Ministry do not affect. However it
becomes the Embassadors of the L.^ Jesus to leave no stroke
untouch't that may conduce to bring men from the power of
Satan unto God; and for this cause it is, that I have permitted
the ensuing Histories to be published. They contain Things
of undoubted Certainty, and ^ey suggest Things of Importance unconceiveable. Indeed > they are only one Head of Collections which in my Uttle time" of Observation I have made of
Memorable Providences, with Reflections thereupon, to be
reserved among other effects of my Diversion from my more
stated and more weary Studies. But I can with a Contentment beyond meer Patience give these rescinded Sheets imto
the Stationer, when I see what pains Mr. Baxter,* Mr. Glanvil,* Dr. More,* and several other Great Names have taken
to publish Histories of Witchcrafts and Possessions unto the
world. I said. Let me also run after them; and this with the
more Alacrity because, I have tidings ready. Go then, my
little Book, as a Lackey* to the more elaborate Essayes of

»Lord.

^Richaid Baxter. His monograph on apparitions and witdies. The Cerlamty cf the Worlds cf Spiriie, was not published, indeed, until 1691; but, as he
teUs us in the preface to that work, "finding that almost all the Atheists, Sadduoees, and Infideb did seem to profess that were they but sure of the Reality
of the Apparitions and Operations of Spirits, it would cure them," he had for
many years been inserting such evidence in his books.

* Joseph Grlanvill (see p. 5, above). * Henry More (see p. 5, above).

■ /. e,, a footman, running behind their chariots.

1688] C. MATHER, MEMORABLE PROVIDENCES 99

those learned men. Go tell Mankind, that there are Devils,
and Witches; and that tho those night-birds least appear
where the Day-light of the Gospel comes, yet New-Engl. has
had Exemples of their Existence and Operation; and that not Q
only the Wigwams of Indians, where the pagan Powaws^ ^
often raise their masters,^ in the shapes of Bears and Snakes
and Fires, but the Houses of Christians, where our God has
had EQs constant Worship, have imdergone the Annoyance of
Evil spirits. Go tell the world. What Prayers can do beyond
all Devils and Witches, and What it is that these Monsters
love to do; and though the Dsemons in the Audience of several standers-by threatned much disgrace to thy Author, if
he let thee come abroad, yet venture That, and in this way
seek a just Revenge on Them for the Disturbance they have
given to such as have called on the Name of God.

Witchcrafts and Possessions.

The First Exemple.

Section I. There dwells at this time, in the south part of
Boston, a sober and pious man, whose Name is John Goodwin,
whose Trade is that of a Mason, and whose Wife (to which a
Good Report gives a share with him in all the Characters of
Yertue) has made him the Father of six (now Uving) Children.
Of these Children, all but the Eldest, who works with his
Father at his Calling, and the Yoimgest, who Uves yet upon
the Breast of its mother, have laboured imder the direful
effects of a (no less palpable than) stupendous Witchcraft.
Indeed that exempted Son had also, as was thought, some
lighter touches of it, in unaccountable stabbs and pains now
and then upon him ; as indeed every person in the Family at
some time or other had, except the godly Father, and the
sucking Infant, who never felt any impressions of it. But
these Four Children mentioned, were handled in so sad and
strange a manner, as has given matter of Discourse and Wonder to all the Coimtrey, and of History not unworthy to be

* Hie "medidne men" of the Indians.

* I, e,, the devils : to the Puritansi as to the eari|y Christians^ all but Christian worship was devil wwship.

100 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1688

considered by more than all the serious or the curious Readers
in this New-English World.

Sect. II. The four Children (whereof the Eldest was about
Thirteen, and the youngest was perhaps about a third part
80 many years of ageO had enjoyed a Religious Education,
and answered it with a very towardly Ingenuity.* They had
an observable Affection unto Divine and Sacr^ £hings; and
those of them that were capable of it, seem'd to have such a
Resentment' of their eternal Concernments as is not altogether
usual. Their Parents also kept them to a continual Employment, which did more than deUver them from the Temptations
of Idleness, and as yoimg as they were, they took a delight in
it, it may be as much as they should have done, (in a word,
Such was the whole Temper and Carriage of the Children,
that there cannot easily be any thing more unreasonable, than
to imagine that a Design to Dissemble could cause them to
fall into any of their odd Fits; though there should not have
happened,' as thei« did, a thousand Thmgs, wherem it was
perfectly impossible for any Dissimulation of theirs to produce
what scores of spectators were amazed at.^

Sect. ni. About Midsunmier, in the year 1688, the Eldest
of these Children, who is a Daughter, saw cause to examine
their Washerwoman, upon their missing of some linnen, which
twas fear'd she had stoUen from them; and of what use this
linnen might bee to serve the Witchcraft intended, the Theef 's
Tempter knows! This Laimdress was the Daughter of an
ignorant and a scandalous old Woman in the Nei^bourhood;
whose miserable Husband before he died, had sometimes complained of her, that she was undoubtedly a Witch, and that
whenever his Head was laid, she would quickly arrive unto
the punishments due to such an one. lliis Woman in her
dau^ters Defence bestow'd very bad Language upon the Girl
that put her to the Question; inmiediately upon which, the

> Martha was 13, John 11 » Mercy 7, Benjamin 5, the elder son (Nathaniel)
15, the baby (Hannah) six months old, when the narrative opens (midsiimmer,
1688). (Savage, Oenealogical DicHonary, and Boston records.)

* I. e,, with encouraging promise.

' /. e., feeling, realization — in the rdigious cant of to-day, "a realiang
sense."

* /. e,, even if there had not happened.

1688] C. MATHER, MEMORABLE PROVIDENCES 101

poor chfld became variously indisposed in her health, and
visited with strange Fits, beyond those that attend an Epilepsy, ^
or a Catalepsy, or those that they call The Diseases of Astonishment.^

Bed. IV. It was not long before one of her Sisters, and
two of her Brothers, were seized, in Order one after another,
with Affects* like those that molested her. Within a few
weeks, they were all four tortured every where in a manner so
very grievous, that it would have broke an heart of stone to
have seen their Agonies. Skilful Physicians were consulted
for their Help, and particularly our worthy and prudent Friend
Dr. Thomas Oakes,* who foimd himself so affronted* by the
Distempers of the children, that he concluded nothing but an
hellish Witchcraft could be the Original* of these Maladies.
And that which yet more confirmed such Apprehension was.
That for one good while, the children were tormented just in
the same part of their bodies all at the same time together; and
tho they saw and heard not one anothers complaints, tho likewise their pains and sprains were swift like Lightening, yet
when (suppose) the Neck, or the Hand, or the Back of one was
Rack% so it was at that instant with t'other too.

&ed. V. The variety of their tortures increased continually; and tho about Nine or Ten at Night they alwaies had a
Release from their miseries, and ate and slept all night for the
most part indifferently well, yet in the day time they were
handled with so many sorts of Ails, that it would require of us
almost as much time to Relate them all, as it did of them to
Endure them. (^Sometimes they would be Deaf, sometimes
Dumb, and sometimes Blind, and often, all this at once. One \
while their Tongues would be drawn down their Throats;
another-while they would be pull'd out upon their Chins, to
a prodigious length. They would have their Mouths opened
unto such a Wideness, that their Jaws went out of joint; and

> /. e., stupefaction : diseases that rob one of his wits. It should not be
forgotten, here or later, that the author had once, while his stammering seemed
to bar him from the ministry, begun the study of medicine.

* Affections, ailments.

' Dr. Oakes (1644-1719) was the locally eminent physician who in 1689
became speaker dL the legislature and in 1690 was sent as a colonial deputy to
Kngiand.

^ Nonplussed, dumbfounded. * Origin.

1Q2 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES |1688

anon they would dap together again with a Force like that
of a strong Spring-Lock. The same would happen to their
Shoulder-Blades, and their Elbows, and Hand-wrists, and
several of their joints.) They would at times ly in a benummed
condition; and be drawn together as those that are ty'd Neck
and Heels ;^ and presently be stretched out, yea, drawn Backwards, to such a d^ree that it was fear'd the very skin of their
BeUies would have crack'd. They would make most pitteous
out-cries, that they were cut with Knives, and struck with
Blows that they could not bear. Their Necks would be
broken, so that their Neck-bone would seem dissolved unto
them that felt after it; and yet on the sudden, it would become
again so stiff that there was no stirring of their Heads; yea,
their Heads would be twisted almost round; and if main
Force at any time obstructed a dangerous motion which they
seem'd to be upon, they would roar exceedin^y. Thus they
lay some weeks most pittiful Spectacles; and this while as a
fiu-ther Demonstration of Witchcraft in these horrid Effects,
when I went to Prayer by one of them, that was veiy desireous
to hear what I said, the CMd utterly lost her Hearing till our
Prayer was oyer.

Sect. VI. (It was a Religious Family that these AfBictions
happened imto; and none but a Religious Contrivance to
obtain Releef, would have been welcome to them. Many
superstitious proposals were made imto them, by persons that
^-y were I know not who, nor what, with Arguments fetch't from
"^ I know not how much Necessity and Experience; but the disi tressed Parents rejected all such counsils, with a gracious Resolution, to oppose Devils with no other weapons but Prayers
and Tears, unto Him that has the Chaining of them; and to

^ "Tied neck and heds" was doubtless at first, as the lezicogra|dien understand it, only a phrase for the securest method of fettering; but it had now be>
come a name for what was (in defiance of English law) a method of torture.
For its use at Salem see p. 363» note 2, below. Jardine says (The Use cf Torture in
ike Criminal Law cf England, p. 37 ff.) that there is now shown in the Tower of
London a device "which compressed the neck of the sufferer down toward his
feet," and he thinks this may be that torture of "the manades" often mentioDed
in the En^^ish state trials of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries and meant
1^ Shake^ieare, when he makes PhMpero say : "111 manade thy neck and feet
together." In Virginia tying neck and heeb was in the seventeenth century a
penalty imposed by the courts.

16881 C. MATHER, MEMORABLE PROVIDENCES 103

try first whether Graces were not the best things to encounter
Witchcrafts with. Accordingly they requested the four Ministers of Boston, with the Minister of Charlstown, to keep a
Day of Prayer at their thus haunted house; which they did
in the Company of some devout people there. Immfediately
upon this Day, the yoimgest of the four children was deUvered,
and never felt any trouble as afore. But there was yet a
greater Effect of these our AppUcations unto our God!

Sect. VII. The Report of the Calamities of the Family \
for which we were thus concerned, arrived now imto the ears . '^"'^
of the Magistrates, who presently and prudently apply'd -
themselves, with a just vigour, to enquire into the story. The
Father of the Children complained of his Neighbour, the suspected ill woman, whose name was Glover; and she being
sent for by the Justices, gave such a wretched Account of her
self, that they saw cause to commit her imto the Gaolers Custody. Goodwin had no proof that could have done her any
Hurt; but the Hag had not power to deny her interest in the
Enchantment of the Children; and when she was asked,
Whether she believed there was a God? her Answer was too
blasphemous and horrible for any Pen of mine to mention. )
An Experiment was made, Whether she could recite the Lords
Prayer; and it was foimd, that tho clause after clause was most
carefully repeated unto her, yet when she said it after them
that prompted her, she could not possibly avoid making Nonsense of it, with some ridiculous Depravations. This Experiment I had the curiosity since to see made upon two more,
and it had the same Event. Upon the Commitment of this
extraordinary Woman, all the Clnldren had some present ease;
imtil one (related imto her) accidentally meeting one or two
of them, entertain'd them with her Blessing, that is. Railing;
upon which Three of them fell ill again, as they were before.

Sect. VIII. It was not long before the Witch thus in the
Trap, was brought upon her Tryal; at which, thro' the Efficacy
of a Charm, I suppose, used upon her, by one or some of her
Crue,* the Court could receive Answers from her in none but
the Irish, which was her Native Language; altho she understood the English very well, and had accustomed her whole
Family to none but that Language in h^ former Conversa-

»Crew.

J

\ N

104 NARRATIVES OP THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1688

tion; and therefore the Communication between the Bench
and the Bar,* was now cheefly convey'd by two honest and
faithful men that were interpreters. It was long before she
could with any direct Answers plead unto her Indictment;
and when she did plead, it was with Confession rather than
Denial of her GuUt. Order was given to search the old
womans house, from whence there were brought into the Court,
several small Images, or Puppets, or Babies, made of Raggs,
and stuff't with Goat's hair, and other such Ingredients.
When these were produced, the vile Woman acknowledged,
that her way to torment the Objects of her malice, was by
wetting of her Finger with her Spittle, and stroaking of those
little Images. The abused Children were then present, and
the Woman still kept stooping and shrinking as one that was
almost prest to Death with a mighty Weight upon her. But
one of the Images being brought unto her, immediately she
started up after an odd manner, and took it into her hand;
but she had no sooner taken it, than one of the Children fdl
into sad Fits, before the whole Assembly. This the Judges
had their just Apprehensions at; and carefully causing tiie
Repetition of the Experiment, found again the same event of
it. They asked her. Whether she had any to stand by her:
She replied. She had; and looking very pertly in the Air, she
added. No, He's gone. And she then confessed, that she had
One, who was her Prince, with whom she maintain'd,I know not
what Communion. For which cause, the night after, she was
heard expostulating with a Devil, for his thus deserting her;
telling him that Because he had served her so basely and f alsly,
she had confessed all. However to make all clear. The Court
appointed five or six Physicians one evening to examine her
very strictly, whether she were not craz'd in her Intellectuals,
and had not procured to her self by Folly and Madness the
Reputation of a Witch. Diverse hours did they spend with
her; and in all that while no Discourse came from her, but
what was pertinent and agreeable: particularly, when they
asked her, What she thought would become of her soul? she
reply'd "You ask me a very solemn Question, and I cannot
well tell what to say to it." She own'd her self a Roman
Catholick; and could recite her Pater Noster in Latin veiy

^ /. 0.y between the judges and the prisoner at the bar.

1688] C. MATHER, MEMORABLE PROVmENCES 105

readily; but there was one Clause or two alwaies too hard for
her, whereof she said, "She could not repeat it, if she might
have all the world." In the up-shot, the Doctors returned
her Compos Mentis;^ and Sentence of Death was pass'd upon
her.

Sect. IX. Diverse dayes were passed between her being
Arraigned and Condemned. In this time one of her Neighbours had been giving in her Testimony of what another of
her Neighbours had upon her Death related concerning her.
It seems one Howen about Six years before, had been cruelly
bewitched to Death; but before she died, she called one Hughes
unto her. Telling her that she laid her Death to the charge of
Glover; That she had seen Glover sometimes come down her
Chinmey; That she should remember this, for within this Six
years she might have Occasion to declare it. This Hughes
now preparing her Testimony, immediately one of her children,
a fine boy, well grown towards Youth, was taken ill, just in
the same woful and surprising manner that Goodwins children
were. One night particularly. The Boy said he saw a Black
thing with a Blue Cap in the Room, Tormenting of him; and
he complained most bitterly of a Hand put into the Bed, to
pull out his Bowels. The next day the mother of the boy
went unto Glover, in the Prison, and asked her. Why she tortured her poor lad at such a wicked rate? This Witch replied,
that she did it because of wrong done to her self and her
daughter. Hughes denied (as well she might) that she had
done her any wrong. "Well then," sayes Glover, "Let me
see your child and he shall be well again." Glover went on,
and told her of her own accord, "I was at your house last
ni^t." Sayes Hughes, "In what shape?" Sayes Glover,
"As a black thing with a blue Cap." Sayes Hughes, "What
did you do there?" Sayes Glover, "with my hand in the Bed
I tryed to pull out the boyes Bowels, but I could not." They
parted; but the next day Hughes appearing at Court, had her
Boy with her; and Glover passing by the Boy, expressed her
good wishes for him; tho' I suppose, his Parent had no design
of any mighty Respect unto the Hag, by having him with her
there. But the Boy had no more Indispositions after the
Condemnation of the Woman.

^Of sound mind.

106 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES 11688

Sect. X. Whfle the miserable old Woman was under Condemnation^ I did my self twice give a visit imto her. She never
denyed the guilt of the Witchcraft charg'd upon her; but she
^confessed very little about the Circumstances of her ConfedJ eracies with the Devils; only, she said, That she us'd to be at
meetings, which her Prince and Four more were present at.
As for those Fom*, She told who they were; and for her Prince,
her account plainly was, that he was the Devil. She entertained me with nothing but Irish, which Language I had not
Learning enough to understand without an Interpreter; only
one time, when I was representing imto her That and How her
Prince had cheated her, as her self would quickly find; she
reply'd, I think in English, and with passion too, '^ If it be so,
I am sorry for that!" I offer'd many Questions unto her,
unto which, after long silence, she told me. She would fain give
me a full Answer, but they would not give her leave. It was
demanded, "r%/ Who is that r%?" and she retum'd, that
They were her Spirits, or her Saints, (for they say, the same
Wonl in Irish signifies both). And at another time, she included her two Mistresses, as she call'd them in that They,
but when it was enquired, Who those two were, she fell into
a Rage, and would be no more urged.

^ Sett before her the Necessity and Equity of her breaking
_j> her Covenant with Hell, and giving her self to the Lord Jesus
^xChrist, by an everlasting Covenant; To which her Answer
was, that I spoke a very Reasonable thing, but she could not
do it. I asked her whether she would consent or desire to be
pray'd for; To that she said. If Prayer would do her any good,
shee could pray for her self. And when it was again propoimded, she said. She could not imless her spirits (or angels)
would give her leave. However, against her will I pray'd
with her, which if it were a Fault it was in excess of Pitty.
When I had done, shee thank'd me with many good Words;
but I was no sooner out of her sight, than she took a stone, a
long and slender stone, and with her Finger and Spittle fell
to tormenting it; though whom or what she meant, I had the
mercy never to imderstandj

Sect. XI. When this Witch was going to her Execution,
she said, the Children should not be reheved by her Death,
for others had a hand in it as well as she; and she named one

1688] C. MATHER, MEMORABLE PROVIDENCES 107

among the rest, whom it might have been thought Natm*al
Affection would have advised the Concealing of. It came to
pass accordingly, That the Three children continued in their
Furnace as before, and it grew rather Seven times hotter than
it was. All their former Ails pursued them still, with an addition of (tis not easy to tell how many) more, but such as
gave more sensible Demonstrations of an Enchantment growing very far towards a Possession by Evil spirits.

Sect. Xn. The Children in their Fits would still cry
out upon They and Them as the Authors of all their Harm;
but who that They and Them were, they were not able to declare. At last, the Boy obtain'd at some times a sight of some
8hi4)es in the room. There were Three or Four of 'em, the
Names of which the child would pretend at certain seasons to
tell; only the Name of One, who was coimted a Sager Hag
than the rest, he still so stammered at, that he was put upon
some Periphrasis in describing her. A Blow at the place
where the Boy beheld the Spectre was alwaies felt by the Boy
himself in the part of his Body that answered what might be
stricken at; and this tho his Back were tum'd; which was
once and again so exactly tried, that there could be no Collusion in the Business. But as a Blow at the Apparition alwaies
hurt him, so it alwaies help't him too; for after the Agonies,
which a Push or Stab of lliat had put him to, were over, (as
in a minute or 2 they would be) the Boy would have a respite
from his Fits a considerable while, and the Hobgoblins disappear. It is very credibly reported that a wound was this
way given to an Obnoxious woman in the town, whose name I
will not expose: for we should be tender in such Relations,
lest we wrong the Reputation of the Innocent by stories not
enough enquired into.

Sect. XIII. The Fits of the Children yet more arriv'd
imto such Motions as were beyond the Efficacy of any natural
Distemper in the World. They would bark at one another like
Dogs, and again purr like so many Cats. They would sometimes complain, that they were in a Red-hot Oven, sweating
and panting at the same time unreasonably : Anon they would
say, Cold water was thrown upon them, at which they would
shiver very much. They would cry out of dismal Blowes
with great Cudgels laid upon them; and tho' we saw no cud-

-■i>

108 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES (1088

gels nor blowes, yet we could see the Marks left by them in
Red Streaks upon their bodies afterward. And one of them
would be roasted on an invisible Spit, run into his Mouth, and
out at his Foot, he lying, and rolling, and groaning as if it had
been so in the most sensible manner in the world ; and then he
would shriek, that Ejiives were cutting of him. Sometimes
also he would have his head so forcibly, tho not visibly, nail'd
unto the Floor, that it was as much as a strong man could do
to pull it up. One while they would all be so Limber, that it
was judg'd every Bone of them could be bent. Another while
they would be so stiff, that not a joint of them could be stir'd.
They would sometimes be as though they were mad, and then
they would climb over high Fences, beyond the Imagination
of them that look'd after them. Yea, They would fly Uke
Geese; and be carried with an incredible Swiftness thro the
air, having but just their Toes now and then upon the
ground, and their Anns waved Uke the Wings of a Bird. One
of them, in the House of a kind Neighbour and Gentleman (Mr.
Willis) flew the length of the Room, about 20 foot, and flew
just into an Infants high armed Chair; (as tis affirmed) none
seeing her feet all the way touch the floor.

Sect. XIV. Many wayes did the Devils take to make
the children do mischief both to themselves and others; but
thro the singular Providence of God, they always fail'd in the
attempts. For they could never essay the doing of any harm,
imless there were some-body at hand that mi^t prevent it;
and seldome without first shrieking out, ''They say, I must do
such a thing!'' Diverse times they went to s^ike furious
Blowes at their tenderest and dearest friends, or to fling them
down staires when they had them at the Top, but the warnings
from the mouths of the children themselves, would still anticipate what the Devils did intend. They diverse times were
very near Burning or Drowning of themselves, but the Children themselves by their own pittiful and seasonable cries for
Help, still procured their DeUverance: Which made me to
Consider, Whether the Little ones had not their Angels, in the
plain sense of Our Saviours Intimation. Sometimes, When
they were tying their own Neck-clothes, their compelled hands
miserably strangled themselves, till perhaps, the standers-by
gave some Relief unto them. But if any small Mischief hap1688] C. MATHER, MEMORABLE PROVIDENCES 109

pen'd to be done where they were; as the Tearing or Dirtying
of a Garment, the Falling of a Cup, the breaking of a Glass
or the like; they would rejoice extremely, and fall into a pleasure and Laughter very extraordinary. All which things compared with the Temper of the Chilcfren, when they are themselves, may suggest some very peculiar Thoughts imto us.

Sect. XV. They were not in a constant Torture for some
Weeks, but were a Uttle quiet, unless upon some incidental
provocations; upon which the Devils would handle them like
Tigres, and woimd them in a manner very horrible. Particularly, Upon the least Reproof of their Parents for any unfit
thing they said or did, most grievous woful Heart-breaking
Agonies would they fall into. If any useful thing were to be
done to them, or by them, they would have all sorts of Troubles
fall upon them. It would sometimes cost one of them an Hour
or Two to be imdrest in the evening, or drest in the morning.
For if any one went to imty a string, or undo a Button about
them, or the contrary; they would be twisted into such postures as made the thing impossible. And at Whiles, they
would be so managed in their Beds, that no Bed-clothes could
for an hour or two be laid upon them; nor could they go to
wash their Hands, without having them clasp't so odly together, there was no doing of it. But when their Friends were
near tired with Waiting, anon they might do what they would
unto them. Whatever Work they were bid to do, they would
be so snap't in the member which was to do it, that they with
grief still desisted from it. If one ordered them to Rub a
clean Table, they were able to do it without any disturbance;
if to rub a dirty Table, presently they would with many Torments be made imcapable. And sometimes, tho but seldome,
they were kept from eating their meals, by having their Teeth
sett when they carried any thing unto their Mouthes.

Sect. XVI. But nothing in the World would so discompose
them as a ReUgious Exercise. If there were any Discourse of
God, or Christ, or any of the things which are not seen and are
eternal, they would be cast into intolerable Anguishes. Once,
those two Worthy Ministers Mr. Fisk* and Mr. Thatcher,*
bestowing some gracious Coimsils on the Boy, whom they then

>The Rev. Moses Fiske (1642-1708), minister at Braintree.
*The Rev. Peter Thacber (1651-1727), minister at Milton.

110 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1688

found at a Neighbours house, he immediately lost his Hearing,
80 that he heard not one word, but just the last word of all
they said. Much more, All Praying to God, and Reading of
His word, would occasion a very terrible Vexation to them:
they would then stop their own Ears with their own Hands;

Qand roar, and shriek; and holla, to drown the Voice of the
Devotion. Yea, if any one in the Room took up a Bible to
look into it, tho the Children could see nothing of it, as being in
a croud of Spectators, or having their Faces another way, yet
would they be in wonderful Miseries, till the Bible were laid
aside. In short. No good thing must then be endiu^ed near
those Children, Which (while they are themselves) do love
every good thing in a measure that proclaims in them the Fear
of God.

Sect. XVII. My Employments were such, that I could
not visit this afflicted Fainily so often as I would; Wherefore,
that I might show them what kindness I could, as also that I
might have a fuU opportunity to observe the extraordinary
Circumstances of the Children, and that I might be furnished
with Evidence and Argument as a Critical Eye-Witness to

^ confute the Saducism of this debauched Age; I took the Eldest
of them home to my House. The yoimg Woman continued
weU at oiu* house, for diverse dayes, and apply'd her self to
such Actions not only of Industry, but of Piety, as she had
been no stranger to. But on the Twentieth of November in
the Fore-noon, she cry'd out, "Ah, They have found me out!
il thought it would be so!" and immediately she fell into her
jfits again. I shall now confine my Story cheefly to Her, from
I whose Case the Reader may shape some Conjecture at the
Accidents of the Rest.

Sect. XVIII. Variety of Tortures now siez'd ujwn the
Girl; in which besides the forementioned Ails retiuning upon
her, she often would cough up a Ball as big as a small Egg,
into the side of her Wind-pipe, that would near choak her, till
by Stroking and by Drinking it was carried down again. At
the beginning of her Fits usually she kept odly Looking up
the Chimney, but could not say what she saw. When I bad
her Cry to the Lord Jesus for Help, her Teeth were instantly
sett; ui)on which I added, ''Yet, child. Look unto Him,'' and
then her Eyes were presently puUed into her head, so farr.

16881 C. MATHER, MEMORABLE PROVIDENCES 111

that one might have fear'd she should never have us'd them
more. When I prayed in the Room, first her Arms were with
a strong, tho not seen Force clap't upon her ears; and when her
hands were with violence pnll'd away, she cryed out, "TAer/
make such a noise, I cannot hear a word! " She likewise complained, that Goody Glover's Chain was upon her L^, and
when she essay'd to go, her postures were exactly such as the
chained Witch had before she died. But the manner still was,
that her Tortures in a small while would pass over, and Frolicks
succeed; in which she would continue many hours, nay, whole
dajrs, talking perhaps never wickedly, but alwaies wittily,
beyond her self; and at certain provocations, her Tortures
would renew upon her, till we had left off to give them. But
she frequently told us, that if she might but steal, or be drunk,
she should be well immediately.

Sect. XIX. In her ludicrous Fits, one while she would be
for Fljring; and she would be carried hither and thither, tho
not long from the ground, yet so long as to exceed the ordinary
power of Nature in our Opinion of it : another-while she would
be for Diving, and use the Actions of it towards the Floor, on
which, if we had not held her, she would have thrown her self.
Being at this exercise she told us. That They said, she must go
down to the Bottom of our Well, for there was Plate there,
and They said. They would bring her safely up again. This
did she tell us, tho she had never heard of any Plate there!
and we ourselves who had newly bought the house, hardly
knew of any; but the former Owner of the House just then
coming in, told us there had been Plate for many years at the
Bottom of the Well.

She had once a great mind to have eaten a roasted Apple,
but whenever she attempted to eat it, her Teeth would be sett,
and sometimes, if she went to take it up her Ann would be
made so stiff, that she could not possibly bring her hand to
her Mouth: at last she said, ''Now They say, I shall eat it,
if I eat it quickly"; and she nimbly eat it all up. Moreover,

There was one very singular passion that frequently attended her. An Invisible Chain would be clapt about her, and
shee, in much pain and Fear, cry out. When They b^an to
put it on. Once I did with my own hand knock it off, as it
b^an to be f astned about her. But ordinarily. When it was

J

112 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1688

on, shee'd be pull'd out of her seat with such violence towards
the Fire, that it has been as much as one or two of us could
do to keep her out. Her Eyes were not brought to be perpendicular to her feet, when she rose out of her Seat, as the Mechanism of a Humane^ Body requires in them that rise, but
she was one dragg'd whoUy by other Hands : and once. When
I gave a stamp on the Hearth, just between her and the Fire,
she screamed out, (tho I think she saw me not) that I Jarr'd
the Chain, and hurt her Back.

Sect. XX. While she was in her FroUcks I was willing
to tiy. Whether she could read or no; and I foimd, not only
That If she went to read the Bible her Eyes would be strangely
twisted and blinded, and her Neck presently broken, but also
that if any one else did read the Bible in the Room, tho it
were wholly out of her sight, and without the least voice or
noise of it, she would be cast into very terrible Agonies. Yet
once Falling into her Maladies a Uttle time after ^e had read
the 59th Psalm, I said unto the standers by, ''Poor child! she
can't now read the Psalm she readd a Uttle whfle ago," she
listened her self unto something that none of us could hear and
made us be silent for some few Seconds of a minute. Whereupon she said, ''But I can read it, they say I shall!" So I
show'd her the Psalm, and she readd it all over to us. Then
said I, " Child, say Amen to it : " but that she could not do. I
added, "Bead the next:" but no where else in the Bible
could she read a word. I brought her a Quakers Book; and
That she could quietly read whole pages of; only the Name of
God and Christ she still skip't over, being unable to pronounce
it, except sometimes with stammering a minute or two or
more upon it. When we urged her to tell what the word was
that she missed, shee'd say, "I must not speak it; They say I
must not, you know what it is, it's G and 0 and D;" so shee'd
spell the Name imto us. I brought her again one that I
thought was a Good Book; and presently ^e was handled
with intolerable Torments. But when I show'd her a JestBook, as, The Oxford Jests j or the Cambridge Jests, she could
read them without any Disturbance, and have witty Descants
ui)on them too. I entertain'd her with a Book that pretends
to prove. That there are no Witches; and that she could read

^ Human. "Humane" was then the current q)dling.

16881 C. MATHER, MEMORABLE PROVIDENCES 113

very well, only the Name Devils, and Witches, could not be
uttered by her without extraordinary DiflBculty. I produced
a Book to her that proves, That there are Witches, and that
she had not power to read. When I readd in the Room the
Story of Ann Cole,^ in my Fathers Remarkable Providences, and
came to the Exclamation which the Narrative saies the Dsemons
made upon her, ''Ah she runs to the Rock!" it cast her into
inexpressible Agonies; and shee'd fall into them whenever I
had the Expression of, " Running to the Rock," afterwards.
A i)opi8h Book also she could endure very well; but it would
kill her to look into any Book, that (in my Opinion) it might y
have bin profitable and edifjring for her to be reading of.
These Experiments were often enough repeated, and still with
the same Success, before Witnesses not a few. The good Books
that were found so mortal to her were cheefly such as lay ever
at hand in the Room. One was the Quid to Heaven from the
Word, which I had given her. Another of them was Mr. Willard's Uttle (but precious) Treatise oj JiLstificcUton. Diverse
Books published by my Father I also tried upon her; particularly, his Mystery of Christ; and another small Book of his
about Faith and Repentance, and the day of Judgement.

Once being very merrily talking by a Table that had this
last Book upon it, she just opened the Book, and was inmiediately struck backwarxls as dead upon the floor. I hope I
have not spoil'd the credit of the Books, By telling how much
the Devils hated them. I shall therefore add. That my Grandfather Cottons Catechism called MiUc for Babes, and The
Assemblies Catechism, would bring hideous Convulsions on the
Child if she look't into them; tho she had once leam't them
with all the love that could be.

Sect. XXI. I was not unsensible that this Girls Capacity
or incapacity to read, was no Test for Truth to be determined
by, and therefore I did not proceed much further in this fanciful Business, not knowing What snares the Devils might lay
for us in the Tryals. A few further Tryals, I confess, I did
make; but what the event of 'em was, I shall not relate, because I would not offend. But that which most made me to
wonder was. That one bringing to her a certain Prayer-Book,
she not only could Read it very well, but also did read a large

* See pp. 18-21, above.

114 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1688

part of it over, and calling it Her Bible, she took in it a delight
and put on it a Respect more than Ordinary. If she were
going into her tortures, at the offer of this Book, she would
come out of her fits and read; and her Attendents were almost
imder a Temptation to use it as a Charm, to make and keep
her quiet. Only, When she came to the Lords Prayer, (now
and then occurring in this Book) she would have her eyes put
out, so that she must turn over a new leaf, and then she could
read again. Whereas also there are Scriptures in that Book,
she could read them there, but if I shew'd her the very same
Scriptures in the Bible, she should sooner Dy than read them.
And she was likewise made unable to read the Psalms in an
ancient meeter, which this prayer-book had in the same volumne with it. There were, I think I may say, no less than
Multitudes of Witnesses to this odd thing; and I should not
have been a faithful and honest Historian, if I had withheld
from the World this part of my History: But I make no
Reflections on it. Those inconsiderable men that are provoked at it (if any shall be of so Uttle Sense as to be provoked)
must be angry at the Devils, and not at me; their Malice, and
not my Writing, deserves the Blame of any Aspersion which a
true History may seem to cast on a Book that some have
enough manifest^ their Concernment for.

Sect. XXn. There was another most unaccountable
Circiunstance which now attended her; and imtil she came to
our House, I think, she never had Experience of it. Ever now
and then, an Invisible Horse would be brought imto her, by
those whom she only called, "them," and, "Her Company":
ui)on the Approach of Which, her eyes would be still closed up;
for (said she) "They say, I am a TeD-Tale, and therefore they
will not let me see tiiem." Upon this would she give a Spring
as one moimting an Horse, and Settling her self in a RidingPosture— she would in her Chair be agitated as one sometimes
Ambleing, sometimes Trotting, and sometimes Galloping very
furiously. In these motions we could not perceive that she
was stiired by the stress of her feet, upon the groimd; for
often she touch't it not; but she mostly continued in her
Chair, though sometimes in her hard Trott we doubted she
would have been tossed over the Back of it. Once being
angry at his Dulness, When she said, she would cut off his

1688] C. MATHER, MEMORABLE PROVIDENCES 115

head if she had a knife^ I gave her my Sheath; wherewith she
suddenly gave her self a stroke on the Neck, but complained,
it would not cut. When she had rode a minute or two or
three, shee'd pretend to be at a Rendezvous with Them, that
were Her Company; there shee'd maintain a Discourse with
them, and asking many Questions concerning her self, (for we
gave her none of ours) shee'd Listen much, and Received Answers from them that indeed none but her self perceived.
Then would she return and inform us, how They did intend to
handle her for a day or two afterwards, besides some other
things that she enquired of them. Her Horse would sometimes
throw her, with much Violence; but she would mount again;
and one of the Standers-by once imagining them that were
Her Company, to be before her (for she call'd imto them to
stay for her) he struck with his Cane in the Air where he
thought they were, and tho her eyes were whoDy shutt, yet
she cry'd out, that he struck her. Her Fantastic Joumeyes
were mostly performed in her Chair without removing from it;
but sometimes would she ride from her Chair, and be carried
odly on the Floor, from one part of the Room to another, in
the postures of a Riding Woman. If any of us asked her,
Who her Company were? She generally replyed, I don't know.
But If we were instant in our Demand, die would with some
witty Flout or other turn it off. Once I said, " Child, if you
can't tell their Names, pray tell me what Clothes they have
on;" and the Words were no sooner out of my mouth, but she
was laid for dead upon the Floor.

Sect. XXIII. One of the Spectators once ask'd her.
Whether she could not ride up stairs; imto which her Answer
was. That she beUeve'd she could, for her Horse could do very
notable things. Accordingly, when her Horse came to her
again, to our Admiration she Rode (that is, was tossed as one
that rode) up the stairs : there then stood open the Study of
one belonging to the Family, into which entring, she stood
immediately upon her Feet, and cry'd out, ''They are gone;
they are gone! They say, that they cannot, — God won't let
'em come here!" She also added a Reason for it, which
the Owner of the Study thought more kind than true. And
she presently and perfectly came to her self, so that her whole
Discourse and Carriage was altered unto the greatest measure

116 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1688

«

of Sobriety, and she satt Reading of the Bible and Good
Books, for a good part of the Afternoon. Her Affairs calling
her anon to go down again, the Dsemons were in a quarter of
a minute as bad upon her as before, and her Horse was Waiting for her. I understanding of it, immediately would have
her up to the study of the yoimg man where she had been at
ease before; meerly to try Whether there had not been a Fallacy in what had newly happened : but she was now so twisted
and writhen, that it gave me much trouble to get her into my
Arms, and much more to drag her up the stairs. She was
puUed out of my hands, and when I recovered my Hold, she
was thrust so hard upon me, that I had almost fallen backwards, and her own breast was sore afterwards, by their Compressions to detain her; she seem'd heavier indeed than three
of her self. With incr^ble Forcing (tho she kept Screaming,
"They say I must not go in!") at length we puU'd her in;
where she was no sooner come, but she could stand on her
Feet, and with an altered tone, could thank me, saying, "now
I am weU." At first shee'd be somewhat faint, and say, She
felt something go out of her; but in a minute or two, she could
attend any Devotion or Business as weU as ever in her life;
and both spoke and did as became a person of good Discretion.

I was loth to make a Charm of the Room; yet some
strangers that came to visit us, the Week after, desiring to see
the Experiment made, I permitted more than two or three
Repetitions of it; and it still succeded as I have declared.
Once when I was assisting 'em in carrying of her up, she was
torn out of all our hands; and to my odS, she cry'd out, " Mr.
M., One of them is going to push you down the stairs, have a
care." I remember not that I felt any Thrust or Blow; but
I think I was unaccoimtably made to step down backward
two or three stairs, and within a few hours she told me by
whom it was.

Sect. XXIV. One of those that had bin concerned for
her Welfare, had newly implored the great God that the
yoimg woman might be able to declare whom she apprehended
her self troubled by. Presently upon this her Horse returned,
only it pestered her with such ugly paces, that she fell out with
her Company, and threatned now to tell all, for their so abusing her. I was going abroad, and she said imto them that

1688] C. MATHER, MEMORABLE PROVIDENCES 117

were about her, "Mr. M. is gone abroad^ my horse won't come
back, till he come home; and then I beUeve" (said she softly,)
"I shall tell him all/' I staid abroad an hour or two, and then
Returning, When I was just come to my Gate, before I had
given the least Sign or Noise of my being there, she said, " My
Horse is come!" and intimated, that I was at the Door.
When I came in, I found her moimted after her fashion, upon
her Aerial Steed; which carried her Fancy to the Journeys
end. There (or rather then) she maintained a considerable
Discourse with Her Company, Listening very attentively when
she had propoimded any Question, and receiving the .^diswers
with impressions made upon her mind. She said; ''Well what
do you say? How many Fits more am I to have? — ^pray, can
ye tell how long it shall be before you are hang'd for what you
have done? — ^You are filthy Witches to my knowledge, I sliall
see some of you go after your sister; You would have killd me;
but you can't, I don't fear you. — ^You would have thrown Mr
Mather down stairs, but you could not. — ^Well! How shall I
be To morrow? * Pray, What do you think of To morrow? —
Fare ye weD. — ^You have brought me such an ugly Horse, I
am angry at you; I could find in my heart to tell all." So
she b€^;an her homeward-paces; but when she had gone a
little way, (that is a Uttle while) she said, ''01 have forgot one
Question, I must go back again;" and back she rides. She
had that day been diverse times warning us, that they had been
contriving to do some harm to my Wife, by a Fall or a Blow,
or the like; and when she came out of her mysterious Journeys,
she would still be careful concerning Her. Accordingly she
now calls to her Company again, "Hark you. One thing more
before we part ! What hurt is it you will do to Mrs Mather?
will you do her any hurt?" Here she list'ned some time;
and then clapping her hands, cry'd out, "0, I am glad on't,
th^ can do Mrs. Mather no hurt : they try, but they say they
can't." So she returns and at once. Dismissing her Horse,
and opening her eyes, she call'd me to her, "Now Sir," (said
she) "I'll tell you all. I have leam'd who they are that are
tiie cause of my trouble, there's three of them," (and she named
who) "if they were out of the way, I should be well. They

* [In the margin:] " Note, on To morrow, the Ministers of the Town were
to keep a day of Pk'ayer at her Fathers House."

118 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1668

say, they can teD now how long I shall be troubled, But they
won't. Only they seem to think, then* power will be broke
this Week. They seem also to say, that I shall be very ill
To morow, but they are themselves terribly afraid of to
morrow; They fear, that to morrow we shall be delivered.
They say too, that they can't hurt Mrs. Mather, which I am
glad of. But they said, they would kill me to night, if I went
to bed before ten a clock, if I told a word." And other things
did she say, not now to be recited.

Sect. XXV. The Day foUowing, which was, I think, about
the twenty seventh of November, Mr. Morton of Charlestown,
and Mr. Allen, Mr. Moody, Mr. Willard, and my self, of Boston,
with some devout Neighbours, kept another Day of Prayer, at
John Goodwin's house; and we had all the Children present
with us there. The children were miserably tortured, while
we laboured in our Prayers; but our good God was ni^ unto
jus, in what we call'd upon Him for. From this day the power
Jof the EInemy was broken; and the children, though Aisaults
after this were made upon them, yet were not so crudly handled
as before. The Liberty of the Children encreased daily more
and more, and their Vexation abated by d^rees; till within a
little while they arrived to Perfect Ease, which for some weeks
or months they cheerfully enjoyed. Thus Good it is for us
Uto draw near to God.

Sect. XXVI. Within a day or two after the Fast, the
young Woman had two remarkable Attempts made upon her,
by her invisible Adversaries. Once, they were Dragging her
into the Oven that was then heating, while there was none in
the Room to help her. She clap't her hands on the Mantletree^ to save her self; but they were beaten off; and she had
been burned, if at her Out-cryes one had not come in from
abroad for her ReUef. Another time, they putt an unseen
Rope with a cruel Noose about her Neck, Whereby she was
choaked, until she was black in the Face; and though it was
taken off before it had kiU'd her, yet there were the red Marks
of it, and of a Finger and a Thiunb near it, remaining to be
seen for a while afterwards.

Sect. XXVII. This was the last Molestation that they
gave her for a While; and she dwelt at my house the rest of

* Mantelpiece, mantdshdf .

lem. C. MATHER, MEMORABLE PROVIDENCES 119

the Winter, having by an obliging and vertuous Conversation,
made her self enough Welcome to the Family. But within
about a Fortnight, she was visited with two dayes of as Extraordinary Obsessions as any we had been the Spectators of.
I thought it convenient for me to entertain my Congregation
with a Sermon upon the memorable Providences which these
Children had been concerned in. When I had b^un to study
my Sermon, her Tormentors again seiz'd upon her; and all
Pryday and Saturday, did they manage her with a special
D^ign, as was plain, to disturb me in what I was about. In
the worst of her extravagancies formerly, she was more dutiful
to my self, than I had reason to Expect, but now her whole
carriage to me was with a Sauciness that I had not been us'd
to be treated with. She would knock at my Study Door,
affirming, That some below would be glad to see me ; when there
was none that ask't for me. She would call to me with multiplyed Impertinencies, and throw small things at me wherewith
she could not give me any hurt. Shee'd Hector me at a strange
rate for the work I was at, and threaten me with I know not
what mischief for it. She got a History that I had Written
of this Witchcraft, and tho she had before this readd it over and
over, yet now she could not read (I beUeve) one entire Sentence
of it; but she made of it the most ridiculous Travesty in the
World, with such a Patness and excess of Fancy, to supply
the sense that she put upon it, as I was amazed at. And she
particularly told me. That I should quickly come to disgrace
by that History.

Sect. XXVIII. But there were many other Wonders beheld by us before these two dayes were out. Few tortures attended her, but such as were provoked; her FroUcks being the
things that had most possession of her. I was in Latin telling
some young Gentlemen of the Colledge, That if I should bid
her Look to God, her Eyes would be put out, upon which her
eyes were presently served so. I was in some surprize, When
I saw that her Troublers understood Latin, and it made me
willing to try a little more of their Capacity. We continually found, that if an English Bible were in any part of the
Room seriously look'd into, though she saw and heard nothing
of it, she would immediately be in very dismal Agonies. We
now made a Tryal more than once or twice, of the Greek New120 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1688

Testament, and the Hebrew Old Testament; and We still
foimd; That if one should go to read in it never so secretly and
silently, it would procure her that Anguish, Which there was
no enduring of. But I thought, at length, I fell upon one inferior Language which the Dsemons did not seem so weQ to

imderstand.

Sect. XXIX. Devotion was now, as formerly, the terriblest of all the provocations that could be given her. I could
by no means bring her to own. That she desired the mercies
of God, and the prayers of good men. I would have obtained
a Sign of such a Denre, by her Lifting up of her hand; but she
stirr'd it not: I then lifted up her hand my self, and thou^
the standers-by thought a more insignificant thing could not be
propounded, I said, '^ Child, If you desire those things, let your
hand fall, when I take mine away :'' I took my hand away, and
hers continued strangely and stifly stretched out, so thiat for
some time, she could not take it down. During these two
dayes we had Prayers oftener in our Family than at other
times; and this was her usual Behavior at tiiem. The man
that prayed, usually b^an with Reading the Word of God;
which once as he was going to do, she call'd to him, ^'Read of
Mary Magdelen, out of whom the Lord cast seven Devils.''
Durmg the time of Reading, she would be laid as one fast asleep ;
but when Prayer was b^un, the Devils would still throw her
on the Floor, at the feet of him that prayed. There would she
lye and Whistle and sing and roar, to drown the voice of the
Prayer; but that being a little too audible for Them, they
woidd shutt close her Mouth and her ears, and yet make such
odd noises in her Throat as that she her self could not hear
/our Cries to God for her. Shee'd also fetch very terrible
^ Blowes with her Fist, and Kicks with her Foot at the man
that prayed; but still (for he had bid that none should hinder
her) her Fist and Foot would alwaies recoil, when they came
within a few hairs breadths of him just as if Rebounding against
a Wall; so that she touch'd him not, but then would b^ hard
of other people to strike him, and particularly she entreated
them to take the Tongs and smite him ; Which not being done,
she cryed out of him, "He has wounded me in the Head."
But before Prayer was out, she would be laid for Dead, wholly
sensless and (unless to a severe Trial) Breathless; with her

1688] C. MATHER, MEMORABLE PROVIDENCES 121

Belly sweUed like a Drum, and sometimes with croaking
Noises in it; thus would she ly, most exactly with the stiffness
and postm^ of one that had been two Days laid out for Dead.
Once l3ring thus, as he that was praying was alluding to the
words of the Canaanitess, and saying, '^ Lord, have mercy on
a Daughter vexed with a Devil;" there came a big, but low
voice from her, saying, "There's Two or Three of them" (or
us!) and the standers-by were imder that Apprehension, as
that they cannot relate whether her mouth mov'd in speaking
of it. When Prayer was ended, she would Revive in a minute
or two, and continue as FroUcksome as before. She thus continued until Saturday towards the Evening; when, after this
man had been at Prayer, I charged all my Family to admit of
no Diveraioa by her f^Ucks, from such exerciL as it was
proper to b^in the Sabbath with. They took the Counsel;
and tho she essayed, with as witty and as nimble and as various
an Application to each of them successively as ever I saw, to
make them laugh, yet they kept close to their good Books
which then called for their Attention. When she saw that,
inmiediately she fell asleep; and in two or three hours, she
waked perfectly her self; weeping bitterly to remember (for
as one come out of a dream ^e could remember) what had
befallen her.

Sect. XXX. After this, we had no more such entertainments. The Demons it may be would once or twice in a
Week trouble her for a few minutes with perhaps a twisting
and a twink[ling] of her eyes, or a certain Cough which did
seem to be more than ordinary. Moreover, Both she at my
house, and her Sister at home, at the time which they call
Christmas, were by the Daemons made very drunk, though
they had no strong Drink (as we are fully sure) to make them
80. When she b^an to feel her self thus drunk, she complain'd, "O they say they will have me to keep Christmas
with them! They wSl dic^ace me when they can do nothing
else!" And inmiediately the Ridiculous Behaviours of one
drunk were with a wonderful exactness represented in her
Speaking, and Reeling, and Spewing, and anon Sleeping, till
she was well again. But the Vexations of the Children otherwise abated continually.

They first came to be alwaies Quiet, unless upon Provoca122 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1688

tions. Then they got Liberty to work, but not to read : then
further on, to re^, but not aloud, at last they were whoUy
delivered; and for many Weeks remained so.

Sect. XXXI. I was not unsensible, that it might be an
easie thing to be too bold, and go too far, in making of Ejq)eriments : Nor was I so imphilosophical as not to discern many
opportunityes of Giving and Solving many Problemes which
the pneumatic Discipline^ is concerned in. I confess I have
Leam't much more than I sought, and I have bin informed of
some things relating to the invisible World, which as I did not
think it lawful to ask, so I do not think it proper to teU; yet
I will give a Touch upon one Problem commonly Discoursed
of; that is,

Whether the Devils know oiu- Thoughts, or no?

I will not give the Reader my Opinion of it, but only my
Experiment. That they do not, was conjectured from this:
We could cheat them when we spoke one thing, and mean't
another. This was found when the Children were to be undressed. The Devils would still in wayes beyond the Force
of any Imposture, wonderfully twist the part that was to be
imdress't, so that there was no coming at it. But, if we said,
untye his neckcloth, and the parties bidden, at the same time,
understood our intent to be, imty his Shooe! The Neckcloth,
and not the shooe, has been made strangely inaccessible. But
on the other side. That they do, may be conjectured from This.
I called the yoimg Woman at my House by her Name, intending to mentiocMLto her some Wous Expedient Uereby
she might, as I thought, much relieve her self; presently her
Neck was broke, and I continued watching my Opportimity
to say what I designed. I could not get her to come out of her
Fit, imtil I had laid aside my purpose of speaking what I
thought, and then she reviv'd immediately. Moreover a
young Gentleman visiting of me at my Study to ask my advice about curing the Atheism and Blasphemy which he complained his Thoughts were more than ordinanly then infested
with ; after some Discourse I carried him down to see this Girl
who was then molested with her unseen Fiends; but when he
came, she treated him very coursly and rudely, asking him
What he came to the house for? and seemed very angry at his

^ The sdenoe of spirits, pneumatology, i. e., the sdenoe of angels and demons.

16881 C. MATHER, MEMORABLE PROVIDENCES 123

being there, urging him to be gone with a very impetuous Importunity. Perhaps all Devils are not alike sagacious.

Sect. XXXII. The Last Fit that the young Woman had,
was very peculiar. The Dsemons having once again seiz'd
her, they made her pretend to be Dying; and Dying truly we
feared at last she was : She lay, she tossed, she puU'd just like
one Djring, and urged hard for some one to dy with her, seeming loth to dy alone. She argued concerning Death, in strains
that quite amazed us; and concluded. That though she was
loth to dy, yet if God said she must, she must ; adding something about the state of the Countrey, which we wondred at.
Anon, the Fit went over; and as I guessed it would be, it was
the last Fit she had at our House. But all my Library never
afforded me any Commentary on those Paragraphs of the '"
Gospels, which speak of Demoniacs, equal to that which the
passions of this Child have given me.

Sect. XXXIII. This is the Story of Goodwins Children,
a Story all made up of Wonders! I have related nothing but
what I judge to be true. I was my self an Eye-witness to a
large part of what I tell; and I hope my neighbours have long
thou^t, That I have otherwise learned Christ, than to ly
imto the World. Yea, there is, I beUeve, scarce any one particular, in this Narrative, which more than one credible Witness will not be ready to make Oath unto. The things of
most Concernment in it were before many Critical Observers;
and the Whole happened in the Metropolis of the English
America, imto a religious and industrious Family which was
visited bv all sorts of Persons, that had a mind to satisfy themselves, fl do now likewise publish the History, While the
thing is yet fresh and New; and I challenge all men to detect
80 much as one designed Falshood, yea, or so much as one^
important Mistake, from the Egg to the Apple of it. I have
Writ as plainly as becomes an Historian, as truly as becomes a
Christian, tho perhaps not so profitably as became a Divine.
But I am resolv'd after this, never to use but just one grain
of patience with any man that shall go to impose upon me a ^
Denial of Devils, or of Witches. I shall coimt that man Ig-^
norant who shall suspect, but I shall count him down-right
Impudent if he Assert the Non-Existence of things which we
have had such palpable Convictions of. I am sure he cannot

124 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [ifiSQ

be a Civil, (and some will question whether he can be an honest
man) that shall go to deride the Being of things which a whole
Coimtrey has now beheld an house of pious people suffering
not a few Vexations by. But if the Sadducee, or the Atheist,
have no right Impressions by these Memorable Providences
made upon his mind; yet I hope those that know what it is
to be sober will not repent any pains that they may have
taken in perusing what Records of these Witchcrafts and Possessions, I thus leave unto Posterity.^

Postscript.

Yon have seen the Trouble and the Relief of John Goodwins Children. After which the Daemons were let loose to
make a fresh Attacque upon them, tho not in a manner altogether 80 terrible and afflictive as what they had before susteined. All the Three Children were visited with some Return of their Calamities; but the Boy was the Child which
endured most in this New Assault.' He had been for some While
kindly entertained with Mr. Baily* at Watertown, where he
had enjoyed a long time of ease; the Devils having given him
but Uttle Disturbance, except what was for a short while after
his first coming there. He no sooner came Home, but he began
to be ill again, with diverse peculiar Circumstances attending

^In 1697 the Boston merchant Calef wrote: "In the times of Sir Ed.
Andros his Government, Goody Glover, a despised, crasy, iU-ccmditioned old
Woman, an Irish Roman Catholick, was tried for afflicting Goodwins Children;
by the Account of which TVyal, taken in Short-^iand, tat the use of the Jury, it
may appear that the generality of her Answers were Nonsense, and her behaviour
like that of one distracted. Yet the Drs. finding her as she had been for many
Years, brought her in Compos Mentis; and setting aside her crazy Answers to
some insnaring questions, the proof against h» was whdly defidoit: The Juiy
brought hsT Guilty.

"Mr. Cotton Mather was the most active and forward of any Minister in

the Country in those matters, taking home one of the Children, and managing

such Intreagues with that Child, and after printing such an Account of the whole,

i in his Memorable Providences, as conduced much to the kindling those flames,

V that in Sir Williams time [1692] threatned the devouring this Country." (More

Wonders cf the Invisible World, pp. 151-152.)

' John, now aged 12. The younger boy, Benjamin, it will be remembeied,
had early been "ddivered" (§6, above).

* The Rev. John Bailey, then minister at Watertown.

1689] C. MATHER, MEMORABLE PROVIDENCES 125

of him. There was this particularly remarkable; That the
Boy dream't he had a Bone within his skin growing cross his
Ribs; and when he awaked, he felt and found a thing there
which was esteemed a Bone, by them that handled it; only
every one wondered how it shoidd be lodged there. An expert
Chinirgeon, Dr. John Clark, being advis'd with about it, very
dexterously took it out; and it proved not the imagined Bone,
but a considerable Pin; a brass Pin, which could not possibly
have come to ly there as it did, without the Prestigious^
Conveyance of a Misterious Witchcraft. Another time, on a
Lord's Day his Father would have taken him to Meeting with
him ; and when his Father spoke of going to some of the Assemblies in the Town (particularly both the North and the South)
the Boy would be cast into such Tortures and Postures, that.
he woidd sooner Dy than go out of doors; but if his Father
spoke of going to others of the Assemblies in the Town, particularly the Quakers, the boy in a moment would be as well
as could be. The tryal of this was more than five times repeated, and were it fully related, would be more than ten times
Admired.

Our Prayers for the Children were justly renewed, and I
hope not altogether unanswered. Upon one Prayer over two
of them, they had about a Fortni^ts ease; and their Ails
again returning, Prayer was again awakened, with some Circumstances not proper to be exposed imto the World. God
gave a present Abatement hereupon to the Maladies of the
Children, and caused their Livaders to retire; so that by degrees they were fully and quickly Delivered. Two days of
Prayer obtained the Deliverance of two. The Third, namely
the Boy, Remaining imder some Annoyance by the evil spirits,
a third Day was employ'd for him, and he soon found the
blessed effects of it in his Deliverance also. There ^ere several very memorable things attending this Deliverance of the
Chfldren, and the Vowes and the Pleas, used in the Prayers
which were thereby answerd, but they were all Private, yea,
in a sort. Secret; Nan est Rdigio ubi omnia paientf and I
understand (for I have some Acquaintance with him) That the

* /. e., preternatural : the lying marvels of devils were counted "prestigious,''
not miraculous.

* "Where there is no mystery, there is no religion.''

126 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1680

Friend of the Children/ whom God gave to be thus conoemed
and successful for them, desires me not to let Reports of those
things go out of the Walls of a Study, but to leave them rather
for tiie Notice of the other World. I think it will not be improper to teU the World, that one thing in the Childnsns Deliverance was the strange Death of an horrible old Woman,
who was presum'd to have a great hand in their AflSiction.*
Before her Death and at it, the Aims-House where she lived
was terrified with fearful noises, and she seem'd to have her
Death hastened by dismal Blowes received from the invisible
World. But having mentioned this, all that I have now to
publish is That Prayer and Faith was the thing which drove
J the Divels from the Children; and I am to bear this Testimony
unto the world, That the Lord is nigh to all them, who caU
upon him in truth, and. That blessed are all they that wait
for Him.

Fmished, June 7th, 1689.«

Mantissa.

To the forgoing Narrative, we have added an accoimt
given us by the Godly Father of these Haimted Children;
who upon his Reading over so much of our History, as was
written of their Exercise before their full deliverance, was willing to express his Attestation to the Truth of it; with this
further Declaration of the Sense which he had of the imusual
Miseries, that then lay upon his Family. 'Tis in his own
Style; but I suppose a Pen hath not conmionly been managed
with more clesmly Discomse by an Hand used only to the
Trowel; and his Condition hath been such, that he may fairiy
have Leave to speak.

In the year 1688, about Midsummer, it pleased the Lord
to visit one of my children with a sore Visitation; and she was

^ He 18 speddng, of course, of himadf : the narrative (as must be inferred
from 1 77, above) was circulated in manuscript before its printing, and doubtless
without the author's name. In revising it for the printer this page seems to
have escaped his eye.

' Who this second old woman was does not appear.

' The story of the Goodwin children is retold by Mather in his Mapwiia
(1702). but without added details.

1688] C. MATHER, MEMORABLE PROVTOENCES 127

not only tormented in her Body, but was in great distress of
Mind, Crying out. That she was in the dark concerning her
Souls estate, and that she had mispent her precious time; She
and we thinking her time was near at an end. Hearing those
Shrieks and Groans which did not only pierce the ears, but
Hearts of her poor Parents, now was a time for me to Consider
with my self, and to look into my own heart and life, and see
how matters did there stand between God and my own soul, /
and see Wherefore the Lord was thus contending with me.
And upon Enquiry I found cause to judge my self, and to
justify the Lonl. This Affliction continuing some time, the
Lord saw good then to double the affliction in smiting down
another Child, and that which was most heart breaking of all,
and did double this double affliction was, it was apparent and
judged by all that saw them, that the Devil and his Instru*
ments had a hand in it.

The consideration of this was most dreadful : I thought of
what David said, 2 Sam. 24. 14. If he feared so to fall into
the hands of Men, oh ! then to think of the Horror of our condition, to be in the Hands of Devils and Witches! This our
doleful condition moved us to call to our Friends to have pity
on us, for Gods Hand had touched us. I was ready to say,
that no ones affliction was like mine; That my little House
that should be a little Bethel for God to dwell in, should be
made a Den for Devils; that those little Bodies, that should
be Temples for the Holy Ghost to dwell in, should be thus
harrassed and abused by the Devil and his ciursed Brood.
But now this twice doubled affliction is doubled again. Two
more of my Children are smitten down, oh! the Cries, the
Shrieks, the Tortures of these poor Children I Doctors cannot
help. Parents weep and lament over them, but cannot ease
them. Now I considering my affliction to be more than ordinary, it did certainly call for more than ordinary Prayer. I
acquainted Mr. Allen, Mr. Moodey, Mr. Willard, and Mr. C.
Mather, the four Ministers of the Town with it, and Mr.
Morton of Charlstown; earnestly desiring them, that they,
with some other praying people of God, would meet at my
house, and there be earnest with God, on the behalf of us and
our Children ; which they (I thank them for it) readily attended
with great fervency of Spirit; but as for my part, my heart

128 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1688

was ready to sink to hear and see those doleful Sights. Now
I thought that I had greatly neglected my duty to my Children,
in not admonishing and instructing of them; and that God
was hereby calling my sins to mmd, to slay my Chfldren.
Then I pondered of that place in Numb. 23. 23. Surdy there
18 no Indumtmerd against Jacobs neither is there any Demnaticn
againsl Israd. And now I thought I had broke Covenant
with God, not only in one respect but in many, but it pleased
the Lord to bring that to mind in Heb. 8. 12. For I wiU he
mercifid to their unrighteousness, and their Sins and Iniquities
wHl I remember no more. The Consideration how the Lord
did deal with Job, and his Patience and the End the Lord
made with him was some support to me. I thought also, on
what David said, that He had sinned, but what have these
poor Lambs done? But yet in the midd'st of my tumultous
Thoughts within me, it was Gods Comforts that did delist
my soul. That in the 18 of Luke, and the Beginning, Where
Christ spake the Parable for that end, that men ought alwaies
to pray and not faint. This, with many other places, bore up
my spirit. I thought with Jonah that I would yet again Look
towards God's holy Temple; the Lord Jesus Christ. And I
did greatly desire to find the Son of God with me in this
Furnace of Affliction, knowing hereby that no harm shall
befall me. But now this solemn day of Prayer and Fasting
being at an End, there was an Eminent Answer of it : for one
of my Children was delivered, and one of the wicked instruments of the Devil discovered, and her own mouth condenmed
her, and so accordingly Executed. Here was Food for Faith,
and great encouragement still to hope and quietly wait for
the Salvation of the Lord; the Ministers still counselling and
encouraging me to labour to be found in Gods way, commiting
my case to him, and not to use any way not allowed in Gods
Word. It was a thing not a little comfortable to us, to see
that the people of God was so much concerned about our
lamentable condition, remembering us at all times in their
prayers, which I did look at as a token for good; but you must
think it was a time of sore Temptation with us, for many did
say, (yea, and some good people too) were it their case, that
they would try some Tricks, that diould give ease to their
Children: But I thought for us to forsake the counsel of

1688] C. MATHER, MEMORABLE PROVIDENCES 129

good old men; and to take the counsel of the young ones^ it
might ensnare our Souls, though for the present it might offer
some relief to our Bodies; which was a thing I greatly feared;
and my Children were not at any time free for doing any such
thing. It was a time of sore affliction, but it was mixed with
abimdance of mercy, for my heart was many a time made
glad in the house of Prayer. The Neighbourhood pitied us,
and were very helpful to us : Moreover, though my Children
were thus in every Limb and Joynt tormented by those Childrea of the Devil, they also using their tongues at their pleasure, sometimes one way, sometimes another; yet the Lord
did herein prevent them, that they could not make them speak
wicked words, though they did many times hinder them from
q)eaking good ones; had they in these Fits blasphemed the
Name of the Holy God, this you may think would have been
an heart-breaking thing to us the poor Parents; but God in
his mercy prevented them, a thing worth takmg notice of.
Likewise they slept well a nights : Ajid the Ministers did often
visit us, and pray with us, and for us; and their love and pity
was so great, their Prayers so earnest and constant, that I
could not but admire at it. Mr. Mather particularly; now
his bowels so yearned towards us m this sad condition, that he
not only pray's with us, and for us, but he taketh one of my
Children home to his own house; which indeed was but a
troublesome guest, for such an one that had so much work
lying upon his hands and heart : He took much pains in this
great Service, to pull this Child, and her Brother and Sister
out of the lumd of the Devil. Let us now admire and adore
that Fountain the Lord Jesus Christ, from whence those streams
come. The Lord himself will requite his labour of love. Our
case is yet very sad, and doth call for more Prayer; and the
good Ministers of this Town and Charlstown readily came,
with some other good praying people to my house, to keep
another Day of solemn Fasting and Prayer; which our Lord
saith this kmd goeth out by. My Children being all at home,
the two biggest lying on the bed, one of them would fain have
kicked the good men while they were wrestling with God for
them, had not I held him with all my power and might; and
sometimes he would stop his own ears. This you must needs
think was a cutting thing to the poor parents. Now our hearts

130 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [less

were ready to sink, had not God put under his everlasting arms
of Mercy and helped us still to hope in his mercy, and to be
quiet; knowing that He is God, and that it was not for the
potsheards of the earth to strive with their Maker. Well
might David say, that had not the Law of his God been his
delight, he had perished in his Affliction. Now the Promises
of God are sweet; God having promised, to hear the prayer of
the destitute, and not to despise their prayer; and He wOl not
fail the Expectation of those that wait on Him; but He heareth the cry of the poor and needy. These Jacobs came and
wrestled with God for a Blessing on this poor Family, which
indeed I hope they obtained, and may be now worthy of the
Name Israel, who prevailed with God, and would not let Him
go till He had blessed us. For soon after this, there were two
more of my children deUvered out of this horrible pit. Here
was now a double mercy, and how sweet was it, knowing it
came in Answer of Prayer! Now we see and know, it is not
a vain thing to call on the name of the Lord. For He is a
present help in the time of trouble; and we may boldly say
the Lord has been our helper. I had simk, but Jesus put fortJi
His hand and bore me up. My Faith was ready to fail, but
this was a support to me that Christ said to Peter, ''I have
prayed for thee that thy faith fail not." And many other
Promises were as Cordials to my drooping soul. And the
Consideration of all those that ever came to Christ Jesus for
Healing, that He healed their bodies, pardoned their Sins,
and healed their Souls too; which I hope in God may be the
fruit of this present Affliction. If God be pleased to make
the Fruit of this Affliction to be to take away our sin, and
cleanse us from iniquity, and to put us on with greater diligence to make our Calling and election sure, t£ien, happy
Affliction I The Lord said that I had need of this to awake me.
I have found a prosperous Condition a dangerous Condition.
I have taken notice and considered more of God's Goodness
in these few weeks of Affliction, than in many years of Prosperity. I may speak itVith shame, so wicked and deceitful,
and ungrateful is my heart, that the more God hath been doing
for me, the less I have been doing for Him. My Returns have
not been according to my Receivings. The Lord help me now
to praise Him in heart. Up, and life. The Lord help us to see

1684] C. MATHER, MEMORABLE PROVIDENCES 131

by this Visitation, what need we have to get shelter under the
wing of Christ, to hast to the Rock, where we may be safe.
We see how ready the Devils are to catch us, and torment our
Bodies, and he is as diligent to ensnare our Souls, and that
many waies; but let us put on all our spiritual Annour, and
follow Christ the Captain of our Salvation; and tho we meet
with the Cross, let us bear it patiently and cheerfully, for if
Jesus Christ be at the one end, we ne^ not fear the Heaft^ of
it : if we have Christ we have enough; He can make His Rod
as well as His Staffe to be a comfort to us; and we shall not
want if we be the Sheep of Christ. If we want Affictions we
shall have them, and sanctified Afflictions are choice mercies.
Now I earnestly desire the Prayer of all good people; That
the Lord would be pleased to perfect that Work He hath
b^un, and make it to appear that Prayer is stronger than
Witchcraft.

John Goodwin.
Decemb. 12, 1688.

This is our First Example; and it is This which has occasioned the Publication of the Rest.

Exem/ple II.

Among those Judgments of God, which are a great Deep,
I suppose few are more unfathomable than this. That pious
and holy men suffer sometimes by the Force of horrid Witchcrafts, and hellish Witches are permitted to break thorough
the Hedge which our Heavenly Father has made about them
that seek Him. I suppose the Instances of this direful thing
are Seldom, but that they are not Never we can produce very
dismal Testimony. One, and that no less Recent than Awful,
I shall now offer: and the Reader of it will thereby learn, I
hope, to work out his own Salvation with Fear and Trembling.

Sect. I. Mr. Philip Smith, aged about Fifty years, a Son
of eminently vertuous Parents, a Deacon of the Church at
Hadley, a Member of our General Court, an Associate in their
Coimty Court, a Select-man for the affairs of the Town, a
Lieutenant in the Troop, and, which crowns all, a man for

^ Heft, weight.

132 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1684

Devotion and Gravity, and all that was Honest, exceeding
exemplary; Such a man in the Winter of the Year 1684 was
murdered with an hideous Witchcraft, which filled all those
parts with a just astonishment. This was the manner of the
Murder.

Sect. II. He was concerned about Relieving the Indigencies of a wretched woman in the Town; who b^g dissatisfied
at some of his just cares about her, expressed her self unto him
in such a manner, that he declared himself apprehensive of
receiving mischief at her hands; he said, he doubted she
would attempt his Hurt.

Sect. ni. About the b^inning of January he b^an to
be very Valetudinarious,^ labouring under those that seemed
Ischiadick^ pains. As his Illness increased on him, so his
Goodness increased in him; the standers-by could in him see
one ripening apace for another world; and one filled not only
with Grace to an high degree, but also with Exceeding Joy.
Such Weanedness from, and Weariness of the World, he
shewed, that he knew not (he said) whether he might pray for
his continuance here. Such Assmtmce had he of the Divine
Love unto him, that in Raptures he would cry out, "Lord, stay
thy hand, it is enough, it is more than thy frail servant can
bear!'' But in the midst of these things, he uttered still an
hard suspicion. That the ill Woman who had threatned him,
had made impressions on him.

Sect. IV. While he remained yet of a sound mind, he
very sedately, but very solemnly charged his Brother to look
well after him. Tho' he said he now understood himself, yet
he knew not how he might be; "but be sure*' (said he) "to
have a care of me for you shall see strange things. There shall
be a wonder in Hadley ! I shall not be dead when it is thought
I am!" This Charge ;he pressed over and over; and afterwards became Delirious.

Sect V. Being become Delirious, he had a Speech Incessant and Voluble beyond all imagination, and this in divers
Tones and sundry voices, and (as was thought) in various
languages.

Sect. VI. He cryed out not only of sore pain, but also of
sharp Pins, pricking of him : sometimes in his Toe, sometimes

^UnwdL >Sciatic

1684] C. MATHER, MEMORABLE PROVIDENCES 133

in his Ami; as if there had been hundreds of them. But the
people upon search never found any more than One.

Sect. VII. In his Distresses he exclaimed very much upon
the Woman afore-mentioned, naming her, and some others, and
sajdng, " Do you not see them ; There, There, There they stand."

Sect. Vni. There was a strong smell of something like
Musk, which was divers times in the Room where he was, and
in the other Rooms, and without the House; of which no
cause could be rendred. The sick-man as well as others,
complained of it; and once particularly, it so siez'd an Apple
Roasting at the Fire, that they were forced to throw it away.

Sect. IX. Some that were about him, being almost at
their wits end, by beholding the greatness and the strangeness of his Calamities, did three or four times in one Night,
go and give Disturbance to the Woman that we have spoken
of: all the while they were doing of it, the good man was at
ease, and slept as a weary man; and these were all the times
they perceived him to take any sleep at all.

Sect. X. A small Galley-Pot ^ of Alkermes,* that was near
full, and carefully look't after, yet unto the surprize of the
people was quite emptied, so that the sick man could not have
the Benefit of it.

Sect. XI. Several persons that sat by him heard a Scratching, that seem'd to be on the Ticking near his feet, while his
Feet lay wholly still; nay, were held in the hands of others,
and his hands were far of ' another way.

Sect. XII. Sometimes Fire was seen on the Bed, or the
Ck)vering, and when the Beholders began to discourse of it,
it would vanish away.

Sect. XIII. Diverse people felt something often stir in the
Bed, at some distance from his Body. To appearance, the
thing that stirr'd was as big as a Cat : some try'd to lay hold
on it with their hands, but under the Covering nothing could
be found. A discreet and sober Woman, resting on the Beds
Feet, felt as it were a Hand, the Thumb and the Finger of it,
taking her by the side, and giving her a Pinch; but turning
to see What it might be, nothing was to be seen.

^ A glazed earthen pot, such as apothecaries use.

* A once famous conf ect made from the kermes insect, then thought a berry.

•Off.

134 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES pffi4

Sect. -XIV. Hie Doctor standing by the sick man, and
seeing him ly still, he did himself tiy to lean on the Beds-head;
but he found the Bed to shake so, that his head was often
knocked against the Post, though he strove to hold it still;
and otheis upoa Tryal foimd the same. Also, the sick man
lying too near the side of the Bed, a very strong and stout man
try'd to lift him a little further into the Bed; but with all his
nught he could not; tho' trying by and by, he could lift a
Bednstead, with a Bed, and man lying on it, all, without any
strain to himself at all.

Sect. XV. Mr. Smith dyes. The Jury that viewed the
Corpse found a Swelling on one Breast, which rendered it
like a Womans. His Privities were wounded or burned. On
his back, besides Bruises, there were several pricks, or holes,
as if done with Awls or Pins.

/Sed. XVI. After the Opinion of all had pronounced him
dead, his Countenance continued as Lively as if he had been
Ahve; his Eyes closed as in a slumber; and his nether Jaw
not falling down. Thus he remained from Satureday morning
about Sun-rise, till Sabbath-Day in the After-noon, V^en
those that took him out of the Bed f oimd him still Warm,
though the Season was as Cold as had almost been known in
an Agd. On the Night after the Sabbath, his Countenance
was yet as fresh as before; but on Monday Morning, they
found the Face extremely tumified and discoloured; 'twas
black and blue, and fresh blood seem'd to run down his Chedc
in the Hairs.

Sect. XVII. The night after he died, a very credible person, watching of the Corpse, perceived the Bed to move and
stir, more than once; but by no means could find out the cause
of it.

Sect. XVm. The second night, some that were preparing
for the Funeral do say. That they heard diverse Noises in the
Room, where the Corpse lay; as though there had been a great
Removing and Clattering of stools and chairs.

Upon the whole, it appeared unquestionable that Witchcraft had brought a period imto the life of so good a man.^
• ••••...

* Thaa story, too, is told again in the Magnalia, mod in nearly the same words.

1648] C. MATHEB, MEMORABLE PBOVIDENCES 135

Exemple IV.

So Horrid and Hellish is the Crime of Witchcraft, that
were Gods Thoughts as our thoughts, or Gods Wayes as our
wayes, it could be no other but Unpiutlonable. But that the J
Grace of God may be admired, and that the worst of Sinners ^
may be encouraged, Behold, Witchcraft also has found a
Pardon. Let no man Despair of his own Forgiveness, but let
no man also Delay about his own Repentance, how aggravated
soever his Transgressions are. From the Hell of Witchcraft
our merciful Jesus can fetch a guilty Creature to the Glory of
Heaven. Our Lord hath sometimes Recovered those who have
in the most horrid manner given themselves away to the Destroyer of their souls.

Sect. I. There was one Mary Johnson tryed at Hartford,
in this Countrey, upon an Indictment of Familiarity with the
Devil. She was found Guilty of the same, cheefly upon her
own Confession, and condemned.

Sect. n. Many years are past since her Execution; and
the Records of the Court are but short; yet there are several
Memorables that are found credibly Related and Attested
concerning her.^

Sect. HI. She said. That a Devil was wont to do her
many services. Her Master once blam'd her for not carrying
out the Ashes, and a Devil did clear the Hearth for her afterwards. Her Master sending her into the Field, to drive out

* A Maxy Johnson was indicted for witchcraft at Hartford in 1648; but the
reooids of her case are now much shorter than in Mather's day, for they consist
of a sin^e entry of the Particular Court, December 7, 1648 (Colonial Records of
Connectietd, I. 171), stating that "the Jury finds the Bill of Inditement against
Maiy Jonson, that by her owne confession shee is guilty of familiarity with the
DevilL" It has been inferred that she was of Wethersfield because an earlier
passage (Records, I. 143) shows that in 1646 a woman of the name was sentenced,
for thievery, to be whipped both at Hartford and at Wethersfield; and later
IMSsages (Records, I. 209, 222, 226, 332) providing (May 21, 1650) for the payment of "charges for Elizabeth Johnson's imprisonment to the first Thursday of
next month, being 24 weeks," and for the care of "Good wife Johnson's child,
which was borne in the prison," have been supposed to refer to her, but Mather's
account alone tells us of her execution and something of the evidence. The story
is told by him again in his Magnolia, but in substantially the same words. His
knowledge doubtless came through Mr. Stone.

136 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES (1658?

the Hogs that us'd to break into it; a Devil would scowre them
out; and make her laugh to see how he feaz'd ^em about.

Sect. IV. Her first Familiarity with the Devils came by
Discontent; and Wishing the Devil to take That and t'other
Thing; and. The devil to do This and That; Whereupon a
Devil appeared unto her; tendring her the best service he
could do for her.

Sect. V. She confessed that she was guilty of the Murder
of a Child; and that she had been guilty of Uncleanness with
Men and Devils.

Sect. VI. In the time of her Imprisonment; the famous
Mr. Samuel Stone^ was at great pains to promote her Conversion unto God; and represent unto her both her Misery and
Remedy; the Success of Which; was very desirable, and considerable.

Sect. VII. She was by most Observers judged very Penitent; both before and at her Execution; and she went out of
the World with many Hopes of Mercy through the Merit of
Jesus Christ. Being asked; what she built her hopes upon;
She answered; on those WordS; Come to me all ye thai IcAowr
and are heavy laden, and I rvill give you Rest; and thosC; There
is a Fountain open for Sin and for Uncleanness. And she died
in a Frame extremely to the Satisfaction of them that were
Spectators of it.

Oiur God is a great Forgiver.

Exemple V.

The near Affinity between Witchcraft and Possession invites me to add unto the Forgoing Histories One that the
Reader; I believe, will count worthy to be Related. It is but
a Fragment of what should have been a fuller Story; but I
cannot without some Trouble or delay inconsistent with my
present Designs put my self in a way to perfect it : and I was
of the Opinion that; Let nothing be lost, was a Rule which I
might very properly extend unto it. The thing happened
many (perhaps Thirty) years agO; and was then much discoursed of. I don't Remember, that I have heard what became
of the Boy concerned in the Narrative, but what I now pub-

^ See above, p. 19, note 2.

ISSSrj C. MATHER, MEMORABLE PROVIDENCES 137

lish, I find among the Papers of my Grand-father,^ of Whom
the World has had such a Character, that they cannot but
judge, no Romance or Folly, nothing but what should be
serious and weighty could be worthy of his Hand; and it is in
his own Hand that I have the Manuscript, from whence I have
caused it to be Transcribed. It runs in such Terms as these.

A Confession of a Boy at TocvU;^ in the time of the Intermission of his
Fits: and other Passages, which many were Eye-witnesses of.

The Boy was for his natural Parts more than ordinary at seven
years old. He with many others went to see a Conjurer play Tricks
in Holland. There it was strongly suggested to him. He should be
as good an Artist as he. From thence to eleven year old he used the
Trade of inventing Lyes, and Stealing mony, Running away from
his Father, spending of it at Dice, and with the vilest Company;
and this Trade he used in that space (he confessed) above Forty
times at least, and many strange Instances he gives of it. His Father
fcdlowing him with constant Instruction, and Correction, he was
despertely hardned under all, and his heart sett in a way of Malice
against the Word of Grod, and all his Father did to restrain him.
When he was about ten or eleven years old, he ran away from Rotterdam, to Delph;* and the Devil appeared to him there (n the shape of
a Boy; counselling him not to hearken to the Word of God, nor unto
any cl his Father's Instructions, and propounding to him, to Enter
into a Covenant with him. Being somewhat fearful at first, desired
that he would not appear to him in a shape, but by a voice, and
though his heart did inwardly consent, to what the Devil said, yet
he was withheld that he could not then Enter into a Covenant with
him. His Father not knowing this, but of his other Wickedness,
being a godly Minister, procured many Christians to join with him
in a day of Humiliation; confessed and bewailed his Sins, prayed
for him, and sent him to New-E.^ and so committed him to God.
Flrom that time to this, being now about Sixteen years old, the
Devil hath constantly come to him by a voice; and he held a constant
Discourse with him; and all about Entring into a Covenant with him :
and still perswaded to have it written and sealed, making many
promises to allure him, and telling him many Stories of Dr. Faustus,

^ Whether his grandfather Mather or his grandfather Cotton does not appear. The contents suggest a suspicion that the original author was nearer the
boy than either — perhaps the Rev. John Davenport, of New Haven.

* Later Branford — ^just east ci New Haven and within its government.

s Delft * New England.

€1
€1

138 NARRATIVES OP THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1658?

and other Witches, how bravely they have lived, and how he should
live delidously, and have Ease, Comfort, and Money; and sometimes threatning to tear him in pieces if he would not. But oidinarily his discourse was as loving and friendly as could be. He hath
been strangely kept, by an hand of Grod, from making a Covenant
to this day. For he still propounded many Difficulties to the Devil,
which he could not satisfie his Reason in : and though, he saith, he
was never well but when he was Discoursing with the devil, and his
heart was strangely enclined to write and seal an Agreement, yet
such dreadf uU horrour did seiz upon him, at the very time, from the
Word of God, and such fears of his Eternal Perishing, that he could
not do it then. He put off the Devil still, that he was not in a fit
Frame, but desired hun to come again that he might have more Discourse, and he would consider of it. The Devil appeared to him a
second time at New-haven, in the shape of a Boy, and a third time
at Tocutt in the shape of a Fox; at which time, at first, they had
loving discourse, as formerly; but at last, the De\il was urgent upon
him, and told him, he had baffled with him so long, now he must
enter into an agreement, or he would tear him in pieces: he saying.
How should I do it? would you have me write upon my hands?''
No," (suth the Devil) " Look here," and with that, set Paper, and
Pen, and Ink like Blood before him. The former horrours, from the
Word of God, and special passages, which he named, set in upon
him so that he could not do it. Only before they parted, the Devil
being so urgent upon him, telling him he had baffled with him, he
set a year and hdf time for Consideration. The last quarter of a
year is yet to come. The Devil told him, if he let him alone so long,
he would baffle with him still : he answered, if he did not yeild then,
he would give him leave to torment him whilst he lived. Still the
Devil would not away, nor could he get from him. Then out of
Fear he cryed out, "Lord, Jesus, rebiie the devil!" at whidi the
Fox, Pen, Ink and Paper vanished. Yet he continued in hb course
of unheard-of Wickedness, and still his Will was bent to write and
seal the Agreement, having his Discourse yet with Satan by Voice.
His Brother with whom he lives at Tocut, having Convulsion Fits,
he laughed and mocked at him, and acted the Convulsion Fits. A
while after God sent Convulsion Fits on himself; in which time, his
former Terrours, the Wrath of God, Death, Hell, Judgment, and
Eternity were presented to him. He would fain then have confessed
his sins, but when he was about to do it the Devil still held his mouth,
that he could not. He entreated Grod, to release him, promising to
confess and forsake his Sins, and the Lord did so; but he being weD,
grew as bad, or worse than ever. About six weeks since, his Convulsion Fits came again three times most dreadfully, with some Inter1658rj C. MATHER, MEMORABLE PROVTOENCES 139

misfflons, and his fonner Hoirours and Fears. He would have confessed his Sins but could not. It pleased Grod to put it into the
heart of one to ask him, Whether he had any Familiarity with the
Devil? he got out so much then as, Yes. He fetching Mr. Pierson,^
the Convulsion Fits left him, and he confessed all, how it had been
with him. That very night the Devil came to him, and told him.
Had he blabbed out such things? He would teach him to blabbi
and if he would not then write and seal the Agreement, he would
tear him in pieces, and he refusing, the Devil took a corporal Possession of him, and hath not ceased to torment him extremely ever
since. If any thing be spoken to him, the Devil answereth (and
many times he barks like a Fox, and hisseth like a Serpent) sometimes with horrible Blasphemies against the Name of Christ; and at
some other times the Boy is sensible. When he hath the Libertie of
his Voice, he tells what the Devil saith to him, urging him to seal the
Covenant still, and that he will bring Paper, Pen and Ink in the
night, when none shall see, pleading, that Grod hath cast him off, that
Christ cannot save him: That When He was upon earth He could
cast out devils, but now He is in Heaven He cannot. Sometimes he
is ready to yeild to all in a desperate way. Sometimes he breaks out
into Confession of his former sins, as they come into his mind; exceedingly judging himself and justifying Grod in His for ever leaving
of him in the hands of Satan. Once he was heard to Pray in such a
manner so sutable to his Condition, so Aggravating h^ Sin, and
{heading with God for mercy, and in such a strange, high enlarged
manner, as judicious godly persons then present, affirm they never
heard the like in their lives, that it drew abundance of tears from the
eyes of aU present, being about twenty persons. But his torment
increased upon him worse after such a time; or if any thing were
spoken to lum from the Word of God by others, or they pray with
him. The last week after he had confessed one strange Passage,
namely that once in Discourse he told the Devil, that if he would
make his Spittle to scald a dog, he would then go on in a way of
Lying and Dissembling, and believe that he should do it, which he
said, he did with aU his heart, and so spit on the dog, and with that
a deal of Scalding Water did poure on the Dog. In pursuance of his
Promise, he went on in a way of Lying and Dissembling : That when
he was urged about it, that he had done some mischief to the dog,
then he fdll down into a Swound, as if he had been dead. As soon as
he had confessed this, the Devil went out of him with an astonishing
Noise, to the terrour of those then present: and so he continued

^ The Rev. Abraham Pierson (d. 1678), who was minister at Branford from
1644 to 1667.

140 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES U«58?

one day. The next day being much troubled in himself for one
special passage in his Discourse with the Devil, when he appeared to
him as a Fox; saith he to the Devil, "I have formeriy sought to God,
and He hath been near unto me": With that the Devil enraged,
said unto him then, ''What, are you got hither?'' and fell to threatning of him. He sud to him again, "But I find no such Thoughts
now, but do and will believe you now more than the Word of God
which saith in Isa. 55, Seek the Lord,'' etc., and said further, ''What
comfort you shall afford me, I shall rely upon you for it." Remembring this Passage the Devil appeared to him, ready to enter into
him again. Thereby much astonished, having the Bible in his hand,
he opened it, and, as it were of it self, at that place of Isai. 55 : his
Eye was fixed upon it, and his Conscience accusing him for abusing
the Word a year ago, his heart failing him, and the Devil entred into
him again a Second time, railing upon him, and calling him. Blabtongue, and Roguel he had promis'd to keep things secret, he would
teadi him to blabb, he would tear him in pieces. Since, he hath
kept his Body in continual Motion, speaking in him, and by him,
with a formidable Voice: sometimes singing of Verses widked and
witty, that formerly he had made against his Father's Ministry, and
the Word of Grod, etc. When the Boy is come to himself, they tell
him of them, and he owns them, that indeed such he did make. Mr.
Eaton^ being his Unde, sent a Letter to him, which he told of before
it came, saying also, it would be goodly stuff I Jeering at him. By
and by the Letter came in, and none of the people knew of it before.
He speaks of men coining to him before t^y come in Sight: and
once, two being with him, their Backs turned, the Devil carried him
away, they knew not how, and after search they found him in a Cellar,
as dead, but after a little space he came to Life again. And another
time, threw him up into a Chamber, stopped him up into a Hcde,
where they after found him. Another time he carried him about a
Bow-Shot and threw him into a Hog-Stye amongst Swine, which ran
away with a terrible noise.

Here is as much to be seen of the Venome of Sin, the Wrath of
Grod against Sin, the Malice of the Devil, and yet his limited Power,
and the Reasonings of Satan in an ocular Demonstration, as hath
fallen out in any Age. Also the strange and High Expressions ot a
distressed Soul, in a way of Judging himself and pleading for Merpy,
such as may be wondered at by dl that hear of it; and more very
observable passages could not be written for want of Time, whidi
will after appear.

> Doubtless Theophflus Eaton, who was governs of the New Haven ool<xiy
from 1639 tiU his death, in 1658.

16887] C. MATHER, MEMORABLE PROVIDENCES 141

Advertisement.

Of what did after appear^ I have no Account; but what
did then appear, is so undoubted and so wonderful, that it
will sufficiently atone for my Publication of it.

Exemple VI. and VII.

Had there been Diligence enough used by them that have
heard and seen amazing Instances of Witchcraft, our Number
of Memorable Providences under this Head, had reached beyond the Perfect. However, before I have done Writing, I
will insert an Exemple or two, conmiunicated imto me by a
Gentleman of sufficient Fidelity to make a Story of his Relating Credible. The Things were such as happened in the Town
whereof himself is Minister; and they are but some of more
which he favoured me with the Conmiunication of. But, it
seems, I must be obliged to conceal the Names of the parties
concerned, lest some should be Offended, tho None could be
Injured by the mention of them.^

In a Town which is none of the youngest in this Countrey,
there dwelt a very Godly and honest Man, who upon some
Provocation, received very Angry and Threatning Expressions,
from two women in the Nei^bourhood ; soon upon this,
diverse of his Cattel in a strange manner dyed; and the man
himself sometimes was haunted with sights of the women, as
he thought, encountring of him. He grew indisposed in his
Body very unaccountably; and one day repaired imto a Church
Meeting then held in the place, with a Resolution there to
declare what he had met withal. The man was one of such
Figure and Respect among them, that the Pastor singled out
him for to pray in the Assembly before their breaking up. He
pray'd with a more than usual measure of both Devotion and

^ Who his informant was can only be guessed; but the description of the
town as "none of the youngest in this Countrey '' makes it impossible not to think
of Salem, which was the oldest in the colony, and of the Rev. Nicholas Noyes,
whose dose acquaintance with Mather and whose sharing of his views on this
subject are well known.

142 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES UesST

Discretion, but just as he was coming to that part of his
Prayer, wherein he intended to petition Heaven for the Discovery of Witchcrafts which had been among them, he sank
down Speechless and Senseless; and was by his Trends carried away to a Bed: where he lay for two or three hours in
horrible Disti^ss, f eakuUy starting, and staring and crying out
''Lord, I am stab'dl'^ and now looking whistly to and fro, he
said, ''0 here are wicked persons among us, even among u^; "
and he complained, ''I came hither witi^ a full purpose to tell
what I knew, but now" (said he) "I ly like a Fool!" Thus
he continued imtil the Meeting was over, and then his Fits
left him ; only he remained very sore. One or two more such
Fits he had after that; but afterwards a more private sort of
Torture was employed upon him. He was advised by a worthy
man to apply himself imto a Magistrate; and warned, That 1^
would shortly be mimiered, if he did not. He took not the
Counsil; but languished for some Weeks; yet able to Walk
and Work; but Then, he had his Breath and Life suddenly
taken away from him, in a manner of which no full Account
could be given.

The man had a Son invaded with the like Fits, but God
gave deliverance to him in answer to the Prayers of His people
for him.

In the same Town, there yet lives a very pious Woman,
that from another Woman of ill Fame, received a small gift,
which was eaten by her. Upon the Eating of it, she became
strangely altered and afi9icted; and hindred from Sleeping at
Night, by the Pulls of some invisible Hand for a long while
together. A Shape or two of, I know not who, Iflcewise
haunted her, and gave her no little Trouble. At last, a Fit
extraordinary Violent came upon her; wherein she pointed her
Hand, and fixed her Eye, much upon the Chimney, and spake
at a rate that astonished all about her. Anon, she broke forth
into Prayer, and yet could bring out scarce more than a
Syllable at a time. Li her short Prayer she grew up to an
high Act of Faith, and said, (by Syllables, and with Stammerings) "Lord, Thou hast been my Hope, and in Thee will I
put my Trust; Thou hast been my Salvation here, and wilt
be so for ever and ever!" Upon which her Fit left her; and
she afterwards grew very well ; still remaining so.

16887] C. MATHER, MEMORABLE PROVIDENCES 143

There were diverse other strange Things, which from the
same Hand, I can both Relate and Believe, As, Of a Child bewitched into Lameness, and recovered immediately, by a Terrour given to the vile Authoress of the Mischief; but the exact
Print, Image and Colour of an Orange made on the Childs
L%, presently upon the sending of an Orange to the Witch
by the Mother of the Child, who yet had no evil design
in making of the Present. And of other Children, which a
palpable Witchcraft made its Impressions on; but Manum de
Tabula.^

1 entreat every Reader, to make such an Use of these things,
as may promote his own well-fare and advance the Glory of
God; and so answer the Intent of the Writer, who,
HoBc scribens studuit, bene de Pietaie mereri}

^ "Hands off the slate!" — L e,, stop writing.

* "In writing these things strove to deserve well of Piety." There MUm,
in the vdume, the two sermons mentioned by the title-page, that occasioned by
the affair of the Goodwin children coming last. It adds no infonnation as to
the episode, but calls itself "A Discourse on ^^^tchcraft," and deak with the
reality and nature of that sin. But at the end of it is this interesting "Notandum":

"Since the Finishing of the BSstory which concerns Goodwin's Children,
there has been a very wonderful Attempt made (probably by Witchcraft) on
another Family in the Town. There is a poor Boy at this time under very terrible and amaring Circumstances which are a Repetition of, with not much
Variation from those of the Children formerly mdested. The person under
vehement Suspicion to be the Authoress [of] this B(^s Calamities is one that
was ocMnplain'd of by those Children in their Ails, and accordingly one or two ol
those Children has at this time some Renewal oi their Afflictions also; which
perhaps may be permitted by the Great God, not to disappoint our Expectations
of their Ddiverance, but for the Detection and the Destruction of more belonging to that hellish Knot, that has not yet perished as others ci the Crue has done,
before the poor prayers of them that Hope in God.

"The Book-sellers not being willing to stay the Event of these New
dentSy cause the Bridles here to be tak^i off."

A BRIEF AND TRUE NARRATIVE, BY DEODAT

LAWSON, 1692

INTRODUCTION

The earliest account of the remarkable happenings at
Salem^ in the spring of 1692, which were to bring to a climax
and then to a conclusion the quest of witches in New England,
was that which here follows. The Rev. Deodat Lawson was
singularly qualified to write it. He had himself, only a little
earlier (1684-1688), served as pastor to Salem Village, the
rural community in which these happenings took their rise;
and, though dissensions in the parish prevented his longer
stay, he seems to have been no party to these dissensions .
and must meanwhile have learned to know the scene and all v
the actors of that later drama which he here depicts. He was,
too, a man of education, travel, social experience. Bom in
England, the son of a scholarly Puritan minister, and doubtless educated there, he first appears in New England in 1676,
and at the time of his call to Salem Village was making his
home in Boston. Thither he returned in 1688 : Samuel Sewall,
who on May 13 had him in at Sunday dinner, notes in his
diary that he ''came to Town to dwell last week," and often
mentions him thereafter. How at the outbreak of the witchpanic he came to revisit the Village and to chronicle the doings
there, he himself a dozen years later thus told his English
friends '}

It pleased (rod in the Year of our Lord 1692 to visit the People
at a place called Salem Village in New-England, with a very Sore
and Grievous Affliction, in wluch they had reason to believe, that the
Soveraign and Holy God was pleased to permit Satan and his Instruments, to Affright and Afflict those poor Mortab in such an Astonand Unusual manner.

^ In the London edition of his Salem sermon. See below, p. 158, note 3.

147

148 NARRATIVES OF THE WTrCHCRAFT CASES

N0W9 I having for some time before attended the woii^ ot the
Ministry in that Village, the Report of those Great Afflictions came
quickly to my notice; and the more readily because the first Person
Afflicted was in the Minister's Family, who succeeded me, after I
was removed from them; in pitty therefore to my Christian Friends,
and former Acquaintance there, I was much concerned about them,
frequently consulted with them, and fervently (by Divine Assistance)
prayed for them; but especially my Concern was augmented, when
it was Reported, at an Examination of a Person suspected for Witdicraft, that my Wite and Daughter, who Dyed Three Years before,
were sent out of the World under the Malicious Operations of the
Infernal Powers; as is more fully represented in the following Remarks. I did then Desire, and was also Desired, by some concerned
in the Court, to be there present, that I might hear what was alledged
in that respect; observing therefore, when I was amongst them, that
the Case of the Afflicted was very amazing, and deplorable; and the
Charges brought against the Accused, such as were Ground of Suspicions yet very intricate, and difficult to draw up right Condusions
about them; I thought good for the satisfaction of my self, and sudi
of my Friends as might be curious to inquiry into those Mysteries ci
Gods Providence and Satans Malice, to draw up and keep by me, a
Brief Account of the most Remarkable things, that came to my
Knowledge in those Affairs; which Remarks were afterwards, (at
my Request) Revised and Corrected by some who Sate Judges <m
the Bench, in those Matters; and were now Transcribed, from the
same Paper, on which they were then Written.

A narrative so timely and so vouched for must have gone
speedily into print.^ TTie latest day named in it — "the 5th
of April'' — was probably the date both of its completion and
of its going to press. In 1693 it was reprinted in London by
John Ihmton, who appended to it an anonymous "Further
Account of the Tryals of the New-England Witches" (an extract from "a letter from thence to a Gentleman in London")
bringing the story to February, 1693, and to both joined Li-

^ One of the acutest students of New England witdicnf t, Mr. George H.
Moore (in his "Notes on the Bibliography of Witchcraft in Massachusetts" in
the Proceedings of the American Antiquarian Society, n. s., V. 248), has said of
it: "I cannot resist the impression upon reading it, that it was prranoted by
Cotton Mather and that he wrote the 'Bookseller's' notice 'to the Reader.' "
If so, he nmy well have inspired to the task both author and publisher.

INTRODUCTION 149

crease Mather's Cases of Conscience (see pp. 377,378, below),prefixing to the volume thus made up the title : A Further Account
of the Tryals of the New-England Witches. With the Observations
of a Person who was upon the Place several Days when the sus^
peded Witches were first taken into Examination. To which is
added, Cases of Conscience, etc.^ In 1704 Lawson, himself
now in England, cast it into a new f onn as an appendix to the
English edition of his Salem sennon.^ All names are now left
out, that he " may not grieve any, whose Relations were either
Accused or Afflicted, in those times of Trouble and Distress,'*
and what had been a narrative is given a statistical form under
"three Heads, viz. (1.) Relating to the Afflicted, (2.) Relating
to the Accused, And (3.) Relating to the Confessing Witches.'' •
On his own views, and the probable trend of his influence
while at Salem, light is thrown by his introductory words :

After this,* I being by the Providence of (Jod called over into
England, in the Year 1696; I then brought that Paper of Remarks
on the Witchcraft with me; upon the sight thereof, some Worthy
IVGnisters and Christian Friends here desired me to Reprint the Sermon and subjoyn the Remarks thereunto, in way of Appendix, but
for some particular Reasons I did then Decline it; But now, forasmuch
as I my self had been an Eye and Ear Witness of most of those Amazing things, so far as they come within the Notice of Humane Senses;
and the Requests of my Friends were Renewed since I came to
Dwell in London; I have given way to the Publishing of them; that
I may satisfy such as are not resolved to the Contrary, that there
may be (and are) such Operations of the Powers of Darkness on the

^ Tlie contents of this vdume were reprinted at London, in 1S62, by John
Russell Smith, in the volume of his Library of Old Attthors which contains also
Cotton Mather's The Wonders of the Invisible World. In this reprint they fill
pp. 199-291, being described in its main tide by only the misleading words, "A
Farther Account of the Tryals of the New-England Witches, by Increase
Mather."

' See below, p. 158, note 3.

' This revised form of his Account has been reprinted in full at the end ci
C. W. Upham's Salem Witchcraft (Boston, 1867), and, with but slight omissions,
in the Library cf American Literature edited by Stedman and Hutchinson (New
York, 1891), H. 106-114.

* This passage immediately follows that above quoted.

150 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES

Bodies and Minds ci Mankind, by Divine Pomission; and that
those who Sate Judges in those Cases, may by the serious Conaideiation of the formidable Aspect and peri^ezed Circumstances of that
Afflictive Providence be in some measure excused; or at least be
less Censured, for passing Sentance on several Persons, as being the
Instruments of Satan in those Diabolical Operations, when they were
involved in such a Dark and Dismal Scene of Providence, in which
Satan did seem to Spin a finer Thred of Spiritual Widkedness than in
the ordinary methods of Witchcraft; hence the Judges desiring to
bear due Testimony against such Diabolical Practices, were inHmed
to admit the validity of such a sort of Evidence as was not so dearly
and directiy demonstrable to Human Senses, as in other Cases is
required, or else they could not discover the Mysteries of Witdn
craft. • • •

One can not read these words without a suspicion that the
reaction in New England against those held reqx>nsible for
the procedure at Salem may have had to do with his return to
England; and even in England, it is dear, his cause now
needed defense. If any can wish him further ill, let them be
appeased by our two glimpses of his after fate — a deqmiring
letter in 1714/ begging from his New England friends meat,
drink, and dothing for his sick and starving family, and the
passing phrase of a writer who in 1727, mentioning Thomas
Lawson, adds that ''he was the father of the unhappy Mr.
Deodate Lawson, who came hither from New England."'

But the reader should not enter on the study of the witchpanic of 1692 without knowing something of our other sources
of knowledge. The contemporary narratives are practically
all printed in the pages that follow, and a part of the trial
records will be found embodied in Cotton Mather's Wanders ;'
but most of these must be sought otherwhere, and, alas, th^
are sadly scattered. Some Governor Hutchinson preserved in

^ Published (from the Bodleian Library's Rawlinson MS. C. 128, fol. 12) by
Greorge H. Moore, in the Proceedings of the American Antiquarian Sodety, n. a.,
V. 268-269.

* Edmund Calamy, in his ContinuaSon, 11. 629 (IL 192 of Pahner's leviaoii
of 1775, The N<mconfomUH*e Memorial),

s At pp. 215-244, below.

INTRODUCTION 161

his wise and careful pages on this subjecV where alone a part
can now be found. Many have drifted into private hands —
like those which in 1860 came into the hands of the Massachusetts Historical Society and are in part printed in its Proceedings (1860-1862, pp. 31-37), or those published by Drake
in the foot-notes and appendices to his various histories and
editions,' or those now in the keeping of the Essex Institute at
Salem or of the Boston Public Library.' Such of these as are
in print are mentioned in the notes at the proper points. But
most are still in public keeping at Salem; and these in 1864
were printed by W. Elliot Woodward in the two volumes of
his Records of Salem Witchcraft, the work most fundamental
for the first-hand study of this episode. It is, however, imperfect and far from complete, and there is hope of a better :
the Records and Files of the Quarterly Courts of Essex County,
<rf which a third volume has just appeared, must in due
course include these witch-trials, and Mr. Geoi^ Francis
Dow, their editor (who has already by his publication of the
witchcraft records relating to Topsfidd ^ shown his keeimess
in such work), has in mind the seizing of this opportunity
to print all obtainable papers relating to the Salem Witchcraft
episode. Precious documents too are published by Upham in
his classical Salem Witchcraft ^ and in the acute and learned
studies of Mr. Abner C. Goodell and Mr. Geoi^ H. Moore.*

> History cf Maaaachufetts, 11., ch. I.

tin his Hitiory and AntiquUiu cf Boston (Boston, 1856), pp. 497, 498, and
in Ids The WUcheraft Delusion in New Enifland, IH. 126, 169-197. AU these
(the indictment and the testimony against Philip English, the examination of
Mary Clark and of the slave Tltuba) are now in the New York Public library,
•8 are also his documents of the Morse case, mentioned above, p. 31, note 1.

'As to the fate of the records in genial see Upham, SoJemFFticAcrqfiE, 11.462.

« In vd. XIII. of the i^Mtonco/ Co220cfum« of the Topsfidd His^
(1Q(»).

'^Boston, 1867, two vols. *See p. 91, note 2; p. 373, note 3.

A BRIEF AND TRUE NARRATIVE

A Brief (md Tfiie Narraiive Of some Remcarkabk

ing to sundry Persons Afflicted by Witchcraft, at Salem
Village Whidi happened from the Nineteenth of March, to
the Fifth of April, 1692.

Collected by Deodat Lawson.

Boston, Printed for Benjamin Harris and are to he Sold at his
Shop, oner-against Oie Old-Meeting-House. 1692.^

The Bookseller to the Reader.

The Ensiling Narrative, being a Collection of sonie Re*
markables, in an Affair now upon the Stage, made by a Credible Eye-witness, is now offered unto the Reader, only as a
Tast, of more that may follow in Gknls Time. If the Prayers
of Good People may obtain this Favour of God, That the
Misterious Assaults from Hell now made upon so many of our
Friends may be thoroughly Detected and Defeated, we suppose the Ciirious will be Entertained with as rare an History
as perhaps an Ag^ has had; whereof this Narrative is but a
Forerunner.

Benjamin Habbib.

On the Nineteenth day of March last' I went to Salem
Village,' and lodged at Nathaniel Ingersols near to the Min-

^ Title-page of the originaL

* 1692. This narrative may wdl be studied in dose connection with the
parallel narratives of Calef and Hale, printed at pp. 296 ff . and 399 ff. of tiin
volume.

* Not Salem <oim, the present Salem dty, but a rural district (what is now
the township of Danvers, with parts of the townships adjoining it) which till
1672 had been a mere dependence of the town, but in that year, at the request of
its inhabitants, was set off as a separate parish, though not as a distinct town.
De^ite the name of "village," there was in Salem Village no huddle of houses
amounting to a hamlet, though about the meeting-house (where now b Danvers

152

1692] LAWSON, BRIEF AND TRUE NARRATIVE 153

ister Mr. P's. house,* and presently after I came into my
Lodging Capt. Walcuts Daughter Mary* came to Lieut. Ingersols and spake to me, but, suddenly after as she stood by the
door, was bitten, so that she cried out of her Wrist, and looking on it with a Candle, we saw apparently the marks of Teeth
both upper and lower set, on each side of her wrist.

In the beginning of the Evening, I went to give Mr. P.* a
visit. When I was there, his Kins-woman, Abigail Williams,
(about 12 years of age,) had a grievous fit; she was at first
hurryed with Violence to and fro in the room, (though Mrs. .
Ingersol endeavoured to hold her,) sometimes makeing as if v
she would fly, stretching up her arms as high as she could,
and crying " Whish, Whish, Whish!" several times; Presently
after she said there was Goodw. N.^ and said, ''Do you not
see her? Why there she stands 1" And the said Goodw. N.
offered her The Book, but she was resolved she would not

Highlands) the farm-houses clustered more thickly than elsewhere. Prefixed
to the Rev. Charles W. Upham's Salem Witchcraft is a map, which, on the basis
of long and loving research, attempts to locate every house in all the region;
and the text of that work will also be of constant use, as will the little volume of
W. S. Nevins, Witchcraft in Salem Village (1892), with its views of sites and buildings (as "Stories of Salem Witchcraft" it had been printed in the New England
Magaaine, IV., V.) and the illustrated edition of John Fiske's New France and
New England (1904).

^Nathaniel IngersoU, deacon in the village church and perhaps its most
devoted member, kept the tavern, or "ordinary," which was the recognized
centre of the "Village." The meeting-house adjoined it to the east, to the west
the parsonage, where lived Mr. Parris.

' Captain Jonathan Walcot, conmiander of the village militia, dwelt next
beyond the parsonage. His daughter Mary was now seventeen.

' Tlie Rev. Samuel Parris (1653-1720), whose part, and whose family's, in
the Salem panic was to be so great, had been at Salem Village since 1688, succeeding Deodat Lawson as its spiritual head. Till then, though educated at Harvard,
which is to say for the ministry, he had been engaged in the West Indian trade,
and had lived for a time in Barbadoes, whence he had brought back with him
the two slaves, John and Tituba, perhaps half negro, half native, with whom we
must soon have to do. Abigail Williams, his niece, was a member of his household; and we shall meet also his little daughter Elizabeth, aged nine. The
account of his life by S. P. Fowler (Essex Institute, Proceedings, II. 49-68) has
been separately printed (Salem, 1857) and is appended to Drake's ed. of Mather
and Calef (HI. 198-222). But the student needs also Upham, Salem Witchcraft,
and the documents reprinted by Calef, More Wonders, pp. 55-64.

* Rebecca Nurse, a matron of 71, wife of Francis Nurse, an energetic and
prosperous farmer.

154 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES ptt2

take it; saying Often; ''I wont, I wont; I wont, take it, I do
not know what Book it is: I am sure it is none of Gods Book,
it is the Divels Book, for ought I know/' After that, ahe run
to the Fire; and begun to throw Fire Brands, about the house;
and run against the Back, as if she would run up Chimney;
and; as they said; she had attempted to go into the Fire in
other Fits.

On Lords Day; the Twentieth of March, there were sundry of the afi9icted Persons at Meeting; aS; Mrs. Pope, and
Goodwif e Bibber; Abigail WilliamS; Mary Walcut; Mary Lewes,
and Docter Griggs' Maid.^ There was also at Meeting, Goodwife C.' (who was afterward Examined on suspicion of being
a T^tch:) They had several Sore Fits, in the time of Publick
Worship, which did something interrupt me in my First Prajrer;
being so imusual. After Psalm was Simg; Abigail Williiuns
said to mC; ''Now stand up; and Name your Text": And after
it was read; she said; ''It is a long Text." In the b^;inning
of SermoU; Mrs. Pope; a Woman afi9icted; said to me, "Now
there is enough of tiiat." And in the afternoon, Abigail
Williams upon my referring to my Doctrine said to me, "I
know no Doctrine you had, If you did name one, I have forgot it."

In Sermon time when Goodw. C was present in the Meetinghouse Ab. W. called out, " Look where Goodw. C sits on the
B^un suckling her Yellow bird betwixt her fingers"! Anne
Putnam another Girle afficted said there was a Yellow-bird
sat on my hat as it himg on the Pin in the Pulpit: but those
that were by, restrained her from speaking loud about it.

On Monday the 2l8t of March; The Magistrates of Salem
appointed to come to Examination of Goodw C And about

^ Mrs. Pope was a woman of good social position and in eariy middle life;
Sarah Bibber (or Vibber), aged 36, a loose-tongued creature, addicted to fits,
who with her husband seems to have "worked out"; Mercy (not Maiy) Lewes,
a maid in the family of Thomas Putnam, whose wife and twel ve-yeaiHild daughter,
both named Ann, were also to have a leading part among "the afflicted." "Doetor Griggs' maid," Elizabeth Hubbard, aged 17, was a niece of his wife. It was
probably Dr. Griggs, the physician of the Village, who had first pronounced the
girb bewitched.

' Martha Corey, wife of Giles Cor^. She too was advanced in years.

* For the official repcxrt of this examination, as of those to fdlow, and for
all the legal documents connected with these cases, the student must d oouiae

ie»2I LAWSON, BRIEF AND TRUE NARRATIVE 155

twelve of the Clock, they went into the Meetmg-House, which
was Thronged with Spectators: Mr. Noyes^ began with a
very pertinent and pathetic Prayer; and Goodwtfe C. being
called to answer to what was AUedged against her, she desired
to go to Prayer, which was much wondred at, in the presence
of so many himdred people : The Magistrates told her, they
would not admit it; they came not there to hear her Pray,
but to Examine her, in what was AUedged against her. The
Worshipful Mr. Hathome' asked her, Why she Afl3icted those
Children? she said, she did not Afflict them. He asked her,
who did then? she said, " I do not know; How should I know?"
The Number of the Afflicted Persons were about that time
Ten, viz. Four Married Women, Mrs. Pope, Mrs. Putman,'
Goodw. Bibber, and an Ancient Woman, named Goodall,
three Maids, Mary Walcut, Mercy Lewes, at Thomas Putman's,
and a Maid at Dr. Griggs's, there were three Girls from 9 to 12
Years of Age, each of them, or thereabouts, viz. Elizabeth
Parris, Abigail Williams and Ann Putman; these were most
of them at G. C's Examination, and did vehemently accuse her
in the Assembly of afflicting them, by Biting, Pinching, Strangling, etc. And that they did in their Fit see her Likeness
coming to them, and bringing a Book to them, she said, she
had no Book; they affiLrmed, she had a Yellow-Bird, that used
to suck betwixt her Fingers, and being asked about it, if she
had any Familiar Spirit, that attended her, she said, She had
no Familiarity with any such thing. She was a Gospel Woman :
which Title die called her self by; and the Afflicted Persons
told her, ah! She was, A Gospel Witch. Ann Putman did
there affirm, that one day when Lieutenant Fuller was at

turn to the publications embodying such court records (see p. 151, above).
Those of Goodwife Corey's case may be found in Woodward's Records cf Salem
Witchcraft, I. 50-60. Especially interesting is the evidence as to her rational
attitude: "shee told us/' testify those who went to arrest her, "that shee did
not thinke that there were any witches." They add that it "was said of her that
shee would open the eyes of the magistrates and ministers."

^ The Rev. Nicholas Noyes, minister at Salem town.

' John Hathome, or Hawthorne, a magistrate of the colony, and, as a member of the highest court, a local magistrate as well, had his home on his farm in
Salem ViUage and must have known personally all these neighbors. It must be
ranembered, and may well be pointed out here, that Massachusetts magistrates
not men trained to the law, but only respected laymen.

* Putnam : this misspelling was common.

J

156 NARRATIVES OF THE WTTCHCRAFr CASES pan

Prayer at her Fathers House, she saw the shi^ of Goodw. G.
and she thought Goodw. N. Praying at the same time to the
Devil, she was not sure it was Goodw. N. she thou^t it was;
but very sure she saw the Shi4)e of G. C. The said C. said,
they were poor, distracted Children, and no heed to be given
to what they said. Mr. Hathome and Mr. Noyes replyed, it
was the jud^ent of all that were present, they were Bewitdied,
and only she, the Accused Person said, they were Distracted.
It was observed several times, that ilf she did but bite her
Under lip in time of Examination the persons afflicted woe
bitten on their armes and wrists and produced the Marks
before the Magistrates, Ministers and others. And being
watched for that, if she did but Pinch her Fingers, or Graq)e
one hand hard in another, they were Pinched and produced
the Marks before the Magistrates, and Spectators. After
that, it was observed, that if she did but lean her Breast
against the Seat, in the Meeting House, (being the Barr at
which she stood,) they were afflicted. Particularly Mrs. Pope
complained of grievous torment in her Bowels as if they were
torn out. She vehemently accused said C. as the instrument,
and first threw her Muff at her; but that fl3dng not home, she
got off her Shoe, and hit Goodwife G. on the head with it.
After these postures were watched, if said G. did but stir her
feet, they were afflicted in their Feet, and stamped fearfully.
The afflicted persons asked her why she did not go to the
company of Witches which were before the Meeting house
mustering? Did she not hear the Drum beat? They accused
her of having Familiarity with the Devil, in the time of EIxamination, in the shape of a Black man whispering in her
ear; they affirmed, that her Yellow-Bird sucked betwixt her
Fingers in the Assembly; and order being given to see if
there were any sign, the Girl that saw it said, it was too late
now; she had removed a Pin, and put it on her head; which
was foimd there sticking upright.

They told her, she had Govenanted with the Devil for ten
years, six of them were gone, and four more to come. She was
required by the Magistrates to answer that Question in the
Gatechism, "How many persons be there in the God-Head?"
she answered it but oddly, yet was there no great thing to be
gathered from it; she denied all that was charged upon her.

10821 LAWSON, BRIEF AND TRUE NARRATIVE 167

and said; They could not prove a Witch; she was that Afternoon Committed to Saiem-Prison; and after she was in Custody, she did not so appear to them, and afflict them as before.
On Wednesday the 23 of March, I went to Thomas Putmans, on purpose to see his Wife : I f oimd her lying on the
Bed, having had a sore fit a little before. She spake to me, and
said, she was glad to see me; her Husband and she both desired
me to pray with her, while she was sensible; which I did,
though the Apparition said, I should not go to Prayer. At the
first b^inning she attended; but after a little time, was taken
with a fit: yet continued sQent, and seemed to be Asleep:
when Prayer was done, her Husband going to her, foimd her
in a Fit; he took her off the Bed, to set her on his Knees; but
at first she was so stiff, she could not be bended; but she afterwards set down; but quickly b^an to strive violently with her
Arms and Leggs; she then began to Complain of, and as it
were to Converse personally with, Goodw. N., sa3ring, " Goodw.
N. Be gone! Be gone! Be gone! are you not ashamed, a Woman
of yoiu- Profession, to afflict a poor Creatine so? what hint did
I ever do you in my life! you have but two years to live, and
then the Devil will torment your Soul, for this yoiu* Name is
blotted out of Gods Book, and it shall never be put in Gods
Book again, be gone for shame, are you not afraid of that which
is coming upon you? I Know, I know, what will make you
afraid; the wrath of an Angry God, I am sure that will make
you afraid; be gone, do not tourment me, I know what you
would have (we judged she meant, her Soul) but it is out of
yoiu* reach; it is Clothed with the white Robes of Christs
Righteousness." After this, she seemed to dispute with the
Apparition about a particular Text of Scripting. The Apparition seemed to deny it, (the Womans eyes being fast closed
all this time) ; she said. She was sure there was such a Text;
and she would tell it; and then the Shape would be gone, for
said she, "I am sure you cannot stand before that Text!"
then she was sorely Afflicted; her mouth drawn on one side,
and her body strained for about a minute, and then said, '^ I will
tell, I will tell; it is, it is, it is!" three or four times, and then
was afflicted to hinder her from telling, at last she broke forth
and said, '^ It is the third Chapter of the Revelations." I did
something scruple the reading it, and did let my scruple ap1S8 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [lee

pear, lest Satan should make any Superstitious lie to improve
the Word of the Eternal God However, tho' not versed in
these things, I judged I might do it this once for an Eb^riment. I b^an to read, and before I had near read throu^
the first verse, she opened her eyes, and was well ; this fit continued near half an hour. Her Husband and the Spectators
told me, she had often been so relieved by reading Texts that
she named, something pertinent to her Case; as Isa. 40. 1,
Isa. 49. 1, Isa. 50. 1, and several others.

On Thursday the Twenty fourth of march, (being in course
the Lecture Day, at the Village,) Goodwife N. was brou^t
before the Magistrates Mr. Hathome and Mr. Corwin,^
about Ten of [the] Clock, in the Fore Noon, to be Examined
in the Meeting House; the Reverend Mr. Hale' b^un with
Prayer, and the Warrant being read, she was required to give
answer, Why she aflicted those persons? she pleaded her owne
innocency with earnestness. Thomas Putman's Wife, Abigail
Williams and Thomas Putmans daughter accused her that she
appeared to them, and aflSicted them in their fitts : but some
of the other said, that they had seen her, but knew not that
ever she had hurt them; amongst which was Mary Walcut,
who was presently after she had so declared bitten, and ciyed
out of her in the meeting-house; producing the Marks of teeth
on her wrist. It was so dispensed, that I had not leisure to
attend the whole time of Examination,' but both Magistrates

1 Jonathan Corwin was, like Hathorae, a member of the Court of
the highest legislative and judicial body of the colony, and like him the son of
one of its founders. Th^ were the men of highest note in the Salem r^joo.
Corwin lived in the town.

• Of Beverly. As to him see p. 397, below.

' What drew Mr. Lawson away from the examinations was doubtless the
need to complete his preparation for the important sermon of that day; and it
must have been this on which he was pondering when (as he records a few lines
later) the shrieks of the afflicted reached him as he walked, "a little distance from
the meeting-house." That sermon was, however, no extempore production, but
a studied disquisition on the power and malice of the Devil, who "Contracts and
Indents with Witches and Wizzards, that they shall be the Instruments by whom
he may more secretly Affect and Afflict the Bodies and Minds of others." "And
the Devil," taught Lawson, committing himself whc^y to bdief in the worth of
that "spectral evidence" which was to play such a part in the Salem episode,
"having them in his subjection, by their Consent, he will use their Bodks and
Minds, Shapes and Representations, to Affright and Afflict otho^ at his pi'
The magistrates were present at the sermon; and to them he dedicated the

1002] LAWSON, BRIEP AND TRUE NARRATIVE 159

and Ministers told me, that the things alledged by the afflicted,
and defences made by her, were much after the same manner,
as the former was. And her Motions did produce like e£Fects
as to Biteing, Pinching, Bruising, Tormenting, at their Breasts,
by her Leaning, and when, bended Back, were as if their Backs
was broken. The afflicted persons said, the Black Man whispered to her in the Assembly, and therefore she could not
hear what the Magistrates said imto her. They said also that
she did then ride by the Meeting-house, behind the Black
Man. Thomas Putman's wife had a grievous Fit, in the
time of Examination, to the very great Impairing of her
strength, and wasting of her spirits, insomuch as die could
hardly move hand, or foot, when she was carryed out. Others
also were there grievously afflicted, so that there was once
such an hideous scrietch and noise, (which I heard as I walked,
at a little distance from the Meetmg house,) as did amaze me,
and some that were within told me the whole assembly was
struck with consternation, and they were afraid, that those
that sate next to them, were imder the influence of Witchcraft.
This woman also was that day committed to Salem Prison.
The Magistrates and Ministers also did inf orme me, that they
apprehended a child of Sarah G.^ and Examined it, being
between 4 and 5 years of Age, And as to matter of Fact, they
did Unanimously affirm, that when this Child did but cast
its eye upon the afflicted persons, they were tormented, and
they held her Head, and yet so many as her eye could fix upon
were afflicted. Which they did several times make careful
observation of : the afflicted complained, they had often been
Bitten by this child, and produced the marks of a small set
of teeth, accordingly, this was also committed to Salem Prison;
the child looked hail, and well as other Children. I saw it
at Lieut. Ingersols.* After the commitment of Goodw. N.,
Tho : Putmans wife was much better, and had no violent fits

mon when, in the foOowing year, he g^ve it to the press under the title of ChriH't
Fiddity the only Skidd agairul Satan's Malignity. A second edition was printed
under his ^ye at London in 1704 (see p. 149, above).

> Sarah Good, who with Sarah Osbum and Parris's slave-woman Tituba
had been examined and committed to jail on March 1, before Lawson's visit (see
p. 343, below).

* Little Dorcas Good, thus sent to prison "as hale and well as other chil«
dieOt" lay there seven or eight months, and "being chain'd in the dungeon was

160 NARRATIVES OP THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1602

at all from that 24th of March to the 5th of April. Some others
also said they had not seen her so frequently appear to them^
to hurt them.

On the 25th of March, (as Capt. Stephen Sewal,^ of Salem,
did afterwards inform me) Eliza. Paris had sore Fits, at his
house, which much troubled himself, and his wife, so as he
told me they were almost discouraged. She related, that the
great Black Man came to her, and told her, if she would be
ruled by him, she should have whatsoever she desired, and go
to a Golden City. She relating this to Mrs. Sewall, she tdd
the child, it was the Divel, and he was a Lyar from tlie B^inning, and bid her tell him so, if he came again : which she did
accordingly, at the next coming to her, in her fits.

On the 26th of March, Mr. Hathome, Mr. Corwin, and
Mr. Higison' were at the Prison-Keepers House, to Examine
the Child,' and it told them there, it had a little Snake that
used to Suck on the lowest Joynt of it[s] Fore-Finger; and
when they inquired where, pointing to other places, it told
them, not there, but there, pointing on the Lowest point of
For©-Finger; where they Observed a deep Red Spot, about the
Bigness of a Flea-bite, they asked who gave it that Snake?
whether the great Black man, it said no, its Mother gave it

The 31 of March there was a Publick Fast kept at Salem
on accoimt of these AfiSicted Persons. And Abigail Williams
said, that the Witches had a Sacrament that day at an house
in the Village, and that they had Red Bread and Red Drink.
The first of April, Mercy Lewis, Thomas Putman's Maid, in
her fitt, said, they did eat Red Bread like Mans Flesh, and

80 hardly used and terrifyed'' that eighteen years later her father alleged ''that
she hath ever since been very chargeable, haveing little or no reason to govern
bersdf." See his petition for damages, September 13, 1710 (printed in the N. E.
Hid. and Gen, RegiMer, XXXV. 253— the MS. is now in the Ptesident White
library at Cornell University). He was allowed £30.

1 Stephen Sewall, clerk olt the courts at Salem, in whose home the Rev. Mr.
Parris had now placed his daughter Elizabeth — a fact which may have some connection with his being one of the most ardent furthervs of the trials. It was
from him that Cotton Mather later asked the materials for his account of them
(see p. 206, below). He must, ol course, not be confused with his more eminent
brother, Samuel Sewall, of Boston, whom we shall soon meet as a judge in the
Salem trials.

' The Rev. John Higginson, the aged senior minister of the chuzdi in Salem.

* Dorcas (rood, of course, not Elizabeth Parris.

1602] LAWSON, BRIEF AND TRUE NARRATIVE 161

would have had her eat some: but she would not; but turned
away her head, and Spit at them, and said, ''I will not Eat, I
will not Drink, it is Blood,'' etc. She said, "That is not the
Bread of Life, that is not the Water of Life; Christ gives the
Bread of Life, I will have none of it ! " This first of April also
Marcy Lewis aforesaid saw in her fitt a White man and was
with him in a Glorious Place, which had no Candles nor Sim,
yet was full of Light and Brightness; where was a great Multitude in White glittering Robes, and they Simg the Song in
the fifth of Revdation the Ninth verse, and the 110 PsaJm,
and the 149 Psalm; and said with her self, "How long shall I
stay here? let me be along with you" : She was loth to leave
this place, and grieved that she could tarry no longer. This
Whiteman^ hath appeared several times to some of them, and
given them notice how long it should be before they had another
Fit, which was sometimes a day, or day and half, or more or
less : it hath fallen out accordingly.

The third of April, the Lords-Day, being Sacrament-day,
at the Village, Goodw. C* upon Mr. Parris's naming his
Text, John 6, 70, One of them is a Devil, the said Goodw. C.
went inmiediately out of the Meeting-House, and flimg the
door after her violently, to the amazement of the Congr^ation : She was afterward seen by some in their Fits, who said,
"0 Goodw. C, I did not think to see you here!" (and being at
their Red bread and drink) said to her, " Is this a time to receive the Sacrament, you ran-away on the Lords-Day, and
scorned to receive it in the Meeting-House, and. Is this a
time to receive it? I wonder at you!" This is the smnm of
what I either saw my self, or did receive Information from
persons of imdoubted Reputation and Credit.

Remarks of things more than ordinary about the Afflicted Persons.

1. They are in their Fits tempted to be Witches, are shewed
the List of the Names of others, and are tortured, because they
will not yield to Subscribe, or meddle with, or touch the Book,
and are promised to have present Relief if they would do it.

^ White man.

*Not Goodwife Corey, but Goodwife Sarah Qoyse, sister of Rebecca
Nune. Few an explanation of the slammed door, see p. 346, below.

162 NABBAHVES of the witchcraft cases [1602

2. They did in the Assembly mutually Cure each other,
even with a Touch of their Hand, when Strangled, and otherwise Tortured; and would endeavour to get to their AflSicted,
to Relieve them.

3. They did also foretel when anothers Fit was a-coming,
and would say, "Look to her! she will have a Fit presently,"
which fell out accordingly, as many can bear witness, that
heard and saw it.

4. That at the same time, when the Accused Person was
present, the AfiSicted Persons saw her Likeness in other places
of the Meeting-House, suckling her Familiar, sometimes in
one place and posting, and sometimes in another.

5. That their Motions in their Fits are Preternatural, both
as to the manner, which is so strange as a well person could
not Screw their Body into; and as to the violence also it is
preternatural, being much beyond the Ordinary force of the
same person when they are in their right mind.

6. The eyes of some of them in their fits are exceeding fast
closed, and if you ask a question they can give no answer, and
I do believe they cannot hear at that time, yet do they plamely
converse with tiie Appearances, as if they did discourse witli
real persons.

7. They are utterly pressed against any persons Pra3ang
with them, and told by the appearances, they shall not go to
Prayer, so Tho. Putmans wife was told, I dbould not Pray;
but she said, I should : and after I had done, reasoned with the
Appearance, "Did not I say he should go to Prayer?"

8. The forementioned Mary W.^ being a little better at
ease, the Afflicted persons said, she had signed the book; and
that was the reason she was better. Told me by Edward
Putman.*

Remarks amcerning the Accused.

1. For introduction to the discovery of those that afflicted
them. It is reported Mr. Parris's Indian Man and Woman
made a Cake of Rye Meal, and the Childrens water, baked it

»Walcot.

' Deacon Eldward Putnam, a pillar of the village church, was brother and
dose neighbor to Thomas Putnam, whose wife, daughter, and maid were leaders
ng "the afflicted."

f^

1602] LAWSON, BRIEF AND TRUE NARRATIVE 163

in the Ashes, and gave it to a Dogge, since which they have
discovered, and seen particular persons hurting of them.

2. In Time of Examination, they seemed little affected,
though all the Spectators were much grieved to see it.

3. Natural Actions in them product Preternatural actions
in the AflBicted, so that they are their own Image without any
Foppits of Wax or otherwise,*

4. That they are accused to have a Company about 23 or
24 and they did Muster in Armes, as it seem^ to the AfSicted
Persons.

5. Since they were confined, the Persons have not been so
much Afflicted with their appearing to them, Biteing or Pinching of them, etc.

6. They are reported by the Afflicted Persons to keep dayes
of Fast and dayes of Thanksgiving, and Sacraments; Satan j
endeavours to Transforme himself to an Angel of Light, and
to make his Kingdom and Administrations to resemble those
of our Lord Jesus Christ.

7. Satan Rages Principally amongst the Visible Subjects
of Christ's Kingdom and makes use (at least in appearance)
of some of them to Afflict others; that Christ's Kingdom may
be divided against it self, and so be weakened.

8. Several things used in England at Tiyal of Witches, to
the Number of 14 or 15, which are wont to pass instead of
or in Concurrence with Witnesses, at least 6 or 7 of them are
found in these accused : see Keebles Statutes.^

^ /. e., these witches have no need, as do others (see p. 104), to make images,
or puppets, in the likeness of those they wish to torment, and then by torturing the
puppets to inflict the same tortures on those th^ represent: these witches have
only to act, and their victims are pretematurally compelled to the same action.

' What is meant is dearly not the collection of English statutes compfled
by Joseph Keeble, or Keble, (1632-1710). Often printed (1676, 1681, 1684,
1695, 1706), this seems to have been standard in the colonies as at home; but it
contains absolutely nothing but the text of the statutes in force, "with the titles
of such as are expired, repealed, altered, or out of use," and at the end an analytical table of subjects, llie work really meant is Keble's An Assitiance to JtuHees
cf the Peace (London, 1683, 1689). This work, however, borrows its pages on
witchcraft (pp. 217-220) from the older manuids of Lambarde, West, and Dalton; and the passage in question is one compiled by Michael Dalton, for the
later editions of his The Countrey Justice, from Thomas Potts's Diecoverie qf
Wiiehee (1613) and Richard Barnard's Guide to GrandrJury Men (1627). For
aid in this identification, and for a transcript of these pages from the Harvard
copy of Keble, the editor is indebted to Mr. David M. Matteson.

164 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1602

9. Some of the most solid Afflicted Persons do affirme the
same things concerning seeing the accused out of their Fitts
as well as in them.

10. The Witches had a Fast, and told one of the Afflicted
Girles, she must not Eat, because it was Fast Day, she said,
she would : they told her they would Choake her tiben; which
when she did eat, was endeavoured.

Fini$.

LETTER OF THOMAS BRATTLE, F. R. S., 169a

INTRODUCTION

From that April day when Mr. Lawson closed his account
it was long before another eye-witness undertook a narrative.
Yet great things were doing. At Salem accusation and hear^
ing went on apace, and the jails grew crowded, awaiting the
session of a court. On May 14 arrived from England FresH
dent Increase Mather, bringing the new charter, and with
him the new governor, Sir li^^am Fhips. What the governor
thought of the emergency and how he dealt with it we shall
presently learn from his own pen. But other pens were earlier
busy. Perhaps the most notable was that of Thomas Brattle,
who early in October addressed the following letter to some
clerical correspondent. Who this divine may have been whose
questions the letter answers is unknown : our docimient is not
the original, but a copy without superscription, and from its
contents we can infer no more than that he lived or had lived
in the colony. But Thomas Brattle we know well. "He was,"
wrote President Leverett of Harvard at his death, "a gentleman by his birth and education of the first order in this country." Bom at Boston, in 1658, of wealthy parentage, a graduate and a master of arts of Harvard, then a traveller and a
student abroad, he won such distinction as a mathematician,
and notably as an astronomer, as to be made a member of the
Royal Society, and was in close touch with the world of
scholars; but his career was that of an opulent and cultivated
Boston merchant, and for twenty years, from 1693 to his
death in 1713, he was treasurer of Harvard College. " In the
Chmrch," said of him the Boston Newa-Letter, "he was known
and valued for his Catholick Charity to all of the reformed

167

168 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES

Religion^ but more especially his great Veneration for the
Church of England, although his general and more constant
communion was with the Nonconformists." In other words,
he was of the Uberal party in religion and poUtics, an eminent
opponent of the Puritan theocracy, and he did not escape the
epithets "apostate" and "infidel."

The letter here printed did not see print in his own day;
but that the present copy exists suggests that it may have been
meant to circulate in manuscript,^ and it is not impossible that
it was even written for that purpose. Yet if so, we may be
sure it was used with discretion. It was his grand-nephew,
the then well-known Thomas Brattle, Esq., of Cambridge
^o late in the eighteenth century communicated it to the
Massachusetts Historical Society.' From that manuscript
copy it is here reprinted.

> The suggestion is thmt of Sibley, in his sketch of Brattle's life (Harwurd
Oraduatei, 11. 489-498), the best summary of what is known of him. That the
eitant copy is without superscription, and signed by initiab only, may point to
audi a use. It must not be forgotten that it was written on the eve of the
of the General Court

*It was first published in that society's ColUdkms, V. 61-79.

LETTER OF THOMAS BRATTLE, F. R. S., 1691

October S, 1692,
Reverend Sir,

Your's I received the other day, and am very ready to servo
you to my uttmost. I should be very loath to bring myself
into any snare by my freedom with you, and therefore nope
that you will put the best construction on what I write, and
secure me from such as would interprett my lines otherwise
than they are designed. Obedience to lawfull authority I
evermore accounted a great duty; and willingly I would not
practise any thing that might thwart and contradict such a
principle. Too many are ready to despise dominions, and
speak evil of Dirties; and I am sure the mischiefs, which
arise from a factious and rebellious spirit, are veiy sad and
notorious; insomuch that I would sooner bite my finger's
ends than willingly cast dirt on authority, or any way offer
rq)roach to it: Far, therefore, be it from me, to have any thing
to do with those men your letter mentions, whom you acknowledge to be men of a factious spirit, and never more in their
elem^it than when they are declaiming against men in public
place, and contriving methods that tend to the disturbance
of the conmKm peace. I never accounted it a credit to my
cause, to have the good liking of such men« My sent (says
Solomcm) fear thou Oie Lard and Ike King, and meddle not wUh
them that are given to change. Prov. xxiv* 2L HaweYer, Sir,
I never thou^t Judges infalUUe; but redoxied that they, as
wdl as private men, mi^t err; and that when ther were
guilty of errii^, standers by, who possiUy had not half their
judgment, mi^, notwithstanding, be able to detect and be*
hold their errars. And furthermore, idien errors of that nature
are thus detected and observed, I never thought it an interfering with dntifnlbiess and subjection for one man to commumcate his tboo^AB to another thereabout; and with modesty

\e^

170 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES 11662

and due reverence to debate the premised failings; at least,
when erronrs are fundamental, and palpably pervert the great
end of authority and government: for as to drcumshmtial
errours, I must conf esse my principle is, that it is the duty of
a good subject to cover with his alence a multitude of tbem.
But I shall no long^ detain you with my preface, but passe
to some things you look for, and whether you expect such
f reedome from me, yea or no, yet shall you find, that I am very
open to communicate my thoughts unto you, and in plain
terms to tell you what my opinion is of the Salem proceedingiB.
First, as to the method which the Salem Justices do tdke
in their examinations, it is truly this: A warrant being issued
out to i^prehend the persons that are charged and complained
oi by the afiSicted children, (as they are called) ; said persons
are brought before the Juatices, (the afiSicted being present.)
The Justices ask the apprehended why they afiSict those pocNr
children; to which the i^prehended answer, they do not afflict
therrL The Justices order the apprehended to look upon the
said children, which accordingly they do; and at the time of
that look, (I dare not say by that look, as the Salem Gentlemen
do) the afflicted are cast into a fitt. The apprehended are then
blinded, and ordered to touch the afflicted; and at that touch,
tho' not by the touch, (as above) the afflicted ordinarily do
come out of their fitts. The afiSicted persons then declare and
affirm, that the i^prehended have afflicted them; upon which
the i^prehended persons, tho' of never so good repute, are
forthwith corrmiitted to prison, on suspicion for witchcraft.
One of the Salem Justices^ was pleased to tell Mr. Alden,'
(when upon his examination) that truly he had been acquainted with him these many years; and had always accoimtedhimagoodman; but indeed now he should be obliged
to change his opinion. This, there are more than one or two
did hear, and are ready to swear to, if not in so many words,
yet as to its natiual and plain meaning. He saw reason to
change his opinion of Mr. Alden, because that at the time he
touched the poor child, the poor child came out of her fitt.

' Bartholomew Gedney.

* Captain John Alden, of Boston, son of the John Alden of the Maifflower
and of Longfellow's poem. For Alden's own account of this episode see pp. 353855, below.

1692] THOMAS BRATTLE, LETTER 171

I suppose his Honour never made the experiment, whether
there was not as much virtue in his own hand, as there was in
Mr. Alden's, to cure by a touch. I know a man that will
venture two to one with any Salemite whatever, that let the
matter be duly managed, and the afflicted person shall come
out of her fitt upon the touch of the most religions hand in
Salem. It is worthily noted by some, that at some times the
afflicted will not presently come out of their fitts upon the
touch of the suspected; and then, forsooth, they are ordered
by the Justices to grasp hard, harder yet, etc. insomuch that
at length the afflicted come out of their fitts; and the reason .
is very good, because that a touch of any hand, and processe J
of time, will work the cure; infallibly they will do it, as experience teaches.

I cannot but condemn this method of the Justices, of
making this touch of the hand a rule to discover witchcraft;
because I am fully persuaded that it is sorcery, and a superstitious method, and that which we have no rule for, either
from reason or religion. The Salem Justices, at least some
of them, do assert, that the cure of the afflicted persons is a
natural effect of this touch; and they are so well instructed
in the Cartesian philosophy, and in the doctrine of effluvia^
that they undertake to give a demonstration how this touch
does cure the afflicted persons; and the account they give of
it is this; that by this touch, the venemous and malignant
particles, that were ejected from the eye, do, by this means,
return to the body whence they came, and so leave the afflicted
persons pure and whole. I must confesse to you, that I am
no small admirer of the Cartesian philosophy; but yet I have
not so learned it. Certainly this is a strain that it will by no
means allow of.

I would fain know of these Salem Gentlemen, but as yet
could never know, how it comes about, that if these apprehended persons are witches, and, by a look of the eye, do cast
the afflicted into their fitts by poisoning them, how it comes
about, I say, that, by a look of their eye, they do not cast others
into fitts, and poison others by their looks; and in particular,
tender, fearfull women, who often are beheld by them, and as
likely as any in the whole world to receive an ill impression
from them. This Salem philosophy, some men may call the

172 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES 11692

. new philosophy; but I think it rather deserves the name of

/- jl Salem superstition and sorcery, and it is not fitt to be named

'\ ' in a land of such light as New-EIngland is. I think the matter

might be better solved another way; but I shall not make

any attempt that way, further than to say, that these afflicted

children, (as they are called,) do hold correspondence with the

^deviU, even in the esteem and account of the S. G.;^ for when

the black man, i. e. (say these gentlemen,) the Devill, does

appear to them, they ask him many questions, and accordingly

give information to the inquirer; and if this is not holding

correq>ondence with the deviU, and something worse, I know

not what is.

But furthermore, I would fain know of these Salem Justices what need there is of further proof and evidence to convict and condemn these apprehended persons, than this look
and touch, if so be they are so certain that this falling down
and arising up, when there is a look and a touch, are natural
effects of the said look and touch, and so a perfect demonstration and proof of witchcraft in those persons. What can the
Jury or Judges desire more, to convict any man of witchcraft,
than a plain demonstration, that the said man is a witch?
Now if this look and touch, circumstanced as before, be a
plain demonstration, (as their Philosophy teaches,) what need
they seek for further evidences, when, alter all, it can be but
a demonstration?

But let this pass with the S. G. for never so plain and
natural a demonstration ; yet certain is it, that the reasonable
part of the world, when acquainted herewith, will laugh at
the demonstration, and conclude that the said S. G. are actually possessed, at least, with ignorance and folly.

I most admire* that Mr. N. N.* the Reverend Teacher at
Salem, who was educated at the School of Knowledge, and is
certainly a learned, a charitable, and a good man, thou^ all
the devils in Hell, and all the possessed girls in Salem, should
say to the contrary; at him, (I say,) I do most admire; that
he should cry up the above mentioned philosophy after the
manner that he does. I can assure you, that I can bring you
more than two, or twice two, (very credible persons) that will

^ /. e., Salem gentlemen — and so hereafter.

* Marvel, am surprised. ' Nicholas Noyes.

ie&2] THOMAS BRATTLE, LETTER 173

affirm, that they have heard him vindicate the above mentioned demonstration sa very reasonable.

Secondly, with respect to the confessours, (as they are improperly cflJIed;) or such as confesse themselves to be witches,
(the second thing you inquire into in your letter), there are
now about fifty of them in Prison; many of which I have
again and again seen and heard; and I cannot but tell you,
that my faith is strong concerning them, that they are deluded, imposed upon, and under the influence of some evill
spirit; and therefore unfitt to be evidences either against
themselves, or any one else. I now speak of one sort of them,
and of others afterward.

These confessours, (as th^ are called,) do very often contradict themselves, as inconsistently as is usual for any crazed,
distempered person to do. This the S. G. do see and take
notice of; and even the Judges themselves have, at some
times, taken these confessours in flat lyes, or contradictions,
even in the Courts; By reason of which, one would have
thought, that the Judges would have frowned upon the said
confessours, discarded them, and not minded one tittle of any
thing that they said; but instead thereof, (as sure as we are
men,) the Judges vindicate these confessours, and salve their
contradictions, by proclaiming, that the Devill takes away
their memory, and imposes upon their brain. If this reflects
any where, I am very sorry for it: I can but assure you, that,
upon the word of an honest man, it is truth, and lliat I can
bring you many credible persons to witnesse it, who have
been eye and ear wittnesses to these things.

These confessours then, at least some of them, even in the
Judges' own account, are under the influence of the Devill;
and the brain of these Confessours is imposed upon by the
DeviU, even in the Judges' account. But now, if, in the
Judges' account, these confessours are under the influence of
the DeviU, and their brains are affected and imposed upon by
the Devill, so that they are not their own men, why then should
these Judges, or any other men, make such account of, and
set so much by, the words of these Confessours, as they do?
In short, I argue thus:

If the Devill does actually take away the memory of them
at some times, certainly the Devill, at other times, may very

174 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES (1092

reasonably be thought to affect their f ancyes, and to represent
false ideas to their imagination. But now, if it be thus granted,
that the DeviU is able to represent false ideas (to speak vulgarly) to the imaginations of the confessours, what man of
sense will r^ard the confessions, or any of the words, of these
confessours?

The great cry of many of our neighbours now is. What,
will you not believe the confessours? Will you not believe
men and women who confesse that they have signed to the
DeviU's book? that they were baptized by the Devill; and
that they were at the mocknsacrament once and again? What!
will you not beUeve that this is witchcraft, and that such and
such men are witches, altho' the confessours do own and assert it?

Thus, I say, many of our good neighbours do argue; but
methinks they might soon be convinc^ that there is nothing
at all in all these their arguings, if they would but duly consider of the premises.

In the mean time, I think we must rest satisfyed in it, and

be thankfull to God for it, that all men are not thus bereft of

their senses; but that we have here and there considerate and

^ thinking men, who will not thus be imposed upon, and abused,

\ by the subtle endeavours of the crafty one.

In the next place, I proceed to the form of their indite^
ments, and the Trials thereupon.

The Inditement runs for sorcery and witchcraft, acted ui)on
the body of such an one, (say M. Warren), at such a particu^
lar time, (say April 14, '92,) and at divers other times before
and after, whereby the said M. W. is wasted and consumed,
pined, etc.

Now for the proof of the said sorcery and witchcraft, the
prisoner at the bar pleading not guilty.

1. The afflicted persons are brought into Court; and after
much patience and pains taken with them, do take their oaths,
that the prisoner at the bar did afflict them : And here I think
it very observable, that often, when the afflicted do mean and
intend only the appearance and shape of such an one, (say G.
Proctour) yet they positively swear that G. Proctour did afflict
them; and they have been allowed so to do; as tho' there was
no real difference between G. Proctour and the shape of G.

leoq TBDBC^ BaATTLS. LJETK& m<

Proctour. Tlnsy mrthmfcs ^osx z^mMy pr^v^ ^ :»tui>»fc>fe»ft
block to the Jnrjr^ lead them mto a \^t:y fuB^sgstiswtaJt ^cv*M>.
and occasioQ innocent bloody Tea the infiboceutei^ bfood i;^^^
inable, to be in great dang^. Wboiu it b^lot]^ uutv^ W b^
eyes onto the Umd^ and to lefoov^ sueh i^vuut^lii^ blwk:*^ \
Imow fun wdl; and yet you^ and every one ebe> do kuow ^
weD as I who do not.^

2. The confessours do declare what they know of the «Md
prisoner; and some of the confeewurs are allowed to give
their oadis; a thing which I belie\'^ was never heard of in thw
world; that such as confesse themselves to be witohen, to hav^
renoimced God and Christ, and all that is saoredi should yet
be allowed and ordered to swear by the nan\a of tl^e great (
God! This indeed seemeth to me to be a gro^a taking of
God's name in vain. I know the S. G. do nay, that thai^a M
hopes that the said Confessours have reponted; 1 Nl^all only
say, that if they have repented, it is well for thenj»*elvaH; hut
if they have not, it is very ill for you know who. Hut than,

3. Whoever can be an evidence against the priitionar at tha
bar is ordered to come into Court; and hara it iksaraa ayar
fails but that evidences, of one nature arid anothar, ara brought
in, tho', I think; all of them altogether allatia to tha iimttar i/f
inditement; for they none of them do ramptM wiUilMeraft mnm *
the bodyes of the afflicted, which 'm the aloiia nmiU^r of ^\m|f^
in the inditement.

4. They are searched by a Jury; ami em U> mnm ot ihumi^
the Jury brou^t in, that [on] Mch or mink a |>lao($ ikmm wim a
preternatural excrescence. And I wonder wiMii immm tJh^H
is, whether man or woman, of whom It caiiiM \m mid iM ttM,
in scHoe part of ibeir body or other, iikt^m in a i^rt^'miwm
excresoeooe. The term is a w^ ^/mmui mui u^'mw*^ Ww.

Some of the B. G. are rety torwiud Uj ^^^hmw^ mA ^c^Midemn the poor pnadoter at tibe i^r, Sjt^m^xim he dt^cU m Umit :
but flodi betzsy great ignorwee io th^ iutture ^ ymim^, w4
as great faeedfeiBBDesse as to oomujMx fMUttu^et) of a um^'n iitfe.
Some there are who x^n^er dUed teanti; vthtm there ai^ iknf^
ordaDMxSj died tears xapwx h^ utxjwiMit, aod y^ ior their
lives eaanot abed a tear wheu the deepest aorrow i^ upoii tbair
hearts; md who is iiu&^ that koowt^ not the^; thki^ Wto

'He iinafw> of ^m^tm, Ifatr jtMljUtf'

176 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1«2

knows not that an ecstasye of Joy will sometimes fetch teaies,
when as the quite contraiy passion will shutt them doee up?
Why then should any be so silly and foolish as to take an
argument from this i^pearance? But this is by the by. In
short, the prisoner at the bar is indited for sorcery and witchcraft acted upon the bodyes of the afiSicted. Now, for the
proof of this, I reckon that the only pertinent evidences
brou^t in are the evidences of the said afflicted.

It is true, that over and above the evidences of the afflicted
persons, there are many evidences brought in, against the prisoner at the bar; either that he was at a witch meeting, or that
he performed things which could not be done by an ordinary
natural power; or that she sold butter to a saylor, which proving bad at sea, and the seamen exclaiming against her, she
appeared, and soon after there was a storm, or the like. But
what if there were ten thousand evidences of this nature; how
do they prove the matter of inditement! And if they do not
reach the matter of inditement, then I think it is dear, that
the prisoner at the bar is brought in guilty, and condemned,
merely from the evidences of the afflicted persons.

The S. G. will by no means allow, that any are brought in
guilty, and condemned, by virtue of spectre Evidence, (as it
is called,) i. e. the evidence of these afflicted persons, who are
said to have spectral eyes; but whether it is not purely by
virtue of these spectre evidences, that these persons are f oimd
guilty, (considering what before has been said,) I leave you,
and any man of sense, to judge and determine. When any
man is indited for murthering tiie person of A. B. and all the
direct evidence be, that the said man pistolled the shadow of
the said A. B. tho' there be never so many evidences that the
said person murthered C. D., E. F. and ten more persons, yet
all this will not amount to a legal proof, that he murthered
A. B. ; and upon that inditement, the person cannot be l^ally
brou^t in guilty of the said inditement; it must be upon this
supposition, that the evidence of a man's pistolling the shadow
of A. B. is a legal evidence to prove that the said man did
miuiher the person of A. B. Now no man will be so much
out of his witts as to make this a legal evidence; and yet this
seems to be oiu* case; and how to apply it is very easy and
obvious.

1602] THOMAS BRATTLE, LETTER 177

As to the late executions;^ I shall only tell you^ that in
the opinion of many unprejudiced, considerate and considerable spectatours; some of the condenmed went out of the
world not only with as great protestations, but also with as
good shews of innocency, as men could do.

They protested their innocency as in the presence of the
great God, whom forthwith they were to appear before : they
wished, and declared their wi^, that their blood might be
the last innocent blood shed upon that accoimt. With great
affection' they intreated Mr. C, M.* to pray with them: they
prayed that God would discover what witchcrafts were among
us; they forgave their accusers; they spake without reflection on Jury and Judges, for bringing them in guilty, and condenming them : they prayed earnestly for pardon for all other
sins, and for an interest in the pretious blood of our dear
Bedeemer; and seemed to be very sincere, upright, and sensible of their circumstances on all accounts; especially Proctor
and Willard, whose whole management of themselves, from
the Goal to the Gallows, and whilst at the Gallows, was very
affecting and melting to the hearts of some considerable Spectatours, whom I could mention to you : — ^but they are executed,
and so I leave them.

Many things I cannot but admire and wonder at, an accoimt of which I shall here send you.

And 1. I do admire that some particular persons, and
particularly Mrs. Thatcher of Boston,* should be much com- /
plained of by the afflicted persons, and yet that the Justices (
should never issue out their warrants to apprehend them,

i The names presently mentioned would seem to show that he has especially
in mind the executions of August 19, and his words suggest that he was present
on this occasion. Those then executed, besides John Proctor and John Willard,
were the Rev. (jeorge Burroughs, George Jacobs, and Martha Carrier. For
two other accounts of their death, both perhaps by eye-witnesses, see below,
pp. 360-364. But there had been executions also on June 10, July 19, and
September 22.

s Emotion, earnestness.

' Cotton Mather.

« Mrs. Margaret Thacher (1625-1694), widow of the Rev. Thomas Thacher
(d. 1678), first minister of the Old South Church. She was the only child of the
wealthy Boston merchant Henry Webb, and had been left by a first marriage the
widow of Jacob Sheafe, then the richest man in Boston.

178 NARRATIVES OP THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1002

when sa upon the same account they issue out their warrants
for the apprehending and imprisoning many others.

This occasions much discourse and many hot words, and
is a very great scandal and stumbling block to many good
people; certainly distributive Justice should have its course,
without respect to persons; and altho' the said Mrs. Thatcher
be mother in law to Mr. Corwin,^ who is one of the Justices
and Judges, yet if Justice and conscience do oblige them to
apprehend others on the account of the afflicted their complaints, I cannot see how, without injustice and violence to
conscience, Mrs. Thatcher can escape, when it is well known
how much she is, and has been, complained of.

2. I cannot but admire that Mr. H. U.' (whom we all
think innocent,) should yet be apprehended on this account,
and ordered to prison, by a mittimus imder Mr. LyndV his
hand, and yet that he should be sufifered, for above a fortni^t,
to be in a private house; and after that, to quitt the house,
the town, and the Province, and yet that authority should
not take effectual notice of it. Methinks that same Justice,
that actually imprisoned others, and refused bail for them on
any terms, should not be satisfyed without actually imprisoning Mr. U. and refusing bail for him, when his case is known
to be the very same with the case of those others.

If he may be suffered to go away, why may not others?
If others may not be suffered to go, how in Justice can he be
allowed herein?

3. If our Justices do think that Mrs. C.^ Mr. E.^ and his
wife, Mr. A.* and others, were capital offenders, and justly
imprisoned on a capital account, I do admire that the said
Justices should hear of their escape from prison, and where
they are gone and entertained, and yet not send forthwith
to the said places,^ for the surrendering of them, that Justice
might be done them. In other Capitidls^ this has been prac-

^ Jonathan Corwin, of Salem.

* Hezekiah Usher (1639-1697), a prominent Boston merchant
'Doubtless Joseph Lynde (1637-1727), of Charlestown — since June a

member of the Council under the new Mather charter.

« Mrs. Nathaniel Gary, of Charlestown. See pp. 349-352.

* Philip En^ish, of Salem. See p. 371 and note 1.

* John Alden, of Boston. See p. 170, note 2.

' /. e., to New York. * /. e,, capital cases.

1602] THOMAS BRATTLE, LETTER 179

tised; why then is it not practised in this case, if really judged
to be so heinous as is made for?

4. I cannot but admire, that any snould go with their distempered friends and relations to the afflicted children, to
know what their distempered friends ayl; whether they are
not bewitched; who it is that afflicts them, and the like. It
is true, I know no reason why these afflicted may not be consulted as well as any other, if so be that it was only their
natural and ordinary knowledge that was had recourse to: .
but it is not on this notion that these afflicted children are vj
sought unto; but as they have a supematmtd knowledge; a
knowledge which they obtain by their holding correspondence
with spectres or evill spirits, as they themselves grant. This
consulting of these afflicted children, as abovesaid, seems to
me to be a very grosse evill, a real abomination, not fitt to be
known in N. E.^ and yet is a thing practised, not only by
Tom and John — ^I mean the ruder and more ignorant sort —
but by many who professe high, and passe among us for some
of the better sort. This is that wluch aggravates the evil,
and makes it heinous and tremendous; and yet this is not the
worst of it, for, as sure as I now write to you, even some of our /
civil leaders, and spiritual teachers, who, (I think,) should '^
punish and preach down such sorcery and wickedness, do
yet allow of, encourage, yea, and practise this very abomination.

I know there are several worthy Gentlemen in Salem, who
account this practise as an abomination, have trembled to
see the methods of this nature which others have used, and
have declared themselves to think the practise to be very evill
and corrupt; but all avails little with the abettours of the
said practice.

A person from Boston, of no small note, carried up his child
to Salem, (near 20 miles,) on purpose that he might consult
the afflicted about his child; which accordingly he did; and
the afflicted told him, that his child was afflicted by Mrs.
Gary and Mrs. Obinson.* The man returned to Boston, and
went forthwith to the Justices for a warrant to seise the said

* New En^and.

' Mrs. Obinson was probably the wife of William Obinaon, or Obbinson, a
Boston tanner.

180 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1002

Obinson, (the said Gary being out of the way) ; but the Boston
Justices saw reason to deny a warrant. The Rev. Mr. I. M.^
of Boston, took occasion severely to reprove the said man;
, asking him whether there was not a God in Boston, that he
^ should go to the Devill in Salem for advice; warning him veiy
seriously against such naughty practices; which, I hope,
proved to the conviction and good of the said person; if not,
his blood will be upon his own head.

This consulting of these afflicted children, about their sick,
was the unhappy begining of the tmhappy troubles at poor
Andover : Horse and man were sent up to Salem Village, from
the said Andover, for some of the said afflicted; and more than
one or two of them were carried down to see Ballard's wife,'
and to tell who it was that did afflict her. I understand that
the said B. took advice before he took this method; but what
pity was it, that he should meet with, and hearken to such
bad Gounsellours? Poor Andover does now rue the day that
ever the said afflicted went among them; they lament their
foUy, and are an object of gr^ pity 'aad Tommiaemtion.
Gi^t. B.' and Mr. St.^ are complained of by the afflicted,
have left the town, and do abscond. Deacon Fiy's wife,
Gwt'n Osgood's wife, and some others, remarkably pious and
go^ pe^e in reput^, are apprehended and impi4ned; and
that that is more admirable, the forementioned women are
become a kind of confessours, being first brought thereto by
the lu^gs and arguings of their good husbands, who, having
taken up that corrupt and highly pernicious opinion, that whoever were accused by the afflicted, were guilty, did break
charity with their dear wives, upon their being accused, and
urge them to confesse their guilt; which so far prevailed with
them as to make them say, they were afraid of their being in
the snare of the Devill ; and which, through the rude and bar-

> Increase Mather.

' Mrs. Joseph Ballard. See below, pp. 371-372; and, for more as to this
Andover episode, pp. 241-244, 418-420. The records of the Andover cases are
printed by Woodward in his Records cf Salem Witchcraft (Roxbury, 1864), and
there are chapters on the episode in Abiel Abbot's Hielory cf Andxner (Andover,
1829) and Sarah Loring Bailey's Historical Sketches of Andover (Boston, 1880).

< Dudley Bradstreet See p. 372.

* Stevens? The conjecture is Mrs. Bailey's {Historical Sketches of Andomr,
p. 228).

1602] THOMAS BRATTLE, LETTER * 181

barous methods* that were afterwards used at Salem, issued
in somewhat plainer d^rees of confession, and was attended
with imprisonment. The good Deacon and Captain are now /
sensible of the erroiu* they were in; do grieve and mourn bit- ^
terly, that th^ should break their charity with their wives,
and urge them to confesse themselves witches. They now
see and acknowledge their rashnesse and uncharitablenesse,
and are very fitt objects for the pity and prayers of every
good Christian. Now I am writing concerning Andover, I
cannot omit the opportunity of sencUng you this information ;
that Whereas there is a report spread abroad the country, how
that th^ were much addicted to Sorcery in the said town,
and that there were f ourty men in it that could raise the Devill
as well as any astrologer, and the like; after the best search
that I can make into it, it proves a mere slander, and a very
unrighteous imputation.

Tlie Rev'd Elders of the said place were much surprized
upon their hearing of the said Report, and faithfully made inquiry about it; but the whole of naughtiness, that they could
discover and find out, was only this, that two or three girls
had foolishly made use of the sieve and scissors,^ as children
have done in other towns. This method of the girls I do not
Justifye in any measure; but yet I think it very hard and
unreasonable, that a town should lye under the blemish and

* You may possibly think that my terms are too severe; but should I
teD you what a kind of Blade was employed in bringing these women to their
confession; what methods from damnation were taken; with what violence
urged; how unseasonably they were kept up; what buzsings and chuckings of
the hand were used, and the like, I am sure that you would call them, (as I
do), rude and barbarous methods.^ [Marginal note in the original.]

^ What Brattle may mean by "methods from damnation" is a puxzle to the
editor. Fahxps "danination" is only a euphemism for "hell/' Possibly he
thinks of that clause in the Massachusetts laws (Body of Libertist cf 1641, art. 46;
Lawe$ and IMteriyes, 1660, p. 67; 1672, p. 129) which permits a prisoner "in some
capital case, iHien he is first fully convicted by dear and sufficient evidence to
be guflty," to be tortured for the discovery of his accomplices, yet not with such
tortures as are barbarous and inhuman. What he means by "busxings and chucks
ings of the hand," L e., whiqxrings and wheedlings, will grow dear if one turn
to pp. 374-376, and read what these Andover women themsdves tell of Uie methods
used with them.

* A mode of divinadoo much in vogue in New England as in (Jid. Called
also "sieve and shears" or "riddle and shears^: the learned name is <xMetiioMafK(7.

y

182 • NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [lfl02

scandal of sorceryes and conjuration, merely for the inconsiderate practices of two or three girls in the said town.

5. I cannot but admire that the Justices, whom I think to

t be well-meaning men, should so far give ear to the Devill, as

^ merely upon Ids authority to issue out their warrants, and

i^prehend people. Liberty was evermore accounted the great

priviledge of an Englishman; but certainly, if the Devill will

be heard against us, and his testimony taken, to the siezing

and i^prehending of us, our liberty vanishes, and we are fools

if we boast of our liberty. Now, that the Justices have thus

X far given ear to the Devill, I think may be mathematically

\^ demonstrated to any man of common sense: And for tli^

demonstration and proof hereof, I desire, only, that these two

things may be duly considered, viz.

1. That severed persons have been apprehended purdy
upon the complaints of these afiSicted, to whom the afflicted
were perfect strangers, andt had not the least knowledge oi
imaginable, before they were apprehended.

2. That the afflicted do own and assert, and the Justices
do grant, that the Devill does inform and tdl the afflicted the
names of those persons that are thus unknown imto iheoL
Now these two things being duly considered, I think it will
i^pear evident to any one, that the DeviU's infonnation is
the fundamental testimony that is gone upon in the appie*
bending of the aforesaid people.

If I believe such or such an assertion as comes immediately
from the Minister of God in the pulpitt, because it is the word
of the everliving God, I build my faith on God's testimony:
and if I practise upon it, this my practice is properly built on
the word of God : even so in the case before us,

If I beUeve the afflicted persons as informed by the Devill,
and act thereupon, this my act may properly be said to be
grounded upon the testimony or ii^ormation of the DevilL
And now, if things are thus, I think it ought to be for a lamentation to you and me, and all such as would be accounted
good Christians.

If any should see the force of this alignment, and upon it
say, (as I heard a wise and good Judge once propose,) that
they know not but that God almighty, or a good spirit, does
give this information to these afflicted persons; I make answer

16021 THOMAS BRATTLE, LETTER 183

thereto, and say, that it is most certain that it is neither
almighty God, nor yet any good Spirit, that gives this information ; and my Reason is good, because God is a God of truth ;
and the good Spirits will not lye; whereas these informations /
have several times proved false, when the accused were brought
before the afflicted.

6. I cannot but admire that these afflicted persons should
be so much countenanced and encouraged in their accusations
as they are: I often think of the Groton woman, that was
afflicted, an account of which we have in print, and is a most
certain truth, not to be doubted of.^ I shall only say, that
there was as much ground, in the hour of it, to countenance
the said Groton woman, and to apprehend and imprison, on
her accusations, as there is now to countenance these afflicted
persons, and to apprehend and imprison on their accusations.
But furthermore, it is worthy of our deepest consideration,
that in the conclusion, (after multitudes have been imprisoned,
and many have been put to death,) these afflicted persons a
should own that all was a mere fancy and delusion of the "^
Devill's, as the Groton woman did own and acknowledge with
respect to herself; if, I say, in after times, this be acknowledged
by them, how can the Justices, Judges, or any else concerned
in these matters, look back upon these things without the <;
greatest of sorrow and grief imaginable? I confesse to you, it
makes me tremble when I seriously consider of this thmg. I
have heard that the chief judge^ has expressed himself very
hardly of the accused woman at Groton, as tho' he believed
her to be a witch to this day; but by such as knew the said
woman, this is judged a very uncharitable opinion of the

^ "The Groton woman" was Elizabeth Knapp, and the "account in print"
probably that of Increase Mather reprinted above, pp. 21-23, though possibly
WiUard's sermon (see p. 21, note 4) is meant

* William Stoughton, the new lieutenant-governor. He had been educated
for the ministry in the Harvard class of 1650, and went to England, where he
preached for some ten years, receiving meanwhile at Oxford his mastership in
arts and the honor of a fellowship; but, ejected at the Restoration, he returned
to New Eln^and, and there, though counted an able preacher, declined a settlement and drifted into public life. He seems to have set store by his learning
in thedogy, and to the end to have maintained the Devil's impotence to personate by a spectre any but a guilty witch. As to his career see the careful study
by Sibley, in hb Harvard Oraduates (I. 194-208).

184 NARRATIVES OP THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1682

said Judge, and I do not understand that any are proselyted
thereto.

Rev'd Sir, these things I cannot but admire and wonder
at. Now, if so be it is the effect of my duUness that I thus
admire, I hope you will pity, not censure me: but if, on the
contrary, these things are just matter of admiration, I know
that you will join with me in expressing your admiration
hereat.

The chief Judge is very zealous in these proceeding?, and
says, he is very clear as to all that hath as yet been acted by
this Court, and, as far as ever I could perceive, is very impatient in hearing any thing that looks another way. I veiy
highly honour and reverence the wisdome and int^rity of the
said Judge, and hope that this matter shall not diminish my
veneration for his honour; however, I cannot but say, my great
fear is, that wisdome and counsell are withheld from his honour as to this matter, which yet I look upon not so much as a
' Judgment to his honour as to this poor land.

But altho' the Chief Judge, and some of the other Judges,
be very zealous in these proceedings, yet this you may take
for a truth, that there are several about the Bay, men for
tmderstandmg, Judgment, and Piety, inf eriour to few, (if any,)
in N. E. that do utterly condemn the said proceedings, and do
freely deliver their Judgment in the case to be this, viz. that
these methods will utterly mine and undoe poor N. E. I
shall nominate some of these to you, viz. The hon'ble Simon
Bradstreet, Esq. (our late Governor); the hon'ble Thomas
_>I)anf orth, Esq. (our late Deputy Governor) ; the Rev'd Mr.
"increase Mather, and the Rev'd Mr. Samud Willard. Major
N. Saltonstall, Esq. who was one of the Judges, has left the
Court, and is very much dissatisfyed with the proceeding? ci
it. Excepting Mr. Hale, Mr. Noyes, and Mr. Parris, the
Rev'd Elders, almost throughout the whole Country, are very
much dissatisfyed. Several of the late Justices, viz. Thomas
Graves, Esq. N. Byfield, Esq. Francis Foxcroft, Esq. are much
dissatisfyed; also several of the present Justices; and in particular, some of the Boston Justices, were resolved rather to
throw up their commissions than be active in disturbing the
I liberty of their Majesties' subjects, merely on the accusations
i of these afiSicted, possessed children.

16021 THOMAS BRATTLE, LETTER 185

Finally; the principal Gentlemen in Boston, and thereabout, are generally agreed that irregular and dangerous
methods have been taken as to these matters.

Sir, I would not willingly lead you into any errour, and
therefore would desire you to note,

1. That when I call these afficted "the aflSicted children,"
I would not be understood as though I meant, that all that
are afflicted are children: there are several young men and
women that are aflSicted, as well as children: but this term
has most prevailed among us, because of the younger sort that
were first afflicted, and therefore I make use of it.

2. That when I speak of the Salem Gentlemen, I would
not be understood as tho' I meant every Individual Gentleman in Salem; nor yet as tho' I meant, that there were no
men but in Salem that run upon these notions : some term they
must have, and this seems not improper, because in Salem this
sort of Gentlemen does most abound.

3. That other Justices in the C!ountry, besides the Salem
Justices, have issued out their warrants, and imprisoned, on
the accusations of the aflSicted as aforesaid; and therefore,
when I speak of the Salem Justices, I do not mean them
exclusively.

4. That as to the above mentioned Judges, that are commissionated for this Court at Salem, five of them do belong
to Suffolk county; four of which five do belong to Boston;* and
therefore I see no reason why Boston should talk of Salem,
as tho' their own Judges had had no hand in these proceedings
at Salem.

Nineteen persons have now been executed, and one pressed
to death for a mute: seven more are condemned; two of
which are reprieved, because they pretend their being with
child; one, viz. Mrs. Bradbury of Salisbiuy, from the intercession of some friends; and two or three more, because they
are confessours.'

The Court is adjoiuned to the first Tuesday in November,
then to be kept at Salem; between this and then will be [the]

^ See p. 355. Richards, Sargent, Sewall, Winthrop, were of Boston; Stoughtoa of Dorchester, dose by. Only Gedney was <^ Salem, till Corwin was called
in to replace Saltonstall (who was of Haverhill).

•As to all these see below, pp. 360-374

186 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES 11682

great assembly;^ and this matter will be a peculiar matter of
their agitation. I think it is matter of earnest supplicatioQ
and prayer to almighty God, that he would afiford his gracious
presence to the said assembly, and direct them aright in this
weighty matter. Our hopes are here; and if, at this Juncture,
God does not graciously appear for us, I think we may cooelude that N. E. is undone and undone.

. I am very sensible, that it is irksome and disagreeable to
go back, when a man's doing so is an imphcation that he has
been walking in a wrong path : however, nothing is more honourable than, upon due conviction, to retract and undo, (so
far as may be,) what has been amiss and irregular.

I would hope that, in the conclusion, both the Judges and
Justices will see and acknowledge that such were their best
friends and advisers as disswaded from the methods which they
have taken, tho' hitherto they have been angry with them,
and apt to speak very hardly of them.

I cannot but higUy applaud, and think it our duty to be
very thankfull, for the endeavours of several Elders,* whose
lips, (I think,) should preserve knowledge, and whose counsell
should, I thmk, have been more r^arded, in a case of this
"^ nature, than as yet it has been : in particular, I cannot but
think very honourably of the endeavoiuB of a Rev'd person in
Boston,' whose good afifection to his countrey in general,

^ The General Court. It convened on October 12. Its attitude as to the
Salem triab is thus tersely intimated in Judge Sewall's diary: "Oct. 26, 1682.
A Bill is sent in about calling a Fast and Convocation of Ministers, that [we] may
be led in the right way as to the Witchcrafts. The season and manner of doing
it, is such, that the Court of Qyer and Terminer count themselves thereby dismissed. 29 Nos and 33 yeas to the Bill." The bill itself has been printed (from
the Mass. Archives, XL 70) by G. H. Moore, in the Proceedings of the American
Antiquarian Society (n. s., II. 172); and that those of Brattle's mind had not
relied alone on prayer to influence the assembly may be seen by the petition
printed in the N, E, HUt, and Gen, Register, XXVII. 55, and in the Proceedings
of the American Antiquarian Society, n. s., V. 246 (see also Proceedings, n. s., n.
171).

• The ministers, now practically the only "elders."

' It has been generally assumed, and with reason, that this "Rev'd pentm**
was the Rev. Samuel Willard. Three of the judges (Sargent, Sewall, and Winthrop) were members of his church (the dHd South), and, unless one suq[)ect
Brattle of intent to mislead, "spiritual relation" must here mean a pastor's.
The phrase "good affection to the country" suggests, too, one who, like WiUard,

10«2I THOMAS BRATTLE, LETTER 187

and fipiritual relation to three of the Judges in particular; has
made him very sohcitous and industrious in this matter; and
I am fully persuaded, that had his notions and proposals been
hearkened to, and followed, when these troubles were in their
birth, in an ordinary way, they would never have grown unto
tiiat heigth which now they have. He has as yet mett with
little but unkindness, abuse, and reproach from many men;
but I trust that, in after times, his wisdome and service will
find a more universal acknowledgment; and if not, his reward
is with the Lord.

Two or three things I should have hinted to you before,
but they slipped my thoughts in their proper place.

Many of these sd99icted persons, who have scores of strange
fitts in a day, yet in the intervals of time are hale and hearty,
robust and lusty, as tho' nothing had afflicted them. I Remember that when the chief Judge gave the first Jury their
charge, he told them, that they were not to mind whether the
bodies of the said afflicted were really pined and consiuned, as
was expressed in the inditement; but whether the said afflicted
did not suffer from the accused such afflictions as naturally

shared Brattle's political views. We have seen ahready (p. 23) what caution in
1671 he used in the case of Elizabeth Knapp; and, if the "notions and proposals"
meant by Brattle are now lost, we have from his pen what puts his position in
1602 beyond all question — a little dialogue, published anonymously while the
troubles were at their height, which with fairness and courtesy, but with striking
deamess and boldness, argues against the iniquity of the procedure. Its title
runs: Some Miscdlany Ohsertatums on wit Present Debates respecting Witchcrafts,
in a Dialogue between S, and B, By P, E, and J, A. Phiiadelpkia, Printed by
WiUiam Bradford, for Hezekiah Usher. 1692. "S." and "B." undoubtedly
mean Salem and Boston. Philadelphia and Bradford probably had as little to
do with the book (the type is not Bradford's) as did Heiekiah Usher, P. £. (Philip
En^^ish), or J. A. (John Alden), three notable fugitives from Salem justice.
All alike were moely remote enough to bear in safety the imputation of such a
booL John Alden and Hezekiah Usher were members of Willard's church; and
Philip English and his wife he visited while in custody at Boston, and probably
was a party to their escape. At least the Rev. William Bentley, of Salem, recording in his diary. May 21, 1793, what their great-granddaughter Susanna
Hathome had UM him, relates that Willard and Moodey "visited them and invited them to the public worship on the day before they were to return to Salem
for trial. Their text was that they that are persecuted in one city, let them flee
to another. After Meeting the Ministers visited them at the Gaol, and asked
them whether they took notice of the discourse, and told them their danger and
urged them to escape since so many had suffered. Mr. English replied, 'God

188 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES 11682

tended to their being piaed and consumed, wasted, etc. Has,
(said he,) is a pining and consuming in tiie sense of the law.
I add not.

Furthermore: These afficted persons do say, and often
have declared it, that they can see Spectres when their eyes
are shutt, as well as when they are open. This one thing I
evermore accounted as veiy observable, and that which mi^t
serve as a good key to unlock the nature of these mysterious troubles, if duly improved by us. Can they see Spectres
when their eyes are shutt? I am sure they lye, at least spesk
falsely, if they say so; for the thing, in nature, is an utter impossibiUty. It is true, they may strongly fancye, or have
things represented to their imagination, when their eyes are
shutt; and I think this is all which ought to be allowed to
these blind, nonsensical girls; and if our officers and Ck>urt8
have apprehended, imprisoned, condenmed, and executed our
guiltlesse neighbours, certainly our errour is great, and we shall
rue it in the conclusion. There are two or three other things
that I have observed in and by these afflicted persons, whidi
make me strongly suspect that the Devill imposes upon their
brains, and deludes their fancye and imagination; and that

win not permit them to touch me.' Mrs. Rngli.sh said : 'Do you not think the
sufferers innocent?' He (Moody) said 'Yes.' She then added, 'Why may we
not suffer also?' The Ministers then told him if he would not carfy his wife
away they would." (Quoted by R. D. Paine, in his Ships and SaHon qf Old
Salem, from Bentl^s privately printed diary, which seems to give the tale in a
more primitive form than his letter to Alden, in the Mass. Hist Soc., CoUectums,
X.) "It ought never to be forgotten," said Willard's odleague, Ebeneier Pernbaton, preaching in 1707 his funeral sermon, "with what Phidenoe, Courage and
Zeal he appeared for the (rood <^ this People in that Dark and Mysterious Season
when we were assaulted from the Invisible Wc»id. And how singulariy Instrumental he was in discovering the Cheats and Delusions of Satan, whidi did
threaten to stain our Land with Blood and to deluge it with all manner of Woes."
IVue, Judge Sewall, mentioning in 1696 (Diary, I. 433) Willard's serm<m at the
day of public prayer, says that he spake smartly "at Ust" about the Salem
witchcraft; but "at last" here means "at the end," "as the peroratioD of his
sermon." It is clearly Willard whom dlotton Mather has especially in mind
when in his life of Phips and again in his Majnalia (bk. II., p. 62) he sets
forth the views of those "who from the beginning were very much dissatisfied
with these proceedings," having "ahready known of one at the Town of Groton"
who had falsely accused a neighb<^. The strange suggestion of W. F. Pbole
>^ that Brattle here means (Ik>tton Mather himself, is adequately answered by
Upham, in his Salem Wiichcrafi and Cotton Mather.

1602] THOMAS BRATTLE, LETTER 189

the Devill's book (which they say has been offered them) is a
mere fancye of theirs, and no reality: That the witches'
meeting^ tibe Devill's Baptism, and mock sacraments, which J
they oft speak of, are nothing else but the effect of their fancye,
depraved and deluded by the Devill, and not a Reality to be
regarded or minded by any wise man. And whereas the Confessours have owned and asserted the said meetings, the said
Baptism, and mock Sacrament, (which the S. G. and some
others, make much account of) I am very apt to think, that,
did you know the circumstances of the said Confessours, you
would not be swayed thereby, any otherwise than to be confirmed, that all is perfect Devilism, and an Hellish design to
mine and destroy this poor land: For whereas there are of
the said Confessoims 55 in number, some of them are known
to be distracted, crazed women, something of which you may
see by a petition lately offered to the chief Judge, a copy
whereof I may now send you;* others of them denyed their
guilt, and maintained their innocency for above eighteen hours,
after most violent, distracting, and draggooning^ methods had
been used with them, to make them confesse. Such methods
they were, that more than one of the said confessours did since
tell many, with teares in their eyes, that they thought their
very lives would have gone out of their bodyes; and wished
that they might have been cast into the lowest dungeon,
rather than be tortiu^ed with such repeated buzzings and chuckings and unreasonable urgings as they were treated withal.

They soon recanted their confessions, acknowledging, with
sorrow and grief, that it was an hour of great temptation with
them; and I am very apt to think, that as for five or six of the
said confessours, if they are not very good Christian women,
it will be no easy matter to find so many good Christian
women in N. E. But, finally, as to about thirty of these fiftyfive Confessours, they are possessed (I reckon) with the Devill,
and afficted as the children are, and therefore not fitt to be
regarded as to any thing they say of themselves or others.
And whereas the S. G. do say that these confessours made

^ The paper meant is doubtless that printed at pp. 374-375, below.

> The attempt of Louis XIV. to force his Protestant subjects to abandon
their faith by turning loose his dragoons upon them had already furnished the
English language with this new word.

190 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1682

their Confessioiis before they were aflBicted, it is absolutely
contrary to universal experience, as far as ever I could understand. It is true, that some c4 these have made their confession before th^r had their faUing, tumbling fitts, but yet
not absolutely before they had any fitts and marks of possession, for (as the S. G. know full well) when these persons were
about first confessing, their mouths would be sU^ped, and
their throats affected, as tho' there was danger of strangling,
and afterward (it is true) came their ttunbling fitts. So that,
I say, the confessions of these persons were in the beginning of
their fitts, and not truly before their fitts, as the S. G. would
make us believe.

Thus, (Sir,) I have given you as full a narrative of these
matters as readily occurs to my mind, and I think every word^
of it is matter of fact; the several glosses and descants whereupon, by way of Reasoning, I refer to your Judgment, whether
to approve or disapprove.

What will be the issue of these troubles, God only knows;
I am afraid that ages wiU not wear off that reproach and those
(j^ stains which these things will leave behind them upon our
land. I pray God pity us, Htunble us, Forgive us, and appear mercif uUy for us in this our mount of distress : Herewith
I conclude, and subscribe mjrself ,

Reverend Sir, your real friend and humble servant,

T. B.

LETTERS OF GOVERNOR PHIPS TO THE HOME

GOVERNMENT, 1692-1693

INTRODUCTION

Sm William Phips^ who arrived in May as the royal
governor under the new charter^ was no stranger to New England. Bom in 1651 at a hamlet on the Maine coast, just beyond the Kennebec, where his father, a Bristol gunsmith, had
become a settler, he had early tiuned from sheep-herding to
ship-caipentry, and then coming up to Boston, where at
twenty-two he first learned to read and write, he had by thrift
become the master of a vessel and had found a path to fortune
in the rescue of lost treasure from Spanish galleons sunken in
West Indian waters. These ventures had brought him into
partnership with some of the most powerful of English nobles,
and even with royalty itself, and his sturdy honesty (or perhi^ a wise use of his wealth) won him from the King in 1687
the honor of knighthood and in 1688 appointment as high
sheriff of New England. The hostility of Governor Andros
brought the sheriffship to nothing; but the English revolution
overtiuned Andros in 1689, and the emancipated colonies made
Sir William head of the expedition that conquered Nova Scotia, and then sent him with another against Quebec. Meanwhile President Increase Mather was laboring in England, as
the agent of Massachusetts, for the restoration of the ancient
charter; and when Sir William (who during his absence had,
as his son's convert, become a member of his church) tiuned
up there too, and just in time to support him against the other
New England commissioners in accepting from the King what
could be got; though not what could be wished, he was the
natural nominee for the new governorship.

But the new governor was little trained for such an emer103

194 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES

gency as awaited him in New England. What more natunl
in such a crisis, which to the thought of that day seemed to
need the divine more than the statesman, than to turn for
counsel to his pastor and patron, or to his colleague the new
lieutenant-governor/ who had enjoyed precisely that training
in theology which seemed now his own chief lack? Stou^tcm
was made chief justice of a special court created by the governor to try the witch-cases,' and during the latter^s repeated
absences' at the frontier became the acting governor. The
ministers of Boston were '^consulted by his Excellency and the
Honomable Council'' as to the conduct of the trials. Their
''Retiun/' bearing date of Jime 15, was drawn by Ck>tton
Mather,*^ and it was perhaps now that that divine, who had
early (May 31) furnished tiie judges a body of instructions,*
was inspired by ''the Direction of His Excellency the Governor"* to undertake that ''Account of the Sufifeiings brought

> Wniiam Stoughton (see above, p. 183 and note 2) was of ooune also a
nominee of Mather's. He had not been forward in the revolution wliidi overthrew the Andros government, but he had rallied to it, and Cottmi Mather bad
written his father wishing he might "do anything to restore him to the imvurd
the country."

* In the last week of May, at his first meetings with the new CouncO. Tlie
court began its sessions at Salem on June 2.

*He was jxesent in Boston at meetings of the Council on June 13^ 1&
July 4, 8, 15, 18, 21, 22, 25, 26, September 5, 12, 16, and again on October 14
(Moore, in American Antiquarian Society^ Prooeedinffs, n. s., V. 251 note).
Sewall on September 29 notes in his diary : "Governor comes to Town."

* A summary of it may be found on pp. 356-357, below; the fuH text is ap*
pended to Increase Math^s Catet of Conteienee (1603) and has been often reprinted, both with that work and in later books. It is Cotton Mather himself
(in his life of Phips) who tells us that he drafted it.

* In his letter oi May 31 to his parishioner John Richards, a member of the
court (Mather Papert, pp. 391-397). It is endorsed— with reason — "M' Cotton
Mather, an Essay concerning Witchcraft"; for an essay it really is. A supplement, and an interesting one, is his letter of August 17 to John Foster, a member
of the Council (printed by Upham in hb Salem Wiichcnxft and CaUon Maiker.
pp. 39-40).

' It has been questioned (by Upham and again by G. H. Moore) whether
''the Govemw" whose "commands" Mather alleges (see p. 206) may not
be Stoughton instead of Phips; but his discrimination between the two is too
dear and too constant to admit the su^idon, and still leas can Stou^ton and

INTRODUCTION 195

iqx>]i the Countrey by Witchcraft," which was ready for submission to Sir Willimn on his return from the east in early
October, and with which, under its title of The Wonders of the
Inaisible World, we must soon make acquaintance. The opening clauses of the governor's letter show plainly the influence
of that book;^ and the change in tone between its earlier and
its later portion, and yet more between the letter of October
and that of February, is not the least interesting feature of
these documents.'

Sewall (see pp. 251, 378) have been inexact A doubt as to who consulted the
ckrgy must be similarly answered. Yet Stoughton may well have been behind
both acts.

^ Bia phrases are taken almost bodily from the book (see, in Drake's edition,
pp. 102-109, not here reprinted); and his statement as to the methods of the
court echoes Mather's. It has been suggested (by Moore) that Mather himself
drafted the letter; but ndther the style nor the matter of its later portion can
be his.

* Cotton Mather, in his life of Phips, names as one of the causes of the governor's changing attitude, the reply of "the Dutch and French Ministers of the
Provinoe of New York," who had "their Judgement asked by the Chief Judge of
that Province" — the Massachusetts Tory, Joseph Dudley. These questions
(now printed with the answers in the Proceedingt of the Mass. Hist. Soc, second ^
aeries, I, 348-358) throw a vivid light on the problems then agitating the public
mind. They are dated at New York on October 5, and the answers, dated October 11, cannot have reached Boston before the middle of that month. More
distinctly than the Boston clergy they reject "spectral evidence." According to
the Anglican rector at New York, John Miller (commenting on Mather's statement as borrowed by the geographer Hermann Moll), "the advice of the established En^h Minister was also asked and generously given"; "but," he adds,
"they were not so dvill as to thank him for it, nor do they here acknowledge it,
although it was much to their purpose, and stood them in good stead." It may
be found, however, written out by his own hand in his copy of Moll's AtUu (now
in the New York Public Library); and it is summarized at pp. 274-276 of the
New York Historical Society's CoUedions for 1869 and in the edition of Miller's
New York considered (1695) by Mr. Paltsits (1903), to whom the editor owes
suggestion of the matter. Miller's answers are, indeed, somewhat less credulous
than those of his Calvinist colleagues; but (as appears from a "Memorandum"
of his own) it is by no means certain that they reached New England.

J

LETTERS OF GOVERNOR PHIPS

When I first arrived I found this Province miserably harrassed with a most Horrible witchcraft or Possession oi DeviDs
which had broke in upon several! Townes, some scores <tf potx
people were taken with pretematurall torments some scalded
with brimstone some had pins stuck in their flesh others hurried into the fire and water and some dragged out of their
houses and carried over the tops of trees and hills for many
Miles together; it hath been represented to mee much like
that of Sweden about thirty years agoe/ and there were many
committed to prison upon suspicion of Witchcraft before my
arrivall. The loud cries and clamours of the friends of the
afflicted people with the advice of the Deputy Governor and
many others prevailed with mee to give a Commission of Oyer
I and Terminer for discovering what witchcraft might be at
"^ the bottome or whether it were not a possession. The chwf
Judge in this Commission was the Deputy Govemour and the
rest were persons of the best prudence and figure that could
then be pitched upon. When the Court came to sitt at Salon
in the County of Essex they convicted more than twenty persons of being guilty of witchcraft, some of the convicted were
such as confessed their Guilt; the Court as I understand began
; their proceedings with the accusations of the afficted and then
'^ went upon other humane* evidences to strengthen that. I was
almost the whole time of the proceeding abroad in the service
of Their Majesties in the Eastern part of the Coimtry and depended upon the Judgement of the Court as to a right method
of proceeding in cases of Witchcraft but when I came home I
found many persons in a strange ferment of dissatisfaction which
was increased by some hott Spiritts that blew up the flame,' but

1 The famous case at Mohra in 166^1670. Cotton Mather had appended
to his Wonders an account of it. 'Human.

' He thinks perhaps of the Baptist [neadier, William Milbome, <me of the
leaders in the later revolution, who on June 25 was called before the Coundl

196

16»2] GOVERNOR PHIPS, LETTERS 197

on enquiring into the matter I found that the Devill had taken
upon him the name and shape of severall persons who were
doubtless inocent and to my certain knowledge of good reputation for which cause I have now forbidden tiie committing (tf
any more that shall be accused without unavoydable necessity,
and those that have been conmiitted I would shelter from any
Proceedings against them wherein there may be the least
suspition of any wrong to be done unto the Innocent. I would
also wait for any particular directions or commands if their
Majesties please to give mee any for the fuller ordering this
perplexed afifair. I have also put a stop to the printing of any
discourses one way or other, that may increase the needless v
disputes of people upon this occasion, because I saw a likelyhood of kindh'ng an inextinguishable flame if I should admitt
any publique and open Contests and I have grieved to see that
some who should have done their Majesties and this Province
better service have so far taken Councill of Passion as to desire
the precipitancy of these matters, these things have been improved by some to give me many interuptions in their Majesties service and in truth none of my vexations have been
greater than this, than that their Majesties service has been
hereby unhappily clogged, and the Persons who have made
soe ill improvement of these matters here are seeking to tume
it all upon mee,^ but I hereby declare that as soon as I came from
fitting against their Majesties Enemyes and understood what
dimger some of their innocent subjects might be exposed to,
if the evidence of the afflicted persons only did prevaile^
either to the committing or trying any of them, I did before"^

because of two papers subscribed by him and several others, "containing very
high reflections upon the administration of public justice within this their
Majesty's Ptovince" (Moore, Notes on Witchcraft, p. 12; Final Notes, p. 72).
What seems one of these papers, addressed "to the Grave and Juditious the Generall Assembly of the Province," has been found (see it in N, E, Hist, cmd Oen,
Register, XXVII. 55, and reprinted by Moore in American Antiquarian Society,
Proceedings, n. s., V. 246) and proves a protest against the conviction "upon
bare specter testimonie" of "persons of good fame and of unspotted reputation." It must have been in circulation before the detection of its author, and
was very possibly the reason for the consultation of the clergy.

^ It must be remembered that the new charter, by opening the suffrage to
those who were not church members, had greatly strengthened the party opposed
to the theocrapy — and to the theocracy's governor. More than once it has been /'
said, too, that the Salem witchcraft was the rock on which the theocracy shattered. >

198 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES pm

any application was made unto me about it put a Bbofp to the
proceedings of the Ck)urt and they are now stopt till their
Majesties pleasure be known. Sir I \yeg pardon for giving yoa
all this trouble, the reason is because I know my enemies are
seeking to turn it all upon me and I take this liberty because
I depend upon your friendship, and desire you will please to
give a true understanding of the matter if any thing of the
kind be urged or made use of against mee. B^use the justnesse of my proceeding herein will bee a sufScient defence. Sb*

I am with all imaginable respect

Your most hiunble Servt

William Fhifs.

Dated at Boston

the 12th of October 1692.^

Mem'dm

That my Lord President be pleased to acquaint his Ma'ty
in Coundll with the account received from New Eng^d fiDm
Sir Wm. Phips the Governor there touching Proceedings against
severall persons for Witchcraft as appears by the Governor's
letter concerning those matters.

Boston in New England Febiy 21st, 169}.

May it please yor. Lordshp.

By tiie Capn. of the Samuell and Henry I gave an account
that att my arrivall here I found the Pnsons full of peofde

* Tbis letter, with its memoraiidum, has been printed in the B$$ex InMihdt
Hidorietd CoUecHons, IX. 86-^, from a copy made in the British archives C'Colonial Entry Book, voL 62, p. 414/' now C. O. 5: 905, p. 414). It has sinoe
been printed also in the Calendar rf State Papere, Cohmal, 168^1602 (no. 2551,
p. 720), which uses not only this MS. (mistakenly called "an extract 'O b«t
another ("Board of TVade, New England, 6, na 7," now C. 0. 5: 857, no. 7);
but the editor has corrected and paraphrased. The last-named MS. (C. O.
5 : 857, no. 7) is, however, the original letter; and the jxesent impteasioD has
been carefully collated with it at London, many corrections resulting. October
14, in the Essex Institute's reprint, is only a printer's error for October 12.
Hie letter was addressed to ^^^Uiam Blathwayt, derk of the Privy Council, and
it is he who added the memorandum (to the Entry Btek copy).

1602] GOVEBNOR FHIPS, LETTERS 199

committed upon suspition of witchcraft and that continuall
complaints were made to me that many persons were grievously
tormented by witches and that they cryed out upon severaU
persons by name, as the cause of their torments. The number
of these complaints increasing every day^ by advice of the
Lieut Govt, and the Councill I gave a Commission of Oyer
and Terminer to try the suspected witches and at that time
the generality of the People represented the matter to me as
reall witchcraft and gave very strange instances of the same.
The first in Conmiission was tiie Lieut. Govr. and the rest pe>
sons of the best prudence and figure that could then be pitched
upon and I depended upon the Court for a right method of
proceeding in cases of witchcraft. At that time I went to
commaad the army at the Eastern part of the Province, for
the French and Indians had made an attack upon some of our
Fronteer Towns. I continued there for some time but when
I returned I found people much disatisfied at the proceedings
of the Court, for about Twenty persons were condemned and
executed of which niunber some were thought by many persons to be innocent. The Court still proceed in the same
method of trying them, which was by the evidence of the
afflicted persons who when they were brought into the Court
as soon as the suspected witches looked upon them instantly
fell to the ground in strange agonies and grievous torments,
but when touched by them upon the arme or some other part I
of their flesh they immediately revived and came to themselves,
upon [which] they made oath that the Prisoner at the Bar did
afflict them and that they saw their shape or spectre come from
their bodies which put them to such paines and torments:
When I enquired into the matter I was enformed by the
Judges that they begun with this, but had humane testimony ,
against such as were condemned and undoubted proof of their ^
being witches, but at length I found that the Devill did take
upon him the shape of Innocent persons and some were accused
of whose innocency I was well assured and many considerable
persons of unblameable life and conversation were cried out
upon as witches and wizards. The Deputy Govr. notwith- . •
standing persisted vigorously in the same method, to the great
disatisfaction and disturbance of the people, untill I put an

200 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES pW

end to the Court and stopped the proceedings, which I did
because I saw many innocent persons might otherwise perish
and at that time I thought it my duty to give an account
thereof that their Ma'ties pleasure might be signifyed, hcqung
that for the better ordering thereof the Judges learned in the
law in England mi^t give such rules and directions as have
^J been practized in Elngland for proceedings in so diflScult and
so nice a point; When I put an end to the Coiui^ there were
at least fifty persons in prison in great misery by reason of
the extream cold and their poverty, most of them having onty
spectre evidence against them, and their mittimusses being
defective, I caused some of them to be lett out upon bayie
and put the Judges upon considering of a way to reliefe othefs
and prevent them from perishing in prison, upon which some
of them were convinced and ackaowledged that their former
proceedings were too violent and not grounded upon a ri^t
foundation but that if they might sit againe, they would im>-
ceed after another method, and whereas Mr. Increase Mathew*
and severall other Divines did give it as their Judgment that
the Devill might afflict in the shape of an innocent person and
that the look and the touch of the suspected persons was not
sufficient proofe against them, these things had not the same
stress layd upon them as before, and upon this consideration
I permitted a spetiall Superior Ck)urt' to be held at Sakm

> It was on October 29, three days after the passage by the General Court
of the bill calling for a fast and a convocation of ministers for guidance ''as to the
intchcrafts," and, as Judge SewaU teUs us (see p. 1S6, note 1, above) in such "season
and manner" that "the Court of Oyer and Terminer count themsdves thereby
dismissed/' that in the Council, when "Mr. Russel asked whether the Court of
Oyer and Terminer should sit, expreadxkg some fear of Inconvenience by its faD,"
the "Govemour said it must fall" (Sewall's Diary, I. 368.)

* Mather. Undoubtedly an error of the English copyist Hie advice meant
was that of the twdve ministers of Boston and vidnity on June 15. See intioduction.

' The Superior Court was created by act of the General Court of the province— of course with the concurrence of the governor — on Novembtf 25, 1602;
but its session at Salem would, under the law, have come in the next November,
and a supplementary act was passed on December 16, providing, "upon oodsideration that many persons charged capital offenders are now in custody
within the county of Enex," for a court of assize and general jail delivery there
on January 3.

1603] GOVERNOR PHIPS, LETTERS 201

in the County of Essex on the third day of Januaiy, the lieut
Govt, being Chief Judg^. Their method of proceeding being
altered, all that were brought to tryall to the number of fifety
two, were cleared saving three, and I was enformed by the
"K^ing^ Attomy Generall that some of the cleared and the condemned were under the same circumstances or that there was
the same reason to clear the three condemned as the rest
according to his Judgment. The Deputy Govt, signed a Warrant for their speedy execucion and also of five others who
were condenmed at the former Coiui of Oyer and terminer,
but considering how the matter had been managed I sent a
reprieve whereby the execucion was stopped imtiU their Maj.
pleasure be signified and declared. The lieut. Gov. upon this
occasion was inraged and filled with passionate anger and refused to sitt upon the bench in a Superior Court then held at
Chaiies Towne,^ and indeed hath from the b^inning hurried
on these matters with great precipitancy and by his warrant
hath caused the estates, goods and chatties of the executed to
be seized and disposed of without my knowledge or consent.
The stop put to the first method of proceedings hath dissipated
the blak cloud that threatened this Province with destruccion;
for whereas this delusion of the Devill did spread and its dismall effects touched the lives and estates of many of their
Matties Subjects and the reputacion of some of the principall
persons here,* and indeed unhappily clogged and interrupted
their Ma'ties affaires which hath been a great vexation to me,
I have no new complaints but peoples minds before divided

> For thb episode see pp. 382-383.

*A "letter from Boston" printed in the British Calendar rf State Papers,
CoUmwl, 1693-1696, p. 63, says that "The witchcraft at Salem went on vigorously . . . untilatlastmembersof Council and Justices were accused"; and the
Boston merchant Calef in 1697 wrote : " If it be true what was said at the Counselboard in answer to the commendations of Sir William, for his stopping the proceedings about Witchcraft, viz. That it was high time for him to stop it, his own
Lady being accused; if that Assertion were a truth, then New-En^and may
seem to be more beholden to the accusers for accusing of her, and thereby necessitating a stop, than to Sir William" (More Wonders, p. 154). Lady Phips had
earned an accusation by daring, in Sir ^l^^lliam's absence, hersdf to issue a warrant for the discharge of an accused woman. The keeper lost his place. (MS.
letter quoted by Hutchinson, XL 61, note; the writer had it from the keeper himself and had seen the document)

202 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES pM

and distracted by differing opinions concerning this matter
are now well composed.

lam
Yor. Lordships most f aithf ull

humble Servant
William Phips

[Addressed :] To the Rt. Honble

the Earle of Nottingham

att Whitehall

London
[Indorsed :] R [i. 6., received] May 24, 93

abt. Witches*

^Tbis letter is here reprinted from the Massachusetts Historical Society's
Proeeeiingi, second ser., I. 340-342, where the originaly in the British ardiives,
b described as "America and West Indies, No. 591" and "also in Colonial Entzy
Book, No. 62, p. 426''; but the Calendar qf State Papen, CaUnwd, 1603-1696,
whidi again prints it, thou^ in aimdged fonn, ascribes it to "America and West
Indies, 561, nos. 28, 29," and mentions the duplicate as "CoL Entry Bk., Vol
LXn, pp. 426-430," and as "entered as addressed to William Blathwayt." It
may also be found in 6. H. Moore's Final Natee on Wileheraft in Mawtaekumtti
(New YoriL, 1885), pp. 90-93, with his annotations. Rxamination at theBritirii
Public Becord Office shows that the original letter (formerly America and West
Indies, 561, no. 28) is now C. O. 5 : 51, na 28, and b plainly addressed to the
Eari of Nottingham.

FROM "THE WONDERS OF THE INVISIBLE
WORLD," BY COTTON MATHER, 1693

INTRODUCTION

How The Wonders of the Invigible WoHd came to be written
we have already seen.^ Its author had ''a talent for sudden
ccHnposures.^' We have seen what a scrap-bag was his Memorable Promdences; and the pigeon-holes of his dedc must for
months have been gathering materials that could now be put
to use. What these materials were is suggested by his titlepage; but tiie title-page description is not exact. There is
first an essay, entitled ''Enchantments Encountered/' on
New Eng^d as a home of ibe saints and the plot of the Devil
against heri eq)ecially as revealed by the witches now confessing; next an abstract of the rules of Perkinsi Gaule, and Bernard for the detection of witches. Then follows ''A Discourse
on the Wonders of the Invisible Worid, uttered (in part) on
Aug. 4, 1692.'' It is a sermon on Rev. xii. 12, depicting in
apocalyptic phrase the Devil's wratii and its present manifestation. Next comes ''An Hortatory and Necessaiy Address,
to a Country now extraordinarily alarum'd by the Wrath of
the Devil " — ^this, too, doubtless written for a sermon. " Having tiius discoursed on the Wonders of the Invisible World,"
says then the autiior, ''I shall now, with God's help, go on to
relate some Remarkable and Memorable Instances of Wonders
which that World has given to ourselves." Yet he still inserts
''A Narrative of an Apparition which a Gentleman in Boston
had of hid Brother," before proceeding to those Salem trials,
the kernel of his book, which are reprinted below.

Doubtless these were meant, as the title-page suggests,
to form a part of the '^Enchantments Encountered," but failed

> See pp. 194-195.
206

V

206 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES

to arrive in time. Mather had long been bagging ibem, bom
Stephen Sewall (brother of Judg^ Sewall), the derk of the
court; but the derk was then very busy. On September 20
Mather wrote : ''That I may be the more capable to aasbt in
lifting up a standard against the infernal enemy, I must renew
my most importunate request.'^ What he asks is "a narrative
of the evidence given in at the trials of half a dozen, or if yoa
please, a dozen, of the principal witches that have been ooih
demned." He pleads not only Sewall's promise, but that
''his ExceUency, the Governor, laid his positive commaDdB
upon me to desire this favor of you"; "and the truth is," he
adds, "there are some of his circumstances with refer^ioe to
this affair, which I need not mention, that call for the e3q)editing of your kindness.'' He wants also some of the dezk's
"observations about the confessors, and the credibility of what
they assert, or about things evidently preternatural in the
witchcrafts"; but, "assure yourself," he condudes, "I shall
not wittingly make what you write prejudicial to any worthy
design which those two excellent persons, Mr. Hale and Mr.
Noyes, may have in hand." But the derk took counsd b^oie
he acted. His brother's Diary records, on Thursday, Sq[>tanber 22, that "William Stoughton, Esqr., John Hathome, Esqr.,
Mr. Cotton Mather, and Capt. John Higginson, with my
brother St., were at our house, speaking about publishing some
Trials of the Witches." These had been received and utilized
by early October (see p. 247), and the book, thus far complete,
could before October 11 be laid before the judges (see p. 251)
and by the 12th could furnish material for the govemor^s
letter (see p. 195).

Before the book was out of press there was time to add
the narrative of the Swedish witches and the sermon on "the
Devil discovered"; but these could not seriously have delayed
the printing, for the book, complete and printed, must have
gone to London by the same ship which in mid-October took

INTRODUCTION 207

Sir William's letter. A copy of the book was doubtless sent|
wilii this letter, to the home goveroment; and it was perhaps
precisely for this use that the volimie had been hurried into
existence and into print. What is certain is that such a copy
had before December 24 reached the hands of John Dunton,
the London publisher; for on that day he announced its
speedy publication, and by December 29 it was already in
print, though with "1693" on its title-page.* A "second edition," much abridged (though not by the omission of the
Salem trials), he issued in February 1693, and reprinted it as
a "third" in June.

The news-letter, with imprint of 1692, calling itself A True
Account of the Tryals . . . at Salem, in New England . . . in
a Letter to a Friend in London and signed at end "C. M." is
only a bookseller's fraud, compiled from the Wonders by some
hack (who has not even taken the trouble to imitate its style)
and printed in 1693.

The Wonders was reprinted at Salem in 1861 (with Calef s
More Wonders), by Mr. S. P. Fowler, in a volmne called Salem
Witduraft; but, alas, from the abridged "third edition" and
with serious further abridgment. In 1862 the first London
edition was embodied in a volume of John Russell Smith's
Library of Old AvJthors {cf. p. 149, note 1); and in 1866 the
work was again reprinted, and with much more exactness,' as

^ That this London edition was printed, not from a manuscript copy, but
from the printed Boston edition, broken up for the compositors, is clear to any
printer who compares the two. See, for details, a paragraph in the N. Y. NaHon
for November 5, 1908 (LXXXVII. 435), or the descriptive note of G. F. BUck
in the New York Library's List cf Works relating to Witchcraft in the United
States (Bulletin, 1908, XII. 666). All extant copies of the Boston edition seem
to have the title-page date "1693" (an aUeged exception proves to be a myth);
and thb probably means that till January, at least, the book was withheld from
ciiculation. As to all the early editions, see Moore, Notes on the Bibliography €if
WUekenfi in Massachusetts (American Antiquarian Society, Proceedings, n. s.,
V.)» and the New Yori^ Library's List, as above.

* The type being set from the first London edition, but the proofs read by
die Boston one. (See Drake's prdaot, p. vii, and his postscript, p. 247.)

206 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES

no. V» of the Hutorical Series of W. Elliot Woodward (Roxbury, Mas8.)i being again coupled with Calebs More Wanden
(forming nos. VI., VII., of the same series) under a
title, The Witchcraft Dehmon in New England, and a
editor, S. G. Drake, who contributes elaborate introductioDS
and notes. An alleged reprint by J. Smith, London, 1834
(and again by H. Howell in 1840), as an addition to Baxter's,
Certainty of the World of Spirits is not Mather's Wonders at
all, but only the witchcraft pages of his Magnolia.

w.iHiin I I

w 1(1111 I.I

THE WONDERS OF THE INVISIBLE WORLD

The Wonders of the Inmible World. Observations As well Historical as Theological, upon the Nature, the Number, and
the Operations of the Devils. Accompantfd vrUh

I. Some Accounts of the Grievous Molestations, by Demons and

Witchcrafts, which have lately annoyed the Cowntrey; and the
Trials of some eminent Moikfajctors Executed upon occasion
thereof: rvHh several Remarkable Curiosities therein occurring.

II. Some CounsHs, Directing a due Improvement of the terrible
things, lately dime, hy the Unusual and Amazing Range of
Evil Spirits, in Our Neighbourhood: and the methods to prevent the Wrongs which those EvU Angels may intend against
aU sorts of people among u>s; especially in Accusations of the
Innocent.

III. Some Conjectures upon the great Events, lUcdy to befall
the World in General, and NeuyEngland in Particular; as
also upon the Advances of the time, when we shall see Better
Dayes.

IV. A short Narrative of a late Outrage committed by a knot of
Witches in Sweddand, very much Resembling, and so far
Explaining, That under which our parts of America have
laboured!

V. The DevU Discovered: In a Brief Discourse upon (hose
Temptations, which are the more Ordinary Devices of the
Wicked One.

By Cotton Mather.

Boston, Printed, by Benjamin Harris for Sam. Phillips. 1693.*

Published by the Special Command of His Excellency, the Governour of the Province of the Massachusetts-Bay in New-Enr

gland.*

> Title-page of original.

* Reverse of title-page. Governor Sir William Phips. We have just read,
indeed, his own assertion (p. 197, above) that he had "put a stop to the printing
ot any discourses one way or other/' and this may explain why, thou^ thb

209

210 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1682

The Author's Defence.

Tis, as I remember, the Learned Scribonius/ who Reports; that One of his Acquaintance, devoutly m Airing his
Prayers on the behalf of a Person molested by Evil SfHiits,
received from those Evil Spirits an horrible Blow over the
Face : And I may my self Expect not few or small Buffeting
from Evil Spirits, for the Endeavours wherewith I am now
going to Encounter them. I am far from Insensible, That at
this Extraordinary Time of the Devils Coming down in Great
Wrath upon us, there are too many Tongues and Hearts
thereby Set on Fire of Hell; that the various Opinions about
the Witchcrafts which of Later Time have Troubled us, are
maintained by some with so much Cloudy Fury, as if they
could never be sufficiently Stated, imless written in the Liquor
wherewith Witches use to write their Covenants; and that he
who becomes an Author at such a Time, had need be Fenced
with Iron, and the Staff of a Spear. The unaccountable Frowardness. Asperity, Untreatableness, and Inconsistency of
many persons, every Day gives a Visible Exposition of that
passage. An Evil Spirit from the Lord came upon Saul ; and
Illustration of that Story, There met him two Possessed with
Devils, exceeding Fierce, so that no man might pass hy that way.
To send abroad a Book, among such Readers, were a very unadvised Thing, if a man had not such Reasons to give, as I can
bring, for such an Undertaking. Briefly, I hope it cannot be
said. They are all so; No, I hope the Body of this People, are
yet in such a Temper, as to be capable of Applying their
Thoughts, to make a Right Use of the Stupendous and prodigious Things that are happening among us : and because I

book was complete in October, it was not published before January, as wefl as
why, when it did appear, it thus bore the express sanction of the governor. As
to the suggestion c^ Upham and Moore that not Phips but StoughtOQ maj be
liere meant, see p. 194, note 6.

^ Wilhelm Adolf Scribonius, a Hessian scholar, is best known in the literature
of witchcraft as the chief advocate of the water ordeal (see p. 21, above) for the
detection of witches. This story is told on ff . S2-S3 of his Pkynolopa Saganm
(Marburg, 1588— the full title is De Sagarum Natura el PoUtMe, ditpte ki$ rwd$
cognoicmdis el pumendU Pkyeioiogia), and in English by Baxter, WcMm if
SpifiU, p. 104.

16021 COTTON MATHER, WONDERS 211

was concem'd, when I saw that no Abler Hand Emitted any
Essayes to Engage the Minds of this People in such Holy,
FiouSy Fruitful Improvements^ as God would have to be made
of His Amazing Dispensations now upon us. Therefore it is,
that One of the Least among the Children of New-England,
has here done, what is done. None, but the Father, who sees
in Secret, knows the Heart-breaking Exercises, wherewith I
have Composed what is now going to be Exposed, Lest I should
in any One Thing miss of Doing my Designed Service for His
Glory, and for His People; But I am now somewhat comfortably Assured of His favourable Acceptance; and, I wiU not
Fear; what can a Satan do unto me!

Having Performed Something of what God Required, in
labouring to suit His Words unto His Works, at this Day
among us, and therewithal handled a Theme that has been
sometimes counted not unworthy the Pen, even of a King, it
will easily be perceived, that some subordinate Ends have
been considered in these Endeavours.

I have indeed set my self to Countermine the whole Plot
of the Devil against New-England,* in every Branch of it, as
far as one of my Darkness can comprehend such a Work of
Darkness. I may add, that I have herein also aimed at the
Information and Satisfaction of Good men in another Countrey, a Thousand Leagues oflf, where I have, it may be, More,
or however, more Considerable Friends, than in My Own;*
And I do what I can to have that Countrey, now as well as
alwayes, in the best Terms with My Own. But while I am

* As to this "plot of the Devil/' see Mather's own words (Wonders, pp. 16-19,
25, not here reprinted) : "we have been advised . . . that a Malefactor, accused
of Witchcraft as well as Murder, and Executed in this place more than Forty
Years ago, did then give Notice of An Horrible Plot against the Countiy by
Witchcraft, and a Foundation of Witchcraft then laid, which if it were not
seasonably discovered would probably Blow up, and pull down all the Churches
in the Country." "We have now with Horror," he adds, "seen the Discovery of
such a Witchcraft I" and from the confessions at Salem he learns that "at prodigious Witch-Meetings the Wretches have proceeded so far as to Concert and
Consult the Methods of Rooting out the Christian Religion from this Countiy"
and setting up instead of it a "Diabolism." Not even this is all: "it may be
fear'd that, in the Horrible Tempest which is now upon ourselves, the design of
the Devil is to sink that Happy Settlement of Government wherewith Almighty
God has graciously endined Their Majesties to favour us."

* It is of En^^and, of course, that he spieaks.

212 NARBAHVES of the witchcraft cases pflOB

doing these things, I have been driven a little to do something
likewise for My self; I mean, by taking off the false Reports
and hard Censures about my Opinion in these matters, the
Farters Portion, which my pursuit of Peace has procured me
among the Keen. My hitherto Unvaried Thou^ts are here
Published; and, I believe, they will be owned by most of the
Ministers of God in these Colonies; nor can amends be wdl
made me, for the wrong done me, by other sorts of Repres^itations.

In fine. For the Dogmatical part of my Discourse, I want
no Defence; for the Historical part of it, I have a very Great
One. The Lieutenant-Govemour of New-England, having
perused it, has done me the Honour of giving me a Shield,^
under the Umbrage whereof I now dare to waUc Abroad.

Reverend and Dear Sir,

You Very much Gratif/d me, as well as put a kind Respect
upon me, when you put into my hands. Your Elaborate and most
seasonable Discourse, entituled. The Wonders of the Ineieibte WoM.
And having now Perused so fruitful and happy a Composure, upon
such a Subject, at this Juncture of Time, and con^dering the PLue
that I Hold in the Court of Oyer and Terminer, still Labouring and
Proceeding in the Trial of the persons Accused and Convicted for
^tchcraft, I find that I am more nearly and highly concerned than
as a meer Ordinary Reader, to Express my Obligati(m and Thankfulness to you for so great Pains; and cannot but hold my sdf many
ways boimd, even to the utmost of what is proper for me, in my
present Publick Capacity, to declare my Singular Approbation
thereof. Such is Your Design, most plainly expressed throughout
the whole; such Your Zeal for God, Your Enmity to Satan and his
Kingdom, Your Faithfulness and Compassion to this poor people;
Such the Vigour, but yet great Temper of your Spirit; Sudi your
Instruction and Counsel, your Care of Truth, Your Wisdom and
Dexterity in allaying and moderating that among us, which needs it;
Such your Clear Discerning of Divine Providences and Periods, now
running on apace towards their Glorious Issues in the Worid; and
finally, Such your Good News of The Shortness of the Devils Time,
That all Good Men must needs Desire the making of this your Dis-

^ As to Lieutenant^jovernor Stoughton, head of the court whidi had tried
the witch cases, see above, p. 183 and note 2, and pp. 196-201. His "ahield'*
means the following letter.

1602] COTTON MATHER, WONDERS 213

course Publick to the World; and will greatly Rejoyce that the Spirit
of the Lord has thus Enabled you to Lift up a Standard against the
Lifemal Enemy, that hath been Coming in like a Flood upon us. I
do therefore make it my particular and Earnest Request unto you,
that as soon as may be, you will Commit the same imto the Press
accordingly. I am.

Your Assured Friend,

William Sioughton.

I Live by Neighbours that force me to produce these Un*
deserved Lines. But now, as when Mr. Wilson/ beholding
a great Muster of Souldiers, had it by a Gentieman then
present said unto him, ^^Sir, I'l tell you a great Thing: here
is a mighty Body of People; and there is not Seven of them
all but what Loves Mr. Wilson ;'' that Gracious Man presently and pleasantly Reply'd, ^^ Sir, I'll tell you as good a thing
as that; here is a mighty Body of People, and there is not so
much as One among them all, but Mr. Wilson Loves him.''
Somewhat so: 'Tis possible that among this Body of People
there may be few that Love the Writer of this Book; but give
me leave to boast so far, there is not one among all this Body
of People, whom this Mather would not Study to Serve, as
well as to Love. With such a Spirit of Love, is the Book now
before us written : I appeal to all this World; and if this World
will deny me the Right of acknowledging so much, I Appeal to
the Other, that it is Not written with an Evil Spirit : for which
cause I shall not wonder, if Evil Spirits be Exasperated by
what is Written, as the Sadducees doubtless were with what
was Discoursed in the Days of our Saviour. I only Demand
the Justice, that others Read it, with the same Spirit wherewith I writ it.*

But I shall no longer detain my Reader, from His expected
entertainment, in a Brief Account of the Trials which have
passed upon some of the Malefactors Lately Executed at
Salem, for the Witchcrafts whereof they stood Convicted.

^ Doubtless the Rev. John Wilson (d. 1667), the first minister of Boston.
* There now follow the miscellaneous matters described in the introduction,
making up more than half of his volume.

J

214 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES Iltt2

For my own part, I was not Present at any of Them;' nor
ever Had I any perscmal prejudice at the persons thus broo^t
upon the Stage; much less at the Surviving RelatioDs of tiboee
persons, with and for whom I would be as Hearty a mourner
as any man Living in the World: The Lord Comfort them!
But hiaving Received a Conmiand so to do,^ I can do no other
than shortly Relate the Chief Matters of fact, which occurr'd
in the Trials of some that were Executed, in an Abridgment
collected out of the Court-Papers, on this occasion put into
my Hands.' You are to take the Truth, just as it was; and
the Truth will hurt no good man. There might have been
more of these, if my Book would not thereby have been siwcdlen
too big; and if some other worthy hands did not peihaps intend something further in these Collections;^ for which cause
I have only angled out Four or Five, which may serve to
Illustrate the way of dealing, wherein Witchcrafts use to be
concerned; and I Report matters not as an Advocate but as
^ an Historian.

They were some of the Gracious Words inserted in the
Advice, which many of the Neighbouring Ministers did this
Summer humbly lay before our Honorable Judges, '' We cannot
but with all thankfulness acknowledge the success which the
Merciful God has given unto the Sedulous and Assiduous estdeavours of Our Honourable Rulers, to detect the abominable Witchcrafts which have been committed in the Countiy;
Hmnbly Praying that the discovery of those mysterious and
mischievous wickednesses, may be perfected." * If in the
midst of the many Dissatisfactions among us, the publicatkm
of these Trials may promote such a pious Thankfulness unto
God, for Justice being so far executed among us, I shall Re-

* He must at least have been present at some of the examinations (like tiiose
described by Lawson) preceding the trials; for in his Diary (1. 151), commending
the judges, he adds, "and my Compassion, upon the Sight of their DifiBcuhies,

^ raised by my Joumeyes to Salem, the chief Seat of these diabolical Vexatioos»
caused mee yett more to do so." From attending the trials he had excused himself (see the letter mentioned on p. 194, note 5) on the score of ill health.

* From the governor; see above, p. 194, and p. 250. ' See introductioiL
^Meaning, doubtless. Hale and Noyes. See p. 206, above.

* This is the second paragraph in the reply of the ministers of Boston, June
15, 1692, to the request of the governor and Council for advice. (See pu 194^
above.) It was drawn up by Cotton Mather himself.

l«a« COTTON MATHBR. WONDERS 31a

Joyce tiiat God is Glorified; aad pray that uo wrong stepitji of
ours msj ever aully any of His Glorious Work^^

/. The Tryal of G. B.^ At a Court of Oyer and Tmnifur,

Hdd in Salem, 1692.

dad i^old I have been^ if I had never kuowu the Naiuo
ct this man; or never had thii$ occa^sion to uieutiou ao much
as the first Letters of his Nanae.' But the iiovwuuHUit roqimiDg some Account of his Trial to be Inserted iu this UiHik,
it beccKoes me with all Obedienw to submit \mto tho Orilw.

I. This G. B. was indicted for Witch-orafta, ami iu tho
Prosecution of the Charge against him, ha was AihuischI by
five or six of the Bewitched, as tho Author of their Misuriits;
he was Accused by eight of the Confessing Witdies, as being
an Head Actor at some of their Hellis)^ Hamlets vuu»eS| and ouu

'What next foUows, very cleverly entmring a friendly attituilu Uiwanl tim
Salem court, is an account of the Engliali wiu*h-trial of HUH tM;f(irti Sir MniiUcw
Hale. It is abridged from the well-known lMM»klut (.-I Tryal nf WUtik^M ai (hi
Asiiau hdd at Bury St Edmondi, etc.) publiiiheil at UnuUm in lUbU, wlud) Uud
been a guide to the Salem judges (nee p. 4I6| liclow).

*The Rev. George Burroughi, the moMt notal)l» of iJu* vivtinin ai tiaiuuj.
A graduate of Harvard in the dans of 1670| lut |)n:«4.*lu:d in Maii&c for minv yvtuu,
and in 1680 became pastor at Salem ViiJai^i wlotre Im fell Jurir Im a imrinii i^uuijul,
and, becoming involved in it, found it wiiie ti> rtumyts iu i<^ J)oiilui luiwdnJi
succeeding hiuL Burroughs returned to Maimf, aiid wum a ^m^Utr liuu' al WulU,
when his accusation by the "afflicted" at SaUuu cmmsd hiu luaui IU- miui
brou^t bade to Salem on May 4, committed iHi May U, Criai «>ii Au|(Utii h. i->r
cuted on August 19. As to his story see enytaiidly (JphuJiJ. ttisJun H t^ifhhtji,
Sibley^ Harmrd Graduates (II. 323-^34), Moari-, "Nolc» im thv Jiil»lt.jMJii|)li> ii(
Witchoraft in Massachusetts" (in American Aiitiquuriujj *Sm'U-i>p i'hhinilnyf,
JL 8., V.)» pp. 270-273, but, first of all, tbi; meatioiitf lA < uial, jt lijinUjil \}vUi\\ (|)|i
301, 360-^65, 27fh279).

' It is not improbable that Mather had ahready Im;|{uii Of hiul litimM'U IiIumh iI
for his faar^ words as to Burroughs. On August h, tlu du> i/l Iiim fiml. lit lnwl
written to a friend : *'Our Good God in workiiiK <jf hAiruf'Ui* J'lvi V\h<'Ih wm
Lately Executed, impudently deinaudijig of G<>J u Minu iil«/ii> \ iM4liM»it<Mi *it
tfaeir InnoeeDc>'. Immediately upon thin, Our G<xi JVliiMf uI'/imI^ 1,4 hI m Jmvi
Andover-Witcbes, who made a ummI MmpicT, sorpri^jy, umu/.my < 'tit\* .rii«Hi. Mf
ail tbeir Villainies and declared tL«^ fivi^ uawiy t:iumulut\ \^i Ituv* l/i«ii i;f llii-u
Company; discovering many more; but ail a^uun^r m huifotjKlj l/finf/ il*itr
Bini^cadcr, who. I suppo»«f, thir day receive^. [u» Trial a< t^aii-iu, Mrhillii i ji \ u«t.
CoDOOurse of people i^ goiie; My Father tiiL: moriiin^ iuuuuy, th*' iUnt."

216 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES pm

who had t^e promise of being a King in Satans Kingdom, now
going to be Erected: he was Accused by nine persons for extraordinary Lifting, and such Feats of Strength, as could not
' be done without a Diabolical Assistance. And for other sudi
Things he was Accused, until about Thirty Testimonies were
brought in against him; nor were these judg'd the half of what
miight have been considered for his Conviction : however they
were enough to fix the Character of a Witch upon him according to the Rules of Reasoning, by the Judicious Gaule,^ in that
Case directed.

II. The Court being sensible, that the Testimonies of the
Parties Bewitched use to have a Room among the Suspicions
or Presumptions, brought in against one Indicted for Witchcraft, thero were now heard the Testimonies of several Persons, who were most notoriously Bewitched, and every day
Tortured by Invisible Hands, and these now all chai^rod tti^
Spectres of G. B. to have a share in their Torments. ^At the
Examination of this G. B. the Bewitched People were grievously harassed with Preternatural Mischiefs, which could not
possibly be Dissembled; and they still ascribed it unto the
Endeavours of G. B. to kill them. And now upon his Trial,
one of the Bewitched Persons testify'd. That in her Agonies,
a little Black hair'd man came to her, saying his Name was
B. and bidding her set her hand unto a Book which he showed
unto her; and bragging that he was a Conjurer, above the
ordinary Rank of Witches; That he often persecuted her with
the offer of that Book, sajring. She should be well, and need
fear no body, if she would but Sign it; but he inflicted cruel
Pains and Kmta upon her, because of her Denying so to do^
The Testimonies of the other Sufferers concurred with these;
and it was Remarkable, that whereas Biting was one of the
. ways which the Witches used for the vexing of the Sufferers,
when they cry'd out of G. B. biting them, the print of the Teeth
would be seen on the Flesh of the Complainers, and just

^ John Gaule, rector of Great Stoughton, in Huntingdonshire, was the first
to oppose openly the witch-finder Hopkins, and wrote a little book, Selsei Coast
qf Conscience Umching WUchee and WUchcmfts (London, 1646), to lay bare his
outrages and suggest saner methods. (See Notestein, Wiichcnfi in Engkmdf
J pp. 186-187, 236-237.) His rules for the detection of witches are
(though not without serious garbling) earlier in Mather's volume.

1602] COTTON MATHER, WONDERS 217

such a sett of Teeth as G. B's would then appear upon
them, which could be distinguished from those of some other
mens. A!)ther8 of them testify'd, That in their Torments, G. B.
tempted them to go unto a Sacrament, unto which they perceived him with a sound of Trumpet Summoning of other
Witches, who quickly after the Sound would come from all
Quarters unto the Rendezvouz. One of them falling into a
Idnd of Trance, afterwards affirmed, That G. B. had carried
her into a very high Mountain, where he show'd her mighty
and glorious Kingdoms, and said. He would give them sdl to
her, if she would write in his Book; but she told him. They
were none of his to give; and refused the motions, enduring
of much misery for that Refusal.]

It cost the Court a wonderful deal of Trouble, to hear the
Testimonies of the Sufferers; for when they were going to
give in their Depositions, they would for a long time be taken
with fitts, that made them uncapable of saying any thing.
The Chief Judge asked the prisoner, who he thought hindr^
these witnesses from giving their testimonies? and he answered,
He supposed it was the Divel. That Honourable person then
reply'd, How comes the Divel so loathe to have any Testimony bom against you? Which cast him into very great
confusion.

ni. It has been a frequent thing for the Bewitched people to be entertained with Apparitions of Ghosts of murdered
people, at the same time that the Spectres of the witches
trouble them. These Ghosts do always affright the Beholders
more than all the other spectral Representations; and when
they exhibit themselves, they cry out, of being Murdered by
the witchcrafts or other violences of the persons who are then
in spectre present. It is further considerable, that once or
twice, these Apparitions have been seen by others at the very
same time that they have shewn them selves to the Bewitched;
and seldom have there been these Apparitions but when something imusual and suspected had attended the Death of the
party thus Appearing. Some that have bin accused by these
Apparitions, accosting of the Bewitched People, who had never
heard a word of any such persons ever being in the world,
have upon a fair examination freely and fully confessed the
mmtlers of those very persons, altho' these also did not know

218 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [16B2

how the Apparitions had complained of them. Acoordiii^
several of the Bewitched had given in their Testimony, that
they had been troubled with the Apparitions of two women,
who said that they were G. B's two wives, and that he had been
the Death of them; and that the Magistrates must be tdd of
it, before whom if B. upon his trial deny'd it, they did not
know but that they should appear again in the Court. Now,
G. B. had been infamous for the Barbarous usage of his two
successive wives, all the Country over. Moreover, It was
testify'd, the spectre of G. B. threatning of the sufferers told
them, he had killed (besides others) Mrs. Lawson and her
Daughter Ann.^ And it was noted, That these were the y^-
tuous wife and Daughter of one at whom this G. B. mi^t have
a prejudice for his being serviceable at Salem-village, from
whence himself had in 111 Terms removed some years before:
and that when they dy'd, which was long since, there weie
some odd circumstances about them, which made some of the
Attendents there suspect something of witchcraft, tho' none
Imagined from what Quarter it should come.

WeU, G. B. being now upon his Triall, one of the Bewitched
persons was cast into Horror at the Ghosts of B's two deceased wives then appearing before him, and ciying for Vengeance against him. Hereupon several of the Bewitched persons were successively called in, who all not knowing what the
former had seen and said, concurred in their Horror of the
Apparition, which they affirmed that he had before him. But
he, tho' much appalled, utterly deny'd that he discerned any
thing of it; nor was it any part of his Conviction.

IV. Judicious Writers have assigned it a great place in
the Conviction of witches, when persons are Impeached by
other Notorious witches, to be as HI as themselves; especially,
if the persons have been much noted for neglecting tike Worship of God. Now, as there might have been Testimonies
Enough of G. B's Antipathy to Prayer and the other Ordinances of God, tho' by his profession singularly obliged there-
^ unto; so, there now came in against the prisoner the Testimonies of several persons, who confessed their own having
been Horrible Witches, and ever since their confessions had
been themselves terribly Tortured by the Devils and other

> The wife and the daughter of Deodat Lawson; see p. 148.

CUTTON HATOER^ WONBfiStS il*

Wttdn, cff^m Etc the odM' Sufl^^ «iid tli^i^ «tti<k!!^ec^
the pains of many Dnths for their OonfesiskMR^

TlKseiiQfwl^isdfy
with them; and tlutt he was the IN»^9k)ii who had ;Sed\K^\i
and Gompcfl'd them into the sMures of Wit<^mft: Hmt K«
promised th»n fine Cloaths, for doing it; that hg bixHidlit
P(^)pets to them, and thorns to stick into those Pbp|)etS) lor
the afflicting of other People; And that he exhort them^
with the rest of the Crue, to bewitch all Salem<^Village» but
be sure to do it Gradually^ if they would prevml in what
they did«

When the Lancashire Witches^ were condemned, t don*t
Remember that there was any considerable further Evidence^
than that of the Bewitched, and then that of some that con-*
fessed. We see so much already against G. B. But this
being indeed not Enough, there were other things to render
what had already been produced credible.

V. A famous Divine* recites this among the Conviotions
of a Witch; The Testimony of the Party Bewitched, whether
Pining or Dying; together with the Joint Oathes of 8ufflclenfc *
Persons that have seen certain Prodigious Pranks or treats
wrought by the party Accused. /Now God had been pleased
so to leave this G. B. that he had ensnared himself by several
Instances, which he had formerly given of a Preternatural
strength, and which were now produced against hlm« He was
a very Puny man,-' yet he had often done things beyond the
strength of a Giant. A Gun of about seven foot barrel^ and
so heavy that strong men could not steadily bold it out wHh
both hands; there were several Testimonies^ given In by Persons of Credit and Honour, that he made naimm of taking up
sudi a Gun behind the Lock^ with but one hand, and holding
it out like a FigUA, at Arms-end. O. B. m his Vindieatkiti was
80 fodiflii as to say. That an Indian was there^ and held H otti
at the same time: Whereas, none of the »%peetak)fs ever saw

^fUtM^ CpiMv WfffU^l hMS in flM^ wKVk Off M8 MMMW^ 60fMi1l m^jh9, (Siw6t

220 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [l«

any such Indian; but they suppos'd the Black man (as the
Witches call the Devil; and they generally ^y he reBonbks
an Indian) might give him that Assistence. (There was Evidence likewise brought in, that he made noth^ of Taking iq>
whole Barrels fill'd with Malasses or Cider, in very Disadvaih
tagious Postures, and Canying of them throu^ the Diffioiltest Places out of a Canoo to the Shore.

Yea, there were Two Testimonies that G. B. with only
putting the Fore-Finger of his Right hand into the Mund of
an heavy Gun, a Fowling-piece of about six or sevi^i foot
Barrel, did Lift up the Gun, and hold it out at Arms end; a
Gun which the Deponents though strong men could not with
both hands Lift up, and hold out at the Butt end, as is usual
Indeed, one of these Witnesses was over perswaded by some
persons to be out of the way upon G. B's Trial; but he came
afterwards with sorrow for lus withdraw, and gave in his
Testimony : Nor were either of these Witnesses made use cl
as evidences in the Trial.

VI. There came in several Testimonies relating to the
Domestick Affayrs of G. B. which had a very hard Aq)ect
upon him; and not only prov'd him a very ill man; but also
confirmed the Belief of the Character, which had been already
fastned on him.

'Twas testifyed. That keeping his two Successive Wives in
a strange kind of Slavery, he would when he came home from
abroad pretend to tell the Talk which any had with them;
That he has brought them to the point of Death, by his Harsh
Dealings with his Wives, and then made the People about him
to promise that in Case Death should happen, they would say
nothing of it; That he used all means to make his Wives
Write, Sign, Seal, and Swear a Covenant, never to Reveal
any of his Secrots; That his Wives had privately complained
unto the Neighbours about frightful Apparitions of Evil
Spirits, with which their House was sometimes infested; and
that many such things have been Whispered among the
Neighbourhood. There were also some other Testimonies, relating to the Death of People, whereby the Consciences of an
Impartial Jury were convinced that G. B. had Bewitched the
persons mentioned in the Complaints. But I am forced to
omit several passages, in this, as well as in all the succeeding

1002] COnOK MATHEB, WONDERS £U

Triaby becanse the Scribes who took Notice of tbeiii» hav^ ik>I
Supplyed me.

Vn. One Mr. Rock, Brother in Law to thfe Cu a, TVm*^
fy'd, that G. B. and he himself, and his Sister, who was C^. B a
Wife, going out for Two or three Miles to gitther Straw-Benrmi»
lUdc with his Sister the Wife of a B.Itode home very So^
with G. B. on Foot in their Oompany. G. R stept aside a
little into the Bushes; Whereupon they Halted ana HattiK^'d
for him. He not answering, they went away homewards, with
a Quickened pace, without any expectation of seeiug him iu
a considerable whfle; and yet when they were got near hiuue,
to their Astonishment they found him on foot with thtMU,
having a Basket of Straw-Berries. G. B. immediately Uieii
fell to chiding his Wife, on the account of what she hail Unm
iq)eaking to her Brother, of him, on the Road : which when they
wondred at, he said. He knew their thoughts. Ruck lHniv|t
startled at that, made some Reply, intimating that the l^twil
himself did not know so far; but G. B. answered, My (UhI
makes known your Thoughts unto me. The priaonor now at
the Barr had nothing to answer, unto what was thus WitiumtHi
against him, that was worth considering. Only ho said, lluc^k
and his Wife left a Man with him, when thoy loft liim. Whic^h
Ruck now affinn'd to be false; and when the Court ankod
G. B. What the Man's Name was? his countonanoo wan niunh
altered; nor could he say, who 'twas. But tlio (3ourt bogaii
to think, that he then stq)'d aside, only that bv the aiwlNlarKui
of the Black Man, he mi^t put on his InvlMibilityi aiid in that
Fascinating Mist, gratifie Ins own Jealous humour, to hmr
what they said of him. Which trick of reiidring ihomm^lvm
Invisible, our Witehes do in their confcssionM imiUmd tlial Uii^y
sometimes aro Masters of; and it is the more cnuliUW., Ixei^auNe
there is Demonstration that they often render many oiluir
things utteriy Invisible.

Vin. Faltring, Faulty, unconstant, and c/miriuy Answirm
upon Judicial and deliberate examinatirin, ari; ly/unU^fJ i^ifiie
unlucky symptoms of guilt, in all crinum, KiqHMHUy in WiU'}^
crafts.^ Now there never was a prmfmtr uunn Kmi/n^it tor
them, than G. B. both at his ExHtsmmium a/i/J on his ^J'riaJ.

*He if qoodiif John Oaule — tike fi/«t o( Li« 'W/re 4wrUiii" m^ffiM *M^
CMBf, pp. ffy%\).

222 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES UW

His Tergiversations, Contradictions, and Falsehoods, were veiy
sensible : he had little to say, but that he had heard scnne things
that he could not prove. Reflecting upon the Reputation of
some of the witnesses. ) Only he gave in a paper to the Jury;
wherein, altho' he had many times before granted, not CMify
that there are Witches, but also that the present siiSenngp of
the Countrey are the Effect of horrible Witchcrafts, yet he
now goes to evince it, That there neither are, nor ever weie
Witches, that having made a compact with the Divel, Can
J send a Divel to Torment other people at a distance. This
paper was Transcribed out of Ady;^ which the Court presently^ knew, as soon as they heard it. But he said, he had
taken none of it out of any Book; for which, his evasion afterwards was, that a Gentleman gave him the discourse in a
manuscript, from whence he Trimscribed it.

IX. The Jury brought him in guilty : But when he came
to Dy, he utterly deny'd the Fact, whereof he had been thus
convicted.*

^ Thomas Ady, A Candle in the Dark (London, 1656) — reprinted in 1661 as
A Perfect Diecotery cf Witches, In neither edition are predsely these woids to
be found; but their substance occurs c^ten. How bold and thorou^igouig a
skeptic is Ady, and why Mather counts it answer enough that the passage was
taken from his book, may be guessed from his opening sentence in wUch he gives
"The Reasoned the Book": ''The Grand Errour of these latter Ages is aacribo^
power to Witches, aiid by foolish imagination ci mens brains, without grounds in
the Scriptures, wrongfull killing of the innocent under the name of Witcfaes."
"When one Mr. Burroughs, a Clergyman, who some few years since was hang'd
in New-En^and as a \^^zzard, stood upon his Tryal," wrote Dr. Hutchinson in
1718 in the book that was to end the controvert {Hietmical Eeeay eomeefmim§
Witchcraft, p. xv), "he pull'd out of his Pocket a Leaf that he had got of Bfr.
Ady's Book, to prove that the Scripture Witchcrafts were not like ours: And as
that Defence was not able to save him, I humbly offer my Book as an Argument
on the Behalf oi all such miserable People."

« "Presently" then meant "at once."

* For detaib as to his execution see above, p. 177, and below, pp. 360-361.
Before accepting in perfect faith Mather's account oi his trial, one should weigh
not only the comments of Calef (see pp. 378-380, below) and the severer criticisms of Upham (Salem Witchcraft and Cotton Mather) but the extant records
(Records of Salem Witchcraft, II. 109-128; Mass. Hist Soc, Pfoeeed&9§9, 18601862, pp. 31-37; indictment, Calef, p. 113).

16921 COTTON MATHER, WONDERS 223

II. The Tryal of Bridget Bishop,^ cdias Oliver^ At the Court of
Oyer and Terminer Held at Salem, June 2, 1692.

I. She was Indicted for Bewitching of several persons in
the Neighbourhood, the Indictment b^ng drawn up, according to the Form in such Gases usual. And pleading, Not
Guilty, there were brought in several persons, who had long
undeigone many kinds of Miseries, which were pretematurally
Inflicted, and generally ascribed unto an horrible Witchcraft.
There was Uttle Occasion to prove the Witchcraft, it being
Evident and Notorious to all Bdiolders. Now to fix the Witchcraft on the Prisoner at the Bar, the first thing used, was the
Testimony of the Bewitched; whereof several Testify 'd. That
the Shape of the Prisoner did oftentimes very grievoiisly pinch
them, choak them. Bite them, and AfiUct them; uiging them
to write their Names in a Book, which the said Spectre called.
Ours. One of them did further Testify, that it was the Shape
of this Prisoner, with another, which one Day took her from
her Wheel, and carrying her to the River side, threatned there
to Drown her, if she did not Sign to the Book mentioned:
which yet she refused. Others of them did also Testify, that
the said Shape did in her Threats brag to them that g^e had
been the Death of sundiy persons, then by her Named; that
she had Ridden a man then likewise Named. Another Testify'd the Apparition of Ghosts unto the Spectre of Bishop,
crying out. You Murdered usl About the Truth whereof,
there was in the matter of Fact but too much Suspicion.

II. It was Testify'd, That at the Examination of the
Prisoner before the Magistrates, the Bewitched were extreamly
Tortured. If she did but cast her Eyes on them, they were
presently struck down; and this in such a manner as there
could be no GoUusion in the Business. But upon the Touch
of her Hand upon them, when they lay in their Swoons, they
would immediately Revive; and not upon the Touch of any
ones else. Moreover, upon some Special Actions of her Body,

^As to Bridget Bishop see also pp. 249, 356, bdow. She was of Salem
Village, where she kept a sort of wayside tavern, but had long lived in the town,
mud still held property there. She was the first witch to be tried (June 2) and
eiBcuted (June 10) — perhaps because she had so long been under suspicion.
Hie records of her case are printed in Records cf Salem WUeheraft, I. 135-172.

224 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES 11692

as the shaking of her Head, or the Turning of her Eyes, thqr
presently and painfiilly fell into the like postures. And many
of the like Accidents now fell out, while she was at the Bar.
One at the same time testif3dng, That she said, She could not
be Troubled to see the Afficted thus Tormented.

ni. There was Testimony likewise brought in, that i
man striking once at the place, where a Bewitched person said,
the Shape of this Bishop stood, the Bewitched cried out, that
he had Tore her Coat, in the place then particularly speafy'd;
and the Womans Coat was found to be Tom in that very place.

IV. One Deliverance Hobbs, who had Confessed her
being a Witch, was now Tormented by the Spectres, for her
Confession. And she now Testify'd, That this Bishop tempted
her to Sign the Book again, and to Deny what she had Confess'd. She affirmed, that it was the Shape of this Prisoner,
which whipped her with Iron Rods, to compel her thereunta
And she affirmed, that this Bishop was at a General Meeting of

' the Witches, in a Field at Salem-Village, and there partook of a
Diabolical Sacrament in Bread and Wine then Administred!

V. To render it further Unquestionable, that the prisoner
at the Bar was the Person truly charged in this Witchcraft,
there were produced many Evidences of other Witchcrafts, by
her perpetrated. For Instance, John Cook testify'd, that about
five or six years ago. One morning, about Sun-Bise, he was in
his Chamber assaulted by the Shape of this prisoner: which
Look'd on him, grin'd at him, and very much hurt him with
a Blow on the side of the Head : and that on the same day,
about Noon, the same Shape walked in the Room where he
was, and an Apple strangely flew out of his Hand, into the
Lap of his Mother, six or eight foot from him.

VI. Samuel Gray testify'd, That about fourteen years
ago, he wak'd on a Night, and saw the Room where he lay
full of Light; and that he then saw plainly a Woman between
the Cradle and the Bed-side, which look'd upon him. He
Rose, and it vanished; tho' he found the Doors all fast. Looking out at the Entry-Door, he saw the same Woman, in the
same Garb again; and said, In Gods Name, what do you
come for? He went to Bed, and had the same Woman again
assaulting him. The Child in the Cradle gave a great schreech,
and the Woman Disappeared. It was long before the Child

1602] COITON MATHEIC WONDERS 2»

could be quietai; aiid tbo' it wete a veiy likely Uurivkig Ouk^
yet bom this time it pined away, and after divert UHMXtb»
dy'd in a sad Condition. He knew not Bishop, nor her Nan^;
but whoi he saw her aftar this, he knew by her Oounteivaixo^
and Appanel, and all Circumstances, that it >^'as the Ap)viut«
tion of this Bishop which had thus troubled him.

Vn. John Bly and his Wife testify'd, that he lH>\ight a
sow of Edward Bishop, the Husband of the prisoner; and waa
to pay jhe price agreed, unto another person. This l^UHiner
being Angry that she was thus hindred fron) iinisrinK ^^
money, Quwrell'd with Bly. Soon after which, the Sow wan
taken with strange Fits, Jumping, Leaping, and kno(^ii\g her
head against the Fence; she seem'd Blind and Deaf, and would
neither eat nor be suck'd. Whereupon a neighbour »aid, rfia
believed the Creature was Over-Looked; and sundry other
circumstances concurred, which made the DeponentH Holive
that Bishop had Bewitched it.

VIII. Richard Coman testify'd, that eight yearn ago, an
he lay Awake in his Bed, with a Light Burning in the Hoomi
he was annoy'd with the Apparition of this liinhop, aiul of
two more that were strangers to him, who camo and oppr(*H*MHl
him so, that he could neither stir himself, nor wake any onci
else, and that he was the night after molesUd again in i\m
like manner; the said Bishop taking him bv the Throat, and
pulling him almost out of the Bed. His kinnman ofTerexi for
this cause to lodge with him; and that Night, bm they m*m
Awake, Discoursing together, this Coman wim on('X) more vi#-
ited by the Guests which had formerly Umi m troublietjoine;
his kinsman being at the same time strrK)k Hf>eex;hlitHM aiid uu«
able to move Hand or Foot. He had laid hi>^ »word by him,
which these imhi^py spectres did strive mu^;h U> wn^t innn
him; only he held too fast for them, llit i\um fi^tm hi flu to
call the People of his house; but altho' tlufy Im^Hrd him, yet
they had not power to epesk or stirr; until at last, one of tlm
people dying out, iniiat's the maXUtrl the ^H*^:ir*fH all wtuiiAytA,

DL Samuel Shattock tddity'd, "Vtmi in the Vear im),
this Bridget Bishop often came U) liis h^Mise Ufx/ri mf:U friwi^-
lous and focdiah ernrnds, that they sui^^er^ted ^^ eai/ie mUikA
with a puipo0e of mischief, PreseritJy whereup^/fi his eWe«t
child, wfaicfa was of as j/romising li^Xh uiA hmn^ m uixy

226 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [16B2

child of its Age, b^an to droop exceedingly; and the oftener
that Bishop came to the House, the worse grew the Child. As
the Child would be standing at the Door, he would be thrown
and bruised against the Stones, by an Invisible Hand, and in
like sort knock his Face against the sides of the House, and
bruise it after a miserable manner. Afterwards this Bishq)
would bring him things to Dy, whereof he could not TfymgmA
any use; and when she paid him a piece of Money, the Puise
and Money were unaccountably conveyed out of a Lock'd
box, and never seen more. The Child was immediately hereupon taken with terrible fits, whereof his Friends thougjht he
would have dyed : indeed he did almost nothing but ciy and
Sleep for several Months together; and at length his understanding was utterly taken away. Among other Symptoms
of an Inchantment upon him, one was, that there was a Board
in the Garden, whereon he would walk; and all the invitations
in the world could never fetch him off. About Seventeen or
Eighteen years after, there came a Stranger to Shattocks
House, who seeing the Child, said, ^^This poor Child is Bewitch^; and you have a Neighbour living not far off, who is
a Witch." He added, ^' Your Neighbour has had a faUing out
with your Wife; and she said in her Heart, your Wife is a
proud Woman, and she would bring down her Pride in this
Child." He then Remembred, that Bishop had parted from
his Wife in muttering and menacing Terms, a little before the
Child was taken HI. The abovesaid Stranger would needs
carry the Bewitched Boy with him to Bishops House, on pretence of buying a pot of Cyder. The Woman EIntertained
him in furious manner; and flew also upon the Boy, scratching
his Face till the Blood came; and saying, ^'Thou Rogue, what,
dost thou bring this Fellow here to plague me?'* Now it
seems the Man had said, before he went, that he would fetch
Blood of her. Ever after the Boy was followed with grievous
Fits, which the Doctors themselves generally ascribed imto
Witchcraft; and wherein he would be thrown still into the
Fire or the Water, if he were not constantly look'd after; and
it was verily believed that Bishop was the cause of it.

X. Jolm Louder testify'd, that upon some Uttle controversy with Bishop about her fowles, going well to Bed, he did
awid^e in the Night by moonlight, and did see clearly the like1602] COTTON MATHER, WONDEBS 227

nessof this woman grievoiisly oppressing him; in which miserable condition she held him, unable to help him self, till near
Day. He told Bishop of this; but she deny'd it, and threatned
him very much. Quickly after this, being at home on a Lords
day, with the doors shutt about him, he saw a Black Pig approach him; at which he going to kick, it vanished away.
Immediately after, sitting down, he saw a Black thing Jmnp
in at the Window, and come and stand before him. The Body
was like that of a Monkey, the Feet like a Cocks, but the Face
much like a mans. He being so extreemly affrighted, that he
could not speak, this Monster spoke to hun, and said, ^'I am
a Messenger sent unto you, for I understand that you are in
some Trouble of Mind, and if you will be ruled by me, you shall
want for nothing in this world." Whereupon he endeavoured
to dap his hands upon it; but he could feel no substance,
and it jmnped out of the window again; but inunediately
came in by the Porch, though the Doors were shut, and said,
"You had better take my Counsel!'' He then struck at it
with a stick, but struck only the Groundsel, and broke the
Stick. The Arm with which he struck was presently Disenabled, and it vanished away. He presently went out at the
Back-Door, and spyed this Bishop, in her Orchard, going toward her House; but he had not power to set one foot forward
unto her. Whereupon returning into the House, he was immediately accosted by the Monster he had seen before; which
Goblin was now going to Fly at him; whereat he cry'd out,
"The whole Armour of God be between me and you!'' So it
sprang back, and flew over the Apple Tree, shaking many
Apples off the Tree, in its flying over. At its Leap, it flung
Dirt with its Feet against the Stomach of the Man ; whereon
he was then struck Dumb, and so continued for three Days
together. Upon the producing of this Testimony, Bishop
deny'd that she knew this Deponent : yet their two Orchards
joined, and they had often had their little Quarrels for some
years together.

XI. William Stacy Testifyed, That receiving Money of
this Bishop, for work done by him, he was gone but a matter
of Three Rods from her, and looking for his money, found it
imaccountably gone from him. Some time after. Bishop asked
him, whether Us Father would grind her grist for her? He

228 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAPT CASES Iie02

demanded why? she Reply 'd, '' Because Folks count me a
Witch." He answered, "No Question, but he will grind it
for you." Being then gone about six Rods from her, with a
small Load in his Cart, suddenly the Ofif-wheel slump't and
sunk down into an Hole upon plain ground, so that the Deponent was forced to get help for the Recovering of the whed.
But stepping Back to look for the Hole which might give him
this disaster, there was none at all to be found. Some time
after, he was waked in the Night; but it seem'd as U^t as
Day, and he perfectly saw the shape of this Bishop in the Room,
Troubling of him; but upon her going out, all was Dark again.
He charg'd Bishop afterwards with it, and she deny'd it not;
but was very angry. Quickly after, this Deponent having
been threatned by Bishop, as he was in a daik Night going
to the Bam, he was very suddenly taken or lifted from the
ground, and thrown against a stone wall; After that, he was
again hoisted up and thrown down a Bank, at the end of his
House. After this again, passing by this Bishop, his Hoise
with a small load, striving to Draw, all his Gears flew to pieces,
and the Cart fell down; and this deponent going then to lift
a Bag of com, of about two Bushels, could not budge it with
all his might.

Many other pranks of this Bishops this Deponent was
Ready to testify. He also testify'd, that he verily Believed,
the said Bishop was the Instrument of his Daughter Priscilla's
Death; of which suspicion, pregnant Reasons were assigned.

XII. To Crown aU, John Bly and William Bly Testifyd,
That being Employed by Bridget Bishop, to help take
down the Cellar-waJl of the old House, wherein die formerly Lived, they did in Holes of the said old Wall find several
Poppets,^ made up of Rags and Hogs Brussels, with Headless
Pins in them, the Points being outward. Whereof she could
give no Account unto the Court, that was Reasonable or
Tolerable.

XIII. One thing that made against the Prisoner was, her
being evidently convicted of Gross Lying in the Court, several
Times, while she was making her Plea. But besides this, a

^ Supposed, of course, by her accusers to be such "images" as witches were
alleged to make of their victims, for the sake of torturing them by proxy. (See
above, p. 1^, note 1, p. 219, and below, p. 440, note 1.)

16021 COTTON MATHER, WONDERS 229

Jury of Women found a preternatural Teat upon her Body;*
but upon a second search, within Three or four hours, there
was no such thing to be seen. There was also an account of
other people whom this woman had afflicted. And there might
have been many more, if they had been enquired for. But
there was no n^ed of them.

XIV. There was one very strange thing more, with which
the Court was newly Entertained. As this Woman was, imder
a Guard, passing by the Great and Spacious Meeting-House
of Salem, she gave a Ix)ok towards the House. And inmiediately a Dsemon Invisibly Entring the Meeting-house, Tore
down a part of it ; so that tho' there were no person to be seen
there, yet the people at the Noise running in, found a Board,
which was stron^y fastned with several Nails, transported
unto another quarter of the House.

ni. The Tryal of Susanna Martin,'^ At the Court of Oyer and
Terminer, Held by Adjournment at Salem, June 29, 1692.

I. Susanna Martin, pleading Not Guilty to the Indictment of Witchcraft brought in against her, there were produced the evidences of many persons very sensibly and grievously Bewitched; who all complaned of the prisoner at the
Bar, as the person whom they Beheved the cause of their
Miseries. And now, as well as in the other Trials, there was
an extraordinary endeavour by Witchcrafts, with Cruel and
Frequent Fits, to hinder the poor sufferers from giving in
their complaints; which the Court was forced with much
patience to obtain, by much waiting and watching for it.

II. There was now also an Account given, of what passed
at her first examination before the Magistrates. The cast of
her eye then striking the Afflicted People to the ground,
whether they saw that Cast or no; there were these among
other passages between the Magistrates and the Examinate.

Magistrate. Pray, what ails these People?
Martin. I don't know.

^ See below, p. 436, and note 1.

* Of Amesbury. She too had been long accused. For the trial records see
Recardi cf Saiem Wiiehcrafi, I. 193-233. She was executed on July 19.

230 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES pm

Magistrate. But what do you think ails them?

Martin. I don't desire to spend my Judgment upon it

Magistrate. Don't you ttnnk they are Bewitch'd?

Martin. No, I do not think they are.

Magistrate. Tell us your thoughts about them then.

Martin. No, my thoughts are my own when they are in,
but when they are out, they are anolJiers. Their Master

Magistrate. Their Master? who do you think is their
Master?

Martin. If they be dealing in the Black Art, you may
know as well as I.

Magistrate. Well, what have you done towards this?

Martin. Nothing at all.

Magistrate. Why, tis you or your Appearance.

Martin. I cannot help it.

Magistrate. Is it not Your Master? How comes your
Appearance to hurt these?

Martin. How do I know? He that i^peared in the sh^pe
of Samuel, a Glorify'd Saint, may Appear in any ones shape.

It was then also noted in her, as in others like her, that if
the AjB3icted went to approach her, they were flung down to
the Ground. And, when she was asked the Reason of it, she
said, ^'I cannot tell; it may be, the Devil bears me more
Malice than another.''

HI. The Court accounted themselves Alarum'd by these
things, to Enquire fiuiher into the Conversation of the Prisoner; and see what there might occur, to render these Accusations fiuiher credible. Whereupon, John Allen, of Salisbuiy,
testify'd, That he refusing, because of the weakness of lus
Oxen, to Cart some Staves, at the request of this Martin, she
was displeased at it; and said, ''It had been as good that he
had; for his Oxen g^ould never do him much more Service."
Whereupon this Deponent said, '' Dost thou threaten me, thou
old Witch? VI throw thee into the Brook'' : Which to avoid,
she flew over the Bridge, and escaped. But, as he was going
home, one of his Oxen Tired, so that he was forced to Unyoke
him, that he might get him home. He then put his Oxen,
with many more, upon Salisbury Beach, where Cattle did use
to get flesh. In a few days, all the Oxen upon the Beach
were found by their Tracks, to have run unto the mouth ci

\

\

\

\

1602] COTTON MATHER, WONDERS 231

Merrimack-River, and not returned; but the next day they
were found come ashore upon Flmn-Island. They that sought
them used all imaginable gentleness, but they would still run
away with a violence that seemed wholly Diabohcal, till they
came near the mouth of Merrimack-River; when they ran
right into the Sea, swimming as far as they could be seen.
(>ie of them then swam back again, with a swiftness amazing
to the Beholders, who stood ready to receive him, and help
up his Tired Carcass: But the Beast ran furiously up into the
Island, and from thence, through the Marishes, up into Newbury Town, and so up into ti^e Woods; and there after a
while found near Amesbury. So that, of Fourteen good Oxen,
there was only this saved: the rest were all cast up, some in
one place, and some in another, Drowned.

IV. John Atkinson Testify'd, That he Exchanged a Cow
with a Son of Susanna Martins, whereat she muttered, and
was unwilling he should have it. Going to Receive this Cow,
tho' he Hamstringed her, and Halter'd her, she of a Tame
Creature grew so mad, that they could scarce get her along.
She broke all the Ropes that were f astned unto her, and though
she were Ty'd fast imto a Tree, yet she made her Escape, and
gave them such further Trouble, as they could ascribe to no
cause but Witchcraft.

y. Bernard Feache testify^d. That being in Bed on a
Lords-day Night, he heard a scrabbling at the Window, whereat
he then saw Susanna Martin come in, and jump down upon the
floor. She took hold of this Deponents Feet, and drawing his
Body up into an Heap, she lay upon him near Two Hours; in
all which time he coidd neither speak nor stirr. At length,
when he could b^gin to move, he laid hold on her Hand, and
pulling it up to fajs mouth, he bit three of her Fingers, as he
judged, unto the Bone. Whereupon she went from the Chamber, down the Stairs, out at the Door. This Deponent thereupon called unto the people of the House, to advise them of
what passed; and he himself did follow her. The people saw
her not; but there being a Bucket at the Left-hand of the
Door, there was a drop of Blood found on it; and several more
drops of Blood upon the Snow newly fallen abroad. There
was likewise the print of her two Feet just without the Threshold; but no more sign of any Footing further ofiF.

232 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [lett

At another time this Deponent was desired by the Prisoner,
to come unto an Husking of Com, at her House; and she said,
If he did not come, it were better that he did! He wemt not;
but the Night following, Susanna Martin, as he judged, and
another came towards him. One of them said, "Here he is!"
but he having a Quarternstaff, made a Blow at them. The
Roof of the Bam broke his Blow; but following them to the
Window, he made another Blow at them, and struck them
down; yet they got up, and got out, and he saw no more oi
them.

About this time, there was a Rumour about the Town, that
Martin had a Broken Head; but the Deponent could say
nothing to that.

The said Peache also testify'd the Bewitching of Cattle to
Death, upon Martin's Discontents.

VI. Robert Downer testifyed, That this Prisoner being
some years ago prosecuted at Court for a Witch,^ he then
said unto her. He believed she was a Witch. Whereat she
being dissatisfied, said, That some Shee-Devil would Shortly
fetch him away! Which words were heard by others, as wdD
as himself. Tlie Night following, as he lay in his Bed, there
came in at the Window the likeness of a Cat, which Flew upon
him, took fast hold of his Throat, lay on him a considerable
while, and almost kiUed him. At length he remembred what
Susanna Martin had threatned the Day before; and with
much striving he cryed out, "Avoid, thou Shee-Devil I In the
Name of God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, Avoid!"
Whereupon it left him, leap'd on the Floor, and Flew out at the
Window.

And there also came in several Testimonies, that before
ever Downer q)oke a word of this Accident, Susanna Martin
and her Family had related, How this Downer had been
Handled!

VII. John Kembal testifyed, that Susanna Martin, upon
a Causeless Disgust, had threatned him, about a certain Cow
of his. That she should never do him any more Good : and it

^ In 1669. She was then bound over to the Superior Court, but was discharged without trial. (Hutchinson, History of McLnackiueUs, II., eh. I., as
pubUshed from an earlier draft, with notes by W. F. Poole, in N. E. Hut, and
Oen. Register, XXIV.)

16021 COTTON MATHER, WONDERS 233

came to pass accordingly. For soon after the Cow was found
stark D^ on the dry Ground, without any Distemper to be
discerned upon her. Upon which he was followed with a
strange Death upon more of his Cattle, whereof he lost in
One Spring to the value of Thirty Pounds. But the said John
Kembal had a further Testimony to give in agamst the Prisoner which was truly admirable.

Being desirous to furnish himself with a Dog, he applied
himself to buy one of this Martin, who had a Bitch with Whelps
in her House. But she not letting him have his Choice, he
said, he would supply himself then at one Blezdels. Having
mark'd a puppy which he lik'd at Blezdels, he met George
Martin, the Husband of the prisoner, going by, who ask^
him. Whether he would not have one of his Wives Puppies?
and he answered. No. The same Day, one Edmund Eliot,
being at Martins House, heard George Martin relate, where
this Kembal had been, and what he had said. Whereupon
Susanna Martin replyed, "If I live, I'll give him Puppies
enough!" Within a few Dayes after, this Kembal coming
out of the Woods, there arose a little Black Cloud in the N.W.
and Kembal inmiediately felt a Force upon him, which made
him not able to avoid running upon the stumps of Trees, that
were before him, albeit he had a broad, plain Cart way, before
him; but tho' he had his Ax also on his Shoulder to endanger
him in his Falls, he could not forbear going out of his way to
tumble over them. When he came below the Meeting-House,
there appeared unto him a Uttle thing like a Puppy, of a Darkish Colour; and it shot backwards and forwards between his
Legs. He had the Courage to use all possible Endeavours
of Cutting it with his Ax; but he could not Hit it; the Puppy
gave a jump from him, and went, as to him it seem'd, into the
Groimd. Going a Utile further, there appeared imto him a
Black Puppy, somewhat bigger than the first, but as Black
as a Cole. Its motions were quicker than those of his Ax;
it Flew at his Belly, and away; then at his Throat; so, over his
Shoulder one way, and then over his Shoulder another way.
EQs heart now b^an to fail him, and he thought the Dog
would have Tore los Throat out. But he recovered himself,
and called upon God in his Distress; and Naming the Name of
Jesus Christ, it Vanished away at once. The Deponent Spoke

234 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES pflU

not one Word of these Accidents, for fear of afifri^ting his
wife. But the next Morning, Edmond Eliot going into Martins House, this woman asked him where Kembal was? He
Replyed, At home, a bed, for ought he knew. She returned,
"They say, he was frighted last Night." Ehot asked, "WiA
what?" She answered, "With Puppies." Eliot asked, Where
she heard of it, for he had heard nothing of it? She rejoined,
"About the Town." Altho' Kembal had mentioned the
Matter to no Creature Living.

Vni. William Brown testify'd, that Heaven having
blessed him with a most Pious and prudent wife, this wife d
his one day mett with Susanna Martin; but when she approch'd just imto her, Martin vanished out of sight, and ikt
her extremely affrighted. After which time, the said Martin
often appear'd unto her, giving her no UtUe trouble; and
when she did come, she was visited with Birds that sor^
peck't and Prick'd her; and sometimes a Bunch, like a pullets
^g, would Rise in her throat, ready to Choak her, till she ciyd
out, " Witch, you shan't choak me ! " While this good W(»nan
was in this Extremity, the Church appointed a Day of Prayff ,
on her behalf; whereupon her Trouble ceas'd; she saw not
Martin as formerly; and the Church, instead of their Fast,
gave Thanks for her Deliverance. But a considerable while
after, she being Siunmoned to give in some Evidence at the
Court, against this Martin, quickly thereupon this
came behind her, while she was milking her Cow, and
imto her, "For thy defaming me at Court, I'l make thee the
miserablest Creature in the World." Soon after which, she
fell into a strange kind of Distemper, and became horribly
Frantick, and uncapable of any Reasonable Action; tt^
Physicians declaring, that her Distemper was preternatural,
and that some Devil had certainly Bewitched her; and in that
Condition she now remained.

IX. Sarah Atkinson testify'd. That Susanna Martin came
from Amesbury to their House at Newbury, in an extraordinaiy
Season, when it was not fit for any one to Travel. She came
(as she said unto Atkinson) all that long way on Foot. She
brag'd and show'd how dry she was; nor could it be perceived
that so much as the Soles of her Shoes were wet. Atkinson
was amazed at it; and professed, that she should her self have

1602] COTTON MATHER, WONDERS 235

been wet up to the knees, if she had then came so far; but
Martin reply 'd, She scom'd to be Drabbled! It was noted,
that this Testimony upon her Trial cast her in a veiy singular
Confusion.

X. John Pressy testify'd, That being one Evening very
unaccountably Be^dred, near a field of Martins, and several
times, as one under an Enchantment, returning to the place
he had left, at length he saw a marvellous Light, about the
Bigness of an Half-Bushel, near two Rod out of the way.
He went, and struck at it with a Stick, and laid it on with all
his might. He gave it near forty blows; and felt it a palpable
substance. But going from it, his Heels were struck up, and
he was laid with his Back on the Ground, SUding, as he thought,
into a Pit; from whence he recovered, by taking hold on the
Bush; altho^ afterwards he could find no such Pit in the place.
Having, after his Recovery, gone five or six Rod, he saw Susanna Martin standing on his Left-hand, as the Light had done
before; but they changed no words with one another. He
could scarce find his House in his Return; but at length he
got home, extreamly affrighted. The next day, it was upon
Enquiry understood, that Martin was in a miserable condition by pains and hurts that were upon her.

It was further testify'd by this Deponent, That after he
had given in some Evidence "against sSsanna Martin, many
years ago, she gave him foul words about it ; and said, He should
never prosper more; particularly. That he should never have
more than two Cows; that tho' he were never so likely to have
more, yet he should never have them. And that from that
very Day to this, namely for Twenty Years together, he could
never exceed that Number; but some strange thing or other
still prevented his having of any more.

XI. Jervis Ring testifyed, that about seven years ago,
he was oftentimes and grievously Oppressed in the Ni^t,
but saw not who Troubled him, imtil at last he. Lying perfectly Awake, plainly saw Susanna Martin approach him.
She came to him, and forceably Bit him by the Finger; so that
the Print of the Bite is now so long after to be seen upon him.

XII. But besides all of these Evidences, there was a
most wonderful Accoimt of one Joseph Ring, produced on
this Occasion.

236 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [IW

This man has been strangely carried about by Dsanons,
from one Witch-Meeting to another, for near two yeais together; and for one Quarter of this Time, they have made
him and kept him Dumb, tho' he is now again able to epetk.
There was one T. H.^ who having, as tis judged, a Design of
engaging this Joseph Ring in a Snare of Devillism, contrived
a wile, to bring this Ring two Shillings in Debt unto him.

Afterwards, this poor man would be visited with unknown
shapes, and this T. H. sometimes among them; which would
force him away with them, unto unknown Places, where he
saw meetings, Feastings, Dancings; and after Ids Return,
wherein they hurried him along thro' the Air, he gave Demonstrations to the Nei^bours, that he had indeed been so transported. When he was brought unto these Hellish meetings,
one of the First things they still ' did imto him, was to give
him a knock on the Back, whereupon he was ever as if Bound
with Chains, imci^able of Stirring out of the place, till they
should Release him. He related, that there often came to
him a man, who presented him a Book, whereto he would have
him set his Hand; promising to him, that he should then have
even what he would; and presenting him with all the Delectable Things, persons, and places, that he could imagine. But
he refusing to subscribe, the business would end witix dreadful
Shapes, Noises and Screeches, which almost scared him out
of his witts. Once with the Book, there was a Pen offered
him, and an Inkhom with Liquor in it, that seemed like Blood:
but he never toucht it.

This man did now affirm, that he saw the Prisoner at
several of those Hellish Randezvouzes.

Note, This Woman was one of the most Impudent, Scurrilous, wicked creatures in the world; and she did now throughout her whole Trial discover herself to be such an one. Yet
when she was asked, what she had to say for her self? her
Cheef Plea was. That she had Led a most virtuous and Holy
life!

1 Thomas Hardy, of Great Island, near P(»tsinoutL See RKordSf I. 216.
* Always.

16021 COTTON MATHER, WONDEBS 237

IV. The Trial of Elizabeth Haw,^ at the Court of Oyer and
Terminer, Held by Adjournment at Salem, June 30, 1692.

I. Elizabeth How pleading Not Guilty to the Indictment
of Witchcrafts, then charged upon her, the Court, according
to the usual proceeding of the Courts in England, in such Cases,
began with hearing the Depositions of Several AfSicted People,
who were grievously Tortm^ by sensible and evident Witchcrafts, and all complained of the Prisoner, as the cause of their
Trouble, It was also found that the Si^erers were not able
to bear her Look, as likewise, that in their greatest Swoons,
they distinguished her Touch from other peoples, being thereby
raised out of them.

And there was other Testimony of people to whom the
shape of this How gave trouble Nine or Ten years ago.

n. It has been a most usual thing for the Bewitched persons, at the same time that the Spectres representing the
Witches Troubled them, to be visited with Apparitions of
Ghosts, pretending to have bin Murdered by the Witches then
represented. And sometimes the confessions of the witches
afterwards acknowledged those very Murders, which these
Apparitions charged upon them; altho' they had never heard
what Informations had been given by the Sufferers.

There were such Apparitions of Ghosts testified by some of
the present Sufferers, and the Ghosts affirmed that this How
had Murdered them : which things were Fear'd but not prov'd.

ni. This How had made some Attempts of Joyning to
the Church, at Ipswich, several years ago ; but she was deny 'd
an Admission into that Holy Society, partly through a suspicion of witchcraft, then urged against her. And there now
came in Testimony, of Preternatural Mischiefs, presently befalling some that had been Instrumental to Debar her from
the Conmiimion, whereupon she was Intruding.

^ Of Ipswich. For the touching story of her trial and of the loyalty of her
blind husband and her daughters, see especially Upham, Salem WUchcraJt, II.
216-223, and, in the HiMorical CoUedienu of the Topsfield Historical Society,
XnL (1908), the study on "Topsfield in the Witchcraft Delusion," by Mrs.
Towne and Miss Clark. In the same volume (pp. 107-126) Mr. G. P. Dow has
published the records of her case more completely than has Woodward in Iteeords
c§ 8aUm Wiidienfi (IL 6»-M). She was executed on July 19.

238 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [ItUt

IV. There was a particular Deposition of Joseph Safford,
That his Wife had conceived an extream Aversion to this How,
on the Reports of her Witchcrafts: but How one day, taking
her by the hand, and sa3dng, "I believe you are not Ignorant
of the great Scandal that I ly under, by an evil Report Raised
upon me/' She immediately, imreasonably, and imperswadeably, even like one Enchanted, b^an to take this Womans
part. How being soon after propounded, as desiring an Admission to the Table of the Lord, some of the pious Brethren
were unsatisfy'd about her> The Elders appointed a Meeting
to hear Matters objected against her; and no Arguments in
the world could hinder this Goodwife Safford from going to
the Lectins. She did indeed promise, with much ado, that
she would not go to the Church-Meeting, yet she could not
refram going thither also. How's AflFayra there were so
Canvased, that she came off rather Guilty than Cleared; nevertheless Goodwife Safford could not forbear taking her by the
Hand, and sa3dng, ''Tho' you are Condemned before men,
you are Justify'd before God." She was quickly taken in a
very strange manner, Frantick, Raving, Raging and dying
out, " Goody How must come into the Church ; she is a precious
Saint; and tho' she be Condemned before Men, she is Justafy'd before God." So she continued for the space of two or
three Hours; and then fell into a Trance. But coming to her
self, she ciy'd out, ^'Ha! I was mistaken"; and afterwards
again repeated, ^'Ha! I was mistaken!" Being asked by a
stander by, "Wherein?" She replyed, "I thought Goody How
had been a Precious Saint of God, but now I see she is a Witch.
She has Bewitched me, and my Child, and we shall never be
well, till there be Testimony for her, that she may be taken
into the Chiut^h." And How said afterwards, that she was
very Sony to see Safford at the Church-Meeting mentioned.
Safford after this declared herself to be afflicted by the Shape
of How; and from that Shape she endured many Miseries.

y. John How, Brother to the Husband of the prisoner
testifyed, that he lef using to accompany the prisoner unto h^
Examination, as was by her desired, immediately some of his
Cattle were Bewitched to Death, Leaping three or four foot
high, tinning about. Squeaking, Falling, and Dying, at onoe;
and going to cut off an Ear, for an use tiiat might as well pa1602] COTTON MATHER, WONDERS 239

haps have been Omitted/ the Hand wherein he held his knife
was taken veiy Numb, and so it remained, and full of Pain,
for several Dajres; being not well at this veiy Time. And he
8U£fpected this prisoner for the Author of it.

VI. Nehemiah Abbot testify'd, that unusual and mischievous Accidents would befal his cattle, whenever he had
any Difference with this Prisoner. Once, Particularly, she
wished his Qxe C!hoaked; and within a Little while that Oxe
was C!hoaked with a Turnip in his Throat. At another time,
refusing to lend his horse, at the Request of her Daughter, the
horse was in a Preternatural manner abused. And several
other Odd Things of that kind were testify'd.

Vn. There came in Testimony, that one goodwife Sher*
win, upon some Difference with How, was Bewitched, and that
she Dy'd, Charging this How of having an Hand in her Death.
And that other People had their Barrels of Drink imaccountably mischieved, spoilt, and spilt, upon their Displeasing of
her.

The things in themselves were Trivial; but there being
such a Course of them, it made them the more to be considered. Among others, Martha Wood gave her Testimony,
that a Little after her Father had been employed in gathering
an Account of Howes Conversation, they once and again Lost
Great Quantities of Drink out of their Vessels, in such a manner, as tiiey could ascribe to nothing but Witchcraft. As also,
that How giving her some Apples, when she had eaten of them
she was tiScen with a very strange kind of a maze, insomuch
that she knew not what die said or did.

Vni. There was Likewise a cluster of Depositions, that
one Isaac Cummings refusing to lend his Mare unto the Husband of this How, tbB mare was within a Day or two taken in
a strange condition. The Beast seemed much Abused; being

> What this purpoae may have been does not appear in the evidence: John
How testifies merdy that a neighbor who had lau^^ed at him for thinking the
sow bewitched told him to cut off her ear, "the which I did." It was doubtless
to bom it, as a means to detect the witch. So, Perkins and Gaule say, in En^^and
it was a practice to bum the thing bewitched; and so at New Haven, in 1657,
Thomas MuUener cut off the tail and ear of a pig and threw them into the fire
to find out the witch (Recordi cf the Colony of New Hcnm, H. 224). The belief
was that the person who then first came to the fire was the witdi (see below,
p. 411).

240 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1682

Bruiaed, as if she had been Rmming over the Rocks, and
mariced where the Bridle went, as if burnt with a Bed hot
Bridle. Moreover, one using a Pipe of Tobacco for the Cure
of the Beast, a blew flame issued out of her, took hold erf her
Hair, and not only Spread and Burnt on her, but it also flew
upwards towards the Roof of the Bam, and had like to have
set the Bam on Fire. And the Mare dy'd very suddenly.

IX. Toothy Perley and his Wife Te8tif3r'd, not only
that unaccountable Mischiefs befel their Cattle, upon their
having of Differences with this Prisoner: but also, that they
had a Dau^ter destroy 'd by Witchcrafts; which Dau^tca*
stiU charged How as the cause of her Affliction; and it was
noted, that she would be stmck down, whenever How were
spoken of. She was often endeavoured to be Thrown into the
Fire, and into the Water^ in her strange Fits: tho' her Father
had Corrected her for Chaiging How with Bewitching her, yet
(as was testify'd by others also) she said, she was sure of it,
and must dy standing to it. Accordingly she Charged How
to the very Death; and said, Tho' How could Afflict and Torment her Body, yet she could not Hurt her Soul : and. That
the Tmth of this matter would appear, when she should be
Dead and Gone.

X. Francis Lane testify'd. That being hired by the Husband of this How to get him a parcel of Posts and Rails, this
Lane hired John Pearly to assist him. This Prisoner then told
Lane, that she believed the Posts and Rails would ftot do, because John Perley helped him; but that if he had got than
alone, without John Pearlies help, they might have done wdl
enough. When James How came to receive his Posts and
Rails of Lane, How taking them up by the ends, they, the'
good and sound, yet unaccountably broke off, so that Lane
was forced to get Thirty or Forty more. And this Prisoner
being informed of it, she said, she told him so before; because
Pearly help'd about them.

XI. Afterwards there came in the Confessions of several
other (penitent) Witches, which affirmed this How to be one
of those, who with them had been baptized by the Devil in
the River at Newbery-Falls : before which, he made them
there kneel down by the Brink of the River and Worship him.

1082] COTTON MATHER, WONDEBS 241

V. The Trial of Martha Carrier,^ at the Court of Oyer and TermineTy Held by Adjournment at Salem, August 2, 1692.

I. Martha Carrier was Indicted for the Bewitching of
certain Persons; according to the Form usual in such Cases.
Pleading Not Guilty, to her Indictment, there were First
brought in a considerable number of the Bewitched Persons;
who not only made the Court sensible of an horrid Witchcraft
conunitted upon them, but also deposed. That it was Martha
Carrier, or her Shape, that Grievously Tormented them, by
Biting, Pricking, Pmching, and Choaking of them. It was
further deposed, that while this Carrier was on her Examination, before the Magistrates, the Poor People were so Tortured
that every one expected their Death upon the very Spott;
but that upon the binding of Carrier they were eased. Moreover the Look of Carrier then laid the Afficted People for
Dead; and her .Touch, if her Eye at the same Time were oflf
them, raised them again. Which things were also now seen
upon her Trial. And it was Testifyed, that upon the mention
of some having their Necks twisted almost round, by the
Shape of this Carrier, she replyed, ''Its no matter, llio' their
Necks had been twisted quite off."

n. Before the Trial of this prisoner, several of her own
Children had frankly and fully confessed, not only that they
were Witches themselves, but that this their Mother had made
them so. This Confession they made with great shows of
Repentance, and with much Demonstration of Truth. They
B^ted Place, Time, Occasion; they gave an account of Journeyes. Meetings, and Mischiefs by them performed; and were
very credible in what they said. Nevertheless, this Evidence
was not produced against the Prisoner at the Bar, inasmuch as
there was other Evidence enough to proceed upon.

III. Benjamin Abbot gave in his Testimony, that last
March was a twelve month, this Carrier was very Angry with

^ Of Andover. She was executed, like Burroughs, on August 19, the day
when Mather himself was present and said "all died by a righteous sentence"
(Sewall, Diary, 1. 363). "All of them/' says Judge Sewall, "said they were innocent, Cairier and all." Important for her case are, beside the Reoordt of Salem
Witehcnfi (11. 54-68, 19S-ld9), the documents preserved by Hutchinson IMomo242 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [leo

him, upon laying out some Land, near her Husbands: Her
Expressions in this Anger, were, That she would stick as dose
to Abbot, as the Bark stuck to the Tree, and that he should
Repent of it afore seven years came to an end, so as Doctor
Prescot should never cure him. These words were heard by
others, besides Abbot himself; who also heard her say. She
would hold his Nose as dose to the Grindstone, as ever it was
held since his Name was Abbot. Presently after this, he was
taken with a swelling in his Foot, and then with a pain in his
side, and exceedingly Tormented. It bred into a sore, wfaidi
was Lanced by Doctor Prescot, and several Gallons of Corruption ran out of it. For six weeks it continued veiy bad; and
then another sore bred in his Groin, which was also Lanc'd
by Doctor Prescot. Another Sore then bred in his Groin,
which was likewise Cut, and put him to veiy great Miseiy.
He was brou^t unto Deaths Door, and so remained until
Carrier was taken, and carried away by the Constable; from
which very day, he bc^an to mend, and so grew better every
day, and is wdl ever since.

Sarah Abbot also, his Wife, testityd, that her Husband
was not only all this while Afflicted in his Body, but also that
strange, extraordinary and unaccountable Calamities befd his
Cattel; their Death being such as they could guess at no
Natural Reason for.

IV. Allin Toothaker testif/d. That Bichard, the Son of
Martha Carrier, having some Difference with him, pull'd him
down by the Hair of the Head. When he Rose again, he was
going to strike at Richard Carrier; but fell down flat on his
Back to the ground, and had not power to stir hand or foot,
until he told Carrier he yielded; and then he saw the Shape of
Martha Carrier go off his Breast.

This Toothaker had Received a Wound in the Wars; and
he now testify'd, that Martha Carrier told him. He ^oukl
never be Cured. Just afore the Apprehending of Carrier, he
could thrust a knitting Needle into his Wound, four Inches

cAiiMttt, II., cL I., and the draft edited by Poole in i^. E. EitL ami Ool
RegUier, XXIV.). They are reprinted in Abbot's Huiory cf Andomr (Andofverf
1829), and Mrs. BaOey, in her Hutorkal Sketches cf Andodsr (Boston, 1880) has
added others and told the story in detail (pp. 194-237). On GoodwifSe Canier
and her Andover neighbors see also pp. 180-182, 363, 371-375. 418-42L

1602] COTTON MATHER, WONDERS 243

De^; but present^ after her being Siezed, he was thorou^y
Healed

He furUier testifyd, That when Carrier and he sometimes
were at variance, she would dap her hands at him, and say,
He should get nothing by it; Whereupon he several times lost
his Cattle, by strange Deaths, whereof no Natural Causes could
be given.

V. John Rogger also testifyed, That upon the threatning
words of this malicious Carrier, his Cattle would be strangely
Bewitched; as was more particularly then described.

VI. Samuel Preston testify'd, that about two years agpi
having some Difference with Martha Carrier, he lost a Cow in
a strange Preternatural unusual manner; and about a month
after this, the said Carrier, having again some Difference
with him, she told him. He had lately lost a Cow, and it
should not be long before he Lost another! which accordingly came to Pass; for he had a Thriving and well-kept
Cow, which without any known cause quickly fell down and
Dy'd.

VII. Phebe Chandler testify'd, that about a Fortnight
before the apprehension of Martha Carrier, on a Lords-Day,
while the Psahn was singing, in the Church, this Carrier then
took her by the shoulder and shaking her, asked her, where
she lived? she made her no Answer, cdthough as Carrier, who
lived next door to her Fathers House, could not in reason but
know who she was. Quickly after this, as she was at several
times crossing the Fields, she heard a voice, that she took to
be Martha Carriers, and it seem'd as if it was over her Head.
The voice told her, she should within two or three days be
Poisoned. Accordingly, within such a Little time. One Half
of her Right Hand became greatly swollen, and very painful;
as also part of her Face; whereof she can give no account how
it came. It continued very Bad for some dayes; and several
times since, she has had a great pain in her Breast; and been
so siezed on her Legs, that she has hardly been able to go.
She added that lately, going well to the House of God, Richard,
the Son of Martha Carrier, Look'd very earnestly upon her,
and immediately her hand, which had formerly been poisoned,
as is abovesaid, began to pain her greatley, and die had a
strange Burning at her stomach; but was then struck deaf.

2M NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1602

so that she could not hear any of the prayer, or singing, till
the two or three last words of the Psalme.

VIII. One Foster, who confessed her own Share in the
Witchcraft for which the Prisoner stood indicted, aflSrm'd,
That she had seen the Prisoner at some of their Witch-Meetings,
and that it was this Carrier, who perswaded her to be a Witdt
She confessed. That the Devil cany'd them on a Pole, to a
Witch-Meeting; but the Pole broke, and she hanging about
Carriers Neck, they both fell down, and she then Received an
Hurt by the Fall, whereof she was not at this very time Recovered.

DL One Lacy, who likewise confessed her share in thu
Witchcraft, now Testify'd, That she and the Prisoner wi»e
once Bodfly present at a Witch-meeting in Salem- Village; and
that she knew the Prisoner to be a Witch, and to have been
at a Diabolical Sacrament, and that the Prisoner was the undoing of her and her Children, by Enticing them into tibe
Snare of the Devfl.

X. Another Lacy, who also Confessed her share in thk
Witchcraft, now Testify'd, That the Prisoner was at the WitchMeeting, in Salem Village, where they had Bread and Wine
Administred unto them.

XI. Li the Time of this Prisoner's Trial, one Susanna
Shelden in open Court had her EEands Unaccountably lyd
tc^ther with a Wheel-band, so fast that without Cutting it
could not be Loosed: It was done by a Spectre; and the
Sufferer affirmed, it was the Prisoners.

Memorandum. This Rampant Hag, Martha Carrier, was
the Person, of whom the Confessions of the Watches, and of
her own Children among the rest, agreed. That the Devil had
promised her, she should be Queen of Hell.

Having thus far done the Service imposed upon me, I will
''further piuBue it, by relating a few of those Matchless Curiosities, with which the Witchcraft now upon us has entertained
us. And I shaU Report nothing but with Good Authority,
and what I would Invite all my Readers to examine, while tis
yet Fresh and New, that if there be found any mistake, it may
be as willin^y Retracted, as it was unwillingly Committed.

1602] COTTON MATHER, WONDERS 245

The First CuriosUie.

1. Tis very Remarkable to see what an Impious and Im«
pudent Imitation of Divine Things is Apishly affected by the
Devil, in several of those matters, whereof the Confessions of ^
our Witches and the Afflictions of our Sufferers have informed
us.

That Reverend and Excellent Person, Mr. John Higginson,^
in My Conversation with him, Once invited me to this Reflection; That the Indians which came from far to settle about
Mexico, were in their Progress to that Settlement, under a
Conduct of the Devil, very strangely Emulating what the
Blessed Gkxl gave to Israel in the Wilderness.

Acosta' is our Author for it, that the Devil in

their Idol Vitzlipultzli governed that mighty Nation. He commanded them to leave their Country, promising to make them Lords
over all the Provinces possessed by Six other Nations of Indians,
and give them a Land abounding with all precious things. They
went forth, carrying their Idol witii them, in a Coffer of Reeds, supported by Four of their Principal Priests; with whom he still Discoursed, in secret, Revealing to them the Successes, and Accidents
of their way. He advised them, when to March, and where to Stay,
and without his Commandment they moved not. The first thing
they did, wherever they came, was to Erect a Tabernacle, for their
False Grod; which they set always in the midst of their Camp, and
there placed the Ark upon an Altar. When they. Tired with pains,
talked of proceeding no further in their Journey, than a certain
pleasant Stage, whereto they were arrived, this Devil in one night
horribly kill'd them that had started this Talk, by pulling out their
Hearts. And so they passed on, till they came to Mexico.

The Devil which then thus imitated what was in the Church ^
of the Old Testament, now among Us would Imitate the Aflfayra

^ Senior minister at Salem Town. See also p. 248, note 2, and pp. 308,
399-402.

> It is the Spanish Jesuit, Joseph Acosta, who in his Natural and Moral Hit*
iory €f the Indies (bk. VII., ch. 4) relates this. Mather seems to have used the
Enj^ish version of Grimston (London, 1604), paraphrasing and abridging after
a free fashion and inserting from the following duster what is in his last two
sentences.

346 NARRAITVBS OP THE WITCHCRAFT CASES pMS

of the Church in the New. Tlie Witches do say, that they
form themselves much after the mamier of CongrRgational
Qiurches; and that they have a Baptism and a Suj^ier, and
Officers among them, abominably Resonbling those (tf our
Lord.

But there are many more of these Bloody Tmitatjops, if
the Confessions of the Witches are to be Received; wfa^ I
confess, ou^t to be but with veiy much of Caution.

What is their striking down with a fierce LookT What k
their making of the Afflicted Rise, with a touch oi their Hand?
What is th^ Tranq)ortation thro' the AirT What is their
Travelling in Spirit, while their Body is cast into a Trance?
What is their causing of Cattle to run mad and perish? What
is their Entring their Names in a Book? What is their ooming
tog^er from all parts, at the Sound of a Trumpet? What is
their Appearing sometimes Qoathed with light or Fire upon
them? What is their Covering of themselves and their Instruments with Invisibilify? But a Blasphanous Imitatkm
of certain Things recorded about our Saviour, or His Pnqphets,
or the Saints in the Kingdom of God.

A Second Cvriositie.

n. In all the Witchcraft which now Grievously Vexes us,
I know not whether any thing be more Unaccountable, than
the Trick which the Witches have, to render themselves and
their Tools Invisible. Witchcraft seems to be the Skill of
Applying the Plastic Spirit of the World^ unto some unlawful
purposes, by means of a Confederacy with Evil Spirits. Yet
one would wonder how the Evil Spirits themselves can do
somethings: especially at InvisibiUzmg of the Grossest Bodies.
I can tell the Name of an Ancient Author, who pretends to
show the way, how a man may come to walk about Invisible,
and I can teU the Name of another Ancient Author, who pretends to Explode that way. But I will not speak too plamly.
Lest I should unawares Poison some of my Readers, as the

^This phrase shows the influence of Ralph Cudworth (see his InitUedmi
fifdern^ Ul I., ch. III., $37) and through him of Cambridge Piatonism — whose
demonology {e. g., Cudworth, Ul L, di. V., at end) must also be remembered

1«2I comas MATFTKR, WONDERS W

Pious Heminghis did one of hs Ptq>ilB> when lie oufy by wi^
of Diverakm recited a SpeSly which, they had said, would euro
Agues.^ This much I will say; The notion of procuring luvisibility, by any Natural Ebqiedient yet ]uk>wu, h^ I B^Ye»
a meer Flinyisin; How far it may be obtained by a Mugioal
Sacrament, is best known to the Dangerous Knaves that hav^
Tiy'd it But our Witches do seem to have got the Kuaok :
and this is cme of the Things, that make me tluuk^ Witi^oraft
wiU not be fully understood, until the Di^ wheu theire nhall
not be one Witch in the World.

There are certain people very Dogmatical about thei*^
matters; but 11 give them only these Three Bonen to Pii>k.

I^rst, One of our Bewitched people was cnieUv aiwaulted
by a Spectre, that, she said, ran at her with a S^nnulo : tho* no
body else in the Room, could see either the SiuH^tre tu* thti
Spindle. At last, in her miseries, giving a Snatcn at Uie H)hh)-
tre, she pull'd the Spindle away; and it was no sooiu^r g\\%
into her hand, but the other people then prt^sant Imht^UI, tnat
it was indeed a Real, Proper, Iron Hpindlo, ImUmgiug thuy
knew to whom; which when they Loek'd up vt^ry mUti, it waa
nevertheless by Demons unaccountably utole away, U) iid
f luiher mischief.

Secondly, Another of our Bewitched P(U)pl» wan hauiit^ui
with a most abusive Spectre, which camo to hnr, tfhu wiiii
with a Sheet about her. After she had undt^rgoiicf a ili)al uf
Teaze, from the Annoyances of the Kf>ectre, h\w gavit a Violent
Snatch at the Sheet that was upon it; wluititfivm liiiii Una a
Comer, which in her Hand immediately iHUMhu ViMihU» U} a
Roomful of Spectators; a Palpalile Ci)nu*.r of a Hluuti. IW
Father, who was now holding her, ('aUtWd thai \ut luiglil Kiu^p
what his Dau^iter had so stra/igely i^^mui, hni i\ui iumun^
Spectre had like to have puU'd hii$ lihiul iM, l;y JOiiika^vouiiiig
to wrest it from him; however be still \yM it, aiid i ti>\iiPiH)m
has it still to show; it being but a AfW Jlouiti agy. iiiuiM^ly
about the Be^jinixig of this ^Mol/er, Uiat tijii-; hiA-MU-ni 1au|;-
pened; in the family <A <h^ ViUsjjtUi, at MujaikLrhU'i.

Thirdly^ A young JuctaU; delayixig U> pnx;ui<; 'J 4:Hiiiii'>iiialj4

' It k the ipKUt LhaMi tUfokigiMii NK:LuUfc Hauuuui^i ^jS'yAt Hiumnu^^'Mj
who idle tbife it4jr>' ^ kaiw^iif ici bit AdtMmdt^ d^ ^up^t^ii^ot^u^ MuffiAn^ «tUAiUi0
(CopcaAnftfti, lulo., ful. C2 v«r»o.

248 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES Dm

for his Parents, who being under confinement on Suspidcm of
Witchcraft; required him to do that Service for them, was
quickly pursued with odd Inconveniences. But once above
tiie Rest, an Officer going to put his Brand on the Horns of
some Cows, belonging to these people, which tho' he had Siex'd
for some of their Debts, yet he was willing to leave in their
Possession, for the Subsistence of the poor Family; this young
man help'd in holding the Cows to be thus Branded. The
three first Cows he held well enough ; but when the hot Brand
was clap't upon the Fourth, he winc'd and shrunk at such a
rate, as that he could hold the Cow no longer. Being afterwards Examined about it, he Confessed, That at that very
Instant when the Brand entred the Cows Horn, exactly tibie
like burning Brand was dap'd upon his own Thigh; where he
has Exposed the Lasting Marks of it, unto such as asked to
see them.

Unriddle these Things, — Et Eris mihi magrvus Apollo.^

A Third Curiositie.

m. If a Drop of Innocent Blood should be shed, in tibe
Prosecution of the Witchcrafts among us, how unhappy are
we! For which cause, I cannot express my self in better tenns,
than those of a most Worthy Person, who Uves near the present Center of these things.' '^The Mind of God in these matters, is to be carefully looked into, with due Circumspection,
that Satan deceive us not with his Devices, who transforms
himself into an Angel of light, and may pretend Justice and
yet intend Mischief.'* But on the other side, if the Storm of
Justice do now fall only on the Heads of those Guilty Witches
and Wretches which have defiled our Land, How Happy!

The Execution of some that have lately Dyed has been
immediately attended with a strange Deliverance of some,
that had lain for many years in a most sad Condition, under

^ "And thou shalt be to me a great Apollo" — t. e., a great revealer of iqys-
^' teries. For their unriddling see p. 370, below.

* It has been suggested that this means the Rev. John Higginson, the venerable senior minister at Salem, whose hesitation as to the proceedings may be
inferred from Brattle's words (p. 184, above) — and from all else we know. See
below, p. 398.

10921 COTTON MATHER, WONDERS 249

they knew not whose Evil Hands. As I am abundantly satich
fyM, That many of the Self-Murders committed here, have
been the effects of a Cruel and Bloody Witchcraft, letting fly
Dsemons upon the miserable Seneca's;^ thus, it has been admirable unto me to see, how a Devillish Witchcraft, sending
Devils upon them, has driven many poor people to Despair,
and persecuted their minds with such Buzzes^ of Atheism and
Blasphemy, as has made them even run Distracted with Terrors: and some long Bow'd down imder such a Spirit of Infirmity, have been marvelously Recovered upon the Death of
the Witches.

One Whetford particularly ten years ago, challenging of
Bridget Bishop (whose Trial you have had) with Stealing of a
Spoon, Bishop threatned her very direfully: presently after
this was Whetford in the Night, and in her Bed, visited by
Bishop, with one Parker, who maJdng the Room Light at their
coming in, there discoursed of several mischiefs they would
inflict upon her. At last, they pull'd her out, and carried her
unto the Sea-side, there to drown her; but she calling upon
God, they left her, tho' not without Expressions of their Fury.
From that very Time, this poor Whetford was utterly spoilt,
and grew a Tempted, Froward, Crazed sort of a Woman; a
vexation to her self, and all about her; and many ways unreasonable. In this Distraction she lay, till those women were
Apprehended, by the Authority; then she began to mend;
and upon their Elxecution, was presently and perfectly Recovered, from the ten years madness that had been upon her.

A Fourth Curiositie.

IV. Tis a thousand pitties, that we should permit our
Eyes to be so Blood-shot with passions, as to loose the sight
of many wonderful Things, wherein the Wisdom and Justice
of God, would be Glorify'd. Some of those Things, are the
frequent Apparitions of Ghosts, whereby many Old Murders
among us, come to be considered. And, among many Instances
of this kind, I will single out one, which concerned a poor man,

^ Hie philosopher Seneca, it will be remembered, was an advocate of suicide
and ended hb own life thus.
'Whisperings.

260 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES (IW

lately Prest unto Death, because of his Befusmg to Plead fw
his life.^ I shall make an Extract of a Letter, which was
written to my Honourable Friend, Samuel Sewal, Esq-i' by
Mr. Putman,' to this piupose;

The Last Night my Daughter Ami was grievously Tormented
by Witches, Threatning that she should be Pressed to Death, before Giles Cory. But thro' the Goodness of a Gracious God, she had
at last a little Respite. Whereupon there appeared unto her (she
said) a man in a \^^nding Sheet; who told her that Giles Cory had
Murdered him, by Pressing him to Death with his Feet; but that
the Devil there appeared unto him, and Covenanted with him, and
promised him, He should not be Hanged. The Apparition said,
God Hardened his Heart, that he should not hearken to the Advice
of the Court, and so Dy an ea^ Death; because as it said, ''It must
be done to him as he has done to me.'' The Apparition also said,
That Giles Cory was carry'd to the Court for this, and that the Jury
had found the Murder, and that her Father knew the man, and the
thing was done before she was bom. Now Sir, This is not a litde
strange to us; that no body should Remember these things, all the
while that Giles Cory was in Prison, and so often before the Court
For all people now Remember very well, (and the Records of the
Court also mention it,) That about Seventeen Years ago, Giles Cory
kept a man in his House, that was almost a Natural Fool : whidi
Man Dy'd suddenly. A Jury was Impannd'd upon him, among
whom was Dr. Zorobbabel Endicot;^ who found the man bruised
to Death, and having dodders of Blood about his Heart. The Jury,
whereof several are yet alive, brought in the man Murdered ; but as
if some Enchantment had hindred the Prosecution of the Matter,
the Court Proceeded not against Giles Cory, tho' it cost him a great
deal of Mony to get off.

Thus the Story.

The Reverend and Worthy Author, having at the Direction
of His Excellency the Govemour, so far Obliged the Publick,
as to give some Accoimt of the Sufferings brou^t upon the

^ As to the case of Gfles Corey see below, pp. 366-367.

* Judge Sewall, of the court.

'Hiomas Putnam, of Salem Milage, whose wife and daughter flayed so
large a part as accusers.

* Of Salem \^age. A son of John Endicott, the first governor of the Bay
colony, and himself mudi honored as a physician.

1602] COTTON MATHER, WONDERS 251

Countrey by Witchcraft; and of the Trials which have passed
upon several Executed for the Same :

Upon Perusal thereof ^ We find the Matters of Fact and
Evidence, Truly reported. And a Prospect given, of the
Methods of Conviction, used in the Proceedings of the Court
at Salem.

Boston Octob 11. William Stoughton

1692. Samuel Sewall.

A BRAND PLUCK'D OUT OF THE BURNING, BY

COTTON MATHER, 1693

INTRODUCTION

The Wofnders of the Invisible World was not yet issued,
the General Court was still debating its course toward the
accused who filled the jaOs, and Judge Sewall (on November
22, 1692) was just imploring God to ^^ bless the Assembly in
their debates'' and (if ^'consisting with his Justice and Holi^
ness") to '^vindicate the late Judges/' when there fell into the
hands of the Rev. Cotton Mather an opportunity to show the
province and the world how a case of bewitchment should be
handled. It is likely enough that he had known Mercy Short
from the time of her first seizure, in the early summer; but
from November, and especially from the day when she fell
into a parox}rsm while attending his church, and was carried
into a neighbor's, where for weeks she lay at his door, till her
'^ deliverance" on March 16, he gave the case the attention
that fruited in the following journal. The journal was doubtless soon thereafter completed, and, like his earlier narrative
of the case of the Goodwin children,^ and his later one of Margaret Rule's,* put into circulation among his friends.

The manuscript, still extant in his own handwriting, bears
on its cover-page, in his hand, ''To be returned unto Cotton
Mather." And in the possession of Cotton Mather and his
family it seems to have remained until 1814, when his granddaughter, Mrs. Hannah (Mather) Crocker, presented it, with
many other papers, to the American Antiquarian Society at
Worcester, Massachusetts.* "About ten years ago," writes

1 See p. 119 and p. 126, note 1. *See p. 306, note 3, p. 307,. note 1.
*"The manuBcripV writes Mr. Brigham, the present Ubnurian of that
society, ''unquestioni^ly came to the Society in December, 1814, under

255

256 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES

W. F. Poole in the second volume (1881) of the Memcrid
History of Boston, ^' Dr. Samuel F. Haven, the accomplished
librarian of the American Antiquarian Society, in looking
through the Mather manuscripts in that library^ found (me
entitled, A Brand Phickt out of the Burning, and on examination it proved to be the long-lost Mercy Short narrative.''
^' Dr. Haven, in announcing the discovery," he adds, ''promised
to print it with notes; but he has not yet found leisure to fulfil
his promise." That leisure never came. A transcript of the
booklet was made and lent to Poole, who made it the basis of
his careful summary of the case,^ and this transcript has since
been used by other scholars; but when, after Dr. Haven's
death (in 1881), his successor was frequently asked, ''When

date b the following entry in the Donation Bock : 'Above 'Siatt Hundred Sennons,
in manuscript and separate, written and preached by the Mathers. Together
with a number of manuscript books and papers which were in the Mather Libniy.
Presented to the Society by Mrs. Hannah Crocker of Boston.' "

The vicissitudes, earlier and later, of the papers and books of the Mft>»*^
have been related in much detail by Mr. Julius H. Tuttle ("The libraries of the
Mathers," in the Proceedings of the American Antiquarian Society, n. a., XX.
269-356), and he narrates (p. 310) how in October, 1831, another body of M
papers, which "nobody could read," found their way from the garret onoe Samud
Mather's to the Antiquarian Society. But it is the hand of President Isaiah
Thomas (d. April, 1831), who received the gift of Mrs. Crodcer, that has writtea
on the cover-page of our MS. its title of "Brand Pludced out of the Burning'*;
and it was doubtless while looking over the "dSbris from the drawers and pigeonholes of a student's desk, that came to this Society with the family library from
Mrs. Hannah Mather Crocker," that Librarian Haven (see his report, p. 36 in
the Proceedings of the American Antiquarian Society, Ajml, 1869) first no^ioed it

The ori^nal manuscript is 7^ inches high by 6 inches wide. It contains
20 leaves, of which the first is blank. The remaining pages are numbered from
1 to 38, p. 26 having nothing upon it and therefore no numbering. At the end of
p. 38 the text breaks off abruptly, after the opening words (printed bdow, p. 286)
of section 29. These suflBce to show the section merely a postscript and to convince us that few words are missing. The manuscript shows marks of mudi use;
many words are blotted or erased, and there are some interlineations in a different
ink, some in the same ink, but practically all in the same hand. The most important marks of the writer's later thought are in the shape of marginal adifitions.

For this careful description of the MS. thanks are due to Librarian Briigbam
and to Dr. Charies H. Lincoln, who has prepared the copy for the printer.

1 Memorial History ef Boston, II. 147-152.

INTRODUCTION 257

shall you publish Cotton Mather's account of the trial of Mercy
Short?" he could only reply that it '^ should see the light at ai\
early day, under the editorial supervision of such students of
the witchcraft problem as Drs. Poole and Moore," ^ Poole
seriously thought of the task. '^His study of the witchcraft
problem and literature/' said Librarian Barton at his death,'
'^had led him to hope that he might edit with notes our Cot-^
ton Mather manuscript account of the case of Mercy Short";
but he seems never to have taken it in hand, and no other
has since attempted it.

The importance of the narrative lies not only in its contemporaneity with the Salem trials and the side-lights it gives us
on that episode and its environment, but yet more in the clearness with which it shows just what its author stood for in the
matter. To him the case of Mercy Short was not only identical in kind with those of "the Bewitched people then tormented by Invisible Furies in the County of Essex" : it was
itself one of those cases. And from first to last he was conscious that he was making his treatment of it an object lesson. ^
The present editor is far, indeed, from finding in it, like Mr.
Poole, "the principles and methods of the Boston ministers"
in general, and yet farther from his conviction that Mather
meant his method to be a rival of the court's. He can not
overlook that author's own explanation that, "had wee not
studiously suppressed all clamom^s and Rxmiours that might
have touched the Reputacion of people exhibited in this Witchcraft, there might have ensued most uncomfortable uproar";*
or that, if he himself used prayer and fasting, he had a little
earlier reminded the court how in Sweden a fast "was immediately [foDowed] with a remarkable Smile of God upon
the endeavoiuB of the Judges to discover and Extirpate the
Authors of that Execrable witchcraft";^ or that, if he foimd

1 Report of Librarian Barton, April, 1885, in Proceedings, n. 8., III. 385-386.
> See his report for April, 1894 (ibid,, IX. 184). < See p. 276, below.
« Mass. Hist Soc., CoUediaru, fourth series, VIII. 392.

258 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES

in Mercy Short's revelations confirmation of his view that the
Devil may sometimes personate the innocent, he found confirmation also for his faith that such a '^dask dispensation"
must be rare and that God could find a way to shelter the
guiltless;^ or that, if he restrained the bewitched girl from betraying to any but himself the names of her tormentors, he
was ready himself to betray them to justice as fast as they
seemed to him ''dangerous and damnable'' and as there could
be found ^'more cause/' i. e., such added evidence as he had
again and again declared satisfactory in the Salem convictions.*
But for these conclusions, as for Mr. Poole's, the present narrative must serve pre-eminently as a criterion; and for the
precise nature and limits of his method, for the appraisal of
his credulity and of his r61e as exorcist and as dupe, no other
can compare with it, not even that of Margaret Rule.' And,
unlike the latter, it does not come to us through the hand of a
foe. It is in the light of such contemporary utterances that
one must read those pages of his Diary which there is so much
reason to bdieve the work of later years.^

1 P. 274, below. *nrid. * Pp. 308-323, below.

* That A Brand pludt^d (ndqftke Burning was written hdate Another Brand
pLvdd otdcfthe Burning is clear from their titles; and the mention, in the latter,
id Merpy Short's experiences, "whereof a Narrative has been already given,"
as ending "about half a year" earlier, before Margaret Rule's began — L e., before
September 10, 1693 — gives us March of that year as a terminus a quo. Mardi
16, 1603, is the latest date mentioned in the manuscript itself; and it is dear from
the hope with which it ends that its author then lost little time in dosmg hb
reooid and sharing it with his friends— if, in a less complete form, it was not
already known to them.

',i tf. .-

"(!»<,., •« >V

f'»^ /»/._:. ~:;r"- ^-^^S:^

4.-.j...u,,^/,.'.-.. s...«i*i v^s-^^yr

- - ^ MT I- la

A BH.VNU n.rcKD OIT OK THE BUKNIMG

Vim p,„, „( ifc „rigi„J ,„„,„„i,,,. i„ ,h, p„„„,i„„ „t u„ Amori^n

A BRAND PLUCK'D OUT OF THE BURNING^

§ 1. Mercy Short had been taken Captive by our cruel
and Bloody Indians in the East, who at the same time horribly Butchered her Father, her Mother, her Brother, her
Sister, and others of her Kindred and then carried her, and
three surviving Brothers with two Sisters, from Nieuchewannic* imto Canada : after which our Fleet Returning from Quebeck to Boston, brought them with other prisoners that were
then Redeemed. But altho she had then already Bom the
Yoke in her youth, Yett God Almighty saw it Good for her
to Bear more of that Yoke, before seventeen years of her life
had RoUed away.

§ 2. It was in the Summer of the Year 1692, when sever{al]
persons were committed unto the Gaol in Boston on suspicion
of having an Hand in that most Horrid and Hellish Witchcraft, which had brought in the Divels upon several parts of
the Country, at such a rate as is the just Astonishment of the
world; Then it was that Mercy Short, being sent by her Mistress upon an Errand unto the prison, was asked by one of the .
Suspected Witches for a little Tobacco; and she affronted the

«

* A cover-page of the maDUScript bears the inscription (by a later hand) :
Brand Fludced out of the Burning, being an Account of Mercy Short who was

supposed to suffer by Witchcraft 1692." And in the hand of Cotton Mather
himself are written the words: "To be returned unto Cotton Mather."

* Or Sahnon Falls, a New Hampshire settlement on the river dividing that
province from Maine, where now on the Maine side is the village of Berwick. In
bis Magrudia (bk. VII., art 6) Mather has told in detail the story of this taking
of Salmon Falls by the French and Indians (March 18, 1600) and what share in
this calamity "fell to the family of one Clement Short" : "This honest man, with
his pious wife, and three children, were kill'd; and six or seven of their children
were made prisoners." His knowledge of the episode was doubtless gathered
from Mercy Short The fleet, which brought her to Boston, arrived November
19, 1690. She probably went into domestic service, and, as we shall see, in a
neighborhood where were "people of quality."

259

260 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [ie02

Hag (t'was one Sarah Good, since executed at Salem)^ by
throwing an Handful of Shavings at her and saying, lliat^s
Tobacco good enough for you. Whereupon that Wretched
Woman bestowed some ill words upon her, and poor Mercy
was taken with just such, or perhaps much worse. Fits as those
which held the Bewitched people then Tormented by Invisible
Furies in the County of Essex. A world of misery did shee
endure, for diverse weeks together, and such as could not possibly bee inflicted upon her without the Immediate efficiency
of some Agent, or Rational or Malicious ; until God was pleased
at length to hear the multiply'd prayers of His people for her
Deliverance. There were many Remarkable Thing? in the
molestations then given her; Whereof one was that they made
her Fast for Twelve Days together.

§ 3. Being happily Delivered, shee for diverse months remained so; even until the Winter foUowing. But then shee
suddenly fell into a swoon wherein shee lay for Dead many
hours together; and it was not long before the Distinct and
Formal Fits of Witchcraft returned upon her.* Shee continued variously Tortured and Harassed by Evil Spirits; and
in the same circumstances that had been upon her formerly
until one of the ministers in the Town' took a little company
of his praying Neighbors, and kept a Day of prayer with her
and for her. On which day shee lay whoUy insensible of the
people that were thus concerned on her behalf and entertained
with none but the ciu'sed Spectres, whom alone shee saw, shee
heard, shee felt; nevertheless while that minister was preaching on Marc. 9. 28, 29, shee flew upon him and shee tore a leaf
of his Bible.^ For some days after This Day shee continued

> Sarah Good (see pp. 343 ff., 414) was sent to the Bostim jail on Mardi 7,
condemned at Salem June 30, executed on July 19. As she is here spoken of as
only ''suspected/' the interview with Mercy Short was as early as June.

*The event is noted by Sewall (Diary, I. 370) under November 22: "Now
about, Mercy Short grows Ul again, as formeriy." This he probably added when
about to write the fdlowing entry: "November 25. Mr. Mather sent for to
her."

* Mather himself, of course.

« Then doubtless it was— "Nov. 29. 1692"— that Mather wrote in hb BiUe:
"While I was preaching at a private fast (kept for a possessed young woman) —
on Mark 9. 28, 29. — the Devel in the Damsel flew upon mee, and tore the Leaf,
as it is now torn over against the Text." A facsimile of this autograph note is

10821 C. MATHER, BRAND OUT OP THE BURNING 261

in her grievous vexations; but then, after what was little short
of an Entire and a Total Fast for about Nine Dayes together,
in those miseries, at length shee gained about Three Dayes
Remission. In this Intermission of her Anguishes, shee did
eat a little, and but a very little. Victuals; and shee was able
on the Lords Day to visit the Lords House, near half a mile
from the place of her abode.^

§ 4. While shee was in the congregation shee so fell under
the Arrest of her Invisible Troublers that shee now Saw and
Heard nothing but those horrid Fiends, but when the Assembly
was just broke up, they fell to Tormenting of her at such a
rate, that many strong men with an united Force, could not
well carry her any Further than the House of a land Neighbour, who charitably took her in. T was by the singular Providence of God, that shee was thus cast amofng] a Neighborhood
whose Hearts Hee stirred up to pitty her, to releeve her, to
pray for her, and with a most christian compassion do all that
could piously bee done, for her Deliverance. There shee lay
for diverse weeks; and you shall now bee told in what manner
handled! A manner (Mering Little or Nothing from that
wherein shee had been thus long already Tortured.

§ 5. There exhibited himself unto her a Divel having the
Figure of A Short and a Black Man; and it was remarkable )
that altho' shee had no sort of Acquaintance with Histories,
of what has happened elswhere, to make any Impressions upon;
her Imagination, yett the Divel that visited her was just of thej
same Statins, Feature, and complexion with what the Histories'
of the Witchcrafts beyond-sea ascribe imto him; he was a
wretch no taller than an ordinary Walking-Staff; hee was not
of a Negro, but of a Tawney, or an Indian colour; hee wore
an high-crowned Hat, with strait Hair; and had one ClovenFoot. This Divel still brought with him unto her a considerable Number of Spectres, most exactly resembling the persons
of several people in the countrey, some of whose Names were

prefixed by Sparks to the life of Cotton Mather in his Library of American Biog*
raphy (at p. 161), and the tracing made by him for it is treasured, with his others,
In the library of Comdl University.

^ /. e,, to come to Mather's church on Sunday, December 4 : her nine days'
fast, if begun on November 22, ended on December 1, and "three days' remission" had followed.

262 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [16B2

either formeily known, or now by their companions told unto
her. And these wicked Spectres assisted, or obeyed, their
Divdlish Master, who brought tiiem to infest her with such
hideous Assaults, as were the Astonishment of all 1^ stander&-

§ 6. When this Divel with his confederate and concomitant
Spectres came unto this our poor Neighbour, it was their custom to cast her into such horrible Darkness that shee stiD
imagined herself in a desolate cellar, where Day or Ni^t could
not bee distinguished. Her eyes were open, moving to and
fro after the Hellish Harpyes that were now fluttering about
her; but so little able to see any thing else, that altho wee
made as if wee would strike at her eyes, it would not make her
wink. If wee laid our Hands upon them it hindred her from
a view of those Fiends which troubled her; but shee gave us
afterwards to imderstand, that it put her unto much pain to
bee so hindred. Her ears were altogether stopt unto all of
our Noises, being wholly engrossed by the Invisible Assailants;
insomuch that tibo' wee sometimes halloo'd extremely loud in
her ears, yett shee heard nothing of it. And it was particularly considerable that altho shee could bee no other than
utterly ignorant of what the European Books relate concerning such matters, nevertheless the Voice of these Dsmons
was exactly such as you shall read in Glanvils collections^
and elsewhere; twas Big, Low, Thick, and such as ordinaiily
caused her to say Haah! or Howl or What do you say? and
listen and oblige them to Repeat before shee could imderstand
Note. That wee the standers-by could neither see nor Hear
the things which thus entertained this young woman, and I
hope wee never shall; but wee were informed partly from the
Speeches that fell from her in these Trances; partly from the
Accounts by her afterwards given unto us; and partly by a
multitude of other concurrant circumstances.

§ 7. The Divel, and his crew, having thus forced her senses
from conversing with their ordinary objects, and captivated
them unto this communion with The Powers of Daikness,
Their manner was in the first place, to make her a tender of a
Book, somewhat long and thick (like the wast-books of many
Traders), butt bound and clasp't, and filled not only with tte

* As to Joseph Glanvin and his "coOectionsy" see above, pp. &-^

ie»21 C MATHER, BRAND OUT OF THE BURNING 263

Names or Marks, but also with the explicit (short) Covenants
of such as had listed themselves in the Service of Satan, and
the Design of Witchcraft; all written in Red characters; many^
whereof shee had opportunity to read when they opened the
Book before her. This Book of Death did they Tempt her to
sign; and condescended so far in their soUicitacions, as to
tdU her, That if shee would only Touch it with her Finger it
should bee enough. Only the received signification of this
little ceremony diould bee That shee now became the Devoted Vassal of the Divel. This was the Temptacion with
which they still persecuted her; and it was the very same, that
the Evil Spirits were at the same time using upon far more
than a Score of miserable people so posessed in several otiier
parts of the coimtrey. Whether this Book bee indeed a Real
Book or no I dispute not. Mercy herself shee thinks it is;
and ^ves this reason for it, That a Touch of it (they told her)
would have cured her. Besides They diverse times made her
Eyes very sore by thrusting it hard upon them, to make her
Touch it when shee should unawares lift up her Hands to save
her Eyes. And they at last gave her to understand, That they
thou^t they should bee forced shortly to drop it.

§ 8. As the Bewitched, in other parts of the world, have
commonly had no other style for their Tormentors but only
They and Them; so had Mercy Short. Wherefore to consult
Brevity, wee shall Note the Divel, and those that accompanied
him in this Business, by that style. And so I go on to say
That They first used a thousand Flatteries and Allurements
to induce her unto a compliance with the Desire of the Divel.
They showed her very splendid garments, and thence proceeded
unto greater glories, which they promised her if shee would
sign to Their Book. They engag'd unto her, I know not how
many more conveniences, if shee would but so much as Touch
it. When all these persuasives were ineflfectual, They terrify'd her with horrible Threatnings of miseries which they
would inflict upon her, and then They as cruelly Inflicted a
great part of what They Threatened.

But that which added unto the Horror of the matter was
that when those Tygres were addressing themselves to some
of their Furious Inflictions, They would so cloathe themselves
in Flames of Fire (a Divellish and most impudent imitation,

264 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES (ie02

sure; of something mentioned in the ScriptmBi) as to render
themselves beyond measure formidable; and accordingly, just
before They f eU upon her with any Torments of a more than
ordinary Account, shee would sometims, by the fright of what
shee perceived them doing, fall a Tremblmg so that the v^
Bed would shake under her. Memorandum. That one evening I had with mee a Lanthom accomodated with n ^asaBall, which rendered the light so extremely glaring that one
could hardly bear to look upon it, but one mi^t thereby read
a very small print a very great way ofif ; and shee being then
able to see and speak, told us That Hee (meaning The Black
Man) sometimes came to her with Eyes Flaming like the
Light of that Lanthom.

§ 9. TVould bee a long work to Recite all the Tortures
with which They plagued her. I shall only Touch upon the
principal. Besides the Thousands of cruel pinches given h^
by those Barbarous Visitants, they stuck innmnerable pins
into her. Many of those pins They did themselves pluck out
again; and yett They left the Bloody Marks of them, which
would bee as tis the strange Property of most Witch-wounds
to bee, cured, perhaps in less than a Minute. But -some of the
Pins They left in her, and those wee took out, with Wonderment. Yea, sometimes They would force Pins into her Mouth,
for her to swallow them; and tho' Shee strove all shee was able
to keep them out, yett They were too hard for her. Only
before they were gott into her Throat, the Standers-by would
by some Dexterity gett hold of them, and fetch them away.
When this mischief was over. They would then come and sitt
upon her Breast, and pull open her Jaw, and keep her without
fetching one sensible Breath, sometimes for Half-an-hour, and
sometimes for several whole Horn's together. At last, when
wee came to understand that it was the Sitting of the Spectres
upon her, which cast her into those doleful Postures, wee would
with main Force, (and so heavy shee was beyond her Ordinary
Weight, that the lifting of her called for a more than Ordinary
Force) lift her upright, and the Spectres would imediately
then so fall ofif, that her Breath retum'd unto her. At other
times there would be heard, it may bee, by more than seven
Witnesses at a time, the Scratches of the Spectres on the Bed
and on the Wall.

16921 C. MATHER, BRAND OUT OP THE BURNING 265

§ 10. Moreover, They would sometimes bring her a little
Cup that had a WWtesh Liquor in it (unto Us, wholly invisible), which They would pour down her Throat, holding her
Jawes wide open in spite of all the Shriekings and Strivings
wherewith shee expressed a Reluctancy to Taking of it.
Wee saw her swallow this Poison, tho wee saw not the
Poison; and immediately shee would swell prodigiously, and
bee just like one poisoned with a Dose of Rats-bane. After
these Potions, shee was capable ordinarily to beg of us,
that wee would help her to some Sallet Oyl.^ Upon the
Taking whereof, the swelling would in a little while abate.
Behold, a proper Venefic Witchcraft I* Because the Name
for Sorcerers in the Bible may signify Poisoners, tis a foolish
Thing thence to infer that by Witches, the Scripture means no
more than such as committ Murders by Poisons. One great
Skill, and way of AfBicting People in Witchcraft, is by another
sort of Poisoning than what may bee seen by common Eyes.
Yea I suppose, all the Bewitched have undergone such a
Spirituous Infection that wee may count them in a manner
poisoned.

Notandum, That Sometimes our la3dng our Hands on the
Mouth of Mercy Short, when wee perceived the Spectres
forcing their Poisons into her Mouth, did keep her from taking
of them in.

§ 11. Another of the Miseries Whereto They putt her was
an Extreme Fasting for many Days together. Shee having
obtained a Liberty of Eating for Three Dayes, after a Fast of
Nine Dayes, was immediately compelled unto another Fast,
which lasted for about Fifteen Dayes together. In all this
Time, shee was permitted scarce to swallow one bitt or drop
of any Victuals. One Raw Pear shee ate, and now and then
an Apple, and some Hard Cider shee drank, things that would
rather sett an Edge upon the Severity of her Fast : Sometimes
also a Chestnut might go down into her Craving Stomach and
sometimes a little Cold Water. If anything else were offered
her, her Teeth would bee sett, and Shee thrown into hideous

^ Salad-oO, olive oil.

*Weyer (and after him many other opponents of witch persecution) had
maintained that venefica, the name for witdi in the Latin Bible, meant only

TtrM«nnpr

1 UlAk VCWtCJWUi lUC lUUUC lUr WliCU UA UIC XJ»UU UlUMK, uicout uuijr 1

266 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [16(8

Torments: and it must bee usually for two or three Dayes
together, that such poor Things as These also must bee deny^d
her. Breefly, Shee scarce took any jot of Sustenance, but
what wee supposed would rather increase the Tortures and Mischiefs of her Fast. How shee was all this while supi)orted I
pretend not now to guess. But the famous Heniicus ab Heer/
in his Observacions, affirms upon Oath, That a Bewitched Giil,
residing in his House, kept just such another Fast; and That
for Fifteen Dayes and Nights together shee took neither Meat
nor Drink. And yett, tlm Fast was not so long as that moitioned by Dr Plott,* in his Natural History of Oxfordnshire;
who affinns. That in the Year 1671, one Rebecka Smith, who
was thought Bewitched, continued without Eating or Drinking
for Ten Weeks together; and afterwards lived only upon warm
Broaths taken in Small Quantities for a whole Twelvemonth.
It seems that Long Fasting is not only Tolerable, but Strang^
Agreeable to such as have something more than Ordinary to
do with the Invisible World.

§ 12. But Binning seem'd the cruellest of all her Tortures.
They would Flash upon her the Flames of a Fire, that was to
Us indeed (tho not unto her) Invisible; but unto us all, in the
Mischiefs and Effects of it, the most sensible Thing that could
bee. The Agonies of One Roasting a Faggot at the Stake were
not more Exquisite, than what Shee imderwent, in the Scalds
which those Hell-hounds gave unto her, sometimes for near a
Quarter of an Hour together. Wee saw not the Flames, but
Once the Room smelt of Brimstone, and at other, yea, at many
Times, wee saw her made Excessively Sore by these Flames,
and wee saw Blisters thereby Raised upon her. To cure the
Soreness which this Fiery Trial would give unto her, wee were
forced sometimes to apply the Oyle commonly used for the
cure of Scalds, and yett (Like other Witch-wounds) in a Day
or Two all would bee well again: Only the marks of some
Wounds thus given her, shee will probably carry to her Grave.
I may add. That once They thrust an hot Iron down her

^ Hemicus ab Heer (Hendrik van Heer), c. 1570-c. 1636, many yean private
physician of the prince-archbishops of Cologne.

> Robert Plot (1640-1696), a Kentish antiquary, published in 1676 his
Natural History of Oxfordshire, It won him a place in the Royal Society, of which
in 1682 he became secretary.

16021 C. MATHER, BRAND OUT OF THE BURNING 267

Throat; which tho* it were to us Invisible, yett wee saw the
Skin fetched off her Tongue and Lips.

§ 13. Reader, If thou hadst a Desire to have seen a Picture
of Hell, it was visible in the doleful Circumstances of Mercy
Short! Here was one lying in Outer Darkness, haunted with
the Divel and his Angels, deprived of all common Comforts,
tortured with most cruciating Fires, Wounded with a thousand
Pains all over, and cured immediately, that the Pains of those
Wounds might bee repeated. It was of old said, If One went
unto them from the Dead, they will Repent. As for us, wee
have had not only the Damned coming to us from the Dead,
in this Witchcraft, but the very State of the Damned itself
represented most visibly before our eyes : Hard-hearted Wee,
if wee do not Repent of the Things which may expose us to an
Eternal Durance in such a State I

§ 14. Her Discourses to Them were some of the most Sur^
prising Things imaginable, and incredibly beyond what might
have been expected, from one of her small Education or Ex«
I)erience. In the Thnes of her Tortures, Little came from her,
besides direful Shrieks, which were indeed so frightful, as to
make many people Quitt the Room. Only now and then any
Expression of marvellous Constancy would bee heard from her;
e. g. "Tho' you kill mee, I'l never do what you would have mee.
— Do what you will, yett with the Help of Christ, Yl never
touch your Book. — ^Do, Bum mee then, if you wfll; Better
Bum here, then [than] Bum in Hell." But when her Torturer
went off, Then t Vas that her senses being still detained in a
Captivity to Spectres, as the only object of them, Wee were
Ear-witnesses to Disputacions that amazed us. Lideed Wee
could not hear what They said unto her; nor could shee herself hear them ordinarily without causing them to say over
again: But Wee could Hear Her Answers, and from her
Answers Wee could usually gather the Tenour of Their Assaults. One very Frequent Theam with Them was Railing
and Slander against a certain Person in the Town,^ Whom
shee often quoted in her Arguments against the Divel, and at
Whom, shee thought, the Divel had a very particular Provoca-

^This "certain person/' like the "one man" of the following sentence,
was of course Mather himself: it must be remembered that this account was
meant to seem anonymous.

268 NARHATIVES OP THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1002

tion and Malignity. Yea, There was One Man Who on a certain Sabbath had solemnly prayed for her (I think hee said)
no less than Ten Times. Four of which Times, were with her
too, and yett wee perceived the Divel at Night Reviling that
man unto her, with telling her, That hee had not in the Day
past pray'd for her so much as Once I But the cheef Argument held between Her and Them, was upon the Business of
Signing the Book, by Them tendred unto Her. — ^In the Handling of this Argument, innumerable Things were uttered by
her which would have been more Agreeable to^ One of a greater
Elevation in Christianity; but omitting multitudes of such
passages, I shall record a few, which were to This Purpose.

Oh You horrid Wretch! You make my very Heart odd within
mee. It is an Hell to mee, to hear You speak sol What? Are
You God f No» bee gone, You Divel I Don't pester mee any more
with such horrid Blasphemies!

You! Do You say that You are Chrigt ! No, You are a IKvd,
and I hope that Christ will shortly deliver mee from sudi a Divd.—
The Christ of God came to seek and to save that which is Lost, sudi
as I am; but as for You, You come to seek and confound all that yon
can light upon.

If You are Christ, Pray how came you by that Clovoi Foot?—
If You are a Christ I am sure you are a ver>' odious One; You shall
bee no Christ for mee. — ^Pray, go about Your Business; if You are
Christ, yett I tdl you plainly. You shaU bee none of my Christ. I
know of a Better Chnst; and Him will I follow. — ^You, a Christ 1
No, You are a Beast. If You had not been a Beast, would You have
asked of our Lord that Hee would give You leave to enter into an
Herd of Swine! — I think truly. That Hogs are the fittest rfwnpany
for You! — ^Would You know my mind? Why then, I say thIS^—
Wlien You have become a Man, and have suffered a cruel Death on
a Cross for me; and when you have Reconciled me to God, and been
some Ages in Heaven powerfully Interceding for my Salvation from
the Divel, — Then come to mee again, and I shaU have somethiiig
further to say to You. — In the meantime I say to You, In the Name
of the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, Beegone!

You pretend a precious deal of Love to mee indeed! If Yoa
Love mee so much, pray, why do you Starve mee? I am een famished; It is Nine Dayes now, that I have not eaten (Hie bitt of
Mctuals.

* More suitable for.

1602] C. MATHER, BRAND OUT OP THE BURNING 269

Fine Promises! You'l bestow an Husband upon mee, if I'l bee
your Servant. An Husband! What? A Divel! I shall then bee
finely fitted with an Husband : No I hope the Blessed Lord Jesus
Christ will marry my Soul to Himself yett before Hee has done with
mee, as poor a Wretch as I am! — ^Flne Clothes! What? Such as
Your Friend Sarah Grood^ had, who hardly had Rags to cover her!
Pray why did you not provide better for Her Then? — ^Never Dy!
What? Is my life in Your Hands? No, if it had. You had killed
mee long before this Time! — ^Whats that? — So You can! — ^Do it
then, if You can. Come, I dare You; here, I challenge You to do
it. Kill mee if You can. — ^Poor Fool! — ^But hark Yeel If you can
keep your Servants alive, the more false Wretch you, to lett the
Halter choke the Witches that were hanged the t'other Day! tho'
You promised them, that when the Halters were about their Necks,
You would come and Rescue them!

You talk of carrying mee to Heaven! It makes mee think of
Goody Carrier;* pray whither did you carry her? — ^Heaven! What
a foolish Question is that? Was I ever there? No, I never was
there; but I hope I shall be there; and I believe what I have heard
and read in the Word of God concerning it. I confess. You were
once in Heaven; but Grod for Your Pride, hurled you thence; and
You shall never come there again. — They that follow You, will mistake the Way to Heaven, I'l promise 'em. Hee that has the Divel
for his Leader must bee content with Hell for his Lodging. — ^Hell!
Yee Lying Wretch, I have catch'd you in an himdred Lyes; Who
would beleeve one Word You say? Yesterday or t'otherday. You
told mee there was no Hell; and now You tell mee, that One may
come out of Hell when they will. Pray then, Lett Sarah Good come;
if I could see her, I am confident shee would tell mee that Hell is a
terrible place; and I know there is no coming out. — ^But if all the
Wood in this World were laid in One Fire, it would not bee so dreadful as Hell; that Hell, whither You carry all that follow You. They
are out of there Wits that will serve such a Divel.

Well if You do Bum mee, I had better Bum for an Hour or Two
here then in Hell forever. — ^What? Will you Bum all Boston and
shall I bee Burnt in that Fire? — No, tis not in Your Power. I hope
God won't lett you do that. {Memorandum, The Night after these
Words were spoken, the Town had like to have been bum't; but
God wonderfully prevented it.) What? — Gertiany? — ^Was that
Place in Germany as big as Boston? — ^Well, I hope ^t in spite of
You, Boston shall stand until the Great Burning of all; and I pray
what will come of You Then! — Safe enough! — ^How, Safe enough? —

^ See pp. 343 ff., 414. 'See pp. 241 ff.

270 NARAATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1002

Among the Jews I — ^Why, what will you do among Them? Thefl
have none such as You among them, I warrant yeel

Stay, One at oncel — ^Well, And is that all that You have to sayf
— ^Pray then. Hear what I have to say. — ^I say this, That when You,
yee filthy Witches, first gave yourselves to your Black Master thoe,
it was the worst Dayes work that ever You did in Your lives. And
I seriously advise you all, to Repent of what You have done. I hope
tis not altogether Too late, at least for some of you, to Repent—
Tho' you have done mee so much Wrong, yett I heartily wish you so
much Good, as Repentance and Conversion. — O that you woidd fall
down before the God against Whom you have sinned, and b^ of
Him, that for the sake of Jesus Christ, Hee would pardon your horrible sin. — ^If You won't take this Counsil, I think, twil bee no Hurt
to wish that God would bring you out, and that you may Dy for what
you have done and that the World may be no longer troubled with you.

Whats that? Must the Younger Women, do yee say, hearlrai to
the Elder? — They must bee another Sort of Elder Women than You
then I they must not bee Elder Witches, I am sure. Pray, do you
for once Hearken to mee. — ^What a dreadful Sight are You I An
Old Woman, an Old Servant of the Di vel I You, tibat should instruct
such poor, young. Foolish Creatures as I am, to serve the Lord Jesus
Christ, come and urge mee to serve the Divel I Tis an horrible ThingI
— And pray, how durst You, after You had given yourself to theDivd,
come to the Table of the Lord : I profess I wonder the Divel did not
come and fetch you away alive I — ^But God is a long-suffering God I

Well; and what if I am Fatherless? How often have you told
mee of That? No, I been't Fatherless. I have God for my Father
and I don't Question but Hee'l provide well for me. Has not Hee
upheld mee all the while? I had signed your Book before now, if
Grod had not kept mee with His Grace. You had before now made
an end of mee, it God had not stood by mee. And I bdeeve that
God will yett deliver mee out of your Cruel Hands.

You are Wicked Wretches. What do you show mee the Shi^
of that good Woman for? I know her. Shee's a good Woman.
Shee never did mee any Hurt Yett you would fain have mee cry
out of her. But I will bee so far from crying out of Her that I will
not cry out of You; I don't know what Tricks you have gott; but
X I hope God will keep mee from letting fall one word that may Uast
the Name of any Person in the World. I will never tell any body,
who you are that have Tormented mee, only it may bee I may tdl
One Grentleman^ who will be as careful, that no Harm should ccmie
on't, as I can desire him. — ^How ever I hope God will find you out.

^ The "one Gentleman" hinted at is of course to be understood as Mather.

16821 C. MllTHEH. 3ILLNr :LT OF THE iJHtMMi :. i

Truiv r am in x '.'er" 3us*;rHbie Ojutiiciuii. f^^ i mui l'*iii*i; «■*•
ly starving in :ie Z'ark me !?U7 Aitvr ^luuicr. ;uiu lu .w iu»ii*- ^ul
Hellish Fiends ail "uie Wjiie. oaii >uifer :iJ -jjajjiici' v»i ciuclvu*. «ioju
them. — You rell me. zhaz jcme iv buc Laugh ;ic uivv I *iii .uiv,
they would do betxer 'i: Fru-y ror mux. You jkJ^^ . thitt ^u^h .*»Kt 4u*h
are m the Roi^m: Whv wcc'x vou mi 'jlkx* :*^v thv*.u ihvi»'

Wefl, I am perswodeti, ih^z y^iz ivt ail ihxs I xh^Ul Uv si^»Aiviu*i.\
delivered, and Goi will have a gwac vlc*l of Klloi> HaU I u^^ l.v
longed unto God, I can't thiiik rh^t vou w\»uUl K4\v uu*^U A^h 4
Deal of aDo to gett mee intv> your lUmt?^ A»hI \i \iv\l Um\ iw^s a
purpose to make mee one of Hb own StTMiiitn. I kww'k t»ui \\\\\\\, \U>
would have left mee before now to Ih\\>uu' oiu* wi \ o\uo \N luv %i
blessed thing will this bee! I oHi\*t butt (luuk {\u\{ \oii .uv ^«m
shortly to loose mee, both Bixly luul Soul too. i\\\\\ duu \\ \u\{ \ %«u \\.\\ v
been doing to my Body, will but lu'lp fi»i-\viu\l tlm l''\nl*».uuji -wi
vacion of my Soul. It makes uiy llrurt Itrjoirr, («• itiiul. Im^^ (uu \\
You'l bee cheated!

Memorandum. Twas mi onliimry lliiiiK Iki iIm IMmI di
persecute her with StorioHof wliuL Miin iiiul llml liml) in (In
Town spoke against her. The linjiiKl. lunI Almiiiii Id Hi • iiun.i
cast upon her by Rash People in Uh*. mihr. Iimifii ,1 m 1 l.u vOn m

Wee discerned that the liivl l(.i'poii.«:il Rii»|j Tfj jj/^m nniu

her in her Fitts, to dlH^jouni^re Ii«ti . I'^ui. rJn*. I#«iii. 1 Inm J * j.J..
as well as the nrnt,

§ 15. But wh'rfi hii'-^z h;j/l J/i //j<i/;Jj JO I' u*v li«///- Hii «»j/Ij

vating Impr«!^.r:o:..> of r.v: Vi'/i-v.}./^. U*:i>, Ua inU*i )j > ..- d. i.« «
able to ae^ a:.'; r.':^* *..'.x: ^/v/: i'"Ajy!/ ;>'.v/' ^^ ^ .j *#• J'.- -.ij
Shee iind^T"*':;.*. i«:./,"*..v;.' v,/'*. V? ',.;;.y..' rrV ..' /. J *.//' * J'/ii.«ii
ber tha* *r/fr.' I 'xs^-r rr. ■. ."^'/m: v.^/. '/■/. i^i ; ,.i, j,. M.vi./'
persGi.'T/',^.uu*5> 'jv* .•:.*-•'.*','•'•.'..*';.•- f •• .*.«/. ■/ iii. .#.
and ??b^ '.*^jt.v.i* ifcn »r/:'.« *»*•//?/. . <-.- * •• .... ' k, rj,*/ .•,,. i../
her Ir.'-ii7.".;i**vx *»•. rf Vi-'i/.*! ; i.i/r.'^ •</. .. .*: // . ..» . /

rj1Tif*?l M if\/«i> >t.i^; ^.' Jj^^JCr.*. '-. .-y. - , -*.*.. ..^'^ , .,» ^^ y

272 NARRATIVES OP THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [ifiM

People, that had any thing in their Apparrel that savoured
of Curiosity or Ornament. Her Apprehension, UndenatandiDg,
yj and Memory, were now Riper than ever in her life; and yett,
when shee was herself, Shee could Remember the other Accidents of her AfiSictions but Foi^ot almost everything that
passed in these Ludicrous Intervs^.

§ 16. There was this Remarkable in these Frolicks, that altho' shee could Hear and Make all manner of other Discourse,
yett shee might bee partaker of None that had anjrthing of
Religeon in it: Her Ear would immediately bee stop'd, if
wee spoke any good Thing, and her Mouth, if shee went to
speak any such Thing. Nevertheless, the charms upon her
were so circimistanced, that wee were able by little Tricks and
Signs to make her sensible of many Devout Things, after which
her Cravings were so greedy that shee would sometimes ciy
for vexation (as Frolicksome as shee was) if shee missed d
presently comprehending us. If any Prayers or Psalms were
used in the Room, shee could not Hear a Word ; and yett could
hear the least Whisper of any thing else that passed, even in
that very Instant. Shee would importunately require us to
Pray; yett shee might not utter that Word but say "Do—
You know what " ; or, " Do, what You use to do." And when
wee had any thing to say unto her about Prayer, wee could
make her hear tho' not the Word itself (much less the Thing)
yett the Letters of the Word 8eve[rally] mentioned. The ^)d
upon her was not such but that a good Word might bee Spelt,
when it could not bee Spoke unto her. I give One Specimen
of the way wee took to convey unto her mind, those Religious
Notions, whereto shee had a manifested Inclination. Shee
cry'd unto a Minister,* that hee would tell her what shee should
say to Them, When They should again assault her. Hee thereupon advised her, " Mercy, tell 'em, That the Lord Jesus Christ
has broke the Old Serpents Head." And the conmiunication
that follow'd, was after this fashion.

Mer. What do you say?

Min. I say, Tell 'em, That the Lord Jesus Christ has btokcD
the CMd Serpents Head. — Can you hear?
Met. No. I can't hear a Word.

1 Mather of course again means himself.

1002] a MATHEB, BRAND OCT OF THE BCBNING 2nZ

Min. Wdl, then; nmid mee and you shaD Know wfaftt you
canH Hear. — ^A Snake. — ^Mercy, can you hear?

Mer. Yes.

if in. Well, — ^An (Xd &iake. — can you hear?

Mer. Yes, — wdl, what of an old snake?

Jf in. (Striking with his linger on his Fwhead) Why, His
Head broke.— D'ye Hear?

Mer. Yes; and what then?

Jftn. (Pdnting up to Heaven.) Why, Who broke it? D'yee
mind?

Met. Oh! I understand. — ^Wdl, what dse shall I tdl them?

After this rate, a Minister in two or three Minutes once
made her apprehend about Seven or Eight Things Wherewith
shoe might [maintain] hersdf against the Spectres. And when
They came next upon her, shee had ail of them up unto her
Troublers with a Readiness and Exactness beyond what the
minister supposed hee could himself have had if hee had been
putt upon Repeating them. I mention This with the more of
particularity, because it affords a Matter of Curious Reflection.

Moreover, While shee was in these Frolicks, it seems that
shee was able still to see what Spectres were hovering about
her chamber, and how They were employed. Shee shook for
fear, when diee saw them once preparing an Image in the
Room; wherefrom shee foretold, Tliat the Image being formed
in order to her Torment, Shee should have a Terrible Evening on't. And so shee had! But shee afterwards told one
in whose custody that Image might bee found. At an other
time, Shee fell a Laughing at One in the Room,^ and asked
him, Whether hee had not a Gold Ring about him? Hee
knew hee had, and look'd for it in the pocket where hee knew it
was, but it was missing; and Shee, laughing, told him, Hiat
a Spectre had newly taken it out; but, said shee, "Look in
such a Place and you shall find it." Accordingly, hee Look'd
and Found. Shee added, " Tliey said, that if hee putt it on,
They would have it off his Finger again before hee gott home."
Hee, to spite Them, Try'd; but tho' hee diverse times between
That and Home, thought his Finger taken with an odd Numbness, yett hee kept it on.

^ Unquestionably himself again.

274 NARAATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1602

§ 17. As for the Spectres that Visited and Afflicted Mercy
Short, there were among them such as wore the shape of several, who are doubtless Innocent as to the Crime of Witchcraft; it would bee a great Iniquity in Mee, to judge them
otherwise; and the World; I hope, shall neither by My means,
nor by Hers, ever know, who they were. But there is Cause
to fear that some few of the persons thus Represented, are as
Dangerous and as Damnable Witches as ever were in the World;
altho These also must bee covered until there bee more Cause
for their being made obnoxious. However, tis a very dark
Dispensacion of Divine Providence, and such as carries much
Humilliation in it, that an Innocent Person should bee, the' but
in EflBgie, Randevouz'd among these Fiends of Darkness. And
concerning these Diabolical Spectres, wee mark'd sundry other
Things that were beyond measure Odd. One was This: Tlie
Honest man, who had given entertainment unto this distressed
Mercy, observing that when shee lay, as to us wholly senseless,
the motion of her Eyes did intimate whereabouts the Spectres
cheefly play'd, hee alently fetch'd a Sword, with a purpose to
make a pass at them. Nevertheless, if hee did but go at any
time to take the Sword into his hand, tho' shee could not possibly discern any thing of it, yett her Eyes would presently bee
shutt, and her Head pull'd into Bed, so that hee must loose the
Direction which her Looke had given him. I cannot say that
This Oddity would bear an Inference that the Witches were
any of them Corporeally tho' Invisibly present in the Chamber.
But there was Another, that would make one suspect th^
might. On the twenty-fifth of December it was,^ that Mercy
said. They were going to have a Dance; and immediately those
that were attending her, most plainly Heard and Felt a Dance,
as of Barefooted People, upon the Floor; whereof they are
willing to make oath before any Lawful Authority. If I
should now venture to suppose. That the Witches do sometimes come in person to do their Mischiefs, and yett have the
horrible skill of cloathing themselves with Invisibilities, it
would seem Romantic. And yett I am inclinable to think it,
upon Reasons more than tis here a Place to mention. But in
my Opinion, Tis not more Incredible, or Inscrutable, than what

^ Modem readers may need to be reminded of the Puritan honor of die
celebration of Christmas^ and even of the use of its name.

imn C MITIIiai, 1B19BD

eould B0t in liie lewi 1111111111 Heir,

Hmlf mn ILuiiiipd %£ hb tngrriwr sqpi^ «f Ji I^aifazi in 1^

Boom; titiilaiuB. H lioit tot T^dr. sbv <ndci Hau* Ji

litde Knock cf a ficde Onkl wx'iht Door, I arr. 1^ flfilosopiiv tiiit csD ghv JB AcxxiiBt f <r die Ote ci 1^^

it far t'odxr too!

§ 1& Tliere were «xzie fimngp dmigs allmdb^ cf Xfcit^
Sioft, vlmBGf flome vcre at aame LasB about die Oi^evttL
idienee tbef dbookl proceed. It vas maircfloos to Hmut Ikmt
much her Aubvccs to the Speetres tmnsoeDded her onfimor
capadtj. Thatsheedboiddsopatienthraiidreao^^
her IfitijiiiaHe TonneDdtB, vfaen one Stroke of her F&i^^Hr
woold ha;ve eased Ihem an, is jet more maiTriBoi]& But that
wfaidi carriea most cf manrel in it, is, The Impolsi^ mhidi
directed her mito the Saiptmeb that wi^t hxv^ assK^^ or
qmAened us in oar DerotiaDB, If miee had seefi Ooisie to luixie^
made that Use of them. In her Tianoes, a Bible Happming
to Ijr 00 her Bed, shee has taken it up, and without ever <ca$t'^
ing her Eye iqxm it, ehee has Tamed over many Leaves^ at
last folding down a Leaf to a Text, I holding up the TVfixt unto
the Spectres; but of all the Texts in the Bible, i^iich db vou
think it was? Twas That, m Bev. 12. 12, The Dwd is cam
down unto you, having great Wrath, hecnuse kee knows W knik
but a short Time. A^Bun, in her Humours, calling for a I^salmbook, sbee has, in the Dazk, turned over many Leav«6, and at
length, without Reading a Syllable, shee has turned down a
Leaf to a Psalm, advising us to go sing it, on her behalf. I do
affirm That no man living ever could have singed out P^ms
more expressive of, and suitable to, her circumstances, than
those that shee pitch'd upon. One of them, I renieml)er) n^^as
the B^inning of the Hundred and second. And when One
present said, '^No; Lett us not sing that psalm: it may bee
tis They direct it; and it won't bee good for us to follow Their
Direction " ; She repl/d with Indigmudon, " They, Fool I No,
Tis not Tliey direct mee; Do you think They would go to
to direct a fitt psalm for my Condicion? No, My Direction
comes from another Quarter; If you would know Whence, tho
first letter of the Name is G" — (it seems, that shee could not

276 NARRATIVES OP THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [im

speak out the Word.) When shee came to herself, shee told
mee, her manner was to Turn the Leaves, till t'was Darted
into her Mind that shee had the Place; and there shee folded.
Moreover, shee did sometimes with much vehemency exclaim,
That there were (three perhaps, or six) persons in ^e Room,
that never prayed so much as once in all their lives : and shee
was importunate that a Minister then in the Room^ would go
drive those Prayerless Wretches out of the Room. The Mmister chid her, and said. If there were any such, hee knew not
how to distinguish them, and hee would not ask her to do it
for him. '' Well, its no matter,'' said shee, '^ take but a Candle
then and look in their Faces, and you'l know by their Blushing
who they are; Turn them out that Blush." But aU that the
Minister did, was to warn the Company, That if any of them
had the guilt of a Prayerless life upon their Consciences, they
must Repent of it, or know who was well acquainted with it.
Nevertheless there was cause given to fear too much of Truth
in the Accusacion.

§ 19. The Methods that were taken for the Deliverance of
Mr. Goodwins aflSicted Family, foiu- years ago,' were the very
same that wee now followed for Mercy Short; and Shee would
herself most affectionately express her own Desires, that none
but Such might bee taken. Had wee not studiously suppressed
all Clamours and Rumours that might have touched the B^u-
^tacion of people exhibited in this Witchcraft, there might have
ensued most uncomfortable Uproars. But Prayer with Fasting wee knew to bee a course against which none but men most
bruitishly Atheistical (and yett such there are among us)
could make Exceptions. Wherefore a number of Pious Pec^le
did ordinarily every Day go in and Pray with her; and whereas
many of our People had some singularly grounded perswasions,
that no Exercise of Religion did give so much Vexacion unto
the Spectres in the Haunted Chamber, as the Singing of Psalms,
they commonly sang between almost every Prayer. But they
judg'd it necessary to Fast as well as Pray : and as I have had
opportimity to see, in some former Dispossessions, the Peojde
of God usually speed not, until they do what may bee called
A Beseech[ing of] the Lord Thrice; Thus the Christians here
were putt upon spending Three Dayes in Fasting and Prayer

himaelf, of course. * For that story see pp. 99 ff.» above.

1603] C MATHKR. BRAND OCT OF THE BURNING 277

one qoiddjr after anodier: And indeed, it was the special Grace
of God, t^ canied the Faith of His poor Servants thro' the
Difficottr of hetinMing the Rage of the Divel to grow under
and agamst all their Prayer for the conquering of that Rage.

Some of us had f earfol Suggestions of Unbdeef now auod
then bun'd into our Minds; and(wfaidiwasalittfesupri2ing!)
the Divd in the Next Fitts would sometimes tdl Mercy Short
what they were. It was abo remarkaUe that wh^oi wee w^re
intending a Day of Prayer, the Spectres would ussuaDy ad\ise
her oi our Intenti<xi, and brag that They would hinder the
Pec^le from coming: According to which Brag of Theirs^
t'was wcxxieifal to see how many Pious Christians that were
desirous to have been with us were hindered of their Desires^
by uneipected occaskxis pressing in up(Hi them. Howe>'ef^»
Many of the Childrm of God in the Xeighbourfaood were
helped fay Him to an extraordinary exercise of Grace, and while
some in the Town who by their profession were under oblige
cion to better things, kept ScoflSng, Railing, Ra\*ing, Th^
kq)t Praying, Fasting and Bekeving. Until at Length, Meat
came out of the Eater!— As her DeUverance drew near, it was
with her as I have seen in one more Possessed Person. A
strange Fancy of Dying Possessed her, and her Discourse ran
much upon her Funerd. Wee then quickly saw the Death
and Bunal of the Trouble now upon her.

§ 20. It was not long after the Third Fast, that on the
evening before the Sabbath, which b^an this New-Year, 165)3,
Mercy Short fell into a Fitt of Despair wherein her Anguishes
exceeded any that had bin yett upon her. The Spectres kept
continually howling in her Ears, That God had utterly cast
her off, and that shee was to bee Damned after all. But that
which made all the misery was, that in this point they so
gain'd upon her, as they had never done before; that is, they
made her almost conclude that what they said of this matter,
had something of Truth in it. And ttie dolours now Raised
in her were inexpressible! Shee Shriek'd, shee Roar*d, sheo
Cry'd out, "This is worse than all the Rest! What? must I
bee Banished from the Favour of God after all?" Yea, shee
imagined that the Spectres were indeed fetching of her away I
In this Agony, shee cfdl'd for a Minister in the Neighbourliood ;
upon whose coming in, shee quickly called for her Clot^^^

278 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES pm

dressed herself, and came to him, with a Countenanoe marvellonsly altered into a Look of Discretion and Gravity; and Aee
said; ''Now, Go, and Give to the Great God, the greatest
Thanks you can devise; for I am gloriously delivered! My
Troubles are gone, and I hope theyT visit mee no more." It
seems They l^t her, just b^ore, in very Raging Terms, and
said. They had no further Power over her. ^ee has ever
since continued free from her Invisible Troublers; only they
left her extremely Faint and Weak. But the Nei^bourfaood
then returned solenm Thanks to that Faithful God, who thus
gave them to Tread upon the Ldon, and to Trample the Dragon
underfoot.

§ 21. Mercy Short having obtained this Deliverance, did
for a Sabbath of Weeks Enjoy What shee had obtained ; yett
not without frequent Fainting and Swooning Fits, that seem'd
the E£Fect of the weakness wherein the Torments of her former
Enchantment left her. But at the End of Seven Weeks, her
Invisible Tormentors again siezed her on a Lords Day, in the
midst of the Assembly then meeting at North Boston, for the
Worship of God; just before which unhappy siezure shee
thought shee felt the Threatnings of it, in unaccountable Disorders, and in a scent of Brimstone haunting of her Lodgings.
The Spectres now under the Conduct of their Black L^suler,
handled the poor Young Woman for the most part just as they
did in the former Visitation; but rather with more Vigour and
Fury, and such as wee judged could not but putt a Speedy
End unto her life.

§ 22. Hie Impudence of the Troublesome Spectres was now
somewhat more Daring and Broad-faced than formerly. It
grew common with them to snatch from her such Apples and
Biskets, as were given her to Try whether shee could eat them;
so that no more could ever bee seen of them. And Mercy
Short affirmed. That shee saw the Spectres (tho' wee could
not,) eating them in the Room, what wee perceived they had
stolen from her. And whether it were from the Mistake or
from the Malice of the Spectres, it was no Rare Thing for the
Stander&-by to have their Arms cruelly scratched, and Kns
thrust into their Flesh, by these Fiends, while they were
molesting of Mercy Short. Yea, several Persons did sometimes actually lay their Hands upon these Fiends ; the Wretches

16Q3I C ICATHBB, BRAND ODT OF THE BURNING S79

were PalpaUe, while yett they were not Msil^, and several of
our Peofde, tbo' they Saw nothing, yett Fdt a Substance that
seemM like a Cat, or Dog, and tho' they were not Fancifiily
they Py'd away at the Fri^t! This Thing was too Sensible
and Repelled a Thing, to bee pure Tmaginarion, I suspected,
Tliat one Thing wbidi more hd^tened the Boldness of the
Spectres, was tl^ Freedom used fay some of our Folks in striking
with swoids, at the parts of the Room where they conjectured
Them to bee Hovering. It was particulariy remarkable, That
some who were very Busy in this method of treating the Spectres, upon a presumption that they might bee corporally present, (tho' covered with sudi a Cloud of Invisibilitie as Virgil,
I remember, gave once unto his Eneas), were terribly scared
with Apparitions in their joumeyes home, whereof, tiio' they
made no manner of Report, yett Mercy Short was presently
after able to tell her Attendents; as having heard the Spectres
brag imto her, and unto one another, how They had paid such
and such for striking at them. They were another sort of
Weapons, unto which therefore I advised my Neighber; even
the Ancient Arms of the Church.

§23. In the new Assault, They did not make the poor Damsels Fast extend much above a Week; tho' about so long They
did. After Tliat, shee gott Liberty once in Two or Three Days,
or 80, to swallow a Mouthful or Two of some Refreshment.
Her other Fits were such as formerly attended her; but in her
Frolicks, I found the Charms upon her so feeble that altho' shee
might not Hear a Word of Religion, (after the hearing whereof
her Longings were nevertheless very passionate), yett there
was No Word, but what wee could make her Hear, by spelling
it unto her. Even those words, God, Christ, Lord, Jesus, Said,
Sin, Heaven, HeU, Angels, Divds, Witches, which They would
never permitt her to Hear in any kind of Discourse what ever,
yett wee could make her Hear by Spelling of them. Moreover One of her Neighber[s] using a little Ingenuity, related
a great part of the £Qstories in the Bible unto her, while shee
was in these Humors, and helped her to apply them unto her
own comfortable Direction and Encouragement; but hee was
forced still to disguise these Histories with a Sort of Air that
could not so well have been given them, upon any other Occa*
sion. .

280 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [ie03

§ 24. The Thing still prest upon her, was to Sign, or to
' Touch Their Book ; and about that Book, wee now had several
Odd Ekitertainments, beyond what we had before. Shea said
They have had Three Books, whereof the Third was newly
b^un; and This was the Book which they now o£fered her in
her Temptacions; tho' they sometimes also showed her the
Second, which it seems wanted but a Leaf or two, to bee fill'd
in her former Visitacion. While shee lay in her Extatic Circumstances, Two or Three of us diverse Times Heard her to
Read in one or t'other of these Books, upon her demanding of
it, as proper for her to See the Books, before they could imagine
it Reasonable for her to sett her hand unto any of them. What
she read, I do for some just causes, forbear fully to relate; but,
. in general, the Book seem'd a Journal of the cheef thing? acted
J or design'd at Their great Witch-meetings; not without some
circumstances that carried an odd Resemblence of the Alcoran;
it had in it the Methods to bee used in seducing of people unto
the service of the Divel, and the Names of them that had been
seduced, with the Terms which they were to serve. It particularly surprised some in the Room, on the Eve of Mardi 9,
1693, to overhear her, in the Book then opened unto her,
spelling a Word that was too hard for her; but from the
best Judgment that could bee made of the Letters that shee
recited, it was Quadragesima. And several more such odd
Things were overheard : whereof One was a Discoiu^se to bee
used by Witchmakers unto their Proselytes, of this purport,
That when Paul and Silas were in prison, they sang; but it
was unto the Divel that they sang; an Earthquake then came,
and the Prison-doors were opened. But it was the Divd that
made that E^arthquake and opened those prison-doors. Accordingly, if the Servants of the Divel should come at any time
to bee clap'd up in Goal they might Expect a like DeUverance.
Horrible stuflf! But I'l tell no more. Shee one Day sent a
Request unto His Excellency, the Govemer,* and unto a
Minister in the Neighbourhood,* that shee might Receive a
Visit from them ; in which Visit, shee informed them. That the
Spectres had newly confessed unto her, that they had been
compelled, a Day or two before, to Drop TTieir Second Book,
in the Cockloft of a Garret belonging to the House of a person

^ Sir William Phips. ' Mather, of course.

16»31 C. MATHER, BRAND OUT OF THE BURNING 281

of Quality, not far ofif. But Their Difficulty to Beleave, that
there was any Corporeal (or any more than a Mystical) Book
in the Business, caused them to bee Negligent in the Search
of it; however, They did after some Dayes, upon mature consideration, permitt a Discreet Servant privately to go see
whether there were any Thing in that place or no. When the
Servant was Examining the place directed, a great Black Cat,
never before known to bee in the House, jumping over him,
threw him into such a Fright and Sweat, that altho' hee were
one otherwise of Coiu^e enough, hee desisted at that Time
from looking any further. Mercy Short presently after sent
for the Minister, and expressed an extreme Discontent and
Vexation for his minding so little, what Informacion shee had
given about the Book; adding (tho' her Attendents affirm'd
shee had never been told a Word of What had happened)
That the Spectres had pray'd and beg'd of their Black-man so
hard, that their Book might not yett come to light, hee had
at length permitted one of them, to putt on the Shape of a
Cat and fetch the Book away; which was done (shee said)
just as the Servant had almost laid his hand upon it; but that
hee had been so scared by the Cat as to give over the Search.
However shee beleeved They must shortly Drop it again.
For my own part, I looked upon these Things as having much
of Diabolical Delusion in them; and as intended pi^y to
make Diversion for Divels that love to play upon mankind.
Whether the Cat were what was pretended, I shall give no
Opinion : tho' I know the Assertion of some. That every Spirit
is endued with an Innate Power by which it can attract suitable matter out of all Things for a Covering or Body, of a
proportionable Form and Nature to itself: which Assertion,
Well stated. Proved, and Applyed, would solve some of the
hardest Phenomena that belong to the uncouth and horrid
Shapes, wherein mischiefs are done by Witchcraft.

§ 25. But there were some strange Occurrence about another
Book, which, whether there lay any thing in the bottom of
them, further than a Trick of the Divels, to decoy us into some
Inconveniences, wee could not Conclude, but thought it not
amiss to Beware. One who was Executed at Salem for Witchcraft had confessed That at their Cheef Witch-meetings, there
had been present some French Canadians, and some Indian

282 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [ie03

Sagamores, to concert the methods of ruining New En^and.
Now tho' Mercy Short had never heard, as far as I have leam't,
of any such Confession, yett the Spectres now, as it were dapping a Chain upon her, would leave her sometimes in a Stupid,
Sottish, Senseless Condicion, for many Hours together: out
of which Condition when shee came, shee told us. That at such
Times the Spectres went away to Their Witch-meetings; but
that when lliey Betiuned, the whole Crew, besides her daily
Troublers, look'd in upon her, to see how the work was carried
on; That there were French Canadiens and Indian Sagan^pres
among them, diverse of whom shee knew, and paiticulariy
Nam'd em : And, that They showed her a Book, out of which,
they said, they took their Directions for the Devotions per-
^ form'd at their Meetings; and they added. That they did use
to fetch that Book from the Study of a certain Person in the
Neighbourhood;^ Yea, that •they had, unbeknown to him,
gott the Book away to their conventions more than an hundred times; moreover to confirm her in the Beleef of i^diat
They said, they folded a Leaf of it, before her eyes. These
Things did shee tell us, and shee described unto us the Colour,
the Breadth, and Length, and Thickness, and other Circumstances of the Book, with all the Exactness Lnaginable: saying also. That there were Psalms in it. Accordingly the person mentioned, tho' Hee were owner of a Library furnished
with Books of all sorts, yett quickly found in it, the Book with
which these Theevish Divels had made so bold; and Mercy,
having it shown unto her, immediately knew it from any other.
It was a Book that indeed came from Canada; a French Book
of Idolatrous Devotions, entituled, Les Saints Devoirs de UAme
Devote. Avec UOffice de La Vierge, pour Urns Les Temps De
U Annie: Et UOffice Des Morts, de La Croix, et Avires; reformez au Saint Concile de Treated But that which added
unto the surprise was, That hee found a Leaf doubled down in
the Book, which hee could not conceive how it should come:
and when a Night or Two after, just as hee went imto his
Rest, hee left this Book on his Table in his Study, carefully

1 Mather's own.

> An ordinary book of Catholic devotion : "The Holy Duties of the Devout
Soul. With the Devotions due the Virgin throughout the Year: and the Office
of the Dead, of the Cross, and others; reformed at the Hdy Council of TVent"

1093] C. MATHER, BRAND OUT OP THE BURNING 283

seeing that there should not bee one Leaf at all folded in it;
yett the next morning hee found Three Leaves unaccountably
Folded, and then Visiting Mercy, hee perceived the Spectres
bragging, That tho' shee had [said] shee would warrant them,
that Gentleman would keep his Book out of their Hands, yett
they had Last Night stole the Book again imto one of their
meetings, and folded sundry Leaves in it. They also told her
afterwards. That the said person had another Book standing
by this, with a Gray Cover, a Little Bigger than This, but
much akin to it, and having many pictures in it; which Book
they sometimes Likewise used at their meetings; and that
they had newly used it, but returning it they had sett it up the
Backside outwards. Now to increa£ie our surprize, tho' what
they said about using the Book abroad might bee all a Ly,
yett all the rest was very True, The Title of the Book was
UOffijce de La Semaine Sainted et de UOdave de Pasque, A Uusage
de Rome, et du Diocese de Paris} These Things very Naturally
Raised in mee, a Contemplacion of the proper Enchantments
whereby Popery was at first Begun, and has been Maintained;
and of the Confusion with which the Divels may probably bee
cast, from an Apprehension of the Total Dissolution that is
quickly to bee given unto all the Charms, which have hitherto
Intoxicated the Nations in that Superstition. But if I should
so far forget myself, as to Lay before my Readers, the several
Reflections which I found myself invited still to make on these
Occasions, I should perform a Work, which for a thousand
Reasons I choose rather to Reserve.

§ 26. Whether I ask my Readers to do it, or no, I know
they will variously spend their Judgments upon one of the
strangest Things that has occured in our Story, now to bee
Related. Mercy Short was attended with another Spirit, besides those which were her continual Tormentors; a Spirit,
which indeed never was Visible nor, I think, properly Audible,
any fmther than in Whisper, imto her; but which managed his
Communion with her cheefly by an Impulse, most powerfully
and sensibly making Impressions upon her Mind. This
Wonderful Spirit would suggest imto her, How to Answer the
Temptacions of the Diabolical Spectres, and comfort her with
Assurances that shee should at last bee Victorious over Them.

^ This too is but a Catholic book of devotion — the offices of Holy Week.

/

V

284 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1693

yTwas by the Guidance of this Spirit that shee would someV times take a Bible into her Hands, and without even casting
an Eye so much as once upon it, after Turning over Scores of
Leaves, Turn down a Leaf at last, unto the most pertinent
Place that could bee thought of, and from thence Argue
against the Wretches that molested her.

For Instance, Once when They were urging her to write
her Name in Their Book, shee did in that imaccountable
Manner Turn to Rev. 13. 8. AU that dwell upon Earth diaU
warship him, whose Names are not written in the Book of Ldfe of
the Lamb : and tho' shee saw not the Text herself, yett Folding
down a Leaf unto it, shee held it up unto the Spectres, for Them
to Read it; adding withal. That her Name was already in that
Book of the Lamb, and therefore it should never come into
Their cursed Book! To which They Reply 'd, Shee had shown
them a Scripture which one (they named) ^ had never yett
preached upon : and in That, tliey spoke True. Another Time
shee did in that marvellous Manner, Folding a Leaf, without
any Looking, show the Spectres that Place in Luc. 7. 21. And
in that same Hour, Hee cured many of their Infirmities, and
plagues and of Evil Spirits. Thus also. After They had been
trying to perswade her, that there would bee no Day of Judgment, shee did in the same astonishing manner show them that
place in Act. 1. 11. This same Jesus Which is taken up from
you into Heaven, shall so come, in Lake Manner, as yee have seen
Him go into Heaven. Well, When the young Woman had lain
under her miseries about Three Weeks, thiig Notable Spirit,
in the Beginning of the Fourth Week, bid her, Bee of Good
Cheer and Hold her Integrity against all the Rage of the Divel
and his Witches, for the Next Thursday in the Evening about
Nine or Ten a clock, shee should bee gloriously delivered,
And accordingly, some Dayes a forehand, shee desired that I
would, with my Brother, bee There at the Time. I suppose
many of my Readers will bee at as much Loss to Determine,
what sort of Spirit this is, as the New-foundlanders are, what
to think of that spirit by them called White-Hat! who ordinarily appears on the Shore, in a White-hat, crying out, Hale
up ! Hale up ! a little before some dangerous Tempest.

§ 27. The people of God in the Neighbourhood still kept

^ Of course again Mather.

16031 C. MATHER, BRAND OUT OF THE BURNING 285

themselves close unto the unexceptionable way of Continual
and Importunate Prayer, for the Deliverance of the Afflicted
Maid. For my part, I did all I could, that not so much as
the Name of any one good person in the World might suffer
the least Hi-Report on this occasion ; but unweari^ Prayer, fwee thought, was our only Way now to Resist the Divel.
Accordin^y, the Pious People in the North-part of Boston,
did very much Pray With the yoimg Woman as well as For her. \
There are, in that vicinage, severS meetings of Young Folks ]
(both sexes apart) who every week meet, that they may Pray
with one another; and These now Adjourned their meetings,
at the Seasons of them, imto the Haimted Chamber. Yea,
There was, I think, scarce a Night for near a Month together,
which was not All spent in the Exercise of Devotion, by those
that Watched. Indeed, in this New Molestacion of Mercy
Short, the Good people kept not any Whole Dayes for Prayer
with Fasting on her behalf, as they did before, yett I have
understood that shee had a Friend or Two, who did so; but
behold, the Lord must bee again Besought Thrice ! The First
and the Second of the Dayes thus kept had not their full
Answer; the Third was no sooner kept, but the Answer came;
whereof You are now to bee Informed.

§ 28. The Young Woman on the Thiu^day Evening which
had been by her mentioned (namely March 16, 1693) lay very
free from her usual Torments. Wee perceived from her. That
the Spectres Try'd all the Evening long to injflict their Tortures
upon her, but still They found her so Hedged by some imseen
Defence, that they were unable to Touch her; and the Black
Man would thereupon Kick Them, Cuff Them, and Maul Them,
for Their so failing in all Their Attempts to woimd her. Whereupon with a sort of Bravery shee Insulted over Them ; and at
last, when the Hour came, Shee said in a way of Derision,
"Well, I see you are going; What good counsU have you to
give mee, before you go? " They then spoke, I know not what
pestiferous Things imto her; but, giving them an Angry Interruption, Shee bid them Hear Her counsil to Them. So,
Telling the Black Man that shee had nothing to say unto him,
for his Condition was beyond Repentance and Forgiveness,
imto the rest shee gave such savoury Admonitions, about endeavouring their own Recovery out of the Snare of the Divel,

286 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1693

as might have broke an Heart of Stone to have heard Them.
They at last bid her leave off, and now. Take their Blessing;
which it seems was of this Tenour, ''Go and bee Damned, Wee
can do no more!" Wheremito Shee Reply^d, "O yee cursed
Wretches; Is that Your Blessing? Well After all the wrong
that you have done to mee, I do not wish that any one of you
may bee Damned; I wish you may bee all saved, if that bee
possible. However, In the Name of the Blessed Lord Jesus
Christ, bee gone, and lett mee bee no more Troubled with
you." Upon That, they flew away Inmiediately, Striking another young Woman down for Dead upon the Floor as they
went along; and so, with a Raised Soul, shee bore a Part with
us, in Giving Thanks to God for her Deliverance; Nor have
her Troublers ever since troubled her with any further Yists.
Upon her first Rescue from these evil Hands, altho' her Eyes
were seemingly Fair, yett the poisons they had used upon
them were such, that ^ee was as blind as one that had been
struck with Lightning; but in a few Dayes her sight Retiuned. They also left her under a very Bl Habit of Body,
whereof shee could not bee cured without some Time and Care;
but in That also shee experienced much of the Divine Goodness. Nor am I without Hope, that God will enable her to
walk answerable to the great obligations, which Hee has thus
laid upon her, by bringing her up out of an Horrible Pitt!

§ 29. My Reader must excuse mee, that I so much Forbear
to give my Opinion about the true Nature and Meaning of
these preternatural occurrences. If God, the Father of li^ts,
graciously should grant unto any of His poor Servants {aa 1
beleeve to some Hee hath !) a System of Consistent Thoughts
about such Works of Darkness, yett such is the froward, flouting sidred,^ and proud Humour, whereunto the people are
now Enchanted, no man in his Wits would fully expose his
Thoughts unto them, till the charms which enrage the people
are a little better Dissipated. I remember an Odd Rdation,
in the German Ephemerides, for* . . .

^ Cidered, t. e,, soured.

* Here, with the end of its thirty-eighth page, the manuscript breaks abruptly
off. The ** Ephejnerides" at the dose means the Miscdlanea Curio$a, or Ephemt^
ridet Medieo-^hyncae, which since 1670 had been published yeariy in Germany.

The best postscript for thb narrative b that inserted by Mather himsdf

16031 C. MATHER, BRAND OUT OF THE BURNING 287

into his diaiy far 1603, after the entry for February 12 : "About this Time, I had
Toany wonderful Entertainments, from the Invisible World, in the Circumstances
of a Young Woman, horribly possessed with Divels. The Damsel was cast into
my cares, by the singular Providence of God; and accordin^y besides my Cares
to lelaeve her, to advise her, to observe the prodigious things that befel her
(whereof I have written a Narrative) I procured some of my devout Neighbours,
to join with mee in praying for her. Wee kept Three Successive Dayes of Frayer
with Fasting on her behalf, and then wee saw her Delivered; for which, wee kept
a Time of solemn Thanksgiving. But after a while, her Tormentors returned,
and her Miseries renewed; and my Neighbours being now either too weary or
too busy, to do as afore, tho' they made much Prayer daily with her as wdl as
for her, I did alone in my Study fast and pray for her Deliverance. And, unto
my Amaaement, when I had kept my third Day for her, shee was finally and forever ddivered from the hands of evil Angeb; and I had afterwards the Satisf actioa of seeing not only her so brought home unto the Lord, that shee was ad«
mitted unto our Church, but also many other, even some scores, of young People,
awakened by the Picture of Hell, eidiibited in her Sufferings, to flee from the
Wrath to come."

It was perhaps more nearly at the time that, to the entry of March 28
recording the birth of his malformed and short-lived babe, he added: "I had
great Reason to suqiect a ^tchcraft, in this prsetematural Accident; because
my Wife, a few weeks before her Deliverance, was affrighted with an horrible
Spoetie, in our Porch, which Fright caused her Boweb to turn within her; and
the Spectres which, both before and after, tormented a young Woman in our
Ndi^bourhood, luag'd of their giving my VfUe that Fright, in hopes, th^ said,
of doing Mischief unto her Infant at least, if not unto the Mother: and besides
all this, the Child was no sooner bom, but a suspected Woman sent unto my
Father, a Letter fuU of railing against myself, wherein shee told him, Hee little
knew, what might quickly befall some of his Posterity."

Frc»n this passage it is dear that Mercy Short was not at the end of her
besetments; and one should not turn from her story, or from that of Margaret
Rule, next to be told, without reading (at p. 384, bdow) what in 1697 a contem*
porary writes of ''their vicious courses since."

FROM "MORE WONDERS OF THE INVISIBLE
WORLD," BY ROBERT CALEF, 1700

INTRODUCTION

Of Robert Calef almost nothing is known except what
can be learned from his book. There has even been doubt
as to whether, of the two Robert Calef s known to us in Boston
at this time, the writer was the father or the son. In 1692,
the time of the Salem witchcraft, the father's age was 44, the
son's 18.^ It is imlikely that anybody would have thought of
the son but for a note copied into one of the memorandmnbooks of Dr. Jeremy Belknap (1744-1798).* This note, of
unknown source, reads: "Robert Calef, author of 'More
Wonders of the Invisible World,' printed at London in 1700,
was a native of England; a yoimg man of good sense, and free
from superstition; a merchant in Boston. He was fimiished
with materials for his work by Mr. Brattle, of Cambridge;
and his brother, of Boston; and other gentlemen, who were
opposed to the Salem proceedings. — ^E. P." The writer speaks
as if with knowledge; and that so sound a historian as Dr.
Belknap should have copied the note speaks for its worth.
Able scholars have by it been led to ascribe the book to the
younger Robert; but more careful study seems to show the
objections insuperable. The author never adds "Jr.'' to his
name, as a son would have done, and as seems to have been
the yoimger Robert's custom.' He never pleads youth, even

^ S. G. Drake, in the introduction to his edition of Calef, would make his
age 14; but the genealogist of the family, Mr. Matthew A. Stickney, says 18.
Yet Mr. Stickney urges the father's authorship (N, E, Hist, and Oen. Register,
XXX. 461; XUX. 224). He died in 1894, leaving this genealogy, alas, unpublished, and his heirs decline to let it be consulted.

>Mass. Hist. Soc., Proceedings, 1858, p. 288.

'Thus in 1706 "Robt. Calef, Jun.," was chosen a derk of the market
(BosUm Record Commissioner^ Reports, YIII. 36); thus in 1708 "Robert Calef,

291

292 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES

when most apologetic; and; what weighs more, his indignant
foeS; seeking all ways to discredit him, never hint at such a
thing. His matter and style have in them nothing of boyishness; and once, in words suggestive of a migrant and a man
of years, he speaks (p. 297, below) of ''sound Reason, which is
what I have been long seeking for in this Country in vain."
Most serious of all, his handwriting seems that found in documents clearly the elder Calefs, and is that of a mature and even
by 1700 that of an aging man; while that of the younger Robert
was in 1719-1722 still firm and flexible — and notably different.^
Robert Calef the elder came to America at some time before
1688. He was a cloth-merchant, and doubtless a maker as

jun'.'' becomes » ooostaUe (id., VHI. 45), and gains permission to erect a
house (id,, XL. 68, XXIX. 187); thus, too, in that jrear (see plate) he signs
himself "Ro. Calfe Jn'"; thus in 1710 "Robert Calfe, Jr.," appears on the
roDs of the ArtiUeiy Company (N. E. Hid. and Oen. Register, XXXVUI. 341);
and it is after his father's death that (see plate) in 1719 to a reodpted account,
in 1721 to his will, in 1722 to the release of a mortgage, he signed ''Rob:
Calfe", "Ro: Calfe", "Robert Calfe" (see the last two in Drake's WiU^icnfi
Ddtuion, II. xxii, xxiv).

^From the author of More Wonders we have two unquestionable autographs : (1) his marginalia of 1695 on Cotton Mather's paper (see bdow, p. 306,
note 1) and (2) a letter of 17(X) presenting a copy of his book to the Earl of
Bellomont, then governor of Massachusetts and New York. A page of the
former is to be photographed in the Massachusetts Historical Society's Proeeei'
ings for 1913-1914; and the latter (now in the New York Public library) is reproduced in full in the Memorial History of Boston (11. 168). Specimens of bodi
are given in our own plate; and to tlwse are added (1) the signature " Robert
Calef" from the report of two appraisers, October 30, 1693; (2) the signature
"Robt. Calef" from the vodict of a Boston coroner's jury, January 15, 1696; (3)
the same signature, with a line or two of text in the same hand, from the dedsioa
of two arbitrators (Boston, July 29, 1697) ; and (4) the last lines and the signature of a paper drawn by " Robt. Calef " as a selectman of Rori>ury in Maidi,
1717 (?). That all six specimens are in the same hand, and in a hand different from the yoimger Calef's, will hardly be questioned. Is not the older
Robert, too, more likely than the younger to have been an appraiser in 1693, a
coroner's juror in 1696, and an arbiter in 1697? And (though Calef and Calfe
were undoubtedly pronounced alike or nearly so) is it not less probable that the
author of More Wonders changed the habitual spelling of his signature than that
a younger Robert, if not the author, should thus have distingtiished hb identity
from his father's? What arguments led the genealogist Stickney to ascribe the
book to the father cannot now be learned : the "full statement of the reasons"

/.

f^fe^ eU A&-il^^c

3.

w^l

-y.

^-^

/7 c/^-^^^im-^^^ ^. ^^

U^f^f*^^2^0^hU^ Aw^i;ew>C^^5C;J3& f/^p^\^pi^S4!^it<^

fir <4n»4

^.

^^o^^^jObti^e}^. , >/, ^// 6

^^4^(5f^"

-l-IWRAPHS OF ROBERT CALEK AND OK HIS SON ROBERT

From various originals

INTRODUCTION 293

well as a seller of cloths.^ Of his eight children the eldest was,
in 1692, a physician in Ipswich. What led to the writing of Mare
Wonders he has himself told us in his book. It remains only
to testify to the care and exactness which all comparison of
his work with the records seems to show, and to remark that
to a student of the Uterature of witchcraft it is evident that
his reading is lai*ger than he cares to parade. Though he
clearly belonged to the popular party, this is as likely to be a
result as a cause — ^it is probably neither — of his feeling on the
subject of the witch superstition; and that he had else any \
grievance against the Mathers or their colleagues there is no
reason to think.

His book; though completed in 1697, was not printed till
1700, and then in London. In June, 1698, Cotton Mather
records in his diary that ''a sort of a Sadducee in this town''
^' hath written a Volumn of invented and notorious lies "; ^^ this
Volumn," he adds, ^'hee is, as I understand, sending to England, that it may bee printed there." Why it found no printer
in New England can be guessed; the storm it raised when it
appeared in print is well known. President Increase Mather
*' ordered the wicked book to be burnt in the coll^ yard," •
and his son's diary is eloquent with vexation*

" Some Years ago," runs his entry of November 15, 1700,
''a very wicked sort of a Sadducee in this Town, raking together a crue of Libels, which he had written at several Times,

promised by him to the N, E. Hid, and Oen. Reffitler (see XXX. 461) was, like
his genealogy, never published. But, from an article on "Robert Calef' ' by
Mr. W. S. Harris in the Oranite Monthly for 1907 (XXXIX. 157-163), and from
correspondence with its author, it is learned that another student of the Calef
pedigree (Mr. W. W. Lunt, of Hin^^iam, Mass.) has reached that result by a
comparison of handwritings. Mr. Harris, it should be added, quotes the Rev.
John Kelly as saying in a funeral sermon (1808) for Judge John Calfe (b. 1740)
of Hampstead, N. H., that the latter's ancestor (who was the elder Calef, not
the younger) was the author of the book.

^ In 1701 Cotton Mather calls him "the Weaver (though he presumes to
call himself Merchant)" (Some Few Remarks, p. 35).

>EUot, Biographical Dictionary (1809), 9. v. "Calef."

/

294 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES

(especially relating to the Wonders of the Invisible World, whidi
have been among us) wherein I am the cheef Butt of his Malice, (tho' many other better Servants of the Lord are also most
maliciously abused by him :) he sent this vile Volume to London to be published. Now, tho' I had often and often cried
unto the Lord, that the Cup of this Man's abominable Bundle
/of Lies, written on purpose, with a Quil under a special Eneigy
"-^ and Management of Satan, to dammfy my precious Opportunities of Glorifying my Lord Jesus Christ, might pass from
me; Yett, in this point, the Lord has denied my Request: ibe
Book is printed, and the Impression is this week arrived here."

It was even felt necessary to print a reply; but the two
Mathers held it beneath them to plead in their own vindication.
It fell to their parishioners. ''My pious neighbours are so
provoked," writes Cotton Mather (December 4), "at the diabolical Wickedness of the Man who has published a Volume of
Libels against my Father and myself, that they sett apart
whole Dayes of Prayer, to complain unto God against him.''
The outcome of their communings together was a pamphlet
called Some Few Remarks upon a Scandalous Book against the
Gospel and Ministry of New England, written by one Robert
Calsf. It was signed by seven, one of them John Goodwin;
but the materials were fmnished by their pastors. It aimed
however at their personal exculpation, and has small interest
for the public story.*

The doughty merchant survived the storm. In 1702-1704
he served his townsmen as an overseer of the poor, in 1707

1 Let any who would know the contents of the ezoesaivety rare little booklet
J turn to the worics of Upham and Poole mentioned on p. 91; and in his Diarjf
(I. 383-384) Mather narrates how the book was compiled. The More Wcmden
it describes as "a libelous Book lately come into this Countrey . . . which is
writ (with what help we know not) by one Robert Calef, who presumes to call
himself Merchant of Boston." "It was highly rejoicing to us," add the writers,
"when we heard that our Booksdlers were so well acquainted with the Integrity
of our Pastors, as that not one of them could admit of any of those libeb to be
vended in their shops." Pp. 34h50 of its seventy-one pages are taken up by m
letter of Cotton Mather to the authors. It was perhi^ a passage in Mather's

INTRODUCTION 295

was chosen an assessor, in 1710 a tithingman. It was perhaps
about this time that he retired to Roxbury, where in 1707 he
had bought a place and where he was a selectman of the town
when, in 1719, death found him. There, in the old burial
groimd just opposite his home, a stone still testifies that ''Here
lyes buried the body of Mr, Robert Calef, aged seventy-one
years, died April the Thirteenth, 1719." *

Calef's book has been five times reprinted: in 1796, at
Salem, by William Carlton (12^, pp. 318); again at Salem, in
1823, a mere reimpression, with the addition, from the court
files, of Giles Corey's examination (12^, pp. 312) ; in Boston,
1828 (24^, pp. 333), again a reimpression; at Salem, 1861,
edited by Mr. S. P. Fowler, with Cotton Mather's Wonders,
in his volume Salem Witchcraft (see p. 207) ; and, more faithfully, in 1866 at Roxbury, as nos. VI., VII., of Woodward's
Historical Series, under the editorship of S. G. Drake (see pp.
207-208). The present text foUows the original edition (1700),
but corrects it by the list of Errata to be foimd in the
copy (once Cotton Mather's) possessed by the Massachusetts
Historical Society.*

letter that led "E. P." to think Robert Calef a "young man"; for those
words, in italics and with capital initials, stare from a sentence so obscure that
to a hasty glance Calef, instead of Mather himself, might easily seem to be
meant.

^ For these and other personal details see Drake's memoir, in his ed. of Calef,
and his History and AnHquUies qf Boston, pp. 529, 531; Boston Record Commis'
sioners' Reports, I. 156, 160, VII. 210, 218, 225, 229, VLU. 24, 26, 31, 33, 41, 43,
75, IX. 179, 195, XI. 145; Memorial History qf Boston, IV. 652; F. S. Drake,
The fount of RoaAmry (Boston, 1905), pp. 102, 140-149; iV^. E. HiH, and Oen.
Register, XIV. 52; and the above-cited article of W. S. Harris, which has a
photogn^h of the gravestone. From these mentions will be learned also the
name of his wife, Mary, and of the two of his eight children who were bom (1688,
1691) after his coming to Boston. It will be learned, too, that in 1692 he was a
constable, in 1694 hayward and fenceviewer, in 1697 a surveyor of highways, in
1698 a clerk of the market. At least it is to "Robert Calef," not to "Robert
Calef, Jr.," that the records award these offices. And it is perhaps to be noticed
that while the name of "Robert Calef" is (^ten preceded by "Mr.", that title
does not appear before that of "Robert Calef, Jr."
s See Drake's ed., III. 223.

MORE WONDERS OF THE INVISIBLE WORLD

Mare Wanders of the Invisible WarJd: Or, The Wanders of the

Invisible World, Displayed in Five Parts.
Part I. An AccourU of tiie Sufferings of Margaret Ride, Written

by the Reverend Mr. C. M.
P. II. Several Letters to the Author, etc. And his Reply rdating to Witchcraft.
P. ///. The Differences between the Inhabita/nts of Salem Village, and Mr. Parris their Minister, in New-England.
P. IV. Letters of a Gentleman uninterested. Endeavouring to

prove the received Opinions dbaut Witchcraft to be Orthodaz.

With short Essays to their Answers.
P. V. A short Historical Accau[n]t of Matters of Fad in that

Affair.
To which is added, A Postscript relating to a Book intitled, The

Life of Sir WiUiam Phips.
Collected by Robert CdUf, Merchant, of Boston in NeuhEngland.

Licensed and Enired according to Order.
London: Printed for Nath. HiUar, at the Princes-Arms, in

LeadenrHall^treet, over against St. Mary-Ax, and Joseph

CoUyer, at the GoldenrBible, on LandonrBridge. 1700.^

The EpisHe to the Reader, And more especially to the NoUe

Bereans? of this Age, wherever Residing.

Gentlemen,

You that are freed from the Slavery of a corrupt Education ;
and that in spite of human Precepts, Elxamples and Presidents/
can hearken to the Dictates of Scr^)tuI& and Reason :

^Title-page of originaL

' /. e,, to those with open minds : the Bereans are commended (Acts xviL 11)
as "more noble" because "th^ received the word with all readiness ol mind,
and searehed the Scriptures daily, whether these things were so."

* IVeoedents: this odd spelling was then the current one.

296

1097] CALEF, MORE WONDERS 297

For your sakes I am content, that these CoUections of nune,
as also my Sentiments should be exposed to publick view; In
hopes that having well considered, and compared them with
Scripture, you will see reason, as I do, to question a belief so
prevalent (as that here treated of) as also the practice flowing
from thence; they standing as nearly connext as cause and
effect; it h&ng foimd whoUy impracticable, to extirpate the
latter without first curing the former.

And if the Buffoon or Satyrical will be exercising their
Talents, or if the Biggots wilfully and blindly reject the Testimonies of their own Reason, and more sure word, it is no more
than what I expected from them.

But you Gentlemen, I doubt not, are willing to Distinguish
between Truth and Error, and if this may be any fiuiherance
to you herein, I shall not miss my Aim.

But if you find the contrary, and that my belief herein is
any way Heterodox, I shall be thankful for the Information
to any Learned or Reverend Person, or others, that shall take j
that pains to inform me better by Scriptm^, or soimd Reason, «
which is what I have been long seeking for in this Countiy in
vain.

In a time when not only England in particular, but almost
all Europe had been labouring against the Usurpations of
Tyranny and Slavery, The English America has not been
behind in a share in the Common calamities; more especially
New-England has met not only with such calamities as are
common to the rest, but with several aggravations enhansing
such Affictions, by the Devastations and Cruelties of the Barbarous Indians in their Eastern borders, etc.

But this is not all, they have been harrast (on many accounts) by a more dreadful Enemy, as will herein appear to
the considerate.

P. 66.* Were it as we are told in Wonders of the InrnSbU
World J that the Devils were walking about our Streets with

^ This page-number and those which follow refer to the pages of Mather's
Wonders (original edition), from which the substance of these paragraphs is
quoted. The passages quoted will be found in Mather's book at pp. 48, 41, 50,
of the first London edition, at pp. 95, 80-82, 100, of that of 1862, at pp. 121122, 102-104, 128, of the American edition of 1866. They do not belong to the
pages reprinted in the present volume.

296 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1607

lengthned Chains making a dreadful noise in our Ears, and
Brimstone, even without a Metaphor, was making a horrid
and a hellish stench in our Nostrils,

P. 49. And that the Devil exhibiting himsdf ordinarily
as a black-Man,^ had decoy'd a fearful knot of Proud, Froward, Ignorant, Envious and Malitious Creatures, to list them^
selves in his horrid Service, by entring their Names in a Book
tendered unto them; and that they have had their Meeting?
and Sacraments, and associated themselves to destroy the
Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, in these parts of the Worid;
having each of them their Spectres, or Devfls Commissionated
by them, and representing of them, to be the Engines of their
Malice, by these wicked Spectres siezing poor People about
the Coimtry with various and bloody Torments. And of
those evidently preternatural Torments some to[o] have died.
And that they have bewitched some even so far, as to make
them self destroyers, and others in many Towns here and there
languished under their evil hands. The People thus afflicted
miserably scratched and bitten; and that the same Invisible
Furies did stick Pins in them, and scald them, distort and disjoint them, with a Thousand other Plagues; and sometimes
drag them out of their Chambers, and carry them over Trees
and HOls Mfles together, many of them being tempted to sign
the Devils Laws.

P. 7[0]. Those furies whereof several have killed more
People perhaps than would serve to make a Village.*

If this be the true state of the Afflictions of this Country,
it is very deplorable, and beyond all other outward Calamities
miserable. But if on the other side, the Matter be as others
do imderstand it. That the Devil has been too hard for us by
his Temptations, signs, and lying Wonders, with the help of
pernicious notions, formerly imbibed and professed; together
with the Accusations of a parcel of posse^ssed, distracted, or
lying Wenches, accusing their Innocent Neighbours, pretending they see their Spectres {i. e.) Devils in their likeness Afflicting of them, and that God in righteous Judgment (after Men

^How Mather conceived this "black man" to look appears from the description he ascribes to Mercy Short (p. 261, above).

' In the original there is here no paragraph, the paragn^h beginning after
the next sentence with *'But if," etc.

1607] CALEF, MORE WONDERS 299

had ascribed his Power to Witches, of Commissionatiiig Devils
to do these things) may have given them over to strong delusions to believe lyes, etc. And to let loose the Devils of
Envy, Hatred, Pride, Cruelty, and Malice against each other;
yet still disguised under the Mask of Zeal for God, and left
them to the branding one another with the odious Name of
Witch; and upon the Accusation of those above mentioned.
Brother to Accuse and Prosecute Brother, Children their
Parents, Pastors and Teachers their immediate Flock unto
death; Shepherds becoming Wolves, Wise Men Infatuated;
People hauled to Prisons, with a bloody noise pursuing to,
and insulting over, the (true) Sufferers at Execution, while
some are fleeing from that called Justice, Justice it self fleeing
before such Accusations, when once it did but begin to refrain
fiu-ther proceedings, and to question such Practises, some
making their Escape out of Prisons, rather than by an obstinate
Defence of their Innocency, to run so apparent hazard of their
lives; Estates seized, FamiUes of Children and others left to
the Mercy of the Wilderness (not to mention here the Numbers
prescribed,^ dead in Prisons, or Executed, etc.)

All which Tragedies, tho begun in one Town, or rather by
one Parish, has Plague-like spread more than through that
Country. And by its Eccho giving a brand of Infamy to this
whole Country, throughout the World,

If this were the Miserable case of this Coimtry in the time
thereof, and that the Devil had so far prevailed upon us in our
Sentiments and Actions, as .to draw us from so much as looking into the Scriptures for our guidance in these pretended
Intricacies, leading us to a trusting in blind guides, such as the
corrupt practices of some other Coimtries, or the bloody Experiments of Bodin, and such other Authors — ^Then tho our
Case be most miserable, yet it must be said of New-England,
Thou hast destroyed thy self, and brought this greatest of
Miseries upon thee.

And now whether the Witches (such as have made a compact by Explicit Covenant with the Devil, having thereby
obtained a power to Commissionate him) have been the cause
of our miseries.

Or whether a Zeal governed by blindness and passion, and

as then often, for "proscribed," ». «., condemned to deatk

V

tfW%. -_?1- - J 9t

300 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1607

led by president; has not herein precipitated us into far greater
wickedness (if not Witchcrafts) than any have been yet proved
against those that suffered,

To be able to distinguish aright in this matter, to which of
these two to refer our Miseries is the present Work. As to
the former, I know of no sober Man, much less Reverend
Christian, that being ask'd dares afiSrm and abide by it, that
Witches have that power; viz. to Commissionate Devils to
Idll and destroy. And as to the latter, it were well if there
were not too much of truth in it, which remains to be demonstrated.

But here it will be said, what need of Raking in the Coals
that lay buried in oblivion. We cannot recall those to Life
again that have suffered, supposing it were unjustly; it tends
but to the exposing the Actors, as if they had proceeded
irr^ularly.

Truly I take this to be just as the Devil would have it, so
much to fear disobliging men, as not to endeavour to detect
his Wiles, that so he may the sooner, and with the greater Advantages set the same on foot again (either here or else where)
so dragging us through the Pond twice by the same Cat.^
And if Reports do not (herein) deceive us, much the same has
been acting this present year in Scotland.^ And what Kingdom or Country is it, that has not had their bloody fits and
turns at it. And if this is such a catching disease, and so imiversal, I presume I need make no Apology for my Endeavours
to prevent, as far as in my power, any more such bloody Victims or Sacrifices; tho indeed I had rather any other would

* For a description of the joke, played on boobies, of "dragging throu^
a pond with a cat," see the Oxford Dictionary, s, v. Cat, IIL 14, or Grose, Dietiotk"
ary qf Fii^ Termt, 9. v. "Cat-whipping." "We hope, sir," said in 1682 the
London Oaaette, "that this Nation will be too wise, to be drawn twice through
the same Water by the very same Cat"

' As Calef is writing in August, 1697, he doubtless has in mind the cases in
Renfrewshire, where on June 10 several witches were hanged, then burned, on
the Gallow Green of Paisley; a "Relation" then printed recounts "the Diabolical
Practices of above Twenty." Neither the relation nor the tidings of the burning
6ould wdl have reached America by August 11 ; but the trials had been notorious
for months. In Scotland, however, such things had been constant, as may be
seen by the records of the Privy Councfl. Those of this period are chronided by
Robert Chambers in his Domestic AnnaU of SoodanL

16071 CALEF, MORE WONDERS 301

have undertaken so offensive, tho necessary a task; yet all '
things weighed; I had rather thus Expose my self to Censure,
than that it should be wholly omitted. Were the notions in
question innocent and harmless, respecting the Glory of God,
and well being of Men, I should not have engaged in them,
but finding them in my esteem so intoUerably destructive of
both. This together with my being by Warrant called before
the Justices, in my own Just Vindication, I took it to be a call
from God, to my Power,^ to Vindicate his Truths, against the
Pagan and Popish Assertions, which are so prevalent; for tho
Clmstians in general do own the Scriptures to be their only
Rule of Faith and Doctrine, yet these Notions will tell us, that
the Scriptures have not sufficiently, nor at all described the
crime of Witchcraft, whereby the culpable might be detected,
tho it be positive in the Command to pimish it by Death;
hence the World has been from time to time perplext in the
prosecution of the several DiaboUcal mediums of Heathenish
and Popish Invention, to detect an Imaginary Crime (not but
that there are Witches, such as the Lbiw of God describes)
which has produced a deluge of Blood ; hereby rendering the
Commands of God not only void but dangerous.

So also they own Gods Providence and Government of the
World, and that Tempests and Storms, Afflictions and Diseases,
are of his sending; yet these Notions tell us, that the Devil
has the power of all these, and can perform them when commissioned by a Witch thereto, and that he has a power at the
Witches call to act and do, without and against the course of
Natm^, and all natural causes, in afflicting and killing of Innocents; and this is that so many have died for.

Also it is generally believed, that if any Man has strength,
it is from God the Almighty Being: But these notions will tell
us, that the Devil can make one Man as strong as many, which
was one of the best proofs, as it was counted, against Mr.
Burroughs the Minister;* tho his contemporaries in the
Schools during his Minority could have testified, that his
strength was tihen as much superiour to theirs as ever (setting
aside incredible Romances) it was discovered to be since.
Thus rendrlng the power of God, and his providence of none
Effect.

> /. e., to the utmost of my power. ' See pp. 219-220, above.

302 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1097

These are some of the destructive notions of this Age, and
however the asserters of them seem sometimes to value themselves much upon sheltring their Neighbours from Spectral
Accusations, They may deserve as much thanks as that
Tyrant, that having industriously obtained an unintelligible
charge against his Subjects, in matters wherein it was impossible they should be Guilty, having thereby their lives in his
power, yet suffers them of his meer Grace to live, and will
be called gracious Lord.

It were too Icarian^ a task for one unfumish'd with necessary learning, and library, to give any Just account, from
whence so great delusions have sprung, and so long continued.
Yet as an Essay from those scraps of reading that I have had
opportunity of, it will be no great ventm^ to say, that Signs
and Lying Wonders have been one principal cause.^

It is written of Justin Martyr, who lived in the second
Century, that he was before his conversion a great Philosopher;
first in the way of the Stoicks, and after of the Peripateticks,
iEifter that of the Pythagorean, and after that of the Platonists
sects; and after all proved of Eminent use in the C!hurch of
Christ; Yet a certain Author speaking of one Apollonius
Tyaneus* has these words, ''That the most Orthodox themselves b^an to deem him vested with power sufficient for a
Deity; which occasioned that so strange a doubt from Justin
Martyr, as cited by the learned Gr^oiy, Fol. 37. Ei Oafe
^crrt,* etc. If God be the Creator and Lord of the World, how
comes it to pass that Apollonius his Telisms,' have so much
over-ruled the course of things! for we see that they also have
stilled the Waves of the Sea, and the raging of the Winds, and
prevailed against the Noisome Flies, and Incimsions of wild
Beasts," etc. If so Eminent and Early a Christian were by
these false shews in such doubt, it is the less wonder in our

^ /. e,, presumptuous, like the venture of Icarus, who flew so hi^ that the
sun mdted off his wings.

s He is thinking, of course, of sudi "Bemariudbles*' as those told by the
Mathers.

'Apollonius of lyana, the first-century I^thagorean philoaopher and
wonder-worker, like Justin Martyr, the second-centuiy apdogist of
is perhaps too well known to need a footnote.

* Justin Martyr, QuaeMmes et Responnones ad Orihodaxot, qu. 24.

* TeUsmata, talismans, magical devices.

16071 CALEF, MORE WONDERS 303

depraved times, to meet with what is Equivalent thereto:
Besides this a certain Author informs me, that '' Julian (afterwards called the Apostate) being instructed in the Philosophy
and Disciplines of the Heathen, by libarius^ his Tutor, by
this means he came to love Philosophy better than the Gospel,
and so by degrees tum'd from Christianity to Heathenism/'

This same Julian did, when Apostate, forbid that Christians
should be instructed in the Discipline of the Gentiles, which
(it seems) Socrates a Writer of the Ecclesiastical History, does
acknowledge to be by the singular Providence of God; Christians having then b^un to degenerate from the Gospel, and
to betake themselves to Heathenish learning. And in the
Mercury for the Month of February, 1695, there is this Account, ''That the Christian Doctors conversing much with the
writings of the Heathen, for the gaining of Eloquence, A
Counsel^ was held at Carthage, which forbad the reading of
the Books of the Gentiles/'

From all which it may be easily perceived, that in the
Primitive times of Christianity, when not only many Heathen
of the Vulgar, but also many leam'd Men and Philosophers
had imbra^ the Christian Faith, they stiU retained a love
to their Heathen-learning, which as one observes being transplanted into a Christian soile, soon proved productive of pernicious weeds, which over-ran the face of the Church, hence
it was so deformed as the Reformation foimd it.

Among other pernicious Weeds arising from this Root, the
Doctrine of the power of Devils and Witchcraft as it is now,
and long has been understood, is not the least; the Fables of
Homer, Virgil, Horace and Ovid, etc., being for the Elegancy
of their Language retained then (and so are to this day) in
the schools, have not only introduced, but established such
Doctrines to the poisoning the Christian World. A certain
Author Expresses it thus, ''that as the Christian Schools at
first brought Men from Heathenism to the Gospel, so these
Schools carry Men from the Gospel to Heathenism, as to their
great perfection,'' and Mr. I. M.' in his Remarkable Ptavidencea,
gives an accoimt that (as he calls it) an Old Coimsel^ did

1 libanius. 'Council: the Fourth Councfl of Carthafe, 398 A. D.

* Increase Mather.

* Council: the Spanish Council of Bracara, 561 A. D.

804 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES (1697

Anathematize all those that believed such power of the Devils,
accounting it a Damnable Doctrine. But as other Evils did
afterwards increase in the Church (partly by such Eklucation)
so this insensibly grew up with them, tho not to that degree,
as that any Counsel^ I have ever heard or Bead of has to this
day taken off those Anathema's; yet after this the Church so
far declined, that Witchcraft became a Principal Ecclesiastical
-:JBngine (as also that of Heresie was) to root up all that stood
in their way; and besides the ways of Tryal that we have still
in practice, they invented some, which were peculiar to themselves; which when ever they were minded to improve against
any Orthodox believer, they could easily make Elffectual:
That Deluge of Blood which that Scarlet Whore^ has to answer for, shed under this notion, how amazing is it.
^ yjJC The first in England that I have read of, of any note since
\/ the Reformation, that asserts this Doctrine, is the famous Mr.
Perkins,' he (as also Mr. Gaul,^ and Mr. Bernard,^ etc. seems
all of them to have undertaken one Task, they) taking notice
of the Multiplicity of irr^ular ways to try them by, invented
by Heathen and Papists, made it their business and main woric
herein to oppose such as they saw to be pernicious. And if
they did not look more narrowly into it, but followed the
first, viz. Mr. Perkins whose Education (as theirs also) had

^CouncQ.

' He means the Roman churcL Revelation, xvii.

•William Perkins (155S-1602), the eminent Cambridge divine— "our
Perkins," as Increase Mather caUs him — whose Duooutm of the Damned AH cf
WUchcrcfi (London, 1608, 1610, and in the many editions (^ his Workf) was the
highest authority to Puritans.

« John Gaule. See p. 216, note 1.

* Richard Bernard (1567-1641), long minister of Batoombe in Somersetshire.
Bib Ouide to Omnd^ufymen . . . in cases of Wiichcrcfi (1627, 1629) was, though
credulous and crud enough, the most mild and cautious of the Puritan monographs. The tiny volume, now very rare, had perhaps never a great circulation
(in 1692 Increase Mather declares it, like Gaule's book, "rare to be had"); but
its rules for the detection of witches gained much vogue from their adoptkm by
Michael Dalton into his The Countrey Justice, the standard manual for the pfocedure of the lower courts. It is clearly, however, from Bernard's book itself
that (]!otton Mather has abridged these rules in his Wonders; and the book, as
well as this extract, was doubtless in the hands of the Salem judges. Increase
Mather quotes it often, and by page, and tells us that it "is a solid and a wise
treatise." (Cases of Conscience, 1693, p. 18.)

im] CALEF, MORE WONDERS 305

forestalled him into such belief; whom they readily followed,
it camiot be wondered at: And that they were men liable to
En*; and so not to be trusted to as perfect guides, will manifestly appear to him that shall see their several receits laid
down to detect them by their Presumptive and Positive ones.
And consider how few of either have any foundation in Scrip- v/
ture or Reason; and how vastly they differ from each other
in both; each having his Art by himself, which Forty or an
Hundred more may as well imitate, and give theirs, ad infinir
turn, being without all manner of proof.

But tho this be their main design to take off People from
those Evil and bloody ways of trial which they speak so much
against. Yet this does not hinder to this day, but the same
evil ways or as bad are still used to detect them by, and that
even among Protestants; and is so far Justified, that a Reverend Person has said lately here, how else shall we detect
Witches? And another being urged to prove by Scriptiu^
such a sort of Witch as has power to send Devils to kill men,
replied, that he did as firmly believe it as any article of his ^^
Faith. And that he (the Inquirer) did not go to the Scripture, ^
to learn the Mysteries of his trade or Art. What can be said ^
more to Establish there Heathenish notions and to villifie the
Scriptures, our only Rule; and that after we have seen such
dire effects thereof, as has threatned the utter Extirpation
of this whole Country.

And as to most of the Actors in these Tragedies, tho they
are so far from defending their Actions that they w£Q Readily
own, that undue steps have been taken, etc., Yet it seems
they choose that the same should be Acted over again inf orced
by their Example, rather than that it should Remain as a
Warning to Posterity, wherein they have mist it. So far are
they from giving Glory to God, and taking the due shame to
themselves. *

And now to sum up all in a few words, we have seen a \
Biggotted Zeal, stirring up a Blind and most Bloody rage, not ^
against Enemies, or Irreligious Proffigate Persons, But (in
Judgment of Charity, and to view) against as Vertuous and
Religious as any they have left behind them in this Country,
which have suffered as Evil doers with the utmost extent of
rigour (not that so high a Charactor is due to all that Suffered)

308 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES 11697

and this by the Testimony of Vile Varlets as not only were
known before, but have been further apparent since l^ their
Manifest LiveS; Whordoms, Incest, etc. The Accusations of
these, from their Spectral Sight, being the chief Evidence
against those that Suffered. In which Accusations they were

I upheld by both Magistrates and Ministers, so long as they

* Apprehended themselves in no Danger.

And then tho they could defend neither the Doctrine, nor
the Practice, yet none of them have in such a publick manner
as the case Requires, testified against either; tho at the same
time they could not but be sensible what a Stain and lasting
Infamy they have brought upon the whole Coimtiy, to the
Indangering the futiu^ welfair not only of this but of other
places, induced by their Example; if not, to an intailing the
Guilt of all the Righteous Blood that has been by the same
means Shed, by Heathen or Papists, etc., upon themselves,
whose deeds they have so far justified, occasioning the great
Dishonour and Blasphemy of liie Name of God, Scandahzing
the Heathen, hardning of Enemies; and as a Natural effect
thereof, to the great Increase of Atheism.

I shall conclude only with acquainting the Reader, that of
these Collections, the first, containing more Wonders of the
Invisible World, I received of a Gentleman,^ who had it of
the Author and communicated it to me,' with his express consent, of which this is a true Copy.' As to the Letters, they

1 It has been oonjectured tliat this gentleman may have been one of the two
Brattles. In a letter of March 1 , 1695 (More Wondtrt, p. 30— not here reprinted),
to a "Mr. B." (Brattle?) Calef mentions other papers received from Mather
throu^ his hands — but to be returned speedily and not copied. He, however,
he says, made notes in the margin where he thou^t it needful. These pmpen,
as it will rejoice all students to learn, have just been identified by Mr. Worthing^
ton C. Ford (to whose courte^ the editor owes his knowledge of them) among
those in the keeping of the Massachusetts Historical Society, and they will be
published in full — both Mather's text and Calefs marginalia (with a facsimile
plate) in that society's Proceeding* for 1913-1914. See also below, p. 388, at end.

'The original has "use"; but this is corrected to "me" in the Erraia (see
p. 295, above).

' A copy, not of the "express consent," but of the "More Wonders of the
Invisible World" — the Margaret Rule story as a whole — to which the letter of
Mather introducing it was perhaps attached as a sort of open "letter to the
reader." Between thb preface and that letter there intervenes a table of contents,
not here reprinted.

16971 CALEF, MORE WONDERS 307

are for Substance the same I sent, tho with some small Variation or Addition. Touching the two Letters from a Gentleman, at his request I have forbom naming him. It is great
Pity the matters of Fact, and indeed the whole, had not been
done by some abler hand better Accomplished and Advantaged
with both natural and acquired Judgments, but others not
Appearing, I have inforc'd my self to do what is done, my
other occasions Will not admit any further Scrutiny therein.

Boston in New-England, Aug. 11, 1697.

Sir,

I now lay before you a very Entertaining Story, a Stoiy
which relates yet more Wonders of the Invisible World,* a
Story which tcJls the Remarkable Af9ictions and Deliverance
of one that had been Prodigiously handled by the Evil Angels.
I was my self a daily Eye Witness to a large part of these Occurrences, and there may be produced Scores of Substantial Witnesses to the most of them ; yea, I know not of any one Passage
of the Story, but what may be suflSciently Attested. I do
not Write it with a design of throwing it presently into the
Press, but only to preserve the Memory of such Memorable
things, the foigetting whereof would neither be pleasing to
God, nor useful to Men; as also to give you, with some others
of peculiar and obliging Friends, a sight of some Curiosities,
and I hope this Apologie will serve to Excuse me, if I mention,
as perhaps I may, when I come to a tenth Paragraph in my
Writing,^ some thmgs which I would have omitted in a farther
Publication.

Cotton Mather.'

1 It is, in other woids, a supplement to his book thus entitled, as its other
name, "Another Brand pludct out of the Burning," makes it a supplement to
his Mercy Short narrative.

« See his "Sect 10" (pp. 316-318, below).

' As to thb letter see p. 306, note 3. The Margaret Rule MS. is still preserved in the library of the Massachusetts Historical Society; and Poole, who
used it for his chi^>ter on witchcraft in the Memorial History qf BoiUm, has
in a footnote (II. 152) printed a facamile of the "To bee Returned unto C.
Mather" written on it by its author.

308 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES U«l

ANOTHER BRAND PLUCKT OUT OF THE BURNING,
OR, MORE WONDERS OF THE INVISIBLE
WORLD

PART L
Section I.

The Ajfflictions of Margaret Ride.

Within these few years there died in the Southern Parts
a Christian Indian, who notwithstanding some of his Indian
Weakness, had something of a better Character of vertue and
Goodness, than many of our People can allow to most of their
Countrey-men, that profess the Christian Religion. He had
been a Zealous Preacher of the Gk)spel to his Neighbour-hood,
and a sort of Overseer, or Officer, to whose Conduct was
owing veiy much of what good order was maintained among
those Proselited Savages : This Man retimiing home from the
Funeral of his Son, was Complemented by an English-Man,
expressing Sorrow for his Loss; now, tho' the Indians use,
upon the Death of Relations, to be the most Passionate and
GKitragious Creatures in the World, yet this Converted Indian
Handsomely and Chearfully repli'd, "Truly I am sorry, and
I am not sorry; I am sorry that I have Buried a dear Son;
but I am not sorry that the will of God is done. I know that
without the will of God my Son could not have Died, and I
know that the will of God is allways just and good, and so
I am satisfied/' Immediately upon this, even within a few
hours, he fell himself Sick of a Disease that quickly kill'd him;
in the time of which Disease he called his Folks about him,
earnestly perswading them to be Sincere in their Praying unto
God, and beware of the Drunkenness, the Idleness, the Lying,
whereby so many of that Nation disgraced their Profession of
Christianity; adding, that he was ashamed when he thought
how little Service he had hitherto done for God; and that if
God would prolong his Life he would Labour to do better Service, but that he was fully sure he was now going to the Lord
Jesus Christ, who had bought him with his own Precious Blood;
and for his part he long'd to Die that he might be with his
Glorious Lord; and in the mid'st of such passages he gave up

1692] CALEF, MORE WONDERS 309

the Ghost, but in such repute, that the English People of good
Fashion (Ud not think much of Travelling a great way to his
Interment. Lest my Reader do now wonder why I have related this piece of a Story, I will now hasten to abate that
Wonder, by telling that whereto this was intended, but for
an Introduction: Enow then that this remarkable Indian
being a little before he Died at work in the Wood making of
Tarr, there appeared unto him a Black-Man, of a Terrible
aspect, and more than humane Dimensions, threatning bitterly
to kill him if he would not promise to leave off Preaching as
he did to his Countrey-Men, and promise particularly, that if
he Preached any more, he would say nothing of Jesus Christ
unto them. The Indian amaz'd, yet had the courage to answer,
I will in spite of you go on to Preach Christ more than ever I
did, and the God whom I serve will keep me that you shall
never hurt me. Hereupon the Apparition abating somewhat
of his fierceness, offered to the Indian a Book of a considerable
thickness and a Pen and Ink, and said, that if he would now set
his hand imto that Book, he would require nothing further of
him; but the Man refused the motion with indignation, and
fell down upon his knees into a Fervent and Pious Prayer unto
God for help against the Tempter, whereupon the Daemon
Vanish't.

This is a Story which I would never have tendered unto
my Reader, if I had not Received it from an honest and useful
English Man, who is at this time a Preacher of the Gospel to
the Indians,^ nor would the probable* Truth of it have encouraged me to have tendered it, if this also had not been a
fit introduction unto yet a further Narrative.

Sect. 2. 'Twas not much above a year or two, after this
Accident (of which no maimer of Noise has been made) that
there was a Prodigious descent of Devils upon divers places
near the Center of this Province, wherein some scores of Mis-

^Very probably his uncle, the Rev. John Cotton (1640-1699), who had
formerly preached in Martha's Vineyard (1664-1667) and had there learned the
Indian tongue, and who now, at Plymouth, continued to preach to Indians as well
as whites. In his life of Eliot and in bk. VI. of his MagnaLia Mather relates
much more of the Christian Indians of Martha's Vineyard and of the witchcrafts
there.

' Provable, demonstrable.

310 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1603

erable People were Troubled by horrible appearances of a
Black-Man, accompanied with Spectres, wearing these and
those Humane Shapes, who offer'd them a Book to be by them
sign'd, in token of their being Listed for the Service of the Devil,
and upon their denying to do it, ihey were Dragoon'd' with
a thousand Preternatural Torments, which gave no little tenor
to the beholders of these unhappy Energuments.* There was
one in the North part of Boston smed by the Evil-Angels many
Months after the General Storm of the late Inchantments was
over, and when the Countrey had long lain pretty quiet, both
as to Molestations and Accusations from the Invisible World,
her Name was Maigaret Rule, a Young Woman. She was
bom of sober and honest Parents, yet Living, but what her
own Character was before her Visitation, I can speak with the
less confidence of exactness, because I observe that wherever
the Devils have been let loose to worry any Poor Creature
amongst us, a great part of the Neighbourhood presently set
themselves to inquire and relate all tibe little Vanities of their
Childhood, with such unequal exaggerations, as to make them
I4)pear greater Sinners than any whom the Pilate of Hell has
not yet Preyed upon : But it is affirm'd, that for about half
a year before her Visitation, she was observably improved in
the hopeful symptoms of a new Creature; She was become
seriously concem'd for the everlasting Salvation of her Soul,
and careful to avoid the snares of Evil Company. This Young
Woman had never seen the affliction of Mercy Short, whereof
a Narrative has been already given,' and yet about half a
year after the glorious and si^ial deliverance of that poor
Damsel, this Maigaret fell into an affliction, marvellous, resembling hers in idmost all the circumstances of it, indeed the
Afflictions were so much alike, that the relation I have given
of the one, would almost serve as the full History of the other,
this was to that, little more than the second part to the same
Tune, indeed Margarets case was in several points less remarkable than Mercies, and in some other things the Entertainment
did a little vary.

Sect. 3. 'Twas upon the Lords Day the 10th of September,
in the Year 1693, that Margaret Rule, after some hours of
previous disturbance in the Publick Assembly, fell into odd

* See p. 189, note 2. 'Eiierguinens: t.e.,demoniao. < See pp. 255 ff., above.

16031 CALEF, MORE WONDERS 311

Fits, which caused her Friends to cany her home, where her
Fits in a few hours grew into a Figure that satisfied the Spectators of their being preternatural; some of the Neighbours
were forward enough to suspect the rise of this Mischief in an
House hard-by, where lived a Miserable Woman, who had
been formerly Imprisoned on the suspicion of Witchcraft, and
who had frequently Cured very painfull Hurts by muttering
over them certain Charms, which I shall not indanger the
Poysoning of my Reader by repeating. This Woman had the
Evening before Mai^garet fell into her Calamities, very bitterly
treated her, and threatn'd her; but the hazard of hurting a
poor Woman that might be innocent, notwithstanding Surmizes that might have been more strongly grounded than
those, caus'd the pious People in the Vicinity to try rather
whether incessant Supplication to God alone, might not procure a quicker and safer Ease to the Afficted, than hasty Prosecution of any supposed Criminal, and accordingly that imexceptionable course was all that was ever followed; yea, which
I look't on as a token for good, the Afflicted Family was as
averse as any of us all to entertain thoughts of any other course.
Sect. 4. The Young Woman was assaulted by Eight cruel
Spectres, whereof she imagin'd that she knew three or four,
but the rest came still with their Faces cover'd, so that she
could never have a distinguishing view of the countenance of
those whom she thought she knew; she was very careful of
my reitterated charges to forbear blazing the Names, lest any
good Person should come to suffer any blast of Reputation
thro' the cunning Malice of the great Accuser; nevertheless
having since privately named them to my self, I wiU venture
to say this of them, that they are a sort of Wretches who for
these many years have gone imder as Violent Presumptions of
Witchcraft, as perhaps any creatures yet living upon Earth;
altho' I am fan* from thinking that the Visions of this Young
Woman were Evidence enough to prove them so. These
cursed Spectres now brought imto her a Book about a Cubet
long, a Book Red and thick, but not very broad, and they
demanded of her that she would set her Hand to that Book,
or touch it at least with her Hand, as a Sign of her becoming
a Servant of the Devil; upon her peremptory refusal to do
what they asked, they did not after renew the profers of the

312 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1603

Book unto her, but instead thereof; they fell to Tormenting
of her in a manner too Hellish to be sufficiently described, in
those Torments confining her to her Bed, for just Six weeks
together.

Sect. 5. Sometimes, but not always, together with the
Spectres there look't in upon the Young Woman (according
to her account) a short and a Black Man, whom liiey called
their Master, a Wight exactly of the same Dimensions and
Complexion and voice, with the Divel that has exhibited himself unto other infested People, not only in other parts of this
Coimtry but also in other Countiys, even of the European
World, as the relation of the Enchantments there inform us,
they all prof est themselves Vassals of this Devil, and in obedience unto him they address themselves unto various ways of
Torturing her; accordingly she was cruelly pinch't with Invisible hiuids very often in a Day, and the black and blew marks
of the pinches became immediately visible unto the standers
by. Besides this, when her attendants had left her without
so much as one pin about her, that so they might prevent some
fear'd inconveniencies; yet she would ever now and then be
miserably hurt with Pins which were found stuck into her Neck,
Back and Arms, however, the Wounds made by the Pins would
in a few minutes ordinarily be cured; she would also be
strangely distorted in her Jo3aits, and thrown into such exorbitant Convulsions as were astonishing imto the Spectators
in General; They that could behold the dol^ul condition of
the poor Family without sensible compassions, might have
Intrals indeed, but I am sure they could have no true Bowels
in them.

Sect. 6. It were a most Unchristian and imcivil, yea a
most unreasonable thing to imagine that the Fitt's of the
Young Woman were but meer Impostures: And I believe
scarce any, but People of a particular Dirtiness, will harbour
such an Uncharitable Censure; however, because I know not
how far the Devil may drive the Imagination of poor Creatures
when he has possession of them, that at another time when they
are themselves would scorn to Dissemble any thing, I shall
now confine my Narrative imto passages, wherein there could
be no room left for any Dissimulation. Of these the first that
I'll mention shall be this; From the time that Margaret Rule

1093] CALEF, MORE WONDERS 313

first found herself to be formally besi^ed by the Spectres
untill the Ninth Day following, namely from the Tenth of
September to the Eighteenth, she kept an entire Fast, and yet
she was mito all appearance as Fresh, as Lively, as Hearty, at
the Nine Days End, as before they began; in all this time,
tho' she had a very eager Hunger upon her Stomach, yet if
any refreshment were brought unto her, her Teeth would be
set, and she would be thrown into many Miseries, Indeed once
or twice or so in all this time, her Tormentors permitted her
to swallow a Mouthful of somewhat that might encrease her
Miseries, whereof a Spoonful of Rum was the most considerable ;
but otherwise, as I said, her Fast unto the Ninth day was
very extream and rigid: However, afterwards there scarce
passed a day wherein she had not liberty to take something or
other for her Sustentation, And I must add this further, that
this business of her Fast was carried so, that it was impossible
to be dissembled without a Combination of Multitudes of
People imacquainted with one another to support the Juggle,
but he that can imagine such a thing of a Neighbourhood so
fill'd with Vertuous People is a base man, I cannot call him
any other.

Sect. 7. But if the Sufferings of this Yoimg Woman were
not Impostiu^, yet might they not be pure Distemper? I will
not here inquire of our Saducees, what sort of Distemper 'tis
shall stick the Body full of Pins, without any Hand that could
be seen to stick them; or whether all the Pin-makers in the
World would be willing to be Evaporated into certain iU habits
of Body producing a Distemper, but of the Distemper my
Reader shall be Judge when I have told him something further
of those unusual Sufferings. I do believe that the Evil Angels
do often take Advantage from Natural Distempers in the Children of Men to annoy them with such further Mischiefs as we
call preternatural. The Malignant Vapours and Humours of
our Diseased Bodies may be used by Devils thereinto insinuating as engine of the Execution of their Malice upon those
Bodies; and perhaps for this reason one Sex may suffer more
Troubles of some kinds from the Invisible World than the other,
as well as for that reason for which the Old Serpent made
where he did his first Address. But I Pray what will you say
to this, Margaret Rule would sometimes have her Jaws for314 NARRATIVES OP THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [im

cibly pulled open, whereupon something Invisible would be
pouied down her Throat; we all saw her swallow, and yet we
saw her try all she could by Spitting, Coughing and Shrildng/
that she might not swalow, but one time ^e standers by
plainly saw something of that odd Liquor it self on the outside
of her Neck; She cried out of it as of Scalding Brimstone
poured into her, and the whole House would Inunediately
scent so hot of Brimstone that we were scarce able to endure it,
whereof there are scores of Witnesses; but the Young Woman
her self would be so monstrously Inflam'd that it would have
broke a Heart of Stone to have seen her Agonies. This was a
thing that several times happened and several times when her
Mouth was thus pull'd open, the standers by dipping their
Hands dose thereupon the distresses that otherwise fdlowed
would be diverted. Moreover there was a whitish powder to
us Invisible somtimes cast upon the Eyes of this Young Woman,
whereby her Eyes would be extreamly inconmioded, but one
time some of this Powder was fallen actually Visible upon h^
Cheek, from whence the People in the Room wq)ed it with
their Handkerchi^s, and somtimes the Young Woman would
also be so bitterly scorched with the unseen Sulphur thrown
upon her, that very sensible Blisters would be raised upon her
Skin, whereto her Friends found it necessary to apply the Oyl's
proper for conmion Burning, but the most of these Hurts
would be cured in two or thr^ days at farthest: I think I may
without Vanity pretend to have read not a few of the best
System's of Physick that have been yet seen in these American
Regions, but I must confess that I have never yet learned the
Name of the Natural Distemper, whereto these odd symptoms
do belong : However I might suggest perhaps many a Natural
Medicine, which would be of singular use against many of
them.

Sect. 8. But there fell out some other matters far beyond
the reach of Natural Distemper : This Margaret Rule once in
the middle of the Night Lamented sadly that the Spectres
threatned the Drowning of a Young Man in the Nei^bourhood, whom she named unto the Company: well it was afterwards found that at that very time this Young Man, having
been prest on Board a Man of War then in the Harbour, was

The woid is unknown to the dictionaries.

1093] CALEF, MORE WONDERS 315

out of some dissatisfaction attempting to swim ashoar, and he
had been Drowned in the attempt, if^a Boat had not seasonablytaken him up; it was by computation a minute or two after
the Young Womans discourse of the Drowning, that the Young
Man took the Water. At another time she told us that the
Spectres bragg'd and laughed in her hearing about an exploit
they had lately done, by stealing from a Gentleman his Will
soon after he had written it; and within a few hours after she
had spoken this there came to me a Gentleman with a private
complaint, that having written his Will it was unaccountably
gone out of the way, how or where he could not Imagine; and
besides all this, there were wonderful Noises every now and
then made about the Room, which our People could Ascribe
to no other Authors but the Spectres, yea, the Watchers affirm
that they heard those fiends clapping of their hands together
with an Audibleness, wherein they could not be Imposed upon:
And once her Tormentors pull'd her up to the Cieling of the
Chamber, and held her there before a very Numerous Company
of Spectators, who found it as much as they could all do to
puU her down again. There was alao another very suiprising
cmnmistance about her, agreeable to what we have not only
Read in several Histories concerning the Imps that have been
Imployed in Witchcraft; but also ^own in some of our own
afflicted : We once thought we perceived something stir ilpon
her Pillow at a little distance from her, whereupon one present
laying his hand there, he to his horror apprehended that he
felt, tho' none could see it, a living Creature, not altogether
imlike a Rat, which nimbly escaped from him : and there were
diverse other Persons who were thrown into a great consternation by feeling, as they Judg'd, at other times the same Invisible Animal.

Sect. 9. As it has been with a Thousand other Inchanted
People, so it was with Margaret Rule in this particular, that
there were several words which her Tormentors would not let
her hear, especially the words Pray or Prayer, and yet she
could so hear the letters of those words distinctly mentioned
as to know what they ment. The standers by were forced
sometimes thus in discourse to spell a word to her, but because
there were some so ridiculous as to coimt it a sort of Spell or
a Charm for any thus to accommodate themselves to the

>l

316 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1603

capacity of the Su£Ferer, little of this kind was done. But that
which was more singular in this matter, was that she could
not use these words in those penetrating discourses, wherewith she would sometimes address the Spectres that were about
her. She would sometimes for a long while together apply
herself to the Spectres, whom she supposed the Witches, with
such Exhortations to Repentance as would have melted an
Heart of Adamant to have heard them; her strains of Expression and Argument were truly Extraordinary; A person perhaps of the best Education and Experience and of Attainments
much beyond hers could not have exceeded them : nevertheless when she came to these Words God, Lord, Christ, Good,
Repent, and some other such, her Mouth could not utter them,
whereupon she would somtimes in an Angry Parenthesis complain of their Wickedness in stopping that Word, but she would
then go on with some other Terms that would serve to teQ
what she ment. And I believe that if the most suspicious
Person in the world had beheld all the Circumstances of this
matter, he would have said it could not have been dissembled.
Sect. 10. Not only in the Swedish, but also in the Salem
Witchcraft the Inchanted People have talked much of a White
Spirit from whence they received marveUous Assistances in
their Miseries; what lately befel Mercy Short from the Communications of such a Spirit, hath been the just Wonder of
us all, but by such a Spirit was Margaret Rule now also visited.
She says that she could never see his Face; but that she had
a frequent view of his bright. Shining and Glorious Garments;
he stood by her Bed-side continually heartning and comforting of her and counselling her to maintain her Faith and hope
in God, and never comply with the temptations of her Adversaries; she says he told her, that God had permitted her
ASlictions to befall her for the everlasting and unspeakable
good of her own Soul, and for the good of many others, and for
his own Immortal Glory, and that she should therefore be of
good Chear and be assured of a speedy deliverance; And the
wonderful resolution of mind wherewith she encountered her
Afflictions were but agreeable to such expectations. Moreover a Minister* having one Day with some Importunity
Prayed for the deliverance of this Young Woman, and pleaded

^ Mather himaelf , of course.

1093] CALEF, MORE WONDERS 317

that she belong'd to his Plock and chai^ge; he had so far a
right unto her as that he was to do the part of a Minister of
our Lord for the bringing of her home unto God; only now the
Devil hindred him in doing that whidi he had a right thus to
do^ and whereas He had a better Title unto her to bring her
home to God than the Divel could have unto her to carry her
away from the Lord^ he therefore humbly applied himself
unto God, who alone could right this matter, with a suit that
she might be rescued out of Satans Hands; Immediatly upon
this, tho' shQ heard nothing of this transaction she bqgan to
call that Minister her Father, and that was the Name whereby
she every day before all sorts of People distinguished him:
the occasion of it she says was this, the white Spirit presently
upon this transaction did after this manner speak to her,
''Margaret, you now are to take notice thaf (such a Man)
" is your Fatiier, God has given you to him, do you from this
time look upon him as your Father, obey him, r^ard him as
your Father, follow his Counsels and you shall do weU"; And
tho' there was one passage more, which I do as little know
what to make of as any of the Re^t, I am now going to relate
it; more than three times have I seen it fulfilled in the Deliverance of Inchanted and Possest Persons, whom the Providence
of God has cast into my way, that their Deliverance could not
be obtained before the third Fast kept for them, and the third
day still obtain'd the Deliverance, altho' I have thought of
beseeching of the Lord thrice, when buffeted by Satan, yet I
must earnestly Intreat all my Readers to beware of any superstitious conceits upon the Number Three; if our God will
hear us upon once Praying and Fasting b^ore him 'tis well,
and if he will not vouchsafe his Mercy upon our thrice doing
so, yet we must not be so discouraged as to throw by our
Devotion but if the Soveraign Grace of our God wiU in any
particular Instances count our Patience enough tryed when we
have Solemnly waited upon him for any determinate Number
of times, who shall say to him, what doest thou, and if there
shall be any Number of Instances, wherein this Grace of our
God has exactly holden the same course, it may have a room in
our humble Observations, I hope, without any Superstition;
I say then that after Mai^aret Rule had been more than five
weeks in her Miseries, this White Spirit said unto her, " WeU

318 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [im

this day such a Man" (whom he named 0 ''has kept a third
day for your deliverance, now be of good cheer you shall
speedjly be deUvered." I inquired whether what nad been
said of that Man were true, and I gained exact and certain
Information that it was precisely so, but I doubt lest in relating this Passage that I have used more openness than a Friend
should be treated with, and for that cause I have concealed
several of the most memorable things that have occurred not
only in this but in some former Histories, altho indeed I am
not so well satisfied about the true nature of this white Spirit,
as to count that I can do a Friend much Honour by reporting
what notice this white Spirit may have thus taken of him.

Sect. 11. On the last day of the Week her Tormentois as
she thought and said, approaching towards her, would be farced
stiU to recoil and retire as unaccountably unable to meddle
with her, and they would retire to the Fire side with their
Poppets; but gping to stick Pins into those Poppets^ they
could not (according to their visions) make the Pins to enter,
she insulted over ti^em with a veiy Proper derision, daring
them now to do their worst, whilst she had the satisfaction to
see their Black Master strike them and kick them, like an
Overseer of so many Nero's, to make them to do their woik,
and renew the marira of his vengeance on them, when they
failed of doing of it. At last being as it were tir^ with their
ineffectual Attempts to mortifie her they furiously said, '* WeD
you shant be the last." And after a pause they added, ''Go, and
the Devil go with you, we can do no more"; whereiqx>n they
flew out of the Room and she returning perfectly to her self
most affectionately gave thanks to God for her deliverance;
her Tormentors left her extream weak and faint, and overwhelmed with Vapours, which would not only cause her sometimes to Swoon away, but also now and then for a little while
discompose the reasonableness of her Thoughts; Nevertheless her former troubles returned not, but we are now waiting
to see the good effects of those troubles upon the Souls oi all
concerned. And now I suppose that some of our Learned witlings of the Coffee-House, for fear lest these proofs of an Invisible-world should spoil some of their sport, will endeavour
to turn them all into sport, for which Buffoonary their only

* Again there can be little doubt that the writer means himaelf .

1693] CALEF, MORE WONDERS 319

pretence will be, they cant understand how such things as
these could be done, whereas indeed he that is but Philosopher
enough to have read but one Little Treatise, Published in the
Year 1656 by no other Man than the Chyrurgion of an Army,*
or but one Chap, of Helmont,' which I will not quote at this
time too particularly, may give a far more intelligible account
of these Appearances than most of these Blades can give why
and how their Tobacco makes 'em Spit; or which way the flame
of their Candle becomes illimiinating. As for that cavil, the
world would be imdone if the Devils could have such power as
they seem to have in several of our stories, it may be Answered
that as to many things the Lying Devils have only known them
to be done, and then pretended imto the doing of those things,
but the true and best Answer is, that by these things we only
see what the Devils could have powers to do, if the great God
should give them those powers, whereas now our Histories
affords a Glorious Evidence for the being of a God, the World
would indeed be imdone, and horribly undone, if these Devils,
who now and then get liberty to play some very mischievous
pranks, were not under a daily restraint of some Almighty
Superior from doing more of such Mischiefs. Wherefore instead of all Apish flouts and jeers at Histories, which have such
imdoubted confirmation, as that no Man that has breeding
enough to r^ard the Common Laws of Humane Society, will
offer to doubt of 'em, it becomes us rather to adore the Goodness of God, who does not permit such things every day to
he(&^ us all, as he sometimes did permit to bdfall some few of
our miserable Neighbours.

Sect. 12. And what, after all my unwearied Cares and

^ Who this "Chynurgion" was and what his treatise, is a puzzle — as it was
perhaps meant to be. Balthasar Tim&us von Guldenklee (1600-1667), physician
to the Elector of Brandenburg, had earned his nobility by healing the Swedish
army of the pest in 1637, and in his Canu Medicinales has a passage on diseases
ascribed to witchcraft; but it does not appear that this work was published before 1662. Antonius Deusing (1612-1666), physician to the Stadhdder of Friesland, published in 1656 a treatise on this subject; but it does not appear that he
was ever an army surgeon.

* Doubtless the elder, Jan Baptista van Heknont (1577-1644), the oninent
but visionary Flemish physician; and the "one Chap." that on "Reoepta injecta"
in his Tradahu de Morhia — though he goes into the subject as fully in paragn^hs
87-152 of his Z)e Magnetioa Vvlnerum Curatume.

320 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1603

I, to rescue the Miserable from the lions and Bears of
Hell, which had siezed them, and after all my Studies to dbiq)point the Devils in their designs to confound my Nei^bourhood, must I be driven to the necessity of an Apologie? Truly
the hard representations wherewith some 111 Men have reviled
my conduct, and the Countenance which other Men have given
to these representations, oblige me to give Mankind some account of my Behaviour; No Christian can, I say none but
evil workers can criminate my visiting such of my poor flodc
as have at any time fallen under the terrible and sensible
molestations of Evil- Angels; let their Auctions have beoi
what they will, I could not lutve answered it unto my Glorious
Lord, if I had withheld my just Counsels and Comforts from
them; and if I have also with some exactness observed the
methods of the Invisible- World, when they have thus become
observable, I have been but a Servant of Mankind in doing so;
yea no less a Person than the Venerable Baxter has more than
once or twice in the most Publick manner invited Mankind
to thank me for that Service.^ I have not been insensible
of a greater danger attending me in this fulfilment of my
Ministry, than if I had been to take Ten Thousand steps over
a Rocky Mountain fill'd with Rattle-Snakes, but I have oonsider'd, he that is wise will observe things, and the SurpriziDg
Explication and confirmation of the biggest part of the Bible,
which I have seen given in these things, has abundantly paid
me for observing them. Now in my visiting of the Miserable,
I was always of this opinion that we were Ignorant of what
Powers'the Devils might have to do their mischi^s in the 8h^)e8
of some that had never been explicitly engaged in Diabolical
Confederacies, and that therefore tho' many Witchcrafts had
been fairiy detected on Enquiries provoked and b^un by
Specteral Exhibitions, yet we could not easily be too jealous*
of the Snares laid for us in the devices of Satan; the Worid
knows how many Pages I have Composed and Published, and
particular Gentlemen in the Government know how many
Letters I have written to prevent the excessive Credit oi

* Notably in his own book oa The Certainty of the Worlds of SpirUe (Loodoo,
1691) and in the pfefaoe which he wrote for the London edition d Mather's
Memorable Promdenoee, published in that year.

' Suspicious.

1603] CALEF, MORE WONDERS 321

Specteral Accusations, wherefore I have still charged the
Afflicted that they should Cry out of no body for Afflicting of \
'em. But that if this might be any Advantage they might ^^
privately tell their minds to some one Person of discretion
enough to make no iU use of their conmiunications, accordingly there has been this effect of it, that the Name of No one
good Person in the World ever came under any blemish by
means of any Afflicted Person that fell under my particuku*
cognisance, yea no one Man, Woman or Child ever came into
any trouble for the sake of any that were Afflicted after I had
once begun to look after 'em ; how often have I had this thrown
into my dish, that many years ago I had an opportunity to
have brought forth such People as have in the late storm of
Witchcraft been complain'd of, but that I smother'd all, and
after that storm was rais'd at Salem, I did myself offer to provide Meat, Drink and Lodging for no less than Six of the y^-
Afflicted, that so an Experiment might be made, whether/ > .
Prayer with Fasting upon the removal of the distressed might v
not put a Period to the trouble then rising, without giving the ^•
Civil Authority the trouble of prosecuting those things which^**
nothing but a Conscientious regard imto the cries of Miserable Families, could have overcome the Reluctancies of the
Honourable Judges to meddle with; In short I do humbly
but freely affirm it, there is not that Man living in this World
who has been more desirous than the poor Man I to shelter
my Neighbours from the Inconveniencies of Specteral Outcries,
yea I am very jealous I have done so much that way as to
Sin in what I have done, such have been the Cowardize and
Fearfulness whereunto my regard unto the dissatisfactions of
other People has precipitated me. I know a Man in the
World, who has thought he has been able to Convict some
such T\^tches as ought to Dye, but his respect unto the Publick
Peace has caused him rather to try whether He could not renew them by Repentance: And as I have been Studious to
defeat the Devils of their expectations to set people together
by the Ears, thus, I have also checked and queU'd those forbidden curiosities, which would have given the Devil an invitation to have tarried amongst us, when I have seen wonderful Snares laid for Curious People, by the secret and future
things discovered from the Mouths of Damsels possest with a

322 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1603

Spirit of divination; Indeed I can recollect but one thing
wherein there could be given so much as a Shadow of Reason
for Exceptions, and that is my allowing of so many to come
and see those that were Afflicted, now for that I have this to
say, that I have almost a Thousand times intreated the Friends
of the Miserable, that they would not permit the Intrusion of
any Company, but such as by Prayers or other ways mi^t
be helpful to them; Nevertheless I have not absolutely forbid all Company from coming to your Haimted Chambers,
partly because the Calamities of the Families were such as
required the Assistance of many Friends; partly because I
have been willing that there should be disinterested Witnesses
of all sorts, to confute the Caliunnies of such as would say all
was but Imposture; and partly because I saw God had Sanctified the Spectacle of the Miseries on the Afflicted unto the
Souls of many that were Spectators, and it is a very Glorious
thing that I have now to mention — ^The Devils have with
most horrendous operations broke in upon our Neighbourhood,
and God has at such a rate over-ruled all the Fury and Malice
of those Devils, that all the Afflicted have not only been Delivered, but I hope also savingly brought home unto God,
and the Reputation of no one good Person in the World has
/ been damaged, but instead thereof the Souls of many, especially
of the rising Generation, have been thereby awaken'd unto
some acquaintance with Religion; our young People who bevy longed unto the Praying Meetings, of both Sexes, a part would
ordinarily spend whole Nights by the whole Wed^ together in
Prayers and Psalms upon these occasions, in which Devotions
the Devils could get nothing but like Fools a Scourge for thdr
own Backs, and some scores of other yoimg People, who were
strangers to real Piety, were now struck with the lively demonstrations of Hell evidently set forth before their Eyes,
when they saw Persons cruelly Frighted, wounded and Starved
by Devils and Scalded with burning Brimstone, and yet so
preserved in this tortiued estate as that at the end of cme
Months wretchedness they were as able still to imdergp another, so that of these also it might now be said, Behold they
Pray in the whole — ^The Devil got just nothing; but God got
praises, Christ got Subjects, the Holy Spirit got Temples, the
Church got Addition, and the Souls of Men got everlasting

legs] CALEF, MORE WONDERS 323

Benefits; I am not so vain as to say that any Wisdome or
Vertue of mine did contribute imto this good order of things :
But I am so just, as to say I did not hinder this Good. When
therefore there have been those that pickt up little incoherent
scraps and bits of my Discourses in this faithful discharge of
my Ministry, and so traversted^ 'em in their abusive Pamphlets,^ as to perswade the Town that I was their conmion
Enemy in those very points, wherein, if in any one thing
whatsoever, I have sensibly approved my self as true a Servant unto 'em as possibly I could, tho my Life and Soul had
been at Stake for it. Yea to do like Satan himself, by sly,
base, impretending Insinuations, as if I wore not the Modesty
and Gravity which became a Minister of the Gospel, I could
not but think my self imkindly dealt withal, and the neglects
of others to do me justice in this affair has caused me to conclude this Narrative with complaints in another hearing of
such Monstrous Injuries.'

> Travestied. * See p. 332, below. /

•The stoiy of Margaret Rule is told again in Mather's Diary (I. 171 ff.)^
and in a way that throws fresh light on his relation to the case.

"About a Week after the Beginning of September, being soUicitous to do some
further Service, for the Name of God, I took a Joum^ to Salem. There, I not
only sought a further Supply of my Furniture for my Church-Histoiy, but also
endeavoured, that the complete Histoiy of the late ^tchcrafts and Possessions
might not bee lost. I judg'd that the Preservadon of that History might in a
while bee a singular Benefit unto the Church, and unto the World, which made mee
sollicitous about it. Moreover, I was willing to preach the Word of God unto
the numerous Congregation at Salem; which I did, on both Parts of the Sabbath,
not only with a most glorious Assistence of Heaven, but also with some Assurance of Good thereby to bee done among the People. But I had one singular
Unhi^)piness, which befel mee, in this Journey. I had largely written three Discourses, which I designed both to preach at Salem, and hereafter to print. These
Notes were before the Sabbath stolen from mee, with such Circumstances, that
I am somewhat satisfied. The Spectres, or Agents in the invisible World, were the
Robbers. This Disaster had like to have disturbed my Designs for the Sabbath;
but God helped mee to remember a great part of what I had written, and to
deliver also many other Things, which else I had not now made use of. So that
the Divel gott nothing I

"Among other things which entertained mee at Salem, one was, a Discourse
with one Mrs. Carver, who had been strangely visited with some shining Spirits,
which were good Angeb, in her opinion of tiiem.

"She intimated several things unto mee whereof some were to be kept secret.
Shee also told mee. That a new Storm of Witchcraft would fall upon the Countrey, to chastise the Iniquity that was used in the wilful Smothering and Covering

324 NARRATIVES OP THE WITCHCRAFT CASES ttm

PART n.

A Letter to Mr. C. M.

BoeroN, Jan. 11th, 1603.^
Mr. Cotton Mather,

Reverend Sir, I finding it needful on many accounts, I here
present you witli the Copy of that Paper, which has been so
much Misrepresented, to the End that what shall be found
defective or not fairly Represented, if any such shall a{q)ear,
they may be set right, wUch Runs thus.

September the 13th, 1693.

In the Evening when the Sun was withdrawn, giving place to
Darkness to succeed, I with some others were drawn by curiosity
to see Margaret Rule, and so much the rather because it was repeated

Mr. M ' would be there that Ni^t: Being come to hsr Fathers

House into the Chamber wherein Ae was in Bed, found her of a

ci Hbe Last; and that many fierce Opposites to tlie Diaoovefy ci that Witdicraft
would bee thereby convinoed.

"Unto my Surprise, idien I came home, I found one of my Neigfaboon horribly arrested by evil Spirits. I then beg^d of God, that Hee would help mee
wisely to discharge my Duty upon this occasion, and avoid gratifying ci the evfl
Angeb in any of their Ezpectacions. I did then concern myself to use and gett
as much Phtyer as I could for the afflicted young Woman; and at the same time,
to forbid, either her from accusing any of her Neighbours, or others frcMn enquiring any thing of her. Nevertheless, a wicked Man wrote a most lying libel to
revile my Conduct in these matters; which drove mee to the Blessed God, with
my Supplications that Hee would wonderfully protect mee, as well from unreasonable Men acted by the Divels, as from the Diveb themselves. I did at first, it
may bee, too much resent the Injuries of that Libel; but God brou^t good out
of it; it occasioned the Multiplication of my Phtyers before Him; it very much
promoted the Works of Humiliation and Mortificati<xi in my Soul. Indeed, the
Divel made that Libel an Occasion of those Paroxysms in the Town, that would
have exceedingly gratif/d him, if God had not helped mee to forgive and forgett
the Injuries done unto mee, and to bee deaf unto the Sollidtations of those that
would have had mee so to have resented the Injuries of some few Persons, as to
have deserted the Lecture at the Old Meeting house.

" When the afflicted young woman had undergone six Weeks of pnetematural
Calamities and when God had helped mee to keep just three Dayes of Pkayer on
her behalf, I had the Pleasure of seeing the same Success, which I used to have,
on my third Fast, for such possessed People, as have been cast into my

n694 of our present calendar. 'Mather.

imi CALEF, MORE WONDERS 325

healthy countenance of about seventeen Years Old, lying very still,
and speaking very little, what she did say seem'd as if she were lightheaded. Then Mr. M , Father and Son, came up and others

with them, in the whole were about 30 or 40 Persons; they being sat,
the Father on a Stool, and the Son upon the Bedside by her, the Son
began to question her, Margaret Rule, how do you do? then a pause
witiiout any answer. Question. What, do there a great many
\^tches sit upon you? Answer. Yes. Q. Do you not know that
there is a hard Master? Then she was in a Fit; He laid his hand
upon her Face and Nose, but, as he said, without perceiving Breath;
then he brush'd her on the Face with his Glove, and rubb'd her
Stomach (her breast not covered with the Bed-doaths) and bid
others do so too, and said it eased her, then she revived. Q. Don't
you know there is a hard Master? A. Yes. Reply; Don't serve
that hard Master, you know who. Q. Do you believe? Then again
she was in a Fit, and he again rub'd her Breast, etc. (about this time
Margaret Perd an attendant assisted him in rubbing of her. The
Afficted spake angerely to her saying don't you meddle with me,
and hastily put away her hand) he wrought his Fingers before her
Eyes and awed her if ^e saw the Witches? A. No. Q. Do you

cares. God gave her a ^orious Deliverance; The remariuible Circumstanoes
whereof, I have more fully related, in an History <^ the whole Busineas.

"As for my missing Notes, the possessed young Woman, <^ her own Accord,
enquired whether I missed them not? Shee told mee, the Spectres brag'd in her
hearing, that they had rob't mee <^ them; shee added,^Bee n't conoem'd; for they
confess, they can't keep them alwayes from you; you shall have them all brought
you a^ain. (They were Notes on Ps. 119. 19 and Ps. 90. 12 and Hag. 1. 7, 9.
I was tender <^ them and often pray'd unto God, that they might bee retum'd.)
On the fifth <^ October following, every Leaf of my Notes again came into my
Hands, tho' they were in ei^teen separate Quarters of Sheets. They were
found drop't here and there, about the Streets of Lyn; but how they came to
bee so drop't I cannot ima^e; and I as much wonder at the Exactness of their
Praeservation.''

And under October 10th he adds: "On this Day, I also visited a possessed
young Woman in the Neighbourhood, whose Distresses were not the least occasion of my being thus before the Lord. I wrestled with God for her: and among
other things, I pleaded, that God had made it my Office and Business to engage
my Neighbours in the Service of the Lord Jesus Christ; and that this young
Woman had expressed her Compliance with my Invitations unto that Service;
only that the evil Spirits now hindred her from doing what shee had vowd: and
therefore that I had a sort of Right to demand her Deliverance from these invading Divels, and to demand such a Liberty for her as might make her capable
of glorifying my Glorious Lord; which I did accordingly. In the close of this
Day, a wonderful Spirit, in White and bright Raiment, with a Face unseen,
appeared unto thb young woman, and bid her count mee her Father, and re326 NARRATIVES OP THE WITCHCRAFT CASES 11683

believe? A. Yes. Q. Do you believe in you know who? A. Yes.
Q. Would you have other people do so too, to believe in you know
who? A. Yes. Q. Who b it that Afflicts you? A. I know not,
there is a great many of them (about this time the Father qiKsticHi'd
if she knew the Spectres? An attendant said, if she did she would
not tell; llie Son proceeded) Q. You have seen the Bladk-man,
hant^ you? A. No. Reply; I hope you never shall. Q. You have
had a Book offered you, hant you? A. No. Q. The brushing of
you gives you ease, don't it? A. Yes. She tum'd her sdfe and a
htde Groan'd. Q. Now the Witches Scratch you and Pindi you,
and Bite you, don't they? A. Yes. Then he put his hand upon
her Breast and Belly, viz. on the Qoaths over her, and felt a Living
thing, as he said, which moved the Father also to feel, and aamt
others; Q. Don't you feel the Live thing in the Bed? A. Na
Reply f that is only Fande. Q. the great company of People increase
your Torment, don't they? A. Yes. The People about were deared to withdraw. One Woman said, I am sure I am no Witch, I
will not go; so others, so none withdrew. Q. Shall we go to Prayen?
Tlien she lay in a Fit as before. But this time to revive her, they
waved a Hat and brushed her Head and PiUow therewith. Q. Shall
we go to Pray, etc Spelling the Word. A. Yes. The Father went

gaid mee and obey mee, as her Father; for bee said, the Lord had given her to mee;
and she should now within a few Dayes bee ddivered. It proved, aoooidmgly.''

And again in December (p. 178) : "And one memorable Frovidenee, I most
not forgett A young Woman being arrested, possessed, afflicted by evil Angeb,
her Tormentors made my Ima^ or Picture to appear before her, and then made
themselves Masters of her Tongue so far, that she b^gan in her Fits to ^'i^mplain
that I threatened her and molested her, tho' whoi shee came out of them, shee
own'd, that they could not so much as make my dead Shape do her aqy Harm,
and that they putt a Force upon her Tcmgue in her Elzdamations. Her greatest
Outrcries whea shee was herself, were, for my poor IVayers to be concerned on
her behalf.

"Being hereupon extremdy sensible, how much a malicious Town and Land
would insult over mee, if such a lying Piece of a Story should fly abroad, that
the Diveb in my Shape tormented the Neighbourhood, I was putt upon some
Agonies, and singular Salleys and Efforts of Soul, in the Redgnation ol n^
Name unto the Lord; content that if Hee had no further service for my Name,-
it should bee torn to pieces with all the Reproches in the woiid. But I cried
unto the Lord as for the Deliverance of my Name, from the Malice <^ Hell, so
for the Deliverance of the young Woman, whom the Powers of Hdl had now
seized iqx>n. And behold I Without any further Noise, the possessed Pierson,
upon my praying by her, was delivered from her Captivity, on the veiy same
Day that shee fell into it; and the whole Plott of the Divd, to rqxoach a poor
Servant <^ the Lord Jesus Christ, was defeated."

1 Havoi't, hain't

I6d3] CALEF, MORE WONDERS 327

to Prayer for perhaps half an Hour, chiefly against the Power of the
Devil and Witchcraft, and that God would bring out the Afflicters :
during Prayer-time, the Son stood by, and when they thought she
was in a fit, rub'd her and brush'd her as before, and beckned to
others to do the like; after Prayer he proceeded; Q. You did not
hear when we were at Prayer, did you? A. Yes. Q. You dont hear
always, you dont hear sometimes past a Word or two, do you?
A. No. Then turning him about said, this is just another Mercy
Short: Margaret Perd reply 'd, she was not like her in her fits.
Q. What does she eat or drink? A. Not eat at all; but drink Rum.
Then he admonished the young People to take warning, etc. Saying
it was a sad thing to be so Tormented by the Devil and his Instruments: A Young-man present in the habit of a Seaman, reply'd
this is the Devil all over. Than^ the Ministers withdrew. Soon after
they were gon the Afflicted desired the Women to be gone, saying,
that the Company of the Men was not offensive to her, and having
hold of the hand of a Young-man, said to have been her Sweet-heart
formerly, who was withdrawing; She pull'd him again into his Seat,
saying he should not go to Night.

September the 19th, 1693.

This Night I renewed my Visit, and found her rather of a fresher
Countenance than before, about eight Persons present with her, she
was in a Fit Screeming and making a Noise : Three or four Persons
rub'd and brush'd her with their hands, they said that the brushing
did put them away, if they brush'd or rub'd in the right place; therefore they brush'd and rub'd in several places, and said that when they
did it in the right place she could fetch her Breath, and by that they
knew. She being come to her self was soon in a merry talking lit.
A Young-man came in and ask'd her how she did? She answered
very bad, but at present a little better; he soon told her he must be
gon and bid her good Night, at which she seem'd troubled, saying,
that she liked his Company, and said she would not have him go till
she was well; adding, for I shall Die when you are gon. Then she
complained they did not put her on a clean Cap, but let her ly so
like a Beast, saying, she should lose her Fellows. She said she wondered any People should be so Wicked as to think she was not Afflicted,
but to diink she Dissembled. A Young-woman answered Yes, if
they were to see you in this merry Rt, they would say you Dissembled indeed; She reply'd, Mr. M said this was her laughing time,

she must laugh now: She said Mr. M had been there this

Evening, and she enquired, how long he had been gon? She said,

»Then.

328 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES pm

he stay'd alone with her in the room half an Hour, and said that he
told her there were some that came for Spies, and to report about
Town that she was not Afflicted. That during the said time she had
no Fit, that he asked her if she knew how many times he had Phiyed
for her to Day? And that she answered that she could not teD;
and that he rc^yed he had Prayed for her Nine times to Day; the
Attendants said that she was sometimes in a fit that none could
open her Joynts, and that there came an Old Iron-jaw'd Woman and
try'd, but could not do it; they likewise said, that her Head could
not be moved from the PiUow; I try'd to move her head, and found
no more difficulty than another Bodies (and so did others) but was
not willing to offend by lifting it up, one being reproved for endeavouring it, they saying angrily you will break her Nedc; The Attendants said Mr. M would not go to Prayer with her when Peopk

were in the Room, as they did one Night, that Night he fdt tiie
Live Creature. Margaret Perd and another said th^ smelt Brimstone; I and others said we did not smell any; then they said they
did not know what it was: This Margaret said, she wish'd she had

been here when Mr. M was here, another Attendant said, if yoo

had been here you might not have been permitted in, for her own
Mother was not suffered to be present.

Sir, after the sorest A£9iction and greatest blemish to
Religion that ever befel this Ck)untrey, and after most Men
began to Fear that some undue steps had been taken, and
after His Excellency (with their Majesties Approbation^ as
is said) had put a stop to Executions, and Men b^an to hope
there would never be a return of the like; finding these Accounts to contain in them something extraordinaiy, I writ
them down the same Nights in order to attain the certainty of
them, and soon found them so confirmed that I have (besides
other Demonstrations) the whole, imder the Hands of two
Persons are ready to attest the Truth of it; but not satisfied
herewith, I shewed them to some of your particular Friends,

^ The answer to Goveraor Phips's letter <^ October 12 (see pp. 196-196,
above) was indeed a royal order of January 26 "approving his action in stopping
the proceedings against the witches in New En^and, and directing that in all
future proceedings against persons accused of witchcraft or of possession by the
devil, all circumspection be used so far as may be without impediment to the
ordinary course of justice" — what Frederick the Great would have called **a
vague answer — in the Austrian style — ^that should mean nothing." It of course
did not reach America till after the despatch <^ Sir William's letter o£ Fehmaiy
21 (pp. 198-202, above).

1093] CALEF, MORE WONDERS 829

that so I might have the greater certainty: But was much
surprized with the Message you sent me, that I should be
Arrested for Slander, and at your calling me one of the worst
of LyarSi making it Pulpit news with the Name of Pernicious
Libels, etc. This occasioned my first Letter.

September the 29th, 1693.
Reverend Sir,

I having written from the Mouths of several Persons, who affirm
they were present with Margaret Rule, the 13th Instant, her Answers
and Behaviours, etc. And having shewed it to several of my Friends,
as also yours, and understanding you are offended at it; This is to
acquaint you, that if you and any one particular Friend, will please
to meet me and some other Indifferent Person with me, at Mr. Wilkins, or at Ben. Harris's,^ you intimating the time, I shall be ready
there to read it to you, as also a further Account of proceedings the
19th Instant, which may be needful to prevent Groundless prejudices,
and let deserved blame be cast where it ought; From,

Sir, yours in what I may, n ^

The effects of which. Sir, (not to mention that long Letter
only once read to me) was, you sent me word you would meet
me at Mr. Wilkins, but before that Answer, at yours and your
Fathers complaint, I was brou^t before their Majesties Justice, by Warrant, as for Scandalous Libels against your self,
and was bound over to Answer at Sessions; I do not remember
you then objected against the Truth of what I had wrote, but
asserted it was wronged by omissions, which if it were 80 was
past any Power of mine to remedy, having given a faithful
accoimt of all that came to my knowledge; And Sir, that you
might not be without some Cognisance of the reasons why I
took so much pains in it, as also for my own Information, if
it might have been, I wrote to you my second Letter to this
effect.

November the 24th, 1693.
Reverend Sirp

Having expected some Weeks, your meeting me at Mr. Wilkins according to what you intimated to Mr. J. M. * and the time draw-

^The two Boston bookaeDers'.

* It is perhaps idle to guess at the idoitity <^ this genUeman; but his initials
suggest the Rev. Joshua Moodey, whose kindlier attitude towaid witches and

/

830 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [m

ing near for our meeting elsewhere, I thought it not amiss to giveyoa
a Summary of my thoughts in the great concern, whidi as you siv
has been agitated with so much heat. That there are Witches is not
the doubt, the Scriptures else were in vain, wMch assign their PimN ishment to be by Death; But what this Witchcraft is, or wherein it
does consist, seems to be the whole difficulty: And as it may be
easily demonstrated, that all that bear that Name cannot be justlv
so accounted, so that some things and Actions not so esteemed by die
most, yet upon due examination will be found to merit no better
Character.

In your late Book you lay down a brief Synopsis of what his
been written on that Subject, by a Triumvirate of as Eminent Men
as ever handled it (as you are pleas'd to call them) Viz. Mr. Pertdos,^
Gaule,* and Bernard' consisting of about 30 Tokens to know them
by, many of them distinct from, if not thwarting eadi other: Among
aU of which I can find but one decisive. Viz. That of Mr. Gaule,
Head IV. and runs thus; Among the most unhappy Circumstances
to contact a Witch, one is a maligning and oppugning the Word, Woii,
or Worship of God, and by any extraordinary Siga seeking to seduce
any from it, see Deu. 13. 1, 2. Mat 24. 24. Acts. 13. 8, 10. 2 Tim.
3. 8. Do but mark wdl the places, and for this very property of
thus opposing and perverting, they are all there conducted Airant
and absolute Witches.^

This Head as here laid down and inserted by you, rither is a
Truth or not; if not, why is it here inserted from one of the Triumvirate, if it be a Truth, as the Scriptures quoted will abundantiy testifie, whence b it that it is so Uttle regarded, tho it be the only Head
well proved by Scripture, or that the rest of the Triumvirate should
so far forget ^eir Work as not to mention it. It were to be unjust
to the Memory of those otherwise Wise Men, to suppose them to
have any Sinister design; But perhaps the force of a prevailing
^ opinion, together with an Education thereto Suited, mi^t overtheir defenders may be inferred from his course in the case of Fhi!q> EqgSab
(see pp. 187-188, note), and who, though early in 1693 he returned to PortsmouUi, was still often in Boston. Nor may it be forgotten that the initiab of
the Rev. Increase Mather are by the printer constantly made "J. M.**

^ See above, p. 304, note 3.

> See above, p. 216, note 1, and p. 219.

* See above, p. 304, note 5.

* To the end of the paragraph the words are Gaule's. Calef is quoting
them, not from Gaule's book, but from Mather's Wonders; for Gaule numbcn
this rule, not IV., but X., and the introductory words ("Among the most nnhappy Circumstances to convict a witch, one b") are not his, but Mather's—
and there are other slight departures from Gaule's

1603] CALEF, MORE WONDERS 331

shadow thdr Judgments, as being wont to be but too prevalent in
many other cases. But if the above be Truth, then the Scripture is V^^
full and plain, What is Witchcraft? And if so, what need of his next
Head of Hanging of People without as full and clear Evidence as in
other Cases? Or what need of the rest of the Receipts of the Triumvirate? what need of Praying that the Afflicted may be able to discover who tis that Affliicts them? or what need of Searching for Tet's
for the Devil to Suck in his Old Age, or the Experiment of saying the
Lords Prayer, etc. Which^ a multitude more practised in some
places Superstitiously inclined. Other Actions have been practised
for easing the Afflicted, less justifiable, if not strongly savouring of
Witchcraft it self, viz. Fondly Imagining by the Hand, etc., to drive
off Spectres, or to knock off Invisible Chains, or by striking in the
Air to Wound either the Affliicted or others, etc. I write not this to
accuse any, but that all may beware believing, That the Devil's
bounds are set, which he cannot pass. That the Devils are so full of
Malice, That it cant be added to by Mankind, That where he hath
Power, he neither can nor will omit Executing it. That 'tis only the
Almighty that sets bounds to his rage, and tixat only can Commissionate him to hurt or destroy any.

These last, Sir, are such Foundations of Truth, in my esteem,
that I cannot but own it to be my duty to ascert them, when call'd
tho' with the hazard of my All : And consequently to detect such as
these, That a Witch can Commissionate Devils to Afflict Mortals, v.
That he can at his or the Witches pleasure Assume any Shape, That
Hanging or Chaining of Witches can lessen his Power of Afflicting,
or restore those that were at a distance Tormented, with many others
depending on these; all tending, in my esteem, highly to the Dishonour of God, and the Indangering the well-being of a People, and
do further add, that as the Scriptures are full that there is Witchcraft, (yt sup.) so 'tis as plain that there are Possessions, and that
the Bodies of the Possest have hence been not only Afflicted, but
strangely agitated, if not their Tongues improved to foretell futurities, etc. and why not to accuse the Innocent, as bewitching them;
having pretence to Divination to gain credence. This being reasonable to be expected, from him who is the Father of Lies, to the end
he may thereby involve a Countrey in Blood, Mallice, and Evil, surmising which he greedily seeks after, and so finally lead them from
their fear and dependence upon God to fear him, and a supposed
Witch thereby attaining his end upon Mankind; and not only so,
but Natimd Distemper, as has been frequently observed by the
Judicious, have so operated as to deceive, more than the Vulgar, as

332 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES lUB

, 18 testified by many Famous PhyadanSy and others. And as far

N/ that proof of Multitudes of Confessions, this Country may be hj

this time thought Competent Judges, what cred^ioe we ought to

give them, having had such numerous Instances, as also how obteinU

And now ^, if herein be any thing in your esteem vafaiabk,

let me intreat you, not to account it the worse for coming from so

. mean a hand; which however you may have received Prqudices, etc.,

Am ready to serve you to my Power; but if you Judge otherwise

hereof, you may take your own Methods for my better Informatioo.

Who am, Sir, yours to command, in what I may, R. C.^

In Answer to this last, Sir, you replyed to the Gentleman
that presented it, that you had nothing to Prosecute against
me; and said as to your Sentiments in your Books, you did not
bind any to believe them, and then again renew'd your promise
of meeting me, as before, tho' not yet performed. According,
tho' I waited at Sessions, there was none to object oug^t
against me, upon which I was dismissed. This gave me some
reason to believe that you intended all should have been fo^
gotten; But instead of that, I find the Coals are fresh blown
up, I being supposed to be represented, in a late Manuscr^t^
Mare Wonders of the, etc., as Traversing* yoiu* Discourse in
your Faithful dischaige of your Duty, etc. And such as see
not with the Authors Eyes, rendred Sadducees and Witlins,'
etc., and the Arguments that square not with the Sentiments
therein contain'd, Buffoonary; rarely no doubt, agreeing with
\ the Spirit of Christ, and his dealings with an unbelieving
' Thomas, yet whose infidelity was without compare less excusable, but the Author having resolved long since, to have
no more than one single Grain of Patience, with them that
deny,^ etc., the Wonder is the less. It must needs be that
offences come, but wo to him by whom they come. To vindicate my self therefore from such false Imputations, of Satanlike insinuations, and misrepresenting your Actions, etc., and
to vindicate your self. Sir, as much as is in my Power from
those Suggestions, said to be Insinuated, as if you wore not
the Modesty and Gravity, that becomes a Minister of the
Gospel; which it seems, some that never saw the said Namr

^ By a misprint the original has "P. C."

* IVavestying. See p. 323, above.

*See p. 318, above. «See p. 123, above.

1694] CALEF, MORE WONDERS 333

tives, report them to contain; I say, Sir, for these reasons, I
here present you with the first Coppy that ever was taken,
etc. And purpose for a Weeks time to be ready, if you shall
intimate your pleasure, to wait upon you, either at the place
formerly appointed, or any other that is indifferent to the End;
that if there shall appear any defects in that Narrative, they
may be amended.

Thus, Sir, I have given you a genuine account of my Sentiments and Actions in this Affair; and do request and pray, >
that if I err, I may be shewed it from Scripture, or sound
Reason, and not by quotations out of Virgil, nor Spanish'
Rhetorick. For I find the Witlings mentioned, are so far
from answering your profound questions, that they cannot
so much as pretend to shew a distinction between Witchcraft
in the Common notion of it, and Possession ; Nor so much as
to demonstrate that ever the Jews or primitive Christians did y
believe, that a Witch could send a Devil to AflSict her Neighbours; but to all these. Sir, (ye being the Salt of the Earth,
etc.) I have reason to hope for a Sati^actory Answer to him,
who is one that reverences your Person and OflSce; And am.
Sir, yours to Command in what I may,

R« C

Boston, January the 15th, 169}.
Mr. R. C.

Whereas you intimate your desires, that what's not fairly,
(I take it for granted you mean truly also,) represented in a
Paper you lately sent me, containing a pretended Narrative
of a Visit by my Father and self to an Afflicted Young woman,
whom we apprehended to be under a Diabolical Possession,
might be rectified : I have this to say, as I have often already
said, that I do scarcely find any one tiling in the whole Paper,
whether respecting my Father or self, either fairly or truly
represented. Nor can I think that any that know my Parents
Circumstances, but must think him deserving a better Character by far, than this Narrative can be thought to give him.
When the main design we managed in Visiting the poor >
Afflicted Creature, was to prevent the Accusations of the ;^
Neighbourhood, can it be fairly represented that our design
was to draw out such Accusations, which is the representation

334 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [16M

of the Paper? We have Testimonies of the best Witnesses mi
in Number not a few, That when we asked Rule whether she
thought she knew who Tormented her? the Question was bat
an Introduction to the Solenm charges which we then laig^
gave, that she should rather Dye than tell the Names of aoj
whom she might Imagine that she knew. Your Informers ha^e
reported the Question, and report nothing of what foDows, as
essential to the giving of that Question: And can this be
termed a piece of fairness? Fair it cannot be, that when Ministers Faithfully and Carefully dischai^ their Duty to the
Miserable in their Flock, little bits, scraps and shreds of thdr
Discourses should be tackt together to make them contemtiUe,
when there shall be no notice of all the Necessary, SeasonaUe,
and Profitable things that occiu*'d, in those Discourses; And
without which, the occasion of the lesser Passages cannot be
understood; And yet I am furnished with abundant Evidences, ready to be Sworn, that will possitively prove this part
of unfairness, by the above mention'd Narrative, to be dooe
both to my Father and self. Again, it seems not fair or reasonable that I should be expos'd, for which your self (not to say
some others) might have expos'd me for, if I had not done, Viz.
for discouraging so much Company from flocking about the
Possest Maid, and yet, as I perswade my self, you cannot but
think it to be good advice, to keep much Company fix)m sudi
haunted Chambers; besides the iinfaimess dotii more appear,
in that I find nothing repeated of what I said about the advantage, which the DevU takes from too much Observation
' and Curiosity.

In that several of the Questions in the Paper are so Worded,
as to carry in them a presupposal of the things inquired after,
to say the best of it is very unfair : But this is not all, the Narrative contains a number of Mistakes and Falshoods; which
were they willful and design'd, might justly be teimed gross
lies. The representations are far from true, when 'tis affirm'd
my Father and self being come into the Room, I b^an the
DiscoiLTse; I hope I understand breeding a little better than
so : For proof of this, did occasion serve, sundry can depose
the contrary.

Tis no less untrue, that either my Father or self put the
Question, how many Witches sit upon you? We always

1694] CALEF, MORE WONDERS 335

cautiously avoided that expression; It being contrary to our
inward belief : All the standers by will (I believe) Swear they
did not hear us use it (your Witnesses excepted) and I tremble
to think how hardy those woful Creatures must be, to call the
Almighty by an Oath, to so false a thing. As false a representation 'tis; that I rub'd Rule's Stomach, her Breast not
being covered. The Oath of the nearest Spectators, giving a
true account of that matter will prove this to be Uttle less than
a gross (if not a doubled) Lie; and to be somewhat plainer, it
carries the Face of a Lie contrived on purpose (by them at /
least, to whom you are beholden for the Narrative) Wickedly
and Basely to expose me. For you cannot but know how much
this Representation hath contributed, to make People believe
a Smutty thing of me; I am far from thinking, but that in
yoiu* own Conscience you beUeve, that no indecent Action of
that Nature could then be done by me before such observers,
had I been so Wicked as to have been inclined to what is Base.
It looks next to impossible that a reparation shoud be made
me for the wrong done to, I hope, as to any Scandal, an unblemish'd, tho' weak and small Servant of the Church of God.
Nor is what follows a less untruth, that 'twas an Attendant
and not my self who said, if Rule knows who AflBicts her, yet
she wont tell. I therefore spoke it that I might incourage
her to continue in that concealment of all Names whatsoever;
to this I am able to furnish my self with the Attestation of
SufSicient Oaths. Tis as far from true, that my apprehension
of the Imp, about Rule, was on her Belly, for the Oaths of the
Spectators, and even of those that thou^t they felt it, can
testify that 'twas upon the Pillow, at a distance from her Body.
As imtrue a Representation is that which follows. Viz. That it
was said unto her, that her not Apprehending of that odd palpable, tho' not visible. Mover was from her Fancy, for I endeavoured to perswade her that it might be but Fancy in
others, that there was any such thing at all. Witnesses every
way sufficient can be produced for this also. 'Tis falsely represented that my Father felt on the Yoimg-woman after the appearance mentioned, for his hand was never near her; Oath
can sufficiently vindicate him. 'Tis very imtrue that my
Father Prayed for perhaps half an Hour, against the power of
the Devil and Witchcraft, and that God would bring out the

336 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES (UM

Afflictors. Witnesses of the best Credit, can depoeSi that hk
Prayer was not a quarter of an Hour, and that there wsb no
more than about one clause towards the close of the Prayv,
which was of this import; And this clause also was guarded
with a singular wariness and modesty, Viz. If there were any
evil Instruments in this matter God would please to discover
them : And that there was more than conunon reaaon for that
Petition I can satisfie any one that will please to Inquire of
me. And strange it is, that a Gentleman that from 18 to 54
hath been an Exemplary Minister of the Gospel; and that
besides a station in the Chm*ch of God, as considerable as any
that his own Ck)untry can afford, hath for divers years come
off with Honour, in his Application to three Crown'd Heads,
and the chief est Nobihty of three Kingdoms, Knows not yet
how to make one short Prayer of a quarter of an hour, but in
New-England he must be Libell'd for it. There are diven
other down-right mistakes, which you have permitted your
self, I would hope not knowingly, and with a Malicious dcagn,
to be receiver or Ck)mpiler of, which I shall now forbear to
Animadvert upon. As for the Appendix of the Narrative I
do find myself therein Injuriously treated, for the utmost of
your proof for what you say of me, amounts to little more than,
viz. Some People told you, that others told them, that sudi
and such things did pass, but you may assure yourself, that
I am not unfumish'd with Witnesses, that can convict the
same. Whereas you would give me to believe the bottom of
these your Methods, to be some dissatisfaction about the commonly received Power of Devils and Witches; I do not only
with all freedom offer you the use of any part of my library,
;' which you may see cause to peruse on that Subject, but also
if you and any else, whom you please, will visit me at my
Study, yea, or meet me at any otiier place, less inconvenient
than those by you propos'd; I will with all the fairness and
calmness in the World dispute the point. I beg of God that
he would bestow as many Blessings on you, as ever on mjrself,
and out of a sincere wish, that you may be made yet more
capable of these Blessings, I take this occasion to lay before
you the faults (not few nor small ones neither) which the
Paper contained, you lately sent me in order to be Examined
by me. In case you want a true and full Narrative of my

1604] CALEF, MORE WONDEBS 337

Visits whereof such an mdecent Traversty (to say the best)
hath been made^ I am not unwilling to conununicate it, in
mean time must take liberty to say, 'Tis scarcely consistent
with Ck)nmion Civility, much less Christian Charity, to oSer
the Narrative, now with you, for a true one, till you have a
truer, or for a full one, till you have a fuller. Your Sincere
(tho Injur'd) Friend and Servant,

C. Mather.

The Copy of a Paper Received with the above Letter.

I do Testifie that I have seen Margaret Rule in her Afflictions from the Invisible World, lifted up from her Bed, wholly
by an Invisible force, a great way towards the top of the Room
where she lay; in her being so lifted, she had no Assistance
from any use of her own Aims or Hands, or any other part of
her Body, not so much as her Heels touching her Bed, or resting on any support whatsoever. And I have seen her thus
lifted, when not only a strong Person hath thrown his whole
weight a cross her to pull her down; but several other Persons
have endeavoured, with all their might, to hinder her from
being so raised up, which I suppose that several others will
testifie as well as my self, when call'd unto it. Witness my
Hand,

Sakuel Aves.

We can also Testifie to the substance of what is above
Written, and have several times seen Maigaret Rule so lifted
up from her Bed. as that she had no use of her own Lims to
help her up, but it was the declared apprehension of us, as
well as others that saw it, impossible for any hands, but some
of the Invisible World to lift her.

Robert Earle.
Copia. John Wilkins.

Dan. Williams.

We whose Names are under-writted do testifie, That one
Evening when we were in the Chamber where Margaret Rule
then lay, in her late Affliction, we observed her to be, by an

-.i

338 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [im

Invisible Force, lifted up from the Bed whereon she lay, so
as to touch the Garret Floor, while yet neither her Feet, nor
any other part of her Body rested either on the Bed, or any
other support, but were also by the same force, lifted iq) bom
all that was imder her, and all this for a considerable ^diile,
we judg'd it several Minutes; and it was as much as several
of us could do, with all our strength to pull her down. AH
which happened when there was not only we two in the Chamber, but we suppose ten or a dozen more, whose Names we
have forgotten,

Copia. Thomas Thornton.

William Hudson Testifies to the substance of Thorntons
Testimony, to which he also hath set his Hand.

Boston, Jan. 18, 1693.*

Mr. Cotton Mather,
Reverend Sir,

Yoims of the 15th Instant, I received yesterday; and soon
found I had promised my self too much by it. Viz, Either concurrence with, or a denial of those Fundamentals mentioned
in mine, of Novem. the 24th, finding this waved by an Invitation to your Library, etc. I thank God I have the Bible, and
do Judge that sufSicient to demonstrate that cited Head of
Mr. Gaule to be a Truth, as also those other Heads mentioned,
as the Foundations of Religion. And in my apprehension, if
it be asked any Christian, whether God governs the Worid,
and whether it be he only can Conunissionate Devils, and such
other Fundamentals, He ought to be as ready as in the Question, who made him? (a little Writing certainly might be of
more use, to clear up the controverted points, than either
looking over many Books in a well fumish'd Library, or than a
dispute, if I were qualified for it ; the Inconveniencies of Passion being this way best avoided) And am not without hopes
that you will yet oblige me so far, as to consider that Letter,
and if I Err, to let me see it by Scripture, etc.

Yoims, almost the whole of it, is concerning the Narrative
I sent to you, and you seem to intimate as if I were giving

1 1694 of new style.

1694] CALEF, MORE WONDERS 339

Characters, Reflections, and Libell's, etc. concerning your self
and Relations; all which were as far from my thoughts, as
ever they were in writing after either your self, or any other
Minister. In the front you declare your apprdiension to be,
that the Afflicted was imder a DiaboUcal Possession, and if so,
I see not how it should be occasion'd by any Witchcraft (unless
we ascribe that Power to a Witch, which is only the Prerogative of the Almighty, of Sending or Conunissionating the Devils
to Afflict her.) But to your particular Objections against the
Narrative; and to the first my intelligence not giving me any
further, I could not insert that I knew not. And it seems improbable that a Question should be put, whether she knew (or
rather who they were) and at the same time to chai^ her,
and that upon her Life, not to tell, and if you had done so, I
see but little good you could promise your self or others by it,
she being Possest, as also having it inculcated so much to her
of Witchcraft. And as to the next Objection about company
flocking, etc., I do profess my Ignorance, not knowing what
you mean by it. And Sir, that most of the Questions did carry
with them a presupposing the things inquired after, is evident,
if there were such as those relating to the Black-man and a
Book, and about her hearing the Prayer, etc. (related in the
said Narrative, which I find no Objection against.) As to
that which is said of mentioning your self first discoursing and
your hopes that your breeding was better (I doubt it not) nor
do I doubt your Father might first apply himself to others;
but my intelligence is, that you first spake to the Afflicted or
Possessed, for which you had the advantage of a nearer approach. The next two Objections are founded upon mistakes:
I find not in the Narrative any such Question, as how many
Witches sit upon you? and that her Breast was not covered, in
which those material words "with the Bed-Cloaths" are wholly
omitted; I am not willing to retort here your own Language
upon you; but can tell you, that your own discoiLrse of it
pubUckly, at Sir W. P.'s^ Table, has much more contributed
to, etc. As to the Reply, if she could she would not tell,
whether either or both spake it it matters not much. Neither
does the Narrative say you felt the live thing on her Belly;
tho I omit now to say what further demonstrations there are

' Sir WUliam Phips's.

340 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [leM

of it. As to that Reply, that is only her fancy, I find the word
"her'' added. And as to your Fathers feeling for the live
Creature after you had felt it, if it were on the Bed it was not
so very far from her. And for the length of his Prayer, possibly your Witnesses might keep a more exact account of the
time than those others, and I stand not for a few Minutes.
For the rest of the Objections I suppose them of less mom^t,
if less can be (however shall be ready to receive them, those
matters of greatest concern I find no Objections against).
These being all that yet appear, it may be thou^t that if the
Narrative be not fully exact, it was as near as Memoiy could
bear away; but should be glad to see one more perfect (which
yet is not to be expected, seeing none writ at the time). Yoa
mention the appendix, by which I understand the Second Visit,
and if you be by the possessed belyed (as being half an hour
with her alone, excluding her own Mother, and as telling her
you had Prayed for her Nine times that day, and that now
was her Laughing time, she must Laugh now) I can see no
Wonder in it; what can be expected less from the Father of
Lies, by whom, you Judge, she was possest.

And besides the above Letter, you were pleased to send me
another Paper containing several Testimonies of the Possessed
being lifted up, and held a space of several Minutes to the
Garret floor, etc., but they omit giving the account, whether
after she was down they boimd her down : or kept holding her:
And relate not how many were to pull her down, which hinders
the knowledge what number they must be to be stronger than
an Livisible Force. Upon the whole, I suppose you expect I
should believe it; and if so, the only advantage gain'd, is that
which has been so long controverted between Protestants and
Papists, whether Miracles are ceast, will hereby seem to be
decided for the latter; it being, for ought I can see, if so^ as
true a Miracle as for Iron to swim, and that the Devil can
work such Miracles.

But Sir, leaving these little disputable things, I do again
pray that you would let me have the happiness of your approbation or confutation of that Letter before referred to.

And now, Sir, that the God of all Grace may enable us
Zealously to own his Truths, and to follow those things that
tend to Peace, and that yourself may be as an useful Instru1692J CALEF, MORE WONDEBS 341

ment in his hand, effectually to ruin the remainders of Heathenish and Popish Superstitions, is the earnest desire and prayer
of yours to command, in what I may.

R. C.^

PART V.

An Impartial Account of the most Memorable Matters of Fact,
touching the supposed Witchcraft in New England.^

Mr. Parris had been some years a Minister in Salem-Vil*
lage,' when this sad Calamity (as a deluge) overflowed them,
spreading it self far and near: He was a Gentleman of Liberal
Education, and not meeting with any great Encouragement,
or Advantage in Merchandizing, to which for some time he
apply 'd himself, betook himself to the work of the Ministry;
this Village being then vacant, he met with so much Encouragement, as to settle in that Capacity among them.

After he had been there about two years, he obtained a
Grant from a part of the Town, that the House and Land he
Occupied, and which had been Alotted by the whole People
to the Ministry, should be and remain to him, etc. as his own
Estate in Fee Simple. This occasioned great Divisions both
between the Inhabitants themselves, and between a considerable part of them and their said Minister, which Divisions were
but as a beginning or Prsdudium to what immediately followed.

It was the latter end of February 1691,* when divers
yoimg Persons belonging to Mr. Parris's Fanuly, and one or

^ Between this letter and the pages of Calef' s book which here follow there
intervene (1) further letters from him to Mather and to other Boston ministers^
on whom he urges his views, (2) a body of documents relating to the controversy
between the Rev. Mr. Parris and his disaffected parishioners at Salem Village
between the period of the witch-trials and his removal, (3) an epistolary discussion as to the theory of witchcraft between Calef and a Scotsman named Stuart.

* I. e., the witchcraft at Salem in 1692.

' As to Parris and Salem Village, and in general as to the Salem witchcraft,
which is the subject of the rest of Calef 's narrative, see the introduction and notes ,
to Lawson's Brief Account (pp. 147-164, above). That account (as also the \J
parallel narrative of Hale, at pp. 413 ff., below) should be constantly compared
with the present one.

< 16^ of our calendar.

/

342 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES p6B2

more of the Neighbourhood, b^an to Act, after a strasge
and unusual manner, viz. as by getting into Holes, and creq>-
ing imder Chairs and Stools, and to use sundry odd Postoia
and Antick Gestures, uttering foolish, ridiculous Speedies,
which neither they themselves nor any others could make
sense of; the Physicians that were called could assign no
reason for this; but it seems one of them,^ having reoourse to
the old shift, told them he was afraid they were Bewitched;
upon such suggestions, they that were concerned applied
themselves to Fasting and Prayer, which was attended not
only in their own private Fanulies, but with calling in the
help of others.

March the llih. Mr. Parris invited several Neighbouring
Ministers to join with him in keeping a Solenm day of Prayer
at his own House; the time of the exercise those Persons were
for the most part silent, but after any one Prayer was ended,
they would Act and Speak strangely and Ridiculous^, yet
were such as had been well Educated and of good Behaviour,
the one, a Girl of 11 or 12 years old,' would sometimes seem
to be in a Convulsion Fit, her limbs being twisted several
ways, and very stiflF, but presently her Fit would be over.

A few days before this Solemn day of Prayer, Mr. Parris's
Indian Man and Woman* made a Cake of Rye Meal, with
the Childrens Water, and Baked it in the AfLes, and as is
said, gave it to the Dog; this was done as a means to Discover Witchcraft,-^ soon after which those ill affected or afflicted
Persons named several that they said they saw, when in tiieir
Fits, afflicting of them.

1 Doubtless Dr. William Griggs, of Salem Village, whose wife's niece, a
maid in his household, was one of the "afficted."

* Abigail Williams, Parris's niece.

' West-Indian slaves, brought bade with him from Barbadoes.

* It was suggested by the wife of a neighbor. When, a fortnight later, she
was disciplined by the village church for this dabbling in superstition, Fmis
himself wrote in the church-record book: "It is well known that when these
Calamities first began, which was in my own Family, the Affliction was several
wedcs befcnre such hdlish Operations as Witchcraft was sasjpeded; Nay, it never
broke forth to any considerable Light, until diabolical Mmus was used, bj the
making of a cake by my Indian Man, who had his Directions from thb our Sister
Mary Sibly; since which Apparitions have been plenty, and exceeding much
Mischief hath followed." (Upham, Salem Witchcraft, XL 95; Hanaon, Dkntsm,
p. 289, quoted by Drake.)

1692] CALEF, MORE WONDERS 343

The first complain'd of, was the said Indian Woman,
named Tituba. She confessed that the Devil urged her to ,
sign a Book, which he presented to her, and al^ to work v
Mischief to the Children, etc. She was afterwards Conmiitted
to Prison, and lay there till Sold for her Fees.^ The accoimt
she since gives of it is, that her Master did beat her and otherways abuse her, to make her confess and accuse (such as he
call'd) her Sister- Witches, and that whatsoever i^e said by
way of confessing or accusing others, was the effect of such
usage; her Master refused to pay her Fees, unless she would
stand to what she had said.'

The Children complained likewise of two other Women,
to be the Authors of their Hurt, Viz. Sarah Good, who had long
been counted a Melancholy or Distracted Woman, and one
Osbum, an Old Bed-rid Woman; which two were Persons so
ill thought of, that the accusation was the more readily believed; and after Examination before two Salem Magistrates,*
were committed:

March the 19^, Mr. Lawson (who had been formerly a
Preacher at the said Village) came thither, and hath since set
fourth in Print an account of what then passed, about which
time, as he saith, they complained of Goodwife Cory, and
Goodwife Nurse, Members of the Churches at the Village and
at Salem, many others being by that time Accused.

March the 21sf, Goodwife Cory was examined before the
Magistrates of Salem, at the Meeting House in the Village,
a throng of Spectators being present to see the Novelty. Mr.
Noyes, one of the Ministers of Salem, b^an with Prayer,
after which the Prisoner being call'd, in order to answer to
what should be Alledged against her, she desired that she might
go to Prayer, and was answered by the Magistrates, that they
did not come to hear her pray, but to examine her.

The number of the Afflicted were at that time about Ten,

* 7. e., to meet her prison expenses. She lay there for a year and a month.

* Besides the documents of Tituba's case printed in the Reoorda cf Salem
Witchcrqfl (I. 41-50), a much fuller report of her examination (March 1-2, 1092)
strangely differing from that already printed, is appended to Drake's edition of
Mather and Calef (The WUehcraft Ddueion in New England, III. 185-195).

'On March 1, befcnre John Hathome and Jonathan Corwin. From this
point to his entry of i^ml 3 Cakfs narrative rests wholly on that of Lawaon.

344 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES (1«

Viz. Mrs. Pope, Mrs. Putman, Goodwife Bibber, and Goodwife Goodall, Mary Wolcott, Mercy Lewes (at Thomas Putmans) and Dr. Griggs Maid, and three Girls, Viz. Elizabeth
Parris, Daughter to the Minister, Abigail Williams his Neioe,
and Aim Putman, which last three were not only the beginners, but were also the chief in these Accusations. Tb»e
Ten were most of them present at the Examination, and did
vehemently accuse her of Afflicting them, by Biting, Pinchiog,
Strangling, etc. And they said, they did in their Fits see her
likeness coming to them, and bringing a Book for them to
Sign ; Mr. Hathom, a Magistrate of Salem, asked her, why she
Afflicted those Children? she said, she did not Afflict them;
he asked her, who did then? she said, ^^ I do not know, how
should I know?" she said, they were Poor Distracted Greatores,
and no heed to be given to what they said; Mr. Hathom and
Mr. Noyes repUed that it was the Judgment of all that were
there present, that they were bewitched, and only she (Ae
Accused) said they were Distracted: She was Accused by
them, that the Black Man Whispered to her in her Elar now
(while she was upon Examination) and that she had a Ydlow
Bird, that did use to Suck between her Fingers, and that tiie
said Bird did Suck now in the Assembly; order being given
to look in that place to see if there were any sign, the Giri
that pretended to see it said, that it was too late now, for she
had removed a Pin, and put it on her Head, it was upon
search foimd, that a Pin was there sticking upright. Whoi
the Accused had any motion of their Body, Hands or Mouth,
the Accusers would cry out, as when she bit her Lip, they
would cry out of being bitten, if she grasped one hand with
the other, they would cry out of being Pinched by her, and
would produce marks, so of the other motions of her Body,
as complaining of being Prest, when she lean'd to the seat
next her, if she stirred her Feet, they would stamp and cry
out of Pain there. After the hearing the said Cory was committed to Salem Prison, and then their crying out of her
abated.

March the 24<A, Goodwife Nurse was brought before Mr.
Hathom and Mr. Curwin (Magistrates) in the Meeting House.
Mr. Hale, Minister of Beverly, began with Prayer, after which
she being Accused of much the same Crimes made the like anie02] CALEF, MORE WONDERS 346

swers, asserting her own Innocence with earnestness. The
Accusers were mostly the same, Tho. Putmans Wife, etc. complaining much. The dreadful Shreiking from her and others,
was very amazing, which was heard at a great distance; she
was also Conmiitted to Prison.

A Child of Sarah Goods was likewise apprehended, being
between 4 and 5 years Old. The Accusers said this Child bit
them, and would shew such like marks, as those of a small
Sett of Teeth upon their Arms; as many of the Afflicted as the
Child cast its Eye upon, would complain they were in Torment; which Child they also Conmiitted.

Concerning these that had been hitherto Examined and
Conmiitted, it is among other things observed by Mr. Lawson
(in PrintO that they were by the Accusers chai^^ to belong
to a Company that did muster in Arms, and were reported
by them to keep Days of Fast, Thanksgiving and Sacraments;
and that those Afflicted (or Accusers) did in the Assembly
Cure each others, even with a touch of their Hand, when
strangled and otherways tortured, and would endeavoiu* to
get to the Afflicted to relieve them thereby (for hitherto they
had not used the Experiment of bringing the Accused to touch
the Afflicted, in order to their Cure) and could foretel one
anothers Fits to be coming, and would say, look to such a
one, she will have a Fit presently and so it happened, and that
at the same time when the Accused person was present, the
Afflicted said they saw her Spectre or likeness in other places
of the Meeting House Suckling' of their Familiars.

The said Mr. Lawson being to Preach at the Village, after
the Psalm was Simg, Abigail Williams said, ^' Now stand up
and name your Text'^* after it was read, she said, ''It is a long
Text." Mrs. Pope in the beginning of Sermon said to him,,
" Now there is enough of that." In Sermon, he referring to his
Doctrine, Abigail Williams said to him, '' I know no Doctrine
you had, if you did name one I have forgot it." Ann Putman, an afflicted Girl, said. There was a Yellow Bird sate on
his Hat as it hung on the Pin in the Pulpit.

March 31, 1692. Was set apart as a day of Solemn Humiliation at Salem, upon the Account of this Business, on
which day Abigail Williams said. That she saw a great number

^ See above, pp. 162-164. * "Suddng'' m original; corrected in ErrtUa.

346 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES fiec

of Persons in the Village at the Administration of a Mock
Sacrament, where they had Bread as read as raw Flesh, and
red Drink.

AprU 1. Mercy Lewis affirmed, That she saw a man in
white, with whom she went into a Glorious Place, mz. In her
fits, where was no light of the Sim, much less of Candks,
yet was full of light and Brightness, with a great Multitude
in White Glittering Robes, who Sang the Song in 5. Bev. 9.
and the 110 and 149 Psalms; And was grieved that she mi^t
tarry no longer in this place. This White Man is said to have
appeared several times to others of them, and to have given
them notice how long it should be before they should have
another Fit.

April the 3d. Being Sacrament Day at the Village, Sarah
Cloys, Sister to Goodvdfe Nurse, a Member to one of the
Churches, was (tho' it seems vdth difficulty prevail'd with
to be) present; but being entred the place, and Mr. Panis
naming his Text, 6 John, 70. Have not I chosen you Twdx,
and one of you is a Devil (for what cause may rest as a doubt
whether upon the accoimt of her Sisters being Committed,
or because of the choice of that Text) she rose up and went out,
the vnnd shutting the Door forcibly, gave occasion to some
to suppose she went out in Anger, and might occasion a suspicion of her; however she was soon after complain'd of,
examin'd and Committed.

April the 11th. By this time the number of the Accused
and Accusers being much encreaaed, was a Publick Examination at Salem, Six of the Magistrates vnth several MinisteiB
being present;^ there appeared several who complain'd agaiifit
others vdth hidious clamors and Screechings. Goodvdf e Proctor was brought thither, being Accused or cryed out against;
her Husband coming to attend and assist her, as there mi^t

^ Among them was Samuel Sewall, who wrote in his diazy for that day:
"Went to Salem, where, in the Meeting-house, the persons accused of Witdicraft were examined; was a very great Assembly; 'twas awfuU to see how die
afflicted persons were agitated. Mr. Noyes pray'd at the beginning, and Mr.
Higginson concluded." In the margin he has later added: "Vae, Vae, Vae,
Witchcraft" — t. e., "woe, woe, woel" So many (seven) of the magistrates woe
present that the court took the form of a "council" (the highest of *vJ*Miial tribunals), under the presidency of Deputy-governor Danforth (Records qf Stiem
Witcherqft, I. 101; Hutchinson, MastackuaeUs, second ed., U. 27-30).

1692] CALEF, MORE WONDERS 347

be need, the Accusers cryed out of him also, and that with
80 much earnestness, that he was Committed with his Wife.
About this time besides the Experiment of the Afflicted falling at the sight, etc., they put the Accused upon sa3dng the
Lords Prayer, which one among them performed, except in
that petition. Deliver us from Evil, she exprest it thus, Deliver
us from aU Evil. This was lookt upon as U she Prayed against
what she was now justly imder, and being put upon it again,
and repeating those words. Hallowed he thy name, she exprest
it. Hollowed be thy Name, this was counted a depraving the
words, as signif3dng to mal^e void, and so a Curse rather then^
a Prayer, upon the whole it was concluded that she also could
not say it, etc. Proceeding in this work of examination and
Commitment, many were sent to Prison. As an Instance, see
the following Mittimus:

To their Majesties Goal4ceeper* in Salem.

You are in Their Majesties Names hereby required to take into
your care, and safe custody, the Bodies of William Hobs, and Deborah' his Wife, Mary Easty, the Wife of Isaac Easty, and Sarah
Wild, the Wife of John Wild, all of Topsfield; and Edward Bishop
of Salem-Village, Husbandman, and Sandi his Wife, and Mary Black,
a Negro of lieutenant Nathaniel Putmans of Salem-Village; also
Mary English the Wite of Philip English, Merchant in Salem ;^ who
stand charged with High Suspicion of Sundry Acts of Witchcraft,
done or committed by ^em lately upon the Bodies of Ann Putman,
Mercy Lewis'^ and Abigail Williams, of Salem-Village, whereby great
Hurt and Damage hatib been done to the Bodies of the said Persons,
[as] according to the complaint of Thomas Putman and John Buxton
of Salem-Village, Exhibited Salem, Apr 21, 1692, appears, whom you
are to secure in order to their further Examination. Fail not.

John Hathorn, 1 ^ . . .

JONA. CURWIN, M''*^'^-

Dated Salem, April 22, 1692.

^ 7. e., than. This spelling was then usual. * Jail-keeper. ' Deliverance.

* Mary Easty, aged 56, was a sbter of Rebecca Nurse and Sarah Cloyse.
We shall meet her again. As to these Topsfield cases, see above, p. 237, note 1.
Edward Bishop, aged 44, was probably a step-son of Bridget Bishop (see above,
pp. 223-229, and below, p. 356), and his wife was a daughter of John Wilds. On
Mary Black, see Chandler, American Crimirud TriaU, I. 427, and Upham, Salem
WUehcn^t, U. 13&-137. As for Mary English, see bdow, p. 371.

* "Mary" in original; corrected in Erraia,

348 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES ptt

To Marshal George Henick of Salem Elgaez.

You are in their Majesties Names hereby required to oodi^
the above-named to the Goal at Salem. Fail not.

John Haihobn.

Dated Salem, Apr 22, 1602.

JONA. CUBWIN, / -**»»"«»•

The occasion of Bishops being ciy'd out of was, he being
at an Examination in Salem, when at the Inn an afflicted
Indian' was very unruly, whom he imdertook, and so managed him, that he was very orderly, after which in riding home,
in company of him and other Accusers, the Indian fdl into a
fit, and clapping hold with his Teeth on the back of the Man
that rode before him, thereby held himself upon the Horse,
but said Bishop striking him with his stick, the Indian soon
recovered, and promised he would do so no more; to which
Bishop replied, that he doubted not, but he could cure them
aD, with more to the same effect; inmiediately after he was
parted from them, he was cried out of, etc.

May 14, 1692. Sir William Phips arrived with CJonmiission from Their Majesties to be Govemoiu*, pursuant to the
New-Charter; which he now brought with him; the Ancient
Charter having been vacated by King Charles, and King
James (by which they had a power not only to make tlidr
own Laws; but also to chuse their own Govemoiu* and OflScers;)
and the Coimtrey for some years was put under an absolute
Commission-Government, till the Revolution,* at which time
tho more than two thirds of the People were for reaasuming
their ancient Government, (to which they had encouragenoent
by His then Royal Highness's Proclamation) yet some that
might have been better imployed (in another Station)^ made
it their business (by printing, as well as speaking) to their

^ 7. e,t cried out against, accused.

* The afl^cted Indian, t. e,, Parris's John : it is clearly a misprint.

' /. e,, the English Revolution and the overthrow in New Rng^^nd of the
Andros government (1689).

*He doubtless means especially Cotton Mather. So, at least, '^^^^**'
assumes in his reply (his letter in Some Few Bemarlu, etc, pp. 40-47) and vigorously denies that he opposed the reassumption.

1092] CALEP, MORE WONDERS Stt

utmost to divert them from such a setUement; and so far
prevaQed^ that for about seven We^ after the Revolution,
here was not so much as a face of any Government; but
some few Men upon their own Nomination would be called
a Committee of Safety; but at length the Assembfy prevailed
with those that had been of the Government, to promise that
they would reassume; and accordingly a Proclamation was
drawn, but before publishing it, it was underwritten, that
they would not have it understood that they did reassume
Charter-Government; so that between Government and no
Government, this Countrey remained till Sir William arrived;
Agents being in this time impowered in England, which no
doubt did not all of them act according to the Minds or Interests of those that impowered them, which is manifest by
their not acting jointly in what was done; so that this place
is perhaps a single Instance (even in the best of Reigns) of a
Charter not restored after so happy a Revolution.

This settlement by Sir Wiliiam Phips his being come Govemour put an end to all disputes of these thing^, and being
arrived, and having read his Commission, the first thing he
exerted his Power in, was said to be his giving Orders that
Irons should be put upon those in Prison; for tho for some
time after these were Committed, the Accusers ceased to ciy
out of them;^ yet now the cry against them was renewed,
which occasioned such Order; and tho thero was partiality
in the executing it (some having taken them off' almost as
soon as put on) yet the cry of these Accusers against such
ceased after this Order.*

May 24. Mrs. Cary of Charlestown, was Examined and
Committed. Her Husband Mr. Nathaniel Cary^ has given
account thereof, as also of her Escape, to this E^ect,

1 See p. 348, note 1.

* Doubtless a misprint for ''having them taken off."

'The reason for the irons was the assertion of the ''afficted" that their
sufferings did not cease till the accused were thus in fetters. An account of the
prison-deeper (Hanson, Danoera, p. 290) has such items as: "May 9th, To
Chains for Sarah Good and Sarah Osbim, 14s. May 23d, To Shackles for 10
Prisoners. May 29th, to 1 pr. Irons." See also Recorda cf Salem WUekeraftt
11. 212, 213. Even little Dorcas Good was put into chains.

' Captain Nathaniel Cary was a shipmaster, a man of alHlity and prominence, lata* a memba of the General Court and a justice.

350 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES pee

I having heard some days, that my Wife was accused ot Witdh
craft, being much disturbed at it, by advice, we went to SakmVillage, to see if the afflicted did know her; we arrived there, 24
May, it happened to be a day appointed for Examination; aooodin^y soon after our arrival, Mr. Hathom and Mr. Curwin, etc, went
to the Meeting-house, which was the place appointed for that Wexk,
the Minister began with Prayer, and having taken caie to get a
convenient place, I observed, that the afflicted were two Gids of
about Ten Years old,^ and about two or three other, of about csgjhieen, one of the Giris talked most, and could discern more than die
rest. The Prisoners were called in one by one, and as they came in
were cried out of, etc. The Prisoner was placed about 7 or 8 foot
from the Justices, and the Accusers between the Justices and them;
the Prisoner was ordered to stand ri^t before the Justices, with an
Officer appointed to hold each hand, least th^ should therewith
afflict them, and the Prisoners Eyes must be constantiy on the Justices; for if they look'd on the i^cted, they would either fall into
their Fits, or cry out of bang hurt by them; after ExaminatioD of
the Prisoners, who it was afflicted these Giris, etc., thqr were put
upon saying the Lords Prayer, as a tiyal of their guih; after the
afflicted seem'd to be out of thdr fits, they would look steadfastly
on some one person, and frequentiy not q)eak; and then the Justices
said they were strudc dumb, and after a littie time would ^wak ag^in;
then the Justices said to the Accusers, *' which of you will gp and
touch the Prisoner at the Bar?'' then the most couragious wooU adventure, but before they had made three steps would (ndinarily USi
down as in a fit; the Justices ordered that they should be taken up
and carried to the Prisoner, that she might toudi them; and as soon
as they were touched by the accused, the Justices would say, ibey are
well, before I could discern any alteration; by whidi I obs^ved that
the Justices understood the manner of it. Thus far I was only as
a Spectator, my Wiie also was there part of the time, but no notice
taken of her by the afflicted, except once or twice they came to her
and asked her name.

But I having an opportunity to Discourse* Mr. Hale^ (with
whom I had formerly acquaintance) I took his advice, what I had
best to do, and desired of him that I might have an opportunity to
speak with her that accused my Wife; whidi he promised shoiikl be,
I acquainting him that I reposed my trust in him.

Accordingly he came to me after the Examinati<m was over,
and told me I had now an opportunity to speak with the said Accuser,

> Abigafl Wniiams and Ann Putnam. ^TaDLwidi.

* The Rev. John Hale, of Bevcriy. A8tohbpartintiietriabaeebekyw,p.M^

1602] CALEF, MORE WONDERS 351

viz. Abigail Williams, a Girl of 11 or 12 Years old; but that we could
not be in private at Mr. Parris's House, as he had promised me; we
went therefore into the Alehouse, where an Indian Man attended us,
who it seems was one of the afflicted: to him we gave some Cyder,
he shewed several Scars, that seemed as if they had been long tiiere,
and shewed them as done by ^tchcraft, and acquainted us that his
Wife, who also was a Slave, was imprisoned for Witchcraft^ And
now instead of one Accuser, they all came in, who began to tumble
down like Swine, and then three Women were called in to attend
them. We in the Room were all at a stand, to see who they would
cry out of; butinashorttimethey cried out, Gary; and immediately
after a Warrant was sent from the Justices to bring my Wife before
them, who were sitting in a Chamber near by, waiting for this.

Being brought before the Justices, her diief accusers were two
Girb; my Wife declared to the Justices, that she never had any
knowledge of them before that day; she was forced to stand with her
Arms stretched out. I did request that I might hold one of her
hands, but it was denied me; then she desired me to wipe the Tears
from her Eyes, and the Sweat from her Face, which I did; then she
desired she might lean her self on me, saying, she should faint.

Justice Hathom replied, she had strength enough to torment
those persons, and she should have strengdi enough to stand. I
speaking something against their cruel proceedings, ti^ey conunanded
me to be silent, or else I should be turned out of the Room. The
Indian before mentioned, was also brought in, to be one of her
Accusers : being come in, he now (when before the Justices) fell down
and tumbled about like a Hog, but said nothing. The Justices asked
the Girls, who afflicted the Indian? they answered she (meaning my
Wife) and now lay upon him; the Justices ordered her to touch him,
in order to his ciu^, but her head must be turned another way, least
instead of ciuing, she should make him worse, by her loolang on
him, her hand bong guided to take hold of his; but the Indian took
hold on her hand, and pulled her down on the Floor, in a barbarous
manner; then his hand was taken ofiF, and her hand put on his, and
the cure was quickly wrought. I being extreamly troubled at their
Inhumane dealings, uttered a hasty Speech (That God would take
vengeance on them, and desired that God would deliver us out of the
hands of unmerciful men.) Then her Mittimus was writ. I did
with difficulty and charge obtain the liberty of a Room, but no Beds
in it; if there had, could have taken but little rest that Night. She
was conmiitted to Boston Prison; but I obtained a Habeas Corpus
to remove her to Cambridge Prison, which is in our County of Mid«

^ Gary is speaking, of course, of "John Indian" and Tituba.

352 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES p«s

dlesex. Having been there one Night, next Morning the Jayior put
Irons on her l^s (having reedved sudi a ccmunand) the weight of
them was about eight pounds; these Irons and h^ other AfflM^inm,
soon brought her into Convulsion Fits, so that I thought she woold
have died that Night. I sent to intreat that the Irons mi^ be
taken off, but all intreaties were in vain, if it would have saved hs
Life, so that in this condition she must continue. The TVyab it
Salem coming on, I went thither, to see how things were there managed; and finding that the Spectre-Evidence was there received,
together with Idle, if not malicious Stories, against Peoples lives, I
did easily pero»ve which way the rest would go; for the same Evidence that served for one, would serve for all the rest. I acquainted
her with her danger; and that if she were carried to Salon to be
tried, I feared she would never return. I did my utmost that she
might have her Tryal in our own County, I with several othen
Petitioning the Judge for it, and were put in hopes of it; but I sooq
saw so much, that I understood thereby it was not intended, wUdi
put me upon consulting the means of her escape; whidi thro the
goodness of Gk)d was effected, and she got to Road Island,^ but soon
found her sdf not safe when there, by reason of the pursuit after
her; from thence she went to New-York, along with some othen
that had escaped their cruel hands; where we found his EbccelleDcy
Benjamin Fletcher, Esq; Govemour, who was very courteous to i&
After this some of my Goods were seized in a Friends hands, with
whom I had left them, and my self imprisoned by the Sheriff, and
kept in Custody half a day, and then dismist; but to speak of thdr
usage of the Pnsoners, and thdr Inhumanity shewn to them, at the
time of their Execution, no sober Christian could bear; th^r bid
also tryals of cruel moddngs; which is the more, considering what a
People for Rdigion, I mean the profession of it, we have been; those
that suffered being many of them Church-Members, and most of
them unspotted in their Conversation, till thdr Adversary the Devil
took up this Method for accusing thenu

Per Nathaniel* Cakt.

May 31. Captain John Aldin' was Examined at Salem,
and Committed to Boston Prison. The Prison-Keeper seeiDg

1 Rhode Island. ''July 30, 1692. Mrs. Gary makes her escape out ol Cambridge-PHson, who was Committed for Wtchcraft" (Sewall» JHarjf, L 3G2.)
* "Jonathan" in original: corrected to "Nathaniel'' in EmUa,
' See above, pp. 170, note 2, and 178, note 6. Captain Alden, Indian fi^itcr,
naval commander, now at seventy a man of wealth, was one of the l*'***"^ %iiRS
of New England.

1602] CALEF, MORE WONDEBS 353

such a Man Committed; of whom he had a good esteem, was
after this the more Compassionate to those that were in Ftison
on the like account; and did refrain from such hard things to
the Prisoners, as before he had used. Mr. Aldin himself has
given account of his Examination, in these Words.

An Account how John Aldin, Senior, was dealt with at Salem-ViUcLge.

John Aldin Senior, of Boston, in the County of Suffolk, Marriner, on the 28th Day of May, 1692, was sent for by the Magistrates
of Salem, in the County of Essex, upon the Accusation of a company
of poor distracted, or possessed Creatures or Witches; and being
sent by Mr. Stoughton,^ arrived there the 31st of May, and appeared
at Salem-Village, before Mr. Gidney,' Mr. Hathom, and Mr. Curwin.

Those Wenches being present, who plaid thdr jugling tricks,
falling down, crying out, and staring in Peoples Faces; the Magistrates demanded of them several times, who it was of all the People
in the Room that hurt them? one of these Accusers pointed several
times at one Captain Hill, there present, but spake nothing; the
same Accuser had a Man standing at her back to hold her up; he
stooped down to her Ear, then she cried out, Aldin, Aldin afiBicted
her; one of the Magistrates asked her if she had ever seen Aldin,
she answered no, he asked her how she knew it was Aldin? She
said, the Man told her so.

Then all were ordered to go down into the Street, where a Ring
was made; and the same Accuser cried out, " there stands Aldin, a
bold fellow with his Hat on before the Judges, he sells Powder and
Shot to the Indians and French, and lies with the Indian Squaes,
and has Indian Papooses." Then was Aldin committed to the Marshal's Custody, and his Sword taken from him; for they said he
afflicted them with his Sword. After some hours Aldin was sent for
to the Meeting-house in the '^^llage before the Magistrates; who required Aldin to stand upon a Chair, to the open view of all the
People.

The Accusers cried out that Aldin did pinch them, then, when he
stood upon the Chair, in the sight of all the People, a good way distant from them, one of the Magistrates bid the Marshal to hold open
Aldin's hands, that he might not pinch those Creatures. Aldin asked

^ The lieutenant-governor — soon to be head of the special court for the trial
of the witches. See above, p. 183, note 2, and p. 199.

* Bartholomew Gedney, of Salem, the third magistrate, was, like his cd«
leagues, an assistant of the province.

354 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [m

them why they should think, that he should come to that Village to
afflict those persons that he never knew or saw before? Mr. (ndney
bid Aldin <x)nfess, and give glory to God; Aldin said he hoped he
should give glory to God, and hoped he should never gratifie the Devil;
but appealed to all that ever Imew him, if they ever suspected him
to be such a person, and challenged any one, that could bring in any
thing upon their own knowledge, that might give suspicion ot ik
being such an one. Mr. Gidney said he had known Aldin many
Years, and had been at Sea with him, and always look'd upon him
to be an honest Man, but now he did see cause to alter his judgment:
Aldin answered, he was sorry for that, but he hoped God would
dear up his Innocency, that he would recall that judgment again,
and added that he hoped that he should with Job nutititfljn his Integrity till he died. They bid Aldin look upon the Accusers, ^cfa
he did, and then they fell down. Aldin asked Mr. Gidney, wh^t
Reason there could be given, why Aldin's looking upon kim did not
strike him down as well; but no reason was given that I heard. But
the Accusers were brought to Aldin to touch them, and this toudi
they said made them wdl. Aldin began to speak of the Providenoe
of Grod in suffering these Creatures to accuse Innocent persons. Mr.
Noyes asked Aldin why he would offer to speak of the Providenoe of
God. God by his Providence (said Mr. Noyes) governs the World,
and keeps it in peace; and so went on with Discourse, and stopt
Aldin's mouth, as to that. Aldin told Mr. Gidney, that he could
assure him that there was a lying Spirit in them, for I can assure yoa
that there is not a word of truth in all these say of me. But Aklin
was again committed to the Marshal, and his Mittimus written,
which was as follows.

To Mr. John Arnold, Keeper of the Prison in Boston, in the Ccfiadf

of Suffolk.

Whereas Captain John Aldin of Boston, Marriner, and Sarah
Rice, Wife of Nicholas Rice of Reding, Husbandman, have been
this day brought before us, John Hathom and Jonathan Curwin,
Esquires; being accused and suspected of perpetrating divers acts
of Witchcraft, contrary to the form of the Statute, in that Case made
and provided : These are therefore in Their Majesties, IQng l^^^Iliam
and Queen Marys Names, to Will and require you, to take into your
Custody, the bodies of the said John Aldin, and Sarah Rice, and
them safely keep, until they shall thence be delivered by due course
of Law; as you will answer the contrary at your peril; and this shall
be your sufficient Warrant. Given under our hands at Salem
Village, the 31st of May, in the Fourth Year of the Reign ctf our

leW] CALEF, MORE WONDEBS 356

Sovereign Lord and Lady, )/\^am and Mary, now IQng and Queen
over England, etc.. Anno Dom. 1692.

Jonathan Curwin, j

To Boston Aldin was carried by a Constable, no Bail would be
taken for him; but was delivered to the Prison-keeper, where he remained fifteen Weeks ;^ and then observing the manner of Tryals,
and Evidence then taken, was at length prevailed with to make his
E^scape, and being returned, was bound over to Answer at the Superior
Court at Boston, the last Tuesday in April, Anno 1693. And was
there cleared by Proclamation, none appearing against him.

Per John Aldin.

At Examinationy and at other times, 'twas usual for the
Accusers to tell of the black Man, or of a Spectre, as being
then on the Table, etc. The People about would strike with
Swords, or sticks at those places. One Justice broke his Cane
at this Ebcercise, and sometimes the Accusers would say, they
struck the Spectre, and it is reported several of the accused
were hurt and wounded thereby, though at home at the same
time.

The Justices proceeding in these works of Examination, and
Commitment, to the end of May, there was by that time
about a Hundred persons Imprisoned upon that Account.

June 2. A special Conunission of Oyer and Terminer having been Issued out, to Mr. Stoughton, the New Lieutenant
Govemour, Major Saltonstall, Major Richards, Major Gidny,
Mr. Wait Winthrop, Captain Sewall, and Mr. Sergeant;'
These (a Quorum of them; sat at Salem this day; where tiiie

* Captain Alden's case seems to have made a great stir. On July 20 there
was held a special "Fast at the house of Capt Alden, upon his account" Judge
Sewall read a sermon, and ^^^^llaid, Allen, and Cotton Mather prayed, then Captain Hill and Captain Scottow; "concluded about 5. adock." (Sewall, Diary,
I. 361-362.) A year later, on June 12, 1693, Sewall records: "I visit Capt
Alden and his wife, and tell them I was sorry for their Sorrow and Temptations
by reason of his Imprisonment, and that [I] was glad of his Restauration."

* See above, pp. 183-185, 196-198. These gentlemen were all members of
the new Council of the province. Saltonstall, out of dissatisfaction with the
proceedings, early withdrew (see above, p. 184), and was later himself accused
(Sewall's Diary, I. 373). Jonathan Corwin took his place. A quorum was five.
All the judges had had experience in the colony's Court of Assistants; but none
had had a legal training.

I

\

356 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES pflK

most that was done this Week, was the Tryai of one Bisbop,
alias Oliver, of Salem; who having long undergone the rqnite
of a Witch, occasioned by the Accusations of one Samuel Gray:
he about ^ Years since, having charged her with such Crimes,
and though upon his Death-bed he testified his aonow and
repentance for such Accusations, as being wholly groundless;
yet the report taken up by his means continued, and she bdng
accused by those afflicted, and upon search a Tet, as they call
it, being found, she was brought in guilty by the Jury; die
received her Sentence of Dea&, and was Ebcecuted, June 10,
but made not the least Confession of any thing rdating to
Witchcraft.*

June 15. Several Ministers in and near Boston, having
been to that end consulted by his Excellency,' eiq^rest ihdr
minds to this effect, viz.

That they were affected with the deplorable state ci the
afflicted; That they were thankful for the diligent care of the
Rulers, to detect the abominable Witchcrafts, which have
been committed in the Country, praying for a perfect discovery
thereof. But advised to a cautious proceeding, least many
Evils ensue, etc. And that tenderness be used towards those
accused, relating to matters presumptive and convictive, and
also to privacy in Examinations, and to consult Mr. Perkins
and Mr. Bernard,' what tests to make use of in the Scrutiny:
That Presumptions and Convictions ought to have better
grounds, than the Accusers affirming that they see such per*
sons Spectres afflicting them : And that the Devil may afflict
in the shape of good Men; and that falling at the sight, and
rising at the touch of the Accused, is no infallible proof d
guilt ; That seeing the Devils strength consists in such Accusations, our disbelieving them may be a means to put a period
to the dreadful Calamities; Nevertheless they humbly recommend to the Government, the speedy and vigorous prosecu-

^ As to the trial of Bridget Bishop see above, pp. 223-229. Before her last
marriage she had been a widow Oliver. The testimony against her i«rhi4cs the
deposition of a Samuel Gray (Records of Salem Wiiehcntft, L 15^153) as to her
bewitching to death his child some fourteen years before. Of his **x?i>ntanfr at
his death, which must have been recent when Calef wrote, the writer doabtkss
speaks from personal knowledge.

* See above, p. 194. * See above, p. 304, notes 3, 5.

1692] CALEF, MORE WONDEBS 357

tion of such as have rendered themselves obnoxious^ according
to the direction given in the Laws of God, and the wholesome
Statutes of the English Nation, for the Detection of Witchcraft.

This is briefly the substance of what may be seen more at
large in Cases of Conscience, (uU.y And one of them* since
taking occasion to repeat some part of this advice, Wonders of
the Invisible World, p. 83, declares, (notwithstanding the Dissatisfaction of others) that if his said Book may conduce to
promote thankfulness to God for such Executions, he shall
rejoyce, etc.

The 30^ of June, the Court according to Adjournment
again sat; five more were tried, viz. Sarah Good and Rebecca
Nurse, of Salem- Village; Susanna Martin of Amsbury; Elizabeth How of Ipswich; and Sarah Wildes of Topsfield; these
were all condenmed that Sessions, and were all Executed on the
19th of July.'

At the Tryal of Sarah Good, one of the afflicted fell in a
Fit, and after coming out of it, she cried out of the Prisoner,
for stabing her in the breast with a Knife, and that she had
broken the Knife in stabbing of her, accordingly a piece of the
blade of a Knife was found about her. Inunediately information being given to the Court, a young Man was called, who
produced a Haft and part of the Blade, which the C!ourt having
viewed and compared, saw it to be the same. And upon inquiry the yoimg Man affirmed, that yesterday he happened
to break that Knife, and that he cast away the upper part,
this afflicted person being then present. The young Man was

1 The full text of the document, that is, may be found at the end of Increase
Mather's Cases cf Conscience (London, 1693). With that book, or from it, it
has been often reprinted. In his life of Phips (and in its reprint in his Magnolia)
Cotton Mather tells us that it was drawn up by himself; but it doubtless embodied a compromise. Increase Mather calls it ' ' the humble Advice which twelve
Ministers concurringly presented before his ExceUency and Council," and it
entitles itself "The Return of several Ministers consulted by his Excellency, and
the Honourable Councfl, upon the present Witchcrafts in Salem Village."

' Cotton Mather, of course.

* As to the trials of Susanna Martin and Elizabeth How see above, pp. 229240, and records there cited. The documents fot those of Sarah Good, Rebecca
Nurse, Sarah Wildes, may be found in Records of Salem Wiichcraft (I. 11-34,
76-99, 180-189), but for the two last more fully in the Historical Collections of
the Top^eld Historical Society (XIII. 80-92).

/

358 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [UK

dismist, and she was bidden by the C!ourt not to tell ^;
and was improved (after as she had been before) to give Evidence against the Prisoners.

At Execution, Mr. Noyes urged Sarah Good to Confeas,
and told her she was a Witch, and she knew she was a Witdi,
to which she replied, ''you are a Iyer; I am no more a WtA
than you are a Wizard, and if you take away my Life, God
will give you Blood to drink."

At the Tiyal of Rebecka Nurse, this was remarkable that the
Jury brought in their Verdicl^not Guilty, immediately all the
accusers in the Court, and suddenly after all the afflicted out
of Court, made an hideous out-cry, to the amazement, not
only of the Spectators, but the Court also seemed strangdy
surprized; one of the Judges exprest himself not satisfied, aaother of them as he was going off the Bench, said they would
have her Indicted anew. The chief Judge said he would not
Impose upon the Jmy; but intimated, as if they had not wdl
considered one Expression of the Prisoners, when she was upon
Tiyal, viz. That when one Hobbs, who had confessed her sdf
to be a Witch, was brought into the Court to witness against
her, the Prisoner turning her head to her, said, '' What, do yoa
bring her? she is one of us," or to that effect; this togiether
with the Clamours of the Accusers, induced the Jury to go
out again, after their Verdict, not Guilty. But not agreeing
they came into the Court, and she being then at the Bar, her
words were repeated to her, in order to have had her explanation
of them, and she making no Reply to them, they foimd the
Bill, and brought her in Guilty; these words being the Inducement to it, as the Foreman has signified in writing, as follows.

July 4, 1692. I Thomas Fisk, the Subscriber hereof, being one
of them that were of the Jury the last week at Salem-Court, upon the
Tryal of Rebecka Nurse, etc., being desired by some of the Rdati(MB
to give a Reason why the Jury brought her in Guilty, after her Verdict not Guilty; I do hereby give my Reasons to be as follows, m.

When the Verdict not Guilty was, the honoured Court was
pleased to object against it, saying to them, that they think th^ kt
slip the words, which the Prisoner at the Bar spake against her self,
which were spoken in reply to Goodwife Hobl^ and her Dau^ter,
who had been faulty in setting their hands to the Devils Book, as
they have confessed formerly; the words were ''What, do these per1092] CALEF, MORE WONDERS 359

sons ^ve in Evidence against me now, they used to come among us."
After the honoured Court had manifested their dissatisfaction of the
Verdict, several of the Jury declared themselves desirous to go out
again, and thereupon the honoured Court gave leave; but when we
came to consider of the Case, I could not tdl how to take her words,
as an Evidence against her, till she had a further opportunity to put
her Sense upon them, if she would take it; and then going into Court,
I mentioned the words aforesaid, which by one of the Court were
affirmed to have been spoken by her, she being then at the Bar, but
made no reply, nor interpretation of them; whereupon these words
were to me a principal Evidence against her.

Thomas Fisk.

When Goodwif 6 Nurse was informed what use was made
of these words, she put in this following Declaration into the
Court.

These presents do humbly shew, to the honoured Court and
Jury, that I being informed, tJiat the Jury brought me in Guilty,
upon my saying that Goodwif e Hobbs and her Daughter were of our
Company; but I intended no otherways, then as^ they were Prisoners
with us, and therefore did then, and yet do judge them not legal
Evidence agunst their fellow Prisoners. And I being something
hard of hearing, and full of grief, none informing me how the Court
took up my words, and therefore had not opportunity to declare
what I intended, when I said they were of our Company.

Rebecka Nubse.

After her Condenmation she was by one of the Ministers
of Salem excommimicated;' yet the Govemour saw cause to
grant a Reprieve, which when known (and some say immediately upon granting) the Accusers renewed their dismal outcries against her, insomuch that the Govemour was by some !
Salem Gentleman prevailed with to recall the Reprieve, and
she was Executed with the rest.

^ /. e., than that. f

* By Mr. Noyes, of whose church in Salem Town she was a member. Says
the church record: "1692, July 3. — ^After sacrament, the elders propounded to
the church, — and it was, by an unanimous vote, consented to, — that our sister
Nurse, being a convicted witch by the Court, and condemned to die, should be
excommunicated; which was accordingly done in the afternoon, she being
present" (Upham, Salem Wiichenfi, II. 290.) Upham, himself long pastor
of thb church, has drawn a powerful jMcture of the probable scene.

\

360 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES m

The Testimonials of her Chrotian behaviour, botii in the
course of her life, and at her Death, and her extraordiDanr
care in educating her Chfldren, and setting them good Examples, etc., under the hands of so many, are so numerous, that
for brevity they are here omitted.^

It was at the Tiyal of these that one of the Accusers died
out publickly of Mr. Willard Minister in BosUm,' as afflictiDg
of her; she was sent out of the Court, and it was told about
she was mistaken in the person.

August 5. The Court again sitting, six more weve tiied
on the same Account, viz. Mr. George Burroughs, sometiiiK
minister of Wells, John Procter, and Elizabeth Procttf tis
Wife, with John TVUlard of Salem-Village, George Jacobs
Senior, of Salem, and Martha Canyer of Andover^ these
were all brought in Guilty and Condemned; and were aD
Executed Aug. 19, except Procter's Wife, who pleaded Pr^
nancy.*

Mr. Burroughs was carried in a Cart with ^be othm,
through the streets of Salem to Execution; ^en he was iqxn
the Ladder, he made a Speech for the clearing of ina Innoomcj,
with such Solenm and Serious Elxpressions, as were to the
Admiration of all present; his Prayer (which he concluded by
repeating the Lord's Prayer,) was so wdl worded, and uttered
with such composedness, and such (at least seeming) fervency
of Spirit, as was veiy affecting, and drew Tears from many
(so that it seemed to some, that the Spectators would hind^

^Two of these testJmoniala, one of them signed by thirty-ei^ht of her
neighbors, are printed by Upham (Salem Wiichcraft, II. 271-272), mud mofe exactly, from the still extant A^., in the HiHorical CoUectUmM 6t the Topsfield
Historical Society (XIII. 57-58) — and with them the toudiing evidcnoe of tlie
neighbors who first bore her the news of her accusation.

* See above, pp. 22, 184, and 186, note 3.

* As to the triab of Burroughs and Groodwife Carrier see above, i^. 215-222,
241-244, and records there cited. Those relating to IVocter and his wife, to
Willard, and to Jacobs may be found in Records qf Salem WUcker^fi (L €0-74,
9^117, 266-279, 253-265). The testimonials on bdialf of the IVocten are reprinted (with corrections) by Upham (Salem WUchcraft, IL 305-307). As to
Willard other papers will be found in 1>t. S. A. Green's GwUm in the WikAenfi
Timet (Groton, 1883), pp. 23-29. The documents rdating to Jacobs are to be
found also in the CoUectioru of the Essex Institute (11. 49-57), whore (and in L
52-56) are further details as to him and his household.

* For Brattle's account of their execution see above, p^ 177.

I

1692] CALEF, MORE WONDERS 361

the Execution). The accusers said the black Man stood and
dictated to hiin; as soon as he was turned off; Mr. Cotton
Mather, being mounted upon a Horse, addressed himself to ^
the People, partly to declare, that he was no ordained Minister, and partly to possess the People of his guilt; saying. That
the Devil has often been transformed into an Angel of light;
and this did somewhat appease the People, and the Executions went on ; when he was cut down, he was dragged by the
Halter to a Hole, or Grave, between the Rocks, about two
foot deep, his Shirt and Breeches being pulled off, and an old
pair of lYousers of one Executed, put on his lower parts, he
was so put in, together with Willard and Carryer, one of his
Hands and his Chin, and a Foot of one [of] them being left
uncovered.^

John Willard had been imployed to fetch in several that
were accused; but taking dissatisfaction from his being sent,
to fetch up some that he had better thoughts of, he declined
the Service, and presently after he himself was accused of the
same Crime, and that with such vehemency, that they sent
after him to apprehend him; he had made his Escape as far
as Nashawag,' about 40 Miles from Salem; yet 'tis said those
Accusers did then presently tell the exact time, saying, now
Willard is taken.

John Procter and his Wife being in Prison, the Sheriff
came to his House and seized all the Goods, Provisions, and
Cattle that he could come at, and sold some of the Cattle at
half price, and killed others, and put them up for the WestIndies; threw out the Beer out of a Barrel, and carried away
the Barrel; emptied a Pot of Broath, and took away the Pot,
and left nothing in the House for the support of the Children :
No part of the said Goods are known to be returned. Procter
earnestly requested Mr. Noyes to pray with and for him, but

I "This day/' writes Judge Sewall in his diary, '*(jeorge Burroughs John
Willard, Jno. Frocter, Martha Carrier and Greorge Jacobs were executed at Salem,
a very great number of Spectators being present. Mr. Cotton Mather was
there, Mr. Sims, Hale, Noyes, Chiever, etc. All of them said they were innocent.
Carrier and all. Mr. Mather says they all died by a Righteous Sentence. Mr. /
Burrough by his Speech, Frayer, protestation of his Innocence, did much move ^
unthinking persons, which occasions their speaking hardly concerning his being
executed." In the margin he later added "Dolefull WitchcraftI"

* Nashaway, an okl name of Lancaster.

I

362 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES fW

it was wholly denied, because he would not own himself to be
a Witch.

During his Imprisonment he sent the following Letta*, in
behalf of himself and others.

Salem-Phison, Jviy 23, 1692.
Mr. Mather, Mr. Allen,
Mr. Moody, Mr. WUlard, cmd
Mr. Bailey.^

Reverend Gentlemen.

The innocency of our Case ?dth the Enmity of our Accosen
and our Judges, and Jury, whom nothing but our Innocent Blood
will serve their turn, having Condemned us already before our Tiyah,
being so much incensed and engaged against us by the Devil, makes
us bold to B^ and Implore your Favourable Assistance of thb our
Humble Petition to his Excdlency, That if it be possible our Innocent Blood may be spared, which undoubtedly otherwise will be
shed, if the Lord doth not mercifully step in. The Magistrates, Mnbters, Jewries,' and all the People in general, being so much imaged
and incensed against us by the Delusion of the Devil, whidi we
can term no other, by reason we know in our own Consciences, we
are all Innocent Persons. Here are five Persons who have lately

^ By ''Mr. Mather" is unquestioiuibly meant Increaae Mather. He akae,
as the senior in age and in dignity, could with propriety be thus given the first
place; and his son, if named at all, would have been identified as "Mr. Gotten
Mather." That he is not named at all needs no explanation to those who have
read his own words as to accusers and accused and his complaints as to the blame
heaped upon himself. Of Moody, Willard, Bailey, we have perhaps seen enoqgb
in earlier pages to guess why such an appeal might with hope be addressed to
them. The Boston Tory Joshua Broadbent, writing on June 21 hosn New York,
reported that "Mrs. Moody, Parson Moody's wife, is said to be one" of tbe
witches. (Calendar of State Papers, CoUmial, 108^1692, p. S53.) Of ABen, tbe
weU-to-do minister of the First Church, who seems to have been a man of much
caution, it nuiy be well to remember that prior to 1678 he had owned the estate
at Salem Village since occupied, but not yet in full ownership, l^ ttm Nurses,
Procter's near neighbors, and that he was doubtless personidly known to the
petitioner. Bailey, who had come to America in 1683, had at fost ^<wi<TtfHi Willard at the South Church, and, after a pastorate at Watertown, was now Allen's
assistant at the First

* Juries. It should not be ov^ooked that in these trials of 1602 the jurors
were chosen from among church-members only, not, as later, from aD who had
the property to make them voters under the new charter. The ttct establisliing this qualification for the jurors was not passed till November 25. (See
Goodell in Mass. Hbt Soc., Proceedinge, second series, I. 67-68.)

1692] CALEF, MORE WONDEBS 363

confessed themselves to be Witches, and do accuse some of us, of
being along with them at a Sacrament, since we were conmiitted into
close Prison, which we know to be lies. Two of the 5 are (Carriers
Sons^) Young-men, who would not confess any thing till they tyed
them Neck and Heeli^ till the Blood was ready to come out of their
Noses, and 'tis credibly believed and reported this was the occasion
of making them confess that* they never did, by reason they said
one had been a Witch a Month, and another five Weeks, and that
their Mother had made them so, who has been confined here this
nine Weeks. My son \^Rlliam Procter, when he was examined, because he would not confess that he was Guilty, when he was Innocent,
they tyed him Neck and Heels till the Blood gushed out at his Nose,
and would have kept him so 24 Hours, if one more Merciful than the
rest, had not taken pity on him, and caused him to be unbound.
These actions are very like the Popish Cruelties. They have already
undone us in our Estates, and that will not serve their turns, without
our Innocent Bloods. If it cannot be granted that we can have our

* Richard and Andrew, sons of Martha Carrier, of Andover. (See above,
pp. 241-244.) Richaid was 18.

* As to this form of torture see above, p. 102 and note 1. For some of the
evidence extorted by it in this case see Records of SaUm Witchcraft, p. 198. The
use of torture in cases of witchcraft had been recommended by Perkins, the
Puritan oracle, and yet more warmly by King James; and despite protesting
jurists it came into use. Even Coke, who maintains that "there is no Law to
warrant tortures in this land, nor can they be justified by any prescription,"
has to add "being so lately brought in" (ItutUidM, III., cap. 2). As to its actual
use in English witch-trials see Notestein, Witchcraft in England, index, s.v,
"Torture." But Massachusetts law, from 1641 on, had straitly forbidden it except, after conviction, to extort the names of accomplices; and even then forbade
"such tortures as be barbarous and inhumane" (see Body of Liberties, par. 45;
ed. of 1660, p. 67; ed. of 1672, p. 129). If in 1648 the highest court of the colony,
learning with admiration of the achievements of Matthew Hopkins in England,
was "desirous that the same course which hath been taken in England for the
discovery of witches, by watchinge, may also be taken here," and ordered, in
the case of a witch, that "a strict watch be set about her every night, and that
her husband be confined to a private room, and watched also" {Records of Masses
chuseUs, in. 126), their phrasing betrays how little they understood the rigor of
the English method. In 1692 even Cotton Mather declared himself "farr from
urging the un-English method of torture" {Mather Papers, p. 394), though he
urged on the judges "whatever hath a tendency to put the witches into confusion," such as "Crosse and Swift Questions." But the procedure of that day,
like our own, drew a line between what might be used in the courts and what
might be permitted to extra-judicial inquiry, and we shall see yet more of methods
used at Salem to extort confession.

< That which.

364 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES (UK

Triab at Boston, we humbly beg that you would endeavour to hive
these Magistrates changed, and others in thdr rooms, b^ging also
and beseeching you would be pleased to be here, if not all, 9onie d
you at our Trials, hoping thereby you may be die Doieans of saving
the shedding our Innocent Bloods, desiring your Prayers to the hod
in our behalf, we rest your Poor Afflicted Servants,

John Pbocteb, etc

He pleaded veiy hard at Execution^ for a little recite d
time, saying that he was not fit to Die; but it was not grantei

Old Jacobs being Condemned, the Sheriff and Officos
came and seized all he had, his Wife had her Wedding Ring
taken from her, but with great difficulty obtained it ag^in.
She was forced to buy Provisions of the Sheriff, such as he had
taken, towaixls her own support, which not being sufficient,
the Neighbours of Charity relieved her.^

Margaret Jacobs being one that had confessed her own
Guilt, and testified against her Grand-Father Jacobs, Mr.
BmroughS; and John Willard, She the day before ExecuticHis,
came to Mr. Bmroughs, acknowledging that she had belyed
them,' and b^ged Mr. Bmroughs Forgiveness, who not otAj

^ /. e,, out of charity the neighbors relieved her.

* How she was brought to confess she herself told in a Inrave pi^Kr:

"The humble declaration of Margaret Jacobs unto the himotired court nom
sitting at Salem, sheweth

"That whereas your poor and humble declarant being closely ooofiiied here
in Salem jail for the crime of witchcraft, which crime, thanks be to the Lord,
I am altogether ignorant of, as will appear at the great day of judgment. May
it please the honoured court, I was cried out upon by some of the possessed po^
sons, as afflicting of them; whereupon I was brought to my examination, whick
persons at the sight of me fell down, which did very mudi startle and affiigfat me.
The Lord above knows I knew nothing, in the least measure, how or who afflicted
them; they told me, without doubt I did, or dse they would not faD down at
me; they told me if I would not confess, I should be put down into the dungeon
and would be hanged, but if I would confess I should have my life; the whiA
did so afiPright me, with my own vile wicked heart, to save my life made me make
the confession I did, which confession, may it please the honoured court, is altogether false and untrue. The very first night after I had made my oonfesaon,
I was in such horror of conscience that I coukl not sleep, for fear the Devil shookl
carry me away for telling such horrid lies. I was, may it please tiie honoured
court, sworn to my confession, as I understand since, but then, at that time,
was ignorant of it, not knowing what an oath did mean. The Lotd, I hapt, m
whom I trust, out of the abundance of hb mercy, will forgive me my false for1602] CALEF, MORE WONDERS 365

forgave her, but also Prayed with and for her. She wrote the
following Letter to her Father.

From the Dungeon in SalemrPrison, August 20, 92.

Hovumred Father,

After my Humble Duty Remembred to you, hoping in the Lord
of your good Health, as Blessed be God I enjoy, tho in abundance of
Affliction, being dose confined here in a loathsome Dungeon, the
Lord look down in mercy upon me, not knowing how soon I shall be
put to Death, by means of the Afflicted Persons; my Grand-Father
having Suffered already, and all his Estate Seized for the King. The
reason of my Confinement is this, I having, through the Ma^trates
Threatnings, and my own Vile and Wretdied Heart, conf e^ed several things contrary to my Conscience and Knowledg, tho to the
Wounding of my own Soul, the Lord pardon me for it; but Oh I the
terrors of a wounded Conscience who can bear. But blessed be the
Lord, he would not let me go on in my Sins, but in mercy I hope so
my Soul would not suffer me to keep it in any longer, but I was
forced to confess the truth of all before the Magistrates, who would
Bot believe me, but tis their pleasure to put me in here, and God knows
how soon I shall be put to death. Dear Father, let me beg your
Prayers to the Lord on my behalf, and send us a Joyful and Happy
meeting in Heaven. My Mother poor Woman is very Crazey, and

swearing myself. What I said was altogether false, against my grandfather,
and Mr. Burroughs, which I did to save my life and to have my liberty; but the
Lord, charging it to my conscience, made me in so much horror, that I could not
contain myself before I had denied my confession, which I did, though I saw
nothing but death before me, choosing rather death with a quiet ^conscience,
than to live in such horror, which I could not suffer. Whereupon my denying
my confession, I was committed to dose prison, where I have enjoyed more felicity
in spirit a thousand times than I did before in my enlargement.

"And now, may it please your honours, your poor and humble declarant
having, in part, given your honours a description of my condition, do leave it to
your honours pious and judicious discretions to take pity and compassion on my
young and tender years; to act and do with me as the Lord above and your honours shall see good, having no friend but the Lord to plead my cause toe me;
not being guilty in the least measure of the crime of witchcraft, nor any other
sin that deserves death from man; and your poor and humble declarant shall
forever pray, as she is bound in duty, for your honours' happiness in this life,
and etenial felicity in the world to come. So prays your honours declarant

"Margaret Jacobs."

The document is preserved by Hutchinson, and may be found in the first
chapter of hb second volume (or in Poole's reprint of an earlier draft, N. E.
HiH. and Oen. Register, XXIV. 402-403).

366 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [1692

remembers her kind Love to you, and to Unde, viz. D. A.* So
leaving you to the protection of tlie Ix>rd9 1 rest your Dutiful Daughter,

Mabgabet Jacobs.

At the time appointed for her Tryal, she had an Imposthume in her head, which was her Escape.'

September 9. Six more were tried, and received Sentance
of Death, triz. Martha Coiy of Salem-Village, Maiy Easty of
Topsfield, Alice Parker and Ann Pudeater of Salem, Dorcas
Hoar of Beverly, and Mary Bradbeny of Salisbury.* SepUmher 16, Giles Cory was prest to Death.

September 17. Nine more received Sentance of Death, viz,
Margaret Scot of Rowly, Goodwife Redd of Marblehead,
Samuel Wardwell, and Mary Parker of Andover, also Abigaii
Falkner of Andover, who pleaded Pregnancy, Rebecka Eames
of Boxford, Mary Lacy, and Ann Foster of Aiidover, and Abigail Hobbs of Topsfield.^ Of these Eight were Executed,

^ Daniel Andrew, the kinsman and neighbor who had fled with her father.
He had been a leading man, a teacher, a deputy to the General Court, and apparently a staunch opponent of the panic. Aa to the craied mother, aee p. 371,
below, and the grandmother's petition in Mass. Hist Soc., CoBocfum*, V. 79 (or
in Chandler's American Criminal TriaU, I. 431-432).

* For a little more of her story see below, p. 371. She was acquittal ia
January, but had to remain in jail, even after the governor by prodamatua
had freed the prisoners (May, 1693), for want of means to pay her prisoii btx
A stranger, touched with compassion on hearing of her case, advanced the maaef
— and was in time repaid. (Upham, Salem Wvtehcrqft, II. 353-^354.)

* The papers rdating to Ann Pudeater (Records qf Salem Wiiekcnfi, H. 1222) have been embodied in a study of her case by G. F. Chever in the CoRsetumt
of the Essex Institute (II. 37-42, 49-54). The widow Dorcas Hoar seems to
have earned some suspicion by an interest in fortune-telling (Records qf Sakm
Witchcraft, I. 235-253), and, though she confessed, she was condemned; but she
had potent friends. "A petition is sent to Town," saya Sewall in his Diar$ on
September 21, "in behalf of Dorcas Hoar, who now confesses. Aooocdiogly aa
OTder is sent to the Sheriff to forbear her Execution." "This is," he adds, "the
first condemned person who has confess'd." The aged Mrs. Bradbury, daui^hAer
of John Perkins of Ipswich and wife of Captain Thomas Bradbuiy of Safisbniy,
was not only one of the most socially eminent but one of the most venerated
women of her region, and her arrest enlisted in her defence the puWc sentiment
of all the dbtrict (see Records of Salem Witchcraft, II. 160-174). She was aided
to escape from prison, and so from death.

* For the Andover and Topsfield cases reference may again be nuMle to Mn.
Bailey's Historical Sketches of Andowr and to vol. XIU. of the CoOedums of the
Topsfidd Historical Sodety as weU as to the /iMortiff (/ Sd^ YFOdbc^v^ Hk

lewi CALEF, MORE WONDERS 367

September 22, viz. Martha Cory, Mary Easfy, Alice Parker,
Ann Pudeater, Margaret Scot, Willmet Redd, Samuel Wardwell, and Mary Parker.

Giles Cory pleaded not Guilty to his Indictment, but would
not put himself upon Tryal by the Jury (they having cleared
none upon Tiyal) and knowing there would be the same Witnesses against him, rather chose to undergo what Death they
would put him to. In pressing his Tongue being prest out
of his Mouth, the Sheriff with his Cane forced it in again,
when he was dying. He was the first in New-England, that
was ever prest to Death.^

The Cart going up the Hill with these Eight to Execution,
was for some time at a sett; the afflicted and others said, that
the Devil hindred it, etc.

Martha Cory, Wife to Giles Cory, protesting her Innocency, concluded her Life with an Eminent Prayer upon the
Ladder.

Wardwell having formerly confessed himself Guilty, and
after denied it, was soon brought upon his Tiyal; his former
Confession and Spectre Testimony was all that appeared
against him. At Execution while he was speaking to the People, protesting his Innocency, the Executioner being at the
same time smoaking Tobacco, the smoak coming in his Face,
interrupted his Discourse, those Accusers said, tiie Devfl hindred hun with smoak.

Mary Easty, Sister also to Rebecka Nurse, when she took

papers as to WUmot Redd, or Reed, are in the Records (11. 97-106); Margaret
Scott's seem lost. The examinatioiis of Mary Lacy and Ann Foster should be
studied in Hutchinson's chapter as well as in the ReconU (U. 135-142), and see
also p. 244, above, and pp. 418-419, below.

1 This was, of course, the old English "peine forte et dure'' for those who, in
cases of petty treason or of felony, will not "put themselves upon the country,"
or, as Coke has it, "when the offender standeth mute, and refuseth to be tryed
by the conmion law of the land." (See Pollock and Maitland, Hidory of English
Law, second ed., II. 650-652.) Whether in Giles Corey's case this was mere
proud protest or had some ulterior end is not yet dear. Tlie theory that he hoped
thereby to save himself from attainder and preserve his right to bequeath his
property has been learnedly contested by G. H. Moore (see especially his Final
Notes on Wiichcraft in Massachusetts, New York, 1885, pp. 40-59). As to Giles
Corey see also p. 250, above, and Records of Salem Witchcraft, U. 175-180. The
missing report of hb examination b printed at the end of Calefs book in the
editions of 1823, 1861, and 1866.

368 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES Il«

her last farewell of her Husband, Chfldren and Friends,
as is reported by them present, as Serious, Religious, Distinct
and Affectionate as could well be exprest, drawing Tean froiL
the Eyes of almost all present. It seems besides the Tesdmony of the Accusers and C!onfessors, another proof, as it was
counted, appeared against her, it having been usual to searcii
the Accuseid for Tets; upon some parts of her Body, not here
to be named, was found an Excrescence, which they called a
Tet. Before her Death she put up the following Petition:

To the Honorable Judge and Bench now siting in Judicatuie in
Salem and the Reverend Mimsters, humbly sheweth, Tliat ^dieraLS
your humble poor Petitioner being Condemned to die, doth humbly
beg of you, to take it into your Judicious and Pious Consideration.
that your poor and humble Petitioner knowing my own Innocencr
(blessed be the Lord for it) and seeing plainly the Wiles and Subtilty
of my Accusers, by my self, cannot but judge charitably ci others,
that are going the same way with my self, if the Lord stq> not
mightily in. I was confined a whole Month on the same account
that I am now condemned for, and then cleared by the Afflicted pe^
sons, as some of your Honours know, and in two days time I wis
cried out upon by them, and have been confined, and now am condemned to die. The Lord above knows my Lmocency then, and
likewise doth now, as at the great day will be known to Men and
Angels. I Petition to your Honours not for my own Life, for I knov
I must die, and my appointed time is set; but the Lord he knows it
is, if it be possible, that no more Innocent Blood be shed, which undoubtedly cannot be avoided in the way and course you go in. I
question not, but your Honours do to the utmost of your powers,
in the discovery and detecting of Witchcraft and Witches, and would
not be guilty of Innocent Blood for the Worid; but by my own
Innocency I know you are in the wrong way. The Lord in hb infinite Mercy direct you in this great work, if it be hb blessed will,
that Innocent Blood be not shed; I would humbly b^ of you, that
your Honours would be pleased to Examine some of those confessing Witches, I being confident there are several of them have helved
themselves and others, as will appear, if not in this World, I am sure
in the World to come, whither I am going; and I question not, but
your selves will see an alteration in these things: They say, my self
and others have made a league with the Devil, we cannot confess.
I know and the Lord he knows (as will shortly appear) they belye
me, and so I question not but they do others; the Lord alone, who
is the searcher of all hearts, knows that as I shall answer it at the

I'ETinON OF MARY ESTY

From the oriRiiial at tlic Ehm-x Cotinty Court Hoi
(Thp lower part i.f the i>latP shuws iho «»nclt"
pi'lition. on the n-viTM* of iKi- (lagc)

1602] CALEF, MORE WONDERS 369

Tribunal Seat, that I know not the least thing of ^tchcraft, therefore I cannot, I durst not belye my own Soul. I beg your Honours
not to deny this my humble Petition, from a poor dying Innocent
person, and I question not but the Lord will give a blessing to your
Endeavours. Mart Estt.

After Execution Mr. Noyes turning him to the Bodies,
said, what a sad thing it is to see Eight Firebrands of Hell
hanging there.

In October 1692, One of Wenham^ complained of Mrs.
Hale, whose Husband, the Minister of Beverly, had been very
forward in these Prosecutions, but being fuUy satisfied of his
Wives sincere Christianity, caused him to alter his Judgment;
for it was come to a stated Controversie, among the NewEngland Divines, whether the Devil could Afflict in a good
Man's shape; it seems nothing else could convince him: yet
when it came so near to himself, he was soon convinced that '
the Devil might so Afflict.^ Which same reason did after- <

* Mary Henick. At least the following remarkable tale of hers (first published in the N, E. HiH, and Gen, Register, XXVII. 55) must have had to do with
Mr. Hale's change of view :

"An Account Received from the mouth of Mary Herrick aged about 17
yeares having been Afflicted [by] the Devill or some of hb instruments, about 2
month. She saith she had oft been Afflicted and that the shape of Mrs. Hayle
had been represented to her, One amongst others, but she knew not what htuad
Afflicted her then, but on the 5th of the 9th [t. e,, November] She Appeared again
with the Ghost of Grooddee Easty, and that then Mrs. Hayle did sorely Afflict
her by pinching, pricking and Choaking her. On the 12th of the 9th she Came
again and Gooddee Easty with her and then Mrs. Hayle did Afflict her as formerly.
Sd Easty made as if she would speake but did not, but on the same night th^
Came again and Mrs. Hayle did sorely Afflict her, and asked her if she thought
she was a Witch. The Girl answered no. You be the Devill. Then said Easty
sd and speake. She Came to tell her She had been put to Death wrongfully and
was Innocent of Witchcraft, and she Came to Vindicate her Cause and she Cryed
Vengeance, Vengeance, and bid her reveal this to Mr. Hayle and Gerish, and then
she would rise no more, nor should Mrs. Hayle Afflict her any more. Memorand :
that Just before sd Easty was Executed, She Appeared to sd Giri, and said I
am going upon the Ladder to be hanged for a Witch, but I am innocent, and before a 12 Month be past you shall believe it. Sd Girl sd she speake not of this
before because she believed she was Guilty, Till Mrs. Hayle appeared to her and
Afflicted her, but now she believeth it is all a Delusion of the Devil.
"This before Mr. Hayle and Gerish 14th of the 9th 1692."
"(jerish" means the Rev. Joseph Gerrish, of Wenham, who is doubtless here
the scribe.

* But see (at pp. 404, 405, below) Hale's own account of this change ci

370 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES im

wards prevail with many others; and much influenced to the
succeeding change at Tryals.^

October 7. (Eklward Bishop and his Wife having made
their Escape out of Prison) thiis day Mr. Corwin the Sheriff,
came and Seiz'd his Goods, and Cattle, and had it not been
for his second Son (who borrowed Ten Pound and gave it him)
they had been wholly lost, the Receipt follows; but it seetns
they must be content with such a Receipt as he would give
them.

Recdved this 7th day of October 1692, of Samuel Bishop of the
Town of Salem, of the County of Essex, in New-En^and, Cordwaiiier,
in full satisfaction, a valuable Summ of Money, for the Goods and
Chattels of Edward Bishop, Senior, of the Town and County afoie^
said. Husbandman; which Goods and Chattels being sdzed, for thit
the said Edward Bishop, and Sarah his Wde^ having been oonmiitted
for ^tchcraft and Felony, have made thdr Escape; and their Goods
and Chatties were forfeited unto thdr Majesties, and now betng in
Possession of the said Samuel Bishop; and in behalf of Thdr Majesties, I do hereby discharge the said Goods and Chatties, the day and
year above written, as witness my hand,

Geobge Cobwin, Sher^.

But before this the said Bishops Eldest Son, having Married into that Family of the Putmans,* who were chief Prosecutors in this business; he holding a Cow to be branded lest
it should be seiz'd, and having a Push or Boyl upon his llugh,
with his straining it broke; this is that that was pretended to
be burnt with the said Brand; and is one of the bones thrown
to the Dogmatical to pick, in Wanders of the Invisible World,
P. 143.' the other, of a Comer of a Sheet, pretended to be taken
from a Spectre, it is known that it was provided the day b^ore,
by that Afflicted person, and the third bone of a ^indle is
almost as easily provided, as the piece of the Knife; so that
Apollo needs not herein be consulted,^ etc.

^ Hale's whole book (see bdow, pp. 397-432) is a oommentary oq

* His wife was a daughter of John Putnam^ brother of Nathaniel and unde
of Deacon Edward and of the Thomas whose wife and dau^^bter were ol the
"afflicted." As to the Bishops see (besides Upham) Essex Ii»titute CcOeeHom,
XUI. 146 ff.

« At pp. 247-248, above.

* I. e., it needs no oracle to explain the matter; see p. 248, note L

16921 CALEF, MORE WONDERS 371

Mr. Philip English and his Wife having made their Escape
out of Prison, Mr. Corwin the Sherifif seiz'd his Estate, to the
value of about Fifteen Hundred Pound, which was wholly
lost to him, except about Three Hundred Pound value, (which
was afterward restored.)*

After Goodwife Hoar was Condemned, her Estate was seiz'd,
and was also bought again for Eight Pound.

George Jacobs, Son to old Jacobs,' being accused, he fled,
then the Officers came to his House, his Wife was a Woman
Crazy in her Senses and had been so several Years. She it
seems had been also accused; there were in the House with
her only four small Children, and one of them suck'd, her
Eldest Daughter* being in Prison; the Officer perswaded
her out of the House, to go along with him, telling her she
should speedily return, the Children ran a great way after
her crying.

When she came where the Afflicted were, being asked, they
said they did not know her, at length one said, don't you know
Jacobs the old Witch, and then they cry'd out of her, and fell
down in their Fits; she was sent to Prison, and lay there Ten
Months, the Nei^bours of pitty took care of the Children
to preserve them from perishing.

About this time a New Scene was begun, one Joseph Ballard of Andover, whose Wife was ill (and after died of a Fever)
sent to Salem for some of those Accusers, to tell him who

^ Philip English was the foremost ship-owner of Salem, a man of large wealth
and exceptional prominence. He had come in early life from the island of Jersey
and at Salem had married, in 1675, the daughter and heiress of the merchant
William Hollingworth. His wife, now thirty-nine, a lady of education and refinement, was arrested on April 22 (see p. 347, above) and on April 30 a warrant
was issued for himself, but he could not be found. Detected, however, in his
Boston hiding-place, he was on May 31 committed, but was allowed to give bafl,
and with his wife was kept in loose custody at Boston. As to their escape thence,
see above, pp. 178, 186, note 3; and for their story in general the articles by
G. F. Chever in the Essex Institute's CoUedioru, I., II., SaUm Witchcraft Records,
I. 18^193, the evidence of William Beale appended by Drake to his ed. of
Mather and Calef (HI. 177-185), the documents printed in the PublicaHoru of the
Colonial Society of Massachusetts, X. 17-20, a letter of Dr. Bentley in Mass.
Hist Soc, CoUedions, first ser., X. 64-66, and a passage from hb diary quoted
by R. D. Paine in The Ships and Saihrs cf Old Salem (New York, 1909), pp.
26-28.

* See above, pp. 360, 364. >Margaiet See pp. 364-366.

372 NARRATIVES OP THE WTTCHCRAPT CASES [IM

afflicted his Wife; others did the like: Horse and Man woe
sent from several places to fetch those Accusers who had the
Spectral sight, that they might thereby tell who afflicted those
that were any ways ill.

When these came into any place where such were, usually
they fell into a Fit; after which being asked who it was that
afflicted the person, they would, for the most part, name one
whom they said sat on the head, and another ih&t sat on the
lower parts of the afflicted. Soon after Ballard's sending (as
above) more than Fifty of the People of Andover were complained of, for afflicting their Neighbours. Here it was that
many accused themselves, of Ridmg upon Poles throu^ the
Air; Many Parents believing their Chfldren to be Witches,
and many Husbands their Wives, etc. When these Accusers
came to the House of any upon such account, it was ordinaiy
for other young People to be taken in Fits, and to have die
same Spectral sight.

Mr. Dudley Bradstreet,^ a Justice of Peace in Andover,
having granted out Warrants against, and Committed Thirty
or Forty to Prisons, for the supposed Witchcrafts, at l^igth
saw cause to forbear granting out any more Warrants. Soon
after which he and his Wife were cried out of, himself was (Iqr
them) said to have killed Nine persons by Witchcraft, and
found it his safest coimse to make his Escape.

A Dog being afflicted at Salem- Village, those that had the
Spectral sight being sent for, they accused Mr. John Bradstreet (Brother to the Justice) that he afflicted the said Dog,
and now rid upon him : He made his Escape into Pescattequa-
/ Government,* and the Dog was put to death, and was all of
the Afflicted that suffered death.

At Andover, the Afflicted complained of a Dog, as afflicting of them, and would fall into their Fits at the Dogs looking upon them; the Dog was put to death.

A worthy Gentleman of Beaton, being about this time accused by those at Andover, he sent by some particular Friends
a Writ to Arrest those Accusers in a Thousand Pound Action
for Defamation, with instructions to them, to inform themselves
of the certainty of the proof, in doing which their business was

^ A son of the venerable Governor Bradstieet and himadf a man of statioiL
* /. e,, New Hampshire.

16a21 CALEF, MORE WONDERS 373

perceived, and from thwce forward the Accusations at Andover
generally ceased.^

In October some of these Accusers were sent for to Glocester,
and occasioned fom* Women to be sent to Prison, but Salem
Prison being so full it could receive no more, two were sent
to Ipswich Prison. In November they were sent for again
by Lieutenant Stephens, who was told that a Sister of his was
bewitched; in their way passing over Ipswich-bridge, they
met with an old Woman, and instantly fell into their Fits:
But by this time the validity of such Accusations being much
questioned, they found not that Encouragement they had
done elsewhere, and soon withdrew.

These Accusers swore that they saw three persons sitting
upon Lieutenant Stephens's Sister till she died; yet Bond was
accepted for those Three.

And now Nineteen persons having been hang'd, and one
prest to death, and Eight more condemned, in all Twenty and
Eight, of which above a third part were Members of some of
the Churches in N. England, and more than half of them of a
good Conversation in general, and not one clear'd; About
Fifty having confest themselves to be Witches, of which not
one Executed; above an Hundred and Fifty in Prison, and
above Two Hundred more accused; The Special Conmiission
of Oyer and Terminer comes to a period,* which has no other
foundation than the Govemours Commission,' and had proceeded in the manner of swearing Witnesses, viz. By holding
up the hand, (and by receiving Evidences in wnting) according to the Ancient Usage of this Coimtrey; as also having
their Indictments in English. In the Tiyids, when any were
Indicted for Afflicting, Pining, and wasting the Bodies of particular persons by Witchcraft; it was usual to hear Evidence
of matter foreign, and of perhaps Twenty or Thirty years
standing, about over-setting Carts, the death of Cattle, un1 On this Andover episode see also pp. 180-181, 241-244, above.

* Its last session was on September 22, though the court was not definitely
dropped till the end of October. See above, p. 200 and note 1.

* The implication perhaps is that the governor exceeded his powers. That
question has been much and hotly debated — most learnedly by Mr. A. C. Goodell
in his Further Notes on the History of Witchcraft in Maseach/uaetts (Cambridge,
1884), pp. 20 ff., and Dr. G. H. Moore in his Find Notes on Witchcraft in Masses
chusetts (New York, 1885), pp. 71-84.

n/

/

^

374 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [lee

kindness to Relations, or unexpected Accidents befalling after
some quarrel. Whetiier this was admitted by tl^ Law of
England, or by what other Law, wants to be determined; the
Executions seemed mixt, in pressing to death for not pleadiog,
which most agrees with the Laws of England, and S^tendng
Women to be hanged for Witchcraft, according to the fonner
practice of this Country, and not by burning, as is said to
have been the Law of England.^ And though the confessiDg
Witches were many; yet not one of them that confessed their
own guilt, and abode by their Confession were put to DeatL'
Here foUoweth what account some of those Tnisftrahk
Creatures give of their Confession under their own hands.

We whose Names are under written, Inhabitants of Andovcr,
when as that horrible and tremendous Judgment beginning at Sakm-
'^Uage, in the Year 1692, (by some) call'd Witchcraft, first IireakiDg
forth at Mr. Parris's House, several Young persons being seemingly
afflicted, did accuse several persons for a^cting them, and maoy
there bcJieving it so to be; we being informed that if a person were
sick, that the afflicted persons could tell, what or who was the etose
of that sickness. Joseph Ballard of Andover (his Wife being siA tt
the same time) he either from himself, or by the advice of othos,
fetch'd two of the persons call'd the ttfflicted persons, from SakmWlage to Andover. Which was the beginning of that dradfol
Calamity that bef el us in Andover. And the Authority in Andover,
believing the sud Accusations to be true, sent for the said persons to
come together, to the Meeting-house in Andover (the afflicted pe^

> This is an error. In En^and, too, witx^ies were hanged — unless oonvicted
of bewitdiing to death their husbands, when for husband-muider, ** petty treason,"
they were burned (see Coke, Institutes, pt III., cap. 2, 6, 101, and the records
of the courts). Sir Matthew Hale indeed makes witchcraft "at CcHnmon Law**
still "punished with death, as Heresie, by Writ De Hceretieo Comdmnndo" (PUa
qf ike Crown, p. 6). But this, of course, was after trial by an ecdesiastical court;
and since the Reformati<Mi ecclesiastical courts had not had cogniianoe of sadi

* This, the most striking feature of the Salem trials, is perhaps partially explained by the closing suggesticm of Cotton Mather's advice to the judges ^Maiker
Papers, p. 396) : "What if some of the lesser CriminaUs be onely scourged witib
lesser punishments, and also put upon some sc^emn, opea, Publikie and Ezplicitt
renunciation of the Divil? ... Or what if the death of some of liie offendos
were either diverted or inflicted, according to the successe of audi their renunciation? " If it was unique that those who confessed esc^)ed death, it was noduDg
unique that they should be reckcmed "lesser CriminaUs."

16921 CALEF, MORE WONDERS 375

sons being thoe.) After Mr. Bernard ^ had been at Pra>'er, we were
blindfolded, and our hands were laid upon the afflicted persons, they
being in their Fits, and falling into thdr Fits at our coming into thdr
presence (as they sud) and some led us and laid our hands upon them»
and then th^ sud they were well, and that we were guilty of afflict*
ing of them; whereupon we were all seized as Prisoners, by a Warrant
from the Justice of the Peace, and forthwith carried to Salem. And
by reason of that suddain surprizal, we knowing our selves altogether
Innocent of that Crime, we were all exceedingly astonished and
amazed, and consternated and a£Frighted even out of our Reason;
and our nearest and dearest Relations, seeing us in that dreadful
condition, and knowing our great danger, apprehending that there
was no other way to save our fives, as the case was then drcumstantiated, but by our confessing our selves to be such and such persons,
as the afflicted represented us to be, they out of tender love and pitty
perswaded us to confess what we did confess. And indeed that
Confession, that is said we made, was no other than what was suggested to us by some Gentlemen; they telling us, that we were
Witches, and they knew it, and we knew it, and they knew that we
knew it, which made us think that it was so; and our understanding,
our reason, and our faculties almost gone, we were not capable of
judging our condition; as also the hard measures they used with us,
rendred us uncapable of making our Defence; but said any thing and
every thing which they desired, and most of what we said, was but
in effect a consenting to what they said. Sometime after when we
were better composed, they telling of us what we had confessed, we
did profess that we were Innocent, and Ignorant of such things.
And we hearing that Samuel Wardwell had renounced his Confefwion,
and quickly after Condenmed and Executed, some of us were told
that we were going after Wardwell.

Mart Osgood, Mabt Tiler, Deuv. Dane, Abigail
Barker, Sarah WnaoN, Hannah Tilkk.*

It may here be further added concerning those that did
Confess, that besides that powerful Argument, of Life (and

^The Rev. Thomas Barnard, aaiociate minister at Andover. Vium, hi*
senior, aeema to have been averse to the prooeedingi.

s This is doubtless what Brattle calls (p. IBO, above) "a petition lately offered
to the chief Judge." The examination and confession of Bfary Osfood may be
found in Hutdiinson's MastaekusetUf II. A. L (or in Poole's reprint, S* B» UiM,
and Gen. RegUter, XXIV. 398). ^le, the two Tylers, and Abigail Barker wert
tried and acquitted in January at the first session of the new Huperior Court
(see in voL X. of the PvbUeaiums of the Colonial Hodety of MassadmsetU tba
brief but vahiable paper of John NoUe, pp* 12-20).

376 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES Iie92

freedom from hardships and Irons not only promised, but also
performed to all that owned their guUt), There are numeroas
Instances, too many to be here inserted, of the tedious
nations before private persons, many horns together; they
that time urging them to Confess (and taking turns to p^-
swade them) till the accused were wearied out by being forced
to stand so long, or for want of Sleep, etc. and so brought to
give an Assent to what they said; they then asking tiiem,
Were you at such a Witch-meeting, or have you signed the
Devil's Book, etc. upon their replying, yes, the whole was
drawn into form as their Confession.

But that which did mightily further such Confessions, wss
their nearest and dearest Relations urging them to it. These
seeing no other way of escape for them, thought it the best
advice that could be given; hence it was that the Husbands
of some, by counsel often urging, and utmost earnestness, and
J Children upon their Knees intreating, have at length prevailed
with them, to say they were guilty.*

As to the manner of Tryals, and the Evidence taken for
Convictions at Salem, it is already set forth in Print, by tiie

^ Hie best oommentary an these words is a remmrkabie paper wfaidi more
than a oratury ago came into the hands of the Massachusetts HisEtoiical Societr
and was published in its CoUections (second series, IIL 221-225). As Dr. BeikoBp, who prepared it for publication, labelled it "Remainder of the aocoantof
the Salem Witchcraft" and seems to have meant it to be printed with Brattle's
letter (see pp. 169-190, above), it is not improbable that, with that document,
it had come from the family of Brattle and that it was originally his. In that
case it is by no means impossible that in his hands Calef may have aeen it and
that from him he may have received the recantation printed just above. Tim
added paper runs :

"Salem, Oct. 19, '92. The Rev. Mr. I. Mather went to Salem [to viat] the
y oonfessours (so called) : He conferred with several of them, and they sfMike as
follows:"

[Then are narrated the explanations given by eleven of the women, ^le most
suggestive being this :] "Goodwife lyier did say, that w^aen. she was first apprehended, she had no fears upon her, and did think that nothing could have nnade
her oonfesse against herseljf; but since, she had found to her great grief, that
she had wronged the truth, and falsely accused herself: she said, that when she
was brought to Salem, her brother Bridges rode with her, and that aU along the
way from Andover to Salem, her brother kept telling her that she must needs
be a witch, since the afflicted accused her, and at her touch were raised out of
their fitts, and urging her to confess herself a witdi; she as o(»istantly told him.

1602] CALEF, MORE WONDERS 377

Reverend Mr. Cotton Mather, in his Wonders of the InvisMe
World, at the Command of his Excellency, Sir William Phips ;
with not only the Reconmiendation, but thanks of the Lieutenant Govemour;* and with the Approbation of the Reverend Mr, J. M.' in his Postscript to his XJases oj Conscience ;

that she was no witch, that she knew nothing of witchcraft, and begg'd of him
not to urge her to confesse; however when she came to Salem, she was carried to
a room, where her brother on one side and Mr. John Emerson on the other side
did tell her that she was certainly a witch, and that she saw the devill before her
eyes at that time (and accordingly the said Emerson would attempt with his hand
to beat him away from her eyes) and they so urged her to confesse, that she ¥n8hed
herself in any dungeon, rather than be so treated : Mr. Emerson told her once
and again, Weill I see you will not confesse! Weill I will now leave you, and
then you are undone, body and soul forever : Her brother urged her to confesse,
and told her that in so doing she could not lye; to which she answered. Good
brother, do not say so, for I shall lye if I confesse, and then who shall answer
unto God for my lye? He still asserted it, and said that God would not suffer
so many good men to be in such an errour about it, and that she would be
hang'd, if she did not confesse, and continued so long and so violently to urge
and presse her to confesse, that she thought verily her life would have gone
from her, and became so terrifyed in her mind, that she own'd at length almost
any thing that they propounded to her; but she had wronged her consdence in
so doing, she was guilty of a great sin in belying of herself, and desired to mourn
for it as long as she lived : This she said and a great deal more of the like
nature, and all of it with such affection, sorrow, rdenting, grief, and mourning
as that it exceeds any pen for to describe and expresse the same."

Hie ''Mr. John Emerson" of this episode was that clerical sdioolmaster
whom we have already met in New Hampshire (see p. 37, note 3), but who was
now a teacher at Charlestown. (Sibley, Harvard Oraditatea, II. 471-474.) If so
personal an activity of President Mather surprise, let it be remembered how
widely the persecution was now striking. His parishioner Lady Phips was
among the accused, and the Quaker John Whiting has a yet more startling su^^
gestion : commenting in 1702 on the account just printed in Cotton Mather's
Magnolia, he mentions the ''two Hundred more accused, some of which of
great Estates in Boston," and in the margin adds, "Query, Was not the Gover- /
nour's Wife, and C. M.'s Mother, some of them?" (Truth and Innocency !>&•
fended, p. 140.)

Yet not all dared to retract "More than one or two of those now in Prison,"
writes Increase Mather (Cases cf Conscience, Postscript), "have freely and credibly acknowledged their Communion and Familiarity with the Spirits of Darkness;
and have also declared unto me the Time and Occasion, with the particular
Circumstances of their Hellish Obligations and Abominations."

^ For Cotton Mather's Wonders, with its imprimaiur by Phips and its preface
by Stoughton, see above, pp. 205 ff .

* Increase Mather: the printer seems unable to distinguish Calefs / from
his J.

378 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES \m

which last Book was set forth by the consent of the Ministeis
in and near Boston.^

Two of the Judges have also given their Sentiments is
these words, p. 147.

The Reverend and worthy Author, having at the directicm of
his Excellency the Govemour, so far obliged the Publick, as to ghc
some account of the sufferings, brought upon the Country by
Witchcrafts, and of the Tryab which have passed upon several atcuted for the same.

Upon perusal thereof. We find the matters of Fact and Eth
dence truly reported, and a prospect given of the Methods of Codviction, used in the proceedings of the Court at Salem.

Boston, October 11, ViiLLiAM Stottghtqn,

1692. Samuel Sewaix.

And considering that this may fall into the hands of sadi
as never saw those Wonders, it may be needful to transcribe
the whole account he has given thereof, without any variatioo
(but with one of the Indictments annext to the Tiyal of each).'

• ••••a ••

Thus far the Account given in Wanders of the Itwisitk
World; in which setting aside such words as these, in the
Tiyal of G. B. viz., **They (i. e. the Witnesses) were enou^ to
fix the character of a Witch upon him."*

In the Tryal of Bishop, these words, ''but there was no
need of them," i. e. of fiuiher Testimony.*

In the Tryal of How, where it is said, ''and there came in
Testimony of preternatural Mischiefs, presently befalling scmie
that had been instrumental to debar her from tiie Communion,
whereupon she was intruding."* Martin is call'd "one of

* The book, with all its credulity, b in the main a vigoiaiis and learned
argument against improper methods for detecting witches^ and diiel^ against
reliance on the testimony of the bewitched. Commended by the ministeni
fourteen of ^diom sign the preface "to the Christian reader/' it may httvedone
something to allay the panic But, though it is dated by the author ''October
3/' the title-page date of 1693 suggests that, like his son's Womden (see p. 207,
note 1), it was long in the press or withheld from the public

* As the pages of Mather's Wondert containing these trials are reprinted in
full above (pp. 215-244), it b needless here to repeat them. They occupy p|k
113-139 of Calefs book. Hien comes what here foUows.

•Seep. 216. «Seep. 229. ^Seep.237.

1602] CALEF, MORE WONDERS 379

the most impudent, scurrilous, wicked Creatures in the World."
In his Account of Maxtha Carryer, he is pleased to call her '^a
Bampant Hag," ^ etc.

Theae Expressions, as they manifest that he wrote more
like an Advocate than an Historian,* so also that those that
were his Imployers* were not mistaken in their choice of him » _
for that work, however he may have mist it in other things. *

As in his owning (in the TVyal of G. B.) That the Testimony of the bewitched and confessors was not enough against
the Accused, for it is known that not only in New-England,
such Evidence has been taken for sufficient, but also in England, as himself there owns, and will also hold true of Scotland,
etc., they having proceeded upon such Evidence, to the taking
away of the lives of many, to assert that this is not enough is
to tell the World that such Executions were but so many<rBloody Murders; which surely was not his intent to say.

His telling that the Court began to think that Burroughs
stept aside to put on invisibility, is a rendring them so mean
Philosophers, and such weak Christians, as to be fit to be imposed upon by any silly pretender.

His calling the Evidence against How trivial, and others
against Burroughs, he accounts no part of his Conviction; and
that of lifting a Gun with one Finger, its being not made use ^
of as Evidence, renders the whole but the more perplext.
(Not to mention the many mistakes therein contain'd.)^

Yet all this (and more that might have been hinted at)
does not hinder, but that his Account of the manner of Trials
of those for Witchcraft is as faithfully related as any Tiyals
of that kind, that was ever yet made publick;* and it may also

1 See p. 244.

* The author had himself said, ''I report matters not as an Advocate, but
as an Historian."

* Phips, Stoughton, and the tatter's fellow-judges.

* As to the insertion in Mather's account of evidence not given at the trial,
and as to his errors oi statement, see the careful analysis of Upham in his "Salem J
Witchcraft and Cotton Mather," pp. 46-48 (HiHorical Magazine, n.s., VI.
175-177).

* To those who know the wretched chap-books which have had to serve as
records (^ the English witch-trials — and theae alone Calef was likely to know —
thb will not seem high praise. Hie modem student can, however, compare for
himself Mather's accounts with the court records — and, where mere transcription
is ccHicemed, will find them faithfuL

380 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES pflBZ

be reasonably thought that there was as caiirful a Scnitmv,
and as unquestion'd Evidences improved, as had been fcHmdy
used in the Tiyals of others, for such crimes in other places.
Tho indeed a second part inight be veiy useful, to set foidi
which was the Evidence Convictive in these Tryals, fcM* it is
not supposed, that Romantick or Ridiculous stories should have
any influence, such as biting a Spectres Finger, so that the
Blood flowed out, or such as Shattock's Stoiy of 12 Years
standing, which yet was presently 18 Years or more, and yet
a Man of that excellent Memory, as to be able to lecaD a
smaU difference his Wife had with another Woman, whffl
Eighteen Years were past.^

As it is not to be supposed that such as these could Influence any Judge or Jury, so not imkindness to relations, on
God's having given to one Man more strength than to stxne
others, the overnsetting of Carts, or the death of Cattle, nur
yet Excrescencies (call'd Tets) nor little bits of Rags tied together (call'd Poppets.) Much less any persons illness, or
having their Cloaths rent when a Spectre has been well banged,
much less the burning the Mares Fart, mentioned in the
Tryal of How.*

None of these being in the least capable of proving Uie
Indictment; The supposed Criminals were Indicted for M9ict^
ing, etc., such and such particular persons by Witchcraft, to
which none of these Evidences have one word to say, and the
Afflicted and Confessors being declared not enough, the matter
needs yet further explaining.*

1 See pp. 225-227. Shattuck, testifying in 1692, placed in 1680 his diiki*9
bewitchment, but ''about 17 or 18 years after" the exposure of the witdL

* See pp. 23^240.

* The offense charged, in the indictments printed by Calef, was that die
accused "wickedly and feloniously hath used certain detestable arts, caDed witchcrafts and sorceries, by which said wicked arts" the said bewitched "was and is
tortured, afflicted, pined, consumed, wasted and tormented against the peace of
our sovereign lord and lady, the King and Queen, and against the form of the
statute in that case made and provided." This was the usual form; but four of
the indictments extant (against Rebecca Eames, Samud Waidw^ Briieoci
Jacobs, Records of Salem WUchcraft, II. 24, 143, 147-148, and William Barker's,
preserved by Chandler, American Criminal Trials, I. 429) diarge ini«^»»nd that
the accused '' wickedly and feloniously a covenant with the Evil Sptiit the Devil
did make," and in two of these "the statute of King James the Firat" is egqxesdy
named as contravened. That statute, indeed, punished alike with death thoee

1602] CALEF, MORE WONDEBS 381

But to proceed, the General Court having sat and enacted
Laws, particularly one against Witchcraft, assigning the Penalty
of Death to any that shall feed, reward or employ, etc.. Evil
Spirits, though it has not yet been explained what is intended
thereby, or what it is to feed, rewaid or imploy Devils, etc.,
yet some of the Legislators have given this instead of an
Explanation, that they had therein but Copied the Law of
another Country.*

who should ''consult, covenant with, entertain, employ, feed, or reward any evil
or wicked spirit," and the laws oi Masaadiusetts made it death ''if any man or
woman be a witch (that is, hath or consulteth with a familiar spirit) ** — without a
mention of harm to man or beast as element oi the crime. That the indictments
specify such harm was perhaps only because the public attorney — ^Iliomas Newton
(succeeded on July 26 by Anthony Cheddey) — was fresh from English practice;
but, as Calef implies, the proof should meet the indictment. Newton (16601721) had come to Boston in 1688. Mr. Goodell, who studied the originals, says
the quoted indictments mentioning the English statute "i^pear to have been
drawn in blank by him, and afterwards filled in by Cheddey" (Further Notes, p.
37). As to Newton see the study of Moore (Final Notes, pp. 94-103). Edward J
Randolph says of him (V. 143) that he was "a person wdl known in the practice
in the Courts in England and New En^^and," while Checkley he calls "a man
ignorant in the Laws of England." In 1601 Newton had beoi attorney general
at New York.

^ The laws of the colony had never ceased to be operative; and the first act \
passed (June 15, 1602) by the (jeneral Court under the new charter was for the ^
continuance of these laws, "being not repugnant to the laws oi England nor inconsistent with the present constitution," in full force till November 10. On
October 20 the Court passed a general "act for the punishing of capital offenders,"
in which the old Massachusetts law as to witdicrait — "If any man or woman be
a witch, that is, hath or consulteth with a familiar spirit, th^ shall be put to
death" — retains its old place and wording. And on December 14, "for more
particular direction in the execution of the law against witchcraft," the same
(jeneral Court enacted the long English statute oi 1604 (1 James I., cap. 12) —
omitting only the penalty of loss of "the privilege and benefit of clergy and sanctuary" and the clauses saving dower and inheritance to widow and heir of the
convicted and providing that peers shall be tried by peers, substituting as the
place of pillorying "some shire town" for "some maiket town upon the market
day or at such time as any fair shall be kept there," and adding to the penalty
(for the lighter degrees of sorcery) of imprisonment, pillory, and public confession
of the offence, the clause: "which said offense shall be written in capital letters,
and placed upon the breast of said offender." The commission creating the
Court of C)yer and Terminer (May 27, 1602) antedated, however, all these laws,
and instructed that body "to enquire of, hear and determine for this time, according to the law and custom of England and of this their Majesties' province,
all and all manner of crimes." (For a learned study of witchcraft laws in England ^
and New England see Moore's Notes on WUehcrefia pp. 3-11.)

382 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES 11693

January 3. By vertue of an Act of the General Court,
the first Superior Court was held at Salem, for the County of
Essex, the Judges appointed were Mr. William Stoughton (the
Lieutenant Govemour) Thomas Danforth, John Richards,
Wait Winthorp,^ and Samuel Sewall, Esquires, Where Ignoramus* was found upon the several Bills of Indictment against
Thirty, and Billa Vera* against Twenty six more; of all these
Three only were found Guilty by the Jewry upon Trial, two of
which were (as appears by their Behaviour) the most sensdess
and Ignorant Creatures that could be found ;^ besides wfaidi
it does not appear what came in against those more than
against the rest that were acquitted.^

The Third was the Wife of WardweD, who was one of the
Twenty Executed, and it seems they had both confessed themselves Guilty ; but he retracting his said Confession, was tried
and Executed f it is supposed that this Woman fearing her Husbands fate, was not so stiff in her denyals of her former Confession, such as it was. These Three received Sentence of Death.

At these Tryals some of the Jewry made Inquiry of the
Court, what Account they ought to make of the Spectre Evidence? and received for Answer ''as much as of Chq)8 in
Wort."^

January 31, 169}. The Superior Court b^an at Charlestown, for tiie County of Middlesex, Mr. Stoughton, Mr. Danforth, Mr. Winthorp, and Mr. Sewall Judges, where several
had Ignoramus returned upon their Bills of Indictment, and
BiUa Vera upon others.

In the time the Court sat, word was brought in, that a
Reprieve was sent to Salem,^ and had prevented the Execution of Seven of those that were there Condemned, which so
moved the chief Judge,* that he said to this eflfect, "We wwe
in a way to have cleared the Land of these, etc., who it is ob-

^Winthrop. * "We do not know" — i. e., no baab for proaecntioiL

« "A true bUl."

* Elisabeth Johnson and Mary Post Elisabedi Johnson (aa to wfaom see
also p. 420) was reprieved, and after six months' imprisooment waa foed. Her
grandfather, the Rev. Francis Dane, said of her "she is but wmplUI^ at tike best**
Mary Post and Sarah Wardwdl likewise escaped death.

* And so the public attorney told the governor (see p. 201).

* See pp. 366-367. ' /. e., as of kas than no wordu

* By Governor Phips (see p. 201). * Stoughton.

I 1603] CALEF, MORE WONDERS 383

3 structs the course of Justice I know not; the Lord be merciful

4 to the CJountrey/' and so went off the Bench, and came no
pi more that Court: The most remarkable of the TryalS; was
I of Sarah Daston. she was a Woman of about 70 or 80 Years
^ of Age. To usher in her Tryal, a report went before, that if
j, there were a Witch in the World she was one, as having been

so accounted of, for 20 or 30 Years; which drew many People
from Boston, etc., to hear her Tryal. There were a multitude
of Witnesses produced against her; but what Testimony they
gave in seemed wholly forreign, as of accidents, illness, etc.,
befalling them, or theirs after some Quarrel; what these testified was much of it of Actions said to be done 20 Years before
that time. The Spectre-Evidence was not made use of in
these Tryals, so that the Jewry soon brought her in not Guflty ;
her Daughter and Grand-daughter, and the rest that were
then tried, were also acquitted. After she was cleared Judge
Danforth Admonished her in these words, ^^ Woman, Woman,
repent, there are shrewd things come in against you''; she was
remanded to Prison for her Fees, and there in a short time
expired. One of Boston that had been at the Tiyal of Daston,
being the same Evening in company with one of the Judges
in a publick place, acquainted him that some that had been
both at the Tiyals at Salem and at this at Charlestown, had
asserted that there was more Evidence against the said Daston than against any at Salem, to which the said Judge conceeded, saying, That it was so. It was replied by that person, that he dare give it under his hand, that there was not
enough come in against her to bear a just reproof.^

April 25, 1693. The first Superiour Court was held at
Boston, for the County of Suffolk, the Judges were the Lieutenant Govemour, Mr. Danforth, Mr. Bichards and Mr.
Sewall, Esquires.

Where (besides the acquitting Mr. John Aldin by Proclamation) the most remarkable was, what related to Mary Watkins, who had been a Servant, and lived about Seven Mfles
from Boston, having formerly Accused her Mistress of Witch-

^On Sarah Daston's case see documents printed in the PuUieaiumi (X.
12-16) of the Cobnial Society of Massachusetts and the brief account of her
trial by an eye-witness in the letter prefixed to the London edition of Increase
Mather's Ca$ei cf ConfcUnce.

384 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES P6B

craft, and was supposed to be distracted, she was threataed
if she persisted in such Accusations to be punished; this with
the necessaiy care to recover her Health, had that good effect,
that she not only had her Health restored, but also whcdh
acquitted her Mistress of any such Crimes, and continued in
Health till the return of the Year, and then again falling into
MelanchoUy hiunours she was found strangling her sdf ; her
life being hereby prolong^, she immediately accused her
self of bemg a Witch; was carried before a Magistrate and
conunitted. At this Court a Bill of Indictment was brought
to the Grand Jury against her, and her confession upon ber
Examination given in as Evidence, but these not wholly satbfied herewith, sent for her, who gave such account of her self,
that they (after they had return^ into the Ck)urt to ask some
Questions) Twelve of them agreed to find Ignoramus, but the
Court was pleased to send them out again, who again at coming in returned it as before.

She was continued for some time in Prison, etc., and at
length was sold to Virginia.^ About this time the Piiaoam
in all the Prisons were released.*

To omit here the mentioning of several Wenches in Boston,
etc., who pretended to be Afflicted, and accused several, the
Ministers often visiting them, and praying with them, concerning whose Affliction Narratives are in being in Manuscript'
Not only these, but the generality of those Accusers may have
since convinc'd»the Ministers by their vicious courses that
they might err in extending too much Charity to them.

The conclusion of the whole in the Massachusetts Cdcmy
was, Sir William Phips, Govemom*, being called home, brfore
he went he pardon'd such as had been condenmed, for ^diidi
they gave about 30 Shillings each to the Kings Attorney.^

1 As to Mary Watkins see an article m the N. E. HitL and Gen. Atfiifcr
(XLIV. 168 ff.)* She lived at Milton, was white, and on August 11 was sdOia
prison, but was asking the jail-keeper to inovide a master to cuiy her ''out of
this country into Virginia."

* /. e., on payment of fees. See pp. 343, 366.

* He means, of course, Mercy Short (see above, pp. 255 ff.) and MaigaRt
Rule (see pp. 308-323). From this sentence it seems dear that tlds account of
the Salem episode was written before the earlier pages of his book, which begiBS
with the narrative of Margaret Rule and takes its title from it.

« Phips left for En^and November 17, 16d4. (SewaD's Diarg, L 993.)

1607] CALEF, MORE WONDERS 385

In August 1697. The Superiour Court sat at Hartford, in
the Colony of Connecticut, where one Mistress Benom was
tried for Witchcraft, she had been accused by some Children
that pretended to the Spectral sight; they searched her several times for Tets; they tried the Experiment of casting her
into the Water,^ and after this she was Excommunicated by
the Minister of Wallinsford.* Upon her Tryal nothing material appearing against her, save Spectre Evidence, she was
acquitted, as also her Daughter, a Girl of Twelve or Thirteen
Years old, who had been likewise Accused; but upon renewed
Complaints against them, they both fled into New-York Government.*

Before this the Government Issued forth the following
Proclamation.^

By the Honourable the Lieutenani Govemour, Council and AesenMy of
kis Majesties Province of the Massachusetts Bay, in General Court
Assembled,

Whereas the Anger of God is not yet turned away, but his Hand
is still stretched out against his People in manifold Judgments, particularly in drawing out to such a length the troubles of Europe, by
a perplexing War; and more especially, respecting ourselves in this
Province, in that God is pleased still to go on in diminishing our
Substance, cutting short our Harvest, blasting our most promising
imdertakings more ways than one, unsetling of us,* and by his more

> See above, p. 21. * Wallingford.

* Of Winifred Benham, mother and daughter, Mr. Taylor {The Witchcraft
Ddusion in CoUmial ConnecUcut, p. 155) learns only — from "Records Court of
Assistants (1 : 74, 77) " — ^that they were in August, 1697, tried and acquitted at
Hartford, and in October indicted on new complaints, the jury returning "Ignoramus." They were doubtless the widow and daughter of that " Joseph Benham
of New Haven," who in 1656/7 was married at Boston to Winifred King (N, E.
Hist, and Gen. Reffister, XI. 203) and later became one of the first settlers of
Wallingford. (See also Davis, History of WaUingford and Meriden, p. 412, cited
by Levermore, in the New Englander, XLIV. 815.)

* For the interesting story of this proclamation see the Diary (I. 439-441)
of Judge Sewall, who drafted its final form, and that of Cotton Mather (I. 211),
who drew a rejected one. The draft itself, with a careful study of these proceedings, see in Moore's Notes on Witchcraft (pp. 14^19).

* The punctuation of the copy in the Massachusetts archives, as printed in
a note to Sewall's Diary (I. 440), joins "more ways than one" to "unsettling of

us."

386 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES im

Immediate hand, snatching away many out of our Ehnbraces, bv
sudden and violent Deaths, even at this time when the Sword is
devouring so many both at home and abroad, and that after manv
days of publiek and Solemn addressing of him. And altho considering the many Sins prevailing in the midst of us, we cannot but
wonder at the Patience and Mercy moderating these Rebukes; yet
we cannot but also fear that there is something still wanting to
accompany our Supplications. And doubtless there are some pa^
ticular Sins, which Grod is Angry with our Israel for, that have Dot
been duly seen and resented by us, about which God expects to be
sought, if ever he turn again our Captivit>\

Wherefore it is Conmianded and Appointed, that Thursday the
Fourteenth of January next be observed as a Day of Prayer, with
Fasting throughout this Province, strictly forbidding all Servile
labour thereon; that so all Gods People may offer up fervent Supplications imto him, for the Preservation, and Prosperity erf lis
Majesty's Royal Person and Government, and Success to attend
his Affairs both at home and abroad; that all iniquity may be {Hit
away which hath stirred Grod's Holy jealousie against this Land;
that he would shew us what we know not, and help us wh^einwe
have done amiss to do so no more; and especially that whatever
mistakes on either hand have been fallen into, ^ther by the body of
this People, or any orders of men, referring to the late Tragedy,
raised among us by Satan and his Instruments, thro the awful Judgment of God, he would hiunble us therefore^ and pardon all the 'Errors
of his Servants and People, that desire to love his Name and be attoned to his Land; that he would remove the Rod of the wicked from
off the Lot of the Righteous; that he would bring the American
Heathen, and cause them to hear and obey his Voice.

Given at Boston, Deoemb. 17, 1696, in the 8th Year of his
Majesties Reign.

Isaac Addington, Secretary.

Upon the Day of the Fast in the full Assembly, at the
South Meeting-House in Boston, one of the Honourable
Judges, who had sat in Judicature in Salem, delivered in a
Paper,* and while it was in reading stood up. But the Copy
being not to be obtained at present, It can only be reported
by Memory to this effect, viz. It was to desire the IVayeis

^ I.e., therefor.

* Samuel Sewall. The exact wording of his paper he gives in his Diary
(1. 445) :

"Copy of the Bill I put up on the Fast day; giving it to Mr. WOkid as he

i

16961 CALEF, MORE WONDERS 387

of God's People for him and his, and that God having visited
his Family^ etc., he was apprehensive that he might have
fallen into some Errors in the Matters at Salem, and pray that
the Guilt of such Miscarriages may not be imputed either to
the Country in general, or to him or his family in particular.

Some that had been qf several Jewries, have given forth a Paper, Signed
with their own hands in these words.

We whose names are imder written, being in the Year 1692
called to serve as Jurors, in Court at Salem, on Tryal of many, who
were by some suspected Guilty of doing Acts of Witchcraft upon
the Bodies of simdry Persons:

We confess that we our selves were not capable to imderstand,
nor able to withstand the mysterious delusions of the Powers of
Darkness, and Prince of the Air; but were for want of Knowledge in
our selves, and better Information from others, prevailed with to take
up with sudi Evidence against the Accused, as on further considera^
tion, and better Information, we justly fear was insufficient for the
toudiing the lives of any, Deut. 17. 6, whereby we fear we have
been instrumental with others, tho Ignorantly and imwittingly, to
bring upon our selves, and this People of the Lord, the Guilt of Innocent Blood; whidi Sin the Lord saith in Scripture, he would not
pardon, 2 Kings 24. 4, that is we suppose in regard of his temporal
Judgments. We do therefore hereby signifie to all in general (and
to the surviving Sufferers in especial) our deep sense of, and sorrow
for our Errors, in acting on such Evidence to the condenming of any
person.

And do hereby declare that we justly fear that we were sadly
deluded and mistaken, for which we are much disquieted and dispass'd by, and standing up at the reading of it, and bowing when finished; in the
Afternoon.

"Samuel Sewall, sensible of the raterated strokes of God upon himself and
family; and being sensible, that as to the Guilt contracted upon the opening of
the late Conunission of Oyer and Terminer at Salem (to whidi the oider for thb
Day relates) he is, upon many accounts, more concerned than any that he knows
of. Desires to take the Blame and shame of it. Asking pardon of men. And especially desiring prayers that God, who has an Unlimited Authority, would pardon that sin and all other his sins, personal and Relative: And according to
his infinite Benignity, and Sovereignty, Not Visit the sin of him, or of any other,
upon himself or any of his, nor upon the Land : But that He would powerfully
defend him against all Temptations to Sin, for the future; and vouchsafe him
the efficacious, saving Conduct of hb Word and Spirit,

»>

388 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES 11700

tressed in our minds; and do therefore humbly b^ foi^venesSy first
of Grod for Christ's sake for this our Error; And pray that God would
not impute the guilt of it to our selves, nor others; and we also
pray that we may be considered candidly, and aright by the living
Sufferers as being then imder the power of a strong and general
Delusion, utterly unaoquunted with, and not experienced in matters
of that Nature.

We do heartily ask forgiveness of you all, whom we have jusdy
offended, and do declare according to our present minds, we would
none of us do such things again on such grounds for the whole World;
praying you to accept of this in way of Satisfaction for our Offence;
and that you would bless the Inheritance of the Lord, that he may
be intreated for the Land.
Foreman, Thomas Fisk, Thomas Perlt, Senior

William Fisk, John Pebodt,

John Batcheler, Thomas PsanNB^

Thomas Fisk, Junior Samuel Sateb,
John Dane, Andrew Eluott,

Joseph Eveuth, Hsnbt Hebbick, Senior.^

Mr. C. M. having been very forward to write Books of
Witchcraft, has not been so forward either to explain or ddfend
the Doctrinal part thereof, and his belief (which he had a
Years time to compose) he durst not venture so as to be copied.'

^ This ends the book, as first written; but the author adds a ** Postscript,"
called out by the pubiicaticm, in 1697, of Cotton Mather's life of Sir William
Phips, who had died in London eariy in 1695. Not the achievements of Sir
William, thinks Cakf, but Increase Mather's negotiation in RnglMi^ and lus
procuring of the new charter, ''are the things prindpaily driven at in the book,"
and "another principal thing is to set forth the supposed witdicrafts in New^
England, and how well Mr. Mather the Younger therein acquitted himself."
Wherefore, after freeing his mind as to the matter of the diarter, he takes up
Mather's allegations as to the Salem episode, and, pointing out that, ''tho this
Book pretends to raise a Statue in Honour of Sir William, yet it appears it was
the least part of the design of the Author to Honour him, but rather to Honour
himself, and the Ministo^" since by so printing the advice of the ministers (see
above, p. 356) "as to give a full Account of the cautions given him, but des^
edly hiding from the Reader the Incouragements and Ezhortadons to pioeeed,"
it really throws the blame upon Phips, he devotes the remaining pages, bcfe reprinted, to Cotton Mather's real views and their influence. The Lffe €f PAijot,
now a rare bode, b reprinted in Mather's Magnolia.

* In a part of hb book not here reprinted (pp. 85 ff.) Calel speaks mote fidly
of this paper, lent him early in 1695, but on condition of its return within a fort*

17001 CALEF, MORE WONDERS 389

Yet in this of the Life of Sir William he sufficiently testifies
his retaining that Heterodox belief, seeking by f rightf nil stories
of the sufferings of some, and the refined sight of others, etc.,
P. 69 to obtrude upon the World, and confirm it in such a
belief, as hitherto he either cannot or will not defend, as if the
31ood already shed thereby were not sufficient.

Mr. I. Mather, in his Cases oj Conscience^ P. 25, tells of a
Bewitched Eye, and that such can see more than others.
They were certainly bewitched Eyes that could see as well
shut as open, and that could see what never was, that could
see the Prisoners upon the Afflicted, harming of them, when
those whose Eyes were not bewitched could have sworn that
they did not stir from the Bar. The Accusers are said to have
suffered much by biting, P. 73. And the prints of just such
a set of Teeth, as those they Accused, had, but such as had
not such bewitch'd Eyes have seen the Accusers bite themselves,
and then complain of the Accused. It has also been seen
when the Accused, instead of having just such a set of Teeth,
has not had one in his head. They were such bewitched Eyes
that could see the Poisonous Powder (brought by Spectres
P. 70.) And that could see in the Ashes tike print of the Brand,
there invisibly heated to torment the pretended Sufferers
with, etc.

These with the rest of such Legends have this direct tendency, viz. To tell the World that the Devil is more ready to
serve his Votaries, by his doing for them things above or
against the coimse of Nature, shewing himself to them, and
making explicit contract with them, etc., than the Divine
Being is to his faithful Servants, and that as he is willing, so
also able to perform their desires. The way whereby &ese
People are believed to arrive at a power to Afflict their Neighbours, is by a compact with the Devil, and that they have a
power to Commissionate him to those Evils, P. 72. However
Irrational, or Inscriptural such Assertions are, yet they seem

night and unoopied. It was perhaps the MS. described by Poole (Memorial
History, II. 152, note) as now in the possession of the Massachusetts Historical
Society, and called "Cotton Mather's belief and practice in those thorny diflSculties wbich have distracted us in the day of temptation" — ^having "marginal
reflections in another hand." [Since the foregoing words were written, thb con*
jecture has been proved true. See above, p. 306, note, 1.]

\ /

390 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAPT CASES (ITOI

a necessary part of the Faith of such as maintain the beM
of such a sort of Witches.

{\a the Scriptures know nothing of a covenanting or commissioning Witch, so Reason cannot conceive how Mortak
^y should by their Wickedness arrive at a power to ComnmBunA ate Angels, Fallen Angels, against their Innocent Nei^iboon.
But the Scriptures are f uU in it, and the Instances numenRO,
that the Ahnighty, Divine Being has this prerogative to mak
use of what Instrument he pleaseth, in Afflicting any, and
consequently to commissionate DevUs: And tho this wofd
commissioning, in the Authors former Books, might be thouglit
to be by inadvertency; yet now after he hath been cautkm'd
of it, still to persist in it seems highly Criminal. And therefore in the name of (jod, I here charge such belief as guilty
vj of Sacriledge in the hi^est Nature, and so much worse than
stealing Church Plate, etc.. As it is a hi^er Offence to steal
any of the glorious Attributes of the Almighty, to bestow than
upon Mortals, than it is to steal the Ut^sils appropriated to
his Service.] And whether to ascribe such power of commissioning De^ to the worst of Men, be not direct Blasphemy,
I leave to others better able to determine. When the Fhaiisees were so wicked as to ascribe to Beelzebub, the mi^ty
works of Christ (whereby he did manifestly shew forth hn
Power and Godhead) then it was that our Saviour dedar'd
the Sin against the Holy Ghost to be unpardonable.

When the Righteous God is contending with Apostste
Sinners, for their departures from him, by lus JudgmraitS) as
Plagues, Earthquakes, Storms and Tempests, Sicknesses and
Diseases, Wars, loss of Cattle, etc. Then not only to ascribe
this to the Devil, but to charge one another with sending or
commissionating those Devils to these things, is so abomioable and so wicked, that it requires a better Judgment than mine
to give it its just denomination.

But that Christians so called should not only chaig^ tfaer
fellow Christians therewith, but proceed to Tiyals and Ehoecutions; crediting that Enemy to all Goodness, and Accuser of
the Brethren, rather than believe their Neighbours in their
own Defence; This is so Diabolical a Wick^lness as cannot
proceed, but from a Doctrine of Devils; how far damnable it
is let others discuss. Tho such things were acting in this

17001 CALEF, MORE WONDERS 391

Country in Sir T^^lliams time, yet p. 65. there is a Discourse
of a Guardian Angel, as then oveiHseeing it, which notion,
however it may suit tiie Faith of Ethnicks,^ or the fancies of
Trithemius;' it is certain that the Omnipresent Being stands
not in need as Earthly Potentates do, of governing the World
by Vicegerents. And if Sir William had such an Invisible
pattern to imitate, no wonder tho some of his Actions were
unaccountable, especially those relating to Witchcraft: For
if there was in those Actions an Angel super-intending, there
is little reason to think it was Gabriel or the Spirit of Mercury,
nor Hanael the Angel or Spirit of Venus, nor yet Samuel the
Angel or Spirit of Mars; Names feigned by tibe said Trithemius, etc. It may rather be thought to be Apollyon, or Abaddon.

Ob].* But here it will be said, "What, are there no Witches?
Do's not the Law of God command that they should be extirpated? Is the Command vain and Unintelligible?'' SoU
For any to say that a Witch is one that makes a compact
with, and Commissions Devils, etc., is indeed to render the
Law of God vain and Unintelligible, as having provided nc^
way whereby they might be detected, and proved to be such;
And how the Jews waded thro this difficulty for so many
Ages, without the Supplement of Mr. Perkins and Bernard
thereto, would be very mysterious. But to him that can t
read the Scriptures without prejudice from Education, etc., •
it will manifesikly appear that the Scripture is full and Intelligible, both as to the Crime and means to detect the culpable.
He that shall hereafter see any person, who to confirm People
in a false belief, about the power of Witches and Devils, pretending to a sign to confirm it, such as knocking off of invisible
Chains with the hand, driving away Devils by brushing, striking with a Sword or Stick, to woimd a person at a great distance, etc., may (according to that head of Mr. Gauls, quoted
by Mr. C. M. and so often herein before recited, and so well
proved by Scripture) conclude that he has seen Witchcraft
performed.

*A German abbot and scbobr who in the caif/ ibtaeotb oeattuy wrote
most crednloiifl^ about witcbes and anfda.

•Objection. ^Midkn.

392 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES m

If Baalam became a Sorcerer by Sacrifizing and Fraying
to the true God against his visible people; Then he that shall
pray that the afflicted (by their Spectral Sight) may aocose
some other Person (whereby their reputations and lives may
be indangered) such will justly deserve the Name of a Sorcerer.
If any Person pretends to know more then^ can be known
by humane means, and prof esseth at the same time that the?
have it from the Black-Man, i. e. the Devil, and shall fnm
hence give Testimony against the Lives of others, they are
manif^y such as have a familiar Spirit; and if any, knowing
them to have their Information from the Black-Man, shall be
inquisitive of them for their Testimony against others, they
therein are dealing with such as have a Familiar-Spirit.

And if these ^all pretend to see the dead by tiieir Spectral Sight, and others shall be inquisitive of them, and receive
their Answers what it is the dead say, and who it is they accuse, both the one and the other are by Scripture Guilty of
Necromancy.

These are all of them crimes as easOy proved as any whatsoever, and that by such proof as the Law of God requires, so
that it is no Unintelligible Law.

But if the Iniquity of the times be such, that these Criminals not only Escape Indemnified,* but are Incouraged in
their Wickedness, and made use of to take away the lives of
others, this is worse than a making the Law of God Vain, it
being a rendring of it dangerous, against the lives of Innocents, and without all hopes of better, so long as these Bloody
Principles remain.

As long as Christians do Esteem the Law of God to be
Imperfect, as not describing that crime that it requires to be
Punish'd by Death;

As long as men su£fer themselves to be Poison'd in their
Education, and be groimded in a False Belief by the Books of
the Heathen;

As long as the Devil shall be believed to have a Natural
Power, to Act above and against a course of Nature;

As long as the Witches shall be believed to have a Power
to Conunission him ;

As long as the Devils Testimony, by the pretended afflicted,

^ /. e., than. * Unpimialied.

17001 CALEF, MORE WONDERS 393.

shall be received as more valid to Condemn, than their Plea
of Not Guilty to acquit;

As long as the Accused shall have their lives and Liberties
confirmed and restored to them, upon their Confessing themselves Guilty;

As long as the Accused shall be forc't to imdei^o Hardships
and Torments for their not Confessing;

As long as Tets for the Devil to Suck are searched for upon
the Bodies of the accused, as a token of guilt;

As long as the Lords Prayer shall be profaned, by being
made a Test, who are culpable;

As long as Witchcraft, Sorcery, Familiar Spirits, and Necromancy, shall be improved to discover who are Witches, etc.,

So long it may be expected that Innocents will su£fer as
Witches.

So long God will be Daily dishonoured. And so long his
Judgments must be expected to be continued.

Finis.

A MODEST INQUIRY INTO THE NATURE OF
WITCHCRAFT, BY JOHN HALE, 1702

[

INTRODUCTION

The Rev. John Hale (1636-1700), a native of the colony
and a graduate of Harvard in its class of 1657, had since 1665
been pastor at Beverly, the parish lying north of Salem, from
which it was severed by a narrow arm of the sea, and at the
west adjoining yet more closely Salem Village, through which
lay the land route connecting Beverly with Salem and with
Boston. Many of those connected with the beginnings of the
witch panic had, prior to the erection of the Village parish,
been in attendance at the Beverly church. Some were still
so; and the spreading suspicion soon invaded this parish itself.
It was not strange, then, that from the first, as we have seen
already, Hale's interest in the proceedings was close and attentive.^ There can be no question that, as Calef says, ''he had
been very forward in these Prosecutions," and, like his neighbor pastors Parris and Noyes, had held the most credulous
views as to the worth of the testimony of the "afflicted."
How those views changed after the accusation of his loved and
honored wife we have also seen;' and of all this he himself
tells us with a touching sincerity in the pages now to follow.
His little book is no apology, but a manly attempt to make
amends for what he now felt to be error by setting forth to
others what he had learned. Judge Sewall, who likewise had
repented of his error and likewise frankly owned it, records in

1 See above, pp. 158, 184, 342, 344, 350, 369. More than once (as agamst
Bridget Bbhop and Dorcas Hoar) he himself became a witness as to the reputation or career of the accused. That already then there was thought of his writing
upon the subject may perhaps be inferred from Cptton Mather's letter quoted on
p. 206 ; and see also p. 214.

> See p. 369, and note 1.

997

398 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES

his diary on November 19, 1697, when he was on a visit to
Salem: ''Mr. Hale and I lodg'd together: He discouis'd me
about writing a History of the Witchcraft ; I fear lest he go
into the other extream."

The Rev. John Higginson (161&-1708), the agpd senk^
pastor of Salem, who writes for Hale the introduction, is ak
no stranger to us;^ and we have seen what reason there is to
think him hesitant all along as to the proceedingis. Yet how
far he had been from incredulity as to himian dealings with
the Devil appears not only from his own words here, but from
the materials he furnished Increase Mather for his Promdenca}
Perhaps he, too, consulted Judge Sewall as to his part in the
little book; for before the words just cited the latter writes:
''Mr. Higginson comes as far as Brother's to see me; v^iicfa
I wonder'd at."

Though completed early in 1698 — smce Higginscm had
read it before signing his introduction on March 23— the book,
as may be seen from its imprint, was not published till 17Q2,
after Hale's death. Perhaps that was its author's wish: so,
Judge Sewall tells us,' Higginson withheld his treatise on
periwigs. The Modest Enquiry is now one of the rarest books
in the literature of witchcraft. Its single reimpression (Boston,
1771) is said to be yet rarer than the original. Happily, that
part of the book which narrates the story of the Salem episode
was taken up by Cotton Mather into his Magnolia (at the end
of his Book VI.) ; and from that work, though it gives Hale
due credit, it is often quoted as if Mather's own.^

1 See above, pp. 245, 248, note 2. > Matker Papen, pp. 282-287.

» Z>uiry, I. 463-464.

^ As to Hale's career see a memoir in Mass. Hist Soe., CoUedums, thiid aem
VII. 255-260; also Sibley, Harwd Oraditaiei, L 500-520, and autfaoritiea tiiat
cited.

HALE'S A MODEST INQUIRY

A Modest Enquiry Into ihe Nature of Witchcraft, and How Persons GuiUy of that Crime may he Convicted: And (he means
vsed for their Discovery Discussed, both Negatively and Affirmatively, according to Scripture and Experience.

By John Hale, Pastor of the Church of Christ in Beverley, Anno
Domini 1697.

When they say unto you, seek unio them that have Familiar Spirits
and unto Wizzards, that peep, etc.. To the Law and to the
Testimony; if they speak not according to this word, it is
because Oiere is no light in them. Isaiah VIII. 19. 20.
That which I see not teach thou me. Job 34. 32.

Boston in N. E. Printed by B. Green and J. Alien, for Benjamin
Eliot under the Town House. 1702.*

Any general Custom against the Law of God is void. St.
Germans, Abridgment of Common Law. lib. 1. C. 6.

(>mumn legum est inanis censura nisi Divime legis imaginem
gerat.* Finch, Common Law. lib. 4. C. 3.

Y^ere a Law is gromided upon a Presimiption; if the Presumption fail the Law is not to be holden in Conscience.
Abridgment of C. Law. lib. 1. C. 19.'

An EpisUe to the Reader.

It hath been said of Old, That Time is the Mother of
Truth, and Truth is the Daughter of Time. It is the Prerogative of the God of Truth, to know all the truth in all things at
once and together: It is also his Glory to conceal a matter,
Prov. 25. 2, And to bring the truth to light in that manner and
measure, and the times appointed, as it pleaseth him; it is

^ Title-page of original.

* "No law hath any validity unless it bear the image of diTiDe law."

* Reverse of title-page.

dd9

400 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES ]m

our duty in all humility, and with fear and trembling, to seud
after truth, knowing that secret things belong to God, loi
only things revealed belong to us, and so far as they are r^
vesded; for in many things it may be said, what God is doio^
we know not now; but we, or others that succeed us, sbl
know hereafter. Omitting other Examples, I shall Instaos
only in the matter of Witchcraft, which on the Humane side.
is one of the most hidden Works of Darkness, managed by tk
Rulers of the darkness of this World, to the doing of gres
spoil amongst the Children of men : And on the Divine side.
it is one of the most awful and tremendous Judgments of God
which can be inflicted on the Societies of men, especially wha
the Lord shall please for his own Holy Ends to Enlaig? SaUos
Commission in more than an ordinary way.

It is known to all men, that it pleased God some few yeazs
ago, to suffer Satan to raise much trouble amongst us in thit
respect, the b^inning of which was very small, and looksi
on at first as an ordicuEuy case which had fallen out before at
several times in other places, and would be quickly aver.
Only one or two persons belonging to Salem Village about
five miles from the Town being suspected were Examined, etc.
But in the progress of the matter, a multitude of other persons
both in this and other Neighbour Towns, were Accused, Examined, Imprisoned, and came to their Trials, at Salem, the
CJounty Town, where about Twenty of them Suffered «s
Witches; and many others in danger of the same Tragical End:
and still the number of the Accused increased imto many
Scores; amongst whom were many Persons of unquestionaUe
Credit, never under any groimds of suspicion of that or any
other Scandalous Evil, lliis brought a general Constematioo
upon all sorts of People, doubting what would be the issue of
such a dreadful Judgment of God upon the Country; but the
Lord was pleased suddenly to put a stop to those proceedings,
that there was no further trouble, as hath been related by
others. But it left in the minds of men a sad remembrance d
that sorrowful time; and a Doubt whether some Innocent P^
sons might not Suffer, and some guilty Persons Escape. Tliere
is no doubt but the Judges and Juries proceeded in their Integrity, with a zeal of God against Sin, according to thdr
best fight; and according to Law and Evidence; but there is

*^ 16981 ' HALE, A MODEST INQUIRY 401

? a Question yet unresolved, Whether some of the Laws, Customs
and Principles used by the Judges and Juries in the Trials of /
Witches in England (which were followed as Patterns here) /
were not insufficient and unsafe.

As for my Self, being under the Lifirmities of a decrepit
Old Age, I stirred little abroad, and was much disenabled
(both in body and mind) from Knowing and judging of Occurrents and Transactions of that time: But my Reverend
Brother Mr. Hale, having for above Thirty Years been Pastor
of the Church at Beverly (but Two Miles from Salem, where
the Tryals were) was frequently present, and was a diligent
Observer of all that passed, and being one of a Singular Prudence and Sagacity, in searching into the narrows of things :
He hath (after much deliberation) in this Treatise, related the
Substance of the Case as it was, and given Reasons from Scrip- ^
ture against some of the Principles and Pra<;tises then used in
the Tryals of Witchcraft; and said something also in a Positive way, and shewing the right Application that is to be made
of the whole, and all this in such a pious and modest Maimer,
as cannot be offensive to any, but may be generally acceptable
to all the lovers of Truth and Peace.

I am the more willing to accompany him to the Press, because I am perswaded such a Treatise as this is needful and
useful, upon divers accounts. As,

1. That the Works of Gkxl may be known; and that God
may be more acknowledged and adored, in his Justice, and in
his Mercy: in his Justice, by letting loose Evil Angels, to v
make so great a spoyl amongst us as they did, for the Piuiish- '
ment of a declining People : And in his Mercy, by Countermanding of Satans Conmiission, and keeping of him in Chains
of restraint, that he should proceed no further. Psal. 83, last.

2. That the Truth of things may be more fully known, so
far as God shall please to reveal the same in the use of lawful
means; for the Judgments of God are a great deep, and he is
wont to make known truth by degrees; and Experience teacheth us, there is need of more to be said than hath been yet,
for the clearing up of difficulties about the matter of Witchcraft. We ought to be fellow helpers to the truth. 3 Epistle
of John, 8. v.

3. That whatever Errors or Mistakes we fell into, in the

402 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [!»

dark hour of Temptation that was upon us, may be (upoc
more light) so discovered, acknowledged and disowned by is.
as that it may be a matter of Warning and Caution to tkee
that come after us, that they may not fall into the like. 1 Ccr.
10. 11. Fcelix quern faciurU cdiena pericvla caiUum.^

4. And that it may Occasion the most Learned and Pioo^
men to make a further and fuller Enquiry into the matter d
Witchcraft, especially into the positive part. How Witcbcs
may be so discovered, that innocent persons may be preserved
and none but the guilty may suffer. Prov. 17. 15.

Verily whosoever shall by the Grace of God be enabled to
Contribute further light in this matter, will do good Service
to God and Men in his Generation.

I would also propound and leave it as an Object of Consideration to our Honoured Magistrates and Reverend Ministers, Whether the ^Equity of that Law in Leviticus, Chap, i
for a Sin offering for the Rulers and for the Congn^ation, in
the case of Sins of Ignorance, when they come to be known,
be not Obliging, and for direction to us in a Gospel way.

Now the Father of Lights and Mercies grant unto us, that
Mercy and Truth may meet together, that righteousness and
peace may kiss each other, that the Glory of God may dwell
in our Land; and that it may be said of New England, The
Lord Bless thee, O Habitation of Justice and Mountain of
Holiness,

Finally, That the Blessing of Heaven may go along with

this little Treatise to attain the good Ends thereof, is, and

shall be the Prayer of him who is daUy waiting for his Change,

and looking for the Mercy of the Lord Jesus Christ unto

Eternal Life. ^ „

John Higginson,

March 23d, Pastor of the Church, of Scdem.

1697, 8. jEtatia 82.*

The Preface to the Christian Reader.

The Holy Scriptures inform us that the Doctrine of Godliness is a great Mystery, containing the Mysteries erf the

^ "Happy the man whom the perils of others make cautknis.*'
' "In the 82d year of his age." As to the aged senior pastor of Salem see
p. 398.

1697] HALE, A MODEST INQUIRY 408

Kingdom of Heaven: Mysteries which require great search
for the finding out: And as the Lord hath his Mysteries to
bring us to Eternal Glory; so Satan hath his Mysteries to
bring us to Eternal Ruine: Mysteries not easily understood, whereby the depths of Satan are managed in hidden
wayes. So the Whore of Babylon makes the Inhabitants of
the E^arth drunk with the Wine of her Fornication, by the
Mystery of her abominations, Rev. 17. 2. And the man of
Sin hath his Mystery of iniquity whereby he deceiveth men
through the working of Satan in signes and Ijdng wonders,
2 Thes. 2. 3, 7, 9.

And among Satans Mjrsteries of iniquity, this of Witchcraft is one of the most difiScult to be searched out by the Sons "/
of men ; as appeareth by the great endeavours of Learned and
Holy men to search it out, and the great differences that are
found among them, in the rules laid down for the bringing to
light these hidden works of darkness. So that it may seem
presumption in me to undertake so difiScult a Theam, and to
lay down such rules as are different from the Sentiments of
many Eminent writers, and from the Presidents and practices
of able Lawyers; yea and from the Common Law it self.

But my Apology for this undertaking is;

1. That there hath been such a dark dispensation by the
Lord, letting loose upon us the Devil, Anno. 1691 and 1692,*
as we never experienced before: And thereupon apprehending
and condemning persons for Witchcraft; and nextly acquit-,
ting others no less liable to such a charge ; which evidently |
shew we were in the dark, and knew not what to do; but have •
gone too far on the one or other side, if not on both. Hereupon
I esteemed it necessary for some person to Collect a Summary
of that affair, with some animadversions upon it, which might
at least give some light to them which come after, to shun
those Rocks by which we were bruised, and narrowly escaped
Shipwrack upon. And I have waited five years for some
other person to undertake it, who might doe it better than I
can, but find none; and judge it better to do what I can, than
that such a work should be left undone. Better sincerely
though weakly done, then not at all, or with such a byas of
prejudice as will put false glosses upon that which was man1 "1691" because the troubles began before March 25.

404 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES lies:

aged with uprightness of heart, thou^ there was not so greii
a spirit of discerning, as were to be wished in so wei^tvi
Concernment.

2. I have been present at several Examinations and Tiyak
and knew sundry of those that Suffered upon that account in
former years, and in this last affair, and so have more advaih
tages than a stranger, to give account of these Proceedings.

3. I have been from my Youth trained up in the k^Twledge and belief of most of those principles I here questicm as
unsafe to be used. The first person that suffered on this a^
count in New-England, about Fifty years since, was my Neig^
hour, and I heard much of what was charged upon her, mi
others in those times; and the reverence I bore to aged,
learned and judicious persons, caused me to drink in tibdr
principles in these things, with a kind of Implicit Faitii. Qm
sernd est imbuta recens servabU odoremj Testa diu.^ A Child
wfll not easily forsake the principles he hath been trained iq>
in from his Cradle.

But observing the Events of that sad Catastrophe, Anno
1692, 1 was brought to a more strict scanning of the piindplss
I had imbibed, and by scanning, to question, and by questioDing at length to reject many of them, upon the reasons shewed
in the ensuing Discourse. It is an approved saying NUd
certiuSf qaam quod ex dvbio fit cerium f No truth more certain
to a man, than that which he hath formerly doubted or denied,
and is recovered from his error, by the convincing evidence of
Scripture and reason. Yet I know and am sensible, that
while we know but in part, man is apt in flying from a discovered error, to run into the contrary extream.

Inddit in SofUam qui vuU vitare Charybdim.*

The middle way is conunonly the way of truth. And if
any can shew me a better middle way than I have here laid
down, I shall be ready to embrace it : But the conviction must
not be by vinegar or drollery, but by strength of argument

4. I have had a deep sence of the sad consequence ctf mis-

^ Literally, "the fresh-made pot will long retain the odor in wiik^ onoe *i3S
steeped." The line is from Horace.

* Literally, "nothing is surer than what out of doubt is made sure."

* ''Into Scylla falls he who tries to keep clear of Chaiybdis."

a 16971 HALE, A MODEST INQUIRY 405

9G takes in matters Capital ; and their impossibility of recover-
. I ing when compleated. And what grief of heart it brings to a
tender conscience, to have been miwittingly encouraging of the
B Sufferings of the innocent. And I hope a zeal to prevent for
M the future such sufferings is pardonable, althou^ there should
9 be much weakness, and some errors in the pursuit thereof.
B 5. I observe the failings that have been on the one hand,
i have driven some into that which is indeed an extream on the
I other hand, and of dangerous consequences, viz. To deny any
; such persons to be imder the New Testament, who by the
Devils aid discover Secrets, or do work wonders. Therefor©
f in the latter part of this discourse, I have taken pains to prove
the AflBrmative, yet with brevity, because it hath been done
already by Perkins of Witchcraft.^ Glanvil his Sadtunsmus
Triumphatua,^ Pt. 1. p. 1 to 90 and Pt. 2. p. 1 to 80. Yet I
would not be imderstood to justify all his notions in those discourses, but acknowledge he hath strongly proved the being
of Witches.

6. I have special reasons moving me to bear my testimony
about these matters, before I go hence and be no more; the
which I have here done, and I hope with some assistance of
his Spirit, to whom I commit my self and this my labour,
even that God whose I am and whom I serve: Desiring his
Mercy in Jesus Christ to Pardon all the Errors of his People
in the day of darkness; and to enable us to fight with Satan
by Spiritual Weapons, putting on the whole Armour of God.
Aiid tho' Satan by his Messengers may buffet Gods Children, yet there's a promise upon right Resisting, he shall flee
from them, Jam. 4. 7. And Oiat aU things shall work togdher
for (he good of those that Love (he Lard, Rom. 8. 28. So that I
believe Gods Children shall be gainers by the assaults of Satan,
which occasioned this Discourse; which that they may, is the
Prayer of. Thine in the Service of the Gospel.

John Ealk.
Beverly, Decemb.
15th, 1697.

' See above, p. 304, note 3.

* Saducimut Triumphahu was the name given GlanvOl's book in the enlarged edition (1681) brought out after the author's death by Henry More. In
later impressions the word becomes Sadducimui. As to Glanvill, see above, p. 5.

406 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES pff

A MODEST ENQUIRY, INTO THE NATURE OF

WITCHCRAFT

Chapter I.

Sect. 1. The Angels who kept not their First Estate, bj
Sin against God, lost their primitive purity, and glorious Excellency, as to their moral qualifications, and became undean,
wicked, envious, lyars, and full of all wickedness, which m
Spirits they are capable of. Yet I do not find in Sci^tuic
that they lost their natural abilities of understanding or power
of Operation.

1. As for their Understanding, they are called Daimm
(which we Translate Devil) because they are fuU of wiscknn,
cunning, skill, subtilty and knowledge. He hath also the
name of Serpent from his subtilty, 2 Cor. 11. 3. And his
knowledge in the Scriptures, and wittiness to pervert than,
appears by his quoting Scripture to our Saviour when he
tempted him. Mat. 4.

And as there be many Devils, and these active, quick, swift
and piercing Spirits, so they going to and fro in the earth,
and walking up and down in it, have advantages to know all
the actions of the Children of men, both open and secret, thai
discourses, consultations, and much of the inward aflFectioDS
of men thereby; thou^ still its Gods prerogative immediatelj
to know the heart. Jer. 17. 10.

2. As to their natural power as Spirits, its very great, if
not equal to that of the Holy Angels: For,

1. They are called Principalities and Powers. Rom. 8. 38.
Eph. 6. 12. Col. 2. 14, 15, compared with Heb. 2. 14, 15.
Now these are names given to the Holy Angels. Eph. 1. 21,
and 3. 10.

2. They are called, Rulers of the darkness of this vxjrld, the
Prince of the power of the Air. Eph. 6. 12 and 2. 2.

3. Such was their power that they contended with Michad
and the Angels about the Body of Moses. 2 Pet. 2. 11.
Jude 9. That is, as I conceive, about preventing the Burial
of the Body of Moses : For it's said, Deut. 34. 6, TTie Lord
buried him, and no man knoweth of his Sepulcher to this day.

g 16071 HALE, A MODEST INQUIRY 407

That is, he did it by the Ministry of Angels (for the Lord gave
J the Law, Exod. 20. 1, and that it was by the Ministry of
Angels, see Gal. 3. 19. so probably was the burial of Moses's
Body) and the Devils endeavour if possible, to discover
Moses's Body, or place of its burial, that they might draw
Israel to conunit Idolatry in worshipping at his Tomb (as our
Popish Fore-fathers did at Thomas Beckets in Kent) from the
Veneration they had to him as their Law giver.

4. The Devils actings against Job, Chap. 1 and 2, and what
he did to the Gadarene Swine, etc., Shew his great power. So
that we may conclude, had the Devils liberty to reveal all
that they know of the affairs of mankind, or to do all that is
in their power to perform, they would bring dreadful confusions and desolations upon the World.

Sect. 2. The way God governs Devils is by Chains. 2 Pet.
2. 4. Jude 6 ver. Rev. 20. 1, 2, 7, 8, whereby they are kept
Prisoners. Men are governed by Laws, by convictions of
Conscience. Rom. 2. 12, 13, 14, 15. By Scripture Rules,
Humane Laws, and also by Gods Spirit. 1 John 2. 20. But
Devils have no such Laws, or tenderness of Conscience to
bridle or restrain them. But the Lord hath his Chains,
which are called Everlasting, and are always lasting; so that
they are never wholly without a Chain. This Cham is sometimes greater and shorter, other times lesser and longer, as the
Lord pleaseth, for his own Glory, Rev. 20. 1, 2, 7, 8. For as
the vrrcUh of man praiseth the Lordf and the remainder of wrath he
doth restrain^ Psal. 76. 10, So may we say of the Devils wrath.

Sect. 3. The Devil is full of nialice against man, and frames
his designs against him, chiefly to destroy his Soul, as, 1 Pet.
6. 8, 2 Cor. 11. 3, and other Scriptures abundantly testify.
Hence probably at sometimes he doth not all the hurt to mans
Body that he could, lest thereby he should awaken man to
repentance and prayer; he seeks to keep men in a false peace.
Luk. 11. 21. Yet at other times he disturbs and afflicts
men in Body and Estate; as Scripture and experience shew.
Among the Devices Satan useth to mine man, one is to allure
him into such a familiarity with him, that by Sorceries, Inchantments. Divinations, and such like, he may lead them
Captive at his pleasure. This snare of his we are warned
against, Deut. 18. 10, 11, and in other Scriptures. This Sin

V

408 NARRATIVES OP THE WITCHCRAFT CASES m

of men hearkening after Satan in these ways, is called TTiu^
craft; of which it is my purpose to treat: But first I ^
speak something Historically what hath been done in Net
England, in prosecution of persons suspected of this Crime.

Sect. 4. Several persons have been Charged with ani \\
suffered for the Crime of Witchcraft in the Govermnoits d
the Massachusetts, New Haven, or Stratford^ and Connecth
cut, from the year 1646 to the year 1692.

Sect. 5. The first was a Woman of Charlestown, ilim
1647 or 48.^ She was suspected partly because that after
) some angry words passing between her and her Nei^iboois,
some mischief befel such Neighbours in their Creatures, or
the like: partly because some thing? supposed to be bewitched,
or have a Charm upon them, being burned, she came to the
fire and seemed concerned.

The day of her Execution, I went in company 6i some
Neighbours,' who took great pains to bring her to oonfesBioii
and repentance. But i^e constantly professed her sdf innocent of that crime : Then one prayed her to consider if God
did not bring this punishment upon her for some other crime,
and asked, if she had not been guilty of Stealing many yens
ago; she answered, she had stolen something, but it was kog
since, and she had repented of it, and there was Grace oiough
in Christ to pardon tiiat long agoe; but as for Witchcraft fihe
was ^olly free from it, and so she said unto her Death.
^ Sect. 6. Another that suffered on that account some time
after, was a Dorchester Woman.^ And npoa the day of her

^ /. e., "New Haven (or Stratford) " : Hale was not sure (see p. 410)
the case in mind was at New Haven or at Stratford. Stratfofd, thoagh ao
New Haven, was under the Connecticut government Under that of New HaTCi
there were, so far as is known, no witchrezecutions.

* Margaret Jones, executed at Boston on June 15, 1648. See WinAram
Journal, II. 344-345 (of the edition in this series, II. 397 of ed. of 1853),
and Poole in Memorial History of Borton, U. 135-137; also, above, p. 363, note
2 — for it was doubtless to Margaret Jones that the resolution as to ''wildiinge" referred, and it suggests that her accusation too may have been die outcome of the witch-hunt whidh had just been raging in the Puritan comities of
England. She was not, as thinks Hale, the first New Rngi^nd victim; in Cqbnecticut Alse Young was hanged, May 26, 1647.

' The writer was then a boy of twelve.

« Doubtless that "H. Lake's wife, of Dorchester, whom," as Nadiamei
Mather in 1684 wrote to his brother Increase of having heaidi *'die devill drew in

^648] HALE. A MODEST INQUIRY 409

*Execution Mr. Thompson Minister at Brantry/ and J. P.*
iher former Master took pains with her to bring her to repenatance, And she utteriy denyed her guilt of Witchcraft: yet
BJustifyed God for bringing her to that punishment: for she
[(had when a single woman played the harlot; and being with
5 Child used means to destroy the fruit of her body to conceal
a her sin and shame, and although she did not effect it, yet she
was a Murderer in the sight of God for her endeavours, and
I shewed great penitency for that sin; but owned nothing of
I the crime laid to her charge.

Sect. 7. Another suffering in this kind was a Woman of
Cambridge, agamst whom a principal evidence was a Watertown Nurse, who testifyed, that the said Kendal (so was the
accused called) did bewitch to Death a Child of Goodman
Genings of Watertown; for the said Kendal did make much
of the Child, and then the Child was well, but quickly changed
its colour and dyed in a few hours after. The Court took this
evidence among others, the said Grenings not knowing of it.
But after Kendal was Executed (who also denyed her guilt
to the Death,) Mr. Rich. Brown knowing and hoping better
things of Kendal, asked said Genings if they suspected her to
bewitch their Child, they answered No. But they judged the
true cause of the Childs Death to be thus, vu. The Nurse
had the night before canyed out the Child and kept it abroad
in the Cold a long time, when the red gum was come out upon
it, and the Cold had struck in the red gum, and this they
judged the cause of the Childs death. And that said Kendal
did come in that day and make much of the Child, but they
apprehended no wrong to come to the Child by her. After
this the said Nurse was put into Prison for Adultery, and there
delivered of her base Child, and Mr. Brown went to her and
told her, It was just with God to leave her to this wickedness

by i^pearing to her in the likenes, and acting the part of a diild of hers then
latdy dead, on whom her heart was much set." (See Mather Papers, p. 58, and
Poole in N. E. Hist, and Oen, Register, XXIV. 3, note.) Mather had lived in
I>(»chester prior to his migration to England, about 1650; but, as he had been
in constant communication with friends in America, it is not at all sure that his
knowledge of this case antedates his leaving. In Hale's account there seems some
confusion with the case of Mary Parsons (p. 410).

^Braintree.

*Fh>bably John Phillips of Dorchester— the conjecture is Fanner's.

\

410 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES il5

as a Punishment for her Murdering goody Kendal by herfak
witness bearing. But the Nurse dyed in Prison, and so ^
matter was not farther inquired into.

There was another Executed, of Boston Anno 1656. fcr »
that crime.^ And two or three of Springfield, one €i wbie
confessed ; and said the occasion of her familiarity with Sate
was this : She had lost a Child and was exceedingly discontent
at it and longed; Oh that she might see her Child agsiiAnd at last the Devil in likeness of her Child came to her bed
side and talked with her, and asked to come into the bed to
her, and she received it into the bed to her that night a&c
several nights after, and so entred into covenant with Satan
and became a Witch.^ This was the only confessor in these ;
times in that Government.

Sect. 8. Another at Hartford, viz. Mary Johnson, mefitioned in Remarkable Providences, p. 62, 63,* Confessed her
self a Witch. Who upon discontent and slouthfulness agreed
with the Devil to do her work for her, and fetch up the Swine.
And upon her inmioderate laughter at the running of the
Swine, as the Devil drove them, as she her self said, was suspected and upon examination confessed. I have also heard
of a Girl at New Haven or Stratford, that confessed her guilt*
But all others denyed it unto the death unless one Greensmith,
at Hartford.'

Sect. 9. But it is not my purpose to give a full relation
of all that have suffered for that Sin, or of all the particulars

^ Mrs. Ann Hibbins, widow of one of the foremost men in Boston and
to have been a sister of Governor Bellingfaam. (See Recordt qf MasmekumSt,
IV., pt 1, p. 269; Hutchinson, MassackusetU, second ed., I. 187-188; Memorial History of Botton, II. 138-141.)

* This was the case of Mary Parsons and her husband Hugh, wbom she
accused (1651). (See Drake, AnnaU qf WUchcnfi, pp. 64r-72, and espedaDy the
appended papers of Hugh Parsons's case, pp. 219-258. Tlie oiipnals o£ tiiese
papers are now in the New York Public Library. Others, from the Suffolk eout
files, are printed mthe N. E. Hist, and Gen. Register, XXXV. 152-153.)

* Not in the Remarkable Promdencee of Increase Mather, but in the MemordU
Providences of Cotton Mather at the pages named (see above, pp. 135-196).

* Probably that "Goody Bassett" who was on trial at Strmtford in 1651
(Connecticut Records, I. 220), and of whom we know from testinKMiy given rt
New Haven in 1654 (New Haven Records, II. 83) that she was oondenmed wad
that she confessed.

* See above, pp. 19-20.

((16971 HALE, A MODEST INQUIRY 411

jt. charged upon them, which probably is now impossible; many
Si witnessing Viva voce, those particulars which were not fully

recorded. But that I chiefly intend is to shew the principles (^
g formerly acted upon in Convicting of that Crime; which were

such as these.

1. The first great principle laid down by a person Eminent
for Wisdom, Piety and Learning^ was; That the Devil could*!
not assume the shape of an innocent person in doing mischief
unto mankind: for if the Lord should suffer him in this he
would subvert the course of humane Justice, by bringing men
to suffer for what he did in their Shapes.

2. Witchcraft being an habitual Crime, one single witness
to one Act of Witchcraft, and another single witness to another such fact, made two witnesses against the Crime and the
party suspected.

3. There was searching of the bodies of the suspected for
such like teats, or spots (which writers speak of) called the \
Devils marks; and if found, these were accounted a presumption at least of guilt in those that had them.

4. I observed that people laid great weight upon this;
when things supposed to be bewitched were burnt, and the
suspected person came to the fire in the time of it.' Although
that Eminent person above said' condemned this way of
tryal, as going to the Devil to find the Devil.

5. If after anger between Neighbours mischief followed,
this oft bred suspicion of Witchcraft in the matter. In fine,
the presumptions and convictions used in former times were
for substance the same which we may read of in Keeble of the

^ When in 1669 the Connecticut court asked the ministers their opinion as
to this point, they answered in ahnost these words (see Taylor, The Witchcraft
Delusion in Colomal ConnecHctd, p. 58). This opinion is said to be in the handwriting of the Rev. Gershom Bulkeley, the author of Will and Doom. But it does
not follow that he was its author, much less that he was the originator of this
dictum. Whatever its source, it is to be suspected that it had originally nothing
to do with "spectral evidence," but was only a protest against such pleas as that
of the bishc^ who, caught under the bed of a nun, maintained later that the culprit was only the Devil impersonating him. On Bulkeley and his rational attitude toward later charges of witchcraft, see his Will and Doom (Conn. Hist Soc.,
Collections, III.), introduction and pp. 239-235.

* See above, p. 239, note 1.

' See above, in paragraph 1.

412 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [m

Common Law/ and in Bernard,' and other Authors d tk
subject.

Sect. 10. About 16 or 17 years since was accused a Womts

of Newbury,' and upon her tryal the Jury brought here

Guilty. Yet the Govemour Simon Bradstreet £Isq. and sm

of the Magistrates repreived her, being unsatisfyed in tk

'* Verdict upon these grounds.

' 1. They were not satisfyed that a Specter doing mischkf
in her likeness, should be imputed to her person, as a groaDd
of guilt.

2. They did not esteem one single witness to one fact
and another single witness to another fact, for two witnesses,
against the person in a matter Capital. She being rq>]ive<i
was carried to her own home, and her Husband (who waa
esteemed a Sincere and understianding Christian by those that
knew him) desired some Neighbour Ministers, of whom I was
one, to meet together and discourse his Wife ; the which we did:
and her discourse was very Christian among us, and stiD
pleaded her innocence as to that which was laid to her chaige.
We did not esteem it prudence for us to pass any definitive
Sentance upon one imder her circumstances, yet we inclined
to the more charitable side.

In her last Sickness she was in much darkness and trouble
of Spirit, which occasioned a Judicious friend to examine ber
strictly, Whether she had been guilty of Witchcraft, but die
said No : But the ground of her trouble was some impatient
and passionate Speeches and Actions of hers while in Prison,
upon the account of her suffering wrongfully; whereby she
had provoked the Lord, by putting some contempt upon his
word. And in fine, she sought her pardon and comfort from
God in Christ, and dyed so far as I understood, pra3ring to
and resting upon God in Christ for Salvation.

Sect. 11. The next that Suffered was an Irish Woman of
Boston,* suspected to bewitch John Goodwins Chfldren, who
upon her Tryal did in Irish (as was testified by the Interpreters)
confess her self guilty, and was condemned out of her own

^ What is meant, as is dear from Hale's later quotadonSy is KMt's Amh
tance to Justices. See above, p. 163, note 2.

* See above, p. 304, note 5. * Mrs. Morae. See above, pp. 23-3L

* Goody Glover. See above, pp. 100 ff.

0 1691] HALE, A MODEST INQUIRY 413

i mouth ; (as Christ saith, Luk. 19. 22. (hd of thine own mouth

will I Jvdge thee) The History of which is published by

t Mr. Cotton Mather, (and attested by the other Ministers of

1 Boston and Charlstown.) in his Book, Entituled, Memorable
I Providences^ Printed Anno 1689.^ Thus far of the History
» of Witches before the year, 1692.

Chapter IL

I. In the latter end of the year 1691,* Mr. Samuel Paris,
Pastor of the Church in Salem-Village, had a Daughter of
Nine, and a Neice of about Eleven years of Age, sadly Afflicted
of they knew not what Distempers; and he made his application to Phy^tianS; yet still they grew worse: And at length
one Physitian gave his opinion, that they were under an Evil 7
Hand. This the Neighbours quickly took up, and concluded
they were bewitched. He had also an Indian Man servant,
and his Wife who afterwards confessed, that without the
knowledge of their Master or Mistress, they had taken some
of the Afflicted persons Urine, and mixing it with meal had
made a Cake, and baked it, to find out the Witch, as they
said. After this, the Afflicted persons cryed out of the Indian
Woman, named Tituba, that ^e did pinch, prick, and grievously torment them, and that they saw her here and ^ere,
where no body else could. Yea they could tell where she was,
and what she did, when out of their humane sight. These
Children were bitten and pinched by invisible agents; their
arms, necks, and backs turned this way and that way, and
returned back again, so as it was impossible for them to do of
themselves, and beyond the power of any Epileptick Fits, or
natural Disease to effect. Sometimes they were taken dumb,
their mouths stopped, their throats choaked, their limbs
wracked and tormented so as might move an heart of stone,
to sympathize with them, with bowels of compassion for them.
I will not enlarge in the description of their cruel Sufferings,
because they were in all things afflicted as bad as John Goodwins Children at Boston, in the year 1689. So that he that

* See above, pp. 91 ff.

* /. e., in February and March of the year we call 1092. As to all this story
see above the parallel narratives of Lawson (pp. 147 ff.) and Calef (pp. 341 ff.).

414 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [UK

will read Mr. Mathers Book of Memorable Providences, page3i
^etc.; may Read part of what these Children, and aft^innfe
sundry grown persons suffered by the hand of Satan, at Sakn
Village, and parts adjacent. Anno 1691, 2. Yet th^e i»
more in these Sufferings, than in those at Boeton, by pinsiih
visibly stuck into their flesh, pricking with Irons, (As in pin
published in a Book Printed 1693, viz. The Wonders of ik
Invisible World)} Mr. Paris seeing the distressed ecmditioB
of his Family, desired the presence of some Worthy Gentkmen of Salem, and some Neighbour Ministers to consult together at his House; who when they came, and had aiquiicd
diligently into the Sufferings of the Afflicted, concluded tber
were preternatural, and feaied the hand of Satan was in them.

n. The advice given to Mr. Paris by them was, that he
should sit still and wait upon the Providence of God to see
what time might discover; and to be much in prayer for tbe
discovery of what was yet secret. They also Examined Tltubt,
.. who confessed the making a Cake, as is above mentioned, and
"' said her Mistress in her own Coimtiy was a Witch, and had
taught her some means to be used for the discovery oi a Witdi
and for the prevention of being bewitched, etc. But said that
she her self was not a Witch.

III. Soon after this, there were two or three private Fasts
at the Ministers House, one of which was kept by sundiy
Neighbour Ministers, and after this, another in Publick at the
Village, and several days afterwards of publick Humiliation,
'during these molestations, not only there, but in other Cmgregations for them. And one General Fast by Order ci the
General Court, observed throughout the Colony to seek the
Lord that he would rebuke Satan, and be a hght unto his
people in this day of darkness.'

But I return to the History of these troubles. In a short
time after other persons who were of age to be witnesses, were
molested by Satan, and in their fits cryed out upon Tltuba
and Goody O. and S. G.* that they or Specters in their Shapes
did grievously torment them; hereupon some of their Village

1 See above, pp. 205 ff.

* This fast, enacted on May 6, was celebrated cm May 26, 1602 (Maaaftdrasetts Acts and Resolves, VII. 459).
' Sarah Osbom and Sarah Grood.

<kmi HALE, A MODEST INQUIRY 415

i^Neighbours complained to the Magistrates at Salem, desiring
lithey would come and examine the afflicted and accused toft gether; the which they did: the effect of which examination
s: was, that Tituba confessed she was a Witch, and that she with
I! the two others accused did torment and bewitch the com-
^plainers, and that these with two others whose names she
I knew not, had their Witch-meeting together; relating the
I times when and plwes where they met, with many other ch--
r cumstances to be seen at large. Upon this the said Tituba
I and O. and S. G. were committed to Prison upon suspicion of
I acting Witchcraft. After this the said Tituba was again exI amined in Prison, and owned her first confession in all points,
and then was her self afflicted and complained of her fellow
Witches tormenting of her, for her confession, and accusing
them, and being searched by a Woman, she was foimd to have
upon her body the marks of the Devils wounding of her.

IV. Here were these things rendred her confession credible. (1.) That at this examination she answered every question jiist as she did at the first. And it was thought that if
she had feigned her confession, she could not have remembred
her answers so exactly. A lyar we say, had need of a good
memoiy, but truth being always consistent with it self is the
same to day as it was yesterday. (2.) She seemed very penitent for her Sin in covenanting with the Devil. (3.) She became a sufferer her self and as she said for her confession.
(4.) Her confession agreed exactly (which was afterwards verified in the other confessors) with the accusations of the afflicted.
Soon after these afflicted persons complained of other persons
afflicting of them in their fits, and the number of the afflicted
and accused began to increase. And the success of Tituba's
confession encouraged those in Authority to examine others
that were suspected, and the event was, that more confessed
themselves gmlty of the Crimes they were suspected for. And
thus was this matter driven on.

V. I observed in the prosecution of these affairs, that
there was in the Justices, Judges and others concerned, a conscientious endeavour to do the thing that was right. And to
that end they consulted the Presidents^ of former times and
precepts laid down by Learned Writers about Witchcraft.

^ Precedents.

416 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [a|

) As Eeeble on the Common Law, Chapt. Ck>njuration, (an Autlxr

i approved by the Twelve Judges of our Nation.)* Abo Sr
Mathew Hales Tryal of Witches, Printed Anno 1682.« Gb
vils Collection of sundry tryals in England and Ireland, in tb
years 1658, 61, 63, 64, and 81.' Bernards Guide to Juryman'
Baxter and R. Burton, their Histories about Witches and their
discoveries.* Cotton Mather's Memorable Providences reUnf
to WitchcrafU, Printed Anno 1689,

VI. But that which chiefly carried on this matter to soA

Jbxl height, was the increasing of confessors till they amounted
to near about Fifty : and four or six of them upon their tiyab
owned their guilt of this crime, and were condemned f(Nr tk
same, but not Executed. And many of the confessors oqdfirmed their confessions with very strong circumstances: As
their exact agreement with the accusations of the afflieted;
their pimctual agreement with their fellow confessors; their
relating the times when they covenanted with Satan, and the
reasons that moved them thereimto; their Witch meetings,

^ and that they had their mock Sacraments of Baptism and Ae
Supper, in some of them ; their signing the Devils book : and
some shewed the Scars of the woimds which they said were
made to fetch blood with, to sign the Devils book; and some

^ See above, p. 163, note 2. "Conjuration" is the t^^^^'Tig given 1^ Kebk
to hb section on witchcraft (pp. 217-220).

* The account is not Sir Matthew's own, nor yet an official reooid, bat ooe
taken down "for his own satisfaction" "by a Person then Attending the Gxirt,'*
and so did not till 1682 find its way into print. As we have seen (p. 215, note 1)
it was embodied by Cotton Mather in his Wonders.

* See above, pp. 5-6.

* See above, p. 304, note 5.

» Baxter's Certainly of the Worlds cf Spirits (1691), really a coOecCioo of
witch stories, has been earlier described (p. 98, note 2). The name of "R. Biv*
ton," or "R. B.," the pseudonym under which the prolific London pubfiafaer
Nathaniel Crouch concealed his identity, is attached to a multitude of diipbooks; but that here in question was undoubtedly his The Kingdom qf Darkmti
(London, 1688), a pictorial "history of dsemons, spect^^ witches, appaiitioos,
possessions, disturbances, and other wonderful and supernatural delusions, dubchievous feats, and malicious impostures of the Devil," "together with a piefaee
obviating the common objections and allegations of the Sadduoes and Atheists
of the age." It is, in other words, a credulous hodge-podge of all the older witck
and devil tales that could be packed into its duodecimo pages; tales made yM
by its startling frontispiece and the crude but awful woodcuts that adon Hs
text.

im] HALE, A MODEST INQUIRY 417

said they had Imps to suck them^ and shewed Sores raw where
they said they were sucked by them.

VII. I shall give the Reader a tast of these things in a
* few Instances. Tlie Afflicted complained that the Spectres
' which vexed them^ urged them to set their Hands to a Book
^ r^resented to them (as to them it seemed) with threatnings
' of great torments, if they signed not, and promises of ease if

they obeyed.

Among these D. H.^ did as she said (which sundry others
confessed afterwards) being overcome by the extremity of her
painS; sign the Book presented, and had the promised ease; and
immediately upon it a Spectre in her Shape afflicted another
person, and said, I have signed the Book and have ease, now
do you sign, and so shall you have ease. And one day this
afflicted person pointed at a certain place in the room, and
said, there is D. H., upon which a man with his Rapier struck
at the place, though he saw no Shape ; and the Afflicted called
out, saying, you have wounded her side, and soon after the
afflicted person pointed at another place, sa3ang, there she is;
whereupon a man struck at the place, and the afflicted said,
you have given her a small prick about the eye. Soon after .
this, the said D. H. confessed her self to be made a Witch by yj
signing the Devils Book as above said ; and declared that she
had afflicted the Maid that complained of her, and in doing
of it had received two wounds by a Sword or Rapier, a small
one about the eye, which she shewed to the Magistrates, and
a bigger on the side of which she was searched by a discreet
woman, who reported, that D. H. had on her side the sign of
a wound newly healed.

This D. H. confessed that she was at a Witch Meeting at
Salem Village, where were many persons that she named,
some of whom were in Prison then or soon after upon suspicion
of Witchcraft: And the said G. B.^ preached to them, and .
such a Woman was their Deacon, and there they had a Sacra- "^
ment.

VIII. Several others after this confessed the same things

* Deliverance Hobbs — called by error "Deborah" on p. 347. The court
record of her examination may be found in Recorda qf Salem WUchcrc^t, II. 186192.

* George Burroughs.

418 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES m

with D. H. In particular Goody F.^ said {Inter alia!) tk
she with two others (one of whom acknowledged the same)
Rode from Andover to the same Village Witch meeting upon
a stick above gromid, and that in the way the stick brake, aod
gave the said F. a fall : whereupon^ said she, I got a fall aod
hurt of which I am still sore. I happened to be preset in
Prison when this F. owned again her former confession to the
Magistrates. And then I moved she might be further questioned about some particulars: It was answered, the Magistrates had not time to stay longer; but I should have lib^
to Examine her farther by my self; The which thing I did:
and I asked her if she rode to the Meeting on a Stick; ^
said, yea. I enquired what she did for Victuals; she answered
that she carried Bread and Cheese in her pocket, and that sl^
and the Andover Company came to the Village brfore the
Meeting began, and sat down together imder a tree and eat
their food, and that she drank water out of a Brook to quendi
her thirst. And that the Meeting was upon a plain grassy
place, by which was a Cart path, and sandy groimd in the path,
in which were the tracks of Horses, feet. And she also t(dd
me how long they were going and returning. And some time
after told me, she had some trouble upon her spirit, and when
I enquired what? she said, she was in fear that G. B. and M. C*
would kill her; for they appeared imto her (in Spectre, for
their persons were kept in other Rooms in the Rison) and
brought a sharp pointed iron like a spindle, but four square,
and threatned to stab her to death with it; because she had
confessed her Witchcraft, and told of them, that they were with
her, and that M. C. above named was the person that made
her a Witch. About a month after the said F. took occasicm
to tell me the same Story of her] fears that G. B. and E. C*
would kill her, and that the thing was much upon her Spirits.
IX. It was not long before M. L.* Dau^ter of said F.
confessed that she rode with her Mother to the said Witch

^Ann Foster. See above, pp. 244, 366. As her son later alleged, she
"suffered imprisonment twenty-one weeks and upon her TryaU was condemned
for supposed witchcraft . . . and died in prison."

* "Among other things."

• Martha Carrier. See above, pp. 241-244.

♦ Doubtless a printer's error for M. C. (Martha Carrier).

* Mary Lacy. See pp. 244, 366. Though condemned, she esci^ied death.

i 1692J HALE, A MODEST INQUIRY 419

Meeting, and confinned the substance of her Mothers Confession. At another time, M. L. junior the Grand Daughter,
aged about seventeen years, confesseth the substance of what
her Grand mother and Mother had related, and declareth,
that when they with E. C.^ rode on a stick or pole in the Air,
She the said Grand-Daughter with R. C.* Rode upon another;
(and she said R. C. acknowledged the same) and that they sat
their hands to the Devils Book. And (inter alia) said, " 0
Mother, why did you give me to the Devil?'' twice or thrice
over. The Mother said, she was sorry at the heart for it, it
was through that wicked one. Her Daughter bid her repent
and call upon God. And said, " Oh Mother, your wishes are
now come to pass! for how often have you wished that the
Devil would fetch me away alive?" And then said, "Oh! my
heart will break within me"; Then she wept bitterly, crying
out, "0 Lord comfort me, and bring out all the Witches," And
she said to her Grandmother, "0 Grandmother, why did you
give me to the Devil? Why did you perswade me, 0 Grandmother do not deny it." Then the Grandmother gave account
of several things about their confederates and acts of Witchcrafts too long to rehearse.

Chapter III.

Nextly I will insert the Confession of a man about Forty
years of Age, W. B.,' which he wrote himself in Prison, and
sent to the Magistrates, to confirm his former Confession to
them, viz.

God having called me to Confess my sin and Apostasy in that
fall in giving the Devil advantage over me appearing to me like a
Black, in the evening to set my hand to his Book, as I have owned
to my shame. He told me that I should not want so doing. At
Salem Village, there being a little off the Meeting-House, about an
hundred five Blades/ some with Rapiers by their side, which was
called and might be more for ought I know by B and Bu.* and the

* Again a nusprint for M. C. (see Mary Iscy's testimony in Records cf Salem
Wiichenfi, II. 140: "her mother Foster, Goody Carrier and herself rid upon a
pole to Salem Village meeting").

t Richard Carrier, son of Martha. • ^I^^Diam Barker, of Andover.

« Bravoes. * Bishop and BurrouffasT

420 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES {IflB

Trumpet sounded, and Bread and ^ne whidi they called the Sacnment, but I had none; being carried over all on a Stick, never hw%
at any other Meeting. I being at Cart a Saturday last, all the diy,
of Hay and English Com, the Devil brought my Shape to Salem,
and did af9ict M. S.^ and R. P.* by ditching my Hand; and aSibbath day my Shape af9icted A. M.* and at night afBicted M. S. and
A. M. E. I.^ and A. P.* have been my Enticers to this great aboonnation, as one have owned and charged her to her Sister with tk
same. And the design was to Destroy Salem Village, and to bepn
at the Ministers House, and to destroy the Church of God, and to
"^set up Satans Kingdom, and then all will be welL And now I hope
God in some measure has made me something sensible of my sin and
apostasy, begging pardon of God, and of the Honourable Magistrata
Mid all Gods people, hoping and promising by the help of God, to aet
to my heart and hand to do what in me lyeth to destroy sucJi wicked
worship, humbly begging the prayers of all Gods People for me, I
may wdk humbly under this great af9iction and that I may procure
to my self, the sure mercies of David, and the blesang of Abraham.

Concerning this Confession. (1) Note it was his own free
act in Prison. (2) He saith the Devil like a Black. Hiis be
had before explained to be like a Black man. (3) That on a
certain day was heard in the Air the soimd of a Trumpet at
Salem Village nigh the Meeting-House, and upon all enquiiy
it could not be found that any mortal man did sowid it. (4)
The three persons he saith the Devil in his Shape afflicted,
had been as to the times and manner afflicted as he conf easetL

(5) That E. I. confessed as much as W. B. chaigeth her witL

(6) Many others confessed a Witch Meeting, or Witch meetings at the Village as well as he.

Note also that these Confessors did not only witness against
themselves, but against one another; and against many if not
all those that Suffered for that Crime. As for example, whea

^ Martha Sprague. * Rose Foster. * Abigail Martin.

* Elizabeth Johnson. Her daughter, of the same name, was abo accuaed
and confessed (see p. 382, note 4, above).

* Abigail Falkner. She and her sister Elizabeth Johnson wefe daughters of
the Rev. Francis Dane (or Deane), senior pastor at Andover, who seems from
the first to have stood against the panic and who was largely instnumental in
ending it. All those here accused were Andover folk, neighbors of
See as to them Mrs. Bailey's cluster on "Witchcraft at Andover" Qn
torical Sketches of Andover).

• 1S921 HALE, A MODEST INQUIRY 421

• G. B.^ was Tiyed, seven or eight of these Confessors severally
! called, said, they knew the said B. and saw him at a Witch1 Meeting at the Village, and heard him exhort the Company /
\ to pull down the Kingdom of God, and set up the Kingdom of
the Devil. He denied all, yet said he justified the Judges and
Jury in Condemning of him ; because there were so many positive witnesses against him : But said he dyed by false Witnesses.
I seriously spake to one that witnessed (of his Exhorting at the
Witch Meeting at the Village) saying to her; You are one that
bring this man to Death, if you have charged any thing upon
him that is not true, recal it before it be too late, while he is
alive. She answered me, she had nothing to charge her self
with, upon that account.

M. C.' had to witness against her, two or three of her own
Children, and several of her Neighbom^ that said they were
in confederacy with her in their Witchcraft.

A. F.' BLad three of her Children, and some of the Neighbom«, her own Sister, and a Servant, who confessed themselves
Witches, and said, she was in confederacy with them: But
alas, I am weary with relating particulars; those that would
see more of this kind, let them have recourse to the Records.

By these things you see how this matter was carried on,
viz. chiefly by the complaints and accusations of the Afflicted,
Bewitched ones, as it was supposed, and then by the Confessions of the Accused, condemning themselves, and others.
Yet experience shewed that the more there were apprehended,
the more were still Afflicted by Satan, and the number of Confessors increasing, did but increase the number of the Accused,
and the Executing some, made way for the apprehending of
others; for still the Afflicted complained of being tormented by
new objects as the former were removed. So that those that
were concerned, grew amazed at the numbers and quality of
the persons accused and feared that Satan by his wiles had in- j
wrapped innocent persons imder the imputation of that Crime.

^ George Burroughs. ' Martha Carrier.

• Abigail Faikner (see pp. 366, 420). "She was urged," says the record,
"to confes the truth for the creddit of hir Town," but "she refused to do it, saying
God would not require her to confess that that she was not guilty of" (Recordi
cf Salem WUehcrtfi, II. 128-135, where may also be found the e^ence against
her). She was condemned, but not executed.

422 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [»'

And at last it was evidently seen that there must be a stq)pDL
or the Generation of the Children of God would fall under tbi
condemnation.

Henceforth therefore the Juries generally acquitted bA
as were Tried, fearing they had gone too far b^ore. AndS
William Phips, Govemour, Reprieved all that were Condomni
even the Confessors, as well as others. And the Confeans
/generally fell off from their Confessions; some saying, tlxf
remembred nothing of what they said ; others said they hii
belied themselves and others. Some brake Prison and m
away, and were not strictly searched after, some acquitted,
some dismissed and one way or other all that had been accosed
were set or left at liberty.

And although had the times been calm, the condition d
the Confessors might have called for a melius inquirendumf
.yet considering the combustion' and confusion this matter
had brought us unto ; it was thought safer to under do than over
' do, especially in matters Capital, where what is once comj^ated
cannot be retrieved : but what is left at one time, may be co^
rected at another, upon a review and clearer discovery of tbe
state of the Case. Thus this matter issued somewhat abruptly.

Ctuipter IV.

Here was generally acknowledged to be an error (at least
on the one hand) but the Querie is. Wherein?

[A.] 1. 1 have heard it said, That the Presidents' in England
were not so exactly followed, because in those there had been
previous quarrels and threatnings of the AfiSicted by those
that were Condemned for Witchcraft; but here, say they, not
so. To which I answer.
/ 1. In many of these cases there had been antecedent p«^
"^ sonal quarrels, and so occasions of revenge; for some of those
Condemned, had been suspected by their Nei^bours several
years, because after quarrelling with their Nei^bours, evils
had befallen those Neighbours. As may be seen in the Printed
Tiyals of S. M. and B. B.^ and others: See Wanders of the In-

^ "Better investigation" — i, e., a writ for a fresh iiiquiiy.

• Excitement. »

* Susannah Martin and Bridget Bishop.

•ai«>2] HALE, A MODEST INQUIRY 423

divisible World, Page 105 to 137.^ And there were other like
i; Cases not Pnnted.

2. Several confessors acknowledged they engaged in the
HI quarrels of other their confederates to afflict persons. As one
it Timothy Swan suffered great things by Witchcrafts, as he
i^ supposed and testifyed. And several of the confessors said
^i they did so torment him for the sake of one of their partners
( who had some oflfenceoflfer'd her by the said Swan. And others
f owned they did the like in the behalf of some of their conI federates.*

, 3. There were others that confessed their fellowship in
, these works of darkness, was to destroy the Church of God (as
is above in part rehearsed) which is a greater piece of revenge
then* to be avenged upon one particular person.

[A.] 2. It may be queried then, How doth it appear that, y
there was a going too far in this afifair.

1. By the numbers of the persons accused which at length
increased to about an himdred and it cannot be imagined l£at
in a place of so much knowledge, so many in so small a compass of Land should so abominably leap into the Devils lap
at once.

2. The quality of several of the accused was such as did
bespeak better things, and things that accompany salvation.
Persons whose blameless and holy lives before did testify for
them. Persons that had taken great pains to bring up their
Children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord : Such as
we had Charity for, as for our own Souls: and Charity is a
Christian duty commended to us. 1 Cor. 13 Chapt., Col. 3.
14, and in many other Scriptures.

3. The number of the afflicted by Satan dayly increased,
till about Fifty persons were thus vexed by the Devil. This
gave just ground to suspect some mistake, which gave advantage to the accuser of the Brethren* to make a breach upon us.

4. It was considerable* that Nineteen were Executed, and
all denyed the Crime to the Death, and some of them were

» At pp. 223-236, above.

« Timothy Swan, aged thirty, died early in February, 1602/3 (J^. E. Hut.
and Gen, Reg,, II. 380; Mrs. Bailey, Huiorical Sketches cf Andotoer, p. 237).
' Than. « /. e., Satan (see Rev. xii. 10).

* Deserving of consideration.

424 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAPT CASES

knowing persons, and had before this been accounted Uid^I
less livers. And it is not to be imagined, but that if aH Ul
been guilty ^ some would have had so much tenderness asti'
seek Mercy for their Souls in the way of Confession and aonoi
for such a Sin. And as for the condenmed confessors at ds
. Bar (they being reprieved) we had no experience whether tte
' would stand to their Self-condenming confessions, when tfaer
came to dye.

5. When this prosecution ceased, the Lord so chained vf
Satan, that the afflicted grew presently well. Tlie accused an
generally quiet, and for five years since, we have no socii
molestations by them.

6. It sways much with me that I have since heard and lead
of the like mistakes in other places. As in Suffolk in En^aod
about the year 1645 was such a prosecution, until they saw
that unless they put a stop it would bring all into blood aod
confusion.^ The like hath been in France, till 900 were pot
to Death,' And in some other places the like; So that N.
England is not the only place circumvented by the wfles of the
wicked and wisely Serpent in this kind.

Wierus de Prcestigiis Demonum, p. 678/ Relates, That an
Inquisitor in the Subalpine Valleys, enquired after WcHoen
Witches, and consumed above an hundred in the Flames, and
daily made new offerings to Vulcan of those that needed Hde
bore more than Fire,^ Until the Coimtiy people rose and hj
force of Arms hindred him, and refer the matter to the Bishop.
Their Husbands, men of good Faith, afiSrmed that in that ve^
time they said of them, that they played and danced under a
tree, they were in bed with them.

^ The famous witch-hunt m which Matthew Hopkins was the leading sprnt
(1645-1646).

* What is in thought is doubtless the boast of NiooIas Ropy (BcmjgiiD),
on the title-page of his Dcemonolaireia (1595), that his book rests on the tiiab of
nine hundred, put to death for witdicraft within fifteen years; but this was in
Lorraine, not yet a part of France, thou^ in dose relations with it.

'Lib. VL, cap. 20, of this notable book by which the eminent Bhenisk
physician Wierus (Johann Weyer, 1515-1588) gave to the seal of the witdi-hatcn
its first effective check. This passage, however, he borrows bodily horn the
Parergon Juris (VTIL 22) of an earlier opponent of witch penecutioii, the Italian
jurist Andrea Aldati.

* I. e., those crazed more than criminal : helldbore was counted a cure for
insanity.

1607] HALE, A MODEST INQUIRY 425

R. Burton of Witches, etc. p. 158,^ Saith, That in Chelmsford in Essex, Anno 1645, were Thirty tiyed at once before
Judge Corners, and Foiuteen of them hanged, and an himdred
more contained in several Prisons in Sufifolk and E^ssex.

If there were an Error in the proceedings in other places,
and in N. England, it must be in the principles proceeded upon
in prosecuting the suspected, or in the misapplication of the
principles made use of. Now as to the case at Salem, I conceive it proceeded from some mistaken principles made use
of; for the evincing whereof, I shall instance some principles
made use of here, and in other Coimtiys also, which I find
defended by learned Authors writing upon that Subject.'

Chapter XVIII.

I shall conclude this Discourse with some Application of
the whole.

1. We may hence see ground to fear, that there hath been
a great deal of innocent blood shed in the Christian World,
by proceeding upon unsafe principles, in condenming persons
for Malefick Witchcraft.'

2. That there have been great sinful n^ects in sparing
others, who by their divinings about things future, or discovering things secret, as stollen Goods, etc., or by their informing
of persons and things absent at a great distance, have implored
the assistance of a familiar spirit, yet coloured over with
specious pretences, and have drawn people to enquire of them :
A sin frequently forbidden in Scripture, as Lev. 19. 31 and
20. 6, Isa. 8. 19, 20. and yet let alone, and in many parts of

^See p. 416, note 5. "Burton" has merely inserted into his Kingdom cf
DarkneM (pp. 149-159) the contents of the contemporary True and Exact Re^
lotion (1645) which narrates this Essex persecudon. y

• The following chapters (V.-XVII.) are devoted to the nature of witch- ^^
craft and the proper means for its detection.

* ''Black Witches, or Malefick Matches," explains Hale a little earlier, are
those "who by their enchantments do call in the Devils aid, for revenge, to do
hurt to the bodies and health of their neighbours, or to their cattle, goods, and the
like. These are the persons commonly called Witdies, and against whom the
spirits of men and the laws of men are most bent, for their prosecution and
punishment."

i

426 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES

the Worlds have been countenanced in their diabolical AS^\
profession ; because they serve the interest of those that
a vain curiosity; to pry into things God hath forbidden,
concealed from discoveiy by lawful noieaiis. And d
that by their inchantmentS; have raised mists, strange
and the like^ to b^et admiration, and please Spectators,
When as^ these divinations and operations are the Wi\
more condemned in Scripture than the other.

3. But to come ni^er home, we have cause to be hundk]
for the mistakes and errors which have been in these Cdoml
in their Proceedings against persons for this crime, abiml
fourty years ago and downwards, upon insufficient presonf*!
tions and presidents* of our Nation, whence they came. I i'
not say, that all those were innocent, that suffered in tks
times upon this accoimt. But that such grounds w»e Ab
laid down to proceed upon, which were too slender to evidenoe
the crime they were brought to prove; and thereby a foondition laid to lead into error those that came after. May le
not say in this matter, as it is, Psal. 106. 6. We have mud
with our fathers? And as. Lam. 5. 7. Our fathers have smud
and are not^ and we have horn their iniquities f And wfaetixr
this be not one of the sins the Lord hath been many yean
contending with us for, is worthy our serious enquiry. If the
Lord punished Israel with famine three years for a sin of misguided zeal fomty years before that, committed by the breiii
of a Covenant made four hundred years before that : 2 Sazn.
21. 1, 2, Why may not the Lord visit upon vfi the misguidai
zeal of our Predecessors about Witchcraft above fourty yens
ago, even when that Generation is gathered to their Fatfaen.

4. But I would come yet nearer to our own times, and be
wail the errors and mistakes that have been in the year 1692.
In the apprehending too many we may believe were innocent,
and executing of some, I fear, not to have been condemned;
by following such traditions of our fathers, maxims oi iSot
Common Law, and Presidents* and Principles, which now nt
may see weighed in the balance of the Sanctuary, are found
too hght. I heartily concur with that direction for our publick prayers, emitted December 17, 1696, by our General
Assembly, in an order for a general Fast, viz. " That God

^ 7. e,, "whenas" : whereas. * Pk^eedents.

1697] HALE, A MODEST INQUIRY 427

would shew us what we know not, and help us wherein we have
done amiss, to do so no more: And especially that whatever
mistakes on either hand, have been fallen into, either by the
body of this people, or any order of men, referring to the late
tragedy raised among us by Satan and his Instruments, through
the awful Judgment of God : He would humble us therefore,
and pardon all the errors of his Servants and People, that
desire to love his Name, and be attoned to his land/' I am
abimdantly satisfyed that those who were most concerned to
act and judge in those matters, did not willingly depart from ) /
the rules of righteousness. But such was the diu*kness of that
day, the tortures and lamentations of the afflicted, and the
power of former presidents, that we walked in the clouds,
and could not see our way. And we have most cause to be
humbled for error on that hand, which cannot be retrieved.
So that we must beseech the Lord, that if any innocent blood
hath been shed, in the hour of temptation, tibe Lord will not
lay it to our charge, but be merciful to his people whom he
hath redeemed, Deut. 21. 8, And that in the day when he
shall visit, he will not visit this sin upon our land, but blot it
out, and wash it away with the blood of Jesus Christ.

5. I would humbly propose whether it be not expedient,
that some what more should be publickly done then^ yet
hath, for clearing the good name and reputation of some that
have suffered upon tlus accoimt, against whom the evidence
of their gmlt was more slender, and the groimds for charity
for them more convincing. And this (in order to our obtaining from the Lord farther reconciliation to our land,) and that
none of their surviving relations, may suffer reproach upon
that account. I have both read and heard of several in England, that have been executed for Capital crimes, and afterwards upon sence of an error in the process against them,
have been restored in blood and honour by some publick act.
My Lord Cook* relates a story. A man going to correct a
Girle his Neice, for some offence, in an upper room, the Girle
strove to save her self, till her nose bled, and wiping it with a
cloath, threw the bloody cloath out at the window, and cryed
Murder; and then ran down staires, got away and hid her self.
Her Uncle was prosecuted by her friends upon suspicion of

^Than. 'Sir Edward Coke.

428 NARRATIVES OP THE WITCHCRAFT CASES

Murdering her, because she could not be found. He
that she made her escape^ as above said. Tlien time was
lowed him to bring her forth, but he could not hear d k\
within the time, and fearing he should dy if she could notVj
found, procures another Girie very like her, to appear in Cor
and declare she was his Neice that had been misBing: Botkl
rdations examine this counterfeit, imtil th^ find her out^iDc'
she conf esseth she was suborned and counterfeited the to
Neice. Upon these presumptions the man was found goihy
of Murdering his Neice, and thereupon executed. And after
his execution his true Neice comes abroad and shews her ri
alive and well. Then all that saw it were convinced of tte
Uncles innocency, and vanity of such presumptions. 1\t
Printing and Publishing of this relation Vindicates the gqod
name of the Uncle, from the imputation of the crime of Mimkr.
And this is one end of this present discourse, to take off (n
far as a discourse of this nature can) infamy from the names
and memory of such sufferers in this kind, as do not desenv
the same.

6. Here it may be suitable for us to enquire, What the
Lord speaks to us by such a stupendeous providence, in his
letting loose Satan upon us in this imusual way? Ans. 1. We
may say of this, as our Saviour said of his washing his disdfdes
feet, Joh. 13. What I do thou knowest not now, hut thou MIt
know hereafter. The Jvdgments of the Lord are a great (top,
Psal. 36. 6. How unseardvahU are his jvdgments, and his wiys
past finding out. 2. Yet somewhat of his counsel at present
for our instruction may be known, by comparing the Word
and works of God together.

1. As when Joshua the high Priest though an holy chosen
man of God, stood before the Angel, Satan stood at his ri^t
hand to resist him, or to be his adversary : And the advantage
Satan had was by the filthy garments Joshua was clothei
with before the Angels : That is, some iniquity which yet was
not passed away, Zech. 3. 1, 3, 4. So we may say here were
among Gods own Children filthy garments. TTie sins of Lukewarmness, loss of our first love, unprofitableness under the
Gospel, slumbering and sleeping in the wise, as weU as fooM
Virgins, worldliness, pride, carnal security, and many othw
sins. By these and such like sins the accuser of the Brethxem] HALE, A MODEST INQUIRY 42»

inen got advantage to stand at our right hand (the place of
iBtn Accuser in Courts of Justice) and there accuse us and
Teeist us.

» 2. When the Egjrptians refused to let Israel go to sacrifice
I and keep a feast to the Lord in the Wilderness: The Lord cast
r upon [them] the fierceness of his wrath, by sending Evil Angels
J among them, Psal. 78. 49. Egypts sins were (1 .) Coveteousness ;
I they would not let Israel go, because they gained by their
labours. (2.) Contempt of Gk)d and his Instituted Worship,
and Ordinances. They did not count them of such concernment, that Israel should go into the Wilderness to observe them.
Both these sins have too much increased in our Land. (1.)
Coveteousness, an inordinate love of the World gave Satan
advantage upon us. (2.) Contempt of Gods Worship and Instituted Ordinances. The Errand of our Fathers into this y
Wilderness, was to Sacrifice to the Lord; that is, to worship
God in purity of heart and life, and to wait upon the Lord,
walking in the faith and order of the Gospel in Church fellowship; that they might enjoy Christ in all his Ordinances. But
these things have been greatly neglected and despised by many
bom, or bred up in the Land. We have much forgotten what
our Fathers came into the Wilderness to see. The sealing
Ordinances of the Covenant of Grace in Church-Communion
have been much slighted and neglected; and the fury of this
Stonn raised by Satan hath fallen very heavily upon many
that lived under these neglects. The Lord sends Evil Angels
to awaken and punish our negligence : And to my knowledge
some have been hereby excited to enter into the Chamber of
Gods Ordinances, to hide themselves, until the indignation be
over past.

3. David when he removed the Ark from Kirjathjearim,
had the Ark put into a new Cart, which should have been carried by the Kohathites. Numb. 3. 31. And David thought
this was right, until the Lord slew Uzza for touching the Ark :
But then he looked more exactly into the will of God; and
confesseth that the Lord made a breach upon them, because
they sought him not after the due order, 1 Chron. 13. 6, 7, 9,
10, and 16. 11, 12, 13. Had not the Lord made that breach
upon them, they had persisted securely in their error. So I
may say in this case. In the prosecution of Witchcraft, we

430 NARRATIVES OF THE WITCHCRAFT CASES [\

sought not the Lord after the due order; but have prooeedeil
after the methods used in former times and other places, mm
Othe Lord in this tremendous way made a breach up(mi&
And hereby we are made sensible that the methods fonnahl
used are not sufficient to prove the guilt of such a crime. M\
this I conceive was one end of the Lords letting Satan looeeic'
torment and accuse so many; that hereby we may search (A
the truth more exactly. For had it not been for this dreadfd
dispensation, many would have lived and dyed in that enor,
which they are now convinced of.

4. The Lord delivered into the hand of Satan the Estate,
Children, and Body of Job, for the tryal of Jobs faith aod
patience, and proof of his perfection and uprightness. So tk
Lord hath delivered into Satans hand mens Children and
Bodies, yea names and estates into Satans hand for the tiyal
of their faith and patience, and farther manifestation of the
sincerity of their professions.

7.^ From that part of the discourse which shews the power
of Satan to torment the bodies, and disturb the minds of those,
he is let loose upon. Chap. 6, I would infer, that Satan may
be suffered so to darken the minds of some pious Souls, as to
cause them to destroy themselves by drowning, hanging, or
the like. And when he hath so far prevailed upon some, that
formerly lived a Christian life, but were under the preval&xj
of a distracting Melancholy at their latter end. We may have
Charity that their Souls are Saved, notwithstanding the sad
conclusion of their lives. I speak not to excuse any that
having the free use of their reason willingly destroy theniselvesy
out of pride, discontent, impatience, etc. Achitophel who out
of height of Spirit because his Counsel was not followed, and to
prevent Davids executing of him, for his rebellion and treason,
destroyed himself, hath left his name to stink imto all generations.* And Judas who for his unpandelled treachery in betraying his Master, and the Lord of life, was justly left to
hange himself; and the rope breaking or dipping he fell down
head long, or with his face down ward, so that he burst asunder
in the midst, and all his bowels gushed out, Math. 27. 5. with
Act. 1. 13, left by his sin and punishment in the last act of

^ Such is the numbering of the original.

' The story of Ahithophel b to be found in II Samuel zv.-xvii.

.6071 HALE, A MODEST INQUIRY 431

.^ life the black character of a Son of perdition. But those
JJiat being out of their right minds, and hurried by an evil
^irit, as persons under a foree to be their own executioners,
^are not always to be ranked with these.
^ 8. Seeing we have been too fierce against supposed Malefick Witchcraft, let us take heed we do not on the contrary
w'become too favourable to divining Witchcraft: And become
^like Saul who was too zealous against the Gibeonites, and at
^last turned to seek after one that had a familiar Spirit, to his

own destruction. Let us not, if we can help it, suffer Satan

i

to set up an ensuring office for stolen Goods. That after he

' hath brought the curse of God into the house of the thief, by
^ tempting him to steal, he may not bring about the curse into
' the houses of them from whom the goods were stolen, by alluring them to go to the god of Ekron to enquire. That men may
not give their Souls to the Devil in exchange, for his restoring
to them their goods again, in such a way of divination. The
Lord grant it may be said of New England, as is prophecyed
of Judah, Mic. 5. 12. / wiU cut off Witdicrafta out of thine hand,
and thou shaU have no more soothsayers.

9. Another extream we must beware of, is, viz. Because
our fathers in the beginning times of this Land, did not see so
far into these mysteries of iniquity, as hath been since discovered. Let us not undervalue the good foundations they laid
for God and his people, and for us in Church and Civil Government. For Paul that eminent Apostle knew but in part; no
wonder then, if our Fathers were imperfect men. In the
purest times in Israel, there were some Clouds of ignorance
over-shadowing of them. Abraham, David, and the best
Patriarchs were generally ignorant of the sin of Polygamy.
And although Solomon far exceeded Nehemiah in wisdom; yet
Nehemiah saw farther into the evil of Marrying Outlandish
Women, than that wisest of Kings, and meer fallen men.
Neh. 13. 26. Josiah kept the Passeover more exactly, than
David, and all the Reforming Kings of Judah, 2 Chron. 35. 18.
All the godly Judges and Kings of Judah were unacquainted
with, and so negligent of the ri^t observation of the feast of
Tabernacles, until it came to Nehemiahs time : And he understood and revived an ordinance of God, that lay buried in
oblivion, near about a thousand years. Now be that shall

.1>«

432 NARRATIVES OP THE WITCHCRAFT CASES

reject all the good in doctrine and practice, which was in&
tainedy professed and practiced by so many Gkxlly leaders
cause of some few errors found among them, will be found;
fight against God. A dwarf upon a giants Moulders, cans
fiuther than the giant.

It was a glorious enterprize of the beginners of these C
onies, to leave their native Coimtry to propagate the Goepe
And a very high pitch of faith, zeal, and courage that caim
them forth, to follow the Lord into this wHdemess, into a hx
that was not sown. Then was New England holiness to ik
Lord, and all that did devour them, or attempted so to do, (fie
offend, and evil did come upon them. And the Lord &
graciously remember this kindness of their Youth, and love d
their Espousals; In granting them many eminent tokens d
his favour; by his presence with them in his Ordinances, k
the Conversion of Souls, and edifying and comforting the beans
of his Sefrvants: By signal answering their prayers in times o(
difiSculty : By protecting them from their Enemies; By guiding of, and providing for them in a Desart. And the Lord wil
stUl remember this their kindness unto their Poeterit}^ unkss
that by their Apostasy from the Lord, they vex his Holy ^mit
to ttum to be their Enemy: And thereby cut off the Entail d
his Covenant Mercies; which God forbid. Oh that the Lad
may he with us, as he was with oiar Fathers; and that he may nd
leave iis, nor forsake vet

Finis.

THE VIRGINIA CASE OF GRACE SHERWOOD,

1706

J

INTRODUCTION

To those who know what elements made up the earliest
population of Virgmia it is needless to point out why there we
find no such abiding fear of the Devil and his minions as among
the religious exiles of New England. There no Mosaic law
was enacted into statute; and the weU-known Cavalier sympathies of the colony suggest why the mid-century witchpanic of England's Presbyterian coimties foimd there no echo.
Fear of witches, indeed, Virginia did not whoUy escape; but
her witch-terrors found their soiux^ in folk-lore more than in
theology, and, though her courts could not keep altogether
clear of the matter, their influence seems to have been almost
whoUy a restraining one. The testimony of their records has,
in part at least, been diligently ferreted out,^ and the historian
of the social and economic life of the colony has summarized
it in a lucid chapter^ which is the best introduction to the single
episode here to be narrated. By the middle of the century the
bandying of the abusive name of ''witch" was calUng forth
actions for slander and vigorous rulings by the courts; and in
1656 a clergyman from Scotland brought against one William
Harding the only legal process which is known to have ended
in conviction and a penalty — ^ten stripes and banishment from
the coimty. Suits enough from that time on there were; but
they were brought by the accused for damages, or failed to
convince the jury. Especially that southeastern r^on known

> Notably by Mr. Edward W. James, who published his gleanings first in
the WiUiam and Mary College Historical Quarterly (I.-IV.— 1S92-1896), then in
the Lower Norfolk County Virginia Antiquary (I.-III.).

' Philip Alexander Bruce, InttiHttimud Hitfory qf Virginia m the Seventeenth
Century, I. 276-289.

435

436 NARRATIVES OP THE WITCHCRAPT CASES

as " Lower Norfolk County/' and, above all, its eastern rtil
along the Atlantic, which in 1691 became Princess Am
County, seems to have been disturbed by these suq)icki&l
There in 1675 and 1679 juries of women had been impandU^
to search Jane Jenkins and Alice Cartwright, " acconfing to it
118th chapter of Dalton,'' for the Devil's maiios;^ and ths!
in 1698 Anne Byrd appealed in vain to a court against iHi
charges of '^ riding '^ her neighbors as a witch. In that san
year Grace Sherwood, wife of James Sherwood, planter, i
woman in middle life whose father, John White, had long
dwelt there as carpenter and planter, was accused by ooe
John Gisbume of bewitching his hogs and cotton. She w&
her husband brou^t an action for slander, but lost it, and was
as unsuccessful against Anthony Barnes, who charged her with
riding his wife and then escaping through the keyhole in tk
shape of a black cat. It was this Grace Sherwood against
whom in 1706 was brought that culminating action for witchcraft to which belong the following papers. Her story has
been often told — ^and often with a generous use of the imagination. More than once the records have been printed, as by
President Gushing of Hampden-Sidney in the Collection (L
67-68) of the Virginia EUstorical and Philosophical Society
and by Henry Howe in his Historical Collections of Virgim
(Charleston, 1845), pp. 436-438; but most fully and carrfuify
by Edward W. James, whose pages in the William and Mary
College Quarterly (III. 190-192, 242-245; IV. 18-20) have furnished our text. It has, however, been collated afresh with
the record at Princess Anne by the editor of the present volume— and not without correction. It will be noticed that the

^ What is meant is of course that paragraph of Michad Dalton's manyeditioned handbook of procedure, The CourUrey JtuHce, which, prescribing tests
for the detection of witches, avers that the witch's imp, or familiar, "hath some
big or little teat upon their body, and in some secret place, where he sucketh
them." ''And besides their sucking, the Devil leaveth other marks upon their
body," which "being pricked will not bleed, and be often in their aeeretest parts,
and therefore require diligent and careful search."

r INTRODUCTION 437

i ^ court clerk uses a sort of short-hand; abbreviating sometimes
*;by a lavish use of "superiors" (as "som^" for "summoned,"
^ "Exiy" for "Excellency"), sometimes by mere omission of
2 letters. The peculiarities of the text are such that in this
g instance we have preserved forms which it is now more usual
, to expand into shapes more easily legible; but the obscurer
] signs (as "y" for "th," or "flf" for "F," or the stroke above
I a final "con" to make it "cion") have not been reproduced.*

^ TTiough the old record book through which these entries are scattered is
still in good condition, the passages relating to this interesting case are beginning to suffer from wear, and from the first four lines of the entry for July 5,
which come at the bottom of a page, a few words have crumbled away, and
are preserved only by the transcripts. In the margin of the entry for May 2
are the words "A^^ Grace Sherwood for witchcraft," and in that of the entry
for June 6 the words " Bousch AttT for Queen vs. Sherwood "

THE CASE OF GRACE SHERWCX)D

Princess Ann ss. At a Court hdd the 3^ of Jan^ 1701.

Whereas Luke Hill and uxor^ Som'^ Grace ^lerwood to
this Court* in Suspetion of witchcraft and she fayhng to
apear it is therefore ord' that attachm* to the Shnr* do lone
to Attach her body to ans' the 8<^ Som next Court.

SJUnOxT Fdmum/ 6, 1705/6.]

Suite for Suspition of witchcraft brougjit by Luke ES
ag^ Grace Sherwood is ord' to be referr tiU to morr^.

[Under Fdmuiry 7, 1705/6.]

Whereas a CompI^ was brou^t ag^ Grace ^errwood m
Suspition of witchcraft by Luke Hill, etc.: and the matter
being after a long time debated and ord' that the s^ Hill pay
all fees of this CompP and that the s^ Grace be here next
Comt to be Searched according to the CompP by a Jury of
women to decide the s^ Diff err : and the Sherr is L^ewise on^
to Som an able Jiuy accordingly.

[Under Mca-ch 7, 1705/6.]

Present : Col<* Edward Moseley , Lieu* [Ck)l®] Adam Thorrowgood, Maj' Henry Sprat, Cap*" Horatio Woodhouse, M'
Jno Comick, Cap*" Henry Chapman, M' W"" Smith, M ' Jn^
Richason, Cap*" Geo : H^oidcock, Justices.

1 Luke Hill and wife. Against them in December, 1705, Grace SbterwooA
had brought action for assault and battery, claiming £50 of damages and reeeiviBg
twenty shillings. What this affray may have had to do with the Aargt of witc^
craft does not appear.

> The court was the county court, its members a group of "gentlemen d
the county, called justices of the peace." Their names appear just bdow, in ^
entry for March 7. Such a panel of the court heads the reooid d eadi of die
sessions named, but its repetiticm has seemed unnecessary. Grace Sherwood's
case was only one of many dealt with at each session. Usually only four or five
justices were present •

438

17061 CASE OP GRACE SHERWOOD 439

Whereas a Complaint have been [made] to this Comi) by
Luke Hill and his wife that one grace Sherrwood of this Coimty
was and Have been a Long time Suspected of witchcraft and
have been as Such Represented wherefore the Sherr at the last

m Court was ord** to Som a Jury of women to this Court to Serch
her on the s"^ Suspicion, She assenting to the Same. And after

. the Jury was impannelld and Sworn and Sent out to make
Due inquirery and Inspection into all Cercumstances, After a

i Mature Consideracion They bring in this verditt: wee of the
Jury have Serch** Grace Sherwood and have found Two things

? like titts w*** Severall other Spotts : Eliz»» Barnes, forewoman,
Sarah Norris, Mai^** Watkins, Hannah Dinnis, Sarah Goodacre, Mary Burgess, Sarah Sergeant, winifred Davis, Ursula
Henly, Arm Bridg", Ezable waples, Mary Cotle.*

[Under May 2, 1706.]

Whereas a former Compl* was brought ag* Grace Sherwood
for Suspicion of Witchcraft, w*** by the Attumy Gen'" Report
to his Ex^'isr in Cotmcill was to' Generall and not Charging her
with any perticular Act, therefore represented to them that
Princess Ann Court might if they thought fitt have her ex-

^ At this point the court reached the limit of its powers, and Luke Hill,
doubtless at its instance, petitioned the highest tribunal of the colony, the Greneral
Court, i. e., the Governor and Council, informing them that "one Grace Sher>
wood of Princess Anne County being suspected of witchcraft upon his complaint
to that county court that she had bewitched the petitioner's wife, the court
ordered a jury of women to search the said Grace Sherwood who upon search
brought in a verdict against the said Grace, but the court not knowing how to
proceed to judgment thereon, the petitioner prays that the Attorney Generall
may be directed to prosecute the said Grace for the same." But the attorney
general, to whom on March 28 the matter was referred, reported on April 16
that he found the charge too general and that the county court ought to have
made a fuller examination of the matters of fact, and that "pursuant to the
directions and powers to County Courts given by a late act of Assembly" th^
ought, if they thought there was sufficient cause, to have conunitted the accused
to the genenl prison of the colony, "whereby it would have come regularly befcnre
the Generall Court" Wherefore he suggested "that the sud County Court do
make a further Enquiry into the matter," and, if they find cause for acticm, to
follow the said law; and it was ordered that a copy of his report "be sent to the
court of Princess Anne County for their direction in the premises." (Qf. Palmer's
Calendar qf Virginia State Papere, 1. 100 : at some points this corrects Mr. James's
readings, at others needs correction by them.)
«Too.

440 NARRATIVES OP THE WrTCHCRAFT CASES \pA

amined De Novo, and the Court Being of Oppinicm that del
is great Cause of Suspicion Doe therefore ord' that the Sbec
take the Said Grace into his Safe Costody untill She Shall gm
bond and Security for her Appearance to the next Comt ;il
be examined Denovo and that the Constable of that predzd:!
go with the Sherr and Serch the Sd graces House and aD Sospicious places Carfully for all Imag^^ and Such like ttme
as may any way Strengthen The Suspicion, and it is likeiris
Ordered that the Sherr Som an Able Jury of Women^ abo A
Evidences as Cann give in anything ag^ her in Evidence, b
behalf of our Soveraign Lady tiie Queen, To Attend the nen
Court Accordingly.

[Under June 6, 1706,1

Whereas Grace Sherwood of this County have be^i Complained of as a person Suspected of Witchcraft, and now bang
Brought before this Court in ord' for examinaeion, this Comt
have therefore requested m' Maxm^^ Boush to present Inf ormacion ag^ her as Councill in behalf of our Soveraign Ladr
the Queen in order to her being brought to a regular TiyalL

■ •••■• «»

Whereas an Inf ormacion in Behalf of her Mag^ was presented by Luk Hill, to the Court in pursuance To M' Gen'"
Atf^' Tomson report on his Excell*'' ord in Councill the 16*
Aprill Last About Grace Sherwood being Suq)ected of Witchcraft, have thereupon Sworn Severall Evidences ag^ her bj
vr^ it Doth very Ifl^ely appear.

[Under June 7, 1706.]

Whereas at the Last Court an ord' was past that the Sherr
should Sonunons an able Juiy of Women to Serch Grace Sherwood on Suspicion of witchcraft, w^*^ although the Same was
performed by the Sherr yet they refused And did not i^pear,
it is therefore ord' that the Same persons be againe Som^ by the

^ Such "images," of course, as witches were believed to make d those ihtj
wished to afflict (see above, pp. 104, 163, 219, 228). "TVy have often," agrs
Dalton, whose book these justices doubtless had open before them, "Pictures
of Clay or Wax Oike a Man, etc., made of sudi as they would bewitch) found in
their House, or which they roast, or bury in the Earth, that as die Fictoie consumes, so may the parties bewitched consume."

^ 47061 CASE OF GRACE SHERWOOD 441

■■Bherr for their Contempt To be Dealt w*"* according to the
^ttmost Severity of the Law, and that a new Jury of Women
^ ^be by him Som** To appear next Court to Serch her on the
^aforesaid Suspicion, and that he likewise Som all evidences
ft that he Shall Be informed of as materiall in the Complaint,
^and that She continue in the Sherr Costody imless She give
■i good bond And Security for her Appearance at the next Court,
Si and that She be of the Gkxxi behaviour towards her Majestie
< and all her Leidge people in the mean time.

II

f

[Under Jvly 5, 1706.]

Present, Mr Jn<* Richason, Cap*" Jn° Moseley, Cap*** Henry
Chapman, Cap*" W" Smyth, Justices.

Whereas for this Severall Courts the Business between luke
hill and Grace Sherwood on Suspicion of witchcraft have Been
for Severall things omitted, perticularly for want of a Jury to
Serch her, and the Court being Doubtfull That they Should
not get one this Court, and b^ng willing to have all means
possible tryed either to acquit her or to Give more Strength to
the Suspicion that She might be Dealt w*** as Deserved, therefore it was Ord'* that this Day by her own Consent to be
tried in the water by Ducking,^ but the weather being very
Rainy and Bad Soe that possibly it might endanger her health,
it is therefore ord*** that the Sherr request the Justices precisely to appear on wednessday next by tenn of the Clock at
the Court house, and that he Secure the body of the Sd Grace
till that time to be forth Coming, then to be Dealt w*'' as
afore sd. Jn» Richason, Henry Chapman.*

[Under July 10, 1706.]

Whereas Grace Sherwood being Suspected of witchcraft
have a long time waited for a Fit uppertunity For a Further
Examinacion, and by her Consent and Approbacion of this
Court, it is ord' that the Sherr take all Such Convenient assistance of boats and men as Shall be by him thought Fitt, to
meet at Jn"" Harpers plantation in ord' to take the Sd Grace
forthwith and put her into above mans Debth and try her how

^ As to this water ordeal for witcbes see above, p. 21, and note 3.

' These gentlemen were doubtless a committee charged with the matter.

442 NARRATIVES OP THE WITCHCRAFT CASES

She Swims Therein, alwajres having Care of her life to pieser?!
her from Drowning, and as Soon as She Comes Out that kl
request as many Ansient and Knowing women as possiUeli
Cann to Serch her CarefuUy For all teats epotts and mansl
about her body not usuall on Others, and that as they Find t)r
Same to make report on Oath To the truth thereof to di
Court, and further it is ord' that Som women be requested ic
Shift and Serch her before She goe into the water, that Sk
Carry nothing about her to cause any Further Suq)ickHL
• ••••• ••

Wheras^ on complaint of Luke hill in behalf of hs
Majesty that now is ag^ Grace Sherwood for a person Suq)ected
oi witdhcraft, and having had Sundry Evidences Swome ag'
her, proving Many Cercumstances to which She could not
make any excuse or Little or nothing to say in her own BduJf ,
only Seemed to Rely on what the Court should Doe, and theieupon consented to be tryed in the Water and Likewise to be
Serched againe, w^ experim^ being tiyed and She Swimmg
when therein and boimd Contrary To Custom and the Judg^ d
all the Spectators, and afterwards being Serched by Fire
antient weomen who have all Declared on Oath that She is not
like them nor noe Other woman that they knew of, having two
things like titts on her private parts of a Black CoIIer, being
Blacker than the Rest of her Body, all which Cercumstaiioe
the Court weighing in their Consideradon Doe therefore ord"
that the Sherr take the Sd Grace Lito his Costody and to Commit her body to the Conmion Goal of this County there to
Secure her by irons, or otherwise there to Remaine till Such
time as he Shall be otherwise Directed in ord' for her coming
to the Common Goale of the country* to bee brought to a
Future Tryall there.* Edward Moseley and M'. Richason.^

^ Tliis entry is made later <m the same day: the court had mere^ taken i
recess for the "dudcing."

' /. e., at Williamsburg. See p. 439, note 1.

* If, at the next session of the Genovl Court, Grace Sherwood came up for
trial, the records are missing, and probably perished in the burning of the State
Courthouse in 1865. She at least survived the trial; for in 1706 she was confessing judgment for six hundred pounds of tobacco, and in 1733 willing her estate
to her three sons. It is not till 1740 that the proving of that will shows her
deceased.

* Perhaps the committee that drafted this verdict

INDEX

INDEX

Abbot, Abiel, Hidary <tfAndooer, 180 n^
242 n.

Abbot, Benjamin, testifies against
Martha Carrier, 241, 242.

Abbot, Ndiemiah, testifies against
Elisabeth How, 239.

Abbot, Sarah, testimony, 242.

Abraham, 431.

Aooeta, Joseph, 245; Natural and Moral
History of the Indies, 245 n.

Adams and Stiles, History of AncierU
Wethersfidd, ^ n.

Addington, Isaac, proclamation for
day of prayer, 385, 386.

Admonitio de SuperMionibus Magids
vitandis, by Nicholas Hemming, 247,
247 n.

Ady, Thomas, A Candle in the Darkf
222, 222 n.; A Perfect Discovery of
Witches, 222, 222 n.

Ahithophel, story of, 427 n.

Albany, N. Y., destruction of documents in fire at, 43.

Alciati, Andrea, Italian jurist, 424 n.;
opposes witch persecution, ^24 n.

Alden, John, of Uie Mayflower, 170 n.

Alden, Capt. John, 187 n., 188 n.,
352 n.; suspected of witcho^t, 170,
170 n., 171, 178, 178 n.; account of
trial for witchcraft, 352-355; fast at
house of, 355 n.; Judge Sewall reads
sermon for, 355 n. ; prayer for, 355 n. ;
acquittal, 383.

Alden, Rev. Lucius, describes house of
George Walton, 61 n.

Allen, Rev. James, 362, 362 n.; minister of First Church in Boston, 97,
97 n., 118.

Allen, John, testifies against Susanna
Martin, 230, 231.

Allen, Small, member of grand jury, 86.

Allyn, John, secretary of the colony of
Connecticut, 34 n.

Amaseen, John, an Italian, 62, 74; arrests George Walton, 76 n.

445

America and West Indies, Calendar of

State Papers, 76 n.
American Antiquarian Society, 255,

255 n., 256 n.; Proceedings, 91 n.,
186 n., 197 n., 207 n., 215 n.; Dr.
Samuel F. Haven, librarian of, 256,

256 n.; Isaiah Thomas, president of,
256 n.; papers of Samuel Mather
in, 256 n.

American Criminal Trials, Chandler,

347 n., 380 n.
American Historical Magasine, 18 n.
Andover, Mass., cases of witchcraft,

180, 180 n., 371-374, 419-422; Dane,

Rev. Fi:^cis, pastor at, 420 n.
Andover, Historical Sketches of, by S. L.

Bailey, 180 n., 242 n., 366 n., 420 n.,

423 n.
Andover, History of, by Abiel Abbot,

180 n., 242 n.
Andover, Witchcraft at, by Sarah Loring

Bailey, 420 n.
Andrew, Daniel, 366 n.
Andros government, 76 n.; overthrQW

in New Ekigland, 348 n.
Annals of WUcherafi, by S. G. Drake,

31 n., 410 n.
A nother Brand Plud^d Out of the Buming,25Sn.
Anthony, Allard, sherifif of New York,

45.
Apollonius of Tyana, 302, 302 n.
Arnold, John, prison keeper, warrant

for prisoners, 354-355.
Ashcom, Charles, accuses Margaret

Mattson of witcdicraft, 86.
Assemblies Catechism, The, by John

Cotton, 113.
Assi^Umce to Justices of the Peace,

An, by Joseph Keble, 411, 412,

412 n.
Atkinson, John, testifies against Susanna Martin, 231.
Atkinson, Sarah, testifies against Susanna Martin, 234, 236.

446

INDEX

Aves, Samuel, testimony rdative to

case of Margaret Rule, 337.
Ayres, Goodwife, 21 n.

Bailey, Rev. John, 362, 362 n.; minister at Watertown, Cknm., 124 n«

Bailey, Sarah Loring, Hidarieal
Shdihu cf Andover, 180 n., 242 n.,
3d6n., 420 n., 423 n.; WUcherafl at
Andooer, 420 n.

Baillehachft, Jean de, 10 n.

Baker, Thomas, service as juror, 44,
44 n.

Balding, Thomas, attestation of, 87.

Ballard, Joseph, asks accusers who afflicted wife, 371-372, 374.

Ballard, Mrs. Joseph, 180, 180 n., 371872.

Barbadoes : Hooton, Oliver, merchant
of, 60; Parris, Rev. Samuel, engaged
in West Indian trade, 153 n.

Barefoot, Capt. Walter, dqnity collector fOT province of New Hampshire, 67, 67 n., 72; witness of stone
throwing in house of George Walton,
69.

Baricer, Abigail, account of confession,
374-376.

Barker, William, preservation of indictment, 380 n.; confesses witchcraft, 419-422.

Barnard, Rev. Thomas, 375, 375 n.

Barnes, Anthony, accuses Grace Sherwood of witchcraft, 436.

Barnes, Elisabeth, forewoman of woman jury, 439.

Barnes, John, member of grand jury,
85,86.

Bassett, Goodwife, confesses witchcraft,
410 n.

Batcheler, John, juryman at Salem
trials, 388.

Baxter, Richard, 92; The Certainty of
the Worlds of SpiriU, 98, 98 n., 208,
320 n., 416, 416 n.

Bayard, Nicholas, marries Judith Varleth, 19 n.

Beale, William, 371 n.

Beard, 4.

Beaumond, Mr., see BaiUehache, Jean de.

Belknap, Dr. Jeremy, 291, 376 n.;
The Remainder of the Acantnt of the
SaUm Witchcraft, 376 n.

Bdlingham, Got. Bktard, 410n.

BdlomoDt, Earl of, gotcmor of
chusetts and New Yori^, 282n.

Benham, Joaqih, 385 n.

Benham, Winifred, aoquitted of witchcraft, 385, 385 n.

Bentley, Rev. Wittkun, 187 n^ 971 1.

Bernard, Rev. Richaid, 330, Z30il,
412; Guide to Gnttd-Jurymem . . .
ta ooset qf Wiieharafif 163, 304 ^
416, 416 n.; rulea for deCeetioa of
witches, 205.

Berwick, Me., 259 n.

Beverly, Mass., Rer. John Hafe^ miaisterat, 397.

Besae, Ed?rard, member of petty joit,
86.

Bibber, Sarah, addicted to fitsi 151
154 n., 155. 344.

Biles, William, attended Counol, 8&.

BtOQrapkical Didionary^ Eliot, 293 b.

Bishop, Bridget (aUam (»ivcr), 249, 378»
419 n., 422, 422 n.; trial fcr witchcraft, 223-228, 229, 307, 307b.;
false accusatioPB agahist, 356, 356 b.

Bishop, Edward, 347 n.; husband of
Bridget, 225; aociHed of witehoaft,
347; escapes from priaoD with wie^
370.

Bishop, George, New Bngkmd Jmi§ii,
35 n.; 43n., 44n.

Bishop, Samuel, 370.

Black, G. F., XTO, a07 n.

Black, Mary, a negro, accused of witahcraft, 347.

Black-Man, appeaianoe of, 309, 310^
312.

Black witchcraft, 425, 425 n.

Blathwayt, William, letter to^ 196 n.

Bly, John, testifies againiit Bridget
Bishop, 225, 228.

Bly, William, tesUfiea against Bridget
Bishop, 228.

Bodleian Library, 150 n.

Bodtf ^ Liberties, Mannschuflcitii taws,
181 n., 363 n.

Bolton, Robert, Hittary ef the Catmiy ef
Westchester, 42 n.

Borden, Matthew, witness of stone
throwing in house of George Waltoa,
69.

Boston, Mass.: Mather, Increase, minister of North Church, 3; OU South

INDEX

447

ii Church, 22 n., V7, 07 n., 118, 177,
It 186 n.; Morse, William, wife tried
k for witchcraft, 31 n.; Broughton,
1 Thomas, merchant at, 37 n.; Allen,
I James, minister at First Church, 97,
97 n., 118; Moodey, Joshua, associ*
f ate minister of First Church, 97, 97 n.,
118; Willard, Rev. Samuel, pastor
i of Old South Church, 97, 97 n., 118;
Public Library, 151; Thacher, Rev,
Thomas, first minister of Old South
Church, 177 n.; justices, 185; Wil«
son, Rey. John, first minister at,
213, 213 n.; Mather, Cotton, replies to ministers at, 214, 214 n.;
Jones, Margaret, executed at» 408,
408 n.

Bodon, History and AntiquitieM qf,
151 n., 295 n.

Bodon, Memorial Hitiory qf, W. F.
Poole in, 256, 256 n., 292 n., 295 n.,
307 n., 408 n., 410 n.

Boston Record Commienonen^ Beporis^
291 n., 295 n.

Boush, Maximilian, prosecutes Grace
Sherwood, 440.

Boyle, Robert, 16; governor of the Corporation f OT the Spread of the Gospel
in New England, 16 n.; PhUooophi'
cal Works, 16 n.

Bracy, Thomas, attestation of, 87.

Bradbury, Capt. Thomas, 366 n.

Bradbuxy, Mary, convicted of witchcraft, 185 n., 366, 366 n.

Bradford, WUliam, 187 n.

Bradstreet, Capt. Dudley, Justice of.
the peace, 180, 180 n.; accused of
witchcraft, 372.

Bradstreet, Gov. Simon, 372 n., 412;
condemns proceedings against witchcraft, 184.

Braintree, Mass.: Fiske, Rev. Moses,
minister at, 109 n.; Thompson, minister at, 409, 409 n.

Brand pluck* d out qf the Bvming, A^
by Cotton Mather, xiii, 258 n., 259287; introduction to, 255-258.

Branford, Conn., 137 n.; Rev. Abraham Pierson, minister at, 139, 139 n.
^ee also Tocutt.

Brattle, Thomas, 168, 186 n., 187 n.,
188 n., 248 n., 291, 376 n.; member
of Royal Society, 167; treasurer of

Harvard College, 167; biographical
sketch, 167, 168; introduction to
letter of, 167, 168; Ldler of, 169190.

Bridgers, Ann, member of woman jury,
439.

Brigham, C. S., librarian of American
Antiquarian Society, xiii, 256 n.

Bristol, R. I., Rev. Benjamin Woodbridge, minister at, 65, 65 n,

Broadbent, Joshua, Boston Tory, 362 n.

Brookhaven, L. I., case of witchcraft
from, 43.

Brookiuwen, Town of. Records, 44 n.

Broughton, Thomas, merchant of Boston, 37 n.

Brown, William^ wife strangely afflicted by Susanna Martin, 234.

Bruce, Philip Alexander, InsHhttUmal
Hilary of Virginia in the Seventeenth
Centtary, 435, 435 n.

Brunning, John, Memorable Providences
published by, 93.

Bulkeley, Rev. Gershom, Will and
Doom, 411 n.

Burgess, Mary, member of woman
jury, 439.

Burroughs, Rev. George, 241 n., 378,
379, 417-419; execution of, 177 n.,
215-222, 360-361; graduate of Harvard College, 215 n.; minister at
Wells, Me., 215 n. ; accused of afficting Ann Lawson by witchcraft, 217,
218; treatment of wife and daughter,
220,221; speech declaring innocence,
360-361; testimony against, 421,
421 n.

Burton, R., The Kingdom of Darkness,
416, 416 n., 425, 425 n.

Buxton, John, complaint of, 347.

Byfield, N., condemns proceedings
against witchcraft, 184.

Byid, Anne, charged with witchcraft,
436.

Caen, France, 10, 10 n.

Calamy, Edmund, Continuation, 150 n.

Calef, Judge John, funeral sermon for,
293 n.

Calef, Robot, a Boston merchant, xiii,
152 n., 153 n., 201 n., 215 n., 380 n.,
397, 413 n.; More Wonders of the
InvisibU World, 124 n., 207, 208,

448

INDEX

280-393, 294 n.; free from ■upentH
tion, 291; biographical sketch, 291*
296; arrival in Ajnerica, 292; autographs, 292 n.; article by W. S. Harris on, 292n.-293n., 295 n.; chil«
dren of, 293, 295 n. ; Cotton Mather's
reference to book of, 293-294; retires to Rozbury, 294-295; burialplace, 295; reprints of book, 295;
memoir by S. G. Drake, 295 n.; wife
of, 295 n.; aim in writing book, 297;
call to vindicate the truth, 301; oom«
parison of the powers of God and the
Devil, 301; evils arising from dootrine of devils and witchcraft, 303*
304; lettNs to Cotton Mather, 329*
333, 33^-341; letUrn from Cotton
Mather, 333-337; opinion of Cotton
Mather, 388, 388 n.

Cakf, Robert, Jr., ziu, 291, 201 n«-292,
292 n., 295 n.

Calef pedigree, 291 n.-293 n.

Calendar of State Papers, Colonial, Amer*
ica and WetA Indies, 76 n., 198 n.,
201 n., 202 n., 362 n.

CambridQe JetU, The, 112.

Cambridge Platonism, 5, 246.

Camerarius, Philip, 4.

Candle in the Dark, A, by Tlumias Ady,
222, 222 n.

Cariton, William, 295.

Carpenter, Samuel, member of grand
jury, 85; attended Council, 88.

Carrier, Andrew, 363 n.

Carrier, Martha, of Andover, 241,
241 n., 379, 418, 418 n., 419 n.; trial
and execution, 177 n., 241-244, 360,
360 n., 361, 361 n.; accused of witchcraft, 241-244, 421, 421 n.; asserts
innocence, 241 n.; own children testify against, 421, 421 n.

Carrier, Richard, 243, 363 n., 419,
419 n.

Cartesian philosophy, 171.

Carthage, Fourth Council ol, 303, 303 n.

Cartwright, Alice, 436.

Cary, Captain Nathaniel, 349 n.; account of wife's trial for witchcraft,
349-352.

Cary, Mrs. Nathaniel, imprisoned for
witchcraft, 178-180; account of trial
for witchcraft, 349-352; escape from
Cambridge prison, 352 n.

Caeee pf Conseieiicey by Increase MidEl

149, 104 n., 304 n., 357, 357 n^q

377 n., 383 n., 380.
Catue MedteuudeBf by BalthiarI-{

m&us von Gukienklee, 319 a.
Certainly of the Woride qf Spir^ Tm\

by Richard Baxter, 96, 96b., m|

320 n., 416, 416 n.
Chamberlain, disabetli, mameiMfr'

tin Lumley, 56.
Chamberiain, Richard, 35 n^ TSl.

lodged at houae of Geoifn Waka

35 n.; biographical aheidi, SSs?

LithcboUa or Siona-'ThrowiMg Dei

58-77.
Chambers, Robert, Dmmeetie AmA4

ScoOand, dOO n.
Chandler, American Criminal fnk,

347 n.; \niliaDDi Barker's iu&tDA

preserved by, 380 n.
Chandler, Phebe, aocuaes Martha Gdrier of witchcraft, 243.
Qiapman, Ci^. Henry, justiee cf tbe

peace, 438, 441.
Chariestown, Mass.: Morton, CbuH

minister at, 97, 97 n.; witdmft

cases, 349, 382.
Chever, G. F., articles by, 371 n.
Chiever, Mr., present at Salem esBca*

tions, 361 n.
Christmas celebration, Puritan honor

of, 274, 274 n.
Chri^'e PiddUy ike oml^ Skidd ogtM

Satan'e MaUgniiy, by Rev. Deodtt

LawBon, 158 n., 150 n.
Church of England, 168.
Chyrurgion, treatise of, 319, 319 a.
City Island, L. I. Sound, 47 n.
Clsric, Eliaabeth, affidavit of, 61 n.
Claric, Mary, 151 n.
Clark, Miss, aee Mre, Towne.
Claric, Walter, deputy governor d

Rhode Island, 69, 60 n.; witnesi d

stone throwing in house of Geoise

Walton, 69, 69 n.
Clarice, Samuel, 4; iftrrair • . . cjf

Examplet, 10 n.
Claypoole, James, 86.
Clayton, William, attended Council, 85.
Cloyse, Sarah, 161, 161b., 317 n.;

committed for witcfaciaf t, 346.
Cock, John, 87.
Cock, Lasse, attended Council, 85^ 8(L

INDEX

449

Coffin, Joehua, Hidory of Nefwbvry,
Sin.

Coke, IndUtOes, 374 n.

Cole, Ann, afflicted with fits, 18; effect of demons on, 18, 20 n.; influence of Dutch family on, 18-19;
story of, 18-21, 113.

Cole, Matthew, killed by lightning,
20 n.

Collet, Jeremiah, member of petty jury,
86.

Cologne, Hexuricus ab Heer, physician
of, 266, 266 n.

Colonial Bntry Books, 198 n., 202 n.

Colonial Records of ConnecUctUj 135 n.

Colonial Society of Massachusetts,
PtMioatuma, 371 n., 375 n.

Colve, Gov. Anthony, dismisses case
against Katharine Ebirrison, 52 n.

Coman, Richard, testifies against Bridget Bishop, 225.

Common Law, by Joseph Keble, 412,
416.

Connecticut, witch cases, 18 n.; Al13m, John, secretary of the colony
of, 34 n.; Court of Assistants,
48 n.; Winthrop, John, governor of,
93 n.

Connecticut aa a doUmy and ae a State,
by F. Morgan, 18 n.

Conneeticut,ColonialReeord8,19n.f^n,f
48 n., 135 n., 410 n.

Conneetiad, Colonial, The Witchcraft
Ddueion in, by J. M. Taylor, 18 n.,
48 n.

Connecticut Historical Society, Colledione, 411 n.

Connecticut, Witchcraft in, by C. H.
Levermore, 52 n.

Continuation, by Edmund Calamy,
150 n.

Cook, Arthur, witness to stone throwing in house of George Walton, 69,
69 n.

Cook, John, accuses Bridget Bishop of
witchcraft, 224.

Coolin, Annakey, accuses Margaret
Mattson of witchcraft, 87.

Corey, Giles, 154 n., 250, 295; pressed
to death, 366, 367, 367 n.

Corey, Martha, convicted of witchcraft, 154-156, 157, 343-344, 366,
367.

Cornell University, President White
library, 160 n.

Comick, John, justice of the peace,
438.

Corwin, Jonathan, member of Court
of Assistants, 158, 158 n.; of Court
of Oyer and Terminer, 178, 178 n.,
185 n., 353, 355.

Cosoinomancy, 181 n.

Cotle, Mary, member of woman jury,
439.

Cotton, Rev. John, 137 n.; law of
Moses as codified by, 42; Cotton
Mather, grandson of, 91; Af tfib for
Babee, 113; The Aseemblies Cale^
ckiem, 113; preacher to Indians, 309,
309 n.

Cotton Mather and Salem Witchcraft, by
W. F. Poole, 91, 91 n.

Cotton Mather, the Puritan Priest, by
Barrett Wendell, 91, 91 n.

Countrey Juetioe, The, by Michael Daiton, 163 n., 304 n., 436, 436 n.

Court of Assistants, 355 n.

Court of Assizes, description of, 43,
43 n.

Court of Oyer and Terminer, see Oyer
and Terminer, Court of.

Cranfield, Edward, first royal governor
of New Hampshire, 60.

Criminal Law of England, The Use of
Torture in, 1(K2 n.

Crocker, Hannah Mather, granddaughter of Cotton Mather, 255, 255 n.,
256 n.; gift of Mather papers, 256 n.

Crouch, Nathaniel, publisher, 416 n.

Cudworth, Ralph, Intellectual System,
246 n.

CummingB, Isaac, depositions of, 239»
240.

"Curiosities," by Cotton Mather, 245250.

Curwin, Jonathan, see Corwin.

Cushing, President, Hampden-Sidney
Col]^436.

Daemonolatreia, by Nicolas Remy, 424,
424 n.

Dalton, Michael, 440 n.; The Coun^
trey Justice, 163 n., 304 n., 436,
436 n.

Dane, Deliverance, account of confession, 374-375.

450

INDEX

Dane, John, juryman at Salem trialB,
388.

Dane, Rev. Francis, pastor at Andover,
420 n.

Danforth, Thomas, dq;>uty governor
of Massachusetts, oondenms proceedings against witchcraft, 184; judge
of Superior Court, 382, 383.

Danvers, Mass., sae Salem Village.

Danpen, Hanson, 342 n.

Danvers Highlands, 152 n., 153 n.

Darter, Ekiward, member of petty
jury, 86.

Daston, Sarah, death of, 383; imprisoned for witchcraft, 383, 383 n.

Davoiport, Rev. John, 5, 137 n.; biographical dcetch, 12 n.

David, King of Israel, 429, 431.

Davis, History of Watiinqford and Meri'
den, 385 n.

Davis, Winifred, member of woman
jury, 439.

Day, John, member of grand Jury,
85.

Dean, J. W., article in New Bngland
Hitiorieal and Otnealogieal Begider,
58 n.

DedanUion of the Oround of ErroTf A^
etc., by George Fox, 81 n.

De HcBTtHeo Combwrendo, 374 n.

Deiawan, The Stpedieh Settiemenie an
the, by Amandus Johnscm, 83 n.

Detawart CourUy, Pennei^wania, Hia»
tory of, by Smith, 84 n., 87 n., 88 n.

Delaware River, colony of William
Penn on the, S2, 83; Swedish colony
on the, 83.

Delft, Devil appears in shape of a boy
at, 137.

De Magnetica Vulnerum CuraHone, by
Jan BapUsta van Helmont, 319 n.

Demons, effect on Ann Cole, 18, 20 n.;
effect on Elisabeth Knap, 22, 23;
haunt house of William Morse, 2332; cause disturbance in house of
Mr. Mompesson, 32 n. ; feats of, 59,
60; appear in various forms to
Martha Goodwin, 110-126; appear
to wife of Thomas Putnam, 156^158;
persecute Mercy Short, 261-268, 269,
270, 271, 272, 275, 277, 278, 279, 280,
282, 285, 286; description of, 297298.

Dennis, Hannah, member cf

jury, 439.
Desborough, NicholaB, ol Hntfiil

strangdy oiofaBtedy 33-34.
Deusing, Antooiufly treatise bjr, SISlI
Devik, aee DemooB; Satan.
DenU, The Doctrine of, by John W^

staffe,6.
Dialogues, Pope Gregory, 4.
Diary of CoUan Maiher, edited bf

Worthington C. Ford, 91 n.; mtk

Mather, CottooL
Dictionary of V'uJLgar TVmif, by Qam.

300 n.
DuoiMrie qf TFOcftet, by TImidm Pom

163 n., 219 n.
Diseases ascribed to witohcraft, 3I9i.
Dadbrine of Dariia promed to ht h

Grand Apoeiacy of them hater IVao,

r%e» William Sewi^ transblor (i

82 n.
Doetimenit and B/Boofrde rdaiiag U

the Froeinee of New Hampim,

61 n.
DaeumenU rdating to the Caiamd Bi»-

tory 4^ New York, 19 n,
Dow, Qeorge Fkmnda, Beeorde omiHa

of the Quarterly Courts of Bwb

County, 151; records case ol S»*

beth How, 237 n.
Downer, Robert, aoeuaoB Sosanoa Ifv^

tin of witchcraft, 232, 232 n.
Drake, S. G., 153 n., 295; Ammtk 4

Witchcraft, zviii, 31 n., 52 n^ 4H)il;

editor of The Witd^craft Ddutiesu

New BngUmd^ 151 n., 208, 343n.;

memoir of Calef, 2d5 n.
Drystreet, Henry, aocuaes Bfargsict

Mattson of witchcraft, 86; member

of grand jury, 86.
Dudcet, ThiMnas, member of paad

jury, 85.
Dudley, Joseph, judge in New Yock,

195 n.
Duke's Laws, 43 n.
Dunton, John, 148, 207.
Dutch Calvinism, leacfan of, 41.
Duxbury, Mass., effects of thnndo^

storm at, 14-15.

Eames, Rebecca, convicted of

craft, 366; indietmeat extant, 380.
Earl, Mr., of Cotehester, story of, 9.

INDEX

451

Eurle, Robert, teeiimoiiy relative to
ease of Margaret Rule, 337.
j. Easthampton, Maas., case of witch-
^ craft at, 42; Elisabeth Garlick indieted for witchcraft at, 42; letter
*' from Governor Winthrop, 42 n.
^? Biuthamptanf Town of, Records of the,
'^ 42 n.

East Riding, L. I., 45, 45 n.
' Eaton, Theophilus, governor of New
* Haven colony, 140, 140 n.
' Eliot, Biographiixd DicUonary, 293 n.

Eliot, Edmund, testifies against Susanna Martin, 233, 234.

EHliott, Andrew, juryman at Salem
trials, 388.

Elson, Abraham, 19 n.

Emerson, John, clerical schoolmaster
at Salem, 37 n., 377 n.

EnchatUmenU EncaurUertd, by Cotton
Mather, 205.

Endicot, Dr. Zorobbabel, 250.

Endicott, John, governor of Massachu«
setts, 250 n.

England, punishment of witches in,
374 n.; witchcraft in, 215 n.

England and Ireland, CoUedion of <imdry trifala in, by Joseph Glanvil, 416.

English, Mary, 347 n.; accused of
witchcraft, 347.

English, Philip, 151 n., 347; imprisonment and escape, 178, 178 n., 187,
371; arrested for witchcraft, 371 n.;
biographical sketch, 371 n.

English, Mrs. Philip, 188 n.

English Law, History of, by Pollock and
Maitland, 367 n.

Episcopius, disbeliever in witchcraft, 41 .

Essay for the Recording of lUtulrious
Providences, by Increase Mather, 6,
6 n., 8-38, 65n., 113,303,398, 410 n.

Essex, England, persecution of witches
in, 425, 425 n.

Essex County y Records and Files of the
Quarterly Courts of, edited by George
Francis Dow, 151.

Essex Institute, Proceedings, 153 n.;
CoUedions, 198 n., 360 n., 370 n.,
371 n.

Esty, Isaac, 347.

Esty, Mary, xiv, 347 n. ; accused and
convicted of witchcraft, 347, 366,
367; petition to judges, 368-369.

Eton College, 9.

Euor, Robert, foreman of grand Jury,

85.
Evans, Nathaniel, member of petty

jury, 86,
Evelith, Joseph, juryman at Salem

trials, 388.

Falkner, Abigail» conviction, 366;
oused of witchcraft, 420, 420 n.;
children testify against, 421, 421 n.;
neighbors testify against, 421, 421 n.

Farmington, Conn., Samuel Hookor,
pastor at, 19, 19 n.

Famworth, Richard, WiUherafi CM
out from the Rdigious Seed and Israd
of Ood, 81 n., 82.

Faustus, Dr., stories of, 137.

Fisher, John, member of grand jury,
85.

Fisk, Thomas, reasons for judging Rebecca Nurse guilty, 35^-359; foreman of jury at Salem trials, 388.

Fisk, Thomas, Jr., juryman at Salem
trials, 388.

Fisk, William, juryman at Salem trials,
388.

Fiske, John, New France and New En*
gland, 153 n.

Fiske, Rev. Moses, minister at Braintree, 109 n.

Flower, Enock, member of grand jury,
86.

Ford, Worthington C, 306 n.; Diary
of Cotton Mather, edited by, 91 n.

Foster, Ann, confesses her share in
witchcraft, 244; conviction, 366,
367 n.; attends witch meeting, 418;
imprisonment, 418, 418 n., 419 n.

Foster, Rose, aifflicted by witchcraft,
420, 420 n.

Fowler, S. P., 295; account in Proceed'
ings, Essex Institute, 153 n.; Salem
Witchcraft, W7.

Fox, George, A Dedaraiion of ih/s
Ground of Error, etc., 81 n.; power
to detect witcho^t, 81, 82.

Foxcroft, Francis, condemns proceedings against witchcraft, 184.

France, nine hundred executed for
witchcraft, 424, 424 n.

French, attack upon frontier towni^
199.

452

INDEX

Vnth, Dr., apparitkmB appearing to, 9.
Fry, Deacon, wife imprisoned for wiidicraft, 180.
Further Account rf the TryaU of the Neuh

Ent^md WUdiee, 148, 149 n.

Garland, John, senrice as juror, 45.

Garlick, EUnbeth, indicted for witdicraft, 42.

Gaule, John, rector of Great Stoti^
ton, England, 216, 216 n., 239, 304 n.,
330; roles for detection of witches,
205; Sded Cfuee qf Conscience touching Witches and WUchcrafis, 216 n.,
219, 219 n., 221.

Gedney, Major Bartholomew, member
of Court of Oyer and Terminer, 170,
170 n., 185, 353, 353 n., 355.

Genealoffical Dictionary, by Savage,
100 n.

Gerrish, Rev. Joseph, 369 n.

Gibbons, John, member of petty jury,
86.

Gisbume, John, accuses Grace Sher^
wood of witchcraft, 436.

Glanvii, Joseph, 98, 98n.; il Blow
at Modem Saddudaitn, 5; defence
of ghosts and witches, 5; Saddudsmus Triumphatus, 6, 6n., 33 n.,
405 n.; CoUectum of Modem RdationSf or, CoUection of Sundry tryats
in Enfjfand and Irdand, 33 n., 262 n.,
416.

Glover, Goodwife, 412, 412 n.; trial fw
witchcraft, 103-106, 111, 124 n.

Good, Dorcas, a child, 160, 160 n.; put
in chains, 349 n.

Good, Sarah, 414, 414 n.; imprison*
ment, 159, 159 n.; afflicts Mercy
Short, 259, 260, 260 n.; child accused of witchcraft, 345; chains for,
349 n.; trial and execution of, 357358.

Goodacre, Sarah, member of woman
jury, 439.

Goodall, Goodwife, 155; affliction of,
344.

Goodell, A. C, Puriker Notes on the
History of Witchcraft in Massaekur
setU^ 373 n.

Goodwin, Benjamin, 100 n., 124 n.

Goodwin, Hamiah, 100 n.

Goodwin, John, a mason, 99, 294;

wife difttingtiMiBd for

piety, 90; children afflicted, 99-1&

129, 143, 255, 276, 276n., til

413.
Goodwin, John, Jr., 100 n., 121b.
Goodwin, Martiha, 100 n.; demoBi»>

pear in ▼mrious forms to, lID-tX:

ministers pmy for, 118, 12L
Goodwin, Mercy, 100 n.
Goodwin, Nathmniel, 100 n.
Goulart, Simon, 4.
Qranite McntKty, 293 n.
Graves, Thmnas, condemns pfQeeedingps againat witchcraft, 1S4.
Gray, Samuel, accuses Bridget Bokp

of witchcraft, 224; false tesdmoBT

against Bridget Biriiop, 356, 356b.
Great Minifords Island, 47.
Green, Dr. S. A., Grottm in the Fibcrq/l Timet, 360 n.
Greensmith, Nathaniel, executed i:

Hartford, 20, 20 n.
Greensmith, Rebecca, imprisoomat,

19, 19 n.; ezecated for witcfacnfl,30t

20 n.
Gregory, P6pe, Didloyiiei, 4.
Grevius, demonatrateB iniquity of tor

ture, 41.

GriggB, Dr. WOliam, physiciu to

Salem Village, 154, 154 n., 155, 312 n.

344.
Griscom, Andrew, member of piod

jury, 86.
Grose, Didionary of Vulgar Ttrwu,

300 n.
Groton, town of, 188 n.
Groton in the Witeharqft Times, by Dr.

S. A. Green, 300 n.
Guard, Robert, accused of witdicnft,

88.
Guide to Grand Jury Men, hj Ridisnl

Bernard, 163 n., 416, 416 n.
Guldenklee, Bahhasar TlmiiB too.

Casus Medidnales, 319 n.
Gummere, Amdia Mott, Witeharefi and

Quakerism, by, 81 n., 88 n.

Haart, Balthaser de, serriee as juror,

45.
Hadley, Mass., story of Fbilip Smitfa,

deacon of the efaivdi at, 131-134.
Haigue, ^VHlliam, attended GooncQ,

85.

INDEX

453

Hale, Rev. John, 70 n., 152 n., 158,
158 n., 184, 206, 214 n.; present at
Salem executions, 361 n.; changes
views on witchcraft, 369-370; credulous of witchcraft, 397; graduate of
Harvard College, 397; minister at
Beverly, 397; witness against Dorcas
Hoar and Bridget Bishop, 397, 397 n.;
biographical dketch, 397, 398; career of, 398 n.; A Modest Inquiry,
399-432.

Hale, Sir Matthew, 374 n.; English
witch-trial, 215 n.; Trial €(f WUches,
416, 416 n.

Hall, George, reformation of, 11.

ELall, Mary, trial and release from
charge of witchcraft, 44-48.

Hall, Ralph, trial and release from
charge of witchcraft, 44-48; charged
with murder of George Wood and
child, 46.

Hall case, first printed in the National
AdvooaUf 43.

Hallett, WiUiam, loses place by opening house to Baptist preaching, 44 n.;
service as juror, 44, 44 n.

Hampden-Sidney College, President
Gushing, 436.

Handoock, Capt. George, justice of the
peace, 438.

Hanson, Danvera, 342 n., 349 n.

Harding, William, 435.

Hardy, Thomas, of Portsmouth, 236,
236 n.

Harper, John, 441.

Harris, Benjamin, a bookseller, 152.

Harris, W. S., article in the Granite
Monthly on Robert Calef, 292 n.-
293 n., 295 n.

Harrison, James, attended Council, 85.

Harrison, Katharine, order relating to
removal from West Chester, 49-^51;
trial, 48; given liberty to remain
in West Chester, 51-52; Governor
Colve dismisses case against, 52 n.

Harrison papers, 43.

Hartford, Conn., witchcraft cases, 18,
18 n., 19, 19 n., 20, 20 n., 33-34, 135,
135 n., 136, 385, 410, 410 n.; Stone,
Samuel, teacher in church, 19, 19 n.;
Greensmith, Nathaniel and Rd>ecca,
execution of, 20, 20 n.; Desborough,
Nicholas, strangely molested at, 3334; Ji^mson, Maiy, trial of, 135,
135 n., 136; woman sentenced to be
whipped, 135 n.

Eofiford, A Caae of Witeherafi in, by
C. J. Hoadly, 18 n.

Hartford, Hietory of the Firet Church in,
19 n.

Hartlib, Samuel, biographical sketch,
12 n.

Harvard College: Mather, Increase,
president of, 3, 15 n.-16 n.; Mather,
Cotton, fellow of, 15 n.-16 n.; Brattle, Thomas, treasurer of, 167; Leverett, president of, 167; Burroughs,
Rev. George, graduate, 215 n.; IbJe,
Rev. John, graduate, 397.

Harvard Univenity, Biographical
Sketdiee of the Graduates of, Sibley,
3 n., 93 n., 168 n., 183 n., 215 n.,
377 n., 398 n.

Hastingps, John, foreman of petty juxy,
86.

Hathom, John, see Hawthorne.

Haven, Dr. Samuel F., librarian of the
American Antiquarian Society, 256,
256 n.

Hawthorne, John, 160, 206; magistrate at Salem Village, 155, 155 n.,
156, 158 n., 160; assistant, 344, 347,
348,355.

Hawthorne, Susanna, 187 n.

Haynes, Rev. Joseph, 19, 19 n.

Heer, Henricus ab, physician of Cologjae, 266, 266 n.

Helmont, Jan Baptista van, De Magnetioa Vtdnerum Curatione, 319 n.;
Traetatus de Morhis, 319 n.

Hemming, Nicholas, Adnumitio de 5uperstitionibus Magids vitandis, 247,
247 n.

Hendrickson, Jacob, enters into a recognizance for wife's appearance, 85,
87.

Hendrickson, Yeshro (Gertrude), trial
for witchcraft, 85.

Henly, Ursula, member of woman jury,
439.

Herrick, Henry, juryman at Salem
trials, 388.

Herrick, Mary, complaint against Mrs.
Hale, 369, 369 n.

Hewes, William, member of petty jury,
86.

464

INDEX

HibbiiMi, Ann, ezeouted tor witchcraft,
410, 410 n.

Higginson, Rev. John, 160, 160 n., 206;
miniBter at Salnn, 245, 248 n., 908;
EpuUe reguding witchcraft, 900402.

Hill, Ci4>tain, 353.

Hill, Ldce, sues Grace Sherwood for
witchcraft, 438, 438 n., 430 n., 440,
441.

Hiitorieal Ccttsetums, Topsfidd Historical Society, 151 n.

Hidorieal Essay concerning Wiiehenfif
by Dr. Hutchinson, 222 n.

Hidorical Maganne, 42 n., 57, 61 n.,
01 n., 370 n.

H%sUmoal Series, by W. Elliot Woodward, 208, 205.

Historical Sketches of Andaser, by Sarah
Loring Bailey, 180 n., 420 n.

Historical Society, Massachusetts, Proceedings, 151.

Historical Society of Pennsybfonia,
Memoirs of, 83 n.

History and Antiquities of Boston, 151 n.

History of Andover, by Abiel Abbot,
180 n.

History of Ddaiware County, Pennsylvania, by Smith, 84 n., 87 n., 88 n.

History of Massachusetts, by Hutchinson, 151 n.

History of Newbury, by Joshua Coffin,
31 n.

History of the First Church in Hartford,
by Walker, 10 n.

Hoadly, C. J., A Case of Witchcraft in
HaHford, 18 n.

Hoar, Dorcas, conviction for witchcraft, 366, 366 n.; estate sdsed, 371 ;
Hale, Rev. John, witness against, 307,
307 n.

Hobbs, Abigail, conviction for witchcraft, 366.

Hobbs, Deliverance, accuses Bridget
Bishop, 224; warrant for, 347; attends witch meeting, 417, 417 n., 418.

Hobbs, William, accused of witchcraft,
347.

Hobs, Deborah, see Hobbs, Deliverance.

Holland, conjurer in, 137; status of
witchcraft in, 41.

Holmes, Thomas, attended Council,
85.

Holy Diifte qf Uk« Dmoid Smd, 7k
282, 282 n.

Hcmdoiff , 4.

Hooker, Rev. Samuel, pastor at Ani>
ingtOQ, 10, 19 n.

Hootoa, CMiver, merdmnt, of Babdoes, 60; witneaa of stone thfovinb
60.

Hopkins, Matthew, 363 n.; wU
finder, 216 n., 423, 423 n.

Hortado, Antonio, dwelling nesr tk
Sahnon Falls, 37.

Hortado, Mary, narrative tddbj Ber.
Joshua Moodey, 37 n.; aundiy ipparitiona of Satan, 37, 38.

How, Elisabeth: Dow, F. G., leeodi
case of, 237 n.; k>yalty of bfind h»
band and dauc^ter, 237 n.; dened
admission into Ipswich cbuich, 237,
237 n., 238; aocuaatkms agunsl,
237-240; trial and execution, 237240, 357, 379; baptised by Deffl,
240.

How, James, 240.

How, John, accuses Elisabeth Bam d
witchcraft, 238, 230.

Howe, Henry, Hieiorieal Colkdiant ^
Fifytnia, 436.

How^, SouihampUm, 42 n., 44 n.

Howell, H., publisher, 208.

Hubbard, Elisabeth, nuud, 154, IMn.

Hunt, Josiah, 48 n.

Hunt, Thomas, appears in behaff of
Katharine Harrison, 48 n., 50; ooidplaint against a woman, 48, 48 n.

Hussey, John, witness of stone throving, 60.

Hutchinson, Francis, Historical Ssaag
concerning WiUhcrafi, 222 n.

Hutchinson, Gov. Thomas, infonmUioo
relating to William Morae, 31 n.;
History of MaseaektieetU, 43 n., 150151, 232 n., 241 n., 375 n., 410 n.

Icarus, 302, 302 n.

Indian, apparition of Black-Man to,
300; afflicted by witchcraft, 348»
348 n.

Indian medidne-men, 42.

Indians, troublcB oocsskmed by, 16; attack upon frontier towns, 100; espture Mercy Short, 250 n.; in Meneo,
245.

INDEX

455

Indiaru in New England^ A Bntf History of the War unth, by Increase
Mather, 16 n.

Indiee, Natural and Moral Hietory of
the, by Joseph Acosta, 245 n.

Ingeraol, Nathaniel, deacon of church
in Salem Village, 152, 153, 153 n.

InstituUSf Coke, 363 n., 374 n.

Inielledual System, by Ralph Cudworth, 246 n.

Ipswich, Mass.: Powell, Caleb, trial of,
31 n.; How, EHisabeth, denied admission to church, 237, 237 n., 238;
witchcraft case, 237-240.

Israel, kings of, ^29, 431.

Jacobs, George, trial and execution, 177,
360,361; accused of witchcraft, 371 ;
wife accused, 371.

Jacobs, Margaret, confesses to false
testimony, 364-366; imprisoned for
witchcraft, 364 n., 365; acquittal of,
366, 366 n.

Jacobs, Rebecca, indictment extant,
380 n.

James I., statute of, 83, 84, 380 n.

James, Edward W., W^iam and Mary
College Quarterly, 435 n., 436, 439 n.

Jeffrey, George, hit by stone, 75.

Jenkins, Jane, 436.

Jennings, Samuel, goyemor of West
Jersey, 69, 69 n.; witness of stone
throwing at George Walton's, 69,
69 n.

Job, 430.

John Carter Brown library, 93 n.

John, Indian slave of Rev. Samuel
Parris, 153 n., 351 n.

Johnson, Amandus, The Swedieh SettlemenU on the Ddaware, 83 n.

Johnson, Elizabeth, imprisonment,
135 n., 382, 382 n.; accused of witchcraft, 420, 420 n.

Johnson, Mary, Magnolia contains
story of, 135 n.; information from
Samuel Stone concerning, 135 n.,
136; trial, 135, 135 n., 136; confesses witchcraft, 410, 410 n.

Jones, Hannah, accused by George
Walton of witchcraft, 60 n., 61 n.,
73 n., 75 n.; not punished, 76 n.

Jones, Margaret, executed at Boston,
Mass., 408, 408 n.

Joshua, 427.

Josiah, 431.

Judas Iscariot, 430.

Jurors, at Philadelphia, 85, 86; Massachusetts act establishing qualification for, 362 n.; testimony from
Fisk, 358.

Jury, woman, 439.

JueHficationf Treatise of, by Samuel
Willard, 113.

Justin Martyr, 302; Quaediones et
Responsiones ad Orthodoxos, 302 n.

Juxon, Richard, life <^, 11.

Keble, Joseph, 163 n.; StaluUs, 163;

An Assistance to Justices of the Peace,

163 n., 411, 412, 412 n.; Common

Law, 412, 416.
Keith, governor of Pennsylvania, 83.
Kembal, John, accuses Susanna Martin

of witchcraft, 232-233, 234.
Kendal, Goodwife, accuiaed of witchcraft, 409, 410.
Kieft, Gov. William, fear of Indian

medicine-men, 42.
King, Winifred, 385 n.
Kingdom of Darkness, by R. Burton,

416, 416 n., 425, 425 n.
King Philip's war, 4.
Kinsman, John, member of petty

jury, 86.
Knapp, Elisabeth, 183, 183 n., 187 n.;

story of, 21-23; effect of demons on,

22,23.

Lacy, Mary, confesses share in witchcraft, 244; convicted of witchcraft,
366, 367 n.; attends witch meeting,
418, 418 n., 419, 419 n.

Lacy, Mary, Jr., attends witch meeting, 419.

Lake, H., of Dorchester, reference to
wife, 408 n., 409 n.

Lancashire witches, 219, 219 n.

Lancaster, Mass., 361 n.

Lane, Francis, testifies against EHisabeth How, 240.

Late Memorable Providences, by Cotton
Mather, 92.

Lawson, Ann: Burroughs, Rev. George,
accused of afflicting by witchcraft,
218.

456

INDEX

Lftwson, RflfT. Deodat, 167, 214 il,
215 n., 413 n.; A BrUf and Trm Norraiwe qf WiUhanfl al SaUm^ Man.,
145-164, 341 n.; Loodon edition of
Balem Bermon, 147 n., 149; Moore,
G.H.,letterfioin, 150,150n.;8eniioa
oo witehoref t, 158, 158 n. ; Cknd'9 Fir
ddUy the only ShiM agauui Saian^M
MaUgnUy, 158 n., 159 n.; wife of,
218, 218 n.

Lawson, Thomas, 150.

Leialer, Jacob, eemoe aa juror, 44 n., 45.

Leverett, preaident of Harvard College, 167.

Levermore, C. H., "Witchcraft in Connecticutt," in the New Engkanderf
18n,52n., 385 n.

Lewes, Mercy, maid, 154, 154 n., 155,
347; aocuaes witches of impiety, 16(^
161; affliction of, 344; yiaion, 846.

Libanius, 303, 303 n.

lAbrariee of the Maihere, by Julius H.
Tuttle,256n.

Library of American Biography, 261 n«

lAbrary of Avtyerican LUaraiure, 149 n.

Library of Old AtUhore, by John Rus*
aell Smith, 7, 149 n., 207.

Lightning, changea needle of oompaaa,
14.

Linoe, Denia, member of grand Jury,
85.

linoc^, Dr. Charlea H., 256 n.

LithoboUaf by Richard Chamberlain,
58-77; dedicated to Martin Lumley,
58,59.

London GaeeUe, 300 n.

Long Island, witchcraft in, 42; given
name of Yorkshire, 45 n.

Long Island WiUst Early, 44 n.

Longfellow, Henry W., 170 n.

Lonicer, 4.

Louder, John, accuses Bridget Bishop
of witchcraft, 226, 227.

Louis XIV., 189 n.

Lovelace, Francis, 49, 51, 52.

Lower Norfolk County Virginia Ant^
qtuxryf 435 n.

Lumley, Martin, marries Elisabeth
Chamberlain, 56; LUhoboUa dedicated to, 58, 59.

Lunt, W. W., student of Calef pedigree,
293 n.

Luther, Martin, 10.

lomde, Joaepb, memtwr of tiw C»
dl, 178» 178 n.

MagnaUa, by GotUm BfaOier, U&.
24n., 126 n«, 134 n^ 135 n^ %k
259n., 300, 308 n., 357 n., 377l
388 n., 388.

Maitland, eee PoUock.

Martha'a Vineymrd, 308 n.

Martin, Abigpaii, afflicted by ^f^
craft, 420, 420 n.

Martin, Ge^ge, 233.

Martin, Suaanna, 228, 228il, 42!,
422 n.; aocoaations relating to nitabcraft, 230-235; atzmi^ge^ aiBictod,
234; proteata innooenoe, 236; tnl
and execution, 228-235, 357.

MarUn, Walter, member of petty jsj,
86.

Mary Magdalen, 120.

Mason, John, grant of land in New
Hampshire to, 55, 76 n.

Maaoa, Robert, ptoprietorBhip inXev
Hampshire recognised, 56, 57.

Massachuaetta: Stoaghton, Wiffiun,
lieutenant-governor, 83 bl, 183 a,
212 n.; laws, ISln.; ardihreB,186iL;
Mathor, Increase, agmt for rsitontioQ of dMrtcr, 193; witdwraft eoaditions, 196-202, 406^ 406 b.; Ea^
cott, John, first governor, 2S0a;
I%ipa, Sir TViUiam, avrival with nev
charter, 348-348.

Maeeadiueetie CenHnel, 8S.

Massachusetts, Colonial Society of,
PvbHeaiione, 371 n., 375 n., 383 b.

MaeeaOitueUe, Final NcUe an Wiidh
craft in, by G. H. Moore, 2Q3n^
367 n.

Ma8eathuuUa,FuriherNaU»onikeHi»-
tory of WUdkcrafl in, by A. C. Goodell, 373 n.

Massachusetts Historical Society: Jfsiher Papere, 18 n.; CoUeetimu, ISil,
91 n., 168, 168b^ 3d6n., 371n.,
376n., 389n., 396n.; Praeeedingi,
12 n., 41 n., 76 n., 151, 185 n., 202 d.,
222 n., 262 n., 291 n., 292 n^ 306 n^
307 n.

Msssdc^iiaettt, Hittary of, hf Tlwaiai
Hutehinaoo, 43 n., 232 il, 241b.,
346 n., 375 n.

IfossadhiMttt, AaeonCi qf, 368ii.

INDEX

467

Math^, Rev. Cottoii,91, 141 n., 148 n.,
153 n., 160 n., 177, 177 n., 206, 211,
219 n.,222 n., 241 n., 245-250, 261 n.,
267 n., 270 n., 272 n., 273, 273 n.,
276, 276 n., 280, 280 n., 282, 282 n.,
284, 284 n., 203 n., 316 n., 348 n.,
389 n., 307 n.; fellow of Harvard College, 15 n.-16 n.; Memorable Proth
idences, 15 n., 92, 9^126, 205, 320 n.,
410 n., 413, 414, 416; The Wanders
of the ImrieMe World, 15 n., 149 n.,
150 n., 196 n., 204, 205-208, 209251, 255, 293, 295, 297, 297 n., 304,
330 n., 357, 370, 377, 377 n., 378,
378 n., 414, 416, 422, 423; Magnolia,
16 n., 24 n., 126 n., 134 n., 135 n.,
208, 250 n.9309, 309 n.,357 n., 377 n.,
388 n., 398; tale of the bedstaff
in the Magnolia, 24 n.; grandson
of John Cotton, 91; biographical
sketch, 91, 92; Memorable Prooi"
deneeSf 92; dedicatory epistle to
Wait Winthrop, 93, 94, 95; Speedy
Repentanee Urged, 93 n.; address
on witchcraft, 95^ 96, 97; reflections
on Memorable Providences, 98; describes eCfect of witchcraft on John
Goodwin's children, 99-126; wife of,
117; prayers for Goodwin children
and Capt. Alden, 129, 355 n.; life of
Phips, 188 n., 388n., 389; "return"
of witch-cases, 194, 194 n.; causes of
Gov.Phips'schangingattitude, 195d.;
Enchantments Encountered, 205; correspondence, 212, 213, 307, 329-341;
replies to Boston ministers, 214, 214
n. ; refers to execution of Rev. George
Burroughs, 215 n., 222 n.; "Curiosities,'' 245-250; granddaughter, 255,
255 n., 256 n.; A Brand plucked
out of the Burning, 259-287; visits
Mercy Short, 260, 260 n.; reference
in diary to Calefs book, 293-294;
Some Pew Remarks, 293 n., 294,
348 n.; Duiry, 294 n., 323 n., 385 n.;
visit to Salem, 323n.-324n.; present at Salem executions, 361, 361 n.;
Calefs opinion, 388, 388 n.

Mather, Rev. Increase, 137 n., 167,
180, 180 n., 183 n., 304 n., 357 n.,
362, 362 n., 376 n., 388 n.; choice of
career, 3; minister of North Church
in Boston, 3; preacher in ESngland,

3; student at Dublin, 3; instigator
of "reforming synod," 3-4; method
of arousing men to religion, 3-4;
biographical dcetch, 3-7; president
of Harvard College, 3, 15n.-16n.;
marshals hosts of New England orthodoxy, 6; Essay for the Recording of
Illustrious Providences, 6, 6 n., 8-38,
65 n., 113, 303, 398, 410 n.; Remarkable Providences iUustraliee of the
Earlier Days of Ammican CiAanisaK(m,6-7; A Bri^ History of the War
vri^ the Indians in New-Bngfand,
IQn.; A Relaium of the Troubles tokich
have hapned ui NeuhEngland, 16 n.;
condemns "water test," 21 n.; of
Cotton Mather, 91; Mather Papers,
97 n.; Mystery of Christ, 113; Cases
of Conseienee, 149, 194 n., 304 n.,
357 n., 377 n., 383 n., 389; condemns
proceedings against witchcraft, 184;
agent for restoration of Masmchusetts charter, 193; visits so-called
confessors at Salem, 376 n.

Mather, Samuel, papers in American
Antiquarian Society, 256 n.

Mather Library, 256 n.

Mather Papers, 18 n., 31 n., 37 n., 62 n.,
65 n., 97 n., 194 n.; experiences of
Nicholas Desborou^ in, 34 n.; gift
from Hannah Mather Crocker, 256 n.

Mathers, Libraries of the, by Julius H.
TutUe, 256 n.

Matteeon, David M., 163 n.

Mattson, Margaret, trial for witchcraft,
85, 86; jury finds not guilty of witchcraft, 87, 87 n.

Mattson, Neels, recognisance of fifty
pounds for wile, 85, 87, 87 n.

Maule, Thomas, merchant of Salem,
New England, 69, 70 n.; witness of
stone tlurowing in house of George
Walton, 69, 70 n.

Mayflower, John Alden, of the, 170 n.

Memoirs of the Historical Society of
Pennsylvania, 83 n.

Memorable Providences, by Cotton
Mather, 15 n., 92, 93-126, 205, 320 n.,
410 n., 413, 414, 416.

Memorial History of Boston, W. F. Poole
in the, 256, 256 n., 389 n.

AffTcury, 303.

Morimack River, 231.

458

INDEX

Merioo, refleeiioii on Indiaiis in, 245;
ViUlipulBli, idol of Indians, 245.

Midklle Ages, takB of vision and apparition, 4.

Milborne, William, called before the
Council, 196 n.-197 n.

Mak for Babes, by John Cotton, 113.

Mill, Anthonio de, service as juror, 45.

Millard, Thomas, member of grand
jury, 86.

Miller, Rev. John, comments by, 195 n.

Milton, Mass., Rev. Peter Thacher,
miniater at, 109 n.

Ministen, convocation for guidance in
matters of witchcraft, 200 n.

Mirrowr . , , of Examj^, by Samuel
Clarke, 10 n.

MimxOanea Curioea, 286, 286 n.

Mode&t Inquiry, A, by Rev. John Hale,
397-432.

Mohra, case of witchcraft at, 196 n.

Moll, Hermann, AUaa, 195 n.

Mompesson, Mr., demons disturb
house, 32 n.; story of, 32-33.

Moodey, Rev. Joshua, 187 n., 188 n.,
329 n., 362, 362 n.; minister at Portsmouth, 31 n., 65 n.; relates narrative
of Mary Hortado, 37 n.; associate
minister of First Church, Boston, 97,
97 n., 118.

Moore, George H., 186 n., 194 n., 210 n.;
Notes on the Bibliography of Witchcraft in Massachtisetts, 91 n., 148 n.,
197 n., 207 n., 215 n., 385^.; letter
from Deodat Lawson published by,
150, 150 n.; Final Notes on Witchcraft in Massachusetts, 197 n., 202 n.,
367 n., 373 n.

More, Henry, 98, 98 n.; leader of the
Cambridge Platonists, 5; publishes
Glanvil's book on Sadducism, 6, 6 n.

More Wonders of the Imnsible Wortd,
by Robert Calef, 124 n., 207, 208,
289-393, 294 n.

Morgan, F., Connecticut as a Colony
and as a State, 18 n.

Morse, William, house haunted by demons, 23-32; Governor Hutchinson's account of, 31 n. ; John Stiles,
grandson, 31 n.; wife tried for witchcraft, 31 n.

Morton, Charles, minister at Charlestown, 97, 97 n.

Mosdey, GoL Edwaxd, iostiee d h

peace, 438, 441, 442.
Moese, Tluxiiasy naember of ^

jury, 85.
Mullotier, Tlioiiiaay 239 n.
Mumo, Alexander^ servioe as juror, 41
Murray, Ekiward, attended CoiiDcil,&
Mystery cf Chriai, by Increase Um&c,

113.

Nashaway, see Lancaster, Mass.

i^oeum, 207 n.

National Adoocaie^ 43.

Natural and Moral History cftksIitiieL,
by Joseph Aoostay 245 n.

Nedscm, Anthony, reoognifanee d
fifty pounds for Bfaiigarei Mattaoo,
87,87n.

Ndiemiah, 431.

VewiD&,W.8.,Wiichentfiin Salem YHhge, 153 n.

New Amsterdam, beoomea New Tok,
45 n.

New Amderdain^ Records off 19 n.

New England, 137 n., 179, 179 n.; "reforming synod" to cure evils, 3-4;
method of arousing men to r^gkn,
4; Puritanism, 5; Mather manlisli
hosts of orthodoxy, 6; TndJans, 16,
16 n.; influence on other coionieg, 42;
Calefs description of witchcraft in,
297-299; Andres govemment ovb^
thrown, 348 n.

New-England, A Britf History of ikt
War with the Indians in, by Increase
Mather, 16 n.

New-England, A BelaUan of the TroMa
whidi ham hajmed th, by Inaease
Mather, 16 n.

New Engiand, The Wiidunfi ZMvnoii
ifh ed. by S. G. Drake, 151 n., 208,
343 n.

New England Historical and Oeneatogtool Register, 35 n., 48 n., 58 n.,
160 n., 186 n., 197 n., 232 n., 242 n^
291 n., 292 n., 295 n., 365 n., 375 n.,
384 n., 385 n., 409 n., 410 n., 423 d.

New Engiand Judged^ Bishop, 35 n^
43 n., 44 n.

New England Magawme^ 18 n., 153 n.

New England Wiiehes, Fvriher Aeoowt
qf the Trials of, 148, 149 n.

^^etr Englander', 18 n., 52 n^^ 385 n.

INDEX

4S0

Ntw France and New England, by John
Fiske, 153 n.

New Hampshire: Chamberiain, Richard, secretary of the province, 35 n.,
55-57; Mason, John, grant of land
to, 55, 76 n.; Mason, Robert, recognition of proprietorship, 56, 57;
Cranfield, Edwaid, first royal governor, 60; Barefoot, Walter, deputy collector for the province, 67,
67 n., 72.

New Hampshire, Documents and Becorde relating to the Prtmnce cf, 61 n.

New Hampshire Historical Society,
Provincial Records in CoUectUme,
61 n., 62 n., 76 n.; Vaughn's Jotirnal in CoUectione, 76 n.

New Hampshire, Probate Records of the
Province of, 35 n., 61 n.

New HampMre Provincial Papers, 76 n«

New Haven colony, Theophilus Eaton,
governor of, 140, 140 n.

New Haoen, Records of the Colony of,
239 n., 410 n.

New Netherlands, witchcraft in, 41.

New York, Documentary History of,
O'Callae^, 43.

New York, Documents relaHng to the
CoUmial History of, 19 n.

New York Oenealogical and Biography
ical Record, 19 n., 43 n., 48 n.

New York Historical Society, CoUeotions, 195 n.

New York, History of, Smith, 43.

New York in the Seoenteenth Centvry,
History of the CUy of, 42 n.

NewYork, Minutesofthe Executive CouncU of, by Pdtoits, 43, 48 n., 52 n.

New York Public library, 151 n.,
410 n.; List cf Books rdating to
Witchcraft in the United States, 207 n.

New York, witchcraft in, 42.

Neuibury, History of, by Joshua Coffin,
31 n.

Newbury, Mass., strange happenings in
house of William Morse at, 23^-32.

Nicolls, Gov. Richard, aids Court of
Assizes to draw code of laws, 43 n.;
serves as juror, 44 n., 45.

Niles's Weekly Register, 43.

Noble, John, paper by, 375 n.

Nonconformists Memorial, The, Palmer's revision of, 150 n.

Norris, Sarah, member of woman jury,
439.

North American Review, 91 n.

Notes on the Bibliography of WiUherafl
in Massachusetts, by George H.
Moore, 91 n., 148 n., 197 n., 207 n.,
215 n.

Notestein, TTiec^uTv^ in ^iH^Iond, 216 n.,
363 n.

Nottingham, Eail of, letter to, 202 n.

N<^3res, Rev. Nicholas, minister at
Salem, 141 n., 155, 155 n., 172, 172 n.,
184, 206, 214 n., 359 n.; present at
executicMis, 361 n.; credukms of
witchcraft, 369, 397.

Nurse, Francis, farmer, 153 n.

Nurse, Rebecca, wife of Francis Nurse,
153, 153 n., 347 n., 367; accusations,
155, 156, 157, 344-345; trial and
execution, 157-159, 357-360; reasons of Thomas Fiak for conviction, 358-359 ; excommunication, 859,
359 n.; testimonials of Christian behavior, 360, 360 n.

Oakes, Dr. Thomas, attends Goodwin

children afflicted by witchcraft, 101,

101 n.
Obinson, Mrs. William, imprisoned for

witchcraft, 179, 179 n., 180.
Obinson, William, 179 n.
Observations on our Present Debates rsspecUng wikherafte, 187 n.
(yCallaghan, Documentary History of

New York, 43.
Offor, George, 7.

Old South Church, see Boston, Mass.
Ome, Richard, member of grand jury,

85.
Osbom, Sarah, 414, 414 n.; imprisonment, 159 n.; chains for, 349 n.
Osgood, C^t., imprisonment of wife,

180.
Osgood, Mary, account of confenkm,

374-375, 375 n.
Owen, Griffith, attended Council, 88.
Oa^ofd JesU, The, 112.
Oxfordshire, Natttral History of, by

Robert Plot, 266, 266 n.
Oyer and Terminer, Court of, 186 n.,

199, 200 n., 201, 212, 229, 237, 241,

355, 387 n.; members, 356, 355 n.;

close of, 373, 373 n.

460

INDEX

», R. D., SHpt and SaOan qf Old
Salem, 188 n., 371 n.

F^idey, Sootlmndy witch omoi at, 900 n.

Fahmetf Calendar of Virginia Stale
Papere, 430.

Pteltdts, Victor Hugo, Iftnutet of the
BxeciUwe CauneU of New York, 43.

Pfemton, Capt, Richud, 48, 48 n., 49, 50.

Ftaker, Alice, convicted of witdicnft,
366,367.

Faricer, Mary, convicted of witdicnf t,
366.

Farm, Elisabeth, 153 n., 155, 160 n.;
aflUction of, 160, 160 n., 344.

Flams, Rev. Samud, 1^ 374; engaged in West Indian trade, at Barbados, 153 n.; minister at Salem
Village, 153, 153 n., 160 n., 161, 341;
grant of land to, 341; invitation to
ministen to pray for afflicted, 342;
credukniB of witchcraft, 397; family afflicted, 413, 414.

Parsons, Hugh, 410 n.

Fftrsoos, John, member of grand jui7,86.

Pktfsons, Mary, 409 n., 410, 410 n.

F^ the Apostle, 431.

Fteche, Bernard, accuses Susanna Mar^
tin of witchcraft, 231, 232.

Pearly, John, trouble with Elisabeth
How, 240.

Pebody, John, juryman at Salem trials,
388.

Penn, William, charter for colony contains no reference to witchcraft, 82,
83; colony on the Delaware, 82, 83;
attended Councils at Philaddphia,
Pa., 85, 88.

Pennsylvania, Governor Keith of, 83.

Pemuy&ania, Memoire of the Hielorical
iSocie<yo/, 83 n.; MinvUe of the Profrindal Council if, 84 n., 88 n.

Perfect EHecovery of WUdice, A, by
Thomas Ady, 222, 222 n.

Perkins, John, 366 n.

Perkins, Rev. William, 239 n.; rules
for detection of witdies, 205; Diecouree of the Damned Art of Witeh'
craft, 20^ n.; recommends torture in
cases of witchcraft, 363 n.

Perkins, Thomas, juryman at Salem
trials, 388.

Perley, Timothy, Elisabeth How afflicts daughter of, 240.

Perly, Thomag, Sr^ jdryman at Sike
trials, 888.

PhiWtriiihia, P^ OoancflBat, 8S,85a,
88.

Phillips, John, of Dcmheatcr, 4niL

PhiUyps, Thofims, vnrmher of pmi
}uiy, 85.

Phips, lady, mccaaed of witdnrf's
201 n., 377 n.

Phips, Sir William, gpvemot of Maachusetts, 167, 209 n., 210n., 38Q,
280n., 839 n., 877, 377 n^ 379i,
382n., 384^ 384n., 891; appoatment as higjh shaiff of New &
l^and, 193; head of espediftni
against Nova Scotia and Qodbee, 10;
Imii^thood of, 193; supports Inma
Mathor against other New Ei«|M
oommiaBonera, 193; fiftoesi tor
goremorship, 193-194; langiapfciMl
sketch, 193, 195; caoses of cfaai^as
attitude, 195 n.; oomspoadaae,
196-202; stops prmting of disocNBaa^
197;stops proce)ediii0s against witchei
in New Enf^and, 197-196, 201, m
n., 328 n.; aliowa that inimnfiit are
wixmgly aecused, 197, 109; ap>
points a oommisBkMi to try 8a»>
pected witdies, 199; rdeases poaans
ehatged with witdhenft, 200, 422;
arrival with new charter, 348-849;
orders irons put on those in prinn,
349.

Pkipe, Life of, by Cotton Mather,
188 n., 388 n., 889.

Pierson, Rev. Abraham, minittiiT at
Branford, Connecticut, 139, 139 n.

Piles, Robert, member of petty juiy, 86.

Piscataqua, home of George Walton oo
island in, 35 n.; boat of George Walton on, 87, 68.

Platonists, groiq) at Cambridge, 5;
Henry More leader of, &

P(0as o/ (As Crotm, 874 n.

Plot, Robert, Naiwei Hutary of Oxfordehire, 266, 266n.; secretary to
Royal Society , 266 n.

Pollock and Maitland, Hiekey rf Englieh Law, 367 n.

Poole, Matthew, 4; biograpliioal aicetdi,
8 n., 9 n.; design for leoording of
illustrious ProeideneeMf 8; S^napeit
CriHoomm, 8, 9 n.

INDEX

461

Poole, W. F., 188 n^ 232 n., 242 n.;
in New England Hist, and Oeneal.
Regigter, Sin., 409 n.; CoiUm Mather
and Salem Wiichcrafi, 91, 91 n.;
"^tcheraft at Boston/' in Memorial History cf BoeUmy 91 n., 256,
256 n., 292 n., 295 n., 307 n., 389,
408 n., 410 n.; student of the witchcraft problem, 257, 258.

Pop«, Mrs., 154, 154 n., 155, 345; affliction of, 344.

Portsmouth, N. H., Rev. Joshua
Moodey, minister at, 31 n., 65 n.

Post, Mary, suspected of witchcraft,
382, 382 n.

Potts, Thomas, Dieeooeris of WUches,
163 n.y 219 n.

Powell, Cald), seaman, indicted for
witchcraft, 31 n.

Presoot, Doctor, 242.

President White library, Cornell University, 160 n.

Pkessy, John, testifies against Susanna
Blartin, 235.

ProbaU Reoorde cf the Pronnee of New
Hampshire, 35 n., 61 n.

Prodamationforday of prayer, 385, 386.

Procter, Elisabeth, trial of, 360.

Procter, John, trial and execution, 177,
177 n., 360, 361^364; committed with
wife for witchcraft, 34, 347; prayers
denied for, 361-^2; letter requesting
change of magistrates, 362-364.

PromdeneeSf by Cotton Mather, see
Memorable Providences; by Increase
Mather, see Bssay for the Recording,
etc.

Providences, illustrious, design for recording, 8, 12-13, 18; at Portsmouth, N. H., 34.

Provincial Records, in New Hampshire
Historical Society, CoUeetions, 61 n.,
62 n., 76 n.

Pudeater, Ann, conviction for witchcraft, 366, 366 n., 367.

Puritanism, 3, 4, 5, 6.

Puritans, Perkins's book on witchcraft
authority of the, 304.

Pusey, Caleb, attended Council, Philadelphia, Pa., 88.

Putnam, Ann, 250, 250 n., 345, 347,
350 n.; affliction of, 154, 154 n., 155,
158, 344.

Putnam, Jehu, 370 n.

Putnam, Nathaniel, 347.

Putnam, Thomas, 160, 250 n.; demons
afflict wife of, 154 n., 155, 156-158,
159, 345; letter to Judge Samuel
Sewall, 250; complaint of, 347.

Quaestiones et Responsianes ad OrOuh

doxos, by Justin Martyr, 302 n.
Quakerism, Mary Wright punished for,

43 n.; Richard Smith punished for,

44 n.

Quakerism, see Witchcraft and Quakerism,
Quinby, John, witness in witchcraft

case, 50.

Rambo, Gunner, member of grand
jury, 86.

Randc^h, Edward, 56, 72, 72 n., 76 n.

Records of New Amsterdam, 19 n.

Records qf Salem Witchcraft, by W. E.
Woodward, 31 n., 380 n.

Records of the Court of Assistants, 31 n.

Redd, or Reed, Wilmot, convicted of
witchcraft, 366, 367, 367 n.

Reformation, 4r

"Reforming synod," Increase Mather
author of the convening of, 3^.

RemarkobU Praoidenees illustratise of
the Earlier Days of American ColonV'
sation, by Increase Mather, 6-7;' see
also Essay for the Recording, etc

Remy, Nicolas, Desmonolatreiaf 4StAf
424 n.

Rhode Island, 351 n., 352.

Rice, Sarah, accused of witchcraft, 354.

Richards, Ann, accuses Robert Gruard
of witchcraft, 88.

Richards, Major John, 185 n.; accuses
Robert Guard of witchcraft, 88;
letter from Cotton Mather, 194 n.;
member of Court of Oyer and Terminer, 185 n., 355; judge of Superior
Court, 382, 383.

Richason, John, justice of the peace,
438, 441, 442.

Ring, Jervis, testifies against Susanna
Martin, 235.

Ring, Joseph, demons trouble, 235, 236.

Rogers, Ann, husband and child victims of witchcraft, 46, 47.

Rogger, John, testifies against Martha
Carrier, 243.

4fi2

INDEX

Roman diiirch, 904 n.

Rotterdam, 137.

BasBbun/f The Town of, 296 n.

Royal Society, Tbomas Brattle, member of, 167; Robert Plot, secretary
to, 266 n.

Rule, Margaret, 255, 258, 258 il, 287,
384 n.; accomit of the afflictkms of,
296, 306 n., 307 n., 308-341; berieged
by flpectree, 311-313, 314r^l5;
prasrers for ddiyerance, 316-317;
questioDe aaked of, 325-i327; testimony relattre to case of, 337-338.

Saddudem, A Blow ai Modem, by Joseph Glanvill, 5.

Sadud^mue Triumphatue, by Joseph
Glanvill, 6, 6 n., 405 n.

Saiford, Joseph, deposition of, 238; Wife
testifies against Elisabeth How, 238.

Salem, Mass., 141 n., 152, 152 n., 171,
172, 179, 187; Emerson, John, schoolmaster of, 37 n.; Maule, Thomas,
merchant of, 69, 70 n.; witdies' testim<my, 81 n.; Winthrop, Wait, member of court at trials, 93, 93 n.; cases
of witdicnft, 145-164, 174-176,
186 n., 196, 215-244, 341-^83, 386887; Essex Institute at, 151; SewaU,
Samuel, judge in trials at, 160 n.;
SewaU, StephBn, derk of the courts,
160, 160 n.; Gedn^, Bartholomew,
a justice at trials, 170, 170 n., 185;
justices, 170, 171, 173, 174 n^ 185;
witchcraft the rode on which theocracy shattered, 197 n.; meetinghouse, 229; Higginson, Rev. John,
minister at, 245, 248 n., 398; Mather,
Cotton, preaches at, 323n.-324n.;
ministers excommunicate Rebecca
Nurse, 359, 3592n.; methods to extort
confession, 363, 363 n.; jurymen, 386,
386 n., 387, 388.

Salem Village, 152, 152 n.-153 n., 180;
Lawson, Rer. Deodat, pastor at,
147; cases of witchcraft, 147-148,
152-164, 341-367, 372; Ingersol,
Nathaniel, deacon of church in, 152,
153, 153 n.; Parris, Rev. Samud,
minister at, 153, 153 n.; Griggs,
Doctor, physician to, 154, 154 n.,
155; Hawthorne, John, magistrate
at, 155, 155 n.

Saiem WOt^enfl, by C. W. U|*i

91, 91 n., 140 n., 151, 151b., ISlI

207, 215 n., 237 n^ 205, 342;a., 3I7l|

359, 360 n., 366 n.
Saiem WUduaraft at%d Catten MoBm, br

C. W. Upluun, 01, 91 n., Wl

194 n., 222 n., 370 n.
Salem Wikkarafl, lUoorde qf, bj W. Eliot Woodwiird, 31 n^ 151, 151&.

155, 222n., 220ii., 241b., SOi,

346 n., 340 n^ 356 n^ 357n.,380&.

363 n., 366 n^ 367 n., 371 n., 380i,

417 n., 410 n., 421 n.
SakmWiUiu:nii,Itemamdtrtifkiit

oofutd oj the, by Dr. Bdknap, STCl
Salisbury, Maas., witAerA cmb,

185 n., 230, 231, 366, 366 b.
Safanon FaUa, N. H^ 2S0n.; dvdfai

of Antonio Hortndo near, 37.
SahonstaU, Major N^ eondesoBs pnoeedingB against witdkcnft, tt4;

member of Court of Oyer aiidTbDDiner, 185n., 35S, 355 B.

Sargent, WHliam, msmn^^m^ of Ooart of
Oyer andTenniner, 185n<^ 186b.,S&.

Satan, form at appearmnee, 20; Uaij
Hortado troubled by, 37, 38; appsntions of, 138-140.

Saian*9 InmeAU WaHd Dimmmni,
George Sindar, 6, 6 n.

Saul, King of Israel, 431.

Saunderling, James, mociMes
MattsoQ of witchcraft, 86.

Sayer, Samuel, jurymaii at
trials, 388.

Scot, Reginald, pKOteato a^uwt witchcraft, 41.

Scotland, DomeeUe Annaie qf, 1^ Bcbert Chambers, 300 n.

Scotland, witchcraft in, 300^ 300 b.

Scott, Margaret, conTicted of witchcraft, 366^ 367.

Scripture witchcrafts, 222 n.

Scylla and Qiarybdia, 404 n.

Seager, Goodwif e, 20 n.

Searie, Thomas, senrioe as juror, 45.

Seataloott, ses BrooUiaveii.

Seleet Caam of Camteiemee iauekimg
WUdm and WUckarafie^ hf Mm
Ganle, 216 n., 219, 210 n^ 221.

Seneca, 249, 240 n.

Sergeant, Sarah, member of
jury, 439.

INDEX

403

K^ SergettDi, WiUiam, aee Swgent.
^1 Settiuket, aee Brookhayen.
*U fiewaU, Judge Sunuel, 147, 185, 105 a.,
*i 241 n., 378, 997, 308; member of
^ Court of Oyer and Tenniiier, 160 n.,
I 18511., 186 n., 356; Diaryj 186 n.,
h 200 n., 260 n., 352 n., 355 n^ 361 n.,
■ 366i&^ 385 n.; letter from Tbomi^
e: Putnam, 250; reads sermon for Jolm
Alien, 355 n.; member of Superior
Coiurt, 382,383; fearaenor in Salem
trials, 386, 386n., 387; requests
prayers of congregation, 387 n.
Sewall, Stephen, derk of the oourt at

Salem, 160, 160 n., 206.
6ewel, William, translator of The
Doctrine of Devik proved io be the
Oramd Apoetaey cf tkeee Later Timee,
82 n.
Shattock, Thomas, aecuses Bridget
Bishop of witofaenft, 225, 226; child
bewitched, 380 n.
Sheale, Jacob, 177 n.
Sheldon, Susanna, testifieB agsinst

Martha Carrier, 244.
Sherwin, Goodwtfe, testifies agsinst

Elisabeth How, 239.
Sherwood, Grace, 437 n.; The Virginia
Caee ef, 433-442; accused of witchcraft, 436; wife of James Sherwood,
436; accuses Luke Hill of assault,
438 n.; complained of by Luke Hill,
438, 439 n., 440, 441; seandied by
juiy of women, 439 n., 440, 441 ; prosecuted by Maximilian Boush, 440;
committed for witdicraft, 442,
442 n.; last will and testankent, 442 n.
Sherwood, James, 436.
Shippen, Edward, attended Council,

Philadelphia, Pa., 88.
Shxp9andSailoT9ofOld8alem,hfK.T>.

Pkine, 188 n., 371 n.
Short, Mercy, 255, 256, 257, 258,
258 n., 287 n., 316, 384 n.; captured
by Lidians, 259; case of, 251^287;
affliction from witchcraft, 259, 260,
260 n., 261, 307 n., 310; visited by
Cotton Mather, 260, 260 n.; demons
persecute, 261-268, 269, 270, 271,
272, 275, 278, 279, 280, 282; demons
cease to trouble, 277, 278, 285, 286;
apparition cf m good spirit to, 283,
284.

Sibley, BiograpAiooZ ShMiee ef As
Graduates cf Hmvcard UmoermJtn^ 3 n.,
168 n., 183 n., 215 n., 377 n., 306 n.

Sibly, Mary, 3tt n.

Sims, Mr., present at Salem executaons,
361 n.

Sinclar, George, Stdan'e ImnnbU World
Dtsosterad, 6, 6n.

Smith, Geoiige, Hietory ef Ddaware
Countiff PennoyfcsrtiOy 84 n^ 87 n.,
88 n.

Smith, J., publisher, 206.

Smith, J<^ Russell, LOrory pf OU
AuOxn^ 7, 149 n., 207.

Smith, PhiUp, deacon of the diureli at
Hadley, 131-134; effect of witchcraft
on, 132; Magrudia con tains atory
of, 134 n.

Smith, Rebecca, kmg fast of, 266.

Smith, Richscd, pmAbnd for Quakerism, 44 n.

Smith, William, justice cf tfae peace,
438, 441.

Smith, William,£rutory^i\rsioroHb ,48.

Socrates, 303.

Sokmion, King of Israel, 431.

Some Few ficniaribt, by Cotton Mather,
293 n., 294, 348 n.

Sawm MieodUmy ObeereaHone^ 187 n.

Southampton, adoption of law of Moses
as codified by Rev. John Cotton, 42;
death penalty for witchcraft, 42.

Southampton, by Howell, 42 n., 44 n.

Southampien, Twm of, The Firet JSsafc
qf Records of the, 42n.

Speedy Bepetdemoe Urged, by Cotton
Mather, 93 n.

Sprague, Martha, afflicted by witchcraft, 420, 420 n.

Sprat, Msjor Henry, justice of the
peace, 438.

Stacy, William, testifies against Bridget Bishop, 227, 228.

Stephens, Lieutenant, 373.

Sterens, 180, 180 n.

Stickney, Matthew A., 291 n., 292 n.

Stiles, John, grandson of William
Morse, 31 n.

Stone, Rer. Samud, teacher of the
Church in Hartford, 19, 19 n.; information concerning Mary Johnr
son, 135 n., 136.

Stone-throwing Devil, aee LithoboUa.

464

INDEX

Stone throwing in hoiiae of George
Walton, ea-68, 70, 71. 72, 73, 74.

SUtriu cf SaUm Wiieharaft, 153 n.

8tory,^TlK»nas, attended Council, Philadelphia, Pa., 88.

Stoughton, William, lieutflDant-govemor of Manachusetts, 183 n., 194,
194 n.,206, 210 n., 212 n., 353, 353 n.,
378, 379 n.; chief justice in witch
eases, 185 n., 194, 355, 382 n., 383;
nominee of Mather^s, 194 n.; letter
to Cotton Mather, 212, 213.

8tratf(»d, witchcraft in, 408, 408n.

Stuyyesant, Peter, goremor of New
Netherland, 18 n.; intercession for
Judith Varlet, 42; prescribes appeal
to Governor and Council in cases relating to witchcraft, 42.

Suffolk justices, 185.

Superior Court, creation of, 200 n.; proceedings of 200, 200 n.-201.

Swan, Timothy, suffers by witchcraft,
423, 423 n.

Sweden, witchcraft in, 316.

Swedirii colony on the Ddaware, 83.

8wedi9h SMemmU on the Ddaware,
The, by Amandus Johnson, 83 n.

Symoock, John, attended Council, 85, 86.

Symonds, Capt. John, service as juror,
44, 44n.

Sffnopeie CriUoorum^ by Matthew
Poole, 8, 9 n.

Talcott, Capt. John, treasurer of Connecticut colony, 50, 50 n.

Taylor, Chris., attended Council, 4, 85.

Taylor, J. M., The WUchcnfi Ddution
in Colonial ConnectiaU, 18 n., 48 n.,
385, 411.

TeUemata, 302 n.

Thacher, Margaret, widow of Rev.
Thomas Thacher, 177 n., 178.

Thacher, Rev. Peter, minister^at Milton, 109 n.

Thacher, Rev. Thomas, first minister
of Old South Church, Boston, 177 n.

Thomas, Isaiah, president American
Antiquarian Society, 256 n.

Thompson, minister at Braintiee, 409,
409 n.

Thornton, Thomas, testimony relative to case of Margaret Rule, 337338.

Thorfowgood, lieat. fOoL] kkm,p\

tioe of the peace, 43S.
ThundefBtoniis, effect at

Mass., 14-15; woilc of Satis, Cl{

see alio Lightoins.
Tiler, Hannah, aooount of

374-^5.
TUer, Mary, aooount of

374-375.
Tituba, a elave, 151 n., 153b., »&.

imprisonmeiit, 159 it., 3IS» 90t

confesses witchcnft, 413, 414, 411

suffers from witdbcraft, 415.
Tocutt, Coon., confeasioii of a bogr a.

137-140, 141.
Toothaker, AlHii, aocuaea MaitbCsrier of witchcraft, 242, 243.
Topsfieki Historical Soe^sty, HiHtmd

CeOeHionM of, 151 n., 237 n., 357 v

360 n., 366 n.
Towne, Mrs. , and MIn Clark, Tef4^

in the Witchcntfl Deiusion, 237 b.
Townsend, Roger, appears in behalf of

Katharine Harrison, 50.
Tradatue de MoHn9, by Jan BapCsu

van Hehnont, 319 n.
Treatiee cf JuaHfioaJtian^ by SsbdcI

Willard, 113.
Trtot qf TFOcAet, by Sir Blatthew Hiif ,

416, 416 n.
Trithemius, a German sdiolar, 391,

391 n.
True Aooount of the TVyob, 207.
True and Exact Rdatiom, 425 n.
Tndk and Innooeney Dtfendedy 377d.
Tuttle, Julius H., The lAbrariee ef tin

MaUiere, 256 n.
Tyler, Goodwif e, aocused of witchcraft,

376 n.

Upham, C. W., 210 n.; Salem WHdh
craft, 01, 01 n^ 140 n^ 151, 151 n.,
153 n., 207, 215 n., 237 n^ 342il,
347n., 35en^ 360, d66n.; SaUm
Witdiarqft and Cotton MoAer, 91.
91 n., 188 n., 194 n., 222 n^ 379 n.

Upland Court, Beeord <|f , 83 a.

Usher, Hesddah, a meRhant, 178,
178 n., 187 n.

Una, 429.

Vanculin, John, affidaTit of, 86.
Van Rensselaer, Blrs. Scfa^]ier, 41.

INDEX

465

Varlet, Judith, imprisoned for witchcraft, 18 n., 20 n.; marriea Nicholas
Bayard, 19 n.; interoession of Governor Stuyyesant for, 42.

Varlet, Capt. Nicholas, 18 n.

Vaughn's Journal, in New Hampshire Historical Society, CdUecUona,
76 n.

Virginia, Mary Watkins sold to, 384.

Virginia C<ue qf Gract Shenoood, The,
433-142.

Virginia Historical and Philosophical
Society, CoUecUoiu, 436.

Virginiaf Hitiorieal CoUecUons of, by
Henry Howe, 436.

Virginia, InsiUutional History of, in the
Seventeenth Century, by Philip Alexander Bruce, 435, 435 n.

Virffinia State Papere, Calendar of,
Pahner, 439.

VitsUpultoli, idol of Mexican Indians,
245.

Wade, Robert, member of petty Jury,
86.

WagBtaffe, John, The Dodrine of Deoib, 6.

Waloot, Jonathan, commander of militia, 153, 153 n.

Walcot, Mary, 153, 153 n., 154, 155,
158.

Walford, Jane, trial for witchcraft, 61 n.

Walford, Jeremiah, 76 n.; widow, marries John Amaseen, 62 n.

Walford, Thomas, a blacksmith, 61 n.;
settles in New Hampshire, 61 n.

Walker, Hietary of fke Fvni Church in
Hartford, 19 n.

Wallingford, Conn., 385, 385 n.

WaUinoford and Meriden, History of,
Davis, 385 n.

Walton, Abisbag, 35 n.

Walton, Alice, noted for piety, 35 n.;
wife of George Walton, 35 n.

Walton, George, strange disturbances
in house, 34-36, 62-68, 71, 73; residence on island in Piscataqua, 35 n.;
prosperous Quaker, 35 n., 55, 57, 61;
demon troubles, 36, 37; information
concerning, by Mather, 37; accuses
TTAfiTM^h Jones, 60 n., 61 n.; house
described, 61 n.; stone throwing in
house, 624(8, 70-74; boat on Piscataqua, 67, 68; witnesses to stone
throwing in house, 69, 69 n., 70;
stone throwing in fieki, 69, 72, 73,
74 n., 75; arrested for wood cutting,
76 n.

Wandall, ThomaSi service as jurcv,
44 n., 45.

Waples, Ezable, member of woman
jury, 439.

Wardwell, Samud, convicted of witchcraft, 366, 367; indictment extant,
380 n.

Wardwell, Sarah, executed for witdicraf t, 382, 382 n.

"Water test" for witches, condemned,
by Increase Mather, 21 n.

Waters, Anthony, service as juror, 44,
44 n.

Waters, Edward, complaint against a
woman suspected for a witch, 48, 50.

Watertown, Conn., Rev. John Bafleyi
minister at, 124 n.

Watkins, Margaret, member of woman's jury, 439.

Watkins, Mary, confesses witchcraft,
383, 384; sokl to Virginia, 384.

Webb, Henry, a merchant, 177 n.

Webster, John, 6.

Weekly Begieter, Niks's, 43.

Wells, Me., Burroughs, Rev. George,
minister at, 215 n.; witchcraft case,
215 n.

Wendell, Barrett, CotUm Mather: the
Puritan Prieet, 91, 91 n.

Wenham, Biass., witchcraft cases, 237240,369,369 0.

West Chester, N. Y., case of Katharine Harrison, 48-52. .

Weateheeter, County of. History of the,
by Robert Bolton, 42 n.

West-Indian slaves, 342 n.

Wethersfieki, Conn., woman sentenced
to be whipped at, 135 n.

Wetherafidd, History of Ancient, by
Adams and Stiles, 48 n.

Weyer, Johann, writes on cruelties of
witchcraft, 41; opposes witch persecution, 424 n.; De Preatigiie Denuh
niiifi, 424,424n.

Whdford, 249.

White, John, a planter, 436.

Whitehead, Benjamin, member of
grand jury, 85.

466

INDEX

Whiting, Rbw. John, paaCor at Hartfordi 18 n.

Whiting, John, Quakor, STTa.

mmia, MS Weycr.

Wiloox, Barnaby, member of grand
jury, 86.

Wild, John, 347, 347 n.

Wild, Sarah, aoeused of witdMsaft,
347; trial and elocution of , 857-858.

^inHdna, John, tartimoiiy reiativa to
OMeof, 837.

WiU and Dwm, by Rev. Qenliom
Bnficeley, 411 n.

Willard, John, 361; eoDBcated f orwitehenift, 177, 177 n.

Willard, Joaah, 50, 50 n.

WHlaid, Rev. Saaiuel, OOn., 185 n.,
188 n., 360, 362, 362 n.; paator at
GfotOB, Coon., 22, 22 n.; paator of
Old Sooth Church, Boaton, Maes.,
22 a., 87, 97 n., 118; TnaHmcfJyB'
HfieaiUm, 113; aermoii of, 188 n.;
oondemna proeeedingi againat witd^
craft, 184.

ITillMNa and if ory Co&gpiQiiarfw^ Edward W.Jamea in, 435 n., 435,4a0n.

WillianM, Abignfl, 345, 847, 350n.;
strangely afflicted, 1&3, 153 a., 154,
155, 158, 842 a., 844; aoeiM
of impiety, 160.

Wilhama, Dan., teatimony lafaUiva
case of, 337.

Williameburg, Va., 442n.

Wilson, Rev. John, fiiat miniatflr
Boston, 213, 218 n.

Wilson, Sarah, account of eoofenion,
374-375.

Winsor, The LUmdun €f WUdianfi,

• • •

xvm.

Winthrop, John, governor of Connecticut, 12 n., 93 n., 185 n., 186 n.; letter to the men of Eaathampton, 42 n.

Winthrop, John, governor of Massachusetts, 93 n.

Winthrop, Wait, Dedicatory E^pistle
from Cotton Mather, 93, 94, 95;
member of Court of Oyer and Terminer, 93 n., 185 n., 186 n., 355; of
Superior Court, 382, 382 n.

Witchcraft, in Europe, xv-xvi; dofended by Joseph Glanvill, 5; water
test, 21 n.; Be^er and Episoopius
disbelieve in, 41 ; Holland the refuge

to

of

fram pcraaoittiaB, 41; New Hi^
land free fraoa, 41; wntcaipaik
41; Loi« Iriaad tbeaBatof,42; Ki
England 'a inflnwwB oo olhcreaiHB.
42; Nevr Toik not idiolly faefaA
42;8oiitliainptoii'a eode idilisgti
42; Stayveaaot, Govanor, pnaaAm
appeal to the Governor andCoBd
42; Poz, Georsa, power to dete0l,a
82; Fna'a barter lor oolonyeoalHi
no reference to, 82, 83; hiatfaer, Cotton, addraas roiiting to^ 516, 90^ 17;
sermon by Bew. Doodat LasMoav,
158,158n.; penoiiaalleetedhy,141143, 161-164; Bradatraet, 8mm,
oondemna pvooaadaoigB agsiait, 181^
Byfiflld, Vmf oQnaamna
against, 184; Danforth,

Fozcroft, fVancia,

184;

184; Saltonatall, Major N.
rtrnins liumiiiiliiiga acainaf, Iftl; TH
lard, Rev. Samuel, ^^^*wi«mM pR>.
eeedii«s againat, 184; fiut far waisters to be led in right way toaaid,
186n.; StomJiloii, Wifl^M, fAarfjMtice in cases of, 194; Fla]3% Sv William, attttode toward, 198^08^
328 n., 422; Molirm, caae at, 196a.;

XHwictiomqian bsie
197n.; plot jatidiwlfri,
211; English trial, 215 a.; tmkfor,
at Salem, 211^244; PboKW.F.,8tadentof,257,3B8;GbW^
of Ncnr Ekigbmd's oonditaan, :
SooUand, csaea in, 800^ aOOa.; eaib
arising from dootriaa of, 803^804; beoomes a prmeqial aaeleaiaaCiaii s^
gine, 304; Swedish, 316; WUlaflkant,
appearance of, 316, 317;
crflMd to, 819 n.;
mended by Perfcina, 968 n.; nanlta of
trials for, 873-874^ 374 n.; pimMi
ment for, 374, 874 n.; JPpMtfsiagarding/fxomrRev. John HlggiBaan, 889,
402; FhuMe^ nfaia hundred pcanas
eseeuted, 424, «Mn.; blade, 425,
425n.; ma]ellck,^8,4a5B.; siaaiis
Salem WUehcnfi,
WUekara/l, AnmOM ol, bja G. Dfeake,
31 n., 52n., 410tt.

INDEX

467

WUchcraft and Quahmtm^ by Amelia

Mott Gumm^ne, 81 n.
WUchcraft at Andover, by Saiah Loring

Bailey, 420n.
Witchcraft ai BoUon, by W. F. Poole,

91 n.
Wikheraft at Salem, Man., A Bri^

amd True NarratUfe of, by Deodat

LawBon, 145-164, 341 n.
WUchcraft Cad out from the BeUgioiu

Seed and lerad of Ood, by Ridiard

Famworth, 81 n., 82.
WUchcraft DdueUm in Colonial Connedicid, by J. M. Tayknr, 18 n., 48 n.,

385, 411 n.
WUdicraft Ddueion in New England,

The, ed. by S. G. Drake, 151 n.,

208, 343 n.
WUchcraft, Ddueien, Tapefiddtnthe, by

Mn. Towne and Miss Clark, 237 n.
WUchcraft, DiBomaree qf the Damned AH

of, by Rev. William Perkina, 304 n.
WUehmft, Qtdde to Orand-Jurymen

, . . in caeee of, by Rev. Richard

Beniard, 304 n.
Wikheraft, Hidoricoi Beeay Coneeming,

by Dr. Hutchinson, 222 n.
WUchcraft in Bngland,tloteBbein,2l6 n.,

363 n.
Wikheraft in Hartford, A Case of, by

C. J. Hoadly, 18 il
Wikhoraft in Maeeadiueette, Final

Notea on, by G. H. Moore, 107 n.,

202 n., 367 n., 373 n.
WUchcraft in Maeeadmeetta, Notee on the

BUMography of, by Q. H. Moore, 91 n.,

148 n., 197 n., 207 n., 215 n., 385 n.
Wikheraft, in Salem Village, by W. S.

Nevins, 153 n.
WUchcraft in the UnUed Stake, Lid of

Booke rdaHno to, in New York Library, 207 n.
Wikheraft, Eecorde of Salem, by W. Elliot Woodward, 151, 155 n., 180 n.
WUchcraft, Stariee of Salem, 153 n.
WUehentfl Time$, Graton in t&e, by Dr.

S. A. Green, 360 n.
WUdteraftt, Obeervatione on our PItment Mxxtee reepecting, 187 n.
WUthes, A Perfed LHeeovery of, by

Thomas Ady, 222, 222 n.
Witches, stories of, 138; niks for detection of, 205, 304 n.; trials of, 215244; invisibiHty of, 246-247, 248;
effects following execution of, 248249; Hobbs, Deliverance, attends
meeting of, 417, 417 n., 418; Foster,
Ann, attends meeting of, 418; Lacy,
Mary, attends meeting of, 418, 418 n.,
419, 419 n. ; Hopkins, Matthew, hunts,
423, 423 n.; Aldati, Andrea, opposes
persecution of, 424 n.; Weyer, Johann, opposes persecution of, 424 n.;
persecution in Essex of, 425, 425 n.;
water test for, 441, 441 n.

Witches, Trial of, by Sir Matthew Hale,
416, 416 n.

Witches and Wikhcrafte, Sded Cases
of Consdenee toudiing, by Gaule,
John, 216 n., 219, 219 n., 221.

Wittenberg, case of young man at,
10 n.

Wolcott, Mary, affliction of, 344.

Wonders of the Ineieible World, by Cotton Mather, 15 n., 149 n., 150 n.,
196 n., 204, 205-208, 209-251, 255,
293, 295, 297, 297 n., 304, 330 n.,
357, 370, 377, 377 n., 378, 378 n.,
414, 416, 422, 423.

Wood, George, witchcraft practised on»
45,46.

Wood, Martha, accuses Elisabeth How
of witchcraft, 239.

Woodbridge, Rev. Beojamin, minister
at Bristol, R. I., 65, 65 n., 75.

Woodhouse, Capt. Horatio, justice of
the peace, 438.

Woodward, W. Elliot, Records of Salem
Wikheraft, 31 n., 151, 151 n., 156 n.,
222 n., 229 n., 241 n., 357 n., 360 n.,
363 n., 366 n., 367 n., 371 n.; Hietorical Series, 208, 295.

Worlds qf Spirits, The Certainly of the,
by Richard Baxter, 98, 98 n.

Wright, Mary, punished for Quakerism, 43 n.; tided for witchcraft, 43,
43 n.

Yattman, John, member of grand jury,
86.

York, Duke of, bestowal of Dutch territory on, 42.

Yorkshire, name given to Long Island,
45 n.

Zwinger, Theodor, 4.
