First Footsteps in East Africa (Richard Francis Burton, 1894)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1894 edition of the 1856 classic (https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.49412). Burton's disguised pilgrimage to Harar (1854–55) — the first European to enter the forbidden city and live.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

FIRST FOOTSTEPS 

IN 

EAST AFRICA 

IN T WO VOJL UMES. 
VOLUME I. 






FIRST FOOTSTEPS 

IN 

EAST AFRICA 

OR, 

AN EXPLORATION OF HARAR 


CAPTAIN SIR RICHARD F. BURTON, 

X.C.M.G., F.R.G.S., &C., &c H Ac. 


EDITED BY HIS WIFE, 

ISABEL BURTON. 

(jjlfUmoriaf Gdtiion. 


IN TWO VOLUMES. 
VOLUME I. 



LONDON: 

TTfoiST O N AND EDWARDS. 

MpcCcxcrv 

(Atti igkto mtrn d *} 




Printed for the Publishers at 
The Meccan Press, 

3, Soho Square, London, W. 


^ ° l £ 



CONTENTS 

OF 

THE FIRST VOLUME 


Page. 


Preface to the Memorial Edition - - - xi 

Preface to the First (1856) Edition - - - xv 

Chapter. 

I. — Departure from Aden 1 

II. — Life in Zayla ------ 19 

III. — Excursions near Zayla - - - - 46 

IV. — The Somal, their Origin and Peculiarities 70 

V. — From Zayla to the Hills - - - 90 

VI. — From the Zayla Hills to the Marar Prairie 128 

VII. — From the Marar Prairie to Harar - 171 

VIII. — Ten Days at Harar 


- 204 




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 

IN VOLUME I. 


Harar, from the Coffee Stream - to face Title Pagk 

Map of Sir R. F. Burton’s Route to Harar 

to face P. i 

The Hammal to face n 

Diagram illustrating Somali Geography - - 25 

The Shantarah Board - - - - - 29 

The Shahh Board - - - - - - 30 

The Fal --------- 62 




xi 


PREFACE 

TO 

(Memorial Edition. 

After Richard Burton left Meccah, he returned 
up the Red Sea to Egypt, and after a short rest, 
to Bombay. The East India Company Service 
had long wished to explore Somali-land in Abys- 
sinia, because Berberah, its chief port, is far 
better than Aden. As Harar, its capital, was the 
most difficult place, and no white man had ever 
succeeded in entering it, the whole country being 
then inhabited by a most dangerous race to deal 
with, he obtained leave to go there as a private 
traveller, the Company agreeing to allow him his 
pay, but no Government protection. He applied 
for three other Anglo-Indian Officers (amongst 
them Lieutenant Speke), to tell off to different 
employments on the coast. Speke was to go to 
punder Guray to buy horses and camels, Herne 
vas to go to Berberah on another errand, and 
troyan on a third errand was to meet him there, 
^hilst Richard Burton was to do the dangerous 
part, i.e., plunge into the country, and eijter Harar 



xii First Footsteps in East Africa. 

as an Arab merchant. This was one of his most 
splendid and dangerous expeditions, and the least 
known, partly because his pilgrimage to Meccah was 
in every man’s mouth, and partly because the 
excitement aroused by the Crimean War had to a 
large extent deadened the interest in all personal 
adventure. 

He disappeared into the desert for four months, 
but this unnoticed, unknown, journey has been 
of great importance to the Egyptians, to the 
English, and now to the Italian Army. The way 
was long and weary, adventurous and dangerous, 
but at last the “ Dreadful City ” was sighted, and 
relying on his good Star and audacity, he walked 
boldly in, sending his compliments to the Amir, 
and asking for audience. His diplomacy on this 
occasion, his capacity for passing as an Arab, and 
his sound Mohammedan Theology, gave him ten 
days in the City, where he slept every night 
in peril of his life. 

The journey back was full of peril, the 
provisions being only five biscuits, a few limejs, 
a few lumps of sugar, and a single skin iof 
water. They passed through a terrible desert, 
such as Grant Allen describes when relating tike 
journey of Mohammed Ali and Ivan Royle from 
Eagle City through the desert to Carthage. Whan 
Richard however had made up his mind that $e 
would.- soon become food for the desert beasts, for 
he had been thirty-six hours without water, coul^ 



xiii 


Preface to the Memorial Edition . 

go no further, and was prepared to die the 
worst of all deaths, a bird flew by him, and 
plunging down , a hundred yards away showed him 
a charming spring; a little shaft of water about 
two feet in diameter, in a margin of green; man 
and beast raced to it, and drank till they could drink 
no more. 

By dodging his enemies he at last reached 
the coast of Berberah, where he found his three 
comrades, and where he and the wretched mule 
were duly provided for, and he says he “ fell asleep, 
conscious of having performed a feat which, like a 
certain ride to York, will live in local annals for 
many and many a year.” 

But he would not “ let well alone ” ; he 
wanted to make a new expedition, Nilewards via 
Harar, on a large and imposing scale, and he 
went and came back from Aden with forty-two 
armed men, established an agency, and a camp in 
a place where he could have the protection of an 
English gunboat which brought them ; but un- 
fortunately the Government drew off the gun-boat, 
and 300 of the natives swarmed round them in 
the night, and tried to throw the tents down, and trap 
them like mice. They fought desperately, but Speke 
received eleven wounds, poor Stroyan was killed, 
Herne was untouched, and Richard Burton, sabre- 
ing his way through the crowd, heard a friendly 
voice behind him, hesitated for a moment, and 
received a javelin through both cheeks, carrying 



xiv First Footsteps in East Africa . 

away four teeth, and transfixing the palate. He 
could not draw it out on account of its barb and 
had to wander up and down on the coast for 
hours from night to daylight. They all managed 
to escape to the water’s edge, where they hailed a 
native craft, which was just sailing out, and to 
whose master and crew Richard fortunately had t 
shown great hospitality. They picked them up and \ 
managed to extract the javelin and bind up his 
jaws till they reached Aden. They were so badly 
wounded that they had to return to England, and 
as soon as he recovered, he proceeded to the Crimea. 

Every word of this narrative is full of interest, 
and ought to be especially so at the present moment 
to the Italian *Army, which now occupies the country 
that was in those days so difficult to enter. 

Isabel Burton. 


January 25th , 1804. 



XV 


PREFACE 

TO THE 

FIRST (1856) EDITION 


Averse to writing, as well as to reading, diffuse 
Prolegomena, the author finds himself compelled to 
relate, at some length, the circumstances which led to 
the subject of these pages. 

In May 1849, the late Vice-Admiral Sir Charles 
Malcolm, formerly Superintendent of the Indian Navy, 
in conjunction with Mr. William John Hamilton, then 
President of the Royal Geographical Society of Great 
Britain, solicited the permission of the Court of Directors 
of the Honourable East India Company to ascertain the 
productive resources of the unknown Somali Country in 
East Africa. 1 The answer returned, was to the following 
effect : — 

“ If a fit and proper person volunteer to travel in 
the Somali Country, he goes as a private traveller, the 
Government giving no more protection to him than they 
would to an individual totally unconnected with the 


1 It occupies the whole of the Eastern Horn, extending from 
the north of Bab al-Mandeb to several degrees south of Cape 
Guardafui. In the former direction it is bounded by the Dankali 
and the Ittu Gallas; in the Matter by the Sawahil or Negrotic 
regions ; the Red Sea is its eastern limit, and westward it stretches 
to within a few miles of Harar. , 




xvi First Footsteps ^ East Afi^ 

service. They will allow the officer ' wha>btaiii8 : .;-]^ 
mission to go, during his absence on the expeditto^ ^ 
retain all the pay and allowances hi^may be enjogS^g 
when leave was granted : they will supply him wr& ^B; 
the instruments required, afford him a passage going ahd 
returning, and pay the actual expenses of the journey.” ^ 

The project lay dormant until March 1850, when* 
Sir Charles Malcolm and Captain Smyth, President' of 
the Royal Geographical Society of Great Britain, waited 
upon the chairman of the Court of Directors of the 
Honourable East India Company. He informed them 
that if they would draw up a statement of what was 
required, and specify how it could be carried into effect, 
the document should be forwarded the Governor- 
General of India, with a recommendation that, should 
no objection arise, either from expense or other cause$ 
a. fit p<erson should be permitted to explore the Somali 
Country. 

Sir Charles Malcolm then offered the charge of the 
expedition to Dr. Carter, of Bombay, an officer favourably 
known to the Indian world by his services on board the 
“ Palinurus " brig whilst employed upon the maritime 
survey of Eastern Arabia. Dr. Carter at. once acceded 
to the terms proposed by those from whom the project 
emanated ; but his principal object being to compare 
the geology and botany of the Somali Country with the 
results of his Arabian travels, he volunteered to traverse 
only that part of Eastern Africa which lies north of a. 
line drawn from Berberah to Ras Hafun — in feet, the 
maritime mountains of the Somal. His health not 
permitting him to be left on shore, he required a cr uizer 
to convey him from pace to place, and to preserve his 
store of presents and provisions. By this he 

hoped to land at the most interesting points, and to 
penetrate here and there frolb sixty to eighty mile* 
inland, across the region which he undertook to explore. 



Preface to the First ( 1856 ) Edition . xvii 

H*- On the 17th of August, 1850, Sir Charles Malcolm 
wrote to Dr. Carter in these terms : — “ I have com- 
municated with the President of the Royal Geographical 
Society and others: the feeling is, that though much 
valuable information could no doubt be gained by 
skirting the coast (as you propose) both in geology and 
botany, yet that it does not fulfil the primary and great 
object of the London Geographical Society, which was, 
and still is, to have the interior explored. 1 ' The Vice- 
Admiral, however, proceeded to say that, under the 
circumstances of the case, Dr. Carter's plans were 
approved of, and asked him to confer immediately with 
Commodore Lushington, then Commander-in-Chief of 
the Indian Navy** * 

In May 1851, Vice-Admiral Sir Charles Malcolm 
died : geographers and traveller lost in him an influential 
and an energetic friend. Duimg the ten years of his 
superintendence over the Indian Navy, that service rose, 
despite the incubus of profound peace, to the highest 
distinction. He freely permitted the officers under his 
command to undertake the task of geographical discovery, 
retaining their rank, pay, and batta, whilst the actual 
expenses of their journeys were defrayed by contingent 
bills. All papers and reports submitted to the local 
government were favourably received, and the successful 
traveller looked forward to distinction and advancement. 

During the decade which elapsed between 1828 and 
1838, “ officers of the Indian Navy journeyed, as the 
phrase is,' with their lives in their hands , through the 
wildest districts of the East. Of these we name the 
late Commander J. A. Young, Lieutenants Wellsted, 
Wyburd, Wood, and Christopher, Retired Commander 
Ormsby, the present Capt. H. B. Lynch C.B., Com- 
manders; Felix Jones and W. C. Barker, Lieutenants 
Cruttenden and Whitelock. Their researches extended 
from the banks of the Bosphorus to the shores of- India. 



xvm 


First Footsteps in East Africa. 


Of the vast, the immeasurable value of such services,” 
to quote the words of the Quarterly Review (No. cxxix. 
Dec. 1839), “ which able officers thus employed, are in 
the mean time rendering to science, to commerce, to 
their country, and to the whole civilized world, we need 
say nothing : — nothing we could say would be too much.” 

“ In five years, the admirable maps of that coral- 
bound gulf— the Red Sea — were complete: the terrors 
of the navigation had given place to the confidence 
inspired by excellent surveys. In 1829 the Thetis of ten 
guns, under Commander Robert Moresby, convoyed the 
first coal ship up the Red Sea, of the coasts of which 
this skilful and enterprising seaman made a cursory 
survey, from which emanated the subsequent trigono- 
metrical operations which form our present ma p c, Xwo 
ships were employed, the * Benares ’ and ‘ Palinurus,’ th e 
former under Commander Elwon, the latter under Com- 
mander Moresby. It remained, however, for the latter 
officer to complete the work. Some idea may be formed 
of the perils these officers and men went through, when 
we state the ‘ Benares ’ was forty-two times aground.” 

“Robert Moresby, the genius of the Red Sea, 
conducted also the survey of the Maidive Islands atM i 
groups known as the Chagos Archipelago.. He narrowly 
escaped being a victim to the deleterious climate of his 
station, and only left it when no longer capable of working. 
A host of young and ardent officers— Christopher, • 
Young, Powell, Campbell, Jones, Barker, and others— 
ably seconded him : death was busy amongst for 
months and so paralyzed by disease were the living, that 
the anchors could scarcely be raised for a retreat to the 
coast of India. Renovated by a three months’ stay, 
occasionally in port, where they were strengthen* L 
dditional numbers, the undaunted remnants from time 
to time returned to their task ; and in 1837, gave to the 
taKmUdg. «f thoM ***, 



Preface to the First ( 1856 ) Edition . xix 

heretofore — though within 150 miles of our coasts — had 
been a mystery hidden within the dangers that environed 
them. The beautiful maps of the Red Sea, drafted by 
the late Commodore Carless, 1 then a lieutenant, will 
ever remain permanent monuments of Indian Naval 
Science, and the daring of its officers and men. Those 
of the Maidive and Chagos groups, executed by Com* 
mander then Acting Lieutenant Felix Jones, were, we 
hear, of such a high order, that they were deemed 
worthy of special inspection by the Queen.” 

u While these enlightening operations were in pro- 
gress, there were others of this profession, no less 
distinguished, employed on similar discoveries. The 
coast of Mekran westward from Scinde, was little 
known, but it soon found a place in the hydrographical 
offices of India, under Captain, then Lieutenant, Stafford 
Haines, and his staff, who were engaged on it. The 
journey to the Oxus, made by Lieut. Wood, Sir 
A. Bumes’s companion in his Lahore and Afghan 
missions, is a page of history which may not be opened 
to us again in our own times; while in Lieut. Carless’s 
drafts of the channels of the Indus, we trace those 
designs, that the sword of Sir Charles Napier only was 
destined to reveal.” 

u The ten years prior to that of 1839 were those of 
fitful repose, such as generally precedes some great out- 
break. The repose afforded ample leisure for research, 

z In a.d. 1838. Lieut. Carless surveyed the seaboard of the 
Somali country, from Ras Hafun to Burnt Island; unfortunately 
his labours were allowed by Sir Charles Malcolm's successor to lie 
five years in the obscurity of MS. Meanwhile the steam frigate 
•' Memnon,” Capt. Powell commanding, was lost at Ras Assayr ; a 
Norie's chart, an antiquated document, with an qrror of from 
fifteen to twenty miles, being the only map of reference on board. 
Thus the Indian Government, by the dilatoriness and prejudices of 
its Superintendent of Marine, sustained an unjustifiable loss of 
at least 50,000/. • 

* b — 2 



XX 


First Footsteps in East Africa . 

and the shores of the island of Socotra, with the south 
coast of Arabia, were carefully delineated. Besides the 
excellent maps of these regions, we are indebted to the 
survey for that unique work on Oman, by the late Lieut. 
Wellsted of this service, and for valuable notices from the 

pen of Lieut. Cruttenden. 1 ” 

a Besides the works we have enumerated, there were 
others of the same nature, but on a smaller scale, in 
operation at the same period around our own coasts. 
The Gulf of Cambay, and the dangerous sands known as 
the Molucca Banks, were explored' and faithfully mapped 
by Captain Richard Ethersey, assisted by Lieutenant 
(now Commander) Fell. Bombay Harbour was de- 
lineated again on a grand scale by Capt. R. Cogan, 
assisted by Lieut. Peters, now both dead ; and the ink of 
the Maidive charts had scarcely dried, when the labours 
of those employed were demanded of the Indian Govern- 
ment by Her Majesty’s authorities at Ceylon, to undertake 
trigonometrical surveys of that Island, and the dangerous 
and shallow gulfs on either side of the neck o( sand con- 
necting it with India. They were the present Captains 
F. F. Powell, and Richard Ethersey, in the Schooner 
* Royal Tiger * and 4 Shannon,* assisted by Lieut, (now 
Commander) Felix Jones, and the late Lieut. Wilmot 
Christopher, who fell in action before Mooltan. The 
first of these officers had charge of one of the tenders 
under Lieut. Powell, and the latter another under Lieut. 
Ethersey. The maps of the Pamban Pass and the 
Straits of Manaar were by the hand of Lieut. Felix 
Jones, who was the draftsman also on this survey : they 
speak for themselves.*” 

z In a.d. 1836-38, Lieut. Cruttenden published descriptions of 
travel, which will be alluded to in a subsequent part of this preface. 

2 This “hasty sketch of the scientific labours of the TmKon 
navy,. . is extracted from an able anonymous pamphlet, un- 
promisingly headed “ Grievances and Present Condition of our 
Indian Officers.” 



xxi 


Preface to the First (1$56) Edition . 

In 1838 Sir Charles Malcolm was succeeded by Sir 
Robert Oliver, an 11 old officer of the old school”— a 
strict disciplinarian, a faithful and honest servant of 
Government, but a violent, limited, and prejudiced man. 
He wanted “ sailors,” individuals conversant with ropes 
and rigging, and steeped in knowledge of shot and 
shakings, he loved the “rule of thumb,” he hated 
“ literary razors,” and he viewed science with the pro- 
foundest contempt. About twenty surveys were ordered 
to be discontinued as. an inauguratory measure, causing 
the loss of many thousand pounds, independent of such 
contingencies as the “Memnon.” 1 Batta was withheld 
from the few officers who obtained leave, and the life of 
weary labour on board ship was systematically made 
monotonous and uncomfortable: — in local phrase it 
was described as “ many stripes and no stars.” Few 
measures were omitted to heighten the shock of contrast. 
No notice was taken of papers forwarded to Government, 
and the man who attempted to distinguish himself by 
higher views than quarter-deck duties, found himself 
marked out for the angry Commodore’s red-hot dis- 
pleasure. No place was allowed for charts and plans : 
valuable original surveys, of which no duplicates existed, 
lay tossed amongst the brick and mortar with which the 
Marine Office was being rebuilt. No instruments were 
provided for ships, even a barometer was not supplied 
in one case, although duly indented for during five years. 
Whilst Sir Charles Malcolm ruled the Bombay dock- 
yards, the British name rose high in the Indian, African, 
and Arabian seas. Each vessel had its presents — guns, 
pistols, and powder, Abbas, crimson cloth and shawls, 
watches, telescopes and similar articles — with a suitable 

z In a.d. 1848, the late Mr. Joseph Hume called in the House 
of Commons for a return of all Indian surveys carried on during the 
ten previous years. The result proved that no fewer than a score 
had been suddenly M broken up," by order of Sir Robert Oliver. 




XXII 


First Footsteps in East Africa . 

stock of which every officer visiting the interior on leave 
was supplied. An order from Sir Robert Oliver with- 
drew presents as well as instruments : with them dis- 
appeared the just idea of our faith and greatness as a 
nation entertained by the maritime races, who formerly 
looked forward to the arrival of our cruizers. Thus the 
Indian navy was crushed by neglect and routine into 
a mere transport service, remarkable for little beyond 
constant quarrels between sea-lieutenants and land- 
lieutenants, sailor-officers and soldier-officers, their 
a passengers.” And thus resulted that dearth of enter- 
prise-alluded to ex cathedra by a late President of the 
Royal Geographical Society of Great Britain — which 
now characterizes Western India erst so celebrated for 
ardour in adventure. 

To return to the subject of East African discovery. 
Commodore Lushington and Dr. Carter met in order 
to concert some measures for forwarding the plans of 
a Somali Expedition. It was resolved to associate 
three persons, Drs. Carter and Stocks, and an officer 
of the Indian navy : a vessel was also warned for service 
on the coast of Africa. This took place in the beginning 
of 1851 : presently Commodore Lushington resigned his 
command, and the project fell to the ground. 

The author of these pages, after his return from 
Al-Hijaz to Bombay, conceived the idea of reviving 
the Somali Expedition: he proposed to start in the 
spring of 1854, an d accompanied by two officers, to 
penetrate vid Harar and Gananah to Zanzibar. His 
plans were favourably received by the Right Hon. Lord 
Elphinstone, the enlightened governor of the colony, 
and by the local authorities, amongst whom the name 
of James Grant Lumsden, then Member of the "Council, 
will ever suggest the liveliest feelings of gratitude and 
affection. But it being judged necessary to refer once 
more for permission to the Court of Directors, an official 



Preface to the First ( 1856 ) Edition . nffi 

letter bearing date the 28th April, 1854, was forwarded 
from Bombay with a warn* recommendation. Lieut. 
Herne of the 1st Bombay European Regiment of Fusil- 
eers, an officer skilful in surveying, photography, and 
mechanics, together with the writer, obtained leave, 
pending the reference, and a free passage to Aden in 
Arabia. On the 23rd August a favourable reply was 
despatched by the Court of Directors. 

Meanwhile the most painful of events had modified 
the original plan. The third member of the Expedition, 
Assistant Surgeon J. Ellerton Stocks, whose brilliant 
attainments as a botanist, whose long and enterprising 
journeys, and whose eminently practical bent of mind 
had twice recommended him for the honours and trials 
of African exploration, died suddenly of apoplexy in the 
prime of life. Deeply did his friends lament him for many 
reasons : a universal favourite, he left in the social circle 
a void never to be filled up, and they mourned the more 
that Fate had not granted him the time, as it had given 
him the will and the power, to trace a deeper and more 
enduring mark upon the iron tablets of Fame. 

No longer hoping to carry out his first project, the 
writer determined to make the geography and commerce 
of the Somali country his principal objects. He there- 
fore applied to the Bombay Government for the assistance 
of Lieut. William Stroyan, I. N., an officer distinguished 
by his surveys on the coast of Western India, in Sind, 
and on the Panjab Rivers. It was not without difficulty 
that such valuable services were spared for the deadly 
purpose of penetrating into Eastern Africa. All obstacles, 
however, were removed by their ceaseless and energetic 
efforts, who had fostered the author’s plans, and early 
in the autumn of 1854, Lieut. Stroyan received leave 
to join .the Expedition. At the same time, Lieut. J. H. 
Speke, of the 46th Regiment Bengal N. I., who had 
spent many years collecting the Fauna of Thibet and 



XXIV 


First Footsteps, in East Africa. 

the Himalayan mountains, volunteered to share the 
hardships of African exploration. 

In October 1854, the writer and his companions 
received at Aden in Arabia the sanction of the Court of 
Directors. It was his intention to march n a body, 
using Berberah as a base of operations, westwards to 
Harar, and thence in a south-easterly direction towards 
Zanzibar. 

But the voice of society at Aden was loud against 
the expedition. The rough manners, the fierce looks, 
and the insolent threats of the Somal — the effects of our 
too peaceful rule — had prepossessed the timid colony at 
the li Eye of Al-Yaman ” with an idea of extreme danger. 
The Anglo-Saxon spirit suffers, it has been observed, 
from confinement with any but wooden walls, and the 
European degenerates rapidly, as do his bull-dogs, his 
game-cocks, and other pugnacious animals, in the hot, 
enervating, and unhealthy climates of the East. The 
writer and his comrades were represented to be men 
deliberately going to their death, and the Somal at Aden 
were not slow in imitating the example of their rulers. 
The savages had heard of the costly Shoa Mission, its 
300 camels and 50 mules, and they longed for another 
rehearsal of the drama : according to them a vast outlay 
was absolutely necessary, every village must be feasted, 
every chief propitiated with magnificent presents, and 
dollars must be dealt out by handfuls. The Political 
Resident refused to countenance the scheme proposed, 
and his objection necessitated a further change of plans. 

Accordingly, Lieut. Herne was directed to proceed, 
after the opening of the annual fair-season, to Berberah, 
where no danger was apprehended. It was judged that 
the residence of this officer upon the coast would 
produce a friendly feeling on the part of the Somal, and, 
as indeed afterwards proved to be the case, would 
facilitate the writer’s egress from Harar, by terrifying 



XXV 


Preface to the First (1856) Edition . 

the ruler for the fate of his caravans. 1 2 * * Lieut. Herne, 
who on the ist of January 1855, was joined by Lieut. 
Stroyan, resided on the African coast from November to 
April ; he inquired into the commerce, the caravan lines, 
and the state of the slave trade, visited the maritime 
mountains, sketched all the places of interest, and made 
a variety of meteorological and other observations as a 
prelude to extensive research. 

Lieut. Speke was directed to land at Bunder Guray, 
a small harbour in the “Arz al-Aman,” or “Land of 
Safety,” as the windward Somal style their country. 
His aim was to trace the celebrated Wady Nogal, 
noting its watershed and other peculiarities, to purchase 
horses and camels for the future use of the Expedition, 
and to collect specimens of the reddish earth which, 
according to the older African travellers, denotes the 
presence of gold dust. 9 Lieut. Speke started on the 
23rd October 1854, and returned, after about three 
months, to Aden. He had failed, through the rapacity 
and treachery of his guide, to reach the Wady Nogal. 
But he had penetrated beyond the maritime chain of 
hills, and his journal (condensed in the Appendix) 
proves that he had collected some novel and important 
information. 

Meanwhile the author, assuming the disguise of an 
Arab merchant, prepared to visit the forbidden city of 
Harar. He left Aden on the 29th of October 1854, 
arrived at the capital of the ancient Hadiyah Empire 
on the 3rd January 1855, and on the 9th of the 
ensuing February returned in safety to Arabia, with the 

1 This plan was successfully adopted by Messrs. Antoine and 
Amauld d’Abbadie, when travelling in dangerous parts of Abyssinia 
and the adjacent countries. 

2 In a.d. i6fjo, Vermuyden found gold at Gambia always "on 

naked and barren hills embedded in a reddish earth." All 1 got was 

a big lizard : lost /500. 9 



XXVI 


First Footsteps in East Africa . 

view of purchasing stores and provisions for a second 
and a longer journey . 1 What unforeseen circumstance 
cut short the career of the proposed Expedition, the 
Postscript of the present volume will show. 

The following pages contain the writer’s diary, kept 
during his march to and from Harar. It must be borne 
in mind that the region traversed on this occasion was 
previously known only by the vague reports of native 
travellers. All the Abyssinian discoverers had traversed 
the Dankali and other northern tribes : the land of the 
Somal was still a terra incognita. Harar, moreover, had 
never been visited, and few are the cities of the world 
which in the present age, when men hurry about the 
earth, have not opened their gates to European ad- 
venture. The ancient metropolis of a once mighty race, 
the only permanent settlement in Eastern Africa, the 
reported seat of Moslem learning, a walled city of stone 
houses, possessing its independent chief, its peculiar 
population, its unknown language, and its own coinage, 
the emporium of the coffee trade, the head-quarters of 
slavery, the birth-place of the Kat plant , 2 and the 
great manufactory of cotton-cloths, amply, it appeared, 
deserved the trouble of exploration. That the writer 
was successful in his attempt, the following pages will 
prove. Unfortunately it was found impossible to use 

i The writer has not unfrequently been blamed by the critics 
of Indian papers, for venturing into such dangerous lands with an 
outfit nearly 1500/. in value. In the Somali, as in other countries 
of Eastern Africa, travellers must carry not only the means of 
purchasing passage, but also the very necessaries of life. Money 
being unknown, such bulky articles as cotton-cloth, tobacco, and 
beads are necessary to provide meat and milk, and he who would 
eat bread must load his camels with grain. The Somal of course 
exaggerate the cost of travelling; every chief, however, may 
demand a small present, and every pauper, as will be seen in the 
following pages, expects to be fed. 

2 It is described at length in Chap. III. 



XXV11 


Preface to the First (1856) Edition . 

any instruments except a pocket compass, a watch, and 
a portable thermometer more remarkable for convenience 
than for correctness. But the way was thus paved for 
scientific observation : shortly after the author’s de- 
parture from Harar, the Amir or chief wrote to the 
Acting Political Resident at Aden, earnestly begging to 
be supplied with a “ Frank physician,” and offering 
protection to any European who might be persuaded 
to visit his dominions. 

The Appendix contains the following papers con- 
nected with the movements of the expedition in the year 
1854. 

1. The diary.and observations made by Lieut. Speke, 
when attempting to reach the Wady Nogal. 

2. A sketch of the grammar, and a vocabulary 
of the Ilarari tongue. This dialect is little known to 
European linguists : the only notices of it hitherto pub- 
lished are in Salt’s Abyssinia, Appendix I. pp. 6 — 10; 
by Balbi Atlas Ethnogr. Tab. xxxix. No. 297.; Kiel- 
maier, Ausland, 1840, No. 76 ; and Dr. Beke (Philo- 
logical Journal, April 25, 1845). 

3. Meteorological observations in the cold season of 
1854 — 55 by Lieut s. Herne, Stroyan, and the Author. 

4. A brief description of certain peculiar customs, 
noticed in Nubia, by Brown and Werne under the name 
of fibulation. 1 

5. The conclusion is a condensed account of an 
attempt to reach Harar from Ankobar. 2 On the 14th 
October 1841, Major Sir William Cornwallis Harris (then 
Captain in the Bombay Engineers), Chief of the Mission 

1 [The publishers of the present edition have made diligent 
search for the MS. of this Appendix, which the publishers of the 
first edition " found it necessary to omit,” but they regret to say 
that no trace of it can be found.] 

2 The author hoped to insert Lieut. Herne’s journal, kept at 
Berberah, and the different places of note in its vicinity ; as yet, 
however, the paper has not been received. 



xxviii First Footsteps in East Africa . 

sent from India to the King of Shoa, advised Lieut. W. 
Barker, I. N., whose services were imperatively required 
by Sir Robert Oliver, to return from Abyssinia via 
Harar, “ over a road hitherto untrodden by Europeans.” 
As His Majesty Sahalah Selassie had offered friendly 
letters to the Moslem Amir, Capt. Harris had “ no 
doubt of the success of the enterprise.” Although the 
adventurous explorer was prevented by the idle fears 
of the Badawin Somal and the rapacity of his guides 
from visiting the city, his pages, as a narrative of travel, 
will amply reward perusal. They have been introduced 
into this volume mainly with the view of putting the 
reader in possession of all that has hitherto been written 
and not published, upon the subject of Harar . 1 For the 
same reason the author has not hesitated to enrich 
his pages with observations drawn from Lieutenants 
Cruttenden and Rigby. The former printed in the Trans- 
actions of the Bombay Geographical Society two excel- 
lent papers : one headed “ Report on the Mijjertheyn 
Tribe of Somallies inhabiting the district forming the 
North East Point of Africa ; ” secondly, a “ Memoir on 

i Harar has frequently been described by hearsay ; the follow- 
ing are the principal authorities : 

Rochet (Second Voyage Dans le Pays des Adels, &c. Paris, 
1846), page 263. 

Sir W. Cornwallis Harris (Highlands of ^Ethiopia, vol. i. ch. 43, 
et passim). 

Cruttenden (Transactions of the Bombay Geological Society 
a.p. 1848). 

Barker (Report of the probable Position of Harar. Vol. xii. 
Royal Geographical Society). 

M'Queen (Geographical Memoirs of Abyssinia, prefixed to 
Journals of Rev. Messrs. Isenberg and Krapf). 

Christopher (Journal whilst commanding the H. C.’s brig 
" Tigris,” on the East Coast of Africa). 

Of these by far the most correct account is that of Lieut. 
Cruttenden. 



XXIX 


Preface to the First (1856) Edition . 

the Western or Edoor Tribes, inhabiting the Somali 
coast of North East Africa ; with the Southern Branches 
of the family of Darood, resident on the banks of the 
Webbe Shebayli, commonly called the River Webbe.” 
Lieut. C. P. Rigby, 16th Regiment Bombay N. I., pub- 
lished, also in the Transactions of the Geographical 
Society of Bombay, an “ Outline of the Somali Language, 
with Vocabulary,” which supplied a great lacuna in the 
dialects of Eastern Africa. 

A perusal of the following pages will convince the 
reader that the extensive country of the Somal is by 
no means destitute of capabilities. Though partially 
desert, and thinly populated, it possesses valuable articles 
of traffic, and its harbours export the produce of the 
Gurague, Abyssinian, Galla, and other inland races. 
The natives of the country are essentially commercial : 
they have lapsed into barbarism by reason of their 
political condition — the rude equality of the Hottentots, 
— but they appear to contain material for a moral 
regeneration. As subjects they offer a favourable con- 
trast to their kindred, the Arabs of Al-Yainan, a race 
untameable as the wolf, and which, subjugated in turn 
by Abyssinian, Persian, Egyptian, and Turk, has ever 
preserved an indomitable spirit of freedom, and eventu- 
ally succeeded in shaking off the yoke of foreign 
dominion. For half a generation we have been masters 
of Aden, filling Southern Arabia with our calicoes and 
rupees — what is the present state of affairs there ? We 
are dared by the Badawin to come forth from behind 
our stone walls and fight like men in the plain, — British 
proteges are slaughtered within the range of our guns 
— our allies* villages have been burned in sight of 
Aden — our deserters are welcomed and our fugitive 
felons protected, — our supplies are cut off, and the 
garrison is reduced to extreme distress, at the word of 
a half-naked bandit — the miscreant Bhagi^ who mur- 



XXX 


First Footsteps in East Africa . 

dered Captain Mylne in cold blood still roams the hills 
unpunished — gross insults are the sole acknowledgments 
of our peaceful overtures — the British flag has been 
fired upon without return, our cruizers being ordered to 
act only on the defensive, — and our forbearance to attack 
is universally asserted and believed to arise from mere 
cowardice. Such is, and such will be, the character of 
the Arab! 

The Sublime Porte still preserves her possessions in 
the Tahamah, and the regions conterminous to Al-Yaman, 
by the stringent measures with which Mohammed 
Ali of Egypt opened the robber-haunted Suez road. 
Whenever a Turk or a traveller is murdered, a few 
squadrons of Irregular Cavalry are ordered out; they 
are not too nice upon the subject of retaliation, and 
rarely refuse to burn a village or two, or to lay waste 
the crops near the scene of outrage. 

A civilized people, like ourselves, objects to such 
measures for many reasons, of which none is more feeble 
than the fear of perpetuating a blood feud with the 
Arabs. Our present relations with them are a “very 
pretty quarrel,” and moreover one which time must 
strengthen, cannot efface. By a just, wholesome, and 
unsparing severity we may inspire the Badawi with 
fear instead of contempt : the veriest visionary would 
deride the attempt to animate him with a higher 
sentiment. 

“ Peace,” observes a modern sage, “ is the dream of 
the wise, war is the history of man.” To indulge in 
such dreams is but questionable wisdom. It was not a 
“peace-policy” which gave the Portuguese a seaboard 
extending from Cape Non to Macao. By no peace 
policy the Osmanlis of a past age pushed their victorious 
arms from the deserts of Tartary to Aden, to Delhi, to 
Algiers, and to the gates of Vienna. It was no peace 
policy which made the Russians seat themselves upon 



XXXI 


Preface to the First (1856) Edition . 

the shores of the Black, the Baltic, and the Caspian 
seas: gaining in the space of 150 years, and, despite 
war, retaining, a territory greater than England and 
France united. No peace policy enabled the French to 
absorb region after region in Northern Africa, till the 
Mediterranean appears doomed to sink into a Gallic 
lake. The English of a former generation were cele- 
brated for gaining ground in both hemispheres: their 
broad lands were not won by a peace policy, which, 
however, in this our day, has on two distinct occasions 
well nigh lost for them the “gem of the British Empire” 
— India. The philanthropist and the political economist 
may fgndly hope, by outcry against “territorial ag- 
grandizement,” by advocating a compact frontier, by 
abandoning colonies, and by cultivating “ equilibrium,” 
to retain our rank amongst the great nations of the 
world. Never ! The facts of history prove nothing more 
conclusively than this: a race either progresses or 
retrogrades, either increases or diminishes : the children 
of Time, like their sire, cannot stand still. 

The occupation of the port of Berberah has been 
advised for many reasons. 

In the first place, Berberah is the true key of the 
Red Sea, the centre of East African traffic, and the only 
safe place for shipping upon the western Erythraean 
shore, from Suez to Guardafui. Backed by lands 
capable of cultivation, and by hills covered with pine 
and other valuable trees, enjoying a comparatively 
temperate climate, with a regular although thin mon- 
sun, this harbour has been coveted by many a foreign 
conqueror. Circumstances have thrown it as it were 
into our arms, and, if we refuse the chance, another and 
a rival nation will not be so blind. 

Secondly, we are bound to protect the lives of 
British subjects upon this coast. In a.d. 1825 the crew 
of the “Mary Ann” brig was treacherously murdered 



xxxii First Footsteps in East Africa . 

by the Somal. The consequence of a summary and 
exemplary punishment 1 was that in August 1843, when 
the H. E. I. C.’s war-steamer “ Memnon " was stranded 
at Ras Assayr near Cape Guardafui, no outrage was 
attempted by the barbarians, upon whose barren shores 
our seamen remained for months labouring at the wreck. 
In a.d. 1855 the Somal, having forgotten the old lesson, 
renewed their practices of pillaging and murdering 
strangers. It is then evident that this people cannot 
be trusted without supervision, and equally certain that 
vessels arc ever liable to be cast ashore in this part of 
the Red Sea. But a year ago the French steam corvette, 
“ Le Caiman,” was lost within sight of Zayla ; the 
Badawin Somal, principally Isa, assembled a fanatic 
host, which was, however, dispersed before blood had 
been drawn, by the exertion of the governor and his 
guards. It remains for us, therefore, to provide against 

1 In a.d. 1825, the Government of Bombay received intelligence 
that a brig from the Mauritius had been seized, plundered, and 
broken up near Berberah, and that part of her crew had been 
barbarously murdered by the Somal. The “ Elphinstone” sloop 
of war (Capt. Greer commanding) was sent to blockade the coast ; 
when her guns opened fire, the people fled with their wives and 
children, and the spot where a horseman was killed by cannon ball 
is still shown on the plain near the town. Through the intervention 
of Al-Hajj Sharmarkay, the survivors were recovered; the Somal 
bound themselves to abstain from future attacks upon English 
vessels, and also to refund by annual instalments the full amount 
of plundered property. For the purpose of enforcing the latter 
stipulation it was resolved that a vessel of war should remain upon 
the coast until the whole was liquidated. When attempts at 
evasion occurred, the traflic was stopped by sending all craft 
outside the guardship, and forbidding intercourse with the shore. 
The "Coote” (Capt. Pepper commanding), the “Palinurus” and 
the “Tigris,” in turn with the “ Elphinstone,” maintained the 
blockade through the trading seasons till 1833. About 6000/. were 
recovered, and the people were strongly impressed with the fact 
that we had both the will and the means to keep their plundering 
propensities within bounds. 



xxxiii 


# Preface to the First (1856) Edition . 

such contingencies. Were one of the Peninsular and 
Oriental Company’s vessels cast by any accident upon 
this inhospitable shore, in the present state of affairs the 
lives of the passengers, and the cargo, would be placed 
in imminent peril. 

In advocating the establishment of an armed post at 
Berberah no stress is laid upon the subject of slavery. 
To cut off that traffic the possession of the great export 
harbour is by no means nec^sary. Whenever a British 
cruizer shall receive positive and bond fide orders to search 
native craft, and to sell as prizes all that have slaves on 
board, the trade will receive a death-blow. 

Certain measures have been taken during the last 
annual fair to punish the outrage perpetrated by the 
Somal at Berberah in a.d. 1855. The writer on his 
return to Aden proposed that the several clans implicated 
in the offence should at once be expelled from British 
dominions. This preliminary was carried out by the 
Acting Political Resident at Aden. Moreover, it was 
judged advisable to blockade the Somali coast, from 
Siyaro to Zayla not included, until, in the first place, 
Lieut. Stroyan’s murderer, and the ruffian who attempted 
to spear Lieut. Speke in cold blood, should be given up 1 ; 
and secondly, that due compensation for all losses should 
be made by the plunderers. The former condition was 
approved by the Right Honourable the Governor-General 
of India, who, however, objected it is said, to the money- 
demand. 8 At present the H. E. I. C.’s cruizers “ Mahi,” 

1 The writer advised that these men should be hung upon the 
spot where the outrage was committed, that the bodies should be 
burned and the ashes cast into the sea, lest by any means the 
murderers might become martyrs. This precaution should invariably 
be adopted when Moslems assassinate Infidels. 

2 The reason of the objection is not apparent. A savage 
people is imperfectly punished by a few deaths : the fine is the only 
true way to produce a lasting impression upon their heads and 
hearts. Moreover, it is the custom of India and the EAst generally, 
and is in reality the only safeguard of a traveller’s property. 

VOL. I. 


C 



XXXIV 


First Footsteps in East Africa . w 

and “ Elphinstone,” are blockading the harbour of 
Berberah, the Somal have offered 15,000 dollars indem- 
nity, and they pretend, as usual, that the murderer has 
been slain by his tribe. 

To conclude. The writer has had the satisfaction 
of receiving from his comrades assurances that they are 
willing to accompany him once more in the task of African 
exploration. The plans of the Frank are now publicly 
known to the Somali. Should the loss of life, however 
valuable, be an obstacle to prosecuting them, he must 
fall in the esteem of the races around him. On the 
contrary, should he, after duly chastising the offenders, 
carry out the original plan, he will command the respect 
of the people, and wipe out the memory of a temporary 
reverse. At no distant period the project will, it is hoped, 
be revived. Nothing is required but permission to 
renew the attempt — an indulgence which will not be 
refused by a Government raised by energy, enterprise, 
and perseverance from the ranks of a society of 
merchants to national wealth and imperial grandeur. 

14, St. James’s Square, 

10th February, 1856. 



TO THE HONOURABLE 

JAMES GRANT LUMSDEN, 

MEMBER OF COUNCIL, ETC., ETC., BOMBAY. 

I have ventured, my dear Lumsden, to address 
you in, and inscribe to you, these pages. Within 
your hospitable walls my project of African travel 
was matured, in the fond hope of submitting, on 
return, to your friendly criticism, the record of 
adventures in which you took so warm an interest. 
Dis aliter visum ! Still I would prove that my 
thoughts are with you, and thus request you to 
accept with your wonted bonhommie this feeble 
token of a sincere good will. 





JO* 




FIRST FOOTSTEPS 


IN 

EAST AFRICA 


CHAPTER I. 

DEPARTURE FROM ADEN. 

• 

I doubt not there are many who ignore the fact that in 
Eastern Africa, scarcely three hundred miles distant from 
Aden, there is a counterpart of ill-famed Timbuctoo in 
the Far West. The more adventurous Abyssinian travel- 
lers, Salt and Stuart, Krapf and Isenberg, Barker and 
Rochet — not to mention divers Roman Catholic Mis- 
sioners — attempted Harar, but attempted it in vain. 
The bigoted ruler and barbarous people threatened death 
to the Infidel who ventured within their walls; some 
negro Merlin having, it is said, read Decline and Fall 
in the first footsteps of the Frank . 1 Of all foreigners the 

i "A tradition exists,” says Lieut. Cruttenden, "amongst the 
people of Harar, that the prosperity of their city depends upon the 
exclusion of all travellers not of the Moslem faith, and all Christians 
are specially interdicted.” These freaks of interdiction are common 
to African rulers, who on occasions of war, famine or pestilence, 
strtick with some superstitious fear, close their gates to strangers. 


I 



2 


' First Footsteps in East Africa . 

English were, of course, the most hated and dreaded; at 
Harar slavery still holds its head-quarters, and the old 
Dragon well knows what to expect from the hand of 
St. George. Thus the various travellers who appeared in 
beaver and black coats became persuaded that the city 
was inaccessible, and Europeans ceased to trouble them- 
selves about Harar. 

It is, therefore, a point of honour with me, dear L., to 
utilize my title of Haji by entering the city, visiting the 
ruler, and returning in safety, after breaking the guardian 
spell. 

The most auspicious day in the Moslem year for 
beginning a journey is, doubtless, the 6th of the month 
Safar, 1 on which, quoth the Prophet, Al-Islam emerged 
from obscurity. Yet even at Aden we could not avail 
ourselves of this lucky time: our delays and difficulties 
were a fit prelude for a journey amongst those “ Blameless 
Ethiopians,” with whom no less a personage than august 
Jove can dine and depart. 2 

On Sunday, the 29th October, 1854, our manifold 
impediments were pronounced complete. Friend S. threw 
the slipper of blessing at my back, and about 4 p.m. em- 
barking from Maala Bunder, we shook out our “muslin,” 
and sailed down the fiery harbour. Passing the guard- 
boat, we delivered our permit ; before venturing into the 
open sea we repeated the Fatihah -prayer in honour of the 


x The 6th of Safar in 1854 corresponds with our 28th October. 
The Hadis is / oil & f r> >J 1 ^ U 1 11 when the 6th of 

Safar went forth, my faith from the cloud came forth.” 

2 The Abyssinian law of detaining guests— Pedro Covilhad, 
the first Portuguese envoy (a.d. 1499), lived and died a prisoner 
there — appears to have been the Christian modification of the old 
Ethiopic rite of sacrificing strangers. . 



3 


L — Departure from Aden . 

Shaykh Majid, inventor of the mariners* compass , 1 and 
evening saw us dancing on the bright clear tide, whose 
“magic waves,” however, murmured after another fashion 


i It would be wonderful if Orientals omitted to romance about 
the origin of such an invention as the Dayrah, or compass. Shaykh 
Majid is said to have been a Syrian saint, to whom Allah gave the 
power of looking upon earth as though it were a ball in his hand. 
Most Moslems agree in assigning this origin to the Dayrah, and the 
Fatihah in honour of the holy man is still repeated by the pious 
mariner. 

Easterns do not “box the compass” after our fashion: with 
them each point has its own name, generally derived from some 
prominent star on the horizon. Of these I subjoin a list as in use 
amongst the Somal, hoping that it may be useful to Oriental students. 
The names in hyphens are those given in a paper on the nautical 
instrument of the Arabs by Jas. Prinseps (Journal of the As. Soc. f 
December, 1836). The learned secretary appears not to have heard 
the legend of Shaykh Majid, for he alludes to the " Majidi Kitab” or 
Oriental Ephemeris, without any explanation. 


North . . . 
N. by E. . . 

N.N.E. . . 
N.E. byE. . 
N.E. . . . 
N.E. byE. . 
E.N.E. . . 
E. by N. . . 


Jah, .1*. 
l'arjad, 

(or jij) 
Naash, Jjo 
Nakah, jsli 
Ayyuk, 

Waki, 

Sumak, dU- 
Surayya, 


East . : Matla, 

E. by S. Jauza, \jy* 

E.S.E. . Tir, £ 

S.E.byE. Iklil, 

S.E. . . Akrab, yfc 
S.E. by S. Himarayn, & jU* 
S.S.E. . Suhayl, Jet* 

S. byE. Suntubar, 

(or ,U-) 


The south is called Al-Kutb (sJd!) and the west Al-Maghib 
(vsJuM). The western points are named like the eastern. North- 
east, for instance, is Ayyuk al-Matlai ; north-west, Ayyuk al-Maghibi. 
Finally, the Dayrah Jahi is when the magnetic needle points due 
north. The Dayrah Farjadi (more common in these regions) is 
when the bar is fixed under Faijad, to allow for variation, which 
at Berberah is about 4 0 50' west. 


I — 2 



4 First Footsteps in East Africa. 

the siren song which charmed the senses of the old 
Arabian voyagers. 1 2 3 

Suddenly every trace of civilization fell from my 
companions as if it had been a garment. At Aden, 
shaven and beturbanded, Arab fashion, now they threw 
off all dress save the loin cloth, and appeared in their 
dark morocco. Mohammed filled his mouth with a 
mixture of coarse Surat tobacco and ashes — the. latter 
article intended, like the Anglo-Indian soldier’s chili in 
his arrack, to “make it bite.” Gulad uncovered his 
head, a member which in Africa is certainly made to go 
bare, and buttered himself with an unguent redolent of 
sheep’s tail; and Ismail, the rais or captain of our 
“foyst,”* the Sahalah, applied himself to puffing his 
nicotiana out of a goat’s shank-bone. Our crew, con- 
sisting of seventy-one men and boys, prepared, as evening 
fell, a mess of Jowari grain” and grease, the recipe of 
which I spare you, and it was despatched in a style that 
would have done credit to Kafirs as regards gobbling, 
bolting, smearing lips, licking fingers, and using ankles 
as napkins. Then with a light easterly breeze and the 
ominous cliffs of Little Aden still in sight, we spread our 
mats on deck and prepared to sleep under the moon. 4 

My companions, however, felt, without perhaps 
comprehending, the joviality arising from a return to 
Nature. Every man was forthwith nicknamed, and 

1 The curious reader will find in the Herodotus of the Arabs, Al- 
Masudi’s “ Meadows of gold and mines of gems," a strange tale of 
the blind billows and the singing waves of Derberah and Jof uni (Cape 
Guardafui, the classical Aromata). 

2 “Foyst" and “buss," are the names applied by old travel- 
lers to the half-decked vessels of these seas. 

3 Holcus Sorghum, the common grain of Africa and Arabia : 
the Somali call it Hirad ; the people of Al-Yaman, Ta’am, 

4 The Somal being a people of less nervous temperament than 
the Arabs and Indians, do not fear the moonlight. 



5 


J . — Departure from Aden . 

pitiless was the raillery upon the venerable subjects of 
long and short, fat and thin. One sang a war-song, 
another a love-song, a third some song of the sea, whilst 
the fourth, an fsa youth, with the villanous expression 
of face common to his tribe, gave us a rain measure, 
such as men chaunt during wet weather. All* these 
effusions were naive and amusing : none, however, could 
bear English translation without an amount of omission 
which would change its nature. Each effort of min- 
strelsy was accompanied by roars of laughter, and led 
to much manual pleasantry, All swore that they had 
never spent, intellectually speaking, a more charm- 
ing soiree , and pitied me for being unable to enter 
thoroughly into the spirit of the dialogue. Truly it is 
not only the polished European, as was said of a certain 
travelling notability, that lapses with facility into pris- 
tine barbarism. 

I will now introduce you to my companions. The 
managing man is one Mohammed Mahmud , 1 generally 
called Al-Hammal, or the porter: he is a Havildar, or 
sergeant in the Aden police, and was entertained for me 
by Lieut. Dansey, an officer who unfortunately was 
not “confirmed” in a political appointment at Aden. 
The Hammal is a bull-necked, round-headed fellow of 
lymphatic temperament, with a lamp-black skin, regular 
features, and a pulpy figure — two rarities amongst his 
countrymen, who compare him to a Banyan. An orphan 
in early youth, and becoming, to use his own phrase, sick 
of milk’, he ran away from his tribe, the Habr Girhajis, 
and engaged himself as a coal-trimmer with the slaves on 
board an Indian war-steamer. After rising in rank to the 
command of the crew, he became servant and interpreter 


i The first name is that of the individual, as the Christian name 
with us, the second is that of the father ; in the Somali country, as in 
India, they are not connected by the Arab " bin "—son of. 



6 


First Footsteps in East Africa. 

to travellers, visited distant lands — Egypt and Calcutta — 
and finally settled as a Faringhi policeman. He cannot 
read or write, but he has all the knowledge to be acquired 
by fifteen or twenty years’ hard ‘‘knocking about”: he 
can make a long speech, and, although he never prays, a 
longer prayer; he is an excellent mimic, and delights his 
auditors by imitations and descriptions of Indian cere- 
mony, Egyptian dancing, Arab vehemence, Persian 
abuse, European vivacity, and Turkish insolence. With 
prodigious inventiveness, and a habit of perpetual in- 
trigue, acquired in his travels, he might be called a 
“knowing” man, but for the truly Somali weakness of 
showing in his countenance all that passes through his 
mind. This people can hide nothing : the blank eye, the 
contracting brow, the opening nostril and the tremulous 
lip, betray, despite themselves, their innermost thoughts. 

The second servant whom I bring before you is 
Gulad, another policeman at Aden. He is a youth of 
good family, belonging to the Ismail Arrah, the royal 
clan of the great Habr Girhajis tribe. His father was a 
man of property, and his brethren near Berberah, are 
wealthy Badawin : yet he ran away from his native 
country when seven or eight years old, and became a 
servant in the house of a butter merchant at Mocha. ' 
Thence he went to Aden, where he began with private 
service, and ended his career in the police. He is one of 
those long, live skeletons, common amongst the Somal : 
his shoulders are parallel with his ears, his ribs are 
straight as a mummy’s, his face has not an ounce of flesh 
upon it, and his features suggest the idea of some lank 
bird: we call him Long Gulad, to which he replies with 
the Yaman saying “ Length is Honour, even in Wood.” 
He is brave enough, because he rushes into danger 
without reflection ; his great defects are weakness of 
body and nervousness of temperament, leading in times 
of peril ft) the trembling of hands, the dropping of 



*7 


1.*— Departure from Aden . 

caps, and the mismanagement of bullets: besides which, 
he cannot bear hunger, thirst, or cold. 

The third is one Abdi Abokr, also of the Habr 
Girhajis, a personage whom, from his smattering of 
learning and his prodigious rascality, we call the Mulla 
“ End of Time ;” 1 He is a man about forty, very old- 
looking for his age, with small, deep-set cunning eyes, 
placed close together, a hook nose, a thin beard, a 
bulging brow, scattered teeth , 2 3 and a short scant figure, 
remarkable only for length of back. His gait is stealthy, 
like a cat’s, and he has a villanous grin. This worthy 
never prays, and can neither read nor write; but he 
knows a chapter or two of the Koran, recites audibly 
a long Ratib or task, morning and evening," whence, 
together with his store of hashed Hadis (tradition), he 
derives the title of Widad or hedge-priest. His tongue, 
primed with the satirical sayings of Abn Zayd al-Halali, 
and Humayd ibn Mansur , 4 is the terror of men upon 
whom repartee imposes. His fatli x was a wealthy ship- 
owner in his day ; but, cursed with Abdi and another 
son, the old man has lost all his property, his children 
have deserted him, and he now depends entirely upon 
the charity of the Zayla chief. The “ End of Time” has 
squandered considerable sums in travelling far and wide 
from Harar to Cutch, he has managed everywhere to 


1 Abdi is an abbreviation of Abdullah ; Abokr, a corruption of 
Abu Bakr. The " End of Time ” alludes to the prophesied corruption 
of the Moslem priesthood in the last epoch of the world. 

2 This peculiarity is not uncommon amongst the Somal ; it is 
considered by them a sign of warm temperament. 

3 The Moslem should first recite the Far z prayers, or those 
ordered in the Koran ; secondly, the Sunnat or practice of the 
Prophet ; and thirdly the Nafilah or Supererogatory. The Ratib or 
self-imposed task is the last of all ; our Mulla placed it first, because 
he could chant it upon his mule within hearing of the people. 

4 Two modern poets and wits well known in Al-Yajnan. 




8 


First Footsteps in East Africa . 

perpetrate some peculiar villany. He is a pleasant com- 
panion, and piques himself upon that power of quotation 
which in the East makes a polite man. If we be 
disposed to hurry, he insinuates that “ Patience is of 
Heaven, Haste of Hell.” When roughly addressed, he 
remarks, — 

“ There arc cures for the hurts of lead and steel, 

But the wounds of the tongue — they never heal.” 

If a grain of rice adhere to our beards, he says, 
smilingly, “the gazelle is in the garden”; to which we 
reply “ we will hunt her with the five. 1 ” Despite these 
merits, I hesitated to engage him, till assured by the 
governor of Zayla that he was to be looked upon as a 
son, and, moreover, that he would bear with him one of 
those state secrets to an influential chief which in this 
country are never committed to paper. I found him an 
admirable buffoon, skilful in filling pipes and smoking 
them ; an vcsic , an individual of “ many words and little 
work,” infinite intrigue, cowardice, cupidity, and endowed 
with a truly evil tongue. 

The morning sun rose hot upon us, showing Mayyum 
and Zubah, the giant staples of the “Gate under the 
Pleiades . 51 ” Shortly afterwards, we came in sight of the 
Barr al-’Ajam (barbarian land), as the Somal call their 
country , 8 a low glaring flat of yellow sand, desert and 

1 That is to say, " we will remove it with the five fingers." 

These are euphuisms to avoid speaking broadly and openly of that 
venerable feature, the beard. • 

2 Bab al-Mandab is called as above by Humayd from its astro- 
nomical position. Jabal Mayyum is in Africa, Jabal Zubah or 
Muayyin, celebrated as the last resting-place of a great saint, Shaykh 
Sa'id, is in Arabia. 

3 'Ajam probably means all nations not Arab. In Egypt and 
Central Asia it is now confined to Persians. On the west of the Red 
Sea, it is invariably used to denote the Somali country : thence Bruce 
draws the Greek and Latin name of the coast, Azamia, and De Sac y 
derives the word “ Ajan," which in our maps is applied to the inner 
regions of the Eastern Horn, So in Africa, Al-Sham, which probably 
means Damascus and Syria, is applied to Al-Hijaz. 



9 


/. — Departure from Aim . 

heat-reeking, tenanted by the Isa, and a meet habitat 
for savages. Such to us, at least, appeared the land of 
Adel. 1 2 3 * * * * At midday we descried the Ras al-Bir, — Head- 
land of the Well, — the promontory which terminates the 
bold Tajurrah range, under which lie the sleeping waters 
of the Maiden’s Sea. a During the day we rigged out 
an awning, and sat in the shade smoking and chatting 
merrily, for the weather was not much hotter than our 
English summer seas. Some of the crew tried praying ; 
but prostrations are not easily made on board ship, and 
Al-Islam, as Umar shrewdly suspected, was not made for 
a seafaring race. At length the big red sun sank slowly 
behind the curtain of sky-blue rock, where lies the not yet 
“ combusted ” village of Tajurrah. 8 * * We lay down to rest 
with the light of day, and had the satisfaction of closing 
our eyes upon a fair though captious breeze. 

On the morning of the 31st October, we entered the 
Zayla Creek, which gives so much trouble to native 
craft. We passed, on the right, the low island of 

1 Adel, according to M. Krapf, derived its name from the Ad Ali, 
a tribe of the Afar or Danakil nation, erroneously used by Arab 
synecdoche for the whole race. Mr. Johnston (Travels in Southern 
Abyssinia, ch. 1) more correctly derives it from Adule, a city which, 
as proved by the monument which bears its name, existed in the 
days of Ptolemy Euergetes (13. C. 247 — 222), had its own dynasty, and 
boasted of a conquerer who overcame the Troglodytes, Sabaeans, 
Homerites, &c., and pushed his conquests as far as the frontier of 
Egypt. Mr. Johnston, however, incorrectly translates Barr al-’Ajam 
" land of fire,” and seems to confound Avalites and Adulis. 

2 Bahr al-Banattin, the Bay of Tajurrah. 

3 A certain German missionary, well known in this part of the 

world, exasperated by the seizure of a few dollars and a claim to the 

droit d’aubaine, advised the authorities of Aden to threaten the 11 com- 

bustion " of Tajurrah. The measure would have been equally unjust 

and unwise. A traveller, even a layman, is bound to put up peace- 

fully with such trifles; and to threaten " combustion” without being 

prepared to carry out the threat is the readiest way to secure con- 

tempt. # 



io First Footsteps in East Africa. 

Masha, belonging to the 44 City of the Slave Merchant/' 
— Tajurrah — and on the left two similar patches of 
seagirt sand, called Aybat and Sa’ad al-Din. These 
places supply Zayla, in the Kharif or hot season , 1 2 * * * * * with 
thousands of gulls’ eggs — a great luxury. At noon we 
sighted our destination. Zayla is the normal African 
port — a strip of sulphur-yellow sand, with a deep blue 
dome above, and a foreground of the darkest indigo. 
The buildings, raised by refraction, rose high, and 
apparently from the bosom of the deep. After hearing 
the worst accounts of it, I was pleasantly disappointed 
by the spectacle of white-washed houses and minarets, 
peering above a long low line of brown wall, flanked 
with round towers. 

As we slowly threaded the intricate coral reefs of 
the port, a bark came scudding up to us ; it tacked, and 
the crew proceeded to give news in roaring tones. 
Friendship between the Amir of Harar and the governor 
of Zayla had been broken ; the road through the Isa 
Somal had been closed by the murder of Mas’ud, a 
favourite slave and adopted son of Sharmarkay ; all 
strangers had been expelled the city for some misconduct . 
by the Harar chief ; moreover, small-pox was raging 
there with such violence that the Galla peasantry would 
allow neither ingress nor egress . 8 I had the pleasure of 

1 The Kharif in most parts of the Oriental world'corresponds with 
our autumn. In Eastern Africa it invariably signifies the hot season 
preceding the monsoon rains. 

2 The circumstances of Mas’ud’s murder were truly African. 

The slave caravans from Abyssinia to Tajurrah were usually escorted 

by the Rer Guleni, a clan of the great isa tribe, and they monopo^ 

lized the profits of the road. Summoned to share their gains with 
their kinsmen generally, they refused, upon which the other 

rose about August, 1854, and cut off the road. A large caravan was 

travelling down in two bodies, each of nearly 300 slaves ; .the Isa" ! 

attacked. the first division, carried off the wives and female slaves, 





THF. “HAMM/ 1 



* l^Beparton from Aden . ■ ti 

reflecting for some time, dear L., upon the amount of 
responsibility incurred by using the phrase “ I will”; 
and the only consolation that suggested itself was the 
stale assurance that 

44 Things at the worst most surely mend.” 

No craft larger than a canoe can ride near Zayla. 
4ft er bumping once or twice against the coral reefs, it 
was considered advisable for our good ship, the Sahalah, 
to cast anchor. My companions caused me to dress, 
put me with my pipe and other necessaries into a cock- 
boat, and, wading through the water, shoved it to shore. • 
Lastly, at Bab al-Sahil, the Seaward or Northern Gate, 
they proceeded to array themselves in the bravery of 
clean Tobes and long daggers strapped round the waist ; 
each man also slung his targe to his left arm, and in his 
right hand grasped lance and javelin. At the gate we 
were received by a tall black spearman with a 44 Ho 
there ! to the governor and a crowd of idlers gathered 
to inspect the strangers. Marshalled by the warder, we 
traversed the dusty roads — streets they could not be 
called — of the old Arab town, ran the gauntlet of a 
gaping mob, and finally entering a mat door, found 
ourselves in the presence of the governor. 

I had met Sharmarkay at Aden, where he received 
from the authorities strong injunctions concerning my 
personal safety : the character of a Moslem merchant, 
however, requiring us to appear strangers, an intro- 
duction by our master of ceremonies, the Hammal, 
followed my entrance. Sharmarkay was living in an 

fefyhom they sold for ten dollars a head, and savagely mutilated 
iupwards of zoo wretched boys. This event caused the Tajurrah line 
jgtp.be permanently closed. The Rer Guleni in wrath, at once 
^murdered Mas'ud, a peaceful traveller, because Inna Handun, his 
&Abban or protector, was of the party who had attacked their 
protlgls : they came upon him suddenly as he was purchasing some 
article, and stabbed him in the back, before he could defcSid himself. 


12 


First Footsteps in East Africa . 

apartment by no means splendid, preferring an Arish 
or kind of cow-house — as the Anglo-Indian Nabobs do 
the bungalow 

“ with mat half hung, 

The walls of plaster and the floors of • • • 

— to all his substantial double-storied houses. The 
ground was wet and comfortless ; a part of the reed 
walls was lined with cots bearing mattresses and silk- 
covered pillows, a cross between a diwan and a couch : 
the only ornaments were a few weapons, and a necklace 
of gaudy beads suspended near the door. I was placed 
upon the principal seat : on the right were the governor 
and the Hammal ; whilst the lowest portion of the room 
was occupied by Mohammed Sharmarkay, the son and 
heir. The rest of the company squatted upon chairs, or 
rather stools, of peculiar construction. Nothing could 
be duller than this asscmblec : pipes and coffee are here 
unknown ; and there is nothing in the East to act sub- 
stitute for them. 1 

The governor of Zayla, Al-Hajj Sharmarkay bin 
Ali Salih, is rather a remarkable man. He is sixteenth, 
according to his own account, in descent from Ishak 
al-Hazrami, 2 the saintly founder of the great Girhajis and 

1 In Zayla there is not a single coffee-house. The settled Somal 
care little for the Arab beverage, and the Badawin’s reasons for 
avoiding it are not bad. "If we drink coffee once,'* say they, " we 
shall want it again, and then where are we to get it ?" The 
Abyssinian Christians, probably to distinguish themselves from 
Moslems, object to coffee as well as to tobacco. The Gallas, on the 
the other hand, eat it : the powdered bean is mixed with butter, and 
on forays a lump about the size of a billiard-ball is preferred to a 
substantial meal when the latter cannot be obtained. 

2 The following genealogical table was given to me by Moham- 
med Sharmarkay : — 

i. Ishak (ibn Ahmad ibn Abdillah). 

i. Girhajis (his eldest son). 

3. Sa'i<| ( the eldest son ; Da'ud being the second). 



*3 


/. — Departure from Aden . 

Awal tribes. His enemies derive him from a less illus- 
trious stock ; and the fairness of his complexion favours 
the report that his grandfather Salih was an Abyssinian 
slave. Originally the Nacoda or captain of a native 
craft, he has raised himself, chiefly by British influence, 
to the chieftainship of his tribe. 1 As early as May, 1825, 
he received from Captain Bagnold, then our resident at 
Mocha, a testimonial and a reward, for a severe sword 
wound in the left arm, received whilst defending the 
lives of English seamen.* He afterwards went to 
Bombay, where he was treated with consideration ; and 
about fifteen years ago he succeeded the Sayyid Moham- 
med al-Barr as governor of Zayla and its dependencies, 
under the Ottoman Pasha in Western Arabia. 


4. Arrah (also the eldest ; Hi, i.e., Ali, being the second). 

5. Musa (the third son : the eldest was Ismail ; then, in suc- 

cession, Ishak, Misa, Mikahil, Gambah, Dandan, &c.). 

6. Ibrahim. 12. Ali. 

7. Fikih (i.e. Fakih). 13. Awaz 

8. Adan (i.e. Adam.) 14. Salih. 

9. Mohammed. 15. Ali. 

10. Hamid. 16. Sharmarkay. 

11. Jibril (i.e. Jibrail). 

The last is a peculiarly Somali name, meaning “ one who sees 
no harm" — Shar-ma-arkay. 

1 Not the hereditary chieftainship of the Habr Girhajis, which 
belongs to a particular clan. 


2 The following is a copy of the document 
“ This Testimonial, 

together with an Honorary Dress, is presented by the British 
Resident at Mocha to Nagoda Shurmakey Ally Sumaulley, in token 
of esteem and regard for his humane and gallant conduct at the 
Port of Burburra, on the coast of Africa, April 10, 1825, in saving 
the lives of Captain William Lingard, chief officer of the Brig Mary 
Anne, when that vessel was attacked and plundered by the natives. 
The said Nagoda is therefore strongly recommended to the notice 
and good offices of Europeans in general, but particularly so to all 
English gentlemen visiting these seas.’' ® 



14 


First Footsteps in East Africa . 

The Hajj Shannarkay in his youth was a man of 
valour : he could not read or write ; but he carried in 
battle four spears , 1 and his sword-cut was recognizable. 
He is now a man about sixty years old, at least six feet 
two inches in stature, large-limbed, and raw-boned : his 
leanness is hidden by long wide robes. He shaves his 
head and upper lip Shafe’i-fashion, and his beard is 
represented by a ragged tuft of red-stained hair on each 
side of his chin. A visit to Aden and a doctor cost him 
one eye, and the other is now white with age. His 
dress is that of an Arab, and he always carries with him 
a broad-bladed, silver-hilted sword. Despite his years, 
he is a strong, active, and energetic man, ever looking to 
the “main chance.” With one foot in the grave, he 
meditates nothing but the conquest of Harar and Ber- 
berah, which, making him master of the seaboard, would 
soon extend his power as in days of old even to Abys- 
sinia .' 2 To hear his projects, you would fancy them the 


1 Two spears being the usual number : the difficulty of three or 
four would mainly consist in their management during action. 

2 In ] uly , 1855, the Hajj Sharmarkay was deposed by the Turkish 
Pasha of Ilodaydah, ostensibly for failing to keep some road open, 
or, according to others, for assisting to plunder a caravan belonging 
to the Dankali tribe. It was reported that he had been made a 
prisoner, and the Political Resident at Aden saw the propriety of 
politely asking the Turkish authorities to “be easy” upon the old 
man. In consequence of this representation, he was afterwards 
allowed, on paying a fine of 3000 dollars, to retire to Aden. 

I deeply regret that the Hajj should have lost his government. 
He has ever clung to the English party, even in sore temptation. A 
few year ago, the late M. Rochet (soi-disant d’Hericourt), French 
agent at Jeddah, paying treble its value, bought from Mohammed 
Sharmarkay, in the absence of the Hajj, a large stone house, in 
order to secure a footing at Zayla. The old man broke off the 
bargain on his return, knowing how easily an Agency becomes a 
Fort, and preferring a considerable loss to the presence of dangerous 
friends. 



15 


I. — Departure from Aden . 

offspring of a brain in the prime of youth : in order to 
carry them out he would even assist in suppressing the 
profitable slave-trade . 1 

After half an hour's visit I was led by the Hajj 
through the streets of Zayla , 2 to one of his substantial 


1 During my residence at Zayla few slaves were imported, 
owing to the main road having been closed. In former years the 
market was abundantly stocked ; the numbers annually shipped to 
Mocha, I-Iodaydah, Jeddah, and Berberah, varied from 600 to 1000. 
The Hajj received as duty one gold "Kirsh,” or about three-fourths 
of a dollar, per head. 

2 Zayla, called Audal or Auzal by the Somal, is a town about 
the size of Suqz, built for 3000 or 4000 inhabitants, and contain- 
ing a dozen large whitewashed stone houses, and upwards of 200 
Arish or thatched huts, each surrounded by a fence of wattle and 
matting. The situation is a low and level spit of sand, which high 
tides make almost an island. There is no harbour : a vessel of 250 
tons cannot approach within a mile of the landing-place ; the open 

■ roadstead is exposed to the terrible north wind, and when gales 
blow from the west and south, it is almost unapproachable. Every 
ebb leaves a sandy flat, extending half a mile seaward from the 
town; the reefy anchorage is difficult of entrance after sunset, and 
the coralline bottom renders wading painful. 

The shape of this once celebrated town is a tolerably regular 
parallelogram, of which the long side* run from east to west. The 
walls, without guns or embrasures, are built, like the houses, of 
coralline rubble and mud, in places dilapidated. There are five 
gates. The Bab al-Sahil and the Bab al-Jadd (a new postern) open 
upon the sea from the northern wall. At the Ashurbara, in the 
southern part of the enceinte, the Badawin encamp, and above it 
the governor holds his Durbar. The Bab Abd al-Kadir derives its 
name from a saint buried outside and eastward of the city, and the 
Bab al-Saghir is pierced in the western wall. 

The public edifices are six mosques, including the Jami, or 
cathedral, for Friday prayer : these buildings have queer little 
crenelles on whitewashed walls, and a kind of elevated summer- 
house to represent the minaret. Near one of them are remains of a 
circular Turkish Munar, manifestly of modern construction. There 
is no Mahkamah or Kazi’s court : that dignitary transacts business 
at his own house, and the Festival prayers are recited near the 



jg First Footsteps in East Africa. 

houses of coralline and mud plastered over with glaring 
whitewash. The ground floor is a kind of warehouse 
full of bales and boxes, scales and buyers. A flight of 
steep steps leads into a long room with shutters to 
exclude the light, floored with tamped earth, full of 

Saint’s Tomb outside the eastern gate. The north-east angle of the 
town is occupied by a large graveyard with the usual deleterious 
consequences. 

The climate of Zayla is cooler than that of Aden, and the site 
being open all around, it is not so unhealthy. Much spare room is 
enclosed by the town walls : evaporation and Nature's scavengers 
act succedanea for sewerage. 

Zayla commands the adjacent harbour of Tajurrah, and is by 
position the northern port of Aussa (the ancient capital of Adel), of 
Harar, and of southern Abyssinia: the feuds of the rulers have, 
however, transferred the main trade to Berberah. It sends cara- 
vans northwards to Dankali, and south-westwards, through the tsa 
and Gudabirsi tribes as far as Ifat and Gurague. It is visited by 
Cafilas from Abyssinia, and by the different races of Badawin, ex- 
tending from the hills to the seaboard. The exports are valuable— 
slaves, ivory, hides, honey, antelope horns, clarified butter, and 
gums: the coast abounds in sponge, coral, and small pearls, which 
Arab divers collect in the fair season. In the harbour I found 
about twenty native craft, large and small : of these, ten belonged 
to the governor. They trade with Berberah, Arabia, and Western 
India, and are navigated by "Rajput" or Hindu pilots. 

Provisions at Zayla are cheap ; a family of six persons live well 
for about 30/. per annum. The general food is mutton: a large 
sheep costs one dollar, a small one half the price ; camels’ meat, 
beef, and in winter kid, abound. Fish is rare, and fowls are not 
commonly eaten. Uolcus, when dear, sells at forty pounds per 
dollar, at seventy pounds when cheap. It is usually levigated with 
slab and roller, and made into sour cakes. Some, however, prefer 
the Arab form " balilah," boiled and mixed with ghi. Wheat and v 
rice are imported : the price varies from forty to sixty pounds the 
Kiyal or dollar. Of the former grain the people make a sweet cake 
called Sabaya, resembling the Fatirah of Egypt : a favourite -dish 
also is "harisah ’’- - flesh, rice flour, and boiled wheat, all finely 
pounded and mixed together. Milk is not . procurable during the 
hot weather ; alter rain every beuse is full of it ; the Badawin bring 
it in skin! and sell it for a nominal sum. 



i7 


J . — Departure from Aden. 

“evening flyers, 1 ” and destitute of furniture. Parallel 
to it are three smaller apartments; and above is a 
terraced roof, where they who fear not the dew and the 
land breeze sleep. 4 I found a room duly prepared ; the 
ground was spread with mats, and cushions against the 
walls denoted the Diwan : for me was placed a Kursi or 
cot, covered with fine Persian rugs and gaudy silk and 
satin pillows. The Hajj installed us with ceremony, 
and insisted, despite my remonstrances, upon occupying 
the floor whilst I sat on the raised seat. After ushering 
in supper, he considerately remarked that travelling is 
fatiguing, and -left us to sleep. 

The well-known sounds of Al-Islam returned from 
memory. Again the melodious chant of the Muezzin — 

Besides a large floating population, Zayla contains about 1500 
souls. They are comparatively a fine race of people, and suffer 
from little but fever and an occasional ophthalmia. Their greatest 
hardship is the want of the pure element ; the Hissi or well, is about 
four miles distant from the town, and all the pits within the walls 
supply brackish or bitter water, fit only for external use. This is 
probably the reason why vegetables are unknown, and why a horse, 
a mule, or even a dog, is not to be found in the place. 

1 " Fid-mer,” or the evening flyer, is the Somali name for a 
bat. These little animals are not disturbed in houses, because they 
keep off flies and mosquitoes, the plagues of the Somali country. 
Flies abound in the very jungles wherever cows have been, and 
settle in swarms upon the traveller. Before the monsoon their bite 
is painful, especially that of the small green species ; and there is a 
red variety called "Diksi as,” whose venom, according to the 
people, causes them to vomit. The latter abounds in Gulays and 
the hill ranges of the Berberah country : it is innocuous during the 
cold seasbn. The mosquito bites bring on, according to the same 
authority, deadly fevers : the superstition probably arises from the 
fact that mosquitoes and fevers become formidable about the same 
time. 

2 Such a building at Zayla would cost at most 500 dollars. At 
Aden, 2000 rupees, or nearly double the sum, would be paid for a 
matted shed, which excludes neither sun, nor wind, nor rein. 



18 First, Footsteps in East Africa . 

no evening bell can compare with it for, solemnity and 
beauty— and in the neighbouring mosque, the loudly? 
intoned Amin and Allaho Akbar— far superior to any 
organ — rang in my ear. The evening gun of camp was 
represented by the Nakyarah, or kettle-drum, sounded 
about seven p.m. at the southern gate ; and at ten a 
second drumming warned the paterfamilias that it was 
time for home, and thieves, and lovers — that it was the 
hour for bastinado. Nightfall was ushered in by the 
song, the dance, and the marriage festival — here no 
permission is required for “ native music in the lines” — 
and muffled figures flitted mysteriously through the dark 
alleys. 

!•••••• 

After a peep through the open window, I fell asleep, 
feeling once more at home. 



i9 


CHAPTER II. 

LIFE IN ZAYLA. 

I will' not weary you, dear L., with descriptions of 
twenty-six quiet, similar, uninteresting days — days of 
sleep, and pipes, and coffee — spent at Zayla, whilst a 
route was traced out, guides were propitiated, camels 
were bought, mules sent for, aqd all the wearisome pre- 
liminaries of African travel were gone through. But a 
joumee in the Somali country may be a novelty to you : 
its events shall be succinctly depicted. 

With earliest dawn we arise, thankful to escape 
from mosquitoes and close air. We repair to the terrace 
where devotions are supposed to be performed, and busy 
ourselves in watching our neighbours. Two in particular 
engage my attention : sisters by different mothers. ’ The 
daughter of an Indian woman is a young person of fast 
propensities — her chocolate-coloured skin, long hair, and 
parrot-like profile 1 are much admired by the Slegants of 
Zayla ; and she coquettes by combing, dancing, singing, 
and slapping the slave-girls, whenever an adorer may be 
looking. We sober-minded men, seeing her, quote the 
well-known lines — 


i This style of profile — highly oval, with the chin and brow 
receding— -is very conspicuous in Eastern Africa, where the face, 
slightly prognathous, projects below the nose. * 


2 — 2 




20 


First Footsteps in East Africa . 

“ Sans justice a king is a cloud without rain ; 

Sans goodness a sage is a field without grain; 

Sans manners a youth is a horse taking rein ; 

Sans lore an old man is a waterless plain; 

And bread without salt is a woman sans shame. 1 ' 

The other is a matron of Abyssinian descent, as her 
skin, scarcely darker that a gipsy’s, her long and bright 
blue fillet, and her gaudily-fringed dress, denote. She 
tattoos her face 1 : a livid line extends from her front hair 
to the tip of her nose ; between her eyebrows is an orna- 
ment representing a fleur-de-lis, and various beauty-spots 
adorn the corners of her mouth and the flats of her 
countenance. She passes her day superintending the 
slave-girls, and weaving mats, 8 the worsted work of this 
part of the world. We soon made acquaintance, as far 
as an exchange of salams. I regret, however, to say 
that there was some scandal about my charming neigh- 
bour; and that more than once she was detected making 
signals to distant persons with her hands. 8 

At 6 a.m. we descend to breakfast, which usually con- 
sists of sour grain cakes and roast mutton — at this hour 
a fine trial of health and cleanly living. A napkin is 
passed under my chin, as if I were a small child, and a 
sound scolding is administered when appetite appears 
deficient. Visitors are always asked to join us : we 
squat on the uncarpeted floor, round a circular stool, eat 


1 Gall-nuts form the base of the tattooing dye. It is worked in 
with a needle, when it becomes permanent : applied with a pen, it 
requires to be renewed about once a fortnight. 

2 Mats are the staple manufacture in Eastern, as in many parts 
of Western, Africa. The material is sometimes Daum or other 
palm : there are, however, many plants in more common use ; they 
are made of every variety in shape and colour, and are dyed zed, 
black, and yellow — madder from Tajurrah and alum being the 
the matter principally used. 

3 When woman addresses woman she always uses her .voice. 



21 


IL—Life in Zayla . 

hard, and never stop to drink. The appetite of Africa 
astonishes us ; we dispose of six ounces here for every 
one in Arabia — probably the effect of sweet water, after 
the briny produce of the “ Eye of Yaman.” We con- 
clude this early breakfast with coffee and pipes, and 
generally return, after it, to the work of sleep. 

Then, provided with some sanctified Arabic book, I 
prepare for the reception of visitors. They come in by 
dozens — no man having apparently any business to 
occupy him — doff their slippers at the door, enter 
wrapped up in their Tobes or togas , 1 and deposit their 
spears, point-upwards, in the comer ; those who have 
swords — the mark of respectability in Eastern Africa — 
place them at their feet. They shake the full hand (I 
was reproved for offering the fingers only); and when 
politely disposed, the inferior wraps his fist in the hem of 
his garment. They have nothing corresponding with 


i The Tobe, or Abyssinian " Quarry," is the general garment of 
Africa from Zayla to Bornou. In the Somali country it is a cotton 
sheet eight cubits long, and two breadths sewn together. An article 
of various uses, like the Highland plaid, it is worn in many ways; 
sometimes the right arm is bared ; in cold weather the whole person 
is muffled up, and in summer it is allowed to fall below the waist. 
Generally it is passed behind the back, rests upon the left shoulder, 
is carried forward over the breast, surrounds the body, and ends 
hanging on the left shoulder where it displays a gaudy silk fringe of 
red and yellow. This is the man's Tobe. The woman's dress is 
of similar material, but differently worn : the edges are knotted 
generally over the right, sometimes over the left shoulder; it is 
girdled round the waist, below which hangs a lappet, which in cold 
weather can be brought like A hood over the head. Though highly 
becoming, and picturesque as the Roman toga, the Somali Tobe is 
by no means the most decorous of dresses: women in the towns 
often prefer the Arab costume — a short-sleeved robe extending to 
the knee; and a Futah or loin-cloth underneath. 

As regards the word Tobe, it signifies, in Arabic, a garment 
generally: the Somal call it “ Maro," and the half Tobe a 
“ Shukkah." # 



22 


First Footsteps in East Africa . 

the European idea of manners ; they degrade all 
ceremony by the epithet Shughl al-banat, or “ girls’ 
work,” and pique themselves upon downrightness of 
manner — a favourite mask, by-the-by, for savage cunning 
to assume. But they are equally free from affectation, 
shyness, and vulgarity ; and, after all, no manners are 
preferable to bad manners. 

Sometimes we are visited at this hour by Mohammed 
Sharmarkay, eldest son of the old governor. He is in 
age about thirty, a fine tall figure, slender but well knit, 
beardless and of light complexion, with large eyes, and a 
length of neck which a lady might covet. His only de- 
tracting feature is a slight projection of the oral region, 
that unmistakeable proof of African blood. His move- 
ments have the grace of strength and suppleness : he is a 
good jumper, runs well, throws the spear admirably, and 
is a tolerable shot. Having received a liberal education 
at Mocha, he is held a learned man by his fellow-country- 
men. Like his father he despises presents, looking higher ; 
with some trouble I persuaded him to accept a common 
map of Asia, and a revolver. His chief interest was con- 
centrated in books : he borrowed my Abu Kasim to copy , 1 2 
and was never tired of talking about the religious sciences : 
he had weakened his eyes by hard reading, and a couple 
of blisters were sufficient to win his gratitude. Moham- 
med is now the eldest son a ; he appears determined to 
keep up the family name, having already married ten 
wives: the issue however, two infant sons, were murdered 
by the isa Badawin. Whenever he meets his father in 

1 Abu Kasim of Gaza, a well-known commentator upon Abu 
Shuja'a of Isfahan, who wrote a text-book of the Shafe’i school. 

2 The Hajj had seven sons, three of whom died in infancy. A1 
and Mahmud, the latter a fine young man, fell victims to small pOx: 
Mohammed is now the eldest, and the youngest is a child called 
Ahmad, left for education at Mocha. The Hajj has also two 
daughters? married to Badawi Somal. 



II. — Life in Zayla . 23 

the morning, he kisses his hand, and receives a salute upon 
the forehead. He aspires to the government of Zayla, 
and looks forward more reasonably than the Hajj to the 
day when the possession of Berberah will pour gold into 
his coffers. He shows none of his father's " softness”: 
he advocates the bastinado, and, to keep his people at a 
distance, he has married an Arab wife, who allows no 
adult to enter the doors. The Somal, Spaniard-like, 
remark, “He is one of ourselves, though a little richer" ; 
but when times change and luck returns, they are not 
unlikely to find themselves mistaken. 

. Amongst other visitors, we have the Amir al-Bahr, 
or Port Captain, and the Nakib al- Askar (Commandant dc 
place ), Mohammed Umar al-Hamumi. This is one of 
those Hazramaut adventurers so common in all the 
countries bordering upon Arabia : they are the Swiss of 
the East, a people equally brave and hardy, frugal and 
faithful, as long as pay is regular. Feared by the soft 
Indians and Africans for their hardness and determination, 
the common proverb concerning them is, “ If you meet a 
viper and a Hazrami, spare the viper." Natives of a poor 
and rugged region, they wander far and wide, preferring 
every country to their own; and it is generally said that 
the sun rises not upon a land that does not contain a man 
from Hazramaut . 1 2 This commander of an army of forty 
men* often read out to us from the Kitab al-Anwar (the 

1 It is related that a Hazrami, flying from his fellow-countrymen, 
reached a town upon the confines of China. He was about to take 
refuge in a mosque, but entering, he stumbled over the threshold. 
"Ya Amud al-Din" — “O Pillar of the Faith!” exclaimed a voice 
from the darkness, calling upon the patron saint of Hazramaut to save 
a Moslem from falling. “ May the Pillar of the Faith break thy 
head! ” exclaimed the unpatriotic traveller, at once rising to resume 
his vain'peregrinations. 

2 Mercenaries from Mocha, Hazramaut, and Bir Hamid, near 
Aden: they are armed with matchlock, sword, and dagger) and each 
receives from the governor a monthly stipend of two dollars and a 
half. 


2^, First Footsteps if % East Africa • 

• Book of Lights) the tale of Abu Jahl, that Judas of Al- 
Islam made ridiculous. Sometimes comes the Sayyid 
Mohammed al-Barr, a stout personage, formerly governor 
of Zayla, and still highly respected by the people on ac- 
count of his pure pedigree. With him is the Fakih Adan, 
a savan of ignoble origin . 1 When they appear the con- 


z The system of caste, which prevails in Al-Yaman, though 
not in the northern parts of Arabia, is general throughout the Somali 
country. The principal families of outcasts are the following : — 

The Yabir correspond with the Dushan of Southern Arabia : the 
males are usually jesters to the chiefs, and both sexes take certain 
parts at festivals, marriages, and circumcisions. The number is said 
to be small, amounting to about too families in the northern Somali 
country. 

The Tomal or Handad, the blacksmiths, originally of Aydur race, 
have become vile by intermarriage with serviles. They must now 
wed maidens of their own class, and live apart from the community : 
their magical practices are feared by the people — the connection of 
wits and witchcraft is obvious— and all private quarrels are traced 
to them. It has been observed that the blacksmith has ever been 
looked upon with awe by barbarians on the same principle that made 
Vulcan a deity. In Abyssinia all artisans are Budah, sorcerers,' 
especially the blacksmith, and he is a social outcast as amongst the 
Somal ; even in Al-Hijaz, a land, unlike Al- Yaman, opposed to distinc- 
tions amongst Moslems, the Khalawiyah, who work in metal, are 
considered vile. Throughout the rest of Al-Islam, the blacksmith 
is respected as treading in the path of David, the father of the craft. 

The word “Tomal,” opposed to Somal, is indigenous. “Han- 
dad” is palpably a corruption of the Arabic “ Haddad,” ironworker. 

The Midgan, “one-hand,” corresponds with the Khadim of Al- 
Yaman: he is called Kami, or "archer,” by the Arabs. There are 
three distinct tribes of this people, who are numerous in the Somali 
country: the best genealogists cannot trace their origin, though some 
are silly enough to derive them, like the Akhdara, from Shimr. All, 
however, agree in expelling the Midgan rom the gentle blood of 
Somali land, and his position has been compared to that of Freed- 
man amongst the Romans. These people take service under the 
different chiefs, who sometimes entertained great numbers to aid in 
forays and frays; they do not, however, confine themselves to one 
craft. Many Midgans employ themselves in hunting and agriculture. 



*5 


II. — Life in Zayla. 

versation becomes intensely intellectual: sometimes we 
dispute religion, sometimes politics, at others history and 
other humanities. Yet, it is not easy to talk history with a 
people who confound Miriam and Mary, or politics to those 
whose only idea of a king is a robber on a large scale, 
or religion to men who measure excellence by forbidden 


The Mountain Kaf. 



meats, or geography to those who represent the earth 
in this guise. Yet, though few of our ideas are in common, 


Instead of spear and shield, they carry bows and a quiver full of 
diminutive arrows, barbed and poisoned with the Waba— a weapon 
used from Faizoghli to the Cape of Good Hope. Like the Veddah 
of Ceylon, the Midgan is a poor shot, and scarcely strong enough to 
draw his stiff bow. He is accused of maliciousness ; and the twang- 
ing of his string will put to flight a whole village. The poison is 
greatly feared: it causes, say the people, the hair and nails to drop 
off, and kills a man in half an hour. The only treatment known is 
instant excision of the part ; and this is done the more frequently, 
because here, as in other parts of Africa, such stigmates are deemed 
ornamental. 

In appearance the Midgan is dark and somewhat stunted: he is 
known to the people by peculiarities of countenance and accent. 




26 First Footsteps in East Africa. 

there are many words; the verbosity of these anti-Laconic 
Oriental dialects 1 renders at least half the subject intelli- 
gible to the most opposite thinkers. When the society is 
wholly Somal, I write Arabic, copy some useful book, 
or extract from it, as Bentley advised, what is fit to quote. 
When Arabs are present, I usually read out a tale 
from “The Thousand and One Nights,” that wonderful 
work, so often translated, so much turned over, and so 
little understood at home. The most familiar of books in 
England, next to the Bible, it is one of the least known* 
the reason being that about one-fifth is utterly unfit for 
translation ; and the most sanguine Orientalist would not 
dare to render literally more than three-quarters of the 
remainder. Consequently, the reader loses the contrast — 
the very essence of the book — between its brilliancy and 
dulness, its moral putrefaction, and such pearls as — 

“ Cast the seed of good works on the least fit soil, 

Good is never wasted, however it may be laid out.” 

And in a page or two after such divine sentiment, the 
ladies of Baghdad sit in the porter’s lap, and indulge in a 
facetiousness which would have killed Pietro Aretino 
before his time. 

Often I am visited by the Topchi-Bashi, or master 
of the ordnance — half-a-dozen honey-combed guns — a 
wild fellow, Bashi Buzuk in the Hijaz and commandant 
of artillery at Zayla. He shaves my head on Fridays, 
and on other days tells me wild stories about his service 
in the Holy Land ; how Kurdi Usman slew his son -in- 
law, I bn Rumi, and how Turkchih Bilmaz would have 


i Ihe reason why Europeans fail to explain their thoughts to 
Orientals generally is that they transfer the Laconism of Western 
Eastern tongues. We for instance say, "Fetch the book I gave you 1 
last night.' This in Hindustani, to choose a well-known tongue, 
must be smothered with words thus, " What book was by me given 
to you yesterday by night, that book bringing tome, come! 



II.— Life in Zayla. 27 

murdered Mohammed Ali in his bed . 1 Sometimes the 
room is filled with Arabs, Sayyids, merchants, and 
others settled in the place : I saw nothing amongst them 
to justify the oft-quoted saw, “Koraysh pride and 
Zayla’s boastfulness.” More generally the assembly is 
one of the Somal, who talk in their own tongue, laugh, 
yell, stretch their legs, and lie like cattle upon the floor, 
smoking the common Hukkah, which stands in the 
centre, industriously cleaning their teeth with sticks, and 
eating snuff like Swedes. Meanwhile, I occupy the 
Kursi or couch, sometimes muttering from a book to 
excite respect, or reading aloud for general information, 
or telling fortunes by palmistry, or drawing out a horo- 
scope. 

It argues “ peculiarity,” I own, to enjoy such a life. 
In the first place there is no woman’s society: Al-Islam 
seems purposely to have loosened the ties between the 
sexes in order to strengthen the bonds which connect 
man and man . 2 Secondly, your house is by no means 
your castle. You must open your doors to your friend at 
all hours ; if when inside it suit him to sing, sing he will ; 
and until you learn solitude in a crowd, or the art of 
concentration, you are apt to become ennuyc and irritable. 
You must abandon your prejudices, and for a time cast 
off all European prepossessions in favour of Indian 
politeness, Persian polish, Arab courtesy, or Turkish 
dignity. 

“ They are as free as Nature e’er made man;” 

1 I have alluded to these subjects in a previous work upon the 
subject of Meccah and Al-Madinah. 

2 Tliis is one of the stock complaints against the Moslem 

scheme. Yet is it not practically the case with ourselves? In 
European society, the best are generally those who prefer the com- 
panionship of their own sex ; the “ ladies' man " and the woman 
who avoids women are rarely choice specimens. , 



2 8 First Footsteps in East Africa. 

and he who objects to having his head shaved in public, 
to seeing his friends combing their locks in his sitting- 
room, to having his property unceremoniously handled, 
or to being addressed familiarly by a perfect stranger, 
had better avoid Somali-land. 

You will doubtless, dear L., convict me, by my own 
sentiments, of being an “ amateur barbarian.” You 
must, however, remember that I visited Africa fresh from 
Aden, with its dull routine of meaningless parades and 
tiresome courts-martial, where society is broken by 
ridiculous distinctions of staff-men and regimental-men, 
Madras-men and Bombay-men, “ European ” officers, 
and “ black ” officers ; where literature is confined to 
acquiring the art of explaining yourself in the jargons of 
half-naked savages ; where the business of life is com- 
prised in ignoble official squabbles, dislikes, disappro- 
bations, and “references to superior authority” ; where 
social intercourse is crushed by “ gup,” gossip, and the 
scandal of small colonial circles ; where — pleasant pre- 
dicament for those who really love women’s society! — 
it is scarcely possible to address fair dame, preserving at 
the same time her reputation and your own, and if seen 
with her twice, all “ camp ” will swear it is an “ affair ” : 
where, briefly, the march of . mind is at a dead halt, and 
the march of matter is in double-quick time to the 
hospital or sick-quarters. Then the fatal struggle for 
Name, and the painful necessity of doing the most with 
the smallest materials for a reputation ! In Europe 
there are a thousand grades of celebrity, from statesman- 
ship to taxidermy; all, therefore, co-exist without rivalry. 
Whereas, in these small colonies, there is but one fame, 
and as that leads directly to rupees and rank, no ma n 
willingly accords it to his neighbour. And, finally, such 
semi-civilized life abounds in a weary ceremoniousness. 
It is highly improper to smoke outside your bungalow/ 
You sha41 pay your visits at u a.m., when the glass' 



II.— Life in Zayla . 


29 


stands at 120°. You shall be generally shunned if you 
omit your waistcoat, no matter what the weather be. 
And if you venture to object to these Median laws — as 
I am now doing — you elicit a chorus of disapproval, and 
acquire some evil name. 

About 11 a.m., when the fresh water arrives from 
the Hissi or wells, the Hajj sends us dinner, mutton 
stews of exceeding greasiness, boiled rice, maize cakes, 
sometimes fish, and generally curds or milk. We all sit 
round a primitive form of the Round Table, and I doubt 
that King Arthur’s knights ever proved doughtier 
trenchermen than do my companions. We then rise to 
pipes and coffee, after which, excluding visitors, my 
attendants apply themselves to a siesta, I to my journal 
and studies. 

At 2 p.m. there is a loud clamour at the door : if it 
be not opened in time, we are asked if we have a Naza- 
rene inside. Enters a crowd of visitors, anxious to pass 
the afternoon. We proceed with a copy of the forenoon 
till the sun declines, when it is time to escape the flies, 
to repair to the terrace for fresh air, or to dress for a 
walk. Generally our direction is through the town east- 
wards, to a plain of dilapidated graves and salt sand, 
peopled only by land-crabs. At the extremity near the 
sea is a little mosque of wattle-work : we sit there under 
the shade, and play a rude form of draughts, called 
Shantarah, or at Shahh, a modification of the former. 1 


1 The Shantarah board is thus made, with twenty-five points 
technically called houses. The players have twelve counters a-piece, 




First Footsteps in East Africa. 

More often, eschewing these effeminacies, we shoot at 
a mark, throw the javelin, leap, or engage in some 
gymnastic exercise. The favourite Somali weapons are 
the spear, dagger, and war-club ; the bow and poisoned 
arrows are peculiar to the servile class, who know 

r 

i “ the dreadful art 

To taint with deadly drugs the barbed dart;” 

and the people despise, at the same time that they fear 


and each places two at a time upon any of the unoccupied angles, 
till all except the centre are filled up. The player who did not begin 
the game must now move a man ; his object is to inclose one of his 
adversary's between two of his own, in which case he removes it, 
and is entitled to continue moving till he can no longer take. It is a 
game of some skill, and perpetual practice enables the Somal to play 
it as the Persians do backgammon, with great art and little reflec- 
tion. The game is called Kurkabod when, as in our draughts, the 
piece passing over one of the adversary’s takes it. 

Shahh is another favourite game. The board is made thus, 



and the pieces as at Shantarah are twelve in number. The object is 
to place three men in line — as the German Muhle and the Afghan 
11 Kitar "—when any one of the adversary’s pieces may be removed. 

Children usually prefer the game called indifferently Togantog 
and Saddikiya. A double line of five or six holes is made in the 
ground, four counters are placed in each, and when in the course of 
play four men meet in the same hole, one of the adversary's is 
removed. It resembles the Bornou game, played with beans a nd 
holes in the sand. Citizens and the more civilized are fond of 
" Bakkis," which, as its name denotes, is a corruption of the well- 
known Indian Pachisi. None but the travelled knows chess, and the 
Damal (draughts) and Tavola (backgammon) of the Turks. * 




firearms, declaring them to be cowardly weapons 1 with 
which the poltroon can slay the bravest. 

The Sdmali spear is a form of the Cape Assegai. A 
long, thin, pliant and knotty shaft of the Dibi, Diktab, and 
Makari trees, is dried, polished, and greased with rancid 
butter : it is generally of a dull yellow colour, and some- 
times bound, as in Arabia, with brass wire for ornament. 
Care is applied to make the rod straight, or the missile 
flies crooked ; it is garnished with an iron button at the 
head, and a long, thin, tapering head of coarse bad iron,’ 1 
made at Berberah and other places by the Tomal. 
The length of the shaft may be four feet eight inches; 
the blade varies from twenty to twenty-six inches, and the 
whole weapon is about seven feet long. Some polish the 
entire spear-head, others only its socket or ferule; com- 
monly, however, it is all blackened by heating it to redness, 
and rubbing it with cow’s horn. In the towns, one of 
these weapons is carried; on a journey and in battle two, 
as amongst the Tlbfis — a small javelin for throwing and 
a large spear reserved for the thrust. Some warriors, 
especially amongst the Isa, prefer a coarse heavy lance, 
which never leaves the hand. The Somali spear is held 
in various ways: generally the thumb and forefinger 
grasp the third nearest to the head, and the shaft resting 


z The same objection against " villanous saltpetre ” was made 
by ourselves in times of old : the French knights called gunpowder 
the Grave of Honour. This is natural enough, the bravest weapon 
being generally the shortest — that which places a man hand to hand 
with his opponent. Some of the Kafir tribes have discontinued 
throwing the Assegai, and enter battle wielding it as a pike. Usually, 
also, the^ shorter the weapon is, the more fatal are the conflicts in 
which it is employed. The old French “ Briquet,” the Afghan 
" Charay,” and the Goorka "Kukkri,” exemplify this fact in the 
history of arms. 

2 In the latter point it differs from the Assegai, which is worked 
by the Kafirs to the finest temper. > 



32 First Footsteps in East Africa. . 

upon the palm is made to quiver. In action, the javelin 
is rarely thrown at a greater distance than six or seven 
feet, and the heavier weapon is used for “ jobbing.” 
Stripped to his waist, the thrower runs forward with all 
the action of a Kafir, whilst the attacked bounds about 
and crouches to receive it upon the round targe, which it 
cannot pierce. He then returns the compliment, at the 
same time endeavouring to break the weapon thrown at 
him by jumping and stamping upon it. The harmless 
missiles being exhausted, both combatants draw their 
daggers, grapple with the left hand, and with the right 
dig hard and swift at each other’s necks and shoulders. 
When matters come to this point the duel is soon decided, 
and the victor, howling his slogan, pushes away from his 
front the dying enemy, and rushes off to find another 
opponent. A puerile weapon during the day when a 
steady man can easily avoid it, the spear is terrible in 
night attacks or in the “bush,” whence it can be hurled 
unseen. For practice we plant a pair of slippers upright 
in the ground, at the distance of twelve yards, and a 
skilful spearman hits the mark once in every three 
throws. 

The Somali dagger is an iron blade abont eighteen 
inches long by two in breadth, pointed and sharp at both 
edges. The handle is of buffalo or other horn, with a 
double scoop to fit the grasp ; and at the hilt is a conical 
ornament of zinc. It is worn strapped round the waist by 
a thong sewed to the sheath, and long enough to encircle 
the body twice: the point is to the right, and the handle 
projects on the left. When in town, the Somal wear 
their daggers under the Tobe : in battle, the strap is girt 
over the cloth to prevent the latter being lost. They 
always stab from above : this is as it should be, a thrust 
with a short weapon “ underhand” may be gtopped, if 
the adversary have strength enough to hold the slabber’s 
forearm.* The thrust is parried with the shield, and the 



33 


II, — Life in Zayla, 

wound is rarely mortal except in the back: from the 
great length of the blade, the least movement of the 
man attacked causes it to fall upon the shoulder-blade. 

The “Budd,” or Somali club, resembles the Kafir 
“Tonga.” It is a knobstick about a cubit long, made of 
some hard wood: the head is rounded on the inside, and 
the outside is cut to an edge. In quarrels it is considered 
a harmless weapon, and is often thrown at the opponent 
and wielded viciously enough where the spear point would 
carefully be directed at the buckler. The Gashan or 
shield is a round targe about eighteen inches in diameter; 
some of the Badawin make it much larger. Rhinoceros’ 
skin being rare, the usual material is common bull’s hide, 
or, preferably, that of the Oryx, called by the Arabs, 
Wa’al, and by the Somal, Ba’id. The shields are prettily 
cut, and are always protected when new with a covering 
of canvass. The boss in the centre easily turns a spear, 
and the strongest throw has very little effect even upon 
'the thinnest portion. When not used, the Gashan is 
slung upon the left forearm : during battle, the handle, 
.which is in the middle, is grasped by the left hand, and 
held out at a distance from the body. 

We are sometimes joined in our exercises by the Arab 
mercenaries, who are far more skilful than the Somal. 
The latter are unacquainted with the sword, and cannot 
defend themselves against it with the targe; they know 
little of dagger practice, and were beaten at their own 
weapon, the javelin, by the children of Bir Hamid. 
Though unable to jump for the honour of the turband, I 
soon acquired the reputation of being the strongest man 
in Zayla: this is perhaps the easiest way of winning re- 
spect froin a barbarous people, who honour body, and 
degrade mind to mere cunning. 

Whenjtired of exercise we proceed round the walls to 
the Ashiirbara or Southern Gate. Here boys play at 
“hockey” with sticks and stones energetically as in 


3 



34 First Footsteps in East Africa. 

England: they are fine manly specimens of the race, but 
noisy and impudent, like all young savages. At two years 
of age they hold out their right hand for sweetmeats, and if 
refused become insolent. The citizens amuse themselves 
with the ball, 1 at which they play roughly as Scotch 
linkers: they are divided into two parties, bachelors and 
married men ; accidents often occur, and no player Wears 
any but the scantiest clothing, otherwise he would retire 
from the conflict in rags. The victors sing and dance 
about the town for hours, brandishing their spears, 
shouting their slogans, boasting of ideal victories — the 
Abyssinian Donfatu, or war vaunt, — and advancing in 
death -triumph with frantic gestures: a battle won would 
be celebrated with less circumstance in Europe. This is 
the effect of no occupation — the pritnum mobile of the 
Indian prince’s kite-flying and all the puerilities of the 
pompous East. 

We usually find an encampment of Badawin outside 
the gate. Their tents are worse than any gipsy’s, low, 
smoky, and of the rudest construction. These people 
are a spectacle of savageness. Their huge heads of 
shock hair, dyed red and dripping with butter, are gar- 
nished with a Firm, or long three-pronged comb, a stick, 
which acts as scratcher when the owner does not wish to 
grease his fingers, and sometimes with the ominous 
ostrich feather, showing that the wearer has “ killed his 
man”; a soiled and ragged cotton cloth covers their 
shoulders, and a similar article is wrapped round their 
loins. 9 All wear coarse sandals, and appear in the 


z It is called by the Arabs, Kubabah, by the Somal Goasa. 
Johnston (Travels in Southern Abyssinia, chap. 8) has described the 
. game; he errs, however, in supposing it peculiar to the Dankali 
tribes. 

2 This is in fact the pilgrim dress of Al-Islam ; its^vide diffusion 
to the eastward, as well as west of the Red Sea, proves its antiquity 
as a popular dress. 



II . — Life in Zayla. 35 

bravery of targe y spear and dagger. Some of the 
women would be pretty did they not resemble the men 
in their scowling, Satanic expression of countenance : 
they are decidedly en deshabille , but a black skin always 
appears a garb. The cantonment is surrounded by asses, 
camels and a troupe of native Flibertigibbets, who dance 
and jump in astonishment whenever they see me : “ The 
white man ! the white man ! ” they shriek ; “ run away, 
run away, or we shall be eaten 1 !” On one occasion, 
however, my amour propre was decidedly fluttered by the 
attentions of a small black girl, apparently four or five 
years old, who followed me through the streets ejaculating 
“ Wa Wanaksan ! ” — “ O fine ! ” The Badawin, despite 
their fierce scowls, appear good-natured; the women 
flock out of the huts to stare and laugh, the men to look 
and wonder. I happened once to remark, “ Lo, we 
come forth to look at them and they look at us ; we gaze 
at their complexion and they gaze at ours ! ” A Badawi 
who understood Arabic translated this speech to the 
others; and it excited great merriment. In the mining 
counties of civilized England, where the “ genial brick- 
bat” is thrown at the passing stranger, or in enlightened 
Scotland, where hair a few inches too long or a pair of 
mustachioes justifies “ mobbing,” it would have been 
impossible for me to have mingled as I did with these 
wild people. 

We must return before sunset, when the gates are 
locked and the keys are carried to the Hajj, a vain pre- 
caution, when a donkey could clear half a dozen places 
in the town wall. The call to evening prayers sounds as 
we enter : none of my companions prays, 1 but all when 

V 

z I often regretted having neglected the precaution of a bottle of 
walnut-juice— a white colour is decidedly too conspicuous in this 
part of the*£ast. 

2 The strict rule of the Moslem faith is this : if a m^n neglect 
to pray, he is solemnly warned to repent. Should he simply refuse, 

3—2 




36 First Footsteps in East Africa. 

asked reply in the phrase which an Englishman hates, 
“ Inshallah Bukra"— “if Allah please, to-morrow 1 "— 
and they have the decency not to appear in public at the 
hours of devotion. The Somal, like most Africans, are 
of a somewhat irreverent turn of mind. 1 When re- 
proached with gambling, and asked why they persist in 
the forbidden pleasure, they simply answer, “ Because we 
like.” One night, encamped among the Isa, I was 
disturbed by a female voice indulging in the loudest 
lamentations ; an elderly lady, it appears, was suffering 
from tooth-ache, and the refrain of her groans was, “ O 
Allah, may thy teeth ache like mine ! O Allah, may 
thy gums be sore as mine are ! ” A well-known and 
characteristic tale is told of the Jirad Hirsi, now chief 
of the Berteri tribe. Once meeting a party of unarmed 

without, however, disbelieving in prayer, he is to be put to death, 
and receive Moslem burial; in the other contingency, he is not 
bathed, prayed for, or interred in holy ground. This severe order, 
however, lies in general abeyance. 

i " Tuarick grandiloquence,” says Richardson (vol. i. p. 207), 
•• savours of blasphemy, c.g., the lands, rocks, and mountains of 
Ghat do not belong to God but to the Azghar.” Equally irreverent 
are the Kafirs of the Cape. They have proved themselves good men 
in wit as well as in war ; yet, like the old Greenlanders and some of the 
Burmese tribes, they are apparently unable to believe in the exist- 
ence of the Supreme. A favourite question to the missionaries was 
this, 41 Is your God white or black ? ” If the European, startled by 
the question, hesitated for a moment, they would leave him with 
open signs of disgust at having been made the victims of a hoax. 

I'he assertion generally passes current that the idea of an 
Omnipotent Being is familiar to all people, even the most barbarous. 
My limited experience argues the contrary. Savages begin with 
fetishism and demon-worship, they proceed to physiolatry (the 
religion of the Vedas) and Sabaeism : the deity is the last and highest 
pinnacle of the spiritual temple, not placed there except by a com- 
paratively civilized race of high development, which leads them 
to study and speculate upon cosmical and psychical themes. This . 
progression is admirably wrought out in Professor Max 'Mfiller's 
44 Rig Veda Sanhita.” 


77 . — Life in Zayla. yj 

pilgrims, he asked them why they had left their weapons 
at hom'e: they replied in the usual phrase, “Nahnu 
mutawakkilin " — 44 we are trusters (in Allah).*’ 'That 
evening, having feasted them hospitably, the chief re- 
turned hurriedly to the hut, declaring that his soothsayer 
ordered him at once to sacrifice a pilgrim, and begging 
the horror-struck auditors to choose the victim. They 
cast lots and gave over one of their number : the Jirad 
placed him in another hut, dyed his dagger with sheep’s 
blood, and returned to say that he must have a second life. 
The unhappy pilgrims rose en masse , and Aed so wildly 
that the chief, with all the cavalry of the desert, found 
difficulty in recovering them. He dismissed them with 
liberal presents, and not a few jibes about their trustful- 
ness in Allah. The wilder Badawin will inquire where 
Allah is to be found: when asked the object of the ques- 
tion, they reply, 44 If the fsa could but catch him, they 
would spear him upon the spot — who but he lays waste 
their homes and kills their cattle and wives ? ” Yet, 
conjoined to this truly savage incapability of conceiving 
the idea of a Supreme Being, they believe in the most 
ridiculous exaggerations : many will not affront a 
common pilgrim, for fear of being killed by a glance or a 
word. 

Our supper, also provided by the hospitable Hajj, is 
the counterpart of the midday dinner. After it we repair 
to the roof, to enjoy the prospect of the far Tajurrah hills 
and the white moonbeams sleeping upon the nearer sea. 
The evening star hangs like a diamond upon the still 
horizon : around the moon a pink zone of light mist, 
shading off into turquoise blue, and a delicate green like 
chrysoprSz, invests the heavens with a peculiar charm. 
The scene is truly suggestive : behind us, purpling in the 
night-air and silvered by the radiance from above, lie the 
wolds and mountains tenanted by the fiercest of savages ; 
their shadowy mysterious forms exciting vague alarms in 



3 g First Footsteps in East Africa. 

the traveller’s breast. Sweet as the harp of David f the 
night-breeze and the music of the water come up from 
the sea : but the ripple and the rustling sound alternate 
with the hyena’s laugh, the jackal’s cry, and the wild 
dog’s lengthened howl. 

Or, the weather becoming cold, we remain below, 
and Mohammed Umar returns to read out more “ Book 
of Lights,” or some pathetic ode. I will quote in free 
translation the following production of the celebrated poet 
Abd al-Rahman al-Burai, as a perfect specimen of melan- 
choly Arab imagery : 

“ No exile is the exile to the latter end of earth, 

The exile is the exile to the coffin and the tomb ! 

“ He hath claims on the dwellers in the places of their birth 
Whoso wandereth the world, for he lacketh him a home. 

“ Then blamer, blame me not, were my heart within thy breast, 
The sigh would take the place of thy laughter and thy scorn. 

“ Let me weep for the sin that debars my soul of rest, 

The tear may yet avail,— -all in vain I may not mourn! 1 

“Woe! woe to thee, Flesh !— with a purer spirit, now 
The death-day were a hope, and the judgment-hour a joy ! 

“ One mom I woke in pain, with a pallor on my brow, 

As though the dreaded Angel was descending to destroy : 

11 They brought to me a leech, saying, 1 Heal him lest he die 1 ’ 
On that day, by Allah, were his drugs a poor deceit I 

“ They stripped me and bathed me, and closed the glazing eye, 
And dispersed unto prayers, and to haggle for my sheet. 


z The Moslem corpse is partly sentient in the tomb, reminding 
the reader of Tennyson : 

••I thought the dead had peace, but it is not so ; 

«To have no peace in the grave, is that not sad ? '* 



II. — Life in Zayla. 39 

“The prayers without a bow 1 they prayed over me that day, 
Brought nigh to me the bier, and disposed me within, 

“ Four bare upon their shoulders this tenement of clay, 

Friend and kinsman in procession bore the dust of Mend and 
kin. 

“ They threw upon me mould of the tomb, and went their way— 
A guest, 'twould seem, had flitted from the dwellings of the 
tribe! 

“ My gold and my treasures each a share they bore away, 
Without thanks, without praise, with a jest and with a jibe. 

“ My gold and my treasures each a share they bore away, 

On me they left the weight !— with me they left the sin ! 

“That night within the grave without hoard or child I lay, 

No spouse, no Mend were there, no comrade and no kin. 

“ The wife of my youth soon another husband found — 

A stranger sat at home on the hearthstone of my sire. 

“ My son became a slave, though not purchased nor bound, 
The hireling of a stranger, who begrudged him his hire. 

“ Such, alas, is human life ! such the horror of his death ! 

Man grows like a grass, like a god he sees no end. 

11 Be wise, then, ere too late, brother ! praise with every breath 
The Hand that can chastise, the Arm that can defend : 

*' And bless thou the Prophet, the averter of our ills, 

While the lightning flasheth bright o'er the ocean and the 
hills." 

At this hour my companions become imaginative and 

superstitious. One Salimayn, a black slave from the 


z The prayers for the dead have no Ruka’at, or bow, as in other 
orisons. 




40 First Footsteps in East Africa. ■ 

Sawahil^now secretary to the Hajj, reads our fortunes in 
the rosary. The « fal, 8 ” as it is called, acts a prominent 
part in Somali life. Some men are celebrated fo{ 
accuracy of prediction ; and in times of danger, when the 
human mind is ever open to the 11 fooleries of faith,” per- 
petual reference is made to their art. The worldly-wise 
Salimayn, I observed, never sent away a questioner with 
an ill-omened reply, but he also regularly insisted upon 
the efficacy of sacrifice and almsgiving, which, as they 
would assuredly be neglected, afforded him an excuse in 
case of accident. Then we had a recital of the tales 
common to Africa, and perhaps to all the world. In 
modern France, as in ancient Italy, “versipelles” become 
wolves and hide themselves in the woods : in Persia they 
change themselves into bears, and in Bornou and Shoa 
assume the shapes of lions, hyenas, and leopards . 8 The 
origin of this metamorphic superstition is easily trace- 


z The general Moslem name for the African coast from the 
Somali seaboard southwards to the Mozambique, inhabited by 
negroid and negrotic races. 

2 The Moslem rosary consists of ninety-nine beads divided into 
sets of thirty-three each by some peculiar sign, as a bit of red coral. 
The consulter, beginning at a chance place, counts up to the mark: 
if the number of beads be odd, he sets down a single 
dot, if even, two. This is done four times, when a figure 
is produced as in the margin. Of these there are O O 
sixteen, each having its peculiar name and properties. O 
The art is merely Geomancy in its rudest shape ; a q 
mode of vaticination which, from its wide diffusion, 
must be of high antiquity. The Arabs call it Al-Raml, ® 9 . 

and ascribe its present form to the Imam Ja'afar al- 
Sadik; amongst them it is a ponderous study, connected as usual 
with astrology. Napoleon's “ Book of Fate” is a specimen ofthe 
old Eastern superstition presented to Europe in a modem and simple ' 
form. 

3 In this country, as in Western and Southern Afric4T the 
leopard, cot the wolf, is the shepherd’s scourge. 



4i 


ILr—Lift in Zayla. 

able like man’s fetishism or demonology, to his fears; a 
Badawi, for instance, becomes.dreadful by the reputation 
of sorcery: bears and hyenas are equally terrible; and 
the two objects of horror are easily connected. Curious 
to say, individuals having this power were pointed out 
to me, and people pretended to discover it in their 
countenances: at Zayla I was shown a Badawi, by 
name, Farih Badaun, who notably became a hyena at 
times, for the purpose of tasting human blood . 1 About 
forty years ago, three brothers, Kayna, Fardayna, and 
Sollan, were killed on Gulays near Berberah for the crime 
of metamorphosis. The charge is usually substantiated 
either by the bestial tail remaining appended to a part of 
the human shape which the owner has forgotten to rub 
against the magic tree, or by some peculiar wound which 
the beast received and the man retained. Kindred to 
this superstition is the belief that many of the Badawin 
have learned the languages of birds and beasts. Another 
widely-diffused fancy is that of the Aksar,® which in this 
pastoral land becomes a kind of wood: wonderful tales 
are told of battered milk-pails which, by means of some 
peg accidently cut in the jungle, have been found full of 
silver, or have*' acquired the qualities of cornucopias 
It is supposed that a red heifer always breaks her fast 
upon the wonderful plant, consequently much time and 
trouble have been expended by the Somal in watching the 
morning proceedings of red heifers. At other times we 
hear fearful tales of old women who, like the Jigar Khwar 
of Persia, feed upon man’s liver; they are fond of destroy- 
ing young children; even adults are not ashamed of 
.defending themselves with talismans. In this country the 


1 Popular superstition in Abyssinia attributes the same power to 
the ffilashas or Jews. 

2 Our Elixir, a corruption of the Arabic Al-Iksir. « , 



42 First Footsteps in East Africa. 

crone is called Bida’a or Kumayyo, words signifying a 
witch: the worst is she that destroys her own progeny. 
No wound is visible in this vampyre’s victim: generally 
he names his witch, <and his friends beat her to"" death 
unless she heal him: many are thus martyred; and in 
Somali land scant notice is taken of such a peccadillo as 
murdering an old woman. The sex indeed has by no 
means a good name: here, as elsewhere, those rtho de- 
grade it are the first to abuse it for degradation. At 
Zayla almost all quarrels are connected with women; 
the old bewitch in one way, the young in another, and 
both are equally maligned. “ Wit in a woman,” exclaims 
one man, “is a habit of running away in a dromedary.” 
“Allah,” declares another, “made woman of a crooked 
rib; he who would straighten her, breaketh her.” Per- 
haps, however, by these generalisms of abuse the sex 
gains: they prevent personal and individual details ; and 
no society of French gentlemen avoids mentioning in 
public the name of a woman more scrupulously than do 
the misogynist Moslems. 

After a conversazione of two hours my visitors 
depart, and we lose no time — for we must rise at cock- 
crow — in spreading our mats round the common room. 
You would admire the Somali pillow, 1 a dwarf pedestal of 
carved wood, with a curve upon which the greasy poll and 
its elaborate fristire repose. Like the Abyssinian article, 
it resembles the head-rest of ancient Egypt in all* points, 
except that it is not worked with Typhons and other 
horrors to drive away dreadful dreams. Sometimes the 
sound of the kettledrum, the song, and the flapp ing of 
hands, summon us at a later hour than usual to a dance. 
The performance is complicated, and, as usual with the 
trivialities easily learned in early youth, it is uncommonly 


x In the Somali tongue its name is Barki : they make 's stool of 
similar sHape, and call it Baxjimo 



43 


IL-*-Life in Zayla . 

difficult to a stranger* Each dance has its own song and 
measure, and, contrary to the custom of Al-Islam, the 
sexes perform together. They begin by clapping the 
hands and stamping where they stand ; to this succeed 
advancing, retiring, wheeling about, jumping about, and 
the other peculiarities of the Jim Crow school. The 
principal measures are ^hose of Ugadayn and Batar; 
these are again divided and subdivided. I fancy that 
the description of Dileho, Jibwhayn, and Hobala would 
be as entertaining and instructive to you, dear L., as 
Polka, Gavotte, and Mazurka would be to a Somali. 

On Friday — our Sunday — a drunken crier goes 
about the town, threatening the bastinado to all who 
neglect their five prayers. At half-past eleven a kettle- 
drum sounds a summons to the Jami or Cathedral. It 
is an old barn rudely plastered with whitewash ; posts or 
columns of artless masonry support the low roof, and the 
smallness of the windows, or rather air-holes, renders 
its dreary length unpleasantly hot. There is. no pulpit ; 
the only ornament is a rude representation of the Meccan 
Mosque, nailed like a pot-house print to the wall ; and 
the sole articles of furniture are ragged mats and old 
boxes containing tattered chapters of the Koran in 
greasy bindings. I enter with a servant carrying a 
prayer carpet, encounter the stare of 300 pairs of eyes, 
belonging to parallel rows of squatters, recite the 
customary two-bow prayer in honour of the mosque, 
placing sword and rosary before me, and then, taking up 
a Koran, read the Cow Chapter (No. 18) loud and twang- 
ingly. At the Zohr or midday hour, the Mu’ezzin inside 
the mosque, standing before the Khatib, or preacher, 
repeats the call to prayer, which the congregation, 
sitting upon their shins and feet, intone after him. This 
ended, all present stand up, and recite every man for 
himself a two-bow prayer of Sunnat or Example, con- 
cluding with the blessing on the Prophet and thfe Salam 



44 


First Footsteps in East Africa. 

over each shoulder to all brother Believers. The Khatib 
ascends his- hole in the wall, which serves for pulpit, 
and thence addresses us with “ The peace be upon you, 
and the mercy of Allah, and his benediction;” to which 
we respond through the Mu’ezzin, “ And upon you be 
peace, and Allah’s mercy I" After sundry other religious 
formulas and their replies, concluding with a second call 
to prayer, our preacher rises, and in a voice with which 
Sir Hudibras was wont \ 

“ To blaspheme custard through the nose,” 

preaches Al-Wa’az, 1 or the advice sermon. He sits down 
for a few minutes, and then, rising again, recites Al- 
Na’at, or the Praise of the Prophet and his Companions. 
These are the two heads into which the Moslem dis- 
course is divided ; unfortunately, however, there is no 
application. Our preacher, who is also Kazi or Judge, 
makes several blunders in his Arabic, and he reads his 
sermons, a thing never done in Al-Islam, except by the 
modici docti. The discourse over, our clerk, who is, if 
possible, worse than the curate, repeats the form of call 
termed Al-Ikamah : then entering the Mihrab, or niche, 
he recites the two-bow Friday litany, with, and in front 
of, the congregation. I remarked no peculiarity in the 
style of praying, except that all followed the practice of 
the Shafe’is in Al-Yaman — raising the hands for a 
moment, instead of letting them depend along the thighs, 
between the Ruka’at or bow and the Sujdah or prostra- 
tion. This public prayer concluded, many people leave 
the mosque ; a few remain for more prolopged devotions. 

There is a queer kind of family likeness between 
this scene and that of a village church in some quiet nook 


i Specimens of these discourses have been given by Mr. Lane, 
Mod. Egypt, chap. 3. It is useless to offer othqys, as all bear the ■ 
closest resemblance. . 



IL — Life in Zayla. 45 

of rural England. Old Sharmarkay, the squire, attended 
by his son, takes his place close to the pulpit; and 
although the Honoratioren have no padded and cushioned 
pews they comport themselves very much as if they had. 
Recognitions of the most distant description are allowed 
before the service commences: looking around is strictly 
forbidden during prayers; but all do not regard the pro- 
hibition, especially when a new moustache enters. 
Leaving the church, men shake hands, stand for a 
moment to exchange friendly gossip, or address a few 
words to the preacher, and then walk home to dinner. 
There are many salient points of difference. No bonnets 
appear in public: the squire, after prayers, gives alms to 
the poor, and departs escorted by two dozen matchlock- 
men, who perseveringly fire their shotted guns, as in 
Ireland, blunderbusses . 1 


x So in the last century the Highland piper played before the 
Laird every Sunday on his way to the Kirk, which he circled three 
times ; performing the family march, which implied defiance to all 
enemies of the clan. In Ireland, in the early part of the present 
century, gentlemen went to church with a brace of bull-dogs or a 
brass blunderbuss, the article to clear a staircase. 



46 


CHAPTER III. 

EXCURSIONS NEAR ZAYLA. 

We determined on the gth of November to visit the 
island of Sa’ad al-Din, the larger of the two patches of 
ground which lie about two miles north of the town. 
Reaching our destination, after an hour’s lively sail, we 
passed through a thick belt of underwood tenanted by 
swarms of midges, with a damp chill air crying fever, and 
a fetor of decayed vegetation smelling death. To this 
succeeded a barren flat of silt and sand, white with salt 
and ragged with salsolaceous stubble, reeking with heat, 
and covered with old vegetation. Here, says local 
tradition, was the ancient site of Zayla, 1 built by Arabs 
from Al-Yaman. The legend runs that when Sa’ad al-Din 
was besieged and slain by David, king of Ethiopia, the 
wells dried up and the island sank. Something doubtless 
occurred which rendered a removal advisable: the sons of 
the Moslem hero fled to Ahmad bin al-Ashraf, Prince of 
Sana’a, offering their allegiance if he would build fortifi- 
cations for them and aid them against the Christians of 
Abyssinia. The consequence was a walled circuit upon 


x Bruce describes Zayla as " a small island, on the very coast of 
Adel." To reconcile discrepancy, he adopts the usual clumsy 
expedient of supposing two cities of the same name, one 
seven degrees south of the other. Salt corrects*the error, but does 
not seed! to have heard of old Zayla's insular position ^ V 



III.— Excursions near Zayla . 47 

the present site of Zayla ; of its old locality almost may 
be said “periire ruina” 

During my stay with Sharmarkay I made many 
inquiries about historical works, and the Kazi ; Moham- 
med Khatib, a Harar man of the Hawiyah tribe, was at 
lastjjpersuaded to send his Daftar, or office papers for my 
inspection. They formed a kind of parish register of 
births, deaths, marriages, divorces, and manumissions. 
From them it appeared that in a.h. 1081 (a.d. 1670-71) 
the Shanabila Sayyids were Kazis of Zayla and retained 
the office for 138 years. It passed two generations ago 
into the hands of Mohammed Musa, a Hawiyah, and the 
present Kazi i$ his nephew. 

The origin of Zayla, or as it is locally called, 
“Audal,” is lost in the fogs of Phoenician fable. The 
Avalites 1 2 3 of the Periplus and Pliny, it was in earliest ages 
dependent upon the kingdom of Axum. a About the 
seventh century, when the Southern Arabs penetrated 
into the heart of Abyssinia, 0 it became the great factory 


1 The inhabitants were termed Avalitae, and the Bay, 11 Sinus 
Avaliticus." Some modern travellers have confounded it with 
Adule or Adulis, the port of Axum, founded by fugitive Egyptian 
slaves. The latter however, lies further north : D'Anville places it at 
Arkiko, Salt at Zula (or Azule), near the head of Annesley Bay. 

2 The Arabs were probably the earliest colonists of this coast. 
Even the Sawahil people retain a tradition that their forefathers 
originated in the south of Arabia. 

3 To the present day the district of Gozi is peopled by Moham- 

medans called Arablet, “whose progenitors," according to Harris, 
“ are said by tradition to have been left there prior to the reign of 
Nagasi, first king of Shoa. Hossain, Wahabit, and Abdool Kurreem, 
generals probably detached from the victorious army of Graan 
(Mohammed Gragne), are represented to have come from Mecca* 
and to have taken possession of the country— the legend assigning to 
the first of these warriors as his capital, the populous village of 
Medina, which is conspicuous on a cone among the mountains, 
shortly after enterihg the valley of Robi." » 



48 First Footsteps in East Africa . 

of the eastern coast, and rose to its height of splendour. 
Taki al-Din Makrizi 1 includes, under the name of Zayla, a 
territory of forty-three days' march by forty and divides 
it into seven great provinces, speaking about fifty 
languages, and ruled by Amirs, subject to the Hati 
(Hatze) of Abyssinia. 

In the fourteenth century it became celebrated by its 
wars with the kings of Abyssinia: sustaining severe 
defeats the Moslems retired upon their harbour, which 
after an obstinate defence fell into the hands of the 
Christians. The land was laid waste, the mosques were 
converted into churches, and the Abyssinians returned to 
their mountains laden with booty. About a.d. 1400, 
Sa’ad al-Din, the heroic prince of Zayla, was besieged in 
his city by the Hatze David the Second : slain by a spear- 
thrust, he left his people powerless in the hands of their 
enemies, till his sons, Sabr al-Din, Ali, Mansur, and 
Jamal al-Din retrieved the cause of Al-Islam. 

Ibn Batutah, a voyager of the fourteenth century, thus 
describes the place : “I then went from Aden by sea, 
and after four days came to the city of Zayla. This is a 
settlement of the Berbers,* a people of Sudan, of the Shafi’a 
sect. Their country is a desert of two months’ extent ; 
the first part is termed Zayla, the last Makdashu. The 
greatest number of the inhabitants, however, are of the 
Rafizah sect. 8 Their food is mostly camels' flesh and fish. 4 

z Historia Regum Islamiticorum in Abyssinia, Lugd. Bat. 1790. 

2 The affinity between the Somal and the Berbers of Northern 
Africa, and their descent from Cana'an, son of Ham, has been 
learnedly advanced and refuted by several Moslem authors. The 
theory appears to have arisen from a mistake ; Berberah, the great 
emporium of the Somali country, being confounded with the Berbers 
of Nubia. 

3 Probably Za*idi from Al-Yaman. At present the people of 
Zayla are all orthodox Sunnites. 

4 Fi|h, as will be seen in these pages, is no longer a favourite 

article of diet. ' 



II I, —Excursions near Zayla . 49 

The stench of the country is extreme, as is also its 
filth, from the stink of the fish and the blood of camels 
which are slaughtered in its streets." 

About a.d. 1500 the Turks conquered Al-Yaman, and 
the lawless Janissaries, “ who lived upon the very bowels 
of commerce, 1 2 3 * * * * " drove the peaceable Arab merchants to 
the opposite shore. The trade of India, flying from the 
same enemy, took refuge in Adel, amongst its partners.* 

The Turks of Arabia, though they were blind to the 
cause, were sensible to the great influx of wealth into the 
opposite kingdoms. They took possession, therefore, o 
Zayla, which they made a den of thieves, established 
there what they called a custom-house, 8 and, by means 
of that post and galleys cruising in the narrow straits of 
Bab al-Mandab, they laid the Indian trade to Adel under 
heavy contributions that might indemnify them for the 
great desertion their violence and injustice had occasioned 
in Arabia. 

This step threatened the very existence both of Adel 
and Abyssinia ; and considering the vigorous government 
of the one, and the weak politics and prejudices of the 
other, it is more than probable that- the Turks would 


1 Bruce, book 3. 

2 Hence the origin of the trade between Africa and Cutch, 
which continues uninterrupted to the present time. Adel, Arabia 
and India, as Bruce remarks, were three partners in one trade, who 
mutually exported their produce to Europe, Asia, and Africa, at that 
time the whole known world. 

3 The Turks, under a show of protecting commerce, established 

these posts in their different ports. But they soon made it appear 
that the end proposed was only to ascertain who were the subjects 

from whom they could levy the most enormous extortions. Jeddah, 

Zabid, and Mocha, the places of consequence nearest to Abyssinia 
on the Arabian coast, Suakin, a seaport town on the very barriers 
of Abyssinia, in the immediate way of their caravan to Cairo on the 

African side, were each under the command of a Turkish Pasha, and 
garrisoned by Turkish troops sent thither from Constantinople by 

the Emperors Salim and Sulayman. 


+ 




50 First Footsteps in Bast Africa . 

have subdued both, had they not in India, their chief 
object, met the Portuguese strongly established. 

Bartema, travelling in a.d. 1503, treats in his 15th 
chapter of “ Zeila in Ethiopia and the great fruitlessness 
thereof, and of certain strange beasts seen there.” 

“ In this city is great frequentation of merchandise* 
as in a most famous mart. There is marvellous abun- 
dance of gold and iron, and an innumerable number of 
black slaves sold for small prices ; these are taken in war 
by the Mahomedans out of Ethiopia, of the kingdom of 
Presbyter Johannes, or Preciosus Johannes, which some 
also call the king of Jacobins or Abyssins, being a 
Christian ; and are carried away from thence into Persia, 
Arabia Felix, Babylonia of Nilus or Alcair, and Meccah. 

In this city justice and good laws are observed. 1 

It hath an innumerable multitude of merchants ; the walls 
are greatly decayed, and the haven rude and despicable. 
The King or Sultan of the city is a Mahomedan, and 
entertaineth in wages a great multitude of footmen and 
horsemen. They are greatly given to war, and wear 
only one loose single vesture : they are of dark ash colour, 
inclining to black.” 


z Bartema’s account of its productions is as follows : 11 The soil 
beareth wheat and hath abundance of flesh and divers other com- 
modious things. It hath also oil, not of olives, but of some other 
thing, I know not what. There is also plenty of honey and wax; 
there are likewise certain sheep having their tails of the weight of 
sixteen pounds, and exceeding fat ; the head and neck are black, and 
all the rest white. There are also sheep altogether white, and 
having tails of a cubit long, and hanging down like a great cluster of 
grapes, and have also great laps of skin hanging down from their 
throats, as have bulls and oxen, hanging down almost to the ground. 
There are also certain kind with horns like unto harts’ horns ; these 
are wild, and when they be taken are given to the Sultan of that 
city as a kingly present. I saw there also certain kind having only 
one horn in the midst of the forehead, as hath the unicorn, and 
about a span of length, but the horn bendeth backward : they are of 
bright Ihming red colour. But they that have harts’ horns are "* 
inclining to black colour. Living is there good and cheap." 



Ill . — Excursions near Zayla . 51 

In July, 1516, Zayla, described as then the “ great 
market of those parts,” was taken, and the town burned 
by a Portuguese armament, under Lopez Suarez Alber- 
guiera, and Berberah would have shared the same fate 
had not the fleet been dispersed by storms. When the 
Turks were compelled to retire from Southern Arabia, it 
became subject to the Prince of Sana’a, who gave it in 
perpetuity to the family of a Sana’ani merchant. 

The kingdom of Al-Yaman falling into decay, Zayla 
passed under the authority of the Sherif of Mocha, who, 
though receiving no part of the revenue, had yet the 
power of displacing the Governor. By him it was farmed 
out to the Hajj^Sharmarkay, who paid annually to Sayyid 
Mohammed al-Barr, at Mocha, the sum of 750 crowns, 
and reserved all that he could collect above that sum for 
himself. In a.d. 1848 Zayla was taken from the family 
Al-Barr, and farmed out to Sharmarkay by the Turkish 
Governor of Mocha and Hodaydah. 

The extant remains at Sa’ad al-Din are principally 
those of water-courses, rude lines of coralline, stretching 
across the plain towards wells, now lost, 1 and diminutive 
tanks, made apparently to collect rain water. One of 
these latter is a work of some art — a long sunken vault, 
with a pointed arch projecting a few feet above the sur- 
face of the ground; outside, it is of rough stone, the 
interior is carefully coated with fine lime, and from the 
roof long stalactites depend. Near it is a cemetery : the 
graves are, for the most part, provided with large slabs 
of close black basalt, planted in the ground edgeways, 
and in the shape of a small oblong. The material was 
most probably brought from the mountains near Tajurrah : 
at another part of the island I found it in the shape of a 

1 The people have a tradition that a well of sweet water exists 
unseen in some part of the island. When Sa'ad al-Din was besieged 
in Zayla by the Hatzi David, the host of Al-Islam suffered severely 
for the want of the fresh element. * 


4—2 




53 First Footsteps in East Africa. 

/ 

gigantic mill-stone, half imbedded in the loose sand. 
Near the cemetery we observed a mound of rough stones 
surrounding an upright pole ; this is the tomb of Shaykh 
Sa’ad al-Din, formerly the hero, now the favourite patron 
saint* of Zayla — still popularly venerated, as was proved 
by the remains of votive banquets, broken bones, dried 
garbage, and stones blackened by the fire. 

After wandering through the island, which contained 
not a human being save a party of Somal boatmen cut- 
ting firewood for Aden, and having massacred a number 
of large fishing hawks and small sea-birds, to astonish 
the natives our companions, we returned to the landing- 
place. Here an awning had been spread ; the goat des- 
tined for our dinner — I have long since conquered all 
dislike, dear L., to seeing dinner perambulating — had 
been boiled and disposed in hunches upon small 
mountains of rice, and jars of sweet water stood in the 
air to cool. After feeding, regardless of Quartana and 
her weird sisterhood, we all lay down for siesta in the 
light sea-breeze. Our slumbers were heavy, . as the 
Zayla people say is ever the case at Sa’ad al-Din, and 
the sun had declined low ere we awoke. The tide was 
out, and we waded a quarter of a mile to the boat, 
amongst giant crabs who showed grisly claws, sharp 
coralline, and sea- weed so thick as to become almost 
a mat. You must believe me when I tell you that in 
the shallower parts the sun was painfully hot, even to 
my well-tried feet. We picked up a few specimens of 
fine sponge, and coral, white and red, which, if collected, 
might be valuable to Zayla, and, our pic-hic concluded, 
we returned home. 

On the 14th November we left the town to meet 
caravan of the Danakil, 1 a nd to visit the tomb of the 

x The singular is Dankali, the plural Danakil : both words are 
Arabic^ the vernacular, name being 11 Afar " or 11 Afer," the Somal 
11 A far nimun." The word is pronounced like the Latin '* Afer," an „ 
African. 



III. — Excursions near Zayla • 53 

great saint Abu Zarbay. The former approached in a 
straggling line of asses, and about fifty camels laden with 
cows’ hides, ivories and one Abyssinian slave-girl. The 
men were wild as ourang-outangs, and the women fit only 
to flog cattle : their animals were small, meagre-looking, 
and loosely made ; the asses of the Badawin, however, 
are far superior to those of Zayla, and the camels are, 
comparatively speaking, well bred. 1 In a few minutes 
the beasts were unloaded, the Gurgis or wigwams 
pitched, and all was prepared for repose. A caravan so 
extensive being an unusual event — small parties carrying 
only grain come in once or twice a week — the citizens 
abandoned eyen their favourite game of ball, with an eye 
to speculation. We stood at “ Government House,” 
over the Ashurbara Gate, to see the Badawin, and we 
quizzed (as Town men might denounce a tie or scoff at a 
boot) the huge round shields and the uncouth spears of 


z Occasionally at Zayla— where all animals are expensive — 
Dankali camels may be bought : though small, they resist hardship 
and fatigue better than the other kinds. A fair price would be 
about ten dollars. The Somal divide their animals into two kinds. 
Gel Ad and Ayyun. The former is of white colour, loose and weak, 
but valuable, I was told by Lieut. Speke, in districts where little 
water is found : the Ayyun is darker and stronger ; i^s price averages 
about a quarter more than the Gel Ad. 

To the Arabian traveller nothing can be more annoying than 
these Somali camels. They must be fed four hours during the day, 
otherwise they cannot march. They die from change of food or sudden 
removal to another country. Their backs are ever being galled, and, 
with all precautions, a month's march lays them up for three times 
that period. They are never used for riding except in cases of 
sickness or accidents. 

The Somali ass is generally speaking a miserable animal. Lieut. 
Speke, however, reports that on the windward coast it is not to be 
despised. At Harar I found a tolerable breed, superior in appear- 
ance but inferior in size to the thorough-bred little animals at Aden. 
They are never ridden ; their principal duty is that of carrying 
water-skins to and from the wells. 




54 First Footsteps in East Africa . 

these provincials. Presently they entered the streets, 
where we witnessed their frantic dance in, presence 
of the Hajj and other authorities. This is the. wild 
men's way of expressing their satisfaction that Fate has 
enabled them to convoy the caravan through all the 
dangers of the desert. 

The Shaykh Ibrahim Abu Zarbay 1 lies under a 
whitewashed dome close to the Ashurbara Gate of 
Zayla : an inscription cut in wood over the doorway 
informs us that the building dates from a.h. 1155= 
a.d. 1741-2. It is now dilapidated, the lintel is falling in, 
the walls are decaying, and the cupola, which is rudely 
built, with primitive gradients — each step supported as 
in Kashmir and other parts of India, by wooden beams 
— threatens the heads of the pious. The building is 
divided into two compartments, forming a Mosque and a 
Mazar Or place of pious visitation : in the latter are five 
tombs, the two largest covered with common chintz stuff 
of glaring colours. Ibrahim was one of the forty-four 
Hasrami saints who landed at Berberah, sat in solemn 
conclave upon Auliya Kumbo or Holy Hill, and thence 
dispersed far and wide for the purpose of propagandism. 
He travelled to Harar about a.d. 1430, a converted many 
to Al-Islam, and left there an honoured memory. His 
name is immortalised in Al-Yaman by the introduction of 
Al-Kat.* 

z He is generally called Abu Zerbin, more rarely Abu Zarbayn, 
and Abu Zarbay. I have preferred the latter orthography upon the 
authority of the Shaykh Jami, most learned of the Somal. 

2 In the same year (a.d. 1429-30) the Shaykh al-Shazili, buried 
under a dome at Mocha, introduced coffee into Arabia. 

3 The following is an extract from the Pharmaceutical Journal, 
vol. xii. No. v. Nov. x, 1852. Notes upon the drugs observed at 
Aden, Arabia, by James Vaughan, Esq., M.R.C.S.E., Assist. Surg., 
B.A., Civil and Port. Surg., Aden, Arabia. 

"K&t oil, the name of the drug which is brought into Aden 
from the interior, and largely used, especially by the Arabs, as a 




55 


III . — Excursions mar Zayla. 

Tired of the town, I persuaded the Hajj to send me 
with an escort to the Hissi or well. At daybreak I set 
out .with four Arab matchlock men, and taking a direction 
nearly due west, waded and walked over an alluvial plain 
flooded by every high tide. On our way we passed lines 


pleasurable excitant. Jt is generally imported in small camel-loads, 
consisting of a number of parcels, each containing about forty slender 
twigs with the leaves attached, and carefully wrapped so as to prevent 
as much as possible exposure to the atmosphere. The leaves form 
the edible part, and these, when chewed, are said to produce great 
hilarity of spirits and an agreeable state of wakefulness. Some esti- 
mate may be formed of the strong predilection which the Arabs have 
for this from the quantity used in Aden alone, which averages about 
280 camel-loads annually. The market price is one and a quarter 
rupees per parcel, and the exclusive privilege of selling it is farmed 
by the government for 1 500 rupees per year. Forskal found the plant 
growing on the mountain of Al-Yaman, and has enumerated it as a new 
genus in the class Pentandria, under the name of Catha. He notices 
two species, and distinguishes them as Catha edulis and Catha spinosa. 
According to his account it is cultivated on the same ground as 
coffee, and is planted from cuttings. Besides the effects above 
stated, the Arabs, he tells us, believe the land where it grows to be 
secure from the inroads of plague ; and that a twig of the K&t carried 
in the bosom is a certain safeguard against infection. The learned 
botanist observes, with respect to these supposed virtues, * Gustus 
foliorum tamen virtutum tantam indicare non videtur.' Lake 
coffee, K&t, from its acknowledged stimulating effects, has been a 
fertile theme for the exercise of Mohamedan casuistry, and names of 
renown are ranged on both sides of the question, whether the use of 
K&t does or does not contravene the injunction of the Koran, Thou 
shalt not drink wine or anything intoxicating. The succeeding notes 
borrowed chiefly from De Sacy's researches, may be deemed worthy 
of insertion here. 

“ Sheikh Abdool Kader Ansari Jezeri, a learned Mahomedan 
author, in his treatise on the use of coffee, quotes the following from 
the writings of Fakr ood Deen Mekki : — * It is said that the first who 
introduced coffee was the illustrious saint Aboo Abdallah Mahomed 
Dhabhani ibn Said; but we have learned by the testimony of many 
persons that the use of coffee in Yemen, its origin, and first introduc- 
tion into that country are due to the learned Ali Shadeli ibn Omar, one 



56 First Footsteps in East Africa . 

of donkeys and camels carrying water skins from the 
town; they were under guard like ourselves, and the 
sturdy dames that drove them indulged in many a loud 
joke at our expense. After walking about four miles. 1 we 
arrived at what is called the Takhushshah — the sandy 


of the disciples of the learned doctor Nasr ood Deen, who is regarded 
as one of the chiefs among the order Shadeli, and whose worth attests 
the high degree of spirituality to which they had attained. Previous 
to that time they made coffee of the vegetable substance called Cafta, 
which is the same leaf known under the name of K&t, and not of 
Boon (the coffee berry) nor any preparation of Boon. The use of this 
beverage extended in course of time as far as Aden, but in the days 
of Mahomed Dhabhani the vegetable substance from which it was 
prepared disappeared from Aden. Then it was that the Sheikh advised 
those who had become his disciples to try the drink made from the 
Boon, which was found to produce the same effect as the K&t, in- 
ducing sleeplessness, and that it was attended with less expense and 
trouble. The use of coffee has been kept up from that time to the 
present.' 

M D’Herbelot states that the beverage called Calmat al Catiat 
or Caftah, was prohibited in Yemen in consequence of its effects 
upon the brain. On the other hand a synod of learned Mussulmans 
is said to have decreed that as beverages of K&t and Cafta do not 
impair the health or impede the observance of religious duties, but 
only increase hilarity and good-humour, it was lawful to use them, 
as also the drink made from the boon or coffee-berry. I am not 
aware that KAt is used in Aden in any other way than for mastication. 
From what I have heard, however, I believe that a decoction re- 
sembling tea is made from the leaf by the Ar&bs in the interior ; and 
one who is well acquainted with our familiar beverage assures me 
that the effects are not unlike those produced by strong green tea, 
with this advantage in favour of KAt, that the excitement is always 
of a pleasing and agreeable kind. 1 


i “ Mr. Vaughan has transmitted two specimens called Tubbare KAt 
and Muktaree KAt, from the districts in which they are produced : the latter 
fetches the lower price. Catha edulis Forsk., Nat. Ord. Celastraceee, is 
figured in Dr. Lindley’s Vegetable Kingdom, p. 588 (Lond. 1846). But then 
is a still more complete representation of the plant under the n ft m> of 
Catha Forskalii Richard , in a work published under the auspices of the 



57 


III . — Excursions mar Zayla . 

bed of a torrent nearly a mile broad , 1 covered with a thin 
coat of caked mud: in the centre is a line of pits from 
three to four feet deep, with turbid water at the bottom. 
Around them were several frame-works of four upright 
sticks connected by horizontal bars, and on these were 
stretched goats’-skins, forming the cattle trough of the 
Somali country. About the well stood troops of camels, 
whose Isa proprietors scowled fiercely at us, and 
stalked over the plain with their long, heavy spears: for 
protection against these people, the citizens have erected 
a kind of round tower, with a ladder for a staircase. 
Near it are some large tamarisks and the wild henna of 
the Somali country, which supplies a sweet-smelling 
flower, but is valueless as a dye. A thick hedge of thorn- 


French Government, entitled, 1 Voyage en Abyssinie 6xecut& pendant les 
annges 1839-43, par une commission scientifique compos6e de MM. Th6o- 
phile Lefebvre, Lieut, du Vaisseau, A. Petit ct Martin-Dillon, docteurs 
mtdecins, naturalistes du Museum, Vignaud dessinateur.' The botanical 
portion of this work, by M. Achille Richard, is regarded either as a 
distinct publication under the title of Tentamen Florae Abyssinics, or 
as a part of the Voyage en Abyssinie. M. Richard enters into some of the 
particulars relative to the synonyms of the plant, from which it appears 
that Vahl referred Forsk&l’s genus Catha to the Linnaean genus Celastnis, 
changing the name of Catha edulis to Celastrus edulis. Hochstetter 
applied the name of Celastrus edulis to an Abyssinian species (Celastrus 
obscurus Richard ), which he imagined identical with ForskSLl’s Catha 
edulis, while of the real Catha edulis Forsk. he formed a new genus and 
species under the name of Trigonotheca serrata Hochs. Nat. Ord. Hippo- 
crateace*. I quote the following references from the Tentamen Florae 
Abyssinics, vol. i. p. 134: * Catha Forskalii Nob. Catha No. 4. Forsk. loc. 
cit. (Flor. iEgypt. Arab. p. 63), Trigonotheca serrata Hochs. in pi. Schimp. 
Abyss, sect. ii. No. 649. Celastrus edulis Va hi, Eel. i, ax/ Although in the 
Flora jEgyptiaco-Arabica of Forskai no specific name is applied to the 
Catha at p. 63, it is enumerated as Catha edulis at p. 107. The refer- 
ence to Celastrus edulis is not contained in the Ecloga Americana of 
Vahl, but in the author's Symbols Botanies (Hanuis, 1790, fol.) pars i. 
p. 21. (Daniel Hanbury signed). 

z This is probably the " River of Zayla,” alluded to by Ibn Sa’id 
and others. Like all similar features in the low country, it is a mere 
surface drain. 




58 First Footsteps in East Africa. 

trees surrounds the only cultivated ground near Zayla : 
as Ibn Sa’id declared in old times, 11 the people have no 
gardens, and know nothing of fruits.” The variety and 
the luxuriance of growth, however, prove that industry is 
the sole desideratum. I remarked the castor-plant — no 
one knows its name or nature 1 2 3 — the Rayhan or Basil, the 
Kadi, a species of aloe, whose strongly-scented flowers 
the Arabs of Al-Yaman are fond of wearing in their tur- 
bands. 8 Of vegetables, there were cucumbers, egg-plants, 
and the edible hibiscus ; the only fruit was a small kind 
of water-melon. 

After enjoying a walk through the garden and a bath 
at the well, I started, gun in hand, towards the jungly 
plain that stretches towards the sea. It abounds in 
hares, and in a large description of spur-fowl 8 ; the 
beautiful little sand antelope, scarcely bigger thah an 
English rabbit, 4 * * * bounded over the bushes, its thin legs 


1 In the upper country I found a large variety growing wild in 
the Fiumaras. The Badawin named it Buamado, but ignored its 
virtues. 

2 This ornament is called Mushgur. 

3 A large brown bird with black legs, not unlike the domestic 
fowl. The Arabs call it Dijajat al-Barr, (the wild hen) : the Somal 
“digarin," a word also applied to the Guinea fowl, which it 
resembles in its short strong flight and habit of running. Owing 
to the Badawi prejudice against eating birds, it is found in large 
coveys all over the country. 

4 It has been described by Salt and others. The Somal call it 

Sagaro, the Arabs Ghazalah: it is found throughout the land gene- 

rally in pairs, and is fond of ravines under the hills, beds of torrents 

and patches of desert vegetation. It is easily killed by a single pellet 
of shot striking the neck. The Somal catch it by a loop of strong 
twine hung round a gap in a circuit of thorn hedge, or they run 

it down on foot, an operation requiring half a day on account of 
its fleetness, which enables it to escape the jackal and wild dog. 
When caught it utters piercing cries. Some Badawin do not eat the 
flesh : generally, however, it is considered a delicacy, and th e skulls 
and bones of these little animals lie strewed around the kraals. 



59 


IIL — Excursions near Zayla . 

being scarcely perceptible during the spring. I was 
afraid to fire with ball, the place being full of Badawin 
huts, herds, and dogs, and the vicinity of man made the 
animals too wild for small shot. In revenge, I did 
considerable havoc amongst the spur-fowl, who proved 
equally good for sport and the pot, besides knocking 
over a number of old crows, whose gall the Arab soldiers 
wanted for collyrium. 1 Beyond us lay Warabalay or 
Hyaenas' hill 9 : we did not visit it, as all its tenants had 
been driven away by the migration of the Nomads. 

x The Somal hold the destruction of the “ Tuka ” next in 
the religious merit to that of the snake. They have a tradition that 
the crow, originally white, became black for his sins. When the 
Prophet and Abu Bakr were concealed in the cave, the pigeon hid 
there from their pursuers : the crow, on the contrary, sat screaming 
“ ghar ! ghar I ” (the cave ! the cave !) upon which Mohammed 
ordered him into eternal mourning, and ever to repeat the traitorous 
words. 

There are several species of crows in this part of Africa. 
Besides the large-beaked bird of the Harar Hills, I found the 
common European variety, with, however, the breast feathers white 
tipped in small semicircles as far as the abdomen. The little 11 king 
crow " of India is common : its bright red eye and purplish plume 
render it a conspicuous object as it perches upon the tall camel's 
back or clings to waving plants. 

2 The Waraba or Durwa is, according to Mr. Blyth, the dis- 
tinguished naturalist, now Curator of the Asiatic Society's Museum 
at Calcutta, the Canis pictus seu venaticus (Lycaon pictus or Wilde 
Honde of the Cape Boers). It seems to be the Chien Sauvage or 
Cynhyene (Cynhyaena venatica) of the French traveller M. Dele- 
gorgue, who in his 11 Voyage dans PAfrique Australe," minutely and 
diffusely describes it. Mr. Gordon Cumming suppose sit to form 
the connecting link between the wolf and the hyaena. This animal 
swarms throughout the Somali country, prowls about the camps all 
night, dogs travellers, and devours everything he can find, at times 
pulling down children and camels, and when violently pressed by 
hunger, men. The Somal declare the Waraba to be a hermaphro- 
dite ; so the ancients supposed the hyaena to be of both sexes— an 
error arising from the peculiar appearance of an orifice situated near 
two glands which secrete an unctuous fluid. 



6 o 


First Footsteps in East Africa . 

Returning, we breakfasted in the garden, and rain 
coming on, we walked out to enjoy the Oriental luxury 
of a wetting. Ali Iskandar, an old Arab mercenary, 
afforded us infinite amusement: a little opium made him 
half crazy, when his sarcastic pleasantries never ceased. 
We then brought out the guns, and being joined by the 
other escort, proceeded to a trial of skill. The Arabs 
planted a bone about 200 paces from us — a long distance 
for a people who seldom fire beyond fifty yards ; moreover, 
the wind blew the flash strongly in their faces. Some 
shot two or three dozen times wide of the mark and were 
derided accordingly : one man hit the bone ; he at once 
stopped practice, as the wise in such matters will do, and 
shook hands with all the party. He afterwards showed 
that his success on this occasion had been accidental; 
but he was a staunch old sportsman, remarkable, as the 
Arab Badawin generally are, for his skill and perseverance 
in stalking. Having no rifle, I remained a spectator. 
My revolvers excited abundant attention, though none 
would be persuaded to touch them. The largest, which, 
fitted with a stock, became an excellent carbine, was at 
once named Abu Sittah (the Father of Six) and the 
Shaytan or Devil: the pocket pistol became the Malunah 
or Accursed, and the distance to which it carried ball 
made every man wonder. The Arabs had antiquated 
matchlocks, mostly worn away to paper thinness at the 
mouth : as usual they fired with the right elbow raised to 
the level of the ear, and the left hand grasping the barrel, 
where with us the breech would be. Hassan Turki had 
one of those fine old Shishkhanah rifles formerly made at 
Damascus and Sana’a : it carried a two-ounce ball with- 
perfect correctness, but was so badly mounted in its block- 
butt, shaped like a Dutch cheese, that it always required 
a rest. 

On our return home we met a party of tsa girls, 
who derided my colour and doubted the fact of my being 



III. — Excursions near Zayla. 6x 

a Moslem. The Arabs declared me to be a Shaykh of 
Shaykhs, and translated to the prettiest of the party an 
impromptu proposal of marriage. She showed but little 
coyness, and stated her price to be an Audulli or neck- 
lace, 1 2 * * * * * * a couple of Tobes — she asked one too many — a few 
handfuls of beads, 9 and a small present for her papa. She 
promised, naively enough, to call next day and inspect the 
goods : the publicity of the town did not deter her, but 
the shamefacedness of my two companions prevented our 
meeting again. Arrived at Zayla after a sunny walk, the 
Arab escort loaded their guns, formed a line for me to 
pass along, fired a salute, and entered to coffee and 
sweetmeats. 

On the ^4th of November I had an opportunity of 
seeing what a timid people are these Somal of the towns, 
who, as has been well remarked, are, like the settled Arabs, 
the worst specimens of their race. Three Isa Badawin 
appeared before the southern gate, slaughtered a cow, 


1 Men wear for ornament round the neck a bright red leather 
thong, upon which are strung in front two square bits of true or 
imitation amber or honey stone: this " Makkawi," however, is 
seldom seen amongst the Badawin. The Audulli or woman*s necklace 
is a more elaborate affair of amber, glass beads, generally coloured, 
and coral : every matron who can afford it possesses at least one of 
these ornaments. Both sexes carry round the necks or hang above 
the right elbow, a talisman against danger and disease, either in 
a silver box pr more generally sewn up in a small case of red 
morocco. The Badawin are fond of attaching a tooth-stick to the 
neck thong. 

2 Beads are useful in the Somali country as presents, and to pay 

for trifling purchases : like tobacco they serve for small change. The 

kind preferred by women and children is the *' binnur,” large and 

small white porcelain: the others are the red, white, green, and 

spotted twisted beads, round and oblong. Before entering a district 

the traveller should ascertain what may be the especial variety. 

Some kind are greedily sought for in one place, and in another 

rejected with disdain. 




6a First Footsteps in East Africa, 

buried its head, and sent for permission to visit one of 
their number who had been imprisoned by the Hajj for . 
the murder of his son Mas’ud. The place was at once ' 
thrown into confusion, the gates were locked, and the 
walls manned with Arab matchlock men: my three 
followers armed themselves, and I was summoned to the 
fray. Some declared that the Badawin were “doing 1 ” 
the town; other that they were the van of a giant host 
coming to ravish, sack, and slay: it turned out that 
these Badawin had preceded their comrades, who were 
bringing in, as the price of blood,’ an Abyssinian slave, 
seven camels, seven cows, a white mule, and a small 
black mare. The prisoner was visited by his brother, 
who volunteered to share his confinement, and the 
meeting was described as most pathetic: partly from 
mental organization and partly from the peculiarities of 


1 The Spmali word “ Ful " properly means '• to do” ; "to be- 
witch," is its secondary sense. 

2 The price of blood in the Somali country is the highest 
sanctioned by Al-Islam. It must be remembered that amongst the 
pagan Arabs, the Koraysh “diyat," was twenty she-camels. Abd al- 
Muttalib, grandfather of Mohammed, sacrificed ioo animals to 
ransom the life of his son, forfeited by a rash vow, and from that 
time the greater became the legal number. The Somal usually 
demand ioo she-camels, or 300 sheep and a few cows ; here, as in 
Arabia, the sum is made up by all the near relations of the slayer ; 30 
of the animals may be aged, and 30 under age, but the rest must be 
sound and good. Many tribes take less— from strangers 100 sheep, a 
cow, and a camel ; but after the equivalent is paid, the murderer or one 
of his clan, contrary to the spirit of Al-Islam, is generally killed by the 
kindred or tribe of the slain. When blood is shed in the same tribe, 
the full reparation, if accepted by the relatives, is always exacted ; 
this serves the purpose of preventing fratricidal strife, for in such 
a nation of murderers, only the Diyat prevents the taking of life. 

Blood money, however is seldom accepted unless the murdered 
man has been slain with a lawful weapon. Those who kill with the 
Dankalah, a poisonous juice rubbed upon meat, are always put to 
death by the members of their own tribe. 




III.— Excursions near Zayla. 63 

society the only real tie acknowledged by these people is 
that which connects male kinsmen. The Hajj, after 
9 speaking big, had the weakness to let the murderer depart 
alive ; this measure like peace-policy in general, is the 
best and surest way to encourage bloodshed and mutila- 
tion. But a few months before, an Isa Badawi enticed 
out of the gate a boy about fifteen, and slaughtered him 
for the sake of wearing the feather. His relations were 
directed to receive the Diyat or blood fine, and the wretch 
was allowed to depart unhurt — a silly clemency ! 

You must not suppose, dear L., that I yielded myself 
willingly to the weary necessity of a month at Zayla. 
But how explain to you the obstacles thrown in our way 
by African indolence, petty intrigue, and interminable 
suspicion ? Four months before leaving Aden I had 
taken the precaution of meeting the Hajj, requesting him 
to select for us an Abban, 1 or protector, and to provide 


1 The Abban or protector of the Somali country is the Mogasa 
of the Gallas, the Akh of Al-Hijaz, the Ghafir of the Sinaitic Penin- 
sula, and the Rabi’a of Eastern Arabia. It must be observed, 
however, that the word denotes the protegg as well as the protector ; 
in the latter sense it is the polite address to a Somali, as Ya Abbanah, 
0 Protectress, would be to his wife. 

The Abban acts at once as broker, escort, agent, and interpreter, 
and the institution may be considered the earliest form of transit 
dues. In all sales he receives a certain percentage, his food and 
lodging are provided at the expense of his employer, and he not un- 
frequently exacts small presents from his kindred. In return he is 
bound to arrange all differences, and even to fight the battles of his 
client against his fellow-countrymen. Should an Abban be slain, his 
tribe is bound to take up the cause and to make good the losses of 
their protlgl. Al-Ta’abanah, the office, being one of “name,” the 
eastern synonym for our honour, as well as of lucre, causes frequent 
quarrels, which become exceedingly rancorous. 

According to the laws of the country, the Abban is master of the 
life and property of his client. The traveller's success will depend 
mainly upon his selection : if inferior in rank, the protector can 
neither forward nor defend him ; if timid, he will impede advance; 



64 First .Footsteps in East Africa* 

camels and mules; two months before starting I had 
advanced to him the money required in a country where 
nothing can be done without a whole or partial prepay- 
ment. The protector was to be procured anywhere, the 
cattle at Tajurrah, scarcely a day’s sail from Zayla: 
when I arrived nothing was forthcoming. I at once 
begged the governor to exert himself; he politely 
promised to start a messenger that hour, and he delayed 
doing so for ten days. An easterly wind set in and 
gave the crew an excuse for wasting another fortnight. 1 
Travellers are an irritable genus : I stormed and fretted 
at the delays, to show earnestness of purpose. All the 
effect was a paroxysm of talking. The Hajj and his son 
treated me, like a spoilt child, to a double allowance of 
food and milk: they warned me that the small-pox was 
depopulating Harar, that the road swarmed with brigands, 
and that the Amir or prince was certain destruction,— I 
contented, myself with determining that both were true 
Oriental hyperbolists, and fell into more frequent fits of 
passion. The old man could not comprehend my secret. 
“ If the English,” he privately remarked, “ wish to take 
Harar, let them send me 500 soldiers ; if not, I can give 


and if avaricious, he will, by means of his relatives, effectually stop 
the journey by absorbing the means of prosecuting it. The best 
precaution against disappointment would be the registering Abbans 
at Aden ; every donkey boy will offer himself as a protector, but 
only the chiefs of tribes should be provided with certificates. 
During my last visit to Africa, I proposed that English officers 
visiting the country should be provided with servants, not protectors, 
the former, however, to be paid like the latter ; all the people recog- 
nized the propriety of the step. 

In the following pages occur manifold details concer ning the 
complicated subject, Al-Ta'abanah. 

1 Future travellers would do well either to send before them a 
trusty servant with orders to buy cattle ; or, what would be better,, 
though a little more expensive, to take with them from Aden all the 
animals required. 


Ill . — Excursions near Zayla . 65 

all information concerning it.” When convinced of 
my determination to travel, he applied his mind to 
calculating the benefit which might be derived from 
the event, and, as the following pages will show, he was 
not without success. 

Towards the end of November, four camels were 
procured, an Abban was engaged, we hired two women 
cooks and a fourth servant ; my baggage was reformed, 
the cloth and tobacco being , sewn up in matting, and 
made to fit the camels’ sides 1 ; sandals were cut out for 
walking, letters were written, messages of dreary length 
— too important to be set down in black and white — were 
solemnly entrusted to us, palavers were held, and affairs 
began to wear" the semblance of departure. The Hajj 
strongly recommended us to one of the principal families 
of the Gudabirsi tribe, who would pass us on to their 
brother-in-law Adan, the Jirad or prince of the Girhi ; 
and he, in due time, to his kinsman the Amir of Harar. 
The chain was commenced by placing us under the 
protection of one Raghi, a petty Isa chief of the 
Mummasan clan. By the good aid of the Hajj and our 
sweetmeats, he was persuaded, for the moderate con- 
sideration of ten Tobes, a to accompany us to the frontier 


x The Somal use as camel saddles the mats which compose their 
huts ; these lying loose upon the animal's back, cause, by slipping 
backwards and forwards, the loss of many a precious hour, and in 
wet weather become half a load. The more civilized make up of 
canvass or “ gunny bags M stuffed with hay and provided with cross 
bars, a rude pack saddle, which is admirably calculated to gall the 
animal's back. Future travellers would do well to purchase camel- 
saddles at Aden, where they are cheap and well made. 

2 He received four cloths of Cutch canvass, and six others of 
coarse American sheeting. At Zayla these articles are double the 
Aden value, which would be about thirteen rupees or twenty-six 
shillings ; in the bush the price is quadrupled. Before leaving us 
the Abban received at least double the original hire. Besides small 

5 




66 First Footsteps in East Africa . 

of his clan, distant about fifty miles, to introduce us to 
the Gudabirsi, and to provide us with three men as 
servants, and a suitable escort, a score or so, in 
dangerous places. He began with us in an extrava- 
gant manner, declaring that nothing but “ name ” 
induced him to undertake the perilous task; that he 
had left his flocks and herds at a season of uncommon 
risk, and that all his relations must receive a certain 
honorarium. But having paid at least three pounds for 
a few days of his society, we declined such liberality, 
and my companions, I believe, declared that it would be 
“next time”: — on all such occasions I make a point of 
leaving the room, since for one thing given, at least five 
are promised on oath. Raghi warned us seriously to 
prepare for dangers and disasters, and this seemed to 
be the general opinion of Zayla, whose timid citizens 
determined that we were tired of our lives. The cold 
had driven the Nomads from the hills to the warm 
maritime plains, 1 we should therefore traverse a 
populous region ; and, as the End of Time aptly 
observed, “ Man eats you up, the Desert does not.” 
Moreover this year the Ayyal Nuh Ismail, a clan of 
the Habr Awal tribe, is “ out,” and has been successful 
against the Isa, who generally are the better men. 
They sweep the country in Kaum or Commandos,* 


presents of cloth, dates, tobacco and rice to his friends, he had six 
cubits of Sa’uda Wilayati or English indigo-dyed calico for women’s 
fillets, and two of Sa'uda Kashshi, a Cutch imitation, a Shukkah or 
half Tobe for his daughter, and a sheep for himself, together with a 
large bundle of tobacco. 

. i When the pastures are exhausted and the monsun sets in, 
the Badawin return to their cool mountains; like the Iliyat of 
Persia, they have their regular Kishlakh and Yaylakh. 

2 “ Kaum " is the Arabic, " All ” the Somali, term for these 
raids. 



Ill . — Excursions near Zayla . 67 

numbering from twenty to two hundred troopers, armed 
with assegai, dagger, and shield, and carrying a water- 
skin and dried meat for a three days’ ride, sufficient to 
scour the length of the low land. The honest fellows 
are not so anxious to plunder as to ennoble themselves 
by taking life : every man hangs to his saddle bow an 
ostrich 1 feather — emblem of truth — and the moment his 
javelin has drawn blood, he sticks it into his tufty poll 
with as much satisfaction as we feel when attaching a 
medal to our shell-jackets. It is by no means necessary 
to slay the foe in fair combat : Spartan-like, treachery is 
preferred to stand-up fighting ; and you may measure 
their ideas of honour, by the fact that women are 
murdered in cold-blood, as by the Amazulus, with 
the hope that the unborn child may prove a male. 
The hero carries home the trophy of his prowess, 2 and 


1 Amongst the old Egyptians the ostrich feather was the symbol 
of truth. The Somal call it " Bal,” the Arabs 11 Rish ” ; it is 
universally used htere as the sign and symbol of victory.^ Generally 
the white feather only is stuck in the hair ; the Isa are not 
particular in using black when they can procure no other. All the 
clans wear it in the back hair, but each has its own rules ; some 
make it a standard decoration, others discard it after the first few 
days. The learned have an aversion to the custom, stigmatizing it 
as pagan and idolatrous; the vulgar look upon it as the highest 
mark of honour. 

2 This is an ancient practice in Asia as well as in Africa. The 
Egyptian temples show heaps of trophies placed before the monarchs 
as eyes or heads were presented in Persia. Thus in 1 Sam. xviii. 
25, David brings the spoils of 200 Philistines, and shows them in 
full tale to the king, that he might be the king's son-in-law. Any 
work upon the subject of Abyssinia (Bruce, book 7, chap.' 8), or the 
late Afghan war, will prove that the^custom of mutilation, opposed 
as it is both to Christianity and to Al-Islam, is still practised in 
the case of hated enemies and infidels ; and De Bey remarks of the 
Cape Kafirs, 11 Victores caesis excidunt ra atfiota, quae exsiccata regi 
afferunt.” 


5— a 



68 First Footsteps in East Africa . 

his wife, springing from her tent, utters a long shrill 
scream of joy, a preliminary to boasting of her man's 
valour, and bitterly taunting the other possessors of 
noirs faineants : the derided ladies abuse their lords with 
peculiar virulence, and the lords fall into paroxysms of 
envy, hatred, and malice. During my short stay at 
Zayla six or seven murders were committed close to the 
walls : the Abban brought news, a few hours before our 
departure, that two Isas had been slaughtered by the 
Habr Awal. The Isa and Dankali also have a blood 
feud, which causes perpetual loss of life. But a short 
time ago six men of these two tribes were travelling 
together, when suddenly the last but one received from 
the hindermost a deadly spear-thrust in the back. The 
wounded man had the presence of mind to plunge his 
dagger in the side of the wayfarer who preceded him, 
thus dying as the people say, in company. One of these 
events throws the country into confusion, for the vendetta 
is rancorous and bloody, as in ancient Germany or 
in modern Corsica. Our Abban enlarged upon the un- 
pleasant necessity of travelling all night towards the 
hills, and lying perdu during the day. The most 
dangerous times are dawn and evening-tide : the 
troopers spare their horses during the heat, and them- 
selves during the dew-fall. Whenever, in the desert — 
where, says the proverb, all men are enemies — you sight 
a fellow-creature from afar, you wave the right arm 
violently up and down, shouting, “ War Joga ! War 
Joga I ” — stand still ! stand still I If they halt, you send 
a parliamentary to within speaking distance. Should 
they advance, 1 you fire, taking especial care not to 
miss ; when two saddles are emptied the rest are sure 
to decamp. 

i When attacking cattle, the plundering party endeavour with 
shouts and noise to disperse the herds, whilst the assailants huddle 
them together, and attempt to face the danger in parties. 




Ill . — Excursions near Zayla. 69 

I had given the Abban orders to be in readiness — 
my patience being thoroughly exhausted — on Sunday, 
the 26th of November, and determined to walk the whole 
way, rather than waste another day waiting for cattle. 
As the case had become hopeless, a vessel was descried 
standing straight from Tajurrah, and, suddenly as could 
happen in the Arabian Nights, four fine mules, saddled 
and bridled, Abyssinian fashion, appeared at the door. 1 


z For the cheapest I paid twenty-three, for the dearest twenty- 
six dollars, besides a Riyal upon each, under the names of custom 
dues and carriage. The Hajj had doubtless exaggerated the price, 
but all were good animals, and the traveller has no right to complain, 
except when he pays dear for a bad article. 




70 


CHAPTER IV. 

THE SOMAL, THEIR ORIGIN AND PECULIARITIES. 

Before leaving Zayla, I must not neglect a short 
description of its inhabitants, and the remarkable Somal 
races around it. 1 2 

Eastern Africa, like Arabia, presents a population 
composed of three markedly distinct races. 

• i. The Aborigines, such as the Negroes, the 
Bushmen, Hottentots, and other races, having such 
physiological peculiarities as the steatopyge, the tablier, 
and other developments described, in 1815, by the 
great Cuvier. 

2. The almost pure Caucasian of the northern 
regions, west of Egypt : their immigration comes within 
the range of comparatively modern history. 

3. The half-castes in Eastern Africa are represented 
principally by the Abyssinians, Gallas, (Hamites), Somal 
Sawahili, and Kafirs. The first-named people derive 
their descent from Menelek, son of Solomon by the Queen of 
Sheba : it is evident from their features and figures — too well 
known to require description — that they are descended from 
Semitic as well as Negrotic (Nigro-Hamitic) progenitors.* 


1 The ancients reckoned in Africa, (1) Libians, (2) /Ethiopians. 
Herodotus added to these (3) Greeks, (4) Phoenicians. 

2 Eusebius declares that the Abyssinians migrated from Asia 
to Africa whilst the Hebrews were in Egypt (circ. a. m. 2345) • 
Syncellus places the event about the age of the Judges. 




IV. — The Somal, their Origin and Peculiarities. 71 

About the origin of the Gallas there is a diversity of 
opinion. 1 Some declare them to be Meccan Arabs, who 
settled on the western coast of the Red Sea at a remote 
epoch : according to the Abyssinians, however, and there 
is little to find fault with in their theory, the Gallas are 
descended from a princess of their nation, who was given 
in marriage to a slave from the country south of Gurague. 
She bare seven sons, who became mighty robbers and 
founded of tribes : their progenitors obtained the name 
of Gallas, after the river Gala, in Gurague, where they 
gained a decisive victory over their kinsmen the Abyssins.* 
A variety of ethnologic and physiological reasons —into 
which space and subject prevent my entering — argue the 
Kafirs of the Cape to be a northern people, pushed 
southwards by some, to us, as yet, unknown cause. 
The origin of the Somal is a matter of modern history. 

“Barbarah” (Berberah),* according to the Kamfis, 

1 Moslems, ever fond of philological fable, thus derive the word 
Galla. When Ullabu, the chief, was summoned by Mohammed to 
Islamize, the messenger returned to report that 11 he said no ” — Kdl 
Id pronounced Gdl Id — which impious refusal, said the Prophet, 
should from that time become the name of the race. 

2 Others have derived them from Metcha, Karaiyo, and 
Tulema, three sons of an Ethiopian Emperor by a female slave. 
They have, according to some travellers, a prophecy that one day 
they will march to the east and north, and conquer the inheritance 
of their Jewish ancestors. Mr. Johnston asserts that the word 
Galla is " merely another form of Calla, which in the ancient 
Persian, Sanscrit, Celtic, and their modern derivative languages, 
under modified, but not changed terms, is expressive of blackness.*' 
The Gallas, however, are not a black people. 

3 The Aden stone has been supposed to name the " Berbers." 
who must have been Gallas from the vicinity of Berberah. A 
certain amount of doubt still hangs on the interpretation: the 
Rev. Mr. Forster and Dr. Bird being the principal contrasts. 

Rev. Mr. Forster. Dr. Bird. 

"We assailed with cries " He, the Syrian philoso- 

of hatred and rage the Abys- pher in Abadan, Bishop of 

sinians and Berbers. Cape Aden, who inscribed this 

f< We rode forth wrath- in the desert, blesses the insti- 
fully against this refuse of tutipn of the fiuth." 
mankind." 




j 2 First Footsteps in East Africa. 

is “a well known town in El Maghrib, and a race located 
between El Zanj — Zanzibar and the Negrotic coast — 
and El Habash 1 : they are descended from the Himyar 
chiefs Sanh&j (Sinhagia) (^l^) and Sumdmah (a*U 5 ), 
and they arrived at the epoch of the conquest of Africa 
by the king Afrikfis (Scipio Africanus ?).” A few details 
upon the subjects of mutilation and excision prove these 
to have been the progenitors of the Somal,* who are 
nothing but a slice of the great Gala nation Islamized 
and Semiticized by repeated immigrations from Arabia. 
In the Kamus we also read that Samal ( ( U~) is the 
name of the father of a tribe, so called because he thrust 
out (jlL, samala) his brother’s eye. 2 3 * * * * 8 The Shaykh Jami, 
a celebrated genealogist, informed me that in a.h. 
666 = a.d. 1266-7, *k e Sayyid Yusuf al-Baghdadi visited 
the port of Siyaro near Berberah, then occupied by an 
infidel magician, who passed through mountains by the 
power of his gramarye : the saint summoned to his aid 
Mohammed bin Yunis al-Siddiki, of Bayt al-Fakih in 
Arabia, and by their united prayers a hill closed upon 


1 This word is generally translated Abyssinia; Oriental geo- 
graphers, however, use it in a more extended sense. The Turks 
have held possessions in “ Habash,” in Abyssinia never. 

2 The same words are repeated in the Infak al-Maysur fi Tarikh 
bilad al-Takrur (Appendix to Denham and Clapperton's Travels, 
No. xii.), again confounding the Berbers and the Somal. Afrikus, 
according to that author, was a king of Al-Yaman who expelled the 
Berbers from Syria 1 

3 The learned Somal invariably spell their national name with 

an initial Sin, and disregard the derivation from Saumal 

which would allude to the hardihood of the wild people. An intelli- 
gent modern traveller derives "Somali" from the Abyssinian 

" Soumahe," or heathens, and asserts that it corresponds with the 

Arabic word Kafir or unbeliever, the name by which Edrisi,' 
the Arabian geographer, knew and described the inhabitants of the 
Affah (Afar) coast, to the east of the Straits of Bab al-Mandib. Such 

derivation is, however, unadvisable. 




IV. — The Smal 9 their Origin and Peculiarities. 73 

the pagan. Deformed by fable, the foundation of the 
tale is fact : the numerous descendants of the holy men 
still pay an annual fine, by way of blood-money to the 
family of the infidel chief. The last and most important 
Arab immigration took place about fifteen generations or 
450 years ago, when the Sharif Ishak bin Ahmad, 1 left 
his native country Hazramaut, and, with forty-four 
saints, before mentioned, landed on Makhar — the wind- 
ward coast extending from Karam Harbour to Cape 
Guardafui. At the town of Met, near Burnt Island, 
where his tomb still exists, he became the father of all 
the gentle blood and the only certain descent in the 
Somali country: by Magaden, a free woman, he had 
Jirhajis, Awal, and Arab; and by a slave or slaves, 
Jailah, Sambur, and Rambad. Hence the great clans, 
Habr Jirhajis and Awal, who prefer the matronymic — 
Habr signifying a mother — since, according to their 
dictum, no man knows who may be his sire. 3 These 
increased and multiplied by connection and affiliation 
to such an extent that about a.d. 1500 they drove their 
progenitors, the Galla, from Berberah, and gradually 
encroached upon them, till they entrenched themselves 
in the Highlands of Harar. 

The old and pagan genealogies still known to the 
Somal, are Dirr, Aydur, Darud, and, according to some, 
Hawiyah. Dirr and Aydur, of whom nothing is certainly 
known but the name, 8 are the progenitors of the northern 


z According to others he was the son of Abdullah. The written 
genealogies of the Somal were, it is said, stolen by the Sharifs of 
al-Yaman, who feared to leave with the wild people documents that 
prove the nobility of their descent. 

a The salient doubt suggested by this genealogy is the barbarous 
nature of the names. A noble Arab would not call his children 
Jirhajis, Awal, and Rambad. 

3 Lieut. Cruttenden applies the term Edoor (Aydur) to the 
descendants of Ishak, the children of Jirhajis, Awal, and Jailah. 




74 First Footsteps in East Africa . 

Somal, the Isa, Gudabirsi, Ishak, and Bursuk tribes. 
Darud Jabarti 1 2 3 bin Ismail bin Akil (or Ukayl) is supposed 
by his descendants to have been a noble Arab from Al- 
Hijaz, who, obliged to flee his country, was wrecked on 
the north-east coast of Africa, where he married a 
daughter of the Hawiyah tribe : rival races declare him 
to have been a Galla slave, who, stealing the Prophet’s 
slippers , 1 was dismissed with the words, Inn&-fottu?-n£-hu 
(verily we have rejected him) : hence his name Tarud 
(j^lk) or Darud, the Rejected . 8 The etymological part 
of the story is, doubtless, fabulous ; it expresses how- 
ever, the popular belief that the founder of the eastward 
or windward tribes, now extending over the seaboard 
from Bundir Jadid to Ras Hafun, and southward from 
the sea to the Webbes , 4 was a man of ignoble origin. The 
children of Darud are now divided into two great bodies : 
“Harti” is the family name of the Dulbahanta, Ogadayn, 
Warsangali and Mijjarthayn, who call themselves sons 
of Harti bin Kombo bin Kabl Ullah bin Darud : the 
other Darud tribes not included under that appellation 
are the Girhi, Berteri, Marayhan, and Bahabr Ali. The 


His informants and mine differ, therefore, toto coelo. According to 
some, Dirr was the father of Aydur ; others make Dirr (it has been 
written Tir and Durr) to have been the name of the Galla family 
into which Shaykh Ishak married. 

1 Some travellers make Jabarti or Ghiberti to signify 11 slaves," 
from the Abyssinian Guebra ; others, " Strong in the Faith " (Al- 
Islam). Bruce applies it to the Moslems of Abyssinia ; it is still 
used, though rarely, by the Somal, who in these times generally 
designate by it the Sawahili or Negroid Moslems. 

2 The same scandalous story is told of the venerable patron 
saint of Aden, the Sharif Haydrus. 

3 Darud bin Ismail's tomb is near the Yubbay Tug in the wind- 
ward mountains ; an account of it will be found in Lieut. Speke's 
diary. 

4 The two rivers Shabayli and Juba. 




IV. — The Somal , their Origin and Peculiarities . 75 

Hawiyah are doubtless of ancient and pagan origin ; 
they call all Somal except themselves Hashiyah, and 
thus claim to be equivalent to the rest of the nation. 
Some attempt, as usual, to establish a holy origin, 
deriving themselves like the Shaykhash from the Caliph 
Abu Bakr: the antiquity, and consequently the pagan 
origin of the Hawiyah are proved by its present widely 
scattered state ; it is a powerful tribe in the Mijjarthayn 
country, and yet is found in the hills of Harar. 

The Somal, therefore, by their own traditions, as 
well as their strongly-marked physical peculiarities, their 
customs, and their geographical position, may be deter- 
mined to be a half-caste tribe, an offshoot of the great 
Galla race, approximated, like the originally Negro- 
Egyptian, to the Caucasian type by a steady influx of 
pure Asiatic blood. 

In personal appearance the race is not unprepossess- 
ing. The crinal hair is hard and wiry, growing, like that 
of a half-caste West Indian, in stiff ringlets which sprout 
in tufts from the scalp, and, attaining a moderate length, 
which they rarely surpass, hang down. A few elders, 
savans, and the wealthy, who can afford the luxury of a 
turband, shave the head. More generally, each filament 
is duly picked out with the comb or a wooden scratcher 
like a knitting-needle, and the mass made to resemble a 
child's “ pudding,” an old bob-wig, a mop, a counsellor's 
peruke, or an old-fashioned coachman’s wig — there are a 
hundred ways of dressing the head. The Badawin, true 
specimens of the “greasy African race,” wear locks 
dripping with rancid butter, and accuse their citizen 
brethren of being more like birds than men. The 
colouring matter of the hair, naturally a bluish-black, 
is removed by a mixture of quicklime and water, or in 
the desert by a lessive of ashes 1 : this makes it a dull 

z Curious to say this mixture does not destroy the hair ; it 
would soon render a European bald. Some of the Somal have 



76 First Footsteps in East Africa • 

yellowish-white, which is converted into red permanently 
by henna, temporarily by ochreish earth kneaded with 
water. The ridiculous Somali peruke of crimsoned 
sheepskin — almost as barbarous an article as the Welsh 
— is apparently a foreign invention : I rarely saw one in 
the low country, although the hill tribes about Harar 
sometimes wear a black or white 11 scratch-wig. 1 ” The 
head is rather long than round, and generally of the 
amiable variety, it is gracefully put on the shoulders, 
belongs equally to Africa and Arabia, and would be 
exceedingly weak but for the beauty of the brow. As 
far as the mouth, the face, with the exception of high 
cheek-bones, is good ; the contour of the forehead en- 
nobles it ; the eyes are large and well-formed, and the 
upper features are frequently handsome and expressive. 
The jaw, however, is almost invariably prognathous and 
African ; the broad, turned-out lips betray approximation 
to the Negro ; and the chin projects to the detriment of 
the facial angle. The beard is represented by a few 
tufts ; it is rare to see anything equal to even the Arab 
development : the long and ample eyebrows admired by 
the people are uncommon, and the mustachioes are short 
and thin, often twisted outwards in two dwarf curls. 
The mouth is coarse as well as thick-lipped ; the teeth 
rarely project as in the Negro, but they are not good : 
the habit of perpetually chewing coarse Surat tobacco 
stains them,* the gums become black and mottled, and 
the use of ashes with the quid discolours the lips. The 
skin, amongst the tribes inhabiting the hot regions, is* 
smooth, black, and glossy; as the altitude increases it 
becomes lighter, and about Harar it is generally of a cafi 

applied it to their beards ; the result has been the breaking and 
falling off of the filaments. 

i Second-hand lawyers’ wigs were exported to Guinea. 

a Few Somal except the citizens smoke, on account of the 
expense, all, however, use the Takhzinah or quid. 




IV.— The Sotnal, their Origin and Peculiarities. 77 

au lait colour. The Badawin are fond of raising beauty 
marks in the shape of ghastly seams, and the thickness 
of the epidermis favours the size of these stigmates . The 
male figure is tall and somewhat ungainly. In only one 
instance I observed an approach to the steatopyge, 
making the shape to resemble the letter S ; but the 
shoulders are high, the trunk is straight, the thighs fall 
off, the shin bones bow slightly forwards, and the feet, 
like the hands, are coarse, large, and flat. Yet with 
their hair, of a light straw colour, decked with the 
light waving feather, and their coal-black complexions 
set off by that most graceful of garments the clean 
white Tobe, 1 the contrasts are decidedly effective. 

In mind the Somal are peculiar as in body. They 
are a people of most susceptible character, and withal 
uncommonly hard to please. They dislike the Arabs, 
fear and abhor the Turks, have a horror of Franks, and 
despise all other Asiatics who with them come under the 
general name of Hindi (Indians). The latter are abused 
on all occasions for cowardice, and a want of generosity, 
which has given rise to the following piquant epigram : 

“ Ask not thy want from the Hindi : 

Impossible to find liberality in the Hindi 1 
Had there been one liberal man in Al-Hind, 

Allah had raised up a prophet in Al-Hind l ” 

They have all the levity and instability of the Negro 
character; light-minded as the Abyssinians — described 
by Gobat as constant in nothing but inconstancy — 
soft, merry, and affectionate souls, they pass without 
any apparent transition into a state of fury, when 

z The best description of the dress is that of F6n&on : M Leurs 
habits sont aisls k faire, car en ce doux climat on ne porte qu’une 
pifece d’&ofie fine et 1 Ig&re, qui n’est point taillle, et que chacun met 
k longs plis autour de son corps pour la modestie ; lui donnant la 
forme qu'il veut." 



78 First Footsteps in East Africa . 

they are capable of terrible atrocities. At Aden they 
appear happier than in their native country. There 
I have often seen a man clapping his hands and dancing, 
child-like, alone to relieve the exuberance of his spirits : 
here they become as the Mongols and other pastoral 
people, a melancholy race, who will sit for hours upon a 
bank gazing at the moon, or croning some old ditty 
under the trees. This state is doubtless increased by the 
perpetual presence of danger and the uncertainty of life, 
which make them think of other things than dancing and 
singing. Much learning seems to make them mad ; like 
the half-crazy Fakihs of the Sahara in Northern Africa, 
the Widad, or priest, is generally unfitted for the affairs 
of this world, and the Hafiz or Koran-reciter, is almost 
idiotic. As regards courage, they are no exception to 
the generality of savage races. They have none of the 
recklessness standing in lieu of creed which characterizes 
the civilized man. In their great battles a score is con- 
sidered a heavy loss ; usually they will run after the fall 
of half a dozen : amongst a Kraal full of braves who 
boast a hundred murders, not a single maimed or 
wounded man will be seen, whereas in an Arabian camp 
half the male population will bear the marks of lead and 
steel. The bravest will shirk fighting if he has forgotten 
his shield: the sight of a lion and the sound of a gun 
elicit screams of terror, and their Kaum or forays much 
resemble the style of tactics rendered obsolete by the 
Great Turenne, when the tactician’s chief aim was not 
to fall in with his enemy. Yet they are by no means 
deficient in the wily valour of wild men : two or three 
will murder a sleeper bravely enough ; and when the 
passions of rival tribes, between whom there has been a 
blood feud for ages, are violently excited, they will u$e 
with asperity the dagger and spear. Their massacres 
are fearful. In February, 1847, a small sept, the Ayyal 
Yunis, being expelled from Berberah, settled at the road- 



IV. — The Somal 9 their Origin and Peculiarities. 79 

stead of Bulhary where a few merchants, principally 
Indian and ‘Arab, joined them. The men were in the 
habit of leaving their women and children, sick and aged, 
at the encampment inland, whilst, descending to the 
beach, they carried on their trade. One day, as they 
were thus employed, unsuspicious of danger, a foraging 
party of about 2,500 fsas attacked the camp : men, 
women, and children were indiscriminately put to the 
spear, and the plunderers returned to their villages in 
safety, laden with an immense amount of booty. At 
present, a man armed with a revolver would be a terror 
to the country ; the day, however, will come when the 
matchlock will supersede the assegai, and then the harm- 
less spearman in his strong mountains will become, like 
the Arab, a formidable foe. Travelling among the 
Badawin, I found them kind and hospitable. A pinch of 
snuff or a handful of tobacco sufficed to win every heart, 
and a few yards of coarse cotton cloth supplied all our 
wants. I was petted like a child, forced to drink milk 
and to eat mutton ; girls were offered to me in marriage ; 
the people begged me to settle amongst them, to head 
their predatory expeditions, free them from lions, and kill 
their elephants ; and often a man has exclaimed in pity- 
ing accents, “ What hath brought thee, delicate as thou 
art, to sit with us on the cowhide in this cold under 
a tree ? ” Of course they were beggars, princes and 
paupers, lairds and loons, being all equally unfortunate ; 
the Arabs have named the country Bilad Wa Issi — the 
14 Land of Give me Something ” — but their wants were 
easily satisfied, and the open hand always made a friend. 

The Somal hold mainly to the Shafe’i school of Al- 
Islam : their principal peculiarity is that of not reciting 
prayers over the dead even in the towns. The marriage 
ceremony is simple : the price of the bride and the feast 
being duly arranged, the formula is recited by some 
priest or pilgrim. I have often been requested to officiate 



8o 


First Footsteps in East Africa . 

on these occasions, and the End of Time has done it by 
irreverently reciting the Fatihah over the happy pair: 1 2 
The Somal, as usual among the heterogeneous mass 
amalgamated by Al- Islam, have a diversity of supersti- 
tions attesting their pagan origin. Such, for instance, 
are their oaths by stones, their reverence of cairns and 
holy trees, and their ordeals of fire and water, the 
Bolungo of Western Africa. A man accused of murder 
or theft walks down a trench full of live charcoal and 
about a spear’s length, or he draws out of the flames a 
smith’s anvil heated to redness : some prefer picking four 
or five cowries from a large pot full of boiling water. 
The member used is at once rolled up in the intestines 
of a sheep and not inspected for a whole day. They 
have traditionary seers called Tawuli, like the Greegree- 
men of Western Africa, who, by inspecting the fat and 
bones of slaughtered cattle, “ do medicine," predict rains, 
battles, and diseases of animals. This class is of both 
sexes : they never pray or bathe, and are therefore con- 
sidered always impure ; thus, being feared, they are 
greatly respected by the vulgar. Their predictions are 
delivered in a rude rhyme, often put for importance into 
the mouth of some deceased seer. During the three 
months called Rajalo* the Koran is not read over graves, 
and no marriage ever takes place. The reason of this 
peculiarity is stated to be imitation of their ancestor 
Ishak, who happened not to contract a matrimonial 
alliance at such epoch : it is, however, a manifest 
remnant of the pagan’s auspicious and inauspicious 
months. Thus they sacrifice she-camels in the month 


1 Equivalent to reading out the Church Catechism at an 
English wedding. 

2 Certain months of the lunar year. In 1854, the third Rajalo, 
corresponding with Rabia the Second, began on the azst of 
December. 




IV.—The Somal, their Origin and Peculiarities . ; 81 

Sabuh, and keep holy with feasts and bonfires the 
Dubshid or New ' Year’s Day. 1 2 At certain unlucky 
periods when, the moon is in ill-omened asterisms those 
who die are placed in bundles of matting upon a tree, 
the idea being that if buried a loss would result to the 
tribe.* 

Though superstitious, the Somal are not bigoted like 
the Arabs, with the exception of those who, wishing to 
become learned, visit Al-Yaman or Al-Hijaz, and catch 
the complaint. Nominal Mohammedans, Al-lslam hangs 
so lightly upon them, that apparently they care little for 
making it binding upon others. 

The Somali language is no longer unknown to Europe. 
It is strange that a dialect which has no written character 
should so abound in poetry and eloquence. There are 
thousands of songs, some local, others general, upon all 
conceivable subjects, such as camel loading, drawing 
water, and elephant hunting; every man of education 
knows a variety of them. The rhyme is imperfect, being 
generally formed by the syllable “ay” (pronounced as in 
bur word “hay”), which gives the verse a monotonous 
regularity ; but, assisted by a tolerably regular alliteration 


1 The word literally means, " lighting of fire." It corresponds 
with the Nayruz of Yaman, a palpable derivation, as the word itself 
proves, from the old Guebre conquerors. In Arabia New Year’s 
Day is called Ras al-Sanah, and is not celebrated by any peculiar 
solemnities. The ancient religion of the Afar coast was Sabaeism, 
probably derived from the Berbers or shepherds — according to Bruce 
the first faith of the East, and the only religion of Eastern Africa. 
The Somal still retain a tradition that the "Furs,” or ancient 
Guebres, once ruled the land. 

2 Their names also are generally derived from their pagan 
ancestors: a list of the most common may be interesting to 
ethnologists. Men are called Rirdsh, Igah, Beuh, Fdhi, Samattar, 
Fdrih, Madar, Rdghe, Dubayr, Irik, Diddar, Awdlah, and Alydn. 
Women's names are Aybld, Ayyo, Aurdld, Ambar, Zahabo, Ashkaro, 
Alkd, Asobd, Gelo, Gobe, Mayrdn and Samawedd. 


6 




82 First Footsteps in East Africa . 

and cadence, it can never be mistaken for prose, even 
without the song which invariably accompanies it. The 
country teems with “poets, poetasters, poetitos, poet- 
accios : ” every man has his recognized position in litera- 
ture as accurately defined as though he had been reviewed 
in a century of magazines — the fine ear of this people 1 
causing them to take the greatest pleasure in harmonious 
sounds and poetical expressions, whereas a false quantity 
or a prosaic phrase excite their violent indignation. 
Many of these compositions are so idiomatic that Arabs 
settled for years amongst the Somal cannot understand 
them though perfectly acquainted with the conversational 
style. Every chief in the country must have a panegyric 
to be sung by his clan, and the great patronize light 
literature by keeping a poet. The amatory is of course 
the favourite theme : sometimes it appears in dialogue, 
the rudest form, we are told, of the Drama. The subjects 
are frequently pastoral: the lover for instance invites his 
mistress to walk with him towards the well in Lahelo, 
the Arcadia of the land ; he compares her legs to the tall 
straight Libi tree, and imprecates the direst curses on her 
head if she refuse to drink with him the milk of his 
favourite camel. There are a few celebrated ethical 
compositions, in which the father lavishes upon his son 
all the treasures of Somali good advice, long as the som- 
niferous sermons of Mentor to the insipid son of Ulysses. 
Sometimes a black Tyrtaeus breaks into a wild lament for 
the loss of warriors or territory ; he taunts the clan with 
cowardice, reminds them of their slain kindred, better 
men than themselves, whose spirits cannot rest unavenged; 
in their gory graves, and urges a furious onslaught upon 
the exulting victor. 


x It is proved by the facility with which they pick up language* : 
Western as well as Eastern, by mere ear and memory. 



IV.— The Somal, their Origin and Peculiarities . 83 

And now, dear L., I Will attempt to gratify your just 
curiosity concerning the sex in Eastern Africa. 

The Somali matron is distinguished — externally — 
from the maiden by a fillet of blue network or indigo-dyed 
cotton, which, covering the head and containing the hair, 
hangs down to the neck. Virgins wear their locks long, 
parted in the middle, and plaited in a multitude of hard 
thin pigtails: on certain festivals they twine flowers 
and plaster the head like Kaffir women, with a red ochre — 
the coiffure has the merit of originality. With massive 
rounded features, large flat craniums, long big eyes, broad 
brows, heavy chins, rich brown complexions, and round 
faces, they greatly resemble the stony beauties of Egypt 
— the models of the land ere Persia, Greece, and Rome 
reformed the profile and bleached the skin. They are of 
the Venus Kallipyga order of beauty: the feature is 
scarcely ever seen amongst young girls, but after the first 
child it becomes remarkable to a stranger. The Arabs 
have not failed to make it a matter of jibe. 

“ *Tis a wonderful fact that your hips swell 
Like boiled rice or a skin blown out,” 

sings a satirical Yamani : the Somal retort by comparing 
the lank haunches of their neighbours to those of tadpoles 
or young frogs. One of their peculiar charms is a soft, 
low, and plaintive voice, derived from their African pro- 
genitors. Always an excellent thing in woman, here it 
has an undefinable charm. I have often lain awake for 
hours listening to the conversation of the Badawi girls, 
whose accents sounded in my ears rather like music than 
mere utterance. 

In muscular strength and endurance the women of 
the Somrfl are far superior to their lords : at home they 
are engaged all day in domestic affairs, and tending the 
cattle ; on journeys their manifold duties are to load and 

6—2 



84 First Footsteps in East Africa. 

drive the camels, to look after the ropes, and, if neces- 
sary, to make them ; to pitch the hut, to bring water 
and firewood, and to cook. Both sexes are equally 
temperate from necessity ; the mead and the millet-beer, 
so common among the Abyssinians and the Danakil, are. 
entirely unknown to the Somal of the plains. As regard 
their morals, I regret to say that the traveller does not. 
find them in the golden state which Teetotal doctrines 
lead him to expect. After much wandering, we are 
almost tempted to believe the bad doctrine that morality 
is a matter of geography; that nations and races have, 
like individuals, a pet vice, and that by restraining one 
you only exasperate another. As a general rule Somali 
women prefer amourettes with strangers, following the 
well-known Arab proverb, “ The new comer filleth the 
eye.” In cases of scandal, the woman’s tribe revenges 
its honour upon the man. Should a wife disappear with 
a fellow-clansman, and her husband accord divorce, no 
penal measures are taken, but she suffers in reputation, 
and her female friends do not spare her. Generally, the 
Somali women are of cold temperament, the result of 
artificial as well as natural causes : like the Kafirs, they 
are very prolific, but peculiarly bad mothers, neither 
loved nor respected by their children. The fair sex lasts 
longer in Eastern Africa than in India and Arabia : at 
thirty, however, charms are on the wane, and when old 
age comes on they are no exceptions to the hideous 
decrepitude of the East. 

The Somal, when they can afford it, marry between 
the ages of fifteen and twenty. Connections between 
tribes are common, and entitle the stranger to immunity 
from the blood-feud: men of family refuse, however, to 
ally themselves with the servile castes. Contrary to Jthe ‘ 
Arab custom, none of these people will marry # CQU|£ai|; 
at the same time a man will give his daughter 
uncle, and take to wife, like the Jews and. 



TV. — The Somali their Origin and Peculiarities . 85 

brother's relict. Some clans, the Habr Yunis for 
instance, refuse maidens of the same or even of a con- 
sanguineous family. This is probably a political device 
to preserve nationality and provide against a common 
enemy. The bride, as usual in the East, is rarely con- 
sulted, but frequent tite it tites at the well and in the bush 
when tending cattle effectually obviate this incon- 
‘venience: her relatives settle the marriage portion, 
which varies from a cloth and a bead necklace to fifty 
sheep or thirty dollars, and dowries are unknown. In 
the towns marriage ceremonies are celebrated with feast- 
ing and music. On first entering the nuptial hut, the 
bridegroom draws forth his horsewhip and inflicts me- 
morable chastisement upon the fair person of his bride, 
with the view of taming any lurking propensity to 
shrewishness . 1 This is carrying out with a will the 
Arab proverb, 

“ The slave girl from her capture, the wife from her wedding." 

During the space of a week the spouse remains with 
his espoused, scarcely ever venturing out of the hut ; his 
friends avoid him, and no lesser event than a plundering 
party or dollars to gain, would justify any intrusion. If 
the correctness of the wife be doubted, the husband on 
the morning after marriage digs a hole before his door 
and veils it with matting, or he rends the skirt of his 
Tobe, or he tears open some new hut-covering: this 
disgraces the woman's family. Polygamy is indis- 
pensable in a country where children are the principal 
wealth . 1 The chiefs, arrived &t manhood, immediately 

z So the old Muscovites, we are told, always began married life 
with a sound flogging. 

2 I would not advise polygamy amongst highly civilized races, 
where the sexes are nearly equal, and where reproduction becomes 
a minor duty. Monogamy is the growth of civilization ; a plurality 
of wives is the natural condition of man in thinly-populated 
countries, where he who has the largest family is the greatest 
benefactor of his kind. 




86 


First Footsteps in East African 

marry four wives: they divorce the old and unfruitful, 
and, as amongst the Kafirs, allow themselves an un- 
limited number in peculiar cases, especially when many 
of the sons have fallen. Daughters, as usual in Oriental 
countries, do not “ count ” as part of the family : they 
are, however, utilized by the 'father, who disposes of 
them to those who can increase his wealth and im- 
portance. Divorce is exceedingly common, for the men ' 
are liable to sudden fits of disgust. There is little cere- 
mony in contracting marriage with any but maidens. I 
have heard a man propose after half an hour’s acquain- 
tance, and the fair one's reply was generally the question 
direct concerning “settlements.” Old men frequently 
marry young girls, but then the portion is high and the 
menage a trois common. 

The Somal know none of the exaggerated and 
chivalrous ideas by which passion becomes refined 
affection amongst the Arab Badawin and the sons of 
civilization, nor did I ever hear of an African abandoning 
the spear and the sex to become a Darwaysh. Their 
“Hudhudu,” however, reminds the traveller of the 
Abyssinian “eye-love,” the Afghan's “ Namzad-bazi,” 
and the Semite’s “ Ishkuzri,” which for want of a better 
expression we translate “ Platonic love.” 1 This meeting 
of the sexes, however, is allowed in Africa by male 
relatives ; in Arabia and Central Asia it provokes their 
direst indignation. Curious to say, throughout the 
Somali country, kissing is entirely unknown. 

Children are carried^ on their mothers' backs or laid 
sprawling upon the ground for the first two years :* they 


x The old French term "la petite oie” explains it .better. 
Some trace of the custom may be found in the Kafir's Slambuka or 
Schlabonka, for a description of which I must refer to the traveller 
Delegorgue. 

The Somal ignore the Kafir custom during lactation. 


IV.—TheSomal f j their Origin and Peculiarities . 87 

are circumcised at the age of seven or eight, provided 
with a small spear, and allowed to run about naked till 
the age of puberty. They learn by conversation, not 
books, eat as much as they can beg, borrow and steal, and 
grow up healthy, strong, and well proportioned according 
to their race. 

As in Al- Islam generally, so here, a man cannot 
make a will. The property of the deceased is divided 
amongst his children — the daughters receiving a small 
portion, if any, of it. When a man dies without issue, his 
goods and chattels are seized upon by his nearest male 
relatives; one of them generally marries the widow, or 
she is sent back to her family. Relicts, as a rule receive 
no legacies. 

You will have remarked, dear L., that the people of 
Zayla are by no means industrious. They depend for 
support upon the Desert: the Badawi becomes the Nazil 
or guest of the townsmen, and he is bound to receive a 
little tobacco, a few beads, a bit of coarse cotton cloth, 
or, on great occasions, a penny looking-glass and a cheap 
German razor, in return for his slaves, ivories, hides, 
gums, milk, and grain. Any violation of the tie is severely 
punished by the Governor, and it can be dissolved only 
by the formula of triple divorce : of course the wild men 
are hopelessly cheated, 1 2 * and their citizen brethren live in 
plenty and indolence. After the early breakfast, the male 
portion of the community leave their houses on business, 
that is to say, to chat, visit, and flaner about the streets 
and mosques. 9 They return to dinner and the siesta, 


1 The citizens have learned the Asiatic art of bargaining under 
a doth. Both parties sit opposite each other, holding hands : if the 
little finger for instance be clasped, it means 6, 60, or 600 dollars, 
according to the value of the article for sale ; if the ring finger, 7, 70, 
or 700, and so on. 

2 So, according to M. Krapf, the Suaheli of Eastern Africa 

wastes his morning hours in running from house to house, to his 



88 First Footsteps in East Africa* 

after which they issue forth again, and do not come home 
till night. Friday is always an idle day, festivals are 
frequent, and there is no work during weddings and 
mournings. The women begin after dawn to plait mats 
and superintend the slaves, who are sprinkling the house 
with water, grinding grain for breakfast, cooking, and 
breaking up firewood; to judge, however, from the 
amount of chatting and laughter, there appears to be far 
less work than play. 

In these small places it is easy to observe the 
mechanism of a government which, en grand , becomes that 
of Delhi, Teheran, and Constantinople. The Governor 
farms the place from the Porte; he may do what 
he pleases as long as he pays his rent with punctuality 
and provides presents and douceurs for the Pasha of Mocha. 
He punishes the petty offences of theft, quarrels, and arson 
by fines, the bastinado, the stocks, or confinement in an 
Arish or thatch-hut: the latter is a severe penalty, as the 
prisoner must provide himself with food. In cases of 
murder, he either refers to Mocha or he carries out the 
Kisas — lex talionis — by delivering the slayer to the 
relatives of the slain. The Kazi has the administration 
of the Shariat or religious law: he cannot, however, pro- 
nounce sentence without the Governor’s permission ; and 
generally his powers are confined to questions of divorce, 
alimony, manumission, the wound mulct, and similar , 
cases which come within Koranic jurisdiction. Thus the 
religious code is ancillary and often opposed to “Al- 
. Jabr” — “the tyranny” — the popular designation of what 
we call Civil Law. 1 Yet is Al-Jabr, despite its name, 


friends or superiors, ku amkia (as he calls it), to make his morning 
• salutations. A worse than Asiatic idleness is the curse of this part pf 
the world. 

z Diwan al-Jabr, for instance, is a civil court, opposed to tbti 
Mahkamah or the Kazi's tribunal. 




IV,— The Somal , their Origin and Peculiarities. 89 

generally preferred by the worldly wise. The Governor 
contents himself with a moderate bribe, the Kazi is 
insatiable: the former may possibly allow you to escape 
unplundered, the latter assuredly will not. This I believe 
to be the history of religious jurisdiction in most parts of 
the world. 



CHAPTER V, 


FROM Z AYLA TO THE HILLS. 

Two routes connect Zayla with Harar ; the south- 
western or direct line numbers ten long or twenty short 
stages 1 : the first eight through the tsa country, and 
the last two among the Nole Gallas, who own the rule 
of “ Waday,” a Makad or chief of Christian persuasion. 
The Hajj objected to this way, on account of his recent 
blood-feud with the Rer Guleni. He preferred for me 
the more winding road which passes south, along the 
coast, through the Isa Badawin dependent upon Zayla, 
to the nearest hills, and thence strikes south-westwards 
among the Gudabirsi and Girhi Somal, who extend 
within sight of Harar. I cannot but suspect that in 
selecting this route the good Sharmarkay served another 


x By this route the Mukattib or courier travels on foot from 
Zayla to Harar in five days at the most. The Somal reckon their 
journeys by the Gadi or march, the Arab “ Hamlah,” which varies 
from four to five hours. They begin before dawn and halt at about 
xx a. at, the time of the morning meal. When a second mardi is 
made they load at 3 p.m. and advance till dark ; thus fifteen miles 
would be the average of fast travelling. In places of danger they 
will cover twenty-six or twenty-seven miles of ground without halting 
to eat or rest : nothing less, however, than regard for " dear life " 
can engender such activity. Generally two or three hours' work 
per diem is considered sufficient; and, where provisions abound* 
halts are long and frequent. 




V. — From Zayla to the Hills . 91 

purpose besides my safety. Petty feuds between the 
chiefs had long “ closed the path/’ and perhaps the 
Somal were not unwilling that British cloth and tobacco 
should re-open it. 

Early in the morning of the 27th of November, 1854, 
the mules and all the paraphernalia of travel stood ready 
at the door. The five camels were forced to kneel, growl- 
ing angrily the while, by repeated jerks at the halter : 
their forelegs were duly tied or stood upon till they 
had shifted themselves into a comfortable position, and 
their noses were held down by the bystanders whenever, 
grasshopper-like, they attempted to spring up. Whilst 
spreading the saddle-mats, our women, to charm away 
remembrance of chafed hump and bruised sides, sang 
with vigour the “ Song of Travel " : 

“ O caravan-men, we deceive ye not, we have laden the camels ! 

Old women on the journey are kenned by their sleeping ! 

(O camel) can’st sniff the cock-boat and the sea ? 

Allah guard thee from the Mikahil and their Midgans ! " 1 

As they arose from squat it was always necessary 
to adjust their little mountains of small packages by 
violently 44 heaving up ” one side — an operation never 
failing to elicit a vicious grunt, a curve of the neck, and 
an attempt to bite. One camel was especially savage ; it 
is said that on his return to Zayla, he broke a Badawi 
girl’s neck. Another, a diminutive but hardy little 
brute of Donkali breed, conducted himself so uproari- 
ously that he at . once obtained the name of Al-Harami, 
or the Ruffian. 

About 3 p.m., accompanied by the Hajj, his amiable 
son Mohammed, and a party of Arab matchlock-men, 


z The Mikahil is a clan of the Habr Awal tribe living nea . 
Berberah, and celebrated for their bloodthirsty and butcherin 
propensities. Many of the Midgan or serviles (a term explains " 
Chap. II.) are domesticated amongst them. 



92 First Footsteps in East Africa . 

who escorted me as a token of especial respect, I issued 
from the Ashurbara Gate, through the usual staring 
crowds, and took the way of the wilderness. After half 
a mile’s march, we exchanged affectionate adieus, re- 
ceived much prudent advice about keeping watch and 
ward at night, recited the Fatihah with upraised palms, 
and with many promises to write frequently and to meet 
soon, shook hands and parted. The soldiers gave me a 
last volley, to which I replied with the 44 Father of Six.” 

You see, dear L., how travelling maketh man band . 
It is the natural consequence of being forced to find in 
every corner where Fate drops you for a month, a 
44 friend of the soul” and a “moon-faced beauty.” With 
Orientals generally you must be on extreme terms, as in 
Hibernia, either an angel of light or, that failing, a 
goblin damned. In East Africa especially, English 
phlegm, shyness, or pride, will bar every heart and raise 
every hand against you, 1 whereas what M. Rochet calls 
44 a certain rondeur of manner ” is a specific for winning 
affection. You should walk up to your man, clasp his 
fist, pat his back, speak some unintelligible words to him 
— if, as is the plan of prudence, you ignore the language 
— laugh a loud guffaw, sit by his side, and begin pipes 
and coffee. He then proceeds to utilize you, to beg in 
one country for your interest, and in another for your 
tobacco. You gently but decidedly thrust that subject 
out of the way, and choose what is most interesting to 
yourself. As might, be expected, he will at times revert 
to his own concerns ; your superior obstinacy will oppose 
effectual passive resistance to all such efforts; by degrees 
the episodes diminish in frequency and duration : at last 1 
they cease altogether. The man is now your own. 

You will bear in mind, if you please, that I am a 


x So the Abyssinian chief informed M. Krapf. that he lovedth* 
French, but could not endure us— simply the effect of manner. - 



V.—FromZayla to the Hills. 93 

Moslem merchant, a character not to be confounded 
with the notable individuals seen on 'Change. Mercator 
in the East is a compound of tradesman, divine and 
T. G. Usually of gentle birth, he is everywhere wel- 
comed and respected ; and he bears in his mind and 
manner that, if Allah please, be may become prime 
minister a month after he has sold you a yard of cloth. 
Commerce appears to be an accident, not an essential, 
with him ; yet he is by no means deficient in acumen. 
He is a grave and reverend signior, with rosary in hand 
and Koran on lip, is generally a pilgrim, talks at dreary 
length about Holy Places, writes a pretty hand, has read 
and can recite much poetry, is master of his religion, de- 
means himself with respectability, is perfect in all points 
of ceremony and politeness, and feels equally at home 
whether sultan or slave sit upoh his counter. He has a 
wife and children in his own country, where he intends 
to spend the remnant of his days; but “the world is 
uncertain " — “ Fate descends, and man’s eye seeth it. 
not " — “ the earth is a charnel house " : briefly his many 
wise old saws give him a kind of theoretical conscious- 
ness that his bones may moulder in other places than his 
fatherland. 

To describe my little caravan. Foremost struts 
Raghi, our Isa guide, in all the bravery of Abbanship. 
He is bare-headed and clothed in Tobe and slippers: a 
long, heavy, horn-hilted dagger is strapped round his 
waist, outside his dress ; in his right hand he grasps a 
ponderous wire-bound spear, which he uses as a staff, 
and the left forearm supports a round targe of battered 
hide. Being a man of education, he bears on one 
shoulder a Musalla or prayer carpet of tanned leather, the 
article used throughout the Somali country ; slung over 
the other is a Wesi or wicker bottle containing water for 
religious ablution. He is accompanied by some men 
who carry a little stock of town goods and drive a camel 



94 First Footsteps in East Africa , 

colt, which by-the-by they manage to lose before mid- 
night. 

My other attendants must now be introduced to 
you, as they are to be for the next two months com- 
panions of our journey. 

First in the list are the fair Samaweda Yusuf, and 
Aybla Farih, 1 2 buxom dames about thirty years old, who 
presently secured the classical nicknames of Shahrizdd, 
and Dunyazad. They look each like three average 
women rolled into one, and emphatically belong to that 
race for which the article of feminine attire called, I 
believe, a “ bussle ” would be quite superfluous. Wonder- 
ful, truly, is their endurance of fatigue! During the 
march they carry pipe and tobacco, lead and flog the 
camels, adjust the burdens, and will never be induced to 
ride, in sickness or in health. At the halt they unload 
the cattle, dispose the parcels in a semicircle, pitch over 
them the Gurgi or mat tent, cook our food, boil tea and 
coffee, and make themselves generally useful. They 
bivouack outside our abode, modesty not permitting the 
sexes to mingle, and in the severest cold wear no clothing 
but a head fillet and an old Tobe. They have curious soft 
voices, which contrast agreeably with the harsh organs 
of the males. At first they were ashamed to see me; but 
that feeling soon wore off, and presently they enlivened the 
way with pleasantries far more naive than refined. To 
relieve their greatest fatigue, nothing seems necessary 
but the " Jogsi”*: they lie at full length, prone, stand 
upon each other’s backs trampling and kneading with the 

i The first is the name of the individual ; the second is that of 
her father. 

2 This delicate operation is called by the Arabs, Da’asah (whence 
the " Doseh ceremony ” at Cairo). It is used over most parts of tbs 
Eastern World as a remedy for sickness and fatigue, and is generally 
preferred to Takbis or Dugmo, the common style of shampooing,' 
which, say many Easterns, loosens the skin. 



95 


V.—Frm Zayla to the Hills . 

toes, and .rise like giants much refreshed. Always 
attendant upon these dames is Yusuf, a Zayla lad, who, 
being one-eyed, was pitilessly named by my companions, 
the “Kalandar;” he prays frequently, is strict in his 
morals, and has conceived, like Mrs. Brownrigg, so 
exalted an idea of discipline, that, but for our influence, 
he certainly would have beaten the two female 'prentices 
to death. They hate him therefore, and he knows it. 

Immediately behind Raghi and his party walk 
Shahr&z&d and Dunyazad, the former leading the 
head, camel, the latter using my chibtik stick as a 
staff. She has been at Aden, and sorely suspects me; 
her little black eyes never meet mine; and frequently, 
with affected confusion, she turns her sable cheek the 
clean contrary way. Strung together by their tails, and 
soundly beaten when disposed to lag, the five camels pace 
steadily along under their burdens — bales of Wilayati or 
American sheeting, Duwwarah or Cutch canvass, with 
indigo-dyed stuff slung along the animals’ sides, and 
neatly sewn up in a case of matting to keep off dust and 
rain — a cow's hide, which serves as a couch, covering the 
whole. They carry a load of “Mushakkar" (bad Mocha 
dates) for the Somal, with a parcel of better quality for 
ourselves, and a half hundredweight of coarse Surat 
tobacco ; 1 besides which we have a box of beads, and 

i The Somal, from habit, enjoy no other variety; they even 
shewed disgust at my Latakia. Tobacco is grown in some places by 
the Gudabirsi and other, tribes ; but it is rare and bad. Without 
this article it would be impossible to progress in East Africa ; every 
man asks for a handful, and many will not return milk for what they 
expect to receive as a gift. Their importunity reminds the traveller 
of the Galloway beggars some generations ago : — 11 They are for the 
most part great chewers of tobacco, and are so addicted to it, that 
they will ask for a piece thereof from a stranger as he is riding on his 
way; and therefore let not a traveller want an ounce or two of roll 
tobacqp in his pocket, and for an inch or two thereof he need not 
fear the Want of a guide by day or night . 11 




96 ; First Footsteps in East Africa. 

another of trinkets, mosaic-gold earrings, necklaces, 
watches and similar nick-nacks. Our private provisions 
are represented by about 300 lbs. of rice — here the. 
traveller’s staff of life — a large pot full of “ Kawurmah,” 1 
dates, salt, 9 clarified butter, tea, coffee, sugar, a box of 
biscuits in case of famine, “ Halwa” or Arab sweetmeats 
to be used when driving hard bargains, and a little 
turmeric for seasoning. A simple batterie de cuisine , and 
sundry skins full of potable water, 8 dangle from chance 
rope-ends : and last but not the least important, is a 
heavy box 4 of ammunition sufficient for a three months' 
sporting tour. 8 In the rear of the caravan trudges a 


1 Flesh boiled in large slices, sun-dried, broken to pieces and 
fried in ghi. 


2 The Bahr Assal or Salt Lake, near Tajurrah, annually sends into 
the interior thousands of little matted parcels containing this neces- 
sary. Inland, the Badawin will rub a piece upon the tongue before 
eating, or pass about a lump, as the Dutch did with sugar in the 
last war ; at Harar a donkey load is the price of a slave ; and the 
Abyssinians say of a millionaire , 11 he eateth salt." 

3 The element found upon the maritime plain is salt or brackish. 
There is nothing concerning which the African traveller should be s 9 
particular as water ; bitter with nitre, and full of organic matter, it 
causes all those dysenteric diseases which have made research in this 
part of the world a Upas tree to the discoverer. Pocket filters are 
invaluable. The water of wells should be boiled and passed through 
charcoal ; and even then it might be mixed to a good purpose with a 
few drops of proof spirit. The Somal generally carry their stores in 
large wickerwork pails. I preferred skins, as more portable and less 
likely to taint the water. 


4 Here as in Arabia, boxes should be avoided, the Badawin 
always believed them to contain treasures. Day after day I have 
been obliged to display the contents to crowds of savages, who 
amused themselves by lifting up the case with loud cries of 11 hoof; : 
hoo 1 ! hoo 111" (the popular exclamation of astonishment), and j# ; ' 
speculating upon the probable amount of dollars contained thereby 


5 The following list of my expenses may perhaps be usefbLv 
to future travellers. It must be observed that, had the whole .cg^|v 




97 


V.—From Zayla to the Hills . 

Badawi woman driving a donkey — the proper “tail” in 
these regions, where camels start if followed by a horse 
or mule. An ill-fated sheep, a parting present from the 
Hajj, races , and frisks about the Kafilah. It became so 
tame that the Somal received an order not to “cut” it; 
one day, however, I found myself dining, and that pet 
lamb was the menu. 

By the side of the camels ride my three attendants, 
the pink of Somali fashion. Their frizzled wigs are 
radiant with grease; their Tobes are splendidly white, 
with borders dazzlingly red ; their new shields are covered 
with canvas cloth ; and their two spears, poised over the 
right shoulder, are freshly scraped, oiled, blackened, and 
polished. They have added my spare rifle and guns to 
the camel-load ; such weapons are well enough at Aden, 
in Somali-land men would deride the outlandish tooll 
I told them that in*my country women use bows and 
arrows, moreover that lancers are generally considered 
a corps of non-combatants; in vain! they adhered as 
strongly — so mighty a thing is prejudice — to their partiality 
for bows, arrows, and lances. Their horsemanship is 


fit been purchased at Aden, a considerable saving would have 
resulted: ' 

Cos. Rs. 


Passage money from Aden to Zayl - - - 33 

Presents at Zayla - - - - - ioo 

Price of four mules with saddles and bridles - - 225 

Price of four camels - - - - 88 

Provisions (tobacco, rice, dates, &c.) for three months 428 
Price of 150 Tobes - - - - - 357 

Nine pieces of indigo-dyed cotton - - 16 

Minor expenses (cowhides for camels, mats for tents, \ 
presents to Arabs, a box of beads, three handsome L 166 
Abyssinian Tobes bought for chiefs) - - J 

Expenses at Berberah, and passage back to Aden • 77 


Total Cos. Rs. 2490=^x49 


7 




p8 First Footsteps in East Africa* 

peculiar, they balance themselves upon little Abyssinian 
saddles, extending the leg and raising the heel in the 
Louis Quinze style of equitation, and the stirrup is an 
iron ring admitting only the big toe. I follow them 
mounting a fine white mule, which with its gaudily gatonni 
Arab pad and wrapper cloth, has a certain dignity of look; 
a double-barrelled gun lies across my lap ; and a rude 
pair of holsters, the work of Hasen Turki, contains my 
Colt’s six-shooters. 

Marching in this order, which was to serve as. a 
model, we travelled due south along the coast, over a 
hard, stoneless, and alluvial plain, here dry, there muddy 
(where the tide reaches), across boggy creeks, broad water- 
courses, and warty flats of black mould powdered with 
nitrous salt, and bristling with the salsolaceous vegetation 
familiar to the Arab voyager. Such is the general forma- 
tion of the plain between the mountains and the sea, 
whose breadth, in a direct line, may measure from forty- . 
five to forty-eight miles. Near the first zone of hills, or 
sub-Ghauts, it produces a thicker vegetation ; thorns and 
acacias of different kinds appear in clumps; and ground 
broken with ridges and ravines announces the junction. 
After the monsfin this plain is covered with rich grass. 
At other seasons it affords but a scanty supply of 
“ aqueous matter ” resembling bilge-water. The land 
belongs to the Mummasan clan of the Isa : how these 
“ Kurrah-jog ” or “ sun-dwellers,” as the Badawin are 
called by the burgher Somal, can exist here in summer, 
is a mystery. My arms were peeled even in the month 
of December ; and my companions, panting with the heat, 
like the Atlantes of Herodotus, poured forth reproaches 
upon the rising sun. The townspeople, when forced to 
hurry across it in the hotter season, cover themselves 
during the day with Tobes wetted every half hour in s^St : 
water; yet they are sometimes killed by the fatal thirst 
which the Samtin engenders. Even the Badawin ajjb^ 



V. — From Zayla to the Hills . 

now longing for rain ; a few weeks* drought destroys half 
their herds. 

Early in the afternoon our Abban and a woman 
halted for a few minutes, performed their ablutions, and 
prayed with a certain display : satisfied apparently, with 
the result, they never repeated the exercise. About sun- 
set we passed, on the right, clumps of trees overgrowing 
a water called “Warabod,” the Hyena’s Well; this is 
the first Marhalah or halting-place usually made by 
travellers to the interior. Hence there is a direct path 
leading south-south -west, by six short marches, to the 
hills. Our Abban, however, was determined that we 
should not so easily escape his kraal. Half an hour 
afterwards we passed by the second station, “ Hanga- 
garri,” a well near the sea : frequent lights twinkling 
through the darkening air informed us that we were in 
the midst of the Isa. At 8 p.m., we reached “ Gagab,” 
the third Marhalah, where the camels, casting themselves 
upon the ground, imperatively demanded a halt. Raghi 
was urgent for an advance, declaring that already he could 
sight the watch-fires of his Rer or tribe: 1 2 * * * but the animals 
carried the point against him. They were presently 
unloaded and turned out to graze, and the lariats of the 
mules, who are addicted to running away, were fastened 
to stones for want of pegs. 8 Then lighting a fire, we sat 
down to a homely supper of dates. 

The air was fresh and clear, and the night breeze 
was delicious after the steamy breath of day. The weary 
confinement of walls made the splendid expanse a luxury 


1 I shall frequently use Somali terms, not to display my scanty 
knowledge of the dialect, but because they perchance may prove 
serviceable to my successors. 

2 The Somal always 14 side-line " their horses and mules with 

stout stiff leathern thongs provided with loops and wooden buttons; 

we found them upon the whole safer than lariats or tethers. 

7 — 2 




100 


First Footsteps in East Africa . 

to the sight, whilst the tumbling of the surf upon the near 
shore, and the music of the jackal, predisposed to sweet 
sleep. We now felt that at length the die was cast. 
Placing my pistols by my side, with my rifle-butt for a 
pillow, and its barrel as a bed-fellow, I sought repose 
with none of that apprehension which even the most 
stout-hearted traveller knows before the start. It is the 
difference between fancy and reality, between anxiety and 
certainty: to men gifted with any imaginative powers 
the anticipation must ever be worse than the event. 
Thus it happens, that he who feels a thrill of fear before 
, engaging in a peril, exchanges it for a throb of exultation 
when he finds himself hand to hand with the danger. 

The “End of Time” volunteered to keep watch 
that night. When the early dawn glimmered he aroused 
tis, and blew up the smouldering fire, whilst our women 
proceeded to load the camels. We pursued our way over 
hard alluvial soil to sand, and thence passed into a 
growth of stiff yellow grass not unlike a stubble in 
English September. Day broke upon a Somali Arcadia, 
whose sole flaws were salt water and Samun. Whistling 
shepherds 1 carried in their arms the younglings of the 
herds, or, spear in hand, drove to pasture long regular 
lines of camels, that waved their vulture-like heads, and 
arched their necks to bite in play their neighbours* faces, 
humps, and hind thighs. They were led by a patriarch, 
to whose throat hung a Kor or wooden bell, the preventa- 


z Arabs hate " Al-Sifr " or whistling, which they hold to be the 
chit-chat of the Jinns. Some say that the musician’s mouth is not to 
be purified for forty days ; others that Satan, touching a man’s per- 
son, causes him to produce the offensive sound. The Hijazis 
objected to Burckhardt that he could not help talking to devils, a$d 
walking about the room like an unquiet spirit. The Somali has no 
such prejudice. Like the Kafir of the Cape, he passes his day . 
whistling to his flocks and herds; moreover, he makes signals by 
changing the note, and is skilful in imitating the song of birds. 




IOI 


V. — From Zayla to thb Hills . 

tive for straggling: and most of them were followed (for 
winter is the breeding season) by colts in every stage of 
infancy . 1 Patches of sheep, with snowy skins, and jetty 
faces, flecked the yellow plain ; and herds of goats resem- 
bling deer were driven by hide-clad children to the bush. 
Women, in similar attire, accompanied them, some chew- 
ing the inner bark of trees, others spinning yarn of a 
white creeper called Sagsug for ropes and tent mats. 
The boys carried shepherds’ crooks , 2 3 and bore their 
watering pails , 8 foolscap fashion, upon their heads. 
Sometimes they led the ram, around whose neck a cord 
of white leather was bound for luck ; at other times they 
frisked with the dog, an animal by no means contemp- 
tible in the eyes of the Badawin . 4 As they advanced, the 
graceful little sand antelopes bounded away over the 
bushes ; and above them, soaring high in the cloudless 
skies, were flights of vultures and huge perenopters, 
unerring indicators of man’s habitation in Somali-land . 5 * * 

A net-work of paths showed that we were approach- 
ing a populous place ; and presently men swarmed forth 
from their hive-shaped tents, testifying their satisfaction .. . 


i In this country camels foal either in the Gugi (monsun), or 
during the cold season immediately after the autumnal rains. 

2 The shepherd's staff is a straight stick about six feet long, 
with a crook at one end, and at the other a fork to act as a rake. 

3 These utensils will be described in a future chapter. 

4 The settled Somal have a holy horror of dogs, and, Wahhabi- 
like, treat man's faithful slave most cruelly. The wild people are 
more humane ; they pay two ewes for a good colley, and demand a 
two-year-old sheep as f< diyat ” or blood-money for the animal, if 
killed. 

5 Vultures and perenopters lie upon the wing waiting for the 

garbage of the kraals ; consequently they are rare near the cow- 

villages, where animals are not often killed. 




Z02 


First Footsteps in East Africa . 

at our arrival, the hostile Habr Awal having threatened 
to “eat them up.’* We rode cautiously, as is customary, 
amongst the yeaning she-camels, who are injured by a 
sudden start, and about 8 a.m. arrived at our guide’s 
kraal, the fourth station, called “ Gudingaras,” or the 
low place where the Garas tree grows. The encampment 
lay south-east (i6j°) of, and about twenty miles from, 
Zayla. 

Raghi disappeared, and the Badawin flocked out to 
gaze upon us as we approached the kraal. Meanwhile 
Shahrazad and Dunyazad fetched tent-sticks from the 
village, disposed our luggage so as to form a wall, rigged 
out a wigwam, spread our beds in the shade, and called 
aloud for sweet and sour milk. I heard frequently 
muttered by the red-headed spearmen the ominous 
term “Faranj 1 ”; and although there was no danger, it 
was deemed advisable to make an impression without 
delay. Presently they began to deride our weapons: the 
Hammal requested them to put up one of their shields 
as a mark ; they laughed aloud but shirked compliance. 
At last a large brown, bare-necked vulture settled oa the 
ground at twenty paces’ distance. The Somal hate the 
“ Gurgur,” because he kills the dying and devours the 
dead on the battle-field : a bullet put through the bird’s 
body caused a cry of wonder, and some ran after the lead 
as it span whistling over the ridge. Then loading with 
swan shot which these Badawin had never seen, I knocked 
over a second vulture flying. Fresh screams followed the 
marvellous feat ; the women exclaimed, “ Lo ! he bringeth 
down the birds from heaven ; ” and one old man, putting 
his forefinger in his mouth, praised Allah and prayed to 


z They apply this term to all but themselves ; an Indian trader 
who had travelled to Harar, complained to me that he had always 
been called a Frank by the Badawin in consequence of his wearing 
Shalwar, or drawers. 




V. — From Zayla to the Hills . 103 

be defended from such a calamity. The effect was such 
that I determined always to carry a barrel loaded with 
shot as the best answer for all who might object to 
44 Faranj.” 

We spent our day in the hut after the normal 
manner, with a crowd of woolly-headed Badawin squat- 
ting perseveringly opposite our quarters, spear in hand, 
with eyes fixed upon every gesture. Before noon the 
door-mat was let down — a precaution also adopted when- 
ever box or package was opened — we drank milk and 
ate rice with 44 a kitchen *’ of Kawurmah. About mid- 
day the crowd retired to sleep ; my companions followed 
their example, and I took the opportunity of sketching 
and jotting down notes. 1 2 Early in the afternoon the 
Badawin returned, and resumed their mute form of 
pleading for tobacco : each man, as he, received a hand- 
ful, rose slowly from his hams and went his way. The 
senior who disliked the gun was importunate for a charm 
to cure his sick camel : having obtained it, he blessed us in 
a set speech, which lasted at least half an hour, and con- 
cluded with spitting upon the whole party for good luck. 1 
It is always well to encourage these Nestors ; they are 
regarded with the greatest reverence by the tribes, who 
believe that 

44 old experience doth attain 
To something like prophetic strain ; ” 


1 Generally it is not dangerous to write before these Badawin, 

as they only suspect account-keeping, and none but the educated 
recognizes a sketch. The traveller, however, must be on his guard : 
in the remotest villages he will meet Somal who have returned to 
savage life after visiting the sea-board, Arabia, and possibly India 
or Egypt. « 

2 I have often observed this ceremony performed upon a new 
turband or other article of attire ; possibly it may be intended as a 
mark of contempt, assumed to blind the evil eye. 




104 Firs* Footsteps in East Africa . 

and they can either do great good or cause much petty 
annoyance. 

In the evening I took my gun, and, accompanied by 
the End of Time, went out to search for venison : the 
plain, however, was full of men and cattle, and its wilder 
denizens had migrated. During our walk we visited the 
tomb of an fsa brave. It was about ten feet long, 
heaped up with granite pebbles, bits of black basalt, and 
stones. of calcareous lime: two upright slabs denoted the 
position of the head and feet, and upon these hung the 
deceased’s milk-pails, much the worse for sun and wind. 
Round the grave was a thin fence of thorns: opposite 
the single narrow entrance were three blocks of stone 
planted in line, and showing the number of enemies slain 
by the brave. 1 Beyond these trophies, a thorn roofing, 
supported by four bare poles, served to shade the 
relatives, when they meet to sit, feast, weep, and pray. 

The Badawin funerals and tombs are equally simple. 
They have no favourite cemeteries as in Sind and other 
Moslem and pastoral lands : men are buried where they 
die, and the rarity of the graves scattered about the 
country excited my astonishment. The corpse is soon 
interred. These people, like most barbarians, have a 
horror of death and all that reminds them of it: on 
several occasions I have been begged to throw away a 
hut-stick, that had been used to dig a grave. The bier 
is a rude framework of poles bound with ropes of hide. 
Some tie up the body and plant it in a sitting posture, to 
save themselves the trouble of excavating deep: this 
perhaps may account for the circular tombs seen in 
many parts of the country. Usually the corpse is thrust 
into a long hole, covered with wood and matting, and 


x Such is the general form of the Somali grave. Sometime*: 
./ wo stumps of wood take the place of the upright stones at the heiul 
and foot, and around one grave I counted twenty trophies. 




105 


V. — From Zayla to the Hills . 

heaped over with earth and thorns, half-protected by an 
oval mass of loose stones, and abandoned to the jackals 
and hyenas. 

We halted a day at Gudingaras, wishing to see 
the migration of a tribe. Before dawn, on the 30th 
November, the Somali Stentor proclaimed from the 
ridge-top, “ Fetch your camels ! — Load your goods ! — 
We march ! ” About 8 a.m. we started in the rear. 
The spectacle was novel to me. Some 150 spearmen, 
assisted by their families, were driving before them 
divisions which, in total, might amount to 200 cows, 
7000 camels, and 11,000 or 12,000 sheep and goats. 
Only three wore the Bal or feather, which denotes the 
brave; several, however, had the other decoration — an 
ivory armlet. 1 Assisted by the boys, whose heads were 
shaved in a cristated fashion truly ridiculous, and large 
pariah dogs with bushy tails, they drove the beasts and 
carried the colts, belaboured runaway calves, and held 
up the hind legs of struggling sheep. The sick, of whom 
there were many — dysentery being at the time prevalent 
— were carried upon camels with their legs protruding in 
front from under the hide-cover. Many of the drome- 
daries showed the Habr Awal brand : * laden with hutting 
materials and domestic furniture, they were led by 
the maidens : the matrons followed, bearing their pro- 
geny upon their backs, bundled in the shoulder-lappets 
of cloth or hide. The smaller girls, who, in addition to 


x Some braves wear above the right elbow an ivory armlet 
called Fol or Aj : in the south this denotes the elephant-slayer. 
Other fsa clans assert their warriorhood by small disks of white 
stone, fashioned like rings, and fitted upon the little finger of the left 
hand. Others bind a bit of red cloth round the brow. 

.2 It is sufficient for a Badawi to look at the general appearance 
of an animal ; he at once recognizes the breed. Each clan, however, 
in this part of Eastern Africa has its own mark. 



io6 First Footsteps in East Africa • 

the boys’ crest, wore a circlet of curly hair round the 
head, carried the weakling lambs and kids, or aidedjjtheir 
mammas in transporting the baby. Apparently in great 
fear of the “ All ” or Commando, the Badawin anxiously 
inquired if I had my 11 fire ” with me, 1 and begged us to 
take the post of honour — the van. As our little Jparty 
pricked forward, the camels started in alarm, and]|we 
were surprised to find that this tribe did not know the 
difference between horses and mules. Whenever the 
boys lost time in sport or quarrel, they were threatened 
by their fathers with the jaws of that ogre, the white 
stranger; and the women exclaimed, as they saw us 
approach, “ Here comes the old man who knows know- 
ledge 9 !” • , 

Having skirted the sea for two hours, I rode off with 
the End of Time to inspect the Dihh Silil, 8 a fiumara 
which runs from the western hills north-eastwards, to the 
sea. Its course is marked by a long line of graceful 
tamarisks, whose vivid green looked doubly bright set 
off by tawny stubble and amethyst-blue sky. These 
freshets are the Edens of Adel. The banks are charm- 
ingly wooded with acacias of many varieties, some 
thorned like the fabled Zakkum, others parachute- 
shaped, and planted in impenetrable thickets: huge 
white creepers, snake-shaped, enclasp giant trees, or 
connect with their cordage the higher boughs, or depend 
like cables from the lower branches to the ground. 
Luxuriant parasites abound : here they form domes of 


z They found no better word than 11 fire " to denote the gun. 

2 " Oddai," an old man, corresponds with the Arab Shaykh in 
etymology. The Somal, however, give the name to men of all ag as 
after marriage. 

3 The "Dihh" is the Arab M Wady," — a fiumara or freshet. 

<( Webbe " (Obbay, Abbai, &c.) is a large river ; “ Durdipr,” a running " 
stream/ 




V. — From Zayta to the Hills. 107 

flashing green, there they surround with verdure decayed 
trunks, and not unfrequent ly cluster into sylvan bowers, 
under which — grateful sight I — appears succulent grass. 
From the thinner thorns the bell-shaped nests of the 
Loxia depend, waving in the breeze, and the wood 
resounds with the cries of bright-winged choristers. 
The torrent-beds are of the clearest and finest white 
sand, glittering with gold-coloured mica, and varied 
with nodules of clear and milky quartz, red porphyry, 
and granites of many hues. Sometimes the centre is 
occupied by an islet of torn trees and stones rolled in 
heaps, supporting a clump of thick jujube or tall acacia, 
whilst the lower parts of the beds are overgrown with 
long lines of lively green colocynth. 1 Here are usually 
the wells, surrounded by heaps of thorns, from which the 
leaves have been browsed off, and dwarf sticks that 
support the water-hide. When the flocks and herds are 
absent, troops of gazelles may be seen daintily pacing 
the yielding surface ; snake trails streak the sand, and at 
night the fiercer kind of animals, lions, leopards, and 
elephants, take their turn. In Somali-land the well is 
no place of social meeting ; no man lingers to chat near 
it, no woman visits it, and the traveller fears to pitch 
hut where torrents descend, and where enemies, human 
and bestial, meet. 

We; sat under a tree watching the tribe defile across 
the water-course: then remounting, after a ride of two 
miles, we reached a ground called Kuranyali, 9 upon 
which the wigwams of the Nomads were already rising. 
The parched and treeless stubble lies about eight miles 


z I saw these Dihhs only in the dry season ; at times the torrent 
must be violent, cutting ten or twelve feet deep into the plain. 

2 The name is derived from Kuranyo, an ant : it means the 
" place of ants," and is so called from the abundance of a tree which 
attracts them. 




108 First Footsteps in East Africa . 

from and 145 0 S.E. of Gudingaras ; both places are sup- 
plied by Angagarri, a well near the sea, which is so 
distant that cattle, to return before nightfall, must start 
early in the morning. 

My attendants had pitched the Gurgi or hut : the 
Hammal and Long Gulad were, however, sulky on 
account of my absence, and the Kalandar appeared dis- 
posed to be mutinous. The End of Time, who never lost 
an opportunity to make mischief, whispered in my ear, 
“Despise thy wife, thy son, and thy slave, or they 
despise thee ! ” The old saw was not wanted, however, 
to procure for them a sound scolding. Nothing is worse 
for the Eastern traveller than the habit of “ sending 
to Coventry : ” it does away with all manner of dis- 
cipline. 

We halted that day at Kuranyali, preparing water 
and milk for two long marches over the desert to the 
hills. Being near the shore, the air was cloudy, although 
men prayed for a shower in vain : about midday the 
pleasant sea-breeze fanned our cheeks, and the plain was 
thronged with tall pillars of white sand. 1 

The heat forbade egress, and our wigwam was 
crowded with hungry visitors. Raghi, urged thereto by 
his tribe, became importunate, now for tobacco, then for 
rice, now for dates, then for provisions in general. No 
wonder that the Prophet made his Paradise for the Poor 
a mere place of eating and drinking. The half-famished 
Badawin, Somal or Arab, think of nothing beyond the 
stomach — their dreams know no higher vision of bliss 
than mere repletion. A single article of diet, milk ' or 
flesh, palling upon man's palate, they will greedily suck, 
the stones of eaten dates : yet Abyssinian like, they are 
squeamish and fastidious as regards food. They despise 
the excellent fish with which Nature has so plentifully 


z The Arabs call these pillars " Devils," the Somal 41 Sigo." 



iog 


V. — From Zayla to the Hills. 

stocked their seas. 1 44 Speak not to me with that mouth 
which eateth fish 1” is a favourite insult amongst the 
Badawin. If you touch a bird or a fowl of any de- 
scription, you will be despised even by the starving 
beggar. You must not eat marrow or the flesh about 
the sheets thigh-bone, especially when travelling, and 
the kidneys are called a woman’s dish. None but the 
Northern Somal will touch the hares which abound in 
the country, and many refuse the sand antelope and 
other kinds of game, not asserting that the meat is un- 
lawful, but simply alleging a disgust. Those who chew 
coffee berries are careful not to place an even number in 
their mouths, and camel’s milk is never heated, for fear 
of bewitching the animal. 3 The Somali, however, differs 
in one point from his kinsman the Arab : the latter prides 
himself upon his temperance ; the former, like the North 
American Indian, measures manhood by appetite. A 
44 Son of the Somal” is taught, as soon as his teeth are 
cut, to devour two pounds of the toughest mutton, and 
ask for more: if his powers of deglutition fail, he is 
derided as degenerate. 

On the next day (Friday, December ist) we informed 
the Abban that we intended starting early in the after- 
noon, and therefore warned him to hold himself and his 
escort, together with the water and milk necessary for 
our march, in readiness. He promised compliance and 
disappeared. About 3 p.m. the Badawin, armed as usual 
with spear and shield, began to gather round the hut, 


z The Cape Kafirs have the same prejudice against fish, com- 
paring its flesh to that of serpents. In some points their squeamish- 
ness resembles that of the Somal : he, for instance, who tastes the 
Rhinoceros Simus is at once dubbed M Om Fogazan ” or outcast. 

2 This superstition may have arisen from the peculiarity that 
the camel’s milk, however fresh, if placed upon the fire, breaks like 
some cow's milk. 




iio First Footsteps in East Africa . 

and — nothing in this country can be done without that 
terrible “ palaver I ” — the speechifying presently coiri- 
menced. Raghi, in a lengthy harangue hoped that the 
tribe would afford us all necessary supplies and assist us 
in the arduous undertaking. His words elicited no hear, 
hear ! there was an evident unwillingness on the part 
of the wild men to let us, or rather our cloth and tobacco, 
depart. One remarked, with surly emphasis, that he 
had “ seen no good and eaten no Bori 1 from that 
caravan, why should he aid it ? ** When we asked the 
applauding hearers what they had done for us, they 
rejoined by inquiring whose the land was ? Another 
smitten by the fair Shahrazad’s bulky charms, had 
proposed matrimony, and offered as dowry a * milch 
camel : she “ temporised,” not daring to return a 
positive refusal, and the suitor betrayed a certain 
Hibernian velleiie to consider consent an unimportant 
part of the ceremony. The mules had been sent to the 
well, with orders to return before noon : at 4 p.m. they 
were not visible. I then left the hut, and, sitting on a 
cow's-hide in the’ sun, ordered my men to begin loading, 
despite the remonstrances of the Abban and the inter- 
ference of about fifty Badawin. As we persisted, they 
waxed surlier, and declared all which was ours became 
theirs, to whom the land belonged : we did not deny the 
claim, but simply threatened sorcery-death, by wild 
beasts and foraging parties, to their “ camels, children 
and women.” This brought them to their senses, the 
usual effect of such threats; and presently arose the 
senior who had spat upon us for luck’s sake. With his 
toothless jaws he mumbled a vehement speech, and 
warned the tribe that it was not good to detain such 
strangers : they lent ready ears to the words of Nestor, 


z " Bori " in Southern Arabia popularly means a water-pips : 
here it is used for tobacco. 




Ill 


V.—From Zayla jo the Hills. 

saying, “Let us obey him, he is near his end ! ” The 
mules arrived, but when I looked for the escort, none 
was forthcoming. At Zayla it was agreed that twenty 
men should protect us across the desert, which is the 
very passage of plunder ; now, however, five or six 
paupers offered to accompany us for a few miles. We 
politely declined troubling them, but insisted upon the 
attendance of our Abban and three of his kindred: as 
some of the Badawin still opposed us, our aged friend 
once more arose, and by copious abuse finally silenced 
them. We took leave of him with many thanks and 
handfuls of tobacco, in return for which he blessed us 
with fervour. Then, mounting our mules, we set out, 
followed for at least a mile by a long tail of howling 
boys, who, ignorant of clothing, except a string of white 
beads round the neck, but armed with dwarf spears, 
bows, and arrows, showed all the impudence of baboons. 
They derided the End of Time’s equitation till I feared 
a scene ; sailor-like, he prided himself upon graceful 
horsemanship, and the imps were touching his tenderest 
point. 

Hitherto, for the Abban’s convenience, we had 
skirted the sea, far out of the direct road : now we were 
to strike south-westwards into the interior. At 6 p. m. 
we started across a “Goban 1 * 1 which eternal summer 
gilds with a dull ochreish yellow, towards a thin blue 
strip of hill on the far horizon. The Somal have no 
superstitious dread of night and its horrors, like. Arabs 
and Abyssinians : our Abban, however, showed a whole- 


z "Goban" is the low maritime plain lying below the "Bor" 
or Ghauts, and opposed to Ogu, the table-land above. “ Ban " is 
an elevated grassy prairie, where few trees grow ; “ Dir," a small 
jungle, called Haija by the Arabs ; and Khain is a forest or thick 
bush. " Bor," is a mountain, rock, or hill : a stony precipice is 
called "Jar," and the high clay banks of a ravine " Gebi." 




1 12 First Footsteps in East Africa . 

some mundane fear of plundering parties, scorpions, and 
snakes . 1 I had been careful to fasten round my ankles 
the twists of black wool called by the Arabs Za’al,* and 
universally used in Al-Yaman : a stock of garlic and 
opium, here held to be specifics, fortified the courage of 
the party, whose fears were not wholly ideal, for, in 
the course of the night, Shahrazad nearly trod upon a 
viper. 

At first the plain was a network of holes, the habi- 


i Snakes are rare in the cities, but abound in the wilds of 
Eastern Africa, and are dangerous to night travellers, though seldom 
seen by day. To kill a serpent is considered by the Badawin almost 
as meritorious as to slay an Infidel. The Somal have many names 
for the reptile tribe. The Subhanyo, a kind of whipsnake, and a 
large yellow rock snake called Got, are little feared. The Abesi (in 
Arabic Al-Hayyah— the Cobra) is so venomous that it kills the 
camel; the Mas or Hanash, and a long black snake called Jilbis, are 
considered equally dangerous. Serpents are in Somali-land the 
subject of many superstitions. One horn of the Cerastes, for 
instance, contains a deadly poison : the other, pounded and drawn 
across the eye, makes man a seer and reveals to him the treasures of 
the earth. There is a flying snake which hoards precious stones, 
and is attended by a hundred guards : a Somali horseman once, it is 
said, carried away a jewel ; he was pursued by a reptile army, and 
although he escaped to his tribe, the importunity of the former pro- 
prietors was so great that the plunder was eventually restored to 
them. Centipedes are little feared; their venom leads to incon- 
veniences more ridiculous than dangerous. Scorpions, especially 
the large yellow variety, are formidable in hot weather ; I can speak 
of the sting from experience. The first symptom is a sensation of 
nausea, and the pain shoots up after a few minutes to the groin, 
causing a swelling accompanied by burning and throbbing, which . 
last about twelve hours. The Somal bandage above the wound and 
wait patiently till the effect subsides. 

2 These are tightened in case of accident, and act as superior 
ligatures. I should, however, advise every traveller in these regions 
to provide himself with a pneumatic pump, and not to place bis 
trust in Za’al, garlic, or opium. 




V. — From Zayla to the Hills. 113 

tations of the Jir Ad, 1 a field rat with ruddy back and 
white belly, the Mullah or Parson, a smooth-skinned 
lizard, and the Dabagalla, a ground squirrel with a 
brilliant and glossy coat. As it became dark arose a 
cheerful moon, exciting the bowlings of the hyenas, the 
barkings of their attendant jackals, 9 and the chattered 
oaths of the Hidinhitu bird. 8 Dotted here and there 
over the misty landscape, appeared dark clumps of a tree 
called “ Kullan,” a thorn with an edible berry not unlike 
the jujube, and banks of silvery mist veiled the far 
horizon from the sight. 

We marched rapidly and in silence, stopping every 
quarter of an hour to raise the camels’ loads as they 
slipped on one side. I had now an opportunity of 
seeing how feeble a race is the Somali. My companions 


1 The grey rat is called by the Somal 11 Baradublay ” : in Eastern 
Africa it is a minor plague, after India and Arabia, where, neglecting 
to sleep in boots, I have sometimes been lamed for a week by their 
venomous bites. 

2 In this country the jackal attends not upon the lion, but the 
Waraba. His morning cry is taken as an omen of good or evil 
according to the note. 

3 Of this bird, a red and long-legged plover, the Somal tell the 
following legend. Originally her diet was meat, and her society 
birds of prey : one night, however, her companions having devoured 
all the provisions whilst she slept, she swore never to fly with 
friends, never to eat flesh, and never to rest during the hours of 
darkness. When she sees anything in the dark she repeats her 
oaths, and, according to the Somal, keeps careful watch all night. 
There is a larger variety of this bird, which, purblind during day- 
time, rises from under the traveller's feet with loud cries. The 
Somal have superstitions similar to that above noticed about several 
kinds of birds. When the cry of the “ Galu " (so called from his 
note Gal I Gal I come in ! come in I) is heard over a kraal, the people 
say, “ Let us leave this place, the Galu hath spoken ! " At night 
they listen for the Fin, also an ill-omened bird: when a man 
declares “the Fin did not sleep last night," it is considered 
advisable to shift ground. 


8 




114 First .Footsteps in East Africa* 

bn the line of march wondered at my being able to carry 
a gun ; they could scarcely support, even whilst riding, 
the weight of their spears, and preferred sitting upon 
them to spare their shoulders. At times they were 
obliged to walk because the saddles cut them, then they 
remounted because their legs were tired ; briefly, an 
English boy of fourteen would have shown more bottom 
than the sturdiest. This cannot arise from poor diet, for 
the citizens, who live generously, are yet weaker than 
the Badawin ; it is a peculiarity of race. When fatigued 
they become reckless and impatient of thirst: on this 
occasion, though want, of water stared uy in the face, 
one skin of the three was allowed to fall upon the road 
and burst, and the contents of the second were drunk be- 
fore we halted. 

At n p.m., after marching twelve miles in direct 
line, we bivouacked upon the plain. The night breeze 
from the hills had set in, and my attendants chattered 
with cold: Long Gulad in particular became stiff as a 
mummy. Raghi was clamorous against a fire, which 
might betray our whereabouts in the “ Bush Inn.** But 
after such a march the pipe was a necessity, and the 
point was carried against him. 

After a sound sleep under the moon, we rose at 5 a.m. 
and loaded the camels. It was a raw morning. A large 
nimbus rising from the east obscured the sun, the line of 
blue sea was raised like a ridge by refraction, and the 
hills, towards which we were journeying, now showed 
distinct falls and folds. Troops of Dera or gazelles, 
herding like goats, stood, stared at us, turned their white 
tails, faced away, broke into a long trot, and bounded 
over the plain as we approached. A few ostriches 
appeared, but they were too shy even for bullet. 1 At 

1 Throughout this country ostriches are exceedingly wild :tfce 
Rev* Mr. Erh&rdt, of the Mombas Mission, informs me that they ere* 




V. — From Zayla to the Hills . 1x5 

8 p.m. we crossed one of the numerous drains which 
intersect this desert — “ Biya Hablod,” or the Girls' 
Water, a fiumara running from south-west to east and 
north-east. Although dry, it abounded in the Marar, a 
tree bearing yellowish red berries full of viscous juice like 
green gum — edible but not nice — and the brighter vegeta- 
tion showed that water was near the surface. About two 
hours afterwards, as the sun became oppressive, we 
unloaded in a water-course, called by my companions 
Adad or the Acacia Gum: 1 the distance was about 
twenty-five miles, and the direction S.W. 225 0 of 
Kuranyali. - 

We spread our couches of cowhide in the midst of a 
green mass of tamarisk under a tall Kud tree, a bright- 
leaved thorn, with balls of golden gum clinging to its 
boughs, dry berries scattered in its shade, and armies of 
ants marching to and from its trunk. All slept upon 
the soft white sand, with arms under their hands, for 
our spoor across the desert was now unmistakeable. At 
midday, rice was boiled for us by the indefatigable 
women, and at 3 p.m. we resumed our march towards 
the hills, which had exchanged their shadowy blue for 
a coat of pronounced brown. Journeying onwards, we 
reached the Barragid fiumara, and presently exchanged 
the plain for rolling ground covered with the remains of 
an extinct race, and probably alluded to by Al-Makrizi 
when he records that the Moslems of Adel had erected, 

equally so farther south. The Somal stalk them during the day with 
camels, and kill them with poisoned arrows. It is said that about 
3 p.m. the birds leave their feeding places, and traverse long distances 
to roost : the people assert that they are blind at night, and rise up 
under the pursuer’s feet. 

z Several Acacias afford gums, which the Badawin eat greedily 
to strengthen' themselves. The town's people declare that the food 
produces nothing but flatulence. 


8 — —2 




n6 First Footsteps in East Africa . 

throughout the country, a vast number of mosques and 
oratories for Friday and festival prayers. Places of 
worship appeared in the shape of parallelograms, un- 
hewed stones piled upon the ground, with a semicircular 
niche in the direction of Meccah. The tombs, different 
from the heaped form now in fashion, closely resembled 
the older erections in the island of Sa’ad al-Din, near 
Zayla — oblong slabs planted deep in the soil. We also 
observed hollow rings of rough blocks, circles measuring 
about a cubit in diameter : I had not time to excavate 
them and the End of Time could only inform me that 
they belonged to the “ Awwalin,” or olden inhabitants. 

At 7 p.m., as evening was closing in, we came upon 
the fresh trail of a large Habr Awal calvacade. The 
celebrated footprint seen by Robinson Crusoe affected 
liim not more powerfully than did this “daaseh” my 
companions. The voice of song suddenly became mute. 
The women drove the camels hurriedly, and all huddled 
together, except Raghi, who kept well to the front ready 
for a run. Whistling with anger, I asked my attendants 
what had slain them : the End of Time, in a hollow 
voice, replied, “ Verily, O pilgrim, whoso seeth the track, 
seeth the foe ! ” and he quoted in tones of terror those 
dreary lines — 


11 Man is but a handful of dust, 

And life is a violent storm.” 

We certainly were a small party to contend against 
200 horsemen — nine men and two women : moreover all 
except the Hammal and Long Gulad would infallibly 
have fled at the first charge. 

Presently we sighted the trails of sheep and goats, 
showing the proximity of a village : their freshness was 
ascertained by my companions after an eager scrutiny in 
the moon’s bright beams. About half an hour after- . 
wards, rough ravines with sharp and thorny descents 



V.—From Zayla to the Hills . 117 

warned us that we had exchanged the dangerous plain 
for a place of safety where horsemen rarely venture. 
Raghi, not admiring the “ open,” hurried us onward, in 
hope of reaching some kraal. At 8 p. m., however, 
seeing the poor women lamed with thorns, and the 
camels casting themselves upon the ground, I resolved 
to halt. Despite all objections, we lighted a fire, finished 
our store of bad milk — the water had long ago been 
exhausted — and lay down in the cold, clear air, covering 
ourselves with hides and holding our weapons. 

At 6 a. m. we resumed our ride over rough stony 
ground, the thorns tearing our feet and naked legs, and 
the camels slipping over the rounded waste of drift 
pebbles. The Badawin, with ears applied to the earth, 
listened for a village, but heard none. Suddenly we saw 
two strangers, and presently we came upon an Isa 
kraal. It was situated in a deep ravine, called Damal, 
backed by a broad and hollow fiumara at the foot of the 
hills, running from west to east, and surrounded by lofty 
trees, upon which brown kites, black vultures, and 
percnopters like flakes of snow were mewing. We had 
marched over a winding path about eleven miles from, 
and in a south-west direction (205°) of, Adad. Painful 
thoughts suggested themselves : in consequence of 
wandering southwards, only six had been taken off thirty 
stages by the labours of seven days. 

As usual in Eastern Africa, we did not enter the 
kraal uninvited, but unloosed and pitched the wigwam 
under a tree outside. Presently the elders appeared 
bringing, with soft speeches, sweet water, new milk, fat 
sheep and goats, for which they demanded a Tobe of 
Cutch canvas. We passed with them a quiet luxurious 
day of coffee and pipes, fresh cream and roasted mutton : 
after the plain-heats we enjoyed the cool breeze of the 
hills, the cloudy sky, and the verdure of the glades, made 



n8 First Footsteps in East Africa. 

doubly green by comparison with the parched stubbles 
below. 

The Isa, here mixed with the Gudabirsi, have 
little power: we found them poor and proportionally 
importunate. The men, wild-looking as open mouths, 
staring eyes, and tangled hair could make them, gazed 
with extreme eagerness upon my scarlet blanket: for 
very shame they did not beg it, but the inviting texture 
was pulled and fingered by the greasy multitude. We 
closed the hut whenever a valuable was produced, but 
eager eyes peeped through every cranny, till the End of 
Time ejaculated “Praised be Allah 1 ! ” and quoted the 
Arab saying, “ Show not the Somali thy door, and if he 
find it, block it up ! ” The women and children were 
clad in chocolate-coloured hides, fringed at the tops : to 
gratify them I shot a few hawks, and was rewarded with 
loud exclamations — “ Allah preserve thy hand ! ” — ■“ May 
thy skill never fail thee . before the foe ! ” A crone 
seeing me smoke, inquired if the fire did not burn ; I 
handed my pipe, which nearly choked her, and she ran 
away from a steaming kettle, thinking it a weapon. As 
my companions observed, there was not a “ Miskal of 
sense in a Maund of heads : ” yet the people looked upon 
my sun-burnt skin with a favour they denied to the 
“ lime-white face.” 

I was anxious to proceed in the afternoon, but 
Raghi had arrived at the frontier of his tribe: he had 
blood to settle amongst the Gudabirsi, and without a 
protector he could not enter their lands. At night we 
slept armed on account of the lions that infest the hills, 
and our huts were surrounded with a thorn fence— a 
precaution here first adopted, and never afterwards 
neglected. Early on the morning of the 4th of Decem- 
ber heavy clouds rolled down from the mountains* 


z " Subhan' Allah 1 11 an exclamation of pettishness or displeasure. 



V.—From Zayla to the Hills. lxg 

and a Sdotch mist deepened into a shower: our new 
Abban had not arrived, and the hut-mats, saturated 
with rain, had become too heavy for the camels to carry. 

In the forenoon the Isa kraal, loading their asses , 1 
set out towards the plain. This migration presented no 
new features, except that several sick and decrepid were 
barbarously left behind, for lions and hyaenas to devour . 9 
To deceive “warhawks” who might be on the look-out, 
the migrators set fire to logs of wood and masses of 
sheep’s earth, which, even in rain, will smoke and 
smoulder for weeks. 

About midday arrived the two Gudabirsi who 
intended escorting us to the village of our Abbans. The 
elder, Rirash, was a black-skinned, wild-looking fellow, 
with a shock head of hair and a deep scowl which belied 
his good temper and warm heart : the other was a 
dun-faced youth betrothed to Raghi’s daughter. They 
both belonged to the Mahadasan clan, and commenced 
operations by an obstinate attempt to lead us far out of 
our way eastwards. The pretext was the defenceless 
state of their flocks and herds, the real reason an itching 
for cloth and tobacco. We resisted manfully this time, 
nerved by the memory of wasted days, and, despite their 
declarations of Absi , 8 we determined upon making west-, 
ward for the hills. 

At 2 p. m. the caravan started along the fiumara 
course in rear of the deserted kraal, and after an hour’s 
ascent Rirash informed us that a well was near. The 
Hammal and I, taking two water skins, urged our mules 


z The hills not abounding in camels, like the maritime regions, 
asses become the principal means of transport. 

2 This barbarous practice is generally carried out in cases of 
small-pox where contagion is feared. 

3 Fear— danger; it is a word which haunts the traveller in 
Somali-land. 




130 


First Footsteps in East Africa . 

over stones and thorny ground : presently we arrived at 
a rocky ravine, where, surrounded by brambles, rude 
walls, and tough frame works, lay the wells— three or 
four holes sunk ten feet deep in the limestone. Whilst 
we bathed in the sulphureous spring, which at once dis- 
coloured my silver ring, Rirash, baling up the water in 
his shield, filled the bags and bound them to the saddles. 
In haste we rejoined the caravan, which we found about 
sunset, halted by the vain fears of the guides. The 
ridge upon which they stood was a mass of old mosques 
and graves, showing that in former days a thick popula- 
tion tenanted these hills: from the summit appeared 
distant herds of kine and white flocks scattered like 
patches of mountain quartz. Riding in advance, we 
traversed the stony ridge, fell into another ravine, and 
soon saw signs of human life. A shepherd descried us 
from afar arid ran away reckless of property : causing 
the End of Time to roll his head with dignity, and to 
ejaculate, “ Of a truth said the Prophet of Allah, ‘fear is 
divided.’ ” Presently we fell in with a village, from 
which the people rushed out, some exclaiming, “ Lo ! let 
us look at the kings 1 ” others, “ Come, see the white 
man, he is governor of Zayla ! ” I objected to such 
dignity, principally on account of its price : my com- 
panions, however, were inexorable ; they would be Salatin 
— kings — and my colour was against claims to low 
degree. This fairness, and the Arab dress, made me at 
different times the ruler of Aden, the chief of Zayla, the 
Hajj’s son, a boy, an old woman, a man painted white, a 
warrior in silver armour, a merchant, a pilgrim, a hedge- 
priest, Ahmad the Indian, a Turk, an Egyptian, a 
Frenchman, a Banyan, a shariff, and lastly a Calamity 
sent down from heaven to weary out the lives of the . 
Somal : every kraal had some conjecture of its own, and 
each fresh theory was received by my companions with 
roars of laughter. 



121 


V.—Frotn Zayla to the Hills. 

As the Gudabirsi pursued us with shouts for tobacco 
and cries of wonder, I dispersed them with a gun-shot: 
the women and children fled precipitately from the 
horrid sound, and the men, covering their heads with 
their shields, threw themselves face foremost upon the 
ground. Pursuing the fiumara course, we passed a 
number of kraals, whose inhabitants were equally voci- 
ferous : out of one came a Zayla man, who informed us 
that the Gudabirsi Abbans, to whom we bore Shar- 
markay’s letter of introduction, were encamped within 
three days’ march. It was reported, however, that a 
quarrel had broken out between them and the Jirad 
Adan, their brother-in-law ; no pleasant news ! — in 
Africa, under such circumstances, it is customary for 
friends to detain, and for foes to oppose, the traveller. 
We rode stoutly on, till the air darkened and the moon 
tipped the distant hill peaks with a dim mysterious 
light. I then called a halt : we unloaded on the 
banks of the Darkaynlay fiumara, so called from a tree 
which contains a fiery milk, fenced ourselves in — taking 
care to avoid being trampled upon by startled camels 
during our sleep, by securing them in a separate but 
neighbouring inclosure— spread our couches, ate our frugal 
suppers, and lost no time in falling asleep. We had 
travelled five hours that day, but the path was winding, 
and our progress in a straight line was at most eight 
miles. 

And now, dear L., being about to quit the land of 
the fsa, I will sketch the tribe. 

The fsa, probably the most powerful branch of the 
Somali nation, extends northwards to the Wayma family 
of the Dankali ; southwards to the Gudabirsi, and mid- 
way between Zayla and Berberah ; eastwards it is 
bounded by the sea, and westwards by the Gallas 
around Harar. It derives itself from Dirr and Aydur, 
without, however, knowing aught beyond the ancestral 



122 First Footsteps in East Africa . . 

names, and is twitted with paganism by its enemies. 
This tribe, said to number 100,000 shields, is divided 
into numerous clans : l 11 these again split "up into minor 
septs 1 which plunder, and sometimes murder, one 
another in time of peace. 

A fierce and turbulent race of , republicans, the Isa 
own nominal allegiance to a Ugaz or chief residing in 
the Hadagali hills. He is generally called “Roblay ” — 
Prince Rainy — the name or rather title being one of 
good omen, for a drought here, like a dinner in Europe, 
justifies the change of a dynasty. Every kraal has its 
Oddai (shaykh or head man,) after whose name the 
settlement, as in Sind and other pastoral lands, is called. 
He is obeyed only when his orders suit the taste of King 
Demos, is always superior to his fellows in wealth 
of cattle, sometimes in talent and eloquence, and in 
deliberations he is assisted by the Wail or Akil — the 
Pitzo-council of Southern Africa — elders obeyed on 
account of their age. Despite, however, this apparatus 


1 The Somali Tol or Tul corresponds with the Arabic Kabilah, 
a tribe ; under it is the Kola or Jilib (Ar. Fakhizah), a clan. “ Gob/' 
is synonymous with the Arabic Kabail, “ men of family," opposed to 

11 Gum," the caste-less. In the following pages I shall speak of the 
Somali nation , the tsa tribe, the Her Musa clan, and the Rer Galan 
sept, though by no means sure that such verbal graduation is 
generally recognized. 

2 The Isa, for instance, are divided into— 

z. Rer Wardik (the royal clan). 6. Rer Hurroni. 

2. Rer Abdullah. 7. Rer Urwena. 

3. Rer Musa. 8. Rer Furlabah. 

4. Rer Mummasan. 9. Rer Gada. 

5. Rer Gulani. zo. Rer Ali Addah. 

These are again subdivided : the Rer Musa (numbering half the 

Isa), split up, for instance, into— 

z. Rer Galan. 4. Rer Dubbah. 

2. Rer Harlah. 5. Rer Kul. 

3. Rer Gadishah. 6. Rer Gedi. 



V.—From Zayla to the Hills . 123 

of rule, the Badawin have lost none of the characteristics 
recorded in the Periplus : they are sti)l “ uncivilized and 
under no restraint.” Every free-born man holds himself 
equal to his ruler, and allows no royalties or preroga- 
tives to abridge his birthright of liberty. 1 Yet I have 
observed, that with all their passion for independence, 
the Somal, when subject to strict rule as at Zayla and 
Harar, are both apt to discipline and subservient to 
command. 

In character, the Isa are childish and docile, 
cunning, and deficient in judgment, kind and fickle, 
good-humoured and irascible, warm-hearted, and in- 
famous for cruelty and treachery. Even the protector 
will slay his protige , and citizens married to Isa girls 
send their wives to buy goats and sheep from, but 
will not trust themselves amongst, their connections. 
“ Traitorous as an Isa,” is a proverb at Zayla, where 
the people tell you that these Badawin with the left 
hand offer a bowl of milk, and stab with the right. 
“ Conscience,” I may observe, does not exist in Eastern 
Africa, and “Repentance” expresses regret for missed 
opportunities of mortal crime. Robbery constitutes an 
honourable man : murder — the more atrocious the mid- 
night crime the better — makes the hero. Honour consists 
in taking human life : hyaena-like, the Badawin cannot 
be trusted where blood may be shed. Glory is the 
having done all manner of harm. Yet the Isa have 
their gopd points: they are not noted liars, and will 
rarely perjure themselves: they look down upon petty 
pilfering without violence, and they are generous and 
hospitable compared with the other Somal. Personally, 


x Traces of this turbulent equality may be found amongst the 
Kafirs in general meetings of the tribe, on the occasion of harvest 
home, when the chief who at* other times destroys hundreds by a 
gesture, is abused and treated with contempt by the youngest 
waiiior. * 




124 


First Footsteps in East Africa . 

I had no reason to complain of them. They were im- 
portunate beggars, but a pinch of snuff or a handful of 
tobacco always made us friends: they begged me to 
settle amongst them, they offered me sundry wives and 
— the Somali Badawi, unlike the Arab, readily affiliates 
strangers to his tribe — they declared that after a few 
days* residence, I should become one of themselves. 

In appearance, the Isa are distinguished from other 
Somal by blackness, ugliness of feature, and premature 
baldness of the temples; they also shave, or rather 
scrape off with their daggers, the hair high up the nape of 
the neck. The locks are dyed dun, frizzled, and greased; 
the Widads or learned men remove them, and none but 
paupers leave them in their natural state ; the mustachioes 
are clipped close, the straggling whisker is carefully 
plucked, and the pile — erroneously considered impure — 
is removed either by vellication, or by passing the limbs 
through the fire. The eyes of the Badawin, also, are less 
prominent than those of the citizens : the brow projects 
in pent-house fashion, and the organ, exposed to bright 
light, and accustomed to gaze at distant objects, acquires 
more concentration and power. I have seen amongst 
them handsome profiles, and ^pme of the girls have fine 
figures with piquant, if not pretty, features. 

Flocks and herds form the true wealth of the fsa. 
According to them, sheep and goats are of silver, and the 
cow of gold : they compare camels to the rock, and 
believe, like most Moslems, the jhorse to have been created 
from the wind. Their diet depends upon the season. In 
hot weather, when forage and milk dry up, the flocks are 
slaughtered, and supply excellent mutton; during the . 
monsun, men become fat, by drinking all day long the 
produce of their cattle. In the latter article of diet, the 
Isa are delicate and curious : they prefer cow’s milk, 
then the goat’s, and lastly the ewe’s, which the Arab loves 
best : the first is drunk fresh, and the two latter clotted, - 



V.—From Zayla to the Hills . 125 

whilst the camel’s is slightly soured. The townspeople 
use camel’s milk medicinally: according to the Badawin, 
he who lives on this beverage, and ‘eats the meat for 
forty-four consecutive days, acquires the animal’s strength. 
It has perhaps less “ body ” than any other milk, and is 
deliciously sweet shortly after foaling : presently it loses 
flavour, and nothing can be more nauseous than the pro- 
duce of an old camel. The Somal have a name for 
cream — “ Laban ” — but they make no use of the article, 
churning it with the rest of the milk. They have no 
buffaloes, they shudder at the Tartar idea of mare’s-milk, 
like the Arabs they hold the name Labban 1 a disgrace, 
and they make it a point of honour not to draw supplies 
from their cattle during the day. 

The life led by these wild people is necessarily 
monotonous. They rest but little — from 11 p.m. till 
dawn — and never sleep in the bush for fear of plundering 
parties. Few begin the day with prayer as Moslems 
should: for the most part they apply themselves to 
counting and milking their cattle. The animals, all of 
which have names, 2 come when called to the pail, and 
supply the family with a morning meal. Then the 
warriors, grasping their sgears, and sometimes the young 
women armed only with staves, drive their herds to 
pasture : the matrons and children, spinning or rope- 
making, tend the flocks, and the kraal is abandoned to 
the very young, the old, and the sick. The herdsmen 
wander about, watching the cattle and tasting nothing 
but the pure element or a pinch of coarse tobacco. 
Sometimes they play at Shahh, Shantarah, and other 
games, of which they are passionately fond: with a board 
formed of lines traced in the sand, and bits of dry wood 


z 11 Milk-seller." 

2 For instance, Anfarr, the “ Spotted ; " Tarren, 11 Wheatflour ; " 
&c., &c. 



ia6 First Footstefs in East Africa . 

or camel’s earth acting pieces, they spend hour after hour, 
every looker-on vociferating his opinion, and catching at 
the men, till apparently the two players are those least 
interested in the game. Or, to drive off sleep, they sit 
whistling to their flocks, or they perform upon the 
Florimo, a reed pipe generally made at Harar, which has 
a plaintive sound uncommonly pleasing. 1 In the evening 
the kraal again resounds with lowing and bleating : the 
camel’s milk is all drunk, the cow’s and goat’s reserved 
for butter and ghi, which the women prepare; the 
numbers are once more counted, and the animals are 
carefully penned up for the night. This simple life is 
varied by an occasional birth and marriage, dance and 
foray, disease and murder. Their maladies are few and 
simple ;* death generally comes by the spear, and the 


i It is used by the northern people, the Abyssinians, GaUas, 
Adail, Isa and Gudabirsi ; the southern Somal ignore it. 

a The most dangerous disease is small-pox, which history traces 
to Eastern Abyssinia, where it still becomes at times a violent epi- 
demic, sweeping off its thousands. The patient, if a man of note, is 
placed upon the sand, and fed with rice and millet bread till he 
recovers or dies. The chicken-pox kills many infants; they are 
treated by bathing in the fresh blood of a sheep, covered with the 
skin, and exposed to the sun. Smoke and glare, dirt and flies, cold 
winds and naked extremities, cause ophthalmia, especially in the hills, 
this disease rarely blinds any save the citizens, and no remedy is 
known. Dysentery is cured by rice and sour milk, patients also 
drink clarified cow’s butter; and in bad cases the stctipfcch is 
cauterised, fire and disease, according to the Somal, never coexisting. 
Haemorrhoids, when dry, are reduced by a stick, used as a bougie and 
allowed to remain in loco all night. Sometimes the part affected is 
cupped with a horn and knife, or a leech performs excision. The diet is ' 
camels’ or goats' flesh and milk ; clarified butter and Bussorah dates : 
— rice and mutton are carefully avoided. For a certain local disease, 
they use Senna or colocynth, anoint the body with sulphur boiled in' 
ghi, and expose it to the sun, or they leave the patient all nightin 
the dew ; abstinence and perspiration generally effect a cure. For 
the minor form, the afflicted drink the melted fat of a sheep's taijk 




Vn — From Zayla to the Hills. ^ 127 

Badawi is naturally long lived. I have seen Macrobians 
hale and strong, preserving their powers and faculties in 
spite of eighty and ninety years. 


Consumption is a family complaint, and therefore considered in- 
curable ; to use the Somali expression, they address the patient with 
V Allah have mercy upon thee ! " not with “ Allah cure thee 1 " , 

There are leeches who have secret simples for curing wounds. 
Generally the blood is squeezed out, the place is washed with water, 
the lips are sewn up and a dressing of astringent leaves is applied. 
They have splints for fractures, and they can reduce disloca- 
tions. A medical friend at Aden partially dislocated his knee, 
which half-a-dozen of the faculty insisted upon treating as a sprain. 
Of all his tortures none was more severe than that inflicted by my 
Somali visitors. They would look at him, distinguish the complaint, 
ask him how long he had been invalided, and hearing the reply — four 
months — would break into exclamations of wonder. 41 In our 
country," they cried, •• when a man falls, two pull his body and two 
his legs, then they tie sticks round it, give him plenty of camel*s milk, 
and he is well in a month ; " a speech which made friend S. groan in 
spirit. 

Firing and clarified butter are the farrier's panaceas. Camels 
are cured by sheep’s head broth, asses by chopping one ear, mules 
by cutting off the tail, and horses by ghi or a drench of melted fat. 



128 


CHAPTER VI. 

FROM THE ZAYLA HILLS TO THE MARAR PRAIRIE. 

I have now, dear L., quitted the maritime plain or 
first zone, to enter the Ghauts, that threshold of the Ethio- 
pian highlands which, beginning at Tajurrah, sweeps 
in semicircle round the bay of Zayla, and falls about 
Berberah into the range of mountains which fringes the 
bold Somali coast. This chain has been inhabited, 
within History’s memory, by three distinct races — the 
Gallas, the ancient Moslems of Adel, and by the modem 
Somal. As usual, however, in the East, it has no 
general vernacular name . 1 

The aspect of these Ghauts is picturesque. The 
primitive base consists of micaceous granite, with veins 
of porphyry and dykes of the purest white quartz: 
above lie strata of sandstone and lime, here dun, there 
yellow, or of a dull grey, often curiously contorted and 
washed clear of vegetable soil by the heavy monsun. 
On these heights, which are mostly conoid with rounded 
tops, joined by ridges and saddlebacks, various kinds of 
Acacia cast a pallid and sickly green, like the olive tree 
upon the hills of Provence. They are barren in the cold 

z Every hill and peak, ravine and valley, will be known by aonie 
striking epithet: as Borad, the White Hill; Libahlay, the Lions' 
Mountain ; and so forth. Comprehensive names are not adapted to 
social wants of uncivilized men. 



VI, — From the Zayla Hills to the Marar Prairie, 129 

seasdn, and the Nomads migrate to the plains : when the 
monsun covers , them with rich pastures, the people 
revisit their deserted kraals. The kloofs or ravines are 
the most remarkable features of this country : in some 
places the sides rise perpendicularly, like gigantic walls, 
the breadth varying from one hundred yards to half a 
mile ; in others cliffs and scaurs, sapped at their founda- 
tions, encumber the bed, and not unfrequently a broad 
band of white sand stretches between two fringes of 
emerald green, delightful to look upon after the bare and 
ghastly basalt of Southern Arabia. The Jujube grows 
to a height already betraying signs of African luxuriance: 
through its foliage flit birds, gaudy- coloured as king- 
fishers, of vivid red, yellow, and changing-green. I 
remarked a long-tailed jay called Gobiyan or Fat, 1 2 * * 
russet-hued ringdoves, the modest honey-bird, corn 
quails, canary-coloured finches, sparrows gay as those 
of Surinam, humming-birds with a plume of metallic 
lustre, and especially a white-eyed kind of maina, called 
by the Somal, Shimbir Load, or the cow-bird. The 
Armo-creeper, 9 with large fleshy leaves, pale green, red, 
or crimson, and clusters of bright berries like purple 
grapes, forms a conspicuous ornament in the valleys. 
There is a great variety of the Cactus tribe, some 
growing to the height of thirty and thirty-five feet: 
of these one was particularly pointed out to me. The 
vulgar Somal call it Guraato, the more learned Shajarat 


1 The Arabs call it Kakatua, and consider it a species of parrot. 
The name Cacatoes, is given by the Cape Boers, according to Dele- 
gorgue, to the Coliphymus Concolor. The Gobiyan resembles in 
shape and flight our magpie ; it has a crest and a brown coat with 
patches of white, and a noisy note like a frog. It is very cunning 
and seldom affords a second shot. 

2 The berries of the Armo are eaten by children, and its leaves, 

which never dry up, by the people in times of famine; they must be 

boiled or the acrid juice will excoriate the mouth. 


9 



130 First Footsteps in East Africa . 

al-Zakkum : it is the mandrake of these regions, and the 
round excrescences upon the summits of its fleshy arms 
are supposed to resemble men’s heads and faces. 

On Tuesday, the 5th December, we arose at G a.m., 
after a night so dewy that our clothes were drenched, 
and we began to ascend the Wady Darkaynlay, which 
winds from east to south. After an hour’s march 
appeared a small cairn of rough stones, called. Siyaro, 
or Mazar, 1 to which each person, in token of honour, 
added his quotum. The Abban opined that Auliya or 
holy men had sat there, but the End of Time more 
sagaciously conjectured that it was the site of some 
Galla idol or superstitious rite. Presently we came upon 
the Hills of the White Ant, 9 a characteristic feature in 
this part of Africa. Here the land has the appearance 
of a Turkish cemetery on a grand scale : there it seems 
like a city in ruins : in some places the pillars are 
truncated into a resemblance to bee-hives, in others they 
cluster together, suggesting the idea of a portico : whilst 
many of them, veiled by trees, and overrun with gay 
creepers, look like the remains of sylvan altars. 
Generally the hills are conical, and vary in height from 
four to twelve feet : they are counted by hundreds, and 
the Somal account for the number by declaring that the 
insects abandon their home when dry, and commence 
building another. The older erections are worn away, 
by wind and rain, to a thin tapering spire, and are 
frequently hollowed out and arched beneath by rats and 
ground squirrels. The substance, fine yellow mud, glued 
by the secretions of the ant, is hard to break: it is 
pierced sieve-like, by a net-work of tiny shafts. I saw 
these hills for the first time in the Wady Darkaynlay t 

z Siyaro is the Somali corruption of the Arabic Ziyftrat, which* 
synonymous with Mazar, means a place of pious visitation. ■; ■'.& 

2 The Somal call the insect Abor, and its hill Dunduma ^ ^ r ' . 



VI.— Front the Zayla Hills to the Marat Prairie. ' 131 

in the interior they are larger and longer than near the 
maritime regions. 

We travelled up the fiumara in a southerly direction 
till 8 a.m., when the guides led us away from the bed. 
They anticipated meeting Gudabirsis : pallid with fear, 
they also trembled with cold and hunger. Anxious con- 
sultations were held. One man, Ali — surnamed “ Doso,” 
because he did nothing but eat, drink and stand over the 
fire — determined to leave us : as, however, he had received 
a tobe for. pay, we put a veto upon that proceeding. 
After a march of two hours, over ground so winding that 
we had not covered more than three miles, our guides 
halted under a tree, near a deserted kraal, at a place 
called Al-Armo, the “ Armo-creeper water,” or more 
facetiously Dabadal&shay : from Damal it bore S.W. 190°. 
One of our Badawin, mounting a mule, rode forward to 
gather intelligence, and bring back a skin full of water. 
1 asked the End of Time what they expected to hear : he 
replied with the proverb “ News liveth ! ” The Somal 
Badawin have a passion for knowing how the world wags. 
In some of the more desert regions the whole population 
will follow the wanderer. No traveller ever passes a kraal 
without planting spear in the ground, and demanding 
answers to a lengthened string of queries : rather than miss 
intelligence he will inquire of a woman. Thus it is that 
news flies through the country. Among the wild Guda- 
birsi the Russian war was a topic of interest, and at 
Harar I heard of a violent storm which had damaged the 
shipping in Bombay Harbour, but a few weeks after the 
event. 

The Badawi returned with an empty skin but a full 
budget. I will offer you, dear L., a specimen of the 
"palaver 1 ” which is supposed to prove the aphorism that 

z The corrupted Portuguese word used by African travellers ; 
in the Western regions it is called Kelder, and the Arabs term it 
“Kalam.” 


9 — 3 



132 First Footsteps in East Africa . 

all barbarians are orators. Demosthenes leisurely dis- 
mounts, advances, stands for a moment cross-legged — the 
favourite posture in this region — supporting each hand 
with a spear planted in the ground : thence he slips to squat, 
looks around, ejects saliva, shifts his quid to behind his 
ear, places his weapons before him, takes up a bit of 
stick, and traces lines which he carefully smooths away — 
it being ill-omened to mark the earth. The listeners sit 
gravely in a semicircle upon their heels, with their spears, 
from whose bright heads flashes a ring of troubled light, 
planted upright, and look steadfastly on his countenance 
over the upper edges of their shields, with eyes apparently 
planted, like those of the Blemmyes, in their breasts. 
When the moment for delivery is come, the head man 
inquires, “What is the news?” The informant would 
communicate the important fact that he has been to the 
well: he proceeds as follows, noting emphasis by raising 
his voice, at times about six notes, and often violently 
striking at the ground in front. 

“ It is good news, if Allah please ! ” 

“ Wa Sidda ! ” — Even so ! respond the listeners, in- 
toning or rather groaning the response. 

“ I mounted mule this morning.” 

“ Even so ! ” 

“ I departed from ye riding.” 

“Even so!” 

“ There ! ” (with a scream and pointing out the direc- 
tion with a stick). 

“ Even so ! ” 

“ There I went.” 

“Even so!” 

“ I threaded the wood.” 

“Even so!” 

“ I traversed the sands.” 

“Even so!*' 

“I feared nothing.” 



VI. — From the Zayla Hills to the Marat Prairie . 133 

“Even so!” 

. “ At last I came upon cattle tracks.” 

“Hooi hool! hoot! I” (An ominous pause follows 
this exclamation of astonishment.) 

“ They were fresh.” 

“ Even so! ” 

“ So were the earths.” 

“ Even so ! ” 

“ I distinguished the feet of women.” 

“ Even so! 

“ But there were no camels.” 

“ Even so ! ” 

“ At last I saw sticks ” — 

“ Even so ! ” 

“ Stones ” — 

“Even so!” 

“ Water”— 

“ Even so ! ” 

“A well!!!” 

Then follows the palaver, wherein, as occasionally 
happens further West,.he distinguishes himself who can 
rivet the attention of the audience for at least an hour 
without saying anything in particular. The advantage 
of their circumlocution, however, is that by considering a 
subject in every possible light and phase as regards its 
cause and effect, antecedents, actualities, and con- 
sequences, they are prepared for any emergency which, 
without the palaver, might come upon them unawares. 

Although the thermometer showed summer heat, the 
air was cloudy and raw blasts poured down from the 
mountains. At half past 3 p.m. our camels were lazily 
loaded, and we followed the course of the fiumara, 
which runs to the W. and S.W. After half an hour’s 
progress, we arrived at the gully in which are the wells, 
and the guides halted because they descried half-a-dozen 
youths and boys bathing and washing their Tobes. All, • 



X34 First footsteps in East Africa. 

cattle as well as men, were sadly thirsty: many of us 
had been chewing pebbles during the morning, yet, 
afraid of demands for tobacco, the Badawin would have 
pursued the march without water had I not forced them 
to halt. We found three holes in the sand ; one was 
dry, a second foul, and the third contained a scanty 
supply of the pure element from twenty to twenty-five 
feet below the surface. A youth stood in the water and 
filled a wicker-pail, which he tossed to a companion 
perched against the side half way up : the latter in his 
turn hove it to a third, who, catching it at the brink, 
threw the contents, by this time half wasted, into the 
skin cattle trough. We halted about half an hour to 
refresh man and beast, and then resumed our way up 
the Wady, quitting it where a short cut avoids the 
frequent windings of the bed. This operation saved 
but little time ; the ground was stony, the rough ascents 
fatigued the camels, and our legs and feet were lacerated 
by the spear-like thorns. Here, the ground was over- 
grown with aloes , 1 sometimes six feet high with pink and 
“pale Pomona green” leaves, bending in the line of 
beauty towards the ground, graceful in form as the 
capitals of Corinthian columns, and crowned with gay- 
coloured bells, but barbarously supplied with woody 
thorns and strong serrated edges. There the Hig, an 
aloetic plant with a point so hard and sharp that horses 
cannot cross ground where it grows, stood in bunches 
like the largest and stiifest of rushes . 9 Senna sprang 

z Three species of the Dar or Aloe grow everywhere in the 
higher regions of the Somali country. The first is called Dar Main, ■ 
the inside of its peeled leaf is chewed when water cannot be procured. 
The Dar Murodi or Elephant’s aloe is larger and useless : the Dar 
Digwen or Long-eared resembles that of Socotra. 

2 The Hig is called " Salab ” by the Arabs, who use its loqg < 
tough fibre for ropes. Patches of this plant situated on moist 
ground at the foot of hills, are favourite places with sand antelope, 
spur-fowl and other game. 




F 7 - — From the Zayla Hitts to the Marat Prairie • 135 

spontaneously on the banks, and the gigantic Ushr or 
Asclepias'shed its bloom upon the stones and pebbles 
of the bed. My attendants occupied themselves with 
gathering the edible pod of an Acacia called Kura, 1 
whilst I observed the view. Frequent ant-hills gave an 
appearance of habitation to a desert still covered with 
the mosques and tombs* of old Adel ; and the shape of 
the country had gradually changed, basins and broad 
slopes now replacing the thickly crowded conoid peaks 
of the lower regions. 

As the sun sank towards the west, Long Gulad 
complained bitterly of the raw breeze from the hills. We 
passed many villages, distinguished by the barking of 
dogs and the bleating of flocks, on their way to the 
field: the unhappy Raghi, however, who had now 
become our protege , would neither venture into a settle- 
ment, nor bivouac amongst the lions. He hurried us 
forwards till we arrived at a hollow called Gud, “ the 
Hole,” which supplied us with the protection of a 
deserted kraal, where our camels, half-starved and 
knocked-up by an eight miles’ march, were speedily 
unloaded. Whilst pitching the tent, we were visited by 
some Gudabirsi, who attempted to seize our Abban, 
alleging that he owed them a cow. We replied doughtily, 
that he was under our sandals: as they continued to 
speak in a high tone, a pistol was discharged over their 
heads, after which they cringed like dogs. A blazing 
fire, a warm supper, dry beds, broad jests, and funny 
stories, soon restored the flagging spirits of our party. 
Towards night the moon dispersed the thick mists 
which, gathering into clouds, threatened rain, and the 
cold sensibly diminished : there was little dew, and we 


z The Darnel or pod has a sweetish taste, not unlike that of a 
withered pea; pounded and mixed with milk or ghi, it is relished 
by the Badawin when vegetable food is scarce. 




136 First Footsteps in East Africa . : ■ ■ ■ 

should have slept comfortably had not our hungry mules 
hobbled as they were, hopped about the kraal and 
fought till dawn. 

On the 6th December, we arose late to avoid the cold 
morning air, and at 7 a.m. set out over rough ground, 
hoping to ascend the Ghauts that day. After creeping 
about two miles, the camels unable to proceed, threw 
themselves upon the earth, and we unwillingly called 
a halt at Jiyaf, a basin below the Dobo 1 2 fiumara. Here, 
white flocks dotting the hills, and the scavengers of the 
air warned us that we were in the vicinity of villages. 

• Our wigwam was soon full of fair-faced Gudabirsi, 
mostly Loajira* or cow-herd boys, who, according to 
the custom of their class, wore their Tobes bound 
scarf-like round their necks. They begged us to visit 
their village, and offered a heifer for each lion shot on 
Mount Libahlay : unhappily we could not afford time. 
These youths were followed by men and women bring- 
ing milk, sheep, and goats, for which, grass being rare, 
they asked exorbitant prices — eighteen cubits of Cutch 
canvas for a lamb, and two of blue cotton for a bottle 
of ghi. Amongst them was the first really pretty face 
seen by me in the Somali country. The head was well 
formed, and gracefully placed upon a long thin neck and 
narrow shoulders; the hair, brow, and nose were un- 
exceptionable, there was an arch look in the eyes of 
jet and pearl, and a suspicion of African protuberance 
about the lips, which gave the countenance an exceeding 
naiveU . Her skin was a warm, rich nut-brown, an 
especial charm in these regions, and her movements 
had that grace which suggests perfect symmetry of 
limb. The poor girl’s costume, a coif for the back 

1 Dobo in the Somali tongue signifies mud or clay. 

2 The Loajira (from 11 Loh," a cow) is a neatherd ; the 
41 Geljira" is the man who drives camels. 




V.I •— Froth the Zayla Hills to the Marar Prairie . 137 

hair, a cloth imperfectly covering the bosom, and a 
petticoat 'of hides, made no great mystery of forms : 
equally rude were her ornaments ; an armlet and 
pewter earrings, the work of some blacksmith, a neck- 
lace of white porcelain beads, and sundry talismans 
in cases of tarnished and blackened leather. As a 
tribute to her prettiness I gave her some cloth, tobacco, 
and a bit of salt, which was rapidly becoming valuable : 
her husband stood by, and, although the preference was 
marked, he displayed neither anger nor jealousy. She 
showed her gratitude by bringing us milk, and by 
assisting us to start next morning. In the evening we 
hired three fresh camels 1 to carry our goods up the 
ascent, and killed some antelopes which, in a stew, 
were not contemptible. The End of Time insisted 
upon firing a gun to frighten away the lions, who. make 
night hideous with their growls, but never put in an 
appearance. 

The morning cold greatly increased, and we did not 
start till 8 a.m. After half an hour’s march up the bed of a 
fiumara, leading apparently to a cul de sac of lofty rocks in 
the hills, we quitted it for a rude zig-zag winding along its 
left side, amongst bushes, thorn trees and huge rocks. The 
walls of the opposite bank were strikingly perpendicular! 
in some places stratified, in others solid and polished by 
the course of stream and cascade. The principal material 
was a granite, so coarse, that the composing mica, quartz, 
and felspar separated into detached pieces as large as a 
man’s thumb; micaceous grit, which glittered in the 
sunbeams, and various sandstones, abounded. The road 
caused us .some trouble; the camels’ lords were always 
slipping from their mats; I found it necessary to dismount 


1 For these we paid twenty-four cubits of canvas, and two of 
blue cotton ; equivalent to about three shillings. 



138 First Footsteps in East Africa • 

from my mule, and, sitting down, we were stung by the 
large black ants which infest these hills. 1 

About half way up, we passed two cairns, and added 
to them our mite like good Somal. After two hours of hard 
work the summit of this primitive pass was attained, and 
sixty minutes more saw us on the plateau above the hills— 
the second zone of East Africa. Behind us lay the plains, 
of which we vainly sought a view : the broken ground at 
the foot of the mountains is broad, and mists veiled the 
reeking expanse of the low country. 2 The plateau in 
front of us was a wide extent of rolling ground, rising 
slightly towards the west ; its colour was brown with a 
threadbare coat of verdure, and at the bottom of each 
rugged slope ran a stony water-course trending from south- 
west to north-east. The mass of tangled aloes, ragged 
thorn, and prim-looking poison trees, 3 * * * * 8 * * 11 must once have been 


1 The natives call them Jana ; they are about three-fourths of 
an inch long, and armed with stings that prick like thorns and bum 
violently for a few minutes. 

2 Near Qerberah, where the descents are more rapid, such 
panoramas are common. 

3 This is the celebrated W£b&, which produces the Somali 

Wfibiyo, a poison applied to darts and arrows. It is a round stiff 

evergreen, not unlike a bay, seldom taller than twenty feet, 

affecting hill sides and torrent banks, growing in clumps that? look 

black by the side of the Acacias ; thornless, with a laurel-coloured 

leaf, which cattle will not touch, unless forced by famine, pretty 

bunches of pinkish-white flowers, and edible berries black and 
ripening to red. The bark is thin, the wood yellow, compact, 
exceedingly tough and hard, the root somewhat like liquorice ; the 
latter is prepared by trituration and other processes, and the 
produce is a poison in substance and colour resembling pitch. 

Travellers have erroneously supposed the arrow poison of 
Eastern Africa to be the sap of a Euphorbium. The following 

11 observations accompanying a substance procured near Aden, and 
used by the Somalis to poison their arrows.” by F. S. Arnott, Esq., 
M.D., will be read with interest. 



VI*— From the Zayla Hills to the Marat Prairie . 139 

populous; tombs and houses of the early Moslems covered 
. with ruin the hills and ridges. 

About noon, we arrived at a spot called the Kafir’s 
Grave. It is a square enceinte of rude stones about one 


“ In February 1853, Dr. Arnott had forwarded to him a watery 
extract prepared from the root of a tree, described as 1 Wabie,' a 
toxicodendron from the Somali country on the Habr Gerhajis range 
of thfc Goolies mountains. The tree grows to the height of twenty 
feet. The poison is obtained by boiling the root in water, until it 
attains the consistency of an inspissated juice. When cool the barb 
of the arrow is anointed with the juice, which is regarded as a 
virulent poison, and it renders a wound tainted therewith incurable. 
Dr. Arnott was informed that death usually took place within an 
hour ; that the hairs and nails dropped off after death, and it was 
believed that the application of heat assisted its poisonous qualities. 
He could not, however, ascertain the quantity made use of by the 
Somalis, and doubted if the point of an arrow would convey a 
sufficient quantity to produce such immediate effects. He had 
tested its powers in some other experiments, besides the ones 
detailed, and although it failed in several instances, yet he was led 
to the conclusion that it was a very powerful narcotic irritant 
poison. He had not, however, observed the local effect said to be 
produced upon the point of insertion. 1 ' 

" The following trials were described : — 

" 1. A little was inserted into the inside of the ear of a sickly 
sheep, and death occurred in two hours. 

" 2. A little was inserted into the inside of the ear of a 
healthy sheep, and death occurred in two hours preceded by 
convulsions. 

“ 3. Five grains were given to a dog ; vomiting took place after 
an hour, and death in three or four hours. 

" 4. One grain was swallowed by a fowl, but no effect produced. 

“ 5. Three grains were given to a sheep, but without producing 
any effect. 

“6. A small quantity was inserted into the ear and shoulder of 
a dog, but no effect was produced. 

“7. Upon the same dog two days after, the same quantity was 
inserted into the thigh ; death occurred in less than two hours. 

"8. Seven grains were given to a sheep without any effect 
whatever. • 




140 First Footsteps in East Africa . 

hundred yards each side ; and legends say that one Misr, 
a Galla chief, when dying, ordered the place to be filled 
seven times with she-camels destined for his Ahan or 
funeral feast. This is the fourth stage -upon the direct 


"9. To a dog five grains were administered, but it was rejected 
by vomiting ; this was again repeated on the following day, with the 
same result. On the same day four grains were inserted into a 
wound upon the same dog ; it produced violent effects in ten, and 
death in thirty-five minutes. 

“10. To a sheep two grains in solution were given without any 
effect being produced. The post-mortem appearances observed 




were, absence of all traces of inflammation, collapse of 
and distension of the cavities of the heart."^.-^" ... 

Further experiments of the Somafi " 

R. Haines, M.B., assistant surgeon (from Transaction!^ 

Medical and Physical Society of Bombay. No. 2, new?' 
i853-i854)- . 

” Having while at Ahmednuggur received from the ■« 
small quantity of Somali arrow poison, alluded Jp by Mr. VljS 
in his notes on articles of the Materia Medica, and published iit :: tlift^ 
last volume of the Society’s Transactions, and called ' Wabie,' the 
following experiments were made with it : — 

"September 17th. 1. A small healthy rabbit was taken, and 

the skin over the hip being divided, a piece of the poisonous extract 
about the size of a corn of wheat was inserted into the cellular tissue 
beneath: thirty minutes afterwards, seems disinclined to move, 
breathing quicker, passed * * : one hour, again passed * * * followed 
by * * * ; has eaten a little : one hour and a half, appears quite to 
have recovered from his uneasiness, and has become as lively as 
before. (This rabbit was made use of three days afterwards for the 
third experiment.) 

" 2. A full-grown rabbit. Some of the poison being dissolved 
in water a portion of the solution corresponding to about fifteen 
grains was injected into an opening in the peritoneum, so large a 
quantity being used, in consequence of the apparent absence of 
effect in the former case: five minutes, he appears to be in pain, 
squeaking occasionally ; slight convulsive retractions of the head 
and neck begin to take place, passed a small quantity of * * : ten 
minutes, the spasms are becoming more frequent, but are neither 
violent nor prolonged, respiration scarcely preceptible ; he now fell 




VI, — From tkejZayla Hills to the Marar Prairie . 141 

road from *Zayla .to Harar : we had wasted ten days, 
and the want of grass and water made us anxious about 
our animals. The camels could scarcely walk, and my 
mule’s spine rose high beneath the Arab pad: — such are 


on his side : twelve minutes, several severe general convulsions came 
on, and at the end of another minute he was quite dead, the pulsation 
being for the last minute quite imperceptible. The chest was instantly 
opened, but there was no movement of the heart whatever. 

11 September 20th. 3. The rabbit used for the first experiment 
was taken and an attempt was made to inject a little filtered solution 
into the jugular vein, which failed from the large size of the nozzle 
syringe ; a good deal of blood was lost. A portion of the 
solution c6rrfespo$4^g to about two grains and a half of the 
poison was > .then isjeetft! into a small opening made in the pleura. 
; $*tie.,minutes afterwards : symptoms precisely resembling those in 
number two began to appear. Fourteen minutes : convulsions more 
; fell on his side. Sixteen minutes, died. 

portion of the poison, as much as could be applied, was 
iSliiM^ed over the square iron head of an arrow, and allowed to dry. 
The arrow was th&i shot into the buttock of a goat with sufficient 
force to carry the head out of sight ; twenty minutes afterwards, no 
effect whatever having followed, the arrow was extracted. The 
poison had become softened and was wiped completely off two of the 
sides, and partly off the two other sides. The animal appeared to 
suffer very little pain from the wound ; it was kept for a fortnight, 
and then died, but not apparently from any cause connected with 
the wound. In fact it was previously diseased. Unfortunately 
the seat of the wound was not then examined, but a few days 
previously it appeared to have healed of itself. In the rabbit of the 
former experiment, three days after the insertion of the poison in 
the wound, the latter was closed with a dry coagulum and pre- 
sented no marks of inflammation around it. 

" 5. Two good-sized village dogs being secured, to each after 
several hours' fasting, were given about five grains enveloped in meat. 
The smaller one chewed it a long time, and frothed much at the mouth. 
He appeared to swallow very little of it, but the larger one ate the 
whole up without difficulty. After more than two hours no effect 
whatever being perceptible in either animal, they were shot to get rid 
of them. These experiments, though not altogether complete, cer- 
tainly establish the fact that it is a poison of no very great activity. 




14a First Footsteps in East Africa. 

the effects of Jilil, 1 the worst of travelling seasons in 
Eastern Africa. 


The quantity made use of in the second experiment was too great to 
allow a fair deduction to be made as to its properties. When a fourth 
to a sixth of the quantity was employed in the third experiment the 
same effects followed, but with rather less rapidity ; death resulting 
in the one case in ten, in the other in sixteen minutes, although the 
death in the latter case was perhaps hastened by the loss of blood. 
The symptoms more resemble those produced by nux vomica than 
by any other agent. No' apparent drowsiness, spasms, slight at 
first, beginning in the neck, increasing in intensity, extending over the 
whole body, and finally stopping respiration and with it the action 
of the heart. Experiments first and fourth show that a* moderate 
quantity, such as may be introduced on the point of an arrow, pro- 
duced no sensible effect either on a goat or a rabbit, and it could 
scarcely be supposed that it would have more on a man than on the 
latter animal; and the fifth experiment proves that a full dose taken 
into the stomach produces no result within a reasonable time. 

11 The extract appeared to have been very carelessly prepared. It 
contained much earthy matter, and even small stones, and a large 
proportion of what seemed to be oxidized extractive matter also was 
left undisturbed when it was treated with water : probably it was not a 
good -specimen. It seems, however, to keep well, and shows no 
disposition to become mouldy." 

x The Somal divide their year into four seasons: — 

x. Gugi (monsun, from " Gug," rain) begins in April, is violent 
for forty-four days and subsides in August. * Many roads may be 
traversed at this season, which are death in times of drought ; the 
country becomes “Barwdko " (in Arabic, Rakha, a place of plenty), 
forage and water abound, the air is temperate, and the light showers 
enliven the traveller. 

2. Ha gi is the hot season after the monsun, and corresponding 
with our autumn: the country suffers from the Fora, a violent 
dusty Samun, which is allayed by a fall of rain called Karan. 

3. Ddir, the beginning of the cold season, opens the sea to 
shipping. The rain which then falls is called Diarti or Hais : it 
comes with a west-south-west wind from the hills of Harar. 

4. Jilftl is the dry season from December to April. Thecountfy 
then becomes Abar (in Arabic, Jahr), a place of famine : the Nomada 
migrate to the low plains, where pasture is procurable. Some reckon 
as a fifth season, Kalil, or the heats between Jil&l and the monsun.: : 




VI, — From the Zayla Hills to the Marar Prairie . 143 

At 1 p.m. we unloaded under a sycamore tree, called, 
after a Galla chieftain, 1 “ Halimalah,” and giving its 
name to the surrounding valley. This ancient of the 
forest is more than half decayed, several huge limbs lie 
stretched, upon the ground, whence, for reverence, no one 
removes them : upon the trunk, or rather trunks, for it 
bifurcates, are marks deeply cut by a former race, and 
Time has hollowed in the larger stem an arbour capable 
of containing half-a-dozen men. This holy tree was, 
according to the Somal, a place of prayer for the infidel, 
and its ancient honours are not departed. Here, probably 
to commemorate the westward progress of the tribe, the 
Gudabirsi Ugaz or chief has the white canvas turband 
bound about his brows, and hence rides forth to witness 
the equestrian games in the Harawwah Valley. As 
everyone who passes by, visits the Halimalah tree, 
foraging parties of the Northern Isa and the Jibril 
Abokr (a clan of the Habr Awal) frequently meet, and 
the traveller wends his way in fear and trembling. 

The thermometer showed an altitude of 3,350 feet : 
under the tree’s cool shade, the climate reminded me of 
Southern Italy in winter. I found a butter-cup, and 
heard a wood-pecker* tapping on the hollow trunk, a 
reminiscence of English glades. The Abban and his 
men urged an advance in the afternoon. But my health 
had suffered from the bad water of the coast, and the 
camels wore faint with fatigue : we therefore dismissed 
the hired beasts, carried our property into a deserted 
kraal, and, lighting a fire, prepared to “ make all snug ” 


x According to Bruce this tree flourishes everywhere on the low 
hot plains between the Red Sea and the Abyssinian hills. The 
Gallas revere it and plant it over sacerdotal graves. It suggests the 
Fetish trees of Western Africa, and the Hiero-Sykaminon of Egypt. 

2 There are two species of this bird, both called by the Somal, 
" Dandaolay " from their tapping. 



144 First Footsteps in East Africa . 

\ 

for the night. The Badawin, chattering with cold, stood 
closer to the comfortable blaze than ever did pater- 
familias in England : they smoked their faces, toasted 
their hands, broiled their backs with intense enjoyment, 
and waved their legs to and fro through the flame to 
singe away the pile, which at this season grows long. 
The End of Time, who was surly, compared then! to 
demons, and quoted the Arab’s saying: — “Allah never 
bless smooth man, or hairy woman ! ” 

On the 8th of December, at 8 a.m., we travelled 
slowly up the Halimalah Valley, whose clayey surface 
glistened with mica and quartz pebbles from the hills. 
All the trees are thorny except the Sycamore and the 
Asclepias. The Gub, or Jujube, grows luxuriantly in 
thickets : its dried wood is used by women to fumigate 
their hair 1 : the Kedi, a tree like the porcupine — all 
spikes — supplies the Badawin with hatchet-handles. I 
was shown the Abol with its edible gum, and a kind of 
Acacia,, here called Galol. Its bark dyes cloth a dull 
red, and the thorn issues from a bulb which, when 
young and soft, is eaten by the Somal, when old it 
becomes woody, and hard as a nut. At 9 a.m. we 
crossed the Lesser Abbaso, a fiumara with high banks 
of stiff clay and filled with large rolled stones : issuing 
from it, we traversed a thorny path over ascending 
ground between higher hills, and covered with large 
boulders and step-like layers of grit. Here appeared 
several Gudabirsi tombs, heaps of stones or pebbles, 
surrounded by a fence of thorns, or an enceinte of loose 
blocks : in the latter, slabs are used to make such houses 
as children would build in pldy, to denote the number 
of establishments left by the deceased. The new grave 
is known by the conical milk-pails surmounting the stick. 


•x The limbs are perfumed with the M ffedi,” and “Karanlit” * 
products of the Ugadayn or southern country. 




W * — From the Zayla Hills to the Marar Prairie. . 145 

at the head of the corpse, upon the neighbouring tree is 
thrown the mat which bore the dead man to his last 
home, and hard by are the blackened stones upon which 
his funeral feast was cooked. At 11 a.m. we reached 
the Greater Abbaso, a fiumara about 100 yards wide, 
fringed with lovely verdure and full of the antelope 
called Gurnuk : its watershed was, as usual in this 
region, from west and south-west to east and north- 
east. About noon we halted, having travelled eight 
miles from the Holy Tree. 

At half past three reloading we followed the course of 
the Abbaso Valley, the most beautiful spot we had yet 
seen. The presence of mankind, however, was denoted 
by the cut branches of thorn encumbering the bed : we 
remarked too, the tracks of lions pursued by hunters, and 
the frequent streaks of serpents, sometimes five inches in 
diameter. Towards evening our party closed up in fear, 
thinking that they saw spears glancing through the trees: 
I 'Qpated their alarm lightly, but the next day proved 
that it wjis not wholly imaginary. At sunset we met a 
shepherd who swore upon the stone 1 to bring us milk 
in exchange for tobacco, and presently, after a five miles’ 
march, wb halted in a deserted kraal on the left bank of 
a fiumara. Clouds gathered black upon the hill tops, 
and a comfortless blast, threatening rain, warned us not 
to delay pitching the Gurgi. A large fire was lighted, 
and several guns were discharged to frighten away the 
lions that infest this place. Twice during the night our 

z This great oath suggests the litholatry of the Arabs, derived 
from the Abyssinian and Galla Sabaeans ; it is regarded by the isa 
and Gudabirsi Badawin as even more binding than the popular 
religious adjurations. When a suspected person denies his guilt, 
the judge places a stone before him saying “ Tabo 1 ” (feel I) ; the liar 
will seldom dare to touch it. Sometimes a Somali, will take up a 
stone and say "Dag&h*,” (it is a stone), he may then generally be 
believed. 



146 First Footsteps in East Africa. 

camels started up and rushed round their thorn ring in 
alarm. 

Late in the morning of Saturday, the 9th December, 
I set out accompanied by Rirash and the End of Time, 
to visit some ruins a little way distant from the direct road. 
After an hour's ride we turned away from the Abbaso 
Fiumara and entered a basin among the hills distant 
about sixteen miles from the Holy Tree. This is the site 
of Darbiyah Kola — Kola's Fort — so called from its 
Galla queen. It is said that this city and its neighbour 
Aububah fought like certain cats in Kilkenny till both 
were “eaten up": the Gudabirsi fix the event at the 
period when their' forefathers still inhabited Bulhar on 
the coast — about 300 years ago. If the date be correct, the 
substantial ruins have fought a stern fight with time. 
Remnants of houses cumber the soil, and the carefully built 
wells are filled with rubbish : the palace was pointed out 
to me with its walls of stone and clay intersected by layers 
of wood work. The mosque is a large roofless bujjpng 
containing twelve square pillars of rude masonry, and 
the Mihrab, or prayer niche, is denoted by a circular arch * 
of tolerable construction. But the voice of the Muezzin 
is hushed for ever, and creepers now twine round the ruined 
fane. The scene was still and dreary as the grave; for a 
mile and a half in length all was ruins — ruins — ruins. 

Leaving this dead city, we rode towards the south- 
west between two rugged hills of which the loftiest summit 
is called Wanauli. As usual they are rich in thorns: the 
tall “Wadi" affords a gum useful to doth-dyers, and 
the leaves of the lofty Wumba are considered, after the 
Daum-palm, the best material for mats. On the ground 
appeared the blue flowers of the “ Man " or “ Himbah,” 1 
a shrub resembling a potato : it bears a gay yellow apple 
full of brown seeds which is not eaten by the SomaL ’ My 
companions made ime taste some of the Karir berries, 

x The wild egg-plant, known all over Zanzibar and the East coast* 




VI, — From the Zayla Hills to the Marar Prairie, 147 

which in colour and flavour resemble red currants : the 
leaves are used as a dressing to ulcers. Topping the 
ridge we stood for a few minutes to observe the view 
before us. Beneath our feet lay a long grassy plain — the 
sight must have gladdened the hearts of our starving 
mules I — and for the first time in Africa horses appeared 
grazing free amongst the bushes. A little further off lay 
the Aylonda valley studded with graves, and dark with 
verdure. Beyond it stretched the Wady Harawwah, a 
long gloomy hollow in the general level. The background 
was a bold sweep of blue hill, the second gradient of the 
Harar line, and on its summit closing the western horizon 
lay a golden streak — the Marar Prairie. Already I felt at 
the end of my journey. 

About noon, reaching a kraal, whence but that 
morning our Gudabirsi Abbans had driven off their kine, 
we sat under a tree and with a pistol reported arrival. 
Presently the elders came out and welcomed their old 
acquaintance the End of Time as a distinguished guest. 
He eagerly inquired about the reported quarrel between 
the Abbans and their brother-in-law the Jirad Adan. 
When assured that it was the offspring of Somali imagi- 
nation, he rolled his head, and with dignity remarked, 
“ What man shutteth to us, that Allah openeth ! ” We 
complimented each other gravely upon the purity of our 
intentions — amongst Moslems a condition of success — and 
not despising second causes, lost no time in sending a 
horseman for the Abbans. Presently some warriors came 
out and inquired if we were of the Caravan that was 
travelling last evening up a valley with laden camels. 
On our answering in the affirmative, they laughingly 
declared that a commando of twelve horsemen had 
followed us with the intention of a sham-attack. This is 
favourite sport with the'Badawin. When however the 
traveller shows fright, the feint is apt to turn out a fact. 
On one occasion a party of Arab merchants, not under- 



148 First Footsteps in East Africa. 

standing the? " fun of the thing,” shot two Somal ; the 
tribe had the justice to acquit the strangers, mulcting 
them, however, a few yards of cloth for the families of 
the deceased. In reply I fired a pistol unexpectedly over 
the heads of my new hosts, and improved the occasion of 
their terror by deprecating any practical facetiousness in 
future. 

We passed the day under a tree : the camels escorted 
by my two attendants, and the women, did not arrive till 
sunset, having occupied about eight hours in marching as 
many miles. Fearing lions, we pitched inside the kraal, 
despite crying children, scolding wives, cattle rushing ^ 
about, barking dogs, flies and ticks, filth and confinement. 

I will now attempt a description of a village in Eastern 
Africa. 

The Rer or Kraal 1 is a line of scattered huts on plains 
where thorns are rare, beasts of prey scarce, and raids 
not expected. In the hills it is surrounded by a strong 
fence to prevent cattle straying : this, when danger 
induces caution, is doubled and trebled. Yet the lion 
will sometimes break through it, and the leopard clears 
it, prey in mouth, with a bound. The abattis has usually 
four entrances which are choked up with heaps of bushes 
at night. The interior space is partitioned qff by dwarf 
hedges into rings, which contain and separate the 
different species of cattle. Sometimes there is an outer 
compartment adjoining the exterior fence, set apart for 
the camels ; usually they are placed in the centre of the 
kraal. Horses being most valuable are side-lined and 
tethered close to the owner's hut, and rude bowers of 
brush and fire wood protect the weaklings of the flocks 
from the heat of the sun and the inclement night breeze* 

At intervals around and inside the outer abattis ere 
built the Gurgi or wigwams — hemispheric huts like 4 M 
# bee-hives about five feet high by six in diameter : the/ 

1 Kariyah is the Atabic word. 




VI.— From the Zayla Hills to the Marar Prairie. 149 

are even -smaller in the warm regions, but they increase 
in ‘size as the elevation of the country renders climate 
les& genial. The material is a framework of “Digo,” 
or sticks bent and hardened in the fire : to build the 
Hut, these are planted in the ground, tied together with 
cords, and covered with mats of two different kinds : 
the Aus composed of small bundles of grass neatly 
joined, is hard and smooth ; the Kibid has a long pile 
and is used as couch as well as roof. The single 
entrance in front is provided with one of these articles 
which serves as a curtain; hides are spread upon the 
top during the monsun, and little heaps of earth are 
sometimes raised outside to keep out wind and rain. 

The furniture is simple as the building. Three 
stones and a hole form the fireplace, near which sleep 
the children, kids, and lambs : there being no chimney, 
the interior is black with sqpt. The cow-skin couches 
are suspended during the day, like arms and* other 
articles which suffer from rats and white ants, by loops 
of cords to the sides. The principal ornaments are 
basket-work bottles, gaily adorned with beads, cowries, 
and stained leather. Pottery being here unknown, the 
Badawin twist the fibres of the root into various shapes, 
and make them water-tight with the powdered bark of 
another tree. 1 The Han is a' large wicker-work bucket, 
mounted in a framework of sticks, and used to contain 
water on journeys. The Guraf (a word derived from 
the Arabic' “Ghurfah”) is a conical-shaped vessel, used 
to bale out the contents of a well. The Del, or milk- 
pail, is shaped like two cones joined at the base by 
lateral thongs, the upper and smaller half acting as cup 
and cover. And finally the Wesi, or water bottle, 
contains the traveller’s store for drinking and religious 
ablution. 

I In the northern country the water-proofing matter is, accord- 
ing to travellers, the juice of the Quolquol, a species of Euphorbia. 


150 First Footsteps in East Africa . 

When the kraal is to be removed, the huts and 
furniture are placed upon the camels, and the hedges 
and earth are sometimes set on fire, to purify the place 
and deceive enemies. Throughout the country black 
circles of cinders or thorn diversify the hill sides, and 
show an extensive population. Travellers always seek 
deserted kraals for security of encampment. As they 
swarm with vermin by night and flies by day, 1 I 
frequently made strong objections to these favourite 
localities: the utmost conceded to me was a fresh 
enclosure added by a smaller hedge to the outside 
abattis of the more populous cow-kraals. 

On the 10th December we halted : the bad water, 
the noonday sun of 107°, and the cold mornings — 51 0 
being the average — had seriously affected my health. 
All the population flocked to see me, darkening the hut 
with nodding wigs and staring faces : and — Gudabirsi 
are polite knaves — apologized for the intrusion. Men, 
women, and children appeared in crowds, bringing milk 
and ghi, meat and water, several of the elders remem- 
bered having seen me at Berberah,* and the blear-eyed 
maidens, who were in no wise shy, insisted upon 
admiring the white stranger. 

Feeling somewhat restored by repose, I started the 
next day, “ with a tail on” to inspect the ruins of 
Aububah. After a rough ride over stony ground we 
arrived at a grassy hollow, near a line of hills, and 
dismounted to visit the Shaykh Aububah’s remains. 


z The flies are always most troublesome where cows have been; 
kraals of goats and camels are comparatively free from the nuisance. 

2 Some years ago a French lady landed at Berberah: her white 
face, according to the End of Time, made every man hate his wife, 
and every wife hate herself. 1 know not who the fair dame was: her 
charms and black silk dress, however, have made alasting impression 
upon the Somali heart ; from the coast to Harar she is still re- 
membered with rapture. 




’ VI* — From the Zayla Hills to the Mara Prairie. 151 

He rests under a little conical dome of brick, clay and 
wood, similar in construction to that of Zayla : it is 
falling to pieces, and the adjoining mosque, long roof- 
less, is overgrown with trees, that rustle melancholy 
sounds in the light joyous breeze. Creeping in by a 
dwarf door or rather hole, my Gudabirsi guides showed 
me a bright object forming the key of the arch: as it 
shone they suspected silver, and the End of Time 
whispered a sacrilegious plan for purloining it. Inside 
the vault were three graves apparently empty, and upon 
the dark sunken floor lay several rounded stones, 
resembling cannon balls, and used as weights by the 
more civilised Somal. Thence we proceeded to the 
battle-field, a broad sheet of sandstone, apparently 
dinted by the hoofs of mules and horses : on this 
ground, which, according to my guides, was in olden 
days soft and yielding, took place the great action 
between Aububah and Darbiyah Kola. A second 
mosque was found with walls in tolerable repair, but, 
like the rest of the place, roofless. Long Gulad 
ascended the broken staircase of a small square mina- 
ret, and delivered a most ignorant and Badawi-like 
Azan or call to prayer. Passing by the shells of houses, 
we concluded our morning’s work with a visit to the 
large graveyard. Apparently it did not contain the 
bones of Moslems : long lines of stones pointed west- 
ward, and one tomb was covered with a coating of hard 
mortar, in whose sculptured edge my benighted friends 
detected magical inscriptions. I heard of another city 
called Ahammad in the neighbouring hills, but did not 
visit it. These are all remains of Galla settlements, 
- which the ignorance and exaggeration of the Somal fill 
with M writings ” and splendid edifices. 

Returning home we found that our Gudabirsi 
Badawin had at length obeyed the summons. The 
six sons of a noted chief, Ali Addah or White Ali, by 



jj2 First Footsteps in East Africa: 

three different mothers, Beuh, Igah, Khayri, Nur, Ismail 
and Yunis, all ^advanced towards me as I dismounted, 
gave the hand of friendship, and welcomed me to their 
homes. With the exception of the first-named, a hard- 
featured man at least forty years old, tfce brothers were 
good-looking youths, with clear brow skins, regular 
features, and graceful figures. They entered the Gurgi 
when invited, but refused to eat, saying, that they came 
for honour not for food. The Hajj Sharmarkay’s intro- 
ductory letter was read aloud to their extreme delight, 
and at their solicitation, I perused it a second and a 
third time; then having dismissed, with sundry small 
presents, the two Abbans Raghi and Rirash, I wrote a 
flattering account of them to the Hajj, and entrusted it 
to certain citizens who were returning in caravan Zayla- 
wards, after a commercial tour in the interior. 

Before they departed, there was a feast after the 
Homeric fashion. A sheep was “ cut, n disembowelled, 
dismembered, tossed into one of our huge cauldrons, and 
devoured within the hour: the almost- live food 1 was 
washed down with huge draughts of milk. The feasters 
resembled Wordsworth's cows, “ forty feeding like one”: 
in the left hand they held the meat to their teeth, and cut 
off the slice in possession with long daggers perilously 
close, were their noses longer and their mouths less 
obtrusive. During the dinner I escaped from the place pf 
flies, and retired to a favourite tree. Here the End of 
Time seeing me still in pain, insisted upon trying a Somali 
medicine. He cut two pieces of dry wood, scooped a hole 
in the shorter, and sharpened the longer, applied point to 
socket, which he sprinkled with a little sand, placed his 


x. The Abyssinian Brindo of omophageanjfame is not eaten ty 
the Somal, who always boil, broil, or sun-dry their flesh. Theyhave, ' 
however, no idea of keeping it, whereas the more civilised dtisens of , 
Harar hang their meat till tender. 




VI. —From the Zayla Hills to the Marat Prairie. 153 

foot upon. the “female stick/* and rubbed the other 
between his palms till smoke and char appeared. He 
then cauterized my stomach vigorously in six different 
places, quoting a tradition, “the End of Physic is Fire.” 

On Tuesdjir the 12th December, I vainly requested 
the two sons of White Ali, who had constituted themselves 
our guides, to mount their horses : they feared to fatigue 
the valuable animals at a season when grass is rare and 
dry. I was disappointed by seeing the boasted “ Faras" 1 2 * * 
of the Somal, in the shape of ponies hardly thirteen hands 
high. The head is pretty, the eyes are well opened, and 
f he ears are small ; the form also is good, but the original 
Arab breed has degenerated in the new climate. They 
are soft, docile and — like all other animals in this part 
of the world — timid: the habit of climbing rocks makes 
them sure-footed, and they show the remains of blood 
when forced to fatigue. The Gudabirsi will seldom 
sell these horses, the great safeguard against their 
conterminous tribes, the Isa and Girhi, who are. all 
infantry: a village seldom contains more than six or eight, 
and the lowest value would be ten cows or twenty Tobes.* 
Careful of his beast when at rest, the Somali Badawi in 
the saddle is rough and cruel : whatever beauty the 
animal may possess in youth, completely disappears before 
the fifth, year, and few are without spavin, or sprained 
back-sinews. In some parts of the country, 8 “to ride 


1 Whilst other animals have indigenous names, the horse 
throughout the Somali country retains the Arab appellation "Faras.” 
This proves that the Somal, like their progenitors, the Gallas, origin- 
ally had no cavalry. The Gudabirsi tribe has but lately mounted 
itself by winking purchases of the Habr Girhajis and the Habr Awal 
herds. 

2 The milch cow is here worth two Tobes or about six shillings. 

'3 Particularly amongst the windward tribes visited by Lieut. 

Gruttenden, from whom I borrow this description. 



154 -Firs* Footsteps in East Africa. 

violently to your hut two or three times before finally dis- 
mounting, is considered a great compliment, and the same 
ceremony is observed on leaving. Springing into the 
saddle (if he has one), with the aid of his spear, the Sojpali 
cavalier first endeavours to infuse a little spirit into his 
half-starved hack by persuading him to accomplish a few 
plunges and capers : then, his heels raining a hurricane 
of blows against the animal’s ribs, and occasionally using 
his spear-point as a spur, away he gallops, and after a 
short circuit, in which he endeavours to show himself to 
the best advantage, returns to his starting point at full 
speed, when the heavy Arab bit brings up the blown horse 
with a shock that half breaks his jaw and fills his mouth 
with blood. The affection of the true Arab for his horse 
is proverbial: the cruelty of the Somali to his, may I think 
be considered equally so.” The Badawin practise horse- 
racing, and run for bets, which are contested with 
ardour : on solemn occasions, they have rude equestrian 
games, in which they display themselves and their 
animals. The Gudabirsi, and indeed most of the Somal, 
sit loosely upon their horses. Their saddle is a demi- 
pique, a high-backed wooden frame, like the Egyptian 
fellah’s : two light splinters leave a clear space for the 
spine, and the tree is tightly bound with wet thongs : a 
sheepskin shabracque is loosely spread over it, and the 
drawf iron stirrup admits only the big toe, as these people 
fear a stirrup which, if the horse fall, would entangle the 
foot. Their bits are cruelly severe ; a solid iron ring, as 
in the Arab bridle embracing the lower jaw takes the 
place of a curb chain. Some of the head-stalls, made at 
Berberah, are prettily made of cut leather and bright steel 
ornaments like diminutive quoits. The whip is a hard 
hide handle, plated with zinc, and armed with a single 
short broad thong. 

With the two sons of White Ali and the End of 
Time, at 8 a.m., on the 12th December, I rode forward, 



VL-t-From the Zayla HiU* to the Mam Prairie. 1 55 

leaving the jaded camels in charge of my companions and 
the women. We crossed the plain in a south-westerly 
direction, and after traversing rolling ground, we came to 
a ridge, which commanded an extensive view. Behind 
lay the Wanauli Hills, already purple in the distance. 
On our left was a mass of cones, each dignified by its own 
name; no one, it is said, can ascend them, which 
probably means that it would be a fatiguing walk. Here 
are the visitation-places of three celebrated saints, Amud, 
Sau, and Shaykh Sharlagamadi, or the “ Hidden from 
Evil.” To the north-west I was shown some blue 
peaks tenanted by the Isa Somal. In front, backed by 
the dark hills of Harar, lay the Harawwah valley. The 
breadth is about fifteen miles : it runs from south-west to 
north-east, between the Highlands of the Girhi and the 
rolling ground of the Gudabirsi Somal, as far, it is said, 
as the Dankali country. Of old this luxuriant waste 
belonged to the former tribe; about twelve years ago it 
was taken from them by the Gudabirsi, who carried off 
at the same time thirty cows, forty camels, and between 
three and four hundred sheep and goats. 

Large herds tended by spearmen and grazing about 
the bush, warned us that we were approaching the kraal 
in which the sons of White Ali were camped ; at half- 
past 10 a.m., after riding eight miles, we reached the 
place which occupies the lower slope of the Northern 
Hills that enclose the Harawwah valley. We spread 
our hides under a tree, and were soon surrounded by 
Badawin, who brought milk, sun-dried beef, ghi and 
honey in one of the painted wooden bowls exported 
from - Cutch. After breakfast, at which the End of 
Time distinguished himself by dipping his meat into 
honey, we went out gun in hand towards the bush. It 
swarmed with sand-antelope and Gurnuk: the ground- 
squirrels haunted every ant-hill, hoopoos and spur-fowls 
paced ATnnng the thickets, in the trees we heard the 



i$S First Footsteps in East Africa. # 

frequent cry of the Gobiyan and the bird facetiously 
termed from its cry “ Dobo-dogon-guswen,” and the 
bright-coloured eagle, the Abodi or Bakiyyah, 1 lay on 
wing high in the cloudless air. When tired of killing we 
returned to our cow-hides, and sat in conversation with 
the Badawin. They boasted of the skill with which they 
used the shield, and seemed not to understand the 
efficiency of a sword-parry: to illustrate the novel idea I 
gave a stick to the best man, provided myself in the same 
way, and allowed him to cut at me. After repeated 
failures he received a sounding blow upon the least bony 
portion of his person : the crowd laughed long and loud, 
and the pretending “knight-at-arms” retired in con- 
fusion. 

Darkness fell, but no caravan appeared: it had been 
delayed by a runaway mule — perhaps by the desire to 
restrain my vagrant propensities — and did not arrive till 
midnight. My hosts cleared a Gurgi for our reception, 
brought us milk, and extended their hospitality to the full 
limits of even savage complaisance. 

Expecting to march on the 13th December soon after 
dawn, I summoned Beuh and his brethren to the hut, 
reminding him that the Hajj had promised irife an escort 
without delay to the village of the Jirad Adan. To my 
instances they replied that, although they were most 


1 This beautiful bird, with a black and crimson plume, and 
wings, lined with silver, soars high and seldom descends except at 
night : its shyness prevented my shooting a specimen. The Abodi 
devours small deer and birds : the female lays a single egg in a large 
loose nest bn the summit of a tall tree, and she abandons her home: 
when the hand of man has violated it. The Somal have majQrj 
superstitions connected with this eagle : if it touch a child the latjjtfr 
dies, unless protected by the talismanic virtues of the • Hajar • 
j^bodi,” a stone found in the bird's body. As. it frequently swoops 
upon children carrying meat, the belief has doubtlessly frequently 
fulfill itself. 



VI.— From the Zayla Bills to the Marar Prairie. 157 

anxious to oblige, the arrival of Mudah the eldest son 
rendered a consultation necessary ; and retiring to the 
woods, sat in palaver from 8 a.m. to past noon. At last 
they came to a resolution which could not be shaken*. 
They would not trust one of their number in the Jirad*s 
country; a horseman however, should carry a letter 
inviting the Girhi chief to visit his brothers-in-law. I 
was assured that A dan would not drink water before 
mounting to meet us : but, fear is reciprocal, there was 
evidently bad blood between them, and already a know- 
ledge of Somali customs caused me to suspect the result 
of our mission. However, a letter was written reminding 
the Jirad of “the word spoken under the tree,” and 
containing in case of recusance, a threat to cut off the 
salt jnrell at which his cows are periodically driven to 
drink. Then came the bargain for safe conduct. After 
much haggling, especially on the part of the handsome 
Igah, they agreed to receive twenty Tobes, three bundles 
of tobacco, and fourteen cubits of indigo-dyed cotton. In 
addition to this I offered as a bribe one of my handsome 
Abyssinian shirts with a fine silk fringe, made at Aden, 
to be received by the man Beuh on the day of entering 
the Jirad’s village. 

I arose early in the next morning, having been 
promised by the Abbans grand sport in the Harawwah 
valley. The Somal had already divided the elephants’ 
spoils : they were to claim the hero’s feather, I was to 
receive two-thirds of the ivory — nothing remained to be 
done but the killing. After sundry pretences and prayers 
for delay, Beuh saddled his hack, the Hammal mounted 
one mule, a stout-hearted Badawi called Fahi took a 
second, and we started to find the herds. The End of 
Time, lagged in the rear : the reflection that a mule cannot 
outrun an elephant, made him look so ineffably miserable, 
that I sent, him back to the kraal. “Dost, thou believe 
me to be » coward, O Pilgrim ? ” thereupon exhumed 



i 5 8 First Footsteps in East Africa . 

the Mullah, waxing bold in the very joy of his heart. 
“ Of a truth I do ! ” was my reply. Nothing abashed, he 
hammered his mule with heel, and departed ejaculating, 
“ What hath man but a single life ? and he who throweth 
it away, what is he but a fool ? ” Then we advanced with 
cocked guns, Beuh singing, Boanerges-like, the Song of 
the Elephant. 

In the Somali country, as amongst the Kafirs, after 
murdering a man or boy, the death of an elephant is con- 
sidered the act of heroism : most tribes wear for it the hair- 
feather and .the ivory bracelet. Some hunters, like the 
Bushmen of the Cape , 1 kill the Titan of the forests with 
barbed darts carrying Waba-poison. The general way of 
hunting resembles that of the Abyssinian Agageers 
described by Bruce. One man mounts a white pony, and 
galloping before the elephant, induces him, as he readily 
does — firearms being unknown — to charge and “chivy.” 
The rider directs his course along, and close to, some 
bush, where a comrade is concealed ; and the latter, as 
the animal passes at speed, cuts the back sinew of the 
hind leg, where in the human subject the tendon Achilles 
would be, with a sharp broad and heavy knife.* This 
wound at first occasions little inconvenience: presently 
the elephant, fancying, it is supposed, that a thorn has 
stuck in his foot, stamps violently, and rubs the scratch 
till the sinew is fairly divided. The animal, thus disabled, 


z The Bushman creeps close to the beast and wounds it in the 
leg or stomach with a diminutive dart covered with a couch of black 
poison : if a drop of blood appear, death results from the almost 
unfelt wound. 

2 So the Veddahs of Ceylon are said to have destroyed the 
elephant by shooting a tiny arrow into the sole of the foot. Thft. 
Kafirs attack it in bodies armed with sharp and broad-head 
11 Omkondo " or assegai: at last, one finds the opportunity of 
cutting deep into the hind back sinew, and so disables the animal. 




'VI* — From the Zayla Hills to the Marar Prairie . 159 

is left to perish wretchedly of hunger and thirst: the tail, 
as amongst the Kafirs, is cut off to serve as trophy, and 
the ivories are removed when loosened by decomposition. 
In this part of Africa the elephant is never tamed. 1 

For six hours we rode the breadth of the Harawwah 
Valley: it was covered with wild vegetation, and surface- 
drains, that carry off the surplus of the hills enclosing 
it. In some places the torrent beds had cut twenty 
feet into the soil. The banks were fringed with milk- 
bush and Asclepias, the Armo-creeper, a variety of 
thorns, and especially the yellow-berried Jujube : here 
numberless birds followed bright-winged butterflies’, and 
the “ Shaykhs of the Blind,” as the people call the black 
fly, settled in swarms upon our hands and faces as we 
rode by. The higher ground was overgrown with a kind 
of cactus, which here becomes a tree, forming shady 
avenues. Its quadrangular fleshy branches of emerald 
green, sometimes forty feet high, support upon their 
summits large round bunches of a bright crimson berry : 
when the plantation is close, domes of extreme beauty 
appear scattered over the surface of the country. This 
" Hassadin ” abounds in burning milk, and the Somal 
look downwards when passing under its branches : the 
elephant is said to love it, and in many places the trees 
were torn to pieces by hungry trunks. The nearest 
approaches to game were the last year’s earths ; likely 
places, however, shady trees and green thorns near 
water, were by no means uncommon. When we reached 
the valley’s southern wall, Beuh informed us that we 
might ride all day, if we pleased, with the same result. 


1 The traveller Delegorgue asserts that the Boers induce the 
young elephant to accompany them, by rubbing upon its trunk the 
hand wetted with the perspiration of the huntsman's brow, and that 
the calf, deceived by the similarity of smell, believes that it is with its 
dam. The fact is, that the orphan elephant, like the bison, follows 
man because it fears to be left alone. 



x6o First Footsteps in East Africa. 

At Zayla I had been informed that elephants are ^ tfiicfc 
as sand” in Harawwah : even the Gudabirsi, wheh M 
a distance, declared that they fed there like sheep, and, 
after our failure, swore that they had killed thirty bat 
last year. The animals were probably in the high 
Harirah Valley, and would be driven downwards by 
the cold at a later period: some future Gordon Cumming 
may therefore succeed where the Hajj Abdullah notably 
failed. 

On the 15th December I persuaded the valiant 
Beuh, with his two brothers and his bluff cousin Fahi, 
to cross the valley with us. After recovering a mule 
which had strayed five miles back to the well, and 
composing sundry quarrels between Shahrazad, whose 
swains had detained her from camel-loading, and the 
Kalandar whose one eye flashed with indignation at her 
conduct, we set out in a southerly direction. An hour's 
march brought us to an open space surrounded by thin 
thorn forest : in the centre is an ancient grave, about 
which are performed the equestrian games when the 
turband of the Ugaz has been bound under the Holy 
Tree. Shepherds issued from the bush to stare at us as 
we passed, and stretched forth the hand for “ Bori” i the 
maidens tripped forwards exclaiming, “Come, girls, let 
us look at this prodigy ! " and they never withheld an 
answer if civilly addressed. Many of them were grown 
up, and not a few were old maids, the result of the tribe’s 
isolation ; for here, as in Somaliland generally, the union 
of cousins is abhorred. The ground of the valley is a 
stiff clay, sprinkled with pebbles of primitive formation : 
the hills are mere rocks, and the torrent banks with 
strata of small stones, showed a water-mack varying from 
ten to fifteen feet in height : in these fiumaras we sawvjr 
frequent traces of the Adler-game, deer and hog. 

1 p.M. our camels and mules were watered at wells in 
broad wady called Jannah-Gaban or the Little Garden ; 



VI* — From the Zayla Hills to the Marat Prairie * 161 

its course, I was told, lies northwards through the 
Harawwah Valley to the Odla and Waruf, two 
depressions, in the Wayma country near Tajurrah. 
About half an hour afterwards we arrived at a deserted 
sheepfold distant six miles from our last station. After 
unloading we repaired t <5 a neighbouring well, and found 
the water so hard that it raised lumps like nettle stings 
in the bather’s skin. The only remedy for the evil is an 
unguent of oil or butter, a precaution which should never 
be neglected by the African traveller. At first the 
sensation of grease annoys, after a few days it is 
forgotten, and at last the “ pat of butter ” is expected 
as pleasantly as the pipe or the cup of coffee. It 
prevents the skin from chaps and sores, obviates the 
evil effects of heat, cold, and wet, and neutralizes the 
Proteus-like malaria poison. The Somal never fail to 
anoint themselves when they can afford ghi, and the 
Badawi is at the . summit of his bliss, when sitting in 
the blazing sun, or — heat acts upon these people as upon 
serpents — with his back opposite a roaring fire, he is 
being smeared, rubbed, and kneaded by a companion. 

My guides, fearing lions and hyenas, would pass the 
night inside a foul sheepfold : I was not without difficulty 
persuaded to join them. At eight next morning we set 
out through an uninteresting thorn-bush towards one of 
those T6tes or isolated hills which form admirable bench- 
marks in the Somali country. “ Koralay,” a term cor- 
responding with our Saddle-back, exactly describes its 
shape : pommel and crupper, in the shape of two huge 
granite bouldersj were all complete, and between them 
was a depression for a seat. As day advanced the 
temperature changed from 50° to a maximum of 12 1°. 
After marching about five miles, we halted in a broad 
* watercourse called Gallajab, the “Plentiful Water”: 
there we bathed, and dined on an excellent camel which 
had broken its leg by falling from a bank. 



1 62 First Footsteps in East Africa . 

Resuming our march at 5 p.m., we travelled over 
ascending ground which must be most fertile after rain: 
formerly it belonged to the Girhi, and the Gudabirsi 
boasted loudly of their conquest. After an hour’s march 
we reached the base of Koralay, upon whose lower slopes 
appeared a pair of the antelopes called Alakud 1 : they 
are tame, easily shot, and eagerly eaten by the Badawin. 
Another hour of slow travelling brought us to a broad 
fiumara with high banks of stiff clay thickly wooded and 
showing a water-mark eighteen feet above the sand. 
The guides named these wells Agjogsi, probably a generic 
term signifying that water is standing close by. Cross- 
ing the fiumara we ascended a hill, and found upon the 
summit a large kraal alive with heads of kine. The 
inhabitants flocked out to stare at us and the women 
uttered cries of wonder. I advanced towards the 
prettiest, and fired my rifle by way of salute over her 
head. The people delighted exclaimed, Mod ! Mod I — 
11 Honour to thee ! ” — and we replied with shouts of Kulli- 
ban — “May heaven aid ye!”* At 5 p.m., after five 
miles 1 march, the camels were unloaded in a. deserted 
kraal whose high fence denoted danger of wild beasts. 
The cowherds bade us beware of lions : but a day before 
a girl had been dragged out of her hut, and Moslem' 
burial could be given to only one of her legs. A 
Badawi named Uddao, whom we hired as mule-keeper, 
was ordered to spend the night singing, and, as is 
customary with Somali watchmen, to address and 


z An antelope, about five hands high with small horns, which 
inhabits the high ranges of the mountains, generally in couples, 
resembles the musk deer, and is by no means shy, seldom flying till 
close pressed ; when running it hops awkwardly upon the toes and. 
never goes far. 

2 These are solemn words used in the equestrian games of the 
Somal. 




VI* — From the Zayla Hills to the Marar Prairie * 163 

answer himself dialogue- wise with a different voice, in 
order to persuade thieves that several men are on the 
alert. He was a spectacle of wildness as he sat before 
the blazing fire — his joy by day, his companion and pro- 
tector in the shades, the only step made by him in 
advance of his brethren the Cynocephali. 

We were detained four days at Agjogsi by the non- 
appearance of the Jirad Adan : this delay gave me an 
opportunity of ascending to the summit of Koralay the 
Saddleback, which lay about a mile north of our encamp- 
ment. As we threaded the rocks and hollows of the 
side we came upon dens strewed with cows 1 bones, and 
proving by a fresh taint that the tenants had lately quitted 
them. In this country the lion is seldom seen unless 
surprised asleep in his lair of thicket : during my journey, 
although at times the roaring was heard all night, I saw 
but one. The people have a. superstition that the king of 
beasts will not attack a single traveller, because such a 
person, they say, slew the mother of all the lions ; except 
in darkness or during violent storms, which excite the 
fiercer camivors, he is a timid animal, much less feared 
by the people than the angry and agile leopard. Unable 
to run with rapidity when pressed by hunger, he pursues 
a party of travellers as stealthily as a cat, and arrived 
within distance, springs, strikes down the hindermost, and 
carries him away to the bush. 

From the summit of Koralay, we had a fair view of 
the surrounding country. At least forty kraals, many 
of them deserted, lay within the range of sight. On all 
sides except the north-west and south-east was a mass of 
sombre rock and granite hill: the course of the valleys 
between the several ranges was denoted by a lively green, 
. and the plains scattered in patches over the landscape 
shone with dull yellow, the effect of clay and stubble, 
whilst a light mist encased the prospect in a circlet of blue 
and silver. Here the End of Timd conceived the jocose 

11 — 2 



164 First Footsteps in East Africa • 

idea of crowing me king of the country. With loud cries 
of Buhl Buhl Buhl he showered leaves of a gum tree 
and a little water from a prayer bottle over my head, and 
then with all solemnity bound on the turband . 1 It is 
perhaps fortunate that this facetiousness was not wit- 
nessed: a crowd of Badawin assembled . below the. hill, 
suspecting as usual some magical practices, and had 
they known the truth, our journey might have ended 
abruptly. Descending, I found porcupines' quills in 
abundance , 9 and shot a rock pigeon called Elal-jog — 
the “Dweller at wells." At the foot a “Baune" or 
■Hyrax Abyssinicus, resembling the Coney of Palestine , 8 
was observed at its favourite pastime of sunning itself 
upon the rocks. 

On the evening of the 20th December the mounted 
messenger returned, after a six hours' hard ride, bring- 
ing back unopened the letter addressed by me to the 
Jirad, and a private message for their sister to the sons 
of White Ali, advising them not to advance. Ensued 
terrible palavers. It appeared that the Jirad was upon 
the point of mounting horse, when his subjects swore him 
to remain and settle a dispute with the Amir of Harar. 
Our Abbans, however, withdrew their hired camels, 
positively refused to accompany us, and Beuh privily 
informed the End of Time that I had acquired through 


1 Sometimes milk is poured over the head, as gold and silver in 
the Nuzziranah of India. These ceremonies are usually performed 
by low-caste men; the free-born object to act in them. 

2 The Somal call it Hiddik or Anukub; the quills are used 
as head scratchers, and are exported to Aden for sale. 

3 It appears to be the Ashkoko of the Amharas, identified by 
Bruce with the Saphan of the Hebrews. This coney lives in chiqjks 
and holes of rocks : it was never seen by me on the plains. The 
Arabs eat it, the Somal generally do not. 




VI, — From the Zayla Hills to the Marar Prairie . 165 

the land the evil reputation of killing everything, from an 
elephant to a bird in the air* One of the younger 
brethren, indeed, declared that we were the forerunners 
of good, and if the Jirad harmed a hair of our heads, he 
would slaughter every Girhi under the sun. We had, 
however, learned properly to appreciate such vaunts, and 
the End of Time drily answered that their sayings were 
honey but their doings myrrh. Being a low-caste and 
a shameless tribe, they did not reply to our reproaches. 
At last, a manoeuvre was successful: Beuh and his 
brethren, who squatted like sulky children in different 
places, were dismissed with thanks — we proposed placing 
ourselves under the safeguard of Jirad Hirsi, the Berteri 
chief. This would have thrown the protection-price, 
originally intended for their brother-in-law, into the 
hands of a rival, and had the effect of altering their 
resolve. Presently we were visited by two Widad or 
hedge-priests, Ao Samattar and Ao Nur, 1 both half- 
witted fellows, but active and kind-hearted. The former 
wore a dirty turband, the latter a Zabid cap, a wicker- 
work calotte, composed of the palm leafs mid-rib : they 
carried dressed goatskins, as prayer carpets, over their 
right shoulders dangled huge wooden ink bottles with 
Lauh or wooden tablets for writing talismans, 8 and from 
the left hung a greasy bag, containing a tattered copy of 
the Koran and a small MS. of prayers. They read 
tolerably, but did not understand Arabic, and I pre» 
sented them with cheap Bombay lithographs of the 
Holy Book. The number of these idlers increased as 
we approached Harar, the Alma Mater of Somali-land : 


z The prefix appears to be a kind of title appropriated by 
' saints and divines. 

2 These charms are washed off and drunk by the people : an 
dwinnmiffl-l pro ceeding where paper is scarce. 



1 66 


First Footsteps in East Africa . 

—the people seldom listen to their advice, but on this 
occasion Ao Samattar succeeded in persuading the 
valiant Beuh that the danger was visionary. Soon 
afterwards rode up to our kraal three cavaliers, who 
proved to be sons of Adam, the future Ugaz of the 
Gudabirsi tribe : this chief had fully recognized the 
benefits of reopening to commerce a highway closed by 
their petty feuds, and sent to say that, in consequence 
of his esteem for the Hajj Sharmarkay, if the sons of 
White Ali feared to escort us, he in person would do the 
deed. Thereupon Beuh became a “ Qesi ” or hero, as 
the End of Time ironically called him : he sent back his 
brethren with their horses and camels, and valorously 
prepared to act as our escort. I tauntingly asked him 
what he now thought of the danger. For all reply he 
repeated the words, which the Badawin — who, like the 
Arabs, have a holy horror of towns — had been dinning 
daily into my ears, “ They will spoil that white skin of 
thine at Harar ! ” 

At 3 p.m., on the 21st December, we started in a 
westerly direction through a gap in the hills, and presently 
turned to the south-west, over rapidly rising ground, 
thickly inhabited, and covered with flocks and herds. 
About 5 p.m., after marching two miles, we raised our 
wigwam outside a populous kraal, a sheep was provided 
by the hospitality of Ao Samattar, and we sat deep into 
the night enjoying a genial blaze. 

Early the next morning we had hoped to advance : 
water, however, was wanting, and a small caravan was 
slowly gathering; — these details delayed us till 4 p.m. 
Our line lay westward, over rising ground, towards a 
conspicuous conical hill called Konti. Nothing could 'be 
worse for camels than the rough ridges at the foot of the 
mountain, full of thickets, cut by deep Fiumaras, and 
abounding in dangerous watercourses: the burdens 
slipped now backwards then forwards, sometimes the load 



‘ VI.— From the Zayla Hills to the Marat Prairie. 167 

was almost dragged off by thorns, and at last we were 
obliged to leave one animal to follow slowly in the rear. 
After creeping on two miles, we bivouacked in a deserted 
cow-kraal-nwi dio, as it was warm under the hills. 
That evening our party was increased by a Gudabirsi 
maiden in search of a husband ; she was surlily received 
by Shahrazad and Dunyazad, but we insisted upon 
her being fed, and superintended the operation. Her 
style of eating was peculiar; she licked up the rice 
from the hollow of her hand. Next morning she was 
carried away in our absence, greatly against her will, by 
some kinsmen who had followed her. 

And now, bidding adieu to the Gudabirsi, I wil 
briefly sketch the tribe. 

The Gudabirsi, or Gudabursi, derive themselves from 
Dir and Aydur, thus claiming affinity with the Isa ; others 
declare their tribe to be an offshoot from the Bahgoba clan 
of the.Habr Awal, originally settled near Jabal Almis, and 
Bulhar, on the sea-shore. The Somal unhesitatingly 
stigmatize them as a bastard and ignoble race : a noted 
genealogist once informed me, that they were little 
better than Midgans or serviles. Their ancestors’ 
mother, it is said, could not name the father of her child: 
some proposed to slay it, others advocated its preservation, 
saying, “Perhaps we shall increase by it.” Hence the 
name of the tribe. 1 

The Gudabirsi are such inveterate liars that I could 
fix them no number between 3,000 and 10,000. They 
own the rough and rolling ground diversified with thorny 
hill and grassy vale, above the first or seaward range of 
mountains ; and they have extended their lands by con- 
quest towards Harar, being now bounded in that direction 


i “ Birsan,” in Somali, meaning to increase. 



i68 Firs t Footsteps in East Africa. 

by the Marar Prairie. As usual, they are subdivided 
into a multitude of clans. 1 

In appearance the Gudabirsi are decidedly superior 
to their lirtiitrophes the Isa. I have seen handsome 
faces amongst the men as well as the women. Some 
approach closely to the Caucasian type : one old man, 
with olive-coloured skin, bald brow, and white hair curl- 
ing round his temples, and occiput, exactly resembled an 
Anglo-Indian veteran; Generally, however, the prog- 
nathous mouth betrays an African origin, and chewing 
tobacco mixed with ashes stains the teeth, blackens the 
gums, and mottles the lips. The complexion is the 
Abyssinian cafe au lait , contrasting strongly with the 
sooty skins of the coast; and the hair, plentifully 
anointed with rancid butter, hangs from the head in lank 
corkscrews the colour of a Russian pointers coat. The 
figure is rather squat, but broad and well set. 

The Gudabirsi are as turbulent and unmanageable, 
though hot so bloodthirsty, as the Isa. Their late chief, 
Ugaz Roblay of the Bayt Samattar sept, left children 
who could not hold their own: the turband was at once 
claimed by a rival branch, the Rer Abdillah, and a civil 
war ensued. The lovers of legitimacy will rejoice to 


i The Ayyal Yunis, the principal clan, contains four septs, 
viz. ■ 


z. Jibril Yunis. 

2. Nur Yunis. 

The other chief clans are — 
z. MikahilDera. 

2. Rer Ugaz. 

3. Jibrain. 

4. Rer Mohammed Asa 

5. Musa Fin. 

6. Rer Abokr 


3. Ali Yunis. 

4. Adan Yunis. 

7. Basannah. 

8. Bahabr Hasan. 

9. Abdillah Mikahil, 
zo. Hasan Mikahil. 
zz. Eyah Mikahil. 

Z2. Hasan Waraba. 




VI.— From the Zayla Hills to the Marat Prairie. 169 

hear that when I left the country, Galla, son of the 
former Prince Rainy, was likely to come to his own again. 

The stranger's life is comparatively safe amongst 
this tribe : as long as he feeds and fees them, he may 
even walk about unarmed. They are, however, liars 
even amongst the Somal, Bobadils amongst boasters, 
inveterate thieves, and importunate beggars. The 
smooth-spoken fellows seldom betray emotion except 
when cloth or tobacco is concerned ; 44 dissimulation is 
as natural to them as breathing,” and I have called one 
of their chiefs a 44 dog ” without exciting his indignation. 

The commerce of these wild regions is at present in 
a depressed state : were the roads safe, traffic with the 
coast would be considerable. The profit on hides, for 
instance, at Aden, would be at least cent, per cent. : the 
way, however, is dangerous, and detention is frequent, 
consequently the gain will not remunerate for risk and 
loss of time. No operation can be undertaken in a hurry, 
consequently demand cannot readily be supplied. What 
Laing applies to Western, may be repeated of Eastern 
Africa : 44 the endeavour to accelerate an undertaking is 
almost certain to occasion its failure.” Nowhere is 
patience more wanted, in order to perform perfect work. 

The wealth of the Gudabirsi consists principally in 
cattle, peltries, hides, gums, and ghi. The asses are 
dun-coloured, small, and weak ; the camels large, loose, 
and lazy; the cows are pretty animals, with small humps, 
long horns resembling the Damara cattle, and in the 
grazing season with plump, well-rounded limbs ; there is. 
also a bigger breed, not unlike that of Tuscany. The 
standard is the Tobe of coarse canvas ; worth about 
three shilling^ at Aden, here it doubles in value. The 
price of a good camel varies from six to eight cloths ; one 
Tobe buys a two-year-old heifer, three, a cow between 
three and four years old. A owe costs half a cloth : the 
goat, although the flesh is according to the Somal 



170 


First" Footsteps in East Africa . 

nutritive, whilst “ mutton is disease,” is a little cheaper 
than the sheep. Hides and peltries are usually collected 
at and exported from Harar ; on the coast they are 
rubbed over with salt, and in this state carried to Aden. 
Cows’ skins fetch a quarter of a dollar, or about one 
shilling in cloth, and two dollars are the extreme price for 
the Kurjah or score of goats’ skins. The people of the 
interior have a rude way of tanning 1 ; they macerate the 
hide, dress, and stain it of a deep calf-skin colour with 
the bark of a tree called Jirmah, and lastly the leather is 
softened with the hand. The principal gum is the Adad 
or Acacia Arabics: foreign merchants purchase it for 
about half a dollar per Farasilah of twenty pounds : cow’s 
and sheep’s butter may fetch a dollar’s worth of cloth for 
the measure of thirty-two pounds. This great article of 
commerce is good and pure in the country, whereas at 
Berberah, the Habr Awal adulterate it, previous to ex- 
portation, with melted sheeps’ tails. 

The principal wants of the country which we have 
traversed are coarse cotton cloth, Surat tobacco, beads, 
and indigo-dyed stuffs for women’s coifs. The people 
would also be grateful for any improvement in their breed 
of horses, and when at Aden I thought of taking with me 
some old Arab stallions as presents to chiefs. Fortu- 
nately the project fell to the ground : a strange horse of 
unusual size and beauty, in these regions, would be 
stolen at the end of the first march. 


1 The best prayer-skins are made at Ogadayn ; there they cost 
about half a dollar each. 



CHAPTER VII. 


FROM THE MARAR PRAIRIE TO HARAR. 

Early on the 23rd December assembled the caravan, 
which we were destined to escort across the Marar 
Prairie. Upon this neutral ground the Isa, Berteri, and 
Habr Awal meet to rob and plunder unhappy travellers. 
The Somal shuddered at the sight of a wayfarer, who 
rushed into our encampment in cuerpo , having barely run 
away with his life. Not that our caravan carried much 
to lose — a few hides and pots of clarified butter, to be ex- 
changed for the Holcus grain of the Girhi cultivators — 
still the smallest contributions are thankfully received by 
these plunderers. Our material consisted of four or five 
half-starved camels, about fifty donkeys with ears cropped 
as a mark, and their eternal accompaniments in Somali 
land, old women. The latter seemed to be selected for 
age, hideousness, and strength : all day they bore their 
babes smothered in hides upon their backs, and they 
carried heavy burdens apparently without fatigue. 
Amongst them was a Badawi widow, known by her 
“ Wer,” a strip of the inner bark of a tree tied round the 
greasy fillet. 1 We were accompanied by three Widads, 


z It is worn for a year, during which modest women will not 
marry. Some tribes confine the symbol to widowhood, others extend 
it to all relations ; a strip of white cotton, or even a white fillet, 
instead of the usual blue cloth, is used by the more civilized. 


172 First Footsteps irf East Africa . 

provided with all the instruments of their craft, and un- 
commonly tiresome companions. They recited Koran h 
tort et h travers: at every moment they proposed Fatihahs, 
the name of Allah was perpetually upon their lips, and 
they discussed questions of divinity, like Gil Bias and his 
friends, with a violence bordering upon frenzy. One of 
them was celebrated for his skill in the “Fal,” or Omens: 
he was constantly consulted by my companions, and 
informed them that we had nought to fear except from 
wild beasts The prediction was a good hit : I must own 
however, that it was not communicated to me before 
fulfilment. 

At half past six a.m., we began our march over rough 
and rising ground, a network of thorns and watercourses, 
and presently entered a stony gap between two ranges of 
hills. On our right was a conical peak, bearing the 
remains of buildings upon its summit. Here, said 
Abtidon, a wild Gudabirsi hired to look after our mules, 
rests the venerable Shaykh Samawai. Of old, a number 
of wells existed in the gaps between the hills: these have 
disappeared with those who drank of them. 

Presently we entered the Barr or Prairie of Marar, 
one of the long strips of plairi which diversify the Somali 
country. Its breadth, bounded on the east by the rolling 
ground over which we had passed, on the west by Gurays, 
a range of cones offshooting from the highlands of Harar, 
is about twenty-seven miles, the general course is north 
and South : in the former direction, it belongs to the Isa: 
in the latter may be seen the peaks of Kadau and Madir, 
the property of the Habr Awal tribes ; and along these 
ranges it extends, I was told, towards Ogadayn. The 
surface of the plain is gently rolling ground : the black 
earth, filled with the holes of small beasts, would be most 
productive, and the outer coat is an expanse of tall, 
waving, sunburnt grass, so unbroken, that from a distance 
it resembles the nap of yellow velvet. In the frequent 



VII.— Front the Marar Prairie to Harar. 173 

Wadys, which carry off the surplus rain of the hills, scrub 
and thorn trees grow in dense thickets, and the grass is 
temptingly green. Yet the land lies fallow: water and 
fuel are scarce at a distance from the hills, and the wildest 
Badawi dare not front the danger of foraging parties, the 
fatal heats of day, and the killing colds of night. On the 
edges of the plain, however, are frequent vestiges of 
deserted kraals. 

About mid-day, we crossed a depression in the centre, 
where Acacias supplied us with gum for luncheon, and 
sheltered flocks of antelope. I endeavoured to shoot the 
white-tailed Sig, and the large dun Oryx; but the 
brouhaha of the caravan prevented execution. Shortly 
afterwards we came upon patches of holcus, which had 
grown wild, from seeds scattered by travellers. This was 
the first sight of grain that gladdened my eyes since I left 
Bombay : the grave of the First Murderer never knew a 
Triptolemus, 1 2 * and Zayla is a barren flat of sand. My 
companions eagerly devoured the pith of this African 
“ sweet cane,” despite its ill reputation for causing fever. 
1 followed their example, and found it almost as good as 
bad sugar. The Badawin loaded their spare asses with 
the bitter gourd, called Ubbah ; externally it resembles 
the water melon, and becomes, when shaped, dried, and 
smoked, the wickerwork of the Somal, and the pottery of 
more civilized people. 

Towards evening, as the setting sun sank slowly 
behind the distant western hills, the colour of the Prairie 
changed from glaring yellow to a golden hue, mantled 
with a purple flush inexpressibly lovely. The animals of 
the waste began to appear. Shy lynxes 9 and jackals 


1 Cain is said to repose under Jabal Shamsan at Aden— an 
appropriate sepulchre. 

2 This beast, called by the Somal Jambel, closely resembles the 

Sind species. It is generally found in the plains and prairies. 




174 First Footsteps in East Africa . 

fattened by many sheeps’ tails , 1 warned my companions 
that fierce beasts were nigh, ominous anecdotes were 
whispered, and I was told that a caravan had lately lost 
nine asses by lions. As night came on, the Badawi 
Kafilah, being lightly loaded, preceded us, and our tired 
camels lagged far behind. We were riding in rear to 
prevent straggling, when suddenly my mule, the hinder- 
most, pricked his ears uneasily, and attempted to turn his 
head. Looking backwards, I distinguished the form of 
a large animal following us with quick and stealthy 
strides. My companions would not fire, thinking it was a 
man: at last a rifle-ball, pinging through the air — the 
moon was too young for correct shooting — put to flight a 
huge lion. The terror excited by this sort of an adventure 
was comical to look upon : the valiant Beuh, who, 
according to himself, had made his preuves in a score of 
foughten fields, threw his arms in the air, wildly shouting 
Libah ! Libah ! ! — the lion ! the lion ! ! — and nothing else 
was talked of that evening. 

The ghostly western hills seemed to recede as we 
.advanced over the endless rolling plain. Presently the 
ground became broken and stony, the mules stumbled in 
deep holes, and the camels could scarcely crawl along. 
As we advanced, our Widads, who poor devils ! had been 
41 roasted ” by the women all day on account of their 
poverty, began to recite the Koran with might, in 
gratitude for having escaped many perils. Night deepen- 
ing, our attention was rivetted by a strange spectacle ; a 
broad sheet of bright blaze, reminding me of Hanno’s 
fiery river, swept apparently down a hill, and, according to 


z In the Somali country, as in Kafirland, the Duwao or jackal 
is peculiarly bold and fierce. Disdaining garbage, he carries off lambs 
and kids, and fastens upon a favourite friandise , the sheep's tail: this 
victim runs away in terror, and unless the jackal be driven off by 
dogs, leaves a delicate piece of fat behind it. 




VII.— From the Marav Prairie to Harar. 175 

my companions, threatened the whole prairie. These 
accidents are common : a huntsman bums a tree for 
honey, or cooks his food in the dry grass, the wind rises 
and the flames spread far and wide. On this occasion 
no accident occurred ; the hills, however, smoked like a 
Solfatara for two days. 

About 9 p.m. we heard voices, and I was told to dis- 
charge my rifle lest the kraal be closed to us ; in due 
time we reached a long, low, dark line of sixty or 
seventy huts, disposed in a circle, so as to form a fence, 
with a few bushes — thorns being hereabouts rare — in 
the gaps between the abodes. The people, a mixture of 
Girhi and Gudabirsi Badawin, swarmed out to gratify 
their curiosity, but we were in no humour for long con- 
versations. Our luggage was speedily disposed in a 
heap near the kraal, the mules and camels were tethered 
for the night, then, supperless and shivering with cold, 
we crept under our mats and fell asleep. That day 
we had ridden nearly fifteen hours ; our halting place 
lay about thirty miles from, and 240° south-west of, 
Koralay. 

After another delay, and a second vain message to 
the Jirad Adan, about noon appeared that dignitary's 
sixth wife, sister to the valiant Beuh. Her arrival dis- 
concerted my companions, who were too proud to be 
protected , by a woman. “ Dahabo,” however, relieved 
their anxiety by informing us that the Jirad had sent 
his eldest son Shirwa, as escort. This princess was 
a gipsy-looking dame, coarsely-dressed, about thirty 
years old, with a gay leer, a jaunty demeanour, and the 
reputation of being “fast”; she showed little shamefaced- 
ness when I saluted her, and received with noisy joy the 
appropriate present of a new and handsome Tobe. 
About 4 p.m. returned our second messenger, bearing 
with him are proving message from the Jirad, for not 
visiting him without delay ; in token of sincerity, he 



176 First Footsteps in East Africa . 

forwarded his baton, a knobstick about two feet long, 
painted in rings of Cutch colours, red, black, and yellow 
alternately, and garnished on the summit with a ball of 
similar material. 

At dawn on the 26th December, mounted upon a 
little pony, came Shirwa, heir presumptive to the Jirad 
Adan’s knobstick. His father had sent him to us three 
days before, but he feared the Gudabirsi as much as 
the Gudabirsi feared him, and he probably hung about 
our camp till certain that it was safe to enter. We re- 
ceived him politely* and he in acknowledgment positively 
declared that Beuh should not return before eating honey 
in his cottage. Our Abban’s heroism now became in- 
fectious. Even the End of Time, whose hot valour had 
long since fallen below zero, was inspired by the occasion, 
and recited, as usual with him in places and at times of 
extreme safety, the Arabs’ warrior lines — 

“ I have crossed the steed since my eyes saw light, 

I have fronted death till he feared my sight, 

' And the cleaving of helm and the riving of mail 
Were the dreams of my youth — are my manhood’s delight.” 

As we had finished loading, a mule's bridle was 
missed. Shirwa ordered instant restitution to his 
father’s stranger, on the ground that all the property 
now belonged to the Jirad ; and we, by no means idle, 
fiercely threatened to bewitch the kraal. The article 
was presently found hard by, on a hedge. This was 
the first and last case of theft which occurred to us in 
the Somali country; — I have travelled through most 
civilized lands, and have lost more. 

At 8 a.m. we marched towards the north-west, along 
the southern base of the Gurays hills, and soon arrived 
at the skirt of the prairie, where a well-trodden path 
warned us that we werjs about to quit the desert. After 
advancing six miles in line we turned to the right; and 



VII. — From the Marar Prairie to Harar . 177 

recited a. Fatihah over a heap of rough stones, where, 
shadowed by .venerable 'types, lie the remains of the 
great Shjaykh Abd al-MaJifi. A little beyond this spot, 
rises suddenly from the plain a mass of castellated rock, 
the subject of many a wild superstition. Caravans 
always encamp beneath it, as whoso sleeps upon the 
summit loses his senses to evil spirits. At some future 
day Harar will be destroyed, and “ Jannah Siri ” will 
become a flourishing town. We ascended it, and found 
no life but hawks, coneys, an owl, 1 and a graceful species 
of black eagle 2 3 4 * ; there were many traces of buildings, 
walls, ruined houses, and wells, whilst the sides and 
summit were tufted with venerable sycamores. This 
act was an imprudence ; the Badawin at once declared 
that, we were “ prospecting " for a fort, and the evil 
report preceded us to Harar. 

. cAfter a mile’s march from Jannah Siri, we crossed 
a ridge of rising ground, and suddenly, as though by 
mfgie, the scene shifted. 

^■‘Before us lay a little Alp; the second step of the 
Ethiopian Highland. Around were high and jagged 
hjBis, their sides black with the Saj 8 and Somali pine, 4 
pjfiiH their upper brows veiled with a thin growth of 
G&ctus. Beneath was a deep valley, in the midst of 
Which ran a serpentine of shining waters, the gladdest 
spectacle we had yet witnessed : further in front, masses 
of hill rose abruptly from shady valleys, encircled on the 
far horizon by a straight blue line of ground, resembling 


1 The Somal call the owl 11 Shimbir libah M — the lion bird. 

a The plume was dark, chequered with white, but the bird was 
so wild that no specimen could be procured. 

3 The Arabs apply this term to teak. 

4 The Dayyib of the Somal, and the Sinaubar of the Arabs ; its 

line of growth is hereabouts, an altitude of 5000 feet. 


12 


178 First Footsteps in East Africa. 

a distant sea. Behind us glared the desert: we had 
now reached the outskirts of civilization, where man, 
abandoning his flocks and herds, settles, cultivates, and 
attends to the comforts of life. 

The fields are either terraces upon the hill slopes or 
the sides of valleys, divided by flowery hedges with lanes 
between, not unlike those of rustic England ; and on a 
nearer approach the daisy, the thistle, and the sweet briar 
pleasantly affected my European eyes. The villages are 
no longer moveable: the Kraal and wigwam are replaced 
by the Gambisa or bell-shaped hut of Middle Africa, 1 
circular cottages of holcus wattle, covered with coarse 
dab and surmounted by a stiff, conical, thatch roof, 
above which appears the central supporting post, 
crowned with a gourd or ostrich egg. 9 A strong abattis 
of thorns protects these settlements, which stud the 
hills in all directions : near most of them are clumps of 
tall trees, to the southern sides of which are hung, like 
birdcages, long cylinders of matting, the hives of these 
regions. Yellow crops of holcus rewarded the peasant's 
toil: in some places the long stems tied in bunches 
below the ears as piled muskets, stood ready for the 
reaper; in others, the barer ground showed that the 
task was done. The boys sat perched upon reed plat- 
forms 8 in the trees, and with loud shouts drove away 
thieving birds, whilst their fathers cut the crop with 
diminutive sickles, or thrashed heaps of straw with rude 


x Travellers in Central Africa describe exactly similar build- 
ings, bell-shaped huts, the materials of which are stakes, clay and 
reed, conical at the top, and looking like well-thatched corn-stacks. 

2 Amongst the Fellatahs of Western Africa, only the royal huts 

are surmounted by the ostrich’s egg. »• § 

3 These platforms are found even amongst the races inhabiting 
the regions watered by the Niger. 



VII.— From the Marat Prairie to Harar. 179 

flails, 1 or winnowed grain by tossing it with a flat wooden 
shovel against the wind. The women husked the pine- 
apple-formed heads in mortars composed of a hollowed 
trunk,* smeared the threshing floor with cow-dung and 
water to defend it from insects, piled the holcus heads 
into neat yellow heaps, spanned and crossed by streaks 
of various colours, brick-red and brownish-purple, 8 and 
stacked the Karbi or straw, which was surrounded like 
the grain with thorn, as a defence against the wild hog. 
All seemed to consider it a labour of love : the harvest- 
home song sounded pleasantly to our ears, and, con- 
trasting with the silent desert, the hum of man's 
habitation was a music. 

Descending the steep slope, we reposed, after a 
seven miles’ march, on the banks of a bright rivulet, 
which bisects the Kobbo or valley : it runs according to 
my guides, from the north towards Ogadayn, and the 
direction is significant — about Harar I found neither hill 
nor stream trending from east to west. The people of 
the Kutti 4 flocked out to gaze upon us: they were 
unarmed, and did not, like the Badawin, receive us with 
cries of “ Bori.” During the halt, we bathed in the 
waters, upon whose banks were a multitude of huge 
Mantidae, pink and tender green. Returning to the 


1 Charred sticks about six feet long and curved at the handle. 

2 Equally simple gre the other implements. The plough, which 
in Eastern Africa has passed the limits of Egypt, is still the crooked 
tree of all primitive people, drawn by oxen ; and the hoe is a wooden 
blade inserted into a knobbed handle. 

3 It is afterwards stored in deep dry holes, which are carefully 
covered to keep out rats and insects ; thus the grain is preserved 
nn ^mag wH for three or four years. Like the Matamores, or under- 
ground caves of Berbers, and the grain stores of Leghorn ; cachettes 
or siloes of Algerines. When opened the grain must be eaten quickly. 

4 This word is applied to the cultivated districts, the granaries 
of Somali land. 

W\ 


I 2-*-2 




180 First Footsteps in East Africa • 

camels, I shot a kind of crow, afterwards frequently 
seen. 1 It is about three times the size of our English 
bird, of a bluish-black with a snow-white poll, and a 
beak of unnatural proportions : the quantity of lead 
which it carried off surprised me. A number of Widads 
assembled to greet us, and some Habr Awal, who were 
returning with a caravan, gave us the salam, and called 
*my people cousins. 44 Verily,” remarked the Hammal, 
44 amongst friends we cut one another’s throats; amongst 
enemies we become sons of uncles 1 ” 

At 3 p.m. we pursued our way oyer rising ground, 
dotted with granite blocks fantastically piled, and every- 
where in sight of fields and villages and flowing water. 
A furious wind was blowing, and the End of Time quoted 
the Somali proverb, “heat hurts, but cold kills:” the 
camels were so fatigued, and the air became so raw, 9 
that after ah hour and a halfs march we planted our 
wigwams near a village distant about seven miles from 
the Gurays Hills. Till late at night we were kept awake 
by the crazy Widads : Ao Samattar had proposed ijbe 
casuistical question, 44 Is it lawful to pray upon a 
mountain when a plain is at hand ? ” Some took the 
pro , others the contra , and the wordy battle raged with 
uncommon fury. 

On Wednesday morning at half past seven we 
started down hill towards 44 Wilensi,” a small table- 
mountain, at the foot of which we expected to find the 
Jirad Adan awaiting us, in one of his many houses, 
crossed a fertile valley, and ascended another steep slope 
by a bad and stony road. Passing the home of Shirwa, 


x “ The huge raven with gibbous or inflated beak and white 
nape/' writes Mr. Blyth, " is the corvus crassirostris of Ruppell. 
and. together with a nearly similar Cape species, is referred to thr 
genus Corvultur of Lesson." 

2 In these hills it is said sometimes to freeze ; I never saw ifSSv 



VII.— From the Marar Prairie to Harar. 181 

who vainly offered hospitality, we toiled onwards, and 
after a mile and a half’s march, which occupied at least 
two hours, our wayworn beasts arrived at the Jirad’s 
village. On inquiry, it proved that the chief, who was 
engaged in selecting two horses and two hundred cows, 
the price of blood claimed by the Amir of Harar, for the 
murder of a citizen, had that day removed to Sagharrah, 
another settlement. 

As we entered the long straggling village of Wilensi, 
our party was divided by the Jirad's two wives. The 
Hammal, the Kalandar, Shahrazad, and Dunyazad, 
remained with Beuh and his sister in her Gurgi, whilst 
Long Gulad, the End of Time, and I were conducted to 
th£; ftottage of the Jirad’s prettiest wife, Sudiyah. She 
was a tall woman, with a light complexion, handsomely 
drived in a large Harar Tobe, with silver earrings, and 
thef kind of necklace called Jilbah or Kardas. 1 The 
Jiflkdah (princess) at once ordered our hides to be 
spttgad in a comfortable part of the hut, and then 
Supplied us with food — boiled beef, pumpkin, and Jowari 
cates* During the short time spent in that Gambisa, I 
had an opportunity, dear L., of seeing the manners and 
customs of the settled Somal. 

The interior of the cottage is simple. Entering the 
dqor, a single plank with pins for hinges fitted into sockets 
altove and below the lintel — in fact, as artless a contri- 
vance as ever seen in Spain or Corsica — you find a space, 
divided by dwarf walls of wattle and dab into three com- 
partments, for the men, women, and cattle. The horses 
and cows, tethered at night on the left of the door, fill the 
cottage with the wherewithal to pass many a nuit blanche: 
the wives lie on the right, near a large fireplace of stones 
and raised clay, and the males occupy the most com- 

x it is a string of little silver bells and other ornaments made 
by the Arabs at Berberah. 



1 82 First Footsteps in East Africa . 

fortable part, opposite to and farthest from the entrance. 
The thatched ceiling shines jetty with smoke, which when 
intolerable is allowed to escape by a diminutive window : 
this seldom happens, for smoke, like grease and dirt, 
keeping man warm, is enjoyed by savages. Equally 
simply is the furniture : the stem of a tree, with 4 >ranches 
hacked into pegs, supports the shields, the assegais are 
planted against the wall, and divers bits of wood, pro- 
jecting from the sides and the central roof-tree of the 
cottage, are hung with clothes and other articles that 
attract white ants. Gourds smoked inside, and coffee 
cups of coarse black Harar pottery, with deep wooden 
platters, and prettily carved spoons of the same material, 
compose the household supellex. The inmates are the 
Jiradah and her baby, Siddik a Galla serf, the slave 
girls and sundry Somal : thus we hear at all times three 
languages 1 2 spoken within the walls. 

Long before dawn the goodwife rises, wakens her 
handmaidens, lights the fire, and prepares for the Afur or 
morning meal. The quern is here unknown.® A flat, 
smooth, oval slab, weighing about fifteen pounds, and a 
stone roller six inches in diameter, worked with both 
hands, and the weight of the body kneeling ungracefully 
upon it on “ all fours,” are used to triturate the holcus 
grain. At times water must be sprinkled over the meal, 
until a finely powdered paste is ready for the oven : thus 
several hours’ labour is required to prepare a few pounds 
of bread. About 6 a.m. there appears a substantial break- 
fast of roast beef and mutton, with scones of jowari 
grain, the whole drenched in broth. Of the men few 

1 Harari, Somali and Galla, besides Arabic, and other more 
civilized dialects. 

2 The Negroes of Senegal and the Hottentots use wooden 
mortars. At Natal and amongst the Amazulu Kafirs, the work is' 
done with slabs and rollers like those described above. 



VII. — From the Marat Prairie to Harar. 183 

perform any ablutions, but all use the tooth stick before 
sitting down to eat. After the meal some squat in the 
sun, others transact business, and drive their cattle to the 
bush till iz a.m., the dinner hour. There is no variety in 
the repasts, which are always flesh and holcus : these 
people despise fowls, and consider vegetables food for 
cattle. During the day there is no privacy ; men, women, 
and children enter in crowds, and will not be driven away 
by the Jiradah, who inquires screamingly if they come 
to stare at a baboon. My kettle especially excites their 
surprise; some opine that it is an ostrich, others, a 
serpent : Sudiyah, however, soon discovered its use, and 
begged irresistibly for the unique article. Throughout 
the day her slave girls are busied in grinding, cooking, 
and quarrelling with dissonant voices: the men have 
little occupation beyond chewing tobacco, chatting, and 
having their wigs frizzled by a professional coiffeur. In 
the evening the horses and cattle return home to be 
milked and stabled : this operation concluded, all apply 
themselves to supper with a will. They sleep but little, 
and sit deep into the night trimming the Are, and con- 
versing merrily over their cups of Farshu or millet beer. 1 
I tried this mixture several times, and found it detestable: 
the taste is sour, and it flies directly to the head, in con- 
sequence of being mixed with some poisonous bark. It 
is served up in gourd bottles upon a basket of holcus 
heads, and strained through a pledget of cotton fixed 
across the narrow mouth, into cups of the same primitive 
material : the drinkers sit around their liquor, and their 
hilarity argues its intoxicating properties. In the morn- 
ing they' arise with headaches and heavy eyes ; but these 


x In the Eastern World this well-known fermentation is 
generally called " Buzah," whence the old German word 11 busen " 
and our "booze." The addition of a dose of garlic converts it into 
an emetic. 



184 First Footsteps in East Africa* 

symptoms, which we, an industrious race, deprecate, are 
not disliked by the Somal — they promote sleep and give 
something to occupy the vacant mind. I usually slumber 
through the noise except when Ambar, a half caste Somali, 
returning from a trip to Harar, astounds us with his 
contes bleus , or wild Abtidon howls forth somplay like 
this : — 


“ Tis joyesse all in Isa’s home ! 

The fatted oxen bleed, 

And slave girls range the pails of milk, 
And strain the golden mead. 

11. 

“ ’Tis joyesse all in fsa’s home ! 

This day the Chieftain’s pride 
Shall join the song, the dance, the feast, 
And bear away a bride. 

nr. 

“ ‘ He cometh not I ' the father cried, 
Smiting with spear the wall ; 

* And yet he sent the ghostly man, 
Yestre'en before the fall ! * 

IV. 

“ 4 He cometh not ! * the mother said, 

A tear stood in her eye ; 

4 He cometh not, I dread, I dread, 

And yet I know not why.’ 

v. 

44 4 He cometh not ! ’ the maiden thought, 
Yet in her glance was light, 

Soft as the flash in summer’s eve 
Where sky and earth unite. 

VI. 

44 The virgins, deck'd with tress and flower, 
Danced in the purple shade, 

And not a soul, perchance, but wished 
Herself the chosen maid. 



VII.^—From the Marat Prairie to Harar. 

VII. 

“ The guests in groups sat gathering 
Where sunbeams warmed the air, 

Some laughed the feasters’ laugh, and some 
Wore the bent brow of care. 

fe v,n - 

44 4 'Tis he 1 — *tis he I * — all anxious peer, 

Towards the distant lea ; 

A courser feebly nears the throng — 

Ah 1 'tis his steed they see. 

IX. 

44 The grief cry bursts from every lip. 

Fear sits on every brow, 

There’s blood upon the courser’s flank I — 
Blood on the saddle bow 1 

x. 

“ 4 'Tis he 1 — 'tis he l ' — all arm and run 
Towards the Marar Plain, 

Where a dark horseman rides the waste 
With dust-cloud for a train. 

XI. 

44 The horseman reins his foam-fleckt steed, 
Leans on his broken spear, 

Wipes his damp brow, and faint begins 
To tell a tale of fear. 

XII. 

44 4 Where is my son ? ’ — 4 Go seek him there, 
Far on the Marar Plain, 

Where vultures and hyaenas hold 
Their orgies o’er the slain. 

XIII. 

44 4 We took our arms, we saddled horse, 

We rode the East countrie, 

And drove the flocks, and harried herds 
Betwixt the hills and sea. 

xiv. * 

44 4 We drove the flock across the hill, 

The herd across the wold — 


185 



1 86 


First Footsteps in East Africa . 

The poorest spearboy had returned 
That day, a man of gold. 

xv. 

“ 4 But Awal’s children mann'd the vale 
Where sweet the Arman flowers, 

Their archers from each bush and tree ^ 
Rained shafts in venomed showers. 

XVI. 

44 4 Full fifty warriors bold and true 
Fell as becomes the brave ; 

And whom the arrow spared, the spear 
Reaped for the ravening grave. 

XVII. 

44 1 Friend of my youth ! shall I remain 
When ye are gone before ? * 

He drew the wood from out his side. 

And loosed the crimson gore. 

XVIII. 

“ Falling, he raised his broken spear. 

Thrice wav’d it o’er his head. 

Thrice raised the warrior's cry 4 revenge ! ’ 
His soul was with the dead. 

XIX. 

41 Now, one by one, the wounded braves 
Homeward were seen to wend, 

Each holding on his saddle bow 
A dead or dying friend. 

xx. 

44 Two galliards bore the Isa’s son. 

The corpse was stark and bare — 

Low moaned the maid, the mother smote 
Her breast in mute despair. 

XXI. 

44 The father bent him o'er the dead. 

The wounds were all before ; 

Again his brow, in sorrow clad, 

The garb of gladness wore. 



VII. — Prom the Marar Prairie to Harar. 187 

XXII. 

44 ‘ Ho ! sit ye down nor mourn for me, 

Unto the guests he cried ; 

1 My son a warrior’s life hath lived, 

A warrior’s death hath died. 

0 XXIII. 

44 4 His wedding and his funeral feast 
Are one, so Fate hath said ; 

Death bore him from the brides of earth 
The brides of Heaven to wed.’ 

XXIV. 

4 4 They drew their knives, they sat them down, 

And fed as warriors feed ; 

The flesh of sheep and beeves they ate, 

And quaffed the golden mead. 

xxv. 

44 And fsa sat between the prayers 
Until the fall of day, 

When rose the guests and grasped their, spears, 
And each man went his way. 

XXVI. 

44 But in the morn arose the cry, 

For mortal spirit flown ; 

The father’s mighty heart had burst 
With woe he might not own. 

XXVII. 

4 ‘ On the high crest of yonder hill, 

They buried sire and son, 

Grant, Allah I grant them Paradise- 
Gentles, my task is done t ” 


Immediately after our arrival at Wilensi we sent 
Yusuf Dira, the Jirad’s second son to summon his 
father. I had to compose many disputes between the 
Hammal and the End of Time : the latter was swelling 



188 First Footsteps in East Africa . 

with importance; he was now accredited ambassador 
from the Hajj to the Girhi chief, consequently he aimed 
at commanding the Caravan. We then made prepara- 
tions for departure, in case of the Jirad being unable 
to escort us. Shahrazad and Dunyazad, hearing that 
the small-pox raged at Harar, and fearing &>r their 
charms, begged hard to be left behind: the Kalandar 
was directed, despite his manly objections, to remain in 
charge of these dainty dames. The valiant Beuh was 
dressed in the grand Tobe promised to him ; as no con- 
sideration would induce him towards the city, he was 
dismissed with small presents, and an old Girhi 
Badawi, generally known as Sa’id Wal, or Mad Sa’id, 
was chosen as our escort. Camels being unable to 
travel over these rough mountain paths, our weary 
brutes were placed for rest and pasture under the sur- ; 
veillance of Shirwa : and not wishing the trouble and 
delay of hiring asses, the only transport in this country, 
certain moreover that our goods were safer here than 
nearer Harar, we selected the most necessary objects, 
and packed them in a pair of small leathern saddlebags 
which could be carried by a single mule. 

'All these dispositions duly made, at io a.m. on the 
29th December we mounted our animals, and, guided by 
Mad Sa’id, trotted round the northern side of the Wilensi 
table-mountain down a lane fenced with fragrant dog 
roses. Then began the descent of a steep rocky hill, the 
wall of a woody chasm, through whose gloomy depths 
the shrunken stream of a large Fiumara wound like a 
thread of silver. The path would be safe to nought less 
surefooted than a mule : we rode slowly over rolling 
stones, steps of micaceous grit, and through thorny bush 
for about half an hour. In the plain below appeared, 
a village of the Jirad's Midgans, who came out to see 
us pass, and followed the strangers to some distance. 
One happening to say, 44 Of what use is his gun ?-r 



■ VII, — From the Marat Prairie to Karat . 189 

before he could fetch lire, I should put this arrow 
through him ! ” I discharged a barrel over their heads, 
and derided the convulsions of terror caused by the un- 
expected sound. 

Passing onwards we entered a continuation of the 
> Wady Harirah. It is a long valley choked with dense 
vegetation, through which meandered a line of water 
brightly gilt by the sun’s rays : my Somal remarked that 
were the elephants now infesting it destroyed, rice, the 
favourite luxury, might be grown upon its banks in abun- 
dance. Our road lay under clumps of shady trees, over 
rocky watercourses, through avenues of tall cactus, and 
down tranchees worn by man eight and ten feet below stiff 
banks of rich red clay. On every side appeared deep 
clefts, ravines, and earth cracks, all, at this season, dry. 
The unarmed cultivators thronged from the frequent 
settlements to stare, and my Somal, being no longer in 
their own country, laid aside for guns their ridiculous 
spears. On the way passing Ao Samattar’s village, the 
Wbrthy fellow made us halt whilst he went to fetch a 
large bowl of sour milk. About noon the fresh western 
breeze obscured the fierce sun with clouds, and we 
watered our mules in a mountain stream which crossed 
our path thrice within as many hundred yards. After 
six miles’ ride reaching the valley’s head, we began the 
descent of a rugged pass by a rough and rocky path. 

. The scenery around us was remarkable. The hill sides 
werei well wooded, and black with pine : their summits 
were bared of earth by the heavy monsun which spreads 
,jhe valleys with rich soil; in many places the beds of 
waterfalls shone like sheets of metal upon the black rock; 
villages surrounded by fields and fences studded the 
country, and the distance was a mass of purple peak and 
blue table in long vanishing succession. Ascending the 
valley’s opposite wall, we found the remains of primaeval 
forests — little glades which had esdaped the axe — they* 



igo First Footsteps in East Africa . 

resounded with the cries of pintados and cynocephali. 1 
Had the yellow crops of Holcus been wheat, I might 
have fancied myself once more riding in the pleasant 
neighbourhood of Tuscan Sienna. 

At 4 p.m., after accomplishing fifteen miles on rough 
ground, we sighted Sagharrah, a snug high-fenced village 
of eight or nine huts nestling against a hill side $ith trees 
above, and below a fertile grain-valley. Presently Mad 
Sa’id pointed out to us the Jirad Adan, who, attended 
by a little party, was returning homewards : we fired our 
guns as a salute, he however hurried on to receive us 
with due ceremony in his cottage. Dismounting at the 
door we shook hands with him, were led through the idle 
mob into a smoky closet contrived against the inside 
wall, and were regaled with wheaten bread steeped in 
honey and rancid butter. The host left us to eat, and 
soon afterwards returned : — I looked with attention at a 
man upon whom so much then depended. 

Adan bin Kaushan was in appearance a strong wiry 
Badawi — before obtaining from me a turband he wore 
his bushy hair dyed dun — about forty-five years old, at 
least six feet high, with decided features, a tricky smile, 
and an uncertain eye. In character he proved to be one 
of those cunning idiots so peculiarly difficult to deal with. 
Ambitious and wild with greed of gain, he was withal so 
fickle that his head appeared ever changing its contents ; 
he could not sit quiet for half an hour, and this physical 
restlessness was an outward sign of the uneasy inner 
man. Though reputed brave, his treachery has won 
him a permanent ill fame. Some years ago he betrothed 
a daughter to the eldest son of Jirad Hirsi of the Berteri 
tribe, and then, contrary to the Somali laws of honour,.: 


i The Somal will not kill these plundering brutes, like the" 
Western Africans believing them to be enchanted men. 




VII.— From the Marat Prairie to Harar. 191 

married her to Mohammed Wa’iz of the Jibril Abokr. 
This led to a feud, in which the disappointed suitor 
was slain. Adan was celebrated for polygamy even in 
Eastern Africa: by means of his five sons and dozen 
daughters, he has succeeded in making extensive con- 
nections, 1 and his sister, the Gisti 9 F&timah, was married 
to Abuftakr, father of the present Amir. Yet the Jirad 
would walk into a crocodile’s mouth as willingly as 
within the walls of Harar. His main reason for re- 
ceiving us politely was an ephemeral fancy for building 
a fort, to control the country’s trade, and rival or over- 
awe the city. Still he did not neglect the main chance: 
whatever he saw he asked for; and after receiving a 
sword, a Koran, a turband, an Arab waistcoat of gaudy 
satin, about seventy Tobes, and a similar proportion of 
indigo-dyed stuff, he privily complained to me that the 
Hammal had given him but twelve cloths. A list of his 
wa^its will best explain the . man. He begged me to 
bring him from Berberah a silver-hilted sword and some 
soap, 1000 dollars, two sets of silver bracelets, twenty 
guns with powder and shot, snuff, a scarlet cloth coat 
embroidered with gold, some poison that would not fail, 
and any other little article of luxury which might be 
supposed to suit him. In return he was to present us 
with horses, mules, slaves, ivory, and other valuables : 
he forgot, however, to do so before we departed. 

The Jirad Adan was powerful, being the head of a 
tribe of cultivators, not split up, like the Badawin, into 
independent clans, and he thus exercises’ a direct influence 

z Some years ago Adan plundered one of Sharmarkay's cara- 
vans ; repenting the action, he offered in marriage a daughter, who, 
however died before nuptials. 

2 Gisti is a "princess" in Harari, equivalent to the Somali 
Jiradah. 




192 First Footsteps in East Africa. 

upon the conterminous races. 1 2 3 * The Girhi or “Giraffes'* 
inhabiting these hills are, like most of the other settled 
Somal, a derivation from Darud, and descended from 
Kombo. 'Despite the unmerciful persecutions of the 
Gallas, they gradually migrated westwards from Makhar, 
their original nest, now number 5000 shields, possess 
about 180 villages, and are accounted the power para- 
mount. Though friendly with the Habr Awal, the Girhi 
seldom descend, unless compelled by want of pasture, into 
the plains. 

The other inhabitants of these hills are the Gallas 
and the Somali clans of Berteri, Bursuk, Shaykhash, 
Hawiyah, Usbayhan, Marayhan, and Abaskul. 

The Gallas 8 about Harar are divided into four 
several clans, separating as usual into a multitude of 
sejrts. The Alo extend westwards from the city ; the 
Nole inhabit the land to the east and north-east, about 
two days' journey between the fsa Somal, and Harar : 
on the south, are situated the Babuli and the Jarsa at 
Wilensi, Sagharrah, and Kondura— places described in' 
these pages. 

The Berteri, who Occupy the Gurays Range, south 
of, and limitrophe to the Gallas, and thence extend east- 
ward to the Jigjiga hills, are estimated at 3000 shields. 1 


1 They are, however, divided into clans, of which the following 
are the principal : — 

1. Bahawiyah, the race which supplies the Jirads. 

2. Abu Yunis (divided into ten septs). , 

3. Rer Ibrahim (similarly divided). 

4. Jibril. 8. Rer Auro. 

5. Bakasiyya. 9. Rer Walembo. 

6. Rer Mahmud. zo. Rer Khalid. 

7. Musa Dar. 

2 I do not describe these people, the task having already been^ 
performed by many abler pens than mine. 

3 They are divided into the Bah Ambaro (the chiefs family) and 

the Shaykhashed. 




VII. — From the Marar Prairie to Harar. 193 

Of Darud origin, they own allegiance to the Jirad Hirsi, 
and were, when I visited the country, on bad terms with 
the Girhi. The chiefs family has, for several genera- , 
tions, been connected with the Amirs of Harar, and the 
caravan’s route to and from Berberah lying through his 
country, makes him a useful friend and a dangerous foe. 
About tire Jirad Hirsi different reports were rife : some 
described him as cruel, violent and avaricious ; others 
spoke of him as a godly and 4 a prayerful person: all, 
however, agreed that he had sowed wild oats. In token 
of repentance, he was fond of feeding Widads, and 
the Shaykh Jami of Harar was a frequent guest at his 
kraal. 

The Bursuk number about 5000 shields, own no chief, 
and in 1854 were at war with the Girhi, the Berteri, and 
especially the Gallas. In this country, the feuds differ 
from those of the plains: the hill men fight for three days, 
as the End of Time phrased it, and make peace for three 
days. The maritime clans are not so abrupt in their 
changes; moreover they claim blood-money, a thing here 
unknown. The Shaykhash, or “ Reverend ” as the term 
means, are the only Somal of the mountains not derived 
from Dir and Darud. Claiming descent from the Caliph 
Abu Bakr, they assert that ten generations ago, one Ao 
Khutab bin Fakih Umar crossed over from Al-Hijaz, 
and settled in Eastern Africa with his six sons, Umar the 
greater, Umar the less, two Abdillahs, Ahmad, and lastly 
Siddik. This priestly tribe is dispersed, like that of Levi, 
amongst its brethren, and has spread from Efat to 
Ogadayn. Its principal sub-families are, Ao Umar, the 
elder, and Bah Dumma, the junior, branch. 

The Hawiyah has been noticed in a previous chapter. 
Of the Usbayhan I saw but few individuals: they in- 
formed me that their tribe numbered forty villages, and 
about 1000 shields; that they had no chief of their own 
race, but owned the rule of the Girhi and Berteri Jirads. 

*3 



19+ 


First Footsteps in East Africa. 

Their principal clans are the Rer Yusuf, Rer Sa'id, Rer 
Abokr, and Yusuf Liyo. 

In the Eastern Horn of Africa, and at Ogadayn, the 
Marahayn is a powerful tribe, here it is unconsequential, 
and affiliated to the Girhi. T*he Abaskul also lies 
scattered over the Harar hills, and owns the jirad Adan 
as its chief. This tribe numbers fourteen viHhges, and 
between 400 and 300 shields, and is divided into the Rer 
Yusuf, the Jibrailah, and the Warra Dig: — the latter 
clan is said to be of Galla extraction. 

On the morning after my arrival at Sagharrah I felt 
too ill to rise, and was treated with unaffected kindness 
by all the establishment. The Jirad sent to Harar for 
millet beer, Ao Samattar went to the gardens in search 
of Kat, the sons Yusuf Dera and a Dwarf 1 insisted upon 
firing me with such ardour, that no refusal could avail : 
and Khayrah the wife, with her daughters, two tall dark, 
smiling, and well-favoured girls of thirteen and fifteen, 
sacrificed a sheep as my Fida, or Expiatory offering. 
Even the Galla Christians, who flocked to see the 
stranger, wept for the evil fate which had brought him so 
far from his fatherland, to die under a tree. Nothing 
indeed, would have been easier than such operation : all 
required was the turning face to the wall, for four or five 
days. But to expire of an ignoble colic 1 — the thing was 
not to be’ thought of, and a firm resolution to live on 
sometimes, methinks, effects its object. 

On the 1st January, 1853, feeling stronger, I clothed 
myself in my Arab best, and asked a palaver with the 
Jirad. We retired to a safe place behind ,the village, 
where I read with pomposity the Hajj Sharpiarkay’s 
letter. The chief appeared much pleased by our having 


z The only specimen of stunted humanity seen by me in the 
Somali cohntry. He was about eighteen years old, and looked ten. 



VII.— From the Marar Prairie to Harar . 193 

preferred his country to that of the Isa : he at once 
opened the subject of the new fort, and informed me 
that I was the builder, as his eldest daughter had just 
dreamed that the stranger wonld settle in the land. 
Having discussed the' project to the Jirad’s satisfaction, 
we brought out the guns and shot a few birds for the 
benefit m the vulgar. Whilst engaged in this occupa- 
tion, appeared a party of five strangers, and three mules 
with ornamented Morocco saddles, bridles, bells, and 
brass neck ornaments, after the fashion of Harar. Two 
of these men, Haji Umar, and Nur Ambar, were 
citizens; the others, Ali Hasan, Husayn Araleh, and 
Haji Mohammed, were Somal of the Habr Awal tribe, 
high in the Amir’s confidence. They had been sent to 
settle with Adan the weighty matter of Blood-money. 
After sitting with us almost half an hour, during which 
they exchanged grave salutations with my attendants, 
inspected our asses with portentous countenances, and 
asked me a few questions concerning my business in 
those parts, they went privily to the Jirad, told him 
that the Arab was not one who bought and sold, that 
he had no design but to spy out the wealth of the land, 
and that the whole party should be sent prisoners in 
their hands to Harar. The chief curtly replied that we 
were his friends, and bade them, “ throw far those 
words.” Disappointed in their designs, they started 
late in the afternoon, driving off their 200 cows, and 
falsely promising to present our salams to the Amir. 

It became evident that some decided step must be 
taken. The Jirad confessed fear of his Harari kinsman, 
and owned that he had lost all his villages in the 
immediate neighbourhood of the city. I asked him 
point-blank to escort us : he as frankly replied that it was 
impossible. The request was lowered — we begged him to , 
accompany us as far as the frontier : he professed inability 
to do so, but promised to send his eldest son, Shirwa. 

13 — 2 



196 First Footsteps in East Africa . m 

Nothing then remained, dear L., but payer d'audace , 
and, throwing all forethought to the dogs, to rely upon 
what has made many a small man great, the good star, 
I addressed my companions in a set speech, advising a 
mount without delay. They suggested a letter to the 
Amir, requesting permission to enter his chy: this 
device was rejected for two reasons. In the frot place, 
had a refusal been returned, our journey was cut short, 
and our labours stultified. Secondly, the End of Time 
had whispered that my two companions were plotting to 
prevent the letter reaching its destination. He had 
charged his own sin upon their shoulders : the Hammal 
and Long Gulad were incapable of such treachery. But 
our hedge-priest was thoroughly terrified; “a coward 
body after a’,** his face brightened when ordered to 
remain with the Jirad at Sagharrah, and though openly 
taunted with poltroonery, he had not the decency 
to object. My companions were then informed that 
hitherto our acts had been those of old women, not 
soldiers, and that something savouring of manliness must 
be done before we could return. They saw my deter- 
mination to start alone, if necessary, and to 5 o 
them justice, they at once arose. This was the more 
courageous in them, as alarmists had done their worst: 
but a day before, some travelling Somali had advised 
them, as they valued dear life, not to accompany that 
Turk to Harar. Once in the saddle, they shook off sad 
thoughts, declaring that if they were slain, I should pay 
their blood-money, and if they escaped, that their reward 
was in my hands. When in some danger, the Hammal 
especially behaved with a sturdiness which produced 
the most beneficial results. Yet they were true Easterns. 
Wearied by delay at Harar, I employed * myself in 
meditating flight ; they drily declared that after- wit 
serves no good purpose : whilst I considered the possi- 
bility of escape, they looked only at the prospect of being 



• • VII. — From the Mar ay Prairie to Harar . 197 

dragged back with pinioned arms by the Amir’s guard. 
Such is generally the effect of the vulgar Moslem’s blind 
fatalism. 

I then wrote an English letter 1 from the Political 
Agent at Aden to the Amir of Harar, proposing to 
deliver igin person, and throw off my disguise. Two 
reasons influenced mein adopting this “neck or nothing” 
plan. All the races amongst whom my travels lay, 
hold him nidering who hides his origin in places of 
danger ; and secondly, my white face had converted me 
into a Turk, a nation more hated and suspected than 
any Europeans, without our prestige . Before leaving 
Sagharrah, I entrusted to the End of Time a few lines 
addressed to Lieut. Herne at Berberah, directing him 
how to act in case of necessity. Our baggage was 
again decimated : the greater part was left with Adan, 
and an ass carried only what was absolutely necessary, 
— a change of clothes, a book or two, a few biscuits, 
ammunition, and a little tobacco. My Girhi escort con- 
sisted of Shirwa, the Badawi Abtidon, and Mad Sa’id 
mounted on the End of Time’s mule. 

At 10 a.m. on the 2nd January, all the villagers 
assembled, and recited the Fatihah, consoling us with 
the information that we were dead men. By the worst 
of footpaths, we ascended the rough and stony hill 
behind Sagharrah, through bush and burn and over 
ridges of rock. At the summit was a village, where 
Shirwa halted, declaring that he dared not advance: 
a swordsman, however, was sent on to guard us through 
the Galla Pass. After an hour’s ride, we reached the 
foot of a tall Table-mountain called Kondura, where our 


1 At first I thought of writing it in Arabic ; but having no seal, a 
sine qud non in an Eastern letter, and reflecting upon the consequences 
of detection or even suspicion, it appeared more politic to come 
boldly as a European. 



198 First Footsteps in East Africa . 

road, a goat-path rough with rocks or fallen trees^ and 
here and there arched over with giant treep&s^ was 
reduced to a narrow ledge, with a forest above and a 
forest below. I could not but admire the beauty of this , 
Valombrosa, which reminded me of scenes.^ 
enjoyed in fair Touraine. High up on out; le^rose t he 
perpendicular walls of the misty hill, fringedKwtl* tufted 
pine, and on the right the shrub-clad foldsi' fell into a 
deep valley. The cool wind whistled and sunbeams . 
like golden shafts darted through tall shady .trees— 

Bearded with moss, and in garments green— 

the ground was clothed with dank grass, and around 
the trunks grew thistles, daisies, and blue flowers which, 
at a distance, might well pass for violets. 

Presently we were summarily stopped by half a dozen 
Gallas attending upon one Rabah, the Chief who owjis 
the Pass. 1 This is the African style of toll-taking: the 
“pike” appears in the form of a plump of spearmen, 
and the gate is a pair of lances thrown across the road. 
Not without trouble, for they feared to depart from the 
mos majorum , we persuaded them that the ass carried no 
merchandise. Then rounding Kondura’s northern flank, 
we entered the Amir’s territory : about thirty *miles 
distant, and separated by a series of blue valleys, lay 
a dark speck upon a tawny sheet of stubble — Harar. 

Having paused for a moment to savour success, 
we began the descent. The ground was a slippery black 
soil — mist ever settles upon Kondura — and frequent 
springs oozing from the rock formed beds of black mire. 
A few huge Birbisa trees, the remnant of a forest still 
thick around the mountain’s neck, marked out the road : 


z It belongs, I was informed, to two clans ofCrallas, who year by 
year in turn monopolize the profits. 




VII. — From the Marar Prairie to Harar. 199 

they weife bjranchy from stem to stem, and many had 
a girtWtrf frcttn twenty* to twenty-five feet. 1 

After an hour’s ride amongst thistles, whose flowers 
of a bright, red&ke worsted were not less than a child's 
head, yre watered our mules at a rill below the slope. 
Then recounting, we urged over hill and dale, where 
Galla peasants were threshing and storing their grain 
with loud tongs of joy : they were easily distinguished 
by their African features, mere caricatures of the Somal, 
* Whose type has been Arabized by repeated immigrations 
from Al-Yaman and Hadramaut. Late in the afternoon, 
having gained ten miles in a straight direction, we 
passed through a hedge of plantains, defending the 
windward side of Gafra, a village of Midgans who 
collect the Jirad Adan’s grain. They shouted delight 
on recognising their old friend, Mad Sa'id, led us to an 
empty Ganibisa, swept and cleaned it, lighted a fire, 
turned our mules into a field to graze, and went forth to 
seek food. Their hospitable thoughts, however, were 
marred by the two citizens of Harar, who privately 
threatened them with the Amir’s wrath, if they dared to 
feed that Turk. 

As evening drew on, came a message from our 
enemies, the Habr Awal, who offered, if we would wait 
till sunrise, to enter the city in our train. The Jirad 
Adan bad counselled mo not to provoke these men ; so, 
contrary to the advice of my two companions, I returned 
a polite answer, purporting that we would expect them 
till eight o’clock the next morning. 

At 7 a.m., on. the 3r<? January, we heard that the 
treacherous Habr Awal had driven away their cows 
shortly after midnight. Seeing their hostile intentions, 
I left my journal, sketches, and other books in charge 

z Of this tree are made the substantial doors, the basins and the 
porringers of Harar. 


200 First Footsteps in East Africa . • ^ 

of an old Midgan, with directions that they should be 
forwarded to the Jirad Adan, and deterntf^^lb carry 
nothing but our arms and a few presents for the Amir. 
We saddled our mules, mounted and' rode hurriedly 
along the edge of a picturesque chasm of tender pink 
granite, here and there obscured by luxuriant v|£etation. 
In the centre, fringed with bright banks a shallow rill, 
called Doghlah, now brawls in tiny cascades, then whirls 
through huge boulders towards the Erar River. 
Presently, descending by a ladder of rock scarcely safe 
even for mules, we followed the course of the burn, and 
emerging into the valley beneath, we pricked forward 
rapidly, for day was wearing on, and we did not wish the * 
Habr Awal to precede us. 

About noon we crossed the Erar River. The bed 
is about one hundred yards broad, and a thin sheet of 
clear, cool, and sweet water covered with crystal the 
greater part of the sand. According to my guides, its 
course, like that of the hills, is southerly towards the 
Webbe of Ogadayn 1 : none, however, could satisfy my 
curiosity concerning the course of the only perennial 
stream which exists between Harar and the coast. 

In the lower valley, a mass of waving holcus, we 
met a multitude of Galla peasants coming from the city 
market with new potlids and the empty gourds which 
had contained their butter, ghi, and milk ; all wondered 
aloud at the Turk, concerning whom they had heard 
many horrors. As we commenced another ascent, 
appeared a Harar Grandee mounted upon a handsomely 
caparisoned mule and attended by seven servants who 
carried gourds and skins of grain. He was a pale-faced 
senior with a white beard, dressed in a fine Tobe and a 
snowy turband, with scarlet edges : he carried no shield, 
but an Abyssinian broadsword was slung over his left 

i The Webbe Shebayli or Haines River. 



201 


g * VII, — From the Marat Prairie to Harar , 

shoulder. We exchanged courteous salutations, and as 
I was^fh®^y he ordered a footman to fill a cup with 
water. Half way up the hill appeared the 200 Girhi 
cows, but those traitors, the Habr Awal, had hurried 
onwards. Upon the summit was pointed out to me the 
village Elaoda: in former times it was a wealthy 
place belonging to the Jirad Adan. 

At 2 p.m. we fell into a narrow fenced lane, and 
halted for a few minutes near a spreading tree, under 
which sat women selling ghi and unspun cotton. About 
two miles distant on the crest of a hill, stood the city — 
the end of my present travel — a long sombre line, 
strikingly contrasting with the white- washed towns of 
the East. The spectacle, materially speaking, was a 
disappointment : nothing conspicuous appeared but two 
grey minarets of rude shape : many would have grudged 
exposing three lives to win so paltry a prize. But of all 
that have attempted, none ever succeeded in entering 
that pile of stones : the thorough-bred traveller, dear L., 
will understand my exultation, although my two com- 
panions exchanged glances of wonder. 

Spurring our mules, we advanced at a long trot, 
when Mad Sa’id stopped us to recite a Fatihah in honour 
of Ao Umar Siyad and Ao Rahmah, two great saints 
who repose under a clump of trees near the road. The 
soil on both sides of the path is rich and red : masses of 
plantains, limes, and pomegranates denote the gardens, 
which are defended by a bleached cow’s skull, stuck 
upon a short stick 1 and between them are plantations of 
coffee, bastard saffron, and the graceful Kat. About 
half a mile eastward of the town appears a burn called 
Jal'ah or the Coffee Water : the crowd crossing it did not 


v z This scarecrow is probably a talisman. In the. Saharah, 
according to Richardson, the skull of an ass averts the evil eye from 
gardens. 




202 


Fifst Footsteps in East Africa* 

prevent my companions bathing, and whilst theVdonned 
clean Tobes I retired to the wayside, and jKetched 
the town. 

These operations over, we resumed our Way up a 
rough tranchie ridged with stone and hedged with tall 
cactus. This ascends to an open plain. On ^e right 
lie the holcus fields, which reach to the town wall : the 
left is a heap of rude cemetery, and in front are the dark 
defences of Harar, with groups of citizens loitering about 
the large gateway, and sitting in chat near the ruined 
tomb of Ao Abdal. We arrived at 3 p.m., after riding 
about five hours, which were required to accomplish 
twenty direct miles. 1 

Advancing to the gate, Mad Sa’id accosted a warder, 
known by his long wand of office, and sent our salams to 
the Amir, saying that we came from Aden, and requested 
the honour of audience. Whilst he sped upon his errand, 
we sat at the foot of a round bastion, and were scrutinized, 
derided, and catechized by the curious of both sexes, 


1 The following is a table 
distances : — 

1. From Zayla to Gudingaras 

2. To Kuranyali 

3. To Adad 

4. To Damal - 

5. ToAl-Armo 

' 6. Tojiyaf - 

7. To Halimalah (the Holy 

Tree, about half-way) - 

8. To Aububah 

9. To Koralay - * 

xo. To Harar - - 


of our 

stations, directions, and 

Miles. 

- 

S.E. 165° 

19 

- 

145° 

8 

- 

*25° 

25 

- 

205° 

XI 

- 

I90 0 

11 

- 

202° 

10 

■: - 

X 92 0 

— 91 miles. 

- 

245 0 

2 X 

- 

165° 

25 

“ 

260° 

65 

—xxx miles. 


Total statute miles 202 



203 


|i ,« - VII.— From the Marar Prairie to Hdrar. 

especially by that conventionally termed the fair. The 
three ffabr Awal presently approached and scowlingly 
inquire^ why we had not apprised them of our intention 
to enter the city. It was now “war to the knife” — we 
did not deign a reply. 



CHAPTER VIII. 


TEN DAYS AT HARAR. 

After waiting half an hour at the gate, we were told 
by the returned warder to pass the threshold, and re- 
mounting guided our mules along the main street, a 
narrow up-hill lane, with rocks cropping out from a 
surface more irregular than a Perote pavement. Long 
Gulad had given his animal into the hands of our two 
Badawin: they did not appear till after our audience, 
when they informed us that the people at the entrance 
had advised them to escape with the beasts, an evil fate 
having been prepared for the proprietors. 

Arrived within a hundred yards of the gate of holcus- 
stalks, which opens into the courtyard of this African St. 
James’s, our guide, a blear-eyed, surly-faced, angry-voiced 
fellow, made signs — none of us understanding his Harari 
—to dismount. We did so. He then began to trot, and 
roared out apparently that we must do the same . 1 We 
looked at one another, the Hammal swore that he would 
perish foully rather than obey, and — conceive, dear L. f 
the idea of a petticoated pilgrim venerable as to beard 
and turband breaking into a long “double!” — I expressed 

1 

i The Ashantis at Customs' time (rites done on the death of 
men of rank) run across the royal threshold to escape being seized 
and sacrificed to wet the grave with slaves' blood (2000 prisoners 
are killed when the King 11 makes a custom " at ancestral tombs) ; ’ 
possibly the trace of a pagan rite is still preserved by Moslem Harar, 
where it is now held a mark of respect and always exacted from the 
citizens. 



VIII. — Ten Days at Harar. 205 

much ttt same sentiment. Leading our mules leisurely, 
in spit#E>f the guide’s wrath, we entered the gate, strode 
down the yard, and were placed under a tree in its left 
corner, close to a low building of rough stone, which the 
clanking of frequent fetters argued to be a state prison. 

This part of the court was crowded with Gallas, some 
lounging about, others squatting in the shade under the 
palace walls. The chiefs were known by their zinc arm- 
lets, composed of thin spiral circlets, closely joined, and 
extending in mass from the wrist almost to the elbow: all 
appeared to enjoy peculiar privileges — they carried their 
long spears, wore their sandals, and walked leisurely about 
the royal precincts. A delay of half an hour, during which 
state affairs were being transacted within, gave me time 
to inspect a place of which so many and such different 
accounts are current. The palace itself is, as Clapperton 
describes the Fellatah Sultan’s state hall, a mere shed, a 
long, single storied, windowless barn of rough stone and 
reddish clay, with no other insignia but a thin coat of 
whitewash over the door. This is the royal and wazirial 
distinction at Harar, where no lesser man may stucco the 
walls of his house. The courtyard was about eighty 
yards long by thirty in breath, irregularly shaped, and 
surrounded by low buildings : in the centre, opposite the 
outer entrance, was a circle of masonry against which 
were propped divers doors. 1 

Presently the blear-eyed guide with the angry voice 
returned from within, released us from the importunities 
of certain forward and inquisitive youths, and motioned 


z I afterwards learned that when a man neglects a summons his 
door is removed to the royal court-yard on the first day; on the 
second, it is confiscated. The door is a valuable and venerable 
article in this part of Africa. According to Bruce, Ptolemy 
Euergetes engraved it upon the Axum Obelisk for the benefit of his 
newly conquered /Ethiopian subjects, to whom it had been unknown. 



206 


First Footste^if East Africa. 

. *•' ‘ #1 . l 

us to doff our slippers at a stone step, or rather like, about 
twelve feet distant from the palace wall. We Jumbled 
that we were not entering a r mosque, but in vain. Then . 
ensued a long dispute, in tongues' mutually unintelligible,, 
about giving up our weapons: by dint of obstinacy we 
retained our daggers and my revolver. The guide raised 
a door curtain, suggested a bow, and I stoofr in the 
presence of the dreaded chief. 

The Amir, or, as he styles himself, the Sultan Ahmad 
bin Sultan Abu Bakr, sat in a dark room with whitewashed 
walls, to which hung— significant decorations — rusty 
matchlocks and polished fetters. His appearance was 
that of a little Indian Rajah, an etiolated youth twenty- 
four or twenty-five years old, plain and thin-bearded, with 
a yellow complexion, wrinkled brows and protruding eyes. 
His dress was a flowing robe of crimson cloth, edged 
with snowy . fur, and a narrow white turband tightly 
twisted round a tall conical cap of red velvet, like the old 
Turkish headgear of our painters. His throne was a 
common Indian Kursi, or raised cot, about five feet long, 
with back and sides supported by a dwarf railing : being 
an invalid he rested his elbow upon a pillow, under 
which appeared the hilt of a Cutch sabre. Ranged' in 
double line, perpendicular to the Amir, stood the “court,” 
his cousins and nearest relations with right arms bared 
after fashion of Abyssinia. 

I entered the room with a loud “Peace be upon 
ye I ” to which H. H. replying graciously, and extending 
a hand, bony and yellow as a kite’s claw, snapped his 
thumb and middle finger. Two chamberlains stepping 
foroard, held my forearms, an<f assisted me to bend low 
over the fingers, which however I did not kiss, being 
naturally averse to performing that operation upon any 
but a woman’s hand. My two servants then took their 1 
turn : in this case, after the back was saluted, the palm 



VIII. — Tm lfiays at Harar. 207 

was presented for a repetition. 1 These preliminaries 
concluded, we were led Jo and seated upon a mat in 
front 01 the Amir, who directed towards us a frowning 
brow and inquisitive eye. 

Some inquiries were made about the chiefs health : 
he shook his head captiously, and inquired our errand. 
I drew from my pocket my own letter : it was carried by 
a chamberlain, with hands veiled in his Tobe, to the 
Amir, who after a brief glance laid it upon the couch, 
and demanded further explanation. I then represented 
in Arabic that we had come from Aden, bearing the 
compliments of our Daulah or governor, and that we had 
entered Harar to see the light of H. H.’s countenance: 
this information concluded with a little speech, describing 
the changes of Political Agents in Arabia, and alluding 
to the friendship formerly existing between the English 
and the deceased chief Abu Bakr. 

The Amir smiled graciously. 

This smile I must own, dear L., was a relief. We 
had been prepared for the worst, and the aspect of affairs 
in the palace was by no means reassuring. 

Whispering to his Treasurer, a little ugly man with 
a badly shaven head, coarse features, pug nose, angry 
eyes, and stubby beard, the Amir made a sign for us to 
retire. The baise main was repeated, and we backed out 
of the audience-shed in high favour. According to 
grandiloquent Bruce, “ the Court of London and that 
of Abyssinia are, in their principles, one”: the loiterers 
in the Harar palace yards who had before regarded us 
with cut-thrOat looks, now smiled as though they loved 
us. Marshalled by the^uard, we 'issued from the pre- 
cincts, and after walking a hundred yards entered the 
Amir’s second palace, which we were told to consider 
our home. There we found the Badawin, who, scarcely 

z In Abyssinia, according to the Lord of Geesh, this is a mark 
of royal familiarity and confidence. 



■'■■"’.510® . . -FWst^FpotsUps in Hast 

befienrig that we had ejfcpaped alive, gnuhfted imth$ joj? 
of their hearts, aid wfe lif ano& padded ihSSf 
chief's kitchen ; wthTit ■ ofv Shabta, :■ holpUs cakes; 
soaked in sour milk, and thickly powdered witk ; ired 
{ pepper,- the salt o{:this'inknd,i^jfon; • YYv^ 

. .When wer had eaten* the treasurer reappeared, bear- 
ing the Amir’s command, 1 that we should call Agon his 
Wazir, the ;jirad Meh&mmed; Resuming our peregrina- 
tions, weltered an abode distinguished^ by its external 
streak of chunam, and in .the ground 

floor, cleanly white- washed and adorned, like . an old 
English kitchen, with varnished . wooden porringers .fltf 
various sizes, we found a venerable old man whose 
benevolent countenance belied the reports current about 
him in Somali-land. 1 Half rising, although his wrinkled 
brow showed suffering, he seated me by his side upon the 


i About seven years ago the Hajj Sharmarkay of Zayla chose as 
his agent at Harar, one of the Amir's officers, a certain Hajj Jani&y. 
Whoa this man died Sharmarkay demanded an account from his 
sons | at Berberah they promised to give it, but returning to Harar 
they were persuaded* it is believed, by the Jirad Mohammed, to 
forget their word. Upon this Sharmarkay 's fronds and relation^ 
incited by one Husayn, a Somali who had Hvedjimpy years at {fcraf* 
in the Amir's favour, wrote an insulting letter to the Jitad, beginning 
with, “No peace be upon thee, and no blessings of Allah, thou 
butcher ! son of a butcher, &c., &c. I " and concluding with athreait 
to pinion him in the market-place as a warning to men. Husa^xt 
carried the letter, which at first excited general terror ; when, how- 
ever, the attack did not take place, -the Amir Abu Bakr imprisoned the. 
imprudent Somali till he’ "died. Sharmarkay by way of reprisals, 
persuaded Alu, son of Sahlah S&laseh, king of Shoa, to seize about 
three hundred Harari citizens living hi his dominions and to keep 
them two years in durtmee. 

The Amir Abu Bakr is said on his deathbed to have warned his 
son against the Jirad. When Ahmad reported his father’s deceqge 
to Zayla, the Hajj Sharmarkay ordered a grand Maulid or Mass in 
honour of the departed. Since that time, however, there Sas bean 
little intercourse and no cordiality between them. 





adding details hoW in the-ol4 4ay one 

. Madar 1F*rih had been charged b$:t-hfe late , Sfajtan Abu 
Bakr with a present to the governor of AdenJ and that 
it was the. wisfy of pn^* people to re-establish friendly 
Ardatioos and with Harar. 

; Inj^^ahl“it wdl if Allah please!” 
ejitcula^ted t'he Jiradv I then bent ‘over hie hand, and 
tookl^Ve^ v : 

Returning, we inquired ^anxiously of the treasurer 
; about my servants’ arms which had not been returned, 
and . were assured that they had been placed in the 
safest'of store-houses, the palace. I then sent a common 
S&cJ^arrelled revolver as a present to the Amir, explaining 
■ its* Use td the bearer and we prepared to make ours^es 
as comfortable as possible. The interior of .our new 
house was a clean room, with plain ,waBe* and a floor of 
’ eapth ; opposite the entrance were two broad 
steps haa&onry, raised about two feet, and a yard above 
the ground, and covered with hard matting. I contrived 
to make upon the higher ledge a bed with the cushions 
,^hich my companions used as shabracques, and, after 
A fed a^chtethergid,. lay dpwn to rest worn 

out by fatigue pre^iirKU^^ with the po&sti 
of our position 1 . ~ Fwas- undfct .the T<§of of a bigoted prince 
whose least word was death ; a*tnongst a people who 
detest foreigners ; the only European that had ever 
passed over their inhospitable threshold, and the fated 
, instrument of their future downfall. 


END OF VOLUME I. 








2.0 ^ [S' 


ROYAL ASIATIC SOCIETY Of BENGAL ! 


Author- 

CaUNo4^3f.».S74.^ H . ^*1 


Date of Issue 


Issued to 


Date of Return 
