A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome, Vol. II (Richard Francis Burton, 1864)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1864 Tinsley Brothers first edition (https://archive.org/details/amissiontogelel01burtgoog). Burton's 1863–64 embassy to Dahomey — firsthand ethnography of the Fon kingdom and the customs of Abomey.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



^$e (nimome 6b«ton 



OF THE 



WORKS 



OF 



CAPTAIN 



SIR RICHARD F. BURTON, 



K.C.M.G., F.R.G.S., &c., &c., &c. 



VOLUME IV. 



VOL. 11. - a 

256 






A MISSION 

TO 

GELELE, KING OF DAHOME. 



IN TWO VOLUMES. 

VOLUME II. 



A MISSION . 
GELELE, KING OF DAHOME 

WITH NOTICES OF 

THE SO-CALLED "AMAZONS." THE GRAND CUSTOMS, 

THE YEARLY CUSTOMS. THE HUMAN SACRIFICES, 

THE PRESENT STATE OF THE SLAVE TRADE; 

AND 

THE NEGRO'S PLACE IN NATURE. 

BY 

CAPTAIN SIR RICHARD F. BURTON, 

K. C.M.G., F. R.G. S., &c., &c., &c. 

(late commissioner to DAHOME,) 
AUTHOR OF "a PILGRIMAGE TO AL-MADINAH AND MECCAH." 

EDITED BY HIS WIFE, 

ISABEL BURTON. 

" If a man be ambitious to improve in knowledge and wisdom, he should travel 
into foreign countries." — Philostratus in Apoll. 

" Every kingdom, every province, should have its own monographer." — 
Gilbert White. 

QUemoriaf Bbition. 



IN TWO VOLUMES. 
VOLUME II. 

LONDON: 
TYLSTON AND EDWARDS. 

MDCCCXCIII. 

(All rights fcscrvcd.) 



Printed for the Publishers at 

The Meccan Press, 
3, Soho Square, London, W. 



Vll 



CONTENTS 

OF 

THE SECOND VOLUME. 



Chapter. Page. 

XIV. — The King's " So-sin Custom" — (Continued) 

Section C. i 

Section D. 6 

Section E. 12 

Section F. 18 

XV. — Of the so-called Amazons and the Daho- 

man Army 42 

XVI. — Addo-kpon, the Bush King's So-sin 
Customs 

Section A. 58 

Section B. 59 

Section C. 62 

Section D. 66 

Section E. 70 

Section F. 72 

XVII.— Of the Dahoman Religion ... 88 

XVIII. — The Sin-kwain, or Water-sprinkling Cus- 
tom Ill 



viii A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome. 

Chapter. Page. 

XIX.— Of " The Negro's Place in Nature" - 1 18 

Note. — Adahoonzou's Speech - - 140 

XX. — The Day of Triumph - - - - 145 

XXI. — Dahome and her Capital - - - 154 

XXII. — The Firing to Whydah, and Conclusion 

of the Customs 169 

XXIII.— The Delivery of the Message - - - 180 

XXIV. — Return to the Seaboard - - - 193 

Conclusion 204 

Appendices. 

I. — Itinerary 215 

II. — Rev. Mr. Bernasko's Account Current 

with Captain Burton . - - - 220 

III. — Extract of a Letter from the Rev. Mr. 

Bernasko - ' 222 

Copy of Commodore Wilmot's Report. — 

No. I 227 

Copy of Commodore Wilmot's Report. — 

No. 2 251 

IV. — Catalogue of the Dahoman Kings - - (265\ 

V. — Dahomey, its People and Customs - - 303 



A MISSION 

TO 

GELELE, KING OF DAHOME. 



CHAPTER XIY.— (Continued). 

THE king's ** SO-SIN CUSTOM." 
SECTION C. 

The Bonu-gan nun Kpon 'gbe diSy^ or Third Day of the King's 

Customs. 

At half-past 3 p.m., on the last day of 1863, we ham- 
mocked to our former place before the south-eastern or 
Komasi Gate, and found the seance much as it was before. 
On this occasion, however, besides the standing dish of 
three royal skulls, there were on the King's proper left, 
eleven ** neptunes," or broad shallow brass pans of Abeo- 
kutan crania, nine or ten to each.'-* A dozen men were 
capering before royalty ; when they had ceased, knelt, and 
shovelled, eight others performed the ** Ganchya" dance, 
in which the hands are washed in imperceptible water, or 
rubbed like a draper's assistant. 

Within the bamboos, women passed before the throne 
from left to right, bowed to Gezo's ghost, and after pros- 
trating to the King, presented arms. First came a proces- 
sion of eighteen Tansi-no, or fetish women, who have 

I Bonu-gan (civilian captains, or ministers), nun (thing), kpon 
(look), 'gbe (to-day), die (this). 

2. The calabashes full of skulls are called men-ta-doka-men. 

VOL. II. I 



2 A Mission to Gelele^ King of Dahome, 

charge of the last monarch's grave/ — slow and solemn 
old gipsies, in gold-trimmed broad-brim felts or white 
night-caps. They were preceded by bundles of matting, 
eight large stools, calabashes, pipes, baskets of water, 
grog, and meat, with segments of gourd, above and 
below, tobacco bags, and similar commissariat articles ; 
and they were followed by a band of horns and rattles. 
Eight stools, or chiefs with their attendant "Amazons," 
and young female slaves of the palace, made obeisance, 
whilst armed women sang dirges in the minor key, clapped 
hands, and presented arms. Followed a dance of six 
Amazons to a very weak band. 

Presently two messenger- women came from the right 
end of the square, ushering twenty-one umbrellas — of 
which two were coloured, and the rest white — divided into 
three parties, accompanied by the usual band and canteen. 
The chief was the she-Min-gan, whose back was all pig- 
tails depending from the score of coral and metal neck- 
laces with which she had been decorated. Joined by the 
Adanejan*s "mother," a middle-aged officeress, stout as 
the most "bulbous" Englishwoman, and round in every 
part where curves should be, she performed a knife dance. 
The pair then took muskets and skirmished, whilst the 
others formed up and pranced before the King. Finally, 
the Min-ganess disposed herself opposite the throne, upon 

I The Dahomans, like other Yorubans, and the people of the Gold 
Coast, bury in the house, choosing a room which is afterwards kept 
locked. So Alexander ab Alexandro informs us that, before the Laws 
of the Twelve Tables, the Romans interred corpses in their habita- 
tions, using as coffins large casks and other vessels —whence arose 
the lares, or ancestral ghosts. Gezo, I am told, is inhumed at the 
Komasi Palace in a small room under a temporary thatch and mat- 
ting shed, which will be replaced with swish when there is blood 
enough to make it. According to some authorities, the Tansi-no are 
all women, and descendants of kings, who attend upon the royal 
graves, whilst these broad-brimmed personages are called Bassaji, 
great fetish women representing the ghosts of former monarchs. 
I — 2 



XIV. — The King's ^^ So-sin Custom,'' — Section C. 3 

the knobs of two war sticks stuck in the ground — it was 
Britannia sitting as she does in pence on the edge of her 
shield. 

The King then rose and walked forward to throw 
cowries, the local money, amongst his subjects. All 
removed their ornaments and girt their loins ; it is a point 
of honour to fight for the royal bakhshish, and nob and 
snob join in the melee. No notice is taken if a man be 
killed or maimed in the affair; he has fallen honourably 
fighting for his sovereign. Some lose eyes and noses; 
the Dahomans gouge like Lancashire "purrers" or Soestu- 
dalian peasants, bite like hyenas — I have seen a hand 
through which teeth met — and scratch like fisherwomen 
or cat-o'-mountains. We speedily withdrew our chairs. 
The King, habited in a toga of tender green, came for- 
ward to the bamboos, and stood as agonistarch under his 
umbrellas and parasol, which were upheld by nine women 
and by two very small girls. He took from baskets, which 
were brought up in turn to him, heads of strung cowries, 
and tossed them high up to the crowd, who fought for 
them as if they were gold. The bundles were torn to 
pieces in a moment, so were the strings, and at times 
there was a scramble, a bite, and a scream about a single 
shell.* 

The King, surrounded by his guard, then perambu- 
lated the square by west and south, still throwing strings 
of cowries ; from where we stood, the dust-blurred mass 
of fighting negrohood looked like the daemons of some 
mediaeval picture, or the dreams of Father Pinamonti. 
When royalty had returned to the bamboo, we were sum- 
moned to "fight for cowries," and not being in uniform we 
scrambled like school-boys, omitting however the Daho- 

I A head of cowries ( == 2 shillings) keeps a poor man for about 
four days, or £g 2s. 6d. per annum. An officer expends about £y^ per 
annum, which is the rate of living of a Moslem gentleman and his 
household in Syria. 



4 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahomc, 

man adjuncts. When our attendants and the Moslem 
deputation had received their share, we regained our old 
places. The palace gate was thrown open, and through it 
we saw the women all hustling one another as the men 
had done. , 

The chief of the hunchbacks,^ Lizi-dogo-bo-je'gbwo- 
to-men,^ wielding, with arms like Rob Roy's, a circinal- 
edged hide-whip, and assisted by his attendants, soon cut 
a way through the crowd. After " Lizzy's" performance 
appeared a body of fetishers in three parties, headed by 
Boro and Zenhwe, their captains. The first seven carried 
on their heads each an ugly " wee wudden goddity," sup- 
posed to walk by itself after nightfall. These "Bo" are 
dwarfish attempts at humanity, male and female — the 
sexes made very distinct — lamp black and red, with white 
caps and pagnes.* The second party, consisting of ten 
men, bore in their hands as many iron fetish sticks, from 
4 feet to 6 feet long, capped mostly with a barrel cone like 
a modern Moslem cresset, apex downwards, and topped 

1 The " Gobbo" is here an institution. These deformities, which 
axe very common, contrary to the case of Africa generally, are of 
both sexes and of all ages. We repeatedly saw troops of little she 
hunchbacks. 

2 Lizi is his proper name. Dogo (the "languti" of India, which 
we generally translate T-bandage), bo (and), je (falls into), Agbwe-to 
(a certain sea-fetish, here used for " the sea,") men (in). The mean- 
ing is, " In his indispensables he falls into the sea," that is to say, '• He 
is brave and fears nothing." 

3 The first was a blue dwarf, in a grey pagne, with a hat on head ; 
the second, a blue woman, with protuberant breasts ; the third, a red 
dwarf with white eyes, clad cap-a-pi6 in red and brown ; the fourth 
was a small black mother and child in a blue loin-cloth, with a basket 
or calabash on the former's head ; the fifth, ditto, but lesser ; the sixth, 
was a pigmy baboon-like thing, with red face under a white skull cap, 
a war club in the right hand and a gun in the left ; and the seventh 
much resembled the latter, but was lamp black, with a white apron 
behind. They were carved much as the face cut on the top of a stick 
by the country bumpkin in England. 



XIV. — The Kinor's ^^ So -sin Custom,** — Section C, 



'o 



with rude iron imitations of land tortoises. The third 
party, also ten in number, was the band. 

Having danced with much effusion and paraded their 
godlings, the fetishers defiled to the right and vanished 
from the crowd. The King then walked up to the victim 
shed, and paced down its length within the railing. To 
the score of wretches there sitting pilloried he threw with 
two hands as many heads of cowries, and these were 
placed by the attendants upon the caps of the recipients. 
He conversed freely with several of them. The others, 
though I could see no sign, were probably gagged, for the 
reason before stated. He then came up and snapped 
fingers with me, when a hint was given that at my inter- 
cession several victims would be pardoned. This also is 
a Dahoman formula. I pleaded for them, sa)ang that 
mercy is the great prerogative of kings, when nearly half 
of them were brought up before Gelele, were untied, and 
were placed by their keepers on all fours to hear the royal 
clemency. 

An** Ago!" and a ting! tang! caused a deep hush, 
and the Min-gan, whose beard and hair were brick-red 
with dust, uttered a long, dreary, drowsy speech, much 
reminding me of a certain ** Great Eltchi." The sub- 
stance was, that the chief of a tributary town, Izatakuno, 
having sent instead of cowries palm kernels to the King, 
he, the Min-gan, ashamed to report such an outrage, had 
captured the prisoners exposed at the palace shed. The 
high officer again powdered his hair and reclined on one 
arm, whilst the King informed him that the proceeding 
was duly approved of, and that the pardoned rebels must 
be speedily removed from his sight. His right royal 
speech was followed by an uproar of cymbals, the usual 
two decanters of rum were sent to us, and •thus we got 
**pass," or permission to leave **the presence." 

That night was our '* watch night," which the ham- 



6 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome. 

mock men kept for us with potations pottle deep of trade 
spirits. 

SECTION D. 

The So-nan-wen-kan 'ghe,^ or Fourth Day of the King's 

Customs, 

The first day of the new year (1864) was chosen for 
the ceremony of loosing horses, which is not usually per- 
formed till a fortnight after the opening of the Customs. 
Mr. Cruikshank was feverish : the labour of pleasure in 
Dahome is somewhat hard ; I therefore went alone to the 
usual place, and found there a new hat. It belonged to a 
dark youth, M. Joaquim de Cirqueira Lima. He had 
been brought up at Berlin, and there had attracted con- 
siderable notice. Presently returning to Africa, he became 
head clerk to the Hamburg factory at Lagos; and at the 
death of his father, the headman of Brazilian emigrants, 
who had received an umbrella from the King, he had 
gravitated to the quality of ** Whydah gentleman." All 
the chief caboceers were sitting in poor clothes under old 
blackened and war-soiled umbrellas, which will be laid 
aside to-morrow. There was a suspicious gathering of 
vultures on the tree under which our chairs were dis- 
posed. Can their sagacity extend to guessing that death 
is near ? 

Seven men were prancing before the King, whose 
brother Anlinwanun substituted for them an untired troop. 
After their obeisances and salutations, the bamboo barrier 
was enlarged for the Amazon dances. A peloton of fifty 
wives and fighteresses, several of them *' half- heads" and 
others with a haircrest along the poll-ridge, stood up: 
then, turning towards the tent where Gezo*s ghost was, 
they capered «nd they sang in chorus and in solo to the 

I So (horse), nan-wen (will break), kan (rope), 'gbe (to-day). As 
I have said, the horses had been returned, but this is probably the 
old name of the fete-day. 



XIV, — The King's ^^So-sin Custom,'' — Section D, 7 

Amazon band on the left of the throne, lauds of the old 
King. After that performance fourteen of the tallest and 
most swaggering, not including a small girl, formed line, 
and two mistresses of the ceremonies, armed with horse- 
tail chauris, chanted and sometimes pranced to give time 
in rear. The toilette was the pink of propriety, — a vest, 
a pagne, a shorter undergarb and Ffon chokoto or "panti- 
lettes," longer than the male article, and extending to the 
knees : it is a provision which might be naturalized in all 
countries where calegons are not de rigueur. When the 
time was to be changed, one or both of the Blue Com- 
panies advanced towards the band with pin toes straight 
in front, ungracefully throwing out first one arm, then the 
other, with one or two fingers extended, and clapping 
palms on the thighs or on something fleshier. Thus the 
measure was taken up by a single cymbal, and finally by 
the full band. The dancers stamped, wriggled, kicked 
the dust with one foot, sang, shufiled, and wrung their 
hands — there is ever a suspicion of beheading in these 
performances — bending almost double, ducking heads, 
moving sideways to right and left, fronting and facing every- 
where, especially presenting the back, converting fore- 
fingers into strigils, working the arms as in Mediterranean 
swimming, and ending in a prestissimo and very violent 
movement of the shoulders, hips, and loins. Then whilst 
the rest reposed on short stools there was a grand pas de 
deux. The whole merits of the ballet were time and 
unison : nothing could be less graceful or more deficient 
in the poetry of motion. All ended with kneeling, bend- 
ing heads to the ground, and rubbing palms. 

Thereupon Adan-men-nun-kon of the guard, sup- 
ported by a three-deep column of fifty men, stood up, and, 
in the bawling barking tone affected by the real brave, 
declared that as the Fanti Company had sung about 
breaking Abeokuta, so the Blue had sworn to destroy it. 
The sentiment was seconded by the Gau and the Matro 
with such jumping and breast beating that a stranger 



8 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome, 

would suppose them to be in a violent rage. The general 
uproar of captains, the dance, and presenting arms, sticks 
and knives, testified their general joy, and they chanted 
to the effect that they would not only knock down the 
walls of Abeokuta, but they would also carry away the 
bits for Gelele their King. It reminded me of the Southern 
heroes who carried Mr. President Lincoln's coffin, and 
were "bound'* to bring him back in it, and have not 
done so. 

The women having re-formed a single peloton five 
deep, Ji-bi-whe-ton, their coloneless, issued from the 
midst of them ; her scalp was clean shaven and shining,' 
a single little lock held a silver knob like the finial of a 
tea-pot, and her chief ornament was the covavcion fleur-de- 
lis of silver attached by a chain to her neck. She wore a 
vest, pink before and white behind, with a drooping slov- 
enly collar : a black leather cartridge-belt kept in posi- 
tion her long blue striped waist-cloth and confined on her 
left hip an ammunition bag, whilst her right hand grasped 
the muzzle of a short musket, to which were hung many 
charms. In hoarse manly tones she called out severally 
her best women, each of whom sharply responded 
'*Tamule! O Brave!" presented them to the King, 
handed to them their cowries, placed the bundles upon 
their heads, and dismissed them. Some of the more for- 
ward made short speeches with a pert air, and struck 
their bosoms, as to say, ** I am the woman to do it, I." 
At times a dozen or two stood up, sang and raised one or 
both arms, the forefinger as usual being extended, thus 
swearing to brave deeds before the King. 

Similarly Adan-men-nun-kon presented his chosen 
warriors, who, unlike the women, prostrated themselves. 
At one name, Mocho,^ the captainesses laughed satiri- 

I If a man " get Afa" (Chapter xii.), before the births of his chil- 
dren, the first boy is called Amoso, and the girl Alugba : the next are 
named Mocho and Alugba-hwe, and so on. 



XIV. — The King's ^^ So-sin . Custom " — Section D, g 

cally, showing the rivalry ever existing between the two 
sexes. The women, naturally somewhat incontinent of 
tongue, also supply all omissions and explanations of the 
men's speeches, whilst these dare not interrupt their sis- 
ter soldiers. On the other hand the full private, the 
jester, the bush man, in fact every one, addresses his sov- 
ereign without interruption, demanding and receiving 
audience and justice. So far the despotism is quite en 
regie : it is the progressive democratic, not the barbarous 
aristocratic. Lastly, there was a general " Tamule ! " the 
women sang and clapped hands, whilst the elite danced. 
This example was duly followed by the men. 

Silence having been once more proclaimed, the King 
spoke fiercely about the capture of Abeokuta, and he was 
seconded by Adan-men-nun-kon the Brave. The women 
fired, the men blew their horns, and both companies, mas- 
culine and feminine, sang to this purport: "We refused to 
let our King furnish his father's grave with any skulls and 
bones save those of the Egbas. These we swear now to 
procure for him. If the foe soar in the air we will fly, if he 
dive we will follow him, if he sink in earth we will descend 
after him." The King excitedly informed them that he would 
see the oath kept. The Blues rushed tumultuously afar, 
skirmishing and firing: presently they returned at a pas de 
charge, and clustered before the King, whilst the women 
chanted Nago songs, in which they are said to excel. 

After the heralds had cried " Oyez ! " the King ordered 
them to sing again, when they recited the past prowess 
of the two principal companies. Once more Gelele, with 
violent gestures and wildly tossing his arms, declared that 
he must go and break Abeokuta. Two baskets of cowries 
were brought out, the Amazons carried off their share, 
and an old messenger woman bore the other to the men, 
who after prostration loaded it upon their shoulders. 

The King made a third warlike speech, to the effect 
that dirty cloth must be washed, and that his honour 



lo A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome. 

must be redeemed by destroying Abeokuta. The women 
sang, both sexes presented arms, and jesters blew loud 
blasts with their tusk-horns. Again the Amazons chanted 
to the funereal tinkle of a single cymbal, succeeded by a 
full band. After sundry dances, all sat down, touched 
with their foreheads the ground opposite the old King's 
tent, and then saluted, with the usual three batta-pahnas, 
his royal son. Wearing many silver studs in a Turkish 
cap-like mop of hair, fifteen princesses, mostly daughters 
of Gelele, and wives of the Adanejan and other officers, 
issued from the palace, and knelt in two lines close to the 
throne. On the Men's side appeared the seven Bo images 
mentioned yesterday, preceded by two fetisheers in pecu- 
liar dress. A So^ was brought up to us, a bull-face mask, 
of natural size, painted black, with glaring eyes and peep- 
holes, the horns were hung with red and white rag strips, 
and beneath was a dress of bamboo fibre covering the 
feet and ruddy at the ends. It danced with head on one 
side, and swayed itself about to the great amusement of 
the people. 

Presently our chairs were hastily removed, and we 
retired to the eastern shed, whilst the natives, flying in 
confusion, occupied the southern side of the square. 
Women dressed in every shade of colour came streaming 
from the palace, and turned to the right ; so that, on pass- 
ing the King, they presented as usual the dexter shoulder. 
They were preceded by the To-no-nun and a single bell : 
after the first turn he and his twenty eunuchs took post 
at the eastern corner of the palace wall, and in bird-like 
voices, cried out to the public to admire what was passing. 

First came thirteen old mothers of the chief captains, 
followed by eighty-women, some with their sticks of office, 

I This is probably the Soh Soh of Commander Forbes (vol. ii. 
p. 120), who considers it to be a representative of the thunder god. I 
could not find in this buffoonery any mystic meaning : the attendants 
only begged from us. 



XIV. — The King's *^ So-sin Custom/' — Section D. ii 

each carrying in a calabash two heads of cowries. After 
them trooped forty women and girls with ten strings per 
head in plates and platters. Then, preceded by small 
girls, walked the fifteen married princesses in fine raiment. 
The rest of the procession consisted of nineteen women, 
bearing on their pates bottles of rum ; forty women, each 
with two heads of cowries; twenty women and young 
girls, known by their nude bosoms, with ten strings each ; 
and, lastly, the she Meu and Min-gan with thirteen at- 
tendants. They circumambulated the square thrice, sing- 
ing, in peculiar tones, the exploits of the late and of the 
present King, and enumerating their victims.^ The pre- 
sents are for distribution amongst the lieges during the 
coming night. They have much diminished : in Gezo's 
time there were looo carriers. After the third round 
some huddled into the palace, and the rest, after again 
forming up before the King and reciting his titles, followed. 
It was the usual African inconsequence — ;^i 00,000 to 
carry ;^2o. 

Shortly, after 6 p.m. we returned to our old sitting- 
places. The woman Meu, standing amongst twenty chief 
captainesses, habited in Hausa tobes, addressed her male 
colleague, who, like the others, was lying elbow-propped 
on the ground. She informed him that the King, who 
was worthily making the Customs of his sire, had brought 
out rum and cowries for his singers — the bards who, in 
Dahome, preserve all history.*^ Then the she- Min-gan 
addressed the men, to the effect that Dahome expects 

1 All is repeated "by heart," and a tenacious memory is required. 
But the practice is hard : I rarely passed a palace, when the King was 
out, without hearing a loud singing lesson within. 

2 The bards are of both sexes, and the women dwell in the palace. 
These chroniclers and narrators of native tradition are here called 
•* Wenukhodoto," in Egba, "Owgbo." The King keeps a whole troop 
of these laureates, very different from him of Bonny, who could afford 
only "Poet Close." On the other hand, the latter could plead the 
well-known to Anglo-Indians "But, I's English." 



12 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome, 

every man to do his duty. Ten bottles of rum and 120 
heads of cowries were finally given to the women, and we 
were graciously dismissed. 

SECTION E. 

The Zan Ny any ana, or Evil Night. 

As we wended our way homewards from the palace 
to the city gate, we found both sides of the road lined with 
bamboo railing, to keep the thoroughfare clear for the 
King : it serves its purpose effectually as policemen and 
Life Guards in England. To-night Gelele will walk in 
procession with his wives, and attended by the high 
officials, from the Komasi House to the Uhun-jro market- 
place, where the Min-gan will perform sundry executions 
with his own hand. 

As sometimes happens, the subject of Men-huwu^ or 
human sacrifice in Dahome has been thoroughly mis- 
understood by the press and the public at home. It is by 
no means done to ** keep up the good old customs of the 
country." The object is not to " offer a valuable and 
acceptable present to Heaven *' ; nor is it penance or self- 
deprivation done because the thing parted with is precious 
or coveted. The King takes no pleasure in the tortures 
and death, or in the sight of blood — as will presently 
appear. The 2000 killed in one day, the canoe paddled 
in a pool of gore, and other grisly nursery tales, must be 
derived from Whydah, where the slave-traders invented 
them, probably to deter Englishmen from visiting the 
King. 

It is useless to go over the ground of human sacrifice 
from the days of the mild Hindu's Naramedha*^ to the 

1 Men (man), huwu (killing). There is no euphuism, as in Yoruba, 
where such murder is called the "basket sacrifice." Koklo-huwu is 
the sacrifice of poultry. 

2 Or killing a man. So Indra became a god, by the Aswa-medha 
or horse sacrifice. 



XIV. — The King's ^^ So-sin Custom J"— rSection E. 13 

burnings of the Druids, and to the awful massacres of 
Peru and Mexico. In Europe the extinction of the custom 
began from the time of poHte Augustus. Any Encyclo- 
paedia will show that human sacrifice, like slavery, is 
almost universally a concomitant of a certain stage of 
civilization, and that with the increase of knowledge it 
disappears for ever. 

Human sacrifice in Dahome is founded upon a purely 
religious basis, which not only strengthens but perpetuates 
the custom. It is a touching instance of the King's filial 
piety, deplorably mistaken, but perfectly sincere. The 
Dahoman sovereign must, I have said, enter Deadland* 
with royal state, accompanied by a ghostly court of leo- 
pard wives, head wives, birth-day^ wives, Afa wives, 
eunuchs — especially the chief eunuch, — singers and drum- 
mers, King's " Joto'si," and ** King's Devils," bards and 
soldiers. This is the object of what we have called the 
** Grand Customs," when the victims may amount to a 
maximum of 5P0. We find the same process extending 
through the continent to the south-eastern country of the 
Cazembe, who shows an equal veneration for his " Muzi- 
mos," or ancestral ghosts. Every year, moreover, deco- 
rum exacts that the first fruits of war and that all 
criminals should be sent as recruits to swell the King's 

1 In the History (p. 204) we read that the moment thedeathof the 
King was heard of in the palace, the women began to kill themselves and 
one another: when Sinmenkpen departed life, 595 perished. Gezo 
ended this abomination by extorting a solemn fetish oath from all his 
chiefs, men and women. Yet it must be unpleasant to find oneself 
at Agbome when the King dies : I should imagine that a foreigner 
would not be safe there at such a time. 

2 Birthday wives are those married on the King's birthday. The 
Joto 'si are half-heads, male and female, who correspond with the 
"'Kra," or "'Kla," of the Gold Coast, and rank in Dahome next to 
the eunuchs. Joto is the ancester, whom Afa, or the Book of Fate, 
declares to have sent the child into the world, and the child calls him 
Joto-che — my Joto. The King's Devils are those who have charge of 
his Legba or priapus (History, p. 204). 



14 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahame. 

retinue. Hence the ordinary annual customs. We can 
hardly find fault with putting criminals to death,^ when, 
in the Year of Grace 1864 we hung four murderers upon 
the same gibbet before 100,000 gaping souls at Liverpool, 
when we strung up five pirates in front of Newgate, 
when, during the late age of "hanging Mondays," the 
Latinist exclaimed, 

Scarce can our fields, such crowds at Tyburn die, 
With hemp the gallows and the fleet supply ; 

and when our last but one Christian king killed a starving 
mother of seventeen, with an infant at her breast, for 
lifting a yard of linen from a shop counter. A Dahoman 
visiting England but a few years ago would have witnessed 
customs almost quite as curious as those which raise our 
bile now. With respect to slaying captives, it must be 
remembered that this severity depends upon the nature of 
African wars ; with these people, lex talionis is the highest 
experience of law, and after defeat quarter is given only 
to those who are reserved for slavery or for sacrifice. 
There is, therefore, a shade of excuse for it. The execu- 
tions are, I believe, performed without cruelty; these 
negroes have not invented breaking on the wheel or tear- 
ing to pieces their victims, as happened to Ravaillac and 
the half-witted Damiens. Finally, it must be remem- 
bered that throughout the year Customs' time is the only 
period of punishment — that the sacrifice is done openly, 
enabling all to witness the consequences of crime, and 
that it seems to wither away all minor offences of violence. 
There are always at least two Evil Nights during the 
annual customs, and there may be more. Commander 
Forbes, I have said, owns that King Gezo had reduced 
the number of his victims to thirty-six. The present 
King has reduced them to thirty-nine or forty. But this 

I Commodore Wilmot (Appendix III.) should have inserted "crimi- 
nal" when asserting that the King of Dahome sacrificed his own 
countrymen. 



XIV. — The King's ** So-siit Custom,'' — Section E. 15 

number must be doubled, to include the female victims 
killed by the Amazons in the palace, and not permitted to 
be seen by man.^ The presumed total of the '* butchery 
bill " will therefore be seventy-eight or eighty.* 

As all who leave the house during the evil night are 
beheaded, it is not easy to learn what is then enacted. 
Our bearers, however, afterwards sang a song, how the 
King had asked a man of the Min-gan, which officer had 
presented the gift, how the man was charged with a mes- 
sage to Gezo, saying that the Customs were being properly 
performed, and how he and his fellows are clubbed with 
knob-sticks.* I could not find out whether, like the Meriah 
victims of the Khonds,who hardly thanked General Camp- 
bell for saving their lives, the doomed are intoxicated: 
it is probable, the object being to send them to the other 
world in the best of tempers. Although the missionaries 
deny the fact, I believe that the King* begins by using a 
broad sharp blade upon the neck of a kneeling criminal, 
after which the same is done to others by the Min-gan, 
the Meu,* and their assistants. 

1 The missionaries were at pains to hoodwink my eyes upon this 
subject, which, however, like all things at Agbome, could not be kept 
secret. When setting up the King's tent in the palace-yard, I saw 
poles being planted for a scaffold. 

2 Dr. Lankester calculates six deaths per mensem, as the loss 
caused by crinoline in London. 

3 This agrees with the History. Others say that, like the Khond 
victims, they are suffocated by the assistants, who hold their noses 
and mouths. Decapitation, it will be observed, is the favourite mode 
of execution at Dahome. 

4 Dr. M'Leod (p. 65) declares it was known when "his majesty" 
condescends to become the executioner, and relates that on one 
occasion a poor fellow objecting to it, and declaring that he was un- 
acquainted with the way, the King cried "I'll show it you" ; and with 
one blow, being very expert, made his head fly many yards from his 
body, highly indignant that there should have been the least expression 
of reluctance. 

5 Others say that the Meu executes only Addo-kpon the bush- 
king's criminals. 



1 6 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome. 

Dahome, it will be seen, shows to advantage by the 
side of Abeokuta, Ashanti, and Benin. When I visited, 
in i860, what Mr. Duncan calls that " saintly place of 
so many converts," one " basket sacrifice," astheEgbas 
delicately call it, had just been performed ; one occurred 
during our week's residence in the town ; and a third 
immediately after we had left. At Komasi, one man is 
slain per diem, except on the Wednesdays, which are the 
King's birthdays ; moreover, the death of every caboceer 
demands a number of victims, whereas in Dahome only a 
single slave accompanies the Min-gan and the Meu, such 
honour not being permitted since the early part of Gezo's 
reign to any other caboceer. Finally, when I visited the 
city of Great Benin, in 1862, I saw three violent deaths 
in three days, though the yearly ceremonies had ended, 
and the large open space before the palace was strewed 
with human skulls and bones. 

But although the Dahoman Customs have been 
greatly exaggerated and admit some little palliation, the 
annual destruction of human life is terribly great. How- 
ever trivial an action is done by the King, such as invent- 
ing a new drum, being visited by a white man, or even 
removing from one palace to another, it must be dutifully 
reported by some male or female messenger to the pater- 
nal ghost.^ I can hardly rate the slaughter at less than 

I All the victims, however, are not killed. On January 31st, 1864, 
two, a youth and a maiden, were offered up (officially), and kept alive 
to sweep King Gezo's grave. The sporadic sacrifice mentioned 
in the text was known to former travellers. "The immolation of vic- 
tims is not confined to a particular period, for at any time, should it 
be necessary to send an account to his forefathers of any remarkable 
event, the King despatches a courier to the shades, by delivering his 
message to whoever may happen to be near him, and then ordering 
his head to be chopped off immediately ; and it has not unfrequently 
happened during the present reign, that, as something new has oc- 
curred to the King's mind, another messenger (as Mr. C — nn — g very 
justly observed, like the postscript of a letter) has instantly followed 
on the same errand, perhaps in itself of the most trivial kind." 
— Dr. M'Leod, p. 64. 



XIV , — The King's '^So-sin Custom.'* — Section E, 17 

500, in average years of the annual Customs, and at less 
than 1000 during the year of the Grand Customs. At 
exceptional occasions, especially of the King's illness, 
many are slain on the suspicion of witchcraft,^ which 
here, as everywhere in Africa, is a capital offence. Dur- 
ing the earthquake which prostrated Accra in 1862, 
Gelele was informed that his father's ghost had been seen 
bathing in the sea, and was returning to Agbome. Ac- 
cording to Mr. Bernasko he slew two slaves, — others say 
the unfortunate captives from Ishagga,^ — and was sur- 
prised to hear that the earthquake had been felt where his 
father's name was unknown. The History mentions part 
of the palace wall at Agbome being overthrown in the 
days of Sinmenkpen (Adahoonzou II., 1774- 1789), when 
the Europeans, improving the occasion, tried to reform 
the royal manners. *' It does not, however, -appear that 
this representation produced any alteration in the King's 
behaviour." 

It is evident, that to abolish human sacrifice here is 
to abolish Dahome. The practice originates from filial 
piety, it is sanctioned by long use and custom, and it is 
strenuously upheld by a powerful and interested priest- 
hood. That, as our efforts to abolish the slave export 
trade are successful, these horrors will greatly increase, 
there is no room to doubt. Finally, the present King is 
for the present committed to them ; he rose to power by 
the goodwill of the reactionary party, and upon it he 
depends. There is a report that his grandsire Agongoro 

1 It must not be forgotten, that even in the days of the Religio 
Medici, all are denounced as infidels and athiests who deny the reality 
of witches. 

2 Joseph Madarikan, an Egban boy recaptured from the Daho- 
mans in March, 1864, asserts that a man named Moses Oshoko, an 
Ishagga convert, was crucified by the Dahomans, and that William 
Doherty, an English subject, was not killed : that he has been put 
under one of the chief captains, who was charged to be ready to pro- 
duce him, if demanded, even after twenty years. 

VOL. II. 2 



1 8 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome. 

(Wheenoohew) was poisoned because he showed a pro- 
pensity to Christianity, and the greatest despots are in 
Yoruba easily told to "go to sleep," or are presented with 
the parrot's eggs. Gelele, I am persuaded, could not 
abolish human sacrifice if he would ; and he would not if 
he could. The interference of strangers will cause more 
secrecy, and more decorum in the practice ; but the 
remedy must come from the people themselves. 

During the last reign, the victims, gagged and 
carrying rum and cowries for the people, were marched 
about, led with cords, and the visitors were compelled 
to witness the executions.^ In 1862-63, ^^^ wretches 
were put to death within hearing, if not within sight, of 
the white visitors. In 1863-64, the King so far regarded 
the explicit instructions which I had received, that no life 
was publicly taken during daytime. This is, let us hope, 
the small end of the wedge. 

SECTION F. 

The Minai Afunfun *khi Uhun-jro men Dadda Gezo^ ; or 
Fifth and Last Day of the King's *^ So -sin Custom.'' 

During the nigHt, at times the deep sound of the 
death-drum and the loud report of a musket informed us 
that some mortal spirit had fled. The 2nd of January, 
1864, opened with a preliminary "palaver," brought by 
the Buko-no. Some years ago, during the reign of Gezo, 
when all were employed at the palace, a fire nearly 
destroyed the city ; consequently came forth a royal 
ordinance, directing every hearth to be kept cold on that 
day, except within the royal precincts. But, though this 

I M. Brandad, a Portuguese merchant, was so terrified by the 
executions, that he fled to Whydah, and fell sick there. 

I Minai (we go to), afunfun (the small mat tent under which the 
King sits), 'khi (for akhi, a bazar or market), Uhun-jro men (in the 
Uhun-jro space, or on the Uhun-jro day), Dadda Gezo (for Grand- 
father Gezo). 
2 — 2 



XIV. — Th€ King's *^ So -sin Custom.'' — Section F. 19 

restriction does not apply to white visitors, our vexatious 
host could not help trying his hand at an avanie by which 
he gained little but contempt. 

I was debating whether to decline attending at the 
palace, as desired to do on the "glad day," when, as if 
the King had divined my intention, the Prince Chyudaton 
called upon me at an early hour and explained that all 
those slain during the last evil night were criminals and 
captives. At 1 1 a.m. we proceeded, armed with all our 
patience, to the Komasi House, where was to take place 
the ceremony called by strangers " The Procession of the 
King's Wealth,^"— it should be rather "Of the Royal 
Poverty." The approach to the palace was not pleasant. 
The north-eastern or market -shed was empty ; out of its 
tenants, nine had perished. Four corpses, attired in 
their criminals* shirts and nightcaps, were sitting in pairs 
upon Gold Coast stools, supported by a double-storied 
scaffold, about forty feet high, of rough beams, two per- 
pendiculars and as many connecting horizontals. At a 
little distance, on a similar erection, but made for half the 
number, were two victims, one above the other. Between 
these substantial affairs was a gallows of thin posts, some 
thirty feet tall, with a single victim hanging by his heels, 
head downwards. Lastly, planted close to the path was 
a patihulum for two, dangling side by side. Fine cords, 
passed in several coils round the ankles and above the 
knees, attached them to the cross-bar of the gallows, and 
the limpnessof their limbs showed that the "dear breath" 
had lately been beaten out of them. There were no signs 
of violence upon the bodies, which were wholly nude ; 
they had been mutilated after death, in respect to the 
royal wives, and very little blood appeared upon the 
ground below .^ 

1 There is, or used to be, the same annual ceremony in the city of 
Great Benin, called the "Coral Feast." 

2 M. Jules Gerard (Appendix III.) seems to imagine that the 



20 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome, 

We then passed to the south-eastern gate of the 
Komasi House, where the palace shed was also untenanted. 
In front of sundry little black dolls, stuck in the ground 
at both sides of the entrance, lay a dozen heads. They 
were in two batches of six each, disposed in double lines 
of three ; their faces were downwards, and the cleanly 
severed necks caught the observer's eye. Around 
each heap was a raised rim of white ashes. These vic- 
tims had probably been slaughtered directly in front of 
the gate, as there were traces of blood there : the bodies 
had been removed, so as not to offend the King. Within 
the palace entrance were two more, making a total of 
fourteen. Thus, during King's *' Evil Night," twenty- 
three human beings had lost their lives. 

We sat under the thin shade of the tree garnished 
with queer fruit and white flags, enjoying the Harmat- 
tanish weather, and were greeted by sundry nobles, who 
politely thanked us for honouring the day with uniform. 
After a long seance we entered the Podoji, or palace-yard, 
in which we had pitched the tent. It was crammed with 
dignitaries, male and female, all habited in their gaudiest 
attire. The time of royal mourning had now passed by, 
and merriment was once more restored to the nation. 

In the centre of the court, which was divided into 
two by a fence- work of matting, rose a sugar-loaf-shaped 
pavilion of native make, called the Tokpon. It was sup- 
ported by a strong central pole, on the top of which, 
pedestalled upon a little oval, was a small white-capped 
fetish figure holding a hatchet in the right hand : above it 
hung a flag, also white, with a chocolate-hued spread- 
mutilation preceded the execution, which I believe is not the case. 
The same error has been noticed in Mr. Duncan (vol. i. p. 220). Mr. 
Norris, in 1772, exactly describes the gibbets, with the naked and 
mutilated victims hanging by the ankles, and he says that they had 
been clubbed on the head, as by the old Roman " Ammazzatore." 
A few days afterwards I saw, in the market-place, a dog similarly 
suspended, as a Vo-sisa, or fetish to prevent disease. 



XIV. — The King's '^ So-sin Custom.'' — Section F. 21 

eagie in the centre. Posts of strong scantling, disposed 
in an inner circle, propped up the heavy flaps, and the 
outer edge was kept extended by iron rods, some four feet 
long, planted in the ground and passed through eyelet- 
holes. Thus was generated a draught which, despite 
crowding, kept the interior cool. The cloth was of the 
coarsest material, gaudy but rainwashed ; red and yellow 
were the predominant tints, varied with patches and rags 
of check. The grotesque ornaments, of different coloured 
cloths, sewn on to the outside, were lions devouring men 
and beasts, turkey-buzzards with wings abased, blue 
snakes, four-legged birds holding swords, and other 
symptoms of the ** ridiculous trade," heraldry. The en- 
trance was garnished with the usual galleries for Vo-sisa, 
little flags, and Bo-so or fetish stick-bundles : on its proper 
right squatted the band of women, on the left were ranged 
calabashes of food and drink. A white calico curtain, 
passed round the iron bars, prevented our seeing the 
women and children that crowded the interior, and the 
mat wall that divided the Podoji showed us only the 
standards and the umbrellas of the female troops.^ Con- 
spicuous objects on the left of the pavilion were two 
Ajalela or fetish pots, made by the present King.^ Both 
are lamp-black, shaped like amphorae, about four feet 
high, and planted on tripods. The larger was solid, the 
smaller was cullendered with many small holes, and both 

1 This Tokpon is accurately described by Mr. Norris, but the 
illustration in the History (opposite p. 135) has been drawn by the 
artist upon his imagination. The same may be said about all the plates 
in that book. Commander Forbes (vol. ii. p. 33) is but little more 
correct. Mr. Cruikshank measured, at the King's request, his largest 
Tokpon, and found it to be 54 feet in diameter, by about the same 
height, supported by twenty-four posts, besides the central pole, and 
raised at the flap by eighty-five iron rods. 

2 As Gezo sat under the Adanzan shed, so Gelele performs the 
Ajalela fetish. The pot reminded me of that given to the old Janis- 
saries. 



22 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome. 

were decorated with brass and silver crescents, stars, and 
similar ornaments. The second, when filled with water 
and medicine, allows none to escape, so great is its fetish 
power ; an army guarded by it can never be defeated, and 
it will lead the way to Abeokuta. Towards the end of 
the procession the smaller vase was carried off by the men, 
after they had made obeisance to the King. The women, 
with similar ceremony, presently removed the other. 

We were seated but a short time under the thin 
tamarind tree when a fall of matting on the proper left of 
the pavilion and almost in front of us, was raised, and the 
royal leopard wives and Amazons, copiously besilvered, 
ushered in the King. He was more dressed than usual, 
in a skull-cap of puce-coloured satin and a toga of violet 
silk ; a rapier, the gift of Captain Wilmot, was swung to 
his shoulder by a crimson silk sash, and an ignoble neck- 
lace of imitation jewellery lay upon his broad breast : he 
walked under a red parasol, with the usual plated spittoon 
by his side. To the music of a full band he crossed the 
court, waiting to return our salutes as we advanced to- 
wards him, and entered the Tokpon, when its white 
curtain was removed. We then betook ourselves to our 
chairs, which were placed near the royal fetisheers, who 
sat grouped under a black and tattered umbrella, fronted 
by about twenty iron sticks planted in the ground, some 
cresset shaped and quaintly capped with the tortoise, 
others crescents and demi-lunes, and mostly decorated 
with pendants of cowries. Immediately by our side 
squatted a little knot, the King's sons, the youngest of 
whom might be twelve years old. Dako, the eldest, who 
had just been made a caboceer, was a plain youth about 
twenty, with an unpleasant countenance. He is, I 
believe, the heir apparent. Presently we were joined by 
the Hun-to-ji, or king's silversmith, a high official, whose 
long calico gown, white pantaloons, straw hat, slippers 
and European chain, proved his Brazilian descent. Under 



XIV, — The King's ** So -sin Custom.'' — Sectiofi F, 23 

him are workmen who will convert dollars — gold has no 
value here — into chains, rings and crucifixes : all are of 
the rudest make, and when tested with nitrate of silver 
they become lead coloured. , 

This was to be, as is the present King's practice, a 
mixed Custom. It began with a general salutation on 
the part of the singers and drummers, who in silver horns 
and bracelets danced before the throne, and waved their 
horse-tail fly-flappers. They were followed by the chief 
ministers, splendid in silk robes of Hausa cut, resembling 
the Arab's '*aba," short sleeved and hanging to the 
ankles : as there must be something ill-sorted about the 
African, their multitudinous necklaces and silver charms 
reposed upon common, and by no means cleanly, trade 
shirts. A troop of " Guiriots," or jesters, knelt before the 
throne, pushed and shoved one another, contorted their 
countenances, and exchanged all manner of buffooneries 
to amuse the King. The Kpo-fen-'su,^ captain of blun- 
derbusses, headsman, and headman of jesters, a living 
old skeleton, wore a long red cap hanging on his shoulder, 
with broad white circles of chalk round his eyes and 
mouth, that made his countenance look at a distance like 
a leather-covered skull. This pipe-claying, and here and 
there a streak of black made with gunpowder, are the 
only remains of the "uncouth devices painted on the face 
and body, and giving a very fiend-like appearance." The 
coadjutress in the inside is similarly goggled. The jesters 
were followed by a dozen pursuivants armed with gong- 
gongs, who advanced bending towards the throne, and 
shouted the ** strong names," or titles. Conspicuous 
amongst them was an oldster in a crimson sleeveless tunic 
and yellow shorts ; his head was red with dust, he carried 

I The Poh-veh-soo of Commander Forbes. The name means Kpo 
(leopard), fen (claw), 'su (grown) ; viz., " He can prey on all beasts," 
and is a title originally ^iven by Tegbwesun. 



24 A Mission to Gelele^ King of Dakonte, 

a large bill-hook, and he went about attended by four 
drums and one cymbal. 

After this preliminary, the processions began to pass 
round the yard. The line, which affected a funereal slow- 
ness, marching to the sound of one cymbal and a chorus 
of women, was composed of eighty-five men ; first the 
ministers, then the governors, and lastly the minor chiefs. 
They were led by the new Ajyaho, who was bareheaded ; 
his right hand rested upon a long cane, and his left held a 
bill-hook; a brass-hilted sword and a little dirk were stuck 
in both sides of his belt. Next came the Min-gan, who 
had a deer's head of thin brass hanging from his girdle ; 
and who, in quality of king's Calcraft -in- Chief, carried a 
long, straight, and sheathed blade. Then bent the old 
Meu, supporting himself upon a beadle's silver-headed 
cane ; attached by a narrow fillet or bandeau of velvet to 
the left side of his head was a small silver-mounted dirk 
or dagger, worn point downwards. The Yevogan, like 
all the rest, carried a cane ; he was armed with a bill- 
hook, and from his girdle depended a brass-scabbarded 
blade. The Adanejan wore silver horns and bracelets, and 
displayed his finery over an old trade shirt. He was 
followed by his father, the Alo-lokpo-nun-gan,^ a brother 
of the late king, who wore four knives, in pairs, attached 
to both temples by a hoop stiff with silver. Of the rest 
some went bareheaded, others had caps ; one wore a tin 
crown, a circlet and four branches meeting at the poll ; 
and several had flat silver plates three to four inches in 
diameter, fixed tightly on the scalp by a concealed lock of 
hair. There was a profusion of necklaces and bracelets ; 
not a few displayed themselves in the dignity of cast-off 
merino coats and ancient capes hardly extending to the 
waist ; all wore long sashes hanging down their left sides, 
and besides carrying long staves they were well armed. 
Here was an old cavalry sabre with open guard, there a 

I Alo (hand), lokpo (one), nun (mouth), gan (captain). 



XIV. — The King's **So-sin Custom" — Section F. 25 

straight blade with silver hilt, there a broad-headed 
Dahoman bill- hook. Sizing was not the rule ; in places 
a quasi-dwarf was followed by a tall fellow who could eat 
from off his neighbour's head. As these Guys passed the 
entrance of the royal pavilion they did obeisance, and 
after the third turn they formed line opposite the tent, 
knelt, bending low, and, at a given signal of a fugleman 
on the right, touched the ground with their foreheads 
and arose. This was the invariable conclusion of each 
act, and the whole was about as sensible as those Tem- 
perance and other gatherings with flags and banners, 
which make men wonder what satisfaction rational beings 
can derive from them. Each procession lasted from 
eight to twenty minutes. 

The ministers were followed at some interval by 
another Indian file of fifty men, the chief captains, body- 
servants, and headmen of singers and drummers. They 
were conducted by a ** Lali,^" or half-head, with the right 
side of his pericranium clean shaven, and the left in a 
casing of silver, that looked like a cast, or a half melon. 
This unique cap was solid below, barred above, and dis- 
closing the black hair beneath ; it was fastened to the 
head by a tight string. Each man had his musket. Two 
were under Ta-bla'-* — huge broad-brims, stiff with tin 
plates nailed on a surface of red cloth, and edged with 
frames of trade looking-glasses flapping in the air. I 
much wondered who could have been the hatter. Adan- 
men-nun-kon, the Capitano Sparafucile, was there, fierce 
as ever, with red scarf and cartridge-box, a war axe on 
his left shoulder, and a carbine on his right. The To-no- 
nun carried a bunch of keys. There were the two tall 

1 Any "haJf-head" is called a Lali. 

2 The Ta-bla is so called because tied to the head. Some 
fetisheers, especially women, wear, perched upon the tops of their 
polls, and lashed on, the cranium not being able to get into the 
coiffure, ridiculous little steeple hats of straw, with the broadest brims, 
and the thinnest possible steeples. 



26 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome, 

casque men with their very long guns, habited in black 
frock coats, over which hung their coral necklaces, and 
with common pagnes, knotted on the left sides under the 
European garb, so as to make them appear deformed. 
The Buko-no, our host, joined them, having previously 
extracted from a large calabash a dozen necklaces, a pair 
of mushroom-shaped silver horns, and a watch that 
wanted only glass and main-spring. In the rear were two 
blunderbusses, and the last was a melancholy-looking 
Grimaldi, smoking a bone by way of pipe, whose ashes he 
occasionally halted to remove. 

At the end of the third circuit, a chosen few received 
presents of rum and bracelets ; all kissed the ground, and 
presented arms, a knife in the right and a gun in the left 
hand ; whilst bells tinkled and snake-bone and watch- 
men's rattles were sprung. Again the fall of matting was 
raised, and issued from the harim a corresponding pro- 
cession of she ministers. Before these noble dames 
began marching round, sundry old messengeresses, slaves 
of the palace, knelt in line upon the open space in front 
of us, forming the demarcation between the sexes. In 
the pride of that utterly gratuitous virtue, celibacy, they 
passed demurely round, reserved as nuns, and for the 
same reason : they rarely allowed a glance to fall upon 
us males, pitying, I presume, our poor hearts. First 
came the five great honours of the empire, — the Ajyaho, 
the Min-gan, the Meu, the Yevogan, and the Adanejan. 
The Min-gan had a bill-hook in her left hand, as execu- 
tioneress of the inside ; the others used staves or sticks, 
and all carried swords at their left sides. These five were 
habited in long Hausa tobes of red silk, the upper garb 
light and the skirt heavy, and two wore tin crowns over 
red calico. They were followed by the lesser dignities in 
blue, striped togas of similar cut, and some had their 
heads bound with white calico, like the male singers and 
fetisheers. This file walked somewhat faster than the 



XIV, — The King's **So-sin Custom,*' — Section F, 27 

men, to the music of a band playing in the tent. After 
the third circumambulation, they formed up in line before 
the King, waved both hands four times, and quickly 
retired behind the matting. 

Then came the captainesses, forty-two in number, 
corresponding with the men. First stalked two " silver 
half-heads," with pouches on their right sides, cartridge 
boxes round their waists, and bill- hooks whose handles 
were swathed in cloth. Then came the Khe-tun-gan 
and the Akpadume, the she-Gau and the Meu, elderly 
women, far too stout for active service. Behind them 
were two heroines, decorated with beards of monkey skin, 
and men's nightgear of white calico. A pair of bayonet 
women followed, with silver sharks on their red " Liberty 
Caps." Number nine was a very bulky old figure, in the 
cook's bonnet of the 'Mman, or Madcap company des- 
cribed at Kana : she is one of the captainesses of the 
right, or Min-gan's side. There were also steeple- 
crowned broad-brims, as amongst the males. Some had 
shaggy skull-caps, like pepper-corn hair, stained a deep 
indigo, and others had applied the dye to their locks 
which contrasted well with the silver ornaments. Others 
had big fooPs caps of stuffs striped white, blue and red, 
and hanging over their shoulders. All wore sashes with 
the ends depending in front ; and carried, at half-cock, 
muskets or blunderbusses, with the muzzle cap off. 
Some were decorated with a human skull, or with a lower 
jaw, fixed to a thin brass plate dangling from the waist. 
At the end of the performance they formed line before the 
King, saluted, firstly, with the right hand ; secondly, with 
presented guns and knives, and again disappeared within 
the harim. 

After the drummers and heralds had played some 
antics before the royal tent, dancing, springing rattles, 
and powdering themselves with dust, a very ridiculous 
procession was formed. The male ministers had changed 



28 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome, 

their dresses for motley, and staff-propped, with left 
shoulders covered, and pipes alight — both showing them 
to be privileged persons — they again promenaded before 
the King. The Ajyaho wore, like Prince Chyudaton, a 
straw hat with a broad black ribbon ; the meagre face of 
the black Min-gan was buried in a vast old felt, and a 
cockaded cocked hat of the last century, very dingy and 
frayed, and worn on the wrong side, well suited the age- 
bleared eyes, the hollow cheeks, and the fallen-in lips of 
the fox-like Meu. The latter also had fastened on his 
silver armlets over a trade shirt. The best man of the 
party was the Yevogan, who, residing at Whydah, had 
achieved a chimney-pot hat, whilst the others were fain 
to be content with caps, straw hats, billycocks, cotton 
extinguishers, sailors* waterproofs, crocodile caps, calico 
fillets, and even bare scalps. Adanejan smoked a Ger- 
man student's pipe, the others being reduced to long and 
short white clays — mostly French, with monkey and 
skull bowls — to native manufacture, or to none. Each 
time the procession passed the royal tent, the old and 
tattered garments were changed for others just as bad. 
At the end they bowed with their hats before the King, 
bared their bodies to the waist, knelt, made obeisance, and 
retired. 

Then was the turn for the men captains, who also, 
like the ministers, appeared before the King with wrap- 
ped-up shoulders, smoking pipes : all were armed with 
muskets as before. One old officer of the *Mman Guards 
carried a double sword, like huge scissors. The To-no- 
nun and another official wore the robes of an Egyptian 
fellah. The Buko-no was habited in an ancient Turkish 
rug, which he held magnificent, and he smoked with an 
air a pestilent Bahia cigar. After the third tour, they 
tucked up their clothes, knelt down, and saluted the King 
ceremoniously by kissing the ground, palm-clapping in 



XIV. — The King's ^*So-sin Custom.'' — Section F, 29 

three sets, again kissing the ground, clapping palms, and 
finally by rising and upraising weapons. 

This necessitated two other processions from the in- 
side, namely, of she ministers and captainesses, who were 
muffled up, and who smoked like the men. At the close 
of the circumambulation the members of both bodies sat 
on their heels before the King, alternately kissed the 
ground four and clapped palms three times, and then 
rising presented arms. A few of the warrioresses sang in 
** the presence'* with the forefinger emphatically cutting 
the air. This brought on a male chant touching Abeo- 
kuta, which also concluded with raised weapons. The 
rum, which had been copiously sent from the King's 
pavilion, now began to take effect upon the African brain. 
Our table was soon spread with liquor, baskets of oranges, 
and boiled manioc, whilst the chiefs were supplied by 
their wives and slave girls with food and drink brought 
in large calabashes.^ It is the habit to dine before the 
King at Agbome. The Buko-no's ** Princess " came, 
attended by twenty of her women. She was a brown 
girl, about eighteen, with the comeliness of that age, and 
much resembling the King : her coralled arms were 
rounded, and her hands well made ; a number of neck- 
laces hung upon a high and ample bosom, modestly 
covered with a fine white cloth, and a double row of brass 
and silver circlets, like new sixpences,^ studded her cauli- 
flower coiffure. Whilst the slave girls behind, were 
spreading a table-cloth upon dried reeds, she retired to 
the rear, and kneeling," bent to the earth. She then 
served her husband with her own hands, touched the 

1 These in Ffon are called " Kago," amongst the Egbas " Pan- 
shuku." 

2 These, I suppose, are the coronets of silver mentioned by Mr 
Duncan (vol. i. p. 254). 

3 So Dr. M'Leod says, " By thus constantly practising genu- 
flexion upon the hard ground, their knees in time become almost as 
hard as their heels." 



30 A Mission to Gelele^ King of Dahome, 

ground with her forehead, and bent before him with 
averted head during the whole meal, never raising her face, 
as it would be deemed "bold'* to stare at him ; but using, 
Lesbia-like, a roving eye. The old Harpagon having 
washed his hands, ate with a claw like that of a prey- 
bird, and seemed to enjoy the sensation caused by the 
buxom wife's presence. 

The misery of the display moved my compassion. In 
the whole assembly there was hardly a redeeming point 
of picturesqueness or appropriateness except the ** Porto 
Novo '* Moslems. As they stood at the other end of the 
court, their swart faces were set off by snowy tur bands 
encircling tall red caps, and hanging down somewhat in 
the ** Taylasan " style, whilst their showy shawls, thrown 
over the left shoulder, their neat sandals, their full dark 
pajammas or drawers, and their ample white shirts, made 
them appear different and superior beings. The wretched 
pagans, however, had imitated them : amongst the occu- 
pants of the harim I saw two poor copies of " Al-Islam." 

A troop of ** Joto-si," drummers, and half heads, of 
all ages, made obeisance before and presented arms to the 
King. Then the Min-gan arose, and addressed his men, 
to the cries of "Tamule!" from the women, upon the 
subject of Abeokuta. He said that Gezo's son had just 
made a custom, aiid had killed criminals for his father, 
who must desire the destruction of Egba-land, and he 
called upon me by name to testify to the same. Thrice 
as he spoke, the Meu stood up, and with outstretched 
right hand, vociferated **Yate!" meaning, in Fanti, **we 
understand." The King responded briefly, that whereas 
ashes never smoke, the cinders in that palace would burn 
down many a house. 

In these slow proceedings, 3.40 p.m. had already sped 
before business began. Presently an occasional rattle, 
the vagitus of women calling out, in bird-like tones, the 
King's titles, and the long firing of heavily loaded muskets 



XIV, — The King's *^ So -sin Custom,'' — Section F, 31 

by the male soldiery behind us and on our right, an- 
nounced the beginning of the end. The first motley group 
that passed us was composed of drums, duck-guns, muskets, 
small infernal machines on wheels, blue- clad bayonet 
women, blunderbusses of brass and iron, soldieresses 
in grass-cloth skirts, and their band of loud braying horns, 
one duck-gun, one huge blunderbuss, small metal whistles 
and long flageolets, two dozen razor women, with as 
many knife women, and, finally, a captainess of Gezo's 
force. They halted before the throne, danced, played, 
fired guns, cheered, presented arms, and having received 
largesse in rum and cowries, passed out of the palace- 
yard through the main gate by which we had entered it. 
Followed a Mau-no^ fetish woman under her umbrella, 
with a troop called Lisa-'si,*^ waving peculiar iron rods, 
serpent -shaped, like the classical Jove's thunderbolts, as 
expressed by poets and painters : some wore white tur- 
bands, others were bareheaded, and all were hung about 
with long strings of white and black beads. The party 
was brought up by slave girls carrying baskets and cala- 
bashes. Then, preceded by six bellowing horns, stalked 
in slowly, and with measured gait, the eight Tansi-no, 
who serve and pray for the ghosts of dead kings. In front 
went their ensign, a copper measuring-rod, fifteen feet 
long, and tapering to a fine end: behind it were two 
chauris and seven mysterious pots and calabashes wrapped 
in white and red checks. The old women seemed to 
wear about forty cloths each, which may account for 
their elephantine development a tergo : they were followed 
by three little girls, and they ** louted " low as the vulgar 
herd before the King. 

The Aro company of archers danced in the presence, 
and recited the royal titles. The valimbles now appeared, 
and almost any pawnbroker's shop could boast a collec- 

1 From mdu (fetish of moon), and no (a mother). 

2 From Lisa (fetish of sun), and 'si (a wife). 



32 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome, 

tion more costly and less heterogeneous. The only re- 
markable article was the carrier, who represented — in 
Cuba — a large sum. Sixteen brilliant banners held hori- 
zontally, preceded a wheelbarrow with a fancy red and 
blue flag. Three brass, four copper, and six iron pots, 
curiosities on account of their great size. Four long horns 
in calico etuis. Five huge fans, followed by razor women. 
Eight images, of which three were apparently ship's figure- 
heads white- washed, and the rest very hideous efforts of 
native art. Sixty-seven women with brown faces, and bead 
mittens and gauntlets on their wrists. Twenty-one girls 
carrying^ cylinders of red and white beads. Seventeen 
women with silver plates fastened to the sides of their skulls, 
habited in red clothes, and handling bead cat-o*-nine-tails. 
Twelve women, also in red. Seventeen fetish pots, three 
jars, one silver-plated urn, attended by singing women. 
Twenty casque-women with red tunics, and plumes, and 
black horsetails. Eight helmet girls, with red plumes, 
dark crests, and coats, and white loin cloths. Six pieces 
of plate, a tree, a crane, a monkey, and other things 
which I could not distinguish. Some were four feet high, 
and all were apparently silver, borne by many women on 
boards: of these three were double, and the whole were 
intended as jewels to decorate the present King's grave. 
After singers and dancers, a huge drum, carried by a 
woman porter, whilst the performer walked behind her 
mate, "leathering" it with a will. Three large chairs, 
preceding about fifty Gbe-to,^ or elephant huntresses, 
clad in chocolate and dark blue, and ostentatiously eschew- 
ing white. They had huge tufts of hair, affected large 
heavy guns, and were conspicuous for bustles of talismans 
behind and strings of cowries in front, adorning bits of 
bone, relics of the enemy. Four pots in their cloths. 

1 In this part of Africa "carrying " always means on the head. 

2 Gbe (a bush, not to be confounded with Gbe, the world), and 
to (father, or he that does). 



XIV, — The King's '^ So -sin Custom/' — Section F, 33 

A large silver-mounted ebony box, like a bullock trunk. 
One big stool, one common trade box, and one calabash. 
Two iron horns shaped like palm leaves, and a dozen 
small girls preceding the mysterious Zan-ku-ku.^ It was 
a portable screen, work, of blue checked and striped 
cloths, upheld by women with muskets and sticks, and it 
contained a gold-topped crimson umbrella. Zan-ku-ku is 
the "place" of the old King: no one is supposed to know 
what is inside. Men turned away their heads, and my 
questions remained unanswered till we returned home. 
A large band with twenty muskets, and three women in 
broad-brimmed felts. Fourteen fetish women, who per- 
form rites for the last sovereign's ghost, in white caps and 
tunics of bright yellow grass-cloth. Five black girls, 
dressed in blue, who were saluted with drums and horns 
as they passed us. Six flags turned towards the right 
hand, a caboceeress under an umbrella, a pipe-bearer, 
and a dozen unarmed girls. Two women carrying water 
breakers, three with pots from which depended white 
streamers, and two large glass jars. A line of 703 women 
and girls with ** grey-beards," seltzer jars, country pots of 
"pitto'*" or native beer, and bottles of trade rum and gin, 
the size of the receptacle becoming small by degrees, and 
the whole supported by a rear-guard. The liquor will 
this night be distributed in the market-place to the mul- 
titude : and the heralds behind us returned praise by crying 
out the King's "strong names,*' trilling out the words by 

1 Zan (night), ku-ku (dead dead), meaning that Gezo, like Queen 
Anne, has departed this life. 

2 This is the beer of Dahome. It is either of rice or of maize — the 
former being by far the more delicate — and is made in the usual 
African way. The grain is soaked, sun-dried upon a mat, and wetted 
with water, till germination develops the saccharine principle. It is 
again sun-dried, coarsely ground and boiled with water ; after which 
it is cooled and drunk. The main objection to it, as to palm wine, is 
that it will not keep. The older travellers seem agreed to hold it an 
unwholesome beverage. I have ever found it the reverse. 

VOL. II. 3 



34 ^ Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome. 

patting their lips, while the women around the monarch 
uttered the Khe or bird sound. A motley group surround- 
ing two women in big felts. A band and a troop of bard- 
esses, — the first rank with eight singer's staves, distin- 
guished by their triangles of glazed calico, the second 
being an armed and an unarmed company : they paraded 
round the court, played and sang on the right of the tent 
entrance, and received glasses of rum. At this time the 
King kindly supplied us with cashew fruits (alakazu), 
tiger-nuts (f iu), and the red fruit of the Lis6 tree noticed 
at Whydah. It certainly rained meat and drink that day 
in the palace, but, I suspect, nowhere else. 

Then came two girls, waving round and round small 
white flags, upon which were horned and rainbow-coloured 
serpents swallowing their own tails. A band in front of 
the late King's great war-drum, ** He-is-able-to-do-any- 
thing." Ten smaller drums of the King's, called Addugba, 
and common instruments. Seven troubadour-women, 
holding horse-tails and twirling flags in their left hands : 
their heads were wrapped in kerchiefs of red, shawl 
pattern, and their short scarlet cloaks had yellow hoods 
showing lions with upturned tails. Assisted by fifty 
women, they danced long and violently before the King, 
whilst the band, squatting near the flag of the tent- 
entrance, regaled us with stunning music. A woman 
carrying a huge battle-axe perforated like a fish-slicer. 
Forty-two girls bearing baskets of cowries on wooden 
platters — sixpence above and ;^200 below! A large flag, 
two immense native stools of black and white wood, 
covered with cloth; two articles like warming-pans, of 
copper and brass, a drum rudely carved with native 
figures, and an escort of bayonet women. Two "black 
white men," natives of the country, dressed in trousers 
and blouses, but shoeless, walking under ragged parasols.* 

1 The King is said also to have similar " white women," but I did 
n()t see any. Dr. M'Leod (p. io6) notices these black whites, whom 

2—3 



XIV, — The King's ^^So-sin Custom/' — Section F, 35 

Another of Gezo's drums, about the size of a bullock, 
carried by four men, with two poles lashed along its sides. 
Another European piece of plate on a wheeled car, covered 
with red calico ; bayonet women, and a large box of skulls. 
Finally, the Agran-hohwe,* or jaw-umbrella, whose white 
top and lappets were thickly studded over with these 
pleasant reliques. 

Then the royal equipages began to pass, the animals 
being men harnessed with ropes. Most of them are old 
barouches and other presents given to the kings when 
slavery was an important branch of English commerce, 
and when the Home Government supported William's 
Fort. Many of these heirlooms are becoming valuable as 
antiques. The first were of home, or native, manufac- 
ture — a blue-green shandridan, with two short flagstaffs 
attached to the front. Two things, like Palkigaris, or 
broncards, supporting a light umbrella. The present King's 
cab-brougham, with a lion on the panels. Two American 
trotting wagons, with leathern hoods. A band of flageo- 
lets, followed by a man in a red blanket, with the Badawi 
hood. After a space, a male slave carrying a long 
blue pole, topped with an imitation knife, stained red. 
Another broken-down vehicle. Two large old canopied 
hammocks, the one of red velvet, the other of yellow silk, 
belonging to the late king, and borne by men. The 
present sovereign's little roan pony, with black points, led 
also by a man. A peculiar old sedan-chair, dating from 
the days of Mr. Nash. Another state hammock ; a 
wheeled platform, with a bench for two, behind a large 
wooden horned eagle and a bunchy plume of feathers ; a 
rocking-horse, with housings and bridle, on wheels ; rat- 
tles ; a large green chariot, of venerable appearance, be- 
longing to King Gezo ; four hunchbacks , two flags ; an 

the King would authorize to assume the European dress, carry an 
English umbrella, and wear shoes. 

I Agran means a jaw-bone (inferior and human). 



Mmm 



36 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome, 

enormous red-and-green board, for playing ** tables," car- 
ried on two men's heads ; another antiquated shandri- 
dan, followed by a band of horns and chanting knife 
women ; a large Gold Coast chair on a small nag ; two 
big Katake, or war foot-stools ; a Men-ta-*zinkpo,^ or 
large chair, adorned with four or five human crania, and 
with its footstool cut out of one piece ; a French drum 
and tambourine ; a small drum, with twelve skulls ; three 
boxes ; a platform on wheels, followed by women ; a Bath 
chair, with a fringed red silk umbrella attached to it ; a 
fighting man, in wood, with drawn sword — probably the 
figure-head of some " Ajax " ; a large hammock, with bead 
hangings, and a pole inlaid with brass ; four umbrellas ; 
a small troop of she-hunchbacks ; bands ; little iron and 
brass swivel guns, carried on women's heads ; a peculiar 
sedan-chair, with gold and red hangings, held high in the 
air, with four parasols to show that it is used by the 
King; drummers ; a metal soup-tureen ; nine large bottles, 
covered with red cloth and himg with cowries ; urns, 
jars, and patera of vermilion -coloured earthenware, 
adorned with gingerbread gilding, very large, and decor- 
ated with hangings of white and red calico. Such was 
the fripicr's collection which passed in motley confusion 
before the King, whilst the carriers sang, danced, and 
made obeisance. 

Then defiled a body of armed women preceding seven 
lunbrellas, of which two were very gorgeous, shading nine 
** leopard wives'* in bright clothing, with swords, and 
a profusion of silver studs in their wool. Like the others 
they made salutations, drank rum, and received small 
presents from their lord. Another string of frippery, con- 
sisting of two home-made images with white heads and 
blue skins, like the Egban Yemaya or Goddess of Books ; 
a short St. Lawrence and Gridiron; a Dominican friar and 

I Men (man), ta (head), 'zinkpo. for azinkpo (a native chair). 
AzinkpK.^ yevo is a white man's chair. 



XIV. — The King's '^So-sln Custom" — Section F. 37 

other statuettes ; the skulls of Bakoko and of his two com- 
panions, carried in honour on young girls* heads ; a tree 
under a globular glass shade ; red jars before described ; 
fancy native stools with and without cowries ; umbrellas 
and parasols also adorned with shells, and many minor 
items which I had not time to note. 

Presently the Vi-de-k*alo* — the Amazon Bi-na-zun, 
or storekeeper — a portable personage, dressed in a white 
body cloth and a pink skirt, with a broad-brimmed and 
gold-laced hat, apparently beaver, upon a head swathed 
in calico, appeared, shaded by a red parasol. She was 
followed by three long-poled flags, tricolour, and eagles, 
dating probably from the days of the elder Napoleon ; a 
troop of girls with jugs, ewers, jars and ** lustre" pottery, 
seven desks of old shape, basins and pitchers all empty, 
pipe cases six feet long, four large stools, two parasols, 
and a fat sheep with a necklace of cowries and a cloth 
over its hinder parts. 

The . next party was headed by twenty blunderbuss 
women in red caps, with silver sharks. Then eight fine 
umbrellas, denoting as many of the late King's " leopard 
wives," old and worn out women richly clad in red and 
yellow silk cloaks, with fillets, bracelets, and sword-hilts 
of silver; the most dignified propped themselves with 
beadle's sticks. A silver half- head woman with four 
bracelets, emitting from a long brass trumpet lugubrious 
noises. Twenty-three fetish sticks in cloth bags; a red 
velvet cushion with silver lions on it; glass platters; 
heaps of cowries, like mould puddings ; porcelain jars ; a 
curious China vase, and the two scarlet shields of the 
harim. Next came the Yavedo, female To-no-nun or 
chief eunuchess, who is also the elder of Mr. Dawson's 
two mothers, in a black crested casque and red plumes, 
followed by two fancy and crimson flags ; six kettledrum 

I Vi (child), de (any), k'alo (stretching out the arms as when a 
child wishes to be carried). 



38 A Mission to Gelele^ King of Dahome, 

girls, in scarlet caps and boddices, and blue skirts with 
figures of red cloth sewn on ; drums and drum lets ; a cala- 
bash with a pyramid of four skulls ; two women with long 
tails, of which they caught hold after dancing and bound- 
ing before the King^; a group of fifty Nago or captive 
Egba women in dark indigo dresses, celebrated as dancers, 
and jingling peculiar rattles thickly covered with cowries; 
an old cut glass chandelier slung to a wonderful white 
bird of native build eating a blue snake ; seven parasols, 
and stools carved and imaged. 

Already, to our joy, those who had passed out of the 
palace gate before the King, and had thrice walked round 
the square in single file, began to return. Then appeared 
the living representatives of the mothers of the Dahoman 
dynasty. As will be seen the first three queens are not 
represented, showing that their names have been forgotten. 
The places of " Zoindi," the present sovereign's mother, 
who still survives, and Danhli-ke,'^ the parent of the 
"Bush king," were under white umbrellas, followed by 
baskets, calabashes, chairs, footstools, and a band: the 
retinue might be composed of a hundred people. The 
representatives were stout old women, remarkable, like 
the five others, for breadth of beam and brim. 

A torn flag, neptunes full of skulls, calabashes, stools, 
pots, and other articles of furniture, preceded Agotime, 
mother of Gezo, and Nutobe, the parent of the corres- 
ponding **Bush king.**" 

Two umbrellas, buff-coloured and fancy, with a band, 
accompanied a dwarfish dignitary with silver crown, big- 
topped staff, and red train borne by followers. This was 

1 The reader will find this dance described in chapter xvi. 

2 Danh (the rainbow), li (stand), and ke (the world). 

3 Mr. Duncan (vol. i. p. 254) thinks of these old women as if they 
were really royal mothers and grandmothers, and he makes one to be 
a century old, " being surprised to see with what agility they moved , 
considering their years." 



XIV. — The King's ^^ So-sin Custom/' — Section F. 39 

Senunme, mother of Agongoro (Wheenoohew), the grand- 
father of the present King. 

A pair of umbrellas, buff and fancy, with seats, cala- 
bashes, and other necessaries, composed the cortege of 
Himajile, mother of Sinmenkpen (Adahoonzou II.). 

An elderly woman in a red coat, with a white hand- 
kerchief under her broad brim, represented Chai, the 
mother of Tegbwesun (Bossa Ahadi). 

A similar umbrella, succeeded by skulls and rattles, 
denoted Addono, the mother of Agaja the conqueror 
(Guaja Trudo Audati). 

The rear was rapidly brought up. It consisted of 
various other "drums for Ganikbaja"; women in red 
nightcaps, with a silver shark on each side fastened by a 
string ; a band of small girls, four wall pieces, fancy flags, 
four pikes with pink hangings and cross pieces like our 
old demi-lune, carried by women in fools' caps slashed 
blue and rose ; razor women ; a huge scimitar ; an Eng- 
lish union -jack ; all kinds of bands ; five plain standards 
attended by a large troop; four small girls with red pen- 
nons ; a company of singers, commanded by an old woman 
in a broad brim, and followed by two chairs, muskets 
and blunderbusses. After this party had formed up 
in line before the King, and had delivered themselves of 
a song, whose length appeared uncalled for, came eight 
skull-standards, carried by women in indigo ; the Komasi 
drum ; two brass shields, segments of circles ; six head- 
women with bracelets and armlets above the elbow, with 
white and spotted body-cloths, silver horns and caps like 
cook's bonnets; then two broad blades worked like fish- 
slicers, rising from skulls ; sundry black hide shields like 
tea-trays, ten women carrying Bo-kpo or forked crutches 
swathed with red calico. A crowd of thirty umbrellas 
now defiled through the yard, the headwoman sitting 
upon her tall stool to watch the retinue marching by. 
Finally the she Min-gan again passed before us, when we 



40 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahofne. 

remarked that two of her retinue were habited in the 
striped nightcaps and shirts of the executed criminals, 
whose wardrobes here, as in England they say, become 
the perquisite of Jack Ketch. The number tallied with 
the three naked corpses suspended near the city gate, and 
this satisfied me that we had seen all the males slain on 
this occasion, and that the women victims, whose spoils 
had been taken by their bourreaux, did not exceed in 
number the men. 

The ceremony was necessarily hurried, because it 
began late, and was exceedingly complicated ; our jaded old 
host groaned with misery whenever I proposed another 
question. The more time was wasted, because every little 
party formed up opposite the royal tent entrance, made 
obeisance according to the several ranks, and secured 
cowries and rum before retiring. Women of rank merely 
touched the spirits, and poured the remainder down the 
throats of their followers; and, despite the urgency of 
messengers, none appeared willing to slur over or to hurry 
through his or her honours. 

After a stunning salute of blunderbusses we were 
called up to meet the King, who came forward to shake 
hands and to snap fingers with us. As he admired my regi- 
mental sword, I placed it in his hands: he returned it, 
saying that we would speak about the matter at another 
time. He then requested me to take the measure of his 
big Tokpon tent. As something was said about our 
attending on the morrow, I put forward a request that we 
might be allowed to pass the Sunday at home. This he 
at once conceded with the best grace : visitors obtain 
everything (unimportant) which they ask from him, whilst 
the "difficulty makers," his ministers and officials, grant 
nothing that they can possibly refuse. 

Seven mortal hours of seance had halted by before 
the elder Yevogan led us out of the palace. Though it 
was waxing dark we could see the railing still lining the 



XIV. — The King's ^^So-sin Custom" — Section F, 41 

streets. We hurried past the dead bodies, upon which 
the heat had already taken effect ; and we were right glad 
to find ourselves once more a table. 

The next day, Sunday, was emphatically one of rest 
to eyes and ears dazed and fatigued by the confusion of 
multitudinous objects rapidly passing, and by the terrible 
din of a Dahoman crowd. The only drawback to our 
comfort was that the Message had not been given, although 
we had been nearly a fortnight with the King. The 
Buko-no bore the major part of the blame: this Cagli- 
ostro was probably awaiting the permission of his Afa. 



42 



CHAPTER XV. 

OF THE SO-CALLED AMAZONS AND THE DAHOMAN ARMY. 

A CHRONIC exaggeration touching the mis-called 
** Amazons 1" has of late years prevailed in England. 
Mr. Duncan found it ** certainly a surprising sight in an 
uncivilised country." Commander Forbes, who drew, as 
artists say, "from feeling," was the first to colour the 
melodramatic picture with a "sensation" and picturesque- 
ness, a sentiment and a wild romance, in which the real 
object is wholly wanting. He begins his account with 
the untravelled statement that "there is not a more extra- 
ordinary army in the world than that of the military nation 
of Dahome." 

The origin of the somewhat exceptional organization 
is, I have said, the masculine physique of the women, 
enabling them to compete with men in enduring toil, 

I The word is probably some barbarian term Grecised. It has 
three popular derivations — the Scythian, Amm Azzon, which the 
Greeks interpreted, "without breasts"; Ave v /lAcliCot'* ^i^hout a breast 
(the right), mythically believed to have been removed for the better 
use of the bow ; thirdly, iLixa(<aira%t or women living together. In 
Dahome the soldieresses have two titles, Akho-'si, also applied to 
the eunuchry, means king's (Akhosu) wife ('si). The other and 
equally popular name is Mi-no, our (mi) mothers (no). The system 
of motherhood is completely mistaken by Mr. Duncan (vol. i. p. 228). 
The commonalty rarely know their ranks and titles, and scarcely 
even their private names. The doings inside the palace are always 
spoken of sotto voce. The Anglo- African calls them " Ama-johns," for 
which also a derivation might perhaps be found. 



XV, — Amazons and the Dahomwi Army, 43 

hardships, and privations. I have remarked this corporeal 
equality of the sexes in the grand Bonny and the " Oil 
Rivers" of the Biafran Bight, where the feminine harsh- 
ness of feature and robustness of form rival the mascu- 
line ; and writers upon Siam have made the same obser- 
vation. 

Bosman (1700) allows the kinglet of Whydah 4000 
to 5000 wives, who, besides labouring in the fields, were 
used to execute the royal sentences.^ The monarch of 
Yoruba, according to Clapperton, could boast that his 
wives, of whom some composed his body-guard, would, 
linked hand in hand, reach clean across his kingdom. 
The late King Gezo used to boast that he had organized 
the Mi-no ; but the History depicts them before he was 
born. The Europeans who visited Agaja (1708-1730), 
found the Dahoman Court much as it is at the present 
day. ** If the chief officers wished to speak to the King 
they first kissed the ground, then whispered their pleasure 
into the ear of an old woman, who communicated it to 
the King, and brought his answer." The same volume^ 
also informs us that the warlike monarch, when his force 
had been reduced by the ** Eyeos," "armed a great numberi 
of women like soldiers, having their proper officers, andj 
furnished like regular troops with drums, colours, and 
umbrellas, making at a distance a very formidable appear- 
ance." With these, in about a.d. 1728, he attacked and 
defeated the combined host of the Whydahs and Popos, j 
and since that time the Amazons have ever been a power 
in the empire.^ 

I Of these women 300 to 400 would be sent to strip the offender's 
house, and to lay it level with the ground. But the Iving of Dahome, 
it must be observed, distinguishes between his wives and his sol- 
dieresses. At Court the former are unarmed, the latter caxxy 
weapons, and do not commonly expect his particular attentions. 
The difference has been overlooked by Dr. M'Leod (p. 38), and by 
almost all subsequent writers. 

I Mr. Bulfinch Lambe, present at the capture of Ahada by the 



44 ^ Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome, 

i Doubtless Gezo, one of the most successful amongst 

J the Dahoman monarchs, regarded the feminine force with 
favouring eye. He depended upon it to check the turbu- 
lence and treachery of his subjects, and to ensure his own 
safety, for 

*' Qui terret plus ipse timet ; sors ista tyrannis 
Convenit." 
He may have also wished to cause rivalry, by the example 
of what is in most cases illogically termed the "weaker 
sex.^" Perhaps, like the old-school Anglo-Indian Nabob, 

' ' ll--» I.I I... ■■l.-l,. I — _. , 11 II. ■■■■■■ 11 ■■■■,■■11 IIMBII — ^M^W^.— ^ 

same king, in 1724, mentions 2000 royal wives, but does not allude 
to "Amazons," which may be explained by the brevity of his com- 
munication. 

I Because we make it so. The feminidae, like the females of the 
equidae, show little corporeal inferiority to the males, and the best 
proof is, that amongst tribes living in the so-called State of Nature, 
women are generally the only labourers. We may etiolate them, as 
in New England, or we may expand them, by beef and beer, to 
grenadiers, as in olden England and in the north of Europe. To 
the present day, the woman of the Scotch fis hing islands is the man 
of the family, who does not marry till she can support what she pro- 
duces ; and the times are not long passed since she was. amongst the 
Southrons, a barber, a mason, and a day labourer. It appears to 
me that in England there is a revival of the feminine industries ; and 
when it is asked, " What shall we do with our old maids ? " I would 
reply, that many might be enlisted. When Mr. Duncan was asked 
by the King of Dahome if the same number of English women would 
equal the Amazons, he, of course, answered no ; we had no female 
soldiers in England, but we had women who, individually and 
voluntarily, had equally distinguished themselves. Such feminine 
troops would serve well in garrison, and eventually in the field. The 
Medea of Euripides preferred the risks of spear and shield amongst 
men to a single casualty after the manner of women. The warlike 
instinct, as the annals of the four quarters of the globe prove, is 
easily bred in the opposite sex. A sprinkling of youth and beauty 
amongst the European Amazons would make campaigning a pleasure 
to us ; and the measure may be taken into consideration when our 
new-fangled rage for neutrality shall be succeeded by more honour- 
able and less "respectable" sentiments; and when the model Eng- 
lishman shall be something better than a warm man of business, with 
a good ledger, and " the dean's daughter •* to wife. 



XV. — Amazons and the Dahoman Army. 45 

he may have preferred the maid to the man-servant. 

Gezo ordered every Dahoman of note in the kingdom 
to present his daughters, of whom the most promising 
were chosen, and he kept the corps clear of the servile 
and the captive. Gelele, his son, causes every girl to be 
brought to him before marriage, and, if she pleases, he 
retains her in the palace: the only subjects exempt from 
this rule are the old English and French slaves at Why- 
dah. These girls, being royal wives, cannot be touched 
without danger of death, they never leave their quarters 
unless preceded by a bell to drive men from the road, and 
all have slaves who act as spies. The sexes meet on the 
march and in the field : at parades, as has been shown, 
they are separated by the typical bamboo. A peculiar 
fetish, placed by the priests at the Agbo-dewe gate of the 
royal abode,^ induces, by reason of the purity of the 
place, certain pregnancy^ in the soldieress that sins. In- 
stances have been known where conscience has made the 
offender coward enough to sicken, to confess, and to doom 
her paramour, if not herself, to a cruel death. They have 
also a "pundonor." Like 

" That Mary Ambree 
Who marched so free," 

many an Amazon captured at Abeokuta^ has refused to 
become a wife till the captor, weary of opposition, has 
killed the acerba puella as a useless animal.* 

1 Agbo (gate), dewe (seaxch out, viz., your fault). Some say 
that all the fetishes can discover crime. 

2 Others believe that the fetish, like the bitter water of the Jews, 
causes bowel disease. 

3 This was written before the latest Dahoman attack, and when 
last off Lagos (May 9, 1864) I heard the same thing. 

4 Though opportunity, which makes the thief, is decidedly 
deficient, there have been, there are, and there ever will be, occa- 
sional scandals. As a rule, these fighting celibataires prefer the 
morosa voluptas of the schoolmen and the peculiarities of the Tenth 
Muse. 



46 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome. 

Of Gelele's Amazons about two-thirds are said to be 
maidens, a peculiar body in Africa, where — though 11,000 
may have been buried at Cologne — no one expects to find 
the integra ptiella, much less the old maid.^ The remaining 
third has been married. That an element of desperation 
might not be wanting, women taken in adultery and liable 
to death, are dashed to the King and duly enlisted. Be- 
sides these criminals, the Xanthippes, who make men's 
eyes yellow, are very properly put into the army, and 
Africa is well stocked with the noble army of martyrs 
that begins not with Socrates, and that ends not with 
Mr. Thomas Sayers.^ 

It is evident that such an organization presents 
nought of novelty : the systematic organization is more 
logical and less harmful than the volunteer furies who, 
as Abolitionists, urge men to ruin and to death. The sol- 
dieress, at least, joins in the danger : this thing does not. 
David flying from Absalom left ten of his concubines to 
guard his palace at Jerusalem. The Greeks probably 

1 Dr. M'Leod sadly errs (pp. 51, 53) when saying, "A mutinous 
wife or a vixen, sometimes the treasure and delight of an English- 
man, — the enlivener of his fireside, and his safeguard from ennui, — 
is a phenomenon utterly unknown in Dahomy; that noble spirit 
which animates the happier dames in lands of liberty being here, 
alas! extinguished and destroyed." He is apparently somewhat a 
farceur, that doctor. According to Mr. Duncan (vol. i. p. 141), if a 
man commit adultery with the wife of another, and the case is laid 
before the King, the offender is doomed to serve, so long as he is 
capable, in the capacity of a soldier, and when unfit for that service, 
he was generally offered as a sacrifice at one of the King's annual 
Customs ; but the latter part of this cruel sentence has been abolished 
by the late King of Dahome (Gezo), who is much more merciful 
than his predecessors. 

2 Commander Forbes wrongly, I believe, states that the King 
gives Amazons in marriage to his warriors ; he *' dashes *' his 
daughters and the palace slaves, but he keeps the fighteresses for him- 
self. Commodore Wilmot (Appendix III.) asserts, that the King 
rarely takes the Amazons to wife ; on the contrary, he has several 
children by them 



XV, — Amazons and the Dahonian Army. 47 

derived their Amazonian myth from exaggerated reports 
of the strength and valour of the Caucasian women. 
With respect to the visit of Thalestris, who desired issue 
by the conqueror of Asia (which Arrian has exploded), it 
is no more than what many a Badawiyah will solicit from 
the traveller who in fair fight beats off her husband and 
brother. Amongst the Homerites of South Arabia it was 
a law for wives to revenge in battle the deaths of their 
husbands, and mothers their sons. The Suliote women 
rivalled the men in defending their homes against Os- 
manli invaders. The Damot or Abyssinian Amazons of 
Alvarez (1520) would not allow their spouses to fight, as 
the Jivaro helpmates of Southern America administer 
caudle to the sex that requires it the least. The native 
princes of India, especially those of Hyderabad in the 
Deccan, for centuries maintained a female guard of Urdu- 
begani ^ whose courage and devotion were remarkable. 
Bodies of European fighting women are found in the cele- 
brated " Female Crusade," organized in 1 147 by order of 
St. Bernard. Temba-Ndumba, among the Jagas of 
Southern inter-tropical Africa, according to old travellers, 
made her subjects rear and teach their female children 
war, but she was probably mad.'* The Tawarik women 
rank with men like the women of Christianity, and 
transmit nobility to their children. Denham found the 
Fellatah wives fighting like males. According to Mr. 
Thompson (1823), the Mantati host that attacked old 
'* Lattaku" was led by a ferocious giantess with one eye. 
M. D'Arnaud (1840) informs us that the King of Bahr, 
on the Upper Nile, was guarded by a battalion of spear 

1 Urdu (a camp), begani (feminine of beg, a captain). 

2 In "Savage Africa," a book which has before been quoted, we 
read that this amiable Ethiopian pounded in a mortar her own male 
child to make an invulnerable ointment ; that she resolved to turn the 
world into a desert, and did her best ; and, finally, that waxing worse 
with years, she took a lover to her arms by night and dined off him 
next day. Of course this black Scourge of God was poisoned. 



48 A Mission to Gelehy King of Dahoine, 

women, and that his male ministers never enter the 
palace, except when required to perform the melancholy 
duty of strangling their master. At present the Tien- 
Wang, or Heavenly King of the Tae-pings, has 1000 she- 
soldiers. 

Sporadic heroines, like Tomyris and Penthesilea of 
the Axe, are found in every clime and in all ages, from 
Semiramis to the artilleryman's wife of Saragossa. Such 
were Judith and Candace ; Kaulah the sister of Derar, 
and her friend Oserrah ; the wife of Aban Ibn Sai'b ; 
Prefect Gregory's daughter ; Joan of Arc ; Margaret of 
Anjou; Black Agnes; Jeanne Hachette; Begum Sombre; 
Kara Fatimah ; Panna Mary an, and many 

" A bold vigaro stout and tall, 
As Joan of Arc, or English Moll," 

— charmers far too numerous to specify. Many a fair 
form was found stark on the field of Waterloo. During 
the late Indian mutiny the Ranis were, as a rule, more 
manly than the Rajahs. And at present the Anglo- 
American States and Poland show women who, despite 
every discouragement, still prefer the military profession 
to all others.^ 

I On the other hand, the notorious Queen Zinga, or Jinga of An- 
gola, as she is called by the old travellers, daughter of the King who 
died in 1640, kept, we are told, 4tbout her Court, fifty or sixty young 
men for amatory purposes, dressed and named like women, whilst 
she assumed the male dress and name ; a touching tribute to the 
superiority of masculine human nature in the npind of the feminine. 
The Court of Loango offered a third anomaly, truly typical of the 
childish African brain. The Macouda, a female officer of high rank, 
cohabited with any man of her choice; the ^ue was accounted 
blood royal ; and if her concubators were unfaithful, death was their 
penalty. A touching tribute to the superiority of the female in those 
regions. In Dahome the woman is officially superior; but under 
other considerations, she still suffers from male arrogance. The 
King has repeatedly said to me, that a^oman is still a woman. And 
when the Amazons boast that they are not women but men, they 
stand self-convicted of the fact, that however near to equality the 



XV. — Amazons and the Dahoman Army. 49 

The regimen in which these women are compelled to 
live, doubtless increases their ferocity in fight. It is the 
essence of training every animal, from a game cock to a 
pugilist, and a married she-soldier would be useful only 
as a mother of men. Commander Forbes thus explains 
the action of forced celibacy : " The extreme exercise of 
one passion will generally obliterate the very sense of the 
others ; the Amazons, whilst indulging in the excitement 
of the most fearful cruelties, forget the other desires of 
our fallen nature." But all the passions are sisters. I 
believe that bloodshed causes these women to remember, 
not to forget, love ; at the same time that it gratifies the 
less barbarous, but, with barbarians, equally animal feel- 
ing. Seeing the host of women who find a morbid 
pleasure in attending the maimed and dying, I must think 
that it is a tribute paid to sexuality by those who object 
to the ordinary means.^ Of course they are savage as 
wounded gorillas, more cruel far than their brethren in 
arms. 

" For men at most differ as heaven and earth ; 
But women, worst and best, as heaven and hell." 

The existence of the Amazons is the second great 
evil of the empire. The first is, or rather was, a thirst 
for conquest, which, unlike the projections of civilized 
lands, impoverish and debilitate the country. The object 
of Dahoman wars and invasions has always been to lay 
waste and to destroy, not to aggrandize the empire by 
conquest and annexation. As the History puts it, the 
rulers have ever followed the example of Agaja, the second 
founder of the kingdom : aiming at conquest and at strik- 

sexes are, there is still always a somewhat of preponderance of the 
active over the passive half of humanity. 

I Instances of this organization must occur to every man who 
has had a somewhat extended . experience. I once knew an amateur 
nurse who was kindness personified to the sick man, and who, after 
curing him, always conceived to him a chronic aversion. 

VOL. II. 4 



50 A Mission to Gelele^ King of Dahome. 

ing terror, rather than at accretion and consolidation. 
Hence there has been a decrease of population, with an 
increase of territory, which is, to nations, the surest road 
to ruin. In the present days the wars have dwindled to 
mere slave hunts — a fact which it is well to remember. 
The women troops, assumed to number 2500, should re- 
present 7500 children ; the waste of reproduction, and 
the necessary casualties of " service,'* in a region so de- 
populated, are as detrimental to the body politic as a pro- 
portional loss of blood would be to the frame personal. 
Thus the land is desert, and the raw material of all in- 
dustry, man, is everywhere wanting. Finally, as regards 
the Amazons, nothing so outrageously insults manly pride 
in the adjoining nations as to find that the warriors who 
attacked them so stoutly are women — and some of them 
old women. 

The dress, the physique^ and the personal appearance 
of the Amazons, have repeatedly been described in these 
pages. I have also alluded to the organization of the 
corps, which requires, however, more detail. 

The soldieresses are not divided into regiments, as 
is supposed by Mr. Duncan. There are, however, in the 
** Household Brigade," three distinct divisions or com- 
mands, female as well as male. 

The Fanti Company^ takes the centre, and repre- 
sents the King's body-guards. These women wear round 
the hair, which requires scanty confinement, narrow white 
fillets, with rude crocodiles of blue cloth sewn on to the 
band.'"* 

The right wing, under the Gundeme, or she Min-gan, 

1 The Blue (Blu or Bru) Company corresponds, on the men's 
side, with the Fanti. 

2 The captainesses of the life-guards are, as has been said, Danh- 
ji-hun-to and Ji-bi-whe-ton. Those of Gezo were on the right Akutu, 
on the other side Humbagi. The captain of the present King's male 
lifeguards is Adan-men-nun-kon, of the late ruler Gulonun, which is 
said to mean "Tower musket." 

2—4 



XV. — Amazons and the Dahoman Army, 51 

and the Khe-tun-gan, or female Gau. It is not distin- 
guished by any peculiarity of costume. 

The left wing, in charge of the Yewe or she-Meu and 
the Akpa-dume, who is the coadjutress of the Po-su. 

The King generally pays ** distinguished strangers " 
the compliment of placing them in command of his body- 
guard, which honour, however, does not entitle them even 
to inspect the corps. The ** Bush-king " has also his 
captains both on the men's and on the women's sides. 
There are lifeguards and commanders for all the deceased 
sovereigns ; moreover, every high official has his head 
war-man or war- woman, with a recognized title. The cadre 
of commissions, in fact would become a country number- 
ing twenty millions instead of some 150,000. 

These three corps ^ consist of five arms, under their 
several officers — 

1. The Agbarya or blunderbuss- women, who may 
be considered the grenadiers. They are the biggest 
and strongest of the force, and each is accompanied by 
an attendant carrying ammunition. With the blun- 
derbuss-women rank the Zo-hu-nun, or carbineers, the 
Gan'u-nlan, or Sure-to-kill Company, and the Achi, or 

bayoneteers. 

2. The elephant huntresses, who are held to be the 
bravest. Of these women, twenty have been known to 
bring down, at one volley, with their rude appliances, 
seven animals out of a herd. 

3. The Nyekplo-hen-to, or razor women, who seem to 
be simply an epouvantail, 

4. The infantry, or line's-women, forming the staple 
of the force, from whom, as in France, the elite is drawn. 
They are armed with tower muskets, and are well sup- 
plied with bad ammunition ; bamboo fibre, for instance, 
being the only wadding. They have but little ball prac- 

I In the field, however, as has been said in chapter viii., the 
Dahoman army numbers four divisions. 



52 A Missio7i to Gelele, King of Dahome. 

tice. They "manoeuvre with the precision of a flock 
of sheep," and they are too Hght to stand a charge 
of the poorest troops in Europe. Personally, they are 
cleanly made, without much muscle; they are hard 
dancers, indefatigable singers, and, though affecting a 
military swagger, their faces are anything but ferocious — 
they are rather mild and unassuming in appearance. 
They fought with fury with Gezo before Abeokuta, because 
there was a jealousy between them and their brother 
soldiers, and because they had been led for many years 
by that king to small but sure victory. They fled, how- 
ever, with the rest, when a little perseverance would have 
retrieved the fortunes of the day. 

5. The Go-hen- to,i or archeresses, who in Gezo's 
time were young girls — the parade corps, the pick of the 
army, and the pink of dancers. They were armed with 
the peculiar Dahoman bow,^ a quiver of poisoned light 
cane shafts — mere birdbolts, with hooked heads, spiny as 
sticklebacks — and a small knife lashed with a lanyard to 
the wrist. They were distinguished by scanty attire, by 
a tattoo extending to the knee, and by an ivory bracelet 
on the left arm. Their weapon has naturally fallen in 
public esteem. Under Gezo's son, they are never seen 
on parade ; and when in the field they are used as scouts 
and porters ; like our drummers and doolee-bearers, they 
also carry the wounded to the rear.** 

1 Go (quiver), hen (hold) to (one thai does). The bow is called 
Ddpo, and the arrow GA. 

2 It is not straight nor a segment of a circle, but partly both, the 
lower end being much less bulged than the upper horn, which, to 
protect the strain, is armed with iron rings. The Dahomans ignore 
the crossbow, nor have they, like the Nagos and Makhis, an iron 
guard for the right-hand fingers, or'a leather on the left wrist. The 
only efficient poison comes from the Makhi country. Mr. Duncan 
(vol. ii. chap. 8) found poison in the Dassa mountains north of 
Dahome, and the arrow heads of superior manufacture. 

3 A man killed in battle is carried within the frontiers of Dahome 



XV. — Amazons and the Dahoman Army, 53 

In 1863, I saw all these women troops marching, on 
service, out of Kana. The officers, distinguished by their 
white head-cloths, and by an esquiress-at-arms, generally 
a small slave girl, carrying the musket, led their com- 
mands. They were mostly remarkable for a stupendous 
stratopyga, and for a development of adipose tissue which 
suggested anything but ancient virginity — man does not 
readily believe in fat ** old maids." I expected to see 
Penthesileas, Thalestrises, Dianas — lovely names ! I saw 
old, ugly, and square-built frows, trudging ** grumpily" 
along, with the face of ** cook " after being much 
** knagg'd" by "the missus." The privates carried packs 
on cradles, like those of the male soldiery, containing 
their bed-mats, clothes, and food for a week or a fort- 
night, mostly toasted grains and bean-cake, hot with pep- 
pers. Cartridge-pouches of two different shapes were 
girt round their waists, and slung to their sides were water- 
gourds, fetish-sacks, bullet-wallets, powder-calabashes, 
fans, little cutlasses, wooden pipe-cases enveloped in 
leather tobacco-bags, flint, steel, and tinder,^ and Lilli- 
putian stools, with three or four legs, cut out of single 
blocks. Their weapons were slung, and behind their 
backs dangled their hats, scarecrow felts, ** extin- 
guishers " of white cotton useful as sacs de nuit, umbrellas 
of plaited palm-leaf, and low-crowned, broad-brimmed 
home-made straws, covered with baft more or less blue. 

After a careful computation in 1863, I obtained the 
following results : — Before ten a.m. were counted 1439, 
mostly weaponed ; they then marched in knots, in all 
246 ; making, when we retired to breakfast, a total of 

and buried in his fatheriand. The Yoruba custom of "Etta" pre- 
vails here to a certain exteijt. When a traveller dies at a distance 
from home, his companions must bring back for sepulture clippings 
of his hair and nails. 

I Called Dekiya, and made of scrapings of palm-trunk mixed 
with a charcoal, known as Addisin, and sold in every market. 



54 ^ Mission to Gelele^ King of Dahonie, 

1685. The movement was interrupted till our return, 
when the King set out with a body-guard of 353. Thus 
the grand total was 2038, and at most, allowing for omis- 
sions, 2500. But of these one-third were unarmed, or 
half- armed, leaving the fighting women at a figure of 
1700. Mr. Bernasko and others, who exaggerate the 
consequence of the country, asserted that, this being a 
small campaign, a large corps of Amazons remained at 
Agbome, but I subsequently ascertained that such was 
not the case.^ Mr. Duncan (1845) reckons 6000 women 
soldiers (in vol. i. p. 227), and 8000 Amazons (vol. i. p. 
231). Commander Forbes and Mr. Beecroft (1849- 
1850), give 5000, but the heroines, like the commissariat 
cattle in Afghanistan, were marched out of one gate and 
in through another.^ M. Wallon (1856- 1858), besides 
dreaming of twenty or twenty-five howitzers, carronades, 
and bronze mortars on campaigning beds, assumed the 
number to be 5000 ; but his figures are all seen through 
a magnifying medium." Mr. Enschott (1862), after in- 
venting a park of artillery, furnished Dahome with 
10,000 Amazons, which Commodore Wilmot (1863) re- 
duced to a half. The fact is, these ** most illustrious 

1 When the King sets out upon a campaign, he carries with him 
even the hammock-bearers of his European visitors, and the fisher- 
men of Whydah, who are like the butchers and bakers of an English 
town. Moreover, all the runaways are sent up in irons to the 
capital. 

2 This trick is not beyond the African brain. Captain John 
A.dams (Remarks on the Country from Cape Palmas to the River 
Congo; London: Whittaker & Co., 1823) mentions a French officer 
who easily detected it when the army of the King of " Hio " (Oyo) 
was marched past him. It was usually numbered at 100,000, the 
majority being cavalry ; and for centuries it has been the terror of 
the southern country. 

3 That officer makes the Dahoman kingdom to contain 800,000 
to 900,000 souls. He gives Whydah, 20,000 to 25,000 ; Allada, 
15,000 to 18,000 ; Agbome, 30,000 ; and the Dahoman army, 25,000 
to 30,000. 



XV, — Amazons and the Dahoman Army. 55 

viragoes " are now a mere handful. King Gezo lost the 
flower of his force under the walls of Abeokuta, and the 
loss has never been made good. 

If the feminine force of Dahome is poor, the male is 
poorer far. The History asserts, that ** fear never enters 
the Dahoman mind" ; but that race has been long extinct, 
and Nagos, slaves, and mongrels occupy its place.* The 
women are as brave as, if not braver than, their brethren 
in arms, who certainly do not shine in that department of 
manliness.'^ Except a few guards, the huissiers of the 
palace, there are absolutely no regulars ; all are military 
men — even the singers, the hunchbacks, and the eunuchs ; 
they live in the town, and they are a mere militia, trading 
and mechanical bourgeois and slaves. Dr. M'Leod (1803) 
describes the 5000 to 6000 men whom he saw bivouacking 
near Grigwee (Whydah) as a "wild-looking group, and 
armed in the most irregular manner, some with musket, 
others with swords, spears, and clubs." I inspected 
them when setting out in 1863. Of the soldiers, about 
one-third was armed with swords and Tower muskets, or 
more generally with cheap trade guns ; the others were 
serviles, used for carriage ; some had the artless bow, 
many carried only a knife or a war-club ; and all were 

1 Commander Forbes rightly stated this in vol. i. p. 19. " Strange 
and contradictory as it may sound, this great nation is no nation, but 
a banditti, and there are few pure Dahomans." Even the local 
papers remarked the fact during the last attack. 

2 I have heard much of the English West India regiments and of 
the negro corps of the Northern Union. But the testimony of white 
men under fire with them, and — one of the best criterions of the 
soldier's efficiency — the list of officers killed aiid wounded in the few 
skirmishes which have taken place during my service on the West 
African Coast (1860-64), convince me that they are worth even less 
than Sepoys. All men " well trained, well treated, well led, and well 
supported," will of course fight ; but the Jamaicans and the West 
Africans will behave perhaps the worst. I by no means include the 
Hausas, the Mandengas, and other Moslem races, a material from 
which tolerable and even good soldiers, as blacks, can be made. 



56 A Mission to GeleU, King of Dahome, 

provided with the inevitable rope to secure ** chattels." I 
need hardly repeat that the object of a Dahoman war is to 
capture, not to kill. It was not easy to form an estimate 
of their numbers, but, reckoning all hands, 15,000 men, 
and certainly not more, might have passed through Kana.i 
This would leave, at the end of a week's march, 8000, and 
a maximum of 9000, both sexes and all arms included ; 
and these are the numbers that are estimated, by English 
ofl&cers who afterwards visited their deserted camps, to 
have been "out " when attacking the towns of Ishagga 
(1862), Igbara (1863), and Abeokuta (1864). 

The reader will see that I differ totally from Mr. 
Duncan*: ** After all I have seen of Africa, I believe the 
King of Dahomey possesses an army superior to any 
sovereign west of the Great Desert"; and from M. 
Wallon : ** L*armee de Dahomy est done sufl&samment 
aguerrie et assez forte pour lutter avec avantage sur son 
terrain meme avec des troupes disciplin6es, extenu6es par 
de longues marches, par le climat et d^pourvues d'artil- 
lerie." And when Commodore Wilmot declares that 
" they (the Amazons) would prove formidable enemies 
with good weapons, if they possessed discipline and real 
courage," it is equivalent to saying that they would be 
good soldiers if they were good soldiers. 

The capture of Abeokuta, and the massacre of its 
population, have ever been, since Commander Forbes' 
time, the pet theme of Dahoman bard and warrior, and 
the King's daily thought and nightly dream. To those 
who know anything of the subject, it is evident that the 
capital of Egba-land will, like threatened folks, live long. 

1 Mr. T. B. Freeman (1842) set down the number at 65,000. The 
official figure of King Gezo's armywhen he attacked Abeokuta (1851), 
and that which will be adopted in history, is 16,000 Dahomans, viz., 
10,000 men, and the rest women, against 8,000 Egbas. For the whim 
of truth the numbers should be inverted ; but this would rob the 
"deliverance" of its " providential" element. 

2 Vol. i. p. 240. 



XV. — Amazons and the Dahoman Army, 57 

Gelele has twice attempted to retrieve his father's honour, 
but he and his troops have never dared to cross the Ogun 
River, in fact to sight the city. This year will be the 
third attack, and if it prove a failure he will not try 
another assault for many a long day. 

Thus Dahome steadily loses prestige. Weakened by 
traditional policy, by a continual issue of blood, and by 
the arbitrary measures of her King,i and demoralized by an 
export slave trade, by close connection with Europeans, 
and by frequent failure, this breed of black Spartans is 
rapidly falling into decay. The Abeokutans, far from 
feeling their old terror of the King, now openly boast that 
they will "whip" the man who attacked them with 
women. Had the capital of Egba-land not engaged in a 
four years* war with Ibadan, the Lord of the Amazons 
would not have retired in safety from Ishagga and Igbara. 
At present, the Egbas, shut up within their walls, are 
afraid to take the initiative ; but some day the King's pet 
prophet will lead him to measures involving the loss of 
his army, and possibly of his life.^ 

1 It is said that Gelele has resolved to grind the faces of his sub- 
jects for ten years, of which six have now elapsed. After that time 
they will be applied to honest labour, and a man shall live on a cowrie 
a day, so cheap will provisions become. He thus inverts the Quin- 
quennium Neronis, and however allegiant may be his people, he will 
probably carry severity too far. But lately forty families have fled 
in a batch to "Porto Novo" as a land of liberty, and .they will be 
followed by others. 

2 These remarks were written at Agbome, in January, 1863, six 
weeks before the King's utter failure at Abeokuta. 



58 



CHAPTER XVI. 

ADDO-KPON, THE BUSH KING's SO-SIN CUSTOMS. 

SECTION A. 

Of Addo-kpon, the Bush King. 

One of the Dahoman monarch's peculiarities is, that 
he is double ; not merely binonymous, nor dual, like the 
spiritual Mikado and the temporal Tycoon of Japan, but 
two in one. Gelele, for instance, is King of the city, 
Addo-kpon^ of the " bush " ; that is to say, of the farmer 
folk and the country as opposed to the city. So the late 
Gezo*s alter ego was Ga-kpwe.^ This country ruler has 
his official mother, the Danh-li-ke ; his Min-gan, or chief 
executioner the Wimekho ; and his Men, or master of 
ceremonies, the Awesu, father of the Whydah Yevo-gan. 
His palace is at Akpwe-ho, a village on the road to Aja, 
about six miles to the south- west of Agbome ; as it is still 
built of matting and will not be made of swish until 
Abeokuta is taken, I was not permitted to see it. The 
house is furnished with male and female officers, eunuchs, 
and wives, besides which, criminals and victims' are set 

1 Addo (the light yellow Popo bead, which does not melt in the 
fire), kpon (see !). It must not be confounded with Adda-kpun, or 
oyster. 

2 Ga (market-day), kpwe (when it comes, scil., it must be full). 

3 Some said that the palace shed was the King's victim depdt, 
the market shed, Addo-kpon's : others confined the King's especial 
sacrifices to the turret of the market shed. Many men declared that 
the King's sacrifices were all captives, Addo-kpon's all criminals; 
more denied these distinctions. 



XV I . — AddO'kpon's So-sin Customs. — Section A, 59 

apart at the Customs. Thus Dahome has two points of 
interest to the ethnologist — the distinct precedence of 
women, and the double king. 

Our travellers are wholly silent upon the subject of 
this strange organization.^ I presume that the duplicate 
was invented of late years to enable the King to trade 
like that Farmer Monarch — 

" Who rams and cows and lambs and bullocks fed." 
Sinmenkpen (Adahoonzou II.) first assumed the 
direct monopoly of commerce which his forefathers had 
held ignoble, but his successors dropped it. It cannot 
be now said of Dahomans — 

" They have a king who buys and sells," 
and yet Addo-kpon derives all the advantages of the 
industry of the palace, in which many things, as pottery, 
pipes, mats, and cloths, are manufactured and monopo- 
lized. 

SECTION B. 

The Nun-kpon 'gbe Addo-kpon-totiy^ or First Day of the Bush 

King's So-sin Customs. 

On Monday, January 4th, 1864, we resumed the 
labours of "pleasure," without which, some one has truly 
said, life would be very endurable. 

At two P.M. we passed through the city gate, where 
we were disgusted by seeing the corpses still sitting and 
suspended. It was a hideous spectacle, the turkey- 
buzzards picking at — but I will spare the reader's feel- 
ings : suffice it to say, even our hanging in chains was 
not more barbarous. 

We were somewhat late : as the parasol showed, 

1 Mr. Bernasko (Appendix III.) mentions " Athopon," which he 
erroneously translates "hearth, a place in which a fire is made." 
All other books ignore the bush king's existence. 

2 Nun (thing, custom) kpon (we look at) 'gbe (to-day), and Addo- 
kpon-ton (belonging to Addo-kpon). 



6o A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome. 

royalty had already taken its station. Whilst bowing to 
the King, we were informed that he wished us again to 
** fight for cowries," and, like himself, to dance before the 
people. I excused ourselves rather to see how he would 
treat the matter ; peeled finger-tips and a sprained 
anmdaris on a previous occasion had interfered with my 
writing, about which he was most anxious ; moreover, 
the drivers had again ousted us, thus spoiling another 
night's rest. The ministers made the usual difficulty 
about delivering the Message, but an answer came back 
at once. The King knew that white men do not ** wrestle 
for shells," but that having admired my "bravery" and 
cunning — I had rolled the Reverend over — he was desir- 
ous of seeing it again. Under the circumstances, how- 
ever, I must not fight, but receive cowries from him at 
once. As regards the dancing, he had promised to show 
the lieges his white friend's performance, and he hoped 
that they might not be disappointed. What answer 
could be made to a reply so amiable ? 

We found a small concourse of people, and about two 
dozen men were kneeling before an equal number of 
baskets containing cowries. The subject of the palaver 
was the eternal Abeokuta. Adan-men-nun-kon came to 
me, and in a loud tone declared that I had fought well 
for cowries, and was a strong man, like my company, the 
Blues. Whereupon the King called me up to the bam- 
boos, and with force complimens presented me with two 
heads, which I carried off amidst the applause of the 
people. Mr. Cruikshank and the Reverend were similarly 
honoured. A little excitement was caused by two men 
being severally hustled off to prison, whilst the new 
Ajyaho stood up and explained their offence. They 
began life as common soldiers, and had risen to be cap- 
tains. Receiving on this occasion no cowries, they had 
sent three impertinent reminders by the chief ministers 
to say that they were in the presence ; whereas the King 



XVI, — Addo-kpon's So-sin Customs, — Section B, 6i 

is the King, and does with his own what he wills. These 
men were greedy, and must be punished accordingly. 
After which Gelele dismissed the speakers for making 
too much noise. They carried off their cowries, the males 
"presenting arms" with muskets, the women with sticks 
and knives. 

Then we had for three hours, without intermission, 
the usual Amazon dance and song, chorus and solo, with 
the whole corps de ballet, and several pas de deux, ending in 
prestissimo movements very fatiguing. The King himself 
tapped a fast measure on a little tom-tom, and when his 
officers pointed out this to us, we rose and bowed, whilst 
those around presented arms, and royalty acknowledged 
the salutation with a small crooked stick. Gelele made 
a speech about Abeokuta, when the Bo-chio figures ap- 
peared, for a short time, and the normal patrol, a band 
with skull-flags and drums, passed up the square.^ The 
Amazons then sang a song of disgrace for those who 
would not fight, and a pair of Ursine dances concluded 
with a ferocious allocution by the Po-su. At the end of 
this scene the women knelt and clapped hands before 
Gezo's ghost. 

I This patrol begins at dawn and lasts through the day and night. 
The African never yet invented an hour, but as the bands perform 
at nearly equal tri-horal periods, he is here seldom at a loss for find- 
ing his time. From 6 a.m. to 8 a.m. is the Ahan-'e, mostly of bone 
rattles, followed till ii a.m. by the Broh, rattles and drums. From 
II A.M. till noon is the Gan or Panigan, " gong-gongs," with heralds 
recapitulating the titles and exploits of all the Dahoman dynasty ; 
this was established by the present King ; Gezo ordered it only once 
a day, before dawn. From noon to 3 p.m. is the time of the Wime- 
hun — cymbals and flutes, followed till sunset by the Goawe — mostly 
drums. From 6.30 p.m. till g.30 to 10 p.m., the Agbaja, tom-tom, 
beats ; the Kpwen, or horns, sound till midnight, relieved at 3 a.m. 
by the Akko; finally, the early gun, or "gong-gong," and the 
heralds' work begin at 3 a.m. and end at sunrise. The bands con- 
sist generally of a man and four boys. They sit upon mats under a 
tree, before the palace gate, strike up at times, and accompany the 
soldiers of the patrol. 



62 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome. 

Presently the caboceers approached the bamboos, 
and reclined on the ground whilst the King again ad- 
dressed them. A favourite captain, the TofFa, had lately 
died, and another was to be promoted to his post. Some 
of the ministers had proposed one of the royal brothers as 
heir, but the King had replied, that although ** Tanistry" 
may be lawful, it is still the will of Mau (God) that when 
the sire dies the son should inherit. Another TofFa was 
then elected, with the usual ceremonies. 

When nearly dark, we were dismissed. The ham- 
mock men rushed frantically past the place of execution to 
escape its terrible atmosphere. 

SECTION c. 

The Second day of Addo-kpon, the Bush King's So-sin 

Customs, 

We deferred our exit till 3 p.m. of January 5th, for 
the Sim was terribly hot. On reaching the old place, we 
found three jesters professionally at work before the 
King : as might be expected, two of them were beating 
the third, who was pretending to cry. The Meu then 
gave a pair of bead necklaces to each of the chief minis- 
ters, who, after acknowledging the present, knelt before 
and solemnly saluted a large basketful of " Wo" pudding. 

Presently began the drum-beat, known as "Gblo.": 
At the further end of the square appeared about twenty 
men, three of whom had tails of some undistinguishable 
material ringed with black and yellow ; these appendages 
were fastened to small square pads of red cloth, adorned 
with cowries, and the pincushion was girt round the waist 
over the loin-wrapper. They pranced up to us with the 
left leg forwards, bending slightly as they touched the 
ground, and a peculiar movement of the glutei made the 
tail which out-topped their heads revolve like a Catherine's 
wheel. They were loudly greeted by the people, and 
were presently joined by a volunteer with an irregular 



XVI, — Addo-kpon's So-sin Ctistoms. — Section C. 63 

"fixing" of blue cloth ; he elicited equal applause. After 
saluting the King, they disappeared. As has been shown, 
there is a similar female institution within the palace.* 

There had been some question amongst us touching 
the proper signification of " Addo-kpon," which the Buko- 
no professed inability to explain. A message was sent by 
a Dakro woman to the King, who at once honoured me 
with a full account of it. I acknowledged this philological 
civility by returning " compliments." 

We were then summoned before the throne. The old 
man Meu, who required perpetual prompting, addressed 
me with his childish treble in the usual loud and would- 
be startling tone, ** Mashna," i.e., Commissioner. To this 
the ofl&cial response is an equally vehement ** W6 ! — 
adsum.*" He theu presented me with a singer's Kpo-ga, 
or staff, and Mr. Cruikshank with another, somewhat less 
silvered. We bowed and retired, the weight of new 
honours pressing heavy on our shoulders. After sitting 
down, we were again summoned by the old Meu, who 
informed me that the King had been pleased to put me in 
the place of his Min-gan, or chief executioner, whilst my 
companion was to perform before him as his Meu, or 
master of ceremonies. I was then invested with a Bonu- 

1 Mr. Norris well describes the dancing of the women : " Each 
had a long tail fi^ced to her rump, which seemed to be a slip of 
leopard skin sewed up and stufifed, which, by a dexterous wriggle of 
her hips, she whirled round like a string with surprising velocity." 
Mr. Duncan shows disapproval of the practice, but Mr. Duncan 
belonged to the respectable class, which " approves of" only its own 
practices. '• Four tall men, singularly dressed, and with bullocks* 
tails tied so as to hang over their hips behind, arranged themselves 
in line in front of his Majesty, and by passing at the side step, 
lowering and poising the body by the bend of the knee, causing the 
tail to make a circular motion of a disgusting appearance." Why 
"disgusting?" 

2 So E ! or He ! in the Egba tongue, is a respectful acknowledg- 
ment, like Sir! or Madam! The Ffons sometimes say, Mi-se, we 
hear, i.e., understand. 



64 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome, 

gan-jei, or "caboceer beads." This was a double necklace 
of 240 greenish beads, with eight cylinders of red coral ; 
behind it hung a pigtail of sixteen cotton strings, the thread 
being spun by a woman on the right of the throne. The 
coral was sham, and the beads were poor imitation of the 
Popo article called ** Ketu." Mr. Cruikshank and the 
Reverend were also presented with similar symbols of 
high dignity and African parsimoniousness. 

The King had repeatedly fixed a day for me to dance 
before him, and had deferred the operation probably with 
the delicate motive of allowing me time to prepare myself 
for so great an event. Now, however, the hour had 
come. I collected my party in front of the semicircle of 
caboceers, gave time to the band, and performed a Hindu- 
stani pas seul, which elicited violent applause, especially 
from the King. My companion then danced a Dahoman 
dance with Governor Mark as fugleman, and his disinvol- 
tura charmed the people. It was then the Reverend's turn 
to perform. He posted himself opposite the throne, 
placed upon another stool his instrument, a large flutina 
or concertina, and having preliminarily explained the 
"God-palaver.^" bravely intoned his favourite hymns. 
They were, Matthias (words by the excellent Dr. Watts, 
and singularly out of place in Agbome), Arnold's Job, 
with a refrain (making more rhyme to endure), and Martin 
Luther's ** Old Hundreth " (opening with ** All people 
that on earth do dwell.") How is that the Wesleyan 
mind cannot forego its fondness for this Ennian literature ? 
The people stared and chuckled a little, but — 

Omnibus hoc vitium est cantoribus, inter amicos, 
Ut nunquam inducant animum cantare rogati, 
Injussi nunquam desistant. 
The Reverend being in his pulpit, so to speak, gave 
his listeners a good half hour of edification. 

I So in the History (p. 131), Mr. Norris fixed the barrel of the 
chamber-organ to the hundred and fourth Psalm, at the request, and 
for the future amusement of his host, " Bossa Ahadi." 



XVI, — Addo'kpons So-sin Customs, — Section C, 65 

When the instrument was mute, the King proposed 
a modification. The Reverend was to play and sing, 
whilst Mr. Cruikshank and I must dance as before on 
both sides.^ It was almost too ridiculous, but we complied 
for a short time. My second pas seul, which ended the 
affair, was greeted with firing guns and presenting arms 
by all my company, men and women, especially the latter, 
to whom the salutation had been especially directed. It 
required some strength of mind to prevent holding oneself 
a manner of prodigy; the people evidently thought the 
power of dancing, of using a sword, of learning enough 
to understand them in a month, of writing down every- 
thing seen so as to recall it to their memories, and of 
sketching objects so that even they could recognize them, 
to be an avatar of intellect. 

We then retired to a little distance, and sat aligned 
fronting the King, whilst all the caboceers, in tumultuous 
throng, danced around us with loud songs and cries of 
praise and congratulation. The parson then intoned in 
"quick metre," despite the singing master,'^ 
*' O, let us be joyful, joyful, joyful, 

When we meet to part no more " 
— an injunction involving consequences possibly even 
more lugubrious than that truly abominable (to the African 
traveller at least) description of future bliss in a land 
where there is 

'* No veiled sun, no clouded sky, 
But sacred, high, eternal noon." 
Thus the Reverend acquired the title of ** Missionary 
Governor.^ " We then withdrew our chairs to the south- 

1 Mr. Duncan (vol. i. p. 255) found it rather a difficult task to 
dance and to play that " ancient Israelitish instrument " — the Jew's 
harp — at the same time. 

2 Who informs us that " when this air is sung quick throughout, 
it is converted into an exceedingly vulgar jig-tune." 

3 Yewe (god), nun (side), hun-to (drummer, ship captain, gov- 
ernor). 

VOL. II. 5 



66 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome. 

eastern corner of the square, and sat there till dark, watch- 
ing the circumambulation of the King's women. It was 
the same scene as on New Year's Day, and it ended our 
immediate labours in the .presence. Again the vultures 
spotted the large tree before the palace gate. Surely they 
must have a sense of "time," telling them when to expect 
a feast. For to-night is a second Zan Nyanyana, a Nox 
Irae, when Gelele, as Addo-kpon, will slay the remainder 
of his criminals and victims. 

Our dancing had so excited the multitude, that we 
had hardly dined before an irruption of friends by the 
score, all wishing to learn ** white man's fashion," crowded 
the house ; and to increase confusion, arrived the outward- 
bound mail-bag, bringing its usual amount of care and 
excitement — such a contrast with the ataraxy and the 
comme il faut calm that characterize the more refined 
Anglo-Tropical mind. I thanked my star for sending me 
to Dahome, and did not "endorse" the sentiment — 
" Oh I la belle chose que la poste." 

SECTION D. 

The Be-du-'ghe,^ or Third Day of the Bush King's So -sin 

Customs, 

Operations began at 7 a.m. on January 6th, when the 
King sent us four baskets of akkara, or bean-cake yellow 
with palm-oil, and four pots of ahan-vo^ — "red liquor," 
or native beer. His father brewed with maize, but being 
a Diomedes, holding himself superior to his sire, he em- 

1 Be (joy ; others say, live thou !), du (eat), 'gbe (to-day, the Happy 
Day, because it ends the deadly part of Addo-kpon's Customs). It is 
also known as Bekpa-men 'gbe; meaning, Bekpa (mat-fence), men 
(in), *gbe (to-day: subaudi, we will go). Commander Forbes, whose 
names and " customs" are equally unintelligible, writes (vol. ii. p. 33) 
" Ekbah-tong-ek-beh," and translates, "Display of the King's 
wealth." 

2 Ahan (any liquor), and vo (red). Ahan yevo, is " white man's 
liquor," meaning rum. 

2—5 



XVI. — Addo-kpon's So-sin Customs. — Section D. 67 

ploys for the purpose "white man's rice." The produce 
is rhubarb-coloured, subacid, anything but **bub," weak 
but wholesome and refreshing. 

Our old host, of whose meddling propensities we had 
every day to complain, visited us at 8 a.m., when we knew 
that nothing would be done before noon, and authori- 
tatively ordered us breakfastless to the palace, for which 
he was, of course, ejected. Formerly English strangers 
were lodged with the Meu, whom they found an intoler- 
able stickler for etiquette. Thence they were transferred 
to the Buko-no, and now the King should be directed to 
build for them a private house ; meanwhile lodging them 
with the Prince Chyudaton. 

At 10 A.M., in no very placid state of mind, we made 
for the palace. The nine dead bodies had been removed 
after the fourth day of exhibition, and in their stead were 
eight others, whose limp limbs showed that they had lately 
met their doom. Four were hanging head downwards on 
single gallows ; a pair, one above the other, was seated, 
in their rude San Benitos, on a rough scaffolding; and 
two were lying prone upon horizontal planks raised on 
poles twenty feet high, with their heads protruding from 
salt-bags of the common matting. We were again assured 
that all were criminals and captives, and that the two last 
mentioned had been thus grotesquely laid out for stealing 
the King's salt — which was probable. A little beyond the 
bodies, the top of a conical tent of crimson cloth, a 
smaller Tokpon, intended for the King's nightly lodging, 
protruded from a mat fence covered with sadly tattered 
cloths. 

Instead of dismounting at the south-eastern angle of 
the palace, we rode behind our host — who, by-the-bye, had 
declared that whilst he did not dismount we should ^ — to 

I He did not dismount, to show how high he was in the King s 
esteem, who allows this liberty to be taken by his subjects on the 
•' Happy Day" only. He wished us to walk on foot, that the people 
might see that we were the slaves of the King. 



68 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahomc, 

the thin-shadowed tree before the Komasi Gate. Then 
we were fronted, as usual, by a semicircle of men and 
boys; und sundry of the caboceers came to greet us with 
**mawnin\^" One of them, the Gbe-wedo, wanted reme- 
dies for a bad Guinea-worm. A medical man visiting 
Agbome has no holiday ; every twenty-four hours he will 
find a fresh but a feeless case; and if he wants "prac- 
tice," he has only to provide himself with what drugs and 
instruments the limited dispensaries of the West African 
Coast allow. On the ground at each side of the palace 
entrance were four heads, recently removed; this time 
they were almost hidden behind little fences of grass. 
Thus the total number of deaths for Addo-kpon, the Bush 
King, were sixteen, whereas Akhosu Gelele, the City 
King, slew twenty-three ; and a total of thirty-nine lives 
were forfeited during the So-sin Customs of Agbome, in 
1863-64. 

At 10.45 A.M. we entered the palace, and found the 
larger Tokpon pitched and surrounded with white cloth. 
Few spectators had assembled, and the Ken-tin, or chief 
singer, occupied the centre of the yard, with nineteen men 
kneeling behind him in two rows. He wore thimble- 
horns, a crimson velvet cloak, like a caballero in the days 
of Gil Bias, and a scarlet loin-cloth ; he held the insignia 
of his order, a silver-mounted sword, a bard's staff, and a 
large black-horse tail. As the ceremony, which was 
almost the same as the Display of the King's Poverty 
lengthily described on January 2nd, began earlier this 
day, the King entered at 11.45 a.m. He was habited in a 
toga of blue and yellow tartan, and a green velvet toque, 
with two horizontal stripes of silver lace; his principal 
ornament was a necklace of cut and stained glass set in 
Mosaic gold, and worth a few shillings. He came up, 
affably shook hands and snapped fingers with us, and told 

I "Good morning." The people easily pick up a few words of 
foreign languages, which, however, they can never master. 



XVI , — AddO'kpon's So-sin Customs, — Section D. 69 

me to write down everything seen on that occasion — 
which I will not do. The whole affair was mean in the 
extreme. The ministers and captains, male and female, 
paraded as before ; but this being the Bush King's ffite, 
they were fewer in number, and not so richly attired as 
before. Baskets of cassava were as usual distributed to 
the crowd, and there was no want of provaunt in the 
palace — its only merit. 

Before entering the yard, the King had sent a mes- 
sage to ask me if I had any objection in joining the dis- 
play. My reply was, by no means, if he wished it, and 
would allow us to walk by ourselves under parasols, which 
are not permitted to the lieges. He freely consented, and 
with all ceremony we circumambulated, in uniform, and 
with our head-decorations and singer's staves, the palace- 
yard from left to right, and not regarding the throne as 
we passed the entrance. The bands of women in the 
pavilion, and of men outside, frantically greeted us with 
cries of Yevo! — the whites! After the third round we 
formed up in line and bowed to the King, who was sitting 
upon a raised dais with a clear approach lined with bottles 
of liquor, calabashes of food, and the women of the 
palace. He took up a fine gold-laced Spanish broad-brim, ^ 
and sending out six flasks of Cura9oa and other liqueurs, 
pledged us all in turn. 

The procession was succeeded by terribly lengthy 
speeches from the Adanejan and the Gan, who compli- 
mented Gelele upon having so worthily performed his 
Customs in the presence of white men. The addresses 
were concluded amidst loud exclamations of Un 'so! **I 
answer you," and Yati! meaning, in Fanti, **I have 
heard," the haranguers raising arms and forefingers. 
These people have certainly practised as much as any 

I The old prints in the History, though mostly drawn from imagin- 
ation, all show the King wearing one of these hats. 



70 A ■ Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome. 

American politician the art of public speaking; they can 
talk for an hour without saying anything. 

At 3.15 P.M. the "wealth" began to pass, and terribly 
slow was this part of the proceedings. The King attempted 
to lighten our labour by sending us liquor, water, fruits, 
and a Moslem sweetmeat called Du-du-kwia, an African 
imitation of the Arabian Halwa.^ Baskets of provisions 
and cowries were brought in great numbers from the 
palace, and most of the caboceers had complicated dinners 
carried by their wives and slave-girls. The smallest gift 
from the King was received with cries of " We ! " This 
was well; the royal hand is looked to, not the value of 
what it out-deals. We were not provided with "pass- 
rum" before darkness came on, and as we hurried house- 
wards, the light railings along the road told us that the 
indefatigable King's labours had by no means ended. 
Firing of guns disturbed the night, gin and rum were 
distributed, and cowries were thrown; this we learned 
next morning, when a patient came with a finger badly 
bitten in the struggle. 

SECTION E. 

The E na-nyin kun,^ or Fourth Day of the Bush King's 

So -sin Customs. 

We listened to Hope's flattering tale about a holiday, 
but at 2.15 P.M., on January 7th, we were unexpectedly 
summoned to the palace. The Tokpon and the human 
heads had been removed from the entrance sides, nor was 
there any connecting splotch of blood. Eight men danced 
on the male side, the bamboos were then extended, when 
seven women, a small girl, and a mistress of ceremonies 
in the rear, began to perform. As the sun was sinking 
low, the King left his shed with a peloton of fifty wives, 

1 A confection of sugar, milk, almonds, spices, &c . 

2 E (he), na-nyin (will pass, i.e., release from duty of further at- 
tendance), hun (drum, viz., drummers and singers). 



XVh — AddO'kpons So-sin Customs. — Section E. 71 

holding a singer's staff, and shaded by a red-and-green 
parasol; after adjusting his toga, he bowed to the tent 
occupied by his father's ghost. He sang to a male band, 
whilst the women joined in the chorus, and then he in- 
verted the process. The gist of the chant was, that 
miserable are the sires of poor men who cannot honour 
them with offerings of wo- pudding and greens in silver- 
mounted calabashes, such as Gezo was now receiving. 
The sentiment was heard with the **khe" and the ** Ububu " 
on both sides. Six women then joined the King in sing- 
ing and dancing. After repeated performances to honour 
Gezo, Gelele presented us with half a loaf of sugar and a 
basket of salt, for which we returned thanks. The King 
presently sang in praise of his visitors, and danced re- 
peated solos. When this ended, a general ballet of women 
tumultuously advanced amidst numerous discharges of 
guns, lasting till darkness came on. Mr. Bernasko was 
then summoned to play "music" before royalty, but his 
sweet sounds were drowned in negro noise. At last 
silence was obtained, and the Meu, addressing us by our 
names, informed us that the morrow would be a day of 
rejoicing, when both Akhosu and Addo-kpon would fire 
guns to show that the days of mourning and punishment 
had gone by, and that all who had attended the Customs 
would be "passed" with presents. He also conveyed to 
us the royal wish that we should come early, as all ministers 
caught napping are heavily fined, and — the crafty oldster 
had served imder three sovereigns — he privily warned his 
colleagues that the Englishman, being a "King's man," 
would be before them all, and thus get them into trouble. 
But they scoffed at him, and said, "These whites, before 
they can leave the house, must bathe, and dress, and 
drink tea; with them * early' means after sunrise." 

During the night, the old King's ghostly tent, the 
corpses, and both the So-sin sheds, were removed. The 
place looked charming as before: — Nature, serenely fair. 



72 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome, 

wore upon her lovely face an ironical smile at what she 
had witnessed amongst her sons.^ 

SECTION F. 

The So-dehwe^ — Fifth and Last Day of the So-sin Customs. 

I awoke my people at 4 a.m. on January 8th, and be- 
fore 5 we were seated in front of the palace. Our old host 
had not slept that night, lest we should give him the slip, 
and we found but one minister, the Abwejekun, waiting 
to receive us. The early gong-gong men, one with a brass 
bell, the other with a cymbal, apparently of silver, and 
both double instruments, were standing at the gate, strik- 
ing first the long and the short tube, and reciting the 
** strong names " of the King and his ancestors. As each 
lingering caboceer appeared, we tolled a large bell, brought 
up from Whydah by Mr. Bernasko, and gave him a glass 
of gin, with the solemn promise of reporting him to 
royalty, who had been made aware by messenger of our 
arrival. All replied that great men do not sleep at night,* 
and with comical ruefulness resigned themselves to their 
fate. 

The early morning at Agbome is full of beauty. As 
the ** grandmother and grandchildren^" waxed faint in 
the south, a lovely roseate blush overspread the pale 
cheek of the eastern firmament, the earth's ruder forms 

1 As we found from the gathering of the turkey-buzzards for a 
week afterwards, the corpses were thrown into the town moat, near 
the Komasi Palace; during the "Atto-year" their place is on the 
north of the enceinte. They are not disposed of, as Mr. Duncan says, 
" in a large pit, at a considerable distance from the town." In all 
cases their skulls, which here are prized as much as by the Anthro- 
pological Society of London, are subsequently removed, and are pro- 
bably afterwards exhibited as the trophies of heroic deeds. 

2 Meaning "thunder to-day," so great will be the noise of mus- 
ketry. 

3 Great men are supposed to transact business at that time. 

4 The Gold Coast name of the Southern Cross. 



XVI, — AddO'kpon's So-sin Customs. — Section F. 73 

were en veiled in soft gauzy blue, and the cool refreshing 
zephyr — 

" The sweet first breathings of the hour of prime." 
— the ** respiration of morn," as the Persians call it, 
made distant music amongst the tree-boughs. 

At dawn about 200 male guards issued from the 
palace. The several companies, under their captains, 
take this duty by turns ; they pass their nights in the 
Podoji, or yard, and by day they are relieved by the 
Amazons. During Customs time they are more numer- 
ous than usual. Each troop, as it passed us with flags 
and bands, halted and discharged guns and blunder- 
busses, which were responded to within the palace. The 
ministers also fired : they must be careful this day ; if 
their weapons do not behave well, the King reprimands 
them pubhcly, and perhaps fines them. 

At 6 A.M. we were conducted by the Meu to the 
palace gate, which was still closed. We were placed in 
front of all the ministers, whom we had outranked by 
early rising, and as they made obeisance, we salamed 
to the Sublime Porte. We then turned to a band of drums 
and cymbals behind us, and, in company with the Meu 
and Chyudaton, we performed a little prancing in Da- 
homan style. 

Shortly afterwards the large umbrellas were disposed 
under the King's shed, and at 7 a.m. Gelele, with a knot 
of she-soldiery, stalked under his parasol to his accus- 
tomed place. We were at once summoned, thanked, and 
complimented for having paid due honour to royalty — in 
this country punctuality is not the politeness of princes. 
Behind us the delinquent ministers lay on the ground 
backed by the ** Don-pwe people," to whom in such cases 
all the caboceers are committed for punishment. The 
sole exceptions are the Min-gan and the Meu, who in 
case of delinquency are prevented from entering their 
homes. 



74 ^ Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome. 

The Buko-no then lengthily and eloquently related 
our exploit, and reported the Yevo-gan and Prince Chy- 
udaton as in fault. They looked at me with a jocose de- 
precation, and covered their heads with dust, whilst the 
" Don-pwe " struck up a loud uproarious song, ending in 
a laughing chorus, to deride the late men. The fat 
Adanejan, unhappily for himself, joined us, and was 
added to the list ; all laughed as he stretched out the 
hand of deprecation towards the "small young men." I 
then invoked for these offenders the royal pardon, especi- 
ally mentioning the old Meu, whose warning had been 
neglected. The King, however, replied, that they were in 
the hands of justice, from which even he could not save 
them, and that they must sleep abroad and be fined in 
rum for preferring to his service the bed and the "kicksey- 
wicksey." Nothing could be said against this slight 
penalty, and I was pleased with the opportunity of prov- 
ing to the ministers that in more important matters they 
might fight a losing battle. 

The two captains who had been locked up for shame- 
less asking, now received formal pardon, which they ac- 
knowledged by a dust-bath. Adanejan was then made 
chief of the Ganchya drum, whose black head and brown 
body rendered it conspicuous amongst the women's band ; 
he also, after removing his necklaces, vigorously shovelled 
up earth. The King sent to inform us that as it was too 
late to hear all the songs, he would at once ** pass" the 
singers and drummers, and then dismiss us to breakfast. 
A bard, with official staff, then came forward and sang — 

Gezo was a forest in which wild beasts (viz., his subjects) 

dwelt securely, 
And now Gezo has left to his son that forest. 

The performer presently retired, and with his brethren 
danced a round before the King. 

The Blue and Fanti Companies thereupon received 
each a maiden flag of white croydon, which is to bear 



XVI. — Addo'kpons So-stn Customs, — Section F. 75 

their honours when they shall have won them. The King 
sent to me a message that I must return in time for the 
next Customs ; my reply was that in such matters every- 
thing depended upon orders from home. This elicited 
many flattering expressions, which ceased only when the 
Gau arose and swore with violent gesticulation that Abeo- 
kuta — the word wearies me ! — must be taken this year, 
with a Kpwe-to^ or, as the Arabs say, with a Katl-am, 
or general massacre. The Commander-in-Chief then 
called me up, and we performed together a short pas de 
deux, with left shoulders forward, corresponding arm 
akimbo, and ditto leg in the air. The Adan-men-nun-kon 
seconded the prophecy, and the Mafro, an old caboceer, 
declared that when a wound is healed men see the scar, 
meaning that on my return I should find the Egba capital 
" broken," and her people captives. 

These speeches were mingled and concluded with 
singing, dancing, drumming, and all manner of interrup- 
tions. By way of varying the sameness, I gave a wine- 
glass of water instead of gin to a Klan or jester-soldier, 
who was making all laugh by counterfeiting, and well too, 
the dying agonies of a wounded man, by pretending to 
weep, and by uttering wild cries, with similar savage 
facetiae. He carried it in triumph to his chief, without 
whose leave it could not be tasted ; and presently a loud 
Yep ! yep ! yep ! from the crowd — so utterly different 
from the hearty English Ha ! ha ! ha ! — proclaimed the 
success of the trick. The King, when informed of it, was 
abundantly amused, and the poor fool was told that he 
must be punished for taking the glass. I replied that a 
jester, who couki not distinguish gin from water, deserved 
a mild discipline ; and the fellow exclaimed ruefully, 
" Preserve me from drinking with you : you first give me 
the wrong stuff, and then you get me a whipping ! '* 

I Kpwe (plenty), and to (here, there, and everywhere ; not to be 
confounded with to, the world) . 



76 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome. 

The women presently danced, sang, and drummed, 
and the she-Gau sent to inform me that when a weight is 
too heavy for one, two may lift it ; meaning that the Blue 
and Fanti Companies were sure of victory. The Ji-bi- 
whe-ton, or second in command of the latter, came out 
from the ranks and exclaimed, the Yevo (albus) has now 
heard us talk, he shall presently see our deeds. A fire for 
cooking must be made slowly,^ not so when one would 
bum an enemy's town. 

Meanwhile the ministers of both sexes had invested 
themselves in their long Hausa tobes of ceremony. The 
Dakros placed in their hands divers bundles of cloths, 
which were severally unfolded and held out horizontally 
by the dignitaries. The recipients were called up accord- 
ing to precedence of rank or merit ; each shouted, ** We ! " 
— Adsum ! — and rushed forwards with affected hurry, 
capering as in childish glee. They knelt down, with one 
hand on the head, whilst the ministers passed the cloth 
plaid-fashion over their right shoulders and under their 
left arms. They then returned and sat in batches. When 
the largesse was all distributed, the two Meus of both 
sexes again called out the names of those whom the King 
had honoured, and told them that they had " got pass." 
During the whole proceeding the women sang a chorus, 
and as each fresh cloth made its appearance they greeted 
it with the Khe-cry, and the men with loud Ububus. 
Followed dances on both sides of the bamboos. 

Meanwhile the King's smoker stood up before the 
throne. He was a black youth, in an ochre-stained kilt, 
with a pigtail of sombre-coloured cotton, and he used a long 
stem ending in a bowl as big as a cocoa-nut. The office 
is one of the. true African fantasticals, and the favoured 
man is supplied from the royal pouch. 

It was then our turn. When summoned, I went up 

I Cuisinely considered, I believe this axiom to be distinctly in- 
correct. 



XVI. — AddO'kpons So-sin CusToms, — Section F. 77 

hurriedly, according to '* etiquette ": it was past 8 a.m., 
and the sun was fierce, but the King could not alter the 
custom and direct me to wear a hat. After being addressed 
by the Meu, I was invested with a handsome cloth, of 
palace manufacture — green, red, and yellow cotton ; by 
formula it is called a ** counterpane," and the King tells 
the presentee that it is meant for his bed.^ Mr. Cruik- 
shank and the Reverend, the boy Tom, and the Buko-no, 
were similarly honoured. After half an hour's candida- 
ture for sun-stroke, we bowed our thanks and retreated. 

A small party of archers from the Agoni, or northern 
country, near Makhi, then knelt before the King and 
dusted themselves. These bush-men also boasted of the 
aid they would render to the army when attacking Egba- 
land. Suddenly, as usual, there was a stir. We hurriedly 
arose and went to the usual shed, where we sat, whilst the 
palace-women, carrying cowries and rum-bottles, thrice 
circumambulated the square. When the precious burdens 
were deposited before the throne we returned to our um- 
brellas, and the King dispensed with the ceremony of crying 
out our names and singing whilst we received his gifts. 
We were presented with twenty heads ^ and as many plates 
of cowries, with ten bottles of rum from Gelele , to which 
the mysterious Addo-kpon added an equal quantity. I 
then was paid five heads for dancing — my first fee of the 
kind — and my companion's salary was similar. Finally, 
two decanters of rum announced the happy moment of 

1 The custom of presenting a "fine striped cotton cloth," is 
found in the History (p. 146), and the " counterpane " is also named. 

2 Or forty shillings. There are always fifty strings of two score 
shells to the vulgar, and ten less to the royal, " head," Moreover, 
the strings are "shroffed," or "cabbaged," by the palace women, 
and must be re-counted. According to the History, three to six 
were deducted as perquisites from a string of thirty-nine. In 
Captain Phillips' time {1694) the King of Whydah gave out cowries 
in a smaller, and received them in a larger, measure than any of his 
subjects. 



78 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome, 

dismissal. It was already 11 a.m., but ** indecent haste*' 
was forbidden ; we followed at a funereal pace, the boys 
who had been seized by the neck to carry the King's 
costly gifts, and no short cuts through the town were per- 
mitted by our conductor, So-kun, the ** English guide." 
On the road we were informed that these were not the 
grand presents — which, of course, will never come — and 
consequently that they must be shared with the chief 
officers. About noon, after a seance of seven hours, we 
were able to break our fast. 

It was past three p.m. when we were summoned to 
conclude the festivities of the day. We repaired to the 
Uhun-jro market-place, and we found pitched upon the 
spot, whence the red victim-shed had been removed, a 
Do-ho,^ or little cloth pavilion, intended for the King. It 
resembled that under which he sat before the Komasi 
Gate ; behind, and connecting it with it, was a mat-tent, 
for privacy ; and in front had been planted a line of five 
umbrellas to shelter the Amazon officers. 

Shortly after we had taken our places on the north of 
the pavilion, two parties of Moslems, one numbering three, 
the other four turbands, passed before us. To the left, 
or southwards, the distance was filled with umbrellas and 
a dense dark crowd, whilst at times individuals and 
squads of fetisheers and warriors flitted about the Champ 
de Mars. The Harmattan wind presently began to blow 
with violence, raising the red dust from the sun -parched 
ground — no pleasant preparation for those about to view 
a Dahoman advance in heavy marching order. 

First appeared a line of scouts, bayoneteers, and 
blunderbuss-men, wearing a substitute for rifleman's 
green — in Europe an error, but here '*no mistake." 
They were habited in kilts, or cap-a-pie suits of freshly- 
cut palm-leaf ; some wore it like a gloria round the head, 

I Do (a *' bamboo " mat), and ho (a room). Some called it Kpla- 
kpla. 



XVI, — AddO'kpons So-sin Customs, — Section F. 79 

others had only the breast thatched, and the contrast of 
the verdure with the black skin was peculiar. This is an 
old custom of the empire. The " eyes of the force " were 
escorted by about 200 veterans, the remains of the Grande 
Armee that had found its Moscow at Abeokuta. They 
marched in open order like our light infantry skirmishers, 
and at times halted, knelt, and delivered fire, all the 
muzzles being of course raised too high. Finally they 
advanced tumultuously till they reached the northern 
extremity of the market-place, where they formed line 
about 500 yards from us. 

Then came the royal escort, the main body of the 
little army, men and boys, about 500 strong. The King, 
who was in the centre of the battalia, rode a little nag, 
smoking his usual pipe. He had drawn with gunpowder^ 
three broad lines upon his face, one straight from hair to 
nose, and two curved from ears to nostrils. Everything 
about him was in gloomiest war-style, the large umbrella 
was darkest indigo, the small parasol chocolate-brown. 
Unlike his war-men, he wore over a short white cloth a 
kilt of cotton stuff, scolloped at the edge, and darkened 
with goat's clotted blood and various barks ; it was dotted 
with charms, triangles of darker material, and small 
feathers protruding from bits of cane. A bronze-coloured 
fillet encircled his head, and its long ends fell upon his 
right and left shoulders ; from his neck depended a short 
horse-tail fly-flapper, whilst two of larger size, white and 
black, hung from his sinister side. Through his belt was 
stuck a short Dahoman briquet, and over his shoulder was 
a crooked club, spiked at the top, and armed along the 
point of percussion with a line of large square-headed 
nails. He wore sandals, and anklets of cowries and black 
seeds: altogether he looked like "business." 

As we arose and mutually bowed, the King descended, 

I Not with a charcoal-blackened face, as declared by M. Jules 
Gerard, Appendix iii. 



So A Mission to Gelele, King of Da home, 

and fired from the hip five guns and carbines, very lightly 
loaded. He then remounted, and made the three cus- 
tomary rounds of the market-place, followed by a few 
" salvage-men *' in green, fourteen standards, one pink 
and six white umbrellas, the show-shields, and the skull- 
drums. The rear-guard consisted of loo men, accompany- 
ing the shabby umbrellas, which here denote soldiery ; at 
times they skirmished in European fashion, with a fire 
pretty well nourri. After the third turn an order, sent to 
it by means of messengers, who ran bawling along the 
noisy chattering line, converted the rear into a van, which 
retired in turn, fraying out in a line of light troops. The 
King then marched down to the south side of the market- 
place, where his parasol showed him to be sitting amongst 
the women soldiery. 

A fetish company of men and boys presently passed 
us at a run, carrying implements of their craft, huge 
cressets, crescents of iron hung with cowries, and various 
images, idols, and simulacres, chiefly of the Bo-fetish — a 
crucified turkey-buzzard of wood with red dots on a white 
body, another spotted animal encoiled by a snake, and 
simdry things undescribable. This party also formed up 
with the veterans, at the northern end of the Uhun-jro 
space. 

It was now the Amazons' turn to advance, and they 
came up in better style as regards marching and firing 
than their brother soldiers. They passed us with a feu 
d'enfeVy and when the dust was not flying the smoke hung 
like a pall upon the ground. The King was followed by 
unarmed wives, who were fanning their lord and carrying 
a few weapons for his proper use. The soldiery wore 
tunics of grey baft, stained brown with blood and barks, 
covering the bosom and extending to the knees like the 
men, short drawers, and white sashes hanging to the right. 
The King dismounted, danced to an ** Amazon " band, 
and again rode thrice round the market-place, followed by 



XVI, — Addo-kpons So-sin Customs, — Section F, 8i 

his rear-guard singing and firing. After the third turn 
he walked up to where our umbrella was pitched, and dis- 
charging several carbines, he danced a simple morris, 
called Hun-gan,^ before a semicircle of armed women, 
who were chanting and cheering him lustily. After this, 
he took from one of his head fetishmen, a fine tall priest, 
with Abyssinian features, a crooked club, covered with 
blue and black cloth, and ringed with Indian cowries, and 
he performed another saltation. Then, holding my wrist, 
Gelele led me out, and we danced opposite each other 
amidst tempestuous applause. On this occasion the 
King expects strangers not to refuse him ; I therefore had 
the honour of executing a very notable decapitating move- 
ment. Mr. Bernasko, as a " god-man," was excused, 
and a slight fever had detained Mr. Cruikshank at home ; 
the performance, therefore, did not last long. The King, 
after dancing, turned round and drank from a small case- 
bottle, or decanter, with the usual noise and averting of 
faces on the part of his subjects. I observed that 
before putting it to his lips he al]owed a few drops to fall 
upon the ground. This is not an oblation to the gods as 
in ancient Europe, but the offering to ancestors, especially 
to the paternal ghost, as made by the Chinese. Gelele 
showed me all his fetish sticks, requesting that they might 
be sketched, and presently retired to his little pavilion, 
where the scouts coated in grass danced before him. He 
continued his attentions by sending food and drink at 
short intervals, till we were surrounded by bottles and 
calabashes. One gourd contained pomegranates, poor in 
the extreme, half ripe, bitter, and preponderant in seed 
and rind. Another calabash, I was told, showed a speci- 
men of his own war-food, bananas, excellent Akansan, 
powdered red pepper, in an Achatina shell, and a few 

I Hun (drum), and gan (big). My ear can detect no difference 
between this adnoun and Gan, a captain. 

VOL. II. 6 



82 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome. 

pods of Malaguetta pepper,^ which were greedily seized by 
the Reverend. A massing and scattering of umbrellas far 
to our left told us that the cabocers were on the move ; it 
was waxing late, and all was hurried. The chiefs were 
distinguished by the vast variety of charms and amulets 
hung about their arms, necks, and limbs, and some held 
a leaf of the Ayyan, or thunder fetish shrub, to prevent 
their guns bursting. These talismans are intended to 
create an artificial courage ; all peoples having their own 
peculiar stimuli. The Englishman nerves himself by a 
sense of duty and hope of profit. The Frenchman by 
visions of glory, and of late years by a bargain with 
Heaven that, if spared, he will believe in the Immaculate 
Conception. The German remembers the Rhine and its 
" ichor divine." The Russian thinks of a kind of a demi- 
god ; whilst in southern Europe the true fetish appears in 
the shape, of the cross, the medal, and the rehc. The 
braver Orientals, mostly Moslems, spur themselves by 
visions of Paradise, and by the prospect of escaping the 
** Squeeze of the Grave " ; and the more cowardly Hindus 
and Chinese, regarding what is scandalously called Dutch 
courage, as the spur of heroism, ** bhang themselves " 
accordingly. In many, if not in all, parts of Pagan Africa, 
the Congo for instance, the negro will not think of fight- 
ing without fetishes that will bring him safe out of battle ; 
and even the less timid North American must propitiate 
imaginary supernatural powers before he sets out to 
" raise hair." 

The caboceers, like their King, passed round three 
times.*-* As a rule, skirmishers, flags, and fetish preceded 

1 Here called Attakun, whereas Attakin is Cayenne pepper. A 
present of this Guinea pepper from one soldier to another is con- 
sidered an insult, hinting that the recipient requires something to 
heat his blood. 

2 The following list of chiefs who appeared this day is banished 
to a foot-note: — 

I. Advance guard representing royalty, 4 umbrellas, 40 men and boys 
2-6 



XVI, — Addo-kpon's So-sin Customs, — Secttm F, S3 
the captain of the party, who walked or rode under his 

escorting Agugun and Ayohi, custodians of the palace. 2. The three great 
ministers of the crown ; a large chair, a parrot or fetish image and stick, 3 
flags, fancy umbrella (lappets with knives and heads of many-coloured 
cloth), and 50 men were the "place" of the Min-gan, who was sick. 3. 
Seven deviced flags, 2 red and black shields, 2 big chairs, i blue striped 
umbrella accompanied the Meu, riding his white nag. Two large chairs, 
an English and a French flag, a pony, mats, calabashes, 4 men with board- 
ing-pikes, attitudinising an attack, a white umbrella, drums and band, 
with 4 deviced flags accompanying the Yevo-gan, who danced before us. 
Then came Addo-kpon, the Bush King's "place," a heavy line of razor and 
musket-men preceding an unridden horse, 2 men and 2 umbrellas, with 
two flags. Behind Addo-kpon marched the King's brother and great digni- 
taries. I. The new Ajyaho, preceded by fetish sticks of iron, followed by 
huge stools, I flag brown and tattered, i deviced, and i white and blue, a 
white umbrella, and an old brown ditto. 2. The Akpulogan, or governor 
of Ahada, whose escort was very mean, many of his men being absent on 
service ; a head and knife flag, 2 white banners, a horse, and a big stool. 
3. The So-gan, with a noisy band, and i umbrella, buff and deviced. 4. 
The Ganze, with similar escort : he is a young man, having been lately 
promoted. 5. The To-metti, with 2 flags, one white, the other white and 
blue, and some 50 men ; he also has lately succeeded his father, who was 
one of Gezo's brothers. 6. The Afarigbe, own brother to Gelele; in his 
suite 5 men, with hair tightly bandaged in calico, like Fetishmen. 7. The 
Aniin-wa-nun, with an English flag, his party passing at the double. 8. 
The Tokpo, with knife and head umbrella. 9. The Bokovo, captain and 
brother to the late king. 10. The Adanejan, with a party of 150 men 
firing lustily, red flag and fancy banner, a horse, and in the rear 2 white 
umbrellas, i white pennon and i red. He sent compliments to us by one 
of his slaves, an Ishaggan captive, who looked the personification of mirth. 
II. The Bin-wan-ton, with a small party, and umbrella knife and head. 12. 
The Bi-na-zon under a white umbrella, and a large party, amongst whom 
were sundry of the present King's young sons, who fired before us. 13. The 
Gwe-be-do, or second eunuch. 14. The Buko-no, or King's magician, 
attired en militaire — blue drawers, tunic with cowries on black ground, 
straw cap dyed red and supplied with chin-strap, and a small sword stuck 
in belt, and tomahawk in right hand. He asked me if I had ever seen such 
a gim (t.e., firing) at Abeokuta, and took place by my side. 15. The Atti- 
rive, brother to the late king, with 2 umbrellas, i white and i head and 
knife. 16. The Aho, another of the blood-royal, followed by three of the 
princes ; he had a blue umbrella, and a fancy blue flag. 17. The Voda, 
brother to the present king, with a white umbrella. 18. The Nonnovo, 
who is said to be a woman passing as a man, the eldest daughter of Gezo, 
and, but for the Salic law of Dahome, his heir to the kingdom. 19. The 
Tokunonfisan, captain and subject, with an English Union-Jack, 20. The 
Gofle, a son of the old Meu, also with British flag. 21. The Chyudaton, 



84 A Mission to GeleUy King of -Dahome, 

umbrella, whilst a full band and stragglers, all firing 
heavily, brought up the rear. Each group numbered from 
10 to 100 men and boys, and was separated by a short 
interval from its neighbours. 

The ceremony much resembled that of the Entrance 
Day, but it was far more military ; it was the march of 
the Dahoman army, whereas the other was the triumphal 
return from war. As sunset approached, the gale in- 
creased. The King sent to say that, at a future and 

with a very small party. 22. The Kwenun, before an akhi-gan, or " king's 
merchant," now promoted to captaincy of all traders at Whydah. He is a 
large fat old man, grotesquely Silenus-like, but not unintelligent. 23. The 
Men-jo-ten, second caboceer of Ahada, with white umbrella and fancy. 
24. The Asogba-hosen, brother to the present King, with a bluish um- 
brella, and a few attendants, chiefly boys. 25. The Awonyon, with a 
white umbrella, a fancy flag, an iron stick crescent- topped, and 2 fetish 
images, one of them black, with a long white unicorn-horn. 26. The Toja, 
a white umbrella, son to a brother of the late king. 27. The Ahopwe, 
brother of Gezo, with a head and knife umbrella. 28. The Assogba'u, with 
very few attendants. 29. The Enekpehun, another brother of Gezo, with 
a blue and white umbrella. 30. The Nuage, a brother of the present king. 
31. Bosu-sau, on horseback, with white umbrella and bluish flag. 32. The 
Nuase, a knife and head umbrella. 33. The Metokal, a white umbrella. 
34. The Vinyi-hun-to. 35. The Ajewanun, a French tri-colour. 36. The 
Khwechiri, a Whydah captain. 37. The Nolufren, ditto. 38. The Mecho- 
nun. 39. The Bokpwe, a white flag. 40. The Ganzu. 41. The Adan- 
vokun. 42, 43. Two new captains, names unknown. 44. The Jogbwenun. 
45. The Honjenun. 46. The Agbado. In the arrUre came the high mili- 
tary officers, preceded by their escorts, firing hard. i. The Gau, with an 
awful flag, a crimson man sprawling on a white ground, a blue and white 
flag, and smaller blue pennons, a black stool, and a pair of blackened and 
tattered vunbrellas. 2. The Matro, or second Gau, passing at a run, with 
two white umbrellas and i head and knife. 3. The Po-su, a white flag, 
with 2 pink and i buff umbrellas. 4. The Ahwig-bamen, or assistant Po-su, 
with his band playing and his men firing, i white flag with green beasts 
eating one another, and 2 tattered umbrellas, one of them head and knife. 

5. The Agbwi, with 2 white and i blue flags, and 2 white tattered umbrellas. 

6. The Allohan, another tattered umbrella. 7. The Ahvvesi, i plaid um- 
brella, and 4 white. 8. The Aovi, i white umbrella, and 8 flags preceding. 
TO {sic in first edition). Verj' tattered umbrellas, showing where the servants 
of the king were. 11. Fetisheers, with Bo-chio images. 12. The royal 
"place," with 9 flags, 2 huge stools, 2 red and blue shields, i head and 
knife umbrella, and another striped, with blue lined valances. Thus the 
total number of parties was 58. 



XVI. — Addo-kpons So-sin Customs, — Section F, 85 

more favourable time, I should see another review, and 
then passed, surrounded by his "Amazons," to the north 
of the Komasi Palace. We waited till the ground was 
clear, and retired — not unwillingly. 

The recreant ministers spent the night under sheds 
at the King's gate, being forbidden to enter their homes. 
The punishments of high officials are here very capricious. 
Dr. M*Leod mentions a chief magistrate being ordered by 
the King " not to shave his beard, pare his nails, or wash 
himself for a certain number of moons, and in this dirty 
state to sit daily at the palace-gate several hours for 
public inspection." This exile continued till 5 p.m. of 
the next day (January 9th), when royalty was induced to 
relent by a storm of thunder and rain, the latter falling in 
peculiar spurts like jets of heavy drops. Agbwejekon, 
however, the only caboceer who did his duty, was 
temporarily rewarded with precedence, and was publicly 
presented with a fine cloth, a wife, and ten heads of cowries. 
Next time the chiefs will not be outwitted : they will pass 
the whole night in the square. 

I will conclude this chapter with an account of the 
Dahoman campaign. The King marches in the midst of 
his host, surrounded by his Amazons. At the halt, a 
mat enclosure is made for him and them. The royal 
quarters, known by their superior size, are pitched far 
from the rest, and beyond danger of ambush. The males 
camp promiscuously in little huts. They move at all 
hours, generally by night, guided by captives kidnapped 
from the place about to be plundered ; these men are 
disguised, tied up, and led in the rear ; and after re- 
turning to the capital, they are released with presents. 
As may be imagined, not a few of them desert, to the 
great peril of the invader. A few soldiers in the garb 
of traders, with cloth and tobacco, precede and ac- 
company the force to attract stragglers, who are at 
once kidnapped. The army advances by circuitous ways, 



86 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome, 

cutting its own roads through the bush ; a favourite 
plan is to spread false reports about the intended direc- 
tion, and to double round upon a town which has 
heard that the foe has passed onwards. Great circum- 
spection is ordered when nearing the destination ; no 
talking is allowed, though the soldiers may snap fingers ; 
and even smoking is forbidden. The point of attack is 
secretly reconnoitered by a chosen spy during the day. 
They surround the fated place so cautiously, that it is 
often taken unawares ; and they assault, as usual amongst 
barbarians, before dawn, with a rush, uttering hellish 
cries and yells. The only village defences are prickly 
plants, and these the troops are trained to despise. Any 
one appearing is at once decapitated ^ ; when weapons are 
thrown down, the prisoners are tied up ; their arms, how- 
ever, are not pierced for cords, as asserted by the Egbas. 
As a rule, their object is to capture, not to kill ; only the 
old, the sick, and the ** unmerchantable " lose their heads, 
which serve as trophies. The chiefs are reserved for 
public sacrifice. When the town is broken, the conque rors 
raise in the centre a clay-heap, which is girt with dry 
palm-leaf ; the wretched fugitives may, after returning to 
their ruined homes, place some of this material upon their 
necks, and appear before the King, who then spares their 
lives. The army, even if victorious, hurries back, after 
losing for every loo prisoners some 200 of their own men 
by famine, fatigue, and privations, many of them self- 
inflicted. During ths whole campaign, even if it last six 
months, the warriors may not remove their tunics for 
ablution. The marching-food is scanty and poor enough 
to cause scurvy, and a single calabash of water must often 
suffice for three days. We cannot wonder that the host 
is decimated by disease, especially by small-pox. 

I Mr. Duncan, in more than one place (vol. i. pp. 233, 253. 261), 
declares that scalps are taken by the Dahomans. The custom appears 
to be now obsolete ; I did not find a trace of it. 



XVI, — AddO'kpon's So-sin Customs, — Section F, 87 

The present ruler has lately made a huge '* gong- 
gong,*' a main tube or cone crowned with thirty-nine small 
bells, denoting the number of towns which he has broken. 
But all these towns would doubtless fit into a middling- 
sized English village. It is amusing to hear the wild boasts 
of the captains ; one man has 40,000 followers, another 
thinks he has 16,000 — remove the last two or three ciphers, 
and the remainder may be correct. On the other hand, it 
is curious to consider the inconsequence of those attacked, 
who, as I have said, after deliberately insulting and pro- 
voking a quarrel with the King, will make no preparations 
for war ; in fact, will never think of the matter till they 
hear the death-cry at their doors, and they find them- 
selves hurried to Agbome*, where they will grace the next 
Customs. 

In a previous volume,^ I have described the warfare 
of the Egbas. It is pitiful enough, but that of the 
Dahomans is worse. There is nothing more contemptible 
than these negro slave-hunts : the ** mild Hindu," as the 
Field of Paniput and many others may prove, has shown 
himself by far a better soldier than the West African. 
Individually, the Dahoman dares not desert upon the 
march, but he ** malingers" readily, and he is so far from 
being brave that the idea of amputation makes him faint 
with fear. The decay of the old kingdom, and the de- 
terioration of blood, are not to be mistaken. 

I A Flying Visit to Abeokuta, chap. vii. 



88 



CHAPTER XVII. 



OF THE DAHOMAN RELIGION. 

I CANNOT but admire the incuriousness of so many 
travellers who have visited Dahome and have described 
its Customs without an attempt to master, or at least to 
explain, the faith that underlies them. Their excuses 
must be the difficulty presented by the incorporation of 
manifold elements, and the various obstacles to exploring 
a religion which every man, to a certain extent, makes 
up for himself. "Perhaps," said a Dahoman officer to 
Captain Snelgrave, the first European who visited his 
country (1627), "that God may be yours who has com- 
municated so many extraordinary things to white men ; 
but as that God has not been pleased to make himself 
known to us, we must be satisfied with this we worship"; 
and Captain Phillips truly remarks of the Whydah people, 
"In truth they have so many things they call fetishes 
that I could never understand the true meaning of the 
word." 

Fetishism, according to the older opinion, is, like the 
negro's personal conformation, a fall from the primitive 
inspired and spiritual belief of mankind. The researches 
of our modern day tend to establish the fact of a fossil 
ancestry of immeasurable inferiority to the present Hmno 
sapiens, the effect of a selection ever active throughout 
a course of ages. Consequently anthropologists will sub- 
stitute, even in the Hmite, a rise above instead of a fall 



kop: 



XVII.— Of the Dahomatt Religion. 89 

from the philosophic Adam : they will consider his super- 
stitions as the dawnings of belief struggling to attain the 
brightness of day, equally inferior in the moral or senti- 
mental qualities to the Asiatic, and to the European in 
the reflectives and the perceptives. 

Africans, as a rule, worship everything except the 
Creator, Yet there is, even amongst this people, a "sensiK 
"which raises them above the Andamanian "Min- 
kopi," the Australasian races, and the idiots or imperfect 
formations amongst the higher families, I will not 
lay to inquire whether the Yoruban deity, confused and 
[digested as the idea is, has not been greatly modified by 
th Al-Islam, or whether it was not derived 
:om Christians driven southwards during the Vandal 
■secutions. 

The Ffon name for the deity is Mau.' The Roman 
itholic missioners have preferred to call themselves 
Mau-no or Man-mother, as opposed to Vodun-no or fetish 
priest. On the other hand, Mau is the moon,* a distinct 
trace of Sabseanism ; as the feminine principle, it made 
man in conjunction with Lisa or Se, — a male, the fetish 
representative of the sun, of which more hereafter.' The 
Fanti or Wesleyan missionaries, who translate Mau as " all 
the gods," or "the unknown God,'" prefer Yewhe, or ji- 

1 So ihe popular saying, Azo ewadelo Ma.11 na dokpwenuwc (If 
you walk and work, Mau ihanks you, i.e., God is of the man who 

2 Lisa-ji (lisa, or sun-sky) is the east, because the sun comes out 
of it. Mau-ji is the west, because Ihe moon is supposed to begin 
there. Gbwe-ji (bush sky — also a fetish, which will be described) is 
the north, under which lies the interior forest. Hu-men (in the sea) 
is the south, for evident reasons. A small oriole, which soars like a 
sky-lark, and strikes its wing-feathers together with a noise like the 
locusts' flight, is called Avo-kan 'gbe-khe — the bird that weaves 
cloth (for Mau). 

3 S*. which has been translated God and Spirit, means rather 
the Ekra of the Gold Coast, also written Okra or Okla, 'kra or ^kla— 
one that has the Umbra, or ghost of another 



90 A Mission to Gelele^ King of Dahome. 

wule-ye-whe.* It is evident that, in the Dahoman mind, the 
numen has not had time to separate itself from material 
objects, or to vindicate its right to Latria as opposed to 
Dulia. 

This Mau, or Ye-whe, is the Esquimaux " Pirk- 
soma *' — ** he who is above " — an entity wholly unde- 
veloped, and, for the same reason, the imperfect intellect 
of both races. Being incomprehensible, the Supreme is 
judged too elevated to care for the low estate of man ; 
and consequently is neither feared nor loved. The senti- 
ment almost universal amongst negro races corresponds 
with the views of many thinkers in modern or in ancient 
Europe, who look upon the Deity as the Cause of Causes 
and the Source of Law, rather than as a local and per- 
sonal fact. It has, at least, saved the African from an- 
thropomorphism — a besetting peculiarity of the Aryan 
race, whose hostility to a pure theism lingers, even at the 
present time, in that Semitic faith which has become the 
creed of modern Europe. Thus, so easily do extremes 
meet, and such is the radical identity of creeds, the negro's 
Deity, if disassociated from physical objects, would al- 
most represent the idea of the philospher. 

It has been doubted whether, in the present state of 
human nature, a belief so abstract as Monotheism, asom- 
atous and non-local, is a sufficient proof for the weak- 
ness of mankind. As there is in man a besoin d'aimer, so 
his veneration requires, they say, a Creator, whose image 
he is. The Athanasian looks upon deism as atheism, 
and holds all but a personal god no god or a useless god. 
In England the mind of Milton found comfort in a Father, 
who, unable to forgive the disobedience of his creatures, 
accepted the agony of a sinless Son ; and he saw nothing 

I Meaning Ji (the sky), wule (glittering), ye (a shadow — any 
shadow), whe (the sun). The mulatto, the "tapoyer" of old trav- 
ellers, is called in Ffon Ye-whe-vi, or Ye-whe-child, because he has 
no fetish. He is thus opposed to Vodun-vi, fetish child. 



XVII, — Of tlie Dahoman Religion, 91 

irreverent in recording a divine dialogue of Arian and 
Calvinistic theology. Truly, says the Yoruban proverb, 
** The wisdom of this year will be as folly in another." 

The African — somewhat like the vulgar Asiatic and 
European, especially the southron — holds the illogical 
belief that his dark, silent, eternal Deity can be influenced 
by intercessions animate and inanimate, human and 
bestial ; that the leopard and the crocodile, like the wali 
(saint) and the prophet, and that the fetish shrub, like the 
Salagram, the Karbela clay, or the bit of True Cross, 
may, by some inexplicable process, control the inscrut- 
able course of mundane law. These articles, however, 
must not be confounded, as they often are by Europeans, 
with the Platonic inferior deities. In some points they 
preserve a family resemblance with the old Gebr faith. 
Thus the latter had, for instance, Izad as angel or fetish 
for the sun, Mohr for the moon, Awa for water, Gowad 
for air, Amardad for trees, and Bahman for cattle. 

In Africa the list of fetish or worshipped objects is 
nearly endless. Some powerful and indescribable influence 
residing in the elements, in beasts (mostly the destruc- 
tive), and even in man (generally human benefactors), 
enables them to work present weal and woe, and wins 
for them propitiation or deprecation. The tendency of 
humanity to worship Nature and her powers extends from 
Pliny ^ to the American savage. It recognizes as its 
temples, caverns, valleys, trees, and forests. The Yorubas, 
of whom it must be remembered the Dahomans are a 
family, have advanced from the adoration of the material 
object towards a personification of Nature's works, and 
these we consider idols or simulacres,^^ There is another 

1 (Lib. ii. chap, v.) Pliny, however, probably believed in the 
Archeus of Nature, its original and all -pervading principle. 

2 Ydoles, according to the old writers, were human or bestial 
forms. "Symulacres," or simileetes, are defined by Maundeville, as 
" y mages made of lewed wille of man," as two-headed or four-armed 
figures. 



92 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome. 

idea which in these lands often makes and breaks gods. 
A man about to undertake a danger or a difficulty looks 
about as, according to the same Pliny, the Romans did, 
for some supernatural aid. He takes the first object, be 
it bird or beast, stock or stone, seen in the morning when 
leaving his house, and he makes it his Genius. If it prove 
useful, worship and sacrifice are not wanting : on the other 
hand, a stronger "medicine" is sought. 

In the days of Bosman (1700) the little kingdom of 
Whydah adored three orders of gods, each presiding, like 
the several officers of a prince, over its peculiar province. 

The first is the Danh-gbwe, whose worship has been 
described.^ This earthly serpent is esteemed the supreme 
bliss and general good: it has 1000 Danh'si or snake 
wives, married and single votaries, and its influence can- 
not be meddled with by the two following, which are sub- 
ject to it. 

The second is represented by lofty and beautiful 
trees,^ " in the formation of which Dame Nature seems to 
have expressed her greatest art." They are prayed to 
and presented with offerings in times of sickness, and 
especially of fever. Those most revered are the Hun-'tin, 
or acanthaceous silk cotton (Bomhax)^ whose wives equal 
those of the snake, and the Loko, the well-known Edum, 
ordeal, or poison tree, of the West African coast. The 
latter numbers few Loko-'si, or Loko spouses: on the 
other hand, it has its own fetish pottery, which may be 
bought in every market. An inverted pipkin full of cul- 
lender holes is placed upon the ground at the tree foot, 
and by its side is a narrow-necked little pot into which 
the water offering is poured. The two are sometimes 
separated by a cresset-shaped fetish iron, planted in the 
earth. The cultus arborum, I need hardly say, is an old 
and far-spread worship: it may easily be understood, as 

1 Chap. iv. 

2 Atin, contracted to 'tin in Ffon, is any tree. 



XVII. — Of the DaJioman Religion, 93 

the expression of man's gratitude and admiration. The 
sacred trees of the Hindu were the Pippala {Ficus religiosa), 
the Kushtha (Costusspeciosus), the sacred juice of the Soma, 
which became a personage, and many others. The Jews, 
and after them the early Christians and the Moslems, had 
their Tuba or Tree of Paradise. Mr. Palgrave, travers- 
ing Arabia in 1862-63, found in the kingdom of Shomer 
or Hail distinct tree worship, the acacia (Talh) being 
danced round and prayed to for rain. In Egypt and other 
Moslem lands rags and cloths are suspended to branches, 
vestiges of ancient Paganism. North European mytho- 
logy embraced Yggdrasil, or the world tree. We no 
longer approach the gods with branches of this sacred 
vegetation in hand ; still the maypole and Christmas tree, 
the Yule log and the church decorations of evergreens, 
holly and palms, and the modern use of the sterility- 
curing mistletoe, descend directly from the treovve-ordung, 
or tree worship of ancient England. It is also curious 
that snake worship is generally connected with it : so in 
the North European system, Nidhoegg, the abyss -worm, 
lay coiled at the foot of Yggdrasil. 

The youngest brother of the triad is Hu, the ocean 
or sea. Formerly it was subject to chastisement, like the 
Hellespont, if idle or useless. The Hu-no, or ocean 
priest, is now considered the highest of all, a fetish king, 
at Whydah, where he has 500 wives. At stated times he 
repairs to the beach, begs ** Agbwe," the Samudra-devta 
or ocean god, not to be boisterous, and throws in rice and 
corn, oil and beans, doth, cowries, and other valuables. 
He doubtless knows the rule mentioned by Captain Phil- 
lips, that the weather is better during the wane of the 
moon than at its full and change. At times the King sends 
as an ocean sacrifice from Agbome a man carried in a 
hammock, with the dress, the stool, and the umbrella of 
a caboceer; a canoe takes him out to sea, where he is 
thrown to the sharks. The Custom for this element is 



94 ^ Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome. 

made at Whydah, in a place near the greater market, 
and called Hu-kpa-men. It is a round hut, with thatch 
and chalked walls; outside is a heap of bones, whilst 
skulls, carapaces of the tortoise, and similar materials, 
cumber the interior. The priest is a fetish woman, who 
offers water and Kola nuts to, and expects rum from, 
white visitors. 

These deities, originally of Whydah, have spread 
throughout Dahome, and men now forget their first 
habitat. We may add a fourth, ** So," or ** Khevioso,'*^ the 
thunder fetish, whose weapon, as amongst our classics 
unlearned in brontology, is here still supposed to be Abi, 
the lightning.'* This deity is worshipped at Whydah, in 
a So Agbajyi, or thunder closet. It has about looo wives 
throughout the country. When a man is killed by the 
electric fluid,® which renders sepulture, as amongst the 
Romans, unlawful, these women place the body upon a 
platform, and cut from it lumps, which they chew with- 
out eating, crying to passers by — **We sell you meat! — 
fine meat ! Come and buy ! " This is the nearest approach 
to cannibalism shown in Dahome. I saw nothing of the 
blood-drinker described by Mr. Duncan, who, when 
offered a draught mixed with rum, ** could, with a good 
heart, have sent a bullet through his head." 

In the following general list I have preserved no 

1 This word is peculiarly Whydah, whence I judge the Dahoman 

fetish to have been first adopted there from the Shango, or Jupiter 
Tonans of Yoruba. 

2 So we still say " thunderbolts." According to Barbot, on the 
Gold Coast (I have heard the same everywhere, from that place to 
Camaroons), " when it thunders they say the Deity — with reverence 
be it spoken — is diverting himself with his wives." The Anglo- 
African is, " Man for top, he play for bush." Others again say, 
" Great devil he talk angry." A common imprecation in Dahome is. 
So ye mi, " Thunder fall upon me if," &c., &c. 

3 The corpse of a free man can be ransomed f ten heads, that 
of a slave never. 



XVII. — Of the Dahoman Religion. 95 

other order than that dictated by my interpreters; the 
Dii servatores and compitales sospitatores and vialeSj are all 
mixed. 

1 . Afa, as has been said,^ is the messenger of fetishes 
and of deceased friends. Its fetisheer is here called Bu- 
ko-no, and by the Egbas, Babbalawo. The people say of 
him, **The priest who is most cunning takes to Afa," 
meaning that it pays best ; consequently, Buko-nos swarm 
throughout the land. When Afa predicts evil the votary 
must perform the catholicon — **Vo-sisa." Ground is 
cleared near the house or in the bush, a mat is then 
spread, and a short staff or thick peg is driven through 
the latter; the worshipper, with his fetishman, who taps 
a small cymbal with an iron rod, pours upon the wood 
first water and then the blood of a fowl, whose body 
becomes, of course, the holy man's perquisite. As has 
appeared in the previous pages, there are many different 
forms of vo-sisa. 

2. Bo, a huge Priapus built of clay, and placed in 
markets, at gates, and in rooms. He is the especial 
guardian of warriors, defending them from fire and sword ; 
and in his honour they are hung with cowries and horse- 
tails. The images called Bo-chio, the crutched stick, 
either planted in the ground at home or carried abroad, 
when travelling, and the Bo-so ** struppi," or bundles of 
truncheons painted and speckled, are sacred to this great 
fetish. 

3. Legba, also a Priapus and a Janus, whose appear- 
ance and worship have been described.^ 

4. Gun, or Gu, the iron fetish. It is the god Ogun 
of Abeokuta, where human sacrifices are offered to it. 
In Dahome it has not that honour. 

5. Hoho, the twin fetish,' that protects those excep- 

I Chap. xii. 2 Chap. iv. 

3 Hoho-no is the mother, Hoho-vi the children. The Dahomans 
do not kill Albinos (here known as "men-wewe" or white bodies), 



y6 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahoine. 

tionals. At Allada the birth was infamous, as men would 
not beUeve that a woman could have two children by one 
husband; at Agbome, where population is wanted, the 
mother is honoured. So at the mouth of the Benin River 
the parent and offspring are put to death, and in the city 
of Great Benin the King makes presents to the progeni- 
trix. Amongst the Fanti, the Attah is also respected, 
whereas in the Bonny River the twin -mother is called a 
**she goat," and is slain. The twin fetish has no wives, 
and its offerings of little pots and irons have been minutely 
described.^ 

6. Sapatan, or small pox, the Buku god of Abeokuta, 
and the Sitla Devi (small-pox goddess) of the Hindu.^ 

7. Takpwonun, the hippopotamus. 

8. Kpo, the leopard — a royal Fetish.^ 

9. Gbwe-ji, the great bush Fetish, which helps hunts- 
men and foresters. It is in the shape of a small snake, 
marked like a boa. 

10. Kpate, the first Whydah man who, sighting a ship 
from his plantation, brought it to anchor by waving a cloth 
tied to a long pole, and led the captain into the town. 
Like Triptolemus, he is worshipped as a benefactor to 
mankind. 

11. Kpase, the man who helped Kpate. 

12. Nate, the storekeeper of the sea, who is worshipped 
by fishermen, and by those who work by water. 

of whom I saw several in the capital : all were of the normal 
leucous type. 

1 Chap. X. 

2 In the Dahoman vocabulary by Commander Forbes our "small- 
pox" is translated Akpotin kpe-vi, and explained in a foot-note, "A 
poh tee peh vee ; literally, small a poh tee." But Akpotin, in the 
Whydah dialect is a box, not a pox — hence the mistake, which is but 
one in a thousand made in that vocabulary. 

3 In Dr. M'Leod's time it was confined to Dahome proper, " but 
they deem it the safest way of worship to perform their acts of 
devotion to his skin only, after death, which is stuffed for that 
purpose." 



XVII, — Of the Dahofnan Religion. 97 

13. Avrekete, a fetish which steals the keys from 
Nate and gives to man — hence he has some 500 wives. 

14. Aizan, one of the many street gods which protect 
the market and the gate. It is a large or small cone of 
clay, with a pipkin or a stone on the top or at the base. 
Upon these are poured the consecrated trash — flour, palm- 
oil, and boiled beans ; sometimes fowls are killed for it. 

15. Agasun, the old Makhi Fetish that ruled Agbome 
before Dako conquered it. It aided his enterprise, for 
which reason the Agasun-no, or head fetishman, is at the 
capital equivalent to the Hu-no of Whydah. Its emblem 
is not known. The abode of the great fetisheer, and the 
respect paid to him by the King and multitude, have been 
described.^ 

16. Li (pronounced with 35, the peculiar Sanskrit I) 
was a great fetish at Whydah, in charge of the town 
before it was conquered by Agaja. The place of worship 
is a little shed in the bush to the west of Savi. 

17^ Lisa, the fetish of Khwezioso, the sun. Its 
emblem is a red clay pot, with a cover of the same material, 
striped white ; on the top is a rude chameleon (agaman), 
that animal being the messenger of Lisa. It is placed 
upon a swish-heap and filled with water. Sometimes 
meat and other food are offered to it. 

18. Dohen, a Whydah fetish. It calls vessels and 
strangers to the English Fort when that building is empty, 
consequently it is worshipped there. Goats and fowls are 
sacrificed to it, and beans are especially offered up. 

19. Nesu, the proper Ffon fetish of Agbome, estab- 
lished by Agaja the Conqueror. It is worshipped in large 
sheds called Nesu-hwe, adjoining the various palaces. 
Its water pot is known as Bagwe, and when the fetish 
women, guarded by Amazons, pass in strings towards the 
wells, they are fetching the element for the mysterious 
rites of Nesu. 

I Chap. X. 
VOL. II. 7 



98 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome, 

20. Ajaruma, the protecting Fetish of white men at 
Whydah. He also is represented in the English Fort by 
a tree and a pot inside a room. 

21. Tokpodun, the crocodile, formerly worshipped at 
Allada and Savi, where Captain Phillips was not allowed 
to shoot it. All are now killed off. 

22. Zo, the fire Fetish. A pot is placed in a room and 
sacrifice is offered to it, that fire may **live'* there, and 
not go forth to destroy the house. The Zovodun has 
already been described.^ 

23. Aydo-whe-do — commonly called Danh, the Heav- 
enly Snake, which makes the Popo beads and confers 
wealth upon man — is the rainbow. Its emblem is, I have 
said, a coiled and horned snake of clay, in a pot or cala- 
bash. This utensil, duly whitewashed, is placed at the 
foot of a silk-cotton tree, or near hills of white ants, which 
are called Danh's houses. The Dahomans do not, as the 
French missionaries suppose, adore insects. 

Abeokuta has her lares,^ Benin boasts a profusion of 
domestic altars, which are here unknown. The Dahomans 
practise, however, like all Yorubans, the worship of their 
own heads, in order to obtain good fortune.* They do not, 
however, honour like the Egba traveller, their big toes.* 
The " head " worshipper, after providing a fowl, kola 
nuts, rum and water, bathes, dresses in pure white baft, 
and seats himself on a clean mat. An old woman with 
her medius finger-tip dipped in water, touches successively 
his forehead, poll, nape, and mid-breast — sometimes all 
his joints. She then breaks a kola into its natural divisions, 

1 Chap. iv. 

2 The images or teraphim of Laban and Micah (Gen. xxxi. 19, 
30 ; Judges xvii. 5). 

3 So the Jews swore by their heads. The ceremony is called in 
Ffon, E (he), wa (makes), ta (or ta-kun, the head), nun (thing). The 
Egbas call it the " Olori li ori," or Good Genius of Head. 

4 In Ffon, •• Afo-su " ; in Egba, " Ikpori." 

2—7 



XVII , — Of the Dahoman Religion, 99 

throws them down like dice, chooses a lucky piece, which 
she causes a bystander to chew, and with his saliva 
retouches the parts before alluded to. The fowl is then 
killed by pulling its body, the neck being held between the 
big and first toe; the same attotichements are performed 
with its head, and finally with the boiled and shredded 
flesh, before it is eaten. Meanwhile, rum and water are 
drunk by those present. A quaint superstition ! 

The fetisheer is all powerful in Dahome. The last 
monarch was notably desirous of modifying the horrors and 
the expenses of the national worship ; his son has been 
compelled to walk in the old path of blood. As has been 
said, the King dismounts at the Agasu-no's door, and 
prostrates to him ; besides which, he is guided in all his 
movements by his Buko-no. When a grandee passes the 
house of a common priest, the latter comes to the entrance, 
pronounces an allocution in the unintelligible hierarchic 
tongue, whilst an acolyte shrieks a response to his recita- 
tive, and both expect largesse. 

There are writers. Captain Adams for instance, who 
would treat all the ecclesiastical body in West Africa as 
mere impostors, which is much as if a Zulu, unable to 
master the subject of Christianity, were to accuse every 
European priest and parson of deliberate fraud. Fetish, 
moreover, is, throughout the dark continent, the strongest 
engine of government — a moral police — whose sudden 
removal would break up society.^ In Dahome it gains 
strength from the peculiar form of tyranny; wherever 
despotism exists it must rest upon a strong and popular 
faith, and it will find in its ministrants the most per- 
sistent and conservative allies, as they are the most 
interested in repelling relaxation of discipline. A notable 
case may be seen nearer home. The French Republic 

I So it has been popularly said of M. Renan's views, that an im- 
mense revolution, and one which Christians never desire to see, 
would immediately follow their general reception. 



loo A Mission to Gehle^ King of Dahofne, 

was satisfied with a latitudinarianism of the amplest. 
The Napoleonic empire must conciliate, if it cannot win 
over, the parti-prctre. But the polished despotism tempers 
the superstition and credulity of the ignorant many by the 
scepticism and the rationalism of the educated few. The 
barbarous tyranny admits only the thaumaturgic ex- 
treme. Amongst the turbulent Fanti there is consider- 
abh^ infidelity touching fetish and its priests ; the Daho- 
man must l>elieve and tremble. 

Thoolc"^cal studies are strict in this section of 
Y()rul>a , The peculiar fetish is chosen after a fit of ecstacy : 
abnorntal brain action is not imcommon amongst the 
no^ro races. Puring the fit the subject rushes, as one 
distracted, to tlio idol, and, after \'iolent exertions, sinks 
faint itig on the ground. When he recovers, the head- 
man informs him what fetish — the sea, for instance, or 
th«^ snako has come to him ; and that, he adopts for 
lifo. This ecstasy is the Hal (JU) of Arabia, the demon- 
iacal |H\ssession of the Pays of Ignorance, the " spirit of 
piophtvy" among>^t the Camisards or Shakers, the "spirit" 
in Metlunlisnu and the '* jerks" and ** holy laugh" of the 
Cinnp nuvtiuji* I hA\x^ not seen it in Dahome, but old 
tf^sidents have dosorilx\i it to me — ^all in almost identical 
tiMins, In many iv^nis it resembles our modem spirit- 
\i<Uism» which a late writer y'* From Matter to Spirit") 
pwM«MS to »» t\\ ujvn some cause, even if false, than upon 
thm<\^" 

Tht^ n<^^phYto is then removed from bis friends to 
tho totiNh vjuauoi ot the u^wn. There he learns the holy 

\ H\xM\|iU ^^^^vtv,v< tv^ s^W' nATTJ^. which imxilves a theory, it 
rt^^^>^s>^^ ^^ «^o At to; \v,v< •.:^<v,:;-> t." be ihe acdoc of an abooniial 
^\<\w y\\ \\w Us\\\. \x>,v>, -.vri.iors u. :.- at. ur.taown and as yet nn - 
iti'Uu^sl o\u*«t \\^V-j\vNv:\t xM :V r\»mAl «ir*«s^ It is less powerfm 
\\\ \\w »v.i\\Ku\»v ,M ;\r,\;^hA:v Kr*j:>:shTn*:: thas in the peo ptes o f 
\ y^\\\\\w\\\^\ Vo.iNN^v a;s\ ;s nv^s; rf«v«rkahie ir. the highly nerroos 



XVII. — Of the Dahoman Religion, loi 

fetish Jargon, which is uninteUigible to th^ uninitiated : 
the technical phraseology and the professional twang — in 
fact, what John Foster calls ** the vulgar of religious 
authorship " — are the only traces of this enlightened pro- 
cess still lingering in England. The course, which ex- 
tends through two or three years, ends with the songs, 
the dances, and the multifarious ceremonies of the 
religious calling. The relatives then ransom the acolyte, 
by paying sundry heads of cowries and clothes, goats, 
and fowls to the principal ; and the youth, gaudily dressed, 
is escorted home, where, for three months, he will not 
make himself understood. At Agbome there is an 
ordination. The aspirant is taken before the King, who 
invests him in a new cloth, changes his name,* and ad- 
dresses him touching his future duties. 

Many fetisheers retain their secular callings. Those 
who have the **cure of souls" receive no regular pay, but 
live well upon the benevolences of votaries who desire 
health or wealth, issue, and length of days, to detect a 
wizard or to destroy a foe. Formerly they had as many 
fueros as a Mexican ecclesiastic, and were not liable to 
capital penalties. It was found advisable to alter the 
system, and to punish them under a legal fiction : whilst 
the fetish is ** upon " the criminal, he is safe ; when the 
fit has passed off, he is put to death. 

Still, these fetisheers have many privileges. Both 
sexes, for instance, may wear dresses forbidden to the 
commonalty, and personal vanity in Africa emphatically 
knows no sore. The men shave half their heads or con- 
fine the hair in white calico : many also carry a chauri, or 
fly-flap, of horse or cow tail. Their costume is arbitrary, 

I There are in Dahome no hereditary or heraldic surnames and 
sire-names like those of Europe. All are personal and significant ; 
they are mostly given by the King, who often renews them. So in 
2 Kings, xxiii. 34, Pharaoh-nechoh turned the name of Eliakim, son 
of Josiah, to Jehoiakim. And lately, Napoleon I. made all his vassal 
brethren assume his first as the dynastic name. 



I02 A Mission to Gelele, King of DaJiome, 

parts of it having been borrowed, apparently, from the 
Portuguese priests at Whydah. The women, especially 
the wives of the small-pox god, are also "half-heads": 
some decorate their hair with bunches of small East 
Indian cowries, beads, or bright flowers, others with the 
feathers of little red birds planted upright, so as to make 
them resemble horned owls ; whilst others wear the Ta- 
bla, or broad-brimmed steeple-hats, with tall thin crowns, 
before described. There are many other coiffures — caps 
adorned, like the hair, with shells and bouquets, fillets, and 
so forth. They cover the bosom with kerchiefs ; and 
gaudy-coloured cloths, extending to their feet, are girt 
round the waist, where the stuff turns over with a fall or 
narrow flap. Both sexes, especially the Mau, or moon 
fetish women, prefer, as ornaments, long strings of 
cowries doubled back to back, with a single black seed* 
separating the pairs. These are passed, baldric-like, 
over the shoulder, and hang down by the side. I have 
alluded to their other implements in the course of these 
pages. 

About a quarter of the female population in Dahome 
may be fetisheeresses, and girls are married to the fetish 
before their birth. These Vodun-vi^ are trained like the 
men, and though but slaves, are greatly respected by the 
laity. How the sea-marriages and others are conducted, 
no one knows ; scandals are, of course, rife, but who can 
substantiate them ? The husband may not chastise or 
interfere with his wife whilst the fetish is " upon " her, 
and even at other times the use of the rod might be 
dangerous.* During the Customs these women pass the 

1 It is called Attikun, and is said to be produced by a tall tree 
growing at a distance from Agbome. 

2 Vodun (fetish), vi (a child). The name is especially applied to 
children claimed by a fetish. 

3 The old travellers inform us, that in their days these ladies 
used to lord it over their lords to such an extent, that to espouse a 
sanctified woman was like marrying an heiress in civilized lands. 



XV I L — Of the Dahoman Religion, 103 

forenoon in begging cowries : about four p.m. they don 
their clerical habits at the fetish house, march in Indian 
file to the squares, where the public dances are performed, 
and so excite themselves by music and violent exercise 
that ecstatic fits are often induced. When the fete is 
over, they re-assume the laical garb and return home. 

The most peculiar, and perhaps the least noticed, 
tenet of Dahoman religion is the ** continuance theory," 
which was apparently raised to a doctrine by the sons of 
Misraim, and which the great Lawgiver of Israel almost 
expelled from his system. Of the Egyptians it was said 
that they lived in Hades rather than on the banks of the 
Nile : the Dahomans call this world their ** plantation," 
and the next their ** home." I am unable to decide 
whether it is a spontaneous idea, or whether it immigrated 
in olden times, as all Africa's poor arts and arms show a 
once general intercourse, from that neutral region between 
the Semite and Hamite. We trace it throughout pagan 
Yoruba and the Gold Coast, and it shows no signs of a 
Christian or Moslem origin. It is essentially prosaic, 
as among the vulgar of Europe. Former travellers 
vaguely allude to a rude notion of futurity in the native 
mind : perhaps the idea has since grown ; possibly, the 
observer failed to break through native secretiveness. 

Ku-to-men, or Deadland,^ is the place which receives 
the "nidon," or ghostly part of man proceeding from him 

I Ku (dead), to (land), men (in, here pleonastic). It is the 
•• Samanmadi " of the Fanti, and the " Ipo-oku " of the Egbas. Mr. 
Duncan (vol. i. p. 116), mentions a Custom held on April 11, 1845, 
•* to ensure to the spirits of departed friends a safe and easy passage 
across the great waters westward. They mean the river Votta 
(Volta). If this custom were not kept up, they believe the spirits 
would wander on the banks for the space of 100 years, before they 
would have performed sufl&cient penance for their friends* neglect." 
But this is a mixture of European classical belief and the creed of 
the Gold Coast, especially of the Ga, or Accra race, whose ghosts 
dwell beyond the Volta. 



I04 A Mission to Gelele, King of Da home, 

after death. This "next world" offers none of those re- 
wards and punishment by which, according to the Semitic 
animist, the balance of good and evil in this life is to 
be struck. He who escapes punishment here, is safe here- 
after ; there the earthly king is a king, the slave a slave 
for ever and ever ; the hunter and warrior shall continue 
their favourite pursuits, and all will busy themselves with 
the affairs of the living. When sunshine accompanies 
rain, the people say that the ghosts are going to market, 
and with us the devil beats his wife. It is impossible to 
determine whether the departed are looked upon in the 
light of our spirits, souls, ghosts, or pale shades wander- 
ing by the gloomy river : they are probably nothing but 
the embodiment of the animal horror of death. Conse- 
quently, Satan and other Semitic machinery are absolutely 
unknown. Ku-to-men is, in fact, a Swedenborgian repro- 
duction of this world, and it is placed under the earth. 
Of course it has been visited as often as St. Patrick's 
** purgatory." Many men, falling ill, believe themselves 
to be summoned by some ancestral ghost : they repair to 
certain priests — mostly those of the small-pox, the iron, 
the poison-tree, and the rainbow gods — not those of the 
snake or the sea — and pay a dollar fee for the holy man 
to descend and deliver their excuses. The fetisheer covers 
himself with a cloth, and, after his trance, reports how, 
down among the dead men, he found the shades eating, 
drinking, and making merry. He will even bring back 
from Hades rare beads known to have been buried with 
a certain corpse ; and sometimes he must pawn his clothes 
to obtain a specimen or a counterfeit. One of these 
worthies on the Gold Coast, after returning with a declar- 
ation that he had left a marked coin in Deadland, dropped 
it from his waist-cloth at the feet of the payer whilst 
drinking rum. But populus vtdt decipi. Some fetisheers, 
exactly like our mediums, pretend to summon the ghosts. 
On the other hand, the departed often returns to earth in 



XVII, — Of the Dahoman Religion, 105 

the body of a child, and yet remains in Deadland — an 
idea which some travellers have confounded with metem- 
psychosis. Curious to relate, the Dahomans have a mor- 
bid fear of losing life : death is never mentioned in the 
King's presence except by some euphuism, as " the tree 
has fallen." As a rule, the more precise the knowledge of 
and the belief in a future world, the less value do the 
believers attach to present existence. 

With so many priests the people must have numerous 
ceremonies. The child's name is given on the eighth day 
after the Buko-no has pronounced what ancestor has sent 
it. The Genesitic precept (xvii. 10), here called Adda- 
gbwibo, is not confined to the priestly practitioner. At 
Whydah it is effected between the twelfth and sixteenth 
year ; at Agbome it is deferred till the twentieth : conse- 
quently, many fall ill after it, and some die. The roughly- 
performed operation is rendered peculiar by a double cut 
above and below: it is rather in the Moslem than in the 
Jewish fashion, but it is doubtless indigenous, as amongst 
many tribes of Central Africa. Hot sand is applied as a 
styptic to the wound ; the patient is dieted with ginger 
soup and warm drinks of ginger water, pork being especi- 
ally forbidden to him. The sister operation, excision, 
wonderful to say, is entirely unknown ; the reverse being 
so much the custom, that a woman in the natural state is 
derided by others. The artiste is some ancient sage femtne, 
and the effect is an exaggeration of that which particular- 
ized the Hottentot Venus dissected by Cuvier. 

The Dahoman marriage is somewhat complicated. 
The aspirant sends to his intended father-in-law's house a 
man and a woman with two double flasks of rum. These 
Mercuries open the affair, after many preliminaries, by 
saying, "Our uncle wishes to wed one of your girls." 
The parent inquires and learns the suitor's name, after 
which the proxies retire. If Afa return a favourable 
reply, the family is informed of the coming event, and the 



jtmm 



1 06 A Mission to Gelele^ King of Dahonie. 

empty flasks are sent back, to signify consent and to grant 
affiance. This honour is acknowledged by two other and 
full flasks; at the same time two heads of cowries and 
two cottons for his fiancee being forwarded by Coelebs. 
He then collects as much cloth as hecan,^ and this task 
may occupy three years, during which he is expected to 
perform all Customs which the girl may have omitted, 
such as sacrifice for her grandmother and other relatives. 

On the ** happy day'* — which is always Sunday — 
three messengers with flasks of rum are sent by the bride- 
groom at morning, noon, and sunset, to beg their daughter 
from her parents. A large cortege brings the bride to her 
future home. The father and mother are seated upon 
chairs, and ensues a general feast and carouse, as many 
goats and pigs as possible being cooked; the banquet 
begins and ends with water and then rum. 

After midnight the bridegroom retires to his sleeping 
chamber, and sits on his couch. Three or four fetish- 
women, holding the girl's wrists, lead her in and place 
her two hands in his, saying, ** Take your wife, we give 
her to you ; flog her if she is bad, and feed and clothe 
her well if she pleases you." They then drink water, 
rum, gin, and liqueurs with the new couple ; and at three 
or four A.M. retire, leaving them to become haron dind feme. 

The Dahomans are not behind the people of Europe 
in attaching an extravagant value to the primitia. Ac- 
cording to Mosaic custom, the bridegroom at once bears 
rejoicing to his people the piece of grey or white baft 
which covers the nuptial couch. On the bride's side, a 
young girl, left purposely in the house when the parents 
and friends have retired, runs off" with the discoloured 
" languti," or T-bandage, here universally worn. Great 
rejoicings follow the demonstration that the daughter has 
proved herself an illihata virgo. Should the other thing 

I The price of a wife, " young and uncorrupted," in Virginia, 
about 1620, was 100 lbs. of tobacco, each pound worth three shillings. 



XV I L — Of the Dahoman Religion, 107 

happen, some men send home their brides in wrath,^ and 
demand back their property of the father, who seeks out 
the author of his family disgrace and compels him to pay 
substantial damages. 

If all has passed off well, the husband, early on Mon- 
day morning, carries cowries and rum as presents to the 
parents of his spouse. The bride, after a week's cohabi- 
tation, returns to her old home. On the first Saturday 
she cooks food, and sends it to her master, who on the 
•next morning returns a gift of cloth, and from ten to forty 
heads of cowries : dollars, however, are not refused. On 
the same evening the bride returns permanently to her 
abode, and on Monday morning she visits the market and 
buys liquor and provisions as a final feast for her hus- 
band's family. When the short period, corresponding 
with our honeymoon, has elapsed, she joins the rest of 
the wives in the field or the plantation, and subsides into 
a quasi-servile position. The vile trick of alluring the 
unwary into crim, con.f is as well understood at Agbome 
as at Abeokuta. 

The barren woman is called, in Ffon, ** wen-si-no " ; 
the Dahoman, however, does not, like the Egba, attribute 
her misfortune to bad health, nor is the word insulting, 
as it generally is in Asia and Africa. As usual, through- 
out savage Africa, osculation is unknown, even by name, 
and an offer to ** salute " on the part of a white man is 
attributed to a display of his cannibal propensities. 

Curious to say, there is in barbarous Dahome a 
coroner's inquest after every death. The kings, who here 
monopolize murder, hearing that many masters killed 
their slaves, established in all the towns " Gevi," or 
officers charged with controlling the abuse. When a 
death is reported they must inspect the body ; and their 
fee for certifying a natural death is a head and a half of 
cowries. Then begins the chio-nun, or " corpse time or 

I The Jews were more ferocious (Deut. xxii. 21). 



io8 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahonte. 

mourning," during which the weeping relatives must fast, 
and refrain from bathing, but not from singing and dram- 
drinking. The body is shaved, washed, and habited in 
its best attire, with bracelets, necklaces, and other orna- 
ments, not forgetting a piece of cloth as a change of 
raiment when arriving in Deadland. A coffin is made of 
bamboo, or of native or foreign wood ; its huge size 
denotes, as in the Congo regions, a caboceer. The body 
is disposed on one side, as if sleeping. 

Except under peculiar circumstances,^ the corpse, as- 
usual in Guinea from the Kru country to the south 
coast, is interred, either in its own house or in the abode 
of certain ancestors. An oblong grave is dug for the 
coffin : the paupers, who are buried wrapped up in palm 
matting, are placed, as among the Moslems, in a niche 
offsetting from a circular pit. The body is lowered with 
ropes, earth is filled in, and the ground is smoothened 
with water. After mourning nine days, the men and 
women relatives and friends visit the wives and family of 
the deceased, join in the myriology, and dash to them 
cowries and cloths to decorate the last home. 

** Here bring the last sad gifts — with these 
The last lament be said ; 
Let all that pleased, and still may please 
Be buried with the dead." 
When a human sacrifice is made the head is placed upon 
the grave, and the body is interred alongside of the corpse 
so honoured. Usually they plant over the dead an Asen, 
or short cresset -shaped iron, upon whose flat top water 
or blood, as a drink for the deceased, is poured. When 
a Dahoman is interred abroad, a little earth from his 
tomb is brought home.^ 

1 As royal blood must not be shed, Tegbwesun (Bossa Ahadi) 
threw his brother Zingah into the sea ofif Whydah. 

2 Amongst the Egbas and various tribes of the Congo family 
(Douville, Voyage au Congo, vol. i. chap. 13), various small parts of 
the body are brought home to be reinterred. 



XVI L — Of the Dahoman Religion, 109 

At Whydah missionary enterprise is still yoxing ; it 
is therefore not to be judged as if it had enjoyed a fair 
trial. But all who know how deeply rooted is fetishism 
in the negro brain, will despair of the nineteenth succeed- 
ing better than the sixteenth century. In our modern 
day the good work has begun here with the curse of 
sectarian theology upon it : Catholics and Protestants 
working against one another in the same field. I leave 
Messrs. Wallon and Dawson to speak each for the suc- 
cess of his own ** doxy," and for the probable failure of 
the others : — 

M. Wallon. Mr. Dawson. 

" Des banni^res, des tableaux "Fetish has been strength- 

pieux, des images, des m6dailles ened by the white* man, whom 

distribu6es comme grisgris, de- the ignorant blacks would not 

viendraient f6tiches pour eux scruple to call a god if he could 

et les disposeraient k connaitre avoid death.^ Gezo told me 

les signes qu'ils doivent res- that, hearing the white man's 

pecter. Avec leur tendance a god was at the beach, he was 

nous consid6rer comme r6elle- surprised, thinking that he 

ment sup6rieurs a eux et leur lived above, but ordered the 

croyance que cette sup6riorit6 Yevo-gan to bring him on 

nous est acquise par celle de shore. When this was done, 

notre Dieu, ils renonceraient the people found * gods many,' 

bient6t aux leurs pour adorer like their own, the work of 

celui que nous leur prions de men's hands, only better made, 

connaitre! Les femmes et les and brought them, with firing 

vieillards seraient Ik comme and drumming, to a house 

partout les plus difficiles k built for them in the town, 

vaincre; mais on s'emparerait The King had now not only 

ais6ment de I'esprit des enfans his own but the white man's 

dans un pays qui de lui-m6me gods, and thus he easily pre- 

I This is good testimony upon a point which only interest or the 
veriest ignorance would dispute. Almost every West Arican tongue 
testifies that the speakers consider white men supernatural beings on 
account of their vast superiority, in all the arts of Ufe, to these poor 
pagans. The Krumen call Europeans Ku-be, or the ghost-tribe ; the 
Efik tribe of Old Calabar, Mbum Ekpo, or spirit men, and the 
Mpongwe of the Gaboon River, M'buiri or ghost, and so on. 



no 



A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome. 



a une v6ritable disposition k la vailed over the Oyos, whom 

civilisation." his father could not drive out. 

All of which is contradicted Were not these grounds strong 

by actual experiment. to compel the African's mind 

to a complete reliance on the 
efficacy of his fetish ? " 

Much of which has been 
proved to be true by the "in- 
exorable logic of facts.*' 

I cannot better conclude this chapter than with the 
words of an old traveller : ** It is morally impossible by 
mere human ministry to convince the people of their 
errors and gross paganism, as it is to convert all other 
blacks, unless Providence would effect a prodigious 
change in their natures by its infinite irresistible grace." 



Ill 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

THE SIN-KWAIN,^ OR WATER-SPRINKLING CUSTOM. 

This ceremony follows closely upon the So-sin, or 
Horse-tie rites. All the Dahoman kings are interred, I 
have said, in the palace of Agbome, where their graves 
are in different buildings. The King, however, must 
repair to the several abodes of his ancestors in the order 
of their succession, and he usually sleeps five to eight 
nights in each house. The ghosts of the old kings 
are induced to lend their aid in present wars by their 
tombs being sprinkled with water ; which in Dahome 
means, of course, blood, and that blood, human. 

On January 9th, 1863, the King, after " giving water 
to his father" in the Komasi Palace, passed about night- 
fall with loud singing, drumming, and firing, to the gate 
of Aho, in the Agbome House. This monarch, the Ada- 
hoonzou I. of our histories, is the second of the list, being 
the son of Dako (Tacoodonou), the Romulus of Dahome. 
Yet he is preferred before his sire in all rites and cere- 
monies, Dako being looked upon as a mere captain, Aho 
as the founder of the capital, and the originator of the 
gong-gong beaters, or heralds. There is a legend that 
he made during his father's life a public assertion of royal 

I Sin (water), kwain (sprinkling). This is generally called giving 
water to the spirits of ancestors, and Commander Forbes writes the 
word, See-que-'ah-hee (passim). 



112 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome, 

dignity, by committing the offence which Ahitophel pre- 
scribed to Absolom.^ 

On the present occasion the King was hurried ; 
during this moon of the last year he had set out on his 
campaign ; he therefore passed, after the second day, to 
the old Dahoman palace, where the same pious rites were 
performed for Dako (Tacoodonou), and Akaba (Wee- 
baigah), the third king. Wishing to see the ceremony, 
which is not usually shown to strangers, I spoke to the 
Buko-no, who sent a message to summon us at 2 p.m. 
We were accompanied by Mr. Dawson, the ex-missionary. 
Having once been detained eighty-five days at Agbome 
by the present King, who is worse than his father,^ he 
had sent so many excuses to the royal invitation, which 
here are commands, that all expected to see him brought 
up by force. Setting out from the north-western corner 
of the Agbome Palace, along the broad road which sur- 
rounds it, we met at that hot hour few of the bell- ringing 
she-slaves that usually infest the thoroughfare. It led us 
to the north side of the royal enceinte, which is upwards 
of a geographical mile in circumference ; here a rough 
fence of palm-mats and a humble entrance denoted the 
place where a clay wall and a barn gate would be built, 
and called after Zoindi, the King's mother. After passing 
another mean entrance, we came to that of Senunme, 
mother of Agongoro, the usual sloping shed backed by 
the swish wall, which here became continuous. A few 
paces beyond it was the Porte of Agontim6, mother of 
Gezo, distinguished by a perpendicular line of ten skulls 
set in the outer face of the wall, and four horizontally 
disposed in its depth at right angles to the door, to which 

1 Josephus (lib. 7, chap. 10). 

2 The captivity of a visitor at Agbome is complete. Europeans 
usually begin to talk of leaving on the day of their arrival at the 
capital, or the people will be persuaded that the whites desire to 
remain. 



XVII L — The Water -sprinkling Custom. 113 

a single cranium was nailed. This gate opens to the 
north-west, upon a cleared space, with fine sward, dotted 
with thick-shaded trees ; on both sides of the entrance 
are figs, and beyond this " Green Park " rises a clump of 
dirty mat huts — the Ajyahi market. Here, on alternate 
years, the Human Sacrifices of the Platforms are per- 
formed by the King, who throws to his subjects cloths 
and cowries, captives and criminals. Two stages are 
erected for this tragedy, one, the Akhosu Atto, or King's 
Platform, due north of the gate ; the other Addo-kpon, or 
the Bush King's stage, rises a little to the west of where 
the market sheds now stand, clustering round a gigantic 
and obscene clay image of the Bo-god. At the north- 
eastern extremity of the green stands a national trophy, 
a large heap of granite stones, brought, one by each 
soldier, from the hill fort of Kenglo,^ when "Ho-ho" — 
Mr. Duncan — was insulted, and which Gezo, his host, 
razed to the ground. Further lies Abiji, the Potter's 
Field of Dahome, where thick smoke may often be seen 
in the morning. 

Beyond the Ajyahi market, the Green Park, and the 
Potteries, are two gates, bearing the name of Chai, mother 
of Tegbwesun (Bossa Ahadi), and near it a small entrance 
where pots made in the palace are exposed for sale. 
Ceramics are here in the same condition as Palissy found 
them three centuries ago throughout Europe. The 
material, clay, glittering with mica, is brought by women 
from a neigbouring water called Diddo, and is hand-made ; 
the wheel, as usual in Africa, is unknown to the skilful 
Zen-men-to,^ who are not, however, confined to the palace. 
The smaller fictile wares fetch seven to fifteen strings, 
the larger water -jars half a head, or one shilling each, 
and the price rises high at Whydah. They are under- 

I Or Kengro, the Koglo of Mr. Duncan (vol. ii. chap. 3). Ho- 
ho means a tall man. 

. 2 Zen (pot), men (person, or making ?), to (one that does). 
VOL. II. 8 



114 -^ Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome, 

baked, and of unequal thickness, therefore of extreme 
fragility, and the roads are strewed with their debris. 

Near the palace-potteries houses crowd upon the 
outside wall, which has another gate ; from this the royal 
women go forth to fetch wood and water : it is also pro- 
vided with two exterior sheds, under which men shelter 
themselves when waiting. The seventh entrance has a 
large barn, called after Ahwanjile, mother of Sinmenkpen 
(Adahoonzou II.), and beyond it at the north-eastern 
corner of the enceinte is that of Addono, mother of Agaja 
the Conqueror, fronted by a fetish shed, resting upon two 
mud columns, chequered with whitewash and grey-black. 

Here we turned off to the left,^ where a very torn 
and tattered swish wall showed us that we were at the 
Dahome Palace, the cradle of the royal family. Opposite 
the entrance was a small open space, and behind us on 
to the south was the palace of the Min-gan, who, like the 
Meu, has the charge of victims and state prisoners. 
From where our chairs were placed, little was to be seen, 
— two humble thatch roofs, and a pair of silver or plated 
imitations of birds, peering above the old enceinte ; sounds 
were heard inside, and at times we were passed by men 
beating together solid bars of iron and blowing through 
the four-holed flageolets, here called Pwete.* After send- 

1 Passing Addono' s Gate to the right we find a deep angle in the 
palace wall, where water is poured out to King Aho (Adahoonzou I.), 
at an entrance called Patin sa, " near the Patin-tree." Beyond it an 
avenue of pollarded trees, leading to nothing, encloses a long and 
large ridge, such as were turned up by the hoe in the good old times : 
it is still kept as a model. Further eastward, and going under the 
usual "Vo" gallows with a central mat, we come to the Han-ho- 
nukun-ji Gate, where Agaja the Conqueror's palace begins. The 
next building of any importance in the enceinte is the Agrigomen 
Gate, which, like the whole of the southern and south-western side, 
has been described in chap. x. 

2 The word is a corruption of the Fanti "keti." It is an artless 
reed, open at both ends, with a little notch in the mouth-piece, 
which is scraped thin to divide the wind. Mr. Dalzel remarks (In- 

2—8 



XVIII, — The Water-sprinkling Custom, 



115 



ing in vain sundry messages to the King, we became 
wearied of the siance, and returned home to make a serious 
** palaver " with the ** landlord." His excuse was that 
the sovereign had been pronouncing a long speech, which 
could not be interrupted. I imagine that Gelele does not 
wish strangers to see the nakedness of his old palaces, or 
the thinness of the company in them assembled. Perhaps 
the presence of the victims may have something to do 
with the exclusiveness. 

The following is an account of the ** Water-sprink- 
ling *' rites, given to me by an eye-witness. The victims 
on each occasion are said not to exceed two, and I have 
heard of the King judging one hundred and sixty, and 
dismissing all without capital punishment. The tomb is 
approached with animals of all sorts, from a bullock to a 
pigeon, with water, rum, kola nuts, and many minor 
things. Whilst the ministers and captains are, like the 
King, on all fours, the Dahoman form of kneeling, before 
the tomb, a Tansi-no priestess, of blood-royal, offers up 
to the Ghost a prayer for its living descendant's long life 
and prosperity, and all of the ancestral shades are invoked 
at each palace. She then pours water and rum upon the 
grave, which is afterwards sprinkled with the blood of men 
and beasts, then and there killed. The non-human meat 

troduction, p. 11) that " the King's women understand and practise 
the combination of the perfect concords, thirds and fifths," and that 
their little airs, played upon the flute and other instruments, are not 
inelegant. Dr. Bowditch describes "the soft breathings of the 
long flutes" at Ashante as being "truly melodious." Dr. M'Leod 
(p. 96) finds the flageolets of Dahome very sweet, and in the next page 
gives the following sample of an air : — 



f^li i IfiN-fmrJ-'i \I7TnT\ 




ii6 A Mission to Gclcle, King of Dahome, 

is finally dressed, and a "tavo," or table, is "spread," 
the stool of the deceased being placed upon it as an 
emblem of his presence, and meat and drink are strewed 
upon the mats around it. This part ends with a general 
distribution of the provisions — the royal portions being 
sent inside the palace. Mr. Bernasko described the 
ceremony, which he was permitted to see, as follows : An 
enclosure of cloth surrounded the stool, or some similar 
relic of the departed ; a Tansi-no woman entered within 
it and prayed ; and lastly, the King, after performing his 
orisons, sprinkled on the ground, to the right of the 
throne, rum, water, and native beer. It is said by some 
that the monarch drinks a glass of blood at the Dahome 
Palace, but this sensational report is highly improbable. 
On January 14th, Gelele proceeded to the Agrin-go- 
men House, and watered the grave of the great Agaja 
Dosu, who received a pair of victims. The next day 
saw him at the palace of the King Tegbwesun (Bossa 
Ahadi), outside the western walls of Agbome, in a place 
called Adan-do-'kpo-ji Daho.^ He then removed to the 
Lisehunzo^ or House of Sinmenkpen (Adahoonzou H.), 
which lies north of its neighbour, and separated by fields 
which abound in partridges. Both are approached by a 
poor gate in the city enceinte, called Sikpo. During the 
firing which accompanied these pilgrimages, several acci- 
dents occurred. On the evening of the i6th, the King 
returned to Bwe-kon, a kind of village, near the Komasi 
Palace, where there is a Kwe-gbo, or old and bush-grown 
enceinte, belonging to Agongoro (Wheenoohew), his grand- 
father. About midnight a servant of the Matro, whose left 
hand had been shattered by the bursting of the musket, 
awoke us with loud and piteous cries of Ye-e-e-g6*! 

1 Meaning Adan (brave), do (live), 'kpo (high place), ji (he stops 
or lives). Daho is great. Some call it Adan-do-'kpo-ji Khe-sa, from 
khe (a kind of tree), and sa (under). 

2 Lise (a tree before described), and hun-zo, a kind of fetish. 
S In Fanti. Mewo ! or megya ! — " My father I " 



X VIII . — The Watey-spnnkling Custom . 117 

Dr. Haran had treated an Amazon for the same accident, 
and Mr. Cruikshank had excised a tumour from the fore- 
head of another soldieress ; neither of these had uttered 
a groan. The King showed as much anxiety for the man's 
hurt as if he had been a caboceer. The wrist bones being 
shattered, and the thumb hanging by a strip of flesh, 
Mr. Cruikshank proposed an amputation. Having ascer- 
tained that we had no chloroform, and determined that 
without such medicine so terrible an operation could never 
be endured by man, the King refused his consent, and the 
Buko-no removed the thumb and dressed the wound after 
his own fashion. This piece of conservative surgery was 
by no means successful, the man dying, probably of sup- 
puration, a few days afterwards. Finally, on January 
19th, the King returned with great noise and tumult to 
his father's palace of Komasi; and so ended the ** water- 
sprinkling" custom of 1864. 

At the risk of repetition, I must again refer to a 
curious fixed idea in England, absonant withal, touching 
human sacrifice at Dahome. It is no mere lust of blood 
nor delight in torture and death that underlies the rite in 
these lands. The King has to perform a disagreeable 
task over his ancestral graves, and he does it ; his sub- 
jects would deem it impious were he to curtail or to omit 
the performance, and suddenly to suppress it would be 
as if a European monarch were forcibly to abolish prayers 
for the dead. 



ii8 



CHAPTER XIX. 

OF ** THE negro's PLACE IN NATURE. 



>j 



" Vices the most notorious seem to be the portion of this unhappy 
race — idleness, treachery, revenge, cruelty, impudence, stealing, 
lying, profanity, debauchery, and intemperance, are said to have 
extinguished the principles of natural law and to have silenced the 
reproofs of conscience. They are strangers to every sentiment of 
compassion, and are an awful example of the corruption of man 
when left to himself." — Encyclopedia Britannica. Art. "Negro" 

(1797)- 

"TO THE FOUNDER OF THE ANTHROPOLOGICAL 

SOCIETY OF LONDON, 

"JAMES HUNT, Esq.. Ph.D., F.S.A., etc., etc., etc. 

** My dear Hunt, 

**I have read with pleasure and profit your 
able and courageous paper on the * Negro's Place in 
Nature.' It shows the reason why, at the last meeting 
of the British Association, you were received with those 
encouraging sounds, which suggested a mob of Eve's 
tempters rather than a scientific assembly of her descend- 
ants. Truth — especially new Truth — will ever meet with 
some such left-handed compliment, which is, however, the 
sincerest homage. Those hisses would have sounded in 
my ears far sweeter than any cheers. In the case of 
your able supporter, my friend Mr. C. Carter Blake, I can 
only hope that he shared in your honours. 

** Like other students of anthropology, I am truly 
grateful to you for having so graphically shown the great 



XIX. — Of *^The Negro's Place in Nature.'' 119 

gulf, moral and physical, separating the black from the 
white races of men, and for having placed in so striking a 
light the physiological cause of the difference — namely, 
the arrested physical development of the negro. There is 
hardly a traveller, however unobservant, who has not 
remarked the peculiar and precocious intelligence of the 
African's childhood, his * turning stupid,' as the general 
phrase is, about the age of puberty, and the rapid declen- 
sion of his mental powers in old age — a process reminding 
us of the simiad. It is pleasant to see anatomically dis- 
covered facts harmonizing with, and accounting for, the 
provisionary theories of those who register merely what 
they have observed. M. Gratiolet's Eureka, that in the 
occipital or lower breeds of mankind, the sutures of the 
cranium close at an earlier age than amongst the frontal 
races, admirably explains the phenomenon which has 
struck the herd of men, however incurious : it assigns a 
'physical cause for the inferiority of the negro, whose 
psychical and mental powers become stationary at an age 
when, in nobler races, the perceptive and reflective prin- 
ciples begin to claim ascendancy. 

" In the letter prefixed to your excellent paper, you 
have called upon me for my experience of the psychologi- 
cal character of the negro race. My opinions have been 
formed mostly by comparing, after ten years of travel, 
* on and off,' the Africans with the Western Asiatics, 
amongst whom I have lived eight years, for the most part 
like one of themselves. This chapter is therefore dedi- 
cated to you, with the especial hope that your paper, which 
is a credit to English anthropology, may, in course of time, 
be expanded into a volume. The subject naturally parts 
itself into three : i. The popular opinion touching the 
negro in the pre- Abolitionist times ; 2. The general senti- 
ments during that period of violent reaction ; and, 3. The 
present state of the public mind when it is gradually 
settling into a middle and rational course. After being 



I20 A Mission to Gelele^ King of Dahome, 

for some years " paradoxical " in my conviction of the 
innate and enduring inferiority of a race which has had so 
many an opportunity of acquiring civilization, but which 
has ever deliberately rejected improvement, I find that 
the rising authors are beginning to express opinions far 
more decided than mine, and I foresee the futurity of hard 
compulsory labour which the negromaniac will have 
brought upon his African protege. The philanthropico- 
criminal movement that began with Howard, has at last 
reached, we are told, its limit of exaggeration, and the 
pendulum begins slowly to swing back. It is the same 
with the negro, and as travelling becomes more com- 
mon, and the world knows more about him, he will 
lose prestige every year. In his case, as with the criminal, 
though there is little danger of our relapsing into cruelties 
of which we read with shame, yet there is an ill time 
coming. For sons may avenge the credulity of their sires, 
by running into the clear contrary extremes, and the 
unnatural * man and brother ' of the day may relapse into 
* nigger,' the * savage,' and the * semi-gorilla ' of the 
morrow. Already there is a dawn of belief in a specific 
difference between the races, which, carried out, leads to 
strange conclusions. Perhaps — permit me to observe — 
our society could do nothing more useful than to deter- 
mine what signification the debated word * species ' should 
convey to the English anthropologist. But the committee 
appointed to report on the terminology of that science of 
which we are the humble students, will probably have 
done so before these lines are published. 

** The following remarks were written at Agbome 
long before I had seen your pamphlet, and but little has 
been added to the original sketch. With you I deprecate 
any political object being attributed to them. 

*' I do confess it is my nature's plague 
To spy into abuses." 

But this inclination is not indulged, as some unwarrant- 



XIX.— Of ''The Negro's Place in Nature^ 121 

ably believe, from any * spite ' against, * antipathy ' to, or 
* instinctive aversion ' from, the negro, whom I regard as 
both useful and valuable in his proper Place in Nature ; 
nor have I any wish to * scare or outrage ' any * class,' 
by * rabid flying at anything with a natural or artificial 
black coat.' These be Irishisms. 

** Hoping that your able President-ship will long con- 
tinue to conduct the affairs of our young society with the 
unexampled success of the last two years, and believing 
with you that it is destined to accomplish the great and 
important objects for which it was established, 
** I subscribe myself, 

** My dear Hunt, 

** Yours very faithfully, 

" Richard F. Burton." 

When doctors are differing, and the professionally 
learned are disputing, about the existence or non-existence 
of a great structural gulf between the black and white 
races, it behoves the empirical student, in other words the 
traveller, to record his experience of, and to offer his 
opinion upon, the workings of the African's mental 
machinery. By these means we can obtain an a posteriori 
evidence of difference in mental and moral, and conse- 
quently in material, status ; and it is only by the compari- 
son of many testimonies that the delicate essence of truth 
can be evoked.^ Before, however, proceeding to the pith 
and marrow of the matter a few premisses must be briefly 
laid down. 

I I was not a little amused by a reviewer of " The Lake Regions 
of Central Africa," in a fifth-rate provincial paper, who, after thanking 
me for my facts, resolutely insisted upon supplanting all my deduc- 
tions by his own. Writers in the (London) "Times," and the 
" Saturday Review," enjoy a prescriptive right to "do the thinking " 
for their readers ; but we are apt to recalcitrate when the critical 
hand of a Methodistico-Missionary print arrogates to itself such 
claim. 



122 A Mission to Gelele^ King of Dahome, 

Touching theAfrican,^ it may be observed that there 
are in England at least two distinct creeds : i. That of 
those who know him ; 2. That of those who do not. This 
may be predicated of most other moot points : in the 
negro's case, however, the singularity is, that ignorance 
not knowledge, sentimentality not sense, sway the practical 
public mind.^ Hence, at every division, non-knowledge 
has on its side a majority, and a something inherent in 
the unthinking looks upon this as a test of truth, when 
the contrary is more often the case. For all things, true, 
great, and good form an imposing minority. 

Of the two types — the ignorant and the non-ignorant 
— the former is best exampled by the north of Europe, 
and pre-eminently so by England.^ The southern nations, 
for instance the Spaniard, without even looking upon the 
negro as his equal, and convinced of his own superiority, 
endeavours to raise his congener in the scale of creation, 
and is not irritated by failure because he is prepared for 
it.* With us the " platform " selected during a rancorous 
political and property quarrel is still held immutably true. 
These principles are supported by the actives, the philan- 
thropic few, between whom and Good Sense runs a broad 
line of demarcation, and by those personally interested in 
keeping up the delusion ; and wonderful is the effect of 
English atmosphere upon unpopular ideas imported from 

1 Used in the sense of negro, concerning which, more presently. 

2 The affecting appeal, "Am I not a man and a brother?" 
accompanying on the seal of the Anti-Slavery Committee a kneeling 
negro, who, properly speaking, should have been on all-fours, has 
been to Africa what Pope's " Lo, the poor Indian!" has been to 
Anglo- America, — a power steadily influencing national policy. 

3 The leaders in the " Times" (1859), as quoted by Mr. M'Henry 
(" The Cotton Trade," pp. 68, 75), ought to bring some knowledge to 
a " public" : seemingly they have not. 

4 " The Spaniards and Portuguese treat their slaves in every 
respect better than the African slave merchants ; and I know, from 
personal inquiry, that none of M. de Suza's slaves would accept 
their liberty from choice." (Mr. Duncan, vol. i. p. 114.) 



XIX.— Of ''The Negro's Place in Nature^ 123 

abroad. The passives are the many listeners. To this 
supreme ignorance I must attribute the general failure of 
English missionary enterprise in Africa, and to a great 
extent the late lamentable occurrences, in which conver- 
sion has ended with ** killing no murder." It is not a 
little instructive to see the effect of Africa upon the excep- 
tional philanthropist — as a rule, he so loves all men, him- 
self included, that he avoids the land as a pestilence. 
When visiting the ** Dark Continent," he finds those 
living amongst negroes all convinced of the African's 
absolute inferiority ; he resists the evil influence as long 
as his nature permits, and he lapses usually into the 
extreme contrary to that with which he commenced. He 
begins by treating his blacks as men and brethren, he 
ends, perhaps, with cruelty to them ; whilst he has secured 
their contempt by degrading himself to their level in 
attempting to raise them to his own. 

To the home-bred Englishman, who has no personal 
experience of the African, I would oppose the Anglo- 
American. The Northerner and the Canadian see, it is 
true, the negro in that debased state to which his race is 
condemned by climate above the Missouri Compromise 
Line.^ Beginning in Pennsylvania, the Abolitionist 
traded his slaves down South — not liberated them — 
because they were not worth their hire. But he has ever 
kept those who live under his protection in their proper 
position, distinct from himself, in the church as in the 
omnibus, whilst none but the extremest sectarians would 
admit them to the family circle, or marry daughters to 
them. On the other hand, the Southerner knows the 
African, and is known to him ; hence in Africa he manages 
the negro better than other white men.^ As a boy he has 

1 In N. lat. 36° 30' — a moral tropic, a boundary between free 
labour and slave labour, laid down by the hand of Nature herself. 

2 Thus the Northerner as an overseer is notably more impatient 
with, and cruel to, the slaves than a Southerner. 



124 ^ Mission to Gelele^ King of Dahome, 

a black nurse and sable foster-brother, and in after years 
he is connected with the "chattels*' by the tie of a 
common interest. He laments the existence of slavery, 
but he finds himself fast bound to it by the law of self- 
preservation. Having wandered through every State of 
the Anglo-American Republic, I can safely assert that in 
none of the richest, namely, the centres of cotton, tobacco, 
and sugar, is white labour possible. If this be true, 
surely the Abolitionist should qualify himself by six 
months' work in Louisiana and the negrophile by a year 
of ** Wandering in West Africa," before they venture 
upon their peculiar statements. ** The South " is between 
the horns of the dilemma, slavery or ruin, and she 
necessarily prefers the former. That emancipated negroes 
will work willingly in genial tropical climates, where life 
is so easily supported, contradicts all our experience of 
the race ; and after seeing the black in many parts of 
Africa, under his own rule, and under that of foreigners, 
French and English, Spanish and Portuguese, I am con- 
vinced that the serfs of a Southern plantation would not 
change lots with their free brethren. 

Returning to public opinion at home touching the 
negro, we find in its present transitional state four popu- 
lar errors, which are amply sufficient to confuse the whole 
subject. 

The first and the front of offence, is the confusion of 
the mixed and the mulatto with the full-blooded negro. 
By the latter word I understand the various tribes of 
intertropical Africa, unmixed with European or Asiatic 
blood.^ In Anglo-America the least African taint makes 

I In our popular works — treasuries of error — every one born in 
Africa is a " negro." Thus " God's Image in Ebony" (London : Par- 
tridge and Oakley), offers in two pages (93, 94), as "convincing 
proofs that the negro is morally and intellectually as well as phy- 
sically the equal of the white man," the following jumble of instances : 
Mitierva (a negro princess !), Origen and Athanasius (Alexandrian), 
Tertullian, Augustine (Numidian), Alexandrinus and Cyril (Moors), 



XIX.— Of ''The Negro's Place in Naturer 125 

a man a ** negro.'* Messrs. Nott and Gliddon — to whom 
Dr. Waitz has done scanty justice — were, methinks, 
justified in asserting that a few drops of the purer ichor 
produce a decided modification in the moral and physical 
character of the black. Had the Slave States manumitted 
and deported their mulattoes, the present state of things 
might not have been. In Southern America, also, the 
mongrel is the canker of society and of political life. In 
England, every frothy spout er of hackneyed phrases, 
though he begins by owning to a mixture of race which, 
whilst subordinating him to his father in intellect, and 
not unfrequently, in physique, to his mother,^ still enables 
him to distance his indigenous half-brothers, is hearkened 
to as a Dingy Daniel come to judgment — ** a logical bomb 
falling amongst the Pandits " — a standing and a talking 
proof that the mulatto's maternal is equal, if not superior, 
to his paternal family. When I see such a mongrel, who 
everywhere hates both the purer races from which he 
sprang, stand up, backed, probably, by a philanthropic 
and fighting Quaker, before a learned society, ere his lips 
open it is known to me what parrot -talk he will emit. 
Cicero, writing to Atticus, deemed the ancient Britons 
(with whom the modern English have little in common) too 
stupid for slavery (decidedly a compliment according to our 
ideas ),^ The white man is not looked upon as a superior 

Alius (Cyreniac and Semitic speaking), Hannibal (a Phoenician), 
and Terence (a Roman). Messrs. Adams, Cherson, and Armistead 
should learn their ethnological alphabet before quoting these as 
" negro representatives of science, learning, religion, war, and poetry." 
The Abb^ Gregoire's examples are mostly mulattoes, as Christophe 
and Dessalines. The oft-quoted Mr. ex-President Roberts, of 
Liberia, is an octoroon. 

1 The older theory was, that in such mules the mother-blood 
predominates (Estwick, History of Jamaica). But this is, to say the 
least, doubtful. 

2 To my astonishment I have heard this threadbare fallacy 
quoted in all simplicity by Mr. Charles Sumner, the Massachusetts 



126 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dakome, 

being in Black-land ^ (the speaker well knowing that his sole 
merit at home in Africa is the title of ^^ oibo-dudu,*' or ^^white- 
black'') ; that there are ** full-blooded negroes " who have 
risen to distinction (quoting a few exceptions, who are not full- 
blooded to prove the rule), and that Paul's Epistle to Phile- 
mon (merely recommending, on ground of his conversion, the 
manumission of a fugitive) was concerning a ** servant" (of 
SovAos, / need hardly say, he had never heard). He will pro- 
bably ** bring down the house " with something of 
Cowper's wishy-washy sentimentality, as, 

" Fleecy locks and black complexion, ^ 

Cannot alter Nature's claim ; 
Skins may differ, but affection 

Dwells in white and black the same.® '* 

Abolitionist. The Britons' inaptitude to learn music and other 
accomplishments may still be traced to their purest descendants. 

1 In Africa, as in India, the aristocracy of the skin, as the French 
deputy tauntingly called it, or the " prejudice of colour," as the 
modern phrase runs, is the outward and visible sign of an inward 
and spiritual difference. One of Mr. Pritchard's few good generali- 
zations is, that as a rule the darker and dingier the African tribe, 
the more degraded is its organization. 

2 The purely melanous complexion is rare in Africa, where, more- 
over, it is generally admired. The fetor is more conclusive as a test 
than the colour of the skin. There is no exception to the rule of smell. 

3 Which I deny. Affection, like love, is the fruit of animalism 
refined by sentiment. The old travellers knew better than the poet. 
•' Here paternal affections and filial love hardly exist," says the 
History. So Bosman declares of the Gold Coast : " The mother 
gives the infant suck for two or three years ; which over, and they 
able to go, it is then ' Turn out, brutes ! ' " An absorbing egotism is 
the necessary rule of savage and barbarous humanity, and society 
must have made great progress before a man can think of his neigh- 
bour's interests and live. Hence the old author asserted of the 
negroes: "They are insensible to grief and want, sing till they die, 
and dance into their graves." Mr. Duncan (vol. ii. p. 79) says: 
•' Not even the appearance of affection exists between husband and 
wife, or between parents and children. So little do they care for 
their offspring, that many offered to sell me one of their sons or 
daughters as slaves. They are, to speak the truth, in point of 
parental affection, inferior to brutes." But why multiply quotations ? 



XIX,— Of ''The Negro's Place in Naturer 127 

And the herd at Newcastle — how deep their studies ! 
how extensive their experience ! — will hiss a counter- 
statement, and go home convinced that they have been 
listening to a speech by a highly intellectual negro, when 
the oft -repeated cant is doled out from memory by a white 
man with a ** dash of the tar-brush ! " 

The second error is the confusion of the negroid, the 
Semiticized, or the noble African,^ with the ignoble pure 
negro. This is a more venial blunder than the first, 
because ethnological knowledge is requisite to draw the 
distinction ; but its effects are even worse. The traveller 
is ever falling into this pit, and the mass of observers is as 
yet hardly aware of the distinction. Of the alphabet 
invented by the Vai or 'Vahie — a race cognate with the 
Mandenga and cognizant of the Koran — Commander 
Forbes (Vol. i. p. 200) remarks, " How far we must have 
mistaken the African's constitution ! " Mr. Winwood 
Reade proposes to apply the term ** negro " to the mari- 
time races, and ** African" to those of the interior ; but 
in the central continent there are tribes as purely negro 
as on the coast. Others would assume 10° N. lat., and 
the same line south of the equator, as the boundaries of 
the race ; in the interior, however, it crosses both these 
limits, nor has any frontier been traced by travellers. 
As I have said, the fetor is the grand discrimen ; thus we 
distinguish the Somali Semite and free man from his slave 
neighbour, the Kisawahili, and the Asiatic Malagash 
from the negro Johanna-man, who will call himself an 
offset from the noble Arabian Kuraysh. By not at- 
tending to this distinction between nobles and ignobles, 
the Moor of Venice has been represented as a " nigger." 
When such men as Touissant I'Ouverture ^ (** The Opener") 
are quoted as ** full-blooded blacks," I must discover, 
before assenting to that proposition, what was their 

1 Arab, Moorish, Abyssinian, Egyptian, Nubian, and Berber. 

2 His true race seems to be unknown. 



128 A Mission to Gelek^ King of Dahome. 

descent. They might be of Hausa, or other Semiticized 
blood : and this would be confounding Norman with Saxon. 
The negroid has taken a long step in the way of progress ; 
for the Arab and the Negro, as might be expected, com- 
bine better than the European and the black.^ Al-Islam, 
by forbidding impure meats and spirituous liquors,^ by 
enjoining ablutions and decent dress, and by discouraging 
monogamy and polyandry, has improved the African's 
physique, and through it, by inevitable sequence, his morale. 
It is a cognate and a congenial civilization, not one im- 
ported from 1500 miles of latitude, and sitting gro- 
tesquely upon the black mind, as the accompanying vest- 
ments upon the sable body — both being made contemp- 
tible by the contrast of what is and what ought to be. 
The pure negro does not exist in septentrional or in 
Southern Africa. North of the Sahara, men are more 
Semitic than Hamitic,® and resemble the peoples of 
Southern Europe more than they do the typical negro. I 
have elsewhere given reasons for suspecting in the great 
Kafir family a considerable mixture of Arab, Persian, and 
other Asiatic blood. 

The third fallacy is that Europe, and especially 
England, were the means of introducing slavery into, or, 
at least, of increasing it in Africa, with a corollary — 

1 The worst melange is perhaps the Anglo-Saxon and the negro. 
As in India, the French succeed better; there are a naivete and 
coquetry in the Gallic half-caste which are unknown to our homely 
and unattractive "Cheechees." 

2 Africans, like the lower Asiatics, ever drink to excess: "A 
glass or two " is a thing unknown to them. Consequently, rum has 
done more harm for them than the slave ship has. As there is a per- 
spective in crime, making the farthest appear the smallest, so, as the 
world progresses, the present acts of honest men, such as selling 
spirits, weapons, and ammunition to savages, will be looked upon by 
their grandsons as the " sum of all villanies." 

3 These are poor words for ethnologists, but intelligible. I use 
Hamitic for pure African or negro, Semitic for the Arab, and Japhetic 
for the Aryan, or Indo-European race. 



XIX, — Of '^The Negro's Place in Nature,'^ 129 

ever maintained by a missionary mterest, crying ** Give ! 
Give ! Give ! " — that the empire must expiate the delicta 
majorum by spending money.^ It requires the extremest 
illiterateness to hold such tenets. Slavery was a rule in 
the days of Abraham. Ezekiel (xxvii. 13) mentions 
** trading the persons of men " in the markets of Tyrus ; 
and of the later classics there is not an author, from 
Juvenal to (Periplus) Arrian, who does not allude to it. 
The more we explore the African interior, and discover 
great races beyond the range of the white man, the more 
confirmed and complete is the system of serfdom and 
thraldom. The true African saying concerning the servile 
is, ** Once a slave for ever a slave." And, as has been 
shown, the races that believe in another world, will not 
manumit their bondsmen even there. 

The fourth delusion is that the African vends his 
wife — as does the Anglais in France — and his family. 
This is an effect of sensational oratory rather than of 
authority : all travellers have carefully contradicted the 
assertion. The accurate Bosman (1698) says : *' Not a 
few in our country fondly imagine that parents here sell 
their children, men their wives, and one brother the other ; 
but those who think so deceive themselves, for this never 
happens on any other account than that of necessity or 
some great crime ; but most of the slaves that are offered 
to us are prisoners of war, which are sold by the victors 

2 In 1561 (the date of Sir John Hawkins' first slave voyage), 
England took the first of three commercial steps that raised her to 
her present grandeur. A charter was presently granted by Queen 
Elizabeth, who became a large shareholder, and the live produce of 
Africa threw 500 millions sterling into the national purse. In 1756, 
after the success of Clive, the profits of India became the " soil and 
crops of England." In 1800 began that enormous importation of 
American cotton (the first few pounds were shipped in 1784), which 
formed the third and culminating commercial speculation. — "The 
Cotton Trade," by George M' Henry. London : Saunders, Otley & 
Co., 1863. 
VOL. II. 9 



130 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome. 

as their booty." The learned Barbot (book iv. chap, i) 
declares that whilst the Slavonians traded with their 
progeny, in Africa the sale of children, wives, and rela- 
tives, ** if it ever happens, is so seldom that it cannot be 
justly charged upon a whole nation as a custom and com- 
mon practice." Commander Forbes (vol. i. p. 146) ex- 
pressly asserts that **the laws of Dahomey forbid such an 
unnatural sale of human beings," which he seems to have 
found on the south-western coast. The few exceptions 
would be considered vile by their neighbour tribes, and 
even they rarely part with their own blood except in dire 
distress or famine. I have seen the same thing done in 
Sind and in Western India.^ As it is, the exported are 
almost invariably of two kinds — criminals and war 
captives ; converted into cash when not wanted for the 
Customs. The absolute prevention of slave export is a 
very mitigated benefit — if, indeed, it be any — to the 
African slave ; and our humanity has often acted, like 
sparrow clubs, in strengthening a worse plague. The 
History informs us that Agaja the Great, after ** break- 
ing " Whydah, slew 400 men. Shortly afterwards, how- 
ever, having taken 1800 prisoners from a nation that had 
offended him even more, **he contented his priests with 
400 of them, ships being then in the road, when he could 
turn the remainder to profit." And we have this excel- 
lent advice : ** It is enough to show through our history 
that avarice can sheathe the knife even of superstition, 
and that her incitements to slaughter, powerful as they 
may be, are confined within narrow limits when self- 
interest waits upon lenity." 

I now proceed to offer the reader the result of my 

I Not to mention children sold in England as sweeps. So on 
December 5, 1701, Alexander Steuart, found guilty at Perth of theft, 
was gifted by the Justiciary, instead of being killed, to Sir John 
Areskin, of Alva. Cromwell sold 3000 soldiers from Drogheda to 
the West India planters, much as the Pasha of Egypt has lately sold 
a regiment or two to France. 

2—9 



XIX.— Of ''The Negro's Place in Nature^ 131 

actual experience of the negro character. The conviction 
that others, as competent to judge as myself, will join 
issue with me, is an inducement to proceed, in the hopes 
that truth may be elicited : whilst the suspicion that my 
statements will be far from popular, makes me look for- 
ward to the day when they will be. 

The pure negro ranks in the human family below 
the two great Arab and Aryan races. In Asia he is prized 
as a slave for hard work ; as a servant he is coarse-handed, 
pilfering, shameless, and with much of the frowardness of 
a baboon. No one thinks of him as a freeman ; and he, 
"hereditary bondsman," never dreams of liberty, because 
no one suggests to him the idea. 

The unpermanency of the half-breed, and the fre- 
quency of sterile marriages amongst mulattoes, show an 
approach to specific difference* between the white and 
black races furthest removed in climate and civilization. 

The negro's brain, in which Burmeister and other 
physiologists found the convolutions less numerous and 
more massive than in the European, is, to judge from its 
action, weak — a very little learning addles it. Even the 
Islamized Somal hold those that read and write to be less 
than men, because their heads are good for nothing else. 

I Mr. Long (History of Jamaica) has testified to the frequent in- 
fecundity, and the limited prolificacy of the male and female mulatto. 
Geoffroy and Nott dwelt upon the sterility of mulattoes, whilst Serres 
and others have asserted that the children of a white woman by a 
negro are rarely viable. Dr. Seemann observed at Panama, and in 
South America, that the European and the negro were not un- 
limitedly productive — rarely passing the second cross. Buffon 
defined species to be a " succession constante d'individus semblables et qui se 
reproduisent." Hunter's criterion is, that the parents should produce 
an offspring equally prolific with themselves, whereas hybrids are 
incapable of perpetuating the breed. This fertility-test was widely 
recognized. Cuvier, followed by Pritchard, defined species to include 
separate origin (how proved ?) and constant transmission of organic 
peculiarities. Judged from this view-point, the negro is a sub-species 
or permanent variety of the genus homo. 



132 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome, 

One of the principal negro characteristics is his truly 
savage want of veneration for God or man; — hence, the 
expressions which we should deem blasphemous in his 
wild state, and the peculiar tone of his prayer, command- 
ing rather than supplicating, which distinguishes him 
in his semi-civilization. 

In the negro the propensities and passions are toler- 
ably well grown, the perceptives and reflect ives are of 
inferior power, and the sentimental or moral regions 
remain almost undeveloped. This is apparently the rule 
of savage and barbarous races. His memory is mostly 
like that of the Australian — powerless, except in matters 
touching his self-interest. His face is an index to his 
mind. The circumoral region is prodigiously developed. 
The lower brow, where the perceptives are placed by 
phrenologists, denotes culture; the upper forehead and 
the vertex of the cranium are weak, retreating and flat- 
tened. 

The extremes of climate and the pitiless fecundity of 
Nature have bound down the negro to the completely 
material. In this point he contrasts greatly with the 
Hindu, in whom imagination, outrunning intellect, de- 
generates into licence, and whose superabundance of 
reverence oppresses inquiry. 

The negro is still at the rude dawn of faith — fetishism 
— and he has barely advanced to idolatry, the eflect of 
deficient constructiveness.^ He has never grasped the 
ideas of a personal Deity, a duty in life, a moral code, or 
a shame of lying. He rarely believes in a future state of 
rewards and punishments, which, whether true or not, 
are infallible indices of human progress. 

The negro is, for the most part, a born servile — not a 
servant.*'^ As has been said, in Dahome and Benin all 

1 The organ, not the bump. 

2 So in Anglo-America every stranger has remarked that whilst 
the negro invariably chooses personal service, the American Indian, 



XIX.— Of ''The Negro's Place in Nature:' 133 

the subjects are literally the King's property. We cannot, 
therefore, apply to him the Homeric statement that 

" The day 
Makes man a slave takes half his worth away." 

The negro will obey a white man more readily than 
a mulatto, and a mulatto rather than one of his own 
colour.^ He never thinks of claiming equality with the 
Aryan race, except when taught. At Whydah the French 
missionaries remark that their scholars always translate 
"white and black" by "master and slave." And he 
readily submits to the iron hand. 

The negro has an instinctive and unreasoning aver- 
sion to increasing population,^ without which there can 
be no progress. A veritable Malthusian, he has a variety 
of traditions justifying infanticide, ordeal, and sacrifice, 
as if, instead of being a polygamist, he were a poly- 
andrian. 

The so-called civilization of the negro is from with- 
out; he cannot find it within, and he has not the latent 
mental capacities ascribed to him by the philanthropes. 
As an adult he is the victim of imitation, the siurest sign 
of deference ; he freely accepts foreign customs, manners, 
and costumes, however incongruous. 

shrinking from it with loathing, affords hardly a single instance. In 
Africa, however, he has a good time of it. The author of " The 
Niger Expedition" (vol. i. p. 398), justly remarks that "domestic 
slavery in the negro's native land is not more irksome than servitude 
in ours" — he might safely have said more. And it must be remem- 
bered, as Mungo Park stated in the last century, that paid service is 
unknown to the negro. Indeed, African languages ignore the word. 

1 It is not a little instructive to see the Southern slaves of Anglo- 
America, fighting as lustily for slavery as their Northern brethren 
are contending for liberty, and the more especially so after the 
dreadful pictures of plunder, rape, and murder drawn upon imagina- 
tion in Europe, and devoutly expected by the good people of England, 
until hard facts have forced open their eyes. 

2 I speak of the people generally, not individually. Personally, 
each man desires children, and yet he is of opinion that propagation 
injures his tribe or nation. 



134 ^ Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome, 

The negro, as a rule, despises agriculture, so highly 
venerated by the Asiatics, Chaldeans, Chinese, Israelites, 
and Persians, and recognized since the days of Aristotle 
as the most important of all the sciences. If it flourished 
amongst the Egyptians, Carthaginians, and Abyssinians, 
the battle-horses of negromaniacs, these were Semitico- 
Hamites, the noble blood of Africa. His highest ambi- 
tion is to be a petty trader, whilst his thick skull, broad 
bones, and cold porous leathery skin, point him out as a 
born ** hewer of wood and drawer of water." 

The cruelty of the negro is, like that of a schoolboy,^ 
the blind impulse of rage combined with want of sym- 
pathy. Thus he thoughtlessly tortures and slays his 
prisoners, as the youth of England torment and kill cats. 
He fails in the domestication of the lower animals, because 
he is deficient in forbearance with them : in a short time 
his violence will permanently ruin the temper of a horse; 
and he will starve to death the English dog, for which 
perhaps he has paid a high price.^ 

The negro has never invented an alphabet, a musical 
scale, or any other element of knowledge. Music and 
dancing, his passions, are, as arts, still in embryo. He 
cultivates oratory ; and so do all barbarians. He is eter- 
nally singing, but he has no idea of poetry.'* His painting 

1 A sensible French missioner uses the phrase, '*Les noirs, qui sont 
a peine aux blancs ce que sont les enfants aux hommes.'' 

2 Amongst the traders of the Bight of Biafra there are, I am 
glad to say, few men so base as to sell an English dog to a negro 
king or chief ; and were a man to do so, he would be loudly blamed 
by his fellows. 

3 In Ffon there is a rude kind of assonance, e.g. : — 

So nun ajil4 : Agbanji ajodisd. 

Take a thing and show it : on the counter 'twill be sold. 

Which Commander Forbes (vol. ii. p. loo) writes with a wondrous 

waste of "r's *' : 

So wae re jar, 

Jorgee 
Ah jorgee sar. 



XIX.— Of ''The Negro's Place in Nature^ 135 

and statuary are, like his person, ungraceful and grotesque; 
whilst his art, like his mind, is arrested by the hand of 
Nature. His year is a rainy season ; his moons have no 
names; and of an hour he has not the remotest concep- 
tion. His technology consists of weaving, cutting canoes, 
making rude weapons, and in some places practising a 
rough metallurgy. 

The negro, in mass, will not improve beyond a cer- 
tain point , and that not respectable ; he mentally remains 
a child, and is never capable of a generalization. Man's 
character is everywhere, to some extent, the gift of 
climate. The tropics engender but few wants, exercise is 
more painful than pleasant, therefore there is little work. 
Our transition state in Europe has at least this consola- 
tion, that we can look forward to a permanent improve- 
ment in type ; to stocking the world with a higher order 
of man. But in Africa, before progress can be general, it 
appears that the negro must become extinct by being 
absorbed into the negroid.^ 

The negro is nowhere worse than at home, where he 
is a curious mixture of cowardice and ferocity. With the 
barbarous dread and horror of death, he delights in the 
torments and the destruction of others, and with more 
than the usual savage timidity, his highest boast is that 
of heroism. ^ He is nought but self; he lacks even the rude 

1 Anti-slavery writers claim a concession, that if one negro has 
shown a character identical with that of the white man, the two 
families must be specifically the same : and they quote a few " living 
witnesses," some of whom are so white as hardly to be distinguished 
from the superior race : others, Mandengas, Joloffs and Hausas. 
But these may be numbered on a man's fingers out of many a 
million, and we must not found a law upon exceptions. On the 
other hand, those who hold the specific difference of the negro, admit 
of no exceptionary instances. I believe in the inferior genesis of the 
negro, and in his incapability of improvement, individually and 
en masse. 

2 The learned and acute Dr. Pruner Bey asserts : " The negro 
has no love for war ; he is only driven to it by hunger. War, -from 



136 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahofne. 

virtue of hospitality, and ever, as Commander Forbes 
has it, he " baits with a sprat to catch a mackerel." 

The negro, in his wild state, makes his wives work^; 
he will not, or rather he cannot, labour, except by indi- 
vidual compulsion, as in the Confederate States ; or by 
necessity, as in the Barbadoes. When so compelled, he 
labours well, and he becomes civilized and humanized to 
the extent of his small powers. When not compelled, as 
S'a Leone and Jamaica prove, he becomes degraded, de- 
bauched, and depraved.^ I conclude, therefore, with 
Franklin the philosopher, that the negro is still, as he 
has been for the last 4000 years, best when "held to 
labour " by better and wiser men than himself. 

The removal of the negro from Africa is like sending 
a boy to school ; it is his only chance of improvement, of 
learning that there is something more in life than drum- 
ming and dancing, talking and singing, drinking and 
killing. After a time, colonists returned to Africa may 
exert upon the continent an effect for which we have as 
yet vainly looked. 

These last two items state merely bald facts, what- 
ever be the deductions from them. They by no means 
involve recognizing the abstract lawfulness of slavery, or 
the right of one human being to possess and to sell another. 
It is quite a different question to ** defend the employ- 
ment of the negroes, as domestic working animals, by 
higher organized beings called men,'' Still less do they 
affect to justify the horrors of slave driving, and of slave 

passion or destructiveness is unknown to him." My personal exper- 
ience has ever found destructiveness highly developed in the negro's 
character. 

1 Barbot (book iv. chap. 5) says of Benin : " But the female sex 
is there, in a most peculiar way, so brisk, jolly, and withal so labor- 
ious, that they despatch all their work very fast, and with a seeming 
pleasure and satisfaction." 

2 Of the Sierra Leone people at Whydah, now extinct, see Mr. 
Duncan (vol. i. p. 139). 



XIX.— Of ''The Negro's Place in Nature^ 137 

transporting, together with the permanent injury to the 
African continent, which the modern pro-slavery writers 
that have of late cropped up slur over or ignore.^ 

It must be remembered, however, that almost all 
races have had, in religion and policy, human sacrifice 
and servitude ; that the latter is the first step taken by 
human society, and that without it no people, from the 
Jews to the Brazilians, has ever risen above mere savagery. 
This great principle is not eliminated from the earlier 
acts of the social drama, till the hereditary bondsman has 
acquired power to free himself. The stage following 
slavery is the begar, corvee or compulsory labour — and this 
co-exists with the highest known refinement. An Act of 
Parliament in the reign of Queen Elizabeth compelled 
married women till thirty and spinsters till forty to do 
service to the country, if they had no other visible means 
of living. We imprison, punish, and compel to labour 
our beggars and vagabonds, even if they fail to prove how 
they subsist. We force our children to attend schools ; 
and, until lately, we have flogged youths of fourteen and 
fifteen who are to the full as intellectual as the child-man 
negro ; and the son of a king in England is not, until 
twenty-one years old, as politically free as the Anglo- 
African of S'a Leone. I see no objection to render lib- 
erated labour forcible^ until the African race is educated 
for wages, and such habits are not learned in a day. 

Nations are poor judges of one another ; each looks 
upon itself as an exemplar to the world, and vents its 
philanthropy by forcing its infallible system or systems 
upon its neighbour. How long is it since popular litera- 
ture has begun to confess that the British Constitution is 

1 I allude more particularly to a pamphlet called •' The Slavery 
Quarrel, &c.," by a Poor Peacemaker. London : Robert Hardwicke, 
1863. It is a specimen of what is to come. 

2 Even in 1845, Mr. Duncan (vol. i. p. 115) was bold enough to 
advocate the "free transportation of slaves from the coast of Afidca." 



138 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dakome. 

not quite fit for the whole human race, and that the 
Anglo-Saxon has much to do at home before he sets out 
a-colonelling to regenerate mankind ? Not later than 
1849, the ** inevitable conclusion " went forth that 
"African commerce and African civilization must be en- 
trusted exclusively to men of African birth.^" 

Africa's great present want is an organized system of 
bofid-fide emigration. Doubtless the experiment which 
lately has failed, with a disgrace equalling the coolie- 
trade from Assam and Cachar in 1861-2, is full of diffi- 
culty. But as time runs on there will be no reason why 
it should not succeed, and become one of the national 
regenerators. 

The opinions of Dahome touching slave export are 
those learned from us in the seventeenth century, when 
England fought for the monopoly. They cannot master 
the change of sentiments in the nineteenth century, 
when the prized privilege is denounced as a sin — a crime, 
— a causa belli, — the ** sum of all villanies." I am in- 
duced to quote in its entirety the fourteenth chapter 
of the History, which may enlighten many upon the 
true state of things in Dahome.^ The King, it will be 

1 '• The Negro Trade," by Sir George Stephen : the offensive tone 
of this pamphlet arises from its having been written for a •• Review." 
Long before its day, Messrs. Buxton and MacQueen declared that 
"it is by African hands and African exertions, chiefly, that the evil 
[slave trade] must be destroyed." I know only one part of the outer 
West African coast which is at present perfectly free from the ex- 
port, and that is the Bight of Biafra, which certainly was cleared by 
English hands and English exertions. 

2 Adahoonzou the Second's (Sinmenkpen) speech upon hearing 
what had passed in England upon the subject of the slave trade. 
(See note at the end of this chapter.) The most important part of it 
is confirmed by Dr. M'Leod (p. 65), who states: " The performance 
of the annual sacrifice is considered a duty so sacred, that no allure- 
ment in the way of gain — no additional price which the white traders 
can offer for slaves — will induce the King to spare even a single 



XIX.— Of ''The Negro's Place in Nature^ 139 

observed, expresses himself with shrewdness, and even 
with wisdom ; but in these lands the rulers are mostly 
a century in advance of their subjects^: nor is there 
any deficiency of cunning in the words of the present 
monarch to Commodore Wilmot (Appendix III). His 
polite expression, ** I will abolish slave trade, and 
gladly, but give me another and a better traffic," merely 
means that Dahome will never cease selling her captives 
and criminals till she can employ them more profitably. 
And it must be owned, that her system of dealing with 
offenders contrasts favourably in simplicity and in 
economy with ours. 

The institution honnie, however, is one of the causes of 
Dahoman decline. This negro race cannot, I have said, 
render conquests a source of aggrandisement : they make 
war to lay waste, capture and destroy, and the present 
King prefers two slave hunts to his father's one per 
annum. 

At Whydah, in 1694, we are told that the price of a 
good ** Kanumo " or slave was equal to £'^ 15s. in goods ; 
" Mackrons," or unmerchantable articles, not being ac- 

victim of the established number ; and he is equally inexorable with 
respect to the chiefs of his enemies, who are never, on any account, 
permitted to live if they fall into his hands." 

I When King Gezo was lectured by Mr. Duncan upon the 
cruelty of slave exportation, the latter, to illustrate the barbarity of 
separating children from their parents, " pointed out a she-goat with 
two kids, and asked him, if one were taken away, whether the young 
would not show symptoms of regret as well as the mother. At this 
he laughed heartily, but remarked that the he-goat, the father of the 
kids referred to, would feel quite indifferent." Mr. Duncan could 
not help smiling in return, when the King touched his forehead with 
his fingers, saying, "Englishman wonderful and a good man." 
Probably, the royal cynic meant this compliment much as the " good 
young man " signifies in the mouth of a fast young "party." Mr. 
Duncan, however, rightly says of G«zo, as compared with the mob, 
" The King possesses talent far beyond the generality of his subjects ; 
in fact, his noble mind seems to have been formed to govern." 



140 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome. 

cepted. The price is now, including the Custom House 
fee, £16 1 6s., and the chattel is not so sound. The 
annual number exported from Dahome cannot be higher 
than 15,000, which represents a paltry sum of ;^25o,ooo. 

Were it not for the southward progress of Al- Islam, 
the slow and silent, but sure advance of the Perfect Cure, 
the future of negro Africa would not be bright. The ex- 
perience of three centuries teaches us, that as a rule the 
tropical continent cannot be colonized by Europeans. 
We have also learned that hitherto maritime intercourse 
with its aqua vwrtis and touches a feu has done nothing but 
degenerate the native, and that until the long day when 
the Guinea Commanders — of whom bluff old Phillips 
wrote, ** their words and promises are the last to be de- 
pended upon of any I know use the sea ; for they would 
deceive their fathers in their trade if they could " — shall 
become ** virtuous," such will continue to be the result. 
The much talked of ** reflux of the West upon the East" 
has yet to begin doing good : hitherto, as a rule, the 
semi-civilized negroes, like the S'a Leone people at Abe- 
okuta, when restored to old influences have proved them- 
selves worse than the heathenry. They have almost to 
a man displayed the blackest and most odious form of 
ingratitude, that which does not merely ignore benefits 
conferred, but which bitterly hates the benefactor for 
having conferred them. It is a generation of vipers that 
found its way from the Red Grave to Lagos and Unde- 
stone. 



NOTE. 



ADAHOONZOU'S SPEECH. 

As a proof that Adahoonzou was not at a loss for arguments 
to defend the conduct of himself and his predecessors, when 
necessary, we shall close that prince's history with the heads of 
a speech made by him upon an occasion which is about to be 



XIX.— Of ''The Negro's Place in Nattivcr 141 

taken notice of, and which took up two hours in the delivery, for 
the Dahomans arc extremely verbose} Governor ^ Abson having 
taken an opportunity of communicating to Adahoonzou some of 
the particulars respecting the slave trade, which had become 
the subject of conversation and parliamentary inquiry in this 
country ; and having carried with him some of the pamphlets 
for and against the abolition of that traffic, which he read to 
him, in Adahoonzou's native language, the King listened with 
great attention, and though business several times broke in 
upon the narration, still requested Mr. Abson, after every inter- 
ruption to proceed. When the whole was finished, the King 
spoke as follows : 

** I admire the reasoning of the white men, but with all 
their sense it does not appear that they have thoroughly studied 
the nature of the blacks, whose disposition differs as much from 
that of the whites as their colour. The same great Being 
formed both ; and since it hath seemed convenient for him to 
distinguish mankind by opposite complexions, it is a fair con- 
clusion to presume that there may be as great a disagree- 
ment in the qualities of their minds. There is likewise a re- 
markable difference between the countries which we inhabit. 
You Englishmen, for instance, as I have been informed, are 
surrounded by the ocean, and, by this situation, seem intended 
to hold communication with the whole world, which you do by 
means of your ships ; whilst we Dahomans, being placed on a 
large continent, and hemmed in amidst a variety of other 
people, of the same complexion, but speaking different languages, 
are obliged, by sharpness of our swords, to defend ourselves 
from their incursions, and punish the depredations they make 
on us. Such conduct in them is productive of incessant wars. 
Your countrymen, therefore, who allege that we go to war for 
the purpose of supplying your ships with slaves, are grossly 
mistaken. You think you can work a reformation, as you call 

1 If Mr. Abson supposes long speeches are confined to Europe and 
Africa he is mistaken: the Brazilians were famous for this species of 
rhetoric long ago. When they wished to excite their people to war, their 
Eldermen, from their hammocks, harangued their auditors on the virtues 
and wrongs of their ancestors for six hours together. — " Purchas Pilgrims," 
1036. 

2 The present Governor of Williams Fort, who h;is resided there since 
1766, and is well acquainted with the language. 



142 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome. 

it, in the manners of the blacks ; but you ought to consider the 
disproportion between the magnitude of the two countries, and 
then you would soon be convinced of the difficulties that must 
be surmounted to change the system of such a vast country as 
this. We know you are a brave people, and that you might 
bring over a great many of the blacks to your opinions, by the 
points of your bayonets ; but to effect this, a great many must 
be put to death, and numerous cruelties must be committed, 
which we do not find to have been the practice of the whites ; 
besides that, this would militate against the very principle 
which is professed by those who wish to bring about a re- 
formation. 

" In the name of my ancestors and myself, I aver that no 
Dahoman man ever embarked in war merely for the sake of 
procuring wherewithal to purchase your commodities. I, who 
have not been long master of this country, have, without think- 
ing of the market, killed many thousands, and I shall kill many 
thousands more. When policy or justice requires that men be 
put to death, neither silk, nor coral, nor brandy, nor cowries, 
can be accepted as substitutes for the blood that ought to be 
spilt for example's sake. Besides, if white men choose to re- 
main at home, and no longer visit this country for the same 
purpose that has usually brought them hither, will black men 
cease to make war ? I answer, by no means. And if there be 
no ships to receive their captives, what will become of them ? I 
answer for you, they will be put to death. Perhaps you may 
ask, how will the blacks be furnished with guns and powder ? 
I reply by another question : Had we not clubs, and bows and 
arrows before we knew white men ? Did you not see me make 
Custom for Weebaigah, the third King of Dahome? and did 
you not observe, on the day such ceremony was performing, 
that I carried a bow in my hand, and a quiver filled with arrows 
on my back ? These were emblems of the times, when, with 
such weapons, that brave ancestor fought and conquered all his 
neighbours. God made war for all the world ; and every king- 
dom, large or small, has practised it more or less, though per- 
haps in a manner unlike and upon different principles. Did 
Weebaigah sell slaves ? No, his prisoners were all killed to a man ! 
What else could he have done with them ? Was he to let them 
remain in his country, to cut the throats of his subjects? This 



XIX,— Of " The Negro's Place in Nature:' 143 

would have been wretched policy, indeed, which, had it been 
adopted, the Dahoman name would have been long ago extin- 
guished, instead of becoming, as it is at this day, the terror of 
surrounding nations. What hurts me most is, that some of 
your people have maliciously represented us in books, which 
never die, alleging that we sell our wives and children for the 
sake of procuring a few kegs of brandy. No, we are shamefully 
belied; and I hope you will contradict, from my mouth, the 
scandalous stories that have been propagated, and tell posterity 
that we have been abused. We do, indeed, sell to the white 
men a part of our prisoners, and we have a right so to do. Are 
not all prisoners at the disposal of their captors ? and are we to 
blame if we send delinquents to a far country ? I have been 
told you do the same. If you want no more slaves from us, why 
cannot you be ingenuous, and tell the plain truth, saying that 
the slaves you have already purchased are sufficient for the 
country for which you bought them; or that the artists who 
used to make fine things are all dead, without having taught 
anybody to make more? But for a parcel of men with long 
heads to sit down in England, and frame laws for us, and pre- 
tend to dictate how we are to live, of whom they know nothing 
— never having been in a black man's country during the whole 
course of their lives — is to me somewhat extraordinary. No 
doubt they must have been biassed by the report of some one 
who has had to do with us ; who, for want of a true knowledge 
of the treatment of slaves, found that they died on his hands, 
and that his money was lost ; and seeing others thrive by the 
traffic, he, envious of their good luck, has vilified both black and 
white traders. 

** You have seen me kill many men at the Customs, and you 
often observed delinquents at Grigwee, and others of my pro- 
vinces, tied and sent up to me — I kill them ; but do I ever insist 
on being paid for them ? Some heads I order to be placed at 
my door; others to be strewed about the market-place, that 
people may stumble on them when they little expect such a 
sight. This gives a grandeur to my Customs, far beyond the 
display of fine things which I buy. This makes my enemies 
fear me, and gives me such a name in the bush.^ Besides, if I 
should neglect this indispensable duty, would my ancestors 

I The country expression for the woods. 



144 ^ Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome, 

suffer me to live ? Would they not trouble me day and night, 
and say that I sent nobody to serve them ; that I was only solic- 
itous about my own name, and forgetful of my ancestors ? 
White men are not acquainted with these circumstances ; but I 
now tell you that you may hear, and know and inform your 
countrymen why Customs are made, and will be made, as long 
as black men continue to possess their own country. The few 
that can be spared from this necessary celebration, we sell to 
the white men. And happy, no doubt, are such, when they 
find themselves on the path for Grigwee, to be disposed of to 
the Europeans. * We shall still drink water ,^ ' say they to them- 
selves; * white men will not kill us, and we may even avoid 
punishment, by serving our new masters with fidelity.' " 

" All this, and much more to the same purpose," adds Mr. 
Abson, " was said by the Dahoman monarch, in my presence, 
however incredible it may appear in England " ; and I can see 
no reason to doubt it, unless we suppose that common sense is 
confined within narrower limits than experience shows it to be. 

I Meaning " We shall still live." 



H5 



CHAPTER XX. 

THE DAY OF TRIUMPH. 

On Wednesday, January 20th, we were suddenly sum- 
moned in the hot sun of 2 p.m. to the Komasi Palace. 
As we sat under the south-eastern corner shade we were 
greeted with Al-Afiyah by our companions in misfortune, 
the Moslems, who wore their usual snowy turbands and 
long white and blue robes. Men in war tunics and wrap- 
pers hurried to the palace, and strings of women were 
coming out all dust, showing that they had been made 
over as wives to new captains. 

We entered and sat down as usual beneath the thin 
tamarind tree, opposite the huge whitewashed storehouse. 
Everything was very military : the King's verandah was 
a line of poor, sooty, and tattered umbrellas, and before 
us were four similar, also blackened : one of these was for 
the fetishmen, whose ten iron sticks were planted in the 
ground. Opposite them, and on our side — the left — were 
seven umbrellas, and within the bamboos stood the Fanti 
women fresh returned from the campaign. They were in 
fighting garb, with white fillets round their heads, short 
drawers, brown war tunics like the men's, and not longer 
than kilts, girt with white sashes and kept in position by 
cartridge boxes, with brilliant pouches on their left sides, 
bright muskets, razors and knives. Their ornaments were 
necklaces, projecting ^/onas of brown monkey skins, quan- 
tities of fetish beads, talismans and other decorations 
VOL. II. 10 



146 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome, 

about their breasts, and brass and iron rings on their left 
arms. They were commanded by Danh-ji-hun-to, a thin, 
yellow, middle-aged woman, with a hoarse voice and wear- 
ing two diminutive antelope horns on her forehead. 

At 4.25 P.M. a long line of unarmed men ran up, in 
Indian file, and deposited near the bamboo barrier fifteen 
little bundles of coarse matting. They were followed by 
four loads of calabashes, a bit of broken canoe, a sheep 
and a goat carried in arms, nine old muskets and other 
equally valuable trophies, which were ranged by the gallant 
captors in a semi-circle before the King. Silence was 
proclaimed by a knot of some eighty fighteresses and 
wives, who sat together in the open air on the right of the 
throne, with their "drum," three small rattles, and one 
cymbal, on their proper left. The front rank wore silver 
horns; each waved a fly-flapper when singing, and the 
handles of their long knives were hung with pink streamers. 
Behind them were successively silver hair, spangles, white 
fillets, and red nightcaps, placed loosely on the heads of 
the blunderbuss women to keep off the sun. One had the 
true sweep's face, with cherry lips, and glaring white eyes 
set in deep circles of black. All the troupe squatted on 
their heels, kneeling up when the emphasis of the song 
required it. 

The fat Adanejan opened the speeching: the gist of 
his lengthiness was, that Eddon, chief of Jabatan, a town 
of Makhi-speaking Nagos in Agoni, about one day beyond 
Iketu, had ever been a spy and a malignant, sending in 
reports to the King's enemy, Abeokuta. The place had 
been taken after six shots; there were few prisoners, as 
all the men ran away, consequently the captors had proved 
themselves poor soldiers. The mat bundles, then opened, 
disclosed human skulls imperfectly cleaned, some being 
only smoke dried. One was much shattered, and another 
had part of the green scalp adhering to the bone. It was 
a shabby display compared with the days when, after an 

10 — 2 



A'^. — The Day of Triumph. 147 

attack on Badagry, Sinmenkpen (Adahoonzou II.) bought 
of his men 6000 crania. 

The four skulls **with names" were then presented 
by the Adanejan as Chabi the second chief, a Vodun-no 
or fetish woman, and Favi and Adibi, two princes. Fol- 
lowed the live male prisoners of distinction. They were 
naked to the waist, which was wrapped in blue calico, 
and they knelt, with hands tied before and elbows con- 
nected behind by a lanyard, which was held by a soldier, 
also on his knees. At each presentation a servant of the 
Adanejan placed both hands upon the captive's shoulders, 
standing behind him, and called out his name and rank, 
which were repeated to the King by a high officeress. 
The following fourteen were presented : First were three 
boys ; Eddon the chief, a miserably lean scowling man, 
who will certainly lose his head, and Doicha Vodun-no, 
his brother ; three princes, Legbo, Bwedon, and Yabi ; 
a hunter and a chief drummer ; Chago, a boy, one of the 
chiefs nephews, three small children, black, yellow, and 
brown ; and three sons of hunters, Bosu, Akholu, and 
Bosan. After presentation, they were all led away by the 

men. 

A violent drumming introduced nine women "with 

names," as follows : Chago, Epwe, Ayinan, and Ede, 

wives of the chief — the third very old, the last aged about 

ten ; Meneke and Yabu, hunters' wives ; Loko-si, a 

hunter's sister; Nyon, a Tansi-no, or fetish woman for 

the King ; and Ojohon, the daughter of a chief long ago 

slain. Behind them stood several others, who were not 

named. The women captives, including one with a babe 

at the breast, born on the march — 

O Lucina ferox, hoc peperisse fuit ? 

— were led away by the women troops. 

After this function, two boys and two girls were 
brought in from left to right, were placed kneeling before 
and were presented as gifts to the King. These the first 



148 A Mission to GelelCy King of Dahonie. 

fruits of the capture, are never bound till in the royal 
presence : they are technically called So-si or Thunder- 
tail.^ After this customary ceremony, the messengeresses 
took the end of the long tether connected with each small 
left arm, and conducted the tribute into the harim. 

Five soldier-prisoners were next placed on their 
knees, and were named like the captives ; one had lost 
his gun, another had tied up his sword in a bundle, a 
third had no gunpowder, a fourth no ball, and the last 
had drawn the royal ammunition without bringing back 
either head or prisoner. The recreants were huddled 
away to jail, and their sentence was confirmed by pro- 
longed ** Ububu," from the male, and ** Khe " on the part 
of the feminine soldiery. 

The Addugba drum then struck up. It is played by 
public women, an organized and royal institution, ap- 
pointed from the palace, and placed under the Meu for 
the comfort and refreshment of the lieges.^ The present 
King has appointed a fresh troop of ladies of pleasure, 
but they have not as yet received permission to practise. 
At first the honorarium was twenty cowries ; hence the 
common title ** Ko-si," score-wife or quadrantaria^ : at the 
representation of the ministers the solatium was increased 
to two strings, or fourfold. They drum during the day at 
the royal abode, and late at night they return to their 
own quarters, near the Bwekon village and the Agbome 
Gate. There are peculiarities about the institution which 
will presently strike the reader. 

The Addugba, ** for outside," consisted of four men 

1 So (thunder, or heavy firing of guns), si (a tail ; not to be con- 
founded with 'si for assi, a wife). The animal's tail is the hunter's 
trophy, and he always removes it the first. 

2 So far Dahome is in advance of us. We now begin to see the 
advantage of Lock Hospitals for the soldier, when every man of 
sense recognized it years ago. 

3 Ko-si is not insulting ; Agaleto, or buona roba, is ; Agaleto-vi — 
filius meretricis — is a common abusive phrase. 



A'-V. — Tiu Dj} cf Trimmtk. 149 

and two women, the latter standing behind with veiled 
bosoms, blue pa^es. and white tillets : they used as fans 

discs of thin brass, pierced u-ith hcles and surmouzitiiig 
long light handles. Their leader had a leathern apron, 
after the fashion of the Lake Regions, but lined and 
streaked with cowries. There were also the Ko-si, or 
quadrantaritz , '• for inside." an amount of cynicism, which 
I had hardly expected. This internal Addugba stood 
behind the warricresses on the left of the throne, and 

wore red headkerchiefs. and white and scarlet tunics, 
with lines of yellow cloth, under blue pagnes. The men 
knelt and performed in the presence of the King. The 
Adanejan now brought forward a sixth prisoner, and ex- 
plained his offence, deserting to Iketu, and attempting to 
join Jabatan. This caitiff was also led off by his rope- 
Shouts and trills announced that cowries and cloth 
were being brought from the palace. Each owner of a 
skull received for it a head of shells (equal to two shil- 
ings),' and the grizzly semi -circle broke up. The fetisheers 
sang : — 

E Bo-han e dqp. 

The Bo-dnim <of wan. it is verv' good! 
All the captives ** with names " advanced on their knees 
up a lane leading towards the King, and formed by 
ministers on one side and by captains on the other. 
Their cords were held by their captors, who sold them to 
the Crown. The minimum price was one head and two 
fathoms of cloth : an rJd woman with children in her 
arms, and presently led off to the harim, fetched the 
maximum, a large cloth and two heads and a half. All 
except a small child, that cried a little with fear, showed 
the utmost stoicism- The raptors were then, uith the 
usual ceremonies, invested by the ministers ; and each 
cloth was acknowledged with cries, to the s^jft sounds of 

I In the History, the utmost prif>t of a ^kiill \s twenty zckies of 
cowries, or thirty shillings ; of a captive thirtj-two cabess. cabet^a. 
or head of cowries, equal to / 16. 



150 A Mission to Gelelcy King of Dahome, 

flageolets and the tinkling of cymbals. The prisoners 
** without names " were then sold. Finally, the chief 
Eddon and his brother Doicha were placed kneeling 
before the throne. His lucky captor, " Kiko,'* a young 
captain, after ample praise from the King as a warman 
that had brought in three skulls, received, by various 
instalments, a total of sixteen heads and a long white 
cloth. The capturer of the chief's brother received a pink 
pagne. 

Divers decorated men now came hastily forward with 
war-axes and "blue knives." One youth declared that 
he would slay eighty, others forty of the foe, and others 
still more moderately : at the end of this boasting all 
prostrated and shovelled up the dust. " Ago " proclaimed 
Silence ! and the Adanejan told the public, to cries of 
'* Tamule ! " that they must fight bravely against Abeo- 
kuta. They clapped hands, received cowries and liquor, 
and retired. The Gau and five men then made furious 
speeches about the Egbas, ending with a sandbath, and 
the King caused villanous cachinnation by declaring that 
when ** spreading a table" for his father he must place 
Jabatan upon it. To which the lanky chief listened 
without moving even an eye-lid. 

The Blue and afterwards the Fanti Companies rose, 
and capered from side to side. Four Ananun-wa-hwisu, 
or " blue knives," were then placed before the King, and 
a corresponding number of women rushed out, grounded 
muskets, took up the amies blanches, and danced like furies. 
As usual, the men imitated them. It being my turn to 
give ** bakhshish," I wrote a promissory note of 100 dols. 
for the women and 50 dols. for the men, who have other 
means of subsistence. The bamboo fence was thrust out, 
and Gelele came to the fore, dressed in a white fillet and 
a Mauve-coloured tobe, one woman fanning and another 
shading him with a red and yellow parasol. We re- 
mained seated as he harangued the lieges about my gift. 



XX, — The Day of Triumph, 151 

and whilst the herald shouted his strong names he de- 
clared that Abeokuta, being no longer the Englishmen's 
friend, must be broken. After presenting cloth to his 
new favourite, the Ajyaho, and requesting me to come 
to-morrow and address my company, he sent to us the 
usual two flowered caraffes of rum, upon which we soon 
beat a retreat into the cool moonshine. 

At I P.M. on Thursday, January 21, we again went 
to the palace, and found a similar mise-en-scene. About 
200 Blues, some with gunpowdered cheeks and forehead, 
were squatting in a semicircle before the throne : on its 
right was a knot of about sixty female singers, on its left 
the same number of Fanti women. The band, with 
waved hands and loud hums at the end of each strophe, 
were singing : — 

A dog fetches game for its master ; 

So the King brought Ishagga to his father's ghost: 

which sounded much like bathos or anti-climax. The 
ensuing clamour, boasting, presenting arms and fearfully 
lengthy songs, were sleepy work as well as absurd. That 
ancient Pistol, Adan-men-nun-kon, strode up and down 
before the King, shouting Ye-ge ! and pretending to weep 
over the doom of the Egbas, who were eating and drink- 
ing, laughing and talking, all heedless of the evil which 
awaited them. He was unconsciously uttering his own 
death wail. 

Another song, a storm of drums and rattles, and a 
"blue knife" dance, summoned the King to perform, 
which, however, he did not. Two swords and sash-belts 
sent to the chiefs captors, an old musket and powder 
pouches or cartridge boxes, each worth perhaps a shilling, 
distributed amongst the less deserving, caused a renewal 
of saltation and saluting. Two piles of two hundred 
cowrie-heads, surrounded by rum bottles, were heaped up 
"for woman's side," and "for man's side" : amongst 
the workwomen we recognised the Yavedo — Mr. Dawson's 



J 52 A Mission to GeleU, King of Dahome. 

younger mother — a large black girl, perhaps ten years 
younger than her son. After more speeches, vows and 
advice, especially from the Gau, who told the soldiers to 
prepare provisions so as not to faint on the road, twenty- 
five kegs^ of powder were exhibited as the material for 
the morrow's firing. 

As sunset was approaching, the King siunmoned me 
before him to address his guards. I was accompanied by 
Mr. Cruikshank and by Messrs. Bemasko and Dawson, 
the ** Prince Bah," alias Beecham, interpreting. I began 
by saying that amongst us the officer is answerable when 
the soldier is unprepared for fight. Our mode of inspect- 
ing and examining arms was then shown. Against this 
nothing could be advanced. I next proposed to place the 
left hand under the trigger guard, and inserting a knife 
handle into the barrel muzzle, imitated our original 
bayonet. The King at once objected, firstly, that it is 
good for soldiers even in play to run risk, and, secondly, 
that they were expected to '*go in" and "give a touch" 
with their daggers. He evidently is, or would be, a 
** general a dix mille hommes par semaine. Of course, nothing 
remained to say but that every country has its customs ; 
and that amongst us it is, or it ought to be, 

** More honourable far servare 
Civem than slay an adversary." 

Being then urged to address the Blues, I exhorted them 
to talk less and to do more, quoting, 

Avun do kho, e do kho, e dume a. 

A dog (who) talketh palaver, he talketh palaver, he biteth not. 

This the old landlord illustrated by falling on all fours, 
and growling like the canida, which here do not bark.* 

1 The mark was "Kames Mills," probably American sold as 
English gunpowder, which the King prefers, finding, it is said, too 
much charcoal in the French. 

2 In the kingdom of Uganda, north of Unyamwezi, courtiers 
acknowledge the presence by wallowing and whining like dogs. Here 
they wallow, but do not whine. 



XX, — The Day of Triumph. 153 

It being a Dahoman fashion to praise the women at the 
expense of the men, I told the latter that in our country 
the feminine gender was garrulous, and the masculine 
silent, whereas at Agbome the phenomenon was reversed. 
As Adan-men-nun-kon again violently addressed his 
monarch, he was told to keep all that energy for the King 
of Abeokuta. The women, after deriding him, thanked 
me, through their commanding officer, and next morning 
came a present of provisions from both companies, with 
the usual complimentary message that they had sat up 
all night pondering over the words of wisdom which had 
fallen from my lips. 

We were summoned on Friday, January 22nd, but 
business detained the King till sunset, when he accepted 
an excuse. Saturday also was a day of rest, our notes 
requiring to be written out. The time slips easily away 
at Agbome. Rising with the dawn, we set out as soon 
as the hammock- men can be collected, and walk till nine 
A.M. Refection follows till eleven, and my lesson in Ffon 
outlasts the noon. If we visit the Komasi Palace, the 
rest of the day will be a blank ; the brain becomes so 
weary that work in the evening is impossible. If we 
avoid it, the afternoon is an inverted copy of the forenoon. 



154 



CHAPTER XXI. 

DAHOME AND HER CAPITAL. 

The extent and population of Danh-ho-men-to ("the 
Land of Dahome") have been grossly exaggerated. 
Dr. M*Leod, who never left Whydah, Commander Forbes, 
and M. Wallon, have assigned to this inconsiderable pro- 
vince of the Great Oyo or Yoruban empire, the wide 
region between the so-called Kong Mountains on the north, 
and the Bight of Benin on the south, a depth of two 
hundred miles. The rivers and lagoons of Lagos, others 
say the Niger, are made the eastern, while the Volta 
River and the Ashantis become the western frontier. 
This gives a breadth of one hundred and eighty, making 
a total area of 36,000 square miles. 

Such boundaries may have been, although I greatly 
doubt them : now we must reduce Dahome to nearly one- 
tenth. Her northern frontier, bordering on the Makhis, 
is a water called Tevi, eighteen hours of hammock, equal 
to forty miles, from Agbome, giving a maximum direct 
distance of one hundred miles. On the north-eastward, 
beyond the tributary Agoni tribes, are the Iketu and 
other Nagos or Yorubans, who have been plundered, but 
never subjected. To the north-westward are the semi- 
independent race, of Aja,^ of Attakpame,^ and others. 

1 The Aja are known by three short cuts on the cheek ; the Nago. 
by three long, with various combinations. There are sundry sub- 
tribes, as Ajabikome, Ajawachi, and Kpese (the "Peshie" of the 
History), whence the trade went to the Popo and Quitta countries. 
They are described as worshipping thunder ; a point of resemblance 
with Yoruba. The French call them Les Barbares. 

2 The Attahpahms of Commander Forbes. They must not be 



XXI. — Da home and her Capital. 155 

The extreme extent, fifty miles, narrows towards the south, 
giving the province a pyriform shape. The base between 
Godome or Jackin, the easternmost settlement, and the 
frontier between Whydah and the turbulent independent 
Popos, cannot exceed twenty-five to thirty miles. Assum- 
ing, therefore, forty miles as the medium breadth, we 
obtain a superficies of 4000 square miles. Moreover, as 
has been shown, this small black Sparta is hedged in by 
hostile accolents. "Porto Novo" and Badagry, to the 
eastward, have fallen into European hands, whilst the 
Popo republics, on the west, are safe in their marshes. 
The people of Agwe "came in" last year, and were 
received by the King,^ but they will add an element of 
weakness. Dahome will crumble to pieces under the first 
heavy shock. 

The numbers assigned to the kingdom vary greatly, 
and are all guess-work. Commander Forbes proposes 
200,000; M. Wallon raises it to 900,000; Commodore 
Wilmot reduces it to 180,000, which I would further 
diminish to 150,000,'^ of whom, perhaps, four-fifths are 
women and children. The population is thus not a third 
of what the land could support. The annual withdrawal 
of both sexes from industry to slave-hunting and the 
Customs at the capital, the waste of reproduction in 

confounded with the proper Takpas of the powerful Nigerian king- 
dom Nufe. In Mr. Norris' map they are made to extend to the north- 
west of Agbome. I have met amongst the slaves and bush women 
lower lips pierced to admit a bit of coral, and when asking the tribe, 
was generally answered "Takpas." 

1 This took place before the Komasi Palace, when Commander 
Wilmot was at the capital. The head men, with their wives, came 
up and made obeisance, after which the whole deputation received 
presents of rum, cloth, and cowries. Finally they were dismissed to 
their homes, with leave to live in peace and quiet till wanted by the 
King for war. 

2 I judge this from the numerical force of the armies. The dis- 
proportion of sexes is caused by polygamy, and the greater risk and 
exposure of the men. 



156 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome, 

Amazons, and the losses by disease and defeat, have 
made the country in parts a desert. So contemptible is 
the African power which is perhaps the best known 
throughout Europe! And so strong is eccentricity to 
attract notice! 

Agbome first appears upon the stage of history in 
1 724, and since that time there has been a regular inter- 
course between England and Dahome, which has now a 
small literature of her own.^ The enceinte of the capital 
is perhaps larger than that of any other Ffon town, but 
the population certainly does not exceed that of Whydah. 
It is, of course, floating, and perhaps at times may have 
reached the figures assigned to it by Commodore Wilmot 
— 20,000 souls. The site^ like that of AUada, is a rolling 
plain or plateau — these people ever prefer high groimd — 
ending in short bluffs to the north-west, where it is bounded 
by a long depression,^ suggesting the action of eluvium, 
grassy, and streaked with long lines of trees, where water 
must lie, if not flow, in the wet season. Scattered over this 
hollow are the principal pans which scantily supply the 
city. Beyond the valley the country again rises towards 
the Makhi Hills, whose jagged blue summits look entic- 
ingly mysterious to the traveller. Amongst them, Minefin 
and Bowule* are described by the people as high, cold, 
and abounding in game, especially wild hog: their land 
wind is cooling and healthy. These hills, which may be 
considered the threshold of the so-called Kongo region, 
supply the granitic and schistose stones used by the people 
for grinding grain. A glance at the map shows that 
between the Benin Gulf and the Niger the land is pris- 

1 See " History of Dahomy " (pp. 20, 28). Forbes, "Dahomey 
and Dahomans" (vol, i, pp. 4, 5), and preface to those volumes. 

2 Not a '* deep ravine," as Commander Forbes calls it. 

3 Possibly the "Boagry" of the History, which the map places 
W.N.W. of Agbome. Mr. Duncan (Vol. i. chap, i) calls it " Gboo- 
wolley." 



XXI. — DaJiottie and her Capital. 157 

moidal, with a long southern slope, and a shorter northern 
counter-slope to the Great River. 

Let us now circumambulate the mceinte of Agbome, 
which has already been partially described. Beginning 
from the southern, or Ako-chyo Gate, which issues upon 
the Komasi Palace and the adjacent suburb of Bwe-kon, 
about one mile leads us to the Kana-'gbonun, or eastern 
gate, by which we first entered the city. The land between 
them is grassy, dotted with palms, and showing by its 
ridges that the hoe was once active. Crossing the village 
of little fetish huts at the Kana Gate, we bend north- 
wards, leaving to the right a path leading to the Kido, or 
north-eastern water-pits. The country continues the same, 
and amongst the few farmsteads we are shown Dokon, or 
Addokon, the Yevogan's hereditary village. Hugging the 
"zun," or acacia bush of the moat, we pass a hole pierced 
through it where the side is shallowest. Here begins a 
double line of circumvallation, protecting the settlement 
from the north-east to the north-west, including the 
principal waters, especially the King's, and probably in- 
tended as a defence against an equestrian enemy.^ The 
extreme distance between the false and the true enceintes 
is more than a mile, and the interv^al is overgrown with 
bush and grass, with here and there a hut or a dwarf field. 
If we follow the outer line of ditch, the path falls, by a suc- 
cession of steps, with outcrops of iron-stone, into the valley 
between Agbome and the Makhi Mountains. On the 
way, four or five tall trees, which here distinguish the 
moat entrances, point out the Tohun-'gbonun,* or north- 
western gate, in the false enceinte. It is a small and poor 
approach, leading to a water called Nyassa. 

1 We read in the History that when the Oyos attacked Agaja the 
Conqueror at Agbome, and were repulsed by him, they filled the 
deep moat in the hurry of their flight, and thus made abridge for the 
others to escape by. 

2 To (stream), and hun (the hole whence it issues). According 
to some, ** Tohun " is a proper name. 



Mtmm 



158 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome, 

Crossing, however, the ditch before reaching the 
Tohun-'gbonun we pursue a goat track through grass, 
wild egg-plants, and neglected plantations, leaving on our 
right, or northwards, the first slope of the great depres- 
sion. After ten minutes we reach the Agesi-'gbonun,^ or 
northern gap, opening upon the direct road to the Diddo 
or royal water, and upon a path bending N.-East to the 
Nyassa pans. Opposite us the north-western arm of the 
false enceinte^ is crossed by the Alo-ma-bli-nen-'gbonun,* 
built by King Gezo. If we would avoid this, we pass 
through the Agesi-'gbonun into the enceinte^ when a few 
yards conduct us to a shrubby and apparently unguarded 
gap, the Tavosa-'gbonun®: it opens to the N.-West, and 
the moat is spanned by a clay dyke with a steep sag. Re- 
suming from this point our walk, after ten minutes of 
peasants' path through neglected fields, we find the Agbo-e- 
ja-ga,* which conducts to the palace of Tegbwesun (Bossa 
Ahadi). Here begins the large exterior suburb, stretch- 
ing from the N.-West, and spreading over the country to 
the S.-West. Agbome, like other cities, is " going out of 
town" ; and the newer is decidedly the cleaner and the 
prettier locality. In this part the faubourg is called Adan- 
do-kpo-ji. Passing en- route the Lise-hun-zo or palace of 
Sinmenkpen (Adahoonzou II.), lying south of the former, 
we find under fine trees a Nesu-hwe, or Nesu temple, 
fronting a clear and cleaned space. A little beyond it 
lies a large double gate, the Adan-do-kpo-ji, through which 
the King passes when visiting the manes of his ancestors. 
The suburb here straggles out, and on all sides appear 
farms and plantations of palm trees, which, however, 

1 So called from some individual. 

2 Alo (hand), md (don't), bli (roll), nen (virility) — a queer name 
for a gate. 

3 Tavosa, also a proper name. 

4 Apbo (gate), e (he), ja-ga (goes out), i.e., the outward-leading 
gate. 



XXI, — Dahome and her Capital, 159 

grow better inside the enceinte, where they are not scorched 
by bush fires. Near the entrance is another Adan-blon- 
no-ten, an open space where the King sits and swears: a 
gateless passage over the moat, known as the E-Oyo- 
nagba-*gbonun,^ connects it with the southern extremity 
of the inner town and with the Kpo-go-e-ji,'* a broad street 
near the Komasi Palace, where a few market wives daily 
assemble to sell cankey and other provisions. There is a 
similar out-door bazar near the Agbome Palace, called 
the Kechli-'li, or **road of Kechi," a Whydah caboceer. 
Continuing our southerly course under a Vo-sisa or Afa 
charm to prevent disease, in the shape of a gallows fur- 
nished with a dead dog, hung head downwards, we reached 
the Uhun-jro market, and the Ako-chyo-*gbonun, where 
our walk began. Each King builds his own gate at the 
time when he is allowed to raise a palace of swish. Thus 
the total number, including the Tohun-'gbonun and the 
Alo-ma-bli-nen-'gbonun, the sister entrances through the 
false enceinte, and not including the gap, is eight. The 
circumambulation required two hours, equal to five miles.' 
To one walking round the inner enceinte, Agbome 
appears ev«a.to less advantage. The aggerose surface is 
pitted with the deep holes common in Yoruba towns: 
these earth diggings are alternately filled with offals, 
foul vegetation — especially the unwholesome croton plant 
(Cfoton Tiglium) — water, and mud, the latter drying, as 
in Whydah, to the consistency of common ashlar. The 
circumference cannot be more than four miles, occupy- 
ing an hour and a-half; two- thirds of it is a fine open 
country, scattered with trees and fields of bean and 
vetch, mostly choked by dense grasses veiling the ancient 
furrows. To the west and south-west, the buildings 

1 Said to be a proper name, meaning he will break down Oyo. 

2 Interpreted Palm roof-tree corner. 

3 Commodore Wilmot says "probably seven miles round," but 
this was not after actual inspection. 



i6o A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome, 

cluster thickest, and latrina being unknown, the ground 
about them is very foul, the Mosaic precept being utterly 
neglected.*^ Agbome is as truly Dahoman as Washington 
is or was United States, — a typical place. Somewhat 
like old and despotic Cairo, it is a mass of villages, which 
under any but the present barbarians would soon grow to 
be a city. When inspected, however, the composing 
elements are found to be the palace carcases and a few 
large establishments JDelonging to the principal officers 
and their retainers. The conspicuous feature in the 
town is the Agbome House, a rude circle, measuring, if 
we cut off the various angles, 2560 paces in circumference. 
The gates of the Queens are, as has been seen, in the 
north and north-western walls : those of the Kings are in 
the eastern and southern sides. Amongst the most con- 
spicuous of these are the Patin-sa, the Han-ho-nukun-ji,^ 
the Agrin -go-men, the Cowrie House, the Akwaji, the 
Singbo-men, and the Adan-jro-ko-de, which some writers 
have confused into different palaces ; — they have all been 
alluded to in previous pages. To the north of the Agbome, 
as was said, is the venerable but decrepid Dahome House, 
and around both are the " compounds " of the chiefs, 
miniature copies of the royal abodes and jealously 
separated by bush and trees for privacy and in fear of fire. 
To the south-west of the Agbome palace is a thick clump 
of houses, extending to the town ditch, and divided only 
by the Uhun-jro market-place from the Komasi House. 
The two royal houses in the Adan-do-kpo-ji are also sur- 
rounded by compounds, and the same may be said of the 
Bwe-kon-hwe-gbo and the Jegbe Palaces. 

The great drawback at Agbome during the dry season, 
is the deficiency and the badness of the water. An Artesian 
well, or at least a Bletonist, would be a boon. As a rule 

1 Deut. xxiii. 13. 

2 The words mean Han (sing), ho (speak), nukun (eyes), ji (top, 
or upon). 



XXI, — Dahome and her Capital, i6i 

the supply is white with clay, and must be a fertile source 
of dysentery. Often it is chalybeate ; and, at the best, it 
is stagnant. For some reason, superstitious or despotic, 
the lieges are not allowed to dig wells ; perhaps the gravelly 
nature of the soil, and the depth of excavation required, 
would place the operation beyond their powers. Supplies 
must be fetched, therefore, by the Sin-no, or water 
wives, from the great depression bounding the town- 
plateau to the north and north-west, where it is found in 
shallow pits, pans, and holes cut near the larger pools to 
filter the element. As the nearest habitations are distant 
two, and the farthest five, miles from these abreuvoirSy the 
path is trodden day and night with heavy monotonous 
toil. Those who want the water anywhere near the royal 
supply must begin early, the women of the palace issuing 
after dawn, and keeping all clear for themselves. Male 
Dahomans have lately been forbidden the road to Diddo, 
the King's water ; holding ourselves, however, not in- 
cluded in this prohibition, Mr. Cruikshank and I resolved 
to visit it. 

Setting out at four on a misty morning, with two 
**Naureo,^" but without interpreter or hammocks, we 
already found a thin string of carriers on the way. After 
the Agesi-'gbonun, or northern gate, we skirted the 
western arc of the false ditch, and presently fell into the 
slope of the great depression. The ground was disposed 
in little steps, ridges, and sheets of the usual reddish and 
large-pored iron-clay stone, congested as if fused. Half-an- 
hour's walk from the city led us to a thick bush, garnished 
with huge trees, and the tremendous din of women who 
were baling water with calabashes into their jars, told us 
that we had arrived at our destination. Some wretches, 

I Here Krumen are so called from the words signifying "good 
morning " in their tongue ; we left the hammock-men, whose perpetual 
fear of punishment after our departure would have laboured hard to 
mislead us. 
VOL. II. II 



1 62 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome, 

wearied out, were sleeping in the cleared places, with 
pots by their sides, and there had been many breakages. 
The principal pits are those on the left of the arenose 
path ; they are cleaner than those of Nyassa and Kido, 
which show an offensive scum, whilst the surrounding 
swamp savours of decay. After our inspection we fol- 
lowed the northern road, till we reathed a house built 
across it, and occupied by Jabwa, warden of the wells. 
Beyond this point, but turning to the right, before enter- 
ing the bush, there is another water called Danh-to-men.^ 
The ** Minister of the Interior" is badly supplied at 
Agbome, and the provisions are dearer even than at 
Whydah. Prices have quadrupled during the last six 
years, the effect of an ultra-military policy ; and very often, 
as in a famine, no inducement will make men part with 
their store. We tasted beef once only during our stay ; 
the Tsetse fly abounds, I believe, in the bush, but in the 
towns black cattle are plentiful, a small bullock fetching 
lo dols. to 1 6 dols. The mutton and goat*s-flesh are 
equally lean, stringy, and tasteless, and the whole animal 
must be bought ; the sheep costing 2 dols., or half the 
price of its more odiferous congener. Pigs are worth 
more than goats ; in the palace they are purely fed, else- 
where they find themselves. I never saw horseflesh, 
which was eaten of old. Dried fish is sometimes sent up 
from the sea-board. Turkeys, rare at Kana and Agbome, 
fetch I dol. 50 cents ; Guinea fowls and Manilla ducks, 
half-a-crown ; and poor thin pullets, two shillings each. 
Poultry, however, are seldom to be bought, especially at the 
present season, when they are being sacrificed by order of 
Afa. There are also a few pigeons. Eggs are not sold, 
perhaps under the conviction that they will fetch more as 
pullets — when obtainable they are worth 8 cents per 

I Danh (snake, or rainbow), to (water, sea, pool, or stream, op- 
posed to sin, drinking water), and men (in). 

II — 2 



XXI, — Dahome and her Capital. 163 

dozen. Milk is not used/ and animals seem to labour 
under a natural agalaxy. 

There are, as has been said, four large and many 
smaller markets. At the latter, the principal sale seems 
to be of water, grain, vegetables, and a few fruits ; the 
former is sold in pots, of various sizes, and, according to 
quality, commands, at this season, from a halfpenny to a 
penny per gallon. The cankey-ball (Dahome's quartern 
loaf) fetched under the old king, three cowries — it is now 
worth twelve. The principal, if not the only, grains are 
maize and Guinea-corn, whose manifold preparations have 
been alluded to. The vegetables are beans and vetches, 
of various kinds ; yams, tolerable ; groundnuts, common ; 
sweet potatoes, plentiful at Whydah, rare here ; manioc, 
sold boiled as well as raw ; ferine, i.e., farinha, ** wood- 
meal,* " much used at Agbome and at Whydah ; and many 
kinds of greens, especially the excellent occro, or esculent 
Hibiscus, locally called ** Fevi," or "Nye'un"; while 
chives, or small onions, are sold in every bazdr. The 
fruits are oranges, mostly bitter, except those in the royal 
gardens ; plantains and papaws in plantations ; limes, 
somewhat acerb ; cashews and rare cocoas ; mangoes, 
guavas, and wild pine-apples, which, wanting water, run 
to leaf. The tamarind is everywhere disregarded, even in 
the King's house. The ginger is very poor. A little sugar 
and salt can be bought or borrowed, red pepper is abun- 
dant, and the black variety is unknown. As has been 
said, all the liquor is of the vilest, and the traveller should 
land at Whydah, where even beer is often unprocurable, 

1 Dr. M'Leod (1803) found "milk used as food, a custom not 
generally practised on any other part of the south-west coast of this 
continent." In his day, cattle, sheep, goats, and poultry were ex- 
ceptionally plentiful. 

2 The root is ground as potatoes for starch: it is again sun- 
dried, and partially ground to the consistence of oatmeal, when it 
can be eaten dry or with water. 



164 A Mission to Gelele, King of DaJtotne, 

with all his stores. It may be said of the Dahoman as of 
•* poor Paddy," that he 

" On basest food pours down the vilest drink." 
There are small patches of small-boled wild cotton, in 
the town, giving false promise of better things to men of 
strong faith. The wild indigo is sold in cakes, and is the 
common cloth-dye of the country; its colour is excellent, 
but no amount of demand would produce a regular supply 
here. 

The list of animals in Dahome is not extensive. 
Elephants have been killed out, lions are known only by 
name; hyaenas — the local " resurrection men " — and bush- 
cats are common. The people are fond of porcupines, 
hares, and of a large grey and sometimes dark-brown 
rodent, called by Mr. Norris "Agouti," and formerly by 
the blacks "Cabra do matto.^" It is killed by a trap 
falling upon it, split, skewered, and carbonadoed with the 
skin on. An average specimen brings a head of cowries, 
and the flesh, as cooked by the natives, is good ; I never 
saw a live specimen. Small antelopes are found in the 
bush surrounding the capital, and it shelters monkeys, 
which the people gladly devour. There is a yellow speci- 
men called kra-ve,^ which seeing the gun before the latter 
is fired, causes the barrel to burst — a reason explaining 
the frequent accidents. Hunters speak of the Gha (Ic), 
or Inaki of the Egbas, a huge anthropoid ape, formerly 
found about Gbezumen, a village one day's journey from 
Whydah, and they make its cry to resemble that of the 
gorilla. There are also fabulous animals. The Aziza, 
for instance, is a sylvan beast, erect, manlike, and loud- 
voiced: it teaches the hunter fetish, and makes him 
wondrous brave.® Many birds have legends attached to 

1 A name formerly applied by the Portnguese to dog's flesh, 
which is still relished here. 

2 Of this animal wonderful tales are rife throughout Yoruba. 

3 The Aja of the Egbas is a dwarf, who carries off men to the 
bush, and teaches them magic and medicine. 



XXI, — Dahome and her Capital, 165 

them. Kites (the Falco Chilla of India) are eaten, and 
magic medicines are made from the Afunsoko*u, or white- 
breasted raven (Corvus Senegalensis), also called Aze-khe, 
or man-eater. It is here supposed to be a "devil" (bad 
ghost), and to talk ; as with the Egbas, no rain falls when 
it lays its eggs, and its flocking denotes impending war. 
The owl, too, is an Aze-khe, or cannibal, a messenger of 
anthropophagi, who would kill and devour a foe ; men and 
boys will often be seen carrying these small grey birds by 
the legs. The turkey-buzzard is respected for its utility. 
No one will kill the ** King's bird," a small motacilla, termed 
Awaje'khe, which consequently becomes tame as a wren ; 
the Nago women are supposed to talk to and to under- 
stand it. The cuculine ** Scotchman" is a ** devil -bird," 
causing the gun to burst. Mr. Cruikshank shot several 
specimens, but — n'importe; it is called ** Wu-tu-tu,'' an ono- 
matopoetic word, exactly expressing its note.^ There is a 
muscicapa called Berille, which disregards the burning 
bush, when attacking the expelled locusts, therefore the 
soldier is ordered to be "brave as the Berille." Ring- 
doves, large and small, abound through the country, and 
were noticed by Phillips. There is a fine spur-fowl known 
as Koklo-asso, or bush poultry, heavier birds and darker 
than the English partridge, short winged and good runners. 
They are best killed with No. 3 shot. In the first year 
they are good eating, and they are found in coveys 
throughout the enceinte, when not built over. A single 
quail was seen, and the few herons and water birds were 
very wild. We could not collect many specimens, being 
compelled to confine our rambles to the vicinity of the 
town. 

The tenure of land throughout the empire is in "fee- 
simple," allodium, as amongst us, being unknown. Agri- 
culture is despised, because slaves are employed in it. 

I This is much as if we were to call a crow a " caw," and a sheep 
a "baa" — expressive but childish. 



1 66 A Mission to Gelele^ King of Dahome. 

The people, however, are not ignorant of husbandry. 
The women ridge the ground neatly with their little hoes, 
and some, more industrious, dispose over their crofts the 
huge heaps of kitchen-midden that have grown about 
their houses. Were its cultivation enforced, the oil-palm 
as has been said, would be a mine of wealth, and the 
roads to the coast, except in a few places, are good enough 
for wheeled vehicles. But there is scant inducement to 
amass riches, of which the owner would assuredly be 
"squeezed" as often as he could support the operation. 

Dahome, like Yoruba, perhaps I may say like eastern 
and western intertropical Africa generally, is a red soil,^ 
and prodigiously fertile. This is ** dead dries," when the 
algid breath of the desert wind blows strongly, making all 
a dust. Yet even the poles planted in our yard put forth 
green leaves. 

Agbome is higher, drier, and less unhealthy than 
Whydah. After eight years' weathering, the swish walls 
show little damage here. The Harmattan'^ season lasts 
from December to January, and is followed by the hot 
months of March and April, when tornadoes usher in toler- 
ably heavy rains. The wet weather begins in May, or 
sometimes, as in 1863, late in June. About September 
there is a break, called the harvest-time or the Little 
Dries. October and November are the later rains, gener- 
ally accompanied by severe tornadoes, and by tremendous 
storms of thunder and lightning. The climate, in fact, is 
is that of inner Yoruba.'' 

1 Hence, in Senegal, the old French name, " Le terrier rouge," 
anglicized by " Red Borough." 

2 The Harmattan wind, here called Wuo, is a supernatural being, 
not unlike the Giant of Egba. This black iEolus is shut in a cave, 
under a guardian called Wuo-hun-to, who, after oiling his own body, 
which would otherwise be cut up by the wind, opens the gate and lets 
his charge issue to torment the world. It is curious to find a Cave of 
the Winds in Yoruba. 

J Mr. Cooley, the self-styled " Opener of Inner Africa," has 



XXI. — Dahome and her Capital, 167 

The modern Dahomans, I have said, are a mongrel 
breed, and a bad. They are Cretan liars, cretins at learn- 
ing, cowardly and therefore cruel and bloodthirsty; 
gamblers, and consequently cheaters ; brutal, noisy, 
boisterous, unvenerative, and disobedient, dipsas-bitten 
things, who deem it a ** duty to the gods to be drunk" ; a 
** flatulent, self-conceited herd of barbarians," who en- 
deavour to humiliate all those with whom they deal ; in 
fact, a slave race — vermin with a soul apiece. 

Furca, furax, infainis, iners, furiosa ruina, 
describes the race. They pride themselves on not being, 
like the Popos, addicted to the ** dark and dirty crime of 
poison ; " the fact is, they have been enabled hitherto to 
carry everything with a high and violent hand. They 
are dark in skin, the browns being of xanthous tempera- 
ment, middle-sized, slight, and lightly made — my Kru- 
men looked like Englishmen amongst them^ — agile, good 
walkers, and hard dancers, that carry little weight. 
Their dress is a godo, or T-bandage, a nun-pwee (under- 
cloth), or a Ffon chokoto (pair of short drawers), and an 
owu-chon, or body-cloth, twelve feet long by four to six 

lately (Athenaeum, July 18, 1863) informed the world, that " the 
rainy season is also the hot season, near the equator." Is this 
dotage ? Bar hot (book 3, chap, xii.) informs us that the Guinea year 
has two seasons, the summer and winter (of the Portuguese and 
English), called good and bad by the Dutch ; high and low by the 
French. " Summer (t.^. hot dry weather) begins in September, and 
lasts the five following months, and the winter {i.e. cold wet season) 
holds the other six months of the year, which are also divided into 
two rainy, two misty and rainy (or smoky), and two windy and rainy 
months (our tornadoes)." So of the Great Bandy (or Bonny River, 
with which he was personally acquainted), he says (book 4, chap, viii.), 
"We reckon the months of October, November, and December, the 
worst season, because of the dry scorching heat of the sun." 

I In all wrestling bouts, my Krumen threw the hammock-bearers 
on their heads, and on one occasion, during a kind of party fight, six 
of them, with fist and stick, held their own against twenty Daho- 
mans. 



i68 



A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome. 



broad, worn like the Roman toga, from which it majj^ 
possibly be derived. 

The women are of the Hastini or elephant- or dei 
described by the Reverend Koka Pandit, dark, pla: 
masculine, and, comparatively speaking, of large, strong, 
and square build. They are the reapers as well as the 
sowers of the field, and can claim the merits of laborious- 
ness, if of no other quality. They tattoo their skins, 
esjjeciaily the stomach, with alto-relievo patterns; their 
dress is a zone of beads, supporting a bandage beneath 
the do'vo, or scanty !oin-c!oth which suffices for the poor 
and for young girls ; the upper classes added an aga-vo, 
or over-cloth, two fathoms long, passed under the arms, 
and covering ail from the bosom to the ankles. The_ 
peculiarities of their coifftire and ornaments have t 
explained. 

Neither sex ever " wears shirt, shoe, or stocking i 
their lives." Yet, as an old traveller remarks, at least! 
this advantage results from their simplicity of dress, that ' 
f^ of both sides they may see their tackle before they go tot.i 
(work, and uot, as we are forced to do, take wives i 
[adventures, without knowing their bodily defects and I 
Ideformities, which are covered and concealed by theifl 
clothes." And even those who deny that climate makes 
the man will not refuse its claim to making the tailor. 
European attire in Africa is as void of the fitness of things 
as an African toilette would be in Europe, Here leather- 
perishes, broadcloth loses nap and stiffens, linen 
cotton mildew or change colour, gloves feed cockroaches 
and flannels shrink to half size. 



169 



CHAPTER XXII. 

THE FIRING TO WHYDAH, AND CONCLUSION OF THE 

CUSTOMS.* 

At nine a.m., of Monday, January 25th, we were 
suddenly summoned to the Jegbe, or southernmost palace, 
lying about twenty minutes of hammock, on a broad open 
road, beyond the Komasi House. The first thing we 
remarked were little grass huts, built at intervals of 200 
to 300 yards, and the measuring-rope still lay upon the 
ground ; the first was on the right hand of the Komasi 
Gate. They had pent roofs, with a terminal tuft at each 
gable, small verandahs, supported by light poles, and the 
side walls were patterned with lines and lozenges of light- 
coloured bamboo and ** Soyyan," the thunder fetish shrub. 
Those nearest the palace were the most decorated. 
Before each hut, for the two soldiers lodged in it, were 
planted on four short forked sticks a pair of muskets, lest 
one should miss fire. During the present custom no dis- 
charge of guns is allowed in the town. These Gu-ho, or 
** tabernacles," are the lodgings of the Dahoman army 
when on the line of march ; as they extend to Whydah, 
they must number some 880, and represent a waste of 
work that would repair all the walls of all the palaces. 
The bright idea of the ** firing play" originated from the 

I This festival in its entirety is known to the natives as Azan'gbe 
— ^birthday to-day. The King keeps his birthday once a year, not 
once per week as his brother of Komasi, and the day is mostly a 
matter of guess. 



lyo A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome, 

Chacha de Souza, who, by stationing men on the road, 
sent up in an hour or two a cigar from Whydah to King 
Gezo at Agbome^ — a rude and barbarous telegraph. Gezo 
worked it out to its present state; he, however, used to 
begin his ceremonies at 7 a.m. 

Passing Bwe-kon Hwe *gbo on the right, we de- 
bouched upon an open country, with light green fields, 
to which grazing horses gave a home look. The out- 
skirts of the southern suburb are scattered over with 
outlying villages of matting, where the principal officers 
are expected at times to lodge, and here the oil palm- 
tree begins to show in force. The sun was hot, and 
the Harmattan blurred the blue horizon line, the float- 
ing imperceptible dust doing away with all idea of 
nearness beyond a hundred yards. The climate is 
much that of an Egyptian spring, remarkable for flies, 
dust, and khamsin, the desert wind, here represented by 
the Harmattan. ** Truly rural " was the scene, and the 
open and healthy site would be far superior for an 
** English House " to the noise, dulness, and prison- 
sensation of the town ; the main disadvantage, however, 
is its distance from water. On the left of the road was 
the Nesu-hwe, or fetish, in which the King sits when on 
his way to change palaces ; white flags were planted in a 
space railed off with the usual thin bamboo and tie-tie ; 
a heap of speckled pottery lay outside, whilst inside 
squatted reverend men and women. 

After half-an-hour's march, our chairs were placed 
beneath a tree opposite, and some 100 yards distant from, 
a long wall of faded matting. This is Jegbe House, 
the private abode of the present King when he was heir- 
apparent ; and here he lived during the last few years of 
his father's life, cultivating the reactionary party. As 

I The forwarding of presents, however, from town to town is 
common in Yoruba, and the Egbas call it Asingba. It is the 
" Banghey dawk" of Africa. 



XXII. — The Firing to Whydah. 171 

Gelele has not yet been confirmed at Allada, the enceinte 
walls must not be built of mud, and whilst the King 
lives under matting, so must his nobles. 

At 11.30 A.M. we were summoned into the palace 
interior. The Agwaji Gate led into an oblong court of 
matting, sprinkled with thick-leaved little fig-trees of 
vivid green, and divided into two by the usual line of 
bamboos. At the bottom of the southern half was the 
royal pavilion, somewhat like a Shahmiyana in Bengal, 
with an open wing on each side. The sloping roof of the 
central part, intended for the King, was of gold and lake 
damask, under two broad strips of red and green satin ; 
the wings, all silk and velvet, were horizontally banded 
with red, white-edged green, purple and yellow, red and 
green, in succession, from the top ; and where the tongue- 
shaped lappets started, with chrome yellow. The hang- 
ings, playing loosely in the wind, were remarkable chiefly 
for grotesque figures of men and beasts cut out of coloured 
cloth and sewn to the lining. At the main entrances seven 
umbrellas, three figured and four plain white, formed a 
baldachin for the women, and sheltered an equal number of 
rude and ricketty little tables. Here also were disposed 
many calabashes ; eight pairs of muskets, each with its 
Amazon, stood on forks ; and in the shade lay a few 
ancient officers, old babery, in bright silk cloaks and 
tippets, holding acinaciform bill -hooks. On the men's 
side, fronting the King, were five tattered white 
umbrellas, covering eleven poor tables, and behind them 
a score of ministers and captains, attired, like the 
women, in capes and majitos of red, pink, and flowered 
silks and satins. Chalk-goggled Kpo-fen-sun, head man 
and head fool, and an assistant Wamba, hideous in a red 
velvet tobe of Hausa cut, sat on the proper right of the 
throne, under a bit of matting near the model of a canoe 
raised on little poles, with three pennons, red, white, and 
blue. Dancing and singing went on in different parts of 



172 A Mission to GeUle, King of Dahonu. 

the compound, and presently a small party of Ko-si, or 
filles de joie, ^^ ior man side" and "for woman side," ail 
dark and very plain, sang before the royal tent, and 
walked about amongst the males. 

Our chairs were placed before a group of miserables, 
who had been sitting in the palace since dawn — Mr. 
Dawson, Pierre, the mulatto ** landlord," of Frenchtown, 
Whydah, where he was born, and his attendant, an old 
Brazilian,' together with a M. Cirqueira, before alluded 
to. They were apparently attending upon a pair of half- 
castes, Antonio de Souza, brother of the Chacha, and 
Francisco Zangrony, son of a Spanish merchant at 
Whydah.'* The latter two had arrived last night at 10 
p.m., and at six this morning they had been summoned to 
the palace. 

After we had waited about two hours, an increased 
noise and hubbub, an uprising of male and female 
dignities, and a raising of the pavilion flaps, announced 
the King. He was dressed in a yellow silk toga, with 
small red flowers ; a broad belt of probably false pearls 
and gold hung from his left shoulder to the right side, 
and a large crucifix suspended to his neck, were the 
the principal ornaments : in his left hand he held a 
common hour-glass. After he had deposited himself on 
the couch acting throne, we saluted him, and he returned 
the compliment with a large black felt sombrero plentifully 
braided with gold. He then drank with us all, using a 
silver mug, which, amongst silver armlets, a rosary, and 
sundry pieces of plate, stood before him on an old- 

1 Known as To (father, scil., his father), do (speaks), nun (thing), 
'gbo (true, opposed to Vu, a lie; e.g., Nun boe! — it is true; Nun vue! 

— it is false). 

2 Years age Zangrony pere disputed about canoe-men with the 
Rev. T. B. Freeman, formerly Wesleyan missionary to these parts, 
and died a few days afterwards. Of course his mishap was attributed 
to the "god-man*s" wrath. 



XXI L — The Firing to Whydah. 173 

fashioned table with four metal legs and a red velvet cover. 
Whilst drinking, a piece of white calico was held up before 
the royal face. 

The ceremonies of the day began with the prostra- 
tions and the copious sand-drenchings of three captains, 
who had quarrelled. They kissed earth as if they loved 
it, as the popular exile is supposed to do when restored to 
" native shore." After long compliments to the King, 
a woman rose and cried, **A-de-o,^'* and at 1.40 p.m. 
the two muskets planted before the King were discharged. 
The firing was taken up by the rest ; it ran round 
Jegbe, went to and returned from Komasi House in three 
minutes. Thus Gelele obtained Gezo's permission to 
" open the Custom,'* and in honour of the occasion he 
twice drank our healths. 

At 2 P.M. another cry of ** A-de-o" started the gims 
to Whydah, which they ought to reach in half-an-hour. 
The Addu-konun and the Sosu-to ^ walked down a line of 
cowries placed about six feet outside the dividing bamboo 
in distinct pairs, enabling the caboceers to ascertain by 
counting when the firing would arrive at its destination. 
On the women's side a weaveress, squatting before the 
usual artless upright loom of Dahome, made a cloth, and 
calculated the number of threads — the rudest substitute 
for a time-piece. Meanwhile the soldier chiefs, Adan- 
men-nun-kon and Dakua, knelt, looking as usual from the 
eye-corner to get the cue for time, made obeisance, and, 
whilst five heralds proclaimed the royal titles with normal 
blateration, and a jester sprang his kra-kra, or watch- 
man's rattle, they began a speech, which is bound to last 
till the discharge returns from Whydah. For a time the 
tongues bore up bravely ; presently the dust and the heat 

1 For Adios, good-bye, a word everywhere used on the Coast till 
superseded by English. 

2 Addu (tooth, teeth), and konun (laugh). The other name is 
Sosu (proper name), and to (father), — that is to say, Sosu's father. 



174 ^ Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome. 

of the sun told upon them ; and lastly, the poor devils could 
hardly from time to time ejaculate a sentence. The firing 
was an utter failure ; an hour^and-a-half had elapsed 
before a blue bag, passed from hand to hand by the 
women, was placed, fronting the King, as a trophy from 
Whydah. There will be stick for this. 

Gelele, having again drunk with us, then summoned 
by name his Gau — who responded " W'e ! " — and began a 
a stale and dreary allocution touching Abeokuta and his 
father's grave, preparation for war, and his resolve that 
the Min-gan should treat as a captive any soldier dis- 
gracing herself by hanging back. Eight old women, the 
ghosts of the kings, presently marched up, solemn and 
slow, paying their respects to live royalty. 

Ensued a terrible hubbub, drumming, talking, and 
singing, which told my now practised ears that victual 
was about to appear. Presently women moved out the 
bamboo, and spread mats before the King ; whilst long 
lines of slave-girls deposited upon them dishes of cates, 
plates of food, bottles of liquor, baskets and calabashes 
marked with the royal brand. There was a great 
number of barbecued piglets, which were easily lifted with 
the thumb and two fingers. Amidst a prodigious noise, 
the provision was parcelled out. We received a share 
that gladdened the hearts of our hammock-men ; they 
little recked that the roasted-whole of to-day would right 
soon diminish to a porker's nose for thirty, their number. 

This ceremony was initiated by Gezo, although the 
custom of spreading a table ^ is common along the West 
African coast. At the end of the funeral customs, especi- 
ally in the Old Calabar River, a small house is built upon 

I That the manes of the dead may eat and be filled. Here it is 
called by the natives Agban (profit), du (eating), do men (on the 
ground). Agban also signifies luggage, a ship's cargo, meats of all 
kinds, and so forth; whilst Agban-du, or profit-eating, is our spend- 
thrifting, meaning that these funeral expenses are ruinous to all but 
the King. 



I 



XXII, — The Firing to Whydah, 175 

the beach, and in it are placed the valuables possessed by 
the departed — some whole, and others broken, — statues, 
clocks, vases, porcelains, and so forth, together with a bed, 
that the ghost may not sleep upon the floor, and a quan- 
tity of food upon the table. Here, on the fourth day after 
the burial, come all who have assisted in the ceremony; 
they wash their faces, and enjoin the departed ghost, by 
the care with which he has been provided with what he 
loved in life, not to let or injure them.^ Similarly in 
Europe, during the last century, when princes lay in state, 
a well-garnished table was provided for the dead in the 
chapel. 

On Tuesday, January 26th, we were again called to 
the palace, where we found little novelty. The King, 
wishing to "talk Abeokuta," summoned his three senior 
military officers, and finding all absent, sent for them. I 
expacted a scene ; the ** Monster of Dahome," however, 
contented himself, after haranguing the defaulters, with 
ordering the people to greet each with cries of 
**Agbwere!'*" 

Then took place the ceremony of declaring war. 
The King sent out a small knapsack-shaped leather case, 
containing rum, to the Min-gan, who, after passing the 
strap over his head, pirouetted three or four times before 
" the presence," and forwarded the article by a messenger 
to the Gau. This dignitary received it with an im- 
mense show of enthusiasm ; and after a fighting speech, 
rushed affectedly to the gate, crying to the outsiders 
that war-rum had been given. The King, summoned by 
his subjects, came forth in a mauve cloth, and, to their 
uproarious delight, addressed them in Fanti, **Egya Mdk- 
'yo" — Father, good morning! — meaning, that when such 

1 See under the word Nqueme, in the valuable dictionary of the 
Efik ' language, published by the Rev. Hugh Goldie. Dunn and 
Wright," Glasgow, 1862. 

2 You are a fool ! or, You have spoiled it ! 



176 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome. 

words were spoken, he must attack the Egbas. Then 
taking a crooked stick, he performed two decapitation 
dances and retired, after handing the weapon to his 
followers, who fervently imitated him. It was nearly 
9 P.M. before we reached our quarters. 

At 8 A.M., Thursday, January 28th, the two wives 
for the Chacha of Whydah and Jose dos Santos were 
despatched to the coast. This is the principal ceremony 
of ** Firing from Whydah," and the women must not quit 
their hammocks, which are carried by the live telegraph, 
till, half dead with fatigue, they reach Whydah. Nothing 
was to be seen but two plain-faced slave girls, in broad- 
brimmed straws and country cloths, sitting their ham- 
mocks in the old fashioned style of Bowdich and Dupuis, 
crossways, and holding to the pole instead of lying at full 
length. 

The ceremonies concluded hastily ; the King was 
hurried by a curious appearance in the sun, visible only 
through the opaque Harmattan air when about 30 deg. 
above the horizon. At 4 p.m., January 27th — we first 
remarked it on that day — a spot, like a black pin's head 
upon the yellow surface, occupied nearly the centre of the 
globe ; it gradually shifted upwards and to the right in 
the morning, the reverse, of course, appearing in the 
evening. It was not seen after February 3rd, but the 
dense morning fogs, and the thick evening mists and 

smokes, may have hid it from us. The Kew Observatory 
noticed it. 

On Saturday, January 30th, a report reached Ag- 

bome, that a Mr. Craft,^ the mulatto agent for the new 
** Company of African Merchants " (limited), had arrived 
at Whydah, and forthwith appeared a batch of samples 
and stuffs which the King had ordered. The Buko-no on 
the same evening proposed that Mr. Bernasko should at 

I The " Iwelrohin," or Abeokuta paper of July, 1863, introduced 
him as having been "sent to Dahomy with a view to inducing the 
King to abandon human sacrifices, and to encourage legitimate trade." 



XXII. — The Firing to Whydah. 177 

once leave us and superintend the loading of the valuables, 
whilst we, being ** great men" — "soft sawder," as usual, 
to dorer la pillule , — must wait for a more ceremonious dis- 
missal. These people, who expect much from traders but 
little from servants of Government, make no secret of 
preferring those who pay to those who do not.^ My reply 
was, that Mr. Bernasko*s departure would be the signal 
for mine, even if we must walk to Whydah. Wishing to 
change the system of dismissal, I had fortunately re- 
served for the hour of need all the small presents which 
had been brought for the high officials, and which are 
usually given immediately after arrival. 

Seeing little chance of immediate departure, I re- 
doubled my efforts to penetrate for a few marches north- 
wards, where the lovely hills of Makhi were a perpetual 
eyesore to me. The late King relaxed the usual Daho- 
man severity in matters of ingress, giving escorts to Dr. 
Dickson, the fellow-traveller of Clapperton, and to Mr. 
Duncan, afterwards H.B.M. Vice-Consul. His son, on 
the contrary, has shut up all the roads, lest strangers 
should learn something about the interior, and perhaps 
assist his enemies; by thus standing fast and firm 
against any semblance of innovation, he hopes, perhaps, 
to hold his own, even in opposition to white men, whose 
superiority he never questions. He promised that, on my 
return, I should penetrate into the mountain-land: 
pleaded want of time and troops, and consoled me by the 
suggestion that I was too important a personage to be 
risked in the bush. This was not wholly "blarney" ; any 
accident to the " King's stranger" would be looked upon 
as a dire and portentous occurrence.^ 

1 So Commander Forbes complained of being kept waiting out- 
side the palace when the slave-dealers were in consultation with King 
Gezo. 

2 See Mr. Duncan, vol. ii. p. 263. The King gave him an escort 
of 100 men, and told the Ashanti envoy, who wished to make mischief, 
VOL. II. 12 



178 A Mission to Gekk, King of Dakome. 

We had now spent nearly six weeks in Agbome \\ i Ji- 
out being allowed to deliver the message of Her Majesty's 
Government in person to the King. The latter was 
therefore informed, that until some respect was paid 
to my instructions, I should not again appear at the 
palace. An opportunity of proving that my words were 
spoken in earnest soon presented itself. When sent for 
on February 6th, to witness the distribution of cloth 
amongst the soldiers who had been firing to Whydah, I 
objected to leave the house. Mr, Cruiltshank, however, 
attended, and saw the presentation of 470 cloths, each 
fourteen yards long, and here worth about two dollars 
each. Thereupon the Buko-no informed the Reverend, 
that after five days, which here means the fourth (Satur- 
day the gth) we should be summoned to deliver the 
Message, and be instantly "passed."' We could not, 
however, rely upon the truth of a word that fell from the 
holy man's lips. 

On February 8th an ofScial letter from Commodore 
Wilmot informed me that a cruiser was waiting for my 
conveyance to the Oil Rivers of the Eight of Biafra. 
This rendered strong measures necessary. The thirty 
porters for whom I had applied had been forgotten, and 
further delay appeared probable. On the morning of 
February gth, our boxes and bags were produced, and 
were ostentatiously packed in the compound, whilst 
Messrs, Bemasko and Dawson repaired to the palace 
with a message, that unless faith was kept with me, I 
must set out on the next day. They witnessed one of 

that he might lake back the royal present, a gold hilted sword, and 
inform his father that all the ^old 1q (he country would nnt induce 
himself to intercept an Englishman. 

t This is an old custom of the empire; no visitor can leave the 
King without his especial pennisaion. In 1772, Mr. Norria was 
"passed " with a present consiMinj;of a. fal sheep, an anker of brandy, 
and five ealiess of cowries 



XXII, — The Firing to Whydah. 179 

the royal houtades. The high ministers, when summoned 
by the King, did not appear within a satisfactory time : 
Gelele reproached them violently for not living, according 
to his arret y close to the Jegbe, and ordered his Amazons 
to take up the Bamboos, and to drive them with blows 
and curses from his presence. They went out like beaten 
hounds, and cowered at the gate, whilst the King sent a 
message to me apologizing for not attending to our affairs, 
as rage would prevent his sleeping. 

On February nth, Mr. Dawson was "passed." He 
swore sacrament that he would never again show face at 
Agbome ; but being a prudent man, he contented himself 
with the Fanti proverb, " Cross the river before you speak 
ill of the crocodile." The ceremony of breaking glasses 
to conclude the Customs now took place. I was sur- 
prised to hear that it is considered the real European 
mode of ending a feast ; it must date from old times, when 
three-bottle men drank only in the evening, not through- 
out the day as do modern sobrieties. The missionaries, 
when sent for to the Jegbe Palace, found, in the central 
space between the men and the women, a table, with two 
flasks of rum and liqueur, flanked by plates and glasses. 
The King, having drunk with his visitors to the health of 
his father's ghost, directed a Portuguese mulatto, a 
resident at Agbome, to pray in Lusitanian tongue for the 
departed. This done, Gelele spilt a few drops of rum 
upon the ground, again imbibed, and dashed his glass 
upon the table. It was a signal for all those present to 
do the same, and the attendants smashed everything, 
including the tables. 

This terminated the Khwe-ta-nun, or yearly Customs 
for 1863-4. 



i8o 



CHAPTER XXIII. 

THE DELIVERY OF THE MESSAGE. 

On Friday, February 12th, we received two visits 
from the fat Adanejan. He led me with great mystery 
into an inner room, and, tracing lines upon the floor, asked 
many questions about Abeokuta, carefully cross-examin- 
ing me, till convinced that he was not deceived. The 
King's personal courtesy to me demanding some return, 
I drew the outline of the Egba defences upon a sheet of 
paper and sent it back, advising him by no means, till his 
forces were trebled, and even then not without howitzers 
or field pieces, to cross the Ogun, a river so fatal to his 
father. ** Ah ! but," said the stout man, " the enemy will 
run when they see us." I told him that they would not, 
at least, as long as they were sheltered by walls, and sug- 
gested fascines, and simple methods of getting at the 
enemy, which were received with incredulous smiles, as 
things worthy of the crafty white, but incompatible with 
the dignity of Dahoman heroism.^ Presently Adanejan 
departed, carrying with him, in token of having seen 
me, a favourite bowie-knife, which it was impossible to 
recover. 

At 3 P.M. on the next day, February 13, when, almost 
in despair, we had resolved to walk to the coast, using our 
hammock-men as porters, the Buko-no's messenger 
hurried us in full dress to the palace. The old man thus 

I The reader will presently see how important was the advice. 



XXI 1 1. — The Delivery of the Message, i8i 

deceived me again, and for the last time. He had heard 
of his rival's success in carrying off a favourite weapon, 
and he was resolved to " pay me out." Harpagon lay 
quietly in the cool verandah, with a stool supporting 
his head, whilst we had the pleasure of sitting in a kind of 
Samum, with glare enough to dazzle an eagle, opposite 
the ragged palm-leaf fence of the Jegbe House. It was 
anything but a dignified position, this four hours* seance 
before the barbarous abode of a petty African chief, whose 
pride has been swollen by mulatto slave-dealers into a 
manner of mania. I resolved to speak plainly to the King 
upon the subject of this unworthy treatment. 

At 6 P.M., when the few ministers who were to be 
present at the conference had entered the palace, we re- 
ceived a summons. Passing through the two mat-fenced 
courts, we found the King sitting under an ordinary shed, 
verandahed by umbrellas. As usual, there was a ring of 
white sand before him ; the nearest posts had been covered 
with calico, and half-a-dozen "ladies" squatted behind 
their lord. Besides ourselves, the only men present were 
the Adanejan, the Meu, and the Buko-no, who acted ward. 
He had ignominiously rated and turned out John Mark, 
the '* governor," who attempted to accompany Beecham, 
the recognized interpreter. The prostrations before the 
King were perfunctory, and there was little of the cere- 
moniousness displayed at the public levees. 

After we had made conges, Gelele rose and shook 
hands with us. Returning to his seat, a bamboo cot, 
covered with fine cloths and mats, he perceived that there 
was something wrong, and told me that he had heard of 
my complaining about him, after we had been the best of 
friends, dancing and drinking together. I replied that 
there was no grievance against the King, but that it had 
not been well to retard the delivery of so important a mes- 
sage for two months. This was met by the plea of occu- 
pation, and by reminding me that the substance of the 



1 82 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahonte. 

despatches had already been communicated. My next 
objection was, that his minister had attempted to make 
us keep the house, like state prisoners, for two moons : 
that we had been subject to other petty annoyances at the 
hands of the Buko-no ; that we had not been permitted 
freely to see and to mix with the chiefs ; and that we had 
been prevented from visiting the Makhi Mountains for 
sport and recreation, as was permitted to Messrs. Dickson 
and Duncan. To this he gave the usual reply, that they 
were small men ; and as this did not satisfy me, he asked 
me point blank, after a whisper from the Meu, if there 
was anything upon that subject in my instructions. I re- 
plied in the negative, and was thereupon assured that, 
had my orders been such, I should have been allowed to 
travel northward, — which, to use the mildest terms, was 
not the case. I finally asked him if he was aware that 
we had that very afternoon been kept for hours in the sun 
before his gate, a custom unknown to all civilized peoples. 
As we expected, he had never heard of it, and showed a 
surprise, which appeared natural, at this and others of our 
tribulations. To change a disagreeable subject, he ban- 
tered me about keeping the Buko-no's unruly slaves in 
order with the staff, to which I pleaded a molliter imposuit. 
At length, seeing my brow cleared by the perfect good 
humour with which he discussed these personal pre- 
liminaries, he directed me to read the " Message." 

I then began, and, after each sentence, the inter- 
preter translated it. He did so correctly, in fear of con- 
viction. The reasons which prevented Captain Wilmot's 
return to Agbome were first duly stated ; then came the 
ticklish subjects of slave export and human sacrifice, for- 
bidden themes at the Court of Dahome. Touching the 
former, the King was informed that Her Majesty's 
Government is resolved to arrest the traffic, and that the 
United States of America would no longer allow their 
vessels to carry live cargo. With respect to human 



XXII L — Tke Delivery of the Message, 183 

sacrifice, that the more its horrors were mitigated, the 
better. In enlarging upon these last two paragraphs, I 
felt a sense of hopelessness with which the reader of these 
pages will, perhaps, sympathize ; it was like talking to 
the winds. As regards the King's offer to repair the 
English Fort, Whydah, and to permit it to be garrisoned 
by English troops,^ I thanked him for such mark of confi- 
dence, assuring him that the royal protection was all- 
sufl&cient, but that before English merchants would settle 
at Whydah, there must be the inducement of useful com- 
merce. I assured him that in such case an agent would 
be appointed to reside at Whydah, both as an organ of 
communication with the King, and as an aid in carrying 
out all views of licit trade.^ The gift of a carriage and 
horses — here came the rub — would entirely depend upon 
future relationb between Her Majesty' Government and 
the King, who must see the propriety of making some 
concessions touching his Customs and slave hunts. 
Finally, that if any of the coloured Christian prisoners 
taken at Ishagga were alive, it would be considered an 
earnest of the King's friendly feeling, and of his desire to 
perform his promises, if these people were given up to us. 
The message was heard, with few interruptions, from 
beginning to end. When the reply was given, I perceived 
that the King and his visitors could not, like many 
Africans, "pick up the words," that is to say, answer 
sentence by sentence. Gelele replied in a rambling style, 
which requires ordering: That the slave-trade was an 
ancestral custom, established by white men, to whom he 

1 Ashanti has just now shown the unadvisability of stationing 
Europeans on the west coast of Africa. Both Gelele and his father 
have expressed an earnest desire to give up Whydah to the English 
— but neither meant it. The latter is said to have refused the 
cession to the Prince de Joinville. 

2 I need hardly add, that the commerce never will become licit, 
except by force ; and that until that time an agent is simply impos- 
sible. 



184 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahonie, 

would sell all they wanted : to the English, who, after 
greatly encouraging the export, had lately turned against 
it, palm oil and ** tree wool " ; to the Portuguese, slaves. 
That a single article would not defray such expenses as 
those which I had witnessed. Moreover, that the cus- 
toms of his kingdom compelled him to make war, and 
that unless he sold he must slay his captives, which Eng- 
land, perhaps, would like even less.^ 

The English, he resumed, had ever been the best 
friends of his family. One of his ancestors had sent a son 
amongst them, and thus all had learned to love them.* 
In the days of Tegbwesun (Bossa Ahadi, 1727- 1774), one 
Ajan-gan — Mr. Goodson — had taught Dahome to use 
field pieces, and thus they had been able to debel the 
Makhi country called "Za.®" The road of amity had 
been closed to Gezo, and re-opened to himself by his friend 
the Rev. Mr. Bernasko. The "King of England" and 

I So the great Central African King, Muata ya Nvo, or Matiamvo, 
said, in 1847, to the Portuguese traveller, Gra9a: "It is customary 
for us to sell ias slaves those who commit murder or robbery, and 
those who are guilty of adultery, insubordination, and sorcery ; and 
having a great number of slaves, what can I do with them but put 
them to death if I cannot find purchasers for them ? " 

I This is explained by Dr. M'Leod (pp. 102-106). About 1800 
one of the kings forwarded two of his brothers for education to 
England, on board a ship then trading to Whydah. The captain 
died, and they were sold as slaves at Demarara. After sundry diffi- 
culties, they were redeemed by the influence of Mr. Robertson, of 
Liverpool, and were sent back under charge of a Captain Davidson. 
They were dressed like English boys, and had scarcely touched their 
natal soil, than they resumed all their old customs, falling on their 
knees to the caboceer who received them, and next day they dis- 
robed themselves of jacket and trowsers, not having been '* white- 
washed," i.e. made white men by their royal brother. Two days 
afterwards they were conducted to Agbome. They did not complain 
of being sold at Demarara, and probably they expected nothing else. 

I It is now an unimportant place, distant a day's march N.E. of 
Agbome. The ruffian conqueror is said to have cut off the noses of 
all his captives. 



XXIII . — The Delivery of the Message. 185 

he were now like one finger. But he directed me to 
write and declare that, whereas men-of-war formerly 
never touched slavers, they now captured them near his 
beach, which could not be permitted. Some of these 
prizes had or might have on board orders from him, 
and this rendered interference with them a personal 
offence.^ 

Here, again, was the work of the caboceers, and 
their master had learned his lesson but too well. A 
counter-demand is the favourite African form of refusing 
a request. I desired the King to hear me before such an 
outrageous claim was put on paper, and he consented. 
He was informed that Great Britain had paid large sums 
to many nations for the right of searching their ships; 
that if he sent his own vessels to sea, he could assert the 
same title to indemnity, but he could not interfere for those 
of any European nations ; moreover, that, even in war, a 
three miles' offing annuls, according to the custom of 
civilized peoples, the protection of a neutral shore. No 
one had prepared a reply to this explanation ; they con- 
tented themselves, by way of rejoinder, with directing me 
to write down what the King had spoken. I could only 
express my regret at being compelled to forward a 
message so unworthy and so disappointing to the govern- 
ment and people of England. 

Upon the second subject, human sacrifice, Gelele 
declared that he slew only malefactors and war-captives, 
who, if they could, would do the same to him ; that his 
own subjects were never victims; that in the accounts 
reported by ** mutual" enemies there had been, as he had 
told Captain Wilmot, a gross numerical exaggeration ; in 
fact, he repeated the statements of a hundred years' 
standing, as the History shows, and his assertions were 
partially true. 

I King Gezo made the same request to Mr. Duncan (vol. ii. 
p. 263). 



1 86 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome. 

When asked for my reply, I submitted, in Jeremy 
Bentham's words, that the worst use to which he could 
put a man was to kill him ; that Dahome wanted not 
deaths but births, and that subjects followed the religion 
of their prince. It was, therefore, incumbent upon him 
to reduce the num ber of his sacrifices, and to spare his 
visitors the disgusting spectacle of nude and mutilated 
corpses, hanging for two or three days in the sun ; more- 
over that, until such barbarity should be changed, I 
should advise all Englishmen, who dislike " tickling of 
the liver,**' to avoid his Court at Customs' time. The 
King had never heard so much truth before in his life : 
he did not accept my plain speaking without " stirring of 
the mind^;" nor could I expect it. The Rev. Mr. Bernasko 
thanked me aloud, and all around understood the ex- 
pression. 

The King passed next to the subject of an English 
resident at Whydah, and adroitly shifted the case into 
granting the permission and privilege, instead of receiving 
it as a favour. He also stipulated that the white must 
be a good man, who would write profitable things about 
the country, cause no palavers, and prevent the captains 
of cruisers capturing slaves off his coast. When I asked 
somewhat ironically, if such agent would be liable to be 
summoned at pleasure to attend the capital, compelled to 
be present at the Customs, condemned to live in the 
Buko-no's house, and be subject to be seated for hours in 
the sun, enjoying the prospect of the palace wall? — he 
carelessly replied **No," in a tone which to me meant 
emphatically Yes. 

With respect to the Ishagga captives,"* the King had, 
early after my arrival, sent me word by the Buko-no that 
he had put all of them to death, not knowing them to be 

1 A native phrase, meaning nausea. 

2 A native phrase, meaning anger. 

3 See chapter xiv. Section E. 



XXIII, — The Delivery of the Message, 187 

Christians^ a marked and emphatic non-fact, which he had 
also protested to Captain Wilmot. Moreover, for certain 
physiognomical reasons, I am induced to think that several 
of the wretches are still alive, and are being reserved for 
future sacrifice. There was, however, no proof positive, 
nor would any one, especially of the missionary body, aid 
me in carrying out an investigation.* 

Ensued a desultory conversation. The King, ap- 
parently forgetting the carriage and horses, recalled to 
mind the Tokpon tent, and adhered to the subject mordicus, 
frequently asking me if Mr. Cruikshank had taken the 
measurements, to which an affirmative reply was given. 
Thinking this the most proper opportunity, I requested 
him that the boys of the English town, Whydah, might 
attend the Wesleyan Missionary School, reminding him 
of a half promise which he had made during the Commo- 
dore's visit. Now, however, being puffed up, he spoke 
another language ; he declared that when black men learn 
to read and write, and to "know sense,^" like Beecham, 
they could not be taken to war. Upon my objecting to 
this view, he directed me to "let it pass"; in other words 
to change the subject. I then complained that the people 
of Godome, who, last spring, had broken open my boxes, 
containing presents for the King, had escaped punish- 
ment, whereby, emboldened, Posu-kpa, caboceer of that 
time, aided and abetted by sundry of the pestilent De 
Souzas, had lately seized, beaten, and imprisoned in a nude 
state, after robbing his watch and seventeen dollars, Mr. 
Henry Bannerman, of Cape Coast Castle, an unoffending 
EngUsh subject. The King replied, very naively, that he 
had never heard of the outrage. The reply was, that had 

1 When at Agbome, a boy put into my hands some strange papers 
touching the Ishagga victims : at present it would be indiscreet to 
reveal the secret. 

2 An old Anglo-African term for civilization, religion, wearing 
small clothes, &c. 



1 88 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahotne. 

we not been present, he certainly never would have 
known, but that his officers did know — which was the 
case.^ He added that inquiry should be made, meaning 
that nothing would be done. Although no official direc- 
tions had reached me, and the coloured man Craft had 
behaved with notable indecency by leaving his arrival 
entirely unannounced, I represented to the King that this 
person was a bonifide employe , of the Company of African 
merchants (limited), and that as he was treated so would 
his employers withdraw from or enlarge their business in 
Dahome, Gelele was profuse in professions, swearing 
that every one dealing with ** Krafu " (Mr. Craft) should 
pay beforehand. Nothing could be further from his 
intentions. 

I was disenchanted by this message scene. The 
personal courtesies of the King compared badly with his 
stubborn resolve to ignore, even in the smallest matters, 
the wishes of Her Majesty's Government. Nothing 
appeared uppermost in his mind but an ignoble greed of 
presents. Of course, his hands were tied in the case of 
abolishing slave export and human sacrifice, but he might 
have offered his minimum. The unexpected civilities of 
the last official visitors to his Court have filled him with 
an exaggerated idea of his own importance ; whilst the 
astuteness and suspiciousi;iess of his caboceers cause them 
to see, in the short interval between the two messages, a 
further aim, and one affecting their interests. I did not 
at all join with the Commodore in thinking Gelele's obser- 
vations '* thoroughly just and honest ^ ; " they are mere 
parrot -like repetitions of a lesson learned from the pro- 
slavery party nearly a century ago. It presently became 
apparent that, even in the smallest matters, he had as 
scant a regard for truth as his subjects have. After a 
long and uninteresting dialogue, in which I told him that 

1 We had scarcely retired home before the Buko-no confessed it. 

2 See Appendix III. 



XXII I , — The Delivery of the Messaf^e, 189 

my departure ought to take place that night, he swore, on 
the word of a King, that I should leave Agbome next 
morning, and directed me to " drop that," when a little 
doubt was expressed touching the " morning." I need 
hardly say that at the time appointed nothing was ready. 
My last question to the King was respecting the name 
which he wishes to bear in England. He proposed, 
through the ministers, who whispered with great awe, 
** Kini-kini-kini." I objected to it, as far too long for the 
time-saving Briton, and proposed " Gelele " ; which was 
approved of.^ 

Eight P.M. had already sped, when the King declared 
the seance over. He told me, that if my mind was no 
longer stirred, we might drink together. I again denied 
personal bad feeling towards him, regretting that the same 
could not be said about certain of his entourage^^ and that 
he had not charged me with a more agreeable message 
for home. We stood up and drank gin and liqueur. No 
noise was made on this occasion, the ministers contenting 
themselves with kissing the ground. The King then arose 
to conduct us outside the palace. The inner doorway 
being too narrow for two abreast, I fell back a little, and 
he asked the reason, through the interpreter. My answer 
was, with us crowned heads always walk first ; where- 
upon he shook hands cordially, told me that I was " a good 
man, but," rolling his head, " too angry." At the dis- 
tance of 200 yards, he stood, shook hands, snapped fin- 
gers, and bade us adieu, exhorting a speedy return. 

On the morning of the next day — Sunday, February 

1 For other names, Tenge, &c., see Appendix IV. How secret 
the King's name is kept may be seen from the " Travels " of Dr. 
M'Leod and Captain Adams, who, though repeating a variety of 
tales about the monarch, nowhere reveal his appellatiod. 

2 This kind of plain speaking is always well received by African 
and often by Asiatic princes. They deem it honourable to defend 
their ministers before an accuser; but in private, the former will 
undergo, as a rule, a searching inquiry. 



I go A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome. 

2 1 St — we arose and looked for porters, but in vain. The 
despairing Reverend visited the houses of the Adanejan, 
who was bathing, and of the Buko-no, who was break- 
fasting. These men have at this moment the game in 
their hands, and know it ; all we can do is to play at 
patience. 

As sunset approached, the Bukn-no and the Adane- 
jan, accompanied by sundry eunuchs and slaves, entered 
our Compound, manifestly bearing the wished-for ** pass." 
They squatted on mats in the open space before our ver- 
andah, spread out the presents, and summoned us, in 
official tones and phrases, to receive them. The speech 
began with the usual formula, — that the King wished to 
send us home wealthy, and to supply us with specimens 
of his fine umbrellas, sticks, and other valuables (!) ; that 
he had not been made aware of our wish to depart (! !), 
and had learned it only last night, when we spoke of it to 
him (! ! !) ; consequently, that nothing had been prepared, 
but that on our return to Dahome we should find every- 
thing awaiting us (oh !). 

The gifts were then distributed, a curious contrast 
with the magniloquence that introduced them. The first 
batch, about which I was ordered to be most careful, were 
for the Highest Personage in the kingdom. It consisted 
of a poor "counterpane," green and white, woven by the 
fat hands of the Adanejan ; a huge leathern pouch for the 
royal tobacco, and a leathern bag to contain change of 
loincloth when travelling. Besides which, two miserable 
boys, hideous and half-starved, were sent as table attend- 
ants to the palace of St. James. 

My fortunate self next received a ** counterpane," a 
tobacco bag, and a sharp-looking boy, who, they warned 
me, and rightly also, would run away. Mr. Cruikshank 
was *' donated " with a cloth and no boy. To Captain 
Wilmot were given a cloth and a boy, who were deposited 
at the English Fort, Whydah. Mr. Bernasko and Tom 



XXIII, — The Delivery of the Message. 191 

were largessed with very inferior ** counterpanes," in which 
they grinned with all the fervour of gratitude. Finally, 
cowries for the road, barely enough to make us set out, 
and a few bottles of rum, were distributed amongst those 
heathens of endless bibacity, our hammals. 

When the King's bounty had run dry, the Buko-no 
proposed a private *' pass," that is to say, presents from 
himself. To this I strongly objected, but I was silenced 
by the unanimous assurance that my predecessors had sub- 
mitted to it. After giving one ** counterpane" to all the 
names above-mentioned, the Buko-no and the Adanejan 
called for a private confabulation. I repeated, but even 
in stronger language, all that had been said before the 
King, pointed out that not a shade of concession had been 
made to the wishes of Her Majesty's Government, warned 
both confidants solemnly that by their fault friendship 
would not endure, and particularly commented upon the 
puerile demand for the immunity of slaves near the beach 
of Dahome. A specimen of their argumentation — their 
style of '^pieceing out the lion's skin with the fox's tail" : 
"You said yesterday," quoth the Buko-no, "that the Eng- 
lish will no longer allow the export of slaves, and that 
the Americans will send their vessels no more." I as- 
sented. " Then why," resumed the old man, "can you 
not promise that our ships shall not be molested during 
the very short time which, according to you, they have 
still to run?" No explanation would account for the im- 
possibility of so doing, in face of the fact that the King 
had made a great point of this absurd claim*. I fear we 
parted with this subject under a painful sense of one 
another's stupidity — de part et d' autre. 

Finally, I was again officially requested to return 
after about ten moons, when the Atto-ton-khwe, or Plat- 
form Year Sacrifices, will commence, and, above all 
things, to bring with me, carriage, horses, and pavilion. 
My reply was, that I should advise all Englishmen to 



192 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome. 

absent themselves from these vile ** Customs" until beasts 
are substituted for captives; and that as regards my re- 
turn with or without presents, all must depend upon orders 
sent out from home. Wishing to do away with any little 
asperity, I took, during the last interview, a friendly leave 
of the confidants, and sent them, in the course of the 
evening, handsome presents of cloth. 

From Commodore Wilmot's report,^ as well as from 
these pages, it will be evident that the caboceers are per- 
fectly successful in isolating the King, from the evil in- 
fluences of foreigners. We were permitted to see him 
almost every day, but on no occasion to sit and converse 
with him. After nearly two months, a single private inter- 
view was granted to me, and two such visits were the 
most that could be expected. It is manifestly useless to 
send Missions to Dahome whilst this state of things 
endures. The only way to force improvement is to exact 
from the King a promise of change, which he would 
readily give; and, upon the strength of it, to demand 
hostages, about which he would demur. Finally, as I 
have before said, the Customs* time must be avoided ; by 
far the best season for visiting him, is when the King 
returns from war, in April or in May. 

I Appendix III. 



193 



CHAPTER XXIV. 

RETURN TO THE SEABOARD. 

Monday f February 15, 1864. — We rose at dawn, ready 
to depart. Our porters, however, were, as usual, dis- 
persed about the town, or drinking the King's rum, or 
quarrelling over his cowries, whilst the Reverend was 
settling the last accounts with Harpagon, our landlord. 
Vain were threats, the stick was vainer, as the carriers 
would only have run away. At last we collected a party 
of three hammock-men, and passed rapidly out of the red 
mud-walled box, where we had been closeted for fifty-six 
days. We felt some natural elation, although setting out 
upon what was fated to be the most comfortless march 
which I had made in Africa. The old Meu had been 
commanded by the King to supply us with bearers ; but, 
not being bribed, he had found it better to forget the 
order. Everything, therefore, fell into the wildest confu- 
sion. 

This time, by way of variety, we chose the TofFo, or 
western road, which anastomoses with the straighter 
main line at Hen-vi, and which, during the rains, is pre- 
ferred by travellers. 

The path, at first familiar to us, passed through the 

Uhun-jro market-place, and by the Komasi Palace, 

where our patience had been so often sorely tried ; thence 

it struck into the open country. All was sunburnt, and, in 

many places, black with the fires whose smoke and glare, 
VOL. II. 13 



194 ^ Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome, 

rolling up from the east and south-east, had not unfre- 
quently, during the last fortnight, rendered my 
observations unreliable. At 8 a.m. we left on the right 
hand a bush market-place, under a shady tree, near some 
mat huts, scattered over the rough palm plantation — 
hereabouts the normal view. It rejoiced in the high- 
sounding name of Adanda-hogi-huto-gon,^ namely, the 
place of the man that slew Adanda-hogi. We had no 
cowries wherewith to buy water ; but the Sin -no in the 
fields readily gave us a draught in exchange for a cigar. 
Shortly afterwards we crossed a fiumara-bed, tending 
northwards : it is called Hun-to-nun, or canoe-water, and 
there are traditions that it once floated boats. The bed 
probably supplies the element in pot-holes at all seasons, 
and the ground on both sides is exceptionally stony. At 
lo A.M., after 3h. 40m. (equal to ten miles) of " walking 
and tieing" our single hammock, we made Ahwansu-gon, 
the place of Ahwansu, a straggling village in the bush, 
landmarked from afar by magnificent bombax trees. 

The servants had been sent on, after East- Indian 
fashion, the night before, to prepare breakfast.^ Mensa 
Cook, two hulking school-pupils, Nahum and "Laja" 
(Elijah), with four slave boys, dashed by the King, 
were under charge of the bibacious Hinton. Uncon- 
trollable as wild asses, they had walked off with only 
their own bags and boxes, and, reaching the first village, 
they had fallen asleep in some distant hut, where we found 
them with great difficulty, and roused them with greater. 
When in the anger of hunger we called for food, nothing 
was forthcoming. The better to abate that nuisance, the 
rascal Ilinton was ordered to carry his effects himself — he 

1 Some of these names, ending in -gon, have an East-Indian 
twang ; but it is an accidental and superficial resemblance between 
the Hindustani "gaon" (a village), and the Ffon "gon" (a place). 

2 In a previous page I have said that the negro is the best of 
slaves, and the worst of servants : this will illustrate what I mean. 

13—2 



XXIV. — Return to the Seaboard, 195 

preferred to remain three days behind until he could hire 
a porter. 

We had nothing to do but to sit under the fig-trees 
that formed the market-place, and to watch the domes- 
ticalities of the scene. There was scant regard for 
apparently poor travellers. A witty Persian book, the 
" Al-Namah," defines Al-Hich, or ** The Nothing," to be 
a Mogol walking (not riding) in India. The word is 
equally applicable to the ** mean white'* in Africa without 
a hammock, unless he is on fighting errand. Jenny 
Johnson, however, a Makhi woman, who had been 
brought up at S'a Leone, but who, having married and 
settled here, had forgotten nearly all her English, showed 
us the little civilities of offering maize and manioc. The 
supply of comestibles was limited to a goat, a few balls 
of Akansan, palm nuts, and water — the latter apparently 
the article most in demand. The dogs were almost all 
neutered, which must be as good a plan as the vow of 
perpetual celibacy for inducing a modified monomania. 

After 3 P.M. the rest of the party straggled in, many 
with unshod feet lamed by the sun. Our score of laggard 
hammock-men came up sneakingly, and were threatened 
with docking of pay in case of their repeating the trick.* 
We could not help again remarking, with a cynical 
pleasure, that every rag, every empty bottle — even the 
broken drum and the cowrie-board belonging to the 
blacks who had been so long eating our salt, and to their 
master, had been brought on, whilst our five bags and 

I At Whydah I was obliged, in several cases, out of the two 
dozen that accompanied us, to carry out the threat. This is an un- 
pleasant duty, which the traveller owes to those who may come after 
him. The African even thinks the last day's good conduct enough to 
wipe away all his previous sins. It is well that he should learn his 
mistake. On this occasion the badly behaved were sent off cam- 
paigning without a present, whilst the others were liberally paid. 
I venture to say that the next visitor to Agbome will thank me for 
this severity. 



196 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome, 

boxes, the latter containing all our books and instruments, 
had been left behind. ** It is all right," quoth the 
Reverend, ** I have left the things in charge of Yamojia, 
the eunuch, who will be here with them soon." ** But 
until every single item appears, O Reverend ! we leave 
not this place." Of course the eunuch joined us at night- 
fall without a load, and of course I also kept my word. 
Otherwise our properties might have been in Agbome 
to this day. 

At 4 P.M., when the east wind had sunk the mercury 
to 85 deg. (F.), the market began to disperse, and 
the drums to appear. With the characteristic negro 
impudence, which ever pierces through Dahoman polite- 
ness, we were directed to remove from under our 
favourite tree, and naturally we did not. Presently a 
wild-goose line of old and ugly Nesu women, first three 
and then nine, defiled into the shady space, and danced 
round the fetish hut. The prima donna was a very dark 
and ancient sybil, in a white night-cap ; the greater num- 
ber had red, white, or coloured fillets, and two wore broad 
brims, with coquettish little steeple crowns that contrasted 
oddly with the vast expanse of sooty cheek and jowl 
below. Five of the superiors held cow- tails, and their 
ornaments were armlets of single cowries, divided by 
black seeds or red beans, and long belts of similar material 
crossing their ample covered bosoms. Being engaged in 
a very serious and religious exercise, they averted their 
heads and ignored us like the younger and more shame- 
faced sort of nun. The vulgar made ''Ububu," knelt 
before them, and rubbed their foreheads against the rever- 
end feet, whose owners bending low, passed the open 
right hand over the laical occiput, and thus frictioned a 
blessing. 

We slept soundly through a fine moonlight night in 
the lukewarm air, with the satisfactory feelings of men 



I 



XXIV, — Return to the Seaboard. 197 

suddenly transported from Newgate to a yacht in the 
Mediterranean.^ 

Tuesday, February 16. — Having sent back, before mid- 
night, the eunuch and my krumen, I was not surprised to 
see them again at dawn: all were pining for the coast. 
At 7 A.M. we set out and crossed the outskirts of the 
Agrime, or Great Swamp, over land here boggy, there 
cultivated, and rich in pine apples and wild solaneae. 
High grasses then led us to Gome, the usual bush village 
scattered on both sides of the path: the next, lying on 
our left, and distant but a few yards, was Sem6n ; whilst 
a third, to the right, was named Akiza'-agbamen, the 
Broom in the Swamp. We then fell into a depression, 
where cracked mud-flakes showed that water had been, 
and would soon be again there. A few yards of rising 
ground then introduced us, after a march of an hour, 
equal to four miles, to the De-nun or Frontier Custom- 
House, whose ** captain " lay on his back in aristocratic 
repose, his head pressing a soft Palmyra log, and a child . 
playing between his legs as he watched for want of other 
work, the ducks, the fowls, the poor devil-niggers and 
ourselves. 

The Harmattan still swept the air clear of cloud, 
threatening a torrid sun, whilst the thermometer stood at 
83 deg. (F.), and the aneroid showed a descent of more 
than 350 feet. We hurried our breakfast, the more ener- 
getically as no food was to be bought at the De-nun ; and 
at 10 A.M. we addressed ourselves to the Swamp. In some 
places, the burnt grass and trees robbed the road of shade, 
and in others we were canopied over with verdure. The 
flooring, everywhere hardened by water, was bad for the 
bearers' feet, but it was a decided improvement upon the 
Eastern or Agrime line. After forty minutes (equal to 

I I would willingly have spent another month at Agbome ; but all 
those around me were wild with impatience to escape, and the emotion 
is contagious. 



198 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome, 

1-50 mile), we made the Chito, a deep gully trending from 
east to west, with a southerly bend. The black earthy 
banks of this swamp-drain are steep, and 15 feet high. 
Slatey and almost stagnant water stands at the present 
season in pools at the bottom, whilst the remnants of a 
bridge show the current to be deep and strong during the 
rains. The Chito, under a dense avenue of giant trees, 
was as algid as it was impure, but a dip in Dahome is a 
rarity and a luxury. 

After the Chito, the path became tortuous, and to the 
eastward there had been a huge bush-fire, whose effects, 
in smoke and radiation of heat, still lasted. The sun 
became fiery — so did the ground, undefended by vegeta 
tion, and a gadfly, like the Tsetse, revenged us upon the 
lazy and laggard bearers. At noon, after ih. 40m. (equal 
to three miles) from the De-nun, a roar of voices arose 
from Koje, a well-known market place near the southern 
edge of the swamp. It was a round hole cut clear in the 
bush, paved with hard mud and dotted with sheds, and 
logs for sitting. The aneroid still showed only 350 feet 
below Agbome, but the thermometer, though the breeze 
was fine, had risen to 94 deg. (F.) in the shade. The 
business seemed to be brisk, and we bought some tolerable 
palm wine. 

Leaving Koje at 12.30 p.m., along a similar but a 
straighter path, hedged in by the tallest grasses, we soon 
emerged, as tall single trees growing upon sandy ground 
informed us, from the Great Agrime Swamp. After an 
hour of gradual up-slope, we saw on our right or west- 
ward well wooded ridges and high broken ground rolling 
away towards the blue distance. The nearer surface was 
greener, and the palms were thicker than about Agbome. 
The beauty of the TofFo plateau has not been exaggerated. 
It is supposed to contain gold, and it is all gold. Un- 
fortunately, it is in the vulture claw of Dahome, and the 



XXIV, — Return to the Seaboard, 199 

officials of the capital have mostly houses and grounds 
where their palm-oil is made. 

According to the History, the " Tuffbes," in the days 
of Agaja the Great, attacked, plundered, and murdered a 
peaceful caravan of Dahomans, passing through their 
lands. The merciless king justly attacked them, cap- 
tured 1800 prisoners, and sold or sacrificed them all. 
In a foot-note we are informed ** Tuffbe, Tafoe, or Tafu, 
is an inland country of the Gold Coast, nearly south-west 
of Abomy, ten or twelve leagues to the northward of Rio 
Grande, and at about sixty leagues, or six days' journey, 
from Ardra.^" The tribe that inhabits it is called Aizoh, 
and is now blended with the Dahoman ; and between 
them and Agbome I would place the ** Croo-too-hoon-too" 
people of Mr. Dalzel. The last dissyllable is evidently a 
corruption of the *' Hun-to" fiumara, which we crossed 
yesterday. 

After ih. 40m. (equal to four miles) we halted at the 
Toffb market-place, a few tattered sheds to the left of the 
path. Several of the morning's corvee were women, and 
they had lagged behind, footsore. Resolving, therefore, 
to halt, we walked for about half a mile to the town of 
Toffb, by a slow incline, on both sides of which rose dark 
palm trees, ruffed and sometimes double ruffed, with 
bright fern-tufts, and sheltering gay verdure, spangled 
with lilies. The settlement is the normal Dahoman, but 
comparatively clean and well built. The aneroid proved 
that we were but a hundred feet below Agbome, and though 
the thermometer was 99 deg. (F.), the wind was fresh and 
the air was elastic. I was visited by an old Hausa Mos- 
lem, whom the king had made chief of the Tokko village 
lying to the west. He brought his wife and his books, 
but, alas ! he turned the latter upside down. The night 
was charming, and at 6 a.m. the mercury stood at 73 deg. 

I R. 34« 



200 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome. 

(F.) : it was our last experience of cool and dry skin. 
Adieu, " Sanitas!" 

Wednesday, February 17. — At 6 a.m. we left the fresh 
crisp air of Toffo. The bush path took a generally south- 
eastern direction, over ridgy ground, all ascents and 
descents. After about three miles, a plantation of palms 
and bananas led us to the Ajagbwe, a streamlet with 
sandy and pebbly bed, flowing westward, and not quite so 
deep as the Chito : it was a poor thing, but a pleasure to 
see. On the rising ground beyond it lay the settlement of 
Koli : we observed sundry aged and doubtless pious ma- 
trons on their knees at matins, before the fetish hut : 
unfortunately, for sentiment, they were also on their 
hands. 

Beyond Koli, the bush again became dense, except 
where it had been cleared away for cultivation, and carda- 
moms everywhere appeared. The number of market 
people had made the path hard and slippery. At last a 
long descent led us, after two hours (equal to five miles), 
to the town of Hen-vi — Hold the Child — on the main 
road. 

We had now returned to the climate of the plains : 
the thermometer showed, in the shade, 75 deg. (F.), and 
the aneroid 778 feet below Agbome. At Hen-vi the 
water was, as usual, vile, and two shillings were refused 
for the leanest of chickens. The road was crowded with 
soldiers hurrying up to the war, and there were many 
chain-gangs of unwilling men. Some of the passing 
caboceers attempted, but in vain, to seize our carriers, 
and even our hammock-bearers. The latter became every 
day more troublesome, and whenever they mutinied the 
Reverend begged a dollar and some rum to smooth 
their tempers. The huts, built at every hundred to two 
hundred yards for the late firing at Whydah, had almost 
all been burned down, and the villages were foul with 
fetish, dead dogs sacrificed for good luck, and poultry 



XXIV, — Return to the Seaboard. 201 

slain by order of Afa. We halted for so short a time at 
Allada, that we passed without knowing the Prince Chyu- 
daton, who was marching northwards. I regretted thus 
losing the opportunity of having with him a few last words. 
The evening saw us at Azohwe where not a chicken was 
to be bought, and where only one old man was len to guard 
the women and children. What an opportunity to attack 
Whydah, or even Agbome ! 

Thursday, February 18, 1864. — We slept in the open, 
through a fine cool and dewless night. Before dawn, the 
Reverend, greatly dejected, awoke us with the tidings 
that all Whydah had been burned down yesterday. 
Naturally believing about a quarter of what was told us, 
we mounted hammocks, and in hot haste hurried through 
Toli and Savi. Arrived at Sogijo's House, and just catch- 
ing the morning sparkles of the sea, we saw at a glance 
that the damage had been extensive, and that the con- 
flagration had not ceased. We wound south-westwards 
through the streets, where women were weeping, and 
carrying off their kit : as we approached the centre of 
danger we saw, at long intervals, men sitting upon their 
roofs with green boughs, to extinguish the sparks. 
Volumes of hot heavy smoke barred our road, and a crowd 
of natives opposed our passing through the Zobeme 
market, which was still a fire. We wound round by the 
north, avoiding as best could the burning poles lying 
on the ground, and the lighted straws that filled the air 
All the circumspection was required : in these places the 
flames run with a horse's speed. 

We were happy to find the English Fort still standing, 
the inmates safe, and their property carried into the 
compound. The mulattoes were patrolling with drawn 
swords, to prevent plunder, and they had, we were told, 
exerted themselves to turn off the fire. But all went 
** hithering and thithering" ; wherever a servant was 
ordered to do this, he forthwith did that ; and my opinion 



202 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome, 

was, that with the least change of , wind the Fort would 
have inevitably been burned. The Whydahs afterwards 
declared that they had no idea why that house should 
have been the only building saved in the vicinity, and lest 
they might attempt to correct the exceptional nature of 
the phenomenon, I employed every wakeful hour at night 
in looking out with a loaded carbine. 

The conflagration began, no one knows how, on 
February 17th, near the house of the late M. Jose D. 
Martinez : it was about noon, and the strong Harmattan 
had already lasted two days. The fire swept, in a broad 
straight band, from east to west. Sparing the northern 
quarter, it gutted the house of the Chacha de Souza, who, 
when informed of the calamity, nearly died with rage, like 
his brother chief. Of the French Factory, nothing was 
left but the slated and lime-washed frontage. The gerant ' 
had prudently started all his gunpowder into the well, but 
the loss in palm oil and stores must have been heavy — 
men named 300,000 dollars. 

Apparently extinguished before sunset on the 17th, 
the fire again broke out at 8 p.m. The worst reports 
spread through the town, and all looked for some terrible 
disaster. Again, at 10 on the next morning, about three 
hours before our arrival, it appeared in the very heart of 
the settlement, all about the English Fort, sweeping away 
the Zobeme bazar, and doing damage to the northwards 
of the yesterday's line. Even the late Mr. Hutton's 
quondam house was not spared, and it was ** muYus 
proximus ardet '' with Mr. Bernasko's homestead. These 
fires are common enough in Yoruba towns — Lagos, 
for instance, where want of space compels men to build 
closely — but three fires in three days wore a suspicious 
appearance. Those whose houses were first seen in 
flames were imprisoned at the Yevo-gan's quarters, but 
they were not proved to be the real arsonists.^ 

I In former days, according to Captain John Adams, the 



XXIV. — Return to the Seaboard. 203 

According to the French missionaries, from sixty to 
eighty people lost their lives. Negro like, they watched 
the advancing flames incuriously till their roofs caught 
fire, when they would rush inside the house to carry off a 
cloth or a pipkin. Some two hundred were wounded, and 
two-thirds of the town appeared either burnt down or 
reduced to scorched clay-walls. This does not include 
the casualties amongst the slaves : many of the wretches 
were confined in barracoons, and there being no one to 
release them, they perished miserably. To make the 
confusion greater, the death of the Yevo-gan was 
rumoured,^ and his successor the Prince, was, I have said, 
absent. Though the roads were at once stopped, many 
will fly from this modern Sodom and Gomorrah. 

«•> «(« .!« •.*« «f« ««« 

'•■• '1* '»» •■»* 'I* 1"* 

I passed at Whydah a few quiet days, chiefly in the 
society of the French Mission. On February 23, 1864, 
tidings reached the fort that the King had set out on his 
campaign. Three days afterwards I transferred myself to 
H.M.S. Jaseur, Commander Grubbe, who had the 
pleasant prospect of a tour round the Oil Rivers. Mr. 
Cruikshank shipped on board his own vessel, H.M.S. 
Philomel, Commander Wildman. After the scenes and 
chances through which we had passed during the last ten 
weeks, I parted from him with regret. "^^ '" '•' 

" Enough ! now turn from that polluted shore." 

Dahomans, like the Fantis, always put to death the man in whose 
house a destructive fire first broke out. 

I He soon recovered enough to summon me to his house, on the 
pretext that the King had appointed me governor of English Town. 
The invitation was declined — not with thanks. 



204 



CONCLUSION. 

The reader may not be unwilling to hear something 
of the catastrophe which included the negro Epos of the 
preceding pages. The following details are, I think, re- 
liable : they are borrowed from the local prints, whose in- 
formation has been corrected by subsequent inquiry. 

Rumours of the intended Dahoman attack had long 
been rife at Abeokuta.i This year, the useless ditches 
were cleaned out, the wretched walls were raised and 
repaired, and to avoid the necessity of guarding a long 
line on the opposite bank of the Ogun river, a new para- 
pet was thrown up on the near side. Stores of shot and 
powder were plentifully laid in, although for many months 
Lagos had refused to supply ammunition; the farmers 
were ordered to remove all their produce from the line of 
Dahoman march, and all the villages between Abeokuta 
and "the Lagoon" were deserted. The Ibashorun,* or 
Commander-in-Chief, took up his residence near the walls ; 
scouts, sent out in all directions, brought in, on March 13, 
a Dahoman deserter, and on the 20th the public crier was 
sent round to warn all the inhabitants of the impending 
danger. 

As has been said, on February 22^ the Dahoman 

1 When I visited Abeokuta in 1861, the chiefs, as well as the* 
people, showed great fear of Dahome. 

2 Meaning, literally, a king who manages Heaven ; not, as a 
correspondent of the Times has asserted, '* A king in Heaven, opening 
out everything." 

3 The local papers say 24th of February, which is a mistake. 



Concltisioji, 205 

army left Agbome. Their stations were— i, Chotonun, 
where they halted four days; 2, Kurugba; 3, Aisunun; 
4, Wonun; 5, Zirigbonun; 6, Aisocho-gon; and 7, Isume. 
Between the two latter they crossed the Opara River, the 
boundary between Dahome and Abeokuta. Ensued, 8, 
Refurefu, where they crossed the lyewa streamlet, in the 
land of Okeadon: as it was deep, though narrow, they 
either repaired or made a bridge over it. The 9th station 
was Besho, the loth Jiga, a little district belonging to 
the chief Akodu, where they stayed four or five days. 
Thence (11) they encamped near the Owiwi River, about 
twelve miles distant from their destination, and running 
between Igbara and Ishagga, scenes of their former 
triumphs. From the Owiwi River they marched (12) to 
Aro, by moonlight, intending, like wild beasts, to spring 
upon the enemy unawares, but they were seen by some 
people bathing in the Ogun river. 

Thus the Dahoman army expended twenty-two days 
— twelve of work, marching from 6 a.m. to 2 p.m., and 
ten of rest — upon the hundred and twenty direct miles 
between the two capitals. They suffered severely from 
want of food, living on hard beans, parched rice, onions, 
and roasted palm -nuts. Many of them ate nothing but 
a little cassava for twenty-four hours before the attack. 
They marched in four battalions, under the Min-gan, the 
Meu, the new Ajyaho, and the Po-su,* and each caboceer 
had his umbrella, his flag, and his stool. Their forces 
were generally estimated at 10,000 to 12,000, including 
carriers, and the maximum named is 16,000, which we 
may readily reduce to half. They were accompanied by 
three brass six-pounders, one of Spanish manufacture, 
bearing date '* Mexico, 1815.'^" There are conflicting 

1 The papers give the 4th battalion to the "Topo"; but the 
Tokpo (chapter xiv.) is a common captain, and not of the blood-royal. 

2 Others say, *' Seville, 1805." They were mounted on Dahoman 
carriages, and having been spiked, the touch-holes were greatly 
enlarged. 



2o6 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome. 

reports concerning the King : some declare that he was 
not with the army, which was led by his brothers ; others 
say that he did not cross the Ogun River ; others that he 
approached the city wall, having left a force behind him 
at Igbara, lest the Ibashorun should fall upon his rear. 

After their twelve miles' march on the Monday 
night, the Dahomans refreshed themselves in the Ogun 
River. A fighting draught of rum and gunpowder was 
then served out to them, and many are said to have 
betrayed its effects. The morning of Tuesday, March 15, 
1863, was dull and foggy, and at 6.30 a.m. the attacking 
party crossed the river, under cover of the mist. They 
were presently perceived. The Abeokutan cannon at 
the Aro gate fired repeated signals. In a few minutes the 
Egbas, who had been all night at the walls, were swarm- 
ing by thousands at their defences. Inside the town, men 
hustled in all directions to the fight : the missionaries had 
some trouble in retaining a single servant for the pur- 
pose of serving out ammunition to their friends. The 
Egbas Hned the wall from Agbameya to Aro, and only 
four townships — Ijeun, Ikemta, Itoku, and Oba — number- 
ing one division, prepared to engage, the other two corps 
d'armees remaining at their posts, as it was reported that 
the enemy would make three independent aftacks. The 
men amused themselves with throwing up their muskets 
and catching them, whilst the women sang and danced. 
The latter behaved well throughout a trying time, carry- 
ing, spirits, water, and food to the fighters, and some, 
arming themselves with swords, kept near the walls in 
case they were wanted. 

Not much encouraged by this reception, the Daho- 
mans still advanced steadily, and in a dense body, over 
the hollow and broken ground, towards the gate where 
Gezo had met his defeat.^ The Egbas had tunnelled 

I I have described this Negro Marathon in "A Flying Visit to 
Abeokuta," chapter iii. 



Conclusion. 207 

their walls in many places, enabling them to sally out 
and to retire when convenient. A body of 400 braves 
leapt forth to engage the enemy upon the plain, but as 
they came on without returning their fire, they withdrew, 
true to their tactics, through their excavations. At this 
moment, an Abeokutan cannon was fired and dismounted 
from its carriage, so as to incapacitate it from further use. 
The effect however, was to make the attacking party 
swerve to the right, where the wall was higher, and which 
therefore was supposed to have no defenders. 

When within two hundred yards of the wall, the 
Dahomans displayed their banners,^ and deployed in 
three bodies — one opposite the Aro gate, and the other 
two to its left : as was proved by the casualties, the 
centre was the best led. The line, about 700 yards long, 
then advanced within 300 to 400 feet of the defences, and 
a column, supposed to number 3000, arrived within half 
that distance. No breach was ever attempted. Did 
they expect to see the defences fall like the walls of 
Jericho ? 

The battle began at 7 a.m. with such a fusillade as 
Abeokuta has seldom heard. A tall stout warrior, dressed 
in blue, probably the Gau, or Commander-in-Chief, gave 
the signal to attack. The Dahomans obeyed by the usual 
impetuous rush, but as they approached the wall, their 
enemy poured a heavy volley into their serried ranks, and 
checked the general progress. For half-an-hour the 
firing was kept up in such quick succession, that it was 
impossible to distinguish the Dahoman from the Egban 
musket reports. Under cover of the smoke, many of the 
attacking party lodged themselves in the moat, hoping to 
surprise the wall, whilst the defenders, principally men of 
Ijeun, were prevented by the hot fire outside from taking 

I The " Iwe Irohin," of Abeokuta (April, 1864), says that the 
banners had "various distinguishing marks, as letters of the 
alphabet ; especially J. O. N. and P. were seen." 



2o8 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome. 

aim at them. Some of the most desperate, especially 
the Amazons, threw large stones at the enemy, and 
snatched away six muskets that were pointed at them ; 
others furiously scaled the wall, and were dragged over 
and slain by the Egbas. Some crept through the tunnels, 
and were instantly decapitated. One woman, who had 
lost an arm in the escalade, shot an Egba with the 
other hand, and fell back sabred into the trench. Three 
other Amazons, who had planted their banners on the 
defences, were cut down, c^nd their heads and hands were 
exhibited on poles, with shouts of victory. This fighting 
at pistol distance lasted for an hour, during which seventy 
to eighty Dahomans fell in the trench ; and of the Egbas 
ten to fifteen were killed and forty wounded. It ended, 
in fact, the attack. 

At 8.30 A.M. the Dahomans, whose officers deserved 
to be hung, retired about two hundred yards from the 
walls. Some sat down, and the others kept up a hope- 
less fire. The Egbas were ordered to keep their places, 
lest the rush and the retreat might be a feint. Many of 
the young men, however, could not be restrained from an 
attack in the open, when the Dahomans again aroused 
themselves. The Egbas retired, and only small parties 
were sent out. Gradually, the Dahomans fell back upon 
the valley of the Ogun. Arrived at Aro, they kept up a 
sharp fire for some time, repulsing the assailants, and 
capturing three Egbas, who were, however, soon recovered. 
As no proper arrangements were made for the attack, so 
no measures had been taken to secure retreat. 

About 10 A.M. a large reinforcement from the Agba- 
meya Gate, after a circuit of three hours, fell upon the 
Dahoman rear, when, after two vain attempts to stand, 
all "skedaddled" in earnest. Another party from the 
Ikija Gate a)so opened fire upon the enemy, after he had 
crossed the river, and the Egba divisions at the Ishagga 
and Ibaka entrances marched out to intercept the retreat, 









which, from the heavy fighting in the Ogun valley, had 
now become a flight. Finally, the Egbaa rushed tii masse, 
shouting victory, outflanking the foe right and left, and 
causing a general " satitie qui pettt." 

One division, in which it is supposed was the doughty 
King, went otF unopposed, having the start of the enemy. 
The other two were mixed, and in confusion — many flying 
off the roads into the fields. When too hotly pressed by 
the Egbas, they would turn and fire. Some refused to 
surrender, and were killed ; others dropped on the way, 
and were captured ; and others, fatigued by the march and 
the flight, were left behind in the pursuit, to be recovered 
on the next day. 

The rout was now complete. The want of water- 
all the streams being dried up — and the mid-day sun told 
heavily upon the fugitives, who were faint with famine, 
and footsore by running on the path sides. They no 
longer kept together in large bodies. At Igbara they 
were attacked in flank by another party of Egbas, who 
had taken a short cut across the river. Here they lost 
many of their carriers, several hundreds of muskets — 
some quite new — and a brass gun, which had burst at the 
muzzle. At 3 p.m. the Ibashorun set out in person, and 
did not return from the pursuit till the next day at noon. 

The Dahomans made another faint stand at their de- 
serted encampment, but they were compelled to fly, losing 
a second brass field-piece, whose vent wanted bushing, 
the royal wives, daughters, horse, sandals with crosses of 
yellow metal, clothes, loads of coral and velvet, and 
sundry carriages: here, too, were picked up decapitating 
razors, and the stores of the King's household and of his 
guards. Beyond Ishagga, which they reached at 2 p.m., 
there was another severe encounter, but the Dahomans 
had the worst of it. They made a stand at the Owiwi 
River, vainly thinking to find water, and suffered severely. 
At Jiga they again met the Egbas before nightfall, and 



2IO A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome. 

their pursuit continued till the fugitives, many of whom 
had marched thirty- five miles that day, reached the 
lyewa River. Here the Okeadon people had broken 
down the bridge. A party, led by a son of the late chief, 
Anaba, killed 400 or 500 of their survivors, who were so 
exhausted that they could not be brought back. 

The King's loss has been variously estimated. The 
Egbas reckoned ** two heads, twenty strings, and twenty 
cowries," equal to 6821 men. The "I we Irohin" more 
moderately declares — "From Abeokuta to Ishagga, a 
distance of about fifteen miles, above 1000 were counted, 
whilst beyond that place it is said that the number of 
dead was still greater. The prisoners cannot be fewer than 
1000 or 1200 — some say above 2000." In the trench 
where the first attack was made, seventy to eighty bodies 
were found in two places, and of those fifty were lost by 
the central division. About fifty-five fell on the plain 
before the walls, and four women within the defences : 
some say that the latter were brought in captive, and 
killed. The Egbas cut all the bodies nearly to pieces — 
every one, even the women, passing a Dahoman corpse, 
cursed, slashed, or stoned it. The greatest destruction 
took place, of course, during the rout. It was impossible 
to number the prisoners who were brought in by various 
entrances at all times of the day and night, and many 
conveyed to distant villages. Up to 2 p.m. of the battle- 
day, Tuesday, more than 200 were marched through the 
Aro Gate : after that hour they were brought in much 
faster than before, and on the next day at an increased 
fate. Many surrendered themselves, begging food ; 
others, picked up in the bush utterly exhausted, were sent 
in by the people of Jiga and Iketu, Otta and Okeadon. 
Some of the prisoners, especially the captains, were put 
to death on account of their violence. It was remarked 
that the greatest part of the killed and wounded were 
men, and that of four captives only one was born in 
14 — 2 



Conclusion. 211 

Dahome. The total loss of the Egbas was about 40 killed 
and 100 wounded. 

A comparison between Gezo*s and Gelele's attacks 
on Abeokuta gives the measure of Dahoman decadence. 
In 1 85 1, the King assaulted on both banks of the Ogun, 
and the distance between the two points of the attack 
was at least a mile. He fought from morning till night, 
and was driven back but one mile to Aro, where he put 
to death fifty Egbas, who had been picked up whilst farm- 
ing. He fought again at Ishagga, preventing further 
pursuit, and lost a total of 1200 soldiers. In 1864, Gelele 
attacks only on one side of the river, which he crossed at 
Aro : he takes to flight, in two hours, after losing 150 
men. The place of the dead upon the field of battle can 
be traversed in two or three minutes ; the rout ends in a 
** sauve qui feut,'' to the lyewa River ; and finally he 
hardly kills any of the enemy. Not more than one of ten 
Egbas fired a shot, and all were surprised to see the 
Dahoman army so small, and fighting so badly : they had 
harder work even at Ijaye. 

According to the latest accounts, the incorrigible 
King at once bought a number of slaves, and returned to 
his capital a conqueror. After three weeks at Agbome, 
he despatched sundry of his brothers to drive and kidnap 
the country north of Porto Novo. About mid- February 
there was a report of his death. On May 6, 1864, he was 
living ; but he was so reduced in strength that he avoided 
all publicity. 

Thus, in utter disgrace, ended the long-expected 
attack of the " Royal Savage " upon Abeokuta. Many 
years must elapse before Dahome can recover from the 
blow, and before that time I hope to see her level with the 
ground. 



APPENDICES. 



215 



APPENDIX I. 



ITINERARY. 

FROM WHYDAH TO AGBOME. 

Corrected by Captain GEORGE, R.N., Royal Geographical 
Society of London, and EDWIN DUNKIN, Esq., Greenwich 

Observatory. 



INSTRUMENTS. 

1 . Aneroid A (Pocket : Spencer, Browning & Co., London). 

On first floor of Fort Whydah, 30*60, temp. 80°. 
On return, after two months, 30*30, ,, 91°. 

2. Aneroid B (Full size: Negretti & Zambra, London). 

On first floor of Fort Whydah, 30*45, temp. 80°. 
On return .... 30*20, „ 91°. 

FIRST DAY— December 14, 1863. 

From Fort Whydah to Toli, 3h. = 11 miles. 

Stage I. — From Whydah Fort to Savi, ih. 3om.=5 miles. 

Started 8.20 a.m. In five minutes, out of town. After 
fifteen minutes more, to Agbana water. In twenty minutes, 
to deep copse. At 9.50 a.m., Savi (Xavier of Mr. Norris). 

Aneroid A, at 10 a.m., 30*50, temp. 85°. 

>> ^i >> >> 3^*5^» >> >> 
Altitude of Savi = 44 feet. 

Stage 2. — From Savi to Toli (halfway to AUada), ih. 30m. 
= 6 miles. 



2i6 A Mission to Gelele^ King of Dahonte, 

Started 2.30 p.m. Passed the Custom House, crossed 
the Savi swamp in five minutes. Then Toli water. At 
4 P.M., Toli (Toree of Mr. Norris). 

Aneroid A, at 2.30 p.m., 30*35, temp. 92°. 
>> -D, ,, ,, 3o*40> >> >> 
On return — 

Aneroid A, at 6 a.m., 30*50, temp. 76°. 

Altitude of Toli =180 feet. 

SECOND DAY— December 15, 1863. 

From Toli to Allada, 3h. = 11 miles. 
(Total from Whydah, 6h. = 22 miles.) 
Stage 3. — From Toli to Azohwe, ih. 45m.=6 miles. 

Started 6.45 a.m. Forest country, few clearings, path 
narrowed. At 8.25 a.m., Azohwe (Azohwee of Commander 
Forbes). 

Aneroid A, at 9 a.m., 30*55, temp. 78°. 

>> -^> >> >> 3^*3^» »> »> 
On return — 

Aneroid A, 30*00, temp. 95°. 

„ B, 30*07, „ „ 
Altitude of Azohwe=i44 feet. 
Stage 4. — From Azohwe to Allada, ih. 15m. =5 miles. 

Started 10.45 a*^* Land flat and wooded. Then 
large clearing. Denun, or Custom House. At 12, Al- 
lada (Ardra, or Alladah, of old writers). 

Aneroid A, at noon, 30*30, temp. 85°. 
n B, „ 30-20, „ „ 

On return — 
Aneroid A, at 6 a.m., 30*30, tem. 79°. 

>> -t)> >> >> 3^*^5> »> >> 
Altitude of Allada = 284 feet. 



Appendix L — Itinerary. 217 

THIRD DAY— December 16, 1863 

From AUada to Akpwe, 4h.=i3*5o miles. 

(Total from Whydah, ioh.=35'5o Yniles). 

Stage 5. — From Allada to Henvi, 2h.=6'5o miles. 

Started 6.40 a.m. Bush and clearings ; hot road. 
After I hour=3 miles, Attogon village. 

Aneroid A, at 7*40 a.m., 30*30, temp. 80°. 

Altitude of Attogon=3i6 feet. 

Reached Henvi Asihwe at 8 a.m., 2*50 miles from 
Attogon. 

Aneroid A, at 8*25 a.m., 30*25, temp. 79°. 

Altitude of Henvi Asihwe=322 feet. 

Reached Henvi Do-vo (Havee of Mr. Norris) at 8*45 
a.m. Total time, 2h.=6*5o miles. 

Aneroid A, at 9 a.m., 30*30, temp. 80°. 

On return — 

Aneroid A, at 9 a.m., 30*25, temp. 75°. 

>> ^i >> >> 3^*^^> >» »» 
Altitude of Henvi Do-vo:=287 feet. • 

Stage 6. — From Henvi to Akpwe, 2h.=7 miles. 

Started 10 a.m. After 50m., Whe-gbo. Forest land 
to edge of Agrim6 swamp. At 2 p.m., Akpwe (Appoy of 
Norris, Apoy of History). 

Aneroid A, at 2 p.m., 30*05, temp. 94°. 

>> ■t'j >> >> 3^*^^> >» >> 
Next morning — 

Aneroid A, at 5 p.m., 30*25, temp. 71°. 

>> -t>> if if 3^*^^» i* if 

Altitude of Akpwe=4i7 feet. 



2i8 A Mission to Gelele^ King of Dahome, 

FOURTH DAY.— December 17, 1863. 

From Akpwe to Agrime, 3h.=ii miles. 

(Total from Whydah, i3h.=46*5o miles.) 

Stage 7. — From Akpwe to Wondonun, ih. i5m.=5 miles. 

Started 5.20 a.m. After 15 minutes=i mile, of good 
path, began the Agrime swamp. Two bad places, but no 
mud, at 6.45 P.M. Wondonun (name not mentioned in 
History). 

Aneroid A, at 7.15 a.m., 30*50, temp. 83°. 

>> -t>> >> >» 3^*3^» >> »> 
Altitude of Wondonun=i34 feet. 

Stage 8. — From Wondonun to Agrim6. 

Started 7.45 a.m. After nearly ih.=2'5o miles, to 
little village, Aiveji. Country improves, becomes more 
open, and rises northwards. At 9.25 a.m., Agrim6. 

Time, ih. 40m. =6 miles. 

Total march, 3h.=ii miles. 

Aneroid A, at 9 a.m., 30-50, temp. 83°. 

»> -t>> »> >> 3^*3^> »» >» 
On the next day — 

Aneroid A, at 4 p.m., 30-25, temp. 84°. 

Altitude of Agrime=232 feet. 

FIFTH DAY— December 18, 1863. 

From Agrim6 to Kana=ih. 3om.=6 miles. 

(Total from Whydah, i4h. 30m. =52-50 miles) 

Stage 9. — Started 5-30 p.m. Road, hitherto north with 
easting, became north with westing. After 50m., 
at Fetish place, and 10 m. more to Zogbodomen 
village. At 7 p.m. entered Kana (Calmina of 
History). 
At Kana, in English House, December 19. 
Aneroid A, at 8-30 a.m., 30-30, temp. 81°. 

„ B, „ „ 20-20, 
Altitude of Kana=27i feet. 



>> »> 



Appendix I, — Itinerary. 219 

SIXTH DAY— December 20, 1863. 

From Kana to Agbome=2h.=7^ miles. 

(Total from Whydah, i6h. 3om.=6o miles, and from the 

roads of Whydah ^=62 miles). 

Stage 10. — Started 3 p.m. Excellent road. At 3.50 p.m., 
Adan-we Palace. At 4.45 p.m. reached the Kana 
Gate of Agbome (Agbomey of History). At 6 p.m. 
(slow walking) reached English house. 
At Agbome, in English House, room facing east- 
ward, mean of 60 observations — 

Aneroid A, 2g*6^ ) Average temperature (except when 
„ B, 29*55 ) harmattan was blowing) Si'^. 

By B. P. Ther. (good observations), 211° 25', temp. 

92°. 

Altitude of Agbome=io65 feet. 

N.B. — The Aneroids seldom varied more than 0*05 
above or below 29*65 and 29*55. 

The difference between dry and wet bulbs was from 
4° to 10°. 

The Preface to the History places Agbome in N. 
lat. f 59'. 

The History places it in N. lat. 9° 50'. 

My observations of Sirius, corrected by Captain 
George, give a mean of N. lat. 7°. 

My sketch-map places Agbome four miles to the east 
of Whydah, «.^., E. long. 2° 4' o". Mr. Townsend makes 
Abeokuta in N. lat. 7° 8' o", and in E. long. 3° 20' o". 
This would give an interval of 1° 15' ©"=75 geographical 
miles, between Agbome and Abeokuta, agreeing with the 
reports of the people that the distance can easily be don e 
in a week. 

I According to Norris, N. lat. 6° 19' o". 
According to Captain Phillips (1694), N. lat. 6° lo'. 
According to Norris, E. long. 2°. 



APPENDIX II. 

Rev, Mr. Btyaasko's Account Current with Captain Burton, 

H. M. S. Contmissioner, Dahomey. 

(From December Sth, 1863, to February 26th, i864_J. 

£ s. d. 

Hammocks, from and to beach - - - i 15 3 

Porters 090 

Reception 170 

60 Bags of Cowries, subsistence for ham- 
mocks, guide, porters, and tents - - 54 o o 

7 Cases of Gin 7 17 o 

9 Pieces of Cloth - - - - - 410 

Presents to the King 250 

Presents to the English Mother - - - 090 
Presents to the Wife of the English Host - 250 
Selim's ten days' board - - - - 126 
John's seven months' board and medical at- 
tendance • - - ■ - - 6 15 o 

S Guides' Presents 2 18 

John Beecham (pay to interpreter) - - 25 

John Mark Lemon {pay to interpreter) - - 25 

Cook --.----- 17 

Servants .-.._.. 6 15 

20 Porters - - - - - - 4 i" 

Paid to the French Factory, Liqueurs for 

King and Chiefs 5' '9 



Appeitdix II. — The liev. Mr. Bernasko's Account. 



Paid to Mr. James Dawson, minor presents 
Presents to the Blue and Fanti Companies 
Presents to the Rev. P. W. Bernasko - - 
Paid to 17 Hammock-men 
I Keg of i-fifth Powder {salute at Whydah) 
6 Krumen, with 4 Boys, one week's. subsis- 
tence - - 



^218 10 3 



222 



APPENDIX III. 

Extract of a Letter from the Rev. Peter W. Bernasko, Native 
Assistant Missionary , dated Whydah, November 2gth^ 
i860. 
(From Wesleyan Missionary Notices, February 25th, 1861^. 

I have now returned from Dahomey, and, as you are 
to receive from me an account of the Grand Custom, I 
take up my pen to give you the detailed particulars, full 
and true. 

Wednesday, the nth of July, I started from this, for 
Abomey, the capital, to see the Custom. I met with a 
man in the way, two days after my departure, nicely 
dressed as a cabboceer, coming down here ; he was riding 
in a hammock, with a large umbrella and a cabboceer- 
stool, and a number of men accompanied him ; and when 
I arrived at Cannah, a town next to Abomey, about eight 
miles distant, I learnt that the poor man was going to be 
thrown into the sea, to join the two porters of the sea- 
gate, to open it for his father to enter in and wash him- 
self. Here was His Majesty the King, busy preparing 
to leave for Abomey to-morrow, because all the visitors 
had come. 

Sunday, the 15th instant, by four o'clock in the after- 
noon, we all started, together with the King, for the 
capital. There were some bamboo mats and pieces of 
different kinds of cloth spread in the way up the town, 
for him to walk on. When we reached midway, he made 



Appendix III. — The Rev. Mr. Bernasko's Letter. 223 

a stay for about an hour, and then ordered us to proceed 
on to the town to sleep ; but he slept at the place. 

Monday, the i6th, we all went out to meet him, to ac- 
company him to the town ; and when we had met him he 
bade us sit down. We then took seats. Here a man had 
his hands tied, and mouth barred, with a fathom of white 
bast wove about his loins. He pointed him out to us as 
a messenger that was going to carry private information 
to his father. The poor creature was taken up to the 
town, and was sacrificed on the tomb of his father. 
Another in the same position sent up to their large 
market to go and tell the spirits there what he was going 
to do for his father. About an hour afterwards, there 
were brought forward again four men in the same posi- 
tion, with one deer, one monkey, and one turkey- buzzard. 
Here the poor creatures had their heads cut off, save one. 
One man was to go to all the markets and tell all the 
spirits what he was about to make for his father ; the second 
man was to go to all the waters, and tell all the animals 
there, &c. ; the third man was to go to all the roads, and 
tell the spirit -travellers, &c ; the fourth and last man was 
to go up to the firmament, and tell all the hosts there, 
&c. ; the deer to go to all the forests, and tell the beasts 
there, &c. ; the monkey to go to all the swamps, to climb 
up trees, and tell all the animals there ; the turkey- 
buzzard, fortunate creature, was let loose to fly up to the 
sky, and tell all the birds there. After this, he got up 
from his throne, which was carried along with him, and 
drew up his sword, and said, " As I am now a King for 
this kingdom, I will bring down all the enemies of my 
father under my footstool. I will also go down to Abbeo- 
kuta, and do to them as they once did to my father. I 
will sweep them up." He was seconded by his two chief 
Ministers, called Mingah and Mewu, who spoke to the 
same effect. After the speeches we accompanied him to 
the town. 



224 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome. 

Tuesday, the 17th, he beat the gong, to fix a fortnight 
for the commencement of the Custom. The Europeans 
were quite annoyed at the time fixed, but tried to bear it 
with patience. 

Sunday, the 29th, the Custom commenced. On the 
eve of the day the whole town slept at the King's gate, 
and got up at five o'clock in the morning to weep. And 
so they hypocritically did. The lamentations did not con- 
tinue more than ten minutes ; and, before the King came 
out to fire guns to give notice to all, one hundred souls had 
already been sacrificed, besides the same number of 
women killed in the inside of the palace.^ Ninety chief 
Captains, one hundred and twenty Princes and Princesses, 
— all these carried out separately human beings by four 
and two to sacrifice for the late King. About two or three 
of the civilized Portuguese did the same. I believe they 
gave twenty men to be sacrificed, besides bullocks, sheep, 
goats, drakes, cocks, guinea-fowls, pigeons, coral-beads, 
cowries, silver money, rum, &c. After these three gentle- 
men, the King thought all the other proper Europeans 
should do the same for him; but none performed such 
wicked actions. 

Wednesday, the ist of August, the King himself 
came out to bury his father, with the following things : — 
Sixty men, fifty rams, fifty goats, forty cocks, drakes, 
cowries, &c. The men and women soldiers, well armed 
with muskets and blunderbusses for firing ; and when he 
was gone round about his palace, he came to the gate and 
fired plenty ; and there he killed fifty of the poor creatures, 
and saved ten. 

Thursday, the 2nd, he threw out cowries and some 
pieces of cloth for his people to struggle for. 

The King made himself of two persons, Ahorsu and 

I Mr. Bernasko has since denied that women are killed in the 
palace, or elsewhere. — R.F.B. 



Appendix III, — The Rev, Mr, Bernasko's Letter. 225 

Athopon.^ The first means King, and the second means 
hearth — a place on which a fire is made.^ The follow- 
ing words are his titles : — Ahorsu Glere, which signifies a 
heavy thing which cannot be lifted up by any number of 
men ; so he is called a heavy King, cannot be lifted up 
by any nation. Ahorsu kini-kini-kiniy means a dragon. 
He is a dragon King, that has strong claws, to tear to 
pieces all that will come in his way. Ahorsu Taingay, 
means a hard stone, cannot be pinched with a nail, hard 
King, that cannot be fought with by any small nations. 
Ahorsu Yemabu, means a shadow ; he will never be lost in 
his kingdom ; Shadow King. He said that his father 
was a King of blacks, and a friend of whites ; but himself 
is a King of both.® 

During the Custom, the visitors and countrymen 
made enormous and wonderful presents to the King. The 
Custom continued for three weeks. We all stopped there 
two months before we got a pass out. I returned to this 
on the ist September, and went up again on the 12th of 
October to witness the annual Custom. During my 
travellings up and down, I am glad to say that the God 
of Jacob was with me. I conversed with many people 
about religious concerns, and they were very glad to hear 
the word of salvation ; only they fear the King. Almost 
every soul in this kingdom is willing to embrace the Gospel 
of our Lord*; but the only hindrance is the Monarch. 
Many have a desire to send their children to our school ; 
but they cannot on account of him. 

Monday, the 15th, I arrived at Abomey. 

Tuesday, the i6th, we were called to the King's 
palace, and at the gate saw ninety human heads, cut off 

1 Query, Has taken a compound name ? — Eds. No ; the former 
is the King, the latter the Bush-king.— R. F. B. 

2 By no means. — R. F. B. 

3 See Appendix IV.— R. F. B. 

4 What an assertion ! — R. F. B. 

VOL. II." 15 



226 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome, 

that morning, and the poor creatures' blood flowed on the 
ground Hke a flood. The heads lay up on swish beds at 
each side of the gate, for public view. We went in to sit 
down, and soon after he sent out the property of his fathers 
as follows : — two chariots, one glass wheel, seven plain 
wheels, three solid silver dishes, two silver tea-pots, one 
silver sugar pot, one silver butter-pot, one large cushion on 
a wheel bar* drawn by six Amazons, three well-dressed 
silk hammocks, with silk awnings. 

Three days after, we went to see the same things. I 
saw at the same gate, sixty heads laid upon the same 
place ; and, on three days again, thirty-six heads laid up. 
He made four platforms in their large market-place, and 
on which he threw cowries and cloths to his people, and 
sacrificed there about sixty souls. I dare say he killed 
more than two thousand, because he kills men outside, to 
be seen by all, and women inside, privately. O, he de- 
stroyed many souls during this wicked Custom. 

Sunday, the 4th of November, the whole town, with 
the King, fired guns from twelve o'clock till eight in the 
evening. 

Monday, the 5th inst., I was very ill, laid up in bed 
three days, without a bit of bread or a drop of drink. 
I forgot to tell you, that ere this the King received a letter 
from Her Britannic Majesty's Government, about his 
frequent expeditions against Abeokuta, just warning him, 
that if he make any attempt, all his places on the coast 
shall be burnt. He has not yet given an answer to this. 
I was the reader of the letter. He seems quite frightened ; 
and I dare say that he cannot take a step over. He has 
already sent out troops to war, but nobody knows where. 

The annual Custom still continues, and the visitors 
have not returned yet ; and had I not been sick, I could 
have had no chance of coming down. 

I Query, Wheelbarrow? — Ex)s. Yes. — R. F. B. 
15—2 



Appendix III. — Commodore Wilmofs Report , No. i. 227 

The pit at Abomey, which was reported to have been 
dug deep enough to contain human blood sufl&cient to 
float a canoe, was false. There were two small pits, of 
two feet deep and four feet in diameter each, to contain 
poor human blood, but not to float a canoe. 

I am sorry to report to you, that in our out-stations 
fightings are still continued. We desire your prayers very 
much. 



RETURN TO AN ADDRESS OF THE HONOURABLE THE HOUSE OF 
COMMONS, DATED JUNE l6, 1863 ; FOR 

" A COPY OF COMMODORE WILMOT'S REPORT OF HIS 
RECENT VISIT TO THE KING OF DAHOMEY." 

No. I. 
Commodore Wilmot to Rear -Admiral Sir B. Walker. 

(Extract.) 

** Rattlesnake,'" off Lagos ^ January 29, 1863. 

My last communication was dated Lagos, 27th 
November of last year, and I informed you that I should 
return to Sierra Leone from Whydah. 

Since that period much has transpired that will 
naturally cause the liveliest interest in all quarters. 

I visited the Yavogah of Whydah on the 20th 
November, and having met the Rev. P. W. Bernasko, 
Wesley an missionary in the English fort, he informed me 
that the King of Dahomey was most anxious to see some- 
body of consideration from England, ** a real Englishman," 
with whom he might converse on the affairs of his country. 

The Yavogah had said, ** If you will come back again 
in seven days, I will send to the King, and let you know 
if he will see you." 

I returned at the appointed time, much to his surprise, 
as he did not believe I should come back, and he told me 
the King was anxious to see me. 



228 A Mission to Gelele^ King of DaJwme, 

The Yavogah had sent up and said that I was a 
" good and proper person " to come out as a messenger 
from the Queen. 

Before making up my mind to accept the King's 
invitation to visit him, there were many points to be 
considered of the very highest importance. 

It had been said, and I believe with some truth, that 
our late attack on Porto Novo had enraged the King's 
mind to such an extent that he had expressed a strong 
desire to lay hands upon an English officer, in order to 
avenge the destruction of that place. 

Porto Novo belongs to his brother. The European 
residents at Whydah had spread the most alarming 
reports of the disposition of the King towards English- 
men, and his hatred of them. 

It was and is, of course, their interest to do so, and 
keep us in ignorance of their evil deeds. 

After mature consideration I resolved to go, and 
place implicit trust in the King's good faith. 

The position of affairs in this country seemed 
favourable for making an impression on the King, and 
opening the way to the establishment of friendly relations. 

Having made my preparations for an absence of 
fourteen days, I landed at lo a.m. of Tuesday the 22nd of 
December of last year, in company with Captain Luce 
and Dr. Haran, of the " Brisk," who had volunteered to 
accompany me. 

The '* Rattlesnake" and the " Brisk" were sent 
to cruize, and both vessels were ordered to return on the 
14th of the same month. 

We were conveyed in hammocks across the lagoon 
and through the wet marshy ground that is almost im- 
passable in the rainy months, to a large tree at the 
entrance of Whydah, where certain ceremonies were gone 
through to welcome us to the place. We were received 
most cordially by the Yavogah and other officials, with 



Appendix III, — Commodore Wilmofs Report j No. i. 231 

according to custom, we were carried three times round 
the square. 

After the third time we got down, and entered the 
palace gates, passing through a row of Chiefs on each side. 

The court-yard of the palace is of great extent, and 
presented a spectacle not easily forgotten. 

At the further end was a large building, of some pre- 
tensions to beauty in this country, being made of thatch, 
and supported by columns of wood, roughly cut. 

In front of this, and close to it, leaving an open space 
for admission to the King, was placed a large array of 
variegated umbrellas, admitted only to be used by himself. 

Under these were congregated his principal Chiefs. 
On either side of him, under the building, were his wives, 
to the number of about one hundred, gaily dressed, most 
of them young, and exceedingly pretty. 

The King was reclining on a raised dais, about three 
feet high, covered with crimson cloth, smoking his pipe. 
One of his wives held a glass sugar basin for him to spit in. 

He was dressed very plainly, the upper part of his 
body being bare, with only a silver chain, holding some 
fetish charm round his neck, and an unpretending cloth 
around his waist. 

The left side of the court-yard was filled with 
Amazons^ from the walls up to the King's presence, all 
armed with various weapons, such as muskets, swords, 
gigantic razors for cutting off heads, bows and arrows, 
blunderbusses, &c. 

They were seated when we entered. Their large war- 
drum was conspicuous, being surrounded with human 
skulls. 

We advanced to where the King was sitting, with due 
form and ceremony, and when close to him all the respect 
due to a King was paid by bowing, &c., which he grace- 
fully acknowledged by bowing himself, and waving his 
hand. 



230 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome, 

Speeches were made expressive of their desire to go 
to war, and cut off heads for their master. The war-dance 
was performed by women and children, and motions 
made with swords as if in the act of decapitating their 
enemies. 

Some of their songs were very curious, which shall be 
described hereafter. 

At all the villages where we slept, comfortable 
quarters had been provided, and water furnished. 

Nothing could exceed the civility of every one. 

The water is very bad, and there is great scarcity of 
it, particularly in the dry season. It must be very 
unwholesome. 

The King had sent three of his sticks by special 
messengers to meet us on our way, with inquiries about 
our health, &c. 

At 10 A.M. on the morning of the loth, the King sent 
to say that he would receive us. 

We accordingly went in full dress, and remained 
under some large trees, in an open space of some extent. 

After a short time, the Chiefs arrived in succession 
with their followers, according to their rank, and were 
introduced to us, the same drumming, firing, dancing, and 
singing, being carried on as at Whydah. 

This occupied a considerable time ; and when finished 
we got into our hammocks, and went to the palace outside 
of which, in a large square, were assembled all the Chiefs 
with their people, as well as large bodies of the King's 
soldiers. 

The sight was most interesting : the gaudy colours of 
the large umbrellas, the dresses of the headmen, the firing 
of the muskets, the songs of the people, the beating of the 
war-drums, the savage gesture of the soldiers, and their 
ferocious appearance, made us feel indeed that we were 
amidst an uncivilised nation. 

All, however, treated us with marked respect, while, 



Appendix III, — Commodore Wilmofs Report, No. i. 231 

according to custom, we were carried three times round 
the square. 

After the third time we got down, and entered the 
palace gates, passing through a row of Chiefs on each side. 

The court-yard of the palace is of great extent, and 
presented a spectacle not easily forgotten. 

At the further end was a large building, of some pre- 
tensions to beauty in this country, being made of thatch, 
and supported by columns of wood, roughly cut. 

In front of this, and close to it, leaving an open space 
for admission to the King, was placed a large array of 
variegated umbrellas, admitted only to be used by himself. 

Under these were congregated his principal Chiefs. 
On either side of him, under the building, were his wives, 
to the number of about one hundred, gaily dressed, most 
of them young, and exceedingly pretty. 

The King was reclining on a raised dais, about three 
feet high, covered with crimson cloth, smoking his pipe. 
One of his wives held a glass sugar basin for him to spit in. 

He was dressed very plainly, the upper part of his 
body being bare, with only a silver chain, holding some 
fetish charm round his neck, and an impretending cloth 
around his waist. 

The left side of the court -yard was filled with 
Amazons^ from the walls up to the King's presence, all 
armed with various weapons, such as muskets, swords, 
gigantic razors for cutting off heads, bows and arrows, 
blunderbusses, &c. 

They were seated when we entered. Their large war- 
drum was conspicuous, being surrounded with human 
skulls. 

We advanced to where the King was sitting, with due 
form and ceremony, and when close to him all the respect 
due to a King was paid by bowing, &c., which he grace- 
fully acknowledged by bowing himself, and waving his 
hand. 



232 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome. 

We then sat down close to him, in chairs that had 
accompanied us from Whydah. 

The conversation commenced with the usual compli- 
ments. He asked about my health, and how I had got on 
with my journey. 

He then inquired about the Queen and all her family, 
asking many questions about the form of government in 
England. 

I said the Queen sent her compliments to him, and 
hoped he was quite well, at which he seemed much pleased. 
. This being only a visit of introduction, not of deliver- 
ing messages, therefore nothing political was entered into. 

He then gave orders for his Amazons to perform a 
variety of movements, and to salute me, which they did 
most creditably. They loaded and fired quickly, singing 
songs all the time. 

They are a very fine body of women and are very 
active in their movements, being remarkably well-limbed 
and strong. 

No one is allowed to approach them except the King, 
who lives amongst them. 

They are first in honour and importance. All 
messages are carried by them to and from the King and 
his Chiefs. 

Every one kneels down while delivering a message, 
and the men touch the ground with their heads and hps 
before the King. The women do not kiss the ground, nor 
sprinkle themselves with dust as the men do. 

When a man appears before the King, he is obliged 
to perform the ceremony of covering his head and upper 
part of his body with dust before he rises, as much as to 
say, " I am nothing but dirt before thee ! " 

It is a most degrading spectacle ; but, after all, only 
the custom of the country. 

After the Amazons had finished their manoeuvres, 
they came to us, and gave us their compliments, singing 



Appendix III. — Commodore Wilmofs Report ^ No. i. 233 

songs in praise of their master, and saying they were 
ready for war, suiting the action to the word by going 
through the motions of cutting off heads. 

The King then introduced all his Princes, Chiefs and 
head warriors in succession, according to rank ; then the 
Chiefs and Captains of the Amazons : then the Princesses, 
daughters of the late king : in fact, he brought before us, 
and named one by one, everybody of importance in his 
kingdom. Some appeared in companies, and others 
separately. The mother of the King and the mothers of 
his principal Chiefs were also named and presented. 

After each company was introduced, and I had bowed 
to them, a bottle of rum was given, the usual present after 
such a ceremony, and a signal that they had permission 
to retire. 

To the head Chiefs a glass each was presented, which 
was drunk by themselves or given to one of their followers. 

When once in the King's presence, or in his capital, 
no one, European or native, can leave without this 
customary present. 

We could not go away, on any one occasion that we 
visited him, without receiving his permission to do so in 
the shape of one or two bottles of rum for our hammork- 
men. 

After all the presentations, the King called the Ama- 
zons again to salute us, and then offered us water and 
spirits, which he drank with us which finished the visit. 

No one is permitted to see the King drirk : all turn 
their faces away, and a large cloth is htld up by Uia 
wives while the royal mouth takes in the liquid. 

The King then got up, it beirg a]n:cfcl dark, uuii 
walkedside by side with me across the court -yard,ll)iou^)i 
the gates, and nearly half-a-mile on the road tcwaidti ijin 
house, which was considered a great compliment, 'ilw 
whole Court followed, with the exception of the A way/jh^ 
and his wives, who never join in such processions. 



234 ^ Mission to Gelele^ King of Dahome. . 

The soldiers shouted, and sang their war songs, while 
the Chiefs went before the King to clear the road, and 
point out any dirt or inequalities of ground, before the 
royal feet. 

The sight was imposing, and gave us a proper idea 
of the power of the King amongst his people. He seemed 
much feared as well as much beloved. 

The King is a very fine-looking man, upwards of six 
feet high, broad shouldered, and a pleasant -countenance 
when he likes. His eyes are bloodshot, which may arise 
from want of rest or other causes. He is a great smoker, 
but does not indulge much in the bottle. His skin is 
much lighter than most of his people, resembling the 
copper colour of the American Indians. 

He is very active, and fond of dancing and singing, 
which he practises in public during the customs. He is 
much addicted to the fair sex, of whom he possesses as 
many as he likes. He is about forty-three years old. 

Before leaving the palace the King saluted the Queen 
with twenty-one guns, from pieces of all sizes, lying on 
the ground, and firmly fixed in the sand. The largest 
was, perhaps, a 3-pounder : the trunnions supported them 
in the ground. 

These guns are carried on men's heads, and occa- 
sionally placed on the ground, and fired off. 

This was done as I entered the palace. 

He also saluted me with nine guns. 

The number of guns fired was shown by a corres- 
ponding number of musket -balls being produced in an 
iron pot. 

We were accompanied from Whydah by the Prince, 
who was ordered to attend us on the road, and found him 
most civil and obliging. 

On arriving at our quarters after this day's ceremony, 
the Prince asked me to make a present to the soldiers 
and Amazons, in consequence of the manner in which 



Appendix III, — Commodore Wilmofs Report^ No* i . 235 

the King had received me. He said he hoped I would 
not make him ashamed before his people, as he had 
brought me up, and was ordered to attend upon me. I 
immediately acquiesced, and made a handsome present, 
which was thankfully acknowledged. Whenever strangers 
meet in this country, they either drink with each other 
on their first arrival, or when they are about to depart. 
We had always to submit to this, which caused a great 
drain upon our resources. 

The King's jesters danced before us to-day. One of 
the Amazons, in firing, had injured her hand very much by 
the bursting of the musket, and a messenger arrived from 
the King with a request that the doctor might be allowed 
to attend her. This was granted, and Dr. Haran saw her 
twice a day until the wound was healed, and a perfect 
cure made. 

The wound was a very nasty one, and I think it was 
fortunate for the Amazon that the skill of Dr. Haran was 
called in. 

We remained at Cannah until Sunday morning the 
14th, when we went to Abomey, eight miles distant, where 
the King was to arrive in state and take up his residence 
in his own capital. 

The custom of this country is delay, delay. No one 
knows the value of time, nor do they much care about 
keeping their word. 

I frequently spoke to the Prince about seeing the 
King, and giving him the presents I had with me, with- 
out which no message can be given, nor private intercourse 
allowed. 

I was told that the King would receive me in his 
capital, whither he was going to hold certain customs in 
honour of his ** Father's spirit," that he wished me to see 
everything, how he went through the *' custom," and what 
he did to his people. The Prince said, also, that he wished 
to salute me, and pass his people before me in review. 



236 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahofne» 

1 found all remonstrances in vain, and that it would 
be useless to get up and walk away without seeing every- 
thing that was interesting in the country. My object was 
to witness the manners and customs of the King and his 
people, and as the King appeared so friendly disposed, and 
had got up so many things solely for my sake, I was deter- 
mined to bear with patience and see what the end would be. 

My policy was to be friendly with every one, and 
endeavour to show the character and disposition of an 
Englishman towards the nations of this country — that we 
could treat them with forbearance, and have some sym- 
pathy with a black man ! 

If I had lost my temper, and shown a disposition to 
be angry at the King's delay, I might have been received 
at once; but I should most assuredly have been sent 
back to Whydah without the opportunity of making a 
good impression on the King, or of witnessing any of 
those scenes which were afterwards displayed before us, 
and have made such a deep impression on our minds. 

I have reason to believe that my line of conduct was 
rewarded by the whole country being laid open before us, 
and the whole people, King, chiefs, and all, being our 
friends. The greater part of what we saw I firmly believe 
was entirely got up for my sake, and certainly no white 
man ever saw what we did, or was treated with such 
marked consideration. 

Whenever strangers visit the capital, the same delay 
occurs, which causes general complaints. The more the 
King is pleased with his visitor, the longer the time he 
wishes to keep him. 

While at Cannah the King invited us on the after- 
noon of [two days to witness the firing of his Amazons 
and soldiers with ball at a mark. 

I had asked him, upon my first interview, whether l^e 
ever practised his people in this way; he said ** Yes," and 
1 heard that he was then at Cannah for this purpose. 



Appendix III, — Commodore Wilmofs Report, No, i, 237 

We found him about two miles outside the town in a 
very large open space, which had been cleared away, sur- 
rounded by his chiefs and people, to the number of several 
thousand, preparing to practise at a number of goats, 
which were tied to stakes driven in the ground at intervals 
of about fifteen yards, under a mud wall of considerable 
length, and about ten feet high. They were placed on 
mats. 

The King received us very cordially, and told the 
Prince to place us under his own umbrellas in a con- 
venient place for seeing everything. 

The firing commenced, and the King's body-guard of 
Amazons distinguished themselves by their good shots. 
The King fired several times himself. 

Every shot would have struck a man. "^ 

The soldiers fired also exceedingly well, and taking 
into consideration the quality of the flint musket and the 
iron ball, which is jagged and fits loosely in the barrel, it 
is really astonishing at the display they made. 

They would prove formidable enemies with good 
weapons, and if they possessed discipline and real courage. 

Several goats were killed, and on the second day four 
of those despatched were sent to me as a present. These 
had been selected by the Amazons as a particular present 
to me, and until they were killed no other goat was fired 
at. 

The firing was very rapid, and I certainly was as- 
tonished at the manner in which they handled their 
weapons. 

On Sunday the 14th, in the afternoon, the King made 
his public entry into Abomey. First came the soldiers 
by companies, headed by their particular Chief under his 
umbrella, firing, dancing, and singing. 

These went three times round the square in which 
we were, outside the palace. An excellent fire was kept 
up. Next came the Amazons in the same manner, danc- 



238 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahonie. 

ing their dances, firing and singing, each company headed 
by a Captain of Amazons. 

They marched better than the men, and looked far 
more warlike in every way : their activity is astonishing. 
Lastly, came the King in a carriage, surrounded by his 
body-guard of women, and drawn by them. He passed 
where we were, and we mutually bowed. I said to the 
Prince it was a pity he had no horses, which was reported 
to the King, who afterwards asked me if I would mention 
his wish to the Queen for some to be sent him as a pre- 
sent, which 1 said 1 would do. 

I laughingly said to the Prince, " He ought to go full 
gallop round the square," which being told the King, he 
made the Amazons run round two or three times as fast 
as they could, much to the delight of his people ; he then 
got out of his carriage, and was carried round in a very 
handsome hammock. 

The whole afternoon was occupied in firing, dancing, 
and singing ; when all was concluded, the King came up 
and shook hands most cordially. We then went home. 

The red sand here is a great nuisance, and finds its 
way into every part of one's body and clothes. Each day 
we found ourselves caked over with a crust, which re- 
quired a good washing to get off; in five minutes a pocket 
handkerchief assumed a yellow colour. 

I believe that some heads were cut off, during the 
night, on this occasion of the King's entry, and that it is 
the custom to do so whenever he returns. We could not 
find out how many, but eight heads were in the doorway 
when we passed the palace on the following morning, and 
it is probable that more of these trophies were inside. 

We remained in Abomey five weeks from this time, 
and daily witnessed scenes of a very extraordinary char- 
acter, such as the dancing of the Amazons, the warlike 
songs, the dancing and songs of the soldiers, the distribu- 
tion of presents to the Princes, Chiefs, Captains, and 



Appendix III. — Commodore Wilmofs Report^ No. i. 239 

headmen of the troops, the "passing" of the King's 
drummers, of the captains of the Amazons, of the King's 
jesters, and a variety of other people which appear before 
the King during the ** customs." 

A number of soldiers from the neighbourhood of 
Aghwey, hearing that it was the intention of the King to 
attack their country, had come up to Abomey to give 
themselves up to him, rather than take the chances of 
being taken, sold, or beheaded. They swore fealty to him, 
and it was curious to observe the ceremony on this 
occasion ; after kissing the dust and covering themselves 
with sand, the King made a speech to them, and then the 
Prime Minister, in which was pointed out the power of 
the King and the greatness of his name ; each Chief was 
called by name and presented with cowries and cloth, the 
two principal ones with a wife each. The whole company 
were then "passed" to their own country, by strings of 
cowries being given to them. 

It is certainly very extraordinary to see what in- 
fluence the King of Dahomey possesses, not only in his 
own country but amongst the neighbouring tribes and 
nations. 

He is feared by all ; but still he is a true friend to 
those who seek his alliance, and is always ready to assist 
them. 

We had an opportunity of observing this during the 
last five days of our stay in his capital. 

Upon the last day but one of the "customs," late in 
the afternoon, a large body of soldiers, with their 
attendants carrying their camp equipage, made their 
appearance from a place about three days in the interior, 
belonging to the King. These men had been sent to the 
assistance of a small town belonging to a Chief on friendly 
terms with the King, who had been threatened by the 
Abbeokutans, and who had applied to Abomey for 
assistance. 



240 A Mission to Gelele, King of DaJwme. 

The King had granted the assistance required, and 
despatched two of his head warriors with about 600 men 
for this purpose. 

When these men arrived at the town they found that 
the Abbeokutans, hearing of their approach, had run 
away, and hence their return to Abomey. 

It was a very pretty sight to see these men return 
and present themselves before the King, who made them 
a long speech, and gave them presents. 

On the Saturday, six days after our arrival at Abomey, 
the King saw us privately in his own palace, and I made 
him the presents brought up for this occasion, and which 
will be mentioned hereafter. 

He was attended by six of his Privy Council, his 
most trusted friends, all well known to me ; also by five 
of his principal wives. 

He would only receive the presents from my own 
hands, which is unusual. I gave him first the picture of 
the Queen, and said that Her Majesty had sent this out 
to him as a mark of her friendship, and her wish to be on 
good terms with him. He took it in his hands, and ad- 
mired it very much. 

The Queen is represented in her coronation robes, 
with crown on her head and sceptre in her hand. The 
frame is very handsome, and the picture is a large 
one. 

After looking at it attentively, he asked many ques- 
tions concerning the dress, and then said, ** From hence- 
forth the Queen of England and the King of Dahomey 
are one. The Queen is the greatest Sovereign in Europe, 
and I am King of the Blacks. I will hold the head of 
the kingdom of Dahomey, and you shall hold the tail." 
I then gave him a few small presents from myself, with 
which he was very much delighted and grasped me 
warmly by the hand. His council participated in these 
feelings, and said ** At last good friends have met.*' 



Appendix III. — Commodore Wilmot'i Report, No. i. 241 

Now coiHmenced the delivery of the message which 
I thought it my duty to lay before the King. 

The first suhject was the Slave Trade, and 1 said, 
" England has, for a long period of years, been doing her 
utmost to stop the Slave Trade in this country. Much 
money has been spent, and many Hves have been sacri- 
ficed to attain this desirable end, but fiitherto without 
success. I have come to ask you to put a stop to this 
traffic, and to enter into some treaty with me to this effect. 
I am ready to listen to any terms which you may reason- 
ably propose, and report to my Government what you 
have to say on the subject." I then reasoned with him 
on the iniquity of selling his fellow-creatures, and the 
benefits he would derive, even in a pecuniary way, by 
keeping these sia^'es in his country, and employing them 
in cultivating the soil, f tried to prove to him that the 
value of a slave thus employed would be far more valu- 
able to him in the long run than if he sold him at once, 
and sent him out of the country. 

I reasoned on the richness of the soil, and how easy 
it would be to introduce the silk-worm, cotton, coffee, and 
ail the productions of a similar character. 1 tried to 
convince him that he was depopulating Africa, and mak- 
ing its inhabitants low and miserable. 

I argued that if the slave trade were suddenly 
stopped, he would become a pauper, and that every man's 
hand would necessarily be turned against his neighbour's 
for daily subsistence, because all his supplies come from 
the "white man" from across the sea, and that these 
could only be purchased by the money obtained from 
selling slaves. 

Stop the selling of slaves, and how could he pmssibly 
get the means of living, as the produce of the soil was 
comparatively nothing ? 

The people were entirely dependent on him, and his 
annual customs, for being fed and clothed ; arms, powder, 



242 A Mission to Geleky King of Dahome, 

rum, tobacco, cloths and cowries, were all distributed on 
these occasions. And how were they produced ? They 
were bought from the ** white man," and paid for out of 
the money he received for selling his slaves. 

I implored him to think over these things, and turn 
his attention to the cultivation of his soil, and the profits 
of legitimate trade. 

I asked him how many slaves he shipped during the 
year, and how much he' would take to enter into a treaty 
with us to stop it. 

The next subject was the ** human sacrifices." I 
said that not only England, but all Europe, deplored the 
sad spectacle of human beings, his own countrymen, 
being offered up on the occasion of his annual customs, 
in company with fowls, bulls and goats. Could he not 
put a stop to this, and let it pass away from the customs 
of the country ? I said that I knew all sudden measures 
were not only dangerous, but impossible, but that I hoped 
he would turn over in his mind the cruelty of these pro- 
ceedings, and their utter uselessness to propitiate his 
gods, and that in time they would cease altogether. 

The third subject was Abbeokuta. I said that the 
Queen and the English Government hoped he would not 
send his army to Abbeokuta ; that peace was better than 
war, and that his people might be far better employed in 
cultivating the soil, than in destroying one another. 

If he had made up his mind to go there, I hoped he 
would be merciful to his prisoners, and particularly that 
he would spare all Christians. 

I next asked him if he was disposed to send a Chief 
of rank, and one that was in his confidence, to England, 
that he might see with his own eyes the wonders that 
civilization wrought in that country. 

I said that he would be well received, and that his 
visit would no doubt have its influence on the King. 

The opening of legitimate trade at Whydah was the 

16- -2 



Appendix III, — Commodore Wilmofs Report, No, i. 243 

• 

next subject of conversation, and the reception of the 
English at that place. 

Lastly, I spoke about the Missionary schools, and 
asked him to allow those who wished to do so, to send 
their children to be educated. 

The King listened attentively to all my questions, 
and made several remarks during their delivery. 

After they were finished, the usual ceremony of 
drinking was gone through, and he accompanied me 
through the gates of the palace far on the road to our 
quarters, amidst the cheers of the soldiers and people. 

We remained a month in Abomey after the delivery 
of this message, in consequence of the ** customs" going 
on, but nothing could persuade the King to let us go until 
this was over, as he was most anxious that we should 
see everything and report it. 

Daily we witnessed his Amazons and soldiers, dancing 
and singing. 

We saw his treasures pass round in the interior of the 
palace, preceded by all the principal Ministers, Princes, 
and Chiefs, in their Court costume. 

The Captains of the Amazons passed round in the 
same way, and it was a very pretty sight. 

The costume worn, the different colours displayed 
according to etiquette, the ornaments of silver round the 
necks, with an occasional skull at the waist belt of the 
Amazons, and the half savage appearance of all, notwith- 
standing their good manners and modest behaviour, was 
peculiarly interesting. 

It was during the procession of the King's treasures, 
which will be more fully described in another letter, that 
the " human sacrifices" came round, after the cowries, 
cloths, tobacco, rum, &c., had passed, which were to be 
thrown to the people. A long string of live fowls on poles 
appeared, followed by goats in baskets, then by a bull, 
and lastly half-a-dozen men with hands and feet tied, and 



244 -^ Mission to GnUle, King of Dahome. 

a cloth fastened in a peculiar way round the head, and 
carried in a basket by one man on the top of his head, 
furnished this part of the procession. 

The men were carried three times round the squawj 
the first time stopping^ opposite to where the King t 
sitting, where the bearers received a glass of ru 
from an Amazon in attendance. They then passed throvq 
the gates to the platform half a mile off. 

The procession lasted two days, and " human s 
fices" passed round both days; on the first day eigfl 
went round, and on the second day six : half of these wew 
killed, and half spared, so we were told. Probably theyarf 
only spared until the next "customs." The unfortunatofl 
men looked at us as they passed ; but it was not in our 
power to heip them in any way. 

The King said they were criminals, who had broken 
the laws of their country, such as murderers, thieves, &c. ; 
but I have every reason to know they were captives mostly 
taken at Ishagga, from the peculiar marks on their face, 

A day or two after these processions, the King ap- 
peared on the first platform : there were four of these, two 
large and two small. 

His father never had more than two, but he is deter- 
mined to excel him in everything, and to do as much again 
as he did. If his father gave one sheep as a present, he 
gives two; which he did when he sent me a present of 
cows, sheep, &c., according to custom. 

The sides of all these platforms are covered with 
crimson and other coloured cloths, with curious devices, 
such as alligators, elephants, snakes, &c., from twelve to 
fifteen feet high ; and the large ones are in the form of a 
square, with a neat building of considerable size, also 
covered over, running along the whole extent of one side. 

You ascend by a rough ladder covered over, and 
enter the platform, which is neatly floored with dry grass, 
and perfectly level. 



Appendix III. — Commodore Wilmofs Report, No, i . 245 

Dispersed all over this were Chiefs under the King's 
umbrellas, sitting down, and at the further end from the 
entrance the King stands surrounded by a chosen few of 
his Amazons. 

In the centre of this side of the platform is a round 
tower, about thirty feet high, covered with cloths, bearing 
similar devices as the other parts. This is a new idea of 
the King's, and from the top of this tower the victims are 
thrown to the people below. 

When the King is ready, he commences by throwing 
cowries to the people in bundles, as well as separately. 
The scramble begins, and the noise occasioned by the 
men fighting to catch these is tremendous. 

Thousands are assembled with nothing on but a waist 
clout, and a small bag for the cowries. Sometimes they 
fight by companies, one company against the other, 
according to the King's fancy ; and the leaders are 
mounted on the shoulders of their people. After the 
cowries, cloths are thrown, which occasions the greatest 
excitement. 

While this lasts the King gives them to understand 
that if any man is killed, nothing will be done to the man 
who is the cause of it, as all is supposed to be fair fighting 
with hands ; no arms are allowed. 

After this the Chiefs are called, and cowries, cloths, 
&c., given to them. The King begins by throwing away 
everything himself; then his Amazons take it up for a 
short time, when the King renews the game, and finishes 
the sport. He changes his position from one place to 
another along the front part of the platform. 

When all that the King intends throwing away for 
the day is expended, a short pause ensues, and by-and-by, 
is seen inside the platform, the poles mentioned before, 
with live fowls (all cocks) at the end of them, in procession 
towards the round tower. 

Three men mount to the top, and receive, one by one, 



246 A Mission to GeleUy King of Dahome, 

all these poles, which are precipitated on the people 
beneath. A large hole has been prepared, and a rough 
block of wood ready, upon which the necks of the victims 
are laid, and their heads chopped off, the blood from the 
body being allowed to fall into the hole. 

After the fowls came the goats, then the bull, and 
lastly the men, who were tumbled down in the same way. 

All the blood is mixed together in the hole, and 
remains exposed with the block till night. 

The bodies of the men are dragged along by the feet, 
and maltreated on the way, by being beaten with sticks, 
hands in some cases cut off, and large pieces cut out of 
their bodies, which are held up. They are then taken to 
a deep pit and thrown in. The heads are alone preserved 
by being boiled, so that the skull may be seen in a state 
of great perfection. The heads of the human victims 
killed are first placed in baskets and exposed for a short 
time. 

This was carried on for two days. I would not wit- 
ness the slaying of these men on the first day, as we were 
very close to them, and I did not think it right to sanc- 
tion by my presence such inhuman sacrifices. I therefore 
got up and went into a tent, and when all was over 
returned to my seat. 

It was upon this occasion that a circumstance took 
place which redounds highly to the credit of the King, 
and should be made known everywhere. While sitting 
in the tent a messenger arrived, saying, '* The King calls 
you." I went and stood under the platform where he 
was. Tens of thousands of people were assembled ; not 
a word, not a whisper was heard. I saw one of the 
victims ready for slaughter on the platform, held by a 
narrow strip of white cloth under his arms. His face was 
expressive of deepest alarm, and much of its blackness 
had disappeared ; there was a whiteness about it most 
extraordinary. 



Appendix III, — Commodore Wthnofs Report, No, i. 247 

The King said, ** You have come here as my friend, 
havfe witnessed all my customs, and shared good-naturedly 
in the distribution of my cowries and cloths ; I love you 
as my friend, and you have shown that an Englishman, 
like you, can bear patience, and have sympathy with the 
black man. I now give you your share of the victims, 
and present you with this man, who from henceforth 
belongs to you, to do as you like with him, to educate him, 
take him to England, or anything else you choose." The 
poor fellow was then lowered down, and the white band 
placed in my hands. 

The expression of joy on his countenance cannot be 
described : it said, *' The bitterness of death, and such a 
death, is passed, and I cannot comprehend my position." 
Not a sound escaped from his lips, but the eye told what 
the heart felt, and even the King himself participated in 
his joy. The Chiefs and people cheered me as I passed 
through them with the late intended victim behind me. 

I will not enter into my own feelings on this occasion ; 
they can be easily understood : but the saving of even 
this one man's life was a sufficient recompense for all the 
delays and for all our detention. I felt that another 
victim would have been added to the sanguinary list of 
Dahomian sacrifices if I had not carried out that line of 
forbearance which I had determined to adopt. 

The Chiefs all congratulated me, and shook me by 
the hand. Another victim was given to a Chief, a par- 
ticular friend of mine, and he said it was on my account. 

The "customs" were concluded by a day of firing, 
when all the soldiers, under their different leaders, marched 
past the King, and in review order before us. The King 
danced with his Amazons, and invited us to join. The 
firing was excellent, and did them great credit. The 
King must have expended an immense quantity of powder 
during our visit. 

While the "customs" last the King does not transact 



248 A Mission to Gelek, King of Dahome, 

any public business, and he told us that he had hurried 
them over on purpose that we might get away. 

On the afternoon of Friday, the i6th of January, the 
King asked me to review his Life Guardsmen and women, 
which I did, and he then made me Colonel or King over 
the whole of them, about 1000 strong each — an honour 
for which I had to pay dearly, according to the custom of 
the country. 

Speeches were made by the captains of each, who 
were introduced separately, the whole tenour of which 
was what they would do at Abbeokuta, and the number 
of heads that would fall to my share, as I was now their 
Chief, and consequently had a right to a part of every- 
thing they took. 

The following day, Saturday the 17th, the King saw 
us in private, as before, and said he was ready to give me 
his answer to the message I had brought. 

He commenced by paying me many compliments, 
and said how glad he was that such a messenger had been 
sent, who by his patience and forbearance had shown him- 
self a friend to the black man. 

He then entered into a long history of his country in 
the time of his ancestors, and how anxious his father was 
to be friends with the English ; that for many years past 
(he did not know the reason why) the English seemed to 
be hostile to him, and endeavoured to make all nations in 
Africa fight agamst him. 

He said that the Slave Trade had been carried on in 
his country for centuries, and that it was his great means 
of living and paying his people. He did not send slaves 
away in his own ships, but "white men" came to him 
for them, and was there any harm in his selling? We 
ought to prevent the "white men" from coming to him: 
if they did not come he would not sell. 

We had seen what a great deal he had to give away 
every year to his people, who were dependent on him: 
that this could not be done by selling palm oil alone. If 



Appendix IIL — Cofmnodore Wilmofs Report^ No, i . 249 

people came for palm oil he would sell it to them ; he could 
not carry on his government upon trade alone. If he 
gave up the Slave Trade, where was he to get money 
from ? It was not his fault that he sold slaves, but those 
who made his fathers do it, and hence it became an in- 
stitution of his country. 

He said, "I cannot stop it all at once: what will my 
people do? And besides this, I should be in danger of 
losing my life.'' I asked him how much money he would 
take to give it up. He replied, **No money will induce 
me to do so ; I am not like the Kings of Lagos, Porto 
Novo, Benin, &c. There are only two Kings in Africa, 
Ashantee and Dahomey : I am the King of all the blacks. 
Nothing will recompense me for the Slave Trade." I 
argued that it must be stopped in time; that even now 
very few ships came for them: and what would he do 
when it was all done? I found it useless to go on any 
further on this subject. He said there were plenty of 
blacks to sell, and plenty to remain ; that the price of a 
slave was 80 dollars, with 4 dollars custom on each. On 
most occasions he is paid before the slaves are taken away, 
but sometimes he risks them on trust, and then he feels 
the capture of the slave-ship. 

He said, *'I must go to Abbeokuta: we are enemies; 
they insulted my brother, and I must punish them. Let 
us alone; why interfere in black man's wars? We do 
not want * white men' to fight against us; let every one 
go out of Abbeokuta, and see who will win. Let the 
* white man' stand by and see which are the brave men ! " 

He spoke strongly of Porto Novo, and said, **If my 
friends the English had sent to me, I would have broke 
Porto Novo for them." He does not want the "white 
man" to interfere in any way with the black man's 
quarrels. He promised faithfully, for my sake, to spare 
all the Christians, and send them to Whydah, and that 
his General should have strict orders to this effect. I 
asked him about the Christians at Ishagga. He said, 



250 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahonu, 

"Who knew they were Christians? The black man says 
he is a white man, calls himself a Christian, and dresses 
himself in clothes: it is an insult to the white man. I 
respect the white man, but these people are impostors, 
and no better than my own people. Why do they remain 
in a place when they know that I am coming ? If they 
do so, I suppose they are taking up arms against me, and 
I am bound to treat them as enemies. If a musket-ball 
touches the white man at Abbeokuta, am I to blame, if 
they will not go away when they know I am coming ? *' I 
reasoned with him no longer on this subject, because I 
thought his observations so thoroughly just and honest. 

The next subject was the ** human sacrifices." He 
said, ** You have seen that only a few are sacrificed, and 
not the thousands that wicked . men have told the world. 
If I were to give up this custom at once, my head would 
be taken off to-morrow. These institutions cannot be 
stopped in the way you propose. By-and-by, little by 
little, much may be done — softly, softly, not by threats. 
You see how I am placed, and the difficulties in the way : 
by-and-by, by-and-by." 

We then came to a Prince being sent to England, 
which he said he would do if I came again to renew the 
friendship and give him the Queen's answer to what he 
had said. 

With regard to the schools at Whydah, the King said, 
** Any of the mulattoes may send their children" ; and I 
have no doubt, if he sees we are in earnest, that in a very 
short time he will allow his own people to do the same 
thing if they choose. 

After the interview, which lasted some time, was 
over, the King made several presents, namely, for the 
Queen, a large umbrella made of different coloured velvets, 
with the devices emblematic of their customs ; a large 
carved stool, which no one but Kings are allowed to 
possess; a pipe-stick and bag; a bag made from the 
leather of the country, with a lion worked upon it ; a very 



Appendix III, — Commodore Wilmofs Report^ No. 2. 251 

handsome country cloth, and a long stick ornamented 
with silver, which can only be carried by the King. Also 
two girls, one about twelve, the other sixteen, very pretty 
and intelligent. I have left these last at Whydah, in 
charge of the coloured missionary's wife there, until I 
can learn the wishes of Her Majesty on the subject. The 
girls were taken at Ishagga, and I should think would be 
very interesting to the Queen. 

In my next letter I hope to give an account of the 
resources of Dahomey, its form of government, the 
number of soldiers and Amazons, as well as a description 
of the country, and everything else that will be both 
valuable and interesting to know ; also many sayings of 
the King, which I have not time to mention now. 

We left Abomey the same evening, and were con- 
ducted with great honours to Whydah, where we arrived 
on Thursday afternoon, the 22nd instant, after an absence 
of fifty-one days. I went on board the following morning. 

Such a lengthened stay in the country of the King, 
and at his capital, could not have been effected without 
some expense ; many presents of different kinds had to be 
given away, as well as money. The reception given me 
by the King demanded this, and I hope I maintained 
with becoming dignity the honour of the country. 
Trusting my proceedings will meet with approval, as I 
have only acted for the good of the public service, I 
have, &c. 



No. 2. 

Commodore Wilmot to Rear -Admiral Sir B. Walker. 

(Extract.) 

'* Rattlesnake y'' at Sea^ Lat. 3° 33' N. 

Long. 6° 7' E., February 10, 1863. 

In continuation of my former letter of proceedings, 

dated Lagos, 29th January, 1863, I have to add the 



252 A Mission to Geleky King of Dahome. 

following additional observations on various subjects 
connected with my late visit to Abomey. 

I have already remarked on the friendly disposition 
evinced by the King towards the English, as manifested 
in his manner to me on all occasions. ** From henceforth," 
he said, ** the King of Dahomey and the Queen of England 
are one ; you shall hold the tail of the kingdom, and I will 
take the head " : meaning that we should have possession 
of Whydah for trading purposes, and supply him with 
everything. 

He is most anxious for trade at Whydah, and if we 
can only prove to him that we are really sincere in our 
wishes to be friendly with him, I am quite certain that he 
will think very seriously of our proposals to him for giving 
up the Slave Trade, as well as the " human sacrifices." 

Both of these are '* institutions" of the country ; the 
first, established and encouraged by the ** white man " him- 
self; the second, handed down from father to son as a 
principal part of their religious ceremonies, still enforced 
and fostered by the ignorance and superstition of the 
" fetish " priests. 

Every house has its "fetish" hanging up, and every 
man has a "fetish" charm about his person. There is a 
devil fetish for driving away evil spirits, and another for 
bringing good luck. These consist of small mounds of 
earth with a calabash on the top, surrounded by cowries, 
or a repulsive-looking face carved out of wood. There are 
all kinds of images, such as lions, tigers, dogs, and other 
animals without a name, cut out in the rudest manner, and 
carried about in all great processions. 

The roads, villages, and houses, are filled with 
"fetish" images, and sacrifices to the "fetish." The 
latter consist of goats, fowls, fruits, &c., being laid under 
a small mat shed, around the idol whom it is intended to 
propitiate, — dead, of course. 

Men, women, and children, consult the "fetish" as to 



Appendix III, — Commodore Wilmofs Report^ No, 2. 253 

the food they ought to eat. Some are allowed to eat beef, 
others only mutton ; many are prohibited to touch the 
flesh of goats. Poultry is permitted to some, eggs to 
others. This nonsense is carried on all over the kingdom, 
and strictly enforced ; but I have never heard any one, 
man or woman, say that the " fetish " forbade them to 
drink wine or spirits. 

We lived at Abomey, in the house of the King's chief 
diviner, a man of high rank and consequence, one of the 
Privy Council, and the King's adviser on all great 
occasions. The King never does anything without the 
diviner first consulting the "fetish," to find out whether 
it will be favourable or unfavourable. His house is full 
of ** fetish" of every description. 

I mention these things concerning the religion and 
superstition of the country, to show how impossible it will 
be for the King to give up at once the "human sacrifices." 
He himself says, ** Softly, softly ; it shall be done in time, 
but not yet ; my head would be cut off to-morrow if I 
stopped it suddenly ! " 

A few have an idea of a Supreme Being, but still a 
very imperfect one. The King knows more of these im- 
portant truths than any of his subjects, and we shall see 
the good effects of this knowledge by-and-by. 

I will now enter upon a description of the country and 
its resources, its capabilities for legitimate trade, its 
present means of subsisting an hostile force, as well as of 
resisting an attack, the number and description of its 
soldiers, the dangers that would attend the landing of a 
force for the occupation of Whydah, and the diflSculties to 
be encountered in retaining it when once in our possession. 

Description of the country and its resources, S^c, — The 
distance from Whydah to Abomey is sixty-five miles. It 
is extraordinary what mistakes former writers have made 
in giving the distance from Whydah to Abomey. Mr. 
Norris, in 1774, states it to be 150 miles ; others more or 



254 ^ Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome. 

less, according to exaggerated reports, or their own 
imagination. 

Whydah is three miles from the sea. From the 
beach to Whydah the country is flat, and three pieces of 
water have to be passed over ; the first is a lagoon that 
extends eastward to Lagos, with the exception of a por- 
tion of the mainland, three miles broad, and westward to 
Aghwey and Little Popoe. This lagoon is navigable for 
canoes all the year round. 

The second and third pieces of water are through 
marshy ground, roads being cut through them, about ten 
feet wide, for the purposes of traffic, &c. These are 
almost impassable in the rainy season, and in the dry 
season contain about two feet of water, black and muddy, 
with a very bad smell. 

In 1 85 1 I caught the fever badly from passing through 
this very swamp. 

Whydah is a large straggling place, containing some 
decent houses. There are three forts or factories, English, 
French, and Portuguese. The French is in excellent 
repair, and does great credit to the French gentleman 
who carries on his business there. The Portuguese is at 
present inhabited by missionaries of that nation, and the 
English fort is the residence of the Wesleyan Missionary, 
the Rev. P. W. Bernasko, a native of Cape Coast. 

No one has any territorial rights in this place. The 
King of Dahomey reigns supreme, and could turn any 
** white man" away if he pleases. 

There are a great number of guns, all spiked, 9- 
pounders and 12 -pounders, in and around the English 
fort, which have been there for ages. There is a curious 
history attached to these guns, which I will relate, as it 
shows that the English are actually the hereditary friends 
of the Dahomian Kings. 

During the long period that England acknowledged 
the Slave Trade as legitimate, and the stowage of slave- 



Appendix III, — Commodore Wilmofs Report, No. 2. 255 

ships was regulated by Act of Parliament, the fort of 
Whydah was in a high state of preservation, and English- 
men were appointed as Governors under the authority of 
the Crown. 

They were always on good terms with the Kings of 
Dahomey, and in those days great presents of carriages 
and horses, &c., were made ; some of the carriages I saw 
the other day at* Abomey in a very ricketty state. They 
are kept as ** heir-looms '* in the capital, and pass round 
with the King's treasures. 

These Governors had great power over every one, and 
communicated directly with the King, who obtained his 
supplies entirely from the fort. We had soldiers then to 
protect the place, and guns were mounted in all command- 
ing positions. 

A deep ditch surrounded the fort, which remains to 
this day. Whydah was a flourishing kingdom early in 
the last century, when it was conquered by Dahomey, 
who committed the most horrible outrages, and the 
country was reduced to desolation. 

It must have been about the year 1750 that the 
people of Whydah, tired of the Dahomian yoke, rose 
against the King, and, no doubt, they would have been 
successful had not the English Governor shut his gates 
and turned the guns of the fort upon the rebels. 

The Dahomian army came in from Savi, a consider- 
able town in those days, four miles from Whydah, and 
the rebejs were completely defeated, thanks to the Eng- 
lish guns. 

The King was very grateful to the Governor for his 
assistance on this occasion, and enlarged his privileges 
considerably ; but at the same time he said, " This won't 
do; these English with their guns are formidable enemies, 
they may turn me out some day " : so he spiked all the 
guns in the fort before he went away, in which state they 
are to be seen to this day. 



256 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome. 

From henceforth, until a few years ago, the Kings of 
Dahomey had a strong friendship for the English, and 
the King mentioned one man in particular in the time of 
his grandfather, Mr. James, who was Governor of the 
fort, and his "t>est friend." 

The population of Whydah is large in comparison to 
other towns in the kingdom, with the exception of 
Abomey ; it contains, probably, about 12,000 inhabitants, 
including the soldiers belonging to the Yavogah and 
Prince Chedathon. 

I observed a great falling off in this place ; twelve 
years ago it was in a flourishing condition, with many 
capital houses and merchants residing there ; now, most 
of these houses are in ruins, and the trade is small. It 
will be well to consider the cause of this decline here- 
after. 

The great families of "De Souza" are either dead or 
dispersed ; those that remain are of small importance to 
what their fathers were. 

Stock used to be plentifyl and very good ; at present 
it may be obtained, but not in such abundance; it is also 
dear to what it was formerly. Water is plentiful both 
from the lagoon and by wells, which are to be found in all 
large houses : it is very good. Fruit, such as oranges, 
pine apples, and bananas, is cheap and abundant. 

From Whydah to Abomey the whole country is a flat 
level, and there are regular villages which are considered 
as established ** halting places '* for the traveller. 

The want of water begins after you leave Whydah. 
There is a dark deep swamp about three miles distant, 
over which (that is, the road through it) large pieces of 
timber have been placed so as to form a bridge, the cross- 
ing of which is a dangerous operation. The water is 
black and muddy. 

The country through which we passed varied much, 
from open plain to thick forest. There is no other road 



Appendix III. — Commodore Wilmofs Report^ No. 2. 257 

than the one by which we travelled. A great part of the 
country is well adapted for cultivation, and would produce 
cotton, silk, coffee, indigo, sugar, and everything else that 
grows in similar climates. 

Around the villages the ground is cultivated, and 
produces Indian corn, cassada, beans, &c., just sufficient 
to maintain life. As we approached Abomey, more ex- 
tensive tracts of ground were under the hands of the 
farmer, chiefly belonging to the King, who has to dis- 
tribute largely to all his people. 

People have no time for peaceful pursuits : war, war, 
war is alone thought of, and the King gives them no rest. 
Many of the Chiefs complain of this, and seem heartily 
tired of it. I am sure they would gladly turn to a better 
state of things if they dared. They have no time to 
themselves : there is always some " custom " going on, 
and hence the country is in a state of desolation, and the 
population is gradually decreasing. 

There are some noble trees in the jungle through 
which we passed. One measured nearly 100 feet round 
its base, and the stem went up to 70 or 80 feet, without a 
knot or branch to rob it of its beauty. This was the 
"cotton silk tree," of no use whatever, either in its fruit 
or timber. The branches were magnificent, and I counted 
thirty some 50 or 60 feet in length, of enormous size, and 
covering a great extent of ground. As far as we could 
see and learn , the trees of this country produce no timber 
fit for any purposes of building. 

I never saw such a scarcity of the necessaries of life. 
Cattle, sheep, and goats are few in number: these are 
only kept by the King and Chiefs, who do not seem to 
understand that their wealth would be increased by breed- 
ing largely and keeping up a good supply. The use of 
milk is unknown. Fowls are not plentiful ; we paid 2s. 
each for them. 

The Chiefs rarely eat meat, the people never. They 

VOL. II. 17 



258 A Mission to Geleh, King of Dahotne. 

live upon "cankey," which is made from Indian com, and 
mixed with palm oil. 

They are ardently fond of spirits — the common nun 
that is imported by nearly all traders : it is very strong, 
and they prefer it to wine or good brandy. 

I was astonished at the scantiness of the population. 
As we passed through the villages, nearly everybody 
turned out to see us. 

After we had left, every soldier in the place went on 
to Abomey to swell the numbers there. There was not a 
man to be seen on our return — none but women and 
children. There may be other villages out of the direct 
route to Abomey, and no doubt there are many, because 
the kingdom is a large one; but still the great question 
of the population of Dahomey has been unquestionably 
decided by my visit. 

We everywhere expressed astonishment at meeting 
so few people, which accounts for the small portion of 
land under cultivation. There are far more women than 
men — I should say three to one, which may be the reason 
why the Kings of Dahomey, who are always at war, are 
obliged to raise and keep up the Amazons, or "woman 
soldiers," to the extent that they do. 

As war is made one of the necessities of the State, a 
constant drain upon the male population is required, and 
it naturally follows that the supply is never equal to the 
demand; hence the remarkable circumstance of nearly 
"5000" women being found in the Dahomian army. 

There is, probably, another reason for thus brutalising 

the minds and feelings of the softer sex in this country, 

which is, that the King may think it a good stroke of 

policy to encourage and patronise these Amazons to the 

extent that he does, for the purpose of creating a rivalry 

amongst the men, which will incite them to prove their 

courage and their strength beyond that displayed by the 

other sex. 
17 — 2 



Appendix III, — Commodore Wilmofs Report, No. 2. 259 

The Amazons are everything in this country. The 
King Hves with them and amongst them ; they are only 
to be found in the Royal palaces. When they go out to 
fetch water, which is every day and nearly all day, the 
one in the front (for they all follow in single Hne) has a 
bell round her neck much like a sheep-bell in England, 
which she strikes herself whenever any person is seen 
approaching. Immediately the men run away in all 
directions, and clear the road by which the Amazons are 
coming. They then wait till all have passed. The 
reason for this is, that if an accident were to happen to 
any one of these women, either by her falling down and 
breaking the water-jar on her head, or if the water-jar 
fell off her head, the unfortunate man who happened to be 
near at the time would be immediately seized, and either 
imprisoned for life, or have his head taken off, as it would 
be supposed that he was the cause of the accident. 

No wonder, then, that they get out of the way as 
quickly as possible. We were always obliged to follow 
this custom ; women are not expected to avoid them in 
this manner. It is one of the most absurd laws that 
even a savage nation can pass, because it stops business, 
and delays everybody on the road. All day long the sound 
of this bell is heard, and people are seen flying away. 
The Amazons seem to enjoy it, and laughed heartily when 
we stepped aside to avoid them. 

Whatever may be the object in thus keeping up such 
a large body of "women soldiers," there is no doubt that 
they are the mainstay of the kingdom. I put down the 
number at 5000 ; besides these there are numerous 
women to attend upon them as servants, cooks, &c. We 
certainly saw 4000 under arms at Abomey, and there are 
more in other parts of the kingdom residing in the Royal 
palaces. 

They are far superior to the men in everything — ^in 
appearance, in dress, in figure, in activity, in their per- 



26o A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome, 

formances as soldiers, and in bravery. Their numbers 
are kept up by young girls of 13 or 14 years of age, being 
attached to each company, who learn their duties from 
them ; they dance with them, sing with them, and live 
with them, but they do not go to war with them until they 
have arrived at a certain age, and can handle a musket. 

These women seem to be fully aware of the authority 
they possess, which is seen in their bold and free manner, 
as well as by a certain swagger in their walk. Most of 
them are young, well-looking, and have not that ferocity in 
their expression of countenance which might be expected 
from their peculiar vocation ; but many have passed that 
time of life when all passions have ceased to animate, and 
make their mode of life at least worth retaining. 

They are supposed to lead a life of chastity, and 
there is no doubt that they do so, because it is im- 
possible for them to do anything wrong without being 
discovered, and such discovery would lead to certain 
death. The King alone has the privilege of selecting 
any of these women for his wives, which is rarely the case. 

As soldiers in an African kingdom, and engaged solely 
in African warfare, they are very formidable enemies. They 
fully understand the use of the musket, and load and fire 
with remarkable rapidity. Their activity is surprising ; 
they would run with some of our best performers in 
England. The "Captains" carry the skulls of their 
enemies in their girdles, and an occasional jaw is also seen. 

During the mornings and evenings large parties of 
these women are sent to fetch water for the use of the 
King and his household, a distance of many miles. It is 
a very pretty sight to see long strings of women, with 
water-jars on their heads, wending their way silently and 
quietly across the country to where the wells are ; the 
only sound to be heard is when the leader rings her bell 
for the road to be kept clear. 

Water at Abomey is the great drawback of the place. 



Appendix III, — Commodore Wihnofs Report, No. 2. 261 

There is none in the town : it all comes from the swamps, 
three or four miles in the country. Women are the prin- 
cipal water-carriers, although men are employed also. At 
this season of the year it is very scarce and very bad. 
The process of getting it is this. An embankment is 
formed round the large pools, which are filled from the 
draining of the marshy ground, very dirty of course. 
Around this large holes or wells are cut, into which the 
water filtrates from the pool. Smaller holes are again cut 
next to these, into which the water percolates, being this 
time tolerably clear. Into these small holes the women 
dip their calabashes, and in process of time the water-jar 
is filled : it is a long operation. 

This clear water is only, however, for the higher 
classes, and for those that can afford to purchase it. The 
poor people drink from the muddy pool, and are thankful 
for what they get. 

The ground is not favourable for boring, being a 
mixture of iron-stone, granite, and sand. It sounds hollow 
as you walk over it. 

We visited all the wells, and it is certainly surprising 
how such a large population can live upon such a limited 
suply of water. 

The '*men soldiers" are more numerous than the 
*' Amazons," and are armed in the same way. They are 
also very active and expert with their weapons. I should 
say that the King could not bring into the field more than 
6000 fighting men. This number, with the " Amazons," 
will amount to 10,000 altogether. I am quite certain that 
this is the full extent of his power. 

All these are armed with a musket and short sword, 
and against their own countrymen would be formidable. 
Their fighting is not like ours, but a system of strategy, 
cunning, and surprise ; their object being to arrive at the 
intended point without being heard or seen. Should they 
succeed, so much the better for themselves ; if not, they 



Appendix III. — Commodore Wilmofs Report ^ No, 2. 263 

There are no regular roads, but merely a footpath all 
the way, which, for many miles in some places, passes 
through a dense forest, while at others it is across an 
open plain, with long grass, bushes, and weeds on either 
side. 

The chiefs and head men ride upon small ponies, 
which originally came from Abbeokuta. These perform 
the journey from Whydah to Abomey, and there is no 
reason why larger animals should not do the same, as the 
road is good, with the exception of the swamps and water 
which have to be crossed. There is a swamp with a very 
bad road through it, nine miles long, about eighteen miles 
from Abomey, which is impassable during the rainy 
season. Even the natives have great difficulty in finding 
their way. It was dry when we walked across, and 
therefore in its best condition, but we were very glad to 
get to the end of it. It is ftiU of deep ruts and holes, and 
very narrow. The bottom is of a dark clayish character, 
and very slippery when the least wet. 

From Cannah to Abomey, a distance of eight miles, 
the road is broad enough for a dozen carriages to drive 
abreast, and in Abomey, and around it, horses might be 
galloped in all directions. 

The country at this time of the year, namely, from 
the middle of November to the end of April, is remarkably 
healthy, at least we found it so ; for a period of fifty-one 
days we never had an hour's sickness. It is much cooler 
on shore at this season than at sea, although the tempera- 
ture is high ; still the atmosphere is not oppressive, and 
during the harmattan winds it is positively cold : we ex- 
perienced this on two occasions, the water becoming in one 
night almost too cold to drink. It affects the natives very 
much, drying up their skin and lips, and preventing them 
from washing, as they cannot stand the change. We, of 
course, enjoyed it. 

The natives are lightly clothed, and are very active 



264 



A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome, 



on their legs. One of the principal Chiefs at Abomey 
told me that he suffered very much from being obliged to 
find his way through the bush when he last went to 
Abbeokuta. 



265 













.52 A Jr< - 'O t; 


COO) 


a> 














-^ g 

^ 9> 














^ ^ j3 5 S ;g 


dein 
plac 
Agb 


a 












• 


lada, 
ngth i 
we, in 
of **A( 

the 

V. 
a little 


nd Ad 
latter 
elf at 


(A 






tx] 




4:i 


— . <U 1 <D U 


<tJ 0) W 






CO 




;? 






1 


at A 
old at 1 
if Adan 
palaces 
(whenc 
Chapte 
Pakhi, 


Kana ; 
:rom th 
led him 





• 




H 

(I) 


c/5 






His princely origin 
migration north, are t 
ter V. ; his conquest c 
X. ; his building the 
and "Danh's Belly" 
name **Dahome"), in 

He also conquered 


dan-we and 

nd coming i 

He enthroE 


t5, and pr( 


> 





H 










>< 

Q 
2 


a: 
< 

w 


WITH 

EXPLOITS. 


H 


en 




between 
the left ] 
Agbome 













U 


H 


en 


H 




»o 






fM 


b 







li 








0^ 



(I) 


> 

Ul 




M 


. . . — 










^ 


> 








§l^« 


&• 









H 


. 


"S ^ V 8 «^ 


-§^ 2 



> 









Q 




the mo 
.k (jije) a 
or ** St 



1-1 




< 
< 





< 




is Nyi, or ** 
e," known to 
de, is Dako 
id Do-nun, * 
y " (which 
knows). He 
coodonou" of 






U 


H 

Q 




^ 


Like 
s, he toe 
nsiyen 


e," or tit 












5 « ^ S -i2 V 


^ ^ s. 


a 1 






H 






C ex U 12 0) s 


^ ^ (/) 


G 










• 

1 




• 




1 



266 



A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome, 









!2 



■♦2 V) 



*0 



:2: 



(A 



bo-f! 

a 



>^ > 

a ^ 
o 2 



1-4 
O 

1-4 

o 



O 0) 

•^ -a* •» 

^ ^ g. 

g s " 

S o S 



o ^ 



Ci4^ 

CA c 

rt .S 






bo 



a> 



0) 



T3 

^ ^^ 

'^ ex 

J3 J3 



«« "^ 

* Ci4 

•r-l _rj 

-^ ^ 

C ^ 

O ^^ 

•S.s 

8.S 






• f-l 



cx "* 



S 
o 

> 
bo 

(A 



O 
c/} 



<U Cfl 



^ p 



1-1 



1-1 






*^ en 
bX) g 

1-4 « 

o bx) 
o .5 






(A (/3 

J3 J3 



O ° 



o :=3 

X 

a; ^ 
o 

c o 



(A 

u 






C/) 

V.I 

0) 

-♦-» 
O 

S 



o 

1-1 

w 

0) 



G 
O ^ 



^ o < ^ o 



K T3 
O 

^ CA 






0) 



O 



g 

o 
c/) 



— . ^ .P 



> ^'^ 



o 

a 



" a 

(A CX 






S 13 
2 ^ 



bX) S 
G -^ 
O ^ O 
bX) bX)T3 

bx).i2 o 
§0.52 ^ 



cs 



U 

cx 

O 
(A 



6 ^ 
o 

G « 

Ctf CA 

y •«-• 

JG '►^ 

fl G 

•jG • 

■4-t CO 



ctf 


I 

00 


u 


^ 1) 


CA 


G 


93 


equal 
lUgibl 


(U 




• 


^ «> 


K 


0) 

J3 


cn 


2 s 

4-» 3 


• 


-♦-» 


CX 

G 




4-» 


a; 


o-o 


• 


J3 

4-» 








G 

O 


s 


Sjs 


(/} 


CO 


(A 


o 




Vh 


4-» 




G 


CX 


o 

CX 



■I 

o 



IH 



Appendix IV. — Catalogue of the Dahoman Kings. 267 



tuDT3 

•s ^ 

(A (A 

CD -" 
eg CD 

3 o 
XI -►- 

• •» a; 
O q3 

o § 

^ o 

o 5 

J^ (A 

J3 



o 



0) 



(A O 



C T3 

O <t> 

•♦-» r' 

s « 

^ 0; 

CA -O 

c3 CA 

-S "^^ 

•5 .CA 



be 



• i-T C 
bp bib 

<u Oh 



=3| 
C14 



(A 



0) 






O CA 

I S 

a (A 

•o § 

2^ 0) 
cr 

o o 
o 



CA -a 
>^ 0) 



c;J 

CA 



O 

J? 

-C CA 



X 



CA 

o 



CA ^ 

a; <D 



>^ CA 



CU -M 

c;J 

S CA 

O ^ 

0*0 

0) « 



CA 



a 

a; 

VJ o 

03 '^ a; 



CA Ul 0) 
O CA JA 

/^ CA S^ 



O 



CA 



3 

o 

a 

E 8 

J3 c« 
Eh '^ 

• 

c« XS 
O 

CA U 



O 

N 
I 

< 
CA 



o 

12 



c« p 

'O CA 

O J3 

CA ^ 
0) 

PQ 2^ 

CA J-, 

G O 

E <^ 



o bo 

,0 



E S 

O -M 

CA '^ 

pO 4-» 



Aho- 
(he 


• 


a 
>> 

a 



2 


^^^ 


CA 


4-» 


1 0^ 


a 


at 


sthus :- 
emanak 





s 


G 




N 


i« 


ctf 





»— ; 


tuo 


^ 







^ 6 


CA 


fi 


g 6 


3 

E 





>% a 

ctJ O 
4-» 'O 



U 



CA 
03 



03 03 CA 

^ ^ *>:3 

•5 03 ^ 

:: CA ^* 

V-i TO J-i 

P CA Ch 



03 03 

xs 

M O 
CA 



03 

1-4 

a- 

CA 
03 



03 

J3 






c;J 
03 

u .T^ 

CA ^ 



d 



268 



A Mission to Gdele, King of Dahome, 



a 
^ 



:5 



^1 



O 
vO 



T3 O ct 






:3 



o 
u 



CO 0) 

'D c/) b 
C O '^^ 

Ct ^ CO 

Vh 0) ^ 
^ CO t^ 

:S * O 

ill 



o 

C CO 



> 



o 
u 

c;J 
0) 



CO 

5b g 

^ CO 



° S 

^ o 



0) 






u O 

Cd CO 

^ s 

CO S 

CO eg 

CO J3 



•a o o 

_, <D O 

a *^ O 

G O CO 

a, £ 

-> s 

O C <l> 

c 9^ :: 

^ -^ -^ 



>^ c;J ^ 

S ^ CO 

O <» n 

►^ o ^ 

i> c o 

CO i-i vj 

o fi^ 

-^ CO 

OX) » Vh 

TJ O 

O CO .T3 

5 g 



o 

00 



I 



O 0) 



CO **H 

o ^ 

a; 

cu 

bo 6 
C 2 

§Q 

u 'O 

CO J^ 



to ^ 
e 9 



o 



0) 

> 

a S 
.2 >. 



as 
O CO 

o S 
bo 

O <^ 

a -c 

.63 



< 

E 



9k 



7: j: Xi 



:3 
o 



NCd 



O NCd 
CO J^ 

CO "^ 
CO 

L'K 

CO ^ 



CO '2 

•r1 CU 

2 S 

^ 2 



CO • (U 

s o r 

c;J 

fi e(J j_^ 

2 § ^ 

CO <U j3 



gco 

O 
O 



O o i^ 



ffi 



^ *-• R< 



^ bo 

bo^ 

• f^ ^^ 

CO rt 

CO 

u C 

8 2 



■I 
o 



d 



ro 



Appendix IV, — Catalogue of the Dahoman Kings, 269 



(A 






bx) 




C 




• f^ 




^ 






ex 






CX 





cd 



CA 
I 

cx 



0) 



4J (u 

... 0) «+-i 

1-4 O 

55 J3 



a; 
o 



bo « 



S « rt 

cd tfi 



- ct s 

j2 a; C 

^ .. ,0 

cd bc't^ 

^ -^ T3 

O C/} 
S w O 

?? ^'J S 

^ cd 2 

0) 

o 

0) 



cd -I-* 

c a; 

c« a 

^ cd 

.- O 

^ o 

CI ex 



0) 


<u 


XI 


> 




cd 


>^-c; 


cd 




g 






bo Jx 

^ cx 



cd ^J* 4_, 

bo ^ 

••jH cd cd 

a; > iH 



> 
cd 

bo 



en 

a 



O O kI 

2 2-- 

^ <M .£3 



O O 

^ Id 

O cd 

a; 
pj en 

O cd 
u (U 

cd a; 

u -G 

O *" 

'C cd 

cd rt 

^^ 

en 

_rj ^ 

cd 
o 



3 

Xi 
en 



en 

g 

bo^ 
XI *. 



S § 

O G 

-^ en 

en o 

13 u 



O 

a 

en 

s 

cd 



J3 
cd 

J3 



T3 

a 

cd 
cd 

cd 



CD < 

fl en 

G bo 

•a ^ 



-C cd 

cx . 

cd ^ 

o c< 

^ Jr 

J3 "^ 

^ G 

en •'-' 

cd .. 

O bo 

4-» (1) 

O -G 

bo ^ 

cd i^ 

Eg ^ 

cd cd 



C (d 

0) o 

O 0) 

•s -^ 

cd ^ 

hJ CD 

G ^ 

S en 

PQ « 

G Id 

O CX 

bo 22 



T3 

G 
cd 

G 

O 

• f-i 

en 

en 

*s 

Xi 

G 
en 

a; 

> 

o; 
o 
a; 

M 

G 

J3 






1-4 

Cd 
o 



00 

o 



bo 



bo rC^ 



cd .G G 



cd 



>H )A 






G ^ S 



T3 
O 

en 



g <u > -G 

rt cd vh-i en 
+3 j3 O cd 



bo -t^ 

•S § 

G 
G 
O 
1-1 
1-1 

G 
en 

0) 
X3 



en 

cd 

a; 

CO 



cd . 

en 

G G 



'T3 

«-^ 

G 
O 

- 1 

Cd cd 

<D O 

X^ c 



cd <u 

cd jH 
bo a; 

CD en 

G cd 

G ^ 

^ cd 

cd CX 

Id -^ 



bo «« 

#H 4-» 

<-> G 

G 

cd ti 
ih cd 



-M en :; 
en ••-I 



(U 



S .tl <G 



en 



P (u :g 



en ^G CO - 



bO 



G 
O 



'tt 



G 

cd o 



^ E iJ 



O o -G 

1-1 

^ <D 
^ CX 

e^ G 

.S-2 p 

G 2 



cd .•• bo 

^ "^/^ cd G 

O >^ G en ^G 

.G S H 5b 

• rH cd v-i ^ 

Cd ^ oT 



H :: 



J a; 



370 


A Mission to GdeU, King of Dakome. 


1 


tnbute of " Jaquin " (Jackin, or Jakin,) a little 
maritime country, west of Whydah. He de- 
feated, by stratagem, an army of Oyos, and 
appeased their king by many presents. In 
February. March, 1737, he took Savi, capital 
of Whydah (Chapter V.) with terrible blood- 
shed, and sacrificed 4000 prisoners. He car- 
ried up to Allada forty white men, whom he 
treated civilly ; and in April, 1737, he was 
visited by Capt. Snelgrave {Catherine galley), 
who published his observations (" A Full 
Account of Some Parts of Guinea, and of the 
Slave Trade, 8vo describing the king as 
" the most extraordinary man of his colour 
that he had ever conversed with." 

After this Agaja turned his attention to the 
"Tuffoes" (Toffos), who had insulted him, 
conquered them with 3000 regulars, and sacri- 


4 


i 


i 


ing" (i.e., throwing large 
presents to people). Mr. 
Bulfinch Lambe's sur- 
name, Trudo " Audali" is 
quite unknown to the 
heralds. Commander 
Forbes writes, with usual 
cacc^raphy, Agah - jah- 
dooso. The latter word is 
"Dosu," a name univer- 
sally given in Dahome to 
a boy bom after twins. 
The fourth king's princi- 
pal strong name is: i. 
"Dosu asks to see, and 
then takes by force from 
the owner." He is the 
first king whose mother's 


i 


4 



Appendix IV. — Catalogue of the Dahoman Kings, 271 



c TS .»3 ^ « q 



o 

a; 

O 
T3 



U 

o 



.S2 rt rt 



CO 

U 

J3 



V4 

C 






E 



t-i 

a* 



•O o.. 

CO 

O 



8 



73 00 S 



U4 O ^ 

§ >^S 

M T3 -Q 

> *:: 5 

o <u 

•^ C_i CO 

wmm, C^ '^ 

o »*i ^ 

!:$ ri c^ 

C 0) o 

?^Vm JG 

too 

3 s 2 



J3 O 73 

bo 

s 






E 



a 


^y 


s 


■*-» 




a 


v^ 


a; 


CO 


s 


rt 
TJ 


4-< 


>> 

^ 


CO 



cti 



bo 



73 g 

(u 5 
a^ T3 

^ bo S 

CO 



T3 *^ 



rt 



O O 

U CO 



u. 



ft J^ " 

^ jG 

rt to o 

13 -O ^ 



^2 

o 
<:^ o 

CO G 

<J biO 
o .a 



bpx 

O 

M to 
TS jG 

O 4-* 

tS T3 

-M CO 

O 'IS 

}^ CQ 

a ^ 

2 G-^ 

» E 



bo^ 
G Tl 

W . 

a; 
o ^ 

G u 

-^ S 

2 ^ 
s ^ 

G 

CO ^ 

o ^ 



CO 

G 



4-* Jv 



CO 
CO 

O TS 

bo >-• 
o 

o 6 

> CO 

^ g 

>-■ O 
O >2 
G c^ 

> ctf 
O ^ 

CO E 



-M ^ bo rt 
rt jG c S 

^ -^ W jG 



:g "^ 

bo -M „: 

=^ ?l S 
«^ tii -G 

0I 
bo 

W.S2 

c^ -G 

V rt jr 

'C tiojj 

^^'^ 

bp 5^ 
G CO 



a; 
G 
O 



CO 






.:<: J3 



r* 


ctf 




^ 


<U 




{5 


}-i 












G 


s 




CO 


U-t 


CO 


•1^ 




0) 


1 


CO 


u 


1 




s 


«J3 


G 



v~4 


S 


T3 





ctf 


TJ 




C/J 


< 




jG 


G 


<0 


^ 


ctf 


s 


•o 


CO 


ctJ 
G 


G 


'C 



272 



A Mission to GeleUy King of Dahonu, 






S 
■I 






I 5 




-^ o 2 

^ bo*" 

G O TJ 



o bo5 
u q ^ 



^ 



u 

jd 



O cS 

■" •< 
-a 2 

o; o 

O G 
O 

c -^ 

B 



O 

O 



O rt 
G G 



j3 •-• 



a> 

J3 



(A 

•c 

o 
u 



G 

E 



G -^ 



b£) 

G 

.S rt 

^ CO 

- s 

<*^ El 

£ o 

t a 

Jr. «^ 

> rt 



G « 
O 

g s 

J3 



G >^ 



G 
O CO 



:::^ s 



•H, G 
O '^ 
O T3 



a> G 
^ o 



o S) 

G a; 

"• e 

.. o 

■Bo 

£ o 

o -M 

O -M 

G ctf 
o 

S '^ 



00 



a; 



CO 



00 
o 



4-» 



CO 



u 
o 

G 

CO 

G 

G 

CO 

bo 
o 

H 









o 

E 

G 

u 

G 

G 
o 

H 



o 



^n 



Appendix I V , — Catalogue of the Dahoman Kings. 273 




|^.2||:S.s g >.g|^^^^ §•§ >>! S-3 

2 .ti " 8 ^ -•• &•- ^ -S " I ^ eg H « J:^:^; ^ 

.E,^T3 « f> S O^N oO b'^ a— -mjC <U cti 




VOL. II. 18 



A Mission to Cehh, King of Dakome. 



^ 1 ° .s " -s |i 1 i I -g I 



: ■- E 



J;'o be S 3 5 g 

; i .a Oh ■= „ _g 



4S s. 



t^^ -^ — JL, _ ^ „, 



S * « 

J2 So 



S S S - » 1 .5 = 



L 8 6 rt S £ Ah ! 



■2 S S..I 



l|S|l 

■a .a j=> S d 



I 

o 

l8-2 



Appendix IV. — Catcdogue of the Dahoman Kings. 275 



•5 5 ^ 

bO C .00 
^ o 

<D H <U 
CO O ^. 

S '^ s 



• d 

3 '42 



X 



u 
a; 



0} 

o 



o 

Oi 
<0 

> t! 

^^ 

O <D 

Oi tJ 

^^ (O 

O rt 



bc»^ 



-^ '2 

0) T3 

CQ ct 
o a; 

^^ 






(O 

O 
X! 



CO 

X! 



o <u 



<U 



O 



*- o 

o bO 

C/3 O 

S 6 



-M <n 

o ^ 
be 

be 

O 13 

- o 

o ^ 



bex! 

Co •?-( 

_ -G 

CO u 

CO o 

pq d) 
. •£ 

o 

2 5P 






d) ^ 

XJ '"' 
fi X5 



S ?2 

5 -a « 
^ S > 

CO CO 
CO 

O (O 



^ CO 






<D 



O 






d) 
CO 

E 
g xs 



XJ 



6;:r^ E ^ 






o 



G 

> 
u 

0) 
CO 



CO 



XJ 



0) 



o 



CO 

13 



<P -M ^ 



■M CO OJ 



G 2 6 

S) So ^ 

^ i^ o 

fin "^ (U 

<D .1=; r5 

:Si3^ 
•^ G ^ 



u 



-M Ctf 



M CO 

|f^X! 



G 



3 be 

6^ 
o 

o . 

^ G 

G "^ 

8 ^ 

(U a; 

CO Vj 

-^ J 

s «^ 

^ o 

G ^ 

•rH O 



276 



A Mission to Gelehj King of Dahome, 









:3 



T3 

a 



.0 



ja . 

"^ 1^ 

^ u 

0) 
_ <D 

»- CO 

>>^ 

Jo 

•_^ C/3 
-^ y 

a> a> 

(O -M 



pq 



O 

CO 

c/3 13 



O 13 

Q a. 

+-» <u 

XJ >^ 

c -^ 

6 a 

o o 

CO 

«+-i o 

O jG 

u ^ 

<D I — 

S 



U 



:3 
o 

N 
C 
O 
O 

Jh -♦-• 

c ^ 
« S 

t ^ 

CA 

•« •t-H 

L *^ 
•H CO 



4-» CQ 
Cd (^ 

CO 
O <D 

(£^ 

S "^ 
CO o 

CO jC 



ct 



0) J3 



CO -£h J3 

a >^ 

rt J=l S^ 

g^ bX) 

S ^ 

(O 4J v^ 

O JH O 

O ^ -^ 

^ cti ^ 

> O 

ctJ 

CO -3 



a; 



T3 

b£) 
be 



a; 
> 

o 



o 



CO 

JS o 

CO ^ 

OH 

^ CJ 

o ^ 

Ui d) 
O M 

G "^ 
boxi 



i2".§^ 



^ CO 



TJ 



CO 



:3 



:3 
o 

> 
O 



"b! -^ ^ 

CO 4-» CO 

"E 



> H 



o 
o 
o 



o 



CO flj 



bo 
o 

d) 



CO 



TJ 
V 



O 

a 

ctJ 

CO 
0) 

b two 
a 












•I 

o 



»n 



Appendix IV. — Catalogue of tht Dahoman Kings, ^-j-j 

« - d s ? ^ 's S s ° -" • = .'S ■§ 2 .g »•? 



J! ,a .2 « S S.S i - g g S a > ? S S -s 5 g' 

s-sS2T^^^"sg-a.-=g£S'»gg .1 

^ I j I c f _- ° :2 I « ^ -a « .fa 8 S g X 
^3 I 2 3 3 ff'S 2 - -s 2 |S S fi i g-S ^ 



278 



A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome, 



it 






S^8 



to 

52: 



o 



•^ CO g 

0) rt oJ 

W (U rt 

Ts G it: 

G O rt 

S3 -^iJ J3 



O O 

>> s 

I: ^ 

u 

0) 



6 O 



(A C/) 

<D O 

(A 2 

o; c/) 



5 ^ "S T? 



O 

a 

CO 
CO 



(O 

o 

04 

o 

Plh 
C 

CO 

cd 



0) 



ctJ d 

^ a 

o ^ 

C CO 

JC (O 

-^^ fi 

> O 

^ bX) 



(O 



a; 



CO 



:3 
ex 



a o 

o c 

u o 

o 

• rH Ut 

1^ 



o; 

M 



(O 

£ be 
o <u 

1^ 

C bi) 

^ OJ 

^ o 



bo^ 



CO 

CO 

a; 



> 
o 

Ctf CO 

ti -G 

^^ 

o Jd 



o 
a 

u 

> 
O 

O 
u 
u 



CTJ 

u 






CTJ T3 

•"I d 

9 - 

o a; 

w n 

jd "^ 



■g 



a 



^ r« 



jd ^ 

CO V 

.. O 

jd *- 



s ^ 

CO ctJ 

>> bX) 

jd ctf 

^ o 

-o S 

d cd 

ctj jc3 

CO C/) 

O VM 

cx o 
f^ o 

r^- CO 

•S « ^ 

vO — ' 
S^ >^ 

« a 3 
& ^ ^ 

s < 



B 
o 

bo 









vr> 



Appendix IV. — Catalogue of the Dahoman Kings. 279 









-I! 



28o A Mission to Gelck, King of Dahome, 



\ 

I 


Abavou (AgbabaVun), or the Swampdog, the 
son of the prince who ate his brother's heart 
" Abavou," after a stout defence, delivered 
himself to Dahome as a peace-offering for his 
men, and was duly beheaded, his calvaria 
being mummified and preserved with all 


Upon this, the King, at the instigation of 
theMeu, the "Cokee" and the "Tovey" (the 
latter two names and offices now unknown), 
disgraced his Yevogan, slapped his face, and 
sent him to a state prison, whence he never 
emerged. Mr. Lionel Abson, the English 
Governor, tried to save him, but unforiuna- 
tely used finesse. The King heard of it, and 
told his visitor, " I wish you had not been so 
much of a Dahoman-man as to have made use 
of any artifice." 


(water),men(in),andkpen | 1774. 
(a stone) — and Kpengfila, i 
from Kpen, a rock, and 1 
gaia,strongor brave. His 
strong names are: i.Heis :: 
not to give into anybody 
as the sellers do to the „ 




i 


buyers. 2. The seller of 
hoes never puts some into 
the buyers. 

The History calls him 
AdahoonzouII. Itisclear, 
however, from p. 133, that 
Adan-hun-20 was the 
princely and not the royal 
name. It mentions two of 
his "titles": i, Ai-yaw- 
soo, or the male oyster, 


. 


^ 





Appendix IV, — Catalogue of the Dahoman Kings. 281 



2 <i> 






' — } 


(U 


<u 


'O 


L^ 


^ 


j:3 


c 


Mh 


+-» 


-4-» 


OJ 



(A 0) 



u 



O 



cti 



O 

be 
bo oj 



ct 



SJ f^ o 

SCO 
CO 

S 2 

O 
O 



C/) 

O 



a 



.%^ <u 



(D 

J3 



X! 

lCc75 

PI <u 

X! 
o 



H-^XI 






a 

e 



X5 fl 



TJ XJ 

bf)l3 

• i-i ^^ 

K> C/) 

O H 

s 

C CO 

a -^ 

CO 7i 



2 « 

.£: ^ 

be ^ 

Vh 

d) 

bx) 

o 
u 
a; 

CO 

u 
o 



s s 

ctJ fl 
bo -^ 



o 
o 



O XJ 
U <D 



XJ --^ C 

rt 5 o 
. o cd 



ctJ 



O 



-i^ XI ti 



(O "S 



^ <u -^ 



ctJ 

s 
s 

O 

o 

d) 

XI 
0) 

c^ O 

O 0, 



bo 
.S T3 

-, O rt 

■ CO 

O 
*^ XI ^ 

i^ -S -a 

rd fl G 
^ :3 rt 



£^0 



ctJ 

'^ >^ 

c^ JCi 

<^ 

^ CO 

> 

bo 

00 a. 



d) 



130 



OJ ' d) 

"^ ctJ 
.0 

'-' o 

« CO § 

Cd M <U 

O "-I 'ti 
4^ CO O 

6 '-3 :: 
o 

rt d « 

o -d 



CO 

O 
bo"^ 

xs 

CO 
^ CO 

d) 

<D a 

XJ rt 



d) 

XI 



CO 

d) 
X3 



XJ 



XJ 

o 

N 
S 



TJ 


XJ 


}m 




ctS 





x: 


d; 


bo 


a 


JH 





• f-4 


CO 


d) 




^ 


CO 






S .S2 

2 -^ 

ctS rt 

n »H 

O ^ 



§1 

X! 

^ s 



CTJ 



CO 



d) 



o 
u 

d) 

CTJ 
d; 

Xi 

o 
o 

ctJ 

CO 



CTJ 

XJ 

< 



p^ d; 

d; CO 

u 

d) 






6 ^ S 



d; 
d; 



O d^ 

bo CO 



73 d) 

:: S 

CO ctf 

•w -d 

•^ d) — 

CO --H TJ 



CO 

bo 



d; 
G 



d) 

d^ 



CO d5 

X5 Id, 

G 

G 

CO 

u 

d) 
XJ 

o 

& 



o 

d) 

a 

G 

d) 

jG 

H 



282 



A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome. 









<: a 

§ g 

o *^ 

X o 
u 

4) 

J « 

o 6 

fi o 

a o 
goo 

• r-l 

u 

O 



i ^ 

.S «J 



8 






o c 

O <D 

o o 
a; 

6 
o 



"♦-• /-T >^ 

c 

Sij jd .i3 









be 

u 
u 

.0 



C en 



-^ :5 £ w V 



CO (i 

a; 

•^ J3 ^5 






g 5 






o r 



s S 

S fl 
o 

4-* A 

C ^ 
O CO 

g Q^ 

^< 

:3 . 
o u 
u d 



2 « 

^ o 

oi cu 

S-S 

52"S 

6 2 

o S 

CO 

CO ^ 
"Jh O 



O '^ 

^ CO 

O 



o 
o 

CO 



a 

a; 

6 
o 



bo « 

• rH -M 

o 

O CO 
CO M 



i3 rt bo 

o ,r -^ 

o g-g 

g CO :3 

^ CO O 

"^ ^ 2 
2 S 

fi -^ .5 



g bO CO 

bo-S « r^ 
•S CO -C 1. 

-M CO a _ 



« H ^ O 

CO O v^ !^ 



2^ 






VO 



Appetidix IV, — Catalogue of the Dahoman Kings, 283 



bo 
a 

u 

-i-i 
(A 

u 

<D 
<D 
O 

o 

a 
o 

M 

o 

<D 

> 

be 
C 

■*-* 
bo 

H 



O Pi 



?T3 J3 

<D jQ 
(D 

5 p 



d) 

;^ cA 

bx) oj 

'T3 . 

o; en 



^ s 



ctS 



en 
u 

rt '^ 

S 2 






(D 






ti bx) 

<u .^ 

<D "£ 

■" 13 

a " 

••2 cn 

a -^ 

^ «=i rn 

S «^ 6 

4-» TS -M 






o ^ 






fl TH 



o 
a; 



S « « C w 



d) 



(A 



^.6 



o ^ 



00 S 



6 

M "^ O 



§•0 

? s . 

<^ I 

•S fig 

G ' o 
_ booo 

<D <D O 
-^ -jQ n-. 

:=! ^ « 

U CO ^ 

-4-» -M CO 



Xi 

0) 
O 

s 

CO 



bo O 
G 

0) 



o 



CO --J CS 

^ 6 t^ 

*^ »-l M 

: o 



rt 



o 



a 



CO 

> 



X 



XI ?> 

- g 

u u 



G 

CO 



CO 









^ G 



CO 



o 

O 



u 00 



O 

2 CO " 

4-1 vG Cli 



- .SH 

^ 6 = 

H o bb 

6 iS 

G ^ 2 
o 

'^ G q; 

<l> O • x^ 

G ^ <W 

< iJ ,£3 



-i ^TSBom Tf ^uu^ Jjn^ if 



^ i'^'^iir^^-T-TaffSS'— "• "3 







4 ^ -^ 




^ 


^ ^ "-*" 




'^ ■ 






'^ 


T -^ ^ 




U 






^^ 


^*** *• 




^»> 






^^^ 






"■^ 


.^^ «^ ^^ 






^^. ^^ 




^^ 


.^^- "^^ 


"^ 


-•> 


^ ^ "* 


■i 


\X 


"^ -^ - 


■v 


'•* 


"» - "^ 


^ 


^ 


'^ -^ ^ 




"> 


'^ "^ "^ 






"^ iA .1^ 


-*• 


-a 


T >v^ 


> 




* "^ ■'* 


:ik. 


*^ 


-». X'*^ 




.^^ 


^ "^ ^ 




«^ 


-■• "*'•' ^ 




^ 


^ iT 




■^■^ 


^s^"^ 




> 
^ 


^ i ^ 




^ 


Cr^ "» 



zz z: >fc-S 






"5 



^ -5: 




5» 



A 



Appendix I V. — Catalogue of the Dahoman Kings. 285 



U OJ 

O c/) 

O 

o « 

w O 

-^ s 



(A 



8 «1 



C/} 



T3 



O 



0) 

u 

g 

.0 



d) 



O _C! 



.0 



C/} 

„ O 

2JU 



^3 

a 
O 

C/} ^ 

13 -^ 

S -CI 

tuo .. 

^ O 



'o 

bo 
en u 

2 



8 



•o o 
c o 
^5 



<M 


(0 


>> 


(/i 
0) 


T3 


s 


^ 


OJ 


oi 


o^ 


^ 





• l-l 








C! 


0) 

q3 


> 

0) 


i^ 


T3 


•M 


0) 

6 





^3 
d) 





a< 


^ 
^ 


T3 


Q 


^ 

C 


(A 


«+H 


a; 


T3 





s 


ctJ 


C/} 





< 





t/1 


<D 


fl^ 






T3 


3 


T3 


C 


0) 


fl 


oJ 


C 


rt 





0) 


•« 


a< 


(U 


(A 


^j 


^ 




bo 


(A 


-M 







ctJ 


fi^ 





J 



en S 

O g 

H bo 



O S 

13 CO 

- S 
n ^ 

■ 4-» 

o ^ 
oJ O 

'^ bo 

• l-l v^ 

u 
^3 



« 00 

o 



ctJ 



d) 



d> -^ 



C/} 

bo S 

is 

Su 

<D 
U 

ctJ . 

bo +3 
c/) 3 

"^ i 



d> Q> a 



3 



o 



d> 



a 

o 
>^ 

^ § !S 

Ih O ^ 

bo o 



C/} 




ctJ 


Q> 




J3 


'O 


■*■» 


C 




OJ 


<D 



3^ ^"^ ^ 
•r vm P /-\ «•) 



(3 



04 cu 



^ to 

r>. CO 

5q -a 



(U o 

•tr w 
> a, 



d> 
> 'o 
d> 



^2 






g g rt -o 



286 



A Mission to GeleUy King of Dahome. 






in 

St 

o 

■*^ 




O S 



1^1 



rt •£ o 

S 'O 
o >^ S 

^ ^ -c 

«^ f3 »H 

(0 o 









vo 



Appendix IV, — Catalogiu of the Dahoman Kings, 287 











^ 




T3 






(U 


-♦-• 


^ 


OJ 








»-H CO 

•^ d) 



O 

.S -^ 



u 



d) 
(/3 



O « 

o ^ 

*-• 'IS 



d> 



d) 
(/) 

O 

a, 

C/3 



00 . 
00 ' 

t^ o 

M O 

^ k 

o 



d) ^ 

a. -^ 
o ^ 

d> d) 



o 
u 



d> 

Xi 

> -^ 

So 

(A O 

o 



d> 

9, ^ 

^ (A 

o a; 

^ -^ 

.0 -^^ 

"^ o 

tfi 04 

d) "is 

d) ^ 

-^ S 

^ s 

O "* 
Hi 



o 
o 



d> ^ 

CA 

s ^ 

•t-H 

s ^ 

o - 
n d) 

< 3 

-. a* 
.S3 ^ 

-j^ t: 
^^ 

o '^ 



T3 O 

W o 

d) j3 

> o o 



d> 

d> 
d) 



d> 
o 



^ 2 
_ d) 'x^ 



c a; 

o ^ 

cn 4j 

o o 

4-. ^ 

3 a; 



O S 

>% C/) 

•IH "ij 

OOJ 

< o 
w 

-i 



CA 



d> 

4-» 

a< 

U 

"So 
a 

•t-H 

4-» 
d> 

w 
d> 
u 

d) 

+-» 

^3 

d) 



t; > -t: 



OJ 



X 
O OJ fl 

t;* bo J-" 

Co -r o 



- s 

-a ^ 



d> 
J3 -5 



u 

cd 



CA 



CA 

cd 

o 

u 



^3 
d> 

O 
i-i 

a 

d> 

I 

a 

s 

i 

•fH 



d> 



X 
d> 



00 



2 > 

O HH 



288 



A Mission to Gelele, King of DaJwme, 





T3 ^^^ 

1 g ^j 




M 


HH (0 

to - 





0) 
Ih 




3 



G 
G 

}h 




G 


• 

G 

s 

• 


a; 


G 


S 

s 




<u 




, had 
s, but 


• 


■ ^^ 
p <^ 

a^ ^ 




X 



1 


0) C/J 

^§ 

N 










U 


G 


m 

■4-t 

G 


G 


G 

<! 

• 


»H 

(U 

u 

G 

E 





G <^ 
^ G 

6 1 


•a 
42 

.0 


.3 « 

i B g S 
1 .Sh '-* a; 




B 


•tH 


N 


• 

> 
X 

04 


g 

1-1 



J. 


bo 

• •* 

a 

(A 






•fH 

c 




Ih 




G 


•t-H 

OJ 

G 


bD 
G 

• t-H 

Ih 

a 

(A 


• 

a; 


«4H 

dm \ 


G CA 

• t-H -fH 

C/) -G 

CA «4H 

" 


^ 


X a (U 


• 

> 

In 


• 1- 

•IH 

(A 

0) 


^ 2 


U 

•tH 


u 

C! 





S 




bo 

a 

> 
be 


CO 

a; 

C/} 

G 


s 






G 


G 
«J 

S 




jB 

p d 

bo > 

"^ 










00 ^ 




^ 




2 




G 



0^ 




G 




bo 


bo 5^ 






d 




M M 


13 


s 


"a; 

vG 



T3 


£^ 


O^ 
bc^ 




CA 

G 


^ 

^M 


*^S 


• 


























• 


^•2 


Tt- 


























0^ 


4S ^ 


t^ 


























00 


« 5J 


t^ 


























t^ 




M 


























M 






























0) (A 






























-^ bJ 






























-^ 2 




























































M G 






























2 bo 






























-d '^ 


• 




























^3 


























































TJ > 






























iH 

bo bo 

s-s 

-c a 
iS 


• 






























^ 






























^ 





























• 


































Appendix IV. — Catalogue of the Dahoman Kings. 289 









t;. :^ -2 § ^ >^ -2 ^ :S ^ -^ -s -o >^f -^ 5 £ s 

8 g- So ° -2 SS ■" :a I :§ i 5^ I •« 2 ^ «• £^ 8 « 



rt O 



'O<i>a)oo'2a)-r>^cni-i-i-i 



...I 



S§'3DS-S2^'2bDM-3ci^?^^«^rt=3 



S S ° a " S ^ -^ -^ S H 1;; &2 2 'S d ^ - * 



4-. o W 



0) tuo 



VOL. II. 



19 



290 



A Mission to Geleky King of Dahome, 






St 
o 



<3 



c ctf a 

<D O 

-^ S^ -^ 
2 6-^^ 

f^ T3 "S 

'S ^ .<« 




rt 
^ 



CO ^ 

S Sol 

§ ^ § 



K 



.ctJ 



T3 



g O en 

^ ^ -s 

CTj (J 

o o .a; 



1-1 ^ 

a; 2^ § 






^ 2 

CO •iH 

O X 

1-1 '*^ 



en 






C/} 

O 









o 
o 






tiiO >-> 



C/) fl 

tn a 

.S ^ 

O rt 

a d 

en 1-1 

2^ 
o 3 

bo 
§ O 

^i 

s -^ 



s 



O 



00 






s 



3 § I ^ 



bo 




en 
u 

a 
a 



en 

O 
en 



2 ^ 






G u 



cu 



en 
o 

O 
S 



CO 



(n 

1-1 



bi)-^ 

2S 

cn > 

•^ bo 

o a 

0) 

'^ ^ 

^ s 



O 0) 
cn -2 



>% 

^ 



o 



2 G 

o o 



bp 6 
.3 O 



04 G 
Oi rt 
G *-• 

5 ^ 

^ o 

o 

ctJ o. 

<u a. 

G- ctJ 



G 



o 
G 

o 2 

M bo 
0) o 

G 
O 






19 — 2 



Appendix IV. — Catalogue of the Dahoman Kings. 291 






g a; ^ t: "^ 5^.^. S tf c3^ & S oT ^ g ^ g 
9 ^ o « « ^:2 rt ^ ^ -S S I .S 2 § ^ a ^ 



292 



A Mission to Gelele^ King of Dahome. 


















I CO 0) •' 

§ 2 -^ ^ 

° o cu 

Jh Oj > 

c/} a; 

*- > '2 

-5 =J rt 



C/) 



s 

o 



<^ ^ ^ 

-^ ^ s 

^ (U O 

Vh B flj 

O d) o 

tuo bx) 4:^ 



on 



C/} 

u 

(A 

d) 

1-1 

o 

}h 
0) 

s 
s 

o 

u 

1-1 

d) 
j3 



^ en 

W S 

1-1 'iH 

5 o 

^ s 

o S 



HH >^ 



C/} 



T3 
d) 



4-» 

(A 



O M 

N 



bo 
bo o 



O 



s-s a< 



.sw . 



u 
d> 



2^ S 



o 

d> 



X 
d) 



o 



.2 S 

G 'Si 



0) o 
en *^ 
ctJ o M 

is- 

g en rt 
1-1 cd 



en en 

§ "^ 

> "^ 
jC cd 

O 



rs 00 






^ G w 

O o 9* 



o 
a 

O 

G 



bo 
G 



G 
O 



S fio'rt 



<0 
u 






bo 
G 

•rH 

G 



d> 

e 

G 
en 



rt s* O 

^^ a. 

^ 5 3 

U •• G 

« O efl 

^ bo d> 

+i G > 

rj O rt 

O U iJ 



T3 



0) 



rt 
^ 






G 
O 
en 
oJ 

(D . . 
u ^ 

s s 

tn ^ 



0^ G 

'G 'S 
O -G 

pG en 

§ bo 

e -^ 

bo > 

d) 9j 

N ^ 

G 

c\3 



00 
00 



5 --3 



d) 
13 d) 

O 



^ 
-$ 



00 



Appendix IV. — Catalogue of the Dahoman Kings, 293 



C/3 



^":S 



1-1 



v2 ^ 

2^ 

^^ 

o a; 
d) o 

u C 

^ E 
bo S 

a o 

O § 



o 



00 



o — r 
u 



(A 



3 



(A 

CA 



T3 






^3 



1^ 

u 

3 o 
a J2 



T3 

c 

+-» 

Ol, 
c/} 



(U 

c 
o 

(A 
(/) 

> 

> 

13 
(0 

> 
0) 



o a; 



CO « 

•e-s 

rt o 



d) 



u 

CA 
0) 



S o 

bo g 



o is 
I 6 



o 6 



a 



U o 
U 

o (u 
u > 

d) 



o 

C 
d) 



^ bo 

•- .2 

o o 
^ d) 



• t-t Co 

3 E 

3 o 






d> 
O 



a, 
d) 



a 
d) 
1-1 

I 

•'^^•t-H 



(U o 

bo ^ 

^ > — i ^ *-• 

4-* .»H r> en C/) d; 
CO 

«J o 



. < 

o S 



d> jjJ ^ 



CO 



d) 



u 






T3 



f3 CO 



-^ o 






^ -^ ^ 

SI'S 



O 



« 2 ^ 
> o o 

CO C/) l> 



<i> rtf bo^ 

Srt cd 

2 S ^ 



a; o 



rt 


TJ 


a 





^ 


^ 


rt 


, , 


3 


• I-I 



2*3 



JD o 

si 

d> 

cd 
O ^ 
N 
d> (U 

00 



«+H ^ 



2 ^^ 

W QJ •iH 

* a 



•* '*!l CO <J 



1-1 
O 



EH 



CO d) ^ 



ctJ O 



^C^1 



^ N E 



o ^ S 



CO 


d) 


3 


Ih 


ja 


OJ 


«4H 



CO 


(U 


E 


^ 


rt 


bo 


JH 



bo A 

S a 
> d> 

« K •S 

-^^ cs C 

bo S 






d> 



o 

CO 






ja 







a 


•M 


u 


Q) 


^ 


s 




E 





-M 







CO 


d 


(U 


CO 


u 


• I-I 


d> 


0) 


^ 


CI4 


-*-» 


d> 


•« 




CO 

d> 


< 



CO 



"^ O 

a « 

o +- 

CO OJ 

d) •s 

CO 

(u a 

r-H •^H 

CO 

•^ -G 
O 

.jG CO 



O 

O ^ 
3 CO 

O d) 



\»^ 



bo 
G 



ctJ 



E 

G 



•2^ rt 

*" CO 
I— t 

CO ^ 

S w 



294 



A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome. 



o 



r! rt\ O ^ 

§ 2 8 -^ 

o ^ >-, o 

fl bp a; u 

<S C fl ctJ 

bo S^ 









0) T3 



•s •« •« I 




en o 

•13 tn 
1-1 

O jd 

c/) 'S 



oJ 



a 

o 
a. ^ 

a 

bo**" 

a 



rt <D a; 



cn "5 

Ho 8 



3 









d) 



bo <D 

• i-t _Q 



s 



-a 

2-2 

en j^ 

U-) CO 

00 o 

.SO 



s 






en 
O 

E 



U 

•t-H 
> 

u 
en 

en 



3 »« - 






00 

M 

00 









en a; r -^ 



o ^ 

(U en 

O ^ 

(U d) 

bo a 

»— < cu 

(u a; 



en ,i-? 

O ctJ 
bo^-^ 

a 

S bp 





1 

o 


3 fl 

O en 


a; 


H 


j:3 


^ . 


•M 


4) ^-— s 

•£ o 


en 
c\3 


t: 6 


^ 



en 



Ol 



bO-S § G 
JD < en ^ 



4-» (-4 N 

bp-^ O 




00 



Appendix IV, — Catalogue of the Dahoman Kings, 295 



§ "S ^ ^ S g : S o S 5 c S ^ 2^ ^ ^ §0^ '5^ 
28 SS,g1^S^il<«^<^:^.2 ^ 



296 



A Mission to Gelehy King of Dahome. 



^ 

^ 










0) (A O 
'^ S -^ 



^3 
O 



JS fl 



t-t ^ 



- ■£ S, 

• fH 

-^ 5^ o 

*i2 6 N 






d) 



be 



' • ft. A 

<D o 2 

bo _. ^ 

^ 00 ^ 

Jh 00 ^ S 

^ 'O ^ 

C/3 HH Ch 



C/} 



^ u 

5 2 

/*{ >-' 
o *- 

+-» T3 
O 3 

-^ S 

<^ 

6 oj 



T3 ^ 

CA d) 
d) .. 






d) 
U 

a 
O 1^ 

d> 

8 " 

01 « 

eg CTJ 

:£ ^ 

•"2 fe 



U 



0) 

d> 

> 



bo 

J-l ^ 
d> 






^ ^ a 



^ 2 'S 
o 

CA 

• - s 



bO § 

C 1-1 



^4 CO 
■Vk CO 



00 

M 

00 






?3 

< 















M 


• 


'?i 


00 


T^ 










Appendix IV. — Catalogue of the Dahoman Kings. 297 






T3 


0) 


<D 





•4^ 


• t-t 


(A 


> 


> 


• 




M 


(A 


§ 


^ 


T3 




C 





OJ 





(A 

a; 




u 


9S 





00 


1-1 


h-« 


<u 


«% 


TD 


u 


G 





3 


-4^ 


s 







u 


G 




HH 


(D 



ctJ 



O ^ 

O 4-. 

-rj J-i 

o C 






6« 



c/T PI 

S o 
o 

S ^ 

•tJ O 

^1 



T3 (A 
^ ■*-• 

Oj }h 

o o 

"* a 

6 

S 
o 









t H 



a 
^ o 

-a .9 

t: g 

cS o 

^^ 

S ^ 
p o 

^ Xi 

o 

- 13 

dP 
O . 

b »-' 



•» cd 
52 ^ 



a; 
u 

J3 



^U 



o 

s s 

• t-t ^ *^ 

» G O 

-MO 

be rj 

G S ^ 

^ Xi ^ 

•^ rr-l '*-' 



d) 
G 

S 

s 

o 

u 



G 



d) 
G 
O 



00 hJ 



S CO 

Xi 

O Jh 

o 

G ^ 

O rG 

cd 

C/} 

>; ° 



C/} 

d) 

• Xi 

^ u 

vG 
be Jh 

G <l^ 
G 

a 

6 

S 
o 

U 



r c/) 



c/5 



K 



o <u 



• 




s 




ffi 


T3 
G 


bo 


•« 


oJ 


< 


'ti 


•^ 




2 


T3 








T3 




(D 


G 


(A 


a; 


oJ 


E 


PQ 


^-H 






§ o 



•« ^ 



<D 



OJ G 

bo (J 

X! 
bo C/3 






G 



bo 2^ 

G 'G i> 

•G 4-» l> 

S o o 

cd Ch -M 

S ^ 



o 
o 
o 



rt U 



T3 
<D 

d) 
d) 
O 



298 



A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome. 






10 



•2 



en 

I;? ^ 

c ^ 
• ■— I c 

4-» O 



C/3 '-H 

^ u 



o o 

en 

en 



o 



en 
en 



a 

o 
en 









CQ ■4-' 

TJ O 

<D U 

J3 cd 



u 

5 en" 

q; cn 

■£ o 



Ct 1-1 

q; O 
O °^ 



i I (-1 

6 

E 
o 

U 



en 



en 



cn 5^ ^ 

:s -^ O 



u^ O 

00 -M 

^ o 
- o 

CO O 

^ 2 






en 
en 

a 



I 2 



en tuO 



O 






S s ^ 

i S G 



^^ 

^ en 

-5 -^ 
• —4 

^ O 

-^ 9 

-M o 

•t-H 

,2 ^ 

tj o 

*G ex. 

u B 

c 

'en <13 

I B 



O en >^ 

en '^ ^ 

en E5 '^ 

ctJ ^ <D 

•^ -M en 

•fH 

'71 D 



en r* 

.2 >- 



a 



TJ 


a; 


a; 


}h 


Ih 


4-» 


<D 




> 


ctJ 





TJ 


a) 


<u 


u 


c 


u 


(n 


> 




(U 





c 


N 






en 00 

^ M 

O 






0} 

> 

en 






en 



CO 4_i 
•IH 

G S ^ 



00 

M 

00 



00 



Appendix IV. — Catalogue of the Dahoman Kings. 299 



•;2 .ti n o '13 CJ iH C S ctf »H *" ^ ^^ 'i «« u 

2<l^ rHS^^^^CU^*S«*S _S 






o 



^ 1 c ^ « c 2 -i " ^ ; i -^ 2 -3 ^ f I . fe 

E 



C/} 



00 

00 



• 



15 fl S rt PQ ^ >^ ^ 

O w o ^ . 2 J^ 2 

^ « a =, _ £ 13 » 

13 ^ "Sta 1^5 



c^ 



300 



A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome, 









^ en 

.C/3 <U 

^ O 

bo -CI 

s ^ 

cd -^ 

« ■ • G 

^ 0) 

(/} C 



.o 



O w 

^ o 

.O '^ fH 

5 >^xi 

CO H— »»^ 
(U G g 

^ "^ J-l 



G 0) '3 
u ^ 

XI . ^ 

G*^ "^ 

S -M G 

cd 






S 3 g 



O 
U 

cd 



§^^ o 
c/5 cd ^_» 



u 

O 



G 
O 



G 

G 



X 



G 
0) o 

£? <u 

J3 o 
cd X) 2 

o S s 

cd 

XI 

^3 
G 
cd 



w o 



u 
O 



13 ^ 



G 



bo bo 
G bo 

CO 

^ § 

Ok 

G 



00 



^3 0) 

cd 

3^ S ^ 

-^ XI G 

-^3 c/) c/3 

o o 

u 



cd 



jiiO cd 13 

c 6 '^ 



bo 



CO J2 (/} 



0) 



cd /\ 

XI W 
U 



M O 

00 Xi 



G 

=•6 



Cd 



cd 
O 

X5 



lO 



X5 
O 

cd 



O 
O 
O 



O'g 

'X3 



9 <" 

^ O cd 

O rt O 

o P 

o ^ -2 

"^ <u g 

S c <i^ 

*" ri 'G 

cd G -^ 

bO G <^ 

•G « S 

U !> CO 



cd 

13 
G 
cd 

CO 

u 

> 

G 
O 

o 

G 
cd 

■*•* 

CO 

X3 

u 

> 

cd 
G 

G 
(D 

XI 

bo 



00 

00 



• 0) 

5 XI 

bo •7^ 
G 8 



•• G 

<D O 

Cd ^ 

CO G 

Cd cd 

G ^ 



XI 


G 


cd 


^ 


}-l 


• fH 


u 


G 


(0 


• 1-1 


4-» 


^ 


O 




G 


• 


G 


cs 


cd 




U 


.-. 


• 1-^ 


T^ 


cd 


o 


G 


XI 


}-i 


<D 


(U 


X) 


bo 




G 




<43 


.tJ 



^ ^ o 

CO 4-; 4i 



CO 

G 
O 



G ^3 
u a; 
^ u 
bo o 

.S a 

> (D 

XJ cd 
G _ XI 

.2 «* '-' 

*G ^. 
cd j^ 

G G O 

3<J iJ 



G^ O 

5^ -^H CO 

G »-« <u 
j3 bp Ok 

CO G in 

s ^ 

<1^ ^ fll 

^ -^ ^ 

*^ o 

0^ bpxJ 

■s.s ^ 



13 

. cd 

T*-x! 

C/) 



4-» 


(U 






s 


4-» 


c 


CO 


• <-H 


»k 


(/J 


0) 


^ 





G 


XI 


X) 


cd 


cd 


Q 


6 



^ G 

5:^ J-" o 

"- ^co g 

O G ^ 

K> CO 

J-i >*< 0) 

'S, ^ t 

»> r* IG 



CO 



CO 



a> 



Appendix IV, — Catalogue of the Dahoman Kings, 301 



2 S •? ,- ^ V-- :« i ^ S s =S ■« 3 " I " - 8 -S 

- I « -« .2 § g « I ^ 5 S ^ I .tJ 6 •> J ^ g 
•eg ^^ oil o|^ ^-^a 2I « ^•Sl.'^ 






302 



A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome, 



^ 

^ 



42 



St 



<3 






T3 

> 

O 
<D 



r >* 



u 

a 
o 



(0 
o 



0) ctf ^ 

a -C 



'■a 
o 



ri<J 



w "h 6 



CO p 



Oj 



a 

(/} 

CO 

CO 

cd 

< a 

o 
,^ 

CO 

cd 

a 



o 
u 



CO 

o 



03 
CO Xi 



CO 'O 



O 



cd 






CO > 

•« C cd 

(D a ^ 

§8 






a. 
6 

cd 
o 

u 

O 

CO 



^3 

u 

cd 

■M 
Cd 

bo 



a; o ^ 



•S-2 

1- c 

o 8 



ui a 



q 



CJO 



u^ 



cd 



-a 

cd 

3 

Cd 

Xi 

O 

>-i 



XI 
u 

cd 

cd 
o 



'13 






XI 

^ i 

-.XI 



cd 

V-i 

cd 



cd (U 

^ S 

4-* Cd 

HI 

^ 13 

O 0) 

X) -^ >% JJ 

< 8 S:S 






^ CO 
■fc* CO 



00 

00 






•I 
o 



0\ 



303 



APPENDIX V. 

DAHOMEY, ITS PEOPLE AND CUSTOMS. 

The following letter has been received by the Duke 
of Wellington from the celebrated lion-hunter, M. Jules 
Gerard : — 

[Times f August i8, 1864.] 

" Monsieur le Due, — Your Grace is well aware that few 
men gain by being seen close, unless they are men of intellect 
and merit. The King of Dahomey, despite his cognomen, which 
signifies the * Eternal ' or the * Infinite, ' ^ fully justifies that rule 
to which he is no exception. Physically he is similar to the 
other blacks of his country — tall, well built, a head like a bull 
dog. The most usual expression of his countenance is that of 
cunning and cruelty. ^ His moral qualities are in perfect keep- 
ing with his physical conformation ; he is more gracious than 
the Kings who have preceded him, fanatical for old traditions 
and customs. The traditions of that microscopic court are to 
turn the whites to the best possible account (exploiter les blancs), 
but especially to induce them to make presents. It is the cus- 
tom to excite the people with sanguinary spectacles, so as to be 
able to carry off the neighbouring population when a slave- 
dealer makes an offer to the King and also at the annual custom 
of human sacrifices. 

" I have just spent twenty days at Kana, where the King 
was staying for the celebration of the lesser ceremonies. On 
the day of my presentation I was conducted across the Market- 
place, where twelve corpses were exposed to view on separate 
sites. Six were hung up by the feet, the six others were upright, 

1 This is pure fancy. — R. F. B. 

2 I did not remark it. — R. F. B. 



304 A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome, 

like men about to walk. Those whom I saw close were horri- 
bly mutilated and not beheaded.^ An enormous pool of blood 
covered the ground beneath the scaffold, giving unmistakeable 
evidence of previous sacrifices and of the tortures which accom- 
panied them. ^ Our reception by the King was brilhant, very 
cordial for myself as well as for the French Consul®; but we 
were soon able to convince ourselves that this was but a com- 
edy always performed by this poor Paladin te get the presents 
brought by the whites. Bom and brought up in the midst of 
these spectacles, which would be ridiculous if they were not 
horrible, the present King is actually more fond of them than 
his subjects. I saw him on that day admiring with the delight 
of a child the grotesque dances and ridiculous pantomime of his 
ministers, and then of the princes, and then of all present, for 
our amusement. A most infernal music, which nearly deafened 
us, delighted the King, who seemed to be in a state of ecstacy ; 
and this, M. le Due, lasted for six hours. On the following day 
his Majesty invited us to witness a procession of the King's 
riches. On reaching the square of the Palace (read huts) an 
agreeable surprise had been prepared for us. The entrance 
gate was flooded by a pool of blood two yards in width, and on 
each side a column of recently decapitated heads formed two 
immense chaplets. It is true that on this day the King wore the 
emblem of Christ on his breast. It must be presumed that it 
was the cross of execution that he meant to imply by this orna- 
ment. As regards the procession of his wealth, it consisted of 
a few old carriages, bath chairs carried by men with figures like 
PoUchinello. One thousand women carried each a bottle of 
liquor on her head, a brass basin in the shape of a footbath to 
receive the blood of the human victims on the day of the King's 
banquet ; an image of the Virgin ; various baskets-full of 
human skulls ; an image of St. Lawrence, as large as Ufe, car- 
ried by blacks ; finally the drum of death. 

" At another festival the King commanded on foot his 
Amazons, who manoeuvred with the precision of a flock of sheep. 
On the Market-place already mentioned each step was orna- 
mented by a dead body ; and the King came and went in the 



1 The mutilation took place after death. — R. F. B. 

2 There had been no previous sacrifices, and no tortures. — R. F. B. 

3 Others represented the contrary. — R. F. B. 



Appendix V, — Dahomey, its People and Customs. 305 

midst of pools of blood and fragments of human flesh in a state 
of putrefaction. On this occasion he had daubed his face with 
coal.^ The ceremony terminated by a mad dance, in which the 
King took part, dancing vis-a-vis to drunken soldiers and musi- 
cians. Such are, M. le Due, the man, the Government, and the 
people whom we have hitherto hoped to turn into a path less 
contrary to the laws of humanity. I regret that Captain Bur- 
ton should have arrived at Kan a just at the moment of the 
King's departure, as he might have been enabled to see and 
judge of all these things. 

" I am, M. le Due, your most obedient servant, 

"JULES GERARD. 

" P.S. — On the day of his departure the King invited us to 
a review of his army prepared for war. It was from 12,000 to 
14,000 strong, comprising 12,000 Amazons, 1000 men of the body- 
guard, and 2000 archers.*^ " 

N.B. — The letter is interesting, as giving the darkest view 
of things Dahoman. — R. F. B. 



1 Read, " with three streaks of gunpowder." — R. F. B. 

2 These are all numerical errors. M. Gerard probably means 1200 
Amazons. — R. F*. B. 



THE END. 



VOL. II. 20 
