TWO TRIPS TO GORILLA LAND AND THE CATARACTS OF THE CONGO
By Richard F. Burton — London: Sampson Low, Marston, Low, and Searle, 1876
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): This text reproduces the 1876 first edition as scanned by the Internet Archive (identifier twotripstogorill11876burt). The 1876 publication is in the public domain. The work is complete.

========================================================================

- 


Smithsonian 

Institution 

Libraries 


From  the 

RUSSELL  E.  TRAIN 
AFRICANA  COLLECTION 


witUmm  llie&t. 


TWO  TRIPS  TO  GORILLA  LAND 

AND  THE  CATARACTS  OF 


THE  CONGO. 


“  Quisquis  amat  Congi  fines  peragrare  nigrantes, 
Africae  et  A^thiopum  cernere  regna,  domus, 

*  #  *  *  *  *  * 

Perlegat  hunc  librum.” 

Fra  Angelus  de  Map.  Piccardus. 

“  Timbuctoo  travels,  voyages  to  the  poles, 
Are  ways  to  benefit  mankind  as  true 
Perhaps  as  shooting  them  a£  Waterloo.” — Don  Juan. 


London:  Sampson.  Low,  Marstorv,  Low  &  SearU >,  i 


London;  SampsoroLow,  Marstoro,  Low  &  Searle/,188  .Fleet  Street. 


TWO  TRIPS.  TO 


GORILLA  LAND 

AND  THE  CATARACTS 
OF  THE  CONGO. 

BY 

RICHARD  F.  BURTON. 


IN  TWO  VOLUMES. 
vol.  I. 


LONDON: 

SAMPSON  LOW,  MARSTON,  LOW,  AND  SEARLE, 

CROWN  BUILDINGS,  FLEET  STREET. 

1876. 

(All  rights  reserved.) 


t 


CHISWICK  PRESS  :  — PRINTED  BY  WHITTINGHAM  AND  WILKINS, 
TOOKS  COURT,  CHANCERY  LANE. 


Trieste,  Jan.  31,  1875. 

My  Dear  Sir  George, 

UR  paths  in  life  have  been  separated  by  a  long 
interval.  Whilst  inclination  led  you  to  explore 
and  to  survey  the  wild  wastes  of  the  North,  the 
Arctic  shores  and  the  Polar  seas,  with  all  their 
hardships  and  horrors ;  my  lot  was  cast  in  the 
torrid  regions  of  Sind  and  Arabia ;  in  the  luxuriant  deserts  of 
Africa,  and  in  the  gorgeous  tropical  forests  of  the  Brazil.  But 
the  true  traveller  can  always  appreciate  the  record  of  another’s 
experience,  and  perhaps  the  force  of  contrast  makes  him  most 
enjoy  the  adventures  differing  the  most  from  his  own.  To  whom, 
then,  more  appropriately  than  to  yourself,  a  discoverer  of  no 
ordinary  note,  a  recorder  of  explorations,  and,  finally,  an  earnest 
labourer  in  the  cause  of  geography,  can  I  inscribe  this  plain,  un¬ 
varnished  tale  of  a  soldier-traveller?  Kindly  accept  the  trifle 
as  a  token  of  the  warmest  esteem,  an  earnest  of  my  thankfulness 
for  the  interest  ever  shown  by  you  in  forwarding  my  plans  and 
projects  of  adventure  ;  and,  in  the  heartfelt  hope  that  Allah  may 
prolong  your  days,  permit  me  to  subscribe  myself, 

Your  sincere  admirer  and  grateful  friend, 

Richard  F.  Burton. 

Admiral  Sir  George  Back,  D.C.L.,  F.R.S., 

Vice-Pres.  R.G.S.,  &c. 


4 


i 


PREFACE. 

HE  notes  which  form  the  ground-work 
of  these  volumes  have  long  been  kept 
in  the  obscurity  of  manuscript :  my 
studies  of  South  America,  of  Syria 
and  Palestine,  of  Iceland,  and  of  I  stria,  left  me 
scant  time  for  the  labour  of  preparation.  Leisure 
and  opportunity  have  now  offered  themselves,  and 
I  avail  myself  of  them  in  the  hope  that  the  publi¬ 
cation  will  be  found  useful  to  more  than  one  class 
of  readers.  The  many  who  take  an  interest  in 
the  life  of  barbarous  peoples  may  not  be  dis¬ 
pleased  to  hear  more  about  the  F&n ;  and  the  few 
who  would  try  a  fall  with  Mister  Gorilla  can  learn 
from  me  how  to  equip  themselves,  whence  to  set 
out  and  whither  to  go  for  the  best  chance. 
Travelling  with  M.  Paul  B.  du  Chaillu’s  “  First 
Expedition  ”  in  my  hand,  I  jealously  looked  into 
every  statement,  and  his  numerous  friends  will 
be  pleased  to  see  how  many  of  his  assertions  are 
confirmed  by  my  experience. 

The  second  part  is  devoted  to  the  Nzadi  or 


Vlll 


Preface. 


lower  Congo  River,  from  the  mouth  to  the  Yellala 
or  main  rapids,  the  gate  by  which  the  mighty 
stream,  emerging  from  the  plateau  of  Inner  Africa, 
goes  to  its  long  home,  the  Atlantic.  Some  time 
must  elapse  before  the  second  expedition,  which  left 
Ambriz  early  in  1873,  under  Lieutenant  Grandy, 
R.  N.,  can  submit  its  labours  to  the  public  :  mean¬ 
while  these  pages  will,  I  trust,  form  a  suitable  in¬ 
troduction  to  the  gallant  explorers  travel  in  the 
interior.  It  would  be  preposterous  to  publish  de¬ 
scriptions  of  any  European  country  from  informa¬ 
tion  gathered  ten  years  ago.  But  Africa  moves 
slowly,  and  thus  we  see  that  the  results  of  an 
Abyssinian  journey  (M.  Antoine  d’Abbadie’s 
“  Geodesie  d’Ethiopie,”  which  took  place  about 
1845,  are  not  considered  obsolete  in  1873. 

After  a  languid  conviction  during  the  last  half 
century  of  owning  some  ground  upon  the  West 
Coast  of  Africa,  England  has  been  rudely  aroused 
by  a  little  war  which  will  have  large  consequences. 
The  causes  that  led  to  the  “  Ashantee  Campaign,” 
a  negro  copy  of  the  negroid  Abyssinian,  may 
be  broadly  laid  down  as  general  incuriousness, 
local  mismanagement,  and  the  operation  of  un¬ 
principled  journalism. 

It  is  not  a  little  amusing  to  hear  the  complaints 
of  the  public  that  plain  truth  about  the  African 
has  not  been  told.  I  could  cite  more  than  one 
name  that  has  done  so.  But  what  was  the  result  •? 


Preface. 


IX 


We  were  all  soundly  abused  by  the  negrophile  ; 
the  multitude  cared  little  about  reading  “  unpopu¬ 
lar  opinions  and  then,  when  the  fulness  of  time 
came,  it  turned  upon  us,  and  rent  us,  and  asked 
why  we  had  not  spoken  freely  concerning  Ashanti 
and  Fanti,  and  all  the  herd.  My  “  Wanderings  in 
West  Africa”  is  a  case  in  point  :  so  little  has  it 
been  read,  that  a  President  of  the  Royal  Geogra¬ 
phical  Society  (African  section  of  the  Society  of 
Arts  Journal,  Feb.  6,  1874)  could  state,  “If 
Fantees  are  cowardly  and  lazy,  K  rumen  are  brave 
the  latter  being  the  most  notorious  poltroons  on 
the  West  African  seaboard. 

The  hostilities  on  the  Gold  Coast  might  have 
been  averted  with  honour  to  ourselves  at  any 
time  between  1863  and  1870,  by  a  Colonial  Office 
mission  and  a  couple  of  thousand  pounds.  I 
need  hardly  say  what  has  been  the  case  now. 
The  first  steps  were  taken  with  needless  disasters, 
and  the  effect  has  been  far  different  from  what  we 
intended  or  what  was  advisable.  For  a  score  of 
years  we  (travellers)  have  been  advising  the  English 
statesman  not  to  despise  the  cunning  of  barbarous 
tribes,  never  to  attempt  finessing  with  Asiatic  or 
African  ;  to  treat  these  races  with  perfect  sincerity 
and  truthfulness.  I  have  insisted,  and  it  is  now 
seen  with  what  reason,  that  every  attempt  at  de¬ 
ception,  at  asserting  the  “  thing  which  is  not,”  will 
presently  meet  with  the  reward  it  deserves.  I 


x  Preface . 

can  only  regret  that  my  counsels  have  not  made 
themselves  heard. 

Yet  this  ignoble  war  between  barbarous  tribes 
whom  it  has  long  been  the  fashion  to  pet,  this  poor 
scuffle  between  the  breechloader  and  the  Birming¬ 
ham  trade  musket,  may  yet  in  one  sense  do  good. 
It  must  perforce  draw  public  attention  to  the  West 
Coast  of  Africa,  and  raise  the  question,  “  What 
shall  we  do  with  it  ?  ”  My  humble  opinion,  ex¬ 
pressed  early  in  1865  to  the  Right  Honourable 
Mr.  Adderley,  has  ever  been  this.  If  we  are  de¬ 
termined  not  to  follow  the  example  of  the  French, 
the  Dutch,  the  Portuguese,  and  the  Spaniards,  and 
not  to  use  the  country  as  a  convict  station,  resolv¬ 
ing  to  consume,  as  it  were,  our  crime  at  home,  we 
should  also  resolve  to  retain  only  a  few  ports  and 
forts,  without  territory,  at  points  commanding 
commerce,  after  the  fashion  of  the  Lusitanians 
in  the  old  heroic  days.  The  export-  slave-trade 
is  now  dead  and  buried  ;  the  want  of  demand 
must  prevent  its  revival  ;  and  free  emigration  has 
yet  to  be  created.  As  Mr.  Bright  rightly  teaches, 
strong  places  and  garrisons  are  not  necessary 
to  foster  trade  and  to  promote  the  success  of 
missions.  The  best  proof  on  the  West  African 
Coast  is  to  be  found  in  the  so-called  Oil  Rivers, 
where  we  have  never  held  a  mile  of  ground,  and 
where  our  commerce  prospers  most.  The  great 
“Tribune”  will  forgive  my  agreeing  in  opinion 


Preface . 


xi 


with  him  when  he  finds  that  we  differ  upon  one 
most  important  point.  It  is  the  merchant,  not 
the  garrison,  that  causes  .African  wars.  If  the 
home  authorities  would  avoid  a  campaign,  let 
them  commit  their  difficulty  to  a  soldier,  not 
to  a  civilian. 

The  chronic  discontent  of  the  so-called 
“  civilized  ”  African,  the  contempt  of  the  rulers 
if  not  of  the  rule,  and  the  bitter  hatred  between 
the  three  races,  white,  black,  and  black-white, 
fomented  by  many  an  unprincipled  print,  which 
fills  its  pocket  with  coin  of  cant  and  Christian 
charity,  will  end  in  even  greater  scandals  than  the 
last  disreputable  war.  If  the  damnosa  licentia  be 
not  suppressed — and  where  are  the  strong  hands 
to  suppress  it  ?— we  may  expect  to  see  the  scenes 
of  Jamaica  revived  with  improvements  at  Sierra 
Leone.  However  unwilling  I  am  to  cut  off  any 
part  of  our  great  and  extended  empire,  to  renew 
anywhere,  even  in  Africa,  the  process  of  dis¬ 
memberment — the  policy  which  cast  off  Corfu — 
it  is  evident  to  me  that  English  occupation  of  the 
West  African  Coast  has  but  slightly  forwarded 
the  cause  of  humanity,  and  that  upon  the  whole 
it  has  proved  a  remarkable  failure. 

We  can  be  wise  in  time. 

Richard  F.  Burton. 

P.S. — Since  these  pages  were  written,  a  name 


Xll 


Preface. 


which  frequently  occurs  in  them  has  become  a 
memory  to  his  friends — I  allude  to  W.  Winwood 
Reade,  and  I  deplore  his  loss.  The  highest  type  of 
Englishman, brave  and  fearless  as  he  was  gentle  and 
loving,  his  short  life  of  thirty-seven  years  shows 
how  much  may  be  done  by  the  honest,  thorough 
worker.  He  had  emphatically  the  courage  of  his 
opinions,  and  he  towered  a  cubit  above  the  crowd 
by  telling  not  only  the  truth,  as  most  of  us  do,  but 
the  whole  truth,  which  so  few  can  afford  to  do. 
His  personal  courage  in  battle  during  the  Ashanti 
campaign,  where  the  author  of  “  Savage  Africa” 
became  correspondent  of  the  “  Times,”  is  a 
matter  of  history.  His  noble  candour  in  publish¬ 
ing  the  “  Martyrdom  of  Man  ”  is  an  example  and 
a  model  to  us  who  survive  him.  And  he  died 
calmly  and  courageously  as  he  lived,  died  in  har¬ 
ness,  died  as  he  had  resolved  to  die,  like  the  good 
and  gallant  gentleman  of  ancient  lineage  that  he 
was. 


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  I. 


Chapter  I. 

Landing  at  the  Rio  Gabao  (Gaboon  River). — Le  Plateau, 
the  French  Colony  ....... 


Page 


I 


Chapter  II. 

The  Departure. — The  Tornado. — Arrival  at  “the  Bush”  20 


Chapter  III. 

Geography  of  the  Gaboon  ......  46 

Chapter  IV. 

The  Minor  Tribes  and  the  Mpongwe  .  .  .  .62 


Chapter  V. 

To  Sanga-Tanga  and  back  .  .  .  .  .  .112 

Chapter  VI. 

Village  Life  in  Pongo-land  .  .  .  .  .  .150 

Chapter  VII. 


Return  to  the  River 


6  170 


XIV 


Contents . 


Chapter  VIII. 

Page 

Up  the  Gaboon  River . 187 

Chapter  IX. 

A  Specimen  Day  with  the  Fan  Cannibals  .  .  197 

Chapter  X. 

To  the  Mblka  (Hill);  the  Sources  of  the  Gaboon. — 

Return  to  the  Plateau  .  .  .  .  .  .228 

Chapter.  XI. 

Mr.,  Mrs.,  and  Master  Gorilla . 238 

Chapter  XII. 

Corisco. — “  Home  ”  to  Fernando  Po  ....  253 


PART  I. 


HE  GABOON  RIVER  AND 
GORILLA  LAND. 


“  It  was  my  hint  to  speak,  such  was  my  process ; 
And  of  the  cannibals  that  each  other  eat, 

The  anthropophagi,  and  men  whose  heads 
Do  grow  beneath  their  shoulders  ” — Othello. 


Part  I. 

TRIP  TO  GORILLA  LAND. 
CHAPTER  I. 

LANDING  AT  THE  RIO  GABAO  (GABOON  RIVER). — 
LE  PLATEAU,  THE  FRENCH  COLONY. 

REMEMBER  with  lively  pleasure 
my  first  glance  at  the  classic  stream 
of  the  “  Portingal  Captains  ”  and  the 
“  Zeeland  interlopers.  ”  The  ten- 
mile  breadth  of  the  noble  Gaboon  estuary  some¬ 
what  dwarfed  the  features  of  either  shore  as  we 
rattled  past  Cape  Santa  Clara,  a  venerable  name, 
“  ’verted”  to  Joinville.  The  bold  northern  head, 
though  not  “  very  high  land,”  makes  some  display, 
because  we  see  it  in  a  better  light ;  and  its  envi¬ 
rons  are  set  off  by  a  line  of  scattered  villages. 
The  vis-a-vis  of  Louis  Philippe  Peninsula  on  the 
starboard  bow  (Zuidhoeck),  “  Sandy  Point  ”  or 


I. 

/o  y"' 


B 


2 


The  Gorilla  Land. 


Sanclhoeck,  by  the  natives  called  Pongara,  and  by 
the  French  Peninsule  de  Marie- Amelie,  shows 
a  mere  fringe  of  dark  bristle,  which  is  tree,  based 
upon  a  broad  red-yellow  streak,  which  is  land. 
As  we  pass  through  the  slightly  overhung  mouth, 
we  can  hardly  complain  with  a  late  traveller  of  the 
Gaboon’s  “  sluggish  waters  ;  ”  during  the  ebb  they 
run  like  a  mild  mill-race,  and  when  the  current, 
setting  to  the  north-west,  meets  a  strong  sea- 
breeze  from  the  west,  there  is  a  criss-cross,  a  tide- 
rip,  contemptible  enough  to  a  cruizer,  but  quite 
capable  of  filling  cock-boats.  And,  nearing  the 
end  of  our  voyage,  we  rejoice  to  see  that  the  dull 
down-pourings  and  the  sharp  storms  of  Fernando 
Po  have  apparently  not  yet  migrated  so  far  south. 
Dancing  blue  wavelets,  under  the  soft  azure  sky, 
plash  and  cream  upon  the  pure  clean  sand  that 
projects  here  and  there  black  lines  of  porous  iron¬ 
stone  waiting  to  become  piers  ;  and  the  water-line 
is  backed  by  swelling  ridges,  here  open  and  green- 
grassed,  there  spotted  with  islets  of  close  and  shady 
trees.  Mangrove,  that  horror  of  the  African 
voyager,  shines  by  its  absence  ;  and  the  soil  is  not 
mud,  but  humus  based  on  gravels  or  on  ruddy 
clays,  stiff  and  retentive.  The  formation,  in  fact, 
is  everywhere  that  of  Eyo  or  Yoruba,  the  goodly 
region  lying  west  of  the  lower  Niger,  and  its  fer¬ 
tility  must  result  from  the  abundant  water-supply 
of  the  equatorial  belt. 


The  Gorilla  Land. 


o 


The  charts  are  fearful  to  look  upon.  The  em¬ 
bouchure,  well  known  to  old  traders,  has  been 
scientifically  surveyed  in  our  day  by  Lieutenant 
Alph.  Fleuriot  de  Langle,  of  La  Malouine  (1845), 
and  the  chart  was  corrected  from  a  survey  ordered 
by  Capitaine  Bouet-Willaumez  (1849)  ;  in  the 
latter  year  it  was  again  revised  by  M.  Charles 


LE  PLATEAU,  FRENCH  CAPITAL  OF  THE  GABOON. 


Floix,  of  the  French  navy,  and,  with  additions  by 
the  officers  of  Her  Britannic  Majesty’s  service,  it 
becomes  our  No.  1877.  The  surface  is  a  labyrinth 
of  banks,  rocks,  and  shoals,  “Ely,”  Nisus,”  “Alli¬ 
gator,”  and  “  Caraibe.”  In  such  surroundings  as 
these,  when  the  water  shallows  apace,  the  pilot 
must  not  be  despised. 

Her  Majesty’s  steam-ship  “Griffon,”  Commander 
Perry,  found  herself,  at  2  p.m.  on  Monday,  March, 


4 


Le  Plateau , 


17,  1862,  in  a  snug  berth  opposite  Le  Plateau,  as 
the  capital  of  the  French  colony  is  called,  and 
amongst  the  shipping  of  its  chief  port,  Aumale 
Road.  The  river  at  this  neck  is  about  five  miles 
broad,  and  the  scene  was  characteristically  French. 
Hardly  a  merchant  vessel  lay  there.  We  had  no  less 
than  four  naval  consorts  “  La  Caravane,”  guard- 
ship,  store-ship,  and  hospital-hulk  ;  a  fine  transport, 
“  La  Riege,”  bound  for  Goree  ;  “  La  Recherche,”  a 
wretched  old  sailing  corvette  which  plies  to  Assini 
and  Grand  Basam  on  the  Gold  Coast ;  and,  lastly, 
“La  Junon,”  chef  de  division  Baron  Didelot,  then 
one  of  the  finest  frigates  in  the  French  navy,  armed 
with  fifty  rifled  sixty-eight  pounders.  It  is  curious 
that,  whilst  our  neighbours  build  such  splendid 
craft,  and  look  so  neat  and  natty  in  naval  uniform, 
they  pay  so  little  regard  to  the  order  and  cleanli¬ 
ness  of  their  floating  homes. 

After  visiting  every  English  colony  on  the  West 
Coast  of  Africa,  I  resolved  curiously  to  examine 
my  first  specimen  of  our  rivals,  the  “  principal 
centre  of  trade  in  western  equatorial  Africa.”  The 
earliest  visit — in  uniform,  of  course — was  to  Baron 
Didelot,  whose  official  title  is  “  Commandant  Supe- 
rieur  des  Etablissements  de  la  Cote  d’Or  et  du 
Gabon  ;  ”  the  following  was  to  M.  H.  S.  L’Aulnois, 
“  Lieutenant  de  Vaisseau  et  Commandant  Particu- 
lier  du  Comptoir  de  Gabon.”  These  gentlemen 
have  neat  bungalows  and  gardens  ;  they  may  spend 


the  French  Colony. 


5 


their  days  ashore,  but  they  are  very  careful  to  sleep 
on  board.  All  the  official  whites  appear  to  have  a 
morbid  horror  of  the  climate  ;  when  attacked  by 
fever,  they  “  cave  in  ”  at  once,  and  recovery  can 
hardly  be  expected.  This  year  also,  owing  to 
scanty  rains,  sickness  has  been  rife,  and  many 
cases  which  began  with  normal  mildness  have 
ended  suddenly  and  fatally.  Besides  fear  of  fever, 
they  are  victims  to  ennui  and  nostalgia ;  and,  ex¬ 
pecting  the  Comptoir  to  pay  large  profits,  they 
are  greatly  disappointed  by  the  reverse  being  the 
case. 

But  how  can  they  look  for  it  to  be  otherwise  ? 
The  modern  French  appear  fit  to  manage  only 
garrisons  and  military  posts.  They  will  make 
everything  official,  and  they  will  not  remember  the 
protest  against  governing  too  much,  offered  by  the 
burgesses  of  Paris  to  Louis  le  Grand.  They  are 
always  on  duty ;  they  are  never  out  of  uniform, 
mentally  and  metaphorically,  as  well  as  bodily  and 
literally.  Nothing  is  done  without  delay,  even  in 
the  matter  of  signing  a  ship’s  papers.  A  long 
proces- verbal  takes  the  place  of  our  summary 
punishment,  and  the  gros  canon  is  dragged  into 
use  on  every  occasion,  even  to  enforce  the  pay¬ 
ment  of  native  debts. 

In  the  Gaboon,  also,  there  is  a  complication  of 
national  jealousy,  suggesting  the  mastiff  and  the 
poodle.  A  perpetual  war  rages  about  flags. 


6 


Le  Plateau, 


English  craft  may  carry  their  colours  as  far  up 
stream  as  Coniquet  Island ;  beyond  this  point 
they  must  either  hoist  a  French  ensign,  or  sail 
without  bunting — should  the  commodore  permit. 
Otherwise  they  will  be  detained  by  the  commander 
of  the  hulk  “l’Oise,”  stationed  at  Anenge-nenge, 
some  thirty-eight  to  forty  miles  above  Le  Plateau. 
Lately  a  Captain  Gordon,  employed  by  Mr. 
Francis  Wookey  of  Taunton,  was  ordered  to  pull 
down  his  flag  :  those  who  know  the  “mariner  of 
England  ”  will  appreciate  his  feelings  on  the  occa¬ 
sion.  Small  vessels  belonging  to  foreigners,  and 
employed  in  cabotage,  must  not  sail  with  their 
own  papers,  and  even  a  change  of  name  is  effected 
under  difficulties.  About  a  week  before  my  arrival 

a  certain  pan-Teutonic  Hamburgher,  Herr  B - , 

amused  himself,  after  a  copious  breakfast,  with 
hoisting  and  saluting  the  Union  Jack,  in  honour  of 

a  distinguished  guest,  Major  L - .  A  report 

was  at  once  spread  that  the  tricolor  had  been 
hauled  down  “with  extreme  indignity;”  and  the 
Commodore  took  the  trouble  to  reprimand  the 
white,  and  to  imprison  “  Tom  Case,”  the  black  in 
whose  town  the  outrage  had  been  allowed. 

This  by  way  of  parenthesis.  My  next  step  was 
to  request  the  pleasure  of  a  visit  from  Messrs. 
Hogg  and  Kirkwood,  who  were  in  charge  of  the 
English  factories  at  Glass  Town  and  Olomi ;  they 
came  down  stream  at  once,  and  kindly  acted  as 


the  French  Colony. 


7 


ciceroni  around  Le  Plateau.  The  landing  is  good  ; 
a  reef  has  been  converted  into  a  jetty  and  little 
breakwater ;  behind  this  segment  of  a  circle  we  dis¬ 
embarked  without  any  danger  of  being  washed  out 
of  the  boat,  as  at  S’a  Leone,  Cape  Coast  Castle, 
and  Accra.  Unfortunately  just  above  this  pier 
there  is  a  Dutch-like  jar  din  d'  StS — beds  of  dirty 
weeds  bordering  a  foul  and  stagnant  swamp,  while 
below  the  settlement  appears  a  huge  coal-shed  : 
the  expensive  mineral  is  always  dangerous  when 
exposed  in  the  tropics,  and  some  thirty  per  cent, 
would  be  saved  by  sending  out  a  hulk.  The 
next  point  is  the  Hotel  and  Restaurant  Fischer — 
pronounced  Fi-cherre,  belonging  to  an  energetic 
German-Swiss  widow,  who  during  six  years’  exile 
had  amassed  some  65,000  francs.  In  an  evil  hour 
she  sent  a  thieving  servant  before  the  “  commis- 
saire  de  police  ;  ”  the  negress  escaped  punishment, 
but  the  verandah  with  its  appurtenances  caught 
fire,  and  everything,  even  the  unpacked  billiard- 
table,  was  burnt  to  ashes.  Still,  Madame  the  Brave 
never  lost  heart.  She  applied  herself  valiantly  as 
a  white  ant  to  repairing  her  broken  home,  and, 
wonderful  to  relate  in  this  land  of  no  labour,  ruled 
by  the  maxim  “ festina  lente'j  all  had  been  re¬ 
stored  within  six  months.  We  .shall  dine  at  her 
table  d'hote . 

Our  guide  led  up  and  along  the  river  bank, 
where  there  is  almost  a  kilometre  of  road  facing 


8 


Le  Plateau , 


six  or  seven  kilometres  of  nature’s  highway — the 
stream.  The  swampy  jungle  is  not  cleared  off 
from  about  the  Comptoir,  and  presently  the  per¬ 
fume  of  the  fat,  rank  weeds  ;  and  the  wretched 
bridges,  a  few  planks  spanning  black  and  fetid 
mud,  drove  us  northwards  or  inland,  towards  the 
neat  house  and  grounds  of  the  “  Commandant  Par¬ 
ticular.”  The  outside  walls,  built  in  grades  with 
the  porous,  dark-red,  laterite-like  stone  dredged 
from  the  river,  are  whitewashed  with  burnt  coral¬ 
line  and  look  clean  ;  whilst  the  house,  one  of  the 
best  in  the  place,  is  French,  that  is  to  say,  pretty. 
Near  it  is  a  cluster  of  native  huts,  mostly  with 
walls  of  corded  bamboo,  some  dabbed  with  clay 
and  lime,  and  all  roofed  with  the  ever  shabby- 
looking  palm-leaf ;  none  are  as  neat  as  those  of 
the  “  bushmen  ”  in  the  interior,  where  they  are 
regularly  and  carefully  made  like  baskets  or  pan¬ 
niers.  The  people  appeared  friendly;  the  men 
touched  their  hats,  and  the  women  dropped  un¬ 
mistakably  significant  curtsies. 

After  admiring  the  picturesque  bush  and  the 
natural  avenues  behind  Le  Plateau,  we  diverged 
towards  the  local  Pere-la-Chaise.  The  new  ceme¬ 
tery,  surrounded  by  a  tall  stone  wall  and  approached 
by  a  large  locked  gate,  contains  only  four  tombs  ; 
the  old  burial  ground  opposite  is  unwalled,  open, 
and  painfully  crowded  ;  the  trees  have  run  wild, 
the  crosses  cumber  the  ground,  the  gravestones  are 


the  French  Colony. 


9 


tilted  up  and  down  ;  in  fact  the  foul  Golgotha  of 
Santos,  Sao  Paulo,  the  Brazil,  is  not  more  ragged, 
shabby,  and  neglected.  We  were  shown  the  last 
resting-place  of  M.  du  Chaillu  pere,  agent  to 
Messrs.  Oppenheim,  the  old  Parisian  house  :  he 
died  here  in  1856. 

Resuming  our  way  parallel  with,  but  distant  from 
the  river,  we  passed  a  bran-new  military  store¬ 
house,  bright  with  whitewash.  Outside  the  com¬ 
pound  lay  the  lines  of  the  “  Zouaves,”  some  forty 
negroes  whom  Goree  has  supplied  to  the  Gaboon  ; 
they  were  accompanied  by  a  number  of  intelligent 
mechanics,  who  loudly  complained  of  having  been 
kidnapped,  coolie-fashion.  We  then  debouched 
upon  Fort  Aumale;  from  the  anchorage  it  appears 
a  whitewashed  square,  whose  feet  are  dipped  in 
bright  green  vegetation,  and  its  head  wears  a 
dingy  brown  roof-thatch.  A  nearer  view  shows 
a  pair  of  semi-detached  houses,  built  upon  arches, 
and  separated  by  a  thoroughfare ;  the  cleaner  of 
the  two  is  a  hospital  ;  the  dingier,  which  is  deco¬ 
rated  with  the  brown-green  stains,  the  normal 
complexion  of  tropical  masonry,  lodges  the  station 
Commandant  and  the  medical  officers.  Fronting 
the  former  and  by  the  side  of  an  avenue  that  runs 
towards  the  sea  is  an  unfinished  magazine  of 
stone,  and  to  the  right,  as  you  front  the  sun,  lies 
the  garden  of  the  “  Commandant  du  Comptoir,” 
choked  with  tropical  weeds.  Altogether  there  is 


IO 


Le  Plateau , 


a  scattered  look  about  the  metropolis  of  the 
“  Gabon,”  which  numbers  one  foot  of  house  to  a 
thousand  of  “  compound.” 

Suddenly  a  bonnet  like  a  pair  of  white  gulls’ 
wings  and  a  blue  serge  gown  fled  from  us,  despite 
the  weight  of  years,  like  a  young  gazelle  ;  the 
wearer  was  a  sister  of  charity,  one  of  five  bonnes 
scours.  Their  bungalow  is  roomy  and  comfortable, 
near  a  little  chapel  and  a  largish  school,  whence 
issue  towards  sunset  the  well-known  sounds  of  the 
Angelus.  At  some  distance  down  stream  and  on 
the  right  or  northern  bank  lies  a  convent,  and  a 
house  superintended  by  the  original  establisher  of 
the  mission  in  1844,  the  bishop,  Mgr.  Bessieux, 
who  died  in  1872,  aged  70.  There  are  extensive 
plantations,  but  the  people  are  too  lazy  to  take 
example  from  them. 

Before  we  hear  the  loud  cry  a  table ,  we  may 
shortly  describe  the  civilized  career  of  the  Gaboon. 
In  1842,  when  French  and  English  rivalry,  burn¬ 
ing  hot  on  both  sides  of  the  Channel,  extended 
deep  into  the  tropics  and  spurned  the  equator, 
and  when  every  naval  officer,  high  and  low,  went 
mad  about  concluding  treaties  and  conquering 
territory  on  paper,  France  was  persuaded  to  set 
up  a  naval  station  in  Gorilla-land.  The  northern 
and  the  southern  shore  each  had  a  king,  whose 
consent,  after  a  careless  fashion,  was  considered 
decorous.  His  Majesty  of  the  North  was  old  King 


the  French  Colony .  1 1 

Glass1  and  his  chief  “  tradesman,”  that  is,  his 
premier,  was  the  late  Toko,  a  shrewd  and  far- 
seeing  statesman.  His  Majesty  of  the  South  was 
Rapwensembo,  known  to  the  English  as  King 
William,  to  the  French  as  Roi  Denis. 

Matters  being  in  this  state,  M.  le  Comte  Bouet- 
Willaumez,  then  Capitaine  de  Vaisseau  and  Go¬ 
vernor  of  Senegal,  resolved,  coute  que  coute ,  to 
have  his  fortified  Comptoir.  Evidently  the  northern 
shore  was  preferable ;  it  was  more  populous  and 
more  healthy,  facing  the  fresh  southerly  winds. 
During  the  preliminary  negotiations  Toko, 
partial  to  the  English,  whose  language  he 
spoke  fluently,  and  with  whom  the  Glass  family 
had  ever  been  friendly,  thwarted  the  design  with 
all  his  might,  and,  despite  threats  and  bribes, 
honestly  kept  up  his  opposition  to  the  last. 
Roi  Denis,  on  the  other  hand,  who  had  been 
decorated  with  the  Legion  d’Honneur  for  saving 
certain  shipwrecked  sailors,  who  knew  French 
well,,  and  who  hoped  to  be  made  king  of  the  whole 
country,  favoured  to  the  utmost  Gallic  views,  taking 
especial  care,  however,  to  place  the  broad  river 
between  himself  and  his  white  friends.  M.  de 
Moleon,  Capitaine  de  F regate,  and  commanding 
the  brig  “  Le  Zebre,”  occupied  the  place,  Mr. 


1  Paul  B.  du  Chaillu,  Chap.  III.  “  Explorations  and  Adven¬ 
tures  in  Equatorial  Africa.”  London:  Murray,  1861. 


Le  Plateau , 


1 2 

Wilson  (“Western  Africa,”  p.  254)  says  by  force 
of  arms,  but  that  is  probably  an  exaggeration.  To 
bring  our  history  to  an  end,  the  sons  of  Japheth 
overcame  the  children  of  Ham,  and,  as  the 
natives  said,  “Toko  he  muss  love  Frenchman, 
all  but  out  of  ( ' anglice  ‘  in  ’)  his  heart.” 

As  in  the  streets  of  Paris,  so  in  every  French 
city  at  home  and  abroad, 

“  Verborum  vetus  interit  setas,” 

and  an  old  colonial  chart  often  reads  like  a  lesson 
in  modern  history.  Here  we  still  find  under  the 
Empire  the  Constitutional  Monarchy  of  1842-3. 
Mount  Bouet  leads  to  Fort  “Aumale:”-  Point 
Joinville,  at  the  north  jaw  of  the  river,  faces  Cap 
Montagnies  :  Parrot  has  become  “  Adelaide,”  and 
Coniquet  “  Orleans”  Island.  Indeed  the  love  of 
Louis-Philippe’s  family  has  lingered  in  many  a 
corner  where  one  would  least  expect  to  meet  it, 
and  in  1869  I  found  “  Port  Saeed  ”  a  hot-bed  of 
Orleanism. 

The  hotel  verandah  was  crowded  with  the 
minor  officials,  the  surgeons,  and  the  clerks  of  the 
comptoir,  drinking  absinthe  and  colicky  vermouth, 
smoking  veritable  “weeds,”  playing  at  dominoes, 
and  contending  who  could  talk  longest  and  loudest. 

1  Rev.  J.  Leighton  Wilson  of  the  Presbyterian  Mission, 
eighteen  years  in  Africa,  “  Western  Africa,”  &c.  New  York. 
Harpers,  1856. 


the  French  Colony . 


!3 


At  7  p.m.  the  word  was  given  to  “fall  to.”  The 
room  was  small  and  exceedingly  close ;  the  social 
board  was  big  and  very  rickety.  The  clientele 
rushed  in  like  backwoodsmen  on  board  a  Missis¬ 
sippi  floating-palace,  stripped  off  their  coats,  tucked 
up  their  sleeves,  and,  knife  in  one  hand  and  bread 
in  the  other,  advanced  gallantly  to  the  fray.  They 
began  by  quarrelling  about  carving  ;  one  made  a 
sporting  offer  to  dScouper  la  soupe ,  but  he  would 
go  no  farther ;  and  Madame,  as  the  head  of  the 
table,  ended  by  asking  my  factotum,  Selim  Agha, 
to  “have  the  kindness.”  The  din,  the  heat,  the 
flare  of  composition  candles  which  gave  45  per 
cent,  less  of  light  than  they  ought,  the  blunders  of 
the  slaves,  the  objurgations  of  the  hostess,  and  the 
spectacled  face  opposite  me,  were  as  much  as  I 
could  bear,  and  a  trifle  more.  No  wonder  that 
the  resident  English  merchants  avoid  the  table- 
d'hote. 

Provisions  are  dear  and  scarce  at  the  Gaboon, 
where,  as  in  other  parts  of  West  Africa,  the  negro 
will  not  part  with  his  animals,  unless  paid  at  the 
rate  of  some  twenty-two  or  twenty-three  shillings 
for  a  lean  goat  or  sheep.  Yet  the  dinner  is  copi¬ 
ous  ;  th employes  contribute  their  rations;  and 
thus  the  table  shows  beef  twice  a  week.  Black 
cattle  are  imported  from  various  parts  of  the  coast, 
north  and  south ;  perhaps  those  of  the  Kru  coun¬ 
try  stand  the  climate  best ;  the  Government  yard 


14 


Le  Plateau , 


is  well  stocked,  and  the  polite  Commodore  readily 
allows  our  cruizers  to  buy  bullocks.  Madame  also 
is  not  a  “  bird  with  a  long  bill the  dinner,  includ¬ 
ing  piquette,  alias  vin  ordinaire,  coffee,  and  the  petit 
verre,  costs  five  francs  to  the  stranger,  and  one 
franc  less  pays  the  dejeuner  a  la  fourchette — most 
men  here  eat  two  dinners.  The  soi-disant  Medoc 
(forty  francs  per  dozen)  is  tolerable,  and  the  cassis 
(thirty  francs)  is  drinkable.  I  am  talking  in  the 
present  of  things  twelve  years  past.  What  a 
shadowy,  ghostly  table  d' hote  it  has  now  become 
to  me ! 

After  dinner  appeared  cigar  and  pipe,  which 
were  enjoyed  in  the  verandah  :  I  sat  up  late,  ad¬ 
miring  the  intense  brilliancy  of  the  white  and  blue 
lightning,  but  auguring  badly  for  the  future, — 
natives  will  not  hunt  during  the  rains.  A  strong 
wind  was  blowing  from  the  north-east,  which,  with 
the  north-north-east,  is  here,  as  at  Fernando  Po 
and  Camaronen,  the  stormy  quarter.  A  “  dry  tor¬ 
nado,”  however,  was  the  only  result  that  night. 

My  trip  to  Gorilla-land  was  limited  by  the  cruise 
upon  which  H.M.  S.S.  “  Griffon”  had  been  ordered, 
namely,  to  and  from  the  South  Coast  with  mail- 
bags.  Many  of  those  whom  I  had  wished  to  see 
were  absent;  but  Mr.  Hogg  set  to  work  in  the 
most  business-like  style.  He  borrowed  a  boat  from 
the  Rev.  William  Walker,  of  the  Gaboon  Mission, 
who  kindly  wrote  that  I  should  have  something 


the  French  Colony .  i  5 

less  cranky  if  I  could  wait  awhile ;  he  manned  it 
with  three  of  his  own  K  rumen,  and  he  collected 
the  necessary  stores  and  supplies  of  cloth,  pipes 
and  tobacco,  rum,  white  wine,  and  absinthe  for  the 
natives. 

My  private  stores  cost  some  200  francs.  They 
consisted  of  candles,  sugar,  bread,  cocoa,  desiccated 
milk,  and  potatoes  ;  Cognac  and  Medoc  ;  ham,  sau¬ 
sages,  soups,  and  preserved  meats,  the  latter  French 
and,  as  usual,  very  good  and  very  dear.  The  total 
expenditure  for  twelve  days  was  300  francs. 

My  indispensables  were  reduced  to  three  loads, 
and  I  had  four  “  pull-a-boys,”  one  a  Mpongwe, 
Mwaka  alias  Captain  Merrick,  a  model  sluggard  ; 
and  Messrs.  Smoke,  Joe  Williams,  and  Tom 
Whistle— Kru-men,  called  Kru-boys.  This  is  not 
upon  the  principle,  as  some  suppose,  of  the  grey¬ 
headed  post-boy  and  drummer-boy:  all  the  Kraoh 
tribes  end  their  names  in  bo,  e.g.  Worebo,  from 
“  wore,”  to  capsize  a  canoe  ;  Grebo,  from  the  mon¬ 
key  “gre”  or  “gle;”  and  many  others.  Bo  be¬ 
came  “boy,”  even  as  Sipahi  (Sepoy)  became  Sea- 
pie,  and  Sukhani  (steersman)  Sea-Coney. 

Gaboon  is  French,  with  a  purely  English  trade. 
Gambia  is  English,  with  a  purely  French  trade  ; 
the  latter  is  the  result  of  many  causes,  but  espe¬ 
cially  of  the  large  neighbouring  establishments  at 
Goree,  Saint  Louis  de  Senegal,  and  Saint  Joseph 
de  Galam.  Exchanging  the  two  was  long  held 


i6 


Le  Plateau , 


the  soundest  of  policy.  The  French  hoped  by  it 
to  secure  their  darling  object, — exclusive  posses¬ 
sion  of  the  maritime  regions,  as  well  as  the  interior, 
leading  to  the  gold  mines  of  the  Mandengas  (Man- 
dingas),  and  allowing  overland  connection  with 
their  Algerine  colony.  The  English  also  seemed 
willing  enough  to  “  swop  ”  an  effete  and  dilapi¬ 
dated  settlement,  surrounded  by  more  powerful 
rivals — a  hot-bed  of  dysentery  and  yellow  fever,  a 
blot  upon  the  fair  face  of  earth,  even  African  earth — 
for  a  new  and  fresh  country,  with  a  comparatively 
good  climate,  in  which  the  thermometer  ranges 
between  65°  (Fahr.)  and  90°,  with  a  barometer 
as  high  as  the  heat  allows ;  and  where,  being  at 
home  and  unwatched,  they  could  subject  a  linger¬ 
ing  slave-trade  to  a  regular  British  putting-down. 
But,  when  matters  came  to  the  point  in  1870-71, 
the  proposed  bargain  excited  a  storm  of  senti¬ 
mental  wrath  which  was  as  queer  as  unexpected. 
The  French  object  to  part  with  the  Gaboon,  as  the 
Germans  appear  inclined  to  settle  upon  the  Ogobe 
River.  In  England,  cotton,  civilization,  and  even 
Christianity  were  thrust  forward  by  half-a-dozen 
merchants,  and  by  a  few  venal  colonial  prints. 
The  question  assumed  the  angriest  aspect;  and, 
lastly,  the  Prussian-French  war  underwrote  the 
negotiations  with  a  finis  pi'o  temp.  I  hope  to  see 
them  renewed ;  and  I  hope  still  more  ardently  to 
see  the  day  when  we  shall  either  put  our  so-called 


the  Fi'ench  Colony.  17 

“colonies”  on  the  West  Coast  of  Africa  to  their 
only  proper  use,  convict  stations,  or  when,  if  we 
are  determined  upon  consuming  our  own  crime  at 
home,  we  shall  make  up  our  minds  to  restore  them 
to  the  negro  and  the  hyaena,  their  “  old  inhabi¬ 
tants.” 

At  the  time  of  my  visit,  the  Gaboon  River  had 
four  English  traders  ;  viz. 

1.  Messrs.  Laughland  and  Co.,  provision-mer¬ 
chants,  Fernando  Po  and  Glasgow.  Their  resi¬ 
dent  agent  was  Mr.  Kirkwood. 

2.  Messrs.  Hatton  and  Cookson,  general  mer¬ 
chants,  Liverpool.  Their  chief  agent,  Mr.  R.  B. 
N.  Walker,  who  had  known  the  river  for  eleven 
years  (1865),  had  left  a  few  days  before  my  arrival ; 
his  successor,  Mr.  R.  B.  Knight,  had  also  sailed 
for  Cape  Palmas,  to  engage  Kru-men,  and  Mr. 
Hogg  had  been  left  in  charge. 

3.  Messrs.  Wookey  and  Dyer,  general  mer¬ 
chants,  Liverpool.  Agents,  Messrs.  Gordon  and 
Bryant. 

4.  Messrs.  Bruforcl  and  Townsend,  of  Bristol. 
Agent,  Captain  Townsend. 

The  resident  agents  for  the  Hamburg  houses 
were  Messrs.  Henert  and  Bremer. 

The  English  traders  in  the  Gaboon  are  no¬ 
minally  protected  by  the’  Consulate  of  Sao 
Paulo  de  Loanda,  but  the  distance  appears  too 
great  for  consul  or  cruizer.  They  are  naturally 

1.  •  '  c 


1 8  Le  Plateau , 

anxious  for  some  support,  and  they  agitate  for 
an  unpaid  Consular  Agent:  at  present  they  have, 
in  African  parlance,  no  “back.”  A  Kruman, 
offended  by  a  ration  of  plantains,  when  he  pre¬ 
fers  rice,  runs  to  the  Plateau,  and  lays  some  fic¬ 
titious  complaint  before  the  Commandant.  Mon.- 
sieur  summons  the  merchant,  condemns  him  to 
pay  a  fine,  and  dismisses  the  affair  without  even 
permitting  a  protest.  Hence,  impudent  robbery 
occurs  every  day.  The  discontent  of  the  white 
reacts  upon  his  clients  the  black  men  ;  of  late,  les 
Gabons ,  as  the  French  call  the  natives,  have  gone 
so  far  as  to  declare  that  foreigners  have  no  right 
to  the  upper  river,  which  is  all  private  property. 
The  line  drawn  by  them  is  at  Fetish  Rock,  off 
Pointe  Fran§aise,  near  the  native  village  of  Mpfra, 
about  half  a  mile  above  the  Plateau ;  and  they 
would  hail  with  pleasure  a  transfer  to  masters  who 
are  not  so  uncommonly  ready  with  their  gros 
canons. 

The  Gaboon  trade  is  chronicled  by  John  Bar- 
bot,  Agent-General  of  the  French  West  African 
Company,  “  Description  of  the  Coast  of  South 
Guinea,”  Churchill,  vol.  v.  book  iv.  chap.  9 ;  and 
the  chief  items  were,  and  still  are,  ivory  and  bees’- 
wax.  Of  the  former,  90,000  lbs.  may  be  exported 
when  the  home  prices  are  good,  and  sometimes 
the  total  has  reached  100  tons.  Hippopotamus 
tusks  are  dying  out,  being  now  worth  only  2 s.  per 


the  French  Colony. 


19 


lb.  Other  exports  are  caoutchouc,  ebony  (of  which 
the  best  comes  from  the  Congo),  and  camwood  or 
barwood  (a  Tephrosia).  M.  du  Chaillu  calls  it  the 
“  Ego-tree;”  the  natives  (Mpongwe)  name  the  tree 
Igo,  and  the  billet  Ezi'go. 


CHAPTER  II. 

THE  DEPARTURE. - THE  TORNADO.  —  ARRIVAL 

AT  “  THE  BUSH.” 

SET  out  early  on  March  19th,  a  day, 
at  that  time,  to  me  the  most  melancholy 
in  the  year,  but  now  regarded  with 
philosophic  indifference.  A  parting 
visit  to  the  gallant  “  Griffons,”  who  threw  the 
slipper,  in  the  shape  of  three  hearty  cheers  and  a 
“tiger,”  wasted  a  whole  morning.  It  was  12.30 
p.m.  before  the  mission  boat  turned  her  head  to¬ 
wards  the  southern  bank,  and  her  crew  began  to 
pull  in  the  desultory  manner  of  the  undisciplined 
negro. 

The  morn  in  of  had  been  clear  but  close,  till  a  fine 
sea  breeze  set  in  unusually  early.  The  doctor  ” 
seldom  rises  in  the  Gaboon  before  noon  at  this 
season  ;  often  he  delays  his  visit  till  2  p.m.,  and 
sometimes  he  does  not  appear  at  all.  On  the  other 
hand,  he  is  fond  of  late  hours.  Before  we  had  pro¬ 
gressed  a  mile,  suspicious  gatherings  of  slaty-blue 
cloud-heaps  advanced  from  the  north-east  against 


The  Departure.  2  1 

the  wind,  with  a  steady  and  pertinacious  speed, 
showing. that  mischief  was  meant.  The  “cruel, 
crawling  sea  ”  began  to  rough,  purr,  and  tumble  ;  a 
heavy  cross  swell  from  the  south-west  dandled  the 
up-torn  mangrove  twigs,  as  they  floated  past  us 
down  stream,  and  threatened  to  swamp  the  deeply 
laden  and  cranky  old  boat,  which  was  far  off  letter 
A  1  of  Lloyd’s.  The  oarsmen  became  sulky  be¬ 
cause  they  were  not  allowed  to  make  sail,  which, 
in  case  of  a  sudden  squall,  could  not  have  been 
taken  in  under  half  an  hour.  Patience  !  Little 
can  be  done,  on  the  first  day,  with  these  demi- 
semi- Europeanized  Africans,  except  to  succeed  in 
the  inevitable  trial  of  strength. 

The  purple  sky-ground  backing  the  Gaboon’s 
upper  course  admirably  set  off  all  its  features. 
Upon  the  sea  horizon,  where  the  river  measures 
some  thirty  miles  across,  I  could  distinctly  see  the 
junction  of  the  two  main  branches,  the  true  Olo’ 
Mpongwe,the  main  stream  flowing  from  the  Eastern 
Ghats,  and  the  Rembwe  (Ramboue)  or  south¬ 
eastern  influent.  At  the  confluence,  tree-dots, 
tipping  the  watery  marge,  denoted  what  Barbot 
calls  the  “  Pongo  Islands.”  These  are  the  quoin¬ 
shaped  mass  “Dambe”  (Orleans  Island)  alias 
“Coniquet”  (the  Conelet),  often  corrupted  to 
Konikey  ;  the  Konig  Island  of  the  old  Hollander,1 


1  Barbot,  book  iv.  chap.  9. 


22 


The  Departure . 


and  the  Prince’s  Island  of  the  ancient  Briton.  It 
was  so  called  because  held  by  the  Mwani-pongo, 
who  was  to  this  region  what  the  Mwani-congo  was 
farther  south.  The  palace  was  large  but  very 
mean,  a  shell  of  woven  reeds  roofed  with  banana 
leaves  :  the  people,  then  mere  savages,  called 
their  St.  James’  “ Goli-patta,”  or  “Royal  House,”  in 
imitation  of  a  more  civilized  race  near  Cape  Lopez. 
The  imperial  islet  is  some  six  miles  in  circum¬ 
ference  ;  it  was  once  very  well  peopled,  and  here 
ships  used  to  be  careened.  The  northern  point 
which  starts  out  to  meet  it  is  Ovindo  (Oweendo 
of  old),  alias  Red  Point,  alias  “Rodney’s,”  remark¬ 
able  for  its  fair  savannah,  of  which  feature  more 
presently.  In  mid-stream  lies  Mbini  (Embenee), 
successively  Papegay,  Parrot — there  is  one  in  every 
Europeo- African  river — and  Adelaide  Island. 

Between  Ovindo  Point,  at  the  northern  bend  of 
the  stream,  stand  the  so-called  “English  villages,” 
divided  from  the  French  by  marshy  ground 
submerged  during  heavy  rains.  The  highest  up¬ 
stream  is  Olomi,  Otonda-naga,  or  town  of 
“  Cabinda,”  a  son  of  the  late  king.  Next  comes 
Glass  Town,  belonging  to  a  dynasty  which  has 
lasted  a  century — longer  than  many  of  its  European 
brethren.  In  1787  a  large  ship-bell  was  sent  as  a 
token  of  regard  by  a  Bristol  house,  Sydenham  and 
Co.,  to  an  old,  old  “  King  Glass,”  whose  descend¬ 
ants  still  reign.  Olomi  and  Glass  Town  are  pre- 


The  Departure . 


23 


ferred  by  the  English,  as  their  factories  catch  the 
sea-breeze  better  than  can  Le  Plateau  :  the  nearer 
swamps  are  now  almost  drained  off,  and  the  dis¬ 
tance  from  the  “  authorities”  is  enough  for  comfort. 
Follow  Comba  (Komba)  and  Tom  Case,  the  latter 
called  after  Case  Glass,  a  scion  of  the  Glasses, 
who  was  preferred  as  captain’s  “  tradesman  ”  by 
Captain  Vidal,  R.  N.,  in  1827,  because  he  had 
“  two  virtues  which  rarely  fall  to  the  lot  of  savages, 
namely,  a  mild,  quiet  manner,  and  a  low  tone  of 
voice  when  speaking.”  Tom  Qua  Ben,  justly  proud 
of  the  “  laced  coat  of  a  mail  coach  guard,”  was 
chosen  by  Captain  Boteler,  R.N.  The  list  con¬ 
cludes  with  Butabeya,  James  Town,  and  Mpfra. 

These  villages  are  not  built  street-wise  after 
Mpongwe  fashion.  They  are  scatters  of  shabby 
mat-huts,  abandoned  after  every  freeman’s  death  ; 
and  they  hardly  emerge  from  the  luxuriant  under¬ 
growth  of  manioc  and  banana,  sensitive  plant  and 
physic  nut  (Jatropha  Curcas),  clustering  round  a 
palm  here  and  there.  Often  they  are  made  to  look 
extra  mean  by  a  noble  “  cottonwood,”  or  Bombax 
(Pentandrium),  standing  on  its  stalwart  braces  like 
an  old  sea-dog  with  parted  legs  ;  extending  its  roots 
over  a  square  acre  of  soil,  shedding  filmy  shade 
upon  the  surrounding  underwood,  and  at  all  times 
ready,  like  a  certain  chestnut,  to  shelter  a  hundred 
horses. 

Between  the  Plateau  and  Santa  Clara,  beginning 


24 


The  Tornado. 


some  two  miles  below  the  former,  are  those  hated 
and  hating  rivals,  Louis  Town,  Qua  Ben,  and 
Prince  Krinje,  the  French  settlements.  The  latter 
is  named  after  a  venerable  villain  who  took  in 
every  white  man  with  whom  he  had  dealings,  till 
the  new  colony  abolished  that  exclusive  agency, 
that  monopoly  so  sacred  in  negro  eyes,  which  here 
corresponded  with  the  Abbanat  of  the  Somal. 
Mr.  Wilson  (p.  252)  recounts  with  zest  a  notable 
trick  played  by  this  “  little,  old,  grey-headed, 
humpback  man”  upon  Captain  Bouet-Willaumez, 
and  Mr.  W.  Winwoocl  Reade  (chap,  xi.)  has  ably 
dramatized  “  Krinji,  King  George  and  the  Com¬ 
mandant.”  On  another  occasion,  the  whole  popu¬ 
lation  of  the  Gaboon  was  compelled  by  a  French 
maivo’-war  to  pay  “  Prince  Cringy’s  ”  debts,  and 
he  fell  into  disfavour  only  when  he  attempted  to 
wreck  a  frigate  by  way  of  turning  an  honest 
penny. 

But  soon  we  had  something  to  think  of  besides 
the  view.  The  tumultuous  assemblage  of  dark, 
dense  clouds,  resting  upon  the  river-surface  in 
our  rear,  formed  line  or  rather  lines,  step  upon 
step,  and  tier  on  tier.  While  the  sun  shone 
treacherously  gay,  a  dismal  livid  gloom  palled  the 
eastern  sky,  descending  to  the  watery  horizon  ; 
and  the  estuary,  beneath  the  sable  hangings  which 
began  to  depend  from  the  cloud  canopy,  gleamed 
with  a  ghastly  whitish  green.  Distant  thunders 


The  Tornado. 


25 


rumbled  and  muttered,  and  flashes  of  the  broadest 
sheets  inclosed  fork  and  chain  lightning ;  the  lift- 
fire  zigzagged  in  tangled  skeins  here  of  chalk-white 
threads,  there  of  violet  wires,  to  the  surface  of 
earth  and  sea.  Presently  nimbus-step,  tier  and 
canopy,  gradually  breaking  up,  formed  a  low  arch 
regular  as  the  Bifrost  bridge  which  Odin  treads, 
spanning  a  space  between  the  horizon,  ninety 
degrees  broad  and  more.  The  sharply  cut  soffit, 
which  was  thrown  out  in  darkest  relief  by  the  dim 
and  sallow  light  of  the  underlying  sky,  waxed 
pendent  and  ragged,  as  though  broken  by  a  torrent 
of  storm.  What  is  technically  called  the  “  ox-eye,” 
the  “  egg  of  the  tornado,”  appeared  in  a  fragment 
of  space,  glistening  below  the  gloomy  rain-arch. 
The  wind  ceased  to  blow ;  every  sound  was 
hushed  as  though  Nature  were  nerving  herself, 
silent  for  the  throe,  and  our  looks  said,  “In  five 
minutes  it  will  be  down  upon  us.”  And  now  it 
comes.  A  cold  blast  smelling  of  rain,  and  a  few 
drops  or  rather  splashes,  big  as  gooseberries  and 
striking  with  a  blow,  are  followed  by  a  howling 
squall,  sharp  and  sudden  puffs,  pulsations  and 
gusts  ;  at  length  a  steady  gush  like  a  rush  of  steam 
issues  from  that  awful  arch,  which,  after  darkening 
the  heavens  like  an  eclipse,  collapses  in  fragmentary 
torrents  of  blinding  rain.  In  the  midst  of  the 
spoon-drift  we  see,  or  we  think  we  see,  “  La  Junon  ” 
gliding  like  a  phantom-ship  towards  the  river 


26 


The  Tornado . 


mouth.  The  lightning  seems  to  work  its  way 
into  our  eyes,  the  air-shaking  thunder  rolls  and 
roars  around  our  very  ears  ;  the  oars  are  taken  in 
utterly  useless,  the  storm-wind  sweeps  the  boat 
before  it  at  full  speed  as  though  it  had  been  a  bit 
of  straw.  Selim  and  I  sat  with  a  large  mackin¬ 
tosh  sheet  over  our  hunched  backs,  thus  offering  a 
breakwater  to  the  waves  ;  happily  for  us,  the 
billow-heads  were  partly  cut  off  and  carried  away 
bodily  by  the  raging  wind,  and  the  opened  foun¬ 
tains  of  the  firmament  beat  down  the  breakers 
before  they  could  grow  to  their  full  growth. 
Otherwise  we  were  lost  men ;  the  southern  shore 
was  still  two  miles  distant,  and,  as  it  was,  the 
danger  was  not  despicable.  These  tornadoes  are 
harmless  enough  to  a  cruiser,  and  under  a  good 
roof  men  bless  them.  But  H.M.S.  “  Heron  ”  was 
sunk  by  one,  and  the  venture  of  a  cranky  gig 
laden  a  flettr  d' eau  is  what  some  call  “  tempting 
Providence.” 

Stunned  with  thunder,  dazzled  by  the  vivid 
flashes  of  white  lightning,  dizzy  with  the  drive 
of  the  boat,  and  drenched  by  the  torrents  and 
washings  from  above  and  below,  we  were  not 
a  little  pleased  to  feel  the  storm-wind  slowly 
lulling,  as  it  had  cooled  the  heated  regions 
ahead,  and  to  see  the  sky  steadily  clearing  up 
behind,  as  the  blackness  of  the  cloud,  rushing 
with  racer  speed,  passed  over  and  beyond  us. 


The  Tornado. 


27 


The  increasing  stillness  of  the  sea  raised  our 
spirits  ; 

“For  nature,  only  loud  when  she  destroys, 

Is  silent  when  she  fashions.” 

But  the  storm-demon’s  name  is  “Tornado” 
(Cyclone)  :  it  will  probably  veer  round  to  the 
south,  where,  meeting  the  dry  clouds  that  are 
gathering  and  massing  there,  it  will  involve  us  in 
another  fray.  Meanwhile  we  are  safe,  and  as 
the  mist  clears  off  we  sight  the  southern  shore. 
The  humbler  elevation,  notably  different  from  the 
northern  bank,  is  dotted  with  villages  and  clearings. 
The  Peninsule  de  Marie-Amelie,  alias  “  Round 
Corner,”  the  innermost  southern  point  visible  from 
the  mouth,  projects  to  the  north-north-east  in  a 
line  of  scattered  islets  at  high  tides,  ending  in  Le 
bois  FStiche ,  a  clump  of  tall  trees  somewhat  ex¬ 
tensively  used  for  picnics.  It  has  served  for 
worse  purposes,  as  the  name  shows. 

A  total  of  two  hours  landed  me  from  the  Comte 
de  Paris  Roads  upon  the  open  sandy  strip  that 
supports  Denistown  ;  the  single  broad  street  runs 
at  right  angles  from  the  river,  the  better  to  catch 
the  sea-breeze,  and  most  of  the  huts  have  open 
gables,  a  practice  strongly  to  be  recommended. 
Le  Roi  would  not  expose  himself  to  the  damp  air  ; 
the  consul  was  not  so  particular.  His  majesty’s 
levee  took  place  in  the  verandah  of  a  poor  bamboo 


The  Tornado. 


28 

hut,  one  of  the  dozen  which  compose  his  capital. 
Seated  in  a  chair  and  ready  for  business,  he  was 
surrounded  by  a  crowd  of  courtiers,  who  listened 
attentively  to  every  word,  especially  when  he 
affected  to  whisper  ;  and  some  pretty  women  col¬ 
lected  to  peep  round  the  corners  at  the  Utangani 
(white  man).1 

Mr.  Wilson  described  Roi  Denis  in  1856  as  a 
man  of  middle  stature,  with  compact  frame  and 
well-made,  of  great  muscular  power,  about  sixty 
years  old,  very  black  by  contrast  with  the  snow- 
white  beard  veiling  his  brown  face.  “He  has  a 
mild  and  expressive  eye,  a  gentle  and  persuasive 
voice,  equally  affable  and  dignified ;  and,  taken 
altogether,  he  is  one  of  the  most  king-like  looking 
men  I  have  ever  met  in  Africa,”  says  the  reverend 
gentleman.  The  account  reminded  me  of  Kim- 
were  the  Lion  of  Usumbara,  drawn  by  Dr.  Krapf. 
Perhaps  six  years  had  exercised  a  degeneratory 
effect  upon  Roi  Denis,  or  perchance  I  have 
more  realism  than  sentiment ;  my  eyes  could  see 
nothing  but  a  petit  vieux  vienx ,  nearer  sixty  than 
seventy,  with  a  dark,  wrinkled  face,  and  an  un¬ 
commonly  crafty  eye,  one  of  those  African  organs 


1  This  word  is  the  Muzungu  of  the  Zanzibar  coast,  and  con¬ 
tracted  to  Utanga  and  even  Tanga  it  is  found  useful  in  expressing 
foreign  wares;  Utangani’s  devil-fire,  for  instance,  is  a  lucifer 
match. 


The  Tornado. 


29 


which  is  always  occupied  in  “taking  your  mea¬ 
sure”  not  for  your  good. 

I  read  out  the  introductory  letter  from  Baron 
Didelot — the  king  speaks  a  little  French  and 
English,  but  of  course  his  education  ends  there. 


THE  AFRICAN  KING. 


After  listening  to  my  projects  and  to  my  offers  of 
dollars,  liquor,  and  cloth,  Roi  Denis  replied,  with 
due  gravity,  that  his  chasseurs  were  all  in  the 
plantations,  but  that  for  a  somewhat  increased 
consideration  lie  would  attach  to  my  service  his 
own  son  Ogodembe,  alias  Paul.  It  was  some 


30 


The  Tornado. 


time  before  I  found  out  the  real  meaning  of  this 
crafty  move ;  the  sharp  prince,  sent  to  do  me 
honour,  intended  me  to  recommend  him  to  Mr. 
Hogg  as  an  especially  worthy  recipient  of  “  trust.” 
Roi  Denis  added  an  abundance  of  “  sweet  mouf,” 
and,  the  compact  ended,  he  condescendingly 
walked  down  with  me  to  the  beach,  shook  hands 
and  exchanged  a  civilized  “  Au  revoir.”  I  re¬ 
entered  the  boat,  and  we  pushed  off  once  more. 

Prince  Paul,  a  youth  of  the  Picaresque  school, 
a  hungry  as  well  as  a  thirsty  soul  and  vain  with 
knowledge,  which  we  know  “  puffeth  up,”  having 
the  true  African  eye  on  present  gain  as  well  as 
to  future  “  trust,”  proceeded  :  “  Papa  has  at  least 
a  hundred  sons,”  enough  to  make  Dan  Dinmont 
blush,  “and  say”  (he  was  not  sure),  “  a  hundred  and 
fifty  daughters.  Father  rules  all  the  southern 
shore;  the  French  have  no  power  beyond  the 
brack  and  there  are  no  African  rivals,” — the 
prince  evidently  thought  that  the  new-comer 
had  never  heard  of  King  George.  Like  most 
juniors  here,  the  youth  knew  French,  or  rather 
Gaboon-French ;  it  was  somewhat  startling  to 
hear  clearly  and  tolerably  pronounced,  “  M’sieur, 
veux-tu  des  macacques  ?  ”  But  the  jargon  is  not 
our  S’a  Leone  and  West-coast  “English;”  the 
superior  facility  of  pronouncing  the  neo-Latin 
tongues  became  at  once  apparent.  It  is  evident 
that  European  languages  have  been  a  mistake  in 


The  Tornado. 


3 1 


Africa  :  the  natives  learn  a  smattering  sufficient 
for  business  purposes  and  foreigners  remain  with¬ 
out  the  key  to  knowledge ;  hence  our  small 
progress  in  understanding  negro  human  nature. 
Had  we  so  acted  in  British  India,  we  should 
probably  have  held  the  proud  position  which  now 
contents  us  in  China  as  in  Western  Africa,  with 
factories  and  hulks  at  Bombay,  Calcutta,  Karachi, 
and  Madras. 

From  Comte  de  Paris  Roads  the  southern 
Gaboon  shore  is  called  in  charts  Le  Paletuvier, 
the  Mangrove  Bank  ;  the  rhizophora  is  the  growth 
of  shallow  brackish  water,  and  at  the  projections 
there  are  fringings  of  reefs  and  “  diabolitos,” 
dangerous  to  boats.  After  two  hours  we  crossed 
the  Mombe  (Mombay)  Creek-mouth,  with  its  out¬ 
lying  rocks,  and  passed  the  fishing  village  of 
Nenga-Oga,  whence  supplies  are  sent  daily  to  the 
Plateau.  Then  doubling  a  point  of  leek-green 
grass,  based  upon  comparatively  poor  soil,  sand, 
and  clay,  and  backed  by  noble  trees,  we  entered 
the  Mbata  River,  the  Toutiay  of  the  chart  and  the 
Batta  Creek  of  M.  du  Chaillu’s  map.  It  comes 
from  the  south-west,  and  it  heads  much  nearer  the 
coast  than  is  shown  on  paper. 

Presently  the  blood-red  sun  sank  like  a  fire- 
balloon  into  the  west,  flushing  with  its  last  fierce 
beams  the  higher  clouds  of  the  eastern  sky,  and 
lighting  the  white  and  black  plume  of  the  soaring 


32 


The  Tornado. 


fish-eagle.  This  Gypohierax  (Angolensis)  is  a  very 
wild  bird,  flushed  at  200  yards  :  I  heard  of,  but 
I  never  saw,  the  Gwanyoni,  which  M.  du  Chaillu, 
(chapter  xvi.)  calls  Guanionian,  an  eagle  or  a 
vulture  said  to  kill  deer.  Rain  fell  at  times, 
thunder,  anything  but  “  sweet  thunder,”  again 
rolled  in  the  distance  ;  and  lightning  flashed  and 
forked  before  and  behind  us,  becoming  painfully 
vivid  in  the  shades  darkening  apace.  We  could 
see  nothing  of  the  channel  but  a  steel-grey  streak, 
like  a  Damascus  blade,  in  a  sable  sheathing  of  tall 
mangrove  avenue  ;  in  places,  however,  tree-clumps 
suggested  delusive  hopes  that  we  were  approaching 
a  region  where  man  can  live.  On  our  return  we 
found  many  signs  of  population  which  had  escaped 
our  sight  during  the  fast-growing  obscurity.  The 
first  two  reaches  were  long  and  bulging ;  the  next 
became  shorter,  and  Prince  Paul  assured  us  that, 
after  one  to  the  right,  and  another  to  the  left,  we 
should  fall  into  the  direct  channel.  Roi  Denis 
had  promised  us  arrival  at  sunset  ;  his  son  gradu¬ 
ally  protracted  sunset  till  midnight.  Still  the 
distance  grew  and  grew.  I  now  learned  for  the 
first  time  that  the  boat  was  too  large  for  the 
channel,  and  that  oars  were  perfectly  useless 
ahead. 

At  8  p.M.  we  entered  what  seemed  a  cul  de  sac ; 
it  looked  like  charging  a  black  wall,  except  where 
a  gleam  of  grey  light  suggested  the  further  end  of 


The  Tornado . 


33 


the  Box  Tunnel,  and  cheered  our  poor  hearts  for 
a  short  minute,  whilst  in  the  distance  we  heard  the 
tantalizing  song  of  the  wild  waves.  The  boughs 
on  both  sides  brushed  the  boat;  we  held  our  hands 
before  our  faces  to  avoid  the  sharp  stubs  threatening 
ugly  stabs,  and  to  fend  off  the  low  branches,  ready 
to  sweep  us  and  our  belongings  into  the  deep  swirl¬ 
ing  water.  The  shades  closed  in  like  the  walls  of 
the  Italians  dungeon ;  until  our  eyes  grew  to  it, 
the  blackness  of  Erebus  weighed  upon  our  spirits ; 
perspiration  poured  from  our  brows,  and  in  this 
watery  mangrove-lane  the  pabulum  vitcz  seemed 
to  be  wanting.  After  forcing  a  passage  through 
three  vile  “gates,”  the  sheet-lightning  announced 
a  second  tornado.  We  sighed  for  more  vivid 
flashes,  but  after  twenty  minutes  they  dimmed  and 
died  away,  still  showing  the  “  bush”-silhouette 
on  either  side.  The  tide  rushed  out  in  strength 
under  the  amphibious  forest — all  who  know  the 
West  Coast  will  appreciate  the  position.  It  was 
impossible  to  advance  or  to  remain  in  this  devil’s 
den,  the  gig  bumped  at  every  minute,  and  the  early 
flood  would  probably  crush  her  against  the  trees. 
So  we  dropped  down  to  the  nearest  “  open,”  which 
we  reached  at  9.30  p.m. 

After  enduring  a  third  tornado  we  grounded, 
and  the  crew  sprang  ashore,  saying  that  they 
were  going  to  boil  plantains  on  the'  bank.  I  made 
snug  for  the  night  with  a  wet  waterproof  and  a 


1 


D 


34 


Arrival  at  “ the  Bush!1 


strip  of  muslin,  to  be  fastened  round  the  mouth 
after  the  fashion  of  Outram’s  “  fever  guard,”  and 
shut  my  lips  to  save  my  life,  by  the  particular 
advice  of  Dr.  Catlin.  The  first  mosquito  piped 
his  “  Io  Paean”  at  8  p.m.  ;  another  hour  brought 
legions,  and  then  began  the  battle  for  our  blood. 
I  had  resolved  not  to  sleep  in  the  fetid  air  of  the 
jungle  ;  time,  however,  moved  on  wings  of  lead;  a 
dull  remembrance  of  a  watery  moon,  stars  dimly 
visible,  a  southerly  breeze,  and  heavy  drops  falling 
from  the  trees  long  haunted  me.  About  midnight, 
Prince  Paul,  who  had  bewailed  the  hardship  of 
passing  a  night  sans  mostiquaire  in  the  bush,  and 
whose  violent  plungings  showed  that  he  failed  to 
manage  un  somme ,  proposed  to  land  and  to  fetch 
fire  from  V habitation. 

“  What  habitation  ?” 

“  Oh  !  a  little  village  belonging  to  papa.” 

“  And  why  the - didn’t  you  mention  it  ?” 

“  Ah !  this  is  Mponbinda,  and  you  know  we’re 
bound  for  Mbata  !  ” 

Nothing  negrotic  now  astonishes  us,  there  is 
nought  new  to  me  in  Africa.  We  landed  upon  a 
natural  pier  of  rock  ledge,  and,  after  some  400 
yards  of  good  path,  we  entered  a  neat  little  village, 
and  found  our  crew  snoring  snugly  asleep.  We 
“  exhorted  them,”  refreshed  the  fire,  and  generously 
recruited  exhausted  nature  with  quinine,  julienne 
and  tea,  potatoes  and  potted  meats,  pipes  and 


Arrival  at  “  the  Bush .” 


35 


cigars.  So  sped  my  annual  unlucky  day,  and  thus 
was  spent  my  first  jungle-night  almost  exactly 
under  the  African  line. 

At  5  a.m.  the  new  morning  dawned,  the  young 
tide  flowed,  the  crabs  disappeared,  and  the  gig, 
before  high  and  dry  on  the  hard  mud,  once  more 
became  buoyant.  Forward  again  !  The  channel 
was  a  labyrinthine  ditch,  an  interminable  complica¬ 
tion  of  over-arching  roots,  and  of  fallen  trees  form¬ 
ing  gateways  ;  the  threshold  was  a  maze  of  slimy 
stumps,  stems,  and  forks  in  every  stage  of  growth 
and  decay,  dense  enough  to  exclude  the  air  of 
heaven.  In  parts  there  were  ugly  snags,  and 
everywhere  the  turns  were  so  puzzling,  that  I  mar¬ 
velled  how  a  human  being  could  attempt  the  pas¬ 
sage  by  night.  The  best  time  for  ascending  is  half¬ 
flood,  for  descending  half-ebb  ;  if  the  water  be  too 
high,  the  bush  chokes  the  way ;  if  too  low,  the  craft 
grounds.  At  the  Gaboon  mouth  the  tide  rises  three 
feet ;  at  the  head  of  the  Mbata  Creek,  where  it  arrests 
the  sweet  water  rivulet,  it  is,  of  course,  higher. 

And  now  the  scene  improved.  The  hat-palm,  a 
brab  or  wild  date,  the  spine-palm  ( Phoenix  spinosa ), 
and  the  Okumeh  or  cotton-tree  disputed  the  ground 
with  the  foul  Rhizophora.  Then  clearings  ap¬ 
peared.  At  Ejene,  the  second  of  two  landing-places 
evidently  leading  to  farms,  we  transferred  ourselves 
to  canoes,  our  boat  being  arrested  by  a  fallen 
tree.  Advancing  a  few  yards,  all  disembarked 


Arrival  at  “  the  Bush 


36 

upon  trampled  mud,  and,  ascending  the  bank,  left 
the  creek  which  supplies  baths  and  drinking  water 
to  our  destination.  Striking  a  fair  pathway,  we 
passed  westward  over  a  low  wave  of  ground,  sandy 
and  mouldy,  and  traversed  a  fern  held  surrounded 
by  a  forest  of  secular  trees  ;  some  parasite-grown 
from  twig  to  root,  others  blanched  and  scathed  by 
the  fires  of  heaven ;  these  roped  and  corded  with 
runners  and  llianas,  those  naked  and  clothed  in 
motley  patches.  At  (j.30  a.m.,  after  an  hour’s 
work,  probably  representing  a  mile,  and  a  total  of 
7  h.  30  m.,  or  six  miles  in  a  south-south-west  direc¬ 
tion  from  Le  Plateau,  we  left  the  Ugly  cul  de  sac  of 
a  creek,  and  entered  Mbata,  which  the  French 
call  “  La  Plantation.” 

Women  and  children  fled  in  terror  at  our  ap¬ 
proach — and  no  wonder  :  eyes  like  hunted  boars, 
haggard  faces,  yellow  as  the  sails  at  the  Cape 
Verdes,  and  beards  two  days  long,  act  very  unlike 
cosmetics.  Ahouse  was  cleared  for  us  by  Hota- 
loya,  alias  “  Andrew,”  of  the  Baraka  Mission,  the 
lord  of  the  village,  who,  poor  fellow  !  has  only  two 
wives ;  he  is  much  ashamed  of  himself,  but  his 
excuse  is,  “  I  be  boy  now,”  meaning  about  twenty- 
two.  After  breakfast  we  prepared  for  a  sleep,  but 
the  popular  excitement  forbade  it  ;  the  villagers 
had  heard  that  a  white  greenhorn  was  coming  to 
bag  and  to  buy  gorillas,  and  they  resolved  to  make 
hay  whilst  the  sun  shone. 


Arrival  at  “ the  Bush 


37 


Prince  Paul  at  once  gathered  together  a  goodly 
crowd  of  fathers  and  mothers,  uncles  and  aunts, 
brothers  and  sisters,  cousins  and  connections.  A 
large  and  loud-voiced  dame,  “  Gozeli,”  swore  that 
she  was  his  “  proper  Ngwe,”  being  one  of  his 
numerous  step-mas,  and  she  would  not  move  with¬ 
out  a  head,  or  three  leaves,  of  tobacco.  Hotaloya 
was  his  brother  ;  Mesdames  Azlzeh  and  Asunye 


THE  HUNTER  AND  HIS  TWO  WIVES: 


declared  themselves  his  sisters,  and  so  all.  My 
little  stock  of  goods  began  visibly  to  shrink,  when 
I  informed  the  greedy  applicants  that  nothing  be¬ 
yond  a  leaf  of  tobacco  and  a  demi-verre  of  tafia 
would  be  given  until  I  had  seen  my  way  to  work. 
Presently  appeared  the  chief  huntsman  appointed 
by  Roi  Denis  to  take  charge  of  me  ;  he  was  named 
Fortuna,  a  Spanish  name  corrupted  to  Forteune. 
A  dash  was  then  prepared  for  his  majesty  and 
for  Prince  Paul :  I  regret  to  say  that  this  young 


Arrival  at  “  the  Bush .” 


38 

nobleman  ended  his  leave-taking  by  introducing  a 
pretty  woman,  with  very  neat  hands  and  ankles 
and  a  most  mutine  physiognomy,  as  his  sister,  in¬ 
forming  me  that  she  was  also  my  wife  pro  temp. 
She  did  not  seem  likely  to  coiffer  Sainte  Catherine, 
and  here  she  is. 


prince  Paul’s  sister. 


The  last  thing  the  prince  did  was  to  carry  off, 
without  a  word  of  leave,  the  mission  boat  and  the 
three  Kru-boys,  whom  he  kept  two  days.  I  was 
uneasy  about  these  fellows,  who,  hating  and  fearing 
the  Gaboon  “  bush,”  are  ever  ready  to  bolt. 

Forteune  and  Hotaloya  personally  knew  Mpolo 
(Paul  du  Chaillu),  and  often  spoke  to  me  of  his 
prowess  as  a  chasseur  and  his  knowledge  of  their 


Arrival  at  “  the  Bush!' 


39 


tongue.  But  reputation  as  a  linguist  is  easily  made 
in  these  regions  by  speaking  a  few  common  sen¬ 
tences.  The  gorilla-hunter  evidently  had  only  a 
colloquial  acquaintance  with  the  half-dozen  various 
idioms  of  the  Mpongwe  and  Mpangwe  (Fa n)  Ba- 
kele,  Shekyani,  and  Cape  Lopez  people.  Yet, 
despite  verbal  inaccuracies,  his  facility  of  talking 
gave  him  immense  advantages  over  other  whites, 
chiefly  in  this,  that  the  natives  would  deem  it  use¬ 
less  to  try  the  usual  tricks  upon  travellers. 

Forteune  is  black,  short,  and  “  trapu  ;  ”  curls  of 
the  jettiest  lanugo  invest  all  his  outward  man  ; 
bunches  of  muscle  stand  out  from  his  frame  like 
the  statues  of  Crotonian  Milo  ;  his  legs  are  bandy  ; 
his  hands  and  feet  are  large  and  patulous,  and  he 
wants  only  a  hunch  to  make  an  admirable  Quasi¬ 
modo.  He  has  the  frank  and  open  countenance 
of  a  sportsman — I  had  been  particularly  warned 
by  the  Plateau  folk  about  his  skill  in  cheating  and 
lying.  Formerly  a  cook  at  the  Gaboon,  he  is  a 
man  of  note  in  his  tribe,  as  the  hunter  always  is  ; 
he  holds  the  position  of  a  country  gentleman,  who 
can  afford  to  write  himself  M.  F.  H.;  he  is  looked 
upon  as  a  man  of  valour ;  he  is  admired  by  the 
people,  and  he  is  adored  by  his  wives — one  of  them 
at  once  took  up  her  station  upon  the  marital  knee. 
Perhaps  the  Nimrod  of  Mbata  is  just  a  little  hen¬ 
pecked — the  Mpongwe  mostly  are — and  I  soon 
found  out  that  soigner  les  femmes  is  the  royal  road 


40 


Arrival  at  “  the  Bushy 


to  getting  on  with  the  men.  He  supplies  the  vil¬ 
lage  with  “  beef,”  here  meaning  not  the  roast  of 
Old  England,  but  any  meat,  from  a  field-rat  to  a 
hippopotamus.  He  boasts  that  he  has  slain  with 
his  own  hand  upwards  of  a  hundred  gorillas  and 
anthropoid  apes,  and,  since  the  demand  arose  in 
Europe,  he  has  supplied  Mr.  R.  B.  N.  Walker  and 
others  with  an  average  of  one  per  month,  including 
a  live  youngster  ;  probably  most,  if  not  all,  of  them 
were  killed  by  his  “  bushmen,”  of  whom  he  can 
command  about  a  dozen. 

Forteune  began  by  receiving  his  “dash,”  six 
fathoms  of  “  satin  cloth,”  tobacco,  and  pipes. 
After  inspecting  my  battery,  he  particularly  ap¬ 
proved  of  a  smooth-bored  double-barrel  (Beattie 
of  Regent  Street)  carrying  six  to  the  pound.  Like 
all  these  people,  he  uses  an  old  and  rickety  trade- 
musket,  and,  when  lead  is  wanting,  he  loads  it  with 
a  bit  of  tile  :  as  many  gorillas  are  killed  with 
tools  which  would  hardly  bring  down  a  wild  cat,  it 
is  evident  that  their  vital  power  cannot  be  great. 
He  owned  to  preferring  a  charge  of  twenty  buck¬ 
shot  to  a  single  ball,  and  he  received  with  joy  a 
little  fine  gunpowder,  which  he  compared  compli- 
mentarily  with  the  blasting  article,  half  charcoal 
withal,  to  which  he  was  accustomed. 

Presently  a  decently  dressed,  white-bearded  man 
of  light  complexion  announced  himself,  with  a 
flourish  and  a  loud  call  for  a  chair,  as  Prince 


Arrival  at  “  the  Bushy 


4i 


Koyala,  alias  “Young  Prince/’  father  to  Forteune 
and  Hotaloya  and  brother  to  Roi  Denis,- — here  all 
tribesmen  are  of  course  brethren.  This  being 
equivalent  to  “  asking  for  more,”  it  drove  me  to 
the  limits  of  my  patience.  It  was  evidently  now 
necessary  to  assume  wrath,  and  to  raise  my  voice 
to  a  roar. 

“  My  hands  dey  be  empty !  I  see  nuffin,  I  hear 
nuffin  !  What  for  I  make  more  dash  ?” 

Allow  me,  parenthetically,  to  observe  that  the 
African,  like  the  Scotch  Highlander,  will  interpose 
the  personal  or  demonstrative  pronoun  between 
noun  and  verb :  “  sun  he  go  down,”  means  “  the 
sun  sets  ”  and,  as  genders  do  'not  exist,  you  must 
be  careful  to  say,  “  This  woman  he  cry  too 
much.” 

The  justice  of  my  remark  was  owned  by  all ; 
had  it  been  the  height  of  tyranny,  the  supple 
knaves  would  have  agreed  with  me  quite  as 
politely.  They  only  replied  that  “  Young  Prince,” 
being  a  man  of  years  and  dignity,  would  be  dis¬ 
honoured  by  dismissal  empty-handed,  and  they 
represented  him  as  my  future  host  when  we  moved 
nearer  the  bush. 

“  Now  lookee  here.  This  he  be  bad  plabba 
(palaver).  This  he  be  bob !  I  come  up  for  white 
man,  you  come  up  for  black  man.  All  white  man 
he  no  be  fool,  ’cos  he  no  got  black  face !” 

Ensued  a  chorus  of  complimentary  palaver 


42 


Arrival  at  “  the  Bttsh  .” 


touching  the  infinite  superiority  of  the  Aryan  over 
the  Semite,  but  the  point  was  in  no  wise  yielded. 
At  last  Young  Prince  subsided  into  a  request  for 
a  glass  of  rum,  which  being  given  “  cut  the 
palaver”  (i.e.  ended  the  business).  I  soon  re¬ 
solved  to  show  my  hosts,  by  threatening  to  leave 
them,  the  difference  between  traders  and  travellers. 
Barbot  relates  that  the  M  pong  we  of  olden  time 
demanded  his  “  dassy”  before  he  consented  to 
“  liquor  up,”  and  boldly  asked,  “  If  he  was  ex¬ 
pected  to  drink  gratis?”  The  impertinence  was 
humoured,  otherwise  not  an  ivory  would  have 
found  its  way  to  the  factory.  But  the  traveller  is 
not  bound  to  endure  these  whimsy-whamsies ;  and 
the  sooner  he  declares  his  independence  the  better. 
Many  monkeys’  skins  were  brought  to  me  for 
sale,  but  I  refused  to  buy,  lest  the  people  might 
think  it  my  object  to  make  money ;  moreover,  all 
were  spoilt  for  specimens  by  the  “  points  ”  being 
snipped  off. 

I  happened  during  the  first  afternoon  to  show 
my  hosts  a  picture  of  the  bald-headed  chimpanzee, 
Nchfgo  Mbuwwe  ( Troglodytes  calvus ),  here  more 
generally  called  Nchfgo  Mpolo,  “  large  chim¬ 
panzee,”  or  Nchfgo  Njue,  “  white-haired  chim¬ 
panzee.”  They  recognized  it  at  once ;  but  when  I 
turned  over  to  the  cottage  (“Adventures,”  &c., 
p.  423),  with  its  neat  parachute-like  roof,  all  burst 
out  laughing. 


Arrival  at  “  the  Btisk  43 

“  You  want  to  look  him  Nago  (house)  ?”  asked 
Hotaloya. 

“  Yes,  for  sure,”  I  replied. 

Forteune  set  out  at  once,  carrying  my  gun,  Selim 
followed  me,  and  the  rear  was  brought  up  by  a 
couple  of  little  prick-eared  curs  with  a  dash  of  the 
pointer,  probably  from  St.  Helena :  the  people 
will  pay  as  much  as  ten  dollars  for  a  good  dog. 
They  are  never  used  in  hunting  apes,  as  they 
start  the  game ;  on  this  occasion  they  nearly  ran 
down  a  small  antelope. 

The  path  led  through  a  new  clearing ;  a  field  of 
fern  and  some  patches  of  grass  breaking  the  forest, 
which,  almost  clear  of  thicket  and  undergrowth, 
was  a  charming  place  for  deer.  The  soil,  thin  sand 
overlying  humus,  suggested  rich  crops  of  ground¬ 
nuts  ;  its  surface  was  everywhere  cut  by  nullahs, 
now  dry,  and  by  brooks,  running  crystal  streams  ; 
these,  when  deep,  are  crossed  by  tree-trunks,  the 
Brazilian  “  pingela.”  After  twenty  minutes  or  so 
we  left  the  “  picada”  (foot-path)  and  struck  into  a 
thin  bush,  till  we  had  walked  about  a  mile. 

“  Look  him  house,  Nchfgo  house!”  said  Hota¬ 
loya,  standing  under  a  tall  tree. 

I  saw  to  my  surprise  two  heaps  of  dry  sticks, 
which  a  schoolboy  might  have  taken  for  birds’  nests ; 
the  rude  beds,  boughs,  torn  off  from  the  tree,  not 
gathered,  were  built  in  forks,  one  ten  and  the  other 
twenty  feet  above  ground,  and  both  were  canopied 


44 


Arrival  at  “  the  Bush. 


by  the  tufted  tops.  Every  hunter  consulted  upon 
the  subject  ridiculed  the  branchy  roof  tied  with 
vines,  and  declared  that  the  N  Hugo’s  industry 
is  confined  to  a  place  for  sitting,  not  for  shelter ; 
that  he  fashions  no  other  dwelling ;  that  a  couple 
generally  occupies  the  same  or  some  neighbour¬ 
ing  tree,  each  sitting  upon  its  own  nest ;  that 
the  Nchfgo  is  not  a  “  hermit”  nor  a  rare,  nor 
even  a  very  timid  animal ;  that  it  dwells,  as  I  saw, 
near  villages,  and  that  its  cry,  “  Aoo !  Aoo  !  Aoo  !” 
is  often  heard  by  them  in  the  mornings  and  even¬ 
ings.  During  my  subsequent  wanderings  in  Gorilla 
land,  I  often  observed  tall  and  mushroom-shaped 
trees  standing  singly,  and  wearing  the  semblance 
of  the  umbrella  roof.  What  most  puzzles  me  is,  that 
M.  du  Chaillu  (“  Second  Expedition,”  chap,  iii.) 
“  had  two  of  the  bowers  cut  down  and  sent  to  the 
British  Museum.”  He  adds,  “  They  are  formed  at 
a  height  of  twenty  to  thirty  feet  in  the  trees,  by 
the  animals  bending  over  and  intertwining  a  num¬ 
ber  of  the  weaker  boughs,  so  as  to  form  bowers, 
under  which  they  can  sit,  protected  from  the  rains 
by  the  masses  of  foliage  thus  entangled  together, 
some  of  the  boughs  being  so  bent  that  they  form 
convenient  seats.”  Surely  M.  du  Chaillu  must 
have  been  deceived  by  some  vagary  of  nature. 

The  gorilla-hunters  sketch  had  always  re¬ 
minded  me  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  Moffat’s  account  of  the 
Hylobian  Bakones,  the  aborigines  of  the  Mata- 


Arrival  at  “  the  Bush.” 


45 


bele  country.  Mr.  Thompson,  a  missionary  to 
Sherbro  (“  The  Palm  Land,”  chap,  xiii),  has, 
however,  these  words  : — “  It  is  said  of  the  chim¬ 
panzees,  that  they  build  a  kind  of  rude  house  of 
sticks  in  their  wild  state,  and  fill  it  with  leaves  ; 
and  I  doubt  it  not,  for  when  domesticated  they 
always  want  some  good  bed,  and  make  it  up 
regularly.” 

Thus  I  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  Nchi'go 
Mpolo  is  a  vulgar  nest-building  ape.  The  bush- 
men  and  the  villagers  all  assured  me  that  neither 
the  common  chimpanzee,  nor  the  gorilla  proper 
{Troglodytes  gorilla),  “  make  ’im  house.”  On 
the  other  hand,  Mr.  W.  Winwood  Reade,  writing 
to  “  The  Athenaeum”  from  Loanda  (Sept.  7,  1862), 
asserts, — “  When  the  female  is  pregnant  he  (the 
gorilla)  builds  a  nest  (as  do  also  the  Kulu-Kamba 
and  the  chimpanzee),  where  she  is  delivered,  and 
which  is  then  abandoned.”  And  he  thus  confirms 
what  was  told  to  Dr.  Thomas  Savage  (1847)  : 
“In  the  wild  state  their  (i.e.  the  gorillas’)  habits 
are  in  general  like  those  of  the  Troglodytes  niger, 
building  their  nests  loosely  in  trees.” 


CHAPTER  III. 


GEOGRAPHY  OF  THE  GABOON. 


EFORE  going  further  afield  I  may  be 
allowed  a  few  observations,  topo¬ 
graphical  and  ethnological,  about  this 
highly  interesting  section  of  the  West 
African  coast. 

The  Gaboon  country,  to  retain  the  now  familiar 
term,  although  no  one  knows  much  about  its  deri¬ 
vation,  is  placed  by  old  travellers  in  “  South 
Guinea,”  the  tract  lying  along  the  Ethiopic,  or 
South  Atlantic  Ocean,  limited  by  the  Camarones 
Mountain-block  in  north  latitude  40,  and  by  Cabo 
Negro  in  south  latitude  150  40'  7",  a  sea-line  of 
nearly  1,200  miles.  The  Gaboon  proper  is  included 
between  the  Camarones  Mountains  to  the  north, 
and  the  “  Mayumba,”  properly  the  “  Yumba” 
country  southwards,  in  south  latitude  30  22', — a 
shore  upwards  of  400  miles  long.  The  inland 
depth  is  undetermined  ;  geographically  we  should 
limit  it  to  the  Western  Ghats,  which  rarely  re- 


Geography  of  the  Gaboon. 


47 


cede  more  than  60  miles  from  the  sea,  and  ethno- 
logically  no  line  can  yet  be  drawn.  The  country  is 
almost  bisected  by  the  equator,  and  by  the  Rio 
de  Gabao,  which  discharges  in  north  latitude 
o°  21'  25"  and  east  longitude  90  21'  23";  and  it 
corresponds  in  parallel  with  the  Somali-Galla 
country  and  the  Juba  River  on  the  east  coast. 

The  general  aspect  of  the  region  is  prepossess¬ 
ing.  It  is  a  rolling  surface  sinking  towards  the 
Atlantic,  in  parts  broken  by  hills  and  dwarf  chains, 
either  detached  or  pushed  out  by  the  Ghats ;  a 
land  of  short  and  abnormally  broad  rivers,  which 
cannot,  like  the  Congo,  break  through  the  ridges 
flanking  the  Central  African  basin,  and  which 
therefore  are  mere  surface  drains  of  the  main  ranges. 
The  soil  is  mostly  sandy,  but  a  thin  coat  of  rich 
vegetable  humus,  quickened  by  heavy  rains  and 
fiery  suns,  produces  a  luxuriant  vegetation  ;  whilst 
the  proportion  of  area  actually  cultivated  is  no¬ 
thing  compared  with  the  expanse  of  bush.  In  the 
tall  forests,  which  abound  in  wild  fruits,  there  are 
beautiful  tracts  of  clear  grassy  land,  and  the  woods, 
clear  of  undergrowth,  resemble  an  English  grove 
more  than  a  tropical  jungle.  Horses,  which  die  of 
the  tsetse  ( Glossina  morsitans)  in  the  interior  of 
North  Guinea,  and  of  damp  heat  at  Fernando  Po, 
thrive  on  its  downs  and  savannahs.  The  Elais  palm 
is  rare,  sufficing  only  for  home  use.  The  southern 
parts,  about  Cape  Lopez  and  beyond  it,  resemble 


48  Geography  of  the  Gaboo7t. 

the  Oil  River  country  in  the  Biafran  Bight :  the 
land  is  a  mass  of  mangrove  swamps,  and  the 
climate  is  unfit  for  white  men. 

The  Eastern  Ghats  were  early  known  to  the 
“  Iberians,”  as  shown  by  the  Sierra  del  Crystal,  del 
Sal,  del  Sal  Nitro  and  other  names,  probably  so 
called  from  the  abundance  of  quartz  in  blocks  and 
veins  that  seam  the  granite,  as  we  shall  see  in  the 
Congo  country,  and  possibly  because  they  contain 
rock  crystal.  Although  in  many  places  they  may  be 
descried  subtending  the  shore  in  lumpy  lines  like 
detached  vertebrae,  and  are  supposed  to  represent 
the  Aranga  Mons  of  Ptolemy,  they  are  not  noticed 
by  Barbot.  Between  the  Camarones  River  and  Cape 
St.  John  (Corisco  Bay),  blue,  rounded,  and  discon¬ 
tinuous  masses,  apparently  wooded, -rise  before  the 
mariner,  and  form,  as  will  be  seen,  the  western  sub¬ 
ranges  of  the  great  basin-rim.  To  the  north  they 
probably  anastomose  with  the  Camarones,  the 
Rumbi,  the  Kwa,  the  P'umbina  north-east,  and  the 
Niger-Kong  mountains.1 

They  are  not  wanting  who  declare  them  to  be 
rich  in  precious  metals.  Some  thirty  years  ago 
an  American  super-cargo  ascended  the  Rembwe 
River,  the  south-eastern  line  of  the  Gaboon  fork, 
and  is  said  to  have  collected  “  dirt”  which,  tested 


“  Abeokuta  and  the  Camaroons  Mountains,”  vol.  ii.  chap.  i. 
London:  Tinsleys,  1863. 


Geography  of  the  Gaboon . 


49 


at  New  York,  produced  16  dollars  per  bushel.  All 
the  old  residents  in  the  Gaboon  know  the  story  of 
the  gold  dust.  The  prospector  was  the  late  Cap¬ 
tain  Richard  E.  Lawlin,  of  New  York,  who  was 
employed  by  Messrs.  Bishop  of  Philadelphia,  the 
same  house  that  commissioned  the  chasseur  de 
gorilles  to  collect  “  rubber  ”  for  them,  and  who  was 
so  eminently  useful  to  the  young  French  traveller 


SIERRA  DEL  CRYSTAL,  FROM  THE  SEA. 


that  the  scant  notice  of  his  name  is  considered 
curious. 

Great  would  be  my  wonder  if  the  West  African 
as  well  as  the  East  African  Ghats  did  not  prove  au¬ 
riferous  ;  both  fulfil  all  the  required  conditions,  and 
both  await  actual  discovery.  The  Mountains  of  the 
Moon,  so  frequently  mentioned  by  M.  du  Chaillu 
and  the  Gaboon  Mission,  are  doubtless  the  versants 
between  the  valleys  of  the  Niger  and  the  Congo. 
Lately  Dr.  Schweinfurth  found  an  equatorial  range 
which,  stretching  northwards  towards  the  Bahr  el 

I.  -  E 


50 


Geography  of  the  Gaboon. 


Ghazal,  was  seen  to  trend  westward.  According  to 
Mr.  Consul  Hutchinson  (“Ten  Years’  Wanderings 
among  the  Ethiopians,”  p.  250),  the  Rev.  Messrs. 
Mackey  and  Clemens,  of  the  Corisco  Mission  “  ex¬ 
plored  more  than  a  hundred  miles  of  country 
across  the  Sierra  del  Crystal  Range  of  Moun¬ 
tains  ” — I  am  inclined  to  believe  that  a  hundred 
miles  from  the  coast  was  their  furthest  point.  We 
shall  presently  travel  towards  this  mysterious 
range,  and  there  is  no  difficulty  in  passing  it, 
except  the  utter  want  of  a  commercial  road,  and 
the  wildness  of  tribes  that  have  never  sighted  a 
traveller  nor  a  civilized  man. 

The  rivers  of  our  region  are  of  three  kinds  ; 
little  surface  drains  principally  in  the  north  ;  broad 
estuaries  like  the  Mersey  and  many  streams  of 
Eastern  Scotland  in  the  central  parts,  and  a  single 
bed,  the  Ogobe,  breaking  through  the  subtending 
Ghats,  and  forming  a  huge  lagoon-delta.  Be¬ 
ginning  at  Camarones  are  the  Boroa  and  Borba 
Waters,  with  the  Rio  de  Campo,  fifteen  leagues 
further  south  ;  of  these  little  is  known,  except  that 
they  fall  into  the  Bight  of  Panari  or  Pannaria. 

According  to  Barbot  (iv.  9),  the  English  charts 
give  the  name  of  Point  Pan  to  a  large  deep  bight  in 
which  lies  the  harbour-bay  “  Porto  de  Garapo” 
(Garapa,  sugar-cane  juice  ?) ;  and  he  calls  the  two 
rounded  hillocks,  extending  inland  from  Point 
Pan  to  the  northern  banks  of  the  Rio  de  Campo, 


Geography  of  the  Gaboon .  5 1 

“  Navia.”  The  un- African  word  Panari  or  Pan- 
naria  is  probably  a  corruption  of  Pao  de  Nao,  the 
bay  north  of  Garapo,  and  “  Navia.” 

These  small  features  are  followed  by  the  Rio  de 
Sao  Bento,  improperly  called  in  our  charts  the  St. 
Benito,  Bonito,  Bonita,  and  Boneto ;  the  native 
name  is  Lobei,  and  it  traverses  the  Kombi  country, 
— such  is  the  extent  of  our  information.  The 
next  is  the  well-known  Muni,  the  Ntambounay  of 
M.  du  Chaillu,  generally  called  the  Danger  River, 
in  old  charts  “Rio  de  Sao  Joao,”  and  “Rio  da 
Angra”  (of  the  bight) ;  an  estuary  which,  like  most 
of  its  kind,  bifurcates  above,  and,  receiving  a  num¬ 
ber  of  little  tributaries  from  the  Sierra,  forms  a 
broad  bed  and  empties  itself  through  a  mass  of 
mangroves  into  the  innermost  north-eastern  corner 
of  Corisco  Bay.  This  sag  in  the  coast  is  formed 
by  Ninje  (Nenge  the  island?),  or  the  Cabo  de 
Sao  Joao  (Cape  St.  John)  to  the  north,  fronted 
south  by  a  large  square-headed  block  of  land, 
whose  point  is  called  Cabo  das  Esteiras — of 
matting  (Barbot’s  Estyras),  an  article  of  trade  in 
the  olden  time.  The  southern  part  receives  the 
Munda  (Moondah)  river,  a  foul  and  unimportant 
stream,  which  has  been  occupied  by  the  American 
missionaries. 

We  shall  ascend  the  Gaboon  estuary  to  its 
sources.  South  of  it,  a  number  of  sweet  little  water¬ 
courses  break  the  shore-line  at  far  as  the  Naza- 


52 


Geography  of  the  Gaboon . 


reth  River,  which  debouches  north  of  Urungu,  or 
Cape  Lopez  (Cabo  de  Lopo  Gonsalvez),  and  which 
forms  by  anastomosing  with  a  southern  river  the 
Ogobe  (Ogowai  of  M.  du  Chaillu),  a  complicated 
delta  whose  sea-front  extends  from  north  to  south, 
at  least  eighty  miles.  Beyond  Cape  Lopez  is  an  out¬ 
fall,  known  to  Europeans  as  the  Rio  Mexias  :  it  is 
apparently  a  mesh  in  the  net-work  of  the  Naza- 
reth-Ogobe.  The  same  may  be  said  of  the  Rio 
Fernao  Vaz,  about  no  miles  south  of  the  Gaboon, 
and  of  yet  another  stream  which,  running  lagoon¬ 
like  some  forty  miles  along  the  shore,  has  received 
in  our  maps  the  somewhat  vague  name  of  R.  Rem- 
bo  or  River  River.  Orembo  (Simpongwe)  being 
the  generic  term  for  a  stream  or  river,  is  applied 
emphatically  to  the  Nkomo  branch  of  the  Gaboon, 
and  to  the  Fernao  Vaz. 

The  Ogobe  is  the  only  river  between  the  Niger 
and  the  Congo  which  escapes,  through  favouring 
depressions,  from  the  highlands  flanking  the  great 
watery  plateau  of  Inner  Africa.  By  its  plainly 
marked  double  seasons  of  flood  at  the  equinoxes, 
and  by  the  time  of  its  low  water,  we  prove  that 
it  drains  the  belt  of  calms,  and  the  region  immedi¬ 
ately  upon  the  equator.  The  explorations  of  Lieu¬ 
tenant  Serval  and  others,  in  “  Le  Pionnier  ”  river- 
steamer,  give  it  an  average  breadth  of  8,200  feet, 
though  broken  by  sand-banks  and  islands ;  the 
depth  in  the  main  channel,  which  at  times  is  narrow 


Geography  of  the  Gaboon . 


53 


and  difficult  to  find,  averages  between  sixteen  and 
forty-eight  feet;  and,  in  the  dry  season  of  1862,  the 
vessel  ran  up  sixty  English  miles. 

Before  M.  du  Chaillu’s  expeditions,  “  the  rivers 
known  to  Europeans/.’  he  tells  us  in  his  Preface 
(“  First  Journey,”  p.  iv.),  “  as  the  Nazareth,  Mexias, 
and  Fernam  Vaz,  were  supposed  to  be  three  dis¬ 
tinct  streams.”  In  1817  Bowdich  identified  the 
“  Ogoowai  ”  with  the  Congo,  and  the  Rev.  Mr. 
Wilson  (p.  284)  shows  us  the  small  amount  of  know¬ 
ledge  that  existed  even  amongst  experts,  five  years 
before  the  “  Gorilla  book”  appeared.  “From  Cape 
Lopez,  where  the  Nazareth  debouches,  there  is  a 
narrow  lagoon  running  along  the  sea-coast,  and  very 
near  to  it,  all  the  way  to  Mayumba.  This  lagoon 
is  much  traversed  by  boats  and  canoes,  and,  when 
the  slave-trade  was  in  vigorous  operation,  it 
afforded,  the  Portuguese  traders  great  facilities 
for  eluding  the  vigilance  of  British  cruizers, 
by  shifting  their  slaves  from  point  to  point,  and 
embarking  them,  according  to  a  preconcerted 
plan.” 

M.  du  Chaillu  first  proved  that  the  Ogobe 
was  formed  by  two  forks,  the  northern,  or  Rembo 
Okanda,  and  the  southern,  or  Rembo  Nguye. 
The  former  is  the  more  important.  Mr.  R.  S.  N. 
Walker  found  this  stream  above  the  confluence  to 
be  from  1,800  to  2,100  feet  wide,  though  half  the 
bed  was  occupied  by  bare  sand-banks.  Higher  up* 


54  Geography  of  the  Gaboon. 

where  rocks  and  rapids  interfered  with  the  boat- 
voyage,  the  current  was  considerable,  but  the 
breadth  diminished  to  600  feet.  The  southern 
branch  (also  written  Ngunie)  was  found  in  Apono 
Land  (S.  lat.  20),  about  the  breadth  of  the 
Thames  at  London  Bridge,  700  feet.  In  June  the 
depth  was  ten  to  fifteen  feet,  to  which  the  rainy 
season  added  ten. 

M.  du  Chaillu  also  established  the  facts  that  the 
Nazareth  river  was  the  northern  arm  of  the  Delta, 
and  that  the  Fernao  Vaz  anastomosed  with  the 
Delta’s  southern  arm. 

The  only  pelagic  islands  off  the  Gaboon  coast 
are  the  Brancas,  Great  and  Little ;  Corisco  Island, 
which  we  shall  presently  visit ;  Great  and  Little 
Elobi,  called  by  old  travellers  Mosquito  Islands, 
probably  for  “  Moucheron,”  a  Dutchman  who  lost 
his  ship  there  in  1600.  The  land  about  the  mouths 
of  the  Ogobe  is  a  mass  of  mangrove  swamps,  like 
the  Nigerian  Delta,  which  high  tides  convert  into 
insular  ground  ;  these,  however,  must  be  considered 
terra  firma  in  its  infancy.  The  riverine  islands  of 
the  Gaboon  proper  will  be  noticed  as  we  ascend 
the  bed. 

Pongo-land  ignores  all  such  artificial  partitions 
as  districts  or  parishes ;  the  only  divisions  are  the 
countries  occupied  by  the  several  tribes. 

The  Gaboon  lies  in  “  Africa-on-the-Line,”  and  a 
description  of  the  year  at  Zanzibar  Island  applies 


Geography  of  the  Gaboon. 


55 


to  it  in  many  points.1  The  characteristic  of  this 
equatorial  belt  is  uniformity  of  temperature  : 
whilst  the  Arabian  and  the  Australian  deserts 
often  show  a  variation  of  50°  Fahr.  in  a  single 
day,  the  yearly  range  of  the  mercury  at  Singapore 
is  about  io°.  The  four  seasons  of  the  temperates 
are  utterly  unknown  to  the  heart  of  the  tropics — 
even  in  Hindostan  the  poet  who  would  sing,  for 
instance,  the  charms  of  spring  must  borrow  the 
latter  word  (Buhar)  from  the  Persian.  If  the  “bull” 
be  allowed,  the  only  rule  here  appears  to  be  one  of 
exceptions.  The  traveller  is  always  assured  that 
this  time  there  have  been  no  rains,  or  no  dries,  or 
no  tornadoes,  or  one  or  all  in  excess,  till  at  last  he 
comes  to  the  conclusion  that  the  Clerk  of  the 
Weather  must  have  mislaid  his  ledger.  Contrary 
to  the  popular  idea,  which  has  descended  to  us 
from  the  classics,  the  climate  under  the  Line  is  not 
of  that  torrid  heat  which  a  vertical  sun  suggests  ; 
the  burning  zone  of  the  Old  World  begins  in  the 
northern  hemisphere,  where  the  regular  rains  do 
not  extend,  beyond  the  tenth  as  far  as  the  twenty- 
fifth  degree.  The  equatorial  climate  is  essentially 
temperate  :  for  instance,  the  heat  of  Sumatra,  lying 
almost  under  the  Line,  rarely  exceeds  240  R.  = 
86°  Fahr.  In  the  Gaboon  the  thermometer 
ranges  from  65°  to  90°  Fahr.,  “a  degree  of  heat,” 


1  See  “  Zanzibar  City,  Island,  and  Coast,”  vol.  i.  chap,  v  sect.  2. 


56 


Geography  of  the  Gaboon . 


says  Dr.  Ford,  “less  than  in  many  salubrious 
localities  in  other  parts  of  the  world.” 

•Upon  the  Gaboon  the  wet  seasons  are  synchro¬ 
nous  with  the  vertical  suns  at  the  vernal  and 
autumnal  equinoxes.  “  The  rainy  season  of  a  place 
within  the  tropics  always  begins  when  the  sun  has 
reached  the  zenith  of  that  place.  Then  the  trade- 
winds,  blowing  regularly  at  other  seasons,  become 
gradually  weaker,  and  at  length  cease  and  give 
way  to  variable  winds  and  calms.  The  trade-wind 
no  longer  brings  its  regular  supply  of  cooler,  drier 
air;  the  rising  heats  and  calms  favour  an  ascending 
current  ”  (in  the  sea-depths,  I  may  add,  as  well  as 
on  land),  “  which  bears  the  damp  air  into  the  upper 
regions  of  the  atmosphere,  there  to  be  cooled,  and 
to  occasion  the  heavy  down-pour  of  each  afternoon. 
The  nights  and  mornings  are  for  the  most  part 
bright  and  clear.  When  the  sun  moves  away  from 
the  zenith,  the  trade-winds  again  begin  to  be  felt, 
and  bring  with  them  the  dry  season  of  the  year, 
during  which  hardly  ever  a  cloud  disturbs  the 
serenity  of  the  skies. 

“  Between  the  tropical  limits  and  the  equator, 
however,  the  sun  comes  twice  to  the  zenith  of  each 
place.  If  now,  between  the  going  and  coming  of 
the  sun,  from  the  Line  to  its  furthest  range,  a 
sufficient  pause  intervenes,  or  if  the  sun’s  tem¬ 
porary  distance  from  the  zenith  is  great  enough, 
the  rainy  season  is  divided  into  two  portions, 


Geography  of  the  Gaboon .  57 

separated  by  a  lesser  dry  season.  Closer  to  the 
tropical  lines,  where  the  sun  remains  but  once  in 
the  zenith,  the  rainy  season  is  a  continuous  one.” 

Such  is  the  theory  of  the  “  Allgemeine  Erd- 
kunde”  (Hahn,  Hochstetter  and  Pokorny,  Prague, 
1872).  An  explanation  should  be  added  of  the 
reason  why  the  cool  wind  ceases  to  blow,  at  the 
time  when  the  air,  heated  and  raised  by  a  perpen¬ 
dicular  sun,  might  be  expected  to  cause  a  greater 
indraught.  We  at  once,  I  have  said,  recognize  its 
correctness  at  sea.  The  Gaboon,  “  in  the  belt  of 
calms,  with  rain  during  the  whole  year,”  has  two 
distinctly  marked  dry  seasons,  at  the  vernal  and 
the  autumnal  equinoxes.  The  former  or  early 
rains  (Nchangya?)  are  expected  to  begin  in 
February,  with  violent  tornadoes  and  storms,  espe¬ 
cially  at  the  full  and  change,  and  to  end  in  April. 
The  heavy  downfalls  are  mostly  at  night,  possibly 
an  effect  of  the  Sierra  del  Crystal.  I  found 
March  28th  (1862)  very  like  damp  weather  at  the 
end  of  an  English  May ;  April  6th  was  equally 
exceptional,  raining  from  dawn  to  evening.  During 
my  trip  to  Sanga- Tanga  and  back  (March  25th  to 
29th)  we  had  frequent  fogs,  locally  called  “  smokes,” 
and  almost  daily  tornadoes,  sometimes  from  the 
south-east,  whilst  the  lightning  was  dangerous  as 
upon  the  Western  prairies.  After  an  interval  of 
fiery  sun,  with  occasional  rain  torrents  and  dis¬ 
charges  of  electricity,  begin  the  Enomo  (Enun?), 


58 


Geography  of  the  Gaboon. 


the  “middle”  or  long  dries,  which  last  four  months 
to  September.  The  “  Enomo  ”  is  the  Angolan 
Cacimbo,  meaning  cool  and  cloudy  weather,  when 
no  umbrella  is  required,  and  when  the  invariably 
grey  sky  rarely  rains.  Travellers  are  told  that 
June  and  July  are  the  cream  of  the  year,  the 
healthiest  time  for  seasoned  Europeans,  and  this 
phantom  of  a  winter  renders  the  climate  more  sup¬ 
portable  to  the  northern  constitution. 

During  the  “  middle  dries,”  when  the  sun,  retiring 
to  the  summer  solstice,  is  most  distant,  land  winds 
and  sea  breezes  are  strong  and  regular,  and  the 
people  suffer  severely  from  cold.  In  the  Gaboon 
heavy  showers  sometimes  fall,  July  being  the 
least  subject  to  them,  and  the  fiery  sun,  when  it 
can  disperse  the  clouds,  turns  the  soil  to  dust. 
At  the  end  of  September  appear  the  “latter  rains,” 
which  are  the  more  copious,  as  they  seldom  last 
more  than  six  hours  at  a  time.  It  is  erroneous  to 
assert  that  “  the  tract  nearest  the  equator  on  both 
sides  has  the  longest  rainy  season ;  ”  the  mea¬ 
sure  chiefly  depends  upon  altitude  and  other  local 
conditions. 

The  rainy  seasons  are  healthier  for  the  natives 
than  the  cold  seasons ;  and  the  explorer  is  often 
urged  to  take  advantage  of  them.  He  must, 
however,  consult  local  experience.  Whilst  ascend¬ 
ing  rivers  in  November,  for  instance,  he  may  find 
the  many  feet  of  flood  a  boon  or  a  bane,  and  his 


Geography  of  the  Gaboon. 


59 


marching  journeys  are  nearly  sure  to  end  in  ul¬ 
cerated  feet,  as  was  the  case  with  poor  Dr.  Living¬ 
stone.  The  rains  drench  the  country  till  the  latter 
end  of  December,  when  the  Nanga  or  “  little  dries” 
set  in  for  two  months.  The  latter  also  are  not 
unbroken  by  storms  and  showers,  and  they  end 
with  tornadoes,  which  this  year  (1862)  have  been 
unusually  frequent  and  violent.  Thus  we  may 
distribute  the  twelve  months  into  six  of  rains, 
vernal  and  autumnal,  and  six  of  dry  weather, 
sestival  and  hibernal  :  the  following  table  will 
show  the  sub-sections  : — 

Early  December  to  early  February,  the  “little 
dries;”  February  to  early  April,  the  “former,” 
early  or  spring  rains ;  May  to  early  June,  the  vari¬ 
able  weather;  June  to  early  September,  the  Ca- 
cimbo,  Enomo,  long  or  middle  dries  ;  September 
to  early  December,  the  “  latter  rains.” 

Under  such  media  the  disease,  par  excellence , 
of  the  Gaboon  is  the  paroxysm  which  is  va¬ 
riously  called  Coast,  African,  Guinea,  and  Bul- 
lom  fever.  Dr.  Ford,  who  has  written  a  useful 
treatise  upon  the  subject,1  finds  hebdomadal  peri- 


1  “  Observations  on  the  Fevers  of  the  West  African' Coast.” 
New  York:  Jenkins,  1856.  A  more  valuable  work  is  the  “Medi¬ 
cal  Topography,  &c.  of  West  Africa,”  by  the  late  W.  F.  Daniell, 
M.D.,  1849.  Finally,  Mr.  Consul  Hutchinson  offered  valuable 
suggestions  in  his  work  on  the  Niger  Expedition  of  1854-5 
(Longmans,  1855,  and  republished  in  the  “  Traveller’s  Library”). 


6o  Geography  of  the  Gaboon. 

odicity  in  the  attacks,  and  lays  great  stress 
upon  this  point  of  chronothermalism.  He  recog¬ 
nizes  the  normal  stages,  preparatory,  invasional, 
reactionary,  and  resolutionary.  Like  Drs.  Living¬ 
stone  and  Hutchinson,  he  holds  fever  and  quinine 
“  incompatibles,”  and  he  highly  approves  of  the 
prophylactic  adhibition  of  chinchona  used  by  the 
unfortunate  Douville  in  1828.  Experience  in  his 
own  person  and  in  numerous  patients  “  proves  all 
theoretical  objections  to  the  use  of  six  grains  an 
hour,  or  fifty  and  sixty  grains  of  quinine  in  one 
day  or  remission  to  be  absolutely  imaginary.”  He 
is  “  convinced  that  it  is  not  a  stimulant,”  and  with 
many  apologies  he  cautiously  sanctions  alcohol, 
which  should  often  be  the  physician  s  mainstay. 
As  he  advocated  ten-grain  doses  of  calomel  by 
way  of  preliminary  cathartic,  the  American  mis¬ 
sionaries  stationed  on  the  River  have  adopted  a 
treatment  still  more  “  severe  ” — quinine  till  deaf¬ 
ness  ensues,  and  half  a  handful  of  mercury,  often 
continued  till  a  passage  opens  through  the  palate, 
placing  mouth  and  nose  in  directer  communication. 
Dr.  Ford  also  recommends  during  the  invasion  or 
period  of  chills  external  friction  of  mustard  or  of 
fresh  red  pepper  either  in  tincture  or  in  powder, 
a  good  alleviator  always  procurable  ;  and  the  in¬ 
ternal  use  of  pepper-tea,  to  bring  on  the  stages  of 
reaction  and  resolution.  Few  will  agree  with  him 
that  gruels  and  farinaceous  articles  are  advisable 


Geography  of  the  Gaboon. 


61 

during  intermissions,  when  the  patient  craves  for 
port,  essence  of  beef,  and  consomme ;  nor  can  we 
readily  admit  the  dictum  that  in  the  tropics  “  the 
most  wholesome  diet,  without  doubt,  is  chiefly 
vegetable.”  Despite  Jacquemont  and  all  the  rice- 
eaters,  I  cry  beef  and  beer  for  ever  and  every¬ 
where  !  Many  can  testify  personally  to  the  value 
of  the  unofficinal  prescription  which  he  offers  in 
cases  of  severe  lichen  (prickly  heat),  leading  to 
impetigo.  It  is  as  follows,  and  it  is  valuable  : — 


Cold  cream  gj. 

Glycerine  .  .  .  .  3]*. 

Chloroform  .  .  .  3!]'. 

Oil  of  bitter  almonds  .  .  gtt.  x. 


CHAPTER  IV. 


THE  MINOR  TRIBES  AND  THE  MPONGWE. 


H  E  tribes  occupying  the  Gaboon  country 
may  roughly  be  divided  into  two  ac¬ 
cording  to  habitat — the  maritime  and 
those  of  the  interior,  who  are  quasi- 
mountaineers.  Upon  the  sea-board  dwell  the 
Banoko  (Banaka),  Bapuka,  and  Batanga ;  the 
Kombe,  the  Benga  and  Mbiko,  or  people  about 
Corisco  ;  the  Shekyani,  who  extend  far  into  the 
interior,  the  Urungu  and  Aloa,  clans  of  Cape  Lopez  ; 
the  Nkommi,  Commi,  Camma  or  Cama,  and  the 
Mayumba  races  beyond  the  southern  frontier. 
The  inner  hordes  are  the  Dibwe  (M.  du  Chaillu  s 
“  Ibouay”),  the  Mbiisha  ;  the  numerous  and  once 
powerful  Bakele,  the  Cannibal  Fa^  (Mpongwe), 
the  Osheba  or  ’Sheba,  their  congeners,  and  a 
variety  of  “  bush-folk,”  of  whom  little  is  known 
beyond  the  names.  Linguistically  we  may  dis¬ 
tribute  them  into  three,  namely,  i .  the  Banoko  and 
Batanga  ;  2.  the  Mpongwe,*  including  the  minor 


The  Minor  Tribes  and  the  Mpongwe.  63 

ethnical  divisions  of  Benga,  and  Shekyani ;  the 
Urungu,  the  Nkommi,  the  Dongas  or  Ndiva,  and 
the  Mbusha,  and  3.  the  Mpongwe  and  the  tribes 
of  the  interior.  Lastly,  there  are  only  three  peo¬ 
ples  of  any  importance,  namely,  the  Mpongwe, 
the  Bakele,  and  the  Fa^. 

The  Mpongwe,  whom  the  French  call  “  les 
Gabons,”  are  the  aristocracy  of  the  coast,  the 
Benga  being  the  second,  and  the  Banoko  and 
Bapuka  ranking  third.  They  are  variously  esti¬ 
mated  at  5,000  to  7,000  head,  serviles  included. 
They  inhabit  both  sides  of  the  Gaboon,  extending 
about  thirty-five  miles  along  its  banks,  chiefly  on 
the  right ;  on  the  left  only  seawards  of  the  She¬ 
kyani.  But  it  is  a  wandering  race,  and  many  a 
“  mercator  vagus  ”  finds  his  way  to  Corisco,  Cape 
Lopez,  Batanga,  and  even  Fernando  Po.  The  two 
great  families  on  the  northern  river  bank  are  the 
Quabens  and  the  Glass,  who  style  themselves  kings 
and  princes  ;  the  southern  side  lodges  King  Wil¬ 
liam  (Roi  Denis)  near  the  mouth,  and  the  power¬ 
ful  King  George,  about  twenty-five  miles  higher 
up  stream.  There  are  also  settlements  scattered 
at  various  distances  from  the  great  highway  of 
commerce  to  which  they  naturally  cling,  and  upon 
the  Coniquet  and  Parrot  Islands. 

Barbot  (iv.  9)  describes  the  “  Gaboon  blacks  ” 
as  “commonly  tall,  robust,  and  well-shaped;” 
they  appeared  to  me  rather  below  the  average  of 


64 


The  Minor  Tribes 


West  Coast  size  and  weight.  Both  sexes,  even 
when  running  to  polysarcia,  have  delicate  limbs 
and  extremities,  and  the  features,  though  negroid, 
are  not  the  negro  of  the  tobacconist’s  shop  :  I  no¬ 
ticed  several  pyramidal  and  brachycephalic  heads, 
contrary  to  the  rule  for  African  man  and  simiad. 
In  the  remarkable  paper  read  (1861)  by  Professor 
Busk  before  the  Ethnological  Society,  that  emi¬ 
nent  physiologist  proved  that  the  Asiatic  apes, 
typified  by  the  ourang-outang,  are  brachycephalic, 
like  the  Mongolians  amongst  whom  they  live,  or 
who  live  amongst  them ;  whilst  the  gorillas  and 
the  African  anthropoids  are  dolichocephalic  as  the 
negroes.  The  Gaboon  men  are  often  almost  black, 
whilst  the  women  range  between  dark  brown  and 
cafS  au  lait .  The  beard,  usually  scanty,  is  some¬ 
times  bien  fo7t7r7iie,  especially  amongst  the  seniors, 
but,  whenever  I  saw  a  light-coloured  and  well- 
bearded  man,  the  suspicion  of  mixed  blood  inva¬ 
riably  obtruded  itself.  It  is  said  that  during  the 
last  thirty  years  they  have  greatly  diminished,  yet 
their  habitat  is  still  that  laid  down  half  a  century 
ago  by  Bowdich,  and  all  admit  that  the  population 
of  the  river  has  not  been  materially  affected. 

The  Mpongwe  women  have  the  reputation  of 
being  the  prettiest  and  the  most  facile  upon  the 
West  African  coast.  It  is  easy  to  distinguish 
two  types.  One  is  large-boned  and  heavy-limbed, 
hoarse-voice.d,  and  masculine,  like  the  “  Ibos”  of 


65 


and  the  Mpongwe . 

Bonny  and  New  Calabar,  who  equal  the  men  in 
weight  and  stature,  strength  and  endurance,  sug¬ 
gesting  a  mixture  of  the  male  and  female  tempera¬ 
ments.  Some  of  the  Gaboon  giantesses  have, 


THE  PRETTY  GABOON  WOMAN. 


unlike  their  northern  sisters,  regular  and  hand¬ 
some  features.  The  other  type  is  quasi- Hindu  in 
its  delicacy  of  form,  with  small  heads,  oval  faces, 
noses  a  la  Roxolane ,  lips  sub-tumid  but  without 
prognathism,  and  fine  almond-shaped  eyes,  with 
remarkably  thick  and  silky  lashes.  The  throat  is 


i. 


F 


66 


The  Minor  Tribes 


thin,  the  bosom  is  high  and  well  carried,  or,  as 
the  admiring  Arab  says,  “  nejda  ;  ”  the  limbs  are 
statuesque,  and  the  hands  and  feet  are  Norman 
rather  than  Saxon.  Many  Europeans  greatly 
admire  these  minois  mntins  et  chiffonis.1 

Early  in  the  present  century  the  Mpongwe 
braided  whiskers  and  side  curls,  tipping  the  ends 
with  small  beads,  and  they  plaited  the  front  locks  to 
project  like  horns,  after  the  fashion  of  the  present 
Fa^  and  other  wild  tribes.  A  custom  noticed  by 
Barbot,  but  apparently  obsolete  in  the  days  of 
Bowdich,  was  to  bore  the  upper  lip,  and  to  insert 
a  small  ivory  pin,  extending  from  nose  to  mouth. 
The  painting  and  tattooing  were  fantastic  and 
elaborate  ;  and  there  was  a  hideous  habit  of  split¬ 
ting  either  lip,  so  as  to  “  thrust  the  tongue  through 
on  ceremonial  occasions.”  A  curious  reason  is 
given  for  this  practice.  “  They  are  subject  to  a 
certain  distemper  very  common  there,  which  on  a 
sudden  seizes  them,  and  casts  them  into  fits  of  so 
long  a  continuance,  that  they  would  inevitably  be 
suffocated,  if  by  means  of  the  split  at  their  upper 
lip  they  did  not  pour  into  their  mouths  some  of 
the  juice  of  a  certain  medicinal  herb,  which  has 
the  virtue  of  easing  and  curing  the  diseased  per¬ 
son  in  a  very  short  time.” 

1  M.  du  Chaillu  ends  his  chapter  i.  with  an  “  illustration  of  a 
Mpongwe  woman,”  copied  without  acknowledgment  from  Mr. 
Wilson’s  “  Portrait  of  Yanawaz,  a  Gaboon  Princess.” 


and  the  Mpongwe. 


67 


All  these  things,  fits  included,  are  now  obsolete. 
The  men  shave  a  line  in  the  hair  like  a  fillet 
round  the  skull,  and  what  is  left  is  coiffe  an  coup 
de  vent.  The  head-dress  is  a  cap,  a  straw  hat,  a 
billy  cock,  or  a  tall  silk  “  chimney  pot,”  the  latter 
denoting  a  chief;  he  also  sports  in  full  dress  a 
broad  coat,  ending  in  a  loin  cloth  of  satin  stripe  or 
some  finer  stuff,  about  six  feet  long  by  four  and  a 
half  broad  ;  it  is  secured  by  a  kerchief  or  an  elastic 
waist  belt ;  during  work  it  is  tucked  up,  but  on 
ceremonial  occasions  it  must  trail  upon  the  ground. 
The  lieges  wear  European  shirts,  stuffed  into  a 
waist-cloth  of  cheaper  material,  calico  or  domestics  ; 
This  Tanga,  or  kilt,  is,  in  fact,  an  article  of  general 
wear,  and  it  would  be  an  airy,  comfortable,  and 
wholesome  travelling  costume  if  the  material  were 
flannel.  The  ornaments  are  necklaces  of  Venetian 
beads,  the  white  pound,  and  the  black  and  yellow 
seed  :  Canutille  or  bugles  of  various  patterns  are 
preferred,  and  all  are  loaded  with  “  Mengo,”  Grigris 
(which  old  travellers  call  “  gregories”),  or  talismans, 
chiefly  leopards’  teeth,  rude  bells,  and  horns.  The 
Monda  are  hunting  prophylacteries,  antelope  horns 
filled  with  “  fetish  ”  medicines,  leopard’s  hair, 
burnt  and  powdered  heart  mixed  with  leaves, 
and  filth ;  the  mouths  are  stopped  with  some 
viscid  black  stuff,  probably  gum.  They  are  often 
attached  to  rude  bells  of  iron  or  brass  (Ige- 
lenga,  Ngenge,  .N kendo,  or  Wonga),  like  the 


68 


The  Minor  Tribes 


Chingufu  of  the  Congo  regions  and  the  metal 
cones  which  are  struck  for  signals  upon  the  Tan¬ 
ganyika  Lake. 

A  great  man  is  known  by  his  making  himself  a 
marvellous  “  guy,”  wearing,  for  instance,  a  dingily 
laced  cocked  hat,  stuck  athwart-ships  upon  an 
unwashed  night-cap,  and  a  naval  or  military  uni¬ 
form,  fifty  years  old,  “swearing”  with  the  loin¬ 
cloth  and  the  feet,  which  are  always  bare. 

The  coiffure  of  the  qnXoxoo-pov  is  peculiar 
and  elaborate  as  that  of  the  Gold  Coast.  These 
ladies  seem  to  have  chosen  for  their  model  the 
touraco  or  cockatoo, — they  have  never  heard  of 
“Kikeriki,” — and  the  effect  is  at  first  wondrously 
grotesque.  Presently  the  eye  learns  to  admire 
pretty  F anny’s  ways ;  perhaps  the  pleureuse ,  the 
old  English  corkscrew  ringlet,  might  strike  the 
stranger  as  equally  natural  in  a  spaniel,  and  un¬ 
natural  in  a  human.  Still  a  style  so  peculiar 
requires  a  toilette  in  keeping;  the  “king”  in  uni¬ 
form  is  less  ridiculous  than  the  Gaboon  lady’s 
chignon,  contrasting  with  a  tight-bodied  and  nar¬ 
row-skirted  gown  of  pink  calico. 

The  national  “  tire-valiant  ^  is  a  galeated  crest  not 
unlike  the  cuirassier’s  helmet,  and  the  hair,  trained 
from  the  sides  into  a  high  ridge  running  along 
the  cranium,  not  unfrequently  projects  far  beyond 
the  forehead.  Taste  and  caprice  produce  endless 
modifications.  Sometimes  the  crest  is  double, 


and  the  Mpongwe . 


69 


disposed  in  parallel  ridges,  with  a  deep  hollow  be¬ 
tween  ;  or  it  is  treble,  when  the  two  lines  of  parting 
running  along  the  mastoids  make  it  remarkably 
like  bears’  ears,  the  central  prism  rises  high,  and 
the  side  hair  is  plaited  into  little  pig-tails.  Others 
again  train  four  parallel  lines  from  nape  to  forehead, 
forming  two  cushions  along  the  parietals.  The 
crest  is  heightened  by  padding,  and  the  whole  of 
the  hair  is  devoted  to  magnifying  it, — at  a  distance, 
some  of  the  bushwomen  look  as  if  they  wore 
cocked  hats.  When  dreaded  baldness  appears, 
rosettes  of  false  hair  patch  the  temples,  and  plaits 
of  purchased  wigs  are  interwoven  to  increase  the 
bulk  :  the  last  resources  of  all  are  wigs  and  tou- 
pets  of  stained  pine-apple  fibre.  The  comb  is 
unknown,  its  succedaneum  being  a  huge  bodkin,  like 
that  which  the  Trasteverina  has  so  often  used  as 
a  stiletto.  This  instrument  of  castigation  is  made 
of  ivory  or  metal,  with  a  lozenge  often  neatly 
carved  and  ornamented  at  the  handle.  The  hair, 
always  somewhat  “  kinky,”  is  anointed  every  morn¬ 
ing  with  palm-oil,  or  the  tallow-like  produce  of  a 
jungle-nut;  and,  in  full  dress,  it  is  copiously  pow¬ 
dered  with  light  red  or  bright  yellow  dust  of 
pounded  camwood,  redwood,  and  various  barks. 

The  ears  are  adorned  with  broad  rings  of  native 
make,  and,  near  the  trading  stations,  with  F rench  imi¬ 
tation  jewellery.  The  neck  supports  many  strings 
of  beads,  long  and  short,  with  the  indispensable 


70 


The  Minor  Tribes 


talismans.  The  body  dress  is  a  Tobe  or  loin-cloth, 
like  that  of  the  men  ;  but  under  the  “  Namba,”  or 
outer  wrapper,  which  hangs  down  the  feet,  there  is 
a  “  Siri,”  or  petticoat,  reaching  only  to  the  knees. 
Both  are  gathered  in  front  like  the  Shukkah  of  the 
eastern  coast,  and  the  bosom  is  left  bare.  Few 
except  the  bush-folk  now  wear  the  I  bongo,  Ipepe, 
or  Ndengi,  the  woven  fibres  and  grass-cloths  of 
their  ancestry ;  amongst  the  hunters,  however,  a 
Tanga,  or  grass-kilt,  may  still  be  seen.  The  expo¬ 
sure  of  the  upper  person  shows  the  size  and  tumi¬ 
dity  of  the  areola,  even  in  young  girls  ;  being  un¬ 
supported,  the  mammae  soon  become  flaccid. 

The  legs,  which  are  peculiarly  neat  and  well 
turned,  are  made  by  art  a  fitting  set-off  to  the 
head.  It  is  the  pride  of  a  Mpongwe  wife  to  cover 
the  lower  limb  between  knee  and  ankle  with  an 
armour  of  metal  rings,  which  are  also  worn  upon 
the  wrists ;  the  custom  is  not  modern,  and  travel¬ 
lers  of  the  seventeenth  century  allude  to  them. 
The  rich  affect  copper,  bought  in  wires  two  feet 
and  a  half  long,  and  in  two  sizes ;  of  the  larger, 
four,  of  the  smaller,  eight,  go  to  the  dollar  ; 
the  brass  are  cheaper,  as  5  :  4 ;  and  I  did  not 
see  iron  or  tin.  The  native  smiths  make  the 
circles,  and  the  weight  of  a  full  set  of  forty  varies 
from  fifteen  to  nineteen  pounds.  They  are  sepa¬ 
rate  rings,  not  a  single  coil,  like  that  used  by  the 
Wagogo  and  other  East  African  tribes  ;  they  press 


and  the  Mpongwe. 


7i 


tightly  on  the  limb,  often  causing  painful  chafes 
and  sores.  The  ankle  is  generally  occupied  by  a 
brass  or  iron  chain,  with  small  links.  Girls  may 
wear  these  rings,  of  which  the  husband  is  expected 
to  present  a  considerable  number  to  his  bride,  and 
the  consequence  is,  that  when  in  full  dress  she 
waddles  like  a  duck. 

Commerce  and  intercourse  with  whites  has  made 
the  Mpongwe,  once  the  rudest,  now  one  of  the 
most  civilized  of  African  tribes ;  and,  upon  the 
whole,  there  is  an  improvement.  The  exact  Bar- 
bot  (iv.  9)  tells  us  “  the  Gaboon  blacks  are  bar¬ 
barous,  wild,  bloody,  and  treacherous,  very  thiev¬ 
ish  and  crafty,  especially  towards  strangers.  The 
women,  on  the  contrary,  are  as  civil  and  courteous 
to  them,  and  will  use  all  possible  means  to  enjoy 
their  company ;  but  both  sexes  are  the  most 
wretchedly  poor  and  miserable  of  any  in  Guinea, 
and  yet  so  very  haughty,  that  they  are  perfectly 
ridiculous  .  .  .  They  are  all  excessively  fond 
of  brandy  and  other  strong  liquors  of  Europe  and 
America  .  .  .  If  they  fancy  one  has  got  a  mouth¬ 
ful  more  than  another,  and  they  are  half  drunk, 
they  will  soon  fall  a-fighting,  even  with  their  own 
princes  or  priests  .  .  .  Their  exceeding  greediness 
for  strong  liquors  renders  them  so  little  nice  and 
curious  in  the  choice  of  them,  that,  though  mixed 
with  half  water,  and  sometimes  a  little  Spanish 
soap  put  into  it  to  give  it  a  froth,  to  appear  of 


72 


The  Minor  Tribes 


proof  by  the  scum  it  makes,  they  like  it  and  praise 
it  as  much  as  the  best  and  purest  brandy.”  Cap¬ 
tain  Boteler  remarks,  in  1827:  “  The  women  do  not 
speak  English  ;  though,  for  the  sake  of  what  trifles 
they  can  procure  for  their  husbands,  they  are  in 
the  habit  of  flocking  on  board  the  different  vessels 
which  visit  the  river,  and  will  permit  them  to 
remain ;  and  the  wives  are  generally  maintained 
in  clothing  by  the  proceeds  of  their  intercourse 
with  the  whites.”  He  further  assures  us,  that 
mulatto  girls  thus  born  are  not  allowed  to  marry 
although  there  is  no  such  restriction  for  the  males  ; 
and  elsewhere,  he  concludes,  that  never  having 
seen  an  infant  or  an  adult  offspring  of  mixed 
blood,  abortion  is  practised  as  at  Delagoa  and  Old 
Calabar,  where,  in  1862,  I  found  only  one  child  of 
mixed  blood.  If  so,  the  Mpongwe  have  changed 
for  the  better.  Half-castes  are  now  not  uncom¬ 
mon  ;  there  are  several  nice  “  yaller  gals  ”  well 
known  on  the  river ;  and  the  number  of  old  and 
sick  speaks  well  for  the  humanity  of  the  tribe. 

Devoted  to  trade  and  become  a  people  of 
brokers,  of  go-betweens,  of  middle-men,  the 
Mpongwe  have  now  acquired  an  ease  and  pro¬ 
priety,  a  polish  and  urbanity  of  manner  which  con¬ 
trasts  strongly  with  the  Kru-men  and  other  tribes, 
who,  despite  generations  of  intercourse  with  Euro¬ 
peans,  are  rough  and  barbarous  as  their  forefathers. 
The  youths  used  to  learn  English,  which  they  spoke 


and  the  Mpongwe . 


73 


fluently  and  with  tolerable  accent,  but  always  bar¬ 
barously  ;  they  are  more  successful  with  the  easier 
neo-Latin  tongues.  Their  one  aim  in  life  is  not 
happiness,  but  “  trust,”  an  African  practice  un¬ 
wisely  encouraged  by  Europeans ;  so  Old  Calabar 
but  a  few  years  ago  was  not  a  trust-river,”  and 
consequently  the  consul  and  the  gunboat  had  little 
to  do  there.  Many  of  them  have  received  advances 
of  dollars  by  thousands,  but  the  European  merchant 
has  generally  suffered  from  his  credulity  or  rapa¬ 
city.  In  low  cunning  the  native  is  more  than  a 
match  for  the  stranger;  moreover,  he  has  “the 
pull  ”  in  the  all-important  matter  of  time ;  he  can 
spend  a  fortnight  haggling  over  the  price  of  a 
tooth  when  the  unhappy  capitalist  is  eating  his 
heart.  Like  all  the  African  aristocracy,  they  hold 
agriculture  beneath  the  dignity  of  man  and  fit  only 
for  their  women  and  slaves;  the  “ladies”  also 
refuse  to  work  at  the  plantations,  especially  when 
young  and  pretty,  leaving  them  to  the  bush-folk, 
male  and  female.  M.  du  Chaillu  repeatedly  asserts 
(chap  xix.  )  “  there  is  no  property  in  land,”  but  this 
is  a  mistake  often  made  in  Africa.  Labourers  are 
hired  at  the  rate  of  two  to  three  dollars  per  mensem, 
and  gangs  would  easily  be  collected  if  one  of  the 
chiefs  were  placed  in  command.  No  sum  of  money 
will  buy  a  free-born  Mpongwe,  and  the  sale  is  for¬ 
bidden  by  the  laws  of  the  land.  A  half-caste  would 
fetch  one  hundred  dollars  ;  a  wild  “  nigger  ”  near 


74 


The  Minor  Tribes 


the  river  costs  from  thirty  to  thirty-five  dollars  ;  the 
same  may  be  bought  in  the  Apinji  country  for 
four  dollars’  worth  of  assorted  goods,  the  “  bundle- 
trade”  as  it  is  called;  but  there  is  the  imminent 
risk  of  the  chattel’s  running  away.  A  man’s  only 
attendants  being  now  his  wives  and  serviles,  it  is 
evident  that  plurality  and  domestic  servitude  will 
extend — 

“  Far  into  summers  which  we  shall  not  see 

in  fact,  till  some  violent  revolution  of  society  shall 
have  introduced  a  servant  class. 

The  three  grades  of  M  pong  we  may  be  con¬ 
sidered  as  rude  beginnings  of  caste.  The  first  are 
the  “  Sons  of  the  Soil,”  the  “  Ongwa  ntye  ”  (con¬ 
tracted  from  Onwana  wi  ntye),  Mpongwes  of 
pure  blood ;  the  second  are  the  “  Mbamba,”  chil¬ 
dren  of  free-men  by  serviles  ;  and  lastly,  “  Nshaka,” 
in  Bakele  “  Nshaka,”  represents  the  slaves.  M.  du 
Chaillu’s  distribution  (chap,  iii.)  into  five  orders, 
namely,  pure,  mixed  with  other  tribes,  half  free, 
children  of  serviles,  and  chattels,  is  somewhat 
over-artificial ;  at  any  rate,  now  it  is  not  generally 
recognized.  Like  the  high-caste  Hindu,  the  nobler 
race  will  marry  women  of  lower  classes  ;  for  in¬ 
stance,  King  Njogoni’s  mother  was  a  Benga ;  but 
the  inverse  proceeding  is  a  disgrace  to  the  woman, 
apparently  an  instinctive  feeling  on  the  part  of  the 
reproducer,  still  lingering  in  the  most  advanced 


and  the  Mpongwe. 


75 


societies.  Old  travellers  record  a  belief  that,  un¬ 
like  all  other  Guinea  races,  the  Mpongwe  marries 
his  mother,  sister,  or  daughter ;  and  they  compare 
the  practice  with  that  of  the  polished  Persians  and 
the  Peruvian  Incas,  who  thus  kept  pure  the  solar 
and  lunar  blood.  If  this  “breeding-in”  ever  ex¬ 
isted,  no  trace  of  it  now  remains  ;  on  the  contrary, 
every  care  is  taken  to  avoid  marriages  of  consan¬ 
guinity.  Bowdich,  indeed,  assures  us  that  a  man 
may  not  look  at  nor  converse  with  his  mother-in- 
law,  on  pain  of  a  heavy,  perhaps  a  ruinous  fine ; 
“  this  singular  law  is  founded  on  the  tradition  of 
an  incest.” 

Marriage  amongst  the  Mpongwe  is  a  purely 
civil  contract,  as  in  Africa  generally,  and  so  per¬ 
haps  it  will  some  day  be  in  Europe,  Asia,  and 
America.  Coelebs  pays  a  certain  sum  for  the  bride, 
who,  where  “  marriage  by  capture”  is  unknown,  has 
no  voice  in  the  matter.  Many  promises  of  future 
“  dash  ”  are  made  to  the  girl’s  parents  ;  and  drink¬ 
ing,  drumming,  and  dancing  form  the  ceremony. 
The  following  is,  or  rather  I  should  say  was,  a  fair 
list  of  articles  paid  for  a  virgin  bride.  One  fine 
silk  hat,  one  cap,  one  coat ;  five  to  twenty  pieces  of 
various  cottons,  plain  and  ornamental ;  two  to 
twenty  silk  kerchiefs ;  three  to  thirty  jars  of  rum  ; 
twenty  pounds  of  trade  tobacco  ;  two  hatchets  ;  two 
cutlasses ;  plates  and  dishes,  mugs  and  glasses, 
five  each  ;  six  knives  ;  one  kettle  ;  one  brass  pan  ; 


76 


The  Minor  Tribes 


two  to  three  Neptunes  (caldrons,  the  old  term 
being  “Neptune’s  pots”),  a  dozen  bars  of  iron  ; 
copper  and  brass  rings,  chains  with  small  links, 
and  minor  articles  ad  libitum.  The  “  settlement” 
is  the  same  in  kind,  but  has  increased  during  the 
last  forty  years,  and  specie  has  become  much  more 
common.1 

After  marriage  there  is  a  mutual  accommodation 
system  suggesting  the  cicisbeo  or  mariage  a  trois 
school  ;  hence  we  read  that  wives,  like  the  much- 
maligned  Xantippe,  were  borrowed  and  lent,  and 
that  not  fulfilling  the  promise  of  a  loan  is  punish¬ 
able  by  heavy  damages.  Where  the  husband  acts 
adjutor  or  cavalier e  to  his  friends  “  Omantwe ” — 
female  person  or  wife — and  the  friend  is  equally 
complaisant,  wedlock  may  hardly  be  called  per¬ 
manent,  and  there  can  be  no  tie  save  children. 
The  old  immorality  endures  ;  it  is  as  if  the  com¬ 
mand  were  reversed  by  accepting  that  misprint 
which  so  scandalized  the  Star  Chamber,  “  Thou 
shalt  commit  adultery.”  Yet,  unpermitted,  the 
offence  is  one  against  property,  and  Moechus  may 
be  cast  in  damages  ranging  from  $100  to  $200: 
what  is  known  in  low  civilization  as  the  “  panel 
dodge”  is  an  infamy  familiar  to  almost  all  the 

1  Everywhere  on  the  lower  river  “  hard  dollars  ”  are  highly 
valued.  The  Spanish,  formerly  the  favourite,  and  always  worth 
4s.  2d.,  command  only  a  five-franc  piece  at  Le  Plateau ;  more¬ 
over,  the  “  peseta,”  like  the  shilling,  is  taken  as  a  franc. 


and  the  Mpongwe.  77 

maritime  tribes  of  Africa.  He  must  indeed  be 
a  Solomon  of  a  son  who,  sur  les  bonds  du  Gabon , 
can  guess  at  his  own  sire ;  a  question  so  imper¬ 
tinent  is  never  put  by  the  ex-officio  father.  The 
son  succeeds  by  inheritance  to  his  fathers  relict, 
who,  being  generally  in  years,  is  condemned  to  be 
useful  when  she  has  ceased  to  be  an  ornament, 
and,  if  there  are  several,  they  are  equally  divided 
amongst  the  heirs. 

Trading  tribes  rarely  affect  the  pundonor  which 
characterizes  the  pastoral  and  the  predatory ;  these 
people  traffic  in  all  things,  even  in  the  chastity 
of  their  women.  What  with  pre-nuptial  excesses, 
with  early  unions,  often  infructuous,  with  a  virtual 
system  of  community,  and  with  universal  drunk¬ 
enness,  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  if  the  mari¬ 
time  tribes  of  Africa  degenerate  and  die  out. 
Such  apparently  is  the  modus  operandi  by  which 
Nature  rids  herself  of  the  effete  races  which  have 
served  to  clear  the  ground  and  to  pave  the  way 
for  higher  successors.  Wealth  and  luxury,  so  ge¬ 
nerally  inveighed  against  by  poets  and  divines, 
injure  humanity  only  when  they  injuriously  affect 
reproduction  ;  and  poverty  is  praised  only  because 
it  breeds  more  men.  The  true  tests  of  the  physical 
prosperity  of  a  race,  and  of  its  position  in  the  world, 
are  bodily  strength  and  the  excess  of  births  over 
deaths. 

Separation  after  marriage  can  hardly  be  digni- 


78 


The  Minor  Tribes 


fied  on  the  Gaboon  by  the  name  of  divorce. 
Whenever  a  woman  has  or  fancies  she  has  a 
grievance,  she  leaves  her  husband,  returns  to 
“  the  paternal  ”  and  marries  again.  Quarrels 
about  the  sex  are  very  common,  yet,  in  cases 
of  adultery  the  old  murderous  assaults  are  now 
rare  except  amongst  the  backwoodsmen.  The 
habit  was  simply  to  shoot  some  man  belonging 
to  the  seducer’s  or  to  the  ravisher’s  village ;  the 
latter  shot  somebody  in  the  nearest  settlement,  and 
so  on  till  the  affair  was  decided.  In  these  days 
“  violent  retaliation  for  personal  jealousy  always 
‘  be-littles  ’  a  man  in  the  eyes  of  an  African  com¬ 
munity.”  Perhaps  also  he  unconsciously  recog¬ 
nizes  the  sentiment  ascribed  to  Mohammed, 
“  Laysa  bi-zanyatin  ilia  bi  zani,”  “  there  is  no 
adulteress  without  an  adulterer,”  meaning-  that  the 
husband  has  set  the  example. 

Polygamy  is,  of  course,  the  order  of  the  day ;  it 
is  a  necessity  to  the  men,  and  even  the  women 
disdain  to  marry  a  “  one-wifer.”  As  amongst  all 
pluralists,  from  Moslem  to  Mormon,  the  senior  or 
first  married  is  No.  i  ;  here  called  “best  wife:” 
she  is  the  goodman’s  viceroy,  and  she  rules  the 
home-kingdom  with  absolute  sway.  Yet  the 
Mpongwe  do  not,  like  other  tribes  on  the  west 
coast,  practise  that  separation  of  the  sexes  during 
gestation  and  lactation,  which  is  enjoined  to  the 
Hebrews,  recommended  by  Catholicism,  and  com- 


and  the  Mpongwe . 


79 


manded  by  Mormonism — a  system  which  partly 
justifies  polygamy.  In  Portuguese  Guinea  the  en¬ 
ceinte  is  claimed  by  her  relatives,  especially  by  the 
women,  for  three  years,  that  she  may  give  undi¬ 
vided  attention  to  her  offspring,  who  is  rightly 
believed  to  be  benefited  by  the  separation,  and 
that  she  may  return  to  her  husband  with  renewed 
vigour.  Meanwhile  custom  allows  the  man  to  co¬ 
habit  with  a  slave  girl. 

Polygamy,  also,  in  Africa  is  rather  a  political 
than  a  domestic  or  social  institution.  A  “judicious 
culture  of  the  marriage  tie”  is  necessary  amongst 
savages  and  barbarians  whose  only  friends  and 
supporters  are  blood  relations  and  nuptial  connec¬ 
tions  ;  besides  which,  a  multitude  of  wives  ministers 
to  the  great  man’s  pride  and  influence,  as  well  as 
to  his  pleasures  and  to  his  efficiency.  When  the 
head  wife  ages,  she  takes  charge  of  the  girlish 
brides  committed  to  her  guardianship  by  the  hus¬ 
band.  I  should  try  vainly  to  persuade  the  English 
woman  that  there  can  be  peace  in  households  so 
constituted  :  still,  such  is  the  case.  Messrs.  Wil¬ 
son  and  Du  Chaillu  both  assert  that  the  wives 
rarely  disagree  amongst  themselves.  The  senti¬ 
mental  part  of  love  is  modified ;  the  common 
husband  becomes  the  patriarch,  not  the  pater¬ 
familias  ;  the  wife  is  not  the  mistress,  but  the 
mere  de  famille.  The  alliance  rises  or  sinks  to  one 
of  interest  and  affection  instead  of  being  amorous 


8o 


The  Minor  Tribes 


or  uxorious,  whilst  the  underlying  idea,  “  the  more 
the  merrier,”  especially  in  lands  where  free  service 
is  unknown,  seems  to  stifle  envy  and  jealousy. 
Everywhere,  moreover,  amongst  polygamists,  the 
husband  is  strictly  forbidden  by  popular  opinion  to 
show  preference  for  a  favourite  wife  ;  if  he  do  so, 
he  is  a  bad  man. 

But  polygamy  here  has  not  rendered  the  women, 
as  theoretically  it  should,  a  down-trodden  moiety 
of  society  ;  on  the  contrary,  their  position  is  com¬ 
paratively  high.  The  marriage  connection  is  not 
“  one  of  master  and  slave,”  a  link  between  freedom 
and  serfdom  ;  the  “  weaker  vessel  ”  does  not  suffer 
from  collision  with  the  pot  de  fer;  generally  the 
fair  but  frail  ones  appear  to  be,  as  amongst  the 
Israelites  generally,  the  better  halves.  Despite  the 
Okosunguu  or  cow-hide  “  peacemaker,”  they  have 
conquered  a  considerable  latitude  of  conducting 
their  own  affairs.  When  poor  and  slaveless  and, 
naturally,  when  no  longer  young,  they  must  work 
in  the  house  and  in  the  field,  but  this  lot  is  not 
singular  ;  in  journeys  they  carry  the  load,  yet  it  is 
rarely  heavier  than  the  weapons  borne  by  the  man. 
On  the  other  hand,  after  feeding  their  husbands, 
what  remains  out  of  the  fruits  of  their  labours  is 
their  own,  wholly  out  of  his  reach — a  boon  not 
always  granted  by  civilization.  As  in  Unyamwezi, 
they  guard  their  rights  with  a  truly  feminine 
touchiness  and  jealousy.  There  is  always,  in  the 


and  the  Mpongwe .  81 

African  mind,  a  preference  for  descent  and  in¬ 
heritance  through  the  mother,  “the  surer  side,”— 
an  unmistakable  sign,  by  the  by,  of  barbarism. 
The  so-called  royal  races  in  the  eight  great  des¬ 
potisms  of  Pagan  Africa — Ashanti,  Dahome,  and 
Benin;  Karagwah,  Uganda,  and  Unyoro;  the 
Mwata  ya  Nvo,  and  the  Mwata  Cazembe — allow 
the  greatest  liberty  even  to  the  king’s  sisters ; 
they  are  expected  only  to  choose  handsome  lovers, 
that  the  race  may  maintain  its  physical  superiority ; 
and  hence,  doubtless,  the  stalwart  forms  and  the 
good  looks  remarked  by  every  traveller.  As  a 
rule,  the  husband  cannot  sell  his  wife’s  children 
whilst  her  brother  may  dispose  of  them  as  he 
pleases — the  vox  populi  exclaims,  “  What !  is  the 
man  to  go  hungry  when  he  can  trade  off  his  sister’s 
brats  ?” 

The  strong-minded  of  London  and  New  York 
have  not  yet  succeeded  in  thoroughly  organizing 
and  popularizing  their  clubs ;  the  belles  sauvages 
of  the  Gaboon  have.  There  is  a  secret  order, 
called  “  Njembe,”  a  Rights  of  Woman  Associa¬ 
tion,  intended  mainly  to  counterbalance  the  Nda 
of  the  lords  of  creation,  which  will  presently  be 
described.  Dropped  a  few  years  ago  by  the  men, 
it  was  taken  up  by  their  wives,  and  it  now  num¬ 
bers  a  host  of  initiated,  limited  only  by  heavy 
entrance  fees.  This  form  of  freemasonry  deals 
largely  in  processions,  whose  preliminaries  and 

i.  G 


82 


The  Minor  Tribes 


proceedings  are  kept  profoundly  secret.  At  cer¬ 
tain  times  an  old  woman  strikes  a  stick  upon  an 
“  Orega”  or  crescent-shaped  drum,  hollowed  out  of 
a  block  of  wood  ;  hearing  this  signal,  the  worship¬ 
ful  sisterhood,  bedaubed,  by  way  of  insignia,  with 
red  and  white  chalk  or  clay,  follow  her  from  the 
village  to  some  remote  nook  in  the  jungle,  where 
the  lodge  is  tiled.  Sentinels  are  stationed  around 
whilst  business  is  transacted  before  a  vestal  fire, 
which  must  burn  for  a  fortnight  or  three  weeks,  in 
the  awe-compelling  presence  of  a  brass  pipkin 
filled  with  herbs,  and  a  basin,  both  zebra  d  like 
the  human  limbs.  The  Rev.  William  Walker 
was  once  detected  playing  “  Peeping  Tom”  by 
sixty  or  seventy  viragos,  who  attempted  to  exact  a 
fine  of  forty  dollars,  and  who  would  have  handled 
him  severely  had  he  not  managed  to  escape.  The 
French  officers,  never  standing  upon  ceremony  in 
such  matters,  have  often  insisted  upon  being  present. 

Circumcision,  between  the  fourth  and  eighth 
year,  is  universal  in  Pongo-land,  and  without  it  a 
youth  could  not  be  married.  The  operation  is 
performed  generally  by  the  chief,  often  by  some 
old  man,  who  receives  a  fee  from  the  parents :  the 
thumb  nails  are  long,  and  are  used  after  the  Jewish 
fashion  P  neat  rum  with  red  pepper  is  spirted 


1  “The  British  Jews,”  by  the  Rev.  John  Mills.  London: 
Houlston  and  Stoneman,  1853. 


and  the  Mpongwe.  83 

from  the  mouth  to  “  kill  wound.”  It  is  purely 
hygienic,  and  not  balanced  by  the  excisio  Judaica. 
Some  physiologists  consider  the  latter  a  neces¬ 
sary  complement  of  the  male  rite ;  such,  how¬ 
ever,  is  not  the  case.  The  Hebrews,  who  al¬ 
most  everywhere  retained  circumcision,  have,  in 
Europe  at  least,  long  abandoned  excision.  I  re¬ 
gret  that  the  delicacy  of  the  age  does  not  allow  me 
to  be  more  explicit. 

The  Mpongwe  practise  a  rite  so  resembling  in¬ 
fant  baptism  that  the  missionaries  have  derived  it 
from  a  corruption  of  Abyssinian  Christianity  which, 
like  the  flora  of  the  Camarones  and  Fernandian 
Highlands,  might  have  travelled  across  the  Dark 
Continent,  where  it  has  now  been  superseded  by 
El  Islam.  I  purpose  at  some  period  of  more 
leisure  to  prove  an  ancient  intercourse  and  rap¬ 
prochement  of  all  the  African  tribes  ranging  be¬ 
tween  the  parallels  of  north  latitude  20°  and  south 
latitude  30°.  It  will  best  be  established,  not  by  the 
single  great  family  of  language,  but  by  the  simi¬ 
larity  of  manners,  customs,  and  belief ;  of  arts  and 
crafts  ;  of  utensils  and  industry.  The  baptism  of 
Pongo-land  is  as  follows.  When  the  babe  is  born, 
a  crier,  announcing  the  event,  promises  to  it  in  the 
people’s  name  participation  in  the  rights  of  the 
living.  It  is  placed  upon  a  banana  leaf,  for  which 
reason  the  plantain  is  never  used  to  stop  the  water- 
pots  ;  and  the  chief  or  the  nearest  of  kin  sprinkles 


84 


The  Minor  Tribes 


it  from  a  basin,  gives  it  a  name,  and  pronounces  a 
benediction,  his  example  being  followed  by  all 
present.  The  man-child  is  exhorted  to  be  truth¬ 
ful,  and  the  girl  to  “  tell  plenty  lie,”  in  order  to 
lead  a  happy  life.  Truly  a  new  form  of  the  re¬ 
generative  rite ! 

A  curious  prepossession  of  the  African  mind, 
curious  and  yet  general,  in  a  land  where  population 
is  the  one  want,  and  where  issue  is  held  the 
greatest  blessing,  is  the  imaginary  necessity  of 
limiting  the  family.  Perhaps  this  form  of  infanti¬ 
cide  is  a  policy  derived  from  ancestors  who  found 
it  necessary.  In  the  kingdom  of  Apollonia 
(Guinea)  the  tenth  child  was  always  buried  alive ; 
never  a  Decimus  was  allowed  to  stand  in  the  way 
of  the  nine  seniors.  The  birth  of  twins  is  an  evil 
portent  to  the  Mpongwes,  as  it  is  in  many  parts  of 
Central  Africa,  and  even  in  the  New  World;  it 
also  involves  the  idea  of  moral  turpitude,  as  if  the 
woman  were  one  of  the  lower  animals,  capable  of 
superfetation.  There  is  no  greater  insult  to  a  man, 
than  to  point  at  him  with  two  fingers,  meaning 
that  he  is  a  twin  ;  of  course  he  is  not  one,  or  he 
would  have  been  killed  at  birth.  Albinos  are 
allowed  to  live,  as  in  Dahome,  in  Ashanti,  and 
among  some  East  African  tribes,  where  I  have 
been  “  chaffed  ”  about  a  brother  white,  who  proved 
to  be  an  exceptional  negro  without  pigmentum 
nigrum. . 


and  the  Mpongwe. 


85 


There  is  no  novelty  in  the  Mpongwe  funeral 
rites ;  the  same  system  prevails  from  the  Oil 
Rivers  to  Congo-land,  and  extends  even  to  the 
wild  races  of  the  interior.  The  corpse,  being  still 
sentient,  is  accompanied  by  stores  of  raiment, 
pots,  and  goats^  flesh  ;  a  bottle  is  placed  in  one 
hand  and  a  glass  in  the  other,  and,  if  the  deceased 
has  been  fond  of  play,  his  draught-board  and 
other  materials  are  buried  with  him.  The  system 
has  been  well  defined  as  one  in  which  the  “  ghost 
of  a  man  eats  the  ghost  of  a  yam,  boiled  in  the 
ghost  of  a  pot,  over  the  ghost  of  a  fire.”  The 
body,  after  being  stretched  out  in  a  box,  is  carried 
to  a  lonely  place  ;  some  are  buried  deep,  others 
close  to  the  surface.  There  is  an  immense  show 
of  grief,  with  keening  and  crocodiles’  tears,  per¬ 
haps  to  benefit  the  living  by  averting  a  charge 
of  witchcraft,  which  would  inevitably  lead  to 
“Sassy”  or  poison-water.  The  wake  continues 
for  five  days,  when  they  “  pull  the  cry,”  that  is  to 
say,  end  mourning.  If  these  pious  rites  be  neg¬ 
lected,  the  children  incur  the  terrible  reproach, 
“  Your  father  he  be  hungry.”  The  widow  may 
re-marry  immediately  after  “  living  for  cry,”  and,  if 
young  and  lusty,  she  looks  out  for  another  consort 
within  the  week.  The  slave  is  thrown  out  into 
the  bush— no  one  will  take  the  trouble  to  dig  a 
hole  for  him. 

The  industry  of  the  Mpongwe  is  that  of  the 


86 


The  Minor  Tribes 


African  generally ;  every  man  is  a  host  in  him¬ 
self  ;  he  builds  and  furnishes  his  house,  he  makes 
his  weapons  and  pipes,  and  he  ignores  division  of 
labour,  except  in  the  smith  and  the  carpenter ;  in 
the  potter,  who  works  without  a  wheel,  and  in 
the  dyer,  who  knows  barks,  and  who  fixes  his 
colours  with  clay.  The  men  especially  pride 
themselves  upon  canoe-making  ;  the  favourite 
wood  is  the  buoyant  Okumeh  ;  or  bombax,  that 
monarch  of  the  African  forest.  I  have  seen  a 
boat,  45  feet  to  inches  by  5  feet  11  inches  in 
beam,  cut  out  of  a  single  tree,  with  the  Mpano  or 
little  adze,  a  lineal  descendant  of  the  Silex  imple¬ 
ment,  and  I  have  heard  of  others  measuring 
70  feet.  These  craft  easily  carry  10  tons,  and 
travel  200  to  300  miles,  which,  as  Mr.  Wilson 
remarks,  would  land  them,  under  favourable  cir¬ 
cumstances,  in  South  America.  Captain  Boteler 
found  that  the  Mpongwe  boat  combined  symmetry 
of  form,  strength,  and  solidity,  with  safeness  and 
swiftness  either  in  pulling  or  sailing.  And  of  late 
years  the  people  have  succeeded  in  launching 
large  and  fast  craft  built  after  European  models. 

The  favourite  pleasures  of  the  Mpongwe  are 
gross  and  gorging  “  feeds,”  drinking  and  smoking. 
They  recall  to  mind  the  old  woman  who  told 
“Monk  Lewis”  that  if  a  glass  of  gin  were  at 
one  end  of  the  table,  and  her  immortal  soul  at  the 
other,  she  would  choose  the  gin.  They  soak  with 


and  the  Mpongwe . 


87 


palm-wine  every  day;  they  indulge  in  rum  and 
absinthe,  and  the  wealthy  affect  so-called  Cognac, 
with  Champagne  and  Bordeaux,  which,  however, 
they  pronounce  to  be  “  cold.”  I  have  seen  Mas¬ 
ter  Boro,  a  boy  five  years  old,  drain  without  wink¬ 
ing  a  wineglassful  of  brandy.  It  is  not  wonderful 
that  the  adults  can  “  stand  ”  but  little,  and  that  a 
few  mouthfuls  of  well-watered  spirit  make  their 
voices  thick,  and  paralyze  their  weak  brains  as 
well  as  their  tongues.  The  Persians,  who  com¬ 
mence  drinking  late  in  life,  can  swallow  strong 
waters  by  the  tumbler. 

Men,  women,  and  children  when  hardly  “  crem- 
nobatic,”  have  always  the  pipe  in  mouth.  The 
favourite  article  is  a  “  dudheen,”  a  well  culottd 
clay,  used  and  worn  till  the  bowl  touches  the 
nose.  The  poor  are  driven  to  a  “  Kondukwe,” 
a  yard  of  plantain  leaf,  hollowed  with  a  wire,  and 
charged  at  the  thicker  end.  The  “  holy  herb  ” 
would  of  course  grow  in  the  country,  and  grow 
well,  but  it  is  imported  from  the  States  without 
trouble,  and  perhaps  with  less  expense.  Some 
tribes  make  a  decent  snuff  of  the  common  trade 
article,  but  I  never  saw  either  sex  chew — perhaps 
the  most  wholesome,  and  certainly  the  most  effi¬ 
cacious  form.  The  smoking  of  Lyambd,  called 
Dydmbd  in  the  southern  regions,  is  confined  to 
debauchees.  M.  du  Chaillu  asserts  that  this 
Cannabis  sativa  is  not  found  wild,  and  the 


88 


The  Minor  Tribes 


people  confirm  his  statement ;  possibly  it  has 
extended  from  Hindostan  to  Zanzibar,  and  thence 
across  the  continent.  Intoxicating  hemp  is  now 
grown  everywhere,  especially  in  the  Nkommi 
country,  and  little  packages,  neatly  bound  with 
banana  leaves,  sell  on  the  river  for  ten  sous  each. 
It  is  smoked  either  in  the  “  Kondukwe  ”  or  in  the 
Ojo.  The  latter,  literally  meaning  a  torch,  is  a 
polished  cow-horn,  closed  at  the  thick  end  with 
wood,  and  banded  with  metal ;  a  wooden  stem, 
projecting  from  the  upper  or  concave  side,  bears  a 
neat  “  chillam  ”  (bowl),  either  of  clay  or  of  brown 
steatite  brought  from  the  upper  Gaboon  River. 
This  rude  hookah  is  half  filled  with  water ;  the 
dried  hemp  in  the  bowl  is  covered  with  what 
Syrians  call  a  “  Kurs,”  a  bit  of  metal  about  the 
size  of  half-a-crown,  and  upon  it  rests  the  fire.  I 
at  once  recognized  the  implement  in  the  Brazil, 
where  many  slave-holders  simply  supposed  it  to 
be  a  servile  and  African  form  of  tobacco-pipe. 
After  a  few  puffs  the  eyes  redden,  a  violent  cough 
is  caused  by  the  acrid  fumes  tickling  the  throat  ; 
the  brain,  whirls  with  a  pleasant  swimming,  like 
that  of  chloroform,  and  the  smoker  finds  himself 
in  gloria .  My  Spanish  friends  at  Po  tried  but 
did  not  like  it.  I  can  answer  for  the  hemp  being 
stronger  than  the  Egyptian  hashish  or  the  bhang 
of  Hindostan;  it  rather  resembled  the  Fasukh  of 
Northern  Africa,  the  Dakha  and  Motukwane  of 


and  the  Mpongwe.  89 

the  southern  regions,  and  the  wild  variety  called 
in  Sind  “  Bang  i  Jabali.” 

The  religion  of  African  races  is  ever  interesting 
to  those  of  a  maturer  faith ;  it  is  somewhat  like 
the  study  of  childhood  to  an  old  man.  The  Jew, 
the  high-caste  Hindu,  and  the  Guebre,  the  Chris¬ 
tian  and  the  Moslem  have  their  Holy  Writs,  their 
fixed  forms  of  thought  and  worship,  in  fact  their 
grooves  in  which  belief  runs.  They  no  longer 


THE  WATER-PIPE. 


see  through  a  glass  darkly  ;  nothing  with  them  is 
left  vague  or  undetermined.  Continuation,  resur¬ 
rection,  eternity  are  hereditary  and  habitual  ideas  ; 
they  have  become  almost  inseparable  and  con¬ 
genital  parts  of  the  mental  system.  This  condition 
renders  it  nearly  as  difficult  for  us  to  understand 
the  vagueness  and  mistiness  of  savage  and  un¬ 
written  creeds,  as  to  penetrate  into  the  modus 
agendi  of  animal  instinct.  And  there  is  yet 
another  obstacle  in  dealing  with  such  people, 
their  intense  and  childish  sensitiveness  and  secre¬ 
tiveness.  They  are  not,  as  some  have  foolishly 


90 


The  Minor  Tribes 


supposed,  ashamed  of  their  tenets  or  their  prac¬ 
tices,  but  they  are  unwilling  to  speak  about  them. 
They  fear  the  intentions  of  the  cross-questioner, 
and  they  hold  themselves  safest  behind  a  crooked 
answer.  Moreover,  every  Mpongwe  is  his  own 
“  pontifex  maximus,”  and  the  want,  or  rather  the 
scarcity,  of  a  regular  priesthood  must  promote 
independence  and  discrepancy  of  belief. 

Whilst  noticing  the  Fetishism  of  the  Gaboon  I 
cannot  help  observing,  by  the  way,  how  rapidly  the 
civilization  of  the  nineteenth  century  is  redeveloping, 
together  with  the  “  Religion  of  Humanity”  the  old 
faith,  not  of  Paganism,  but  of  Cosmos,  of  Nature  ; 
how  directly  it  is,  in  fact,  going  back  to  its  older  gods. 
The  Unknowable  of  our  day  is  the  Brahm,  the  Aka- 
rana-Zaman,  the  Gaboon  Anyambia,  of  which  no¬ 
thing  can  be  predicated  but  an  existence  utterly  un¬ 
intelligible  to  the  brain  of  man,  a  something  free 
from  the  accidents  of  personality,  of  volition,  of 
intelligence,  of  design,  of  providence  ;  a  something 
which  cannot  be  addressed  by  veneration  or  wor¬ 
ship ;  whose  sole  effects  are  subjective,  that  is,  upon 
the  worshipper,  not  upon  the  worshipped.  N othing 
also  can  be  more  illogical  than  the  awe  and  respect 
claimed  by  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer  for  a  being  of 
which  the  very  essence  is  that  nothing  can  be 
known  of  it.  And,  as  the  idea  grows,  the  several 
modes  and  forms  of  the  Unknowable,  the  Hor- 
muzd  and  Ahriman  of  the  Dualist,  those  personi- 


and  the  Mpongwe. 


9i 


fications  of  good  and  evil ;  the  Brahma,  Vishnu, 
and  Shiva,  creation,  preservation,  and  destruc¬ 
tion  ;  the  beginning,  the  middle,  and  the  end  of 
all  things;  the  Triad,  adored  by  all  Triadists 
under  some  modification,  as  that  of  Osiris,  Isis, 
and  Horus,  father,  mother,  and  son,  type  of  the 
family;  or  Jupiter,  Neptune,  and  Pluto,  the  three 
great  elements ;  these  outward  and  visible  ex¬ 
pressions  lose  force  and  significance,  making 
place  for  that  Law  of  which  they  are  the  rude 
exponents.  The  marvellous  spread  of  Spiritual¬ 
ism,  whose  god  is  the  Unknowable,  and  whose 
prophet  was  Swedenborg,  is  but  the  polished  form 
of  the  Mpongwe  Ibambo  and  I  logo  ;  the  benefi¬ 
cent  phantasms  have  succeeded  to  the  malevolent 
ghosts,  the  shadowy  deities  of  mans  childhood ;  as 
the  God  of  Love  formerly  took  the  place  of  the  God 
of  Fear.  The  future  of  Spiritualism,  which  may 
be  defined  as  “  Hades  with  Progress,”  is  making 
serious  inroads  upon  the  coarse  belief,  worthy  of 
the  barbarous  and  the  middle  ages,  in  an  eternity 
of  punishment,  easily  expressed  by  everlasting  fire, 
and  in  ineffable  joys,  which  no  one  has  ever  success¬ 
fully  expressed.  The  ghosts  of  our  childhood 
have  now  become  bond  fide  objective  beings,  who 
rap,  raise  tables,  display  fireworks,  rain  flowers, 
and  brew  tea.  We  explain  by  “ levitation”  the 
riding  of  the  witch  upon  the  broom-stick  to  the 
Sabbath ;  we  can  no  longer  refuse  credence  to 


92 


The  Minor  Tribes 


Canidia  and  all  her  spells.  And  the  very  vague¬ 
ness  of  the  modern  faith  serves  to  assimilate  it 
the  more  to  its  most  ancient  forms,  one  of  which 
we  are  studying  upon  the  Gaboon  River. 

The  missionary  returning  from  Africa  is  often 
asked  what  is  the  religion  of  the  people  ?  If  an 
exact  man,  he  will  answer,  “  I  don’t  know.”  And 
how  can  he  know  when  the  people  themselves, 
even  the  princes  and  priests,  are  ignorant  of  it  ? 
A  missionary  of  twenty  years’  standing  in  West 
Africa,  an  able  and  conscientious  student  withal, 
assured  me  that  during  the  early  part  of  his  career 
he  had  given  much  time  to  collecting  and  collating, 
under  intelligent  native  superintendence,  negro 
traditions  and  religion.  He  presently  found  that 
no  two  men  thought  alike  upon  any  single  subject : 
I  need  hardly  say  that  he  gave  up  in  despair  a 
work  hopeless,  as  psychology,  the  mere  study  of 
the  individual. 

Fetishism,  I  believe,  is  held  by  the  orthodox 
to  be  a  degradation  of  the  pure  and  primitive 
“  Adamical  dispensation,”  even  as  the  negro  has 
been  supposed  to  represent  the  accursed  and 
degraded  descendants  of  Ham  and  Canaan.  I 
cannot  but  look  upon  it  as  the  first  dawn  of  a 
faith  in  things  not  seen.  And  it  must  be  studied 
by  casting  off  all  our  preconceived  ideas.  For 
instance,  Africans  believe,  not  in  soul  nor  in 
spirit,  but  in  ghost ;  when  they  called  M.  du 


and  the  Mpongwe. 


93 


Chaillu  a  “  Mbwiri,”  they  meant  that  the  white 
man  had  been  bleached  by  the  grave  as  Dante  had 
been  darkened  by  his  visit  below,  and  consequently 
he  was  a  subject  of  fear  and  awe.  They  have  a 
material,  evanescent,  intelligible  future,  not  an 
immaterial,  incomprehensible  eternity  ;  the  ghost 
endures  only  for  awhile  and  perishes  like  the 
memory  of  the  little-great  name.  Hence  the 
ignoble  dread  in  East  and  West  Africa  of  a  death 
which  leads  to  a  shadowy  world,  and  eventually  to 
utter  annihilation.  Seeing  nought  beyond  the 
present-future,  there  is  no  hope  for  them  in  the 
grave ;  they  wail  and  sorrow  with  a  burden  of 
despair.  “  Ame-kwisha  ” — he  is  finished — is  the 
East  African’s  last  word  concerning  kinsman  and 
friend.  “  All  is  done  for  ever,”  sing  the  West 
Africans.  Any  allusion  to  loss  of  life  turns  their 
black  skins  blue  ;  “Yes,”  they  exclaim,  “  it  is  bad  to 
die,  to  leave  house  and  home,  wife  and  children  ;  no 
more  to  wear  soft  cloth,  nor  eat  meat,  nor  “  drink  ” 
tobacco,  and  rum.”  “  Never  speak  of  that”  the 
moribund  will  exclaim  with  a  shudder ;  such  is  the 
ever-present  horror  of  their  dreadful  and  dreary  times 
of  sickness,  always  aggravated  by  suspicions  of 
witchcraft,  the  only  cause  which  their  imperfect 
knowledge  of  physics  can  assign  to  death — even 
Van  Helmont  asserted,  “  Deus  non  fecit  mortem.” 
The  peoples,  who,  like  those  of  Dahome,  have 
a  distinct  future  world,  have  borrowed  it,  I  cannot 


94 


The  Minor  Tribes 


help  thinking,  from  Egypt.  And  when  an  African 
chief  said  in  my  presence  to  a  Yahoo-like  naval 
officer,  “  When  so  be  I  die,  I  come  up  for  white 
man !  When  so  be  you  die,  you  come  up  for 
monkey !  ”  my  suspicion  is  that  he  had  distorted 
the  doctrine  of  some  missionary.  Man  would 
hardly  have  a  future  without  a  distinct  priestly 
class  whose  interest  it  is  to  teach  “  another  and  a 
better,” — or  a  worse. 

Certain  missionaries  in  the  Gaboon  River  have 
detected  evidences  of  Judaism  amongst  the  Mpon- 
gwe,  which  deserve  notice  but  which  hardly  require 
detailed  refutation,  i.  Circumcision,  even  on  the 
eighth  day  as  amongst  the  Efik  of  the  old  Calabar 
River ;  but  this  is  a  familiar  custom  borrowed  from 
Egypt  by  the  Semites  ;  it  is  done  in  a  multitude  of 
ways,  which  are  limited  only  by  necessity ;  the 
resemblance  of  the  Mpongwe  rite  to  that  of  the 
Jews,  though  remarkable,  is  purely  accidental.  2. 
The  division  of  tribes  into  separate  families  and 
frequently  into  the  number  twelve  ;  but  this  again 
appears  fortuitous  ;  almost  all  the  West  African 
people  have  some  such  division,  and  they  range  up- 
wards  from  three,  as  amongst  the  Kru-men,  the  Gal- 
las,  the  Wakwafi, and  the  Wanyika.1  3.  Exogamy 
or  the  rigid  interdiction  of  marriage  between  clans 


1  For  further  details  see  “  Zanzibar  City,  Island,  and  Coast,” 
vol.  ii.  chap.  iv. 


and  the  Mpongwe. 


95 


and  families  nearly  related  ;  here  again  the  Hindu 
and  the  Somal  observe  the  custom  rigidly,  whilst 
the  Jews  and  Arabs  have  ever  taken  to  wife  their 
first  cousins.  4.  Sacrifices  with  blood-sprinkling 
upon  altars  and  door-posts ;  a  superstition  almost 
universal,  found  in  Peru  and  Mexico  as  in  Pales¬ 
tine,  preserved  in  Ashanti  and  probably  borrowed 
by  the  Hebrews  from  the  African  Egyptians.  5. 
The  formal  and  ceremonial  observance  of  new 
moons  ;  but  the  Wanyamwezi  and  other  tribes  also 
hail  the  appearance  of  the  lesser  light,  like  the 
Moslems,  who,  when  they  sight  the  Hilal  (crescent), 
ejaculate  a  short  prayer  for  blessings  throughout 
the  month  which  it  ushers  in.  6.  A  specified 
time  of  mourning  for  the  dead  (common  to  all 
barbarians  as  to  civilized  races),  during  which  their 
survivors  wear  soiled  clothes  (an  instinctive  sign 
of  grief,  as  fine  dresses  are  of  joy),  and  shave  their 
heads  (doubtless  done  to  make  some  difference 
from  every-day  times),  accompanied  with  ceremonial 
purifications  (what  ancient  people  has  not  had  some 
such  whim  ? ).  7.  The  system  of  Runda  or  for¬ 

bidden  meats ;  but  every  traveller  has  found  this 
practice  in  South  as  in  East  Africa,  and  I  noticed 
it  among  the  Somal  who,  even  when  starving,  will 
not  touch  fish  nor  fowl.  Briefly,  external  resem¬ 
blances  and  coincidences  like  these  could  be  made 
to  establish  cousinhood  between  a  cockney  and 
a  cockatoo;  possibly  such  discovery  of  Judaism 


96 


The  Minor  Tribes 


dates  from  the  days  about  1840,  when  men  were 
mad  to  find  the  “Lost  Tribes,”  as  if  they  had 
not  quite  enough  to  do  with  the  two  which  remain 
to  them. 

The  Mpongwe  and  their  neighbours  have 
advanced  a  long  step  beyond  their  black  brethren 
in  Eastern  Africa.  No  longer  contented  with 
mere  Fetishes,  the  Egyptian  charms  in  which 
the  dreaded  ghost  “sits,”1  meaning,  is  “bound,” 
they  have  invented  idols,  a  manifest  advance  toward 
that  polytheism  and  pantheism  which  lead  through 
a  triad  and  duad  of  deities  to  monotheism,  the 
finial  of  the  spiritual  edifice.  In  Eastern  Africa 
I  know  but  one  people,  the  Wanyika  near  Momba- 
sah,  who  have  certain  images  called  “  Kisukas;” 
they  declare  that  this  great  medicine,  never  shown 
to  Europeans,  came  from  the  West,  and  Andrew 
Battel  (1600)  found  idols  amongst  the  people 
whom  he  calls  Giagas  or  Jagas,  meaning  Congoese 
chiefs.  Moreover,  the  Gaboon  pagans  lodge  their 
idols.  Behind  each  larger  establishment  there  is  a 
dwarf  hut,  the  miniature  of  a  dwelling-place,  care¬ 
fully  closed ;  I  thought  these  were  offices,  but 
Hotaloya  Andrews  taught  me  otherwise.  He 
called  them  in  his  broken  English  “  Compass- 
houses,”  a  literal  translation  of  “  Ndgo  Mbwiri,” 
and,  sturdily  refusing  me  admittance,  left  me  as 


1  See  Zanzibar  City,  Island,  and  Coast,”  vol.  ii.  chap.  v. 


and  the  Mpongwe. 


97 


wise  as  before.  The  reason  afterwards  proved 
to  be  that  “Ologo  he  kill  man  too  much.” 

I  presently  found  out  that  he  called  my  pocket 
compass,  “  Mbwiri,”  a  very  vague  and  compre¬ 
hensive  word.  It  represents  in  the  highest  signi¬ 
fication  the  Columbian  Manitou,  and  thus  men 
talk  of  the  Mbwiri  of  a  tree  or  a  river;  as  will 
presently  be  seen,  it  is  also  applied  to  a  tutelar 
god ;  and  I  have  shown  how  it  means  a  ghost. 
In  “  Nago  Mbwiri”  the  sense  is  an  idol,  an  object 
of  worship,  a  “medicine”  as  the  North- American 
Indians  say,  in  contradistinction  to  Munda,  a 
grigri,  talisman,  or  charm.  Every  Mpongwe, 
woman  as  well  as  man,  has  some  Mbwiri  to  which 
offerings  are  made  in  times  of  misfortune,  sickness, 
or  danger.  I  afterwards  managed  to  enter  one  of 
these  rude  and  embryonal  temples  so  carefully 
shut.  Behind  the  little  door  of  matting  is  a  tall 
threshold  of  board ;  a  bench  lines  the  far  end,  and 
in  the  centre  stands  “  Ologo,”  a  rude  imitation  of 
a  human  figure,  with  a  gum-torch  planted  in  the 
ground  before  it  ready  for  burnt  offerings.  To 
the  walls  are  suspended  sundry  mystic  imple¬ 
ments,  especially  basins,  smeared  with  red  and 
white  chalk-mixture,  and  wooden  crescents  deco¬ 
rated  with  beads  and  ribbons. 

During  worship  certain  objects  are  placed  before 
the  Joss,  the  suppliant  at  the  same  time  jangling 
and  shaking  the  Ncheke  a  rude  beginning  of 

H 


i. 


98 


The  Minor  Tribes 


the  bell,  the  gong,  the  rattle,  and  the  instru¬ 
ments  played  before  idols  by  more  advanced 
peoples.  It  is  a  piece  of  wood,  hour-glass-shaped 
but  flat,  and  some  six  inches  and  a  half  long  ; 
the  girth  of  the  waist  is  five  inches,  and  about 
three  more  round  the  ends.  The  wood  is  cut 
away,  leaving  rude  and  uneven  raised  bands  hori¬ 
zontally  striped  with  white,  black,  and  red.  Two 
brass  wires  are  stretched  across  the  upper  and 
lower  breadth,  and  each  is  provided  with  a  ring  or 
hinge  holding  four  or  five  strips  of  wire  acting  as 
clappers. 

This  “  wicker-work  rattle  to  drive  the  devil  out  ” 
(M.  du  Chaillu,  chap,  xxvi.)  is  called  by  the 
Mpongwe  “  Soke,”  and  serves  only,  like  that  of  the 
Dahomans  and  the  Ashantis  (Bowdich,  364)  for 
dancing  and  merriment.  The  South  American 
Maraca  was  the  sole  object  of  worship  known  to 
the  Tupi  or  Brazilian  “  Indians.”  1 

The  beliefs  and  superstitions  popularly  attributed 
to  the  Mpongwe  are  these.  They  are  not  without 
that  which  we  call  a  First  Cause,  and  they  name  it 
Anyambia,  which  missionary  philologists  consider 
a  contraction  of  Aninla,  spirit  (?),  and  Mbia,  good. 
M.  du  Chaillu  everywhere  confounds  Anyam- 


1  See  part  ii.  chap.  xxii.  “  Hans  Stade,”  translated  by  Mr. 
Albert  Tootal,  annotated  by  myself,  and  published  by  the  Hak¬ 
luyt  Society,  1874. 


and  the  Mpongwe. 


99 


bfa,  or,  as  he  writes  the  word,  “  Aniambie,”  with 
Inyemba,  a  witch,  to  bewitch  being  “  punga  in- 
yemba.”  Mr.  W.  Winwood  Reade  seems  to  make 
Ariyambfa  a  mysterious  word,  as  was  J  ehovah  after 
the  date  of  the  Moabite  stone.  Like  the  Brahm 
of  the  Hindus,  the  god  of  Epicurus  and  Confucius, 
and  the  Akarana-Zaman  or  Endless  Time  of  the 
Guebres,  Anyambia  is  a  vague  being,  a  vox  et  prce- 
terea  nihil ,  without  personality,  too  high  and  too 
remote  for  interference  in  human  affairs,  therefore 
not  addressed  in  prayer,  never  represented  by  the 
human  form,  never  lodged  in  temples.  Under  this 
“  unknown  God  ”  are  two  chief  agencies,  working 
partners  who  manage  the  business  of  the  world, 
and  who  effect  what  the  civilized  call  “  Providence.” 
Mbwi'ri  here  becomes  the  Osiris,  Jove,  Hormuzd  or 
Good  God,  the  Vishnu,  or  Preserver,  a  tutelar  deity, 
a  Lar,  a  guardian.  Onyambe  is  the  Bad  God,  Ty- 
phon,  Vejovis,  the  Ahriman  or  Semitic  devil  ; 
Shiva  the  Destroyer,  the  third  person  of  the 
Aryan  triad  ;  and  his  name  is  never  mentioned 
but  with  bated  breath.  They  have  not  only  fear 
of,  but  also  a  higher  respect  for  him  than  for  the 
giver  of  good,  so  difficult  is  it  for  the  child-man’s 
mind  to  connect  the  ideas  of  benignity  and  power. 
He  would  harm  if  he  could,  ergo  so  would  his  god. 
I  once  hesitated  to  believe  that  these  rude  people 
had  arrived  at  the  notion  of  duality,  at  the  Mani- 
chseanism  which  caused  Mr.  Mill  (sen.)  surprise 


IOO 


The  Minor  Tribes 


that  no  one  had  revived  it  in  his  time  ;  at  an  idea 
so  philosophical,  which  leads  directly  to  the  ne plus 
ultra  of  faith,  El  Wahdaniyyeh  or  Monotheism. 
Nor  should  I  have  credited  them  with  so  logical 
an  apparatus  for  the  regimen  of  the  universe,  or 
so  stout-hearted  an  attempt  to  solve  the  eternal 
riddle  of  good  and  e  vil.  But  the  same  belief  also 
exists  amongst  the  Congoese  tribes,  and  even  in 
the  debased  races  of  the  Niger.  Captain  William 
Allen  (“  Niger  Expedition,”  i.  227)  thus  records 
the  effect  when,  at  the  request  of  the  com¬ 
missioners,  Herr  Schon,  the  missionary,  began 
stating  to  King  Obi  the  difference  between  the 
Christian  religion  and  heathenism  : 

“  Herr  Schon .  There  is  but  one  God. 

“  King  Obi .  I  always  understood  there  were 
two,”  &c. 

The  Mpongwe  “  Mwetye  ”  is  a  branch  of  male 
freemasonry  into  which  women  and  strangers 
are  never  initiated.  The  Bakele  and  Shekyani, 
according  to  “Western  Africa’'  (Wilson,  pp. 
391-2),  consider  it  a  “  Great  Spirit.”  Nothing 
is  more  common  amongst  adjoining  negro  tribes 
than  to  annex  one  another’s  superstitions,  com¬ 
pletely  changing,  withal,  their  significance. 
“  Ovengwa”  is  a  vampire,  the  apparition  of  a 
dead  man ;  tall  as  a  tree,  always  winking  and 
clearly  seen,  which  is  not  the  case  with  the 
Ibambo  and  I  logo,  plurals  of  Obambo  and 


and  the  Mpongwe. 


IOI 


Ologo.  These  are  vulgar  ghosts  of  the  departed, 
the  causes  of  “  possession,”  disease  and  death  ; 
they  are  propitiated  by  various  rites,  and  every¬ 
where  they  are  worshipped  in  private.  Mr.  Wilson 
opines  that  the  “  Obambo  are  the  spirits  of  the 
ancestors  of  the  people,  and  Inlaga  are  the  spirits 
of  strangers  and  have  come  from  a  distance,”  but 
this  was  probably  an  individual  tenet.  The 
Mumbo-Jumbo  of  the  Mandengas ;  the  Semo 
of  the  Susus  ;  the  Tassau  or  “  Purrah-devil  ”  of 
the  Mendis;  the  Egugun  of  the  Egbas;  the  Egbo 
of  the  Duallas  ;  and  the  Mwetye  and  Ukukwe  of 
the  Bakele,  is  represented  in  Pongo-land  by  the 
Nda,  which  is  an  order  of  the  young  men.  Ndd 
dwells  in  the  woods  and  comes  forth  only  by  night 
bundled  up  in  dry  plantain  leaves1  and  treading 
on  tall  stilts ;  he  precedes  free  adult  males  who 
parade  the  streets  with  dance  and  song.  The 
women  and  children  fly  at  the  approach  of  this 
devil  on  two  sticks,  and  with  reason  :  every 
peccadillo  is  punished  with  a  merciless  thrashing. 
The  institution  is  intended  to  keep  in  order 
the  weaker  sex,  the  young  and  the  “  chattels 
Nda  has  tried  visiting  white  men  and  missionaries, 
but  his  visits  have  not  been  a  success. 

1  Captain  Boteler  (v.  ii.  p.  374)  gives  a  sketch  of  the  “  Fetiche 
dance,  Cape  Lopez/"  and  an  admirable  description  of  Nda,  who 
is  mounted  on  stilts  with  a  white  mask,  followed  by  negroes 
with  chalked  faces. 


102 


The  Minor  Tribes 


The  civilized  man  would  be  apt  to  imagine  that 
these  wild  African  fetishists  are  easily  converted 
to  a  “  purer  creed.”  The  contrary  is  everywhere 
and  absolutely  the  case ;  their  faith  is  a  web 
woven  with  threads  of  iron.  The  negro  finds  it 
almost  impossible  to  rid  himself  of  his  belief ;  the 
spiritual  despotism  is  the  expression  of  his  organiza¬ 
tion,  a  part  of  himself.  Progressive  races,  on  the 
other  hand,  can  throw  off  or  exchange  every  part 
of  their  religion,  except  perhaps  the  remnant  of 
original  and  natural  belief  in  things  unseen — in 
fact,  the  Fetishist  portion,  such  as  ghost-ex¬ 
istence  and  veneration  of  material  objects,  places, 
and  things.  I  might  instance  the  Protestant  mis¬ 
sionary  who,  while  deriding  the  holy  places  at 
Jerusalem,  considers  the  “  Cedars  of  Lebanon” 
sacred  things,  and  sternly  forbids  travellers  to 
gather  the  cones. 

The  stereotyped  African  answer  to  Europeans 
ridiculing  these  institutions,  including  wizard- 
spearing  and  witch-burning  is,  “  There  may  be  no 
magic,  though  I  see  there  is,  among  you  whites. 
But  we  blacks  have  known  many  men  who  have 
been  bewitched  and  diedT  Even  in  Asia,  when¬ 
ever  I  spoke  contemptuously  to  a  Moslem  of  his 
Jinns,  or  to  a  Flindu  of  his  Rakshasa,  the  rejoinder 
invariably  was,  “  You  white  men  are  by  nature  so 
hot  that  even  our  devils  fear  you.” 

Witchcraft,  which  has  by  no  means  thoroughly 


and  the  Mpongwe. 


103 


disappeared  from  Europe,  maintains  firm  hold  upon 
the  African  brain.  The  idea  is  found  amongst 
Christians,  for  instance,  the  “  reduced  Indians”  of 
the  Amazonas  River;  and  it  is  evidently  at  the 
bottom  of  that  widely  spread  superstition,  the 
“  evil  eye,”  which  remains  throughout  Southern 
Europe  as  strong  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  Pliny. 
As  amongst  barbarians  generally,  no  misfortune 
happens,  no  accident  occurs,  no  illness  nor  death 
can  take  place  without  the  agency  of  wizard  or 
witch.  There  is  nothing  more  odious  than  this 
crime ;  it  is  hostile  to  God  and  man,  and  it  must 
be  expiated  by  death  in  the  most  terrible  tortures. 
Metamorphosis  is  a  common  art  amongst  Mpongwe 
magicians  :  this  vulgar  materialism,  of  which  Ovid 
sang,  must  not  be  confounded  with  the  poetical 
Hindu  metempsychosis  or  transmigration  of  souls 
which  explains  empirically  certain  physiological 
mysteries.  Here  the  adept  naturally  becomes  a 
gorilla  or  a  leopard,  as  he  would  be  a  lion  in  South 
Africa,  a  hyena  in  Abyssinia  and  the  Somali 
country,  and  a  loup-garou  in  Brittany.1 

The  poison  ordeal  is  a  necessary  corollary  to 
witchcraft.  The  plant  most  used  by  the  Oganga 
(medicine  man)  is  a  small  red-rooted  shrub,  not 
unlike  a  hazel  bush,  and  called  Ikazya  or  Ikaja. 
Mr.  Wilson  (p.  225)  writes  “  Nkazya:”  Battel  (loc. 


1  See  “  Zanzibar,  City,  Island,  and  Coast,”  vol.  i.  chap.  vii. 


104  The  Minor  Tribes 

cit.  334)  terms  the  root  “  Imbando,”  a  corruption 
of  Mbundu.  M.  du  Chaillu  (chap,  xv.)  gives  an 
illustration  of  the  “  Mboundou  leaf”  (half  size)  : 
Professor  John  Torrey  believes  the  active  principle 
to  be  a  vegeto-alkali  of  the  Strychnos  group,  but 
the  symptoms  do  not  seem  to  bear  out  the  con¬ 
jecture.  The  Mpongwe  told  me  that  the  poison  was 
named  either  Mbundu  or  Olonda  (nut)  werere — 
perhaps  this  was  what  is  popularly  called  “  a  sell.” 
Mbundu  is  the  decoction  of  the  scraped  bark 
which  corresponds  with  the  “  Sassy- water”  of  the 
northern  maritime  tribes.  The  accused,  after 
drinking  the  potion,  is  ordered  to  step  over  sticks 
of  the  same  plant,  which  are  placed  a  pace  apart. 
If  the  man  be  affected,  he  raises  his  foot  like  a 
horse  with  string-halt,  and  this  convicts  him  of 
the  foul  crime.  Of  course  there  is  some  antidote, 
as  the  medicine-man  himself  drinks  large  draughts 
of  his  own  stuff :  in  Old  Calabar  River  for  instance, 
Mithridates  boils  the  poison-nut ;  but  Europeans 
could  not,  and  natives  would  not,  tell  me  what  the 
Gaboon  “  dodge”  is.  According  to  vulgar  Africans, 
all  test-poisons  are  sentient  and  reasoning  beings, 
who  search  the  criminal’s  stomach,  that  is  his 
heart,  and  who  find  out  the  deep  hidden  sin  ; 
hence  the  people  shout,  “If  they  are  wizards,  let  it 
kill  them  ;  if  they  are  innocent,  let  it  go  forth !  ” 
Moreover,  the  detected  murderer  is  considered  a 
bungler  who  has  fallen  into  the  pit  dug  for  his 


and  the  Mpongwe.  105 

brother.  Doubtless  many  innocent  lives  have 
been  lost  by  this  superstition.  But  there  is  reason 
in  the  order,  “  Thou  shalt  not  suffer  a  witch  to 
live,”  without  having  recourse  to  the  super¬ 
naturalisms  and  preternaturalisms,  which  have 
unobligingly  disappeared  when  Science  most  wants 
them.  Sorcery  and  poison  are  as  closely  united  as 
the  “  Black  Nightingales,”  and  it  evidently  differs 
little  whether  I  slay  a  man  with  my  sword  or  I 
destroy  him  by  the  slow  and  certain  torture  of  a 
mind  diseased. 

The  Mpongwe  have  also  some  peculiarities  in 
their  notions  of  justice.  If  a  man  murder  another, 
the  criminal  is  put  to  death,  not  by  the  nearest  of 
kin,  as  amongst  the  Arabs  and  almost  all  wild 
people,  but  by  the  whole  community  ;  this  already 
shows  an  advanced  appreciation  of  the  act  and  its 
bearings.  The  penalty  is  either  drowning  or  burn¬ 
ing  alive  :  except  in  the  case  of  a  chief  or  a  very 
rich  man,  little  or  no  difference  is  made  between 
wilful  murder,  justifiable  homicide,  and  accidental 
manslaughter — the  reason  of  this,  say  their  jurists, 
is  to  make  people  more  careful.  Here,  again,  we 
find  a  sense  of  the  sanctity  of  life  the  reverse  of 
barbarous.  Cutting  and  maiming  are  punished  by 
the  fine  of  a  slave. 

And  now  briefly  to  resume  the  character  of  the 
Mpongwe,  a  nervous  and  excitable  race  of  negroes. 
The  men  are  deficient  in  courage,  as  the  women 


io6 


The  Minor  Tribes 


are  in  chastity,  and  neither  sex  has  a  tincture  of 
what  we  call  morality.  To  commercial  shrewd¬ 
ness  and  eagerness  they  add  exceptional  greed  of 
gain  and  rascality ;  foreign  rum  and  tobacco,  dress 
and  ornaments,  arms  and  ammunition  have  been 
necessaries  to  them ;  they  will  have  them,  and, 
unless  they  can  supply  themselves  by  licit,  they 
naturally  fly  to  illicit  means.  Yet,  despite  threats 
of  poison  and  charges  of  witchcraft,  they  have 
arrived  at  an  inkling  of  the  dogma  that  “  honesty 
is  the  best  policy  the  East  African  has  never 
dreamed  it  in  the  moments  of  his  wildest  imagina-? 
tion.  Pre-eminent  liars,  they  are,  curious  to  say, 
often  deceived  by  the  falsehoods  of  others,  and 
they  fairly  illustrate  the  somewhat  paradoxical 
proverb  : 

“  He  who  hates  truth  shall  be  the  dupe  of  lies.” 

Unblushing  mendicants,  cunning  and  calculating, 
their  obstinacy  is  remarkable  ;  yet,  as  we  often  find 
the  African,  they  are  at  the  same  time  irresolute  in 
the  extreme.  Their  virtues  are  vivacity,  mental 
activity,  acute  observation,  sociability,  politeness, 
and  hospitality  :  the  fact  that  a  white  man  can 
wander  single-handed  through  the  country  shows 
a  kindly  nature.  The  brightest  spot  in  their 
character  is  an  abnormal  development  of  adhe¬ 
siveness,  popularly  called  affection ;  it  is  some¬ 
what  tempered  by  capricious  ruffianism,  as  in 


and  the  Mpongwe .  107 

children ;  yet  it  entitles  them  to  the  gratitude 
of  travellers. 

The  language  of  the  Mpongwe  has  been  fairly 
studied.  T.  Edward  Bowdich  (“  Mission  from  Cape 
Coast  Castle  to  Ashantee,”  London,  Murray,  1819) 
when  leaving  the  West  Coast  for  England,  touched 
at  the  Gaboon  in  a  trading  vessel,  and  visited 
Naango  (King  George’s  Town),  on  Abaaga  Creek, 
which  he  places  fifty  miles  up  stream.  He  first 
gave  (Appendix  VI.)  a  list  of  the  Mpongwe 
numerals.  In  1847  the  “  Missionaries  of  the 
A.  B.  C.  F.  M.”  Gaboon  Mission,  Western  Africa, 
printed  a  “  Grammar  of  the  Mpongwe  Language, 
with  Vocabularies”  (New  York,  Snowden  and  Pratt, 
Vesey  Street),  perhaps  a  little  prematurely  ;  it  is 
the  first  of  the  four  dialects  on  this  part  of  the 
coast  reduced  to  system  by  the  American  Mis¬ 
sionaries,  especially  by  the  Rev.  Mr.  Leighton 
Wilson,  the  others  being  Bakele,  Benga,  and  Fa^. 

In  1856,  the  same  gentleman,  who  had  taken  the 
chief  part  in  the  first  publication,  madeanableabstract 
and  a  comparison  with  the  Grebo  and  Mandenga 
tongues  (“  Western  Africa,”  part  iv.  chap.  iv.).  M. 
du  Chaillu  further  abridged  this  abridgement  in  his 
Appendix  without  owning  his  authority,  and  in 
changing  the  examples  he  did  all  possible  damage. 
In  the  Transactions  of  the  Ethnological  Society  of 
London  (part  ii.  vol.  i.  new  series),  he  also  gave 
an  abstract,  in  which  he  repeats  himself.  A  “  voca- 


io8 


The  Minor  Tribes 


bulaire  de  la  langue  Ponga  ”  was  printed  in  the 
“  Memoires  de  la  Societd  Ethnologique,”  tome  ii., 
by  M.  P.  H.  Delaporte. 

The  other  publications  known  to  me  are  : — 

1.  The  Book  of  Proverbs,  translated  into  the 
Mpongwe  language  at  the  mission  of  the  A.  B. 
C.  F.  M.,  Gaboon,  West  Africa.  New  York. 
American  Bible  Society,  instituted  in  the  year 

MDCCCXVI.  1859. 

2.  The  Books  of  Genesis,  part  of  Exodus,  Pro¬ 
verbs,  and  Acts,  by  the  same,  printed  at  the  same 
place  and  in  the  same  year. 

The  missionary  explorers  of  the  language,  if  I 
may  so  call  them,  at  once  saw  that  it  belongs  to 
the  great  South  African  family  Sichwana,  Zulu, 
Kisawahili,  Mbundo  (Congoese),  Fiote,  and  others, 
whose  characteristics  are  polysyllabism,  inflection 
by  systematic  prefixes,  and  an  alliteration,  the 
mystery  of  whose  reciprocal  letters  is  theoretically 
explained  by  a  euphony  in  many  cases  unintelli¬ 
gible,  like  the  modes  of  Hindu  music,  to  the  Euro¬ 
pean  ear.1  But  they  naturally  fell  into  the  uni¬ 
versally  accepted  error  of  asserting  “  it  has  no 
known  affinities  to  any  of  the  languages  north  of 
the  Mountains  of  the  Moon,”  meaning  the  equa¬ 
torial  chain  which  divides  the  Niger  and  Nile 
valleys  from  the  basin  of  the  Congo. 

1  I  have  discussed  this  subject  in  my  “  Zanzibar,”  vol.  i. 
chap.  xi. 


and  the  Mpongwe.  109 

This  branch  has  its  peculiarities.  Like  Italian — 
the  coquette  who  grants  her  smiles  to  many,  her 
favours  to  few — one  of  the  easiest  to  understand 
and  to  speak  a  little,  it  is  very  difficult  to  master. 
Whilst  every  native  child  can  thread  its  way  safely 
through  its  intricate,  elaborate,  and  apparently 
arbitrary  variations,  the  people  comprehend  a 
stranger  who  blunders  over  every  sentence.  Mr. 
Wilson  thus  limits  the  use  of  the  accent  :  “Whilst 
the  Mandenga  (“  A  Grammar  of  the  Mandenga 
Language,”  by  the  Rev.  R.  Maxwell  Macbriar,  Lon¬ 
don,  John  Mason)  and  the  Grebo  (“  Grammar,”  by 
the  Right  Rev.  John  Payne,  D.D.  150,  Nassau 
Street,  New  York,  1864),  distinguish  between 
similar  words,  especially  monosyllables,  by  a  cer¬ 
tain  pitch  of  voice,  the  Mpongwe  repel  accent,  and 
rely  solely  upon  the  clear  and  distinct  vowel 
sounds.”  But  I  found  the  negative  past,  present, 
and  future  forms  of  verbs  wholly  dependent  upon 
a  change  of  accent,  or  rather  of  intonation  or 
voice-pitch,  which  the  strangers  ear,  unless  acute, 
will  fail  to  detect.  F  or  instance,  Mi  Taunda 
would  mean  “  I  love ;  ”  Mi  taunda ,  “  I  do  not 
love.”  The  reverend  linguist  also  asserts  that  it 
is  almost  entirely  free  from  guttural  and  nasal 
sounds ;  the  latter  appeared  to  me  as  numerous 
and  complicated  as  in  the  Sanskrit.  Mr. 
Wilson  could  hardly  have  had  a  nice  ear,  or  he 
would  not  have  written  Nchfgo  “  Ntyege,”  or 


I  IO 


The  Minor  Tribes 


Njina  “  Engena,”  which  gives  a  thoroughly  un- 
African  distinctness  to  the  initial  consonant. 

The  adjectival  form  is  archaically  expressed  by 
a  second  and  abstract  substantive.  This  pecu¬ 
liarity  is  common  in  the  South  African  family,  as 
in  Ashanti ;  but,  as  Bowdich  observes,  we  also 
find  it  in  Greek,  e.g.  A Ipsa-sis  aVaAs/W,  “  heresies  of 
destruction  ”  for  destructive.  Another  notable 
characteristic  is  the  Mpongwe’s  fondness  for  the 
passive  voice,  never  using,  if  possible,  the  active ; 
for  instance,  instead  of  saying,  “He  was  born 
thus,”  he  prefers,  “  The  birth  that  was  thus  borned 
by  him.”  The  dialect  changes  the  final  as  well  as 
the  initial  syllable,  a  process  unknown  to  the  purest 
types  of  the  South  African  family.  As  we  advance 
north  we  find  this  phenomenon  ever  increasing ; 
for  instance  in  Fernando  Po  ;  but  the  Mpongwe 
limits  the  change  to  verbs. 

Another  distinguishing  point  of  these  three 
Gaboon  tongues,  as  the  Rev.  Mr.  Mackey  ob¬ 
serves,  is  “  the  surprizing  flexibility  of  the  verb, 
the  almost  endless  variety  of  parts  regularly  de¬ 
rived  from  a  single  root.  There  are,  perhaps,  no 
other  languages  in  the  world  that  approach  them 
in  the  variety  and  extent  of  the  inflections  of  the 
verb,  possessing  at  the  same  time  such  rigid  regu¬ 
larity  of  conjugation  and  precision  of  the  mean¬ 
ing  attached  to  each  part.”  It  is  calculated  that 
the  whole  number  of  tenses  or  shades  of  meaning 


and  the  Mpongwe. 


1 1 1 


which  a  Mpongwe  radical  verb  may  be  made  to 
express,  with  the  aid  of  its  auxiliary  particles, 
augmentatives,  and  negatives — prefixes,  infixes, 
and  suffixes — is  between  twelve  and  fifteen  hun¬ 
dred,  worse  than  an  Arabic  triliteral. 

Liquid  and  eminently  harmonious,  concise  and 
capable  of  contraction,  the  Mpongwe  tongue  does 
not  deserve  to  die  out.  “  The  genius  of  the  lan¬ 
guage  is  such  that  new  terms  may  be  introduced 
in  relation  to  ethics,  metaphysics,  and  science ; 
even  to  the  great  truths  of  the  Christian  religion.” 

The  main  defect  is  that  of  the  South  African 
languages  generally — a  deficiency  of  syntax,  of 
gender  and  case ;  a  want  of  vigour  in  sound ;  a 
too  great  precision  of  expression,  rendering  it 
clumsy  and  unwieldy ;  and  an  absence  of  excep¬ 
tions,  which  give  beauty  and  variety  to  speech. 
The  people  have  never  invented  any  form  of 
alphabet,  yet  the  abundance  of  tale,  legend,  and 
proverb  which  their  dialect  contains  might  repay 
the  trouble  of  acquiring  it. 


CHAPTER  V. 

TO  SANGA-TANGA  AND  BACK. 

Y  objects  in  visiting  Mbata,  the  reader 
will  have  understood,  were  to  shoot  a 
specimen  or  specimens  of  the  gorilla, 
and,  if  possible,  to  buy  or  catch  a 
youngster.  Even  before  landing,  the  pilot  had 
assured  me  that  a  “  baby  ”  was  on  sale  at  the 
Comptoir,  but  on  inquiry  it  proved  to  have  died. 
I  was  by  no  means  sanguine  of  success — when  the 
fight  is  against  Time,  the  Old  Man  usually  wins 
the  day.  The  short  limits  of  my  trip  would  not 
allow  me  to  wander  beyond  the  coast  and  the 
nearer  riverine  regions,  where  frequent  villages 
and  the  constant  firing  of  muskets  have  taught  all 
wild  animals  that  flight  is  their  only  defence  ;  thus, 
besides  being  rare,  they  must  be  shy  and  timid, 
wary  and  knowing,  “  like  an  old  hedgehog  hunted 
for  his  grease.”  The  first  glance  at  the  bush  sug¬ 
gested,  “  Surely  it  is  impossible  to  find  big  game  in 
such  a  land  of  farms  and  plantations.” 


To  Sdnga-Tdnga  and  Back .  113 

Those  who  have  shot  under  such  circumstances 
will  readily  understand  that  everything  depends 
upon  “  luck ;  ”  one  man  may  beat  the  forest 
assiduously  and  vainly  for  five  or  six  weeks ; 
another  will  be  successful  on  the  first  day.  Thus 
whilst  I,  without  any  fault  of  my  own,  utterly 
failed  in  shooting  a  gorilla,  although  I  saw  him 
and  heard  him,  and  came  upon  his  trail,  and  found 
his  mortal  spoils,  another  traveller  had  hardly 
landed  in  the  Gaboon  before  he  was  so  fortunate 
as  to  bring  down  a  fine  anthropoid. 

However,  as  man  cannot  command  success,  I 
was  obliged  to  content  myself  with  doing  all  in  my 
power  to  deserve  it.  I  offered  five  dollars,  equal¬ 
ling  the  same  number  of  sovereigns  in  England,  to 
every  huntsman  for  every  fair  shot,  and  ten  dollars 
for  each  live  ape.  I  implicitly  obeyed  all  words 
of  command,  and  my  factotum  Selim  Agha  was 
indefatigable  in  his  zeal.  Indeed  “  luck”  was  dead 
against  us  during  the  whole  of  my  stay  in  Gorilla- 
land.  W,Q  ran  a  fair  risk  of  drowning  in  the  first 
days  voyage  ;  on  the  next  march  we  were  knocked 
down  by  lightning,  and  on  the  last  trip  I  had  a 
narrow  escape  from  the  fall  of  a  giant  branch  that 
grazed  my  hammock. 

My  first  “  bush  ”  evening  was  spent  in  palm- 
wine,  rum,  and  wassail ;  one  must  begin  by  humour¬ 
ing  Africans,  under  pain  of  being  considered  a 
churl ;  but  the  inevitable  result  is,  that  next  day 


1. 


1 


1 1 4  To  Sdnga -  Tanga  and  Back. 

they  will  by  some  pretext  or  other  shirk  work  to 
enjoy  the  headache.  That  old  villain,  “Young 
Prince/’  becoming  very  fou. ,  hospitably  offered 
me  his  daughter-in-law  Azfzeh,  Forteune’s  second 
wife  ;  and  he  was  vigorously  supported  by  the 
Nimrod  himself,  who  had  drawn  a  horizontal  line 
of  white  chalk  above  the  eyebrows,  a  defence 
against  the  Ibambo,  those  bad  ghosts  that  cause 
fevers  and  sickness.  Forteune  then  hinted  that 
perhaps  I  might  prefer  his  daughter — •“  he  be 
piccanniny ;  he  be  all  same  woman.”  Marchandise 
offerte  a  le  pied  coupd,  both  offers  were  declined 
with,  Merci ,  non !  Sporting  parties  are  often  made 
up  by  the  Messieurs  du  Plateau,  I  had  been  told 
at  the  Comptoir;  but  such  are  the  fascinations 
of  les  petites ,  that  few  ever  progress  beyond  the 
first  village.  There  was,  consequently,  wonder  in 
the  land  as  to  what  manner  of  utangani  this  one 
might  be. 

It  is  only  fair  to  own  that  the  ladies  endured 
with  great  philosophy  the  spretce  injuria  formcz , 
and  made  no  difference  in  their  behaviour  on  ac¬ 
count  of  their  charms  being  unappreciated.  Azfzeh 
was  a  stout  and  sturdy  personage  of  twenty-five, 
with  thick  wrists  and  ankles,  a  very  dark  skin,  and 
a  face  rendered  pleasing  by  good  humour.  And 
Azfzeh  was  childless,  a  sad  reproach  in  these 
lands,  where  progeny  forms  a  man’s  wealth  and  a 
woman’s  honour. 


To  Sdnga-  Tdnga  and  Back.  1 1 5 

The  next  day  was  perforce  a  halt,  as  had  been 
expected ;  moreover,  rains  and  tornadoes  were  a 
reasonable  pretext  for  nursing  the  headache.  The 
2 1  st  was  also  wet  and  stormy,  so  Nimrod  hid  him¬ 
self  and  was  not  to  be  found.  Then  the  baliv  ernes 
began.  One  Asini,  a  Mpongwe  from  the  Plateau, 
offered  to  show  me  a  huge  gorilla  near  his  village ; 
in  the  afternoon  he  was  confronted  with  “  Young 
Prince,”  and  he  would  have  blushed  scarlet  if  he 
could.  But  he  assured  me  plaintively  that  he 
must  lie  to  live,  and,  after  all,  la  prudence  des  souris 
nest  pas  celle  des  chats.  Before  dark,  Forteune  ap¬ 
peared,  and  swore  that  he  had  spent  the  day  in 
the  forest,  he  had  shot  at  a  gorilla,  but  the  gun 
missed  fire — of  course  he  had  slept  in  a  snug  hut. 

This  last  determined  me  to  leave  Mbata;  the 
three  Kru-men  had  returned;  one  of  them  was 
stationed  in  charge  of  the  boat,  and  next  morning 
we  set  out  at  6  a.m.  for  Nche  Mpolo,  the  head¬ 
quarters  of  “  Young  Prince.”  The  well-wooded 
land  was  devoid  of  fetor,  even  at  that  early  hour  ; 
we  passed  Ndagola*,  a  fresh  clearing  and  newly 
built  huts,  and  then  we  skirted  a  deep  and  forested 
depression,  upon  whose  further  side  lay  our 
bourne.  It  promised  sand-flies,  the  prime  pest  of 
this  region  ;  a  tall  amphitheatre  of  trees  on  a  dune 
to  the  west  excluded  the  sea-breeze,  and  north¬ 
wards  a  swampy  hollow  was  a  fine  breeding  place 
for  M.  Maringouin. 


1 1 6  To  Srtnga- Tanga  and  Back. 

Nche  Mpolo  lies  some  three  miles  nearly  due 
south  of  Mbatd ;  the  single  street  contains  fourteen 
cottages  and  two  palaver  houses.  We  were  re¬ 
ceived  with  distinction  by  “  Young  Princes’ ’ 
daughter,  a  huge  young  woman,  whose  still  huger 
mamma  was  from  Cape  Lopez.  She  placed  mats 
upon  the  bamboo  couch  under  the  verandah, 
brought  water  to  wash  our  feet,  and  put  the  kettle 
on  that  we  might  have  tea.  The  sun  was  fiery 
and  the  day  sultry ;  my  companions  complained  of 
fatigue  after  a  two  hours’  walk,  and  then  busied 
themselves  ostentatiously  in  cleaning  their  muskets, 
in  collecting  provisions,  and  in  appointing  certain 
bushmen  to  meet  us  on  the  morrow.  Before  dark 
Hotaloya  returned  to  his  village,  declaring  that  he 
could  find  no  bed  at  his  papa’s.  Probably  the 
uxorious  youth  had  been  ordered  home  by  his  pet 
wife,  who  had  once  lived  with  a  European  trader, 
who  spoke  a  few  words  of  English,  and  who  cooked 
with  peculiar  skill, — the  solid  merits  of  a  “  superior 
person.” 

At  dawn  on  the  23rd  we  set  out  for  the  southern 
bush,  Selim,  Forteune,  and  a  carrier  Kru-man— to 
carry  nothing.  We  passed  through  a  fresh 
clearing,  we  traversed  another  village  (three 
within  five  miles  !),  we  crossed  a  bad  bridge  and  a 
clear  stream  flowing  to  the  south-east,  and  pre¬ 
sently  we  found  ourselves  deep  in  the  dew-dripping 
forest.  The  leaves  no  longer  crackled  crisp  under 


To  Sdnga -  Tdnga  and  Back.  1 1 7 

foot,  and  the  late  rains  had  made  the  swamps 
somewhat  odorous.  After  an  hour  of  cautious 
walking,  listening  as  we  went,  we  saw  evident 
signs  of  Mister  Gorilla.  Boughs  three  inches  in 
diameter  strewed  the  ground  ;  the  husks  of  Ntondo 
or  I  here  (wild  cardamom)  had  been  scattered 
about,  and  a  huge  hare's  form  of  leaves  lay  some 
five  yards  from  the  tree  where  Forteune  declared 
that  Mistress  and  Master  Gorilla  had  passed  the 
night,  Paterfamilias  keeping  watch  below.  A  little 
beyond  we  were  shown  a  spot  where  two  males 
had  been  fighting  a  duel,  or  where  a  couple  had 
been  indulging  in  dalliance  sweet;  the  prints 
were  8  inches  long  and  6  across  the  huge  round 
toes ;  whilst  the  hinder  hand  appeared  almost 
bifurcate,  the  thumb  forming  nearly  a  half. 
This  is  explained  in  the  “  Gorilla  Book”  (chap, 
xx.)  :  “  Only  the  ball  of  the  foot,  and  that  thumb 
which  answers  to  our  great  toe,  seem  to  touch 
the  ground.” 

Presently  we  came  upon  the  five  bushmen  who 
had  been  appointed  to  meet  us.  They  were  a 
queer-looking  lot,  with  wild,  unsteady  eyes,  re¬ 
ceding  brows,  horizontal  noses,  and  projecting 
muzzles;  the  cranium  and  the  features  seemed 
disposed  nearly  at  a  right  angle,  giving  them  a 
peculiar  baboon-like  semblance.  Each  had  his 
water-gourd  and  his  flint-gun,  the  lock  protected 
by  a  cover  of  monkey’s  skin  or  wild  cow’s  hide, 


1 1 8  To  Sdnga -  Tdnga  and  Back . 

whilst  gibecieres  and  ammunition-bags  of  grass- 
cloth  hung  from  their  shoulders.  There  were  also 
two  boys  with  native  axes,  small  iron  triangles, 
whose  points  passed  through  knob-sticks ;  these 
were  to  fell  the  trees  in  which  our  game  might 
take  refuge,  and  possibly  they  might  have  done  so 
in  a  week.  A  few  minutes  with  this  party  con¬ 
vinced  me  that  I  was  wilfully  wasting  time  ;  they 
would  not  separate,  and  they  talked  so  loud  that 
game  would  be  startled  a  mile  off.  I  proposed  that 
they  should  station  me  in  a  likely  place,  form  a 
circle,  and  drive  up  what  was  in  it — they  were  far 
above  acting  beaters  after  that  fashion.  So  we 
dismissed  them  and  dispersed  about  the  bush. 
My  factotum  shot  a  fine  Mboko  ( Siurus  ebo- 
rivorus ),  2  ft.  2  in.  total  length  :  the  people  de¬ 
clare  that  this  squirrel  gnaws  ivory,  whence  its 
name.  I  had  heard  of  it  in  East  and  Central 
Africa,  but  the  tale  appeared  fabulous  :  here  it  is 
very  common,  half  a  dozen  will  be  seen  during  the 
day ;  it  has  great  vitality,  and  it  will  escape  after 
severe  wounds.  The  bushmen  also  brought  a 
Shoke  ( Colubus  Sat  anas),  a  small  black  monkey, 
remarkably  large  limbed :  the  little  unfortunate 
was  timid,  but  not  vicious ;  it  worried  itself  to 
death  on  the  next  day.  They  also  showed  me  * 
the  head  of  the  Nji'wo  antelope,  which  M.  du 
Chaillu  (chap,  xii.)  describes  as  “  a  singular  ani¬ 
mal  of  the  size  of  a  donkey,  with  shorter  legs,  no 


To  S&nga-  Tanga  and  Back.  1 1 9 

horns,  and  black,  with  a  yellow  spot  on  the 
back.” 

In  the  afternoon  Selim  went  to  fetch  my  arsen¬ 
ical  soap  from  Mbdta,  where  I  had  left  it  en 
Fitichd :  as  long  as  that  “  bad  medicine  ”  was 
within  Hotaloya s  “ben,”  no  one  would  dare  to 
meddle  with  my  goods.  Forteune  walked  in  very 
tired  about  sunset.  He  had  now  added  streaks 
of  red  to  the  white  chalk  upon  his  face,  arms,  and 
breast,  for  he  suspected,  we  were  assured,  witch¬ 
craft.  I  told  him  to  get  ready  for  a  march  on  the 
morrow  to  the  Shekyani  country,  lying  south-east, 
but  he  begged  so  hard,  and  he  seemed  so  assured 
of  showing  sport,  that  the  design  was  deferred,  and 
again  “  perdidi  diem.” 

Monday  the  24th  was  a  Black  Monday,  sultry 
and  thundery.  We  went  to  the  bush,  and  once 
more  we  returned,  disgusted  by  the  chattering  of 
the  wild  men.  As  we  discussed  our  plans  for 
moving,  Forteune  threw  cold  water  upon  every 
proposal.  This  puzzled  me,  and  the  difficulty  was 
to  draw  his  secret.  At  last  Kangd,  a  black  youth, 
who,  being  one  of  the  family,  had  attached  himself 
uninvited  to  the  party,  blurted  out  in  bad  French 
that  the  Shekyani  chief,  to  whose  settlement  we 
were  bound,  had  left  for  the  interior,  and  that  the 


1  M.  du  Chaillu’s  description  of  the  animal  is  excellent 
(p.  282),  and  the  people  at  once  recognized  the  cut. 


120  To  Sdnga-T&nga  and  Back . 

village  women  would  not,  or  rather  could  not,  give 
us  “chop.”  This  was  a  settler  to  my  Mpongwe 
friends.  Nimrod,  however,  declared  that  some 
bushmen  had  lately  seen  several  gorillas  in  the 
direction  of  Sanga-Tanga,  two  marches  down  coast 
from  Mbdta,  and  about  half-way  to  Cape  Lopez. 
I  did  not  believe  a  word  of  his  intelligence  ;  the 
direction  is  south-west  instead  of  south-east,  to¬ 
wards  the  sea  instead  of  into  the  forest.  But  it 
was  evidently  hopeless  to  seek  for  the  “  ole  man  ” 
in  these  parts,  and  I  had  long  been  anxious  to  see 
Sanga-Tanga;  we  therefore  agreed  newt.  con.  to 
set  out  before  dawn  on  the  next  day. 

But  the  next  day  dawned,  and  the  sun  rose 
high,  and  the  world  was  well  heated  and  aired 
before  the  bushmen  condescended  to  appear. 
After  a  two  hours’  battle  with  the  sand-flies  we 
set  off  at  7.35  a.  m.,  Forteune,  Hotaloya,  and 
Kangd  at  the  head  of  the  musketeers,  one  of  them 
also  carrying  an  axe ;  sixteen  guns  form  a  strong 
party  for  these  regions.  The  viol  (nchambf)  was 
not  allowed  to  hang  mute  in  Mbata  s  halls  ,  this 
instrument  or  the  drum  must  never  be  neglected 
in  African  travel ;  its  melody  at  the  halt  and  the 
camp-fire  are  to  the  negro  what  private  theatricals 
are  to  the  European  sailor  half  fossilized  in  the 
frozen  seas.  Our  specimen  was  strung  with  thin 
cords  made  from  the  fibre  of  a  lliana ;  I  was  shown 
this  growth,  which  looked  much  like  a  convolvulus. 


To  Sdnga-Tdnga  and  Back.  12 1 

The  people  have  a  long  list  of  instruments,  and 
their  music,  though  monotonous,  is  soft  and  plain¬ 
tive  :  Bowdich  gives  a  specimen  of  it  (“  Sketch  of 
Gaboon,”  p.  449),  and  of  a  bard  who  seems  to  have 
been  somewhat  more  frenzied  than  most  poets.  Cap¬ 
tain  Allen  (iii.  398)  speaks  of  a  harp  at  Bimbia  (Ca- 
marones)  tightly  strung  with  the  hard  fibre  of  some 
creeping  plant.  The  Bakele  harp  (M.  du  Chaillu, 
chap,  xvi.)  is  called  Ngombi ;  the  handle  opposite 
the  bow  often  has  a  carved  face,  and  it  might  be  a 


GABOON  HARP. 


beginning  of  the  article  used  by  civilized  Europe 
— Wales  for  instance. 

The  path  plunged  westward  into  the  bush, 
spanned  a  dirty  and  grass-grown  plantation  of 
bananas,  dived  under  thorn  tunnels  and  arches  of 
bush,  and  crossed  six  nullahs,  Neropotamoi,  then 
dry,  but  full  of  water  on  our  return.  The  ant- 
nests  were  those  of  Yoruba  and  the  Mendi  country; 
not  the  tall,  steepled  edifices  built  by  the  termites 
with  yellow  clay,  as  in  Eastern  Africa,  but  an 
eruption  of  blue-black,  hard-dried  mud  and  mucus, 
resembling  the  miniature  pagodas,  policemans  lan¬ 
terns,  mushrooms,  or  umbrellas  one  or  two  feet 


122  To  S&nga-T&nga  and  Back. 

high,  here  single,  there  double,  common  in  Ashanti 
and  Congo-land.  Like  most  of  their  congeners ,  the 
animals  die  when  exposed  to  the  sun.  The 
“  Bashikouay  ”  and  Nchounou  (Nchu’u)  of  M.  du 
Chaillu  are  the  common  “  driver-ant  ”  of  West 
Africa  ( Termes  bellicosa ).  It  is  little  feared  in  the 
Gaboon  ;  when  its  armies  attack  the  mission- 
houses,  they  are  easily  stopped  by  lighting  spirits 
of  turpentine,  or  by  a  strew  of  quicklime,  which 
combines  with  the  formic  acid.  The  different 
species  are  described  in  “  Palm  Land  ”  and 
“Western  Africa”  (pp.  369-373),  from  which  even 
the  account  of  the  “tubular  bridge”  is  taken — 
Mr.  Wilson  less  sensationally  calls  it  what  it  is,  a 
“  live  raft.”  The  most  common  are  the  Nkazeze, 
a  large  reddish  and  fetid  ant,  which  is  harmless  to 
man ;  the  Njenge,  a  smaller  red  species,  and  the 
Ibimbi'zi,  whose  bite  is  painful. 

We  passed  the  mortal  remains  of  a  gorilla  lashed 
to  a  pole  ;  the  most  interesting  parts  had  been  sold 
to  Mr.  R.  B.  N.  Walker,  and  were  on  their  way 
to  England.  I  was  shown  for  the  first  time  the 
Ndambo,  or  Ndambie  (Bowdich,  “Olamboo”), 
which  gives  the  india  rubber  of  commerce ;  it  is 
not  a  fat-leaved  fig-tree  ( Ficus  elastica  of  Asia)  nor 
aeuphorbia  ( Siphonia  elastica ),  as  in  South  Ame¬ 
rica,  but  a  large  climbing  ficus,  a  cable  thick  as 
a  man’s  leg  crossing  the  path,  and  “  swarming  up  ” 
to  the  top  of  the  tallest  boles ;  the  yellow  fruit  is 


To  Sdnga- Tdnga  and  Back.  123 

tart  and  pleasant  to  the  taste.  In  1817  the  style 
of  collecting  the  gum  (olamboo)  was  to  spread  with 
a  knife  the  glutinous  milk  as  it  oozed  from  the 
tree  over  the  shaved  breast  and  arms  like  a 
plaister ;  it  was  then  taken  off,  rolled  up  in  balls 
to  play  with  or  stretched  over  drums,  no  other  use 
being  known.  The  Rev.  Mr.  Wilson  declares 
(chap,  ii.)  that  he  “  first  discovered  the  gum 
elastic,  which  has  been  procured,  as  yet,  only  at 
Corisco,  Gabun,  and  Kama.”  In  1854,  Mr. 
Thompson  (p.  112)  found  it  in  the  Mendi  country, 
near  Sherbro ;  he  describes  it  as  a  vine  with 
dense  bark,  which  yields  the  gum  when  hacked, 
and  which  becomes  soft  and  porous  when  old. 
The  juice  is  milk-white,  thick,  and  glutinous,  soon 
stiffening,  darkening,  and  hardening  without  aid  of 
art.  I  should  like  to  see  the  raw  material  tried 
for  making  waterproofs  in  the  tropics,  where  the 
best  vulcanized  articles  never  last.  The  Ndambo 
tree  has  been  traced  a  hundred  miles  inland  from 
the  Liberian  Coast ;  that  of  the  Gallinas  and 
Sherbro  is  the  best ;  at  St.  Paul’s  River  it  is  not 
bad ;  but  on  the  Junk  River  it  is  sticky  and  little 
prized.  The  difficulty  everywhere  is  to  make  the 
negro  collect  it,  and,  when  he  does,  to  sell  it  un¬ 
adulterated  :  in  East  Africa  he  uses  the  small 
branches  of  the  ficus  for  flogging  canes,  but  will 
not  take  the  trouble  even  to  hack  the  “  Mpira  ” 
tree. 


124 


To  Sdnga-Tdnga  and  Back . 

At  a  brook  of  the  sweetest  water,  purling  over 
the  cleanest  and  brightest  of  golden  sands,  we  filled 
the  canteens,  this  being  the  last  opportunity  for 
some  time.  Forest  walks  are  thirsty  work  during 
the  hot  season ;  the  air  is  close,  fetid,  and  damp 
with  mire ;  the  sea-breeze  has  no  power  to  enter, 
and  perspiration  streams  from  every  pore.  After 
heavy  rains  it  is  still  worse,  the  surface  of  the  land 
is  changed,  and  paths  become  lines  of  dark  pud¬ 
dles  ;  the  nullahs,  before  dry,  roll  muddy,  dark- 
brown  streams,  and  their  mouths  streak  the  sea 
with  froth  and  scum.  Hardly  a  living  object 
meets  the  eye,  and  only  the  loud,  whirring  flight  of 
some  large  bird  breaks  the  dreary  silence.  The 
music  of  the  surf  now  sounded  like  the  song  of  the 
sea-shell  as  we  crossed  another  rough  prism  of 
stone  and  bush,  whose  counter-slope  fell  gently 
into  a  sand- flat  overgrown  with  Ipomaa  and  other 
bright  flowering  plants.  After  walking  about  an 
hour  (equal  to  2*50  miles)  between  south  and 
south-west,  we  saluted  the  pleasant  aspect  of 
0aAa<nra  with  a  general  cheer.  Northwards  lay 
Point  Ipizarala,  southways  Nyonye,  both  looking 
like  tree-clumps  rising  from  the  waves.  I  could 
not  sufficiently  admire,  and  I  shall  never  forget  the 
exquisite  loveliness  of  land  and  sea ;  the  graceful 
curve  of  the  beach,  a  hundred  feet  broad,  fining 
imperceptibly  away  till  lost  in  the  convexity  of 
waters.  The  morning  sun,  half  way  to  the  zenith, 


To  Sdnga-Tdnga  and  Back.  125 

burned  bright  in  a  cloudless  sky,  whilst  in  the  east 
and  west  distant  banks  of  purple  mist  coloured  the 
liquid  plain  with  a  cool  green-blue,  a  celadon  tint 
that  reposed  the  eye  and  the  brain.  The  porpoise 
raised  in  sport  his  dark,  glistening  back  to  the  light 
of  day,  and  plunged  into  the  cool  depths  as  if 
playing  off  the  “amate  sponde”  of  the  Mediter¬ 
ranean  ;  and  sandpipers  and  curlews,  the  latter  wild 
as  ever,  paced  the  smooth,  pure  floor.  The  shore¬ 
line  was  backed  by  a  dark  vegetable  wall,  here  and 
there  broken  and  fronted  by  single  trees,  white 
mangroves  tightly  corded  down,  and  raised  on 
stilted  roots  high  above  the  tide.  Between  wood 
and  wave  lay  powdered  sandstone  of  lively  yellow, 
mixed  with  bright  white  quartz  and  debris  of  pink 
shells.  Upon  the  classic  shores  of  Greece  I  should 
have  thought  of  Poseidon  and  the  Nereids;  but 
the  lovely  scene  was  in  unromantic  Africa,  which 
breeds  no  such  visions  of 

“  The  fair  humanities  of  old  religion.” 

Resuming  our  road,  we  passed  the  ruins  of  an 
“  Olako,”  the  khambi  of  East  Africa,  a  temporary 
encampment,  whose  few  poles  were  still  standing 
under  a  shady  tree.  We  then  came  upon  a  block¬ 
aded  lagoon ;  the  sea- water  had  been  imprisoned 
by  a  high  bank  which  the  waves  had  washed  up, 
and  it  will  presently  be  released  by  storms  from 
the  south-west.  Near  the  water,  even  at  half-ebb, 


126  To  Sdnga- Tanga  and  Back. 

we  find  the  floor  firm  and  pleasant ;  it  becomes 
loose  walking  at  high  tide,  and  the  ribbed  banks 
are  fatiguing  to  ascend  and  descend  under  a  hot 
sun  and  in  reeking  air.  A  seine  would  have  sup¬ 
plied  a  man-of-war  in  a  few  hours ;  large  turtle  is 
often  turned  ;  in  places  young  ones  about  the  size 
of  a  dollar  scuttled  towards  the  sea,  and  Hotaloya 
brought  a  nest  of  eggs,  which,  however,  were  too 
high  in  flavour  for  the  European  palate.  The  host 
of  crabs  lining  the  water  stood  alert,  watching  our 
approach,  and  when  we  came  within  a  hundred 
yards  they  hurried  sideways  into  the  safer  sea — 
the  scene  reminded  me  of  the  days  when,  after 
“ tiffin,”  we  used  to  “mar  kankras”  on  the  Clifton 
Sands  in  the  Unhappy  Valley. 

Presently  we  came  to  a  remarkable  feature  of 
this  coast,  the  first  specimen  of  which  was  seen  at 
Point  Ovindo  in  the  Gaboon  River.  The  Iberian 
explorers  called  them  “  Sernas,”  fields  or  downs, 
opposed  to  Coroas,  sand-dunes  or  hills.  They  are 
clearings  in  the  jungle  made  by  Nature’s  hand, 
fenced  round  everywhere,  save  on  the  sea  side,  by 
tall  walls  of  dark  vegetation ;  averaging  perhaps  a 
mile  long  by  200  yards  broad,  and  broken  by 
mounds  and  terraces  regular  as  if  worked  by  art. 
These  prairies  bear  a  green  sward,  seldom  taller 
than  three  feet,  and  now  ready  for  the  fire, — here 
and  there  the  verdure  is  dotted  by  a  tree  or  two. 
It  is  universally  asserted  that  they  cannot  be 


To  Sdnga- Tdnga  and  Back.  127 

cultivated ;  and,  if  this  be  true,  the  cause  would  be 
worth  investigating.  In  some  places  they  are 
perfectly  level,  and  almost  flush  with  the  sea ;  in 
others  they  swell  gently  to  perhaps  100  feet ;  in 
other  parts,  again,  they  look  like  scarps  and  earth¬ 
works,  remarkably  resembling  the  lower  parasitic 
craters  of  a  huge  volcano  ;  and  here  and  there  they 
are  pitted  with  sinks  like  the  sea-board  of  Loango. 
These  savannahs  (savanas)  add  an  indescribable 
charm  to  the  Gaboon  Coast,  especially  when  the 
morning  and  evening  suns  strike  them  with  slant¬ 
ing  rays,  and  compel  them  to  stand  out  distinct 
from  the  setting  of  eternal  emerald.  The  aspect 
of  the  downs  is  civilized  as  the  banks  of  the 
Solent ;  and  the  coast  wants  nothing  to  complete 
the  “  fine,  quiet  old-country  picture  in  the  wilds  of 
Africa  ”  but  herds  of  kine  grazing  upon  leas  shin¬ 
ing  with  a  golden  glory,  or  a  country  seat,  backed 
by  the  noble  virgin  forest,  such  a  bosquet  as  Europe 
never  knew. 

After  another  hours  walk,  which  carried  us 
about  three  miles,  we  sighted  in  one  of  these 
prdirillons  a  clump  of  seventeen  huts.  A  negro 
in  European  clothes,  after  prospecting  the  party 
through  a  ship’s  glass,  probably  the  gift  of  some 
slaver,  came  down  to  meet  us,  and  led  the  way  to 
his  “town.”  Finding  his  guest  an  Englishman, 
the  host,  who  spoke  a  few  words  of  French  and 
Portuguese,  at  once  began  to  talk  of  his  “summer1 


128  To  Sdnga- Tanga  and  Back . 

gite”  where  pirogues  were  cut  out,  and  boats  were 
built ;  there  were  indeed  some  signs  of  this  Indus¬ 
trie ,  but  all  things  wore  the  true  Barracoon  aspect. 
Two  very  fine  girls  were  hid  behind  the  huts,  but 
did  not  escape  my  factotum’s  sharp  eyes  ;  and 
several  of  the  doors  were  carefully  padlocked :  the 
pretty  faces  had  been  removed  when  he  returned. 
This  coast  does  an  active  retail  business  with 
Sao  Thome  and  the  Ilha  do  Principe, — about 
Cape  Lopez  the  “  ebony  trade  ”  still,  I  hear,  flou¬ 
rishes  on  a  small  scale. 

During  our  halt  for  breakfast  at  the  barracoon, 
we  were  visited  by  Petit  Denis,  a  son  of  the  old 
king.  His  village  is  marked  upon  the  charts  some 
four  miles  south-south-east  of  his  father’s ;  but  at 
this  season  all  the  royalties,  we  are  assured,  affect 
the  sea-shore.  He  was  dressed  in  the  usual  loin- 
wrap,  under  a  broadcloth  coat,  with  the  French 
official  buttons.  Leading  me  mysteriously  aside, 
he  showed  certificates  from  the  officials  at  Le 
Plateau,  dating  from  1859,  recommending  him 
strongly  as  a  shipbroker  for  collecting  Emigrants 
libres)  and  significantly  adding,  les  negres  ne  man- 
quent  pas .  Petit  Denis’s  face  was  a  study  when 
I  told  him  that,  being  an  Englishman,  a  dozen 
negroes  were  not  worth  to  me  a  single  “  Njfna.” 
Slave  cargoes  of  some  eight  to  ten  head  are 
easily  canoed  down  the  rivers,  and  embarked  in 
schooners  for  the  islands  :  the  latter  sadly  want 


To  Sanga-Tdnga  and  Back.  129 

hands,  and  should  be  assisted  in  setting  on  foot  a 
system  of  temporary  immigration. 

At  10.45  a.m.  we  resumed  our  march.  The 
fiery  sun  had  sublimated  black  clouds,  the  north¬ 
east  quarter  looked  ugly,  and  I  wished  to  be 
housed  before  the  storm  burst.  The  coast  ap¬ 
peared  populous  ;  we  met  many  bushmen,  who 
were  perfectly  civil,  and  showed  no  fear,  although 
some  of  them  had  probably  never  seen  a  white 
face.  All  were  armed  with  muskets,  and  carried 
the  usual  hunting  talismans,  horns  and  iron  or 
brass  bells,  hanging  from  the  neck  before  and 
behind.  We  crossed  four  sweet-water  brooks, 
which,  draining  the  high  banks,  flowed  fast  and 
clear  down  cuts  of  loose,  stratified  sand,  some¬ 
times  five  feet  deep  :  the  mouths  opened  to  the 
north-west,  owing  to  the  set  of  the  current  from 
the  south-west,  part  of  the  great  Atlantic  circula¬ 
tion  running  from  the  Antarctic  to  the  equator. 
Those  which  are  not  bridged  with  fallen  trees 
must  be  swum  during  the  rains,  as  the  water  is 
often  waist-deep.  Many  streamlets,  shown  by 
their  feathery  fringes  of  bright  green  palm,  run 
along  the  shore  before  finding  an  outlet ;  they  are 
excellent  bathing  places,  where  the  salt  water  can 
be  washed  off  the  skin.  The  sea  is  delightfully 
tepid,  but  it  is  not  without  risk,— it  becomes  deep 
within  biscuit-toss,  there  is  a  strong  under-tow, 
and  occasionally  an  ugly  triangular  fin  may  be 

1.  K 


130  To  Sdnga-T&nga  and  Back. 

seen  cruizing  about  in  unpleasant  proximity.  As 
our  naked  feet  began  to  blister,  we  suddenly 
turned  to  the  left,  away  from  the  sea ;  and,  after 
crossing  about  1 00  yards  of  prairillon,  one  of  the 
prettiest  of  its  kind,  we  found  ourselves  at  Bwa- 
mange,  the  village  of  King  Langobumo.  It  was 
then  noon,  and  we  had  walked  about  three  hours 
and  a  half  in  a  general  south-south-west  direction. 

His  majesty’s  hut  was  at  the  entrance  of  the 
village,  which  numbered  five  scattered  and  un¬ 
walled  sheds.  He  at  once  led  us  to  his  house,  a 
large  bamboo  hall,  with  several  inner  sleeping 
rooms  for  the  “  Harlm  placed  couch,  chair,  and 
table,  the  civilization  of  the  slave-trade ;  brought 
wife  No.  1  to  shake  hands,  directed  a  fowl  to  be 
killed,  and,  sitting  down,  asked  us  the  news  in 
French.  As  a  return  for  our  information,  he  told 
us  that  the  Gorilla  was  everywhere  to  be  found, 
even  in  the  bush  behind  his  town.  The  rain 
coming  down  heavily,  I  was  persuaded  to  pass  the 
night  there,  the  king  offering  to  beat  the  bush  with 
us,  to  engage  hunters,  and  to  find  a  canoe  which 
would  carry  the  party  to  Sdnga-Tanga,  landing  us 
at  all  the  likely  places.  I  agreed  the  more  will¬ 
ingly  to  the  suggestion  of  a  cruize,  as  my  Mpongwe 
fashionables,  like  the  Congoese,  and  unlike  the  Yo- 
rubans,  proved  to  be  bad  and  untrained  walkers ; 
they  complained  of  sore  feet,  and  they  were 
always  anticipating  attacks  of  fever. 


To  Sdnga-  Tanga  and  Back.  1 3 1 

When  the  delicious  sea-breeze  had  tempered 
the  heat,  we  set  out  for  the  forest,  and  passed  the 
afternoon  in  acquiring  a  certainty  that  we  had 
again  been  “  done.”  However,  we  saw  the  new 
guides,  and  supplied  them  with  ammunition  for 
the  next  day.  The  evening  was  still  and  close ; 
the  Ifuru  (sandflies)  and  the  Nchuna  (a  red  gad-fly) 
were  troublesome  as  usual,  and  at  night  the  mos¬ 
quitoes  phlebotomized  us  till  we  hailed  the  dawn.1 
A  delightful  bath  of  salt  followed  by  fresh  water, 
effectually  quenched  the  fiery  irritation  of  these 
immundicities. 

Wednesday,  as  we  might  have  expected,  was 
wasted,  although  the  cool  and  cloudy  weather  was 
perfection  for  a  cruize.  As  we  sat  waiting  for  a 
boat,  a  youth  rushed  in  breathless,  reporting  that 
he  had  just  seen  an  “ole  man  gorilla”  sitting  in  a 
tree  hard  by.  I  followed  him  incredulously  at 
first,  but  presently  the  crashing  of  boughs  and 
distant  grunts,  somewhat  like  huhh !  huhh !  huhh  ! 
caused  immense  excitement.  After  half  a  day’s 
hard  work,  which  resulted  in  nothing,  I  returned 
to  Bwamange,  and  met  the  “  boat-king,”  whose 


1  I  did  not  see  the  Iboko,  which  M.  du  Chaillu  (chap,  xvi,) 
calls  the  “bocof 1 ’  but,  from  the  native  description,  I  determined 
it  to  be  the  tsetse.  He  names  the  sandfly  (chap,  xvi.)  “  igoo- 
gouai.”  His  “  ibolai”  or  “  mangrove  fly  ”  is  “  owole  ”  in  the  sin¬ 
gular,  and  “  iwole  ”  in  the  plural.  The  wasp,  which  he  terms 
“  eloway,”  is  known  to  the  Mpongwe  people  as  “ewogoni.” 


132  To  Sdnga- Tanga  and  Back . 

capital  was  an  adjacent  settlement  of  three  huts. 
He  was  in  rags,  and  my  diary  might  have  recorded, 
Rc^u  un  roi  dans  un  tres  fichu  etat.  He  was 
accompanied  by  a  young  wife,  with  a  huge  toupet, 
and  a  gang  of  slaves,  who  sat  down  and  stared  till 
their  eyes  blinked  and  watered.  For  the  loan  of 
his  old  canoe  he  asked  the  moderate  sum  of  fifteen 
dollars  per  diem,  which  finally  fell  to  two  dollars ; 
but  there  was  a  suspicious  reservation  anent  oars, 
paddles  and  rudder,  mast  and  sail. 

Meanwhile  the  sanguine  Selim  compelled  his 
guide  to  keep  moving  in  the  direction  of  the 
gorilla’s  grunt,  and  explaining  his  reluctance  to 
advance  by  the  fear  of  meeting  the  brute  in  the 
dark.  Savage  Africa,  however,  had  as  usual  the 
better  of  the  game,  and  showed  his  ’cuteness  by 
planting  my  factotum  in  mud  thigh-deep.  After 
dark  Forteune  returned.  He  had  fired  at  a  huge 
njfna,  but  this  time  the  cap  had  snapped.  As  the 
monster  was  close,  and  had  shown  signs  of  wrath, 
we  were  expected  to  congratulate  Nimrod  on  his 
escape.  Kindly  observe  the  neat  gradations,  the 
artistic  sorites  of  Mpongwe  lies. 

At  7.30  a.  m.  on  the  next  day  the  loads  were 
placed  upon  the  crew’s  heads,  and  we  made  for 
the  village,  where  the  boat  was  still  drawn  up. 
The  “  monoxyle  ”  was  full  of  green-brown  rain 
water,  the  oar-pins  were  represented  by  bits  of 
stick,  and  all  the  furniture  was  wanting.  After  a 


To  S&nga-T&nga  and  Back .  133 

time,  the  owner,  duly  summoned,  stalked  down 
from  his  hut,  and  began  remarking  that  there  was 
still  a  “  palaver  ”  on  the  stocks.  I  replied  by  pay¬ 
ing  him  his  money,  and  ordering  the  craft  to  be 
baled  and  launched.  It  was  a  spectacle  to  see  the 
bushmen  lying  upon  their  bellies,  kicking  their 
heels  in  the  air,  and  yep-yep-yeping  uproariously 
when  Forteune,  their  master,  begged  of  them  to 
bear  a  hand.  Dean  Presto  might  have  borrowed 
from  them  a  hint  for  his  Yahoos.  The  threat  to 
empty  the  Alugu  (rum)  upon  the  sand  was  effica¬ 
cious.  One  by  one  they  rose  to  work,  and  in  the 
slowest  possible  way  were  produced  five  oars,  of 
which  one  was  sprung,  a  ricketty  rudder,  a  huge 
mast,  and  a  sail  composed  half  of  matting  and  half 
of  holes.  At  the  last  moment,  the  men  found  that 
they  had  no  “  chop ;  ”  a  franc  produced  two 
bundles  of  sweet  manioc,  good  travelling  food, 
as  it  can  be  eaten  raw,  but  about  as  nutritious  as 
Norwegian  bark.  At  the  last,  last  moment,  Lan- 
gobumo,  who  was  to  accompany  us,  remembered 
that  he  had  neither  fine  coat  nor  umbrella, — indis¬ 
pensable  for  dignity,  and  highly  necessary  for  the 
delicacy  of  his  complexion,  which  was  that  of  an 
elderly  buffalo.  A  lad  was  started  to  fetch  these 
articles ;  and  he  set  off  at  a  hand-gallop,  making 
me  certain  that  behind  the  first  corner  he  would 
subside  into  a  saunter,  and  lie  down  to  rest  on 
reaching  the  huts. 


134  To  Sdnga-  Tanga  and  Back . 

Briefly,  it  was  9  a.m.  before  we  doubled  Point 
Nyonye,  which  had  now  been  so  long  in  sight. 
With  wind,  tide,  and  current  dead  against  us,  we 
hugged  the  shore  where  the  water  is  deep.  The 
surf  was  breaking  in  heavy  sheets  upon  a  reef  or 
shoal  outside,  and  giving  ample  occupation  to  a 
hovering  flock  of  fish-eating  birds.  Whilst  re¬ 
turning  over  water  smooth  as  glass  I  observed  the 
curious  effect  of  the  current.  Suddenly  a  huge 
billow  would  rear  like  a  horse,  assume  the  shape 
of  a  giant  cobra  s  head,  fall  forward  in  a  mass  of 
foam,  and  subside  gently  rippling  into  the  calm 
surface  beyond  ;  the  shadowy  hollow  of  the  break¬ 
ers  made  them  appear  to  impinge  upon  a  black 
rock,  but  when  they  disappeared  the  sea  was 
placid  and  unbroken  as  before.  This  is,  in  fact, 
the  typical  “  roller  ”  of  the  Gaboon  coast — a  happy 
hunting  ground  for  slavers  and  a  dangerous  place 
for  cruizers  to  attempt.  As  the  sea-breeze  came 
up  strong,  the  swell  would  have  swamped  a 
European  boat;  but  our  conveyance,  shaped  like  a 
ship’s  gig,  but  Dalmatian  or  Dutchman-like  in  the 
bows,  topped  the  waves  with  the  buoyancy  of  a 
cork,  and  answered  her  helm  as  the  Arab  obeys 
the  bit.  To  compact  grain  she  added  small 
specific  gravity,  and,  though  stout  and  thick,  she 
advanced  at  a  speed  of  which  I  could  hardly 
believe  her  capable. 

Past  Nyonye  the  coast  forms  another  shallow 


To  Sango- Tanga,  and  Back.  .  135 

bay,  with  about  ten  miles  of  chord,  in  every  way 
a  copy  of  its  northern  neighbour — the  same 
scene  of  placid  beauty,  the  sea  rimmed  with 
opalline  air,  pink  by  contrast  with  the  ultramarine 
blue ;  the  limpid  ether  overhead ;  the  golden 
sands,  and  the  emerald  verdure — a  Circe,  however, 
whose  caress  is  the  kiss  of  death.  The  curve  is 
bounded  south  by  Point  Dydnye,  which  appeared 
to  retreat  as  we  advanced.  At  2  p.  m.,  when  the 
marvellous  clearness  of  the  sky  was  troubled  by  a 
tornado  forming  in  the  north-east,  we  turned 
towards  a  little  inlet,  and,  despite  the  heavy  surf, 
we  disembarked  without  a  ducking.  A  creek 
supplied  us  with  pure  cold  water,  a  spreading  tree 
with  a  roof,  and  the  soft  clean  shore  with  the  most 
luxurious  of  couches — at  3  p.m.  I  could  hardly 
persuade  myself  that  an  hour  had  flown. 

As  we  approached  Byanye,  at  last,  a  village 
hoisted  the  usual  big  flag  on  the  normal  tall  pole, 
and  with  loud  cries  ordered  us  to  land.  Lango- 
biimo,  who  was  at  the  helm,  began  obeying,  when 
I  relieved  him  of  his  charge.  Seeing  that  our 
course  was  unaltered,  a  large  and  well-manned 
canoe  put  off,  and  the  rest  of  the  population 
walked  down  shore.  I  made  signs  for  the 
stranger  not  to  approach,  when  the  head  man, 
Angflah,  asked  me  in  English  what  he  had  done 
to  offend  me,  and  peremptorily  insisted  upon  my 
sleeping  at  his  village.  All  these  places  are  look- 


136  To  Sdnga- Tanga  and  Back . 

in g  forward  to  the  blessed  day  when  a  trader, 
especially  a  white  trader,  shall  come  to  dwell 
amongst  the  “  sons  of  the  soil,”  and  shall  fill  their 
pockets  with  “  trust  ”  money.  On  every  baylet 
and  roadstead  stands  the  Casa  Grande ,  a  large 
empty  bungalow,  a  factory  in  embryo  awaiting 
the  Avatar  ;  but,  instead  of  attracting  their  “  mer¬ 
chant  ”  by  collecting  wax  and  honey,  rubber  and 
ivory,  the  people  will  not  work  till  he  appears. 
Consequently,  here,  as  in  Angola  and  in  the 
lowlands  of  the  Brazil,  it  is  a  slight  to  pass  by 
without  a  visit ;  and  jealousy,  a  ruling  passion 
amongst  Africans,  suggests  that  the  stranger  is 
bound  for  another  and  rival  village.  They  wish, 
at  any  rate,  to  hear  the  news,  to  gossip  half  the 
night,  to  drink  the  Utangani’s  rum,  and  to  claim  a 
cloth  for  escorting  him,  will  he,  nill  he,  to  the 
next  settlement.  But  what  could  I  do  ?  To 
indulge  native  prejudice  would  have  stretched  my 
cruize  to  a  fortnight ;  and  I  had  neither  time, 
supplies,  nor  stomach  for  the  task.  So  Lango- 
bumo  was  directed  to  declare  that  they  had  a 
“  wicked  white  man  ”  on  board  who  e’en  would 
gang  his  ane  gait,  who  had  no  goods  but 
weapons,  and  who  wanted  only  to  shoot  a  nji'na, 
and  to  visit  Sanga-Tanga,  where  his  brother 
“  Mpolo  ”  had  been.  All  this  was  said  in  a 
sneaking,  deprecating  tone,  and  the  crew,  though 
compelled  to  ply  their  oars,  looked  their  regrets 


To  Sdnga-Tanga  and  Back.  137 

at  the  exceedingly  rude  and  unseemly  conduct  of 
their  Utangani.  Angflah  followed  chattering  till 
he  had  learned  all  the  novelties ;  at  last  he 
dropped  aft,  growling  much,  and  promising  to 
receive  me  at  Sanga-Tanga  next  morning — not  as 
a  friend.  On  our  return,  however,  he  prospected 
us  from  afar  with  the  greatest  indifference;  we 
were  empty-handed.  There  has  been  change 
since  the  days  when  Lieutenant  Boteler,  passing 
along  this  shore,  was  addressed  by  the  canoe-men, 
“  I  say,  you  mate,  you  no  big  rogue  ?  ship  no  big 
rogue  ?  ” 

At  5  p.  m.  we  weathered  Point  Dyanye,  gar¬ 
nished,  like  Nyonye,  with  a  threatening  line  of 
breakers  ;  the  boat-passage  along  shore  was  about 
400  yards  wide.  Darkness  came  on  shortly  after 
six  o’clock,  and  the  sultry  weather  began  to  look 
ominous,  with  a  huge,  angry,  black  nimbus  dis¬ 
charging  itself  into  the  glassy  livid  sea  north¬ 
wards.  I  suggested  landing,  but  Langobumo  was 
positive  that  the  storm  had  passed  westwards,  and 
he  objected,  with  some  reason,  that  in  the  outer 
gloom  the  boat  might  be  dashed  to  pieces.  As 
we  had  not  even  a  stone  for  an  anchor,  the  plea 
proved  valid.  We  guided  ourselves,  by  the  fitful 
flashes  of  forked  and  sheet  lightning  combined, 
towards  a  ghostly  point,  whose  deeper  blackness 
silhouetted  it  against  the  shades.  Suddenly  the 
boat’s  head  was  turned  inland ;  a  huge  breaker, 


138 


To  Sanga-Tdnga  and  Back . 


foaming  along  our  gunwales,  drove  us  forwards 
like  the  downwards  motion  of  a  “  swing-swong,” 
and,  before  we  knew  where  we  were,  an  ugly 
little  bar  had  been  crossed  on  the  top  of  the  curl¬ 
ing  scud.  We  could  see  the  forest  on  both  sides, 
but  there  was  not  light  enough  to  trace  the  river 
line ;  I  told  Hotaloya  to  tumble  out ;  “  Plenty 
shark  here,  mas’r,”  was  the  only  answer.  We  lost 
nearly  half  an  hour  of  most  valuable  time  in  pot¬ 
tering  and  groping  before  all  had  landed. 

At  that  moment  the  rain-clouds  burst,  and  in 
five  minutes  after  the  first  spatter  all  were  wet  to 
the  skin.  Selim  and  I  stood  close  together,  trying 
to  light  a  match,  when  a  sheet  of  white  fire 
seemed  to  be  let  down  from  the  black  sky,  pass¬ 
ing  between  us  with  a  simultaneous  thundering 
crash  and  rattle,  and  a  sulphurous  smell,  as  if  a 
battery  had  been  discharged.  I  saw  my  factotum 
struck  down  whilst  in  the  act  of  staggering  and 
falling  myself ;  we  lay  still  for  a  few  moments, 
when  a  mutual  inquiry  showed  that  both  were 
alive,  only  a  little  shaken  and  stunned ;  the  sen¬ 
sation  was  simply  the  shock  of  an  electrical 
machine  and  the  discharge  of  a  Woolwich  infant 
— greatly  exaggerated. 

We  then  gave  up  the  par  tie;  it  was  useless  to 
contend  against  Jupiter  Tonans  as  well  as  Plu- 
vialis.  I  opened  my  bedding,  drank  a  “  stiffener” 
of  raw  cognac,  wrapped  myself  well,  and  at  once 


To  Sdnga-  Tdnga  and  Back .  1 39 

fell  asleep  in  the  heavy  rain,  whilst  the  crew 
gathered  under  the  sail.  The  gentlemen  who 
stay  at'  home  at  ease  may  think  damp  sheets  dan¬ 
gerous,  but  Malvern  had  long  ago  taught  me  the 
perfect  safety  of  the  wettest  bivouac,  provided  that 
the  body  remains  warm.  At  Fernando  Po,  as  at 
Zanzibar,  a  drunken  sailor  after  a  night  in  the  gutter 
will  catch  fever,  and  will  probably  die.  But  he 
has  exposed  himself  to  the  inevitable  chill  after 
midnight,  he  is  unacclimatized,  and  both  places 
are  exceptionally  deadly — to  say  nothing  of 
the  liquor.  The  experienced  African  traveller 
awaking  with  a  chilly  skin,  swallows  a  tumbler  of 
cold  water,  and  rolls  himself  in  a  blanket  till  he 
perspires  ;  there  is  only  one  alternative. 

Next  day  I  arose  at  4  a.m.,  somewhat  cramped 
and  stiff,  but  with  nothing  that  would  not  yield  to 
half  a  handful  of  quinine,  a  cup  of  coffee  well 
“  laced,”  a  pipe,  and  a  roaring  fire.  Some  country 
people  presently  came  up,  and  rated  us  for  sleep¬ 
ing  in  the  bush  ;  we  retorted  in  kind,  telling  them 
that  they  should  have  been  more  wide-awake. 
Whilst  the  boat  was  being  baled,  I  walked  to  the 
shore,  and  prospected  our  day’s  work.  The  forest 
showed  a  novel  feature ;  flocks  of  cottony  mist- 
clouds  curling  amongst  the  trees,  like  opals  scat¬ 
tered  upon  a  bed  of  emeralds  ;  a  purple  haze 
banked  up  the  western  horizon,  whilst  milk-white 
foam  drew  a  delicate  line  between  the  deep  yellow 


140  To  Sanga-Tanga  and  Back . 

sand  and  the  still  deeper  blue.  Far  to  the  south 
lay  the  Serna  or  prairillon  of  Sanga-Tanga,  a 
rolling  patch,  “  or,  on  a  field  vert,”  backed  by  the 
usual  dark  belt  of  the  same,  and  fronted  by  strag¬ 
gling  dots  that  emerged  from  the  wave — they 
proved  to  be  a  thin  line  of  trees  along  shore.  We 
were  lying  inside  the  mouth  of  the  “  Habanya,” 
alias  the  Shark  River,  which  flows  along  the  south 
of  a  high  grassy  dome,  streaked  here  and  there 
with  rows  of  palms,  and  broken  into  the  sem¬ 
blance  of  a  verdure-clad  crater.  According  to  the 
people  the  Nkonje  ( Squalus )  here  is  not  a  dan¬ 
gerous  “  sea-tiger  ”  unless  a  man  wear  red  or 
carry  copper  bracelets  ;  it  is  caught  with  hooks 
and  eaten  as  by  the  Chinese  and  the  Suri  Arabs. 
The  streamlet  is  a  favourite  haunt  of  the  hippopo¬ 
tamus  ;  a  small  one  dived  when  it  sighted  us,  and 
did  not  reappear.  It  was  the  only  specimen  that 
I  saw  during  my  three  years  upon  the  West 
African  Coast, — a  great  contrast  to  that  of  Zan¬ 
zibar,  where  half  a  dozen  may  be  shot  in  a 
single  day.  The  musket  has  made  all  the  dif¬ 
ference. 

At  6  a.m.  on  Friday,  March  28,  the  boat  was 
safely  carried  over  the  bar  of  Shark  River,  and  we 
found  ourselves  once  more  hugging  the  shore  south¬ 
wards.  The  day  was  exceptional  for  West  Africa, 
and  much  like  damp  weather  at  the  end  of  an 
English  May  ;  the  grey  air  at  times  indulged  us 


To  Sdnga-  Tanga  and  Back.  14 1 

with  a  slow  drizzle.  After  two  hours  we  passed 
another  maritime  village,  where  the  farce  of  yester¬ 
day  evening  was  re-acted,  but  this  time  with  more 
vigour.  Ignorant  of  my  morning’s  private  work, 
Hotaloya  swore  that  it  was  Sanga-Tanga.  I  com¬ 
plimented  him  upon  his  proficiency  in  lying,  and 
poor  Langobumo,  almost  in  tears,  confessed  that 
he  had  pointed  out  to  me  the  real  place.  Where¬ 
upon  Hotaloya  began  pathetically  to  reproach  him 
for  being  thus  prodigal  of  the  truth.  Nurya,  the 
“  head  trader,”  coming  down  to  the  beach,  with 
dignity  and  in  force  told  me  in  English  that  I 
must  land,  and  was  chaffed  accordingly.  He  then 
blustered  and  threatened  instant  death,  at  which 
It  was  easy  to  laugh.  About  10  a.m.  we  lay  off 
our  destination,  some  ten  miles  south  of  Dyanye 
Point.  It  was  a  beautiful  site,  the  end  of  a  grassy 
dune,  declining  gradually  toward  the  tree-fringed 
sea  ;  the  yellow  slopes,  cut  by  avenues  and  broken 
by  dwarf  table-lands,  were  long  afterwards  recalled 
to  my  memory,  when  sighting  the  fair  but  desolate 
scenery  south  of  Paraguayan  Asuncion.  These 
downs  appear  to  be  a  sea-coast  raised  by  secular 
upheaval,  and  much  older  than  the  flat  tracts  which 
encroach  upon  the  Atlantic.  We  could  now  under¬ 
stand  the  position  of  the  town  which  figures  so 
largely  in  the  squadron-annals  of  the  equatorial 
shore ;  it  was  set  upon  a  hillock,  whence  the  eye 
could  catch  the  approaching  sail  of  the  slaver,  and 


142 


To  Sdnga-  Tanga  and  Back . 


where  the  flag  could  be  raised  conspicuously  in 
token  of  no  cruiser  being  near. 

But  the  glory  had  departed  from  Sanga-Tanga 
(Peel-White  ?  Strip- White  ?)  ;  not  a  trace  of  the 
town  remained,  the  barracoons  had  disappeared, 
and  all  was  innocent  as  upon  the  day  of  its  creation. 
A  deep  silence  reigned  where  the  song  of  joy  and 
the  shrieks  of  torture  had  so  often  been  answered 
by  the  voice  of  the  forest,  and  Eternal  Nature  had 
ceased  to  be  disturbed  by  the  follies  and  crimes  of 
man. 

Sanga-Tanga  was  burned  down,  after  the  fashion 
of  these  people,  when  Mbango,  whom  Europeans 
called  “  Pass-all,”  King  of  the  Urungu,  who  ex¬ 
tend  up  the  right  bank  of  the  Ogobe,  passed  away 
from  the  sublunary  world.  King  Pass-all  had  com¬ 
pleted  his  education  in  Portugal  :  a  negro  never 
attains  his  highest  potential  point  of  villany  with¬ 
out  a  tour  through  Europe ;  and  thus  he  rose  to 
be  the  greatest  slave-dealer  in  this  slave-dealing 
scrap  of  the  coast.  In  early  life  he  protected  the 
Spanish  pirates  who  fled  to  Cape  Lopez,  after 
plundering  the  American  brig  “  Mexico  they 
were  at  last  forcibly  captured  by  Captain  (the  late 
Admiral)  Trotter,  R.N.;  passed  over  to  the  United 
States,  and  finally  hanged  at  Boston,  during  the 
Presidency  of  General  Jackson.  Towards  the 
end  of  his  life  he  became  paralytic,  like  King 
Pepple  of  Bonny,  and  dangerous  to  the  whites  as 


To  Sdnga-T&nga  and  Back .  143 

well  as  to  the  blacks  under  his  rule.  The  people, 
however,  still  speak  highly  of  him,  generosity  being 
a  gift  which  everywhere  covers  a  multitude  of  sins. 
H  e  was  succeeded  by  one  of  his  sons,  who  is 
favourably  mentioned,  but  who  soon  followed  him 
to  the  grave.  I  saw  another,  a  boy,  apparently  a 
slave  to  a  Mpongwe  on  the  coast,  and  the  rest  of 
the  family  is  scattered  far  and  wide.  Since  Pass- 
all’s  death  the  “  peddlers  in  human  flesh  and  blood” 
have  gone  farther  south  :  men  spoke  of  a  great 
depot  at  the  Mpembe  village  on  the  banks  of  the 
Nazareth  River,  where  a  certain  Ndabuliya  is 
aided  and  abetted  by  two  Utangani.  Now  that 
“  ’long-sea”  exportation  has  been  completely  sup¬ 
pressed,  their  only  markets  must  be  the  two 
opposite  islands. 

South  of  Sanga-Tanga,  lay  a  thin  line  of  deeper 
blue,  Fetish  Point,  the  eastern  projection  of  Cape 
Lopez  Bay.  From  Mbango’s  Town  it  is  easy  to 
see  the  western  headland,  Cape  Lopez,  whose  low 
outliers  of  sand  and  trees  gain  slowly  but  surely 
upon  the  waters  of  the  Atlantic.  I  deferred  a 
visit  until  a  more  favourable  time,  and — that  time 
never  came. 

Cape  Lopez  is  said  to  have  considerable  advan¬ 
tages  for  developing  trade,  but  the  climate  appears 
adverse.  A  large  Catholic  mission,  described  by 
Barbot,  was  established  here  by  the  Portuguese  : 
as  in  the  Congo,  nothing  physical  of  it  remains. 


144  To  Sdnga- Tanga  and  Back. 

But  Mr.  Wilson  is  rather  hard  when  he  asserts 
that  all  traces  have  disappeared — they  survive  in 
superior  'cuteness  of  the  native. 

Little  need  be  said  about  our  return,  which  was 
merrier  than  the  outward  bound  trip.  Wind,  tide, 
and  current  were  now  in  our  favour,  and  we  fol¬ 
lowed  the  chords,  not  the  arcs,  of  the  several  bays. 
At  9.30  p.m.  we  gave  a  wide  berth  to  the  rollers 
off  Point  Nyonye  and  two  hours  afterwards  we 
groped  through  the  outer  darkness  into  Bwamange, 
where  the  good  Azfzeh  and  Asunye,  who  came  to 
receive  us,  shouted  with  joy.  On  the  next  day 
another  “  gorilla  palaver,”  when  a  large  male  was 
reported  to  have  been  shot  without  a  shadow  of 
truth,  detained  me  :  it  was  the  last  straw  which 
broke  the  patient  camel’s  back.  After  “  dashing” 
to  old  King  Langobumo  one  cloth,  one  bottle  of 
absinthe,  two  heads  of  tobacco,  and  a  clay  pipe, 
we  set  out  betimes  for  the  fifteen  miles’  walk  to 
Mbata.  Various  obstacles  delayed  us  on  the  way, 
and  the  shades  of  evening  began  to  close  in  rapidly  ; 
night  already  reigned  over  the  forest.  Progress 
under  such  circumstances  requires  the  greatest 
care  ;  as  in  the  streets  of  Damascus,  one  must  ever 
look  fixedly  at  the  ground,  under  penalty  of  a 
shaking  stumble  over  cross-bars  of  roots,  or  fallen 
branches  hidden  by  grass  and  mud.  And  the  worst 
of  these  wet  walks  is  that,  sooner  or  later,  they  bring 
on  swollen  feet,  which  the  least  scratch  causes  to 


To  Sdnga- Tanga  and  Back.  145 

ulcerate,  and  which  may  lame  the  traveller  for 
weeks.  They  are  often  caused  by  walking  and 
sitting  in  wet  shoes  and  stockings  ;  it  is  so  trouble¬ 
some  to  pull  off  and  pull  on  again  after  wading  and 
fording,  repeated  during  every  few  hundred  yards, 
that  most  men  tramp  through  the  brooks  and  suffer 
in  consequence.  Constant  care  of  the  feet  is  neces¬ 
sary  in  African  travel,  and  the  ease  with  which 
they  are  hurt — sluggish  circulation,  poor  food  and 
insufficient  stimulants  being  the  causes — is  one  of 
its  deplaisirs.  The  people  wash  and  anoint  these 
wounds  with  palm  oil  :  a  hot  bath,  with  pepper- 
water,  if  there  be  no  rum,  gives  more  relief,  and 
caustic  must  sometimes  be  used. 

We  reached  Mbata  at  6.15  p.  m.,  and  all  agreed 
that  two  hours  of  such  forest-walking  do  more 
damage  than  five  days  along  the  sands. 

Since  my  departure  from  the  coast,  French  naval 
officers,  travellers  and  traders,  have  not  been  idle. 
The  Marquis  de  Compiegne,  who  returned  to 
F ranee  in  1874,  suffering  from  ulcerated  legs,  had 
travelled  up  the  Fernao  Vaz,  and  its  tributary 
the  highly  irregular  Ogobai,  Ogowa'i,  or  Ogowe 
(Ogobe) ;  yet,  curious  to  remark,  all  his  discoveries 
are  omitted  by  Herr  Kiepert.  His  furthest  point 
was  213  kilometres  east  of  “  San  Quita”  (Sankwita), 
a  village  sixty-one  kilometres  north  (??)  of  Pointe 
Fetiche,  near  Cape  Lopez ;  but  wars  and  receding 
waters  prevented  his  reaching  the  confluence  where 

L  L 


146  To  Sdnga-Tdnga  and  Back . 

the  Ivindo  fork  enters  the  north  bank  of  the  Ogobe. 
He  made  observations  amongst  the  “  K amnia” 
tribe,  which  differs  from  the  Bakele  and  other 
neighbours.  M.  Guirold,  commanding  a  cruiser, 
was  also  sent  to  the  estuary  of  the  Rembo  or 
Fernao  Vaz,  into  which  the  Mpungule  (N’pou- 
lounay  of  M.  du  Chaillu  ?),  ascended  only  by  M. 
Aymes,  discharges.  The  explorers  found  many 
shoals  and  shifting  sands  before  entering  the  estu¬ 
ary  ;  in  the  evening  they  stopped  at  the  Ogobe 
confluence,  where  a  French  seaman  was  employed 
in  custom-house  duties.  M.  de  Compiegne,  after 
attending  many  palavers,  was  duly  upset  when 
returning  to  the  ship. 

On  the  Fernao  Vaz  there  are  now  (1873)  five 
factories,  each  named  after  some  French  town  : 
Paris  Factory,  however,  had  fallen  to  ruins,  the 
traders  having  migrated  150  miles  higher  up  the 
Kamma  River.  Here  a  certain  drunken  kinglet, 
“  Rampano,”  breaks  everything  he  finds  in  the 
house,  and  pays  damages  when  he  returns  to  his 
senses.  On  March  31st  there  was  a  violent  quarrel 
between  the  women  of  two  settlements,  and  the 
“  reguli  ”  embarked  with  all  their  host,  to  fight  it 
out;  Rampano  was  the  victor,  and  after  the  usual 
palaver  the  vanquished  was  compelled  to  pay  a 
heavy  fine.  M.  du  Chaillu’s  descriptions  of  the 
country,  a  park  land  dotted  with  tree-mottes,  are 
confirmed ;  but  the  sport,  excepting  hippopotamus, 


To  S&nga-T&nga  and  Back.  147 

was  poor,  and  the  negroes  were  found  eating  a 
white-faced  monkey — mere  cannibalism  amongst 
the  coast  tribes.  The  fauna  and  flora  of  the 
Ogobe  are  those  of  the  Gaboon,  and  the  variety 
of  beautiful  parrots  is  especially  remarked. 

On  January  9,  1874,  M.  de  Compiegne  passed 
from  the  Fernao  Vaz  through  the  Obango  Canal 
into  the  Ogobe,  which,  bordered  by  Fetish  rocks, 
flows  through  vast  forests ;  his  object  was  to 
study  the  manners  and  customs  of  the  Kammas,  a 
more  important  tribe  than  is  generally  supposed, 
far  outnumbering  the  Urungus  of  the  coast.  Their 
country  is  large  and  contains  many  factories,  the 
traders  securing  allies  by  marrying  native  women. 
The  principal  items  of  import  are  dry  goods,  guns, 
common  spirits,  and  American  tobacco ;  profits 
must  be  large,  as  what  costs  in  France  one  franc 
eighty  cents,  here  sells  for  ten  francs’  worth  of 
goods.  The  exports  are  almost  entirely  comprised 
in  gum  mastic  and  ivory.  At  the  factory  of  Mr. 
Watkins  the  traveller  secured  certain  figures  which 
he  calls  “  idols” — they  are  by  no  means  fitted  for 
the  drawing-room  table.  He  also  noticed  the 
“  peace  of  the  household,”  a  strip  of  manatus  nerve, 
at  times  used  by  paterfamilias. 

Mr.  R.  B.  N.  Walker,  who  made  sundry  ex¬ 
cursions  between  1866  and  1873,  a^so  wrote  from. 
Elobe  that  he  had  left  the  French  explorers,  MM. 
de  Compiegne  and  Marche,  on  the  Okanda  River 


148  To  Sanga-Tdnga  and  Back. 

which  M.  du  Chaillu  believes  to  be  the  northern 
fork  of  the  Ogobe.  Their  letters  (Feb.  12,  1874) 
were  dated  from  Osse  in  the  Okanda  country, 
where  they  had  made  arrangements  with  the  king¬ 
let  for  a  journey  to  the  “  Qtjebos,”  probably  the 
Moshebo  or  Moshobo  cannibals  of  the  “  Gorilla 
Book.”  The  rocks,  shoals,  and  stony  bottom  of 
the  Ogobe  reduced  their  rate  of  progress  to  three 
miles  a  day,  and,  after  four  wearisome  stages,  they 
reached  a  village  of  Bakele.  Here  they  saw  the 
slave-driving  tribe  “  Okota,”  whose  appearance  did 
not  prepossess  them  and  whose  chief  attempted 
unsuccessfully  to  stop  the  expedition.  They  did 
not  leave  before  collecting  specimens  of  the  lan¬ 
guage. 

Further  eastward,  going  towards  the  country 
of  the  Yalimbongo  tribe,  they  found  the  Okanda 
River,  which  they  make  the  southern  fork,  the 
Okono  being  the  northern,  descending  from  the 
mountains  ;  here  food  was  plentiful  compared  with 
Okota-land.  The  active  volcano  reported  by  Mr. 
R.  B.  N.  Walker,  1873,  was  found  to  bear  a  lake 
upon  the  summit — which,  in  plutonic  formations, 
would  suggest  an  extinct  crater.  East  of  the  Ya¬ 
limbongo  they  came  upon  the  Apingis,  whom 
M.  du  Chaillu,  after  two  visits,  also  placed  upon 
the  southern  fork  of  the  Ogobe.  The  tribe  is 
described  as  small  in  stature,  of  mild  habits,  and 
fond  of  commerce ;  hence  their  plantations  on  the 


1 49 


To  Sdnga-Tdnga  and  Back . 

north  or  right  bank  of  the  river  are  plundered  with 
impunity  by  the  truculent  “Oshieba”  (Moshebo  or 
Moshobo  ?).  Further  east  the  river,  after  being 
obstructed  by  rapids,  broadens  to  a  mile  and 
becomes  navigable — they  were  probably  above 
the  “  Ghats.”  It  is  supposed  to  arise  south  in 
a  lakelet  called  Tern  or  N’dua.  A  Bakele  village 
was  seen  near  Ochunga,  a  large  riverine  island  ; 
and  thence  they  passed  into  the  country  of  the 
mountaineer  Okandas.  They  are  described  as 
fine  men,  but  terrible  sorcerers ;  their  plantations 
of  banana  and  maize  are  often  plundered  by  the 
“  Oshieba,”  the  latter  being  now  recognized  as  a 
kindred  tribe  of  the  Pahouin  (Fa^). 


* 


CHAPTER  VI. 


VILLAGE  LIFE  IN  PONGO-LAND. 


n  pr  next  jay  was  perforce  a  halt.  For- 
teune  and  his  wives  did  not  appear 
till  9  A.M.,  when  it  was  dead  low  water. 
I  had  lent  Nimrod  a  double-barrelled 
gun  during  the  march,  and  he  was  evidently 
anxious  to  found  a  claim  upon  the  protracted 
usufruct.  “  Dashes  ”  also  had  to  be  settled,  and 
loads  made  up.  The  two  women  to  whose  un¬ 
varying  kindness  all  my  comfort  had  been  owing, 
were  made  happy  with  satin-stripe,  cassis,  and  the 
inevitable  nicotiana.  In  an  unguarded  moment 
my  soft  heart  was  betrayed  into  giving  a  bottle 
of  absinthe  to  the  large  old  person  who  claimed 
to  be  Forteune’s  mamma.  Expecting  nothing, 
had  nothing  been  offered  she  would  not  have 
complained ;  the  present  acted  upon  her  violently 
and  deleteriously  ;  she  was  like  the  cabman  who 
makes  mauvais  sang  because  he  has  asked  and 


Village  Life  in  Pongo-land.  15 1 

received  only  twice  his  fare  ;  briefly,  next  morning 
she  was  too  surly  to  bid  us  adieu. 

When  giving  Forteune  his  “  dash,”  I  was 
curious  to  hear  how  he  could  explain  the  report 
about  the  dead  gorilla  shot  the  night  before  last : 
the  truth  of  the  old  saying,  “  a  black  man  is  never 
fast  for  an  excuse,”  was  at  once  illustrated ;  the 
beast  had  been  badly  wounded,  but  it  had  dragged 
itself  off  to  die.  And  where  was  the  blood  ? 
The  rain  had  washed  the  blood  away ! 

Nimrod  seemed  chagrined  at  the  poor  end  of 
so  much  trouble,  but  there  was  something  in  his 
look  and  voice  suggesting  a  suppressed  thought — 
these  people,  like  the  English  and  the  Somal,  show 
their  innermost  secrets  in  their  faces.  At  last,  I 
asked  him  if  he  was  now  willing  to  try  the  She- 
kyani  country.  He  answered  flatly,  “No!”  And 
why  ? 

Some  bushmen  had  bewitched  him ;  he  knew 
the  fellow,  and  would  quickly  make  “  bob  come 
up  his  side  already  two  whites  had  visited  him 
with  a  view  of  shooting  gorillas ;  both  had  failed ; 
it  was  “  shame  palaver !  ” 

This  might  have  been  true,  but  it  certainly  was 
not  the  whole  truth.  I  can  hardly  accept  M.  du 
Chaillu’s  explanation,  that  the  Mpongwe,  who 
attack  the  beasts  with  trade  muskets  and  peb¬ 
bles,  will  not  venture  into  the  anthropoid’s  haunts 
unless  certain  of  their  white  employer’s  staunch- 


152  Village  Life  in  Pongo-land. 

ness.  What  could  that  matter,  when  our  Nimrod 
had  an  excellent  weapon  in  his  hand  and  a  strong 
party  to  back  him?  Very  likely  Forteune  was 
tired  with  walking,  and  five  dollars  per  shot  made 
the  game  not  worth  the  candle.  Again,  perhaps 
the  black  diplomatist  feared  to  overstock  the  mar¬ 
ket  with  Njinas,  or  to  offend  some  regular  customer 
for  the  sake  of  an  “  interloper.”  In  these  African 
lands  they  waste  over  a  monkey’s  skin  or  a  bottle 
of  rum  as  much  intrigue  as  is  devoted  to  a  con¬ 
tested  election  in  England. 

I  then  asked  the  guide  if  my  staying  longer 
would  be  of  any  use  ?  He  answered  with  a  simple 
negative.  Whilst  the  Utangani  remained  the 
Mbumji  (spell)  would  still  work,  but  it  would  at 
once  be  broken  by  our  departure,  and  he  would 
prove  it  by  sending  down  the  first-fruits.  This 
appeared  to  me  to  be  mere  Mpongwe  “  blague,” 
but,  curious  to  say,  the  sequel  completely  justified 
both  assertions.  He  threw  out  a  hint,  however, 
about  certain  enemies  and  my  “  medicine,”  the 
arsenical  soap ;  I  need  hardly  say  that  it  was 
refused. 

When  the  palaver  ended  and  the  tide  served,  a 
fierce  tornado  broke  upon  us,  and  the  sky  looked 
grisly  in  the  critical  direction,  north-east.  Having 
no  wish  to  recross  the  Gaboon  River  during  a 
storm  blowing  a  head  wind,  I  resolved  to  delay 
my  departure  till  the  morrow,  and  amused  myself 


Village  Life  in  Pongo-land.  153 

with  drawing  from  the  nude  a  picture  of  the  vil¬ 
lage  and  village-life  in  Pongo-land. 

The  Mpongwe  settlements  on  the  Gaboon 
River  are  neatly  built,  but  without  any  attempt  at 
fortification ;  for  the  most  part  each  contains  one 
family,  or  rather  a  chief  and  his  dependants.  In 
the  larger  plantation  “  towns,”  the  abodes  form  a 
single  street,  ranging  from  100  to  1,000  yards  in 
length ;  sometimes,  but  rarely,  there  are  cross 
streets ;  the  direction  is  made  to  front  the  sea- 
breeze,  and,  if  possible,  to  present  a  corner  to 
storm-bearing  Eurus.  An  invariable  feature,  like 
the  arcaded  loggie  of  old  Venetian  towns,  is  the 
Nampolo,  or  palaver -house,  which  may  be  de¬ 
scribed  as  the  club-room  of  the  village.  An  open 
hangar,  like  the  Ikongolo  or  “  cask-house  ”  of  the 
trading  places,  it  is  known  by  a  fire  always  kept 
burning.  The  houses  are  cubes,  or  oblong  squares, 
varying  from  10  to  100  feet  in  length,  according  to 
the  wealth  and  dignity  of  the  owner ;  all  are  one¬ 
storied,  and  a  few  are  raised  on  switch  foundations. 
Most  of  them  have  a  verandah  facing  the  street, 
and  a  “  compound  ”  or  cleared  space  in  the  rear 
for  cooking  and  other  domestic  purposes.  The 
walls  are  built  by  planting  double  and  parallel 
rows  of  posts,  the  material  being  either  bamboo  or 
the  mid-rib  of  a  wine-giving  palm  (Raphia  vini- 
fera)  ;  to  these  uprights  horizontal  slats  of  cane 
are  neatly  lashed  by  means  of  the  never-failing 


154  Village  Life  in  Pongo-land. 

“  tie-tie,”  bast-slips,  runners,  or  llianas.  For  the 
more  solid  buildings  thin  “  Mpavo,”  or  bark  slabs, 
are  fitted  in  between  the  double  posts  ;  when  cool¬ 
ness  is  required,  their  place  is  taken  by  mats  woven 
with  the  pinnated  leaves  of  sundry  palms.  This 
is  a  favourite  industry  with  the  women,  who  make 
two  kinds,  one  coarse,  the  other  a  neat  and  close 
article,  of  rattan-tint  until  it  becomes  smoke-stained  : 
the  material  is  so  cheap  and  comfortable,  that 
many  of  the  missionaries  prefer  it  for  walls  to 
brick  or  boarding.  The  windows  are  mere  holes 
in  the  mats  to  admit  light,  and  the  doors  are  cut 
with  a  Mpano  (adze)  from  a  single  tree  trunk,  which 
would  be  wilful  waste  if  timber  were  ever  wanting. 
The  floor  is  sometimes  sandy,  but  generally  of 
hard  and  level  tamped  clay,  to  which  the  European 
would  prefer  boarding,  and,  as  a  rule,  it  is  clean — 
no  fear  of  pythogenie  from  here  !  The  pent-shaped 
roof  of  rafters  and  thatch  is  water-tight  except 
when  the  host  of  rats  disturb  it  by  their  nocturnal 
gambols. 

Rich  men  affect  five  or  six  rooms,  of  which  the 
principal  occupies  the  centre.  The  very  poor 
must  be  contented  with  one ;  the  majority  have 
two.  The  “  but”  combines  the  functions  of  hall, 
dining-room,  saloon  and  bachelors  sleeping  quar¬ 
ters.  The  “  ben”  contains  a  broad  bed  for  the 
married,  a  standing  frame  of  split  bamboo  with 
mats  for  mattresses ;  it  is  usually  mounted  on 


Village  Life  in  Pongo-land.  155 

props  to  defend  it  from  the  Nchu’u  or  white  ants, 
and  each  has  its  mosquito  bar,  an  oblong  square, 
large  enough  to  cover  the  whole  couch  and  to  reach 
the  ground ;  the  material  is  either  fine  grass-cloth, 
from  the  Ashira  country,  a  light  stuff  called 
“  M bongo,”  or  calico  and  blue  baft  from  which  the 
stiffening  has  been  washed  out.  It  is  far  superior 
to  the  flimsy  muslin  affairs  supplied  in  an  Anglo- 
Indian  outfit,  or  to  the  coarse  matting  used  in 
Yoruba.  Provided  with  this  solid  defence,  which 
may  be  bought  in  any  shop,  one  can  indulge  one's 
self  by  sleeping  in  the  verandah  without  risk  of 
ague  or  rheumatism.  The  “  ben”  always  displays 
a  pile  of  chests  and  boxes,  which,  though  possibly 
empty,  testify  to  the  “  respectability”  of  the  house¬ 
hold.  In  Hotaloya’s  I  remarked  a  leather  hat- 
case  ;  he  owned  to  me  that  he  had  already  invested 
in  a  silk  tile,  the  sign  of  chieftainship,  but  that 
being  a  “  boy”  he  must  grow  older  before  he  could 
wear  it.  The  inner  room  can  be  closed  with  a 
strong  door  and  a  padlock ;  as  even  the  window- 
hole  is  not  admitted,  the  burglar  would  at  once  be 
detected.  Except  where  goods  are  concerned,  the 
Mpongwe  have  little  respect  for  privacy ;  the 
women,  in  the  presence  of  their  husbands,  never 
failed  to  preside  at  my  simple  toilette,  and  the 
girls  of  the  villages  would  sit  upon  the  bedside 
where  lay  an  U  tangani  in  almost  the  last’  stage  of 
dishabillL 


156  Village  Life  in  Pongo-lana. 

The  furniture  of  course  varies ;  a  rich  man  near 
the  river  will  have  tables  and  chairs,  sofas,  looking- 
glasses,  and  as  many  clocks,  especially  “  Sam 
Slicks,”  as  love  or  money  can  procure.  Even  the 
poorest  affect  a  standing  bedstead  in  the  “  ben,” 
plank  benches  acting  as  couches  in  the  “  but,”  a 
sufficiency  of  mats,  and  pots  for  water  and  cook¬ 
ing.  A  free  man  never  condescends  to  sit  upon 
the  ground;  the  low  stool,  cut  out  of  a  single 
block,  and  fancifully  carved,  is  exactly  that  of  the 
old  Egyptians  preserved  by  the  modern  East 
Africans;  it  dates  from  ages  immemorial.  The 
look  of  comparative  civilization  about  these  domi¬ 
ciles,  doubtless  the  effect  of  the  Portuguese  and  the 
slave  trade,  distinguishes  them  from  the  barbarous 
circular  huts  of  the  Kru-men,  the  rude  clay  walls 
of  the  Gold  Coast,  and  the  tattered,  comfortless 
sheds  of  the  Fernandian  “  Bube.”  They  have 
not,  however,  that  bandbox-like  neatness  which 
surprises  the  African  traveller  on  the  Camerones 
River. 

Tl\e  only  domestic  animals  about  these  villages 
are  dogs,  poultry,  and  pigeons  (fine  blue  rocks)  :  I 
never  saw  in  Pongo-land  the  goats  mentioned  by 
M.  du  Chaillu.  The  bush,  however,  supplies  an 
abundance  of  “  beef,”  and,  as  most  South  Africans, 
they  have  a  word,  Isangu  (amongst  the  Mpongwes), 
or  Ingwamba  (of  the  Cape  Lopez  people),  to  ex¬ 
press  that  inordinate  longing  and  yearning  for  the 


Village  Life  in  Pongo-lancl.  157 

stimulus  of  meat  diet,  caused  by  the  damp  and  de¬ 
pressing  equatorial  climate,  of  which  Dr.  Living¬ 
stone  so  pathetically  complains.  The  settlements 
are  sometimes  provided  with  little  plots  of  vege¬ 
tables  ;  usually,  however,  the  plantations  are  dis¬ 
tant,  to  preserve  them  from  the  depredations  of 
bipeds  and  quadrupeds.  They  are  guarded  by 
bushmen,  who  live  on  the  spot  and,  shortly  before 
the  rains  all  the  owners  flock  to  their  farms,  where, 
for  a  fortnight  or  so,  they  and  their  women  do 
something  like  work.  New  grounds  are  preferred, 
because  it  is  easier  to  clear  them  than  to  remove 
the  tangled  after-growth  of  ferns  and  guinea  grass  ; 
moreover,  they  yield,  of  course,  better  crops.  The 
plough  has  not  yet  reached  Pongo-land ;  the  only 
tools  are  the  erem  (little  axe  for  felling),  the 
matchet  (a  rude  cutlass  for  clearing),  the  hoe,  and 
a  succedaneum  for  the  dibble.  After  the  bush  has 
been  burned  as  manure,  and  the  seed  has  been 
sown,  no  one  will  take  the  trouble  of  weeding,  and 
half  the  surface  is  wild  growth. 

Maize  (Zea  mays)  has  become  common,  and  the 
people  enjoy  “  butas,”  or  roasted  ears.  Barbot 
says  that  the  soil  is  unfit  for  corn  and  Indian 
wheat ;  it  is  so  for  the  former,  certainly  not  for  the 
latter.  Rice  has  extended  little  beyond  the  model 
farms  on  the  north  bank  of  the  river ;  as  every¬ 
where  upon  the  West  African  Coast,  it  is  coarser, 
more  nutritious,  and  fuller  flavoured  than  the 


158  Village  Life  in  Pongo-land. 

Indian.  The  cereals,  however,  are  supplanted  by 
plantains  and  manioc  (cassava).  The  plantains 
are  cooked  in  various  ways,  roast  and  boiled, 
mashed  and  broiled,  in  paste  and  in  balls ;  when 
unripe  they  are  held  medicinal  against  dysentery. 
The  manioc  is  of  the  white  variety  ( Jatropka  Aypim 
sen  utilissima),  and,  as  at  Lagos,  the  root  may  be 
called  the  country  bread :  I  never  saw  the 
poisonous  or  black  manioc  ( Jatropha  manihot\ 
either  in  East  or  in  West  Africa,  and  I  heard  of  it 
only  once  in  Unyamwezi,  Central  Africa.  Yet  it 
is  mentioned  by  all  old  travellers,  and  the  sweet 
harmless  variety  gives  very  poor  “  farinha,”  Anglice 
“  wood  meal.” 

The  vegetables  are  “Mbongwe”  (yams),  koko 
or  Colocasia  esculenta,  Occras  (Hibiscus  esmlentus ), 
squashes  (pumpkins),  cucumbers,  beans  of  several 
sorts,  and  the  sweet  potato,  an  esculent  disliked  by 
Englishmen,  but  far  more  nutritious  than  the 
miserable  “  Irish”  tuber.  The  ground-nut  or  pea¬ 
nut  ( Arachis  hypogcea'),  the  “pindar”  of  the 
United  States,  a  word  derived  from  Loango,  is 
eaten  roasted,  and,  as  a  rule,  the  people  have  not 
learned  to  express  its  oil.  Proyart  (Pinkerton,  xvi. 
55 1)  gives,  probably  by  misprint,  “  Pinda,  which 
we  call  Pistachio.”  “  Bird-peppers,”  as  the  small 
red  species  is  called,  grow  wild  in  every  bush ;  they 
are  wholesome,  and  the  people  use  them  exten¬ 
sively.  Tomatoes  flourish  almost  spontaneously, 


Village  Life  in  Pongo-land.  159 

and  there  is  a  bulbless  native  onion  whose  tops 
make  excellent  seasoning.  .  Sugar-cane  will  thrive 
in  the  swamps,  coffee  on  the  hill-slopes  :  I  heard 
of,  but  never  saw  ginger. 

The  common  fruits  are  limes  and  oranges, 
mangoes,  papaws,  and  pineapples,  the  gift  of  the 
New  World,  now  run  wild,  and  appreciated  chiefly 
by  apes.  The  forest,  however,  supplies  a  multi¬ 
tude  of  wild  growths,  which  seem  to  distinguish 
this  section  of  the  coast,  and  which  are  eaten  with 
relish  by  the  people.  Amongst  them  are  the 
Sango  and  Nefu,  with  pleasant  acid  berries  ;  the 
Ntaba,  described  as  a  red  grape,  which  will  pre¬ 
sently  make  wine ;  the  olive-like  Azyigo  (Ozigo  ?); 
the  filbert-like  Kula,  the  “koola-nut”  of  M.  du 
Chaillu  (“Second  Expedition,”  chap,  viii.),  a  hard- 
shelled  nux,  not  to  be  confounded  with  the  soft- 
shelled  kola  ( Sterculia )  ;  and  the  Aba,  or  wild 
mango  ( Mango  Gabonensis ),  a  pale  yellow  pome, 
small,  and  tasting  painfully  of  turpentine.  It  is 
chiefly  prized  for  its  kernels.  In  February  and  March 
all  repair  to  the  bush  for  their  mango-vendange, 
eat  the  fruit,  and  collect  the  stones  :  the  insides, 
after  being  sun-dried,  are  roasted  like  coffee  in  a 
neptune,  or  in  an  earthern  pot.  When  burnt 
chocolate  colour,  they  are  pounded  to  the  con¬ 
sistency  of  thick  honey,  poured  into  a  mould,  a 
basket  lined  with  banana  leaves,  and  set  for  three 
days  to  dry  in  the  sun  :  after  this  the  cake,  which 


160  Village  Life  in  Pongo-land . 

in  appearance  resembles  guava  cheese,  will  keep 
through  the  year. 

For  use  the  loaf  is  scraped,  and  a  sufficiency 
is  added  to  the  half-boiled  or  stewed  flesh,  the 
two  being  then  cooked  together  :  it  is  equally 
prized  in  meat  broths,  or  with  fish,  dry  and 
fresh  ;  and  it  is  the  favoured  kitchen  for  rice  and 
the  insipid  banana.  “  Odika,”  the  “Ndika”  of 
the  Bakele  tribes,  is  universally  used,  like  our 
“  Worcester,”  and  it  may  be  called  the  one  sauce 
of  Gorilla-land,  the  local  equivalent  for  curry, 
pepper-pot,  or  palm-oil  chop;  it  can  be  eaten  thick 
or  thin,  according  to  taste,  but  it  must  always  be 
as  hot  as  possible.  The  mould  sells  for  half  a 
dollar  at  the  factories,  and  many  are  exported 
to  adulterate  chocolate  and  cocoa,  which  it  re¬ 
sembles  in  smell  and  oily  flavour.  I  regret  to  say 
that  travellers  have  treated  this  national  relish  dis¬ 
respectfully,  as  continentals  do  our  “  plomb-bou- 
din  :  ”  Mr.  W.  Winwood  Reade  has  chaffed  it,  and 
another  Briton  has  compared  it  with  “  greaves.” 

At  “  Cockerapeak,”or,  to  speak  less  unpoetically, 
when  Alectryon  sings  his  hymn  to  the  dawn,  the 
working  bees  of  the  little  hive  must  be  up  and 
stirring,  whilst  the  master  and  mistress  enjoy  the 
beauty-sleep.  “  Early  to  bed,  and  early  to  rise,” 
is  held  only  fit  to  make  a  man  surly,  and  give  him 
red  eyes,  by  all  wild  peoples,  who  have  little  work, 
and  who  justly  hold  labour  an  evil  less  only  than 


Village  Life  in  Pongo-land.  161 

death.  Amongst  the  Bedawin  it  is  a  sign  of 
Shaykh-dom  not  to  retire  before  dawn,  and  I  have 
often  heard  the  Somal  “palavering”  after  mid¬ 
night.  As  a  rule  the  barbarian  enjoys  his  night 
chat  and  smoke  round  the  fire  all  the  more  because 
he  drinks  or  dozes  through  the  better  part  of  the 
day.  There  is  a  physical  reason  for  the  prefer¬ 
ence.  The  absence  of  light  stimulus,  and  the 
changes  which  follow  sunset  seem  to  develope  in 
him  a  kind  of  night-fever  as  in  the  nervous  tem¬ 
perament  of  Europe.  Hence  so  many  students 
choose  the  lamp  in  preference  to  the  sun,  and 
children  mostly  clamour  when  told  at  8  o’clock  to 
go  to  bed. 

Shortly  after  sunrise  the  young  ones  are  bathed 
in  the  verandah.  Here  also  the  mistress  smooths 
her  locks,  rumpled  by  the  night,  “  tittivates  ”  her 
macaw-crest  with  the  bodkin,  and  anoints  her  hair 
and  skin  with  a  tantinel  of  grease  and  palm  oil. 
Some,  but  by  no  means  all,  proceed  for  ablution  to 
the  stream-side,  and  the  girls  fetch  water  in  heavy 
earthen  jars,  containing  perhaps  two  gallons  ;  they 
are  strung,  after  the  Kru  fashion,  behind  the  back 
by  a  band  passing  across  the  forehead.  When  we 
meet  them  they  gently  say  “Mbolo!”  (good  morn¬ 
ing),  or  “  Oresa  ”  (are  you  well)  ?  At  this  hour, 
however,  all  are  not  so  civil,  the  seniors  are 
often  uncommonly  cross  and  surly,  and  the  mollia 
tempora  fandi  may  not  set  in  till  after  the  first 

I.  M 


1 62  Village  Life  in  Pongo-land. 

meal — I  have  seen  something  of  the  kind  in 
England.  The  sex,  unpolitely  said  to  have  one 
fibre  more  in  the  heart  and  one  cell  less  in  the 
brain,  often  engages  in  a  violent  wordy  war ;  the 
tornado  of  wrath  will  presently  pass  over,  and  leave 
clear  weather  for  the  day.  In  the  evening,  when 
the  electric  fluid  again  gathers  heavily,  there  will 
be  another  storm.  Meanwhile,  superintended  by 
the  mistress,  all  are  occupied  with  the  important 
duty  of  preparing  the  morning  meal.  It  is  sur¬ 
prising  how  skilful  are  these  heaven-born  cooks  ; 
the  excellent  dishes  they  make  out  of  “  half- 
nothing.”  I  preferred  the  cuisine  of  Forteune’s 
wives  to  that  of  the  Plateau,  and,  after  finding  that 
money  was  current  in  the  village,  I  never  failed  to 
secure  their  good  offices. 

The  Mpongwe  breakfast  is  eaten  by  the  women 
in  their  respective  verandahs,  with  their  children 
and  friends  ;  the  men  also  gather  together,  and 
prefer  the  open  air.  This  feed  would  not  only 
astonish  those  who  talk  about  a  “  free  breakfast- 
table,”  with  its  silly  slops  and  bread-stuffs  ;  it  would 
satisfy  a  sharp-set  Highlander.  In  addition  to 
yams  and  sweet  potatoes,  plantains,  and  perhaps 
rice,  there  will  be  cooked  mangrove-oysters  fresh 
from  the  tree,  a  fry,  or  an  excellent  bouillabaisse  of 
fish  ;  succulent  palaver  sauce,  or  palm-oil  chop  ; 
poultry  and  me£t.  The  domestic  fowl  is  a  favou¬ 
rite  ;  but,  curious  to  say,  neither  here  nor  in  any 


Village  Life  in  Pongo-land ’  163 

part  of  tropical  Africa  known  to  me  have  the 
people  tamed  the  only  gallinaceous  bird  which  the 
Black  Continent  has  contributed  to  civilization. 
The  Guinea  fowl,  like  the  African  elephant,  re¬ 
mains  wild.  We  know  it  to  be  an  old  importation 
in  Europe,  although  there  are  traditions  about  its 
appearing  in  the  fourteenth  century,  when  Moslems 
sold  it  to  Christians  as  the  Jerusalem  cock,”  and 
Christians  to  Moslems  as  the  “bird  of  Meccah.”  It 
must  be  the  Greek  meleagris,  so  called,  says  ./Elian, 
from  the  sisters  who  wept  a  brother  untimely  slain  ; 
hence  the  tears  upon  its  plume,  suggesting  the 
German  Perl-huhn,  and  its  frequent  cries,  which  the 
Brazilians,  who  are  great  in  the  language  of  birds, 
translate  Sto  fraca ,  sto  fraca,  sto  fraca  (I’m  weak). 
The  Hausa  Moslems  make  the  Guinea  fowl 
cry,  “  Kilkal  !  kilkal  !”  (Grammar  by  the  Rev. 
F.  J.  Schon,  London,  Salisbury  Square,  1862).  It 
is  curious  to  compare  the  difference  of  ear  with 
which  nations  hear  the  cries  of  animals,  and  form 
their  onomatopoetic,  or  “  bow-wow  ”  imitations. 
For  instance,  the  North  Americans  express  by 
“whip-poor-will”  what  the  Brazilians  call  “Joao- 
corta-pao.”  The  Guinea  fowl  may  have  been  the 
“  Afraa  avis  ;”  but  that  was  a  dear  luxury  amongst 
the  Romans,  though  the  Greek  meleagris  was 
cheap.  The  last  crotchet  about  it  is  that  of  an 
African  traveller,  who  holds  it  to  be  the  peacock 
of  Solomon’s  navies,  completely  ignoring  the 


164  Village  Life  in  Pongo-land. 

absolute  certainty  which  the  South- Indian  word 
“  Tukkiim”  carries  with  it. 

The  Mpongwe  will  not  eat  ape,  on  account  of 
its  likeness  to  themselves.  But  they  greatly 
enjoy  game  ;  the  porcupine,  the  ground-hog  (an 
Echymys),  the  white  flesh  of  the  bush  pig  ( Crice - 
tomys ),  and  the  beef  of  the  Nyare  (Bos  brachyceros )  ; 
this  is  the  “  buffalo  ”  or  “  bush-cow  ”  of  the  regions 
south  of  Sierra  Leone,  and  the  empacassa  of  the 
Congo-Portuguese,  whose  “empacasseirs”  or  native 
archers,  rural  police  and  auxiliaries  “  of  the  second 
line,”  have  as  “  guerra  preta  ”  (black  militia)  won 
many  a  victory.  Their  numbers  in  Angola  have 
amounted  to  30,000,  and  they  aided  in  conquest 
like  the  Indian  Sipahi  (sepoy)  and  the  Tupi  of 
the  older  Brazil.  Now  they  wear  the  Tanga  or 
Pagne,  a  waist  cloth  falling  to  the  knee,  and  they 
are  armed  with  trade  muskets  and  cartridge- 
boxes  fastened  to  broad  belts.  Barbot  calls  the 
Nyare  a  buffalo,  and  tells  us  that  it  was  commonly 
shot  at  Sandy  Point,  where  in  his  day  elephants 
also  abounded.  Captain  Boteler  (ii.  379)  well  de¬ 
scribes  a  specimen,  which  was  killed  by  Dr.  Guland, 
R.N.,  as  exactly  resembling  the  common  cow  of 
England,  excepting  that  its  proportions  are  far 
more  “  elegant.” 

This  hearty  breakfast  is  washed  down  with 
long  drinks  of  palm  wine,  and  followed  by  sundry 
pipes  of  tobacco  ;  after  which,  happy  souls  !  all 


Village  Life  in  Pongo-land.  165 

enjoy  a  siesta,  long  and  deep  as  that  of  Andine 
Mendoza;  and  they  “kill  time ”  as  well  as  they 
can  till  evening.  The  men  assemble  in  the  club 
round  the  Nampolo-fire,  where  they  chat  and  smoke, 
drink  and  doze ;  those  who  are  Agriophagi  or 
Xylobian  Ethiopians,  briefly  called  hunters,  spend 
their  days  much  like  the  race  which  Byron  declared 

“  Merely  born 

To  hunt  and  vote,  and  raise  the  price  of  corn.” ' 

The  Pongo  Venator  is  up  with  the  sun,  and, 
if  not  on  horseback,  at  least  he  is  on  the  traces  of 
game ;  sometimes  he  returns  home  during  the 
hours  of  heat,  when  he  knows  that  the  beasts  seek 
the  shady  shelter  of  the  deepest  forests  ;  and,  after 
again  enjoying  the  “  pleasures  of  the  chase,”  he 
disposes  of  a  heavy  dinner  and  ends  the  day, 
sleep  weighing  down  his  eyelids  and  his  brains 
singing  with  liquor.  What  he  did  yesterday  that 
he  does  to-day,  and  what  he  does  to-day  that  he 
shall  do  to-morrow  ;  his  intellectual  life  is  varied 
only  by  a  visit  to  town,  where  he  sells  his  choice 
skins,  drinks  a  great  deal  too  much  rum,  and 
makes  the  purchases,  ammunition  and  so  forth, 
which  are  necessary  for  the  full  enjoyment  of 
home  and  country  life.  At  times  also  he  joins  a 
party  of  friends  and  seeks  some  happier  hunting 
ground  farther  from  his  campagne . 

Meanwhile  the  women  dawdle  through  the  day, 


1 66  Village  Life  in  Pongo-land . 

superintending  their  domestic  work,  look  after 
their  children’s  and  their  own  toilette,  tend  the 
fire,  attend  to  the  cooking,  and  smoke  con- 
sumedly.  The  idle  sit  with  the  men  at  the  doors 
of  their  huts  ;  those  industriously  disposed  weave 
mats,  and,  whether  lazy  or  not,  they  never  allow 
their  tongues  and  lungs  a  moment’s  rest.  The 
slaves,  male  and  female,  draw  water,  cut  fuel,  or 
go  to  the  distant  plantations  for  yams  and  bananas ; 
whilst  the  youngsters  romp,  play  and  tease  the 
village  idiot — there  is  one  in  almost  every  settle¬ 
ment.  Briefly,  the  day  is  spent  in  idleness,  ex- 
cept,  as  has  been  said,  for  a  short  time  preceding 
the  rains. 

When  the  sun  nears  the  western  horizon,  the 
hunter  and  the  slaves  return  home,  and  the  house¬ 
wife,  who  has  been  enjoying  the  “  coolth  ” 
squatting  on  her  dwarf  stool  at  her  hut-door,  and 
puffing  the  preparatory  pipe,  girds  her  loins  for 
the  evening  meal,  and  makes  every  one  “  look 
alive.”  When  the  last  rays  are  shedding  their  rich 
red  glow  over  the  tall  black  trees  which  hem  in 
the  village,  all  torpidity  disappears  from  it.  The 
fires  are  trimmed,  and  the  singing  and  harping, 
which  were  languid  during  the  hot  hours,  begin 
with  renewed  vigour.  The  following  is  a  speci¬ 
men  of  a  boating-song  : 

(Solo.)  “Come,  my  sweetheart !” 

(Chorus.)  “  Haste,  haste  !” 


Village  Life  in  Pongo-land.  167 

(Solo.)  “How  many  things  gives  the  white  man?” 

(Chorus  chaunts  all  that  it  wants.) 

(Solo.)  “  What  must  be  done  for  the  white  man?” 

(Chorus  improvises  all  his  requirements .) 

(Solo.)  “  How  many  dangers  for  the  black  girl?” 

(Chorus.)  “  Dangers  from  the  black  and  the 
white  man  !” 


THE  VILLAGE  IDIOT. 


The  evening  meal  is  eaten  at  6  p.m.  with  the 
setting  of  the  sun,  whose  regular  hours  contrast 
pleasantly  with  his  vagaries  in  the  northern  tem- 
perates.  And  Hesperus  brings  wine  as  he  did  of 
old.  Drinking  sets  in  seriously  after  dark,  and  is 


1 68  Village  Life  in  Pongo-lana. 

known  by  the  violent  merriment  of  the  men,  and 
the  no  less  violent  quarrelling  and  “  flyting  ”  of 
the  sex  which  delights  in  the  “  harmony  of 
tongues.”  All  then  retire  to  their  huts,  and  with 
chat  and  song,  and  peals  of  uproarious  laughter 
and  abundant  horseplay,  such  as  throwing  minor 
articles  at  one  another’s  heads,  smoke  and  drink 
till  ii  p.m.  The  scene  is  “  Dovercourt,  all  speakers 
and  no  hearers.”  The  night  is  still  as  the  grave, 
and  the  mewing  of  a  cat,  if  there  were  one, 
would  sound  like  a  tiger’s  scream. 

The  mornings  and  evenings  in  these  plantation- 
villages  would  be  delightful  were  it  not  for  what 
the  Brazilians  call  immundicies .  Sandflies  always 
swarm  in  places  where  underwood  and  tall  grasses 
exclude  the  draughts,  and  the  only  remedy  is 
clearing  the  land.  Thus  at  St.  Isabel  or  Clarence, 
Fernando  Po,  where  the  land-wind  or  the  sea- 
breeze  ever  blows,  the  vicious  little  wretches  are 
hardly  known ;  on  the  forested  background  of 
mountain  they  are  troublesome  as  at  Nigerian 
Nufe.  The  bite  burns  severely,  and  presently  the 
skin  rises  in  bosses,  lasting  for  days  with  a  severe 
itching,  which,  if  unduly  resented,  may  end  in 
inflammatory  ulcerations — I  can  easily  understand 
a  man  being  laid  up  by  their  attacks.  The 
animalcules  act  differently  upon  different  constitu¬ 
tions.  While  mosquitoes  hardly  take  effect, 
sand  flies  have  often  blinded  me  for  hours  by 


Village  Life  in  Pongo-land.  169 

biting  the  circumorbital  parts.  The  numbers  and 
minuteness  of  this  insect  make  it  formidable.  The 
people  flap  their  naked  shoulders  with  cloths  or 
bushy  twigs;  Nigerian  travellers  have  tried  palm 
oil  but  with  scant  success,  and  spirits  of  wine 
applied  to  the  skin  somewhat  alleviate  the  itching 
but  has  no  prophylactic  effect.  Sandflies  do  not 
venture  into  the  dark  huts,  and  a  “  smudge  ”  keeps 
them  aloof,  but  the  disease  is  more  tolerable  than 
the  remedy  of  inflaming  the  eyes  with  acrid 
smoke  and  of  sitting  in  a  close  box,  by  courtesy 
termed  a  room,  when  the  fine  pure  air  makes  one 
pine  to  be  beyond  walls.  After  long  endurance 
in  hopes  of  becoming  inoculated  with  the  virus,  I 
was  compelled  to  defend  myself  with  thick  gloves, 
stockings  and  a  muslin  veil  made  fast  to  the  hat 
and  tucked  in  under  the  shirt.  After  sunset  the 
sandflies  retire,  and  the  mosquito  sounds  her 
hideous  trump ;  as  has  been  said,  however,  Pongo- 
land  knows  how  to  receive  her. 


SWORD  FROM  THE  INTERIOR. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

RETURN  TO  THE  RIVER. 

ARLY  on  the  last  morning  in  March 
we  roused  the  Kru-men ;  they  were 
eager  as  ourselves  to  leave  the  “bush,” 
and  there  was  no  delay  in  loading  and 
launching  the  mission-boat  Forteune,  Azfzeh, 
and  Asunye  were  there  to  bid  me  God-speed,  and 
Hotaloya  did  not  fail  to  supply  a  fine  example  of 
Mpongwe  irresolution. 

That  “  sweet  youth  ”  had  begged  hard  during  the 
last  week  that  I  would  take  him  to  Fernando  Po  ; 
carpenters  were  wanted  for  her  Majesty’s  con¬ 
sulate,  and  he  seemed  to  jump  at  the  monthly  pay  of 
seven  dollars — a  large  sum  in  these  regions.  On 
the  night  before  departure  he  had  asked  me  for 
half  a  sovereign  to  leave  with  his  wives,  and  he 
made  me  agree  to  an  arrangement  that  they  should 
receive  two  dollars  per  mensem.  In  the  morning  I 
had  alluded  to  the  natural  sorrow  which  his  better 


Return  to  the  River. 


1 7i 

semi-halves  must  feel,  although  the  absence  of 
groaning  and  weeping  was  very  suspicious,  and  I 
had  asked  in  a  friendly  way,  “  Them  woman  he 
make  bob  too  much  ?  ” 

“Ye’,  sar,”  he  replied  with  a  full  heart,  “he  cry 
too  much.” 

When  the  last  batch  had  disappeared  with  the 
last  box  I  walked  up  to  him,  and  said,  “  Now, 
Andrews,  you  take  hat,  we  go  Gaboon.” 

Hotaloya  at  once  assumed  the  maudlin  expres¬ 
sion  and  insipid  ricanement  of  the  Hindu  charged 
with  “Sharm  ki  bat”  (something  shameful). 

“  Please,  mas’r,  I  no  can  go — Nanny  Po  he  be 
too  far — I  no  look  my  fader  (the  villain  had  three), 
them  boy  he  say  I  no  look  ’um  again !  ” 

The  wives  had  won  the  day,  and  words  would 
have  been  vain.  He  promised  hard  to  get  leave 
from  his  papa  and  “grand-pap,”  and  to  join  me 
after  a  last  farewell  at  the  Plateau.  His  face  gave 
the  lie  direct  to  his  speech,  and  his  little  manoeuvre 
for  keeping  the  earnest-money  failed  ignobly. 

The  swift  brown  stream  carried  us  at  full  speed. 
“  Captain  Merrick  ”  pointed  out  sundry  short  cuts, 
but  my  brain  now  refused  to  admit  as  truth  a  word 
coming  from  a  Mpongwe.  We  passed  some  ba¬ 
teaux  pecheurs,  saw  sundry  shoals  of  fish  furrowing 
the  water,  and  after  two  hours  we  were  bumping 
on  the  rocks  outlying  Mombe  Creek  and  Nenga 
Oga  village.  The  passage  of  the  estuary  was  now 


172  Return  to  the  River. 

a  pleasure,  and  though  we  grounded  upon  the  shal¬ 
lows  of  “  Voileliay  Bay,”  the  Kru-men  soon  lifted 
the  heavy  boat ;  the  wind  was  fair,  the  tide  was 
ebbing,  and  the  strong  current  was  in  our  favour. 
We  reached  Glass  Town  before  midday,  and  after 
five  hours,  covering  some  twenty-two  direct  geo¬ 
graphical  miles,  I  found  myself  with  pleasure  under 
the  grateful  shade  of  the  Factory.  It  need  hardly 
be  described,  as  it  is  the  usual  “  bungalow  ”  of  the 
West  African  shore. 

Twelve  days  had  been  expended  upon  120 
miles,  but  I  did  not  regret  the  loss.  A  beautiful  bit 
of  country  had  been  added  to  my  mental  Pinaco- 
thek,  and  I  had  satisfied  my  mind  to  a  certain 
extent  upon  that  qucestio ,  then  vexata ,  the  “  Go¬ 
rilla  Book.”  Even  before  my  trip  the  ethnolo¬ 
gical  part  appeared  to  me  trustworthy,  and,  if  not 
original,  at  any  rate  borrowed  from  the  best 
sources.  My  journey  assured  me,  from  the  speci¬ 
men  narrowly  scrutinized,  that  both  country  and 
people  are  on  the  whole  correctly  described.  The 
dates,  however,  are  all  in  confusion  :  in  the  preface 
to  the  second  edition,  “October,  1859,”  became 
“October,  1858,”  and  we  are  told  that  the  excur¬ 
sions  were  transposed  for  the  simple  purpose  of 
taking  the  reader  from  north  to  south.  As  in  the 
case  of  most  African  travels,  when  instruments  are 
not  used,  the  distances  must  be  reduced :  in  chapter 
xii.  the  Shekyani  villages  are  placed  sixty  miles 


Return  to  the  River. 


1 73 


due  east  of  Sanga-Tanga  ;  whereas  the  map 
shows  twenty.  Mr.  W.  Winwood  Reade  declares 
that  the  Aping!  country,  the  ultima  Thule  of  the 
explorer,  is  distant  from  Ngumbi  “  four  foot-days’ 
journey;”  as  MM.  de  Compiegne  and  Marche 
have  shown,  the  tribe  in  question  extends  far  and 
wide.  Others  have  asserted  that  seventy- five 
miles  formed  the  maximum  distance.  But  many 
of  M.  du  Chaillu’s  disputed  distances  have  been 
proved  tolerably  correct  by  MM.  Serval  and 
Griffon  du  Bellay,  who  were  sent  by  the  French 
government  in  1862  to  survey  the  Ogobe.  A 
second  French  expedition  followed  shortly  after¬ 
wards,  under  the  charge  of  MM.  Labigot  and 
Touchard;  and  finally  that  of  1873,  like  all  pre¬ 
ceding  it,  failed  to  find  any  serious  deviation  from 
fact. 

The  German  exploring  expedition  (July  25, 
1873)  confirms  the  existence  of  M.  du  Chaillu’s 
dwarfs,  the  Obongo  tribe,  scoffed  at  in  England 
because  they  dwell  close  to  a  fierce  people  of 
Patagonian  proportions.  The  Germans  report 
that  they  are  called  “  Babongo,”  “  Vambuta,”  and 
more  commonly  “  Bari,”  or  “  Bali ;  ”  they  dwell 
fourteen  days’  march  from  the  mouth  of  the  Luena, 
or  River  of  Chinxoxo.  I  have  not  seen  it  remarked 
that  these  pygmies  are  mentioned  by  Andrew  Battel 
Plinian  at  the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century.  “To 
the  north-east  of  Mani  Kesoch,”  he  tells  us,  “  are  a 


174  Return  to  the  River. 

kind  of  little  people  called  Matimbas,  who  are  no 
bigger  than  boys  twelve  years  old,  but  are  very 
thick,  and  live  only  upon  flesh,  which  they  kill  in 
the  woods  with  bows  and  darts.”  Of  the  Aykas 
south  of  the  Welle  River,  discovered  by  Dr. 
Schweinfurth,  I  need  hardly  speak.  It  is  not 
a  little  curious  to  find  these  confirmations  of  He- 
rodotean  reports  about  dwarfish  tribes  in  the  far 
interior,  the  Dokos  and  the  Wabilikimo,  so  long 
current  at  Zanzibar  Island,  and  so  long  looked 
upon  as  mere  fables. 

Our  departure  from  Mbata  had  broken  the  spell, 
and  Forteune  did  keep  his  word;  I  was  com¬ 
pelled  in  simple  justice  to  cry  “  Peccavi.”  On  the 
very  evening  of  our  arrival  at  Glass  Town  the 
youth  Kanga  brought  me  a  noble  specimen  of 
what  he  called  a  Nchfgo  Mpolo,  sent  by  For- 
teune’s  bushmen ;  an  old  male  with  brown  eyes 
and  dark  pupils.  When  placed  in  an  arm-chair, 
he  ludicrously  suggested  a  pot-bellied  and  patri¬ 
archal  negro  considerably  the  worse  for  liquor. 
From  crown  to  sole  he  measured  4  feet  iof 
inches,  and  from  finger-tip  to  finger-tip  6  feet 
1  inch.  The  girth  of  the  head  round  ears 
and  eyebrows  was  1  foot  1 1  inches ;  of  the  chest, 

3  feet  2  inches ;  above  the  hip  joints,  2  feet 

4  inches ;  of  the  arms  below  the  shoulder,  2  feet 

5  inches ;  and  of  the  legs,  2  feet  5  inches.  Evi¬ 
dently  these  are  very  handsome  proportions,  con- 


Return  to  the  River. 


1 75 


sidering  what  he  was,  and  there  was  a  suggestion 
of  ear  lobe  which  gave  his  countenance  a  pecu¬ 
liarly  human  look.  He  had  not  undergone  the 
inhuman  Hebrew- Abyssinian  operation  to  which 
M.  du  Chaillu’s  gorillas  had  been  exposed,  and 
the  proportions  rendered  him  exceedingly  re¬ 
markable. 

That  interesting  anthropoid’s  career  after  death 
was  one  series  of  misfortunes,  ending  with  being 
stuffed  for  the  British  Museum.  My  factotum  sat 
up  half  the  night  skinning,  but  it  was  his  first 
coup  d’essai.  In  a  climate  like  the  Gaboon, 
especially  during  the  rains,  we  should  have  turned 
the  pelt  “hairy  side  in,”  filled  it  with  cotton  to 
prevent  shrinking,  and,  after  painting  on  arsenic, 
have  exposed  it  to  the  sun  :  better  still,  we  should 
have  placed  it  on  a  scaffolding,  like  a  defunct  Congo- 
man,  over  a  slow  and  smoky  fire,  and  thus  the  fatty 
matter  which  abounds  in  the  integuments  would 
have  been  removed.  The  phalanges  of  the  hands 
and  feet,  after  being  clean-scraped,  were  restored 
to  their  places,  and  wrapped  with  thin  layers  of 
arsenicated  cotton,  as  is  done  to  small  animals, 
yet  on  the  seventh  day  decomposition  set  in  ;  it 
was  found  necessary  to  unsew  the  skin,  and  again 
to  turn  it  inside  out.  The  bones  ought  to  have 
been  removed,  and  not  replaced  till  the  coat  was 
thoroughly  dry.  The  skinned  spoils  were  placed 
upon  an  ant-hill ;  a  practice  which  recalls  to  mind 


Return  to  the  River. 


1 76 

the  skeleton  deer  prepared  by  the  emmets  of  the 
Hartz  Forest,  which  taught  Oken  that  the  skull 
is(?)  expanded  vertebrae.  We  did  not  know  that 
half-starved  dogs  and  “  drivers  ”  will  not  respect 
even  arsenical  soap.  The  consequence  of  ex¬ 
posing  the  skeleton  upon  an  ant-hill,  where  it 
ought  to  have  been  neatly  cleaned  during  a  night, 
was  that  the  “  Pariah  ”  curs  carried  off  sundry  ribs, 
and  the  “  parva  magni  formica  laboris  ”  took  the 
trouble  to  devour  the  skin  of  a  foot.  Worse  still  : 
the  skull,  the  brain,  and  the  delicate  members  had 
been  headed  up  in  a  breaker  of  trade  rum,  which 
was  not  changed  till  the  seventh  day.  It  was 
directed  to  an  eminent  member  of  the  old  Anthro¬ 
pological  Society,  and  the  most  interesting  parts 
arrived,  I  believe,  soft,  pulpy,  and  utterly  useless. 
The  subject  seems  to  have  been  too  sore  for  men¬ 
tioning — at  least,  I  never  heard  of  it  again. 

The  late  Dr.  John  Edward  Gray,  of  the  British 
Museum,  called  this  Nchigo  Mpolo,  from  its  bear¬ 
like  masses  of  breast-pile,  the  “  hairy  Chimpanzee” 
( Troglodytes  vellerosus) .  After  my  return  home  I 
paid  it  a  visit,  and  could  only  think  that  the  hirsute 
one  was  considerably  “mutatus  ab  illo.”  The  co¬ 
lour  had  changed,  and  the  broad-chested,  square¬ 
framed,  pot-bellied,  and  portly  old  bully-boy  of 
the  woods  had  become  a  wretched  pigeon-breasted, 
lean-flanked,  shrunk-limbed,  hungry-looking  beg¬ 
gar.  It  is  a  lesson  to  fill  out  the  skin,  even  with 


Return  to  the  River. 


1 77 


bran  or  straw,  if  there  be  nothing  better- — any¬ 
thing,  in  fact,  is  preferable  to  allowing  the  shrink¬ 
age  which  ends  in  this  wretched  caricature. 

During  my  stay  at  Glass  Town  I  was  fortunate 
enough  to  make  the  acquaintance  of  the  Rev. 
Messrs.  Walker  and  Preston,  of  the  Baraka  Mis¬ 
sion.  The  head-quarter  station  of  the  American 
Board  of  Foreign  (Presbyterian)  Missions  was 
established  on  the  Gaboon  River  in  1842  by  the 
Rev.  J.  Leighton  Wilson,  afterwards  one  of  the 
secretaries  to  the  Society  in  New  York.  He  had 
left  the  best  of  memories  in  “  the  River,”  and  there 
were  tales  of  his  having  manumitted  in  the  South¬ 
ern  U  nited  States  a  small  fortune  of  slaves  without 
a  shade  of  compulsion.  His  volume  on  West 
Africa,  to  which  allusion  has  so  often  been  made, 
contains  a  good  bird’s-eye  of  the  inter-tropical 
coast,  and  might,  with  order,  arrangement,  and 
correction  of  a  host  of  minor  inaccuracies,  become 
a  standard  work. 

I  have  already  expressed  my  opinion,  founded 
upon  a  sufficiently  long  experience,  that  the  U  nited 
States  missionary  is  by  far  the  best  man  for  the 
Western  Coast,  and,  indeed,  for  dangerous  tropical 
countries  generally.  Physically  he  is  spare  and 
hard,  the  nervous  temperament  being  more  strongly 
developed  in  him  than  in  the  bulbous  and  more 
bilious  or  sanguine  European.  He  is  better  born, 
and  blood  never  fails  to  tell.  Again,  he  generally 


1. 


N 


i78 


Return  to  the  River . 


adopts  the  profession  from  taste,  not  because  it 
faut  vivre .  He  is  better  bred;  he  knows  the 
negro  from  his  childhood,  and  his  education  is 
more  practical,  more  generally  useful  than  that  of 
his  rivals.  Moreover,  I  never  yet  heard  him  ex¬ 
claim,  “  Capting,  them  heggs  is  ’igh  !  ”  Lastly 
he  is  more  temperate  and  moderate  in  his  diet : 
hitherto  it  has  not  been  my  fate  to  assist  in  carry¬ 
ing  him  to  bed. 

Perhaps  the  American  missionary  carries  so¬ 
briety  too  far.  In  dangerous  tropical  regions, 
where  there  is  little  appetite  and  less  nutritious 
diet,  where  exertion  of  mind  and  body  easily 
exhaust  vitality,  and  where  “  diffusible  stimu¬ 
lants  ”  must  often  take  the  place  of  solids,  he  dies 
first  who  drinks  water.  The  second  is  the  man 
who  begins  with  an  “  eye-opener  ”  of  “  brandy- 
pawnee,”  and  who  keeps  up  excitement  by  the 
same  means  through  the  day.  The  third  is  the 
hygienic  sciolist,  who  drinks  on  principle  poor 
“Gladstone”  and  thin  French  wines,  cheap  and 
nasty  ;  and  the  survivor  is  the  man  who  enjoys  a 
quantum  suff.  of  humming  Scotch  and  Burton 
ales,  sherry,  Madeira,  and  port,  with  a  modicum 
of  cognac.  This  has  been  my  plan  in  the  tropics 
from  the  beginning,  when  it  was  suggested  to  me 
by  the  simplest  exercise  of  the  reasoning  faculties. 
“  A  dozen  of  good  port  will  soon  set  you  up !  ” 
said  the  surgeon  to  me  after  fever.  Then  why 
not  drink  port  before  the  fever  ? 


Return  to  the  River. 


179 


I  have  said  something  upon  this  subject  in 
“  Zanzibar  City,  Island,  and  Coast”  (i.  p.  180),  it 
will  bear  repetition.  Joseph  Dupuis  justly  re¬ 
marks  :  “  I  am  satisfied,  from  my  own  experience, 
that  many  fall  victims  from  the  adoption  of  a 
course  of  training  improperly  termed  prudential  ; 
viz.  a  sudden  change  of  diet  from  ship's  fare  to  a 
scanty  sustenance  of  vegetable  matter  (rejecting 
even  a  moderate  proportion  of  wine),  and  seclu¬ 
sion  in  their  apartments  from  the  sun  and  atmo¬ 
sphere.” 

An  immense  mass  of  nonsense,  copied  in  one 
“  authority  ”  from  another,  was  thrown  before  the 
public  by  books  upon  diet,  until  the  “  Physiology 
of  Common  Life”  (George  Henry  Lewes)  dis¬ 
cussed  Liebig’s  brilliant  error  in  considering  food 
chemically,  and  not  physiologically.  The  rest 
assume  his  classification  without  reserve,  and 
work  from  the  axiom  that  heat-making,  carbo¬ 
naceous  and  non-nitrogenous  foods  (eg.  fat  and 
sugars),  necessary  to  support  life  in  the  arctic 
and  polar  regions,  must  be  exchanged  for  the 
tissue-making,  plastic  or  nitrogenous  (vegetables), 
as  we  approach  the  equator.  They  are  right 
as  far  as  the  southern  temperates,  their  sole  field 
of  observation ;  they  greatly  err  in  all  except  the 
hot,  dry  parts  of  the  tropics.  Why,  a  Hindoo 
will  drink  at  a  sitting  a  tumbler  of  gli  (clarified 
butter),  and  the  European  who  would  train  for 


i8o 


Return  to  the  River. 


wrestling  after  the  fashion  of  Hindostan,  as  I 
attempted  in  my  youth,  on  “  native  ”  sweetmeats 
and  sugared  milk,  will  be  blind  with  “  melan¬ 
cholia  ”  in  a  week.  The  diet  of  the  negro  is  the 
greasiest  possible,  witness  his  “palm-oil  chop” 
and  “  palaver  sauce  ;  ”  his  craving  for  meat,  espe¬ 
cially  fat  meat,  is  a  feeling  unknown  to  Europe. 
And  how  simple  the  reason.  Damp  heat  de¬ 
mands  almost  as  much  carbon  as  damp  or  dry 
cold. 

Return  we  to  the  Baraka  Mission.  The  name 
is  a  corruption  of  “  barracoon ;  ”  in  the  palmy 
days  of  the  trade  slave-pens  occupied  the  ground 
now  covered  by  the  chapel,  the  schoolroom,  and 
the  dwelling-house,  and  extended  over  the  site  of 
the  factory  to  the  river-bank.  The  place  is  well 
chosen.  Immediately  beyond  the  shore  the  land 
swells  up  to  a  little  rounded  hill,  clean  and  grassy 
like  that  about  Sanga-Tanga.  The  soil  appears 
poor,  and  yet  around  the  mission-house  there  are 
some  fine  wild  figs,  one  a  huge  tree,  although  not 
a  score  of  years  old ;  the  bamboo  clump  is  magni¬ 
ficent,  and  the  cocoas,  oranges,  and  mangoes  are 
surrounded  by  thick,  fragrant,  and  luxuriant 
quickset  hedges  of  well-trimmed  lime. 

A  few  words  concerning  the  banana  of  this 
coast,  which  we  find  so  flourishing  at  Baraka. 
An  immense  god-send  to  the  Gaboon,  it  is  well 
known  to  be  the  most  productive  of  all  food,  ioo 


Return  to  the  River . 


1 8 1 

square  yards  of  it  giving  annually  nearly  2,000  kilo¬ 
grammes  of  food  far  more  nutritious  than  the  potato. 
Here  it  is  the  musd  sapientum ,  the  banana  de  Soa 
Thome,  which  has  crossed  over  to  the  Brazil,  and 
which  is  there  known  by  its  sharper  leaves  and 
fruit,  softer  and  shorter  than  the  indigenous 
growth.  The  plant  everywhere  is  most  vigorous 
in  constant  moist  heat,  the  atmosphere  of  a  con¬ 
servatory,  and  the  ground  must  be  low  and  wet, 
but  not  swampy.  The  best  way  of  planting  the 
sprouts  is  so  to  dispose  them  that  four  may  form 
the  corners  of  a  square  measuring  twelve  feet 
each  side ;  the  common  style  is  some  five  feet 
apart.  The  raceme,  which  appears  about  the 
sixth  to  the  tenth  month,  will  take  sixty  days 
more  to  ripen  ;  good  stocks  produce  three  and 
more  bunches  a  year,  each  weighing  from  twenty 
to  eighty  pounds.  The  stem,  after  fruiting,  should 
be  cut  down,  in  order  to  let  the  others  enjoy  light 
and  air,  and  the  oftener  the  plants  are  removed  to 
fresh  ground  the  better. 

The  banana,  when  unripe,  is  white  and  insipid ; 
it  is-  then  baked  under  ashes  till  it  takes  a  golden 
colour,  and,  like  a  cereal,  it  can  be  eaten  as  bread. 
A  little  later  it  is  boiled,  and  becomes  a  fair  vege¬ 
table,  tasting  somewhat  like  chestnuts,  and  cer¬ 
tainly  better  than  carrots  or  turnips.  Lastly, 
when  softer  than  a  pear,  it  is  a  fruit  eaten  with 
milk  or  made  into  beignets .  I  have  described  the 


182 


Return  to  the  River. 


plantain-cider  in  “  Lake  Regions  of  Central  Africa ” 
(ii.  287).  The  fruit  contains  sugar,  gum,  and 
acids  (malic  and  gallic)  ;  the  rind,  which  is  easily 
detached  when  ripe,  stains  cloth  with  ruddy  grey 
rusty  colour,  by  its  tannin,  gallic,  and  acetic 
acids. 

The  Baraka  Mission  has  had  several  out-sta¬ 
tions.  One  was  at  a  ruined  village  of  Fa/z,  which 
we  shall  presently  pass  on  the  right  bank  of  the 
river.  The  second  was  at  Ikoi,  a  hamlet  distant 
about  fifteen  (not  twenty-five)  miles,  upon  a  creek 
of  the  same  name,  which  enters  the  Gaboon 
behind  Point  Ovindo,  and  almost  opposite  Konig 
Island.  A  third  is  at  Anenge-nenge,  vulgo 
Inenge-nenge, — “  nenge”  in  Mpongwe,  and  anenge 
in  Bakele,  meaning  island, — situated  forty  (not 
100)  miles  up  the  main  stream  ;  here  a  native 
teacher  still  resides.  The  Baraka  school  now 
(1862)  numbers  thirty  scholars,  and  there  are 
twelve  to  fifteen  communicants.  The  missionaries 
are  our  white  “  labourers ;  ”  but  two  of  them,  the 
Revs.  Jacob  Best  and  A.  Bushnell,  are  absent  in 
the  United  States  for  the  benefit  of  their  health. 

My  first  visit  to  the  Rev.  William  Walker 
made  me  regret  my  precipitate  trip  to  Mbata :  he 
told  me  what  I  now  knew,  that  it  was  the  wrong 
line,  and  that  I  should  have  run  two  or  three 
days  up  the  Rembwe,  the  first  large  influent  on 
the  southern  bank  of  the  Gaboon.  He  had  come 


Return  to  the  River.  183 

out  to  the  River  in  1842,  and  had  spent  twenty 
years  of  his  life  in  Africa,  with  occasional  fur¬ 
loughs  home.  He  greatly  interested  me  by  a  work 
which  he  was  preparing.  The  Gaboon  Mission  had 
begun  its  studies  of  the  many  native  dialects  by 
the  usual  preparatory  process  of  writing  grammars 
and  vocabularies ;  after  this  they  had  published 
sundry  fragmentary  translations  of  the  Scriptures, 
and  now  they  aimed  at  something  higher.  After 
spending  years  in  building  and  decorating  the 
porticoes  of  language,  they  were  ambitious  of 
raising  the  edifice  to  which  it  is  only  an  ap¬ 
proach  ;  in  other  words,  of  explaining  the  scholar¬ 
ship  of  the  tongue,  the  spirit  of  the  speech. 

“  Language,”  says  the  lamented  Dr.  O.  E. 
Vidal,  then  bishop  designate  of  Sierra  Leone,1 
“  is  designed  to  give  expression  to  thought. 
Hence,  by  examining  the  particular  class  of  compo¬ 
sition  ” — and,  I  may  add,  the  grammatical  and  syn¬ 
tactical  niceties  characterizing  that  composition — - 
“  to  which  any  given  dialect  has  been  especially 
devoted,  we  may  trace  the  direction  in  which  the 
current  of  thought  is  wont  to  flow  amongst  the 
tribe  or  nations  in  which  it  is  vernacular,  and  so 
investigate  the  principal  psychical  peculiarities,  if 
such  there  be,  of  that  tribe  or  nation.”  And 


1  “Introductory  Remarks  to  a  Vocabulary  of  the  Yoruba 
Language.”  Seeleys,  Fleet  Street,  London. 


184 


Return  to  the  River. 


again  he  remarks  :  “  Dr.  K rap  was  unable  to  find 
any  word  expressing  the  idea  of  gratitude  in  the 
language  of  all  the  Suaheli  (Wasawahili)  tribes 
a  fact  significant  enough  as  to  the  total  absence  of 
the  moral  feeling  denoted  by  that  name.”  Simi¬ 
larly  the  Mpongwe  cannot  express  our  “honesty 
they  must  paraphrase  it  by  “  good  man  don’t  steal.” 
In  time  they  possibly  may  adopt  the  word  bodily 
like  pus  (a  cat),  amog  (mug),  kapinde  (carpenter), 
krus  (a  cross),  and  ilepot  (pot). 

Such  a  task  is  difficult  as  it  is  interesting,  the 
main  obstacle  to  success  being  the  almost  insuper¬ 
able  difficulty  of  throwing  off  European  ideas  and 
modes  of  thought,  which  life-long  habit  has  made 
a  second  nature.  Take  the  instance  borrowed 
from  Dr.  Krap,  and  noticed  by  a  hundred  writers, 
namely,  the  absence  of  a  synonym  for  “  gratitude  ” 
amongst  the  people  of  the  nearer  East.  I  have  ex¬ 
plained  the  truth  of  the  case  in  my  “  Pilgrimage,” 
and  it  will  bear  explanation  again.  The  Wasa- 
wahfli  are  Moslems,  and  the  Moslem  view  every¬ 
where  is  that  the  donor’s  Maker,  not  the  donor, 
gives  the  gift.  The  Arab  therefore  expresses  his 
“Thank  you!”  by  “  Mamniin” — I  am  under  an  obli¬ 
gation  (to  your  hand  which  has  passed  on  the 
donation)  ;  he  generally  prefers,  however,  a  short 
blessing,  as  “  Kassir  khayr’  ak”  (may  Allah)  “in¬ 
crease  thy  weal!”  The  Persian’s  “May  thy 
shadow  never  be  less  !”  simply  refers  to  the  shade 


Return  to  the  River.  185 

which  you,  the  towering  tree,  extend  over  him,  the 
humble  shrub. 

Another  instance  of  deduction  distorted  by  cur¬ 
rent  European  ideas,  is  where  Casalis  (“  Etudes 
sur  la  langue  Sechuana,”  par  Eugene  Casalis, 
part  ii.  p.  84),  speaking  of  the  Sisuto  proverbs, 
makes  them  display  the  “  vestiges  of  that  universal 
conscience  to  which  the  Creator  has  committed  the 
guidance  of  every  intelligent  creature.”  Surely  it 
is  time  to  face  the  fact  that  conscience  is  a  purely 
geographical  and  chronological  accident.  Where, 
may  we  ask,  can  be  that  innate  and  universal 
monitor  in  the  case  of  a  people,  the  Somal  for  in¬ 
stance,  who  rob  like  Spartans,  holding  theft  a 
virtue;  who  lie  like  Trojans,  without  a  vestige  of 
appreciation  for  truth ;  and  who  hold  the  treacher¬ 
ous  and  cowardly  murder  of  a  sleeping  guest  to  be 
the  height  of  human  honour  ?  And  what  easier 
than  to  prove  that  there  is  no  sin  however  infa¬ 
mous,  no  crime  however  abominable,  which  at 
some  time  or  in  some  part  of  the  world  has  been 
or  is  still  held  in  the  highest  esteem?  The  utmost 
we  can  say  is  that  conscience,  the  accident,  flows 
directly  from  an  essential.  All  races  now  known 
to  the  world  have  a  something  which  they  call 
right,  and  a  something  which  they  term  wrong ; 
the  underlying  instinctive  idea  being  evidently  that 
everything  which  benefits  me  is  good,  and  all 
which  harms  me  is  evil.  Their  good  and  their 


i86 


Return  to  the  River . 


evil  are  not  those  of  more  advanced  nations ;  still 
the  idea  is  there,  and  progress  or  tradition  works 
it  out  in  a  thousand  different  ways. 

My  visits  to  Mr.  Walker  first  gave  me  the  idea 
of  making  the  negro  describe  his  own  character  in 
a  collection  of  purely  Hamitic  proverbs  and  idioms. 
It  appeared  to  me  that,  if  ever  a  book  aspires  to 
the  title  of  “T Africain  peint  par  lui-meme”  it  must 
be  one  in  which  he  is  the  medium  to  his  own 
spirit,  the  interpreter  to  his  own  thoughts.  Hence 
“  Wit  and  Wisdom  from  West  Africa  ”  (London, 
Tinsleys,  1856),  which  I  still  hold  to  be  a  step  in 
the  right  direction,  although  critics,  who  possibly 
knew  more  of  Cornhill  than  of  Yoruba,  assured  me 
that  it  was  “rather  a  heavy  compilation.”  Nor 
can  I  yet  see  how  the  light  fantastic  toe  can  show 
its  agility  in  the  sabots  of  African  proverbs. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 


UP  THE  GABOON  RIVER. 


ETESTABLE  weather  detained  me 
long  at  the  hospitable  factory.  Tor¬ 
nadoes  were  of  almost  daily  occurrence 
— -not  pleasant  with  200  barrels  of  gun¬ 
powder  under  a  thatched  roof ;  they  were  useful 
chiefly  to  the  Mpongwe  servants  of  the  establish¬ 
ment.  These  model  thieves  broke  open,  under 
cover  of  the  storms,  a  strong  iron  safe  in  an  inner 
room  which  had  been  carefully  closed ;  they  stole 
my  Mboko  skin,  and  bottles  were  not  safe  from 
them  even  in  our  bedrooms. 

My  next  step  was  to  ascend  the  “  Olo’  Mpon¬ 
gwe, ”  or  Gaboon  River,  which  Bowdich  (“Sketch 
of  Gaboon  ”)  calls  Oroongo,  and  its  main  point 
Ohlombopolo.  The  object  was  to  visit  the  Fa^, 
of  whose  cannibalism  such  curious  tales  had  been 
told.  It  was  not  easy  to  find  a  conveyance.  The 
factory  greatly  wanted  a  flat-bottom  iron  steamer, 
a  stern-wheeler,  with  sliding  keel,  and  furnaces  fit 


1 88 


Up  the  Gaboon  River. 


for  burning  half-dried  wood — a  craft  of  fourteen 
tons,  costing  perhaps  £i/\.  per  ton,  would  be  ample 
in  point  of  size,  and  would  save  not  a  little  money 
to  the  trader.  I  was  at  last  fortunate  in  securing 
the  “  Eliza,”  belonging  to  Messrs.  Hatton  and 
Cookson.  She  was  a  fore-and-aft  schooner  of 
twenty  tons,  measuring  42  feet  6  inches  over  all 
and  put  up  at  Bonny  Town  by  Captain  Birkett. 
She  had  two  masts,  and  oars  in  case  of  calms ; 
her  crew  was  of  six  hands,  including  one  F ernando, 
a  Congoese,  who  could  actually  box  the  compass. 
No  outfit  was  this  time  necessary,  beyond  a  letter 
to  Mr.  Tippet,  who  had  charge  of  the  highest 
establishments  up  stream.  His  business  consisted 
chiefly  of  importing  arms,  ammunition,  and  beads  of 
different  sorts,  especially  the  red  porcelain,  locally 
called  Loangos. 

On  April  10,  a  little  before  noon,  I  set  out,  de¬ 
spite  thunder  and  lightning,  rain,  sun,  torrential 
showers,  and  the  vehemently  expressed  distaste  of 
my  crew.  The  view  of  the  right  bank  was  no 
longer  from  afar ;  it  differs  in  shape  and  material 
from  the  southern,  but  the  distinction  appears  to 
me  superficial,  not  extending  to  the  interiors.  Off 
Konig  Island  we  found  nine  fathoms,  of  water,  and 
wanted  them  during  a  bad  storm  from  the  south¬ 
east  ;  it  prevented  my  landing  and  inspecting  the 
old  Dutch  guns,  which  Bowdich  says  are  remains 
of  the  Portuguese.  Both  this  and  Parrot  Island, 


Up  the  Gaboon  River . 


189 


lying  some  five  miles  south  by  west,  are  masses  of 
cocoas,  fringed  with  mangroves  ;  a  great  contrast 
with  the  prairillon  of  the  neighbouring  Point 
Ovindo.  At  last,  worn  out  by  a  four-knot  current 
and  a  squall  in  our  teeth,  we  anchored  in  four 
fathoms,  about  five  miles  south-east  of  Konig. 

From  this  point  we  could  easily  see  the  wide 
gape  of  the  Rembwe,  the  south-eastern  influent,  or 
rather  fork,  of  the  Gaboon,  which  rises  in  the 
south-western  versant  of  some  meridional  chain, 
and  which  I  was  assured  can  be  ascended  in  three 
tides.  The  people  told  me  when  too  late  of  a 
great  cavity  or  sink,  which  they  called  Wonga- 
Wonga;  Bowdich  represents  it  to  be  an  “unin¬ 
habited  savannah  of  three  days’  extent,  between 
Empoongwa  and  Adjoomba  (Mayumba).  I  saw 
nothing  of  the  glittering  diamond  mountains,  lying 
eastward  of  Wonga-Wonga,  concerning  which  the 
old  traveller  was  compelled  to  admit  that,  “  when 
there  was  no  moon,  a  pale  but  distinct  light  was 
invariably  reflected  from  a  mountain  in  that  quarter, 
and  from  no  other.”  It  has  now  died  out — this 
superstition,  which  corresponds  with  the  carbuncle 
of  Hoy  and  others  of  our  Scoto-Scandinavian 
islands. 

Resuming  our  cruize  on  the  next  day,  we  passed 
on  the  right  a  village  of  “  bad  Bakele,”  which  had 
been  blown  down  by  the  French  during  the  last 
year ;  in  this  little  business  the  “  king  ”  and  two 


190 


Up  the  Gaboon  River. 


lieges  had  been  killed.  The  tribe  is  large  and 
important,  scattered  over  several  degrees  north 
and  south  of  the  equator,  as  is  proved  by  their 
slaves  being  collected  from  distances  of  several 
weeks  and  even  months.  In  1854  Mr.  Wilson 
numbered  them  at  100,000.  According  to  local 
experts  they  began  to  press  down  stream  about 
1830,  driven  a  tergo  by  their  neighbours,  the  Mpan- 
gwe  (Fa n),  even  as  they  themselves  are  driving 
the  Mpongwes.  But  they  are  evidently  the  Kaylee 
or  Kalay  of  Bowdich  (p.  427),  whose  capital, 
“  Samashialee,”  was  “  the  residence  of  the  king, 
Ohmbay.”  He  places  them  in  their  present  habitat, 
and  makes  them  the  worst  of  cannibals.  Whilst  the 
“  Sheekans  ”  (Shekyani)  buried  their  dead  under 
the  bed  within  the  house,  these  detestable  K  ay- 
lees  ate  not  only  their  prisoners,  but  their  defunct 
friends,  whose  bodies  were  “  bid  for  directly  the 
breath  was  out  of  them indeed,  fathers  were  fre¬ 
quently  seen  to  devour  their  own  children.  Bowdich 
evidently  speaks  from  hearsay ;  but  the  Brazil  has 
preserved  the  old  traditions  of  cannibalism  amongst 
the  Gaboes. 

The  Bakele  appeared  to  me  very  like  the  coast 
tribes,  only  somewhat  lighter-coloured  and  wilder 
in  look,  whilst  they  again  are  darker-skinned  than 
their  eastern  neighbours  from  the  inner  highlands. 
Their  women  are  not  so  well  dressed  as  the 
“  ladies  ”  of  the  Mpongwe,  the  chignon  is  smaller, 


Up  the  Gaboon  River.  191 

and  there  are  fewer  brass  rings.  The  men,  who 
still  cling  to  the  old  habit  of  hunting,  cultivate  the 
soil,  practise  the  ruder  mechanical  arts,  and  trade 
with  the  usual  readiness  and  greed  ;  they  asked  us 
a  leaf  of  tobacco  for  an  egg,  and  four  leaves  for  a 
bunch  of  bananas.  Missionaries,  who,  like  Messrs. 
Preston  and  Best,  resided  amongst  them  for  years, 
have  observed  that,  though  a  mild  and  timid 
people,  they  are  ever  involved  in  quarrels  with 
their  neighbours.  I  can  hardly  understand  how 
they  “  bear  some  resemblance  to  the  dwarfish 
Dokos  of  the  eastern  coast,”  seeing  that  the  latter 
do  not  exist. 

The  Dikele  grammar  proves  the  language, 
which  is  most  closely  allied  to  the  Benga  dialect, 
to  be  one  of  the  great  South  African  family,  vari¬ 
ously  called  Kafir,  because  first  studied  amongst 
these  people;  Ethiopic  (very  vague),  and  Nilotic 
because  its  great  fluvial  basin  is  the  Zambezi, 
not  the  Nile.  As  might  be  expected  amongst 
isolated  races,  the  tongue,  though  clearly  related 
to  that  of  the  Mpongwe  and  the  Mpangwe, 
has  many  salient  points  of  difference ;  for  in¬ 
stance,  the  liquid  “  r  ”  is  wholly  wanting.  Ac¬ 
cording  to  Mr.  T.  Leighton  Wilson,  perhaps  one 
word  in  two  is  the  same,  or  obviously  from  the 
same  root ;  consequently  verbal  resemblances  are 
by  no  means  striking.  The  orthography  of  the 
two  differs  materially,  and  in  this  respect  Dikele 


192 


Up  the  Gaboon  River. 


more  resembles  the  languages  of  the  eastern  coast 
than  its  western  neighbour,  at  the  same  time  less 
than  the  Fiote  or  the  Congoese.  It  has  a  larger 
number  of  declensions,  and  its  adjectives  and  pro¬ 
nouns  are  more  flexible  and  complicated.  On  the 
other  hand,  it  possesses  few  of  the  conjugations 
which  form  so  conspicuous  a  feature  in  the  tongues 
of  the  Lower  River,  and,  reversing  the  usage  of  the 
Mpongwe,  it  makes  very  little  use  of  the  passive. 

Running  the  gauntlet  of  cheer  and  chaff  from 
the  noisy  inmates  of  the  many  Bakele  villages,  and 
worried  by  mangrove-flies,  we  held  our  way  up 
the  muddy  and  rapidly  narrowing  stream,  whose 
avenues  of  rhizophoras  and  palms  acted  as  wind- 
sails  ;  when  the  breeze  failed  the  sensation  was 
stifling.  Lyamba  ( Cannabis  sativa)  grew  in  patches 
upon  the  banks,  now  apparently  wild,  like  that 
about  Lagos  and  Badagry.  Not  till  evening  did 
the  tide  serve,  enabling  us  to  send  our  papers  for 
visa  on  board  the  guard-ship  “  L’Oise,”  where  a 
party  of  young  Frenchmen  were  preparing  for  la 
ckasse.  A  little  higher  up  stream  are  two  islets, 
Nenge  Mbwendi,  so  called  from  its  owner,  and 
Nenge  Sika,  or  the  Isle  of  Gold.  The  Mpongwe 
all  know  this  name  for  the  precious  metal,  and  the 
Bakele  appear  to  ignore  it :  curious  to  say,  it  is  the 
Fanteand  Mandenga  word,  probably  derived  from 
the  Arabic  Sikkah,  which  gave  rise  to  the  Italian 
Zecca  (mint)  and  Zecchino.  It  may  have  been 


Up  the  Gaboon  River. 


193 


introduced  by  the  Laptots  or  Lascar  sailors  of 
the  Senegal.  M.  du  Chaillu  (“  Second  Expedi¬ 
tion,”  chap,  iii.)  mentions  “the  island  Nengue 
Shika”  on  the  Lower  Fernao  Vaz  River;  and  Bow- 
dich  turns  the  two  into  Ompoongu  and  Soombea. 
The  third  is  Anenga-nenga,  not  Ninga-ninga,  about 
one  mile  long  from  north  to  south,  and  well 
wooded  with  bush  and  palms ;  here  the  Gaboon 
Mission  has  a  neat  building  on  piles.  The  senior 
native  employs  was  at  Glass  Town,  and  his  junior, 
a  youth  about  nineteen,  stood  a  la  NapolSon  in  the 
doorway,  evidently  monarch  of  all  he  surveyed. 

I  found  there  one  of  the  Ndiva,  the  old  tribe  of 
Pongo-land,  which  by  this  time  has  probably  died 
out.  We  anchored  off  Wosuku,  a  village  of  some 
fifty  houses,  forming  one  main  street,  disposed 
north-east — south-west,  or  nearly  at  right  angles 
with  the  river.  The  entrance  was  guarded  by  a 
sentinel  and  gun,  and  the  “  king,”  Imondo,  lay  right 
royally  on  his  belly.  A  fine  plantation  of  bananas 
divides  the  settlement,  and  the  background  is 
dense  bush,  in  which  they  say  “  Nyare”  and  deer 
abound.  The  Bakele  supply  sheep  and  fowls  to 
the  Plateau,  and  their  main  industry  consists  in 
dressing  plantain-fibre  for  thread  and  nets. 

We  now  reach  the  confluence  of  the  Nkomo  or 
north-eastern,  with  the  Mbokwe,  or  eastern  branch, 
which  anastomose  to  form  the  Gaboon  ;  the  latter, 
being  apparently  the  larger  of  the  two,  preserves  the 


1. 


o 


194 


Up  the  Gaboon  River. 


title  Mpolo.  Both  still  require  exploration ;  my 
friend  M.  Braouezzec,  Lieutenant  de  Vaisseau,  who 
made  charts  of  the  lower  bed,  utterly  failed  to 
make  the  sources ;  and  the  Rev.  Mr.  Preston,  who 
lived  seven  months  in  the  interior,  could  not 
ascend  far.  Mr.  W.  Winwood  Reade  reached  in 
May,  1862,  the  rapids  of  the  Nkomo  River,  but 
sore  feet  prevented  his  climbing  the  mountain, 
which  he  estimates  at  2,000  feet,  or  of  tracing  the 
stream  to  its  fountain.  Mr.  R.  B.  N.  Walker 
also  ascended  the  Nkomo  for  some  thirty  miles, 
and  found  it  still  a  large  bed  with  two  fathoms  of 
water  in  the  Cacimbo  or  “  Middle  dries.”  In  M. 
du  Chailhfs  map  the  Upper  Nkomo  is  a  dotted 
line  ;  according  to  all  authorities,  upon  the  higher 
and  the  lower  river  his  direction  is  too  far  to  the 
north-east.  The  good  Tippet  declares  that  he  once 
canoed  three  miles  up  the  Mbokwe,  and  then 
marched  eastward  for  five  days,  covering  a  hundred 
miles — which  is  impossible.  He  found  a  line  of 
detached  hills,  and  an  elevation  where  the  dews 
were  exceedingly  cold  ;  looking  towards  the  ut¬ 
terly  unknown  Orient,  he  could  see  nothing  but 
a  thick  forest  unbroken  by  streams.  He  heard 
from  the  country  people  traditions  of  a  Great  Lake, 
which  may  be  that  placed  by  Tuckey  in  north 
latitude  20 — 30.  The  best  seasons  for  travel  are 
said  to  be  March  and  November,  before  and  after 
the  rains,  which  swell  the  water  twelve  feet. 


i95 


Up  the  Gaboon  River. 

About  Anenge-nenge  we  could  easily  see  the 
sub-ranges  of  the  great  Eastern  Ghats,  some  twenty 
miles  to  the  north-east.  Here  the  shallows  and 
the  banks  projecting  from  different  points  made 
the  channel  dangerous.  Entering  the  Mbokwe 
branch  we  were  compelled  to  use  sweeps,  or  the 
schooner  would  have  been  dashed  against  the 
sides ;  as  we  learned  by  the  trees,  the  tides  raise 
the  surface  two  to  three  feet  high.  After  the  third 
hour  we  passed  the  “  Fa;^  Komba  Vina,”  or  village 
of  King  Vina.  It  stood  in  a  pretty  little  bay,  and 
the  river,  some  400  feet  broad,  was  fronted,  as  is 
often  the  case,  by  the  “  palaver  tree,”  a  glorious 
Ceiba  or  bombax.  All  the  people  flocked  out  to 
enjoy  the  sight,  and  my  unpractised  eye  could  not 
distinguish  them  from  Bakele.  Above  it,  also  on 
the  right  bank,  is  the  now-deserted  site  where 
Messrs.  Adams  and  Preston  nearly  came  to  grief 
for  bewitching  the  population  with  “  bad  book.” 

Five  slow  hours  from  Anenge-nenge  finally 
placed  us,  about  sunset,  at  Mayyas,  or  Tippet 
Town.  The  depot  lies  a  little  above  the  con¬ 
fluence  of  the  Mbokwe  and  the  Londo,  or  south¬ 
eastern  fork  of  the  latter.  A  drunken  pilot  and  a 
dark  and  moonless  night,  with  the  tide  still  running 
in,  delayed  us  till  I  could  hardly  distinguish  the 
sable  human  masses  which  gathered  upon  the 
Styx-like  stream  to  welcome  their  new  Matyem — 
merchant  or  white  man.  Before  landing,  all  the 


196 


Up  the  Gaboon  River. 


guns  on  board  the  steamer  were  double-loaded  and 
discharged,  at  the  instance  of  our  host,  who  very 
properly  insisted  upon  this  act  of  African  cour¬ 
tesy — “  it  would  be  shame  not  to  fire  salute.” 
We  were  answered  by  the  loudest  howls,  and  by 
the  town  muskets,  which  must  have  carried  the 
charges  of  old  chambers.  Mr.  Tippet,  an  intelli¬ 
gent  coloured  man  from  the  States,  who  has  been 
living  thirteen  years  on  the  Gaboon,  since  the  age 
of  fourteen,  and  who  acts  as  native  trader  to  Mr. 
R.  B.  N.  Walker,  for  ivory,  ebony,  rubber,  and 
other  produce,  escorted  me  to  his  extensive  esta¬ 
blishment.  At  length  I  am  amongst  the  man- 
eaters. 


CHAPTER  IX. 


A  SPECIMEN  DAY  WITPI  THE  FAN  CANNIBALS. 

T  5  a.m.  on  the  next  day,  after  a  night 
with  the  gnats  and  rats,  I  sallied  forth 
in  the  thick  “  smokes,”  and  cast  a 
nearer  look  upon  my  cannibal  hosts. 
And  first  of  the  tribal  name.  The  Mpongwe  call 
their  wild  neighbours  Mpangwe  ;  the  Europeans 
affect  such  corruptions  as  Fan  we,  Panwe,  the  F 
and  P  being  very  similar,  Phaouin  and  Paouen 
(Pawen).  They  call  themselves  Fan,  meaning 
“  man in  the  plural,  Bafan.  The  n  is  highly 
nasalized  :  the  missionaries  proposed  to  express 
it  by  “ nk”  which,  however,  wrongly  conveys  the 
idea  of  aspiration;  and  “Fan,”  pronounced  after  the 
English  fashion,  would  be  unintelligible  to  them. 

The  village  contains  some  400  souls,  and 
throughout  the  country  the  maximum  would  be 
about  500  spears,  or  4,000  of  both  sexes,  whilst 
the  minimum  is  a  couple  of  dozen.  It  is  pleasantly 
situated  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Mbokwe  River, 


198 


A  Specimen  Day 


a  streamlet  here  some  50  feet  broad,  whose 
water  rises  6  feet  10  inches  under  the  tidal  in¬ 
fluence.  The  single  street,  about  half  a  mile  long, 
is  formed  by  two  parallel  rows  of  huts,  looking 
upon  a  cleared  line  of  yellow  clay,  and  provided 
with  three  larger  sheds — the  palaver  houses.  The 
FAn  houses  resemble  those  of  the  Mpongwe ;  in 
fact,  the  tribes,  beginning  at  the  Camarones  River, 
build  in  much  the  same  style,  but  all  are  by  no 
means  so  neat  and  clean  as  those  of  the  seaboard. 
A  thatch,  whose  projecting  eaves  form'  deep  shady 
verandahs,  surmounts  walls  of  split  bamboo,  sup¬ 
ported  by  raised  platforms  of  tamped  earth,  win¬ 
dows  being  absent  and  chimneys  unknown  ;  the 
ceiling  is  painted  like  coal  tar  by  oily  soot,  and  two 
opposite  doors  make  the  home  a  passage  through 
which  no  one  hesitates  to  pass.  The  walls  are 
garnished  with  weapons  and  nets,  both  skilfully 
made,  and  the  furniture  consists  of  cooking  utensils 
and  water-pots,  mats  for  bedding,  logs  of  wood  for 
seats  and  pillows,  and  lumps  of  timber  or  dwarf 
stools,  neatly  cut  out  of  a  single  block.  Their 
only  night-light — that  grand  test  of  civilization — 
is  the  Mpongwe  torch,  a  yard  of  hard,  black  gum, 
mixed  with  and  tightly  bound  up  in  dried  banana 
leaves.  According  to  some  it  is  acacia ;  others 
declare  it  to  be  the  “blood’'  of  the  bombax,  which  is 
also  used  for  caulking.  They  gather  it  in  the  forest, 
especially  during  the  dries,  collect  it  in  hollow 


with  the  Fdn  Cannibals . 


199 


bamboos,  and  prepare  it  by  heating  in  the  nep- 
tune,  or  brass  pan.  The  odour  is  pleasant,  but 
fragments  of  falling  fire  endanger  the  hut,  and 
trimming  must  be  repeated  every  ten  minutes. 
The  sexes  are  not  separated  ;  as  throughout  inter- 
tropical  Africa,  the  men  are  fond  of  idling  at  their 
clubs ;  and  the  women,  who  must  fetch  water  and 
cook,  clean  the  hut,  and  nurse  the  baby,  are  seldom 
allowed  to  waste  time.  They  are  naturally  a  more 
prolific  race  than  those  inhabiting  the  damp,  un¬ 
healthy  lowlands,  and  the  number  of  the  children 
contrasts  pleasantly  with  the  “  bleak  house  ”  of  the 
debauched  Mpongwe,  who  puts  no  question  when 
his  wife  presents  him  with  issue. 

In  the  cool  of  the  morning  Fitevanga,  king  of 
Mayyas,  lectured  me  upon  the  short  and  simple 
annals  of  the  Fdn.  In  1842  the  first  stragglers 
who  had  crossed  the  Sierra  del  Crystal  are  said  to 
have  been  seen  upon  the  head  waters  of  the 
Gaboon.  I  cannot,  however,  but  suspect  that  they 
are  the  “  Paamways  ”  of  whom  Bowdich  (“  Sketch 
of  Gaboon,”  p.  429)  wrote  in  the  beginning  of  the 
century,  “  All  the  natives  on  this  route  are  said  to 
be  cannibals,  the  Paamways  not  so  voraciously  as 
the  others,  because  they  cultivate  a  large  breed  of 
dogs  for  their  eating.”  Mr.  W.  Win  wood  Reade 
suspects  them  to  be  an  offshoot  of  the  great  F ulah 
race,  and  there  is  nothing  in  point  of  dialect  to 
disprove  what  we  must  at  present  consider  a  pure 


200 


A  Specimen  Day 


conjecture.  “The  Fulah  pronouns  have  striking 
analogies  with  those  of  the  Y oruba,  Accra,  Ashantee, 
and  Timmanee,  and  even  of  the  great  Kaffir  class 
of  dialects,  which  reaches  from  the  equator  to  the 
Cape,”  wrote  the  late  learned  E.  Norris,  in  his 
“  Introduction  to  the  Grammar  of  the  Fulah 
Language”  (London  :  Harrison,  1854). 

According  to  the  people  of  the  upper  river  the 
Fa^  were  expelled  by  the  Bati  or  Batti — not  “  Bari  ” 
as  it  has  been  written — from  their  ancient  seats ;  and 
they  are  still  pushing  them  seawards.  The  bushmen 
are  said  to  live  seven  to  ten  short  marches  (seventy 
to  a  hundred  miles)  to  the  east,  and  are  described 
by  Mr.  Tippet,  whom  they  have  visited,  as  a  fine, 
tall,  slender,  and  light-skinned  people,  who  dress 
like  the  Fa^,  but  without  so  much  clothing,  and 
who  sharpen  the  teeth  of  both  sexes.  Dr.  Barth 
heard  of  the  Bati,  and  Herr  Petermann’s  map  de¬ 
scribes  them1  as  “  Pagans,  reported  to  be  of  a 
white  colour,  and  of  beautiful  shape,  to  live  in 
houses  made  of  clay,  to  wear  cloth  of  their  own 
making,  and  to  hold  a  country  from  which  a  moun¬ 
tain  is  visible  to  the  south-west,  and  close  to  the 
sea.”  The  range  in  question  may  be  the  Long 
Qua  (Kwa),  which  continues  the  Camarones  block 
to  the  north-east,  and  the  Batis  may  have  passed 
south-westward  from  Southern  Adamawa. 


1  Hutchinson’s  “Ten  Years’  Wanderings,”  p.  319. 


with  the  Fan  Cannibals. 


201 


The  Fa n  were  accompanied  in  their  seaward 
movement  by  the  Osheba  or  ’Sheba,  the  Moshebo 
and  Moshobo  of  M.  du  Chaillu’s  map.  They  are 
said  to  be  a  tribe  of  kindred  blood  and  warlike 
tastes,  speaking  a  remarkably  guttural  tongue,  but 
intelligible  to  the  M  pang  we.  They  too  were 
doubtless  pressed  forward  by  the  Inner  Bati,  who 
are  also  affected  by  the  Okana,  the  Yefa,  and  the 
Sensoba.  The  latter  are  the  innermost  known 
to  my  negro  informants,  and  their  sheep  and  goats 
have  found  their  way  to  the  Gaboon  :  they  are 
doughty  elephant-hunters,  and  they  attack  the 
Njma,  although  they  have  no  fire-arms.  The 
Mpangwe  deride  the  savagery  of  these  races,  who 
have  never  heard  of  a  man  riding  a  horse  or  an 
ass,  which  the  Mpongwes  call  Cavala  and  Buro 
burro).  The  names  of  these  three  races,  which 
are  described  as  brave,  warlike,  and  hospitable  to 
strangers,  will  not  be  found  on  any  map  ;  indeed  the 
regions  east  of  the  Gaboon  belong  to  the  great  white 
blot  of  inter-tropical  Africa,  extending  from  north 
latitude  j°  to  south  latitude  50.  Major  de  Ruvignes 
heard  also  of  a  tribe  called  Lachaize  (Osheba?) 
which  excels  the  Fan  in  strength  and  courage  as 
much  as  the  latter  do  the  coast  tribes :  a  detach¬ 
ment  of  them  had  settled  near  one  of  the  chief 
Mpangwe  towns,  “  Mboma.”  Some  days  after  his 
arrival  he  saw  several  of  these  people,  and  describes 
them  as  giants,  compared  with  the  negro  races  to 


202 


A  Specimen  Day 


which  his  eye  was  accustomed.  The  general 
stature  varied  from  six  feet  to  six  feet  four  inches; 
their  complexion  was  a  light  cafS  au  lait ;  their 
hair  was  ornamented  with  cowries,  strung  so  thickly 
as  to  suggest  a  skull-cup,  whilst  long  streamers  of 
elephants’  tails,  threaded  with  the  Cyprsea  and  brass 
rings,  hung  down  from  the  head  behind  the  ears, 
covering  the  nape  of  the  neck.  All  these,  we  may 
observe,  are  Congo  customs.  In  their  manufac¬ 
ture  of  iron,  dug  by  themselves,  they  resemble  the 
cannibals. 

The  Fa n  have  now  lodged  themselves  amongst 
the  less  warlike,  maritime,  and  sub-maritime  tribes, 
as  the  (Ashantis)  Asiante  lately  did  in  Fante-land; 
now  they  visit  the  factories  on  the  estuary,  and 
wander  as  far  as  the  Ogobe.  In  course  of  time, 
they  will  infallibly  “  eat  up  ”  the  Bakele,  as  the 
latter  are  eating  up  the  Mpongwe  and  Shekyani. 
They  have  their  own  names  for  neighbouring 
tribes :  the  Mpongwe,  according  to  Bowdich,  called 
the  Shekyani,  and  the  inner  tribes  “  Boolas,  a 
synonym  of  Dunko  in  Ashantee;”  hence,  probably, 
the  “Bulous”  of  Mr.  Hutchinson  (p.  253),  “a 
tribe  on  the  Guergay  Creek,  who  speak  a  different 
language  from  the  Mpongwes.”  The  Fazz  call  the 
Mpongwes,  Bayok ;  the  Bakele,  Ngozz;  the  Shek¬ 
yani,  Besek;  and  the  Gaboon  River,  Aboka.  The 
sub-tribes  of  cannibals,  living  near  my  line  of 
march,  were  named  to  me  as  follows: — 1.  The 


with  the  Fdn  Cannibals . 


203 


Lala  (Oshebas  ?),  whose  chief  settlement,  Sankwf, 
is  up  the  Mbokwe  River  ;  2.  their  neighbours,  the 
Esanvima  ;  3.  the  Sanikiya,  a  bush  tribe  ;  4.  the 
Sakula,  near  Mayyas;  5.  the  Esoba,  about  Fakan- 
jok ;  6.  the  Esonzel  of  the  Ute,  or  Auta  village; 
7.  the  Okola,  whose  chief  settlement  is  Esamasi ; 
and  8.  the  Ashemvon,  with  Asya  for  a  capital. 

From  M.  du  Chaillu’s  illustrations  (pp.  74,  77) 
I  fully  expected  to  see  a  large-limbed,  black¬ 
skinned,  and  ferocious-looking  race,  with  huge 
mustachios  and  plaited  beards.  A  finely  made, 
light-coloured  people,  of  regular  features  and  de¬ 
cidedly  mild  aspect,  met  my  sight. 

The  complexion  is,  as  a  rule,  chocolate,  the 
distinctive  colour  of  the  African  mountaineer  and 
of  the  inner  tribes  ;  there  are  dark  men,  as  there 
would  be  in  England,  but  the  very  black  are  of 
servile  origin.  Few  had  any  signs  of  skin-disease; 
I  saw  only  one  hand  spotted  with  white,  like  the 
incipient  Morphetico  (leper)  of  the  Brazil.  Many, 
if  bleached,  might  pass  for  Europeans,  so  “  Cau¬ 
casian  ”  are  their  features ;  few  are  negro  in  type 
as  the  Mpongwe,  and  none  are  purely  “  nigger  ” 
like  the  blacks  of  maritime  Guinea  and  the  lower 
Congoese.  And  they  bear  the  aspect  of  a  people 
fresh  from  the  bush,  the  backwoods ;  their  teeth 
are  pointed,  and  there  is  generally  a  look  of  gro¬ 
tesqueness  and  surprise.  When  I  drank  tea,  they 
asked  what  was  the  good  of  putting  sugar  in 


204 


A  Specimen  Day 


tobacco  water.  The  hair  is  not  kinky,  pepper¬ 
corn-like,  and  crisply  woolly,  like  that  of  the  Coast 
tribes ;  in  men,  as  well  as  in  women,  it  falls  in  a 
thick  curtain,  nearly  to  the  shoulders,  and  it  is  finer 
than  the  usual  elliptical  fuzz.  The  variety  of  their 
perruquerie  can  be  rivalled  only  by  that  of  the 
dress  and  ornament.  The  males  affect  plaits, 
knobs,  and  horns,  stiff  twists  and  upright  tufts, 
suddenly  projecting  some  two  inches  from  the 
scalp ;  and,  that  analogies  with  Europe  might  not 
be  wanting,  one  gentleman  wore  a  queue,  zopf,  or 
pigtail,  bound  at  the  shoulders,  not  by  a  ribbon, 
but  by  the  neck  of  a  claret  bottle.  Other  heads 
are  adorned  with  single  feathers,  or  bunches  and 
circles  of  plumes,  especially  the  red  tail-plumes  of 
the  parrot  and  the  crimson  coat  of  the  Touraco 
(Corythrix),  an  African  jay  ;  these  blood-coloured 
spoils  are  a  sign  of  war.  The  Brazilian  traveller 
will  be  surprised  to  find  the  coronals  of  feathers,  the 
Kennitare  (Acangatara)  of  the  Tupf-Guarani  race, 
which  one  always  associates  with  the  New  World. 
The  skull-caps  of  plaited  and  blackened  palm  leaf, 
though  common  in  the  interior,  are  here  rare ;  an 
imitation  is  produced  by  tressing  the  hair  longi¬ 
tudinally  from  occiput  to  sinciput,  making  the  head 
a  system  of  ridges,  divided  by  scalp-lines,  and  a 
fan-shaped  tuft  of  scarlet-stained  palm  frond  sur¬ 
mounts  the  poll.  I  noticed  a  fashion  of  crinal 
decoration  quite  new  to  me. 


with  the  Fan  Cannibals.  205 

A  few  hairs,  either  from  the  temples,  the  sides 
or  the  back  of  the  head,  are  lengthened  with  tree- 
fibres,  and  threaded  with  red  and  white  pound- 
beads,  so  called  by  Europeans  because  the  lb. 
fetches  a  dollar.  These  decorations  fall  upon  the 
breast  or  back ;  the  same  is  done  to  the  thin 
beard,  which  sprouts  tufty  from  both  rami  of  the 
chin,  as  in  the  purely  nervous  temperament  of 


FAN  HEAD-DRESS. 


Europe;  and  doubtless  the  mustachios,  if  the  latter 
were  not  mostly  wanting,  would  be  similarly 
treated.  Whatever  absurdity  in  hair  may  be 
demanded  by  the  trichotomists  and  philopogons  of 
Europe,  I  can  at  once  supply  it  to  any  extent 
from  Africa — gratis.  Gentlemen  remarkable  by 
a  raie,  which  as  in  the  Scotch  terrier  begins  above 
the  eyes  and  runs  down  the  back,  should  be 
grateful  to  me  for  this  sporting  offer. 


206 


A  Specimen  Day 


Nothing  simpler  than  the  Fa n  toilette.  Thongs 
and  plaits  of  goat,  wild  cat,  or  leopard  skin  gird 
the  waist,  and  cloth,  which  is  rare,  is  supplied  by 
the  spoils  of  the  black  monkey  or  some  other 
“  beef.”  The  main  part  of  the  national  costume, 
and  certainly  the  most  remarkable,  is  a  fan  of  palm 
frond  redolent  of  grease  and  ruddled  with  ochre, 
thrust  through  the  waist  belt ;  while  new  and  stiff 
the  upper  half  stands  bolt  upright  and  depends  only 
when  old.  It  suggests  the  “  Enduap  ”  (rondache) 
of  ostrich-plumes  worn  by  the  Tupf-Guaram  bar¬ 
barians  of  the  Brazil,  the  bunchy  caudal  appen¬ 
dages  which  made  the  missionaries  compare  them 
with  pigeons.  The  fore  part  of  the  body  is  here 
decked  with  a  similar  fan,  the  outspread  portion 
worn  the  wrong  way,  like  that  behind.  The  orna¬ 
ments  are  seed-beads,  green  or  white,  and  Lo- 
angos  (red  porcelain).  The  “  bunch”  here  con¬ 
tains  ioo  to  120  strings,  and  up  country  200,  worth 
one  dollar ;  each  will  weigh  from  one  to  three, 
and  a  wealthy  Fan  may  carry  fifteen  to  forty-five 
pounds.  The  seed-bead  was  till  lately  unknown  ; 
fifteen  to  twenty  strings  make  the  “bunch.”  There 
is  not  much  tattooing  amongst  the  men,  except  on 
the  shoulders,  whilst  the  women  prefer  the  stomach  ; 
the  gandin ,  however,  disfigures  himself  with 
powdered  cam-wood,  mixed  with  butter-nut,  grease, 
or  palm  oil — a  custom  evidently  derived  from  the 
coast-tribes.  Each  has  his  “  Ndese,”  garters  and 


with  the  Fan  Cannibals.  207 

armlets  of  plaited  palm  fibre,  and  tightened  by 
little  cross-bars  of  brass  ;  they  are  the  “  Hibas” 
which  the  Bedawin  wear  under  their  lower  articu¬ 
lations  as  preservatives  against  cramp.  Lastly,  a 
Fetish  horn  hangs  from  the  breast,  and  heavy  cop¬ 
per  rings  encumber  the  wrists  and  ankles.  Though 
unskilful  in  managing  canoes — an  art  to  be  learned, 
like  riding  and  dancing,  only  in  childhood — many 
villagers  affect  to  walk  about  with  a  paddle,  like 
the  semi-aquatic  Kru-men*  Up  country  it  is  said 
they  make  rafts  which  are  towed  across  the  stream 
by  ropes,  when  the  swiftness  of  the  current  de¬ 
mands  a  ferry.  The  women  are  still  afraid  of  the 
canoe. 

All  adult  males  carry  arms,  and  would  be  held 
womanish  if  they  were  seen  unweaponed.  These 
are  generally  battle-axes,  spears  cruelly  and  fan¬ 
tastically  jagged,  hooked  and  barbed,  and  curious 
leaf-shaped  knives  of  archaic  aspect ;  some  of  the 
latter  have  blades  broader  than  they  are  long,  a 
shape  also  preserved  by  the  Mpongwe.  The 
sheaths  of  fibre  or  leather  are  elaborately  deco¬ 
rated,  and  it  is  chic  for  the  scabbard  to  fit  so 
tight  that  the  weapon  cannot  be  drawn  for  five 
minutes ;  I  have  seen  the  same  amongst  the 
Somal.  There  are  some  trade-muskets,  but  the 
“  hot-mouthed  weapon  ”  has  not  become  the 
national  weapon  of  the  Fa/2.  Bows  and  arrows 
are  unknown  ;  the  Nayin  or  cross-bow  peculiar  to 


208 


A  Specimen  Day 


this  people,  and  probably  a  native  invention,  not 
borrowed,  as  might  be  supposed,  from  Europe,  is 
carried  only  when  hunting  or  fighting  :  a  speci¬ 
men  was  exhibited  in  London  with  the  gorillas. 
The  people  are  said  sometimes  to  bend  it  with 
the  foot  or  feet  like  the  Tupi  Guaranis,  the  Jivaros, 
and  other  South  Americans.  Suffice  it  to  remark 
of  this  weapon,  with  which,  by  the  by,  I  never 
saw  a  decent  shot  made,  that  the  ditente  is  simple 
and  ingenious,  and  that  the  “  Ebe  ”  or  dwarf  bolt 
is  always  poisoned  with  the  boiled  root  of  a  wild 
shrub.  It  is  believed  that  a  graze  is  fatal,  and 
that  the  death  is  exceedingly  painful  :  I  doubt 
both  assertions.  Most  men  also  carry  a  pliable 
basket  full  of  bamboo  caltrops,  thin  splints, 
pointed  and  poisoned.  Placed  upon  the  path  of  a 
bare-footed  enemy,  this  rude  contrivance,  com¬ 
bined  with  the  scratching  of  the  thorns,  and  the 
gashing  cuts  of  the  grass,  must  somewhat  dis¬ 
courage  pursuit.  The  shields  of  elephant  hide 
are  large,  square,  and  ponderous.  The  “  terrible 
war-axe  ”  is  the  usual  poor  little  tomahawk,  more 
like  a  toy  than  a  tool. 

After  a  bathe  in  the  muddy  Mbokwe,  I  returned 
to  the  village,  and  found  it  in  a  state  of  ferment. 
The  Fa^,  like  all  inner  African  tribes,  with  whom 
fighting  is  our  fox-hunting,  live  in  a  chronic  state 
of  ten  days’  war,  and  can  never  hold  themselves 
safe  ;  this  is  the  case  especially  where  the  slave  trade 


with  the  Fan  Cannibals. 


209 


has  never  been  heard  of.  Similarly  the  Ghazwah 
(“  Razzia  ”)  of  the  Bedawin  is  for  plunder,  not  for 
captives.  Surprises  are  rare,  because  they  will 
not  march  in  the  dark.  Battles  are  not  bloody; 
after  two  or  three  warriors  have  fallen  their  corpses 


FAN  WARRIOR. 


are  dragged  away  to  be  devoured,  their  friends 
save  themselves  by  flight,  and  the  weaker  side 
secures  peace  by  paying  sheep  and  goats.  On  this 
occasion  the  sister  of  a  young  “  brave  ”  had  just 
now  been  killed  and  “  chopped  ”  by  the  king  of 
Sankwf,  a  neighbouring  settlement  of  Oshebas, 


1. 


p 


2  10 


A  Specimen  Day 


and  the  bereaved  brother  was  urging  his  com¬ 
rades  with  vociferous  speeches  to  “  up  and  arm.” 
Usually  when  a  man  wants  “  war,”  he  rushes  naked 
through  his  own  village,  cursing  it  as  he  goes. 
Moreover,  during  the  last  war  Mayyas  lost  five 
men  to  three  of  the  enemy ;  which  is  not  fair,  said 
the  women,  who  appeared  most  eager  for  the  fray. 
All  the  youths  seized  their  weapons ;  the  huge 
war-drums,  the  hollowed  bole  of  a  tree  fringed 
with  Nyare  hide,  was  set  up  in  the  middle  of  the 
street ;  preparations  for  the  week  of  singing  and 
dancing  which  precedes  a  campaign  were  already 
in  hand,  and  one  war-man  gave  earnest  of  blood¬ 
shed  by  spearing  a  goat  the  property  of  Mr. 
Tippet.  It  being  our  interest  that  the  peace 
should  be  kept  till  after  my  proposed  trip  into  the 
interior,  I  repaired  to  the  palaver-house  and  lent 
weight  to  the  advice  of  my  host,  who  urged  the 
heroes  to  collect  ivory,  ebony,  and  rubber,  and  not 
to  fight  till  his  stores  were  filled.  We  concluded 
by  carrying  off  the  goat.  After  great  excitement 
the  warriors  subsided  to  a  calm  ;  it  was  broken, 
however,  two  days  afterwards  by  the  murder  of  a 
villager,  the  suspected  lover  of  a  woman  whose 
house  was  higher  up  the  Mbokwe  River ;  he  went 
to  visit  her,  and  was  incontinently  speared  in  the 
breast  by  the  “  injured  husband.”  If  he  die  and 
no  fine  be  paid,  there  will  be  another  “  war.” 

I  made  careful  inquiry  about  anthropophagy 


with  the  Fdh  Cannibals. 


21 1 


amongst  the  Fa^,  and  my  account  must  differ 
greatly  from  that  of  M.  du  Chaillu.  The  reader, 
however,  will  remember  that  Mayyas  is  held  by  a 
comparatively  civilized  race,  who  have  probably 
learned  to  conceal  a  custom  so  distasteful  to  all 
their  neighbours,  white  and  black  ;  in  the  remoter 
districts  cannibalism  may  yet  assume  far  more 
hideous  proportions.  Since  the  Fa n  have  encou¬ 
raged  traders  to  settle  amongst  them,  the  interest 


THE  DRUM. 


as  well  as  the  terrors  of  the  Coast  tribes,  who 
would  deter  foreigners  from  direct  dealings,  has 
added  new  horrors  to  the  tale  ;  and  yet  nothing 
can  exceed  the  reports  of  older  travellers. 

During  my  peregrinations  I  did  not  see  a  single 
skull.  The  chiefs,  stretched  at  full  length,  and 
wrapped  in  mats,  are  buried  secretly,  the  object 
being  to  prevent  some  strong  Fetish  medicine  being 
made  by  enemies  from  various  parts  of  the  body. 


2  I  2 


A  Specimen  Day 


In  some  villages  the  head  men  of  the  same  tribe 
are  interred  near  one  another ;  the  commonalty  are 
put  singly  and  decently  under  ground,  and  only  the 
slave  (Maka)  is  thrown  as  usual  into  the  bush. 
Mr.  Tippet,  who  had  lived  three  years  with  this 
people,  knew  only  three  cases  of  cannibalism  ;  and 
the  Rev.  Mr.  Walker  agreed  with  other  excellent 
authorities,  that  it  is  a  rare  incident  even  in  the 
wildest  parts — perhaps  opportunity  only  is  wanted. 
As  will  appear  from  the  Fa/z’s  bill  of  fare,  anthro¬ 
pophagy  can  hardly  be  caused  by  necessity,  and 
the  way  in  which  it  is  conducted  shows  that  it  is  a 
quasi-religious  rite  practised  upon  foes  slain  in 
battle,  evidently  an  equivalent  of  human  sacrifice. 
If  the  whole  body  cannot  be  carried  off,  a  limb  or 
two  is  removed  for  the  purpose  of  a  roast.  The 
corpse  is  carried  to  a  hut  built  expressly  on  the 
outskirts  of  the  settlement ;  it  is  eaten  secretly  by 
the  warriors,  women  and  children  not  being  allowed 
to  be  present,  or  even  to  look  upon  man’s  flesh  ; 
and  the  cooking  pots  used  for  the  banquet  must  all 
be  broken.  A  joint  of  “  black  brother  ”  is  never 
seen  in  the  villages  :  “  smoked  human  flesh  ”  does 
not  hang  from  the  rafters,  and  the  leather  knife- 
sheaths  are  of  wild  cow ;  tanned  man’s  skin  sug¬ 
gests  only  the  tanherie  de  Meudon ,  an  advanced 
“institution.”  Yet  Dr.  Schweinfurth’s  valuable 
travels  on  the  Western  Nile  prove  that  public 
anthropophagy  can  co-exist  with  a  considerable 


with  the  Fan  Cannibals . 


213 


amount  of  comfort,  and,  so  to  speak,  civilization — 
witness  the  Nyam-Nyam  and  Mombattu  (Mimbut- 
too).  The  sick  and  the  dead  are  uneaten  by  the 
Fazz,  and  the  people  shouted  with  laughter  when  I 
asked  a  certain  question. 

The  “  unnatural  ”  practice,  which,  by  the  by,  has 
at  different  ages  extended  over  the  whole  world, 


THE  CANNIBAL. 


now  continues  to  be  most  prevalent  in  places 
where,  as  in  New  Zealand,  animal  food  is  wanting; 
and  everywhere  pork  readily  takes  the  place  of 
“long pig.”  The  damp  and  depressing  atmosphere 
of  equatorial  Africa  renders  the  stimulus  of  flesh 
diet  necessary.  The  Isangu,  or  Ingwanba,  the 
craving  felt  after  a  short  abstinence  from  animal 


214 


A  Specimen  Day 


food,  does  not  spare  the  white  traveller  more  than 
it  does  his  dark  guides ;  and,  though  the  moral 
courage  of  the  former  may  resist  the  “gastronomic 
practice  ”  of  breaking  fast  upon  a  fat  young  slave, 
one  does  not  expect  so  much  from  the  untutored 
appetite  of  the  noble  savage.  On  the  eastern  parts 
of  the  continent  there  are  two  cannibal  tribes,  the 
Wadoe  and  the  Wabembe ;  and  it  is  curious  to 
find  the  former  occupying  the  position  assigned  by 
Ptolemy  (iv.  8)  to  his  anthropophagi  of  the  Bar- 
bar  icus  Sinus:  according  to  their  own  account, 
however,  the  practice  is  modern.  When  weakened 
by  the  attacks  of  their  Wakamba  neighbours,  they 
began  to  roast  and  eat  slices  from  the  bodies  of  the 
slain  in  presence  of  the  foe.  The  latter,  as  often 
happens  amongst  barbarians,  and  even  amongst 
civilized  men,  could  dare  to  die,  but  were  unable 
to  face  the  horrors  of  becoming  food  after  death  : 
the  great  Cortez  knew  this  feeling  when  he  made 
his  soldiers  pretend  anthropophagy.  Many  of  the 
Wadoe  negroids  are  tall,  well  made,  and  light  com- 
plexioned,  though  inhabiting  the  low  and  humid 
coast  regions — a  proof,  if  any  were  wanted,  that 
there  is  nothing  unwholesome  in  mans  flesh. 
Some  of  our  old  accounts  of  shipwrecked  seamen, 
driven  to  the  dire  necessity  of  eating  one  another, 
insinuate  that  the  impious  food  causes  raging  in¬ 
sanity.  The  Wabembe  tribe,  occupying  a  strip  of 
land  on  the  western  shore  of  the  Tanganyika 


with  the  Fan  Cannibals.  215 

Lake,  are  “  Menschenfresser,”  as  they  were  rightly 
called  by  the  authors  of  the  “  Mombas  Mission 
Map.”  These  miserables  have  abandoned  to  wild 
growth  a  most  prolific  soil;  too  lazy  and  unenergetic 
to  hunt  or  to  fish,  they  devour  all  manner  of  car¬ 
rion,  grubs,  insects,  and  even  the  corpses  of  their 
deceased  friends.  The  Midgan,  or  slave-caste  of 
the  semi-Semitic  Somal,  are  sometimes  reduced  to 
the  same  extremity ;  but  they  are  ever  held,  like 
the  Wendigo,  or  man-eaters,  amongst  the  North 
American  Indians,  impure  and  detestable.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  Tupf-Guaranfs  of  the  Brazil,  a 
country  abounding  in  game,  fish,  wild  fruits,  and 
vegetables,  ate  one  another  with  a  surprising 
relish.  This  subject  is  too  extensive  even  to  be 
outlined  here :  the  reader  is  referred  to  the 
translation  of  Hans  .  Stade :  old  travellers  at¬ 
tribute  the  cannibalism  of  the  Brazilian  races  to 
“  gulosity  ”  rather  than  superstition  ;  moreover, 
these  barbarians  had  certain  abominable  practices, 
supposed  to  be  known  only  to  the  most  advanced 
races. 

Anthropophagy  without  apparent  cause  was 
not  unknown  in  Southern  Africa.  Mr.  Layland 
found  a  tribe  of  “  cave  cannibals  ”  amongst  the 
mountains  beyond  Thaba  Bosigo  in  the  Trans- 
Gariep  Country.1  He  remarks  with  some  surprise, 

1  “Journal. of  the  Ethnological  Society,”  April,  1869. 


2 1 6  A  Specimen  Day 

“  Horrible  as  all  this  may  appear,  there  might 
be  some  excuse  made  for  savages,  driven  by  famine 
to  extreme  hunger,  for  capturing  and  devouring 
their  enemies.  But  with  these  people  it  was  totally 
different,  for  they  were  inhabiting  a  fine  agricul¬ 
tural  tract  of  country,  which  also  abounded  in 
game.  Notwithstanding  this,  they  were  not 
contented  with  hunting  and  feeding  upon  their 
enemies,  but  preyed  much  upon  each  other  also, 
for  many  of  their  captures  were  made  from  amongst 
the  people  of  their  own  tribe,  and,  even  worse  than 
this,  in  times  of  scarcity,  many  of  their  own  wives 
and  children  became  -the  victims  of  this  horrible 
practice.” 

Anthropophagy,  either  as  a  necessity,  a  senti¬ 
ment,  or  a  superstition,  is  known  to  sundry,  though 
by  no  means  to  all,  the  tribes  dwelling  between  the 
Nun  (Niger)  and  the  Congo  rivers-;  how  much 
farther  south  it  extends  I  cannot  at  present  say. 
On  the  Lower  Niger,  and  its  branch  the  Brass 
River,  the  people  hardly  take  the  trouble  to 
conceal  it.  On  the  Bonny  and  New  Calabar, 
perhaps  the  most  advanced  of  the  so-called  Oil 
Rivers,  cannibalism,  based  upon  a  desire  of  re¬ 
venge,  and  perhaps,  its  sentimental  side,  the  object 
of  imbibing  the  valour  of  an  enemy  slain  in  battle, 
has  caused  many  scandals  of  late  years.  The 
practice,  on  the  other  hand,  is  execrated  by  the 
Ehks  of  Old  Calabar,  who  punish  any  attempts  of 


with  the  Fan  Cannibals. 


2 1  7 


the  kind  with  extreme  severity.  During  1862 
the  slaves  of  Creek-town  attempted  it,  and  were 
killed.  At  Duke- town  an  I  bo  woman  also  cut  up 
a  man,  sun-dried  the  flesh,  and  sold  it  for  monkey’s 
meat — she  took  sanctuary  at  the  mission  house. 
Yet  it  is  in  full  vigour  amongst  their  I  bo  neigh¬ 
bours  to  the  north-west,  and  the  Duallas  of  the 
Camarones  River  also  number  it  amongst  their 
“  country  customs.”  The  Mpongwe,  as  has  been 
said,  will  not  eat  a  chimpanzee;  the  Fa n  devour 
their  dead  enemies. 

The  Fa n  character  has  its  ferocious  side,  or  it 
would  not  be  African  :  prisoners  are  tortured  with 
all  the  horrible  barbarity  of  that  human  wild  beast 
which  is  happily  being  extirpated,  the  North 
American  Indian ;  and  children  may  be  seen 
greedily  licking  the  blood  from  the  ground.  It  is 
a  curious  ethnological  study,  this  peculiar  develop¬ 
ment  of  destructiveness  in  the  African  brain. 
Cruelty  seems  to  be  with  him  a  necessary  of  life, 
and  all  his  highest  enjoyments  are  connected  with 
causing  pain  and  inflicting  death.  His  religious 
rites — a  strong  contrast  to  those  of  the  modern 
Hindoo — are  ever  causelessly  bloody.  Take  as  an 
instance,  the  Efik  race,  or  people  of  Old  Calabar, 
some  6,000  wretched  remnants  of  a  once-powerful 
tribe.  For  200  years  they  have  had  intercourse 
with  Europeans,  who,  though  slavers,  would  cer¬ 
tainly  neither  enjoy  nor  encourage  these  profitless 


2  I  8 


A  Specimen  Day 


horrors  ;  yet  no  savages  show  more  brutality  in 
torture,  more  frenzied  delight  in  bloodshed,  than 
they  do.  A  few  of  their  pleasant  practices  are- — 

The  administration  of  Esere,  or  poison-bean  ; 

“  Egbo  floggings  ”  of  the  utmost  severity,  equal¬ 
ling  the  knout  ; 

Substitution  of  an  innocent  pauper  for  a  rich 
criminal ; 

Infanticide  of  twins  ;  and 

Vivisepulture. 

And  it  must  be  remembered  that  this  tribe  has 
had  the  benefit  of  a  resident  mission  for  the  last 
generation.  I  can  hardly  believe  this  abnormal 
cruelty  to  be  the  mere  result  of  uncivilization ;  it 
appears  to  me  the  effect  of  an  arrested  develop¬ 
ment,  which  leaves  to  the  man  all  the  ferocity 
of  the  carnivor,  the  unreflecting  cruelty  of  the 
child. 

The  dietary  of  these  “  wild  men  of  the  woods  ” 
would  astonish  the  starveling  sons  of  civilization. 
When  will  the  poor  man  realize  the  fact  that  his 
comfort  and  happiness  will  result  not  from  work- 
houses  and  almshouses,  hospitals  and  private 
charities,  but  from  that  organized  and  efficient 
emigration,  so  long  advocated  by  the  seer  Car¬ 
lyle  ?  Only  the  crassest  ignorance  and  the  list¬ 
lessness  born  of  misery  and  want  prevent  the 
able-bodied  pauper,  the  frozen-out  mechanic,  or 
the  weary  and  ill-clad,  the  over- worked  and  under- 


with  the  Fan  Cannibals.  219 

fed  agricultural  labourer,  from  quitting  the  scenes 
of  his  purgatory,  and  from  finding,  scattered  over 
earth’s  surface,  spots  where  he  may  enjoy  a  com¬ 
parative  paradise,  heightened  by  the  memory  of 
privations  endured  in  the  wretched  hole  which  he 
pleases  to  call  his  home.  But  nostalgia  is  a  more 
common  disease  than  men  suppose,  and  it  affects 
none  more  severely  than  those  that  are  remarkable 
for  their  physical  powers.  A  national  system  of 
emigration,  to  be  perfect,  must  not  be  confined  to 
solitary  and  individual  hands,  who,  however 
numerous,  are  ever  pining  for  the  past.  The 
future  will  organize  the  exodus  of  whole  villages, 
which,  like  those  of  the  Hebrides  in  the  last 
century,  will  bear  with  them  to  new  worlds  their 
Lares  and  Penates,  their  wives,  families,  and  friends, 
who  will  lay  out  the  church  and  the  churchyard 
after  the  old  fashion  familiar  to  their  youth,  and 
who  will  not  forget  the  palaver-house,  vulgarly 
called  pothouse  or  pub. 

Few  of  these  Lestrigons  lack  fish,  which  they 
catch  in  weirs,  fowl,  flesh  of  dogs,  goats,  or  sheep  ; 
cattle  is  a  luxury  yet  unknown,  but  the  woods 
supply  an  abundance  of  Nyare  and  other  “bush- 
beef.”  They  also  have  their  special  word  for  the 
meat-yearning.  Still  in  the  semi-nomadic  stage, 
they  till  the  ground,  and  yet  depend  greatly  upon 
the  chase.  They  break  their  fast  (kidiashe)  at 
6  a.m.,  eat  a  mid-day  meal  (amos),  and  sup 


220 


A  Specimen  Day 


(g°ga3he)  at  sunset,  besides  “snacks”  all  through 
the  day  when  they  can  find  material.  They  are 
good  huntsmen,  who  fear  neither  the  elephant 
(nyok),  the  hippopotamus  (nyok  d  madzim),  fre¬ 
quent  in  the  rivers  of  the  interior,  the  crocodile, 
nor  the  gorilla  (njf).  It  is  generally  asserted — and 
the  unfortunate  Douville  re-echoed  the  assertion — 
that  the  river-horse  and  the  crocodile  will  not  live 
together ;  the  reason  is,  simply,  that  upon  the 
seaboard,  where  these  animals  were  first  observed, 
the  crocodile  prefers  the  fresh  water  of  the  river, 
the  hippopotamus  the  brackish  water  at  its  mouth. 
In  the  interior,  of  course,  they  dwell  together  in 
amity,  because  there  is  nothing  for  them  to  quarrel 
about. 

The  banana,  planted  with  a  careless  hand,  sup¬ 
plies  the  staff  of  life,  besides  thatch,  fuel,  and  fibre 
for  nets  and  lines  :  when  they  want  cereals,  maize, 
holcus,  and  panicum  will  grow  almost  spontane¬ 
ously.  The  various  palm-trees  give  building 
materials,  oil,  wine,  and  other  requisites  too  nu¬ 
merous  to  mention.  The  “  five  products  of  the 
cow”  are  ignored,  as  in  the  western  hemisphere  of 
yore  :  one  of  the  most  useful,  however,  is  produced 
by  the  Nje  or  Njeve,  a  towering  butyraceous  tree, 
differing  from  that  which  bears  the  Shea  butter¬ 
nut.  Its  produce  is  sun-dried,  toasted  over  a  fire, 
pounded  and  pressed  in  a  bag  between  two  boards, 
when  it  is  ready  for  use.  The  bush,  cut  at  the 


with  the  Fan  Cannibals. 


221 


end,  is  fired  before  the  beginning,  of  the  rains, 
leaving  the  land  ready  for  yams  and  sweet  pota¬ 
toes  almost  without  using  the  hoe.  In  the  middle 
dries,  from  June  to  September,  the  villagers  sally 
forth  en  masse  for  a  battue  of  elephants,  whose 
spoils  bring  various  luxuries  from  the  coast. 
Lately,  before  my  arrival,  they  had  turned  out  to 
gather  the  Aba,  or  wild  mango,  for  Odika  sauce ; 
and  during  this  season  they  will  do  nothing  else. 
The  Fa^  plant  their  own  tobacco,  which  is  de¬ 
scribed  as  a  low,  spreading  plant,  and  despise  the 
imported  weed  ;  they  neither  snuff  nor  chew.  All 
manufacture  their  own  pipe-bowls,  and  they  are 
not  ignorant  of  the  use  of  Lyamba  or  Hashish. 
They  care  little  for  sugar,  contrary  to  the  rule  of 
Africa  in  general,  but  they  over- salt  all  their 
food ;  and  they  will  suck  the  condiment  as  chil¬ 
dren  do  lollipops.  Their  palm  oil  is  very  poor, 
as  if  they  had  only  just  learned  the  art  of 
making  it. 

After  the  daily  siesta,  which  lasted  till  3  r.  m., 
Mr.  Tippet  asked  me  to  put  in  an  appearance 
at  a  solemn  dance  which,  led  by  the  kings  eldest 
daughter,  was  being  performed  in  honour  of  the 
white  visitor.  A  chair  was  placed  in  the  ve¬ 
randah,  the  street  being  the  ballroom.  Received 
with  the  usual  salutation,  “  Mbolane,”  to  which 
the  reply  is  “  A n”  I  proceeded  to  the  external 
study  of  Yhn  womanhood.  Whilst  the  men  are 


222  A  Specimen  Day 

tall  and  tlancis,  their  partners  are  usually  short 
and  stout,  and, 

“  Her  stature  tall,  I  hate  a  dumpy  woman,” 

is  a  matter  of  taste  upon  which  most  of  us  agree 
with  his  lordship.  This  peculiar  breadth  of  face 
and  person  probably  result  from  hard  work  and 
good  fare,  developing  adipose  tissue.  I  could 
not  bring  myself  to  admire  Gondebiza,  the  prin¬ 
cess  royal, — what  is  grotesque  in  one  sex  becomes 
unsightly  in  the  other.  Fat,  thirty,  and  perhaps 
once  fair,  her  charms  had  seen  their  prime,  and 
the  system  of  circles  and  circlets  which  com¬ 
posed  her  personnel  had  assumed  a  tremulous  and 
gravitating  tendency.  She  was  habited  in  the 
height  of  Fa/z  fashion.  Her  body  was  modestly 
invested  in  a  thin  pattern  of  tattoo,  and  a  gauze- 
work  of  oil  and  camwood ;  the  rest  of  the  toilette 
was  a  dwarf  pigeon-tail  of  fan-palm,  like  that  of 
the  men,  and  a  manner  of  apron,  white  beads,  and 
tree  bark,  greasy  and  reddened  :  the  latter  was 
tucked  under  and  over  the  five  lines  of  cowries, 
which  acted  as  cestus  to  the  portly  middle,  “  big  as 
a  budget.”  The  horns  of  hair,  not  unlike  the  rays 
of  light  in  Michael  Angelo’s  “Moses,”  were  covered 
with  a  cap  of  leaves,  and  they  were  balanced  behind 
by  a  pigtail  lashed  with  brass  wire.  Her  ornaments 
were  sundry  necklaces  of  various  beads,  large  red 
and  white,  and  small  blue  and  pink  porcelains ;  a 


with  the  Fdn  Cannibals.  223 

leaf,  probably  by  way  of  amulet,  was  bound  to  a 
string  round  the  upper  arm ;  and  wrists  and  ankles 
were  laden  with  heavy  rings  of  brass  and  copper, 
the  parure  of  the  great  in  Fa^-land.  The  other 
ballerine  were,  of  course,  less  brilliantly  attired, 
but  all  had  rings  on  their  arms,  legs,  and  ankles, 
fingers,  and  toes.  A  common  decoration  was  a 
bunch  of  seven  or  eight  long  ringlets,  not  unlike 
the  queues  de  rat ,  still  affected  by  the  old-fashioned 
Englishwoman ;  these,  however,  as  in  the  men, 
were  prolonged  to  the  bosom  by  strings  of  alter¬ 
nate  red  and  white  beads.  Others  limited  the 
decoration  to  two  rats’  tails  depending  from  the 
temples,  where  phrenologists  localize  our  “  cau¬ 
sality.”  Many  had  faces  of  sufficient  piquancy  ; 
the  figures,  though  full,  wanted  firmness,  and  I 
noticed  only  one  well-formed  bosom.  The  men 
wore  red  feathers,  but  none  carried  arms. 

The  form  of  saltation  suggested  Mr.  Catlin’s 
drawings.  A  circular  procession  of  children,  as 
well  as  adults,  first  promenaded  round  the  prin¬ 
cess,  who  danced  with  all  her  might  in  the  centre, 
her  countenance  preserving  th e grand  serieux.  The 
performers  in  this  “  ging-a-ring  ”  then  clapped 
hands  with  prolonged  ejaculations  of  o-o-o-oh, 
stamped  and  shuffled  forwards,  moving  the  body 
from  the  hips  downwards,  whilst  H.  R.  H.  alone 
stood  stationary  and  smileless  as  a  French  demob 
selle  of  the  last  century,  who  came  to  the  ball  not 


2  24 


A  Specimen  Day 


to  causer  but  to  danser.  At  times,  when  King 
Fitevanga  condescended  to  show  his  agility,  the 
uproar  of  applause  became  deafening.  The  or¬ 
chestra  consisted  of  two  men  sitting  opposite  each 
other, — one  performed  on  a  caisson,  a  log  of  hol¬ 
lowed  wood,  four  feet  high,  skin-covered,  and  fanci¬ 
fully  carved ;  the  other  on  the  national  Anjya,  a 
rude  “  Marimba,”  the  prototype  of  the  pianoforte. 
It  is  made  of  seven  or  eight  hard- wood  slats, 
pinned  with  bamboo  tacks  to  transverse  banana 
trunks  lying  on  the  ground  :  like  the  grande  caisse , 
it  is  played  upon  with  sticks,  plectra  like  tent-pegs. 
Mr.  W.  Winwood  Reade  (“Savage  Africa,”  chap, 
xiii.)  says :  “The  instrument  is  also  described  by 
Froebel  as  being  used  by  the  Indians  of  Central 
America,  where,  which  is  still  more  curious,  it  is 
known  by  the  same  name — ‘  marimba/  ”  Of  course 
they  borrowed  the  article  and  the  name  from  the 
negroes :  most  tribes  in  Africa  have  their  own 
terms  for  this  universal  instrument,  but  it  is  every¬ 
where  recognized  by  the  African  who  knows 
Europeans  as  “  marimba.”  Thus  Owen  tells  us 
(p.  308)  “  that  at  the  mouth  of  the  Zambesi  it  is 
called  ‘  Tabbelahf  ”  evidently  the  Arabic  “  Tablah” 
Another  favourite  instrument  is  a  clapper,  made  of 
two  bamboos  some  five  feet  long,  and  thick  as 
capstan  bars, — it  is  truly  the  castanet  en  grand . 

Highly  gratified  by  the  honour,  but  somewhat 
overpowered  by  the  presence  and  by  that  vile 


with  the  Fan  Cannibals. 


225 


scourge  the  sandfly,  I  retired  after  the  first  review, 
leaving  the  song,  the  drum,  and  the  dance  to  con¬ 
tinue  till  midnight.  Accustomed  to  the  frantic 
noises  of  African  village-life  in  general,  my  ears 
here  recognized  an  excess  of  bawl  and  shout,  and 
subsequent  experience  did  not  efface  the  impres¬ 
sion.  But,  in  the  savage  and  the  barbarian,  noise, 
like  curiosity,  is  a  healthy  sign  ;  the  lowest  tribes 
are  moping  and  apathetic  as  sick  children ;  they 
will  hardly  look  at  anything,  however  strange  to 
them. 

The  rest  of  my  day  and  week  was  devoted  to 
the  study  of  this  quaint  people,  and  the  following 
are  the  results.  Those  who  have  dealings  with 
the  Yb,n  universally  prefer  them  in  point  of 
honesty  and  manliness  to  the  Mpongwe  and  Coast 
races ;  they  have  not  had  time  to  become  tho¬ 
roughly  corrupt,  to  lose  all  the  lesser  without 
gaining  anything  of  the  greater  virtues.  They 
boast,  like  John  Tod,  that  they  ne’er  feared 
the  French,  and  have  scant  respect  for  (white) 
persons ;  indeed,  their  independence  sometimes 
takes  the  form  of  insolence.  We  were  obliged  to 
release  by  force  the  boy  Nyongo,  and  two  of  Mr. 
Tippet’s  women  who  had  been  put  “  in  log” — 
Anglice ,  in  the  stocks.  They  were  wanted  as 
hostages  during  the  coming  war,  and  this  rude 
contrivance  was  adopted  to  insure  their  presence. 

Chastity  is  still  known  amongst  the  Fa^.  The 

Q 


1. 


226  A  Specimen  Day 

marriage  tie  has  some  significance,  the  women  will 
not  go  astray  except  with  the  husband’s  leave, 
which  is  not  often  granted.  The  men  wax  wroth 
if  their  mothers  be  abused.  It  is  an  insult  to 
call  one  of  them  a  liar  or  a  coward ;  the  coast- 
tribes  would  merely  smile  at  the  soft  impeach¬ 
ment,  and  assure  you  that  none  but  fools — yourself 
included  by  implication — are  anything  else.  Their 
bravery  is  the  bravery  of  the  savage,  whose  first 
object  in  battle  is  to  preserve  his  only  good,  his 
life  :  to  the  civilized  man,  therefore,  they  appear 
but  moderately  courageous.  They  are  fond  of 
intoxication,  but  are  not  yet  broken  to  ardent 
spirits  :  I  have  seen  a  single  glass  of  trade  rum 
cause  a  man  to  roll  upon  the  ground  and  convul¬ 
sively  bite  the  yellow  clay  like  one  in  the  agonies 
of  the  death-thirst.  They  would  do  wisely  to 
decline  intercourse  with  Europeans ;  but  this,  of 
course,  is  impossible — there  is  a  manifest  destiny 
for  them  as  for  their  predecessors.  The  vile 
practice  of  the  white  or  West  Coast  is  to  supply 
savages  with  alcohol,  arms,  and  ammunition  ;  to 
live  upon  the  lives  of  those  they  serve.  The 
more  honourable  Moslems  of  the  eastern  shores  do 
not  disgrace  themselves  by  such  greed  of  gain. 

The  Fa^  are  cunning  workers  in  iron,  which  is 
their  wealth.  Their  money  is  composed  of  Ikfa, 
dwarf  bars  shaped  like  horse-fleams,  a  coinage 
familiar  to  old  travellers  in  West  Africa,  and  of 


with  the  Fan  Cannibals .  227 

this  Spartan  currency  a  bundle  of  ten  represents 
sixpence.  “  White  man’s  Ikfa”  would  be  silver, 
for  which  the  more  advanced  Mpongwe  have  cor¬ 
rupted  the  English  to  “  solove.”  An  idea  exists 
on  the  Lower  River  that  our  hardware  is  broken 
up  for  the  purpose  of  being  made  into  spear-heads 
and  other  weapons.  Such  is  not  generally  the 
case.  The  Wamasai,  the  Somal  and  the  Cape 
Kafirs — indeed,  all  the  metal-working  African  bar¬ 
barians-— call  our  best  Sheffield  blades  “  rotten 
iron.”  They  despise  a  material  that  chips  and 
snaps,  and  they  prefer  with  ample  cause  their  na¬ 
tive  produce,  charcoal-smelted,  and  tempered  by 
many  successive  heatings  and  hammerings,  with¬ 
out  quenching  in  water.  Nor  will  they  readily  part 
with  it  when  worked.  .  The  usual  trade  medium 
is  a  metal  rod  ;  two  of  these  are  worth  a  franc  if 
of  brass,  while  three  of  copper  represent  two 
francs.  There  is  a  great  demand  for  beads  and 
salt,  the  latter  especially  throughout  the  interior. 

Thus  ended  my  “  first  impressions”  amongst 
the  Fa.22  cannibals. 


CHAPTER  X. 

TO  THE  MBIKA  (HILL)  ;  THE  SOURCES  OF  THE 
GABOON. - RETURN  TO  THE  PLATEAU. 


OT  yet  despairing  of  a  shot  at  or  of 
capturing  a  “  poor  relation,”  I  per¬ 
suaded  Mr.  Tippet  to  assemble  the 
lieges  and  offer  them  double  what  was 
proposed  at  Mbata.  No  one,  however,  appeared 
sanguine  of  success,  the  anthropoid  keeps  his 
distance  from  the  Fa n.  A  trip  to  the  interior  was 
suggested,  first  up  the  Mbokwe,  and  finally  ar¬ 
ranged  for  the  Londo  River.  Information  about 
the  country  was,  as  usual,  vague  ;  one  man  made 
the  stream  head  two  days  off,  the  other  a  few 
hours,  and  Mr.  Tippet’s  mind  fluctuated  between 
fifty  and  one  hundred  miles. 

The  party  was  easily  assembled,  and  we  set  out 
at  7  a.m.  on  April  14th.  I  and  Selim  had  the 
dignity  of  a  “dingy”  to  ourselves:  Mr.  Tippet 
out  of  a  little  harem  of  twenty-five  had  chosen 


To  the  Mbikct. 


229 


two  wives  and  sundry  Abigails ;  his  canoe,  laden 
with  some  fifteen  souls,  was  nearly  flush  with  the 
water.  The  beauties  were  somewhat  surly,  they 
complained,  like  the  sluggard,  of  too  early  waking 


ANKOMBE. 


and  swore  that  they  would  do  nothing  in  the  way 
of  work,  industry  being  essentially  servile.  Anne 
Coombe  (Ankombe,  daughter  of  Qua-ben),  was 
a  short,  stout,  good-humoured  lass ;  “  ’Lizer  ” 
(Eliza),  I  regret  to  say,  would  not  make  the  least 


230 


To  the  Mbika. 


exertion,  and,  when  called,  always  turned  her 
back. 

After  dropping  three  miles  down  the  Mbokwe 
River,  we  entered  the  Londo  influent :  some  three 
miles  further  on  it  fines  down  from  a  width  of 
eighty  feet  to  a  mere  ditch,  barred  with  trees,  which 
stop  navigation.  We  landed  on  the  left  bank  and 
walked  into  the  palaver-house  of  Fakanjok  or 
Pakanjok,  the  village  of  a  Fan  head  man,  called 
by  Mr.  Tippet  “John  Matoko.”  It  was  old,  dirty 
and  tattered,  showing  signs  of  approaching  re¬ 
moval.  Out  of  the  crowd  of  men  and  women 
who  nearly  sat  upon  us,  I  had  no  difficulty  in 
hiring  eight  porters,  thereby  increasing  our  party 
to  twenty-five  souls.  These  people  carry  on  the 
shoulder,  not  as  Africans  always  should  do,  on  the 
head  :  they  even  cross  the  fallen  trunks  which  act 
as  rickety  bridges,  with  one  side  of  the  body  thus 
heavier  than  the  other. 

The  bush-path  began  by  wheeling  westward,  as 
though  we  were  returning  to  Anenge-nenge ; 
thence  it  struck  south-eastwards,  a  rhumb  from 
which  it  rarely  deviated.  Though  we  were  ap¬ 
proaching  the  sub-ranges  of  the  Sierra  del  Crystal, 
the  country  was  very  like  that  about  Mbata ; 
streamlets  flowing  to  the  Mbokwe,  wet  yellow 
soil  forming  slippery  muds,  unhealthy  as  un¬ 
pleasant  in  the  morning  sunshine  ;  old  and  new 
clearings  and  plantations,  mostly  of  bananas,  mere 


To  the  Mbika . 


2  31 


spots  in  the  wide  expanse  of  bush,  and  deserted 
or  half-inhabited  villages.  Shortly  after  noon  we 
came  to  a  battle-field,  where  the  heroes  of  Tippet- 
town  had  chanced  to  fall  in  with  their  foes  of 
Auta,  a  settlement  distant  eight  or  nine  miles. 
Both  armies  at  once  “tree’d”  themselves  behind 


“  ’lizer.” 


trunks,  and  worked  at  long  bowls;  the  “  bush- 
men/’  having  only  one  gun  and  two  charges,  lost 
four  of  their  men,  and  the  victors,  who  had 
no  time  to  carry  off  the  slain,  contented  them¬ 
selves  with  an  arm  or  two  by  way  of  gigot. 

Probably  the  memory  of  this  affair,  which  is 
still  to  be  settled,  unfavourably  impressed  my 
escort.  After  a  total  of  some  two  hours  (six 
miles)  we  arrived  at  a  large  “Olako”  or  break- 


232 


To  the  Mbika. 


wind,  a  half-face  of  leafy  branches,  and  all  insisted 
upon  a  long  rest.  I  objected,  and  then  “  palaver 
came  up.”  We  were  at  last  frankly  told  that  the 
villages  ahead  were  hostile,  that  we  could  not 
proceed  further  in  this  direction,  and  that  the 
people  of  Fakanjok  had  thought  my  only  object 
was  to  sight  from  afar  a  golden  prairie  and  a  blue 
range  beyond.  The  latter  is  known  to  the  French 
as  “Tern,”  from  a  hillock  crowned  with  a  huge 
red-trunked  tree  of  that  name. 

Opposition  was  useless,  so  we  turned  back  some 
twenty  minutes  to  a  junction,  and  took  the  south¬ 
eastern  instead  of  the  eastern  line.  Here  the 
country  was  higher  and  drier,  more  hilly  and 
gravelly,  the  aneroid  showing  some  900  feet 
(29*11)-;  it  would  be  exceptionally  healthy  in  any 
but  the  rainy  season.  Before  the  afternoon  had 
well  set  in,  a  camping  ground  had  been  chosen  in 
the  tall,  thin  forest,  near  the  confluence  of  two 
dwarf  streams,  whose  vitreous  waters,  flowing  over 
fine  sand  and  quartz  pebbles,  were  no  small 
recommendation.  As  the  cooking  proceeded, 
frowning  brows  relaxed,  and  huge  fires  put  to 
flight  ill  temper  and  the  sandfly.  I  had  proposed 
lashing  my  hammock  to  one  of  the  tree-stumps, 
which  are  here  some  ten  feet  tall,  the  people,  who 
swing  themselves  for  the  purpose  of  felling,  declare 
the  upper  wood  to  be  softer  than  below.  “  Public 
opinion,”  however,  overruled  me,  and  made  it  fast 


To  the  Mbika . 


233 


to  two  old  trunks.  The  night  was  a  succession 
of  violent  tornadoes,  and  during  one  of  the  most 
outrageous  the  upper  half  of  a  “  triste  lignum/’ 
falling  alongside  of  and  grazing  my  hammock, 
awoke  me  with  its  crash. 

Next  morning,  when  the  rain  had  somewhat 
abated,  I  set  out,  by  a  path  whose  makers  were 
probably  the  ape  and  the  squirrel-hunter,  in  the 
direction  of  a  rise,  which  the  people  called  Mbika 
— The  hill.  After  a  total  of  some  two  miles 
and  a  half,  we  found  a  clearing  upon  the 
summit,  but,  although  I  climbed  up  a  tree,  the 
bush  was  dense  enough  to  conceal  most  of  the 
surroundings.  According  to  the  Fa n,  the  Nkomo 
rises  on  the  seaward  or  western  face  of  this  Mbika, 
whilst  the  Mbokwe,  springing  from  its  eastern 
counterslope,  runs  south-west  of  the  Massif  and 
joins  the  former.  The  one-tree  hill  known  as 
“  Tern ”  appeared  a  little  to  the  north  of  west: 
to  the  north-east  we  could  see  a  river-fork,  but 
none  knew  its  name. 

Our  return  was  enlivened  by  the  inspection  of 
an  elephant-kraal,  where  a  herd  had  been  trapped, 
drugged,  and  shot  during  the  last  season.  As  the 
walls  were  very  flimsy,  I  asked  why  the  animals 
did  not  break  loose ;  the  answer  was  that  the 
Nghn  (Mganga  or  Fetishman)  ran  a  line  of 
poison  vine  along  its  crest,  and  that  the  beasts, 
however  wild,  would  not  attempt  to  pass  through 


234 


Return  to  the  Plateau. 


it.  The  natives  showed  me  the  liana  which 
they  described,  still  lying  on  the  poles  of  the 
broken  corral.  Mr.  Preston,  of  the  Gaboon  Mis¬ 
sion,  who  first  noticed  it,  and  Mr.  Wilson,  who 
gives  an  illustration  of  the  scene  (p.  363),  declares 
that  the  creeper  is  drawn  around  the  herd  when 
browsing ;  that  as  long  as  the  animals  are  un¬ 
molested  they  will  not  dash  through  the  magic 
circle,  and  that  the  fence  of  uprights  is  constructed 
outside  it.  The  same  tale  is  told  of  all  the  wild 
elephant-hunters  in  the  interior,  the  Bati  the 
Okana,  the  Yefa,  and  the  Sensoba. 

Arrived  at  Tippet-town,  I  gave  my  ‘‘dashes,” 
chiefly  brass  and  copper  rods,  bade  an  affectionate 
farewell,  and  then  dropped  down  stream  without 
further  ceremony.  I  had  been  disappointed  a 
second  time  in  re  gorilla,  and  nothing  now  re¬ 
mained  but  a  retreat,  which  time  rendered  neces- 
'  sary.  The  down-stream  voyage  was  an  easy 
matter,  and  it  need  hardly  be  said  far  less  un¬ 
pleasant  than  the  painful  toil  up.  From  the 
Sanjika  village  on  the  Gaboon,  the  “  Tern”  hill 
was  seen  bearing  due  east  (Mag.)  and  the  Mbika 
9 20.  Behind  them  were  glimpses  of  blue  high¬ 
land,  rising  in  lumpy  and  detached  masses  to  the 
east ;  these  are  evidently  sub-ranges  of  the  western 
Ghats,  the  Sierra  del  Crystal,  which  native 
travellers  described  to  me  as  a  serrated  broken 
line  of  rocky  and  barren  acicular  mountains ;  tall, 


Return  to  the  Plateau . 


235 


gravelly,  waterless,  and  lying  about  three  days’ 
journey  beyond  the  screen  of  wooded  hill.  It  is 
probably  sheltered  to  some  extent  from  the  damp 
sea-breeze,  and  thus  to  the  east  there  would  be  a 
“lee-land,”  dry,  healthy  and  elevated,  which, 
corresponding  with  Ugogo  on  the  Zanzibar-Tan- 
ganyika  line,  would  account  for  the  light  com¬ 
plexions  of  the  people.  Early  on  the  morning  of 
Thursday,  April  17th,  the  “Eliza”  was  lying  off 
Mr.  R.  B.  N.  Walker’s  factory,  and  I  was  again 
received  with  customary  hospitality  by  Mr.  Hogg. 

These  two  short  trips  gave  me  a  just  measure 
of  the  comparative  difficulties  in  travelling  through 
Eastern  and  Western  Africa,  and  to  a  certain 
extent  accounted  for  the  huge  vacuum  which  dis¬ 
figures  the  latter,  a  few  miles  behind  the  seaboard. 
The  road  to  Unyam wezi,  for  instance,  has  been 
trodden  for  centuries  ;  the  people  have  become 
trained  porters  ;  they  look  forward  annually  to 
visiting  the  coast,  and  they  are  accustomed  to  the 
sight  of  strangers,  Arabs  and  others.  If  war  or 
blood-feud  chance  to  close  one  line,  the  general 
interests  of  the  interior  open  another.  But  in  this 
section  of  Africa  there  is  no  way  except  from 
village  to  village,  and  a  blood-feud  may  shut  it  for 
months.  The  people  have  not  the  habit  of  dealing 
with  the  foreigner,  whom  they  look  upon  as  a 
portent,  a  walking  ghost,  an  ill-omened  apparition. 
Porterage  is  in  embryo,  no  scale  of  payment 


236  Return  to  the  Plateau . 

exists ;  and  no  dread  of  cutting  off  a  communica¬ 
tion  profitable  to  both  importer  and  exporter  pre¬ 
vents  the  greedy  barbarian  plundering  the  stranger. 
Captain  Speke  and  I  were  fortunate  in  being  the 
first  whites  who  seriously  attempted  the  Lake 
Region ;  our  only  obstacles  were  the  European 
merchants  at  Zanzibar  ;  the  murder  of  M.  Maizan, 
although  a  bad  example  to  the  people,  had  been 
so  punished  as  to  render  an  immediate  repetition 
of  the  outrage  improbable.  I  say  immediate,  for, 
shortly  after  our  return,  the  unfortunate  Herr 
Roscher  was  killed  at  the  Hisonguni  village,  near 
the  Rufuma  River,  without  apparent  reason.1 

But  M.  du  Chaillu  had  a  very  different  task,  and 
as  far  as  he  went  he  did  it  well.  His  second  ex¬ 
pedition,  in  which  an  accidental  death  raised  the 
country  against  him,  was  fortunately  undertaken  by 
a  man  in  the  prime  of  youth  and  strength  ;  other¬ 
wise  he  must  have  succumbed  to  a  nine  hours’  run, 
wounded  withal.  In  East  Africa  when  one  of 
Lieutenant  Cameron’s  “  pagazis  ”  happened  to  kill 
a  native,  the  white  man  was  mulcted  only  in 
half  his  cloth. 

On  the  other  hand,  I  see  no  reason  why  these 
untrodden  lines  should  be  pronounced  impossible, 
as  a  writer  in  the  “  Pall  Mall  ”  has  lately  done, 
deterring  the  explorer  from  work  which  every  day 


1  “  Zanzibar  City,  Island,  and  Coast,”  vol.  ii.  chap.  ii. 


Return  to  the  Plateau. 


237 


would  cover  new' ground.  The  Gaboon  is  by  no 
means  a  bad  point  de  depart ,  whence  the  resolute 
traveller,  with  perseverance  ( Anglice  time),  a  know¬ 
ledge  of  the  coast  language,  and  good  luck  might 
penetrate  into  the  heart  (proper)  of  Africa,  and 
abolish  the  white  blot  which  still  affronts  us.  His 
main  difficulty  would  be  the  heavy  outlay ;  “  im- 
pecuniosity  ”  to  him  would  represent  the  scurvy 
and  potted  cat  of  the  old  Arctic  voyager.  But 
if  he  can  afford  to  travel  regardless  of  delays  and 
expense,  and  to  place  depots  of  cloth,  beads,  and 
other  “  country-money  ”  at  every  hundred  miles, 
Mpongwe-land  would  be  one  of  the  gateways  to  the 
unknown  regions  of  the  Dark  Continent.  More¬ 
over,  every  year  we  hear  some  new  account  of 
travellers  coming  from  the  East.  Unfortunately 
men  with  ,£5,000  to  /20,000a  year  do  not  “plant 
the  lance  in  ^  Africa,”  the  old  heroic  days  of  the 
Spanish  and  Portuguese  exploring  hidalgos  have 
yet  to  dawn  anew.  We  must  now  look  forward 
to  subsidies  from  economical  governments,  and 
whilst  the  Germans  and  Italians,  especially  the 
former,  are  so  liberally  supported  and  adequately 
rewarded,  Englishmen,  as  in  the  case  of  the 
gallant  Lieutenant  Cameron,  run  the  risk  of  being 
repudiated,  left  penniless  in  the  depths  of  Negro- 
land. 


CHAPTER  XI. 

MR.,  MRS.,  AND  MASTER  GORILLA. 

HE  reader  will  kindly  bear  in  mind, 
when  perusing  my  notes  upon  the 
gorilla,  that,  as  in  the  the  case  of  the 
Fa^  cannibalism  described  by  the 
young  French  traveller,  my  knowledge  of  the 
anthropoid  is  confined  to  the  maritime  region ; 
moreover,  that  it  is  hearsay,  fate  having  prevented 
my  nearer  acquaintance  with  the  “ape  of  con¬ 
tention. ’’ 

The  discovery  must  be  assigned  to  Admiral 
Hanno  of  Carthage,  who,  about  b.  c.  500,  first  in  the 
historical  period  slew  the  Troglodytes,  and  carried 
home  their  spoils. 

The  next  traveller  who  described  the  great 
Troglodytes  of  equatorial  Africa  was  the  well- 
known  Andrew  Battel,  of  Leigh,  Essex  (1589  to 
1 600) ;  and  his  description  deserves  quoting.  “  Here 
(Mayombo)  are  two  kinds  of  monsters  common  to 
these  woods.  The  largest  of  them  is  called  Pongo 


Mr .,  Mrs.,  and  Master  Gorilla.  239 

in  their  language,  and  the  other  Engeco  ”  (in  the 
older  editions  “  Encego”  evidently  Nchfgo,  whilst 
Engeco  may  have  given  rise  to  our  “  Jocko’'). 
“  The  Pongo  is  in  all  his  proportions  like  a  man, 
except  the  legs,  which  have  no  calves,  but  are  of 
a  gigantic  size.  Their  faces,  hands,  and  ears 
are  without  hair ;  their  bodies  are  covered,  but  not 
very  thick,  with  hair  of  a  dunnish  colour.  When 
they  walk  on  the  ground  it  is  upright,  with  their 
hands  on  the  nape  of  the  neck .  They  sleep  in 
trees,  and  make  a  covering  over  their  heads  to 
shelter  them  from  the  rain.  They  eat  no  flesh,  but 
feed  on  nuts  and  other  fruits  ;  they  cannot  speak, 
nor  have  they  any  understanding  beyond  instinct. 

“  When  the  people  of  the  country  travel  through 
the  woods,  they  make  fires  in  the  night,  and  in 
the  morning,  when  they  are  gone,  the  Pongos  will 
come  and  sit  round  it  till  it  goes  out,  for  they  do 
not  possess  sagacity  enough  to  lay  more  wood  on. 
They  go  in  bodies,  and  kill  many  negroes  who 
travel  in  the  woods.  When  elephants  happen 
to  come  and  feed  where  they  are,  they  will  fall 
on  them,  and  so  beat  them  with  their  clubbed 
fists  (sticks?)  that  they  are  forced  to  run 
away  roaring.  The  grown  Pongos  are  never 
taken  alive,  owing  to  their  strength,  which  is  so 
great  that  ten  men  cannot  hold  one  of  them.  The 
young  Pongos  hang  upon  their  mother’s  belly, 
with  their  hands  clasped  about  her.  Many  of  the 


240  Mr.,  Mrs.,  and  Master  Gorilla . 

young  ones  are  taken  by  means  of  shooting  the 
mothers  with  poisoned  arrows,  and  the  young 
ones,  hanging  to  their  mothers,  are  easily  taken.” 

I  have  italicized  the  passages  which  show  that 
the  traditions  still  preserved  on  the  coast,  about 
the  Pongo  and  the  Chimpanzee,  date  from  old. 
Surely  M.  du  Chaillu  does  grave  injustice  to  this 
good  old  Briton,  who  was  not  a  literary  man,  by 
declaring  his  stories  to  be  mere  travellers’  tales, 
“  untrue  of  any  of  the  great  apes  of  Africa.” 
Battel  had  evidently  not  seen  the  animal,  and  with 
his  negro  informants  he  confounds  the  gorilla  and 
the  “  bushman ;  ”  yet  he  possibly  alludes  to  a 
species  which  has  escaped  M.  du  Chaillu  and 
other  modern  observers. 

Mr.  W.  Winwood  Reade  (“  Savage  Africa,” 
chap,  xix.)  has  done  good  service  by  reprinting 
the  letter  of  a  Bristol  trader  on  the  west  coast  of 
Africa,  first  published  by  Lord  Monboddo  (“  Origin 
and  Progress  of  Language,”  vol.  i.  p.  281,  1774  to 
1792).  Here  we  find  distinct  mention  of  three 
anthropoid  apes.  The  first  is  the  “  Impungu”  (or 
pongo?),  which  walks  upright,  and  is  from  seven  to 
nine  feet  high.  The  second  is  the  “  Itsena,”  evi¬ 
dently  the  Njina,  Njf,  Nguyla,  or  gorilla ;  and  thirdly 
is  the  “  Chimpenza,”  our  Chimpanzee,  a  word  cor¬ 
rupted  from  the  Congoese  Kampenzy,  including  the 
Nchigo,  the  Kulu-Kamba,  and  other  Troglodytes. 
I  have  heard  of  this  upright- walking  Mpongo 


241 


Mr.,  Mrs.,  and  Master  Gorilla. 

at  Loango  and  other  places  on  the  west  coast  of 
Africa,  where  the  Njrna  is  familiarly  spoken  of, 
and  it  is  not,  methinks,  impossible,  that  an  ape 
even  larger  than  the  gorilla  may  yet  be  found. 

James  Barbot  (“A  Voyage  to  Congo  River,” 
Churchill,  vol.  v.  p.  512,)  tells  us  in  1700  that  the 
“kingdom  of  Angola ,  or  Dongo ,  produces  many 
such  extraordinary  apes  in  the  woods  ;  they  are 
called  by  the  blacks  Quojas  morrow ,  and  by  the 
Indians  Orang-outang ,  that  is  satyrs,  or  woodmen. 

This  creature  seems  to  be  the  very  satyr 
of  the  ancients,  written  of  by  Pliny  and  others, 
and  is  said  to  set  upon  women  in  the  woods,  and 
sometimes  upon  armed  men.”  Amongst  these 
animals  he  evidently  includes  the  chimpanzee,  as 
may  be  seen  by  his  reference  to  the  Royal  Ex¬ 
change,  London. 

In  1776  the  philosophical  Abbe  Proyart,  in  his 
excellent  “  History  of  Loango,”  tells  us  ( vide 
the  chapter  upon  animals)  that  “  there  are  in  the 
forests  baboons  four  feet  high ;  the  negroes  affirm 
that,  when  they  are  hard  pushed,  they  come  down 
from  the  trees  with  sticks  in  their  hands  to  defend 
themselves  against  those  who  are  hunting  them, 
and  that  very  often  they  chase  their  pursuers. 
The  missionaries  never  witnessed  this  singularity.” 
According  to  the  people,  gorillas  five  or  six  feet 
tall  have  been  seen  as  lately  as  1840  at  “  Looboo 
Wood,”  a  well-known  spot  which  we  shall  presently 


1. 


R 


242  Mr .,  Mrs.,  and  Master  Gorilla . 

sight,  about  three  miles  inland  from  the  centre  of 
Loango  Bay. 

And  now  the  long  intervals  between  travellers’ 
accounts  wax  shorter.  The  well-known  writer, 
Bowdich,  before  quoted,  published,  in  1819,  his 
hearsay  description  of  the  “  Ingena,”  garnished 
with  the  usual  native  tales.  I  had  the  honour 
of  receiving  an  account  of  his  discovery  from  his 
widow,  the  late  Mrs.  Lee,  who  was  held  the 
“  mother  of  African  travellers,”  and  whose  energy 
and  intelligence  endured  to  the  last, — if  memory 
serves  me,  she  referred  to  some  paper  upon  the 
subject,  written  by  herself  about  1825.  Towards 
the  end  of  1846,  the  Rev.  Mr.  Wilson,  founder  of 
the  Gaboon  Mission,  and  proto-grammarian  of  its 
language,  obtained  two  skulls,  which  were  fol¬ 
lowed  by  skeletons,  fragmentary  and  perfect.  He 
sent  No.  1,  measuring,  when  alive,  5^  feet  in 
height,  and  4  feet  across  the  shoulders,  to  the 
“Natural  History  Society”  of  Boston.  He  evi¬ 
dently  has  a  right  to  boast  that  he  was  “  the  first 
to  call  the  attention  of  naturalists  to  the  ‘  Njena.’  ” 
His  colleague,  Dr.  Thomas  Savage,  and  Professor 
Jeffries  Wyman  called  the  new  animal  by  the  old 
name  of  gorilla,  suffixing  it  to  the  “  Troglodytes” 
which  Geoffroy  de  Saint- LI ilaire,  reviving  Linnaeus, 
had  proposed  in  1812.  In  1847,  Dr.  Savage  pub¬ 
lished  in  the  “Journal  of  Natural  History”  (Bos¬ 
ton)  the  result  of  his  careful  inquiries  about  the 


Mr.,  Mrs.,  and  Master  Gorilla.  243 

“  Enge-ena”  and  the  “  Enche-eko.”  In  1852,  this 
information  was  supplemented  by  Dr.  Ford,  also 
of  the  Gaboon  Mission,  with  a  “  Paper  on  the 
Gorilla,”  published  in  the  “Transactions  of  the 
Philadelphian  Academy  of  Sciences.” 

M.  du  Chaillu  first  had  the  honour  of  slaying 
the  gorilla  in  its  native  wilds.  I  saw  his  trophies 
in  the  United  States  in  1859;  anc^  the  sensation 
which  they  subsequently  created  in  London  (1861- 
1862)  is  too  recent  to  require  notice.  Unfortu¬ 
nately  the  specimens  were  mutilated  and  imperfect. 
Mr.  R.  B.  N.  Walker,  agent  of  Messrs.  Hatton  and 
Cookson  at  the  Gaboon  River,  was  the  first  to  send 
home  a  young  specimen  bodily,  stowed  away  in 
spirits ;  two  boiled  skeletons  of  large  grey  animals, 
whose  skins  I  saw  at  the  factory,  and  rum-pre¬ 
served  brains,  intestines,  and  other  interesting 
parts,  which  had  vainly  been  desired  by  naturalists. 
Mr.  W.  Winwood  Readespent  five  active  months  in 
the  Gorilla  country  in  1862  :  Major  Levison  also 
visited  the  river,  but  their  hunting  was  as  unsuccess¬ 
ful  as  mine;  whilst,  in  1863,  Major  (now  Colonel) 
De  Ruvignes  is  reported  to  have  been  more  for¬ 
tunate.  Since  that  time  gorillas  have  been  killed 
by  the  French  chasseur. 

The  young  Troglodyte  has  often  been  captured. 
The  usual  mode  is  to  fell  the  tree,  and  during  the 
confusion  to  throw  a  cloth  over  its  head ;  the 
hands  are  then  pinioned  behind,  and  a  forked 


244  Mr.,  Mrs.,  and  Master  Gorilla. 

stick  is  fastened  under  the  chin  to  prevent  the 
child  biting.  I  should  prefer,  for  trapping  old  as 
well  as  young,  the  way  in  which  bears  are  caught 
by  the  North  American  backwoodsman, — a  hol¬ 
lowed  log,  with  some  fruit,  plantains  for  instance, 
floating  in  a  quant,  stiff,  of  sugar,  well  sugared 
and  narcotized. 

Concerning  the  temper  of  these  little  captives, 
there  are  heroic  differences  of  opinion.  Mr.  Ford 
records  the  “implacable  desperation”  of  a  juve¬ 
nile  which  was  brought  to  the  Mission.  It  was 
taken  very  young,  and  kept  four  months,  and 
many  means  were  used  to  tame  it ;  but  it  was  so 
incorrigible,  that  it  bit  me  an  hour  before  it  died.” 
Yet,  in  face  of  this  and  other  evidence,  Mr.  W.  Win- 
wood  Reade,  writing  to  the  “  Athenaeum  ”  (Sep¬ 
tember  7,  1862),  asserts  that  “the  young  gorilla  in 
captivity  is  not  savage.”  “  Joe  Gorilla,”  M.  du 
Chaillu’s  brat,  was  notoriously  fierce  and  unman¬ 
ageable.  The  Rev.  Mr.  Walker,  of  Baraka,  had 
a  specimen,  which  he  describes  as  a  very  tractable 
pupil;  and  my  excellent  friend  Major  Noeliy  White, 
better  known  as  “  Governor  White,”  of  Corisco 
Island,  brought  to  Fernando  Po  a  baby  Njfna,  which 
in  its  ways  and  manners  much  resembled  an  old 
woman.  Mr.  R.  B.  N.  Walker  became  the  happy 
godfather  of  two  youngsters,  who  were  different  in 
disposition  as  Valentine  and  Orson.  One,  which 
measured  18  inches  high,  and  died  in  1861,  was 


Mr.,  Mrs.,  and  Master  Gorilla.  245 

so  savage  and  morose,  that  it  was  always  kept 
chained ;  the  other,  “  Seraphino,”  was  of  angelic 
nature,  a  general  favourite  at  the  Factory  :  it  sur¬ 
vives,  in  a  photograph  taken  by  the  French  Com¬ 
mandant  of  the  Comptoir,  as  it  sat  after  break¬ 
fast  on  godpapa’s  lap.  At  first  it  was  confined, 
but  it  soon  became  so  tame  and  playful,  that  the 
cage  was  required  only  at  night.  It  never  bit, 
unless  when  teased,  and  its  only  fault  was  not 
being  able  to  avoid  the  temptation  of  eating  what 
disagreed  with  it — in  fact,  it  was  sub-human  in 
some  points,  and  very  human  in  others.  All  died 
in  direct  consequence  of  dysentery,  which  even  a 
milk  diet  could  not  prevent.  Perhaps  the  best 
way  to  send  home  so  delicate  an  animal  would  be 
to  keep  it  for  a  time  in  its  native  forest ;  to  accus¬ 
tom  it  to  boiled  plantains,  rice,  and  messes  of 
grain  ;  and  to  ship  it  during  the  fine  season,  having 
previously  fitted  up  a  cabin  near  the  engine-room, 
where  the  mercury  should  never  fall  below  70° 
(Fahr.).  In  order  to  escape  nostalgia  and  melan¬ 
choly,  which  are  sure  to  be  fatal,  the  emigrant 
should  be  valeted  by  a  faithful  and  attached 
native. 

The  habitat  of  the  gorilla  has  been  unduly 
limited  to  the  left  banks  of  the  Gaboon  and 
Fernao  Vaz  rivers,  and  to  the  lands  lying  be¬ 
tween  north  latitude  20,  and  south  latitude  20, — in 
fact,  to  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  equator. 


246  Mr .,  Mrs.,  and  Master  Gorilla. 


The  late  Count  Lavradio  informed  me  that  he 
had  heard  of  it  on  the  banks  of  the  lower  Con^o 
River  (south  latitude  90),  and  the  “  Soko,”  which 
Dr.  Livingstone  identifies  with  the  Gorilla,  ex¬ 
tends  to  the  Lualaba  or  Upper  Congo,  in  the 
regions  immediately  west  of  the  Tanganyika  Lake. 
His  friends  have  suggested  that  the  “Soko” 
might  have  been  a  chimpanzee,  but  the  old  travel¬ 
ler  was,  methinks,  far  above  making  the  mistake. 
The  Y orubans  at  once  recognize  the  picture ;  they 
call  the  anthropoid  “Naki;”  and  they  declare 
that,  when  it  seizes  a  man,  it  tears  the  fingers 
asunder.  So  M.  du  Chaillu  (chapter  vi.)  men¬ 
tions,  in  the  Mpongwe  report,  that  the  Njina 
tears  off  the  toe-nails  and  the  finger-nails  of  his 
human  captives.  We  should  not  believe  so  scan¬ 
dalous  an  assertion  without  detailed  proof ;  it  is 
hardly  fair  to  make  the  innocent  biped  as  need¬ 
lessly  cruel  as  man.  It  is  well  known  to  the 
natives  of  the  Old  Calabar  River  by  the  name  of 
“  Omon.”  In  i860,  the  brothers  Jules  and  Am- 
broise  Poncet  travelled  with  Dr.  Peney  to  Ab 
Kuka,  the  last  of  their  stations  near  the  head  of 
the  Luta  Nzige  (Albert  Nyanza)  Lake,  and  Dr. 
Peney  “  brought  back  the  hand  of  the  first  gorilla 
which  had  been  heard  of”  (“  Ocean  Highways,” 
p.  482 — February,  1874).  The  German  Expedi¬ 
tion  (1873)  reports  Chicambo  to  be  a  gorilla 
country ;  that  the  anthropoid  is  found  one  day’s 


Mr.,  Mrs.,  and  Master  Gorilla.  247 

journey  from  the  Coast,  and  that  the  agent  of 
that  station  has  killed  five  with  his  own  hand. 
Mr.  Thompson  of  Sherbro  (“  Palm  Land,”  chap, 
xiii.)  says  of  the  chimpanzee  :  “Some  have  been 
seen  as  tall  as  a  man,  from  five  to  seven  feet  high, 
and  very  powerful.”  This  is  evidently  the  Nji'na, 
the  only  known  anthropoid  that  attains  tall  human 
stature  ;  and  from  the  rest  of  the  passage,1  it  is 
clear  that  he  has  confounded  the  chimpanzee  with 
the  Nchigo-mpolo. 

The  strip  of  gorilla-country  visited  by  me  was 
an  elevated  line  of  clayey  and  sandy  soil,  cut  by 
sweet -water  streams,  and  by  mangrove -lined 
swamps,  backed  inland  by  thin  forest.  Here  the 
comparative  absence  of  matted  undergrowth  makes 
the  landscape  sub-European,  at  least,  by  the  side 
of  the  foul  tropical  jungle  ;  it  is  exceptionally  rich 
in  the  wild  fruits  required  by  the  huge  anthropoid. 
The  clearings  also  supply  bananas,  pine-apple 
leaves,  and  sugar-cane,  and  there  is  an  abundance 
of  honey,  in  which,  like  the  Nchi'go,  the  gorilla 
delights.  The  villages  and  the  frequent  planta¬ 
tions  which  it  visits  to  plunder  limit  its  reproduc¬ 
tion  near  the  sea,  and  make  it  exceedingly  wary 
and  keen  of  eye,  if  not  of  smell.  Even  when 
roosting  by  night,  it  is  readily  frightened  by  a 
footstep ;  and  the  crash  caused  by  the  mighty 


1  See  chap.  ii. 


248  Mr.,  Mrs.,  and  Master  Gorilla. 

bound  from  branch  to  branch  makes  the  traveller 
think  that  a  tree  has  fallen. 

The  gorilla  breeds  about  December,  a  cool  and 
dry  month  :  according  to  my  bushmen,  the  period 
of  gestation  is  between  five  and  six  months.  The 
babe  begins  to  walk  some  ten  days  after  birth  ; 
“  chops  milk”  for  three  months  and,  at  the  end  of 
that  time  may  reach  eighteen  inches  in  height.  M. 
du  Chaillu  makes  his  child,  “Joe  Gorilla,”  2  feet 
6  inches  when  under  the  third  year :  assuming  the 
average  height  of  the  adult  male  at  5  feet  to 
5  feet  6  inches,  this  measurement  suggests  that, 
according  to  the  law  of  Flourens,  the  life  would 
exceed  thirty  years.  I  saw  two  fragmentary  skins, 
thoroughly  “  pepper  and  salt ;  ”  and  the  natives 
assured  me  that  the  gorilla  turns  silver-white  with 
age. 

It  is  still  a  disputed  point  whether  the  weight  is 
supported  by  the  knuckles  of  the  forehand,  like  the 
chimpanzee,  or  whether  the  palm  is  the  proper 
fulcrum.  M.  du  Chaillu  says  (“  First  Expedition,” 
chap,  xx.),  “  the  fingers  are  only  lightly  marked  on 
the  ground  ;  ”  yet  a  few  pages  afterwards  we  are 
told,  “  The  most  usual  mode  of  progression  of  the 
animal  is  on  all-fours  and  resting  on  the  knuckles.” 
In  the  “Second  Expedition”  (chap,  ii.)  we  read, 
“The  tracks  of  the  feet  never  showed  the  marks  of 
toes,  only  the  heels,  and  the  track  of  the  hands 

1 

showed  simply  the  impressions  of  the  knuckles.” 


Mr.,  Mrs.,  and  Master  Gorilla.  249 

The  attack  of  the  gorilla  is  that  of  the  apes  and 
the  monkeys  generally.  The  big-bellied  satyr 
advances  to  the  assault  as  it  travels,  shuffling  on 
all-fours  ;  “  rocking  ”  not  traversing  ;  bristling  the 
crest,  chattering,  mowing  and  displaying  the  fear¬ 
ful  teeth  and  tusks.  Like  all  the  Simiads,  this 
Troglodyte  sways  the  body  to  and  fro,  and  springs 
from  side  to  side  for  the  purpose  of  avoiding  the 
weapon.  At  times  Quasimodo  raises  himself 
slightly  upon  the  dwarfed  “  asthenogenic,”  and  al¬ 
most  deformed  hind  limbs,  which  look  those  of  a 
child  terminating  the  body  of  a  Dan  Lambert :  the 
same  action  may  be  seen  in  its  congeners  great 
and  small.  The  wild  huntsmen  almost  cried  with 
laughter  when  they  saw  the  sketches  in  the  “  Gorilla 
Book,”1  the  mighty  pugilist  standing  stiff  and  up¬ 
right  as  the  late  Mr.  Benjamin  Gaunt,  “  beating 
the  breast  with  huge  fists  till  it  sounded  like  an 
immense  bass  drum  ;  ”  and  preparing  to  deal  a 
buffet  worthy  of  Friar  Tuck.  They  asked  me  if 
I  thought  mortal  man  would  ever  attempt  to  face 
such  a  thing  as  that  ?  With  respect  to  drumming 
with  both  forehands  upon  the  chest,  some  asserted 
that  such  is  the  brute’s  practice  when  calling  Mrs. 
Gorilla,  or  during  the  Excitement  of  a  scuffle ;  but  the 
accounts  of  the  bushmen  differ  greatly  on  this  point. 
In  a  hand-to-hand  struggle  it  puts  forth  one  of  the 


1  First  Edition,  Illustration  VI.  (p.  71),  and  XLIII.  (p.  297). 


250  Mr.,  Mrs.,  a7id  Master  Gorilla. 

giant  feet,  sometimes  the  hinder,  as  “Joe  Gorilla” 
was  wont  to  do  ;  and,  having  once  got  a  hold  with 
its  prehensile  toes,  it  bites  and  worries  like  any 
other  ape,  baboon,  or  monkey.  From  this  grapple 
doubtless  arose  the  old  native  legend  about  the 
gorilla  drawing  travellers  up  trees  and  “  quietly 
choking  them.”  It  can  have  little  vitality,  as  it 
is  easily  killed  with  a  bit  of  stone  propelled  out  of 
a  trade  musket  by  the  vilest  gunpowder,  and  the 
timid  bushmen,  when  failing  to  shoot  it  unawares,  do 
not  fear  to  attack  it  openly.  As  a  rule,  the  larger 
the  Simiad,  the  less  sprightly  it  becomes  ;  and  those 
most  approaching  man  are  usually  the  tamest 
and  the  most  melancholy — perhaps,  their  spirits 
are  permanently  affected  by  their  narrow  escape. 
The  elderly  male  (for  anthropoids,  like  anthropoi, 
wax  fierce  and  surly  with  increasing  years)  will  fight, 
but  only  from  fear,  when  suddenly  startled,  or 
with  rage  when  slightly  wounded.  Moreover, 
there  must  be  rogue-gorillas,  like  rogue-elephants, 
lions,  hippopotami,  rhinoceros,  and  even  stags,  vieux 
grognards,  who,  expelled  house  and  home,  and 
debarred  by  the  promising  young  scions  from  the 
softening  influence  of  feminine  society,  become,  in 
their  enforced  widowerhood',  the  crustiest  of  old 
bachelors.  At  certain  seasons  they  may  charge  in 
defence  of  the  wife  and  family,  but  the  practice 
is  exceptional.  Mr.  Wilson  saw  a  man  who  had 
lost  the  calf  of  his  leg  in  an  encounter,  and  one 


Mr.,  Mrs.,  and  Master  Gorilla .  251 

Etia,  a  huntsman  whose  left  hand  had  been 
severely  crippled,  informed  Mr.  W.  Winwood 
Reade,  that  “  the  gorilla  seized  his  wrist  with  his 
hind  foot,  and  dragged  his  hand  into  his  mouth, 
as  he  would  have  done  a  bunch  of  plantains.”  No 
one,  however,  could  give  me  an  authentic  instance 
of  manslaughter  by  our  big  brother. 

The  modifications  with  which  we  must  read  the 
picturesque  pages  of  the  “  Gorilla  Book  ”  are  chiefly 
the  following.  The  Gorilla  is  a  poor  devil  ape,  not  a 
“  hellish  dream-creature,  half  man,  half  beast.”  He 
is  not  king  of  the  African  forest ;  he  fears  the 
Njego  or  leopard  and,  as  lions  will  not  live  in 
these  wet,  wooded,  and  gameless  lands,  he  can 
hardly  have  expelled  King  Leo.  He  does  not 
choose  the  “  darkest,  gloomiest  forests,”  but  prefers 
the  thin  woods,  where  he  finds  wild  fruits  for  him¬ 
self  and  family.  His  tremendous  roar  does  not 
shake  the  jungle  :  it  is  a  hollow  apish  cry,  a  loudish 
huhh  !  huhh  !  huhh  !  explosive  like  the  puff  of  a 
steam-engine,  which,  in  rage  becomes  a  sharp  and 
snappish  bark — any  hunter  can  imitate  it.  Doubt¬ 
less,  in  some  exceptional  cases,  when  an  aged 
mixture  of  Lablache  and  Dan  Lambert  delivers 
his  voce  di  petto ,  the  voice  may  be  heard  for  some 
distance  in  the  still  African  shades,  but  it  will 
hardly  compare  with  the  howling  monkeys  of  the 
Brazil,  which  make  the  forest  hideous.  The  eye  is 
not  a  “light  grey”  but  the  brown  common  to  all  the 


252  Mr,,  Mrs.,  and  Master  Gorilla. 

tribe.  The  Gorilla  cannot  stand  straight  upon  his 
rear  quarter  when  attacking  or  otherwise  engaged 
without  holding  on  to  a  trunk  :  he  does  not  “  run  on 
his  hind  legs  ;  ”  he  is  essentially  a  tree  ape,  as  every 
stuffed  specimen  will  prove.  He  never  gives  a 
tremendous  blow  with  his  immense  open  paw  ; 
doubtless,  a  native  legend  found  in  Battel  and 
Bowdich  ;  nor  does  he  attack  with  the  arms.  How¬ 
ever  old  and  male  he  may  be,  he  runs  away  with 
peculiar  alacrity :  though  powerfully  weaponed 
with  tigerish  teeth,  with  “bunches  of  muscular  fibre,” 
and  with  the  limbs  of  Goliah,  the  gorilla,  on  the 
seaboard  at  least,  is  essentially  a  coward  ;  nor  can 
we  be  surprised  at  his  want  of  pluck,  considering 
the  troubles  and  circumstances  under  which  he 
spends  his  harassed  days.  Finally,  whilst  a  hen 
will  defend  her  chicks,  Mrs.  Gorilla  will  fly,  leaving 
son  or  daughter  in  the  hunter’s  hands. 


CHAPTER  XII. 

CORISCO — “  home”  TO  FERNANDO  PO. 

N  April  22  nd,  after  some  five  weeks 
in  the  Gaboon  River,  I  found  myself 
once  more  in  her  Majesty’s  steam-ship 
“  Griffon,”  which  had  returned  from  the 
south  coast,  bound  for  Corisco  (Gorilla  Island  ?) 
and  Fernando  Po.  It  was  “  going- away  day,”  when 
proverbially  the  world  looks  prettier  than  usual, 
and  we  enjoyed  the  suggestive  view  of  the  beaded 
line  which,  seen  from  the  sea,  represents  the 
Sierra  del  Crystal.  The  distance  from  Le  Plateau 
to  the  Isle  of  Lightning  was  only  thirty-five  miles, 
from  the  nearest  continent  ten,  and  before  the 
evening  tornado  broke  from  the  south-east,  here 
the  normal  direction,  we  were  lying  in  the  roads 
about  two  miles  from  the  landing-place.  The 
anchorage  is  known  by  bringing  Mbanya  (Little 
Corisco),  the  smaller  and  southern  outlier  in  a  line 
between  Laval  Islet  and  the  main  island. 

The  frequent  coruscations  gave  a  name  to 


254 


C oris  co. 


Corisco,  which  the  natives  know  as  Mange  :  it 
was  called,  says  Barbot,  “  ‘  I  Ilia  do  Corisco,’  from 
the  Portuguese,  because  of  the  violent  horrid 
lightnings,  and  claps  of  thunder,  the  first  dis¬ 
coverers  there  saw  and  heard  there  at  the  time  of 
their  discovery.”  There  is  still  something  to  be 
done  in  investigating  the  cause  of  these  electrical 
discharges.  Why  should  lofty  Fernando  Po  and 
low-lying  Corisco  suffer  so  much,  when  Zanzibar 
Island,  similarly  situated,  suffers  so  rarely  ?  Again, 
why  is  Damascus  generally  free  from  thunder¬ 
storms  when  Brazilian  Sao  Paul,  whose  site  is  of 
the  same  altitude  and  otherwise  so  like,  can  hardly 
keep  the  lightning  out  of  doors  ?  The  immu¬ 
nity  of  Zanzibar  Island  can  hardly  be  explained 
by  the  popular  theory  ;  neither  it  nor  Fernando 
Po,  which  suffers  greatly  from  thunder-storms,  lies 
near  the  embouchure  of  a  great  river,  where  salt 
and  fresh  water  may  disturb  electrical  equilibrium. 
I  shall  say  more  upon  this  point  when  in  the 
Congo  Regions  (chap.  xii.). 

The  position  of  Great  Corisco  (north  latitude 
o°  55'  o")  is  at  the  mouth  of  a  well- wooded  bay, 
which  Barbot  (iv.  9)  calls  Bay  of  Angra,  i.e. 
Bight  of  Bight.  He  terms  the  southern  or 
Munda  stream  Rio  de  Angrta,  or  Angex,  whilst 
the  equally  important  Muni  (Danger)  becomes 
only  “a  little  river”  without  name.  The  modern 
charts  prefer  Corisco  Bay.  It  measures  some 


Corisco, 


255 


forty  miles  from  north  to  south  by  half  that 
depth,  and  its  position  causes  the  rains,  which  are 
synchronous  with  those  of  the  Gaboon,  to  be 
much  more  copious  and  continuous.  They  last 
nine  months  out  of  twelve,  and  in  March,  1862, 
the  fall  was  25  inches,  the  heaviest  remembered  : 


TADI'  NZAZHI,  THE  “  LIGHTNING  ROCK.” 


it  had  filled  the  little  island  valleys,  and  made 
the  paths  lines  of  canal. 

Next  morning  we  were  visited  by  the  Rev.  Mr. 
Mackey,  the  senior  of  the  eight  white  men  who 
inhabit  this  piece  of  land — a  proper  site  for  Robin¬ 
son  Crusoe — where,  as  the  Yankee  said  of  Great 
Britain,  you  can  hardly  stretch  yourself  without 
fear  of  falling  overboard.  He  kindly  undertook 
to  be  our  guide  over  the  interior,  and  we  landed 


256 


Corisco. 


on  the  hard  sand  of  the  open  western  beach  :  here 
at  times  a  tremendous  surf  must  roll  in.  We 
struck  into  the  bush,  and  bent  towards  the  south¬ 
west  of  the  islet,  where  stands  the  monarch  of 
cliffs,  80  feet  high.  The  maximum  length  is 
three  miles  by  about  the  same  breadth,  and  the 
circumference,  including  the  indentations,  may  be 
fifteen.  The  surface  is  rolling  composed  of 
humus  and  clay,  corallines  and  shelly  conglo¬ 
merates  based  on  tertiary  limestone  and  perhaps 
sandstone  ;  dwarf  clearings  alternate  with  tracts  of 
bush  grass,  and  with  a  bushy  second  growth,  lack¬ 
ing  large  trees.  The  only  important  wild  pro¬ 
ductions  pointed  out  to  us  were  cardamoms,  the 
oil  palm  ( Elais  Guineensis ),  and  an  unknown  spe¬ 
cies  of  butter-nut.  The  centre  of  the  island  was 
a  mass  of  perennial  pools,  fed,  they  say,  by  springs 
as  well  as  rains,  one  puddle,  adorned  with  water 
lilies  and  full  of  dwarf  leeches  which  relish  man’s 
life,  extended  about  a  hundred  yards  long.  In 
fact,  the  general  semblance  of  Corisco  was  that 
of  a  filled  up  “  atoll,”  a  circular  reef  still  growing 
to  a  habitable  land.  Here  only  could  I  find  on 
the  west  coast  of  Africa  a  trace  of  the  features 
which  distinguished  the  Gorilla  island  of  2,300 
years  ago. 

At  South  Bay  we  came  upon  a  grassy  clearing 
larger  than  usual,  near  a  bright  stream ;  its  pottery 
and  charred  wood  showed  the  site  of  the  Spanish 


Corisco. 


257 


barracoon  destroyed  by  the  British  in  1840. 
During  the  last  seven  years  the  “  patriarchal  in¬ 
stitution”  has  become  extinct,  and  the  old  slavers 
who  have  at  times  touched  at  the  island,  have  left 
it  empty-handed.  Corisco  had  long  been  celebrated 
for  cam-wood,  a  hard  and  ponderous  growth, 
yielding  a  better  red  than  Brazil  or  Braziletto,  alias 
Brazilete  ( Brasilettia ,  De  Cand.)  one  of  the  Eu- 
ccEsalpiniece ,  a  congener  of  C.  Echinata ,  which  pro¬ 
duces  the  Brazil-wood  or  Pernambuco-wood  of 
commerce.  In  1679,  the  Hollander  Governor- 
General  of  Minas  sent  some  forty  whites  to  culti¬ 
vate  “  Indian  wheat  and  other  sort  of  corn  and 
plants  of  Guinea.”  The  design  was  to  supply  the 
Dutch  West  Indian  Company’s  ships  with  grain 
and  vegetables,  especially  bananas,  which  grow  ad¬ 
mirably  ;  I  heard  that  there  are  fifteen  varieties 
upon  this  dot  of  dry  land.  Thus  the  crews  would 
not  waste  time  and  money  at  Cape  Lopez  and  the 
Portuguese  islands.  The  Dutch  colonists  began  by 
setting  up  a  factory  in  a  turf  redoubt,  armed  with 
iron  guns,  “  the  better  to  secure  themselves  from 
any  surprise  or  assault  of  the  few  natives,  who  are 
a  sort  of  wild  and  mischievous  blacks.”  The 
plantation  was  successful,  but  the  bad  climate  and 
noxious  gases  from  the  newly  turned  ground,  com¬ 
bined  with  over-exertion,  soon  killed  some  seven¬ 
teen  out  of  the  forty ;  and  the  remainder,  who  also 
suffered  from  malignant  distempers,  razed  their 


1. 


s 


258 


Corisco. 


buildings  and  returned  to  the  Gold  Coast.  When 
the  Crown  of  Spain  once  more  took  possession 
of  Fernando  Po,  it  appointed  a  Governor  for 
Corisco,  but  no  establishment  was  maintained 
there.  To  its  credit  be  it  said,  there  was  not 
much  interference  with  the  Protestant  mission ; 
public  preaching  was  forbidden  pro  forma  in 
i860,  but  no  notice  was  taken  of  “passive  re¬ 
sistance.” 

The  native  villages,  exactly  resembling  those  of 
the  Gaboon,  are  all  built  near  the  strip  of  fine 
white  sand  which  forms  the  shore,  and  upon  the 
sweet  water  channels  which  cut  deep  into  the  lime¬ 
stones.  They  are  infested  with  rats,  against  whose 
depredations  the  mango  trees  must  be  protected 
with  tin  ruffs  ;  yet  there  are  six  kinds  of  reptilia 
upon  the  island,  including  the  common  black 
snake  and  cobras,  from  six  to  seven  feet  long  : 
these  animals,  aided  by  the  dogs,  which  also 
persecute  the  iguanas,  have  prevented  rabbits 
breeding.  In  Barbot’s  time  (1700)  there  were 
only  thirty  or  forty  inhabitants,  who  held  the 
north-eastern  point  about  a  league  from  the  wood¬ 
ing  and  watering  places.  “  That  handful  of  blacks 
has  much  ado  to  live  healthy,  the  air  being  very 
intemperate  and  unwholesome ;  they  are  governed 
by  a  chief,  who  is  lord  of  the  island,  and  they  all 
live  very  poorly,  but  have  plenty  enough  of  cu¬ 
cumbers,  which  grow  there  in  perfection,  and  many 


Corisco. 


259 


sorts  of  fowl.”  In  1856  the  Rev.  Mr.  Wilson 
reckons  them  at  less  than  2,000,  and  in  1862  I 
was  told  that  there  were  about  1,100,  of  whom 
600  were  Bengas.  In  look,  dress,  and  ornaments 
they  resemble  the  Mpongwe,  but  some  of  them 
have  adopted  the  Kru  stripe,  holding  a  blue  nose 
to  be  a  sign  of  freedom.  They  consider  themselves 
superior  to  the  “  Pongos,”  and  they  have  ex¬ 
changed  their  former  fighting  reputation  for  that 
of  peaceful  traders  to  the  mainland  and  to  the 
rivers  Muni  and  Mundah.  They  live  well,  eating 
flesh  or  fish  once  a  day,  not  on  Sundays  only,  the 
ambition  of  Henri  Quatre :  at  times  they  trap 
fine  green  turtle  in  seines,  but  they  do  not  turn 
these  “  delicate  monsters.” 

Mr.  Wilson  numbered  the  whole  Benga  tribe  at 
8,000,  but  Mr.  Mackey  reduced  the  figure  to  half. 
Besides  Corisco  they  inhabit  the  two  capes  at  the 
north  and  south  of  the  bay.  The  language  is 
used  by  other  tribes  holding  the  coast  northward 
for  a  hundred  miles  or  more,  and  probably  by 
the  inner  people  extending  in  a  northerly  direc¬ 
tion  from  Corisco  Bay  :  the  same,  with  certain 
modifications,  is  also  spoken  at  Sao  Bento, 
Batanga,  and  perhaps  as  far  north  as  the  Cama- 
rones  River.  On  the  other  hand,  the  tribes  occu¬ 
pying  the  eastern  margin  of  Corisco  Bay,  such  as 
the  Mbiko,  Dibwe,  and  Belengi,  cannot  under¬ 
stand  one  another,  and  the  tongues  of  the 


26o 


Corisco. 


southward  regions  differ  even  more  from  the 
Benga.  Yet  all  evidently  belong  to  the  great 
South  African  family. 

Mr.  Mackey,  who  explored  Corisco  Island  in 
1849,  assures  us  that  scarcely  any  of  the  older 
inhabitants  were  born  there  ;  they  came  from  the 
continent  north  or  north-east  of  the  bay,  gra¬ 
dually  forcing  their  way  down.  The  character¬ 
istic  difference  of  the  Benga,  the  Bakele,  and  the 
Mpongwe  dialects  is  as  follows  :  “  The  Mpongwes 
have  a  great  partiality  for  the  use  of  the  passive 
voice,  and  avoid  the  active  when  the  passive  can 
be  used.  The  Bakele  verb  delights  in  the  active 
voice,  and  will  avoid  the  passive  even  by  a  con¬ 
siderable  circumlocution.  The  Benga  takes  an 
intermediate  position  in  this  respect,  and  uses  the 
active  and  passive  very  much  as  we  do  in 
English.” 

The  Corisco  branch  of  the  Presbyterian  Board 
of  Foreign  Missions  was  established  by  the  Rev. 
James  S.  Mackey  in  1850.  It  made  as  much 
progress  as  could  be  expected,  and  in  1862  it 
numbered  no  scholars  and  65  communicants; 
the  total  of  those  baptized  was  80,  and  15  had 
been  suspended.  The  members  applied  them¬ 
selves,  as  the  list  of  their  publications  shows, 
with  peculiar  ardour  to  the  language,  and  they 
did  not  neglect  natural  history  and  short  explora¬ 
tions  of  the  adjoining  interior.  They  had  sent 


“Home”  to  Fernando  Po. 


261 


home  specimens  of  the  six  reptilia ,  the  six  snails 
and  land  shells,  the  seventy-five  sea  shells,  and 
the  no  fishes,  all  known  by  name,  which  they 
collected  upon  the  island  and  in  the  bay.  It  is 
to  be  presumed  that  careful  dredging  will  bring  to 
light  many  more  :  the  pools  are  said  to  produce 
a  small  black  fish,  local  as  the  Proteus  anguineus 
of  the  Styrian  caves,  to  mention  no  other. 

I  was  curious  to  hear  from  Mr.  Mackey  some 
details  about  the  Muni  River,  where  he  travelled 
in  company  with  M.  du  Chaillu.  It  still  keeps 
the  troublous  reputation  for  petty  wars  which 
made  the  old  traders  dignify  it  with  the  name  of 
“  Danger.”  The  nearest  Falls  are  about  thirty 
miles  from  Olobe  Island,  and  the  most  distant 
may  be  sixty-five.  Of  course  we  had  a  laugh 
over  the  famous  Omamba  or  Anaconda,  whose 
breath  can  be  felt  against  the  face  before  it  is 
seen. 

Late  in  April  24th  I  returned  the  books  kindly 
lent  to  me  from  the  mission  library,  shook  hands 
with  my  kind  and  hospitable  entertainers  at  the 
mission  house,  mentally  wishing  them  speedy 
deliverance  from  Corisco,  and  embarked  on  board 
the  “Griffon.”  We  quickly  covered  the  “great 
water  desert”  of  160  miles  between  the  Gorilla 
Island  and  Fernando  Po,  and  at  noon  on  the  next 
day  I  found  myself  once  more  “  at  home.” 


PRINTED  BY  WHITTINGHAM  AND  WILKINS, 
TOOKS  COURT,  CHANCERY  LANE. 


Crown  Buildings,  188,  Fleet  Street , 

London ,  February ,  1875. 

9  List  of  IBooks 


PUBLISHING  BY 

SAMPSON  LOW,  MARSTON,  LOW,  &  SEARLE, 


ALPHABETICAL  LIST. 

BBOTT  (J.  S.  C.)  History  of  Frederick  the  Great, 

with  numerous  Illustrations.  8vo.  il.  is. 

About  in  the  World,  by  the  author  of  “  The 

Gentle  Life.”  Crown  8vo.  bevelled  cloth,  4th  edition.  6s. 


Adamson  (Rev.  T.  H.)  The  Gospel  according  to  St. 

Matthew,  expounded.  8vo.  12*. 

Adventures  of  a  Young  Naturalist.  By  Lucien  Biart, 

with  117  beautiful  Illustrations  on  Wood.  Edited  and  adapted  by 
Parker  Gillmore.  Post  8vo.  cloth  extra,  gilt  edges,  new  edition,  7 s.  6d. 

Adventures  on  the  Great  Hunting  Grounds  of  the  World, 

translated  from  the  French  of  Victor  Meunier,  with  engravings,  2nd 
edition.  5.?. 

“  The  book  for  all  boys  in  whom  the  love  of  travel  and  adventure  is 
strong.  They  will  find  here  plenty  to  amuse  them  and  much  to  instruct 
them  besides.” — Times. 


Aikin-Kortright  (Fanny).  A  Little  Lower  than  the 

Angels.  Small  post  8vo.,  cloth  extra.  3 s.  6d. 

Alcott,  (Louisa  M.)  Aunt  Jo’s  Scrap-Bag.  Square  i6mo. 

3 s*  6d. 

- -  Cupid  and  Chow-Chow.  Small  post  8vo.  3.5-.  6d. 

- Little  Men  :  Life  at  Plumfield  with  Jo’s  Boys. 

By  the  author  of  “  Little  Women.”  Small  post  8vo.  cloth,  gilt  edges, 
3.?.  6d.  Cheap  edition,  cloth,  2s.  ;  fancy  boards,  w.  6d. 

-  Little  Women.  Complete  in  1  vol.  fcap.  3^.  6d. 

Cheap  edition,  2  vols.  cloth,  2 s. ;  boards,  is.  6d.  each. 

— -  Old  Fashioned  Girl,  best  edition,  small  post  8vo.  cloth 

extra,  gilt  edges,  3 s.  6d. ;  Low’s  Copyright  Series,  is.  6d.  ;  cloth,  2 s. 

A 


2 


Sampson  Low  and  Co.’s 


Alcott  (Louisa  M.)  Work.  A  Story  of  Experience.  New 

Edition.  In  One  volume,  small  post  8vo.,  cloth  extra.  6s.  Several  Il¬ 
lustrations. 

-  Shawl  Straps.  Small  post  8vo.  Cl.  extra,  gilt,  3j.  6d. 

Alexander  (Sir  James  E.)  Bush  Fighting.  Illustrated  by 
Remarkable  Actions  and  Incidents  of  the  Maori  War.  With  a  Map. 
Plans,  and  Woodcuts,  i  vol.  demy  8vo.  pp.  328,  cloth  extra,  i6j. 

Alexander  (W.  D.  S.)  The  Lonely  Guiding  Star.  A 

Legend  of  the  Pyrenean  Mountains  and  other  Poems.  Fcap.  8vo. 
cloth.  5$. 

Amphlett  (John).  Under  a  Tropical  Sky:  a  Holiday 
Trip  to  the  West  Indies.  Small  post  8vo.,  cloth  extra.  7s.  6d. 

- Warnton  Kings.  Crown  8vo.  cloth,  ioj.  6 d. 

Andersen  (Hans  Christian).  The  Story  of  My  Life.  8vo. 

1  or.  6d. 

- -  Fairy  Tales,  with  Illustrations  in  Colours  by  E.  V.  B. 

Royal  4to.  cloth.  1  /.  sj. 

Andrews  (Dr.)  Latin-English  Lexicon.  13th  edition. 

Royal  8vo.  pp.  1,670,  cloth  extra.  Price  i8j. 

“  The  best  Latin  Dictionary,  whether  for  the  scholar  or  advanced 
student.  ” — Spectator. 

“  Every  page  bears  the  impress  of  industry  and  care.  ”—A  thence  urn. 

Anecdotes  of  the  Queen  and  Royal  Family,  collected  and 
edited  by  J.  G.  Hodgins,  with  Illustrations.  New  edition,  revised  by 
John  Timbs.  55. 

Angell  (J.  K.)  A  Treatise  on  the  Law  of  Highways.  8vo. 

Second  Edition.  il.  5s. 

Anglo-Scottish  Year  Book,  The,  for  1874.  By  Robekt 

Kempt.  Fcap.  8vo.  is. 

Arctic  Regions  (The).  Illustrated.  See  Bradford. 

- German  Polar  Expedition.  See  Koldewey. 

- Explorations.  See  Markham. 

Art,  Pictorial  and  Industrial.  New  Series,  vols.  1  to  3, 

385.  each.  In  numbers,  is.  each. 

Ashton  (Frederick  T.)  The  Theory  and  Practice  of  the 
Art  of  Designing  Fancy  Cotton  and  Woollen  Cloths  from 
Sample.  With  fifty-two  Illustrations.  Folio.  2/.  10 s. 


List  of  Publications. 


3 


Assollant  (A.)  The  Fantastic  History  of  the  Celebrated 
Pierrot.  Written  by  the  Magician  Alcofribas,  and  translated  from 
the  Sogdien  by  Alfred  Assollant,  with  upwards  of  One  Hundred 
humorous  Illustrations  by  Yan’  Dargent.  Square  crown  8vo.,  cloth 
extra,  gilt  edges,  7 s.  6d. 

Atmosphere  (The).  See  Flammarion. 

Auerbach  (Berthold).  Waldfried.  Translated  from  the 
German.  3  vols.  crown  8vo.  3  is.  6d. 

Australian  Tales,  by  the  “  Old  Boomerang.”  Post8vo.  5-r. 


r^Wrt  ”  an  Autobiography.  By  Fenton.  3  vols.  8vo. 

3„. 

BACK-LOG  Studies.  See  Warner. 


Backward  Glances.  Edited  by  the  Author  of  “  Episodes  in 
an  Obscure  Life.”  Small  post  8vo.,  cloth  extra.  5s. 


Baldwin  (J.  D.)  Prehistoric  Nations.  i2mo.  4 s.  6d. 

-  Ancient  America,  in  notes  of  American  Archaeology 

Crown  8vo.  10s.  6d. 

Bancroft’s  History  of  America.  Library  edition,  vols.  1  to  10, 

8vo.  61. 

Barnes’s  (Rev.  A.)  Lectures  on  the  Evidences  of  Christi¬ 
anity  in  the  19th  Century.  12010.  7 s.  6d. 

Barnum  (P.  T.)  Struggles  and  Triumphs.  Crown  8vo. 

Fancy  boards.  2 s.  6d. 

Barrington  (Hon.  and  Rev.  L.  J.)  From  Ur  to  Macpelah  ; 

the  Story  of  Abraham.  Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  55. 

Barton  (J.  A.  G.)  Shunkur.  A  tale  of  the  Indian  Mutiny. 

Crown  8 vo.,  cloth.  5 s. 


THE  BAYARD  SERIES.  Comprising  Plea¬ 
sure  Books  of  Literature  produced  in  the  Choicest 
Style  as  Companionable  Volumes  at  Home  and 
Abroad. 

Price  2s.  6d.  each  Volume ,  complete  in  itself,  printed  at  the  Chiswick  Press, 
bound  by  Burn,  flexible  cloth  extra,  gilt  leaves ,  with  silk  Headbands 
and  Registers. 

The  Story  of  the  Chevalier  Bayard.  By  M.  De  Berville. 

De  Joinville’s  St.  Louis,  King  of  France. 


4 


Sampson  Low  and  Co.'s 


The  Essays  of  Abraham  Cowley,  including  all  his  Prose 
Works. 

Abdallah  ;  or,  the  Four  Leaves.  By  Edouard  Laboullaye 
Table-Talk  and  Opinions  of  Napoleon  Buonaparte. 
Vathek:  An  Oriental  Romance.  By  William  Beckford 

The  King  and  the  Commons  :  a  Selection  of  Cavalier  and 
Puritan  Song.  Edited  by  Prof.  Morley. 

Words  of  Wellington  :  Maxims  and  Opinions  of  the  Great 

Duke. 

Dr.  Johnson’s  Rasselas,  Prince  of  Abyssinia.  With  Notes- 
Hazlitt’s  Round  Table.  With  Biographical  Introduction. 

The  Religio  Medici,  Hydriotaphia,  and  the  Letter  to  a 
Friend.  By  Sir  Thomas  Browne,  Knt. 

Ballad  Poetry  of  the  Affections.  By  Robert  Buchanan. 

Coleridge’s  Christabel,  and  other  Imaginative  Poems.  With 
Preface  by  Algernon  C.  Swinburne. 

Lord  Chesterfield’s  Letters,  Sentences  and  Maxims. 
With  Introduction  by  the  Editor,  and  Essay  on  Chesterfield  by  M.  De 
Ste.-Beuve,  of  the  French  Academy. 

Essays  in  Mosaic.  By  Thos.  Ballantyne. 

My  Uncle  Toby;  his  Story  and  his  Friends.  Edited 
by  P.  Fitzgerald. 

Reflections  ;  or,  Moral  Sentences  and  Maxims  of  the  Duke 

de  la  Rochefoucauld. 

Socrates,  Memoirs  for  English  Readers  from  Xenophon’s 
Memorabilia.  By  Edw.  Levien. 

Prince  Albert’s  Golden  Precepts. 

“  We  can  hardly  imagine  better  books  for  boys  to  read  or  for  men  to 
ponder  over.” — Times. 

A  suitable  Case  containing  12  volumes,  price  315.  6d.  ;  or  the  Case  separate , 
price  3-f.  6d. 


Beecher  (Henry  Ward,  D.  D.)  Life  Thoughts.  12mo.2s.6d. 

- Sermons  Selected.  i2mo.  8j-.  6d. 

- Norwood.  Ci'own  8vo.  6s. 

- (Dr.  Lyman)  Life  and  Correspondence  of.  2  vols. 

post  8vo.  1  /.  is. 

Bees  and  Beekeeping.  By  the  Times’  Beemaster.  Illustrated. 
Crown  8vo.  New  Edition,  with  additions.  2s.  6d. 


List  of  Publications. 


5 


Bell  (Rev.  C.  D.)  Faith  in  Earnest.  i8mo.  is.  6d. 

- Blanche  Nevile.  Fcap.  8vo.  6s. 

Bellows  (A.  J.)  The  Philosophy  of  Eating.  Post  8vo. 

7s.  6d. 

- How  not  to  be  Sick,  a  Sequel  to  Philosophy  of 

•  Eating.  Post  8vo.  js.  6d. 

Better  than  Gold.  By  Mrs.  Arnold,  Author  of  “  His  by 
Right,”  &c.  In  3  volumes,  crown  8vo.,  3 is.  6d. 

Benedict  (F.  L.)  Miss  Dorothy’s  Charge.  3  vols.  31  s.  6d. 

Bickersteth’s  Hymnal  Companion  to  Book  of  Common 

Prayer. 

The  following  Editions  are  now  ready : — 

s.  d 

No.  1.  A  Small-type  Edition,  medium  32106.  cloth  limp  o  6 
No.  1,  B  ditto  roan  limp,  red  edges  ..  10 

No.  1.  C  ditto  morocco  limp,  gilt  edges  . .  2  o 


No.  2.  Second-size  type,  super-royal  32mo.  cloth  limp  ..  10 

No.  2.  A  ditto  roan  limp,  red  edges  ..20 

No.  2.  B  ditto  morocco  limp,  gilt  edges  . .  3  o 


No.  3.  Large-type  Edition,  crown  8vo.  cloth,  red  edges  ..  2  6 
No.  3.  A  ditto  roan  limp,  red  edges  ..36 

No.  3.  B  ditto  morocco  limp,  gilt  edges  . .  56 

No.  4.  Large-type  Edition,  crown  8vo.  with  Introduction 


and  Notes,  cloth,  red  edges  ..  ..  ..36 

No.  4.  A  ditto  roan  limp,  red  edges  . .  46 

No.  4.  B  ditto  morocco,  gilt  edges  ..  6  6 


No.  5.  Crown  8vo.  with  accompanying  Tunes  to  every 

Hymn,  New  Edition  . . 30 

No.  5.  A  ditto  with  Chants  . . 4  o 

No.  5.  B  The  Chants  separately  . 16 


No.  6. ,  Penny  Edition. 

Fcap.  4to.  Organists’  edition.  Cloth,  7s.  6d. 

The  Church  Mission  Hymn  Book  has  been  recently  issued  : 
it  contains  120  Hymns  for  Special  Missions  and  Schoolroom  Services, 
selected,  with  a  few  additions,  from  the  Hymnal  Companion.  Price  8s.  4 d. 
per  100,  or  1  \d.  each. 

*V*  A  liberal  allowance  is  made  to  Clergymen  introducing 
the  Hymnal . 

An  8  pp.  prospectus  sent  post  free  on  application. 

The  Book  of  Common  Prayer,  bound  with  The  Hymnal  Com¬ 
panion.  32mo.  cloth,  9 d.  And  in  various  superior  bindings. 

The  Hymnal  Companion  is  also  sold,  strongly  bound  with  a 

Sunday  School  Liturgy,  in  two  sizes,  price  4 d.  and  8 d. 


6 


Sampson  Low  and  Co.’s 


Bickersteth  (Rev.  E.  H.,  M.A.)  The  Reef,  and  other  Para¬ 
bles.  One  Volume  square  8vo.,  with  numerous  very  beautiful  En¬ 
gravings,  uniform  in  character  with  the  Illustrated  Edition  of  Heber’s 
Hymns,  &c.,  price  js.  6d. 

- -  The  Master’s  Home-Call;  Or,  Brief  Memorials 

of  Alice  Frances  Bickersteth.  3rd  Edition.  32mo.  cloth  gilt.  is. 

“They  recall  in  a  touching  manner  a  character  of  which  the  religious 
beauty  has  a  warmth  and  grace  almost  too  tender  to  be  definite.” — The 
Guardian. 

- The  Shadow  of  the  Rock.  A  Selection  of  Reli¬ 

gious  Poetry.  i8mo.  Cloth  extra.  2s.  6 d. 

- The  Shadowed  Home  and  the  Light  Beyond. 

By  the  Rev.  Edward  Henry  Bickersteth.  Second  Edition.  Crown 
8vo,  cloth  extra,  6s. 

Bida,  The  Authorized  Version  of  the  Four  Gospels. 

With  the  whole  of  the  magnificent  etchings  on  steel,  after  the  drawings 
by  M.  Bida. 

The  Gospels  of  St.  Matthew  and  St.  John,  appropriately  bound  in 
cloth  extra,  price  £2  3 s.  each,  are  now  ready.  (St.  Mark  in  preparation.) 

Bishop  (J.  L.)  History  of  American  Manufacture.  3  vols. 

8vo.  2I.  5 s. 

- (J.  P.)  First  Book  of  the  Law.  8vo.  il.  is. 

Bits  of  Talk  about  Home  Matters.  By  H.  H.  Fcap.  8vo. 

cloth  gilt  edges.  3 s. 

Black  (Wm.)  Uniform  Editions  : 

- Kilmeny  :  a  Novel.  Small  Post  8vo.  cloth.  6s. 

- In  Silk  Attire.  3rd  and  cheaper  edition,  small  post 

8vo.  6s. 

“A  work  which  deserves  a  hearty  welcome  for  its  skill  and  power  in 
delineation  of  character.” — Saturday  Review. 

- A  Daughter  of  Heth.  nth  and  cheaper  edition, 

crown  8vo.,  cloth  extra.  6s.  With  Frontispiece  by  F.  Walker,  A.R.A. 

“  If  humour,  sweetness,  and  pathos,  and  a  story  told  with  simplicity 
and  vigour,  ought  to  insure  success,  *  A  Daughter  of  Heth  ’  is  of  the 
kind  to  deserve  it.” — Saturday  Review. 

Black  (C.  B.)  New  Continental  Route  Guides. 

- Guide  to  the  North  of  France,  including  Nor¬ 
mandy,  Brittany,  Touraine,  Picardy,  Champagne,  Burgundy, 
Lorraine,  Alsace,  and  the  Valley  of  the  Loire  ;  Belgium  and  Holland  ; 
the  Valley  of  the  Rhine  to  Switzerland ;  and  the  South-West  of 
Germany,  to  Italy  by  the  Brenner  Pass.  Illustrated  with  numerous 
Maps  and  Plans.  Crown  8vo.,  cloth  limp.  9s.  6d. 


List  of  Publications. 


7 


Black  (C.  B.)  New  Continental  Route  Guides. 

- Guide  to  Normandy  and  Brittany,  their  Celtic 

Monuments,  Ancient  Churches,  and  Pleasant  Watering-Places.  Illus¬ 
trated  with  Maps  and  Plans  Crown  8vo.,  cloth  limp,  zs.  6d. 

- Guide  to  Belgium  and  Holland,  the  North-East 

of  France,  including  Picardy,  Champagne,  Burgundy,  Lorraine,  and 
Alsace  ;  the  Valley  of  the  Rhine,  to  Switzerland  ;  and  the  South-West 
of  Germany,  to  Italy,  by  the  Brenner  Pass,  with  Description  of  Vienna. 
Illustrated  with  Maps  and  Plans.  Crown  8vo.,  cloth  limp,  5 s. 

- Paris,  and  Excursions  from  Paris.  Illustrated 

with  numerous  Maps,  Plans,  and  Views.  Small  post  8vo.,  cloth  limp, 
price  3s. 

- Guide  to  the  South  of  France  and  to  the  North 

of  Italy  :  including  the  Pyrenees  and  their  Watering-Places  ;  the  Health 
Resorts  on  the  Mediterranean  from  Perpignan  to  Genoa  ;  and  the  towns 
of  Turin,  Milan,  and  Venice.  Illustrated  with  Maps  and  Plans.  Small 
post  8vo.,  cloth  limp,  5 s. 

- Switzerland  and  the  Italian  Lakes.  Small  post  8vo. 

price  3s.  6d. 

- Guide  to  France,  Corsica,  Belgium,  Holland,  the 

Rhine,  the  Moselle,  the  South-West  of  Germany,  and  the 
North  of  Italy.  With  numerous  Maps  and  Plans.  Complete  in  One 
Volume.  Limp  cloth,  price  15s. 

- Railway  and  Road  Map  of  Switzerland,  West 

Tyrol,  and  the  Italian  Lake  Country.  Boards,  price  is. 


Blackburn  (H.)  Art  in  the  Mountains  :  the  Story  of  the 

Passion  Play,  with  upwards  of  Fifty  Illustrations.  8vo.  xzs. 

- Artists  and  Arabs.  With  numerous  Illustrations.  8vo. 

7  s.  6d. 

- Harz  Mountains  :  a  Tour  in  the  Toy  Country. 

With  numerous  Illustrations.  12s. 

-  Normandy  Picturesque.  Numerous  Illustrations. 

8vo.  1 6s. 

- Travelling  in  Spain.  With  numerous  Illustrations. 

8vo.  i6j. 

- Travelling  in  Spain.  Guide  Book  Edition.  i2mo. 

zs,  6d. 

- The  Pyrenees.  Summer  Life  at  French  Watering- 

Places.  100  Illustrations  by  Gustave  Dore,  Royal  8vo.  i8j. 

Blackmore  (R.  D.)  Lorna  Doone.  New  edition.  Crown, 

8vo.  6s. 

“  The  reader  at  times  holds  his  breath,  so  graphically  yet  so  simply 
does  John  Ridd  tell  his  tale.” — Saturday  Review. 

- -  Alice  Lorraine.  3  vols.  it.  ns.  6d.  \In  the  press. 


8 


Samps 071  Low  aTid  Co.’s 


Blackmore  (R.  D.)  Cradock  Nowell.  2nd -and  cheaper  edi¬ 
tion.  6s. 

-  Clara  Vaughan.  Revised  edition.  6s. 

— — -  Georgies  of  Virgil.  Small  4to.  4 s.  6d. 

Blackwell  (E.)  Laws  of  Life.  New  edition.  Fcp.  3^.  6d. 
Boardman’s  Higher  Christian  Life.  Fcp.  is.  6d. 
Bonwick  (J.)  Last  of  the  Tasmanians.  8vo.  1 6s. 

- — — —  Daily  Life  of  the  Tasmanians.  8vo.  12 s.  6d. 

- -  Curious  Facts  of  Old  Colonial  Days.  i2mo.  cloth. 

5s* 

Book  of  Common  Prayer  with  the  Hymnal  Companion. 

32010.  cloth.  9 d.  And  in  various  bindings. 

Books  suitable  for  School  Prizes  and  Presents.  (Fuller 
description  of  each  book  will  be  found  in  the  alphabet.) 
Adventures  of  a  Young  Naturalist.  7 s.  6d. 

- -  on  Great  Hunting  Grounds.  5s. 

Allcott’s  Aunt  Jo’s  Scrap-bag.  3$.  6d. 

— - Cupid  and  Chow  Chow.  35.  6d. 

- Old  Fashioned  Girl.  3s.  6d. 

- Little  Women.  3^.  6d. 

- -  Little  Men.  3$.  6d. 

- -  Shawl  Straps.  3s.  6d. 

Anecdotes  of.the  Queen.  5$. 

Atmosphere  (The).  By  Flammarion.  30s. 

Backward  Glances.  5 s. 

Bayard  Series  (See  Bayard.) 

Bickersteth  (Rev.  E.  H.)  Shadow  of  the  Rock.  2s.  6d. 

Black  (Wm.)  Kilmeny.  6s. 

-  In  Silk  Attire.  65. 

■ -  A  Daughter  of  Heth.  6s. 

Blackmore  (R.  D.)  Cradock  Nowell. 

- Clara  Vaughan.  6s. 

- Lorna  Doone.  6s. 

Burritt’s  Ten  Minutes  Talk  on  all  sorts  of  Topics.  Sm. 

8  vo.  6s. 

Butler’s  Great  Lone  Land.  75.  6d. 

Changed  Cross  (The).  2s.  6d. 

Child’s  Play.  7 s.  6d. 

Christ  in  Song.  5$. 

Craik  (Mrs.)  Adventures  of  a  Brownie.  5s. 


List  of  Publications. 


9 


Books  for  School  Prizes  and  Presents,  continued — 

Craik  (Mrs.)  Little  Sunshine’s  Holiday.  4*. 

Craik  (Miss)  The  Cousin  from  India.  4$. 

-  Miss  Moore.  4s. 

Dana’s  Corals  and  Coral  Islands.  21s. 

- —  Two  Years  before  the  Mast.  6j. 

Davies’s  Pilgrimage  of  the  Tiber.  i8,y. 

De  Witt  (Mad.)  An  Only  Sister.  45. 

Erkmann-Chatrian’sThe  Forest  House.  3s.  6d. 

Faith  Gartney.  3s.  6 d.  cloth;  boards,  is.  6d. 

Favell  Children  (The).  45. 

Favourite  English  Poems.  300  Illustration.  2 is. 

Forbes  (J.  G.)  Africa  :  Geographical  Exploration  and  Chris¬ 
tian  Enterprise.  Crown  8vo.  cloth.  7 s.  6d. 

Franc’s  Emily’s  Choice.  5s. 

- —  John’s  Wife.  45. 

- -  Marian.  5 j. 

- - Silken  Cord.  55. 

- Vermont  Vale.  sr. 

— — s —  Minnie’s  Mission. 

Friswell  (Laura)  The  Gingerbread  Maiden.  35.  6d. 
Gayworthys  (The).  3 s.  6d. 

Gentle  Life,  (Queen  Edition).  io?.  6d. 

Gentle  Life  Series.  ( See  Alphabet). 

Getting  on  in  the  World.  6s. 

Glover’s  Light  of  the  Word.  2 s.  6d. 

Hayes  (Dr.)  Cast  Away  in  the  Cold.  6s. 

Healy  (Miss)  The  Home  Theatre.  3s.  6d. 

Henderson’s  Latin  Proverbs.  10s.  6d. 

Holland  (Dr.)  Mistress  of  the  Manse.  2s.  6d. 

House  on  Wheels.  By  Madame  Stolz.  2 s.  6d. 

Hugo’s  Toilers  of  the  Sea.  ior.  6d. 

»*  >»  s*  _ 

Kingston’s  Ben  Burton.  3s.  6d. 

Kennan’s  Tent  Life.  6j. 

King’s  Mountaineering  in  the  Sierra  Nevada, 

Low’s  Edition  of  American  Authors,  xs.  6d.  and  2$.  e  ach.  23 
Vols.  published.  See  Alphabet  under  Low. 

Lyra  Sacra  Americana.  4s.  6d. 

Macgregor  (John)  Rob  Roy  Books.  (See  Alphabet.) 

Maury’s  Physical  Geography  of  the  Sea.  6s. 

Parisian  Family.  5 s. 

Phelps  (Miss)  The  Silent  Partner.  5$. 

Picture  Gallery  British  Art.  12*. 


a  2 


IO 


Sampson  Low  and  Co.’s 


Books  for  School  Prizes  and  Presents,  continued — 

Picture  Gallery  Sacred  Art.  12s. 

Ready,  O  Ready.  By  Captain  Allston,  R.N.  3$.  6d. 

Reynard  the  Fox.  100  Exquisite  Illustrations.  7s  6d. 

Sea-Gull  Rock.  79  Beautiful  Woodcuts.  7s.  6d.  and  2 s.  6d. 
Stanley’s  How  I  Found  Livingstone.  21s. 

Stowe  (Mrs.)  Pink  and  White  Tyranny.  3s.  6d. 

- Old  Town  Folks.  Cloth  extra  6s.  and  2s .  6 d. 

-  Minister’s  Wooing.  5 s. ;  boards,  is.  6d. 

■ - Pearl  of  Orr’s  Island.  5 s. 

- My  Wife  and  I.  6s. 

Tauchnitz’s  German  Authors.  See  Tauchnitz. 

Tayler  (C.  B.)  Sacred  Records.  2 s.  6d. 

Titcomb’s  Letters  to  Young  People,  is.  6 d.  and  2 s. 

Twenty  Years  Ago.  4s. 

Under  the  Blue  Sky.  7 s.  6d. 

Verne’s  Meridiana.  7 s.  6d. 

- Twenty  Thousand  Leagues  Under  the  Sea.  iay.  6d. 

Whitney’s  (Mrs.)  Books.  See  Alphabet. 

Bowles  (T.  G.)  The  Defence  of  Paris,  narrated  as  it  was 

Seen.  8vo.  14^. 

Bowker  (G.)  St.  Mark’s  Gospel.  With  Explanatory  Notes. 
For  the  Use  of  Schools  and  Colleges.  By  George  Bowker,  late 
Second  Master  of  the  Newport  Grammar  School,  Isle  of  Wight.  1  vol. 
foolscap,  cloth. 

Bradford  (Wm.)  The  Arctic  Regions.  Illustrated  with 
Photographs,  taken  on  an  Art  Expedition  to  Greenland.  With  Descrip¬ 
tive  Narrative  by  the  Artist.  In  One  Volume,  royal  broadside,  25  inches 
by  20,  beautifully  bound  in  morocco  extra,  price  Twenty-five  Guineas. 

Bremer  (Fredrika)  Life,  Letters,  and  Posthumous  Works. 

Crown  8vo.  ios.  6d. 

Brett  (B.)  Notes  on  Yachts.  Fcp.  6s. 

Bristed  (C.  A.)  Five  Years  in  an  English  University. 

Fourth  Edition,  Revised  and  Amended  by  the  Author.  Post  8vo.  iar.  6d. 

Broke  (Admiral  Sir  B.  V.  P.,  Bart.,  K.C.B.)  Biography 

of.  ll. 

Brothers  Rantzau.  See  Erckmann-Chatrian. 

Brown  (Colin  Rae).  Edith  Dewar.  3vols.  Cr.8vo.  1l.11s.6d. 

Browning  (Mrs.  E.  B.)  The  Rhyme  of  the  Duchess  May. 
Demy  4to.  Illustrated  with  Eight  Photographs,  after  Drawings  by 
Charlotte  M.  B.  Morrell.  21  s. 


List  of  Publications. 


11 


Burritt  (E.)  The  Black  Country  and  its  Green  Border 

Land.  Second  edition.  Post  8vo.  6s. 

- A  Walk  from  London  to  Land’s  End.  Cr.  8vo.  6s. 

- Lectures  and  Speeches.  Fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  6s. 

- Ten- Minute  Talk  on  all  sorts  of  Topics.  With 

Autobiography  of  the  Author.  Small  post  8vo.,  cloth  extra.  6s. 

Bush  (R.  J.)  Reindeer,  Dogs,  and  Snow  Shoes.  8vo.  12 s.  6d. 
Bushnell’s  (Dr.)  The  Vicarious  Sacrifice.  Post  8vo.  7 s.6d. 

- Sermons  on  Living  Subjects.  Crown  8vo.  cloth. 

js.  6d. 

- Nature  and  the  Supernatural.  Post  8vo.  3 s.  6d. 

- Christian  Nurture.  3s.  6d. 

- Character  of  Jesus.  6d. 

- The  New  Life.  Crown  8 vo.  3 s.  6d 

Butler  (W.  F.)  The  Great  Lone  Land ;  an  Account  of  the 
Red  River  Expedition,  1869-1870,  and  Subsequent  Travels  and  Adven¬ 
tures  in  the  Manitoba  Country,  and  a  Winter  Journey  across  the  Sas¬ 
katchewan  Valley  to  the  Rocky  Mountains.  With  Illustrations  and 
Map.  Fifth  and  Cheaper  Edition.  Crown  8vo.  cloth  extra.  7 s.  6d. 
(The  first  3  Editions  were  in  8vo.  cloth.  i6.y.) 

-  The  Wild  North  Land  :  the  Story  of  a  Winter 

Journey  with  Dogs  across  Northern  North  America.  Demy  8vo.  cloth, 
with  numerous  Woodcuts  and  a  Map.  Fourth  Edition.  18s. 


ADOGA.N  (Lady  A.)  Illustrated  Games  of 

Patience.  By  the  Lady  Adelaide  Cadogan.  Twenty- 
four  Diagrams  in  Colours,  with  Descriptive  Text.  Foolscap 
4to.,  cloth  extra,  gilt  edges,  12 s.  6d. 


California.  See  Nordhoff. 


Canada  on  the  Pacific :  being  an  account  of  a  journey  from 
Edmonton  to  the  Pacific,  by  the  Peace  River  Valley.  By  Charles 
Horetzky.  Cloth.  55. 


Carlisle  (Thos.)  The  Unprofessional  Vagabond.  Fcap. 

«i8vo.  Fancy  boards,  is. 


Ceramic  Art.  See  Jacquemart.- 

Changed  Cross  (The)  and  other  Religious  Poems.  2 s.  6d. 

Child’s  Play,  with  16  coloured  drawings  by  E.  V.  B.  An 
entirely  new  edition,  printed  on  thick  paper,  with  tints,  js.  6d. 


12 


Sampson  Low  and  Co.’s 


Chefs-d’oeuvre  of  Art  and  Master-pieces  of  Engraving, 

selected  from  the  celebrated  Collection  of  Prints  and  Drawings  in  the 
British  Museum.  Reproduced  in  Photography  by  Stephen  Thompson. 
Imperial  folio,  Thirty-eight  Photographs,  cloth  gilt.  4 l.  145-.  6d. 

China.  See  Illustrations  of. 

Christ  in  Song.  Hymns  of  Immanuel,  selected  from  all  Ages, 
with  Notes.  By  Philip  Schaff,  D.D.  Crown  8vo.  toned  paper, 
beautifully  printed  at  the  Chiswick  Press.  With  Initial  Letters  and 
Ornaments  and  handsomely  bound.  New  Edition.  5s. 

Christabel.  See  Bayard  Series. 

Christmas  Presents.  See  Illustrated  Books. 

Chronicles  of  Castle  of  Amelroy.  4to.  With  Photographic 

Illustrations.  2/.  2s. 

Clara  Vaughan.  See  Blackmore. 

Coffin  (G.  C.)  Our  New  Way  Round  the  World.  8vo.  12 s. 

Conquered  at  Last ;  from  Records  of  Dhu  Hall  and  its  Inmates; 
A  Novel.  3  vols.  Crown  ;  cloth.  3  is.  6d. 

Cook  (D.)  Young  Mr.  Nightingale.  A  Novel.  3  vols. 

Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  sis’.  6d. 

Courtship  and  a  Campaign;  a  Story  of  the  Milanese  Volun¬ 
teers  of  1866,  under  Garibaldi.  By  M.  Dalin.  2  vols.  cr.  8vo.  21s. 

Cradock  Nowell.  See  Blackmore. 

Craik  (Mrs.)  The  Adventures  of  a  Brownie,  by  the  Author 

of  “  John  Halifax,  Gentleman.”  With  numerous  Illustrations  by  Miss 
Paterson.  Square  cloth,  extra  gilt  edges.  5s. 

A  Capital  Book  for  a  School  Prize  for  Children  from  Seven  to  Fourteen. 

- Little  Sunshine’s  Holiday  (forming  Vol.  1.  of  the 

John  Halifax  Series  of  Girls’  Books).  Small  post  8vo.  4J. 

- John  Halifax  Series.  See  Girls’  Books. 

■ - - —  Poems.  Crown,  cloth,  5^. 

- —  (Georgiana  M.)  The  Cousin  from  India,  forming 

Vol.  2.  of  John  Halifax  Series.  Small  post  8vo.  4J. 

- Only  a  Butterfly.  One  Volume,  crown  8vo.,  cloth, 

10 s.  6d. 

- -  Miss  Moore.  Small  post  8vo.,  with  Illustrations,  gilt 

edges.  4  s. 

- Without  Kith  or  Kin.  3  vols.  crown  8vo.,  31.?.  6d. 

- Hero  Trevelyan.  2  Vols.  Post  8vo.  2 is. 


List  of  Publications. 


i3 


Craik’s  American  Millwright  and  Miller.  With  numerous 

Illustrations.  8vo.  xl.  is. 

Cummins  (Maria  S.)  Haunted  Hearts  (Low’s  Copyright 

Series).  i6mo.  boards,  is.  6d.  ;  cloth,  2 s. 

Curtis’s  History  of  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States. 

2  vols.  8vo.  24 j. 

S  ALTON  (J.  C.)  A  Treatise  on  Physiology  and 

Hygiene  for  Schools,  Families,  and  Colleges,  with 
numerous  Illustrations,  ys.  6d. 

Dana  (R.  H.)  Two  Years  before  the  Mast  and 

Twenty-four  years  After.  New  Edition,  with  Notes  and  Revisions. 
i2mo.  6s. 

Dana  (Jas.  D.)  Corals  and  Coral  Islands.  Numerous 

Illustrations,  charts,  &c.  New  and  Cheaper  Edition,  with  numerous 
important  Additions  and  Corrections.  Crown  8vo.  cloth  extra.  8s.  6d. 

[In  the  press. 

“  Professed  geologists  and  zoologists,  as  well  as  general  readers,  will 
find  Professor  Dana’s  book  in  every  way  worthy  of  their  attention.” 
— The  Athencetim,  October  12,  1872. 

Daughter  (A)  of  Heth,  by  Wm.  Black.  Eleventh  and  Cheaper 

edition.  1  vol.  crown  8vo.  6s. 

Davies  (Wm.)  The  Pilgrimage  of  the  Tiber,  from  its 

Mouth  to  its  Source  ;  with  some  account  of  its  Tributaries.  8vo.,  with 
many  very  fine  Woodcuts  and  a  Map,  cloth  extra.  Second  Edition.  i8.y. 

Devonshire  Hamlets  ;  Hamlet  1603,  Hamlet  1604.  I  Vol. 

8vo.  7 s.  6d. 

De  Witt  (Madame  Guizot).  An  Only  Sister.  Vol.  V. 

of  the  “John  Halifax”  Series  of  Girls’  Books.  With  Six  Illustrations. 
Small  post  8vo.  cloth.  45. 

Draper  (John  W.)  Human  Physiology.  Illustrated  with 

more  than  300  Woodcuts  from  Photographs,  &c.  Royal  8vo.  cloth 
extra.  1 1.  5J. 

Duer’s  Marine  Insurance.  2  vols.  3 /.  3s. 

Duplais  and  McKennie,  Treatise  on  the  Manufacture  and 
Distillation  of  Alcoholic  Liquors.  With  numerous  Engravings. 
8vo.  2 1.  2S. 

Duplessis  (G.)  Wonders  of  Engraving.  With  numerous 

Illustrations  and  Photographs.  8vo.  12J.  6d. 

Dussauce  (Professor  H.)  A  New  and  Complete  Treatise 

on  the  Art  of  Tanning.  Royal  8vo.  2 1.  ios. 

— - General  Treatise  on  the  Manufacture  of  Vinegar. 

8vo.  1  /.  ij. 


14 


Sampson  Low  and  Co.fs 


NGLISH  Catalogue  of  Books  (The)  Published 

during  1863  to  1871  inclusive,  comprising  also  the  Important 
American  Publications. 

This  Volume,  occupying  over  450  Pages,  shows  the  Titles 
of  32,000  New  Books  and  New  Editions  issued  during  Nine 
Years,  with  the  Size,  Price,  and  Publisher’s  Name,  the  Lists  of  Learned 
Societies,  Printing  Clubs,  and  other  Literary  Associations,  and  the  Books 
issued  by  them  ;  as  also  the  Publisher’s  Series  and  Collections — altogether 
forming  an  indispensable  adjunct  to  the  Bookseller’s  Establishment,  as 
well  as  to  every  Learned  and  Literary  Club  and  Association.  30?.  half¬ 
bound. 

***  The  previous  Volume,  1835  to  1862,  of  which  a  very  few  remain  on 
sale,  price  2/.  55. ;  as  also  the  Index  Volume,  1837  to  1857,  price  il.  6 s. 


-  Supplements,  1863,  1864,  1865,  3^.  6d.  each ;  1866, 

1867  to  1874,  5 s.  each. 

English  Writers,  Chapters  for  Self-improvement  in  English 

Literature;  by  the  author  of  “The  Gentle  Life.”  6s, 

- -  Matrons  and  their  Profession;  With  some  Con¬ 
siderations  as  to  its  Various  Branches,  its  National  Value,  and  the 
Education  it  requires.  By  M.  L.  F.,  Writer  of  “  My  Life,  and  what 
shall  I  do  with  it.”  “  Battle  of  the  Two  Philosophies,”  and  “Strong 
and  Free.”  Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  extra,  7 s.  6d.  [Now  ready. 

Erckmann  -  Chatrian.  Forest  House  and  Catherine’s 

Lovers.  Crown  8vo.  3 $.  6d. 

— -  The  Brothers  Rantzau :  A  Story  of  the  Vosges. 

2  vols.  crown  8vo.  cloth.  21s.  New  Edition.  1  vol.,  profusely  illus¬ 
trated.  Cloth  extra.  5s. 

Evans  (C.)  Over  the  Hills  and  Far  Away.  By  C.  Evans, 

Author  of  “A  Strange  Friendship.”  One  Volume,  crown  8vo.,  cloth 
extra,  ios.  6d. 

-  A  Strange  Friendship.  Crown  8vo. ,  cloth.  5^. 

Evans  (T.  W.)  History  of  the  American  Ambulance, 

established  in  Paris  during  the  Siege  of  1870-71.  Together  with  the 
Details  of  its  Method  and  its  Work.  By  Thomas  W.  Evans,  M.D., 
D.  D.  S.  Imperial  8vo.,  with  numerous  illustrations,  cloth  extra,  price 
35s’ 

y-g^AITH  GARTNEY’S  Girlhood,  by  the  Author  of 

“The  Gayworthys.”  Fcap.  with  Coloured  Frontispiece.  3 s.6d. 

Favourite  English  Poems.  New  and  Extended 

Edition,  with  300  illustrations.  Small  4to.  21  s. 

Favell  (The)  Children.  Three  Little  Portraits.  Crown  i2mo: 

Four  Illustrations.  Cloth  gilt.  4s. 

“  A  very  useful  and  clever  story.” — John  Bull. 

Few  (A)  Hints  on  Proving  Wills.  Enlarged  Edition,  sewed. 


List  of  Publications. 


IS 


Field  (M.  B.)  Memories  of  Many  Men  and  of  some 
Women.  Post  8vo.s  cloth.  10s.  6d. 

Fields  (J.  T.)  Yesterdays  with  Authors.  Crown 8vo.  ior.  6d. 

Fleming’s  (Sandford)  Expedition.  See  Ocean  to  Ocean. 

Flemish  and  French  Pictures.  With  Notes  concerning 
the  Painters  and  their  Works  by  F.  G.  Stephens,  Author  of  “  Flemish 
Relics,”  “  Memoirs  of  Sir  Edwin  Landseer,”  &c.  Small  4to.  cloth  extra, 
bevelled  boards,  gilt  sides,  back,  and  edges.  1  /.  8j. 

Flammarion  (C.)  The  Atmosphere.  Translated  from  the 
French  of  Camille  Flammarion.  Edited  by  James  Glaisher, 
fi.R.S.,  Superintendent  of  the  Magnetical  and  Meteorological  Depart¬ 
ment  of  the  Royal  Observatory  at  Greenwich.  With  10  beautiful 
Chromo-Lithographs  and  81  woodcuts.  Royal  8vo.  cloth  extra,  bevelled 
boards.  30s. 

Forbes  (J.  G.)  Africa:  Geographical  Exploration  and 
Christian  Enterprise,  from  the  Earliest  Times  to  the  Present.  By 
J.  Gruar  Forbes.  Crown  8vo.,  cloth  extra,  7 s.  6d. 

Franc  (Maude  Jeane)  Emily’s  Choice,  an  Australian  Tale. 
1  vol.  small  post  8vo.  With  a  Frontispiece  by  G.  F.  Angas.  5s. 

- -  Hall’s  Vineyard.  Small  post  8vo.,  cloth.  4^. 

— — • —  John’s  Wife.  A  Story  of  Life  in  South  Australia. 

Small  post  8vo. ,  cloth  extra,  45. 

- —  Marian,  or  the  Light  of  Some  One’s  Home.  Fcp. 

3rd  Edition,  with  Frontispiece.  5s. 

- Silken  Cords  and  Iron  Fetters.  4^. 

— — — •  Vermont  Vale.  Small  post  4to.,  with  Frontispiece.  $s. 

- Minnie’s  Mission.  Small  post  8vo.,  with  Frontis¬ 
piece.  4-f. 

Friswell  (J.  H.)  See  Gentle  Life  Series. 

— — — -  One  of  Two.  3  vols.  1  /.  1  is.  6d. 

Friswell  (Laura.)  The  Gingerbread  Maiden;  and  other 
Stories.  With  Illustration.  Square  cloth.  3 s.  6d. 


AY  WORTH  YS  (The),  a  Story  of  New  England 

Life.  Small  post  8vo.  3s.  6d. 

Gems  of  Dutch  Art.  Twelve  Photographs  from 
finest  Engravings  in  British  Museum.  Sup.  royal  4to.  cloth 
extra.  25s. 

Gentle  Life  (Queen  Edition).  2  vols.  in  1.  Small  4to.  ior.  6d. 


i6 


Sampson  Low  and  Co.’s 


THE  GENTLE  LIFE  SERIES.  Printed  in 
Elzevir,  on  Toned  Paper,  handsomely  bound,  form¬ 
ing  suitable  Volumes  for  Presents.  Price  6s.  each; 
or  in  calf  extra,  price  ios.  6d. 

The  Gentle  Life.  Essays  in  aid  of  the  Formation  of  Cha¬ 

racter  of  Gentlemen  and  Gentlewomen.  Tenth  Edition. 

“  Deserves  to  be  printed  in  letters  of  gold,  and  circulated  in  every 
house.” — Chambers ’  Journal. 

About  in  the  World.  Essays  by  the  Author  of  “The  Gentle 

Life.” 

“It  is  not  easy  to  open  it  at  any  page  without  finding  some  handy 
idea.” — Morning  Post. 

Like  unto  Christ.  A  New  Translation  of  the  “De  Imita- 
tione  Christi  ”  usually  ascribed  to  Thomas  a  Kempis.  With  a  Vignette 
from  an  Original  Drawing  by  Sir  Thomas  Lawrence.  Second  Edition. 

“Could  not  be  presented  in  a  more  exquisite  form,  for  a  more  sightly 
volume  was  never  seen.” — Illustrated  London  News. 

Familiar  Words.  An  Index  Verborum,  or  Quotation  Hand¬ 
book.  Affording  an  immediate  Reference  to  Phrases  and  Sentences 
that  have  become  embedded  in  the  English  language.  Second  and  en¬ 
larged  Edition. 

“The  most  extensive  dictionary  of  quotation  we  have  met  with.” — 
Notes  and  Queries. 

Essays  by  Montaigne.  Edited,  Compared,  Revised,  and 
Annotated  by  the  Author  of  “The  Gentle  Life.”  With  Vignette  Por¬ 
trait.  Second  Edition. 

“  We  should  be  glad  if  any  words  of  ours  could  help  to  bespeak  a  large 
circulation  for  this  handsome  attractive  book.” — Ilhistrated  Times. 

The  Countess  of  Pembroke’s  Arcadia.  Written  by  Sir 
Philip  Sidney.  Edited,  with  Notes,  by  the  Author  of  “The  Gentle 
Life.”  Dedicated,  by  permission,  to  the  Earl  of  Derby.  7 j.  6d. 

“  All  the  best  things  in  the  Arcadia  are  retained  intact  in  Mr.  Fris- 
well’s  edition. — Examiner. 

The  Gentle  Life.  Second  Series.  Third  Edition. 

“  There  is  not  a  single  thought  in  the  volume  that  does  not  contribute  in 
some  measure  to  the  formation  of  a  true  gentleman.” — Daily  News. 

Varia :  Readings  from  Rare  Books.  Reprinted,  by  per¬ 

mission,  from  the  Saturday  Review ,  Spectator,  &c. 

“The  books  discussed  in  this  volume  are  no  less  valuable  than  they 
are  rare,  and  the  compiler  is  entitled  to  the  gratitude  of  the  public.” 
— Observer. 

The  Silent  Hour :  Essays,  Original  and  Selected.  By 

the  Author  of  “The  Gentle  Life.”  Second  Edition. 

“All  who  possess  the  ‘Gentle  Life’  should  own  this  volume.” — 
Standard. 


List  of  Publications. 


17 


Essays  on  English  Writers,  for  the  Self-improvement  of 

Students  in  English  Literature. 

“To  all  (both  men  and  women)  who  have  neglected  to  read  and  study 
their  native  literature  we  would  certainly  suggest  the  volume  before  us 
as  a  fitting  introduction.” — Examiner. 

Other  People’s  Windows.  By  J.  Hain  Friswell.  Second 

Edition. 

“The  chapters  are  so  lively  in  themselves,  so  mingled  with  shrewd 
views  of  human  nature,  so  full  of  illustrative  anecdotes,  that  the  reader 
cannot  fail  to  be  amused.” — Morning  Post. 

A  Man’s  Thoughts.  By  J.  Hain  Friswell. 


German  Primer;  being  an  Introduction  to  First  Steps  in 
German.  By  M.  T.  Preu.  2 s.  6d. 

Getting  On  in  the  World;  or,  Hints  on  Success  in  Life. 
By  William  Mathews,  LL.D.  Small  post  8vo.,  cloth  extra,  bevelled 
edges.  6s. 

Girdlestone  (C.)  Christendom.  i2mo.  3^. 

— - —  Family  Prayers.  i2mo.  is.  6d. 

Glover  (Rev.  R.)  The  Light  of  the  Word.  Third  Edition. 

i8mo.  2S.  6d. 

Goethe’s  Faust.  With  Illustrations  by  Konewka.  Small  4to. 

Price  ios.  6d. 

Gouffe  :  The  Royal  Cookery  Book.  By  Jules  GouffE  ; 

translated  and  adapted,  for  English  use  by  Alphonse  Gouffe,  head 
pastrycook  to  Her  Majesty  the  Queen.  Illustrated  with  large  plates, 
printed  in  colours.  161  woodcuts.  8vo,  cloth  extra,  gilt  edges.  2/.  2s. 

- - Domestic  Edition,  half-bound,  ioj.  6d. 

“  By  far  the  ablest  and  most  complete  work  on  cookery  that  has  ever 
been  submitted  to  the  gastronomical  world.” — Pall  Mall  Gazette. 

— — -  The  Book  of  Preserves  ;  or,  Receipts  for  Preparing 

and  Preserving  Meat,  Fish  salt  and  smoked,  Terrines,  Gelatines,  Vege¬ 
tables,  Fruits,  Confitures,  Syrups,  Liqueurs  de  Famille,  Petits  Fours, 
Bonbons,  &c.  &c.  x  vol.  royal  8vo.,  containing  upwards  of  500  Receipts 
and  34  Illustrations.  10s.  6 d. 

- Royal  Book  of  Pastry  and  Confectionery.  By  Jules 

Gouffe,  Chef-de- Cuisine  of  the  Paris  Jockey  Club.  Royal  8vo.  Illus¬ 
trated  with  10  Chromo-lithographs  and  137  Woodcuts,  from  Drawings 
from  Nature  by  E.  Monjat,  cloth  extra,  gilt  edges,  35$. 

Gower  (Lord  Ronald).  Hand-book  to  the  Art  Galleries, 

Public  and  Private,  of  Belgium  and  Holland.  i8mo.,  cloth. 

[In  the  press. 


i8 


Sampson  Low  and  Co.’s 


Girls’  Books.  A  Series  written,  edited,  or  translated  by  the 

Author  of  “  John  Halifax.”  Small  post  8vo.,  cloth  extra,  4 s.  each. 

1.  Little  Sunshine’s  Holiday. 

2.  The  Cousin  from  India. 

3.  Twenty  Years  Ago. 

4.  Is  it  True. 

5.  An  Only  Sister.  By  Madame  Guizot  De  Witt. 

6.  Miss  Moore. 

Gospels  (Four),  with  Bida’s  Illustrations.  See  Bida. 

Gray  (Robertson)  Brave  Hearts.  Small  post  8vo.  3s.  6d. 

Gouraud  (Mdlle.)  Four  Gold  Pieces.  Numerous  Illus- 

trations.  Small  post  8vo.,  cloth.  2 s.  6d.  See  also  Rose  Library. 

Grant  (Rev.  G.  M.)  See  Ocean  to  Ocean. 

Greenleaf’s  Law  of  Evidence.  13th  Edition.  3  vols.  84^ 

Guizot’s  History  of  France.  Translated  by  Robert  Black. 
Royal  8vo.  Numerous  Illustrations.  Vols.  I.,  II.  and  III.,  cloth  extra 
each  24s. ;  in  Parts,  2s.  each  (to  be  completed  in  two  more  volumes). 

Guyon  (Mad.)  Life.  By  Upham.  Third  Edition.  Crown 

8vo.  6s. 

— - Method  of  Prayer.  Foolscap,  is. 

Guyot  (A.)  Physical  Geography.  By  Arnold  Guyot, 

Author  of  “  Earth,  and  Man.”  In  x  volume,  large  4to.,  128  pp.,  nume¬ 
rous  coloured  Diagrams,  Maps  and  Woodcuts,  price  10s.  6d.,  strong 
boards. 


ALE  (E.  E.)  In  His  Name;  a  Story  of  the  Dark 
Ages.  Small  post  8vo.,  cloth,  35.  6d. 

Hacklander  (F.  W.)  Bombardier  H.  and  Cor¬ 
poral  Dose  ;  or,  Military  Life  in  Prussia.  First  Series. 
The  Soldier  in  Time  of  Peace.  Translated  (by  permission  of  the  Author) 
from  the  German  of  F.  W.  Hacklander.  By  F.  E.  R.  and  H.  E.  R. 
Crown  8vo.,  cloth  extra,  55. 

Harrington  (J.)  Pictures  of  Saint  George’s  Chapel,  Wind¬ 

sor.  Photographs.  4to.  635. 

Harrington’s  Abbey  and  Palace  of  Westminster.  Photo¬ 

graphs.  5/.  5s. 

Harper’s  Handbook  for  Travellers  in  Europe  and  the 

East.  New  Edition,  1874.  Post  8vo.  Morocco  tuck,  1 1.  ixj.  6d. 

Haswell  (Chas.  H.)  The  Engineers’  and  Mechanics’ 
Pocket-Book.  30th  Edition,  revised  and  enlarged.  i2mo,  morocco 
tuck,  145. 

Hawthorne  (Mrs.  N.)  Notes  in  England  and  Italy.  Crown 

8vo.  las'.  6d. 


List  of  Publications. 


19 


Hayes  (Dr.)  Cast  Away  in  the  Cold;  an  Old  Man’s  Story 
of  a  Young  Man’s  Adventures.  By  Dr.  I.  Isaac  Hayes,  Author  of 
“The  Open  Polar  Sea.”  With  numerous  Illustrations.  Gilt  edges,  6j. 

- - The  Land  of  Desolation;  Personal  Narrative  of  Ad¬ 
ventures  in  Greenland.  Numerous  Illustrations.  Demy  8vo.,  cloth 
extra.  14s. 

Hazard  (S.)  Santo  Domingo,  Past  and  Present;  With  a 

Glance  at  Hayti.  With  upwards  of  One  Hundred  and  Fifty  beautiful 
Woodcuts  and  Maps,  chiefly  from  Designs  and  Sketches  by  the  Author. 
Demy  8vo.  cloth  extra.  18s. 

Hazard  (S.)  Cuba  with  Pen  and  Pencil.  Over  300  Fine 
Woodcut  Engravings.  New  edition,  8vo.  cloth  extra.  15s. 

Hazlitt  (William)  The  Round  Table.  (Bayard  Series.) 

2  s.  6d. 

Healy  (M.)  Lakeville.  3  vols.  it.  m.  6d. 

- A  Summer’s  Romance.  Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  ioj-.  6d. 

— — -  The  Home  Theatre.  Small  post  8vo.  3s.  6d. 

-  Out  of  the  World.  A  Novel.  Three  Volumes 

crown  8vo,  cloth  extra.  1 1.  ns.  6d. 

Henderson  (A.)  Latin  Proverbs  and  Quotations ;  with 

Translations  and  Parallel  Passages,  and  a  copious  English  Index.  By 
Alfred  Henderson.  Fcap.  4to.,  530  pp.  ioj.  6d. 

Hearth  Ghosts.  By  the  Author  of  “  Gilbert  Rugge.”  3  Vols. 

1  /.  xi s.  6d. 

Heber’s  (Bishop)  Illustrated  Edition  of  Hymns.  With 

upwards  of  100  Designs  engraved  in  the  first  style  of  art  under  the 
superintendence  of  J.  D.  Cooper.  Small  4to.  Handsomely  bound, 
7 s.  6d. 

Higginson  (T.  W.)  Atlantic  Essays.  Small  post  8vo.  6s. 

Hitherto.  By  the  Author  of  “  The  Gayworthys.”  New  Edition, 
cloth  extra.  3J.  6d.  Also  in  Low’s  American  Series.  Double  Vol.  2 s.  6d. 

Hofmann  (Carl)  A  Practical  Treatise  on  the  Manufac¬ 
ture  of  Paper  in  all  its  Branches.  Illustrated  by  One  Hundred  and 
Ten  Wood  Engravings,  and  Five  large  Folding  Plates.  In  One  Volume, 
4to,  cloth  ;  about  400  pages.  3/.  13s.  6d. 

Holland  (Dr.)  Kathrina  and  Titcomb’s  Letters.  See  Low’s 
American  Series. 

-  Mistress  of  the  Manse.  2 s.6d.  Seealso  Rose  Library. 

Holmes  (Oliver  W.)  The  Guardian  Angel ;  a  Romance. 

2  vols.  i6j. 

-  (Low’s  Copyright  Series.)  Boards,  is*  6d. ;  cloth,  2 s. 


20 


Sampson  Low  and  Co’s 


Holmes  (Oliver  W.)  Autocrat  of  the  Breakfast  Table, 

i2mo.  is.  Illustrated  edition,  3s.  6d. 

— - The  Professor  at  the  Breakfast  Table.  3 s.  6d> 

— — -  Songs  in  Many  Keys.  Post  8vo.  7 s.  6d. 

— — —  Mechanism  in  Thought  and  Morals.  i2mo.  is.  6 d. 

Homespun,  or  Twenty  Five  Years  Ago  in  America,  by 

Thomas  Lackland.  Fcap.  8vo.  7 s.  6d. 

Hoppin  (Jas.  M.)  Old  Country,  its  Scenery,  Art,  and 

People.  Post  8vo.  js.  6 d. 

Howell  (W.  D.)  Italian  Journeys.  i2mo.  cloth.  Ss.  6d. 

Hugo  (Victor)  “Ninety-Three.”  Translated  by  Frank 
Lee  Benedict  and  J.  Hain  Friswell.  New  Edition.  Illustrated. 
One  vol.  crown  8vo.  6s. 

• -  Toilers  of  the  Sea.  Crown  8vo.  6s. ;  fancy  boards, 

2 s. ;  cloth,  2S.  6d.  ;  Illustrated  Edition,  10 s.  6d. 

Hunt  (Leigh)  and  S.  A.  Lee,  Elegant  Sonnets,  with 

Essay  on  Sonneteers.  2  vols.  8vo.  i8j. 

- Day  by  the  Fire.  Fcap.  6s.  6d. 

Huntington  (J.D.,  D.D.)  Christian  Believing.  Crown  8vo. 

3 s-  6d. 

Hutchinson  (T.  J.)  Two  Years  in  Peru;  with  Exploration 

of  its  Antiquities.  By  Thomas  J.  Hutchinson.  Map  by  Daniel 
Barrera,  and  numerous  Illustrations.  In  2  vols.,  demy  8vo.,  cloth  extra. 
28^. 

Hymnal  Companion  to  Book  of  Common  Prayer.  See 

Bickersteth. 


LLU  STRATI  ON  S  of  China  and  its  People. 

By  J.  Thomson,  F.R.G.S.  Being  Photographs  from  the 
Author’s  Negatives,  printed  in  permanent  Pigments  by  the 
Autotype  Process,  and  Notes  from  Personal  Observation. 

***  The  complete  work  embraces  200  Photographs,  with  Letter-press 
Descriptions  of  the  Places  and  People  represented.  Four  Volumes, 
imperial  4to.,  each  £  3  35-. 

Illustrated  Books,  suitable  for  Christmas,  Birthday,  or 
Wedding  Presents.  (The  full  titles  of  which  will  be  found 
in  the  Alphabet.) 

Adventures  of  a  Young  Naturalist.  7 s.  6d. 

Alexander’s  Bush  Fighting.  16s. 

Andersen’s  Fairy  Tales.  25 s. 

Arctic  Regions.  Illustrated.  25  guineas. 

Art,  Pictorial  and  Industrial.  New  Series,  Vols.  I.  to  III.,  i8j.  each. 
Bida’s  Gospels  of  St.  Matthew  and  St.John.  3/.  3$.  each. 


List  of  Publications , 


21 


Illustrated  Books,  continued — 

Blackburn’s  Art  in  the  Mountains.  12 s. 

- - Artists  and  Arabs.  7s.  6d. 

- Harz  Mountains.  12s. 

— - Normandy  Picturesque.  i6j. 

- - Travelling  in  Spain.  i6j. 

- The  Pyrenees.  18$. 

Bush’s  Reindeer,  Dogs,  &c.  12 s.  6d. 

Butler’s  Great  Lone  Land.  7s.  6d. 

Cadogan  (Lady)  Games  of  Patience.  125.  6d. 

Chefs-d’oeuvre  of  Art.  4/.  145.  6d. 

China.  Illustrated.  4  vols.  3 1.  3 s.  each  vol. 

Christian  Lyrics. 

Davies’s  Pilgrimage  of  the  Tiber.  i8.y. 

Dream  Book,  by  E.  V.  B.  21s.  6d. 

Duplessis’  Wonders  of  Engraving.  x2S.6d. 

Favourite  English  Poems.  21  s. 

Flammarion’s  The  Atmosphere.  305. 

Fletcher  and  Kidder’s  Brazil.  18$. 

Goethe’s  Faust,  illustrations  by  P.  Konewka.  10 s.  6d. 

Goufie’s  Royal  Cookery  Book.  Coloured  plates.  424. 

— —  Ditto.  Popular  edition.  10 s.  6d. 

-  Book  of  Preserves,  xos.  6d. 

Hazard’s  Santa  Domingo.  184. 

- Cuba.  isj. 

Heber  (Bishop)  Hymns.  Illustrated  edition.  7 s.  6d. 

How  to  Build  a  House.  By  Viollet-le-Duc.  8vo.  12s. 
Jacquemart’s  History  of  the  Ceramic  Art.  42s. 

Koldewey’s  North  German  Polar  Expedition,  it.  134-. 
MacGahan’s  Campaigning  on  the  Oxus.  18s. 

Markham  (Capt.)  Whaling  Cruise  to  Baffin’s  Bay.  7s.  6d. 
Markham  (Clements)  Threshold  of  the  Unknown  Region.  7 s.6d. 
Markham’s  Cruise  of  the  Rosario.  164. 

Masterpieces  of  the  Pitti  Palace,  3/.  13J.  6d. 

Milton’s  Paradise  Lost.  (Martin’s  plates).  3/.  13J.  6d. 

My  Lady’s  Cabinet.  21.?. 

Ocean  to  Ocean.  10s.  6d.  , 

Palliser  (Mrs.)  History  of  Lace.  21s. 

- Historic  Devices,  &c.  21s. 

Pike’s  Sub-Tropical  Rambles.  185. 

Red  Cross  Knight  (The).  25s. 

Sauzay’s  Wonders  of  Glass  Making.  12s.  6d 
Schiller’s  Lay  of  the  Bell.  14$. 

Stanley’s  How  I  Found  Livingstone.  7 s.  6d. 

-  Coomassie  and  Magdala.  i6j. 

Sulivan’s  Dhow  Chasing.  16s. 

Thomson’s  Straits  of  Malacca.  21s. 

Verne  (Jules)  Books.  8  vols.  See  Alphabet. 

Viardot,  Wonders  of  Sculpture.  •  12 s.  6d. 

- Wonders  of  Italian  Art.  12s.  6d. 

- Wonders  of  European  Art.  12J.  6d. 

Werner  (Carl)  Nile  Sketches.  2  Series,  each  3 1.  xos. 

In  the  Isle  of  Wight.  Two  volumes,  crown  8vo.,  cloth.  21  s. 

Is  it  True  ?  Being  Tales  Curious  and  Wonderful.  Small  post 

8vo.,  cloth  extra.  44. 


22 


Sampson  Low  and  Co.’s 


ACK  HAZARD,  a  Story  of  Adventure  by  J.  T. 

Trowbridge.  Numerous  illustrations,  small  post.  3s.  6 d. 

Jackson  (H.)  Argus  Fairbairne;  or,  a  Wrong 
Never  Righted.  By  Henry  Jackson,  Author  of  “Hearth 
Ghosts,”  &c.  Three  volumes,  crown  8vo.,  cloth,  31s.  6d. 


Jacquemart  (J.)  History  of  the  Ceramic  Art:  Descriptive 
and  Analytical  Study  of  the  Potteries  of  all  Times  and  of  all  Nations. 
By  Albert  Jacquemart.  200  Woodcuts  by  H.  Catenacci  and  J. 
Jacquemart.  12  Steel-plate  Engravings,  and  1,000  Marks  and  Mono¬ 
grams.  Translated  by  Mrs.  Bury  Palliser.  In  1  vol.,  super  royal 
8vo.,  of  about  700  pp.,  cloth  extra,  gilt  edges,  42 s.  [Ready. 

“  This  is  one  of  those  few  gift  hooks  which,  while  they  can  certainly 
lie  on  a  table  and  look  beautiful,  can  also  be  read  through  with  real 
pleasure  and  profit.” — Times,  December  13. 

Jessup  (H.  H.)  The  Women  of  the  Arabs.  With  a  Chapter 
for  Children.  By  the  Rev.  Henry  Harris  Jessup,  D.D.,  seventeen 
years  American  Missionary  in  Syria.  Crown  8vo.,  cloth  extra,  10s.  6d. 


Jilted.  A  Novel.  3  vols.  1  /.  iu.  6d. 

Johnson  (R.  B.)  Very  Far  West  Indeed.  A  few  rough 

Experiences  on  the  North-West  Pacific  Coast.  Cr.  8vo.  cloth.  10s.  6 d. 
New  Edition— the  Fourth,  fancy  boards.  2 s. 


EDGE  Anchor,  or  Young  Sailor’s  Assistant,  by 

Wm.  Brady.  8vo.  i8s. 

Kennan  (G.)  Tent  Life  in  Siberia.  3rd  edition.  6s. 


Kennaway  (L.  J.)  Crusts.  A  Settler’s  Fare  due  South; 

or,  Life  in  New  Zealand.  Illustrations  by  the  Author.  Crown  8vo, 
cloth  extra.  5$. 


Kent  (Chancellor)  Commentaries  on  American  Law. 

12th  edition.  4  vols.  8vo.  5 1. 

King  (Clarence)  Mountaineering  in  the  Sierra  Nevada. 

crown  8vo.  Third  and  Cheaper  Edition,  cloth  extra.  6s. 

The  Times  of  Oct.  20th  says  “If  we  judge  his  descriptions  by 
the  vivid  impressions  they  leave,  we  feel  inclined  to  give  them  very  high 
praise.” 

Knight  (C.)  A  Romance  of  Acadia  Two  Centuries  Ago. 

From  a  Sketch  by  the  late  Charles  Knight.  In  3  vols.  crown  8vo. 
1 1.  1  w.  6d. 


List  of  Publications, 


23 


Koldewey  (Capt.)  The  Second  North  German  Polar 
Expedition  in  the  Year  1869-70,  of  the  Ships  “Germania”  and 
“Hansa,”  under  command  of  Captain  Koldewey.  Edited  and  con¬ 
densed  by  H.  W.  Bates,  Esq.,  and  Translated  by  Louis  Mercier, 
M.A.  (Oxon.)  Numerous  Woodcuts,  Maps,  and  Chromo-lithographs. 
Royal  8  vo,  cloth  extra.  1/.  155-. 


ANE  (Laura  C.  M.) 

3  vols.  1 1.  ns.  6d. 


Gentleman  Verschoyle. 


Lang  (Dr.)  An  Historical  and  Statistical  Account 

of  New  South  Wales,  from  the  Founding  of  the  Colony 
in  1788  to  the  present  day,  including  details  of  the  remarkable  discoveries 
of  Gold,  Copper,  and  Tin  in  that  Colony.  By  John  Dunmore  Lang, 
FS  D.D.,  A.M.,  Senior  Minister  of  the  Scotch  Church,  Sydney.  Fourth 
biaii&Edition.  In  2  vols.,  crown  8vo,  cloth  extra.  1 l.  is. 

Lang  (J.  D.)  The  Coming  Event.  8vo.  12 s. 


L’Estrange  (Sir  G.  B.)  Recollections  of  Sir  George 

B.  L’Estrange.  With  Heliotype  reproductions.  8vo.  cloth  extra.  14.L 

Le  Due  (V.)  How  to  Build  a  House.  By  Viollet  LeDuc, 

Author  of  “The  Dictionary  of  Architecture,”  &c.  Numerous  Illustra¬ 
tions,  Plans,  &c.  One  vol.,  medium  8vo,  cloth,  gilt  edges.  12J. 

- - Annals  of  a  Fortress.  Numerous  Illustrations  and 

Diagrams.  Demy  8vo,  cloth  extra.  [In  the  press. 

Lee  (G.  R.)  Memoirs  of  the  American  Revolutionary 

War.  8vo.  1 6s. 

Lessing’s  Laocoon :  an  Essay  upon  the  Limits  of  Painting 
and  Poetry,  with  remarks  illustrative  of  various  points  in  the  History  of 
Ancient  Art.  By  Gotthold  Ephraim  Lessing.  A  New  Translation 
by  Ellen  Frothingham,  crown  8vo.  cloth  extra.  5s. 

Lindsay  (W.  S.)  History  of  Merchant  Shipping  and 

Ancient  Commerce.  In  4  vols.  Vols.  I.  and  II.,  demy  8vo.  21s.  each. 

Locker  (A.)  The  Village  Surgeon.  A  Fragment  of  Auto¬ 
biography.  By  Arthur  Locker,  Author  of  “Sweet  Seventeen.” 
Crown  8 vo.,  cloth.  New  Edition.  3$.  6d. 


Little  Preacher.  32mo.  is. 

Longfellow  (H.  W.)  The  Poets  and  Poetry  of  Europe. 

New  Edition.  8vo.  cloth,  it.  is. 


Loomis  (Elias).  Recent  Progress  of  Astronomy.  Post  8vo. 

js.  6d. 

- — — .  Practical  Astronomy.  8vo.  ioa 


24 


Sampson  Low  and  Co's 


Low’s  Half-Crown  Series,  choicely  bound,  cloth,  gilt  edges, 
small  post  8vo. 

1.  Sea-Gull  Rock.  By  Jules  Sandeau.  Numerous  Illustrations. 

2.  The  House  on  Wheels.  By  Madame  Stolz.  Numerous  Illus¬ 

trations. 

3.  The  Mistress  of  the  Manse.  By  Dr.  Holland. 

4.  Undine,  and  the  Two  Captains.  By  Fouqu£.  Illustrations. 

5.  Draxy  Miller’s  Dowry  and  the  Elder’s  Wife. 

6.  The  Four  Gold  Pieces.  By  Madame  Gouraud.  Numerous 

Illustrations. 

7.  Picciola ;  or,  The  Prison  Flower.  By  X.  B.  Saintine.  Nume¬ 

rous  Illustrations.  [In  the  press. 

Low’s  Copyright  and  Cheap  Editions  of  American 
Authors,  comprising  Popular  Works,  reprinted  by  arrange¬ 
ment  with  their  Authors  : — 

1.  Haunted  Hearts.  By  the  Author  of  “  The  Lamplighter.” 

2.  The  Guardian  Angel.  By  “The  Autocrat  of  the  Breakfast  Table.” 

3.  The  Minister’s  Wooing.  By  the  Author  of  “Uncle  Tom’s  Cabin.” 

4.  Views  Afoot.  By  Bayard  Taylor. 

5.  Kathrina,  Her  Life  and  Mine.  By  J.  G.  Holland. 

6.  Hans  Brinker:  or.  Life  in  Holland.  By  Mrs.  Dodge. 

7.  Men,  Women,  and  Ghosts.  By  Miss  Phelps. 

8.  Society  and  Solitude.  By  Ralph  Waldo  Emerson. 

9.  Hedged  In.  By  Elizabeth  Phelps. 
n.  Faith  Gartney. 

12.  Stowe’s  Old  Town  Folks,  is.  6d. ;  cloth,  35. 

13.  Lowell’s  Study  Windows. 

14.  My  Summer  in  a  Garden.  By  Charles  Dudley  Warner. 

15.  Pink  and  White  Tyranny.  By  Mrs.  Stowe. 

16.  We  Girls.  By  Mrs.  Whitney. 

20.  Back-Log  Studies.  By  Charles  Dudley  Warner,  Author  of 
“  My  Summer  in  a  Garden.” 

“  This  is  a  delightful  book.” — Atlantic  Monthly. 

22.  Hitherto.  By  Mrs.  T.  D.  Whitney.  Double  Volume,  2 s.  6d. 
fancy  flexible  boards. 

23.  Farm  Ballads,  by  Will.  Carleton,  price  ONE  SHILLING. 

Low’s  Monthly  Bulletin  of  American  and  Foreign  Publi¬ 

cations,  forwarded  regularly.  Subscription  is.  6d.  per  annum. 

Low’s  Standard  Library  of  Travel  and  Adventure. 
Crown  8vo.  Bound  uniformly  in  cloth  extra,  Js.  6d.  each 
volume. 

1.  The  Great  Lone  Land.  By  W.  F.  Butler.  With  Illustrations 

and  Map.  Fifth  Edition. 

2.  The  Wild  North  Land  :  the  Story  of  a  Winter  Journey  with 

Dogs  across  Northern  North  America.  By  W.  F.  Butler.  With 
numerous  Woodcuts  and  a  Map.  Fifth  Edition. 

3.  How  I  Found  Livingstone.  By  H.  M.  Stanley.  Introductory 

Chapter  on  the  Death  of  Livingstone,  with  a  Brief  Memoir. 

4.  The  Threshold  of  the  Unknown  Region.  By  C.  R.  Mark¬ 

ham.  New  Edition  (the  third).  With  Maps  and  Illustrations. 

5.  A  Whaling  Cruise  to  Baffin’s  Bay  and  the  Gulf  of  Boothia. 

By  A.  H.  Markham.  New  Edition.  Two  Maps  and  several 
Illustrations. 


Other  volumes  in  preparation. 


List  of  Publications, 


25 


Low’s  Standard  Novels.  Crown  8vo.  6.?.  each,  cloth  extra. 
A  Daughter  of  Heth.  By  W.  Black.  With  Frontispiece  by  F. 
Walker,  A.R.A. 

Kilmeny.  A  Novel.  By  W.  Black 
In  Silk  Attire.  Third  Edition. 

Lorna  Doone.  By  R.  D.  BLACkMORE. 

Cradock  Nowell.  By  R.  D.  Blackmore. 

Clara  Vaughan.  By  R.  D.  Blackmore. 

Innocent.  By  Mrs.  Oliphant.  Eight  Illustrations. 

Work  :  a  Story  of  Experience.  By  Louisa  M.  Alcott.  Illustrations. 
(See  also  “  Rose  Library.”) 

Mistress  Judith :  a  Cambridgeshire  Story.  By  C.  C.  Frazer- 
Tytler. 

Ninety-Three.  By  Victor  Hugo.  Numerous  illustrations. 

Low’s  Handbook  to  the  Charities  of  London  for  1874. 

Edited  and  Revised  to  February,  1875,  by  Charles  Mackeson,  F.S.S., 
Editor  of  “A  Guide  to  the  Churches  of  London  and  its  Suburbs,”  &c. 
Price  1$. 

Lunn  (J.  C.)  Only  Eve.  3  vols.  3U.  6d. 

Lyne  (A.  A.)  The  Midshipman’s  Trip  to  Jerusalem. 

With  illustration.  Third  Edition,  Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  iay.  6d. 

Lyra  Sacra  Americana.  Gems  of  American  Poetry,  selected 
and  arranged,  with  Notes  and  Biographical  Sketches,  by  C.  D.  Cleve¬ 
land,  D.  D.,  author  of  the  “  Milton  Concordance.”  i8mo.  45.  6d. 


AC  GAHAN  (J.  A.)  Campaigning  on  the  Oxus 

and  the  Fall  of  Khiva.  With  Map  and  numerous  Illustra¬ 
tions.  Third  Edition.  Demy  8vo.,  cloth  extra,  18s. 

Macgregor  (John,)  “Rob  Roy”  on  the  Baltic. 

Third  Edition,  small  post  8vo.  zs.  6d. 


Macgregor  (John).  A  Thousand  Miles  in  the  “  Rob 

Roy  ”  Canoe.  Eleventh  Edition.  Small  post,  8vo.  2 s.  6d. 


Description  of  the  “  Rob  Roy  ”  Canoe,  with 


plans,  &c.  1  s. 

- The  Voyage  Alone  in  the  Yawl  “  Rob  Roy.” 

Second  Edition.  Small  post,  8vo.  5$. 

Mahony  (M.  F.)  A  Chronicle  of  the  Fermors ;  Horace 
Walpole  in  Love.  By  M.  F.  Mahony.  2  vols.  demy  8vo.,  with 
steel  portrait.  24s. 


Manigault,  The  Maid  of  Florence ;  or,  a  Woman’s  Ven¬ 

geance.  3J.  6d. 

March  (A.)  Anglo-Saxon  Reader.  8vo.  7 s.  6d. 

— — -  Comparative  Grammar  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  Lan¬ 

guage.  8vO.  I2J. 


26 


Sampson  Low  and  Co.’s 


Marcy  (R.  B.)  Thirty  Years  of  Army  Life.  Royal  8vo. 

12 S. 

- Prairie  and  Overland  Traveller.  2s.  6d. 

Marigold  Manor.  By  Miss  Waring.  With  Introduction  by 
Rev.  A.  Sewell.  With  Illustrations.  Small  post  8vo.  4s. 

Markham  (A.  H.)  The  Cruise  of  the  “  Rosario.”  By 
A.  H.  Markham,  Commander,  R.N.  8vo.  cloth  extra,  with  Map  and 
Illustrations.  1 6s. 

- A  Whaling  Cruise  to  Baffin’s  Bay  and  the  Gulf 

of  Boothia.  With  an  Account  of  the  Rescue,  by  his  Ship,  of  the 
Survivors  of  the  Crew  of  the  “  Polaris  ;  ”  and  a  Description  of  Modern 
Whale  Fishing.  Second  and  Cheaper  Edition.  Crown  8vo.  2  Maps 
and  several  Illustrations.  Cloth  extra.  7 s.  6d. 

Markham  (C.  R.)  The  Threshold  of  the  Unknown  Region. 

Crown  8vo.  with  Maps  and  Illustrations.  Third  Edition,  cloth  extra, 
7-y.  6d. 

Marlitt  (Miss)  The  Princess  of  the  Moor.  Tauchnitz  Trans¬ 

lations. 

Marsh  (G.  P.)  Origin  and  History  of  the  English  Lan¬ 
guage.  8vo.  16s. 

- The  Earth,  as  modified  by  human  action,  being 

a  New  Edition  of  “  Man  and  Nature.”  Royal  8vo.,  cloth,  18s. 

- Lectures  on  the  English  Language.  8vo.  15s. 

Martin’s  Vineyard.  By  Agnes  Harrison.  Crown  8vo.  cloth. 

ios.  6d. 

Mason  (C.  W.)  The  Rape  of  the  Gamp.  3  vols.  3U.  6d. 

[In  the  press. 

Masterpieces  of  the  Pitti  Palace,  and  other  Picture  Gal¬ 
leries  of  Florence,  with  some  Account  of  the  Artists  and 
their  Paintings.  Atlas  4to.  handsomely  bound  in  cloth  extra,  gilt 
edges.  3 1.  135.  6d. 

Masters  (The)  of  Claythorpe.  By  the  Author  of  “Only 

Eve.”  3  vols.  crown  8vo.  cloth.  3 is.  6d. 

Matthews  (Wm.)  See  Getting  on  in  the  World. 

Maury  (Commander)  Physical  Geography  of  the  Sea  and 
its  M  eteorology .  Being  a  Reconstruction  and  Enlargement  of  his  former 
Work  ;  with  illustrative  Charts  and  Diagrams.  New  Edition.  Crown 
8vo.  6s. 


List  of  Publications. 


27 


May  (J.  W.)  A  Treatise  on  the  Law  of  Insurance. 

Third  Edition.  8vo.  38J. 

McMullen’s  History  of  Canada.  8vo.  i6x. 

Mercier  (Rev.  L.)  Outlines  of  the  Life  of  the  Lord  Jesus 

Christ.  2  vols.  crown  8vo.  15$. 

Michell  (N.)  The  Heart’s  Great  Rulers,  a  Poem,  and 

Wanderings  from  the  Rhine  to  the  South  Sea  Islands.  Fcap.  8vo.  3 s.6d. 

Milton’s  Complete  Poetical  Works  ;  with  Concordance  by 

W.  D.  Cleveland.  New  Edition.  8vo.  12J.  ;  morocco  1  /.  is. 

— - -  Paradise  Lost,  with  the  original  Steel  Engravings  of 

John  Martin.  Printed  on  large  paper,  royal  4to.  handsomely  bound. 
3/.  13.L  6d. 

Miss  Dorothy’s  Charge.  By  Frank  Lee  Benedict,  Author 

of  “  My  Cousin  Elenor.”  3  vols.  crown  8vo.  315.  6d. 

Missionary  Geography  (The) ;  a  Manual  of  Missionary 
Operations  in  all  parts  of  the  World,  with  Map  and  Illustrations.  Fcap. 
3  .s'.  6d. 

Mistress  Judith.  A  Cambridgeshire  Story.  By  C.  C. 
Fraser-Tytler,  Author  of  “Jasmine  Leigh.”  A  New  and  Cheaper 
Edition.  In  one  volume,  small  post  8vo.,  cloth  extra.  6s. 

Monk  of  Monk’s  Own.  3  vols.  31J.  6d. 

Montaigne’s  Essays.  See  Gentle  Life  Series. 

Morgan’s  Macaronic  Poetry.  i6mo.  12 s. 

Mountain  (Bishop)  Life  of.  By  his  Son.  8vo.  iox.  6d. 

Mundy  (D.  L.)  Rotomahana,  or  the  Boiling  Springs  of 
New  Zealand.  Sixteen  Photographs,  with  descriptive  Letterpress. 
By  D  L.  Mundy.  Edited  by  Dr.  F.  Von  Hochstetter.  Imperial 
4to.  cloth  extra.  42s.  f 

My  Cousin  Maurice.  A  Novel.  3  vols.  Cloth,  31J.  6d. 

My  Lady’s  Cabinet.  Charmingly  Decorated  with  Lovely 
Drawings  and  Exquisite  Miniatures.  Contains  Seventy-five  Pictures. 
Royal  4to.,  and  very  handsomely  bound  in  cloth.  1 1.  is. 


LEON  I.,  Recollections  of.  By  Mrs.  Abell. 

i  Edition.  Revised  with  additional  matter  by  her  daugh- 
Mrs.  Charles  Johnstone.  Demy  8vo.  With  Steel 
rait  and  Woodcuts.  Cloth  extra,  gilt  edges,  iof.  6d. 


28 


Sampson  Low  and  Co.’s 


Napoleon  III.  in  Exile  :  The  Posthumous  Works  and  Un¬ 
published  Autographs.  Collected  and  arranged  by  Count  de  la 
Chapelle.  8 vo.,  cloth  extra.  14.J. 

Narrative  of  Edward  Crewe,  The.  Personal  Adventures 

and  Experiences  in  New  Zealand.  Small  post  8vo.,  cloth  extra.  5s. 

Never  Again  :  a  Novel.  By  Dr.  Mayo,  Author  of  “Kaloo- 
lah.  ”  New  and  Cheaper  Edition,  in  One  Vol.,  small  post  8vo.  6s. 
Cheapest  edition,  fancy  boards,  2s. 

New  Testament.  The  Authorized  English  Version  ;  with  the 
various  Readings  from  the  most  celebrated  Manuscripts,  including  the 
Sinaitic,  the  Vatican,  and  the  Alexandrian  MSS.,  in  English.  With 
Notes  by  the  Editor,  Dr.  Tischendorf.  The  whole  revised  and  care¬ 
fully  collected  for  the  Thousandth  Volume  of  Baron  Tauchnitz’s  Collec¬ 
tion.  Cloth  flexible,  gilt  edges,  2 s.  6d.  ;  cheaper  style,  2 s.  ;  or  sewed, 
ij.  6d. 

Noel  (Hon.  Roden)  Livingstone  in  Africa;  a  Poem. 

By  the  Hon.  Roden  Noel,  Author  of  “  Beatrice,”  &c.  Post  8vo.,  limp 
cloth  extra,  2 s.  6d. 

Nordhoff  (C.)  California  :  for  Health,  Pleasure,  and  Resi¬ 
dence.  A  Book  for  Travellers  and  Settlers.  Numerous  Illustrations, 
8vo.,  cloth  extra.  12s.  6d. 

- Northern  California,  Oregon,  and  the  Sandwich 

Islands.  Square  8vo.,  cloth  extra,  price  12$. 

Nothing  to  Wear,  and  Two  Millions.  By  William 

Allen  Butler,  is. 

Nystrom’s  Mechanic’s  Pocket  Book.  12th  edition.  i8j. 


BCEAN  to  Ocean.  Sandford  Fleming’s  Expedition 
through  Canada  in  1872.  By  the  Rev.  George  M.  Grant, 
With  Sixty  Illustrations.  Demy  8vo.,  cloth  extra,  pp.  372. 

Old  Fashioned  Girl.  See  Alcott. 

Old  Masters.  Da  Vinci,  Bartolomeo,  Michael  Angelo,  Ro¬ 
magna,  Carlo  Dolci,  &c.,  &c.  Reproduced  in  Photography  from  the 
Celebrated  Engravings  by  Longhi,  Anderloni,  Garavaglia,  Toschi,  and 
Raimondi,  in  the  Collection  of  Prints  and  Drawings  in  the  British 
Museum,  with  Biographical  Notices.  By  Stephen  Thompson.  Imperial 
folio,  cloth  extra.  3/.  135-.  6d. 

Oliphant  (Mrs.)  Innocent.  A  Tale  of  Modern  Life.  By 
Mrs.  Oliphant,  Author  of  The  Chronicles  of  Carlingford,”  &c.,  &c. 
With  Eight  full-page  Illustrations.  Small  post  8vo.,  cloth  extra.  6s. 


I 


List  of  Publications. 


29 


One  Only ;  A  Novel.  By  Eleanor  C.  Price.  2  vols.  Crown 

8vo.,  cloth,  zis. 

Only  Eve.  By  Mrs.  J.  Galbraith  Lunn,  Three  Vols. 

post  8vo.  cloth.  3 ix.  6d. 

Our  American  Cousins  at  Home.  By  Vera,  Author  of 
“  Under  the  Red  Cross.”  Illustrated  with  Pen  and  Ink  Sketches,  by 
the  Author,  and  several  fine  Photographs.  Crown  8vo,  cloth.  95. 

Our  Little  Ones  in  Heaven.  Edited  by  Rev.  H.  Robbins. 
With  Frontispiece  after  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds.  Second  Edition. 
Fcap.  3s.  6d. 

ALLISER  (Mrs.)  A  History  of  Lace,  from  the 

Earliest  Period.  A  New  and  Revised  Edition,  with  upwards 
of  100  Illustrations  and  coloured  Designs.  1  vol.  8vo.  1 l. 1  s. 

[New  Edition  in  the  press. 

“  One  of  the  most  readable  books  of  the  season  ;  permanently  valuable, 
always  interesting,  often  amusing,  and  not  inferior  in  all  the  essentials 
of  a  gift  book.” — Times . 

- Historic  Devices,  Badges,  and  War  Cries.  8vo. 

il.  is. 

- —  The  China  Collector’s  Pocket  Companion.  With 

upwards  of  1,000  Illustrations  of  Marks  and  Monograms.  Second 
Edition,  with  Additions.  Small  post  8vo.,  limp  cloth,  5 s. 

“We  scarcely  need  add  that  a  more  trustworthy  and  convenient  hand¬ 
book  does  not  exist,  and  that  others  besides  ourselves  will  feel  grateful 
to  Mrs.  Palliser  for  the  care  and  skill  she  has  bestowed  upon  it.” — 
Academy. 

Parsons  (T.)  A  Treatise  on  the  Law  of  Marine  Insurance 

and  General  Average.  By  Hon.  Theophilus  Parsons.  2  vols.  8vo. 
3^  y. 

— - —  A  Treatise  on  the  Law  o»f  Shipping.  2  vols.  8vo. 

3*- 

Parisian  Family.  From  the  French  of  Madame  Guizot  De 
Witt.  Fcap.  5  s. 

Phelps  (Miss)  Gates  Ajar.  32mo.  6d. 

-  Men,  Women,  and  Ghosts.  i2mo.  Sd.  is.6d.  ;  cl.  2s. 

- Hedged  In.  i2mo.  Sewed,  is.  6d. ;  cloth,  2s. 

- —  Silent  Partner,  $s. 

— -  Trotty’s  Wedding  Tour.  Small  post  8vo.  3^.  6d. 

- What  to  Wear.  Foolscap  8vo.,  fancy  boards. 


Sampson  Low  and  Co.’s 


3° 


Phillips  (L.)  Dictionary  of  Biographical  Reference.  8vo. 

i/.  ii s.  6d. 

Phillips’  Law  of  Insurance.  5th  Edition,  2  vols.  3/.  3s. 

Picture  Gallery  of  British  Art  (The).  Thirty-eight  beautiful 
and  Permanent  Photographs  after  the  most  celebrated  English  Painters. 
With  Descriptive  Letterpress.  Vols.  1  to  3,  cloth  extra,  18s.  each. 

Pike  (N.)  Sub-Tropical  Rambles  in  the  Land  of  the 

Aphanapteryx.  In  1  vol.  demy  8vo.  i8j.  Profusely  Illustrated  from 
the  Author’s  own  Sketches,  also  with  Maps  and  valuable  Meteorological 
Charts. 

Planner’s  Manual  of  Qualitative  and  Quantitative  Ana¬ 
lysis  with  the  Blow-Pipe.  From  the  last  German  Edition,  revised  and 
enlarged.  By  Prof.  Th.  Richter,  of  the  Royal  Saxon  Mining  Academy. 
Translated  by  Prof.  H.  B.  Cornwall,  Assistant  in  the  Columbia 
School  of  Mines,  New  York.  Illustrated  with  87  Woodcuts  and  1 
Lithographic  Plate.  Second  Edition,  revised  and  reduced  in  price. 
8vo.  cloth.  31s.  6d. 

Plutarch’s  Lives.  An  Entirely  New  and  Library  Edition. 
Edited  by  A.  H.  Clough,  Esq.  5  vols.  8vo.,  2/.  10 s.  ;  half  morocco, 
top  gilt,  3 1. 

- Morals.  Uniform  with  Clough’s  Edition  of  “  Lives  of 

Plutarch.”  Edited  by  Professor  Goodwin.  5  vols.  8vo.  3 1.  3$. 

Poe  (E.  A.)  The  Works  of.  4  vols.  2/.  2s. 

Poems  of  the  Inner  Life.  A  New  Edition,  Revised,  with 
many  additional  Poems,  inserted  by  permission  of  the  Authors.  Small 
post  8vo.,  cloth.  5 s. 

Polar  Expedition.  See  Koldeway  and  Markham. 

Poor  (H.  V.)  Manual  of  the  Railroads  of  the  United 

States  for  1874-5 ;  Showing  their  Mileage,  Stocks,  Bonds,  Cost, 
Earnings,  Expenses,  and  Organisations,  with  a  Sketch  of  their  Rise,  &c. 
1  vol.  8vo.  24s. 

Portraits  of  Celebrated  Women.  By  C.  A.  Ste.-Beuve. 

i2mo.  6s.  6d. 

A  Practical  Treatise  on  the  Manufacture  of  Colours 

for  Painting.  By  MM.  Riffault,  Vergnaud  and  Toussaint.  Re¬ 
vised  and  Edited  by  M.  F.  Malepeyre.  Translated  from  the  French 
by  A.  A.  Fesquet.  Illustrated  by  85  Engravings.  8vo.  315.  6d. 

Preces  Veterum.  Collegit  et  edidit  Joannes  F.  France.  Crown 

8vo.,  cloth,  red  edges.  5$. 

Preu  (M.  T.)  German  Primer.  Square  cloth.  2 s.  6d. 


List  of  Publications. 


3i 


Prime  (I.)  Fifteen  Years  of  Prayer.  Small  post  8vo.,  cloth. 

3s.  6d. 

- (E.  D.  G.)  Around  the  World.  Sketches  of  Travel 

through  Many  Lands  and  over  Many  Seas,  8vo.,  Illustrated.  14J. 

- (W.  0.)  I  go  a- Fishing.  Small  post  8vo.,  cloth.  5^. 

Publishers’  Circular  (The),  and  General  Record  of  British 

and  Foreign  Literature  ;  giving  a  transcript  of  the  title-page  of  every 
work  published  in  Great  Britain,  and  every  work  of  interest  published 
abroad,  with  lists  of  all  the  publishing  houses. 

Published  regularly  on  the  1st  and  15th  of  every  Month,  and  forwarded 
post  free  to  all  parts  of  the  world  on  payment  of  8s.  per  annum. 


ALSTON  (W.  R.  S.)  Early  Russian  History. 

Four  Lectures  delivered  at  Oxford  by  W.  R.  S.  Ralston, 
M.A.  Crown  8vo.,  cloth  extra.  5s. 

Randolph  (Mrs.)  Clarice  Adair.  3  vols.  1  /.  1  is.6d. 


Rasselas,  Prince  of  Abyssinia.  By  Dr.  Johnson.  With 

Introduction  by  the  Rev.  William  West,  Vicar  of  Nairn.  (Bayard 
Series.)  2 s.  6d. 


Reminiscences  of  America  in  1869,  by  Two  Englishmen. 

Crown  8vo.  js.  6d. 


Reynard  the  Fox.  The  Prose  Translation  by  the  late  Thomas 

Roscoe.  With  about  100  exquisite  Illustrations  on  Wood,  after  designs 
by  A.  J.  Elwes.  Imperial  i6mo.  cloth  extra,  js.  6d. 


Richardson  (A.  S.)  Stories  from  Old  English  Poetry. 

Small  post  8vo.,  cloth.  55. 

Riffault  (MM.)  A  Practical  Treatise  on  the  Manufacture 

of  Colours  for  Painting.  Illustrated.  31  s.  6d. 

Rivington’s  (F.)  Life  of  St.  Paul.  With  map.  5 s. 


Rochefoucauld’s  Reflections.  Flexible  cloth  extra.  2s.  6d. 

(Bayard  Series.) 

Rogers  (S.)  Pleasures  of  Memory.  See  “  Choice  Editions 

of  Choice  Books.”  5 s. 

Rohlfs  (Dr.  G.)  Adventures  in  Morocco  and  Journeys 
through  the  Oases  of  Draa  and  Tafilet.  By  Dr.  Gerhard  Rohlfs, 
Gold  Medallist  of  the  Royal  Geographical  Society.  Translated  from 
the  German.  With  an  Introduction  by  Winwood  Reade.  Demy  8vo. 
Map,  and  Portrait  of  the  Author,  cloth  extra,  12J. 


32 


Sampson  Low  and  Co’s 


Rose  Library  (The).  Popular  Literature  of  all  countries.  is. 
each  volume.  Many  of  the  volumes  are  Illustrated.  The 
following  volumes  are  now  ready 

1.  Sea-Gull  Rock.  By  Jules  Sandeau.  Illustrated. 

2.  Little  Women.  By  Louisa  M.  Alcott. 

3.  Little  Women  Wedded.  (Forming  a  Sequel  to  “Little  Women”) 

4.  The  House  on  Wheels.  By  Madame  de  Stolz.  Illustrated. 

5.  Little  Men.  ByLouiSA  M.  Alcott. 

6.  The  Old-Fashioned  Girl.  By  Louisa  M.  Alcott. 

7.  The  Mistress  of  the  Manse.  By  J.  G.  Holland. 

8.  Timothy  Titcomb’s  Letters  to  Young  People.  Single  and 

Married. 

9.  Undine,  and  the  Two  Captains.  By  Baron  De  La  Motte 

Fouque.  A  new  Translation  by  F.  E.  Bunnett.  Illustrated. 

10.  Draxy  Miller’s  Dowry  and  the  Elder’s  Wife.  By  Saxe  Holm. 

11.  The  Four  Gold  Pieces.  By  Madame  Gouraud.  Numerous 

Illustrations.  [In  the  press. 

12.  Work  :  a  Story  of  Experience.  First  Portion.  By  Louisa  M. 

Alcott.  [Nearly  ready. 

13.  Beginning  Again:  being  a  continuation  of  “  Work.”  By  Louisa 

M.  Alcott.  [Nearly  ready. 

14.  Picciola  ;  or,  The  Prison  Flower.  By  X.  B.  Saintine.  Nu¬ 

merous  graphic  Illustrations.  [In  the  press. 

Notice. — The  Volumes  in  this  Series  will  also  be  published  in  a  more 
expensive  form  on  fine  toned  paper,  cloth  extra,  gilt  edges,  at 
2 s.  6d.  or  3 s.  6d.  each,  according  to  size,  &c. 


ANTO  DOMINGO,  Past  and  Present. 

Hazard. 

Sauzay  (A.)  Marvels  of  Glass  Making. 

merous  Illustrations.  Demy  8vo.  12s.  6d. 


See 


Nu- 


Schiller’s  Lay  of  the  Bell,  translated  by  Lord  Lytton.  With 

42  illustrations  after  Retsch.  Oblong  4to.  14s. 

School  Books.  See  Classified. 


School  Prizes.  See  Books. 

Schuyler  (E.)  Turkistan.  Notes  of  a  Journey  in  the  Russian 
Provinces  of  Central  Asia  and  the  Khanates  of  Bokhara  and  Kokand. 
By  Eugene  Schuyler,  Secretary  of  American  Legation,  St.  Petersburg. 

[In  the  press. 

Schweinfurth  (Dr.  G.)  The  Heart  of  Africa;  or,  Three 
Years’  Travels  and  Adventures  in  the  Unexplored  Regions  of  the  Centre 
of  Africa.  By  Dr.  Georg  Schweinfurth.  Translated  by  Ellen  E. 
Frewer.  Two  volumes,  8vo.,  upwards  of  500  pages  each,  with  130 
Woodcuts  from  Drawings  made  by  the  Author,  and  2  Maps.  42s. 

[Second  Edition. 


List  of  Publications. 


33 


Sea-Gull  Rock.  By  Jules  Sandeau,  of  the  French  Aca¬ 
demy.  Translated  by  Robert  Black,  M.A.  With  Seventy-nine 
very  beautiful  Woodcuts.  Royal  i6mo.,  cloth  extra,  gilt  edges.  7 s.  6d. 
Cheaper  Edition,  cloth  gilt,  2 s.  6d.  See  also  Rose  Library. 

“  It  deserves  to  please  the  new  nation  of  boys  to  whom  it  is  presented.” 
— Times. 

Sedgwick,  (T.)  Treatise  on  the  Measure  of  Damages.  8vo. 

6th  Edition.  2 1.5s. 

Silent  Hour  (The),  Essays  original  and  selected,  by  the  author 

of  “The  Gentle  Life.”  Second  edition.  6s. 

Silliman  (Benjamin)  Life  of,  by  G.  P.  Fisher.  2  vols. 

crown  8vo.  il.  4s. 

Simson  (W.)  A  History  of  the  Gipsies,  with  specimens  of 

the  Gipsy  Language,  i&y.  6d. 

Smith  (G.)  Assyrian  Explorations  and  Discoveries. 
By  George  Smith  (of  the  British  Museum).  Illustrated  by  Photographs 
and  numerous  Woodcut  Illustrations  of  his  recent  Discoveries.  Demy 
8vo.  18  s. 

Smith  and  Hamilton’s  French  Dictionary.  2  vols.  Cloth, 

21  s.  ;  half  roan,  22s. 

Socrates.  Memoirs,  from  Xenophon’s  Memorabilia.  By 

E.  Levien.  Flexible  cloth.  2s.  6d.  Bayard  Series. 

Spayth  (Henry)  The  American  Draught-Player.  2nd 

edition,  ismo.  12^.  6d. 

St.  Cecilia,  a  modern  tale  of  Real  Life.  3  vols.  post  8vo. 

3  is.  6d. 

Stanley  (H.  M.)  How  I  Found  Livingstone.  Crown  8vo., 

cloth  extra.  7 s.  6d. 

This  Edition  has  been  revised  most  carefully  from  beginning  to  end, 
and  all  matters  of  a  personal  or  irrelevant  character  omitted. 

- “  My  Kalulu,”  Prince,  King,  and  Slave.  A  Story 

from  Central  Africa.  Crown  8vo.,  about  430  pp.,  with  numerous  graphic 
Illustrations,  after  Original  Designs  by  the  Author.  Cloth,  7 s.  6d. 

- Coomassie  and  Magdala  :  A  Story  of  Two  British 

Campaigns  in  Africa.  Demy  8vo.,  with  Maps  and  Illustrations,  r6j. 
Second  Edition. 

“We  are  struck  throughout  his  volume  by  the  shrewdness  of  his 
surmises  when  he  is  guessing  in  the  dark,  and  of  the  frequency  with 
which  his  hurried  judgments  are  confirmed.” —  T imes. 


34 


Sampson  Low  and  Co.7 s 


Steele  (Thos.)  Under  the  Palms.  A  Volume  of  Verse.  By 
Thomas  Steele,  translator  of  “An  Eastern  Love  Story.”  Fcap.  8vo. 
Cloth,  5s. 

Stewart  (D.)  Outlines  of  Moral  Philosophy,  by  Dr.  McCosh. 

New  edition.  i2mo.  3$.  6d. 

- Mental  Philosophy.  i2mo.  2s.  6d. 

Stolz  (Madame)  The  House  on  Wheels.  Small  post  8vo 
2S.  6 d.  See  also  Rose  Library. 

Stone  (J.  B.)  A  Tour  with  Cook  Through  Spain.  Illus¬ 
trated  by  Photographs.  Crown  8vo.,  cloth.  6s. 

Stories  of  the  Great  Prairies,  from  the  Novels  of  J.  F. 

Cooper.  With  numerous  illustrations.  5s. 

Stories  of  the  Woods,  from  J.  F.  Cooper.  5j. 

- Sea,  from  J.  F.  Cooper.  $s. 

Story  without  an  End,  from  the  German  of  Carove,  by  the 
late  Mrs.  Sarah  T.  Austin,  crown  4to.  with  15  exquisite  drawings  by 
E.  V.  B.,  printed  in  colours  in  facsimile  of  the  original  water  colours, 
and  numerous  other  illustrations.  New  edition.  7s.  6d. 

- —  square,  with  illustrations  by  Harvey.  2 s.  6d. 

- of  the  Great  March,  a  Diary  of  General  Sherman’s 

Campaign  through  Georgia  and  the  Carolinas.  Numerous  illustrations. 
i2mo.  cloth,  js.  6d. 

Stowe  (Mrs.  Beecher).  Dred.  Tauchnitz  edition.  i2mo.  3s.  6d. 

- Geography,  with  60  illustrations.  Square  cloth,  45-.  6d. 

- Little  Foxes.  Cheap  edition,  is. ;  library  edition,  4^.  6d. 

— — —  Minister’s  Wooing.  3s.  ;  copyright  series,  is.  6d. 

cloth,  2  s. 

- Old  Town  Folk.  6s.  Cheap  Edition,  2 s.  6d. 

- - Old  Town  Fireside  Stories.  Cloth  extra.  3s.  6d. 

- My  Wife  and  I ;  or,  Harry  Henderson’s  His¬ 
tory.  Small  post  8vo,  cloth  extra.  6j. 

- Pink  and  White  Tyranny.  Small  post  8vo.  3s.  6d. 

Cheap  Edition,  is.  6d.  and  2 s. 

- Queer  Little  People,  is,  ;  cloth,  2s. 

- Chimney  Corner,  is.  ;  cloth,  is.  6d. 

- The  Pearl  of  Orr’s  Island.  Crown  8vo.  5 s. 

- Little  Pussey  Willow.  Fcap.  2 s. 

- Woman  in  Sacred  History.  Illustrated  with  15 

chromo-lithographs  and  about  200  pages  of  letterpress,  forming  one  of 
the  most  elegant  and  attractive  volumes  ever  published.  Demy  4to., 
cloth  extra,  gilt  edges,  price  il.  5s. 


List  of  Publications. 


35 


STORY’S  (JUSTICE)  WORKS: 

Commentaries  on  the  Law  of  Agency,  as  a  Branch 
of  Commercial  and  Maritime  Jurisprudence.  8th  Edition. 
8  vo.  i  /.  15J. 

Commentaries  on  the  Law  of  Bailments.  8th  Edition. 

8vo.  1 l.  11  s.  6d. 

Commentaries  on  the  Law  of  Bills  of  Exchange, 
Foreign  and  Inland,  as  administered  in  England  and  America. 
4th  Edition.  8vo.  xl.  1  is.  6d. 

Commentaries  on  the  Conflict  of  Laws,  Foreign 

and  Domestic,  in  regard  to  Contracts,  Rights,  and  Remedies, 
and  especially  in  regard  to  Marriages,  Divorces,  Wilis,  Successions, 
and  Judgments.  7th  Edition.  8vo.  1  /.  15J. 

Commentaries  on  the  Constitution  of  the  United 

States  ;  with  a  Preliminary  Review  of  the  Constitutional  History 
of  the  Colonies  and  States  before  the  adoption  of  the  Constitution. 
4th  Edition.  2  vols.  8vo.  3I.  3 j. 

Commentaries  on  the  Law  of  Partnership  as  a  branch 
of  Commercial  and  Maritime  Jurisprudence.  6th  Edition, 
by  E.  H.  Bennett.  8vo.  i l.  ns.  6d. 

Commentaries  on  the  Law  of  Promissory  Notes, 

and  Guarantees  of  Notes  and  Cheques  on  Banks  and  Bankers.  6th 
Edition  ;  by  E.  H.  Bennett.  8vo.  i l.  ns.  6d. 

Commentaries  on  Equity  Pleadings  and  the  Inci¬ 
dents  relating  thereto,  according  to  the  Practice  of  the  Courts  of 
Equity  of  England  and  America.  8th  Edition.  8vo.  xl.xns.6d. 

Commentaries  on  Equity  Jurisprudence  as  admi¬ 

nistered  in  England  and  America,  nth  Edition.  3/.  15 s. 

Treatise  on  the  Law  of  Contracts.  By  William 

W.  Story.  4th  Edition,  2  vols.  8vo.  3/.  15.?. 

Treatise  on  the  Law  of  Sales  of  Personal  Property. 

4th  Edition,  edited  by  Hon.  J.  C.  Perkins.  8vo.  xl.  xxs.  6d. 

Sub-Tropical  Rambles.  See  Pike  (N.) 

Suburban  Sketches,  by  the  Author  of  “Venetian  Life.” 

Post  8vo.  6s. 

Sullivan  (G.  C.)  Dhow  Chasing  in  Zanzibar  Waters  and 

on  the  Eastern  Coast  of  Africa ;  a  Narrative  of  Five  Years’  Expe¬ 
riences  in  the  suppression  of  the  Slave  Trade.  With  Illustrations  from 
Photographs  and  Sketches  taken  on  the  spot  by  the  Author.  Demy  8vo, 
cloth  extra.  i6.f.  Second  Edition. 

Summer  in  Leslie  Goldthwaite’s  Life,  by  the  Author  of 

“The  Gayworthys,”  Illustrations.  Fcap.  8vo.  $s.  6d. 


36  Sampson  Low  and  Co's 

Sweet  not  Lasting.  A  Novel,  by  Annie  B,  Lefurt. 

1  vol.  crown  8vo.,  cloth.  10 s.  6d. 

Swiss  Family  Robinson,  i2mo.  3^.  6d. 


3'AUCHNITZ’S  English  Editions  of  German 

Ju  Authors.  Each  volume  cloth  flexible,  2 s.  ;  or  sewed,  is.  6d. 
The  following  are  now  ready : — 

On  the  Heights.  By  B.  Auerbach.  3  vols. 

In  the  Year  T3.  By  Fritz  Reuter,  i  vol. 

Faust.  By  Goethe,  i  vol. 

L’Arrabiata.  By  Paul  Heyse.  i  vol. 

The  Princess,  and  other  Tales.  By  Heinrich  Zschokke.  i  vol. 
Lessing’s  Nathan  the  Wise,  and  Emilia  Galotti. 

Hacklander’s  Behind  the  Counter,  translated  by  Mary  Howitt. 
2  vols. 

Three  Tales.  By  W.  Hauff. 

Joachim  v.  Kamern  ;  Diary  of  a  Poor  Young  Lady.  By  M. 

Nathusius. 

Poems  by  Ferdinand  Freiligrath.  Edited  by  his  daughter. 
Gabriel.  From  the  German  of  Paul  Heyse.  By  Arthur  Milman. 
The  Dead  Lake,  and  other  Tales.  By  P.  Heyse. 

Through  Night  to  Light.  By  Gutzkow. 

Flower,  Fruit,  and  Thorn  Pieces.  By  Jean  Paul  Richter. 
2  vols. 

The  Princess  of  the  Moor.  By  Miss  Marlitt.  2  vols. 

An  Egyptian  Princess.  By  G.  Ebers.  2  vols. 

Ekkehard.  By  J.  V.  Scheffel.  2  vols. 

Barbarossa  and  other  Tales.  By  Paul  Heyse.  From  the  German. 
By  L.  C.  S. 

Wilhelm  Meister’s  Apprenticeship. 


By  Goethe.  2  vols. 


Tauchnitz  (B.)  German  and  English  Dictionary,  Paper, 

is.  ;  cloth,  1$.  6d.  ;  roan,  2 s. 

French  and  English.  Paper  is.  6d. ;  cloth,  2s> ; 


oan,  2S.  6d. 


roan,  2s.  6d. 


Italian  and  English.  Paper,  is.  6d. ;  cloth,  2s. ; 
Spanish  and  English.  Paper,  is.  6d. ;  cloth,  2s. ; 


roan,  2 s.  6d. 

- New  Testament.  Cloth,  2s.  ;  gilt,  2 s.  6d. 


37 


List  of  Publications. 


Tayler  (C.  B.)  Sacred  Records,  &c.,  in  Verse.  Fcap.  8vo, 

cloth  extra,  2 s.  6d. 

Taylor  (Bayard)  The  Byeways  of  Europe;  Visits  by  Unfre* 
quented  Routes  to  Remarkable  Places.  By  Bayard  Taylor,  author 
of  “Views  Afoot.”  2  vols.  post  8vo.  i6f. 

. - —  Travels  in  Greece  and  Russia.  Post  8vo.  7 s.  6d. 

- Northern  Europe.  Post  8vo.  Cloth,  8r.  6d. 

- Egypt  and  Iceland.  8j.  6d. 

- Beauty  and  the  Beast.  Crown  8vo.  ior.  6d. 

- A  Summer  in  Colorado.  Post  8vo.  7 s.  6d . 

- Joseph  and  his  Friend.  Post  8vo.  iof.  6d. 

- Views  Afoot.  Enamelled  boards,  if.  6d.  ;  cloth,  2  s. 

See  Low’s  Copyright  Edition. 

Tennyson’s  May  Queen;  choicely  Illustrated  from  designs  by 

the  Hon.  Mrs.  Boyle.  Crown  8vo.  See  Choice  Series.  5$. 

Thomson  -(J.)  The  Straits  of  Malacca,  Indo-China,  and 
China  ;  or,  Ten  Years’  Travels,  Adventures,  and  Residence  Abroad. 
By  J.  Thomson,  F.R.G.S. ,  Author  of  “Illustrations  of  China  and  its 
People.”  Upwards  of  60  Woodcuts,  from  the  Author’s  own  Photographs 
and  Sketches.  Demy  8vo,  cloth  extra.  21s. 

Thomson  (W.  M.)  The  Land  and  the  Book.  With  300 

Illustrations.  2  vols.  1/.  if. 

Timothy  Titcomb’s  Letters  to  Young  People,  Single  and 

Married.  Cloth,  2 s.  (See  also  Rose  Library.) 

Tinne  (J.  E.)  The  Wonderland  of  the  Antipodes  : 

Sketches  of  Travel  in  the  North  Island  of  New  Zealand.  Illustrated 
with  numerous  Photographs.  Demy  8vo.,  cloth  extra.  1 6s. 

Tischendorf  (Dr.)  The  New  Testament.  See  New  Testa¬ 

ment. 

Tolhausen  (A.)  The  Technological  Dictionary  in  the 

French,  English,  and  German  Languages.  Containing  the  Technical 
Terms  used  in  the  Arts,  Manufactures,  and  Industrial  Affairs  generally. 
Revised  and  Augmented  by  M.  Louis  Tolhausen,  French  Consul  at 
Leipzig.  This  Work  will  be  completed  in  Three  Parts. 

The  First  Part,  containing  French-German-English,  crown  8vo.  2  vols. 
sewed,  8f.  ;  1  vol.  half  roan,  9 s. 

The  Second  Part,  containing  English-German-French,  crown  8vo. 

2  vols.  sewed,  8 s.  ;  1  vol.  bound,  gs . 

The  Third  Part,  containing  German-English-French,  is  in  prepara¬ 
tion. 

Trollope  (A.)  Harry  Heathcote  of  Gangoil.  A  Story  of 
Bush  Life  in  Australia.  With  graphic  Illustrations.  In  1  vol.  Small 
post,  cloth  extra,  55. 

Tuckermann  (C.  K.)  The  Greeks  of  To-day.  Crown  8vo. 
cloth.  7 f.  6d. 


38 


Sampson  Low  and  Co's 


Twenty  Years  Ago.  (Forming  Volume  3  of  the  John  Halifax 

Series  of  Girls’  Books).  Small  post  8vo.  4s. 

Twining  (Miss).  Illustrations  of  the  Natural  Orders  of 
Plants,  with  Groups  and  Descriptions.  By  Elizabeth  Twining. 
Reduced  from  the  folio  edition,  splendidly  illustrated  in  colours  from 
nature.  2  vols.  Royal  8vo.  5/.  5s. 

Under  Seal  of  Confession.  By  Averil  Beaumont, 

Author  of  “  Thornicroft’s  Model.”  3  vols.  crown  8vo.,  cloth.  31s.  6 d. 


ANDENHOFF’S  (George),  Clerical  Assistant 

Fcap.  3 j.  6d. 

- Ladies’  Reader  (The).  Fcap.  $s. 

Varia ;  Rare  Readings  from  Scarce  Books,  by  the  author  of 
“  The  Gentle  Life.”  Reprinted  by  permission  from  the  “  Saturday  Re¬ 
view,  “  Spectator,”  &c.  6s. 

Vaux  (Calvert).  Villas  and  Cottages,  a  new  edition,  with 

300  designs.  8vo.  15J. 

VERNE’S  (JULES)  WORKS. 

Five  Weeks  in  a  Balloon.  New  Edition.  Numerous 
Illustrations,  printed  on  Toned  Paper,  and  uniformly  with  “  Around 
the  World,”  &c.  Square  crown  8vo.  7s.  6d. 

Meridiana  :  Adventures  of  Three  Englishmen  and 

Three  Russians  in  South  Africa.  Translated  from  the  French. 
With  Numerous  Illustrations.  Royal  i6mo.,  cloth  extra,  gilt 
edges.  7 s.  6d. 

The  Fur  Country.  Crown  8vo.  With  upwards  of  80 

Illustrations.  Cloth  extra.  10.?.  6d. 

Twenty  Thousand  Leagues  Under  the  Sea.  Trans¬ 
lated  and  Edited  by  the  Rev.  L.  P.  Mercier,  M.A.  With  113 
very  Graphic  Woodcuts.  Large  post  8vo.,  cloth  extra,  gilt  edges. 
10 s.  6d. 

Around  the  World  in  Eighty  Days.  Numerous  Illus¬ 

trations.  Square  crown  8vo.  7 s.  6d. 

From  the  Earth  to  the  Moon,  and  a  Trip  Round  It. 

Numerous  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  gilt  edges.  10s.  6d. 
New  Edition. 

A  Floating  City  and  the  Blockade  Runners.  Con¬ 
taining  about  50  very  fine  Full-page  Illustrations.  Square  crown 
8vo.  Cloth,  gilt  edges.  7 s.  6d. 

Dr.  Ox’s  Experiment ;  Master  Zacharius  ;  A  Drama 

in  the  Air  ;  A  Winter  Amid  the  Ice,  &c.  Numerous  full-page 
Illustrations.  Cloth,  gilt  edges.  7 s.  6d. 

Viardot  (L.)  Wonders  of  Italian  Art,  numerous  photo¬ 

graphic  and  other  illustrations.  Demy  8vo.  123-.  6d. 


39 


List  of  Publications. 


Viardot  (L.)  Wonders  of  Painting,  numerous  photographs 

and  other  illustrations.  Demy  8vo.  12 s.  6d. 

-  Wonders  of  Sculpture.  Numerous  Illustrations. 

Demy  8vo.  125.  6d. 

Vincent  (F.)  The  Land  of  the  White  Elephant :  Sights 
and  Scenes  in  South-Eastern  Asia.  With  Maps,  Plans,  and  Illustrations. 
8vo.  cloth  extra.  i8j. 


ALLER  (Rev.  C.  H.)  The  Names  on  the  Gates 

of  Pearl,  and  other  Studies. .  By  the  Rev.  C.  H.  Waller, 
M.A.  Crown  8vo,  cloth  extra.  6j. 

Warburton’s  (Col.  Egerton)  Journey  across 

Australia.  An  Account  of  the  Exploring  Expedition  sent  out  by 
Messrs.  Elder  and  Hughes,  under  the  command  of  Colonel  Egerton 
Warburton ;  giving  a  full  Account  of  his  Perilous  Journey  from  the 
cerrtre  to  Roebourne,  Western  Australia.  With  Illustrations  and  a  Map. 
Edited,  with  an  Introductory  Chapter,  by  H.  W.  Bates,  .Esq.,  of  the 
Royal  Geographical  Society.  [In  the  press. 

Warner  (C.  D.)  My  Summer  in  a  Garden.  Boards,  is.  6d.; 

cloth,  2 s.  (Low’s  Copyright  Series.) 

- Back-log  Studies.  Boards  is.  6d.;  cloth  2s.  (Low’s 

Copyright  Series.) 

Webster  (Daniel)  Life  of,  by  Geo.  T.  Curtis.  2  vols.  8vo. 

Cloth.  3  6s. 

Weppner  (M.)  The  Northern  Star  and  Southern  Cross. 

Being  the  Personal  Experiences,  Impressions,  and  Observations  of  Mar- 
garetha  Weppner,  in  a  Voyage  Round  the  World.  2  vols.  Crown  8vo, 
cloth.  245'.  [In  the  press. 

Werner  (Carl),  Nile  Sketches,  Painted  from  Nature  during 

his  travels  through  Egypt.  Imperial  folio,  in  Cardboard  Wrapper.  3/.  10s. 
Three  Series,  each  £ 3  10 s. 

Westropp  (H.  M.)  A  Manual  of  Precious  Stones  and 
Antique  Gems.  By  Hodder  M.  Westropp,  Author  of  “The 
Traveller’s  Art  Companion,”  “  Pre-Historic  Phases,”  &c.  Numerous 
Illustrations.  Small  post  8vo,  cloth  extra.  6s. 

Wheaton  (Henry)  Elements  of  International  Law.  New 

edition.  [In  the  press. 

When  George  the  Third  was  King.  2  vols.,  post  8vo.  21  s. 
Where  is  the  City  ?  i2mo.  cloth.  6s. 

White  (J.)  Sketches  from  America.  8vo.  12 s. 

White  (J.)  Te  Rou ;  or,  The  Maori  at  Home.  Exhibiting 

the  Social  Life,  Manners,  Habits,  and  Customs  of  the  Maori  Race  in 
New  Zealand  prior  to  the  introduction  of  civilization  amongst  them. 
Crown  8vo.,  cloth  extra.  105.  6d. 


40  Sampson  Low  and  Co.’s  List  of  Publications. 


White  (R.  G.)  Memoirs  of  the  Life  of  William  Shake¬ 

speare.  Post  8vo.  Cloth,  io s.  6d. 

Whitney  (Mrs.  A.  D.  T.)  The  Gayworthys.  Small  post 

8vo.  3s.  6d. 

- Faith  Gartney.  Small  post  8vo.  3^.  6d.  And  in  Low’s 

Cheap  Series,  is.  6d.  and  2 s. 

— - Hitherto.  Small  post  8vo.  3 s.  6d.  and  2 s.  6d. 

- Summer  in  Leslie  Goldthwaite’s  Life.  Small  post 

8  vo.  3s.  6d. 

- The  Other  Girls.  Small  post  8vo.,  cloth  extra.  3^.  6d. 

- We  Girls.  Small  post  8vo.  3^.  6d.  Cheap  Edition. 

is.  6d.  and  2$. 

Whyte  (J.  W.  H.)  A  Land  Journey  from  Asia  to  Europe. 

Crown  8vo.  12s. 

Wikoff  (H.)  The  Four  Civilizations  of  the  World. 

An  Historical  Retrospect.  Crown  8vo.,  cloth.  6s. 

Wills,  A  Few  Hints  on  Proving,  without  Professional 

Assistance.  By  a  Probate  Court  Official.  Fourth  Edition, 
revised  and  considerably  enlarged,  with  Forms  of  Wills,  Residuary 
Accounts,  &c.  Fcap.  8vo.,  cloth  limp.  is. 

Winter  at  the  Italian  Lakes.  With  Frontispiece  View  of 

Lake  Como.  Small  post  8vo.,  cloth  extra,  ys.  6d. 

Woman’s  (A)  Faith.  A  Novel.  By  the  Author  of  “  Ethel.” 

3  vols.  Post  8vo.  315-.  6d. 

Wonders  of  Sculpture.  See  Viardot. 

Worcester’s  ('Dr.'),  New  and  Greatly  Enlarged  Dictionary 
of  the  English  Language.  Adapted  for  Library  or  College  Refer¬ 
ence,  comprising  40,000  Words  more  than  Johnson’s  Dictionary.  4to. 
cloth,  1,834  pp.  Price  31  $.  6d.  well  bound  ;  ditto,  half  mor.  2/.  2 s. 

“  The  volumes  before  us  show  a  vast  amount  of  diligence  ;  but  with 
Webster  it  is  diligence  in  combination  with  fancifulness, — with  Wor¬ 
cester  in  combination  with  good  sense  and  judgment.  Worcester’s  is  the 
soberer  and  safer  book,  and  may  be  pronounced  the  best  existing  English 
Lexicon.  ”  — A  thenceum. 

Words  of  Wellington,  Maxims  and  Opinions,  Sentences 

and  Reflections  of  the  Great  Duke,  gathered  from  his  Despatches, 
Letters,  and  Speeches  (Bayard  Series).  2s.  6d. 

Young  (L.)  Acts  of  Gallantry;  giving  a  detail  of  every  act 

for  which  the  Silver  Medal  of  the  Royal  Humane  Society  has  been 
granted  during  the  last  Forty-one  years.  Crown  8vo.,  cloth.  7s.  6d. 


CHISWICK  PRESS  PRINTED  BY  WHTTTINGHAM  AND  WILKINS, 
TOOKS  COURT,  CHANCERY  LANE.
