TRYAL OF WITCHES,

AT THE ASSIZES

BURY ST. EDMONDS

COUNTY OF SUFFOLK:

THE TENTH DAY OF MARCH, 1664.

£<r JWaMjefo $ate, at*

THEN

Lord Chii'j Baron of His Majestie's Court of Exchequer

BEPRINTED VERBATIM
FKOM 1 ORIGINAL EDITION OP S2. I

WITH AN APPENr
CLARK, ESQ.., OF GRRAT TOTIIAM, ESSEX

TRYAL OF WITCHES,

AT THE ASSIZES

HELD AT

BURY ST. EDMONDS

FOR THE

COUNTY OF SUFFOLK;

ON

THE TENTH DAY OF MARCH, 1664.

BEFORE

Sir JWatt&cfo $ale, Ht.

THEN

Lord Chief Baron of His Majesties Court of Exchequer.
REPRINTED VERBATIM

FROM THE ORIGINAL EDITION OF 1682.

WITH AN APPENDIX
BY C. CLARK, ESQ., OF GREAT TOTHAM, ESSEX.

aontron .
JOHN RUSSELL SMITH,

4, OLD COMPTON STREET, SOHO.

1838.

GREENWICH:

PRINTED BY HENRY S. RICHARDSON,

STOCKWELL STREET.

TO THE READER.

This Tryal of Witches hath lain a long time in a private
Gentleman's hands in the Country, it being given to him by
the Person that took it in the Court for his own satisfaction ;
but it came lately to my hands, and having perused it, I found
it a very remarkable thing, and fit to be Publish' d ; especially
in these times, wherein things of this nature are so much
controverted, and that by persons of much Learning on both
sides. I thought that so exact a Kelation of this Tryal would
probably give more satisfaction to a great many persons, by
reason that it is pure Matter of Fact, and that evidently
Demonstrated ; than the Arguments and Reasons of other
very Learned Men, that probably may not be so Intelligible
to all Readers ; especially, this being held before a Judge,
whom for his Integrity, Learning, and Law, hardly any Age,
either before or since could parellel ; who not only took a
great deal of paines, and spent much time in this Tryal
himself; but had the Assistance and Opinion of several other
very Eminent and Learned Persons : So that this being the
most perfect Narrative of any thing of this Nature hitherto
Extant, made me unwilling to deprive the World of the
Benefit of it; which is the sole Motive that induced me to
Publish it.

FAREWEL.
London, 1682.

9 ^rjjal of WLitfytg,

AT the Assizes and General Gaol delivery, held at Bury
St. Edmonds for the County of Suffolk, the Tenth day of
March, in the Sixteenth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign
Lord King Charles II. before Matthew Hale, Knight, Lord
Chief Baron of His Majesties Court of Exchequer ; Rose
Cullender and Amy Duny, Widows, both of Leystoff, in
the County aforesaid, were severally indicted for Bewitching
Elizabeth and Ann Durent, Jane Booking, Susan Chandler, William Durent, Elizabeth and Deborah Pacy :
And the said Cullender and Duny, being arraigned upon
the said Indictments, pleaded Not Guilty : And afterwards, upon a long Evidence, were found GUILTY, and
thereupon had Judgment to DYE for the same.

The Evidence whereupon these Persons were convicted
of Witchcraft, stands upon divers particular Circumstances.

i. THREE of the Parties above-named, viz. Ann Durent,
Susan Chandler, and Elizabeth Pacy, were brought to Bury to
the Assizes and were in a reasonable good condition : But that
Morning they came into the Hall to give Instructions for the
drawing of their Bills of Indictments, the Three Persons fell
into strange and violent fits, screeking out in a most sad manner, so that they could not in any wise give any Instructions
in the Court who were the Cause of their Distemper. And
although they did after some certain space recover out of their
fits, yet they were every one of them struck Dumb, so that
none of them could speak neither at that time, nor during the
Assizes until the Conviction of the supposed Witches.

As concerning William Durent, being an Infant, his Mother
Dorothy Durent sworn and examined deposed in open Court,
That about the Tenth of March, Nono Caroli Secundi,
she having a special occasion to go from home, and having
none in her House to take care of her said Child (it then
sucking) desired Amy Duny her Neighbour, to look to her
Child during her absence, for which she promised her to

give her a Penny : but the said Dorothy Durent desired the
said Amy not to Suckle her Child, and laid a great charge
upon her not to do it. Upon which it was asked by the
Court, why she did give that direction, she being an old
Woman and not capable of giving Suck? It was answered
by the said Dorothy Durent, that she very well knew that
she did not give Suck, but that for some years before, she
had gone under the Eeputation of a Witch, which was one
cause made her give her the caution : Another was, That it
was customary with old Women, that if they did look after a
sucking Child, and nothing would please it but the Breast,
they did use to please the Child to give it the Breast, and it
did please the Child, but it sucked nothing but Wind, which
did the Child hurt. Nevertheless after the departure of this
Deponent, the said Amy did Suckle the Child : And after the
return of the said Dorothy, the said Amy did acquaint her.
That she had given Suck to the Child contrary to her command. Whereupon, the Deponent was very angry with the
said Amy for the same ; at which the said Amy was much discontented, and used many high Expressions and Threatning
Speeches towards her ; telling her, That she had as good to
have done otherwise than to have found fault with her, and so
departed out of her House : And that very Night her Son fell
into strange fits of swounding, and was held in such terrible
manner, that she was much affrighted therewith, and so continued for divers weeks. And the said Examinant farther said,
that she being exceedingly troubled at her Childs Distemper,
did go to a certain Person named Doctor Jacob, who lived
at Yarmouth, who had the reputation in the Country, to help
children that were Bewitch'd ; who advis'd her to hang up the
Childs Blanket in the Chimney-corner all day, and at night
when she put the Child to Bed, to put it into the said blanket,
and if she found anything in it, she should not be afraid, but
to throw it into the Fire. And this Deponent did according to
his direction ; and at night when she took down the Blanket
with an intent to put her Child therein, there fell out of the
same a great Toad, which ran up and down the hearth, and she
having a young youth only with her in the House, desired him
to catch the Toad, and throw it into the Fire, which the youth
did accordingly, and held it there with the Tongs ; and as soon
as it was in the Fire it made a great and horrible Noise, and
after a space there was a flashing in the Fire like Gun-powder,
making a noise like the discharge of a Pistol, and thereupon
the Toad was no more seen nor heard. It was asked by the
Court, if that after the noise and flashing, there was not the
Substance of the Toad to be seen to consume in the fire ? And
it was answered by the said Dorothy Durent, that after the

flashing and noise, there was no more seen than if there had
been none there. The next day there came a young Woman a
Kinswoman of the said Amy, and a neighbour of this Deponent, and told this Deponent, that her Aunt (meaning the
said Amy) was in a most lamentable condition having her face
all scorched with fire, and that she was sitting alone in her
House, in her smock without any fire. And thereupon this
Deponent went into the House of the said Amy Duny to see
her, and found her in the same condition as was related to
her; for her Face, her Leggs, and Thighs, which this Deponent saw, seemed very much scorched and burnt with Fire, at
which this Deponent seemed much to wonder. And asked the
said Amy how she came into that sad condition ? and the said
Amy replied, she might thank her for it, for that she this
Deponent was the cause thereof, but that she should live to
see some of her Children dead, and she upon Crutches. And
this Deponent farther saith, that after the burning of the said
Toad, her Child recover'd, and was well again, and was living
at the time of the Assizes. And this Deponent farther saith,
That about the 6th. of March, n° Car. 2. her Daughter Elizabeth Durent, being about the Age of Ten Years, was taken in
like manner as her first Child was, and in her fits complained
much of Amy Duny, and said, That she did appear to her,
and AfflrCt her in such manner as the former. And she this
Deponent going to the Apothecaries for some thing for her
said Child, when she did return to her own House, she found
the said Amy Duny there, and asked her what she did do
there ? and her answer was, That she came to see her Child,
and to give it some water. But she this Deponent was very
angry with her, and thrust her forth of her doors, and when
she was out of doors, she said, You need not be so angry, for
your Child will not live long : and this was on a Saturday,
and the Child dyed on the Monday following. The cause of
whose Death this Deponent verily believeth was occasion'd by
the Witchcraft of the said Amy Duny : for that the said Amy
hath been long reputed to be a Witch, and a person of very
evil behaviour, whose Kindred and Relations have been many
of them accused for Witchcraft, and some of them have been
Condemned.

The said Deponent further saith, that not long after the
death of her Daughter Elizabeth Durent, she this Deponent
was taken with a Lameness in both her Leggs, from the knees
downward, that she was fain to go upon Crutches, and that
she had no other use of them but only to bear a little upon
them till she did remove her Crutches, and so continued till
the time of the Assizes, that the Witch came to be Tryed, and

8

was there upon her Crutches; the Court asked her, That at
the time she was taken with this Lameness, if it were with her
according to the Custom of Women ? Her Answer was, that
it was so, and that she never had any stoppages of those
things, but when she was with Child.

This is the Substance of her Evidence to this Indictment.

There was one thing very remarkable, that after she had
gone upon Crutches for upwards of Three Years, and went
upon them at the time of the Assizes in the Court when she
gave her Evidence, and upon the Juries bringing in their
Verdict, by which the said Amy Duny was found Guilty, to
the great admiration of all Persons, the said Dorothy Durent
was restored to the use of her Limbs, and went home without
making use of her Crutches.

ii. As concerning Elizabeth and Deborah Pacy, the first of
the Age of Eleven Years, the other of the age of Nine Years
or thereabouts : as to the Elder, she was brought into the
Court at the time of the Instructions given to draw up the
Indictments, and afterwards at the time of Tryal of the said
Prisoners, but could not speak one Word all the time, and for
the most part she remained as one wholly senseless as one in
a deep Sleep, and could move no part of her body, and all the
Motion of Life that appeared in her was, that as she lay upon
Cushions in the Court upon her back, her stomack and belly
by the drawing of her breath, would arise to a great height :
and after the said Elizabeth had lain a long time on the Table
in the Court, she came a little to her self and sate up, but
could neither see nor speak, but was sensible of what was said
to her, and after a while she laid her Head on the Bar of the
Court with a Cushion under it, and her hand and her Apron
upon that, and there she lay a good space of time : and by the
direction of the Judge, Amy Duny was privately brought to
Elizabeth Pacy, and she touched her hand; whereupon the
Child without so much as seeing her, for her Eyes were closed
all the while, suddenly leaped up, and catched Amy Duny by
the hand, and afterwards by the face; and with her Nails
scratched her till Blood came, and would by no means leave
her till she was taken from her, and afterwards the Child
would still be pressing towards her, and making signs of
Anger conceived against her.

Deborah the younger Daughter was held in such extream
manner, that her Parents wholly despaired of her life, and
therefore could not bring her to the Assizes.

The Evidence which was given concerning these Two
Children was to this Effect.

SAMUEL PACY a Merchant of Leystoff aforesaid, (a man
who carried himself with much soberness during the Tryal,
from whom proceeded no words either of Passion or Malice,
though his Children were so greatly Afflicted,) Sworn and
Examined, Deposeth, That his younger Daughter Deborah,
upon Thursday the Tenth of October last, was suddenly taken
with a Lameness in her Leggs, so that she could not stand,
neither had she any strength in her Limbs to support her, and
so she continued until the Seventeenth day of the same Month,
which day being fair and Sunshiny, the Child desired to be
carryed on the East part of the House, to be set upon the
Bank which looketh upon the Sea ; and whil'st she was sitting
there, Amy Duny came to this Deponents House to buy some
Herrings, but being denyed she went away discontented,
and presently returned again, and was denyed, and likwise the
third time and was denyed as at first ; and at her last going
away, she went away grumbling ; but what she said was not
perfectly understood. But at the very same instant of time,
the said Child was taken with most violent fits, feeling most
extream pain in her Stomach, like the pricking of Pins, and
Shreeking out in a most dreadful manner, like unto a Whelp,
and not like unto a sensible Creature. And in this extremity
the Child continued to the great grief of the Parents until the
Thirtieth of the same Month. During this time this Deponent
sent for one Dr. Feavor, a Doctor of Physick, to take his
advice concerning his Childs Distemper; the Doctor being
come, he saw the Child in those fits, but could not conjecture
(as he then told this Deponent, and afterwards affirmed in open
Court, at this Tryal) what might be the cause of the Childs
Affliction. And this Deponent farther saith, That by reason
of the circumstances aforesaid, and in regard Amy Duny is a
Woman of an ill Fame, and commonly reported to be a Witch
and a Sorceress, and for that the said Child in her fits would
cry out of Amy Duny as the cause of her Malady, and that she
did affright her with Apparitions of her Person (as the Child
in the intervals of her fits related) he this Deponent did suspect
the said Amy Duny for a Witch, and charged her with the
injury and wrong to his Child, and caused her to be set in the
Stocks on the Twenty-eighth of the same October : and during
the time of her continuance there, one Alice Letteridge and
Jane Buxton demanding of her (as they also affirmed in Court
upon their Oathes) what should be the reason of Mr. Pacy's
Childs Distemper? telling her, That she was suspected to be
the cause thereof; she reply ed, Mr. Pacy keeps a great stir

10

about his Child, but let him stay until he hath done as much
by his Children, as I have done by mine. And being further
examined, what she had done to her Children ? She answered,
That she had been fain to open her Child's Mouth with a Tap
to give it Victuals.

And the said Deponent further deposeth, That within two
days after speaking of the said words being the Thirtieth of
October, the eldest Daughter Elizabeth, fell into extream fits,
insomuch, that they could not open her Mouth to give her
breath, to preserve her Life without the help of a Tap which
they were enforced to use ; and the younger Child was in the
like manner Afflicted, so that they used the same also for her
Relief.

And further the said Children being grievously afflicted
would severally complain in their extremity, and also in the
intervals, That Amy Duny (together with one other Woman
whose person and Cloathes they described) did thus Afflict
them, their Apparitions appearing before them, to their great
terrour and affrightment : And sometimes they would cry out,
saying, There stands Amy Duny, and there Rose Cullender ;
the other Person troubling them.

Their fits were various, sometimes they would be lame on
one side of their Bodies, sometimes on the other : sometimes
a soreness over their whole Bodies, so as they could endure
none to touch them : at other times they would be restored to
the perfect use of their Limbs, and deprived of their Hearing ;
at other times of their Sight, at other times of their Speech ;
sometimes by the space of one day, sometimes for two ; and
once they were wholly deprived of their Speech for Eight days
together, and then restored to their Speech again. At other
times they would fall into Swoundings, and upon the recovery
to their Speech they would Cough extreamly, and bring up
much Elegme, and with the same crooked Pins, and one time a
Two-penny Nail with a very broad head, which Pins (amounting to Forty or more) together with the Two-penny Nail were
produced in Court, with the affirmation of the said Deponent,
that he was present when the said Nail was Vomited up, and
also most of the Pins. Commonly at the end of every fit they
would cast up a Pin, and sometimes they would have four or
five fits in one day.

In this manner the said Children continued with this Deponent for the space of two Months, during which time in their
Intervals this Deponent would cause them to Read some

11

Chapters in the New Testament. Whereupon this Deponent
several times observed, that they would read till they came to
the Name of Lord, or Jesus, or Christ ; and then before they
could pronounce either of the said Words they would suddenly
fall into their fits. But when they came to the Name of Satan,
or Devil, they would clap their Fingers upon the Book, crying
out, This bites, but makes me speak right well.

At such time as they be recovered out of their fits (occasion'd as this Deponent conceives upon their naming of Lord,
or Jesus, or Christ,) this Deponent hath demanded of them,
what is the cause they cannot pronounce those words, They
reply and say, That Amy Duny saith, I must not use that name.

And farther, the said Children after their fits were past,
would tell, how that Amy Duny, and Rose Cullender would
appear before them, holding their Fists at them, threatning,
That if they related either what they saw or heard, that they
would Torment them Ten times more than ever they did
before.

In their fits they would cry out, There stands Amy Duny, or
Rose Cullender ; and sometimes in one place and sometimes in
another, running with great violence to the place where they
fancied them to stand, striking at them as if they present ; they
would appear to them sometimes spinning, and sometimes reeling, or in other postures, deriding or threatning them.

And this Deponent farther saith, That his Children being
thus Tormented by all the space aforesaid, and finding no
hopes of amendment, he sent them to his Sisters House, one
Margaret Arnold, who lived at Yarmouth, to make tryal,
whether the change of the Air might do them any good. And
how, and in what manner they were afterwards held, he this
Deponent refers himself to the Testimony of his said Sister.

Margaret Arnold, Sworn and Examined, saith, That the said
Elizabeth and Deborah Pacy came to her House about the
Thirtieth of November last, her Brother acquainted her, that
he thought they were Bewitch' d, for that they vomited Pins ;
and farther Informed her of the several passages which occurred
at his own House. This Deponent said, that she gave no credit
to that which was related to her, conceiving possibly the Children might use some deceit in putting Pins in their mouths themselves. Wherefore this Deponent unpinned all their Cloathes,
and left not so much as one Pin upon them, but sewed all the
Cloathes they wore, instead of pinning of them. But this De12

ponent saith, that notwithstanding all this care and circumspection of hers, the Children afterwards raised at several times
at least Thirty Pins in her presence, and had most fierce and
violent Fitts upon them.

The Children would in their Fitts cry out against Rose Cullender and Amy Duny, affirming that they saw them ; and they
threatned to Torment them Ten times more, if they complained
of them. At some times the Children (only) would see things
run up and down the House in the appearance of Mice; and
one of them suddainly snapt one with the Tongs, and threw it
into the fire, and it screeched out like a Rat.

At another time, the younger Child being out of her Fitts
went out of Doors to take a little fresh Air, and presently a
little thing like a Bee flew upon her Face, and would have
gone into her Mouth, whereupon the Child ran in all haste to
the door to get into the House again, screeking out in a most
terrible manner; whereupon, this Deponent made haste to come
to her, but before she could get to her, the Child fell into her
swooning Fitt, and at last with much pain straining herself,
she vomitted up a Two-penny Nail with a broad Head ; and
after that the Child had raised up the Nail she came to her
understanding ; and being demanded by this Deponent, how
she came by this Nail ? she Answered, That the Bee brought
this Nail and forced it into her Mouth.

And at other times, the Elder Child declared unto this
Deponent, that during the time of her Fitts, she saw Flies come
unto her, and bring with them in their Mouthes crooked Pins ;
and after the Child had thus declared the same, she fell again
into violent Fits, and afterwards raised several Pins.

At another time, the said Elder Child declared unto this
Deponent, and sitting by the Fire suddainly started up and
said, she saw a Mouse, and she crept under the Table looking
after it, and at lenght, she put something in her Apron, saying,
she had caught it ; and immediately she ran to the Fire and
threw it in, and there did appear upon it to this Deponent,
like the flashing of Gun-powder, though she confessed she saw
nothing in the Childs Hand.

At another time the said Child being speechless, but otherwise, of perfect understanding, ran round about the House
holding her Apron, crying hush, hush, as if there had been
Poultrey in the House ; but this Deponent could perceive
nothing : but at last she saw the Child stoop as if she had

13

catch't at something, and put it into her Apron, and afterwards
made as if she had thrown it into the Fire : but this Deponent could not discover any thing : but the Child afterwards
being restored to her speech, she this Deponent demanded of
her what she saw at the time she used such a posture? who
answered, That she saw a Duck.

At another time, the Younger daughter being recovered out
of her Fitts, declared, That Amy Duny had been with her, and
that she tempted her to Drown her self, and to cut her Throat,
or otherwise to Destroy her self.

At another time, in their Fitts they both of them cryed out
upon Eose Cullender and Amy Duny, complaining against
them ; Why do you not come your selves, but send your Imps
to Torment us ?

These several passages as most remarkable, the said Deponent did particularly set down as they daily happen'd, and for
the reasons aforesaid, she doth verily believe in her conscience,
that the Children were bewitched, and by the said Amy Duny,
and Eose Cullender ; though at first she could hardly be induced to believe it.

As concerning Ann Durent, one other of the Parties, supposed to be bewitched, present in Court.

Edmund Durent her Father Sworn and Examined; said,
That he also lived in the said Town of Leystoff, and that the
said Eose Cullender, about the latter end of November last,
came into this Deponents House to buy some Herrings of his
Wife, but being denyed by her, the said Eose returned in a
discontented manner; and upon the first of December after,
his Daughter Ann Durent was very sorely Afflicted in her
Stomach, and felt great pain, like the pricking of Pins, and
then fell into swooning fitts, and after the Eecovery from her
Fitts, she declared, That she had seen the Apparition of the
said Eose, who threatned to Torment her. In this manner she
continued from the first of December, until this present time of
Tryal ; having likewise vomited up divers Pins (produced here
in Court.) This Maid was present in Court, but could not
speak to declare her knowledge, but fell into most violent fits
when she was brought before Eose Cullender.

Ann Baldwin Sworn and Examined, Deposeth the same
thing as touching the Bewitching of the said Ann Durent.

14

As concerning Jane Booking who was so weak, she could
not be brought to the Assizes.

Diana Booking Sworn and Examined, Deposed, That she
lived in the same Town of Leystoff, and that her said Daughter having been formerly Afflicted with swooning fitts, recovered well of them, and so continued for a certain time ; and
upon the First of February last, she was taken also with great
pain in her Stomach, like pricking with Pins ; and afterwards
fell into swooning fitts and so continued till the Deponents
coming to the Assizes, having during the same time taken
little or no food, but daily vomiting crooked Pins ; and upon
Sunday last raised Seven Pins. And whilst her fits were upon
her she would spread forth her Arms with her hands open, and
use postures as if she catched at something, and would instantly
close her hands again; which being immediatly forced open,
they found several Pins diversly crooked, but could neither
see nor perceive how or in what manner they were conveyed
thither. At another time, the same Jane being in another of
her fitts, talked as if she were discoursing with some persons
in the Room, (though she would give no answer nor seem to
take notice of any person then present) and would in like
manner cast abroad her Arms, saying, I will not have it, I will
not have it ; and at last she said, Then I will have it, and so
waving her Arm with her hand open, she would presently close
the same, which instantly forced open, they found in it a LathNail. In her Fitts she would frequently complain of Rose
Cullender and Amy Duny, saying, That now she saw Rose
Cullender standing at the Beds feet, and another time at the Beds
head, and so in other places. At last she was stricken Dumb
and could not speak one Word, though her fitts were not upon
her, and so she continued for some days, and at last her speech
came to her again, and she desired her Mother to get her some
Meat; and being demanded the reason why she could not
speak in so long time ? She answered, That Amy Duny would
not suffer her to speak. This Lath-Nail, and divers of the
Pins were produced in Court.

As concerning Susan Chandler, one other of the Parties
supposed to be Bewitched and present in Court.

Mary Chandler Mother of the said Susan, Sworn and Examined, Deposed and said, That about the beginning of February last past, the said Rose Cullender and Amy Duny were
Charged by Mr. Samuel Pacy for Bewitching of his Daughters.
And a Warrant being granted at the request of the said Mr.

15

Pacy, by Sir Edmund Bacon, Baronet, one of the Justices of
the Peace for the County of Suffolk, to bring them before him,
and they being brought before him were Examined, and Confessed nothing. He gave order that they should be searched ;
whereupon this Deponent with five others were appointed to do
the same : and coming to the House of Rose Cullender, they
did acquaint her with what they were come about, and asked
whether she was contented that they should search her ? she
did not oppose it, whereupon they began at her Head, and so
stript her naked, and in the lower part of her Belly they found
a thing like a Teat of an Inch long, they questioned her about
it, and she said, That she had got a strain by carrying of water
which caused that Excrescence. But upon narrower search,
they found in her Privy Parts three more Excrescences or
Teats, but smaller than the former: This Deponent farther
saith, That in the long Teat at the end thereof there was a
little hole, and it appeared unto them as if it had been lately
sucked, and upon the straining of it there issued out white
milkie Matter.

And this Deponent farther saith, That her said Daughter
(being of the Age of Eighteen Years) was then in Service in
the said Town of Leystoff, and rising up early the next Morning to Wash, this Rose Cullender appeared to her, and took
her by the hand, whereat she was much affrighted, and went
forthwith to her Mother, (being in the same town) and acquainted her with what she had seen; but being extreamly
terrified, she fell extream sick, much grieved at her Stomach;
and that Night after being in Bed with another young Woman,
she suddenly scrieked out, and fell into such extream fits as if
she were distracted, crying against Rose Cullender; saying,
she would come to bed to her. She continued in this manner
beating and wearing her self, insomuch, that this Deponent was
glad to get help to attend her. In her Intervals she would
declare, That some time she saw Rose Cullender, at another
time with a great Dog with her : She also vomited up divers
crooked Pins ; and sometimes she was stricken with blindness,
and at another time she was Dumb, and so she appeared to be
in Court when the Tryal of the Prisoners was ; for she was not
able to speak her knowledge; but being brought into the Court
at the Tryal, she suddenly fell into her fits, and being carryed
out of the Court again, within the space of half an hour she
came to her self and recovered her speech, and thereupon was
immediatly brought into the Court, and asked by the Court,
whether she was in condition to take an Oath, and to give
Evidence, she said she could. But when she was Sworn, and
asked what she could say against either of the Prisoners?
before she could make any answer, she fell into her fits, screek16

ing out in a miserable manner, crying Burn her, burn her,
which were all the Words she could speak.

Robert Chandler, father of the said Susan, gave in the same
Evidence, that his Wife Mary Chandler had given ; only as to
the searching of Rose Cullender as aforesaid.

This was the sum and Substance of the Evidence which was
given against the Prisoners concerning the Bewitching of the
Children before mentioned. At the hearing this Evidence
there were divers known persons, as Mr. Serjeant Keeling,
Mr. Serjeant Earl, and Mr. Serjeant Bernard, present. Mr.
Serjeant Keeling seemed much unsatisfied with it, and thought
it not sufficient to Convict the Prisoners : for admitting that
the Children were in Truth Bewitched, yet said he, it can never
be applyed to the Prisoners, upon the Imagination only of the
Parties Afflicted ; For if that might be allowed, no person
whatsoever can be in safety, for perhaps they might fancy another person, who might altogether be innocent in such matters.

There was also Dr. Brown of Norwich, a Person of great
knowledge; who after this Evidence given, and upon view of
the three persons in Court, was desired to give his Opinion,
what he did conceive of them : and he was clearly of Opinion,
that the persons were Bewitched; and said, That in Denmark
there had been lately a great Discovery of Witches, who used
the very same way of Afflicting Persons, by conveying Pins
into them, and crooked as these Pins were, with Needles and
Nails. And his Opinion was, That the Devil in such cases did
work upon the Bodies of Men and Women, upon a Natural
Foundation, (that is) to stir up and excite such humours superabounding in their Bodies to a great excess, whereby he did in
an extraordinary manner Afflict them with such Distempers as
their Bodies were most subject to, as particularly appeared in
these Children ; for he conceived, that these swouning Fits
were Natural, and nothing else but that they call the Mother,
but only heightned to a great excess by the subtilty of the
Devil, co-operating with the Malice of these which we term
Witches, at whose Instance he doth these Villanies.

Besides the particulars above-mention'd touching the said
persons Bewitched, there were many other things Objected
against them for a further proof and manifestation that the
said Children were Bewitched.

As First, during the time of the Tryal, there were some
experiments made with the Persons Afflicted, by bringing the
Persons to touch them ; and it was observed, that when they

17

were in the midst of their Fitts, to all Mens apprehension
wholly deprived of all sense and understanding, closing their
Fists in such manner, as that the strongest Man in the Court
could not force them open ; yet by the least touch of one of
these supposed Witches, Rose Cullender by Name, they would
suddenly shriek out opening their hands, which accident would
not happen by the touch of any other person.

And least they might privatly see when they were touched,
by the said Rose Cullender, they were blinded with their own
Aprons, and the touching took the same Effect as before.

There was an ingenious person that objected, there might be
a great fallacy in this experiment, and there ought not to be
any stress put upon this to Convict the Parties, for the Children might counterfeit this their Distemper, and perceiving what
was done to them, they might in such manner suddenly alter
the motion and gesture of their Bodies, on purpose to induce
persons to believe that they were not natural, but wrought
strangely by the touch of the Prisoners.

Wherefore to avoid this scruple it was privatly desired by
the Judge, that the Lord Cornwallis, Sir Edmund Bacon, and
Mr. Serjeant Keeling, and some other Gentlemen there in
Court, would attend one of the Distempered persons in the
farther part of the Hall, whilst she was in her fits, and then to
send for one of the Witches, to try what would then happen,
which they did accordingly : and Amy Duny was conveyed
from the Bar and brought to the Maid: they put an Apron
before her Eyes, and then one other person touched her hand,
which produced the same effect as the touch of the Witch did
in the Court. Whereupon the Gentlemen returned, openly
protesting, that they did believe the whole transaction of this
business was a meer Imposture.

This put the Court and all persons into a stand. But at length
Mr. Pacy did declare, That possibly the Maid might be deceived by a suspition that the Witch touched her when she did
not. For he had observed divers times, that although they
could not speak, but were deprived of the use of their Tongues
and Limbs, that their understandings were perfect, for that
they have related divers things which have been when they
were in their fits, after they were recovered out of them. This
saying of Mr. Pacy was found to be true afterwards, when his
Daughter was fully recovered (as she afterwards was) as shall
in due time be related : For she was asked, whither she did
hear and understand any thing that was done and acted in the

18

Court, during the time that she lay as one deprived of her
understanding ? and she said, she did : and by the Opinions of
some, this experiment, (which others would have a Fallacy)
was rather a confirmation that the Parties were really Bewitched, than otherwise : for say they, it is not possible that
any should counterfeit such Distempers, being accompanied
with such various Circumstances, much less Children ; and for
so long time, and yet undiscovered by their Parents and Relations : For no man can suppose that they should all Conspire
together, (being out of several families, and, as they Affirm, no
way related one to the other, and scarce of familiar acquaintance) to do an Act of this nature whereby no benefit or advantage could redound to any of the Parties, but a guilty
Conscience for Perjuring themselves in taking the Lives of
two poor simple Women away, and there appears no Malice in
the Case. For the Prisoners themselves did scarce so much as
Object it. Wherefore, say they, it is very evident that the
Parties were Bewitched, and that when they apprehend or
understand by any means, that the persons who have done
them this wrong are near, or touch them ; then their spirits
being more than ordinarily moved with rage and anger at
them being present, they do use more violent gestures of their
Bodies, and extend forth their hands, as desirous to lay hold
upon them ; which at other times not having the same occasion,
the instance there falls not out the same.

21y. One John Soam of Leystoff aforesaid, Yeoman, a sufficient Person, Deposeth, That not long since, in harvest time
he had three Carts which brought home his Harvest, and
as they were going into the Field to load, one of the Carts
wrenched the Window of Rose Cullenders House, whereupon
she came out in a great rage and threatned this Deponent for
doing that wrong, and so they passed along into the Fields
and loaded all the Three Carts, the other two Carts returned
safe home, and back again, twice loaded that day afterwards ;
but as to this Cart which touched Rose Cullenders House,
after it was loaded, it was overturned twice or thrice that day ;
and after that they had loaded it again the second or third
time, as they brought it through the Gate which leadeth out of
the Field into the Town, the Cart stuck so fast in the Gateshead, that they could not possibly get it through, but were
inforced to cut down the Post of the Gate to make the Cart
pass through, although they could not perceive that the Cart
did of either side touch the Gate-posts. And this Deponent
further saith, That after they had got it through the Gate-way,
they did with much difficulty get it home into the Yard ; but
for all that they could do, they could not get the Cart near

19

unto the place where they should unload the Corn, but were
fain to unload it at a great distance from the place, and when
they began to unload they found much difficulty therein, it
being so hard a labour that they were tired that first came ;
and when others came to assist them, their Noses burst forth a
bleeding : so they were fain to desist and leave it until the next
Morning, and then they unloaded it without any difficulty at all.

Robert Sherringham also Deposeth against Rose Cullender,
That about Two Years since, passing along the Street with his
Cart and Horses, the Axletree of his Cart touched her House,
and broke down some part of it, at which, she was very much
displeased, threatning him, that his Horses should suffer for it ;
and so it happen'd, for all those Horses, being Four in Number, died within a short time after: since that time he hath had
great Losses by the suddain dying of his other Cattle ; so soon
as his Sows pigged, the Pigs would leap and caper, and immediately fall down and dye. Also, not long after, he was taken
with a Lameness in his Limbs that he could neither go nor
stand for some days. After all this, he was very much vexed
with great Number of Lice of an extraordinary bigness, and
although he many times shifted himself, yet he was not any
thing the better, but would swarm again with them; so that
in the Conclusion he was forc'd to burn all his Clothes, being
two suits of Apparel, and then was clean from them.

As concerning Amy Duny, one Richard Spencer Deposeth,
That about the first of September last, he heard her say at his
House, That the Devil would not let her rest until she were
Revenged on one Cornelius Sandeswell's Wife.

Ann Sandeswell, Wife unto the above-said Cornelius, Deposed, That about Seven or Eight Years since, she having
bought a certain number of Geese, meeting with Amy Duny,
she told her, If she did not fetch her Geese home they would
all be Destroyed : which in a few days after came to pass.

Afterwards the said Amy became Tenant to this Deponents
Husband for a House, who told her, That if she looked not
well to such a Chimney in her House, that the same would
fall: Whereupon this Deponent replyed, That it was a new
one; but not minding much her Words, at that time they
parted. But in a short time the Chimney fell down according
as the said Amy had said.

Also this Deponent farther saith, That her Brother being a
Fisherman, and using to go into the Northern Seas, she desired

20

him to send her a Firkin of Fish, which he did accordingly ;
and she having notice that the said Firkin was brought into
Ley stoff-Road , she desired a Boatman to bring it ashore with
the other Goods they were to bring ; and she going down to
meet the Boat-man to receive her Fish, desired the said Amy
to go along with her to help her home with it ; Amy Reply ed,
She would go when she had it. And thereupon this Deponent
went to the Shoar without her, and demanded of the Boat-man
the Firkin, they told her, That they could not keep it in the
Boat from falling into the Sea, and they thought it was gone to
the Devil, for they never saw the like before. And being demanded by this Deponent, whether any other Goods in the
Boat were likewise lost as well as hers? They answered,
Not any.

This was the substance of the whole Evidence given against
the Prisoners at the Bar ; who being demanded what they had
to say for themselves ? They replyed, Nothing material to any
thing that was proved against them. Whereupon the Judge
in giving his direction to the Jury, told them, That he would
not repeat the Evidence unto them, least by so doing he should
wrong the Evidence on the one side or on the other. Only
this acquainted them, That they had Two things to enquire
after. First, Whether or no these Children were Bewitched ?
Secondly, Whether the Prisoners at the Bar were Guilty of it?

That there were such Creatures as Witches he made no
doubt at all ; For First, the Scriptures had affirmed so much.
Secondly, The wisdom of all Nations had provided Laws
against such Persons, which is an Argument of their confidence
of such a Crime. And such hath been the judgment of this
Kingdom, as appears by that Act of Parliament which hath
provided Punishments proportionable to the quality of the
Offence. And desired them, strictly to observe their Evidence;
and desired the great God of Heaven to direct their Hearts in
this weighty thing they had in hand: For to Condemn the
Innocent, and to let the Guilty go free, were both an Abomination to the Lord.

With this short Direction the Jury departed from the Bar,
and vyithin the space of half an hour returned, and brought
them in both GUILTY upon the several Indictments, which
were Thirteen in Number, whereupon they stood Indicted.

This was upon Thursday in the Afternoon, March 13, 1664.

21

The next Morning, the Three Children with their Parents
came to the Lord Chief Baron Hale's Lodging, who all of them
spake perfectly, and were as in good Health as ever they were ;
only Susan Chandler, by reason of her very much Affliction,
did look very thin and wan. And their friends were asked, At
what time they were restored thus to their Speech and Health ?
And Mr. Pacy did Affirm, That within less than half an hour
after the Witches were Convicted, they were all of them Restored, and slept well that Night, feeling no pain ; only Susan
Chandler felt a pain like pricking of Pins in her Stomach.

After, they were all of them brought down to the Court, but
Ann Durent was so fearful to behold them, that she desired
she might not see them. The other Two continued in the
Court, and they Affirmed in the face of the Country, and
before the Witches themselves, what before hath been Deposed
by their Friends and Relations ; the Prisoners not much
contradicting them. In Conclusion, the Judge and all the
Court were fully satisfied with the Verdict, and thereupon gave
Judgment against the Witches that they should be Hanged.

They were much urged to confess, but would not.

That morning we departed for Cambridge, but no Reprieve
was granted : And they were Executed on Monday, the Seventeenth of March following, but they Confessed nothing.
