Pithecoid Priscan Man from Gibraltar (George Busk, 1864)
========================================================
Busk's July 1864 letter — the first published account of the Gibraltar Neanderthal skull, the fossil that confirmed Neanderthal was no one-off. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive (sim_reader-a-review-of-literature-science-and-art_1864-07-23_4_82) — The Reader, July 23, 1864.


PITHECOID PRISCAN MAN FROM
GIBRALTAR.


15, Harley Street, July 16, 1864.

N the 30th of January last you afforded me
an opportunity of stating the circumstance

of the discovery by Captain Brome, Governor of
the Military Prison at Gibraltar, of a cavern, or
rather a series of caverns and fissures, on Windmill
Hillin that place. LIalso stated that Captain Brome
had forwarded some time before a very large and
valuable collection of various animal and human
remains, which were in course of examination by
Dr. Falconer and myself. Since then we have
received from the same gentleman a second very
large consignment of similar remains from the
same locality, and which, like the former, were
packed, arranged, and ticketed with the greatest
care and discrimination. Still more recently,
Captain Sayer (the author of the latest History
of Gibraltar) has brought over for us some
human and other remains from a different place,
about 200 feet lower down than the Wiridmill
Hill Flats. These remains, as we understand
from Captain Sayer, were procured some years
since by Sir James Cochrane from a very deep
and till then unexplored cavern, the entrance of
which is in his own garden. And again, within
the last few days, we have been furnished with
additional human and other bones from Captain
Brome; but we are as yet uninformed as to the


ise locality whence these have been derived. .


rec
We have.also received from Mr. Mawe two por-
tions of bone-breccia containing a considerable
number of fragments, amongst which the most
important is a large portion of the plastron of a
species of tortoise. Captain Douglas Galton has
a communicated to us two large ents of
ossiferous breccia procured from Camp Bay, close
to Rosia Bay.

In my former communication I gave a rough
list of the chief animals whose bones were con-
tained in the first collection sent by Captain
Brome, and referred to some great iarities
observable in many of the human bones. The
second collection forwarded by the same gentle-
man, although it has not added many new
species to those contained in the former, has yet
been of inestimable value from the additional
means it has afforded us for the proper identifica-
tion of many of the species. The human remains
contained in the second collection were, as in the
previous one, very numerous, but, unfortunately,
in an equally fragmentary condition, e as
regards the crania. In the two collections we have


THE READER.


=


23 JULY, 1864.


nearly 400 fragments of skulls, most of the frag-
ments very small, and nearly all presenting signs of
very ancient fracture. Out of this enormous mass I
have as yet succeeded in building up no more
than about half of the cranium of one individual
and smaller portions of three or four others. But
the larger specimen thus constructed suffices in
some measure to give an idea of the general con-
tour and size, &c., of the skull when entire; and,
taken in conjunction with the numerous more or
less perfect frontal and lower jaw-bones, this
cranium and the other less complete specimens
afford an insight into the cranial conformation of
some of the human beings then existing on the
Rock of Gibraltar. One conclusion that we were
inclined to adopt, as I stated before, was that the
lower jaws, at any rate, might be referred to two
distinct types. This opinion appeared to be
strengthened also by the circumstance that some
of the other bones of the skeleton presented very
remarkable distinctive characters. Amongst the
numerous leg and thigh bones, belonging, as nearly
as I can estimate, to 35 or 36 individuals, are
many so singular and, as it may almost be said,
so monstrous in their form as to have excited the
astonishment of all anatomists who have beheld
them. Notwithstanding diligent search and
inquiry, we have as yet been unable to meet with
or hear of any similar bones in collections in this
country, although in Paris, through the great
kindness-of MM. Pruner-Bey and Lartet, Dr.
Falconer, on a late visit to that city, was put in
possession, for the purpose of comparison, of
some from Algeria and one from Laugerie, in the
valley of the Vezére, approaching the same type.
Under these circumstances, any further contri-
butions to our anthropological materials from
Gibraltar became of the utmost importance to us.
The human cranium brought by Captain Sayer
from the lower, or Sir James Cochrane’s cave was
a welcome addition of this kind. Itis fortunately
quite perfect, except that the lower jaw properly
belonging to it has been replaced by one of a
different individual, and we are consequently
unable to determine the character of that highly
important bone. The skull itself, as were most of


the bones with which it was accompanied, was
encased in a very hard grey stalagmitic crust, in
some pars several inches thick, and evidently the


result of very long and slow deposition. But, when
this was removed, the bone stood out as fresh to
all ap nee as if it. had been carefully macerated
and cleaned. It is a small, roundish, symmetrical
‘cranium ; but we have not yet so critically com-
pared it as to allow of any definite opinion being
given on the présent occasion as to its nearest
probable affinities. In one respect it is of extreme
interest, from its being associated with several
leg bones presenting the peculiar compressed form
above adverted to, and amongst which one, from
the condition of the bone itself and the exact
similarity of the calcareous incrustation upon it,
most probably belongs to the same individual.
We thus appear to be furnished with a clue to
the cranial conformation of the “sharp-shinned”
or platyenemic race—a point of considerable
importance.
ut by far the most important addition to the
human remains from Gibraltar is contained in
the last contribution just received from my friend
Captain Brome. This collection includes, besides
several quadrupedal bones, the greater part of a
human cranium and a lower jaw not belonging to
it. The cranium resembles, in all essential
iculars, including its great thickness, the
-famed Neanderthal skull; but, in many
respects, it is of infinitely higher value than
that much-disputed relic, inasmuch as it retains
the entire occipital region, including the hinder
in of the foramen magnum, great part of
the the whole of one temporal bone (thus
ie the precise situation of the auditory open-
, and nearly the entire face, including the
upper jaw, with most of the much and curiously-
worn teeth. As it is precisely these parts that are
wanting in the Neanderthal calvarium, of which
the present is, in other , almost an exact
counterpart, the value of this cranium in the
r Of prisean man cannot be rated too high.
Its discovery also adds immensely to the scientific
value of the Neanderthal specimen, if only as
showing that the latter does not represent, as
many have hitherto supposed


As this cranium will shortly, I hope, be fully
described and figured, I will not now enter into any
further particulars concerning it, more than simply
toremark that, in several respects, owing perhaps to
its greater completeness, it presents more strongly
marked pithecoid characters than even the
Neanderthal calvarium possesses, and that, from
the mineral condition of the bone itself, apart from
its intrinsic characters of form, there can be no
doubt of its enormous antiquity. The other
bones also sent with it, and obviously taken from
the same locality, though not themselves of an
extinct species, yet belong to one (Jbexr) whose
remains occur very abundantly throughout the
Rock in the oldest breccia, in which are also con-
tained those of at least one, if not of two, wholly
extinct species of rhinoceros, and of several other
animals which are extinct, so far as Europe is
concerned.

I may be allowed this opportunity of an-
nouncing that, having now pretty nearly con-
cluded our not very light task of the exami-
nation and determination of the great collections
from Windmill Hill, it is our intention, if pos-
sible, to lay some account of the principal results
before the next meeting of the British Associa-
tion, when the extreme value of those collections,
in conjunction with the others here noticed, not
only in an anthropological and antrological point
of view, but also as regards the former distribution
and true affinities of the ancient South-European
fauna, will, we hope, be rendered fully manifest.

I would merely add that, if any one either in
this country or in Gibraltar is in possession of
remains from the ossiferous breccia of that Rock,
or from its caverns and fissures, not already pub-
lished, it would materially aid us in giving a com-
plete account of its ancient fauna if we were
afforded an opportunity of examining them in
addition to the copious stores already in our
hands. And, with the object of collecting and
keeping together, as much as possible, all the evi-
dence bearing on this important subject, it is our
intention shortly to proceed to Gibraltar and
examine on the spot the conditions under which
the different classes of fossils occur in the caverns,
&e. Gero. Busk.
