The Bustan of Shaikh Muslihu-d-din Sa'di Shirazi (Saadi; H. Wilberforce Clarke (trans.), 1879)
==========================================================
Saadi's Orchard — the companion to the Gulistan, ten chapters of verse tales on justice, mercy and the dervish life — in Captain H. Wilberforce Clarke's pioneering 1879 English prose translation, the first complete rendering (Wm. H. Allen, London). Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/bstnbyshaikh00sadiuoft).

\


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive

in  2007  with  funding  from

IVIicrosoft  Corporation


http://www.archive.org/details/bstnbyshaikhOOsadiuoft


THE    BUSTAN

BY

SHAIKH   MUSLIHU-D-DIN   SA'DI
SHIRAZi,

TEA.NSLATED  FOR  THE  FIRST  TIME  INTO  PROSE,

WITH

EXPLANATORY  NOTES  AND  INDEX,


BY


CAPTAIN  H.  WILBERTORCE  CLARKE,  R.E.


LONDON:
Wm.    H.   ALLEN  AND  CO.,   13  WATERLOO  PLACE.

PUBLISHERS   TO    THE    INDIA    OFFICE.

1879.


JOU)  BY  ORDER  OF
pq^BETH  PALACE  LIBRARY


LONDON  :
PBINTKD    BY    W.    H.    ALLEN   &   CO.,    13    WATERLOO   PLACE.


TO


THIS    WORK    IS    INSCRIBED

AS    A    TOKEN    OF    HEARTY    AFFECTION,

AND    AS    A    TRIBUTE    TO    HER    UNVARYING    KINDNESS    DURING

HIS    CHILDHOOD,    BOYHOOD,    AND    MANHOOD,

BY    HER    NEPHEW,


THE  TRANSLATOK.


PREFACE  BY  THE  TRANSLATOR.


The  Reader's  attention  is  invited  to  the  following  points  in
this  translation  of  the  Biistan  of  Shaikh  Muslihu-d-din  Sa'di
of  Shiraz :

a.  The  couplets  are  uumbei'ed,  rendering  reference  easy.

b.  Each,  line  of  the  translation  agrees  with  the  corresponding  line  in

the  original  Persian  text ;  the  two  lines,  forming  a  couplet,  are
not  run  into  each  other.

c.  A  full  index  to  the  discourses  is  given.  r

d.  Foot-notes  give  information  as  to  the  couplets  of  the  Bustan  which

are  omitted  in  the  'Ikd-i-manzum,  while  the  index  shows  the
stories  of  the  'Ikd-i-manzum,  which  are  omitted  in  the  examina-
tion for  "  High  Proficiency  "  in  Persian.*

The  Persian  texts  of  the  Bustan  differ  greatly.  The
Persian  text  of  this  translation  is  that  which  was  brought
out,  under  the  auspices  of  the  Oriental  Society  of  Germany,
by  Charles  M.  Graf,  at  Vienna,  in  1858.

The  student,  as  he  reads,  should  number  the  couplets  of
his  Persian  text,  so  as  to  make  them  accord  with  those  of
this  translation.  Much  trouble  .in  making  references  will
thus  be  saved.

The  Bustan,  as  a  whole,  or  in  part,  is  retjuired   for  the —

High  Proficiency  ^  ,       .        .     r*      .

...   ,       .,       ^     -  I  Lxanmiations  m  Persian,

Hioher  Standard  >  .     t    t

°  1  m  India.

Degree  of  Honour  j


The  'Ikd-i-niauzi'mi  consists  of  Selet^tions  from  the  Bdstau  only.


Vlll


PREFACE.


The  original  is  in  Persian  verse.  This  translation  is
in  prose.  In  this  I  have  but  pursued  the  course  which
Mr.  Wollaston  has  followed  in  rendering  the  verses  of  the
Anvar-i-Suhaili.  To  render  the  Bustan  in  verse,  one  should
be  a  poet,  at  least  equal  in  power  to  the  author.  Even
then  it  would  be  well-nigh  impossible  to  clothe  the  Bustan
in  such  an  EngUsh  dress  as  would  truly  convey  its  beauties.
Moreover,  if  such  a  translation  could  be  prepared, — no
matter  how  beautiful  it  might  be  in  execution, — it  would
be  of  little  advantage  to  the  student.  That  which  is  now
offered  is  so  literal  and  so  annotated  as  to  encoui*age  the
hope  that  it  may  in  a  great  measure  relieve  the  student
from  the  labour  of  consulting  a  dictionaiy.

The  fblloAving  table  shows  the  work  done  in  this  trans-
lation :


Number

In  Introduo*
tion.

In  Chapter

Grand

of

1

•I

3         4

5

6   1    7

8

9

10

Total.

Couplets  .
Discourses

190
4

971
33

618
27

364  527
28     30

202
17

174
15

438
33

273
16

330
24

112
6

4099
233

"  When  one  couplet  out  of  a  thousand  is  pleasing  to  thee,
In  the  name  of  manliness  !  restrain  thy  hand  from  criticism."

"  Bustan,"  Introduction,  couplet  124.


H.  WILBEKPOECE  CLAEKE,

Captain,  E.E.


CONTENTS.


PAGK

INTRODUCTION     .  .  .  .  .  .1

CHAPTEK  I. — On  Justice,    Equity,    and  Administbatiox  op

Government  .  .  .  .  .  .  .26

CHAPTER  II.— On  Beneficence  .  .  .  .  .123

CHAPTER  III.— On  Love 172

CHAPTER  IV.— On  Humility       .  .  .  .  .213

CHAPTER  v.— On  Resignation    .  .  .  .  .264

CHAPTER  VI.— On  Contentment  .  .  .  .284

CHAPTER  VII.— On  Education  .  .  .  .  .301

CHAPTER  VIII.— On  Thanks       .  .  .  .  .343

CHAPTER  IX.— On  Repentance  .  .  .  .  .368

CHAPTER  X.— On  Prater  .  •  .  .399

SUPPLEMENTARY  NOTE  .  .  ...    411

INDEX  ........    416


^'OTE  OX  THE  FlIOrsTrSPIECE.


razi.  i


,n-.
n;  V


The  Frontispiece  is  a  portrait  of  Shaikh  Muslihu-d-din  SaMi  Shirazi,
by  a  Persian  artist,  from  a  picture  in  the  Haftan,  built  by  Vakil
Kai-im  Khan  in  1775-79.

The  Haftan,  near  Shiraz,  is  an  enclosure  33  by  110  yards,  con
taining  the  graves  of  seven  darveshes  whose  names  are  unknovv
and  an  'imarat,  or  edifice,  in  which  are  two  oil-portraits — one  of
SaMi,  half  life-size,  over  the  door  on  the  west  side ;  and  the  other  of
Hafiz,  in  a  niche,  over  the  door  on  the  east  side.

The  bowl  in  Sa'di^s  liand  is  called  "  Kashkiil,"  or  alms-bowl.

For  a  full   description   of  this  picture  see   Vol.   I.  of  Binney's
"  Travels  in  Persia/'

Through  the  kindness  of  Mr.  J.  J.  Fahie,  of  the  Persian  Telegraph
Department,  this  copy  of  the  picture  was  obtained  for  this  work.


ERRATUM.


Pag-e  325,   line  9.  .'"w  From   which   the  wife's   clamour  issues   loudly,  rnfid   From
which,  loud  issues  the  wife's  clamour.


THE    BUSTAN


OP


OUR    LOED    SA'DI',


In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Meeciful,  the  Compassionate  !


INTEODUCTION.

^  In  the  name  of  the  Lord  life-creating  !
The  Wise  One  speech-creating  within  the  tongue  I

The  Lord,  the  giver,  hand- seizing  !
Merciful,  sin-forgiving,  excuse-accepting  !

A  King  such  that  whosoever  turned  away  his  head  from

His  door
Found  not  any  respect  at  the  doors  to  which  he  went,

The  heads  of  kings,  neck-exalting,

(Are),  at  His  court,  on  the  ground  of  supplication.

»  He  does  not  instantly  seize  the  froward  ;
He  does    not    drive  away,   with   violence,   those   excuse-
bringing.


I       "  Sar  az  dar  taftan  "  signifies  to  be  disobedient.
"  Azize  "  signifies  a  king ;  it  is  applied  to  God.


2  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA  DI.

And,  thougli  He  becomes  angry  at  bad  conduct,
When  thou  didst  return.  He  cancelled  the  past  circumstance
(in  the  book  of  sins).

The  two  worlds  (this  and  the  next)  are   (like)   a  drop  in

the  sea  of  His  knowledge  ;
He  sees  a  crime,  but  in  mercy  covers  it  with  a  screen.

If  a  person  seeks  a  quarrel  with  his  father,
Doubtless,  the  father  becomes  very  angry.

And,  if   a  relation  be  not   satisfied   with  a   relation    (on

account  of  bad  conduct).
He  drives  him  from  before  him,  like  strangers.

10  And  if  the  clever  slave  is  not  of  use,
The  master  holds  him  not  dear,

And,  if  thou  art  not  kind  to  friends.

The  friend  will  fly  from  thee  to  the  distance  of  a  league.

And  if  a  soldier  abandons  service.

The  king  army-leading  becomes  quit  of  him.

Butf  the  Lord  of  high  and  low  (Grod),

Shuts  not  the  door  of  food  on  anyone,  on  account  of  his
sin.

The  embroidered  leather  surface  of  the  earth  is  His  common

table ;
At  this  open  table,  whether    enemy    (infidel),    or    friend

(the  faithful) — what  matter  ?


14  "  Adhi'm  "  is  a  sweet- smelling  grained  and  coloured  skin,  which  is
sometimes  called  "  sakhtiyan."  Kings  and  Amirs  spread  this  skin,  and
eat  food  from  off  it.  God  most  High  having  made  the  "  adhi'm  "  of  the
earth  the  treasure- chest  of  his  creatures,  all  the  people  eat  off  it,

"  Khwan-i-yaghma  "  is  the  tray  of  food  which  liberal  people  spread,
and  to  which  they  invite  the  poor.


I


INTRODUCTION.  3

ji5  And  if  He  had  hastened  against  one  tyranny-practising,
'     "Who  would  have  obtained  safety  from  the  hand  of  His
violence  ?


His  nature  (is)  free  from  suspicion  of  opposition  and  simi-
litude ;

His  kingdom  independent  of  the  devotion  of  jinn  and
mankind.

The  servant  of  His  order  every  thing  and  person  :
The  son  of  Adam,  and  fowl,  and  ant,  and  fly.

He  spreads  so  wide  a  tray  of  liberality,
That  the  Simurgh  (in  the  mountains  of)  Kaf  (the  Caucasus)
enjoys  a  portion.

Grace  and  liberality  diffusing,  and  work  executing ;
Because  He  is  the   Possessor  of    Creation,    and  Knower
of  secrets.

20  Grandeur  and  egotism  are  proper  for  Him,

Whose  kingdom  is  ancient,  and  nature  independent.

He  places  the  crown  of  fortune  on  the  head  of  one ;
He  brings  another  from  a  throne  to  the  dust.

This  one  (has)  the  cap  of  Good-Fortune  on  his  head ;
That  one  the  blanket  of  Mis-fortune  on  his  body.


15  The  first  line  may  also  be  rendered  : —
And,  if  he  had  hastened  in  the  way  of  tyranny.

16  The  nature  of  God  is  free  from  the  evil  imputation  of  similitude,  and
of  being  of  the  same  nature,  made  by  those  opposed  to  His  commands.

18       "  Simurgh  "  is  a  rare  fabulous  bird,  sometimes  called  "  'anka."

"  Gilime"  is  a  "  postin,"  which  is  a  cloth  made  of  the  hair  of  the  goat
and  sheep.

1   •


"4  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA  DI.

He  makes  a  fire,  a  rose-garden,  for  Ibrahim ;
He  takes  a  crowd,  from  the   waters  of  the  Nil,  to  the  fire
(of  Hell).

If  that  (making  the  fire  a  rose-garden) — it  is  the  written

order  of  His  beneficence ;
And,  if  this  (the  destruction   of   Far'un   in  the  Nil) — it  is

the  sign  manuaLof  His  order.

26  Behind  the  screen  He  sees  bad  acts :

By  His  own  favour.  He  covers  them  with  a  veil.

If,  with  threatening.  He  draws  forth  the  sharp  sword  of

Command,
The  Cherubim  will  remain  deaf  and  dumb.

And  if,  from  the  tray  of  Liberality,  He  gives  victuals  to  be

carried  home,
'Azazil  {i.e.  Satan)   will   say,  "  I  may  carry  away  a  good

portion."

At  the  Court  of  His  grace  and  greatness.

The  Great  Ones  have  put  greatness  out  of  their  heads.

In  mercy,  near  to  those  who  are  distressed :

A  hearer  of  the  prayer  of  those  supplication-making.

so  Concerning  circumstances  not  yet  come  to  pass.  His  know-
ledge penetrating ;
As  to  secrets  unspoken,  His  grace  informed.

By  power,  the  Gruardian  of  high  (sky)  and  low  (earth).
The  Lord  of  the  Court  of  the  day  of  reckoning  (Judgment-
day).


28  "  Khabl,"  meaning  "the  friend  of  God,"  is  one  of  the  titles  of  Ibrahim.
Nimrud  threw  Ibrahim  into  the  fire  ;  but  God  made  the  fire  a  rose-
garden  for  Ibrahim's  sake,  so  that  his  auspicious  body  received  no  hurt.
"  Gurohe  "  refers  to  Far'un  and  his  host,  who  were  drowned  in  the
waters  of  the  Nile.     God  sent  them  to  Hell.

81       "  Hasi'b  "  is  written  for  "  hisab  "  for  poetry  sake.


INTRODUCTION.  6

The  back  of  a  person  is  not  free  from  obedience  to  Him

(it  must  bend) ;
On  His  word,  there  is  not  room  for  the  finger  of  a  person

(in  slander).

The  ancient  doer  of  good,  good-approving ;

With  the  reed  of  Destiny,  in  the  womb,  picture-painting.

From  the  east  to  the  west,  the  moon  and  sun,
He  put  into  motion ;  and  spread   the  firmament  on   the
water.

35  The  earth,  from  distress  of  earthquake,  became  stupefied  ;
On  its  skirt.  He  drove  down  a  mountain  as  a  nail.

He  gives  to  the  seed  of  man,  a  form  like  a  pari ;
Who  has  made  a  painting  on  the  water  ?

He  places  the  ruby  and  turquoise,  in  the  back-bone  (middle)

of  the  rock ;
The  red  rose,  on  the  branch  of  green  colour.

From  the  cloud,  He  casts  a  drop  towards  the  ocean ;
From  the  back-bone   (of  the  father)   He  brings  the  seed
into  the  womb.

From  that  drop,  He  makes  an  incomparable  pearl ;
And  from  this,  He  makes  a  form  (of  man)  like  the  lofty
cypress.

40  The  knowledge  of  a  single  atom  is  not  hidden  from  Him,
To  whom  the  evident  and  the  hidden  are  one.

He  prepares  the  daily  food  of  the  snake  and  the  ant ;
Although,  they  are  without  hands,  and  feet,  and  strength.


f  5       God  said  -.—(^Arabic.)  "  He  who  paints  you  in  the  womb."
35       For  "  tab,"  "  zuhmat,"  or  "  hami'y,"  as  sometimes  read.

The  earth  is  supposed  to  be  stretched  out  flat,  like  a  carpet,  with  the
hills  planted  on  it,  to  keep  it  steady.


9  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA  DI.

By  His  order,  He  pourtrayed  existence  from  non-
existence ;

Who,  except  Him,  knows  how  to  make  the  existing  from
the  non-existing  ?

Another  time,  He  takes  away  (creation)  to  the  concealment

of  non-existence;
And,  thence  conveys  (it)  to  the  plain  of  the  place  of  assem-

bhng  (the  Resurrection).

(The  people  of  the)  world  are  agreed  to  His  divine  origin ;
Overpowered  in  respect  to  the  substance  of  His  essence.

45  The  people  discovered  not  what  was  beyond  His  majesty ;
The  vision  discovered  not  the  extent  of  His  power.

The  bird  of  Fancy  flies  not  to  the  summit  of  His  nature ;
The  power  of  the  intellect  arrives  not  at  the  skirt  of  His
description.

In  this  whu'lpool,  a  thousand  ships  (of  reason)  foundered,
In  such  a  way  that  not  a  plank  was  found  on  the  marge.

Many   nights,    1    sate   lost   in   this   journey    (of    thought

of  God),
When  (suddenly)  terror  seized  my  sleeve,    saying,   *'  Get

up!"

The  kuowledge  of  the  King  (God)  is  the  encircler  of  the

wide  plain  (of  creation)  ;
Thy  conjecture  becomes  not  the  encircler  of  Him.


4«       Terror  overpowered  me,  so  that  I  lagged  behind ;  because  the  condition
of  knowledge  is  the  comprehending  by  a  learned  man  of  the  thmg  found
out,  or  being  equal  with  it.     But  this  condition,  on  our  side,  is  not.
In  some  copies  the  first  line  reads  : —

Many  nights,  I  sate  silent  in  this  world  (of  thought  of  Grod).
49       "Kiyas."     God  has  no   similitude,  and   His   knowledge   is  without
equal;  then  conjecture  regarding  Him  cannot  be   encircling  or  com-
prehending.


INTRODTJCTION.


)  Genius  reaches  not  to  the  substance  of  His  nature,
Thought  reaches  not  to  the  profundity  of  His  qualities.

One  can  attain  to  (the  'Arab  poet),  Suhban,  in  eloquence ;
(But)  one  cannot  reach  to  the  substance  of  God  without
equal.

Because  the  immature  ones  have  on  this  road  urged  the

steed  (of  thought).
At    (the   words)    "  la    ahsa,"  they  have    wearied    of  the

pace.

One  cannot  gallop  a  steed  in  every  place,.

Places  there  are  where  it  is  proper  to  cast  the  shield  (yield).

And,  if  a  traveller  (a  pious  one)   becomes  acquainted  with

the  secret  of  God,
They  (the  angels)  will  shut  on  him  the  door  of  returning

(to  the  world).


»


a  Suhban  Wail  was  an  'Arab  orator,  who  was  so  eloquent  that  he  would
not  re'peat  a  word,  but  express  his  meaning  in  different  language.     .

I  cannot  reckon  Thy  praises  of  Thyself ;  but  Thou  art  such  an  One  that
Thou  hast  made  Thy  own  praise  of  Thyself.  "  L4  ahsa  "  signifies"!
cannot  count  Thy  praises."  The  meaning  is-A  person  cannot  attaan
to  the  substance  of  the  God  without  equal  so  that  he  may  describe  His
perfection ;  because  the  best  of  persons  in  respect  to  this  truth  have
made    conjectures,    but    at    at    this    phrase,    "\k    ahsa,"    they    were

confounded.  .        i       mu

According  to  the  holy  tradition :-(^ra6ic.)    "I  cannot  reckon  Thy

praises.  Oh  God,  as  Thou  dost  know  Thyself."

S8  In  this  religious  idea  they  have  made  this  comparison  :-If  a  person
looks  at  the  signs  of  the  sun,  his  eyes  become  dark  and  obscure.  Even
80  if  a  person  looks  at  the  signs  of  God  most  High,  he  knows  that  He  is
the  Creator  of  the  strange,  and  the  One  who  causes  wonderful  thmgs  to
happen.  But,  if  he  wishes  to  understand  the  substance  of  His  nature,
his  reason  becomes  dark  and  obscure.

As  in  the  traditions -.-(Orotic.)  "In  this  case  think  .nly  that  there
is  one  God  ;  do  not  think  of  the  substance  of  God."  ,     ,    , ,

«  Sipar  andakhtan  "  signifies-to  fly,  to  make  submission,  to  be  feeble ;
or,  in  respect  to  God  most  High,  one  cannot  make  reflection.

M       As   in   the   traditions  :-(^ra6tc.)  "Who  knows  God,  his  tongue  is

dumb."

In  the  "  'Ikd-i-manz^,"  couplets  64  to  67  are  omitted.


8  THE    BUSTAN    OP    SA'DI.

55  In  this  banquet  (of  tlie  mystery  of  God),  tliey  give  a  cup
(of  the  wine  of  the  love  of  Grod)  to  that  one,
To  whom  they  give  a  draft  of  senselessness  (that  he  may
not  utter  the  mystery  of  Grod).

The  wise  man  fears  this  sea  of  blood  (the  mystery  of  G-od),
Out  of  which  no  one  has  taken  the  bark  (of  his  life).

Of  this  hawk   (the  Eationalist),  the  eye  is  sewn  up  (blind

to  the  knowledge  of  God) ;
Of  the  other  (the  holy  man),   the  eyes  are  open  (to  the

knowledge  of    God) ;    and  feathers  (of  flight   to  the

world)  burned.

No  one  went  to  the  (buried)  treasure  of  Kartin  (mystery  of

God);
And  if  he  found  a  way,  he  found  not  (a  way)  out  of  it.

If  thou  art  a  seeker,  who  over  this  ground  (of  the  know-
ledge of  God)  dost  travel,

First  thou  shouldst  pluck  up  the  foot  of  the  steed  of
-returning.

60  Shouldst  reflect,  in  the  mirror  of  the  mind  ;
Shouldst  acquire  purity  by  degrees.

Possibly  the  perfume  of    the  love  (of  God)   makes    thee

intoxicated ;
Makes    thee    a    seeker   of    the    Covenant — "  Am    I   your

God?"

58  Kartin  was  bom  of  the  uncle,  or  sister,  of  Moses.  He  was  famous  for
his  riches.  The  wealth  of  Karun  is  here  emblematic  of  the  knowledge
of  God.

59  "  Zamin  "  here  signifies — baznu-i-Mahrumiyat,  which  the  author  calls
"  the  sea  of  blood,"  and  "  the  treasure  of  Karan  ;"  but,  more  properly,
it  means  the  path  of  the  desert  of  the  knowledge  of  God,  which  is
d  '.ngerous.

"  Asp  "  here  means — that  which  draws  one  to  the  world,  e.g.  avarice,
sensual  pleasures,  etc.

61  "  Bue  "  has  ya,e  wahdat.

In   the    ayat   of    the    Sara    of    I'rak,    God    says : — (Arabic.)    "  Oh,


INTEODUCTION.  9

With  the  foot  of  search  thou  dost  travel  to  that  place  (the

mystery  of  God) ;
And  thence,   thou  dost  fly  with  the  wing  of  the  love  of

God.

Truth  tears  the  curtains  of  fancy ;

There  remains  not  a  lofty  curtain,  save  the  glory  of  God.

Again  for  the  steed  of  reason  there  is  no  running ;
Astonishment  will  seize  its  rein,  saying,  "  Stand !  '*

65  In  this  sea  (of  God)  only  the  man -guardian  (Muhammad)
went :
That  one  became  lost,  who  went  not   behind  the  inviter
(Muhammad).

Those  persons,  who  have  turned  back  from  this  road  (of

following  Muhammad)
Travelled  much,  and  are  distressed.


Muhammad !  thy  God  took  this  confession  from  the  descendants,  the
offspring  and  race  of  Adam  ;  and,  I  possess  evidence  on  their  bodies  as
to— "Am  I  your  God?"

God  most  High,  before  the  creation  of  Adam  (on  him  be  peace),  having
created  the  souls  of  men,  said  : —

"  Am  I  your  God  ?  "
The  souls  answered  "  Yes."  Those  who  said  "  Yes  "  in  this  world  became
of  the  faith  of  Islam.  Those  who  gave  no  reply  remained  as  infidels.
Some  of  the  Muslims,  by  reason  of  the  affections  of  this  world,  forgot
that  Covenant ;  but,  in  the  case  of  the  souls  of  those  who  are  lovers  of
God,  and  solitary  save  as  regards  Him, — its  sound  still  remains.

When  the  perfume  makes  thee  intoxicated  and  a  seeker  of  the  Cove-
nant— "  Am  I  your  God  ?  "  then,  with  the  foot  of  search,  thou  dost  find
the  path  to  that  stage  (am  I  your  God  ?)

God  most  High  says  to  thee — "  0  Adorer !  "  and  thou  dost  reply —
"OLord!"

Thence,  with  the  wing  of  love,  thou  dost  fly  and  arrive  at  the  side  of
the  Court  of  God,  which  is  the  end  of  the  world.  Certainty  as  to  the
Unity  of  God  is  then  acquired,  and  no  veil  remains  between  the  Adored
(God)  and  the  adorer  (man)  save  the  veil  of  splendour,  beyond  which
tliere  is  no  passing  for  the  steed  of  thought.

After  that,  thou  dost  reach  the  stage  of  astonishment  at  witnessing
the  essence  of  the  splendovu*  of  God.


id  THE   BUSTAN   OF   Sa'dI.

That  person,  who  chooses  the  way  opposite  to  the  Prophet,
"Will  never  arrive  at  the  stage  (of  his  journey).

Oh  Sa'di !  think  not  that  the  path  of  purity,
One    can    travel,   except   behind   the    Chosen   One    (Mu-
hammad).


70


Generous  of  dispositions,  beautiful  of  natures !

The  Prophet  of  creatures,  the  Intercessor  of  nations !

The  Imam  of  the  prophets,  the  Leader  of  the  road  !
The  faithful  of  God,  the  place  of  descent  of  the  Angel
Jibra,il !

The  Intercessor  of  mortals,  the  Lord  of  raising  and  dis-
persing (the  Judgment-day)  !

The  Imam  of  the  guides,  the  Chief  of  the  Court  of
Assembling  (the  Resurrection) !

The  Speaker,  whose  Mount  Sinai  is  the  celestial  sphere  ;
All  lights  are  the  rays  of  his  Hght.

The  orphan  (Muhammad)  who,  the  Kuran  un-completed.
Washed  the  library  of  (effaced)  so  many  religions.

When  anger  drew  forth  his  sword  of  terror.

Struck,  by  a  miracle,  the  waist  of  the  moon  in  two  halves.


69  "  Kan'ma-l-sajaya  "  is  one  possessed  of  great  qualities  and  good  habits ;
who  gives  infonnation  about  God  to  the  people,  and  is  an  intercessor
with  God  for  them ;  and  who  asks  pardon  from  God  for  the  Muslims  of
the  earth.     Prom  couplet  69  to  80  is  in  praise  of  Muhammad.

70  "  Imam  "  is  one  who  precedes,  or  leads,  the  prophets.

Faithful,  because  Muhammad  concealed  not  any  part  of  the  revelation
of  God.     The  angel  Jibra,il  descended  on  Muhammad  with  the  Kuran.
72       Kah'me  has  ja,e  wahdat.     The  ladder  of  Moses,  "  the  Speaker  of  God,"
was  Tur,  or  M.^unt  Sinai.     The  author,  having  alluded  to  it,  says,  "  Our
Prophet,    Muhammad,    is    like    Moses,  whose  Tur,  that  is  to  say  his
ladder,  is  the  sphere.    They  have  said :— Although  Musa  spoke  to  God  on
Mount  Tur,  the  highest  sphere  is  the  base  of  the  Tur  of  Muhammad.
In  the  'Ikd-i-manzum,  couplets  72  to  97  are  omitted.
74       This  miracle  is  said  to  have  occurred  at  Makka.


INTRODUCTION.  11

rs  "When  his  fame  fell  in  the  mouths  of  the  people  of  the
world,
An  earthquake  occurred  in  the  court  of  KisrI  (King  Nau-
shiravan).

By  the  words — la  ilaha  illa-llah — he  broke  into  small  pieces

(the  idol)  Lat ;
For  the  honour  of  religion,  he  took  away  the  reputation  of

(the  idol)  'Uzza.

He  brought  'not    forth   the  dust  of  (the  idols)   Lat  and

'Uzza  (only) ;
But  made  the  Old  Testament  and  Gospel  obsolete.

One  night  he  sate  (on  the  beast  Burak) ;  he  passed  beyond

the  Heavens :
In  majesty  and  grandeur,  he  exceeded  the  angels.

So  impetuous,  he  urged  (his  steed)  into  the  plain  of  propin-
quity (to  God),
While  Jibra,il  remained  behind  him,  at  the  tree  of  paradise.

The  Chief  of  the  sacred  house  (of  the  Ka'ba)  spoke  to  him.

Saying  : *'  Oh,  bearer    of    the  Divine  Revelation  !  move

proudly  higher.

"  When  thou  didst  find  me  sincere  in  friendship,
"  Why  didst  thou  twist  the  reins  from  my  love  ?  "

Jibra,il  said  :— "  The  power  to  move  higher  was  not  to  me  :
**  I  remained  here,  because  the  power  of  wing  remained
not  to  me.


80


76  Kisrf  was  the  name  of  King  Naushirawdn  the  Just ;  it  became  a  title
of  the  kings  of  Persia.

76  There  is  no  god  but  God  !

77  The  revelation  of  the  Old  Testament  descended  on  Moses  ;  that  of  the
New  Testament,  or  Anjil,  on  'I'sa,  or  Jesus.     See  note  70.

78  Prom  couplet  78  to  98  is  on  Muhammad's  ascent  to  the  ninth  heaven.
Por  a  full  account,  see  the  Sikandar-Nama.

79  The  Sudra  is  a  tree  in  the  seventh  heaven;  it  is  caUed  the  tree  of
paradise,  or  "sudra  u-1-muntaha."  The  angels  cannot  go  beyond  it.
The  seventh  heaven  is  the  mansion  of  the  angel  Jibra,il.


12  THE    BDSTAN    OF    SA'dI.

•'  If  I  fly  one  hair's  breadth  higher,

"  The  effulgence  of  splendour  will  burn  my  feathers."

On  account  of  sins,  a  person  remains  not  in  restraint,
"Who  has  such  a  Lord  (Muhammad)  as  guide.

85  What  acceptable  praise  may  I  say  to  thee  ?
Oh,  Prophet  of  Mortals  !  peace  be  on  thee  !

May  the  benedictions  of  angels  be  on  thy  soul !
May  they  be  on  thy  companions  and  followers !

First  Abii-Bakr,  the  old  disciple ;

'Umar,  grasp  on  the  convolution  of  the  contumacious  demon
(Satan) ;

The  wise  'Usman,  night,  alive-keeping ;
The  fourth  'AH-Shan,  Duldul,  riding.

Oh  God  !  by  the  right  of  the  sons  of  Fatima,
May  I,  on  the  word  of  faith,  conclude  (my  life)  !

90  If  thou  dost  reject  my  claim,  or  if  thou  dost  accept,

I,  and  the  hand,  and  the   skirt   of   the   offspring  of  the
Prophet  (are  together).

Oh  chief  happy  footed  !  what  loss  occurs

Of  thy  exalted  dignity,  at  the  court  of  the  Living  One,

That  there  are  a  few  beggars  of  the  tribe,
Humble     companions,    guests,    at    the    House   of   Safety
(paradise)  ?


86  "Darud"  is  a  salutation,  which  means: — from  God — mercv  ;  from
angels— asking  pardon  ;  from  men— praise  and  prayer  ;  from  anilnals—
praise.

88  "  Duldul "  was  the  name  of  'All's  mule.

89  In  the  traditions :— (Arabic.)  "  He  whose  last  words  are  M  iUha  ilia-
1-lah  !  will  indeed  enter  paradise."

^■■i  Tufail  was  the  name  of  a  person  of  the  tribe  of  IJmayya,  who,  in  a
state  of  distress  and  poverty,  used  to  go  without  invitation  to  the
rejoicings  of  men  and  to  their  bridal  feasts.     The  Persians  call  such  an


INTEODUCTION.  13

God  praised  and  honoured  thee  (oh  Muhammad  !)
Jabra,il  performed  the  ground-kiss  of  thy  worth.

The  lofty  sky,  before  thy  worth,  (is)  ashamed,
Thou  created,  and  man  yet  water  and  clay.

96  Thou  from  the  first,  the  essence  of  the  existence  of  man ;
Whatever  else  became  existent  is  an  offshoot  from  thee.

I  know  not  what  words  I  may  say  to  thee,
Who  art  higher  than  what  I  say  of  thee.

To  thee,  the  honour   of — "  but   for   thee " — is    sufficient

grandeur ;
Thy  praise  in  the  verse  of  the  Kuran — ^taha  wa  yasin — is
sufficient.

What  praise  may  the  imperfect  Sa'di  make  ?

Oh  Prophet !  on  thee  be  benedictions,  and  safety  !


In  the  extremes  of  the  world,  I  wondered  much  ;
With  every  one,  I  passed  my  time.

LOO  From  every  corner,  I  found  pleasure  ;

From  every  harvest,  I  obtained  an  ear  of  corn.


one  "  the  uninvited  guest,"  or  "  the  uninvited  companion  of  a  person
going  to  a  feast."  The  meaning  of  the  sentence  is — Thy  great  dignity,
Oh  Muhammad !  at  the  court  of  God  most  High,  becomes  not  less,  if,
at  the  feast  of  paradise,  a  handful  of  beggars,  like  the  man  Tufail,  are
thy  guests.

g^  In  the  traditions : — (Arabic.)  "  Whatever  God  created, — ^my  soul  first."
And  again : — (Arabic.)  "  I  was  Prophet,  and  Adam  between  water  and
clay."

97  According  to  the  holy  saying  of  God : — (Arabic.)  "  Oh,  Muhammad !
hadst  thou  not  been,  I  would  not  have  created  the  sky."

99  "  Ba  sar  burdan  "  signifies — to  bring  to  an  end,  or  finish.  Prom
couplet  99  to  128  is  on  the  cause  of  the  versification  of  this  Book.


14  THE   BT7STAN   OF   SA*DI.

Like  the  pure  ones  of  Shiraz  of  dust-like  (submissive)  dis-
position,

I  saw  not  (one). — May  mercy  be  on  this  pure  soil  (of
Shiraz)  !

The  cultivating  of  friendship  of  the  men  of  this  pure  soil.
Drew  away  my  heart  from  Syria  and  Turkey.

I  said  to  my  heart : — "  From  Egypt,  they  bring  sugar  ;
They  take  it  as  a  present  to  friends."

From  all  that  garden  (of  the  world),  I  was  loath
To  go  empty-handed  to  my  friends.

105  If  my  hand  be  empty  of  that  sugar,
There  are  words  sweeter  than  sugar —

Not  that  sugar  that  men  apparently  enjoy ;
But  that,  which  the  lords  of  truth  take  away  on  paper
(with  respect).

When  I  completed  this  palace  of  wealth,

I  prepared  in  it  ten  doors  (chapters)  of  instruction.

One  chapter  is  on  Justice,  and  Deliberation,  and  Judgment ;
The  guarding  of  the  people,  and  the  fear  of  God.

(In)  the  second  chapter,  I  laid  the  foundation  of  Benefi-
cence, .

That  the  benefactor  may  praise  (by  liberality)  the  excel-
lence of  God.


104       In  the  'Ikd-i-manzdm,  this  couplet  is  omitted.

106  "  Kande  "  has  ya,e  wahdat.

107  In  the  'Ikd-i-manzum,  couplets  107'to  190  are  omitted.

108  Before  the  words  which  constitute  the  subject  of  each  chapter,  the
word  "  dar  "  should  be  vmderstood,  as  "  dar  'adl."


INTRODUCTION.  15

Lio  The  third  chapter  is  on  Love  (of  God),  and  Phrenzy,  and
Perturbation , —
Not  the  worldly  love  that  men  fasten,  with  force,  on  them-
selves.

The  fourth  chapter  is  on  Humility ;  the  fifth, — Content-
ment;

The  sixth, — the  description  of  the  man  Contentment-
choosing.

The  seventh  chapter  on  the  description  of  the  Science  of

Education  ;
The  eighth  chapter, — on  thanks  for  safety.

The   ninth   chapter   is    on    Repentance    and   the   way   of

Rectitude ;
The  tenth, — on  Prayers  and  the  Conclusion  of  the  book.

On  the  august  day,  and  happy  year ;

On  the  auspicious  date,  between  the  two  'idds, —

^16  It  was  fifty-five  years  more  than  six  hundred,

Since  that  this  renowned  treasury  (the  Biistan)  became  full
of  pearls  (of  eloquence).


Lio  "  Mastf "  signifies — khardbi  (intoxication),  a  state  in  which  a  person
makes  himself  (khardb)  enraptured  in  the  knowledge  of  God.

"  Mai "    signifies — bekhudi   (senselessness),  ecstacy,  or  the  state  in
which  a  person  considers  himself  non-existent.

"  ^ar4bi  wa  bekhudi,"  signifying — the  true  state  of  the  lovers  of  God.
And  it  may  may  be  mentioned  that,  similarly,  s6ki  (a  cup-bearer)
signifies  : —

The  Divine   promise ;    a   spiritual    guide ;    or,    a    source   of    Divine
bounties.

L12       For  "  az  "  read  "  dar  baiyan."

L14  One  'idd  is  the  breaking  of  the  fast  of  Rama?4n  ;  the  other  'I'dd  is  the
day  on  which  sacrifices  are  offered  ahmakkah,  or  the  sacrifice  of  the
solemn  festival  of  Bairam.


16  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'DI.

My  jewel  of  speecli  has  remained  in  a  woman's  veil ;
Yet  from  shame,  I  carry  my  head  on  my  bosom.

Because,  in  the  sea  there  is  the  pearl  and  also  the  oyster

(pearl-less) ;
In  the  garden  there  is  the  lofty  tree  and  the  small.

Ho  !  oh  wise  man  of  tappy  disposition  !

I  have  not  heard  the  skilful  one,  a  defect-seeker.

If  the  coat  be  of  silk,  or  if  painted  and  embroidered.
Of  necessity,  its  quilting  (of  cotton)  is  in  the  interior.

120  If  thou  dost  not  obtain  the  painted  and  embroidered  silk,
fret  not.
Do  the  work  of  Liberality,  and  cover  my  redundant  words.

I  boast  not  of  the  capital  of  my  own  excellence ;
I  have  brought  my  hands  in  front,  in  beggary.

I  (have)  heard  that  in  the  day  of  hope  and  fear  (the  resur-
rection),

The  Merciful  One  will  pardon  the  bad  for  the  sake  of  the
good.

If  thou  also  dost  see  evil  in  my  words,
Act,  in  imitation  of  the  world-Creator.


116  "  Damani  "  is  a  fine  linen,  or  painted  silk  veil,  worn  by  ladies  ;  it  is
sometimes  called  mikna',  which  signifies  a  coif  of  fine  linen  two  cubits
(3  feet)  long,  worn  by  Arabian  women  at  home  and  abroad.  The  word
is  here  used  to  show  that  the  jewels  of  speech  were  so  abundant  that  a
woman's  veil  was  required  to  hold  them.

"  Sar  andar   burdan  or  zadan  "  signifies — to  plunge  the  head  in  the
collar  of  reflection,  or  to  be  thoughtful  and  amazed.

I  raise  not  my  head,  because  in  my  words  goodness  (eloquence)  and
evil  (defect)  are  mingled.

123  God,  on  the  day  of  resurrection,  will  pardon  the  bad  for  the  sake  of
the  good.  So,  for  the  sake  of  my  good  words,  do  not  thou  sneer  at  the
ill  words  which  may  fall  under  thy  notice.


INTEODUCTION.  17

When  one  couplet,  out  of  a  thousand,  is  pleasing  to  thee,
[n    the    name   of    manliness !     restrain    thy    hand    from
criticism.

^   Assuredly,  in  Persia,  my  creation  (the  Bustan),
Is  priceless,  Hke  musk  in  Khutn.

Like  the  noise  of  the  drum,  the  fear  of  me  was  afar.
In  my  absence,  my  defect  was  veiled.

Sa'di  brings  the  rose  to  the  garden

With  sauciness  ;  and  pepper  to  Hindustan.

Like  the  date,  skin  with  sweetness  encrusted ;
When  thou  dost  open  it,  a  bone  (a  stone  or  difficulty)  is
inside.

My  disposition  had  no  desire  for  this  kind  (of  composition)  ;
It  had  no  wish  for  the  praising  of  kings.

^'  But,  I  threaded  the  pearls  (of  poetry)  in  the  name  of  a
certain  one ;
Perhaps,  the  holy  men  may  unfold,

That  Sa'di,  who  snatched  the  ball  of  eloquence.

Was  (lived)  in  the  days  of  Abii-Bakr,  the  son  of  Sa'd.

If  in  his  time,  I  boast — it  is  fit ;

Even   as,   the   Lord  (Muhammad)  in  the  time  of  (King)
Naushirawan.


1.  Khutn  is  a  musk-producing  country  of  TurkistAn.  Sa'df  remarks
that,  in  Persia,  there  are  many  compositions  like  the  "Bustdn";  hence,
only  out  of  Persia  will  the  "  Bustan  "  be  valued.

i;       Those  afar  off  knew  not  my  defects.

1        "  Shankhi"  signifies — without  fear,  bashfulness,  or  shame.'

ii       From  couplet  129  to  175  is  in  praise  of  : —

Muhammad  Atabak  Abu  Bakr-i-Sa'd-i-Zangi,  to  wlxoini>thia  work  is

dedicated.    He  died  in  ^^^^  ^p  ,      ,    ^    ;,  ..r  .„,,  |...

i:       Muhammad  was  bom  in  the  time  of  Kijig  Naushirawan;  thetjosti

Muhammad  says : — (Arabic.)  "I  was  born  in  the  time  of  the  just  kih^J*

2


18  THE    BUSTA.N    OP    SA  DI.

A  world-guardian,  and  Faith-cherisher,  and  justice-distri-
buter—
Came  not  after  (Khalifa)  'Umar,  like  (King)  Abii-Bakr.


133


Abu-Bakr  was  the  first,  'Umar  the  second,  and  'Usman  the  third
i^ali'fa.  They  reigned  respectively  2,  12,  and  12  years.  Abu-Bakr  was
the  father  of  'A,isha,  Muhammad's  favourite  wife.  King  Abu-Bakr  is
not  to  be  confounded  with  the  Khalifa  of  the  same  name.

These  Khulafa  were  succeeded  by  'Ali,  the  cousin  of  Muhammad,  who
had  married  Fdtima,  the  daughter  of  the  Prophet.  The  Sunni's  acknow-
ledge Abu-Bakr,  'TTmar,  'Usm^n  and  AH.  The  Shi'ahs  reject  these,  and
consider  that  'All  was  the  rightful  heir  to  Muhammad.  'Ali  was  assas-
sinated in  A.D.  660  in  the  Masjid,  at  Kufa ;  he  was  succeeded  by  his
eldest  son  Hasan,  who  gave  place  to  Mu'awiyya,  the  enemy  of  his  father.
It  is  believed  that  Hasan  was  afterwards  poisoned.

'All's  younger  son  Husain,  on  the  death  of  Mu'awiyya  and  accession
of  his  son  Yazid,  escaped  to  Makkah.  .Misled  by  the  representations  of
the  people  of  Kufa,  he  set  out  for  that  city  with  100  men.

On  the  plains  of  Kerbela,  5,000  men  were  opposed  to  him ;  his  party
were  massacred.  The  corpse  of  Husain  was  subjected  to  many  indig-
nities.    This  took  place  in  A.D.  680.

The  Persians  (Shi'ah)  venerate  the  three  imams  'Ali,  Hasan,  and
Husain ;  they  execrate  the  memory  of  the  three  successors  of  the  Prophet;
to  wit,  Abu-Bakr,  'Umar,  and  'Usman.

The  masjid  of  Muhammad  is  at  Makka;  of  'All,  at  Najuf,  near
Kiifa ;  of  Husain,  at  Kerbela,  near  the  ruins  of  Babylon.

The   orthodox   Mussulman   was   ordered    to    make   a  pilgrimage   to
Makka  at  least  once  in  his  life.     Harunu-r-rashid  visited  Makkah  nine
times,  and  spent  (^6700,000)  on  the  way.     Ibrahim  Adham,  who  had  1
abandoned  the  throne  of  Khurasan,  spent  twelve  years  on  the  pilgrimage,  "
in  consequence  of  the  number  of  genu-flections  which  he  had  vowed  to
perform.

The  Ka'ba,  at  Makka,  is  a  square  building  protecting  a  black  stone,
which  is  said  to  be  oue  of  the  precious  stones  of  paradise,  which  fell  to
the  earth  with  A'dam.  The  angel  Jibra,il  brought  it  to  Ibrahim  when
he  was  re-building  the  Ka'ba.  The  stone  is  set  in  silver  in  the  S.E.  corner,
seven  spans  above  the  ground  ;  it  was  originally  white  as  snow,  but  has
become  superficially  black — either  by  the  touch  of  a  menstruous  woman
or  by  the  kisses  of  numberless  pilgrims ;  it  is  said  to  be  lighter  than
water.

The  pilgrims,  free  from  sin  and  impurity,  have  to  circulate  seven  times
around  the  Ka'ba.  The  first  three  circuits  should  be  at  a  quick  pace,
and  the  last  four  slowly.  As  they  pass  the  stone  it  is  incumbent  to
kiss  it,  or  to  touch  it  with  the  hand,  which  should  immediately  be  applied
to  the  lips.


INTRODUCTION.  19

Chief  of  the  head-exalting  ones,  and  crown  of  the  great

ones ! —
The  world  will  boast,  in  the  time  of  his  justice.

35  If  a  person  comes  from  tumult  into  shelter,

He  has  no  shelter-place,  save  this  country  (Shiraz).

Happiness  for  the  door  (of  Abii-Bakr),  like  the  old  house

(Ka'ba)  !
From  every  broad  road  around  it,  men  come.

I  saw  not  such  a  country,  and  treasure,  and  throne
Which  is  a  bequest  to  the  child,  and  to  the  young  man,  and
to  the  old.


The  style  and  title  of  the  ceremony  is —

tawaf-i-baytu-llahi-l-haram.

With  the  Persians  the  pilgrimage  to  the  shrine  of  Husain  is  more
popular  than  that  to  Makka,  which  is  in  the  hands  of  their  opponents,
the  Sunnis  (Turks).

From  aU  parts  of  Persia,  bodies  (often  in  an  advanced  state  of  decom-
position) are  brought  to  Kerbela.

It  is  allowable,  for  those  who  cannot  make  the  pilgrimage,  to  get  a
substitute.  There  are  men  whose  sole  occupation  is  to  make  the  journey
for  others.

The  deaths  of  Hasan  and  Husain  are  commemorated  during  the  first
ten  days  of  the  Muharram.

The  play  is  acted  on  a  stage  :  when  the  audience  has  been  worked  up
into  passionate  grief,  it  is  not  unusual  for  men  to  rush  through  the
streets,  cutting  themselves  with  knives,  and  crying  "  Hasan  !  Husain !  "
The  acting  usually  takes  place  in  a  tent  called  a  takiya.

The  Shi'ahs  only  believe  the  interpretations  of  the  Kuran  given  by
'All,  Husain,  and  the  next  seven  lineal  descendants  of  the  Prophet,  who
form  their  nine  imams.  They  do  not  call  the  Sunnis  infidels,  but
refuse  them  the  appellation  of  "al  mumi'n,"  the  faithful.
5  As  the  roads  to  the  house  of  the  Ka'ba  are  open,  and  men  come  from
every  quarter  for  the  sake  of  performing  Hajj,  even  so  the  door  of  King
Abu-Bakr  is  open,  and  men,  for  the  sake  of  justice  and  repelling  of  their
needs,  are  present  in  his  presence.
7  The  bequest  of  treasure  to  children,  who  ai-e  fond  of  gold  and  silver,
of  country  to  youths  desirous  of  renown,  and  of  throne  to  wise  old  men
versed  in  state  affairs,  they  have  assigned.

2  ♦


20  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA  DI.

The  one  sorrowful  on  account  of  a  grief  came  not  to  him,
On  whose  heart  he  placed  not  a  plaster.

He  (Abu-Bakr)  is  a  seeker  of  good,  and  hopeful  (of  good)  :
Oh  God  !  fulfil  the  hope  that  he  has.

1*0  A  comer  of  his  hat  on  the  highest  Heaven, —
Yet,  from  humility,  his  head  on  the  ground.

If  the  beggar  supplicates, — it  is  his  nature ;
Humility  from  the  neck-exalting  ones  is  good.

If  an  inferior  falls  (in  humility)  it  is  proper ;

The  superior  prostrate  (in  humility)  is  a  man  of  God.

The  recollection  of  his  grace  is  not  concealed  ;

Nay,  the  clamour  of  liis  liberality  travels  in  the  world.

A  wise  man  of   happy  disposition  like  him.

The  world,  so  long  as  it  was  a  world,  recollects  not.

1*5  In  his  age,  thou  dost  not  see  a  sorrowing  one.

Who   complains  of   the   injustice   of    the   one   of    strong
grasp.

No  one  has  seen  this  custom,  and  order,  and  regulation  :
King  Firidtin,  with  the  majesty  that  he  had,  saw  not  this.

On  that  account,  his  dignity  before  God  is  great ;
Because   by   his   might,    the   hand   of    the    weak  ones  is
strong.


Some  say  that  "  wakf  "  signifies — dastma,  a  wrist-ornament.  The
couplet  would  then  mean — that  country,  treasure,  and  throne,  were  the
adornment  and  boast  of  child,  youth,  and  old  men.

1 12        The  superior  is  humble  only  from  fear  of  God.

143       "  Ki  "  here  signifies — balki.

146  Firidun  was  a  king,  who  reigned  over  Persia  in  750  b.c.  He  placed  in
bonds  King  ^ahhak,  who  was  notorious  for  cruelty.


INTRODUCTION.  21

He  so  spreads  his  shadow  over  a  world,
That  an  old  man  fears  not  a  Rustam.

In  every  age,  men  of  the  violence  of  time.
And  of  the  revolution  of  the  skies, — groan.

60  Oh  great  monarch  !  in  thy  just  age,
No  one   complains  in  respect  to  time.

In  thy  time,  I  behold  the  peace  of  the  people ;
After   thee,    I   know   not   (what  will  be)  the  end  of  the
people.

It  is  also  by  reason  of  thy  fortune  of  happy  ending.
That  the  date  of  Sa'di  is  in  thy  era.

So  long  as  the  moon  and  sun  are  in  the  sky.
In  this  book,  remembrance  of  thee  is  eternal.

If  kings  have  gathered  a  good  name.

They  have  learned  a  good  way  of  life  from  former  kings.

L66  Thou,  in  the  administration  of  thy  own  kingdom.
Surpassed  former  kings.

Alexander,  with  a  wall  of  brass  and  stone,
Confined  the  way  of  Ya,jui  from  the  world.

Thy  barrier  against  Ya,jui-kufr  is  of  gold  ;    .
It  is  not  brass,  like  the  wall  of  Alexander.


156  "  Ya,ju3  "  and  "  Ma,jui  "  signify— Gog  and  Magog ;  they  represent  the
descendants  of  Japhet,  son  of  Noah ;  they  lived  in  cities  to  the  north  of
Kohist^n,  whence  they  were  wont  to  issue  and  oppress  the  neighbouring
nations.  Alexander  the  Great  built  a  wall  one  hundred  farsangs  in
length  between  two  mountains,  and  so  confined  them.  See  the  Sikandar-
Nama,  by  Nizami,  Discourse  13,  couplet  49.

167  "Ya.juj  Kufr,"  or  Changez  Khan.  King  AtAbuk  made  peace  with
him,  by  paying  money,  so  that  the  Muslims  of  Shi'raz  obtained  safety
from  his  tyranny.  The  Author  gives  pre-exceUence  to  his  praised  one,
Abu-Bakr.


22  THE    BUSTAN   OF   SA  DI.

That  eloquent  one — who,  in  security  and  justice,
Utters  not  thy  praise, — let  him  not  have  a  tongue  !

"Well  done  !  The  sea  of  gift  and  mine  of  liberality !
Because  the  implorer  for  aid  is  existent  from  thy  existence.

160  I  consider  the  qualities  of  the  King  beyond  computation ;
Within    this   narrow    plain    of    the   book,    they   are   not
contained.

If  Sa'di  writes  all  thy  good  qualities,
He  will  assuredly  make  another  book.

I  desist  from  thanks  for  such  liberality ;
It  is  indeed  better,  that  I  should  spread  forth  the  hand  of
prayer : —

May  the  world  be  to  thy  desire,  and  Heaven  thy  friend !
May  the  Creator  of  the  World  be  thy  guardian  !

Thy  lofty  star  has  illumined  a  world  ;

The  declination  of  thy  star  has  burned  the  enemy.

166  Of  the  revolution  of  Time  let  there  not  be  grief  to  thee  !
And  of  reflection,  let  there  not  be  dust  (of  grief)  on  thy
heart !

Because  a  single  grief,  on  the  heart  of  kings,
Disturbs  the  heart  of  a  world.

May  thy  heart  and  territory  be  tranquil  and  prosperous
May  confusion  be  far  from  thy  kingdom  !

May  thy  body  be  always  (sound)   like  thy  true  rehgion  (of

Islam) !
May  the  heart  of  thy  enemy  be  sluggish,  like  deHberation !

May  thy  inward  parts,  by  the  strengthening  of  God,   be

joyful !
May  ihj  heart,  and  religion,  and  territory  be  prosperous  I


1


INTRODUCTION.  23


70  May  the  World- Creator  have  mercy  on  thee  !
Whatever  more  I  may  say  is  empty  talk  and  wind.

This  indeed  is  enough  from  the  Grlorious  Omnipotent  One,
That  the  grace  of  thy  welfare  is  on  the  increase.

(King)  Sa'd,  the  son  of  Zangi,  departed  not  with  pain  from
the  world ;

When  he  begot  a  renowned  successor,  like  thee  (Muham-
mad Sa'd).

This  branch,  from  that  pure  stock  (Sa'd,  son  of  Zangi),  is

not  wonderful ;
Because  his  soul  is  on   the  summit  (of  paradise),  and  his

body  in  the  dust  (of  the  grave).

Oh  God  !  On  that  renowned  tomb  (of  Sa'd,  son  of  Zangi),
By  Thy  grace,  let  the  rain  of  mercy  fall !


176  If  of  Sa'd,    son  of    Zangi,    an   example   and    recollection
remain, —
May  Heaven  be  the  Protector  of  Sa'd,  son  of  Abu-Bakr !


Atabak  Muhammad,  a  king  of  good  fortune.
Lord  of  crown,  and  Lord  of  throne.

A  youth  of  fresh  fortune,  enlightened  mind  ;
In  fortune,  young ;  in  deliberation,  old.


172  Zangi  was  the  grandfather  of  Abu-Bakr ;  Sa'd,  the  son  of  Zangi,
was  the  father  of  Abu-Bakr,  who  was  King  of  Persia,  in  the  time  of  the
poet  Sa'di.  There  was  another  ^Sa'd,  who  was  the  son  of  Abu-Bakr.
Vide  couplet  175.

175  "  Atabak"  signifies— an  instructor.  Sa'd,  son  of  Zangi,  was  instructor
to  Sultan  Sanja,  of  Shi'raz ;  one  night  the  Sultan,  in  a  state  of  intoxica-
tion, gave  the  sovereignty  of  the  country  of  Shiraz  to  Sa'd,  son  of  Zangi.
After  the  death  of  Sanjar,  Sa'd  and  his  heirs  were  called  Atabak.

176  Muhammad  was  the  son  of  that  Abu-Bakr ;  they  used  to  call  him
Muhammad  Sa'd.  From  couplet  176  to  190  is  in  praise  of  Muhammad
Sa'd,  son  of  Bu-Bakr,  son  of  Sa'd  son  of  Zangi.


L


24  THE   BTJSTAN    OF    SA'dI.

In  wisdom,  great ;  and  in  spirit,  lofty ;
In  arm,  strong ;  and  in  heart,  sensible.

Oh  happy  fortune  of  the  mother  of  Time  !
Who  cherishes  such  a  son  in  her  bosom.

180  With  the  hand  of  liberality,  he  took  away  the  water  (of
reputation)  of  the  river  :
In  exaltation,  he  took  the  place  of  the  Pleiades.

Bravo  !  may  the  eye  of  Fortune  be  open  (joyous)  on  thy

face,
Oh  chief  of  monarchs,  neck  exalting  !

The  oyster,  that  thou  dost  see  full  of  pearl-grains.
Has  not  that  value  that  one  pearl-grain  has.

Thou  art  that  hidden  (rare)  pearl  of  one  grain ;
Because,   thou   art   the    ornament   of    the   house   of    the
kingdom.

Oh  God  !  preserve  him  by  Thy  grace  :
Keep  him  from  injury  and  the  evil  eye.

186  Oh  God  !  make  him  renowned  in  every  horizon  :
Make  him  precious,  by  the  grace  of  devotion.

Keep  him  a  dweller  in  justice  and  piety ;
Fulfil  his  wish  in  this  world  and  the  next.

Let  there  not  be  grief  to  thee  on  account  of  the  hateful
enemy !

Let  there  not  be  injury  to  thee,  from  the  revolution  of  the
world !


180       He  made  the  river  ashamed  by  his  liberality,  and   diminished  the
splendour  of  the  Pleiades  by  his  grandeur.

182       "Yak  dana"   signifies— a  jewel,  incomparable,   without  equal  and

unrivalled.  '

187       In  some  places  "  tk  "  is  replaced  by  "  ash."


INTEODTJCTION.  26

The  tree  of  paradise  like  thee  brings  forth  fruit :
The  son  fame-seeking ;  the  father  fame-possessing.

Know  that  welfare  is  a  stranger  of  that  household
Who  are  evil  speakers  of  this  household.

19^  Bravo !    Religion   and   knowledge.      Bravo !    justice    and
equity.
Bravo !    country    and    government. —  May    it   always   be
lasting !


\


THE   BUSTAN    OP    SA'DI.  [cHAP.  I.


CHAPTER    1.

On  Justice,  Equity,  and  Administration  of  Goveenment.    "5


1  The  beneficences  of  God  are  not  contained  in  the  imagina-
tion ;
What  service  does  the  tongue  of  praise  offer  ?

Oh  God  do  thou— this  king  (Abu-Bakr  son  of  Sa'd),  the

poor  man's  friend,
Since  the  case  of  the  people  is  in  his  protection, —

Keep  long  established  over  the  head  of  the  people ;
By  the  grace  of  devotion,  keep  his  heart  alive  (fresh).

Keep  his  tree  of  hope  fruitful ;

His  head  green,  and  his  face,  with  mercy,  fair.

6  Oh  Sa'di !  go  not  in  the  way  of  dissimulation  (in  regard  to
the  King's  praise)  ;
If  thou  hast  honesty,  bring  and  come.


1       In  the  'Ikd-i-manzum  couplets  1  to  21  are  omitted.
6       According  to  the  demands  of  truth,   direct   to   goodness   the    Poet
addresses  himself.


f


CHAP.  I.]  ON   JUSTICE,    EQUlTr,    AND    GOVEENMENT.  27

Thou  (Sa'di)  art  a  stage-recogniser,  and  the  King  a  road-
traveller  :

Thou  art  a  speaker  of  truth ;  and  the  King,  the  bearer  of
truths.

What  necessity  that  nine  thrones  of  the  sky,

Thou  dost  place  below  the  foot  of  (the  King)  Kizil-Arsalan.

Say  not : — place  thy  foot  of  honour  on  the  Heavens.
Say : — place  the  face  of  sincerity  in  the  dust.

Place,  in  devotion,  the  face  on  the  threshold  (of  Grod)  ;
Because  this  is  the  highway  of  the  righteous.

10  K  thou  (Abu-Bakr)  art  a  slave  of  God,  place  thy  head  on
this  door  (of  God) ;
Place,  from  off  thy  head,  the  cap  of  lordship.

At  the  Court  of  the  Order-giver  possessed  of  Majesty,
Bewail,  like  a  darwesh,  before  a  rich  and  powerful  man.

When  thou  dost  perform  thy  devotions,   put  not  on  the

kingly  raiment ;
Like  the  poor  darwesh,  bring  forth  a  cry.

Saying  : — "  Oh  Omnipotent  One  !   Thou  art  powerful ;
"  Thou  art  strong ;    Thou  art  the  darwesh-cherisher.


Q       "  Manzil  shinas  "  is  a  spiritual  guide,  or  one  who  knows  God.
7       The  following  couplet  was  composed  by  the  poet  Zahir-fariydbi,  whose
patron  was  King  Kizil  Arsalan : —

"  Reflection  places  beneath  its  foot  nine  thrones  of  the  sky,
So  that  it  may  kiss  the  stirrup  of  Kizil  Arslan."
The  poet  Sa'di,  in  praising  Abu-Bakr,  says  What  need  to  say  so  much  ?
because  in  saying  so,  pride  and  arrogance  are  found,  and  pride  is  the
mark  of  misfortune.
U       Let  Ritualists  observe  this  passage.


28  THE   BUSTAN   OF    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  I.

"  I  (Abii-Bakr)  am  neither  a  monarch,  nor  an  order-giver ;
"  I  am  one  of  the  beggars  of  this  Court.

16  "  What  springs  forth  from  the  power  of  my  conduct,
"  Unless  the  power  of  Thy  grace  is  my  friend  ?

'•  Give  to  me  the  means  of  liberality  and  goodness ;
*'  And,  if  not, — what  goodness  can  come  from  me  to  any-
one?

"  Oh  God  !  keep  me  on  the  work  of  goodness ;
"  Otherwise,  no  work  can  come  from  me."

At  night,  like  the  beggars,  pray  with  ardour,
If,  by  day,  thou  dost  exercise  sovereignty.

The  obstinate  ones  (courtiers)  are  at  thy  door,  loin  girt ;
Thou  (shouldst  be  thus) — thy  head  on  the  threshold  of
devotion.

20  Oh,  excellent ! — for  us  slaves,  the  Lord-God ;
For  the  lord  a  slave,  duty-performing.


They  relate  a  story  of  the  great  men  of  the  faith,
Recognisers  of  the  truth  of  the  essence  of  truth.


19  "  Gardan-kashan  "  signifies  —  men  possessed  of  power,  and  arrogant.
"  Kamar-bastan  "  signifies  —  to  choose,  to  be  of  stout  heart  in  deeds,  to
show  solicitude  in  work.
21  "  'Hmu-l-yakin  "  is — proof  of  the  certainty  of  a  thing  is  obtained  to
such  a  degree  that  the  doubter  is  incapable  of  entertaining  doubt,  though
the  thing  itself  may  not  be  viewed  as —

The  conception  of  the  form  of  fire  from  smoke,
"  'Ainu-1-yakin  "  is — the  viewing  of  a  thing  is  obtained  so  that  a  person
sees  the  form  of  fire  with  his  eye.     This  yakin  is  superior  to  the  first.

"  Hakku-1-yakin  "  signifies — the  effacing  of  one  thing  by  another  in
such  a  way  that,  apparently,  it  becomes  that  other  thing  itself,  as —

Iron  in  the  fire  of  the  smith's  stove  appears  exactly  like  the  fire
itself.
The  "Nineteenth  Century"  magazine,  October  1878,  "  Faith  and  Veri-


i


OHAP.  I.]  ON   JUSTICE,   EQUITY,    AND   GOVERNMENT.  29

As  follows  : — A  pious  man  sate  on  a  panther  ;

Snake  in  hand,  he  urged  his  long,  pleasant  paced  steed.

One  said  to  him  : — "  Oh  man  of  the  way  of  God  !
Guide  me  to  this  road  by  which  thou  didst  go.

"  What  didst  thou,  that  the  rending  animal  became  obe-
dient to  thee  ?
*'  That  the  seal-ring  of  good  fortune  went  to  thy  name  ?  "

25  He  said  : — "  If  the  panther  and  snake  be  submissive  to  me,
"  And  if   (also)  the  elephant  and  vulture, — be  not    asto-
nished.

"  Do  thou  also  from  the  order  of  the  Ruler  (God)  twist  not

thy  neck,
"  So  that  no  one,  from  thy  order,  may  twist  his  neck."

When  the  ruler  is  obedient  to  God,
God  is  his  Protector  and  Friend.

It  is  impossible  when  He  loves  thee,

That  He  will  leave  thee  in  the  power  of  an  enemy.


fication,"  page  677 : — "  A  fact  only  is  proved  when  the  evidence  can  leave
us  no  room  to  doubt ;  when  it  cannot  be  denied  without  absurdity  ;
when  it  becomes  a  necessity  of  the  reason  that  we  give  our  full  assent
to  it."  Page  678 : — "  This  great  scientific  axiom  is  an  utterly  false
one."  "  It  is  in  diametrical  opposition  to  truth."  "  It  is  only  the
meanest  and  most  subordinate  truths  that  are  capable  of  being  proved
at  all."

24  That  like  Salaiman  thou  didst  become  master  of  ravening  beasts.

25  'Jn  some  places  the  following  occurs  : —

I  saw  one,  in  the  bed  of  a  river  (or,  from  the  plain  of  the  city  of

Eud-bar),
Who  came  towards  me  riding  on  a  panther :
Such  terror,  on  account  of  that  state,  sate  on  (overpowered)  me,

f  That  fearing  bound  the  feet  of  my  going.

V    ^miling,  he  took  his  hand  to  his  lip,
hv(    *^  ing— Oh  Sa'di !  at  whatever  thou  didst  see  be  not  astonished.

/


go  THE   BU8TAN   OF    SA'pI.  [cHAP.  I.

This  is  the  road,  and  turn  not  thy  face  from  the  way  ;  |

Place  thy  foot  (on  this  road),  and  obtain  the  object  which
thou  dost  desire.

so  Advice  of  a  person  is  profitable  to  a  person, — ^to  him.
To  whom  the  saying  of  Sa'di  is  agreeable.


I  have  heard  that,  at  the  time  of  the  agony  of  the  soul  (the

last  breath),
(King)  Naushiravan  (the  Just)  thus  spoke  to  Hurmuz  (hig

son).

Saying : — "  Be  observant  of  the  heart  of  the  poor
*'  Be  not  in  the  desire  of  thy  own  ease.

"  A  person  rests  not  within  thy  territory,

"  When  thou  dost  seek  thy  own  ease,  and  no  more.

•*  In  the  opinion  of  the  wise,  it  is  not  approved —

"  The  shepherd  asleep,  and  the  wolf  among  the  sheep.

S6  "  Gro  :  protect  the  poor  and  needy  one,

"  Because,  the  king  is  the  crown-holder  for  the  sake  of  his
subjects.

"  The  subject  is  like  the  root,  and  the  king  the  tree ;
"  Oh  son  !  the  tree  is  strong  by  reason  of  the  root.         i

"  So   long   as   thou   canst,   wound   not  the  heart  of  the

people ;
"  But,  if  thou  dost, — thou  dost  pluck  up  thy  own  roots.


29  "  Shari'at,"  the  laws  of  Muhammad.  >»

"  Tankat,"  the  way  (to  God).  I  By   these   four  means,    a

"  Hakikat,"  the  truth  (of  existence  of  God).  [      man  may  find  God.
"  Ma'rifat,"  the  knowledge  (of  God).  J

38       In  the  'Ikd-i-manzum,  this  couplet  is  omitted.
35       In  some  places : —

Thou  hast  slept  cool,  in  the  retired  place,  half  a  day  ;  ^^®      ®

Say, — to  the  traveller,  bum  in  the  heat  outside.

I  and  Veri-


CHAP.  I.]  ON   JUSTICE,    EQUITY,    AND   GOVERNMENT.  3i


"  If  a  straight  road  (of  safety)  is  necessary  for  thee-
"  The  way  of  the  pious  is  hope  and  fear.

"  The  disposition  of  man  is  towards  wisdom,

"  In  the  hope  of  goodness,  and  fear  of  wickedness."


40  If  thou  didst  find  these  two  doors  (hope  arid  fear)  in  the
King,
Thou  didst  obtain  shelter  in  the  territory  of  his  kingdom.

(The  King)  brings  a  gift  to  the  hopeful  one,

In  hope  of  the  gift  (of  pardon)  of  the  Creator  of  the  World.

•'  The  injury  of  persons  is  not  pleasing  to  him  (the  king),
"  Who  fears  lest  injury  should  come  to  his  kingdom.

"  And  if  there  is  not  this  disposition,  in  his  nature,
"  There  is  not  the  perfume  of  ease  in  that  territory.

"  If  thou  art  foot-bound  (by  wife  and  family),  accept  con-
tentment ;

*'  But,  if  thou  art  a  single  horseman  (solitary),  take  thy
own  desire.

4^5  "  Seek  not  plenteousness  in  that  land  and  region,

"  Where  thou  dost  see  the  subjects  of  the  king  sorrowful.


og       After  the  first  line,  understand : — have  fear  of  wickedness  and  hope  of
^        goodness.     See  the  second  line  of  couplet  39.
'  „Q       The  Stiffs  have  said: — (Arabic.)     "  Find  out  whatever  desire  there  is

in  hope  ^j\5kff %liy  r

!,\^  ^Arabic.)     "  Fear  and  hope  are  to  man,  as  wings  to  a

QV

■  J  the  'Ikd-i-manzum,  couplets  39  to  41  are  omitted.

43  '^feu,e  "  (lit.  a  smell)  signifies — a  portion,  a  share,  wish.

44  '   Ijiat  is  : —

!  In  thy  hand,  there  is  nothing  although  thou  art  a  king.     More-

~    over,  affairs  are  in  the  hand  of  God.     Hence  thou  also  hast  hope
and  fear.  .


gg  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  I.

"  Fear  not  the  proud  haughty  ones ;
*'  Fear  that  one,  who  fears  God.

"  In  a  dream,  he  sees  the  territory  of  another  populous,
«  Who  keeps  the  heart  of  the  people  of  his  country  dis-
tressed.

**  From  violence  come  ruin  and  ill-fame  ;
"  The   prudent   man   reaches   to   the   profundity  of    this
speech.

"  It  is  not  proper  with  injustice  to  slay  the  peasants,
"  Who  are  the  shelter  and  support  of  the  kingdom.

60  "  For  thy  own  sake  preserve  the  villagers ;

"  Because,   the  labourer   of  happy   heart  executes  more
work  (for  his  master).

"  It  is  not  manliness  to  do  ill  to  that  one  (the  villager),
•'  From  whom,  thou  mayst  have  experienced  much  benefit
(in  tribute)."


I  have  heard  that  King  Khusrau  said  to  (his  son)  Shirwiya
At  that  time  when  his  eyes  slept  (rested)  from  seeing  (at
the  time  of  death), —

"  In  that  state  be,  so  that  whatever  resolution  thou  mayst

make,
"  Thou  mayst  consider  the  peace  of  the  peasant.


^g       In  the  text,  in  the  second  line,  a  negative  is  wroii^  ^,^r>/)     gg^,  f.jj  g

Sikandar  Ndma,  Discourse  34,  couplet  41 —  ^  ,^'

In  business,  I  have  fear  of  none,  ^u'       d'l    '

Save  that  one,  who  is  God-fearing.  ^W

'.1       The  splendid  clothes  and  delicate  food  of  kings,  and  other  delig'  i     of

8.    life,  are  purchased  with  the  gold  of  the  villagers.  -^v

85      Khusrau  Parvez,  son  of  Hurmuz,  reigned  690-625  a.d.     He      J  nie

v^/,^   -£J3Ji/rin,     Shirwiya,  in  order  to  increase  his  sensual  appj^      ^e,

Say, — to  tilxich  proved  to  be  poison :  he  reigned  six  months.  _.

Ver


CHAP.  I.]  ON   JUSTICE,    EQUITY,    AND    GOVERNMENT.  33

'*  Be  sure,   so  long  as  thou  dost  not  turn  thy  head  from

equity  and  judgment,
"  That  men  will  not  turn  aside  their  feet,  from  thy  power.

56  "  The  peasant  flies  from  the  tyrant ;

"  He  makes  his  bad  repute,  a  stock  story  in  the  world.

"  Much  time  passes  not,  that  his  own  foundation,
"  That   one   plucked   up,  who  laid  a  bad   foundation  (of
tyranny).

"  The  enemy,  skilful  with  the  sword,  lays  waste,
"  Not  so  much  as,  the  smoke  (grief)  of  the  heart  of  an  old
woman.

"  The  lamp  (of  grief)  that  the  widow- woman  lighted  up, —
"  Thou  mayst  often  have  seen  that  it  burned  a  city.

"  Who,  in  the  world,  is  more  favoured  than  that  one,
"  Who  with  justice,  in  sovereignty,  lived?

JO  "  When  the  time  of  his  travelling  from  this  world  arrives,
*'  (The  people  of  the  world)  send  mercy  to  his  tomb.

"  Since  bad  and  good  men  pass  away  (die),
"It  is  best  indeed  that  they  connect  thy  name  with  good-
ness (and  bless  thee).

"  Appoint  the  God-fearing  one  over  the  peasant ;

"  Because,  the  abstinent  one  is  the  architect  of  the  country.

"  That  liver-eater  of  the  people  is  thy  enemy,

"  Who  seeks  thy  profit,  in  the  injury  of  the  people.

"  Grovernment  is  a  fault  in  the  hand  of  those  persons,
"  From  whose  power,  the  hands  (of  the  people)  are  (up-
lifted in  prayer)  before  God.


■         Khud  should  be  pronoiinced  witli  f atha  for  poetry  sake.


I


34  THE   BUSTAN   OF    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  I.

65  "  The  cherislier  of  good  sees  not  evil ;

"  When  thou  dost  cherish  evil,  thou  art  the  enemy  of  thy
own  life.

"  Exercise  not  retribution  against  the  despoiler  by  (con-
fiscation of)  his  property ;

*'  But,  it  is  proper  to  bring  forth  (to  destroy)  his  root  from
the  foundation.

"  Exercise  not  patience  with  the  agent  of  the  friend  of

tyrannv :
"  Since,  on  account  of  his  fatness  (from  extortion)   it  is

proper  to  flay  his  skin.

"  It  is  also  proper,  at  first,  to  cut  off  the  wolf's  head,

"  Not  at  the  time  when  he  tore  in  pieces  the  sheep  of  men."

How  well  said  the  captive  merchant

When  the  robbers  gathered  around  him  with  arrows !

70  "  Inasmuch  as  courage  comes  from  highwaymen,

"  Whether  the  men  of  the  army,  or  a  troop  of  women,  what
matter?"


66  In  the  second  line,  "  ki  "  may  have  the  force  of — because  ;  or,  nay.
"  Malish  "  signifies — punishment.
"  Malash  "  signifies — his  property,  as  given  in  the  text.

67  "  Zulm  dost  "  signifies — one  who  loves  tyranny.
Exercise  not  patience  ;  nay,  dismiss  him,  because  I  will  plunder  this

tyranny-practising  one,  after  that  he  has  become  fat,  and  amassed  by
oppression  much  wealth  from  the  peasant,  and  will  take  his  plunder  from
him.

Again : —

Exercise  not  patience ;  because  it  is  necessary  to  flay  this  tyranny-
practising  one.  If  not,  having  become  bold,  he  will  exercise  on  all  still
greater  tyranny.

68  In  the  'Ikd-i-manziim,  couplets  Q9  to  264  are  omitted.

70  The  army  should  repel  robbers ;  when  it  does  not  exercise  sufficient
bravery  to  do  this,  the  author  asks — what  difference  is  there  between  it
and  a  troop  of  women  ?  j

The  gist  of  this  speech  is  : — That  a  king  should  protect  merchants       I.
and  travellers.


1


CHAP.  I.]  ON   JUSTICE,    EQUITY,    AND   GOVERNMENT.  3-5

The  great  king,  who  injured  the  merchants.
Shut  the  door  of  well  being  on  the  (people  of  the)  city  and
the  army.

How  may  wise  men  again  go  there,

When  they  hear  the  rumour  of  bad  custom  ?

Are  a  good  name  and  favourable  reception  necessary  to

thee  ?—
Hold  in  esteem  merchants  and  envoys.

Merchants  heartily  cherish  travellers ;

Because,  they  carry  their  good  name  to  the  world.

76  That  kingdom  soon  becomes  ruined,

From  which,  the  injured  heart  becomes  a  traveller.

Be  the  acquaintance  of  the  foreigner,  and  friend  of  the

traveller ;
Because   the   traveller   is   one   who  hawks  about  a  good

name.

Hold  dear  the  guest,  and  precious  the  traveller ;
But  also  be  on  guard  from  injury  from  them.

To  beware  of  the  stranger  is  good ;

Because,  possibly,  he  may  be  an  enemy  in  the  guise  of  a
friend.


75       In  some  places : —

When  the  king  broke  faith,  in  whom  may  he  seek  faith  ?

When  the  villagers  fled,  from  whom  will  he  seek  fame  ?

What  goodness,  does  that-one- without-purity  expect,

In  whose  rear  are  curses  ?

Neither  poverty,  nor  helplessness ;

Neither  rebuke,  nor  oppression — at  once.

When  memory  of  former  kings  comes  to  thee,

Recite  that  same  writing  after  thy  own  time.

They  possessed  this  very  desire,  and  pride,  and  pleasure ;

In  the  end,  they  departed,  and  abandoned  the  world.

3  •


86


THE   BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  I.


Advance  the  rank  of  thy  own  old  friends ;

Because,  treachery  never  comes  from  the  cherished  one.

80  When  thy  servant  becomes  old,
Forget  not  the  right  of  his  years.

If  old  age  has  bound  the  hand  of  his  service  ;
Yet,  thou  hast  power,  in  respect  to  liberality.


I  heard  that  Shahpiir  heaved  a  sigh.

When  Khusrau  drew  the  pen  on  (cancelled)  his  pension.

When,  from  want  of  food  his  state  became  distressed.
He  wrote  this  tale  to  the  king,

As  follows  : — "  Oh  king,  clime-spreader,  in  justice  !

"  If  I  remain  not  (die  still),  thou  dost  remain  in  excellence.

86  "  When  I  spent  for  thee  my  youth,

**  Drive  me  not  from  before  thee,  in  the  time  of  old  age."

The  foreigner,  whose  head  is  intent  on  strife.
Injure  not ;  but,  expel  him  from  the  country.

If  thou  dost  not  become  angry  with  him,  it  is  proper ;
Because,  his  own  bad  nature  is  the  enemy,  in  pursuit  of
him.

And,  if  Persia  be  his  native  country.

Send  him  not  to  Sin'an,  Slavonia,  or  Turkey.

Even  there  (in  Persia)  give  him  not  respite,  until  the  mid-
day meal  (slay  him) ;
It  is  not  proper  to  establish  a  calamity  on  any  one.


g2       "  Sli4hpdr "    was    the   attendant,    who    used    to    be    employed    as
messenger  between  "  Khusrau  Parvez  "  and  his  mistress  "  Shirin."

88  Sin'dn  is  a  town  in  Yaman,  in  Arabia ;  Saklab  is  a  country  in  the  north.

89  "  Chdsht "  is  one  watch  out  of  the  four  watches  into  which  the  day
(not  night)  is  divided.


CHAP.  I.]  ON    JUSTICE,    EQUITY,    AND    GOVERNMENT.  37

)  Because  they  say : — May  that  country  be  overturned,
Since  such  men  come  out  of  it !

If  thou  dost  give  service  (place  and  rank)  recognise   the

beneficent  man ;
Because,  the  poor  man  has  no  fear  of  the  king.

When  the  poor  man  lowers  his  neck  to  the  shoulder  (in

humility).
Only  lamentation  proceeds  from  him.

When  the  inspector  has  not  two  hands  of  rectitude,
It  is  necessary  to  appoint  an  examiner  over  him.

And  if  he  (the  examiner)  agrees  with  his  heart,

Pluck  away  service  from  the  inspector  and  his  examiner.

D5  The  Grod-fearing  man,  fidelity-displaying,  is  necessary ;
Hold  him  not  faithful,  who  fears  thee  (and  not  Grod).

The  faithful  one  is  necessary,  fearing  the  Euler  (God) ;
Not  eminence  of  the  minister,  nor  reproof,  nor  ruin.

Scatter  (thy  money),  and  reckon,  and  sit  at  leisure ;
Because,  thou  dost  not  see  one  faithful  out  of  a  hundred.

Two  persons  of  the  same  nature,  old,  of   the   same   pen

education).
It  is  not  proper  to  send  together  to  one  place.

How  dost  thou  know  that  they  may  become  mutual  helper

and  friend  ?
This  one  may  be  a  thief,  the  other  a  confidant.


»       "  Faro  burdan  gardan  ba  dosh  "  signifies— to  practise  humility  ;  to

reflect ;  to  obey.
Nl       See  couplet  46.

When  a  man  is  in  doubt  as  to  how  much  he  possesses,  he  spreads  out

his  long  purse  (the  scrip  suspended  at  the  girdle),  and  counts  his  money.
>9       "  Ham  dast  gardan  "  signifies  —  to  become  concordant.


38  THE    BUSTAN    OP    SA'dI.  [oHAP.   1.

100  When  thieves  have  fear  and  terror  of  one  another,
A  Karawan  goes  safe,  in  the  midst  of  them.

One  whom  thou  didst  dismiss  from  dignity, —
Forgive  his  crime,  when  some  time  elapses.

To  accomplish  the  desire  of  the  hopeful
Is  better  than  to  break  (the  bonds)  of  a  thousand  fettered
ones.

If  the  pillar  of  the  office  of  the  scribe
Falls,  he  cuts  not  the  rope  of  hope.

The  just  monarch,  with  his  subjects.
Becomes  angry  like  a  father  with  a  son.

106  Sometimes,  he  strikes  him  so  that  he  becomes  sorrowful ;
Sometimes,  he  makes  water  (flow)  from  his  pure  eyes.

When  thou  dost  exercise  gentleness,  the  enemy  becomes   "

bold;
But,  if  thou  art  an  anvil,  he  becomes  wearied  of  thee.

Severity  and  mildness  together  are  best.
Like  the  vein- striker  (bleeder),  who  is  surgeon  and  plaster-
placer.

Be  generous,  and  pleasant  tempered,  and  forgiving ;
Even  as  God  scatters  (favour)  over  thee,  do  thou  scatter
over  the  people.


102       The  second  line  may  be  rendered : —

Is  better  than  to  subdue  a  thousand  fortresses.
10:{       If  the  official  be  dismissed  from   office,   he  despairs  not   of    being

reinstated.
108       As  God  ordered:— (^rafeic.)  "  Do  good  as  God  has  done  good  to  thee."


II


CHAP.  I.]        ON    JUSTICE,    EQUITY,    AND    GOVERNMENT.  39

No  one  came  into  the  world,  who  remained.
Save  that  one,  whose  good  name  remained.

^®  That  one  died  not,  after  whom  there  remained —
Bridge,  or  masjid,  or  khan,  or  guest-house.

Every  one,  behind  whom,  a  token  remained  not, —
The  tree  of  his  existence  brought  not  forth  fruit.

If  he  departed  (from  this  world)  and  the  marks  of  his  well-
doing remained  not.
It  is  not  fit  to  chaunt,  after  his  death, — "  Al  hamd  !  "

When  thou  dost  wish  that  thy  name  may  be  eternal,
Conceal  not  the  good  name  of  the  great  ones.

After  thy  own  time  (death)  call  to  mind  that  same  descrip-
tive picture,
That,  after  the  age  of  former  kings,  thou  didst  behold.

u^is  One  took  away  a  good  name  from  the  world ;

The  bad  custom  of   the  other  remained  behind  him  for
ever.


109  In  some  places : —

Whosoever  came  into  the  world  vsdll  be  one  who  passes  away ;
He  who  is  permanent  and  lasting  will  be  God.

110  "Khan"  signifies  —  Karawan-house.

I  "  Mihman  sarae  "  signifies  —  the  place  where  they  give  food  to  the  poor

and  necessitous.
112       "  Al  hamd ! "  refers  to  the  Surafatiha  of  the  Kuran.     It  here  signifies

— du'd,e  khair.
114       In  some  places  : —

They  possessed  this  very  desire,  ajad  blandishment,  and  joy  ;
In  the  end,  they  departed  (from  the  world)  and  passed  away.
The  picture,  regarding  their  lifelessness  and  namelessness,  which  after
the  death  of  former  kings  thou  didst  see  on  the  tablet  of  possibility —
behold  that  same  picture  (of  non-existence)  on  the  page  of  Time  after
thy  own  epoch.  That  is — like  former  ones,  thou  also  wilt  become  name-
less and  traceless.


40


THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'DI.  [cHAP.   1.


With  the  ear  of  approval,  listen  not  to  a  person's  injury ;
But,  if  the  speech  comes  probe  its  depth.

Accept  the  excuse  of  f orgetf ulness  of  the  sinner ;
When  he  asks  for  protection,  give  protection.

If  a  sinner  comes  to  thy  shelter ;

It  is  not  proper  to  slay  him,  at  the  first  fault.

When  once  they  uttered  advice,  and  the  sinner  heard  not ;
Punish   him,    the   second   time,   with   imprisonment   and
bonds.

120  And,  if  advice  and  bonds  are  of  no  advantage  to  him ;
He  is  an  impure  tree ;  pluck  up  his  roots.

When  anger  comes  to  thee,  on  account  of  a  person's  crime.
Reflect  much  on  his  punishment ;

Because,  it  is  easy  to  break  the  ruby  of  Badakhshan.
Broken, — it  is  not  possible  to  fasten  it  together  again.

A  certain  one  came  from  the  sea  of  'Umman,
Much  sea  and  plain  travelled ;

Arabia  and  Turkistan,  and  Majanderan,  and  Turkey  seen ;
Sciences  of  every  class  of  men,  in  his  pure  spirit ;

125  World  travelled,  and  knowledge  gathered ;
Travelled  and  society- versed ;

In  form  strong,  like  a  large-boiled  tree ;
But  very  weak  without  leaf.

Two  hundred  rags,  one  on  the  other  stitched ;
He  in  the  midst  burnt  from  their  heat.


I
I


122  Badakhshan  is  a  country  between  Hindustan  and  Khurasan ;  in  that
place  is  a  mine  of  rubies  and  gold.  Some  say  that  there  is  no  mine  of
rubies,  but  that  they  bring  rubies  to  Badakhshan  and  call  them  rubies
of  Badakhshan.


I


CHAP.  I.]        ON    JUSTICE,    EQUITY,    AND    GOVERNMENT.  41

By  a  river-bank,  he  entered  a  city ;
A  great  one  (was)  king  in  that  locality.


Who  had  a  disposition  reflecting  on  good  name ;
Who  held  the  head  of  submission,  at  the  foot  of  the  dar-
wesh.

L30  The  servants  of  the  king  washed.

In  a  bath,  his  head  and  body  from  the  dust  of  the  road.

When  he  placed  his  head  on  the  threshold  of  the  king.
Lauding,  he  placed  his  hand  in  his  bosoin.

He  entered  the  hall  of  the  great  king.

Saying  : — "  May  thy  fortune   be   young,   and   power   thy
slave  !  "

The  great  king  said  : — "  Whence  didst  thou  come  ?
"  What  happened  to  thee  that  thou  camest  to  me  ?

"  In  this  territory,  what  sawest  thou  of  good  and  bad  ?
'*  Oh  one  of  good  name  and  good  disposition  !     Say  !  "


ws  He  replied  : — '*  Oh  lord  of  the  face  of  the  earth  !
"  May  God  be  thy  helper,  and  Fortune  thy  friend  I

"  In  this  country,  I  went  not  one  stage,

"  During  which,  I  saw  a  single  heart  calamity-distressed.

"  For   the    king,    this   very    kingdom   and   ornament   (of

justice)  is  sufficient,
"  That — he  is  not  pleased  with  injury  done   to   a  single

person.

"  I  saw  not  one,  head  heavy  with  wine ;

"  Indeed  I  also  saw  the  wine  taverns  desolate.**


42  THE    BCSTAN    OP    SA'dI.  [oHAP.  I.

He  spoke,  and  expanded  his  skirt  of  jewels  of  speech,
With  such  a  grace,   that  the  king  extended  his  sleeve  in
rapture  (was  astonied).


140  The  excellent  speech  of  the  man  was  pleasing  to  the  king ;
He  called  him  near  to  himself  and  did  him  honour.


Qrove  to  him  gold  and  jewels  and  thanks  for  auspicious

arrival ;
Inquired  of  him  his  original  birthplace.

Whatever  the  king  asked  of  past  events,  he  told  ;

In  propinquity  to  the  king,  he  surpassed  other  persons.

The  king  was  in  talk  with  his  own  heart.
Saying : — "  I   may  commit   to   him   the   chief   dignity  of
wazir-ship,

**  But  by  degrees,  so  that  the  assembly  of  courtiers

"  May  not  laugh  at  my  judgment,  on  account  of  negligence.

146  «<  First  it  will  be  necessary  to  prove  him  in  wisdom ;
"  To  exalt  his  rank,  according  to  his  skill."

.From  the  power  of  grief,  there  may  be  burdens  on  the

heart  of  that  one,
Who,  untried,  performs  deeds.

When  the  Kdzi,  with  thought,  writes  the  decree.
He   becomes    not    ashamed    of    turban-wearers    (nobles,
learned  and  pious  men).


189       "  Asti'n  bar  afshandan  "  signifies — to  be  astonished.
147       "  Sijjil"  is  the  written  degree,  in  which  the  judge  writes  the  order  of
decision  with  the  reasons.


CHAP.  I.]        ON   JUSTICE,    EQUITY,    AND    GOVEENMENT.  43

Glance  (at  the  butt),  when  thou  hast  the  arrow-notch  in

the  bowstring-seizer.
Not,  at  that  time,  when  thou  didst  shoot  the  arrow  from

the  hand.


Like  Joseph  in  rectitude  and  discretion,  (for)  a  person —
Many  years  are  necessary  (in  order)  that  he  may  become
'aziz  (king).

^  So  long  as  much  time  passes  not.

One  cannot  reach  a  person's  profundity.

The  king  discovered  his  good  qualities  of  every  kind ;
He  was  a  man  wise  and  of  pure  religion.

The    king    saw    his    good    way    of    life,   and    illumined

judgment ;
His  considerate  speech,  and  capability  of  man-appraising.

Considered  him  in  judgment  better  and  greater  than  the

great  ones ;
Placed  him  above  the  power  of  his  own  wazir.

He  acquired  such  skill,  and  knowledge  of  work.

That  he  wounded  not  a  heart  by  his  order  and  prohibition.

He  brought  a  kingdom  beneath  the  (sway  of  his)  pen ;
Because,  from  him,  sorrow  came  not  to  a  single  person.


He  closed  the  tongue  of  all  word-seizers ;
Because  an  evil  thing  issued  not  from  his  hand.


^^  "  Shist "  signifies— the  bowstring-seizer ;  it  is  like  a  ring,  made  of
bone ;  they  place  it  on  the  thumb  at  the  time  of  shooting  and  pvill  the
bowstring  with  it,

^^       "  'Aziz  "  was  the  title  of  the  wazir  of  Egypt.


44  THE    BUSTAN    OP    8A*DI.  [CHAP.  I.

The  envious  one,  who  beheld  not  (in  this  conduct)  one  grain
of  deceit,

Trembled,  on  account  of  his  work,  like  wheat  on  the  frying-
pan.

From  his  illumined  mind,  the  country  acquired  light ;
Grief,  on  account  of  the  new  wazir,  seized  the  old  minister.

He,  in  respect  to  that' wise  one,  saw  not  a  single  breach  (of

observance)
On  account  of  which,  he  could  express  reproach.

160  The  faithful  one  is  a  basin,. and  the  evil  one  an  ant ;

The  ant  cannot,  by  force,  make  a  breach  in  the  basin  (when
within  it).

Two  sun-shaped  slaves  of  the  king
Used  to  be  always  loin-girt  (in  service).

Two  pure  forms  like  "  hiir  "  and  **  pari "

Like  the  sun  and  moon,  free  from  a  third  likeness.

Two  forms,  of  which  thou  wouldst  have  said — one  is  not

greater  (than  the  other),  i

Made  themselves  equal  (in  reflection)  in  the  mirror.  Ij

The  words   of   the  wise   one  (the  new  wazir),   sweet  of

discourse.
Took  the  heart  of  those  two  (youths)  box  trees  (in  stature).

165  W'hen  they  saw  that  the  qualities  of  his  disposition  were
good.
They  became,  in  inclination,  his  well-wishers  and  friends.

The  inclination  of  humanity  (love)  also  affected  him ; —
Not  an  incHnation  (lust)  like  that  of  short-sighted  ones  for
evU.


180       Even  80,  the  evil  one  cannot  prevail  over  the  upright  one.


1


CHAP.  I.]        ON   JUSTICE,    fiQUITT,    AND    GOVERNMENT.  45

He  used  to  possess  news  of  (enjoy)  ease  at  that  time,
When  he  used  to  glance  in  their  faces.


"When  thou  dost  wish  that  thy  power  may  remain  high.
Oh  Sir !  attach  not  thy  heart  to  the  smooth-faced  ones.

And  although  desire  (lust)  itself  be  not  present ;
Exercise  caution  because  there  is  fear  of  loss.

,70  The  old  minister  in  respect  to  this  obtained  a  little  informa-
tion;
In  villainy,  he  carried  this  story  to  the  king.

Saying : — "  I  know  not   this  new  wazir,   what   they  call

him,  nor  who  he  is,
"  In  this  country,  he  will  not  live  in  chastity.

"  Those  who  have  made  journeys  live  without  fear,
"  Because  they   are   not    cherished    by   the    country   and
government.

"  I  heard  that  he  has  an  affection  for  the  slaves ;
"  He  is  a  treachery-approver  and  lust  worshipper.

"  It  is  not  fit  that  such  a  dissipated,  black- faced  one
"  Should  bring  bad  repute  to  the  halls  of  the  king.

.75  "  Perhaps,  I  forget  the  king's  favour,
"  Because,  I  see  ruin  and  am  silent.

**  On  suspicion,  one  cannot  quickly  speak  ;
"So  long  as  I  was  uncertain,  I  spoke  not.

"  One  of  my  followers  observed

**  That  he  had  one  of  them  in  his  bosom.


171       "  Saman  "  signifies — ease,  rest,  repose,  innocence,  chastity.
174       "W^ira,  rue  "  signifies — shameless,  saucy-eyed.


4e


THE   BUSTAN    OP    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  I.


"  I  this  have  said ;  now,  oh  king  of  ripe  judgment !
"As  I  tried,  do  thou  also  try.'*

He  explained  the  matter  in  the  worst  manner.
May  there  not  be  a  happy  day  to' the  bad  man ! —

180  When  the  evil  one  obtained  power  over  a  small  matter.
He  burned  the  vitals  of  the  great  ones  in  the  fire.

One  can  light  a  fire  with  fragments  ;
After  that,  one  can  burn  the  large  tree.

This  speech  made  the  king  so  wrath.

That  his  sigh  came  forth  from  the  heart  to  the  mouth.

Anger,  in  respect  to  the  blood  of  the  darwesh  (new  wazir),

held  sway ;
But,  tranquillity  held  the  hand  in  front  (forbade)

Because  to  slay  the  cherished  one  is  not  manliness.
Tyranny  after  justice  is  coldness.

186  Injure  not  one  cherished  by  thyself.

When  he  has  thy  arrow,  strike  him  not  with  the  arrow.

It  was  not  proper  to  cherish  him  with  wealth.

When,  with  injustice,  thou  dost  desire  to  drink  his  blood.

So  long  as  his  skill  was  not  certain  to  thee.
In  the  royal  halls,  he  was  not  thy  associate.

Now,  so  long  as  his  crime  is  not  certain  to  thee.
Seek  not,  at  the  suggestion  of  an  enemy,  his  injury.


jyg       The  second  line  is  uttered  by  the  Poet.

Ig5       When  kings  go  a-ravaging  and  desire  to  spare  any  of  the  inhabitants

of  the  country  from  rapine,  they  give  to  them  an  arrow,  on  seeing  which

the  soldiers  refrain  from  plundering.


CHAP.  I.]        ON   JUSTICE,    EQUITY,    AND    GOVERNMENT.  47

The  king  held  concealed  this  secret  in  his  heart ;
Because,  he  preserved  the  saying  of  the  sages.

90  "  Oh  wise  man !  the  prison  of  the  secret  is  the  heart,
"  When  thou  didst  speak,  it  came  not  back  to  chains."

In  respect  to  the  work  of  the  man,  he  secretly  looked ;
In  the  way  of  the  sensible  man,  he  saw  defect.

When  he  (the  new  wazir)  suddenly  glanced  at  one  of  the

slaves.
The  fairy-cheeked  one  covertly  laughed.

Of  two  persons,  who  are  soul  and  sense  together,
The  silent  lips  are  telling  a  tale.

When,  by  looking  (at  them),  he  used  to  make  the  eye  bold,
Like  the  dropsical  one  of  (drinking)  the  Euphrates,  he  used
not  to  be  satiated  (of  looking).

W  The  king's  suspicion  of  evil  became  confirmed.
From  frenzy,  he  wished  to  be  enraged  with  him ;

But,  from  right  deliberation  and  perfect  judgment

He  said  to  him,  in  a  whisper : — "  Oh,  one  of  good  name  I

*'  I  considered  thee  sensible ;

**  Held  thee  faithful  to  the  secrets  of  the  kingdom  :

"  Reckoned  thee  wise  and  intelligent ;

"  Regarded  not  thee  shameless  and  unworthy.

"  Such  lofty  station  is  not  thy  place.
"  The  sin  is  mine ;  it  is  not  thy  fault.


92       This  couplet  describes  the  nature  of  the  defect  mentioned  in  couplet

196.
.94       "  As  the  one  stricken  with  dropsy  becomes  not  satiated  of  drinking

water,  so  he  became  not  wearied  of  looking  at  the  youths.


48


THE   BUSTAN    OF    SA  DI.


[chap.  I.


200  «  When  I  cherish  one  of  bad  stock,  assuredly,
**  I  permit  treachery  in  my  house."


The  man-much-knowing  raised  his  head  :

He  thus  spoke  to  King  Khusrau,  work-understanding :

"  "When  my  skirt  is  free  from  crime,

"  Fear  of  the  villainy  of  the  evil-intent  one  comes  not.

"  This  thought  never  passed  in  my  heart :

"  I  know  not  who  said  what  never  chanced  to  me."

The  great  king  said  : — "  What  I  have  said  to  thee,
"  Enemies  will  say  to  thy  face.

206  "  Thus  spoke  the  old  wazir  to  me ;

"What   thou   dost   know,  also  say;  and,  do  (what  thou
canst)."

He  laughed,  and  placed  his  finger  on  the  lip.
Saying  : — "  What  he  uttered, — is  no  wonder.

"  The  envious  one,  who  sees  me  in  his  own  place,

"  Brings  on  (utters  with)  his  tongue — what,  but  evil  of  me?

"  I  considered  him  my  enemy,  that  hour,
"  When  Khusrau  placed  him  lower  than  me.

*'  When  the  Sultan  places  my  worth  above  him,
"  Knows  he  not  that  an  enemy  is  behind  me  ?

210  "  Till  the  Judgment-day,  he  will  not  accept  me  as  a  friend,
"  When  he  sees  that,  in  my  honour,  is  his  degradation.

"  On  this  point,  I  will  thee  a  true  tale,

"  If  first  to  (this)  slave  thou  dost  give  an  ear.


1

i


201       111  the  text,  "  darad  "  is  an  error  for  "  daram."^
206       "  Angusht  bar  lab  giriftan  "  signifies  : —

Angusbt  ba  dandan  gazidan ;  ta'aj jub  wa  tahrir  namudan  ;  angusht
i.^airat  bar  lab  giriftan.


CHAP.  I.]        ON   JUSTICE,    EQUITY,    AND    GOVERNMENT.  49

"  I  know  not  where  in  a  book  I  have  seen,
"  That  a  person  in  a  dream  saw  Iblis.

"  With  the  stature  of  a  fir-tree,  with  the  countenance  of  a

Hiir,
"  Light,  sun-like,  burned  from  his  face.

**  He  went  before  him  and  said  : — '  Oh  wonderful !  art  thou

this  Iblis  ?
"  '  There  is  not  an  angel  with  this  goodness  (of  appearance).

"  '  Since  thou  hast  this  face  with  the  beauty  of  the  moon,
"  '  Why  art  thou  a  stock-story  as  to  ugliness  in  the  world  !

"  *  They  considered  thee  terrible  of  face ;

"  '  In  the  bath-room,  they  painted  thee  hideous.

"  '  Why,  in  the  halls  of  the  king,  have  they  painted  thee,
"  '  Dejected  of  face,  distorted  of  hand,  ugly,  ruined  ? '

"  Shaitan  of  overturned  fortune  heard  this  speech.
"  In  lament,  he  raised  a  shout  and  cry,

"  Saying  : — '  Oh,  one  of  good  fortune  !  that  is  not  my  form,
"  '  But  the  pencil  is  in  the  hand  of  an  enemy.

0  "  *  I  threw  out  their  root  (A'dam)  from  Paradise  ;
"  '  Now,  by  reason  of  malice,  they  depict  me  ugly.'

"  Just  so  I  (the  new  wazir)  have  a  good  name ;  but,

"  For  reason,  the  evil-intent  one  speaks  not  good  (of  me).

"  The  wazir,  whose  reputation  my  rank  spilled, —
"  It  is  necessary  to  fly  from  his  deceit  to  the  distance  of  a
league.


2       In  some  places : —

A  person,  in  a  dream,  saw  Iblis  :

In  stature,  a  cone-bearing  tree ;  in  face,  a  sun.


50


THE   BUSTAN   OP   SA'dI.  [cHAP.  I


"  But,  I  tMnk  not  of  the  anger  of  the  king ;
"  One  without  sin  is  brave  in  speech.


"  If  the  inspector  of  measures  seizes, — there  is  sorrow  to

that  one,
"  Whose  weight  of  the  standard  balance-weight  is  deficient.

16  "  "When  a  word  comes  happily  from  my  pen,
**  To  me, — of  word-seizers,  what  care  ?  "

The  king  remained  confounded  at  his  speech  :
He  spread  the  tip  of  the  hand  of  Order- Giving,—


I


I


— Because  the  malefactor,  by  fraud  and  eloquence.
Becomes  not  free  from  a  crime  which  he  has  (committed) —

Saying: — "Assuredly  from  an  enemy,  I  have  not  heard

this;
— "  Have  I  not  seen  thee,  in  short,  with  my  own  eyes  ? —

*•  That,  of  this  crowd  of  people  in  my  court,

"  Thou  hast  only  a  glance  for  these  two  slaves."

«30  The  man  of  eloquence  laughed,  and  said : —

"This  speech  is  right ;  it  is  not  proper  to  conceal  the  truth.

"  In  this  matter  there  is  a  subtle  point,  if  thou  wilt  listen.
— "  May  thy  Order  be  current,  and  government  strong  ! —

*'  Dost  thou  not  see  that  the  darwesh,  without  resources,
"  Looks  with  regret  at  the  rich  ?


224       "  Sang-i-tar4zu  "  is  the  weight  used  in  weighing.

226       "  Sar-i-dast  af shandan  "  signifies  —  to  be  angry,  to  give  tip,  to  refuse.

Thus : — A  person  utters  a  speech,  and  the  person  addressed  agrees  not.

He  turns  the  back  of  his  hand  towards  the  speaker,  and  shakes  it  in  his

direction,  signifying  that  he  disagrees  with  him  and  does  not  allow  the

speech  to  pass.


I


I


OHAP.  I.]        ON   JUSTICE,    EQUITY,    AND   GOVERNMENT.  51

"  The  resources  of  my  youth  have  passed ;
"  Life  in  play  and  pastime  passed.

"Of  the  appearance    of    these    (two    slaves)    I  have   no

B  patience ;

"  Because,  they  are  the  possessors  of  the  capital  of  beauty
and  grace.

M  "  I  had  even  such  a  rose-coloured  face ;
**  My  limbs  were  crystal  by  reason  of  beauty.

"  In  this  extremity,  it  is  proper  to  spin  my  shroud ;

"  Since  my  hair  is  like  cotton,  and  my  body  like  a  spindle.

**  I  had  even  such  night-coloured  ringlets  ;

"  My  coat  was  tight  on  the  body  from  delicacy  (fatness).

"  Two  rows  of  pearls  had  a  place  in  my  mouth,
"  Erect  like  a  wall  of  silver  bricks.

*'  Now,  at  the  time  of  speech,  glance —

"  One  by  one,  like  an  old  city- wall,  they  have  fallen.

M)  "  Why  may  I  not  look  with  envy  at  these  (two  slaves),
"When  I  bring  to  memory  my  ruined  (mis-spent)  life?

*'  Those  precious  days  (of  youth)  departed  from  me ;

*'  Suddenly,  this  day  (of  old  age)  also  arrives  at  an  end."

When  the  wise  man  pierced  this  pearl  of  lustrous  truth,
The  king  said  : — "  To  speak  better  than  this  is  impossible."

The  king  glanced  at  the  nobles.

Saying  : — "  Desire  not   words   and   truth  more   beautiful
than  this.


^36       Like  crystal, — white  and  flashing  bright ;  but  we  should  say,  like  ivory
rather  than  crystal.

4  *


i


I

52  THE   BTJSTAN   OF   SA*DI.  [CHAP.  I


**  The  glance  towards  a  lovely  one  is  lawful,  to  that  one,
"  Who  knows  how  to  utter  excuse  with  such  argument.

246  "  If  I  had  not  in  wisdom  acted  deliberately,

"  I  should  have  injured  him  by  the  speech  of  an  enemy.'

"With  severity,  to  carry  a  light  hand  to  the  sword

Is  to  carry  the  back  of  the  hand  of  regret  to  the  teeth.


*

1


Beware  that  thou  hearest  not  the  speech  of  the  designing   |

man;
Because,  if  thou  dost  set  to  work  (on  his  speech),  thou

wilt  become  regretful.  _

I

The  dignity  and  honour,  and  property  of  the  one  of  good

name
The  king  increased,  and  to  the  evil  speaker  (the  old  wazir)

he  gave  rebuke.


By  the  dehberation  of  his  learned  prime-minister.

His  name,  in  the  country,  became  renowned  for  goodness.

250  "With  justice  and  liberality,  years  he  governed  the  country;
He  departed  (died),  but  his  good  name  remained.

Such  kings,  who  cherish  religion,

"With  the  arm  of  religion  (of  Islam),  carry  off  the  ball  of
empire.

In  this  age,  I  see  not  one  of  those  kings ;

But  if  there  be,  it  is  Abii-Bakr,  son  of  Sa'di,  and  no  other  !

Oh  King  !     Thou  art  the  tree  of  paradise.
Because,  thou  hast  flung  thy  shadow  (of  justice)  to  the  dis-
tance of  a  year's  journey.


I


^


252       Tho8e  kings  are  the  kings  mentioned  in  couplet  251.


OHAP.  I.]        ON   JUSTICE,    EQUITY,    AND   GOVERNMENT.  63

From  fortune  of  happy  star,  there  was  to  me  greed ;
That  it  might  cast  the  shadow  of  the  Huma's  wing  over  my
head.

6  Wisdom  said  : — "  The  Huma  gives  power."
(Nay !)  if  thou  dost  desire  prosperity,  come  into  this  shadow
(of  Abii-Bakr).

Oh  God  !  in  mercy  Thou  hast  looked ;
Since  Thou  hast  diffused  this  shadow  (of  Abii-Bakr)  on  the
people.

Slave-like,  I  am  a  prayer-utterer  for  this  kingdom  :
Oh  God  !  keep  perpetually  this  shadow  (of  Abii-Bakr).

It  is  proper  to  imprison  before  slaying  ;

Because,  one  cannot  join  the  head  of  the  slain  one.

The  Lord  of  Command,  and  Judgment,  and  Dignity
Becomes  not  distressed,  on  account  of  the  clamour  of  men.

^  Head  full  of  pride,  void  of  patience, —
To  him,  the  kingly  crown  is  forbidden.

I  say  not : — When  thou  dost  fight,  keep  the  foot  (firm) ;
(But)  when  thou  dost  gather  anger,  keep  reason  in  place.

Whosoever  has  reason  endures ;

Not  a  wise  man  is  he,  whom  anger  makes  subject.

Like  an  army,  anger  rushed  from  ambush :
Justice  remained  not,  nor  piety,  nor  religion.

I  saw  not  such  a  demon  (as  anger)  beneath  the  sky,
From  whom  so  many  angels  fly.


54       The  Huma  is  a  fabulous  bird,  found  in  the  Caucasus.     He,  on  whom

its  shadow  falls,  arrives  at  power.
56       Abu-Bakr  was  a  just  and  liberal  monarch.
64       The  word  "  angel  "  refers  to  justice,  piety,  and  religion.  ^


54


THE   BUSTAN   OP    SA*DI.  [OHAP.  I.


I


265  Is  it  not  a  crime  to  drink  water,  without  the  order  of  the
Law  of  Religion  ?  •  .    .  1

But,  if  by  decree  of  the  judge,  thou  dost  shed  blood,  it  is
lawful.  J

Whomsoever  the   decree   of  the  Law  of  Islam  gives  to

destruction,
Oh  Sir !  beware,  that  thou  mayst  not  have  fear  of  slaying

him.


And  if  thou  hast  (about  thee)  followers  in  his  tribe.
Bestow  gifts  on  them,  and  cause  ease  to  arrive.

It  was  a  crime  on  the  part  of  the  tyrannous  man ;
What  is  the  crime  of  his  wife  and  helpless  children  ?

Thy  body  is  powerful,  and  army  great ;
But,  into  the  country  of  the  enemy  (of  the  kings  of  Islam)
urge  it  not.

270  When,  the  enemy  flies  to  his  lofty  citadel,

Injury  arrives  to  the  innocent  people  of  the  country.

Look  into  the  affairs  of  prisoners  :

It  is  possible  that  a  guiltless  one  may  be  among  them.

When  a  (foreign)  merchant  died  in  thy  country,
It  is  paltriness  to  carry  thy  hand  to  his  property

Because,  afterwards  they  will  bitterly  lament  for  that  mer-
chant ;
His  relations  and  tribe  will  openly  speak,

Saying  : — "  The  wretched  one  died  in  a  foreign  country ;
"  The  tyrant  took  away  his  property  that  remained."


J65       Water-drinking  is  allowable ;  but  it  is  a  crime  to  drink  it  in  the  auspi-
cious month  Eamazan,  when  it  is  forbidden  by  the  law  of  Islam.

Blood-shedding  is  considered  abominable  in  all  religions ;  but  when
the  law  has  decreed  it,  it  is  lawful.


t


«


OHAP.  I.]  ON   JUSTICE,    EQUITY,    AND   QOVEKNMENT.  66


2  Think  of  that  poor  child,  without  father ;
And  be  cautious  of  the  sigh  of  his  sorrowful  heart.

(There  is)  many  a  good  fame  of  fifty  years, —
Which  one  disreputable  act  treads  under  foot.

Those  of  approved  acts  of  everlasting  fame

Exercised  not  tyranny  over  the  property  of  the  people.

If  he  is  king  over  the  whole  world.

When  he  takes  property  from  the  rich  man,  he  is  a  beggar.

The  noble  liberal  man  dies  of  poverty ;

He  fills  not  his  belly  from  the  side  of  the  distressed  one.

>  I  heard  that  a  just  order-giver
Used  to  have  a  coat,  both  surfaces  of  lining  (cheap)  material.

One  said  to  him :  "  Oh  Khusrau  of  happy  days  !
"  Sew  a  coat  of  brocade  of  China."

He  said  : — '*  (Cloth  of)  this  quality  is  covering  and  ease ;
"And   thou   dost   exceed  this  (rule),  it  is  ornament  and
decoration.

"  I  take  not  the  land  tax  for  the  sake,
"  That  I  may  put  embellishments  on  my  own  body,  and
throne,  and  crown.

'*  If  like  women,  I  put  ornaments  on  my  body,
"  How  may  with  manliness  I  repulse  the  enemy  ?

16  "  A  hundred  times,  I  have  even  greed  and  desire  for  it ;
"  But,  the  treasury  is  not  only  for  me.

"  The  treasuries  are  full  for  the  sake  of  the  army ;

"  They  are  not  for  the  sake  of  ornament  and  decoration.'*

The  soldier,  who,  on  account  of  his  king,  is  not  happy  at

heart.
Watches  not  the  borders  of  the  kingdom.


56  THE   BUSTAN   OP    SA'dI.  [oHAP.  I.

When  the  enemy  carries  ofE  the  villager's  ass,  'J|

Why  does  the  king  enjoy  tribute  (levied  from  the  people)
and  the  tenth  part  ?

The  enemy  took  away  his  ass,  the  king  tribute ;
In   respect    to    that    throne    and    crown,    what   fortune
remains  ?

290  Violence  to  the  fallen,  one  is  not  manliness  :

The  mean  bird  carries  off  the  grain  from  before  the  (weak)
ant.

The  peasant  is  a  tree ;  if  thou  dost  cherish  it,  (Oh  King-
Gardener  of  the  kingdom !)

Thou  mayst  enjoy  the  fruit  to  the  desire  of  the  heart  of
thy  friends.

With  mercilessness,  pluck  it  not  out  with  root  and  fruit ;
Because,  the  fool  does  injury  to  his  own  body.

Those  persons  enjoy  the  fruit  of  youth  and  fortune,
Who  act  not  severely  to  their  inferiors.

If  an  inferior  becomes  distressed
Beware  of  his  complaining  to  God.

S95  When  it  is  possible  to  take  the  country  with  gentleness.
In  contest,  bring  not  forth  blood  from  a  single  pore  of  the
body.

In  the  name  of  manliness !    because,  the  country  of  the

whole  earth
Is  not  worth  one  drop  of  bood  that  trickles  on  the  earth.


290       "  Uftada  "  signifies — weak  and  faulty.

The  weak  ant,  with  great  labour,  collects  his  store  of  food.
294       "  Az    p4e    dar  amadan  "   signifies — "  'ajiz   shudan ;     sakat    shudan  ;

uftadan."
296       "  Masiimi  "  =  "  bikh-i-mtie."


CHAP.  I.]         ON    JUSTICE,    EQUITY,    AND    GOVEENMENT.  57

I  heard  tliat  King  Jamsliid  of  happy  nature
"Wrote  on  a  stone,  at  a  fountain  head.


**  At  this  fountain,  many  like  us  took  rest ;

"  They  departed  (in  death),  just  as  the  eyes  twinkled.

"  With  manliness  and  force,  they  took  the  world;
"  But,  they  took  it  not  with  themselves  to  the  tomb.

wo  a  They  departed,  and  each  one  reaped  what  he  sowed :
"  There  remained  only  good  and  bad  fame."

When  thou  hast  power  over  an  enemy.
Injure  him  not;  because  this  (the power)  is  indeed  sujQ&cient
sorrow  to  him.

A  living  enemy,  head-revolving  (raging),  about  thee   (in

desire  of  thy  blood),
Is  better  than  his  (life-)  blood  revolving  (circulating)  about

thy  neck.

I  heard  that  Darius  of  august  family.

Became  separated,  on  a  hunting  day,  from  his  retinue ;


Jamshid  was  a  famous  Persian  king  who  practised  sorcery,  by  which
jinns  and  devils  became  subject  to  him.  It  is  said  he  reigned  three
hundred  years,  during  which  time  there  was  no  sickness  among  the
people.     At  length  he  laid  claim  to  godship,  and  was  slain  by  Zuhhdk.

In  the  'Ikd-i-manzdm  couplets  297  to  302  are  omitted.

"  Damkardan  "  signifies — to  rest,  or  delay.

In  some  places : —

What  use  is  there  in  boasting,  or  complaining,  of  prosperity  and
misfortune  ?

If  thou  dost  twinkle  the  eye,  thou  dost  see  neither  this,  nor  that.

Darius  III.  (336-330)  B.C.,  was  a  Persian  king.

In  the  year  333  b.c,  on  the  bank  of  the  Issus,  Darius  with  600,000
men  met  the  army  of  Alexander  consisting  of  30,000  foot  and  6,000
horse.  Darius  fled  from  the  field.  Alexander  gained  a  complete  victory
over  the  Persian  Army,  of  which  110,000  were  slain.


I

53  THE   BUSTAN   OF   SA'dI.  L^^^^^'  ^'

A  herdsman  came  running  towards  him :
Darius  of  happy  sect  said  to  his  heart : —

305  «  Perhaps,  this  is  an  enemy  who  has  come  to  battle :

"  From  a  distance,  I  will  pierce  him  with  a  white  poplar


arrow.*'


He  adjusted  the  royal  how  to  the  bow-string  :
He  desired   in  a  moment   to  make    his    existence,   non-
existence.

The  herdsman  said  :— "  Oh  Lord  of  Iran  and  Ttiran  !
— "  May  the  evil  eye  be  far  from  thy  time  ! —

"  I  am  he  who  cherishes  the  king's  horses  :
"  In  this  meadow,  I  am  in  thy  service."

The  heart  of  the  king,  (which  had)  gone  (in  fear),  returned
to  its  place.

He  laughed  and  said: — "Oh  one  of  contemptible  judg-
ment !

310  <«  The  auspicious  angel  (Jibra,il)  assisted  thee  ;

"  Otherwise,  I  had  brought  the  bow-string  to  the  ear."


Alexander  then  conquered  Egypt,  and  was  prepared  in  331  B.C.  to
meet  the  forces  which  Darius  had  collected.

Darius  wished  for  peace.  He  offered  to  Alexander  the  proyinces
west  of  the  Euphrates,  and  a  vast  sum  for  the  release  of  his  family.

Alexander,  being  determined  to  conquer  Persia,  refused.

In  331  B.C.  the  two  armies  met  near  Arbela.  Darius  had  40,000
horse  and  myriads  of  infantry.  The  horsemen  came  from  the  Khurd  and
Turkoman  tribes  ;  the  footmen  from  Afghanistan  and  Bokhara.

Alexander  mustered  7,000  horse  and  40,000  foot.

As  at  the  battle  of  the  Issus,  the  courage  of  Darius  gave  way ;  he
fled,  and  his  flight  decided  the  fate  of  the  day.  Darius  escaped  the
hand  of  Alexander,  to  fall  by  the  hand  of  his  own  satrap  Bessus.

This  event  is  most  graphically  described  by  Shaikh  Nizami  in  Dis-
course 30  of  the  "  Sikandar  Nama,"  translated  by  Clarke.
308       The  student  should  note  that  "  parwaram "  is  used  in  the  text,  not
"  parwarad."


I


CHAP.  1.]  ON   JUSTICE,    EQUITY,    AND    GOVERNMENT.  59

The  guardian  of  the  land-pastured  laughed  and  said : —
"It  is  not  proper  to  conceal  advice  from  a  benefactor;

"  It  is  not  laudable  deliberation,  nor  good  judgment,
"  That  the  king  knows  not  an  enemy  from  a  friend.

**  The  condition  of  living  in  greatness  is  such,

"  That  thou  shouldst  know  each  humble  person — ^who  he  is.

"  Thou  hast  many  times  seen  me  in  the  presence  :
*'  Thou  hast  asked  me  concerning  the  herd  of  horses  and
the  meadow.

)15  "  Now  in  love  I  returned  before  thee  :

"  Thou  dost  not  again  recognise  me  from  an  enemy.

*'  Oh  renowned  monarch  !     I  am  powerful ;
"  Because,  I  can  bring  a  particular  horse  out  of  a  hundred
thousand.

"  By  reason  of  wisdom  and  judgment,  I  have  the  guardian-
ship of  the  horses ;

"  Thou  also  shouldst  keep  thy  own  herd  permanent  (free
from  loss)."

When  Darius  heard  this  counsel  from  the  man,
He  spoke  fairly  to  him,  and  did  him  kindness.

Darius  kept  going  and  saying  in  his  shame, —

It  will  be  proper  to  write  this  advice  on  the  heart.

820  On  account  of  anarchy,  there  may  be  sorrow  in  that  throne
and  country,
When  the  deliberation  of  the  king  may  be  less  than  that
of  the  shepherd.


818       In  the  'Ikd-i-manzum,  couplets  318  and  819  are  omitted.


60


THE   BUSTAN    Of    SA'DI.  [cHAP.  I.


How   mayst   thou   hear   the   lament    of    one   crying    for

justice, —
The  curtain  of  thy  bed-place  at  Saturn  ?

So  sleep,  that  the  lamentation  may  come  to  thy  ear.
If  the  crier  for  justice  brings  forth  a  shout.

Who  complains  of  the  tyrant,  who  is  in  thy  time.
When  every  violence  that  he  commits  is  thy  violence  ?

The  dog  tore  not  the  skirt  of  one  of  a  Karawan,
But  the  ignorant  villager,  who  cherished  the  dog.

325  Oh  Sa'di !  thou  camest  boldly  into  speech  :

When   the  sharp  sword  of  (true)  speech  is  at  thy  hand,
be  victorious.

Say  what  thou  dost  know ;  because,  truth  spoken  is  well :
Thou   art   not  a    bribe-taker,    nor    a   blandishment-giver
(hypocrite).

Bind  avarice  (to  thyself)  but  (then)  wash  the  book  of  philo-
sophy ;—
Bid  farewell  to  avarice,  and  say  whatever  thou  dost  desire.


A  certain  neck-exalting  one   (a  king),  in  Media,  came  to

know
That  a  wretched  one  beneath  an  arch  kept  saying  : —

"  Thou  even  art  hopeful  at  the  door  (of  God) :

"  Then  accomphsh  the  hope  of  those,  door-sitting."


321  Kaiwan,  or  Zuhal,  is  the  planet  Saturn  in  the  seventh  heaven.  Such
is  its  loftiness  that  the  cry  for  justice  cannot  reach  so  far.

822       In  the  'Ikd-i-manzum,  couplets  322  to  358  are  omitted.

827  When  thou  madest  avarice  thy  garment,  wash  philosophy  from  the
book  of  thy  wisdom ;  because,  by  reason  of  avarice,  thou  wilt  not  be  able
to  act  according  to  philosophy.


?


CHAP.  I.]         ON   JUSTICE,    EQUITY,    AND    GOVEENMENT.  61.

130  Thou  dost  not  wish,  that  thy  heart  may  be  sorrowful —
Bring  forth  from  fetters  the  heart  of  the  sorrowing  ones.

The  distress  of  the  heart  of  the  one  justice-seeking
Casts  a  king  from  his  kingdom.

Thou  hast  slept  cool  half  a  day  in  the  retired  place  (haram) ;
Say  to  the  foreigner,  burn  in  the  heat  outside.

Grod  is  the  taker  of  justice  for  that  person,
"Who  cannot  ask  for  justice  from  a  king.


One  of  the  great  ones,  possessed  of  discretion,
Tells  a  story  of  the  son  of  King  'Abdu-l-'Aziz.

»6  Saying : — He  had  a  ring- stone  set  in  a  ring.

In   respect   to   the   value   of   which,  the  (Court)  jeweller
was  confounded.

At    night,    thou    wouldst     say    it    is    the    orb,    world-
illuminating  ;
A  glittering  star  it  was,  in  light  like  the  day.

By  chance,  a  drought-year  occurred,

When  the  full-moon  of  the  face  of  men  became  the  new-
moon.

"When  he  saw  not  ease  and  strength  in  man,

He  considered  it  not  manliness  to  be  himself  at  ease.

When  a  person  sees  poison  in  the  jaws  of  men.
How  will  the  sweet  water  pass  to  his  throat  ?


834      The  name  of  the  son  was  'TJmar,  a  just  and  liberal  prince.


f

52  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  I.

340  He  ordered  :  they  sold  the  ring-stone  for  silver

Because  pity  came  to  him,  on  account  of  the  poor  and
orphan.

He  gave  its  value,  in  spoil,  in  one  week  :

He  gave  to  the  poor,  and  needy,  and  necessitous.

Those  reproach-making  fell  on  him,

Saying  : — '*  Such  a  ring  will  not  again  come  to  thy  hand."

I  heard  that  he  said,  and  the  rain  of  tears
Ran  down,  like  wax,  on  his  cheeks —

As  follows  : — "  Ugly  is  the  ornament  on  a  monarch,
"  The  heart  of  a  citizen  afflicted  with  powerlessness.

345  «  ^  ring,  without  a  stone,  is  fit  for  me  :

"  The  heart  of  a  sorrowful  populace  is  not  fit  for  me."

Happy  is  that  one,  who,  the  ease  of  man  and  woman,
Prefers  to  his  own  ease.

The  cherishers  of  skill  displayed  not  desire

For  their  own  pleasure  (acquired)  from  the  grief  of  others.

If  the  king  on  the  throne  sleep  pleasantly,
I  think  not  the  poor  man  sleeps  at  ease.

But  if  he  keeps  at  night  a  long  time  awake.
Men  will  sleep  in  ease  and  repose.

850  Praise  be  to  G-od  !  this  way  of  life  and  straight  road,
Atdbuk  Abii-Bakr  son  of  Sa'd  has

In  Persia,  a  trace  of  another  calamity,  a  person
Sees  not  save   the  figures  of  the  moon-like  ones    (lovely
women).


CHAP.  I.]         ON   JUSTICE,    EQUITY,    AND    GOVERNMENT.  63

These  five  couplets  came  pleasantly  to  my  ear,
"Which  they  sang  in  an  assembly  last  night : —

"  Last  night,  I  had  ease  of  life ;

"  Because,  that  moon-faced  one  was  in  my  embrace.

"  When  I, — head  intoxicated  with  sleep — saw  her,
"  I  said  : — '  Oh  lovely  one  !  the  cypress  before  thee  is  low
(in  stature).

855  "  *  One  moment,  wash  the  narcissus  (the  eye)  from  sweet
sleep ;
"  '  Laugh  like  the  rose-bush  ;  and  sing  like  the  nightingale.

"  '  Oh  calamity  of  the  age  !  why  art  thou  asleep  ?
*' '  Come ;  and  bring  the  luscious  red  wine.'

"  Confused  with  sleep,  she  glanced  and  said : —

"  *  Thou  dost  call  me  a  calamity ,  and  sayst, — sleep  not.'  "

In  the  time  of  the  Sultan  (Abii  Bakr)  of  enlightened  spirit,
A  person  sees  not  another  calamity  awake.


In  the  annals  of  former  kings,  it  is  written,
That  when  Tukla  sate  on  the  throne  of  Zangi,

860  In  his  age,  a  person  offended  not  another ;

If  this  were  indeed  so,  he  surpassed  (former  kings)  and
(for  a  king)  enough.


1868       This  couplet  is  by  the  Author,  in  praise  of  the  King;  its  meaning  is: —
I        In  the  time  of  the  Sultan  of  enlightened  spirit,  men  experience  only  the

calamity  of  Lovely-Ones !
359       "  Tukla  "  is  the  name  of  one  of  the  Atabuks,  who  ruled  in  ShfrAz  ;

Zangi  is  the  grandfather  of  Abu-Bakr,  the  son  of  Sa'd.

The  qualities  of  justice  of  Tukla  were  high.     In  his  time,  no  one

injured  another.     Sa'di  says  : — if  this  be  so,  he  surpassed  former  kings,

and  for  a  king  this  is  enough.


64  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  I.     ^

He  (Tukla)  once  thus  spoke  to  a  pious  man,

Saying  : — "  My  life  in  uselessness  became  accomplished.

"  When  country  and  rank,  and  throne  pass  away,
"  Only  the  fakir  carries  away  empire  from  the  world.

**  I  wish  to  sit  in  the  corner  of  devotion,  ^

"  That  I  may  obtain  this  period  of  five  days  that  is  (left
of  my  life)."


When  that  wise  one  of  enlightened  soul  heard.
With    anger,    he    arose,    saying : — "  Oh    Tukla !    this    is
enough.

s6o  **  Religion  is  only  in  the  service  of  the  people ;

"It  is   not — in  the  rosary,    and   the    prayer  carpet,  and
darwesh-garment.

"  Be  a  king  on  thy  own  throne  ;
"  Be  a  darwesh  in  pure  morals.

"  Keep  loin-girt  in  truth  and  desire  (of  Grod) ;

"  Keep  tongue-bound  from  idle  speech  and  pretension."

In  religion,  the  foot  (of  action)  is  necessary,  not  the  breath

(of  words) ;
Because,  breath  without  action  has  no  real  essence.

The  great  ones,  who  possessed  the  ready  money  of  purity.
Wore,  beneath  the  outside  coat,  such  a  habit  (of  truth  and
desire  of  Grod).


I


361       Because  I  exercised  not  enough  devotion  to  God.

3g2       Seven  days  were  required  for  the  creation  of  the  world.     Man  is  bom

on   one   day ;   he   dies    on   another.     Thus    five    days   are    left  which

metaphorically  represent  his  life.
369       Belief  is  not  to  be  reposed  on  appearance,  but  on  the  way-of-life.


CHAP.  1.]         ON   JUSTICE,    EQUITY,    AND    GOVERNMENT.  G5

70  I  heard  tliat  the  Sultan  of  Turkey  wept,
Before  a  good  man,  possessed  of  sciences,

Saying : — "  From  the  hand  of  the  enemy,  power  remained

not  to  me,
"  Save  this  fort  and  city  nothing  remained  to  me.

"  Much  I  tried  that  my  son,

"  After  me,  might  be  chief  of  the  assembly  {i.e.  army).

"  Now  the  enemy  of  bad  descent  prevailed  ;

"  He  twisted  the  tip  of  my  hand  of  manliness  and  exertion.

"  What  plan  may  I  prepare,  what  remedy  may  I  make  ?
"  Because,  the  soul  in  my  body  is  consumed  from  grief.'*

rs  The  good   man   said : — "  Oh   brother !    suffer  sorrow  for
thyself
"  Since,  the  best  and  largest  portion  of  thy  life  has  gone.

"  This  extent  (of  country)  is  sufficient  for  thee,  so  long  as

thou  dost  remain  (in  the  world) ;
"  When  thou  dost  go,  the  world  is  the  place  of  another."

If  he  be  wise ;  if  he  be  foolish ; —

Suffer  not  grief  for  him,  because  he  will  endure  his  own
grief.

The  world  is  not  worth  the  trouble  of  having ;
Of  seizing  by  the  sword,  and  of  abandoning.

Whom  of  the  Kings  of  Persia  knowest  thou.

Of  the  age  of  Firidiin,  and  Zahhak,  and  Jamshid,

)0  In  respect  to  whose  throne  and  country,  did  not  declina-
tion come  ?
There  only  remained  the  country  of  God  most  High.


jQ       In  the  'Ikd-i-manzum,  couplets  370  to  414  are  omitted.

75       In  some  places  : —

The  wise  man  was  amazed,  saying :— "  Wherefore  is  this  weeping  'r
It  is  proper  to  weep,  on  account  of  this  reason  and  spirit."

5


66  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  I.

To  whom  remains  the  hope  of  remaining  for  ever  in  this

world,
When  thou  seest  no  one  who  remained  for  ever  ?

If  silver  and  gold  and  treasure  and  property  remains,
It  becomes  trodden  under  foot,  after  a  few  days.

But  of  whomsoever  a  good  act  remains  current,
— May  mercy  perpetually  arrive  on  his  soul ! —

A  great  one,  whose  good  name  remained, —  -^

One  can  say  with  the  pious,  as  follows  : — he  remained.         '

385  Ho  !  take  care  that  thou  dost  cherish  the  tree  of  liberality,
In  order  that  thou  mayst  have  hope  that  thou  mayst  enjoy
its  fruit.

Practise  liberality  that  to-morrow  (the  Judgment  Day)
when  they  (the  angels)  place  the  account-book.

They  may  give  thee  dignities,  according  to  the  extent  of
thy  beneficences.

One,  whose  foot-struggle  is  greater,
(Has)  greater  dignity,  at  the  Court  of  G-od.

One,  a  backslider,  deceiver,  shameless.
Greedily  desires  the  wages  for  work  not  done.


_g.       In  some  places  : —

Make  thy  own  deliberation ;  because  that  one  full  of  wisdom,

Who  is  after  thee,  endures  his  own  grief.

Boast  not  o'f  this  five  days'  stay ;

Prepare  for  the  thought  of  the  plan  of  departing  (from  the  world).

887       "S^'^'  kadam "  signifies — to  run,  to  make   an  effort.     It  may   be

translated  by  "  'amal "  work.     In  some  copies  the  first  line  runs : —

One  whose  foot  is  foremost  in  endeavour.

388  The  other — whose  foot,  in  endeavour,  falls  backwards,  and  who  prac-
tises deception — will  remain  in  God's  court,  disappointed  and  un-
rewarded.


.1  -,  B^»

OHAP.  I.J         ON   JUSTICE,    EQUITY,   AND   GOVERNMENT.  67

"Qiiit  Mm,  so  tKat  Ke  may  carry  tte  back  of  his  hand  (in

regret)  to  the  teeth  :
An  oven  (of  ability)  so  hot, — ^yet  he  baked  not  the  bread

(of  good  deeds) !

10  At  the  time  of  corn-gathering,  thou  wilt  know,
That  idleness  is — not  seed-sowing.


A  wise  man,  in  the  boundaries  of  Syria,

Took  a  cave,  for  his  dwelling  away  from  the  world.

By  reason  of  his  patience,  in  that  dark  corner  of  a  place,
His  foot  descended  to  the  treasure  of  contentment.

I  heard  that  his   name   was — "  Khuda-dost "    (friend   of

God) ;
He  was  of  an  angelic  nature,  man-in-form.

The  great  ones  placed  their  heads  at  his  door ;
Because  his  head  entered  not  at  their  doors  (for  petition-
ing).

6  The  holy  man  of  pure  practice  desires
The  abandonment  of  lust,  by  the  beggary  of  the  body.

When  every  hour,  his  lust  says  : — *'  give,"

It  makes  him  wander,  in  contempt,  from  village  to  village.

In  that  land,  where  this  wise  man  was.
There  was  a  lord  of  the  marches, — a  tyrant.

Such  that  every  feeble  one,  whom  he  used  to  find.
He  used  to  twist  his  hand  (torment),  with  his  strength  of
grasp.


9      This  is  uttered  by  the  poet.

1       "  Pde  fano    raftan "    signifies— sab&t-i-kadam    warzfdan ;     fstddagf

kardan.

5  *


I

68  THE    BUSTAN   OP    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  I.

World-burner  (a  tyrant),  and   merciless,  and  malevolent-
slayer.
The  face  of  a  world  became  distressed  by  his  bitterness.

ioo  A  crowd  of  people  went  (from  the  coimtry)  on  account  of
that  tyranny  and  shame,
They  took  his  bad  name  into  the  districts.

A  crowd  of  people  (women),  wretched  and  miserable,  pc

mained  :
Behind  the  spinning  wheel,  they  uttered  curses.

In  the  place,  where  the  hand  of  tyranny  becomes  long,
Thou  dost  not  see  the  lip  of  man,  open  from  laughing.

The  tyrant  used  now  and  then  to  come,  to  see  the  shaikh ;
"  Khuda-dost  "  used  not  to  look  at  him.

One  time,  the  king  (the  tyrant)  said  to  him  : — "  Oh  one  '

of  good  fortune  !
"  Grather   not   together   thy   face   severely,  in  abhorrence

of  me.

405  "  Thou  dost  know  that  I  have  the  desire  of  friendship  for
thee,
"  For  what,  dost  thou  bear  enmity  to  me  ?

**  I  grant  that  I  am  not  the  chief  of  the  territory  ;
"  (But)  in  honour  I  am  not  less  than  the  darwesh.

"  I  say  not — place  my  excellence  above  any  one,  !

"  So  be  with  me,  as  (thou  art)  with  every  one."

The  wise  'dbid  heard  this  speech  :

He  arose  in  perturbation,  and  said  : — "  Oh  King  !  hold  thy
ear  (listen).


401       The  student  should  note  the  use  of  "  pesh  giriftan."
408       "  Ba-r  ashuftan  "  signifies  —  to  be  grieved  and  angry.


I


CHAP.  I.]    ON  JUSTICE,  EQUITY,  AND  GOVERNMENT.        69

"  The  distress  of  the  people  is  on  account  of  thy  existence  :
"  I  love  not  the  afl&iction  of  the  people.

P  "  Thou  art  an  enemy  to  him,  with  whom  I  am  a  friend ;
**  I  consider  thee  not  a  friend  of  mine.

"  Why,  in  vain,  should  I  hold  thee  my  friend,
"  When  I  know  that  God  considers  thee  enemy  ?

"  Give  not  a  kiss  on  my  hand,  like  a  friend  :
"Go, — love  my  friends  (the  creatures  of  God).

"  If  they  tear  off  the  skin  of  *  Khudd-dost,*

"  He  will  not  become  the  friend  of  the  enemy  of  the  friend.'*

I  wonder  at  the  sleep  of  that  stony-hearted  one.
On  account  of  whom,  a  whole  nation  sleeps  straitened  in
heart.

^  Oh  great  one  !  exercise  not  violence  on  the  humble ;
Because,  the  world  remains  not  in  one  way.

Twist  not  the  grip  of  the  hand  of  the  powerless,
For,  if  he  prevail,  thou  wilt  rise  to  nothing.

I   said  to  thee  : — take  not  the   feet   of   men   from  their

place  (distress  them  not) ;
Because,  if  thou  dost  fall  into  distress,  thou  wilt  become

weak.


.1      In  some  places : —

If  friendship  for  me  chances  to  thee,
Perhaps  then  God  holds  thee  an  enemy.
.6       That  is — Wealth  and  power  become  changed.
.6       "  Panja  pechidan  "  signifies — to  vex,  to  cause  distress.
.7       That  is  :—

Drive  not  men  from  their  place,  and  cause  them  not  to  slip  from  their
station  and  rank.
"  Pae  az  jae  ben  dan  "  signifies —

Az  kadar  kase  ra  afgandan  wa  ba  4r4m  sA^tan.
"  Pae  "  has  here  the  force  of  "  takat."
"  Az  pa,  e  dar  amadan  "  signifies — to  fall  into  distress.


70  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  Ij

It  is  not  proper  to  reckon  the  enemy  at  a  low  estimation ;
Since  I  have  seen  a  ffreat  mountain  from  a  small  stone.

Dost  thou  not  see  that,  when  the  (weak)  ants  assemble

together,
They  bring  trouble  and  torment  to  fighting  lions  ?

420  The  (slender)  hair  is  not  less  than  a  thread  of  silk :

When  it  becomes  manifold,  it  is  stronger  than  a  chain  (<
iron).

The   heart  of  friends   collected   (tranquil)  is   better  than

the  treasure  collected :
The  empty  treasury,  better  than  men  in  grief.

Throw  not  the  work  of  any  one  at  his  feet ;
Because  it  may  often  happen,  that  thou  mayst  fall  at  his
feet.

Oh  feeble  one  !  endure  (the  tyranny)  of  the  strong ;
Because,  one  day,  thou  mayst  be  stronger  than  he.

"With  resolution,  bring  forth  a  cry  against  the  oppressor ;
Since,  the  arm  of  resolution  is  better  than  the  hand  of
rorce.

^25  Say  to  the  withered  lip  of  the  oppressed  one, — laugh  !
Because  they  will  die:  out  the  teeth  of  the  tyrant.

By  the  noise  of  the  drum,  the  rich  man  became  awake ;
What   knows  he  as  to  how  the  night   of  the  watchman
passed  ?


418       In  the  'Ikd-i-manzum,  couplets  418  to  421  are  omitted.
So,  when  the  weak  gather  together  they  become  strong.
422       "Darpde  andakhtan"  signifies —

Tahkir  wa  ihmal  wa  ta'hl  kardan.
424       As   they   have  said: — (Arabic.)   The  spirit  of  men  is  the  cause   of

the  moving  of  mountains.
^6       That  is  : — the  rich  one,  all  night,  is  in  sleep  and  ease  ;  the  poor  one,
all  night,  is  awake  and  in  agitation.


I


CHAP.  I.]  ON   JUSTICE,    EQUITY,    AND    GOVEENMENT.  71

The  man  of  the  Karawdn  suffers  grief  on  account  of  his

own  load  (of  merchandise) ;
His  heart  burns  not  at  the  wounded  back  of  the  ass.

I  have  granted  that  thou  art  not  of   (the  number  of)  the

fallen :
"When  thou  dost  see  a  fallen  one,  why  dost  thou  stand  (and

not  give  help)  ?

On  this  point,  I  will  tell  thee  a  tale  of  past  event ;
Inasmuch  as  it  would  be  slothf  ulness  to  pass  by  this  speech.


0  Such  a  famine  occurred  in  the  city  of  Damascus,
That  lovers  forgot  love.

The  sky  over  the  earth  became  such  a  miser,

That  the  crops  and  the  date-trees  wetted  not  their  lips.

The  spring  of  the  ancient  fountains  dried  up  ;
Water   remained    not,   save    the   water   of    the   eyes    of
orphans.

Only  the  sigh  of  a*  widow- woman,  it  used  to  be,
K  smoke  went  forth  from  a  window.

I  saw  trees,  leafless  (poor),  like  a  darwesh ;
Those  strong  of  arm,  languid  and  greatly  distressed  (by
the  severity  of  the  famine).


J8       "  Giriftan  "  is  frequently  used  in  this  sense,  as  "  far;}  ydkabul  kardan,"

to  grant,  to  assume,  to  agree.
30       Damascus  was  founded  by  Damsha^,  son  of  Nimrud.

Friends  on  meeting  said  in  former  times — "  'Ishk,"  love  be  to  thee !
Say  in  these — "  SaUm  'alayka,"  peace  be  to  thee !

In  the  drought  year,  for  fear  of  being  asked  for  something,  friends
saluted  not  each  other.
34       "  Barg  "  signifies — the  leaf  of  a  tree ;  and  also,  provisions.


72  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  I.

«6  Not   in   the   mountain,    verdure;    not,   in  the   garden,    a
branch  :
The  locusts  ate  the  garden ;  and  men,  the  locusts.

In  that  state  of  things,  a  friend  came  to  me  :

To  that  extent  broken  down, — merely  a  skin  on  his  bones.

Although,  in  dignity,  he  was  of  strong  state ;
Was  lord  of  rank  and  gold  and  property.

I  said  to  him  : — "  Oh  friend  of  pure  disposition  !
'*  Say,  what  wretchedness  has  happened  to  thee  ?  "

He    angrily   shouted   at    me,    saying : — "  Where    is    thy

reason  ?
"  When  thou  dost  know,  and  dost  ask, — ^the  question  is  a

fault.

*^  "  Dost  thou  not  see  that  distress  has  reached  to  an  exceed-
ing great  degree, —
'*  Trouble  arrived  to  an  extreme  limit  ?

"  The  rain  from  the  sky  descends  not ;

*'  The  sigh  of  the  complaining  ones  ascends  not."

At  length,  I  said  to  him  : — " For  thee,  there  is  not  fear;
**  The  poison  (only)  slays  where  the  antidote  is  not.

*'  Though  another  person  should  perish  from  destitution,
"Thou   hast    wealth.     To    the   duck,    what   fear   of    the
storm?"

The  lawyer,  vexed,  glanced  at  me  :

The  glancing  of  a  learned  man  at  a  foolish  one.

*«  Saying  : — "  Oh  friend  !  although  a  man  is  on  the  shore,
'*He  rests  not, — his  friends,  drowning.

"  I  am  not  yellow  of  face,  by  reason  of  want  of  victuals ;
*'  Gnef  for  those  food-less  has  made  yellow  my  face."


^

f

r

I


CHAP.  I.]  ON   JUSTICE,    EQUITY,    AND    GOVERNMENT.  73

The  wise  man  wishes  not  to  see  a  wound

Neither  on  the  limbs  of  a  man,  nor  on  his  own  limbs.

I  am  one  of  the  first  of  those  of  sound  body ;
When  I  behold  a  wound,  my  body  trembles.

The  pleasure  of  that  sound-bodied  one  becomes  disturbed,
When  he  is  at  the  side  of  the  languid  sick.

50  When  I  see  that  the  wretched  darwesh  eats  not.

The  morsel  of  food  within  my  palate  is  poison  and  grief.

Thou  dost  take  one  of  (his)  friends  to  prison  : —
Where  is  his  pleasure  in  the  garden  ?


One  night,  the  sigh  of  the  people  lighted  up  a  fire.
I  heard  that  a  half  of  the  city  of  Baghdad  was  burned.

One,  in  that  state,  quickly  uttered  thanks.
Saying  : — *'  Injury  has  not  reached  my  shop."

A  world-experienced  one   said   to  him : — "  Oh   father  of

lust !
"  For  thee  the  grief  of  thy  self  was  sufficient.

166  "  Thou  dost  approve  that  a  whole  city  should  burn  by  fire,
"  If  thy  house  is  on  one  side,  away  from  danger."


443       In  some  places : —

Tliank  God,  although  I  am  free  from  wound.

452       In  the  'Ikd-manzum,  couplets  452  to  479  are  omitted.

t54       The   text  gives  " bu-1-hawas,"  which  is   said  to  be  wrong;  because

"  hawas  "  is  Persian.     The  construction  in —

"  bu-l-fazdl " )  .  ,       ,^  J  A     u-

"  b '  1  '      b  'M  ^^  correct,  as  the  words  are  Arabic.

For  this  word,  "  bul-hawas  "  should  be  read,  in  which  "  bul"  signifies
— "  bisiyar."


74^r  THE   BUSTAN    OP    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  1.

Except    the   stony-hearted  one,    how   may   he   make    his;

stomach  tight  (with  food),
When  he  sees  persons  stone-bound  on  the  belly  ?

How  does  the  rich  man  himself  eat  that  morsel,
When  he  sees  that  the  darwesh  devours  the  blood  (of  his
heart  from  grief)  ?

Say  not  to  the  care-taker  of  the  sick  one  : — "  He  is  of_

sound  body,"
Because  he  writhes  from  grief,  like  a  sick  one.

The  one  of  tender-heart,  when  friends  arrive  at  a  stage,
Sleeps  not,  when  the  wearied  loiterers  are  in  rear.

*^  The  heart  of  kings  is  a  load  carrier,

When  they  see  the  ass  of  the  fire-wood  drawer  in  the  clay.

If  a  (worthy)  person  is  in  the  house  of  happiness,
One  word  of  the  saying  of  Sa'di  is  enough.

This  also  is  sufficient  for  thee,  if  thou  wilt  hear,

To  wit : — if  thou  sowest  thorns,  thou  reapest  not  jasmine.


Thou  hast  knowledge  of  the  Kings  of  Persia,
Who  exercised  tyranny  over  their  subjects.


45g  The  way  of  the  most  excellent  of  the  pious  was  such  that,  when  over-
taken with  famine,  they  begged  not  of  any.  Rather,  lest  any  should
become  acquainted  with  their  famished  condition,  they  bound  a  stone  on
the  belly,  by  which  they  mitigated  the  pain  of  himger  and  obtained  an
appearance  of  fulness  of  belly,  as  from  eating  food.

453       The  care-taker  of  the  sick  is,  by  sympathy,  himself  sick.

461  As  they  have  said : — If  a  person  is  in  the  house,  one  word  is  enough.

462  As  they  have  said : —

The  sage  of  Ghuznavi  has  said  : —

Oh  Brother !  whatever  thou  sowest,  thou  wilt  reap.


CHAP.    I.]         ON   JUSTICE,    EQUITY,    AND    GOVEBNMENT.  75-

That  dignity  and  sovereignty  remained  not ;
That  tyranny  over  the  peasant  remained  not.

465  Behold   the   crime   which  issued   from   the   hand   of   the.

tyrant !
The   world   remained;    he,  with   his   acts   of   oppression,
departed  (died).

The  body  of  the  justice-giver  is  happy  on  the  day  of  the
place  of  assembhng  (resurrection)  ;

(Because,  he  has  an  abiding  place  in  the  shadow  of  the
throne  of  God.

To  a  tribe,  whose  goodness  He  approves,  God
Gives  a  king,  just,  of  good  judgment.

When  He  wishes  to  waste  a  world.

He  places  the  country,  in  the  grasp  of  a  tyrant->

The  pious  ones  think  cautiously  of  the  tyrant ;
Because,  the  oppressor  is  (the  personification  of)  the  anger
of  God.

470  Recognise  greatness  from  Him,  and   understand  the  ob-

ligation ;
Because,  the  prosperity  of    the  ungrateful   one  becomes
frail.

If  thou  dost  express  thanks  (to  God)  in  respect  to  this .
country  and  property,
I       Thou    mayst   reach   to    a   property   and   country  without
decline  (Paradise).

466  When,  in  the  Day  of  Judgment,  the  Sun  ascends  to  the  height  of  one
spear  only  (and  will  be  very  near),  there  are  three  persons  whom  God
will  place  beneath  the  shadow  of  His  throne.

One  of  the  three  will  be  a  just  king.

On  the  Judgment  Day  there  will  be  no  shadow  save  that  of  Good's
throne.

471  If  thou  dost  exercise  justice,  equity,  liberality,  and  generosity, —
thou  mayst  obtain  a  property  and  country  without  decline,  i.e.  Paradise.
Because, — thanks  for  country  is  the  exercising  of  justice ;  and  thanks
for  property  is  bestowing  on  the  poor.


76  THE   BTJSTAN    OP    SA*DI.  [cHAP.  I.

But,  if  in  sovereignty  thou  doest  violence,
After  sovereignty,  thou  mayst  practise  beggary.

Sweet  sleep  is  forbidden  to  a  king,

When  the  weak  one  is  the  load-carrier  of  the  strong.

To  the  extent  of  a  mustard  seed-grain,  injure  not  a  people ;
Because,  the  Sultan  is  the  shepherd,  and  the  people  the
flock.

4176  When  they  experience  strife  and  injustice  from  the  king,
He  is  not  a  shepherd ;  he  is  a  wolf.     Cry  out  against  him.

He  went  to  a  bad  end,  and  thought  ill- advisedly,
Who  exercised  tyranny  over  his  inferiors.

By   negligence  and    severity   towards   these  inferiors,   he

passes  away;
A  bad  name  will  for  years  remain  attached  to  him.

Thou  dost  not  wish  that,  from  behind,  they  should  curse

thee?
Be  good :  so  that  a  person  may  not  utter  evil  of  thee.


I  have  heard  that,  in  a  territory  of  the  west.
There  were  two  brothers   (prince-sons),  of   one  father  (a
king),

480  Army-commanding,  and  neck-exalting    (headstrong),  and
stout.
Good  of  visage,  and  wise,  and  expert  with  the  sword.

The  father  considered  them  both  to  be  terrible  men ;
He  found  them  seekers  of  warhke  action  and  strife.


472       The  beggary  of  this  world  is  evident  to  all.     The  beggary  of  the  next
world  consists  in  being  there  contemptible  and  void  of  its  ready  money.
481       "  Yaft "  here  signifies—"  did."


CHAP.  I.]         ON    JUSTICE,    EQUITY,    AND    GOVEENMENT.  11

He  went  (and)  divided  the  country  into  two  parts ;
He  gave  a  portion  of  it  to  each,  of  the  sons.

God  forbid !  that  on  account  of  one  another,  they  should

wrangle, —
Should  draw  forth,  in  contest,  the  sword  of  rancour.

After  that,  the  father  lived  a  short  time ;
(Then)    he   surrendered   his   precious   soul   to   the   Soul-
Creator.

'  ■*85  Death  caused  his  rope  of  hope  to  break ;
i       Death  tied  down  his  hands  from  work.

On  two  kings  was  established  that  kingdom.
In    which    were   treasure    and   army,    beyond   limit   and
computation.

According   to   their  own   view,  in  respect   to   their   own

welfare.
Each  one  took  a  different  way.

One  (pursued  the  path  of)  justice,  so  that  he  might  bear  a

good  name ;
The  other,  tyranny,  so  that  he  might  amass  wealth.

One  made  benevolence,  the  way  of  his  life ;
He  gave  money,  and  provided  for  the  darwesh.

1490  Laid  foundations    (of  buildings),    and    gave    bread,  and
cherished  the  army  ;
Made  night-houses  for  the  sake  of  the  night  of  the  darwesh.


486       In  some  places : —

When  Death  broke  the  rope  of  his  hope,
The  hand  of  Death  tied  down  his  tongue.
«7       "  Bih  uftdd  "  signifies—"  bihbud,"  or  "  lAairiyat,"  welfare.

According  to  the  guidance  of  their  reason,  to  whatever  they  recognised
as  best  for  them,  they  each  took  their  way.


'^  THE   BCSTAN   OP   SA'dI.  [cHAP.  I.,

Made  empty  the  treasuries,  but  made  full  (numerous,  otI

satisfied)  the  army ;
Even  as  people,  the  time  of  festivity.

The  noise  of  gladness,  like  thunder,  kept  rising.

Like  Shiraz,  in  the  time  of  (King)  Abti-Bakr,  son  of  Sa'd.

A  wise  monarch  of  happy  disposition, —
May  the  branch  of  his'  hope  be  fruitful  I

Hear  the  tale  of  the  youth,  fame-seeking  ;

He  was  of  approved  conduct,  and  happy  temperament ;

495  Assiduous  in  the  consolation  of  high  and  low ;
A  praise-utterer  of  God,  morning  and  evening.

In  that  country,  Karun  used  to  go  boldly  (fearless  of  the

robber) ;
Because,  the  king  was  a  giver-of -justice,  and  the  darwesh,

satisfied.

In  his  time,  there  came  not  to  a  single  heart  (the  injury  of)
— I  say  not — a  thorn,  nay,  a  rose-leaf !

By  the  assistance  of  fortune,  he  became  chief  of  chiefs  :
The  chiefs  placed  their  heads  (in  submission)  on  the  line  of
his  order.

The  other  (prince)  desired  to  increase  the  power  of  his  throne

and  crown,
He  augmented  the  tribute  from  the  men  of  the  villages.


I


401      In  the  East,  a  great  deal  of  money  is  spent  at  a  festival.
493       Or  auspicious  descent,

498  "  Sar  bar  ^att  nihddan  "  signifies — to  be  obedient  to  order.

499  In  some  places  : —

Hear  the  end  of  the  other  brother  !
If  thou  art  a  good  man,  and  manly  run.


CHAP.  I.]  ON   JUSTICE,    EQUITY,    AND    GOVERNMENT.      •  79

600  Greedily  thirsted  for  the  property  of  the  merchants ;
Poured  calamity  on  the  lives  of  helpless  ones.


Bestowed  not  and  enjoyed  not,  in  the  hope  of  augmenting ;
The  wise  man  knows  that  he  did  not  well.


Because,  while  he  collected  that  gold,  by  cheating.
The  army  became  distressed  and  dispersed  by  reason  of
weakness.


The  merchants  heard  the  news,

To  the  effect  that, — in  the  land  of  that  unskilled  one,  there
is  tyranny.

They  cut  off  (abandoned)  buying  and  selling  from  (in)  that

place :
Cultivation  was   not;   the  peasant   burned  i^  heart    (on

account  of  scarcity).

605  When  Fortune  turned  away  her  head  from  his  friendship,
The  enemy  necessarily  prevailed  over  him.

The  anger  of  the  sky  plucked  out  his  root  and  fruit ;
The  hoof  of  the  horse  of  the  enemy  dug  his  country.

In  whom  may  he  seek  faith,  when  he  broke  his  promise  ?
From  whom  does  he  wish  the  land-tax,  when  the  villagers
fled?

What  goodness  does  that  unfaithful  one  hope  for,
When  imprecation  is  in  pursuit  of  him  ?


jOi       "  Peshf"  is  for  "  pesh-budan  "  ;  it  is  called  the  "  jk,e  ma^dariya"  or

infinitive  yd.
505       "  Bina-kdm  "  signifies — without  desire,  unasked,  i.e.  necessarily.


80  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'DI.  [cHAP.  I..A

When,   in   the   beginning   of    creation,   his   fortune    was

reversed.
Whatever  the  good  men  said  to  him — do  ;  he  did  not.

610  What  said  the  good  men  to  that  good  (unjust)  prince  ? —
Enjoy  the  fruit  (of  power ;  do  justice) ;  because  the  unjusi
one  enjoys  not.

His  imagination  was  a  fault,  and  his  policy  languid  ;
Because,    whatever  he  sought  in   oppression  was   (to   be
found)  in  justice.

Of  this  one,  a  bad  repute  remained ;  of  that  one,  a  good

name :
The  pinnacle  of  a  good  end  is  not  for  the  bad.


A  certain  one  (was  sitting)  at  the  end  of  a  branch,  and  the

butt  end  kept  cutting  :
The  Lord  of  the  garden  glanced,  and  saw.

He  said : — If  this  man  does  evil.

He  does  it  not  to  me,  but  to  his  own  body.

615  Advice  is  in  place  (proper),  if  thou  wilt  hear ;

With  the  strong  shoulder  cast  not  down  the  weak  ones.


609       "  K4f  Ktm."

"  Kun,"  tlie  order  of  God  in  the  beginning  of  the  creation  of  the  world.
Verse  of  the   Kuran : — (Arabic.)  "  When  God   wished  to    create  a
thing,  His  command  was  indeed  as  follows  : — God   said  to  it — '  Be  ! '
Then  it  became."

"  Kaf  "  is  the  first  letter  of  the  word  "  Kun."    Immediately  on  God's
order,  all  created  things  became.
512       "  This  "  refers  to  the  unjust  prince  ;  "  that  "  to  the  just  prince.
612       In  the  'Ikd-i-manzum,  couplets  512  to  647  are  omitted.


I


CHAP.  I.]         ON   JUSTICE,    EQUITY,    AND    GOVERNMENT.  81

Because,  to-morrow  (the  Judgment  Day)  to  God,  the  king

brings
The  beggar,  who  before  thee  is  not  worth  a  barley-grain.

Since  thou  dost  wish  that,  to-morrow,  thou  mayst  be  a

great  one.
Make  not  an  humble  one  thy  enemy.

Because,  when  this  kingdom  passes  from  thee  (in  death),
That  beggar  will,  in  anger,  seize  thy  skirt.

From  the  feeble,  restrain  thy  hand ;  do  not  (such  a  deed) ;
Because,  if  they  cast  thee  down,  thou  wilt  become  ashamed.

20  In  the  opinion  of  those  free  from  worldly  cares,  there  is
shame.
In  falling  by  the  hand  of  the  fallen.

The  great  ones  of  enlightened  mind  and  good  fortune
Won,  by  learning,  a  crown  and  throne.

In  rear  of  the  upright,  swerve  not :

And,  if  thou  dost  desire  truth,  listen  to  Sa'di.


Say  not- — there  is  no  dignity,  higher  than  sovereignty ;
Because  there  is  no  empire  safer  than  the  empire  of  the
darwesh.

Men,  the  more  lightly  loaded,  the  more  quickly  go  :
This  is  true;  and  the  pious  ones  listen  (and  obey).


L6  The  agent  to  "  barad  "  is  "  gad^,e"  ;  and  its  subject  is  "  K]iusrau,e."
In  the  endeavour  to  keep  the  two  lines  distinct,  the  couplet  is  obscure.
The  meaning  is : —

On  the  Judgment  Day,  the  oppressed  beggar  (who  in  thy  opinion  is
not  worth  a  grain  of  barley)  brings  the  king  (his  oppressor)  before
God.

6


82


THE   BUSTAN    OP    SA'dI.  [cHAP.    I.


625  The  empty-handed  one  suffers  distress,  on  account  of  a  loaf
of  bread  :
The  king  suffers  grief,  to  the  extent  of  a  world.

In  the  case  of  the  beggar,  when  the  bread  of  the  evening

is  obtained,
He  sleeps  as  pleasantly,  as  the  Sultdn  of  Syria.

Grief  and  joy  proceed  to  an  end ;
By  death,  these  two  quit  the  head.

Whether  this  one,  on  whose  head  they  placed  the  crown  :
Or  that  one,  on  whose  neck  the  (paying  of)  tribute  came,

If  the  exalted  one  be  in  Saturn ;
And,  if  the  straitened  one  be  in  prison.

630  "When  the  cavalcade  of  death  hastes  to  the  head  of  these  two.
It  is  not  possible  to  recognise  one  from  the  other.

The  guardianship  of  country  and  empire  is  a  calamity :
The  beggar  is  king,  but  his  name  is  beggar  !


I  once  heard  that,  in  a  certain  place,
A  skull  spoke  to  an  'abid.

Saying : — "  I  possessed  the  pomp  of  order-giving ;
*'  I  had  on  my  head  the  cap  of  greatness  (a  crown) ;

"  Heaven  and  concordant  fortune  gave  me  aid ;
**  With  the  arm  of  empire,  I  seized  Babylonia ;

535  "I  had  greatly  desired  that  I  might  enjoy  Kirmania,
"When,  suddenly,  the  worms  ate  my  head."

Pluck  out  the  cotton  of  carelessness  from  the  ear  of  sense,
That  the  advice  of  dead  men  may  come  to  thy  ear.


585       Tama'  karda  budam  may  be  rendered : —

I  was  desire-making ;  or,  I  was  wishing.


CHAP.  I.]  ON   JUSTICE,    EQUITY,    AND    GOVERNMENT.  88

The  man  of  good  work — evil  is  not  to  him  :

No  one  practises  evil,  that  good  may  come  to  himself.

The  man  mischief-stirring  is  also  in  the  desire  of  wickedness,
Like   the    scorpion,  that   seldom    goes  as  far  as  his  own
house.

If  in  thy  disposition,  there  is  not  (the  wish  for)  a  person's

advantage,
A  jewel  and  the  hard  stone  are  even  so  identical.

>40  Oh  friend  of  happy  disposition  !  I  uttered  a  mistake ;
Since  there  is  profit  in  iron,  and  stone,  and  brass.

Even  so,  for  the  sake  of  reputation,  the  dead  is  best,  the

man
Over  whom  the  stone  has  pre-excellence.

Not  every  man-born-one  is  better  than  a  rapacious  animal ;
Since  the  rapacious  animal  is  better  than  the  bad  man-
born-one.

Man,  endowed  with  wisdom,  is  better  than  the  beast  of

prey,—
Not  the  man,  who,  like  a  beast  of  prey,  falls  upon  men.

When  a  man  understands  only  eating  and  sleeping.
What  excellence  has  he  over  the  reptiles  ?

II45  The  unfortunate  horseman,  going  without  a  road.
The  footman  surpasses  in  travelling.

No  one  sowed  the  grain  of  generosity,
Who   gathered  not  up   the  harvest  of  the  desire  of  his
heart.


38       When  the  scorpion,  for  man-injuring,  issues  from  his  house— men  cause
him  injury,  so  that  it  is  seldom  they  let  him  return  to  his  house  alive.


84  THE   BUSTAN   OF    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  I.

In  our  lives,  we  have  never  heard,
That  goodness  befell  the  bad  man.


A  man  of  war  had  fallen  into  a  well
Such  an  one  that  the  male-tiger  became  female,  from  fear
of  him.

The  evil-intent  one  ever  experiences  only  evil : —
He  fell ;  and  saw  no  one  weaker  than  himself.

550  All  night,  from  complaint  and  lamentation,  he  slept  not ;
One  struck  his  head  with  a  stone,  and  said  : —

Didst  thou  ever  come  to  a  person's  call  (for  help),
That  to-day  thou  dost  desire  a  grievance-redresser  ?

Thou  didst  sow  every  seed  of  unmanliness ;
See  assuredly  what  thou  hast  taken  up.

Who  places  a  plaster  on  thy  soul- wound,
When  hearts  keep  complaining  of  the  wounds  inflicted  by
thee  ?

Thou  usedst  to  dig  a  pit  in  our  path.

In  the  end,  without  doubt,  thou  hast  fallen  into  the  pit.

555  Two  persons,  for  the  sake  of  high  and  low,  dig  a  pit :
One  of  good  walk  of  life ;  the  other,  of  bad  repute.


548       "  Glazfr  "  signifies — an  officer,  a  hero.

649       "  l^ud  "  should  be  read  with  fatha  for  poetry  sake.

550       Lit.  "  One  stuck  a  stone  on  his  head."

553       Whatever  thou  dost  sow,  thou  dost  take  up  its  produce.

553       In  some  places  : —

Souls  will  bewail,  on  account  of  thy  power.
And  again : —

Thou  hadst  no  grief,  for  the  pain  of  hearts.


CHAP.  I.]         ON   JUSTICE,    EQUITY,    AND    GOVERNMENT.  85

This  one,  that  he  may  make  the  throat  of  the  thirsty  one

fresh;
The  other,  that  people  may  fall  into  it,  up  to  the  neck.

If  thou  doest  bad,  expect  not  goodness  :

Because  the  tamarisk  never  brings  forth  the  grape-fruit.

Oh  thou  barley  sown  in  autumn !     I  think  not
That  thou  wilt  obtain  wheat,  at  reaping-time.

If  with  soul,  thou  dost  cherish  the  tree  of  hell.
Think  not,  that  thou  mayst  ever  eat  its  fruit.

60  The  wood  of  the  colocynth  brings  not  the  green  date :
Whatever  seed  thou  didst  cast, — expect  that  very  fruit.

They  relate  a  story  of  a  certain  good  man.

That  he  paid  not  respect  to  Hujjaj,  the  son  of  Joseph.

In  frenzy,  he  cast  on  him  such  power  (of  argument)
That  the  power  of  altercation  remained  not  to  Hujjaj.


Another  poet  says  : —

Be  attentive  to  this  speech  and  listen  well :
Wheat  springs  from  wheat ;  barley  from  barley.
"Zakum"  (properly  written  "zakktim")  is  a  frmtless,  thorny  tree  of
the  desert ;  its  white  sap  is  of  foul  smell ;  it  is  called  the  tree  of  hell.
In  the  'Ikd-i-manzum,  couplets  659  and  560  are  omitted.
560       "  Khar-zahra  "  is  called  in  Arabic  "  sammu-l-himdr."     Originally,  in
Persian,  it  was  written  "  khar-zahraj " ;  in  medical  works,  it  is  called
"  hinzal,"  that  is,  colycinth.
)6i       Hujjaj,  the  son  of  Joseph  (not  the  Joseph  of  Bible  history),  was  an
amir  of  Baghdad,  notorious  for  tyranny.     He  lived  in  685  a.d.

The  good  man  gave  advice  with  severity;  and,  whatever  Hujjaj  said,
rejected.
562       "  Sauda  "  signifies — frenzy,  anger,  passion.

"  Dast-i-huj jat  fishanad."  That  is  to  say,  Hujjaj  became  convinced.
The  custom  of  Hujjaj  was  this : — He  would  slay  a  guiltless  man.  If  it
were  his  pleasure,  they  would  spread  the  decapitation  carpet  before  him  ;
place  the  victim  on  it ;  cut  ofE  his  head ;  and  take  away  the  slain  one  on
it.    In  this  way,  the  spot,  in  front  of  Hujj4j,  was  unstained  with  blood.


g6  THE    BUSTAN    OF    Sa'dI.  [cHAP.  I.

Hujjdj  looked  sharply  at  the  officer  of  the  court,
Saying : — **  Cast  down  the  decapitation-carpet,  and  spill  his
blood."

When  argument  remained  not  to  the  violence- seeking  one,
He  draws,  in  contest,  his  face  together.

565  The  man  of  God  laughed  and  wept :

The  stony-hearted  one  of  obscure  judgment  wondered.

When  he  saw  that  he  laughed,  and  again  wept.
He     inquired,     saying:— "Why    is    this    laughing     and
weeping?"

The  Man  of  Grod  said  : — "  T  keep  weeping,  on  account  (of

the  violence)  of  time ;
"  Because,  I  have  four  helpless  children.

"  I  keep  laughing  on  account  of  the  grace  of  the  pure  Grod ;
*'  Because  I,  the  oppressed  one,  go  to  the  dust, — not  the
oppressor, ^^

One  said  to  Hujjaj : — "  Oh  good-hearted  monarch  !

'*  What  dost  thou  desire  of  this  old  man  ?  touch  him  not.

570  "  Because  a  people  look  towards,  and  lean  upon  him  :
"  It  is  not  lawful,  to  slay  a  crowd  at  one  time.

"  Practise  greatness  and  forgiveness,  and  liberality :
"  Think  of  his  little  children.

"  Perhaps  thou  art  the  enemy  of  thy  own  household,
"  Because  thou  dost  approve  of  evil  to  households  ?

"  Think  not — hearts  (being)  torn  by  thy  tyranny —
"  That,  on  the  last  day,  good  may  befall  thee."


573       For  "  resh,"  read  "  resh-Rbuda."


CHAP.  I.]  ON   JUSTICE,    EQUITY,    AND   GOVERNMENT.  87

I  heard  that  Hujjaj  listened  not ;  but  shed  his  blood.
I    Who  knows  how  to  fly  from  the  decree  of  Grod  ?

75  That  night,  a  great  one  slept  in  that  thought :

In    sleep,    he    saw    him,    and    asked    (his    state) ;     the
slaughtered  one  said :

"  Hujjaj  urged  not  his  punishment,  in  regard  to  me,  more

than  one  moment ;
"  Punishment  remained  to  him,  till  the  Judgment  Day."

The  oppressed  one  slept  not ;  fear  his  sigh  :
In  the  morning  time,  fear  the  sigh  of  his  heart.

Dost  thou  not  fear,  that,  at  night,  the  one  of  pure  heart
May   bring   forth,    from   the   burning   of   his  heart, — Oh
Lord  I

Iblis  did  evil,  and  experienced  good  ? — No ;

The  pure  fruit  comes  not  from  the  filthy  seed.
i
[so  Shout  not  against  rough  Hon-like  men,

When  with  boys,  in  boxing,  thou  dost  not  prevail.

One  gave  advice  to  a  son

— Preserve  the  counsel  of  the  wise —

i76       "  Siyasat  "  signifies — order,  regulation  of  government.    Here  it  means

punishment.
•77       Muhammad  ordered : — (Arabic.)  Fear  the  claim  of  the  oppressed  one ;
indeed  God  Most  High  has  not  hung  a  curtain  between  this  and  that
(i.e.  between  Himself  and  the  oppressed  one.)
>79       As  they  have  said  : —

Tree  and  fruit  continually  speak  to  thee,

Saying : — Oh  Sir !  whatever  thou  wilt  sow,  the  same  grows  for  thee.
In  some  places : —
At  the  time  of  quarrelling,  rend  not  the  curtain  of  any  one ;
Because,  thou  also  mayst  have  shame  in  secret.
'81       The  second  hemistich  has  no  connection  with  the  first,  nor  with  couplet
682.     The  author  says  to  the  reader  as  follows  : —

I  am  relating  the  advice  given  by  a  certain  one ;  listen,  and  hold
dear.
In  the  'Ikd-i-manzum,  couplets  581  to  688  are  omitted.


88  THE    BUSTAN   OF    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  I.  J^

"  Oh  son  I  exercise  not  violence  on  small  folk,

"  Because  one  day,  a  great  one  may  attack  thy  head."

Oh  wolf  of  deficient  understanding,  dost  thou  not  fear,
That,  one  day,  a  panther  may  rend  thee  in  pieces  ?

In  youth,  I  had  strength  of  grasp ;

The  heart  of  inferiors  was  distressed  on  account  of  me.

686  I  suffered  one  blow  of  the  fist  of  the  strong ;
I  exercised  not  force,  again,  against  the  weak.


Take  care  thou  sleepst  not  in  carelessness ;  because  sleep
Is  improper  for  the  eyes  of  the  leader  of  a  tribe.

Beware ;  sympathise  with  the  grief  of  inferiors  ;
Fear  the  violence  of  time.

The  advice,  that  is  free  from  design,

Is  hke  bitter  medicine, — the  repelling  of  disease.

They  relate  a  story  of  one  of  the  kings,

Whom  the  disease  of  guinea- worm  made  like  a  spindle.

590  Weakness  of  body  to  such  a  degree  overthrew  him.
That  he  envied  his  subjects.

Although,  the  king  on  the  chess-board  is  famous.
When  weakness  comes,  he  is  less  than  a  pawn.

A  courtier  kissed  the  ground  before  the  king,
Saying : — "  May  the  country  of  the  Lord  be  eternal !

"  In  this  city,  is  a  man  of  happy  spirit,
"  Like  whom,  in  abstinence,  a  man  is  rare.

"  They  brought  not  before  him  the  important  affairs  of  any

one, —
"  Whose  object  was  not  obtained,  in  a  breath.


II


CHAP.  I.]         ON    JUSTICE,    EQUITY,    AND    GOVEENMENT.  89

595  "  An  improper  act  has  never  issued  in  regard  to  him,

"  (He  is)  one  of  illumined  heart,  and  one  whose  prayers  are
answered.


"  Call  (him),  so  that  he  may  utter  a  prayer,  on  account  of

this  disease
"  That  mercy  from  heaven  may  arrive  on  earth."

The  king  ordered,  so  that  the  chiefs  of  the  servants
Summoned  the  old  man  of  happy  footstep.

They  went  and  uttered  the  message.     The  fakir  came —
Body  powerful  in  contemptible  dress.

The  king  said : — "  Oh  wise  man  !  utter  a  prayer;
'*  Because,  in  respect  to  the  guinea- worm,  I  am  foot-bound,
like  a  needle."

*^  The  old  man,  bent  as  to  his  back,  heard  this  speech  :
"With  severity,  he  brought  forth  a  harsh  shout.

Saying  : — "  Grod  is  compassionate  to  the  just  ruler :
"  Forgive;  and  behold  the  gift  of  God.

^    "  How  may  my  prayer  be  profitable  to  thee —
"  The  oppressed  captives,  in  pit  and  fetters  ?

"  Thou  hast  not  made  presents  to  the  people,
""Whence  mayst  thou  experience  the  empire  of  easiness?

*'  It  is  necessary  to  ask  pardon  (from  Grod)  for  thy  fault,
"  Then,  beseech  a  blessing  from  the  holy  shaikh.

605  "  How  may  his  (the  shaikh's)  prayer  aid  thee,
"  The  prayers  of  oppressed  ones  behind  thee  ?  "


699       The  eye  of  the  needle  is  considered  the  foot.     When  it  is  threaded,  it
is  said  to  he  foot-hound.


90  THE    BTJSTAN   OF    SA'dI.  [oHAP.  I.

The  monarch  of  Persia  heard  this  speech ;
From  anger  and  shame,  he  frowned.

He  grieved  and  then  said  to  his  heart : —

"Why  do  I  grieve?  this,  that  the  darwesh  said,  is  right."

He  ordered :  so  that  whoever  was  in  fetters.
Him,  by  order,  they  quickly  freed.

The   world-experienced   one    (the   shaikh),  after   two   in-
clinations of  the  head  in  prayer.
Lifted  up  the  hand  of  supplication  to  God,

610  Saying :— "  Oh  uplifter  of  the  sky !

"  In  battle  (against  thee)  thou  didst  seize  him ;    in  peace
invite  him."

The  saint  thus  held  up  his  hands  in  prayer.
When   the   king   raised   his   head  (from   the  pillow)   and
leaped  on  his  feet.

Thou  wouldst  say  : — "  From  joy,  he  will  fly,
"  Like  a  peacock,  when  he  saw  no  longer  the  thread  (of
captivity)  on  his  foot."

The  king  ordered : — the  treasury  of  his  jewels,
They  scattered  on  liis  (the  shaikh's)  feet,  and  gold  on  his
head.

The  shaikh  shook  his  skirt  from  all  that   (treasure)  and

said : —
"  For  the  sake  of  the  false,  it  is  not  proper  to  conceal  the

truth.


610       "  Jang  wa  sulh  "  signify — "mukhalifat  wa  muwafikat,"  i.e.  in  opposition

and  concord.
614       "  Daman    afshandan,"    or    "  daman    bar    afshandan,"     signifies — ^to

journey,  to  abandon,  to  turn  away  tbe  face  from.     That  is :— f or  the

sake  of  wealth,  it  is  not  fit  to  conceal  the  truth.


OHAP.  I.]         ON   JUSTICE,    EQUITY;    AND    GOVEENMENT.  91

615  "  Go  not  again  to  the  end  of  the  tether  (of  injustice),
pi      "  Lest  that  again  the  guinea-worm  should  raise  its  head."

When  once  thou  hast  fallen,  take  care  of  thy  foot,
That  once  more  it  slips  not  from  its  place.


Listen  to  Sa'di,  for  this  speech  is  true, —
"Not  every  time,  has  the  fallen  one  risen."


i


Oh  Son !  the  world  is  not  an  everlasting  country ;
There  is  no  hope  of  the  sincerity  from  the  world.

Morning  and  evening,  on  the  wind,  used  not  to  go,
The  throne  of  Sulaiman  ? — on  him  be  peace  !

®o  In  the  end,  didst  thou  not  see  that  it  went  to  the  wind
(became  non-existent),
Happy  is  that  king,  who  went  (from  the  world)  possessed
of  learning  and  justice  I

That  person  seized  from  the  midst  (of  the  world)  the  ball

of  empire.
Who  was  in  consideration  of  the  ease  of  the  people.

Those   things  which  they  took  up  (to  the  future  world)

came  of  use ;
Not    those    things    which   they   amassed   and   abandoned

(in  this  world).

I  have  heard  that,  in  respect  to  the  glorious  chief  of  Egypt,
Death  hastened  an  army  on  his  life.


615       "  Sar-i-rishta  "  signifies — desire,  or  object.

Practise  not  again  tlie  tyrannies  which  thou  didst  once  exercise.
617       The  second  hemistich  is  the  true  speech  referred  to.
6]s       In  the  'Ikd-i-manzum,  couplets  618  to  636  are  omitted.

622  In  some  places  : —

This  space  of  five  days'  prosperity  is  his,
Whose  pleasure  is — the  vexing  of  men.

623  "  Ajall  "  is  glorious  ;  "  ajal  "  signifies— death.


92  THE   BtJSTAN    OF    SA  DI.  [OHAP.  I.    |

The  beauty  went  from  his  cheek,  heart- exalting  :
When  the  sun  becomes  yellow,  much  of  the  day  remain^
not.

625  TjjQ  ^igg  jjjgjj  ^jjj  sorrow)  bit  the  hand  of  annihilation ;
Because,  in  the  medical  books,  they  saw  no  remedy  for
death.

Every  throne  and  country  declines —

Save  the  country  of  the  Eternal  Order-Giver.

When  the  day  of  his  life  came  near  to  the  night  (of  non-
existence).
They  heard  him  say  beneath  his  lip,

As  follows  : — "  A  king  like  me,  in  Egypt,  there  was  not :
"  When  this  is  the  fruit,  sovereignty  is  worthless.

*'  I  gathered  the  world ;  I  enjoyed  not  its  fruit :
"Like  the  helpless  ones,  I  passed  from  its  desire."

680  The  one  of  approved  judgment  who  gave  and  enjoyed;
Gathered  the  world,  for  the  sake  of  his  own  body.

Strive  in  this  work,  so  that  wealth  may  be  a  dweller  with

thee ;
Because,  whatever  remains  behind  thee  is  regret  and  fear.

The  rich  man,  on  the  couch,  soul-fleeting,  makes
One  hand  short ; — and  the  other,  long.

At  that  moment,  he  shows  thee  by  the  hand,

— Because,  fear  has  bound  his  tongue  from  speaking, —


525       The  Sages  chose  the  hand  of  annihilation ;  or  became  captive  to  its

power  and  resigned  themselves  to  his  dying.
627       "  Dar  zer-i-lab  gnftan,"  signifies — to  whisper,
629       "  Az  sar  raftan,"  signifies — to  abandon.
634       "  Dast"  has  ya,e  wahdat.


CHAP.  I.]         ON   JITSTICE,    EQUITY,    AND    GOVERNMENT.  93

To    this    effect : — extend    one    hand    in    generosity   and

liberality ;
Contract  the  other  hand  from  tyranny  and  avarice.

635  Now,  that  thou  hast  the  power,  take  action ;

How  again  (in  the  grave)  mayst  thou  bring  forth  the  hand
from  the  shroud  ?

Often  the  moon  and  pleiades  and  sun  will  shine ;
But  thou  wilt  not  raise  thy  head  from  the  pillow  of  the
grave.


King  Kizil  Arslan  had  a  strong  fort

That  exalted  its  neck  above  the  mountain  Alwand.

There  was  not  fear  of  any  one ;  nor  need  of  anything  :
Like  the  ringlets  of  brides,  its  road  fold  within  fold.

It  had  fallen  strangely  in  a  garden,  in  such  a  way,
As  a  white  egg  on  a  green  tray.

*^  I  heard  that  a  man  of  favourable  mien

Came,  from  a  long  journey,  to  King  Kizil- Arslan.

A  truths-recogniser  ;  world-experienced ;
A  skilled  one ;  world-travelled ;

A  great  one ;  an  eloquent  one,  work-knowing ;
A  wise  one ;  speech-weighing  ;  much-knowing.

Kizil  said  : — "  So  much  as  thou  hast  travelled,
"Hast  thou  seen  another  place,  strong  like  this?  "


635       "  Dast  zadan  "  signifies— to  assist,  or  to  show  manliness.

637  Alwand  is  a  lofty  mountain  in  the  territory  of  Hamdan.

638  Because  the  fort  was  strong,  and  all  things  were  ready  within  it.
"  Zulf  "  is  the  ringlet  that  goes  round  about  the  ear.


94  THE    BUSTAN    OP    SA*DI.  [OHAP.  I.

He  laughed,  saying  : — "  This  fort  is  joyous ;
"  But,  I  do  not  think  it  is  strong.

645  «  Did  not  the  obstinate  ones  (kings)  possess  it  before  thee !
"  A  few  moments,  they  were ;  and  they  abandoned  it.

"  May  not  other  kings  take  it,  after  thee,
"  (And)  enjoy  the  fruit  of  thy  tree  of  hope  ?

"  Eemember  the  revolution  of  the  country  of  thy  father ;
"  Set  free  the  heart  from  the  knot  of  reflection.

"  Fortune  placed  him,  in  a  corner  (of  the  grave)  in  such

a  way,
"  That  power  remained  not  to  him,  over  a  particle.

"  When  hope  remained  not  as  to  any  thing,  or  person,
"  Hope  remained  to  him  of  the  excellence  of  God  only."

650  To  the  wise  man,  the  world  is  straw ;

For,  every  moment,  it  is  the  place  of  another.


A  frantic  one,  in  Persia,  thus  spoke,

To   Naushiravan,   saying : — "  Oh   heir  of    the   country  of
Jamshid !

"  If  country  and  fortune  had  remained  to  Jamshid,
*'  When  would  crown  and  throne  have  become  attainable
by  thee  ?  "

If  thou  bring  the  treasure  of  Kariin  within  thy  grasp.
There  only  remains — what  thou  dost  give  (to  the  indigent)
thou  mayst  take  away.


644  If  it  were  strong,  the  Angel  of  Death  and  Death  would  not  enter  it.

646  "  It "  refers  to  the  fort.

617  This  world,  which  was  lent  to  them,  remained  not  in  their  hands.

650  In  the  'Ikd-i-manzum,  couplets  651  to  655  are  omitted.


CHAP.  I.]  ON   JUSTICE,    EQUITY,    AND   GOVEENMENT.  95

When  Alap-Arslan  gave  his  soul  to  the  Soul-giver,
The  son  placed  the  royal  crown  on  his  head.

655  From  the  crown-place,  they  consigned  him  to  the  tomb.
The  target-place  was  not  a  spot  for  sitting.

Thus  spoke  a  distraught  wise  one,

— When  he  saw  his  son,  the  next  day,  on  horse-back, —

"  Oh    excellent   government    and   country !      When   head

down-cast,
"  The  father  departs   (in  death),  the  son's  foot  is  in  the

stirrup."

Thus  is  the  revolution  of  time

A  gad-about,  and  bad-of-faith,  and  inconstant.

When  the  One  of  ancient  days  brings  his  life  to  an  end.
One,  whose  fortune  is  young,   raises   his  head  from   the
cradle.

660  Place  not  the  heart  on  the  world,  for  it  is  a  stranger,
Like  the  musician,  who  is,  every  day,  in  a  different  house.

Pleasure  is  not  proper  with  such  a  heart-ravishing  one.
Who  has,  every  morning,  a  fresh  mate.

This  year,  when  the  village  (of   the  world)  is   thine,  do

good :
Because,  next  year,  another  will  be  village-chief.

A  sage  prayed  for  King  KaykubM,

Saying  : — "  In  thy  sovereignty,  may  there  be  no  decline !  "


655  "  AmAj-gah  "  is  the  place,  where  they  fix  the  target ;  it  is  also  applied
to  a  king's  throne.

656  Distraught  as  to  the  things  of  this  world ;  wise  as  to  those  of  the
next.

657  The  speaker  jests  at  the  transient  nature  of  things.

658  "  Sar  dar  nashib"  signifies — sar-nigdn  ;  ma,yus ;  be  bahra.
663       In  the  'Ikd-i-manzum,  couplets  663  to  Q77  are  omitted.


i


96


THE   BUSTAN    OF    SA  DI.


[chap.  I.


A  great  one,  upon  this,  reproached  him.
Saying : — "  The  wise  man  utters  not  the  impossible,
wonder !

665  "  Of  the  kings  of  Persia,  whom  dost  thou  know,
"  Of  the  time  of  Firidiin  and  Zahhak  and  Jamshid,


"In  respect  to  whose  throne  and  country,  decline  hap-
pened not  ?

"(To  utter)  the  impossible  is  not  decorous,  on  the  part  of
a  wise  man.

"  To  whom  remains  the  hope  of  existing  always,
"  When  thou  seest  no  one,  who  remains  for  ever?  "

The  learned  sensible  man  thus  replied.

Saying : — "  The  wise  man  utters  not  unsuitable  speech.

"  I  sought  not  perpetual  life  for  him ;

"  I  sought  for  aid,  by  the  grace  of  his  liberality.

670  "  For,  if  he  be  devout,  and  pure  in  conduct,
"  ReHgion-understanding,  advice-hearing, —

"  The   day,    on   which  he  plucks  up  his  heart  from  this

country  (of  the  world),
"He    pitches    his    royal   tent    in  the   other   country   (of

Paradise).

"  Then,  there  is  no  decline  to  this  empire ;
"  There  is  translation  from  the   (transient)  world  to  the
(everlasting)  world.

"  If  he  be  devout,  what  harm  in  his  death  ?
"  For  he  is  a  kmg  even  in  the  future  world."

"Whosoever  has  treasure,  and  command,  and  army  ;
Grovernment,  and  dignity,  and  desire,  and  pleasure, —

675  If  his  disposition  be  good, —

Ease,  at  all  times,  is  prepared  for  him.


CHAP.  I.]  ON    J[JSTIOE,    EQUITY,    AND    GOVERNMENT.  97

But,  if  he  exercises  violence  against  the  poor.

This  same  command  and  dominion  are  his  for  five  days.

When  Far'iin  abandoned  not  wickedness,

He  exercised  sway  only  up  to  the  brink  of  the  grave.


I  have  heard  that  of  the  monarchs  of  Grhur,
A  certain  king  used  to  seize  asses  by  force.

The  asses,  beneath  heavy  loads,  fodderless,
Wretched,  perished  in  the  space  of  two  days.

80  When  Time  makes  the  mean  one  rich.

He  places  a  load  on  the  straitened  heart  of  the  darvesh.

When  his  roof  is  lofty,  the  self-worshipper
Pollutes,    and   casts  rubbish  on  the  humble   roof  (of  his
neighbour).

I  heard  that,  one  day,  with  the  intention  of  hunting.
The  tyrannous  monarch  went  out.

He  urged  his  steed  in  rear  of  the  game,

Night  overtook  him ;  he  remained  far  from  his  retinue.

Knew,  in  solitude,  neither  the  turning  nor  the  path ;
Cast  at  length  his  head  (himself)  into  a  village.

»6  A  certain  old  man  was  residing  in  that  village,
Old-of  old  men,  men-recognising.

He  kept  saying  to  his  son  : — "  Oh  happy  portion  I
"  Take  not  thy  ass,  in  the  morning,  to  the  city.


S78       Ghur  is_a  country  near  Kandahdr.
584       "  Ru,e  "  may  mean — sue ;  janib.


98  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  1.

"  For  tliis  one,  ungenerous  and  of  reversed  fortune

" "Would  that  I  might,  instead  of  his  throne,  behold  his

bier  I  —

"  Has  his  loins  girt  in  a  demon's  service,
"  A  cry,  on  account  of  the  hand  of  his  violence,  goes  to
the  sphere.

"  In  this  territory,  ease  and  cheerfulness
"  The  eye  of  man  saw  not  and  sees  not.

690  "  Perhaps   this  one  whose  book  of  sins  is  full,    void   o!
purity,
"  Will  go  to  hell, — curses  in  his  rear."

The  son  said  : — "  Long  is  the  way  and  difficult ;
"  Oh  one  of  good  fortune  !  I  cannot  go  on  foot.

"  Consider  a  way,  and  express  an  opinion ;

"  For  thy  judgment  is  more  luminous  than  mine.*'

The  father  said : — "  If  thou  wilt  listen  to  my  judgment,
"  It  is  proper  to  take  up  a  large  stone ;


"  To  strike  the  ass,  the  load-carrier,  several  times  with  it ;
"  To  wound  his  head,  and  his  leg,  and  his  flank.


I


A


695  "  Perhaps,  that  base  one  of  ugly  religion

"  An  ass, — ^lame,  wounded — may  be,  for  his  work,  useless.

"  Like  Khizr,  the  prophet,  who  shattered  the  ship,
"  And,  thus,  stayed  the  hand  of  the  powerful  tyrant.

"  In  the  year,  in  which  the  tyrant  seized  the  ship  at  sea,
"  He  won  many  years  of  bad-repute."


ggg  "  Khizr  "  was  a  celebrated  prophet ;  his  history  is  written  in  the  Sura
Kahf  of  the  Kuran ;  he  is  said  to  have  discovered  the  water  of  life. — See
Sikandar  Nama,  Discourses  68,  69,  and  70.


jCHAP.    I.]  ON   JUSTICE,    EQUITY,    AND    GOVERNMENT.  99

"When  the  boy  heard  this  tale  from  his  father.

He  took  not  his  head  beyond  the  writing  of  the  order.

He  struck  down  the  helpless  ass  with  a  stone ;
The  ass  became  feeble  of  leg,  lame  of  foot.

3  The  father  said  to  him  : — "  Now,  take  thy  own  way ;
"  Take  that  road  even  which  is  desirable  to  thee."

The  son  fell  in  with  a  karavan  ;

As  much  abuse  as  he  knew,  he  gave  (to  the  tjrrant).

And,  on  this  side,  the  father — face  towards  the  sky,
Saying : — "  Oh  Lord  !  by  the  prayer-carpet  of  the  true,

"  G-ive  me,  from  Time,  as  much  tranquillity,
"  As  ruin  springs  from  this  oppressing  tyrant.

"  If  I  witness  not  his  destruction,

"  My  eyes,  in  the  night  of  the  grave,  will  not  sleep  in  the
dust.

5  *'  A  woman, — much  better  than  an  injurious  man;
"  A  dog, — better  than  the  man,  man-injuring.

"  The  hemaphrodite,  who  shows  injustice  towards  himseK.
"  Better  than  that  one,  who  shows  evil  towards  man."

The  tyrant-king  heard  this  speech,  but  said  nothing ;
He  tethered  his   horse;    and,  head  on   saddle-cloth,  laid
himself  down  to  sleep.

All  night,  in  wakefulness,  he  counted  the  stars ;
Through  frenzy  and  reflection,  sleep  took  him  not.

When  he  heard  the  voice  of  the  morning-bird,
He  forgot  the  night's  distress.

10  The  (king's)  horsemen,  all  night,  galloped  (in  search) ;
Recognised,  in  the  morning,  the  track  of  his  horse :

7  *


100  THE    BUSTAN    OF    Sa'dI.  [cHAP.  I.

Beheld,  on  horseback, — in  that  plain,  the  king.

On  foot ;  the  whole  of  the  troop  went  (towards  him)  :

Placed  the  head,  in  service,  on  the  earth,

From  the  wave  of  the  multitude,  the  earth  became  h

the  sea. —

The  great  ones  sate  down,  and  asked  for  food ;
They  ate,  and  set  the  assembly  in  array.

One  of  his  old  friends  said  : —
— Who  was  his  chamberlain,  at  night ;    and  courtier,  by
day.—

715  "  Last  night,  what  victuals  did  the  peasants  place  before
thee?
"  As  for  us,  neither  eye  nor  ear  reposed."

The  monarch  could  not  relate  the  adventure,
Which,  from  bad  repute,  occurred  to  him.

He  brought  his  head,  very  slowly,  before  the  courtier's

head ;
(And)  whispered,  secretly,  to  his  ear : —

"  No  one  brought  before  me  the  leg  of  a  bird,

"  But  the  leg  of  an  ass, — dislocated  beyond  measure.'

When  the  tumult  of  joy  came  into  the  king's  nature,
Memory  of  the  villager  of  the  previous  night  came  to  him.

720  He  ordered  : — they  searched,  and  firmly  bound  him ;
Oast  him,  with  ignominy,  at  the  foot  of  the  throne.

The  black-hearted  one  drew  forth  the  sharp  sword ;
The  helpless  one  knew  not  the  way  of  flight :


714       The  second  line  describes  the  friend.

In  the  'Ikd-i-manzum,  couplets  714  and  715  are  omitted.
718       They  brought  him — not  the  leg  of  a  bird  to  eat, — but  the  dislocated
leg  of  an  ass,  as  evidence  of  his  tyranny .


♦


CHAP.  I.]         ON   JUSTICE,    EQUITY,    AND    GOVEENMENT.  101

Reckoned  that  moment  the  last  of  his  life ;
Said  whatever  revolved  in  his  heart.


Seest  thou  not  that  when  the  knife  is  at  the  head
Of  the  pen — its  tongue  (nib)  is  swifter  ?

When  the  villager  knew  that  flight  from  the  enemy  was

impossible.
Fearless  of  him,  he  poured  forth  the  arrows  of  his  quiver

(of  speech).

7-  He  raised  the  head  of  despair,  and  spoke  : —
"  On  the  night  of  the  grave,  it  is  not  possible  to  sleep  in
the  house.

"  Oh  monarch !  not  alone,  said  I  to  thee,

"  That  thou  art  of  reversed  fortune  and  unfortunate.

"  I  (alone)  cursed  not  the  power  of  thy  oppression,
"  But  a  people ;    suppose — one   slain,    out   of  a  people :
(what  then  ?)

"  From  the  mercilessness  that  exists  in  thy  time,
"  The  whole  world  is  the  proclaimer  of  thy  violence.

"  Why  getst  thou  angry  with  me  only  ?
"  1  spoke  before  thee ;    but,  all  the  World  behind  (thy
back).

"  It  is  strange  that  cursing  on  my  part  comes  harshly  to

thee,
"  Slay ;  if  thou  canst  slay  the  whole  world.

"  But  if  rebuke,  on  my  part,  appears  severe

"  Pluck  up,  in  justice,  the  root  of  reproach  (of  injustice).

"  When  thou  doest  injustice,  expect  not,

"  That  thy  name  for  goodness  will  go  into  the  country.


102  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA*DI.  [OHAP.  I.

"  And,  if — oh  mean  one  ! — it  be  that  my  speech  is  hard

to  thee,
"  Do  not  to  another, — what  is  hard  to  thee.

"  For  thee,  the  remedy  is  to  turn  away  from  tyranny ;
"  It  is  not  an  innocent  matter,  to  slay  the  helpless.

786  "  Suppose — ^for  thee,  five  days  more  are  remaining  ; —
"  Suppose — two   days   more    of    enjoying   pleasant   ei
(What  then  ? )

"The  tyrant  of  bad  walk  of  Kfe  remains  not  (in  the  world),
'*  (But)  everlasting  curses  will  remain  on  him.

"  I  know  not  how  thine  eyes  sleep,

"  The  oppressed,  through  thy  hand  of  oppression,  sleepless.

*'  For  thee,  there  is  good  advice,  if  thou  wilt  listen ;  ^

"  But  if  thou  wilt  not  hearken,  thou  thyself  wilt  become

sorrowful.  -

"  Know, — how  praised  becomes  a  king
"  Whom  the  people  praise  in  the  Court.

740  "  What  profit — the  applause,  at  the  head  of  the  assembly,
'*  The  old  woman, — cursing  behind  the  spinning  wheel."

The  villager  thus  spoke, — the  sword  above  his  head ;
The  soul  surrendered  to  the  arrow  of  Fate.

The  king,  from  the  intoxication  of  carelessness,  came  to

reason ;
The  auspicious  angel  Surosh  (Gabriel)  whispered  to  his  ear,

Saying : — "  Restrain  the    hand   of  torture   from  this  old

man;
"  Suppose, — one  slain,   out   of   thousands   of    thousands

(what  then?)"


741       "  Safr  kardan  "  signifies — to  surrender.


I
\\   ■  CHAP.  I.]         ON   JUSTICE,    EQUITY,    AND    GOVERNMENT.  103

His  head  remained  sometime  in  tbe  collar  (of  reflection) ;
After  that,  he  filled  his  sleeve  with  pardon.

6  Took  off  his  fetters,  with  his  own  hands ;
Kissed  his  head,  and  took  him  into  his  bosom.

Gave  him  greatness  and  lordship ;
II     His  welfare  sprang  forth  from  the  branch  of  hope.

This  story  became  related  in  the  world ;
Good  fortune  goes  behind  the  upright.

Thou  wilt  learn  an  adorned  walk  of  life,— from  wise  men ;
(But)  not  to  the  same  degree  as  from  the  ignorant   (the
enemy),  fault-finding.

Hear  thy  own  character  from  the  enemy ;  because.
In  the  friend's  eye,  whatever  comes  from  thee  is  good.

Those  singing  praises  are  not  thy  friends ;
Those  reproaching  are  thy  friends.

It  is  a  crime  to  give  sugar  to  the  sick  one ;
When  the  bitter  medicine  is  fit  for  him.

The  one  of  sour  face  rebukes  better,

Than  friends  of  pleasant  disposition,  of  sweet  temperament.

No  one  utters  to  thee  better  advice  than  this  :
If  thou  art  wise,  a  hint  is  enough.


so


When  the  turn  of  the  Khilafat  came  to  Mamiin
He  purchased  a  damsel  with  a  face  as  the  moon.


744


.„       In  the  'Ikd.i-manzAm,  couplets  742-747  and  753-797  are  omitted.
;  764       Mamiin,  'one  of  the  KhtdafA  of  'AbAsiya,  wa«  the   son  of  Harunu-r-
Eashid,  so  often  mentioned  in  the  Arabian  Nights.


104


THE    BUSTAN    OF    Sa'dI.  [cHAP.  I.


755  In  face,  a  sun ;  in  body,  a  rose ;
In  wisdom,  wise, — a  wanton  one.

In  the  blood  of  lovers,  her  hand  deeply  imbrued ;
Her  finger-tips,  jujube-stained.

Saffron — on  the  eye-brow,  devotee-enchanting, —
Was  like  the  rainbow  on  the  sun.

On  the  night  of  the  rites  of  Venus,  that  enchanti

Hur-born,
Perhaps  gave  not  her  body  to  Mamun's  embrace.

The  fire  of  anger  fiercely  seized  him ;

He  wished  to  make  her  head  two  portions,  like  the  Gremini.

760  She  said : — "  Lo  !  my  head,  with  the  sharp  sword,

*•  Cast  down ;  but,   exercise  not  sleeping  and  rising  with


Mamun  said  : — "  From  whom,  has  injury  reached  thy  heart;
"  What  feature  of  mine  was  disagreeable  to  thee  ?  "

She  replied  : — "  If  thou  slayst  me,  or  if  thou  cleavest  my

head
**  (I  must  say) — from  the  smell  of  thy  mouth,   I  am  in

distress.

"  The  sword  of  contest,  and  the  arrow  of  oppression  slay,
*'  At  once  ;  the  smell  of  thy  mouth,  gradually."

Sarwar  (Mamiin)  of  happy  fortune  heard  this  speech ;
He  was  greatly  astonied,  and  sorely  grieved.


767       "  Kaus  "  signifies — a  bow.

"Kazah  "  is  the  name  of  a  devil.

"  Kaus-i-Kazah  "  is  Satan's  bow  ;  and  also  the  name  of  Rustam's  bow.
In  Persia,  rain  is  precious.     When  the  rainbow  appears,  rain  usually
ceases.  The  people  then  say  that "  Shaitan  "  has  stopped  the  rain  with  his
bow.


CHAP.  I.]    ON  JUSTICE,  EQUITY,  AND  GOVERNMENT.       105

765  Was,  all  night,  in  this  thought,  and  slept  not ;
Spoke,  the  next  day,  to  the  wise  ones.

I

Those  of  every  clime,  constitution — understanding, —
With  every  one  of  them,  he  spoke  on  every  matter.

:^1  though,  at  that  time,  his  heart  was  vexed  with  her,

He  took  medicine  ;  and,  became  fragrant  of  smell,  rose-like.

r

He  made  the  pari-faced  one,  companion  and  friend ;
Saying  : — "  This  one  uttered  my  defect;  she  is  my  friend."

In  my  opinion,  that  one  is  thy  well-wisher,
Who  says  : — "  A  thorn  is  in  thy  path."

'  770  Tp  sav  to  the  road-lost — "  Thou  goest  well,"
/  ';t  cruelty  and  atrocious  crime.

'^"^^t  tha      ^,  when  they  utter  not  before  thee  thy  defect,
Thou,  from  ignorance,  considerst  thy  defect,  skill.

'Say  not : — "  The  sweet  honey  is  the  superior  sugar  "
To  that  one,  for  whom  scammony  is  necessary.

How  well  did  the  druggist,  one  day,  say  : —
"  Is     convalescence    necessary     to    thee  ?     drink    bitter
medicine."

i

If  sharbat  is  good  for  thee,

Take,  from  Sa'di,  the  bitter  medicine  of  advice.

776  With  the  sieve  of  knowledge,  sifted  ;
With  the  honey  of  devotion,  mixed.

I  'have  heard  that,  on  account  of  a  good  man,  a  fakir,
The  heart  of  a  proud  king  became  troubled.


772       "  Sakmuniya  "  is  Greek ;  in  Arabic,  it  is  called  "  Mahmudat."  1-3?

The  Persians  say  it  is  a  bitter  juice,  possessing  the  power  of  purging
the  bile  from  the  body.


I


106  THE  BUSTAN  OF  SA'dI.  [cHAP.  I.

Perhaps,  on  his  tongue,  a  truth  had  passed ;
He  became,  through  pride,  enraged  with  him.

He  sent  him  from  the  Court  to  the  prison ;
For,  the  arm  of  a  king  is  strong  proved.

One  of  his  friends  said  secretly  to  him  (the  fakir)  ; —
"  It  was  not  well  to  utter  this  speech."     He  replied  : —

780  "  To  cause  God's  order  to  be  accomplished  is  obedience  to
God;
"  I  fear  not  the  prison,  which  is  for  a  moment."

That  very  moment,  when  this  secret,  in  private,  went  forth

(from  his  tongue).
The  tale  also  went  to  the  ear  of  the  king.

He  laughed,  saying : — "  He  entertains  a  foolish  idea,
"  He  knows  not  that  he  will  die  in  this  confinement."

A  slave  brought  that  speech  to  the  poor  man ;
He  said  : — "  Oh  slave  !  say  to  Khusrau,

"  I  have  not  the  load  of  grief  on  a  wounded  heart ;
*'  For  the  world,  this  very  moment,  is  no  more.

785  "  If  thou  helpst  me  not,  I  am  joyful ;

"  If   thou    cutst  off  my  head,  grief   comes   not  into   my
heart.

"  If  thou  art  prosperous  in  command  and  treasure,
"  Another  is  dejected,  in  fear  or  grief.

**  When  we  enter  at  the  gate  of  death,

"  We  become,  in  one  week,  together  equal.


784      In  some  copies : —

Since,  this  very  moment,  the  world  is  no  more,
Grief  and  joy  axe  not  present  to  the  Darvesh.


:ii


CHAP.  I.]         ON   JUSTICE,    EQUITY,    AND    GOVBENMENT.  107

"  Place  not  the  heart  on  this  empire  of  five  days,

"  Consume  not  thyseK,  with  the  sighs  of  the  people's  heart.

**  Did  not  the  kings  before  thee  collect  together  more  than

thou?
**  In  exercising  injustice,  they  consumed  the  world.

790  **  Live  even  so,  that  they  may  commemorate  thee  with
praise ;
"  May   not    recite    curses,    over   thy    grave,   when   thou
diest.

"  In  regard  to  a  bad  custom,  it  is  unnecessary  to  lay  laws ;
"  For  they  say  : — May  a  curse  be  on  him,  who  laid  this  evil
custom  !

'*  But,  if  the  Lord  of  Force  raises  his  head,
"  Does  not  the  dust  of  the  grave  in  the  end  make  his  head
low?"

The  narrow-hearted  one,  by  way  of  oppression,  ordered —
That  they  should  dig  out  his  tongue,  from  the  back  (of  the
neck).

The  man,  truths-knowing  thus  spoke

Saying : — "  I  have  no  fear  of  this  even  that  thou  hast  said.

795  "I  have  no  grief  of  tonguelessness ;

"  For,  I  know  that  God  understands  the  unspoken  word.

"  And  if,  through  tyranny,  I  suffer  foodlessness,
— **  If,  in  the  end  it  be  well  with  me,  what  grief  ?

*'  The  sound  of  mourning  (for  thy  death)  may  be  nuptial,
"  If  thy  end  be  good."


108  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  I.

A  certain  boxer  had  neither  fortune  nor  victuals ;
The  means  ready — neither   for   his    evening   nor   for   his
morning  repast.

On  account  of  the  cravings  of  his  belly,  he  used  to  carry  clay

on  his  back ;
For  it  is  impossible  to  enjoy  (gain)  victuals,  by  means  of

the  fist.

800  Through  distress  of  fortune,  always —

His  heart,  grief- stricken ;  his  body,  spindle-like.

For  him,  sometimes,  battle  with  a  malevolent  world ;
Sometimes,  his  face  bitter,  from  distressed  fortune.

Sometimes,  from  beholding  the  sweet  pleasure  of  the  (rich)

people.
The  bitter  water  (tears)  used  to  descend  to  his  neck.

Sometimes,  he  used  to  weep  on  account  of  perplexed  work,
Saying : — *'  No  one  experienced  a   more   bitter  life  than
this!"

The  people  eat  honey,  and  bird,  and  lamb ;
The  surface  of  my  bread  sees  not  herbs.

805  If  thou  desirest  justice, — this  is  not  good,
I  naked;  but,  to  the  cat,  a  coat  (of  fur).

How  well  would  it  have  been,  if  my  foot,  in  this  clay- work,
Had  descended  to  the  treasure  of  my  heart's  desire.

Perhaps,  for  a  time  I  would  have  urged  the  desire  (of

lust) ;
Would  have  scattered  from  myself  the  dust  of  affliction.

I  heard  that  he  was,  one  day,  breaking  up  the  earth  ;
He  found  a  rotten  chin-bone.

Within  the  dust,  its  joints  dissevered;
The  jewels  of  teeth  scattered.


CHAP.  I.]  ON    JUSTICE,    EQUITY,    AND    GOVERNMENT.  109

810  The  tongueless  mouth  mysteriously  uttered  advice,

Saying  : — "  Oh  sir !  be  content  with  want  of  sustenance.

"  Is  not  this  the  state  of  the  mouth,  beneath  the  clay  ?
"  Suppose — sugar   eaten;    or  blood   of   the   heart  (grief)
suffered  (what  then  ?)

'*  Have  not  grief  of  time's  revolution ;

"  For  much  time  will  revolve  without  us.*'

That  very  moment,  when  this  idea  appeared  to  him.
Grief  placed  aside  its  burden  from  his  heart.

Saying  : — "  Oh  spirit !  void  of  judgment,   deliberation  and

sense,
*'  Endure  the  load  of  grief,  and  slay  not  thyself."

815  If  a  slave  carries  a  load  on  his  head ;

Or  if  he  rears  his  head  to  the  summit  of  the  sky,

At  that  moment,  when  his  state  becomes  changed,
In  death,  both  ideas  leave  his  head.

G-rief  and  joy  remain  not ;  but.

Requital  for  work  and  good  name  (work)  remains.

Liberality,  not  diadem  and  throne,  has  permanence ;
Oh  one  of  good  fortune ! — give  that  this  may  remain  after
thee  (in  the  world).

Rely  not  on  country,  and  rank  and  pomp  :

For,  they  were  before  thee,  and  will  be  after  thee.

820  Thou   wishst  not  that  thy  country  should  come  to  con-
fusion ?
It  is  necessary  to  suffer  sorrow  for  both  country  and  religion.


813       "  Rd,e  dMan  "  signifies — tawajjuh  kardan ;  mutawajjih  shudan.
In  the  first  line,  "  khatir  "  signifies — Anchi  ba  dil  k^atur  kun&d.


110  THE  BUSTAN  OF  SA'dI.  [cHAP.  I.

Scatter  gold,  since  thou  wislist  not  to  leave  tlie  world,  '^■1

As  Sa'di  scattered  pearls   (of  counsel),  when  he  had  not    ™i

gold.


They  relate  a  story  of  a  certain  violence — scatterer,
Who  held  sway  over  a  country.

The  day  of  man  was,  in  his  time,  like  the  evening ;
At  night,  the  hands  of  the  pure  were,  through  fear  of  him,
in  prayer.

All  day,  the  good,  through  him,  in  calamity ;

At  night,  the  hands  of  the  pure,  against  him,  in  prayer.

825  Before  the  Shaikh  of  that  time,  a  crowd  of  men
Wept  bitterly,  on  account  of  the  tyrant's  power.

Saying : — "  Oh  wise  man  of  happy  disposition  !
"  Say  to  this  young  man, — Fear  God  I  "

The  Shaikh  replied  : — "  I  am  loath  (to  utter)  the  name  of

God;
"  For,  every  one  is  not  worthy  of  His  message."

Whomsoever  thou  seest  apart  from  God,
Oh  Sir !  reveal  not  to  him  the  name  of  God.

It  is  sorrowful  to  speak  of  the  knowledge  (of  God)  with

the  mean ;
For,  seed  in  salt  soil  is  wasted.

830  When  it  affects  him  not,  he  considers  thee  an  enemy ;
Grieves  heartily,  and  vexes  thee.


822       In  the  'Ikd-i-manzum,  couplets  822  to  880  are  omitted.


CHAP.  1.]  ON   JUSTICE,    EQUITY,    AND    GOVEENMENT.  Ill

Oh  King !  thou  hast  the  custom  of  a  right  walk  of  life ;
The  heart  of  the  man,  truth- speaking,  is,  on  this  account,
firm.

Oh  one  of  happy  fortune  !  the  seal-ring  has  a  quality, —
Such  that,  it  takes  an  impression  in  wax,  not  in  the  hard
stone.

It  is  not  wonderful,  if  this  tyrant,  of  me,  heartily
Grieves ;  for,  he  is  a  thief ;  and  I,  a  watchman.

Thou  art  also  guardian  as  to  justice  and  equity ;
May  the  protection  of  God  be  thy  guardian  !

835  In  the  way  of  reason,  thanks  (of  the  people)  are  not  for
thee ;
Grace,  and  obligation,  and  praise — for  God.

When  God  holds  thee,  in  service,  in  the  work  of  goodness.
He  left  thee,  not  abandoned,  like  others.

AU  are  in  the  plain  of  struggle ;

But,  not  every  one  wins  the  ball  of  empire.

Thou  didst  not,  by  endeavour,  gain  Paradise ;

God  created  within  thee,  a  disposition  Paradise-like.

May  thy  heart  be  illumined,  and  time  tranquil !
May  thy  foot  be  firm,  and  dignity  exalted !

840  Thy  life,  pleasant ;  and,  thy  conduct,  (bent)  on  rectitude  !
Thy  devotion,  agreeable  (to  God) ;  and,  prayer,  accepted !


So  long  as  thy  work  prospers  by  deliberation.
Courtesy  to  an  enemy  (is)  better  than  contest.


831  ^

and  i       The  king  alluded  to  is  Abd  Bakr.
834;


112  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  ^  [CHAP.  I.

When  one  cannot,  by  force,  defeat  tlie  enemy ;
With  cajolery  it  is  proper  to  close  the  door  of  strife.

If  there  be  fear  of  the  injury  of  the  enemy.
Fasten  his  tongue  with  the  charm  of  beneficence.

Scatter  gold  for  the  enemy,  in  place  of  crow's  feet ;
For,  kindness  makes  blunt  the  sharp  teeth.

846  When  it  is  impossible  to  bite  the  hand,  kiss  it ;

For,  with  superiors,  the  remedy  is  deceit  and  flattery.

Even  as  the  friend,  pay  observance  to  the  enemy.
Whose  skin,  at  the  time  of  opportunity,  one  can  flay ;

By  right  judgment,  there  came  to  bonds  Rustam,
From  whose  noose,  Isfandiyar  escaped  not.

Exercise  caution  as  to  contest  with  the  meanest  person ;
For,  I  have  seen  many  a  torrent,  from  a  drop.

Express  not — so  long  as  thou  canst, — a  knot  (frown)  on

thy  eyebrow ;
For,  the  enemy  though  weak  (is)  better  a  friend.

850  His  enemy  may  be  fresh  ;  and,  friend,  wounded, —

That   one,   whose   enemies    are    (in   number)    more   than
friends.

Strive  not  with  an  army  more  powerful  than  thy  own ;
For,  one  cannot  strike  the  fist  on  a  lancet.

And,  if  thou  art  stronger,  in  contest,  than  he,

It  is  not  manly  to  exercise  force  against  the  feeble.

If  thou  art  of  elephant- strength,  or  of  lion -claw.
Peace  is,  in  my  opinion,  better  than  strife.

When  the  hand  is  broken  as  to  every  artifice.
It  is  lawful  to  carry  the  hand  to  the  sharp  sword.


CHAP.  I.]         ON   JUSTICE,    EQUITY,    AND    GOVERNMENT.  113

355  If  the  enemy  seeks  peace,  turn  not  aside  the  head ;
I      And,  if  he  seeks  battle,  turn  not  aside  the  rein.

'      For,  if  he  shuts  the  door  of  conflict

Thou  hast  the  power  and  awe  of  ten  thousand.

And,  if  he  bring  the  foot  of  battle  into  the  stirrup.
The  Ruler  (God)  will  not  desire  from  thee   an  account  at
the  rising  (Judgment  Day).

t      Be  thou  his  battle-opponent,  when  he  seeks  strife ;
For  with  the  malicious  kindness  is  a  mistake,

"When  thou  speakst,  with  kindness   and  pleasantness,    to

the  mean.
His  pride  and  obstinacy  become  greater.

860  With  Arab- steeds  and  manly  men,

Bring  forth  the  dust  (of  destruction)  from  the  nature  of
the  enemy.

But,  if  he  returns,  with  gentleness  and  understanding,
Speak  not  to  him,  with  severity  and  anger  and  harshness.

"When  the  enemy  enters  at  thy  door,  with  submission,
Put  out  malice  from  thy  heart ;  and,  anger  from  thy  head.

"When  safety  demands,  practice  the  trade  of  liberality ;
Pardon ;  but,  reflect  on  his  (possible)  deceit.

Turn  nob  away  from  the  deliberations  of  old  men ;
For,  one  years-endured  is  work-experienced.

865  They  pluck  up  the  brazen  foundations  from  its  root, —
Young  men  with  the  sword ;  and,  old  men  with  judgment.

Consider  a  place  of  retreat,  in  the  heart  of  battle ;

Of  that,  what  knowst  thou, — that  he  may  be  conqueror?

"When  thou  beholdst  the  enemy  in  discord,
Give  not,  alone,  thy  sweet  life  to  the  wind.

8


114  THE    BUSTAN    OP    SA'dI.  [cHAP,  I.

And,  if  thou  art  on  one  side  of  the  army,  strive  to  go

(from  the  slaughter) ;
But,  if  in  the  midst  (of  the  enemy),  put  on  the  guise  of

the  enemy.

And,  if  thou  art  a  thousand,  and  the  enemy   (only)  two

hundred,
Stand  not  in  the  enemy's  territory,  when  it  becomes  night.

870  In  the  dark  night,  fifty  horsemen,  from  ambuscade,
"Will,  with  terror,  rend  the  earth  like  five  hundred.

When  thou  wishst  to  travel  the  road  at  night,
Be  cautious  first  of  ambuscade.

When  one  day's  march  between  two  armies
Remains, — pitch  thy  tent  in  some  place.

If  he  displays  aggression,  have  no  fear ;

And  if  he  be  Afrasiyab,  pluck  forth  his  brains.

Knowst  thou  not,  that  when  the  enemy  pursues  one's  day

march,
His  grasp  of  force  remains  not.

875  Thou  tranquil, — strike  at  the  wearied  army;

For,  the  ignorant  one  practised  oppression  against  his  own
body.

When   thou    hast    defeated    the   enemy,    cast   down   the

standard,
That  his  wound  may  not  come  together  again  (heal).

Urge  not  far,  in  rear  of  the  routed  army ;

It  is  not  fit  that  thou  shouldst  go  far  from  thy  companions.

Thou  mayst  behold,  the  air  cloud-like,  from  the  dust  of

conflict ;
With  javelin  and  sword  they  will  gather  around  thee.

Let  not  the  army  urge  in  pursuit  of  plunder,

Lest  that  (the  place)  behind  the  king's  back  be  void.


CHAP.  I.]        ON    JUSTICE,    EQUITY,    AND    GOVERNMENT.  116

.J80  For  the  army,  the  guardianship  of  the  monarch
Is  better  than  battle,  in  the  circle  of  contest.

The  warrior,  who  has  once  showed  ardour  (in  battle),
It  is  proper  to  increase    (his   dignity),  according  to  his
worth.

That,  the  next  time,  he  may  place  his  heart  on  destruction ;
May  have  no  fear  of  contest  with  the  (tribe  of)  Yajjiij.

I      Keep  the  soldier  happy,  in  peace  ;

That  he  may  be  of  use  in  the  time  of  distress.

Kiss  the  hand  of  fighting  men,  now.

Not,  at  the  time  when  the  enemy  beats  the  war-drum.

i86  The  soldier,  whose  duty  is  (lies)  not  in  (getting)  victuals, —
"Why  should  he,  on  the  day  of  battle,  place  his  heart  ou
death  ?

From  the  enemy's  hand,  the  quarters  of  the  country,
I     Keep  by  the  army  ;  and,  the  army,  by  wealth.

Of  the  king,  the  hand  is  bold  against  an  enemy,
When  the  army  is  tranquil  of  heart,  and  satisfied.

j     They  enjoy  the  price  of  their  own  heads ;

It  is  not  right,  that  they  should  endure  severity.

When  they  keep  pay  from  the  soldier ;

He  is  loth  to  carry  his  hand  to  the  sharp  sword.

i90  What  manliness  may  he  exhibit,  in  the  battle-ranks,
When  his  hand  is  empty,  and  work  despised  ?

Send  warriors  to  the  contest  with  the  enemy ;
Send  lions  to  the  conflict  with  lions.


;91       lu  the  'Ilfd-i-manzum,  couplets  891-971  are  omitted.

8   *


116  THE    BUST  AN    OF    Sa'dI.  [cHAP.  I.

Execute  work,  according  to  the  judgment  of  those  world-
experienced  ;
For,  the  old  wolf  is  experienced  in  hunting.

Fear  not  the  young  men,  sword-striking ;
Be  cautious  of  the  old  men  of  much  science.

The  young  men,  elephant-overthrowing,  lion-seizing,
Know  not  the  artifices  of  the  old  fox.

895  The  man,  world-experienced,  is  wise ;

For,  he  has  experienced  much  the  hot  and  cold   (vicissi-
tudes) of  life.

Young  men,  worthy  of  good  fortune.

Turn  not  aside  their  heads  from  the  saying  of  old  men.

If  further,  a  well  ordered  kingdom  be  necessary.
Give  not  a  great  work  to  an  aspirant.

Make  none  leader  of  the  army,  save  that  one.
Who  may  have  been,  in  many  battles.

Entrust  not  a  difficult  matter  to  the  young ;
For,  one  cannot  break  the  anvil  with  the  fist.

900  Peasant-cherishing  and  being  chief  of  an  army,
Are  not  work  of  sport  and  folly.

Thou  wishst  not  that  time  should  be  lost  ?
Entrust  not  work  to  one,  work-unseen.

The  hunting-dog  turns  not  his  face  from  the  panther ;
The  tiger,  inexperienced  in  battle,  fears  the  fox.

When  the  son  is  brought  up  to  hunting,
He  fears  not,  when  contest  meets  him.

In  wrestling,  and  hunting,  and  shooting  at  a  mark,  and

ball-play,
A  man  becomes  a  warrior,  and  contest-seeker.


CHAP.  1.]         ON    JUSTICE,    EQUITY,    AND    GOVERNMENT.  117

905  One  reared  in  the  hot  bath,  and  pleasure,  and  luxury.
Will  fear,  when  he  sees  the  door  of  conflict  open.

Two  men  place  him  in  the  saddle ;

It  may  be  a  boy  strikes  him  to  the  earth.

The  one,  whose  back  thou  seest  in  the  day  of  battle,
Slay, — if  the  enemy  slay  him  not  in  the  ranks.

An  impotent  one  is  better  than  the  swordsman.

Who,  in  the  battle-day,  turns  away  his  head,  woman-like.


How  well  said  the  hero  G-urgin  to  his  own  son.
When  he  (the  son)  shut  up  the  bow-case,  and  quiver  of
battle  : —

910  "  If,  women-like,  thou  wilt  seek  flight,

"  Go   not  (to   the   battle-field) ;    spill  not   the  honour  of
fighting  men."

The  single  horseman,  who,  in  battle,  showed  his  back,
Slew  not  himself,  but  those  of  renown.

Bravery  comes  not,^save  from  those  two  friends,
Who  feU,  in  the  circle  of  conquest.

Two  of  the  same  quality,  of  the  same  table,  of  the  same

speech,
Will  strive  mightily  in  the  heart  of  conflict.

For   shame   comes   to    him    of  fleeing    from    before    the

arrow, —
The  brother,  a  captive  in  the  enemy's  grasp.

915  When  thou  seest  that  friends  are  not  friends  (in  contest).
Consider  flight  from  the  battle-field, — gain.


The  first  line  means  : —

Though  by  reason  of  his  size  it  requires  two  men  to  place  him,  «fcc.


118  THE  BUSTAN  OF  SA'dI.  [cHAP.  I.

Oh  king,  territory- conquering  !  cherisli  two  persons —
One  a  man  of  arm  (strong) ;  the  other,  a  man  of  judgment.

Those  carry  of  the  ball  of  empire  from  those  renowned.
Who  cherish  the  wise  man  and  sword-man.

"Whoever  exercised  not  the  pen  and  the  sword.
If  he  dies, — say  not  over  him  : — "  Alas  !  "

Take  care  of  the  pen-striker  (pen-man)  and  sword-striker

(sword-man) ;
Not  the  musician ;  for  manliness  comes  not  from  the  striker.

920  This  is  not  manliness, — the  enemy  in  the  affairs  of  war ;
Thou, — confused  with    the  wine-cup,  and    sound  of    the
harp.

Possessed  of  sovereignty,  sate  down  to  play,  many  a  one
Whose  wealth  went  in  play  from  the  hand.


I  say  not — fear  battle  with  the  enemy ;
Fear  rather  him,  who  is  in  the  state  of  peace.

Many  a  one  recited,  in  the  day,  the  verse  of  peace ;
(And)    urged,  when    it    became    night,  his    army  at    the
sleeper's  head.

Warriors  sleep  mail-clad ;

Since,  the  couch  is  the  sleeping- place  of  women.

Within  the  tent,  one,  sword- striking,
925  Sleeps  not  naked  (unarmed),  like  women  in  the  house.

It  is  necessary  to  prepare  secretly  for  war ;
So  that  one  can  secretly  assault  the  enemy.

Caution  is  the  business  of  men  acquainted  with  work ;
The  advanced  guard  is  the  brazen  fence  of  the  army-place.


919


In  the  second  line,  "zan"  signifies— striker,  possibly  a  harp-striker
or  player  j  and  also  woman.


CHAP.  I.]  ON    JUSTICE,    EQUITY,    AND    GOVERNMENT.  119

Between  two  ill- wishers  of  short  hand  (weak),
It  is  not  wisdom,  to  sit  secure.

Because,  if  both,  together  secretly,  deliberate, —
Their  short  hand  becomes  long  (powerful).

930  Keep  one  engaged  with  deceit ;

Bring  forth  the  destruction  of  the  other's  existence.

If  an  enemy  chooses  war,

SpHl  his  blood,  with  the  sword  of  deliberation.

I        Gro  ;  accept  friendship  with  his  enemy ;

'        That  the  shirt  on  his  body  may  be  a  prison.

When  discord  occurs  in  the  enemy's  army.
Place  thou  thy  own  sword,  in  the  scabbard.

"When  wolves  approve  of  each  other's  injury,
The  sheep  repose  in  the  midst.

935  "When  the  enemy  becomes  engaged  with  enemy.
Sit  down,  in  ease  of  heart,  with  thy  friend.

When  thou  liftst  up  the  sword  of  contest.
Look  out,  secretly,  for  the  path  of  peace.

Because  army-leaders,  helmet-cleaving,

Seek  secretly  peace ;  and,  openly,  the  battle-ranks.

Seek  secretly  (in  friendship)  the  heart  of  the  man  of  the

battle-field ;
For,  it  may  be,  that  he  may  fall  (in  friendship)  at  thy

feet.

When  an  officer  of  rank  of  the  enemy  falls  to  thy  grasp,
It  is  proper  to  exercise  delay  in  slaying  him.

940  For,  it  may  happen  that  a  chief  of  this  half  (thy  own  army)
May  remain  a  captive,'^in  bonds.


120  THE   BUSTAN    OF    SA*DI.  [CHAP.  I.

If  thou  slayst  this  wounded  captive,

Thou  wilt  not  again  behold  thy  own  captive.

Fears  he  not  that  Heaven's  revolution  may  make  captive

him,
"Who  exercises  violence  towards  captives  ?

That  one  is  hand-seizer  (helper)  of  captives.
Who  himself  may  have  been  a  captive  in  bondage.

If  a  chief  places  his  head  on  thy  writing  (of  command), —
When  thou  keepst  him  well,  another  chief  places  his  head.

945  If  thou,  secretly,  bringst  to  thy  hand  ten  hearts,

It   is   better  than  that  thou  shouldst  execute  a  hundred
assaults.


If  a  relation  of  the  enemy  be  friendly  to  thee.
Beware ;  be  not  secure  of  craftiness.

Because,  his  heart  becomes  torn  for  vengeance  against  thee.
Wlien,  memory  of  the  love  of  his  own  relation  comes  to
him.

Consider  not  the  sweet  words  of  an  enemy ;
For,  it  is  possible,  there  is  poison  in  the  honey.

That  one  took  his  life  safe  from  the  trouble  of  the  enemy,
Who  reckoned  friends  as  enemies.

960  That  knave  preserves  the  pearl  in  his  purse,
Who  considers  all  people  purse-cuts.

The  soldier,  who  is  an  offender  against  the  Amir,
So  long  as  thou  canst, — take  not  into  service.

He  knew  not  gratitude  towards  his  own  chief ;
He  knows  not  thee  also  :  be  afraid  of  his  deceit.


i


I


CHAP.  1.]  ON   JUSTICE,    EQUITY,    AND    GOVERNMENT.  121

Hold  (consider)  him  not  strong  as  to  oath  and  covenant ;
Appoint  a  secret  v?"atchman  over  him.

Make  long  the  tether  of  the  aspirant ;

Break  it  not,  lest  thou  shouldst  not  see  him  again.


955  When,  in  battle  and  siege,  the  enemy's  country,
Thou  seizst, — consign  it  to  the  prisoners.

L       Because,  when  a  captive  plunges  his  teeth  in  blood,
He  drinks  blood  from  the  tyrant's  throat.

When  thou   plucks t  away  a  territory  from  the  enemy's

clutch.
Keep  the  peasantry  in  more  order  than  he.

For,  if  he  beats  open  the  door  of  conflict.

The  people  will  pluck  out  the  essence  of  his  brain.

But,  if  thou  causest  injury  to  the  citizens,

Shut  not  (vainly)  the  city-gate  in  the  enemy's  face.

960  Say  not : — "  The  enemy,  sword- striking,  is  at  the  gate !  "
When  the  enemy's  partner  is  within  the  city.

Essay  with  deliberation  battle  with  the  enemy ;
Reflect  on  counsel ;  and,  conceal  thy  resolution;

Reveal  not  the  secret  to  every  one ;

For,  I  have  seen  many  a  cup-sharer,  a  spy.

Sikandar,  who  waged  war  with  the  Easterns,
Kept,  they  say,  his  tent-door  towards  the  west.

When  Bahman  wished  to  go  to  Zawulistdn,
He  cast  a  rumour  of  (his  going  to  the)  left,  and  went  to
the  right.


964       If  a  mistake  occurs,  overlook  it ;  for,  if  thou  becometh  angry  and
makest  severance  of  his  hope, — ^thou  wilt  not  see  him  again.


122  THE  BUSTAN  OF  SA'dI.  [cHAP.  I.

965  If  one,  besides  thee,  knows  wliat  thy  resolve  is, —

It  is  fit  to  weep  over  that  judgment,  and  knowledge,  and
resolution.

Exercise  liberality ; — neither  conflict,  nor  rancour, —
That  thou  mayst  bring  a  world  beneath  thy  signet-ring.

When  a  work  prospers  through  courtesy  and  pleasantness,
What  need  of  severity  and  arrogance  ?

Thou  wishest  not,  that  thy  heart  should  be  sorrowful?
Bring  forth  from  bondage  the  hearts  of  those  sorrowful.

The  army  is  not  powerful  by  the  arm ;
Go ;  ask  a  blessing  from  the  feeble.

970  The  prayer  of  the  hopeful  weak  ones
Is  of  more  avail  than  the  manly  arm.

Whosoever  takes  to  the  darwesh,  his  request  for  aid,
If  he  strikes  at  Firidun,  he  would  overcome  him.


971       In  some  copies,  "  o"  occurs  in  place  of^  "  az,"  which,  otherwise,  is  re-
dundant.


CHAP.  II.]  ON   BENEFICENCE.  123


CHAPTER  II.

On  Beneficence.

1  If  thou  art  wise,  incline  to  trnth ;
For  truth,  not  the  semblance,  remains  in  its  place.

To  whomsoever,  there  was  neither  knowledge,  nor  liberality,

nor  piety, —
In  his  form,  there  was  no  reality.

Beneath  the  clay,  sleeps  at  ease  that  one.
By  whom,  men  sleep  tranquil  at  heart.

Suffer  thy  own  grief  in  life ;  for  the  relation.

Through  his  own  avarice,  busies  not  himself  with  one  dead.

5  Give  now  gold  and  silver,  which  is  thine ;
For,  after  thy  (death),  it  is  out  of  thy  command.

Thou  wishest  not,   that    thou    shouldst  be  distressed   in

heart  ?
Put  not  out  of  thy  heart  those  distressed.

1       In  the  'Ikd-i-manzuin,  couplets  1  to  28  are  omitted.


124


THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA  DI.


[chap.  II?


Scatter  treasure  in  alms,  to-day,  without  delay  ;■
For,  to-morrow,  the  key  is  not  in  thy  hand.


Take  away  with  thy  self,  thy  own  road-provisions  ;
For  compassion  (after  death)  comes  from  neither  son,  nor
wife.

That  one  takes  away  the  ball  of  empire  from  this  world,
"Who  took,  with  himself,  a  portion  to  the  future  world.

10  With  sympathy,  like  my  finger-tip.
No  one  in  the  world  scratches  my  back.

Place  now,  on  the  palm  of  the  hand,  whatever  there  is ;
Lest  that,  to-morrow  (the  Judgment  Day)  thou  shouldst
with  the  teeth  bite  the  back  of  the  hand.

Strive  as  to  covering  the  shame  of  the  darwesh.

That  the  veil  of  God  may  be  thy  secret  (defect)  -concealer.

Turn  not  the  foreigner  portionless  from  thy  door.
Lest  that  thou  shouldst  become  a  wanderer  (in  beggary)  at
doors.

The  great  one  causes  alms  to  reach  the  indigent ;
For  he  fears  that  he  may  become  necessitous  (as  to  the
need  of  others).

15  Look  into  the  state  of  the  heart  of  those  wearied  ;
For  thy  heart  may,  perhaps,  one  day  be  broken.

Make  the  hearts  of  those  dejected  happy ;

Remember  the  day  of  helplessness  (the  Judgment  Day).

Thou  art  not  a  beggar  at  the  doors  of  others ;
Drive  not,  in  thanks  to  God,  a  beggar  from  thy  door.


Cast  protection  over  the  head  of  the  one  father-dead ;
Scatter  his  dust  (of  affliction),  and  pluck  out  his  thorn.


I


CHAP.  II.]  ON   BENEFICENCE.  126

Knowst  thou  not,  how  very  dejected  his  state  was  ?
May  a  rootless  tree  be  ever  green  ?

20  When  thou   seest  an  orphan,  head  lowered  in  front  (from
grief).
Give  not  a  kiss  to  the  face  of  thy  own  son.

If  the  orphan  weeps,  who  buys  for  his  consolation  ?
And,   if    he    becomes    angry,    who   leads   him   back    (to
quietude)  ?

Beware  !  that  he  weep  not ;  for,  the  great  throne  of  God
Keeps  trembling,  when  the  orphan  weeps.

Pluck  out,  with  kindness,  the  tear  from  his  pure  eye ;
Scatter,  with  compassion,  the  dust  (of  affliction)  from  his
face.

If  his    (the  father's)  protection   departed  from  over  his

head,
Do  thou  cherish  him,  with  thy  own  protection.

26  I  esteemed  my  head  crown- worthy,  at  that  time.
When,  I  held  my  head  in  my  father's  bosom.

If  a  fly  had  sate  on  my  body,

The  heart  of  some  would  have  become  distressed.

If  now,  ei^3mies  should  bear  me  away  captive,
None  of  nay  friends  is  a  helper.

For  me,  is  acquaintance  with  the  sorrows  of  orphans,
For,  in  childhood,  my  father  departed  (in  death),  from  my
head.


A   certain    one    plucked  out  a  thorn  from    an    orphan's

foot ;
The  Khujand  Chief,  saw  him,  in  a  dream : —


19       The  father  is  the  root,  the  son  the  branches  of  the  tree.    A  tree's

freshness  is  due  to  its  root.
29       Khujand  is  a   village  in  the  country  of  M&wara,u-n-nahr,  between

the  Ji'hun  and  Sihun  rivers.


126  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  II.

30  He  was  talking  and  sauntering  in  the  gardens  of  Paradise,
Saying  : — "  How  many  roses  blossomed  from  that  thorn !  "

So  long  as  thou  canst,  be  not  free  from  mercy ;
For  they  bear  pity  to  thee,  when  thou  bearst  pity.

When  thou  hast  done  a  favour,  be  not  self- worshipping,
Saying : — "  I  am  a  superior ;  and,  that  other  an  inferior."

Say  not : — "  The  sword  of  Time  has  cast  him  !  "
For,  the  sword  of  Time  is  yet  drawn.

"When  thou  seest  a  thousand  persons,  prayer-uttering  for

the  empire,
Give  thanks  to  Grod  for  favours.

35  For  the  reason  that  many  men  have  expectation  from  thee.
Thou  hast  expectation  at  the  hand  of  none.

I  have  said  that  liberality  is  the  character  of  chiefs ;
I  uttered  a  mistake ; — it  is  the  quality  of  prophets  !


I  have  heard  that,  one  week,  a  son  of  the  road  (r  ^iraveller)
Came  not  to  the  guest-house  of  (Ibrahim)  the  friend  of
God.

Through  his  happy  disposition,  he  used  not  to  eat  in  the

morning,
Unless  one,  foodless,  came  from  the  path  (of  travel).

He  went  out,  and  looked  in  every  direction ;
Glanced  in  the  quarters  of  the  valley ;  and  saw  : —

40  One,  willow-like,  in  solitude,  in  the  desert ;

His  head  and  hair  white  with  the  snow  of  old  age.


CHAP.  II.]  ON    BENEFICENCE.  127

For  consolation,  he  said  to  him  : — "  Marhaba  !  "
Uttered,  according  to  the  custom  of  the  liberal,  the  invi-
tation,

Saying  : — "  Oh  pupil  of  my  eyes  !

"  Do  me  a  favour,  as  to  bread  and  salt."

He  said,  "  Yes  "  ;  and  sprang  up  and  lifted  his  feet ;
For,  he  knew  his  temperament : —  on  him  be  peace  !

The  guards  of  the  guest-house  of  Ibrahim
Placed  the  abject  old  man,  with  respect.

*6  He  ordered ;  and,  they  arranged  the  table ;
All  sate  around.

When  the  company  began  : — "  Bismi-Uah  !  "
A  word  from  the  old  man  reached  not  his  ear.

He  spoke  to  him,  thus  : — *'  Oh  old  man  of  ancient  days !
"  I  behold  not  thy  truth  and  heart-burning,  like  old  men.

'*  When  thou  eatst  food,  is  it  not  the  custom
"  That  rthou   shouldst   take   the   name   of    the   Lord   of
Victuals  ?"

He  said  : — "  I  accept  not  a  reHgion,
*'  Which  I  have  not  heard  from  the  old  men,  fire- wor-
shipping."

w  The  prophet  of  good  omen  knew

That  the  old  man,  of  state-become  ruined,  was  a  Grabr.

He  drove  him  away,  with  contempt,  when  he  saw  him  a

stranger  (to  Isldm)  ;
For  to  the  pure,  the  filthy  is  forbidden.

The  angel  Surosh  came  from  the  glorious  Omnipotent,
With  majesty,  reproaching,  saying  : — "  Oh  friend  of  God  I

In  Arabic,  "  Marhaba  "  ;  in  Persian,  "  Kbush  Amadf."


128  THE    BUSTAN    OP    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  II.

"  I  had  for  a  hundred  years  given  him  victuals  and  life ;
"  Abhorrence  of  him  comes  to  thee,  in  a  moment.

*'  If  he  takes  his  adoration  to  the  fire,

"  Why  withdrawst  thou  thy  hand  of  magnanimity  ?  "

65  Make  not  a  knot  at  the  head  of  the  ligature  of  beneficence.
Saying : — "  This  one  is  of  fraud  and  deceit :  and,  that  one
of  treachery  and  guile."

The  man,  Kurdn-knowing,  does  injury.

When  he  sells,  for  bread,  the  Kuran  and  sound  doctrine.

Where  do  wisdom  and  law  give  the  decision.

That  one  of  wisdom  should  give  religion  for  the  world  ?

But,  do  thou  take  ;  because  the  wise  man
Buys  gladly  from  those  cheap-selling.


One,  tongue-knowing,  came  to  a  pious  man.
Saying  : — "  I  have  stuck  firmly  in  the  mire.

60  "  Ten  dirams  of  a  mean  one  are  (weighing)  on  me,

"  In  such  a  way  that  a  fourth  part  of  them  is  ten  mans  on
my  heart.

**  Through  him,  all  night,  my  state  distracted ;
"  All  day,  (he  is)  shadow-like,  behind  me.

"  From  words,  heart-confounding,  he  has  made
"  A  wound,  like  a  house-door,  within  my  heart.

"  Perhaps  since  he  was  bom  of  his  mother,  God

"  Grave  not  (to  him)  anything  save  these  ten  dirams.

"  Of  the  book  of  Religion,  Alif  unknown  ;
"  Unread,  save  the  chapter  : — Spend  not.


55       In  the  'Ikd-i-manzum,  couplets  65  to  121  are  omitted,
eo  _^  The  dirain=0-032481bs.

maii=  13-0033  „
68       Alif  is  the  first  letter  of  the  alphabet.


CHAP.  II.]  ON    BENEFICENCE.  129

\S  "  The   sun   raised   not   its   head  a  single  day  above  the
mountain
"  That  that  scoundrel  knocked  not  at  my  door.

"  I  am  in  reflection, — What  liberal  one
"  May  take  my  hand  (help  me)  with  silver,  from  that  one
of  stone  heart."

The  old  man  of  happy  disposition  heard  this  speech,
He  placed  two  gold  coins  in  his  sleeve.

The  gold  fell  into  the  hand  of  the  tale-teller  ;
He  went  out,  thence, — a  face  fresh  like  gold.

One  said  : — "  Oh  Shaikh  !  knowst  thou  not,  who  this  is  ?
"  It  is  not  proper  to  weep  over  him,  if  he  dies

'0  "  A  beggar,  who  (by  deceit)  places  a  saddle  on  the  male
lion;
"  "Who  places  (on  one  side)  the  knight  and  queen  of  Abii-
Zaid  (the  chess-player)."

The  'dbid  was  confounded,  saying  : — "  Be  silent !
"  Thou  art  not  a  man  of  tongue  ;  listen !

"  If  what  I  thought  (regarding  him)  was  right
"  I  preserved  his  honour  from  the  people.

"  If  he  practised  impudence  and  hypocrisy,
**  Thou  knowst  not  that  he  beguiled  me.

"  For,  I  preserved  my  own  honour ;

"  From  the  hand  of  such  a  deceiver,  foolishness-uttering."


ro       "  Asp  va  farzi'n  nihadan  "  signifies— asp  va  farzfn  ba  tarh  dAdan  va
hkzi  rk  burdan.

9


]30  THE    BUSTAN   OP    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  II.

76  Spend  silver  and  gold  on  the  bad  and  the  good ;

For,  this  is  the  trade  of  liberality ;  and,  that  the  repelling
of  evil.

Happy  he  who,  in  the  society  of  the  wise.
Learns  the  qualities  of  the  pious.

Wisdom,  and  judgment,  and  deliberation,   and  sense  are

thine ;
Listen,  with  reverence,  to  Sa'di's  advice.

Because,  Sa'di,  for  the  most  part,  has  words  (of  counsel)

in  this  fashion ;
Not — as  to  eye,  and  ringlet,  and  lobe  of  the  ear,  and  mole
(of  lovely  ones).


One  departed  (from  the  world),  and  a  hundred  thousand

dinars  of  his.
The  heir,  a  sensible  pious  man,  took.

80  He  clutched  not  his  hand  on  the  gold,  like  the  misers;
He  took  off  the  fastening  from  it,  like  the  nobles.

The  darvesh  used  not  to  be  empty  at  his  door ;
Nor,  the  traveller,  within  his  guest-house.

He  made  the  heart  of  stranger  and  relation  happy ;
Tied  not  up  the  gold,  like  his  father.

One,  reproach-making,  said  to  him  : — "  Oh  one  of  wind-
hand!
*'  Make  not  altogether  scattered  what  treasure  there  is.

"  Gold,   and  consequential  airs,  and  favour,  remain    not

long.
"  Perhaps,  no  one  has  told  thee  this  tale  ?


76       Expenditure  on  the  good  is  liberality ;  on  the  bad,  the  repelling  of
evil.


CHAP.  11.]  ON    BENEPICJENCE.  131

86  "  In  these  days,  a  certain  Zaliid,  to  his  son,
"  I  heard — kept  saying — *  Oh  soul  of  father  !

"  *  Go  alone ;  and  be  house-emptying ;
"  *  Be  liberal,  and  wealth-dispersing.'

"  The  son  was  fore-seeing  and  work-experienced,
"  He  praised  his  father,  saying  : — *  Oh  one  of  good  judg-
ment !

"  *  In  one  year,  one  can  gather  together  the  harvest ;
"  *  To  burn  it  in  a  moment,  is  not  manliness.'

**  "When  thou  hast  no  patience,  as   to   straitened  circum-
stances,
"  Consider  the  account,  in  the  plenteous  season.

90  "  How  well  spoke  the  lady  of  the  village  to  her  daughter,
*'  Saying  : — '  Put  aside,  in  the  time   of  plenty,  means  for
adversity.

"  '  Keep  full,  at  all  times,  the  water-bag  and  pitcher ;
"  '  For,  the  rivulet  in  the  village  is  not  always  running.'

"  By  this  world,  one  can  obtain  the  next ;
"  By  gold,  one  can  turn  aside  a  lion -grasp.

"  If  thou  art  straitened,  go  not  before  a  friend ;

"  But,  if  thou  hast  silver,  come  and  bring  (that  silver).

"  If  thou  placest  thy  face,  on  the  dust  of  his  feet,
"  He  utters  no  reply  to  thee,  with  empty  hands.

95  "  The  lord  of  gold  plucks  out  the  demon's  eye  ;
"  He  brings  the  jinn  Sahar,  by  craft,  to  his  net.


86       "  Khana-pardaz  "  signifies — tamam  kunanda,  casbAb-i-khAna.

"  Mujarrd  "  signifies — one  who  flings  away  all  his  goods  that  he  may
devote  himself  to  God.
95       Sahar  is  the  jinn  who  obtained  possession  of  Sulaiman's  ring.

9  *


132  THE  BUSTAN  OF  SA'dI.  [cHAP.  II.

"  Associate  not,  empty-handed,  with  lovely  ones ;

*'  For  without  anything,  a  man  is  not  worth  anything.

"  The  hope  of  the  empty-handed  one  prospers  not ;
"  With  gold  thou  mayst  pluck  out  the  eye  of  the  white
demon.

"  Scatter  not  gold,  alLat  once,  on  friends ;

"  Be  in  contemplation  of  the  trouble  of  the  enemy.

"  And  if,  on  the  palm  of  the  hand,  thou  placest  whatever

thou  hast,
"  In  the  time  of  need,  thou  wilt  remain  empty  (handed).

100  "  By  thy  effort,  the  beggars — ever  strong,
"  Become  not ;  I  fear,  thou  dost  become  lean."

When  the  forbidder  of  liberality  uttered  this  tale,
The  young  man's  vein,  through  anger,  slept  not.

He  became  perplexed  in  heart  as  to  that  censorious  one ;
Was  confounded,  and  said  : — "  Oh  foolish  talker  !

"  The  power  that  is  around  me,

"  My  father  said — was  the  heritage  of  my  grandfather.

"  Did  they  not  first  preserve  it  ?
"  They  died,  in  regret ;  and,  left  it.

105  "  To  my  hand,  did  not  my  father's  property  fall,
"  That  it  might  fall  after  me  to  my  son's  hand  ?  "

It  is  best  indeed  that  men  should  to-day  enjoy ;

For,  to-morrow,  after  me,  they  will  take  it  away  in  rapine.


97       Dev-Safaed  is  the  name  of  a  hero  of  Mazandaran,  whom  Rustam,  son
of  Zal,  slew.


CHAP.  II.]  ON    BENEFICENCE.  133

Eat,    and  clothe  thyself,   and  bestow,  and  cause  ease  to

arrive ;
Why  keepst  thou  (money)  for  the  sake  of  the  people  ?

The  lords  of  judgment,   (by  alms)  take  away  with  them-
selves from  the  world ;
The  base  one  remains,  in  regret,  in  his  place.

With  this  world,  thou  canst  buy  the  future  world ;
Oh  my  soul !  purchase ;  and,  if  not,  suffer  regret.

Gold  and  wealth  are  of  use  to  that  one,
110  Who  makes  the  wall  of  the  future  world,  gold  decorated.

He  (the  heir)  enjoyed  and  gave  away,  so  that  those  endowed

with  vision
Beheld  the  marks  of  that  money-loss  in  him.

A  person,  out  of  nobleness,  praised  him.
Saying : — "  In   the  path  of   God,   thou   enduredst   much
grief."

Head  in  the  collar  of  shame,  he  kept  saying : —
'*  What  (good  deed)  did  I,  to  which  one  can  attach  the
heart  ?

"The  hope  that  I  have  is  in  the  grace  of  God ;

"  For,  to  exercise  reliance  on  my  own  effort  is  a  crime."

Religion  is  this  indeed, — that  people  of  truth
115  Are  good-doers,  and  (their  own)  fault-perceivers.

The  Shaikhs  have,  all  night,  uttered  prayers ;
Have,  in  the  morning,  spread  the  prayer-carpet.

In  the  name  of  manliness !  listen  to  the  words  of  men ;
Not  Sa'di;  but,  of  Sahrwadi,  hear.


117       Shaikh  Shahabu-d-di'n  Abii  Hifz  'Umar,  son  of  Muhammadu-l-Bakrm-
s-Saharwadi,  was  of  the  offspring    of   Abu  Bakr  Sadi'V,  the  l^aXiia.


134  THE    BUSTAN   OP    Sa'dI.  [cHAP.  II.

For   me   the   shaikh   of   knowledge,    the   spiritual   guide,

Shahab,
Uttered  two  maxims  of  counsel, — boat  on  the  water  : —

"  One, — be  not  in  the  assembly  of  those  evil-viewing ;
"  The  other, — be  not  in  the  lust  of  self -beholding."

120  One  night,  I  know,  that,  from  fear  of  hell,  Shahab  slept
not;
In  the  morning,  it  came  to  my  ear, — that  he  said  : —

"  How  well  would  it  have  been,  if  hell  had  been  full  of  me ;
"  Perhaps,  for  others,  there  might  have  been  escape  ! "


Once  upon  a  time,  a  wife  lamented  to  her  husband,
Saying : — "  Purchase   not   again   bread   from  the  general
vendor  of  the  street.

"  Go  to  the  market  of  the  wheat-sellers.

"  For,  this  is  a  barley-seller,  wheat-exhibiting.

"  Not  on  account  of  purchasers,  but  from  a  swarm  of  flies,
"  No  one  has  seen  his  face  for  a  week."

125  With  heartiness,  that  indigent  man.

To  his  wife,  said  : — "  Oh  light  (of  my  eyes)  !  be  content.

"  In  hope  of  us,  the  vendor  took  here  a  shop  ;

"  It  is  not  manhness,  to  take  back  from  him  profit."

Take  the  path  of  good,  noble  men ;

When  thou  art  erect,  seize  the  hand  of  the  fallen.

Bestow ;  for,  those  who  are  men  of  God

Are  the  purchasers  (at)  of  the  shop  without  splendour.

His  connection  with  Suf i,isni  was  through  his  uncle  Abu-n-Najfb  Sahar-
wadi.  He  attained  to  the  society  of  Shaikh  'Abdu-l-Kadir  of  G-ilan,  and
many  others.  His  birth  occurred  in  the  month  Eajab  in  the  Muham-
madan  year  639 ;  and  death  in  630.

Shaikh  Sa'di^enjoyed  his  society  j  and  travelled,  by  water,  with  him.


I


OHAP.  II.]  ON    BENEFICENCE.  135

If  thou  desirest  truth, — the  saint  ('Ali)  is  the  generous  man  ;
Liberality  is  the  profession  of  'Ali,  king  of  men.


130  I  have  heard  that  an  old  man,  on  the  road  to  Hijaz,
Used  to  make  two  prayer-motions,  at  every  step.

So  impetuous  in  the  path  of  God,

That  he  used  not  to  pluck  the  ghilan  thorn  from  his  foot.

At  length  from  temptation,  heart-disturbing.
His  work  seemed  good  in  his  sight.

By  the  craft  of  Iblis,  he  fell  into  the  pit  (of  pride).
Saying  : — "  One  cannot  go  on  a  road,  better  than  this."

If  the  mercy  of  Grod  had  not  found  him.
Pride  would  have  turned  his  head  from  the  path  (of  reli-
gion).

185  An  angelic  messenger  gave  voice,  from  the  invisible.

Saying  : — "  Oh  one  of  happy  fortune  !  of  good  disposition  !

"  If  thou  hast  performed  devotion,  think  not,
**  That  thou  hast  brought  a  rarity  to  this  court.

"  By  beneficence  a  heart  tranquil  making,
*'  Is  better  than  a  thousand  sacred  inclinations  of  the  head
at  every  stage."


A  wife  thus  spoke  (to  her  husband)  an  officer  of  the  Sultan,
Saying  : — '*  Oh  fortunate  one  !  arise ;  knock  at  the  door  of
food.

"  Go;    so   that   they  may  give  thee  a  portion  from   the

(SuMn's)  tray ;
"  For,  the  children  are  looking  to  thee  for  food.

140  He  said  : — *'  To-day,  the  kitchen  is  cold  ;

"  For,  the  Sultan  made  the  resolve  of  fast,  at  night."


136  THE   BUSTAN    OF    SA'DI.  [cHAP.  II.j

The  wife,  through  helplessness,  cast  down  her  head ;
Heart  torn  with  hunger,  she  kept  saying  to  herself  : —

"  What  did  the  Sultdn  wish  from  this  fast-talking,

"  The  breaking  of  which  is  the  festival  of  my  children  ?

The  devourer,  from  whose  hand  liberality  issues.
Is    better  than  one,   who,  world-worshipping,   perpetually
fasts.

Fast-keeping  is  reserved  for  bim.

Who  gives,  to  tbe  wearied  one,  the  bread  of  the  morning
meal.

145  Otherwise,  what  need  that  thou  shouldst  endure  the  trouble
(of  fasting) ;
Shouldst  keep  back  from  thyseK  (food  in  the  day)  ;  and
shouldst  eat  it  (at  night)  ?

The  imaginings  of  the  ignorant  one,  sitting  in  solitude !
He  confounds,  at  length,  infidelity  and  religion.'

Purity  is  in  water ;  and,  also,  in  the  mirror ;
But,  discretion  is  necessary  for  purity.


To  a  certain  one,  liberality  was ;  but  power  was  not ;
Means  of  subsistence,  to  the  extent  of  his  generosity,  were
not.

Let  not  the  mean  one  be  lord  of  wealth !

Let  not  straitened  means  be  to  the  generous  man !

160  To  him,  to  whom  lofty  spirit  chances.

The  object  of  his  desire  seldom  falls  within  the  noose.

Like  the  pouring  torrent,  which,  in  a  mountainous  country,
Takes  not  ease  in  the  midst  of  the  heights.


CHAP.  IT.]  ON   BENEFICENCE.  137

He  exercised  not  liberality,  according  to  his  means ;

On  this  account,  assuredly,  he  used  to  be  of  small  worth.

One  straitened  wrote  to  him  two  words,
Saying : — "  Oh  one  of  happy  end,  of  auspicious  tempera-
ment I

"  Take  my  hand  (help  me)  once  with  some  dirams ;
"  For,  it  is  some  time  that  I  have  been  in  prison."

165  The  request  was,  in  his  eye,  of  no  value ;

But,  in  his  hand,  there  was  not  the  smallest  coin.

He  sent  a  man  to  the  enemies  of  the  captive,
Saying  : — "  Oh  men  of  good  name,  and  noble  !

*'  Restrain,  for  a  little,  your  hands  from  his  skirt ;
"  And  if  he  flies,  security  for  him  (is)  on  me."

And,  thence,  he  came  to  the  prison,  saying  : — "  Arise  !
"  Elee  from  this  city,  so  long  as  thou  hast  feet."

When  the  sparrow  beheld  the  cage- door  open,
Repose  within  it  remained  not  to  it,  a  moment.

160  Like  the  zephyr-wind,  from  that  land  he  travelled ;

Such  travelling,  that  the  wind  would  not  have  reached  the
dust  of  his  feet.

They,  at  once,  seized  the  generous  man.

Saying  : — "  Thou  mayst  obtain  the  silver,  or  the  man."


162       A  poet  has  said  : —

"  Last  night,  in  a  dream,  I  beheld  money.
I  said :  *  Why  comest  thou  not  to  me  ?  '
The  money  replied :  '  Thou  recognisest  not  my  worth  ;
Thou  givest,  in  liberality,  to  this  and  that.
Misers  know  my  value  ;
I  therefore  go  to  the  misers.'  "


138  THE  BUSTAN  OF  SA'dI.  [cHAP.  II.

He  took,  in  helplessness,  the  path  to  the  prison ;
For,  one  cannot  take  the  bird,  gone  from  the  cage.

I  heard  that  he  remained  some  time  in  prison ;
He  neither  wrote  to  any  one  a  complaint ;  nor,  uttered  a
lament.

Times,  he  reposed  not ;  nights,  slept  not ;
A  devotee  passed  by  him,  and  said : —

166  "  I  think  not  thou  devourest  the  property  of  man ;
"  What  chanced  to  thee,  that  thou  art  in  prison  ?  "

He  said  : — '*  Oh  comrade  of  happy  spirit !
*'  I  enjoyed,  by  fraud,  the  property  of  no  one.

"  1  beheld  one,  powerless,  torn  by  captivity ;

"  I  beheld  no  release  for  him,  save  by  my  own  conj&nement.

"  It  seemed,  in  my  opinion,  not  proper,

"  I,  at  ease;  another,  in  the  noose  (of  torment)."

At  length,  he  died  ;  and,  took  away  a  good  name  ;
How  excellent,  the  life  of  him,  whose  name  died  not !

170  Beneath  the  clay, — a  body  dead,  a  heart  alive ;
Is  better  than  a  world  alive,  heart  dead.

The  living  heart  never  becomes  destroyed ;

If,  the  body  of  the  living  heart  dies, — what  matter  ?


A  certain  one  found,  in  the  desert,  a  thirsty  dog ;
He  found  not  beyond  a  spark  of  life  in  him.

He  of  approved  religion  made  a  cap-bucket ;
Bound  to  it  his  own  turban,  rope-like.


171       "  Zinda-dil "  signifies — roshan-dil  wa  neko  kar.
"Murda-dil "  signifies — tarik-dil  wa  bad-kar.


CHAP.  II.]  ON   BENEFICENCE.  139

Bound  his  loins  in  service ;  and  stretched  forth  his  arm ;
Gave  a  little  water  to  the  powerless  dog.

175  The  Prophet  gave  intelligence  of  the  man's  state,
Saying  : — "  The  Ruler  (God)  pardoned  his  sins."

Ho  !  if  thou  art  a  tyrant,  reflect ;
Choose  fidehty ;  exercise  liberaUty.

How  does  liberality  become  lost  to  the  good  man,
Since  he  lost  not  goodness  done  to  a  dog  ?

Pactise  liberality  so  far  as  it  may  (suitably)  come  from  thy

hand.
The  world-keeper  closes  the  door  of  beneficence  on  none.

To  bestow  from  the  treasury,  to  the  extent  of  an  ox's  skin

of  gold,
Is  not  like  half  a  dang  from  the  hand  of  toil.

180  Every  one  carries  a  load  suitable  to  his  strength ;
The  locust's  foot  is  heavy  to  the  ant.

Oh  one  of  happy  fortune !  do  good  to  the  people.
That  to-morrow,  (the  Judgment  Day)   God  may  not  take
hard  (measures)  with  thee.

If  he  come  from  his  feet  (fall),  he  remains  not  captive,
Who  was  hand-seizer  (helper)  of  the  fallen.

Give  not,  with  rebuke,  an  order  to  the  slave ;

For,  it  may  be  that  he  may  fall  (come)  to  order-giving.

"When  thy  majesty  and  rank  are  lasting
Exercise  not  violence  on  the  weakness  of  the  common  dar-
wesh ;

186  For,  it  may  happen  that  he  becomes  possessed  of  rank  and
majesty ;
Like  the  pawn,  that  suddenly  becomes  a  queen  (at  chess).


140  THE   BUSTAN   OP   SA'dI.  [cHAP.  II.

Listen  to  the  counsel  of  men,  far-seeing ;

They  scatter  not  the  seed  of  rancour,  in  any  heart.

The  lord  of  the  harvest  suffers  loss.

When  he  displays  arrogance  towards  the  corn-gleaners.

Fears  he  not  that  they  (the  angels)  may  give  wealth  to  the

wretched  one ;
And  from  that  one  place  the  load  of  grief  on  the  heart  of

this  one  ?

Many  strong  ones, — who  fell  suddenly ;
Many  a  fallen  one, — Fortune  assisted.

190  It  is  not  proper  to  break  the  hearts  of  inferiors  ;
Lest  that,  one  day,  thou  shouldst  become  an  inferior.


A  certain  darvesh  complained  of  weakness  of  state.
To  one  of  stern  face,  lord  of  wealth.

The  one  of  black  heart  gave  him  neither  dinars,  nor  dangs  ;
(And)  shouted  at  him,  moreover,  in  anger.

The  beggar's  heart,  from  his  violence,  bled.

He  raised  his  head,  with  grief,  and  said  : — "  Oh  wonder  !

"  Why,  indeed  is  the  rich  man  of  severe  visage  ?
*'  Perhaps,  he  fears  not  the  bitterness  of  begging."

195  The  one  of  short  sight  ordered, — so  that  his  slave
Drove  him  away,  with  contempt,  and  utter  scorn.

By  not  offering  thanks  to  the  Omnipotent,
I  heard  that  Fortune  turned  from  him.


188       Tliat  refers  to  the  wretched  one  ;  this,  to  the  arrogant  one.
192       "  Sar-bar  "  is  a  small  load  placed  on  a  large  load  ;  the  word  is  here
metaphorically  used.


CHAP.  II.]  ON    BENEFICENCE.  141

His  greatness  placed  its  head  towards  ruin ;

Mercury  put  his  pen  in  the  ink  (in  record  against  him).

Wretchedness  made  him  sit  naked,  hke  garlic ;

It  left  him  neither  chattels  nor  baggage-taker  (the  ass).

God's  decree  made  him,  through  poverty,  sit,  dust  on  the

head;
Juggler-like,  purse  and  hand  empty.

200  His  state,  head  to  foot,  became  of  another  kind ;
Some  time  passed  on  (after)  this  occurrence.

His  slave  fell  to  the  hand  of  a  liberal  one.
Generous  of  heart,  and  hand ;  and  luminous  of  tempera-
ment.

By  the  sight  of  the  wretch  of  overturned  state,

He  used  to  be  as  much  pleased,  as  the  poor  one  with  wealth.

A  certain  one  sought,  at  night-time,  a  morsel  at  his  door ;
From  hardship-enduring,  his  steps  were  slow.

The  lord  of  gift  ordered  the  slave,

Saying : — "  Make  the  dejected  one  happy."

206  "When  he  carried  to  him  a  portion  from  the  table ;
He  involuntarily  raised  a  cry.

He  returned,  heart-broken,  to  his  master,
Tears  on  his  face,  mystery  revealing.

The  chief  of  happy  temperament  inquired.
Saying : — "  From  whose  violence,  came  these  tears  on  thy
face?"

He  said  : — "  My  heart  sorely  grieved,

"  At  the  state  of  this  old  man  of  distracted  fortune.

"  For,  in  former  times,  I  was  his  slave ;

"  He, — the  lord  of  goods  and  property,  and  silver.


142  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  II.

210  «*  When  his  hand,  from  honour  and  luxury,  became  short,
"  He  makes  long  the  hand  of  begging  at  doors."

He  laughed  and  said : — "  Oh  son  !  it  is  no  violence ;
"  For  the  revolution  of  Time,  there  is  oppression  against
none.

"  Is  he  not  that  merchant  of  stern  countenance,

"  Who  used,  from  pride,  to  bear  his  head  against  the  sky  ?

"  T  am  that  one,  whom  he  drove,  that  day,  from  his  door ;
"  The  world's  revolution  has  placed  him  in  my  day  (state).

"  The  sky  looked,  again,  towards  me ;

"  It  scattered  the  dust  of  grief  from  my  face."

215  If  Grod  closes  one  door,  in  wisdom.

He  opens  another,  in  grace  and  liberality.

Many  a  poor  one,  foodless,  became  satiated ;
Many  a  work  of  the  rich  one  became  overturned.


Hear  a  trait  of  good  men.

If  thou  art  a  good  man,  and  of  manly  gait.

When  Shibli,  from  the  shop  of  the  wheat-seller.
Carried  a  wallet  of  wheat,  on  his  back,  to  the  village.

He  glanced ;  he  beheld,  in  that  wheat,  an  ant.
That  ran,  head-revolving,  in  every  corner.


213       See  couplet  195.

219       Abu  Bakru-sh-Shibli  was  Ja'ffar,  the  Egyptian,  son  of  Yunis.     He

came  to  Baghdad ;  repented  of  his  sins  in  the  assembly  Khair-Mizaj  ;

was  the  disciple  of  Saint  jTini'd,    a  learned    man,  lawyer,  and  adviser ;

was  of  the  sect  of  Malik ;  was  born  in  a.h.  247,  and  died  in  a.h.  334,  at

the  age  of  eighty-seven  years.


OHAP.  II.]  ON    BENEFIOENCE.  143

220  He  could  not  sleep,  at  night,  for  pity  of  that  ant ;
He  brought  it  back  to  its  own  dwelling,  and  said  : —

"  It  is  not  manliness  that  this  wounded  ant,

"  I  should  cause  to  be  separated  from  its  dwelling."

Keep  tranquil  the  hearts  of  those  distressed,
That  tranquillity,  from  time,  may  be  thine.

How  well  said  Firdausi  of  pure  birth,
— May  mercy  be  on  that  pure  tomb  ! —

"  Wound  not  the  ant,  that  is  the  grain-carrier ;
"  For,  it  also  has  life ;  and,  life  is  pleasant."

j|    225  He  is  of  black  vitals,  and  of  stone-heart.

Who  wishes  that  an  ant  may  be  of  straitened-heart.

Strike  not  the  hand  of  force  on  the  head  of  the  powerless,
Lest  that  thou  shouldst,  one  day,  fall  ant-like  beneath  his
foot.

The  candle  bestowed  no  pity  on  the  moth's  state ;
Behold  how  it  (the  candle)  burned  in  the  assembly  !

I  have  assumed, — many  are  less  powerful  than  thou ;
Also  there  is  a  certain  one,  in  the  end,  more  powerful  than
thou.


Oh  son  !  bestow  ;  for,  the  one  man-born,  a  prey.
One  can  make  by  benefits ;  and,  the  wild  beast,  by  re-
straint.


223       The  second  line  is  uttered  by  Sa'df.

Firdausi  wrote  the  Shah-Niima,  containing  one  hundred  and  twenty
thousand  lines,  at  the  desire  of  Mahmud  of  Q-haznf ;  he  died  a.d.  1021.

The  Shah-Nama  has,  in  part,  been  translated  into  English.
229       In  the  'Ikd-i-manzum,  couplets  229-234  are  omitted.


144  THE    BUSTAN    OP    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  II.

230  Bind  tlie  enemy,  by  sTiowing  kindness ;

For,  one  cannot  sever  this  noose,  with  the  sword.

When  the  enemy  experiences  liberality,  and  courtesy,  and

generosity,
Villainy  from  him  comes  not,  again,  into  existence.

Do  not  evil,  lest  thou  experience  evil  from  the  good  friend  ;
The  good  fruit  comes  not  from  the  seed-stone  of  wicked-
ness.

When  with  a  friend,  thou  art  difficult  and  hard  to  please,
He  desires  not  to  see  thy  painting  and  colour  (of  face).

But,  if  a  man  desires  good  to  his  enemies.
Much  time  passes  not,  but  they  become  friendly.


235  A  young  man  came  before  me,  on  the  road,
A  sheep,  running  in  bounds,  behind  him.

I  said  to  him  : — "  This  is  a  cord  and  ligature,
"  Which  draws  the  sheep  behind  thee."

He  quickly  undid  the  collar  and  chain  from  it ;
Left  and  right,  it  began  to  bound.

Yet,  from  behind  him,  gambolling,  it  proceeded ;
For,  it  had  eaten  barley  and  green-corn  from  the  man's
hand.

When  it  returned  to  its  place  from  pleasure  and  sport,
He  regarded  me,  and  said  : — "  Oh  man  of  sense !

240  "  This  cord  draws  it  not  to  me  ;

"  But  kindness  is  the  noose  about  its  neck."


CHAP.  II.]  ON   BENEFICENCE.  145

From  the  kindness,  whicli  the  raging  elephant  has   expe-
rienced,
He  attacks  not  the  elephant-keeper.

Oh  good  man  !  cherish  the  bad  ;

For,  the  dog  keeps  watch,  when  he  devours  thy  bread.

The  leopard's  teeth  are  blunt  against  that  man,
On  whose  cheek,  he  rubs,  for  two  days,  his  tongue.


A  certain  one  saw  a  fox,  legless  and  footless.

He  was  astonied  at  the  grace  and  creation  of  God,

}45  Saying : — "  How  does  he  pass  his  life  ?

"  With  this  leg  and  foot,  how  does  he  eat  ?  "

The  darvesh  of  disturbed  complexion  was  in  this  thought,
When  a  lion  came  forth,  a  jackal  in  his  claws.

The  lion  devoured  the  jackal  of  reversed  fortune  ;
Whatever  remained, — of  it,  the  fox  ate  to  satiety.

Again,  the  next  day,  the  event  happened,

That  the  Victual-sender  (Grod)  gave  to  him  the  day's  food.

Truth  made  the  man's  eye  capable  of  vision ;
He  went ;  and  relied  on  the  Creator,

250  Saying  : — "  I  may,  after  this,  sit,  ant-like,  in  a  corner  ;
"  Since,  elephants  eat  not  their  daily  food  by  force."

He  lowered,  for  some  time,  his  chin  to  the  collar  (of  reflec-
tion),

Saying  : — "  The  Griver  of  daily  food  sends  from  the  un-
seen."


241       Muslims  regard  a  dog  as  being  very  unclean.

244       "  Be  dast  wa  be  pa,"  signify — be  tabi  wa  be  takati.

10


146  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [oHAP.  II.

Neither  stranger  nor  friend  suffered  toil  for  him  ;
Harp-like,  his  veins,  and  bones,  and  skin  remained.

When,  from  weakness,  his  patience  and  sense  remained  not,
From  the  wall  of  the  prayer-place,  there  came  to  his  ear  : —

"  Oh  impostor !  go;  be  the  rending  lion ;
"  Cast  not  thyself,  like  the  crippled  fox."

255  Strive  so  that,  lion-like,  there   may   remain   (something)
from  thy  (trade)
Why  art  thou,  fox-like,  depending  upon  the  lion's  leavings.

Whose  neck  is  stout,  like  lions,

If  he  falls  (into  idleness)  fox-like,  a  dog  is  better  than  he.

Bring  to  thy  grasp ;  and,  drink  with  others ;
Pay  no  attention  to  others'  leavings.

Eat,  so  long  as  thou  canst, — by  means  of  thy  own  arm ;
That  thy  strength  may  be  in  thy  own  balance.

Endure  toil,  like  men ;  and  cause  ease  to  arrive  (to  others)  ;
The  impotent  enjoys  the  gain  of  others'  toil.

260  Oh  young  man  !     Take  the  hand  of  the  old  darvesh ;
Cast  not  thyself  down,  saying : — "  Take  my  hand  !  "

The  gift  of  Grod  is  on  that  slave.

By  whose  existence,  the  people  are  at  ease.

That  head,  in  which  is  a  brain,  exercises  liberality ;
For,  those  of  mean  spirit  are  skin, — brainless.

That  one  experiences  good,  in  both  habitations.
Who  causes  good  to  reach  the  people  of  God.


258       On  the  Judgment  Day  thy  endeavours  will  be  estimated.
263       Li  tlie  'Ikd-i-manzum,  couplets  263  to  265  are  omitted.


CHAP.  II.]  ON    BENEFICENCE.  147

Didst  thou  not  see  (hear),  on  the  foot-binding  (difficult)

road  to  Kesh,
What  that  camel-driver  said  to  his  own  son  ?

i5  "  Enjoy  food,  with  good  men;
"  For,  they  will  not  eat  in  solitude."


I  have  heard  that  there  was  a  man  of  pure  birth-place,
A  recogniser,  and  road- traveller  (in  the  way  of  Grod),  in  the
confines  of  Eiim.

J    I  and  some  other  travellers,  desert-wandering,
"Went  a-travelling  for  the  sake  of  seeing  the  man.

He  kissed  the  head,  and  eyes,  and  hands  of  each  one ;
Caused  us  to  sit,  with  reverence  and  respect;  and  sate
down.

I  beheld  his   gold,  and   sown  fields,  and  attendants  and

goods ;
But,  without  generosity,  like  a  fruitless  tree.

0  As  to  manner  and  grace,  he  was  attentive  ;
But,  his  cooking-pot-place  was  very  cold.

All  night,  there  was  neither  rest,  nor  sleep, — ^for  him,
As  to  praising  Grod  and  reciting — "  There  is  no  God,  but
God  "  ;  and,  for  us,  from  hunger.

In  the  morning,  he  bound  his  loins  and  opened  the  door ;
Began  the  very  same  courtesy  and  hand-kissing.


i       "  Pii-band  "  signifies — foot-binding.     It  may  be  by  clay,  by  stones,  or

other  impediment  on  tbe  patb.
I       "Tasbih"  signifies — subb^nii-llAh !
"  Taljlil  "  signifies— la  ilaba  ilia  llah !

10  ♦


148


THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA  DI.


[chap.  II.


There  was  one,  who  was  of  sweet  and  pleasant  temper,
"Who,  was,  in  that  inn,  a  traveller  with  us.

He  said : — "  Give  me  the  kiss,  by  letter-translating,
"  Because,  for  the  darvesh,  food  (tosha)  is   better  than
a  kiss  (bosa).

275  "  Place  not  the  hand  in  service,  on  my  shoes ;
"  Give  me  bread ;  and,  strike  then  on  my  head."

Men  have,  by  gifts,  excelled ;

Not  those  night-alive-keeping,  heart  dead.

This  indeed  I  experienced  from  the  Tatar  watchman,
Heart  dead,  but  night-alive-keeping.

Liberality  is — generosity  and  bread-giving  j
Foolish  speech  is  the  empty  drum.

At  the  Resurrection,  thou  seest,  in  Paradise,  that  one.
Who  sought  truth,  and  let  go  pretension.

280  By  truth,  one  can  make  a  proper  claim ;

Breath,  without  action,  is  a  slothful  resting-place.


I  have  heard  that,  in  the  time  of  Hatim,  there  was.
Among  his  horses,  one  swift  footed,  like  smoke.

A  black  steed  of  zephyr  swiftness,  thunder  noise,
That  used  to  surpass  the  hghtning  :


274  "  Tashif "  signifies — the  altering  of  the  dots  of  letters ;  thus,  &-^
bosa,  "  a  kiss,"  (using  "  tashif")  means  &J»f  tosha,  "  victuals."

277  The  author  signifies — by  the  watchman,  a  holy  man ;  by  the  Tdtar
watchman,  one  not  holy.

280  "  Ma'ni "  signifies — good  deeds  and  approved  qualities.

281  Hatim,  a  celebrated  liberal  man,  was  the  son  of  'Abdu-llah,  the  son
of  Sa'du-t-Tai  Shamsu-d-din,  the  son  of  Khulfan.  See  the  book  in
Persian,  "  Hatim-Tai,"  which  is  easy  to  read


p


CHAP.  II.]  ON    BENEFICENCE.  149

Used,   in  the  gallop,  to  scatter  hail  over  mountain  and

plain ;
Thou  wouldst  have  said  : — **  Perhaps,  an  April-cloud  has

passed?"

Such  an  one,  torrent-moving,  desert-travelHng,
That  the  wind,  from  the  front,  used  to  lag,  like  dust.

285  Of  Hatim's  qualities,  in  every  land  and  clime.
They  mentioned  a  little  to  the  Sultan  of  Riim,

Saying : — "  A  man,  there  is  not,  like  him  in  liberality ;
"  A  horse,  there  is  not,  like  his  in  moving  and  journeying.

"  Such  a  desert-traveller,  like  a  boat  on  the  water,
'*  That  the  crow  flies  not  above  his  journeying  !  "

The  Sultan  of  Rtim  spoke  to  his  learned  Yazir,  thus,
Saying : — *'  The  claim  without  evidence  is  shame.

"  Of  Hatim,  that  steed  of  Arab  descent,  I

"  Will  ask ;  if  he  should  exercise  liberality,  and  give,

290  "  I  shall  know  that,  in  him  is  the  pomp  of  greatness  ;

"  But,  if  he  refuses,  (his  pretension)  is  the  noise  of  the
empty  drum !  "

An  envoy,  skilful  in  the  world,  to  (the  tribe  of)  Tai,
He  despatched ;  and,  ten  men  along  with  him.

The  ground  dead ;  but,  the  cloud  weeping  over  it,
The  zephyr  again  placed  life  in  it.

At   the   halting   (dwelling)   place    of   Hatim,   the    envoy

alighted ;
(And)  became  tranquil,  like  the  thirsty  one,  by  the  Zinda

river.


293       "  Zinda  "  is  a  stream  near  Isfahan ;  its  water  is  very  sweet.


160  THE   BUSTAN   OP    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  U.

He  (Hatim)  spread  a  table,  victual- covered ;  and,  killed  a

horse ;
Gave  them  sugar  in  his  skirt ;  gold  in  his  fist.  .

296  There,  they  passed  the  night ;  and,  the  next  day.

The  man  of  information  (the  envoy)  uttered  what  he  knew.

The  envoy  kept  talking ;  and,  Hatim  distracted,  like  one

intoxicated.
Kept  gnawing  his  hand  with  the  teeth  of  regret,

Saying  : — "  Oh  partner,  learned,  of  good  name  1

"  Why  didst  thou  not  utter  before  this  thy  message?

"  That  wind-moving,  fast,  Duldul, — I

"  Made  roast-meat,  last  night,  for  your  sake.

"  For,  through  the  dread  of  rain  and  torrents,  I  knew
'*  It  was  impossible  to  go  into  the  pasture  place  of  the  herd
(of  cattle).

300  "  For  me,  there  was,  in  no  other  way,  either  turning  or
path;
*'  There  was  only  that  horse  at  the  door  of  my  court.

"  I  considered  it  not  generosity,  in  respect  to  my  usage,
"  That  a  guest  should  sleep,  heart  torn  with  hunger.

'*  For  me, — a  name  conspicuous  in  the  climes  (of  the  world)

is  necessary;
"  Say  : — ^let  there  not  be  (for  me)  another  famous  steed."

He  gave  to  the  individuals  of  the  envoy's  retinue  dirams,

dresses  of  honour,  and  horses.
— The  good  quality  is  natural,  not  an  acquisition. —


295       The  envoy  asked  for  the  horse,  desired  by  the  Sultan.
298       See  Longfellow's  poem,  entitled  "  Sir  Frederigo  and  his  Falcon,"  one
of  the  tales  of  the  Wayside  Inn.


CHAP.  II.]  ON   BENEFICENCE.  151

News  of  the  young  man  of  Tai  went  to  Riim ;
The  Sultan  uttered  a  thousand  benedictions  on  his  disposi-
tion.

305  Be  not  content  with  this  incident  of  Hatim ;
P       Listen  to  this  more  beautiful  circumstance.


I  know  not,  who  told  me  this  tale,

That  there  had  been,  in  the  country  of  Yaman,  an  order-
giver.

He  snatched  the  ball  of  empire  from  those  renowned ;
For  in  treasure-bestowing,  there  was  no  equal  to  him.

One  could  call  him^ — "the  Cloud  of  Liberality,"
For,  his  hand  used  to  scatter  money  like  rain.

No  one  used  to  take  to  him  the  name  of  (mention)  Hatim,
At  which  (mentioning),  phrenzy  used  not  to  go  to  his  head,

310  Saying  : — "  How  much — of  the  words  of  that  wind-weigher,
"  Who  has  neither  country,  nor  command,  nor  treasure?  "

I  heard  that  he  prepared  a  royal  feast,
(And)  harp-like  entertained  the  people,  in  the  midst  of  the
banquet.

One  opened  the  door  of  mention  of  Hatim ;
Another  began  to  utter  his  praise.

Envy  held  the  man  to  the  desire  of  revenge  ;
He  appointed  one  for  his  blood-devouring.

Saying  : — "  So  long  as  Hatim  is  in  my  time,

"  My  name  will  not  go  (into  the  world)  for  goodness."


152  THE   BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [oHAP.  II.

315  The  calamity-seeking  one  took  the  path  to  the  tribe  of  Tai,
He  set  out  for  the  slaying  of  the  young  man.

There  came  before  him,  on  the  road,  a  young  man,
From  whom,  the  perfume  of  affection  came  up  to  him :

Good  of  visage,  and  wise,  and  sweet  of  tongue ;

He  brought  him  a  guest,  that  night,  to  his  own  abode  :

Exercised  liberality,  and  sympathised,  and  made  excuses ;
Snatched  the  enemy's  heart,  by  kindness  :

Placed  the  morning-kiss  on  his  hands  and  feet.
Saying  : — "  Stay  at  ease,  a  few  days,  with  us."

320  He  said : — "  I  cannot  here  become  a  resident ;
"  For  I  have  before  me  an  important  matter."

He  replied  : — "  If  thou  wilt  reveal  the  matter  to  me,

"  I  will  with  soul  exert  myself,  like  friends  of  one  heart."

He  replied  : — "  Oh  young  man  !  listen  to  me;

"  For,  I  know  the  generous  one  is  a  secret-concealer.

"  Thou  knowest,  perhaps,  in  this  land,  Hatim,
"  Who  is  of  happy  judgment,  and  good  manners?

"  The  King  of  Yaman  has  desired  his  head;

*'  I  know  not,  what  hatred  has  arisen  between  them.

325  "  Show  me  the  short  path  to  where  he  is ;

'*  Oh  friend!  this  indeed,  I  look  for  from  thy  courtesy."

The  youth  laughed,  saying  : — '*  I  am  Hatim :
"  Behold  !  separate,  with  the  sword,  the  head  from  my
body.


816       "  Pai  giriftan  "  here  signifies — kajd  namudan.


CHAP.  II.]  ON   BENEFICENCE.  153

*'  When  the  morning  becomes  white,  it  is  not  proper  that,
"  Injury  should  reach  thee;  or,  that  thou  shouldst  become
disappointed."

"When    Hatim    placed,    with     nobleness,    his     head    (for

slaughter),
A  cry  issued  from  the  young  man  (the  guest).

He  fell  upon  the  dust ;  and,  leaped  to  his  feet ;
Kissed  now  the  dust ;  now,  his  feet  and  hands  :

330  Threw  down  the  sword  ;  and  placed  the  quiver  (on  the
ground) ;
Put,  like  the  helpless,  his  hands  on  his  breast,

Saying  : — "  If  I  strike  a  rose  on  thy  body,
"  I  am,  in  men's  sight,  a  woman,  not  a  man.'*

He  kissed  both  his  eyes  ;  and,  embraced  him ;
And,  took  his  way,  thence,  to  Yaman.

Between  the  two  eyebrows  of  the  man,  the  king

Knew,  immediately,  that  he  had  not  performed  the  duty.

He  said  : — "  Come  ;  what  news  hast  thou  ?

"  Why  didst  thou  not  bind  his  head  to  thy  saddle-strap  ?

335  "  Perhaps  a  renowned  one  made  an  assault  against  thee ;
*'  Thou,   through  weakness,  sustainedst   not  the   fury  of
the  contest?  "

The  clever  youth  gave  the  ground-kiss ;

Praised  the  king ;  and,  the  majesty  of  his  nature,

Saying  : — **  I  discovered  Hatim,  fame-seeking,

*'  Skilful,  and  of  pleasant  appearance,  and  of  good  visage  :


827       My  relatives  may  do  thee  an  injury  for  slaying  me ;  therefore  slay  me

at  once,  and  get  thee  away.
330       "  Bar  pa,e  jastan  "  here  signifies — to  leap  on  the  feet,  in  joy.


154  THE  BUSTAN  OP  SA'dI.  [cHAP.  II.

"  Considered  him  generous,  and  endowed  with  wisdom ;
'*  Regarded  him,  in  manliness,  my  superior  :

"  The  load  of  his  favour  made  my  back  bent ;

"  He  slew  me,  with  the  sword  of  kindness  and  grace.'*

340  Whatever  he  experienced,  from  his  liberality, — he  uttered  ;
The  monarch  recited  praises  on  the  offspring  of  Tai :

Gave  the  envoy  gold-money.

Saying  : — "  Liberality  is  the  seal  on  Hatim's  name."

It  (the  evidence)  reaches  (touches)  him,  if  they  give  evi-
dence ;
Since,  truth  and  fame  are  his  fellow-travellers.


I  have  heard  that,  in  the  time  of  the  Prophet,  the  tribe  of

Tai
Made  not  acceptance  of  the  faith  (of  the  Kuran).

The  Messenger  of  good  news  and  the  Observer  (Muham-
mad) sent  an  army ;
They  took  captive  a  multitude  of  them.

345  The  Prophet  ordered  them  to  slay  them  with  the  sword  of
hate,
Saying  : — "  They  are  unclean,  and  of  impure  religion."

A  woman  said  : — "  I  am  Hatim's  daughter,
"  Ask  (pardon  for  me)  from  this  renowned  Ruler  (Mu-
hammad) :

"  Oh  revered  sir  !  exercise  generosity  as  to  my  state  ;
"  For  my  lord  (Hatim)  was  endowed  with  liberahty."


842  Eeport  is  not  a  liax ;  his  liberality  is  a  settled  matter.

843  In  the  'Ikd-i-manzum,  couplets  343  to  367  are  omitted-


CHAP.  II.]  ON    BENEFICENCE.  155

By  the  command  of  the  Prophet  of  pure  judgment,
They  loosed  the  fetters  from  her  hands  and  feet :

Drew  the  sword  upon  the  rest  of  that  tribe,

So  that  they  caused,  mercilessly,  a  torrent  of  blood  to  flow.

350  With  weeping,  the  woman  said  to  the  swordsman : —
"  Strike  my  neck  also  with  all  the  rest :

"  I  consider,  not  release  from  fetters,  generosity;

"  I — alone  ;  and,  my  friends  in  the  noose  (of  calamity)."

She  kept  uttering  lamentations,  over  the  brothers  of  Tai;
Her  voice  came  to  the  Prophet's  ear.

The  rest  of  that  tribe,  he  gave  to  her.
Saying : — "  One  of  true  origin  never  erred  !  "


From  Hatim's  store-house,  an  old  man
Demanded  ten  diram's  weight  of  sugar  candy.

355  From  the  historian,  I  remember  news  such,
That  he  sent  him  a  sack  of  sugar.

The  wife  said,  from  the  tent : — "  What  is  this  ?
"  The  old  man's  need  was  exactly  ten  dirams."

The  man-cherisher  of  Tai  heard  this  speech ;
He  laughed,  and  said : — "  Oh  heart's  ease  of  Hail

"  If  he  demanded  (what  was)  suitable  to  his  own  need,

(and  got  it),
"  Where  is  the  liberality  of  the  offspring  of  Hdtim  ?  "


854       "Paniz,"   in  Arabic;    "  pani'z,"  in  Persian,    signifies— a  confection
like  shakar-barg;  shakar-Valam.


156  THE   BUSTAN   OF   SA'dI.  [ohAP.  II.

Another  in  generosity,  like  Hatim,

Comes  not,  perhaps,  from  the  world's  revolution,

860  That  Abii  Bakr,  son  of  Sa'd, — the  hand  of  munificence,
"Whose  magnanimity  places  on  the  mouths  of  beggars.

Oh  peasant-refuge  !     May  thy  heart  be  glad  !
May  Islam,  by  thy  endeavour,  flourish  !

This  dust  of  happy  soil  raises  its  head  (ascends).
By  thy  justice  over  the  climes  of  G-reece  and  Riim  !

Like  Hatim,  if  his  name  had  not  been,
No  one,  in  the  world,  would  have  taken  the  name  of  (men-
tioned) Tai.

In  books,  the  praise  of  that  renowned  one  (Hatim)  remains;
For  thee,  both  praise  and  also  reward  remain.

365  Whereas,  Hatim  sought  for  that  reputation  and  renown  (in
the  world) ;
Thy  struggle  and  endeavour  are  for  the  sake  of  God !

There  is  no  ceremony  for  the  darvesh ;

Save  this  one  word, — there  is  no  other  counsel : —

"  As  much  as  may  be  in  thy  power,  do  good  ;  '*
Good  remains,  after  thee  (Oh  Abii  Bakr  !) ;  and,  speech
after  Sa'di.


Of  a  certain  one,  an  ass  had  fallen  into  the  mire ;
The  blood,  through  phrenzy,  had  gathered  to  his  heart.


860       Abu  Bakr,  witliout  being  asked,  gave  to  beggars  ;  and,  thus  closed  their
mouths,

Eead : — Whose  magnanimity  places  the  hand  of  munificence  on  the
mouths,  &c.


CHAP.  II.]  ON   BENEFICENCE.  157

Desert  and  rain,  and  cold,  and  torrent ; —
Darkness  let  down  its  skirt  on  the  horizon.

j,  870  He  was  in  this  grief,  all  night,  till  the  morning ;
!!         Spoke  passionately;  and  gave  curse  and  abuse.

Neither  enemy,  nor  friend,  escaped  his  tongue  (of  reproach) ;
Nor  the  Sultan,  whose  land  and  produce  it  was.

By  chance,  the  lord  of  that  wide  plain
Passed  by  him  in  that  reprehensible  state.

He  heard  these  words, — far  from  rectitude ; —
Neither  patience  of  hearing  ;  nor,  way  of  answer.

He  looked  at  him,  with  the  eye  of  punishment.

Saying : — "  For  what  is  this  person's  anger  against  me  ?  "

875  He  said  : — "  Oh  king !  strike  him  with  the  sword  ;
"  Pluck  up  his  life's  root,  from  the  earth's  surface."

The  Sultan  of  high  rank  glanced ;

He  himself  saw  him,  in  calamity ;  and,  his  ass  in  the  mire  :

Forgave  the  man,  on  account  of  his  ruined  state  :
Swallowed  the  anger  of  his  cold  words  :

Gave  him  gold,  and  a  horse,  and  a  coat  of  fur ;
— How  good  is  love,  at  the  time  of  hate  ! —

One  said  to  him ; — "  Oh  old  man,  void  of  reason  and  sense  !
*'  Thou  didst  escape  wonderfully  from  slaughter."      He
said  : — "  Be  silent :

880  "  If  I  complained  on  account  of  my  own  grief,
"  He  gave  me  presents  suitable  to  himself."

For  evil,  the  return  of  evil  is  easy  ;

If  thou  art  a  man,  do  good  to  him  who  did  evil  to  thee.


158  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [oHAP.  II.

I  have  heard  that  a  proud  man,  from  pride-intoxication,
Shut  the  door  of  his  house  in  a  beggar's  face.

The  man,  helpless,  sate  down  in  a  corner  ;
His  liver  hot  (with  rage) ;  and,  sigh  cold,  from  the  heat  (of
despair)  of  his  chest.

A  certain  one,  covered  as  to  the  eyes  (blind),  entered ;
He  asked  him,  the  cause' of  his  hate  and  rage.

385  He  related — and  wept,  on  the  dust  of  the  street —
The  violence,  that  chanced  to  him,  from  that  person.

He  said  : — "  Oh  certain  one  !  abandon  grief,
"  Break  fast,  only  to-night,  with  me."

He  drew  his  collar,  with  politeness  and  kindness ;
Brought  him  to  his  lodging ;  and,  spread  the  victual- table.

The  darwesh  of  luminous  disposition  became  comforted ;
He   said : — "  May   God  give  thee   luminosity  (as   to   thy
eyes)  ! "

At  night,  from  his  eyes  some  drops  trickled ;

In  the  morning,  he  opened  his  eyes  ;  and,  beheld  the  world !

390  Within  the  city,  the  story  went ;  and  tumult  occurred —
For,  last  night,  an  eyeless  one  opened  his  eye.

He  heard  this  report, — the  rich  man  of  stone  heart.
From  whom,  the  darwesh  turned  away  straitened  in  heart.

He  said  : — "  Oh  fortunate  one  !  relate  this  tale,
"  How  this  difficult  deed  became  easy  to  thee.

"  "Who   turned    back   to   thee    this    candle,  world-illumi-
nating?"
He  replied : — "  Oh  tyrant  of  troubled  days  !


887       "Witli  kindness  and  compassion,  having  seized  his  collar,  and  placed
his  hand  on  his  neck,  he  drew  him  to  his  own  house.


CHAP.  II.]  ON    BENEFICENCE.  159

"  Thou  wast  of  short  vision,  and  of  sluggish  judgment,
"  For,  instead  of  the  huma  (an  auspicious  bird),  thou  wast
engaged  with  the  owl  (a  filthy  bird).

35  "  That  one  opened  this  door  (of  vision)  on  my  face ;
"  On  whose  face,  thou  didst  shut  the  door.

"  If  thou  dost  express  a  kiss  on  the  dust  of  men,

"  In  the  name  of  manliness  !  luminosity  comes  to  thee.

"  Those,  who  are  covered  as  to  the  eye  of  the  heart,
"  Are,  indeed,  careless  of  this  antimony."

"When  the  one  of  overturned  fortune  heard  this  rebuke,
He  bit  the  finger-tip  of  regret,  with  his  teeth.

Saying : — "  My  falcon  became  the  prey  of  thy  net ;
"  I  had  fortune  ;  to  thy  name,  it  went."

DO  How  may  he  bring  the  male  falcon  to  his  grasp, — that  one,
Like  a  mouse,  teeth  plunged  in  avarice.

Verily,  if  thou  art  a  seeker  of  the  pious  one.
Exercise  not  carelessness,  a  moment,  as  to  his  service.

Give  food  to  the  sparrow,  and  partridge  and  dove,
That  the  huma  may,  one  day,  fall  to  thy  net.

When  thou  castst  the  arrow  of  supplication,  in  every  corner,
There  is  hope  that  thou  mayst,  suddenly,  make  a  prey.

From  many  oysters,  a  single  pearl  comes  forth ;
Out  of  a  hundred  arrows,  one  comes  to  the  butt.


96


The  first  line  means : — If  thou  dost  ask  for  aid  from  man.
00       The  falcon  here  signifies — mardum-i-ma'nf  wa  kdmil;    9&hib-i-dil,  a
pious  one.
"Danddn  faro  burdan  "  signifies — khAm  tam'  namudan.


160  THE   BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  II.

405  The  son  of  a  certain  one  was  lost  from  a  camel-litter ;

The   father   wandered   about,   in   the    night-time,  in   the
kafila :

Inquired  at  every  tent ;  and,  hastened  in  every  direction ;
Found  that  light  (his  son),  in  the  darkness.

"When  he  came  to  the  men  of  the  karavan,
I  heard,  that  he  said  to  the  camel-driver  : —

"  Knowst  thou  not  how  I  found  the  path  to  the  friend  (my

son)  ?
*'  "Whosoever  came  before  me,  I  said  : — it  is  he  !  "

The   pious   ones  are   at  the  heels  of  every  one,  on  that

account,
That  they  may,  perchance,  one  day,  reach  a  sage,  holy  man  :

410  Bear  burdens,  for  the  sake  of  the  pious  ;

Endure  the  thorn  (of  affliction)  for  the  sake  of  a  single  rose.


From  the  crown  of  one  king-born,  in  a  camel-stable,
A  ruby  fell,  one  night,  in  a  stony  place.

The  father,  to  his  son,  said  : — "  In  this  night,    of  dark

colour,
"  How  knowst  thou, — which  is  the  jewel  or  stone  ?

"  Oh  son !  take  care  of  all  the  stones,

"  That  the  ruby  may  not  be  out  of  their  midst."

The  pure  ones  of  distraught  visage,  among  the  rogues,
Are,  indeed — the  ruby  and  (precious)  stone,  in  a  dark  place.


408       Whoever  seeks  runs ;  whoever  runs  finds.

411       In  the  'Ikd-i-manzum,  couplets  411  to  426  are  omitted.


CHAP.  II.]  ON  BBNEPIOBNOB.  161

A5  Endure,  with  pleasure  the  burden  (of  violence)  of  every
ignorant  one,
That,  in  the  end  of  time,  a  pious  one  may  fall  (to  thee).

The  person,  who  is  merry  of  head  (enamoured)   with  a

friend, —
Seest  thou  not  how  he  is  the  enemy's  (rival's)  load-carrier?

He  rends  not  his  garment,  rose-like,  on   account  of  the

power  of  the  thorn,
"Who,  pomegranate-like,  laughs,  blood  gathered  in  the  heart.

Endure  the  grief  of  a  crowd,  for  the  love  of  one,
Pay  observance  to  a  hundred,  for  the  sake  of  one.

If  those  of  foot-dust,  distraught  of  head.
Are,  in  thy  sight,  contemptible  and  miserable,

420  Ever  look  not  at  them,  with  the  eye  of  approval ;
For,  they  are  approved  of  God,  and  that  is  enough.

The  one,  who,  in  thy  opinion,  is  bad.

How  knowst  thou  but  that  he  himself  is  the  possessor  of
saintship  ?

The  door  of  the  knowledge  of  God  is  open  to  those,
In  whose  face,  the  doors  of  men  are  shut.


416  For  the  good,  he  endures  the  violence  of  the  bad.

417  "  Khun  dar  dil  uf tadan  "  signifies — ghussa  dar  dil  ddshtan,  wa  dar
'ishk-i-mahbube  giriftar  budan.  When  the  pomegranate  is  red  and
ripe,  it  rends  its  skin.  The  rending  of  the  skin  they  call  laughing  or
being  of  happy  state.  Notwithstanding  that,  through  grief,  blood  had
fallen  (gathered)  to  his  heart,  he  was  content.

In  some  copies,  the  second  line  runs: —

(a)  Which  thorn  (rival)  may  have,  snake-like,  fallen  in  thy  path.
(&)  In  whose  heart,  blood,  pomegranate-like,  may  have  gathered.
420       If  the  fallen  and  abject,  who  are  of  pure  breath,  but  outwardly  di-
shevelled and  wretched,  appear  to  thee  contemptible,  look  not  at  them  ;
for,  being  approved  of  God,  they  have  no  need  of  thy  approbation.

11


162  THE  BUSTAN  OP  BA'J)I.  [cHAP.   H.

Many  of  better  life,  and  bitterness-tasting,
May  be,  in  the  quarter  (Judgment  Day),  skirt-displaying  (in
majesty).  I

If  thou  hast  reason  and  deliberation,  thou  wilt  kiss  ^

The  hand  of  the  king-born  one  (the  Man  of  God)  in  the
prison  (of  this  world).

425  For,  the  day  he  comes  from  prison,

He  may,  when  he  becomes  lofty,  give  to  thee  loftiness.

Cause  not  the  rose-tree  to  burn,  in  the  autumn ;
For,  it  appears  to  thee  excellent,  in  the  fresh  spring.


A  certain  one  possessed  not  the  power  of  spending ;  t|

Gold,  he  had ;  the  power  of  enjoying,  he  had  not^

He  used  not  to  eat,  that  his  heart  might  rest ;
Used  not  to  give  (in  alms),  that  it  might  be  of  use  to  him
to-morrow  (Judgment  Day).

Night  and  day,— in  the  entanglement  of  gold  and  silver  :
— The  fetter  of  the  mean  one,  (is)  in  gold  and  silver.—-

480  One  day,  the  son,  in  ambush,  knew

Where  the  miser  had  placed  the  gold,  in  the  earth.

He  brought  it  forth  from  the  dust,  and  gave  it  to  the  wind ;
I  heard,  that  he  deposited  a  stone  in  that  spot.

For  the  young  man,  the  gold  remained  not ;

It  came  to  one  hand ;  he  enjoyed  it  with  the  other.


423       "Tal^  'aishan"   signifies — persons  to  whom  life,  from    exceeding

liardship  and  poverty,  is  bitter.

"  Daman-kashan  "  signifies — kharamdn  banaz  vayanda.
426       ^  the  autumn  of  this  world,  the  holy  man  appears  bad  ;  but,  in  the

fresh  spring  of  the  next  world,  the  marks  of  his  goodness  will  appear.


CHAP.  II. ]|  ON   BBNEPICENOE.  163

For  this  reason  that  he  was  one  of  unclean  face  (conduct)

and  a  low  thrower  of  dice ;
His  hat  in  the  bazar ;  and,  trousers  pawned.

The  father, — clutch  placed  (in  grief)  on  his  own  neck ;
The  son, — a  harp  and  flute  (in  enjoyment)  brought  to  the
front.

135  The  father,  weeping  and  lamenting,  slept  not  all  night ;
The  son,  in  the  morning,  laughed ;  and  said  : —

"  Oh  father  !  gold  is  for  the  sake  of  enjoying ;

"  For  depositing,  whether  stone  pr  gold,-^what  matter  ?  "

They  bring  forth  gold  from  the  hard  ^tone  ;

That  they  may  enjoy  it  with  friends  and  beloved  ones.

Gold,  in  the  palm  of  the  man's  hand,  world- worshipping,
Oh  brother !  ig  yet  within  the  stone.

When,  thou  art,  in  life,  bad  to  thy  family.
Complain  not  of  them,  if  they  wish  thy  death.

440  Thy  family  enjoy  thy  (wealth)  to  satiety,  at  that  time.
When  thou  f allst  from  the  roof  of  fifty  yards  to  the  bottom.

The  miser,  rich  with  dinars  and  silver,
Is  a  tilism  dwelling  over  the  treasure.

His  gold  remained  years,  for  the  reason,
That  such  a  tilism  trembles  at  its  head  !

With  the  stone  of  Fate  (death),  they  suddenly  shatter  it;
They  make,  at  ease,  division  of  the  treasure.


441  **  Tilism  "  signifies — a  creature  which  guards  gold.  It  neither  enjoys
the  gold,  nor  permits  anyone  else  to  enjoy  it.  From  this  word,  comes
talisman.

11   *


164  THE   BUSTAN   OP   SA'dI.  [oHAP.  II.'

After  carrying  and  collecting,  like  the  ant,
Enjoy, — ^before  that  the  grave-worm  devours  thee.

*45  The  words  of  Sa*di  are  precept  and  counsel ;

If  thou  becomest  work-performing,  they  are  of  use  to  thee.

It  is  folly  to  turn  away  the  face  from  this ;
Since  one  can,  in  this  way,  obtain  empire.


A  young  man  had  exercised  liberality  to  the  extent  of  a

dang ;
He  had  accomplished  an  old  man's  desire.

The  sky  suddenly  caught  him,  in  a  crime ;
The  Sultdn  sent  him  to  the  slaughtering-place  :

The  hurrying  of  soldiers,  and  uproar  of  the  people ;
Sightseers  about  the  door,  and  street,  and  roof.

450  When,  within  the  tumult,  the  old  darvesh  beheld
The  young  man,  a  captive  in  the  people's  hands.

His  heart  was  wounded,  on  account  of  the  wretched  youth.
Who  had,  once,  taken  his  heart.

He  raised  a  cry,  saying  : — "  The  Sultan  is  dead  !
"  The  world  remained ;  but,  he  took  away  his  good  dispo-
sition."

He  kept  rubbing  together  the  hands  of  sorrow ;
The  soldiers,  swords  drawn  (for  slaying)  heard.

At  the  cry,  a  shout  issued  from  them, —
Palm-striking  on  head,  and  face,  and  shoulder  !


453       «« Turk "  signifies— a  man  of   Turkistan,  the  people  of  which  were
notorious  for  blood-shedding  and  fearlessness.


OaAP.  II.]  ON   BENEPIOENOE.  166

55  On  foot,  up  to  the  door  of  the  court,  with  haste,
They  ran ;  they  saw  the  king  on  the  throne.

The  youth  went  forth  from  the  midst ;  they  took  the  old

man.
By  the  neck,  a  captive,  to  the  Sultan's  throne.

He,  with  awe-inspiring  manner  inquired;  and,  displayed

majesty.
Saying  : — "  To  thee, — wherefore  was  the  desiring  of  my

death  ?


"  Since  my  disposition  and  rectitude  are  good,
"Why,  in  the  end,  desirest  thou  ill  (by  my  death)  to
men  ?  "

The  resolute  old  man  brought  forth  a  tongue.
Saying : — "  Oh  (king)  !  the  world  is  a  ring  in  the  ear  (a
slave)  of  thy  order  I

460  "  By  a  false  word — *  the  king  is  dead  ! '

"  Thou  didst  not  die ;  and,  a  helpless  one  carried  off  his
life."

The  king  wondered  at  this  tale  to  such  a  degree.
That  he  gave  him  something,  and  said  nothing.

And,  on  this  side,  the  youth,  falling  and  rising.

Kept  proceeding,  running  in  every  direction,  helplessly.

One  said  to  him  : — "  From  the  four  directions  of  retribution,
"  What  didst  thou,  that  liberation  came  to  thy  soul  ?  "


458       See  couplet  452.

463       "Char-sA"    signifies— the  "  square  "  in  which   punishments  axe  in-
flicted and  orders  issued.


166  THE    BUSTAN   OF   SA'dI.  [oHAP.  II.

He  whispered  to  his  ear — '*  Oh  wise  m^nl

"  I  escaped  from  bonds,  through  a  brave  soul  and  a  dang."

465  He  places  a  seed  in  the  dust  for  the  reason,
That  it  may,  in  the  day  of  distress,  give  fruit.

A  barley-grain  keeps  back  a  great  calamity ;
Thou   hast   heard  of  the   staff,  that  killed  'tJj    (King  of
Bashan)  ?

The  true  account  came  from  the  Chosen  One  (Muhammad),
That — ^the  giving  of  arms  is  the  repelling  of  calamity.

Thou  seest  iidt  an  enemy's  foot,  in  this  habitation ;
For,  Abii  Bakr,  son  of  Sa'd,  is  master  of  the  kingdom.

A  world  joyful  by  thy  face, — Oh  (Abu  Bakr)  !  seize
The  world,  that  joy  may  be  on  thy  face.

470  In  thy  time,  no  one  endures  distress  from  another ;

The  rose  in  the  parterre  suffers  not  the  violence  of  the
thorn.

Thou  art  the  shadow  of  the  grace  of  God  on  the  earth ;
Prophet-like — the  mercy  of  both  worlds  !


466  The  mother  of  'ITj,  who  lived  to  the  age  of  three  thousand  five  hun-
dred years,  was  a  daughter  of  Adam  (on  him  be  peace  !)  ;  his  father  was
'Anak.  At  the  time  of  Noah's  deluge,  notwithstanding  that  the  water
stood  forty  yards  above  the  highest  moimtains  of  the  earth,  it  reached
only  to  his  waist.

Moses  made  an  attempt  against  him,  upon  which  'l/j  took  up  a  moun-
tain, two  farsangs  in  extent,  on  his  head,  with  the  intention  of  casting
it  on  the  army  of  Moses,  so  that  it  might  be  destroyed.  God  sent  the
bird,  Hoopoo,  which  pierced  the  mountain,  so  that  it  became  a  collar
about  his  neck.

Moses  then  struck  him  on  the  ankle,  so  that  he  fell  and  died.

467  In  the  'Ikd-i-manzum,  couplets  467  to  472  are  omitted.

469  The  world  having  become  gladsome  through  Abu  Bakr,  the  author
invites  Abu  Bakr  to  be  joyous  through  the  world.


i


CHAP.  II.]  ON   BENEFICENCE.  167

If  a  person  knows  not  thy  worth, — wliat  matter  ?
They  also  know  not  the — "  Shab-i-kadr."


In   a   dream,  a  person  beheld  the  plain  of  the  place  of

assembling  :
The  earth's  surface,  from  sun, — molten  copper.

From  men,  complaint  kept  ascending  to  heaven ;
The  brain,  through  heat,  came  to  boiling.

475  (Beheld)  a  certain  one  of  this  multitude, — in  the  shade ;
An  ornament  of  Paradise,  about  his  neck.

He  inquired,  saying  : — "  Oh  man,  assembly-adorning !
*'  Who  was  thy  helper,  in  this  assembly  ?  "

He  said : — "  I  had  a  vine  at  my  house-door ;
"  A  holy  man  slept  in  its  shade.

"  At  this  time  of  despair,  that  true  man

*'  Asked  pardon  for  my  sins  from  the  Ruler  of  rulers,

"  Saying  : — *  Oh  Lord  !  forgive  this  slave ;

"  *  For  once  I  experienced,  through  him,  ease.'  "

480  "What  said  I,  when  I  unloosed  this  mystery  (of  the  title)  ?
— "May   glad  tidings  be  to   the  Lord  of   Shirdz  (Abti-
Bakr)  I "

For,  the  grandees,  in  the  shadow  of  his  spirit.
Are  resident ;  and,  at  the  table  of  his  bounty.


472       The  "  Shab-i-kadr  "  is  the  most  blessed  of  nights,  on  which  prayers

are  accepted ;  it  is  the  27th  of  the  month  Ramaz4n.
480       The  author's  reply  is  given  in  the  second  line.

In  the  'Ikd-i-manzdm,  couplets  480  to  484  are  omitted.
The  king, — in  whose  shade  a  world  is  living  and  at  ease  at  his  table
of  bounty, — to  what  dignity  will  he  (in  heaven)  ascend !


168  THE   BUSTAN   OF   SA*DI.  [CHAP.  U,

The  man  of  liberality  is  a  tree,  fruit-possessing ;
When  thou  passest  beyond  it, — fuel  of  the  mountain.

If  they  strike  the  axe,  at  the  foot  of  the  tree,  fit  for  fuel, — ^j
When  strike  they  at  the  fruitful  tree  ?

Oh  tree  of  skill  (Abii-Bakr) !     Long  keep  thy  foot !
For,  thou  art  fruit-possessing ;  and,  also  shady.

486  As  to  beneficence,  I  said  much ;
But,  it  is  not  proper  for  every  one.

Enjoy  the  blood  and  wealth  of  the  one,  man-injuring ;
For,  of  the  bad  bird, — ^the  feather  and  wing  plucked  out  is
best.

One,  who  is  in  strife  with  thy  master,  ;

Why  givest  thou  to  his  hand,  the  stick  and  stone  ?

Cast  away  the  root,  that  bears  the  thorn ;
Cherish  the  tree,  that  produces  fruit.

Give  the  dignity  of  the  great,  to  that  one.
Who  to  inferiors  holds  himself,  not  proudly.

490  Wherever,  there  is  a  tyrant, — pardon  him  not ;
For,  mercy  to  him  is  tyranny  to  the  world.

The  lamp  of  the  world-consumer  (tyrant)  extinguished — is

best;
One  in  the  fire  is  better  than  a  people  with  the  stain  (of

tyranny).

Whosoever  shows  mercy  to  a  thief,
Attacks  the  karavan,  with  his  own  arm.


482       "  Guzashtan  "  signifies — "  to  abandon  "  as  well  as  "  to  pass."
489       **  Sar  giran  dashtan  bar  kase  "  signifies — ^ulzat  wa  sakl  namddan
ba  kase.


CHAP.  II.]  ON   BENBPIOENCE.  169

Give   to  the   wind   (of   destruction)   the  heads   of  those

tyranny-practising :
Oppression,  on  one  oppression-practising,   is  justice  and

equity.


I  have  heard  that  a  man  experienced  house- vexation  ;
For,  a  wasp  made  a  nest  in  his  roof.

495  His  wife  said  : — "What  thou  desirest  in  respect  to  them,
do  not ;
"  Lest  that  they  should  become  scattered  from  their  native
country."

The  wise  man  went  to  his  own  work ;

The  wasps  began,  one  day,  to  sting  his  wife.

About  the  door,  and  roof,  and  street, — the  foolish  wife
Kept  making  lamentation.     But,  the  husband  said  : —

"  Oh  woman  !  make  not  thy  face  bitter  towards  men  ;
"  Thou  didst  say  : — '  Slay  not  the  poor  wasps  ! '  "

How  may  one  do  good  to  the  bad  !
Forbearance  to  ill-doers  increases  ill.

500  When  thou  beholdst  a  people's  injury  in  a  chief.
Cut  his  throat,  with  a  sharp  sword.

What  dog,  in  short,  is  there — ^f  or  whom  they  place  a  victual-
tray  ?
Order,  that  they  give  him  a  bone.

How  well  has  the  old  man  of  the  village  (Firdausi)  ex-
pressed this  proverb : —

"  The  baggage-animal,  leg-striking  (kicking),  is  best  under
a  heavy  load."

If  the  watchman  shows  mercy.

No  one  is  able  to  sleep  at  night,  for  thieves.


l?d  THE   BUSTAN   OF   SA'dI.  [CHAP.  II.

In  the  circle  of  contest,  the  spear-reed
Is  more  precious   than  a  hundred   thousand   sugar-reeds
(canes).

505  Not  every  one  is  worthy  of  property ;

This  one  requires  property  ;  that  one,  rebuke.

When  thou  cherishst  the  cat,  it  takes  away  the  pigeon  ;
When  thou  makest  the  wolf  fat,  it  rends  Joseph.

The  edifice,  that  has  not  firm  foundations, —
Make  it  not  lofty ;  and,  if  thou  dost,  tremble  for  it.

How  well  said  Bahrto,  desert-dwelling,
When  his  thorough-bred,  restive,  steed  threw  him  to  the
earth,

"  It  is  proper  to  take  from  the  herd  another  horse,

"  Which  it  is  possible  to  restrain,  if  he  becomes  restive."

510  Oh  son  !  bind  the  Euphrates,  at  low- water ;
For,  when  the  torrent  is  risen,  it  is  of  no  use.

When  the  filthy  wolf  comes  to  thy  snare.

Slay ;  if  not,  pluck  up  thy  heart  from  (love  for)  the  sheep.

From  Iblis,  adoration  never  comes ;

Nor  from  the  bad  jewel, — goodness  into  existence.

Grive  neither  place  nor  opportunity  to  the  malignant  one  ;
The  enemy  in  the  pit,  and  the  demon  in  the  glass  bottle-
is  best.


506       The  brothers  cast  Joseph  into  a  pit,  sold  him,  and  represented  to  their

father  that  a  wolf  had  devoured  him.
506       Bahram  was  called   Bahram  Gor,  "  Sahra-nishin,"  because   he  loved

the  hunting  of  asses  in  the  desert.

In  the  'Ikd-i-manzdm,  couplets  608  to  518  are  omitted.


!


GHAP.  II.]  ON   BEKBPIOBNCB.  171

Say  not : — "  It  is  proper,  to  kill  this  snake  with  a  stick  '* ;
Strike,  when  he  has  his  head  beneath  thy  stone.

>15  The  pen  striker  (pen-man),  who  did  ill  to  his  inferiors,
To  make,  with  the  sword,  his  hand  a  pen  (to  sever  it) — is
best.

The  deliberator,  who  introduces  bad  regulations,
Takes  thee,  that  he  may  give  thee  to  hell-fire.

Say  not : — "  For  the  country,  this  deliberator  is  enough  "  ;
Call  him  not  deliberator,  who  is  unfortunate.

The  fortunate  one  acts  upon  Sa'di^s  speech.
Because,  it  is  the  (cause  of)  increase  of  country,  and  deli-
bi^t'atioti,  and  judgment.


172  THE   BUSTAN   OP   SA'dI.  [cHAP.  III..


CHAPTER    111.
On  Love.

1  Oh  happy  the  time  of  those  distraught  in  love  of  Him,
Whether  they  experience  the  wound  (of  separation) ;  or,
the  plaster  (of  propinquity  to  Him) !

Beggars  from  royalty  fleeing ;

In  the  hope  of  union  with  Him,  in  beggary,  long-suffering.


This  chapter  is  on  Sufi-ism  (tasawwuf),  or  mysticism;  the  language
used  is  mystical  (mutasawwif).  The  one  who  practises  Sufi- ism  is
called — Sufi ;  ahl-i-hal ;  'ashik-i-sadik  ;  ahl-i-tarikat ;  ahl-i-dil ;  lahib-
dil ;  sdlik  ;  sahib-i-ma'rifat ;  'arif .

The  student  should  on  this  subject  see —

(a)  A  summary  of  the  tenets  of  Suf  i-ism,  by  Sir  William  Jones.
(6)  De  Bode's  Bakhara.

(c)  Sind,  by  Eichard  Burton,  World- traveller,  chap.  viii.

(d)  Hughes'  Notes  on  Muhammadanism,  p.  227.

For  a  general  view  of  the  tenets  of  the  Muslim  religion,  see  Lane's
Modem  Egyptians,  vol.  i.  chap.  iii.

The  season  of  those  distraught  in  love  for  God  Most  High  is,  in  every
state,  very  happy.  Whether  they  experience  the  wound  of  separation,
through  the  thorn  of  pain  of  love  for  Him,  or  become  wounded  by  the  axe
of  separation,  life-penetrating,  and  the  arrow  of  affliction  of  separation,
heart-stitching ;  or,  by  obtaining  propinquity  to  the  presence  of  God,
and  the  fortune  of  union  with  Him,  receive  the  healing  plaster  for  the
heart -woimd,  and  drink  the  draught,  pleasant-tasting,  of  beholding
Him.

In  "padshahi"  the  word  "pad"  signifies — pas;  "shah"  signifies —
khudawind.


CHAP.  III.]  ON   LOVE.  173

Time  to  time,  they  drink  tlie  wine  of  pain  (of  love  for  Him) ;
And,   if   they   consider  it   bitter,  they  draw  breath  (are
patient).

In  the  pleasure  of  wine,  there  is  the  evil  of  head- sickness  ;
The  thorn  is  the  armour-bearer  of  the  rose-branch.

5  Patience,  which  is  in  remembrance  of  Him,  is  not  bitter ;
For  bitterness  from  a  friend's  hand  is  sugar.

His  captive  descries  not  release  from  bonds ;
His  prey  seeks  not  freedom  from  the  snare.

Sultans  of  retirement,  beggars  of  Hai !
Stages  of  God  recognisers,  foot-trace  lost.

Intoxicated  with  (the  love  of)  the  friend  (Grod),  reproach-
enduring  ;
The  camel,  intoxicated,  more  easily  bears  the  load.

How,  may  people  find  the  path  to  their  state  ?
For,  like  the  water  of  life,  they  are  in  darkness.


For  the  wine-drinkers  of  the  carpet  of  love,  head-sickness  of  pain
and  affliction  is  inevitable ;  and,  for  rose-pluckers  of  the  gardens  of  the
knowledge  of  God, — the  skirt,  full  of  thorns.

Then,  head-sickness  from  wine-drinking  and  the  thorn  of  the  rose-
branch  are  as  guards,  so  that  the  father  of  lust  may  not,  without
bitterness,  obtain  the  taste  of  pleasure,  nor  easily  bring  to  his  hand  the
rose  (of  the  beloved).

The  true  lovers  of  God  apparently  wander  about  villages,  and  appear,
in  the  sight  of  superficial  observers,  beggars,  foodless  and  wretched.
But,  in  retirement,  they  are  kings  of  the  time,  and  road-recognisers,
that  is,  they  have  reached  the  stage  and  are  as  those  trace-lost,  so  that
no  one  finds  information  regarding  their  track,  or  becomes  acquainted
with  the  work  which  they  do.

"  'Uzlat"  here  signifies — kljilwat  wa  tanhd,f,  or  the  mystery  belonging
to  God,  into  which  a  stranger  has  no  entrance.

"  Gum  karda  pai "  signifies — be  nishan  budan,  one  who  so  does  his
work  that  another  cannot  find  the  clue  to  his  purpose.

"  ManAzil-shinAs^n  "  signifies  — murshid4n  wa  'Arif An,  holy  men.

In  the  first  line,  "  sar  "  is  redundant.

"  Wakt "  here  signifies — wakt-i-huzur,  the  time  of  being  present  before
God.


J74  THE  BUSTAN  Off  SA'dI.  [CHAP.  HI.

10  Like  the  holy  house  (JenisaJem),  within — full  of  towers

(po»ip) ;

"Without, — the  wall  left  desolate.

V

Moth-like,  they  set  fire  to  themselves  ;

Silk-worm-like,  they  spin  not  on  themselves  (a  protection).

Mistress  in  embrace,— rmistress-seeking ;
On  the  stream-bank,  lip  dry  with  thirst.

I  say  not  that,  as  to  water,  they  are  powerless ;
But  they  are,  on  the  Nile,  dropsical.


The  love  of  one,  like  thyself — of  water  and  clay,
Ravishes  patience  and  heart-ease.

15  In  wakiefulness, — enamoured  of  her  cheek  and  mole ;
In  sleep, — foot-bound,  in  thought  of  her.

Ii;  truth,  thou  placest  thy  head  (life)  at  her  feet,  in  such  a,

way.
That,  thou  considerst  the  world,  in  comparison  with  her

existence,  non-existent.

When  thy  gold  comes  not  to  the  eye  (of  approval)  of  thy

mistress.
Gold  and  dust  appear  to  thee  the  same.


As  regards  the  water  of  life,  see  the  Sikandar  Nama,  Discourses  69

and  70.     English  translation  by  Clarke.
10       Their  interior  is  prosperous  ;  exterior,  wretched.
12       Their  love  of  God  is  insatiable.     A  dropsical  patient  is  never  wearied

of  drinking  water.
14       There  are  two  kinds  of  love,  one  superficial — the  love  of  man  for  man;

the  other,  real — the  love  of  the  creature  for  the  Creator.


To  tliee,^-desire  for  another  appears  not ;
For,  with  her, — pla^e  for  another  remains  not.

Thou  sayst :— ■"  Her  lodging  is  within  my  eye  "  ;

And,  if  thou  closest  together  the  eye-^"  It  is  in  my  heart."

20  Neither,  thought  of  any  one,  lest  thou  shouldst  become
disgraced,
Nor,   power  that  thou  shouldst,  for  a  moment,  becomq
patient.

If  she  desires  thy  life,  thoi;  placest  it  on  the  palm  of  her

hand;
And,  if  she  puts  the  sharp  sword  on  thy  head,  thou  placest

thy  head  (in  submission).

When  love,  whose  foundation  is  on  desire.

Is,  to  such  a  degree,  tumult-exciting  and  command-issuing,

Hast  thou  wonder  at  the  travellers  of  the  path  of  God,
That  they  should  be  immersed  in  the  sea  of  truth  ?

In  passion  for  the  Beloved,  with  soul  engaged ;

In  remembrance  of  the  Friend  (God),  careless  of  the  world.

25  In  memory  of  God,  they  have  fled  from  the  world ;

So   intoxicated  with   (the  splendour   of)  the   Oup-bearer
(God)  that  they  have  spilled  the  wine  I


24  "  Mushtaghil,"  in  the  first  line,  signifies — ikrigj^;  mash^iil shayanda;
and  kar  kunanda.

"  MusMaghil,"  in  the  second  line,  signifies — ^dfilj  nd-parwd;  rde
gardanida.
"  Janan"  signifies — ma'shuk,  a  mistress.

25  In  Suf  i-ism, "  sakf "  signifies — murshid-i-kAmil,  a  holy  spiritual  guide  ;
and  hence  God,  who,  cup-bearer-like,  gives  the  wine  of  love  to  His
lovers,  and  makes  them  non-existent  in  His  beauty.

The  second  line  means — With  the  splendour  of  the  Cup-bearer  (God)
they  are  to  such  a  degree  intoxicated,  and  become  non-existent,  that
they  have  spUled  the  wine  of  love,  and  have  no  need  of  wine  for  causing
intoxication  (masti),  and  aelfiessness  (be-khudi).


176  THE   BUSTAN   OF   SA'dI.  [cHAP.  IH.

It  is  impossible  to  effect  their  cure  with  medicine ;
For,  none  is  acquainted  with  their  pain  (of  love).

From  eternity  without  beginning,  to  their  ear  comes : —

"  Am  I  not  your  God  ?  "
With  clamour,  in  a  shout,  they  utter  : — "  Yes  I  "

A  crowd, — office-holding,  corner-sitting  ;
Feet,  clayey ;  breath  fiery, —

Pluck  up,  with  a  shout,  a  mountain  from  its  place ;
Heap  together,  with  a  cry,  a  city  :

30  Are,  wind-like,  invisible,  and  swift-moving ;
Are,  stone-like,  silent,  but  praise-uttering.

In  the  morning,  they  weep  to  such  a  degree  that  the  water
Washes  down  from  their  eyes  the  collyrium  of  sleep.

Steed  (of  the  body)  slain,  with  the  great  (austerity),  with

which  they  have  urged  the  night ;
In  the  morning,  shouting,  saying  : — *'  They  are  wearied  !  '*


27  Before  the  creation  of  Adam,  God  Most  High  made  all  the  souls,
and  said,  "  Am  I  not  your  God  ?  "

They  gave  evidence  to  the  truth,  and  said,  "  Yes !  "

When  they  came  into  the  world,  many,  by  reason  of  worldly  affections,
forgot  that  covenant ;  but,  as  to  the  true  lovers,  the  sound  of  those
words  is  yet  in  the  ear  of  their  hearts ;  and  they  are  in  shout  till  now,
in  exclaiming,  "  Yes !  "

28  This  crowd  of  men  possessed  of  majesty,  though  they  are  apparently
dismissed  from  office  and  are  sitting  in  retirement,  are,  by  reason  of  the
heart,  possessed  of  office.  Outwardly,  they  appear  contemptible ;  yet,
from  the  effects  of  the  fire  of  love,  they  bring  forth  hot  sighs,  sparks-
raining.

32  "Shab  randan"  signifies — shab  ravani  kardan;  shab  bedar  budan.
They  have  slain  lust ;  exercised  night- watching ;  opened  the  door  of  the
knowledge  of  God  to  their  own  faces ;  and  with  these  qualities,  are  in
shout,  saying : —     *     *     *     *

After  passing  through  the  stage  "  ila  Allah  "  (to  God),  they  proceed
to  "  ti  Allah  "  (in  God),  to  which  there  is  no  limit.


CHAP.  III.]  ON    LOVE.  177

Night  and  day,  in  the  sea  of  phrenzy  and  burning ;
From  perturbation,  they  know  not  night  from  day.

So  enamoured  of  the  splendour  of  the  figure-painter  (God),
That  they  have  no  occupation  with  the  beauty  of  the  out-
ward form.

35  The  pious  ones  gave  not  their  hearts  to  the  covering   (ex-
ternal beauty)  ;
And,  if  a  fool  gave, — he  is  brainless,  and  fleshless.

That  one  drank  the  pure  wine  of  the  Unity  (of  G-od),
Who  forgot  this  world  and  the  next.


I  have  heard  that,  once  upon  a  time,  one,  beggar- born,
Had  affection  for  one,  king-born.

He  went,  and  cherished  a  vain  desire  ;
Imagination  plunged  its  teeth  in  desire.

Mile-stone  like,  he  used  not  to  be  free  (absent)  from  his  (the

prince's)  plain ;
Bishop-like,  at  all  times,  at  the  side  of  his  horse.

40  His  heart  became  blood,  and  the  secret  remained  in  his
heart ;
But,  his  feet,  through  weeping,  remained  in  the  mii'e  (of
desire).

The  guards  obtained  intelligence  of  his  grief ;
They  said  to  him  : — "  Wander  not  again  here  I  "


87       In  the  'Ikd-i-manzum,  couplets  37-66  are  omitted.
"  Nazar  d^shtan  "  signifies — 'ishk  dashtan.

"DandAn   ba  k6m  faro  burdan"    signifies — kdm-y&b    wa  mastaulf
shudan.
89       At  chess,  the  Bishop  is  next  the  Blnight  (horse).

12


178  THE   BUSTAN    OF    Sa'dI.  [cHAP.  III.

A   moment,   he   went;    recollection   of   the   friend's   face

came  to  him ;
Again,   he   pitched   his  tent,  at  the  head  of  his  friend's

street.

A  slave  broke  his  head,  and  hand,  and  foot,

Saying  : — "  Said  we  not  once  to  thee, — come  not  here  ?  '*

Again,  to  him, — patience  and  rest  remained  not ;

On  account  of  his  friend's  face,  patience  remained  not.

45  Like  flies  from  off  the  sugar,  with  violence,  him.

They  used  to  drive  away;  but,  with  speed,  he  used  to
return.

One  said  to  him  : — "  Oh  impudent  one  of  insane  appear-
ance !

"  Thou  hast  wonderful  patience  as  to  (blows  of)  stick  and
stone."

He   said : — "  This   violence,   against    me,    is   through  his

tyranny ;
"  It  is  not  proper  to  complain  of  a  friend's  hand.

"  Behold,  I  express  the  breath  of  friendship  ;
"  If  he  holds  me  friend  ;  or,  if  enemy.

"  Expect  not,  without  him,  patience  from  me ;
"  Nay — even  with  him,  repose  has  no  possibility.

50  "  Neither  the  power  of  patience,  nor  room  for  anger ;
*'  Neither  the  possibility  of  being  (stopping),  nor  the  foot
of  flight.

'*  Say  not, — turn  aside  the  head  from  this  door  of  the
Court ;

"  Though  he  place  my  head,  like  a  tent-peg  in  the  tent-
rope.

"  Nay, — the  moth,  life  given  at  its  friend's  foot,
"  Is  better  than  alive  in  its  dark  corner."


I


CHAP.  111.]  ON    LOVE.  179

He  said  : — *'  If  thou  shouldst  suffer  the  wound  of  his  club?"
He  replied  :— ''  I  will  fall,  at  his  feet,  ball-like."

He  said  : — "  If,  with  the  sword,  he  cuts  off  thy  head  ?  "
He  replied : — "This  much  even,  I  grudge  not.

55  "  To  me, — indeed,  there  is  not  so  much  knowledge, —
"  Whether,  the  crown,  or  the  axe,  be  at  my  head.

"  Display  not  reproof  with  me  impatient ;
"  For,  patience  appears  not,  in  love.

*'  If  my  eye  becomes  white  (diseased)  like  Yakub,
**  I  abandon  not  hope  of  seeing  Yusiif.

"  One  who  is  happy  (in  love)  with  another,

"  Is  not  vexed  with  him,  for  every  little  thing."

On  day,  the  youth  kissed  his  (the  prince's)  stirrup ;
He  became  angry ;  and  turned  the  rein  from  him.

60  He  laughed,  and  said  : — "  Turn  not  the  rein ;

"  For,  the  Sultan  turns  not  away  the  rein  (face)  from  any.

"  To  me — by  thy  existence,  existence  remains  not ;
"  To  me, — in  memory  of  thee,   self -worshipping   remains
not.

"  If  thou  observst  a  crime,  reproach  me  not :
"  Thou  art  head  brought  forth   (produced)   from  my  collar
(of  existence).

57  Tat; ub,  from  much  weeping  for  Yusuf,  became  blind;  he  still  kept
the  hope  of  seeing  him.     The  meeting  eventually  took  place.

58  See  couplet  168.

62  Whenever  the  degree  of  love  reaches  the  perfection  of  exaltation,
there  is  in  the  lover's  heart  no  room  for  another.  To  such  a  degree
does  this  occur,  that  the  lover  forgets  his  own  existence,  and  considers
himself  indeed  the  beloved  one.  Thus  Majnum,  in  fancy  of  Laila,
regarded  his  own  body  as  Laila,  and  said,  "  I  am  Lail?i !  "  The  beggar,
even  so,  regarded  his  own  body  to  be  that  of  his  beloved,  and  recognised
not  himself.

12  «


1^0  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  IIIjJ

*•  I  fixed  my  hand  in  thy  stirrup  with  that  boldness ;
"  For,  I  brought  not  myself  in  the  account.

"  I  drew  the  pen  on  (effaced)  my  own  name ;
"  Placed  my  foot  on  the  head  of  my  own  desire.

66  "  The  arrow  of  that  intoxicated  eye  slays  me  indeed ;
"  What  need  that  thou  shouldst  bring  thy  hand  to  the
sword.

"  Set  fire  to  the  reed,  and  pass ;

"  So  that  in  the  for^t  neither  dry,  nor  green,  thing  may
remain."


I  have  heard,  that  at  the  chanting  of  a  singer,
One  of  Pari  face  began  to  dance.

From  the  fire  of  the  distracted  hearts  around  her,
A  candle-flame  caught  in  her  skirt.

She  became  troubled  in  heart  and  vexed  ;
One  of  her  lovers  said  : — "  "What  fear  ?

70  "  Oh  love  !  as  to  thee, — the  fire  burned  the  skirt ;

*'  As   to    me, — it   burned,    all   at   once,    the    harvest    (of
existence)."

If  thou  art  a  lover,  express  not  a  breath  about  thy  self ;
For,  it  is  infidelity  (to  speak  of)  lover  and  one's  self.


I  recollect  hearing  from  a  knowing  old  man,  in  this  way,
That  one,   distraught  with  love,  turned  his  head  to   the
desert.


66       The  work  which  is  accomplished  with  ease,  make  not  difficult ;  and

useless  labour  endure  not.

Again  :—  Cast  the  fire  of  love  into  my  heart  and  go,  so  that  all  my

body  may  bum.
71       Notwithstanding  the  existence  of  thy  beloved,  to  consider  thy  own

existence  is  disloyalty  and  infidelity.


CHAP.  III.]  ON   LOVE.  181

The  father,  through  separation  from  him,   neither  ate  nor

slept ;
They  reproached  the  son  ;  he  said  : —

"  From  that  time,  when  the  Friend  called   me  one   of  his

own,
"  Further  love  for  any  one  remained  not  to  me.

75  "  By  Grod  !  when  He  showed  me  His  beauty,
'*  Whatever  else  I  beheld  appeared  to  me  fancy."

He,  who  turned  away  from  the  people  became  not  lost ;
For  he  found  again  his  own  lost  one  (Grod).

There  are,  beneath  the  sky,  shunners  of  men.

Whom  one  can  call,  at  once,  wild  beast  and  also  angel.

Like  the  angel,  they  rest  not  from  remembering  the  King

(God);
Like  the  wild  beast,  they,  night  and  day,  shun  men.

Strong  of  arm  (by  spirituality) ;  but  short  of  hand  (by
materiality) ;

Wise, — (outwardly)  mad  ;  sensible — (outwardly)  intoxi-
cated.

80  Sometimes,  tranquil  in  a  corner,  religious  habit- stitching ;
Sometimes,  perplexed  in  society,  religious  habit-burning.

Neither  passion  as  to  themselves ;  nor,  solicitude  for  any

one ;
Nor  place  for  any  one,  in  the  cell  of  their  unitarianism.

Perturbed  of  reason,  confused  of  sense ;
Ear-stuffed  to  the  word  of  the  adviser.


79  Strong,  by  spirituality ;  weak,  by  materiality ;  wise  as  to  the  next
world ;  mad  as  to  this  world ;  sensible,  not  having  drunk  of  the  cup  of
lust ;  intoxicated,  with  the  cup  of  truth.

82       The  adviser  is  one,  who  tries  to  lead  them  to  the  world.


182  THE   BUSTAN   OF   SA'dI.  [oHAP.  III.

The  duck  will  not  become  drowned  in  the  river  (of  lust) ; '
The  samundar !  what  knows  he  of  the  torment  of  burning  ?

Empty  of  hand,  men  of  full  stomach  (proud) ;
Desert  wanderers,  without  a  Kafila  :

85  They  have  no  expectation  of  the  people's  approbation;
For,  they  are  approved  of  God ; — and  that  is  enough.

Dear  ones  (of  Grod)  concealed  from  the  people's  eye ;
Not  those  waist-cord-possessing,  clothed  in  the  habit  of  the
darwesh.

They  are  full  of  fruit,  and  shady,  vine-like ;

Are  not  like  us, — of  black  deeds,  and  blue  garment-dyers.-.

Head  plunged  in  themselves  (in  reflection),  oyster-like;
Not,  foam  (on  mouth)  gathered,  river-like.

If  wisdom  be  thy  friend,  be  afraid  of  them,  (those  foam-
gathered)  ;
For,  they  are  demons  in  the  garb  of  men.

90  They  are  not  men  indeed  of  bone  and  skin  ;
A  true  soul  is  not  in  every  form.

The  Sultan  (Grod)  is  not  the  purchaser  of  every  slave ;
Not,  beneath  every  religious  garment  is  there  a  living  man.

If  every  drop  of  hail  had  become  a  pearl,

The  bazdr  would  have  become  full  of  them  like  small  shells.


88  The  samundar  is  an  animal,  lizard-like,  which  dwells  in  the  fire;
when  it  comes  forth  from  the  fire,  it  dies.  Sultans  make  caps  of  its
skin.

87       In  former  times,  Sufis  wore  blue-coloured  woollen  garments.

89  Regard  not  their  outward  weakness  ;  be  not  careless  of  their  spiritual
powerfulness.


OHA?.  III.]  ON   LOVE.  183

They  fasten  not  the  (wooden)  clog  to  themselves,  juggler-
like;
For,  the  wooden  clog  moves  hardly  from  its  place.

Companions  of   the   house   of   retirement — "Am   I   your

God?"
They  are,  with  a  draught,  intoxicated  until  the  blast   of

the  trumpet  (of  Sarafil).

95  For  the  sword,  they  take  not  off  their  grasp  from   desire
(of  God) ;
For  abstinence  and  love  are  as  the  mirror  and  the  stone.


A  certain  one  had  a  mistress  in  Samarkand  ;
Thou  wouldst  say : — "  She   possessed  sugar,  in  place  of
speech."

A  beauty, — pledge  taken  from  the  sun  !

Piety's  foundation  became  ruined  by  her  coquetry.

God  Most  High  ! — of  beauty,  to  such  a  degree.

That  thou  wouldst  think  it  a  sign  of  the  mercy  (of  God)  !

She  used  to  walk ; — and,  eyes  were  behind  her ;
Lover's  hearts,  life  placed  in  exchange  for  her.

100  That  lover  used,  covertly,  to  glance  at  her ;
She  once,  with  severity,  looked;  and,  said: —


93  Not  like  jugglers  do  they  display  devotion,  by  way  of  deceit ;  for
devotion  on  the  foot  is  like  the  wooden  clog,  which  goes  with  difficulty
from  place  to  place.

94  " Khilwat-sara,e "  refers  to— the  covenant  "Am  I  your  God?"  It
means  God's  abode  at  that  time.

95  As  the  stone  shatters  the  mirror,  so  does  love  abstinence.

96  In  the  'Ikd-i-manzum,  couplets  96-113  are  omitted.

97  The  Sun  pledged  its  goods  for  her  beauty.
99       Men.  used  to  glance  after  her.


184  THE  BUSTAN  OP  SA'dI.  [oHAP.  III.

"  Oh  perverse  one  !  so  much,  thou  runst  after  me ;
"  Knowst  thou  not,  that  I  am  not  the  bird  of  thy  net  ?

"  If,  again,  I  see  thee  (at  my  heels),  with  the  sword,
"  Like  an  enemy,  pitiless,  I  will  cut  off  thy  head."

One  said  to  him  : — "  Now  take  thy  resolve ;
"  Choose  a  more  easy, object  than  this  one.

**  I  think  not  thou  mayst  acquire  this  desire ;
"  God   forbid !    that  thou  shouldst  place  thy   life   in   the
heart's  desire."

105  When  he, — mad  with  love,  heart-lost, — heard  this  reproach.
He  drew  forth  with  sorrow  a  cry  from  his  heart.

Saying  : — "  Allow, — that  the  wound  of  the  sword  of  de-
struction
"  May  cause  my  corpse  to  roll  in  blood  and  sweat.

"  Perhaps,  before  friend  and  enemy,  they  will  speak,
"  Saying  : — '  This  is  one  slain  by  her  hand  and  sword  !  '

"  I  see  not  the  (way  of)  flight,  from  the  dust  of  street ;
"  Say  : — in  tyranny,  spill  not  my  honour  !

"  Oh    self- worshipper !     For   me, — thou    dictatest   repen-
tance ;
"  For  thee, — repentance  of  this  speech  is  better.

110  "  Pardon  me  ;  for,  whatever  she  does,

"  She  does  well — even  if  there  be  desire  for  my  blood.

"  Every  night,  her  fire  (of  love)  causes  me  to  burn;

*'  In  the  morning,  I  become  alive  by  her  pleasant  perfume.

"  If,  to-day,  I  die,  in  the  street  of  my  beloved,

"  In  the  Resurrection,  I  will  pitch  my  tent  by  my  beloved."


CHAP.  III.]  ON   LOVE.  185

Yield  not,  so  long  as  thou  canst,  in  this  battle  (of  love) ;
For  Sa'di  is  alive,  whom  love  slew.


\


A  certain  one  thirsty  was  saying,  while  he  surrendered  his

soul : —
"  Happy  is  that  fortunate  one,  who  in  water  died !  "

116  One  of  deficient  understanding  said  to  him, — "  Oh  wonder  !
"  "When  thou  art  dead, — ^whether  moist  or  dry  of  lip,  what
matter  ?  "

He  said: — "  In  the  end,  do  I  not  make  my  mouth  moist,
"  Until,  I  lay  down  even  my  precious  life  ?  "

The  thirsty  one  falls  into  the  deep  basin ;

For,  he  knows  that  the  one  drowned  dies  water-satiated.

If  thou  art  a  lover,  seize  her  skirt ;

And,  if  she  says  : — "  Surrender  thy  life  !  "  say  : — "  Take
it."

Thou  mayst  enjoy  ease  of  life,  at  that  time,
"When  thou  passest  over  the  hill  of  non-existence.

1*0  The  heart  of  seed-sowers  may  be  afflicted  ;

(But),  when  the  harvest  is  accomplished,  they  sleep  plea-
santly.

In  this  assembly  (of  love  to  God),  those  arrive  at  their

desire,
Who,  in  the  last  circulation,  attain  the  cup  (of  love).


113       Lovers  of  God  do  not  die.     Sa'df  was  a  Suff.

118       Some  say  that  "  0  "  refers  to  Gk)d.     The  line  will  run  : — seize  the

skirt  of  God.
121       "  Daur-i-dl^ir  "  signifies — piyAla,e   6khir(n-i-hazm-i-shardb,   the   last

circulation  of  the  cup,

"  Jim  "  signifies — j4m-i-ma'rifat  wa  risdlat.


186  THE   BUSTAK  OE'  SA'dI.    -  [OHAPi  IBL^

I  have  a  tale  of  this  sort — of  the  men  of  the  way  of  God,
Rich  mendicants ;  king  beggars  ;

— That  an  old  man  went,  in  the  morning,  for  the  purpose

of  begging;
He  beheld  the  door  of  a  masjid  ;  and,  gave  the  mendicant's

cry.

One  said  to  him : — "  This  is  not  the  people's  house  ;
"  "Where  they  give  thee  anything ;  stand  not  here,  in  im-
pudence."

125  He  said  to  him  : — "  Then,  whose  is  this  house,

"  In  which,  there  is  no  bestowing  (of  alms)  to  any  one  ?  "

He  said : — "  Be  silent ;  what  faulty  word  is  this  ?
"  The  lord  of  this  house  is  our  Lord  God !  "

The   old   man   glanced    within;    he    beheld    candle    and

prayer-arch.
He  drew  forth,  with  burning,  a  lament  from  his  liver.

Saying  : — "  It  is  a  pity,  to  go  farther  hence ;
"  It  is  a  pity,  to  go  disappointed  from  this  door.

"  In  disappointment,  I  went  not  forth  from  any  street ;
"  Why  should  I  go,  yeUow-of-face,  from  God's  door  ?

130  "  Even  here,  I  may  make  the  hand  of  entreaty  long ;
'*  For,  I  know  that  I  may  not  return  empty  of  hand."

I  have  heard  that,  for  a  year,  he  sate,  a  sojourner, ,
Like  those  redress-seeking,  hand-uplifted.

One  night,  the  foot  of  his  life  descended  into  the  clay  (of

death).
Through  weakness,  his  heart  began  to  palpitate.


122       Outwardly  mendicants,  inwardly  rich.

Outwardly  beggars,  inwardly  kings.
129       An  Eastern  becomes  yellow,  not  pale,  with  fear  or  distress.


CHAP.  III.]  ON    LOVE.  187

In  the  morning,  a  person  brought  a  lamp  near  to  his  head ;
He  beheld  a  spark  of  life  in  him,  like  the  morning-lamp.

From  gladness,  clamour-making,  he  kept  saying  : —
"  Whosoever  beats  (knocks  at)  the  door  of  the  Merciful
One,  that  door  becomes  opened.

5  The  seeker  of  God  must  be  patient  and  submissive;
I  have  not  heard  that  the  alchymist  is  (ever)  dejected.

How  much  gold  do  they  put  in  the  obscure  dust,
That  they  may,  possibly,  one  day,  make  a  piece  of  copper
gold !

Gold,  for  the  sake  of  purchasing  a  thing,  is  good  ;
What  wilt  thou  buy  better  than  friend  and  lover  ?

If  through  one,  heart-ravishing, — thy  heart  is  straitened.
Another  consoler  may  come  to  thy  grasp.

For  one  of  bitter  face,  endure  not  life-bitterness ;
With  the  water  (of  beauty)   of  another,  draw  out  the  fire
(of  love)  for  her.

40  But  if  she  have,  in  beauty,  no  equal ;

Abandon  her  not,  for  a  little  heart-annoyance.

It  is  possible  to  disengage  the  heart  from  that  one,
Without  whom,  thou  knowst  it  is  possible  to  be  content.


I  heard  that  an  old  man  kept  awake  the  night ;

In  the  morning,  he  raised  the  hand  of  need  to  God.

A  voice  from  heaven  loast  into  the  old  man's  ear  :—
— "  Thou  art  profitless  ;  go  ;  take  thy  own  way."


143       "  Sar-i-khwesh  giriftsm  "  signifies — dar-kar-i-kiud  budan.
See  couplet  103.


I

188  THE   BUSTAN   OP   SA'dI.  [cHAP.  III.

"  At  this  door  (of  God),  thy  prayer  is  unacceptable;
"  Go,  in  contempt;  or  stand,  in  lamentation."

146  The  next  night,  from  recitation  of  the  name  of  God  and
devotion,  he  slept  not ;
A  disciple  obtained  news  of  his  state,  and  said : —

"  When  thou  sawst  that  the  door  on  that  side  was  closed,
*'  Endure  not  uselessly  such  a  struggle."

On  his  cheek,  tears  of  ruby-colour

Rained,  in  regret ;  and,  he  said  : — "  Oh  youth  !

"  I  would,  in  hopelessness,  have  turned  away,
"  From  this  door,  at  the  time  when  I  could  have  found
another  way.

"  Think  not,  if  the  friend  broke  the  reins,

"  That  I  would  take  off  the  hand  from  his  saddle- strap.

150  "  When  the  asker  becomes  disappointed  at  a  door,
"  What  grief,  if  he  recognises  another  door  ?

*'  I  have  heard  that  my  way  is  not  in  this  street ;
"  But,  there  is  not  the  semblance  of  another  path."

He  was  in  this  talk, — head  on  the  ground  of  devotion,
When,  in  the  ear  of  his  soul,  they  uttered  this  sound  : —

"  The  prayer  is  accepted,  though  to  him  is  no  goodness  ;
"  For  save  us,  to  him  is  no  other  shelter."


A  new  young  bride  complains.

To  an  old  man  (her  father),  of  her  unkind  husband,


160       But  for  me  there  is  no  other  door.

164       In  the  'Ikd-i-manzum,  couplets  154-163  are  omitted.


i


CHAP.  III.]  ON   LOVE.  189

65  Saying : — "  Approve  not  so  much  that,  by  this  son  (my
husband),
"  My  time  should  pass  in  bitterness.

"  Those  (man  and  wife)  who  are  with  us  in  this  lodging
"  — I  see  not  that  they  are,  like  me,  disturbed  in  heart.

k

"  The  woman  and  man  are  together  such  friends,
"  That  thou  mayst   say — they  are  two  kernels,  and  one
husk.

"  During  this  time,  on  my  husband's  part,  I  have  not  seen,
"  That,  he  once  smiled  in  my  face."

The  old  man  of  happy  omen  heard  this  speech ;
The  man  of  ancient  years  was  speech-knowing.

160  He  gave  to  her  an  answer,  sweet  and  pleasant.

Saying  : — "  Endure  the  biirden  of  his  violence,  if  he  be
beautiful  of  face."

It  is  a  pity  to  turn  away  from  one.

Like  whom,  it  is  not  possible  to  find  another.

Why  art  thou  arrogant  with  one  who,  if  he  be  arrogant,
Draws  the  pen  on  the  letter  of  (effaces)  thy  existence  ?

Acquiesce,  slave-like,  to  the  order  of  G-od ;
For,  thou  seest  not  a  master  like  Him.


One  day,  my  heart  burned  (in  pity)  on  account  of  a  slave ;
Who,  while  his  master  was  selling  him,  was  saying : —

165  **  To  thee, — many  a  slave,  better  than  I,  may  chance;
*•  To  me, — a  master,  like  thee,  no  one  may  be.


'190  THE    BUSTAN   OF    SA'dI.  [OHAP.i'in

'  In  Marv,  there  was  a  physician  of  Pari  cheek,
Whose  stature,  in  the  garden  of  the  heart,  was  a  cypress.

To  him, — no  knowledge  of  the  grief  of  torn  hearts  ;
To  him, — no  knowledge  of  his  own  sick  eye.

A  sorrowful  wanderer  relates  a  tale,

Saying :— "^ome  time,  I  had  love  for  the  physician.

*'  I  desired  not  my  own  health  ;

"  Lest  that  the  physician  should  not,  again,  come  to  me."

170  There  is  much  strong,  brave,  wisdom,
Which  the  passion  of  love  subdues.

When  the  passion  of  love  rubs  wisdom's  ear,
Sense  is  unable,  again,  to  raise  its  head.


A  certain  one  established  (by  training)  an  iron  grasp,
Who  wished  to  grapple  with  the  lion.

When  the  lion  drew  him  within  his  own  grasp.
He  found  not,  again,  any  force  in  his  own  grasp.


166  In  the  'Ikd-i-manzum,  couplets  166-171  are  omitted.

167  "  Chashm-bimar  "  signifies — chashm-i-nim-khwab,  the  eye,  half -asleep,
of  lovers ;  red  and  intoxicated.

With  the  intoxication  of  the  wine  of  beauty  and  loveliness,  he  was  so
intoxicated  and  senseless  that,  apart  from  (kata'-i-najar)  the  remedy  foi
the  heart-pain  of  lovers,  he  had  not  even  knowledge  of  his  own  sick  eye
so  that  he  might  prepare  a  remedy  for  it.

168  "Ba  kase  saram  khtish  bud"  signifies —

'  Bar  kase  'ashik  shudam.
Ba  kase  ta'ashshuk  wa  mail-i-dil  dashtam.
See  couplets  68  and  268.


CHAP.  III.]  ON   LOVE.  191

One,  at  length,  said  to  him  : — "  Why  sleepst  thou,  woman-
like ?
"  Strike  him  (the  lion)  with  the  iron  fist.'*

175  I  heard  that  the  wretch,  beneath  that  (lion),  said : —
"  It  is  not  possible  with  this  grasp  to  battle  with  the  lion.'*

WTien  love  becomes  audacious,  as  to  the  wisdom  of  the

sage,
This,  indeed,  is  an  iron  grasp  and  a  lion.

Thou  art  a  woman,  in  the  grasp  of  Hon-men,
What  advantage  may  the  iron  grasp  render  thee?

When  love  comes,  speak  not  again  of  reason ;
For   the  ball   (of  reason)  is  captive  in   the  power  of  the
Chaugan  (of  love).


Between  two  uncle-born  ones,  marriage  occurred  :
Two  of  sun-face,  of  high  descent.

180  To  one   (the  wife) — it   (the   marriage)  had  chanced  very
agreeably ;
The  other  had  become  shunning  and  avoiding.

One  possessed  courtesy  and  Pari-like  grace ;
The  other  kept  his  face  towards  the  wall.


175       The  first  line  may  otherwise  be  rendered : —

I  heard  the  wretch  in  that  (state)  beneath  (the  lip)  say : —

177  To  obtain  release,  by  the  power  of  resolution  and  strong  resolve,
from  the  grasp  of  imperious  lust,  and  to  arrive  at  the  stage  of  thy
desire  (like  the  pure  lovers  of  desire,  those  life-playing  in  the  valley  of
the  knowledge  of  God),  is  a  work  and  labour  indeed.

179  In  the  'Ikd-i-manzum,  oouplets  179-187  are  omitted.

180  "  Zan  ri  az  mard  khush  uftada  bud  "  signifies —

(a)  Ta'alluk  wa  mihr-i-tamdm  ba  shauhar  dAsht.
(6)  Zan  ba  shauhar  ragliib  wa  masrur  bud.
The  student  should  note  the  use  of  "  uftadan  "  in  these  two  lines.


192  THE    BUST  AN   OP    SA'dI.  [oHAP.  111.

One  used  to  adorn  her  own  body ;

The  other  used  to  ask  for  his  own  death  from  God.

The  old  men  of  the  village  caused  the  husband  to  sit  (before

them),
Saying: — "  To  thee,  is  no  love  for  her;  to  her,  give  the

dowry."

He  laughed  and  said  : — *'  "With  a  hundred  sheep,
*'  Deliverance  from  bonds  is  not  loss  !  "

186  The  one  of  Pari-face,  with  her  own  nail,  flayed  her  skin,
Saying  : — "  With  this  number  of  sheep,  how  can  I  ever  be
patient,  as  to  my  friend  ?

'•  Not  a  hundred  sheep,  but  six  hundred  thousand,

"  Are  unnecessary, — without  seeing  the  face  of  my  lover  !  "

Whatever  keeps  thee  engaged  with  a  friend,

— If  thou  desires t  truth, — it  is  thy  heart-ease  (mistress).

A  certain  one  to  one  of  distraught  state,  wrote.
Saying : — "  Desirest  thou  hell,  or  heaven  ?  "

He  said  : — "  Ask  not  of  me,  this  matter ;
"  I  approve  what  He  approves  for  me."

190  A  certain  one  spoke  to  Majniin,    saying : — "  Oh  one  of

auspicious  foot !

"  What  happened  to  thee,  that  thou  comest  not  again  to

Hayy?

"  Perhaps,  the  passion  for  Laila,  in  thy  brain,  remains  not ;
"  Thy  fancy  turns ;  and  desire  remains  not  ?  "

When  the  helpless  one  heard,  he  wept  bitterly.
Saying  : — "  Oh  sir  !     Keep  thy  hand  from  my  skirt.


185       "  Tag^abun  "  signifies — ziyan-karf  4wardan.


CHAP.  III.]  ON    LOVE.  193

"  I  have,  indeed,  a  heart, — sorrowful  and  torn  ;
"  Pour  not  thy  salt  on  my  wound.

"  Separation  is  not  a  proof  of  patience ;
"  For,  separation  is  often  a  necessity."

L95  He  said  : — "  Oh  one  fidelity-possessing,   of  happy  disposi-
tion !
"  Utter  the  message,  which  thou  hast  for  Laila."

He  replied  : — "  Take  not  my  name  before  the  beloved ;
"  For  (to  mention)  my  name,  where  she  is,  is  violence."


A  certain  one  took  up  reproach  against  Mahmud  of  Grhaznin,
Saying  : — "  Ayaz  has  no  (great)  beauty.     Oh  wonder !

"  The  rose,  which  has  neither  colour  nor  perfume, —
"  The  nightingale's  passion  for  it  is  wonderful."

One  uttered  this  matter  to  Mahmud ;

He  writhed  much  on  himself,  in  reflection,

200  Saying  : — ''  Oh  sir  !  my  love  is  for  his  disposition,
"  Not,  for  his  stature,  and  good  height."

I  heard  that,  in  a  defile,  a  camel
Fell ;  and,  a  chest  of  pearls  broke.

The  king  expanded  his  sleeve  for  plunder  ;
And,  thence  urged  his  horse  with  speed.

The  horsemen  (of  the  retinue)  went  after  the  pearls  and

coral ;
They  became,  in  search  of  plunder,  separated  from  the  king.

Of  the  attendants,  neck-exalting,  there  remained
None,  behind  the  king,  save  Aydz.

13


194  THE    BUSTAN    OF    Sa'dI.  [cHAP.  III.

205  He  glanced,  saying  : — "  Oh  one  heart-enchanting,  fold  in
fold!
"What   hast   thou   brought   from    the    plunder?"      He
replied  : — "  Nothing.

"  I  galloped  in  rear  of  thee ;

"  I  quitted  not  service  for  wealth."

If  thou  hast  propinquity,  in  the  Court  (of  Grod),
Be  not  careless  of  the  King,  for  wealth.

It  is  contrary  to  religion,  that  the  friends  of  God ;
Should  ask  for  anything,  save  Grod,  from  God.

If,  as  to  a  friend,  thy  eye  is  intent  upon  his  beneficence.
Thou  art  in  the  desire  of  thyself,  not  in  the  desire  of  thy
friend.

210

So  long  as  thy  month  is  open,  through  avarice ;
The  secret  (of  God)  from  the  hidden  comes  not  to  the  ear
of  the  heart.

Truths  are  a  decorated  house ;

Lust  and  concupiscence  are  dust  up-raised.

Seest  thou  not,  that  wherever  the  dust  has  risen,

The  sight  beholds  not,  though  man  be  possessed  of  vision.


1


By  chance  I  and  an  old  man  from  Faryab

Arrived  at  a  water  (of  a  river)  in  the  soil  of  the  "West.

205       "  Dilbur  pech  pech  "  signifies —

(a)  Mahbub-i-muza'af  wa  mustahkam.
(6)  Dil-rabayanda  dar  kham-i-zulf-i-tabdar.
Oh  lieart-ravisher,  in  the  curl  of  the  curling-curl !
208       The  Persians  often  use  the  Arabic  plural  in  a  singular  sense,  as  : —
Sing,  hur  Plur.  huri.

„     hamam  „      hamamat.

211       Truths  are  a  decorated  house,  around  which  lust  and  concupiscence
are  as  dust  up-raised.     Therefore  the  eye  of  those  possessed  of  avarice
reaches  not  to  it  (the  decorated  house),  and  admittance  to  them  is  denied.
213       Faryab  is  a  town  in  Turkistdn.

In  the  'Ikd-i-manzum,  couplets  213-236  are  omitted.


CHAP.  III.]  ON   LOVE.  195

I  had  one  diram ;  they  took

Me,  in  a  boat ;  and,  left  the  darvesh.

215  The  Ethiopians  (boatmen)  urged  the  vessel,  like  smoke  ;
For   the   commander    of    that    vessel   was    one,    Grod-not
fearing.

From  thought  of  my  companion,  to  me  weeping  came ;
He  laughed  a  horse-laugh,  at  my  weeping,  and  said  : —

"  Oh  one  full  of  wisdom  !  suffer  not  grief  for  my  sake ;
B       "  That  One,  who  takes  the  boat,  brings  me."


He  spread  the  prayer-carpet  on  the  surface  of  the  water ;
— I  thought,  is  it  fancy  ;  or  (do  I  behold  it)  in  a  dream  ? —

From  amazement,  my  eye,  that  night,  slept  not ;

In  the  morning,  the  old  man  glanced  at  me,  and  said  : —

220  "  Oh  friend  of  happy  judgment !  remainst  thou  astonied  ?
"  A  boat  brought  thee  !  and,  God  me  !  "

"Why  do  not  the  people  of  prayer  believe  to  this  extent.
That  certain  pious  men  may  go  in  water  and  fire  ?

The  child,  who  has  no  knowledge  of  fire.
The  loving  mother  protects.

Then  those,  who  are  immersed  in  religious  fervour,
Are,  night  and  day,  in  the  eye  of  the  protection  of  Grod.


215  "  Na-khudd  "  is  contracted  from — nav-khuda.  Had  the  commander
of  the  vessel  feared  God  he  would  have  taken  the  darvesh.

221  "  Abdal"  (sing,  badi'l)  are  those  by  reason  of  whom  God  continues  the
world  in  existence ;  they  go  fearlessly  into  fire  and  water,  and  pass  un-
harmed ;  they  are  seventy  in  number,  of  whom  forty  are  in  Syria  and
the  remainder  elsewhere.

"  Ahl-i-da'wa  "  signifies — ahl-i-duny/i,  people  attentive  to  the  exterior,
but  who  know  not  God  from  the  heart  (the  Pharisee).

13  *


J  96  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  III.

God  preserves  (Ibrahim)  the  friend  of  God  from  the  heat

of  the  fire ;
As  the  wooden-cradle  of  Musa  (the  speaker  of  God)  from

the  whirl-pool  of  the  Nile.

225  When  a  boy  is  in  the  hand  of  a  swimmer,
He  fears  not,  though  the  Euphrates  be  broad.

How  mayst  thou  walk  on  the  surface  of  the  sea.
Like  men   (of  God),  when,  on  dry  land,  thou  art  wet  of
skirt  (sin-stained)  ?


Wisdom's  path  is  not,  save  turning  on  turning ;
.     Before  holy  men  there  is  nothing,  save  God.

One  can  say  this  to  the  one  truths-knowing ;
But,  the  people  of  argument  cavil.

Saying  : — "  Then  the  sky  and  earth — what  are  they  ?
"  The    son   of    Adam,    and   rapacious   and    non-rapacious
beasts  what  are  they  ?"

230  Oh  wise  man !  thou  didst  ask  an  approved  matter ;
If  the  answer  be  agreeable  to  thee,  I  will  speak,

Saying  : — "  The  plain,  and  sea,  and  mountain,  and  sky,
"  Pari  and  Adam-born,  and  demon,  and  angel —

"  All,  whatever  they  are, — are  less  than  He ;

"  For,  they  took  the  name  of  existence  by  His  existence.


225       In  the  first  line  "  bar  "  is  rediindant,

228  "  Haka-ik-shinas "  signifies — 'urfa  (sing,  'arif),  those  who  make  a
certainty  of  attaining  their  objects  by  purification  and  bringing  them-
selves to  perfection.

"  Ahl-i-kiyas  "  signifies — sages  who  make  proof  of  religious  points  by
sight  and  argument.

232  The  author  utters  not  a  negation  as  to  their  existence,  for  all  things
are  of  God  ;  without  Him  there  is  nothing,  as  is  the  belief  of  some  sects
of  Sufi's.


^


CHAP.  III.]  ON    LOVE.  J  97

"  Before  thee,  the  sea,  in  wave-motion,  is  mighty  ;
"  The  shining  sun,  in  the  zenith,  is  lofty.

"  But,  how  do  people  of  external  form  find  the  trace,
"  To  the  country,  where  the  lords  of  truth  are  ?

235  "  Saying : — '  If  it  be  a  sun,  it  is  not  even  an  atom  ;

"  And,  if  it  be  seven  rivers,  it  is  not  even  a  drop  of  water.'  "

When   the    Sultan   of    Honour    (God)    draws    forth    His

standard  (appears).
The  world  draws  its  head  into  the  collar  of  non-existence.


The  Ra,is  of  a  village,  with  his  son,  on  a  certain  road,
Passed  by  the  centre  of  a  monarch's  army.

The  son  beheld  the  heralds,  and  sword,  and  battle-axe ;
Coats  of  satin,  waist-belts  of  gold.

Warriors,  bow-possessing,  and  prey-striking  ;
Slaves,  quiver-bearing,  and  arrow-casting.


According  to  the  author,  the  possible  existence  (of  a  creation)  in  con-
nection with  the  necessary  existence  (God  the  Creator)  is  in  the  stage
of  nonentity  ;  and,  though  possibilities  (of  creation)  are  great,  they  are
small  in  comparison  with  the  greatness  of  God.

With  the  Sufi's  the  display  of  argument  on  the  part  of  sages  is  im-
possible, for  they  say  that  reason,  in  the  understanding  of  this,  is  dis-
missed, even  as  in  the  understanding  of  probabilities  the  senses  are  out
of  office.

They  call  the  Sufi's  "  t8i,ifa,e  wujudiya."  The  word  Sufi  comes  from
the  Arabic  word  "  ^uf  "  signifying  wool.  In  former  days  the  §uf  is  wore
a  blue  woollen  garment  of  harsh  texture ;  for  good  clothing  could  not
then  be  made  of  wool.  In  Persia,  the  educated  people  are  in  favour  of
Sufi-ism.  The  belief,  set  forth  in  couplet  232,  is  attributed  to  Revela-
tion  and  Apocalypse.

"  Ahl-i-9urat "  signifies — a^hdb-i-zahir,  which  is  opposed  to  ahl-i-
ma'ni.

To  those  regarding  God's  grandeur,  the  sun,  world-illuminating,  is
less  than  an  atom.


198  THE  BUSTAN  OF  SA'dI.  [oHAP.  III.  "

240  This  one, — a  garment  of  painted  silk  on  his  body  ;
That  one, — a  royal  cap  on  his  head.

The  son,  when  he  beheld  all  that  pomp  and  splendour,
Saw  the  exceeding  meanness  of  his  father,

Whose  state  changed,  and  whose  colour  went ;
From  fear,  he  fled  to-  a  cave.

The  son  said,  at  length,  to  him  : — "  Thou  art  the  Ra,is  of

a  village ;
*'  Thou  art,  in  chieftainship,  of  the  great  ones.

"  What  chanced  to  thee,  that  thou  didst  sever  the  hope  of

life;
"  Didst  tremble,  willow-like,  with  the  blast  of  terror  ?  "

245  He  replied  : — "  Yes  ;  I  am  chief,  and  order-giver;

"  But,  my  honour  is  (only)  so  long  as  I  am  in  the  village."

The    great    ones    (holy  men)    are   terror-struck,   on   that

account.
That  they  have  been  in  the  Court  of  the  King  (God).

Oh  simpleton  !  thou  art,  in  the  village,  inasmuch

As  thou  attributest  such  importance  to  thy  own  person.

The  eloquent  uttered  no  word,

On  which,  Sa'di  utters  not  a  parable.


Perhaps,  thou  mayst  have  seen,  in  the  garden  or  meadow,

how
The  fire-fly  gleams  at  night,  lamp-like  ?


243       In  the  second  line  the  second  "  sar  "  is  redundant.
249       "  Kirmake  "  comes  from  "  kirm."     The  "ak"  is  added  to  render  the
word  diminutive  ;  the  final  "  e  "  is  *'  ya,e  wahdat."


OHAP.  III.]  ON    LOVE.  199

|i60  One  said  to  it : — "  Oh  fire-flv,  nio^lit-illiiminatiiig^ !

"  What  is  the  matter  with  thee,  that  thou  comest  not  forth
by  day  ?  "

Behold — the  fiery  fire-fly,  earth-born,

What  answer  it  gave  from  its  head  of  luminosity.

"  Day  and  night,  save  in  the  desert,  I  am  not ;
"  But,  in  the  sun's  presence,  I  am  not  manifest."


In  a  city  of  Syria,  tumult  occurred ;
They  seized  an  old  man  of  happy  nature.

Within  my  ear,  still  is  that  speech,

— When  they  placed  fetters  on  his  feet  and  hands, —

255  Which  he  uttered  : — "  If  the  Sultan  (God)  makes  not  the
signal,
"  To  whom,  is  there  the  boldness  to  plunder  ?  "

It  is  proper  to  hold  such  an  enemy  (the  plunderer),  a  friend  ;
For,  I  know  the  Friend  (Grod)  appointed  him  over  me.

If  there  be  respect  and  rank ;  or,  if  contempt  and  bonds, —
I  know  that  they  come  from  God,  not  from  'Umar  and  Zayd.

Oh  wise  man  !  have  no  fear  of  disease ;

For,  the  Physician  (God)  sends  bitter  medicine.

Enjoy  whatever  comes  from  the  hand  of  the  friend ;
The  sick  one  is  not  wiser  than  the  physician.


260  A  certain  one  uttered  praise  as  to  Sa'd  (son)  of  Zangi;
Saying : — "  May  there  be  much  mercy  on  his  tomb  !  "


257       "  'Umar  va  Zayd  "  stand  for — A.  and  B,

260       For  the  examination  for  "  High -Proficiency,"  couplets  260-267  are
omitted.


200  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  111.

He  gave  money,  and  a  dress  of  honour ;  and  cherished  him ;
Prepared  for  him,  a  dignity  conformable  to  his  skill.

When  he  saw — "  Allah  va  has," — on  a  picture  of  gold,
He  was  agitated ;  and  plucked  off  the  robe  from  his  body.

From  perturbation,  such  a  flame  caught  his  soul,
That  he  arose,  and  took  the  path  to  the  desert.

One  of  those  desert- sitting  said  to  him  : —

"  What  sawst  thou,  that  thy  state  became  changed?

265  *'  Thou  didst,  first,  kiss  the  ground  in  three  places ;

"  Thou  shouldst  not,  in  the  end,  strike  the  back  of  the
foot  (on  the  gold)."

He  laughed,  saying  : — "  First,  from  fear  and  hope,
"  A  trembhng,  willow-like,  fell  on  my  limbs.

"  Finally,  from  the  majesty  of — '  Allah  va  bas  "
"  Neither   thing,    nor  person,    appeared    (worthy)    in    my
eye.


Of  a  certain  one  like  me,  the  heart  to  the   power   of  a

person
Was  pledged ;  and,  he  endured  much  contempt.

After  (regarding  him  for)  learning  and  wisdom,
They  proclaimed  him  by  (beat  of)  drum  for  madness.


262  "  Allah  va  bas  "  signifies — Allah  kaf  i ;  the  word  "  va  "  is  redundant.
On  seeing  the  illumination  of  "  Allah  va  bas,"  which,  in  gold,  was  em-
broidered on  that  robe,  he  severed  his  heart  from  the  world;  and
drawing  it  off  from  his  shoulder,  in  perturbation,  rent  it.

266       "  Zadan  pusht-i-pa,e  "  signifies — lakad  zadan ;  tark  zadan.

268  "  Dil  ba  dast-i-kase  giran  budan  "  signifies — bar  kase  'ashik  shudan.
See  couplet  168.

In  the  'Ikd-i-manzum,  couplets  268  to  283  are  omitted.


CHAP.  III.]  ON    LOVE.  201

270  For  the  friend,  he  used  to  bear  the  violence  of  the  enemy ;
For  the  poison  (even)  of  a  friend  is  a  great  antidote.

He  used  to  suffer  pushing  on  the  back  of  the  head,  from

the  hands  of  his  friends  ;   .
Forehead  brought  forward  (to  the  blows)  nail-like.

Fancy  made  tumult  as  to  his  head,  in  such  a  way.
That,  it  made  the  roof  of  his  brain  kick-suffering.

Of  his  friends'  reproaching,  to  him  was  no  knowledge.
As  one  drowning  has  no  knowledge  of  rain.

He,  whose  heart's  foot  has  come  against  the  stone  (of  love)
Reflects  not  regarding  the  gloss  of  name  and  fame.

275  One  night  the  demon  (Shaitan)  made  himself  like  one  of
Pari-f  ace ;
He  hastened  into  that  young  man's  embrace.

In  the  morning,  to  him,  was  no  power  of  prayer ;
Of  his  friends  none  was  acquainted  with  his  secret.

He  plunged  into  a  piece  of  water,  near  the  roof  (building), —
A  marble-door,  on  it  ice  fixed.

An  adviser  began  to  reproach.

Saying : — *'  Thou  wilt  kill  thyself,  in  this  cold  water."

From  the  just  youth,  a  cry  issued,
•  Exclaiming : — "  Oh    friend !    be   silent    as    to    so    much
reproach.


270  Everything  from  a  friend's  hand  is  good.

271  Kafa  khurdan "   signifies — gardani   khurdan,  to   suffer  pushing,   by
nape  of  the  neck  seizing.

275       "  Bar  wai "  should  be— bumA.     See  couplet  268.

277       The  cold  had  fixed  a  door  of  ice  upon  the  surface  of  the  water.


202  THE   BUSTAN    OP    SA'DI.  [cHAP.  III.

280  *'  Five  days,  this  boy  fascinated  my  heart ;

"  For  love  of  him,  I  am  in  such  a  state  that  I  cannot  be
patient.

"  He  asked  not  once,  with  sweet  throat,  (as  to  my  con-
dition),

*'  Behold, — how  long  I  endure,  with  soul,  the  burden  of
his  tyranny.

"  Then  as  to  Him, — who  created  my  body  from  the  dust ;
*'  Created  within  it,  by  His  power,  the  pure  soul, —

"  Hast  thou  wonder,  if  I  bear  the  burden  of  His  order,
"  When  I  am  perpetually  immersed  in  His  beneficence  and
grace  ? "

If  thou  art  a  man  of  love,  lose  thyself ;
And,  if  not, — take  the  path  of  ease.

286  Fear  not  that  God  may,  through  love,  make  thee  clay ;
For  thou  remainst,  if  God  destroys  thee.

From  true  grains,  vegetation  springs  not,
Unless,  first,  dust  gathers  about  them.

That  gives  thee  acquaintance  with  God,

"Which  gives  thee  deliverance  from  thy  own  hand.


280       See  couplets  268,  275.

284  "  Gum  ^wesh  gi'r  "  signifies —

(a)  Ikhtiyar-i-nisti  kun.

(b)  Tark-i-]^udi  kun,  va  dar  yad-i-ma'shuk  l^ud  va  faramosh

kun.
In  the  'Ikd-i-manzum,  couplets  284-304  are  omitted.

285  Fear  not  tliat  God  may  through  love  make  thee  clay,  or  destroy  thee  ;
for  thou  wilt  obtain  everlasting  life  from  this  non-existence.

286  Change  of  state  is  the  cause  of  fruition.

287  So  long  as  thou  art  a  captive  to  thyself  thou  canst  not  have  know-
ledge of  God.


CHAP.  III.]  ON    LOVE.  203

For,  so  long  as  thou  art  self -possessing,  the  path  to  thyself

is  not ;
And,  with  this  subtlety,  the  self -less  one  only  is  acquainted.

Not  the  musician, — but  the  sound  of  the  animal's  hoof.
Is  song  (sama'),  if  thou  hast  love  (to  God)  and  passion
(for  Him).

290  The   fly  beats    not  its   wings,   before  the  one  heart-dis-
traught.
Who  strikes  not,  fly-like,  his  hands  on  his  head.

The  one  distraught  in  affairs  (the  lover  of  God)  knows

neither  the  bass  nor  the  treble  note ;
The  fakir  weeps  at  the  voice  of  the  fowl.

The  Singer  (God)  Himself  becomes  not  silent ;
But,  not  every  time,  is  the  ear  open.

When  those  distraught  practise  wine-adoration,

They  express  intoxication,  at  the  sound  of  the  water-wheel.

Like  a  water-wheel,  they  begin  gyrating ;

Like  a  water-wheel,  they  weep  bitterly  on  themselves.


288       So  long  as  thou  art  not  self-less  (bekhud),  thou  knowst  not  thyself
— who  thou  art  or  whence  thou  earnest,  as  they  have  said  : —
"  Whosoever  regards  hinaself  self-less,  he  is  informed."

290  If  a  fly  beat  its  wings  before  the  lover  of  Grod,  he  becomes  enraptured
at  the  sound;  strikes,  fly-like,  his  hands  on  his  head,  and  exhibits
ecstacy  and  "  sama'."

"  Sama'  "  signifies — hearing,  song,  the  circular  dance  of  the  darvesh.

291  **  Bum  "  signifies — awaz-i-gir^n,  a  great  noise.

"  Zer  "  signifies — awaz-i-sabuk  wa  barik  wa  narm,  a  quick,  gentle,  and
soft  note.

292  The  hidden  Singer  and  Player  (God)  is  never  silent  and  never  reposes ;
but  the  hearer's  ear  is  not  always  open.

293  When  those  distraught  with  the  wine  of  the  love  of  Gk)d,  and  with
the  draught  of  the  worshippers  of  the  wine-tavern  of  love,  come  into
tumult  by  reason  of  the  intoxication  of  the  wine  of  love,  and  into
clamour  by  the  intoxication  of  the  wine  of  affection,  they  display  rapture
and  ecstacy  at  the  sound  of  the  water-wheel.


204  THE  BUSTAN  OF  Sa'dI.  [cHAP.  III.

295  With  resignation,  they  carry  their  head  into  the  collar  (of
reflection) ;
"When   power    (of   patience)   remains   not,  they   rend  the
collar  (in  perturbation).

Reproach    not  the    darvesh,    bewildered   and   intoxicated

(with  love),
Who  is  immersed  in  the  sea  of  God ;  for  that  reason,  he

strikes  hand  and  foot.

Oh  brother !  I  say  not  sama',  what  it  is  (lawful,  or  not) ;
Perhaps,  I  know  not  the   hearer,  who   he  is   (a  lover  of
Grod,  or  not)  ?


295  "  Sar  dar  giriban  burdan  "  signifies —

(a)  Gardan  nihadan.

(6)  Murakibat  kardan.

(c)  Fikr  wa  andesha  kardan.
In  resignation  to  God,  they  sit,  head  on  the  knee  of  reflection  ;  and
whenever,  in  the  stage  of  witnessing  the  splendour  of  God,  power  of
I'estraining  the  effulgence  of  the  rays  of  glory  remains  not,  they  rend
the  collar  in  perturbation.

296  In  the  phraseology  of  Suff-ism  the  hearing  of  a  pleasant  sound  is
"  sama'."  By  a  certain  quality  this  sound  brings  the  hearer  into
motion,  as  they  hare  said : —

"  The  hearing  of  a  pleasant  modulated  sound  is  the  inciter  of  the
heart."

When  the  hearer  comes,  by  reason  of  this  sound,  into  motion,  I
observe  that  the  motion  is  either  modulated,  or  not  modulated.  If  it
be  modulated,  they  call  it  dancing  (raks),  and,  if  not  modulated,  agita-
tion (iztirab),  or  "  sama'."

When  the  "  sama'  "  is  the  cause  of  motion,  they  call  the  motion  itself
"  sama*,"  after  the  fashion  of  naming  jbhe  thing  caused  (rak?)  by  the
name  of  the  cause  (sama').

When  a  person  hears  this  pleasant  sound,  a  certain  state,  called
ecstasy  (wajd)  is  created  within  him.  When,  involuntarily,  not  through
sport  or  in  the  way  of  the  sinner,  such  a  state  (wajd)  is  produced  within
him,  "  sama' "  is  lawful,  otherwise  unlawful.  The  impropriety  (hurmat)
of  sport  and  mirth,  on  hearing  a  pleasant  sound,  is  not  because  the
"  sama' "  is  modulated,  or  that  it  is  a  pleasant  sound.  The  listening  to
modulated  metrical  utterances  of  God's  word,  and  the  traditions  of  His
Prophet,  and  the  words  of  pious  men,  and  to  nightingales  and  men  of
fine  voice,  would  then  have  been  unlawful ;  but  no  one  has  said  so.


OHAP.  III.]  ON    LOVE.  205

If  from  the  tower  of  truth  (of  Grod),  his  bird  (soul)  flies,
The  angel  remains  below  his  journeying.

If  he  be  a  man  of  sport  and  pastime  and  mirth,

The  demon  (of  lust)  becomes  stronger  within  his  brain.

300  How  is  the  lust- worshipper  a  man  of  sama'  ?

At  the  pleasant  sound,  the  one  sleeping  rises,  not  the  one
intoxicated.

By  the  moving  wind,  the  rose  becomes  disturbed ;

Not,  the  fire- wood,  which  one  can  split  only  with  an  axe.

The  world  is  full  of  sama',  and  intoxication,  and  distraction.
But,  what  does  the  blind  man  behold  in  the  mirror  ?


The  difference  between  song  (sarod)  and  melody  (naghma)  depends
upon  the  degree  of  ability  and  rank  of  the  hearer.

If  the  bird  of  fancy  is  the  hearer  from  the  tower  of  the  knowledge  of
God  (that  is,  the  nest  of  truth,  "ma'ni,"  is  in  his  fancy),  his  flight  will
reach  to  a  place  where  the  angel  is  impotent  as  to  his  flight.

But,  if  he  be  a  lust-worshipper,  his  imperious  lust  will  become
stronger,  and  will  incline  him  to  his  sins.

"  Mard-i-sama'  "  signifies — kabil-i-sama'.

The  lust- worshipper  is  incapable  of  hearing  "  sama'  "  and  song  (sarod),
for  he  is  in  the  sleeping  stage  [careless  of  intoxication  (masti)  and  the
relish  of  the  love  of  God],  not  intoxicated  and  senseless  with  wine  of  the
love  of  God.     He,  sleeping,  becomes  awake  at  the  pleasant  sound.

The  lovers  of  God  are  all,  with  wine  of  love,  intoxicated  and  senseless.

Again : — He  who  is  a  lust- worshipper  is  not  of  the  people  of  "  samd'."
When  the  lovers  of  God  hear  the  sound  of  the  song  of  praise  to  God,
the  hearing  of  such  sound  is  lawful.     Hence,  they  have  said  : —

"  '  Sama' '  is  lawful  to  that  one  to  whom  the  sound  of  the  harp
and  of  the  shutting  of  a  door  are  the  same  as  regards  enjoyment  and
pleasure."

The  one,  rose-like  (tender),  is  affected  by  everything.

Those  of  blind  heart  find  not  God.  They  say  that  'Ali  (may  God  be
satisfied  with  him !)  heard  the  sound  of  a  conch.  One  who  was  with
him  asked,  "  Understandest  thou  what  this  conch  says  ?  "

Another  of  the  assembly  replied,  "  God  and  His  Prophet,  and  the
Cousin  of  His  Prophet  ('All')  know."

Then  'Alf  said,  "  This  conch  exclaims  *  Oh  God  !  Oh  God  !  Oh  God  !
Oh  truth !  Oh  truth  !  Oh  truth ! '  "


206  TBE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  ITI.

Seest  thou  not — the  camel  at  the  rousing  of  the  Arab's

(recitation),
How  joy  brings  him  to  dancing  ?

"What !  the  camel  has,  in  his  head,  tumult  and  joy ;
K  a  man  has  not — he  is  an  ass.


305  A  young  man  of  sugar-lip  used  to  blow  the  flute ;

In  such  a  way,  that  he  used  to  burn  hearts  in  the  fire,
reed-like.

The  father,  oftentimes,  hurled  shouts  at  him,
With  severity;  and,  used  to  set  fire  to  the  flute.

One  night,  he  listened  to  his  son's  performance ;
The  hearing  of  it  made  him  confused  and  senseless.

The  father  spoke — sweat  cast  up  on  his  face.

Saying  : — "  This  time,  the  reed  (flute)  set  fire  to  me."

Knowst  thou  not — the  intoxicated  phrenzied  ones
Why  they  spread  forth  the  hands  in  dancing  ?

810  Through  events,  a  door  opens  on  his  heart.

He  scatters  his  hand  as  to  (abandons)  the  universe.

In  memory  of  his  Friend  (God),  dancing  was  lawful  to  him.
In  whose  every  sleeve  is  a  soul.


303       On  their  journeys  the  Arabs  recite  poetry.     The  camels  become  joyful

and  display  celerity.
305       Observe  the  rare   meaning  of   "  amokhtan."     Here   it  means   "  na-

w^^tan."

In  the  'Ikd-i-manzum,  couplets  305-314  are  omitted.
810       "  Waridat  "    (sing,     warid)     signifies  —  hazir     shavanda.       In    the

phraseology  of  Sufi-ism,  warid  means   that   which   descends  into  the

heart  without  the  labour  of  acquisition.
311       Whosoever  has  these  qualities,  that  thou  mayst  say  "  A  soul  of  truth

is  in  his  sleeve,"  dancing  and  hand- scattering  (abandoning)  are  to  him

lawful,  in  order  that  he  may  scatter  the  ready  money  of  life  on  the

head  of  his  friend,  and  the  jewel  of  faith  (in  Islam)  on  his  feet.


CHAP.  III.]  ON    LOVE.  207

I  allow — that  thou  art  vigorous  in  swimming ;
Naked, — thou  canst  better  strike  the  hand  and  foot.

Pluck  off  the  ragged  garments  of  name  and  reputation,

and  hypocrisy ;
For  a  man,  powerless  by  his  garment,  may  be  drowned.

Worldly  connection  is  a  veil,  and  profitless  ;
When  thou  breakst  the  ligature,  thou  art  one  joined  (to
God).


315  A  person  said  to  a  moth  : — "  Oh  contemptible  one  !
"Go;  take  a  friend  suitable  to  thyself,

"  Go  on  such  a  path,  that  thou  mayst  see  the  way  of  hope ;
"  Thou,  and  the  love  of  the  candle  is  from  where  to  where  ?

"  Thou  art  not  the  samundar ;  circle  not  around  the  fire ;
"  For,  manliness  is  (first)  necessary  (for  man),  then  con-
flict.

"  The  blind  mouse  (bat)  goes  hidden  from  the  sun;
"  For,  force  is  foolish  against  an  iron  grasp.


312       "  Giriftan  "   signifies — farz  kardan.

In  the  sea  of  love,  calamity-exciting,  and  in  the  sea  of  the  knowledge
of  God,  blood-shedding,  thou  canst  not  swim  with  the  garments  of  fame
and  reputation,  nor  with  the  raiment  of  fraud  and  hyi)ocrisy.

Then  pluck  ofE  the  garment  of  existence  from  thy  back ;  cast  off  the
ragged  robe  of  worldly  affections  from  thy  breast.
314       "  Ta'alluk  "  signifies — ta'alluk-i-hir?  va  hawa,e  nafsdni  va  amr-i-dun-
yaviy.

" Wa?il,"  in  Sufi'-ism,  signifies — one  who  has  escaped  from  himself;
joined  God  Most  High ;  dived  into  the  sea  of  non-existence ;  and  carried
his  foot  to  the  shore  of  existence,  so  that  his  trace  is  not  visible,  just  as
a  drop  in  the  ocean  becomes  untraceable.

"  Hijab  "   signifies — a  veil,  or  hinderer  of  union,  between   thee  and
God.
316       The  candle   is   a   burner,  and  thou  (the  moth)  hast  a  capacity  for
burning.     The  love  of  the  candle,  which  is  the  enemy  of  thy  life,  befits
thee  not.


208  THE  BUSTAN  OP  SA'dI.  [cHAP.  III.

'*  The  person,  whom  thou  knowst  to  be  thy  enemy ;
"  To  take  for  a  friend  is  not  (the  part)  of  wisdom."

820  No  one  says  to  thee  : — "  Thou  dost  do  good

•'  When  thou  placest  thy  life  in  the  desire  of  his  love.

"  The  beggar  who,  of  a  king,  asked  (in  marriage)  for  his

daughter,
"  Suffered  pushing  on  the  back  of  his  head,  and  nurtured

a  vain  passion.

"  How  may  she  bring  into  reckoning  a  lover  like  thee,
"  For,  the  faces  of  kings  and  sultans  are  towards  her  ?

"  Think  not  that,  in  such  an  assembly,  she

"  "Will  exercise  courtesy  to  a  poor  one  like  thee.

'*  Or  if  she  practise  gentleness  towards  the  whole  creation,
"  — Thou  art  a  helpless   one  ; — she  will  exercise  severity
to  thee."

325  Behold  !  the  ardent  moth

What  it  said : — "  Oh  wonder  display er  !   if  I  burn,  what
fear?

"  Like  Ibrahim,  a  fire  (of  love)  is  in  my  heart,
"  That,  thou  mayst  consider  this  (candle-)  flame  is  to  me
a  rose.


319       "  Jan  dar  sar-kar-i-kase  kardan  "   signifies —

Fida   sakhtan-i-jan   dar   sar   o   kar-i-kase,   wa   'umr-i-khud  sirf
namudan.
820       "  Sar  o  kar  "  signifies —

(a)  Awwal  kar  wa  kar-i-d^ir.
•■        (h)  Sauda,e  'ishk.
322       This  may  be  rendered : —

Into  reckoning,  a  lover  like  thee,  how  may  that  one  bring,
Towards  whom  the  faces  of  kings  and  sultans  are  (turned)  ?
825       "  'Ajab  "  signifies — ta'ajjub  kunanda.

326       Nirarud  threw  Ibrahim  into  the  fire.     God  made  the  fire  a  rose-garden
for  Ibrahim's  sake.


880


886


CHAP.  III.]  ON    LOVE.  209

*  Mj  heart  draws  not  the  skirt  of  the  ravishing  one  (the

candle)  ;

*  But  its  love  draws  the  collar  of  my  soul.

*  Voluntarily,  I  take  not  myself  to  the  fire  ;
'  But,  the  chain  of  love  is  about  my  neck.

*  Even  so,  1  was  far,  when  it  burned  me ;

*  Not  this  moment,  when  the  fire  of  love  kindled  in  me.

'  A  beloved  one,  in  regard  to  loveliness,  does  not  do  that,

*  That  one  can  speak  to  her  of  continence.

*  Who  reproaches  me  for  love  of  the  friend,

'  When,  slain  at  the  friend's  foot,  I  am  content  ?

*  Knowst  thou,  why  I  have  a  lust  for  destruction,

'  When  it  (the  candle)  is,  if  I  am  not, — it  is  proper.

*  I  will  burn  because  it  is  the  approved  beloved,

*  In  whom,  the  burning  of  the  friend  (the  moth)  makes

circulation.

*  How  long  speakst  thou  to  me,  saying  : — *  Suitable  to

thyself

*  *  Get  a  companion,  compassionate  to  thyself  ?  '

'  Admonition  to  that  one  of  distraught  state  is  as  if

*  Thou  shouldst  say  to  one  scorpion-bitten — lament  not !

*  Oh  astonished  one !  utter  not  advice  to  that  person,

*  In  whom,  thou  knowst  that  it  will  take  no  effect.

'  To  the  helpless  one,  rein-gone  from  the  hand,
'  They  say  not : — *  Oh  boy  !  urge  slowly.'  "


827       I  am  not  the  allxirer  of  my  beloved ;  but,  love  is  my  allurer.

336  "  Shiguft  "  signifies — muta'ajjib.

337  In  the  'I^d-i-manzum,  couplets  336-347  are  omitted.

14


210  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  III.

How  pleasantly  occurred  tliis  witticism  in  the  book — Sind-

Md:—
— "  Oh  son  I  love  is  fire ;  advice,  wind."

The  fierce  fire,  by  the  wind,  becomes  more  lofty ;
The  panther,  by  striking,  becomes  more  angry.

340  "When  I  saw,  thoroughly,  thou  doest  evil.

That  thou  placest  my  face  opposite  to  one  like  thyself.

Seek  one  better  than  thyself,  and  reckon  it  gain ;
For,  with  one  like  thyself,  thou  losest  time.

The  self -worshippers  go  in  pursuit  of  such  as  themselves  ;
Those  intoxicated  of  Grod  go  in  a  dangerous  street  (of  love).

When  I  first  possessed  desire  for  this  work,

I  took  up,  at  once,  my  heart  from  desire  (of  life).

One  head-casting  is  true  as  a  lover ;

For,  one  of  white-liver  is  the  lover  of  himself.

345  Death,  in  ambush,  suddenly,  slays  me ;

It  is  better,  indeed,  that  the  delicate  one  should  slay  me.

"When,  doubtless,  destruction  is  written  on  my  head.
Destruction  (is)  most  pleasant,  by  the  hand  of  the  beloved.

Dost  thou  not,  one  day,  in  helplessness,  yield  the  soul  ?
Then,  it  is  best  thou  surrender  it,  at  the  feet  of  the  beloved.


One  night,  T  recollect  that  my  eyes  slept  not ;
I  heard  that  a  moth  spoke  to  a  candle.


388       Sindbad  is  a  work  on  philosophy,  maxims,  counsel,  and  sage  precepts.
340       No  one  is  profited  by  association  with  one  like  himself.

343  "  Sar  dashtana  "  signifies — dar  sar  kardan.

"  Sar  bar  dashtan  "  signifies — tark-i-sar  kardan.

344  "  Bad-zuhra"  (lit.  of  bad  liver)  is  here  rendered  white-liyer.
"  Sar  andaz  "  is  one  who  sports  with  his  head  (life).


OHAP.  III.]  ON    LOVE.  211

Saying  : — **  I  am  a  lover ;  if  I  burn,  it  is  lawful,
"  Wherefore  is  thy  weeping  and  burning  ?  "

50  It  replied  : — "  Oh  my  poor  lover  !

"  Honey  (wax),  my  sweet  friend,  has  departed  from  me.

"  When  sweetness  (wax)  goes  away  from  me,

"  Like  (the  statuary)  Far  had,  fire  goes  to  my  head."

The  candle  kept  speaking, — and,  every  moment,  a  torrent

of  grief
Ran  down,  on  its  yellow  cheeks, —

Saying  : — "  Oh  claimant !  love  is  not  thy  business ;
"  For,    thou  hast    neither    patience,   nor   the    power   of
standing.

"  Thou  dost  fly  from  before  a  naked  flame ;
"  I  am  standing,  until  I  completely  burn.

185  "  If  the  fire  of  love  burns  thy  feathers,

"  Behold  me,  whom  it  burns  from  head  to  foot.

"  Observe  not  my  splendour,  assembly-illuminating ;
"  Consider  the  heat  and  torrent  of  my  heart-burning.

"  Like  Sa'di,  whose  outward  form  is  illuminated ;
"  But,  if  thou  lookst, — his  vitals  are  burned.'*

A  portion  of  the  night,  even  so,  had  not  passed.
When  one  of  Pari-face,  suddenly,  extinguished  it.

While  its  smoke  rose  to  its  head,  it  kept  saying  : —
"  Oh  son  !  this  is  indeed  the  end  of  love  !  "


357  Sa'di  was  "  ahl-i-Ml."     See  couplet  1.

358  A  little  of  the  night  yet  remained.

359  The  end  of  love  is  to  surrender  one's  life.

14  ♦


212  THE  BUSTAN  OF  SA'dI.  [oHAP.  III.

360  This  is  the  way  (of  God),  if  thou  wilt  learn ;

By  being  slain,  thou  wilt  obtain  ease  from  the  burning  (of
love).

Make  not  lamentation  over  the  grave  of  one  slain  by  the

friend ;
Say  : — "  Praise  be  to  God  !  that  he  is  accepted  by  Him."

If  thou  art  a  lover,  wash  not  the  hand  of  sickness  (of  love).
Wash  the  hand,  like  Sa'di,  of  (worldly)  design.

The  one  who  sacrifices  his  life  keeps  not  his  hand  from  his

object,
Though  they  rain  arrow  and  stone  on  his  head.

I  said  to  thee  "  Beware  ;  go  not  to  the  ocean ;

"  But,  if  thou  goest,  entrust  thy  body  to  the  storm."


360       By  dying,  thou  wilt  obtain  everlasting  life.

Observe  that  "  kushtan  "  is  used  to  express  in  couplet. —
358,  the  extinguishing  of  a  candle.
360,  the  slaying  of  a  man.
862       The  first  line  means — be  always  sick  (with  lovf ).
368       "  Fida,i "  is  one  who  casts  himself  into  da.gerous  places,  regardless
of  life,  for  the  sake  of  his  beloved.


CHAP.  IV.]  ON    HUMILITY.  213


CHAPTER   IV.
On  Humility.

The  pure  Lord  created  thee  from  dust,
Then,  oh  slave,  practise  humility  like  dust.

Be  not  avaricious,  and  world-consuming,  and  head-strong ;
Of  dust,  He  created  thee ;  be  not  like  fire.

When  the  horrent  fire  exalted  its  neck.
The  dust  cast  down  its  body  in  abjectness.

When  that  (the  fire)  showed  head-exaltation ;  this,  abase-
ment;
They  made — of  that,  a  demon  ;  of  this,  a  man.


8  A  rain-drop  dropped  from  a  cloud ;
It  became  ashamed,  when  it  beheld  the  amplitude  of  the
ocean.


2       Some  say  that  the  phrase  "  world-consuming  "  qualifies  "  hari?."
*       Couplets  4  and  5  form  a  "  kat'a-band."

In  the  'Ikd-i-manzum,  couplets  5  to  21  are  omitted.
The  Imuran  says : — "  Verily,  we  have  created  man  from  black  clay,
kneaded ;  and,  before  his  creation,  jinn,  from  red  fire,  flame-possessing
and  burning.

"  Tan  ba  becharagf  anda^htan  "  signifies  —

Tawazu'  farotani  kiaksAri  kardan.


214  THE   BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  IV.

Saying : — "  Where  the  ocean  is,  what  am  I  ?
"  If  it  be ;  by  Grod  !  then,  I  am  not."

When  it  regarded  itself  with  the  eye  of  contempt,
A  shell  cherished  it  with  fervour  in  its  bosom.

The  sky  caused  its  work  to  reach  to  the  place  (of  honour),
Where,  it  became  the  famous  royal  pearl.

It  obtained  loftiness,  in  that  it  became  low  ;

It  beat  the  door  of  non-existence,  until  it  became  existent.


10  A  wise  youth  of  pure  disposition

Came  forth  from  the  sea,  at  the  barrier  of  Kiim.

They  observed  in  him, — excellence,  and  austerity,  and  dis-
cretion ;
They  placed  his  chattels  in  a  precious  place  (a  masjid).

One  day,  the  chief  of  the  'Abids  (the  shaikh)  spoke  to  the

man.
Saying : — "  Sweep  up  the  chips  and  dust  of  the  masjid."

As  soon  as  the  man,  road-travelling  (to  God)  heard  this

speech.
He  went  forth ;  and,  none  saw  again  a  trace  of  him.

The  religious  brethren  (the  Sufis),  and  the  shaikh  con-
jectured.
Saying  : — "  The  fakir  has  no  solicitude  for  service."

15  The  next  day,  a  servant  (of  the  monastery)  seized  him  on
the  road.
Saying : — "  Through  faulty  judgment,  thou  didst  not  well.


12       "  Sar-i-^alihan  "  signifies — imam ;  shaikh ;  peshwa,e  neko  karan.

18       "  Rah-rau  "  signifies — salik ;  ravanda,e  sharf'yat  va  tari^at  va  hakikat.


CHAP.  IV.]  ON   HUMILITY.  215

'•  Oh  boy,  self -approving !   knowst  thou  not,
"  That  by  service,  men  attain  to  rank  ?

From  the  power  of  truth  and  ardour,  he  began  to  weep,
Saying : — "  Oh  friend,  life-cherishing,  heart-illuminating !

"  In  that  abode  (the  masjid),  I  beheld  neither  dust,  nor

refuse ;
"  In  that  pure  place,  I  (only)  was  polluted.

"  I  consequently  took  the  retreating  step,
**  Saying : — '  The  masjid  pure  of  dust  and  chips  (myself)
is  weU.' "

80  For  the  darvesh,  there  is  only  this  path ;
That  he  hold  his  own  body  subjected.

Is  exaltation  necessary  to  thee  ?     Choose  humility ;
For  there  is  only  this  ladder  to  that  roof  (of  exaltation).


I  have  heard  that,  once  upon  a  time,  on  the  morning  of

an  'id,
Bayizid  came  out  of  the  hot  bath.


22       They  call  him  Bayizid  the  Bustani ;  but  his  name  was  Taif ur  bin  Tsa
bin  Adam  Surshan.     His  death  occurred  in  a.h.  281  or  304.
Abu  Musa,  his  disciple,  says  that  Bdyazid  relates  : —
In  a  dream  I  beheld  God  Most  High.     I  said,  "  How  is  the  path  to
Thee  ? "      He    replied,    "  When    thou    passest    out    of    thyself,    thou
arrivest."

In  a  dream  they  beheld  Bayizid,  after  death,  and  asked,  "  What  is
thy  state?  "  He  replied,  "  The  angels  said  to  me,  '  Oh,  old  man,  what
hast  thou  brought  ?  '  I  said,  *  When  a  darvesh  goes  to  a  king's  country,
they  say  not  ^to  him,  "  What  broughtst  thou  ?  "  but  "  What  wishst
thou?'""

Bdyizid,  at  the  time  of  death,  said : —

**  Neither  did  I  worship  Thee,  save  with  negligence  ;
Nor  did  I  serve  Thee,  save  with  carelessness."


216  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  IV.

A  certain  one,  unknowingly,  a  basin  of  ashes,
Cast  down,  from  a  house,  on  his  head.

He  spoke, — turban  and  hair  polluted.

Rubbing  the  palm  of  his  hand  thankfully  on  his  face, —

25  Saying  : — *'  Oh  lust  of  mine  !  I  am  worthy  of  the  fire  (of
hell)  ;
"  Why  draw  I  together  my  face  for  a  single  ash  ?  '*

The  great  showed  not  regard  to  themselves  ;
Desire  not  Grod-beholding  from  one  self -beholding.

Greatness  is  not  in  reputation  and  speech ;
Exaltation  is  not  in  pretension  and  conceit.

Humility  exalts  the  head  of  thy  sublimity ;
Arrogance  casts  thee  to  the  dust.

One,  head-extending,  of  fierce  temper  falls  to  the  neck  (in

a  pit) ;
Is  exaltation  necessary  to  thee  ? — seek  not  exaltation.

30  Seek  not  for  the  way  of  Islam  from  one  world-proud ;
Seek  not  Grod-beholding  from  one  self -beholding.

If  rank  be  necessary  to  thee, — ^like  the  mean,
Look  not  at  persons,  with  the  eye  of  contempt.

How  may  the  sensible  man  entertain  the  idea,
That  high  worth  is  in  head-mightiness  ?


30       In  the  'Ikd-i-manzum,  couplets  30  to  41  are  omitted.

"  Maghrur-i-dunyd "  signifies— one   in  love   with  the  pomp   of  the
world.


CHAP.  IV.]  ON   HUMILITY.  217

Seek  not  rank  more  renowned  than  this,
That  the  people  should  call  thee  : — "  One  of  approved  dis-
position."

No ; — when  one  like  thyself  uses  haughtiness  to  thee,
Thou,  with  wisdom's  eye,  considerst  him  not  great.

35  If  thou  displayst  arrogance, — thou  also,  even  so,

Appearst,  as  those  haughtiness-displaying  appear  to  thee.

When  thou  art  standing  on  the  lofty  house,
— If  thou  art  wise — laugh  not  at  the  fallen.

There  came  down  off  his  feet,  many  a  standing  one,
"Whose  place,  the  fallen  took.

I  allow  that  thou  art  thyself  free  from  defect ;
Exercise  not  reproaching  on  the  faulty.

This  one  has,  in  his  hand,  the  door-ring  of  the  Ka'ba ;
That  one  is  fallen,  intoxicated,  in  the  tavern.

40  If  G-od  calls  this  one, — who  may  not  permit  him  ?

And,  if  He  drives  away  that  one, — who  may  bring  him
back?

Neither  is   that   one   strength-finder  by  his  own  (good)

deeds  !
Nor  for  this  one  is  the  door  of  repentance  shut  in  the  face.


A  compiler  of  the  traditions,  thus  related,  in  talk,-
That,  in  the  time  of  'Isa  (on  Him  be  peace !)

A  certain  one  had  squandered  his  life  ;
Had  passed  it  in  ignorance  and  error.


42       This  tale  occurs  in  the  Bible,  Luke  xviii.  10-13.


218  THE  BUSTAN  OP  SA*DI.  [CHAP.  IV.

One  bold,  of  black  deeds,  of  hard  heart ;

Through  his  uncleanness,  Iblis  was  ashamed  of  him.

45  His  time,  uselessly  accomplished ;

Through  him,  not  a  single  soul  rested,  so  long  as  he  Uved.

His  head  void  of  wisdom,  but  full  of  grandeur ;
His  belly  fat  with  forbidden  morsels.

With  non-uprightness,  one,  garment-stained.
With  shamelessness,  one,  house-plastered.

Neither  one  of  foot  straight-travelling,  like  those  seeing ;
Nor  one  of  ear,  like  the  man,  advice-hearing.

The  people  fleeing  from  him,  like  the  bad  year ;
Pointing  him  out,  together  from  afar,  like  the  new  moon.

50  His  harvest  (of  life)  lust  and  concupiscence  burned ;
A  grain  of  good  repute  ungathered.

He  of  black  deeds  urged  his  pleasure  in  such  a  way.
That,  in  the  Book,  no  place  for  writing  (his  deeds)  re-
mained.

A  sinner,  and  one  self-opiniated,  and  lust-worshipper,
Night  and  day,  in  carelessness,  drunk  and  intoxicated.

I  heard  that  'Isa  entered  from  the  desert ;
He  passed  by  the  cell  of  a  certain  'Abid.

The  recluse  came  down  from  a  window ;
He  fell,  head  on  the  earth,  at  His  feet.


49       As  people  dislike  the  bad  (drought)  year  and  avoid  it,  so  they  fled
from  him,  and  pointed  him  out,  with  the  finger,  from  afar.

In  some  copies,  "  sale  bud  "  occurs  instead  of  "  chu  sal-i-bad  "  ;  the
first  line  will  then  run  : —

Like  the  year,  the  people  were  fugitives  from  him.
The  word  "  sale  "  (a  year)  is  introduced,  in  this  case,  to  mark  exces-
sive avoidance  and  abhorrence ;  for,  a  year  is  a  long  period  of  time.


CHAP.  IV.]  ON    HUMILITY.  219

55  From  afar,  the  ill-starred  sinner,

Moth-like,  astonied  at  them,  by  (their)  splendour.

Reflecting,  with  regret,  ashamed ;
Darvesh-like  before  one  wealth-possessing.

Ashamed,    beneath    his    lip    excuse-asking,    with   heart-
burning.
On  account  of  whole  nights  passed  in  carelessness.

Tears  of  grief  raining,  cloud-like,  from  his  eye,
Saying  : — "  Alas  !  my  life  in  carelessness  passed.

"  I  threw  away  the  ready  money  of  dear  life ;
"  A  particle  of  goodness  unacquired.

60  "  Let  there  never  be  one,  like  me,  living ;

'*  For,  his  death  (is)  much  better  than  his  living.

"  That  one  escaped,  who  died  in  childhood  !

'•  For,  he  bore  not  the  aged  head  of  shame  (to  the  grave).

*'  Oh  "World- Creator  !  pardon  my  sin;
"  For,  if  it  come  with  me  (to  the  Resurrection)  it  will  be
a  bad  companion."

In  this  corner,  the  old  sinner  weeping.
Saying  : — "  Oh  hand-seizer  1  come  to  the  complaint  of  my
state."

His  head,  in  shame  lowered.

The  water  of  remorse,  with  lamentation  and  desire  running.

65  And,  on  that  side, — the  'Abid,  head  full  of  pride.

His  eye-brows  gathered  together,  on  the  sinner  from  afar.

Saying : — *'  Why  is  this  wretch  behind  us  ?
"  The  ignorant  unfortunate  one  I  what !  is  he  of  the  same
sort  as  we  ?


220  THE  BUSTAN  OF  SA'dI.  [cHAP.  IV.

"  One  steeped  to  the  neck  in  fire ;
"  One  life-given  to  the  wind  of  lust.

**  What  good  came  from  his  soul,  wet  of  skirt,

"  That  he  is  society  for  Masih  (the  Messiah)  and  me  ?

"  Well  would  it  have  been,  if  he  had  taken  the  trouble  (of

his  person)  from  before  me  ;
"  (If)  he  had  gone  to  hell,  after  his  own  deeds,

70  •*  I  am  constantly  vexed  by  his  unpleasant  countenance ;
"  Lest  that  the  fire  of  his  sins  should  fall  on  me.

"  At  the  place  of  assembling,  when  the  assembly  becomes

present,
"  Oh  God!  make  not  Thou  my  assembling  with  him."

In  this,  he  was ;  and,  from  the  One  of  glorious  qualities,  a

revelation
Came  to  'Isa, — on  Him  be  blessing ! —

Saying  : — "  If  this  one  be  learned,  and  that  one  ignorant,
"  The  prayers  of  both  have  come  to  My  acceptance.

"  The  one  of  wasted  time,  and  inverted  days,

*'  Bewailed  before  Me,  with  weeping  and  heart-burning.

76  "  Whosoever  comes  to  Me,  in  helplessness,

*'  Him,  I  cast  not  down  from  the  threshold  of  mercy.

"  I  pass  over  his  ugly  (sinful)  deeds ;

"  I  bring  him,  by  My  own  grace,  into  Paradise.

"  But,  if  the  devotion-zealot  has  shame,

"  That  he  should  be  feUow-sitting  with  him  in  Paradise,

"  Say — Have  no  shame  of  him,  on  the  Resurrection  Day ;
"  For,  they  will  carry  that  one  (the  sinner)  to  heaven;
and,  this  one  to  hell.


CHAP.  IV.]  ON    HUMILITY.  221

"  If  the  liver  of  that  became  blood,  through  heart-burning

and  sorrow ;
"  And,  if  this  one  relied  on  his  own  devotion,

80  "  Knew  he  not  that  in  the  Court  of  the  Independent  One
(God),
"  Helplessness  is  better  than  pride  and  presumption  ?

"  Whose  garment  is  pure,  but  walk  of  life  impure, —
"  For  him,  no  key  to  hell's  door  is  necessary.

*'  At  this  threshold  of  God,  thy  weakness  and  wretchedness
"  Are  better  than  thy  devotion,  and  self -beholding."

"When  thou  reckonedst  thyself  among  the  good,  thou  art

bad;
Self-sufficiency  is  not  contained  in  godship.

If  thou  art  a  man,  speak  not  of  thy  own  manliness,
Not  every  jockey  carries  off  the  ball  (of  victory).

86  He  is  an  onion,  all  husk, — that  one  skill-less.

Who  thought  there  was,  within  him,  a  brain  pistachio-nut-
like.

Devotion  of  this  sort  is  of  no  use ;

Go ;  bring  excuse  for  the  fault  of  thy  devotion.

That  ignorant  one  enjoys  not  the  fruit  of  devotion,
Who  to  himself  is  good ;  and,  to  the  people  bad.

Whether  a  vagabond  of  confused  distracted  fortune  ;
Or,  a  devotee,  who,  on  his  body,  practises  severity — what
difference  ?


81       The  key  to  hell's  door  lies  in

Fisk  va  fajur  va  'asiydn.
See  chap.  v.  couplet  168.


222  THE  BUSTAN  OF  SA'dI.  [oHAP.  IV.

Strive  with  abstinence  and  fear  of  Grod,  and  truth,  and

purity ;
But  add  not  to  the  merit  of  the  Chosen  One  (Muhammad).

90  Desire  not  whiteness  (purity)  beyond  limit,

Saying  :^It  is  disgusting ;  what  room  for  blackness  ?

Of  wise  men  speech  remains  a  token ;
Of  Sa'di,  remember  this  one  word  : —

"  The  sinner,  God-fearing

**  Is  better  than  the  saint,  devotion-displaying."


A  certain  lawyer  of  tattered  garment,  of  straitened  hand,
Sate  down  in  the  foremost  ranks,  in  the  hall  of  the  Kazi.

The  Kazi  very  sharply  glanced  at  him ;

The  officer  of  the  court  seized  his  sleeve,  saying : — "  Rise

95  "  Knowst  thou  not,  that  thy  place  is  not  the  highest !
"  Sit  lower,  or  go,  or  stand.

"  Not  every  one  is  worthy  of  the  chief -place ;
"  Munificence  is  in  grace  ;  and  rank,  in  worth.


89  In  Suf  i-ism,  "  zuLd  "  signifies — berun  amadan  az  dunya.  Make  not
pride  thy  occupation  ;  consider  not  excess  lawful ;  preserve  limit  (mode-
ration) in  every  matter.

Tlie  Prophet — with  all  his  devotion  and  purity,  and  power  of  pro-
phesying, and  message-bringing,  and  sublime  rank — chose  humility ;
put  not  his  foot  beyond  limit,  in  any  matter ;  and  confessed  to  the
defect  of  his  devotion.

90  Whenever,  beyond  limit,  whiteness  increases,  it  is  disgusting,  and
resembles  disease.

In  every  matter,  to  pass  beyond  limit  and  not  to  preserve  bounds,  is
indecorous ;  nay,  it  brings  loss  upon  the  face  of  the  work.

When  some  of  the  "  Companions  "  exercised  asceticism,  Muhammad
forbade  their  going  deeply  in  devotion.


CHAP.  IV.]  ON   HUMILITY.  223

"  "What  need  to  thee  of  anyone's  advice  ?

"  This  very  shame  is  to  thee  sufficient  torture.

"  Every  one,  who  sate,  with  honour,  lower  down,
"  Falls  not  with  contempt  from  above  to  below.

*'  Exercise  not  boldness,  in  the  place  of  the  great ;
"  Display  not  lionishness,  when  thou  hast  not  the  power  of
grasp."

.00  When  that  wise  one  of  darvesh  complexion  saw
That  his  fortune  sate  down  and  rose  up  to  battle,

A  sigh,  like  fire,  came  forth  from  the  helpless  one ;
Than  the  place  where  he  was,  he  sate  lower  down.

The  lawyers  prepared  the  path  of  strife ;

They  hurled — the  "not,"  and  "I  do  not  agree."

They  opened  together  the  door  of  contest ;
Neck  made  long  with — "  not ;  and — '*  yes."

Thou  wouldst   have   said — the   courageous   cocks   are  in

battle ;
Entangled,  they  fell  on  each  other  with  beak  and  claw.

105  This  one,  from  anger  beside  himself,  like  one  intoxicated ;
That  one,  beating  both  his  hands  on  the  ground.

They  fell  into  a  difficulty,  exceedingly  intricate  ;
In  the  solution  of  which,  they  could  find  no  path.

The  one  of  tattered  garment,  .in  the  lowest  ranks,
Entered  the  contest,  with  force,  like  a  roaring  lion.

He  said : — '*  Oh  chiefs  of  the  law  of  the  Prophet !
"  With  the  traditions,  and  revelations  (of  the  Kuran),  and
law,  and  the  principles  of  Islam,

"  Proofs,  strong  and  real,  are  necessary ;

"  Not,  the  veins  of  the  neck  (swelling)  in  hot  altercation.


224  THE  BUSTAN  OP  SA'dI.  [cHAP.  IV.

110  "  To  me,  also  are  the  chaugdn  (bat)  of  sport  and  ball."
They  said  : — "  If  thou  knowst  well,  speak."


Then  he,  who  sate  at  the  knee  of  respect.
Opened  liis  tongue,  and  closed  their  mouths.

With  the  reed  of  eloquence  of  description,  which  he  pos-
sessed.

He  pourtrayed  on  their  hearts,  like  the  picture  of  a  ring-
stone  :

Drew  his  head  from  the  street  of  simile  to  reality ;
Drew  the  pen  upon  the  head  of  the  letter  of  (effaced)  the
claim.

On  every  side,  they  shouted ; — "  Afrin  !  Afrin  !  "
Saying : — "  On    thy    wisdom    and    genius,     a    thousand
praises  I  "

116  The  dun  horse  of  speech,  he  urged  so  far,

That  the  Kazi,  ass-like,  remained  behind  in  the  mire.

He  came  forth  from  his  robe  and  turban  ;
He  sent  them,  with  reverence  and  courtesy,  to  the  one,
garment-tattered.

Saying : — "  Alas  !  I  recognised  not  thy  worth  ;

"  I  was  not  engaged  in  thanks  for  thy  auspicious  arrival.

'*  With  so  great  a  capital  of  eloquence,  I  grieve,
"  That  I  behold  thee,  in  such  a  rank  (the  lowest)."

The  officer  of  the  court  came,  with  cordiality,  to  him.
That  he  might  place  the  turban  of  the  Kazi,  on  his  head.

120  **  With  hand  and  tongue,  he  forbade  him  saying  : — "  Be  it
far  from  me !
"  Place  not,  on  my  head,  the  foot-link  of  pride.


CHAP.  IV.]  ON    HUMILITY.  226

"  For,    to-morrow,  towards    those  wearing   old   garments

(the  poor),
"  Heavy  will   my  head  become  with    the  turban  of  fifty

yards.

"  When  they  call  me  Maula  and  chief  magistrate,
"  Men  will  appear  contemptible  in  my  eyes.

"  Is  drinking-water  ever  different,
"  If  its  vessel  be  golden,  or  earthen  ?

"  Wisdom  and  brain,  within  man's  head,  are  necessary ;
"  For  me,  like  thee,  a  beautiful  turban  is  unnecessary.

M  "  A  person  is  not  of  worth,  through  head-greatness  ;
"  The  gourd  of  great  head  is  even  without  a  kernel.

"  Exalt  not  the  neck  with  turban  and  beard  :
*'  For,    the   turban  is   cotton ;    and,   the   moustache,  *  dry
herbage.

"  Those  who,  in  form  (only)  are  man-like,

"  Best  indeed  it  is,  that  they  be  silent,  picture-like.

**  To  the  extent  of  one's  skill,  it  is  proper  to  seek  dignity  :
"  Make  not,  Saturn-like,  loftiness  and  misfortune.

"  Grreat  is  the  greatness  of  the  mat-reed,
"  In  which,  indeed,  is  the  intrinsic  quality  of  the  sugar-
reed.

so  "  With  this  (deficient)  wisdom,  and  spirit, ^ — I  call  thee  no
one,
'*  Even  if  a  hundred  slaves  go  behind  thee.  ^


21       In  future  my  head  will  be  for  the  poor  full  of  awe ;  and  they  will

appear  to  me  contemptible.
■23       The  student  should  note  the  idiom  of  the  original  in  the  first  line.

Even  so  are  the  Lords  of  Eloquence,  in  every  garment  and  condition  ;

difference,  in  their  perfection  and  greatness,  occurs  not.

16


226  •     THE   BTJSTAN   OF   SA*DI.  [OHAP.  IV

"  How  well  said  the  small  shell  in  the  clay,

"  "When  an  ignorant  one,  full  of  avarice,  took  it  up, —

"  No  one  will  purchase  me  for  any  thing;

"  Wind  me  not,  in  foolishness,  in  silk  (like  a  jewel).

"  A  beetle  has  that  very  worth  which  is  its,
"  Even  if  it  sate  amidst  tulips.

"  The  rich  man  is  not,  by  property,  better  than  a  person ;
"  If  the  ass  puts  on  satin-housings, — he  is  an  ass."    -

135  In  this  way,  the  sensible  man  (the  lawyer),  speech-uttering,
Washed  malice,  with  the  water  of  speech,  from  the  heart.

The  speech  of  one  heart-troubled  is  hard ;
When  thy  enemy  falls,  display  not  sluggishness.

When  power  reaches  thee,  pluck  out  the  enemy's  brain  ;
For,  the  opportunity  washes  down  the  dust  (of  grief)  from
the  heart.

The  Kazi  remained  captive  to  his  own  violence,  in  such  a

way
That  he  said  : — "  This  is  indeed  a  disastrous  -day  !  "

Through  astonishment,  he  bit  his  hands,  with  his  teeth ;
His  eyes,  like  the  two  stars  near  the  pole,  remained  fixed
on  him.


140  And  thence,  the  young  man  turned  the  face  of  resolution ;
He  went  out,  and  no  one  again  found  his  trace.

Clamour  arose  from  the  chiefs  of  the  assembly,
"  Say,  whence  is  one  of  such  a  bold  eye  ?  "


I


133       It  is  said  that  when  a  beetle  perceives  the  perfume  of  the  rose, — it  dies.

"  Ja'l "  signifies — sargi'n,  ghalatang.
135       The  first  line  may  otherwise  be  rendered : —

In  this  way,  the  man,  speech-uttering,  quickly.


CHAP.  IV.]  ON    HUMILITY.  227

A  herald  went  from  the  front,  and  ran  in  every  direction,
Saying : — "  Who  saw  a  man  of  this  description  and  ap-
pearance?"

One  said ; — "  Of  this  kind  of  sweet  speech,
"  "We  know,  in  this  city,  Sa'di ;  and  him  only.

*'  On  him  be  a  hundred  thousand  blessings  that  he  thus

spoke ;
"  The  bitter  truth — behold !  how  sweetly  he  uttered  it.*'


18  There  was  in  the  town  of  Granja, — one  king-born.

Who   was    unclean    and   tyrannical — may  it   be  far  from
thee  !—

Singing  and  intoxicated,  he  entered  a  masjid,
Wine  in  his  head,  and  bumper-glass  in  hand.

In  a  cell,  a  devotee  was  dwelling.

One,  tongue-entangling  (in  truth) ;    and,  heart-pure  (as  to
malice).

Some  persons  for  his  talking,  assembled.
— When   thou    art   not   learned,   be   not    less    than    the
hearer. —

When  that  refractory  steed  (the  prince)  exercised  disre-

spectfulness.
Those  dear  ones  (the  assembly)  became  desolate  of  heart.

50  When  the  foot  of  the  prince  is  wicked.

Who  is  able  to  express  a  breath  concerning  the  well-known
order  ?


44       In  the  'Ikd-i-manzdm,  couplets  145-201  are  omitted.
60      When  the  Prince  places  his  foot  on  forbidden  things.

15  *


228  THE  BUSTAN  OF  SA'dI.  [cHAP.  IV.

Garlic  overpowers  the  rose-perfume ;

The  sound  of  the  harp  becomes  weak,  through  the  drum.

If   the  prohibiting   of  forbidden  things  comes  from   thj^

hand,
It  is  not  proper  to  sit  like  one,  handless  and  footless.

And  if  thou  hast  not  the  hand  of  power,  speak ;
For,  the  disposition  becomes  pure  by  admonition.

When  as  to  both  hand  and  tongue,  power  is  not.
Men  show  manliness  by  prayer.

165  One  (of  the  hearers)  before  the  sage,  sitting  in  solitude,
Lamented  and  wept,  head  on  the  earth.

Saying : — "  On  this  intoxicated  rascal  (the  prince)  once,
"  Pray ;  for  we  are  tongueless  and  handless.

"  A  single  ardent  breath  (sigh)  from  a  thoughtful  heart,
"  Is  stronger  than  seventy  swords  and  axes."

The  one,  world-experienced,  stretched  forth  his  hand  ;
What  said  he  ?     "  Oh  Lord  of  high  and  low  !

"  Through  fortune,  this  youth, — his  time  is  happy;
"  Oh  Grod  !  keep  all  his  time  happy."

160  A  person  said  to  him  : — "  Oh  exemplar  of  rectitude  !
"  Why  desirest  thou  for  goodness  for  this  wretch  ?

"  When  thou  desirest  good  for  the  faithless,
"  What  ill  desirest  thou  on  the  citizens  ?  "


151       Even  so,  legal  orders  become  not  current  over  one  who  is  entangled  ii

forbidden  things — fisk  wa  fajur.
166       See  couplet  147.


OBAP.  IV.]  ON    HUMILITY.  229

The  one  beholding  with  quick  intelligence  thus  spoke : —
"  "When  thou  findst   not  the  secret   of  my  speech,  agitate
not :

"  We  adorned  not  the  assembly  with  raving  nonsense ;

"  We  desired  his  repentance  from  the  justice  of  the  Creator.

"  For  every  one,  who  returns  from  bad  ways,
"  Reaches  eternal  ease  in  Paradise.

5  *'  This  pleasure  of  wine  is  indeed  for  five  days ;
"  In  abandoning  it, — ^perpetual  pleasures."

This  matter,  which  the  man,  speech-making  (the  recluse),

uttered.
One  out  of  that  assembly  unfolded  to  the  prince.

From  rapture,  water,  cloud-like,  came  to  his  eyes ;
A  torrent  of  sorrow  rained  on  his  face.

His  heart  burned  with  the  fires  of  desire ;
Shame  sewed  his  eyes  to  the  back  of  his  feet.

To  the  one  of  good  appearance  (the  recluse)  he  sent  a  person,
Knocking  at  the  door  of  repentance,  saying  ; — *'  Oh  griev-
ance-redresser  I

'0  "Be  pleased  to  come,  that  I  may  lay  down  my  head  (at
thy  feet) ;
"  That  I  may  put  aside  ignorance  and  non-rectitude."

The  adviser  (the  recluse)  came  to  the  prince's  court ;
He  glanced  into  the  hall  of  the  court.

He  saw  sugar,  and  jujube,  and  candle,  and  wine ;
The  assembly  prosperous  with  wealth;  but,  the  men  in-
toxicated.


72      Sugar  and  jujube  here  stand  for — the  lip  of  a  mistress.
Candle  here  signifies — joking.


2B0  THE  BUSTAN  OF  Sa'dI.  [cHAP.  IV.

This  one  unconscious  of  himself ;  that  one  half-drunk ;       ||
Another  poetry-spouting,  wine-flagon  in  hand.

On  one  side,  the  minstrel's  cry  raised  ;

On  the  other,  the  cup-bearer's  voice  saying  : — "  Drink  !  "

176  The  companions,  with  wine  of  red  colour  intoxicated,
Through  sleep,  the.  head  of  the  harper  on  his  bosom,  harj
like.

Of  the  boon-companions,  neck- exalting,  there  was  not
An  eye  of  any  open  there,  save  the  narcissus.

The  drum  and  harp  consonant  with  each  other ;
The  flute,  from  the  midst,  brought  forth  a  lament.

He  (the  recluse)  ordered :  they  shattered  (the  drum  am

harp)  into  small  pieces ;
That  pure  pleasure  became  changed  to  dregs.

They  broke  the  harp  and  snapped  the  string  ;
The  speaker  put  singing  out  of  his  head.

180  They  struck  a  stone  on  the  wine-vessel,  in  the  wine-house
They  placed  the  wine- vessel  (before  them),  and  struck  off
its  neck.

The  wine  of  red  colour  from  the  flagon,  head-lowered.
Ran  as  blood  from  a  slain  duck.

The  jar  was  pregnant  nine  months  with  wine :
In  that  calamity  (of  birth),  it  quickly  cast  out  the  daughter
(of  grapes).

They  rent  the  belly  of  the  leathern  (wine)  bag  to  its  navel.
The  blood  eyes  of  the  cup,  over  it,  full  of  tears.


183       In  some  copies — ^the  eyes  of  the  cup,  over  it,  bloody  with  tears.


CHAP.  IV.]  ON    HUMILITY.  231

He  ordered  : — the  stone  of  the  court-yard  of  the  building,
They  plucked  up,  and  put  anew  in  its  place.

;6  For,  the  rosy  colour  of  the  wine  of  ruby  hue

Departed  not,  by  washing,  from  the  marble  surface.

It  is  not  wonderful  if  the  sink  become  intoxicated,
When,  it  drank,  on  that  day,  so  much  wine.

Whosoever  used  again  to  take  the  harp  in  his  hand.
Used  to  endure  pushing  (beating)  of  his  head,  drum-like,
at  men's  hands.

And,  if  a  worthless  fellow  had  taken  a  harp  on  his  neck.
He  would  have  rubbed  his  ear,  guitar-like.

The  young  man  (the  prince),  head-intoxicated  with  pride

and  conceit,
Sate,  like  old  men,  in  the  corner  of  devotion.

The  father  had,  many  times,  spoken  vehemently  to  him,
■**  Saying : — "  Be  of  decent  gait,  and  of  pure  speech."

He  endured  his  father's  violence,  and  prison,  and  restraint,
It  was  not  so  useful  to  him,  as  counsel.

If  the  gentle-speaker  (the  recluse)  had  spoken  severely  to

him,
Saying: — "Put  youthfulness,  and  ignorance    out    of  thy

head."

Imagination  and  pride  would  have  prevailed  over  him.
That  he  would  not  have  left  the  darvesh  (the  speaker)  alive.

The  roaring  lion,  through   fighting,  casts   not  away  the

shield  (surrenders  not) ;
The  panther  thinks  not  of  the  cutting  sword.

L96  One  can,  with  gentleness,  flay  the  enemy's  skin ;

When  thou  exercisest  severity  towards  a  friend,  he  is  an
enemy.


232  THE    BUSTAN    OP    SA*DI.  [CHAP.  IV.

No  one  made  a  hard  face,  anvil-like,

Who  suffered  not  the  chastising  hammer  on  his  head.

Exercise  not  vehemence,  in  speaking  to  an  amir  ;
Pursue    gentleness,    when   thou   seest    that   he   practises
severity.

Make  thyself,  by  manners,  concordant,  with  whomsoever

thou  mayst  see,
Whether  he  be  inferior,  or  superior.

For  this  one  (the  superior)  may  draw  back  his  neck  from

pride ;
And,  that  one  may,  by  thy  pleasant  speech,  draw  his  head

within  thy  noose.

200  One  can,  by  sweet  speech,  carry  away  the  ball  (of  power) ;
But  one  of  bad  disposition,  constantly,  endures  bitterness.

Take  thou,  from  Sa'di,  the  pleasant  speech ;

To  the  one  of  bitter  visage,  say  : — "  Die  of  bitterness  !  "


One  of  sugar-laughter  sold  honey.

From  whose  sweetness,  hearts  become  consumed.

A  sweet  one,  waist-girt,  sugar-cane  like,

The  purchasers  about  her  more  (numerous)  than  the  flies.

If,  for  instance,  she  should  have  taken  up  poison,
They  would  have  devoured  it  like  honey  from  her  hand.

205  One  of  hard  life  glanced  at  her  work ;

He  bore  envy,  in  respect  to  her  market-day.

.  He  went,  the  next  day,  running  around  the  world ;
Honey  in  his  hand ;  vinegar  (ill-temper)  on  his  eye-brow.

Wandered  much,  before  and  behind,  clamour-making,
But,  not  a  fly  sate  on  his  honey.


/

CHAP.  IV.]  ON    HUMILITY.  233

At  night-time,  when  money  came  not  to  his  hand,
He  sate,  with  straitened  heart,  face  to  the  corner.

Like  a  sinner,  face  embittered  with  (God's)  threatening ;
Like  the  eyebrows  of  prisoners  on  a  day  of  festival.

«io  A  woman  sportively  said  to  her  husband  : —
*'  The  honey  of  one  of  bitter  visage  is  bitter."

A  bad  temper  takes  a  man  to  hell ;
Those  of  good  temper  only  see  Paradise,

Go ;  drink  warm  water  from  the  brink  of  the  rivulet ;
Drink  not  the  cool  draught  of  one  of  bitter  face.

It  was  forbidden  thee  to  taste  the  bread  of  that  one,
Who  drew  together  his  eye-brows  table-cloth-like.

Sir  I  put  not  on  thyself  difficult  work ;

For  the  one  of  bad  temper  is  of  reversed  fortune.

215  I  assume — ^that  to  thee,  there  is  neither  silver,  nor  gold ;
To  thee,  the  tongue  also  is  not  sweet,  like  Sa'di's.


I  have  heard  that  of  a  learned  man,  God -worshipping, —
His  collar,  a  drunken  knave  seized.

From  that  one  of  black  heart,  the  man  of  pure  heart
Suffered   head-pushing,   but   raised    not    his    head    from
tranquillity.

At  length,  one  said  to  him  : — *'  Art  thou  not  also  a  man  ?
"  Endurance,  in  respect  to  this  indiscreet  one,  is  a  pity."

The  man  of  pure  disposition  heard  this  speech ;

He  said  to  him : — "  Speak  not  again  to  me  in  this  way.


234  THE  BUSTAN  OF  SA'dI.  [oHAP.  IV.

220  "  The  ignorant  drunken  one  rends  a  man's  collar : —
"  Who  meditates  (practises)  conflict  with  a  lion-claw  ?

"  It  befits  not  the  learned  one,  that  his  hand,

"  He  should  fix  in  the  collar  of  the  drunken,  ignorant  one.

**  The  skilful  one  possesses  life  in  this  way : —
"  He  suffers  violence ;  and  exercises  kindness."


The  foot  of  one  desert-sitting,  a  certain  dog  bit
With  such  anger,  that  poison  dropped  from  his  teeth.

At  night,  through  pain,  helpless,  sleep  took  him  not ;
There  was,  in  his  party,  a  little  daughter.

225  She  used  violence  to  her  father,  and  displayed  severity,
Saying  : — "  Hast  thou,  also,  indeed  no  teeth  ?"

After  weeping,  the  man  of  distressed  days

Laughed,  saying  : — "  Oh  little  mother,  heart-illuminating !

"  Although,  to  me — are  power  and  poison,
**  I  am  loth  (to  use)  my  jaws  and  teeth.

"  It  is  impossible,  even  if  I  endure  a  sword  blow  on  my

head,
*•  That  I  should  plunge  my  teeth  within  the  leg  of  a  dog.

"  As  to  dogs,  the  nature  is  evil ;

*'  But,  doggishness  comes  not  from  man."


230  There  was  a  certain  great  one,  skilful  in  the  world ;
His  slave  was  of  depraved  qualities.


220       Couplets  220  and  221  form  a  "  kat'a-band."


CHAP.  IV.]  ON   HUMILITY.  235

Through  this  filthy  one,  hair  dishevelled,

He  used  to  be  as  one  vinegar-rubbed  on  the  face.

Like  a  large  male  serpent,  his  teeth  stained  with  poison ;
From  the  ugly  ones  of  the  city,  pledge  taken.

Continually  on  his  face,  the  water  of  a  diseased  eye

Used  to  run,  as  the  smell  of  onion  (issued)  from  his  armpit.

At  cooking-time,  he  used  to  express  a  frown  on  his  eye-
brow ;

When  they  had  cooked,  he  used  to  strike  knee  (in  sitting)
with  his  master.

885  Time  to  time,  for  bread-eating,  his  fellow-sitter ;

But  if  he  (the  master)  had  died,  he  would  not  have  given
water  to  his  hand.

Neither  speaking  nor  the  blows  of  a  stick  used  to  exercise

effect  on  him ;
Night  and  day,  the  house  was  in  a  state  of  being  mined

(ruined)  by  him.

Sometimes,  he  used  to  throw  thorns  and  chips  on  the  road ;
Sometimes,  he  used  to  fling  the  hens  into  the  well.

From  his  aspect,  great  terror  used  to  arise ;

He  used  not  to  go  to  a  work,  from  which  he  used  to  return.

A  person  said  : — "  Of  this  slave  of  bad  qualities,

"  "What  desirest  thou, — manners,  or  skill,  or  beauty  ?


281  The  second  line  may  otherwise  be  rendered : —

An  evil  one :  one  with  vinegar  rubbed  on  his  face.

282  The  ugly  ones  had  pledged  their  ugliness  to  him,  so  that  he  possessed
the  sum  total  of  ugliness  in  the  city.

"  Az  kase  girau  burdan "  signifies — ba  kase  s&bi^a  kardan  ;  ta]f;ad«
dum  namudan ;  az  kase  rihn  sitdndan.
284      Observe  the  phrase — ba  kase  z&nu  zadan.
286       "  Kand  o  kob  "  signifies — digging  and  knocking ;  tashwish  wa  bez&rf.


236  THE  BUSTAN  OF  SA'dI.  [cHAP.  IV.

240  "  A  person,  with  this  unpleasantness,    is   not  worth    (so
much),
"  That  thou  shouldst  approve  of  his  violence,  and  endure
his  torment.

**  A  slave, — good  and  of  correct  walk  of  life,  I
*'  Wni  bring  to  thy  hand;  take  away  this  to  the  captive-
seller.

"  And,  if  he  brings  thee  the  smallest  coin,  turn  not  away

thy  head ;
"  He  is  dear  at  any  price, — if  thou  wishest  the  truth."

The  man  of  good  disposition  heard  this  speech  ;

He  laughed,  saying : — **  Oh  friend  of  auspicious  family  !

**  As  to  this  boy — his  nature  and  disposition  are  bad ;  but,
**  By  him,  my  nature  becomes  good  nature.

245  "  When  I  shall  have  endured  much  from  him,

*'  I  may  be  able  to  endure  the  violence  of  everyone."

Endurance  appears,  at  first,  to  thee,  Uke  poison ;

But  when  it  grows  in  the  disposition,  it  becomes  honey.


No  one  sought  the  road  to  the  ancient  shaikh  Ma'riif  of

Karkh,
Who  placed  not,  first,  his  own  renown,  out  of  his  head.

I  heard  that  a  certain  one  came  a  guest  to  him ;
From  his  sickness  to  death  little  remained.

Head  cast  as  to  its  hair ;  and  face,  as  to  its  purity  (of

complexion) ;
The  soul  clinging,  by  a  single  hair,  to  his  body.


247  Ma'rdf  Kirkhi  was  one  of  the  ancient  Bhaikhs ;  he  died  a.h.  200.  His
grave  is  at  Baghdad,  of  which  Kir^  was  a  quarter.  People  go  in
pilgrimage  to  his  tomb  to  utter  prayers.


CHAP.  IV.]  ON    HUMILITY.  237

«60  At  night,  he  cast  himself  down  there,  and  put  his  pillow ;
Forthwith,  he  placed  his  hands — in  clamour,  and  lament.

Nights,  one  moment,  neither  used  sleep  to  seize  him ;
Nor  (was  there)  sleep  to  anyone,  by  reason  of  his  lament.

A  disturbed  nature,  and  rough  disposition ;

He  died  not ;  but  slew  a  people  by  his  altercation.

From   his    clamour,    and    lamenting,    and    sleeping,    and

rising, —
People  took  the  path  of  flight  from  him.

Of  the  men-inmates  of  that  abode,  a  person  (was  not)  ;
There  remained — the  powerless  one,  and  Ma'ruf  only.

266  I  have  heard  that,  many  nights,   on  account  of  service,
Ma'ruf  slept  not ;
Like  men,  he  bound  his  waist ;  and  did  whatever  he  said.

One  night,  sleep  brought  an  army  to  his  (Ma'riif 's)  head ;
— How  much  power  may  the  non-sleeping  man  exercise  ? —

In  a  moment,  when  his  eyes  began  to  sleep.
The  distressed  traveller  began  to  speak.

Saying  : — "  May  there  be  a  curse  on  this  impure  race  (of

darveshes),
"  Who  are  (seekers  of)  name  and  fame ;  but,  are  fraud

and  wind  :

"  Filthy  believers,  purity-wearing  ;
"  Deceivers,  piety- selling.

260  "  How  knows  the  glutton,  sleep-intoxicated,
'*  That  a  helpless  one  closed  not  his  eyes  ?  "


260      "lat-amb4n"    signifies — hari?  va   pur   kiwdr   va   bisijar   kbwAr   va
shikam-parast.


238  THE  BUSTAN  OF  SA'dI.  [cHAP.  IV.

He  uttered  unlawful  words  to  Ma'riif ,

Saying : — "  Why  slept  he  careless  of  him,  one  moment  ?  **

The  shaikh,  from  generosity,  endured  this  matter ;
The  concealed  ones  of  the  haram  (the  women)  heard.

One  spoke  secretly  to  Ma'ruf.

Saying : — "  Heardst    thou  what   the   lamenting    darvesh
said  ?

"  Oh  shaikh  !  go ;  after  this,  say  : — take  thy  own  way ;
"  Take  away  reproach ;  die  in  another  place.

265  "  Goodness  and  mercy  are  in  their  own  places  ;
"  But,  generosity  to  the  bad  is  evil.

"  Place  not  a  round  piUow  for  the  head  of  the  mean ;  .  :^

"  The  head  of  the  man-injurer  (is)  best  against  a  stone.

"  Oh  one  of  good  fortune  !  exercise  not  goodness  to  the

bad;
"  For,  (only)  the  fool  places  the  tree  in  the  salt  soil.

"  I  say  not — Take  no  care  of  a  man,

"  But  waste  not  generosity  on  such  as  are  not  men.

"  Act  not,  with  qualities  of  softness  towards  the  rough ;
"  For,  they  rub  not  the  dog's  back,  like  the  cat.

270  "  If  thou  desirest  justice,  the  dog,  right-recognising,
"  Is  better,  in  character,  than  the  man  ungrateful.

"  Use  not  mercy,  with  ice-water,  towards  the  mean ;

"  When  thou  dost, — write  the  compensation  for  it  on  ice.

"  I  beheld  not  such  a  crafty  person  ;

"  Show  not  mercy  to  this  worthless  one."


266       The  second  line  means : — It  is  proper  to  beat  his  head  on  a  stone.
270       "  Ba  yakh  nawishtan  "  signifies — kar-i-taha^il  va  be  sabat  kardan.


CHAP.  IV.]  ON    HUMILITY.  239

When  the  lady  of  the  palace  (Ma'riif's  wife)  uttered  this

reproach,
A  cry  issued  from  the  good  man's  heart,

Saying  : — "  Return,  and  sleep  tranquil  of  heart ;
"  Be  not  distressed,  as  to  this  distressed  one,  because  he
thus  spoke.

^^  "  If,  from  indisposition,  he  shouted  at  me,

*'  The  unpleasant  speech  from  him  came  pleasantly  to  my  ear.

**  It  is  proper  to  listen  to  the  tale  of  violence  of  such  a

one,
"  Who,  from  restlessness,  cannot  slumber."

When  thou  seest  thyself  of  strong  state  and  happy.
Endure,  thankfully,  the  burden  of  the  feeble.

If  thou  art,  indeed,  a  mere  semblance,  tilism-like,
Thou  wilt  die ;  and,  thy  name,  like  thy  body,  will  die ;

But  if  thou  causest  thyself  to  cherish  the  tree  of  liberality,
Thou  mayst,  assuredly,  enjoy  the  fruit  of  good  name.

280  Seest  thou  not  that,  in  Karkh,  the  tombs  are  many?
The  tomb  of  Ma'ruf  only  is  known.

The  man  pomp-worshipping  displays  pride ;
He  knows  not  that  grandeur  is  in  gentleness.

An  impudent  one  preferred  his  desire  (in  beggary)  to  a

pious  one.
There   was   not,  at  that  time,   a   single    acquired  thing

(money)  in  his  girdle.

His  girdle  and  hands  were  void  and  clean  (empty) ;
Otherwise,  he  would  have  scattered  gold  on  his  face,  dust-
like.

The  beggar,  malignant  of  face,  hastened  out ;
In  the  street,  he  began  to  reproach  nim,


240  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  IV.

285  Saying  : — '*  Beware  of  these  silent  scorpions  ;
"  Panther-renders,  wool-clad.

"  For,  they  place  the  knee  against  the  heart,  cat-like ;
*'  But,  if  a  prey  chances,  they  leap  up,  dog-like.

"  The  shop  of  fraud  to  the  masjid  brought,
"  For,  one  can  seldom  find  game  in  a  house.

"  Lion-men  attack  the  kdravan ;

"  But,  these  (Stifis)  pluck  off  the  garment  of  men.

"  White  and  black  pieces  (of  cloth)  stitched  together ;
"  Capital  put  together ;  gold  gathered.

290  "  Oh  excellent !  barley-sellers,  wheat-exhibiting  ;

"  "World- wanderers,  night-mendicants,  harvest-beggars.

"  Look  not  at  their  devotion,  saying  : — **  They  are  old  and

lazy ;
"  For,  in  dancing  (rapture)  and  ecstacy,  they  are  young

and  vigorous.

"  Why  is  it  necessary  to  make  prayers  from  a  state  of

posture,
"  When  they  can  leap  up  to  dance  ?

*'  They  are  the  staff  of  Miisa,  much-devouring ;
"  Outwardly — so  yellow  of  face,  and  emaciated.


291       See  chap.  iii.

293  When  his  holiness  Musa  went  to  Par'un,  and  invited  him  to  join  his
faith,  he  displayed  apparent  miracles.  Far'un  said,  "  This  is  all  sorcery
and  magic ;  I  also  can  summon  my  own  sorcerers ;  let  us  contend
together  ;  whichever  is  superior,  truth  is  on  his  side."  Musa  consented.
When  the  magicians  were  assembled,  they  displayed  their  magic.  Musa
feared.  But,  a  revelation  from  the  GTlorious  One  came  to  him :  "  Oh,
Musa !  fear  not,  but  cast  thy  staff  on  the  ground."  When  the  staff  left
his  hand,  lo!  it  became  snake-like,  and  immediately  swallowed  their
sorceries.

Mus?,'8  rod,  by  swallowing,  became  not  fat ;  the  same  is  the  case  with
these  men.


CHAP.  IV.]  ON    HUMILITY.  241

"  Thej  are  neither  abstinent,  nor  learned ;
"  This,  indeed,  is  enough — that  they  purchase  the  world
with  religion.

295  "  On   their   body,  they  put  a  coarse   cloak  like   that  of
Bilal;
"  With  the   produce   of  Abyssinia,  they  make  garments
for  women.

"  Of  the  precepts  of  Muhammad,  thou  seest  in  them  no
sign,

"  Save  the  former  sleep  (in  the  afternoon),  and  the  morn-
ing bread.

"  The  belly  up  to  the  head,  they  have  filled  tight  with

morsels ;
"  Like  the  palm-leaf  basket  of  beggary  of  seventy  colours.

"  Beyond  this,  I  will  not  speak  on  this  matter ;

**  For,  it  is  a  sin  to  speak  of  one's  own  walk  of  life."

The  impudent  speaker  spoke  of  this  habit  (of  the  Siifis)  ;
The  eye,  fault-finding,  sees  not  skill.

300  One  who  has  made  many  dishonoured,
What  care  has  he  of  anyone's  reputation  ?

A  disciple  related  this  speech  to  the  shaikh ;
— If  thou  wishst  the  truth,  he  did  not  wisely.

An  evil  one  behind  me  spoke  of  my  defect,  and  slept ;
Worse  than  he, — the  friend,  who  brought  (the  tale)  and
uttered  it.


295  Bilal,  an  Abyssinian  of  black  colour,  was  the  crier  who  announced  to
the  people  when  Muhammad  prayed.

296  "  Nan-i-sihr  "  signifies — something  which  Muslims  eat  at  the  close  of
the  night,  during  the  Kamzan.

801       From  the  second  line  of  301  to  coiiplet  304  is  uttered  by  the  author.

16


242  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  IV.

A  certain  one  cast  an  arrow,  and  it  fell  on  the  road ;
It  injured  not  my  existence,  and  gave  me  no  wound.

Thou  didst  take  it  up  and  come  to  me ;
Didst  strike  it  violently  into  my  loins. —

305  The  pious  one  of  good  disposition  laughed.

Saying : — "  This  is  easy,  say — utter  a  more  difficult  matter
than  this.

"  Yet  what  he  said  ill  of  me  is  little ;

"  It  is  one,  out  of  a  hundred  of  those  bad  deeds  I  know.

"  These  that  he,  through  suspicion,  attributed  to  me ;
"  I,  on  my  part,  truly  know  that  they  are  so.

"  He  joined  his  society  with  us  this  year;

"What  knows  he  of  the  defects  of  my  seventy  years?

"  In  the  world,  better  than  I,  a  person,  my  own  defect,
"  Knows  not, — save  the  Knower  of  my  secret  (God).

310  "I  have  not  seen  one  of  such  good  intention,

"  Who  considered  my  defect  was  this,  and  no  more.

'*  At  the  place  of  assembling,  if  he  be  the  evidence  of  my

sin,
"  I  fear  not  hell ;  for,  my  work  is  good.

"  If  my  enemy  speaks  ill  of  me,

"  Come  and  say  : — '  Take  away  the  draft   (of  my  defect)
from  before  me.'  "  .

Those  have  been  men  of  the  path  of  God,

Who  have  been  the  butt  of  the  arrow  of  calamity.

They  threw  off  (from  the  head)  the  hat  of  pride ;
They  exalted  the  head  with  the  crown  of  eminence.


807       "Bar  man  bastan"  signifies — ba  man  isndd  kardan.


1


CHAP.  IV.]  ON    HUMILITY.  243

816  Be  submissive,  while  they  rend  thy  skin ;

For  the  pious  endure  the  burden  of  the  impudent.

If,  of  the  dust  of  men,  they  make  a  pitcher ;
Those  reproach-making  will  break  it  with  a  stone.


King  SaUh  of  the  kings  of  Syria

Used  to  come  out  early  in  the  morning  with  his  slave.

He  used  to  wander  in  the  quarters  of  the  bazar  and  streets.
After  the  manner  of  an  Arab, — a  veil  bound  about  his  face.

For,  he  was  possessed  of  discernment,  and  was  the  poor

man's  friend ;
"Whosoever  has  these  two  qualities, — he  is  King  Salih.

320  He  discovered  two  darveshes  sleeping  in  a  masjid ;

He  found  them  distressed  of  heart,  and  heart  disturbed.

In  the  night,  through  cold,  sleep  had  not  taken  their  eyes ;
Thinking  of  the  sun,  lizard-like.

One  of  those  two  was  speaking  to  the  other.
Saying  : — "  Even,  on  the  day  of  the  place  of  assembling,
there  is  justice.

"  If  these  kings,  neck- exalting,

"  Who  are  in  sport  and  pastime,  and  possessed  of  desire
and  consequential  airs,

"  Enter  Paradise  with  those  distressed,

"  I  will  not  raise  my  head  from  the  brick  of  the  grave.

325  "  Lofty  Paradise  is  our  country  and  abode ;

"  For,  to-day,  the  fetter  of  grief  is  about  our  feet.


322       Only,  in  this  world,  there  is  no  justice.

16  •


244  THE    BUSTAN   OF    SA'dI.  [oHAP.  IV.

"  During  thy  whole   life-time,  what  pleasure   didst  thou

experience  from  them,
"  That  thou  shouldst,  in  the  next  world,  also  endure  their

trouble  ?

"  If  Salih  there,  by  the  garden-wall,

"  Enters,  I  will  rend  his  brain  with  my  shoe."

When  the  man  uttered  this  speech,  and  Salih  heard  it,
He  considered  it  not  wisdom  to  be  (standing)  longer  there.

A  moment  passed,  when  the  fountain  of  the  sun,
Washed  down  sleep  from  the  eyes  of  the  people.

330  Running,  he  sent  for  the  two  men,  and  called  them ;
In  pomp,  he  sate ;  and,  in  dignity,  caused  them  to  sit.

He  rained  on  them  the  rain  of  liberality;

He  washed  down,  from  their  bodies,  the  dust  of  contempt.

After  distress  through  cold,  and  rain,  and  torrent,
They  sate  with  those  renowned  of  the  tribe  :

Two  beggars,  night  made  day,  garmentless.
Perfuming  their  garments  over  the  aloe-burner.     .

One  of  them  spoke  privately  to  the  king,
Saying  : — "  Oh  king !  the  world  a  ring  in  the  ear  (a  slave)
to  thy  order,

»

335  Those  approved  of  Grod  attain  greatness ;

In  us  two  slaves,  what  appeared  pleasing  to  thee  ?

The  monarch  expanded  from  joy,  rose-like  ;

He  laughed,  in  the  face  of  the  darvesh,  and  said  : —

"  I  am  not  such  a  one  that,  from  pride  of  retinue,
"  I  contract  my  face,  at  those  helpless.


330       "  Dawjin  ya  rawan  "  signifies — zud,  quickly.
See  couplet  260.


OHAP.  IV.]  ON    HUMILITY.  245

"  Put  thou  also  as  to  me  the  malignant  disposition,  out  of

thy  head  :
**  Lest  thou  shouldst,  in  Paradise,  display  discordance.

"  I  opened,  to-day,  the  door  of  peace ;

"  Shut  not,  to-morrow,  the  door  on  my  face.

840  "  If  thou  art  an  accepter  of  the  true  path,  choose  a  path
like  this ;
"  "When  power  reaches  thee,  take  the  hand  of  the  darvesh.

"  That  one  took  not  away  the  fruit  (of  pardon)  of  the

Tuba  tree,
"  Who    sowed  not,  to-day,  the  seed  of   desire  (of  good

deeds).

"  Thou  hast  not  desire, — seek  not  happiness ;
"  With  the  chaugan  of  service,  one  can  carry  off  the  ball
(of  empire)."

To  thee,  how  is  there  effulgence  (of  love)  lamp-like.
Since,  thou  art  full  of  thyself,  as  a  lamp  with  water.

That  existence  gives  light  to  the  assembly.
Whose  burning  in  the  bosom  is  candle-like.


345  A  certain  one  had  a  little  skill  in  astronomy ;
But,  he  possessed  a  head,  intoxicated  with  pride.

From  the  far  road,  he  came  to  Koshydr,

— A  heart  full  of  desire  ;  a  head,  full  of  pride. —

The  sage  used  to  sew  up  (close)  his  eyes  from  him.
He  used  not  to  teach  him  a  single  letter.


J48       In  the  East,  men  fill  a  glass  with  water  and  put  in  it  oil  and  a  wick.

This  sort  of  lamp  gives  but  little  light.
H6       KoshyAr  was  the  name  of  a  sage  of  GflAn.


246  THE  BUSTAN  OF  SA'DI.  [cHAP.  IV.

When  portionless,  he  resolved  to  return,
The  sage,  neck-exalting,  said  to  him  : —

"  Thou  hast  imagined  thyself  full  of  wisdom ;
"  A  vase  that  is  full — how  may  it  take  more.

350  "  Thou  art  full  of  pretension  ;  on  that  account,  thou  goest
empty  from  me  i
"  Come  empty;  so  that  thou  mayst  become  full  of  truth."

Sa'di-like,  in  the  world, — of  self -consciousness.
Become  void,  and  return  full  of  the  knowledge  of  God.


In  anger,  a  slave  turned  his  head  from  a  king  (fled) ;
He  ordered  a  person  to  seek ;  no  one  found  him.

When  he  (the  slave)  returned,  in  anger  and  rancour,
He  said  to  the  swordsman  : — "  Spill  his  blood  !  "

Thirsty  for  blood,  the  unkind  executioner
Drew  forth  a  sword  like  a  thirsty  tongue.

855  I  heard  that,  from  his  straitened  heart,  he  said  : —
"  Oh  God  !  I  pardon  him  my  blood,

"  Because,  always  in  favour,  and  pleasure,  and  fame,
"  I  have,  in  his  fortune,  been  a  friend.

"  God  forbid !  that,  to-morrow  (the  Judgment  Day),  for

my  blood,
"  They  should  seize  him,  and  his  enemy  become  joyful  (by

his  punishment)."

When  his  speech  came  to  the  king's  ear,
The  cauldron  of  his  wrath  boiled  no  further.


352       "  Dar  "  is  superfluous.

In  the  'Ikd-i-manzum,  couplets  352  to  363  are  omitted.
356       "  Ikbal "  signifies — pesh  amadan ;  rue  awardan  bar  chi'ze  ;  chi'ze  pesh-i-
kase  dashtan.


I


CHAP.  IV.]  ON    HUMILITY.  247

He  gave  (Mm)  raany  kisses  on  his  head  and  eyes  ;

He  became  lord  of  the  standard,  and  tambourine,  and  drum.

360  From  such  a  frightful  place,  by  softness.
He  caused  his  fortune  to  attain  that  dignity.

The  design  of  this  tale  is — that  soft  speech
Is  Hke  water  on  the  fire  of  a  fiery  man.

Oh  friend  !  exercise  humility  to  a  stern  enemy ;
For,  gentleness  makes  blunt  the  cutting  sword.

Seest  thou  not  that,  in  the  place  of  meeting  of  sword  and

arrow,
They  put  on  the  garment  of  silk,  a  hundred-fold  ?


From  the  desolate  place  of  a  holy  man,  ragged  gafment-

clad.
The  baying  of  a  dog  came  to  a  certain  one's  ear.

365  To  his  heart,  he  said  : — '*  How  is  the  baying  of  a  dog
here?"
He  entered,  saying  : — "Where  is  the  holy  darvesh?  "

From  before  and  behind,  he  saw  not  the  trace  of  a  dog ;
Save  the  pious  man,  he  saw  none  other  there.

Ashamed,  he  began  to  return  ;

For,  shame  came  to  him  to  argue  about  the  mystery.

From  within,  the  holy  man  heard  the  foot- sound ;

He  said  : — *'  Ho  I  why  standst  thou  at  the  door?     Enter.

"  Oh  my  resplendent  eye  I  thoughtst  thou  not,

"  That,  from  here,  a  dog  gave  tongue  ?     I  am  the  dog.


360       "Eifk"  signifies — mulatif at,  mula,  imat.


4

248  THE   BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  IV.

370  "  When  I  saw  that  He  purchases  helplessness,

"  I  put  out  of  my  head — pride,  and  judgment,  and  wisdom,

"  I  made  much  noise,  dog-like,  at  His  door ;
"  For,  I  beheld  not  many  meaner  than  a  dog."

When  thou  desirest  that  thou  mayst  attain  sublime  rank.
Thou    wilt    attain    to    loftiness    from    the   low   place   of
humility.

Those  took  the  chief  seat  in  this  presence.
Who  placed  their  own  worth  low.

When  the  torrent  came  with  fear  and  haste,
It  fell  headlong,  from  height  to  depth.

375  When  the  dew  fell — humble  and  feeble,

The  sky   carried    it,    with  love,    to   the    (lofty)    red   star
(Pleiades-following).

A  number  of  the  eloquent  are  of  opinion.
That  Hatim  was  deaf ;  believe  it  not.

In  the  morning,  there  issued  the  buzzing  of  a  fly.
Which  fell  into  a  spider's  net.

All  the  spider's  weakness  and  silence  was  deceit ;
The  fly  thought  it  sugar  ;  .it  was  imprisonment.

From  the  desire  of  counsel,  the  shaikh  glanced  at  the  fly.
Saying  : — "  Oh  foot-bound  in  avarice  !  be  still.

380  "  Sugar  and  honey,  and  candy  everywhere,  are  not ;
"  But  nets  and  fetters,  in  the  corners,  are  open."


376  HAtim,  son  of  ' Amw^nu- e-asamm,  entitled  'Abdu-r-rahman,  belonged
to  the  ancient  Shaikhs'  of  Khurasan  of  Balkh.  He  died  in  Bavashjard,
in  Balkh,  in  a.h.  237.

In  the  'Ikd-i-manziim,  couplets  376  to  424  are  omitted.


CHAP.  IV.]  ON    HUMILITY.  249

One  of  that  clique  of  people  of  judgment  said : —
"  Oh  man  of  the  way  of  Grod  !  I  hold  it  wonderful,

"  How  thou  didst  perceive  the  fly's  noise,
"  When  it  came,  to  our  ears,  with  difficulty !

*'  Since  thou  art  acquainted  with  the  fly's  sound,
"  It  is  not  proper,  after  this,  to  call  thee  deaf."

Hdtim,  smiling,  said  to  him : — "  Oh  ojie  of  quick  under-
standing !
"  To  be  deaf  is  better  than  to  be  listening  to  foolish  talk.

385  "  Those,  who  are  with  me  in  privacy,

"  Are  defect-concealers  and  praise-scatterers.

"  When  I  hold  concealed  mean  qualities,

"  Existence  makes  me  weak;   (and)  lust,  vile.

"  I  show  myself  as  though  I  heard  not,

"  Perhaps  I  may  be  free  from  the  trouble  (of  bad  qualities).

"  When  fellow-sitters  consider  me  deaf,

"  They  utter  whatever  is  good  and  bad  of  me.

"  If  to  hear  evil  is  unpleasant  to  me,

"  I  withdraw  my  skirt  from  bad  conduct."

390  Be   not    at    the    well    (of    egotism),    with    the    cord    of
praise ;
Be  deaf,  like  Hatim,  and  hear  thy  own  defects.

He  sought  not  happiness,  and  found  not  safety.
Who  turned  aside  the  neck  from  Sa'di's  sayings.

Is  a  better  adviser  than  this  Sa'di  necessary  to  thee  ?
I  know  not  what  may  chance  to  thee  after  him.


There  was,  in  the  limits  of  Tabriz,  one  dear  to  God,
Who  was  always  wakeful  and  night-rising  (in  devotion).


250  THE   BU8TAN    OF    SA'dI.  [(JHAP.  IV.

One  night,  he  saw  a  place  where  a  thief,  a  noose,
Twisted  and  cast  upon  the  side  of  a  roof.

895  He  informed  the  people,  and  raised  a  cry ;
Men,  from  every  side,  arose  with  sticks.

When  the  unmanly  thief  heard  the  voice  of  men,

He  saw  no  place  of  existing,  in  the  midst  of  the  danger.

Through  that  tumult,  fear  came  upon  him ;
Flight,  in  season,  became  his  choice.

From  pity,  the  devotee's  heart  became  wax ;
For,  the  helpless  night-thief  was  disappointed.

In  the  darkness,  he,  from  behind  came  to  his  front ;
By  another  road,  he  returned  in  front  of  him,

400  Saying  : — "  Oh  friend  !  go  not ;  for  I  am  a  friend  of  thine  ;
"  I  am,  in  manliness,  the  dust  of  thy  foot.

"  I  have  seen  no  one,  like  thee,  in  manliness ;
*'  Since  battle-action  lies  in  two  ways  only.

"  One  way  is  to  come  manfully  before  the  enemy  ;
"  The  second  to  carry  one's  life  out  of  the  contest  (by
flight).

*'  By  these  two  qualities  of  thine,  I  am  thy  slave ;

"  How  art  thou  named  ;  for  I  am  the  slave  of  thy  name  ?

"  K,  by  way  of  liberality,  it  be  thy  opinion ;
*'  I  may  guide  thee  to  a  place  which  I  know.

405  "  It  is  a  house,  small;  and  the  door  fast  shut;
"  I  think  not  the  lord  of  the  chattels  is  there.

"  "We  may  place  two  clods,  one  on  the  other ;
**  We  may  put  one  foot  on  the  shoulder  of  the  other  (to
reach  the  roof).


CHAP.  IV.]  ON    HUMILITY.  251

"  Be  satisfied  with  as  much  as  falls  to  thy  hand ;
"  It  is  better,  than  that  thou  shouldst  return  empty  of
hand."


With  cordiality,  and  flattery,  and  art,

He  drew  him  (the  thief)  towards  his  own  house.

The  young  night-traveller   (the   thief)  held   lowered    his

back;
The  lord  of  sense  (the  devotee)  entered  (the  house),  by  his

shoulder.

410  Horse-housings,  and  turbans,  and  chattels  which  he  had ;
He  put,  from  above,  into  his  (the  thief's)  skirt.

And,  thence  he  raised  a  shout,  saying  : — "  Thief  I
"  Oh  young  men !  (there  are)  recompense,  and  aid,  and
hire."

The  deceitful  thief  leaped  out  from  the  tumult.
Running,  the  garment  of  the  devotee  under  his  arm.

The  man  of  good  faith  became  comforted,
Saying  : — *'  The  desire  of  the  one  head  distracted  became
accomplished."

The  filthy  one,  who  pitied  no  one, —
The  heart  of  a  good  man  forgave.

415  From  the  mode  of  life  of  the  intelligent,  it  is  not  won-
derful.
That  they  should,  from  magnanimity,  do  good  to  the  bad.


411       The  second  line  means : —

Assist  me,  for  recompense  and  reward.


262  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  IV.

In  the  prosperity  of  the  good,  the  bad  live ;
Although,  the  bad  are  not  people  of  goodness.


There  was  a  pure  heart,  Sa'di-like,  to  a  certain  one,
Who  had  fallen  in  love  with  one  of  smooth  face.

He  used  to  endure  violence  from  the  enemy,  harsh-speaking.
Used  to  leap,  ball-like,  from  the  chaugan  of  hardship.

Used  not  to  cast  a  frown,  at  any,  on  his  eyebrows.
Used  not  to  relinquish  gentleness  for  harshness.

420  One,  at  length,  said  to  him  : — "  To  thee  is  there  no  shame  ?
"Of  all  this  slap-giving  and  stone- thro  wing, — is  there  no
knowledge  ?

"  The  mean  make  their  own  body  fat ;

"  The  feeble  make  endurance  of  the  enemy.

"  It  is  not  proper  to  pass  over  the  fault  of  an  enemy,
"  Lest  they  say  : — *  He  possessed  neither  power,  nor  man-
liness.' "

The  distraught  one,  distracted  of  head,  gave  to  him
An  answer,  which  it  is  fit  to  write  in  gold  : —

"  My  heart  is  the  house  of  the  love  of  my  friend  only ;
"  For  that  reason,  malice  to  no  one  is  contained  in  it."

425  How  well  said  Bahliil  of  happy  temperament,
When  he  passed  by  a  holy  man,  battle- seeking, —


417       "  Ba  kase  dar  uftadan  "  signifies — ba  kase  'dshik  gashtan.
419       "  Chin  bar  abru.  andakhtan  "  signifies — 'abusu-1-wajh  gashtan,
425       Bahlul  was  a  saint,  who  feigned  madness.


CHAP.  IV.]  ON    HUMILITY.  253

"  If  this  claimant  had  recognised  the  Friend  (Grod),

"  He  would  not  have  engaged,  in  contest  with  the  enemy."

If  he  had  possessed  knowledge  of  the  existence  of  God,
He  would  have  considered  all  people  non-existent.


I  have  heard  that  Lukman  was  of  black  colour ;

Was  neither  tender,  as  to  body ;  nor,  delicate,  as  to  limb.

A  certain  one  considered  him  his  own  slave ;

He  was  vile ;  he  kept  him  (engaged)  on  clay- work.

*8o  He   experienced  violence,  and   endured   his   tyranny  and
anger ;
He  prepared,  in  one  year,  a  house  for  his  sake.

When  the  runaway  slave  came  back  to  him,
Of  Lukmdn,  a  great  fear  came  over  him.

He  fell  at  his  feet,  and  made  apology ;

Lukman  laughed,  saying : — '*  What  is  the  use  of  apology  ?

"  In  a  year,  by  thy  violence,  I  make  my  liver  blood ;
"  In  a  moment,  how  may  I  put  grief  out  of  my  heart  ?

"  But  indeed  I  forgive  thee,  oh  good  man  !

"  For,  thy  gain  (by  my  service)  made  not  my  loss.

485  «  Thou  didst  make  thy  sleeping-chamber  prosperous  ;
*'  For  me, — skill  and  knowledge  of  God  became  greater.


426      Whoever  is  a  holy  man,  Gk)d-recogni8ing,  and  Friend  (God)  knowing,

regards  no  one  as  an  enemy.
The  claimant  here  means  one  claiming  to  be  of  the  circle  of  holy

men.
428       Lukman  was  a  celebrated  Greek  philosopher.      In  the  ^Curdn,  Qod

Bays :— '♦  And,  verily,  I  have  given  (power  of)  prophecy  to  Lukmdn."
484       "  Mara,"  in  place  of  "  mara,"  is  for  respect.


254  THE   BUSTA2J    OP    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  IV.

"  Oh  one  of  good  fortune  !  there  is,  among  my  followers,  a

slave,
"  Whom  1  oftentimes  order  difficult  work.

"  Again  I  will  not  sorely  vex  his  heart ;
"  When  recollection  comes  to  me  of  the  severity  of  the
clay- work."

Whosoever  endured  not  the  violence  of  the  great,
His  heart  burned  not  for  the  poor  weak  folk.

If  the  word  of  rulers  be  hard  to  thee,
Exercise  not  harshness  towards  thy  inferiors.


440  I  have  heard  that,  in  the  desert  of  San'a,  Junid
Saw  a  dog  (by  old  age)  the  hunting-teeth  dug  out.

From  the  power  of  the  grasp,  lion-seizing,
He  had  become  weak,  like  an  old  fox.

After  seizing,  on  foot,  mountain- sheep  and  antelope,
He  used  to  suffer  kicks  from  the  sheep  of  the  tribe  of
Hayy.

When  he  beheld  it  weak,  powerless  and  wounded.
He  gave  to  it  a  half  of  his  own  provisions.

I  heard  that  he  said,  while  he  wept  blood  : —
"  Who  knows,  which  of  us  two  is  the  better  ?

445  "  To-day,  in  outward  appearance,  I  am  better  than  this
dog;
"  In  the  future,  what  (decree)  may  Fate  urge  against  me  ?


440       San'a  is  a  town  in  the  district  of  Yaman,  in  Arabia  Felix.

Juuid  was  a  well-known  saint  of  Baghdad ;  they  say  that  originally
he  was  of  Nihavand ;  his  title  was  Abu-1-Kasim,  and  his  nickname
Kavariri  of  Zajjaj,  or  ^azzar.     He  died  in  a.h.  287  or  289.

All  Imams  are  directly  descended  from  him ;  hence  they  call  him
Sayyidu-l-ta,ifa,  "chief  of  the  band."


CHAP.  IV.]  ON    HUMILITY.  256

"  If  the  foot  of  my  faith  slips  not  from  its  place,

"  I  may  place  the  crown  of  Grod's  pardon  on  my  head.

"  But  if,  on  my  body,  the  garment  of  holiness
"  Remain  not,  I  am  less  by  much  than  this  dog.

"  For  when  the  dog,  with  all  its  ill-repute,  dies
"  They  will  not  carry  it  to  hell."

Oh  Sa'di !  this  is  the  way — that  men  of  the  path  of  God
Looked  not  on  themselves  with  honour.

480  They  possessed  honour  above  the  angels,  on  that  account,
That  they  regarded  not  themselves  better  than  a  dog.


A  certain  drunken  one  had  a  harp  under  his  arm ;
He  broke  it,  at  night,  on  a  devotee's  head.

When  day  came,  that  good  gentle  man

Carried  a  handful  of  silver  to  that  one  of  stone-heart.

Saying : — "  Last  night,  thou  wast  proud  and  intoxicated ;
"  For  thee  and  me,  harp  and  head  are  broken.

"  As  to  me,  that  wound  has  become  well,  and  fear  has

risen  (and  departed) ;
"  As  to  thee,  save  by  silver,  the  harp  will  not  be  sound."     ,

455  The  friends  of  God  are  over  heads  (in  power),  on  that
account.
That  they  endure  much  on  their  heads.


I  heard  that,  in  the  dust  of  Wakhsh,  of  the  great.
There  was  one  hidden,  in  the  corner  of  retirement.


456       Wakhsh  was  a  town  in  Bada^hshdn.

In  the  'Ikd-i-manzum,  couplets  456-601  are  omitted.


256  THE  BUSTAN  OP  SA'dI.  [cHAP.  IV.

Naked  in  truth ;  not,  by  the  religious  garment,  a  holy  one,
Who  puts    out   the    hand   of   need   (in   beggary)    to   the
people.

As  to  happiness, — the  door  opened  towards  him ;
The  doors  of  others  shut  in  his  face.

An  eloquent  one,  void  of  wisdom,  endeavoured,
Through  impudence,  to  speak  ill  of  that  good  man,

4S0  Saying : — "  Beware  of  this  deceit,  and  artifice,  and  fraud ;
"  Of  sitting,  demon-like,  in  the  place  of  Sulaiman.

"  From  time  to  time,  they  (the  Siifis)  wash  the  face,  cat-
like,
"  Lusting  for  the  prey  of  the  mice  of  the  street.

**  Austerity-enduring,  for  the  sake  of  name  and  pride ;
"  For,  far  goes  the  sound  of  the  empty  drum."

He  kept  talking,  and  the  crowd  about  him  a  multitude,
Man  and  woman,  making  fun  of  them  (the  devotee  and  the
orator).

I  heard  that  the  sage  of  Wakhsh  wept,
Saying  : — "  Oh  Lord  !  forgive  this  Thy  slave.

465  "  Oh  pure  Lord !  if  he  spoke  truth,

"  Give  to  me  repentance,  that  I  may  not  be  destroyed.


457  He  was  not  a  hypocrite,  who,  by  the  religious  dress,  gained  his  liveU-
hood.

460  The  jinn  Sahra  having  assumed  the  likeness  of  Sulaiman,  and  taken
the  finger-ring  from  a  female  slave,  sate  on  Sulaiman's  throne.  In  the
end  Asai  bin  Bur^ya,  Sulaiman's  vazir,  having  discovered  this,  recited
(for  the  purpose  of  revealing  the  secret)  in  his  presence  the  book  Zabur.
That  accvirsed  one,  not  having  the  power  to  hear  the  word  of  Grod,  with-
drew himself  from  the  throne,  and  cast  the  ring  into  the  sea,  whence,
in  the  belly  of  a  fish,  it  returned  to  Sulaiman's  hand.  Ever  after,  bands
of  jinns  and  men,  and  beafcts  and  birds  were  present,  as  of  yore,  in  his
court.


CHAP.  IV.]  ON    HUMILITY.  257

"  My  fault-seeker  was  agreeable  to  me ;

"  For,  he  made  known  to  me  my  bad  disposition.'*

If  thou  art  that  which  an  enemy  says,  grieve  not ;
And,  if  thou  art  not,  say  : — "  Go,  wind- weigher  !  "

If  a  fool  called  the  musk  fetid,

Be  thou  tranquil ;  for,  he  uttered  nonsense.

And,  if  this  speech,  as  to  the  onion  passes.
Say  it  is  so ;  display  not  a  fetid  (proud)  brain.

170  The  wise  one  of  enlightened  mind  takes  not

The  mouth- stopper  of  the  enemy  (defect-revealing)   from
tlie  juggler.

It  is  not  wisdom,  and  judgment,  and  understanding.
That  a  wise  man  should  purchase  deceit  from  a  juggler.

Then  the  wise  man  sate  behind  his  own  work.
He  shut  against  himself  the  enemy's  tongue.

Be  thou  of  good  conduct,  that  the  malevolent  one
May  not  obtain  the  power  of  speaking  to  thy  injury.

When  from  the  enemy's  speech,  it  comes  hard  to  thee.
See  !  what  defect  he  takes  up,  that  do  not.


1^       "  Ganda  maghz  "  signifies — takabbur  kardan  ;  hirza  bar  zab&n  rAn-

dan  ;  durushti  wa  kaj  khulk  namudan.
WO       Since  the  hearing  of  faults  from  the  enemy  is  the  cause  of  amend-
ment of  the  disposition,  the  sage  takes  no  charm  from  the  juggler  for
the  stopping  of  men's  mouths  ;  nay,  he  desires  that  the  enemy  should
utter  his  faults.

Hangama-gir  is  one  who,  in  public  places,  utters  tales  so  that  men
purchase  his  amulets.

"  Zaban-band  "  signifies — a  charm,  with  which  they  close  an  enemy's
mouth,  so  that  he  is  unable  to  slander.

"Mush'abid"  signifies — hukka-b6z  ;  hangAma-gfr.

17


258  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  IV.

475  That  person  only  knows  good  of  me,
Who  reveals  to  me  my  faults.


A  certain  one  brought  a  difficult  matter  before  'Ali; —
Peradventure,  he  may  make  apparent  to  him  the  difficulty.

The  chief,  enemy-binding,  territory-conquering,
Gave  to  him  an  answer  from  the  fountain  of  knowledge
and  judgment.

I  heard  that,  in  this  assembly,  a  person
Said :— "  Oh  Bu-1-Hasan  !  it  is  not  so."

Haydar,  name-seeking,  on  account  of  him,  grieved  not ;
He  said  : — "  If  thou  knowst  better  than  this,  speak."

4S0  Whatever  he  knew,  he  spoke ;  and  suitably  spoke ;
It  is  improper  to  conceal  the  sun's  fountain  with  clay.

The  king  of  men  approved  of  his  answer,
Saying  : — "  I  was  in  error ;  and  he,  in  truth.

"  He  spoke  better  than  I ;    the  Wise  One    is   one    only

(God) ;
"  For,  knowledge  is  not  higher  than  His  knowledge."

If,  to-day,  there  had  been  a  lord  of  rank.

He  would  not,  through  his  pride,  have  looked  at  him.

The  chamberlain  would  have  placed  him  out  of  court ;
They  would,  without  reason,  have  beaten  him.

485  Saying  : — "  Hereafter,  make  not  one  void  of  reputation;
"  Speech  is  improper  before  the  great."


476       '^li  was  the  fourth  Khalifa;  he  was  called  Bu-1-Hasan;    Haydar  i
Shah-i-Mardan.


CHAP.  IV.]  ON   HUMILITY.  259

One,  in  whose  head,  is  conceit, —

Think  not,  that  he  will  ever  listen  to  truth.

From  his  knowledge,  comes  sorrow;  from  admonition,  dis-
grace;
The  red  tuhps  grow  from  rain,  not  from  stone.

If  thou  hast  the  pearl  of  the  river  of  excellence,  rise ;
Scatter,  in  admonition,  (pearls)  at  the  feet  of  the  darvesh.

Seest  thou  not  that, — in  the  dust,  fallen,  wretched, —
The  rose  grows,  and  the  fresh  spring  blossoms  ?

«o  In  the  eye  of  (wise)  people,  no  one  is  of  account.
Who  shows,  in  himself,  much  haughtiness.

Oh  sage !  scatter  not  sleeves  of  pearls  (of  eloquence),
When  thou  beholdst  a  rich  man,  full  of  himself.

Speak  not, — so  that  a  thousand  persons  may  utter  thy

praises ;
When  thou  speakst  of  thyself,   expect    not  (praise)  from

any.


I  heard  that,  in  a  narrow  street,  as  regards  a  beggar,
'Umar  placed  his  own  foot  on  the  back  of  his  foot.

The  helpless  poor  man  knew  not  who  he  was ;
For  one  aggrieved  knows  not  enemy  from  friend.

495  He   was   enraged   at  him,  saying  : — "  Perhaps,    thou  art
blind?"
'Umar,  the  just  chief,  said  to  him  : —


498       'Umar  was  the  second  ^^lif&.

17


260  THE  BUSTAN  OF  SA'dI.  [cHAP.  IV.

*'  I  am  not  blind ;  the  deed  passed  by  mistake ;
"  I  observed  not;  pass  over  my  fault."

How  just  have  been  the  great  ones  of  religion.
Who  have,  with  inferiors,  been  even  so.

One  sense-choosing  is  humble ;

The  branch  full  of  fruit  places  its  head  on  the  earth.

Those  humility-practising  will,  to-morrow,  boast ;

The  head  of  those  neck-exalting  will,  in  shame,  be  lowered.

500  If  thou  fearst  the  day  of  reckoning,

Forgive  the  fault  of  that  one,  who  fears  thee.

Exercise  not  malignant  tyranny  towards  thy  inferiors ;
For,  there  is  a  power  even  above  thy  power.


Of  good  conduct  and  good  disposition,  there  was  a  certain

one.
Who  was  well-speaking  of  the  bad.

When  he  passed  (in  death),  a  person  beheld  him  in  a  dream

(and  asked).
Saying  : — "  Tell  me  of  past  events."

He  opened  a  mouth,  rose-like,  with  laughter,

He  gave  utterance,  nightingale-like,  with  a  sweet  sound,

g(j5  Saying  : — "  They  used  not  much  severity  towards  me ;
"  For  I  practised  oppression  against  no  one."


I  have  recollection  of  this  sort,  that  the  water-carrier  of

the  Nile
Prepared  not,  one  year,  water  for  Egypt.


496      "  ^ata  raft  kar  "  signifies — in  'amai  kliata  waki'  shud.


CHAP.    IV.]  ON    HUMILITY.  261

A  crowd  went  towards  the  naountains ;

Became,  with  supplication,  suppliants  for  rain.  -

They  wept ;  but,  from  their  weeping,  a  running  rivulet
Came  not,  save  the  water  of  the  eyes  of  women.

One  from  among  them  carried  news  to  the  Saint  Zu-n-Nun,
Saying : — "  On  the  people  there   is  much  grief  and  suffer-
ing.

510  "  Pray  for  those  distressed ;

"  For  the  word  of  those  God-accepted  is  not  rejected."

I  heard  that  Zii-n-Nun  fled  to  Madin ;
Much  time  passed  not  before  rain  fell.

After  the  lapse  of  twenty  days,  the  news  went  to  Madin,
That  the  cloud  of  black  heart  had  wept  over  them.

The  old  man  made  an  immediate  resolution  of  returning ;
For,  by  the  spring-torrents,  the  water-pools  became  full.

A  holy  man  secretly  inquired  of  him,

"  What  philosophy  was  there  in  this  thy  going  away  ? "
He  replied : —

r,i5  "  I  heard  that  for  fowl,  and  ant,  and  rapacious  beast,

"  There  was  scarcity  of  food,  on  account  of  the  deeds  of
the  wicked.


607  In  a  drought-year,  men,  by  reason  of  excessive  wretchedness,  used  to
assemble  in  the  mountains  and  deserts,  and  to  beseech,  with  lamenta-
tion, rain  from  God.

509  Zu-n-Nun  was  a  saint ;  his  name  Suban  Ibrahim ;  title,  Abu-1-fazl ;
and  nickname,  Zu-n-Nun.

His  father  was  Naubi  of  the  wise  ones  of  Kuresh ;  his  spiritual  guide,
Isr4f  il ;  his  teacher,  Malik-i-Uns,     He  died  in  a.h.  245.

611  Madin  is  the  name  of  a  city,  on  a  river  of  the  west,  of  the  tribe  of
•Shu'aib  (Jethro).


262  THE  BUSTAN  OP  SA'dI.  [cHAP.  IV.

"  In  this  country,  I  reflected  much ;

"  I  considered  no  one  worse  than  myself.

"  I  went,  lest  that,  through  my  wickedness,
"  God  should  fasten  the  door  of  liberality  on  the  people
(of  Egypt)."

Is  greatness  necessary  to  thee?  exercise  courtesy;  for  those

great  ones
Beheld  not  men  worse  than  themselves,  in  the  world.

Thou  becomest  precious  before  men,  at  that  time.
When  thou  reckon  st  thyself  for  nothing.

620  The  great  one,  who  reckoned  himseK  among  the  small  folk.
Carried  away  greatness  in  this  and  in  the  future  world.

From  this  dust-holder  (the  world),  that  slave  went  pure.
Who,  at  the  feet  of  the  meanest  person,  became  dust.

Ho  !  thou  who  passest  over  our  dust.

By  the  dust  of  dear  ones !  (let  it  be)  that  thou  rememberst
(me).

For   if   Sa*di    (after   death)    became   dust — to   him   what

sorrow  ?
Since  he  was,  in  life  also,  dust  (humble).

In  humbleness,  he  gave  his  body  to  the  dust ;
Although  he  went,  wind-like,  around  the  world.

625  Much  time  passes  not  before  that  the  dust  (of  the  grave)
consumes  him.
The  wind  carries  him,  again,  through  the  world.


622       "  Ilia  ai  ki  "  is  a  common  form  of  address.
The  second  line  may  mean : —

That  thou  rememberst  me  in  auspicious  prayer.
Or,  That  thou  rememberst  this  speech,  in  couplet  523.
524       The  second  line  refers  to  the  fact  that  Sa'di  was  a  great  traveller.


CHAP.  IV.]  ON    HUMILITY.  263

Behold  !  since  the  rose-garden  of  truth  blossomed,
No  nightingale  spoke  in  it,  sweetly,  like  Sa'di.

If  a  nightingale  should  die  in  such  a  way,  wonderful, —
That  a  rose  should  not  grow  on  its  bones  !


264  THE  BUSTAN  OF  SA*DI.  [CHAP.  V.


CHAPTER    V.
On  Resignation.

1  One  night,  I  kept  burning  the  olive-oil  of  reflection  ;
I  lighted  up  the  lamp  of  eloquence.

A  foolish  talker  heard  my  speech,

Save  to  say — To  thee  be  praise  ! — ^he  saw  no  way.

From  villainy  of   nature,   he   also   folded   within   it  (the

following),
— For,  from  pain  of  envy  a  cry  involuntarily  arises, —

Saying : — "  His  thought  is  subUme,  and  his  judgment
lofty,

**  In  this  matter  of  the  habit  of  abstinence,  and  regula-
tions, and  counsel :

5  "  Not,  in  regard  to  lance  and  mace  and  heavy  club ;
*'  For,  the  conclusion  of  this  matter  is  for  others."

Knows  he  not  that  to  us  there  is  no  desire  for  battle ;
Otherwise  the  power  of  speech  is  not  scanty  ?

I  am  able  to  draw  forth  the  sword  of  the  tongue ;
To  draw  forth  his  existence,  in  a  moment.


()HAP.  v.]  .  ON    RESIGNATION.  265

Come ;  so  that,  in  this  matter,  we  may  wage  war ;
(And)  may  make  a  stone-pillow  for  the  enemy's  head.


Happiness  is  in  the  gift  of  the  Ruler  (God) ;
It  is  not  in  the  grasp  and  arm  of  the  strong.

10  When  the  lofty  sky  gives  not  wealth,
It  comes  not,  by  manliness,  into  the  snare.

Neither,  through  weakness,  did  distress  come  to  the  ant ;
Nor,  by  grasp  of  strength,  did  Hons  eat.

Since  one  cannot  draw  forth  the  hand  against  the  sky.
It  is  necessary  to  be  content  with  its  revolution.

If  Grod  has  written  for  thee  long  life.

Neither  the   snake,   nor  the  sword,  nor  the  arrow  may
injure  thee.

And,  if,  as  to  thy  life,  a  portion  remains  not.
The  electuary  kills  thee  just  as  poison.

X6  No ;  when  Rustam  experienced  the  end  of  his  days,

Shughdad  brought  forth  the  dust  (of  destruction)  from
his  body.


In  Sipahdn,  I  had  a  certain  friend.

Who  was  warlike  and  fearless  and  shrewd.


18       "  Gaz^yad  "  comes  from — gazdyidan,  not  from  gazidan.

18  Shughad,  Eust^m's  brother,  threw  Rustam,  with  his  horse  Rakhsh,
into  a  well ;  he  himself  was  slain  by  an  arrow,  which  Rustam  fired  from
the  well.  The  Persians  trace  his  descent  from  Mamun,  son  of  Benjamin,
son  of  Jacob.


266  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  V.

Continually,  his  hand  and  dagger  coloured  with  blood ;
The  enemy's  heart  was,  through  him,  like  roast  meat  on
the  fire.

I  beheld  not  the  day,  on  which,  he  bound  not  (to  his  waist)

the  quiver;
And  fire  leaped  not  from  his  steel  arrow.

Courageous ;  strong,  with  the  gripe  of  an  ox, —
Through  fear  of  him,  confusion  fell  upon  lions.

20  He  used  to  cast  his  arrow,  with  such  precision,

That  he  used  to  cast  down  an  enemy  with  every  arrow.

The  thorn  in  the  rose, — I  saw  not  that  it  passed  in  such  a

way.
As  his  arrow  passed  not  into  the  shields.

He  struck  not  the  helmet  of  the  one  contest-seeking,
Whose  helmet  and  head,  he  shattered  not  completely.

In  battle  (enraged)  like  a  sparrow  on  the  locust  day,
In  slaying, — whether  a  sparrow,  or  a  man,  to  him  what
difference  ?

If  it  were  to  him,  to  attack  Firidiin,

He  would  not  have  given  him  respite  for  sword-drawing.

25  Panthers,  by  the  force  of  his  gripe,  beneath  him  ;
His  fingers  plunged  in  the  brain  of  the  lion.

He  used  to  seize  the  girdle  of  one  strength-tried.
And  if  he  had  been  a  mountain,  he  would  have  plucked
him  from  his  place.

When  he  used  to  strike  his  battle-axe  on  the  one  mail-
clad,
It  used  to  pass  through  the  man,  and  strike  his  saddle.


19  "  G-av-zor"  may  signify — rude,  violent,  brutal.

20  "  DaVa  "  signifies — claim ;  but  here  it  means  precision.

23       On  tbe  swarming  of  locusts,  the  sparrow  becomes   demented;  and,
rushing  in  every  direction,  seizes  every  locust  it  can.


CHAP,  v.]  ON    EESIGNATION.  267

Neither  as  to  manliness,  nor  as  to  magnanimity, — to  him,
A  second,  no  one  saw  a  man  in  this  world.

He  used  not  to  allow  me  to  go  a  moment  from  his  hand
(side) ;

For,  he  used  to  have  an  inclination  for  those  of  true  dis-
position.

30  Suddenly,  a  journey  snatched  me  from  that  soil ;
For,  in  that  abode,  there  was  no  food  for  me.

Fate  transported  me  from  Media  to  Syria ;
In  that  pure  dust,  my  abode  was  happy.

In  short,  some  time,  I  became  resident ;
In  sorrow  and  in  ease ;  in  hope,  and  in  fear.

Of  Syria,  my  cup  again  became  full ;
The  desire  of  my  house  drew  me.

By  chance  it  so  fell.

That  my  path  again  fell  by  Media.

35  One  night,  my  head  became  lowered  in  thought ;
That  skilled  one  (of  Ispahan)  passed  to  my  heart.

The  salt  (of  desire)  made  fresh  my  ancient  wound ;
For,  I  was  one  who  had  eaten  salt  from  the  man's  hand.

For  seeing  him,  I  went  towards  Sipahdn;

In  love  of  him,  I  became  a  seeker  and  inquirer.

I  beheld  the  young  man  old  from  time's  revolution  ;
His  poplar  arrow  (of  stature)  a  bow ;  his  deep  red  colour
(complexion)  yellow.

81       "  Trak-i-'Ajam  "      signifies — Media ;       "  Trdk-i-'Arab  "     signifies —

Chaldea  ;  "  Sham-i-'Ai*ab  "  signifies — Syria.
34       The  student  should  note  the  use  of  "  uftAdan,"  in  this  couplet.
1 36       "  Namak  "  here  signifies — ishtiy&k.
38       Arghavan  is  a  tree  of  deep  red  colour.

Zarir  is  a  yellow  grass  with  which  they  dye  garments.


268  THE  BUSTAN  OF  SA'dI.  [cHAP.  V.

His  head,  from  snow-hair,  like  a  white  mountain ;
"Water,  from  the  snow  of  old  age,  running  on  his  face.

40  Heaven  obtained  the  hand  of  power  over  him ;
It  twisted  the  tip  of  his  manly  hand.

The  world  put  pride  out  of  his  head ;
The  head  of  powerlessness  on  his  knees.

I  said  to  him : — "  Oh  chief,  lion-seizing  !

"  What  made  thee  withered  like  an  old  fox?  "

He  laughed,  saying : — "  From  the  day  of  battle  with  the

Tatdrs,
"  I  put  out  of  my  head  that  battle-seeking.

'*  I  beheld  the  ground,  with  spears,  like  a  cane-brake,
"  The  (coloured)  standards,  fir-like,  set  in  it.

45  "  I  raised  the  dust  of  battle,  like  smoke ;

"  When  there  is  not  the  power, — of  what  use  is  ardour  ?

"  I  am  that  one  who  when  I  used  to  attack,

"  Used  to  carry  off,  with  a  spear,  a  ring  from  the  hand.

"  But,  when  my  star  displayed  not  assistance ;
"  They  gat  themselves  about  me  like  a  ring.

"  I  reckoned  the  way  of  flight  gain;

"  For  (only)  the  fool  makes  a  sharp  tussle  with  Fate.

"  How  may  helmet  and  cuirass  render  me  aid,
"  When  my  bright  star  displayed  not  assistance?

50  "  When  victory's  key  is  not  in  the  hand,

"  One  cannot  break  victory's  door,  by  the  arm.


48       "Panja  tez  kardan"  signifies — mukabila  kardan;  koftan-i-panja  ba
tezf  va  shitab  zadagf.


CHAP,  v.]  ON   EESIGNATION.  269

"  A  crowd,  panther-overthrowing,  and  of  elephant- strength,
"  Man's  head  (the  rider)  and  horse's  hoof  (the  ridden) —
in  iron.

"  That  very  moment,  when  we  saw  the  dust  of  the  army,
"  We  put    on    the  mail-garment,  and  the    helmet   head-
piece :

"  Urged  our  Arab  steeds,  cloud-like ;

"  Showered  down  our  gleaming  arrows,  rain-like.

"  From  ambush,  the  two  armies  dashed  together ;
"  Thou  wouldst  have  said : — On  the  earth,  they  dashed
the  sky.

)6  "  From  the  raining  of  arrows,  hail-like,
"  Death's  storm  arose  on  every  side.

*'  For  the  chase  of  lions,  conflict-making,
"  The  dragon-noose,  mouth  opened.

"  With  blue  dust,  the  earth  became  the  sky;
**  The  flash  of  sword  and  helmet  in  it  star-like.

**  When  we  overtook  the  enemy's  horsemen,
"  On  foot,  we  wove  shield  within  shield.


'A       "  Baham  bar  zadan  "  signifies — bar  ham  di'gar  rek^tan.

Tbrough  the  display  of  bravery  and  assault,  they  rendered  all  things
topsy-turvy.
$8       "  Dar  yaftan  "  signifies — dar  rasfdan.

"  Sipar  dar  sipar  ydftem  "  signifies — darmiydn-i-ma  va  eshan  parda
sd^tem.

In  the  second  line,  "bAftem" — signify ing^mutta^il  va  paiwand  kar-
dem  " — sometimes  occurs.

When  the  enemy's  horsemen  approached  and  the  work  of  arrow  and
musket  was  ended — of  necessity,  alighting  from  our  horses,  and  placing
the  shield  in  front,  we  were  opposed  to  the  enemy,  who  did  even  so.
-'    On  both  sides,  the  armies  commingled  to  such  a  degree  that  shield  to
shield  became  conjoined.


270  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  V.

"  With  arrow  and  spear,  we  split  the  hair ;
"  When  power  was  not, — we  turned  away.

60  **  What  force  does  the  grasp  of  man's  exertion  Jbring,
"  When  the  arm  of  God's  grace  assists  not  ?

"  The  sword  of  those  malice-bearing  was  not  blunt ;
"  But  there  was  malice,  on  the  part  of  the  angry  star.

"  A  person  of  our  army,  forth  from  the  conflict,

"  Came  not — save  with  a  khaftan  bedabbled  with  blood.

"  Within  the  silken  vest,  went  not  the  arrow  of  those
"  Of  whom,  I  said  : — They  may  sew  (pierce)  the   anvil
with  an  arrow.

"  Like  a  hundred  grains,  clustered  in  an  ear  of  corn,
"  We  fell, — each  grain  in  a  corner.

65  "  With  unmanliness,  we  became  dispersed ;

"  Like  the  fish,  which,  cuirass-clad,  falls  to  the  fish-hook.

"  When  Fortune,  from  towards  us,  was  face  on  the  turn;
"  The  shield  before  the  arrow  of  destiny  was — nothing."


In  Ardabil,  a  certain  one  of  iron  grasp
Caused,    continually,    the    double-headed    arrow    to    pass
through  a  spade.

One  felt- clad  came  before  him  in  battle,

A  young  man,  world-consuming,  battle-making,


65       "Az  ham   dast    dadan"   signifies — azyak  di'gar  gashtanj   hazfmat

^urdan ;  pareshan  shudan.

"  Shist "  signifies — VuUabf  a  fish-hook.
67       Ardabil  is  a  city  in  Azar  bijan,  in  Persia ;  it  is  said  to  have  been

founded  by  Fi'ruz,  Naushiravan's  grandfather.


1


CHAP,  v.]  ON    KESIGNATION.  271

Contest-seeking,  like  Bahram-Gor,

On  his  shoulder,  a  noose  of  the  raw  hide  of  the  wild  ass.

'^^  "When  he  of  Ardabil  saw  the  one  felt- wearing.

He  brought  the  string  to  the  bow,  and  the  string  to  the
ear.

He  struck  him  with  j&fty  poplar  arrows ;

But ;  not  a  single  arrow  passed  beyond  the  felt.

The  warrior  came  like  the  hero  Dastdn,
He  brought  him  (of  Ardabil)  within  the  curl  (of  his  noose),
and  took  him  away.

In  the  camp,  at  the  tent-door,  his  hand.
He  bound  to  his  neck — like  bloody  thieves.

In  the  night,  from  anger  and  shame,  he  slept  not ;
In  the  morning,  a  slave-girl,  from  the  tent  said  : —

76  "  Since  thou  piercest  iron  with  the  arrow  and  dart,
'*  How  didst  thou  fall  a  captive  to  one  felt- wearing  ?  "

I  heard  that  he  said,  while  he  wept  blood  : —

**  Knowst  thou  not  that  no  one  lives  on  the  day  of  death  ?

"  I  am  that  one,  who, — in  the  act  of  spear-piercing  and

sword- striking,
"  Teach  Rustam  the  manner  of  battle.

"  When  the  arm  of  my  fortune  was  of  strong  state,
"  The  thickness  of  the  spade  appeared  to  me  as  felt.

"  Now,  that  fortune  is  not  in  my  grasp,

"  The  felt  is  not  less  than  the  spade,  before  my  arrow.


Bahrain  Gor  was  a  king  of  Persia,  who  was  fond  of  hunting  wild
asses.     He  was  Naushfravdn's  grandson.


272  THE  BUSTAN  OP  SA'dI.  [oHAP.  V.

80  "On  the  day  of  death,  the  spear  rends  the  cuirass ;
"  It  passes  not  beyond  the  shirt  of  one  deathless.

"  He,  in  whose  rear  is  the  sword  of  the  wrath  of  death,
"  Is  naked, — if  his  cuirass  be  manifold.

"  But,  if  Fortune  be  his  friend ;  and,  Time  supporter —
"  It  is  impossible  to  slay  him  naked — (even)  with  a  large
knife.

"  Neither  did  the  sage,  carry  away  (save)    his    life,    by

effort ;
"  Nor,  did  the  fool  die,  by  improper  eating."


One  night,  a  hero  slept  not  on  account  of  a  side-pain ;
There  was  a  physician,  in  that  quarter  ;  he  said  : —

8    *'  Since,  he  eats  the  vine-leaf  in  this  fashion,
"  I  have  wonder  if  he  will  finish  the  night  (alive).

"  For,  the  blade  of  the  Tatar  arrow  in  the  chest,
"  Is  better  than  wine- sweetmeats  of  improper  food.

*'  If  by  a  single  morsel,  griping  occurs  in  the  bowels,
*'  All  the  life  of  the  ignorant  one  comes  to  naught."

By  chance,  the  physician  died  that  night ;
Forty  years  have  passed  since  this  time ;  but  the  hero  is
alive.


As  to  a  certain  villager, — ^his  ass  fell  (and  died) ;
On  9,  vine-tendril,  he  placed  its  head  flag-fashion.


"  'Alam  kardan  "  signifies — dar  aweldbtan,  to  suspend.
For  driving  away  the  evil  eye,  they  used  to  suspend  the  head  of  an
ox,  or  an  ass.


OHAP.  v.]  ON    RESIGNATION.  273

90  An  old  man,  world-experienced,  passed  by  it ;

To  the  vineyard-keeper,  laughing,  he  thus  spoke  : —

"  Oh  soul  of  father  !  think  not  that  this  ass
"  Repels  the  evil  eye,  from  the  sown  field.

"  For,  from  its  own  head  and  buttocks, — this  ass,  the  re-
pelling (of  blows)
"  Effected  not,  so  that,  feeble  and  wounded,  it  died."

What  knows  the  physician  of   trouble-removing    from  a

person.
When  helpless,  he  himself  will  die  of  trouble  !


I  have  heard  that,  from  an  indigent  person,  a  dinar
Fell ;  and  that  the  wretched  one  sought  for  it  much.

95  At  length,  he  turned  away  the  head  of  despair ;
Another,  without  searching,  found  it.

For  bad  and  good  fortune,  the  pen.
The  Fates  urge ; — we,  yet,  in  the  womb.

By  strength  of  grasp,  they  enjoy  not  their  daily  food ;
For  those  of  strong  grip  are  more  straitened  in  circum-
stance.

An  old  man  struck  his  son  with  a  stick  ;

He  said  : — "  Oh  father  !  I  am  guiltless ;  strike  not.

,  "  For  men's  violence  against  thee,  it  is  possible  to  weep ;
"  But,  when  thou  displayst  violence,  to  me  what  remedy  is
there?"


99       It  is  right  to  complain  to  God,  but  not  of  God.

18


274  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  V.

100  Oh  lord  of  sense !  cry  to  the  Ruler  (God),
Raise  not  a  cry,  on  account  of  the  Ruler.


One  of  lofty  star, — his  name  Bakht-yar, —
Was  of  great  power,  and  possessed  of  capital.

In  that  place,  to  him  were  both  gold  and  property ;
Others  poor  of  reversed  fortune.

His  house  was  in  the  street  of  the  beggars ;
His  gold  was  like  wheat  in  the  measure.

When  the  darvesh  beholds  the  rich  one  in  affluence,
His  heart  burns  the  more  by  the  stain  of  indigence.

105  A  woman  joined  battle  with  her  husband.

When,  in  the  night-time,  he  went  to  her  empty-handed,

Saying : — "  There  is  no  one,  unfortunate,  poor,  like  thee ;
"  Thou  hast  only  this  sting,  like  the  red  wasp.

"  Learn  manliness  from  the  neighbours ;

"  For  I  am  not,  in  short,  a  harlot  picked  up  on  the  road.

"  Persons  have  gold,  and  silver,  and  territory,  and  house-
hold goods,
"  Why  art  thou  not  of  good  fortune,  like  them?  "

The  one  of  pure  heart,  wool-clad,  raised
A  shout  from  the  heart,  drum-like,

110  Saying : — *'  I  possess  not  the  hand  of  power,  as  to  any-
thing ;
'*  Writhe  not  in  the  grasp  of  the  hand  of  Fate.


104       After  "  tawangar  "  read  "  ra."
106       The  red  wasp  has  a  sting  but  no  honey  ;  so  thou  hast  the  power  of
doing  injury,  not  of  good.


OHAP.  v.]  ON    DESIGNATION.  275

"  In  my  hand  they  placed  not  power,
"  That  I  might  make  myself  fortunate."


In  the  dust  of  Kish,  a  certain  poor  man, —
How  well  he  said  to  his  ugly  partner  (wife) ; —

"  When  the  hand  of  Fate  created  thee  ugly  of  face,

"  Plaster  not  the  rose-colour  (rouge)  on  thy  ugly  face."

Who  acquires  good  fortune,  by  force  ?

Who  makes  the  blind  man's  eye  seeing,  by  antimony  ?

115  A  good  deed  comes  not  from  those  of  bad  stock  ;
Needle-work  is  impossible  to  dogs.

AU  the  philosophers  of  Greece  and  Riim

Know  not  how  to  make  honey  from  the  thorny  tree.

It  happens  not  that,  from  a  wild  beast,  a  man  becomes ;
Education,  (even)  with  exertion,  is  lost  on  it.

One  can  make  clean  the  mirror  from  blight ;
But,  the  mirror  comes  not  from  a  stone.

The  flower  grows  not  from  the  willow-bough,  by  effort ;
The  Ethiopian  becomes  not  white,  by  the  hot  bath.

120  When  the  poplar-arrow  of  destiny  is  not  repelled.
For  the  slave, — there  is  no  shield,  save  resignation.


A  vulture  to  a  kite  thus  spoke.

Saying: — "  There  is  no  one  more  far-seeing  than  myself."


112       Ki'sh  is  the  name  of  a  city  in  an  island  in  the  sea  of  Hurniuz.
115       The  disposition  of  dogs  is  to  rend,  not  to  put  together,  as  in  sewing.
121       "  Zaghan  "  signifies — gosht-raba;  ghalivaj.
"  Kargis  "  signifies — nasr.

18  •


276  THE  BUSTAN  OF  Sa'dI.  [cHAP.  V.

The  kite  replied : — "  It   is   not  proper  to    pass    bj   this

matter ;
"  Come ;  so  that  thou  mayst  look  at  the  quarters  of  the

desert."

I  heard  that,  to  the  extent  of  one  day's  march,
The  vulture  viewed  from  height  to  depth.

Thus,  he  spoke  : — "  I  saw,  if  belief  be  to  thee,
"  Where  a  grain  of  wheat  is  on  the  plain."

125  From  astonishment,  patience  remained  not  to  the  kite,
From  sublimity,  they  turned  to  profundity.

"When  the  vulture  came  close  to  the  grain,
A  long  foot-tether  became  knotted  on  him.

From  his  devouring  that  grain,  the  vulture  knew  not
That  adverse  fortune  would  cast  a  snare  about  his  neck.

Not  every  oyster  is  pregnant  with  the  pearl ;

Not  every  time  does  the  expert  archer  hit  the  butt.

The  kite  said  : — "  From  seeing  this  grain,  what  profit,
"  When    to    thee,   there  was    not  the    beholding   of    the
enemy's  snare  ?  "

130  I  heard  that,  he,  neck  in  the  noose,  said  : —
"  Caution,  as  to  destinj^  is  unprofitable."

When  death  brought  forth  the  hand  for  his  blood,
Fate  bound  his  eyes,  finely-discerning.

In  that  water  (of  eternity),  whose  shore  is  unknown,
The  swimmer's  pride  is  of  no  avail.


How  well  said  the  apprentice  of  the  embroidery- weaver,
When  he  pourtrayed  'Ankd,  and  elephant,  and  giraffe  : —


122       "  Bar  "  belongs  to  "  guzasMan."


CHAP,  v.]  ON    RESIGNATION.  277

"  From  my  hand,  there  came  not  a  form,
"  The  plan  of  which,  the  Teacher  from  above  pourtrayed
not."

135  If  the  form  of  thy  state  be  bad,  or  good.
The  hand  of  Fate  is  its  painter.

There  is  a  kind  of  concealed  hypocrisy  in  this,
Namely — '*  Zaid  injured  me,  or  'Umar  wounded  me."

If  the  Lord  of  Command  gives  thee  the  eye.
Thou  seest  not  again  the  form  of  Zaid  and  'Umar.

I  think  not — if  a  slave  rests  (from  seeking  food).
That  God  draws  his  pen  on  (stops)  his  daily  food.

May  the  World-Creator  give   thee  the  means  of  opening

(the  door)  !
For,  if  He  shuts,  none  can  open.


140  A  young  camel,  to  its  mother,  said  : —
*'  After  travelling,  at  last,  sleep  awhile."

She  said : — "  If  the  rein  had  been  in  my  hand
"  No  one  would  have  seen  me  a  load-carrier  in  the  camel-
string."

There,  where  it  wishes.  Fate  takes  the  vessel.
Although,  the  captain  rends  the  garment  on  his  body.

Oh  Sa'di !  place  not  thy  eye  (of  expectation)  on  anyone's

power ;
For  Omnipotence  only  is  the  Giver.


186       Man's  vision  should  be  such  that  he  should  see  the  signs  of  (Jod,  no
I        those  of  an  abject  creature.


278  THE  BUSTAN  OP  SA'dI.  [cHAP.  V.

If  thou  worshipst  God,  of  (people's)  doors,  sufficient  for

thee ;
But  if  He  drives  thee  away,  no  one  desires  thee.

146  If  God  makes  thee  a  crown-possessor, — raise  thy  head ;
But,  if  not,  scratch  the  head  of  despair.

"Worship,  with  sincerity  of  intention,  is  good  ;
Otherwise,  what  comes  from  the  husk,  without  kernel  ?

"What, — the  idolater's  cord  on  thy  waist  ?    what,  the  re-
ligious garment?
If  thou  putst  them  on  for  the  opinion  of  the  people.

I  said  to  thee  : — Display  not  thy  own  manliness ;

"When  thou  displayst  manliness,  be  not  an  hermaphrodite.

It  is  proper  to  display  (religious  qualities)  to  the  extent  of

thy  capacity ;
Shame  overpowered  not  him,  who  had  not  displayed.

150  For,  when  they  draw  the  borrowed  garment  from  off  thy
head,
The  old  robe  will  remain  on  thy  body.

If  thou  art  small,  fasten  not  on  wooden  feet.
That  thou  mayst,  in  children's  eyes,  appear  tall.

And,  if  copper  be  silver-plated,
One  can  expend  it  on  the  ignorant.

Oh  my  life  !  place  not  the  gold-water  on  the  valueless  coin ;
For  the  wise  banker  takes  it  as  nothing.

They  take  the  things  gold -washed  to  the  fire;
Then,  it  appears  which  are  copper,  and  which  gold.


144       The   first   line   means — that   people,  to  whose   doors   thou   goest  in

beggary,  will  give  thee  alms.
148       See  chapter  iv.  couplet  84.


OHAP.  v.]  ON    EESIGNATION.  279

153  Knowst  thou  not  what  the  old  mac  of  the  mountain  said,
To  the  man,  who,  for  reputation,  slept  not  at  night  ?

"  Oh  soul  of  father !  go  ;  strive  for  sincerity  ;
"  For,  from   the    people,   thou    canst    not    establish   any
(proof)."

Those  persons,  who  have  approved  of  thy  acts,
Have  yet  only  seen  thy  outward  form.

What  price,  does  the  Khurdis  slave  fetch,
Who  has  leprous  limbs  beneath  the  over-coat  ?

It  is  impossible  to  enter  Paradise,  with  imposture.
For,  the  shroud  goes  back  (on  the  Judgment  Day)   from
thy  ugly  face.


ifio  I  have  heard  that  a  certain  one  of  immature  age  kept  a
fast.
With  a  hundred  difficulties,  he  accomplished  one  day  up  to
the  mid-day  meal.

The  tutor  took  him  not  that  day  to  school ;
Devotion,  on  the  part  of  a  little   boy,   appeared  to  him
great.

The  father  kissed  his  eyes  ;  and,  the  mother  his  head ;
They  scattered  almonds  and  gold  on  his  head.

When  a  half  of  the  day  passed  over  him,
From  his  stomach's  fire,  the  burning  (of  hunger)  fell  upon
him.


156       "  Az  khalk  bar  bastan  "  signifies— az  khalk  naf  giriftan.
160       "  Sa,ik  "  comes  from  "  suk,"  signifying— adab-amoz  ;  atalilf.
"  Skhik  "  signifies— sabak  dibanda ;  yialifa,e  maktab.


280  THE  BUSTAN  OF  SA'dI.  [cHAP.  V.

To  his  heart,  he  said  : — "  If  I  eat  a  few  morsels,
'*  How  may  my   father  and  mother   know  of    the  secret
(deed)?"

165  When  the  boy's  face  was  towards  his  father  and  family,
He  secretly  ate  ;  but  openly  carried  on  the  fast.

Who  knows,  whether  thou  art  in  the  bonds  of  Grod ;
K  thou  standst  unwashed,  in  prayer  ?

Then,  this  old  man  is  more  ignorant  than  that  child,
Who,  for  the  sake  of  men,  is  in  devotion.

The  key  of  hell's  door  is  that  prayer.
Which  thou,  in  men's  eyes,  makest  long.

If,  except  to  God,  thy  way  goes, —
They  spread  thy  prayer-carpet  in  hell.


170  One  of  black  deeds  fell  from  a  ladder ;

I  heard  that,  even  in  a  breath,  he  gave  his  soul  (to  God).

For  some  days,  the  son  took  to  weeping ;
Took,  again,  to  sitting  with  his  companions :

Beheld,  in    a  dream,  his   father ;    and  inquired  after  his

state.
Saying : — "  How  escapedst  thou  from  the  assembling,  and

reviving,  and  questioning  ?  "

He  said  : — "  Oh  son  !  desire  not  news  concerning  me;
*'  From  the  ladder,  I  fell  into  hell."


166       "  Wuzii'  "  signifies — in  law,  the  washing  of  the  face,  hands,  feet,  and
anointing  of  the  head.

168  See  chapter  iv.  couplet  81.

169  If  thou  performst  devotion  to  be  seen  of  men.


CHAP,  v.]  ON    RESIGNATION.  281

One  of  good  walk  of  life,  outwardly  unceremonious,
(Is)  better  than  one  of  good  fame,  inwardly  evil.

176  In  my  opinion,  the  night-going  highway-man
Is  better  than  the  adulterer  of  chaste  skirt.

One  trouble-enduring  at  the  people's  door, —

What  reward  will  Grod  give  him  on  the  Resurrection  Day  ?

Oh  son  !  expect  not  reward  from  'Umar,
When  thou  art,  at  work,  in  the  house  of  Zaid.

I  say  not : — he  can  reach  his  Friend  (God),
In  this  path ;  save  that  one,  whose  face  is  turned  towards
Him.

Go  the  right  way,  that  thou  mayst  reach  the  stage,
(Oh  hypocrite  !)  thou  art  not  on  the  path ;  for  this  reason,
thou  art  lagging.

180  Like  the  ox,  whose  eyes  the  oil-presser  binds  up,

Though  running  till  the  night, — at  night,  even  there  where
it  is.

The  person,  who  turns  away  his  face  from  the  altar.
The  people  of  eloquence  give  evidence  as  to  his  infidelity.

Thou  also  art,  in  prayer,  back  to  the  Kibla,
If  thy  face  of  supplication  be  not  towards  God.

That  tree,  whose  root  is  firm.

Cherish — that  one  day  it  may  give  thee  the  fruit  of  fruit.

If  the  root  of  sincerity  be  not  in  thy  soil.

No  one  is  disappointed  like  thee,  at  this  door  (of  God).


179  The  one,  who  is  a  hypocrite,  does  much,  but  makes  no  progress.   How,
then,  can  he  reach  the  stage  ?

180  The  ox  is  always  circling.


282  THE    BUSTAN    OP    SA'dI.  [oHAP.  V.

185  Whosoever  casts  seed  on  the  rock-surface,

At  the  time  of  in-come,  not  a  grain  comes  to  his  grasp.

Put   not   honour   upon   the   reputation    of  (acquired   by)

hypocrisy ;
For,  this  (hypocrisy)  has  mire  beneath  the  (lustrous)  water.

When  thou  art,  in  secret,  bad  and  dust-like,
,  What  profit, — the  water  of  hypocrisy  on  the  surface  of  the
work  ?

On  the  surface  of  hypocrisy,  it  is  easy  to  stitch  the  reli-
gious garment.
If  thou  canst  sell  it  to  God.

How  may  men  know  who  is  in  the  religious  habit  ?
The  writer  knows  what  is  in  the  register  (of  deeds).

190  What  weight  may  the  leathern  bag,  full  of  wind,  show  in
the  place
Where  there  is  the  scale  of  justice,  and  the  book  of  equity  ?

The  hypocrite,  who  showed  so  much  austerity,
They  see  there  is  nothing  in  his  leathern  bag.

They  make  the  outside  of  the  coat  cleaner  than  the  lining ;
For,  this  is  behind  a  veil,  and  that  before  the  sight.

The  great  possessed  indifference  as  to  men's  eyes.
For  that  reason,  they  possessed  a  painted  silk  lining.

If  thou  wishst  renown  spread  abroad  in  the  country,
Place  the  cloak  outside ;  say  : — Fill  the  interior  with  cotton.


187       "  N^mus  "  here  signifies — riya,  hypocrisy.

190       A  hypocrite's  work  is  compared  to  a  bag  full  of  wind.

193  They  are  clothed  with  good  deeds ;  because  they  desire  not  renown.

194  "  Hulla"  signifies — azar  ;  rada.
The  second  line  means : —

Cause  thy  exterior  to  be  decked  with  hypocrisy.


OHAP.  v.]  ON   RESIGNATION.  283

195  Bdjizid  uttered  not,  in  sport,  this  speech : —

"  I  am  safer  from  the  disbeliever,  than  from  the  disciple.'*

Those,  who  are  sultans  and  monarchs,

Are  altogether  beggars  at  this  Court  (of  God).

The  man  of  truth  fixes  not  his  desire  (of  help)  upon  the

beggar;
It  is  improper  to  take  the  hand  of  the  fallen.

This  indeed  is  best, — if  thou  be  pregnant  with  a  jewel.
That  thou  shouldst  take  thy  head  within  thyself, — oyster-
like.

"When  the  face  of  thy  adoring  is  towards  God,
If  Jibra,il  see  thee  not,— it  is  proper.

200  Oh  son  !  Sa'di's  counsel  is  enough  for  thee.
If  thou  hearst  it,  like  a  father's  counsel.

If,  to-day,  thou  hearst  not  my  word,

God  forbid  !  that,  to-morrow,  thou  shouldst  be  abashed.

Than  this  (Sa'di)  is  a  better  adviser  necessary  to  thee  ?
I  know  not  what  may  chance  to  thee,  after  me.


195       The   disbeliever  tells  me  of    my  ill-doing;  but  the  disciple,  of  my

well-doing.
197       The  beggar  is  described  in  couplet'  196.
202       See  chapter  iv.  couplet  392.


284  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [oHAP.  VI.


CHAPTER  VI.

On  Contentment.

1  He  knew  not  God  and  worshipped  not,
Who  displayed  not  contentment  with  his  fortune  and  daily
food.

Contentment  makes  a  man  rich ;

— Inform  the  greedy  one,  world-travelling. —

Oh  one  without   permanence  !    bring   tranquillity  to    thy

hand.
For,  vegetation  grows  not  on  the  rolling  stone.

If  thou  art  a  man  of  judgment  and  sense,  cherish  not  thy

body;
For,  when  thou  cherishst  it, — thou  slayst  it.

5  Wise  men  are  skill-cherishers  ;
But  body-cherishers  are  feeble  in  skill.

Eating  and  sleeping  is  the  way  of  beasts  alone ;
To  be  in  this  way  is  the  habit  of  the  unwise.

That  one  attended  to  a  manly  life.
Who  silenced  first  the  dog  of  lust.


CHAP.  VI.]  ON    CONTENTMENT.  285

Happy  that  fortunate  one,  who,  in  a  corner,
Gathers  to  his  hand  road -provisions  of  the  knowledge  of
God.

Those,  to  whom  God's  mystery  became  revealed.
Preferred  not  the  false  to  it.

10  But,  when  he  knows  not  darkness  from  light,

Whether  the  sight  of  a  demon,  or  the  cheek  of  a  htiri — to
him  what  difference  ?

Thou  didst  cast  thyself  into  a  well,  on  that  account,
That  thou  didst  not  recognise  the  well  from  the  road.

How  may  the  young  hawk  fly  to  the  zenith  of  the  sky,
When,  in  its  long  feathers,  the  stone  of  desire  is  bound  ?

If  from  lust's  claw,  thy  skirt  free,

Thou  shouldst  make,  thou    wouldst  go  to  the  lotus-tree
(in  Paradise).

By  eating  less  food  than  one's  custom,

One  can  make  the  body  of  angelic  temperament.

15  How  may  the  brutal  lion  reach  the  angel  state  ?
It  cannot  fly  from  earth  to  sky.

Practise  first  the  human  temperament ;
Think  after  that  of  the  angelic  temperament.

Thou  art  on  the  flanks  of  a  refractory  colt ;

Take  care  that  it  twist  not  its  head  from  thy  order.

For,  if  it  should  tear  the  halter  from  thy  hand, —
It  would  slay  thy  body,  and  spill  thy  blood.

If  thou  art  a  man,  eat  food  within  limit ;
Such  a  fully  belly  ! — art  thou  a  man,  or  a  jar  ?


10      The  demon  (of  falsehood)  and  the  "hArf"  (of  truth)  are  alike  to
him.


286  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  VI.

20  Within  the  body,  is  a  place  for  food,  and  reflection  on  God,
and  breath ;
Thou  thinkst  it  is  for  bread  only.

In  the  wallet  of  lust,  where  is  remembrance  of  G-od  con-
tained ?
With  difficulty,  he  breathes, — leg  extended.

The  body-cherishers  have  no  knowledge.
That — the  full  stomach  is  void  of  wisdom.

The  two  eyes  and  stomach  became  not  filled  with  any-
thing ;
These  bowels,  coil  on  coil,  are  best  empty.

Like  hell  which  they  fill  with  fuel.

Again,  there  is  a  shout,  saying  : — "  Is  there  any  more  ?  "

25  Thy  'Isa  (the  soul)  continually  dies  of  weakness ;

Thou  art  in  that  desire,  that  thou  mayst  cherish  thy  ass
(the  body).

Oh  one  of  little  worth !  buy  not  the  world,  in  exchange

for  religion ;
Purchase  not  thou  the  ass  with  the  gospel  of  'Isa.

Perhaps,  thou  seest  not  that  as   to  rapacious   and    non-
rapacious  animals,
Only  the  greed  of  eating  casts  into  the  snare.

The  panther,  which  stretches  its  neck  (in  pride)  among

the  beasts.
Falls,  mouse-Uke,  into    the    snare,  through  the  greed  of

eating.

Mouse-like,  whose  bread  and  cheese  thou  eatst.
Into  his  snare,  thou  fallst  and  sufferst  his  arrow.


24       This  occurs  in  thejSura  of  Kaf  in  the  Kuran.


CHAP.  VI.]  ON    CONTENTMENT.  287

30  **♦♦♦«

If  food  be  delicious,  or  if  it  be  simple,

When  delay  occurs  to  thy  hand,  thou  eatst  pleasantly.

35  The  sage  places  his  head  on  the  pillow  at  that  time  when.
Sleep  takes  him,  with  violence,  into  its  net.

So  long  as  thou  obtainst  not  the  power  of  speech, — speak

not;
When  thou  seest  not  the  plain  (of  power),  beware  of  the

ball  (of  speech).

Speak  not;  and,  so  long  as  thou  canst,  plant  not  thy  foot
Outside  of  limit,  or  inside  of  limit.


Go  ;  acquire  a  pure  heart ;

The  belly  will  not  become  full,  save  with  the  dust  of  the
grave.

A  Haji  gave  me  an  ivory  comb.

Saying  : — "  May  the  mercy  of  God  be  on  the  good  quali-
ties of  pilgrims !"

40  I  heard  that  once  upon  a  time  he  had  called  me  a  dog,
For  his  heart  was,  in  some  way,  dejected  about  me.

I  threw  away  the  comb,  saying  : — "  This  bone,

"  Is  unnecessary  for  me ;  another  time,  call  me  not  a  dog.

"  Think  not,  if  I  swallow  my  own  vinegar,
"  That   I  will  endure  the  violence  of  the  lord  of  sweet-
meats."

Oh  soul  I  be  content  with  a  little

That  thou  mayst  consider  the  sultan  and  darvesh  as  one.


30       In  the  'Ikd-i-manzum,  couplets  30  to  37  are  omitted.
For  obvious  reasons,  couplets  30  to  33  are  here  omitted.


288  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [oHAP.  VI.

"Why  goest  thou  before  the  king,  with  entreaty  ?
When  thou  placest  avarice  aside,  thou  art  a  king.

45  And,   if  thou    art  a    self-worshipper,    make    the    belly  a
drum ;
Make  the  door  of  this  and  that  (man) — a  Kibla.

And,  if  every  moment,  thy  lust  says  : — give.

It  causes  thee  to  wander,  village  to  village,  in  beggary.

Oh  man  of  sense  ;  contentment  exalts  the  head  ;

The  head  full  of  avarice  comes  not  forth  from  the  shoulder.


A  certain  one,  possessed  of  avarice,  before  King  Khwarazm,
— I  heard — went  early  in  the  morning.

When  he  saw  Khwarazm,  he  became  doubled  and  straight ;
He  rubbed  his  face,  moreover,  on  the  earth ;  and  arose.

60  His  son  said  : — "  Oh  little  father,  name-seeking  !
"  I  ask  of  thee  a  difficulty ;  explain  it.

**  Didst  thou  not  say,   that    the    dust  of  Hijaz  was    thy

Kibla  ?
"  Why  didst  thou,  to-day,  pray  in  this  direction  (towards

the  king)  ?  "

Display  not  devotion  to  the  lust  of  the  lust- worshipper ;
Since,  it  has,  every  hour,  another  Kibla.

Avarice  spilled  the  reputation  of  honour ;

It  poured  out  a  skirt  (full)  of  pearls  for  two  barley-grains.

When  thou   wishst   to  become   satiated  with  the  rivulet-
water.
Why  spillst  thou  face- water  (honour)  for  the  sake  of  ice  ?


47       For,  every  moment,  he  is  bowing  in  humility  (niku') ;  and,  in  sub-
mission (Wbuzu').


OHAP.    VI.]  ON    CONTENTMENT.  289

66  Perhaps,  thou  art  a  patient  one  as  to  happiness  ;
But  if  not,  thou  art,  of  necessity,  (begging)  at  doors.

•  Sir  !  go  ;  make  short  the  hand  of  avarice ;
What  need  to  thee  of  the  long  sleeve  (of  beggary)  ?

Of  him,  who  folded  up  the  casket  of  avarice.

It  is  unnecessary  to  write — "  Slave  or  servant  to  any  one."

Expectation  will  drive  thee  from  every  assembly,
Drive  it  from  thyself,  so  that  no  one  may  drive  thee.


To  one  of  the  holy  men,  a  fever  came,

A  person  said : — "  Ask  for  sugar  from  such  a  one."

60  He  said  : — "  Oh  son  !  the  bitterness  of  my  dying

"  Is  better    than   my  bearing   the    oppression    of  one   of
bitter  face."

The  wise  man  ate  not  sugar  from  the  hand  of  that  one,
Who,  through  arrogance,    made  his  face  vinegar  (bitter)
towards  him.

Go  not,  in  pursuit  of  whatever  thy  heart  desires
For  the  strengthening  of  the  body  diminishes  the  soul's
light.

Imperious  lust  makes  a  man  contemptible ;
If  thou  art  wise,  hold  it  not  dear.

If  thou  enjoyst  whatever  may  be  thy  wish.
Thou  wilt  endure  much  disappointment  from  the  revolu-
tion of  time.


85       Oh,  covetous  one !    exercise  patience  as  to   affluence  ;  and  moderate
thy  desire.

19


290  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [oHAP.  VI.

65  To  heat  constantly  the  oven  of  the  belly
May,  in  the  day  of  want,  be  a  misfortune.

In  straitened  circumstances,  thy  face  causes  not  its  com-
plexion to  be  shed

If,  in  the  time  of  plenteousness,  thou  makst  the  belly
tight.

The  man,  fuU-devourer,  endures  the  belly-load ;
And,  if  he  obtain  not  food,  he  endures  the  grief-load.

Thou  mayst  often  see  the  belly-slave  greatly  ashamed.
In  my  opinion,  the  belly  straitened  is  better  than  the  heart
(straitened).

Alas !  thou  art  one  man-born,  full  of  dignity,
Who  is  like  the  beasts — "  Nay ;  they  are  lost !  "

70  Show  not  pity  to  the  ox  of  great  weight ;
For,  it  is  a  great  sleeper,  and  great  devourer.

If  fatness,  ox-like,  be  necessary  to  thee.

Submit  thy  body,  ass-like,  to  the  tyranny  of  persons.


Knowst  thou  what  wonderful  thing  I  brought  from  Basra?
— A  tale,  which  is  sweeter  than  the  green  date.

We — a  few  individuals  in  the  religious  garb  of  the  true

(Siifis)—
Passed  by  the  side  of  a  date-garden.

One  amongst  us  was  a  stomach-barn  (a  glutton)  ;

He  was,  through  this  narrow-eyedness,  a  belly-en j oyer.


68  The   belly   straitened,   by    want   of  food,  is   better  than  the   heart
straitened  by  not  obtaining  its  desire.

69  The  second  line  conies  from  the  Sura  A'raf  of  the  Kuran.
In  the  'Ikd-i-manzum,  couplets  69  to  71  are  omitted.

72       Basra  is  a  town  near  the  Persian  gulf  ;  it  is  sometimes  called  .Balsora.
See  Lane's  Arabian  Nights  Entertainments.


CHAP.  VI.]  ON    CONTENTMENT.  291

75  The  wretched  one  bound  his  loins,  and  ascended  the  (date)
tree ;
And,  thence  fell  heavily  headlong.

The  Ra,is  of  the  village  came,  saying : — "  Who  slew  this

man  ?  "
I  said : — "  Express  not  against  us  a  harsh  word.

"  The  belly  drew  his  skirt  down  from  the  branch."
— The  one  of  narrow  heart  is  of  capacious  bowels. —

Not  every  time,  can  one  eat  the  date  and  carry  it  away ;
The  stomach-barn  (the  glutton)  suffered  a  bad  end,  and
died.

The  belly  is  the  hand-fetter,  and  foot-chain  ;
A  belly-slave  rarely  worships  God.

80  The  locust  is  assuredly  altogether  belly ;

The  ant  of  small  belly  drags  the  locust  by  the  foot.


A  certain  one  had  sugar-cane,  on  a  small  plate, —
A  wanderer,  left  and  right,  for  a  purchaser.

In  a  corner  of  the  village,  to  a  pious  man,  he  spoke,
Saying  : — "  Take  ;  and  pay,  when  thou  hast  the  means."

That  wise  man  of  adorned  disposition  uttered
An  answer,  that  should  be  written  on  the  eye.

"  Perhaps,  to   thee,  patience  (as  to  payment)  may  not  be

(exercised)  towards  me ;
"  But,  to  me,  (patience)  is,  as  to  the  sugar-cane."


77  "Rudgan"  is  a  word  of  the  same  character  as — rozgariin  ;  bahanin.

78  "  Lat-amban  "  signifies — lat-nabaz  ;  lat  nabar.

JO       The  belly  extends  from  the  locust's  neck  to  its  hinder  extremity.

19  •


292  THE  BUSTAN  OF  SA'pI.  [cHAP.  VI.

85  Sugar,  in  its  reed,  has  no  sweetness,

When,  behind  it,  is  the  bitter  demand  (for  its  price).


To  one  of  the  men  of  ilhirained  mind,

The  Amir  of  Khutan  gave  a  piece  of  silk  cloth.

He  expanded,  through  gladness,  like  the  laughing  rose-
leaf ;
Kissed  his  hands ;  clothed  himself ;  and  said  : —

"  How  good  is   the   garment   of  honour  of  the  King  of

Khutan  !
"  But,  my  own  religious  garment  is  more  beautiful  than  it."

K  thou  art  noble,  sleep  on  the  earth ;  for,  it  is  enough  :
Perform  no  one's  ground-kiss  (in   obeisance)  for  a  costly
carpet.


90  A  certain  one  had  no  bread-food,  save  an  onion  ;
He  had  no  resources  nnd  means,  like  others.

One  said  to  him  : — "Oh  one  of  foolish  time  !
"  Go  ;  bring  something  cooked   from  the  tray  of  plunder
(the  king's  table).

"  Oh  sir  !  ask,  and  have  fear  of  none  ;

"  For  the  one  ashamed  is  cut  as  to  his  victuals."

He  bound  about  him  his  over-coat,  and  quickly  folded  his

hand  (sleeve) ;
They  rent  his  coat,  and  broke  his  hand.


86       Khutan  is  a  country  in  Turkistan,  near  Khata,  or  Tartary.
90       "Nan-^urish"  signifies — the   condiments    eaten  with  bread.      See
couplet  95.


CHAP.  VI.]  ON    CONTENTMENT.  293

I  have  heard  that  lie  said,  while  he  wept  blood : —

"  "What  is  the  remedy  for  the  deed  done  by  one's  self !

05  "  The  captive  of  avarice  is  one  calamity- seeking,

*' After   this — I    and    my    house;    bread   and    onion  (are
enough)."

The  barley-loaf,  which  I  eat  by  the  power  of  my  arm,
Is  better  than  flour  (twice  sifted)  on  the  tray  of  people  of
liberality.

Last  night,  how  heart-straitened  slept  that  worthless  one,
Who    kept  the   ear    (of   expectation)   upon  the  Kibla    of
others  !


In  an  old  woman's  house,  there  was  a  certain  cat,
Which  was  of  reversed  fortune,  and  of  bad  state.

It  went  running  to  the  amir's  guest-house,
The  slaves  of  the  sultan  struck  it  with  arrows.

100  It  ran,  blood  dropping  from  its  bones  (wounds),
While  from  fear  of  life  it  ran,  it  kept  saying : —

*'  If  I  escape  from  the  hand  of  this  arrow-caster,
*'  I  and  the  mouse,  and   the  old  woman's  desolate  abode
(are  enough)."

Oh  my  soul !  honey  is  not  worth  the  sting's  wound ;
Contentment  with  one's  own  syrup  of  dates  is  best.

The  Lord  God  is  not  satisfied  with  that  slave,
Who  is  nut  content  with  his  Lord's  portion.


A  certain  child  had  cut  its  teeth,

The  father  was  head-lowered  in  reflection,


96       See  couplet  101.


294  THE   BUSTAN   OF   SA'dI.  [cHAP.  VI.

6  Saying : — "  WTience  may  I  bring  bread  food  for  him  ?
"  It  is  not  manliness  to  abandon  him."  I

When  helpless,  he  uttered  this  speech  to  his  partner  (his

wife),
Behold  how  like  a  man  she  spoke  to  him !

*'  Suffer  not  fear  of  Iblis,  until  he  surrenders  life  (to  God).
*'  That  same  Person,  who  gives  teeth,  gives  bread."

The  Lord  of  Days  (God)  is,  in  short,  able

To  cause  daily  food  to  arrive ;  vex  not  thyself  so  much.

He  is  the  Pourtrayer  of  the  boy  within  the  womb ;
He  is  also  the  Writer  (Computer)  of  its  age,  and  daily
food.

110  That  lord,  who  bought  a  slave,

Maintains  him.     How  much  more  God,   who  created  the
slave  !

To  thee,  there  is  not  that  reliance  on  the  Omnipotent, —
As  to  the  slave,  on  his  lord.

I  heard  that,  in  ancient  times,

A  stone  used,  in  the  hands  of  the  pious,  to  become  silver.

Thou  thinkst  not  this  speech  is  unreasonable  ? —
When  thou  becomest  content,  silver  and  stone  are  ahke  to
thee.


107       In  the  Kuran  : —

"  Through  fear  of  want,  kill  not  thy  children ;  we  give  thee  and
them  daily  food,"
109       "  Navfsanda  "  here  signifies — andaza  kunanda.

U2  "Abdal"  («mgr.  badi'l)  signifies — religious  men,  for  whose  sake  God
preserves  the  world ;  they  are,  in  number,  seventy.  Of  these,  forty  are
in  Syria,  and  the  remainder  elsewhere.  -


CHAP.  VI.]  ON    CONTENTMENT.  295

When  the  child  has  a  heart  free  from  avarice,
In   its  mind,  whether  a   handful    of  gold,  or   dust,  what
difference  ?

115  Give  news  to  the  darvesh,  sultan-worshipping.

Saying  : — "  The  sultan  is  more  wretched  than  the  darvesh.'*

A  diram  of  silver  makes  the  beggar  satiated ;
Firidiin,  with  the  kingdom  of  Persia, — half  satiated.

The  guardianship  of  the  country  and  of  the  empire  is  a

calamity ;
The  beggar  is  king,  but  his  name  is  beggar.

The  beggar,  on  whose  heart  is  no  desire,
Is  better    than  a  king,   who    is    unhappy    (through    dis-
content).

The  villager  and  his  partner  (wife)  sleep  pleasantly,
With  a  pleasure,   with  which  the  sultan,    in   the  palace,
sleeps  not.

120  If  he  be  king ;  or,  if  garment-stitcher, —

When  they  sleep,  the  night  of  both  becomes  day.

And,  if  the  torrent  of  death  comes  and  takes  both,
Whether  the  sultan  on  the  throne ;  or  the  wanderer  in  the
desert — what  difference  ?

When  thou  seest  the  rich  man,  head  intoxicated  with  pride,
Oh  one  of  straitened  hand !  go ;  give  thanks  to  God.

Praise  be  to  God  !  thou  hast  not  those  resources,
That,  by  thy  power,  any  one's  injury  may  arise.


I  have  heard  that  a  pious  one,  a  good  man,
Made  a  house  conformable  to  his  stature.


120       In  each  case  the  night  terminates  and  day  begins


296  THE  BUSTAN  OF  Sa'dI.        '  [cHAP.  VI.

125  One  said  : — "  I  know  thy  means  (are  such),

"  That  thou  mayst   construct  a  better  house  than  this."
He  replied  : — "  Enough.

"  Why  should  I  desire  to  raise  a  house  above  my  head  ?
"  This  indeed  is  enough,  for  the   sake  of  leaving,  (after
death)."

Oh  slave  !  make  not  a  house  in  the  path  of  the  torrent  (of

this  world);
Because,  for  none  did  this  edifice  become  complete.

Through  knowledge  of  God,  and  wisdom,  and  judgment, —

it  is  not
That  one  of  a  karavan  constructs  a  house  on  the  road  (of

this  world).


As  to  a  certain  one,  empire-ruling,  possessed  of  pomp,  —
His    sun   (life)  desired  to  descend   to    the    mountain   (in
death).

130  He  left  his  territory  to  the  shaikh  of  that  place ;
For  he  had,  in  his  house,  no  successor.

When  the  recluse  heard  the  drum  of  empire,
He  experienced  not  again  pleasure  in  the  corner  of  retire-
ment ;

He  began  to  lead  his  army,  left  and  right ;
Began  to  strengthen  the  heart  of  those  hearty  :

Became  so  strong  of  arm,  and  sharp  of  grip,
That  he  sought  contest  with  those  battle- seeking.

He  killed  a  number  of  a  scattered  tribe ;

The  rest  assembled  together,  confederates  and  allies.

135  They  drew  him  within  a  fence  so  tightly.

That   he   became   distressed   with   the   arrow   and  stone-
raining.


CHAP.  VI.]  ON    CONTENTMENT.      .  297

He  sent  a  person  to  a  good  man,

Saying: — "I  am  mucli  distressed;    come  to  my  call  for
help.

"  Assist  by  blessing ;  for,  the  sword  and  arrow
"  Are  not  a  help  in  every  battle."

When  the  'abid  heard,  he  laughed  and  said : —
*'  Why  ate  he  not  half  a  loaf,  and  slept  ?  "

Kariin,  wealth- worshipping,  knew  not.

That  the  treasure  of  safety  was  in  retirement.


140  The  perfection  (of  existence)  is  the  breath  (spirit)  of  a
gentle  man,
If  he  have  not  gold, — what  loss  or  fear  ?

Think  not, — if  a  mean  one  becomes  rich.
That  his  base  disposition  becomes  changed.

But  if  the  one  liberality  practising  gets  not  bread,
His  nature  may  still  be  rich  (generous).

Generosity  is  the  soil ;  capital,  the  sown-field ;

Give, — that  the  root  may  not  be  destitute  of  a  branch.

That  God,  who  makes  man  from  dust, —
1  have  wonder  if  He  makes  lost  humanity,

145  Seek  not  greatness,  by  gathering  wealth ;

For,  stagnant  water  makes  an  unpleasant  smell.

Strive  for  liberality ;  for,  the  running  water,
Aid  from  heaven  reaches  with  the  flood.


144       It  is  inconceivable  that  God  should  ruin  humanity,  or  that  He  should
cause  the  source  of  liberality  to  disappear.


I

298  THE   BUSTAN   OF   Sa'dI.  [cHAP.  VI.

If  a  mean  one  fall   from   rank  and   fortune  (or,  be  dis-
missed),
He  rarely  again  becomes  erect  (reinstated).

But,  if  thou  art  a  precious  jewel,  have  no  care  ;
For,  time  causes  thee  not  to  be  destroyed.

A  clod — although  it  be  fallen  on  the  road, —
Thou  seest  not  that  any  one  looks  at  it.

150  But,  if  a  fragment  of  gold  from  the  teeth  (blade)  of  the
scissors.

Falls, — they  will  search  again   (and  again)  for  it,  with  a
candle.

They  extract  glass-ware  from  stone  ;

Where  remains  the  mirror,  beneath  the  blight  ?

Skill,  and  religion,   and  excellence,  and    perfection, — are

necessary ;
For  rank  and  wealth  sometimes  come ;  sometimes  depart.


From  men  of  sweet  discourse,  I  have  heard.
That,  there  was  within  the  city  (of  Shiraz)  a  certain  ancient
old  man ;

Mucb  experienced  as  to  kings,  and  the  period  of  command;
A  lifetime  brought  to  an  end  from  the  era  of  'Umar.

155  The  ancient  tree  had  fresh  fruit  (a  son).

Who  kept,  by  his  goodness  (of  beauty),  the  city  full  of
noise.


151       They  make  the  mirror  clean  and  free  from  blight.

163       In  the  'Ikd-i-manzum,  couplets  153  to  174  are  omitted.


CHAP.  Vt.]  ON   CONTENTMENT.  299

Wonder, — as  to  the  (apple-like)  chin   of  that  one,  heart-
fascinating  ;
For,  there  was  never  an  apple  on  the  cypress  (of  stature).

On  account  of  his  sauciness  and  lacerating  of  men,
The  old  man  found  pleasure  in  shaving  his  head.

With  an  old  razor,  the  age  of  small  hope  (the  old  man)
Made  his  (the  son's)  head  white,  like  the  hand  of  Moses.

That  one  of  iron  heart  (the  old  man),  from  the  impetuosity

which  he  had.
Opened  (his  own)  tongue,  as  to  the  defect  of  the  one  of

Pari-cheek.

leo  As  to  the  razor,  which  made  diminution  of  his  beauty,
Men  placed,  at  once,  its  head  in  its  belly.

The  head  of  the  one  of  beautiful  countenance,  from  shame,

harp-like.
Lowered  ;  and,  his  hair  fallen,  in  front,  (on  the  ground).

As  to  a  certain  one, — in  whom  the  heart  had  gone, —
He  was  infatuated  like  his  (the  boy's)  eyes,  heart-binding.

A  person    said : — "  Thou  didst    experience   violence   and

pain;
"  Wander  not  again  in  regard  to  a  vain  fancy.

"  Turn  away,  moth-like,  from  love  for  the  boy ;
"  For  the  scissors  have   extinguished   the  candle  of   his
beauty."


166      One  has  never  seen  an  apple  on  the  cypress.     But,  his  stature  was  as

a  cypress  ;  and  his  chin,  the  apple  on  it.
158       "  Musa,  in  the  first  line,  signifies  a  razor  ;  in  the  second,  Moses.
160       After  shaving,  men  put  the  razor-blade  into  the  razor-handle   (its
belly).

A  commentator  says  that  the  second  line  may  be  rendered : —
"  Men  placed,  at  once,  the  loss  of  the  beauty  of  his  head,  in  secret,
within  their  own  belly."


300  THE    BTJSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [oHAP.  VI.

165  A  cry  arose  from  that  true  lover  : —

"  The   covenant   of   those   of    wet    skirt    (sin-stained)    is
sluggish.

"  A  son  of  pleasant  temperament  and  handsome  face — ^is

necessary ;
"  To  his  father,  say  : — In  ignorance,  cast  away  his  hair.

"  My  soul  has  mingled  with  his  love ;
"  My  heart  is  not  attached  to  his  hair."

When  thou  hast  a  handsome  countenance,  suffer  not  grief;
For,  if  the  hair  falls,  it  will  again  grow.

The  vine  gives  not  always  a  green  cluster ;

It  sometimes  sheds  its  leaves  ;  sometimes  gives  fruit.

170  Sun-like,  the  great  fall  under  a  veil  (of  eclipse) ;
Spark-like,  the  envious  fall  into  the  water.

The  sun  comes  forth  from  beneath  the  cloud,
Gradually ;  but,  the  spark  perishes  in  the  water.

Oh  approved  friend  !  fear  not  the  darkness.
In  which  it  is  possible  there  is  the  water  of  life.

Did  not  the  world  find  rest,  after  motion  ?
Did  not  Sa'di  travel,  until  he  found  his  desire  ?

Consume  not  thy  heart,  from  failure  of  desire ;
Oh  brother !  the  night  is  pregnant  with  the  day.


165       I  am  not  of  those.     Nay,  I  am  a  lover,  violence-enduring.     I  love  the

nature  of  the  beloved  one,  not  his  forelock  (kakul).
172       The  Water  of  Life  is  to  be  found  in  a  very  dark  place.   See  translation'

of  the  Sikandar-Nama,  by  Clarke.


OHAP.  VII.]  ON    EDUCATION.  301


CHAPTER  VII.
On  Education.

1  The  language  (of  this  chapter)  is  on  integrity,  and  delibe-
ration, and  disposition  ;
Not  on  the  steed,  and  the  battle-field,  and  the  ball-game.

Thou  art  fellow-lodger  with  the  enemy, — lust ;
Why  art  thou  a  stranger  in  the  art  of  conflict  ?

Those  turning  back  the  rein  of  lust,  from  forbidden  things.
Surpassed  Rustam  and  Sam  in  manliness.

Chastise  thyself,  with  a  stick,  boy-like ;
Beat  not  men's  brains  with  the  heavy  mace.

•^  No  one  has  concern  for  an  enemy  like  thee.
Who  prevailst  not  against  thy  own  body.


1

This  couplet  means: — Our  language    is   on  the  correcting  of    the
passions,  and  deliberating  on  the  future  world,  and  perfecting  the  dis-
position ;   not  on  reining  the  steed,  and  galloi»ing  in  the  battle-field.
2       Thou  shouldst  slay  so  near  an  enemy  ;  but  wonderful  to  say— thou
art  careless  of  him,  and  a  stranger  as  to  contest  with  him.


302  THE    BUSTAN    OP    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  VII.

Thy  body  is  a  city  full  of  good  and  bad ;

Thou  art  sultan ;  and  wisdom  (is)  the  prime-minister.

Know  for  sure,  that  the  mean,  neck-exalting,
In  this  city  are — pride,  and  passion,  and  avarice.

Resignation  and  the  fear  of  Grod  are  the  free  of  good  report ;
Lust  and  concupiscence  are  highway-men  and  out-purses.

When  the  sultan  displays  favour  to  the  bad,
How  may  ease  remain  for  the  wise  ?

10  Lust,  and  avarice,  and  pride,  and  envy

Are  like  blood  in  thy  veins ;  and,  like  the  soul  in  thy  body.

If  these  enemies  should  obtain  nurture,
They  would  turn  aside  their  heads  from  thy  order  and
judgment.

On  the  part  of  lust  and  concupiscence,  opposition  remains

not.
When  they  experience  the  grasp  of  sharp  wisdom.

The  Ra,is,  who  punished  not  the  enemy.

Ruled  not  also, — by  reason  of  the  enemy's  power.

What  need  to  say  much  in  this  chapter.

When  a  word  is  enough,  if  a  person  acts  upon  it  ?

15  If  thou  bringst  thy  feet,  mountain-like,  (firmly)  beneath
thy  skirt.
Thy  head  will  pass  beyond  the  sky  in  grandeur.

Oh  man,  much-knowing  !  draw  within  the  tongue ;
For,  at  the  Resurrection,  there  is  no  register,  as  to  the
tongueless.


16  At  the  Eesurrection,  there  will  be  no  reckoning  of  deeds  done  by
tongueless  animals.  It  is  possible  that  the  expression  "  tongueless "
here  means — little-speaking.  For,  in  truth,  nothing  casts  men  head-
long into  hell-fire,  save  the  requital  of  words  spoken  by  the  tongue.


CHAP.  VII.]  ON    EDUCATION.  303

Those  scattering  the  jewel  of  secrets,  oyster-like,
Opened   not   their  mouths,  save   for   pearls   (of   lustrous
vrords).

The  one  great  in  speech  (loquacious)  is  stuffed  as  to  his

ears  (deaf) ;
He  takes  not  advice,  save  in  silence.

When  thou  wishst  to  speak  incessantly,

Thou  findst  not  pleasure  from  the  speech  of  any.

20  It  is  improper  to  utter  unprepared  speech  ;

It  is  unfit,  to  cut  (to  stop  a  person's  speech)  not  cast  out
(delivered).

Those  reflecting  on  falsehood  and  truth.
Are  better  than  triflers,  ready  of  answer.

In  man's  soul,  speech  is  perfection ;

Make  not  thyself  of  less  account,  by  speech.

Thou  seest  not  the  little  talker  ashamed ;

A  grain  of  musk  is  better  than  a  heap  of  clay.

Exercise  caution  as  to   the  fool  having  the  speech  of  ten

men;
Utter,  like  a  wise  man,  one  prepared  speech.

26  Thou  didst  cast  a  hundred  arrows,  and  each  of  the  hun-
dred is  a  miss ;
If  thou  art  wise,  cast  one  straight.

Why  does  a  man  utter  in  secret  that  thing.

When,  if  it  becomes  known,  his  face  becomes  yellow  ?


21       "  Zhazh  "  signifies— a  grass  excessively  hard,  which  the  camel  eats.
"Zhazh-kh6"  is  opposed  to  "  shakr-kha  "  ;    it  is  synonymous  with
"  behuda-go  "  ;  "  sakht-go."
24       Nizami  says  : —

"  K  thou  knowst,  say  little ;
Utter  not  one  thing  a  hundred  times ;  say  a  hundred  things  once."


304  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  VII.

Detract  not,  in  front  of  a  wall,

Behind  which,  it  often  happens  some  one  has  his  ear.

The  interior  of  thy  heart  is  the  rampart  of  a  secret,
Take  care  that  it  may  not  see  the  city- door  open.

The  wise  man  has  sewn  up  his  mouth,  for  that  reason,
That  he  sees  the  candle  is  consumed  by  its  tongue  (wick).


30  Takash  uttered  a  secret  to  his  slaves.

Saying : — "  It  is  improper  to  unfold  this  secret    to   any
one."

In  one  year,  it  came  from  the  heart  to  his  lip  ;
In  one  day,  it  became  published  in  the  world.

He  ordered  the  merciless  executioner,

Saying  : — "  Take  off  the  heads  of  these,  with  the  sword."

One,  from  amongst  the  slaves,   while  he  asked  for   pro-
tection, said : —
"  Slay  not  the  slaves ;  for,  this  crime  arose  from  thee.

"  At  first,  when  it  was  a  mere  fountain,  thou  didst  not

bind  it ;
"  When  it  became  a  torrent,  of  what  use  is  binding  ?  "

35  Reveal  thou  not  the  heart's  secret  to  any  one,
Who  will,  indeed,  utter  it  to  every  one.

Entrust  the  jewel  to  the  treasury-guards ;
But,  keep  guard  over  the  secret  thyself.

So  long  as  thou  utterst  not  speech,  to  thee,  there  is  power

over  it ;
When  it  becomes  uttered,  it  obtains  mastery  over  thee.


CHAP.  VII.]  ON  EDUCATION.  305

Thou  knowst  that  when  the  demon   has  departed   from

bonds,
He  returns  not  again  at  the — La  haul — of  any  one.

Speech  is  a  confined  demon  in  the  heart's  well ;
Let  it  not  go  to  the  height  of  palate  and  tongue.

^  One  can  give  way  to  the  ugly  demon ;
But,  one  cannot  seize  him  again  by  fraud.

A  child  may  take  off  the  tether  from  (the  steed)  Rakhsh ;
It  comes  not  within  the  noose,  with  a  hundred  Rustams.

Utter  not  that  which,  if  it  falls  on  an  assembly  (becomes

revealed),
A  person,  on  its  account,  falls  into  calamity.

How  well  said  the  woman  to  the  ignorant  villager, —
*'  Utter  speech,  with  wisdom ;  or,  express  not  a  breath."

Utter  not  what  thou  hast  not  the  power  to  hear ;
For,  having  sown  barley,  thou  wilt  not  reap  wheat.

*5  How  well,  (the    Indian    sage)  Barhaman   expressed   this
proverb : —
"  Every  one's  dignity  is  of  himself.'*

It  is  unnecessary  that  thou  shouldst  play  much,
In  order  that  thou  mayst  shatter  thy  own  value.


A  certain  one  was  of  good  disposition,  but  ragged  garment

clad.
Who  was  silent  for  some  time,  in  Egypt.


88      "  L4  haul  wal6  kAwata  1114  bi-lldh  "—there  is  no  power,  nor  strength,

but  in  God !
41       Rakhsh  was  the  name  of  Rustam's  steed.

20


306  THE  BUSTAN  OP  SA'dI.  [cHAP.  VII.

The  wise  men,  from  near  and  far,
Around  him,  moth-like,  light-seeking.

One  night,  within  his  own  heart,  he  reflected,
Saying  : — "  A  man  is  hidden  under  his  own  tongue.

50  "  Even  so,  if  I  lower  my  head  to  myself ;
"  How  many  men  know  whether  I  am  wise  ?  "

He  spoke  ;  and  enemy  and  friend  knew

That  he  was  indeed,  in  Egypt,  more  ignorant  than  himself.

Those  who  used  to  be  in  his  presence  became  dispersed ;

and  his  work  ruined ;
He  made  a  journey ;  and,  on  the  arch  of  a  masjid,  wrote : —

"  If  I  had,  in  a  mirror,  beheld  myself,

"  I  would  not,  in  foolishness,  have  rent  the  curtain.

"So  ugly, — I  lifted  the  screen  from  it ;
"  For,  I  thought  myself  of  good  visage."

S5  For  the  one  little  speaking,  there  is  great  fame ;

When  thou  spakest,  and  splendour  remained  not  to  thee, —

%•

Oh  lord  of  sense  !  for  thee,  silence

Is  dignity ;  and,  for  the  worthless  one,  a  curtain.

If  thou  art  a  sage,  take  not  away  fear  of  thyself  (as  to

uttering  speech)  ;
And,  if  thou  art  a  fool,  rend  not  thy  own  screen.

Display  not  quickly  the  idea  of  thy  own  mind ;
For,  whenever  thou  wishst,  thou  canst  reveal  it.


49  'All,  cousin  and  son-in-law  of   Muhammad,  spoke  as  given  in  the
second  line.

50  The  first  line  signifies — "  If  I  keep  silent."


CHAP.  VII.]  ON  EDUCATION.  307

But,  when  a  man's  secret  is  discovered,

One  cannot,  by  endeavour,  make  it  again  secret.

60  How  well  the  pen  concealed  the  sultdn's  secret.

At  the  head  of  which,  so  long  as  the  knife  was  not,  it
spoke  not.

The  wild  beasts  are  silent, — mankind  speakers  ;
The  foolish  speaker  is  worse  than  the  wild  beast.

It  is  proper  to  utter  speech  with  sense,  like  a  man ;
Or,  otherwise,  to  be  silent  like  a  wild-beast.

By  articulation  and  sense,  one  man-bom  is  known ;
Be  not  loquacious  and  foolish,  parrot-like.


A  certain  foolish  one  spoke  at  the  time  of  quarrelling ;
"With  the  hand,  they  rent  his  collar.

65  He  suffered  blows  on  the  back  of  his  head ;  and  sate  naked
and  weeping ;
One,   world-experienced,    said    to    him: — "Oh    self -wor-
shipper I

"  If  thou  hadst,  rose-bud-like,  been  mouth-closed,

*'  Thou  wouldst  not  have  seen  thy  shirt  rent,  rose-like.'*

The  confounded  one  utters  speech  full  of  folly ;
Like  a  brainless  (hollow)  drum,  much-boasting.

Seest  thou  not,  that  the  tongue  is  only  a  fire  ?
One  can  extinguish  it,  in  a  moment,  with  water.

If  a  man  be  possessed  of  skill.

Skill  itself  will  speak,  not  the  possessor  of  skill.

70  If  thou  hast  pure  musk,  speak  not ;

For,  if  it  be  (existent), — it  becomes  known  by  its  smell.

20  *


308  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  VII.

To  say,  with  an  oath, — *'  the  gold  is  of  the  West,"
What  need  ?  the  touch-stone,  indeed,  will  say  what  it  is.

A  thousand  calumniators  will  speak,  for  this  reason,
Saying  : — "  Sa'di  is  neither  skilful  nor  sociable."

It  is  allowable  if  they  rend  my  fur-coat  (slander  me)  ;
For,  I  have  not  the  power  (of  endurance)  that  they  should
take  my  brain  (by  much  talking).


The  son  of  King  '  Aztid  was  very  ill ;
Patience  was  far  from  his  father's  nature.

75  A  certain  pious  one  spoke  to  'Aztid,  by  way  of  advice.
Saying : — *'  Let  go  the  wild  fowls  from  confinement."

He  broke  the  cages  of  the  birds,  morning-singing  ;
— Who    remains    in    confinement,    when    the    prison    is
broken  ?

The  king  kept  on  the  arch  of  the  garden-house.
One  famous  nightingale,  a  sweet  singer.

The  son,  in  the  early  morn,  hastened  towards  the  garden ;
He  found  only  that  bird,  on  the  arch  of  the  hall.

He  laughed,  saying  : — "  Oh  nightingale  of  pleasant  voice !
"  Thou  art  left  in  a  cage,  on  account  of  thy  sweet  speech."

80  No  one  has  business  with  thee,  speechless ;
But,  when  thou  spakest,  bring  its  proof.

Like  Sa'di,  who,  for  some  time,  closed  his  tongue ;
(And)  escaped  from  the  calumny  of  calumniators.


81       This  couplet  may  be  rendered : —

Like  Sa'di,  who,  while  he  was  tongue-bound,
Was  free  from  the  calumny  of  calumniators.


CHAP.  VII.]  ON    EDUCATION.  309

That  one  takes  ease  of  heart  into  his  bosom,

Who,  from  people's  society,  takes  the  edge  (of  the  road).

Oh  wise  man  !  make  not  evident  the  people's  defect ;
Be   occupied  with  thy  own  defect,  not  with    that  of  the
people.

When  they  speak  falsely,  apply  not  the  ear  (listen  not) ;
When  thou  seest  one  uncovered,  cover  thy  eyes.


85  I  have  heard  that,  at  a  banquet  of  intoxicated  slaves,
A  disciple  broke  the  minstrel's  tambourine  and  harp.

They  drew  him,  at  once,  by  the  hair,  harp-like.
The  slaves  struck  him  on  the  face,  drum-like.

At  night,  from  pain  of  stick  and  slap,  he  slept  not ;
The  next  day,  an  old  man  said  to  him,  by  way  of  admoni-
tion : —

"  Thou  wishst  not  to  be  face- wounded  drum-like  ;

*'  Oh  brother  !  cast  down  thy  head,  in  front,  harp-like."


Two  persons  beheld  dust,  and  tumult,  and  conflict ;
Shoes  scattered;  stones  flying.

90  This  one  saw  the  commotion ;  he  turned  away  from  its
direction ;
The  other  went  into  the  midst,  and  broke  his  head.

No  one  is  happier  than  one  lord  of  himself ;
For,  he  has  no  concern  with  the  good  and  bad.


Note  the  difference  between  "  ba  chfze  mashj^ul  bddan  "  and  "  as
chfze  mashghul  budan."


810  THE   BUSTAN   OF    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  VII.

They  placed  thy  eye  and  ear  in  the  head ;
The  mouth,  the  place  of  speech ;  and,  the  heart  the  place
of  sense.

Perhaps,  thou  mayst  again  know  descent  from  ascent ;
Thou  mayst  not  say  : — "  This  is  short,  that  long."


Thus  spoke  an  old  man  of  approved  sense,

— The  words  of  old  men  are  pleasing  to  the  ear. —

95  Saying  : — In  India,  I  went  down  to  a  corner ;

What  saw  I  ?     A  black  man,  long,  like  the  longest  winter-
night.

In  his  embrace,  a  girl,  moon-like.
His  teeth  lowered  to  her  lips.

In  his  embrace,  so  tightly  gathered,

That  thou  wouldst  say  : — the  night  covers  the  day.

The  well  known  command  of  God  seized  my  skirt ;
Presumption  became  a  fire  and  seized  me.

From  before  and  behind,  I  sought  for  a  stick  or  stone.
Saying  : — "  Oh  one  fearing  not  Grod !  nameless  and  shame-
less."

100  With  reproach,  and  abuse,  and  outcry,  and  force,

I  separated  the  white  (girl)  from  the  black  (man)  as  the
dawn.

From  above  the  garden,  that  horrible  cloud  departed ;
From  beneath  the  crow,  that  egg  appeared.


93  Thou  mayst  be  cautious  in  thy  gait.

94  In  the  'Ikd-i-manzdm,  couplets  94  to  116  are  omitted.

98       It  is  proper  to  dissuade  a  person  from  violating  an  order  of  Grod.


CHAP.  VII.]  ON   EDUCATION.  311

From  the  reciting  of— Ld  haul— that  demon-form  leaped

forth;
The  hand  of  the  one  of  Pari-form  clung  to  me.

Saying : — "  Oh  thou  of   the  prayer-carpet   of   hypocrisy,

blue- clad ;
"  Of  black  deeds,  world-purchaser,  religion-seller !

"  A  long  time,  my  heart  had  gone  from  the  hand
"  To  this  person ;  and,  my  soul  was  desirous  of  him.

105  "  Now  became  cooked  my  raw  morsel,

"  Which  hot  thou  didst  put  out  of  my  mouth.'*

She  brought  an  accusation  of  tyranny,  and  uttered  com-
plaint.

Saying  : — "  Compassion  fell  down,  and  mercy  remained
not.

'*  None  of  the  young  men  remained  a  helper,

"  Who  might  take  justice  from  me,  from  this  old  man,

"  To  whom  shame  of  his  old  age  comes  not,

"  To  fix  his  hand  in  the  veil  of  a  woman,  unlawful  to  him.'*

My  skirt  in  her  grasp,  she  kept  complaining ;
From  shame,  my  head  remained  in  the  collar.

uo  Like  garlic,  I  immediately  went  out  of  my  garment ;
For,  I  feared  the  rebuke  of  young  and  old.

Naked,  I  went  running  from  before  the  woman ;
For,  my  garment  in  her  hand  was  better  than  myself.

After  a  time,  she  passed  by  me.

Saying  :— "  Knowst  thou  me  ?  '*     I  replied :— "  Beware  !

"  On  account  of  thy  hand,  I  have  repented,
"  Saying, — I  wander  not  again  about  a  matter  of  inter-
ference.'*


312  THE   BUSTAN   OP    SA'dI.  [oHAP.    VII.

Such  a  matter  comes  not  before  that  one,
Who  wisely  sits  behind  his  own  work.

115  Through  this  disgrace,  I  took  up  this  counsel,
I  regarded,  in  future,  the  thing  seen,  un-seen.

If  thou  hast  sense  and  wisdom,  draw  within  the  tongue ;
Like  Sa'di,  utter  speech ;  if  not,  be  silent.

A  certain  one  sate  before  Da'ud  of  the  tribe  of  Tai,
Saying : — *'  I  saw  a  certain  Sufi  fallen  drunk.

"  His  turban  and  shirt,  vomit- stained ;
"  A  crowd  of  dogs,  a  ring  around  him."

When  the  one  of  happy  disposition  heard  this  tale.
He  gathered  together  his  eyebrows  at  the  speaker.

120  For  a  time,  he  was  amazed,  and  said  : — "  Oh  companion  I
"  A  kind  friend  is  of  use  to-day.

"  Go ;  bring  him  from  that  shameful  place ;
"  For  it  is  forbidden  in  the  law;  and,  a  disgrace  as  to  the
religious  garb.

"  Bring  him  on  thy  back,  like  men,  for  the  intoxicated  one
"  Has  not  the  rein  of  safety  in  his  hand."

Through   this    speech,  the   hearer   became   straitened   in

heart ;
He  descended  into  thought,  like  an  ass  in  the  mire.

Neither  the  boldness,  that  he  might  refuse  the  order ;
Nor  the  power,  that  he  might  bring  the  drunken  one  on
his  shoulder.


117       Abu  Sulaiman  Da,ud  bin  Nasr  belonged  to  the  great  Shaikhs,  and  to
the  Lords  of  Suff-ism.    He  was  the  pupil  of  Abu  Hani'fa  the  Ktifite.


CHAP.  VII.]  ON   EDUCATION.  3l3

125  He  contorted  himself,  for  a  while  ;  but,  saw  no  remedy ;
He  saw  no  way  of  drawing  his  head  out  of  the  order.

He  bound  his  loins,  and  without  choice,  on  his  back.
Brought  him ;  and,  a  city  about  him,  in  ferment.

One  reviled  him,  saying  : — "  Behold  the  darvesh  (Siifi) !
*'  Oh  wonderful  devotees  of  pure  religion !

"  See  thou  these  Stifis,  who  have  drunk  wine ;
"  (Who)  have  pawned  the  patched  garment  for  aromatic
wine."

Pointing  with  the  hand  to  this  one  and  the  other,
Saying: — "  This  one  is  altogether  drunk;  and,  that  one,
half  drunk."

130  The  sword  of  the  enemy's  violence  on  the  neck

Is  better  than  the  disgrace  of  a  city,  and  the  clamour  of
the  people.

He  suffered  calamity ;  and,  with  trouble,  passed  one  day ;
He  carried  him,  without  desire,  to  a  place  that  he  had.

During  the  night,  from  shame  and  thought,  he  slept  not ;
The  next  day  Tai  laughed,  and  said : —

"  Spill  not  a  brother's  reputation  in  the  street,
"  That  adverse  fortune  may  not  spill  thy  reputation,  in  a
city."


In  respect  to  the  man,  good  or  bad, — ill

Utter  not.     Oh  young  man  endowed  with  understanding

185  For,  thou  makest  the  bad  man  thy  enemy ;
And,  if  he  be  a  good  man,  thou  doest  ill.


180       "  Josh-i-'awaanm  "  signifies — hujum-i-andm.


314  THE   BUSTAN   OF   SA*DI.  [CHAP.  VII.

Whosoever  says  to  thee,  a  certain  one  is  bad ;
Know  this  much,  that  he  is  censuring  himself.


For,  the  proof  of  (the  bad)  act  of  a  person  is  necessary ;
And,  his  (the  calumniator's)  bad  act  appears  clear.

In  ni-speaking,  when  .thou  expressest  breath,
If  thou  speakst  the  truth  even,  thou  art  bad.

A  person  made  long  his  tongue,  in  slander ;
A  sagacious  one,  head-exalting  spoke  to  him,

140  Saying : — '*  Render  not  bad  the  memory  of  persons,  before
me ;
"  Make  me  not  evilly  suspicious,  as  to  thyself.

"  I  admit — there  may  be  diminution  of  his  dignity ;
"  There  will  be  no  increase  to  thy  rank."

A  person  said — I  thought  it  was  a  jest —
"  Thieving  is  more  upright  than  slandering."

I  said  to  him  : — "  Oh  friend  of  distracted  sense  !
"  That  tale  came  strangely  to  my  ear.

"  "What  goodness,  seest  thou  in  dishonesty,
"  That  thou  preferst  it  to  slander  ?  "

145  He  replied , — "  Yes  ;  thieves  display  ardour  ;
"  By  the  manly  arm,  they  fill  the  belly.


136       "  Dar  postin-i-khud  budan  "  signifies — mazimmat-i-kliud  kardan.      See
couplet  162.


CHAP.  Vn.]  ON  EDUCATION.  316

"  From  slander,  what  does  that  simpleton  desire,
"  Who  blackened  his  record-book  (with  Grod)  and  enjoyed
not  anything  ?  "


In  the  Nizamiya,  I  had  a  pension ;

Night  and  day,  there  was  instruction  and  repetition.

I  said  to  my  teacher : — '*  Oh  one  full  of  wisdom  I
"  A  certain  friend  bears  me  envy.

"  When  I  give  the  gift  of  signification,  as  to  the  traditions,
"  His  polluted  heart  becomes  disturbed."

60  When  the  leader  of  morals  heard  this  speech,

He  was  greatly  enraged,  and  said  : — "  How  wonderful !

"  Thy  friend's  enviousness  is  disagreeable  to  thee ;
"  Who  informed  thee  that  detraction  is  good  ?

*'  If  he,  through  baseness,  took  hell's  path,
"  Thou,  by  this  other  path,  reachst  it."


A  certain  one  said  : — "  Hujjaj  is  a  blood-devourer,
"  His  heart  is  like  a  piece  of  black  stone.

"  He  fears  neither  the   sigh,  nor   the   complaint   of  the

people ;
"  Oh  God  1  Take  from  him  the  justice  due  to  the  people.'*

S5  One,  world-experienced,  an  old  man  of  ancient  birth,

Gave  to  a  young  man,  a  piece  of  counsel,  worthy  of  an  old
man.


.47  The  Nizdmiya  was  a  college  at  Ba|^d4d.  It  was  founded  by  Niz4mu-
l-Mulk  Tusi,  the  vazi'r  of  Sultan  SanjAr  of  Persia.

.68  Hujjaj,  son  of  Yusuf,  ruled  'Irak-i-'Arab,  in  685  a.d.  He  was  noto-
rious for  cruelty.


316  THE    BUSTAN   OF   SA'dI.  [cHAP.  VII.

Saying  : — "  The  justice,  of  (due  to)  his  wretched  oppressed

ones,
**  They  will  demand  (on  the  Judgment  Day) ;  and,  from

the  others  (his  slanderers)  revenge.

"  Restrain  thy  hand  (of  criticism)  from  his  and  his  time ;
"  For,  time  itself  makes  him  powerless.

"  Neither  does  injustice  on  his  part  appear  to  me  happy ;
"  Nor,  slander  even,  on  thy  part,  appear  to  me  pleasant."

Sin  carries  to  hell  the  ill-fated  one,

"Who  made  full  his  measure ;  and  black  (with  entries)  his
record-book.

160  The  other  person,  by  slander,  runs  behind  him.
Lest  that  he  should  go  alone  to  hell.


I  have  heard  that  one  of  the  pious
Laughed,  jestingly,  at  a  boy.

The  other  devotees,  sitting  in  retirement.
Fell,  in  slander,  on  his  fur-garment.

At  length,  this  story  remained  not  concealed ;

They  unfolded  it  to  that  one  of  clear  sight.     He  said : —

"  Rend  not  the  curtain  over  the  friend  of  perturbed  state ;
"  Neither  is  pleasantry  unlawful;  nor,  slander  lawful."


165  In  my  childhood,  the  desire  of  fast-keeping  arose ;
I  used  not  to  know,  which  was  left,  and  which  right.


162      See  couplet  136.

164      "  Parda  daridan  "  signifies — 'aib  kardan ;  nam-i-kase  ba  badi  yad  kar-
dan ;  mazimmat-i-kase  kardan.


CHAP.  VII.]  ON   EDUCATION.  317

A  certain  'abid  of  the  pious  of  the  street

Used  constantly  to  teach  me  the  washing  of  hand  and  foot,

Saying : — "  First,    according    to   tradition,   say  : — In  the

name  of  Grod !
"  Secondly,  summon  resolution ;  thirdly,  wash  the  palms

of  the  hands.

"  Wash,  after  that,  the  mouth  and  nose  three  times,
*'  Scratch  the  nostrils,  with  the  little  finger.

"  Rub  the  front  teeth,  with  the  fore-finger ;
"  For,  after  the  declining  (of  the  sun  the  tooth-brush)  is
forbidden  during  a  fast.

'0  "  And  throw,  after  that,  three  handfuls  of  water  on  the
face ;
"  From  the  growing-place  of  the  hair,  down  to  the  chin.

"  "Wash  again  the  hands  up  to  the  elbow ;
"  Utter  whatever  thou  knowst  of  praise  and  recitation  of
the  names  of  God.

"  Again,  stroking  of  the  head  ;  after  that,  washing  of  the

feet;
"  This  is  indeed  (ablution) ;  and  its  conclusion, — *  in  the

name  of  God.'

**  As  to  this  custom  (of  ablution),  no  one  knows  better

than  I,
"  Seest  thou  not  that  the  old  man  of  the  village  has  become

doting?"


97  Among  the  Sunni's  there  are  four  sects  (mazhab).  The  titles  are
derived  from  the  names  of  the  chief  of  the  sect,  thus  : — Mazhab- i-
hanffa ;  Mazhab-i-shafi'i ;  Mazhab-i-hambl ;  Mazhab-i-mAlik.

At   the   beginning   of    ablution,    to    say — "  Bimi-Udhu-r-rahmanu-r-
rahim," — was  Muhammad's  command.

80  The  tooth-brush  (miswak)  consists  of  a  piece  of  soft  wood,  the  end  of
which  is  rubbed  against  the  teeth.  These  tooth-brushes  are  sold  in
small  bundles  in  the  bAziirs.


318  THE  BUSTAN   OP   SA'dI.  [cHAP.  VII.

The  ancient  village-holder  heard  this  speech ;

He  was  confounded,  and  said  : — "  Oh  execrable  filthy  one  !

175  "  Saidst  thou  not  that,  the  tooth-brush  during  a  fast  is  a
crime  ?
"  To  eat  the  dead  sons  of  Adam  is  lawful.

"  Say — first,  the  mouth  from  things  unfit  to  be  uttered,
"  Wash — to  that  one  who  has  washed  as  to  things  fit  to  be
eaten."

The  person,  whose  name  is  mentioned  in  public,
Recite  his  name  and  praises,  in  the  sweetest  way.

When  always  thou  sayst  that  men  are  asses
Entertain  not  the  idea,  that  they,  like  men,   will  mention
thy  name.

Speak  of  my  mode  of  life,  within  the  street,  even  as
Thou  canst  speak  of  it  to  my  face.

180  And,  if  thou  hast  shame  of  the  one  present

Oh    sightless    one !    is    not    the    Secret-Knower    (God)
present  ?

Shame  comes  not  to  thee  of  thyself

That  thou  hast  freedom  as  to  Him,  and  shame  as  to  me  ?


Those  path-recognising  of  firm  foot
Sate,  some  time,  together  in  privacy.

One  from  amongst  them  began  to  slander.

He  opened  the  door  of  remembrance  of  a  helpless  one.

A  person  said  to  him : — "  Oh   friend  of  perturbed  com-
plexion I
"  Hast  thou  ever  made  war  against  the  infidels  in  Europe  ?  "


CHAP.  VII.]  ON   EDUCATION.  319

88  The  slanderer  said  : — "  From  behind  my  four  walls,

"  1  have  not,  during  my  whole  life,  placed  my  foot  in  front
(of  them)."

The  darvesh  of  pure  breath  thus  spoke  : —
"  I  have  not  beheld  a  person,  to  such  a  degree  greatly  dis-
traught,

"  That  the  infidel  sits  secure  from  contest  with  him ;
"  (But)  a  Muslim  escapes  not  from   the   violence  of  his
tongue."


How  well  a  distraught  one  of  Marghaz  uttered
A  saying,  from  the  subtlety  of  which  thou  mayst  bite  the
lip  with  the  teeth  : —

"  If  I  defame  the  name  of  men,

"  I  only  utter  the  slander  of  my  mother.

so  **  For  the  wise  educated  ones  know,

"  That   that  devotion  is   indeed   best  which   the   mother
takes."

Oh  one  of  good  name !  a  friend,  who  is  absent, —
As  to  him,  two  things  are  unlawful.

One  is  that  they  should  wrongfully  enjoy  his  property ;
The  second  that  they  should  defame  him.

Whosoever  defames  men,

Expect  not  thou  thy  own  thanks  from  him.


ao  'Abdu-lUh  says : — "  K  I  slander  anyone,  I  ought  to  slander  my  father
and  mother ;  for  they  are  worthy  of  my  good  deeds.  When  a  person
slanders  another,  the  angels  give  the  slanderer's  good  deeds  to  the
slandered."

In  the  traditions,  it  is  stated : — "  If  a  person  oppresses,  the  boldness
of  the  oppressed  goes  to  the  oppressor ;  and  the  goodness  of  the  oppressor
to  the  oppressed.


320  THE   BUSTAN   OF   SA'dI.  [oHAP.  VII.

For,  he  utters  tliat  very  thing  in  thy  absence,
Which  be  utters  before  thee,  behind  men.

195  In  my  opinion,  that  person  is  world- wise,

Who  is  engaged  about  himself,  and  careless  of  the  world.


As  to  three  persons,  I  have  heard  that  slander  is  lawful ;
When  thou  exceedst  this,  the  fourth  is  a  sin.

First,  the  king,  reproach- approving, —
From  whom,  thou  mayst  observe  injury  as  to  the  people's
heart, —

It  is  lawful  to  carry  information  regarding  him ;
Perhaps,  the  people  may  be  cautious  of  him.

Secondly, — draw  not  the  screen  on  the  shameless  one ;
For,  he  himself  rends  the  screen  of  his  own  body.

200  Oh  brother  !  guard  not,  from  the  (shallow)  pool,  him,
Who  falls,  up  to  the  neck,  in  a  well.

Thirdly — the  one  of  crooked  balance,  of  dishonest  disposi-
tion.
Utter  whatsoever  thou  knowst  of  his  bad  deeds.


I  have  heard  that  a  thief  entered  from  the  desert,
He  passed  by  the  gate  of  Sistan.

The  green-grocer  robbed  him  of  half  a  dang.
The  thief  of  black  deeds  raised  a  cry : —


201  This  couplet  describes  the  fraudulent  trader.

202  Rustam  used  to  live  in  Sistdn.


CHAP.  VII.]  ON   EDUCATION.  321

"  Oh  God  !  burn  not  Thou  in  the  fire  the  night-traveller

(robber)  ;
"  For,  an  inhabitant  of  Sistdn  road  travels  (robs)  by  day."


205  A  certain  one  said  to  a  Siifi,  possessed  of  purity ; —

'*  Knowst  thou  not  what  a  certain  person  said  behind  thy
back?"

He  replied : — "  Oh  brother  !  be  silent ;  go  to  sleep  :
"  What  the  enemy  said, — best  unknown."

Those  persons,  who  bear  the  enemy's  message.
Are,  assuredly,  more  an  enemy  than  the  enemy.

Bears  the  enemy's  word  to  a  friend,  no  one,

Save  that  one,  who  is,  in  enmity,  the  enemy's  friend.

The  enemy  is  unable  to  express  violence  to  me,
To  such  a  degree  that  my  body  should  tremble  at  hearing
(his  words).

210  Thou   art   the  greater  enemy,  who  bringst  to  the  mouth
(openly),
What  the  enemy  said,  in  secret.

The  word-plucker  makes  fresh  the  ancient  feud ;
He  brings  the  good,  meek,  man  to  anger.

So  long  as  thou  canst,  fly  from  that  fellow- sitter,
Who  said  to  the  dormant  trouble — "  Arise !  "

(To  be)  a  man  of  black  condition  (in  distress), — in  it,  foot-
bound.
Is  better  than  to  carry  strife  from  place  to  place.

Contest,  between  two  persons,  is  like  fire ;

The  unfortunate  tale-bearer  is  the  fire- wood  cutter.


21


322  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  VII.

215  Firidiin  had  an  approved  vazir,

Who  possessed  an  illumined  heart,  and  far-seeing  eye.

First,  he  used  to  preserve  resignation  to  Grod ;

Next,  he  used  to  keep  observance  of  the  king's  command.

The  mean  functionary  places  trouble  upon  the  people.
Saying : — "  It  is  the  administration  of  the  country  and  the
augmentation  of  the  treasury."

If  thou  keepst  not  Grod's  side,

Grod  causes  injury  to  reach  thee  from  the  king.

A  certain  one  went,  in  the  morning,  to  the  king.
Saying  : — "  May  ease  and  desire  every  day  be  thine  !

220  "  Consider  it  not  design ;  accept  counsel  from  me ;
"  This  vazir  is,  in  secret,  thy  enemy.

"  Of  the  high  and  low  of  the  army — none  have  remained,
"  "Who  have  not  loans  of  silver  and  gold  from  him.

*'  On  the  condition  that, — when  the  king,  neck-exalting,
"  Dies, — they  give  back  that  gold  and  silver.

"  That  self -worshipper  wishes  not  thee,  alive ;
"  Lest  that  he  should  not  regain  his  money.*'

Often,  towards  the  vazir,  the  asylum  of  the  kingdom,
The  king,  with  the  eye  of  punishment,  used  to  glance,

225  Saying : — "  In  the  semblance  of  friends,  before  me,
"  Why  art  thou,  in  heart,  my  enemy  ?  "

The  vazir  kissed  the  ground  before  his  throne  and  said :
"  Since  thou  askst,  it  is  now  improper  to  conceal.

"  Oh  renowned  king !  I  this  wish,

"  That  the  world,  like  me,  may  be  thy  well-wisher.


OHAP.  VII.]  ON    EDUCATION.  323

"  "When  thy  death  is  the  stated  period  for  (the  return  of)
my  silver,

"  They  will,  from  fear  of  me,  wish  thee  greater  perma-
nency.

"  Desirest  thou  not  that  men,  with  sincerity  and  supplica-
tion,
"  Should  wish  thy  head  green,  and  thy  life  long.

280  "  Men  reckon  prayer — a  gain ;

"  For,  it  is  the  cuirass  against  the  arrow  of  calamity."

The  monarch  approved  of  what  he  said :

The  rose  of  his  face,  from  freshness,  expanded.

Of    the    rank    and    station,     which    the    prime-minister

possessed.
He  increased  its  dignity,  and  exalted  its  rank.

Than  a  calumniator,  I  have  seen  no  one  more  afflicted ;
Of. more  reversed  fortune,  and  overturned  state.

Through  the  ignorance  and  obscurity  of  judgment,  which

is  his.
He  casts  altercation  between  two  friends.

285  Another  time,  this  and  that  (the  two  friends)  make  glad
their  hearts ;
He,  between  them,  unfortunate  and  ashamed,

To  kindle  a  fire  between  two  persons ;

To  consume  oneself  in  the  midst — is  not  wisdom.

Like  Sa'di,  that  one  tasted  the  delight  of  retirement,
Who,  from  both  worlds,  withdrew  his  tongue.

"Whatever  thou  knowst  of  profitable  speech — utter ;
Though  it  be  acceptable  to  no  one.

21  ♦


324  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'DI.  [cHAP.  VII.

For,  to-morrow  (the  Judgment  Day),  he  penitent  may  raise

a  cry,
Saying  : — "  Alas  !  why  did  I  not  listen  to  the  truth  ?  '*


240  A  good,  order-bearing,  chaste  wife
Makes  a  poor  man,  a  king.

Go  ;  strike  five  times  (in  joy)  at  thy  door.
That  a  concordant  mistress  is  in  thy  bosom.

If,  all  day,  thou  endurest  grief, — have  no  care.
When,  at  night,  the  dear  companion  is  in  thy  embrace.

Whose  house  is  prosperous,  and  bed-fellow,  a  companion —
God's  glance  is,  in  mercy,  towards  him.

When  the  wife  of  beautiful  face  is  chaste.
The  husband,  by  beholding  her,  is  in  Paradise.

245  That  person  took  up,  from  the  world,  his  heart's  desire.
Whose  mistress  was  concordant  with  him.

If  she  be  chaste,  and  pleasant  of  speech,
Look  not  at  her  beauty,  or  deformity.

From   the   one   of   Pari-face,   of   bad   disposition, — takes

away  (the  ball  of  empire).
The  woman  of  demon-face  of  pleasant  disposition.

From  her  husband's  hand,  she  takes  vinegar,  like  sugar;
Face  vinegar  plastered,  she  eats  not  sweetmeats.

250  The  woman,  well-wishing  is  the  heart' s-ease ;
But,  from  the  bad  woman, — oh  God !  protect  me.

As  a  parrot,  for  whom  a  crow  was  companion.
Considers  freedom  from  the  cage, — gain, —

Place  thy  head  in  wandering,  in  the  world ;
Place,  otherwise,  thy  heart  on  helplessness.


CHAP.  Vn.]  ON   EDUCATION.  325

To  go  bare-foot, — ^better  tlian  the  tight  shoe  ;

The  toil  of  travel, — better  than  contention  in  the  house.

A  captive  in  the  kazi's  dungeon, — better
Than,  in  the  house,  to  see  contraction  on  the  eyebrow  (of
the  wife).

255  Travel  is  a  festival  to  that  house-master,
In  whose  house  is  a  wife  of  bad  disposition.

Shut  the  door  of  joyfulness  on  that  house,
From  which,  the  wife's  clamour  issues  loudly.

When  the  wife  takes  the  path  to  the  bazar,  strike ;
Otherwise,  sit,  in  the  house,  wife-like.

If  the  wife  has  no  ear  for  her  husband.
Clothe  the  man  in  her  black  garment.

The  wife,  who  is  ignorant  and  dishonourable.

Thou  didst  ask  for  a  calamity  on  thy  head, — not  a  woman.

1260  When,  in  the  barley-measure,  she  breaks  faith.
Wash  thy  hand  of  the  wheat-store.

God  has  desired  good  to  that  slave,

For  whom,  the  heart  and  hand  of  the  wife  are  true.

When  the  wife  laughs  in  the  stranger's  face.

To  the  husband,  say  : — "  Boast  not  further  of  manliness.**

May  the  woman's  eyes  be  blind,  as  to  strangers !

When  she  goes  out  of  the  house,  may  it  be  to  her  grave  I

When  the  wanton  wife  places  her  hand  in  the  fried  meat,
Say  : — "  Go  ;  put  thy  hand  in  a  man's  face."


260      The  wife  who  abandons  rectitude, — as  to  her  being  a  harlot,  have  no
doubt.


326  THE   BUSTAN   OF   SA*DI.  [CHAP.  VII.

265  When  thou  seest  that  the  woman's  foot  is  not  in  one  place.
Silence  is  not  the  part  of  wisdom  and  judgment.

Fly  from  her  hand,  into  the  crocodile's  mouth  ;
For  dying  is  better  than  life,  in  distress.

Cause  her  face  to  be  covered  from  the  strange  man ;
And,  if  she  hear  not, — then  whether  wife,  or  husband, —
what  difference  ?

The  beautiful  wife  of  pleasant  disposition  is  fortune  and

companion ;
Release  (divorce)  the  wife,  ugly,  discordant.

How  well  came  this  single  speech  from  those  two  persons,
Who  were  bewildered  by  a  woman's  hand.

270  This  one  said : — "  Let  there  not  be  a  bad  wife  for  any
one  !  "
The  other  said : — "  Let  there  not  be  a  woman,  in  the  world
itself!"

Oh  friend  !  every  fresh  spring,  take  a  new  wife ;
For,  last  year's  almanac  is  of  no  use.

Whomsoever,  thou  seest  captive  to  a  woman ;
Do  not — oh  Sa'di !  reproach  him  not.

Thou  also  mayst  suffer  violence,  and  endure  her  burden, —
If,  one  night,  thou  drawst  her  into  thy  embrace.


A  young  man,  from  want  of  concordance  with  his  wife,
Bewailed  to  an  old  man,  and  said  : —


271       The  first  line  may  be  rendered : —

Take  a  virgin  woman.


CHAP.  VII.]  ON  EDUCATION.  327

J75  "  A  heavy  load,  from  the  hand  of  this  bold  enemy,
"  I  endure,  even  as  the  nether  mill-stone."

He  said  to  him  : — "  Oh  sir  !  place  thy  heart  on  distress  ;
'*  No  one,  by  patience  exercising,  becomes  ashamed.

"  Oh  one  house-burning  !    at  night,  thou  art   the  upper

mill-stone ;
"  In  the  day,  why  art  thou  the  nether  stone  ?  "

When  thou  mayst  have  experienced  pleasure  from  a  rose-
bush.
If  thou  endurest  the  burden  of  its  thorn,  it  is  proper.

The  tree,  whose  fruit  thou  constantly  enjoyst.

At  that  time, — when  thou  sufferst  its  thorn, — be  patient.


280  When  a  boy  has  passed  ten  years  of  age.

Say : — '*  Sit  apart  from  those  not  unlawful    (to    him  in
marriage)."

It  is  not  right  to  kindle  a  fire  on  cotton ;

For,  while  thou  winkst  the  eye,  the  house  is  burned.

When  thou  wishst  that   thy  name   may  remain   in  place

(of  honour).
Teach  the  son  wisdom,  and  judgment.

When  his  skill  and  judgment  are  insufficient,
Thou  wilt  die ;  and,  none  of  thy  family  will  remain.

He  endures  severity  for  much  time,

The  son, — whom  the  father  tenderly  cherishes.


276  "  Ba  sakhti  dil  nihadan  "  signifies— to  be  content  with  hardship.

277  "  ghana-soz  "  is  a  word  of  the  same  class  as  "  jah4n-80z."     It  signifies
— one  complaining  of  others ;  time-stricken  ;  shameless ;  unjust.


328  THE   BUSTAN   OP   SA*DI.  [CHAP.  VII.

285  Keep  him  wise  and  abstinent ;

If  thou  lovest  him,  keep  him  not  by  endearing  expressions.

Rebuke  and  instruct  him,  in  childhood  ;

Exercise  promise  and  fear,  as  to  his  good  and  bad  deeds.

For  the  young  student, — commendation,  and  praise,  and

reward
(Are)  better  than  the  master's  reprimand,  and  threatening.

Teach  the  one  matured,  hand-toil ;

Even  if,  Kariin-like,  thou  hast  command  as  to  wealth.

How  knowst  thou — the  revolution  of  time

May  cause  him  to  wander,  in  exile,  in  the  country  ?

290  Rely  not  on  that  resource  which  is  ;

For,  it  may  be,  that  wealth  may  not  remain  in  thy  hand.

When,  for  him — there  are  the  resources  of  trade,
How  may  he  bear  the  hand  of  beggary  before  any  one  ?

The  purse  of  silver  and  gold  reaches  its  limit ;
The  purse  of  the  trader  becomes  not  empty.

Knowst  thou  not  how  Sa'di  obtained  his  object  ?

He  neither  traversed  the  desert,  nor  ploughed  the  sea.

In  childhood,  he  suffered  slaps  from  the  great ;
In  matureness,  God  gave  him  purity.

295  "Whosoever  places  his  neck  (in  submission)  to  order.
Not  much  time  passes,  but  he  gives  orders.

Every  child,  who  the  violence  of  the  teacher.
Experiences  not, — will  suffer  the  violence  of  time.

Keep  the  son  good  and  cause  ease  to  reach  him.
That  his  eyes   (of    expectation)   may  not  remain  on  the
hands  of  others.


CHAP.  VII.]  ON  EDUCATION.  329

Whosoever  endured  not  grief  for  his  son,
Another  suffered  grief  and  abused  him.

Preserve  him  from  the  bad  teacher ;

For,  the  unfortunate  and  road-lost  one  makes  him,  like
himself.

Desire  not  one  of  more  black  deeds  than  that  herma-
phrodite.

Whose  face  becomes  black  (with  sin)  before  the  sprouting
of  the  beard.

From  that  one,  void  of  honour,  it  is  proper  to  fly ;

For,  his  unmanliness  spilled  the  water  (of  honour)  of  men.

The  boy  who  sate  among  Kalandars,

To  his  father,  say  : — "  Wash  thy  hands  of  his  welfare."

Suffer  not  regret  as  to  his  destruction  and  ruin.

For,  the  degenerate  son,  dead  before  his  father,  (is)  best.


One  night,  in  my  street,  there  was  a  convivial  meeting ; — •'
Men  of  every  class,  in  that  assembly.


302  The  Kalaudar,  or  Kalandar,  or  Kaiida,e  natarashida,  has,  in  perfection,
the  disposition  of  going  alone  to  Makka ;  of  leading  a  solitary  life ;  and
of  strenuously  exerting  himself  in  the  demolishing  of  customs  and  forms
of  worship.  He  has  no  religious  teacher ;  at  the  same  time,  he  does  not
refuse  to  take  murids  or  disciples.     The  Sufis  blame  the  order.

The  Malamati  is  one  who  keeps  secret  the  worship  of  God  from
others,  who  displays  neither  goodness  nor  beauty,  and  who  conceals
neither  wickedness  nor  evil.

The  Saf  1  is  one  whose  heart  is  not  engaged  with  the  people.

The  Sdf  f  is  higher  than  the  other  two,  because  they  are  obedient  to
saints  and  prophets.

They  apply  the  word  Kalandar  to  wicked  men,  on  account  of  their  out-
ward similarity  to  Kalandars,  and  to  wine-drinkers.  Of  these  three
sects,  the  Kalandar  alone  shaves  his  head.


330  THE  BUSTAN  OF  SA'dI.         [oHAP.  VII.

305  When  the  musician's  voice  entered  from  the  street,
The  ha,e  hu,e  of  lovers  went  to  the  firmament.

One  of  fairy  face  was  my  beloved ;

I  said  to  him : — *'  Oh  my  beautiful  toy !

"  Why   comest   thou  not,  with  thy    companions,    to   the

assembly,
"  That  thou  mayst  illumme  our  assembly,  candle-like  ?  "

I  heard  that  he  went,  and  by  himself.
Kept  saying  to  me  : — "  Oh  my  lover  !

"  When  thou  hast  not  a  beard,  like  men ;
"  It  is  not  manliness  to  sit  before  men."


310  The  beardless  boy,  house-mining,  ruins  thee ;

Gk) ;  make  the  house  prosperous  vrith  a  pleasant  woman.

It  is  improper  to  play  at  love,  with  a  rose.
Which  has,  every  morning,  a  fresh  nightingale.

Since,  in  every  assembly,  he  made  himself  a  candle,
Wander  not  again,  about  him,  moth-like.

A  woman,  good,  and  of  pleasant  disposition  and  adorned,-
How  does  she  resemble  the  ignorant  youth  ?

Blow  a  breath  of  fidelity  upon  her,  rose-bud-like.
Who  follows  thee,  with  laughing,  rose-like.


810       "  ]^ana  kan"  signifies — na-khalaf,  one  who  does  wicked  deeds.

818       That  woman,  good  and  pleasant,  is  like  a  rose-bud.

Then,  as  the  rose-bud,  with  the  breath  of  the  morning  wind,  laughs —
do  thou  breathe  the  breath  of  fideUty,  and  see  that,  rose-like,  with
much  laughter,  she  will  fall  in  rear  and  display  cordiality.


OHAP»  VII.]  ON  EDUCATION.  331

815  Not  like  a  beloved  boy,  impudent,
Whom  one  cannot  break  with  a  stone.

Consider   him  (the    boy)  not    charming,  like  the  htiri  of

Paradise,
For  whom,  the  face  of  another  is  ugly,  demon-like.

If  thou  dost  kiss  his  feet,  he  has  no  thanks  (to  give) ;
And,  if  thou  art  the  dust  (in  humility),  he  has  no  fear.

Make  void  thy  head  of  brain,  and  hand  of  money.
When  thou  givest  thy  heart  to  the  son  of  man.

Exercise  not  the  evil  glance,  towards  the  son  of  man ;
Lest  evil  should  arise  to  thy  own  son.


Once   upon  a  time,  it   reached  my  ear   in    this    city  (of

Shiraz),
That  a  certain  merchant  purchased  a  slave.


The  one  of  fairy-face,  whatever  fell  to  his  hand.
Broke,  in  malice,  the  head  and  brain  of  the  foolish  mer-
chant.


He  summoned  God  and  His  Prophet  to  himself,  as  witness,
Saying ; — '*  I  will  not  again  wander  about  folly."

825  In  this  week,  journeying  chanced  to  him,

Heart-wounded,  and  head-bound,  and  face-torn.


316       "  Pech  bar  pech"  here  signifies— mahbub.
,  321       For  obvious  reasons,  couplets  321  and  323  are  omitted.


332  THE   BUSTAN   OF   SA*DI.  [OHAP.  VII.

When  he  went  one  or  two  miles  out  of  Kazrtin
A  dangerous,  stony  place  appeared  before  him.

He    inquired,    saying  : — '*  "What    is    the    name    of    this

castle?"
Saying  : — "  Whosoever  lives  sees  many  wonderful  things."

An  intimate    companion    of    the  karavan  thus    spoke    to

him  : —

"  Thou  knowst   not,  perhaps,    the    place  called — tang-i-

turkan?"

The  merchant  grieved  when  he  heard  the  name — ^tang-i-

turkan ;
Thou  wouldst  have  said,  that  he  had  beheld  the  sight  of

an  enemy.

330  He  raised  a  great  shout  at  the  black.

Saying  : — "  Why  urgest  thou  farther  ?     Throw  away  the
goods.

"  To  me,  there  is  not  a  barley-grain  of  wisdom,  nor  know-
ledge,
"  If  I  again  go  to  the — tang-i-turkan."

Shut  the  door  of  lust  of  the  ungrateful  soul ;
Or,  if  thou  art  a  lover, — suffer  the  kick,  and  bind  the
head.

When  thou  cherishst  a  slave,

Bring  him  up  in  awe,  so  that  thou  mayst  enjoy  advantage
from  him.

And,  if  the  lord  bite  with  the  teeth  (kisses)  his  slave's  lip,
He  (the  slave)  matures  the  fancy  of  lordship.


826       Kazrun  is  at  a  distance  of  two  karoh  (twenty  miles)  from  Shi'raz.

One  mil  =  four  thousand  camel-paces  =  one-third  of  a  farsang.
327       The  merchant  thought  the  lofty  rocks  a  castle.
828       "  Turk  "  signifies — mahbub.


CHAP.  VII.]  ON   EDUCATION.  333

886  The  slave  should  be  water-drawer,  and  brick-maker ;
The  cherished  slave  is  a  fist-striker.


A  crowd  sate  with  a  pleasant  youth,

Saying  : — "  We  are    honourable    lovers,  and  possessed  of
discernment."

Ask  (their  state)  of  me,  time-wearied ;

For  the  fast-keeper  suffers  regret  at  the  table-cloth.

The  sheep  eats  the  date-seed,  for  that  reason.
That  there  is  a  lock  and  fastening  on  the  dates.

The  head  of  the  oil-presser's  ox  is  towards  the  grass,  for

that  reason.
That,  its  tether  is  short  of  the  rape-seed.


T  840  A  certain  (chaste)  one  saw  a  form  possessed  of  beauty ;
Through  phrensy  of  love  and  ecstacy  for  her,  he  changed.

Helpless,  he  cast  forth  perspiration,  to  the  same  degree,
As  the  dew  on  the  leaf  of  the  April- tree.

The  sage  Bukrdt,  riding,  passed  by  him ;

He  inquired,  saying  : — "  What  matter  befell  this  one  ?  "

A  person  said  to  him  : — "  This  is  a  chaste  'dbid,
"  From  whose  hand  sin  never  sprang.


335      In  some  copies,  in  the  second  line,  "  khisht,"  in  place  of  "  musht,"

occurs.

Then  "  khisht-zan,"  in  the  first   line  means — brick-maker ;    in  the

second,  brick-caster.
337       This  couplet  is  uttered  by  Sa'di,  in  reproach  of  the  statement  made  in

couplet  336.
342       "  Bakrdt "  signifies — ^Hippocrates.


334  THE    BUSTAN   OF    SA'dI.  [oHAP.  VII.

"  Day  and  night,  he  goes  into  the  plain  and  mountain ;
**  From  society,  fleeing ;  and,  with  men,  disgusted.

845  "  One,  heart-ravishing,  has  snatched  his  heart ;

"  The  foot  of  his  vision  has  descended  into  the  clay  (of
love).

"  When  the  reproach  of  the  people  comes  to  his  ear,
"  He  says  : — Of  so  much  reproach,  be  silent.

"  Say  not,  if  I  complain,  that  he  is  not  excusable ;
"  For,  my  complaint  is  not  far  from  cause.

"  This  picture  snatches  not  the  heart  from  my  hand ;

"  He  (God)  takes  the  heart,  who  pourtrayed  this  picture."

The  man,  work-tried,  heard  this  speech ;
Old  in  years,  one  cherished,  of  ripe  judgment.

350  He  said : — "  Although,  the  soul  of  goodness  goes  forth  (in
these  words),
"  With  whatever  thou  mayst  utter,  every  one  goes  not.

"  Of  the  Painter  (God)  indeed  is  this  picture  ;

"  Which  snatched,  in  rapine,  the  heart  of  the  distraught.

"  Why  does  not  the  child  of  one  day  (in  age)  ravish  his  sense,
"  For,  in  beholding  the  creating  of  God,  whether  of  ripe
age,  or  tender, — what  difference  ?  "

The  asserter  of  God's  truth  looks  at  the  camel,   in  the

same  way.
As,  at  the  beauties  of  Chin  and  Chigal.


352  The  poet  saith  : —

"  From  sky  to  earth,  if  thou  lookst  with  wisdom,
There  is  not  an  atom  in  which  there  is  not  a  strange  mystery.

353  In  Chigal  and  Turkistan  the  people  are  very  handsome.


CHAP.  VII.]  ON   EDUCATION.  336

Every  line  of  mine  of  this  book  (the  Bustdn)  is  a  woman's

veil
Lowered  on  the  cheek  of  the  one,  heart-alluring.

855  There  are  meanings  (clear)  beneath  the  black  letters,

Like  the  beloved   one   behind    the  curtain;   or  the  moon
behind  the  cloud.

In  the  times  of  Sa'di  sorrow  is  not  comprehended ;
For,  there  is  so  much  beauty  of  thought  behind  the  screen
(of  black  letters).

For  me, — there  are  words,  assembly  adorning.
In  them,  fire-like,  illumination  (for  the  seeker)  and  burning
(for  the  envious).

I  grieve  not  of  enemies,  if  (through  envy)  they  tremble ;
For,  through  this  Persian  fire,  they  are  in  burning.


If  he  has  escaped  in  the  world,  from  the  (people  of  the)

world,
It  is  he,  who  has  closed  the  door  on  himself,  against  the

people.

860  No  one  escaped  from  the  violence  of  tongues,

Whether  he  be  self-displaying,  or  truth-worshipping.

If,  angel-like,  thou  dost  fly  from  the  sky,
111- thought  will  cling  to  thy  skirt.

One  can,  with  effort,  bind  the  Tigris ;
One  cannot  bind  the  enemy's  tongue.


864      The  author  compares  the  book  Bustdn  to  a  woman's  veil;  and  its

meaning  to  a  lovely  one.
867       As  in  fire  there  are  illumination  and   heat,  so   in  Sa'df's   langua(?e

splendour  and  heart-burning.


336  THE   BTJSTAN   OP   SA*DI.  [CHAP.  VII.

Those  wet  of  skirt  (sin-stained)  sit  together,
Saying : — "  This   is   dry  devotion ;    and   that   a  trap  for
gaining  bread."

Turn  not  thy  face  from  worshipping  God,

Abandon ; — so  that  people  may  reckon  thee  as  nothing.

365  When  the  pure  Grod  becomes  satisfied  with  the  slave,
If  these  (people)  be  not  contented, — what  matter  ?

The  enemy  of  the  people  is  not  acquainted  with  God ;
Through  the  tumult  of  the  people,  there  is  no  way  for  him
to  God.

They  have  not  found  the  path  to  the  place  (of  their  desire)

for  that  reason.
That,  they  have  missed  their  foot,  at  the  first  step.

Two  persons  apply  their  ears  (listen)  to  a  tradition  :
From  this  one,  to  that — as  far  as  from  Ahriman  (Satan)  to
Surosh  (Gabriel).

One  accepts  advice ;  the  other,  odious,
Through  word- seizing  (slandering),  is  not  occupied  with
the  advice.

870  Dejected,  in  the  dark  corner  of  a  place.

What  may  he  find  from  the  cup,  world-displaying  ?

If  thou  art  a  lion,  or  a  fox,  think  not

That  thou  mayst  escape  from  these  (slanderers)  by  man-
liness, or  stratagem.

If  a  person  chooses  the  corner  of  retirement ;
Because  he  has  not  much  solicitude  for  society, —

They  make  him  contemptible,  saying  : — "  (This  one's  work)

is  fraud  and  deceit ;
"  He  flies  from  man,  as  from  the  demon.'*


CHAP.  VII.]  ON   EDUCATION.  337

If  he  be  of  laughing  face  and  sociable,
They  consider  him  not  chaste  and  abstinent.

•5  "With  slander,  they  rend  the  rich  man's  skin,
Saying  : — "  If,  in  the  world,  there  be  a  Far'dn,  it  is  he."

If  one,  foodless,  weeps,  with  heart-burning,
They  call  him  : — "  Unfortunate  and  unhappy.'*

If  a  poor  man  be  in  distress,

They  will  say  it  is — from  calamity  and  misfortune.

And,  if  a  prosperous  one  comes  down  from  his  footing,
They  regard  it  (his  fall)  as  gain,  and  God's  grace.

Saying  : — '*  How  long  this  dignity  and  arrogance  ?
"  In  the  rear  of  happiness,  is  unhappiness."

»  If  as  to  a  straitened  one  of  narrow  means, —
Fortune  makes  his  rank  high,

In  malice  towards  him,  they  gnash  their  teeth  with  poison.
Saying : — "  This  base  time  is  the  cherisher  of  the  mean."

When  they  behold  a  work  perfect  in  thy  hand.
They  reckon  thee  covetous,  and  world- worshipping.

And  if  thou  holdst  the  hand  of  resolution  from  the  work

(of  the  world).
They  consider  thee  of  the  beggar-trade,  and  cooked  food-

devourer.

And,  if   thou  art   an   orator, — thou   art   a   drum  full  of

nonsense ;
If  thou  art  silent, — thou  art  a  picture   (lifeless)  of  the

bath-room.


77       "  Idbar  "  signifies — pusht  d^dan.

88  '•  Pukhta-khwar  "  signifies — one  who  gives  no  toil  to  his  body,  but
devours  the  earnings  of  others.  It  means,  also,  one  who  eats  the  cooked
food  of  others,  and  who  is  present  at  their  time  of  eating.

22


338  THE   BUSTAN   OF    SA*DI.  [OHAP.  VII.

386  They  call  not  those,  patience- exercising,  men.

Saying : — "  The  helpless  one,  through  fear,  raised  not  his
head."

And,  if  in  his  head  (nature)  there  be  awe  and  manliness.
They  fly  from  him,  saying  : — "  What  madness  is  this  ?  "

If  he  be  a  little  eater,,  they  slander  him,

Saying: — ^"His  property  is  perhaps  the  fortune  of  another."

And,  if  his  food  be  excellent  and  pure.

They  call  him  : — "  Belly-slave,  and  body-cherisher."

And,  if  the  wealth-possessor  lives  without  pomp.
Saying : — "  Decoration  is  a  reproach  to  people  of  discern-
ment."

390  They  apply  the  tongue  (of  reproach)  to  his  torture,  sword-
like.
Saying  : — "  The  unfortimate  one  withholds  gold  from  his
own  body !  "

If  he  constructs  a  palace  and  painted  hall ;
Makes  a  splendid  dress  for  his  own  body.

He  is  ready  to  die,  from  the  power  of  cavillers.
Saying  : — "  He  adorned  himself  woman-like."

If  a  devotee  travelled  not.

Those,  who  have  made  journies  call  him  not  a  man.

Saying : — "  For   him,    not    advanced    beyond   his   wife's

embrace,
*'  What  is  his  skill,  or  judgment,  or  knowledge? "

395  They  even  rend  the  skin  of  one,  world-experienced.

Saying  : — "  He    is    one,    head- revolving,    of    overturned
fortune.

"  If  of  fortune,  there  were  for  him,  a  portion  and  share,
*'  Time  would  not  drive  him  from  city  to  city."


CHAP.  VII.]  ON   EDUCATION.  339

The  one  viewing  critically  contemns  the  bachelor,
Saying  : — "  The   earth   is   vexed   with    his    sleeping  and
rising."

And,  if  he  marries,  he  says  : — "  From  the  power  of  the

heart,
"  He  has  fallen  headlong,  in  the  mire,  ass-like."

The  one  of  ugly  face  escapes  not  from  man's  oppression ;
Nor  the  lovely  one,  from  the  unmanly  one  of  ugly  speech.

30  If,  one  day,  anger  plucks  (a  man)  from  his  place.
They  call  him  : — *'  Insane,  and  of  obscure  judgment."

And,  if  he  exercises  patience  with  any.

They  will  say : — "  He  has  not  sufficient  spirit."

They   say,   by   way  of   counsel,   to  the   generous  one, —

"  Enough !

"  For,  to-morrow,  both   thy  hands  may  be  (in  beggary)

before  a  person."

And  if  he  becomes  contented  and  self -possessing.
He  becomes  captive  to  the  reproaching  of  a  crowd,

Saying : — "  This  mean  man  wishes  to  die  Uke  his  father.
"  Who  gave  up  wealth,  and  took  away  regret."

)5  "Who  is  able  to  sit  in  the  corner  of  safety,
When  the  Prophet  escaped  not  from  the  villainy  of  the
enemy  ?

Of  God, — who  resemblance,  and  partner  and  co-equal,
1 1    Has  not, — heardst  thou  what  the  Christian  said  1


W


K)      In  the 'Ikd-i-manzum,  couplets  400  to  407  are  omitted.
>5       The   infidels   say:— "How  is  he  (Muhammad)  a  prophet,  who  cats
like  us,  and  wanders  in  the  streets  and  hkz&x  ?  "

22  ♦


340  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  VII.

No  one  escapes  from  a  person's  hand,

The  remedy  for  the  captive  is  patience  only.


There  was  a  young  man,  skilful  and  learned,

Who  was,  as  regards  admonishing,  vigilant  and  manly.

Of  good  repute,  and  pious,  and  God- worshipping,
The   beard   of    his    face  more    beautiful   than   his   hand-
writing.

410  Strong  in  eloquence,  and  clever  in  grammar ;

But,  he  used  not  to  utter  truly  the  letters  of  the  Abjad.

Perhaps,  he  had  stammering  in  the  tongue.

For,  he  used  not  to  explain  the  truth  of  the  Mu'jam.

I  spoke  to  one  of  the  pious,

Saying : — "  A  certain  one  has  no  front  teeth."

At  my  folly,  he  became  red  of  face.

Saying  : — "  Speak  not  again,  in  this  foolish  way.

"  Thou  didst  see  in  him  that  very  defect,  which  is  existent;
"  From  how  much  skill,  thy  wisdom's  eye  was  shut !

415  *'  Listen   truly  to  me;  for,  in  the  day  of  certainty  (Re-
surrection),
"  The  man,  good-seeing,  will  not  experience  evil.

"  One,  who  has  grace,  and  science,  and  judgment,
'*  — If  the  foot  of  his  integrity  slips  from  its  place. —

"  Approve  not  violence  against  him,  for  one  small  matter.
"  What  have  the  sages  said : — Take  what  is  clean."

Oh  wise  man  !  the  thorn  and  the  rose  are  together :
Why  art  thou  in  the  fetter  of  the  thorn  ?  fasten  thou  the
rose-bouquet.


415      Couplets  416  and  416  form  a  "  kat'a-band."


CHAP.  VII.]  ON   EDUCATION.  341

He — in  whose  nature,  is  the  ugly  disposition,
Sees  not  the  peacock, — only  his  ugly  foot.

t2o  Oh  one  of  malevolent  face  !  acquire  purity  (of  heart)  ;
For,  the  dark  mirror  displays  not  the  face.

Seek  a  path  by  which,  thou  mayst  escape  from  punishment

(of  hell) ;
Not  a  word  (of  man),  on  which  thou  mayst  lay  the  finger

(of  criticism).

Oh  wise  one !  place  not  in  front  (expose  not)  the  people's

defects ;
For  it  sews  up  thy  eyes  from  thy  own  defects.

Why  do  I  inflict  punishment  on  the  one  of  stained  skirt.
When  I  know,  within  myself,  that  I  am  of  wet  (stained)
skirt?

It  is  improper  that  thou  shouldst  exercise  violence  against

a  person.
When  thou  dost  aid  thyself  by  artifice  of  speech.

425  When  evil  is  unpleasant  to  thee,  do  not  do  it  thyself;
Say,  after  that,  to  thy  neighbour : — "  Do  not  evil."

If  I  am  Grod- worshipping ;  or  if  self-displaying ;

I  preserve  my  exterior  for  thee,  my  interior  for  God.

When  I  adorned  my  exterior  with  chastity.
Interfere  not  with  my  crookedness,  or  uprightness.

If  my  way  of  life  be  good ;  or  if  bad,

God  is  more  acquainted  than  thou,  with  my  secret.

Punish  for  bad  conduct  that  person.

Who  hopes  from  thee  the  reward  of  goodness.

480  If  I  am  good  or  bad,  be  thou  silent ;

For,  I  am  myself  the  porter  of  profit  and  loss.


342  THE  BUSTAN  OF  SA'dI.         [oHAP.  VII.

For  a  good  deed  by  a  man  of  good  judgment, —
For  one,  Grod  writes  ten.

Oh  son !  of  whomsoever,  thou  also  a  single  talent
Mayst  observe, — pass  by  his  ten  defects.

Count  not  upon  the  finger  one  defect  of  his  ;
Bring  forth  a  world  of  excellence  for  nothing.

Like  the  enemy,  who,  on  the  poetry  of  Sa'di,
Grlances  with  scorn,  heart  ruined.

435  He  has  no  ear  for  the  hundred  beautiful  subtleties ;
When  he  beholds  a  defect,  he  raises  a  shout.

That   one,  bad-approving, — to   whom,  there   is   only  this

reason, —
Envy  plucked  out  his  eyes,  good-discerning.

Did  not  God's  creating  create  the  people  ?
Black,  and  white,  and  beautiful,  and  ugly — came.

Not  every  eye  nor  eyebrow,  that  thou  seest,  is  good ;
Bat  the  kernel  of  the  pistachio  nut ;  cast  away  its  husk.


431       Thus  it  is  written  in  the  Imuran.


CHAP.  VIII.]  ON   THANKS.  343


CHAPTER   VIII.

On  Thanks.

1  I  CANNOT  express  a  breath  for  thanks  to  my  Friend  (God) ;
For,  I  know  not  a  word  of  praise  that  is  worthy  of  Him.

Every  hair  on  my  body  is  a  gift  from  Him ;
How  may  I  perform  thanks  for  every  hair  ?

Praise  to  the  Lord-G-iver,

Who,  from  nonentity,  made  the  slave  existing.

To  whom,  is  there  the  power  of  description  of  His  benefi-
cence ?
For,  His  praises  are  immersed  in  His  dignity.

6  That  inventor,  who  creates  a  person  from  clay,
Q-ives  soul,  and  wisdom,  and  sense,  and  heart.

From  the  father's  back-bone  to  the  limit  of  old  age.
Behold  to  what  extent,  He,  from  the  imseen,  gave  thoo
honour  I


4      If  one  utters  thanks  to  God,

How  may  he  utter  thanks  for  the  grace  of  thanks  to  God  ?


344  THE   BtJSTAN    OP   SA*DI.  [OHAP.  VIII.

When  God  created  thee  pure,  be  sensible  and  pure ;

For,  it  is  a  shame  to  go  unclean  to  the  dust  (of  the  grave).

Shake  off  continually  the  dust  (of  mean  qualities)  from  the

mirror  (of  the  heart) ;
For,  it  takes  not  polish,  when  the  blight  eats  it.

In  the  beginning,  wast  thou  not  water  of  man's  seed  ?
If  thou  art  a  man,  put  presumption  out  of  thy  head.

10  When,  thou  bringst,  with  effort,  victuals  to  thyself.
Rely  not  on  the  strength  of  thy  own  arm.

Oh  self- worshipper  !  why  dost  thou  not  see  God
Who  brings  into  revolution  the  arm  of  the  hand?

When  by  thy  striving,  a  thing  happens.

Know  by  God's  grace  (it  is);  not,  by  thy  own  effort.

By  violence  no  one  has  carried  off  the  ball ;
Utter  praise  to  the  Lord  of  Grace.

Of  thyself,  thou  art  not  erect  one  step ;
From  the  hidden,  aid  arrives  momently.

15  Wast    thou  not   a   child,   tongue-bound   as   to  boast   (of
speech)  ?
Food,  from  the  navel,  kept  coming  within  thee.

When  they  severed  the  umbihcal  cord,  thy  daily  food  was

broken  off;
Thy  hand  clung  to  thy  mother's  breast.

A  traveller,  before  whom  adverse  time  brings  sickness.
They  give  to  him  water  from  his  own  city,  as  medicine.

Then  he  obtained  nourishment  in  the  belly ;
He  obtained  food  from  the  store  of  the  bowels.


17       When   a  person   drinks  the  water  of  his  native   place,   he  obtains
(they  say)  convalescence.


CHAP.  VIII.]  ON   THANKS.  •  345

The  two  breasts, — that,  to-day,  are  heart-pleasing  to  him, —
Are  also  two  fountains  of  his  nurturing-place.

20  The  bosom  and  breast  of  the  mother,  heart-pleasing.

Are  paradise ;  and,  the  breast  is  for  him,  a  stream  of  milk.

Her  stature,  life-nourishing,  is  a  tree ;

The  offspring,  on  her  bosom, — a  delicate  fruit.

Are  not  the  veins  of  the  breast,  within  the  heart  ?
Then,  if  thou  wilt  consider,  milk  is  the  heart's  blood.

Teeth,  sting-Hke,  plunged  in  her  blood ;

Love  for  her  own  blood-devourer  created  within  her.

When  God  made  the  arm  strong;  and,  the  teeth,  dense —
The  nurse  anoints  her  breast  with  aloes.

25  The  aloe  makes  it  (the  offspring)  silent  (forgetful)  of  milk,  so
That  it  forgets  the  breast  and  its  milk.

Oh  sir  !  thou  also  art,  as  to  repentance,  a  child  of  the  path

of  God ;
By  bitterness,  sin  becomes  forgotten  by  thee.


A  young  man  turned  his  head  from  his  mother's  judgment,
Her  sorrowful  heart  burned  like  fire.

When  she  became  helpless,  she  brought  a  cradle  before

him,
Saying  : — "Oh  one  languid  of  love  and  forgetful  of  the

time  (of  infancy) !

"  Wast  thou  not  weeping,  and  tired  and  small,
"  When  nights,  from  thy  power,  sleep  overpowered  me
not?


346  THE   BUSTAN   OP    SA'dI.  [oHAP.  VUI.

30  "  No ;  to  thee,  in  the  cradle  there  was  not  the  strength  of

thy  (present)  state;

"  To  thee,  there  was  not  the  power  to  drive  away  a  fly

from  thyself.

"  Thou  art  that  one,  who  used  to  be  vexed  with  a  single

fly.

'*  Who,  to  day,  art  chief  and  powerful."

Thou  mayst  again  be  in  that  state,  at  the  bottom  of  the

grave.
When  thou  canst  not  repel  an  ant  from  thy  body.

Again  how  may  the  eye  light  up  its  lamp,

When  the  worm  of  the  grave  devours  the  fat  of  the  brain  ?

Like  one  clothed  as  to  the  eye  (blind),  seest  thou  not  that

the  road
He  knows  not,  at  the  time  of  going,  from  the  well  ?

85  Thou  who  art  possessed  of  vision,  if  thou  didst  perform
thanks  (knowst  the  path  from  the  well) ;
If  not,  thou  also  art  one  clothed  as  to  the  eye  (bhnd).

The  instructor  taught  thee  not  understanding  and  judg-
ment;
God  created  these  qualities  in  thy  existence.

If  He  had  refused  thee  a  heart,  truth-hearing.
Truth  would  have  appeared  to  thy  eye  the  essence  of  false-
hood.


Behold  one  finger,  with  how  many  joints,
God,  by  creating,  cast  together.

Then,  it  is  madness  and  foolishness.

That  thou  shouldst  place  thy  finger  (of  cavilling)  on  the
word  of  His  creating.


CHAP.  VIII.]  ON   THANKS.  347

•  Far  the  sake  of  man's  motion,  consider
Him,  who  fixed  the  sinews  and  placed  the  articulations  of
so  many  bones.

For,  without  the  revolution  of  the  ancle,  and  the  knee,  and

the  foot.
It  is  impossible  to  raise  the  foot  from  its  place.

Prostration  (on  the  ground)  is  not  difficult  for  a  man,  on

that  account.
That,  the  joint  in  his  back-bone  is  not  of  one  piece.

God  has  arranged  two  hundred  joints  within  one  another,
Who  has  finished  like  thee  (oh  Grod  !)  a  clay- joint?

Oh  one  of  agreeable  disposition !  the  veins  in  thy  body
Are  a  land, — in  it,  are  three  hundred  and  sixty  streams.

5  In  the  head, — vision,  and  thought,  and  judgment,  and  dis-
cretion ;
The  limb  of  the  body  for  the  dear  heart ;  (and)  the  heart
for  dear  wisdom.

The  wild  beasts,  with  the  countenance  downcast,  are  con-
temptible ;
Thou,  Alif-like,  art  a  rider  on  thy  feet.

They,  head-lowered,  for  the  sake  of  eating ;
Thou,  with  dignity,  bringst  thy  food  to  the  head.

It  beseems  thee  not,  with  so  much  chieftainship,
That  thou  shouldst  lower  thy  head,  save  in  devotion  (to
God).

By" His  own  beauty,  God  gave  thee  knowledge;  behold  1
He  made  thee  not,  like  the  animals,  head  in  the  grass.


40      "  Pad  zadan  "  signifies — ba  a'?4b  band  kajdan.
46      The  letter  Alif  is  straigM  and  upright.


348  THE    BUSTAN   OF    SA*DI.  [OHAP.  VIII.

50  But,  with  this  form,  heart- enchanting,
Be  not  fascinated  ;  take  a  good  walk  of  Hfe.

A  straight  path  is  necessary,  not  erect  stature ;
For,  the  infidel  is  also  like  us,  in  outward  form.

He,  who  gave  thee  eye  and  mouth,  and  ear ;

If  thou  art  wise, — strive  not  in  opposition  to  Him.

I  grant,  that  thou  mayst  beat  the  enemy  with  a  stone.
Wage  not  war,  at  least  from  ignorance,   with  the  Friend
(God).

Those  of  wise  disposition,  obligation-recognising,
Sew  up  the  favour  (of  Grod),  with  the  nail  of  thanks.


65  One  king-born  fell  from  a  black  horse  ;
A  joint  in  his  neck  became  dislocated.

The  neck,  elephant-like,  descended  to  his  body ;

His  head  used  not  to  turn,  so  long  as  his  body  moved  not.

The  physicians  were  astonied  at  this ;
But,  a  philosopher,  from  the  Grreek-land,

Twisted  back  his  head,  and  the  vein  became  right,
And,  if  he  had  not  been  present,  he  would  have  become
paralytic.

Again,  he  came  near  to  the  king ;
That  mean  one  looked  not  at  him.

60  The  sage's  head  became  plunged  in  shame ;
I  heard  that  he  went,  and  gently  said  : —

"  If,  yesterday,  I  had  not  twisted  his  neck,

"  He  would  not,  to-day,  have  turned  his  face  from  me."


CHAP.  VIII.]  ON   THANKS.  349

He  sent  a  seed,  by  the  hand  of  a  slave,
Saying  : — "  It  is  proper  that  thou  shouldst  place  it  on  the
censer,  aloe-burning."

To  the  one,  king-born,  through  the  smoke,  sneezing  came,
His  head  and  neck  became  even  as  they  were.

With  apology,  they  hastened  after  the  philosopher ;
They  sought  much,  but  found  little.

65  Turn  not  thy  head  from  thanks  to  a  benefactor.

Lest  that  thou  shouldst,  in  after  days,  raise  thy  head  for
nothing.


A  certain  one  severely  rubbed  a  boy's  ears  (chastised  him),
Saying : — "  Oh  father  of  wonderful  judgment,  of  overturned
fortune !

"  I  gave  thee  an  axe,  saying  : — Split  fire-wood ;
"  I  said  not : — Undermine  the  masjid-wall."

The  tongue  came  (from  God)  for  thanks  and  praise ;
The  grateful  one  moves  it  not  in  slander.

The  ear  is  the  thoroughfare  for  the  Kur^n  and  counsel ;
Strive  not  to  listen  to  calumny  and  falsehood.

70  Two  eyes,  for  the  sake  of  (beholding)  the  creating  of  God,
are  good ;
Lower  the  eyes  from  the  defect  of  brother  and  friend.


For  the  sake  of  thy  ease,  the  night  and  day  are ;

The  resplendent  moon  and  the  sun,  world-illuminating.

For  thy  sake,  the  west  wind,  chamberlain-like,
Causes  constantly  to  be  spread  the  carpet  of  spring.


350  THE   BUSTAN   OF   SA'dI.  [oHAP.  Vm.

K  wind,  and  snow,  and  rain,  and  hail  are,
And  if  the  Chaugan  expresses  thunder,    and  the^  sword
Hghtning, —

All  are  work-performers,  and  order-bearers  (of  God)
"Who  cherish  thy  seed  in  the  dust.

75  And,  if  thou  remainst  thirsty,  rage  not  through  affliction ;
For,  the  Water-carrier  brings  thee  a  cloud  of  water  on  His
back.

From  the  dust,  He  brings  colour,  and  perfume,  and  food ;
Amusement  for  the  eye,  and  brain,  and  palate.

He  gave  thee  honey  from  the  bees  ;  and  manna,  from  the

sky;
He  gave  thee  the  green  date,  from  the  date-tree ;  and  the

date-tree  from  the  seed-stone.

All  the  gardeners  gnaw  the  hand

In  astonishment,  saying  : — "  No  one  planted  such  a  date-
tree!  "

The  sun  and  moon  and  Pleiades  all  are  for  thee ;
They  are  the  candles  of  the  roof  of  thy  house.

80  He  brings  thee  a  rose  from  the  thorn;  musk,  from  the
(animal's)  navel :
Gold,  from  the  mine ;  and  the  green  leaf,  from  the  dry
wood.


77  "  Manna  "  is  an  Arabic  word.  The  substance  so  called  is  produced
in  Europe  from  the  ash.

In  Persia,  from  a  willow  growing  in  moist  ground.

In  Arabia,  from  a  tamarisk,  in  the  district  of  Mount  Sinai.  This
"  manna  "  is  called  "  tufra."

In  India  and  Syria,  from  the  camel-thorn.  This  "  manna  "  is  called
"alhaj."

"Manna"  is  of  red  colour,  very  sweet;  it  melts  in  water.  In  India,
it  is  used  as  medicine.


CHAP.  VIII.]  ON   THANKS.  361

He  pourtrajed  thy  eye  and  eye-brow,  with  His  own  hand  ;
For,  one  cannot  leave  the  intimate  friend  to  strangers.

The  powerful  One,  who  cherishes  the  delicate,
Cherishes  thee,  with  various  favours.

Breath  by  breath,  with  soul,  it  is  proper  to  utter  (praise) ;
For,  thanks  to  Him  is  not  a  work  of  the  tongue  only.

Oh  God  !  my  heart  became  blood,  and  eye  wounded,
"When  I  see  thy  reward  is  greater   than  my   speech    (of
thanksgiving).

86  I  speak  not  of  the  rapacious  and  non-rapacious  beast,  and
ant,  and  fish.
But,  of  the  army  of  angels  above  heaven's  summit.

Yet,  they  have  uttered  a  little  Thy  praise ;
They  have  uttered  one  out  of   so  many  thousands  (which
they  should  have  uttered).

Oh  Sa'di !  go ;  wash  thy  hand,  and  the  book ;
Hasten  not  on  the  path,  that  has  no  end.


A  person  knows  not  the  value  of  a  day  of  pleasure,
Save  on  that  day  when  he  falls  to  hardship-enduring.

The  winter-season  of  the  darvesh,  in  the  narrow  year, —
How  easy  is  it  to  the  lord  of  wealth  ?

90  One  healthy, — who,  once  complaining,  slept  not, —
Uttered  not  thanks  to  God  for  sound  health.

When  thou  art  a  manly  mover,  and  swift  of  foot.
Stand,  with  thanks  (to  God)  by  those  slow  of  foot.


81       By  strangers  are  meant  angels.     Thou,  an  intimate  friend  of  God's,
art  not  left  to  the  angels.


352  THE    BUSTAN   OF   SA'dI.  [oHAP.  VIII.

The  young  man  bestows  to  the  ancient  old  man,
The  powerful  one  displays  pity  for  the  powerless.

"What  do  the  people  of  the  Jihiin  know  of  the  value  of

water  ?
Ask  those  wearied  utterly  in  the  sun.

To  the  Arab,  who  is  sitting  by  the  Tigris
What  care  is  there  as  to  the  thirsty  ones  of  the  (desert  of)
Zariid  ?

95  That  one  recognised  the  value  of  healthiness,
Who,  once,  helpless  sweltered  in  fever.

How  may  the  dark  night  appear  long  to  thee,
Who  roUst,  from  side  to  side,  in  comfort  ?

Think  of  one  falling  and  rising  in  fever ;

For,  the  sick  one  knows  the  lengthiness  of  the  night.

At  the  sound  of  the  drum,  the  rich  man  becomes  awake ;
What  knows  he,  how  the  watchman  passed  the  night?


I  have  heard  that  Tughril,  one  night,  in  the  autumn.
Passed  a  Hindu  watchman,

100  From  the  pouring  of  snow,  and  rain,  and  torrent,
Fallen  to  trembling,  like  the  star  Canopus.

His  heart,  from  pity  for  him,  suffered  agitation ;
He  said  : — "  Behold  !  put  on  my  fur  garment.

"  Wait  a  moment,  by  the  terrace-side ;

"  For,  I  will  send  it  out  by  the  hand  of  a  slave."

He  was  in  this  (speech)  ;  and,  the  morning-breeze  blew.
The  monarch  entered  the  royal  hall.

He  had,  in  his  retinue,  a  slave  of  Pari-form,
For  whom,  his  disposition  had  a  little  inclination.


CHAP.  VIII.]  ON   THANKS.  353

K»  The  sight  of  the  beloved  chanced  so  agreeably  to  him,
That  the  wretched  Hindu  passed  from  his  memory.

The  (word)  fur-coat  passed  to  his  (the  watchman's)  ear,
It  came  not,  through  misfortune,  to  his  shoulders.

Perhaps  the  torment  of  toil  was  not  enough  for  him,
Since,  the  sky's  revolution  added  to  it  expectation.

When  the  sultan  slept  in  carelessness,  behold,
What  the  watchman  said  to  him,  in  the  morning !

"  Perhaps  (the  watchman)   "  Nek-Bakht "  was  forgotten

by  thee,
"  When  thy  hand  went  to  the  bosom  of  (the  slave-girl)

"Aghosh."

10  *'  For  thee,  the  night  passes  in  ease  and  joy ;

"  As  to  us,  what  knowst  thou  how  the  night  passes? "

One  of  a  karavan,  head-lowered  to  the  caldron, —
To  him,  what  care  of  those  sunk  in  sand  ?

Oh  Lord  of  the  Zaurak !  keep  on  the  water  ;

For  the  water  has  passed  over  the  head  of  those  helpless.

Oh  vigorous  young  men !  stay ;

For,  in  the  karavan,  are  sluggish  old  men.

Thou  hast  slept  well  in  the  haudaj  of  the  karavan, —
The  camel-rein,  in  the  camel-driver's  hand.

18  Whether  plain  or  mountain ;  whether  stone  or  sand, — to
thee  what  matter  ?
Ask  the  state  (of  the  road)  from  those  lagging  behind.

The  camel  of  burden,  mountain-form,  carries  thee  ;

What  knowst  thou  of  the  foot-man,  who  devours  the  blood

(of  grief)  ?

23


354  THE   BUSTAN   OF   SA*DI.  [OHAP.  VIII.

Those  sleeping,  in  comfort  of  heart,  in  the  house,
What  know  they  of  the  state  of  the  hungry  belly.


The  night-guard  had  bound  a  certain  one's  hand ;
He  was,  all  night,  afflicted,  and  heart-broken.

In  the  night  of  dark  colour,  there  came  to  his  ear, —
A    person    kept    complaining    of    his    straitened     hand
(poverty).

120  The    thief    had,    neck-fastened,   heard    this   speech,   and
said  : —
"  How  long  lamentst  thou  of  helplessness  ?     Sleep.

"  Oh  one  of  straitened  hand  (poor)  !  go ;  give  thanks  to

God,
That  the  night-guard  bound  not  straitly  thy  hand."

Make  not  much  lamentation,  as  to  foodlessness.
When  thou  seest  one  more  foodless  than  thyself.


One  of  naked  body  made  loan  of  one  diram ;
He  made  for  his  body  a  garment  of  raw  hide.

He  complained,  saying  : — "  Oh  perverse  fortune !
"  I  am  cooked  with  heat,  within  this  raw  hide."

125  When  the  uncooked  (foolish)  one,  with  fierceness,  began  t(
boil, —
One  from  the  prison-pit  said  to  him  : — "  Silence !

"  Oh  raw  one  !  offer  thanks  to  Grod,
"  That  thou  art  not  like  me — ^raw-hide  (bound)  on  hanc
and  foot."


CHAP.  VIII.]  .  ON   THANKS.  355

A  certain  one  passed  by  a  holy  man,

He  came  to  his  sight,  in  the  form  of  a  Jew.

He  struck  him  a  blow,  on  his  neck ;
The  darvesh  gave  him  his  shirt.

He  became  ashamed  saying : — "  What  passed  from  me  was

a  fault.
"  Pardon  me;    what   room   (need)  is  there  for  giving  (a

shirt)?"

3  He  said : — On  this  (shirt-giving),  I  am  firm,  in  thanks  (to
God),
"  That  that  one  whom  thou  didst  think  me,  I  am  not.'*


One  left  behind  on  the  road  was  weeping.

Saying : — "  Than  I  in  this  desert,  who  is  more  wretched  ?  "

An  ass,  load-carrier,  said  to  him  : — "  Oh  one  without  dis-
cretion I

"  How  long  bewailst  thou  also  of  the  tyranny  of  the
heavens  ?

"  Go ;  thank  God  although  thou  art  not  on  an  ass,
"  That  thou  art,  in  short,  a  son  of  Adam,  not  an  ass."

A  lawyer  passed  by  one  fallen  drunk  ;
He  became  proud  of  his  own  abstinence.

5  Through  haughtiness,  he  looked  not  at  him.
The  young  man  raised  his  head,  saying  : — "  Oh  old  man  1

"  Go  ;  thank  God,  when  thou  art  in  prosperity,
"  For  disappointment  comes  from  pride.

"  Laugh  not  at  one,  whom  thou  seest  in  bonds ;
"  Lest  that,  suddenly,  thou  shouldst  fall  into  confinement.

23.*


356  THE   BUSTAN   OP   SA'dI.  [oHAP.  VIH.

"  In  short,  is  it  not,  in  the  possibility  of  fate,

"  That  thou  mayst  be  to-morrow  fallen  drunk  like  me  ?  "

Heaven  wrote  for  thee  the  inscription  on  the  Masjid  (ol

Islam),
Express  not  reproach  on  others  in  the  fire-temple.

140  Oh  Musalman  !  join  the  hands,  in  thanks,

That  He  bound  not  the  idolater's  cord  about  thy  waist.

Whosoever  is  a  seeker  of  Him,  goes  not  by  himself ;

The  favour  of  the  friend  (God)  drawing  takes  him  by  force.

Behold,  whence  destiny  travelled !

For  it  is  blindness  to  place  reliance  on  another  (God).

God  has  created  the  power  of  convalescence  in  honey.
Not  to  such  an  extent  that  it  exercises  power  over  death.

Honey  makes  pleasant  (benefits)  the  constitution  of  those

alive ;
But,  the  pain  of  dying  has  no  remedy.

145  For  the  one,  in  whom  a  spark  of  life  remained, — when  life
from  his  body
Issues,  what  use  (is)  honey  in  the  mouth  ?

A  certain  one  suffered  (a  blow  of)  a  steel  mace  on  his  head
One  said  : — "  Rub  sandal  wood  on  his  wound.'*

Fly,  so  long  as  thou  canst,  from  danger ;
But  strive  not  sharply  with  destiny.

So  long  as  the  interior  is  capable  of  drinking  and  eating,
The  body  is  fresh  of  face,  and  pure  of  form.

This  house  (of  the  body)  becomes  altogether  bad,  at  that

time.
When  the  constitution  and  food  agree  not.


CHAP,  Vin.]  ON^^THANKS.  357

1'  Thy  temperament  is  moist  and  dry;  and  hot,  and  cold;
I    Man's  constitution  is  compounded  of  these.

When  one  of  these  obtains  the  mastery  over  the  others,
It  breaks  the  balance  of  the  equilibrium  pf  thy  temper-
ament.

If  the  wind  of  a  cold  sigh  passes,

The  stomach's  heat  brings  the  soul  into  agitation.

And  if  the  caldron  of  the  stomach  agitates  the  food,
The  work  of  the  delicate  body  becomes  inimature.

The  one  possessed  of  knowledge  binds  not  his  heart  to

these  (four  elements),
Which  will  not  always  agree  with  each  other.

5  Consider  not  powerfulness  of  body,  from  food ;
But,  Ood's  grace  gives  thee  sustenance.

By  God !  if,  on  sword  and  knife,— the  eye,

Thou  placest,  thou  wilt  not  perform  thanks  to  Him.

When  thou  placest  thy  face  on  the  ground,  in  service,
Utter  praise  to  God ;  and  regard  not  thyself.

Praising  God,  and  repeating  the  name  of  God,  and  having

the  heart  towards  Him — are  acts  of  beggary ;
For  the  beggar,  it  is  improper  that  he  should  be  proud.

I  admit,  that  thou  thyself  hast  done  a  service  to  God ;
Hast  thou  not  constantly  enjoyed  His  portion  on  feudal
tenure  ?

50  Fu*st,  He  placed  in  thy  heart  desire  of  worship,

Then  His  slave  placed  his  head  (in  devotion)  at  His  thres-
hold.

If  the  grace  of  a  good  act  arrives  not  from  God,

How  may  a  good  act  arrive  to  a  stranger  from  a  slave  ?


358  THE   BUSTAN   OP    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  VI

"Why  observest  thou  the  tongue  which  gave  confession  ?
Behold  Him,  who  gave  speech  to  the  tongue.

The  door  of  the  knowledge  of  Grod  is  man's  eye,
Which  He  has  opened  on  sky  and  earth.

To  thee,  how  could  there  have  been  understanding  of

ascent  and  descent.
If  He  had  not  opened  this  door  (of  the  eye)  on  thy  face  ?

165  He  brought  the  head  and  hand  from  nonentity  to  existence,
He  placed  in  this,  liberality ;  in  that,  adoration.

And,  if  not,  how  would   Hberality  have   come   from   thy

hand  ?
It  is  impossible  that  adoration  would  have  come  from  thy

head.

He  gave  thee  a  tongue  endowed  with  wisdom ;  and,  created

the  ear, —
"Which  are  the  keys  of  the  heart's  chest.

If  the  tongue  had  not  possessed  (the  power  of)  narration.
When  would  a  person   have  possessed  knowledge  of  the
heart's  secret  ?

And,  if  there  were  not  effort  on  the  part  of  the  news-
gatherer  of  the  ear.

When  would  news  have  reached  the  sultan  of  sense  (the
mind)  ?


170  He  gave  to  me  the  sweet  word  of  the  narrator ;

He  gave  to  thee  the  ear  and  perception  of  the  understander.

These  two  are  perpetually,  like  chamberlains,  at  the  door ;
They  carry  news  from  sultdn  to  sultan.

Why  reflectst    thou   of    thyself,  saying  : — "  My  action  is

good!"
Glance  at  that  door ;  because,  it  is  His  grace.


I


CHAP.  VIII.]  ON   THANKS.  359

The  gardener  carries  to  the  king's  hall,

As  first-fruit,  even  the  rose  from  the  king's  garden.


I  beheld  an  idol  of  ivory  in  the  (idol-temple)  Somnath,
Gemmed  like  the  (idol)  Manat,  in  (the  days  of)  ignorance.

^5  The  painter  had  so  pourtrayed  its  form,

That  one  more  beautiful  than  it  may  not  be  imagined.

From  all  countries,  karavans  going,
For  the  seeing  of  that  soul-less  form.

The  chiefs  of  Chin  and  Chigal  greedily  desired
Fidelity,  like'Sa'di,  from  that  idol  of  stone-heart.

The  eloquent  ones,  set  out  from  every  abode.
Supplication-making  before  that  tongueless  form.

I  was  exhausted  as  to  the  revealing  of  this  matter,
Saying  : — "  "Why  does  the  living  one  worship  a  mineral  ?  '*

80  Of  an  idolater,  who  was  partner  with  me.

One  speaking  well  of  me,  and  of  the  same  cell,  and  friend,

I  inquired,  with  gentleness, — "  Oh  Barhaman  !
"  I  have  wonder  at  the  proceedings  of  this  house.


L74  Somnath  was  an  idol-temple  in  Gujerat ;  it  was  destroyed  by  Mahmud
of  Ghazni  in  a.d.  1024.  For  its  maintenance,  the  revenues  of  two
thousand  villages  had,  by  various  princes,  been  granted.  There
officiated  at  the  ceremonies  (which  at  the  time  of  eclipses  were  attended
by  two  hundred  thousand  votaries)  two  thousand  priests,  five  hundred
dancing  women,  and  three  hundred  musicians.  The  gold  chain,  sup-
porting a  bell,  struck  at  the  time  of  prayer,  weighed  sixteen  thousand
poimds.  The  idol  was  washed  daily  with  water  brought  from  the  Gkuiges,
one  thousand  miles  distant ;  it  was  of  hollow  stone,  five  yards  in  height,
of  which  two  were  concealed  in  the  earth.  Mahmud,  striking  the  idol
with  a  mace,  exposed  the  interior,  which  was  filled  with  jewels  far  ex-
ceeding in  value  the  sum  offered  by  the  priests  for  its  preservation.

181  "Barhaman"  is  a  term  applied  to  the  learned  of  the  idolaters,  and
Hindis,  and  fire- worshippers.


366  THE   BUSTAN   OP   SA*DI.  [OHAP.  Vifli>

"  For,  they  are  distracted  about  this  powerless  form ;
"  They  are  imprisoned  in  the  pit  of  error.

"  In  it,  neither  power  of  hand,  nor  motion  of  foot ;
"  And,  if  thou  cast  it  down,  it  rises  not  from  its  place.

"  Seest  thou  not,  that  its  eyes  are  of  amber !
*'  To  seek  fidelity  from  stone-eyes  (lovely  ones)  is  a  mis-
take."

185  At  this  speech,  that  friend  became  angry ;

He  became,  with  anger,  fire-like,  and  caught  me.

He  informed  the  idolaters  and  the  old  men  of  the  temple ;
I  saw  not,  in  that  assembly,  a  face  of  goodness.

The  idolaters,  Zand-reading,  fell

Dog-like  upon  me,  for  the  sake  of  that  bone  (the  idol).

When  that  crooked  way  was,  in  their  opinion,  straight,
The  straight  road  appeared,  in  their  eyes,  crooked.

For,  although  a  man  be  wise  and  pious.

He  is,  in  the  opinion  of  the  ignorant,  foolish.

190  Like  a  drowning  person,  I  was  destitute  of  remedy ;
Beyond  courtesy,  I  saw  no  path  (of  escape).

When  thou  seest  the  ignorant  ones  bent  on  malice.
Safety  is  in  surrender ;  and,  in  being  gentle.

I  loudly  praised  the  chief  of  the  Barhamans,

Saying : — "  Oh  explaining  old  man,  and  Zand- teacher  !

"  To  me,  also,  the  painting  of  this  idol  is  agreeable ;
"  For,  it  is  a  beautiful  form,  and  a  heart-alluring  shape.


187  Ten  little  books  (?ahf )  were  revealed  to  Ibrahim ;  the  name  of  the
tenth  is  Pdzand,  which  comprehends  counsel,  philosophy,  and  the  mystery
(of  God).


i
I


OHAP.  VIII.]  ON   THANKS.  361

"  In  my  sight,  its  form  appears  rare ;

"  But,  I  have  no  information  as  to  its  meaning.

195  "  Because,  lately,  I  am  the  traveller  of  this  place ;
"  The  foreigner  seldom  recognises  bad  from  good.

"  Thou  knowst ;  because  thou  art  the  learned  man  (queen)

of  this  chess-board ;
"  Thou  art  the  adviser  of  the  king  of  this  abode.

'*  What  is  the  meaning  in  the  form  of  this  idol ;

"  For,  I  am  the  first  (chief)  among  its  worshippers?

"  "Worship,  in  imitation,  is  seduction ;

"  He  who  is  acquainted  is  pleasing  to  the  wayfarer."

The  Barhaman's  face  kindled  with  joy ;
He   approved  and  said : — "  Oh  one  of  approved  counte-
nance !

200  '*  Thy  question  is  right,  and  thy  deed  excellent ;

"  Whoever   desires    proof   arrives    at  the   stage   (of   his
desire).

"  Much,  like  thee,  I  wandered  in  travel ;

"  I  beheld  idols,  void  of  knowledge  of  themselves.

'*  Except  this  idol,  which,  in  the  morning  from  this  place

where  it  is,
"  Raises  its  hand  to  Grod,  the  Ruler  !

"  And  if  thou  wishst,  stay  even  here  to-night ;
"  So  that,  to-morrow,  this  idol's  mystery  may  be  revealed
to  thee."

By  the  old  man's  order,  T  remained  there  the  night,
Like  Bezhan,  a  captive,  in  the  pit  of  calamity.


204  Bezhan,  the  son  of  Eustam's  sister,  was  known  as  "  dukbtar-zMa."
He  became  enamoured  of  Munizha,  daughter  of  Afrasiydb,  King  of
Persia.  Afrdsiy^b  finding  him  one  day  in  Munizha's  house,  seized  and
confined  him  in  a  pit,  whence  he  was  delivered  by  Rustam.


362  THE   BUSTAN   OP   SA*DI.  [CHAP.  VIII.

205  That  night,  long  like  the  Judgment  Day ;
The  idolaters,  unwashed,  in  prayer  around  me.

The  priests,  ever  water  untroubled,
Their  arm-pits, — ^like  a  corpse  in  the  sun.

Perhaps,  I  had  committed  a  great  sin  ;

For,  I  endured  much  torment,  during  that  night.

All  night  afflicted  in  this  bondage  of  grief ;
One  hand  on  my  breast ;  the  other,  in  prayer.

When,  suddenly  the  drum-striker  beat  the  drum ;
The  Barhaman,  cock-like,  suddenly  called  out.

210  Night, — preacher,  black-clad — without  opposition.
Drew  forth  the  sword,  of  day  from  the  scabbard.

The  fire  of  the  morning  fell  upon  tinder ;
A  world  became,  in  a  moment,  illumined.

Thou  wouldst  have  said  that,  in  the  country  of  Zangbdr,
A  Tatar  had  suddenly  issued  from  a  corner.

The  idolaters,  of  ruined  judgment,  of  unwashed  face.
Appeared  from  door,  and  plain  and  street.

Of  man  or  woman,  none  remained  in  the  city ;

For  a  needle,  there  remained  no  room  in  that  idol-temple.

215  I — ^through  anguish,  afflicted ;  and  through  sleep,  intoxi-
cated ;
When,  suddenly,  the  image  raised  its  hand  I


211  "So^ta"    signifies  —  harraka;    lutta     va    amata,e    parcha,e    m'm-
sokhta.

212  The  people  in  Zangbar  are  black ;  in  Turkistan,  fair.


OEAP.  VIII.]  ON   THANKS.  363^

A  shout  immediately  issued  from  them ;
Thou  wouldst  have  said,  that  a  sea  had  come  into  agita-
tion.

When  the  idol-temple  became  void  of  the  assembly,
The  Barhaman,  laughing,  glanced  at  me.

Saying  : — "  I  know,  a  difficulty  remains  not  to  thee  ;
"  Truth  became  evident;  and  falsehood  remained  not."

When  I  saw  that  ignorance  was  strong  within  him  ;
(And  that)  an  absurd  fancy  was  concealed  within  him.

220  I  again  prepared  not  any  speech  of  truth ;

For,  it  is  proper  to  conceal  the  truth  from  the  false.

When  thou  seest  the  superior  powerful  of  arm.
It  is  unmanliness  to  break  one*s  fist.

In  hypocrisy,  I  wept  for  a  while,

Saying  : — "  I  am  become  penitent,  as  to  what  I  said.'*

By  weeping,  the  hearts  of    the  infidels  inclined  towards

me ;
By  a  torrent,  if  a  stone  rolls, — it  is  not  wonderful.

Those  service-performing  ran  towards  me ;
They  seized,  with  respect,  my  arm.

225  Excuse-uttering,  I  went  to  the  person  of  ivory  (the  idol),
On  a  chaii'  of  beaten  gold,  on  a  throne  of  ebony,

I  gave  a  kiss  on  the  hand  of  that  worthless  idol,
Saying: — "Maya  curse  be  on  it;  and,  on  the  idol- wor-
shipper I "

Hypocritically,  I  became  an  infidel  for  a  few  days ;
I  became,  in  the  sayings  of  Zand,  a  Barhaman.

When  I  saw  that  I  was  safe  in  the  temple.
Through  joy,  I  contained  not  myself  in  the  earth.


9^  THE   BUBTAN  OP  8A*DI.  [OHAP.  Yia,

One  night,  I  firmly  fastened  the  temple-door ;
Ran,  left  and  right,  scorpion-like :

230  Looked  beneath  and  above  the  throne ;
Saw  a  screen,  gold-bordered  :

Behind  the  screen,  an  arch-priest,  a  fire-worshipper,
Sitting,  the  end  of  a  cord  in  his  hand.

Immediately,  the  state  as  to  that  (idol)  became  known  to

me.
Like  David,  when  the  iron  became  (soft  as)  wax  to  him.

That  when  he  pulls  the  cord,  of  necessity.
The  idol  raises  its  hand,  redress-seeking.

The  Barhaman  from  before  my  face  went  ashamed ;
For,  the  quilting,  on  the  face  of  the  work  was  a  disgrace.

235  He  ran,  and  I  hastened  after  him ;
I  threw  him  headlong  into  a  well.

For  I  knew  if  that  Barhaman,  alive.
Remained,  he  would  strive  for  my  blood :

"Would  desire,  that  he  might  bring  forth  my  destruction.
Lest  I  should  make  display  of  his  secret.

When  thou  obtainst  information  of  the  work  of  a  perni-
cious one.
Bring  him  forth  from  his  power,  when  thou  findst  him.

For,  if  thou  leavest  him  alive,  that  unskilful  one
Will  not  wish  thee  further  life.

240  And  if  he  places  his  head  in  service  at  thy  door.
If  he  prevail,  he  wiU  out  off  thy  head.


232       Iron,  in  David's  hand,  became  wax;    of   which  he  made  a  coat  of

mail.
234       "Bakbiya  bar  rue  kar  nftadan"  signifies — L£sha,e  raz  kardan.


CHAP.  VIII.]  ON   THANKS.  365

Plant  not  thy  foot  on  the  deceiver's  foot ;

"When  thou  goest  and  seest  him,  give  him  not  respite.

I  slew  him,  that  impure  one,  outright  with  a  stone ;
For,  from  a  corpse,  the  tale  issues  not.

"When  I  saw  that  I  excited  tumult,
I  escaped  from  that  land  and  fled.

When  thou  setst  fire  to  the  cane-brake.
If  thou  art  wise,  shun  the  tigers.

245  Slay  not  the  young  of  the  snake,  man-biting ;
If  thou  slayst,  stand  no  longer  in  that  dwelling.

When  thou  disturbst  the  house  of  the  wasp.
Fly  quickly,  from  that  quarter, — lest  thou  fall.

Cast  not  thy  arrow  at  one  more  expert  than  thyself;
"When  it  falls,  seize  thy  skirt  with  the  teeth  (and  fly).

In  the  leaves  of  Sa'di,  there  is  only  this  advice  : —
"  "When  thou  minest  the  foundation  of  a  wall, — stand  not
there."

After  that  resurrection  day,  I  came  to  Hind ;
And,  thence,  by  way  of  Yaman,  to  Hijaz.

250  From  that  amount  of  bitterness,  which  passed  over  me.
To-day  only,  my  mouth  became  sweet.

In  the  fortune,  and  strengthening  of  Abii  Bakr  (son)  of

Sa'd;
Like  whom,  neither  before  nor  after,  a  mother  produces.

I  came,  justice-seeking,  from  heaven's  violence ;

I  came  to  this  shelter  of  the  shelter-spreader  (Abii  Bakr).

I  am,  slave-like,  a  prayer-utterer  for  this  kingdom  ;
Oh  God !  keep  perpetually,  this  shadow,


366


THE   BUSTAN   OF   SA'dI.


[chap.  VIII.


Which  placed  not  on  me  a.  plaster,  worthy  of  the  wound ;
But,  worthy  of  his  own  favours  and  honours.

255  How  may  I  perform  thanks  for  this  favour,
Though  my  head  become  foot  in  his  service?

After  those  bonds  (of  trouble)  I  obtained  joy;
Yet,  of  those  counsels^  at  my  ear,  is

One  that,  at  that  time,  when  the  hand  of  supplication,
I  raise  to  the  Court  of  the  Knower  of  Secrets  (God),

That  Chinese  puppet  comes  to  my  hand,
It  puts  dust  in  the  eye  of  my  self-conceit.

I  know  that  the  hand,  I  raised,

I  exalted  not  through  my  own  power.

260  The  pious  draw  not  up  (of  themselves)  their  hands ;

For,  they  draw  the  end  of  the  cord  through  the  One  unseen
(God).

The  door  of  goodness  and  devotion  is  open  ;  but,
Every  one  is  not  powerful  as  to  good  deeds.

This,  indeed,  is  the  hinderer  that — into  the  Court,
Save  by  the  Bang's  order,  it  is  improper  to  go.

The  key  of  destiny  is  in  no  one's  hand ;

God  is  absolutely  powerful,  and  that  is  enough.

Then,  oh  man  running  on  the  straight  path !
Thanks  are  not  for  thee ;  they  are  for  God.

265  When  He,  in  the  hidden,  created  thy  disposition  good.
Bad  conduct  issues  not  from  thy  disposition.

This  sweetness  from  the  bee,  made  appear.

That  very  Person,  who  created  poison  in  the  snake.


OHAP.  VIII.]  ON  THANKS.  367

When  He  wishes  to  lay  waste  a  country,
He  first  makes  a  people  afflicted  by  thee.

And  if  His  bounty  be  over  thee,

He  causes  ease  to  reach  the  people  from  thee.

Display  not  pride  on  the  path  of  truth;

For,  they  (angels)  seized  thy  hand,  and  thou  didst  rise.

270  Speech  is  profitable,  if  thou  wilt  listen;

Thou  mayst  attain  to  the  (stage  of  the)  men  of  God,  if
thou  travel  the  path  of  religion,

If  they  guide  thee,  thou  wilt  obtain  an  abode,
"Where,  they  place  thy  table-cloth  (victual-spread),  on  the
tray  of  respect.

But,  it  is  improper  that  thou  shouldst  eat  alone ;

Thou  shouldst  remember  the  distressed  darvesh  (Sa'di).

Thou  didst,  perhaps,  send  mercy  upon  me  ;
For,  I  am  not  confiding  to  my  own  work.


368  THE  BUSTAN   OF   SA*DI.  [CHAP.  IX,


CHAPTER  IX.

On  Repentance.

1  Oh,  thou  whose  age  has  passed  to  seventy  years  !  Come ;
Thou  wast,  perhaps,  asleep  that  thy  life  went  to  the  wind.

Thou  didst  prepare   every    requisite    of    being    (in  this

world) ;
Didst  not  engage  thyself  in  the  thought  of  going  (to  the

next  world).

On  the  Resurrection  Day,  when  they  lay  out  the  market  of

heaven,
They  give  dignities  for  good  deeds.

Stock  in   trade,   as  much  as  thou  bringst,   thou    takest

away ;
And,  if  thou  art  poor,  thou  takest  away  shame.

5  For,  the  more  full  the  market,  just  so  much,
The  more  distressed  (is)  the  heart  of  the  one  of  empty  hand.

If  out  of  fifty  dirams,  five  become  wanting.
Thy  heart,  with  the  grasp  of  grief,  becomes  torn.


CHAP.  IX.]  ON    REPENTANCE.  369

When  fifty  years  have  gone  forth  from  thy  hand,
Consider  it  gain  that  there  is  a  space  of  five  days.

If  the  wretched  corpse  had  possessed  a  tongue.
He  would  have  raised  a  shout,  in  lament  and  cry,

Saying : — "  Oh  living  one !    when  there  is  the  power  of

speech,
"  Let  not  the  lip  sleep  (cease),  corpse-like,  from  uttering

the  name  of  God.

'  K'  "  Since  our  time,  in  carelessness  passed,

"  Do  thou,  at  least,  reckon  a  few  moments, — opportunity."


One  night,  in   youth   and   the   pleasure    of    affluence    (of

youth).
We,  young  men,  sate  sometime  together.

Nightingale-like,  singing ;  rose-like,  fresh  of  face ;
From  hilarity,  clamour  cast  into  the  street.

An  old  man,  world-experienced,  apart  from  us,
The  blackness  of  his  hair  white,  through  the  violence  of
Time,

Was  tongue-bound,  as  to  speech,  nut-like ;

Was  unlike  us,  lip  from  laughter,  pistachio-nut-Hke.

16  A  youth  went  before  him,  saying  : — "  Oh  old  man  !
"  Why  sittest  thou,  with  sorrow,  in  the  corner  of  regret  ?

"  Raise  once  thy  head  from  the  collar  of  grief ;

"  Move  jauntily,  with  ease  of  heart,  with  the  young  men."


10      "  Shumar  "  is  the  root  of  "  shumdrfdan"  ;  and  "  shumar  "  of  "  shu-
murdan."     Both  verbs  have  the  same  meaning.

24


370  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [oHAP.  IX.

He  year-stricken  raised  his  head  from  concealment,
Behold  his  answer !  how  like  an  old  man,  he  spoke  : —

"  When  the  morning  breeze  blows  over  the  garden,
"  It  befits  the  young  tree  to  move  to  and  fro.

"  The  green  corn,  so  long  as  it  is  young  and  the  head

green, — waves ;  -
"  When  it  reaches  mellowness,  it  becomes  broken.

20  "  In  the  spring-time,  when  the  wind  brings  (the  fragrance
of)  the  musk- willow,
"The  ancient  tree  sheds  its  dry  leaves.

"  It  does  not  beseem  me  to  move  jauntily  with  young  men,
"  When  the  morning   of  old  age  has  blossomed  on   my
cheek.

"  The   male  falcon  (of  my  soul),    which    was   within   my

bonds,
"  Wishes,  from  time  to  time,  to  snatch   the  end  of  the

thread  (of  life).

"  Yours  is  the  time  to  sit  at  this  tray  (of  enjoyment) ;
"  For,  we  have  washed  our  hands  of  luxurious  enjoyment.

"  When  the  dust  of  venerability  sits  on  the  head,
"  Look  not  again  for  the  pleasure  of  youth.

25  "  Snow  rained  on  my  raven  feathers  (hair),

"  The  spectacle  of  the  garden,  nightingale-like,  is  not  suit-
able to  me.

"  The  peacock,  possessed  of  beauty,  makes  display ;
"  What  desirest  thou  of  the  hawk,  feather-stripped?

"  For  me,  the  reaping  of  the  corn  is  near ;

*'  For  you,  now  the  fresh  verdure  (of  the  beard)  grows.


OHAP.  IX.]  ON    REPENTANCE.  371

"  The  freshness  of  our  rose-garden  has  passed ;
"  Who    binds    the    rose-bouquet,    when    it   has   become
withered  ?

"  Oh  soul  of  father !  my  reliance  is  on  a  staff ;
"  Further  reliance  on  life  is  a  mistake.

so  "  For  the  young  man,  it  is  reserved  to  leap  on  his  feet ;
"  For  old  men  prefer  a  request  for  aid  to  the  hands  (of
others).

"  Behold  the  red  rose  of  my  face, — pure  yellow ;
"  When  the  sun  becomes  yellow,  it  descends.

"  To  entertain  lust,  on  the  part  of  an  immature  youth,
"  Is  not  so  odious,  as  on  the  part  of  an  old  man.

"  It  is  proper  for  me  to  weep,  like  children,

"  For  shame  of  my  sins ;  not  to  live,  child-like  (in  sport).*'

Lukman  spoke  well  saying : — "  Not  to  live
"  Is  better,  than  to  live  years  in  sin."

•5  Even,  to  shut  the  shop-door  in  the  morning

Is  better  than  to  give  from  the  hand   (to  squander)  the
profit  and  capital  of  life.

While  the  young  man  causes  the  blackness   (of  hair)  to

attain  to  light  (whiteness),
The  wretched  old  man  takes  his  whiteness  to  the  grave.


One  of  ancient  years  came  to  a  physician,
From  his  weeping,  near  to  dying,

Saying  : — "  Oh  one  of  good  judgment !  place  thy  hand  on

my  vein ;
"  For  my  foot  rises  not  from  its  place.

24  •


i

372  THE    BU8TAN    OF    SA'dI.  '  [cHAP.  IX.

"  This  my  bent  stature  resembles  that,
"  That  thou  mayst  say, — I  have  descended  into  the  clay  (of  j
the  grave)."

^  He  said  to  him  : — "  Part  asunder  from  the  world,

*'  That  thy  foot  may,  in  the  Resurrection,  issue  from  thej
clay."

Seek  not  the  joy  of  youth  from  old  men ;

For  the  running  stream  returns  not  to  the  rivulet.

If,  in  the  time  of  youth,  thou  didst  exercise  hand  and  foot

(in  lust)  ;
In  the  season  of  old  age,  be  sensible  and  reasonable.


When  the  revolution  of  age  exceeds  forty  (years),
Exercise  not  hand  and  foot  in  lust ;  for  the  water  (of  life)
has  passed  over  thy  head.

Joy  began  to  be  afraid  of  me,  at  that  time.
When  my  evening  (black  hair)  began  to  blossom  as  the
down  (white  hair).

45  It  is  necessary  to  put  lust  out  of  the  head,

When  the  season  of  lustfulness  comes  to  an  end.

How  may  my  heart  with  freshness  become  green,
When  verdure  will  spring  from  my  clay?

Sporting  in  lust  and  concupiscence,
We  passed  over  the  dust  of  many.

Those  who  are  yet  invisible  (unborn)
Will  come,  and  pass  over  our  dust.

Alas  !  that  the  season  of  youth  has  departed ;
Life,  in  sport  and  pastime,  has  departed.

50  Alas  !  time,  soul-cherishing,  in  such  a  way.
Passed  over  us  as  the  lightning  of  Yaman.


I


CHAP.  IX.]  ON    REPENTANCE.  373

From  the  passion  for  this  I  wear,  and  that  I  eat,

I  became  not  free,  that  I  might  suffer  care  for  religion.

Alas  !  we  became  engaged  in  falsehood ;

"We  remained  far  from  God,  and  became  careless.

How  well  spoke  the  teacher  to  the  boy,

Saying  : — "  We  did  not  a  single  work ;  but,  time  passed.'*


Oh  young  man ;  to-day  (in  youth),  take  the  path  of  salva-
tion ;
For,  to-morrow,  youth  comes  not  from  old  age.

86  Thou  hast  leisure  of  mind,  and  strength  of  body ;
When  the  plain  is  spacious,  strike  the  ball  (of  life).

I  understood  not  the  value  of  that  day  (of  youth)  j
Now  I  know  it,  when  I  have  played  it  away.

Fate  snatched  for  me  such  a  time,
Every  day  of  which  was  a  night  of  power.

What  effort    may  the  old  ass  (of  the  body)  beneath  the

load  (of  devotion)  make  ?
Do  thou  go ;  who  art  a  rider  on  a  wind-footed  steed.

If  they  cleverly  piece  together  the  broken  goblet.
It  will  not  fetch  the  price  of  the  perfect  one.


67  "  Shab-i-kadr  "  signifies— lailatu-1-kadr.  There  is  much  explanation
of  this,  in  the  glorious  Kuran,  that  angels  descend  on  that  night  of
all  nights  most  honoured.  It  is  the  27th  night  of  the  Ramazan,  on
which  night  the  Kuriin  descended  from  heaven.

69  The  old  man  (who  is  like  the  broken  cup),  though  he  mightily  strives,
the  work  of  youth  comes  not  truly  from  him.

Devotion  in  old  age  cannot  attain  to  austerity  in  youth  ;  but  such
devotion  is  at  least  better  than  that  thou  shouldst  go  empty-handed,  and
have  no  bank-draft  in  thy  hand.


374  THE  BUSTAN  OF  SA'dI.  [cHAP.  IX.

60  Since  tlie  cup  fell,  in  negligence,  from  thy  hand, — now,
There  is  no  way  save  to  fasten  anew.

Who  said  to  thee  : — "  Throw  thy  body  into  the  Jihtin  ?
"  "When  thou  hast  fallen.  Strike  (in  swimming)  hand  and
foot."

Thou  didst,  in  carelessness,  give  pure  water  (honour)  from

thy  hand,
"What  remedy  now,  except  purifying  with  dust  ?

When,  from  those  expert  in  running, — the  wager.
Thou  didst  not  carry  off,  go  (on  the  path  of  religion)  even
falling  and  rising  (as  a  cripple).

If  those  wind-footed  steeds  (pious  men)  went  quickly.
Do  thou,  footless  and  handless,  arise  from  sitting.


65  One  night,  in  the  desert  of  Faid,  sleep

Bound  down  my  foot  of  running  with  fetters.

A  camel-driver  came,  with  fear-inspiring  and  rancour.
He  struck  the  camel-rein  on  my  head,  saying  : — "  Arise  !

"  Perhaps,  thou  hast  fixed  thy  heart  on  dying  in  rear  (of  the
kafila),

"  Since  thou  risest  not,  at  the  sound  of  the  bell  (of  de-
parture) ?

'*  To  me  as  to  thee,  sweet  sleep  is  in  the  head ;
"  But,  the  desert  is  in  front.

"  When,  from  sweet  sleep,  at  the  sound  of — Al  rahil !  Al

rahil!  thou
"  Risest  not,  when  wilt  thou  again  reach  the  track  (of  the

kafila)  ?  "


paAP.  IX.]  ON   EEPENTANCB.  375

70  The  camel-driver  (death)    beat   the    camel-drum    (of    de-
parture),
The  first  of  the  karavan  reached  the  stage.

Happy,  those  sensible  of  auspicious  fortune.
Who,  before  the  drummer,  bound  up  their  chattels.

When  those  sleeping  on  the  road  raise  their  heads.

They  see  not  a  trace  of  those  who  have  travelled  the  road.

That  wayfarer  excelled,  who  arose  quickly  ;
To  be  awake,  after  translation  (to  the  next  world),— what
profit  ?

A  certain  one  scatters  barley,  in  the  spring ;
How  may  he  take  wheat,  at  reaping-time  ?

76  Oh  sleeping  one !  how  it  is  necessary  to  be  awake ;
When  death  fetches  thee  from  sleep,— what  advantage:'

When  on  the  face  of  youth,  white  hair  comes  forth,
The  night  (black  hair)  becomes  day  (white  hair),— pluck  up
the  eye  from  sleep  (of  carelessness).

That  day,  I  plucked  up  hope  of  life.

When,  within  my  blackness  (black  hair),  white  occurred.

Alas  !  precious  life  has  passed ;
These  few  moments  will  also  pass.

Whatever  passed  ;  in  non-rectitude,  passed ;

And,  if  thou  takest  not  advantage  of  this,  it  will  also  pass.

80  n  thou  art  solicitous,  now  is  the  seed-time ;

n  thou  hast  hope,  that  thou  mayst  take  the  harvest.

Go  not  empty  of  hand  to  the  city  of  Resurrection ;
For,  there  is  no  reason  to  sit  m  regret.


^^^  THE   BUSTAN    OF   SA'dI.  [oHAP.  IX.

If  to  thee  be  an  eye  to  wisdom,  and  deliberation  as  to  the
grave,—

Act  now,  when  the  ant  (of  the  grave)  has   not  devoured
thine  eye.

Oh  son  !  one  can  make  profit,  with  capital;

What  profit  comes  to  that  one,  who  enjoyed  his  capital  ?

Strive  now,  when  the"  water  possesses  (only)  thy  waist ;
Not,  when  the  torrent  passes  over  thy  head.

85  JSTow,  when  thou  hast  an  eye,— rain  a  tear  ;

The  tongue  is  in  thy  mouth,— bring  forth  excuse  (for  sin).

The  soul  is  not  always  in  the  body ;

The  tongue  turns  not  always  in  the  mouth.

Now,  it  is  necessary  to  utter  excuse  for  sin;
Not   when  the  spirit   of  articulation  sleeps    (rests)    from
speaking.

To-day,   from  the  learned,  hear  the  word  (of  Nakir  and

Munkir)  ;
For,  to-morrow,  Nakir  may  question  thee  with  terror.

Beckon  this  precious  soul, — gain ;
For  the  cage,  birdless,  has  no  value.

r^o  Waste  not  thy  life,  in  regret  and  sorrow ;

For  opportunity  is  precious  ;  and,  time,  a  sword.

Fate  cut  the  vein  of  Life  of  one  living  ;
Another,  through  grief,  rent  his  collar.

A  beholder,  with  sharp  sense,  thus  spoke.
When  complaint  and  lament  reached  his  ear  :  —

"  With  your  hand,  the  corpse,  on  its  own  body,
"Would  have  rent  the  shroud,— if  there  had  been  to  it  a
hand.


I


CHAP.  IX.]  ON   EEPENTANOB.  377

"  Saying  : — '  Writhe  not  so  much,  through  care  and  sorrow

for  me,
"  •  That  I  prepared  (for   the  next  world),  a  day   or  two,

before  thee.

95  "  •  Thou  didst,  perhaps,  forget  regarding  thy  own  death,
"  '  Since  my  death  has  made  thee  powerless  and  wounded?

When  the  teacher  of  truth  lets  fall  clay  on  the  corpse.
His  heart  will  burn,  not  for  it, — but  for  himself.

In  separation  from  that  child,  who  went  into  the  dust  (of

the  grave).
Why  lamentst  thou?  for  he  came  pure,  and  departed  pure.

Thou  camest  pure  (into  this  world) ;  be  firm  as  to  caution

and  purity ;
For,  it  is  a  shame  to  go  unclean  to  the  dust  (of  the  grave).

Now,  it  is  necessary  to  bind  the  foot  of  this  bird  (of  the

soul) ;
Not,  at  the  time  when  it  takes  the  end  of  the  string  from

thy  hand.

100  Thou  didst  sit  much  in  another's  place";
Another  one  will  sit  in  thy  place.

If  thou  art  a  warrior ;  or,  if  a  swordsman.

Thou  wilt  only  carry  the  shroud  (out  of  the  world).

If  the  wild  ass  causes  the  noose  to  snap.

He  becomes  foot-bound,  when  he  sticks  in  the  sand.

Thou  also  hast  such  arm-power.

For,  thy  foot  has  not  gone  into  the  sand  of  the  grave.

Place  not  thy  heart  on  this  year-stricken  house  (of  the

world) ;
For,  a  walnut  rests  not  a  dome.


378  THE   BUSTAN    OP    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  IX.

105  When  yesterday  passed ;  and,  to-morrow  comes  not  to  the
hand,
Make  reckoning  of  this  one  moment  that  is.

A  certain  delicate  one  (a  son)  of  (King)  Jamshid  descended

(to  the  grave),
A  shroud  of  silk,  he  made  him,  like  the  silk- worm.

After  a  few  days,  he  came  to  the  tomb,
That  he  might,  with  lament  and  heart-burning,  weep  over
him.

When  he  beheld  the  silken  shroud,  rotten.
He  thus,  in  thought,  spoke  to  himself  : —

"  I  had  plucked  it   (the  silk),  with  force,  from  the  silk-
worm;
"  The  grave- worms  plucked  it  again  from  him."

110  One  day,  two  couplets  made  my  liver  (as  it  were)  roast  meat ;
When  the   minstrel,  with   the  stringed   instrument,  kept
saying : —

"  Alas  !  without  us,  many  a  time,

"  The  rose  will  grow ;  and,  the  fresh  spring  blossom.

"  Many  a  fourth,  tenth  and  second  month
"  Will  appear, — when  we  are  dust  and  brick."


As  to  one  of  devotee-disposition,  Grod- worshipping, —
A  golden  brick  fell  to  his  hand.

His  wise  head  became  as  stupid

As  his  illumined  heart  became  obscure  through  phrensy.


112       The  sun  is  in — the  Crab  in  the  fourth  month ;  Capricorn,  in  the  tenth
month ;  the  Bull,  in  the  second  month.


OHAP.  IX.]  ON   EEPBNTANOE.  379

116  AH  night,  in  thouglit,  saying : — "  This  treasure  and  pro-
perty,
"  To  it,  so  long  as  I  live,  the  way  of  decline  will  come  not.

"  Again,  for  begging,  my  weak  stature
"  It  is  unnecessary  to  make  bent  and  straight  (in  bowing)
to  any.

"  I  may  make  a  house, — its  foundation,  marble ;
'*  The  timber  of  its  roof, — all  native  aloe.

"  A  special  room  for  friends ;

"  The  chamber-door  in  the  garden-mansion.

"  I  am  wearied  of  stitching  rag  on  rag ;
«  The  efPulgence  of  others  has  burned  (with  envy)  my  eyes
and  brain.

120  «  In  future,  inferiors  may  cook  my  food ;
"  In  ease,  I  may  give  sustenance  to  my  soul.

"  This  woollen  bed  has  slain  me  with  its  hardness ;
"  I  go  after  this,  and  spread  a  gorgeous  bed."

Imagina,tion  made  him  a  dotard  and  crazy-like,—
A  crab's  claw  plunged  in  his  brain.

For  him,— leisure  for  prayers  and  secrets  (with  God)  re-
mained not ;

For  him,— eating  and  sleeping,  and  reciting  the  name  of
God,  and  prayers  remained  not.

Head   intoxicated  with   consequential  airs  he  came   to   a

desert.
For,  he  had  no  place  for  sitting  at  ease.

125  A  certain  one,  at  the  head  of  a  grave,  kneaded  clay,
That  he  might  get  bricks  from  that  clay  of  the  grave.


380  THE    BUSTAN    OP    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  IX.

The  old  man  descended,  for  a  while,  in  thought,
Saying  : — "  Oh  soul  of  little  vision  !  take  advice  (from  the
brick-maker's  action).

"  Why  attachest  thou  thy  heart  to  this  golden  brick,
"  When  one  day  he  will  make  a  brick  out  of  thy  clay  ?

"  Of  avarice,  the  mouth  is  not  open  to  such  a  degree,

"  That  avarice  causes  it  to  sit  (tranquil)  with  one  morsel.

'*  Oh  mean  one !  restrain  thy  hand  from  this  (gold)  brick ;
"  For,  it  is  impossible  to  dam  the  Jihiin  (of  avarice)  with  a
single  brick."

130  Thou  art  careless  as  to  thought  of  profit  and  wealth.
While  the  capital  of  life  becomes  trodden  under  foot.

The  morning  breeze  will  pass  over  this  dust,  in  such  a  way,
As  will  carry  every  atom  of  us  to  some  place,  or  other.

The  dust  of  lust  stitched  up  wisdom's  eye;
The  simum  (hot  wind)  of  desire  consumed  the  sown  field
of  thy  life.

Make  clean  from  the  eye,  the  antimony  of  carelessness ;
For,  to-morrow,  thou  wilt  become  coUyrium,  in  the  eye  of
the  dust.


Between  two  persons,  there  was  enmity  and  strife,
Through  pride,  head  above  the  other,  panther-like.

135  Flying  from  the  sight  of  each  other,  to  such  a  degree,
That  the  sky  used  to  appear  narrow  for  both.

Death  brought  his  army  to  the  head  of  this  one;
Days  of  ease  arrived  at  an  end  for  him.

The  heart  of  his  enemy  became  joyful ;
He  passed,  after  a  while,  by  his  grave.


CHAP.  IX.]  ON    REPENTANCE.  381

He  saw  the  bed-clianiber  of  his  grave,  clay-plastered ;
But,  he  once  saw  (in  life)  his  house  gold-plastered.

He  came,  proudly-walking  opposite  to  his  pillow ;
Kept  saying  to  himself,  Hp  open  with  laughter ; —

140  "Oh  happy  is  the  tranquil  time  of  that  one,  who  is
"  After  an  enemy's  death,  in  the  friend's  embrace.

"  It  is  unnecessary  to  weep  for  the  death  of  that  one,
"  Who  lived  a  single  day,  after  his  enemy's  death."

By  way  of  enmity,  with  a  powerful  arm,

He  plucked  up  a  plank,  from  the  surface  of  his  grave.

He  beheld— his  crowned  head,  in  the  pit ;
His  two  eyes,  world-seeing,  dust-stuffed ;

His  existence,  a  captive  in  the  prison  of  the  grave ;
His  body,  the  food  of  worms,  and  the  plunder  of  ants ;

145  His  bones  tightly  stuffed  with  dust,  just  as

The  collyrium-casket  of  ivory,  full  of  collyrium :

From  the  sky's  revolution,  the  full  moon  of  his  face,— the

new  moon ;
From  Time's  violence,  his  cypress  stature, — a  tooth-pick  :

The  palm  of  the  hand  of  powerful  grasp ;
Time-separated,  joint  from  joint.

From  his  heart,  pity  for  him  came  to  him,  in  such  a  way,
That  he  made  clay,  with  weeping  on  his  dust.

He  became  penitent,  as  to  his  deeds  and  bad  disposition  ;
He  ordered  them  to  write  on  his  tomb-stone  ;—

150  "  Rejoice  not  at  any  one's  death ;

"  For,  after  him,  thy  time  remains  not  long."


382  THE   BUSTAN   OP    SA'dI.  [oHAP.  IX.

A  holy  wise  man  heard  this  speech.

He  bewailed,  saying  : — "  Oh  powerful  Omnipotence  !

"  Wonderful ! — if  thou  awardst  not  mercy  to  him,
"  Over  whom,  the  enemy,  with  lamentation,  wept.

"  May  our  body  also,  one  day,  become  so

"  That  the  heart  of  enemies  may  grieve  over  it.

"  Perhaps,  in  the  heart  of  my  Friend  (God)  pity  may  come,
**  When  He  sees  that  my  enemy  forgave  me.

155  "  The  head,  slowly  or  quickly,  reaches  that  state,

"  In  which — thou  mayst  say — there  never  was  an  eye.'*

One  day,  I  struck  a  mattock  on  a  dust-heap ;
A  sorrowful  lament  came  to  my  ear.

Saying  : — "  If  thou  art  a  man,  take  care  (to  strike)  more

gently ;
"  For  the  eye,  and  lobe  of  the  ear,  and  face,  and  head — are

here."


One  night,   I  had   slept  with  the  intention  of   making  a

journey ;
In  the  morning,  I  followed  a  karavan.

A  frightful  wind  and  dust  arose.

Which  made  the  world  dark  to  the  eyes  of  men.

160  The  guide  had  a  house-daughter

With  the  mi' jar,  she  wiped  the  dust  from  her  father.

The  father  said  to  her  : — "  Oh  dear  face  of  mine  !
"  Who  hast  the  love  of  my  distracted  heart,

"  In  this  eye  (after  death)  dust  sits,  not  to  such  a  degree,
"  That  one  can,  again,  make  it  clean  with  the  mi'jar."


CHAP.  IX.]  ON    EEPENTANCE.  383

Thy  beautiful  spirit,  like  an  impetuous  animal,
Takes  thee  running  to  the  marge  of  the  bottom  of  the
grave.

Death  will  suddenly  cause  thy  stirrup  to  break ;
One  cannot  hold  back  the  rein  from  the  profundity  (of  the
grave).


165  Oh  bone-cage  !  knowst  thou

That  thy  soul  is  a  bird  ;  and  its  name,  spirit  ?

When  the  bird  departs  from  the  cage  (of  the  body),  and

snaps  its  chain ;
It  becomes  not,  by  effort,  again,  thy  prey.

Take  care  of  opportunity ;  for,  the  world  is  for  a  moment ;
In  the  opinion  of  the  wise,  a  moment  (of  life)  is  better  than
a  world.

Sikandar,  who  held  sway  over  a  world.
Abandoned  the  world,  at  that  time  when  he  died.

To  him,  it  was  unattainable  that— a  world  from  him.
They  might  take ;    and  give  him,  in  return,  a  moment's
respite.

170  They  departed,  and  every  one  reaped  what  he  sowed ;
There  only  remains — good  and  bad  name.

Why  place  we  the  heart  on  this  karavdn-place.
From  which,  friends  have  departed ;  and,  we  are  on  the
road  ?

After  us,— the  garden  gives  this  very  rose ;
Friends  sit  with  one  another.


167       Because,  a  moment  of  life  is  attainable  by  none,  even  thougb  the
world  be  given  for  it.


384  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  IX.

Fix  not  the  heart  on  this  mistress  of  the  world ;

For  she  sate  "with  no  one,  whose  heart  she  ravished  not.

When  a  man  sleeps  in  the  dust-place  of  the  grave,

The  Resurrection  Day  will  scatter  the  dust  from  his  face.

i'75  Bring  forth,  now,  the  head  from  the  pocket  of  carelessness
That,  to-morrow  (the  Eesurrection  Day)  it  may  not  remain
lowered  in  regret'.

No ;  when  thou  desirest  to  enter  Shiraz,

Thou  wilt  wash  the  head  and  body  from  the  dust  of  travel.

Oh  one  dusty  with  sin  !  then,  presently,
Thou  wilt  make  a  journey  to  a  foreign  city  (in  the  next
world).

Urge  a  stream  from  the  two  fountains  of  the  eye ;
And,  if  thou  hast  impurity, — wash  it  from  thyself.


I  remember,  in  my  father's  time,

— The  rain  of  mercy,  every  moment  on  him  ! —

180  That  he  purchased,  in  my  childhood,  a  tablet  and  book ;
He  bought,  for  my  sake,  also,  a  gold  ring.

Suddenly,  a  purchaser  took  off

The  ring,  from  my  hand,  for  a  single  date.

When  the  little  boy  understands  not  (the  value  of)  a  ring,
They  can  take  it  away  from  him,  for  a  sweetmeat.

Thou,  also,  didst  not  recognise  life's  value,
When  thou  didst  throw  it  away  for  sweet  ease.

On  the  Resurrection  Day,  when  the  good   attain   to   the

highest  (dignity).
They  rise   fi^om   the   bottom   of   the   grave-ashes   to    the

Pleiades.


I       CHAP.  IX.]  ON    REPENTANCE.  385

85  Thy  head  will,  from  shame,  remain  (lowered)  before  thee.
When  thy  (bad)  deeds  arise  around  thee.

Brother !  have  shame  of  the  work  of  the  bad ;

For,  thou  wilt  become  ashamed  in  the  presence  of  the  good.

On  that  day,  when  they  ask  of  thy  deeds  and  words,
The  body  of  the  lords  of  resolution  (the  prophets)  will
tremble  from  fear.

In  the  place,  where  the  prophets  suffer  fear,
— Come — what  excuse  for  sin,  hast  thou  ?

Those  women,  who,  with  pleasure,  perform  devotions
Surpass  (in  rank)  the  non-devout  men.

190  Does  not  shame  come  to  thee  of  thy  own  manliness.

That  there  should  be  greater  favour  (in  God's  Court)  for
women,  than  for  thee  ?

By  the  established  excuse,  that  exists  for  women,
They  sometimes  withhold  the  hand  from  devotion.

Thou,  excuseless,   sittest   apart,    woman-like  (excuse-pos-
sessing) ;
Oh  less  than  woman !  go ;  boast  not  of  manliness.

I  may  not  indeed  have  eloquence ;

The  poet  'Ansar,  king  of  speech,  thus  spoke  : —

«  When  thou  passest  out  of  straightness,  it  is  crookedness ;
"  What  kind  of  man  is  he,  who  is  less  than  a  woman  ?  "


187       irid-l-'azm  are  the  prophets,  masters  of  the  new  law.    They  are  :—

Nuh,  Ibrsihiin,  Musa,  Tsa,  Muhammad.
191       "'Uzr-i-mu'aiyin"   refers   to— haiz  and   nafAs,   during  which  times

women  are  excused  from  praying.

25


386  THE    BUSTAN   OF    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  IX.

195  Suppose — lust  cherished,  with  kindness  and  joy;

Accept — in  the  passing  of  time,  a  strong-made  enemy.


A  certain  one  cherished  a  wolf's  whelp ;

When  it  became  fully  matured,  it  rent  its  master.

When  he  slept  on  the  brink  of  life — surrendering,
An  eloquent  one  went  to  his  head,  and  said  : —

"  When  thou  tenderly  cherishst  such  an  enemy,
"  Knowst  thou  not  that  thou  wilt,  inevitably,  suffer  its
wound?"

No ;  Iblis  expressed  reproach  as  to  us.
Saying  : — "  Only  evil  comes  from  these."

200  Lament  as  to  the  evils  that  are  in  us ;
For,  I  fear  the  opinion  of  Iblis  is  true.

The  accursed  one — when  our  punishment  became  agreeable

to  him,
Grod  drove  him,  for  our  sake,  from  the  door.

How  may  we  bring  forth  the  head  from  this  reproach  and

shame.
When  we  are  at  peace  with  him ;  and,  at  war,  with  God  ?

Thy  friend  rarely  glances  at  thee,

When  thy  face  is  towards  the  enemy's  face.

If  to  thee  be  necessary,  a  friend,  from  whom  thou  mayst

enjoy  profit,
It  is  improper  that  thou  shouldst  take  the  enemy's  order.

205  He  holds  estrangement  right  from  that  friend.
Who  chooses  the  enemy  for  a  companion.

Knowst  thou  not  that  the  friend  seldom  plants  his  foot

(within  the  house)
When  he  sees  that  an  enemy  is  within.


CHAP.  IX.]  ON   REPENTANCE.  387

Behold,  what  wilt  thou  buy  with  black  silver  (base  deeds),
Who  will  sever  thy  heart  for  love  for  Joseph  (God)  ?

If  thou  art  wise,  turn  not  from  a  friend,
That  the  enemy  may  be  unable  to  glance  at  thee  (to  thy
injury).


A  certain  one  used  contention  with  a  king  :
He   consigned   him   to   his    enemy,    saying  : — "  Spill    his
blood."

210  A  captive,  in  the  power  of  that  one,  revenge-seeking.

He  kept  saying  to  himself,  with  lamentation  and  heart-
burning : —

'*  If  I  had  not  vexed  my  friend  the  king  against  myself,
"  How  should  I  have  suffered  violence  from  the  enemy's
hand?"

With  his  nails,  his  enemy's  skin,  he  tore,

That  friend,  who  vexed  not  a  friend  against  himself.

With  a  friend,  be  thou  of  one  heart,  and  of  one  speech ;
For   the   friend   brings   forth  the  enemy's  root  from   the
foundation.

I  consider  not  this  infamy  good  : —

For  an  enemy's  pleasure,  a  friend's  injury.


215  A  certain  one,  by  fraud,  enjoyed  a  man's  property.
When  it  arose  (and  departed),  he  cursed  Iblis.

Iblis,  on  the  path,  thus  spoke  to  him,

Saying : — "  I  have  never  seen  a  fool,  like  thee.


210       "  Kfna-toz"  signifies — kina-kosh ;  kfna-kash.

25  •


388  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'dT.  [cHAP.  IX.

"  To  thee  with  me  (there  was)  concord.     Oh  certain  one  I
"  Why  didst  thou  rise  to  battle  with  me  ?  "

It  is  a  pity  that   the   deed   ordered   by  the   ugly  demon

(Shaitan),
The  hand  of  an  angel  (who  is  pure)  should  write  against

thee.

From  thy  ignorance  and  fearlessness,  thou  holdst  it  lawful,
That  the  pure  ones  (angels)  should  write  unclean  things
of  thee.

220  Find  a  better  path,  and  seek  the  peace  (of  God) ;

Raise  an  intercessor ;    and  utter  thy  acknowledgment  (of
sin).

For,  safety,  for  a  moment,  appears  not

"When,  by  time's  revolution  the  measure  (of  life)  is  full.

And,  if   thou   hast   not  the  hand  of  power,  for  a  (good)

work.
Bring  forth,  like  the  helpless,  the  hand  of  lamentation.

And,  if  thy  evil  doing  passed  beyond  limit,
When  thou  saidst : — "Evil  went  (from  me),"  thou  wast
good.

Rise ;    and  come  forward,   when   thou    seest  the  door  of

peace  open ;
For  the  door  of  repentance  becomes  suddenly  shut.

225  Oh  son  !  go  not  beneath  the  load  of  sin.

For  the  burden-carrier  becomes  wearied  on  a  journey.


218  The  author  says : — "  Oh  one  subject  to  Satan  (curses  be  on  him !),
pity  comes  to  me  that  thou  performst  Satan's  command  and  doest  evil
deeds ;  because,  the  hand  of  an  angel  (who  is  pure)  will  write  in  the
Book  of  Deeds  thy  bad  deeds,  which  are  instigated  by  Satan."

223  In  the  traditions  : — Whosoeyer  repented  one  day  before  death,  God
turned  on  him  with  pardon .


CHAP.  IX.]  ON    REPENTANCE.  389

It  is  proper  to  hasten  after  good  men ;

For,  whosoever  sought  for  this  happiness — ^found  it.

But,  thou  art  in  rear  of  the  base  demon  (Shaitdn),
I  know  not,  when  thou  mayst  arrive  among  the  holy.

The  Prophet  (Muhammad)  is  an  intercessor  for  that  one,
Who  is  on  the  highway  of  the  law  of  the  Prophet.


One  clay-stained  took  the  path  to  a  masjid ;
From  fortune  of  reversed  fortune,  in  astonishment.

280  One   forbade   him,    saying  : — "  May   both   thy   hands    be
destroyed  !
"  Go  not,  skirt-stained,  into  a  pure  place."

As  to  this  matter,  a  tenderness  entered  my  heart;
Because,  lofty  Paradise  is  pure  and  joyful.

In  that  place  (Paradise)  of  the  hopeful  pure  ones,
For  one  clay-stained  with  sin, — what  business  ?

That  one  takes  Paradise,  who  bears  devotion.
To  whom,  ready  money  is  necessary, — let  him    take  his
trade-stock.

Do  not ; — wash  the  skirt  from  the  dust  of  vileness  ;
For,  from  above,  they  suddenly  close  the  stream  (of  puri-
fication).

235  Say   not  :— "  The   bird   of   wealth   has   leaped  from   my
bonds " ;
Thou  hast,  yet,  the  end  of  the  cord  in  thy  hand.


226  In  the  traditions : — Death  is  ease  for  believers.

227  The  signs  of  happiness  are:— Truth  in  the  heart;  fear  of  God  in
religion;  abstinence  in  the  world;  modesty  in  the  eye;  fear  in  the
tody.

235       "  Murgh-i-daulat  "  signifies— kudrat-i-tauba ;  zamAn-i-jaw4nf.


390  THE    BUSTAN   OP    SA*DI.  [CHAP.  IX.

And,  if  there  was  delay  (in  repenting),  be  impetuous  and

active ;
A  perfect  work  has  no  concern  as  to  late  coming.

Death  has  not  yet  bound  thy  hand  of  entreaty  (to  G-od) ;
Raise  thy  hand  to  the  Court  of  the  Omnipotent.

Oh  one  sin-committed,  sleeping !  sleep  not ;  arise ;
Pour  out  eye-water  (tears),  in  acknowledgment  of  sin.

Since  it  is  an  order  of  necessity  that,  their  reputation.
They  (sinners)  should  spill ;  on  this  dust  of  the  street  (of
the  world,  let  them  spill  it).

240  And,  if  water  (of  repentance)  remains  not  to  thee, — bring
an  intercessor.
Whose  reputation  (before  Grod)  is  greater  than  thine.

If  God  drives  me,  in  anger  from  His  door ;

I  may  bring  the  souls  of  the  great,  as  intercessors.


Recollection  keeps  coming  to  me  of  the  time  of  childhood,
When,  on  an  'Id,  I  came  out  with  my  father.

I  became  engaged  in  the  pastime  of  the  men ;
I  became  lost  as  to  my  father,  through  the  tumult  of  the
people.

Through  restlessness,  I  raised  a  shout ;
My  father  suddenly  rubbed  my  ear,

^45  Saying  : — "  Oh  saucy  one !  at  least,  several  times,  to  thee,
*'  Said  I  not : — Keep  not  thy  hand  from  off  my  skirt."

The  little  child  knows  not  how  to  go  alone ;

For  one  can,  with  difficulty,  travel  the  unseen  road.

Oh  fakir  !  thou  also  art  a  child  of  the  road ;  with  effort.
Go;    seize   the   skirt    of    those    road-knowing   (spiritual-
guides).


CHAP.  IX.]  ON    REPENTAKCB.  891

Sit  not  with  mean  men ;

When  thou  dost,  wash  thy  hand  of  respect.

Affix  thy  grasp  to  the  saddle-strap  of  the  pure ;
For  the  holy  one  has  no  shame  of  beggary.

250  The  disciples  are,  in  strength,  less  than  children ;
The  shaikhs  are  like  a  strong  wall.

Learn  motion  from  that  little  child ;

How  he  prefers  a  request  for  aid  to  the  wall !

He  escaped  from  the  chain  of  the  impure,
Who  sate  in  the  circle  of  the  devout.


I


If  thou  hast  any  need, — take  this  society  (of  the  devout) ;
For,  the  sultan  (even)  has  no  flight  from  this  door.

Go  ;  be  an  ear-of-corn  gatherer,  like  Sa'di,
That  thou  mayst  gather  the  harvest  of  the  knowledge  of
God.


255  Ho  !  oh  revellers  in  the  prayer-niche  of  affection.
When,  to-morrow,  you  sit  at  the  holy  table,

Turn  not  away  the  face  from  the  beggars  of  the  tribe ;
For,   the  lords  of  generosity  turn  not  away  the  humble
companion.

Now,  it  is  proper  to  become  a  partner  with  wisdom ;
For,  to-morrow,  the  path  of  returning  remains  not.


A  certain  one  heaped  up  the  corn  of  the  autumn  month

Mardad ;
He  set  his  heart  at  ease,  as  to  the  care  of  the  spring  month

Dai.


254  Be  a  corn-gatherer  of  those  of  the  path  of  God.

255  In  the  'Ikd-i-manzum,  couplets  255  to  267  are  omitted.
258        In  the  fifth  month,  Mardad  (July),  the  sun  is  in  Leo.


392  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  IX.

One  night,  he  became  drunk  ;  he  kindled  a  fire ;

The  foolish  one  of  reversed  fortune  burned  his  harvest.

260  The  next  day,  he  sate  gleaning  ears  of  corn,

For,  a  single  grain  of  his  harvest  remained  not  to  him.

"When  they  saw  the  poor  man  afflicted,
One  said  to  his  own  cherished  one,

Thou  wishst  not,  that  thou  shouldst  be  of  such  dark  days  ?
Burn  not  thy  harvest,  in  madness.

If  thy  life  passed  from  thy  hand,  in  evilness.
Thou  art  he,  who  set  fire  to  his  own  harvest.

It  is  a  disgrace  to  gather  ears  of  corn  (to  beg),
After  burning  thy  own  harvest.

265  Oh   my    soul !    do   not ;    sow   the   seed    of   religion   and
justice ;
Give  not  the  harvest  of  good  fame  to  the  wind.

When  one  of  reversed  fortune  falls  into  bonds,
Those  of  happy  fortune  take  warning  from  him.

Before  punishment,  beat  thou  the  door  of  pardon ;
For,  lament,  beneath  the  rod,  has  no  profit.

Bring  forth  thy  head  from  the  collar  of  carelessness ;
That  shame  may  not  remain,  to-morrow,  in  thy  breast.


A  certain  one  was  consenting  to  a  forbidden  deed ;
One  of  good  qualities  passed  by  him.

270  He  sate,  perspiring  as  to  his  face,  through  sharae,

Saying  : — "  Have  I  become  ashamed  of  the  shaikh  of  the
street  ?  "

The  shaikh  of  illumined  soul  heard  this  speech,

He  was  confounded  at  him,  and  said  : — "  Oh  youth  !


CHAP.  IX.]  ON   REPENTANCE.  393

"  Does  not  shame  come  to  thee  of  thyself,

"  That  God  is  present ;  and  thou  hast  shame  of  me  ?

"  Have  such  shame  of  the  lord  of  self,

"  As  shame  is  to  thee  of  strangers  and  relations.

"  Thou  restst  not  at  any  one's  side ;
"  Go  ;  look  towards  God  only."


m  "When  Zulaikha  became  intoxicated  with  the  wine  of  love,
She  fixed  her  hand  on  the  skirt  of  Yiisuf.

The  demon  of  lust  had  given  consent,  to  such  a  degree.
As  when  the  wolf  had  fallen  upon  Yiisuf.


I


The  lady  of  Egypt  (Zulaikha)  had  an  idol  of  marble,
She  was,  morning  and  evening,  assiduous  in  its  devotion.

At  that  time,  she  covered  its  face  and  head.

Lest  that  her  act  might,  in  its  sight,  be  disagreeable.

Yiisuf,  grief-stricken,  sate  in  a  corner,
Hand  over  the  head,  through  the  lust  of  the  tyrant  (Zulai-
kha).

280  Zulaikha  kissed  both  his  hands  and  feet.

Saying  : — *'  Oh  one  of  sluggish  covenant,  perverse  I

"  Contract  not  thy  face,  with  anvil  heart ;
"  Waste  not  the  sweet  time,  in  harshness."

From  his  eye,  a  stream  went  running  on  his  face,
Saying: — "Return;  and,  seek  not  this  uncleanness  from
me.

"  Thou  didst  become  ashamed,  in  the  face  of  thy  stone

idol ;
"  Does  not  shame  come  to  me  of  Omnipotence?  "


394  THE    BUSTAN    OP    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  IX.

What  profit, — if  repentance  comes  to  hand,
When  thou  hast  squandered  the  capital  of  life.

285  They  drink  wine,  for  the  sake  of  a  ruddy  face ;

But,  they  bear,  in  the  end,  through  it,  a  yellow  face.

Make  entreaty,  to-day,  with  supplication  for  pardon  for

sin;
For,   to-morrow,    (the   Resurrection  Day),   the   power    of

speech  remains  not.

The  cat  makes  pollution,  in  a  pure  place ;
When  it  appears  filthy,  he  covers  it  with  dust.

Thou  art  free  (from  fear)  of  filthy  deeds.

Thou  fearst  not,  that  the  eyes  (of  men)  may  fall  on  them.

Reflect  on  that  sinful  slave,

Who  is,  sometimes,  disobedient  to  his  master.

290  If  he  returns,  in  truth  and  supplication.

They  bring  him  not  back  to  chains  and  fetters.

Thou  art,  in  malice,  in  strife  with  that  Person  (God),
From  whom,  there  is  for  thee  remedy  (for  ills),  or  flight.

It  is  necessary  to  make  reckoning  of  thy  deeds,  now,
Not,  at  the  time  when  the  Book  (of  Deeds)  becomes  spread
open.

Although,  a  person  did  evil, — he  did  not  evil.
When,   before  the  Judgment  Day,  he   suffered  grief  for
himself.

Although  the  mirror  becomes  obscured  by  a  sigh ;
The  heart's  mirror  becomes  bright  by  a  sigh.

295  Be  afraid  of  thy  sins,  this  moment.

That  thou  mayst  fear  no  one,  in  the  Judgment  Day.


I


CHAP.  IX.]  ON    EEPENTANCB.  395

I  came  a  traveller  into  a  city  of  Abyssinia ;

Heart,  from  care,  free  ;*liead,  through  ease,  happy.

On  the  road,  I  beheld  a  lofty  prison ;
In  it,  some  wretched  ones  foot-bound.

I  immediately  prepared  for  journeying ;

I  took  to  the  desert,  like  a  bird  from  the  cage.

One   spoke,    saying  : — "  These   fettered   ones    are   night-
prowlers  ;
"  They  take  not  advice ;  and  hear  not  truth."

0  When  oppression  comes  to  no  one  from  thy  hand ;

If  the  watchman  seize  the  world, — to  thee  what  care  ?

No  one  takes  captive  the  one  of  good  name ;

1  Fear  God  ;  but,  fear  not  the  amir.

The  agent,  treachery  unused  in  business,
Cares  not  for  the  deciding  of  court-oflB.cials.

But,  if  there  be  deceit  beneath  his  (apparent)  integrity,
The  tongue  of  his  account-giving  becomes  not  bold.

When  thou  performst  approved  service,
Thou  thinkst  not  of  the  malignant  enemy.

35  If  the  slave  exerts  himself,  slave-like.
The  lord  holds  him  dear.

But  if  he  be,  in  service,  dull  of  judgment,
He  falls  from  soul-guarding  to  ass-slaving.

Plant  the  foot  (of  devotion)  forward,  that  thou  mayst
surpass  the  angels ;

For,  if  thou  remainst  behind,  thou  art  less  than  a  rapa-
cious animal.


396  THE   BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  IX.j

The  King  of  Damighan,  witli  a  chaugan,  a  certain  one,
Struck,  so  that  his  cry,  drum-like,  came  forth.

At  night,  from  restlessness,  he  could  not  sleep ;
A  devotee  passed  by  him,  and  said : —

310  "  If,  at  night,  he  had  borne  his  heart-burning  (for  crime)  t(
the  watchman,
"In  the  day,  the  crime  would  not  have  taken  his  repu-
tation."

On  the  day  of  the  place  of  assembling  (Judgment  Day)

that  one  becomes  not  ashamed.
Who,  nights,  preferred  his  heart-burning  to  the  Court  (ol

God).

Still,  if  thou  hast  desire  for  peace  (with  God),  what  fear  ?
The  Merciful  One  (Grod)  fastens  not  the  door  against  those
pardon-seeking.

If  thou  art  wise, — of  the  ruler  (Grod),  desire
Forgiveness  for  the  sin  of  the  day,  on  the  night  of  re-
pentance.

That  Merciful  One  (God),  who  brought  to  thee  existence,

from  non-existence.
Will  seize  thy  hand,  if  thou  shouldst  fall.     Oh  wonderful

815  If  thou  art  a  slave, — ^bring  forth  the  hand  of  need,  (a
God's  Court) ;
And,  if  ashamed, — rain  the  water  of  repentance  (weep).

There  came  to  this  door,  pardon-asking,  no  one,
Whose  sin  the  water  of  penitence  washed  not  away.


813       There  are  certain  nights  on  which  prayers  are  answered.


OHAP.  IX.]  ON   EEPENTANOE.  397

Crod  spills  the  honour  of  none,

Whose  sin  pours  forth  much  eye-water  (tears).


In  Sin'a,  a  child  of  mine  passed  away  (in  death) ;

Of  that  which  passed  over  my  head, — what  may  I  say  ?

Fate  drew  not  a  picture  of  beauty,  Yiisuf-like,
Which  the  fish  of  the  grave  devoured  not,  Ydaas-like.

0  This  garden  (of  the  world),  that  cypress  became  not  lofty,
Whose  root,  the  wind  of  death  plucked  not  from  its  foun-
dation.

It  is  not  wonderful,  if  the  rose  blossoms  on  his  dust ;
For,  many  a  rose-limb  sleeps  in  the  dust.

To  my  heart,  I  said  :■ — "  Oh  shame  of  men  !  die  ;
*'  For,  the   boy  goes   pure  (to  God) ;    and,   the    old  man,
stained."

Through  madness  and  perturbation  regarding  his  stature

(of  body),
I  uplifted  a  stone  from  his  tomb.

In  that  place,  dark  and  narrow, — through  fear.

My  state  became  confounded,  and  complexion  changed.

6  From  that  changed  state,  when  I  returned  to  sense ;
From  the  son,  heart-binding,  there  came  to  my  ear  : —

"  If  fear  comes  to  thee,  of  the  dark  place  (of  the  grave),
"  Be  wise  ;  and,  enter  endowed  with  light.

"  Thou  wishst   the    night   of  the   grave,  illumined    day-
like?
"  Here  (in  this  world),  kindle  the  lamp  of  (good)  deeds."


L8       Sin'4  is  the  name  of  a  town.


398  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [cHAP.

The  body  of  the  work-performer  trembles  with  fever  (o

anxiety).
Least  that  his  date-tree  should  not  bring  forth  dates.

A  multitude  of  excessive  avarice  entertain  the  idea,
That  they  may,  wheat  unscattered,  take  up  the  harvest.

880  Oh  Sa'di !    that  one  enjoyed  the  fruit,  who  planted  th
root;
That  one  took  the  harvest,  who  scattered  the  seed.


1        CHAP.  X.]  ON  PRAYER.  399


CHAPTER    X.
On  Prater.

1  Come  ;  let  us  raise  a  hand  from  the  heart ;
For,  to-morrow,  (after  death),  one  cannot  raise  the  hand
from  the  clay  (of  the  grave).

In  the  autumn  season,  seest  thou  not  the  tree,
"Which,  from  severe  cold,  remains  leafless !

It  uplifts  the  empty  hands  of  supplication.
It  returns  not,  through  God's  mercy,  empty-handed  (leaf-
less).


I


Fate  gives  to  it  a  renowned  dress  of  honour ;
Destiny  places  fruit,  within  its  bosom.


6  At  that  door,  which  God  never  closed, — think  not,
That  he,  hands  raised  (in  supplication),  becomes  hopeless.

All  bring  devotion  ;  and  the  wretched,  supplication ;
Come,    so   that    at   the   Court   of    the    Cherisher   of    the
Wretched  (God),


400  THE  BUSTAN  OF  SA'dI.  [cHAP.  X.

We  may  raise  the  hand,  like  the  naked  (leafless)  branch ;
For,  one  cannot  sit  longer  than  this,  without  means  (leaf-
less).

Oh  Lord !  look  with  bounty,

When  sin  comes  into  existence  (issues)  from  Thy  slaves.

Sin  issues  from  the  dust-like  slave,
In  hope  of  the  pardon  of  the  Lord.

10  Oh  Merciful  One  !  we  are  cherished  by  Thy  bounty ;
We  are  accustomed  to  Thy  favour  and  grace.

When   a   beggar   experiences    liberality,    and   grace,    and

tenderness.
He  turns  not  back  from  the  rear  of  the  giver.

Since  Thou  didst  make  us  precious  in  the  world,
We  have  expectation  of  this  same  (dearness),  in  the  future
world.

Thou  alone  givest  preciousness  and  despicability  ;
One,  dear  to  Thee,  experiences  contempt  from  none.

Oh  God  !  by  Thy  honour,  make  me  not  contemptible  (in

the  future  world) ;
By  the  baseness  of  sin,  make  me  not  ashamed.

15  Make  not,  a  person  like  unto  myself,  ruler  over  me ;
If  I  bear  punishment,  it  is  best  from  Thy  hand.

There  is  no  evil,  in  the  world,  worse  than  this, —
To  suffer  oppression  from  the  hand  of  one  like  unto  my-
self.

Shame  of  Thee  is  for  me  enough;

Make  me  not  further  ashamed  before  any.

If  a  shadow  from  Thee  falls  on  my  head.
For  me, — the  sky  is  of  the  lowest  rank.


CHAP.  X.]  ON   PRAYER.

If  Thou  grantst  a  crown,  it  exalts  mj  head ;
Raise  Thou  me,  so  that  none  may  cast  me  down.


401


»  My  body  trembles,  when  I  bring  to  recollection,

The  prayers  of  one  distraught,  in  the  sacred  enclosure  at
Makka,

"Who,  with  much  lamentation,  was  saying  to  Q-od : —
"  Cast  me  not  away ;  for  no  one  takes  my  hand.

"  Call  me,  with  kindness,  to  Thy  door ;  or,  drive  me  from

Thy  door ;
"  — My  head  is  only  at  Thy  threshold.

"  If  Thou  knowst  that  we  are  wretched,  and  helpless ;
"  We  are  wearied  of  imperious  lust.

"  This  headstrong  lust  hastens  to  such  a  degree,
"  That  reason  cannot  seize  its  rein.

25  "  Who,  by  force,  prevails  over  lust  and  Shaitdn  ?
"  The  battle-ranks  of  panthers  come  not  from  the  ant.

"  Grive  me  a  path,  by  the  holy  men  of  Thy  path,
"  Give  me  protection,  from  these  enemies  (lusts).

"  Oh  God  !  by  the  nature  of  Thy  Lordship,
"  By  Thy  qualities,  matchless  and  unequalled,

"  By — I  await  Thy  command — of  the  pilgrim  of  the  holy

house  (the  Ka'ba),
*'  By  the  buried  Muhammad, — peace  be  on  him  I

"  By  the  extolling  of  Thee  of  men,  sword-exercising,
"  Who  reckon  the  man  of  war,  a  woman.

JO  "  By  the  worship  of  old  men  adorned  (with  devotion),
"  By  the  truth  of  young  men,  newly  risen, —

26


402  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  X.

*'  (I  pray)  saying : — In  tliat  whirlpool  of  a  breath  (death-
throes),
**  Help  us  from  the  shame  of  saying,  two  (Grods).

*'  There  is  hope  from  those  who  perform  devotions ;
"  For,  they  make  intercession  for  those  devotionless.

*•  Keep  me  far  from  pollution,  by  the  pure ;

"  And  hold  me  excusBd,  if  any  sin  passes  from  me.

"  By  the  old  men,  back  bent  with  devotion  ;

"  Eye  from  shame  of  sin  (stitched)  to  the  back  of  the  foot.

35  <«  (I  pray)  saying : — Close  not  my  eye  from  the  face  of

happiness ;
■    "  Bind  not  my  tongue,  at  the  time  of  witnessing.

"  Hold  the  lamp  of  truth  opposite  my  path ;
"  Keep  my  hand  short  of  doing  evil.

**  Cause  my  eyes  to  turn  from  that  unfit  to  be  seen :
"  Give  me  no  power,  as  to  disgraceful  deeds.

*'  I  am  that  atom,  standing  in  Thy  air,
"  My  existence,  or  non-existence,  through  despicability,  is
one.

"  A  single  ray  of  the  sun  of  Thy  grace  is  sufficient;
"  For  no  one  sees  me,  save  in  Thy  effulgence.

40  "  Glance  at  the  evil  one,  that  he  may  be  better ;
"  A  glance  from  the  king  is  enough  for  the  beggar.

"  If  Thou,  in  justice  and  equity,  seizesf  me,
"  I  will  complain,  saying  : — Thy  pardon  gavest  not  to  me
this  condition.


38       A  mote,  from  the  sun's  effulgence  and  moon's  luminosity,  becomes
visible ;  in  obscurity,  its  existence  and  non-existence  are  one.


CHAP.  X.]  OX    PRAfER.  408

"  Oh  Grod  !  drive  me  not,  in  contempt,  from  Thy  door ;
"  For  no  other  door  appears  to  me.

"  And  if  I  become,  through  ignorance,  absent  a  few  days,
"  Shut  not  the  door,  in  my  face,  when  I  return.

"  What  excuse  may  I  bring  for  the  shame  of  wet-skirted-

ness,
"  Unless  I  offer  submission,  saying: — Oh  independent  One  !

45  "  I  am  a  poor  man ;  take  me  not  in  crime,  and  sin  ;
"  The  rich  man  has  pity  for  the  poor.

"  "Why  is  it  necessary  to  weep  for  the  weakness  of  my  state  ?
"  If  I  am  weak,  my  shelter  is  Thou.

"  Oh  Grod  !  in  carelessness,  we  broke  the  covenant;
"  What   force   may  the   hand   of   struggle   bring  against
destiny  ?

*'  What  issues  from  the  hand  of  our  deliberation  ?

"  This  reliance  is,  indeed,  enough, — confession  of  our  sin.

"  Whatever  I  did,  Thou  didst  strike  it  all  together  (upset

it);
"  What  power  may  one's  self  exert  against  God  ?

60  "  I  take  not  my  head  beyond  Thy  order ;

"  But  Thy  command  thus  passes  over  my  head."


A  certain  one  called  one  of  blackish  colour,  ugly ;
He  gave  to  him  an  answer  of  such  a  sort  that  he  remained
astonied.

"  I  have  not  created  my  own  form,

"  Which  thou  considerest  my  fault,  saying  :— I  have  done

ill.

26  *


404  THE   BUSTAN   OP    SA'dI.  [cHAP.  1.

"  K  I  am  ugly  of  face,  what  business  (oh  sneerer !)  hast

thou  with  me  ?
**  I   am   not,  in   short,  the  pourtrayer   of   the   ugly   and

beautiful."

Beyond  that  which  Thou  didst  write  on  my  forehead.
Oh  Slave- cherisher !    I  did  neither  less  nor  more.

65  Thou  art,  in  short,  the  Knower  that  I  am  not  powerful ;
Thou  art  absolutely  powerful ; — who  am  I  ?

If  Thou  art  my  Guide,  I  arrive  at  safety ;
But,  if  Thou  shouldst  lose  me,  I  remain  behind  in  journey-
ing.

If  the  World-Creator  affords  not  assistance.
How  may  the  slave  exercise  abstinence?


How  well  said  the  darvesh  of  short  hand.
Who,  in  the  night,  vowed ;  and,  in  the  morning,  broke  his
vow : —

"  If  He  gives  repentance,  it  will  remain  steadfast ;
**  For,  our  covenant  is  unstable  and  languid."

60  By  Thy  truth !  stitch  up  my  eyes  from  falsehood ;
By  Thy  light !  consume  me  not,  to-morrow,  in  hell.

My  face,  through  poverty,  went  into  the  dust ;
My  sin's  dust  ascended  to  Heaven.

Oh  Cloud  of  Mercy !  rain  Thou  once ;

For  dust,  in  the  presence  of  rain,  remains  not.


54      Couplets  54-57  are  uttered  by  the  poet.


CHAP.  X.]  ON    PEATEB.


405


Through  sin,  to  me,  in  this  kingdom  (of  the  world)  is  no

rank;
But,  to  the  next  world,  there  is  no  path.

Thou  knowst  the  intention  of  those  tongue-bound ;
Thou  placest  the  plaster,  on  those  heart- wounded.


¥


66  An  idolater  was  door  shut  as  to  his  face  against  the  world ;
He  was  loin-girt  in  an  idol's  service.

After  some  years,  as  to  that  one  of  despised  religion
— Fate  brought  before  him,  a  difficult  matter.

At  the  idol's  foot,  in  the  hope  of  good.

He  helplessly  rolled,  in  the  dust  of  the  temple,

Saying  : — "  Oh  idol !  I  am  distressed ;  help  me ;
"  I  am  ready  to  die;  pity  my  body."

Many  times,  in  its  service,  he  groaned ;

But,  any  deeds  for  his  arrangement  issued  not.

70  How  may  an  idol  accomplish  a  person's  important  affairs,
Which  cannot  drive  a  fly  from  its  face  ?

He   was   confounded,   saying : — "  Oh   one   foot-bound   in

error !
"  I  worshipped  thee  several  years,  in  folly :

'*  Accomplish  the  important  matter,  which  1  have  before

me ;
"  Otherwise,  I  will  ask  it  from  the  Omnipotent."

His  face,  still  stained  with  dust  from  (prostration  before)

the  idol,
"When  the  pure  God  accomplished  his  wish.

One  truths-recognising  became  astonished  at  this ;
— For,  his  pure  time  became  to  him  obscured, —


406  THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'dT.  [cHAP.  X.

75  Saying  : — **  A  mean,  false,  perturbed  worshipper,

" — His  head  still,  with  the  wine  of  the  wine-tavern,  in-
toxicated,—

*'  Washed  not  his  heart  from  infidelity ;  nor  his  religion

from  treachery,
** — God  fulfilled  that  desire,  which  he  sought !  "

His  heart  descended  into  this  difficulty,

When  a  message  (from  Grod)  came  to  the  ear  of  his  heart,

Saying : — "  The  old  man  of  deficient  wisdom,  before  the

idol,
"  Uttered  much ;  but,  his  prayer  was  unacceptable.

*'  If  he  be  also  repulsed  from  Our  Court,

"  Then,  from  the  idol  to  the  Lord  God, — what  difference  ?"

80  Oh  friend !  it  is  necessary  to  bind  the  heart  on  the  Lord
God;
Than  the  idol  whatever  (or  whosoever)    it  be — who  are
more  helpless?

If  thou  placest  thy  head  (in  devotion)  at  this  door,  it  is

impossible.
That  the  hand  of  need  should  return  to  thee  empty.

Oh  God  !  we  came  deficient  in  work ;
We  came  empty  of  hand,  but  hopeful.


I  have  heard  that  one  intoxicated  with  the  heat  of  the

date- wine.
Ran  to  the  most  sacred  place  of  a  mas j  id.

He  bewailed  at  the  threshold  of  mercy.

Saying  : — "  Oh  Lord  !  take  me  to  the  loftiest  Paradise  9  "


CHAP.  X.]  ON   PRAYER.


407


95  The  Mii,azziii  seized  his  collar,  saying : — "  Make  haste,
"  Oh  one  careless  of  wisdom  and  religion  I — a  dog  and  a
masjid.

"  What  worthy  deed  didst  thou,  that   thou   seekst  Para-
dise?
"  Grace  beseems  thee  not  with  an  ugly  face."

The  old  man  uttered  this  speech,  while  intoxicated  one

wept.
Saying  : — "  Oh  sir  !  I  am  drunk ;  keep  thy  hand  from  me.

**  Hast  thou  wonder  at  the  grace  of  the  Omnipotent,
**  When  a  sinner  is  hopeful?

*'  I  say  not  to  thee  (oh  Mu,azzin  !) — accept  my  excuse  ;
"  The  door  of  repentance  is  open,  and  God  is  helper."

90  I  have  constantly  shame  of  the  gi'ace  of  the  Merciful  One ;
For,  I  call  my  sin  great,  in  comparison  with  his  pardon.

When  old  age  brings  down  a  person  from  his  feet, —
r    When  thou  seizest  not  his  hand,  he  rises  not  from  his  place.

I  am  that  old  man,  fallen  from  his  feet ;
Oh  God  !  help  me,  by  Thy  own  grace.

1  say  not : — Give  me  greatness  and  rank ;

Pardon  me  the  cause  of  my  wretchedness  (sin),  and  my


crime.


If  a  friend  knows  a  little  defect  regarding  me,
He  makes  me  notorious  for  foolishness.

95  Thou  seeing,  and  we  fearful  of  each  other ;

For  Thou   art  the  Screen-coverer    (of   sin),   and    we   the
screen-render.


85       "  Hi'n  "  signifies — ziid  bash.

90       The  author  here  begins  to  speak.


\


408  THE    BUSTAN    OF    Sa'dI.  [cHAP.  X.

Men  from  without  (the  screen)  have  raised  a  shout  (on

finding  a  defect) ;
Thou  art  always  within  the  screen  and  screen-coverer.

If  slaves,  in  foolishness,  turn  their  heads  (from  order),
The  lords  draw  the  pen  (efface  the  crime).

If  Thou  pardonst  sin  to  the  extent  of  Thy  liberality,
There  remains  no  captive  in  existence.

And,  if  Thou  becomest  angry  to  the  extent  of  sin, —
Send  to  hell ;  and,  ask  not  for  the  balance.

100  If  Thou  helpst  me,  I  may  arrive  at  the  (appointed)  place ;
And,  if  Thou  castest  me  down, — no  one  assists.

Who  uses  violence,  if  Thou  givest  assistance  ?
Who  seizes,  when  thou  givest  deliverance  ?

In  the  place  of  assembling,  there  will  be  two  parties ;
I  know  not  which  path  they  may  assign  to  me.

If  my  road  be  from  the  right  hand,— it  is  wonderful ;
For,  only  crookedness  arose  from  my  hand.

My  heart  gives,  time  to  time,  hope,
That  God  has  shame  of  my  white  hair.

105  I  have  wonder,  if  He  has  shame  of  me,
For  shame  comes  not  to  me  of  myself.

Did  not  Yiisuf — who  experienced  such  calamity  and  im-
prisonment.
When  his  command  became  current,  and  his  rank  lofty, —

Pardon  the  crime  of  the  offspring  of  Ya'kiib  ?
For  a  good  appearance  has  virtue.


104       In  the  traditions,  it  is  stated: — Him,  who  became  old  in  Islam,  God
is  ashamed  to  punish.


CHAP.  X.]


ON   PRATBE.


409


He  imprisoned  them  not,  for  their  bad  conduct ;
He  rejected  not  their  small  capital.

We  also,  from  Thy  grace,  have  expectation   of  this  very

(treatment),
Oh  dear  One  !   forgive  the  sin  of  this  one,  without  capital.

110  No  one  has  seen  one  of  blacker  deeds  than  me
Of  whom  no  deed  is  approved.

Besides  this  that  to  me  there  is  hope  of  Thy  assistance ;
To  me,  there  is  hope  of  Thy  forgiveness.

I  have  brought  no  capital,  save  hope ;

Oh  God  !  make  me  not  hopeless  of  pardon.


109  We  have  hope  that  our  small  capital  may  not  be  rejected,  for  it  is  a
reason  for  mercy.  Nay,  our  prayers,  without  capital,  are  a  cause  of
compassion.

We  lament  and  supplicate  and  prefer  excuse  for  sin.    After  saying —
Oh  Lord  ! — we  depreciate  ourselves  and  our  deeds.


SUPPLEMENTARY    NOTE.


In  some  copies,  the  following  version  of  the  passage,
couplets  685  to  *70Q,  in  Chapter  7.,  occurs.

i86  He  saw  an  ass,  fleet  and  load-carrying ;
Strong,  powerful,  and  effective.

A  certain  man, — a  bone  in  his  hand,
He  so  struck  it,  that  he  broke  its  bone.

The  king  was  astonied  and  said  : — "  Oh  youth  !
m"  Thy  cruelty  to  this  tongueless  one  has  passed  bounds.

"  Since  thou  art  strong,  make  not  this  self -display ;
'*  Exercise  not  strength  against  the  fallen."

The  idle  words  of  the  king  came  not  pleasing  to  him ;
He  expressed  a  shout,  in  terror,  against  the  king.

K)  Saying  : — "  I  chose  not,  in  folly,  this  action ;

■  "  Since  thou  knowst  not, — go  about  thy  own  business.

"  Many  an  one,  who  is  in  thy  opinion  not  excused,
"  — If  thou  wilt  look  well  into  the  matter, — is  not  far  from
good  counsel."


412  SUPPLEMENTARY    NOTE.

To  the  king,  his  reply  seemed  severe ;
He  said  : — "  Come ;  what  right  hast  thou  ?

"  I  think  thou  art  a  stranger  to  reason;

"  Thou  art,  assuredly,  not  drunk, — but  mad."

The  man  laughed,  saying  : — "  Oh  foolish  soldier !   silence ;
**  The  tale  of  Khizr  has  not  perhaps  come  to  thy  ears  ?

695  "  No  one  calls  him  either  mad,  or  intoxicated ;
''Why  broke  he  the  ship  of  the  feeble  folk  ?  "

The  king  said  : — "  Oh  tyranous  one  !

**  Knowst  thou  not,  why  Khizr  so  acted  ?

"  In  that  sea,  was  a  king,  a  tyrant,

"  On  whose  account,  hearts  were  a  sea  of  terror.

"  Creatures,  from  his  deeds,  full  of  lamentation ;
"  A  world,  by  his  power,  like  a  river  in  agitation.

"  Then,  for  the  sake  of  the  good,  he  broke  (in  pieces)  that

ship ;
*'  That  the  chief,  the  tyrant,  might  not  acquire  it.

700  **  A  broken  (article  of)  property,  that  is  in  thy  hand,

"  Is  better  than  that  whole  (should  be)  in  the  enemy's
power."

The  villager  of  enlightened  mind  laughed,
Saying  : — '*  0  Amir  !  the  right  is  in  my  hand.

'*  Not,  through  stupidity,  do  I  break  the  ass's  leg ;
"  But,  through  the  oppression  of  the  unjust  sultan.

"  The  ass,  in  this  place,  lame  and  pain-suffering,
"  Is  better  than  that  (ass)  which  (is)  a  load-carrier  before
the  king.

"  Fie  upon  such  (a  tyrant  king)  who  ruled  (this)  country

and  empire  !
**  On  whom,  shame  will  remain  till  the  Judgment  Day.


SUPPLEMENTARY   NOTE.  413

05  "  If  the  woman,  burden-bearing  (pregnant)  brings  forth  a
snake,
*'  It  is  better  than  one  man-born  of  demon-form."

The  tyrant  exercised  tyranny  on  his  own  body  ;
He  exercised  it  not  on  the  state  of  the  poor  darvesh.

For,  to-morrow,  in  that  assembly  of  fame  and  infamy,
The  darvesh  will  seize,  in  his  grasp,  the  tyrant's  collar  and
beard.

The  darvesh  places  the  load  of  his  own  sins,  on  his  neck ;
He  (the  tyrant)  is  unable  to  raise  his  head.

I  grant — that  the  ass  now  carries  his  load  ;
How  will  he  (the  tyrant)  bear  the  load  of  asses,  on  that
Day  (of  Judgment).

710  If  thou  askest  justice,  he  is  ill-starred.
To  whom,  another's  sorrow  is  joy.

These  very  fine  days  of  delight,  he  has
Whose  delight  is  in  the  grief  of  men.

If  that  dead-heart  (ignorant  one)  rise  not  (from  his  sleeping-
garment),  it  is  better  than  that
Men  should,  on  his  account,  sleep  heart-distressed.


415


INDEX.


Serial
Number.

Subject.

Couplet
where
com-

Letter

of
Befer-

mencing.

ence.

Inteodttction,  p.  1.

1

Address  to  God             ....

1

2

Address   to    Muhammad,    the   most   distin-

3

guished  of  apostles
On  the  cause  of  the  versification  of  the  work

69
99

4

In  praise  of  Atabuk  Bu  Bakr,  son  of  Sa'd,

6

son  of  Zangi           ....
In   praise  of    Muhammad   Sa'd,   son   of  Bd

130

a

Bakr            .....

176

a

6

7

8

9

10
11

12

13
14
16
16
17


Chapter  I. — On  Justice,  Equity,  and  Admi-
nistration of  Government,  p.  26.

Preamble  .....

The  pious  man  who  rode  on  a  panther,  snake

in  hand       .....
The  counsel  given  by  Naushiravan  to  his  son

Hurmuz      .....
The  counsel  given  by  Khusrau-Parviz  to  his

son  Shfrviya  ....

The  merchant  surrounded  by  robbers
Cherishing   old  attendants  ;  or,  the  story  of

Khusrau  and  Shahpur        .  .  .

On  deliberation  of  kings,  and  on  exercising

delay  in  administration
The  man  who,  in  a  dream,  saw  Satan
On  mercy  towards  the  weak     .
On  kindness  towards  subjects
What  Jamshid  wrote  at  a  fountain-head
On  recognising  friend  and  foe,  on  the  part  of

kings;  or,  Darius  and  the  keeper  of  the

king's  horses  ....


1

a

21

31

52*
69

82

a

123
212
265
280
297

a

308


416


INDEX.


Serial
Number.


18
19


20


21
22
23
24
25
26

27

28
29
30

31
32
33

34
35
36


37
38
39
40
41
42
43

44
45
46

47

48
49
50
61
52
63
64

56


SUBJBCT.


On  kings  beholding  their  subjects

The  King  of  Media  and  one  who  lamented

beneath  an  arch
The   compassion   of    ancient   kings   towards

the  wretched ;-  or,   the  storj  of  'Abdu-1

'Aziz  ....

The  Lovely  One

Atabuk  (deceased)  Tukla  bin  Sa'd  Zangi
The  Sultan  of  Rum  and  the  good  man
The  unjust  king  and  the  recluse  Khuda-dost
On  respecting  the  hearts  of  darveshes
Mercy  to  the  powerless ;  or,  the  famine  at  Da

mascus
The  selfish  man
On  justice  and  its  reward
The  two  brothers, — one  just,  the  other  unjust
The  man  who  sat  on  a  branch  of  a  tree  while

he  cut  it      ,
The  tranquillity  of  the  heart  of   the  darvesh
The  skull  that  spoke  to  a  devotee
The  watch-keeper  man-injuring,  who  fell  into  a

well  ....

Hujjaj  and  the  good  man
On  exercising  violence  against  small  folk
On  the  vigilance  of  kings  and  their  merciful

ness  to  their  subjects ;  or,  the  king  who

suffered  from  guinea- worm
On  the  infidelity  of  this  world
On  the  vicissitudes  of  time
King  Kizil  Arslan  and  the  wise  man
The  phrenzied  one
Alaf  Arslan' s  death
The  sage  who  prayed  for  King  Kaykubad
On  the  lusting  of  the  world  for  just  kings;  or

the  King  of  Ghur  and  the  peasant
Mamun  and  the  moon-faced  damsel
The  unjust  king  and  the  fakir,  truth-speaking
On  the  strength- essaying  of  the  empty-
headed  one  ....
0»»refraining  from  giving  advice  to  one  who

accepts  it  not
On  administration

On  cherishing  the  army  in  peace-time
On  the  btrength  of  men,  work-experienced
The  hero  Gurgm  and  his  son
On  cherishing  wise  men
On  caution  towards  the  enemy
On  repelling  the  enemy  by  judgment  and  de

liberation    ....
On  courtesy  towards  the  enemy,  as  a  matter

of  prudence


Couplet
where
com-
mencing.


321
328


334
353
359
370
391
416

429
462
463

479

513
523
532

648
661
581


686
618
623
637
661
664
663

678
754
776

798

822
841
881
891
909
916
922

928

936


INDEX.


417


Subject.


90


On  caution  towards  the  enemy  who  comes  in
submission

Chaptbr  II. — On  Beneficence,  p.  123.

Preamble  ....

On  cherishing  orphans

The  man  whom  the  Chief  of    ^ojand  saw

walking  in  Paradise
The  liberality  of  Ibrahim
On  beneficence  to  men,  good  or  bad    .
The  pious  man  and  the  impudent  impostor
The  miserly  father  and  generous  son  .
The  woman  who  complained  to  her  husband

of  the  cheating  of  the  shopkeeper
The  old  man  who  performed  the  pilgrimage

to  Hijaz       .  .  ...

The  officer  of  the  Sultan,  and  his  wife
The  poor  liberal  man  and  the  beggar
The  man  who  gave  water  to  a  thirsty  dog
The  dai-vesh  who  became  rich
Shibli  and  the  ant  in  the  wheat-sack  .
Generosity  and  its  fruit
On  making  prey  by  beneficence  ;  or,  the  youth

who  led  a  sheep
The  darvesh  and  the  crippled  fox
The  miserly  hermit
Hatim  Tai  and  the  swift-footed  steed
Hatim  Tai  and  the  King  of  Yaman
The  daughter  of  Hatim  in  the  time  of  the

Prophet  Muhammad
HAtim  Tai  and  the  sugar-sack
The  clemency  of  a  king  towards  one  whose

ass  had  fallen  in  the  mire
The  mean  rich  man  and  the  pious  darvesh
On  cherishing  the  people  so  that  one  may  find

a  pious  one  .  .  .  .

The  man  who  sought  for  his  son  in  a  kArav&n
The  ruby  that  was  lost  in  a  camel-stable
The  miserly  father  and  the  prodigal  son
The  small  favour  and  its  great  reward
On  the  reward  of  goodness.     .
On   those   to   whom   it    is    improper   to    be

liberal  ....

On  kindness  to  one  unworthy ;  or,  the  man,  hia

wife,  and  the  wasps
Bahram  and  his  steed

Ohafteb  m. — On  Love,  p.  172.

Preamble  .  .  .  <


Ooaplet

Letter

where

of

com-

Befer-

mencing.

ence.

J  in

946

1

18

29
37
55

59    \
79

122

130
138
148
172
191
217
229

235
244
266
281
805

343
354

368
382

401
405
411
427
447
473

485

494
508


1
27


418


INDEX.


Serial
Number.


91
92


93


94
95


96

97

98

99

100
101

102
103
104
105
106

107

108

109
110
111

112

113
114

115
116
117


118
119


Subject.


On  the  meaning  of  worldly  love

On  the  perfection  of  the  love  of  the  pure
lover;  or,  the  beggar-born  one  and  the
prince  .....

On  the  meaning  t>f  the  sacrifice  of  themselves
made  by  lovers;  or,  the  lovely  one  and
the  candle   .....

On  the  occupation  of  lovers     .

On  the  overpowering  nature  of  ecstasy  and
the  dominion  of  love ;  or,  the  beauty  of
Samarkand  who  disdained  her  lover

On  lovers  sacrificing  themselves  and  consider-
ing death  gain         ....

On  the  i>atience  of  men  of  God ;  or,  the  old
man  who  dwelt  in  a  mas j id

The  true  lover  (of  God)  turns  not  back  on
account  of  violence

On  patience  as  to  the  tyranny  of  that  one
from  whom  one  cannot  bear  separation     .

The  slave  who  wept  on  leaving  his  master

On  preferring  pain  to  the  remedy ;  or,  the
physician  and  his  friend     .

On  the  overpowering  nature  of  love  over  reason

The  marriage  of  two  cousins  .

Desirest  thou  hell,  or  heaven  ?

Majnun  and  his  loyal  love  for  Laila    .

Sultan  Mahmud  and  his  true  love  for  the  dis-
position of  Ayaz     ....

On  the  true  foot  of  holy  men ;  or,  the  old  man
who  crossed  a  piece  of  water  on  his  prayer-
carpet  .....

On  the  transitory  nature  of  created  things,
and  the  grandeur  of  God  ,

The  villager  and  his  son  passing  by  an  army

The  fire-fly        .  .  .  .  .

The  man,  truth -recognising  ;  or,  the  seizing
of  an  old  man  in  a  Syrian  city

What  the  man  did  on  seeing  the  words —
"  Allah  vabas"       .  .  .  .

On  love  which  turns  not  from  violence

On  the  ecstasy  of  the  pious,  and  on  its  truth
and  falsehood  ....

The  young  man  who  played  on  a  flute

The  moth's  love  for  a  candle    .

The  moth's  address  to  a  candle

Chaptee  IV. — On  Humility,  p.  213.

Preamble  .....

The  meaning  of  humility  shown  by  the
exaltation  of  a  drop  of  water


Couplet
•where
com-
mencing.


14


37


67
72


96

114

122

142

154
164

166
172
179
187
190

197

213

227
237
249

253

260

268

284
305
315
348


INDEX.


419


Serial
Number.


120

121

122

123
124

125

126

127


128
129

130
131

132

133


134

136

136

137
138

139

140

141

142
143


144
145


146


Subject.


Conplet
where
com-
mencing.


The  contempt  with  which  men  of  God  regard

themselves  ,  .  .  .10

The  humility  of   Bayi'zid,  the   Bustamf,  on

whose  head  ashes  fell         .  .  .         22

On  haughtiness  and  its  end  ;  on  humbleness

and  its  blessing      ,  .  .  .30

Jesus  and  the  'abid,  and  the  sinner    .  .         42

The   lawyer   of    tattered    garment    and  the

kazi  .....         93

The    repentance    of    the    Prince    of   Ganja

brought  about  by  a  recluse  ..  .       145

The  lovely  one  who  sold  honey,  and  the  sour-

visaged  one  ....       202

On  the  humility  of  good  men,  exemplified  by
the  pious  one  whose  collar  an  intoxicated
one  seized  ....       216

The  man  who  was  bitten  by  a  dog       .  .       223

The  benevolent  master  and  the  disobedient

slave  .  .  .  .  .230

Shaikh  Ma'riif  of  Karkh  and  his  guest  .        247

On   the  insolence  of  the  worthless  and  the

endurance  of  good  men     .  .  •       282

On  the  presumption   of   darveshes  and    the

clemency  of  kings  .  .  .       317

On  the  disappointment  of  the  conceited,
illustrated  by  the  conceited  man  and  the
sage  Koshyar  ....       345

On  the  resignation  and  right-recognising  of

God's  creatures      ....        352

On  humility  and  negation  of  desire,  exempli-
fied by  the  man  who  barked  like  a  dog     .       364

Hatim,  his  deafness  and  disposition  for  hu-
mility .  .  .  .  .376

The  devotee  and  the  thief        .  .  .        393

On  the  endurance  of  the  violence  of  an  enemy

for  the  sake  of  a  friend     .  .  .417

The  saint  Bahlul  .  .  .  .425

The  sage  Lukman  and  his  endurance  of  hard-
ship .....       428

Shaikh  Junid  and  his  humility  in  comparing

himself  to  a  dog     .  .  .  •       440

The  holy  man  and  the  intoxicated  minstrel    .       451

On  the  patience  of  good  men  as  to  the  vio-
lence of  the  worthless ;  or,  the  sage  of
Wakhsh  and  his  calumniator  .  .       456

On   the  humility   of   the   Commander  of  the

Faithful,  'All         .  .  •  .476

On  the  humility  of  'Umar,  who  trod  on  a

beggar's  foot  .  .  •  •       493

The  one  of  good  conduct  and  good  disposi-
tion .  .  .  .501


Letter

of
Refer-
ence.


420


INDEX.


Serial
Number.


Subject.


Couplet
where'
com-
mencing.


147


148
149

160

151

152
153

154
165
156
157

158
169
160

161

162

163
164


166
166
167
168

169

170
171

172

173

174
176


The  humility  of  Zu-n-Nun  at  the  time  of  the  j

drought  of  Egypt  .  .  .  j     606

i
Chapter  V. — On  Besignation,  p.  264.  j


Preamble  ....

On  patience  and  resignation  to  the  decree  of

Fate  ....

The  warrior  of    Sipahan   and  his  resignation

to  Fate        ....
The  falling  of  the  archer  of  Ardabil  to  the

hand  of  one  felt- wearing
The  warrior  and  the  physician
The  villager  who  put  up  an  ass's  head  as  a
I         charm  ....

The  poor  man  who  lost  a  diram
The  old  man  who  struck  his  son  with  a  stick
\  The  rich  man,  Bakht-Yar
,  The  woman  who  quarrelled  with  her  husband
because  he  came  empty-handed
The  man  of  Ki'sh  and  his  ugly  spouse
The  vulture  and  kite    .

The    apprentice     of    the     weaver   of     gold
wi'ought  garments
i  Sincerity  and  its  reward ;  hypocrisy  and  its
!         evU  results
I  The  Chief  of  Kalandars  living  on  a  mountain,
and  the  man  who  slept  not  at  night
The  boy  who  fasted
The   hypocritical    devotee   who  fell  from   a
'         ladder  into  hell      ...


Chapter  VI. — On  Contentvient,  p.  284.

Preamble  ....

The  Sufi  who  spent  two  dinars
The  Hj'iji  who  gave  Sa'di  an  ivory  comb
The  covetous  one  who  bowed  obsequiously  to

Khwarazam
The  holy  man,  who,  suffering  from  fever,  was

told  to  ask  for  sugar
On  the  disgrace  of  gluttons    .
The  man  who  wandered  about  offering  sugar

cane  .  .  .  .

The  man  to  whom  the  King  of  Kliutan  gave

a  piece  of  sUk
How  the  man  was  treated  who  went  for  food

to  the  king's  table
The  old  woman's  cat    .
The  man  of  narrow  views  j  the  wife  of  lofty

spirit  .  .  .  .  .


16

67

84

89

94

98

101

105
112
121

L33

146

155
160

170


1

30
39

48

69
72

81

86

90
98

104


INDEX.


421


Serial
Number.


176


177

178

179


180
181
182

183

184

185
186

187
188

189
190
191

192
193
194
195

196
197

198

199

200

201
202

203

204
205
206
207

208


Sttbjbct.


The  holy  man  who  made  a  house  proportion-
able to  his  stature

The  shaikh  who  became  a  king

On  patience  in  weakness,  in  the  hope  of  pros-
perity .....

The  old  man  who  shaved  his  son's  head

Chaptee  Vn. — On  Education,  p.  301.

Preamble  ....

On  the  excellence  of  taciturnity

On  keeping  a  secret ;  or,  Sultan  Takash  and

his  slaves    .....
The   safety  of  the  ignorant  one  within  the

veil  of  silence         ....
The  one  who  uttered  abuse  at  the  time  of

fighting       .....
King  'Azud,  whose  son  was  sick
The  disciple  who  broke  the  musician's  harp  .
The  Ethiop  and  the  moon-like  damsel
On   the   excellence  of  concealing  faults ;  or,

Da,ud  Ta,i  aud  the  drunken  Sdf i
On  backbiting  ....

The  slanderer  and  the  wise  man
The   person  who  considered  thieving  better

than  slandering      .  .  .  .

Sa'di  at  the  Nizamiya  of  Baghdad     .
Hujjaj,  the  blood-devourer
The  pious  one  who  laughed  at  a  boy  .
The  devotee  who  taught  Sa'di  the  manner  of

ablution      .....
The  Sufi  who  slandered
The  distraught  one  of  Marghaz,  his  opinion

as  to  slandering      .  .  .  •

The   three   persons    whom    it    is   lawful   to

slander        .  .  .

The  thief  who  was  robbed  by  the  grocer  of

Si'stan          .  .  .  •  .

The  Siifi   who  was  asked  if  he  knew  what

someone  said  behind  his  back
Firidun,  the  vazir,  and  his  calumniator
On  the  rights   of  women, — their   good  and

bad  qualities
The  youth  who  bewailed  about  his  discordant

wife  .  .  .  .  •

On  the  training  of  boys
The  convivial  meeting  and  the  youth
On  abstaining  from  the  society  of  youths      .
What   befell    the   merchant  in  the   Tang-i-

Turkan        ,  .  .  •  •

The  crowd  of  men  who  sate  with  a  youth     .


Couplet
where
com-
mencing.

Letter

of
Sefer.
ence.

124
129      ,

c
c

140
153

c
a

1      i
15

e
e

30

47

64

74
85
94

c

c
b

117
134

139

c

142
147
153
161

e
e
e
e

165
1     182

c
e

188

e

196

e

202

«

205
215

«

1      «

240

0

1    274
280

1    304
810

e

0

e
a

820
836

a
a

422


INDEX.


Couplet

Letter

Serial
Number.

SUBJBCT.

•where
com-

of
Eefer-

mencing.

ence.

209

The  devotee  who  became  enamoured.     What

Bukrat  said             ....

340

a

210

On  safety  in  retirement,  and  patience  under

the  calumny  of  men

369

h

211

What   happened  -  to     Sa'di,   on    his    saying

"  Someone  has  no  front  teeth  "      .

408

c

Chapter  VTTT.— 0»  Thanks,  p.  343.

212

Preamble          .....

1

e

213

The  woman  who  showed  a  cradle  to  her  rebel-

lious son     .....

27

214

On  the  creation  of  mankind    .

38

c

215

The  prince  and  the  philosopher  of  Greece

55

c

216

The   boy    who    undermined    the   wall   of  a

masjid         .             •             .             .             .

66

c

217

On  looking  at  the  creating  of  God  Most  High

71

c

218

On  examining  the  state   of   the  feeble,    and

offering  thanks  to  God  for  His  favour

88

c

219

Sultan  Tughril  and  the  Hindu  watchman

99

c

220

The  thief  hard-bound,  and   the  man    hard-

straitened    .....

118

c

221

The  man  who  wore  a  dress  of  raw  hide

123

c

222

The  man  who  beat  a  pious  one,  thinking  him

to  be  a  Jew             ....

127

c

223

The  road-lost  one  and  the  ass

131

c

224

The  lawyer  who  passed  by  one  fallen  drunk   .

134

c

225

The  regard  of  the  pious  for  God's  creating    .

143

c

226

On  God's  grace            ....

160

i

227

Sa'di's  journeying  to  Somnath
Chapter  IX. — On  Repentance,  p.  368.

174

228

Preamble          .....

1

c

229

The  old  man  and  his  regret  over  the  time  of

youth          .....

11

c

230

The  physician  and  the  old  man

37

c

231

On  the  valuing  of  youth  before  the  weakness

of  old  age                ....

54

c

232

On  understanding  religion  before  death

65

c

233

On  Sa'di's  approaching  death

91

c

234

The  death  of  Jamshia's  son    .

106

c

235

The  devotee  who  found  a  gold  brick    .

113

236

The  two  enemies           ....

134

c

237

The  girl  who  wiped  the  dust  from  her  father's

face             .....

158

c

238

Exhortation  and  counsel

165

c

239

Sa'di's  boyhood            ....

179

c

240

The  man  who  cherished  a  wolf's  cub  .

196

c

241

The  man  who  contended  with  a  king

209

c

242

The  man  who  enjoyed  wealth  by  fraud

215

c

INDEX.


423


Coaplet

Letter

Serial
Number.

Subject.

where
com-

of
Befer-

mencing.

enoe.

243

The  one,  clay-stained,  who  went  to  a  masjid

229

c

244

Incident  in  Sa'di's  boyhood     .

242

e

245

The  intoxicated  one  who  burned  his  harvest

258

c

246

The  man,  ashamed  before    the  shaikh,    not

ashamed  before  God

269

e

247

ZulaiWia  (Potiphar's  wife)  and  Joseph

275

a

248

On  avoiding  pollution

287

e

249

Sa'di's  journeying  to  Abyssinia

296

c

250

The  man  whom  King  Damaghan  struck

308

c

251

Death  of  Sa'di's  son    ....
Chapter  X. — On  Prayer,  p.  399.

318

e

252

Preamble          .....

1

e

253

The  prayer  of  the  distraught  one  at  Makka  .

20

c

254

The  man  who  called  a  black  man  ugly

51

c

255

The  darvesh  who  repented  at  night  and  broke

his  vow  by  day        ....

58

c

256

The  idolater  who  asked  his  idol  to  aid  him    .

65

257

The  intoxicated  one  who  entered  a  masjid

83

c

The  tales,  or  discourses,  marked : —
a  are  not  contained  in  the  'Ikd-i-manzum ;
b  do  not  properly  belong  to  the  'Ikd-i-manzum  ;    .
a  and  c  need  not  be  read  for  the  High  Proficiency  Examination  in
Persian,  in  India.

As  to  examinations,  see  Appendix  to  Clarke's  "  Persian  Manual."


I


424


INDEX.


The  following  Table  sliows  the  Couplets,  belonging  to  the  Bustan,
which  are  omitted  in  the  'Ikd-i-Manzum.


From

To

Total
Couplets.

Chapter.

From

To

Total
Coaplets.

Chapter.

54

72
104
107

67

97

190

14

26
1

84

Intro-
duction.

179

213

268
284
305
336

187
236
283
304
314
347

9
24
16
21
10
12

1

126

146

1
39
69
297
318
322
370
418
452
612
659
581
618
€51
663
714
742
753
822
891

21
41

264
302
319
358
414
421
479
547
560
588
636
655
677
718
747
797
880
971

21      1

3

195

6

2

37

45

4

28

36

2

8

19

5

15

5

6

45

59

89

i

5
30
146
362
376
466

21
41
201
363
424
501

17
12

67
12

49
46

4

193

0

5

0

30

69

153

37

71

174

8

3

22

6

33

94
310

400

116

358
407

23
49

8

7

630

1
66
229
263
411
467
480
508

28
121
234
265
426
472
484
518

28

67
6
3

16
6
5

11

2

80

0

8

0

255
275

257
286

3
12

9

142

15

37

96

154

166

66
113
163
171

•30
8

10
6

3

0

10

0

Total  number  of  couplets  in  the  Bustan        -  -  -     4,099

„  „  „  omitted  in  the  'Ikd-i-manzum       -     1,344

Hence  total  number  of  couplets  in  the  'Il^d-i-manzlim  -     2,755


London :  Printed  by  W.  H.  Allen  &  Co.,  13,  Waterloo  Place.


September,  1879.

BOOKS,  &o.,

ISSUED  BY

MESSES.  Wm.  H.  ALLEN  &  Co.,

Puilisjjers  $c  iLiterarg  Agents  to  tjje  Intiia  ©fttce,

COMPRISING

MISCELLANEOUS    PUBLICATIONS    IN    GENERAL
LITERATURE.       DICTIONARIES,     GRAMMARS,     AND     TEXT
BOOKS    IN    EASTERN    LANGUAGES,        MILITARY    WORKS,
INCLUDING  THOSE  ISSUED  BY  THE  GOVERNMENT.  INDIAN
AND    MILITARY   LAW.      MAPS    OF   INDIA,    &o.


In  January  and  July  of  each  yea/r  is  'published  in  800.,  price  10s.  6d.,

THE  INDIA  LIST,  CIVIL  &  MILITARY.

BY    PEBMISSIOK    OF    THE    SEOEETABT    OP    STATE   POE   INDIA  IN   COUNCH..


CONTENTS.

CIVIL. — Gradation  Lists  of  Civil  Service,  Bengal,  Madraa  and  Bombay.
Civil  Annuitants.  Legislative  Council,  Ecclesiastical  Establishments,
Educational,  Public  Works,  Judicial,  Marine,  Medical,  Land  Revenue,
Political,  Postal,  Police,  Customs  and  Salt,  Forest,  Registration  and
Railway  and  Telegraph  Departments,  Law  Courts,  Surveys,  &c.,  &c.

MILITARY.— Gradation  List  of  the  General  and  Field  Officers  (British
and  Local)  of  the  three  Presidencies,  StaflP  Corps,  Adjutants-G^eneral's
and  Quartermasters-General's  Offices,  Army  Commissariat  Depart-
ments, British  Troops  Serving  in  India  (including  Royal  Artillery,  Royal
Engineers,  Cavalry,  Infantry,  and  Medical  Department),  List  ofJNatlTA
Regiments,  Commander-in-Chief  and  Staff,  Garrison  Instruction  Staff,
Indian  Medical  Department,  Ordnance  Departments,  Punjab  Frontier
Force,  Military  Departments  of  the  three  Presidencies,  Veterinary
Departments,  Tables  showing  the  Distribution  of  the  Army  in  India,
Lists  of  Retired  Officers  of  the  three  Presidencies.

HOME. — Departments  of  the  Office  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  Coopers
Hill  College,  List  of  Selected  Candidates  for  the  Civil  and  Forest  Services,
Indian  Troop  Service.

MISCELLANEOUS.— Orders  of  the  Bath,  Star  of  India,  and  St.  Michael
and  St.  George.  Order  of  Precedence  in  India.  Regulations  for  AdmiS'
sion  to  Civil  Service.  Regulations  for  Admission  of  Chaplains.  Civil
Leave  Code  and  Supplements.  Civil  Service  Pension  Code — relating  to
tlie  Covenanted  and  Uncovenanted  Services.  Rules  for  the  Indian
Medical  Service.  Furlough  and  Retirement  Regulations  of  the  Indian
Army.  Family  Pension  Fund.  Staff  Corps  Regulations.  Salaries  of
Staff  Officers.     Regulations  for  Promotion.     English  Furlough  Pay.


Wm.  H.  Allen  &  Co.,


Works   issued   from   tlie    India   Office,    and  Sold   by
Wm.  H.   ALLEN   &  Go.


Tree  and  Serpent  Worship  ;

Or,  Illustrations  of  Mythology  and  Art  in  India  in  the  First
and  Fourth  Centuries  after  Christ,  from  the  Sculptures  of  the
Buddhist  Topes  at  Sanchi  and  Amravati.  Prepared  at  the
India  Museum,  under  the  authority  of  the  Secretary  of  State
for  India  in  Council.  Second  edition,  Revised,  Corrected,  and
in  great  part  Re-written.  By  James  Fergusson,  Esq.,  F.R.S.,
F.R.A.S.  Super-royal  4to.  100  plates  and  31  engravings,
pp.  270.     Price  £6  5s.

ninstrations  of  Ancient  Bmldings  in  Easlimir.

Prepared  at  the  Indian  Museum  under  the  authority  of  the
Secretary  of  State  for  India  in  Council.  From  Photographs,
Plans,  and  Drawings  taken  by  Order  of  the  Government  of
India.  By  Henry  Hardy  Cole,  Liedt.  R.E.,  Superintendent
Archaeological  Survey  of  India,  North- West  Provinces.  In
One  vol. ;  half-bound.  Quarto.     Fifty-eight  plates.     £3  10s.

The  Illustrations  in  this  work  have  been  produced  in  Carbon  Irom
the  original  negatives,  and  are  therefore  permanent.

Pharmacopoeia  of  India.

Prepared  under  the  Authority  of  the  Secretary  of  State  for
India.  By  Edward  John  Waring,  M.D.  Assisted  by  a
Committee  appointed  for  the  Purpose.     8vo.     68.

Archaelogical  Survey  of  Western  India.

Report  of  the  First  Season's  Operations  in  the  Belgam  and
Kaladgi  Districts.  January  to  May,  1874.  Prepared  at  the
India  Museum  and  Published  under  the  Authority  of  the
Secretary  of  State  for  India  in  Council  By  James  Burgess,
Author  of  the  "  Rock  Temples  of  Elephanta,"  &c.,  &c.,  and
Editor  of  "  The  Indian  Antiquary."  Half-bound.  Quarto.
58  Plates  and  Woodcuts.     £2  2s.


i


13,  Waterloo  Place,  Pall  Mall.


Adam  W.  (late  of  Calcutta)  Theories  of  History.

8vo.     15s.     (See  page  27.)

Advice  to  Officers  in  India.

By  John  MoCosh,  M.D.     Post  8vo.     Ss.
Allen's  Series.

1. — World  We  Live  In.     (See  page  30.)     2s.

2. — Earth's  History.     (See  page  6.)     2s.

3. — Geography  of  India.     (See  page  8.)     2s.

4. — 2000  Examination  Questions  in  Physical  Geography.     2s.

5. — Hall's  Trigonometry.     (See  page  9.)     2s.

6. — Wollaston's  Elementary  Indian  Reader.     Is.     (See  pag«

30.)
7  — Ansted's  Elements  of  Physiography.     Is.  4d.

Analytical  History  of  India.

From  the  earliest  times  to  the  Abolition  of  the  East  India
Company  in  1858.  By  Robert  Sewell,  Madras  Civil  Service.
Post  8vo.     8s.

***  The  object  of  this  work  is  to  supply  the  want  which  has
been  felt  by  students  for  a  condensed  outline  of  Indian  History
which  would  serve  at  once  to  recall  the  memory  and  guide  the
eye,  while  at  the  same  time  it  has  been  attempted  to  render  it
interesting  to  the  general  reader  by  preserving  a  mediuHa
between  a  bare  analysis  and  a  complete  history.
Ancient  and  Mediaeval  India.

2  vols.  8vo.     30s.     (See  page  17.)

Anderson's  (F.)  English  in  Western  India.

8vo.     148.
Andrew's  (W.  P.)  India  and  Her  Neighbours,

With  Two  Maps.     8vo.     ISs.
Ansted's  (D.  T.)  Elements  of  Physiography.

For  the  use  of  Science  Schools.     Fcap.  8vo.      Is.  4d.
Ansted's  (D.  T.)  Physical  Geography.

5th  Edition.     With  Maps.     Crown  Bvo     Ts.     (See  page  28.)
Ansted's  (D.  T.)  "World  We  Live  In.

Fcap     2s.    25th  Thousand,  with  lllustiutions.    (See  page  80.)

.Ansted's  (D.  T.)  Earth's  History.

Fcap.     23.     (See  page  G.)
Ansted's  (D.  T.)

Two  Thousand  Examination  Questions  in  Physical  Geography.

pp.  ISO.     Price  2s,
Ansted's  (D.  T.)  Ionian  Islands.

8vo.     88.     (See  page  14.)


Wm.  H.  Allen  &  Co.,


Ansted's  (S.  T.)  and  R.  G.  Latham's  Ghamiel  Islands.

8vo.     16s.     (See  page  14.)

Ansted's  (D.  T.)  Water,  and  Water  Supply.

Chiefly  with    reference    to    the   British    Islands.  — ■  Surface
Waters.     8vo.     With  Maps.     18s.
Archer's   (Capt.    J.   H.    Laurence)    Commentaries   on  the

Punjaub  Campaign — 1848-49.    Crown  8vo.    8s.    (See  page  5.)

Atterbury  Memoirs,  &c.

The  Memoir  and  Correspondence  of  Francis  Atterbury,  Bishop
of  Rochester,  with  his  distinguished  contemporaries.  Compiled
chiefly  from  the  Atterbury  and  Stuart  Papers.  By  Folkestone
WiLLLA-MS,  Author  of  "  Lives  of  the  English  Cardinals,"  &c.,
2  vols.  Svo.     14s.

Anthors  at  Work.

By  Ch.\rles  Pebodt.     Post  Svo.     10s.  6d.

Bengal  Artillery.

A  Memoir  of  the  Services  of  the  Bengal  Artillery  from  the
formation  of  the  Corps.  By  the  late  Capt.  E.  Buckle,  Assist  -
Adjut.  Gen.  Ben.  Art.  Edit,  by  Sra  J.  W.  Kaye.  Svo.  Lond.
1852.     lOs.

Bemays,  (Dr.  A.  J.)  Students'  Chemistry.
Crown  8vo.     5s.  6d.     (See  page  96.)

Binnlng's  (B,.  M.)  Travels  in  Persia,  &c.
2  vols.  Svo.     16s.

Birth  of  the  War  God.

A  Poem.  By  Kaltd.asa.  Translated  from  the  Sanscrit  into
English  Verse.     By  Ralph  T.  H.  Griffith.     5s.

Blanchard's  (S.)  Yesterday  and  To-day  in  India.

Post  Svo.     6s.     (See  page  30.)

Blenkinsopp's  (Rev.  E.  L.)  Doctrine  of  Development

In  the  lUble  aud  in  the  Church.  2nd  edit,  12mo.  6s.  (See  page  6.)

Boileau  (Major-General  J.  T.)

A  New  and  Complete  Set  of  Traverse  Tables,  showing  the
Differences  of  Latitude  and  the  Departures  to  every  Minute  of
the  Quadrant  und  to  Five  Places  of  Decimals.  Together  with
a  Table  of  the  lengths  of  each  Degree  of  Latitude  and  corres-
.  ponding  Degree  of  Longitude  from  the  Equator  to  the  Poles ;
with  other  Tables  useful  to  the  Surveyor  and  Engineer.
Fourth  Edition,  thoroughly  revised  and  corrected  by  the
Author.     Royal  Svo.     12s.    London,  1876.


J  3,  Waterloo  Place,  Pall  Mall.


Boulger  (D.  C.)  The  Life  of  Yakoob  Beg,  Athalik  Ghazi  and

Badaulet,  Ameer  of  Kashgar.  8vo.  With  Map  and  Ap-
pendix.     16s.

Boulger  (D.  C.)  England  and  Russia  in  Central  Asia.  With
Appendices  and  Two  Maps,  one  being  the  latest  Russian
Official  Map  of  Central  Asia.     2  vols.  8vo.     388.

Bowring's  Flowery  Scroll.

A  Chinese  Novel.  Translated  and  Illustrated  with  Notes  by
Sir  J.  BowRiNoJate  H.B.M.Plenipo.  China.  PostBvo.  lOs.  6d.

Boyd  (B.  Nelson).    Coal  Mine  Inspection :  Its  History  and

Results.     8vo.     14s.

Bradshaw  (John)  LL.D.  The  Poetical  Works  of  John  MUton,

with  Notes,  explanatory  and  philological,  'i  vols,  post  8vo.
1 2s.  6d.

Brandis'  Forest  Flora  of  North- West  and  Central  India.

Text  and  plates,     i'2  l^s.     (See  page  8.)

Briggs'  (Gen.  J.)  India  and  Europe  Compared.

Post  8vo.     78.

Browne's  (J.  W.)  Hardware;   How  to  Buy  it  for  Foreign

Markets.     Bvo.     10s.  6d.     (See  page  9.)

Canal  and  Culvert  Tables,  based  on  the  Formula  of  Kutter,
under  a  Modified  Classification,  with  Explanatory  Text  and
Examples.  By  Lowis  D'A.  Jackson,  A.M.I.C.E.,  author  of
"  Hydraulic  Manual  and  Statistics,"  &c.     Roy.  8vo.     28s.

CathoUc  Doctrine  of  the  Atonement.

An  Historical  Inquiry   into  its   Development  in  the  Church,
with  an  Introduction  on  the  Principle  of  Theological  Develop-
ment. By  H.  NutcombeOxenham,  M.A.  2nd  Edit.  8vo  lOs.Od.
"  It  is  one  of  the  ablest  and  probably  one  of  the  most  charminglj

written  treatises  on  the  subject  which  exists  in  our  language." — Timet.

Celebrated^Naval  and  Military  Trials.

By  Peter  Burke,  Serjeant-at-Law  Author  of  "  Celebrated
Trials  connected  with  the  Aristocracy."    Post  Bvo.     10s.  6d.

Central  Asia  (Sketches  of).

By  A.  Va.mbery.     8vo      16s.     (See  page  28.)

Cochrane,  (John)  Hindu  Law.     20s.    (See  page  18.)

Commentaries  on  the  Funjaub  Campaign  1848^9,  including

some  additions  to  the  History  of  the  Second  Sikh  War,
from  original  sources.  By  Capt.  J.  H.  Lawrence- Archer,
Bengal  H.  P.     Crown  8vo.     Ss.


Wm.  H.  Allen  &  Co.,


Cruise  of  H.M.S.  "  Galatea,"

Captain  H.R  H.  the  Duke  of  Edinburgh,  K.G.,  in  1 867  -1868.
By  the  Rev.  John  Milker,  B.A.,  Chaplain  ;  and  Oswald  W.
Brierly.  Illustrated  by  a  Photograph  of  H.R.H.  the  Duke
of  Edinburgh ;  and  by  Chromo-Lithographs  and  Graphotypes
from  Sketches  taken  on  the  spot  by  0.  W.  Brierly.  8vo.  168.

Cyprus :  Historical  and  Descriptive.

Adapted  from  the  German  of  Herr  Franz  Von  Loher.  With
much  additional  matter.  By  Mrs.  A.  Batson  Jotner.
Crown  Bvo.     With  2  Maps.     10s.  6d

Danvers  (Fred.  Chas.)  On  Coal.

With  Reference  to  Screening,  Transport,  &c       8vo.     lOs.  6d.

Doctrine  of  Development  in  the  Bible  and  in  the  Clinrcli.

By  Rev.  E,  L.  Blenkinsopp,  M.A.,  Rector  of  Springthorp.
2nd  edition.     12mo.     68.

Doran  (Dr.  J.)  Annals  of  the  English  Stage.

Post  8vo.     6s      (See  p.  26.)

Down  by  the  Drawle.

By  Major  A.  F.  P.  Haroourt,  Bengal  Staff  Coi-ps,  author  of
"  Kooloo,  Lahoul,  and  Spiti,"  "  The  Shakespeare  Argosy,"  &c.
2  Vols,  crown  Bvo.     21s.

Drain  of  Silver  to  the  East,

And  the  Currency  of  India.  By  W.  Nassau  Lees.  Post  8vo.  8s.

Dmry.— The  Usefal  Plants  of  India,

With  Notices  of  their  chief  value  in  Commerce,  Medicine,
and  the  Arts.  By  Colonel  Heber  Drtjry.  Second  Edition,
with  Additions  and  Corrections.     Royal  8vo.     16s.

Earth's  History,

Or,  First  Lessons  in  Geology.  For  the  use  of  Schools  and
Students.  By  D.  T.  Ansted.    Third  Thousand.   Fcap.  8vo.    28.

East  India  Calculator,

By  T.  Thornton.     8vo.     London,  1823.      lOs.

Edinburgh  (The  Dnke  of)  Cruise  of  the  "Galatea."

With  Illustrations      8vo.     16s.

Edwards'  (H.  S.)  Bussians  at  Home.

With  Illustrations.     Post  Bvo.     6s.     (See  page  25.)

Edwards'  (H.  S.)  History  of  the  Opera.

2  Vols.,  8vo.     10s.  6d.     (See  page  10.)


13,  Waterloo  Place,  Pall  Mall.


Elementaxy  Mathematics.

A  Course  of  liilementary  Mathematics  for  the  use  of  candidates
for  admission  into  either  of  the  Military  Colleges;  of  appli-
cants for  appointments  in  the  Home  or  Indian  Civil  Services  ;
and  of  mathematical  students  generally.      By  Professor  J.  R.
Young.     In  one  closely-printed  volume    8vo.,  pp.  648.     1*28.
"  In  the  work  before  us  he  has  digested  a  complete  Elementary
Course,  by  aid  of  his  long  experience  as  a  teacher  and  writer ;  and  he  ha«
produced  a  very  useful  book.      Mr.  Young  has  not  allowed  his  own  taste
to  rule  the  distribution,  but  has  adjusted  his  parts  with  the  skill  of  a
veteran.' ' — Atheneeum.

English  Cardinals.

The  Lives  of  the  English  Cardinals,  from  Nicholas  Break-
speare  (Pope  Adrien  IV".)  to  Thomas  Wolsey,  Cardinal  Legate.
With  Historical  Notices  of  the  Papal  Court.  By  Folkestoke
Williams.     In  2  vols.     14s.

English  Homes  in  India.

By  Mrs.  Keatjnge.  Part  I. — The  Three  Loves.  Part  II. —
The  Wrong  Turning.  Two  vols..  Post  8vo.  16s.
Entombed  Alive,  and  other  Songs  and  Ballads.  (From  the
Chinese.)  By  George  Carter  Stent,  M.R.x\.S.,  of  the
Chinese  Imperial  Maritime  Customs  Service,  author  of
"  Chinese  and  English  Vocabulary,"  "  Chinese  and  English
Pocket  Dictionary,"  "  The  Jade  Chaplet,"  &c.  Crown  8vo.
With  four  Illustrations.     9s.

Eyre,  Major-General  (Sir  V.),  K.C.S.I.,  C.B.    The  Kabul  In-

surrection  of  1841-42.  Revised  and  corrected  from  Lieut.
Eyre's  Original  Manuscript.  Edited  by  Colonel  G.  B.
Malleson,  C.S.I.  Crown  8vo.,  with  Map  and  Illustra-
tions. 9s,
Final  French  Struggles  in  India  and  on  the  Indian  Seas.
Including  an  Account  of  the  Capture  of  the  Isles  of  France
and  Bourbon,  and  Sketches  of  the  most  eminent  Foreign
Adventurers  in  India  up  to  the  period  of  that  Capture.  With
an  Appendix  containing  an  Account  of  the  Expedition  from
India  to  Egypt  in  1801.  By  Colonel  G.  B.  Malleson,  C.S.L
Crown  8vo.     lOs.  6d.

First  Age  of  Christianity  and  the  Church  (The).

By  John  Ignatius  DoUinger,  D.D.,  Professor  of  Ecclesiastical
History  in  the  University  of  Munich,  Ac,  &c.  Translated
from  the  German  bv  Henrv  Nutcombe  Oxenhara,  M.A.,  lat«
Scholar  of  Baliol  College,  'Oxford.  Third  EdiUon.  8  vols.
Crown  8vo.     188,


Forbes  (Dr.  Sancaii)  History  of  Chess.

8vo.     7s,  6d.     (See  page  10.)

Forest  Flora  of  North-Western  and  Central  India.

By  Dr.  Branbis,  Inspector  General  of  Forests  to  the  Govern-
ment of  India.     Text  and  Plates.     £2  18s.

Franz  Schubert.

A  Musical  Biography,  from  the  German  of  Dr.  Heinrich
Kreisle  von  Hellborn.  By  Edward  Wilberforce,  Esq.,
Author  of  "Social  Life  in  Munich."     Post  Bvo.     6s.

Gazetteers  of  India.

Thornton,  4  vols.,  8vo,     £2  16s.
8vo.     2  Is.
(N.W.P.,  «S!c.)2  vols.,8vo.     25s.

Gazetteer  of  Southern  India.

With  tlie  Tenasserim  Provinces  and  Singapore.  Compiled
from  original  and  authentic  sources.  Accompanied  by  an
Atlas,  including  plans  of  all  the  principal  towns  and  canton-
ments.    Royal  8vo.  with  4to.  Atlas.     £3  3s.

Gazetteer  of  the  Funjaub,  Affghanistan,  &c.

Gazetteer  of  the  Countries  adjacent  to  India,  on  the  north-
west, including  Scinde,  Affghanistan,  Beloochistan,  thePunjaub,
and  the  neighbouring  States.  By  Ebward  Thornton,  Esq.
9  vols.  8vo.     £1  5s.

Geography  of  India.

Comprising  an  account  of  British  India,  and  the  various  states
enclosed  and  adjoining.     Fcap,  pp.  250.     2s.

Geologfical  Papers  on  Western  India.

Including  Cutch,  Scinde,  and  the  south-east  coast  of  Arabia.
To  which  is  added  a  Summary  of  the  Geology  of  India  gene-
rally. Edited  for  the  Government  by  Henry  J.  Carter,
Assistant  Surgeon,  Bombay  Army.  Royal  8vo.  with  folio
Atlas  of  maps  and  plates;  half-bound.     £2  2s.

German  Life  and  Manners

As  seen  in  Saxony.  With  an  account  of  Town  Life — Village
Life — Fashionable  Life  — Married  Life — School  and  University
Life,  &c.  Illustrated  with  Songs  and  Pictures  of  the  Student
Customs  at  the  University  of  Jena.  By  Henry  Mayhew,
2  vols.     8vo.,  with  numerous  illustrations.     1 8s.

A  Popular  Edition  of  the  above.  With  illustrations.  Cr.  8vo.  Ts.
"  Full  of  original  thought  and  observation,  and  may  be  studied  with  pro-
fit by  both  German  and  English — especially  by  the  Qerman."  AfJ-evepwm.


18,  Waterloo  Place,  Pall  Mall.


Glyn's  (A.  C.)  Civilization  in  the  5tli  Century.

a  vols,  post  8vo.     Jtl  Is.

Oolclstucker  (Dr.)  The  Miscellaneong  Essays  of.
With  a  Memoir.     2  vols.  8vo.     21s.

Grady's  (S.  G.)  Mohamedan  Law  of  Inheritance  &  Contract

8vo.      14s.     (See  page  13.)

Grady's  (S.  G.)  Institutes  of  Menu.

8vo.     1--2S.     (See  page  13.)
Griffith's  (Ralph  T.  H.)  Birth  of  the  War  God.

8vo.     5s.    (See  page  4.)

Hall's  Trigonometry.

The  Elements  of  Plane  and  Spherical  Trigonometry.  With  an
Appendix,  containing  the  solution  of  the  Problems  in  Nautical
Astronomy.  For  tho  use  of  Schools.  By  the  Rev.  T.  G.
Halu-,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Mathematics  in  King's  College.
London.     12mo.     2s.

Hamilton's  Hedaya.

A  new  edition,  with  the  obsolete  passages  omitted,  and  a  copious
Index  added  by  S.  G.  Grady.     8vo.     £\   158.

Handbook  of  Reference  to  the  Maps  of  India.

Giving  the  Lat.  and  Long,  of  places  of  note.    1 8mo.  Ss.  6d.

*^*  This  will  be  found  a  valuable  Companion  to  Messrs.  Allen  Jj;  Co.'*

Maps  of  India.

Hardware;  How  to  Buy  it  for  Foreign  Markets.

By.  J.  Wilson  Browne.     (See  page  5.)

This  is  the  most  complete  Guide  to  the  Hardware  Trade  yet
brought  out ;  comprising  all  the  principal  Gross  Lists  in  (general
use,  with  Illustrations  and  Descriptions.     8vo.     lOs.  6d.

Hedaya.

Translated  from  the  Arabic  by  Walter  Hamilton.  A  New
Edition,  with  Index  by  S.  G.  Grady      8vo.     £1.  16s.

Henry  VIII.

An  Historical  Sketch  as  affecting  the  Reformation  iu  England.
By  Charles  Hastings  Collette.     Post  8vo.     Os.

Hindu  Law.

By  Sir  Thomas  Strange,  'i  vols.  Royal  8vo.,  1830.  248.
(See  page  13.)

Historical  Results

Deducible  from  Recent  Discoveries  in  Affghanistan.  By  H.
T.  Pkinsep.     8vo.     Lond.  1844.     ISs.


10  Wm.  H.  Allen  &  Co.,


Histories  of  India.

Mill,  9  vols.,  cr.  8vo.     £2  10s.     (See  page  92.)

Thornton,  0  vols.,  8vo.     £2  Ss.     (See  page  27.)

Thornton,  1  vol.,  8vo.     123.      (See  page  27.)

Trotter,  2  vols.,  8vo.     82s.     (See  page  28.)

Sewell  (Analytical)      Crown  8vo.     8s.     (See  page  3.)

Owen,  India  on  the  Eve  of  the  British  Conquest.     8s.     (See

page  22.)

History  of  Civilization  in  the  Fifth  Century.

Translated  by  permission  from  the  French  of  A.  Frederic
Ozanam,  late  Professor  of  Foreign  Literature  to  the  Faculty
of  Letters  at  Paris.  By  Ashby  C.  Glyn,  B.A.,  of  the  Inner
Temple,  Barrister-at-Law.     2  vols.,  post  8vo.     ;£1  Is.

History  of  Chess,

From  the  time  of  the  Early  Invention  of  the  Game  in  India,
till  the  period  of  its  establishment  in  Western  and  Central
Europe.     By  Doncan  Forbes,  LL  D      8vo      7s.  6d.

History  of  the  Opera,

From  Monteverde  to  Donizetti.  By  H.  Sutherland  Edwards.
Second  edition.     2  vols..  Post  8vo.     10s.  6d.

History  of  the  Pnnjanb,

And  of  the  Pvise,  Progress,  and  Present  Condition  of  the
Sikhs.      By  T.  Thobnton.     2  Vols.    Post  8vo.     8s.

Horses  of  the  Sahara,  and  the  Manners  of  the  Desert.

By  E.  Daumas,  CJeneral  of  the  Division  Commanding  at  Bor-
deaux, Senator,  &c.,  &c.  With  Commentaries  by  the  Emii
Abd-el-Kadir  (Authorized  Edition).     8vo.     6s.

"  We  have  rarely  read  a  work  giving  a  more  picturesque  and,  at  the
same  time,  practical  account  of  the  manners  and  customs  of  a  people,  than
this  book  on  the  Arabs  and  their  horses." — Edinburgh  Courant.

Hongh  (Lient.-Col.  W.)  Precedents  in  Military  Law.

8vo.  cloth.     25s.

Hnghes's  (Rev.  T.  P.)  Notes  on  Mnhammadanism.

Second  Edition,  Revised  and  Enlarged.     Fcap.  8vo.     6s.

Hydranlic   Manual   and  Working  Tables,  Hydraulic   and

Indian  Meteorological  Statistics.  Published  under  the
patronage  of  the  liight  Honourable  the  Secretary  of  State  for
India.     Bj  Lowis  D'A  Jackson.     8vo.     28s.


Illustrated  Horse  Doctor.

Being  an  Accurate  and  Detailed  Account,  accompanied  bv
more  than  400  Pictorial  Representations,  characteristic  of  the
various  Diseases  to  which  the  Equine  Race  are  subjected:
together  with  the  latest  Mode  of  Treatment,  and  all  the  re-
quisite Prescriptions  written  in  Plain  English.  By  Edward
Mayhew,   M.R.C.V.S.     8vo.    18s.  6d,

Contents. — The  Brain  and  Nervous  System. — The  Eyes.—
The  Mouth.— The  Nostrils.— The  Throat.-— The  Chest  and  its
contents. — The  Stomach,  Liver,  &c. — The  Abdomen.  — The
Urinary  Organs — The  Skin. — Specific  Diseases. — Limbs  •—
The  Feet. —  Injuries. — Operations.

"The  book  contains  nearly  600  pages  of  valuable  matter,  which
reflects  great  credit  on  its  author,  and,  owing  to  its  practical  details,  the
result  of  deep  scientific  research,  desei-ves  a  place  in  the  library  of  medical,
veterinary,  and  non-professional  readers." — Field.

"  The  book  furnishes  at  once  the  bane  and  the  antidote,  as  the
drawings  show  the  horse  not  only  sufferingfrom  every  kind  of  disease,  but
in  the  different  stages  of  it,  while  the  alphabetical  summary  at  the  end  gives
the  cause,  symptoms  and  treatment  of  each." — Illttstrated  London  Newt.

Illustrated  Horse  Management.

Containing  descriptive  remarks  upon  Anatomy,  Medicine,
Shoeing,  Teeth,  Food,  Vices,  Stables  ;  likewise  a  plain  account
of  the  situation,  nature,  and  value  of  the  various  points ;
together  with  comments  on  grooms,  dealers,  breeders,  breakers,
and  trainers ;  Embellished  with  more  than  400  engravings
from  original  designs  made  expressly  for  this  work.  By  E.
Mayhew.  A  new  Edition,  revised  and  improved  by  J.  I.
LuPTON.  M.R.C.V.S.     8vo.  12s.

Contents. — The  body  of  the  hoi-se  anatomically  considered
Physic. — The  mode  of  administering  it,  and  minor  operations
Shoeing. — Its  origin,  its  uses,  and  its  varieties.  The  Teeth.
— Their  natural  growth,  and  the  abuses  to  which  they  arf  liable.

Food. — The  fittest  time  for  feeding,  and  the  kind  of  food
which  the  horse  naturally  consumes.  The  evils  which  are
occasioned  by  modem  stables.  The  faults  inseparable  from
stables.  The  so-called  "  incapacitating  vices,"  whioh  are  the
results  of  injury  or  of  disease.  Stables  as  thej  should  bo.
Grooms. — Their  prejudices,  their  injuries,  and  the^r  duties.
Points. — Their  relative  importance  and  where  to  look  for  their
development.  BBKi-DiNfi. —  Us  inconsisiencies  and  its  di.sap-
pointments.  Breaking  and  Tbajnino — Their  errors  and
their  results.


12  Wm.  H.  Allen  &  Co.,


India  Directory  (The).

For  the  Guidance  of  Commanders  of  Steamers  and  Sailing
Vessels.  Founded  upon  the  Work  of  the  late  Captain  James
HoRSBORGH,  F.R.S.

Part  I. — The  East  Indies,  and  Interjacent  Ports  of  Africa
and  South  America.  Revised,  Extended,  and  Illustrated  with
Charts  of  Winds,  Currents,  Passages,  Variation,  and  Tides.
By  Commander  Alkrkd  Dondas  Taylor,  F.R.G.S.,  Superin-
tendent of  Marine  Surveys  to  the  Governmentof  India.  £1  I8s.

Pari-  II. — The  China  Sea,  with  the  Ports  of  Java,  Australia
and  Japan  and  the  Indian  Archipelago  Harbours,  as  well  as
those  of  New  Zealand.  Illustrated  with  Charts  of  the  Winds,
Currents,  Passages,  &c.     By  the  same.     (In  the  Press.)

India  and  Her  Neighbonrs.

By  W.  P.  Andrew.     8vo.     With  2  Maps.     15s.

Indian  Administration.

By  H.  G.  Keene.     Post  8vo.     5s.

The  India  List,  Civil  and  Military,

Containing  Names  of  all  Otficers  employed  by  the  Indian
Government,  including  those  of  the  Public  Works,  Educational,
Political,  Postal,  Police,  Customs,  Forests,  Railway  and  Tele-
graphs Departments,  with  Rules  for  Admission  to  these
Services,  Furlough  Rules,  Retiring  Pensions,  StafiF  Corps
Regulations  and  Salaries,  &c.,  with  an  Index.  Issued  in  Jan-
uary and  July  of  each  year,  by  permission  of  the  Secretary  of
State  for  India  in  Council.     8vo,      10s.  6d.

Indian  Code  of  Civil  Procednre.

In  the  Form  of  Questions  and  Answers.  With  Explanatory
and  Illustrative  Notes.     By  Angelo  J.  Lewis.     123.  6d.

Indian  Criminal  Law}and  Procedure,

Including  the  Procedure  in  the  High  Courts,  as  well  as  that  in
the  Courts  not  established  by  Royal  Charter ;  with  Forms  of
Charges  and  Notes  on  Evidence,  illustrated  by  a  large  number
of  English  Cases,  and  Cases  decided  in  the  High  Courts  of
India:  and  an  Appendix  of  selected  Acts  passed  by  the
Legislative  Council  relating  to  Criminal  matters.  By  M.  H.
Starlino,  Esq  ,  LL.B.  &  F.  B.  Constable,  M.A.  Third
edition.     8vo.     £2  2s.

Indian  Penal  Code.

In  the  Form  of  Questions  and  Answers.  With  Explanatory
and  Illustrative  Notes      By  Angelo  J.  Lewis.      78.  6d.


Indian  and  Military  Law.

Mahonirnedan  Law  of  Inheritance,  &c.  A  Manual  of  tbe
Mahommedan  Law  of  Inheritance  and  Contract ;  comprising  the
Doctrine  of  the  Soonee  and  Sheca  Schools,  and  based  upon  the  text
of  Sir  H.  W.  Macnaqhten's  Principles  and  Precedents,  together
with  the  Decisions  of  the  Privy  Council  and  High  Courts  of  the
Presidencies  in  India.  For  the  use  of  Schools  and  Students.  By
Standish  Geote  Gkadt,  Barrister-at-Law,  Reader  of  Hindoo,
Mahommedan,  and  Indian  Law  to  the  Inns  of  Court.    8vo.     14e.

Hedaya,  or  Guide,  a  Commentary  on  the  Mussuhnan  Laws,
translated  by  order  of  the  Governor-General  and  Council  of  Bengal.
By  Charles  Hamilton.  Second  Edition,  with  Preface  and  Index
by  Standish  Geove  Geadt.  8vo.   £1  15s.

Institutes  of  Menu  in  English,  The  Institutes  of  Hindu
Law  or  the  Ordinances  of  Menu,  according  to  Gloss  of  Collucca.
Comprising  tbe  Indian  System  of  Duties,  Religious  and  Civil,
verbally  translated  from  the  Original,  with  a  Preface  by  SiE  William
Jones,  and  collated  with  the  Sanscrit  Text  by  Graves  Chamnet
Hattghton,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  Professor  of  Hindu  Literature  in  the
East  India  College.  New  edition,  with  Preface  and  Index  by
Standish  G.  Geadt,  Barrister-at-Law,  and  Reader  of  Hindu,
Mahommedan,  and  Indian  Law  to  the  Inns  of  Court.  8vo.,  cloth.  128.

Indian  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure.  Being  Act  X  of  I87i>,
Passed  by  the  Governor-General  of  India  in  Council  on  the  25th  of
April,  1872.    8vo.     12s.

Indian  Code  of  Civil  Procedure.  In  the  form  of  Questions
and  Answers,  with  Explanatory  and  Illustrative  Notes.  By
Angelo  J.  Lewis,  Barrister-at-law.     12mo.     12s.  6d.

Indian  Penal  Code.  In  the  Form  of  Questions  and  Answers.
With  Explanatory  and  Illustrative  Notes.  Bt  Anoelo  J.  Lxwis,
Barrister-at-Law.     Post  8vo.     Vs.  6d.

Hindu  Law.  Principally  with  reference  to  such  portions  of  it
as  concern  the  Administration  of  Justice  in  the  Courts  in  India.
By  SiE  Tho.\ias  Steange,  late  Chief  Justice  of  Madras.  2  vol*.
Royal  8vo.,  1830.    248.

Hindu  Law.  Defence  of  the  Daya  Bhaga.  Notice  of  the
Case  on  Prosoono  Coomar  Tajore's  Will.  Judgment  of  the  Judicial
Committee  of  the  Privy  Conncil.  Examination  of  such  Judgment.
By  John  Cochbane,  Barrister-at-Law.     Royal  8vo.     208.

Law  and  Customs  of  Hindu  Castes,  within  the  Dekhan  Pro-
vinces subject  to  the  Presidency  of  Bombay,  chiefly  afiecting  Civil
Suits.    By  Aethub  Steele.    Royal  8vo.    £1  Is.

Chart  of  Hindu  Inheritance.  With  an  Explanatory  Treatise,
By  Almabic  RxrMSSX.    8vo.    68.  6d.


U  Wm.  H.  Allen  &  Co.,

]\Ianual  of  Military  Law.  For  all  ranks  of  the  Army,  Militia
and  Volunteer  Serrices.  By  Colonel  J.  K.  PiPON,  Assist.  Adjutant
Gkaeral  at  Head  Quarters,  &  J.  F.  Collieb,  Esq.,  of  the  Inner
Temple,  Barrister-at-Law.  Third  and  E«Tised  Edition.  Pocket
size.     5s.

Pi'ecedents  in  Military.  Law  ;  including  the  Practice  of  Courts-
Martial  ;  the  Mode  of  Conducting  Trials ;  the  Duties  of  OflBcers  at
Military  Courts  of  Inquests,  Coiu*ts  of  Inquiry,  Courts  of  Bequests,
&c.,  &c.     The  following  are  a  portion  of  the  Contents  :—

1.  Military  Law.  2.  Martial  Law.  3.  Courts-Martial.  4.
Courts  of  Inquiry.  5.  Courts  of  Inquest.  6.  Courts  of  Request.
7.  Forms  of  Courts-Martial.  8.  Precedents  of  MiUtary  Law.
9.  Trials  of  Arson  to  Bape  (Alphabetically  arranged.)  10.  Rebellions.
11.  Riots.  12.  Miscellaneous.  By  Lieut.-Col.  W.  HouoH,  late
Deputy  Judge-Advocate-General,  Bengal  Army,  and  Author  of
several  Works  on  Courts-MartiaL     One  thick  8vo.  vol.     25s.

The  Practice  of  Courts  Martial.  By  Hough  &  Long.  Thick  8vo.
London,  1825.  268.

Indian  Infanticide.

Its  Origin,  Progress,  and  Suppression.  By  John  Cave-Bkown,
M.A.     Hvo.     5s.

Indian  Wisdom,

Or  Exaraples  of  the  Religious,  Philosophical  and  Ethical
Doctrines  of  the  Hindus.  With  a  brief  History  of  the  Chief
Departments  of  Sanscrit  Literature,  and  some  account  of  the
Past  and  Present  Condition  of  India,  Moral  and  Intellectual.
By  MoNiER  Williams,  M.A.,  Boden  Professor  of  Sanscrit  in
in  the  University  of  Oxford.     Third  Edition.     8vo.     15s.

Ionian  Islands  in  1863.

By  Professor  D.  T.  Ansted,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  &c.|  8vo.,  with
Maps  and  Cuts.     8s.

Jackson's  (Lowis  D'A.)  Hydraulic  Manual  and  Working
Tables,  Hydraulic  and  Indian  Meteorological  Statistics.
8vo.     28s.     (See  page  10.)

Jackson  (Lowis  D'A.)  Canal  and  Culvert  Tables.  Roy.  8vo.
28s.     (See  page  5.)

Japan,  the  Amoor  and  the  Pacific.

With  notices  of  other  Places,  comprised  in  a  Voyage  of  Circum-
navigation in  the  Imperial  Russian  Corvette  Rynda,  in  1858 —
18(30.    Bv  Henry  A.  TiLLEY.    Eight  Illustrations,    8vo.   16s.

Jersey,  Guernsey,  Aldemey,  Sark,  &c.

The  Channel  Isl.^nds.  Containing:  Part  I. — Physical  Geo-
graphy. Part  II.  — Natural  History.  Part  III — Civil  His-
tory. Part  IV. — Economics  and  Trade.  By  David  Thomas
Ansted,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  and  Roberi-  Gordon  Latham,  M.A.,
M.D.,  F.R.S.     New  and  Cheaper  Edition  in  one  handsome


13,  Waterloo  Place,  Pall  Mall.  15


8vo.  Volume,  with   72   Illustrations   on  Wood  by  Vizetelly,
Loudon,  Nicholls,  and  Hart  ;  with  Map.     168.

"  This  is  a  really  valuable  work.  A  book  which  will  long  remain  the
standard  authority  on  the  subject.  No  one  who  has  been  to  the  Channel
Islands,  or  who  purposes  going  there  will  be  insensible  of  its  value." —

Saturday  Review.
"  It  is  the  produce  of  manj  hands  and  everj  hand  a  good  one."

Jerrold's  (Blauchard)  at  Home  in  Paris.

2  Vols.     Post  8vo.      16s.
Kaye  (Sir  J.  W.)  The  Sepoy  War  in  India.    (See  page  5i5.)

Vol.  1.      18s.

Vol.  2,     db'l.

Vol.  -6.     £1.
Zaye  (Sir  J.  W.)  History  of  the  War  in  Aflfghanistan.

New  edition.     3  Vols.     Crown  8vo.     £1.  6s.
Kaye  (Sir  J.  W.)  H.  St.  G.  Tncker's  Life  and  Correspondence.

8vo.      10s.
Eaye's  (Sir  J.  W.)  Memorials  of  Indian  Governments.

By  H.  St.  George  Tucker.     8vo.      lOs.
Keene's  (H.  G.)  Mogul  Empire.

8vo.      IDs.  6d.     (See  page  2Ji.)
Eeene's  (H.  G.)  Administration  in  India.

Post  8vo      9s.
Keene  (H.  G.).    The  Turks  in  India.

Historical  Chapters  on  the  Administration  of  Hindostan

by   the    Chugtai    Tartar,   Babar,   and    his    Descendants.

12s.  6d.
Kenneth  Trelawny.

By  Alec  Feaeon.     Author  of  "  Touch  not  the  Nettle."

2  vols.     Crown  8to.     21s.
Lady  Morgan's  Memoirs.

Autobiography,    Diaries  and  Correspondence.      5i  Vols.  f<vo  ,

with  Portraits.     J  8s.
Latham's  (Dr.  E.  G.)  Nationalities  of  Europe.

Q  Vols.     8vo.     12s.    (See  page  ii-^.)
Latham's  (Dr.  R.  G.)  Eussian  and  Turk,

From  a  (jeographical,  Kthnological,  and   Historical   Point  of

View.     8vo.     18s.
Law  and  Customs  of  Hindu  Castes,

By  Arthur  Steele.     Hoyal  8vo.     £1.    Is.     (^See  page  HM

Lee  (Eev.  F.  G.,  D.C.L.)  The  Words  from  the  Cross :  Seven
Sermons  for  Lent,  Passion-Tide,  and  Holy  Week.  Third
edition  revised.     Fcap.     Ss.  6d.


16


Wii.  H.  Allen  &  Co.,


Lee's  (Dr.  W.  N.)  Drain  of  Silver  to  the  East.

Post  8vo.     fts.

Lewin's  Wild  Races  of  the  South  Eastern  Frontier  of  India.
Includiugan  Account  of  the  Loshai  Country.  Post  8vo.   10s.  6d.

Lewis's  (iC  J.)  Indian  Penal  Code
Post  8vo.     7s.  6(1.    (See  page  12.)

Lewis's  Indian  Code  of  Civil  Procedure.
Post  8vo.      liis   6d.     (See  page  12.)

Leyden  and  Erskine's  Baber.

Memoirs  of  Zehir-eu-Din  Muhammed  Baber,  Emperor  of
Hindustan,  written  by  himself  in  the  Jaghatai  Turki,  and
translated  partly  by  the  late  John  Leyden,  Esq.,  M.D.,  and
partly  by  William  Ekskine,  Esq.,  with  Notes  and  a  Geo-
graphical and  Historical  Introduction,  together  with  a  Map  of
the  Countries  between  the  Oxus  and  Jaxartes,  and  a  Memoir
regarding  its  construction.  By  Charles  Waddington,  of  the
East  India  Company's  Engineers.    4to.   Lond.  1826.    £1  5s.

Lianconrt's  and  Pincott's  Primitive  and  Universal  Laws  of
the  Formation  and  development  of  language  ;  a  Bational  and
Inductive  System  founded  on  the  Natural  Basis  of  Onomatops.
8vo.      12s.  hd.

Lockwood's  (Ed.)  Natural  History,  Sport  and  Travel.
Crown  8vo.     With  numerous  Illustrations.     9s.

McBean's  (S.)  England,  Eg^t,  Palestine  &  India  by  Railway.
Popularly  Explained.     Crown  f^vo.,  with  a  coloured  Miip.     4s.

MacGrregor's  (Col.  C.  M.)  Narrative  of  a  Journey  through
the  Province  of  Khorassan  and  on  the  N.  W.  Frontier  of
Afghanistan  in  1875.  By  Colonel  C.  M.  MacGeegor,
C.S.I.,  C.I.E.,  Bengal  Staff  Corps.  2  vols.  8vo.  With
map  and  numerous  illustrations.     SOs.

Mahonunedan  Law  of  Inheritance  and  Contract.

By  Standish  Grove  Grady,  Barrister at-Law.  8vo.  14s.
(See  page  13.)

Malleson's  (Col.  0.  B.)  Final  French  Struggles  in  India.
Crown  8vo.      His.  6d.     (See  page  7.)

Malleson's  (Col.  G.  B.)  History  of  the  Indian  Mutiny,
1657-1658,  commencing  from  the  close  of  the  Second
Volume  of  Sir  John  Kaye's  History  of  the  Sepoy  War.
Vol.1.     Bvo.     With  Map.     £1.

Contents.  Book  Vll. — Calcutta  in  May  and  June. —
William  Tayler  and  Vincent  Eyre. — How  Bihar  and  Calcutta
were  saved.  Book  VIII. — Mr.  Colvin  and  Agra. — Jhansi
and  Bandalkhand. — Colonel  Durand  and  Holkar. —  Sir  George
Lawrence  and  Rajputana. — Brigadier  Polwhele's  great  battle


and  its  results. — Bartli,  Rohilkhaiid,  iind  Farakhabad.  Book
IX. — The  relation  of  the  annexation  of  Oudh  to  the  Mutiny.
— Sir  Henry  Lawrence  and  the  Mutiny  in  Oudh.— The  siege
of  Lakhnao. — The  first  relief  of  Lakhnao.

Vol.  II. — Including  the  Storming  of  Delhi,  the  Eelief
of  Lucknow,  the  Two  Battles  of  Cawnpore,  the  Campaign
in  Eohilkhand,  and  the  movements  of  the  several  Columns
in  the  1^.  W.  Provinces,  the  Azimgurh  District,  and  on  the
Eastern  and  South- Eastern  Frontiers.  8vo.  With  4  Plans.
20s.

Malleson's  (Col.  G.  B.)  History  of  Afghanistan,  from  the
Earliest  Period  to  the  Outbreak  of  the  War  of  1878.  8vo.
2nd  Edition.     With  Map.     18s.

Manning  (Mrs.)  Ancient  and  Mediaeval  India.

Being  the  History,  Religion,  Laws,  Caste,  Manners  and
Customs,  Language,  Literature,  Poetry,  Philoaophy,  Astronomy.
Algebra,  Medicine,  Architecture,  Manufactures,  Commerce.
&c.,  of  the  Hindus,  taken  from  their  writings.  Amongst  the
works  consulted  and  gleaned  from  may  be  named  the  Rig  Veda,
Sama  Veda,  Vajur  Veda,  Sathapatha  Brahraana,  Baghavat
Gita,  The  Puranas,  Code  of  Menu,  Code  of  Yajna-valkya,
Mitakshai'a,  Daya  Bagha,  Mahabharata,  Atriya,  Chaiuka,
Susruta,  Hamayana,  Eaghu  Vansa.  Bhattikavia,  Sakuntala
Vikramorvasi,  Malali  and  Madhava,  Mudra  Rakshasa,  Retna-
vali,  Kuinara  Sarabhava,  Piabodah,  Chandrodaya,  Mogha  Duta,
Gita  Govinda,  Panchatantra,  Hitopadesa,  Katha  Sarit,  Sagara,
Ketala.  Panchavinsati,  Dasa  Kumara  Charita,  &c.  By  Mrs
Manning,  with  Illustrations.     2  vols.,  8vo.    80s.

Manual  of  Military  Law.

By  Colonel  J.  K.  Pipon,  and  J.  F.  Collikb,  Esq..  of  the
Inner  Temple,  Barrister-at-Law.     5s.

Mayhew's  (Edward)  Illustrated  Horse  Doctor.
8vo.     18s,  6d      (See  page  11.)

Mayhew's  (Edward)  Illustrated  Horse  Management
New  edit.     By  J.  I.  Lupton.     Hvo.      I'^s.     (See  page  11.)

Mayhew's  (Henry)  German  Life  and  Manners.
)i  vols.,  8vo.      18s.
Also  a  cheaper  edition.  Post  bvo.     Ts.     (See  page  8.)

Max  Mnller's  Rig-Veda-Sanhita.

The  Sacred  Hymns  of  the  Brahmins ;  together  with  the
Commentary  of  Sayanacharya.  Published  under  the  Patron-
age of  the  Right  Honourable  the  Secretary  of  State  for  India  in
Council.     6  vols.,4to.  £'^  lOs.  per  volume.


18  Wm.  B.  Allen  &  Co.,


Meadow's  (T.)  Notes  on  China.

8vo.     98.


Military  Works — chiefly  issued  by  the  Government.

Field  Exercises  and  Evolutions  of  Infantry.    Pocket  edition,  Is.

Queen's  Regulations  and  Orders  for  the  Army.       Corrected  to

1874.    8vo.   3s.   6d.     Interleaved,  Ss.   6d.     Pocket  Edition,  Is.

Musketry  Regulations,  as  used  at  Hythe.    Is.
Dress  Regulations  for  the  Army.      1875.      Is.  Qd.
Infantry  Sword  Exercise.     1875.     6d.
Infantry  Bugle  Sounds,     fid.

Handbook  of  Battalion  Drill.     By  Lieut.  H.  C.  Slack.     2s  ;

or  with  Company  Drill,  29.  6d.
Handbook  of  Brigade  Drill.     By  Lieut.  H.  C.  Slack.     3s.

Red  Book  for  Sergeants.  By  William  Bbtght,  Colour-
Sergeant,  37tli  Middlesex  E.V.     Is.

Handbook  of  Company  Drill ;  also  of  Skirmishing,  Battalion,
and  Shelter  Trench  Drill.     By  Lieut.  Cm  kles  Slack.     Is.

Elementary  and  Battalion  Drill.  Condensed  and  Illustrated,
together  with  duties  of  Company  Officers.  Markers,  Ac.,  in  Batta-
lion.    By  Captain  Maiton.     2s.  6d.

Cavalry  Regulations.  For  the  Instruction,  Formations,  and
Movements  of  Cavalry.     Royal  Svo.     4s.  6d.

Cavaky  Sword,  Carbine,  Pistol  and  Lance  Exercises,  together

with  Field  Gun  Drill.     Pocket  Edition.    Is.
Manual  of  Artillery  Exercises,  1873.     Svo.     5s.
Manual  of  Field  Artillery  Exercises.     1877.     3s.
Standing  Orders  for  Royal  Artillery.     8vo,     3s.

Principles  and  Practice  of  Modern  Artillery.     By  Lt.-Col.  C.

H.  Owen,  R.A.    Svo.    Illustrated.     158.
Artillerist's  Manual  and  British  Soldiers'  Compendium.     By

Major  F.  A.  Geifpiths.     11th  Edition.     5s.
Compendium  of  Artillery  Exercises — Smooth  Bore,  Field,  and

Garrison  Artillery  for  Reserve  Forces.  By  Captain  J.  M.  McKenzie.

38.  6d.

Vifinciples  of  Gunneiy.  By  John  T.  Hyde,  MA.,  late  Pro-
fessor of  Fortification  and  Artillery,  Royal  Indian  Military  College,
Addiscombe.  Second  edition,  revised  and  enlarged.  With  many
Plates  and  Cuts,  and  Photograph  of  Armstrong  Gim.     Royal  Svo.

148.

Votes  on  Gunnery.      By  Captain  Goodeve.     Hevised  Edition.

iB.


13,  Waterloo  Vulch,  Pall  Mall.  10


Text  Book  of  the  Construction  and  Manufacture  of  Rifled
Ordnauce  in  the  British  Service.  By  Stokbt  &  Jomes.  Second
Edition.     Paper,  38.  6d.,  Cloth,  4*.  6d.

Handbooks  of  the  9,  16,  and  64-Pounder  R.  M.  L.
Converted  Guns.     6d.  each.

Handbook  of  the  9  and  10-inch  R.  M.  L.  Guns.     6d.  each.
Handbook  Oi  40-Pounder  B.  L   Gun.    Qd.

Handbooks  of  9-iuch  Rifle  Muzzle  Loading  Guns  of  154  tons,

and  the  10-inch  gun  of  18  tons.     6d.  each.
Treatise  on   Fortification  and  Artillery.     By  Major  Hector

Steaith.    Eevised  and  re-arranged  by  Thomas  Cook,  R.N.,    by

John  T.  Hyde,  M. A.     7th  Edition.     Royal  8vo.    llluatrated and

Four  Hundred  Plans,  Cuts,  &c.    £2  2s.

Military  Surveying  and  Field  Sketching.  The  Various
Methods  of  Contouring,  Levelling,  Sketching  without  Instruments,
Scale  of  Shade,  Examples  in  Military  Drawing,  Ac,  &c.,  Ac.  As  at
present  taught  in  the  Military  Colleges.  By  Major  W.  H.  BiCHA&BS,
55th  Regiment,  Chief  Garrison  Instructor  in  India,  Late  Instruc-
tor in  Military  Surveying,  Royal  Military  College,  Sandhurst.
Second  Edition,  Revised  and  Corrected.     128.

Treatise  on  Military  Surveying;  including  Sketching  in  the
Field,  Plan- Drawing,  Levelling,  Military  Reconnaissance,  Ac.  By
Licut.-Col.  Basil  Jackson,  late  of  the  Royal  Staff  Corps.  Th«
Fifth  Edition.     8vo.     Illustrated  by  Plans,  Ac.     145.

Instruction  in  Military  Engineering.     Vol.  1.,  Part  III.     48.

Elementary  Principles  of  Fortification.  A  Text- Book  for
Military  Examinations.  By  J.  T.  Htdb,  M.A.  Royal  8vo.  With
numerous  Plans  and  Illustrations.     lOs.  6d.

Military  Train  Manual.     Is.

The  Sappers'  Manual.  Compiled  for  the  use  of  Kngineer
Volunteer  Corps.  By  Col.  W.  A.  Fbankland,  RJ:.  With
numerous  Illustrations.     2s.

Ammunition.  A  descriptive  treatise  on  the  different  Projectiles
Charges,  Fuzes,  Rockets,  Ac.,  at  present  in  use  for  Land  and  Se«
Service,  and  on  other  war  stores  manufactured  in  the  Royal
Laboratory.    6«.

Hand-book  on  the  Manufacture  and  Proof  of  Gunpowder,  as

carried  on  at  the  Royal  Gunpowder  Factory,  Waltham  Abbey.   6s.
Regulations  for  the  Training  of  Troops  for  service  in  the  Field

and  for  the  conduct  of  Peace  Manoeuvres.     2s.
Hand-book  Dictionary  for  the  Militia  and  Volunteer  Services,

Containing  a  variety  of  useful  information,  Alphabetically  arranged.

Pocket  size,  Ss.  6d. ;  by  post,  Ss.  8d.
Gymnastic  E.xercises,    System  of  Fencing,  and  Exercises  for

the  Regulation  Clubs.    In  one  volume.    Crown  8to.    1877.    Ss.


20


Wm.  H.  Allem  &  Co.,


Army  Equipment.  Prepai'ed  at  the  Topographical  and
Statistical  Department,  War  Office.  By  Col.  Sir  Henbt  Jauss,
R.E.,  F.R.S.,  &c.,  Director.

Pabt,  1. — Cavalry.    Compiled  by  Lieut.  H.  M,  Hozisb,  2nd  Life

Guards.     Royal  8vo.     48.
Pabt  4. — Military  Train.     Compiled  by  Lieut.  H.  M.  Hozi£B,

2nd  Life  Guards.     Royal  8vo.     28.  6d.
Pabt   5.  —  Infantry.       Compiled  by    Capt.  F.   Mabtin  Pbtbib.

Royal  8vo.     With  Plates.     5s.
Pabt  6. — Commissariat.     Compiled  by  Lieut.  H.  M.  Hozieb,  2nd

Life  Guards.     Royal  Svo.     Is.  6d.
Pabt  7. — Hospital  Service.     Compiled  by  Capt.  Mautik  Pbtbib.

Royal  Svo.     With  Plates.     5s.

Text- Book  on  the  Theory  and  Motion  of  Projectiles ;  the  His-
tory, Manufacture,  and  Explosive  Force  of  Gunpowder ;  the  History
of  Small  Arms.     For  Officers  sent  to  School  of  Musketry.     Is.  6d.

Notes  on  Ammunition.     4th  Edition.     1877.     Ss.  6d.
Regulations  and  Instructions  for  Encampments.     6d.

Rules  for  the  Conduct  of  the  War  Game.     '2s.

Medical  Regulations  for  the  Army,  Instructions  for  the  Army,
Comprising  duties  of  Officers,  Attendants,  and  Nurses,  &c.  Is.  6d.

Purveyors'  Regulations  and  Instructions,  for  Guidance  of
Officers  of  Purveyors'  Department  of  the  Army.    Ss.

Priced  Vocabulary  of  Stores  used  in  Her  Majesty's  Service.  4s.

Transport  of  Sick  and  Wounded  Troops.  By  Dr.  Longmore.  58.

Precedents  in  Military  Law.  By  Lt-Col.  W,  Hough.  Svo.  258.

The  Practice  of  Courts-Martial,  by  Hough  &Long.  Svo.   268.

Manual  of  Military  Law.  For  all  ranks  of  the  Army,  Militia,
and  Volunteer  Services.  By  Colonel  J.  K.  Pipon,  and  J.  F.  CoL-
LIEB,  Esq.      Third  and  Revised  Edition.       Pocket  size.     5b.

Regulations  applicable  to  the  European  Officer  in  India.  Con-
taining Staff  Corps  Rules,  Staff  Salaries,  Commands,  Furlough  and
Retirement  Regulations,  &c.  By  Geobge  E.  Cochbane,  late
Assistant  Military  Secretary,  India  Office.    1  voL,  post  Svo.    78.  6d.

Reserve  Force;  Guide  to  Examinations,  for  the  use  of  Captains
and  Subalterns  of  Infantry,  Militia,  and  Rifle  Volunteers,  and  for  Ser-
jeants of  Volunteers.    By  Capt.  G.  H.  Gbeaves.     2nd  edit.     2s.

The  Military  Encyclopaedia  ;  referring  exclusively  to  the
Military  Sciences,  Memoirs  of  distinguished  Soldiers,  and  the  Narra-
tives of  Remarkable  Battles.    By  J.  H.  Stocqueleb.    Svo.     12b.


13,  Waterloo  Place,  Pali-  Mall.  21


The  Operations  of  War  Explained  and  Illustrated.     By  Col.

Hamlet.    New  Edition  Revised,  with  Plates.     Royal  8vo.    30b.
Lessons  of  War.    As  taught  by  the  (jreat  Masters  ana  Others ;

Selected  and  Arranged  from  the  various  operations  in  War.     By

Feance  James  Soady,  Lieut.-Col.,  R.A.     Royal  8vo.    Zls.
The  Soldiers'  Pocket  Book  for  Field  Service.     By  Col.  Sir

Q-AENET  J.  WoLSELEY.  2nd  Edition.  Revised  and  Enlarged.  4e.  6d.
The  Surgeon's  Pocket  Book,  an  Essay  on  the  best  Treatment  of

Wounded  iu  War.    By  Surgeon  Major  J.  H.  Porteb.    7s.  6d.

A  Precis  of  Modern  Tactics.  By  Colonel  Home.    8vo.   Ss.  6d.

Armed  Strength  of  Austria.    By  Capt.  Cooke.    U  pts.    Mi  iis.

Arnaed  Strength  of  Denmark.     3s.

Armed  Strength  of  Russia.    Translated  from  the  German.  Tb.

Armed  Strength  of  Sweden  and  Norway.     Ss.  Bd.

Armed  Strength  of  Italy.     58.  6d.

Armed  Strength  of  Germany.     Part  I.     Ss.  6d.

The  Franco-German   War  of  1870—71.     By  Capt.    C.    H.

Clahke.    Vol.  I.    £1  68.      Sixth  Section.     Ss.     Seventh  Section

68.   Eighth  Section.  Ss.   Ninth  Section.    48. 6d.    Tenth  Section.  6s.

Eleventh  Section.     Ss.  3d.     Twelfth  Section.    4«.  6d.
The  Campaign  of  1866  in  Germany.  Royal  8vo.  With  Atlas,  2  Is.
Celebrated   Naval  and   Military  Trials      By  Peter  Burke.

Post  8vo.,  cloth .    lOs.  6d.
Military  Sketches.  By  Sir  La8Ckli.es  Wbaxall.  Post  8vo.  Bs.
Military  Life  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington.     By  Jackson  and

ScOTT.     2  Vols.  8vo.     Maps,  Plans,  &o.     128.
Single  Stick  Exercise  of  the  Aldershot  Gymnasium.     6d.
Treatise  on  Military  Carriages,  and  other  Manufactures  of  the

Royal  Carriage  Department.     Ss.
Steppe  Campaign  Lectures.     2s.
Manual  of  Instructions  for  Army  Surgeons.     Is.
Regulations  for  Army  Hospital  Corps.     9d.
Manual  of  Instructions  for  Non-Commissioned  Officers,  Army

Hospital  Corps.     28.
Handbook   or  Military  Artificers.     Ss.
Instructions  for  the  use  of  Auxiliary  Cavalry.     28.  6d.
Equipment  Regulations  for  the  Army.     6s.  6d.
Statute  Law  relating  to  the  Army.     Is.  3d.
Regulations  for  Commissariat  and  Ordnance  Department  fls.


22  Wm.  H.  Allen  &  Go.,


Regulations  for  the  Commissariat  Department.     Is.  6d.
Regulations  for  the  Ordnance  Department.     Is.  6d.
Artillerist's  Handbook  of  Reference  for  the  use  of  the  Royal

and  Reserve  Artillery,  bj  Will  and  Dalton.     58.
An   Essay   on   the   Principles  and   Construction   of   Military

Bridges,  by  SiE  Howaed  Dottglas.     1853.     15b.

Mill's  History  of  British.  India,

With  Kotes  and  Continuation.     By  H.  H.  Wilson.    9  vols.

or.  8vo.     £2   10s.
Milton's  Poetical  Works,  with  Notes.

By  John  Bradshaw,  LL.D.,  Inspector  of  Schools,  Madras.

2  vols,  post  8vo.      10s.  6d.
Mogul  Empire.

From  the  death  of  Aurungzeb  to  the  overthrow  of  the  Mahratta

Power,    by   Henry   Gkorge   Keene,    B.C.S.     8vo.    Second

edition.      With  Map.      10s.  6d.

This  Work  fills  up  a  blank  between  the  ending  of  Elphinstone^s

and  the  commencement  of  Thorntons  Histories,
Mysteries  of  the  Vatican ;

Or  Crimes  of  the  Papacy.  From  the  German  of  Dr.  Theodore

Greisenger.     2  Vols,  post  Svo      218.
Nationalities  of  Europe.

By  Robert  Gordon  Latham,  M.D.     2  Vols.  Bvo.     128.
Natural  History,  Sport  and  Travel.

By  Edwahd  Lockwood,  Bengal  Civil  Service,  late  Magistrate

of  Monghyr      Crown  Bvo.     9s.
Nirgis  and  Bismillah.

N  IRQ  is;  a  Tale  of  the   Indian  Mutiny,  from  the  Diary  of  a
Slave  Girl :  and  Bismillah  ;  or,  Happy  Days  in  Cashmere.     By
Hafiz  Allard.    Post  8vo.     10s.  6d.
Notes  on  China.

Desultory  Notes  on  the  Government  and  People  of  China  and

on  the  Chinese  Language.     By  T.  T.  Meadows,  8vo.    9s.
Notes  on  the  North  Western  Provinces  of  India.

By  a  District  Officer.     2nd  Edition.     Post  bvo  ,  cloth.     Ss.

Contents. — Area  and  Population. — Soils. — Crops. —  Irriga-
tion.— Rent. — Rates. — Land  Tenures.
Owen  (Sidney)  India  on  the  Eve  of  the  British  Conquest.

A   Historical   Sketch.     By  Sid.ney  Owkn.   M.A.      Reader  in

Indian    Law    and    History   in    the    University    of    Oxford.

Formerly   Professor  of  History  in  the  Elphinstone  College,

Bombay.     Post  8vo.     Ss.


13,  Waterloo  Place,  Pall  Mall.


38


Oxenham  (Eev.  H.  N.)  Catholic  Eschatology  and  TTniver-

salism.  An  Essay  on  the  Doctrine  of  Future  Retribution.
Second  Edition,  revised  and  enlarf^ed.     Crown  8vo.     7s.  6d.

Oxenham's  (Rev.  H.  N.)  Catholic  Doctrine  of  the  Atonement.
8vo.      lOs.  6d.     (See  page  5.)

Ozanam's  (A.  F.)  Civilisation  in  the  Fifth  Century.  From
the  Frencli.    By  The  Hon.  A.  C.  Gi.yn.    --i  Vols,  jiost  8vo.  3  Is.

Pathologia  Indica,

Based  upon  Morbid  Specimens  from  all  parts  of  the  Indian
Empire.    By  Allan  Wkub.  B.M.S.  Second    Edit.    8vo.     14s.

Pelly  (Sir  Lewis).  The  Miracle  Play  of  Hasan  and  Husain.
Collected  from  Oral  Tradition  by  Colonel  Sir  Lewis  Pelly,
K.C.B.,  K.C.S.I.,  formerly  serving  in  Persia  as  Secretary
of  Legation,  and  Political  Eesident  in  the  Persian  Gulf.
Revised,  with  Explanatory  Notes,  by  Abthur  N.  Wol-
laston,  H.M.  Indian  (Home)  Service,  Translator  of  Anwar-
i-Suhaili,  &c.     2  Vols,  royal  8vo.     32s.

Pharmacopoeia  of  India.

By  Edward  John  Warino,  M.D.,  &c.  Bvo.    63.    (See  page  8.)

Physical  Geography.

By  Profkssok  D.  T.   Ansted,   M.A.,  F.R.S.,    &c.      FiftJi

Edition.  Post  Bvo.,  with  Illustrative  Maps.  7s
Contents: — Part  I. — Introduction. — The  Earth  as  a  Planet.
— Physical  Forces. — The  Succession  of  Rocks.  Part  II. —
Earth  — Land. — Mountains. — Hills  and  Valleys. — Plateaux
and  Low  Plains.  Part  III. — Water. — The  Ocean. — Rivera.
— Lakes  and  Waterfalls. — The  Phenomena  of  Ice. — Springs
Part  IV. — Air. — The  Atmosphere.  Winds  and  Storms. —
Dew,  Clouds,  and  Rain. — Climate  and  Weather.  Part  V. —
Fire. — Volcanoes  and  Volcanic  Phenomena  —Earthquakes.
Part  VI.  -Life. — The  Distribution  of  Plants  in  the  different
Countries  of  the  Earth. — The  Distribution  of  Animals  on  the
Earth.— The  Distribution  of  Plants  and  Animals  in  Time. —
Effects  of  Human  Agency  on  Inanimate  Nature.

"  The  Book  is  both  valuable  and  comprehensive,  and  desenrea  a  wide

circulation." — Ohnerver.

Pilgrimage  to  Mecca  (A).

By  the  Nawab  Sikandar  Begum  of  Bhopal.  Translated  from
the  Original  Urdu.  By  Mrs.  Wuxoughby  Osborni;.  B'ollowed
by  a  Sketch  of  the  History  of  Bhopal.  By  Col.  Willoughuv-
CisBORNE,  C.B.  With  Photographs,  and  dedicated,  by  permis-
sion, to  Her  Majesty.  Queen  Victorfa.  Post  8vo.  £1.  Is.
This  is  a  highly  important  book,  not  onlj  for  its  literary  merit,  i»n<l  the

information  it  contains,  but  also  from  the  fact  of  its  beinc;  the  first  work

written  by  an  Indian  lady,  and  that  lady  a  Queen.


One  thick  8vo.  Vol.     -^.^s.


Pebody  (Charles)  Authors  at  Work.

Francis  Jeflfrey — Sir  Walter  Scott — Robert  Burns — Charles
Lamb — R.  B.  Sheridan — Sydney  Smith — Macaulay — Byron
Wordsworth — Tom  Moore — Sir  James  Mackintosh.  Post  8vo.
10s.  6d.
Pollock  (Field  Marshal  Sir  George)  Life  &  Correspondence.
By  C.  R.  Low.     8vo.     With  portrait.     18s.

Practice  of  Courts  Martial.

By  Hough  &  Long.      8vo.      London.     1825.     2l3s.

Precedents  in  Military  Law ;

By  LiKUT.-Cor,.  W.  Hough.

Prichard's  Chronicles  of  Budgepore,  &c.

Or  Sketches  of  Life  in  Upper  India.  2  Vols.,  Foolscap  8vo.  ISs.

Primitive  and   Universal    Laws    of   the    Formation    and

Development  of  Language.     8vo.      12s.  6d.     (See  page  16.)

Prinsep's  (H.  T.)  Historical  Results.
8vo.      1 5s.

Prinsep's  (H.  T.)  Thibet.
Post  8vo.     5s.

Prinsep's  Political  and  Military  Transactions  in  India.
2  Vols.     8vo.     London,  1825.      18s.

Races  and  Tribes  of  Hindostan.

The  People  of  India.  A  series  of  Photographic  Illustrations
of  the  Races  and  Tribes  of  Hindustan.  Prepared  under  the
Authority  of  the  Government  of  India,  by  J.  Forbes  Watson
and  John  William  K.\te.  The  Work  contains  about  450
Photographs  on  mounts,  in  Eight  Volumes,  super  royal  4to.
£2    5s.  per  volume.

Red  Book  for  Sergeants.

By  W.  Bhight,  Culour-Sergeant,  37th  Middlesex  R.V.  Fcap.
interleaved.      Is.

Regiments  of  the  British  Army  (The).

Chronologically  arranged.  Showing  their  History,  Services,
Uniform,  &c.  By  Captain  R.  Trjme.»i,  late  35th  Regiment.
Svo.      10s.  6rl.

Republic  of  Fools  (The).

Being  the  History  of  the  People  of  Abdera  in  Thrace,  from
the  German  of  C.  M.  Von  Wieland.  By  Rev.  Henry  Christ-
mas, M.A.     2  Vols   crown  8vo.      12s.

Richards  (Major  W  H.)  Military  Surveying,  &c.

12s.     (See  page  19.)


13,  Waterloo  Pi^ce,  Pall  Mall.  25

Russians  at  Home.

Unpolitical  Sketches,  showing  what  Newspapers  they  read,  what
Theatres  they'  frequent ;  and  how  they  eat,  drink  and  enjoy
themselves  ;  with  other  matter  relating  chiefly  to  Literature,
Music,  and  Places  of  Historical  and  Religious  Interest  in  and
about  Moscow.  By  H.  Sutheri^nd  Edwards.  Second  Edition,
post  8vo.,  with  Illustrations.     Os

Russian  and  Turk,  from  a  Geographical,  Ethnological,  and
Historical  point  of  View.  By  K.  G.  IjAtham,  M.A.,  M.D.,  Ac.
8vo.     18s.

Sanderson's  (G.  P.)  Thirteen  Years  among  the  Wild
Beasts  of  India.     Small  4to.     '25s.     (See  page  87.)

Sepoy  War  in  India.

A  History  of  the  Sepoy  War  in  India,  1857 — 1858.  By  Sir
John  William  Kaye,  Author  of  "The  History  of  the  War  in
Affghanistan."  Vol.  1 ,  8vo.  IBs.  Vol.  II.  £1.  Vol.  Ill.jei.
Contexts  OF  Vol.  I. : — BpoK  I. — Introductory. — The  Con-
quest of  the  Punjab  and  Pegu. — The  "  Right  of  Lapse." — The
Annexation  of  Oude. — Progress  of  Englishism.  Book  II. — The
Sepoy  Army  :  its  Rise,  Progress,  and  Decline. — Early  His-
tory of  the  Native  Array. — Deteriorating  Influences. — The
Sindh  Mutinies. — The  Punjaub  Mutinies.  Discipline  of  the
Bengal  Army.  Book  III. — The  Ouibreak  of  the  Mutiny. —
Lord  Canning  and  his  Council. — The  Oude  Administration  and
the  Persian  War. — The  Rising  of  the  Storm. — The  First
Mutiny. — Progress  of  Mutiny. — Excitement  in  Upper  India  —
Bursting  of  the  Storm. — Appkndix,

Contents  of  Vol  II.: — Book  IV. — The  Rising  in  the
North-west.  The  Delhi  History. — The  Outbreak  at  Meerut.
^The  Seizure  of  Delhi.— Calcutta  in  May. — Last  Days  of
General  Anson. — The  March  upon  Delhi  Book  V. — Pro-
gress OF  Rebellion  in  Upper  India  — Benares  and  Alla-
habad.— Cawnpore. — The  March  to  Cawnpore. — Re-occupation
of  Cawnpore  Book  VI.— The  Punjab  and  Delhl — First
Conflicts  in  the  Punjab. — Peshawur  and  Rawul  Pindcr. — Pro-
gress of  Events  in  the  Punjab.  — Delhi — First  Weeks  of  the
Siege. — Progress  of  the  Siege. — The  Last  Succours  from  the
Punjab.

Contents  of  Vol  III. :— Book  VII.— Bengal,  Behar.
AND  the  North-west  Provinces. — At  the  Seat  of  Govern-
ment.— The  Insurrection  in  Behar.— The  Siege  of  Arrah. —
Behar  and  Bengal.  Book  VIII.— Mutiny  and  Rebellion
in  the  Northwest  Provinces. — Agra  in  May.— Insurrec-
tion in  the  Districts.— Bearing  of  the  Native  Chiefs.— Agra  in


26  Wm.  H.  Allen  &  Co.,

June,  July,  August  and  September.  Book  IX. — Lucknow
AND  Delhi. — Kebelliou  in  Oiide. — Eevolt  in  the  Districts. —
Lucknow  in  June  and  July. — The  siege  and  Capture  of  Delhi.

Sewell's  (Robert)  Analytical  History  of  India.

Crown  bvo.     8s.     (See  page  3.)

Sherer.    Who  is  Mary  1

A  Cabinet  Novel,  in  one  volunae.  By  J.  W.  Sheeeb,  Esq.,
C.S.I.     10s.  6d.

Simpson.  Archseologia  Adelensis;  or  a  History  of  the  Parish
of  Adel,  in  the  West  Eiding  of  Yorkshire.  Being  an
attempt  to  delineate  its  Past  and  Present  Associations,
Archaeological,  Topographical,  and  Scriptural.  By  Henby
Teaill  Simpson,  M.A.,  late  Eector  of  Adel.  With  nu-
merous etchings  by  W.  Lloyd  Feegussen.  Roy.  8vo.
21s.

Sin :  Its  Causes  and  Consequences.

An  attempt  to  Investigate  the  Origin,  Nature,  Extent  and
Results  of  Moral  Evil.  A  Series  of  Lent  Lectures.  By  the
Rev.  Hknry  Christmas,  M.A.,  F.R.S.     Post  8vo,     58.

Social  Life  in  Mnnich.

By  li^DWAED  WiLBERFOKCE,    Sccond  Edition.    Post  8vo.     Bs.
"  A  very  able  volume.  Mr.  Wilberforce  is  a  very  pleasant  and  agree-
able vrriter  whose  opinion  is  worth  hearing  on  the  subject  of  modem  art
which  enters  largely  into  the  matter  of  his  diacoiirse." — Saturday  Review.

Starling  (M.  H.)  Indian  Criminal  Law  and  Procedure.

Third  edition.     8vo.     £'2  2s.

Student's  Chemistry.

Being  the  Seventh  Edition  of  Household  Chemistry,  or  the
Science  of  Home  Life.  By  Albert  J.  Beknays,  Ph.  Dr.
F.C.S.,  Prof,  of  Chemistry  and  Practical  Chemistry  at  St.  Thomas'
Hospital,  Medical,  and  Surgical  College.    Post  8vo.     6s.  6d.

Strahge's  (Sir  T.)  Hindu  Law.

2  Vols.     Royal  8vo.     1830.     -248.     (See  page  18.)

"  Their  Majesties  Servants" :

Annals  of  the  English  Stage.  Actors,  Authors,  and  Audiences.
From  Thomas  Betterton  to  Edmund  Kean.  By  Dr.  Dokan,
F.S.A.,  Author  of  "  Table  Traits,"  "  Lives  of  the  Queens  of
England  of  the  House  of  Hanover."  &c.     Pust  8vo.     6s.

"  Every  page  of  the  work  is  barbed  with  wit,  and  will  make  its  way

point  foremost provides   entertainment   for   the  most   diverse

tastes." — Daily  News.


13,  Waterloo  Place,  Pall  Mall.  27


Textile  Manufactures  and  Costumes  of  the  People  of  India,

As  originally  prepared  under  the  Authoritj  of  the  Secretary  of

State   for   India  in   Council.     By  J.  Forbes  Watson.  M.A.,

M.D.,  F  R.A.S.,  Reporter  on  the  Products  of  India.     Folio.

half-morocco.  With  numerous  Coloured  Photographs,    i'3.  58.

This  work — by  affording  a  key  to  the  Fashions  of  the  People,  and  to

the  Cotton,  Silk,  and   Wool  Textiles  in  actual  use  in  India — is  of  special

interest  to  Manufacturers,  Merchants,  and  Agents ;  as  also  to  the  Student

and  lover  of  ornamental  art.

Theories  of  History.

An  Inquiry  into  the  Theories  of  History, — Chance, — Law, —
Will.  With  Special  Reference  to  the  Principle  of  Positive
Philosophy.     By  W^illiam  Adam      8vo.     158.

Thirteen  Years  among  the  Wild  Beasts  of  India;  their
Haunts  and  Habits,  from  Personal  Observation ;  with  an
account  of  the  AJodesof  Capturing  and  Taming  Wild  Elephants.
By  G.  P.  Sandekson,  Officer  in  Charge  of  the  Government
Elephaut  Keddahs  at  Mysore.  With  21  full  page  Illus-
trations and  three  Maps.     Second  Edition.    Fcp.  4to.    Jt'l  58.

Thomson's  Lunar  and  Horary  Tables.

For  New  and  Concise  Methods  of  Performing  the  Calculations
necessary  for  ascertaining  the  Longitude  by  Lunar  Observa-
tions, or  Chronometers ;  with  directions  for  acquiring  a  know-
ledge of  the  Principal  Fixed  Stars  and  finding  the  Latitude  of
them.    By  David  Thomson.    Sixty-fifth  edit.    Royal  8vo    lOs.

Thornton's  History  of  India.

The  History  of  the  British  Empire  in  India,  by  Edward
Thornton,  Esq.  Containing  a  Copious  Glossary  of  Indian
Terms,  and  a  Complete  Chronological  Index  of  Events,  to  aid
the  Aspirant  for  Public  Examinations.  Third  edition.  I  vol.
8vo.     With  Map.     12s.

*»*  2%e  Library  Edition  of  the  above  in  6  volumes,  8ro.,  majf  h*

had,  price  £2.  8s.

Thornton's  Gazetteer  of  India.

Compiled  chiefly  from   the  records  at  the  India  Office.     By
Edward  Thornton.     1  vol.,  Hvo.,  pp.  1015.    With  Map.   iil».
*^*   The  chief  objects  in  view  in  compiling  this  Oaxetleer  are : —
1st.  To  fix  the  relative  position  of  the  various  cities,  towns,  and  villagea
with  as  much  precision  as  possible,  and  to  e-rhilit  with  ike  greattH
practicable  brevity  all  that  is  known  respecting  them ;  and
2ndly.   To  note  the  various  countries,  provinces,  or  territorial  divisions,  and
to   describe   the  physical  characteristics  of  each,  together  with   their
statistical,  social,  and  political  circumstances.

To  these  are  added  minute  descriptions  of  the  principal  riven
and  chains  of  mountains;  thus  presenting  to  the  reader,  within  a  brief  com'
pass,  a  mass  of  information  which  cannot  otherwise  be  obtained,  except  from
a  multiplicity  of  volumes  and  manuscript  record*.


28


Wm.  H.  Allen  &  Co.,


£2  1(


Post  8vo.     5s.


of    the    Jains,
Faith   between


The  Library  Edition.

4  vols.,  8vo.     Notes,  Marginal  References,  and  Map
Thugs  and  Dacoits  of  India.

A  Popular  Account  of  the  Thugs  and  Dacoits,  the  Hereditary

Garotters  and  Gang  Robbers  of  India.     By  James  Hutton.

Post  8vo.     5s.
Tibet,  Tartary,  and  Mongolia.

By  Henhy  T.  Piunsep,  Esq.     Second  edition.
Tilley's  (H.  A.)  Japan,  &c.

8vo.     16s.     (See  page  14.)
Tod's  (Col.  Jas.)  Travels  in  Western  India.

Embracing   a    visit    to    the    Sacred    Mounts

and  the  most  Celebrated  Shrines  of  Hindu

Rajpootana  and    the  Indus,  with  an  account  of  the  Ancient

City  of   Nehrwalla.       By   the   late    Lieut.-Col.  James   Tod,

Illustrations.     Royal  4to.     £3  3s.

*^*  This  is  a  companion  volume  to  Colonel  Tod's  Rajasthan.

Trimen's  (Capt.  R.,  late  35tli  Regiment)  Regiments  of  the

British  Army  chronologically  arranged.     8vo.     Ids.  fid.
Trotter's  (L.  J.)  History  of  India.

The    History   of    the    British    Empire   in   India,   from   the

Appointment  of  Lord  Hardinge  to  the  Death  of  Lord  Canning

(1844  to    1862).      By  Lionel  James  Trotjer,  late  Bengal

Fusiliers.       2  vols.     8vo.      16s.  each.
Trotter's  (L.  J.)  Warren  Hastings,  a  Biography.

Crown  8vo.     9s.
Turkish  Cookery  Book  (The).

A  Collection  of  Receipts  from  the  best  Turkish  Authorities.

Done  into  English  by  Farabi  Efendi.    I'-imo.  Cloth.   3s.  6d.
Vambery's  Sketches  of  Central  Asia.

Additional  Chapters  on  My  Travels  and  Adventures,  and  of  the

Ethnology  of  Central  Asia.  By  Arnienius  Vambery.  8vo.    lbs.
"  A  valuable  guide  on  almost  untrodden  ground." — Athenaum.

View  of  China,

For  Philological  Purposes.  Containing  a  Sketch  of  Chinese
Chronology,  Geography,  Government,  Religion,  and  Customs.
Designed  for  tbe  use  of  Persons  who  study  the  Chinese
Language.     By  Rev.  R.  Morrison.     4to.    Macao,  18  J  7.     6s.

Waring' s  Pharmacopoeia  of  India.
8vo.     6s.     (See  page  2.)

Warren  Hastings :  a  Biography.  By  Captain  Lionel  James
Troiter,  Bengal  H.  P.,  author  of  a  "  History  of  India,"
"  Studies  in  Biography,"  &c.     Crown  8vo.     9s.


13,  Waterloo  Place,  Pall  Mall.  29

Water,  and  Water  Supply,  chiefly  in  Reference  to  the  liritish
Islands. — Surfrtce  Waters.  By  Professor  D.  T.  Ansted,  MA.,
F.R.S.,  F.G  S.,  &c.     Hvo      With  numerous  Maps.     18s.

Watson.    Money.

By  JcLES  Saudieu.  Translated  from  the  French  by  Mar-
garet Watson.     Crown  8vo.     7s.  6d.

Watson's  (Dr.  J.  Forbes)  Textile  Manufactures  of  India.
Folio,     i'3.  5s.     (So  -  paf,'e  27.)

Watson's  (Dr.  J.  F.)  and  J.  W.  Kaye,  The  People  of  India.
A  Series  of  Photograpiis.    Vols.  1  to  K,  £18.

Webb's  (Dr.  A.)  Pathologia  Indica.
8vo.     14s.     (See  page  23.)

Wellesley's  Despatches.

The  Despatches,  Minutes,  and  Correspondence  of  the  Marquis
Wellesley,  K.G.,  during  his  Administration  in  India.  5  vols.
8vo.     With  Portrait,  Map,  &c.     £6.  10s.

This  work  should  be  perused  by  all  who  proceed  to  India  in  ih*

Civil  Services.

Wellington  in  India.

Military    E^istory  of  the   Duke  of  Wellington  in    India.      Is.

Wilberforce's  (Edward)  Social  Life  in  Munich.
Post  8vo.     6s.     (See  page  26.)

Wilberforce's  (E.)  Life  of  Schubert.
Post  8vo.     6s.

Wilk's  South  of  India.
3  vols.     4to.     £5.  5s.

Wilkins.  Visual  Art ;  or  Nature  through  the  Healthy  Eye.
With  some  remarks  on  Originality  and  Free  Trade.  Artistic
Copyright,  and  Durability.  By  Wm.  Nov  Wilkins.  Author  of
'•Art  Impressions  of  Dresden,"  &c.     8vo.     6s.

Williams'  (F.)  Lives  of  the  English  Cardinals.
2  vols.,  8vo.     14s.     (See  page  7.)

Williams'  (F.)  Life,  &c.,  of  Bishop  Atterbury.
2  vols.,  8vo.     lis.     (See  page  4.)

Williams'  Indian  Wisdom.
8vo.      15s.     (See  page  14.)

Wilson's  Glossary  of  Judicial  and  Revenue  Terms,  and  of
useful  Words  occuriiiig  in  Official  Documents  relating  to  the
Administration  of  the  Government  of  British  India.  From  the
Arabic,  Persian,  Hindustani.  Sanskrit,  Hindi,  Bengali,  Uriya,
Marathi,  Guzarathi.  Telugu,  Karnata.  Tamil,  Malayalnm.  and
other  Languages.  Compiled  and  published  under  the  autho-
rity of  the  Hon.  the  Court  of  Directors  of  the  E.  I.  Company.
4to.,  cloth.     .£1  lOs.


30  Wm.  H.  Allen  &  Co.,


Wollaston's  (Arthur  N.)  Anwari  Suhaili,  or  Lights  of  Canopus

Commonly  known  as  Kalilah  and  Damnah,  being  an  adaptation
of  the  Fables  of  Bidpai.  Translated  from  the  Persian.  Royal
4to.,  with  illuminated  borders,  designed  specially  for  the  work,
cloth,  extra  gilt.     £3   13s.  6d.

Wollaston's  (Arthur  N.)  Elementary  Indian  Reader.

Designed  for  the  use  of  Students  in  the  Angio-Vemacular
Schools  in  India.     Fcap.     Is.

Woolrych's  (Serjeant  W.  H.)

Lives  of  Eminent  Serjeants-at-Law  of  the  English  Bar.  By
Humphry  W.  Woolrych,  Serjeant-at-Law.     2  vols.  8vo.    30s.

World  we  Live  In.

Or  First  Lessons  in  Physical  Geography.  For  the  use  of
Schools  and  Students.  By  D.  T.  Ansted,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  &c.
25th  Thousand.     Fcap.  8vo.     2s.

Wraxall's  Caroline  Matilda.

Queen  of  Denmark,  Sister  of  George  3rd.  From  Family  and
State  Papers.  By  Sir  Lascelles  Wraxall.  Bart.  3  vols.,  8vo.    IBs.

Wraxall's  Military  Sketches.

By  Sir  Lascelles  Wraxall,  Bart.     Post  Bvo.     6s.

"  The  book  is  clever  and  entertaining  from  first  to  l&st."—Atken<eum.

Wraxall's  Scraps  and  Sketches,  Gathered  Together.

By  StR  Lascelles  Wraxall,  Bart.     2  vols.,  Post  8vo.      12s.

Yakoob  Beg  (the  Life  of),  Athalik  Ghazi  and  Badaulet,
Ameer  of  Kashgar.  By  Demetrius  Charles  Boulgkr,
Member  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society.  8vo.  With  Map  and
Appendix.     16s.

Yesterday  and  To-Day  in  India.

By  Sidney  Laman  Blanchard.     Post  8vo.     6s.

Contents. — Outward  Bound. — The  Old  Times  and  the  New. —
Domestic  Life. — Ht)uses  and  Bungalows. — Indian  Servants  —
The  Great  Shoe  Question. — The  Garrison  Hack  — The  Long
Bow  in  India. — Mrs.  Dulcimer's  Shipwreck. — A  Traveller's
Tale,  told  in  a  Dark  Bungalow. — Punch  in  India. — Anglo-
Indian  Literature. — Christmas  in  India. — The  Seasons  in
Calcutta. — Farmers  in  Muslin. —Homeward  Bound. — India
as  it  Is.

Young's  (J.  R.)  Course  of  Mathematics.

8vo.     128.     (See  page  7.)


13,  Watert.00  Place,  Pall  Mall.


31


A    SELECTION    FEOM


MKSSKS.  ALLE.N'S  CATALOGUE

OP  BOOKS  IN  THE  EASTERN  LANGUAGES,  &c.


HINDUSTANI,  HINDI,  Ac.

f  Dr.  Forhes's  Works  are  used  as  Class  Books  in  the  Colleges  and  Schools

in  India."]

Forbes 's  Hindustani-English  DictionaiT  in  the  Pereian  Character,
with  the  Hindi  words  in  Nagari  also;  and  an  English  Hindustani
Dictionary  in  the  English  Character;  both  in  one  Tolume.  By  Duir-
CAN  F0KBS8,  LL.D.     Royal  8vo.    428.

Forbes's  Hindustani  Grammar,  with  Specimens  of  Writing  in  the
Persian  and  Nagari  Characters,  Reading  Lessons,  and  Vocabulary.
8ro.     10s.  6d.

Forbes's  Hindustani  Manual,  containing  a  Compendious  Gram-
mar, Exercises  for  Translation,  Dialogues,  and  Vocabulary,  in  the
Roman  Character.  New  Edition,  entirely  revised.  By  J.  T.  Platts.
18mo.    38.  6d.

Forbes's  Bagh  0  Bahar,  in  the  Persian  Character,  with  a  complete
Vocabulary.     Royal  Bvo.     123  6d.

Forbes's  Bagh  0  Bahar  in  English,  with  Explanatory  Notes,
illustrative  of  Eastern  Character.     8vo.     88.

Eastwick  (Edward  B.)  The  Bagh-o-Bahar — literally  translated
into  English,  with  copious  explanatory  notes.     8ro.     lOs.  6d.

Forbes's  Tota  ivahani ;  or,  "  Tales  of  a  Parrot."  in  the  Persian
Character,  with  a  complete  Vocabulary.     Royal  8vo.     8s.

Small's  (Rev.  G.)  Tota  Kahani;  or,  "Tales  of  a  Parrnt."  Ti-ans-

lated  into  English.    8vo.     8s.
Forbes's  Baital  Pachisi ;  or,  '•Twenty-five  Tales  of  a  Demon,''

in  the  Nagari  Character,  with  a  complete  Vocabulary.  Royal  Bvo.   tft.

Platts'  J.  T.,  Baital  Pachisi ;  translated  into  English.    8vo.    8s.

Forbes's  Jkhwanu  s  Safa;  or,  "Brothers  of  Purity,"  in  the
Persian  Character.     Royal  8vo.     12s.  6d.

[For  the  higher  standard  for  military  officers^  examimations.']
Platts'  Ikhwanu  S  Safa;  translated  iuto  English.   8vo.  lOs.  6d.


32


Wm    H.  Allen  1  Co.,


Platts'  Grammar  of  the  Urdu  or  Hindustani-Language.   8vo.  12s.

Forbes's  Oriental  Penmanship  ;  a  Guide  to  Writing  Hindustani
in  the  Persian  Character.     4to.     8s.

Forbes's  Hindustani-English  and  English  Hindustani  Dictionary,
in  the  English  Character.     Bojal  S'^o.     368.

Forbes's  Smaller  Dictionary,  Hindustani  and  English,  in  the
English  Character.     12s.

Forbes's  Bagh  o  Bahar,  with  Vocabv.,     English  Character.     5s.

Hindustani  Selections,  with  a  Vocabulary  of  the  Words.  By
James  R.  Ballantyne.     Second  Edition.     1845.     5s.

Singhasan  Battisi.  Translated  into  Hindi  from  the  Sanscrit-
A  New  Edition.  Revised,  Corrected,  and  Accompanied  with  Copioua
Notes.    By  Sykd  Abdoolah.     Royal  8vo.     128.  6d.

Robertson's  Hindustani  Vocabulary.     3s.  6d.

Eastwick's  Prem  Sagur.     4to.  30s.

Akhlaki  Hindi,  translated  iuto  Urdu,  with  an  Introduction  and
Notes.    By  Sted  Abdoolah.    Royal  8vo.    128.  6d.

Sakuntala.  Translated  into  Hindi  from  the  Bengali  recension
of  the  Sanskrit.  Critically  edited,  with  grammatical,  idiomatical,  and
exegetical  notes,  by  Feedekic  Pincott.     4to.     128.  6d.

SANSCRIT.

Haughton's  Sanscrit  and  Bengali  Dictionary,  in  the  Bengali
Character,  with  Index,  serving  as  a  reversed  dictionary.     4to.     80s.

Williams's  English-Sanscrit  Dictionary.     4 to.,  cloth.  £3.  38.

Williams's  Sanskrit-English  Dictionary.     4to.     £4  14s.  6d.

Wilkin's  (Sir  Charles)  Sanscrit  Grammar.     4to.     15s.

Williams's  (Monier)  Sanscrit  Grammar.     8vo.     15s.

Williams's   (Monier)   Sanscrit  Manual ;    to  which   is   added,  a

Vocabulary,  by  A.  E.  Qoitgh.  18mo.    Ts.  6d.

Gough's  (A.  E.)   Key  to  the  Exercises  in  Williams's  Sanscrit

Manual.     18mo.     4s.

Williams's  (Monier)  Sakuntala,  with  Literal  English  Translation
of  all  the  Metrical  Passages,  Schemes  of  the  Metres,  and  copious
Critical  and  Explanatory  Notea.     Royal  8vo.    2l8.

Williams's  (Monier)  Sakuntala.  Translated  into  English  Prose
and  Verse.     Fourth  Edition.     Ss.

Williams's  (Monier)  Vikramorvasi.     The  Text.     8vo.     5s.

Cowell's  (E  B.)  Translation  of  the  Vikramorvasi.     8vo.    3s.  6d.


13,  Waterloo  Place,  Pall  Mall.  88

Thompson's  (J.  C.)  Bhagavat  Gita.     Sanscrit  Text.     58.

Haughton's  Menu,  with  English  Translation.    2  vols.    4to.    248.

Johnson's  Hitopadesa,  with  Vocabulary.     158.

Hitopadesa,  Sanscrit,  with  Bengali  and  English  Trans.  lOs.  6cL

Johnson's  Hitopadesa,  English  Translation  of  the.     4to.     58.

Wilson's  Megha  Duta,  with  Translation  into  English  Verse,
Ifotes,  Illustrations,  and  a  Yocabularj.    Bojal  8vo.    6*.

PERSIAN.

Richardson's  Persian,  Arabic,  and  English  Dictionary.  Edition
of  1852.    By  F,  Johnson.    4to.     £4,

Forbes's  Persian  Grammar,  Reading  Lessons,  and  Vocabulary.

Eoyal  Sto.     12s.  6d.
Ibraheem's  Persian  Grammar,  Dialogues,  &c.  Royal  8vo.  ISs.  6d.

Gulistan.  Carefully  collated  with  the  original  MS.,  with  a  full
Vocabulary.  By  John  Platts,  late  Inspector  of  Schools,  Central
Provinces,  India.     Eoyal  8vo.    12s.  6d.

Gulistan.  Translated  from  a  revised  Text,  with  Copious  Notes.
By  John  Platts.    8vo.     12s.  6d,

Ouseley's  Anwari  Soheili.    4to.    428.

Wollaston's    (Arthur    N.)    Translation  of   the  Anvari  Soheili.

Eoyal  8to.     £2  2s.
Keene's  (Rev.  H.  G.)  First  Book  of  The  Anwari  Soheili.    Persian

Text.    8vo.    5s.
Ouseley's   (Col.)  Akhlaki   Mushini.     Persian  Text.     8vo.     Ss

Keene's  (Rev.  H.  G.)  Akhlaki  Mushini.  Translated  into  English.
8vo.    3s,  6d.

Clarke's  (Captain  H.  Wilberforce,  R.E.)  The  Persian  Manual.
A  Pocket  Companion.

PAET  I.— A  CONCISE  Gbammab  op  thb  Lanouaob,  with  Exer-
cises on  its  more  Prominent  Peculiarities,  together  with  a  Selection  of
Useful  Phrases,  Dialogues,  and  Subjects  for  Translation  into  Persian.
PAET  II.— A  YocABULABT  ov  Ubkfttl  Wobds,  English  and
Peesian,  showing  at  the  same  time  the  diflTerence  of  idiom  between
the  two  Languages.     18mo.     78.  6d.

A  Translation  of  Robinson  Crusoe  into  the  Persian  Langunge.
Eoman   Character.      Edited  by  T.  W.  H.   Tolbobt,  Bengal   CitU

Service.     Cr,  8vo.     78.


84


Wm.  H.  Allen  &  Co.,


BENGALI.

Haughton's  Bengali,  Sanscrit,  and  English  Dictionary,  adapted
for  Students  in  either  language  ;  to  which  is  added  an  Index,  serving
as  a  reversed  dictionary.     4to.     30s.

Forbes's  Bengali  Grammar,  with  Phrasesand  dialogues.     Royal

8vo.     128.  6d.
Forbes's  Bengali  Reader,  with  a   Translation  and  Vocabulary

Eoyal  8to.     128.  6d.
Nabo  Nari.     12mo.     Ts.

AEABIC.

Richardson's  Arabic,  Persian  and  English  Dictionary.  Edition
of  1852.    By  F.  Johnson.    4to.,  cloth.    £4.

Forbes's  Arabic  Grammar,  intended  more  especially  for  the  use  of
young  men  preparing  for  the  East  India  Civil  Service,  and  also  for  the
use  of  self  instructing  students  in  general.     Royal  8to.,  cloth.     IBs.

Palmer's  Arabic  Grammar.     8vo.     18s.

Forbes's  Arabic  Reading  Lessons,  consisting  of  Easy  Extracts
from  the  best  Authors,  with  Vocabulary.     Koyal  8vo.,  cloth.     ISs.

Matthew's  Translation  of  the  Mishkat-ul-Masabih.  2  vols  in  1.
By  the  Rev.  T.  P.  HuaHES,  Missionary  to  the  Afghans  at  Peshawur.
{In  the  press.)

TELOOGOO.

Brown's  Dictionary,  reversed ;  with  a  Dictionary  of  the  Mixed
Dialects  used  in  Teloogoo.     3  vols,  in  2,  royal  8vo.    £5.

Campbell's  Dictionary.     Royal  8vo.     30s.

Bromn's  Reader.     8vo.     2  vols.     14s.

Brown's  Dialogues,  Teloogoo  and  English.     8vo.     5s.  6d.

Pancha  Tantra.     8s.

Percival's  English- Teloogoo  Dictionary,     10s.  6d.

TAMIL.

Bottler's  Dictionary,  Tamil  and  English.     4to.     428.
Babington's  Grammar  (High  Dialect).     4to.     12s.
Percival's  Tamil  Dictionary.     2  vols.     lOs.  6d.


I


13,  Waterloo  PiiAcs,  Pall  Mall.  35

OTJZEATTEE.

Mavor's  Spelling,  Guzrattee  and  English.     Ts,  6d.
Shapuaji  Edalji's  Dictionary,  Guzrattee  and  English.     2ls.

MAHRATTA.

Molesworth's  Dictionary,  Mahratta  and  English.     4to.     428.
Molesworth's  Dictionary,  English  and  Mahratta.     4to.     428.
Stevenson's  Grammar.     8vo.,  cloth.     17s.  6d.
Esop's  Fables.     19.mo.     Ss.  6d.
Fifth  Reading  Book.     Ts.

MALAY.

Marsden's  Grammar.    4to.    £1  Is.

CHINESE.

Morrison's  Dictionary.     6  vols.  4to.  £10.

Marshman's— Clavis  Sinica,  a  Chinese  Grammar.      4to.     f2  28.

Morrison's  View  of  China,  for  Philological  purposes:  containing  a
Sketch  of  Chinese  Chronology,  Geography,  Government,  Religion  and
Customs,  designed  for  those  who  study  the  Chinese  language.  4to.  6».

MISCELLANEOUS.

Reeve's  English-Carnatica  and  Carnatica-English  Dictionary.
2  vols.  (Very  slightly  damaged).     £8.

Collett's  Malayalam  Reader.     8vo.     1 2s.  6d.

Esop's  Fables  in  Camatica.     8vo.  bound.     1 2s.  6d.

A  Turkish  Manual,  comprising  a  Condensed  Grammar  with
Idiomatic  Phrases,  Exercises  and  Dialogues,  and  Vocabulary.  By
Captain  C.  F.  Mackenzie,  late  of  H.M.'s  Consular  Service.    W.


36


Wm.  H.  Allen  &  Co.


A  CHRONOLOGICAL  AND  HISTORICAL

CHART  OF  INDIA,

Price,  fully    tinted^  mounted   on  roller  or   in  case,  20s.
size,  about  40  in.  hy  50  in.

Showing,  at  one  view,  all  the  principal  nations,  government^,  and  empires  which
have  existed  in  that  country  from  the  earliest  times  to  the  suppression  of  the  Great
Mutiny,  A.D.  1858,  with  the  date  of  each  historical  event  according  to  the  vaxiout
eras  used  in  India.

BY

ARTHUR  ALLEN  DURTNALL,

Of  the  High  Court  of  Justice  in  England.

By  this  Chart,  any  person,  however  ignorant  of  the  subject,  may,  by  an  hour's
attention,  obtain  a  clear  view  of  the  broad  lines  of  Indian  History,  and  of  the
evolutions  which  have  resulted  in  the  dominion  of  Her  Majesty  as  EMPRESS  OF
INDIA.  It  will  be  found  invaluable  for  Educational  Pubi-oses,  especially  in
Colleges  and  Schools,  where  an  Indian  career  is  in  contemplation.  It  will  also  be
found  of  PEKHANLNT  nTiLiTi  in  all  Libraries  and  Offices  as  a  work  of  ready
reference  for  the  connection  of  events  and  dates.  Besides  the  History  of  India,  it
includes  the  contemporaneous  histories  of  Afghanistan,  Central  Asia,  and
EnsoPE.


A  RELIEVO   MAP  OF  INDIA.


HENRY  F.  BRION.

In  Frame,  '21s.

A  map  of  this  kind  brings  before  us  such  a  picture  of  the  surface  of  a  given
country  as  no  ordinary  map  could  ever  do.  To  the  mind's  eye  of  the  average
Englishman,  India  consists  of '  the  plains  '  and  'tlie  hills,'  chiefly  of  the  former,
the  hills  being  limited  to  the  Himalayas  and  tlie  Nilgiris.  The  new  map  will  at
least  enable  him  to  correct  his  notions  of  Indian  geography.  It  combines  the
usual  features  of  a  good  plain  map  of  the  country  on  a  scale  of  150  miles  to  the
inch,  with  a  faithful  representation  of  all  the  uneven  surfaces,  modelled  on  a  scale
thirty-two  times  the  hoiizontal  one;  thus  bringing  out  into  clear  relief  the  com-
parative heights  and  outlines  of  all  the  hill-ranges,  and  sliowing  broad  tracts  of
uneven  ground,  of  intermingled  hill  and  valley,  which  a  common  map  of  the
same  size  would  hardly  indicate,  except  to  a  very  practised  eye.  The  plains  of
Upper  India  are  reduced  to  their  true  proportions;  the  Central  Provinces,
Malwa,  and  Western  Bengal  reveal  their  actual  ruggedness  at  a  glance ;  and
Southern  India,  from  the  Vindhyas  to  Cape  Comorin,  proclaims  its  real  height
above  the  sea-level.  To  the  historical  as  well  as  the  geograpliical  student  such  a
map  is  an  obvious  and  important  aid  in  tr.icing  the  course  of  past  campaigns,  in
lealising  the  conditions  under  which  successive  races  carried  their  arms  or  settle-
ments through  tlie  Peninsula,  and  in  comprehending  the  difference  of  race,  climate,
and  physical  surroundings  which  make  up  our  Indian  Empire.  Set  in  a  neat
frame  of  maplewood,  the  map  seems  to  attract  the  eye  like  a  prettily-coloured
picture,  and  its  price,  a  guinea,  should  place  it  within  the  reach  of  all  who  care  to
combine  the  useful  with  the  omamentaL" — Home  News.


MAPS   OF  INDIA,   etc.

Messrs.  Allen  Sf  Co's  Maps  of  India  were  revised  and  mnoh  improved
during  1876,  with  especial  reference  to  the  existing  Administrative
Divisions,  Railways,  ^c.

District  Map  of  India  ;  corrected  to  1876;

Divided  into  Collectoratea  with  the  Telegraphs  and  Railways  from  Go-
vernment surveys.  On  six  sheets — size,  5ft.  6)n.  high;  5ft.  8ui.  wide,
£2;  in  a  case,' £2  128.  6d.  ;  or,  rollers,  vam.,  £3  38.

A  General  Map  of  India  ;  corrected  to  1876;

Compiled  chiefly  from  surveys  executed  by  order  of  the  Government
of  India.  On  six  sheets — size,  5  ft.  3  in.  wide  ;  5  ft.  4  in.  high,  £2  ;
or,  on  cloth,  in  case,  £2  12s.  6d. ;   or,  rollers,  vam.,  £3  38.

Map  of  India ;  corrected  to  1876  ;

From  the  most  recent  Authorities.  On  two  sheets — size,  2  ft.  lOin.
wide  ;  3  ft.  3  in.  high,  IGs. ;  or,  on  cloth,  in  a  case,  £1  Is.

Map  of  the  Routes  in  India;  corrected  to  187-1 ;

With  Tables  of  Distances  between  the  principal  Towns  and  Military
Stations  On  one  sheet — size,  2  ft.  3  in.  wide ;  2  ft.  9  in.  high,  98.  ;
or,  on  cloth,  in  a  case,  12s.

Map  of  the  Western  Provinces  of  Hindoostan,

The  Punjab,  Cabool,  Scinde,  Bhawulpore,  &o.,  including  all  the  States
between  Candahar  and  Allahabad.  On  four  sheets — size,  4  ft.  4iii.
wide ;  4  ft.  2  in.  high,  30s. ;  or,  in  case,  £2 ;  rollers,  varnished,  £2  10a.

Map  of  India  and  China,  Burmah,  Siam,  the  Malay  Penin-
sula, and  the  Empire  of  Anam.     On  two  sheets — size,  4  ft.  3  in.  wide  ;

3  ft.  4  in.  high,  16s. ;  or,  on  cloth,  in  a  case,  £1  58.

Map  of  the  Steam  Communication  and  Overland  Routes
between  England,  India,  China,  and  Australia.  In  a  case,  14s. ;  on
rollers,  and  varnished,  18s.

Map  of  China,

From  the  most  Authentic  Sources  of  Information.  One  large  sheet-
size,  2  ft.  7  in.  wide  ;  2  ft.  2  m.  high,  63. ;  or,  on  cloth,  in  case,  8s.

Map  of  the  World  ;

On  Mercator's  Projection,  showing  the  Tracts  of  the  Early  Navigators,
the  Currents  of  the  Ocean,  the  Principal  Lines  of  groat  Circle  Sailing,
and  the  most  recent  discoveries.  On  four  sheets— size,  6ft.  2  in.  wide  ;

4  ft.  3  in.  high,  £2  ;  on  cloth,  in  a  case,  £2  lOs  :  or,  with  rollers,  and
varnished,  £3.

Handbook  of  Reference  to  the  Mapn  of  India.

Giving  the  Latitude  and  Longitude  of  places  of  note.     18mo.    8s.  6d.

Russian  Official  Map  of  Central  Asia.  Compiled  in  accord-
ance with  the  Discoveries  and  Surveys  of  Russian  Staff  OflScers  up
to  the  close  of  the  year  1877.  In  2  Sheets.  lOs.  6d.,  or  ui  cloth
case,  14a.


THE


EOTAL    KALENDAE,


AND


COURT  &  CITY  REGISTER


FOR


FOR  THE   YEAR

18  7  9.

contatning  a  correct  list  of  the  twenty-flrst  imperial
Parliament,    summoned    to   meet    for  their   First
Session — March  5th,  1874.

House  of  Peers — House  of  Commons — Sovereigns  and  Rulers
of  States  of  Europe  -Orders  of  Knighthood — Science  and  Art
Department — QueenV  Household — Government  Ofiflces — Mint
— Customs — Inland  Revenue — Post  Office — Foreign  Ministers
and  Consuls — Queen's  Consuls  Abroad — Naval  Department —
Navy  List — Army  Department — ^Army  List — Law  Courts —
Police — Ecclesiastical  Department — Clergy  List — Foundation
Schools — Literary  Institutions — City  of  London — Banks — Rail-
way Companies — Hospital  and  Institutions — Charities — Miscel-
laneous Institutions — Scotland,  Ireland,  India,  and  the  Colonies ;
and  other  useful  information.


Price  with  Index y  7s. ;  without  Index,  5s.


Published  on  the  arrival  of  every  Mail  from  India,     SubteripHon  26#.  per
annum,  post  free,  specimen  copy,6d.

ALLEN'S    INDUN   MAIL,

AND
FBOM

INDIA,   CHINA,   AND  ALL   PARTS  OF  THE  EAST.

Allkn's  Indian  Mail  contains  the  fullest  and  most  aatbentic  Reports
of  all  important  Occurrences  in  the  Countries  to  which  it  is  devoted,  com-
piled chiefly  from  private  and  exclusive  sources.  It  has  been  pronounced
by  the  Press  in  general  to  be  indispensable  to  all  who  have  Friends  or  Rela-
tives in  the  East,  as  affording  the  Only  correct  information  regarding  the
Services,  Movements  of  Troops,  Shipping,  and  all  events  of  Domestic  and
individual  interest.

The  subjoined  list  of  the  usual  Contents  will  show  the  importance  and
variety  of  the  information  concentrated  in  Axlsn's  Indian  Mail.


Summon/  and  JRevieto  of  Eastern  News.


Shipping— Arrival  of  Ships

„  „  Pasaencera

„  Departure  of  Ships

„  „  Passengers

Commercial-State  of  the  Markets
„  IndianSecorities

„  Freights

ate.     ate.     *e.


Precis  of  Public  Intelligence
Selections  from  the  Indian  Press
Movements  of  Troops
The  Government  Gazette
Courts  Martial
Domestic  Intelligence— Births
I,  fy  Marriages

„  „  Deaths

Some  Intelligence  relating  to  India,  Sfc.
Original  Articles  Arrival  reported  In  EngUnd

Miscellaneous  Information  Departures       „  „

Appointments,    Idst    of    Fur-       Shipping— Arrival  of  Ships

loughs,  Extensions,  Sec.  \  ,,  „  Passengers

„  Civil  „  Departure  of  Ships

„  MiUtary  „  „  Passengers

„  Ecclesiastical  and  „  Vessel  spoken  with

„  Marine  I  *c.      »c.      *c.

Review  of  Works  on  the  East.-And  Notices  of  all  affairs
connected  with  India  and  the  Services.

Each  year  an  Indbz  is  furnished,  to  enable  Subaoriber*  to   bind  np  the  Tolooi*

which  forms  a  complete

ASIATIC  ANNUAL  REGISTER  AND  LIBRARY  OF  REFERENCE,
London:Wm.  H.  ALLEN  &  Co.,  18,  WATERLOO  PLACE,  S.W.

(publishers  to  the  INDIA  OFFICE),

To  whom  Communications  for  the  Editor,  and  Advertttememtt
are  requested  to  be  addressed.


Wm.  H.  ALLEN  &  Co.'s

LIST  OF  FORTHCOMING  WORKS.


THE  ARABIC  TEXT  OF  ALBIRUNI,

The  celebrated  Chronologist.  Translated  into  English  by
Dr.  E.  Sachatj,  of  the  Royal  University  of  Berlin.

THE  BUSTAN  OF  SADI,

A  Literal  Translation,  with  Explanatory  Notes,  Index,  and
Grlossary.    By  Captain  H.  Wilbeefoece  Claeke,  R.E.

A  JOURNEY  IN  AURACANIA.

By  GrEOEGE  Chawoeth  Mustees,  R.N.,  author  of  "  At
Home  with  the  Patagonians."

THE  ARABIC  MANUAL,

A  Compendium  of  Classical  and  Colloquial  Arabic.  By  Prof.
E.  H.  Palmee.

THE  RUSSIANS  AT  HOME  AND  THE
RUSSIANS  ABROAD.

Sketches,  Unpolitical  and  Political,  of  Russian  Life  under
Alexander  XL     By  H.  Sutherland  Edwaeds.

THE    CHURCH   UNDER   QUEEN
ELIZABETH.

An  Historical  Sketch,  By  the  Rev.  Feedeeick  G-eoege
Lee,  D.D.,  D.C.L.,  F.S.A.,  author  of  "Historical  Sketches
of  the  Reformation,"  &c,,  &c.

THE  PUS'HTO  MANUAL ;

Comprising  a  Condensed  Grammar,  with  Idiomatic  Phrases,
Exercises  and  Dialogues,  and  Vocabulary.  By  Major
H.  G.  Raveety,  Bombay  Army,  Retired  List.

A  TEXT-BOOK  OF  INDIAN  HISTORY;

With  Geographical  Notes,  Genealogical  Tables,  Examination
Questions,  and  Chronological,  Biographical,  Geographical,
and  General  Indexes.  For  the  use  of  Schools,  Colleges,
and  Private  Students.  By  the  Rev,  G.  U.  Pope,  D,D.,
Principal  of  Bishop  Cotton's  Grammar  School  and  College,
Bangalore;  Fellow  of  the  Madras  University.  Third
Edition,  thoroughly  revised.


(7


0


BINDING


SECT.     OCT  4    ^97^


f


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY


FK

820.^3
1879


Sa'dl

The  Bus tan


SI
