FIFTEEN SERMONS PREACHED AT THE ROLLS CHAPEL
Public domain. Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/bim_eighteenth-century_fifteen-sermons-preached_butler-joseph_1729): the 1729 second edition, corrected, with the author's Preface (London: printed by W. Botham, for James and John Knapton).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

FIFTEEN


SERMONS


Preached at the


ROLLS CHAPEI


Upon the following SUBJECTS.


Upon Humane Nature. Upon Forgiveneſs of Injuries.
Upon the Government of the | Upon Self. Deceit.
Tongue.
Upon the Love of our Neigh-
Upon Compaſſion. bour.
Upon the Character of Balaam. Upon che Love of God.
Upon Reſentment. | Upon the Ignorance of Man.


By FOSEPH BUTLER, L.L. B.
Preacher at the Rolls, and Rector of Stan-
hope in the Biſhoprick of Durham.


—


The Second Ep 1 T 10 U, correfted: To which is added a
PREFACE.


LONDON:


Printed by V. Botham, for Aus and Jon
KNnAPTON, at the Crown in St. Paul's Church-
Yard, M pcc xxix.


A. ..


>
3
|


2443444224

To the Right Honourable BY
Sir JoSEPH JEKYLL,
Maſter of the Ro LLS, &c.


The following SERMONS,
preached in his Chapel, are
with all pa Dedica-
ted,


BY
his moſt dutiful, and


moſt obedient Servant,


JoskPH BUTLER.
&a3-


4 *
, *
Ys
*


THE


PREFACE.


1 (HOUGH tis ſcarce poſſible to a-


void judging, in ſome way or o-
ther, of almoſt every thing which
offers itſelf ro one's Thoughts; yet tis cer-
tain that many Perſons, from different Cau-
ſes, never exerciſe their Judgment, upon
what comes before them, in the way of de-
termining whether it be concluſive and holds,
They are perhaps entertained with ſome
things,not ſo with others ; they like and they
diſlike : But whether that which is propoſed
to be made out, be really made out or not;
whether a Matter be ſtated according to the
real Truth of the Caſe, ſcems to the gene-
rality of People merely a Circumſtance of
no Conſideration at all. Arguments arc of-
ten wanted for ſome accidental Purpoſe :
But Proof as ſuch is what they never want
for Themſelves ; for their own Satisfaction
of Mind, or Conduct in Life. Not to men-
tion the Multitudes who read merely for

the ſake of Talking, or to qualifie them-
ſelves for the World, or ſome ſuch Kind of
A 3 Reaſons ;


PREFACE.


Reaſons ; there are, even of the few who
read for their own Entertainment, and have
a real Curioſity to ſce what is ſaid, ſeveral,
which is prodigious, who have no ſort of
Curioſity to ſee what is true: I ſay, Curi-
oſity; becauſe tis too obvious to be men-
tioned, how much that religious and ſacred
Attention, which is due to Truth, and to
the important Queſtion, what is the Rule of
Life, is loſt out of the World.

Fo R the Sake of this whole Claſs of Rea-
ders, for they are of different Capacities,
different Kinds, and get into this way from
different Occaſions, I have often wiſhed,
that it had been the Cuſtom to lay before
People nothing in Matters of Argument but
Premiſes, and leave them to draw Conclu-
ſions themſelves; which, though it could
not be done in all Caſes, might in many.

THE great Number of Books and Papers
of Amuſement, which, of one Kind or ano-
ther, daily comein one's way, have in Part
occaſioned, and moſt perfectly fall in with
and humour, this idle way of reading and
conſidering things. By this Means, Time
even in Solitude is happily got rid of, with-
out the Pain of Attention : Neither is any
Part of it more put to the Account of Idle-
neſs, one can ſcarce forbear ſaying, is ſpent
with leſs Thought, than great Part of that,
which is ſpent in Reading.


THUS


PREFACE


Tuus People habituate themſelves to let
things paſs through their Minds, as one may
ſpeak, rather than to think of them. Thus by
Uſe they become fatisficd merely with ſee-
ing what is ſaid, without going any further.
Review and Attention, and even forming a
Judgment, becomes Fatigue; and to lay a-
ny thing before them that requires it, is put-
ting them quite out of their Way.

THERE are allo Perſons, and there are
at leaſt more of them than have a Right to
claim ſuch Superiority, who take for grant-
ed, that they arc acquainted with every thing;
and that no Subject, if treated in the Man-
ner it ſhould be, can be treated in any Man-
ner but what is familiar and caſie to them.

'T 1s true indeed, that few Perſons have a
Right to demand Attention; but tis alſo
true, that nothing can be underſtood with-
out that Degree of it, which the very Na-
ture of the thing requires. Now Morals,
conſidered as a Science, concerning which
ſpeculative Difficulties are daily raiſed, and
treated with Regard to thoſe Dithculties,
plainly require a very peculiar Attention,
For here Ideas never are in themſelves deter-
minate, but become ſo, by the Train of
Reaſoning and the Place they ſtand in;
ſince tis impoſſible that Words can always
ſtand for the ſame Ideas, even in the ſame
Author, much leſs in different ones. Hence

A 4 an


11¹


iv


PREFACE.


an Argument may not readily be apprehend-
ed, which is different from its being miſta-
ken; and even Caution to avoid being miſ-
taken may, in ſome Caſes, render it leſs rea-
dily apprehended. 'Tis very unallowable for a
Work of Imagination or Entertainment not
to be of caſte Comprehenſion, but may be
unavoidable in a Work of another Kind,
where a Man is not to form or accommodate,
but to ſtate things as he finds them.

Ir muſt be acknowledged that ſome of the
following Diſcourſes are very abſtruſe and
difficult; or, if you pleaſe, obſcure :
But I muſt take Leave to add, that thoſe a-
lone are Judges, whether or no and how
far this is a Fault, who are Judges, whether
or no and how far it might have been avoid-
ed thoſe only who will be at the Trouble
to underſtand what is here ſaid, and to ſee
how far the Things here inſiſted upon, and
not other Things, might have been put in a
plainer Manner; which yet I am very far
from aſſerting that they could not.

Tuus much however will be allowed,
that general Criticiſms concerning Obſcuri-
ty conſidered as a diſtin thing from Con-
fuſion and Perplexity of Thought, as in ſome
Caſes there may be Ground for them; ſo in
others, they may be nothing more at the
Bottom than Complaints, that every thing
is not to be underſtood with the ſame Eaſe


that


PREFACE.


that ſome things are. Confuſion and Per-
plexity in Writing i is indeed without Excuſe,


| becauſe any one may, if he pleaſes, know


whether he underſtands and ſees through
what he is about: And tis unpardonable
for a Man to lay his Thoughts before O-
thers, when he is conſcious that he himſelf
docs not know whereabouts he is, or how
the Matter before him ſtands. Iis coming
Abroad in a Diſorder, which he ought to be
diſlatisfied to find himſelf in at Home.

B U T even Obſcuritics ariſing from other
Cauſes than the Abſtruſeneſs of the Argu-
ment, may not be always inexcuſable. Thus
a Subject may be treated in a Manner, which


all along ſuppoſes the Reader acquainted


with what has been ſaid upon it, both by an-
cient and modern Writers; and with what
is the preſent ſtate of Opinion in the World
concerning ſuch Subject. This will create
a Difficulty of a very peculiar Kind, and even
throw an Obſcurity over the whole before
thole who are not thus informed ; but thoſe
who arc, will be diſpoſed to excuſe ſuch a
Manner, and other things of the like Kind,
as a ſaving of their Patience.

HowEv ER upon the whole, as the Title
of Jermons gives ſome Right to expect what
is plain and of eaſie Comprehenſion, and as
the beſt Auditories are mixt; I ſhall not ſet
about to juſtific the FrOpaiary of Preaching,


O


PREFACE.


or under that Title Publiſhing, Diſcourſes
ſo abſtruſe as ſome of theſe are : Neither is
it worth while to trouble the Reader with
the Account of my doing either. He muſt
not however impute to me, as a Repetition
of the Impropriety, this ſecond Edition, but
to the Demand for it. |

WHETHER he will think he has any
Amends made him, by the following Illu-
ſtrations of what ſeemed moſt to require
them, I my ſelf am by no Means a proper


Judge.


THERE are two Ways in which the Sub-
ject of Morals may be treated. One begins
from inquiring into the abſtract Relations of
things: the other from a Matter of Fact,
namely, what the particular Nature of Man
is, its ſeveral Parts, their Oeconomy or Con-
ſtitution ; from whence it proceeds to de-
termine what Courſe of Life it is, which is
correſpondent to this Whole Nature. In the
former Method the Concluſion is expreſs d
thus, that Vice is contrary to the Nature and
Reaſons of things: In the latter, that tis a
Violation or Breaking in upon our own
Nature. Thus they both lead us to the ſame
thing, our Obligations to the Practice of
Virtue ; and thus they exceedingly ſtrengthen
and enforce each other. The firſt ſeems the

moſt


PREFACE.


moſt direct formal Proof, and in ſome Re-
ſpects the leaſt liable to Cavil and Diſpute :
The latter is in apeculiar Manner adapted to
ſatisfie a fair Mind; and is more caſily ap-
plicable to the ſeveral particular Relations
and Circumſtances in Life.

TRE following Diſcourſes proceed chief-
ly in this latter Method. The three firſt
wholly. They were intended to explain
what is meant by the Nature of Man, when
it is ſaid that Virtue conſiſts in following,
and Vice in deviating from it; and by ex-
plaining to ſnew that the Aſſertion is true.
That the ancient Moraliſts had ſome in ward
Feeling or other, which they choſe to ex-
preſs in this Manner, that Man is born to
Virtue, that it conſiſts in following Nature,
and that Vice is more contrary to this Na-
ture than Tortures or Death, their Works
in our Hands are Inſtances. Now a Perſon
who found no Myſtery in this Way of ſpeak-
ing of the Ancients; who, without being
very explicit with himſelf, kept to his natu-
ral Feeling, went along with them, and
found within himſelf a full Conviction that
what they laid down was juſt and true; ſuch
an one would probably wonder to ſce a
Point, in which he never perceived any Dit-
ficulry, ſo laboured as this is, in the ſecond
and third Sermons; inſomuch perhaps as to


be at a Loſs for the Occalion, Scope and
Dritt


vii


PREFACE.


Drift of them. But it need not be thought


ſtrange that this Manner of Expreſſion, though
familiar with them, and, if not uſually car-
ried ſo far, yet not uncommon amongſt Our-
ſelves, ſhould want explaining 3; ſince there
are ſeveral Perceptions daily felt and ſpoken
of, which yet it may not be very eaſie at firſt
View to explicate, to diſtinguiſh from all o-
thers, and aſcertain exactly what the Idea
or Perception is. The many Treatiſes up-
on the Paſſions are a Proof of this; ſince ſo
many would never have undertaken to un-
fold their ſeveral Complications, and trace
and reſolve them into their Principles, if
they had thought, what they were endea-
vouring to ſhew, was obvious to every one,
who felt and talked of thoſe Paſſions. Thus,
though there ſeems no Ground to doubt, but
that the generality of Mankind have the in-
ward Perception expreſsd ſo commonly in
that Manner by the ancient Moraliſts, more
than to doubt whether they have thoſe Pal-
ſions ; yet it appeared of Uſe to unfold that
inward Conviction, and lay it open in a
more explicit Manner, than I had ſeen done ;
eſpecially when there were not wanting Per-
ſons, who manifeſtly miſtook the whole
thing, and ſo had great Reaſon to expreſs
themſelves diflatisfied with it. A late Au-
thor of great and deſerved Reputation **
that to place Virtue in following Nature, is


at


PREFACE.


at beſt a looſe Way of Talk. And he has
Reaſon to ſay this, if what I think he intends
to expreſs, though with great Decency, be
true, that ſcarce any other Senſe can be put up-
on thoſe Words, but acting as any of the ſeve-
ral Parts, without Diſtinction, of a Man's
Nature happened moſt to incline him *.

W HoOEVER thinks it worth while to con-
ſider this Matter thoroughly, ſhpuld begin
with ſtating to himſelf exactly the Idea of a
Syſtem, Oeconomy or Conſtitution of any
particular Nature, or particular any thing :
And he will, I ſuppoſe, find, that tis an
One or a Whole, made up of ſeveral Parts ;
but yet, that the ſeveral Parts even conſi-
dered as a Whole, do not compleat the
Idea, unleſs in the Notion of a Whole, you
include the Relations and Reſpe&s, which
thoſe Parts have to cach other. Every Work
both of Nature and of Art is a Syſtem : And
as every particular thing both natural and
artificial is for ſome Uſe or Purpoſe out of
and beyond itſelf, one may add, to what has
been already brqught into the Idea of a Sy-
ſtem, its Conduciveneſs to this one or more
Ends. Let us Inſtance in a Watch —Sup-
poſe the ſeveral Parts of it taken to Pieces,
and placed apart from each other: Let a Man
have ever ſo exact a Notion of theſe ſeveral
Parts, unleſs he conſiders the Reſpects and


Relati-


* Rel. of Nature delin, Ed. 1714. P. 22, 22.


PREFACE.


Relations which they have to each other, he
will not have any thing like the Idea of a
Watch. Suppoſe theſe ſeveral Parts brought
together and any how united : Neither will
he yet, be the Union ever fo cloſe, have an
Idea which will bear any Reſemblance to
that of a Watch. But let him view thoſe ſe-
veral Parts put together, or conſider them as
to be put together in the Manner of a
Watch ; let him form a Notion of the Re-
lations which thoſe ſeveral Parts have to
each other—all conducive in their reſpective
Ways, to this Purpoſe, ſhewing the Hour
of the Day ; and then he has the Idea of a
Watch. Thus it is with Regard to the in-
ward Frame of Man. Appetites, Paſſions,
Affections, and the Principle of Reflection,
conſidered merely as the ſeveral Parts of our
in ward Nature, do not at all give us an Idea
of the Syſtem or Conſtitution of this Na-
ture: Becauſe the Conſtitution is formed by
ſomcwhat not yet taken into Conſideration,
namely by the Relations, which theſe ſeve-
'ral Parts have to each other; the chief of
which is the Authority of Reflection or
Conſcience. Tis from conſidering the Re-
lations which the ſeveral Appetites and Paſ-
ſions in the inward Frame have to each o-
ther, and above all the Supremacy of Reflec-
tion or Conſcience, that we get the Idea of


the Syſtem or Conſtitution of Humane Na-
ture.


T 4 a . A. <=


.


* *


eren


*


PREFACE.


ture. And from the Idea itſelf twill as ful-
ly appear, that this our Nature, z. e. Con-
ſtitution is adapted to Virtue, as from the
Idea of a Watch it appears, that its Nature,
1. e. Conſtitution or Syſtem is adapted to
meaſure Time. What in Fact or Event com-
monly happens, is nothing to this Queſtion.
Every Work of Art is apt to be out of Or-
der: But this is ſo far from being according
to its Syſtem, that let the Diſorder increaſe,
and 'twill totally deſtroy it. This is merely
by Way of Explanation what an Occonomy,
Syſtem or Conſtitution is. And thus far
the Caſes are perfectly parallel. If we go
further, there is indeed a Difference, no-
thing to the preſent Purpoſe, but too impor-
tant an one ever to be omitted. A Machine
is inanimate and paſſive: But we are A-
gents. Our Conſtitution is put in our own
Power. We are charged with it: And there-
fore are accountable for any Diforder or Vi-
olation of it.

THvs nothing can poſſibly be more con-
trary to Nature than Vice; meaning by Na-


ture, not only the ſeveral Parts of our in-


ternal Frame, but alſo the Conſtitution of
it. Poverty and Diſgrace, Tortures and
Death are not ſo contrary to it. Miſery and
Injuſtice are indeed equally contrary to ſome
different Parts of our Nature taken ſingly :
But Injuſtice is morcover contrary to the
wholc Conſtitution of the Nature. Ir


_—


PREFACE.


Ir it be asked whether this Conſtitution
be really what thoſe Philoſophers meant,
and whether they would have explained
themſelves in this Manner: The Anſwer is
the ſame, as if it ſhould be asked, whether
a Perſon, who had often uſed the Word Re-
ſentment and felt the thing, would have ex-
plained this Paſſion exactly in the ſame Man-
ner, in which tis done in one of theſe Diſ-
courſes. As I have no Doubt, but that this
is a true Account of that Paſſion, which he
referr'd to and intended to expreſs by the
Word, Reſentment ; ſo I have no Doubt, but
that this is the true Account of the Ground
of that Conviction, which they referr'd to,
when they ſaid, Vice was contrary to Na.
ture. And though it ſhould be thought that
they mcant no more than, that Vice was
contrary to the higher and better Part of
our Nature; even this implies ſuch a Con-
ſtitution as I have endeavourcd to explain.
For the very Terms, higher and better, im-
ply a Relation or Reſpect of Parts to each
other; and theſe relative Parts, being in one
and the ſame Nature, form a Conſtitution
and are the very Idea of it. They had a
Perception that Injuſtice was contrary to
their Nature, and that Pain was ſo alſo.
They oblerved theſe two Perceptions totally
different, not in Degree, but in Kind: And
the Reflecting upon each of them as ney

us


PREFACE.


thus ſtood in their Nature, wrought a full


intuitive Conviction, that more was due and


of Right belonged to one of theſe in ward
Perceptions, than to the other ; that it de-
manded in all Caſes to govern ſuch a Crea-
ture as Man. So that upon the whole, this
is a fair and true Account of what was the
Ground of their Conviction ; of what they
intended to refer to when they faid, Virtue
conſiſted in following Nature: A Manner
of ſpeaking not looſe and undeterminate, but
clear and diſtin, ſtrictly juſt and true.

THoUGH lam perſuaded the Force of
this Conviction is felt by almoſt every one;
yet ſince, conſidered as an Argument and put
in Words, it appcars ſomewhat abſtru e, and
ſince the Connection of it is broken in the
three firſt Sermons, it may not be amils to
give the Readcr the whole Argument here
in one View. |

MAN KIND has various Inſtincts and
Principles of Action, as brute Creatures have;
ſome leading moſt directly and immediately
to the good of the Community, and ſome
moſt directly to private Good.

MAN has ſeveral which Brutes have not;
particularly Reflection or Conſcience, an Ap-
probation of ſome Principles or Actions, and


Diſapprobation of others.


BRU TES obey their Inſtincts or Princi-
ples of Action, according to certain Rules;


b ſuppoſe


—— ——


PREFACE.


ſuppoſe the Conſtitution of their Body, and
the Objects around them.

THE generality of Mankind alſo obey
their Inſtin&s and Principles, all of them;
thoſe Propenſions we call Good, as well as
the Bad, according to the ſame Rules ; name-
ly the Conſtitution of their Body, and the
external Circumſtances which they arc
in. [Therefore it is not a true Repreſentati-
on of Mankind, to affirm that they are
wholly governed by Sgt-love, the love of
Power and ſenſual Appetites : Since, as on
the one Hand, they are often actuated by
theſe, without any Regard to Right or
Wrong; ſo on the other, tis manifeſt Fact,
that the ſame Perſons, the Generality, are
frequently influenced by Friendſhip, Compaſ-


ſion, Gratitude; and even a general Abhor-


rence of what is baſe, and liking of what is
fair and juſt, takes its Turn amongſt the o-
ther Motives of Action. This is the par-
tial inadequate Notion of Human Nature
treated of in the firſt Diſcourſe: And tis
by this Nature, if one may ſpeak ſo, that
the World is in Fact influenced, and kept
in that tolerable Order, in which it is. ]
BRU r Es in acting according to the Rules
befote- mentioned, their bodily Conſtitution
and Circumſtances, act ſuitably to their
whole Nature. [It is however to be dil-


tintly noted, that the Reaſon why we at-
2 firm


Action, Conſcience or Reflection,


PREFACE


firm this, is not merely that Brutes in Fact
act ſo; for this alone, however univerſal,
does not at all determine, whether ſuch
Courſe of Action be correſpondent to their
whole Nature: But the Reaſon of the Aſ-
ſertion is, that as in acting thus, they plainly
Act conformably to ſomewhar in their Na-
ture, ſo from all Obſervations we are able to
make upon them, there docs not appear the
ſeaſt Ground to imagine them to have any
thing elſe in their Nature, which requires a
different Rule or Courſe of Action.]

MANKIND allo in afting thus would
act ſuitably to their whole Nature, if no
more were to be ſaid of Man's Nature,
than what has been now ſaid; if Thar, as
it is a true, were alſo a compleat, adequate
Account of our Nature.

BUT That is not a compleat Account of
Man's Nature. Somewhat further muſt be
brought in to give us an adequate Notion of
it; namely, that one of thoſe Principles of
com-
pared with the reſt as they all ſtand together
in the Nature of Man, plainly bears upon it
Marks of Authority over all the reſt, and
claims the abſolute Direction of them all, to
allow or forbid their Gratification: A Diſ-
approbation of Reflection being in itſelf a
Principle manifeſtly ſuperiour to a mere Pro-
penſion. And the Concluſion is, that to

b 2 allow


PREFACE.


allow no more to this ſuperiour Principle or
Part of our Nature, than to other Parts; to
let it govern and guide only occaſionally in
common with the reſt, as its Turn happens
to come, from the Temper and Circum-
ſtances one happens to be in; this is not to
at conformably to the Conſtitution of Man :
Neither can any Human Creature be ſaid to
att conformably to his Conſtitution of Na-
ture, unleſs he allows to that ſuperior Prin-
ciple the abſolute Authority which is due to
it. And this Concluſion is abundantly con-
firmed from hence, that one may determine
what Courſe of Action the Oeconomy of
Man's Nature requires, without ſo much as
knowing in what Degrees of Strength the
ſeveral Principles prevail, or which of them
have actually the greateſt Influence.

THe practical Reaſon of inſiſting ſo much
upon this natural Authority of the Principle
of Reflection or Conſcience is, that it ſeems
in great Meaſure over-looked by many, who
are by no Means the worſt ſort of Men. Tis
thought ſufficient to abſtain from groſs Wick-
edneſs, and to be humane and kind to ſuch
as happen to come in their way. Whereas
in reality the very Conſtitution of our Na-
ture requires, that we bring our whole Con-
duct before this ſuperior Faculty; wait its
Determination; enforce upon ourſelves its
Authority, and make it the Buſineſs of our

Lives,


y__ ”-


„„ r EAR... Or dr ds


PREFACE.


Lives, as it is abſolutely the whole Buſineſs of
a Moral Agent, to conform ourſelves to ir.


This is the true Meaning of that ancient Pre-


cept, Reverence thy Self.

THE not taking into Conſideration this
Authority, which is implied in the Idea
of reflex Approbation or Diſapprobation,
ſeems a material Deficiency or Omiſſion in
Lord Shaftsbury's Inquiry concerning Vir-
tue. He has ſhewn beyond all Contradicti-


on, that Virtue is naturally the Intereſt or


Happineſs, and Vice the Miſery of ſuch a
Creature as Man, placed in the Circumſtan-


ces which we are in this World. But ſup-


poſe there are particular Exceptions ; a


| Caſe which this Author was unwilling to


put, and yet ſurely it is to be put: Or ſup-
poſe a Caſe which He has put and deter.
mined, that of a Sceptick not convinced of
this happy Tendency of Virtue, or being
of a contrary Opinion. His Determination
is, that 'twould be without Remedy *. One
may ſay more explicitly, that, leaving out
the Authority of reflex Approbation or Diſ-
approbation, ſuch an one would be under an
Obligation to act vitiouſly ; ſince Intereſt,
one's own Happineſs, is a manifeſt Obligati-
on, and there is not ſuppoſed to be any o-
ther Obligation in the Caſe. *<* But does it

b 3 « much


* CharaReriſticks, V. 2. p. 69.


XVII


PREFACE.


te much mend the Matter, to take in that
* natural Authority of Reflexion ? There
« indeed would be an Obligation to Vir
te tue; but would not the Obligation from
« ſuppoſed Intereſt on the ſide of Vice re
main?“ If it ſhould, yet to be unde:
two contrary Obligations, . e. under none
at all, would not be exactly the ſame, as tc
be under a formal Obligation to be Vitious
or to be in Circumſtances in which the Con-
ſtitution of Man's Nature plainly required
that Vice ſhould be preferr'd. . But the Ob
ligation on the ſide of Intereſt really doe:
not remain. For the natural Authority of the
Principle of Reflection, is an Obligation the
moſt near and intimate, the moſt certain anc
known : Whereas the contrary Obligatior
can at the utmoſt appear no more than pro
bable; ſince no Man can be certain in an)
Circumſtances, that Vice is his Intereſt ir
the preſent World, much leſs can he be cer
tain againſt another: And thus the certait
Obligation would intircly ſuperſede and de-
ſtroy the uncertain one; which yet would
have been of real Force without the former

In Truth the taking in this Conſiderati-
on, totally changes the whole ſtate of the
Caſe; and hews, what this Author does
not ſeem to have been aware of, that the
greareſt Degree of Scepticiſm which He
rhonglht pollible, will ſtill leave Men under


the


| that
There
> Vir-
from
ce re-
under
none

as to
tious,
Con-
uired,
e Ob-
does
of the
YN the
in and
zation
1 pro-
n any
reſt in
e cer-
certain
id de-
would
rmer.
lerati-
of the
does
at the
h He
under


the


PREFACE.


the ſtricteſt Moral Obligations, whatever
their Opinion be concerning the Happineſs
of Virtue. For that Mankind upon Reflecti-
on felt an Approbation of what was Good,
and Diſapprobation of the Contrary, He
thought a plain Matter of Fact, as it un-


doubtedly is, which none could deny, but


from mere Affectation. Take in then that
Authority and Obligation, which is a con-
ſtituent Part of this reflex Approbation,
and it will undeniably follow, though a
Man ſhould doubt of every thing elſe, yet,
that he would ſtill remain under the neareft
and moſt certain Obligation to the PraQtice
of Virtue ; an Obligation implied in the
very Idea of Virtue, in the very Idea of re-
flex Approbation.

AND how little Influence ſoever this
Obligation alone, can be expected to have in
Fact upon Mankind, yet one may appeal e-
ven to Intereſt and Self- love, and ask, ſince
from Man's Nature, Condition and the
ſhortneſs of Life, ſo little, ſo very little in-
deed, can poſſibly in any Caſe be gained by
Vice; whether it be fo prodigious a thing to
ſacrifice that little, to the moſt intimate ot
all Obligations; and which a Man cannot
tranſgreſs without being Self-condemned,
and, unleſs he has corrupted his Nature,
without real Scelf-diflike : This Queſtion 1
jay may be asked, even upon Suſpicion that

b 4 ths


PREFACE.


the Proſpect of a_ future Life were ever ſo
uncertain.

THE Obſervation that Man is thus by his
very Nature a Law to himſelf, purſued to
its juſt Conſequences, is of the utmoſt Im-
portance ; becauſe from it 'twill follow, that
though Men ſhould, through Stupidity. or
Speculative Scepticiſm, be ignorant of or
dlisbelieve any Authority in the Univerſe to
puniſh the Violation of this Law; yet, if
there ſhould be ſuch Authority, they would
be as really liable to Puniſhment, as though
they had been beforc-hand convinced, that
ſuch Puniſhment would follow. For in
whatever Senſe we underſtand Juſtice, even
ſuppoſing, what I think would be very pre-
{ſumptuous to aſſert, that the End of Di-
vine Puniſhment is no other than that of
civil Puniſhment, namely to prevent future
Miſchict ; upon this bold Suppoſition, Ig-
norance or Disbelief of the Sanction would
by no Mcans exempt even from this Juſtice :
Becauſe it is not Foreknowledge of the Pu-
niſhment, which renders obnoxious to it;
but mcrely Violating a known Obliga-
tion,

AN p here it comes in one's Way to take
Notice of a manifeſt Error or Miſtake, in the
Author now cited, unleſs perhaps he has in-
cautiouſly expreſſed himſelf ſo as to be miſ-


underſtood; namely, that it zs Malice only,
and


PREFACE.


and not Goodneſs, which can make us a-
fraid *. Whereas in Reality, Goodnels is
the natural and juſt Obje& of the greateſt
Fear to an ill Man. Malice may be appeaſ-
ed or ſatiated; Humour may change: But
Goodneſs is a fixt, ſteady, immoveable Prin-
ciple of Action. If either of the former
holds the Sword of Juſtice, there is plainly
Ground for the greateſt of Crimes to hope
for Impunity : But if it be Goodneſs, there
can be no poſſible Hope, whilſt the Reaſons
of Things, or the Ends of Government,
call for Puniſhment. Thus every one ſees,
how much greater Chance of Impunity, an
ill Man has, in a partial Adminiſtration,
than in a juſt and upright one. It is ſaid,
that the Intereſt or Good of the Whole,
muſt be the Intereſt of the univerſal Being,
and that He can have no other. Be it ſo.
This Author has proved, that Vice is natu-
rally the Miſery of Mankind in this World.
Conſequently it was for the Good of the
Whole, that it ſhould be fo. What ſhadow
of Reaſon then is there to aſſert, that this
may not be the Caſe hereafter ? Danger of
future Puniſhment (and if there be Danger,
there is Ground of Fear) no more ſuppoles
Malice, than the preſent Fecling of Puniſh-
ment does.


| Ins
* Charact, V. I. p. 29.


Nl


PREFACE.


Trax Sermon upon the Character of Ba-
laam, and that pn Self- Deceit both re-
late to one Subject. I am perſuaded, that a
very great Part of the Wickedneſs of the
World, is, one Way or other, owing to the
Self-partiality, Self-flattery and Self-deceit
endeavoured there to be laid open and ex-
plained. Iis to be obſerved amongſt Per-
ſons of the loweſt Rank, in Proportion to
their Compaſs of Thought, as much as a-
mongſt Men of Education and Improve-
ment. It ſeems, that People are capable of
being thus artful with Themſelves, in Pro-
portion as they are capable of being ſo with
Others. Thoſe who have taken Notice that
there is really ſuch a Thing, namely plain
Falſeneſs and Inſincerity in Men with Re-
gard to Themſelves, will readily ſee the
Drift and Deſign of theſe Diſcourſes: And
nothing, that I can add, will explain the
Deſign of them to him, who has not before-
hand remarked, at leaſt, ſomewhat of the
Character. And yet, the Admonitions they
contain, may be as much wanted by ſuch a
Perſon, as by Others ; for 'tis to. be noted,
that a Man may be intirely poſſeſs d by this
Unfairneſs of Mind, without having the
{caſt ſpeculative Notion what the Thing is.


In


«Ss 5 WoW By VWs


PREFACE


THE Account given of Reſentment in
the Eighth Sermon, is introductory to the
following one Upon Forgiveneſs of Inju-
ries. It may poſſibly have appeared to ſome,
at firſt ſight, a ſtrange Aſſertion, that Injury
is the only natural Object of ſetled Reſent-
ment, or that Men do not in Fact reſent
deliberately any thing but under this Ap-
pearance of Injury. But I muſt deſire the
Reader not to take any Aſſertion alone by
itſelf, but to conſider the whole of what is
ſaid upon it: Becauſe this is neceſſary, not
only in Order to judge of the Truth of it,
but often, ſuch is the Nature of Language,
to ſee the very Meaning of the Aſſertion.
Particularly as to this, Injury and Injuſtice is,
in the Sermon itſelf, explained to mean,
not only the more groſs and ſhocking In
ſtances of Wickednels, but alſo Contempt,
Scorn, Neglect, any ſort of diſagreeable
Behaviour towards a Perion, which he thinks


xxiii


other than what is due to him. And the


general Notion of Injury or Wrong, plain-
ly comprehends this, though the Words are
moſtly confined to the higher Degrees of it.
FoRGIVENESss of lnjurics is one of
the very few moral Obligations which has
been diſputed. Put the Proof that it is
really an Obligation, what our Nature and
Condition require, ſcems very obvious, were
Ns


PREFACE.


it only from the Conſideration that Revenge


is doing Harm merely for Harm's ſake. And
as to the Love of our Enemies: Reſentment
cannot ſuperſede the Obligation to univer-
ſal Benevolence, unleſs they are in the Na-
ture of the thing inconſiſtent, which they
plainly are not *. |

THr1s Divine Precept, to forgive Inju-
rics and love our Enemies, though to be met
with in Gentile Moraliſts, yet is in a peculi-
ar Senſe a Precept of Chriſtianity 3 as our
Saviour has inſiſted more upon it, than up-
on any other ſingle Virtue. One Reaſon of
this doubtleſs is, that it ſo peculiarly be-
comes an imperfect, faulty Creature. But
it may be obſerved alſo, that & virtuous
Temper of Mind, Conſciouſneſs of Inno-
cence and good Meaning towards every bo-
dy, and a ſtrong Feeling of Injuſtice and In-
jury, may itſelf, ſuch is the Imperfection of
our Virtue, lead a Perſon to violate this Ob-
ligation, if he be not upon his Guard. And
it may well be ſuppoſed, that this is ano-
ther Reaſon why it is ſo much inſiſted upon
by Him, who knew what was in Man.


TE chief Deſign of the Eleventh Diſ-
courſe is to ſtate the Notion of Self. love and
Diſintereſtedneſs, in Order to ſhew that Be-


nevolence
p. 165.


TOE HSI _ 1 1 nn n ps 8


PREFACE.


nevolence is not more unfriendly to Self-
love, than any other particular Affection
whatever. There is a ſtrange Affectation in
many People of explaining away all particu-
lar Affections, and repreſenting the whole
of Life as nothing but one continued Exer-
ciſe of Self-love. Hence ariſes that ſur-
prizing Confuſion and Perplexity in the Epi-
cureans * of old, Hobbs, the Author of Re-
flexions Sentences et Maximes Morales,
and this whole Sett of Writers; the Confu-
ſion of calling Actions intereſted which arc
done in Contradiction to the moſt manifeſt
known Intereſt, mercly for the Gratification
of a preſent Paſſion. Now all this Confu-
ſion might eaſily be avoided, by ſtating to
Ourſelves wherein the Idea of Self-love in
general conſiſts, as diſtinguiſhed from all par-
ticular Movements towards particular ex-
ternal Objects; the Appetites of Senſe, Re-
ſentment, Compaſſion, Curioſity, Ambition

and


One need only look into Torquatus's Account of the Epi-
eurean Syſtem, in Cicero's firſt Book De Finibus, to ſee, in
what a ſurprizing Manner this was done by Them. Thus the
Defire of Praiſe, and of being beloved, he explains to be no
other, than Deſire of Safety: Regard to our Country, even
in the moſt virtuous Character, to be nothing but Regard to
Ourſelves. The Author of Reflexions e. Morales ſays, Cu-
rioſity proceeds from Intereſt or Pride; which Pride alſo
would doubtleſs have been explained to be Self- love. Pag.
85. Ed. 2s. As if there were no ſuch Paſſions in Mankind,
as Defire of Eſteem, or of being Beloved, or of Knowledge.
Hobbs Account of the Aſſectious of Goodwill and Pity, are
Inſtanees of the fame Kind.


XXV


PREFACE.


and the reſt #, When this is done, if the
Words Selſiſb and Intereſted cannot be part-
cd with, but muſt be applied to every thing ;
yet, to avoid ſuch total Confuſion of all
Language, let the Diſtinction be made by
Epithets: And the firſt may be called cool
or ſetled Selfiſhneſs, and the other paſſio-
nate or ſenſual Selfiſhneſs. But the moſt
natural Way of ſpeaking plainly is, to call
the firſt only, Self-love, and the Actions
procecding from it, intcreſted : And to ſay
of the latter, that they are not Love to Our-
ſelves, but Movements towards ſomewhat
external: Honour, Power, the Harm or
Good of Another: And that the Purſuit of
theſe external Objects, ſo far as it proceeds
from theſe Movements (for it may proceed
from Self. love q) is no otherwiſe intereſted,
than as every Action of cvery Creature muſt,
from the Nature of the thing, be; for no
one can act but from a Deſire, or Choice, or
Preference of his own.

SELF-LOVE and any particular Paſſion
may be joined together; and from this
Complication, it becomes impoſſible in
numberleſs Inſtances to determine preciſely,
how far an Action, perhaps even of one's
own, has for its Principle general Self. love,
or ſome particular Paſſion. But this need
create no Confuſion in the Ideas *

O
* p.205, Oc. + Videin the Note p. 9. theſe being the
Occaſion 65.


"wy EF" EET ST WY wa” Wy MT”


1
1
*
l
5
ſt
II


LS


PREFACE.


of Self-love and particular Paſſions. We
diſtinctly diſcern what one is, and what the
other ate; though we may be uncertain how
far one or the other influences us. And
though from this Uncertainty, it cannot but
be, that there will be different Opinions con-


cerning Mankind, as more or leis, governed
by Intereſt; and ſome will aſctibe Actions


to Self-love, which Others will aſcribe to
particular Paſſions : Yet 'tis abſurd to ſay
that Mankind are wholly actuated by either;


ſince 'tis manifeſt that both have their Influ-


ence. For as on the one Hand, Men form a
general Notion of Intereſt, ſome placing it
in one Thing, and ſome in another, and have
a conſiderable Regard to it throughout the
Courſe of their Life, which is owing to Self-
love; ſo on the other Hand, they are often
{et on Work by the particular Paſſions them-
ſelves, and a conſiderable Part of Life is ſpent
in the actual Gratification of them, . e. is
employed, not by Self- love, but by the
Paſſions.

BESIDES, the very Idea of an intereſted
Purſuit, neceſſarily pre- ſupꝑoſes particular
Paſſions or Appetites; ſince the very Idea of
Intereſt or Happineſs conſiſts in this, that an
Appetite or Affection enjoys its Object. Tis
not becauſe we love Ourſelves that we find
Delight in ſuch and ſuch Objects, but be-
cauſe we have particular Affections towards

them.


XXVil


XXViii PREFACE.


them. Take away theſe Affections, and you
leave Self-love abſolutely nothing at all to
i employ itſelf about *; no End or Object for
| it to purſue, excepting only that of avoiding
| Pain. Indced the Epricureans, who main-
| tain'd that Abſence of Pain, was the higheſt
|
|
|


Happineſs, might, conſiſtently with them-
ſelves, deny all Affection, and, if they had
ſo pleaſed, every ſenſual Appetite too : But
the very Idea of Intereſt or Happineſs other
than Abſence of Pain, implies particular Ap-
petites or Paſſions ; theſe being neceſſary to
I conſtitute That Intereſt or Happineſs.
1 THE Obſervation that Benevolence is no
more diſintereſted than any of the common
particular Paſſions , ſeems in itſelf worth
| being taken Notice of; but is inſiſted up-
ll on to obviate that Scorn, which one ſees
| _ riſing upon the Faces of People who are ſaid
| to know the World, when Mention is made
of a diſintereſted, generous or publick-ſpirit-
ed Action. The Truth of that Obſervation
might be made appear, in a more formal
Manner of Proof: For whoever will conſi-
der all the poſſible Reſpects and Relati-
ons which any particular Affection can
have to Self love and private Intereſt, will,
I think, ſce demonſtrably, that Benevolence
is not in any Reſpect more at Variance with _
Self- love, than any other particular Aﬀe@ti-
on


* pag. 210. + p. 213. Ec.


, WIL” F-


PREFACE.
on whatever, but that it is in every Reſpect,
at leaſt, as friendly to it.
IF the Obſervation be true, it follows,


that Self. love and Benevolence, Virtue and
Intereſt are not to be oppoſed, but only to


be diſtinguiſned from each other; in the


ſame Way as Virtue and any other particu-
lar Affection, Love of Arts, ſuppoſe, are to
be diſtinguiſhed. Every thing is what it is,
and not another thing. The Goodneſs or
Badneſs of Actions does not ariſe from hence,
that the Epithet, intereſted or diſintereſted,
may be applicd to them, any more than that
any other indifferent Epithet, ſuppoſe inqui-
ſitive or jealous may or may not be applicd
to them ; not from their being attended
with preſent or future Pleaſure or Pain; bur
from their being what they are : Namely,
what becomes ſuch Creatures as we are,
what the ſtate of the Caſe requires, or the
contrary. Or in other Words, we may
judge and determine, that an Action is mo-
rally Good or Evil, before we ſo much as
conſider, whether it be intereſted or diſin-
tereſted. This Conſideration no more comes
in to determine, whether an Action be vir-
tuous, than to determine whether it be re-
ſentful. Self- love in its due Degree is as
juſt and morally Good, as any Affection
Whatever. Benevolence towards particular


Perſons may be to a Degree of Weakneſs,
c and


XXIX


XXX


PREFACE.


and ſo be blameable : And Diſintereſtedneſs
is ſo far from being in itſelf commendable,
that the utmoſt poſlible Depravity, which
we can in Imagination conceive, is that of
diſintereſted Cruelty.

NEITHER does there appear any Rea-
ſon to wiſh Self-love were weaker in the
gencrality of the World, than it is. The
Influence which it has, ſeems plainly owing
to its being conſtant and habitual, which it
cannot but be, and not to the Degree or
Strength of it. Every Caprice of the Ima-
gination, every Curioſity of the Under-
ſtanding, every Affection of the Heart, is per-
petually ſhe wing its Weakneſs by prevailing
over it. Men daily, hourly ſacrifice the great-
eſt known Intereſt, to Fancy, Inquiſitiveneſs,
Love or Hatred, any vagrant inclination.
The Thing to be lamented is, not that Men
have ſo great Regard to their own Good or
Intereſt in the preſent World, for they have
not enough * ; but that they have ſo little to
the Good of Others. And this ſcems plainly
owing to their being ſo much engaged in the
Gratification of particular Paſſions unfriend-
ly to Benevolence, and which happen to
be moſt prevalent in them, much more than
to Self- love. As a Proof of this may be ob-
ſerved, that there is no Character more void
of Fricndſhip, Gratitude, natural Affecti-

on,


Pag, 21.


BO I IL RRG eee


*


*
by _—
*


PREFACE.


on, Love to their Country, common Juſtice,
or more equally and uniformly hard-heart-
ed, than the abandoned in, what is called,
the Way of Pleaſure——hard-hearted and
totally without Feeling in Behalf of Others;

except when they cannot eſcape the fight
of Diſtreſs, and fo are interrupted by it in
their Pleaſures. And yet tis ridiculous to


call ſuch an abandoned Courſe of Pleaſure


intcreſted, when the Perſon engaged in it
knows before-hand, and goes on under the
Feeling and Apprehenſion, that twill be as
ruinous to himſclf, as to thoſe who depend
upon him.

Ur on the whole, if the generality of
Mankind were to cultivate within them-
ſelves the Principle of Self-love ; if they
were to accuſtom themſelyes often to ſect
down and conſider, what was the greateſt
Happineſs they were capable of attaining for
themſelves in this Life, and if Self-love were
ſo ſtrong and prevalent, as that they would
uniformly purſue this their ſuppoſed chief
temporal Good, without being diverted
from it by any particular Paſſion ; it would
manifeſtly prevent numberleſs Follics and
Vices. This was in a great meaſure the E-
picurean Syſtem of Philoſophy. Tis in-
feed by no Means the religious, or even
moral Inſtitution of Life. Yet, with all the
Miſtakes Men would fall into about Intercſt,

C 2 it


xxxii PREFACE.


it would be leſs miſchievous, than the Ex-
travagances of mere Appetite, Will and
Pleaſure : For certainly Self-love, though
confined to the Intereſt of this Life, is, of
the two, a much better Guide than Paſſion *,
which has abſolutely no Bound nor Mea-
ſure, but what is ſet to it by this Self-love, -
or Moral Conſiderations.

FROM the Diſtinction above made be-
tween Self-love, and the ſeveral particular
Principles or Affections in our Nature, we
may ſee how good Ground there was for that
Aſſertion, maintained by the ſeveral ancient
Schools of Philoſophy, againſt the Epicure-
ans, namely, that Virtue is to be purſued as an
| End, eligible in and for itſelf, For, if there
ith be any Principles or Affections in the Mind
it of Man diſtint from Self. love, that the
08 Things thoſe Principles tend towards, or that
1 the Objects of thoſe Affections are, each of
1 them, in themſelves eligible, to be purſued


| upon its own Account, and to be reſted in
1 as an End, is implied in the very Idea of ſuch


Principle or Affection +. They indeed aſ-
ſerted much higher Things of Virtue, and with
very good Reaſon; but to ſay thus much of
it | it, that it is to be purſued for itſelf, is to ſay
| no more of it, than may truly be ſaid of the
il Object of cvery natural Affection whatever.


— — — —
.


18h | | THE
Il * Pap. 39. + p. 265.


the World; this
+ Religion, to that old one in Morals now


PREFACE.


THe Queſtion, which was a few Years a-
go diſputed in France concerning the Love
of God, which was there called Enthuſiaſm,
as it will every where by the Generality of
Queſtion I ſay, anſwers in


mentioned. And both of them are, I think,


fully determined by the ſame Obſervation,
namely, that the very Nature of Affection,
the Idea itſelf, neceſſarily implies reſting in


its Object as an End.


I ſhall not here add any thing further, to what
have ſaid in the two Diſcourſes upon that


moſt important Subject, but only this: That if
| we are conſtituted ſuch ſort of Creatures, as


from our very Nature, to feel certain Affecti-
onsor Movements of Mind, upon the Sight
or Contemplation of the meaneſt inanimate


Part of the Creation, for the Flowers of the


Ficld have their Beauty ; certainly there muſt
be ſomewhat due to Him Himſelf, who is the
Author and Cauſe of all Things ; who is more
intimately preſent to us, than any thing elſe
can be, and with whom we have a nearer and
more conſtant [ntercourſe, than we can have
with any Creature : There muſt be ſome
Movements of Mind and Heart which cor-
reſpond to his Perfections, or of which thoſe
Perfections are the natural Object. And that


when we are commanded to love the Lord


our


XXXUuM


XXX1V


PREFACE.


our God, with. all our Heart, and with all
our Mind, and with all our Soul ; ſomewhat
more muſt be meant than merely, that we
live in of Rewards, or Fear of Paniſh-
ments from Him ; ſomewhat more than this
muſt be intended : Though theſe Regards
themſelves are moſt juſt and reaſonable, and
abſolutely neceſſary to be often recolleQed,
in ſuch a World as this.


IT may be proper juſt to advertiſe the
Reader, that he is not to look for any parti-
cular Reaſon for the Choice of the —
part of theſe Diſcourſes; their taken
from amongſt many Others, preached in the
ſame Place, through a Courſe of Eight Vears,
being in great Meaſure accidental. Neither
is he to expect to find any other Connection
between them, than that Uniformity of
Thought and Beſign, which will always be
found in the Writings of the ſame Perſon,
when he writes with Simplicity and in
Earneſt. =


Stanhope, Sept. the 16th, 1729.


J.


CON


| if ay Man among


E F . 8 AN S


—


TENTS.


Pon Humane Nature, or Man
conſidered as a Moral Agent.


S ERM. I. Upon the Social Nature of Man


—


SERX. I. II. III.


SAR M. II. III. Upon the natural Supremacy of
ROM. ii. 14.


For when the Gentiles which have not the Law, do by
Natxre the things comtained in the Law, theſe having
not the Law, are a Law to themſelves, p. 25. 45
SIAM. IV. Upon the Government of the Tongue.
JAMES 1. 26.
ſeem to be religious, and bridleth
not his Tongue, but deceiveth his own Heart, this Man's
Religion is vain, 59


SRAM. V. VI. Upon Compaſſion.


ROM. xii. 15. ro
ſeyce with them that do rejoyce, and weep with them
Weep, - 81, 101


\ SERmM. VII. Upon the Character of Balaum.


— NUMB. xxiii. 10.
we die the Death of the Righteons, and let my laſt
End be like his, *


2


A SERMON


SEA M. ſo further, though they be known, yet if


I.


they be diſcontinued or changed; Exhorta-
tions, Precepts, and Illuſtrations of things,
which refer to ſuch Circumſtances now cea-
ſed or altered, cannot at this Time be urged +
in that Manner, and with that Force which
they were to the Primitive Chriſtians. Thus
the Text now before us, in its firſt Intent
and Dcſign, relates to the decent Manage-
ment of thoſe extraordinary Gifts which
were then in the Church *, but which are
now totally ceaſed. And even as to the
Alluſion that we are one Body in Chrift 3
though. what the Apoſtle here intends is e-
qually true of Chriſtians in all Circum- ©
ſtances ; and the Conſideration of it is plain-
Iy till an additional Motive, over and above
moral Conſiderations, to the Diſcharge of
the ſeveral Duties and Offices ofa Chriſtian : ©
Vet it is manifeſt this Alluſion muſt have ap-
peared with much greater Force to thoſe, who |
by the many Dithculties they went through;
for the lake of their Religion, were led to
keep always in View the Relation they ſtood .
in to their Saviour, who had undergone
the ſame; to thoſe, who from the Idola-


> 4" <4 n . Kd.
—


a ud 4 54 N


tries of all around them, and their ill Treat-
ment,


* x Cor, Xii.


Upon Humane Nature.


f ment, were taught to conſider themſelves St rm.
as not of the World in which they lived,

, F but as a diſtinct Society of themſelves; with

a f Laws, and Ends, and Principles of Life and

d 1 Action, quite contrary to thoſe which the

h } World profeſs d themſelves at that Time

as * influenced by. Hence the Relation of a

at : Chriſtian was by them conſidered as nearer

4 than that of Affinity and Blood; and they

ch


almoſt literally eſteemed themſelves as Mem-
re bers one of another.
he * 1Ir cannot indeed poſſibly be denied,
that our being God's Creatures, and Virtue
C- 2 being the canal Law we are born under,
ml. and the whole Conſtitution of Man being
* plainly adapted to it, are prior Obligations
de to Picty and Virtue, than the Conſideration
of that God ſent his Son into the World to
n: ſave it, and the Motives which ariſe from
ap- the peculiar Relation of Chriſtians, as Mem-
ho bers one of another under Chriſt our Head.
gh However, though all this be allowed, as it
to expreſly is by the inſpired Writers; yet tis
50d | manifeſt that Chriſtians at the Time of the
dne Revelation, and immediately after, could


not but inſiſt moſtly upon Conſiderations oſ


by ! this latter Kind,


B 2 THESE


4


SERMu.
J.


A SERMON


THaEsE Obſervations ſhow the original
particular Reference of the Text; and the
peculiar Force with which the Thing intend-
ed by the Alluſion in it muſt have been felt
by the primitive Chriſtian World. They
likewiſe afford a Reaſon for treating it at
this Time in a more general Way. |
TuE Relation, which the ſeveral Parts or
Members of the natural Body have to cach
othcr and tothe whole Body,is here compared
to the Relation which each particular Perſon
in Socicty has to other particular Perſons and
to the whole Society: And the latter is in-
tended to be illuſtrated by the former. And
if there be a Likeneſs between theſe two
Relations, the Confequence is obvious : that
the latter ſhows us we were intended to do
good to others; as the former ſhows us that
the ſeveral Members of the natural Bo-
dy were intended to be Inſtruments of
Good to each other and to the whole Bo-
dy. But as there is ſcarce any Ground for
a Compariſon between Society and the mere
material Body, this without the Mind being
a dead unactive Thing; much leſs can the
Compariſon be carried to any length. And
ſince the Apoſtle ſpeaks of the ſeveral Mem-
bers as having diſtin Offices, which im-

= plics


Upon Humane Nature.


Plies the Mind; it cannot be thought an un- SER M.


allowable Liberty, inſtcad of the Body and
its Members, to ſubſtitute the whole Na-
ture of Man, and all the variety of inter-
nal Principles which belong to it. And
then the Compariſon will be between the
Nature of Man as reſpecting Self, and tend-
ing to private Good, his own Preſervation
and Happineſs ; and the Nature of Man as
having reſpect to Society, and tending to
promote publick Good, the Happineſs of
that Society. Theſe Ends do indeed per-
fectly coincide; and to aim at publick and
private Good are ſo far from being incon-
ſiſtent, that they mutually promote each
other: Vet in the following Diſcourſe they
muſt be conſidered as entirely diſtinct; other-
wiſe the Nature of Man as tending to one,
or as tending to the other, cannot be com-
pared. There can no Compariſon be made,
without conſidering the Things compared as
diſtinct and different.

FR o M this Review and Compariſon of the
Nature of Man as reſpecting Self, and as re-
ſpecting Society, it will plainly appear, that
there are as real and the ſame kind of Indi-
cations in Humane Nature, that we were
ſuade for Society and to do good to our Fel-

B 3 low-


WWW


SE : M. Jow-creatures : ; as that we were intended to


A SERMON


take Care of our own Life and Health and


private Good: and that the ſame Objecti-


ons lie again/t one of theſe Aſſertions, as
again/; the other. For

Firſt, There is a natural Principle of Bene-
volence * in Man; which is in ſome Degree


to Society, what Self-love is to the Indivi-
aual.


* Suppoſe a Manof Learning to be writing a grave Book up-
on Humane Nature, and to ſhew in ſeveral Parts of it that he
had an Inſight into the Subject he was conſidering : Amongft
other things, the following one would require to be account-
ed for; The Appeararce of Benevolence or Good-will in Men
towards each other in the Inſtances of Natural Relation, and
in others +, Cavtious of being deceived with outward Show,
he retires within himſelf to ſee exactly, what That is in the
Mind of Man from whence this Appearance proceeds; and,
upon deep Reflection, aſſerts the Principle in the Mind to be
only the Love of Power, and Delight in the Exerciſe of it.
Wouid not every Body think here was a Miſtake of one Word
for another? That the Philoſopher was contemplating and ac-
counting for ſome other Humane Actions, ſome other Behavi-
our of Man to Man? And could any one be thoroughly ſatis-
fied, that what is commonly called Benevolence or Good-will
was really the Affection meant, but only by being made to un-
derſtand that this Learned Perſon had a general Hypotheſis, to
which the Appearance of Good-will could no otherwiſe be
reconciled ? That what has this Appearance is often nothing
but Ambition; that Delight in Superiority often (ſuppoſe al-
ways) mixes i:ſelf with Benevolence, only makes it more ſpe-
cious to call it Ambition than Hunger, of the two: But in
reality that Paſſion does no more account for the whole Ap-
pearances of Good - will, than this Appetite does. Is there not


osten the Appearance of one Man's wiſhing that Good to
Another,


1
4. —_—


Upon Humane Nature.


7


dual. And if there be in Mankind any SER M.


Diſpoſition to Friendſhip ; If there be any
ſuch thing as Compaſſion, for Compaſſion
B 4 is


Another, which he knows himſelf unable to procure him; and
rejoycing in it, though beſtowed by a third Perſon ? And can
Love of Power any way poſſibly come in to account for this
Deſire or Delight ? Is there not often the Appearance of Mens
diſtinguiſhing between two or more Perſons, preferring one
before another to do good to, in Caſes where Love of Power


I.
— .


cannot in the leaſt account for the Diſtinction and Preference?


For this Principle can no otherwiſe diſtinguiſh between Ob-
jects, than as it is a greater Inſtance and Exertion of Power
to do good to one rather than to another. Again, Suppoſe
Good-will in the Mind of Man to be nothing but Delight in
the exerciſe of Power : Men might indeed be reſtrained by
diſtant and accidental Confiderations ; but theſe Reſtraints be-
ing removed, they would have a Diſpoſition to, and Delight
in Miſchief as an Exerciſe and Proof of Power: And this Diſ-
poſition and Delight would ariſe from or be the ſame Princi-
ple in the Mind, as a Diſpoſition to and Delight in Charity.
Thus Cruelty, as diſtinct from Envy and Reſentment, would
be exactly the ſame in the Mind of Man as Good-will: That
one tends to the Happineſs, the other to the Miſery of our
Fellow-Creatures, is it ſeems meerly an accidental Circum-
ſtance, which the Mind has not the leaſt Regard to. Theſe are
the Abſurdities which even Men of Capacity run into, when
they have occaſion to belie their Nature, and will perverſely
diſclaim that Image of God which was originally ſtamped
upon it; the Traces of which, however faint, are plainly diſ-
cernible upon the Mind of Man. + Hobbs of Human Nature,
c. 9. I. 17.


If any Perſon can in earneſt doubt, whether there be ſuch a


thing as Good-will in one Man towards another ; ( for the
Queſtion is not concerning either the Degree or Extenſiveneſs
of it, but concerning the Affection itſelf; ) let it be obſerved,
that Whether Man be thus or otherwiſe conſtituted, What is the


in ward


8


A SERMON


SRM. is momentary Love; if there be any ſuch


J.


thing as the paternal or filial Affections;
if there be any Affection in Humane Na-
- ive, the Object and End of which is the
Good of another; this is itſelf Benevolence,
or the Love of another. Be it ever ſo ſhort,
be it in ever ſo low a Degree, or ever ſo un-


happily confined ; it proves the Aſſertion,
and


inward Frame in this Particular, is a meer Queſtion of Fact or
narural Hiſtory, not proveable immediately by Reaſon. It is

therefore to be judged of and determined in the ſame way
other Facts or Matters of Natural Hiſtory are : By appealing to
the external Senſes, or inward Perceptions, reſpectively, as

the Matter under Conſideration is cognizable by one or the
other: By arguing from acknowledged Facts and Actions;
for a great Number of Actions of the ſame Kind, in different
Circumſtances, and reſpeQing different Objects, will prove,
to a Certainty, what Principles they do not, and, to the
greateſt Probability, what Principles they do proceed from :
And laſtly, by the Teſtimony of Mankind. Now that there is
ſome Degree of Benevolence amongſt Men, may be as ſtrong-
ly and plainly proved in all theſe Ways, as it could poſſibly
be proved, ſuppoſing there was this Affection in our Nature.
And ſhould any one think fit to aſſert, that Reſentment in
the Mind of Man was abſolutely nothing but reaſonable Con-
cern for our own Safety ; the Falfity of this, and what is the
real Nature of that Paſſion, could be ſhewn in no other Ways
than thoſe in which it may be ſhewn, that there is ſuch a
thing in ſome Degree as real Good-will in Man towards Man.
Ic is ſufficient that the Sceds of it be implanted in our Nature
by God. There is, it is owned, much left for us to do upon
pur own Heart and Temper 3 ; to cultivate, to improve, to call
forth, ro exerciſe it in a ſteady, uniform Manner, This i 10

£137 Work: This is Virtue and Religion.


Bf” | =
r


3 ů ere, |


Upon Humane Nature.


and points out what we were deſigned for, SAA.
as really as though it were in a higher De- 14 |


orce and more extenſive. I muſt however
remind you, that though Benevolence and
Self-. love are different; though the former
tends moſt directly to publick Good, and
the latter to private: Yet they are ſo per-
fectly coincident, that the greateſt Satisfacti-
ons to our ſelves depend upon our having
Benevolence in a due Degree; and that
Selt-love is one chief Security of our right
Behaviour towards Society. It may be add-
cd, that their mutual coinciding, ſo that we
can ſcarce promote one without the other,
is equally a Proof that we were made for
both.

Secondly, THIS will further appear from
obſerving that the ſeveral Paſſions and Af.


fections, which are diſtin * both from Be-


nevolence


* Every Body makes a Diſtinction between Self. love, and
the ſeveral particular Paſſions, Appetites, and Affections; and
yet they are often confounded again. That they are totally


different will be ſeen by any one w ho will diſtinguiſn between


the Paſſions and Appetites themſelves, and endeavouring after the
Means of their Gratification. Conſider the Appetite of Hun-
ger, and the Deſire of Eſteem: Theſe being the Occaſion both
of Pleaſure and Pain, the cooleſt Self-love, as well as che Ap-
petites and Paſſions themſelves, may put us upon making Uſe
of the proper Methods of obtaining that Pleaſure, and avoiding
that


10


A SERMON


Sz RM. neyolence and Self. love, do in general con-


tribute and lead us to public Good, as really


as to private. It might be thought too mi-


nute and particular, and would carry us too
great a length, to diſtinguiſh between and


compare together the ſeveral Paſſions or
Appetites diſtin& from Benevolence, whoſe


primary


that Pain; but the Feelings themſelves, the Pain of Hunger and
Shame, and the Delight from Efteem, are no more Self-love
than they are any thing in the World. Though a Man hated
himſelf, he would as much feel the Pain of Hunger as he
would that of the Gout : And it is plainly ſuppoſeable there
may be Creatures with Self-love in them to the higheſt
Degree, who may be quite inſenfible and indifferent (as Men
in ſome Caſes are) tothe Contempt and Eſteem of thoſe, upon
whom their Happineſs does not in ſome further Reſpects
depend. And as Self-love and the ſeveral particular Paſſions
and Appetites are in themſelves totally different; ſo, that ſome
Actions proceed from one, and ſome from the other, will be
manifeſt to any who will obſerve the two following very
ſuppoſeable Caſes. One Man ruſhes upon certain Ruin for the
Gratification of a preſent Deſire: No Body will call the
Principle of this Action Self-love. Suppoſe another Man to
go through ſome laborious Work upon Promiſe of a great
Reward, without any diſtin Knowledge what the Reward
will be: This Courſe of Action cannot be aſcribed to any
particular Paſſion. The former of theſe Actions is plainly


to be imputed to ſome particular Paſſion or Affection, the


latter as plainly to the general Affection or Principle of Self-
love. That there are ſome particular Purſuits or Actions
concerning which we cannot determine how far they are
owing to one, and how far to the other, proceeds from this,
that the two Principles are frequently mixt together, and run
up into each other. This Diſtinction is further explained
in the Eleventh Sermon,


"EN
. „„


1 2 - F " * wt nen,, wy hy 1 3 » OE Ho
? | v4 ; - 1 * 10 3 8 fo ä F "De. 1 3 5 0 E 2 * 9 . "# - 5 "4 < "i, 65 * * was . SW
CM EO ws * = 2 FI : Y 2 0 . — | OTST E63 - f


Upon Humane Nature.


primary Uſe and Intention is the Security
and Good of Society ; and the Paſſions di-
ſtint from Self. love, whoſe primary In-
tention and Deſign is the Security and Good
of the Individual *. It is enough to the pre-
ſent Argument, that Deſire of Eſteem from
others, Contempt and Eſteem of them, Love
of Society as diſtinct from Affection to the
Good of it, Indignation againſt ſucceſsful
Vice, that theſe are publick Affections or
Paſſions; have an immediate reſpect to o-
thers, naturally lead us to regulate our Be-
haviour in ſuch a Manner as will be of Ser-
vice to our Fellow. Creatures. If any or all
of theſe may be conſidered likewiſe as pri-
vate Affections, as tending to private Good;
this does not hinder them from being pub-

lick


* If any deſire to ſee this Diſtinction and Compariſon made
in a particular Inſtance, the Appetite and Paſſion now men-
tioned may ſerve for one. Hunger is to be conſider d as a pri-
vate Appetite ; becauſe the End for which it was given us is
the Preſervation of the Individual. Deſire of Eſteem is a publick
Paſſion ; becauſe the End for which it was given us is to regu-
late our Behaviour towards Society. The reſpe& which This
has to private Good is as remote, as the reſpect That has to
publick Good: And the Appetite is no more Self-love, than
the Paſſion is Benevolence. The Object and End of the for-
mer is meerly Food; the Object and End of the latter is
meerly Eſteem : But thelatter can no more be gratified, with-
out contributing to the Good of Society; than the former
can be pratified, without cont! ibuting to the Preſervation of
the *


11


SERM,


12


A SERMON


SzxM. lick Affections too, or deſtroy the good In-


I.


-


fluence of them upon Society, and their
Tendency to publick Good. It may be ad-


' ded, that as Perſons without any Convicti-


on from Reaſon of the deſirableneſs of
Life, would yet of Courſe preſerve it meerly
from the Appetite of Hunger; ſo by acting
meerly from Regard (ſuppoſe) to Reputati-
on, without any Conſideration of the Good
of Others, Men often contribute to publick
Good. In both theſe Inſtances they. are
plainly Inſtruments in the Hands of ano-
ther, in the Hands of Providence, to carry
on Ends, the Preſervation of the Individu-
al and Good of Society, which they them-
ſelves have not in their View or Intention.
The Sum is, Men have various Appetites,
Paſſions, and particular Affections, quite
diſtinct both from Self-love, and from Be-
nevolence: All of theſe have a tendency to
promote both publick and private Good,
and may be conſidered as reſpecting others
and ourſelves equally and in common: But
ſome of them ſeem moſt immediately to
reſpect others, or tend to publick Good ; o-
thers of them moſt immediately to reſpett
Self, or tend to private Good: As the for-
mer are not Benevolence, ſo the latter are


not


* A 21


* 5 - ff * 4 Now
e


Upon Humane Nature.


not Self-love : Neither Sort are Inſtances of Sr nm.


our Love cither to ourſelves or others; but
only Inſtances of our Maker's Care and Love
both of the Individual and the Species, and
Proofs that he intended we ſhould be In-
ſtruments of Good to each other, as well as

that we ſhould be ſo to our ſelves.
Thirdly, THERE is a Principle of Re-
flection in Men, by which they diſtinguiſh
between, approve and diſapprove their own
Actions. We are plainly conſtituted ſuch
ſort of Creatures as to reflect upon our own
Natures The Mind can take a View of
what paſles within itſelf, its Propenſions,
Averſions, Paflions, Affections, as reſpect-
ing ſuch Objects, and in ſuch Degrees; and
of the ſeveral Actions conſequent thercup-
on. In this Survey it approves of one,
diſapproves of another, and towards a third
is affected in neither of theſe ways, but is
quite indifferent. This Principle in Man,
by which he approves or diſapproves his
Heart, Temper, and Actions, is Con cience;
for this is the ſtrict Senſe of the Word, tho
ſometimes it is uſed ſo as to take in more.
And that this Faculty tends to reſtrain Men
from doing Miſchief to each other, and
leads them to do good, is too manifeſt to
need


— ied


14


TU


A SERMON


need being inſiſted upon. Thus a Parent |


has the Affection of Love to his Children:

This leads him to take care of, to educate,
to make due Proviſion for them; the natu-
ral Affection leads to this: But the Reflecti-
on that it is his proper Buſineſs, what be-
longs to him, that it is right and commenda-
ble ſo to do; this added to the Affection,
becomes a much more ſettled Principle, and
carries him on through more Labour and
Difficulties for the ſake of his Children,
than he would undergo from that Affection
alone; it he thought it, and the Courſe of
Action it led to, either indifferent or cri-
minal. This indeed is impoſſible, to do
that which is good and not to approve of
it; for which reaſon they are frequently not
conſidered as diſtinct, though they really are:
For Men often approve of the Actions of
others, which they will not imitate, and
likewiſe do that which they approve not. It
cannot poſſibly be denied that there is this
Principle of Reflection or Conſcience in
Humane Nature. Suppoſe a Man to relieve
an innocent Perſon in great Diſtreſs; ſup-


poſe the ſame Man afterwards, in the Fury


of Anger, to do the greateſt Miſchief to a
Perſon who had given no juſt Cauſe of Of-
tencc;z


Fd
.
4%


= = hc — —
* — £8 = oy Wa 4 PF.

F — — . Fn act £$z i 1 -
EET oi ni A. 9 r


13
4
*
#
5
*
S


WP
S..S
*
*
1


Upon Humane Nature.


fence; to aggravate the Injury, add the Cir- SE = M.


cumſtances of former Friendſhip, and Obli-
gation from the injured Perſon ; let the
Man who is ſuppoſed to have done theſe


two different Actions, cooly reflect upon


em afterwards, without regard to their
Conſequences to himſelf: To aſſert that any
common Man would be affected in the
ſame Way towards theſe different Actions,
that he would make no Diſtinction be-
tween them, but approve or diſapprove them
equally, is too glaring a Falſity to need be-
ing confuted. There is therefore this Prin-
ciple of Reflection or Conſcience in Man-
kind. It is needleſs to compare the Re-
ſpect it has to private Good, with the Re-
ſpect it has to publick; ſince it plainly tends
as much to the latter as to the former, and is
commonly thought to tend chiefly to the lat-
ter. This Faculty is now mentioned meerly as
another Part in the inward Frame of Man,
pointing out to us in ſome Degree what we
are intended for, and as what will naturally
and of courſe have ſome Influence. The par-
ticular Place aſſigned to it by Nature, what
Authority it has, and how great Influence it

ought to have, ſhall be hereafter conſidered.
2 FROM


I
A


16
1 98


was


A SER MON


FRO M this Compariſon of Benevolence
and Self. love, of our publick and private
Affections, of the Courſes of Life they lead
to, and of the Principle of Reflection of
Conſcience as reſpecting each of them, it
is as manifeſt, that we were made for Fo-
ciety, and to promote the Happineſs of it;


as that we were intended to take Care of


our own Life, and Health, and private
Good.

AN d from this whole Review muſt be gi-
ven a different Draught of Humane Nature
from what we are often preſented with.
Mankind arc by Nature ſo cloſely united,
there is ſuch a Correſpondence between the
inward Senſations of one Man and thoſe of
another, that Diſgrace is as much avoided
as bodily Pain, and to be the Object of
Eſteem and Love as much deſired as any
external Goods : And in many particular
Caſes, Perſons are carricd on to do good to
others, as the End their Affection tends to
and reſts in; and manifeſt that they find
real Satisfaction and Enjoyment in this
Courſe of Behaviour. There is ſuch a na-
tural Principle of Attraction in Man to-
wards Man, that having trod the ſame Tract
of Land, having breathed in the ſame Cli-

mate;


2.


1
8
99 *


4 1 „ Ea . 4 wh *
A bt -
««


—


—


Upon Humane Nature.


mate, barely having been born in the ſame Sz xm.


artificial Diſtrit or Diviſion, becomes the
Occaſion of contracting Acquaintances and
Familiarities many Years after: For any thing
may ſerve the Purpoſe. Thus Relations meer-
ly nominal are {ought and invented, not by
Governors, but by the loweſt of the Peo-
ple; which are found ſufficient to hold
Mankind together in little Fraternities and
Copartnerſhips: Weak tics indeed, and
what may afford Fund cnough for Ridicule;
if they are abſurdly conſidered as the real
Principles of that Union : But they are in
Truth meerly the Occaſions, as any thing


may be of any thing, upon which our Na-


ture carries us on according to its own pre-
vious Bent and Bias ; which Occaſions there-
fore would be nothing at all, were there nor
this prior Diſpoſition and Bias of Nature,
Men are ſo much one Body, that in a pecu-
liar Manner they feel for cach other, Shame,
ſudden Danger, Reſentment, Honour, Proſ-
perity, Diſtreſs ; one or another, or all of
| theſe, from the ſocial Nature in general,
ftom Benevolence, upon the Occaſion of
natural Relation, Acquaintance, Protection,
Dependance; each of theſe being diſtinct
Cements of Society. And therefore to have


—


18
SERM.
I.


A SERMON


no reſtraint from, no regard to others in
our Behaviour, is the ſpeculative Abſurdity |
of conſidering ourſelves as ſingle and inde-
pendant, as having nothing in our Nature
which has reſpe& to our Fellow - Creatures,
reduced to Action and Practice. And this
is the ſame Abſurdity, as to ſuppoſe a- Hand,
or any Part to have no natural Reſpect to
any other, or to the whole Body. |
Bur allowing all this, it may be asked,
« Has not Man Diſpoſitions and Principles
ce within which lead him to do Evil to o-
te thers, as well as to do Good? Whence ©
t come the many Miſeries elſe, which Men
« are the Authors and Inſtruments of to
« each other?” Theſe Queſtions, ſo far as
they relate to the foregoing Diſcourſe, may
be anſwered by asking, Has not Man alſo
Diſpoſitions and Principles within, which
lead him to do Evil to himſelf, as well as
good? Whence come the many Miſeries
elſe, Sickneſs, Pain and Death, which Men
are the Inſtruments and Authors of to them- *
ſelves? | .
Ir may be thought more eaſie to anſwer |
one of theſe Queſtions than the other, but


the Anſwer to both is really the ſame ; +


that Mankind have ungoverned Paſſions |


. hh
Which
4 **


Upon Humane Nature. I9


Which they will gratific at any Rate, as well Sz nm,
7 to the Injury of Others, as in Contradicti- wow
on to known private Intereſt : But that as
there is no ſuch thing as Self-hatred, ſo
g neither is there any ſuch thing as IIl-will in


one Man towards another, Emulation and
Reſentment being away; whereas there is
plainly Benevolence or Good-will : There is
no ſuch thing as Love of Injuſtice, Oppreſ-
ſion, Treachery, Ingratitude ; but only
eager Deſires after ſuch and ſuch external
Goods; which, according to a very ancient
Obſervation, the moſt abandoned would
chooſe to obtain by innocent Means, if
they were as eaſy, and as effectual to their
End: That even Emulation and Reſent-
ment, by any one who will conſider what
theſe Paſſions really arc in Nature *, will
be found nothing to the Purpoſe of this Ob-

C 2 jection:


\


-”: 0 0 &. W  Y © WW 2 69 0. WG


* Emulation is meerly the Deſire and Hope of Equality
with or Superiority over others, with whom we compare
our ſelves. There does not appear to be any other Grief in
the natural Paſſion, but only that Want which is implied in
Deſire. However this may be ſo ſtrong as to be the Occaiion
of great Grief. To defire the attainment of this Equality or
Superiority by the particular Means of Others, being brought
down to our own Level, or below it, is, I think, the diſtinct
Notion of Envy. From whence it is eaſy to ſee, that the real
End, which the natural Paſſion Emulation, and which the un-

lawful


= 0 WW... vv FS


20


A SERMON


Sxxm. jection: And that the Principles and Paſſi- |


J.


ons in the Mind of Man, which are diſtince
both from Self. love and Benevolence, pri-
marily and moſt directly lead to right Bcha-
viour with regard to Others as well as Him-
ſelf, and only ſecondarily and accidentally |
to what is Evil. Thus, though Men to a- |
void the Shame of one Villany are ſome-
times guilty of a greater, yet it is cafy to
ſce, that the original Tendency of Shame is
to prevent the doing of ſhameful Actions;
and its leading Men to conceal ſuch Acti-


ons when done, is only in conſequence of
their being done; . e. of the Paſſions not


having anſwered its firſt End. |

IF it be ſaid, that there are Perſons in
the World, who are in great Meaſure with- |
out the natural Affections towards their
Fellow-Creatures : There are likewiſe In-
ſtances of Pcrions without the common na-
tural Affections to themſelves : But the Na-
ture of Man is not to be judged of by either
of theſe, but by what appears in the com-
mon World, in the Bulk of Mankind.


I


lawful one Envy aims at, is exactly the fame ; namely, that
Equality or Superiority : And conſequently, that to do Miſ-
chief is not the End of Envy, but meerly the Means it makes
uſe of to attain its End, As to Reſentment, ſee the Eighth
Ser mon.


Upon Humane Nature. 21


l am afraid it would be thought very SER N.
i. | ſtrange, if to confirm the Truth of this Ac- 1 *
count of Humane Nature, and make out
the Juſineſs of the foregoing Compariſon, it
ſhould be added, that from what appears,
Men in Fact as much and as often contradict
that Part of their Nature which reſpects
Self, and which leads them to their own
private Good and Happineſs ; as they con-
tradict that Part of it which reſpects So-
ciety, and tends to publick Good: That there
are as few Perſons, who attain the greateſt
Satisfaction and Enjoyment which they
might attain in the preſcnt World ; as who
do the greateſt Good to others which they
might do: Nay, that there are as few who
can be ſaid really and in earneſt to aim at
one, as at the other. Take a Survey of Man-
kind : The World in general, the Good and
Bad, almoſt without Exception, equally are
agreed, that were Religion out of the Caſe,
the Happineſs of the preſent Life would con-
ſiſt in a Manner wholly in Riches, Honours,
ſenſual Gratifications; inſomuch that one
ſcarce hears a Reflection made upon Pru-
dence, Life, Conduct, but upon this Suppo-
ſition. Yet on the contrary, that Perſons in
the greateſt Affluence of Fortune are no
C 3 happicx


cc Www | RE


22


A SERMON


SRM. happicr than ſuch as have only a Compe-


I.


tency ; that the Cares and Diſappointments
of Ambition for the moſt Part far exceed
the Satisfactions of it; as alſo the miſerable
Intervals of Intemperance and Exceſs, and |
the many untimely Deaths occaſioned by a
diſſolute Courſe of Life: Theſe things are
all ſeen, acknowledged, by every one ac-
knowledged ; but are thought no Objections
againſt, though they expreſsly contradict, this
univerſal Principle, that the Happineſs of the
preſent Life conſiſts in one or other of them.
Whence is all this Abſurdity and Contradic-
tion ? Is not the middle Way obvious? Can
any thing be more manifeſt, than that the
Happineſs of Life conſiſts in Theſe poſſeſſed
and enjoyed only to a certain Degree ; that |
to purſue them beyond this Degree, is al-
ways attended with more Inconvenience
than Advantage to a Man's ſelf, and often
with extream Miſery and Unhappineſs.
Whence then, I ſay, is all this Abſurdity
and Contradiction? Is it really the Reſult of
Conſideration in Mankind, how they may
become moſt caly to themſelves, moſt free
from Care, and enjoy the chief Happineſs
attainable in this World? Or is it not mani-
teſtly owing either to this, that they have
not


v WU Vu 9» YU wr = GN WL. 5 Vv J


Upon Humane Nature.


not cool and reaſonable Concern enough Str M.


for themſelves, to conſider wherein their
chief Happineſs in the preſent Life conſiſts ;


or elſe, if they do conſider it, that they will


not act conformably to what is the Reſult
of that Conſideration : 1. e. reaſonable Con-
cern for themſelves, or cool Self-love is
prevailed over by Paſſion and Appetite. So
that from what appears, there is no Ground
to aſſert that thoſe Principles in the Nature
of Man, which moſt directly lead to pro-
mote the Good of our Fellow-Creatures, arc
more generally or in a greater Degree vio»
lated, than thoſe, which moſt directly lead
us to promote our own private Good and
Happineſs.

TuE Sum of the whole is plainly this.
The Nature of Man conſidered in his ſin—
gle Capacity, and with reſpe& only to the
preſent World, is adapted and leads him to


attain the greateſt Happineſs he can for him-


ſelf in the preſent World, The Nature of
Man conſidered in his publick or ſocial Ca-


Pacity leads him to a right Behaviour in So-


ciety, to that Courſe of Life which we call
Virtue. Men follow or obey their Nature
in both theſe Capacities and Reſpects to a
certain Degree, but not intirely : Their AQi-


C 4 ons


4


— .


24


A SERMON


SERM- ons do not come up to the whole of what
why


Part are equally ſo to both by the ſame


their Nature leads them to in either of theſe
Capacitics or Reſpects; and they often vio-
late their Nature in both. i. e. As they neg-
le& the Duties they owe to their Fellow-
Creatures, to which their Nature leads them
and arc injurious, to which their Nature 1s
abhorrent: So there is a manifeſt Negli-
gence in Men of their real Happineſs or In-
tereſt in the preſent World, when that In-
tereſt is inconſiſtent with a preſent Gratifi-
cation; for the ſake of which they negli-
gently, nay, even knowingly are the Au-
thors and Inſtruments of their own Miſery
and Ruin. Thus they are as often unjuſt
to themſelves as to others, and for the moſt


Actions.


— — a —
- *


SERMON IL III.
Upon Humane Nature.


Ro M. ii. 14.


For when the Gentiles which have not the
Law, do by Nature the things contain-
ed in the Law, theſe having not the
Law, are a Law unto themſelves.


| S ſpeculative Truth admits of diffe- Sz x M.
rent Kinds of Proof, ſo likewiſe


by different Methods. If the real Nature
of any Creature leads him and is adapted
to ſuch and ſuch Purpoſes only, or more
than to any other; this is a Reaſon to be-
lieve the Author of that Nature intended it
for thoſe Purpoſes. Thus there is no Doubt
the Eye was intended for us to ſee with.
And the more complex any Conſtitution

is,


Moral Obligations may be ſhewn o Y


A SERMON


| SERM. is, and the greater Variety of Parts there are
| II. which thus tend to ſome one End, the Y
| ſtronger is the Proof that ſuch End was de- | i
ſigned. However, when the inward Frame S
of Man is conſidered as any Guide in Mo-
rals, the utmoſt Caution muſt be uſed that V
none make Peculiarities in their own Tem- C
per, or any thing which is the Effect of
| particular Cuſtoms, though obſervable in
| ſeveral, the Standard of what is common

to the Species; and above all, that the high-
| eſt Principle be not forgot or excluded,
| That to which belongs the Adjuſtment and
| Correction of all other inward Movements
and Aﬀettions : Which Principle will of
Courſe have ſome Influence, but which be-
| ing in Nature ſupream, as ſhall now be
ſhown, ought to preſide over and govern |
all the reſt. The Difficulty of rightly ob-
| ſerving the two former Cautions; the Ap- |
| pearance there is of ſome ſmall Diverſity *
| amongſt Mankind with reſpe& to this Fa-
culty, with reſpect to their natural Senſe of
moral Good and Evil; and the Attention ne-
ceſſary to ſurvey with any Exactneſs what
paſſes within, have occaſioned that it is not


ſo much agreed what is the Standard of the
internal Nature of Man, as of his external
Form.


26


Z — — — — — _ -


Upon Humane Nature.


Form. Neither is this laſt exactly ſettled. SER M.
Yet we underſtand one another when we II.


ſpeak of the Shape of a Humane Body :
So likewiſe we do when we ſpeak of the
Heart and inward Principles, how far ſoe-
ver the Standard is from being exact or pre-
ciſely fixt. There is therefore Ground for
an Attempt of ſhewing Men to themſelves,


of ſhewing them what Courſe of Life and
Behaviour their real Nature points out and
would lead them to. Now Obligations of
: Virtue ſhown, and Motives to the Practice
| of it enforced, from a Revicw of the Na-


ture of Man, are to be conſidered as an


Appeal to each particular Perſon's Heart and
natural Conſcience : As the external Senſes
are appealed to for the Proof of things cog-
nizable by them. Since then our inward
Feelings, and the Perceptions we receive
from our external Senſes are equally real;
to argue from the former to Life and Con-
duct, is as little liable to Exception, as to
argue from the latter to abſolute ſpeculative
Truth. A Man can as little doubt whe-
ther his Eyes were given him to ſee with,
as he can doubt of the Truth of the Science
of Optics, deduced from ocular Experi-
ments. And allowing the inward Feeling,


Shame;


28
SERM.


A SERMON


Shame; a Man can as little doubt whether
it was given him to prevent his doing ſhame- *'
ful Actions, as he can doubt whether his
Eyes were given him to guide his Steps.
And as to theſe inward Feelings themſelves ;
that they are real, that Man has in his Na-
ture Paſſions and Affections, can no more
be queſtioned, than that he has external
Senſes. Neither can the former be wholly
miſtaken ; though to a certain Degree liable
to greater Miſtakes than the latter. |
THERE can be no doubt but that ſeveral


Propenſions or Inſtincts, ſeveral Principles


in the Heart of Man, carry him to Society,
and to contribute to the Happineſs of it, in
a Senſe and a Manner in which no inward
Principle leads him to Evil. Theſe Princi-
ples, Propenſions or Inſtincts which lead him
to do Good, are approved of by a certain
Faculty within, quite diſtin from theſe
Propenſions themſelves. All this hath been
fully made out in the foregoing Diſcourſe.
Bur it may be ſaid, © What is all this,
«< though true, to the Purpoſe of Virtue and
< Religion ? Theſe require, not only that
<< we do good to others when we are led
« this Way, by Benevolence or Reflection,
< happening to be ſtronger than other Prin-
« ciples,


Upon Humane Nature.


Ay


e ciples, Paſſions, or Appetites; but like- Sz x.


« wiſe that the whole Character be formed
upon Thought and Reflection; that eve-
« ry Action be directed by ſome determi-


C nate Rule, ſome other Rule than the


e Strength and Preyalency of any Principle
* or Paſſion. What Sign is there in our
* Nature (for the Inquiry is only about what
* is to be collected from thence) that this
was intended by its Author ? Or how
* does ſo various and fickle a Temper as
e that of Man appear adapted thereto ? It
e may indeed be abſurd and unnatural for
e Men to act without any Reflection; nay,
* without Regard to that particular Kind of
4 Reflection which you call Conſcience;
< becauſe this does belong to our Nature.
« For as there never was a Man but who
“ approved one Place, Proſpect, Building,
« before another: So it does not appear
ce that there ever was a Man who would
4 not have approved an Action of Huma-
e nity rather than of Cruelty ; Intercſt and


« Paſlion being quite out of the Cale. But


* Intereſt and Paſſion do come in, and are
te often too ſtrong for and prevail over Re-
te flection and Conſcience. Now as Brutes
© have various Inſtincts, by which they are

« carried


30


SERM. 4 carried on to the End the Author of their


II.


Www


cc
c c


cc


A SERMON


Nature intended them for: Is not Man
in the ſame Condition ; with this Diffe-
rence only, that to his Inſtincts (i. e. Ap-


< petites and Paſſions) is added the Princi-


ce ple of Reflection or Conſcience ? And


ce


as Brutes act agreeably to their Nature, in


« following that Principle or particular In-


cc
cc
cc
ce
cc
cc
cc
ec
Cc
cc
cc
cc


cc


ſtint which for the preſent is ſtrongeſt
in them: Does not Man likewiſe act a-
greeably to his Nature, or obey the Law
of his Creation, by following that Prin-
ciple, be it Paſſion or Conſcience, which
for the preſent happens to be ſtrongeſt in
him? Thus different Men are by their
particular Nature hurried on to purſue
Honour, or Riches, or Pleaſure : There
are alſo Perſons whoſe Temper leads them
in an uncommon Degree to Kindneſs,
Compaſlion, doing Good to their Fellow-
Creatures : As there are others who are


given to ſuſpend their Judgment, to weigh


cc


and conſider Things, and to act upon
Thought and Reflection. Let every one
then quietly follow his Nature; as Paſſi-
on, Reflection, Appetite, tne ſeveral Parts
of it, happen to be ſtrongeſt: But let
not the Man of Virtue take upon him

2 « ro


Upon Humane Aware.


ce to blame the Ambitious, the Covetous, SEM.


« the Diſlolute ; ſince theſe equally with
« him obey and follow their Nature. Thus,
* as in ſome Caſes we follow our Nature
e in doing the Works contained in the Law,
« ſo in other Caſcs we follow Nature in
* doing contrary.

No w all this licentious Talk intirely goes
upon a Suppoſition, that Men follow their
Nature in the ſame Senſe, in violating the
known Rules of Juſtice and Honeſty for the
ſake of a preſent Gratification, as they do
in following thoſe Rules when they have
no Temptation to the contrary. And if
this were true, that could not be ſo which
St. Paul aſſerts, that Men are by Nature a
Law to themſelves. If by following Na-
ture were meant only acting as we pleaſe, it
would indced be ridiculous to ſpeak of Na-
ture as any Guide in Morals: Nay the ve-
ry mention of deviating from Nature would
be abſurd ; and the mention of following it,
when ſpoken by way of Diſtinction, would
abſolutely have no Meaning. For did ever any
one act otherwiſe than as he pleaſed? And
yet the Anticnts ſpeak of deviating from
Nature as Vice; and of following Nature


ſo much as a Diſtinction, that according to
them


—


= — — — —— —


32


StrR. them the Perfection of Virtue conſiſts there?


A SERMON


I. in. So that Language itſelf ſhould teach
people another Senſe to the Words follow-


ing Nature, than barely acting as we pleaſe.
Let it however be obſerved, that though the
Words Humane Nature are to be explained,
yet the real Queſtion of this Diſcourſe is
not concerning the Meaning of Words, a-
ny otherwiſe than as the Explanation of
them may be needful to make out and ex-
plain the Aſſertion, that every Man is na-
turally a Law to himſelf, that every one
may find within himſelf the Rule of Right,
and Obligations to follow if. This St. Paul
afirms in the Words of the Text, and this
the foregoing Objection really denies by
ſeeming to allow it. And the Objection


will be fully anſwered, and the Text be-


fore us explained, by obſerving that Na-
ture is conſidered in different Views, and the
Word uſed in different Senſes; and by
ſhewing in what View it is conſidered, and
in what Senſe the Word is uſed, when in-
tended to expreſs and ſignify that which
is the Guide of Life, that by which Men
are a Law to themſelves. I ſay, the Ex-
planation of the Term will be ſufficient,
becauſe from thence it will appear, that in

2 ſome


ö T N


ther.


upon Humane Nature.


ſome Senſes of the Word, Nature cannot S ERM.
1


be, but that in another Senſe it manifeſtly
is, a Law to us.

I. By Nature is often meant no more
than ſome Principle in Man, without regard
either to the Kind or Degree of it. Thus
the Paſſion of Anger, and the Affection of
Parents to their Children, would be called
equally natural. And as the ſame Perſon
hath often contrary Principles, which at the
ſame Time draw contrary Ways, he may by
the ſame Action both follow and contradict
his Nature in this Senſe of the Word; he
may follow one Paſſion and contradict ano-


Il. Nature is frequently ſpoken of as


- conſiſting in thoſe Paſſions which are ſtrong-


eſt, and moſt influence the Actions; which
being vicious ones, Mankind is in this
Senſe naturally vicious, or vicious by Na-
ture. Thus St. Paul ſays of the Gentiles,


' who were dead in Treſpaſſes and Sins, and


walked according to the Spirit of Diſobe-


dience, that they were by Nature the Chil-


dren of Wrath *. They could be no other-
wiſe Children of Wrath by Nature, than


they were vicious by Nature,
D HERE


* Epheſ. ii. 3.


323 ET VoIlE — — — — —


34


SERM.


II.
WWW


A SERMON.


HERE then are two different Senſes of
the Word Nature, in neither of which Men
can at all be ſaid to be a Law to themſelves.
They are mentioned only to be excluded


to prevent their being confounded, as the


latter is in the Objection, with another Senſe
of it, which is now to be inquired after,


and explained.
III. THE Apoſtle alerts, that the Gen-


tiles do by NATURE the things con-


put by way of Diſtinction from Revelation,
but yet it is not a meer Negative. He in-
tends to expreſs more than that by which
they did not, that by which they did the
Works of the Law; namely, by Nature.
It is plain the meaning of the Word is not
the ſame in this Paſſage as in the former,
where it is ſpoken of as Evil; for in this
latter it is ſpoken of as Good; as that by
which they acted, or might have acted vir-
tuouſly. What that is in Man by which he
is naturally a Law to himſelf, is explained


in the following Words: Which ſhew the
Work of the Law written in their Hearts,


their Conſciences alſo bearing Witneſ3, and


their Thoughts the mean while accuſmg or
elſe excuſing one another, If there be a Diſ-


tinction


Fained in the Law. Nature is indeed here


r 0


upon Humane Nature:
tinction to be made between the Works
written in their Hearts, and the Witneſs
of Conſcience ; by the former muſt be meant
the natural Diſpoſitions to Kindneſs and
Compaſſion, to do what is of good Report,
to which this Apoſtle often refers : That
Part of the Nature of Man, treated of in
the foregoing Diſcourſe, which with very
little Reflection and of Courſe leads him to
Society, and by means of which he natu-
rally acts a juſt and good Part in it, unleſs
other Paſſions or Intereſt lead him aſtray.
Yet ſince other Paſſions, and Regards to
private Intereſt, which lead us (though in-


directly, yet they lead us) aſtray, - are them-


ſelves in a Degree equally natural, and of-
ten moſt prevalent ; and ſince we have no
Method of ſecing the particular Degrees in
which one or the other is placed in us by
Nature; it is plain the former, conſidered
meerly as natural, good and right as they
are, can no more be a Law to us than the
latter. But there is a ſuperior Principle of
Reflection or Conſcience in every Man,
which diſtinguiſhes between the internal
Principles of his Heart, as well as his exter-
nal Actions: Which paſſes Judgment upon
himſelf and them; pronounces determinate-

D 2 ly


35


SERM.


II.
AA


70


SRM. ly ſome Actions to be in themſelves juſt,


II.


A SERMON


right, good; others to be in themſelves evil,
wrong, unjuſt : Which, without being con-
ſuited, without being adviſed with, magi-
ſerially exerts itſelf, and approves or con-
demns Him the doer of them accordingly :
And which, if not forcibly ſtbpp'd, natural-
ly and always of Courſe goes on to antici-
pate a higher and more effectual Sentence,
which ſhall hereafter ſecond and affirm its
own. But this Part of the Office of Con-
ſcience is beyond my preſent Deſign ex-
plicitely to conſider. It is by this Faculty,
natural to Man, that he is a moral Agent,
that he is a Law to himſelf : By this Facul-
ty, I ſay, not to be conſidered meerly as a
Principle in his Heart, which is to have ſome
Influence as well as others; but conſidered as
a Faculty in Kind and in Nature ſupream
over all others, and which bears its own
Authority of being ſo.

TNIS Prerogative, this natural Supre-
macy, of the Faculty which ſurveys, ap-
proves or diſapproves tae ſeveral Affections
of our Mind, and Actions of our Lives, be-
ing that by which Men are a Law to them-
ſelves, their Conformity or Diſobedience
to which Law of our Nature renders their

2 | Actions,


upon Humane Nature.


Senſe, natural or unnatural ; it is fit to be
further explained to you: And I hope it
will be fo, if you will attend to the follow-
ing Reflections.

MAN may act according to that principle
or Inclination which for the preſent hap-


pens to be ſtrongeſt, and yet act in a Way


diſproportionate to, and violate his real
proper Nature. Suppoſe a brute Creature
by any Bait to be allured into a Snare, by
which he is deſtroyed. He plainly followed
the Bent of his Nature, leading him to gra-
tify his Appetite: There is an entire Cor-
reſpondence between his whole Nature and
ſuch an Action: Such Action therefore is na-
tural. But ſuppoſe a Man, foreſeeing the ſame
Danger of certain Ruin, ſhould ruſh into
it for the ſake of a preſent Gratification.
He in this Inſtance would follow his ſtrongeſt
Deſite, as did the brute Creature: But there
would be as manifeſt a Diſproportion, be-
tween the Nature of a Man and ſuch an
Action, as between the meaneſt Work of Art
and the Skill of the greateſt Maſter in that
Art: Which Diſproportion ariſes, not from


conſidering the Action ſingly in itſelf, or
in its Conſequences but trom Compariſon of


D 3 it


— :


ay


Adions, in the higheſt and moſt proper SER NM.


II.


SERM.


A SERMON


it with the Nature of the Agent. And ſince
ſuch an Action is utterly diſproportionate
to the Nature of Man, it is in the ſtricteſt
and moſt proper Senſe unnatural ; this Word
expreſſing that Diſproportion. Therefore
inſtead ofthe Words, Diſproportionate to his
Nature, the Word, Unnatural, may now be


put; this being more familiar to us: But


let it be obſerved, that it ſtands for the ſame
thing preciſely. |
Now what is it which renders ſuch a
raſh Action unnatural? Is it that he went a-
gainſt the Prigciple of reaſonable and cool
Self- love, conſidered meerly as a Part of his
Nature? No: For if he had ated the con-
trary Way, he would equally have gone a-
cainſt a Principle or Part of his Nature,
namely, Paſſion or Appetite. But to deny
a preſent Appetite, from Foreſight that the
Gratification of it would end in immediate
Ruin or extream Miſery, is by no Means an
annatural Action: Whereas to contradict or
go againſt cool Self- love for the ſake of ſuch
Gratification, is ſo in the Inſtance before us.
Such an Action then being unnatural ; and
its being ſo not ariſing from a Man's going
againſt a Principle or Deſire barcly, nor in
going againſt that Principle or Deſire which


happens


Wong


1


1 —


„ can 4


co „ TY ww (3 ww Pj CU CP.


_ Io


upon Humane Nature.


39


happens for the preſent to be ſtrongeſt ; it Sz RM.


neceſſarily follows, that there muſt be ſome
other Difference or Diſtinction to be made
between theſe two Principles, Paſſion and
cool Self- love, than what I have yet taken
Notice of. And this Difference, not being
a Difference in Strength or Degree, I call a


Difference in Nature and in Kind. And


ſince, in the Inſtance ſtill before us, if Paſſion
prevails over Self- love, the conſequent Acti-
on is unnatural ; but if Self- love prevails o-
ver Paſſion, the Action is natural: It is ma-
nifeſt that Self- love is in Humane Nature a
ſuperiour Principle to Paſſion. This may
be contradicted without violating that Na-
ture; but the former cannot. So that, if
we will act conformably to the Oeconomy
of Man's Nature, reaſonable Self- love muſt
govern. Thus, without particular Conſide-
ration of Conſcience, we may have a clear
Conception of the ſuperiour Nature of one
inward Principle to another; and ſee that
there really is this natural Superiority, quite
diſtin from Degrees of Strength and Preva-
lency. |
LE r us now take a View of the Natur
of Man, as conſiſting partly of various Ap-
petites, Paſſions, Affections, and partly of
D 4 the


II.


40 A SERMON
Sz xx. the Principle of Reflection or Conſcience 3

II. leaving quite out all Conſideration of the
* different Degrees of Strength, in which ei-
ther of them prevail, and it will further ap-
pear that there is this natural Superiority of
one inward Principle to another, or that it
is even Part of the Idea of enen or
Conſcience.

PAss ION or Appetite implies a a direct
ſimple Tendency towards ſuch and ſuch
Objects, without Diſtinction of the Means by
which they are to be obtained. Conſequent-
ly "twill often happen there will be a De-
fire of particular Objects, in Caſes where
1 they cannot be obtained without manifeſt
[ Injury to others. Reflection or Conſcience
| comes in, and diſapproves the Purſuit of
if them in theſe Circumſtances ; but the De-
| fire remains. Which is to be obeyed, Ap-
„ petite or Reflection? Cannot this Queſtion
| be anſwered from the Oeconomy and Con-
ſtitution of Humane Nature meerly, with-
out ſaying which is ſtrongeſt 2 Or need this
at all come into Conſideration 2 Would
not the Queſtion be intelligibiy and fully
anſwered by ſaying, that the Principle of
Reflection or Conſcience being compared


with the various Appetites, Paſſions, and
Affections


—— — ——ñ —̃ —̃ (HL — —
— ͤ . RR N —


— . - —
- — 2
—


— om. —
© _ — LY


ba — —
i — — — — — *


n —
_ — - ——
— — — — — —
- —


U "DU WE


„


1__ ww


mm 00 = 0 1


..:3 -: 0


upon Flumane Nature.


Affections in Men, the former is manifeſtly Sz x12
PT


ſuperiour and chief, without regard to
Strength? And how often ſoever the latter
happens to prevail, it is meer Uſurpation :
The former remains in Nature and in Kind
its Superiour ; and cvery Inſtance of ſuch
Prevalence of the latter is an Inſtance of
breaking in upon and Violation of the Con-
ſtitution of Man.

ALL this is no more than the Diſtinction,
which cvery Body. is acquainted with, be-
tween meer Power and Authority : Only,
inſtead of being intended to expreſs the
Differcnce betwcen what is poſlible, and
what is lawful in Civil Government; here it
has been ſhewn applicable to the ſeveral
Principles in the Mind of Man. Thus that
Principle, by which we ſurvey, and cither
approve or diſapprove our own Heart,
Temper and Actions, is not only to be
conſidered as what is in its turn to have
ſome Influence; which may be ſaid of e-
very Paſſion, of the loweſt Appetites :
But likewiſe as being ſuperiour ; as from its
very Nature manifeſtly claiming Superiority
over all others: inſomuch that you cannot
form a Notion of this Faculty, Conſcience,
Without taking in Judgment, Direction,

Super-


. - —
— ———


” - -
- — ——E. — —_—


— - 2 —
— 2 —


— * —— ——ů — — — ¶— — — —— v.
—— — — — —— — — = : . —
. a —— _ __ . N ©


42


II.


A SERMON


Sz xM, Superintendency. This is a conſtituent Part


of the Idea, that is, of the Faculty itſelf :


And, to preſide and govern, from the very


Oeconomy and Conſtitution of Man, be-
longs to it. Had it Strength, as it has Right;
had it Power, as it has manifeſt Authority;
it would abſolutely govern the World.
THIs gives us a further View of the
Nature of Man ; ſhews us what Courſe of
Life we were made for : Not only that our
real Nature leads us to be influenced in ſome
Degree by Reflection and Conſcience ; but
liewiſe in what Degree we are to be in-
fluenced by it, if we will fall in with, and
act agreeably to the Conſtitution of our
Nature : That this Faculty was placed with-
in to be our proper Governour ; to dire&
and regulate all under Principles, Paſſions,
and Motives of Action. This is its Right
and Office: Thus ſacred is its Authority.
And ho often ſoever Men violate and rebel-
liouſly refuſe to ſubmit to it, for ſuppoſed
Intereſt which they cannot otherwiſe ob-
tain, or for the ſake of Paſſion which they
cannot otherwiſe gratify ; this makes no
Alteration as to the natural Right and Of-
fice of Conſcience,


LET


upon Humane Nature.


LET us now turn this whole Matter ano-
ther way, and ſuppoſe there was no ſuch
thing at all as this natural Supremacy of
Conſcience ; that there was no Diſtinction
to be made between one inward Principle
and another, but only that of Strength ;
and ſee what would be the Conſequence.

CONSIDER then what is the Latitude
and Compaſs of the Actions of Man with
regard to Himſelf, his Fellow-Creatures and
the Supream Being? What are their Bounds,
beſides that of our natural Power? With re-
ſpe to the two firſt, they are plainly no
other than theſe : No Man ſeeks Miſery as
ſuch for himſelf ; and No one provoked
does Miſchief to Another for its own ſake.
For in every Degree within theſe Bounds,
Mankind knowingly from Paſſion or Wan-
tonneſs bring Ruin and Miſery upon them-
ſelves and others. And Impiety and Pro-
phaneneſs, I mean, what every one would
call ſo who believes the Being of God, have
abſolutely no Bounds at all, Men blaſ-
pheme the Author of Nature, formally and
in Words renounce their Allegiance to their
Creator, Put an Inſtance then with reſpect
to any one of theſe three. Tho' we ſhould
ſuppoſe prophane Swearing, and in general

that


43
S ERM.
II.


WWW


- „„ —  _ — — — — —
py 4 - — *
— - ——_ N 1
a 1 : Tn — * —


75


Szx. that Kind of Impiety now mentioned, to


II.
WWW


Being our Crcator ; and is this as ſuitable


A SERMON


mean nothing, yet it implies wanton Diſ-
regard and Irreverence towards an Infinite


to the Nature of Man, as Reverence and
Dutiful Submiſſion of Heart towards that
Almighty Being? Or ſuppole a Man guilty
of Parricide, with all the Circumſtances of
Cruelty which ſuch an Action can admit
of. This Action is done in Conſequence
of its Principle being for the preſent ſtrong-
eſt : And if there be no Difference between
inward Principles, but only that of Strength;
the Strength being given, you have the
whole Nature of the Man given ſo far as it
relates to this Matter. The Action plainly
correſponds to the Principle, the Principle
being in that Degree of Strength it was: It
therefore correſponds to the whole Nature
of the Man. Upon comparing the Action
and the whole Nature, there ariſes no Diſ-
proportion, there appears no unſuitableneſs
between them. Thus the Murder of a Fa-
ther and the Nature of Man correſpond to
each other, as the ſame Nature and an act
of filial Duty. If there be no Difference be-
tween inward Principles, but only that of
Strength; we can make no Diſtinction be-
tween


0
-


"20. -.- TY 2


. 3 WW WW...» WW” CT” JF J0 - OD VO WY 3 IO- W000


Ph v OF bw (3 C0


upon Humane Nature.


45


tween theſe two Actions, conſidered as the SRM.


Actions of ſuch a Creature; but in our
cooleſt Hours muſt approve or diſapprove
them equally : Than which nothing can be


reduced to a greater Abſurdity.


Conſcience being thus eſtabliſhed; we may
from it form a diſtin Notion of what is
meant by Humane Nature, when Virtue is
aid to conſiſt in following it, and Vice in
deviating from it.

As the Idea of a Civil Conſtitution im-
plies in it united Strength, various Subordi-
nations, under one Direction, that of the
ſupream Authority ; the different Strength


of each particular Member of the Society


not coming into the Idea ; whereas, if you
leave out the Subordination, the Union and
the one Direction, you deſtroy and loſe it:
So Reaſon, ſeveral Appetitcs, Paſſions and
Aﬀettions, prevailing in different Degrees


of Strength, is not that Idea or Notion of


Humane Nature; but that Nature conſiſts
in theſe ſeveral Principles conſidered as
having a natural Reſpect to each other, in
the ſeveral Paſſions being naturally ſubordi-

nate


T HE natural Supremacy of Reflection or S ERM.


III.


4 „


46


1 SER M. nate to the one ſuperior Principle of Reflecti-


A SERMON


*


on or Conſcience. Every Bias, Inſtinct,


9 Propenſion within, is a real Part of our


Nature, but not the Whole: Add to theſe
the ſuperiour Faculty, whoſe Office it is to
adjuſt, manage and preſide over them, and
take in this its natural Superiority, and you
compleat the Idea of Humane Nature. And


as in Civil Government the Conſtitution is
broken in upon and violated by Power and


Strength prevailing over Authority ; ſo
the Conſtitution of Man is broken in up-
on and violated by the lower Faculties or
Principles within prevailing over that which
is in its Nature ſupream over them all. Thus,
when it is ſaid by ancient Writers, that
Tortures and Death are not fo contrary to
Humane Nature as Injuſtice ; by this to be
ſure is not meant, that the Averſion to the
former in Mankind is leſs ſtrong and preva-


tent than their Averſion to the latter: But


that the former is only contrary to our Na-
ture conſidered in a partial View, and
which takes in only the loweſt Part of it,
that which we have in common with the
Brutes ; whereas the latter is contrary to our
Nature, conſidered in a higher Senſe, as a

Syſtem

'I


m_ * SIS 4s


upon Humane Nature.


whole Oeconomy of Man *, ©
3 AND


* Every Man in his phyſical Nature is one individual ſingle
Agent. He has likewiſe Properties and Principles, each of
which may be conſidered ſeparately, and without Regard to
the Reſpects which they have to each other. Neither of
theſe are the Nature we are taking a View of. But it is the
inward Frame of Man conſidered as a Syſkem or Conſtitution -


Individuation, but by the Reſpects they have to each other;
the chief of which is the Subjection which the Appetites,
Paſſions, and particular Affections have to the one ſupream
Principle of Reflection or Conſcience. The Syſtem or Con-
ſtitution is formed by and conſiſts in theſe Reſpects and this
Subjection. Thus the Body is a Syſtem or Conſtitution : So is
a Tree: So is every Machine. Conſider all the ſeveral Parts of a


Tree without the natural Reſpects they have to each other, and


you have not at all the Idea of a Tree ; but add theſe Reſpects,
and this gives you the Idea. The Body may be impaired by
Sickneſs, a Tree may decay, a Machine be out of Order, and
and yet the Syſtem and Conſtitution of them not totally diſ-
ſolved. There is plainly fomewhat which anſwers toall this
in the moral Conſtitution of Man. Whoever will conſider his
own Nature, will ſee that the ſeveral Appetites, Paſſions, and
particular Affections, have different Reſpects amongſt them-
ſelves. They are Reſtraints upon, and are in a Proportion to
each other. This Proportion is juſt and perfect, when all
thoſe under Principles are perfectly coincident with Conſci-
ence, ſo far as their Nature permits, and in all Caſes under its
abſolute and intire Direction. The leaſt Exceſs or Defect,
the leaſt Alteration of the due Proportions amongſt them-
ſelves, or of their Co-incidence with Conſcience, though not
proceeding into Action, is ſome Degree of Diſorder in the
moral Conſtitution. But Perfection, though plainly intelligi-
ble and ſuppoſeable, was never attained by any Man. If the


higher Principle of Reflection maintains its Place, aud as much
as


2


Whoſe ſeveral Par ts are united, not by a phy ſical Principle of


47
Syſtem and Conſtitution, contrary to the S ERM.
*


48 A SERMON.


SRM. AND from all theſe things put together,
III. nothing can be more evident, than that, ex- f
cluſive of Revelation, Man cannot be con-
ſidered as a Creature left by his Maker to
act at random, and live at large up to the
Extent of his natural Power, as Paſſion,
Humour, Wilfulneſs, happen to carry him;
which is the Condition brute Creatures are
in: But that from his Make, Conſtitution,
or Nature, he is in the ſtricteſt and moſt
proper Senſe a Law to himſelf. He hath
the Rule of Right within : What is wanting
is only that he honeſtly attend to it.

Tu E Inquiries which have been made by
Men of Leiſure after ſome general Rule,
the Conformity to, or Diſagreement from
which, ſhould denominate our Actions Good
or Evil, are in many Reſpects of great Ser-
vice. Yet let any plain honeſt Man, before
he engages in any Courſe of Action, ask
himſelf, Is this 1 am going about Right, or

545». S$


as it can cbrrects that Diſorder, and hinders it from breaking

out into Action, this is all that can be expected in ſuch a
Creature as Man. And though the Appetites and Paſſions have

not their exact due Proportion to each other; though they of-
ten ſtrive for Maſtery with Judgment or Reflection; yet,
ſince the Superiority of this Principle to all others is the chief
Reſpect which torms the Conſtitution, ſo far as this Superi-
ority is maintained, the Character, the Man, is good, wor-

thy, virtuous,


. 1 3 6 1 . 1 1


upon Humane Nature.


not in the leaſt doubt but that this Queſtion
would be anſwered agreeably to Truth and
Virtue, by almoſt any fair Man in almoſt a-
ny Circumſtance. Neither do there appear
any Caics which look like Exceptions to
this ; but thole of Superſtition, and of Parti-
ality to ourlelycs, Superſtition may perhaps
be ſomewhat of an Exception : But Partiali-
ty to ouriclves is not; this being itſelf
Diſhoneſty. For a Man to judge that to be
the equitable, the moderate, the right Part
for him to act, which he would ſce to be
hard, unjuſt, oppreſſive in another ; this is
plain Vice, and can proceed only from grcat
Unfairneſs of Mind.

BurT allowing that Mankind hath the
Rule of Right within himſelf, yet it may be
asked, Whar Obligations arc we under to
" attend to and follow it?” 1 anſwer : It
has been proved that Man by his Nature is a
Law to himſclf, without the particular dif
tint Conſideration of the poſitive Sanctions


of that Law ; the Rewards and Puniſhments


which we feel, and thoſe which from the
Light of Reaton we have ground to believe,


are annext to it. The Queſtion then carries


ts own Anſwer along with it, Your Obli-
E | gation


49


is it Wrong! Is it Good, or is it Evil? IdoSzzm.


III.


WWW


WW


* —— — — — — —„—- — ̃—


A SERMON
SERM. pation to obey this Law, is its being the


Law of your Nature. That your Conſci-
ence approves of and atteſts to ſuch a Courſe


of Action, is itſelf alone an Obligation.
Conſcience does not only offer itſelf to ſhew
ns the Way we ſhould walk in, but it like-
wiſe carries its own Authority with it, that
it is our natural Guide; the Guide aſſigned


us by the Author of our Nature: It there-
fore belongs to our Condition of Being, it


is our Duty, to walk in that Path and fol-


low this Guide without looking about to
fee whether we may not poſſibly forſake
them with Impunity.

How EVER, let us hear what is to be
faid againſt obeying this Law of our Nature,
And the Sum is no more than this. Why


e ſhould we be concerned about any thing
* out of and beyond ourſelves ? If we do


& find within Ourſelves Regards to Others,
« and Reſtraints of we know not how ma-
© ny different Kinds; yet, theſe being Em-
cc baraſſments, and hindering us from going
« the nearcſt Way to our own Good, why
« ſhould we not endeavour to ſuppreſs and


« get over them? ”,


' Tavs People go on with Words, which,
when applicd to Humane Nature, and the
- Condition


* 7 OO gs CS af x 4 4
PL RE InAs fie


* ”. a c—_— VVT'Y *


e.


upon Humane Nature.


Condition in which it is placed in this SER M.


—


World, have really no Meaning. For does
not all this kind of Talk go upon Suppoſi-


tion, that our Happineſs in this World con-
fiſts in ſomewhat quite diſtinct from Re-


gards to others ; and that it is the Priviledge
of Vice to be without Reſtraint or Confine-
ment? Whereas on the contrary, the En-


joyments, in a Manner all the common En-
joyments of Life, even the Pleaſures of
Vice, depend upon theſe Regards of one
Kind or another to our Fellow- Creatures.
Throw off all Regards to others, and we.
ſhould be quite indifferent to Infamy and to
Honour ; there could be no ſuch thing at
all as Ambition; and ſcarce any ſuch thing


as Covetouſneſs ; for we ſhould likewiſe
be equally indifferent to the Diſgrace of


Poverty, the ſeveral Neglects and Kinds of


Contempt which accompany this State; and


to the Reputation of Riches, the Regard


and Reſpect they uſually procure. Neither
is Reſtraint by any means peculiar to one
Courſe of Life: But our very Nature, ex-
cluſive of Conſcicnce, and our Condition
lays us under an abſolute Neceſſity of it.
We cannot gain any End whatever without
being confined to the proper Means, which

Z 2 is


62


III.


AY


A SER MON


Sz. is often the moſt painful aud uneaſy con-
finement. And in numberleſs Inſtances a. |
preſent Appetite cannot be gratified without
ſuch apparent and immediate Ruin and Mi-
ſery, that the moſt diſſolute Man in the
World chooſes to forego the Pleaſure, ra-


ther than endure the Pain.


Is the Meaning then, to indulge thoſe ©
Regards to our Fellow-Creatures, and ſub- |
mit to thoſe Reſtraints, which upon the
whole ate attended with more Satisfaction
than Uncaſineſs, and get over only thoſe
which bring more Uncaſineſs and Inconve-
nience than Satisfaction? © Doubtleſs this
* was our Meaning.“ You have changed
Sides then. Keep to this; be conſiſtenk
with yourſelves ; and you and the Men of
Virtue are in general perfectly agreed. But

let us take Care and avoid Miſtakes. Let it
not be taken for granted that the Temper of


Envy, Rage, Reſentment, yields greater De-
light than Meekneſs, Forgiveneſs, Compaſ-
ſion, and Good- will: Eſpecially when it is


acknowledged that Rage, Envy, Reſent-


ment, arc in themſelves meer Milery ;
and the Satisfaction ariſing from the Indul-
gence of them is little more than Relief
from that Miſery; whercas the Temper of


2 Compaſlion


upon Humane Nature.


2 . PIT) 8 * 4 7
4 ——— 7 * 8 3


lightful; and the Indulgence of it, by doing

i- Good, affords new poſitive Delight and En-
joyment. Let it not be taken for granted,

that the Satisfaction ariſing from the Repu-
1 tation of Riches and Power however ob-
; © tained, and from the Reſpect paid to them,
is greater than the Satisfaction ariſing from
the Reputation of Juſtice, Honeſty, Chari-
n ty, and the Eſteem which is univerſally ac-
e | knowledged to be their due. And if it be
>= | doubtful which of theſe Satisfactions is the
is | greateſt, as there are Perſons who think nci-
ther of them very conſiderable, yet there
t | can be no doubt concerning Ambition and
f _ Covetoulſneſs, Virtue and a good Mind, con-
t | ſidered in themſelves, and as leading to dit-
it ferent Courſes of Life; there can, I ſay,
f | be no doubt, which Temper and which
- Courſe is attended with moſt Peace and Tran-
—  quillity of Mind, which with moſt Perplexi-
s ty, Vexation and Inconvenience. And both
the Virtucs and Vices which have been now
mentioned, do in a Manner cqually imply
- in them Regards of one Kind or another to
f our Fellow-Creaturess® And with reſpe&
f to Reſtraint and Confinement : Whoever
* Will conſider the Reſtraints from Fear and
E 3 Shame,


Compaſſion and Benevolence is itſelf de- SER AM.


8


—


|


54


Str Mm. Shame, the Diſſimulation, mean Arts of | |


III.


A SERMON


Concealment, ſervile Compliances, one or
other of which belong to almoſt every


Courſe of Vice; will ſoon be convinced :
that the Man of Virtue is by no Means upon
a Diſadvantage in this Reſpect. How ma-
ny Inſtances are there in which Men feel
and own and cry aloud under the Chains
of Vice with which they are enthrall'd, and


which yet they will not ſhake off ? How


<
]
t
|
|
|


many Inſtances, in which Perſons mani-


feſtly go through more Pains and Selt-denial


to gratify a vitious Paſſion, than would have


been ncceflary to the Conqueſt of it? To


this is to be added, that when Virtue is be-


come habitual, when the Temper of it is
acquir'd, what was before Confinement cea-
ſes to be ſo, by becoming Choice and De-
light. Whatever Reſtraint and Guard upon
ourſelves may be needful ta unlearn any un-
natural Diſtortion or odd Geſture; yet, in
all Propriety of Speech, natural Behaviour


muſt be the moſt caſy and unreſtrained. It


is manifeſt that, in the common Courle of
Life, there is ſeldom any Inconſiſtency be-
tween our Duty and what is called Intereſt:
It is much ſeldomer that there is an Incon-
ſiſtency between Duty and what is really

Our


upon Humane Nature.


our preſent Intereſt ; meaning by Intereſt, SRM.
- Happineſs and Satisfaction. Self. love then,
though confined to the Intereſt of the pre-
5 ſent World, does in general perfectly coin-
cide with Virtue; and leads us to one and
the ſame Courſe of Life. But, whatever
Exceptions there are to this, which are much
fewer than they are commonly thought, all
ſhall be (et right at the final Diſtribution of
things. It is a manifeſt Abſurdity to ſup-
poſe Evil prevailing finally over Good, un-


der the Conduct and Adminiſtration of a


perfect Mind.


THE whole Argument, which I have
been now inſiſting upon, may be thus ſum-


mad up and given you in one View. The


Nature of Man is adapted to ſome Courle
of Action or other. Upon comparing ſome


Actions with this Nature, they appear ſui-


table and correſpondent to it: From Com-
pariſon of other Actions with the ſame Na-
ture, there ariſes to our View ſome Unſui—
tableneſs or Diſproportion. The Correſ-
pondence of Actions to the Nature of the
Agent renders them natural: Their Diſpro-
portion to it, unnatural. That an Action
is correſpondent to the Nature of the A-
gent, docs nat ariſe from its being agreca-

E 4 ple


*


— ä — —— — — —


A SERMON


1 ble to the principle which happens to be F


wo


the ſtrongeſt : For it may be ſo, and yet be
quite diſproportionate to the Nature of the
Agent. The Correſpondence therefore, or
Diſproportion, ariſes from ſomewhat elſe.
This can be nothing but a Difference in Na-
ture and Kind ( altogether diſtinct from
Strength) between the inward Principles.
Some then are in Nature and Kind ſuperior |
to others. And the Correſpondence ariſes
from the Action being conformable to the
higher Principle; and the Unſuitableneſs,
from its being contrary to it. Reaſonable
Self. love and Conſcience are the chief or
ſuperiour Principles in the Nature of Man:
Becauſe an Action may be ſuitable to this
Nature, though all other Principles be vio- |
lated ; but e uniuitable, if either of
thoſe _ Conſcience and Self-love, if we
underſtand our truc Happineſs, always lead
us the ſame Way. Duty and Intereſt are
perfectly coincident ; for the moſt Part in
this World, but intircly and in every In-
ſtance if we take in the future, and the
whole ; this being implied in the Notion
a good and perfect Adminiſtration of
things. Thus they who have been ſo wiſe
in their Gencration as to regard only their
own


18


pr
e.


P
q 2
*
*


upon Humane Nature. [- 7


own ſuppoſed Intereſt, at the Expence and A 3 M.


to the Injury of others, ſhall at laſt find,
that he who has given up all the Advantages
ö of the preſent World, rather than violate his
Conſcience and the Relations of Life, has
infinitely better provided for himſelf, and
ſecured his own Intereſt and Happineſs.


SERMON


K
— 2 — TR" % — — | — —ß — * — ;
_ „ .


*


*


SERMON IV.
Upon the Government of the
Tongue,


JaMEs 1. 26.


If any Man among you ſeem to be religi-
ous, and bridleth not his Tongue, but de-
ceiueth his own Heart, this Man's Re-


ligion 1s vain.
be more determinate by being more IV.

literal, thus: I any Man among WY
you ſeemeth to be religious, not bridling his
Tongue, but decetving his own Heart, this
Man's Religion is vain. This determines
that the Words, but decerveth his own
Heart, are not put in Oppoſition to, ſeem-
eth Io be religious, but to, bridleth not his
Tongue,


HE Tranſlation of this Text would SER.


60
SERM.


IV.
WY


ASERM ON upon the


Tongue. The certain determinate Meaning
of the Text then being, that he who ſeem-
eth to be religious, and bridleth not his
Tongue, but in that particular deceiveth his
own Heart, this Man's Religion is vain 3 we
may obſerve ſomewhat very forcible and
expreſſive in theſe Words of St. James. As
it the Apoſtle had ſaid, No Man ſurely can
make any Pretences to Religion, who does
not at leaſt believe that he bridleth his
Tongue: If he puts on any Appearance or


Face of Religion, and yet does not govern


his Tongue, he muſt ſurely deceive himſelf
in that particular, and think he does: And
whoever is ſo unhappy as to deceive himſelf
in this, to imagine he keeps that unruly Fa-
culty in due Subjection, when indeed he
docs not, whatever the other Part of his
Lite be, his Religion is vain; the Govern-
ment of the Tongue being a moſt material
Reſtraint which Virtue by us under : With-
Qut it no man can be truly religious.

IN treating upon this Subject, I will con-
ſider,

Firſt, WHAT is the general Vice or Fault
here referred to: Or what Diſpoſition in Men


is ſuppoled in Moral Reflections and Pre-


cepts concerning bridling the Tongue.
Secondly,


Government of the Tongue.


G1


Secondly, WHEN it may be ſaid of any SEN M.


one, that he has a due Government over
himſelf in this reſpe&.

IJ. Now the Fault referred to, and the
Diſpoſition ſuppoſed, in Precepts and Re-
flections concerning the Government of the
Tongue, is not Evil-ſpeaking from Malice;
nor Lying or bearing falſe Witneſs from
indirect iclfiſh Deſigns. The Diipoſition to
theſe, and the actual Vices themſelves, all
come under other Subjects. The Tongue may
be employed about and made to ſerve all the
Purpoſes of Vice, in tempting and decei-
ving, in Perjury and Injuſtice. But the Thing
here ſuppoſed and referred to, is Talkative-
neſs: A Diſpoſition to be talking, abſlrated
from the Conſideration of what is to be
faid ; with very little or no Regard to, or
Thought of doing, cither Good or Harm.
And let not any imagine this to be a flights
Matter, and that it deſerves not to have ſogreat
Weight laid upon ir ; till he has conſidered,
what Evil is implied in it, and the bad Et-
fects which follow from it. It is perhaps
true, that they who are addicted to this
Folly would choole to contine themſelves
to Trifles and indifferent Subjects, and ſo
intend only to be guilty of being imperti-

nent:


IV.


ah


62


AS ER MON hon the


SRM. nent: But as they cannot go on for ever


IV.


talking of Nothing, as common Matters
will not afford a ſufficient Fund for perpe-
tual continued Diſcourſe: when Subjects of
this Kind are exhauſted, they will go on to
Defamation, Scandal, divulging of Secrets,
their own Secrets as well as thoſe of others,
any thing rather than be ſilent. They are
plainly hurried on in the Heat of their Talk
to ſay quite different Things from what they
firſt intended, and which they afterwards
wiſh unſaid ; or improper things, which
they had no other End in ſaying but only
to afford Employment to their Tongue.
And if theſe People expect to be heard and
regarded, for there are ſome content meer-
ly with talking, they will invent to engage
your Attention : and, when they have heard
the leaſt imperfet Hint of an Affair, they
will out of their own Head add the Cir-
cumſtances of Time and Place, and other
Matters to make out their Story, and give
the Appearance of Probability ro it : Not
that they have any Concern about being
believed, otherwiſe than as a Means of be-
ing heard. The thing is, to engage your


Attention; to take you up wholly for the


preſent Time: What Reflections will be made
afterwards


; 7 TY 2 4 2 5 N # F 8 - 2 * 3 ww; "iS. 5 A * OS. . 5 * 3
r — E


Government of the Tongue.


afterwards, is in Truth the leaſt of their SE: nm.


——


Thoughts. And further; when Perſons, who
indulge themſelves in theſe Liberties of the
Tongue, are in any Degree offended with
another, as little Diſguſts and Miſunder-


ſtandings will be, they allow themſelves to
defame and revile ſuch an one without a-
ny Moderation or Bounds; though the Of-
fence is ſo very flight, that they themſelves


would not do, nor perhaps wiſh him an
Injury in any other way. And in this Caſe


the Scandal and Revilings are chiefly owing
to Talkativeneſs, and not bridling their
Tongue; and fo come under our preſent
Subject. The leaſt Occaſion in the World
will make the Humour break out in this
particular Way, or in another. It is like a
Torrent, which muſt and will flow; but the
| leaſt thing imaginable will firſt of all give
tit either this or another Direction, turn it
into this or that Channel: Or like a Fire;


the Nature of which, when in a Heap of


| combuſtible Matter, is to ſpread and lay


waſte all around ; but any one of a thouſand

little Accidents will occaſion it to break out

firſt cither in this or another particular Part.
TAE Subject then before us, though


it does run up into, and can ſcarce be treat-
cd


64


S ERM.


IV.
22


ASERMON hon the
ed as intirely diſtinct from all others; yet
it needs not be ſo much mixed and blend-
ed with them as it often is. Every Facul-
ty and Power may be ufed as the Inftru-
ment of premeditated Vice and Wickedneſs,
meerly as the moſt proper and effcQual |
Means of executing ſuch Deſigns; But if
a Man, from deep Malice and Deſire of
Revenge, ſhould meditate a Falſhood with
a ſetled Deſign to ruin his Neighbour's Re-
putation, and ſhould with great Coolneſs
and Deliberation ſpread it; no- body would
chooſe to ſay of ſuch an one, that he had
no Government of his Tongue. A Man
may uſe the Faculty of Speech as an In-
ſtrument of Falſe-witnefs, who yet has ſo
intire a Command over that Faculty, as ne-
ver to ſpeak but from Forethought and cool
Deſign. Here the Crime is Injuſtice and
Perjury: and, ſtrictly ſpeaking, no more be-
longs to the preſent Subject, than Perjurx
and Injuſtice in any other way. But there
is ſuch a thing as a Diſpof tion to be talk- |
ing for its own ſake ; from which Perſons
often ſay any thing, good or bad, of others,
meerly as a Subje& of Diſcourſe, according
to the particular Temper they themſelves |


happen to be in, and to paſs away the pre-
fent


Government of the Tongue.


65


ſent Time. There is likewiſe to be obſer- SER N.


ved in Perſons ſuch a ſtrong and eager De-
fire of engaging Attention to what they
fay, that they will ſpcak Good or Evil,


Truth or otherwiſe, meerly as one or the
bother ſeems to be moſt hearkened to: And
this, though it is ſometimes joined, is not


the ſame with the Deſire of being thought


important and Men of Conſequence. There


is in ſome ſuch a Diſpoſition to be talking,


that an Offence of the lighteſt Kind, and
> ſach as would not raiſe any other Reſent-
ment, yet raiſes, if I may ſo ſpeak, the
* Reſcntmeat of the Tongue, puts it into 2


* Flame, into the moſt ungovernable Moti-


5 ons. This Outrage, when the Pexſon it
keſpects is preſent, we diſtinguiſh in the
© lower Rank of People by a peculiar Term:


And let it be obſerved, that though the De-


cencies of Behaviour are a little kept; the
ſame Outrage and Virulence, indulged when
he is abſent, is an Offence of the ſame Kind.
But not to diſtinguiſh any further in this


Manner: Men run into Faults and Follies,
which cannot ſo properly be referred to a-
BY one general Head as this, that they have
rot a due Government over their Tongue,


F And


o


66 A SERMON pon the


, SERM. AND this unreſtrained Volubility and
IV. Wantonneſs of Speech is the Occaſion of |


numberleſs Evils and Vexations in Life. It


begets Reſentment in him who is the Subject
of it; ſows the Seed of Strife and Diſſenſion
amongſt others; and inflames little Diſguſts
and Offences, which if let alone would
wear away of themſelves : It is often of
as bad Effect upon the good Name of o-
thers, as deep Envy or Malice: And, to ſay
the leaſt of it in this Reſpect, it deſtroys
and perverts a certain Equity of the utmoſt
Importance to Society to be obſerved; 4
namely, that Praiſe and Diſpraiſe, a good
or bad Character, ſhould always be beſtow- 8
ed according to Deſert. The Tongue uſed 1
in ſuch a licentious Manner is like a Sword
in the Hand of a Madman; it is employed
at random, it can ſcarce poſſibly do any
Good, and for the moſt Part does a World
of Miſchief; and implies not only great
Folly and a trifling Spirit, but great Vitioul-
neſs of Mind, great Indifference to Truth and
Falſity, and to the Reputation, Welfare, and
Good of others. So much Reaſon is there for
what St. James ſays of the Tongue, It is 4
Fire, a World of Iniquity,it defileth the whole
Body,


Chap. iii. v. 6.


* 2


FR


—”=— %SVS 2 — — | |
— —_—  — - „ —
„


— — aqHOE


N.


r gun www | ti we FF ee I |


Government of the Tongue.


Body, ſetteth on Fire the Courſe of Na- SRM.
ture, and is itſelf ſet on Fire of Hell. This IV.


is the Faculty or Diſpoſition which we are
required to keep a Guard upon: Theſe are
the Vices and Follies it runs into, when
not kept under due Reſtraint.

II. WHEREIN the due Government of
the Tongue conſiſts, or when it may be ſaid
of any one in a moral and religious Senſe
that he bridleth his Tongue, 1 come now
to conſider.

TE due and proper Uſe of any natural
Faculty or Power, is to be judged of by the
End and Deſign for which it was given us,
The chief Purpoſe, for which the Faculty
of Speech was given to Man, is plainly
that we might communicate our Thoughts
to each other, in order to carry on the At-
fairs of the World; for Buſineſs, and for
our Improvement in Knowledge and Learn-
ing. But the good Author of our Nature
deſigned us not only Neceſſaries, but like-
wiſe Enjoyment and Satistaction, in that
Being he hath graciouſly given, and in that
Conaition of Life he hath placed us in.
There are ſecondary Ulcs of our Faculties:
They adminiſter to Delight, as well as to
Neceſlity : And as they are equally adapted

F F 2 do


68


ASERM ON upon the


SzrM. to both, there is no Doubt but He intended


IV.


them for our Gratification, as well as for the
Support and Continuance of our Being. The
ſecondary Uſe of Speech is to pleaſe and be
entertaining to each other in Converſation.
This is in every Reſpect allowable and
right : It unites Men cloſer in Alliances and
Friendſhips ; gives us a Fellow- feeling of the
Proſperity and Unhappineſs of each other;
and is in ſeveral Reſpects ſerviceable to Vir-
tue, and to promote good Behaviour in the
World. And provided there be not too
much Time ſpent in it, if it were conſider-
ed only in the Way of Gratification and De-
light, Men muſt have ſtrange Notions of


be offended with it, or that it is any way in-
conſiſtent with the ſtricteſt Virtue. But the
Truth is, ſuch ſort of Converſation, though
it has no particular good Tendency, yet it
has a general Good one : It is ſocial and
fricndly ; and tends to promote Humanity,
Good nature and Civility.

As the End and Uſe, ſo likewiſe the A-
buſe of Specch, relates to the one or other
of Theſe; either to Buſineſs, or to Conver-
ſat ion. As to the former; Deceit in the
Management of Buſineſs and Affairs does

2 not


God and of Religion, to think that He can


a —

2 PRES | * * 1 * . 3 0 :

2 ha .- * o
* ww MM 3 4 22 A » 7


Government of the Tongue. 69


not properly belong to the Subject now be- SERM.
fore us: Though one may juſt mention that As
Multitude, that endleſs number of Words, |
with which Buſineſs is perplexed ; when a
much fewer would, as it ſhould ſeem, bet-
= ter ſerve the Purpoſe : But this muſt be left
to thoſe who underſtand the Matter. The
Government of the Tongue, conſidered as
- a SubjeQof itſelf, relates chiefly to Conver-
ſation; to that Kind of Diſcourſe which u-
ſually fills up the Time ſpent in friendly
Meetings, and Viſits of Civility. And the
Danger is, leſt Perſons entertain themſelves
and others at the Expence of their Wiſdom
and their Virtue, and to the Injury or Of-
fence of their Neighbour. If they will ob-
ſerve and keep clear of Theſe, they may be
as free, and eaſy, and unreſerved, as they
can defire.

THE Cautions to be given for avoiding
theſe Dangers, and to render Converſation
innocent and agreeable, fall under the fol-
lowing Particulars : Silence; Talking of in-
different things; and, which makes up too
great a Part of Converſation, Giving of Cha-
raters, Speaking well or evil of others.

THE wiſe Man obſerves, that 7here is 4
Time to ſpeak, and a Time to keep ſilence.

| F 3 One


*
3 5 a
2 OR 4 * y 7p 2
3 * 4 *


—


70 A SERMON upon the


SzRu. One meets with People in the World, who


IV.


ſeem never to have made the laſt of theſe
Obſervations. And yet theſe great Talkers
do not at all ſpcak from their having any
thing to ſay, as every Sentence ſhews, but
only from their Inclination to be talking.
Their Converſation is meerly an Exerciſe
of the Tongue : No other humane Faculty
has any Share in it. It is ſtrange theſe Per-
ſons can help reflecting, that unleſs they
have in Truth a ſuperiour Capacity, and are
in an cxtraordinary Manner furniſhed for
Converſation; it they are entertaining, it is
at their own Expence. Is it poſſible, that
it ſhould never come into Peoples Thoughts
to ſuſpect, whether or no it be to their Ad-
vantage to ſhew ſo very much of themiclves ?
O that you would altogether hold your
Peace, and it ſnould be your Wiſdom X.
Remember likewiſe there are Perlons who
love fewer Words, an inoffenſive Sort of
People, and who deſerve ſome Regard,
though of too (till and compoſed Tempers
for you. Of this Number was the Son of
Sirach: Fer he plainly {peaks from Experi-
ence, when he ſays, As Hills of Sand are


to the Steps of the Aged, fo is one of ma-
ny


- * Toh xiii.


6 Ty, X 42. ge > EE | e
8 8 1 #0. a.
tell” * 6 4 : „


* q © 0 of


e


„ . 5 ES”


think it ſhould be obvious to every one, that
when they are in Company with their Su-
periours of any Kind, in Vears, Knowledge
and Experience; when proper and uſeful


Subjects are diſcourſed of, which they cannot


bear a Part in; that theſe are Times for Si-
lence: when they, ſhould learn to hear, and
be attentive 3 at leaſt in their turn. It is in-


deed a very unhappy Way theſe People are
in: They in a Manner cut themſelves out


from all Advantage of Converſation, except
tnat of being entertained with their own
Talk : Their Buſineſs in coming into Com-
pany not being at all to be informed, to hear,
to learn ; but to diſplay themſelves ; or ra-
ther to exert their Faculty, and talk without
any Deſign at all. And if we conſider Con-
verſation as an Entertainment, as ſomewhat
to unbend the Mind ; as a Diverſion from the
Cares, the Buſineſs, and the Sorrows of Life ;
it is of the very Nature of it, that the Diſ-
courſe be mutual. This, I fay, is implied in
the very Notion of what we diſtinguiſh by
Converſation, or being in Company. At-
tention to the continued Diſcourſe of one
alone grows more painful often, than the
Cares and Buſineſs we come to be diverted

F 4 from.


Government of the Tongue. 71


ny Words to a quiet Man. But one would Szrm.


IV.


72
SzxM. from. He therefore who impoſes this upon
— us, is guilty of a double Offence; arbitrarily


—


AS ER MON upon the


enjoining Silence upon all the reſt, and lie-


wiſe obliging them to this painful Attention.


I am ſenſible theſe things are apt to be paſ- |
ſed ovet, as too little to. come into a ſeri- |
ous Diſcourſe : But in reality Men are obli-
ged, even in Point of Morality and Virtue, |


to obſerve all the Decencies of Behaviour.


The greateſt Evils in Life have had their


Riſe from ſomewhat, which was thought of
too little Importance to be attended to.
And as to the Matter we are now upon,


it is abſolutely neceſſary to be conſidered.
For if People will not maintain a due Go-


vernment over themſelves, in regarding pro-
per Times and Scaſons for Silence, but will | 7
be talking; they certainly, whether they de- ,


ſign it or not at firſt, will go on to Scandal


and Evil-ſpcaking, and divulging Secrets.


IF it were needful to ſay any thing fur-
ther, to perſuade Men to learn this Leſſon of


I


J


*7
ET
a

*


.


Silence; one might put them in Mind, hoW
inſignificant they render themſelves by this
exceſſive Talkativeneſs : inſomuch that, if


they do chance to ſay any thing which de-
ſerves to be attended to and regarded, it is


” 0 IX Hy ”


Fr”
® . ON nn
3 „ q 2
td” 228 3 N


4 9.4% * : « 4 C % bY TIL, Eo. = 4
„ 4 S IE _—_ * 8 ME * e
r © 4 «nov Ee, ROD ,,
2 7A Fad — 5 * * 1 5 * 5 1 * 8 hes oy 1 8 * * Fa "*
a. — 1 >. - Ks $ * * 2 3 8 * E * * * * 2 # . , . 3 » q


Government of the Tongue.


loſt in the Variety and Abundance which 8 ERM.


they utter of another Sort.

THE Occaſions of Silence then are obvi-
ous, and one would think ſhould be eaſily
diſtinguiſhed by every Body : Namely, when
a Man has nothing to ſay ; or nothing, but
what is better unſaid : Better, either in re-
gard to the particular Perſons he is preſent
with; or from its being an Interruption to


' | Converſation itſelf ; or to Converſation of


a more agreeable Kind ; or better, laſtly,
with regard to himſelf. I will end this Par-
ticular with two Reflections of the wiſe
Man: One of which, in the ſtrongeſt Man-
ner, expoſes the ridiculous Part of this Li-
centiouſneſs of the Tongue ; and the other,
the great Danger and Viciouſneſs of it.
When he that is a Fool walketh by the Way
Side, his Wiſdom faileth him, and he ſaith
to every one that he is a Fool*. The other
is, In the multitude of Words there want-
eth not Sin. +
As to the Government of the Tongue in
reſpec to talking upon indifferent Subjects:
After what has been ſaid concerning the due
Government of it in reſpect to the Occaſions
and Times for Silence, there is little more
neceſſary,
Eccleſ. x. 3 + Prov. x. 19.


*


74 A SERMON wupou the


Sz x. neceſſary, than only to caution Men to be
IV. fully ſatisfied, that the Subjects are indeed 6
of an indifferent Nature; and not to ſpend |
too much Time in Converſation of this
Kind. But Perſons muſt be ſure to take |
| heed, that the Subject of their Diſcourſe be
| at lcaſt of an indifferent Nature: That it be
| no way offenſive to Virtue, Religion, or ;
good Manners; that it be not of a licentious *
diſſolute Sort, this leaving always ill Impreſ- |
ſions upon the Mind; that it be no way in-
jurious or vexatious to others; and that too
much Time be not ſpent this way, to the
neglect of thoſe Duties and Offices of Life
which belong to their Station and Conditi-
on in the World. However, though there is
not any Neceſſity, that Men ſhould aim at be-
ing important and weighty in every Sentence
they ſpeak: Vet ſince uſeful Subjects, at leaſt
of ſome Kinds, are as entertaining as others;
a wiſe Man, even when he deſires to unbend
his Mind from Buſineſs, would chooſe that
the Converſation might turn upon ſome-
what inſtructive. |
TE b laſt Thing is, The Government of the
Tongue as relating to Diſcourſe of the Af-
fairs of others, and giving of Characters.
Theſe are in a Manner the fame : And one
can


— —— — —— — ts — ans


Government of the Tongue. 75


can ſcarce call it an indifferent Subject, be- Str mo
* cauſe Diſcourſe upon it almoſt perpetually IV.
runs into ſomewhat criminal. *
AN ,d firſt of all, it were very much to be
wiſhed that this did not take up ſo great a
Part of Converſation ; becauſe it is indeed a
Subject of a dangerous Nature, Let any one
conſider the various Intereſts, Competitions,

and little Miſunderſtandings which ariſe a-
mongſt Men; and he will ſoon ſee, that he

is not unprejudiced and impartial, that he is

not, as I may ſpeak, neutral enough, to truſt
himſelf with talking of the Character and
Concerns of his Neighbour, in a free, care-

leſs, and unreſcrved Manner. There is perpe-
tually, and often it is not attended to, a

* Rivalſhip amongſt People of one kind or
another, in reſpect to Wit, Beauty, Learn-

ing, Fortune; and that one Thing will

inſenſibly influence them to ſpeak to the

| Diſadvantage of others, even where there

is no formed Malice or ill Deſign, Since
therefore it is ſo hard to enter into this
Subject without offending ; the firſt thing

to be obſerved is, that Pcople ſhould learn

to decline it ; to get over that ſtrong In-

| clination moſt have to be talking of the
Concerns and Bchaviour of their Neighbour.

| 2 BUT


. . 0


—
Oo
*


e


8 P x r RTE I CSE
Fs 4 3 Me '* *** s rt Þ * hs; ad £5 vp {4 1 — — 5 MS,


PE VV. > d RS +3


76


SxRxu.
IV.


AS ER MON ahn the


B v r ſince it is impoſſible that this Subject f


ſhould be wholly excluded Converſation ;


and ſince it is neceſſary that the Characters
of Men ſhould be known: The next thing
is, that it is a Matter of Importance what
is ſaid; and therefore, that we ſhould be re-
ligiouſly ſcrupulous and exact to ſay nothing,
either good or bad, but what is true. I
put it thus, becauſe it is in reality of as
great Importance to the good of Society,
that the Characters of bad Men ſhould be
known, as that the Characters of good Men
ſhould. People, who are given to Scandal
and Detraction, may indeed make an ill uſe
of this Obſervation : But Truths, which are f
Service towards regulating our Conduct, are
not to be diſowned, or even concealed, be-
cauſe a bad Uſe may be made of them. This
however would be effectually prevented, if

theſe two things were attended to. Firſt,
That, though it is equally of bad Conſequence _
to Society, that Men ſhould have either good
or ill Characters which they do not deſerve; |
yet, when you ſay ſomewhat Good of a |


Man which he does not delerve, there is


no wrong done him in particular ; where- |


as, when you ſay evil of a Man which he


does not deſerve, here is a direct formal In-


jury,


. Nan; it muſt be allowed in general, that


Government of the Tongue.


jury, a real Piece of Injuſtice, done Him. S EAM.
This therefore makes a wide Difference;
and gives us, in Point of Virtue, much greater
Latitude in ſpeaking well, than ill, of Others.
© Secondly, A good Man is friendly to his
Fellow. creatures, and a Lover of Mankind;
and ſo will, upon every Occaſion, and often
without any, ſay all the Good he can of e-
N very Body: But, ſo far as he is a good Man,
1 vill never be diſpoſed to ſpeak Evil of any,
| unleſs there be ſome other Reaſon for it, be-
ſides barely that it is true. If he be charged
with having given an ill Character, he will
| ſcarce think it a ſufficient Juſtification of
| himſelf to ſay it was a true one; unleſs he
can alſo give ſome farther Account how
he came to do ſo: A juſt Indignation a-
gainſt particular Inſtances of Villany, where


they are great and (ſcandalous ; or to prevent


an innocent Man from being deceived and


betray'd, when he has great Truſt and Con-


\ fidence in one who does not deſerve it.
| Juſtice muſt be done to every Part of a Sub-
ject, when we are conſidering it. If there


be a Man, who bears a fair Character in the


World, whom yet we know to be with-


out Faith or Honeſty, to be really an il]


ve


WY


78 A SERMON pon the


SzR mM. we ſhall do a Piece of Service to Society,
IV. by letting ſuch an one's true Character be
known. This is no more, than what we
|| have an Inſtance of in our Saviour himſelf ; *
| . * though he was mild and gentle beyond
| Example. However, no Words can expreſs |
too ſtrongly the Caution which ſhould be
1 uſed in ſuch a Caſe as this. e
| Uryon the whole Matter: If People
| would obſcrve the obvious Occaſions of
| Silence; if they would ſubdue the Inclinati-
on to Tale- bearing; and that eager Deſire |
|
|


*
I
* :
”


to engage Attention, which is an Original
(| | Diſeaſe in ſome Minds; they would be in
little Danger of offending with their
Tongue; and would, in a moral and rcli- |
gious Senſe, have due Government over it.
I will conclude with ſome Precepts and
[| Reflections of the Son of Sirach upon this
Subject. Be ſwift to hear: and, if thou


l haſt Underſtanding, anſwer thy Neighbour ;
| F not, lay thy Hand upon thy Mouth,


Honour and Shame is in Talk A Manof |.

| an ill Tongue is dangerous in his City, and |

| he that is raſh in his Talk ſhall be hated.

| A wiſe Man will hold his Tongue, till he

Il fee Opportunity; but a Babler and a Fool
will

* Mark xii. 38, 49-


Government of the Tongue. 79


mull regard no Time. He that uſeth many SE RU.
4 Mords ſhall be abhorred; and he that taketh IV.
to himſelf Authority therein, ſhall be hated.
A back-biting Tongue hath diſquieted ma-
ny; ſtrong Cities hath it pulled down, and
overthrown the Houſes of great Men.
The Tongue of a Man is his fall ; but if
thou love to hear, thou ſbalt receive Un-


Aerſtanding.


SERMON


— — — _
— - - — —
= my — —— = *


— — —


* 8 — 8 —


— 7
Mu.


SERMONV.
| Upon Compaſſion.


8 ll. _—


Ro M. Xii. 15.
Rejerce with them that do rejoyce, and
weep with them that weep.


VERY Man is to be conſidered in Sz x,
E two Capacities, the Private and Pub- V.
lick; as deſigned to purſue his own YY
Intereſt, and likewiſe to contribute to the
Good of others. Whoever will conſider,
may ſce, that in general there is no Con-
trariety between theſe; but that from the
original Conſtitution of Man, and the Cir-
cumſtances he is placed in, they perfectly
coincide, and mutually carry on each o-
ther. But, amongſt the great Variety of Af-
fections or Principles of Action in our Na-
ture, ſome in their primary Intention and
Deſign ſeem to belong to the ſingle or pri ·

os G vate,


1 —


82 A SERMON


SERM, yate, Others ro the publick or ſocial Capa-
V. city. The Affections required in the Text


are of the latter Sort. When we rejoyce |
in the Proſperity of others, and compaſſi-
onate their Diſtreſſes, we, as it were, ſubſti- |
tute them for b their Intereſt for
our own; and have the ſame Kind of Plea- |
ſure in their Proſperity and Sorrow in their
Diſtreſs, as we have from Reflection upon
our own. Now there is nothing ſtrange
or unaccountable in our being thus carried
out, and affected towards the Intereſts of |
others. For, if there be any Appetite, or a-
ny inward Principle beſides Self- love; why |
may there not be an Affection to the Good
of our Fellow. creatures, and Delight ftom |
that Affection's being gratified, and Uneaſi-


nels from things going contrary to it ? *


mw , as 1


There being manifeſtly this Ae of Men's ſubſti-
tuting Others for Themſelves, and being carried out and af- |
fected towards them as towards themſelves; ſome Perſons, |
who have a Syſtem which excludes every Affection of this
Sort, have taken a pleaſant Method to ſolve it; and tell you it ©
is not Another you are at all concerned about, but your Ke.
ly, when you feel the Affection called Compaſſion, 5. e. Here
is a plain Matter of Fact, which Men cannot reconcile with |
the general Account they think fir to give of things: ber :
therefore, inſtead of that manifeſt Fact, ſubſtitute another,
which is reconcileable to their own Scheme, For does not

eycry


DD ns mw 0 = 5 =»


—


QA P22. 2


f
f


1 N


upon Compaſſion,


Or theſe two, Delight in the Proſperity Szz m.


of others and Compaſſion for their Diſtreſſes,


G 2 the


every Body by Compaſſion mean, an Affection the Object of
which is Another in Diſtreſs? Inſtead of this, but deſigning to
have it miſtaken for this, they ſpeak of an Affection or Paſſi-
on, the Object of which is Our ſelves, or Danger to ourſelves.
Hobbs defines Pity, Imagination, or Fict on of future Calamity to
ourſelves, proceeding from the Senſe (he means Sight or Know-
ledge) of another Man's Calamity. Thus Fear and Compaſſion
would be the ſame Idea, and a fearful and a compaſſionate
Man the ſame Character, which every one immediately ſees are
totally different. Further, to thoſe who give any Scope to
their Affections, there is no Perception or inward Feeling
more univerſal than this; that one who, has been merciful
and compaſſionate throughout the Courſe of his Behaviour,
ſhould himſelf be treated with Kindneſs, if he happens to fall
into Circumſtances of Diſtreſs. Is Fear then or Cowardice


ſo great a Recommendation to the Favour of the Bulk of Man-


kind? Or is it not plain, that meer Fearleſsneſs (and therefore
not the contrary) is one of the moſt popular Qualifications ?
This ſhews that Mankind are not affected towards Compaſ-
ſion as Fear, but as ſomewhat totally different.

Nothing would more expoſe ſuch Accuunts as theſe of the
Affections which are fayourable and friendly to our Fellow-
creatures, than to ſubſtitute rhe Definitions which this Au-
thor, and others who follow his Steps, give of ſuch Affecti.
ons, inſtead of the Words by which they are commonly ex-
preſſed. Hobbs, after having laid down that Pity or Compaſ.
fion is only Fear for ourſelves, goes on to explain the Reaſon,
why we pity our Friends in Diſtreſs more than Others. Now
ſabſtirute the Definirion inſtead of the Word Pity in this Place,
aud the Inquiry will be, why we fear our Friends, Sc. which
Words (ſince he really does not mean why we are afraid of
them) make no Queſtion or Sentence at all. So that common
Language, the Words to Compaſſionate, to Pitz, cannot be ac-
commodated to his Account of Compaizon. The very join-


iog


03


V.


—


84


Su. the laſt is felt much more generally than


V.


AS ER MON


the former. Though Men do not univer-
ſally


ing of the Words to Pity our Friends, is a direct Contradiction
to his Definition of Pity : Becauſe thoſe Words ſo joined, ne-
ceſſarily expreſs that our Friends are the Objects of the Paſ-
ſion ; whereas his Definition of it aſſerts, that Ourſelves (or
Danger to Ourſelves) are the only Objects of it. He might
indeed have avoided this Abſurdity, by plainly ſaying what he
is going to account for; namely, why the Sight of the Inno-
cent, or of our Friends in Diſtreſs, raiſes greater Fear for our-
ſelves than the Sight of other Perſons in Diſtreſs. But had
he put the thing thus plainly, the Fact itſelf would have been
doubted ; that the Sight of our Friends in Diſtreſs raiſes in us
greater Fear for ourſelves, than the Sight of others in Diſtreſs.
And in the next Place ic would immediately have occurred to
every one, that the Fact now mentioned, which at leaſt is
doubtful, whether true or falſe, was. not the ſame with this
Fact, which no- body ever doubted, that the Sight of our Friends
in Diſiveſs raiſes in us greater Compaſſion than the Sight of O-
thers in Diſtreſs : Every one, I fay, would have ſeen that theſe
are not the ſame, but two different Inquiries; and conſequently,
that Fear and Compaſſion are not the ſame. Suppoſe a Perſon


to be in real Danger, and by ſome Means or other to have for-


got it; any trifling Accident, any Sound might alarm bim,
recall the Danger to his Remembrance, and renew his Fear :
But it is almoſt too groſly ridiculous (though it is to ſhow an
Abſurdity) to ſpeak of that Sound or Accident as an Object


of Compaſſion; and yet according to Mr. Hobbs, our greateſt |
Friend in Diftreſs is no more to us, no more the Object of


Compaſſion or of any Affection in our Heart: Neither the
one nor the other raiſes any Emotion in our Mind, but only
the Thoughts of our Liableneſs to Calamity, and the Fear of


it; and both equally do this. It is fit ſuch fort of Accounts |
of Humane Nature ſhould be ſhown to be what they really |


are, becauſe there is raiſed upon them a general


Scheme which


undermines |


|
|


;


*
|
:


oy” WP — .


444% ˙ A on Radha ded


upon Compaſſion.


85


ſally rejoyce with all whom they ſee re- SER M.


joyce, yet, accidental Obſtacles removed,
they naturally compaſſionate all in ſome


G 3 Degree


undermines the whole Foundation of common Juſtice and
Honeſty, See Hobbs of Hum. Nat. c. 9. F. 10.

There are often three diſtin Perceptions or inward Feel-
ings upon Sight of Perſons in Diſtreſs : Real Sorrow and Con-
cern for the Miſery of our Fellow-creatures ; ſome Degree of
Satisfaction from a Conſciouſneſs of our Freedom from that
Miſery; and, as the Mind paſſes on from one thing to ano-
ther, it is not unnatural from ſuch an Occaſion to reflect up-
on our own Liableneſs to the ſame or other Calamities. The
two laſt frequently accompany the firſt, but it is the firſt only
which is properly Compaſſion, of which the Diſtreſſed are the
Objects, and which directly carries us with Calmneſs and
Thought to their Aſſiſtance. Any one of theſe, from various
and complicated Reaſons, may in particular Caſes prevail o-
ver the other two; and there are, I ſuppoſe, Inſtances where
the bare Sight of Diſtreſs, without our feeling any Compaſ-
fion for it, may be the Occafion of either or both of the two
latter Perceptions. One might add, that if there be really any
ſuch thing as the Fiction or Imagination of Danger to our-
ſelves from Sight of the Miſeries of others, which Hobbs
ſpeaks of, and which he has abſurdly miſtaken for the whole
of Compaſſion; if there be any thing of this Sort common
to Mankind, diſtin& from the Reflection of Reaſon, it would
be a moſt remarkable Inſtance of what was furtheſt from his
Thoughts, namely, of a mutual Sympathy between each Par-
ticular of the Species, a Fellow-feeling common to Mankind.
It would not indeed be an Example of our ſubſtituting Others
for Ourſelves, but it would be an Example of our ſubſtituting


Ourſelves for Others. And as it would not be an Inftance of


Benevolence, ſo neither would it be any Inſtance of Self-love :
For this Phantom of Danger to Ourſelves, naturally riſing to
View upon Sight of the Diſtreſſes of Others, would be no more
an Inſtance of Love to Ourſelves, than the Pain of Hunger 1s,


V.


86


Stu. Degree whom they ſee in Diſtreſs, ſo fat


V.


A SERMON


as they have any real Perception or Senſe
of that Diſtreſs : Inſomuch that Words ex-
preſſing this latter, Pity, Compaſſion, fre-
quently occur; whereas we have ſcarce a-
ny ſingle one, by which the former is di-
ſtinctly expreſs d. Congratulation indeed
anſwers Condoleance: But both theſe Words
are intended to ſignify certain Forms of
Civility, rather than any inward Senſation
or Feeling. This Difference or Inequality
is ſo remarkable, that we plainly conſider
Compaſſion as itſelf an original, diſtin,
particular Affection in Humane Nature;
whereas to rejoyce in the Good of others,
is only a Conſequence of the general Af.
fection of Love and Good-will to them.
The Reaſon and Account of which Matter
is this. When a Man has obtained any par-
ticular Advantage or Felicity, his End is
gained ; and he does not in that particular
want the Aſſiſtance of another: There was
therefore no need of a diſtinct Affection to-
wards that Felicity of another alrcady ob-
taincd ; neither would ſuch Affection direct-
ly carry him on to do Good to that Perſon :
Whereas Men in Diſtreſs want Afliftance ;
and Compaſſion leads us directly to affift

them.


upon Compaſſion.


87


them. The Object of the former is the pre- SER 1.


ſent Felicity of another; the Object of the
latter is the preſent Miſery of another: It is
eaſy to ſee that the latter wants a particular
Affection for its Relief, and that the former
does not want one, becauſe it does not want
Aſſiſtance. And upon Suppoſition of a di-
ſtinct Affection in both Caſes, the one muſt
reſt in the Exerciſe of itſelf, having no-
thing further to gain; the other does not
reſt in itſelf, but carries us on to aſſiſt the
Diſtreſſed.

Bur, ſuppoſing theſe Affections natural
to the Mind, particularly the laſt ; Has not
« each Man Troubles enough of his own?
« Muſt he indulge an Affection which appro-
<« priates to himſelf thoſe of others? which
< leads him to contract the leaſt deſirable of
« all Friendſhips, Friendſhips with the Un-
cc fortunate? Muſt we invert the known
cc Rule of Prudence, and chooſe to aſſoci-
cc ate ourſclvcs with the Diſtreſſed? Or al-
« lowing that we ought, ſo far as it is in our
C Power, to relieve them; yet is it not bet-
© ter to do this from Reaſon and Duty ? Docs
ce not Paſſion and Affection of every Kind
« perpetually miſlead us? Nay, is not Paſ-
<« ſion and Affection itſelf a Weakneſs, and

Ss SR. « what


V.
SN


ASERMON


SE RM. © what a perfect Being muſt be entirely free
WV


« from? ” Perhaps ſo : But it is Mankind I
am ſpeaking of ; imperfe& Creatures, and
who naturally and, from the Condition we
are placed in, neceſſarily depend upon each
other. With reſpect to ſuch Creatures, it
would be found of as bad Conſequence to
eradicate all natural Affections, as to be in-
tirely governed by them. This would al-
moſt ſink us to the Condition of Brutes ;
and That would leave us without a ſuffici-
ent Principle of Action. Reaſon alone,
whatever any one may wiſh, is not in Rea-
lity a ſufficient Motive of Virtue in ſuch a
Creature as Man; but this Reaſon joined
with thoſe Affections which God has im-
preſs d upon his Heart: And when Theſe are
allowed Scope to exerciſe themſelves, but
under ſtrict Government and Direction of
Reaſon ; then it is we act ſuitably to our
Nature, and to the Circumſtances God
has placed us in. Neither is Affection it-
ſelf at all a Weakneſs ; nor does it argue
Defeat, any otherwiſe than as our Senſes
and Appetites do; They belong to our Con-
dition of Nature, and are what we can-
not be without. God Almighty is to be
ſure unmoved by Paſſion or Appetite, un-

changed


upon Compaſſion.


changed by Affection: Bur then it is to be Sz N u.
added, that he neither ſecs, nor hears, nor ,


perceives things by any Senſes like ours; but
in a Manner infinitely more perfect. Now,
as it is an Abſurdity almoſt too groſs to be
mentioned, for a Man to endeavour to
get rid of his Senſes, becauſe the ſupream
Being diſcerns things more perfectly with-
out them; it is as real, though not ſo ob-
vious an Abſurdity, to endeavour to eradi-
cate the Paſſions he has given us, becauſe
He is without them. For, ſince our Paſſions
are as really a Part of our Conſtitution as
our Senſes; ſince the former as really belong
to our Condition of Nature as the latter;
to get rid of either, is equally a Violation of
and breaking in upon that Nature and Con-
ſtitution he has given us. Both our Senſes
and our Paſſions are a Supply to the Im-
perfection of our Nature: Thus they ſhew
that we are ſuch ſort of Creatures, as to
ſtand in need of thoſe Helps which higher
Orders of Creatures do not. But it is not
the Supply, but the Deficiency; as it is not
a Remedy, but a Diſeaſe, which is the Im-
perfection. However, our Appetites, Paſſi-
ons, Senſes, no way imply Diſeaſe: Nor in-
deed do they imply Deficiency or Imper-

fection


90


Srxm. fection of any ſort; but only This, that the


V.


A SERMON


Conſtitution of Nature according to which
God has made us, is ſuch as to require them.
And it is ſo far from being true, that a wile
Man muſt intirely ſuppreſs Compaſſion,
and all Fellow-fecling for others, as a
Wceakneſs; and truſt ro Realon alone, to
teach and enforce upon him the Practice
of the ſeveral Charitics we owe to our
Kind ; that on the contrary, even the bare
Exerciic of ſuch Affections would itſelf be
for the Good and Happineſs of the World;
and the Imperfection of the higher Princi-
ples of Realon and Religion in Man, the


little Influence they have upon our Practice,


and the Strength and Prevalency of contrary
ones, plainly require theſe Affections, to be


a Reſtraint upon theſe latter, and a Supply


to the Deficicncies of the former.

Firſt, The very exerciſe itſelf of theſe Af-
fections, in a juſt and reaſonable Manner and
Degree, would upon the whole increaſe the


- as} 1 —


Satisfactions, and leſſen the Miſeries of Life.


Iris the Tendency and Buſineſs of Vir-
tue and Religion to procure, as much as
may be, univerſal Good-will, Truſt and


Friendſhip amongſt Mankind. If this could
be brought to obtain; and each Man enjoy-


ed


aa Rn a CE as * n *


n 8 St wood ——


-

$

4 |
1 .
d


upon Compaſſion.


91


ed the Happineſs of others, as every one SER N.


does that of a Friend; and looked upon the
Succeſs and Proſperity of his Neighbour, as
every one does upon that of his Children


and Family; it is too manifeſt to be inſiſt-


ba ws


| ed upon, how much the Enjoyments of Life
would be increaſed, There would be fo


much Happineſs introduced into the World,
without any Deduction or Inconvenience
from it, in Proportion as the Precept of re-
joycing with thoſe who rejoyce was univer-
fally obeyed. Our Saviour has owned this
good Affection as belonging to our Nature,
in the Parable of the /o/# Sheep; and does
not think it to the Diſadvantage of a perfect
State, to repreſent its Happineſs as capable
of Increaſe from Reflection upon that of
others.

Bur ſince in ſuch a Creature as Man,
Compaſſion or Sorrow for the Diſtreſs of


others, ſeems ſo far neceſſarily connected


with Joy in their Proſperity, as that who-
ever rejoyces in one muſt unavoidably com-
paſſionate the other; there cannot be that
Delight or Satisfaction, which appears to be
ſo conſiderable, without the Inconvenien-
cies, Whatever they are, of Compaſlion.

| Ho w-


*.


92


SERM.
V.


ASERMON


How EVER, without conſidering this


Connection, there is no doubt but that more


Good than Evil, more Delight than Sorrow,
ariſes from Compaſlion itſelf ; there being
ſo many things which ballance the Sor- |
row of it. There is firſt the Relief which


d n Wy 4 « Ls. .
— . . *.


_—— — \ _— 7 a A”


the diſtreſſed feel from this Affection in o-


thers towards them. There is likewiſe the |
Additional Miſery which they would feel |
from the Reflection that no one commi- |
ſcrated their Caſe. It is indeed true, that
any Diſpoſition, prevailing beyond a certain
Degree, becomes ſomewhat wrong; and
we have ways of ſpeaking, which, though F
they do not directly expreſs that Exceſs, |
yet, always lead our Thoughts to it, and


give us the Notion of it. Thus, when men-
tion is made of Delight in being pitied,


this always conveys to our Mind the Noti- |


on of ſomewhat which is really a Weak-
neſs: The Manner of ſpeaking, I ſay, im-


plics a certain Weakneſs and Feebleneſs of |
Mind, which is and ought to be diſap-
proved. But Men of the greateſt Forti- |


tude would in Diſtreſs feel Uneaſineſs, from
knowing that no Perſon in the World had


any ſort of Compaſſion or real Concern


ior them; and in ſome Caſes, eſpecially |
when |


5 -


2 Rs TY


upon Compaſſion.


93


when the Temper is enfeebled by Sickneſs Sz xm.


or any long and great Diſtreſs, doubtleſs
would feel a kind of Relief even from the
” helpleſs Good-will and ineffectual Aſſiſtan-
ces of thoſe about them. Over againſt the
Sorrow of Compaſſion is likewiſe to be ſet
a peculiar calm Kind of Satisfaction, which
- accompanies it, unleſs in Cafes where the
Diſtreſs of Another is by ſome means ſo
brought home to Ourſelves, as to become
in a manner our own ; or when from
* Weakneſs of Mind the Affection riſes too


high, which ought to be corrected. This


Tranquillity or calm Satisfaction proceeds,


partly from Conſciouſneſs of a right Af-
fection and Temper of Mind, and partly
from a Senſe of our own Freedom from the
Miſery we compaſſionate. This laſt may
poſſibly appear to ſome at firſt ſight faulty ;
but it really is not ſo. It is the ſame with
that poſitive Enjoyment, which ſudden Eaſe
from Pain for the preſent affords, ariſing
from a real Senſe of Miſery, joined with a
Senſe of our Freedom from it ; which in all
caſes muſt afford ſome Degree of Satisfaction.
To theſe things muſt be added the Ob-
ſervation, which reſpects both the Affections
we arc conſidering 3 that they who have

got


V.


94


A SERMON


Sz RM. got over all Fellow. feeling for Othets, have |


V.


be as defective, as much wanting, conſider-


withal contracted a certain Callouſneſs of |
Heart, which renders them inſenſible to moſt
other Satisfactions, but thoſe of the groſſeſt
kind.


Secondly, Without the Exerciſe of theſe |


Affections, Men would certainly be much


more wanting in the Offices of Charity they
owe to each other, and like wiſe more crucl
and injurious, than they are at preſent.

THe private Intcreſt of the Individual
would not be ſufficiently provided for by
reaſonable and cool Selt-Loye alone:
Therefore the Appetites and Paſſions arc
placed within as a Guard and further Secu-
rity, without which it would not be taken
due Care of. It is manifeſt our Life would
be neglected, were it not for the Calls of
Hunger, and Thirſt, and Wearineſs ; not-


withſtanding that without them Reaſon |
would aſſure us, that the Recruits of Food |


and Sleep are the neceſſary means of our
Preſervation. It is therefore abſurd to ima-
ging; that, without Affection, the ſame Rea-
ſon alone would be more effeQual to engage
us to perform the Duties we owe to our
Fellow-Creatures. One of this Make would


ed


«


|
K
|


a
C4


3
>


upon Compaſſion.


ed with reſpect to Society ; as one of the SEN N.


former Make would be defective, or want-
ing, conſidered as an Individual, or in his
private Capacity. Is it poſſible any can in
carneſt think, that a Publick Spirit, z. e. a
ſettled reaſonable Principle of Benevolence
to Mankind, is ſo prevalent and ſtrong in
the Species, as that we may venture to
throw off the under Affections, which arc
its Aſſiſtants, carry it forward and mark out
particular Courſes for it; Family, Friends,
Neighbourhood, the Diſtreſſed, our Coun-
try? The common Joys and the common
Sorrows, which belong to theſe Relations
and Circumſtances, are as plainly uſeful to
Society; as the Pain and Pleaſure belonging
to Hunger, Thirſt, and Wearineſs are of
Service to the Individual. In Defect of that
higher Principle of Reaſon, Compaſſion is
often the only Way. by which the Indigent


can have acceſs to us: And therefore to era-


dicate this, though it is not indeed formal-
ly to deny them that Aſſiſtance which is
their Due; yet it is to cut them off from
that which is too frequently their only way
of obtaining it. And as for thoſe who have


ſhur up this Door againſt the Complaints of


the Miſerable, and conquered this Aﬀection
2 in


Ser. in themſelves; even theſe Perſons will be


ASERMON


under great Reſtraints from the ſame Af.
fection in Others. Thus a Man who has
himſclf no Senſe of Injuſtice, Cruelty, Op-
preſſion, will be kept from running the ut-
moſt Lengths of Wickedneſs, by fear of
that Deteſtation, and even Reſentment of
Inhumanity, in many particular Inſtances of
it, which Compaſſion for the Object, to-
wards whom ſuch Inhumanity is exerciſed,
excites in the Bulk of Mankind. And this
is frequently the chief Danger, and the chief
Reſtraint, which Tyrants and the great Op-
preſſours of the World feel.

IN general, Experience will ſhew, that as |
want of natural Appetite to Food ſuppo- |
ſes and proceeds from ſome bodily Diſeaſe ; |
ſo the Apathy the Stoicks talk of as much
ſuppoſes or is accompanied with ſomewhat þ
amiſs in the Moral Character, in that which
is the Health of the Mind. Thoſe who for-
merly aimed at this upon the Foot of Phi- |
loſophy, appear to have had better Succeſs
in eradicating the Affections of Tenderneſs |
and Compaſſion, than they had with the
Paſſions of Envy, Pride, and Reſentment :


Theſe latter, at beſt, were but ** f
1 "a


— * „


T 8


N wu


7 oeav Tf aAAmMmt FT 6


2 — — 0 rr


at laſt bring themſelves to, by ſuppreſſing


upon Compaſſion.


and that imperfectly too. How far this Ob- SER N.
vour to ſuppreſs the natural Impul ſes of their
Affections, in order to form themſelves for
Zuſineſs and the World, I ſhall not deter-
mine. But there does not appear any Ca-
pacity or Relation to be named, in which
Mien ought to be entirely deaf to the Calls
of Affection, unleſs the judicial one is to
be excepted,


ſervation may be extended to ſuch as endea-


AN pas to thoſe who are commonly cal-


led the Men of Pleaſure, it is manifeſt that
the Reaſon they ſet up for Hardneſs of Heart,
is to avoid being interrupted in their Courſe,


by the Ruin and Miſery they are the Authors


of: Neither are Perſons of this Character


always the moſt free from the Impotencies
of Envy and Reſentment. What may Men


their Paſſions and Affections of one Kind,
and leaving thoſe of the other in their full
Strength? But ſurely it might be expected,
that Perſons who make Pleaſure their Study
and their Buſineſs, if they underſtood what
they profeſs, would reflect, how many of
the Entertainments of Lite, how many of
thoſe Kind of Amuſements which ſeem pe-
culiarly to belong to Men of Leiſure and

H


Education,


98 A SERMON


su. Education, they become inſenſible to by
this acquired Hardneſs of Heart. 5

| I ſhall cloſe theſe Reflections with bare-

ly mentioning the Behaviour of that Divine

Perſon, who was the Example of all Perfec-

tion in Human Nature, as repreſented in _

the Goſpels mourning, and even, in a litte-

ral Senſe, weeping over the Diſtreſſes of his
Creatures.

TE Obſervation already made, that, of
the two Affections mentioned in the Text,
the latter exerts itſelf much more than the
former; that, from the Original Conſtituti-
on of Human Nature we much more ge—
nerally and ſenſibly compaſſionate the Dif-
treſſed, than rejoice with the Proſperous,
requires to be particularly conſidered. This
Obſervation therefore, with the Reflecti-
ons which ariſe out of it, and which it leads |
our Thoughts to, ſhall be the Subject of a-
nother Diſcourſe.

Fo R the Concluſion of this, let me juſt
take Notice of the Danger of over-great |
Refinements ; of going beſides or beyond
the plain, obvious, firſt Appearances of |
Things, upon the Subject of Morals and Re-
ligion. The leaſt Obſervation will ſhow,


how little the Generality of Men are capable
Tm of


ub Compaſſion.


99


of Speculations. Therefore Morality and SER N.
Religion muſt be ſomewhat plain and eaſy * ;


to be underſtood : It muſt appeal to what we
call plain common Senſe, as diſtinguiſhed


— from ſupcriour Capacity and Improve-
in ment; becauſe it appeals to Mankind. Per.
C-


ſons of ſuperior Capacity and [mprovement


have often fallen into Errors, which
no one of meer common Underſtanding

of could. ls it poſlible that one of this lat-
ct, ter Character could ever of himſelf have
he thought, that there was abſolutely no ſuch
ti. thing in Mankind as Affection to the Good
. of others; ſuppole of Parents to their
il- Children; or that what he felt upon ſce-
us; ing a Friend in Diſtreſs, was only Fear for
nis himſelf ; or, upon Suppoſition of the Af-
t- fections of Kindneſs and Co mpaſſion, that
ds jt was the Buſineſs of Wiſdom and Virtue,
a to ſet him about cxtirpating them as faſt
as he could? And yet each of theſe mani-

aſt | feſt Contradictions to Nature has been laid
rat down by Men of Speculation, as a Diſcove-
nd ty in moral Philoſophy ; which they, it
of ſeems, have found out through all the ſpe-
£- | cious Appearances to the contrary. This
W, | Reflection may be extended further. The
le | Extravagancies of Enthuſiaſm and Superſti-
of H 2 tion


100 ASERMON
SER AM. tion do not at all lic in the Road of com-
V. mon Senſe; and therefore ſo far as they are
' © original Miſtakes, muſt be owing to going 2
beſide or beyond it. Now, ſince Inquiry 5
and Examination can relate only to Things
ſo obſcure and uncertain as to ſtand in need 5
of it, and to Perſons who are capable of
it; the proper Advice to be given to plain
honeſt Men, to ſecure them from the Ex-
treams both of Superſtition and Irreligion,
is that of the Son of Sirach: In every
good Work truſt thy own Soul; for this it
the keeping of the Commandment *.


* Ecclus. xxxii. 43.


SERMON


| o
x
: n


— ——— -


' SERMON VI


"|

Upon Compaſſion.
of | Preached the firſt Sunday in Lent.
_ OO ies
. Ro M. xii. 1 ;.
114


' Regoyee with them that do rejoyce, and


weep with them that weep.
1 is a much more exact Cor- S ERM.


reſpondence between the natural VI.
Ld ind


and moral World, than we are

apt to take Notice of. The inward Frame
of Man does in a peculiar Manner anſwer
to the external Condition and Circumſtances
of Life, in which he is placed. This is a
particular Inſtance of that general Obſerya-
tion of the Son of Sirach: * All things
ere double one againſt another, and God
bath made nothing imperfect. The ſeveral
Paſſions and Affections in the Heart of
| H 3 Man,


: ® Feclus, xlib 24,


102


2


wr


A SERMON


Man, compared with the Circumſtances of |


Life in which he is placed, afford, to ſuch


as will attend to them, as certan Inſtances | 5
of final Cauſes, as any whatever which are


I


more commonly alledged for ſuch : ſince
thoſe Affections lead him to a certain deter-
minate Courſe of Action ſuitable to thoſe
Circumſtances; as (for Inſtance) Compaſſi-
on, to rclieye the Diftreg'd. And as all Ob-
ſervations of final Caufes, drawn from the
Principles of Action in the Heart of Man,
comparcd with the Condition he is placed
in, ſerve all the good Uſes which Inſtances
of final Cauſes in the material World about
us do; and both theſe are equally Proofs of
Wiſdom and Deſign in the Author of Na-
ture: So the former ſerve to further good
Purpoſes ; they ſhew us what Courſe of Life
we are made for, what is our Duty, and in
a peculiar Manner enforce upon us the
Practice of it.

SUPPOSE we are capable of Happineſs
and of Miſery in Degrees equally intenſe
and extream, yet, we are capable of the lat-
ter for a much longer Time beyond all
Compariſon. We ſec Men in the Tor-
tures of Pain for Hours, Days, and, cx-
cepting the ſhort Suſpenſions of Sleep, for

Months


|
'


F
K
7
2.
13


upou Compaſſion. 103


of Months together without Intermiſſion ; to Sz x.
ch | which no Enjoyments of Life do, in Degree VI.

es \ and Continuance, bear any ſort of Propor-
re tion. And ſuch is our Make and that of
ce the World about us, that any thing may be-
come the Inſtrument of Pain and Sorrow
ſe to us. Thus almoſt any one Man is capable
1- of doing Miſchicf to any other, though he
>- may not be capable of doing him Good:
e And if he be capable of doing him ſome
1, , Good, he is capable of doing him more E-
d vil. And it is, in numberleſs Caſes, much
8 more in our Power to leſſen the Mi-
t ſeries of others, than to promote their po-
f Afitive Happineſs, any otherwiſe than as the
- former often includes the latter; Eaſe from
4 Miſery occaſioning for ſome time the great-
© | eft poſitive Enjoyment. This Conſtitution
l


of Nature, namely, that it is ſo much more
in our Power to occaſion and likewiſe to leſ-
ſen Miſery, than to promote poſitive Hap-
3 | pines, plainly required a particular Affecti-
on, to hinder us from abuſing, and to incline
us to make a right Uſe of the former Pow-
ers, . e. the Powers both to occaſion and to
lefien Miſery ; over and above what was ne—
ceſſary to induce us to make a right Uſe of
the latter Power, that of promoting poſitive


Ha4 Hap-


104


SERM.


9


ey ww


ASERMON
Happineſs. The Power we have over the
Miſery of our Fellow-creatures, to occaſi- |
on or leſſen it, being a more important
Truſt, than the Power we have of promo-
ting their poſitive Happineſs ; the former
requires and has a further, an additional Se-
curity and Guard againſt its being violated, |
beyond and over and above what the latter
has. The ſocial Nature of Man, and gene-
ral Good-will to his Species, equally pre-
vent him from doing Evil, incline him to
relieve the Diſtreſſed, and to promote the
poſitive Happineſs of his Fellow- creatures:
But Compaſſion only reſtrains from the firſt,
and carries him to the ſecond ; it hath no-
thing to do with the third.

TH E final Cauſes then of Compaſſion are
to prevent and to relieve Miſery.

As to the former: This Affection may
plainly be a Reſtraint upon Reſentment,


Envy, unreaſonable Self. love; that is, upon
all the Principles from which Men do Evil


to one another. Let us inſtance only in Re-
ſentment. It ſeldom happens, in regulated
Societies, that Men have an Enemy ſo in-
tirely in their Power, as to be able to ſati-
ate their Reſentment with Safety. But if
we were to put this Caſe, it is plainly ſup-
polcable, |


upon Compaſſion.


As this World was not intended to be
a State of any great Satisfaction or high En-
joyment ; ſo neither was it intenfled to be a
meer Scene of Unhappineſs and Sorrow.


 Mitigations and Reliefs are provided by the


merciful Author of Nature, for moſt of the
Afflictions in Humane Life. There is kind
Proviſion made even againſt our Frailties;
as we are ſo conſlituted that Time abun-
dantly abates our Sorrows, and begets in
us that Reſignment of Temper, which ought
to have been produced by a better Cauſe ;
a due Senſe of the Authority of God, and


our State of Dependance. This holds in
teſpect


109
poſeable, that a Perſon might bring his S ERM.
Enemy into ſuch a Condition, as from
being the Object of Anger and Rage, to be-
come an Object of Compaſſion, even to
himſelf, though the moſt malicious Man in
the World: And in this Caſe Compaſſion
would ſtop him, if he could ſtop with
Safety, from purſuing his Revenge any far-
| ther. But ſince Nature has placed within us
more powerful Reſtraints to prevent Miſ-
chief, and ſince the final Cauſe of Com-
paſſion is much more to relieve Miſery, let
us go on to the Conſideration of it in this
View.


*


106


A SERMON


Ser M. reſpect to far the greateſt Part of the Evils of


VI.


Life; I ſuppoſe, in ſome Degree, as to Pain
and Sickneſs. Now this Part of the Con-
ſtitution or Make of Man, conſidered as
ſome Relief to Miſery, and not as Proviſion
for poſitive Happineſs, is, if I may ſo ſpeak,
an Inſtance of Naturc's Compaſſion for us;
and every natural Remedy or Relief to Mi-


ſery, may be conſidered in the ſame View.


B v r ſince, in many Caſes, it is very much
in our Power to alleviate the Miſeries of
each other; and Benevolence, though na-
tural in Man to Man, yet is in a very low
Degree, kept down by Intereſt and Compe-
titions; and Men, for the moſt Part, are fo


cngaged in the Buſineſs and Pleaſures of the


World, as to overlook and turn away from
Objects of Miſery; which are plainly con-
ſidered as Interruptions to them in their
Way, as Intruders upon their Buſineſs,
their Gaicty and Mirth: Compaſſion is an
Advocate within us in their behalf, to gain
the Unhappy Admittance and Acceſs, to
make their Caſe attended to. If it ſome-
times ſervcs a contrary Purpoſe, and makes
Men induſtriouſly turn away from the Mi-
ſerable, theſe are only Inſtances of Abuſe
and Perverſion: For the End, for which the


Affection j


7
|
4


, EY , ˙ p ˙ w EL pe Iv


nr” —_— — 8


t
-
a


upon Compaſſion.


Affection was given us, moſt certainly is not SE RN.
to make us avoid, but to make us attend VI.
to the Objects of it. And if Men would "I
N only reſolve to allow thus much to it; let it


bring before their View, the View of their


Mind, the Miſeries of their Fellow-crea-
tures; let it gain for them that their Caſe
be conſidered; I am perſuaded it would
not fail of gaining more, and that very few
real Objects of Charity would paſs unrelie-
ved. Pain and Sorrow and Miſery have


a right to our Aſſiſtance: Compaſſion
puts us in Mind of the Debt, and that we
owe it to ourſelves, as well as to the Di-


ſtreſſed. For, to endeavour to get rid of
the Sorrow of Compaſſion by turning from
the Wretched, when yet it is in our Power
to relieve them, is as unnatural, as to endea-
vour to get rid of the Pain of Hunger by


keeping from the Sight of Food. That we


can do one with greater Succeſs than we
can the other, is no Proof that one is leſs a
Violation of Nature than the other. Com-
paſſion is a Call, a Demand of Nature, to

relieve the Unhappy; as Hunger is a natural
| Call for Food. This Affection plainly gives
the Objects of it an additional Claim to
Relief and Mercy, over and above what


Our


108


SRM.
VI.


ASERMON


our Fellow-creatures in common have to


our Good-will. Liberality and Bounty are
exceedingly commendable ; and a particular
Diſtinction in ſuch a World as this, where
Men ſet themſelves to contract their Heart,
and cloſe it to all Intereſts but their own.
It is by no means to be oppoſed to Mercy,


but always accompanies it: The Diſtinction


between them is only, that the former leads
our Thoughts to a more promiſcuous and
undiſtinguiſhed Diſtribution of Favours; to
thoſe who are not, as well as thoſe who are
neceſſitous; whereas the Object of Com-
paſſion is Miſery. But in the Compariſon,
and where there is not a Poſſibility of both,
Mercy is to have the Preference: The Affecti-


on of Compaſſion manifeſtly leads us to this
Preference. Thus, to relieve the Indigent
and Diſtreſſed, to ſingle out the Unhappy.
from whom can be expected no Returns ei-
ther of preſent Entertainment or future Ser-


vice, for the Objects of our Favours; to e-


ſteem a Man's being friendleſs as a Recom- _
mendation; Dejection, and Incapacity of
ſtrugling through the World, as a Motive
for aſſiſting him; in a word, to conſider
theſe Circumſtances of Diſadvantage, which
are uſually thought a ſufficicat Reaſon for


Neglect


upon Compaſſion.


1 Neglect and overlooking a Perſon, as a Mo-


tive for helping him forward: This is the
Courſe of Benevolence which Compaſſion
marks out and directs us to: This is that
Humanity, which is ſo peculiarly becoming
our Nature and Circumſtances in this World.

To theſe Conſiderations, drawn from the
Nature of Man, muſt be added the Reaſon
of the Thing itſelf we are recommending,
which accords to and ſhews the ſame. For,
ſince it is ſo much more in our Power to
leflen the Miſery of our Fellow-creatures,
than to promote their poſitive Happineſs ;
in Caſes where there is an Inconſiſtency,
we ſhall be likely to do much more Good
by fetting ourſelves to mitigate the former,
than by endeavouring to promote the lat-
ter. Let the Competition be between the
Poor and the Rich. It is eaſy, you will
ſay, to ſee which will have the Preference.
True : But the Queſtion is, which ought
to have the Preference? What Proportion
is there, between the Happineſs produced
by doing a Favour to the Indigent, and that


produced by doing the ſame Favour to one
incaſic Circumſtances ? It is manifeſt, that the


Addition of a very large Eſtate to one who
before had an Affluence, will in many In-
ſtances


109
SERM.
VI.


*


110


SRM.
VI.


WV


A SERMON


ſtances yield him leſs new Enjoyment or Sa-


tisfaction, than an ordinary Charity would


yield to a neceſſitous Perſon. So that it
is not only true, that our Nature, 7z. e. the


Voice of God within us, carries us to the


Exerciſe of Charity and Benevolence in the © -
Way of Compaſſion or Mercy, preferably |
to any other Way ; but we alſo manifeſtly * |
diſcern much more Good done by the for-

mer; or, if you will allow me the Expreſſi-
ons, more Miſery annihilated, and Happi-
neſs created. If Charity and Benevolence,
and endeavouring to do Good to our Fel-
low. creatures, be any thing, this Obſervati-
on deſerves to be moſt ſcriouſly conſidered |
by all who have to beſtow. And it holds
with great Exactneſs, when applied to the
ſeveral Degrees of greater and leſs Indigency, |
throughout the various Ranks in Humane
Life: The Happineſs or Good produced not
being in Proportion to what is beſtowed,


but in Proportion to This joined with the


Need there was of it.


Ir may perhaps be expected, that, upon


A
#

4
4
.
1
*

t
1
1


* .


this Subject, Notice ſhould be taken of Oc- *


caſions, Circumſtances


and Characters,


which ſeem at once to call forth Affections


of different Sorts. Thus Vice may be
thought


upon Compaſſion.


nation: Folly, of Pity and of Laughter.


.. Ho far this is ſtrictly true, I ſhall not in-


* .
p S . 8 2 as. 2 SZ . a 8 At « F 4 2 , n e A - l — 0 —— — .
2.4 er „ AAA 4J˙ͤͤĩ ð K 7, we. MH, „„ = ea Ow > MS 45s. :; On RT 2


quire; but only obſerve upon the Appea-


rance, how much more Humane it is to


yield and give Scope to Affections, which
are moſt directly in Favour of, and friend-
ly towards our Fellow-creatures ; and that
there is plainly much leſs Danger of being


led wrong by theſe, than by the other.
Bur, notwithſtanding all that has been
ſaid in Recommendation of Compaſſion,
that it is moſt amiable, moſt becoming Hu-
mane Nature, and moſt uſeful to the World;


111


thought the Object both of Pity and Indig- SRM.


3
.


yet it muſt be owned, that every Affection,


as diſtinct from a Principle of Reaſon, may
riſe too high, and be beyond its juſt Pro-
portion. And by means of this one carried
too far, a Man throughout his Life is ſub-
jet to much more Uncaſineſs than belongs
to his Share: And in particular Inſtances, it
may be in ſuch a Degree, as to incapacitate
him from aſſiſting the very Perſon who is the
Object of it. But, as there are ſome who up-
on Principle ſet up for ſuppreſſing this Affe-
ction itſelf as Weakneſs, there is alſo l know
not what of Faſhion on this Side; and, by


ſome Means or other, the whole World al-


2 moſt


112


VI.
—


ASERMON


SERM. moſt is run into the Extreams of Inſenſibility


towards the Diſtreſſes of their Fellow-crea-
tures : So that general Rules and Exhorta-
tions muſt always be on the other Side.


A ND now to goon to the Uſes we ſhould :
make of the foregoing Reflections, the fur-
ther ones they lead to, and the general
Temper they have a Tendency to beget in
us. There being that diſtin>t Affection


implanted in the Nature of Man, tending


to leſſen the Miſeries of Life, that particu-
lar Proviſion made for abating its Sorrows,
more than for increaſing its poſitive Happi-
nels, as before explained; this may ſuggeſt |
to us, what ſhould be our general Aim re-
ſpcting ourſelves, in our Paſſage through
this World : Namely, to endeavour chiefly
to eſcape Miſery, keep free from Uneaſi-
nc's, Pain and Sorrow, or to get Relief
and Mitigation of them; to propoſe to our-
ſelves Peace and Tranquillity of Mind, ra-
ther than purſue after high Enjoyments. | |
This is what the Conſtitution of Nature be- |
fore explained, marks out as the Courſe |
we ſhould follow, and the End we ſhould |
aim at. To make Pleaſure and Mirth and |
Jollity our Buſineſs, and be conſtantly hur- |
ſome |
new |


rying about after ſome gay Amuſement,


—— — —


OP
4


2


SY > i Re Ro Of v1


upon Compaſſion.


new Gratification of Senſe or Appetite, to


thoſe who will conſider the Nature of Man
and our Condition in this World, will ap-
pear the moſt romantick Scheme of Life that


ever entered into Thought. And yet how
many are there who go on in this Courſe,
without learning bettet from the daily, the
hourly Diſappointments, Liſtleſsneſs and
Satiety, which accompany this faſhionable
Method of waſting away their Days?


THE Subje& we have been inſiſting upon


would lead us into the ſame kind of Reflecti-
ons, by a different Connection. The Mi
ſeries of Life brought home to ourſelves by
Compaſſion, viewed through this Affecti-
on conſidered as the Senſe by which they
ate perceived, would beget in us that Mo-
deration, Humility, and Soberneſs of Mind,
which has been now recommended ; and
which peculiarly belongs to a Scaſon of
© Recolletion, the only Purpoſe of which
is to bring us to a juſt Senſe of Things, to
| recover us out of that Forgettulneſs of our
' ſelves, and our true State, which it is ma-
- Niteſt far the greateſt Part of Men pats their
| whole Life in. Upon this Account Solomon


ſays, that it is better to go to the Houſe
' of mourninz, than to go to the Houſe of
1


feaſting.


113
S ERM.
VI.
A


114


A SERMON


SRM. feaſting. i. e. It is more to a Man's Advan-


WY'W


tage to turn his Eyes towards Objects of Dif- *
treſs, to recall ſometimes to his Remem-
brance the Occaſions of Sorrow, than to pals
all his Days in thoughtleſs Mirth and Gaiety. |
And he repreſents the Wiſe as chooſing to |
frequent the former of theſe Places; to be
ſure not for its own Sake, but becauſe 6y |
the ſadneſs of the Countenance the Heart is |
made better. Every one obſerves, how tem-
perate and reaſonable Men are when humb- |
led and brought low by Afflitions, in come |


pariſon of what they are in high Proſperi- |


ty. By this voluntary Reſort to the Houſe |


of Mourning which is here recommended,
we might learn all thoſe uſeful Inftrutions |


which Calamities teach, without undergo- |
ing them ourſelves ; and grow wiſer and |
better at a more caſy Rate than Men com-


monly do. The Objects themſelves, which |


in that Place of Sorrow lie before our View,
naturally give us a Seriouſneſs and Attenti- |
on, check that Wantonneſs which is the
Growth of Proſperity and Eaſe, and lead
us to reflect upon the Deficiencies of Hu- |
mane Life itſelf; that every Man at his
beſt Eſtate is altogether Vanity. This


would correct the florid and gaudy Proſpects
2 | and |


upon Compaſſion.


and Expectations which we are too apt to StxM.
| indulge, teach us to lower our Notions of VL
: Happineſs and Enjoyment, bring them down


to the Reality of things, to what is attaina-
ble, to what the Frailty of our Condition


will admit of; which, for any Continuance,
is only Tranquillity, Eaſe, and moderate Sa-
Y | tisfations. Thus we might at once become
Proof againſt the Temptations, with which
the whole World almoſt is carried away;
ſince it is plain, that not only what is called


a Life of Pleaſure, but alſo vicious Purſuits


| in general, aim at ſomewhat beſides and be-
| yond theſe moderate Satisfactions.


AN p as to that Obſtinacy and Wilfulneſs,


which renders Men ſo inſenſible to the Mo-
tives of Religion; this right Senſe of our-
ſelves and of the World about us would


bend the ſtubborn Mind, ſoften the Heart,


and make it more apt to receive Impreſſi-
on: And this is the proper Temper in which


-| to call our Ways to Remembrance, to re-


view and ſet home upon ourſelves the Miſ-
carriages of our paſt Life. In ſuch a com-


pliant State of Mind, Reaſon and Conſci-
ence will have a fair Hearing; which is the
Preparation for, or rather the Beginning of


12 that


116 ASERMON, c.


SERMu. that Repentance, the outward ſhow of
VI which we all put on at this Seaſon.


Laſtly, THe various Miſeries of Life


which lie before us whetever we turn our


Eyes, the Frailty of this mortal State we are
paſſing through, may put us in Mind that
the preſent World is not our Home; that
we are meerly Strangers and Travellers in
it, as all our Fathers were. It is therefore to
be conſidered as a foreign Country; in
which our Poverty and Wants, and the in-


ſufficient Supplies of them were deſigned to |
turn our Views to that higher and better |


State we are Heirs to: A State where will
be no Follies to be overlooked, no Miſeries


to be pitied, no Wants to be relieyed ; |


where the Affection we have been now | k
treating of will happily be loſt, as there will ;


be no Objects to exerciſe it upon: For G


ſhall wipe away all Tears from their Eyes,
and there ſhall be no more Death, neither


Sorrow, nor Crying, neither ſball there be


any more Pain; for the former things are


paſſed away.


SERMON.


*
4
1
7
.
|
z


1


3
[


LL AMIE SEA. EZ Ax.OA4c. ac. £5.
2 > E x „ 2 K


= ww
3


A. .


5
19
<a>
*
bs
4
3
8


> ately to the different Ends of good and bad
Men. For, though the Compariſon is not
expreſs d, yet it is manifeſtly implied; as is
alſo the Preference of one of theſe Cha-
tacters to the other in that laſt Circum-
ſtance, Death. And, ſince dying the Death
of the Righteous or of the Wicked, ne-
, ceſſarily implies Men's being rightcons or


— —
— —„—


SERMON VII.


5 Upon the Character of Balaam.


Preached the ſecond Sunday after Eaſter.


—


NUMB. XX1l1. 10.


Let me die the Death of the Righteous,


and let my laſi End be like his.


HESE Words, taken alone, and SER.
without reſpe& to him who ſpoke VII.
them, lead our Thoughts immedi- |


[ 3 V. ickesd 5


118 ASERMON upon the


SERM. Wicked, . e. having lived righteouſly or
VII. wickedly; a Compariſon of them in their |
Lives alſo might come into Conſideration |
from ſuch a ſingle View of the Words them- |
ſelves. But my preſent Deſign is, to conſi- |


der them with a particular Reference or Re-


ſpect to him who ſpoke them; which Re-


ference, if you pleaſe to attend, you will


ſee. And if what ſhall be offered to your |


Conſideration at this Time, be thought a
Diſcourſe upon the whole Hiſtory of this


*


Man, rather than upon the particular Words


I have read, this is of no Conſequence : It


is ſufficient, if it afford Reflection of Ule


and Service to ourſelves.


B u r, in order to avoid Cavils reſpeQing |


this remarkable Relation in Scripture, ei-
ther that Part of it which you have heard
in the firſt Leſſon for the Day, or any o-
ther ; let me juſt obſerve, that as this is not
a Place for anſwering them, ſo they no
way affect the following Diſcourſe ; ſince
the Character there given is plainly a real
one in Life, and ſuch as there are Parallels to.

THE Occaſion of Ba/aam's coming out
of his own Country into the Land of Mo-
4, Where he pronounced this ſolemn


Prayer or Wiſh, he himſelf relates in the
firſt


Character of Balaam. 119
x | firſt Parable or prophetick Speech, of which SER It.
ir it is the Concluſion. In which is a Cuſtom VII.
n teferr'd to, proper to be taken Notice of:
1- That of devoting Enemies to Deſtruction,
before the Entrance upon a War with them.
This Cuſtom appears to have prevailed over
2 great Part of the World; for we find it
11] amongſt the moſt diſtant Nations. The
ir | Romans had publick Officers, to whom it
a| belonged as a ſtated Part of their Office.
is | But there was ſomewhat more particular in
s | ,the Calc now before us; Balaam being look-
Tt | ed upon as an extraordinary Perlon, whoſe
| Bleſſing or Curſe was thought to be always
effectual.

IN order to engage the Readers Attenti-
on to this Paſſage, the ſacred Hiſtorian has
4} enumerated the preparatory Circumſtances,
which are theſe, Balaam requires the King
t| of Moab to build him ſeven Altars, and to
prepare him the ſame Number of Oxen and
of Rams. The Sacrifice being over, he re-
tires alone to a Solitude ſacred to theſe Oc-
caſions, there to wait the divine Inſpiration
or Anſwer, for which the foregoing Rites
were the Preparation. * And God met
I 4 Balaanz


v4


* Ver * 4. * *


'»»*‚ % - ns TY.


120
StrM.
VII.


SO in


ASERM ON upon the


Balaam, and put a Ward in his Mouth, up-
on receiving which, he returns back to the
Altars; where was the King, who had all
this while attended the Sacrifice, as appoint- |
ed; he and all the Princes of Moab ſtand-
ing, big with Expectation of the Prophets
Reply. * And he took up his Parable and
ſaid, Balak the King of Moab hath brought |
me from Aram, out of the Mountains of |


the Eaſt; ſaying, come, Curſe me Jacob,
and come, defie Iſrael. How ſhall I curſe,
whom God hath not curſed 8 Or how ſhall
T defy, whom the Lord hath not defied ?
For from the top of the Rocks I ſee him,
and from the Hills I behold him: Lo,
the People ſball dwell alone, and ſball not
be reckoned among the Nations. Who can
count the Duſt of Facob, and the Number
of the fourth Part of Iſrael ? Let me die
the Death of the Righteous, and tet my laſt
End be like his.

Ir is neceſſary, as you will ſee in the Pro-
greſs of this Diſcourſe, particularly to ob-
ſerve what he underſtood by Righteous. And
he himſelf is introduced in the Book of
Mech + explaining it; if by Ryghreons is

meant


* Ver. 6. + Micah vi.


0 2 FY 2 1 e e 8c _ ©. « Md. —_


Character of Balaam. 121


meant Good, as to be ſure it is. O my Peo- Sr RM.
: br remember now what Balak King of
| Moab conſulted, and what Balaam the Son
>| of Beor anſwered him from Shittim unto
G:i/gal, From the mention of Shittim it
is manifeſt, that it is this very Story which
z here referr'd to, though another Part of
tit, the Account of which is not now extant ;
gas there are many Quotations in Scripture
| | out of Books which are not come down to
„us. Remember what Balaam anſwered,
that ye may know the Righteouſneſs of the
| Lord, i.c. the Rightcouſneſs which God
will accept. Balak demands, I berewith
: ſhall I come before the Lord, and bow my
| ſelf before the high God ? Shall I come be-
fore him with Burnt-Offerings, with Calves
a Tear old? Will the Lord be pleaſed with
' thouſandof Rams, or with ten thouſands of
Rivers of Oil? Shall IT give my firſt-born
for my Tranſgreſſion, the Fruit of my Body
for the Sin of my Soul? Balaam anſwers
him, He hath ſhewed thee, O Man, what
is Good: And what doth the Lord require
of thee, but to do juſtly, and to love Mer-
cy, and to walk humbly with thy God ?
Here is a good Man expreſly characterized,
as diſtinct from a diſhoneſt, and a ſuperſti-
tious


122 ASERMON upon the
Siu. tious Man. No Words can more ſtrongly
VII. exclude Diſhoneſty and Falſeneſs of Heart,
than doing Fuſtice, and loving Mercy : And
both theſe, as well as walking humbly with
God, are put in Oppoſition to thoſe cere-
monial Methods of Recommendation, which
Balak hoped might have ſerved the Turn.
From hence appears what he meant by the
Righteous, whoſe Death he deſires to die.
WHETHER it was his own Character
ſhall now be inquired : And in order to de-
termine it, we muſt take a View of his whole
Bchaviour upon this Occaſion. When the
Elders of Moab came to him, though he |
appears to have been much allured with
the Rewards offered, yet he had ſuch Regard
ro the Authority of God, as to keep the |
Meſſengers in Suſpence until he had con-
ſulted his Will. And God ſaid to him, * |
Thou ſhalt not go with them, thou ſhalt not |
curſe the People, for they are bleſſed. Up-
on this he diſmiſſes the Ambaſſadors, with |
an abſolute refuſal of accompanying them
back to tacir King. Thus far his Regards
to his Duty prevailed, neither does there
any thing appear as yet amiſs in his Con-
duct. His Anſwer being reported to the
King


1 e adi 1 4


W


* Chap. xzii. 22.


123


King of Moab, a more honourable Embaſſy Se RN.


is immediately diſpatched, and greater Re-
wards propoſed. Then the Iniquity of his
Heart began to diſcloſe itſelf. A thorough
honeſt Man would without Heſitation have
repeated his former Anſwer, that he could
not be guilty of ſo infamous a Proſtitution
of the ſacred Character with which he was
inveſted, as in the Name of a Prophet to
curſe thoſe, whom he knew to be bleſſed.
"But inſtead of this, which was the only ho-
neſt Part in theſe Circumſtances that lay be-


fore him, he deſires the Princes of Moab


uh —_ T —— * a
„ "OY + at nd 2
©, Eat


„
U EY PTY n 1 „52


to tarry that Night with him alſo; and for
the Sake of the Reward deliberates, whe-
ther by ſome Means or other he might nor
be able to obtain leave to curſe Iſrael; to
do that, which had been before revealed to
him to be contrary to the Will of God,
which yet he reſolves not to do without
that Permiſſion. Upon which, as when this
Nation afterwards rejected God from reign-
ing over them, he gave them a King in his
Anger ; in the ſame Way, as appears from
other Parts of the Narration, he gives Ba-
laam the Permiſſion he deſired: For this is
the moſt natural Senſe of the Words. Arri-
ving in the Territories of Moab, and being

reccived


SVN


7
,
ll 1 4


| Wy


SzRM.


ASERM ON upon the


received with particular Diſtinction by the
King, and He repeating in Perſon the Pro-
miſe of the Rewards he had before made
to him by his Ambaſſadors : he ſeeks, the
Text ſays, by Sacrifices and Enchantments,
(what theſe were is not to our Purpoſe) to
obtain Leave of God to curſe the People;
keeping ſtill his Reſolution, not to do it
without that Permiſſion : Which not being
able to obtain, he had ſuch regard to the
Command of God, as to keep this Reſoluti-
on to the laſt. The Suppoſition of his be-
ing under a ſupernatural Reſtraint is a meer
Fiction of Philo: He is plainly repreſented
to be under no other Force or Reſtraint, than
the Fear of God. However, he goes on per-
ſevering in that Endeavour, after he had de-


clared, that God had not beheld Iniquity in 1
Facoo, neither had he ſeen Perverſeneſs in


Iſrael. * i. e. they were a People of Virtue
and Piety ſo far as not to have drawn down,
by their Iniquity, that Curſe which he was
ſolliciting Leave to pronounce upon them,
So that the State of Balaams Mind was
this : He wanted to do what he knew to be
very wicked, and contrary to the expreſs


Command


9 Ver 21.


ET SIE i +,
. r


k
8
7


Charafer of Balaam.


Command of God; he had inward Checks Sz xm.


and Reſtraints, which he could not intirely
get over; he therefore caſts about for Ways
to reconcile this Wickedneſs with his Du-
ty. How great a Paradox ſoever this may
appear, as it is indeed a Contradiction in
Terms, it is the very Account which the
Scripture gives us of him.

Bur there is a more ſurprizing Piece of
Iniquity yet behind. Not daring in his re-
© ligious Character as a Prophet to aſſiſt the
| King of Moab, he conſiders whether there
might not be found ſome other Means of
+ aſſiſting him againſt that very People, whom
he himſelf by the Fear of God was reſtrain-
ed from curſing in Words. One would
not think it poſſible, that the Weakneſs, e-
ven of religious Selt-deceit in its utmoſt Ex-
ceſs, could have ſo poor a Diſtinction, ſo
fond an Evaſion, to ſerve itſelf of. But
ſo it was: And he could think of no other
Method, than to betray the Children of
Iſrael to provoke his Wrath, who was their
only Strength and Defence. The Tempta-
tion which he pitched upon, was that con-
cerning which Solomon afterwards obſerved,
that it had caſf down many wounded ; yea,


many ſtrong Men had been ſlain by 1 :
n


SVN


126 ASERM ON upon the


|| 'Sz xm. And of which he himſelf was a ſad Ex-
||| VIII. ample, when his Wives turned away his
Heart after other Gods. This ſucceeded :
The People ſin againſt God; and thus the


[
f
Prophet's Counſel brought on that Deſtructi- 1 l
\


on, which he could by no means be pre-
vailed upon to aſſiſt with the religious Ce-
remony of Execration, which the King of
Moab thought would itſelf have effected it.
Their Crime and Puniſhment are related in
Deuteronomy *, and Numbers T. And |
from the Relation repeated in Numbers (a), |
it appears, that Balaam was the Contriver |
of the whole Matter. It is alſo aſcribed to |
him in the Revelation (), where he is ſaid |
to have taught Balak to caſt a ſiumbling- |
block before the Children of Ißrael.

TAIS was the Man, this Balaam, I lay,
was the Man who deſired to die the Death
of the Righteous, and that his laſt End |
might be like his: And this was the Statc |
of his Mind, when he pronounced theſe
Words.

S o that the Object we have now before
us is the moſt aſtoniſhing in the World: A
very wicked Man, under a deep Senſe of


© God


* Chap. iv. + Chap. xxv. (a) Chap. xxxi. (6) Chap. ii.


* *
2


Character of Balaam.


God and Religion, perſiſting till in his _ R M.


Wickedneſs, and preferring the Wages of
Unrighteouſneſs, eyen when he had before
him a lively View of Death, and that ap-


proaching Period of his Days, which ſhould
- deprive him of all thoſe Advantages for


which he was proſtituting himſelf; and
likewiſe a Proſpe&, whether certain or un-
certain, of a future State of Retribution :
All this joined with an explicit ardent Wiſh,


that, when he was to leave this World, he
might be in the Condition of a righteous


Man. Good God, what Inconſiſtency, what
Perplexity is here! With what different


Views of things, with what contradictory


Principles of Action, muſt ſuch a Mind be


torn and diſtracted! It was not unthinking
Careleſsneſs, by which he run on headlong


in Vice and Folly, without ever making a


ſtand to ask himſelf what he was doing :
No; he acted upon the cool Motives of In-
tereſt and Advantage. Neither was he to-
tally hard and callous to Impreſſions of Re-
ligion, what we call Abandoned; for he ab-


ſolutely denyed to curſe Iſrael. When Rea-


ſon aſſumes her Place, when convinced of
his Duty, when he owns and feels, and is
actually under the Influence of the divine

Authority ;


VII.


— A,


128 ASERM ON upon the
Sau. Authority; whilſt he is carrying on his


Views to the Grave, the End of all tempo- |
ral Greatneſs ; under this Senſe of things,


with the better Charactet and more deſira-


ble State preſent—full before him—in his


Thoughts, in his Wiſhes, voluntarily to


chooſe the worſe What Fatality is here!


Or how otherwiſe can ſuch a Character be


explained? And yet, ſtrange as it may ap-


pear, it is not altogether an uncommon one :
Nay, with ſome ſmall Alterations, and put
a little lower, it is applicable to a very con-
ſiderable Part of the World.
reaſonable Choice be ſeen and acknow-


For, if the


ledged, and yet Men make the unreaſona- |
ble one, is not this the ſame Contradicti-


on; that very Inconſiſtency, which appeared


ſo unaccountable ?
To give ſome little Opening to ſuch Cha-


racers and Behaviour, it is to be obſerved


in general, that there is no Account to be
given in the Way of Reaſon, of Men's ſo
ſtrong Attachments to the preſent World :
Our Hopes and Fears and Purſaits are in De-
grees beyond all Proportion to the known
Value of the Things they reſpect. This may
be ſaid without taking into Conſideration


Religion and a future State; and when theſe |


2 As


— i. - _


» — —


Character of Balaam.


are conſidered, the Diſproportion is infinitc- S ERM.
ly heightened. Now when Men go againſt VII.
WY


their Reaſon, and contradict a more im-
portant Intereſt at a Diſtance, for one near-
er, though of leſs Conſideration ; if this be
the Whole of the Caſe, all that can be faid


is, that ſtrong Paſſions, ſome kind of brute


Force within, prevails over the Principle of


| Rationality. However, if this be with a


clear, full and diftint Vicw of the Truth
of Things, then it is doing the utmoſt Vio-
lence to Themſelves, acting in the moſt palpa-
ble Contradiction to their very Nature. But if
there be any ſuch thing in Mankind, as put-
ting Half-deceits upon them!ielves ; which
there plainly is, either by avoiding Reflecti-
on, or (if they do reflect) by religious Equi-
vocation, Subterfuges, and palliating Mat-
ters to themſelves ; by theſe Means Conſci-
ence may be laid aſleep, and they may go on
in a Courſe of Wickedneſs with leſs Diſtur-
bance. All the various Turns, Doubics and
Intricacies in a diſhoneſt Heart, cannot be
unfolded or laid open; but that there is
ſomewhat of that kind is manifeſt, be it to
be called Self-deceit, or by any other Name.
Balaam had before his Eyes the Authority of


God, abſolutely forbidding him what he, for
K the


120 ASERMON upon the


Sr mM. the Sake of a Reward, had the ſtrongeſt In- F
clination to: He was likewiſe in a State of
Mind ſober enough to conſider Death and


VII.


his laſt End: By theſe Conſiderations he was


reſtrained, firſt from going to the King of
Moab; and after he did go, from curſing
Iſraef. But notwithſtanding this, there was


12
N
*


great Wickedneſs in his Heart. He could


not forego the Rewards of Unrighteouſ-
neſs: He therefore firſt ſceks for Indulgences;


and when theſe could not be obtained, he


ſins againſt the whole Meaning, End and


Deſign of the Prohibition, which no Con-
ſideration in the World could prevail with


him to go againſt the Letter of. And ſure-
ly that impious Counſel, he gave to Balak |


againſt the Children of Iſrael, was, conſi-
dered in itſelf, a greater Piece of Wicked-
nels, than if he had curſed them in Words.

IF it be inquired what his Situation, his


Hopes and Fears were, in reſpect to this his
Wiſh : The Anſwer muſt be, that Conſci- |


ouſneſs of the Wickedneſs of his Heart
muſt neceſlarily have deſtroyed all ſettled
Hopes of dying the Death of the Righteous :
He could have no calm Satisfaction in this
View of his laſt End: Yet, on the other


hand, it is poſſible that thoſe partial Re-
gards


Ho NO


OREN ES e Fw x, ©,


Character of Balaam. 131


f gards to his Duty, now mentioned, might Sz xm.
keep him from perfect Deſpair.


U rot the Whole, it is manifeſt that Ba-
laam had the moſt juſt and true Notions of


God and Religion; as appears, partly from
the original Story itſelf, and more plainly
from the Paſſage in Micah ; where he ex-
- Plains Religion to conſiſt in real Virtue and


real Piety, expreſlily diſtinguiſhed from Su-
perſtition, and in Terms which moſt ſtrong-
ly exclude Diſhoneſty and Falſeneſs of Heart.
Yet you ſee his Behaviour: He ſeeks In-
dulgences for plain Wickedneſs ; which not
being able to obtain, he gloſſes over that
ſame Wickedneſs, dreſſes it up in a new
Form, in order to make it paſs off more
caſily with himſelf. That is, he delibe-
rately contrives to deceive and impoſe up-
on himſelf, in a Matter which he knew to
be of the utmoſt Importance.

To bring theſe Obſervations home to
ourſelves. It is too evident that many Per-
ſons allow themſelves in very unjuſtifiable
Courſes, who yet make great Pretences
to Religion; not to deceive the World,
none can be ſo weak as to think this will
paſs in our Age ; but from Principles, Hopes,
and Ecars, reſpecting God and a future State;

K 2 and


4
if
if

1

4

4

"

we

17

45

4 =

l

199

|
17

J
1%
l
55
|

m

}
|

J


|
|
|
4
i | l
|


a


= =»


132


AS ER MO N upon the


by
1


Sz RM. and go on thus with a ſort of Tranquilli- L:


VII.


ty and Quiet of Mind. This cannot be
WO" upon a thorough Conſideration, and full |


Reſolution, that the Pleaſures and Advan-
tages they propole are to be purſued at all
Hazards, againſt Reaſon, againſt the Law of


God, and though everlaſting Deſtruction is;
to be the Conſequence. This would be do-


ing too great Violence upon themſelves.


No, they are for making a Compoſition |


with the Almighty. Theſe of his Com-
mands they will obey : But as to others
why they will make all the Atonements in
their Power ; the ambitious, the covetous,


the diſſolute Man, each in a Way which!


ſhall not contradi& his reſpective Purſuit.
Indulgences before, which was Balaam's
firſt Attempt, though he was not ſo ſucceſs.
ful in it as to deceive himſelf, or Atone-
ments afterwards, ate all the ſame. And here
perhaps come in faint Hopes that they may,
and Half. reſolves that they will, one time
or other, make a Change.


BESIDEs theſe, there are alſo Perſons,


who from a more juſt way of conſidering
things, ſee the infinite Abſurdity of This, of
ſubſtituting Sacrifice inſtead of Obedience;
there are Perſons far enough from Super-

2 ſtition


18
1
*
4

%


| dition, and not without ſome real Senſe of SER M.


Character of Balaam.


God and Religion upon their Minds; who


yet are guilty of moſt unjuſtifiable Practices,


and go on with great Coolneſs and Com-
mand over themſelves. The ſame Diſhoneſty
and Unſoundneſs of Heart diſcovers itſelf


in Theſe another way. In all common or-


dinary Caſes we ſee intuitively at firſt View
what is our Duty, what is the honeſt Part,
This is the Ground of the Obſervation, that
the firſt Thought is often the beſt. In theſe
Caſes Doubt and Deliberation is itſelf Diſ-
honeſty ; as it was in Balaam upon the


| ſecond Meſſage. That which is called con-


ſidering what is our Duty in a particular Caſe,


is very often nothing but endeavouring to
explain it away. Thus thoſe Courſes, which,
if Men would fairly attend to the Dictates
of their own Conſciences, they would ſce
to be Corruption, Exceſs, Oppreſſion, Un-
charitableneſs ; theſe arc refined upon —
Things were ſo and ſo circumſtantiated — —


Great Difficulties are raiſed about fixing


Bounds and Degrees: And thus every moral
Obligation whatever may be evaded. Here


is Scope, I ſay, for an unfair Mind to ex-


plain away every moral Obligation to It-
ſelt. Whether Men reflect again upon
1 this


134
SERM.
VIL.


3


AS ER MO N upon the


this internal Management and Artifice, and
how explicit they are with themſelves, is a-
nother Queſtion. There are many Operati- |
ons of the Mind, many things pals within,
which we never reflect upon again; which
a By-ſtander, from having frequent Opportu-
nities of obſerving us and our Conduct,
may make ſhrewd Gueſſes at.
THAT great Numbers are in this Way of
deceiving themſelves is certain. There is
ſcarce a Man in the World, who has intirely
got over all Regards, Hopes and Fears, con-
cerning God and a future State; and theſe
Apprehenſions in the Generality, bad as
we are, prevail in conſiderable Degrees:
Yet Men will and can be wicked with Calm-
neſs and Thought; we ſee they are. There
muſt therefore be ſome Method of making
it ſit a little caſy upon their Minds; which,
in the Superſtitious, is thoſe Indulgences and
Atonements before mentioned, and this
Self. deceit of another Kind in Perſons of
another Character. And both theſe pro-
ceed from a certain Unfairneſs of Mind, a
peculiar inward Diſhoneſty ; the direct con-
trary to that Simplicity which our Saviour
recommends, under the Notion of becoming
little Children, as a neceſſary Qualification
2 R : yk


Character of Balaam. 135


nd for our entering into the Kingdom of Hea- Sz xm.


a yen VII.
= T 2
ti- B u r to conclude: How much ſoever Men


in, differ in the Courſe of Life they prefer,
ch and in their Ways of palliating and excu-
u- ſing their Vices to themſelves; yet all agree
t, in the one thing, deſiring to die the Death
F the righteous, This is ſurely remarka-
off ble. The Obſervation may be extended
is further, and put thus: Even without deter-
mining what that is which we call Guilt or
n-t Innocence, there is no Man but would chooſe,
ſe after having had the Pleaſure or Advantage
as of a vitious Action, to be free of the Guilt
: of it, to be in the State of an innocent
* Man. This ſhews at leaſt a Diſturbance,
e an implicit Diſſatisfaction in Vice. If we


8 enquire into the Grounds of it, we ſhall
, find it proceeds partly from an immediate
df, Senſeof having done Evil; and partly from
is an Apprehenſion, that this inward Senſe ſhall
ff onetime or another be ſeconded by an high-


6 cr Judgment, upon which our whole Being
a depends. Now to ſuſpend and drown this
- Senſe, and theſe Apprehenſions, be it by
. the Hurry of Buſineſs or of Pleaſure, or by
q Superſtition, or moral Equivocations, this is
in a Manner one and the tame, and makes
; K 4 no


136


AS ER MON, ©c.


SRM. no Alteration at all in the Nature of our


VII.
2


Caſe. Things and Actions are what they are,
and the Conſequences of them will be what
they will be: Why then ſhould we deſire to
be deceived 2 As we are reaſonable Crea-
tures, and have any Regard to ourſelves, we
ought to lay theſe things plainly and honeſt- |
ly before our Mind, and upon this, act as
you pleaſe, as you think moſt fit; make that |
Choice and prefer that Courſe of Life, which
you can juſtify to yourſelves, and which fits
moſt eaſy upon your own Mind. It will
immediately appear, that Vice cannot be the
Happineſs, but muſt upon the whole be
the Miſery, of ſuch a Creature as Man; a
Moral, an Accountable Agent. Superſtiti-
ous Obſervances, Selt-Deceit though of a
more refined Sort, will not in Reality at all
mend Matters with us. And the Reſult of
the whole can be nothing elſe, but that
with Simplicity and Fairneſs we keep Inno-
cency, and take heed unto the thing that is


right; for this alone ſhall oring a Man Peace
at the laſt.


SERMON


- Þ lhe


p ww . 69 F'y ae * 1 1 e


5 ERM ON VIII.
Upon Reſentment.


MATTH. v. 43, 44-


: Te have heard that it hath been ſaid, Thou


ſhalt love thy Neighbour, and hate thine
Enemy : But I ſay unto you, Love your
Enemies, bleſs them that curſe you, do
good to them that hate you, and pray
for them which deſpitefully uſe you and
perſecute you.


0: CE perfect Goodneſs in the Dei


niverſe was brought into Being, and
by which it 1s preſerved ; and ſince general
Benevolence is the grear Law of the whole
moral Creation: It is a Queſtion which im-
mediately occurs, Nhy had Man implanted
in him a Principle, which appears the di-


rect contrary to Benevolence? Now the


Foot


ty Sz na.
is the Principle, from whence the U-


VIII.


— .


SERM.
VIII.


WWW


A SERMON


Foot upon which Inquiries of this Kind
ſhould be treated is this: To take Humane
Nature as it is, and the Circumſtances in


which it is placed as they are; and then con-
ſider the Correſpondence between that Na- |
ture and thoſe Circumſtances, or what Courſe |
of Action and Behaviour, reſpecting thoſe |
Circumſtances, any particular Affection or
Paſſion leads us to. This I mention to diſtin-
guiſh the Matter now before us from Diſ-


quiſitions of quite another Kind; namely,


that I know of, any thing at all to do with.
God Almighty undoubtedly foreſaw the Diſ-


happen in this State of things. If upon this


we ſet ourſelves to ſearch and examine, |
why he did not prevent them ; we ſhall, Iam |


afraid, be in Danger of running into ſome-
what worſe than impertinent Curioſity. But


upon this to examine, how far the Nature |


which he hath given us hath a Reſpect to
thoſe Circumſtances, ſuch as they are ; how
far it leads us to act a proper Part in them;
plainly belongs to us: And ſuch Inquirics
are in many ways of excellent Uſe. Thus the

thing


Why we are not made more perfect Crea- |
tures, or placed in better Circumſtances ?
Theſe being Queſtions which we have not, |


orders, both natural and moral, which would


| Th 8 « « W


|


L


|


ſuch Circumſt
ſo harſh and turbulent a Paſſion as Reſent-


5


upon Reſentment.


139


thing to be conſidered is, not, Why we were S ERM.
not made of ſuch a Nature, and placed in VIII.


ances, as to have no need of


ment; But, taking our Nature and Conditi-
on as being what they are, Mh or for what
End ſuch a Paſſion was given us: And this


chiefly in order to ſhew, what are the Abuſes


of it.

THe Perſons who laid down for a Rule,
Thou ſbalt love thy Neighbour and hate
thine Enemy, made ſhort Work with this
Matter. They did not, it ſeems, perccive
any thing to be diſapproyed in Hatred, more
than in Good-will : And, according to their
Syſtem of Morals, our Enemy was the pro-
per natural Object of one of theſe Paſlions,
as our Neighbour was of the other of them.
This was all they had to ſay, and all they
thought needful to be ſaid, upon the Subject.
But this cannot be ſatisfactory; becauſe Ha-
tred, Malice and Revenge, are directly con-
trary to the Religion we profeſs, and to the
Nature and Reaſon of the thing itſelf. There-
fore, ſince no Paſſion God hath endued us
with can be in itſelf Evil; and yet ſince Men
frequently indulge a Paſſion in ſuch Ways and
Degrees, that at length it becomes quite a-

nother


ASERMON


nother thing from what it was originally in
our Nature ; and thoſe Vices of Malice and
Revenge in particular take their Occaſion
from the natural Paſſion of Reſentment : It
will be needful to trace This up to its Origi-
nal, that we may ſee, What it is in itſelf,
as placed in our Nature by its Author ; from
which it will plainly appear, For what Ends
it was placed there. And when we know
what the Paſlion is in itſelf, and the Ends of
it, we ſhall eaſily ſee, Nhat are the Abuſes
of it, in which Malice and Revenge conſiſt ;
and which are ſo ſtrongly forbidden in the
Text, by the direct contrary being command-
ed.
RESENTMEN r is of two Kinds: Haſty
and ſudden, or ſettled and deliberate. The
former is called Anger, and often Paſſion ;
which, though a gencral Word, is frequent-
ly appropriated and confined to the particu-
lar Feeling, ſudden Anger, as diſtinct from
deliberate Reſentment, Malice and Revenge.
In all theſe Words is uſually implied ſome-
what vitious; ſomewhat unreaſonable as to
the Occaſion of the Paſſion, or immoderate
25 to the Degree or Duration of it. But that
the natural Paſſion itſelf is indifferent, St.
Paul has aſſerted in that Precept, Be ye an-


809


upon Reſentment.


gry and ſin not : Which though it is by
no means to be underſtood as an Encourage-
ment to indulge ourſelves in Anger, the
Senſe being certainly this, Though ye be an-
gry, ſm not; yet here is evidently a Diſtincti-
on made, between Anger and Sin ; between
the natural Paſſion, and ſinful Anger.
Sudden Anger upon certain Occaſions is
meer Inſtinct: As meerly ſo, as the Diſpoſi-
tion to cloſe our Eyes upon the Apprehenſion
of ſomewhat falling into them; and no more
neceſſarily implies any Degree of Reaſon.
I ſay, neceſſarily : For to be ſure haſty, as
well as deliberate, Anger may be occaſion-
ed by Injury or Contempt; in which Caſes
Reaſon ſuggeſts to our Thoughts that Injury
and Contempt, which is the Occaſion of
the Paſſion : Bur I am ſpeaking of the for-
mer only ſo far as it is to be diſtinguiſhed
from the latter. The only Way, in which
our Reaſon and Underſtanding can raiſc An-
. ger, is by repreſenting to our Mind Injuſtice
or Injury of ſome Kind or other. Now mo-
mentary Anger is frequently raiſed, not on-
ly without any real, but without any appa-
rent Reaſon ; that is, without any Appear-
ance of Injury, as diſtin& from Hurt or Pain.


It


* Ephel. iv. 26,


141
SERM.


VIII.
WNW


142


Sr RN. It cannot, I ſuppoſe, be thought that this |
Paſhon, in Infants; in the lower Species of | |


VIII.


ASERMON


Animals; and, which is often ſeen, in Men


towards them; it cannot, I ſay, be imagi-


ned that theſe Inſtances of this Paſſion are
the Effect of Reaſon : No, they are occaſi-
oned by meer Senſation and Feeling. It is


Oppoſition, ſudden Hurt, Violence, which |
naturally excites the Paſſion ; and the real |
Demerit or Fault of him who offersthat Vio- |
lence, or is the Cauſe of that Oppoſition or |
Hurt, does not in many Caſes ſo much as |


come into Thought.

Tuk Reaſon and End, for which Man was
made thus liable to this Paſſion, is, that he
might be better qualified to prevent, and like-
wiſe (or perhaps chicfly) to reſiſt and defeat,
ſudden Force, Violence and Oppoſition, conſi-
dered meerly as ſuch, and without Regard to
the Fault or Demerit of him who is the Au-
thor of them. Vet, ſince Violence may be
conſidered in this other and further View,
as implying Fault; and ſince Injury, as diſtinct
from Harm, may raiſe ſudden Anger; ſud-
den Anger may likewile accidentally ſerve
to prevent, or remedy, ſuch Fault and Injury.
But, conſidered as diſtinct from ſetled Anger,
it ſtands in our Nature for Self-: defence, and
2 not


4
7


— 1 Bens ans Ü Ü an om .o a. AA& 7 ana” aa Lo. oo. . anos Sire...


upon Reſentment.


is not for the Adminiſtration of Juſtice. There SE nM.


f are plainly Caſes, and in the uncultivated
n Parts of the World, and, where regular Go-


vernments are not formed, they frequently
happen, in which there is no Time for Con-


ſideration, and yet to be paſſive is certain
Deſtruction; in which, ſudden Reſiſtance is
| the only Security.


Bur from This, deliberate Anger or Ne-


ſent ment is eſſentially diſtinguiſhed, as the
latter is not naturally excited by, or intend.
ed to prevent mere Harm without appearance


of Wrong or Injuſtice. Now, in order to
ſce, as exactly as we can, what is the natural
Object and Occaſion of ſuch Reſentment ;
let us reflect upon the Manner in which we


are touched with reading, ſuppoſe, a feign-


ed Story of Baſeneſs and Villany, properly


worked up to move our Paſſions. This im-


mediately raiſes Indignation, ſomewhat of a
Deſire that it ſhould be puniſhed. And though
the deſigned Injury be prevented, yet that it
was deſigned is ſufficient to raiſe this inward
Feeling. Suppoſe the Story true, this inward
Feeling would be as natural and as juſt :
And one may venture to affirm, that there
is ſcarce a Man in the World, but would
have it upon {ome Occaſions. It ſeems in


722
*
*


143


WW


744 ASERMON


SERM. xs plainly connected with a Senſe of Virtiel
Jul. and Vice, of moral Good and Evil. Suppoſe
; further, we knew both the Perſon who did,
and who ſuffered the Injury: Neither would
this make any Alteration, only that it would
probably affect us mote. The Indignation
raiſed by Cruelty and Injuſtice, and the De-
fire of having it puniſhed, which Perſons un-
concerned would feel, is by no means Ma-
lice. No, it is Reſentment againſt Vice and}
Wickedneis : It is one of the common Bonds, |
by which Society is held together; a Fellow-
ll; feeling which each Individual has in Behalf
1 of the whole Species, as well as of him—
ſelf. And it does not appear that This, ge-
nerally ſpeaking, is at all too high amongſt
Mankind. Suppoſe now the Injury I have
been ſpeaking of, to be done againſt our-
felves; or thoſe whom we conſider as our-
ſelves. It is plain, the Way, in which we
ſhould be affected, would be exactly the ſame
in Kind : but it would certainly be in a high-
er Degree, and leſs tranſient ; becauſe a Senſe
of our own Happineſs and Miſery is moſt in-
timately and always preſent to us; and,
from the very Conſtitution of our Nature,
we cannot but have a greater Senſibility to,


and be more deeply in in, what con-
cerns


2 fon AC.D.AQ2nqn Da


- da
a& _ ®
= »%
SS


„ we Sp # = ard


upon Reſentment. 145


cerns ourſelves. And this ſcems to be the 5 7 P.M,
whole of this Paſſion which is, properly III.


| ſpeaking, natural to Mankind: Namely, a


Reſentment againſt Injury and Wickedneſs
in general; and in a higher Pegree when
towards ourſelves, in Propo:tion to the


greater Regard which Men naturally have
for themſelves, than for others. From hence


it appears, that it is not natural, but moral


Evil; it is not Suffering, but Injury, which
raiſes that Anger or Reſentment, which is of


any Continuance. The natural Object of it


is not one, who appears to the ſuffering Per-


ſon to have been only the innocent Occaſion
of his Pain or Loſs; but one, who has been
in a moral Senſe injurious cither to ourſelves
or others. This is abundantly confirmed by
obſerving, what it is which heightens or leſ-
ſens Reſentment ; namely, the fame which
aggravates or leſſens the Fault: Friendſhip
and former Obligations, on one hand; or In-
advertency, ſtrong Temptations and Miſtake,
on the other. All this is ſo much under-
ſtood by Mankind, how little foever it be
reflected upon, that a Perſon would be reck-
oned quite diſtracted, who ſhould cooly re-
ſent an Harm, which had not to himſelf the
Appearance of Injury or Wrong. Men do

L indeed


146


SERM.
VIII.


2


ASERMON


indeed reſent what is occaſioned through
Careleſsneſs: But then they expect Obſer-|
vance as their due, and ſo that Careleſsnef}
is conſidered as faulty. It is likewiſe true,
that they reſent more ſtrongly an Injury


„


done, than one which, though deſigned, was


prevented, in Caſes where the Guilt is per-
haps the ſame : The Reaſon however is, not
that bare Pain or Loſs raiſes Reſentment, but]


4


that it gives a new, and, as I may ſpeak, ad!


ditional Senſe of the Injury or Injuſtice. Ac.
cording to the natural Courſe of the Paſſi
ons, the Degrees of Reſentment are in Pro.
portion, not only to the Degree of Deſign
and Deliberation in the injurious Perſon ;|þ
but in Proportion to this, joined with thc
Degree of the Evil deſigned or premedita-
ted; ſince this likewiſe comes in to make
the Injuſtice greater or leſs. And the Evil or
Harm will appear greater when they feel it
than when they only reflect upon it: So
therefore will the Injury: And conſequently
the Reſentment will be greater.

TH E natural Object, or Occaſion, of ſet
tled Reſentment then being Injury, as diſtinct
from Pain or Loſs; it is eaſy to ſee, that
to prevent and to remedy ſuch Injury, and
the Miſeries ariſing from it, is the End for

Which


}


which this Paſſion was implanted in M
It is to be conſidered as a Weapon, put in-
to our Hands by Nature, againſt Injury, In-
| juſtice and Cruclty : How it may be inno-
- cently employed and made ule of, ſhall pre-
ſently be mentioned.


upon Reſentment.


T E Account, which has been now given


of this Paſſion, is in brief, that ſudden An-
ger is raiſed by, and wies chiefly intended to
prevent or remedy, meer Harm diſtin from


Injury: But that it ay be raiſed by Injury,
and may ſerve to prevent or to remedy it;
and then the Occaſions and Effects of it are


the ſame, with the Occaſions and Effects of
i deliberate Anger. But they are eſſentially
diſtinguiſhed in this, that the latter is never.


occaſioned by Harm,diſtin& from Injury ; and
its natural proper End is to remedy or pre-
vent only that Harm, which implies, or is
ſuppoſed to imply, Injury or moral Wrong.
Every one ſees that theſe Obſervations do


not relate to thoſe, who have habitually ſup-


preſſed the Courſe of their Paſſions and Af-


fections, out of Regard cither to Intereſt or


Virtue; or who, from Habits of Vice and
Folly, have changed their Nature. But, I
ſuppoſe, there can be no doubt but this, now
deſcribed, is the general Courſe of Reſent-

1 ment,


147


an. SER M.


VII.


= — —
pe [7
I" - —
——— — 1 my
— — — — — — —
— — — — — — — A =
- - > © =» *
5 — 11
-» -


4 - — FR
_ - —
C PY = — — 51 = - __
— = — -_ — — P Ja —
— __ — — — — in — pe — w . —
— — . — = * —
* —
— — — — —_ SY = — =
- - —+ — 2 —— p - — — 2- = — * — — Bs =
— — — _ —_— — 8 * — — 1 =} dy = — — — — —
— _  --- — — — — = = * — — —
- — 2 — —
— — - — — — —— ”
— _ --
— —


148


SERM.


VIII.
2


ASERMON


ment, conſidered as a natural Paſſion, neither |
increaſed by Indulgence, nor corrected by
Virtue, nor prevailed over by other Paſli- |
ons, or particular Habits of Life. .

As to the Abuſes of Anger, which it iss
to be obſerved may be in all different De-


grees, the firſt which occurs is what is com- |


monly called Paſſion; to which ſome Men |
are liable, in the ſame Way as others are to
the Epilepſie, or any ſudden particular Diſ-
order. This Diſtemper of the Mind ſeizes |
them upon the leaſt Occaſion in the World, |
and perpetually without any real Reaſon Þ
at all: And by Means of it they are plain-f
ly, every Day, every waking Hour of their |


Lives, liable and in Danger of running in-


to the moſt extravagant Outrages. Of af
leſs boiſterous, but not of a leſs innocent
Kind, is Peeviſbneſs ; which I mention with
Pity, with real Pity to the unhappy Crea- |
tures, who, from their inferiour Station, or
other Circumſtances and Relations, are o-
bliged to be in the Way of, and to ſerve for
a Supply to it. Both theſe, for ought that
can ſee, are one and the ſame Principle:
But, as it takes Root in Minds of different
Makes, it appears differently, and ſo is come
to be diſtinguiſhed by different Names. That
which


upon Reſentment.


which in a more feeble Temper is Peeviſh- SERNM.
| neſs, and languidly diſcharges itſelf upon e VIII.
very thing which comes in its Way; the
ſame Principle, in a Temper of greater Force
and ſtronger Paſſions, becomes Rage and Fu-
ry. In one, the Humour diſcharges itſelf at
once; in the other, it is continually diſcharg-
ing. This is the Account of Paſſion and
* Peeviſbneſs, as diſtin& from each other, and
- appearing in different Perſons. It is no Ob-
jection againſt the Truth of it, that they are


both to be ſeen ſometimes in one and the
fame Perſon.

Wir reſpe to deliberate Reſentment,
the chief Inſtances of Abuſe are: When, from
Partiality to ourſclves, we imagine an Injury
done us, when there is none : When this
Partiality repreſents it to us greater than it
really is: When we fall into that extrava-
gant and monſtrous Kind of Reſentment, to-


wards one who has innocently been the Oc-


caſion of Evil to us; that is, Reſentment up-
on Account of Pain or Inconvenience, with-
out Injury ; which is the ſame Abſurdity, as
ſettled Anger at a thing that is inanimate :
When the Indignation againſt Injury and
Injuſtice riſes too high, and is beyond Pro-
portion to the particular ill Adion it is exer-
b L 3 ciſed


WWW


150


S ERM.
VIII.


WY


ASERMON
ciſed upon : Or laſtly, when Pain or Harm of
any Kind is inflicted meerly in Conſequence


of, and to gratify, that Reſentment, though


naturally raiſed.


Ir would be endleſs to deſcend into and
explain all the Peculiarities of Perverſeneſs, |


and wayward Humour, which might be tra-
ccd up to this Paſſion. But there is one thing,
which ſo generally belongs to and accom-
panies all Exceſs and Abuſe of it, as to re-
quire being mentioned: a certain Determi-
nation, and reſolute Bent of Mind,/ not to be
convinced or ſet right; thongh it be ever ſo
plain, that there is no Reaſon for the Diſplea-
ſure, that it was raiſed merely by Error or
Miſunderſtanding. In this there is doubtleſs
a great Mixture of Pride; but there is ſome-
what more, which I cannot otherwiſe expreſs
than, that Reſcntment has taken Poſſeſſion
of the Temper and of the Mind, and will not
quit its Hold. It would be too minute, to in-
quire whether this be any thing more than
bare Obſtinacy : It is ſufficient to obſerve, that
it in a very particular Manner and Degree,
belongs to the Abuſes of this Paſſion.

Bur, notwithſtanding all theſe Abuſes


* Is not juſt Indignation againſt Cruelty and
% Wrong, one of the Inſtruments of Death
e which


upon Reſentment


151


te which the Author of our Nature hath pro- SER M.


dignation againſt Vice and Wickedneſs is,
and may be allowed to be, a Ballance to that
Weakneſs of Pity, and alſo to any thing
elſe which would prevent the neceſſary Me-
thods of Severity. Thoſe, who have never
thought upon theſe Subjects, may perhaps not
ſee the Weight of this: But let us ſuppoſe a
Perſon guilty of Murther, or any other AQi-
on of Cruelty, and that Mankind had natu-
rally no Indignation againſt ſuch Wickedneſs
and the Authors of it ; but that Every Body
was affected towards ſuch a Criminal in the
ſame Way, as towards an innocent Man :
Compaſſion, amongſt other Things, would
render the Execution of Juſtice exceedingly
painful and difficult, and would often quite
prevent it, And notwithſtanding that the

| L 4 Principle


C yided ? Are not Cruelty, Injuſtice and VIII.
« Wrong, the natural Objects of that Indig-
« nation? Surely then it may one way or o-
« ther be innocently employed againſt them.“
True. Since therefore it is neceſſary for the
very Subſiſtence of the World, that Injury,
Injuſtice and Cruelty, ſhould be puniſhed ;
and ſince Compaſſion, which is ſo natural to
Mankind, would render that Execution of
* Juſtice exceedingly difficult and uneaſie; In-


— —
- =
- 1

— = — -

—

82 — -

_ — ST: —- —

* = — — 2


„.
FI
i
5
i 4
{ |
1
i, .
1 Wu .
ny
|
vi!
warn
l 0
.
1


49


AS ER MON


S ERM. Principle of Benevolence is denied by ſome,
VIII. and is really in a very low Degree, that Men


are in great Meaſure inſenſible to the Happi-
neſs of their Fellow- creatures; yet they are |
not inſenſible to their Miſery, but are very
ſtrongly moved with it: In ſomuch that there
plainly is Occaſion for that Feeling which is |
raiſed by Guilt and Demerit, as a Ballance to]
that of Compaſlion. Thus much may I think |
juſtly be allowed to Reſentment, in the ſtrict-


eſt way of Moral Conſideration.


THE good Influence which this Paſſion |


has in Fact upon the Affairs of the World, is


obvious to every one's Notice. Men are]
plainly reſtrained from injuring their Fellow- |


creatures by Fear of their Reſentment ; and
it is very happy that they are ſo, when they
would not be reſtrained by a Principle of Vir.


tue. And after an Injury is done, and there is a


Neceſlity that the Offender ſhould be brought
to Juſtice ; the cool Conſideration of Reaſon,


that the Security and Peace of Society re-
quires Examples of Juſtice ſhould be made,


might indced be ſufficient ro procure Laws
to be enacted, and Sentence pals'd : But is it
that cool RefleQion in the injured Perſon,
which, for the moſt Part, brings the Offender
to Jutlice? Or is it not Reicntment and In-

dignation


commonly the Caſe. This however is to be
| conſidered as a good Effect, notwithſtanding
it were much to be wiſhed that Men would
| at from a better Principle, Reaſon and cool


upon Reſentment.


163


dignation againſt the Injury and the Author 8E RN.


of it? I am afraid there is no Doubt, which is


Reflection.


THE Account now given of the Paſſion


| of Reſentment, as diſtin& from all the Abuſes
of it, may ſuggeſt to our Thoughts the fol-
lowing Reflections.


Firſt, That Vice is indeed of ill-deſert, and
muſt finally be puniſhed. Why ſhould Men
diſpute concerning the Reality of Virtuc, and


| whether it be founded in the Nature of
Things, which yet ſurely is not Matter of


Queſtion ; but why ſhould this, I ſay, be diſ-
puted, when every Man carries about him
this Paſſion, which affords him Demonſtrati-
on, that the Rules of Juſtice and Equity are to
be the Guide of his Actions? For every Man
naturally feels an Indignation upon ſeeing In-
ſtances of Villany and Baſeneſs, and there-
fore cannot commit the ſame without being
ſelf. condemned.

Secondly, That we ſhould learn to be cau-
tious leſt we charge God fooliſhly, by aſcri-
bing That to him, or the Nature He has gi-

Ven


AY Yo


A SERMON, &c.


SRM. ven us, which is owing wholly to our own
VIII. Abuſe of it. Men may ſpeak of the Dege- |
neracy and Corruption of the World, accord- |
ing to the Experience they have had of it; |
but Human Nature, conſidered as the divine |
orkmanſhip, ſhould methinks be treated |
as ſacred: For in the Image of God made He


Man. That Paſſion, from whence Men take
Occaſion to run into the dreadful Vices of
Malice and Revenge ; even That Paſſion, as
implanted in our Nature by God, is not only
innocent, but a generous Movement of
Mind. It is in itſelf, and in its Original, no
more than Indignation againſt Injury and
Wickedneſs : That which is the only Defor-
mity in the Creation, and the only reaſona-


ble Object of Abhorrence and Diſlike. How


manifold Evidence have we of the divine
Wiſdom and Goodneſs, when even Pain in
the natural World, and the Paſſion, we have
been now conſidering in the Moral, come
out Inſtances of it!


SERMON


$
4
f
)
|


4


A


SERMON IX.
| Upon Forgiveneſs of Injuries.


—_ *.. * » — __— EF”


— * — — 3
—


MAr TH. v. 43, 44.


| Te have heard that it hath been ſaid, Thou


ſhalt love thy Neighbour, and hate thine
Enemy: But IT ſay unto you, Love your
Enemies, bleſs them that curſe you, do
good to them that hate you, and pray
for them which deſpitefully uſe you and
perſecute you.


S God Almighty foreſaw the Irregu-
larities and Diſorders, both natural
and moral, which would happen in

this State of Things; He hath graciouſly

made ſome Proviſion againſt them, by giving

us ſeveral Paſſions and Affections, which a-

riſe from, or whoſe Objects are thoſe Diſor-


ders. Of this Sort are Fear, Reſentment,


Compaſſion and others; of which there could
| be


SZRM.
IX.


—


WV


. - — —
— — —— -
: _ - \ — -
— — — 2 — _ _ —

— — 4 — = — — — — —
- N 4 — —
2 — — * ä * *

— — — — n —— — — —


3
oe £=\, 2
—


— Cl 0 — ww . . ²˙ðÜ6 WW _ — ore err er rr rn 5


| |
[

'r

4

}

\

'1
[
i
1


Pi —


— . I


ASE R MO N ho
SRM. be no Occaſion or Uſe in a perfect State: But


in the preſent we ſhould be expoſed to great-
er Inconveniences without them; though |
there are very conſiderable ones, which they


themſelves are the Occaſions of. They are] di
Incumbrances indeed, but ſuch as we are ob-


liged to carry about with us, through this
various Journey of Life : Some of them as
a Guard againſt the violent Aſſaults of others,
and in our own Defence; ſome in Behalf of
others ; and all of them to put us upon, and

help to carry us through, a Courſe of Behavi-f


our ſuitable to our Condition, in Default of]


that Perfection of Wiſdom and Virtue, which
would be inal! Reſpects our better Security. |


THE Paſſion of Anger or Reſentment hath |


already been largely treated of. It hath been
ſhown, that Mankind naturally feel ſome E-
motion of Mind againſt Injury and Injuſtice,
whoever are the Sufferers by it; and even
though the injurious Deſign be prevented]
from taking Effect. Let this be called Anger,
Indignation, Reſentment, or by whatever
Name any one ſhall chuſe; the thing itſelf is
underſtood, and is plainly natural. It] has like-
wiſe been obſerved, that this natural Indigna-
tion is generally moderate and low enough in
Mankind, in cach particular Man, when the


Injury


7


Forgiveneſs of Injuries.


Injury which excites it doth not affect himſelf, SER M.
or one whom he conſiders as himſelf. There-
fore the Precepts to forgive, and to love our
Enemies, do not relate to that general In-
dignation againſt Injury and the Authors of


it, but to this Feeling, or Reſentment when


| raiſed by private or perſonal Injury. But no


Man could be thought in earneſt, who ſhould


aſſert, that, though Indignation againſt Inju-
ry, when Others are the Sufferers, is inno-
cent and juſt; yet the ſame Indignation a-
gainſt it, when we ourſelves are the Suf-
| ferers, becomes faulty and blameable. Theſe
Precepts therefore cannot be underſtood to
forbid This in the latter Caſe, more than in


the former. Nay they cannot be underſtood
to forbid this Feeling in the latter Caſe, tho
raiſed to a higher Degree, than in the for-
mer : Becauſe, as was alſo obſerved further,


| from the very Conſtitution of our Nature,


we cannot but have a greater Senſibility to
what concerns ourſelves. Therefore the Pre-
cepts in the Text, and others of the like Im-
port with them, muſt be underſtood to forbid
only the Exceſs and Abuſe of this natural
Feeling, in Caſes of perſonal and private In-
jury: The chief Inſtances of which Exceſs


and Abuſe have likewiſe been already re-
marked ;


\


9


188 ASERMON upon |'
StrM. marked; and all of them, excepting that of
IX. Retaliation, do ſo plainly in the very Terms
expreſs ſomewhat unreaſonable, diſproporti-|
onate and abſurd, as to admit of no Pretence
or Shadow of Juſtification.
B v r ſince Cuſtom and falſe Honour are on
the Side of Retaliation and Revenge, when]
the Reſentment is natural and juſt ; and Rea-f
ſons are ſometimes offered in Juſtification of
Revenge in theſe Caſes; and ſince Love off
our D is thought o hard a Saying to
be obeyed : I will ew the abſolute unlaw-
fulneſs of the former; The Obligations wel
are under io the latter; And then proceed
to ſome Reflections, which may have a mort
direct and immediate Tendency to beget in us
a right Temper of Mind towards thoſe wha
have offended us. I
In ſhewing the Unlawfulneſs of Revenge, |
it is not my preſent Deſign to examine what
is alledged in Favour of it, from the Tyran- |
ny of Cuſtom and falſe Honour, but only |
to conſider the Nature and Reaſon of the
Thing itſelf ; which ought to have prevented, |
and ought now to extirpate, every thing of |
that Kind.
Firſt, Let us begin with the Suppoſition of |


That being innocent, which is pleaded *
ang


«ͤ⁊1õͤô⁊ RR: "SW 7 * "i J) a a. as hos Ws A Hy — — AQ 8


of and which ſhall be ſhewn to be altogether vi- Sz xm.


ms] cious, the Suppoſition that we were allowed IX.
to render Evil for Evil, and ſee what would
be the Conſequence. Malice or Reſent-


ti-
ce


Forgiveneſs of Injur ies.


ment towards any Man hath plainly a Ten-


| dency to beget the ſame Paſſion in him who
is the Object of it; and this again increaſes


it in the Other. It is of the very Nature of


this Vice to propagate itſelf, not only by
Way of Example, which it does in common


with other Vices, but in a peculiar Way of


its own; for Reſentment itſelf, as well as
What is done in Conſequence of it, is the


Obje& of Reſentment : Hence it comes to


| paſs that the firſt Offence, even when ſo


{light as preſently to be dropt and forgotten,
becomes the Occaſion of entring into a long
Intercourſe of ill Offices: Neither is it at


all uncommon to ſee Perſons, in this Pro-


greſs of Strife and Variance, change Parts;
and Him, who was at firſt the injured Per-
ſon, become more injurious and blameable
than the Aggreſſor. Put the Caſe then, that
the Law of Retaliation was univerſally re-
ccived, and allowed, as an innocent Rule of
Life, by all ; and the Obſervance of ir
thought by many, (and then it would ſoon
come to be thought by all,) a Point of Ho-

nour:


160 ASERMON upou


Sex M. nour: This ſuppoſcs every Man in private] i
IX. Caſes to paſs Sentence in his own Caule ;
| and likewiſc, that Anger or Reſentment is to
be the Judge. Thus, from the numberleſs
Partialitics which we all have for ourſelves,
every one would often think himſelf injured
when He was not: and in moſt Caſes would
repreſent an Injury as much greater than it
really is; the imagined Dignity of the Perſon
offended would ſcarce ever fail to magnifie
the Offence. And, if bare Retaliation, or
returning juſt the Miſchief reccived, always
begets Reſentment in the Perſon upon whom
wc retaliate, what would that Exceſs do ?
Add to this, that he like wiſe has his Partiali- Þ
ties There is no going on to repreſent this
Scene of Rage and Madneſs: It is manifeſt F
there would be no Bounds, nor any End.
Tf the Beginning of Strife is as when one |
letteth out Water, what would it come to || |
when allowed this free and unreſtrained Þ 1!
Courſc? As Coals are to burning Coals, or | i
Mood to Fire; ſo would theſe contentions |
Men be to kindle Strife *. And, ſince the Ii
Indulgence of Revenge hath manifeſtly this b
Tendency, and does actually produce theſe | 0
Effects in Proportion as it is allowed; a Paſſi- I 1


on of ſo dangerous a Nature ought not to be
indulged,


— vo OO oe NN -- yo


* 63 ow ins eo On eh o—_ © Mui


Forgiveneſs of Injuries.
indulged, were there no other Reaſon a-
gainſt it.

Setondly, It hath been ſhewn that the
Paſſion of Reſentment was placed in Man,
upon Suppoſition of, and as a Prevention or
Remedy to Irregularity and Diſorder. Now


' whether it be allowed or not, that the Paſſi-


on itſelf and the Gratification of it joined to-
gether are painful to the malicious Perſon ;
it muſt howevet be ſo with Reſpect to the
Perſon towards whom it is exerciſed, and
upon whom the Revenge is taken. Now, if


ve conſider Mankind, according to that


fine Alluſion of St. Paul, as one Body, and


every one Members one of another; it muſt


be allowed that Reſentment is, with Re-


| ſpe to Society, a painful Remedy. Thus
then the very Notion or Idea of this Paſſion,
a a Remedy or Prevention of Evil, and as
in itſelf a painful Means, plainly ſhews that
it ought never to be made ule of, but only
in order to produce ſome greater Good.


161


SERM.
IX.
WWW


Ir is to be obſerved, that this Argument


is not founded upon an Alluſion or Simile ;


but that it is drawn from the very Nature
of the Paſſion itſelf, and the End tor which


it was given us. We are obliged to make
M uſe


162 ASERMON 20


1 Szxm. uſe of Words taken from ſenſible thing
Wt IX. to explain what is the moſt remote fron
0 them: And every one ſees, from whenc:
the Words Prevention and Remedy are taker
But if you pleaſe, let theſe Words be drop
ped : The thing itſelf, I ſuppoſe, may be ex
preſs d without them. |
TAT Mankind is a Community, that wi
all ſtand in a Relation to each other, tha
there is apublick End and Intereſt of Socie
which each Particular is obliged to promot
is the Sum of Morals. Conſider then the Paſ
ſion of Reſentment, as given to this one Be
dy, as given to Socicty. Nothing can be
more manifeſt, than that Reſentment is t
be conſidered as a ſecondary Paſlion, place:
in us upon Suppoſition, upon Account of,
and with Regard to Injury; not, to be ft
to promote and further it, but to render it
and the Inconveniences and Miſeries ariſing
from it, leſs and fewer than they would be
without this Paſſion. It is as manifeſt, tha
the Indulgence of ir is, with Regard to So
cicty, a painful Means of obtaining theſe
Ends. Conſidered in itſelf, it is very unde-
ſirable, and what Society muſt very much
wiſh to be without, It is in every Inſtanceſ
2 abſolutely


Fw A -©® 1 ©


— — oo —ñ— XR 2 © Mai


rs ten


C
0
|
(
F
IT
f
C
t


— wv .
Fa l bens — _—
_ — - — — » > —_— ——__— 2 4
— - o — - X = — — -+ 4
bl _ - l
8 _ * K — — — — _
- N — — — — Oo _ _ w- — _ _ == 3 = = by ——j——ꝓ— —— - - '1 &
—— — — 5 — 2 — — — =
PY — — A . —_ — — — — * —
* © — — — -
* ; — — —
2 8 2 1 ' * 2
- — 2 = * 1 2 - . .
. , — yo w - - © — og © * =
— + —_ — mm — . 2 . 2 = — — > ” *
— 4 ꝶ6ꝶ6Fů r.. — _ = f — . — - = =”
—— — — — - — —
ay — —— — —


Forgtveneſs of Injuries.
1 producing Miſery : And conſequently muſt
ken never be indulged or gratified for itſelf,
by ariy one who conſiders Mankind as a
Community or Family, and himſelf as a
Member of it.

LET us now take this in another View.
thall Every natural Appetite, Paſſion and Affecti-
on, may be gratified in particular Inſtances,
without being ſubſervient to the particular
Pal chief End, for which theſe ſeveral Princi-

ples were reſpectively implanted in our Na-
Jure. And, if neither this End, nor any
other moral Obligation be contradicted,
ſuch Gratification is innocent. Thus, I
ſappoſe, there are Caſes in which cach of
theſe Prinajples, this one of Reſentment
excepted, may innocently be gratified, with-
out being ſubſervient to what is the main

End of it: That is, though it does not con-
| duce to, yet it may be gratified without
Þ contradifting that End, or any other Obli-
cation. But the Gratification of Reſent-
ment, if it be not conducive to the End
** for which it was given us, muſt neceſſarily
contradict, not only the general Obligation
to Benevolence, but like wiſe that particular
End itſelf, The End, for which it was gi-
M 2 ven,


abſolutely an Evil in itſelf; becauſe it implies S ERM.


WWY—wns


LY


164 ASERMON upon


9 3 Mu. ven, is to prevent or remedy Injury; 1. e.


the Miſery occaſioned by Injury; 1. e. Mi-
ſery itielf: And the Gratification of it con-


ſiſts in producing Miſery ; 1. e. in contra- Þ a


dicting the End, for which it was implanted F


in our Nature.


THis whole Reaſoning is built upon the |


Difference there is between this Paſſion Þ


and all others. No other Principle, or Paſli-


on, hath for its End the Miſery of our Fel.
low-creatures. But Malice and Revenge


meditates Evil itſelf; and to do Miſchief, to
be the Author of Miſery, is the very Thing
which gratifics the Paſſion : This is what it
directly tends towards, as its proper Deſign.
Other Vices eventually do Milchicf : This
alone aims at it as an End.

NoTHING can with Reaſon be urged in
Juſtification of Revenge, from the good Ef.


fects which the Indulgence of it were before


mentioned * to have upon the Affairs of the
World; becauſe, though it be a remarkable
Inſtance of the Wiſdom of Providence to
bring Good out of Evil, yet Vice is Vice to
him who is guilty of it. But ſuppoſe theſe
*« good Effects are foreſeen: That is, Sup-


poſe


* Serm. VIII. p. 152,


Forgiveneſs of Injuries.


poſe Reaſon in a particular Caſe leads a Man Sz nm.


the ſame Way as Paſſion? Why then, to be
ſure, he ſhould follow his Reaſon, in this


zs well as in all other Caſes. So that, turn


the Matter which way ever you will, no


more can be allowed to this Paſſion, than
| what hath been already +.


As to that Love of our Enemies, which i is


commanded; this ſuppoſes the general Ob-


ligation to Benevolence or Good- will to-
wards Mankind: And this being ſuppoſed,
that Precept is no more than to forgive In-


juries; that is, to keep clear of thoſe Abuſes
before-mentioned : Becauſe that we have
the habitual Temper of Benevolence, is ta-


ken for granted.


RESENTMEN T is not inconſiſtent with
Good-will : For we often ſee both together in
very high Degrees; not only in Parents to-
wards their Children, but in Caſes of Friend-
ſhip and Dependance, where there is no na-
tural Relation. Theſe contrary Paſſions,
though they may leſſen, do not neceſlarily
deſtroy each other. We may therefore love
our Enemy, and yet have Reſentment a-
gainſt him for his injurions Behaviour to-
Wards us. But when this Reſentment in—

M 3 tirely


+ Serm. VIII. p.


165


IX.
—


166 ASERMON pon


Sx RM. tirely deſtroys our natural Benevolence to-
IX. wards him, it is exceſſive, and becomes Ma. |
" lice or Revenge. The Command, to pre-
vent its having this Effect, i. e. to forgive |
Injuries, is the ſame as to love our Enemies;
becauſe that Love is always ſuppoſed, unleſs
deſtroyed by Reſentment. 'F

BU r though Mankind is the natural
« Object of Benevolence, yet may it not be
* leſſened upon Vice, i. e. Injury?“ Allow-
ed : But if every Degree of Vice or Injury
muſt deſtroy that Benevolence, then no Man |
is the Object of our Love; for no Man is
without Faults.

« Bur if lower Inſtances of Injury may
ce leflen our Benevolence, why may not
« higher, or the higheſt, deſtroy it? The
Anſwer is obvious. It is not Man's being a
ſocial Creature, much leſs his being a moral
Agent, from whence alone our Obligations
to Good-will towards him ariſe. There is
an Obligation to it prior to either of theſe, a-
riſing from his being a ſenſible Creature ;
that is, capable of Happineſs or Miſery, Now
this Obligation cannot be ſuperleded by his
moral Character. What juſtifies publick
Executions is, not that the Guilt or Demerit
of the Criminal diſpenſes with the Obligati-

on


p
—
*
c
;
$


Forgiveneſs of Injuries.


167


on of Good - will, neither would this juſtify Sz RM.


any Severity; but, that his Life is incon-


ſiſtent with the Quiet and Happineſs of the
World: That is, a general and more en-
larged Obligation neceſſarily deſtroys a par-
ticular and more confined one of the ſame


Kind, inconſiſtent with it. Guilt or Injury
then docs not diſpenſe with or ſuperſede


" # the Duty of Love and Good-will.


NEITHER does that peculiar Regard to
ourſelves, which was before allowed to be


natural * to Mankind, diſpenſe with it: Be-


cauſe that can no way innocently heighten
our Reſentment againſt thoſe who have been
injurious to ourſelves in particular, any o-
ther wiſe than as it heightens our Senſe of the
Injury or Guilt; and Guilt, though in the
higheſt Degree, does not, as hath been ſhewn,
diſpenſe with or ſuperſede the Duty of Love
and Good-will.

IF all this be true, what can a Man ſay,
who will diſpute the Reaſonableneſs, or
the Poſſibility, of obeying the divine Pre-
cept we are now conſidering ? Let him
ſpeak out, and it muſt be thus he will ſpeak.
« Mankind, 2. e. a Creature defective and
faulty, is the proper Object of Good-

Ma « will,
* Serm. VIII. p. 144.


—


168


ASERMON upon


ITT c will, whatever his Faults are, when they


IX.


e reſpe& others; but not when they re-


« ſpe&t me my ſelf.” That Men ſhould be


affected in this Manner, and act accordingly, |


is to be accounted for like other Vices; but


to aſſert that it ought, and muſt be thus,
is Self-partiality poſſeſs d of the very Under- |


ſtanding.


THrvs Love to our Enemies, and thoſe


who have been injurious to us, is ſo far from
being a Rant, as it has been prophanely cal-
led, that it is in Truth the Law of our Na-


ture, and what every one muſt ſee and own,


who is not quite blinded with Self. love.
FRO M hence it is eaſy to ſee, what is the
Degree in which we are commanded to
love our Encmies, or thoſe who have been
injurious to us. It were well if it could
as eaſily be reduced to Practice. It cannot be


imagined, that we are required to love them


with any peculiar Kind of Affection. But
ſuppoſe the Perſon injured to have a due, na-
tural Senſe of the Injury, and no more; he
ought to be affected towards the injurious


Perſon in the ſame Way any good Men, un-


intereſted in the Caſe, would be; if they
had the ſame juſt Senſe, which we have ſup-
poſed the injured Perſon to have, of the
| Fault:


Forgiveneſs of Injuries.


Fault : After which there will yet remain
real Good-will towards the Offender. -


No w what is there in all this, which ſhould


be thought impraQticable ? I am ſure there is


nothing in it unreaſonable. Ir is indeed no


more than that we ſhould not indulge a Paſli-
on, which, if generally indulged, would


propagate itſclf ſo as almoſt to lay waſte the


World: That we ſhould ſuppreſs that partial,


that falſe Self-love, which is the Weakneſs
of our Nature: That Uneaſineſs and Miſery
ſhould not be produced, without any good
Purpoſe to be ſerved by it : And that we
ſhould not be affected towards Perſons dif-
ferently from what their Nature and Cha-
racter require.

Bur ſince to be convinced that any
Temper of Mind, and Courſe of Bchavi-
our, is our Duty, and the contrary vitious,
hath but a diſtant Influence upon our Tem-
per and Actions; let me add ſome few Re-
flections, which may have a more direct Ten-
dency to ſubdue thoſe Vices in the Heart, to
beget in us this right Temper, and lead us
to a right Behaviour towards thoſe who have
offended us: Which Reflections however
ſhall be ſuch as will further ſhew the Ob-
ligations we are under to it.

No


169


SERM.
IX.
WWW


170
SxrM.
IX.
Wy


A SERMON upon


No one, I ſuppoſe, would chooſe to
have an Indignity put upon him, or to be
injurioufly treated. If then there be any
Probability of a Miſunderſtanding in the
Caſe, cither from our imagining we are in-
jured when we are not, or repreſenting the
Injury to ourſelves as greater than it really
is; one would hope an Intimation of this
Sort might be kindly received, and that Peo-
ple would be glad to find the Injury not fo
great as they imagined. Therefore, with-
out knowing Particulars, I take upon me
to aſſure all Perſons who think they have
received Indignities or injurious Treatment,
that they may depend upon it, as in a Man-
ner certain, that the Offence is not ſo great
as they themſelves imagine. We are in
ſuch a peculiar Situation, with reſpe& to
Injuries done to ourſelves, that we can ſcarce
any more ſee them as they really are, than
our Eye can ſee itſelf. If we could place
ourſelves at a due Diſtance, 7. e. be really
unprejudiced, we ſhould frequently diſcern
That to be in reality Inadvertence and Mi-
ſtake in our Enemy, which we now fancy we
ice to be Malice or Scorn. From this proper
point of View, we ſhould likewiſe in all
Probability ſee ſomething of theſe latter in

ourſelves,


Forgiveneſs of Injuries. 171
\ ourſelves, and moſt certainly a great deal of SER M.
the former. Thus the Indignity or Injury
would almoſt infinitely leflen, and perhaps
at laſt come out to be nothing at all. Self-
love is a Medium of a peculiar Kind: In
* theſe Caſes it magnifies every thing which is
amiſs in others, at the ſame time that it leſ-
ſens every thing amiſs in ourſelves.
ANGER alſo or Hatred may be conſi-
dered as another falſe Medium of viewing
things, which always repreſents Characters
and Actions much worſe than they really are.
II- will not only never ſpeaks, but never thinks
well, of the Perſon towards whom it is ex-
erciſed. Thus in Caſes of Offence and En-
mity, the whole Character and Behaviour is
conſidered with an Eye to that particular
Part which has offended us, and the wholc
Man appears monſtrous, without any thing
right or human in him: Whereas the Re-
ſentment ſhould ſurely at leaſt be confined
to that particular Part of the Behaviour which
gave Offence; ſince the other Parts of a
Man's Life and Character ſtand juſt the ſame
as they did before.

IN general, there are very few In-
ſtances of Enmity carried to any length
but Inadyertency, Miſunderſtanding, ſome

| real


172
SRM.
i —


IX.


ASE RMO N apo


real Miſtake of the Caſe, on one ſide how-
ever, if not on both, has a great Share
in it.

I F theſe things were attended to, theſe Ill-
humours could not be carried to any length
amongſt good Men, and they would be ex-
ccedingly abated amongſt all, And one
would hope they mighr be attended to: For
all that theſe Cautions come to, is really no
more than deſiring, that Things may be con-
ſidered and judged of as they are in them-
ſelves, that we ſhould have an Eye to, and be-
ware of, what would otherwiſe lead us into
Miſtakes. So that to make Allowances for In-
advertence, Miſunderſtanding, for the Par-
tialitics of Sclf-love, and the falſe Light which
Anger ſets things in; I fay, to make Allow-
ances for theſe, is not to be ſpoken of as an
Inſtance of Humbleneſs of Mind, or Meck-
neſs and Moderation of Temper ; but as
what common Senſe ſhould ſuggeſt, to avoid
judging wrong of a Matter before us, though
Virtue and Morals were out of the Caſe.
And therefore it as much belongs to ill Men,
who will indulge the Vice I have been argu-
ing againſt ; as to good Men, who endeavour
to ſubdue it in themſelves. In a word, all
theſe Cautions, concerning Anger and Self-


loye,


Forgrveneſs of Imuries. 173
| love, are no more than deſiting a Man, who Szxm,
was looking through a Glaſs which either IX.

magnified or leſſened, to take Notice, that

the Objects are not in themſelves what they
appear through that Medium. |

To all theſe Things one might add, that,

| Reſentment being out of the Caſe, there is

not properly ſpeaking any ſuch Thing as di-

| rect IIIl-will in one Man towards another:

Therefore the firſt Indignity or Injury, if it

be not owing to Inadvertence or Miſunder-

ſtanding, may however be reſolved into o-

| | ther particular Paſſions or Self- love: Princi-

ples quite diſtin from IIl-will, and which

we ought all to be diſpoſed to excuſe in o-

thers, from experiencing ſo much of them in

ourſelves. A great Man of Antiquity is re-

ported to have faid, that, as He never was in-

dulgent to any one Fault in himſelf, He could

not excuſe thoſe of others. This Sentence

could ſcarce with Decency come out of the

Mouth of any humane Creature. But if we

invert the former Part, and put it thus: That

He was indulgent to many Faults in himſelf,

as it is to be feared the beſt of us are, and yet

was implacable; how monſtrous would ſuch

an Aſſertion appear? And this is the Caſe in

Reſpect to every humane Creature, in Pro-

2 portion


— — —
— —


——
— - — >
- = —


174
S ERM. portion as He is without the forgiving Spirit |
IX. I have been recommending. |
Pur R, Though Injury, Injuſtice, |


ASERMON upot


Oppreſlion, the Baſeneſs of Ingratitude, are
the natural Objects of Indignation, or if you
pleaſe of Reſentment, as before explained ;
yet they are likewiſe the Objects of Compaſ-
ſion, as they are their own Puniſhment, and
without Repentance will for ever be ſo. No
one ever did a deſigned Injury to another, but |
at the ſame time He did a much greater to
himſelf. If therefore we would conſider
things juſtly, ſuch an one is, according to the
natural Courſe of our Affections, an Object
of Compaſſion, as well as of Diſpleaſure:
And to be affected really in this manner, I
ſay really, in Oppoſition to Show and Pre-
tence, argues the true Greatneſs of Mind. We
have an Example of Forgiveneſs in this
Way in its utmoſt Perfection, and which in-
deed includes in it all that is Good, in that
Prayer of our Bleſſed Saviour on the Croſs:
Father, forgive them; for they know not
what they do.

Burt Laſtly, The Offences which we are
all guilty of againſt God, and the Injurics
which Men do to each other, are often men-
tioned together: And, making Allowances

for


Forgiveneſs of Injuries. 1756
| ſor the infinite Diſtance between the Majeſty Sz xm.
of Heaven and a frail Mortal, and likewiſe IX.
for this, that He cannot poſſibly be affected or "0
moved as we are; Offences committed by o-
thers againſt ourſelves, and the Manner in
which we are apt to be affected with them,
give a real Occaſion for calling to Mind our
own Sins againſt God. Now there is an Ap-
prehenſion and Pre-ſentiment, natural to
Mankind, that we ourſelves ſhall one Time
or other be dealt with, as we deal with others;
and a peculiar Acquieſcence in, and Feeling
of the Equity and Juſtice of this equal Diſtri-
bution. This natural Notion of Equity the
Son of Sirach has put in the ſtrongeſt way.
He that revengeth ſball find Vengeance from

the Lord, and he will ſurely keep his Sins in
Remembrance. Forgive thy Neighbour the
Hurt he hath done unto thee, ſo ſball thy
Sins alſo be forgiven when thou prayeſt. One
Man beareth Hatred againſt another, and
doth he ſeek pardon from the Lord? He
ſheweth no Mercy to a Man which is like him-
ſelf ; and doth He ask Forgiveneſs of his
own Sins? Let any one read our Saviour's
Parable of the King who took Account of his
Servants + ; and the Equity and Rightneſs
of


* Ecclus. xxviti, 14. + Matth. xviii.


176


SERUM.


IX.


ASERMON wupot


of the Sentence, which was paſs'd upon |
him who was unmerciful to his Fellow. Ser.
vant, will be felt. There is ſomewhat inf


Humane Nature, which accords to, and falls
in with that Mcthod of Determination. Let
us then place betore our Eyes the Time which
is repreſented in the Parable ; That of our
own Death, or the final Judgment. Suppoſe
your ſelves under the Apprehenſions of ap-
proaching Death; that you were juſt going
to appear naked and without Diſguiſe before
the Judge of all the Earth, to give an Ac-
count of -your Behaviour towards your Fel-
low-creatures: Could any thing raiſe more


- dreadful Apprehenſions of that Judgment,


than the Reflection that you had been impla-
cable, and without Mercy towards thoſe who
had offended you: without that forgiving
Spirit towards others, which that it may
now be exerciſed towards yourſelves, is your
only hope? And theſe natural Apprehenſi-
ons are authorized by our Saviour's Applica-
tion of the Parable: So /kewiſe ſhall my


wed Hd A , 4 Q a ͤ „ ͤ „ ff . „ er: fre Pd ©) Wa A


—
— OY


heavenly Father do alſo unto you, if ye from


your hearts forgive not every one his Brother
their Treſpaſſes. On the other hand, ſup-
poſe a good Man in the ſame Circumſtance,


in the laſt Part and Cloſe of Life ; conſcious
of


Forgiveneſs of Injuries.


of many Frailtics, as the beſt are, but con- Stern,


ſcious too that He had been meek, forgiving


and mercitul ; that He had in Simplicity of


Heart been ready to paſs over Offences a.


gainſt himſelf: The having felt this good Spi-
rit will give him, not only a full View of the


Amiableneſs of it, but the ſureſt Hope that


He ſhall meet with it in his Judge. This like-


wiſe is confirmed by his own Declaration:


If ye forgive Men their Treſpaſſes, your hea-
venly Father will likewiſe forgive you.
And that we might have a conſtant Senſe
of it upon our Mind, the Condition is ex-
preſs d in our daily Prayer. A forgiving Spi-
tit is therefore ablolutely neceſſary, as ever
we hope for Pardon of our own Sins; as
ever we hope for Peace of Mind in our dying
Moments, or for the divine Mercy at that
Day when we ſhall moſt ſtand in need of
It,


SERMOK


"77


SW WW


—


——
—


| SERMON X.
Upon Se, Deceit.


8


2 SAM. Xii. 7.


And Nathan ſaid to David, Thou art the
Man.


HESE Words are the Application Sz xn.
of Nathan's Parable to David, up- X.


on Occaſicn of his Adultery with "YY
Bathſbeba, and the Murder of Uriah her
Husband. The Parable, which is related in
the moſt beautiful Simplicity, is this.
* There were two Men in one City ; the one
rich, and the other poor. The rich Man had
exceeding many Flocks and Herds : But the
poor Man had nothing ſave one little Eu-
Lamb, which he had bought and nouriſbed
up : And it grew up together with him,
N 2 and


kx Ver. 1.


A SERMON


SERUM. and with his Children; it did eat of his
Xx. own Meat, and drank of his own Cup, and |
3 lay in his Boſom, and was unto him as 4


Daughter. And there came a Traveller
unto the rich Man, and he ſpared to take
of his own Flock, and of his own Herd, to
dreſs for the way-faring Man that was
come unto him, but took the poor Man's
Lamb, and dreſſed it for the Man that was
come to him. And David's Anger was
greatly kindled againſt the Man, and he ſaid
to Nathan, As the Lord liveth, the Man
that hath done this thing ſhall ſurely die.
And he ſhall reſtore the Lamb four. fold,


becauſe he did this thing, and becauſe be


had no Pity. David paſles Sentence, not
only that there ſhould be a four-fold Reſti-
tution made; but he proceeds to the Ri-
gour of Juſtice, the Man that hath done
this thing ſhall die: And this judgment is
pronounced with the utmoſt Indignation a-
gainſt ſuch an Act of Inhumanity; As rhe
Lord liveth, be ſhall ſurely die: and his


Anger was greatly kindled againſt the Man.
And the Prophet anſwered, Thou art tbe
Man. He had been guilty of much greater
Inhumanity, with the utmoſt Deliberation,
Thought and Contrivance. Near a Year
PROTO MN at mt


J *


SK 2


„„ ,


upon. Self-Deceit.


muſt have paſſed, between the Time of the Sz x m.
Commiſſion of his Crimes, and the Time


of the Prophet's coming to him ; and it does
not appear from the Story, that he had in
all this while the leaſt Remorſe or Contri-
tion.

THERE is not any thing, relating to Men
and Characters, more ſurprizing and unac-
countable, than this Partiality to themſelves,
which is obſervable in many; as there is no-
thing of more melancholy Reflection, re-
ſpecting Morality, Virtue and Religion.
Hence it is that many Men ſeem perfect
Strangers to their own Characters. They
think, and reaſon, and judge quite differ-
ently upon any Matter relating to them-
ſelves, from what they do in Caſes of Others
where they are not intereſted. Hence it is one
hears People cxpoling Follies, which they
themſelves are eminent for; and talking with
great Severity againſt particular Vices, which,
if all the World be not miſtaken, they them-
ſelves: re notorioully guilty of. This Selt-igno-
rance and Self-partiality may be in all diffe-
rent Degrees. Itis a lower Degree of it, which
David himſelf refers to in theſe Words,
Who can tell how oft he offendeth £ O cleanſe
thou me from my ſecret Faults. This

N 3 is


WWW


182 A SERMON


SzRM. is the Ground of that Advice of Elihu to
X. Job: Curely it is meet to be ſaid unto God,
That which I ſee not, teach thou me; if
I have done Iniquity, I will do no more. And
Solomon ſaw this thing in a very ſtrong Light,
when he ſaid, He that truſteth his own
Heart is a Fool. This likewiſe was the Rea-
ſon why that Precept, Know thy ſelf, was
ſo frequently inculcated by the Philoſophers
of old. For if it were not for that partial
and fond Regard to ourſelves, it would cer-
tainly be no great Difficulty to know our own
Character, what paſſes within, the Bent and
Bias of our Mind ; much leſs would there
be any Difficulty in judging rightly of our
own Actions. But from this Partiality it fre-
quently comes tb paſs, that the Obſervation,
of many Men's being themſelves laſt of all
acquainted with what falls out in their own
Families, may be applicd to a nearer Home,

to what paſſes within their own Breaſts.
THERE is plainly, in the Generality of
Mankind, an Abſence of Doubt or Diſtruſt,
in a very great Meaſure, as to their moral
Character and Behaviour; and likewiſe a
Diſpoſition to take for granted, that all is
right and well with them in theſe Reſpects.


The former is owing to their not reflect -
ing


'
'
.
i
|
:
:
*
|


upon Se V Deceit.


183


ing, not exerciſing their Judgment upon SER M.


themſelves ; the latter, to Selt-love. 1 am


not ſpeaking of that Extravagance, which is
ſometimes to be met with; Inſtances of
Perſons declaring in Words at length, that
they never were in the wrong, nor had e-
ver any Diffidence of the Juſtneſs of their
Conduct, in their whole Lives. No, theſe
People are too far gone to have any thing
ſaid to them. The thing before us is indeed
of this Kind, but in a lower Degree, and
confined to the moral Character; ſome-
what of which we almoſt all of us have,
without reflecting upon it. Now conſider
how long, and how groſly, a Perſon of
the beſt Underſtanding might be impoſed
upon by one of whom he had not any Suſ-
picion, and in whom he placed an intire
Confidence; eſpecially if there were Friend-
ſhip and real Kindneſs in the Caſe : Surely rhis
holds even ſtronger with reſpect to that Self
we arc all ſo fond of. Hence ariſes in Men
aDiſregard of Reproof and Inſtruction, Rules
of Conduct and moral Diſcipline, which
occaſionally come in their Way: A Ditre-
gard, I ſay, of theſe ; not in every Reſpect,
but in this ſingle one, namely, as what may
be of Service to them in particular towards

N 4 mending


_—


X.
GNI


184


S ERM.
X.
A


ö
1
i
|
f
|
|


A SERMON


mending their own Hearts and Tempers, and
making them better Men. It never in ear-
neſt comes into their Thoughts, whether
ſuch Admonitions may not relate, and be of
Service to themſelves; and this quite diſtinct
from a poſitive Perſuaſion to the contrary,
a Perſuaſion from Reflection that they are
innocent and blamcleſs in thoſe Reſpects.
Thus we may invert the Obſervation which
is ſomewhere made upon Brutus, that he
never read bur in order to make himſelf a
bettcr Man. It ſcarce comes into the
Thoughts of the Generality of Mankind,
that this Uſe is to be made of moral Re-
fictions which they meet with; that this
Uſe, I fay, is to be made of them by
Themſelves, for every Body obſerves and

wonders that it is not done by Others.
FURTHER, there are Inſtances of Perſons
having ſo fixed and ſteady an Eye upon their
own Intereſt, whatever they place it in, and
the Intcreſt of thoſe whom they conſider as
themſelves, as in a Manncz to regard nothing
elſe; their Views are almoſt contined to this
alone. Now we cannot be acquainted with,
or in any Propriety of Speech be ſaid to
know any thing, but what we attend to.
If therefore they attend only to one Side,
they


0 8 n LY — — „„ Oo


upon Self-Deceit.


they really will not, cannot ſee or know what
is to be alledged on the other. Though a
Man hath the beſt Eyes in the World, he
cannot ſee any Way but that which he turns
them. Thus theſe Perſons, without paſſing
over the leaſt, the moſt minute Thing which
can poſſibly be urged in Favour of them-
ſelves, ſhall overlook intircly the plaineſt
and moſt obvious Things on the other Side.
And whilſt they are under the Power of
this Temper, Thought and Conſideration
upon the Matter before them has ſcarce a-
ny Tendency to ſet them right: Becauſe
they are engaged ; and their Deliberation con-
cerning an Action to be done, or RefleQi-
on upon it afterwards, is not to ſee whether
it be right, but to find out Reaſons to juſtify
or palliate it; palliate it, not to — but
to themſelves.

In ſome there is to be obſerved a general
Ignorance of themſelves, and wrong Way of
thinking and judging in every thing relating
to themſelves; their Fortune, Reputation,
every thing in which Self can come in:
And this perhaps attended with the righteſt
Judgment in all other Matters. In others
this Partiality is not ſo general, has not ta-
ken hold of the whole Man, but is confined

—


135
SER M.


X.
i


136


SERM.


X.
Wyw


A SERMON


to ſome particular favourite Paſſion, Intereſt
or Purſuit ; ſuppoſe Ambition, Covetouſ-
neſs, or any other. And theſe Perſons may
probably judge and determine what is perfeQt-
ly juſt and proper, even in Things in which
they themſelves are concerned, if theſe things
have no Relation to their particular favou-
rite Paſſion or Purſuit. Hence arifes that
amazing Incongruity, and ſeeming Incon-
ſiſtency of Character, from whence flight
Obſervers take it for granted, that the Whole
is hypocritical and falſe ; not being able o-
therwiſe to reconcile the ſeveral Parts:
Whereas in truth there is real Honeſty, fo
far as it goes. There is ſuch a thing as
Men's being honeſt to ſuch a Degree, and
in ſuch Reſpects, but no further. And this,
as it is true, ſo it is abſolutely neceſſary to
be taken Notice of, and allowed them ; ſuch
general and undiſtinguiſhing Cenſure of their
whole Character, as deſigning and falſe, be-
ing one main thing which confirms them in
their Self-deceit. They know that the whole
Cenſure is not true; and ſo take for grant-
ed that no Part of it is.


B Ur to go on with the Explanation of
the thing itſelf: Vice in general conſiſts in
having an unreaſonable and too great Re-


gard


upon Seh. Deceit.


gard to ourſelves, in Compariſon of others.
Robbery and Murder is never from the Love
of Injuſtice or Cruelty, but to gratify ſome
other Paſſion, to gain ſome ſuppoſed Ad-
vantage : And it is falſe Selfiſhneſs alone,
whether cool or paſſionate, which makes a
Man reſolutely purſue that End, be it ever
ſo much to the Injury of another. But
whereas, in common and ordinary Wicked-
neſs, this Unreaſonableneſs, this Partiality
and Selfiſhne's relates only, or chiefly, to
the Temper and Paſſions ; in the Characters
we are now conſidering, it reaches to the
Underſtanding, and influences the very Judg-
ment *, And, beſides that general want of
Diſtruſt

* That peculiar Regard for ourſelves, which frequently
produces this Partiality of Judgment in our own Favour, may
have a quite contrary Effect, and occaſion the utmoſt Diffi-
dence and Diſtruſt of Ourſelves; were it only, as it may ſet us
upon a more frequent and ſtrict Survey and Review of our
own Character and Behaviour. This Search or Recollection
itſelf implies ſomewhat of Diffidence; and the Diſcoveries
we make, what is brought to our View, may poſſibly in-
creaſe it. Good-will to Another may either blind our Judg-
ment, ſo as to make us overlook his Faults; or it may put us
upon exerciſing that Judgment with greater ſtrictneſs, to ſee
whether he is ſo faultleſs and perfect as we wiſh him. If
that peculiar Regard to Ourſelves leads us toexamine our own
Character with this greater Severity, in order really to im-
prove and grow better, it is the moſt commendable Turn of
Mind poſſible, and can ſcarce be to Exceſs. But if, as every


Thing hath its Counterfeir, we are ſo much employed about
ourſelves


187


SER M.


ww /


188


SERM.


WW


A SERMON

Diſtruſt and Diffidence concerning our own
Character, there are, you ſee, two things
which may thus prejudice and darken the
Underſtanding itſelf : That Over-fondneſs
for ourſelves, which we are all ſo liable to;
and alſo being under the Power of any par-
ticular Paſſion or Appetite, or engaged in any
particular Purſuit. And theſe, eſpecially the
laſt of the two, may be in ſo great a Degree,
as to influence our Judgment, even of other
Perſons and their Behaviour. Thus a Man,
whole Temper is formed to Ambition or


Covetouſneſs, ſhall even approve of them
ſometimes in others.


THis ſeems to be in a good Meaſure the
Account of Selt-partiality and Self- deceit,
when traced up to its original. Whether it
be, or be not thought ſatisfactory, That
there is ſuch a thing is manifeſt; and that it
is the Occaſion of great Part of the unrea-
ſonable Behaviour of Men towards each o-
ther: That by means of it they palliate their
Vices and Follies to themſelves: and that it


prevents


ourſelves in order to Diſguiſe what is amiſs, and to make a
berter Appearance ; or if our Attention to ourſelves has chief-
ly this Effect; it is liable to run up into the greateſt Weakneſs
and Exceſs, and is like all other Exceſſes its own Diſappoint-


ment: For ſcarce any ſhow themſclves to Advantage, who
are over ſollicitous of doing fo.


upon Self-Deceit.


prevents their applying to themſelves thoſe Sz RM.


Reproofs and Inſtructions, which they meet
with either in Scripture or in moral and re-
ligious Diſcourſes, though exactly ſuitable to
the State of their own Mind, and the Courſe
of their Behaviour. There is one thing fur-
ther to be added here, that the Temper we
diſtinguiſh by Hardneſs of Heart with reſpect
to others, joined with this Self-partiality,
will carry a Man almoſt any Lengths of
Wickedneſs, in the Way of Oppreſſion, hard
Uſage of others, and even to plain Injuſtice;
without his having, from what appears, any
real Senſe at all of it. This indeed was
not the general Character of David: For
he plainly gave Scope to the Affections of
Compaſſion and Good-will, as well as to
his Paſſions of another Kind.

Bur as ſome Occaſions and Circumſtan-
ces lie more open to this Self-deceit, and
give it greater Scope and Opportunities than
others, theſe require to be particularly men-
tioned. |

Ir is to be obſerved then, that as there
are expreſs determinate AQs of Wickednels,
ſuch as Murder, Adultery, Theft: So on the
other hand, there are numberleſs Caſes in
which the Vice and Wickedneſs cannot be

2 exactly


—


190


A SERMON


S ERM. exactly defined; but conſiſts in a certain


X.


general Temperand Courſe of Action, or in
the neglect of ſome Duty, ſuppoſe Charity
or any other, whoſe Bounds and Degrees are
not fixed. This is the very Province of
Self-deccit and Self-partiality : Here it go-
verns without Check or Controul. For
* what Commandment is there broken? Is
* there a Tranſgreſſion where there is no
« Law? a Vice which cannot be defined?”

WnokvER will conſider the whole
Commerce of Humane Life, will ſee that a
great Part, perhaps the greateſt Part, of the
Intercourſe amongſt Mankind, cannot be re-
duced to fixed determinate Rules. Yet in


theſc Cales there is a Right and a Wrong:


A merciful, a liberal, a kind and compaſſio-
nate Behaviour, which ſurely is our Duty;
and an unmerciful contracted Spirit, an hard
and oppreſſive Courſe of Behaviour, which
is moſt certainly immoral and vitious. But
who can define preciſely, wherein that con-
tracted Spirit and hard Uſage of others con-
ſiſt, as Murder and Theft may be defined ?
There is not a Wordin our Language, which
expreſſes more deteſtable Wickedneſs than
Oppreſſion : Yet the Nature of this Vice


cannot be ſo exactly ſtated, nor the Bounds
of


J


. : W .. WT —_ -.—_


upon Self-Deceit.


191


of it ſo determinately marked, as that we SER M.


ſhall be able to ſay in all Inſtances, where
rigid Right and Juſtice ends, and Oppreſſi-
on begins. In theſe Caſes there is great La-
titude left, for every one to determine for,
and conſequently to deceive himſelf. It is
chicfly in theſe Caſcs that Self-deceit comes
in; as every one mult ſec that there is much
larger Scope for it here, than in expreſs, ſin-
gle, determinate Acts of Wickedneſs. How-
ever it comes in with reſpect to the Circum-


ſtances attending the moſt groſs and deter-


minate Acts of Wickedneſs. Of this, the
Story of David, now before us, affords the
moſt aſtoniſhing Inſtance. It is really pro-
digious, to {ce a Man, before ſo remarkable
for Virtue and Picty, going on deliberately
from Adultery to Murder, with the ſame
cool Contrivance, and, from what appears,
with as little Diſturbance, as a Man would
endeavour to prevent the ill Con ſequences
of a Miſtake he had made in any common
Matter. That total Inſenſibility of Mind
with reſpect to thoſe horrid Crimes, after
the Commiſſion of them, manifeſtly ſhews
that he did ſome way or other delude him-
ſelf : And this could not be with reſpect to
the Crimes themſelves, they were ſo mani-

feſtly


X.


192 A SERMON
Szrm. feſtly of the groſſeſt Kind. What the parti.
X. cular Circumſtances were, with which he
— extenuated them, and quicted and deceived
himſelf, is not related.

HAvIN G thus explained the Nature of
internal Hypocriſy and Self- deceit, and re-
marked the Occaſions upon which it exerts
itſelf; there are ſeveral Things further to be
obſerved concerning it : That all of the
Sources, to which it was traced up, are ſome-
times obſervable together in one and the
ſame Perſon ; But that one of them is more
remarkable, and to a higher Degree, in ſome,
and others of them are ſo in others: That in
general it is a complicated Thing ; and may
be in all different Degrees and Kinds: That
the Temper itſelf is eſſentially in its own
Nature vitious and immoral. It is Unfair-
nes; it is Diſhoneſty ; it is Falſeneſs of
Heart: And is therefore ſo far from extenu-
ating Guilt, that it is itſelf the greateſt of all


Guilt in Proportion to the Degree it pre-
vails; for it is a Corruption of the whole
moral Character in its Principle. Our Un-
derſtanding, and Senſe of Good and Evil, is
the Light and Guide of Life: If therefore
this Light that is in thee be Darkneſs, how


great


le


% OS Y- al


— . a... £7. as


* LJ


_— 9 _—


upon Self-Deceit.


193


great is that Darkneſs ? * For this Reaſon Sz xm.


our Saviour puts an evil Eye as the direct


oppoſite to a ſingle Eye; the Abſence of


that Simplicity, which theſe laſt Words im-
ply, being itſelf evil and vitious. And whilſt
Men are under the Power of this Temper,
in Proportion ſtill to the Degree they are ſo,
they arc fortified on every Side againſt Con-
viction : And when they hear the Vice and
Folly of what is in Truth thcir own Courſe
of Life, expoſed in the juſteſt and ſtrongeſt
Manner, they will often aſſent to it, and e-
ven carry the Matter further; perſuading
themſelves, one docs not know how, but
ſome Way or other perſuading themſelves,
that they arc out of the Caſe, and that it
hath no Rclation to them. Yet, notwith-
ſtanding this, there frequently appears a Sul-
picion, that all is not right, as it ſhould be ;
and perhaps there is always at bottom ſome-
what of this Sort. There are doubtleſs many


Inſtances of the Ambitious, the Revengeful,
the Covetous, and thole whom with too


great Indulgence we only call the Men of


Plcaſure, who will not allow themſelves to
think how guilty they are, who cxplain and
O argue


Matth. vi. 23.


W


194 ASERMON ahn
Sx RM. argue away their Guilt to Themſelves: And
X. though they do really impoſe upon Them-
ſelves in ſome Meaſure, yet there are none of
them but have, if not a proper Knowledge,
yet at leaſt, an implicit Suſpicion, where the
Weakneſs lies, and what Part of their Beha-
viour they have Reaſon to wiſh unknown or
forgotten for ever. Truth, and real good
Senſe, and thorough Integrity, carry along
with them a peculiar Conſciouſneſs of their
own Genuincneſs: There is a Feeling be-
longing to them, which does not accompa-
ny their Counterfeits, Error, Folly, Half.
Honeſty, partial and flight Regards to Vir-
tue and Right, ſo far only as they are con-
ſiſtent with that Courſe of Gratification
which Men happen to be ſet upon. And,
if this be the Caſe ; it is much the ſame, as
if we ſhould ſuppoſe a Man to have had a
general View of ſome Scene, enough to ſa-
tisfy him that it was very diſagreeable, and
then to ſhut his Eyes, that he might not have
a particular or diſtinft View of its ſeveral
Deformities. It is as eaſy to cloſe the Eyes
of the Mind, as thoſe of the Body: And the
former is more frequently done with Wilful-
neſs, and yet not attended to, than the lat-
ter; the Actions of the Mind being more
quick


2 —— . „ - - — _


|
1
p
|
}


> _ — —


upon Self-Deceit.


105


quick and tranſient, than thoſe of the Senſes. SE Rm.


This may be further illuſtrated by another
thing obſervable in ordinary Life. Ir is not
uncommon for Perſons, who run out their
Fortunes, intirely to neglect looking into the
State of their Affairs, and this from a ge-
neral Knowledge, that the Condition of them
is bad. Theſe extravagant People are per-


—


petually ruined before they themſelves ex-


pected it: And they tell you for an Ex-
cuſe, and tell you truly, that they did not
think they were ſo much in Debt, or that
their Expences ſo far exceeded their Income.
And yet no one will take this for an Excuſe,
who is ſenſible that their Ignorance of their
particular Circumſtances was owing to their

eral Knowledge of them; that is, their
general Knowledge, that Matters were not
well with them, prevented their looking in-
to Particulars. There is ſomewhat of the
like Kind with this, in Reſpect to Morals,
Virtue, and Religion. Men find that the
Survey of themſelves, their own Heart and


Temper, their own Life and Behaviour,


doth not afford them Satisfaction: things
are not as they ſhould be: Therefore they
turn away, will not go over Particulars, or
* deeper, leſt they ſhould find more

O 2 | amils.


196


A SERMON


SEeRM, amiſs. For who would chooſe to be put

out of Humour with himſelf? No one ſure- |
ly, if it were not in order to mend, and to
be more thoroughly and better pleaſed with |


X.


himſelf for the future.


I F this ſincere Self-Enjoyment and Home-


Satisfaction be thought deſirable, and worth
ſome Pains and Diligence; the following
Reflections will, Iſuppole, deſerve your At-
tention; as what may be of Service and Aſ-
ſiſtance to all who are in any Meaſure ho-
neſtly diſpoſed, for avoiding that fatal Self-
deceit, and towards getting acquainted with
themſelves.

THE firſt is, that thoſe who have never
had any Suſpicion of, who have never made
Allowances for this Weakneſs in themſelves,
who have never (if I may be allowed fuch
a manner of ſpeaking) caught themſelves in
it, may almoſt take for granted that they
have becn very much miſled by it. For


conſider : Nothing is more manifeſt, than |


that Affection and Paſſion of all Kinds in-
fluence the Judgment. Now as we have na-
turally a greater Regard to ourſelves than to
others, as the private Affection is more pre-
valent than the public ; the former will
have proportionally a greater Influence up-

0 3 on


A — en ——


F * = © RL 1 Sat TE
I <” # 2 K *


e


ohne. Ne rr Is "1


n
0
ſi


. 4 weeds PF, Wy in, CA „ —


A 11. — 1 A. [ WY ””


upon Self-Deceit. 197


on the Judgment, upon our Way of conſi- S ERM.
dering things. People are not back ward in X.
ovwning this Partiality of Judgment, in Caſes
of Friendſhip and natural Relation. The
| Reaſon is obvious, why it is not ſo readily ac-
knowledged, when the Intereſt which miſ-
leads us is more confined, confined to our-
| ſelves: But we all take Notice of it in each
other in theſe Caſes. There is not any Ob-
' ſervation more common, than that there is
no judging of a Matter from hearing only
one Side. This is not founded upon Suppo-
ſition, at leaſt it is not always, of a formed
; Deſign in the Relater to deccive: For it
holds in Caſes, where he expects that the
Whole will be told over again by the other
Side. But the Suppoſition, which this Ob-
ſervation is founded upon, is the very thing
now before us; namely, that Men are ex-
ceedingly prone to deceive themſelves, and
judge too favourably in every Reſpect, where
Themſelves, and their own Intereſt are con:
cerned. Thus, though we have not the leaſt
Reaſon to ſuſpect that ſuch an intereſted Per-
ſon hath any Intention to deceive us, yet we
of Courſe make grcat Allowances for his
having deccived himſelf. If this be general,
almoſt univerſal, it is prodigious that every
O 3 Man


— „


. N * * 2 a bs 1 , 2 5 . n 8 rn : I
—— VT Seer


.


„een


:

:
ö
4


*
del
Z L

8
a
ww


198


A SERMON


Serxm. Man can think himſelf an Exception, and Be


X.


that he is free from this Self- partiality. The


direct contrary is the Truth, Every Man


may take for granted that he has a great deal


of it, till, from the ſtricteſt Obſervation up-


on himſelf, he finds particular Reaſon to
think otherwiſe.

Secondly, There is one eaſy and almoſt
ſure Way to ayoid being miſled by this Selt-


mi
mi
Cl
m
a
A
*
TY


partiality, and to get acquainted with outF th


real Character: To have regard to the ſuſpi-|
cious Part of it, and keep a ſteady Eye over
ourſelves in that Reſpect. Suppoſe then 2
Man fully ſatisfied with himſelf, and his own!


Behaviour; ſuch an one, if you pleaſe, as


the Phariſee in the Goſpel, ora better Man
Well, but allowing this good Opinion you
have of your ſelf to be true, yet every one is
liable to be miſrepreſented. Suppoſe then
an Enemy were to ſet about defaming you,
what Part of your Character would he ſin -
gle out? What particular Scandal, think
you, would he be moſt likely to fix upon
you? And what would the World be moſt

ready to believe? There is ſcarce a Man
living, but could, from the moſt tranſient |
ſuperficial View of himſelf, anſwer this
Queſtion, What is that ill Thing, that faulty


Be haviour, 1


upon Self-Decett.


199


ad Behaviour, which I am apprehenſive an Ene- Sz xm.


he
an
eal


”
to


oft
It-
ur


|
„


my, who was thoroughly acquainted with
me, would be moſt likely to lay to my
Charge, and which the World would be
moſt apt to believe? It is indeed poſſible that

a Man may not be guilty in that Reſpect.
All that 1 ſay is, let him in Plainneſs and Ho-
neſty fix upon that Part of his Character for
a particular Survey and Reflection; and by
this he will come to be acquainted, whether
he be guilty or innocent in that Reſpect, and
how far he is one or the other.
Thirdly, It would very much prevent our
being miſled by this Selt-partiality, to re-
' duce that practical Rule of our Saviour,
n bat ſoe ver ye would that Men ſbould do
io you, even ſo do unto them, to our Judg-
ment, and Way of thinking. This Rule,


you ſce, conſiſts of two Parts. One is, to


| ſubſtitute another for yourſelf, when you
take a Survey of any Part of your Bchaviour,
or conſider what is proper and fit and reaſon-
able for you to do upon any Occaſion: The
other Part is, that you ſubſtitute yourſelf in


the room of another; conſider yourſelf as
the Perſon affected by ſuch a Behaviour, or
towards whom ſuch an Action is done:
And then you would not only ſec, but like-


O 4 wile


X.


200


A SERMON


SEeRM. Wile feel, the Reaſonableneſs or Unreaſon-


X.


ableneſs of ſuch an Action or Behaviour.


But alas, the Rule itſelf may be diſhoneſtly |!


applied: There are Perſons, who have not


Impartiality enough with reſpect to them-


ſelves, nor regard enough for others, to be


able to make a juſt Application of it. This]


juſt Application, if Men would honeſtly
make it, is in Effect all that I have been re.


commending; it is the whole Thing, the]
direct contrary to that inward Diſhoneſty as]
reſpecting our Intercourſe with our Fellow-


creatures. And even the Bearing this Rule]


in their Thoughts, may be of ſome Service;


the Attempt thus to apply it, is an AttemptÞ
h


towards being fair and impartial, and may]
chance unawares to ſhew them to them-


;


tl


c


ſelves, to ſhew them the Truth of the Caſe N a
10


they are conſidering.
Uron the whole it is manifeſt, that there


is ſuch a thing as this Self- partiality and
Self-deceit: That in ſome Perſons it is to


=
XK.


a Degrce which would be thought incredi-


ble, were not the Inſtances before our


Eyes; of which the Behaviour of David 2
is perhaps the higheſt poſſible one, in a ſin-


gle particular Caſe ; for there is not the |


leaſt Appearance, that it reached his gene- |


ral


S.
*
*
99
*
on
*
4
þ
*


;


upon Self-Deceit. 201


ral Character: That we arc almoſt all of SERM.
us influenced by it in ſome Degree, and &.


ly þ in ſome Reſpects: That therefore every one
ot | ought to have an Eye to and beware of it.
n. | And all that I have further to add upon
de] this Subject is, that either there is a Diffe-
is rence between Right and Wrong, or there
ly þ not: Religion is true, or it is not. If it
2 | be not, there is no Reaſon for any Con-
ze | cern about it: But if it be true, it requires
as real Fairneſs of Mind and Honeſty of Heart.
„ And, if People will be wicked, they had
le better of the two be ſo from the common
y vitious Paſſions without ſuch Refinements,
ot than from this deep and calm Source of De-
yluſion; which undermines the whole Prin-
\. ciple of Good; darkens that Light, that Can-
| dle of the Lord within, which is to direct
our Steps; and corrupts Conſcience, which
| is the Guide of Life.


'


SERMON


1 — * p
= = 3 Sp 7+ i IP
> „ 9 4
» 22 1 1 ene


14 bs 2 9 5


— — — — — -


SERMON XL


Upon the Love of our Neighbour.


Preached on Advent Sunday.


_ - —
— Q ——_ * nd


Rom. xiu. 9.


And if there be any other Commandment,
it is briefly comprehended in this Saying,
namely, Thou ſbalt love thy Neighbour
as thy ſelf.


T: is commonly obſerved, that there is Sz x M.


a Diſpoſition in Men to complain of XI.
the Vitiouſneſs and Corruption of the


Age in which they live, as greater than that
of former. ones; which is uſually followed
with this farther Obſervation, that Man-
kind has been in that reſpe& much the ſame
in all Times. Now to determine whether
this laſt be not contradicted by the Accounts


of


* * —— —
— —


204


S ERM.
XI.
WWW


ASERM ON upon the


of Hiſtory ; thus much can ſcarce be doubt-
ed, that Vice and Folly takes different Turns,
and ſome particular Kinds of it are more o-
pen and avowed in ſome Ages than in o-.
thers: And, 1 ſuppoſe, it may be ſpoken of
as very much the Diſtinction of the preſent,
to profeſs a contracted Spirit, and greate


Regards to Self-intereſt, than appears to have


been done formerly. Upon this Account
it ſcems worth while to inquire, whether


private Intercſt is likely to be promoted in


Proportion to the Degree in which Self. love
engroſſes us, and prevails over all other Prin-
ciples ; or whether the contracted Affecti.


on may not poſſibly be ſo prevalent as to diſ.


appoint itſelf, and even contraditt its own
End, private Good.

AND ſince further, there is gencrally
thought to be ſome peculiar Kind of Con-
trariety between Selt-love and the Love of
our Neighbour, between the Purſuir of


publick and of private Good; inſomuch
that when you are recommending one ot |


theſe, you are ſuppoſed to be ſpeaking a-


gainſt the other; and from hence ariſes a


ſecret Prejudice againſt, and frequently open


Scorn of all Talk of publick Spirit, and


real Good- will to our Fellow. creatures; ite
; will


ad


ns,


Love of our Neighbour.


Benevolence hath to Self-love, and the Pur-
ſuit of private Intereſt, to the Purſuit of pub. VN
lick : Or whether there beany thing of that pe-
culiar Inconſiſtence and Contrariety between
them, over and above what there is between


Self. love and other Paſſions and particular


Affections, and their reſpective Purſuits.


THESE Inquiries, it is hoped, may be fa-


vourably attended to: For there ſhall be all
poſſible Conceſſions made to the favourite


Paſſion, which hath ſo much allowed to it,
and whoſe Cauſe is ſo univerſally pleaded :
It ſhall be treated with the utmoſt Tender-


"neſs, and Concern for its Intereſts.


IN order to this, as well as to determine
the forementioned Queſtions, it will be ne-
ceſſary to conſider the Nature, the Object
and End of that Self-love, as diſtinguiſhed


from other Principles or Aſfections in the
Mind, and their reſpective Objects.


E VERY Man hath a general Deſire of his


own Happineſs ; and likewiic a Variety of
particular Affections, Paſſions and Appetites


to particular external Objects. The former
proceeds from, or is Sclf-love ; and ſeems
inſeparable from all ſenſible Creatures, who


can reflect upon themſelves and their own


2 Intereſt


206


will be neceſſary to inquire what Reſpect St xm.
©


206 ASERMON bn dhe


SERM. Intereſt or Happineſs, ſo as to have that In-
XI. tereſt an Object to their Minds: What is to


* be ſaid


of the latter is, that they proceed
from, or together make up that particulat
Nature, according to which Man is made.
The Object the former purſues is ſome-
what internal, our own Happineſs, Enjoy.
ment, Satisfaction; whether we have, or
have not a diſtinct particular Perception what
it is, or wherein it conſiſts: The Objects of
the latter are this or that particular exter-
nal Thing, which the Affections tend to-
wards, and of which it hath always a par-
ticular Idea or Perception. The Principle
we call Self. love never ſeeks any Thing ex.
ternal for the ſake of the Thing, but only
as a Means of Happineſs or Good: Particu
lar Affections reſt in the external Thing
themſelves. One belongs to Man as a rea
ſonable Creature reflecting upon his own
Intereſt or Happineſs. The other, though
quite diſtin from Reaſon, are as much a
Part of Humane Nature.

THra x all particular Appetites and Paſſi-
ons are towards external Things themſelves,
diſtin from the Pleaſure ariſing from them,
js manifeſted from hence ; that there could
not be this Pleaſure, were it not for that
| priot


—— " 3 =_ =


Love of our Neigbbour.


prior Suitableneſs between the Object and SER NM.


the Paſſion: There could be no Enjoyment
or Delight from one thing more than ano-
ther, from eating Food more than from
ſwallowing a Stone, if there were not an
Affection or Appetite to one thing more
than another.

EVER particular Affection, even the
Love of our Neighbour, is as really our own
Affection, as Self. love; and the Pleaſure a-
tiſing from its Gratification is as much my
own Pleaſure, as the Pleaſure Self. love would
have, from knowing I my ſelf ſhould be hap-
py ſome time hence, would be my own Plea-
ſure. And if, becauſe every particular Af-
fection is a Man's own, and the Pleaſure a-
riſing from its Gratification his own Plea-
ſure, or Pleaſure to himſelf, ſuch particular
Affection muſt be called Self- love; accord-
ing to this way of ſpeaking, no Creature
whatever can poſſibly act but meerly from
Self-love 3 and every Action and every Af-
fetion whatever is to be reſolved up into
this one Principle. But then this is not the
Language of Mankind; Or if it were, we
ſhould want Words to expreſs the Difference,
between the Principle of an AQtion, pro-
ceeding from cool Conſideration that it will

be


207


XI.


208 ASERM ON hon the


SA. be to my own Advantage; and an Action, ſup-
XI. poſe of Revenge, or of Friendſhip, by which


WWW


a Man runs upon certain Ruin, to do Evil
or Good to another. It is manifeſt the Prin.
ciples of theſe Actions are totally different,
and ſo want different Words to be diſtin.
guiſhed by: All that they agree in is, that
they both procced from, and are done to
gratify an Inclination in a Man's ſelf. But
the Principle or Inclination in one Caſe is
Self-love; in the other, Hatred or Love of
another. There is then a Diſtinction be-
tween the cool Principle of Self- love, or ge-
neral Deſire of our own Happineſs, as one
Part of our Nature, and one Principle of
Action; and the particular Affections to-
wards particular external Objects, as ano-
ther Part of our Nature, and another Princi-
ple of Action. How much ſoever therefore
is to be allowed to Self- love, yet it cannot
be allowed to be the Whole of our in ward
Conſtitution; becauſe, you ſee, there are
other Parts or Principles which come into it.
FURTHER, private Happineſs or Good
is all which Self- love can make us deſire, or
be concerned about: In having this conſiſts
its Gratification : It is an Affection to our-


ſelves; a Regard to our own Intereſt, Hap-
pinels


n nm Mi. 1 *


, . ẽ r oo acc;


mm > 22 2


ea A A; 2A. , Am,


Love of our Neighbour.


pineſs, and private Good: And in the Pro- 9 M.
WWW


portion a Man hath this, he is intereſted, or
a Lover of himſelf. Let this be kept in
Mind ; becauſe there is commonly, as I
ſhall preſently have Occaſion to obſerve, a-
nother Senſe put upon theſe Words. On
the other Hand, particular Affections tend
towards particular external things : Theſe
are their Objects: Having theſe is their End:
In this conſiſts their Gratification: No Mat-
ter whether it be, or be not, upon the
Whole, our Intereſt or Happineſs. An
Action done from the former of theſe Prin-
ciples is called an intereſted Action. An
Action proceeding from any of the latter
has its Denomination of paſſionate, ambiti-
ous, friendly, revengeful, or any other, from
the particular Appetite or Affection from
which it proceeds. Thus Self- love as one
Part of Humane Nature, and the ſeveral par-
ticular Principles as the other Part, are,
Themſelves, their Objects and Ends, ſtated

and ſhewn. |
From hence it will be eaſy to ſee, how
far, and in what Ways, cach of theſe can con-
tribute and be ſubſervient to the private Good
of the Individual, Happineſs does not con-
fiſt in Self-love. The Deſire of Happineſs is
P no


210


SERM.
= i id
XI.


ASERM ON upon the


no more the Thing itſelf, than the Deſire of
Riches is the Poſſeſſion or Enjoyment of
them. People may love themſelves with
the moſt entire and unbounded Affection,
and yet be extreamly miſerable. Neither
can Self-love any way help them out, but
by ſetting them on work to get rid of the
Cauſes of their Miſery, to gain or make uſe
of thoſe Objects which are by Nature 2.
daptcd to afford Satisfaction. Happineſs or
Satisfaction conſiſts only in the Enjoyment
of thoſe Objects, which are by Nature ſuit-
ed to our ſeveral particular Appetites, Paſſi-
ons and Affections. So that if Self- love
wholly engroſſes us, and leaves no room
for any other Principle, there can be abſo-
lutely no ſuch thing at all as Happineſs, or
Enjoyment of any Kind whatever; ſince
Happineſs conſiſts in the Gratification of par-
ticular Paſſions, which ſuppoſes the having
of them. Self- love then does not conſti-
tute This or That to be our Intereſt or
Good ; but, our Intereſt or Good being con-
ſtituted by Nature and ſuppoſed, Self- love
only puts us upon obtaining and ſecuring it.
Therefore, if it be poſſible, that Selt-love
may prevail and exert itſelf in a Degree


or Manner which is not ſubſervient to
this


2 — > „


Love of our Neigbbour.


our Intereſt will be promoted in Proporti-
on to the Degree in which that Principle
engroſſes us, and prevails over others. Nay
further, the private and contracted Affection,
when it is not ſubſervient to this End private
Good, may, for any thing that appears, have
a direct contrary Tendency and Effect. And
if we will conſider the Matter, we ſhall ſee
that it often really has. Di engagement is
abſolutely neceſſary to Enjoyment: And a
Perſon may have ſo ſteady and fixed an Eye
upon his own Intereſt, whatever he places
it in, as may hinder him from attending to
many Gratifications within his reach, which
others have their Minds free and open to.
Over-fondneſs for a Child is not generally
thought to be for its Advantage : And, if
there be any Gueſs to be made from Appear-
ances, ſurely that Character we call Selfiſh
is not the moſt promiſing for Happineſs.
Such a Temper may plainly be and exert it-


ſelf in a Degree and Manner which may give
| unneceſſary and uſeleſs Sollicitude and Anx-


icty, in a Degree and Manner which may
prevent obtaining the Means and Materials
of Enjoyment, as well as the making uſe
of them, Immoderate Self. love does very

P 2 ill


211
this End; then it will not follow, that SE RM.
WW


212


ASERM ON upon the


SERM. ill conſult its own Intereſt : And, how much


ſocver a Paradox it may appear, it is cer-
tainly true, that even from Self-love we
ſhould endeavgnr to get over all inordinate
Regard to, and Conſideration of ourſelves.
Every one of our Paſſions and Affections
hath its natural Stint and Bound, which may
eaſily be exceeded; whereas our Enjoyments
can poſlibly be but in a determinate Mea-
ſure and Degree. Therefore ſuch Exceſs of
the Affection, ſince it cannot procure any
Enjoyment, mult in all Caſes be uſeleſs; but
is generally attended with Inconveniences,
and often is downright Pain and Miſery,
This holds as much with regard to Self-loye
as to all other Affections. The natural De-
gree of it, ſo far as it ſets us on work to
gain and make uſe of the Materials of Sa-
tisfaction, may be to our real Advantage;
but beyond or beſides this, it is in ſeveral
Reſpects an Inconvenience and Diſadvan-
tage. Thus it appears, that private Intereſt
is ſo far from being likely to be promoted
in Proportion to the Degree in which Selt-
love engroſſes us, and prevails over all other
Principles; that the contracted Afﬀettion


may be ſo prevalent as to diſappoint itſelf,
„ . and


*.


Love of our Nerghbour. 213


and even contradict its own End, private SE RM.


Good.


« BUT who, except the moſt ſordidly Co-


vetous, ever thought there was any Ri-
e yalſhip between the Love of Greatneſs,
Honour, Power, or between ſenſual Ap-
petites, and Self. love? No, there is a per-
e fect Harmony between them. It is by
e means of theſe particular Appetites and
« Affections that Self- love is gratified in En-
« joyment, Happineſs and Satisfaction. The
« Competition and Rivalſhip is between
« Self-love, and the Love of our Neighbour :
« That Affection which leads us out of our-
« ſelves, makes us regardleſs of our own
© Intereſt, and ſubſtitute that of another in
« its ſtead.” Whether then there be any
peculiar Competition and Contrariety in

this Caſe, ſhall now be conſidered.
SELF.LO VE and Intereſtedneſs was ſta-
ted to conſiſt in or be an Affection to our-
ſelves, a Regard to our own private Good :
It is therefore diſtinct from Benevolence,
which is an Affection to the Good of our
Fellow-creatures. But that Benevolence is
diſtin& from, that is, not the ſame thing with
Self. love, is no Reaſon for its being looked
upon with any peculiar Suſpicion ; becauſe
F< every


214


XI.
WI


ASERM ON upon the


SER M. every Principle whatever, by means of which


Self. love is gratified, is diſtinct from it: And
all things which are diſtinct from each other,
are equally ſo. A Man has an Affection ot
Averſion to another: That one of theſe
tends to and is gratified by doing Good,
that the other tends to and is gratified by
doing Harm, does not in the leaſt alter the
Reſpe& which either one or the other of
theſe in ward Feelings has to Self. love. We
uſe the Word Property lo as to exclude &
ny other Perſons having an Intereſt in that
of which we ſay a particular Man has the
Property. And we often uſe the Word]
Selfiſh ſo as to exclude in the ſame Manner
all Regards to the Good of Others. Bur the
Caſcs arc not parallel : For though That
Excluſion is really Part of the Idea of Pro-f
perty ; yet ſuch poſitive Excluſion, or bring,
ing this peculiar Diſregard to the Good of
Others into the Idea of Self- love, is in reali
ty adding to the Idea, or changing it from
what it was before ſtated to conſiſt in, name-
ly, in an Affection to Ourſelves x. This
being the whole Idea of Self. love, it can no
otherwiſe exclude Good- will or Love of O-
thers, than merely by not including it, no
otherwilc,


p. 208,


Love of our Neighbour. 215


ch} otherwiſe, than it excludes Love of Arts or SERM.
nd Reputation, or of any thing elſe. Neither on
the other hand does Benevolence, any more
than Love of Arts or of Reputation, exclude
Self-love. Love of our Neighbour then has
juſt the ſame Reſpect to, is no more diſtant
from Self. love, than Hatred of our Neigh-
bour, or than Love or Hatred of any thing
elſe. Thus the Principles, from which Men
raſh upon certain Ruin for the Deſtruction
of an Enemy, and for the Preſervation of a
at Friend, have the ſame Reſpect to the private
he Affection, and arc equally intereſted, or e-
rd} qually diſintereſted : And it is of no Avail,
a} whether they are ſaid to be one or the o-
ef ther. Therefore to thoſe who are ſhocked
to hear Virtue ſpoken of as diſintereſted, it
may be allowed that it is indeed abſurd to
| ſpeak thus of it; unleſs Hatred, ſeveral par-
ticular Inſtances of Vice, and all the com-
mon Affections and Averſions in Mankind,
are acknowledged to be diſintereſted too. Is
there any leſs Inconſiſtence, between the
is} Love of inanimate Things, or of Creatures
of meerly ſenſitive, and Self- love; than be-
.
0


XI.
Wye,


tween Self-love, and the Love of our Neigh-

bour ? 1s Deſire of and Delight in the Hap-
„pineſs of another any more a Diminution of
P 4 Sclf-love,


216 ASERM 0 N pon the


SeRM. Self-loye, than Deſire of and Delight in the
XI. Eſteem of another ? They are both equally
. Deſire of and Delight in ſomewhat external


to ourſelves: Either both or neither are ſo.
The Object of Self. love is expreſſed in the
Term, Self: And every Appetite of Senſe,
and every particular Affection of the Heart,
are cqually intereſted or diſintereſted, be.
cauſe the Objects of them all are equally
Self or ſomewhat elſe. Whatever Ridicule
thercfore the mention of a diſintereſted
Principle or Action may be ſuppoſed to lie t
open to, muſt, upon the Matter being thus] tl
ſtared, relate to Ambition, and every Ap] a
petite and particular Affection, as much as
to Benevolence. And indeed all the Rid
cule, and all the grave Perplexity, of which
this Subject hath had its full Share, is meer)
from Words. The moſt intelligible Way of
ſpeaking of it ſeems to be this: That Sell.
love, and the Actions done in conſequence}
of it (for theſe will preſently appear to be
the ſame as to this Queſtion) are intereſted;
that particular Affections towards external
Objects, and the Actions done in conſe-
quence of thoſe Affections, are not ſo, But
every one is at Liberty touſe Words as he
pleaſes. All that is here inſiſted upon is,
that |


Love of our Neighbour. 217


that Ambition, Revenge, Benevolence, all Sz xm.
particular Paſſions whatever, and the Acti- XI.
ons they produce, are equally intereſted or
| diſintereſted.

Ius it appears that there is no peculiar
Contraricty between Self. love and Benevo-
lence 3 no greater Competition between
theſe, than between any otker particular Af-
fections and Self- love. This relates to the
Affections themſelves. Let us now ſee whe-
ther there be any peculiar Contrariety be-
tween the reſpective Courſes of Life which
us} theſe Affections lead to; whether there be
p-# any greater Competition betwcen the Pur-
vF ſuit of private and of publick Good, than
i- between any other particular Purſuits and
that of private Good.

5 THERE ſcems no other Reaſon to ſuſ-
ñpect that there is any ſuch peculiar Contra-
. ricty, but only that the Courſes of Action
e] which Benevolence leads to, has a more di-
erect Tendency to promote the Good of O-

;} thers, than that Courſe of Action which
|} Love of Reputation, ſuppoſe, or any other
particular Affection leads to. But that any
th Affection tends to the Happineſs of Another,
does not hinder its tending to one's own


,| Happincſs too. That Others enjoy the Be-
| nefit


218 ASERMON upon the


SERM. nefit of the Air and the Light of the Sun,


XI. does not hinder but that theſe are as much


—
„


— — —— . ——a I — * a
1 y — þ4 — =_ - -4 - = hw >


2
if
4.4
x
''$


one's own private Advantage now, as they
would be if we had the Property of them
excluſive of all Others. So a Purſuit which
tends to promote the Good of Another, yet
may have as great Tendency to promote pri-
vate Intcreſt, as a Purſuit which does not
tend to the Good of Another at all, or which | tl
is Miſchicvous to him. All particular Af. }
fe&tions whatever, Reſentment, Benevo- | b
lence, Love of Arts, equally lead to a ſi
Courſe of Action for their own Grati-
fication, . e. the Gratification of Our- !
ſelves ; and the Gratification of each gives!
Delight: So far then tis manifeſt they
have all the ſame Reſpect to private Inte-
reſt. Now take into Conſideration further
concerning theſe three Purſuits, that the
End of the firſt is the Harm, of the ſecond, |
the Good of Another, of the laſt ſomewhat
indifferent; and is there any Neceſſity, that
theſe additional Conſiderations ſhould alter |
the Reſpect, which we before ſaw theſe
three Purſuits had to private Intereſt ; or |
render any one of them leſs conducive to it,
than any other? Thus One Man's Affecti-
on is to Honour as his End; in order to ob-
tain


wh


2 S8.


Love of our Neighbour.


219


tain which, he thinks no Pains too great., S ER M.


Suppoſe another with ſuch a Singularity of
Mind, as to have the ſame Affection to pub-
lick Good as his End, which he endeavours
with the ſame Labour to obtain. In Caſe
of Succeſs, ſurely the Man of Benevolence
hath as great Enjoyment as the Man of Am-
bition 3 they both equally having the End
their Affections, in the ſame Degree, tend-
ed to: But in Caſe of Diſappointment, the
benevolent Man has clearly the Advantage ;


ſince endeavouring to do Good conſidered


as a Virtuous Purſuit, is gratified by its own
Conſciouſneſs, 1. e. is in a Degree its own


| Reward.


AND as to thele two, or Benevolence and
any other particular Paſſions whatever, con-
ſidered in a further View, as forming a gene-
ral Temper, which more or leſs diſpoſes us
for Enjoyment of all the common Bleſ-
ſings of Life, diſtin& from their own Grati-


fication : Is Benevolence leſs the Temper of


Tranquillity and Freedom than Ambition or
Covetouſneſs? Does the benevolent Man
appear leſs eaſy with himſelf, from his Love


to his Neighbour ? Does he leſs reliſh his


Being? Is there any peculiar Gloom ſeated
on his Face? Is his Mind leſs open to Enter-


tainment,


XI.


220 ASERM 0 N upon the


SER M. tainment, to any particular Gratification ?


XI.


Nothing is more manifeſt, than that being in
Good-humour, which is Benevolence whilſt


it laſts, is itſelf the Temper of Satisfaction


and Enjoyment.

SUPPOSE then a Man ſitting down to con-
ſider how he might become moſt eaſy to
himſelf, and attain the greateſt Pleaſure he
could; all that which is his real natural
Happineſs. This can only conſiſt in the
Enjoyment of thoſe Objects, which are by


Nature adapted to our ſeveral Faculties.


Theſe particular Enjoyments make up the
Sum Total of our Happineſs : And they are


ſuppoſed to ariſe from Riches, Honours, |


and the Gratification of ſenſual Appetites :
Be it ſo : Yet none profeſs themlelves fo
compleatly happy in theſe Enjoyments, but
that there is room left in the Mind for others,
if they were preſented to them: Nay theſe,
as much as they engage us, are not thought


to high, but that Humane Nature is capable
even ot greater.


ſons in all Ages, who have profeſs d that |
they found Satisfaction in the Exerciſe of
Charity, in the Love of their Neighbour, in
endeavouring to promote the Happineſs of
all they had to do with, and in the Purſuit

of


Now there have been Per-


Love of our Neighbour. 221


of what is juſt and right and good, as the ge- SERM.
in neral Bent of their Mind, and End of their _
it Life; and that doing an Action of Baſeneſs Ore
n | or Cruelty, would be as great Violence to

their Self, as much breaking in upon their
n- Nature, as any external Force. Perſons of
0 | this Character would add, if they might be
ie | heard, that they conſider themſelves as act-
ing in the View of an infinite Being, who
c | is in a much higher Senſe the Object of Re-
Jy | verence and of Love, than all the World be-
S. | ſides ; and therefore they could have no more
e Enjoyment from a wicked Action done un-
eder his Eye, than the Perſons to whom they
are making their Apology could, if all Man-
kind were the Spectators of it; and that the
Satisfaction of approving themſelves to His
unerring Judgment, to whom they thus refer
„all their Actions, is a more continued ſettled
» # Satisfation than any this World can afford ;

as alſo that they have, no leſs than Others, a

Mind free and open to all the common
- | innocent Gratifications of it, ſuch as they
are. And if we go no further, does there
| appearany Abſurdity in this? Will any one
take upon him to ſay, that a Man cannot
' | find his Account in this general Courſe of

Life, as much as in the moſt unbounded

| 55 rt Ambition,


222 A S RR MO N upon the


Sex M. Ambition, and the Exceſſes of Pleaſure ? Or


XI.


that ſuch a Perſon has not conſulted ſo well
for Himſelf, for the Satisfaction and Peace of
his own Mind, as the ambitious or diſſolute
Man? And though the Conſideration, tha]
God himſelf will inthe End juſtify their Taſte,
and ſupport their Cauſe, is not formally to
be inſiſted upon here; yet thus much come
in, that all Enjoyments whatever are much
more clear and unmixt from the Aſſurance
that they will end well. Is it certain then
that there is nothing in theſe Pretenſion


to Happineſs? eſpecially when there are na t
wanting Perſons, who have ſupported them
ſelves with Satisfactions of this Kind in Sick ke
neſs, Poverty, Diſgrace, and in the ven],
Pangs of Death ; whereas it is manifeſt al a


other Enjoy ments fail in theſe Circumſtances
This ſurely looks ſuſpicious of having ſome
what in it. Self- love methinks ſhould be + /
larmed. May ſhe not poſlibly paſs ove
greater Pleaſures, than thoſe ſhe is ſo wholly
taken up with?

Tn E ſhort of the Matter is no more than
this. Happineſs conſiſts in the Gratificatiot
of certain Affections, Appetites, Paſſions
with Objects which are by Nature adapted
to them. Self- love may indeed ſet us on

work


Love of our Neighbour. 9223


»| work to gratify theſe : But Happineſs or Str.
eu Enjoyment has no immediate Connection XI.
off with Self-love, bur ariſes from ſuch Grati-

| fication alone. Love of our Neighbour is

one of thoſe Affections. This, conſidered as

e 2 virtuous Principle, is gratified by a Con-

of ſciouſneſs of endeavouring to promote the
Good of others ; but conſidered as a natu-

aff ral Affection, its Gratification conſiſts in the
actual Accompliſhment of this Endeavour.

Now Indulgence or Gratification of this Af-


; fetion, whether in that Conſciouſneſs, or
xf this Accompliſhment, has the ſame Reſpect
| 0 Intereſt, as Indulgence of any other Af-
| fetion; they equally proceed from or do
not proceed from Self- love, they equally in-
dude or equally exclude this Principle. Thus
| it appears, that Benevolence and the Purſuit
| of publick Good hath at leaſt as great Re-
ect to Self-love and the Purſuit of pri-
vate Good, as any other particular Paſſi-


ons, and their reſpectiue Purſuits.
NEITHER is Covetouſneſs, whether as
a Temper or Purſuit, any Exception to this,
For if by Covetouſneſs is meant the Deſire
and Purſuit of Riches for their own Sake,
without any Regard to, or Conſideration of
the Uſes of them ; this hath as little to do
2 with


P—
—


= ©. 5 5


*


224 ASERM ON hon the


SERUM. with Self-love, as Benevolence hath. But by

AL. this Word is uſually meant, not ſuch Mad.

gneſs and total Diſtraction of Mind, but im.

moderate Affection to and Purſuit of Riches

as Poſſeſſions in order to ſome further End:

namely, Satisfaction, Intereſt, or Good.

This therefore is not a particular Affection,

or particular Purſuit, but it is the general

Principle of Self-love, and the general Pur-

. fuit of our own Intereſt; for Which Rea. le

ſon the Word, Selfiſh, is by every one ap- tc

propriated to this Temper and Purſuit. Now]
as it is ridiculous to aſſert, that Self-love and
the Love of our Neighbour are the fame;

ſo neither is it aſſerted, that following theſe
different Affections hath the ſame Tendency
and Reſpect to our own Intereſt. The Com-
pariſon is not between Self- love and the
Love of our Neighbour; between Purſuit

of our own Intereſt, and the Intercſt of o-
thers : But between the ſeveral particular
Affections in Humane Nature towards ex-
ternal Objects, as one Part of the Compa-

riſon; and the one particular Affection to |
the Good of our Neighbour, as the other
Part of it: And it has been ſhewn, that all
_ theſe have the ſame Reſpect to Self-love

and private Intereſt.


Se 2


THERE |


- Love of our Neighbour.


ence or Interfering, between Selt-love or
private Intereſt, and the ſeveral particular
Appetites, Paſſions, Affections, or the Pur-


Interfering is meerly accidental ; and hap-
pens much oftener between Pride, Revenge,
ſenſual Gratifications, and private Intereſt,
than between private Intereſt and Benevo-
lence. For nothing is more common, than
to ſee Men give themſelves up to a Paſſion
or an Affection to their known Prejudice
and Ruin, and in direct contradiction to ma-
nifeſt and real Intereſt, and the loudeſt Calls
of Self- love: Whereas the ſeeming Competi-
tions and Interfering, between Benevolence
and private Intereſt, relate much more to
the Materials or Means of Enjoyment, than
to Enjoyment itſelf. There is often an in-
terfering in the former, when there is none
in the latter. Thus as to Riches: So much
Money as a Man gives away, ſo much leſs
will remain in his Poſſeſſion. Here is a real
» F interfering. But though a Man cannot pol-
ſibly give without leſſening his Fortune, yet
there are Multitudes might give without leſ-
ſening their own Enjoy ment; becauſe they
may have more than they can turn to any


| = - real


Lr


ee


ö


1 *


ſuits they lead to. But this Competition or


226


THERE is indeed frequently an Inconſiſt- Sz xm.


XI.
WW


226 ASERM ON hon the


SER M. real Uſe or Advantage to themſelves. Thus
ide more Thought and Time any one em.
__ © ploys about the Intereſts and Good of others,
he muſt neceſſarily have leſs to attend his
Vn; but he may have ſo ready and large
a Supply of his own Wants, that ſuch
Thought might be really uſeleſs to himſelf,
though of great Service and Aſſiſtance to O. 1
thers. 1
THE general Miſtake, that there is ſome a
greater Inconſiſtence between endeavouring
to promote the Good of Another and Self.
intereſt, than between Self. intereſt and purſy.
ing any thing elſe ſeems, as hath already been
hinted, to ariſe from our Notions of Pro-
perty ; and to be carried on by this Proper.
ty's being ſuppoſed to be itſelf our Happi-
neſs or Good. People are ſo very much
taken up with this one Subject, that they
ſeem from it to have formed a general way
of thinking, which they apply to other
things that they have nothing to do with.
Hence, in a confuſed and flight way, it
might well be taken for granted, that Ano-
ther's having no Intereſt in an Affection
(i. e. his Good not being the Object of it)
renders, as one may ſpeak, the Proprietor's |
Intereſt


i109
4
#
4


B ˖‚ FO oy oro ug rue ww ax = = z*# = F .,


F 2 5B Aa & * NT Oo©


TS T TOO &o


WALL
*


e


Love of bur Neighbour.


Intereſt in it greater; and that if Another SzaM.
had an Intereſt in it, this would render his XI.


leſs, or occaſion that ſuch Affection could
not be ſo friendly to Self- love, or conducive
to private Good, as an Affection or Purſuit
which has not a Regard to the Good of A-
nother. This I ſay might be taken for
granted, whilſt it was not attended to, that
the Object of every particular Affection is
equally ſomewhat external to Ourſelves;
and whether it be the Good of another Per-
ſon, or whether it be any other external


thing, makes no Alteration with Regard to


its being one's own Affection, and the Gra-
tification of it one's own private Enjoy-
ment. And ſo fat as tis taken for granted,
that barely having the Means and Materials
of Enjoyment is what conſtitutes Intereſt and
Happineſs; that our Intereſt or Good con-
fits in Poſſeſſions themſelves, in having the
Property of Riches, Houſes, Lands, Gardens,
not in the Enjoyment of them; ſo far 'twill
even more ſtrongly be taken for granted,


in the Way already explained, that an Af-


fections conducing to the Good of another,


muſt even neceſſarily occaſion it to conduce


leſs to private Good, if not to be poſitively
Q 2 -detrimental


228


SER M.
XI.
eff, us


particular common Affections, as it is in 24


AIS ER MO N upon the


detrimental to it. For, if Property and Hap-
pineſs are one and the ſame thing, as by in-
creaſing the Property of another, you leſſen


your own Property, ſo by promoting the


Happineſs of another you muſt lefſen your
own Happineſs, But whatever occaſioned the
Miſtake, 1 hope it has been fully proved to
be one ; as it has been proved, that there is
no peculiar Rivalſhip or Competition be-
tween Self. love and Benevolence; that as
there may be a Competition between theſe
two, ſo there may alſo between any parti


cular Affection whatever and Self- love; that
every particular Affection, Benevolence


mong the reſt, is ſubſervient to Self. love by
being the Inſtrument of private Enjoyment;
and that in one Reſpect Benevolence contri-
butes more to private Intereſt, i. e. Enjoy-
ment or Satisfaction, than any other of the


Degree its own Gratification.
AND to all theſe Things may be added,


That Religion, from whence ariſes our!


ſtrongeſt Obligation to Benevolence, is ſo
far from dilowning the Principle of Self-
love, that it often addreſſes itſelf to that ve-
ry Principle, and always to the Mind in that


State when Reaſon preſides z and there can |
| no


nt „ - ——--


Fa.


3 7 F,


—
_


0'* © by


1
n
0 ;


Love of our Neighbour.


no Acceſs be had to the Underſtanding, but 8 ERM.


by convincing Men, that the Courſe of Life
we would perſuade them to is not contrary
to their Intereſt. It may be allowed, with-
out any Prejudice to the Cauſe of Virtue and
Religion, that our Ideas of Happineſs and
Miſery are of all our Ideas the neareſt and
moſt important to us; that they will, nay,
if you pleaſe, that they ought to prevail over
thoſe of Order, and Beauty, and Harmony,
and Proportion, if there ſhould ever be, as
it is impoſſible there ever ſhould be, any In-


conſiſtence between them: Though theſe
laſt too, as expreſling the Fitneſs of Act


ons, are real as Truth itſelf. Let it be al-
lowed, though Virtue or moral Rectitude
does indeed conſiſt in Affection to and Pur-
ſuit of what is Right and Good, as ſuch ;
yet, that when we fit down in a cool Hour,


we can neither juſtify to ourſelves this or


any other Purſuit, till we are convinced that
it will be for our Happineſs, or at leaſt not


. contrary to it. |
Common Reaſon and Humanity will


have ſome Influence upon Mankind, what-


ever becomes of Speculations : But, ſo far as


the Intereſts of Virtue depend upon the The-
ory of jt being ſecured from open Scorn,


Q 3 9


229


XI.
WWW


230


SERM.


3


and above thoſe which ariſe out of the Na.


ASERMON han the


ſo far its very Being in the World depends for
upon its appearing to have no Contraricty to
private Intereſt and Self- love. The foxegoing
Obſervations therefore, it is hoped, may
have gained a little Ground in Favour of the
Precept before us; the particular Explanath
on of which, ſhall be the Subject of the
next Diſcourſe.

I will conclude at preſent, with obſerving
the peculiar Obligation which we are under
to Virtue and Religion, as enforced in the
Verſes following the Text, in the Epiſtle ] ce
for the Day, from our Saviour's coming in-
to the World. The Night is far ſpent, |
Phe Day is at hand; let us therefore caft of n
the Works of Darkneſs, and let us put on
the Armour of Light, &c. The Meaning |
and Force of which Exhortation is, that
Chriſtianity lays us under new Obligations
to a good Life, as by it the Will of God ig
more clearly revealed, and as it affords ad |
ditional Motives to the Practice of it, over


ture of Virtue and Vice; I might add, as
our Saviour has ſet us a perfect Example of
Goodneſs in our own Nature. Now Love
and Charity is plainly the Thing in which he, |
hath placed his Religion; in which there-

forc, |


Love of our Neighbour. 231
&| fore, as we have any Pretence to the Name SER M.
tof of Chriftians, we muſt place ours. He
hath at once injoined it upon us by Way of
Command with peculiar Force; and by his
Example, as having undertaken the Work
of our Salvation out of pure Love and Good-
will to Mankind. The Endeavour to ſet
home this Example upon our Minds is a
very proper Employment of this Seaſon,
which is bringing on the Feſtival of his
Birth : Which as it may teach us many ex-
cellent Leſſons of Humility, Reſignation,
and Obedience to the Will of God; ſo there
is none it recommends with greater Autho-
rity, Force and Advantage, than this of Love
and Charity; ſince it was for us Men, and
for our Salvation, that he came down from
Heaven, and was incarnate, and was made
Man ; that he might teach us our Duty,
and more eſpecially that he might enforce
the Practice of it, reform Mankind, and fi-


nally bring us to that eternal Salvation, of
| which he is the Aut bor to all thoſe that


> . Þ 2 V5


- - =o =E=2R.,OTH 3» a :.n7


a


[
*
s | obey him.
|


Q 4 SERMON


—


"EY
*
o
.


[SERMON XII.


Upon the Love of our Neighbour.


Rom. xiii. 9.


And if there be any other Commandment,
it is briefly comprehended in this Saying,
namely, Thou ſbalt love thy Neighbour

as thy ſelf.


AVING already removed the Pre- SE R M.
H judices againſt publick Spirit, or the XII.
Love of our Neighbour, on the Side VV
of private Intereſt and Self-love ; I proceed
to the particular Explanation of the Precept
before us, by ſhewing, Ibo is our Neigh-
bour : In what Senſe we are required to
love him as ourſelues: The Influence ſuch
| Love would have upon our Behaviour in
Life: And laſtly, How this Commandment
Fomprehends in it all others.


I. The


234 ASERMON upon the

Sexm, I. TRE Objects and due Extent of this Af.
XII. fection will be underſtood by attending ts |
the Nature of it, and to the Nature and Cir-
cumſtances of Mankind in this World. The |
Love. of our Neighbour is the fame: with
Charity, Benevolence, or Good-will : It is
an Affection to the Good and Happinels of


our Fellow-creatures. This implies in it 2


Diſpoſition to produce Happineſs : And this


is the ſimple Notion of Goodneſs, which |


appears ſo amiable wherever we meet with
it. From hence it is eaſy to fee, that the


Perfection of Goodneſs conſiſts in Love to
the whole Univerſe. This is the Perfecti


on of Almighty God.
Bu r as Man is ſo much limited in his Cz |

pacity, as ſo ſmall a Part of the Creation

comes under his Notice and Influcnce,, and


as we are not uſed to conſider things in ſo


general a Way; it is not to be thought of
that the Univerſe ſhould be the Object of
Benevolence to ſuch Creatures as we are.
Thus in that Precept of our Saviour, * Be
ye perfect even as your Father which is in
Heaven is perfect, the Perfection of the Di-
vine Goodneſs is propoſed to our Imitation
as it is promiſcuous, and extends to the Evil


* Matth. v. 48.


* S


0, ww CD = Gm Ge 3a on wo A©*” oÞ


7


Lowe of our Neighbour.


zs well as the Good; not as it is abſolutely Sz x.


ſal, of it in this Reſpect be- XII.
univerſal, Imitation in this ReſpeR x5


ing plainly beyond us. The Object is too


| vaſt. For this Reaſon moral Writers alſo have


ſubſtituted a leſs general Object for our Be-.
nevolence, Mankind. But this likewiſe
is an Object too general, and very much


out of our View. Therefore: Perſons more


practical have, inſtead of Mankind, put oun


Country; and, made the Principle of Vir-


tue, of Humane Virtue, to conſiſt in the
intire uniform Love of our Country: Andi


| this is what we call a publick Spirit; which


in Men of publick Stations is the Character
of a Patriot. But this is ſpeaking to-the up-
per Part of the World. Kingdoms and
Governments are large; and the Sphere of
Action of far the greateſt Part of Man-


kind is much narrower than the Govern-


ment they live under: Or. however, com-
mon Men do not conſider. their Actions as
affecting the whole Community of which
they are Members. There plainly is want-
ing a. leſs general and nearer Object of Be-


| nevolence for the Bulk of Men, than that


of their Country. Therefore: the Scripture,
not being a Book of Theory and Speculati-
Qn, but a plain, Rule of Life for Mankind,

has


4


236 r


Szx M. has with the utmoſt poſſible Propriety put

XII. the Principle of Virtue upon the Love of

our Neighbour; which is that Part of the

Univerſe, that Part of Mankind, that Part

of our Country, which comes under our

immediate Notice, Acquaintance and In-
fluence, and with which we have to do.

'TH1sis plainly the true Account or Rea-
ſon, why our Saviour places the Principle of
Virtue in the Love of our Nezghbour ; and
the Account itſelf ſhows who arc compre-
hended under that Relation.

Il. LET us now conſider in what Senſe
we are commanded to love our Neighbour
as ourſetves.

T # Is Precept, in its firſt Delivery by our
Saviour, is thus introduced: Thou ſhalt love
the Lord thy God with all thine Heart,

with all thy Soul, and with all thy Strength ;
and thy Neighbour as thy ſelf. Theſe very
different Manners of Expreſſion do not lead
our Thoughts to the ſame Meaſure or De-
gree of Love, common to both Objects; but
to one, peculiar to each. Suppoſing then,
which is to be ſuppoſed, a diſtin Meaning
and Propriety in the Words, as thy ſelf;
the Precept we are conſidering will admit of
apy of theſe Senſes: That we bear the ſame


Kind


28888


LES. AE. ASA...


Love of our Neighbour.


do to ourſelves : Or, that the Love we bear
to our Neighbour ſhould have ſome certam
Proportion or other to Self- love: Or laſtly,
that it ſhould bear the particular Proportion
of Equality, that it be in the ſame Degree.
Firſt, The Precept may be underſtood as
requiring only, that we have the ſame Kind
of Affection to our Fellow-creatures, as to
ourſelves : That, as every Man has the Prin-
ciple of Self- love, which diſpoſes him to
avoid Miſery, and conſult his own Happi-


| neſs; ſo we ſhould cultivate the Affection of
| Good-will to our Neighbour,and that it ſhould


influence us to have the ſame Kind of Regard
tohim. This at leaſt muſt be commanded :
And this will not only prevent our being
injurious to him, but will alſo put us upon
promoting his Good. There are Bleſſings
in Life, which we ſhare in common with
others; Peace, Plenty, Freedom, healthful
Seaſons. But real Benevolence to our Fel-
low- creatures would give us the Notion of
a common Intereſt in a ſtricter Senſe : For
in the Degree we love another, his Inte-
reſt, his Joys and Sorrows, are our own.
It is from Self- love that we form the No-
tion of private Good, and conſider it as our

© = own


Kind of Affection to our Neighbour, as we SE RM.


236
Sx&M.


XII.
Www


ASERMON upon the
own : Love of our Neighbour would teach
us thus to appropriate to ourſelves his Good
and Well-fare; to conſider ourſelves as ha-
ving a real Share in his Happineſs. Thus
the Principle of Benevolence would be an
Advocate within our own Breaſts, to take
care of the Intereſts ot our Fellow-Crea-
tures in all the interfering and Competiti-
ons which cannot but be, from the Imper-
fection of our Nature, and the State we ate
in. It would likewiſe, in ſome Meaſure,
leſſen that interfering z and hinder Men from
forming ſo ſtrong a Notion of private Good,
excluſive of the Good of others, as we com-
monly do. Thus, as-the private Affection
makes us in a peculiar Manner ſenſible of
Humanity, Juſtice, or Injuſtice, when ex-
erciſed towards ourſelves ; Love of our
Neighbour would give us the ſame Kind of
Senſibility in his Behalf. This would be the
greateſt Security of our uniform Obedience
to that moſt equitable Rule; Whatſoever yt
would that Men ſbould do unto you, do ye
even ſo unto them.

ALL this is indeed no more than that we
ſhould have a rcal Love to our Neighbour:
But then, which is to be obſerved, the
Words, as thy ſelf, expreſs this in the moſt

diſtinct


F ͤ R wa 2. MT & =


. i Sn » __ av a”


Love of our Neighbour, 2


———


—


39


diltinẽt Manner, and determine the Precept to Sr uu.
relate to the Affection itſelf. The Advantage, XII.


which this Principle of Benevolence has o-
yer other remote Conſiderations, is that it
is itſelf the Temper of Virtue ; and like-
wiſe, that it is the chief, nay the only ef-
fectual Security of our performing the ſe-
veral Offices of Kindneſs, we owe to our
Fellow-creatures. When from diſtant Con-
fiderations Men reſolve upon any thing to
which they have no liking, or perhaps an
Averſeneſs, they arc perpetually finding out
Evaſions and Excuſes; which need never be
wanting, if People look for them : And they
equivocate with themſelves in the plaineſt
Caſes in the World. This may be in reſpect
to ſingle determinate Acts of Virtue : But
it comes in much more, where the Obliga-
tion is to a general Courſe of Behaviour;
and moſt of all, if it be ſuch as cannot be
reduced to fixed determinate Rules. This
Obſervation may account for the Diverſity
of the Expreſſion, in that known Paſſage of
the Prophet Micah : To do juſtly, and to
love Mercy. A Man's Heart muſt be form-
ed to Humanity and Benevolence, he muſt
love Mercy, otherwiſe he will not act mer-
cifully in any ſettled Courſe of Behaviour.

; As


if 1 .


240 AS ER MO N hon the


S ERM. As Conſideration of the future Sanctions of

XII. Religion is our only Security of perſevering
in our Duty, in Caſes of great Temptations:
So to get our Heart and Temper formed to
a Love and Liking of what is Good, is ab.
ſolutely neceſſary in order to our behaving
rightly in the familiar and daily Intercourſes
amongſt Mankind.

Secondly, The Precept before us may be
underſtood to require, that we-love our
Neighbour in ſome certain Proportion
or other, according as we love ourſelves,
And indeed a Man's Character cannot be de-
termined by the Love he bears to his Neigh-
bour, conſidered abſolutely : But the Pro.
portion which this bears to Self-love, whe-
ther it be attended to or not, is the chief It
thing which forms the Character, and in-
fluences the Actions. For, as the Form of
the Body is a Compoſition of various Parts;
ſo likewiſe our inward Structure is not ſim-
ple or uniform, but a Compoſition of vari-
ous Paſſions, Appetites, Affections, together
with Rationality ; including in this laſt both
the Diſcernment of what is right, and a Di-
poſition to regulate ourſelves by it. There is
greater Variety of Parts in what we call } |


Character, than there are Features in a Face:
| And


kw


„ O09 =>,


— ow TT OS


"—_—_ Ty, MW. WW. ITT TY -


Love of our Neighbour.


And the Morality of That is no more deter- StrM.
Sa ina


mined by one Part, than the Beauty or De-
formity of This is by one ſingle Feature:
Each is to be judged of by all the Parts or
Features, not taken ſingly, but together. In
the inward Frame the various Paſſions, Ap-
petites, Affections, ſtand in different Re-
ſpects to each other. The Principles in our
Mind may be contradictory, or Checks and
Allays only, or Incentives and Afliſtants to
each other. And Principles, which in their
Nature have no Kind of Contraricty or Affi-
nity, may yet accidentally be each other's
Allays or Incentives.

FR o M hence it comes to paſs, that though
we were able to look into the inward Con-
texture of the Heart, and {ce with the great-
eſt Exactneſs in what Degree any one Prin-
ciple is in a particular Man; we could not
from thence determine, how far that Prin-
ciple would go towards forming the Cha-
rater, or what Influence it would have upon
the Actions, unleſs we could likewiſe diſ-
cern what other Principles prevailed in him,
and ſee the Proportion which that one bears
to the others. Thus, though two Men ſhould


have the Affection of Compaſſion in the


ſame Degree exactly; yet one may have the
R Princi-


242


ASERM ON upon the


SzRM. Principle of Reſentment, or of Ambition ſo


XII.


ſtrong in him, as to prevail over that of Com.
paſſion, and prevent its having any Influ.
ence upon his Actions; ſo that he may de-


ſerve the Character of an hard or cruel Man:
Whereas the other, having Compaſſion in


juſt the ſame Degree only, yet having Re.
ſentment or Ambition in a lower Degree, his
Compaſſion may prevail over them, ſo as to
Influence his Actions, and to denominate his
Temper compaſſionate. So that, how ſtrange
ſoever it may appear to People who do not
attend to the thing, yet it is quite manifeſt,
that, when we ſay one Man is more Reſcnt-
ing or Compaſlionate than another, this
does not neceſſarily imply that one has the
Principle of Reſentment or of Compaſſion
ſtronger than the other. For if the Pro-
portion, which Reſentment or Compaſ
ſion bears to other inward Principles, is
greater in one than in the other; this is it-
ſelf ſufficient to denominate one more Re-
ſenting or Compaſſionate than the other.
FURTHER, thc whole Syſtem as I may
ſpeak, of Affections (including Rationality)
which conſtitute the Heart, as this Word is
uſed in Scripture and oh moral Subjects,


are each and all of them ſtronger in ſome
than


, ww. r r


Love of our Neigbbour.


than in others. Now the Proportion which
the two general Affections, Benevolence and
Self-love, bear to cach other, according to
this Interpretation of the Text, denominates
Men's Character as to Virtue. Suppoſe then
one Man to have the Principle of Benevo-
lence in an higher Degree than another: It
will not follow from hence, that his general
Temper or Character or Actions will be more
Benevolent than the others. For he may
have Self- love in ſuch a Degree as quite to
prevail over Bencvolence; ſo that it may
have no Influence at all upon his Actions:
Whereas Benevolence in the other Perſon,
though in a lower Degree, may yet be the
ſtrongeſt Principle in his Heart; and ſtrong
enough to be the Guide of his Actions, ſo
25 to denominate him a good and virtuous
Man. The Caſe is here as in Scales: It is
not one Weight, conſidered in itſelf, which
determines whether the Scale ſhall aſcend or
deſcend; but this depends upon the Propor-
tion, which that one Weight hath to the
other.

Ir being thus manifeſt that the Influence
which Bencvolence has upon our Actions,
and how far it goes towards forming our


Character, is not determined by the Degree


R 2 itſelf


243
SERM.
XII.


WWW


*


Condition in this World. Of the Degree


244 ASERM ON upon the


SERM. itſelf of this Principle in our Mind; but by
XII. the Proportion it has to Self- love and other


Principles: A Compariſon alſo being made
in the Text between Self- love and the Love
ot our Neighbour ; theſe joint Conſidera.
tions afforded ſufficient occaſion for treating
here ot that Proportion: It plainly is implied
in the Precept, though it ſhould be queſtion-
ed whether it be the exact Meaning of the
Words, as thy Self. |

Love of our Neighbour then muſt bear
ſome Proportion to Self. love, and Virtue to
be ſure conſiſts in the due Proportion. What
this due Proportion is, whether as a Princi-
ple in the Mind, or as cxcrted in Actions,
can be judged of only from our Nature and


in which Affections and the Principles of
Action, conſidered in themſelves, prevail,
we have no Meaſure : Let us then proceed to
the Courſe of Behaviour, the Actions they
produce. |

Bo v H our Nature and Condition require,
that each particular Man ſhould make parti-
cular Proviſion for himſelf: And the Inqui-
ry, what Proportion Benevolence ſhould
have to Self- love, when brought down to


Practice, will be, what is a competent Care
and


Love of our Neighbour.


tain ſoever it be, that each Man muſt deter-
mine this for himſelf; and how ridiculous
ſoever it would be, for any to attempt to
determine it for Another: yet it is to be ob-
ſcrved, that the Proportion is real; and that
do | a competent Proviſion has a Bound; and
that it cannot be all which we can poſſibly
get and keep within our Graſp, without le-
gal Injuſtice. Mankind almoſt univerſally
bring in, Vanity, Supplies for what is cal-
led a Life of Pleaſure, Covetouincſs, or
imaginary Notions of Superiority over O-
thers, to determine this Queſtion : Dut eve-
ry one, who deſires to act a proper Part in
Society, would do well to conſider, how
far any of them come in to determine it,
in the Way of Moral Conſideration. All
that can be ſaid is, ſuppoſing, what, as the
World goes, is ſo much to be ſuppoſed that


tis ſcarce to be mentioned, that Perſons do


not neglect what they really owe ro Them-

| ſelves ; the more of their Care and Thought,

and of their Fortune they employ in doing

Good to their Fellow- creatures, the nearer

they come up to the Law of Perfection,
Thou ſhalt love thy Neighbour as thy ſelf.

1 Thirdly,


245


and Proviſion for ourſelves. And how cer- Srxm.


XII


WF


SERM.,


246 ASERMON hen the
Thirdly, If the Words, as thy ſelf, wereto


XII. be underſtood of an Equality of Affection;


it wou'd not be attended with thoſe Conſe.
quences, which perhaps may be thought to
follow from it. Suppoſe a Perſon to have
the ſame ſettled Regard to Others, as to Him
ſelf; that in every deliberate Scheme or Pur-


{uit He took their Intereſt into the Account
in the ſame Degree as his own, ſo far as an


Equality of Affection would produce this:
Yet He would in fact, and ought to be, much
more taken up and employed about Himſelf,
and his own Concerns; than about Other,
and their Intereſts. For, beſides the one
common Affection toward Himſelf and his
Neighbour, He would have ſeveral other
Particular Affections, Paſlions, Appetites,
which he could not poſlibly fecl in common
both for Himſelf and Others: Now theſe Sen-
ſations themſelves very much employ us;

and have perhaps as great Influence, as Self.
love. So far indeed as Selt-love, and cool
Reflection upon what is for our Intereſt,
would ſet us on work to gain a Supply of our
own ſeveral Wants; ſo far the Love of out
Neighbour would make us do the ſame for
him : But the Degree in which we are put
upon ſeek ing and making uſe of the Means |
22 | 1


Love of our Neighbour.


of Gratification, by the feeling of thoſe Aﬀe- Szzm.


ions, Appetites and Paſſions, muſt neceſſa-


rily be peculiar to ourſelves. A


THAT there are particular Paſſions, (ſup-

poſe Shame, Reſentment) which Men ſeem
to have, and feel in common both for Them-
ſelves and Others, makes no Alteration in
Reſpect to thoſe Paſſions and Appetites
which cannot poſlibly be thus felt in com-
mon. From hence, (and perhaps more
things of the like Kind might be mentioned,)
it follows, that though there were an Equa-
lity of Affection to both, yet Regards to Our-
| ſelves would be more prevalent than Atten-
tion to the Concerns of Others.
AN o from moral Conſiderations it ought
to be ſo, ſuppoſing ſtill the Equality of Aﬀe-
ction commanded : Becauſe we arc in a pecu-
liar manner, as I may ſpeak, entruſted with
ourſelves ; and therefore Carc of our own
Intereſts, as well as of our Conduct, particu-
larly belongs to us.

To theſe things muſt be added, that moral
Obligations can extend no further than to na-
tural Poſſibilities. Now we have a Percep-
tion of our own lntcreſts, like Conſciouſneſs
of our own Exiſtence, which we always car-
ry about with us; and which, in its Continu-

R 4 ation ,


248


ASERM ON pon the


SRM. ation, Kind, and Degree, ſeems impoſlible


XII.
WY


to be felt in reſpe to the Intereſts of O.
thers.

FRO N all theſe Things it fully appears,
that though we were to love our Neighbour
in the /ame Degree as we love our.clves, ſo
far as this is poſſible; yet the Care of our-
ſelves, of the Individual, would not be neg-
lected; the apprchended Danger of which
ſeems to be the only Objection againſt un-
derſtanding the Precept in this ſtrict Senſe.

III. TAE general Temper of Mind which
the duc Love of our Neighbour would form
us to, and the Influence it would have upon
our Behavio..r in Life, is now to be conſi-
dered. ;

THrr Temper and Behaviour of Charity is
explained at large, in that known Paſlage of
St. Paul * : Charity ſuffereth long, and is
kind ; Charity envieth not, doth nos behave
itſelf unſeemly, ſeeketh not her own, think
eth no evil, beareth all things, believeth all
things, hopeth all things. As to the Mean-
ing of the Expreſſions, ſeeketh not her own,
thinketh no evil, believeth all things; how-
ever thoſe Expreſſions may be explained a-


Way,


* 3 Cor. xill.


our Right for the ſake of Peace as well as in
the Way of Compaſſion, Freedom from
Miſtruſt, and Diſpoſition to believe well of
our Neighbour, this general Temper, I ſay,
accompanies and is plainly the Effect of Love
and Good- will. And, though ſuch is the
World in which we live, that Experience
and Knowledge of it, not only may, but
muſt beget in us greater Regard to ourſelves,
and Doubtfulneſs of the Characters of O-
thers, than is natural to Mankind; yet theſe
ought not to be carried further than the Na-
ture and Courſe of things make neceſſary.
It is ſtill true, even in the preſent State of
things, bad as it is, that a rcal good Man
had rather be deceived, than be ſuſpicious;


had rather forego his known Right, than


run the Venture of doing even a hard thing.
This is the general Temper of that Charity,
of which the Apoſtle aſſerts, that if he had
it not, giving his Body to be burned would a-
vail him nothing; and which, he ſays, ſball
never fail.

TAE happy Influence of this Temper ex-
tends to every different Relation and Cir-
cumſtance in Humane Life. Ir plainly ren-

ders


Love of our Neighbour. 249


way, this Meekneſs, and, in ſome Degree, SER.
Eaſineſs of Temper, Readineſs to forcgo XII.


H4


— a


2650


ASERMON upon the


SER M. ders a Man better, more to be deſired, as


XII.


to all the Reſpects and Relations we can
ſtand in to each other. The benevolent
Man is diſpoſed to make uſe of all external
Adyantages in ſuch a Manner, as ſhall con-
tribute to the Good of Others, as well as to
his own Satisfaction. His own Satisfaction
conſiſts in this. He will be eaſy and kind
to his Dependants, compaſſionate to the
Poor and Diſtreſſed, friendly to all with
whom he has to do. This includes the good
Neighbour, Parent, Maſter, Magiſtrate :
And ſuch a Behaviour would plainly make
Dependance, Inferiority, and even Servitude,
eaſy. So that a good or charitable Man of
ſuperiour Rank in Wifdom, Fortune, Au-


thority, is a common Bleſſing to the Place


he lives in; Happineſs grows under his In-
fluence. This good Principle in Inferi-
ours would diſcover itſelf in paying Re-
ſpect, Gratitude, Obedience, as due. It were
therefore methinks one juſt way of trying
one's own Character, to ask ourſelves, Am
Iin reality a better Maſter or Servant, a bet-
ter Friend, a better Neighbour, than ſuch
and ſuch Perſons; whom, perhaps, I may
think not to deſerve the Character of Virtus
and Religion ſo much as my (elf ?


ANE


Love of our Neighbour.


AND as to the Spirit of Party, which un-
happily prevails amongſt Mankind, what-
ever are the Diſtinctions which ſerve for a
Supply to it, ſome or other of which have
obtained in all Ages and Countries: One,
who is thus friendly to his Kind, will im-
mediately make due Allowances for it, as
what cannot but be amongſt ſuch Creatures
as Men, in ſuch a World as this. And as
Wrath and Fury and Overbearing upon theſe
Occaſions proceed, as I may ſpeak, from
Men's feeling only on their own Side : So
a common Feeling, for others as well as for
ourſelves, would render us ſenſible to this
Truth, which it is ſtrange can have ſo lit-

tle Influence ; that we ourſelves differ from
others, juſt as much as they do from us. I
put the Matter in this Way, becauſe it can
ſcarce be expected that the Generality of Men
ſhould ſee, that thoſe things, which are made
the Occaſions of Diſſenſion and fomenting
the Party-Spirit, are really nothing at all :
But it may be expected from all People,
how much ſoever they are in earneſt about
their reſpective Peculiarities, that Humani-.
ty, and common Good-will to their Fellow-
creatures, ſhould moderate and reſtrain that
yretched Spirit. |
| THis


261


SERM.


XII.
WAR


262
SERM.


XII.


AIS ERM O N upon the


T H1s good Temper of Charity likewiſe
would prevent Strife and Enmity ariſing from
other Occaſions : It would prevent our giving
juſt Cauſe of Offence, and our taking it
without Cauſe. And in Caſes of real In-
jury, a good Man will make all the Allow-
ances which are to be made ; and, without
any Attempts of Retaliation, he will only
conſult his own and other Men's Security
for the future, againſt Injuſtice and W rong.

IV. I proceed to conſider laſtly, what is
affirmed of the Precept now explained, That
it comprehends in it all others; 2. e. that
to love our Neighbour as ourſelves includes
in it all Virtues.

Now the Way in which every Maxim of
Conduct, or general Speculative Aſſertion,
when it is to be explained at large, ſhould be
treated, is, to ſhow what are the particular
Truths which were deſigned to be compre-
hended under ſuch a general Obſervation,
how far it is ſtrictly true; and then the Li-
mitations, Reſtrictions, and Exceptions, if
there be Exceptions, with which it is to be
underſtood. But it is only the former of
theſe, namely, how far the Aſſertion in the
Text holds, and the Ground of the Pre-emi-
nence aſſigned to the Precept of it, which

in


Love of our Neighbour.


in ſtrictneſs comes into our preſent Con-
ſideration.

HOW EVER, in almoſt every thing that
is ſaid, there is ſomewhat to be underſtood
beyond what is explicitly laid down, and
which we of Courſe ſupply ; ſomewhat, I
mean, which would not be commonly call-
ed a Reſtriction or Limitation. Thus, when
Benevolence is {aid to be the Sum of V irtue,
it is not ſpoken of as a blind Propenſion,
but as a Principle in reaſonable Creatures,
and fo to be directed by their Reaſon : For
Reaſon and Reflection comes into our Noti-
on of a moral Agent. And That will lead
us to conſider diſtant Conſequences, as well
as the immediate Tendency of an Action:
It will teach us, that the Care of ſome Per-
ſons, ſuppoſe Children and Families, is par-
ticularly committed to our Charge by Nature
and Providence ; as alſo that there arc other
Circumſtances, ſuppoſe Friendſhip or for-
mer Obligations, which require that we do


253
SERM.


XII.
WWW


good to ſome, preferably to others. Rea-


ſon, conſidered meerly as ſubſervient to Be-
nevolence, as aſſiſting to produce the great-
eſt Good, will teach us to have particular
Regard to theſe Relations and Circumſtances;
becauſe it is plainly for the Good of the

World


— — — — — ERR ——


264 A SER MO N upon the


S ERM. World that they ſhould be regarded. And
XII zs there are numberleſs Caſes, in which,


notwithſtanding Appearances, we are not
competent Judges, whether a particular Acti-


on will upon the Whole do Good or Harm; |
Reaſon in the ſame Way will teach us to |
be cautious how we act in theſe Caſes of |


Uncertainty. It will ſuggeſt to our Conſi-


deration, which is the ſafer Side; how lia- |


ble we are to be led wrong by Paſſion and


private Intereſt; and what Regard is due |


to Laws, and the Judgment of Mankind.


All theſe things muſt come into Conſidera- |


tion, were it only in order to determine |


which way of aCting is likely to produce
the greateſt Good. Thus, upon Suppoſition
that it were in the ſtricteſt Senſe true, with-


out Limitation, that Benevolence includes |


in it all Virtues; yet Reaſon muſt come in


as its Guide and Director, in order to attain


its own End, the End of Benevolence, the


greateſt publick Good, Reaſon then being


thus included, letus now conſider the Truth
of the Aſſertion itſelf.

Firſt, It is manifeſt that nothing can be
of Conſequence to Mankind or any Crea-
ture, but Happineſs. This then is all which
any Perſon can, in ſtrictneſs of ſpeaking,

; be


:


Love of our Neighbour.


be ſaid to have a Right to. We can there- Sz Rm,
\ | fore owe no Man any thing, but only to


further and promote his Happineſs, ac-
cording to our Abilities. And therefore a


; | Diſpoſition and Endeavour to do Good to


all with whom we have to do, in the De-
gree and Manner which the different Rela-
tions we ſtand in to them require, is a Diſ-


charge of all the Obligations we are under


to them.

As Humane Nature is not one ſimple uni-
form Thing, but a Compoſition of various
Parts; Body, Spirit, Appetites, particular
Paſſions and Affections; for each of which
reaſonable Self- love would lead Men to have
duc Regard, and make ſuitable Proviſion :
So Society conſiſts of various Parts, to which
we ſtand in different Reſpects and Relati-
ons; and juſt Benevolence would as ſurely
lead us to have due Regard to each of theſe,
and behave as the reſpective Relations re-
quire. Reaſonable Good-will, and right Be-
haviour towards our Fellow. creatures, are in
a Manner the ſame : Only that the former
expreſſeth the Principle as it is in the Mind;
the latter, the Principle as it were become
external, 2. e. exerted in Actions.


ARD


256


SE RM.
XII.


ASERM ON upon the


AN pb lo far as Temperance, Sobricty, and
Moderation in ſenſual Pleaſures, and the
contrary Viccs, have any Reſpect to our Fel.
low-creatures, any Influence upon their Qui-


et, Welfare, and Happineſs ; as they al-


ways have a real, and often a near Influ-


ence upon it; ſo far it is manifeſt thoſe þ
Virtues may be produced by the Love of
our Neighbour, and that the contrary Vi-


ccs would be prevented by it.' Indeed, if
Men's Regard to themſelves will not reſtrain


them from Exceſs ; it may be thought little


probable, that their Love to others will be
ſufficient: But the Reaſon is, that their Love
to others is not, any more than their Regard
to themſelves, juſt, and in its due Degree.
There are however manifeſt Inſtances of
Perſons kept ſober and temperate from Re-


gard to their Affairs, and the Welfare of |


thoſe who depend upon them. And it is
obvious to every one, that habitual Exceſs,


a diſſolute Courſe of Life, implies a general |


neglect of the Duties we owe towards our
Friends, our Families and our Country.


FER O M hence it is manitfeſt that the com-
mon Virtues, and the common Vices of


Mankind, may be traced up to Benevolence,
I or |


Love of our Neighbour. 257


id | or the want of it. And this intitles the SER M.
ne | Precept, Thou ſhalt love thy Netghbour as
| thy ſelf, to the Pre-cminence given to it;
i. þ and is a Juſtification of the Apoſtle's Aſſer-
L tion, that all other Commandments are
\. | comprehended in it; whatever Cautions
© | and Reſtrictions * there are, which might


f | 8 require


—


* For Inſtance: As we are not competent Judges, what is
upon the whole for the Good of the World; there may be 0-
ther immediate Ends appointed us to purſue, beſides that one


if

: of doing Good, or producing Happineſs. Though the Good
of the Creation be theonly End of the Author of it, yet he may
8
0
|


havelaid us under particular Obligations, which we may diſ-
cern and feel ourſelyes under, quite diſtin from a Percepti-
on, that the Obſervance or Violation of them is for the Hap-
pineſs or Miſery of our Fellow-creatures. And this is in
Fa& the Caſe. For there are certain Diſpoſitions of Mind, and
certain Actions, which are in themſelves approved or diſap-
proved by Mankind, abſtracted from the Conſideration of
their Tendency to the Happineſs or Miſery of the World ;
approved or diſapproved by Reflection, by that Principle
within, which is the Guide of Life, the Judge of Right and
Wrong. Numberleſs Inſtances of this Kind might be menti-
oned. There are Pieces of Treachery, which in themſelves
appear baſe and deteſtable to every one. There are Actions,
which perhaps can ſcarce have any other general Name given
them than Indecencies, which yet are odious and ſhocking
to Humane Nature. There is ſuch a thing as Meanneſs, a lit-
tle Mind; which, as it is quite diſtin& from Incapacity, ſo it
riſes a Diſlike and Diſapprobation quite different from that
Contempt, which Men are too apt to have, of meer Folly. On
ttzhbe other Hand; what we call Greatneſs of Mind, is the Ob-
ject of another Sort of Approbation, than ſuperiour Under-
ſtanding. Fidelity, Honour, ſtrict Juſtice, are themſelves ap-
proved in the higheſt Degree, abſtracted from Conſideration
of


258


S ERM. require to be conſidered, if we were td
XII.
Wy —>


ASERM ON pon the


ſtate particularly and at length, what if
Virtue and right Behaviour in Mankind
Bur,

Secondly, It might be added, that in


higher and more general Way of Conſfidef


ration, leaving out the particular Nature of


Creatures, and the particular Circumſtancof
in which they are placed, Benevolence ſeem


in the ſtricteſt Senſe to include in it all th
is Good and Worthy ; all that is Goo


which we have any diſtinct particular Notialf


of. We have no clear Conception of an
poſitive moral Attribute in the ſupream Be
ing, but what may be re ſolved up into Good
nels. And, if we conſider a reaſonabl


to the particular Relations and Circumſtan
ces in Which he is placed; we cannot con
ceive any thing clic to come in, toward

determinin!


of their Tendency. Now, whether it be thought that eaci
of theſe are connected with Benevolence in Our Nature, ani
lo may be conlidered as the ſame thing with it; or whethe


ſome of them be thought an inferiour Kind of Virtues ant} |


Vices, ſomewhat like natural Brauties and Deformities ; of
laſtly, plain Exceptions to the general Rule; thus much bow |
ever is certain, that the things now inſtanced in, and number:


leſs others, are approved cr diſapproved by Mankind in gene}.


ral, in quite another View than as conducive to the Happineds
or Milery of the World.


Creature or moral Agent, without Regan


Love of our Neighbour.


determining whether he is to be ranked in an


higher or lower Claſs of virtuous Beings,


but the higher or lower Degree in which


that Principle, and what 1s manifeſtly con-


ck


or the Love of God, and which is an eſſential
Part of a right Temper, ſome may perhaps


nected with it, prevail in him.
THAT which we more ſtrictly call Piety,


imagine no Way connected with Benevo-
lence : Yet ſurely they mult be connected,
if there be indeed in Being an Object infi-


nitely Good. Humane Nature is ſo conſti-


tuted, that every good Affection implies the
Love of itſelf; i. e. becomes the Object of
a new Affection in the ſame Perſon. Thus,
to be righteous implies in it the Love of


F Rightcouſneſs ; to be benevolent the Love


of Benevolence ; to be good the Love of
Goodneſs; whether this Righteouſneſs, Be-
nevolence, or Goodneſs, be viewed as in our
own Mind, or in another's : And the Love
of God as a Being perfectly Good, is the Love


of perfect Goodneſs contemplated in a Be-
ing or Perſon. Thus Morality and Religi-
on, Virtue and Piety, will at laſt neceſlarily


co-incide, run up into one and the ſame
Point, and Love will be in all Senſes he


End of the Commandment.
S 2 O


-.-


259
SERM.


XII.
WY


260 A 8 E R MO N upon the


SERUM.


XII.
n


O Almighty God, inſpire us with this
divine Principle ; kill in us all the
Seeds of Enuy and Il will; and
help us, by cultivating within our-
ſelves the Love of our Neighbour,
to improve in the Love of Thee.
Thou haſt placed us in various Kin-
dreds, Friendſbips, and Relations,
as the School of Diſcipline for ou
Aﬀettions : Help us, by the due Ex ©
erciſe of them, to improve to Per.
fection; till all partial Affection be
loſt in that intire univerſal on,
and Thou, O God, ſhalt be all in all | 7


7.


SERMON XIII, XIV.


7, |
; |
1 |
: Upon the Love of GOD.

(p

|
2 5 8 1
N MAT TH. xxii. 37. |
|


Thou ſhalt love the Lord thy God with all
thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, and |


VERY Body knows, you therefore SE RM.
E need only juſt be put in Mind, that XIII.

there is ſuch a Thing, as having ſo
great Horror of one Extream, as to run in-
ſenſibly and of Courſe into the contrary ;
and that a Doctrine's having been a Shelter |
for Enthuſiaſm, or made to ſerve the Purpo- |
ſes of Superſtition, is no Proof of the Falſity f
of it: Truth or Right being ſomewhat real |
in itſelf, and ſo not to be judged of by its
S 3 Liableneſs


— .


XIII.


262


Serxm. Liableneſs to Abuſe, or by its ſuppoſed Di- |
ſtance from or Nearneſs to Error. It may]


 ASERMON upon


be ſufficient to have mentioned this in ge-


neral, without taking Notice of the parti- þ
cular Extravagancics, which have been vent-


ed under the Pretence or Endeavour of ex
plaining the Love of God ; or how mani-
feſtly we are got into the contrary Extream,


under the Notion of a reaſonable Religion;


ſo very reaſonable, as to have nothing to do


with the Heart and Affections, it theſe Words


ſignify any thing but the Faculty by which
we diſcern ſpeculative Truth.


By the Love of God, I would underſtand


all thoſc Regards, all thole AﬀeCtions of


Mind, which are due immediately to him


from ſuck a Creature as Man, and which
reſt in him as their End. As this does not
include ſcrvile Fear; ſo ncither will any o-
ther Regards, how reaſonable ſocver, which
reſpect any thing out of or beſides the Per-
fection of the divine Nature, come into
Conſideration here. But all Fcar is not ex-
cluded, becauſe his Diſpleaſure is itſelf the
natural proper Object of Fear. Reverence,
Ambition of his Love and Approbation, De-
light in the Hope or Conſciouſneſs of it,
come likewiſe into this Definition of the

Love


W Vw www _| oo o,£-A


the Love of G OD. 263


iLove of God; becauſe he is the natural SFR.
Object of all thoſe Affections or Movements XIII.
Jof Mind, as really as he is the Object of
- the Affection, which is in the ſtricteſt Senſe
-| called Love; and all of them equally reſt
in him, as their End. And they may all be
- | underſtood to be implied in theſe Words of
, | our Saviour, without putting any Force up-
on them: For he is ſpeaking of the Love of
God and our Neighbour, as containing the
5 whole of Piety and Virtuc,
| Ir is plain that the Nature of Man is io
conſtituted, as to feel certain Affections up-
on the Sight or Contemplation of certain
Objects. Now the very Notion of Affecti—
on implies reſting in its Object as an End.
And the particular Affection to good Cha-
racters, Reverence and moral Love of them,
is natural to all thoſe who have any Degree
of real Goodneſs in themſelves. This will
be illuſtrated by the Deſcription of a perfect
Character in a Creature; and by conſider-
ing the Manner, in which a good Man in his
Preſence would be affected towards ſuch a
Character. He would of Courſe feel the
Affections of Love, Reverence, Deſire of
his Approbation, Delight in the Hope or
Conſciouſneſs of it. And ſurely all this is
8 4 applica-


264


SER. applicable, and may be brought up to that]


ASERM ON upon


Being, who is infinitely more than an ade.


quate Object of all thoſe Affections; whom
we are commanded to Love with all our


Heart, with all our Soul, and with all our
Mind. And of theſe Regards towards Al.
mighty God, ſome are more particularly F


ſuitable to and becoming ſo imperfeQ a Crea.


ture as Man, in this mortal State we are


paſſing through ; and ſome of them, and
perhaps other Exerciſes of the Mind, will
be the Employment and Happineſs of Good
Men in a State of Perfection.

THis is a general View of what the fol.
{owing Diſcourſe will contain. And it is
manifeſt the Subject is a real one: There js
nothing in it enthuſiaſtical or unreaſona-
ble. And if it be indeed at all a Subject,
it is one of the utmoſt Importance.


As Mankind have a Faculty by which they |


diſcern ſpeculative Truth; ſo we have va-
rious Affections towards external Objects.
Underſtanding and Temper, Reaſon and Af
tection, are as diſtin& Ideas, as Reaſon and
Hunger; and one would think could no
more be confounded. It is by Reaſon that
we get the Ideas of ſeveral Objects of our
Affections: But in theſe Caſes Reaſon and

Affection


I a> @ SS wwyL[CcamnrF


\


the Love of GOD.


Uneaſineſs conſequent thereupon, are the


' fame. Now, as Reaſon tends to and reſts
in the Diſcernment of Truth, the Object of
it; ſo the very Nature of Affection con-
ſiſts in tending towards, and reſting in, its

Objects as an End. We do indeed often


in common Language ſay, that things are
loved, deſired, eſteemed, not for themſelves,
but for ſomewhat further, ſomewhat out of
and beyond them : Yet, in theſe Caſes, who-
ever will attend, will ſee, that theſe Things
are not in Reality the Objects of the Af-
fections, 3. e. are not loved, deſired, e-


ſteemed, but the ſomewhat further and be-


yond them, If we have no Affections which
reſt in what are called their Objects, then
what is called Affection, Love, Deſire, Hope,
in Humane Nature, is only an uneaſineſs in
being at Reſt ; an unquiet Diſpoſition to
Action, Progreſs, Purſuit, without End or
Meaning. But if there be any ſuch thing
as Delight in the Company of one Perſon,
rather than of another; whether in the
Way of Friendſhip, or Mirth and Entertain-
ment, it is all one, if it be without reſpect
to Fortune, Honour, or increaſing our Stores

of


265


Affection are no more the ſame, than Sight SER.
of a particular Object, and the Pleaſure or


XIII.
*


ASERM ON upon


SERUM. of Knowledge, or any thing beyond the pre-
XIII. ſent time; here is an Inſtance of an Affec-
tion abſolutely reſting in its Object as its
End, and being gratified, in the ſame Way as
the Appetite of Hunger is ſatisfied with Food.
Yet nothing is more common than to hear it]
asked, What Advantage a Man hath in ſuch |


a Courſe, ſuppoſe of Study, particular
Fricndſhips, or in any other; nothing, I ſay,
is more common than to hear ſuch a Que.
ſtion put in a Way which ſuppoſes no Gain,
Advantage or Intereſt, but as a Means to
ſomewhat further: And if ſo, then there is
no ſuch thing at all as real Intereſt, Gain or
Advantage. This is the ſame A'urdity


with reſpect to Life, as an infinite Series of |


Effects without a Cauſe is in Speculation.
The Gain, Advantage or Intereſt conſiſts in
the Delight itſelf, ariſing from ſuch a Facul-
ty's having its Object: Neither is there any
ſuch thing as Happineſs or Enjoyment, but
what ariſes from hence. The Pleaſures of
Hope and of Reflection arc not Exceptions:
The former being only this Happineſs anti-


Cipated ; the latter, the ſame Happineſs en-


joyed over again after its Time. And even
the general Expectation of future Happineſs


can


the Love of G 0 D.


267


ean afford Satisfaction, only as it is a preſent SRM.
Object to the Principle of Self- love.


XIII.


Ir was doubtleſs intended, that Life ſhould "WG


be very much a Purſuit to the Groſs of Man-
kind. But this is carried ſo much further
than is reaſonable, that what gives imme-
| diate Satisfaction, 2. e. our preſent Intereſt,
is ſcarce conſidered as our Intereſt at all.


It is Inventions which have only a remote
Tendency towards Enjoyment, perhaps but a
remote Tendency towards gaining the Means
only of Enjoyment, which are chiefly ſpoken
of as uſeful to the World. And though this
way of thinking were juſt with reſpe& to
the imperfe& State we are now in, where


we know ſo little of Satisfaction without


Satiety ; yet it muſt be guarded againſt, when
we are conſidering the Happineſs of a State
of Perfection; which Happineſs being En-
joy ment and not Hope, muſt neceſſarily con-
ſiſt in this, that our Affections have their
Objects, and reſt in thoſe Objects as an End,
i. e. be ſatisfied with them. This will fur-
ther appear in the Sequel of this Diſcourſe.

O y the ſeveral Affections, or inward Sen-
ſations, which particular Objects excite in
Man, there are ſome, the having of which


implies the Love of them, when they are
reflect-


268


ASERM ON upon


Serm. reflected upon. This cannot be ſaid of all


XIII. our Affections, Principles, and Motives off on,


Action. It were ridiculous to aſſert, that a fotn
Man upon Reflection hath the ſame Kind off duc
Approbation of the Appetite of Hunger, or Ch-
the Paſſion of Fear, as he hath of Good-willl is ir
to his Fellow-creatures. To be a juſt, a] nab
good, a righteous Man, plainly carries with
it a peculiar Affection to, or Love of Juſtice,
Goodneſs, Righteouſneſs, when theſe Prin-
ciples are the Objects of Contemplation.
Now if a Man approves of, or hath an Af.
tection to, any Principle in and for itſelf ; in-
cidental things allowed for, it will be the}
ſame whether he views it in his own Mind ert
or in another ; in himſelf, or in his Neigh-} ; 20
bour. This is the Account of our Approbati- th
on of, our moral Love and Affection to good in
Characters; which cannot but be in thoſe? Ol
who have any Degrees of real Goodneſs in 15
themſelves, and who diſcern and take No- *
tice of the ſame Principle in others. Þþ

v

L

' C

't

|

|


FROM Obſervation of what paſſes with. |
in ourſelves, our own Actions, and the Be-
haviour of others, the Mind may carry on
its Reflections as far as it pleaſes much be-
yond what we experience in ourſelves, or
diſcern in our Fellow-creatures, It may go


on,


S fi : P 0 4 FEET.


" the Love of GOD.


of on, and conſider Goodneſs as become an uni- SERM.
al form continued Principle of Action, as con- XIII.


off ducted by Reaſon, and forming a Temper and
or Character abſolutely good and perfect, which
ill is in a higher Senſe excellent, and proportio-
al nably the Object of Love and Approbation.
th} LE rus then ſuppoſe a Creature perfect ac-
e, cording to his created Nature: Let his Form
n- be Humane, and his Capacities no more than
n. equal to thoſe of the Chief of Men: Good-
f. neſs ſhall be his proper Character; with
n Wiſdom to direct it, and Power within ſome
je certain determined Sphere of Action to ex-
d ert it: But Goodneſs muſt be the ſimple
t- actuating Principle within him; this being
1 the moral Quality which is amiable, or the
d immediate Object of Love as diſtinct from
e other Affections of Approbation. Here then
n is a finite Object for our Mind to tend to-
Wards, to exerciſe itſelf upon: A Creature,
perfect according to his Capacity, fixt, ſtea-
dy, equally unmoved by weak Pity or more
weak Fury and Reſentment ; forming the
2 © juſteſt Scheme of Conduct; going on un-
r
)


. © diſturbed in the Execution of it, through
the ſeveral Methods of Severity and Reward,
towards his End, namely, the general Hap-
, © pineſs of all with whom he hath to do, as
in


270 ASERM ON 2b
SERM. in itſelf right and valuable. This Character, K
XIII. though uniform in itſelf, in its Principle, yet | ©
— exerting itſelf in different Ways, or conſi- | hi
dered in different Views, may by its appear- | ic
ing Variety move different Affections. Thus, b.
the Severity of Juſtice would not affect us | '®
in the ſame Way, as an Act of Mercy: The di
adyentitious Qualities of Wiſdom and Power Jt
may be conſidered in themſelves: And even b
the Strength of Mind, which this immove- f.
able Goodneſs ſuppoſes, may likewiſe be # V
viewed as an Object of Contemplation, di.
ſtinct from the Goodneſs itſelf. Superiout # P
Excellence of any Kind, as well as ſuperiout | \
Wiſdom and Power, is the Object of Awe P
and Reverence to all Creatures, whatever | '!
their moral Character be: But ſo far as Crea. ®
tures of the loweſt Rank were good, ſo far
the View of this Character, as ſimply good,
muſt appear amiable to them, be the Object
of, or beget Love. Further, ſuppoſe we were
conſcious, that this ſuperiour Perſon ſo far
approved of us, that we had nothing ſer-
vilely to fear from him; that he was really |
our Friend, and kind and good to us in par-
ticular, as he had occaſionally Intercourſe |
with us: We muſt be other Creatures than |


we arc, or we could not but feel the ſame
Kind


the Love of G OD. 271


Kind of Satisfaction and Enjoy ment (what- Se RM.

ever would be the Degree of it) from this XIII. |

higher Acquaintance and Friendſhip, as we ;
fecl from common ones; the Intercourſe
being real, and the Perſons equally preſent,
in both Caſes. We ſhould have a more ar-
dent Deſire to be approved by his better
Judgment, and a Satisfaction in that Appro-
bation of the ſame ſort with what would be
felt in reſpe& to common Perſons, or be

wrought in us by their Preſence.
| LE r us now raiſe the Character, and ſup-
poſe this Creature, for we are ſtill going on
with the Suppoſition of a Creature, our pro-
per Guardian and Governour ; that we were
in a Progreſs of Being towards ſomewhat
further; and that his Scheme of Govern-

ment was too vaſt for our Capacities to
comprehend ; remembring ſtill that he is
perfectly Good, and our Friend as well as
our Governour. Wiſdom, Power, Good-
neſs, accidentally viewed any where, would
inſpire Reverence, Awe, Love: And as theſe
Affections would be raiſed in higher or low-
er Degrees, in Proportion as we had occaſio-
nally more or leſs Intercourſe with the
| Creature endued with thoſe Qualities ; ſo
this further Conſideration and Knowledge,
that


272


ASERM ON 0


Str u. that he was our proper Guardian and Gover-


XIII.


nor, would much more bring theſe Objects
and Qualities home to ourſelves; teach us


they had a greater reſpe to us in particular,


that we had an higher Intercſt in that Wic. |


dom and Power and Goodneſs. We ſhould,


with Joy, Gratitude, Reverence, Love, Truſt, j


and Dependance, appropriate the Character,
as what we had a right in; and make our


Boaſt in ſuch our Relation to it. And the!
Concluſion of the whole would be, that we


ſhould refer ourſelves implicitly to him, and
caſt ourſelves intirely upon him. As the
whole Attention of Life ſhould be to obey
his Commands; ſo the higheſt Enjoyment
of it muſt ariſe from the Contemplation of
this Character, and our Relation to it, from
a Conſciouſneſs of his Favour and Appro-


bation, and from the Excrciſe of thoſe Af.


fections towards Him which could not but
be raiſed from his Preſence. A Being who


loweſt Appetite of Senſe and its Object.


1 THAT


hath theſe Attributes, who ſtands in this Re- i
lation, and is thus ſenſibly preſent to the
Mind, muſt neceſſarily be the Object of
theſe Affections: There is as real a Correſ-
pondence between them, as between the


the Live of GOD. 273


t- THAT this Being is not a Creature, but S ERM.


XIII.
a ind


the Almighty God ; that he is of infinite Pow-


er and Wiſdom and Goodneſs, does not ren-
der him leſs the Object of Reverence and


Love, than he would be if he had thoſe At-
tributes only in a limited Degree. The Be-


ing who made us, and upon whom we in-


tirely depend, is the Object of ſome Re-


gards. He hath given us certain Affections
of Mind, which correſpond to Wiſdom,
Power, Goodneſs ; . e. which are raiſed


upon View of thoſe Qualities. If then he
be really wiſe, powerful, good ; he is the
natural Object of thoſe Affections, which
he hath endued us with, and which corre-
ſpond to thoſe Attributes. That he is infinite
in Power, perfect in Wiſdom and Goodnels,
makes no Alteration, but only that he is the


Object of thole Affections raiſed to the high-


eſt Pitch. He is not indeed to be diſcerned
by any of our Senſes. Igo forward, but he


is not there; and backward, but I cannot


| perceive him: On the left hand where he
doth work, but I cannot behold him: He hi-
 deth himſelf on the right hand, that I can-
not ſee him. O that I knew where I might


find him ! that 1 might come even to his
T Seat


274


XIII. not fill Heaven and Earth with his Preſence


into Conſideration : It is the Certainty al


ASERMON upon
SER M. Seat] * But is He then afar off? Does bh.


The Preſence of our Fellow- creatures affe
our Senſes, and our Senſes give us the Knoy
ledge of their Preſence; which hath diffe
rent Kinds of Influence upon us ; Love, Joy
Sorrow, Reſtraint, Encouragement, Reye.
rence. However this Influence is not imme
diately from our Senſes, but from tha
Knowledge. Thus ſuppoſe a Perſon neithe
to ſee nor hear Another, not to know by
ny of his Senſes, but yet certainly to kno -4
that Another was with him; this Knowledg
might, and in many Caſes would, have ou
or more of the Effects before-mentionelÞ
It is therefore not only reaſonable, but alk
natural, to be affected with a PreſenaÞ
though it be not the Object of our Scnſs: 0
Whether it be, or be not, is merely an acl *
dental Circumſtance, which needs not com


He is with us, and we with him, which hat 0


the Influence. We conſider Perſons then a |
preſent, not only when they are within
Reach of our Senſes, but alſo when we arc
aſſured by any other Means that They ar}
within ſuch a Nearneſs ; nay, if they are not,
we can recall them to our Mind, and be moved}

toward


1
4


cl
o Ct


* Job axii,


the Love of GOD.


ce
80 is ſo much more intimately with us, that in


Vin we live and move and have our Being,
2 be thought too diſtant to be the Object of
our Affections? We own and feel the Force
of amiable and worthy Qualities in our Fel-
ow. creatures: And can we be inſenſible to
the Contemplation of perfect Goodneſs ?
Do we reverence the Shadows of Greatneſs
here below, are we ſollicitous about Honour
and Eſteem and the Opinion of the World:
And ſhall we not feel the ſame with reſpect
to Him, whole are Wiſdom and Power in
their Original, who zs the God of Fudgment
U ih whom Actions are weighed ? Thus Love,
Reverence, Deſire of Eſteem, every Facul-
J, every Affection, tends towards, and is
employed about its reſpective Object in
common Caſes: And muſt the Exerciſe of
[them be ſuſpended with Regard to him a-
N lone, who is an Object, an infinitely more
| than adequate Object, to our moſt exalted
Faculties; Him, of whom, and through
.þ om, and to whom are all things?
þ As we cannot remove from this Earth, or
change our general Buſineſs on it; ſo ncither
can we alter our real Nature. Thetefote no
i af Exerciſe of the Mind can be recommended,
| 1 2 but


of
«gp
a


*


A towards them as preſent : And muſt He, who SER M,


ASER MO N upon


SER M. but only the Exerciſe of thoſe Faculties you


are conſcious of. Religion does not de-


mand new Affections, but only claims the


Direction of thoſe you already have, thoſe
Affections you daily feel; though unhappily
confined to Objects, not altogether unſuita-
ble, but altogether unequal to them. We on-
ly repreſent to you the higher, the adequate
Objcas of thoſe very Faculties and Affection.
Let the Man of Ambition go on ſtill to con-
ſider Diſgrace as the greateſt Evil; Honour, as
his chief Good. But Diſgrace, in whoſe
Eſtimation ? Honour, in whoſe Judgment
This is the only Queſtion. If Shame, and
Delight in Eſteem be ſpoken of as real, as 2
ny ſettled Ground of Pain or Pleaſure; both
theſe muſt be in Proportion to the ſuppoſed
Wiſdom and Worth of him, by whom we
are contemned or eſteemed. Muſt it then
be thought enthuſiaſtical, to ſpeak of a Senſi
bility of this Sort, which ſhall have reſpect
to an unerring Judgment, to infinite Wiſ-
dom; when we are aflured This unerring
Judgment, This infinite Wiſdom does ob-
ſerve upon our Actions?

I 15 the ſame with reſpect to the Love of
God in the ſtricteſt and moſt confined Senſe.


wy only offer and eren the higheſt Ob-
ject


the Love of GOD.


jet of an Affection, ſuppoſed already in S ERA.
WNW


your Mind. Some Degree of Goodneſs
muſt be previouſly ſuppoſed : This always
implies the Love of itſelf, an Affection to
Goodneſs : The higheſt, the adequate Object
of this Affection, is perfect Goodneſs; which
therefore we are to love with all our Heart,
with all our Soul, and with all our Strength.
e Muſt we then, forgetting our own Intereſt,
te as it were go out of ourſelves, and love God
* for his on Sake? No more forget your
own Intereſt, no more go out of yourſelves
than when you prefer one Place, one Proſpect,
the Converſation of one Man to that of Ano-
ther, Does not every Affection neceſſarily
imply, that the Object of it be itſelf loved!
If it be not, tis not the Object of the Affec-
tion, You may and ought if you can, but it
is a great Miſtake to think you can, love
or fear or hate any Thing, from Conſi-
deration that ſuch Love or Fear or Hatred
may be a Means of obtaining Good or avoid-
ing Evil. But the Queſtion, whether we
ought to love God for his Sake or for our
own, being a mere Miſtake in Language ;
the real Queſtion, which this is miſtaken for,
Will, I ſuppoſe, be anſwered by obſerving,
that the Goodneſs of God alrcadyygxerciſed


.


T2 "towards


Sr u. but only the Exerciſe of thoſe Faculties you]


A


AS ER MON upon


are conſcious of. Religion does not de-
mand new Affections, but only claims the].
Direction of thoſe you already have, thoſe
Affections you daily feel; though unhappily '
conſined to Objects, not altogether unſuits-
ble, but altogether uncqual to them. We on-
ly repreſent to you the higher, the adequate
Objccts of thoſe very Faculties and Affection;
Let the Man of Ambition go on ſtill to con-
ſider Diſgrace as the greateſt Evil; Honour, 2
his chief Good. But Diſgrace, in whoſe
Eſtimation ? Honour, in whoſe Judgment
This is the only Queſtion. If Shame, and
Delight in Eſteem be ſpoken of as real, as 2
ny ſettled Ground of Pain or Pleaſure; both
theſe muſt be in Proportion to the ſuppoſed
Wiſdom and Worth of him, by whom we
are contemned or eſteemed. Muſt it then
be thought enthuſiaſtical, to ſpeak of a Senſ-
bility of this Sort, which ſhall have reſped
to an unerring Judgment, to infinite Wil:
dom; when we are aſſured This unerring
Judgment, This infinite Wiſdom does ob-
lerve upon our Actions?

'T 1s the ſame with reſpect to the Love of
God in the ſtricteſt and moſt confined Senſe. ,,
We only offer and repreſent the higheſt Ob-

| ject


JU
C-
le


the Love of GOD.


ect of an Affection, ſuppoſed already in Sz.
n


your Mind. Some Degree of Goodneſs

uſt be previouſly ſuppoſed : This always
implies the Love of itſelf, an Affection to
Goodneſs: The higheſt, the adequate Object
of this Affection, is perfect Goodneſs; which
therefore we are to love with all our Heart,
with all our Soul, and with all our Strength.
% Muſt we then, forgetting our own Intereſt,
as it were go out of ourſelves, and love God
for his own Sake? ” No more forget yeur
own Intereſt, no more go out of yourſelves
than when you prefer one Place, one Proſpect,
the Converſation of one Man to that of Ano-
ther. Does not every Affection neceſſarily
imply, that the Object of it be itſelf loved ?
If it be not, tis not the Object of the Affec-
tion, You may and ought if you can, but it


| is a great Miſtake to think you can, love
or fear or hate any Thing, from Conſi-


deration that ſuch Love or Fear or Hatred
may be a Means of obtaining Good or avoid-
ing Evil. But the Queſtion, whether we
ought to love God for his Sake or for our
own, being a mere Miſtake in Language ;
the real Queſtion, which this is miſtaken for,
will, I ſuppoſe, be anſwered by obſerving,
that the Goodneſs of God already exerciſed

T3 towards


278
SERM.


XIII.
9


ASE RM O N pon


towards us, our preſent Dependance upon
him, and our Expectation of future Benefits,
ought, and have a natural Tendency, to beget
in us the Affection of Gratitude, and great-
er Love towards Him, than the ſame Good.
neſs exerciſed towards others: were it only
for this Reaſon, that every Affection is mo.
ved in Proportion to the Senſe we have ofthe


Object of it; and we cannot but have a more
lively Senſe of Goodneſs, when cxerciled


towards ourſelves, than when exerciſed tu.
wards others. I added ExpeRation of futur
Benefits, becauſe the Ground of that Expec-
tation is preſent Goodnels.

Tavs Almighty God is the natural Ob.
ject of the ſeveral Affections, Love, Reve-
rence, Fear, Deſire of Approbation. For
tho' He is ſimply One, yet we cannot but
conſider Him in partial and different Views
He is in Himſelf one uniform Being, and for
cver the ſame without Yariableneſs or Shu
dow of Turning: But his infinite Greatneß,
His Goodneſs, His Wiſdom, are different
Objects to our Mind. To which is to be
added, that from the Changes in our own
Characters, together with his Unchangeablc-
nels, we cannot but conſider ourſelves as
more o the Objects of His Approbation,
"me ; —


nz — — @A ro — 82 ©0


8 FO — a «


the Love of G OD. 279
and really be ſo. For if He approves what S 1
is Good; He cannot, meexly from the Un- — 3
changeableneſs of his Nature, approve what 8
is Evil. Hence muſt ariſe more various
Movements of Mind, more different Kinds
of Affections. And this greater Variety alſo
is juſt and reaſonable in ſuch Creatures as we
are, though it reſpects a Being ſimply one,
good and perfect. As ſome of theſe Aﬀec-
tions are moſt particularly ſuitable to ſo im-
perfect a Creature as Man, in this mortal
State we are paſling through ; ſo there may
be other Exerciſes of Mind, or ſome of
theſe in higher Degrees, our Employment
and Happineſs in a State of Perfection.


— a 3 5


oF” -. A0Y _ WV . ov 6 a


a CONSIDER then our Ignorance, the SER Mu.
l Imperfection of our Nature, our Virtue and XIV.
- & our Condition in this World, with reſpect to

an infinitely good and juſt Being, our Crea-
tor and Governour; and you will (ce what
religious Affections of Mind are moſt par-
ticularly ſuitable to this mortal State we are
paſſing through.

: TROUGH we are not affected with any
"| thing fo ſtrongly, as what we diſcern with
dur Senſes; and though our Nature and Con-
dition require, that we be much taken up
; of © about


278
SERM.


XIII.
WWW


ASE RMO N upon


towards us, our preſent Dependance upon] +;
him, and our Expectation of future Benefits, i;
ought, and have a natural Tendency, to beget c
in us the Affection of Gratitude, and great.!
er Love towards Him, than the ſame Good
neſs exerciſed towards others: were it only
for this Reaſon, that every Affection is mo. is
ved in Proportion to the Senſe we have ofthe a


Object of it; and we cannot but have a more
lively Senſe of Goodneſs, when cxercikl t


towards ourſclves, than when exerciſed to. p
wards others. I added ExpeRation of futut | «
Benefits, becauſe the Ground of that Expe- f
tation is preſent Goodneſs. t

T avs Almighty God is the natural Ob.
ject of the ſeveral Affections, Love, Reve-
rence, Fcar, Deſire of Approbation. For
tho' He is ſimply One, yet we cannot ln |
conſider Him in partial and different View. | |
He is in Himſelf one uniform Being, and for
cvet the ſame without Yariableneſs or She
dow of Turning: But his infinite Greatneb,
His Goodneſs, His Wiſdom, are different
Objects to our Mind. To which is to be
added, that from the Changes in our own
Characters, together with his Unchangeablc-
neſs, we cannct but conlider ourſelves as
more ox. leſs the Objects of His Approbation,
"7 and


1 n — — FLY


„ 5. —_— a


the Love of G OD.


279


and really be ſo. For if He approves what SEAM.


is Good; He cannot, meerly from the Un-
changeableneſs of his Nature, approve what
is Evil. Hence muſt ariſe more various
Movements of Mind, more different Kinds
af Affections. And this greater Variety alſo
is juſt and reaſonable in ſuch Creatures as we
are, though it reſpects a Being ſimply one,
good and perfect. As ſome of theſe Affec-
tions are moſt particularly ſuitable to ſo im-
perfect a Creature as Man, in this mortal
State we are paſling through ; ſo there may
be other Exerciſes of Mind, or ſome of
theſe in higher Degrees, our Employment
and Happineſs in a State of Perfection.


CoN s ID ER then our Ignorance, the SER u.


Imperfection of our Nature, our Virtue and
our Condition in this World, with reſpect to
an infinitely good and juſt Being, our Crea-
tor and Governour; and you will (ce what
religious Affections of Mind are moſt par-
ticularly ſuitable to this mortal State we are
paſſing through.

TROUGH we are not affected with any
thing ſo ſtrongly, as what we diſcern with
our Senſes ; and though our Nature and Con-


dition require, that we be much taken up


T 4 about


XIII.
ed ins


XIV.


280


ASERM ON upon


SexM. about ſenſible things ; yet our Reaſon con-


XIV.
WWW


vinces us that God is preſent with us, and we
ſee and feel the Effects of his Goodneſs :
He is therefore the Object of ſome Regards.
The Imperfection of our Virtue, joined with


the Conſideration of his abſolute Reftitude |


or Holineſs, will ſcarce permit that Perfec-
tion of Love, which intirely caſts out all
Fear: Yet Goodneſs is the Object of Love to
all Creatures who have any Degree of it
themſelves ; and Conſciouſneſs of a real En-
deavour to approve ourſelves to Him, joined


with the Conſideration of his Goodneſs, as |


it quite excludes ſervile Dread and Horror,
ſo it is plainly a rcaſonable Ground for


Hope of his Favour. Neither Fear, nor |
Hope, nor Love then are excluded: And


one or another of theſe will prevail, accord-
ing to the different Views we have of God ;
and ought to prevail, according to the
Changes we find in our own Character,
There is a Temper of Mind made up of, or
which follows from all three, Fear, Hope,
Love ; namely, Reſignation to the Divine
Will, which is the general Temper belong-
ing to this State; which ought to be the ha-


bitual Frame of our Mind and Heart, and


tO


the Love of GOD. 281
to be exerciſed at proper Seaſons more di- SERM.
ſtinctly, in Acts of Devotion. | XIV :
RESIGNATION to the Will of God is |
the whole of Piety : It includes in it all that is
good, and is a Source of the moſt ſettled
Quiet and Compoſure of Mind. There is
the general Principle of Submiſſion in our
Nature. Man is not ſo conſtituted as to de-
fire Things, and be uneaſy in the want of
them, in Proportion to their known Value :
Many other Conſiderations come in to de-
termine the Degrees of Deſire ; particularly,
| | whether the Advantage we take a View of,
be within the Sphere of our Rank. Who
ever felt Uneaſineſs, upon obſerving any of
the Advantages Brute Creatures have over
us? And yet it is plain they have ſeveral. It
is the ſame with reſpect to Advantages be-
longing to Creatures of a ſuperior Order.
Thus, though we ſee a Thing to be highly
valuable, yet that it does not belong to our
Condition of Being, is ſufficient to ſuſpend
our Deſires after it, to make us reſt ſatisfied
without ſuch Advantage. Now there is juſt
the ſame Reaſon for quiet Reſignation in the
Want of every Thing equally unattainable,
and out of our Reach in particular, though
others of our Species be poſſeſſed of it.
All


”.. ov EY OO 0” ” _


282


SERM.
XIV,
U


ASERM ON upon

All this may be applied to the Whole of
Life ; to poſitive Inconveniences as well as
Wants ; not indeed to the Senſations of
Pain and Sorrow, but to all the Uncaſincſles
of Reflection, Murmuring and Diſcontent.
Thus is Humane Nature formed to Compli-
ance, Yiclding, Submiſſion of Temper. We
find the Principles of it within us; and eve-
ry one cxerciles it towards ſome Objects or
other; 1. e. feels it with Regard to ſome
Perſons, and ſome Circumſtances. Now
this is an excellent Foundation of a reaſon-
able and religious Reſignation. Nature
teaches and inclines us to take up with our
Lot: The Conſideration, that the Courſe
of Things is unalterable, hath a Tendency
to quiet the Mind under it, to beget a Sub-
miſſion of Temper to it. But when we
can add, that this unalterable Courſe is ap-
pointed and continued by infinite Wiſdom
and Goodneſs; how abſolute ſhould be our
Submiſſion, how intire our Truſt and De-
pendance ? |

Tuis would reconcile us to our Condi-
tion; prevent all the ſupernumerary Trou-
bles ariſing from Imagination, diſtant Fears,
Impatience ; all Uncaſineſs, except that
which neccſlarily ariſes from the Calamities
| them-


the Love of GOD.


themſelves we may be under. How many of Sz x.
our Cares ſhould we by this Means be disbur- XIV.
thened of? Cares not properly our own, haw


apt ſoever they may be to intrude upon us,
and we to admit them; the Axxieties of Ex-
pectation, Sollicitude about Succeſs and Dil-
appointment, which in Truth are none of
our Concern, How open to every Gratifi-
cation would that Mind be, which was clcar
of theſe Incumbrances ?

O ux Reſignation tothe Will of God may
be ſaid to be perfect, when our Will is loſt
and reſolved up into His; when we reſt in
his Will as our End, as being itſelf moſt juſt,
and right, and good. And where is the Im-
poſſibility of ſuch an Affection to what is
juſt, and right, and good, ſuch a Loyalty of
Heart to the Governour of the Univerſe, as
ſhall prevail over all ſiniſter indirect Deſires
of our own ? Neither is this at bottom any
thing more than Faith, and Honeſty, and
Fairneſs of Mind; in a more enlarged Senſc
indeed, than thoſe Words are commonly u-
ſed. And as, in common Caſes, Fear and
Hope and other Paſlions are raiſed in us
by their reſpective Objects: So this Submiſſi-
on of Heart and Soul and Mind, this reli-
gious Reſignation, would be as naturally

produced


—
— — ——. — ——ä—— —e Z—DůÄ —u—ä—


284


ASERM ON 20


SERM. produced by our having juſt Conceptions of


XIV.


Almighty God, and a real Senſe of his Pre-
ſence with us. In how low a Degree ſo-
ever this Temper uſually prevails amongſt
Men, yet it is a Temper right in itſelf :
It is what we owe to our Creator : It is
particularly ſuitable to our mortal Condi-
tion, and what we ſhould endeavour after


for our own Sakes in our Paſſage through
ſuch a World as this ; where is nothing up-


on which we can reſt or depend ; nothing,
but what we are liable to be deceived and
diſappointed in. Thus we might acquaint
ourſelues with God, and be at Peace. This
is Piety and Religion in the ſtricteſt Senſe,
conſidered as an Habit of Mind: An habitu-
al Scnſe of God's Preſence with us ; being
affeted towards him, as preſent, in the Man-
ner his ſuperiour Nature requires from ſuch
a Creature as Man : This is to walk with
God.

L1TTLE more need be ſaid of Devotion
or religious Worſhip, than that it is this
Temper exerted into Act. The Nature of it
conſiſts in the actual Exerciſe of thoſe Affecti-
ons towards God, which are ſuppoſed habi-
tual in good Men. He is always equally pre-
ſent with us: But we are ſo much taken up

with


„


the Love of GOD. 285


with ſenſible things, that, Lo, He goeth by us, SE RM.
and we ſee Him not: He paſſeth on alſo, AY.
but we perceive Him not *. Devotion is *
Retirement, from the World he has made,
to Him alone: It is to withdraw from the
Avocations of Senſe, to employ our Attenti-
on wholly upon Him as upon an Object
actually preſent, to yield ourſelves up to the
Influence of the Divine Preſence, and to
give full Scope to the Affections of Grati-
tude, Love, Reverence, Truſt and Depen-
dance; of which infinite Power, Wiſdom
and Goodneſs, is the natural and only ade-
quate Object. We may apply to the whole
of Devotion thoſe Words of the Son of Si-
rach : When you glorifie the Lord, exalt him
as much as you can; for even yet will he far
exceed : and when you exalt him, put forth
all your Strength, and be not weary ; for
you can never go far enough F. Our moſt
raiſed Affections of every Kind cannot but
fall ſhort and be diſproportionate, when an
infinite Being is the Object of them. This is
the higheſt Exerciſe and Employment of
Mind, that a Creature is capable of. As this
Divine Service and Worſhip is itſelf abſolure-


ly


* Job, ix,12; (+ Ecclus. xliii. 30.


|
|
|


286


ASERM ON upon


StRrm. ly due to God, ſo allo is it neceſlary in order


XIV.


to a further End, to keep alive upon our
Minds a Senſe of his Authority, a Senſe that
in our ordinary Behaviour amongſt Men we
act under Him as our Governour and Judge.
Thus you ſee the Temper of Mind re-
ſpecting God, which is particularly ſuitable to
a State of Imperfection; to Creatures in a
Progreſs of Being towards ſomewhat further.
SUPPOSE now this ſomething' further at-
tained; that we were arrived at it: What a
Perception will it be, to ſee and know and
feel that our Truſt was not vain, our Depen-
dance not groundleſs ? That the Iflue, Event,
and Conſummation came out ſuch as fully
to juſtify and anſwer that Reſignation ? If
the obſcure View of the divine Perfection,
which we have in this World, ought in juſt
conſequence to beget an intire Reſignation ;
what will this Reſignation be exalted into,
when we (ball ſee Face to Face, and know as
we are known? If we cannot form any dif-
ſtin& Notion of that Perfection of the Love


af God, which caſts out all Fear; of that En-


joy ment of him, which will be the Happineſs
of good Men hercaftcr; the Conſideration
of our Wants and Capacities of Happineſs,
and that He will be an adequate Supply to

them,


the Love of GOD.


297


them, muſt ſerve us inſtead of ſuch diſſinct SER M.


Conception of the particular Happineſs it- |


| ſelf.

LE r us then ſuppoſe a Man intirely diſen-
gaged from Buſineſs and Pleaſure, fitting
down alone and at leiſure, to reflect upon
himſelf and his own Condition of Being. He
would immediatcly fecl that he was by no
means compleat of himſelf, but totally in-
ſufficient for his own Happineſs. One may
venture to affirm that every Man hath felt
this, whether He hath again reflected upon it
or not. It is feeling this Deficiency, that they
are unſatisfied with themſelves, which makes


Men look out for Aſſiſtance from abroad;
and which has given Riſe to various Kinds of


Amuſements, altogether ncedleſs any other-
wile than as they ſerve to fill up the Blank
Spaces of Time, and fo hinder their feeling
this Deficiency, and being uncaſic with
Themſclves. Now, if theſe external Things


we take up with, were really an adequate Sup-


ply to this Deficiency of Humane Nature, it
by their Means our Capacitics and Deſires
were all ſatisficd and filled up; then it might
be truly ſaid, that we had found out the pro-
per Happineſs of Man; and fo might fit down
fatisficd, and be at Reſt in the Enjoyment of

it.


XIV.


288


ASERM ON 20


SER M. it. But if it appears, that the Amuſements,
XIV. which Men uſually paſs their Time in, are ſo
F far from coming up to, or anſwering our


Notions and Deſires of Happineſs or Good,
that they are really no more than what they
are commonly called, ſomewhat to paſs a-
way the Time; . e. ſome what which ſerves
to turn us aſide from, and prevent our attend-
ing to this our internal Poverty and Want;
if they ſerve only, or chiefly, to ſuſpend,
inſtead of ſatisfy ing our Conceptions and
Deſires of Happineſs; if the Want remains,
and we have found out little more than bare-
ly the Means of making it leſs ſenſible; then
arc we ſtill to ſeek for ſomewhat to be an
adequate Supply to it. It is plain that there
is a Capacity in the Nature of Man, which
neither Riches, nor Honours, nor ſenſual
Gratifications, nor any thing in this World
can perfectly fill up, or ſatisfie: There is a
deeper and more eſſential Want, than any
of theſe Things can be the Supply of. Yet
ſurely there is a Poſlibility of Somewhat,
which may fill up all our Capacities of Hap-


pineſs; Somewhat, in which our Souls may |


find Reſt ; Somewhat, which may be to us
that ſatisfactory Good we are inquiring after.


But it cannot be any Thing which is valuable
T only


28 0


JJ . U m ¼ꝛᷣ TT ww Tr =:


the Love of G OD.


only as it tends to ſome further End. Thoſe St xm.
therefore who have got this World ſo much XIV.
into their Hearts, as not to be able to conſi SY


der Happineſs as conſiſting in any Thing bur
Property and Poſſeſſions, which are only va-
luable as the Means to ſomewhat elſe, can-
not have the lcaſt Glimpſe of the Subject be-
fore us; which is the End, not the Means;
the Thing itſelf, not ſomewhat in order to
it. But if you can lay aſide that general,
confuſed, undeterminate Notion of Happi-
neſs, as conſiſting in ſuch Poſſeſſions; and
fix in your Thoughts, that it really can con-
ſit in Nothing but in a Faculty's having its
proper Object; you will clearly ſee, that in
the cooleſt way of Conſideration, witkout
cither the Heat of fanciful Enthuſiaſm, or
the Warmth of real Devotion, nothing is
more certain, than that an infinite Being may
Himſelf be, if He pleaſes, the Supply to all
the Capacities of our Nature. All the com-
mon Enjoyments of Life are from the Fa-
culties He hath endued us with, and the Ob-
jects He hath made ſuitable to them. He
may Himſelf be to us infinitely more than all
theſe : He may be to us all that we want.
As our Underſtanding can contemplate itſelf,
and our Affections be exerciſed upon them-

U ſelves


290


ASERMON pon


Serm. ſelves by Reflection, ſo may each be em-


XIV.


ployed in the ſame manner upon any other
Mind : And ſince the Supream Mind, the
Author and Cauſe of all Things, is the high-
eſt poſſible Object to Himſelf, He may be an
adcquatc Supply to all the Facultics of our
Souls ; a Subje& to our Underſtanding, and
an Object to our Affections.

ConsIDER then: When we ſhall have
put off this mortal Body, when we ſhall be
deveſted of ſenſual Appetites, and thoſe Pol.
ſeſſions which are now the Means of Grati-
fication ſhall be of no Avail ; when this reft-
leſs Scene of Buſineſs and vain Pleaſures,
which now diverts us from ourſelves, ſhall
be all over; We, our proper Self, ſhall ſtill F
remain: We ſhall ſtill continue the ſame Þ
Creatures we are, with Wants to be ſupplicd, Þ
and Capacitics of Happineſs. We muſt have
Facultics of Perception, though not ſenſitive
ones; and Pleaſure or Uncaſineſs from oui
Perceptions, as now we have.

THERE arc certain Ideas, which we ex-
preſs by the Words, Order, Harmony, Pro-
portion, Beauty, the furtheſt removed from
any thing ſenſual. Now what is there in Þ
thoſe intellectual Images, Forms, or Ideas,
which begets that Approbation, Love, De-

light,


8 * 0 0


the Love of G OD.


light, and even Rapture, which is ſcen in SERM.
ſome Perſon's Faces upon having thoſc Ob- XIV. |


jects preſent to their Minds ?—*< Mere En-
thuſiaſm !”—Be it what it will: There are
Objects, Works of Nature and of Art, which
all Mankind have Delight from, quite dil-
tink from their affording Gratification to
ſenſual Appetites; and from quite another
View of them, than as being for their Inte-
reſt and further Advantage. The Faculties
from which we are capable of theſe Plea-
ſures, and the Pleaſures themſelves, arc as
natural, and as much to be accounted for, as
any ſenſual Appetite whatever, and the Phea-
ſure from its Gratification. Words to be
ſure are wanting upon this Subject: To ſay,
that every thing of Grace and Beauty through-
out the whole of Nature, every thing excel-
lent and amiable ſhared in differently lower
Degrees by the whole Creation, meet in the
Author and Cauſe of all Things; this is an
inadequate, and perhaps improper Way of
ſpeaking of the Divine Nature: But tis mani-
feſt that abſolute Rectitude, the Perfection of
Being, muſt be in all Senſes, and in every
Reſpect the higheſt Object to the Mind.

In this World it is only the Effects of Wil-
dom and Power and Grcatneſs, which we

U 2 diicern :


292


SERM,
XIV.


Www


ASERM ON upon


diſcern : It is not impoſſible, that hereafter
the Qualitics Themſelves in the ſupream Be-
ing may be the immediate Object of Con-
templation. What amazing Wonders are
opened to View by late Improvements !
What an Object is the Univerſe to a Crea-
ture, if there be a Creature who can com-
prehend its Syſtem ! But it muſt be an infinite-
ly higher Exerciſe of the Underſtandiag, to
view the Scheme of it in that Mind, which
projected it, before its Foundations were
laid. And ſurely we have Meaning to the
Words, when we ſpeak of going further ; and
viewing, not only this Syſtem in His Mind,
but the Wiſdom and Intelligence itſelf from
whence it proceeded. The fame may be ſaid
of Power. But ſince Wiſdom and Power
arc not God, He is a wiſe, a powerful Being;
the Divine Nature may therefore be a further
Object to the Underſtanding. It is nothing
to obſerve that our Senſes give us but an im-
perfect Knowledge of Things: Effects them-
ſelves, if we knew them thoroughly, would
give us but imperfect Notions of Wiſdom
and Power; much leſs of his Being, in whom


they reſide. I am not ſpeaking of any fan-


citu} Notion of ſccing all Things in God;
but only repreſenting to you, how much an
higher


ah — Wy wx


4 3 8 he of nt I RX” RR” _ —


the Love of GOD.


higher Object to the Underſtanding an infi- SH RM.
nite Being himſelf is, than the Things which XIV.


He has made: And this is no more than ſay-
ing, that the Creator is ſuperiour to the
Works of his Hands.

THIS may be illuſtrated by a low Exam-
ple. Suppoſe a Machine, the Sight of which
would raiſe, and Diſcoveries in its Contri-
vance gratifie, our Curioſity : the real Delight,
in this Caſe, would ariſe from its being the
Effect of Skill and Contrivance. This Skill
in the Mind of the Artificer would be an
higher Object, if we had any Senſes or Ways
to diſcern it. For, obſerve, the Contempla-
tion of that Principle, Faculty or Power
which produced any Effect, muſt be an high-
er Exerciſe of the Underſtanding, than the
Contemplation of the Effect itſelf. The
Cauſe muſt be an higher Object to the Mind
than the Effect.

B U T whoever conſiders diſtin&ly what the
Delight of Knowledge is, will ſee Reaſon
to be fatisficd that it cannot be the chief
Good of Man: All this, as it is applicable,
ſo it was mentioned with Regard to the At-
tribute of Goodneſs. I ſay, Goodneſs. Our
Being and all our Enjoyments are the Effects
of it: Juſt Men bear its Reſemblance: But

U 3 how


294. ASERM ON pon
Str mM. how little do we know of the Original, of
XIV. what it is in itſelf? Recall what was before
V © obſerved concerning the Affection to moral


Characters; which, in how low a Degree
ſoever, yet is plainly natural to Man, and


the moſt excellent Part of his Nature : Sup- i
poſe this improved, as it may be improved £
to any Degree whatever, in the Spirits of
Juſt Men made perfect; and then ſuppoſe ]
that they had a real View of that Righteouſ

|


neſs, which is an everlaſting Righteouſneſs ;
of the Conformity of the Divine Will to
the Law of Truth, in which the moral At-
tributes of God conſiſt ; of that Goodneſs in
the Sovereign Mind, which gave Birth to
the Univerſe : Add, what will be true of all
good Men hereafter, a Conſciouſneſs of ha-
ving an Intereſt in what they are contem-
plating ; Suppoſe them able to ſay, This God
:s our God for ever and ever : Would they
be any longer to feek for what was their
chief Happineſs, their final Good? Could
the utmolt Stretch of their Capacities look
further? Would not infinite perfect Good-
neſs be their very End, the laſt End and
Object of their Affections; beyond which
they could neither have, nor deſire; be-

yond


the Love of GOD. 295


yond which they could not form a Wiſh or Sz xm.
Thought ? XIV.
ConSIDER wherein that Preſence of a a

Friend conſiſts, which has often ſo ſtrong an
Effect, as wholly to poſſeſs the Mind, and
intirely ſuſpend all other Affections and Re-
gards; and which itſelf affords the higheſt
Satisfaction and Enjoyment. He is within
Reach of the Senſes. Now, as our Capaci-
ties of Perception improve, we ſhall have,
perhaps by ſome Faculty intirely new, a Per-
ception of God's Preſence with us in a near-
er and ſtricter way; fince it is certain He is
more intimately preſent with us, than any
Thing elſe can be. Proof of the Exiſtence
and Preſence of any Being is quite different
from the immediate Perception, the Conſci-
ouſneſs of it. What then will be the Joy of
Heart, which His Preſence, and the Light of
His Countenance, who is the Life of the U-
niverſe, will inſpire good Men with, when
they ſhall have a Senſation, that He is the
Suſtainer of their Being, that they exiſt in
him; when they ſhall feel his Influence to
chear and enliven and ſupport their Frame,
in a Manner of which we have now no Con-
ception? He will be in a literal Senſe heir
Strength and their Portion for ever.

U 4 Wur x


296


SERM.
XIV.


GY


ASERM ON upon


Wu we ſpeak of things ſo much a-
bove our Comprehenſion, as the Employ-
ment and Happineſs of a future State,
doubtleſs it behoves us to ſpeak with all Mo-
deſty and Diſtruſt of ourſelves. But the
Scripture repreſents the Happineſs of that
State under the Notions of ſeeing God, ſee-
ing him as He is, knowing as we are known,
and ſeeing Face ts Face. Thele Words
are not general or undetermined, but ex-
preſs a particular determinate Happineſs.
And I will be bold to ſay, that nothing can
account for, or come up to theſe Expreſſi-
ons, but only this, that God himſelf will be
an Object to our Faculties, that He Himſelf
will be our Happineſs; as diſtinguiſhed from
the Enjoyments of the preſent State, which
ſeem to ariſe, not immediately from Him,
but from the Objects He has adapted to give
us Delight. | |

To conclude ; Let us ſuppoſe a Perſon ti-
red with Care and Sorrow and the Repetiti-
on of vain Delights which fill up the Round
of Life; ſenſible that every thing here below
in its beſt Eſtate is altogether Vanity. Suppoſe
him to feel that Deficiency of Humane Na-
ture, before taken Notice of; and to be con-
vinced that God alone was the adequate Sup-


ply


the Love of GOD. 297


ply to it. What could be more applicable to Sz xn.
a good Man, in this State of Mind; or bet- XV.
ter expreſs his preſent Wants and diſtant —
Hopes, his Paſſage through this World as a
Progreſs towards a State of Perfection, than
the following Paſſages in the Devotions of
the Royal Prophet? They are plainly in an
higher and more proper Senſe applicable to
This, than they could be to any Thing elſe.
I have ſeen an End of all Perfection. Whom
have I in Heaven but Thee ? And there is
none upon Earth that I deſire in Compari-
ſon of Thee. My Fleſh and my Heart faileth :
but God is the Strength of my Heart, and
my Portion for ever. Like as the Hart
deſireth the Water-Brooks : ſo longeth my
Soul after Thee, O God. My Soul is athirſt
for God, yea, even for the living God :
when ſball I come to appear before Him?
How excellent is thy Loving-kinaneſs, O
God and the Children of Men ſhall put
their Truſt under the Shadow of thy Wings.
They ſhall be ſatisfied with the Plenteouſ-
neſs of thy Houſe : and T hou ſhalt give them
Drink of thy Pleaſures, as out of the River.
For with thee is the Well of Life : And in
thy Light ſhall we ſee Light. Bleſſed is the
Man whom thou chooſeſt, and receiveſt unto
Thee:


ASERMON upon


Ser Mm. Thee : be ſhall dwell in thy Court, and ſhall
GW


be ſatisfied with the Pleaſures of thy Houſe,
even of thy holy Temple. B leſſed is the
People, O Lord, that can rejoice in Thee :
they ſball walk in the Light of thy Counte
nance. Their Delight ſball be daily in thy
Name, and m thy Righteouſneſs ſhall they
make their Boaſt. For thou art the Glory
of their Strength: and in thy Loving-kind.
neſs They ſhall be exalted. As for me, I
will behold thy Preſence in Righteouſneſs :
and when I awake up after thy Likeneſs,
J ſhall be ſatisfied with it. Thou ſhalt
ſhew me the Path of Life; in thy Pre.
ſence is the Fulineſs of Foy, and at thy
right Hand there is Pleaſure for ever-
more.


SERMON


——_—
—


SERMON XV.


Upon the Ignorance of Man.


—


EccLES. viii. 16, 17.


When I applied mine Heart to know Wiſ-
dom, and to ſee the Buſmeſs that is done
upon the Earth: Then I beheld all the
Work of God, that a Man cannot find
out the Work that is done under the Sun
Becauſe though a Man labour to ſeek it
out, yet he ſhall not find it; yea fur-
ther, though a wiſe Man think to know
it, yet ſball he not be able to find it.


* Writings of Solomon are very St RM.


much taken up with Reflections up- XV.
on Humane Nature, and Humane
Life; to which he hath added, in this Book,
Reflections upon the Conſtitution of Things.
And it is not improbable, that the little Sa-
tisfaction, and the great Difficulties he met
with


300


SER NM.
XV.


= i id


ASERM ON b


with in his Reſcarches into the general Con-
ſtitution of Nature, might be the Occaſion
of his confining himſelf, ſo much as he hath
done, to Life and Conduct. However, up-
on that joint Review he expreſſes great Ig-
norance of the Works of God, and the Me-
thod of his Providence in the Government
of the World; great Labour and Wearineſs
in the Search and Obſervation he had em-
ployed himſelf about; and great Diſappoint-
ment, Pain, and even Vexation of Mind,
upon that which he had remarked of the
Appearances of things, and of what was go-
ing forward upon this Earth. This whole
Review and Inſpection, and the Reſult of
it, Sorrow, Perplexity, a Senſe of his ne-
ceſſary Ignorance, ſuggeſts various RefleQi-
ons to his Mind. But, notwithſtanding all
this Ignorance and Diſſatisfaction, there is
{ſomewhat upon which he aſſuredly reſts and
depends; ſomewhat, which is the Conclu-
ſion of the whole Matter, and the only Con-
cern of Man. Following this his Method
and Train of Reflection, let us conſider,

I. The Aſſertion of the Text, the Igno-
rance of Man ; that the wiſeſt and moſt


knowing cannot comprehend the Ways and
Works of God : And then,


II. WHAT


the Ignorance of Man.


Il WHAx are the juſt Conſequences of SER M.


this Obſervation and Knowledge of our own
Ignorance, and the Reflections which it leads
us to.

I. THE viſeſt and moſt knowing cannot
comprehend the Works of God, the Me-
thods and Deſigns of his Providence in the
Creation and Government of the World.

CREATION is abſolutely and intirely
out of our Depth, and beyond the Extent of
our utmoſt Reach. And yet it is as certain
that God made the World, as it is certain
that Effects muſt have a Cauſe. It is indeed
in general no more than Effects, that the moſt
knowing are acquainted with : For as to
Cauſes, they are as intirely in the Dark as the
moſt Ignorant. What arc the Laws by
which Matter acts upon Matter, but certain
Effects; which ſome, having obſerved to be
frequently repeated, have reduced to gene-
ral Rules? The real Nature and Eſſence of
Beings likewiſe is what we are altogether ig-
norant of. All theſe things are ſo intirely


out of our Reach, that we have not the leaſt
Glimpſe of them. And we know little
more of ourſelves, than we do of the World
about us : How we were made, how our Bc-


ing is continued and preſerved, what the
Facultics


WWW


ASERMON upon


SER u. Faculties of our Minds are, and upon what the
XV. power of exerciſing them depends. I am


fearfully and wonderfully made : Marvel.
lous are thy Works, and that my Soul know-
eth right well. Our own Nature, and the
Objects we are ſurrounded with, ſerve to
raiſe our Curioſity; but we are quite out of
a Condition of ſatisfy ing it. Every Secret
which is diſcloſed, every Diſcovery which is
made, every new Effe& which is brought to
View, ſerves to convince us of numberleſls


more which remain concealed, and which


we had before no Suſpicion of. And what
if we were acquainted with the whole Cre-
ation, in the ſame Way and as thoroughly
as we are with any ſingle Object in it? What
would all this natural Knowledge amount
to? It muſt be a low Curioſity indeed which
ſuch ſuperficial Knowledge could ſatisfy. On
the contrary, would it not ſerve toconvince
us of our Ignorance ſtill; and to raiſe our
Deſire of knowing the Nature of Things
themſelves, the Author, the Cauſe, and the
End of them ?

As to the Government of the World :
Though from Conſideration of the final
Cauſcs which come within our Knowledge;
of Characters, perſonal Merit and Demerit ;

of


the Ignorance of Man. 303


of the Favour and Diſapprobation, which re- St 2 m.
| ſpettively are due and belong to the Righ- XV.
teous and the Wicked, and which therefore
muſt neceſſarily be in a Mind which ſees
things as they really are; though, I ſay,
from hence we may know ſomewhat con-
cerning the Deſigns of Providence in the
Government of the World, enough to en-
force upon us Religion and the Practice of
Virtue: Yet, ſince the Monarchy of the U-
niverſe is a Dominion unlimited in Extent,
and everlaſting in Duration; the general Sy-
ſtem of it muſt neceſſarily be quite beyond
our Comprehenſion. And, ſince there ap-
pears ſuch a Subordination and Reference of
the ſeveral Parts to each other, as to con-
ſtitute it properly one Adminiſtration or Go-
vernment; we cannot have a thorough
Knowledge of any Part, without knowing
the Whole. This ſurely ſhould convince
us, that we are much leſs competent Judges
of the very {mall Part which comes under
our Notice in this World, than we are apt
to imagine. No Heart can think upon theſe
things worthily: And who is able to con-
ceive his May? It is a Tempeſt which na
Man can ſee: For the moſt Part of his
Forks are hid. Who can declare the Works


of


304
SERM. of his Fuſtice ? for his Covenant is afar
XV. off, and the trial of all things is in the
End: i. e. The Dealings of God with the
Children of Men are not yet compleated,
and cannot be judged of by that Part
which is before us. Jo that a Man cannot


fay, This is worſe than that: For in time


ASERM ON upoy


they ſball be well approved. Thy Faithful-
neſs, O Lord, reacheth unto the Clouds :
Thy Righteouſneſs ſtandeth like the ſtrong
Mountains : Thy Fudements are like the
great Deep. He hath made every thing
beautiful in his time : Alſo he hath ſet the
World in their Heart; ſo that no Man can
find out the Work that God maketh from
the Beginning to the End. And thus, St.
Paul concludes a long Argument upon the
various Diſpenſations of Providence: O the


Depth of the Riches, both of the Wiſdom


and Knowledge of God! How unſearchable


are his Fudgements, and his Ways paſt find
ing out For who hath known the Mind
of the Lord?

Tavs the Scheme of Providence, the
Ways and Works of God, are too vaſt,
of too large Extent for our Capacitics.
There is, as I may ſpeak, ſuch an Expence


of Power, and Wiſdom, and Goodneſs, in
| the


the Ignorance of Man.


305


the Formation and Government of the Sz xm.


comprehend. Power, and Wiſdom, and
Goodneſs are manifcſt to us in all thoſe
Works of God, which come. within our
View: But there are likewile infinite Stores
of each poured forth throughout the Im-
menſiry of the Creation ; no Part of which
can be thoroughly underſtood, without ta-
king in its Reference and Reſpect to the
whole: And this is what wc have not Fa-
culties for.

ANDÞ as the Works of God, and his Scheme
of Government, are above our Capacities
thoroughly to comprehend: So there poſſi-
bly may be Reaſons which originally made
it fit that many things ſhould be concealed
from us, which we have perhaps natural Ca-
pacities of underſtanding; many things con-
cerning the Deſigns, Methods and Ends of
Divine Providence in the Government of the
World. There is no Manner of Ab/urdiry
in ſuppoſing a Veil on Purpoſe drawn over
ſome Scenes of infinite Power, Wiſdom,
and Goodneſs, the Sight of which mighr
ſome Way or other ſtrike us roo ſtrongly;
or that better Ends are deſigned and ſerved


by their being conccaled than could be by
X their


N
World, as is too much for us to take in or


306


SERMu.


AS RR MO N upon


their being expoſed to our Knowledge. The


XV. Almighty may caſt Clouds and Darkneſs
round about him, for Reaſons and Purpoſes


of which we have not the leaſt Glimpſe or
Conception. |
HowEVER, it is. ſurely reaſonable, and
what might have been expected, that Crea-
turcs in ſome Stage of their Being, ſuppoſe in
the Infancy of it, ſhould be placed in a State
of Diſcipline and Improvement, where their
Patience and Submiſſion is to be tried by
Afflictions, where Temptations arc to be
reſiſted, and Difficulties gone through in the
Diſcharge of their Duty. Now If the great-
eſt Plcaſures and Pains of the preſent Life
may be overcome and ſuſpended, as they
manifeſtly may, by Hope and Fear, and o-
ther Paſſions and AﬀeRions ; then the Evi-
dence of Religion, and the Senſe of the
Conſequences of Virtue and Vice, might
have been ſuch, as intircly in all Caſes to
prevail over thoſe Afflictions, Difficulties and
Temptations ; prevail over them ſo, as to


render them abſolutcly none at all. But the


very. Notion itſelf, now mentioned, of a
State of Diſcipline and Improvement, neceſ-
farily excludes ſuch ſenſible Evidence and
Conviction of Religion, and of the Conſe-

quences


the Tenorance of Man.


quences of Virtue and Vice. Religion con-
ſits in Submiſſion and Reſignation to the
Divine Will. Our Condition in this World
is a School of Exerciſe for this Temper: And
our Ignorance, the Shallowneſs of our Rea-
ſon, the Temptations, Difficulties, Afflicti-
ons, which we are expoſed to, all equally
contribute to make it ſo. The general Ob-
ſervation may be carried on; and whoever
will attend to the thing will plainly ſee, that
leſs ſenſible Evidence, with leſs Difficulty in
Practice, is the ſame, as more ſenſible Evi-
dence, with grcater Difficulty in Practice.
Therefore Difficulties in Speculation as much
come into the Notion of a State of Diſci-
pline, as Difficulties in Practice: And ſo the
ſame Reaſon or Account is to be given of
both. Thus, though it is indeed abſurd to
talk of the greater Merit of Aſſent, upon
little or no Evidence, than upon Demonſtra-
tion; yet the ſtrict Diſcharge of our Duty,
with leſs ſenſible Evidence, does imply in
it a better Character, than the ſame Diligence
in the Diſcharge of it, upon more ſenſible
Evidence. This fully accounts for and ex-


plains that Aſſertion of our Saviour, * Bleſ-
X 2 ſed


* Joha xx. 29,


307
SzrM.


XV,
WW


308


AS ER MO N upon


SRM. ſed are they that have not ſeen, and yet


XV.


have believed ; have become Chriſtians and
obeyed the Goſpel, upon leſs ſenſible Evi-
dence, than that which Thomas, to whom
he is ſpeaking, inſiſted upon.

B u x after all, the ſame Account is to be
given, why we were placed in theſe Cir-
cumſtances of Ignorance, as why Nature
has not furniſhed us with Wings; namely,
that we were deſigned to be Inhabitants
of this Earth. 1 am afraid we think too
highly of ourſelves ; of our Rank in the
Creation, and of what is due to us. What
Sphere of Action, what Buſineſs is aſſigned
to Man, that he has nor Capacities and
Knowledge fully equal to? It is manifeſt he
has Reaſon, and Knowledge, and Faculties
ſuperiour to the Buſineſs of the preſent
World : Faculties which appear ſuperfluous,
if we do not take in the Reſpect which
they have to ſomewhat further, and beyond
it. If to acquire Knowledge were our pro-
per End, we ſhould. indeed be but poorly
provided: But if Somewhat elſe be our Bu-
ſineſs and Duty, we may, notwithſtanding


our Ignorance, be well enough furniſhed for


it; and the Obſervation of our Ignorance
2 may


- AS


the Ignorance of Man.


may be of Aſſiſtance to us in the Diſcharge Sz x mw.


of it.


II. LET us then conſider, what are the
Conſequences of this Knowledge and Obſer-
vation of our own Ignorance, and the Re-
flection it leads us to.

Firſt, WE may learn from it, with what
Temper of Mind a Man ought to enquire in-
to the Subject of Religion; namely, with


Expectation of finding Difficulties, and with


a Diſpoſition to take up and reſt ſatisfied with
any Evidence whatever, which is real.


H E ſhould before-hand expect Things my-
ſterious, and ſuch as he will not be able
throughly to comprehend, or go to the Bot-
tom of. To expect a diſtin comprehenſive
View of the whole Subject, clear of Diffi-
culties and Objections, is to forget our Na-
ture and Condition; neither of which admit
of ſuch Knowledge, with reſpect to any Sci-
ence whatever. And to inquire with this
Expectation, is not to inquire as a Man, but
as one of another Order of Creatures.

Dux Senſe of the general Ignorance of
Man would alſo beget in us a Diſpoſition to


309


XV.
—


take up and reſt ſatisfied with any Evidence


whatever, which is real. I mention this as
the contrary to a Diſpoſition, of which there
X 3 ate


C | S ERM ON h


SE RM. are not wanting Inſtances, to find. Fault with
XV. and reject Evidence, becauſe it is not ſuch as
| was deſired. If a Man were to walk by Twi-
light, muſt he not follow his Eyes as much
as if it were broad Day and clear Sunſhine ? n
Or if he were obliged to take a Journey by
Night, would he not give heed to any Light
ſhining in the Darkneſs, till the Day ſhould.
break and the Day-Star ariſe ? It would not
be altogether unnatural for him to reflect how
much better it were to have Day-light ; he
might perhaps have great Curioſity to ſce the
Country round about him ; he might lament
that the Darkneſs concealed many extended
Proſpects from his Eyes, and wiſh for the Sun
to draw away the Veil : But how ridiculous
would it be, to reject with Scorn and Diſ-
dain the Guidance and Direction which that
leſſer Light might afford him, becauſe it was
not the Sun itſelf? If the Make and Conſtitu-
tion of Man, the Circumſtances he is placed
in, or the Reaſon of Things affords the
leaſt Hint or Intimation, that Virtue is the
Law he is born under; Scepticiſm itſelf
ſhould lead him to the moſt ſtrict and inviola-
ble Practice of it ; that he may not make the
dreadful Experiment, of leaving the Courſe
of Life marked out for him by Nature, what-
ever


the Tenorance of Man. 311


ever that Nature be, and entring Paths of his SER.
own, of which he can know neither the Dan- 2 |
gers nor the End. For though no Danger


be ſcen, yet Darkneſs, Ignorance and Blind-
neſs are no manner of Security. |
Secondly, Ou x Ignorance is the proper ö
Anſwer to many Things, which ate called |
Objections againſt Religion ; particularly, to
thoſe which ariſe from the Appearances of
Evil and Irregularity in the Conſtitution of
Nature and the Government of the World.
In all other Caſes tis thought neceſſary to be
thoroughly acquainted with the whole of a
Scheme, even one of ſonarrow a Compaſs as
thoſe which are formed by Men, in order to
judge of the Goodneſs or Badneſs of it : And
the moſt ſlight and ſuperficial View of any
Humane Contrivance comes abundantly
nearer to a thorough Knowledge of it, than
that Part, which we know of the Govern-
ment of the World, does to the general
Scheme and Syſtem of it; to the whole Set
of Laws by which it is governed. From our
Ignorance of the Conſtitution of Things, and
the Scheme of Providence in the Govern-
ment of the World; from the Reference
the ſeveral Parts have to each other, and to
the Whole ; and from our not being able to


T'4 {ce


212


SERM. ſee the End and the Whole; it follows, that
WWW


ASERMON upon


however perfect Things are, they muſt even


neceſſarily appear to us otherwiſe, leſs per-
feCt than they are *.


Thirdh,


* Suppole ſome very complicated Piece of Work, ſome Syſtem
or Conflitution, formed for ſome general End, to which each
of the Parts had a Reference. The Perfection or Juſtneſs of
this Work or Conſtitution would conſiſt in the Reference and
Reſpect, which the ſeveral Parts have to the general Deſign.
This Reference of Parts to the general Deſign may be infinitely
various, both in Degree and Kind. Thus one Part may only
contribute and be ſubſervient to another; this to a third; and
ſo on through a long Series, the laſt Part of which alone may
contribute immediately and dĩrectly to the general Deſign. Or


a Part may have this diſtant Reference to the general Deſign,


and may alſo contribute immediately to it. For Inſtance: If
the general Deſign or End, for which the complicated Frame
ot Nature was brought into Being, is Happineſs ; whatever
affords preſent Satisfaction. and likewiſe rends to carry on the
Courſe of Things, hath this double Reſpe& to the general
Defign. Now ſuppoſe a Spectator of that Work or Conſti-
tution was in a great Meaſure ignorant of ſuch various Reſe-
rence to the general End, whatever that End be; and that,
upon a very ſlight and partial View which he had of the Work,
ſeveral Things appeared to his Eye diſproportionate and
wrong; others, juſt and brautiful: What would He gather
from theſe Appearances ? He would immediately conclude
there was a Probability, if he could ſee the whole Reference
of the Parts appearing wrong tothe general Defigy, that this
would deſtroy the Appearance cf Wrongneſs and Diſpropor-


tion: But there is no Probability, that the Reference would


deſtroy the particular right Appearances, though that Refe-
rence might ſhew the things already appearing juſt, to be ſo
likewiſe in an higher Degree or another Manner. There is a
F: obability, that the right Appearances were intended: There

| is


the Ignorance of Man.


ture, and the Methods and Deſigns of Pro-
vidence in the Government of the World,
are above our Comprehenſion, we ſhould
acquieſce in, and reſt ſatisfied with our Igno-
rance; turn our Thoughts from that which is
above and beyond us, and apply ourſelves to
that which is level to our Capacities, and
which is our real Buſineſs and Concern.
Knowledge is not our proper Happineſs.
Whocver 1 will in the leaſt attend to the thing
will ſee, that 'tis the Gaining, not the Having
of it, which is the Entertainment of the
Mind. Indeed, if the proper Happineſs of
Man conſiſted in Knowledge conſidered as a
Poſſeſſion or Treaſure, Men who are poſleſ-
ſed of the largeſt Share would have a very ill
Time of it; as they would be infinitely more
ſenſible than others, of their Poverty in this
Reſpet. Thus He who increaſes Know-
ledge would eminently increaſe Sorrow.


Men


is no Probability, that the wrong Appearances were. We


cannot ſuſpect Irregularity and Diſorder to be deſigned. The
Pillars of a Building appear beautiful; but their being likewiſe
its Support does not deſtroy that Beauty: There ſtill remains a
Reaſon to believe that the Architect intended the beautiful Ap-
pearance, after we have found out the Reference, Support.
It would be reaſonable for a Man of himſelf to think thus, up-
en the firſt Piece of Architecture he ever ſaw.


Thirdly, Since the Conſtitution of Na- SERM.
WY Vg


314
SERM.
XV.
WS


AS ER MO N upon


Men of deep Reſearch and curious Inquiry
ſhould juſt be put in Mind, not to miſtake
what they are doing. If their Diſcoveries
ſerve the Cauſe of Virtue and Religion, in
the way of Proof, Motive to Practice, or
Aſſiſtance in it; or it they tend to render
Life leſs unhappy, and promote its Satifacti-
ons; then they are moſt uſefully employed:
But bringing Things to Light, alone and of it-
ſelf, is of no manner of Uſe, any otherwiſe
than as an Entertainment or Diverſion. Nei-
ther is this at all amiſs, if it does not take up
the Time which ſhould be employed in bet-
ter Work. But it is evident that there is ano-
ther Mark ſet up for us to aim at; another
End appointed us to direct our Lives to: An
End, which the moſt Knowing may fail of,
and the moſt Ignorant arrive at. The ſecret
things belong unto the Lord our Cod; but
thoſe things which are revealed belong unto
us, and to our Children for ever, that we
may do all the Words of this Law. Which
Reflection of Moſes, put in general Terms, is,
that the only Knowledge, which is of any
Avail to us, is that which teaches us our Du-
ty, or aſliſts us in the Diſcharge of it. The
Oeconomy of the Univerſe, the Courſe of


Nature, Almighty Power exerted jn the Cre-


ation


4


the Ignorance of Man. 315


ation and Government of the World, is out: S 3
of our Reach? What would be the Conſe-
quence, if we could really get an Inſight into
theſe Things, is very uncertain 3 whether it
would aſſiſt us in, or divert us from what we
have to doin this preſent State. If then there
be a Sphere of Knowledge, of Contemplation
and Employment, level to our Capacities,
and of the utmoſt Importance to us; we
ought ſurely to apply ourſelves with all Dili-
gence to This our proper Buſineſs, and eſteem
every thing elſe nothing, nothing as to us, |
in Compariſon of it. Thus Job, diſcourſing
of natural Knowledge, how much it is above
us, and of Wiſdom in general, ſays, God un-
derftandeth the Way thereof, and He knou-
eth the Place thereof. And unto Man He
ſaid, Behold, the Fear of the Lord, that is
Wiſdom, and to depart from Evil is Under-
ſtanding. Other Orders of Creatures may
perhaps be let into the ſecret Counſels of
Heaven; and have the Deſigns and Methods
of Providence, in the Creation and Govern-
ment of the World, communicatcd to them :
But this does not belong toour Rank or Con-
dition. The Fear of the Lord, and to de-
part from Evil, is the only Wiſdom which
Man ſhould aſpire after, as His Work and
I Buſineſs.


4


316
| SxRM. Buſineſs. The ſame is ſaid, and with the ſame


E A Connection and Context, in the Concluſion


ASERM ON upon


of the Book of Eccleſiaſtes. Our Igno-
rance, and the little we can know of other
Things, affords a Reaſon why we ſhould not
perplex ourſelves about them : But no way
invalidates that which is the Concluſion of the
whole Matter, Fear God, and keep his Com-
mandments; for this is the whole Concern
of Man. So that Socrates was not the firſt
who endeavourcd to draw Men off from la-
bouring aſtcr, and laying Streſs upon other
Knowledge, in Compariſon of that which
related to Morals. Our Province is Virtue
and Religion, Life and Manners ; the Sci-
ence of improving the Temper, and making
the Heart better. This is the Field aſſigned us


to cultivate : How much it has lain neglected


is indced aſtoniſhing. Virtue is demonſtra-
bly the Happineſs of Man : It conſiſts in good
Actions, proceeding from a good Principle,
Tempcr or Heart. Overt-AQt are intirely
in our Power. What remains is, that we
learn to keep our Heart ; to govern and re-
culate our Paſſions, Mind, Affections: that


to we may be free from the Impotencies of


Fear, Envy, Malicc, Covetouſneſs, Ambiti-
on; that we may be clear of theſe, conſider-


ed


the Ignorance of Man.


conſtituting a general wrong Temper ; from


which general wrong Frame of Mind, all
the Miſtaken Purſuits, and far the greateſt


Part of the Unhappineſs of Life, procecd.
He, who ſhould find out one Rule to aſſiſt us
in this Work, would deſerve infinitely bet-
ter of Mankind, than all the. Improvers of
other Knowledge put together.

Laſth, Let us adore that infinite Wiſ-
dom and Power and Goodneſs, which is a-
bove our Comprehenſion. To whom hath
the Root of Wiſdom been revealed ? Or who
hath known her wiſe Counſels ? There is
one wiſe and greatly to be feared ; the Lord
ſitting upon his Throne. He created her,
and ſaw her, and numbred her, and poured


a conſiderable thing, to be acquainted with a
few, a very few, of the Effects of infinite
Power and Wiſdom ; the Situation, Bignels,
and Revolution of ſome of the heayenly Bo-
dics; whar Sentiments ſhould our Minds be
filled with concerning Him, who appointed
to each its Place and Meaſure and Sphere of
Motion, all-which arc kept with the moſt
uniform Conſtancy ? J/ho ſtretched out the
Heavens, and telleth the Number of the

Stars,


317


ed as Vices ſeated in the Heart, conſidered as SRM.


XV.
a ind


her out upon all his Works. It it be thought


SER M. Stars, and calleth them all by their Names:
XV. Ip ho laid the Foundations of the Earth, who


ASERM ON bon


comprebendeth the Duſt of it in a Meaſure,
and weigheth the Mountains in Scales, and
the Hills in a Ballance. And, when we have
recounted all the Appearances which come
within our View, we muſt add, Lo, theſe
are Part of His ways; but how little a Por-
tion is heard of Him? Canſt thou by ſearch-
ing find out God? Canſt thou find out the
Almighty unto Perfection? It is as high as
Heaven ; what canſt thou do ? deeper than
Hell; what canſt thou know ?

TRE Concluſion is, that in all Lowlineſs
of Mind we ſet lightly by Ourſelves : That we
form our Temper to an implicit Submiſſion
to the Divine Majeſty; beget within ourſelves
an abſolute Reſignation to all the Methods of
his Providence, in his Dealings with the Chil-
dren of Men: That, in the deepeſt Humility of
our Souls, we proſtrate ourſelves before Him,
and join in that celeſtial Song; Great and
marvellous are thy Works, Lord God Al-
mighty ; juſt and true are thy Ways, thou
King of Saints : Who ſball not fear Thee,
O Lord, and glorifie thy Name ?


FINITE
