The Journey of Alvar Nuñez Cabeza de Vaca (Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca (Fanny Bandelier, trans.), 1542)
==========================================================
Cabeza de Vaca's Relación (1542) - eight years shipwrecked across North America, from Florida to Mexico; the first European account of the American Southwest's peoples. Bandelier's 1905 translation.

ALVAR  NUNEZ
CABEZA  DE  VACA

FIRST  ACROSS

THE CONTINENT

1528-1536

#■%&

(Xyyi/\y\

THE  JOURNEY  OF
ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

The Trail Makers

A  Library  of  History  and  Exploration

Prof.  John  Bach Mac  Master, Consulting Editor

With  Introductions,  Illustrations,  and  Maps.
13  vols.  Each  i2ino.  $1.00,  net  per  vol.

The  Journey  of  Alviir  Nunez  Cabeza  tie  Vaca,  and
his  companions  from  Florida  to  the  Pacific,
1528-1536.

Translated  by  Fanny  liandclier.  Edited  with  an  Introduc-
tion by  Ad.  F.  Bandelier.

Narratives  of  the  Career  of  Hernando  de  Soto  in  the
Conquest  of  Florida,  1539-1542,  as  told  by  a
gentleman  of  Elvas,  by  Lnyi  Hernandez  de  ISied-
ma  and  hy  Rodrigo  Ranjel.

Edited  with  an  Introduction  by  Prof.  Edward  Gayiord
Bourne,  of  Yale  University. In  two  volumes.

The  Journey  of  Coronado,  1540-43.  From  the  City
of  Mexico  to  the  Buffalo  Plains  of  Kansas  and
Nebraska.

Translated  and  Edited,  wi  h  an  Introduction  by  George
Parker  Winship.

Voyages  from  Montreal  Through  the  Continent  of
North  America  to  the  Frozen  and  Pacific  Oceans
In  1789  and 1793.

Bu  Alexander  Mackenzie. In  tiro  volume! .

History  of  the  Expedition  "Under  the  Command  of
Captains  Lewis  and  Clark  to  the  Sources  of  the
Missouri.  Across  the  Ro<-kv  Mountains  Dow  n
the  Columbia  River  to  the  Pacific  In  1S04-4J.

With  an  account  of  the  Louisiana  Pun-  ase,  Inj  Prof.  John
Bach  MacMaster,  and  an  Introduction  Identifying  Hie  route.
In  three  volumes.

A  History  of  the  Five  Indian  Nations  of  Canada
Which  Are  Depemleitt  Upon  the  Province  of
New  York.

By  Cadwallader  ('olden.  Surveyor-General  of  trie  Colony  of
New  York. In  two  volumes.

A  Journal  of  Voyages  and  Travels  in  the  Interior
of  North  America.

By  Daniel  Williams  Harmon,  a  partner  in  the  Northwest
Company,  {beginning  in  1600).

The  Wild  Northland.  The  Story  of  a  Winter
Journey  With  Hogs  Across  Northern  North
America. 1872-:*.

By  Gen.  Sir  Wm. Francis  Butter,  K.  0.  B.

A.  S.  BARNES  &  CO.

NEW YORK

t

o

IT

SUGGESTION  OF  THE

EINE  OF  TRAVEE  OF

CABEZA  DE  VACA

AND  HIS  COMPANIONS

Cabeza  de  Vaca  ami  his  companions ■■■■  mb  ^  ■
Probable  route  of  Father  Marcos  of  Nizza

THE  JOURNEY
OF  ALVAR  NUNEZ
CABEZA  de'vACA

AND  HIS  COMPANIONS  FROM  FLORIDA
TO  THE  PACIFIC

1528-1536

TRANSLATED  FROM
HIS  OWN  NARRATIVE
By  FANNY  BANDELIER

TOGETHER  WITH  THE REPORT  OF FATHER

MARCOS  OF  NIZZA  AND  A  LETTER  FROM

THE  VICEROY MENDOZA

EDITED  WITH  AN INTRODUCTION BY

AD.  F.  BANDELIER

NEW  YORK

A.  S.  BARNES  &  COMPANY
1905

Copyright,  1905

BY

A.  S.  BARNES  &  CO.

fXa  rdacfonqueotoBfoarnu*

iie5cabe$at>eiPacaoelo  acaefddo  enlae  $ndfa0

cnla  armada  oonde  tua  po:  gouernade*  #§

pfcito  oc  narbac5^t>efdc  d  ano^e vejmie

t  fiete  bafta  d  aiio  tf  trcynta  y  feys

quebolirio  a  Sem!la^5inr?»

cefucompam'a^

TITLE  PAGE  OF  EDITION  OF  1542.

Reduced  fac-simile  from  the  original  in  the  Lenox
Branch  of  N.  Y.  Public  Library.

INTRODUCTION

THIS  volume  offers  the  original  nar-
rative of  the  first  white  man  to  cross
North  America.  The  remarkable
journey  of  Alvar  Nunez  Cabeza  de  Vaca,
Andres  Dorantes,  Alonso  del  Castillo  Mal-
donado,  and  the  Moor  Estevanico,  from
Florida  to  Northwestern  Mexico  (Sonora
and  Sinaloa),  near  the  Pacific  coast,  ante-
dates the  expeditions  of  Coronado  and  De
Soto,  whose  histories  have  already  been  pub-
lished in  The  Trail-Makers.  Nevertheless,
it  is  proper  to  publish  his  narrative  later.
Compared  with  either  of  them,  the  journey
of  Cabeza  de  Vaca  and  his  companions  is  an
episode,  important,  but  an  incident  brought
about  by  a  disastrous  failure.  This  history
describes  the  only  —  and  comparatively
meagre — results  of  the  expedition  under-
taken by  Pamfilo  de  Narvaez  in  1527,  and
an  outcome  which  had  nothing  more  to  do
with  Narvaez  and  his  ill-conducted  scheme.

INTRODUCTION

Yet  it  is  certain  that  the  appearance  of  Ca-
beza  de  Vaca  and  his  fellow-sufferers  at
Culiacan,  and  their  statements,  directed  the
attention  of  the  Spanish  authorities  at  the
young  city  of  Mexico  to  the  North  more
than  the  reports  about  the  Seven  Cities  and
the  raids  which  Nuno  de  Guzman  had  made
in  that  direction.  Nevertheless,  the  impor-
tance of  the  story  of  Cabeza  de  Vaca  must
not  be  overestimated.  A  perusal  of  the  nar-
rative shows  that  the  forlorn  wanderers
were  not — as  it  has  long  been  admitted —
the  ''discoverers  of  New  Mexico."  They
never  saw,  nor  do  they  claim  to  have  seen,
any  of  the  so-called  "Pueblos. "  They  only
heard  of  them,  in  a  more  or  less  confused
manner.  On  the  other  hand,  more  precise
than  their  information  on  this  point  is  what
they  said  about  the  plains,  their  Indians;
and  it  seems  above  all  doubt  that  the  first
knowledge  of  the  American  Bison,  or  Buf-
falo, is  due  to  their  descriptions.

On  the  minds  of  the  Spanish  occupants  of
Mexico,  especially  on  what  may  be  called
the  floating  population  (proportionately
large  at  the  time,  as  everywhere  in  newly

INTRODUCTION

occupied  countries),  the  impression  of  the
feat  performed  by  the  travellers  and  the  tale
of  their  unequalled  sufferings  produced  a
much  greater  effect  than  on  the  authorities.
The  people  saw  in  their  reports  an  outline
for  a  possible  advance  into  the  unknown  be-
yond. The  picture  of  the  country  traversed
was,  in  the  main,  not  enticing,  but  the  allu-
sion to  permanent  settlements  beyond  the
unprepossessing  plains  was  looked  upon  as
full  of  promise.  The  outcome  was  a  mod-
erate "excitement"  among  the  adventurous
and  the  idle,  and  this  excitement  was  ably
taken  advantage  of  by  the  Viceroy  of  New
Spain,  Don  Antonio  de  Mendoza.

This  high  functionary,  as  sagacious  as  he
was  cautious,  regarded  the  real  merits  of
Cabeza  de  Vaca  (who  is  the  representative
figure  in  the  whole  episode)  with  reserve.
On  February  nth  (old  style),  1537,  he
wrote  to  the  Empress  recommending  Cabeza
de  Vaca  and  Dorantes  (the  letter  mentions
Dorantes,  but  it  was  Castillo  who  went  to
Spain  with  Cabeza  de  Vaca)  to  the  benevo-
lence of  the  monarch,  in  consideration  of
"what  they  have  done  in  it  [this  country]

INTRODUCTION

and  suffered,  and  their  disposition  to  con-
tinue there  and  here,  wherever  they  may
be  sent."  He  does  not  seem  to  attach
more  than  a  modest  importance  to  the  prac-
tical results  of  their  adventures.  In  that
same  letter  he  states  that  the  wanderers  had
already  made  a  report  to  him  on  their  jour-
ney, which  report  he  had  sent  to  the  Empress
previously.  It  cannot  be  the  one  contained
in  Oviedo's  Historia  General  y  Natural  de
Jndias  (Edition  of  1850,  Vol.  Ill,  Lib.
XXXV),  since  the  latter  was  directed  to  the
Audiencia  of  Santo  Domingo.  There  is  a
fragment  of  a  Relation  attributed  to  Cabeza
de  Vaca  alone,  without  date,  in  Vol.  XIV
of  the  Documentos  Ineditos  de  Indian.  It
reads  like  a  resume,  or  condensation,  of  the
narrative  presented  in  this  volume.  This
fragment  terminates  abruptly  at  the  time
when  a  meeting  of  Cabeza  de  Vaca  and  Do-
rantes  was  being  prepared.  It  is  entitled,
"Relacion  de  Cabeza  de  Vaca,  tesorero  que
fue  en  la  c&nquista"  and  preceded  by  a
truncated  copy  of  the  directions  which  the
King  issued  to  Cabeza  de  Vaca  as  "Factor"
of  the  expedition. Whether  this  document

INTRODUCTION

(noticed  in  the  Index  under  a  very  mislead-
ing title)  is  perhaps  the  first  report  men-
tioned in  the  letter  of  Mendoza  from  Febru-
ary, 1537,  I  am  unable  to  decide  thus  far,
but  there  are  some  indications  favoring  the
supposition.

The  influence  which  the  return  and  re-
ports of  Cabeza  de  Vaca  and  companions
may  have  had  upon  the  subsequent  enter-
prise of  Hernando  de  Soto  was,  if  any,  but
slight.  The  contract  made  with  the  latter
by  the  Crown  on  April  20,  1537  (Documen-
tos  de  Indias,  Vol.  XXII,  pp.  534  to  546:
Capitulacion  que  se  tomo  con  Hernando  de
Soto,  para  conquistar  y  poblar  desde  el  Rio
de  las  P almas  Imsta  la  Florida)  does  not  per-
mit any  conclusion  on  this  point.  The  first
report  of  the  outcasts  had  probably  reached
Spain  before  that  time,  but  on*  August  15,
of  the  same  year,  Cabeza  de  Vaca  was  still
at  Lisbon.  The  statements  of  other  sur-
vivors of  the  expedition  of  Narvaez  (men-
tioned at  the  close  of  our  narrative  as  having
been  met  by  Cabeza  de  Vaca  in  Mexico  and
in  Spain)  cannot  have  been  very  encourag-
ing to  a  fresh  attempt  at  penetrating  Florida,
ix

INTRODUCTION

Still,  Soto  tried  to  enlist  the services  of
Cabeza  de  Vaca,  but  failed.

Of  the  biography  of  Cabeza  de  Vaca  only
such  portions  are  well  known  as  relate  to
his  career  in  America.  It  is  also  known
that  he  was  born  in  Jerez  de  la  Frontera,
in  Spain,  and  hence  was  an  Andalusian.
His  father — according  to  Oviedo — was
Francisco  de  Vera,  son  of  the  Spanish  Con-
queror of  the  Canaries,  Pedro  de  Vera.  His
mother  was  Teresa  Cabeza  de  Vaca,  a  native
of  Jerez.  Why  he  assumed  the  name  of  his
mother  in  place  of  his  paternal  appellative
I  am  unable  to  state.  The  family  of  Cabeza
de  Vaca  bore,  originally,  the  name  Alhaja.
They  were  simple  peasants  until  after  the
battle  of  Las  Navas  de  Tolosa,  on  July  1 1,
1212,  which  the  Kings  of  Castile,  Aragon
and  Navarra  gained  over  the  Moors.  A  few
days  before  the  battle,  a  shepherd  by  the
name  of  Alhaja  offered  to  show  the  Chris-
tian forces  a  path  by  which  they  might  cir-
cumvent the  mountain-passes  held  by  the
Moors  in  strong  force.  To  indicate  it,
he  placed  at  the  entrance  of  the  defile  the
skull  of  a  cow. In  recompense  for  this  emi-

INTRODUCTION

nent  service,  Martin  Alhaja,  until  then  a
humble  shepherd,  .was  ennobled,  and  he
changed  his  name  into  that  of  Cabeza  de
Vaca  (head  of  a  cow,  literally)  in  memory
of  the  origin  of  his  improved  social  condi-
tion. Several  of  his  descendants  held  com-
paratively high  positions,  among  them  Don
Pero  Fernandez  Cabeza  de  Vaca,  elected
grand  master  of  the  order  of  Knights  of  St.
James  in  1383.

The  career  of  Alvar  Nunez  Cabeza  de
Vaca  in  America  was  particularly  unfortu-
nate. After  the  disastrous  termination  of
Narvaez's  expedition  and  his  (almost  mirac-
ulous) return  to  Spain,  he  obtained  as  a  re-
ward for  his  sufferings  the  position  of  Gov-
ernor of  the  settlements  on  the  La  Plata
river,  vacant  since  the  death  of  Pedro  de
Mendoza.  Reaching  his  post  in  1541,  he
soon  became  the  object  of  sinister  intrigues
on  the  part  of  his  subordinates.  The  ani-
mosity against  him  broke  out,  in  1543,  in
open  revolt.  He  was  seized  and  sent  to
Spain  as  a  prisoner.  His  (mild)  captivity
there  lasted  eight  years. It  is  asserted  that

he  lived  in  Sevilla  to  an  advanced  age,  and
zi

INTRODUCTION

occupied,  up  to  his  demise  (the  date  of
which  I  have  not  yet  been*  able  to  find),  an
honorable  and  fairly  lucrative  position.

Concerning the conduct of Cabeza de
Vaca  as Governqr on the La Plata, or
Parana,  the  opinions  of  eye-witnesses  are
divided. Some  speak  in  his  favor; others,
like the German Ulrich (or Huldreich)
Schmiedel, of Straubing,  accused him of
haughty demeanor  towards his men and
cruelty. Oviedo,  who  knew  him  personally
and  conversed  with  him  on  the  matter,  is
non-committal. It  seems  likely  that  Cabeza
de  Vaca  was  an  honest  and  well-intentioned
man,  and  he  may  have  been  a  good  sub-
altern but unfit for superior command.
Hence  he  proved  a  failure  as  soon  as  raised
to  a  position  above  the  scope  of  his  abilities.
Of  the  three  companions  of  Cabeza  de
Vaca  little is known. Andres Dorantes,
who  had  been  a  captain  with  Narvaez,  was
the  son  of  Pablo  Dorantes,  a  native  of  Gib-
raleon,  Castilla. Maldonado  was  from  Sala-
manca, and  the  son  of  Doctor  Castillo  and
Aldonza  Maldonado. He  is  said  to  have

remained  in  Spain,  whereas  Dorantes  stayed
xii

INTRODUCTION

in  Mexico,  and  entered,  in  1538,  into  an
agreement  with  the  Viceroy  for  a  journey  of
exploration  to  the  north  or  Sinaloa.  It  was
never  carried  out.  Lastly  the  "negro,"
Estevanico  was  an  Arab  Moor,  from  the
town  of  Azamor,  on  the  Atlantic  coast  of
Morocco.  It  is  therefore  not  unlikely  that
he  was  not  a-  negro  proper,  but  from  one  or
the  other  of  the  tribes  of  the  desert.  His
subsequent  fate  is  well  known.  As  guide
and  advance  scout  of  Father  Marcos,  of
Nizza,  he  became  the  victim  of  his  own
imprudence,  or  lafck  of  understanding  of
the  differences  in  customs  and  beliefs  be-
tween Indian  tribes  far  distant  from  each
other.

It  is  well  known  that  Cabeza  de  Vaca
wrote  two  principal  works,  both  of  which
were  published  at  Valladolid  in  1555  by
Francisco  Fernandez  de  Cordova.  The  first
one  of  these  two  books  is  a  second  issue  of
the  one  translated  here.  The  other  gives  an
account  of  his  vicissitudes  in  Paraguay  and
what  is  now  the  Argentine  Republic,  and
bears  the  title  of  Comentarios  de  Alvar
N lines  Cabeza  de  VacU,  Adelantado  y  Gob-

xiii

INTRODUCTION

ernador  del  Rio  de  la  Plata.  The  print  from
1555  is  the  earliest  known  of  the  Cotnen-
tario's.  Of  the  Naufragios  here  translated
an  earlier  issue  has  been  foundr.  Only  two
copies  of  it  are  known :  One,  which  is  per-
fect, is  at  the  Lenox  branch  of  the  Public
Library  of  New  York ;  the  other,  somewhat
damaged,  at  the  British  Museum.  This  old-
est print  of  the  Naufragios  is  from  1542  and
was  published  at  Zamora.  Its  text  has  been
followed  exclusively  in  this  translation.  The
(reduced)  photographic  reproductions  of
the  title-pages  of  both  editions  and  of  the
kolophon  of  the  first  edition  give  an  idea  of
the  appearance  of  both  of  these  books,  the
extreme  rarity  of  which  makes  it  difficult
for  the  general  reader  to  see  them.  Both
are  small  quartos.  The  1542  edition  has  no
headings  for  chapters,  and  this  has  been  fol-
lowed here.

Oviedo,  who  gives  the  text  in  full  of  the
Letter  handed  to  the  Audiencia  of  Santo
Domingo  by  Cabeza  de  Vaca  and  Castillo
when  they  touched  that  port  on  their  return
to  Spain,  in  1537,  has  used  the  1542  print
for  comparison  with  that  letter. The  second

INTRODUCTION

edition  appeared  two  years  before  his  death
(which  occurred  in  1557),  but  it  is  manifest
that  he  did  not  use  it.

Comparing  the  Letter  to  the  Audiencia
with  the  book  of  Cabeza  de  Vaca,  Oviedo  in-
clines in  favor  of  the  former.  He  remarks  :
''But  in  a  certain  way  I  hold  the  report  of
the  three  to  be  good  and  more  clear  than
the  other  one,  which  a  single  man  made  and
has  had  printed,"  &c.  But  Cabeza  de  Vaca
was  one  of  the  three  who  framed  the  Letter
to  the  Audiencia,  and  this  document  is
merely  a  more  concise  narration  than  his
book,  and  does  not,  on  important  points,
conflict  with  it.  The  latter  was  written  in
Spain,  when  the  author  had  leisure  to  recol-
lect and  to  write.  In  a  foot-note  I  have  al-
luded to  the  statement,  made  in  the  book,
about  little  bags  filled  with  silver,  which,
Oviedo  says,  contained  only  mica.  This,
however,  he  distinctly  attributes  to  a  mis-
print, not  to  a  misstatement  by  the  author.
On  the  whole,  the  difference  between  the
two  documents  is  so  slight  that  there  has
been  no  occasion  to  publish  the  Letter  to  the

Audiencia  also.

xv

INTRODUCTION

Oviedo  mentions  Andres  Dorantes  among
the  signers  of  the  Letter,  which  was,  as  he
states,  sent  to  the  Audiencia  at  Santo  Do-
mingo from  Havana.  Cabeza  de  Vaca  af-
firms Dorantes  remained  at  Vera  Cruz,  and
thence  went  back  to  Mexico.  This  is  fully
established  by  the  communications  of  the
Viceroy,  Mendoza,  notwithstanding  Her-
rera  says  he  returned  to  Spain  with  his
companions.  The  objection  may  be  re-
moved, however,  by  supposing,  as  is  very
likely,  that  the  Letter  was  writen  in  Mex-
ico, when  the  three  wrere  still  together.

A  very  serious  objection  to  the  credibility
of  the  three  narratives,  however,  arises  from
the  fact  that  all  are  based  upon  recollections
only,  and  not  upon  journals  or  field-notes  of
any  kind.  It  was,  of  course,  impossible  for
the  outcasts,  shifted  and  shifting  from  tribe
to  tribe,  to  keep  any  written  record  of  their
trip.  Many  of  their  descriptions  are  not,
therefore,  expected  to  be  fully  accurate.

At  the  end  of  the  eight  years  of  constant
misfortune and suffering, memory clings
most  to  personal  vicissitudes,  and  the  narra-
tive of  these  does  not  appear  exaggerated,
xvi

INTRODUCTION

The  descriptions  of  the  countries  traversed,
superficial  as  they  must  be,  still  leave  some
recognizable  data,  and  so  do  the  descriptions
of  plants  and  animals.  It  is  acknowledged
that  through  Cabeza  de  Vaca  the  first  knowl-
edge of  the  buffalo  reached  Europe,  and  his
description  of  the  hunchbacked  cows,  while
very  brief,  is  quite  accurate.

Descriptions  of  customs  and  habits  of  In-
dian tribes  or  bands,  especially  of  such  as
lived  east  of  the  Rio  Grande,  must  of  course
be  accepted  with  proper  reserve.  Still,  many
may  yet  prove  to  be  of  ethnologic  value.
The  general  picture  of  the  condition  of  these
tribes  is  very  likely  to  be  exact,  while,  on
the  other  hand,  many  details  are  probably
misstated,  through  having  been  misunder-
stood or  superficially  observed.  It  might  be
worth  while  to  make  a  special  study  of  these
ethnographic  data  and  compare  them  with
whatever  material  of  the  kind  has  been
placed  on  record  by  subsequent  explorers
and  narrators.

In  the  statements  regarding  the  "faith
cures"  which  the  travellers  claim  to  have
performed,  and  to  which  they  attribute  the

INTRODUCTION

success  of  their  desperate  attempt  to  cross
the  continent,  there  is  truth  as  well  as  hon-
est delusion.  Indian  medicine  itself  bases
largely  upon  conceptions  of  the  kind,  and
empirical  hypnotism  plays  a  part  in  the  per-
formances of  their  medicine-men.  Cabeza
de  Vaca,  unconsciously  and  by  distinct
methods,  imitated  the  Indian  Shamans  and
probably  succeeded,  in  at  least  many  cases,
since  the  procedure  was  new  and  striking.
That  they  attributed  their  success  to  the  di-
rect aid  of  divine  power  was  in  strict  accord-
ance with  the  spirit  of  the  times  and  by  no
means  to  their  discredit.  On  the  contrary,
there  is  a  commendable  modesty  in  their  dis-
claimer of  merits  of  their  own.  It  should
also  not  be  forgotten  that  men  in  their  ex-
ceptional situation,  without  reasonable  hope
of  salvation,  relentlessly  persecuted  by  mis-
fortune and  the  worst  hardships  for  many
years,  have  their  imagination  finally  raised
to  the  higest  pitch,  and  exaggerations  and
misconceptions  become  therefore  excusable.
There  is  no  doubt  that  they  sincerely  be-
lieved their  own  statements.  Not  only  the
times must  be  taken into  account when

xviii

INTRODUCTION

judgment  is  passed,  but  also  the  violent
strain  under  which  they  labored  for  such  a
long  period.

In  regard  to  the  route  followed  by  the
outcasts,  there  are  but  very  few  ascertained
points. Opinions  vary  so  much  that  I  shall
not  attempt  to  trace  the  course  of  their  wan-
derings except  by  referring  to  the  sketch-
map  appended. The  route  traced  is  a  mere
suggestion of  possible  approximations, as
stated  on  it. It  will  certainly  be  modified
by  the  results  of  investigations  in  the  coun-
tries themselves,  which  I  have  not  been  and
am  not  able  to  carry  on*  myself. It  seems,
however,  that  the  overland  journey  of  the
four  began  at  some  point  west  of  the  Missis-
sippi, and  that  they  successively  traversed
the  State  of  Texas  and  the  northern  part  of
the  Mexican  Republic  into  central  Sonora.
It  is  not  likely  they  touched  New  Mexico,
and  they  certainly  never  saw  the  New  Mexi-
can pueblos,  but  heard  of  them  in  Sonora.
Cabeza  de  Vaca  therefore  but  confirmed  the
few  vague  notions  extant  at  his  time  about
the  sedentary  Indians  of  New  Mexico,  but
was  not  the  real  discoverer  of  that  country.

INTRODUCTION

The  bibliography  of  the  book  of  Cabeza
de  Vaca  is  soon  told.  In  addition  to  the  two
issues  often  mentioned— the  Editio  Princeps
from  1542,  and  the  second  of  1555 — there
are  two  more  Spanish  publications  of  it
known.  The  earliest  is  in  Volume  II  of  the
Collection  by  Andres  Gonzales  Barcia,  Hts-
toriades  primitivos  de  Indias,  1749.  Its  title
is :  Naufragios  y  relation  de  la  Jornada  que
hizo  a  la  Florida,  con  Pdniilo  de  Narvaez.

The  other  is  found  in  Volume  II  of  the
Historiadores  primitivos  de  Indias,  by  Eii-
riqae  de  Vedia.  The  title  of  this  (the  text
of  which  was  taken  from  the  Edition*  of
1555)  reads:  Naufragios  de  Alvar  Nunez
Cabeza  de  Vaca  y  Relation  de  la  Jornada
que  hizo  a  la  Florida  con  el  Adelantado  Pdn-
iilo de  Narvaez.  It  is  well  known  that  the
two  volumes  of  Vedia's  reprints  of  older
narratives  and  histories  touching  upon
America  form  a  part  of  the  voluminous  col-
lection entitled,  Biblioteca  de  Autores  Espa-
iioles,  published  at  Madrid,  and  thaft  the  two
volumes  of  Vedia  were  printed  in  1852.

An  Italian  version,  under  the  title  of  Re-
lation che  fece  Alvaro  Nvnez  detto  Capo  di
xx

INTRODUCTION

Vacca,  di  quell o  ch'  intervenne  nell  India
all'  armata,  della  qual  era  gouernatore  Pam-
philo  Naruaez,  dell  anno  1527  Uno  all  1536,
che  ritorno  in  Sibilla  con  tu  soli  suoi  com-
pagni,  is  contained  in  Volume  II  of  the  cele-
brated collection  of  travels  and  voyages  by
Gian  Battista  Ramusio,  Delle  Navigatione  e
Viaggi,  1556,  Venice. '

Of  English  translations  there  have  ap-
peared thus  far  three :  In  Samuel  Purchas  :
His  Pilgrimage,  London,  1625- 1626,  Vol-
ume IX :  Relation  of  the  fleet  in  India,
whereof  Pamphilus  Naruaez  was  gouemor.
The  Narrative  of  Alva  Nunez  Cabeza  de
Vaca*,  translated  by  Buckingham  Smith,
Washington,  1851.  This  translation  is  just-
ly prized.  A  second  edition  of  it  appeared
at  New  York  in  1871,  edited  by  the  late  John
Gilmary  Shea.  Finally  there  is  a  paraphrase
of  the  book  in  Tcdes  of  Old  Travels,  Nar-
rated by  H.  Kingsley,  London,  1869.

In  the  French  language  there  is  the  well-
known  translation  by  H.  Ternaux  Compans
in  the  first  series  of  his  collection :  Voyages,
Relations  et  Memoires  originanx  pour  servir

d  I'Histoire  de  la  Decouverte  de  I'Ameriqae.
xxi

INTRODUCTION

Date  of  publication,  1837.  Title:  Relation
Vaca,  Adelantade  et  Gouverneur  du  Rio  de
la  Plata.

A  word  yet  touching  the  translation  here
given.  The  narrative  of  Cabeza  de  Vaca  is
very  difficult  to  translate  for  the  reason,  thai
the  criticism  by  Oviedo  about  its  lack
of  clearness  is  too  well  founded.  Many
parts  of  chapters  and  also  whole  chap-
ters are  so  confused  that  it  is  impos-
sible to  follow  the  original  more  than  re-
motely, and  paraphrasing  had  to  be  resorted
to.  Even  then,  in  several  instances,  the
meaning  remains  possibly  somewhat  ob-
scure. It  is  as  if  the  author,  in  consequence
of  long  isolation  and  constant  intercourse
with  people  of  another  speech,  had  lost  touch
with  his  native  tongue.  There  is  less  of  this
in  his  later  work,  the  Comentarios,  written
after  a  number  of  years  of  uninterrupted  in-
tercourse with  his  countrymen.

AD. F. BANDELIER.
New  York  City,  March  28,  1905.

xxii

C  £a  rclacion  p  comcntarioo  oel  gouerna

do^Bluar nuncjcabcca  fce  vaea,  cc  to  acacfado cnlaa
Cos  jojifad  as  que  bi'50  a  taa  Jndi  as.

Con  pa'uflcgio.

4  E  fit  ciffkU^r  k»  «e**  :«:t  rtt&i  oen O  <*&»  Y  *»  m*

TITLE  PAGE  OF  EDITION  OF  1555.

Reduced from original in Lenox Branch of
N.  Y.  Public  Library.

The  Journey  of  Alvar  Nunez
Cabeza  De  Vaca

ON  the  27th  day  of  the  month  of  June,
1527,1  the  Governor  Panfilo  de  Nar-
vaez  departed  from  the  port  of
San  Lucar  de  Barrameda,  with  authority
and  orders  from  Your  Majesty  to  conquer
and  govern  the  provinces  that  extend  from
the  river  of  the  Palms  to  the  Cape  of  the
Florida,  these  provinces  being  on  the  main
land.  The  fleet  he  took  along  consisted  of
five  vessels,  in  which  went  about  600  men.
The  officials  he  had  with  him  (since  they
must  be  mentioned)  were  those  here  named :
Cabeza  de  Vaca,  treasurer  and  alguacil
mayor ;  Alonso  Enriquez,  purser ;  Alonso  de
Solis,  factor  of  Your  Majesty  and  inspector.
A  friar  of  the  order  of  Saint  Francis,  called
Fray  Juan  Gutierrez,2  went  as  commissary,

1A\\  the  dates  are  old  style,  of  course.

2The  edition  of  1555  and  subsequent  publications
have  Fray  Juan  Suarez,  which  the  first  edition
from  1542  also  has,  as  will  be  seen  subsequently,
so  that  the  name  of  this  Commissary  of  the  Fran-
ciscans must  have  been  Suarez,  or  (as  it  is  also
written)  Xuarez.

I

THE JOURNEY OF

with  four  other  monks  of  the  order.  We
arrived  at  the  Island  of  Santo  Domingo,
where  we  remained  nearly  forty-five  days,
supplying  ourselves  with  necessary  things,
especially  horses.  Here  more  than  140  men
of  our  army  forsook  us,  who  wished  to  re-
main, on  account  of  the  proposals  and  prom-
ises made  them  by  the  people  of  the  country.
From  there  we  started  and  arrived  at  San-
tiago (a  port  in  the  Island  of  Cuba)  where,
in  the  few  days  that  we  remained  the  Gov-
ernor supplied  himself  again  with  people,
arms  and  horses.  It  happened  there  that  a
gentleman  called  Vasco  Porcallo,  a  resi-
dent of  la  Trinidad  (which  is  on  the  same
island),  offered  to  give  the  Governor
certain  stores  he  had  at  a  distance  of
100  leagues  from  the  said  harbor  of  San-
tiago.

The  Governor,  with  the  whole  fleet,  sailed
for  that  place,  but  midways,  at  a  port
named  Cape  Santa  Cruz,  he  thought  best  to
stop  and  send  a  single  vessel  to  load  and
bring  these  stores.  Therefore  he  ordered  a
certain  Captain  Pantoja  to  go  thither  with
his  craft  and  directed  me  to  accompany  him

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

for  the  sake  of  control,  while  he  remained
with  four  ships,  having  purchased  one  on
the  Island  of  Santo  Domingo.  Arrived  at
the  port  of  Trinidad  with  these  two  vessels,
Captain  Pantoja  went  with  Vasco  Porcallo
to  the  town  (which  is  one  league  from
there)  in  order  to  take  possession  of  the
supplies.  I  remained  on  board  with  the
pilots,  who  told  us  that  we  should  leave  as
soon  as  possible,  since  the  harbor  was  very
unsafe  and  many  vessels  had  been  lost  in  it.
Now,  since  what  happened  to  us  there  was
very  remarkable,  it  appeared  to  me  not  un-
suitable, for  the  aims  and  ends  of  this,  my
narrative,  to  tell  it  here.

The  next  morning  the  weather  looked
ominous.  It  began  to  rain,  and  the  sea
roughened  so  that,  although  I  allowed  the
men  to  land,  when  they  saw  the  weather
and  that  the  town  was  one  league  away,
many  came  back  to  the  ship  so  as  not  to  be
out  in  the  wet  and  cold.  At  the  same  time
there  came  a  canoe  from  the  town  convey-
ing a  letter  from  a  person  residing  there,
begging  me  to  come,  and  they  would  give
me  the  stores  and  whatever  else  might  be
3

THE JOURNEY OF

necessary.  But  I  excused  myself,  stating
that  I  could  not  leave  the  ships.

At  noon  the  canoe  came  again  with  an-
other letter,  repeating  the  request  with
much  insistency,  and  there  was  also  a  horse
for  me  to  go  on.  I  gave  the  same  reply
as  the  first  time,  saying  that  I  could  not
leave  the  vessels.  But  the  pilots  and  the
people  begged  me  so  much  to  leave  and
hasten  the  transportation  of  the  stores  to
the  ships,  in  order  to  be  able  to  sail  soon,
from  a  place  where  they  were  in  great
fear  the  ships  would  be  lost  in  case  they  had
to  remain  long.  So  I  determined  upon  go-
ing, although  before  I  went  I  left  the  pilots
well  instructed  and  with  orders  in  case  the
south  wind  (which  often  wrecked  the  ship-
ping) should  rise,  and  they  found  them-
selves in  great  danger,  to  run  the  vessels
ashore,  when  men  and  horses  might  be
saved.  So  I  left,  wishing  for  some  of  them
to  accompany  me,  but  they  refused,  alleging
the  hard  rain,  the  cold  and  that  the  town
was  far  away.

On  the  next  day,  which  was  Sunday,  they
promised  to  come,  God  helping,  to  hear
4

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

mass.  One  hour  after  my  departure  the
sea  became  very  rough  and  the  north  wind
blew  so  fiercely  that  neither  did  the  boats
dare  to  land,  nor  could  they  beach  the  ves-
sels, since  the  wind  was  blowing  from  the
shore.  They  spent  that  day  and  Sunday
greatly  distressed  by  two  contrary  storms
and  much  rain,  until  nightfall.  Then  the
rain  and  storm  increased  in  violence  at  the
village,  as  well  as  on  the  sea,  and  all  the
houses  and  the  churches  fell  down,  and  we
had  to  go  about,  seven  or  eight  men  locking
arms  at  a  time,  to  prevent  the  wind  from
carrying  us  off,  and  under  the  trees  it  was
not  less  dangerous  than  among  the  houses,
for  as  they  also  were  blown  down  we  were
in  danger  of  being  killed  beneath  them.  In
this  tempest  and  peril  we  wandered  about
all  night,  without  finding  any  part  or  place
where  we  might  feel  safe  for  half  an  hour.
In  this  plight  we  heard,  all  night  long  and
especially  after  midnight,  a  great  uproar,  the
sound  of  many  voices,  the  tinkling  of  little
bells,  also  flutes  and  tambourines  and  other
instruments,  the  most  of  which  noise  lasted
until  morning,  when  the  storm  ceased.
5

THE JOURNEY OF

Never  has  such  a  fearful  thing  been  wit-
nessed in  those  parts.  I  took  testimony  con-
cerning it,  and  sent  it,  certified,  to  Your
Majesty.  On  Monday  morning  we  went
down  to  the  harbor,  but  did  not  find  the  ves-
sels. We  saw  the  buoys  in  the  water,  and
from  this  knew  that  the  ships  were  lost.  So
we  followed  the  shore,  looking  for  wreck-
age, and  not  finding  any  turned  into  the  for-
est. Walking  through  it  we  saw,  a  fourth
of  a  league  from  water,  the  little  boat  of  one
of  the  vessels  on  the  top  of  trees,  and  ten
leagues  further,  on  the  coast,  were  two  men
of  my  crew  and  certain  covers  of  boxes.
The  bodies  were  so  disfigured  by  striking
against  the  rocks  as  to  be  unrecognizable.
There  were  also  found  a  cape  and  a  tattered
quilt,  nothing  else.  Sixty  people  and  twenty
horses  perished  on  the  ships.  Those  who
went  on  land  the  day  we  arrived,  some  thirty
men,  were  all  who  survived  of  the  crews  of
both  vessels.

We  remained  thus  for  several  days  in
great  need  and  distress,  for  the  food  and
stores  at  the  village  had  been  ruined  also,

as  well  as  some  cattle. The  country  was
6

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

pitiable  to  look  at.  The  trees  had  fallen
and  the  woods  were  blighted,  and  there  was
neither  foliage  nor  grass.  In  this  condition
we  were  until  the  5th  day  of  the  month  of
November,  when  the  Governor,  with  his
four  vessels,  arrived.  They  also  had  weath-
ered a  great  storm  and  had  escaped  by  be-
taking themselves  to  a  safe  place  in  time.
The  people  on  board  of  the  ships  and  those
he  found  were  so  terrified  by*  what  had  hap-
pened that  they  were  afraid  to  set  to  sea
again  in  winter  and  begged  the  Governor
to  remain  there  for  that  season,  and  he,  see-
ing their  good  will  and  that  of  the  inhabi-
tants, wintered  at  that  place.  He  put  into
my  charge  the  vessels  and  their  crews,  and
I  was  to  go  with  them  to  the  port  of  Xagua,
twelve  leagues  distant,  where  I  remained
until  the  20th  day  of  February.

A T  that  time  the  Governor  came  with

/A a  brig  he  had  bought  at  Trinidad,

and  with  him  a  pilot  called  Miruelo.

That  man  he  had  taken  because  he  said

he  knew  the way  and had been  on  the

7

THE JOURNEY OF

river  of  the  Palms  and  was  a  very  good
pilot  for  the  whole  northern  coast.  The
Governor  left,  on  the  coast  of  Habana,  an-
other vessel  that  he  had  bought  there,  on
which  there  remained,  as  captain,  Alvaro  de
Cerda,  with  forty  people  and  twelve  horse-
men. Two  days  after  the  Governor  ar-
rived he  went  aboard.  The  people  he  took
along  were  400  men  and  eighty  horses,  on
four  vessels  and  one  brigantine.  The  pilot
we  had  taken  ran  the  vessels  aground  on  the
sands  called  "of  Canarreo,"  so  that  the  next
day  we  were  stranded  and  remained  strand-
ed for  fifteen  days,  the  keels  often  touching
bottom.  Then  a  storm  from  the  south  drove
so  much  water  on  the  shoals  that  we  could
get  off,  though  not  without  much  danger.
Departing  from  there  and  arrived  at
Guaniguanico,  another  tempest  came  up  in
which  we  nearly  perished.  At  Cape  Cor-
rientes  we  had  another,  which  lasted  three
days.  Afterward  we  doubled  the  Cape  of
Sant  Anton  and  sailed  with  contrary  winds
as  far  as  twelve  leagues  off  Habana,  and
when,  on  the  following  day,  we  attempted  to

enter,  a  southerly  storm  drove  us  away,  so
8

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

that  we  crossed  to  the  coast  of  Florida,
sighting  land  on  Tuesday,  the  12th  day  of
the  month  of  April.3  We  coasted  the  way
of  Florida,  and  on  Holy  Thursday  cast  an-
chor at  the  mouth  of  a  bay,  at  the  head  of
which  we  saw  certain  houses  and  habita-
tions of  Indians.

ON  that  same  day  the  clerk,  Alonso
Enriquez,  left  and  went  to  an  island
in  the  bay  and  called  the  Indians,
who  came  and  were  with  him  a  good  while,
and  by  way  of  exchange  they  gave  him  fish
and  some  venison.  The  day  following
(which  was  Good  Friday)  the  Governor
disembarked,  with  as  many  men  as  his  little
boats  would  hold,  and  as  we  arrived  at  the
huts  or  houses  of  the  Indians  we  had  seen,
we  found  them  abandoned  and  deserted,  the

8Same  date  in  Oviedo  (Historia  general  y  nat-
ural de  Indias,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  582.  But  the  details
of  the  stay  on  the  coast  and  in  the  ports  of  Cuba
are  only  found  in  Cabeza  de  Vaca's  book,  and  in
his  Relacion  (Documentos  de  Indias,  Vol.  XIV,
p.  289),  where  he  mentions  two  tempests:  the
great  hurricane  and  one  that  nearly  wrecked  them
near  Cape  Corrientes.  That  Relacion  seems  like
an  abridgement  of  the  Naufragios.
9

THE JOURNEY OF

people  having  left  that  same  night  in  their
canoes.  One  of  those  houses  was  so  large
that  it  could  hold  more  than  300  people.
The  others  were  smaller,  and  we  found  a
golden  rattle  among  the  nets.  The  next  day
the  Governor  hoisted  flags  in  behalf  of  Your
Majesty  and  took  possession  of  the  country
in  Your  Royal  name,  exhibited  his  creden-
tials, and  was  acknowledged  as  Governor
according  to  Your  Majesty's  commands.
We  likewise  presented  our  titles  to  him,
and  he  complied  as  they  required.  He
then  ordered  the  remainder  of  the  men  to
disembark,  also  the  forty-two  horses  left
(the  others  having  perished  on  account  of
the  great  storms  and  the  long  time  they  had
been  on  sea),  and  these  few  that  remained
were  so  thin  and  weak  that  they  could  be  of
little  use  for  the  time.  The  next  day  the
Indians  of  that  village  came,  and,  although
they  spoke  to  us,  as  we  had  no  interpreters
we  did  not  understand  them ;  but  they  made
many  gestures  and  threats,  and  it  seemed  as
if  they  beckoned  to  us  to  leave  the  country.
Afterward,  without  offering  any  molesta-
tion, they  went  away.
10

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

AFTER  another  day  the  Governor  re-
solved to  penetrate  inland  to  ex-
plore the  country  and  see  what  it
contained.  We  went  with  him — the  com-
missary, the  inspector  and  myself,  with
forty  men,  among  them  six  horsemen,  who
seemed  likely  to  be  of  but  little  use.  We
took  the  direction  of  the  north,  and  at  the
hour  of  vespers  reached  a  very  large  bay,
which  appeared  to  sweep  far  inland.  After
remaining  there  that  night  and  the  next
day,  we  returned  to  the  place  where  the  ves-
sels and  the  men  were.  The  Governor  or-
dered the  brigantine  to  coast  towards  Flor-
ida in  search  of  the  port  which  Miruelo,  the
pilot,  had  said  he  knew,  but  he  had  missed
it  and  did  not  know  where  we  were,  nor
where  the  port  was.  So  word  was  sent  to
the  brigantine,  in  case  it  were  not  found  to
cross  over  to  Habana  in  quest  of  the  vessel
of  Alvaro  de  la  Cerda,  and,  after  taking  in
some  supplies,  to  come  after  us  again.

After  the  brigantine  left  we  again  pene-
trated inland,  the  same  persons  as  before,

with  some  more  men. We  followed  the
ii

THE JOURNEY OF

shore  of  the  bay,  and,  after  a  march  of  four
leagues,  captured  four  Indians,  to  whom  we
showed  maize  in  order  to  find  out  if  they
knew  it,  for  until  then  we  had  seen  no  trace
of  it.  They  told  us  that  they  would  take  us
to  a  place  where  there  was  maize  and  they
led  us  to  their  village,  at  the  end  of  the  bay
nearby,  and  there  they  showed  us  some  that
was  not  yet  fit  to  be  gathered.  There  we
found  many  boxes  for  merchandize  from
Castilla.  In  every  one  of  them  was  a  corpse
covered  with  painted  deer  hides.  The  com-
missary thought  this  to  be  some  idolatrous
practice,  so  he  burnt  the  boxes  with  the
corpses.  We  also  found  pieces  of  linen  and
cloth,  and  feather  head  dresses  that  seemed
to  be  from  New  Spain,  and  samples  of  gold.
We  inquired  of  the  Indians  (by  signs)
whence  they  had  obtained  these  things  and
they  gave  us  to  understand  that,  very  far
from  there,  was  a  province  called  Apalachen
in  which  there  was  much  gold.4 They  also

*There  is  a  discrepancy  here  between  the  state-
ment of  Cabeza  de  Vaca  and  the  Letter  to  the
Audiencia.  The  latter  says  {Historia,  &c,  III,
P-  583)  :  "And  there  they  found  some  large  boxes
from  Castilla,  and  in  each  of  them  a  dead  man,
and  the  corpses  covered  with  painted  hides.  It
12

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

signified  to  us  that  in  that  province  we
would  find  everything  we  held  in  esteem.
They  said  that  in  Apalachen  there  was
plenty.

So,  taking  them  as  guides,  we  started,  and
after  walking  ten  or  twelve  leagues,  came
tc  another  village  of  fifteen  houses,  where
there  was  a  large  cultivated  patch  of  corn

appeared  to  the  Commissary  and  friars  that  these
were  idolatries,  so  the  Governor  had  them  burnt.
There  were  also  found  pieces  of  shoes  and  canvas
(liemo),  of  cloth  and  some  iron,  and  inquiring
of  the  Indians  they  told  us  by  signs  that  they  had
found  it  in  a  vessel  that  had  been  lost  on  this
coast  and  in  that  bay."

The  text  of  Oviedo  discriminates  between  the
origin  of  these  objects  and  that  of  the  gold,  which
it  says  the  Indians  declared  that  there  was  none
in  the  country,  but  at  Apalache,  very  far  away.
The  first  edition  always  has  either  Apalachen  or
Palachen.  Oviedo  (p.  615)  justly  blames  the
friars  for  having  burnt  the  bodies:  "Since  the
boxes  and  other  indications  might  have  led  them
to  think  that  they  were  the  bodies  of  Christians,
and  so  it  is  stated  in  the  second  relation,  that  they
learned  from  Indians  that  these  dead  people  had
been  Christians."  The  Relation  (p.  270)  men-
tions briefly  the  bodies,  and  also  states  that  gold
was  found  in  the  province  of  Apalache.

The  shipwreck  mentioned  may  allude  to  the
loss,  in  1526,  of  one  of  the  two  vessels  in  which
Lucas  Vazquez  de  Ayllon  made  his  unlucky
voyage  to  Chicora.  This  vessel  was  lost  at  the
mouth  of  the  "Rio  Jordon"  Herrera  (Historia
general,  &c,  1726.  Vol.  II.  p.  242,  Decada  III,
Lib.  VII,  Cap.  XIII).  Still,  this  is  conjectural
and  requires  special  investigation,  which  does  not
enter  into  the  scope  of  these  notes.
x3

THE JOURNEY OF

nearly  ready  for  harvest,  and  also  some
that  was  already  ripe.  After  staying  there
two  days,  we  returned  to  the  place  where  we
had  left  the  purser,  the  men  and  the  vessels,
and  told  the  purser  and  pilots  what  we  saw
and  the  news  the  Indians  had  given  us.

The  next  day,  which  was  the  1st  of  May,
the  Governor  took  aside  the  commissary,  the
purser,  the  inspector,  myself,  a  sailor  called
Bartolome  Fernandez  and  a  notary  by  the
name  of  Jeronimo  de  Albaniz,  and  told  us
that  he  had  in  mind  to  penetrate  inland,
while  the  vessels  should  follow  the  coast  as
far  as  the  harbor;  since  the  pilots  said  and
believed  that,  if  they  went  in  the  direction
of  the  Palms  they  would  reach  it  soon.  On
this  he  asked  us  to  give  our  opinions.

I  replied  that  it  seemed  to  me  in  no  man-
ner advisable  to  forsake  the  ships  until  they
were  in  a  safe  port,  held  and  occupied  by
us.  I  told  him  to  consider  that  the  pilots
were  at  a  loss,  disagreeing  among  them-
selves, undecided  as  to  what  course  to  pur-
sue. Moreover,  the  horses  would  not  Be
with  us  in  case  we  needed  them,  and,  fur-
thermore, we  had  no  interpreter  to  make
14

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

ourselves  understood  by  the  natives ;  hence
we  could  have  no  parley  with  them.  Neither
did  we  know  what  to  expect  from  the  land
we  were  entering,  having  no  knowledge  of
what  it  was,  what  it  might  contain  and  by
what  kind  of  people  it  was  inhabited,  nor
in  what  part  of  it  we  were ;  finally,  that  we
had  not  the  supplies  required  for  penetrating
into  an  unknown  country,  for  of  the  stores
left  in  the  ships  not  more  than  one  pound  of
biscuit  and  one  of  bacon  could  be  given  as
rations  to  each  man  for  the  journey,  so  that,
in  my  opinion,  we  should  re-embark  and
sail  in  quest  of  a  land  and  harbor  better
adapted  to  settlement,  since  the  country
which  we  had  seen  was  the  most  deserted
and  the  poorest  ever  found  in  those  parts.

The  commissary  was  of  the  contrary
opinion  saying,  that  we  should  not  embark,
but  follow  the  coast  in  search  of  a  harbor,  as
the  pilots  asserted  that  the  way  to  Panuco
was  not  more  than  ten  or  fifteen  leagues  dis-
tant and  that  by  following  along  the  coast  it
was  impossible  to  miss  it,  since  the  coast
bent  inland  for  twelve  leagues.  The  first
ones  who  came  there  should  wait  for  the
i5

THE JOURNEY OF

others.  As  to  embarking,  he  said  it  would
be  to  tempt  God,  after  all  the  vicissitudes  of
storms,  losses  of  men  and  vessels  and  hard-
ships we  had  suffered  since  leaving  Spain,
and  until  we  came  to  that  place.  So  his  ad-
vice would  be  to  move  along  the  coast  as  far
as  the  harbor,  while  the  vessels  with  the
other  men  would  follow  to  the  same  port.

To  all  the  others  this  seemed  to  be  the
best,  except  to  the  notary,  who  said  that  be-
fore leaving  the  ships  they  should  be  put
into  a  harbor  well  known,  safe  and  in  a  set-
tled country,  after  which  we  might  go  in-
land and  do  as  we  liked.

The  Governor  clung  to  his  own  idea  and
to  the  suggestions  of  the  others.

Seeing  his  determination,  I  required  him,
on  the  part  of  Your  Majesty,  not  to  forsake
the  vessels  until  they  were  in  a  secure  port,
and  I  asked  the  notary  present  to  testify  to
what  I  said.  The  Governor  replied  that  he
approved  the  opinion  of  the  other  officials
and  of  the  commissary;  that  I  had  no  au-
thority for  making  such  demands,  and  he
asked  the  notary  to  give  him a  certified

statement  as  to  how,  there  not  being  in  the
16

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

country  the  means  for  supporting  a  settle-
ment, nor  any  harbor  for  the  ships,  he  broke
up  the  village  he  had  founded,  and  went  in
search  of  the  port  and  of  a  better  land.  So
he  forthwith  ordered  the  people  who  were  to
go  with  him  to  get  ready,  providing  them-
selves with  what  was  necessary  for  the  jour-
ney. After  this  he  turned  to  me,  and  told
me  in  the  presence  of  all  who  were  there
that,  since  I  so  much  opposed  the  expedition
into  the  interior  and  was  afraid  of  it,  I
should  take  charge  of  the  vessels  and  men
remaining,  and,  in  case  I  reached  the  port
before  him,  I  should  settle  there.  This  I
declined.

After  the  meeting  was  over  he,  on  that
same  evening,  saying  that  it  seemed  to  him
as  if  he  could  not  trust  anybody,  sent  me
word  that  he  begged  me  to  take  charge  of
that  part  of  the  expedition,  and  as,  in  spite
of  his  insistency,  I  declined,  he  asked  for  the
reasons  of  my  refusal,  I  then  told  him  that  I
refused  to  accept,  because  I  felt  sure  he
would  never  see  the  ships  again,  or  be  seen
by  their  crews  any  more ;  that,  seeing  how
utterly  unprepared  he  was  for  moving  in-
i7

THE JOURNEY OF

land,  I  preferred  to  share  the  risk  with  him
and  his  people,  and  suffer  what  they  would
have  to  suffer,  rather  than  take  charge  of
the  vessels  and  thus  give  occasion  for  say-
ing that  I  opposed  the  journey  and  remained
out  of  fear,  which  would  place  my  honor  in
jeopardy.  So  that  I  would  much  rather  ex-
pose of  my  life  than,  under  these  circum-
stances, my  good  name.

Seeing  that  he  could  not  change  my  de-
termination, he  had  others  approach  me
about  it  with  entreaties.  But  I  gave  the
same  answer  to  them  as  to  him,  and  he
finally  provided  for  his  lieutenant  to  take
command  of  the  vessels,  an*  alcalde  named
Caravallo.

ON  Saturday,  the  1st  of  May,  the  day
on  which  all  this  had  happened,  he
ordered that  they should give  to
each  one  of  those  who  had  to  go  with  him,
two pounds of ship-biscuit and one-half
pound  of  bacon,  and  thus  we  set  out  upon  our

journey  inland. The  number  of  people  we
18

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

took  along  was  three  hundred,5  among  them
the  commissary,  Father  Juan  Xuarez,  another
friar  called  Father  Juan  de  Palos  and  three
priests,  the  officers,  and  forty  horsemen.  We
marched  for  fifteen  days,  living  on  the  sup-
plies we  had  taken  with  us,  without  finding
anything  else  to  eat  but  palmettos  like  those
of  Andalusia.  In  all  this  time  we  did  not
meet  a  soul,  nor  did  we  see  a  house  or  vil-
lage, and  finally  reached  a  river,  which  we
crossed  with  much  trouble,  by  swimming
and  on  rafts.  It  took  us  a  day  to  ford  the
river  on  account  of  the  swiftness  of  its  cur-
rent. When  we  got  across,  there  came  to-
wards us  some  two  hundred  Indians,  more
or  less;  the  Governor  went  to  meet  them,
and  after  he  talked  to  them  by  signs  they
acted  in  such  a  manner  that  we  were  obliged
to  set  upon  them  and  seize  five  or  six,  who
took  us  to  their  houses,  about  half  a  league
from  there,  where  we  found  a  large  quan-
tity of  corn  ready  for  harvest.  We  gave
infinite  thanks  to  our  Lord  for  having  help-

6Oviedo  (Historia,  III,  p.  584)  says,  following
the  Letter  to  the  Audiencia,  260  foot  and  forty
horse.  The  Relacion  (p.  270)  three  hundred  men
and  forty  men  on  horseback  ("trescientos
hombres  y  quarenta  hombres  de  a  caballo").
19

THE JOURNEY OF

ed  us  in  such  great  need,  for,  as  we  were
not  used  to  such  exposures,  we  felt  greatly
exhausted,  and  were  much  weakened  by
hunger.

On  the  third  day  that  we  were  at  this
place  the  purser,  the  inspector,  the  com-
missary and  myself  jointly  begged  the  Gov-
ernor to  send  out  in  search  of  a  harbor,  as
the  Indians  told  us  the  sea  was  not  very  far
away.  He  forbade  us  to  speak  of  it,  saying
it  was  at  a  great  distance,  and  I  being  the
one  who  most  insisted,  he  bade  me  to  go  on
a  journey  of  discovery  and  search  of  a  port,
and  said  I  should  go  on  foot  with  forty  peo-
ple. So  the  next  day  I  started  with  the  Cap-
tain Alonso  del  Castillo  and  forty  men  of  his
company.  At  noon  we  reached  sandy  patches
that  seemed  to  extend  far  inland.  For  about
one  and  a  half  leagues  we  walked,  with  the
water  up  to  the  knee,  and  stepping  on  shells
that  cut  our  feet  badly.  All  this  gave  us
much  trouble,  until  we  reached  the  river
which  we  had  crossed  first,  and  which
emptied  through  the  same  inlet,  and  then,  as
we  were  too  ill-provided for  crossing  it,

we  turned  back  to  camp  and  told  the  Gov-
20

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

ernor  what  we  had  found  and  how  it  was
necessary  to  ford  the  river  again  at  our  first
crossing  in  order  to  explore  the  inlet  thor-
oughly and  find  out  if  there  was  a  harbor.

The  next  day  he  sent  a  captain  called
Valenzuela  with  sixty  footmen  and  six
horsemen  to  cross  the  river  and  follow  its
course  to  the  sea  in  search  of  a  port.  After
two  days  he  came  back,  reporting  that  he
had  discovered  the  inlet,  which  was  a  shal-
low bay,  with  water  to  the  knees,  but  it  had
there  no  harbor.  He  saw  five  or  six  canoes
crossing  from  one  side  to  the  other,  with
Indians  who  wore  many  feather  bushes.

Hearing  this,  we  left  the  next  day,  al-
ways in  quest  of  the  province  called  Apa-
la.chen  by  the  Indians,  taking  as  guides
those  whom  we  had  captured,  and  marched
until  the  17th  of  June  without  finding
an  Indian  who  would  dare  to  wait  for  us.
Finally  there  came  to  us  a  chief,  whom
an  Indian  carried  on  his  shoulders.  He
wore  a  painted  deerskin,  and  many  people
followed  him,  and  he  was  preceded  by  many
players  on  flutes  made  of  reeds. He  came

to  the  place  where  the  Governor  was  and
21

THE JOURNEY OF

stayed  an  hour.  We  gave  him  to  under-
stand by  signs  that  our  aim  was  to  reach
Apalachen,  but  from  his  gestures  it  seemed
to  us  that  he  was  an  enemy  of  the  Apalachen
people  and  that  he  would  go  and  help  us
against  them.  We  gave  him  beads  and  little
bells  and  other  trinkets,  while  he  presented
the  Governor  with  the  hide  he  wore.  Then
he  turned  back  and  we  followed  him.

That  night"  we  reached  a  broad  and  deep
river,  the  current  of  which  was  very  strong
and  as  we* did  not  dare  to  cross  it,  we  built  a
canoe  out  of  rafts  and  were  a  whole  day  in
getting  across.  If  the  Indians  had  wished
to  oppose  us,  they  could  have  easily  impeded
our  passage,  for  even  with  their  help  we  had
much  trouble.  One  horseman,  whose  name
was  Juan  Velazquez,  a  native  of  Cuellar,
not  willing  to  wait,  rode  into  the  stream,
and  the  strong  current  swept  him  from  the
horse  and  he  took  hold  of  the  reins,  and
was  drowned  with  the  animal.  The  Indians
of  that  chief  (whose  name  was  Dulchan-
chellin)  discovered  the  horse  and  told  us
that  we  would  find  him  lower  down  the
stream.  So  they  went  after  the  man,  and
22

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

his  death  caused  us  much  grief,  since  until
then  we  had  not  lost  anybody.  The'  horse
made  a  supper  for  many  on  that  night.  Be-
yond there,  and  on  the  following  day,  we
reached  the  chief's  village,  whither  he  sent
us  corn.

That  same  night,  as  they  went  for  water,
an  arrow  was  shot  at  one  of  the  Chris-
tians, but  God  willed  that  he  was  not
hurt.  The  day  after  we  left  this  place,  with-
out any  of  the  natives  having  appeared,  be-
cause all  had  fled,  but  further  on  some  In-
dians were  seen  who  showed  signs  of  hos-
tility, and  although  we  called  them  they
would  neither  come  back  nor  wait,  but  with-
drew and  followed  in  our  rear.  The  Gov-
ernor placed  a  few  horsemen  in  ambush
near  the  trail,  who  as  they  (the  Indians)
passed,  surprised  them*  and  took  three  or
four  Indians,  whom  we  kept  as  guides
thereafter.  These  led  us  into  a  country  diffi-
cult to  traverse  and  strange  to  look  at,  for  it
had  very  great  forests,  the  trees  being  won-
derfully tall  and  so  many  of  them  fallen  that
they  obstructed  our  way  so  that  we  had  to
make  long  detours  and  with  great  trouble.
23

THE JOURNEY OF

Of  the  trees  standing  many  were  rent  from
top  to  bottom  by  thunderbolts,  which  strike
very  often  in  that  country,  where  storms  and
tempests  are  always  frequent.

With  such  efforts  we  travelled  until  the
day  after  St.  John's  Day,  when  we  came
in  sight  of  Apalachen,  without  having  been
noticed  by  the  Indians  of  the  land.  We  gave
many  thanks  to  God  for  being  so  near  it,
believing  what  we  had  been  told  about  the
country  to  be  true,  and  that  now  our  suffer-
ings would  come  to  an  end  after  the  long
and  weary  march  over  bad  trails.  We  had
also  suffered  greatly  from  hunger,  for,  al-
though we  found  corn  occasionally,  most  of
the  time  we  marched  seven  or  eight  leagues
without  any.  And  many  there  were  among
us  who  besides  suffering  great  fatigue  and
hunger,  had  their  backs  covered  with
wounds  from  the  weight  of  the  armor  and
other  things  they  had  to  carry  as  occasion
required.  But  to  find  ourselves  at  last  where
we  wished  to  be  and  where  we  had  been
assured  so  much  food  and  gold  would  be
had,  made  us  forget  a  great  deal  of  our

hardships  and  weariness.
24

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

ONCE  in  sight  of  Apalachen,6  the
Go.vernor  commanded  me  to  enter
the  village  with  nine  horsemen  and
fifty  foot.  So  the  inspector  and  I  undertook
this.  Upon  penetrating  into  the  village  we
found  only  women  and  boys.  The  men  were
not  there  at  the  time,  but  soon,  while  we
were  walking  about,  they  came  and  began  to
fight,  shooting  arrows  at  us.  They  killed
the  inspector's  horse,  but  finally  fled  and
left  us.  We  found  there  plenty  of  ripe
maize  ready  to  be  gathered  and  much  dry
corn  already  housed.  We  also  found  many
deer  skins  and  among  them  mantles  made  of
thread  and  of  poor  quality,  with  which  the
women  cover  parts  of  their  bodies.  They
had  many  vessels  for  grinding  maize.7  The
village contained forty small and low

"This  Indian  village  seems  to  have  been  situated
west  of  the  peninsula  of  Florida,  not  far  from  the
coast.  Without  presuming  to  insist  upon  its  loca-
tion, I  would  only  remark  that  it  might  have  been
on  or  near  what  is  now  the  Apalachicola  river.
At  least,  the  French  map  accompanying  the  His-
torical Collections  of  Louisiana  (Part  II,  185,
1850)  has :  "Apalaches.  lei  etaient  ci-devant  les
Apalaches."

7The text says : "Tenian muchos  vasos para
moler  maiz." This  seems  to  indicate  mortars.
25

THE JOURNEY OF

houses,8  reared  in  sheltered  places,  out  of
fear  of  the  great  storms  that  continuously
occur  in  the  country.  The  buildings  are  of
straw,  and  they  are  surrounded  by  dense
timber,  tall  trees  and  numerous  water-pools,
where  there  were  so  many  fallen  trees  and
of  such  size  as  to  greatly  obstruct  and  im-
pede circulation.

THE  country  between  our  landing
place  and  the  village  and  country  of
Apalachen  is  mostly  level;  the  soil
is  sand  and  earth.  All  throughout  it  there
are  very  large  trees  and  open  forests  con-
taining nut  trees,  laurels  and  others  of  the
kind  called  resinous,  cedar,  juniper,  water-
oak,  pines,  oak  and  low  palmetto,  like  those
of  Castilla.9 Everywhere  there  are  many

8I  use  the  word  "house"  here,  but  I  shall  here-
after prefer  the  term  of  "lodge."  It  is  more  in
harmony  with  the  character  of  the  frail  construc-
tions which  he  describes.  Later  on,  when  Cabeza
de  Vaca  alludes  to  more  substantial  structures,  I
shall  again  employ  the  term  "house."  In  general,
"casa"  in  Spanish  means  house,  dwelling,  home,
abode,  &c.

The  original  has :  "Donde  hay  nogales  y  lau-
reles  y  otros  que  se  llaman  liquid-dmbares,
cedros  sabinos  y  encinas  y  pinos  y  robles,  palmitos
bajos,  de  la  mancra  de  los  de  Castilla."  Luquid-
dmbar  is  the  product  of  a  species  of  the  Mexican
pine,  besides  being  amber  proper.
26

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

lagunes,  large  and  small,  some  very  difficult
to  cross,  partly  because  they  are  so  deep,
partly  because  they  are  covered  with  fallen
trees.  Their  bottom  is  sandy,  and  in  the
province  of  Apalachen  the  lagunes  are  much
larger  than  those  we  found  previously.
There  is  much  maize  in  this  province  and
the  houses  are  scattered  all  over  the  country
as  much  as  those  of  the  Gelves.  The  ani-
mals we  saw  there  were  three  kinds  of  deer,
rabbits  and  hares,  bears  and  lions  and  other
wild  beasts,  among  them  one  that  carries  its
young  in  a  pouch  on  its  belly  as  long  as  the
young  are  small,  until  they  are  able  to  look
for  their  sustenance,  and  even  then,  when
they  are  out  after  food  and  people  come,  the
mother  does  not  move  until  her  little  ones
are  in  the  pouch  again.  The  country  is  very
cold  ;10  it  has  good  pasture  for  cattle ;  there
are  birds  of  many  kinds  in  large  numbers :
geese,  ducks,  wild  ducks,  muscovy  ducks,
Ibis,  small  white  herons  (Egrets),  herons
and  partridges.  We  saw  many  fal-
cons, marsh-hawks,  sparrow-hawks,  pigeon-

10It  is  somewhat  puzzling  to  read  this,  since  it
was  midsummer  when  Narvaez  reached  Apa-
lachen,

27

THE JOURNEY OF

hawks  and  many  other  birds.11  Two  hours
after  we  arrived  at  Apalachen  the  Indians
that  had  fled  came  back  peaceably,  begging
us  to  give  back  to  them  their  women  and
children,  which  we  did.12  The  Governor,
however,  kept  with  him  one  of  their  ca-
ciques, at  which  they  became  so  angry  as  to
attack  us  the  following  day.  They  did  it  so
swiftly  and  with  so  much  audacity  as  to  set
fire  to  the  lodges  we  occupied,  but  when  we
sallied  forth  they  fled  to  the  lagunes  nearby,
on  account  of  which  and  of  the  big  corn
patches,  we  could  not  do  them  any  harm
beyond  killing  one  Indian.  The  day  after,
Indians  from  a  village  on  the  other  side
came  and  attacked  us  in  the  same  manner,
escaping  in  the  same  way,  with  the  loss  of
a  single  man.

We  remained  at  this  village  for  twenty-

lu'Hay  aves  de  muchas  maneras,  ansares  en
gran  cantidad,  pasos,  dnades,  patos  reales,  dorales
y  garzotas  y  garzas,  perdices;  vimcs  muchos  hal-
cones,  neblis,  gavilanes,  esmorejanes,  y  otras
muchas  aves."  The  "dorales"  are  ibis,  the  "ne-
bli"  corresponds  to  the  marsh-hawk,  and  the
nearest  approach  to  the  "esmorejan"  might  be
the  pigeon-hawk,  perhaps.  The  "garzota"  is  the
egret.

12To  return  the  non-combatants  to  the  Indians
was  not  very  wise,  and  shows  that  Narvaez  and
his  officers  had  little  knowledge  of  Indian  nature.
28

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

five  days,  making  three  excursions  dur-
ing the  j  time.  We  found  the  country
very  thinly  inhabited  and  difficult  to  march
through,  owing  to  bad  places,  timber
and  lagunes.  We  inquired  of  the  cacique
whom  we  had  retained  and  of  the  other  In-
dians with  us  (who  were  neighbors  and
enemies  of  them)  about  the  condition  and
settlements  of  the  land,  the  quality  of  its
people,  about  supplies  and  everything  else.
They  answered,  each  one  for  himself,  that
Apalachen  was  the  largest  town  of  all ;  that
further  in  less  people  were  met  with,  who
were  very  much  poorer  than  those  here,  and
that  the  country  was  thinly  settled,  the  in-
habitants greatly  scattered,  and  also  that
further  inland  big  lakes,  dense  forests,  great
deserts  and  wastes  were  met  with.

Then  we  asked  about  the  land  to  the  south,
its  villages  and  resources.  They  said  that  in
that  direction  and  nine  days'  march  towards
the  sea  was  a  village  called  Aute,13  where
the  Indians  had  plenty  of  corn  and  also
beans  and  melons,  and  that,  being  so  near

13On  the  map  in  Louisiana  historical  collections,
already  mentioned,  Aute,  is  placed  near  the  mouth
of  the  Apalachicola  river.
29

THE JOURNEY OF

the  sea,  they  obtained  fish,  and  that  those
were  their  friends.  Seeing  how  poor  the
country  was,  taking  into  account  the  un-
favorable reports  about  its  population  and
everything  else,  and  that  the  Indians  made
constant  war  upon  us,  wounding  men  and
horses  whenever  they  went  for  water
(which  they  could  do  from  the  lagunes
where  we  could  not  reach  them)  by  shoot-
ing arrows  at  us;  that  they  had  killed  a
chief  of  Tezcuco  called  Don  Pedro,  whom
the  commissary  had  taken  along  with  him,
we  agreed  to  depart  and  go  in  search  of  the
sea,  and  of  the  village  of  Aute,  which  they
had  mentioned.  And  so  we  left,  arriving
there  five  days  after.  The  first  day  we
travelled  across  lagunes  and  trails  without
seeing  a  single  Indian.

On  the  second  day,  however,  we  reached
a  lake  very  difficult  to  cross,  the  water
reaching  to  the  chest,  and  there  were  a  great
many  fallen  trees.  Once  in  the  middle  of
it,  a  number  of  Indians  assailed  us  from
behind  trees  that  concealed  them  from  our
sight,  while  others  were  on  fallen  trees,  and
they  began  to  shower  arrows  upon  us,  so
30

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

that  many  men  and  horses  were  wounded,
and  before  we  could  get  out  of  the  lagune
our  guide  was  captured  by  them.  After  we
had  got  out,  they  pressed  us  very  hard,  in-
tending to  cut  us  off,  and  it  was  useless  to
turn  upon  them,  for  they  would  hide  in  the
lake  and  from  there  wound  both  men  and
horses.

So  the  Governor  ordered  the  horsemen
to  dismount  and  attack  them  on  foot.  The
pursuer  dismounted  also,  and  our  people  at-
tacked them.  Again  they  fled  to  a  lagune,
and  we  succeeded  in  holding  the  trail.  In
this  fight  some  of  our  people  were  wounded,
in  spite  of  their  good  armor.  There  were
men  that  day  who  swore  they  had  seen  two
oak  trees,  each  as  thick  as  the  calf  of  a  leg,
shot  through  and  through  by  arrows,  which
is  not  surprising  if  we  consider  the  force
and  dexterity  with  which  they  shoot.  I
myself  saw  an  arrow  that  had  penetrated
the  base  of  a  poplar  tree  for  half  a  foot  in
length.  All  the  many  Indians  from  Florida
we  saw  were  archers,  and,  being  very  tall
and  naked,  at  a  distance  they  appear  giants.

Those  people  are  wonderfully  built,  very
31

THE JOURNEY OF

gaunt  and  of  great  strength  and  agility.
Their  bows  are  as  thick  as  an  arm,  from
eleven  to  twelve  spans  long,  shooting  an  ar-
row at  200  paces  with  unerring  aim.  From
that  crossing  we  went  to  another  similar
one,  a  league  away,  but  while  it  was  half  a
league  in  length  it  was  also  much  more  diffi-
cult. There  we  crossed  without  opposition,
for  the  Indians,  having  spent  all  their  ar-
rows at  the  first  place,  had  nothing  where-
with they  would  dare  attack  us.  The  next
day,  while  crossing  a  similar  place,  I  saw
the  tracks  of  people  who  went  ahead  of  us,
and  I  notified  the  Governor,  who  was  in  the
rear,  so  that,  although  the  Indians  turned
upon  us,  as  we  were  on  our  guard,  they
could  do  us  no  harm.  Once  on  open  ground
they  pursued  us  still.  We  attacked  them
twice,  killing  two,  while  they  wounded  me
and  two  or  three  other  Christians,  and  en-
tered the  forest  again,  where  we  could  no
longer  injure  them.

In this manner  we marched for eight

days, without  meeting  any more  natives,

until one league from the site  to which

I said we were going. There, as we

32

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

were  marching  along,  Indians  crept  up  un-
seen and  fell  upon  our  rear.  A  boy  be-
longing to  a  nobleman,  called  Avellaneda,
who  was  in  the  rear  guard,  gave  the  alarm.
Avellaneda  turned  back  to  assist,  and  the
Indians  hit  him  with  an  arrow  on  the  edge
of  the  cuirass,  piercing  his  neck  nearly
through  and  through,  so  that  he  died  on  the
spot,  and  we  carried  him  to  Aute.  It  took
us  nine  days  from  Apalachen  to  the  place
where  we  stopped.14  And  then  we  found
that  all  the  people  had  left  and  the  lodges
were  burnt.  But  there  was  plenty  of  maize,
squash  and  beans,  all  nearly  ripe  and  ready
for  harvest.  We  rested  there  for  two
days.

After  this  the  Governor  entreated  me  to
go  in  search  of  the  sea,  as  the  Indians  said
it  was  so  near  by,  and  we  had,  on  this
march,  already  suspected  its  proximity  from
a  great  river  to  which  we  had  given  the
name  of  the  Rio  de  la  Magdalena.15 I  left

"Oviedo,  p.  587,  has  eight  or  nine  days.  On
p.  586  he  says  they  stayed  26  days  at  Apalachen,
instead  of  25,  as  Cabeza  de  Vaca.

"This  may  have  been  the  Apalachicola,  accord-
ing to  the  French  map.
33

THE JOURNEY OF

on  the  following  day  in  search  of  it,  accom-
panied by  the  commissary,  the  captain  Cas-
tillo, Andres  Dorantes,  seven  horsemen  and
fifty  foot.  We  marched  until  sunset,  reach-
ing an  inlet  or  arm  of  the  sea,  where  we
found  plenty  of  oysters  on  which  the  peo-
ple feasted,  and  we  gave  many  thanks  to
God  for  bringing  us  there.

The  next  day  I  sent  twenty  men  to
reconnoiter  the  coast  and  explore  it,  who
returned  on  the  day  following  at  night-
fall, saying  that  these  inlets  and  bays
were  very  large  and  went  so  far  in-
land as  greatly  to  impede  our  investiga-
tions, and  that  the  coast  was  still  at  a  great
distance.  Hearing  this  and  considering
how  ill-prepared  we  were  for  the  task,  I  re-
turned to  where  the  Governor  was.  We
found  him  sick,  together  with  many  others.
The  night  before,  Indians  had  made  an  at-
tack, putting  them  in  great  stress,  owing  to
their  enfeebled  condition.  The  Indians  had
also  killed  one  of  their  horses.  I  reported
upon  my  journey  and  on  the  bad  condition
of  the  country.  That  day  we  remained
there.

34

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

ON  the  next  day  we  left  Aute  and
marched  (all  day)  to  the  spot  I  had
visited  on  my  last  exploration.  Our
march  was  extremely  difficult,  for  neither
had  we  horses  enough  to  carry  the  sick,  nor
did  we  know  how  to  relieve  them.  They
became  worse  every  day,  and  our  sufferings
were  afflicting.  There  it  became  manifest
how  few  resources  we  had  for  going  fur-
ther, and  even  in  case  we  had  been  provided
we  did  not  know  where  to  go ;  our  men  were
mostly  sick  and  too  much  out  of  condition
to  be  of  any  use  whatever.  I  refrain  from
making  a  long  story  of  it.  Any  one  can
imagine  what  might  be  experienced  in  a
land  so  strange  and  so  utterly  without  re-
sources of  any  kind,  either  for  stay  or  for
an  escape.  Nevertheless,  since  the  surest
aid  was  God,  Our  Lord,  and  since  we  never
doubted  of  it,  something  happened  that  put
us  in  a  worse  plight  yet.

Most of the  horsemen began to leave
in secret, hoping thus to save them-
35

THE JOURNEY OF

selves,  forsaking  the  Governor  and  the
sick,  who  were  helpless.16  Still,  as  among
them  were  many  of  good  families  and
of  rank,  they  would  not  suffer  this  to
happen  unbeknown,  to  the  Governor  and
Your  Majesty's  officials,  so  that,  when  we
remonstrated,  showing  at  what  an  unseason-
able time  they  were  leaving  their  captain
and  the  sick  and,  above  all,  forsaking  Your
Majesty's  service,  they  concluded  to  stay,
and  share  the  fate  of  all,  without  abandon-
ing one  another.  The  Governor  thereupon
called  them  to  his  presence  all  together,  and
each  one  in  particular,  asking  their  opinion
about  this  dismal  country,  so  as  to  be  able  to
get  out  of  it  and  seek  relief,  for  in  that  land
there  was  none.

One-third  of  our  people  were  danger-
ously ill,  getting  worse  hourly,  and  we
felt  sure  of  meeting  the  same  fate,
with  death  as  our  only  prospect,  which  in
such  a  country  was  much  worse  yet.  And
considering  these  and  many  other  incon-
veniences and  that  we  had  tried  many  ex-
pedients, we  finally  resorted  to  a  very  diffi-

"Of  this  planned  desertion  Oviedo  says  nothing.
36

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

cult  one,  which  was  to  build  some  craft  in
which  to  leave  the  land.  It  seemed  impossi-
ble, as  none  of  us  knew  how  to  construct
ships.  We  had  no  tools,  no  iron,  no  smith-
ery,  no  oakum,  no  pitch,  no  tackling ;  finally,
nothing  of  what  was  indispensable.  Neither
was  there  anybody  to  instruct  us  in  ship-
building, and,  above  all,  there  was  nothing
to  eat,  while  the  work  was  going  on,  for
those  who  would  have  to  perform  the  task.
Considering  all  this,  we  agreed  to  think  it
over.  Our  parley  ceased  for  that  day,  and
everyone  went  off,  leaving  it  to  God,  Our
Lord,  to  put  him  on  the  right  road  accord-
ing to  His  pleasure.

The  next  day  God  provided  that  one
of  the  men  should  come,  saying  that  he
would  make  wooden  flues,  and  bellows
of  deerskin,  and  as  we  were  in  such
a  state  that  anything  appearing  like  relief
seemed  acceptable,  we  told  him  to  go  to
work,  and  agreed  to  make  of  our  stirrups,
spurs,  cross-bows  and  other  iron  imple-
ments the  nails,  saws  and  hatchets  and
other  tools  we  so  greatly  needed  for  our
purpose.

37

THE JOURNEY OF

In  order  to  obtain  food  while  the  work  pro-
posed was  in  progress  we  determined  upon
four  successive  raids  into  Aute,  with  all  the
horses  and  men  that  were  fit  for  service,  and
that  on  every  third  day  a  horse  should  be
killed  and  the  meat  distributed  among  those
who  worked  at  the  barges  and  among  the
sick.  The  raids  were  executed  with  such
people  and  horses  as  were  able,  and  they
brought  as  many  as  four  hundred  fanegas  of
maize,  although  not  without  armed  opposi-
tion from  the  Indians.  We  gathered  plenty  of
palmettos,  using  their  fibre  and  husk,  twist-
ing and  preparing  it  in  place  of  oakum  for
the  barges.  The  work  on  these  was  done  by
the  only  carpenter  we  had,  and  progressed  so
rapidly  that,  beginning  on  the  fourth  day
of  August,  on  the  twentieth  day  of  the
month  of  September17  five  barges  of  twenty-
two  elbow  lengths  each  were  ready,  caulked
with  palmetto  oakum  and  tarred  with  pitch,
which  a  Greek  called  Don  Teodoro  made
from  certain  pines. Of  the  husk  of  pal-

"The  latter  date  is  also  in  Oviedo  (p.  588),
but  not  in  Relation;  but  the  estimate  of  the  dis-
tances is  of  little  importance.  It  is  a  computation
of  the  length  of  the  line  of  march,  not  the  dis-
tance between  two  points.
38

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

mettos,  and  of  the  tails  and  manes  of  the
horses  we  made  ropes  and  tackles,  of
our  shirts  sails,  and  of  the  junipers  that
grew  there  we  made  the  oars,  which  we
thought  were  necessary,  and  such  was
the  stress  in  which  our  sins  had  placed  us
that  only  with  very  great  trouble  could
we  find  stones  for  ballast  and  anchors
of  the  barges,  for  we  had  not  seen  a
stone  in  the  whole  country.  We  flayed
the  legs  of  the  horses  and  tanned  the  skin
to  make  leather  pouches  for  carrying
water.

During  that  time  some  of.  the  party  went
to  the  coves  and  inlets  for  sea-food,  and
the  Indians  surprised  them  twice,  kill-
ing ten  of  our  men  in  plain  view  of  the
camp,  without  our  being  able  to  prevent  it.
We  found  them  shot  through  and  through
with  arrows,  for,  although  several  wore
good  armor,  it  was  not  sufficient  to  protect
them,  since,  as  I  said  before,  they  shot  their
arrows  with  such  force  and  precision.  Ac-
cording to  the  sworn  statements  of  our
pilots,  we  had  travelled  from  the  bay,  to
which  we  gave  the  name  of  the  Cross,  to
39

THE JOURNEY OF

this  place,  two  hundred  and  eighty  leagues,
more  or  less.

In  all  these  parts  we  saw  no  mountains
nor  heard  of  any,  and  before  embarking  we
had  lost  over  forty  men  through  sickness
and  hunger,  besides  those  killed  by  Indians.
On  the  twenty-second day  of  the month
of September we had eaten up all the
horses but one. We embarked in the
following order: In the barge of the
Governor  there  were  forty-nine  men,  and
as many in the one entrusted to the
purser and the commissary. The third
barge  he  placed  in  charge  of  Captain  Alonso
del  Castillo  and  of  Andres  Dorantes,  with
forty-eight  men ;  in  another  he  placed  two
captains,  named  Tellez  and  Penalosa,  with
forty-seven  men. The  last  one  he  gave  to
the  inspector  and  to  me, with forty-nine
men,  and,  after  clothing  and  supplies  were
put  on  board,  the  sides  of  the  barges  only
rose  half  a  foot  above  the  water. Besides,
we  were  so  crowded  as  to  be  unable  to  stir.
So great is the  power of need that it
brought  us  to  venture  out  into  such  a  trou-
blesome sea  in  this  manner,  and  without
40

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

any  one  among  us  having  the  least  knowl-
edge of  the  art  of  navigation.

THAT  bay  from  which  we  started  is
called  the  Bay  of  the  Horses.  We
sailed  seven  days  among  those  in-
lets, in  the  water  waist  deep,  without  signs
of  anything  like  the  coast.  At  the  end  of
this  time  we  reached  an  island  near  the
shore.  My  barge  went  ahead,  and  from  it
we  saw  five  Indian  canoes  coming.  The
Indians  abandoned  them  and  left  them  in
our  hands,  when  they  saw  that  we  approach-
ed. The  other  barges  went  on  and  saw
some  lodges  on  the  same  island,  where  we
found  plenty  of  ruffs  and  their  eggs,  dried,
and  that  was  a  very  great  relief  in  our  needy
condition.  Having  taken  them,  we  went
further,  and  two  leagues  beyond  found  a
strait  between  the  island  and  the  coast,
which  strait  we  christened  Sant  Miguel,  it
being  the  day  of  that  saint.  Issuing  from
it  we  reached  the  coast,  where  by  means  of
the  five  canoes  I  had  taken  from  the  Indians
we  mended  somewhat  the  barges,  making
4i

THE JOURNEY OF

washboards  and  adding  to  them  and  raising
the  sides  two  hands  above  water.

Then  we  set  out  to  sea  again,  coast-
ing towards  the  River  of  Palms.19  Every
day  our  thirst  and  hunger  increased  be-
cause our  supplies  were  giving  out,  as
well  as  the  water  supply,  for  the  pouches
we  had  made  from  the  legs  of  our
horses  soon  became  rotten  and  useless.
From  time  to  time  we  would  enter  some
inlet  or  cove  that  reached  very  far  inland,
but  we  found  them  all  shallow  and  danger-
ous, and  so  we  navigated  through  them  for
thirty  days,  meeting  sometimes  Indians  who
fished  and  were  poor  and  wretched  people.

At  the  end  of  these  thirty  days,  and  when
we  were  in  extreme  need  of  water  and  hug-
ging the  coast,  we  heard  one  night  a  canoe
approaching. When  we  saw  it  we  stopped

10This  "Rio  de  las  Palmas"  is  frequently  men-
tioned in  the  oldest  sources  on  Florida  and  north-
eastern Mexico.  (See,  concerning  it,  the  expe-
dition of  De  Soto  in  "Trail-Makers")  The  map
by  Brevoort  identifies  the  "Rio  de  las  Palmas"
with  the  Rio  Grande.  The  mouth  of  the  Palmas
is  stated  to  have  been  sixty  leagues  above  (north)
of  that  of  the  Panuco  river.  This,  as  well  as  the
statement  repeatedly  found  in  older  documents,
that  from  the  river  of  Palms  the  coast  turns  to
the  south,  whereas  from  Florida  on  it  ran  from
east  to  west,  favors  the  assumption.
42

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

and  waited,  but  it  would  not  come  to  us,
and,  although  we  called  out,  it  would  neither
turn  back  nor  wait.  It  being  night,  we  did
not  follow  the  canoe,  but  proceeded.  At
dawn  we  saw  a  small  island,  where  we
touched  to  search  for  water,  but  in  vain,  as
there  was  none.  While  at  anchor  a  great
storm  overtook  us.  We  remained  there  six
days  without  venturing  to  leave,  and  it  be-
ing five  days  since  we  had  drank  anything
our  thirst  was  so  great  as  to  compel  us  to
drink  salt  water,  and  several  of  us  took  such
an  excess  of  it  that  we  lost  suddenly  five
men.

I  tell  this  briefly,  not  thinking  it  necessary
to  relate  in  particular  all  the  distress  and
hardships  we  bore.  Moreover,  if  one  takes
into  account  the  place  we  were  in  and  the
slight  chances  of  relief  he  may  imagine
what  we  suffered.  Seeing  that  our  thirst
was  increasing  and  the  water  was  killing  us,
while  the  storm  did  not  abate,  we  agreed  to
trust  to  God,  Our  Lord,  and  rather  risk  the
perils  of  the  sea  than  wait  there  for  certain
death  from  thirst.  So  we  left  in  the  direc-
tion we  had  seen  the  canoe  going  on  the
43

THE JOURNEY OF

night  we  came  here.  During  this  day  we
found  ourselves  often  on  the  verge  of
drowning  and  so  forlorn  that  there  was
none  in  our  company  who  did  not  expect  to
die  at  any  moment.

It  was  Our  Lord's  pleasure,  who  many
a time shows His favor in the hour
of greatest distress, that at sunset we
turned a  point of  land and found there
shelter and much improvement. Many
canoes  came  and  the  Indians  in  them  spoke
to us, but turned back without waiting.
They  were  tall  and  well  built,  and  carried
neither bows nor arrows. We  followed
them  to  their  lodges, which were nearly
along  the  inlet,  and  landed,  and  in  front  of
the  lodges  we  saw  many  jars  with  water,
and  great  quantities  of  cooked  fish. The
chief  of  that  land  offered  all  to  the  Governor
and  led  him  to  his  abode. The  dwellings
were  of  matting  and  seemed  to  be  perma-
nent. When  we  entered  the  home  of  the
chief  he  gave  us  plenty  of  fish,  while  we
gave  him  of  our  maize,  which  they  ate  in
our  presence,  asking  for  more. So  we  gave
more  to  them,  and  the  Governor  presented
44

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

him  with  some  trinkets.  While  with  the
cacique  at  his  lodge,  half  an  hour  after  sun-
set, the  Indians  suddenly  fell  upon  us  and
upon  our  sick  people  on  the  beach.

They  also  attacked  the  house  of  the  cacique,
where  the  Governor  was,  wounding  him  in
the  face  with  a  stone.  Those  who  were  with
him  seized  the  cacique,  but  as  his  people
were  so  near  he  escaped,  leaving  in  our
hands  a  robe  of  marten-ermine  skin,  which,
I  believe,  are  the  finest  in  the  world  and
give  out  an  odor  like  amber  and  musk.  A
single  one  can  be  smelt  so  far  off  that  it
seems  as  if  there  were  a  great  many.  We
saw  more  of  that  kind,  but  none  like  these.

Those  of  us  who  were  there,  seeing  the
Governor  hurt,  placed  him  aboard  the  barge
and  provided  that  most  of  the  men  should
follow  him  to  the  boats.  Some  fifty  of  us
remained  on  land  to  face  the  Indians,  who
attacked  thrice  that  night,  and  so  furiously
as  to  drive  us  back  every  time  further  than
a  strone's  throw.

Not  one  of  us  escaped  unhurt.  I  was
wounded  in  the  face,  and  if  they  had
had  more  arrows  (for  only  a  few  were
45

THE JOURNEY OF

found)  without  any  doubt  they  would  have
done  us  great  harm.  At  the  last  onset
the  Captains  Dorantes,  Penalosa  and  Tellez,
with  fifteen  men,  placed  themselves  in  am-
bush and  attacked  them  from  the  rear,  caus-
ing them  to  flee  and  leave  us.  The  next
morning  I  destroyed  more  than  thirty  of
their  canoes,  which  served  to  protect  us
against  a  northern  wind  then  blowing,  on
account  of  which  we  had  to  stay  there,  in
the  severe  cold,  not  venturing  out  to  sea  on
account  of  the  heavy  storm.  After  this  we
again  embarked  and  navigated  for  three
days,  having  taken  along  but  a  small  supply
of  water,  the  vessels  we  had  for  it  being
few.  So  we  found  ourselves  in  the  same
plight  as  before.

Continuing  onward,  we  entered  a  firth
and  there  saw  a  canoe  with  Indians  ap-
proaching. As  we  hailed  them  they  came,
and  the  Governor,  whose  barge  they  neared
first,  asked  them  for  water.  They  offered
to  get  some,  provided  we  gave  them
something  in  which  to  carry  it,  and  a
Christian Greek, called Doroteo Teodoro

(who  has  already  been  mentioned),  said  he
46

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

would  go  with  them.  The  Governor  and
others  vainly  tried  to  dissuade  him,  but  he
insisted  upon  going  and  went,  taking  along
a  negro,  while  the  Indians  left  two  of  their
number  as  hostages.  At  night  the  Indians
returned  and  brought  back  our  vessels,  but
without  water;  neither  did  the  Christians
return  with  them.  Those  that  had  remained
as  hostages,  when  their  people  spoke  to
them,  attempted  to  throw  themselves  into
the  water.  But  our  men  in  the  barge  held
them  backj  and  so  the  other  Indians  forsook
their  canoe,  leaving  us  very  despondent  and
sad  for  the  loss  of  those  two  Christians.

IN  the  morning  many  canoes  of  Indians
came,  demanding  their  two  compan-
ions, who  had  remained  in  the  barge
as  hostages.  The  Governor  answered  that
he  would  give  them  up,  provided  they  re-
turned the  two  Christians.  With  those  peo-
ple there  came  five  or  six  chiefs,  who  seemed
to  us  to  be  of  better  appearance,  greater
authority  and  manner  of  composure  than
any  we  had  yet  seen,  although  not  as  tall  as
47

THE JOURNEY OF

those  of  whom  we  have  before  spoken.  They
wore  the  hair  loose  and  very  long,  and  were
clothed  in  robes  of  marten,  of  the  kind  we
had  obtained  previously,  some  of  them  done
up  in  a  very  strange  fashion,  because  they
showed  patterns  of  fawn-colored  furs  that
looked  very  well.

They  entreated  us  to  go  with  them,  and
said  that  they  would  give  us  the  Christians,
water  and  many  other  things,  and  more
canoes  kept  coming  towards  us,  trying  to
block  the  mouth  of  that  inlet,  and  for  this
reason,  as  well  as  because  the  land  appeared
very  dangerous  to  remain  in,  we  took  again
to  sea,  where  we  stayed  with  them  till  noon.
And  as  they  would  not  return  the  Giris-
tians,  and  for  that  reason  neither  would  we
give  up  the  Indians,  they  began  to  throw
stones  at  us  with  slings,  and  darts,  threaten-
ing to  shoot  arrows,  although  we  did  not  see
more  than  three  or  four  bows.

While  thus  engaged  the  wind  freshened
and  they  turned  about  and  left  us.  We  navi-
gated that  day  until  nightfall,  when  my
bark,  which  was  the  foremost,  discovered  a
promontory  made  by  the  coast.  At  the  other
48

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

end  was  a  very  large  river,  and  at  a  small
island  on  the  point  I  anchored  to  wait  for
the  other  barges.

The  Governor  did  not  want  to  touch,  but
entered  a  bay  close  by,  where  there
were  many  small  islands.  There  we  got
together  and  took  fresh  water  out  of  the
sea,  because  the  river  emptied  into  it  like  a
torrent.

For  two  days  we  had  eaten  the  corn
raw,  and  now,  in  order  to  toast  it,  we
went  ashore  on  that  island,  but  not  find-
ing any  firewood,  agreed  to  go  to  the  river,
which  was  one  league  from  there  behind  the
point.  However,  the  current  was  so  strong
that  it  in  no  way  allowed  us  to  land,  but
rather  carried  us  away  from  the  shore
against  all  our  efforts.  The  north  wind  that
blew  off  shore  freshened  so  much  that  it
drove  us  back  to  the  high  sea,  without  our
being  able  to  do  anything  against  it,  and  at
about  one-half  league  from  shore  we  sound-
ed and  found  no  bottom  even  at  thirty  fath-
oms. Without  being  able  to  understand  it,
it  was  the  current  that  disturbed  our  sound-
ings. We  navigated  two  days  yet,  trying
49

THE JOURNEY OF

hard  to  reach  the  shore.  On  the  third  day,
a  little  before  sunrise,  we  saw  many  col-
umns of  smoke  rising  on  the  coast.  Work-
ing towards  these,  we  found  ourselves
in  three  fathoms  of  water,  but  it  being
night  did  not  dare  to  land  because,  as
we  had  seen  so  much  smoke,  we  believed
that  greater  danger  might  be  in  wait
for  us  there.  We  were  unable  to  see,
owing  to  the  darkness,  what  we  should
do.  So  we  determined  to  wait  until
morning.

When  it  dawned  the  barges  had  been
driven  apart  from  each  other.  I  found
myself  in  thirty  fathoms  and,  drifting
along  at  the  hour  of  vespers,  I  descried
two  barges,  and  as  I  approached  saw
that  the  first  one  was  that  of  the  Gov-
ernor, who  asked  me  what  I  thought  we
should  do.  I  told  him  that  we  ought  to  re-
join the  other  barge,  which  was  ahead  of  us,
and  in  no  manner  forsake  her,  and  the  three
together  should  continue  our  way  whither
God  might  take  us.  He  replied  it  was  im-
possible, since  the  barge  was  drifting  far
away  into  the  sea,  whereas  he  wanted  to
So

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

land,  but  that  if  I  wished  to  follow  I  should
put  the  people  of  my  barge  at  the  oars  and
work  hard,  as  only  by  the  strength  of  our
arms  the  land  could  be  reached.  In  this  he
had  been  advised  by  a  captain  he  had  along,
whose  name  was  Pantoja,  who  told  him  that
if  he  did  not  land  that  day  he  would  not  in
six  days  more,  during  which  time  we  would
of  necessity  starve.

Seeing  his  determination,  I  took  to  my
own  oar  and  the  other  oarsmen  in  my
craft  did  the  same,  and  thus  we  rowed
until  nearly  sunset.  But  as  the  Governor
had  with  him  the  healthiest  and  strong-
est men,  in  no  way  could  we  follow  or
keep  up  with  him.  Seeing  this,  I  asked  him
to  give  me  a  rope  from  his  barge  to  be  able
to  follow,  but  he  answered  that  it  was  no
small  effort  on  their  part  alone  to  reach  the
shore  on  that  night.  I  told  him  that  since  it
was  barely  possible  for  us  to  follow  and  do
what  he  had  ordained,  he  should  tell  me
what  he  commanded  me  to  do.  He  an-
swered that  this  was  no  time  for  orders;
that  each  one  should  do  the  best  he  could  to
save  himself ;  that  he  intended  to  do  it  that
5i

THE JOURNEY OF

way,  and  with  this  he  went  on  with  his
craft20

As  I  could  not  follow  him,  I  went  after
the  other  barge,  which  was  out  at  sea  and
waited  for  me,  and  reaching  it  I  found  it
was  the  one  of  the  Captains  Penalosa  and
Tellez.  We  travelled  together  for  four  days,
our  daily  ration  being  half  a  handful  of
raw  maize.  At  the  end  of  these  four  days
a  storm  overtook  us,  in  which  the  other
barge  was  lost.21  God's  great  mercy  pre-
served us  from  being  drowned  in  that
weather.

It  being  winter  and  the  cold  very  great,
and  as  we  had  been  suffering  so  many  days
from  hunger  and  from  the  injuries  we  re-
ceived from  the  waves,  that  the  next  day
people  began  to  break  down,  so  that  when

20The  conduct  of  Narvaez  is  justly  criticised  by
Oviedo  (Vol.  Ill,  p.  590) •  The  Letter  to  the
Audiencia  mentions  it,  and  Relacion  (p.  275)  al-
ludes to  it  simply.

21Relacion  (p.  275)  mentions  the  loss  of  the
barge  of  Tellez  and  Penalosa.  The  text  of  Ovi-
edo (III,  p.  590)  is  quite  different.  What  Cabeza
de  Vaca  states  happened  four  days  after  the  meet-
ing ;  the  Letter  to  the  Audiencia  refers  to  the  day
immediately  after.  It  barely  alludes  to  the  loss
of  the  barge  of  Penalosa,  &c.  This  discrepancy
seems  to  have  escaped  Oviedo  himself,  since  he
does  not  speak  of  it  in  Chapter  VII  (p.  614,  &c).
52

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

the  sun  set  all  those  aboard  of  my  barge  had
fallen  in  a  heap  and  were  so  near  dying  that
few  remained  conscious,  and  not  five  men
kept  on  their  feet.

When  night  came  the  skipper  and  I  were
the  only  ones  able  to  manage  the  barge.
Two  hours  after  nightfall  the  skipper  told
me  to  steer  the  craft  alone,  since  he  felt  that
he  would  die  that  same  night.  Thereupon
I  stood  at  the  helm,  and  after  midnight  went
to  see  if  the  skipper  was  dead,  but  he  said
that,  on  the  contrary,  he  felt  better  and
would  steer  till  daybreak.  On  that  occasion
I  would  have  hailed  death  with  delight
rather  than  to  see  so  many  people  around
me  in  such  a  condition.  After  the  skipper
had  taken  the  barge  under  his  control  I
went  to  rest,  very  much  without  resting,  for
I  thought  of  anything  else  but  sleep.

Near  daybreak  I  fancied  to  hear  the  sound
of  breakers,  for  as  the  coast  was  low,  their
noise  was  greater.  Surprised  at  it,  I  called
the  skipper,  who  said  he  thought  we  were
near  the  shore.  Sounding,  we  found  seven
fathoms,  and  he  was  of  the  opinion  that  we
should  keep  off  shore  till  dawn.  So  I  took
53

THE JOURNEY OF

the  oar  and  rowed  along  the  coast,  from
which  we  were  one  league  away,  and  turned
the  stern  to  seaward.

Close  to  shore  a  wave  took  us  and
hurled  the  barge  a  horse's  length  out  of
water.  With  the  violent  shock  nearly  all
the  people  who  lay  in  the  boat  like
dead  came  to  themselves,  and,  seeing  we
were  close  to  land,  began  to  crawl  out  on  all
fours.  As  they  took  to  some  rocks,  we  built
a  fire  and  toasted  some  of  our  maize.  We
found  rain  water,  and  with  the  warmth  of
the  fire  people  revived  and  began  to  cheer
up.  The  day  we  arrived  there  was  the  sixth
of  the  month  of  November.

AFTER  the  people  had  eaten  I  sent
Lope  de  Oviedo,  who  was  the
strongest  and  heartiest  of  all,  to  go
to  some  trees  nearby  and  climb  to  the  top
of  one,  examine  the  surroundings  and  the
country  in  which  we  were.  He  did  so  and
found  we  were  on  an  island,  and  that  the
ground  was  hollowed  out,  as  if  cattle  had
gone  over  it,  from  which  it  seemed  to  him
54

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

that  the  land  belonged  to  Christians,  and  so
he  told  us.  I  sent  him  again  to  look  and
examine  more  closely  if  there  were  any
worn  trails,  and  not  to  go  too  far  so  as  not
to  run  into  danger.  He  went,  found  a  foot-
path, followed  it  for  about  one-half  league,
and  saw  several  Indian  huts  which  stood
empty  because  the  Indians  had  gone  out  into
the  field.22

He  took  away  a  cooking  pot,  a  little  dag
and  a  few  ruffs  and  turned  back,  but  as  he
seemed  to  delay  I  sent  two  other  Christians
to  look  for  him  and  find  out  what  had  hap-
pened.

They  met  him  nearby  and  saw  that
three  Indians,  with  bows  and  arrows,  were
following  and  calling  to  him,  while  he  did
the  same  to  them  by  signs.  So  he
came  to  where  we  were,  the  Indians  re-
maining behind,  seated  on  the  beach.  Half
an  hour  after  a  hundred  Indian  archers
joined  them,  and  our  fright  was  such  that,
whether  tall  or  little,  it  made  them  appear

"The  word  "campo"  means  literally  field,  but
in  the  present  instance  may  as  well  apply  to  the
surrounding  country  in  general,  whether  level  or
accidented,  wooded  or  a  grassy  plain.  The  idea
of  cultivated  land  is,  of  course  excluded.
55

THE JOURNEY OF

giants  to  us. They  stood  still  close  to  the
first  ones,  near  where  we  were.

We  could  not  defend  ourselves,  as  there
were  scarcely  three  of  us  who  could  stand  on
their  feet.  The  inspector  and  I  stepped  for-
ward and  called  them.  They  came,  and  we
tried  to  quiet  them  the  best  we  could  and
save  ourselves,  giving  them  beads  and  bells.
Each  one  of  them  gave  me  an  arrow  in  token
of  friendship,  and  by  signs  they  gave  us  to
understand  that  on  the  following  morning
they  would  come  back  with  food,  as  then
they  had  none.

THE  next  day,  at  sunrise,  which  was
the  hour  the  Indians  had  given  us
to  understand,  they  came  as  prom-
ised and  brought  us  plenty  of  fish  and  some
roots  which  they  eat  that  taste  like  nuts,
some  bigger,  some  smaller,  most  of  which
are  taken  out  of  the  water  with  much
trouble.

In  the  evening  they  returned  and  brought
us  more  fish  and  some  of  the  same  roots,
56

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

and  they  brought  their  women  and  children
to  look  at  us.  They  thought  themselves
very  rich  with  the  little  bells  and  beads  we
gave  them,  and  thereafter  visited  us  daily
with  the  same  things  as  before.  As  we  saw
ourselves  provided  with  fish,  roots,  water
and  the  other  things  we  had  asked  for,  we
concluded  to  embark  again  and  continue  our
voyage.

We  lifted  the  barge  out  of  the  sand  into
which  it  had  sunk  (for  which  purpose
we  all  had  to  take  off  our  clothes)  and  had
great  work  to  set  her  afloat,  as  our  condi-
tion was  such  that  much  lighter  things
would  have  given  us  trouble.

Then  we  embarked.  Two  crossbow  shots
from  shore  a  wave  swept  over  us,  we  all  got
wet,  and  being  naked  and  the  cold  very
great,  the  oars  dropped  out  of  our  hands.
The  next  wave  overturned  the  barge.  The
inspector  and  two  others  clung  to  her  to
save  themselves,  but  the  contrary  happened ;
they  got  underneath  the  barge  and  were
drowned.

The  shore  being  very  rough,  the  sea  took
the  others  and  thrust  them,  half  dead,  on  the
57

THE JOURNEY OF

beach  of  the  same  island  again,  less  the  three
that  had  perished  underneath  the  barge.

The  rest  of  us,  as  naked  as  we  had  been
born,  had  lost  everything,  and  while  it  was
not  worth much,  to  us  it  meant  a  great
deai. it  was in  November,  bitterly  cold,
and  we  in such a state  that every bone
could  easily  be  counted,  and  we  looked  like
death  itself. Of  myself  I  can  say  that  since
the  month  of  May  I  had  not  tasted  anything
but  toasted  maize,  and  even  sometimes  had
been  obliged  to  eat  it  raw. Although  the
horses were killed during the time the
barges  were  built,  I  never  could  eat  of  them,
and  not  ten  times  did  I  taste  fish. This  I
say  in  order  to  explain  and  that  any  one
might  guess  how  we  were  off. On  top  of
all  this,  a  north  wind  arose,  so  that  we  were
nearer  death  than  life. It  pleased  Our  Lord
that,  searching  for  the  remnants  of  our  for-
mer fire,  we  found  wood  with  which  we
built  big  fires  and  then  with  many  tears
begged  Our  Lord  for  mercy  and  forgiveness
of  our  sins. Every  one  of  us  pitied  not  only
himself,  but  all  the  others  whom  he  saw  in

the  same  condition.

58

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

At  sunset  the  Indians,  thinking  we  had
not  left,  came  to  bring  us  food,  but
when  they  saw  us  in  such  a  different
attire  from  before  and  so  strange-looking,
they  were  so  frightened  as  to  turn  back.
I  went  to  call  them,  and  in  great  fear
they  came.  I  then  gave  them  to  understand
by  signs  how  we  had  lost  a  barge  and  three
of  our  men  had  been  drowned,  while  before
them  there  lay  two  of  our  men  dead,  with
the  others  about  to  go  the  same  way.

Upon  seeing  the  disaster  we  had  suffered,
our  misery  and  distress,  the  Indians  sat
down  with  us  and  all  began  to  weep  out  of
compassion  for  our  misfortune,  and  for
more  than  half  an  hour  they  wept  so  loud
and  so  sincerely  that  it  could  be  heard  far
away.

Verily,  to  see  beings  so  devoid  of  reason,
untutored,  so  like  unto  brutes,  yet  so  deeply
moved  by  pity  for  us,  it  increased  my  feel-
ings and  those  of  others  in  my  company  for
our  own  misfortune.  When  the  lament  was
over,  I  spoke  to  the  Christians  and  asked
them  if  they  would  like  me  to  beg  the  In-
dians to  take  us  to  their  homes.  Some  of
59

THE JOURNEY OF

the  men,  who  had  been  to  New  Spain,  an-
swered that  it  would  be  unwise,  as,  once  at
their  abode,  they  might  sacrifice  us  to  their
idols.

Still,  seeing  there  was  no  remedy  and
that  in  any  other  way  death  was  surer  and
nearer,  I  did  not  mind  what  they  said,
but  begged  the  Indians  to  take  us  to  their
dwellings,  at  which  they  showed  great
pleasure,  telling  us  to  tarry  yet  a  little,  but
that  they  would  do  what  we  wished.  Soon
thirty  of  them  loaded  themselves  with  fire-
wood and  went  to  their  lodges,  which  were
far  away,  while  we  stayed  with  the  others
until  it  was  almost  dark.  Then  they  took
hold  of  us  and  carried  us  along  hurriedly  to
where  they  lived.

Against  the  cold,  and  lest  on  the  way

some  one  of  us  might  faint  or  die,  they  had

provided  four  or  five  big  fires  on  the  road,

at  each  one  of  which  they  warmed  us. As

soon  as  they  saw  we  had  regained  a  little

warmth  and  strength  they  would  carry  us

to  the  next  fire  with  such  haste  that  our  feet

barely  touched  the  ground.

So  we  got  to  their  dwellings,  where  we
60

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

saw  they  had  built  a  hut  for  us  with  many
fires  in  it.  About  one  hour  after  our  arrival
they  began  to  dance  and  to  make  a  great  cel-
ebration (which  lasted  the  whole  night),  al-
though there  was  neither  pleasure,  feast  nor
sleep  in  it  for  us, since  we  expected  to-be  sac-
rificed. In  the  morning  they  again  gave  us
fish  and  roots,  and  treated  us  so  well  that
we  became  reassured,  losing  somewhat  our
apprehension  of  being  butchered.

THAT  same  day  I  saw  on  one  of  the
Indians  a  trinket  he  had  not  gotten
from  us,  and  asking  from  where
they  had  obtained  it  they  answered,  by  signs,
that  other  men  like  ourselves  and  who  were
still  in  our  rear,  had  given  it  to  them.  Hear-
ing this,  I  sent  two  Christians  with  two  In-
dians to  guide  them  to  those  people.  Very
near  by  they  met  them,  and  they  also  were
looking  for  us,  as  the  Indians  had  told  them
of  our  presence  in  the  neighborhood.  These
were  the  Captains  Andres  Dorantes  and
Alonso  del  Castillo,  with  all  of  their  crew.
When  they  came  near  us  they  were  much

THE JOURNEY OF

frightened  at  our  appearance  and  grieved  at
being  unable  to  give  us  anything,  since  they
had  nothing  but  their  clothes.  And  they
stayed  with  us  there,  telling  how,  on  the
fifth  of  that  same  month,  their  barge  strand-
ed a  league  and  a  half  from  there,  and  they
escaped  without  anything  being  lost.

All  together,  we  agreed  upon  repairing
their  barge,  and  that  those  who  had  strength
and  inclination  should  proceed  in  it,  while
the  others  should  remain  until  completely  re-
stored and  then  go  as  best  they  could  along
the  coast,  following  it  till  God  would  be
pleased  to  get  us  all  together  to  a  land  of
Christians.

So  we  set  to  work,  but  ere  the  barge
was  afloat  Tavera,  a  gentleman  in  our  com-
pany, died,  while  the  barge  proved  not  to
be  seaworthy  and  soon  sank.  Now,  being
in  the  condition  which  I  have  stated — that
is,  most  of  us  naked  and  the  weather  so  un-
favorable for  walking  and  for  swimming
across  rivers  and  coves,  and  we  had  neither
food  nor  any  way  to  carry  it,  we  determined
upon  submitting  to  necessity  and  upon  win-
tering there,  and  we  also  agreed  that  four
62

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

men,  who  were  the  most  able-bodied,  should
go  toPanuco,whichwe  believed  to  be  nearby,
and  that,  if  it  was  God,  Our  Lord's  will  to
take  them  there,  they  should  tell  of  our  re-
maining on  the  island  and  of  our  distress.
One  of  them  was  a  Portuguese,  called  Al-
varo  Fernandez,  a  carpenter  and  sailor ;  the
second  was  Mendez;  the  third,  Figueroa,  a
native  of  Toledo;  the  fourth,  Astudillo,
from  Zafra.  They  were  all  good  swimmers
and  took  with  them  an  Indian  from  the
island.

A  FEW  days  after  these  four  Chris-
tians had  left,  the  weather  became
so  cold  and  tempestuous  that  the
Indians  could  no  longer  pull  roots,  and  the
canebrake  in  which  they  used  to  fish  yielded
nothing  more.  As  the  lodges  afforded  so
little  shelter,  people  began  to  die,  and  five
Christians,  quartered  on  the  coast,  were
driven  to  such  an  extremity  that  they  ate
each  other  up  until  but  one  remained,  who
being  left  alone,  there  was  nobody  to  eat
him.  Their  names  are:  Sierra,  Diego,
63

THE JOURNEY OF

Lopez,  Corral,  Palacios  and  Gonzalo  Ruiz.
At  this  the  Indians  were  so  startled,  and
there  was  such  an  uproar  among  them,  that
I  verily  believe  if  they  had  seen  this  at  the
beginning  they  would  have  killed  them,  and
we  all  would  have  been  in  great  danger.
After  a  very  short  time,  out  of  eighty  men
who  had  come  there  in  our  two  parties  only
fifteen  remained  alive.

Then  the  natives  fell  sick  from  the  stom-
ach, so  that  one-half  of  them  died  also,  and
they,  believing  we  had  killed  them,  and  hold-
ing it  to  be  certain,  they  agreed  among  them-
selves to  kill  those  of  us  who  survived.

But  when  they  came  to  execute  it  an
Indian  who  kept  me  told  them  not  to
believe  we  were  the  cause  of  their  dying,
for  if  we  had  so  much  power  we  would
not  have  suffered  so  many  of  our  own
people  to  perish  without  being  able  to
remedy  it  ourselves.  He  also  told  them
there  remained  but  very  few  of  us,  and  none
of  them  did  any  harm  or  injury,  so  that  the
best  was  to  let  us  alone.  It  pleased  Our
Lord  they  should  listen  to  his  advice  and
counsel  and  give  up  their  idea.
64

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

To  this  island  we  gave  the  name  of  the
Island  of  III  Fate.2*  The  people  on  it  are
tall  and  well  formed;  they  have  no  other
weapons  than  bows  and  arrows  with  which
they  are  most  dextrous.  The  men  have  one
of  their  nipples  perforated  from  side  to
side  and  sometimes  both ;  through  this  hole
is  thrust  a  reed  as  long  as  two  and  a  half
hands  and  as  thick  as  two  fingers ;  they  also
have  the  under  lip  perforated  and  a  piece  of
cane  in  it  as  thin  as  the  half  of  a  finger.
The  women  do  the  hard  work.  People  stay
on  this  island  from  October  till  the  end  of
February,  feeding  on  the  roots  I  have  men-
tioned, taken  from  under  the  water  in  No-
vember and  December.  They  have  channels
made  of  reeds  and  get  fish  only  during  that
time ;  afterwards  they  subsist  on  roots.  At
the  end  of  February  they  remove  to  other
parts  in  search  of  food,  because  the  roots
begin  to  sprout  and-  are  not  good  any
more.

Of  all  the  people  in  the  world,  they  are

those  who  most  love  their  children  and  treat

•  23In  Relacion  (p.  277)  Cabeza  de  Vaca  says
the  island  was  called  by  them  "Mai  Fondo,"
which  seems  a  misprint.

65

THE JOURNEY OF

them  best,  and  should  the  child  of  one  of
them  happen  to  die,  parents  and  relatives
bewail  it,  and  the  whole  settlement,  the  la-
ment/lasting a  full  year,  day  after  day.  Be-
fore sunrise  the  parents  begin  to  weep,  after
them  the  tribe,  and  the  same  they  do  at
noon  and  at  dawn.  At  the  end  of  the  year
of  mourning  they  celebrate  the  anniversary
and  wash  and  cleanse  themselves  of  all  their
paint.  They  mourn  all  their  dead  in  this
manner,  old  people  excepted,  to  whom  they
do  not  pay  any  attention,  saying  that  these
have  had  their  time  and  are  no  longer  of
any  use,  but  only  take  space,  and  food  from
the  children.

Their  custom  is  to  bury  the  dead,  ex-
cept those  who  are  medicine  men  among
them,  whom  they  burn,  and  while  the  fire
is  burning,  all  dance  and  make  a  big  fes-
tival, grinding  the  bones  to  powder.  At
the  end  of  the  year,  when  they  celebrate  the
anniversary,  they  scarify  themselves  and
give  to  the  relatives  the  pulverized  bones  to
drink  in  water.  Every  man  has  a  recognized
wife,  but  the  medicine  men  enjoy  greater

privileges,  since  they  may  have  two  or  three,
66

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

and  among  these  wives  there  is  great  friend-
ship and  harmony.

When  one  takes  a  woman  for  his  wife,
from  the  day  he  marries  her,  whatever  he
may  hunt  or  fish,  she  has  to  fetch  it  to  the
home  of  her  father,  without  daring  to  touch
or  eat  of  it,  and  from  the  home  of  the  father-
in-law  they  bring  the  food  to  the  husband.
All  the  while  neither  the  wife's  father  nor  her
mother  enter  his  abode,  nor  is  he  allowed  to
go  to  theirs,  or  to  the  homes  of  his  brothers-
in-law,  and  should  they  happen  to  meet  they
go  out  of  each  other's  way  a  crossbow's  shot
or  so,  with  bowed  heads  and  eyes  cast  to
the  ground,  holding  it  to  be  an  evil  thing  to
look  at  each  other  or  speak.  The  women
are  free  to  communicate  with  their  parents-
in-law  or  relatives  and  speak  to  them.  This
custom  prevails  from  that  island  as  far  as
about  fifty  leagues  inland.

There  is  another  custom,  that  when  a  son
or  brother  dies  no  food  is  gathered  by  those
of  his  household  for  three  months,  prefer-
ring rather  to  starve,  but  the  relatives  and
neighbors  provide  them  with  victuals.  Now,
as  during  the  time  we  were  there  so  many
67

THE JOURNEY OF

of  them  died,  there  was  great  starvation  in
most  of  the  lodges,  due  to  their  customs  and
ceremonials,  as  well  as  to  the  weather,
which  was  so  rough  that  such  as  could  go
out  after  food  brought  in  but  very  little,
withal  working  hard  for  it.  Therefore  the
Indians  by  whom  I  was  kept  forsook  the
island  and  in  several  canoes  went  over  to
the  mainland  to  some  bays  where  there
were  a  great  many  oysters  and  during  three
months  of  the  year  they  do  not  eat  anything
else  and  drink  very  bad  water.  There  is  lack
of  firewood,  but  great  abundance  of  mos-
quitoes. Their  lodges  are  made  of  matting
and  built  on  oyster  shells,  upon  which  they
sleep  in  hides,  which  they  only  get  by
chance.  There  we  remained  to  the  end  of
April,  when  we  went  to  the  seashore,  where
we  ate  blackberries  for  a  whole  month,  dur-
ing which  time  they  danced  and  celebrated
incessantly.

ON  the  island  I  have  spoken  of  they
wanted  to  make  medicine  men  of
us  without  any  examination  or  ask-
ing for  our  diplomas,  because  they  cure  dis-
68

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

eases  by  breathing  on  the  sick,  and  with
that  breath  and  their  hands  they  drive  the
ailment  away.  So  they  summoned  us  to  do
the  same  in  order  to  be  at  least  of  some
use.  We  laughed,  taking  it  for  a  jest,  and
said  that  we  did  not  understand  how  to  cure.

Thereupon  they  withheld  our  food  to
compel  us  to  do  what  they  wanted.  Seeing
our  obstinacy,  an  Indian  told  me  that  I  did
not  know  what  I  said  by  claiming  that  what
he  knew  was  useless,  because  stones  and
things  growing  out  in  the  field  have  their
virtues,  and  he,  with  a  heated  stone,  placing
it  on  the  stomach,  could  cure  and  take  away
pain,  so  that  we,  who  were  wiser  men,  sure-
ly had  greater  power  and  virtue.

At  last  we  found  ourselves  in  such
stress  as  to  have  to  do  it,  without  risk-
ing any  punishment.  Thefr  manner  of
curing  is  as  follows :  When  one  is  ill
they  call  in  a  medicine  man,  and  after
they  are  well  again  not  only  do  they  give
him  all  they  have,  but  even  things  they
strive  to  obtain  from  their  relatives.  All
the  medicine  man  does  is  to  make  a  few  cuts
where  the  pain  is  located  and  then  suck  the
69

THE JOURNEY OF

skin  around  the  incisions.  They  cauterize
with  fire,  thinking  it  very  effective,  and  I
found  it  to  be  so  by  my  own  experience.
Then  they  breathe  on  the  spot  where  the
pain  is  and  believe  that  with  this  the  disease
goes  away.24

The  way  we  treated  the  sick  was  to  make
over  them  the  sign  of  the  cross  while
breathing  on  them,  recite  a  Pater  noster  and
Ave  Maria,  and  pray  to  God,  Our  Lord,  as
best  we  could  to  give  them  good  health  and
inspire  them  to  do  us  some  favors.  Thanks
to  His  will  and  the  mercy  He  had  upon  us,
all  those  for  whom  we  prayed,  as  soon  as
we  crossed  them,  told  the  others  that  they
were  cured  and  felt  well  again.  For  this
they  gave  us  good  cheer,  and  would  rather
be  without  food  themselves  so  as  to  give  it
to  us,  and  they  gave  us  hides  and  other
small  things. So  great  was  the  lack  of  food

"Jacques  le  Moyne  de  Morgues,  Brevis  Nar-
ratio  corvm  qua  in  Florida  America  Provicia
Gallis  acciderunt  (1591,  in  De  Bry),  says  of  the
"Mode  of  treating  the  sick"  {Narrative  of  Le
Moyne,  Illustration  20,  p.  9)  :  "Cutting  into  the
skin  of  the  forehead  with  a  sharp  shell,  they  suck
out  blood  with  their  mouths."  The  remainder  of
the  ceremony,  as  described,  differs  from  that  re-
lated by  Cabeza  de  Vaca.
70

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

then  that  I  often  remained  without  eating
anything  whatsoever  for  three  days,  and
they  were  in  the  same  plight,  so  that  it
seemed  to  me  impossible  for  life  to  last,  al-
though I  afterwards  suffered  still  greater
privations  and  much  more  distress,  as  I
shall  tell  further  on.

The  Indians  that  kept  Alonso  del  Cas-
tillo, Andres  Dorantes  and  the  others,
who  were  still  alive,  being  of  another
language  and  stock,  had  gone  to  feed  on
oysters  at  another  point  of  the  mainland,
where  they  remained  until  the  first  day  of
the  month  of  April.  Then  they  came  back
to  the  island,  which  was  from  there  nearly
two  leagues  off,  where  the  channel  is  broad-
est. The  island  is  half  a  league  wide  and
five  long.

All  the  people  of  this  country  go  naked ;
only  the  women  cover  part  of  their  bodies
with  a  kind  of  wool  that  grows  on  trees.
The  girls  go  about  in  deer  skins.  They  are
very  liberal  towards  each  other  with  what
they  have.  There  is  np  ruler  among  them.
All  who  are  of  the  same  descendancy  clus-
ter together.  There  are  two  distinct  lan-
7i

THE  JOURNEY OF

guages  spoken  on  the  island;  those  of  one
language  are  called  Capoques,  those  of  the
other  Han.  They  have  the  custom,  when
they  know  each  other  and  meet  from  time  to
time,  before  they  speak,  to  weep  for  half  an
hour.  After  they  have  wept  the  one  who
receives  the  visit  rises  and  gives  to  the  other
all  he  has.  The  other  takes  it,  and  in  a  little
while  goes  away  with  everything.  Even
sometimes,  after  having  given  and  obtained
all,  they  part  without  having  uttered  a  word.
There  are  other  very  queer  customs,  but
having  told  the  principal  ones  and  the  most
striking,  I  must  now  proceed  to  relate  what
further  happened  to  us.

AFTER  Dorantes  and  Castillo  had
come  back  to  the  island,  they  gath-
ered together  all  the  Christians,  who
were  somewhat  scattered,  and  there  were  in
all  fourteen.  I,  as  told,  was  in  another
place,  on  the  mainland,  whither  my  Indians
had  taken  me  and  where  I  suffered  from
such  a  severe  illness  that,  although  I  might

otherwise  have  entertained  some  hope  for
72

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

life,  this  was  enough  to  take  it  away  from
me  completely.  When  the  Christians  learn-
ed of  it  they  gave  an  Indian  the  robe  of
marten  we  had  taken  from  the  cacique,  as
stated,  in  order  that  he  should  guide  them
to  where  I  was,  to  see  me,  and  so  twelve  of
them  came,  two  having  become  so  feeble
that  they  did  not  dare  to  take  them  along.

The  names  of  those  who  came  are  :  Alonso
del  Castillo,  Andres  Dorantes  and  Diego
Dorantes,  Valdivieso,  Estrada,  Tostado,
Chaves,  Gutierrez,  an  Asturian  priest;
Diego  de  Huelva,  Estevanico,  the  negro
Benitez,  and  as  they  reached  the  mainland
they  found  still  another  of  our  men  named
Francisco  de  Leon,  and  the  thirteen  went
along  the  coast.  After  they  had  gone  by,
the  Indians  with  whom  I  was  told  me  of  it,
and  how  Hieronimo  de  Alaniz  and  Lope  de
Oviedo  had  been  left  on  the  island.

My  sickness  prevented  me  from  following
or  seeing  them.  I  had  to  remain  with  those
same  Indians  of  the  island  for  more  than
one  year,  and  as  they  made  me  work  so
much  and  treated  me  so  badly  I  determined
to  flee  and  go  to  those  who  live  in  the  woods
73

THE JOURNEY OF

on  the  mainland,  and  who  are  called  those
from  (of)  Charruco.

I  could  no  longer  stand  the  life  I  was
compelled  to  lead.  Among  many  other
troubles  I  had  to-  pull  the  eatable  roots
out  of  the  water  and  from  among  the
canes  where  they  were  buried  in  the
ground,  and  from  this  my  fingers  had
become  so  tender  that  the  mere  touch  of  a
straw  caused  them  to  bleed.  The  reeds
would  cut  me  in  many  places,  because  many
were  broken  and  I  had  to  go  in  among  them
with  the  clothing  I  had  on,  of  which  I  have
told.  This  is  why  I  went  to  work  and  joined
the  other  Indians.  Among  these  I  improved
my  condition  a  little  by  becoming  a  trader,
doing  the  best  in  it  I  could,  and  they  gave
me  food  and  treated  me  well.

They  entreated  me  to  go  about  from  one
part  to  another  to  get  the  things  they  needed,
as  on  account  of  constant  warfare  there  is
neither  travel  nor  barter  in  the  land.

So, trading along with my wares I

penetrated  inland  as  far  as  I  cared  to  go

and along the coast as much as forty

or  fifty  leagues. My  stock  consisted  main-

74

ALVAR  NUNEZ  GABEZA  DE  VACA

ly  of  pieces  of  seashells  and  cockles,  and
shells  with  which  they  cut  a  fruit  which
is  like  a  bean,  used  by  them  for  healing
and  in  their  dances  and  feasts.  This  is
of  greatest  value  among  them,  besides
shell-beads  and  other  objects.  These  things
I  carried  inland,  and  in  exchange  brought
back  hides  and  red  ochre  with  which  they
rub  and  dye  their  faces  and  hair;  flint  for
arrow  points,  glue  and  hard  canes  where-
with to  make  them,  and  tassels  made  of  the
hair  of  deer,  which  they  dye  red.  This
trade  suited  me  well  because  it  gave  me  lib-
erty to  go  wherever  I  pleased ;  I  was  not
bound  to  do  anything  and  no  longer  a  slave.
Wherever  I  went  they  treated  me  well,  and
gave  me  to  eat  for  the  sake  of  my  wares.
My  principal  object  in  doing  it,  however,
was  to  find  out  in  what  manner  I  might  get
further  away.  I  became  well  known  among
them;  they  rejoiced  greatly  when  seeing
me  and  I  would  bring  them  what  they  need-
ed, and  those  who  did  not  know  me  would
desire  and  endeavor  to  meet  me  for  the  sake
of  my  fame.

My sufferings, while trading thus, it
75

THE JOURNEY OF

would  take  long  to  tell;  danger,  hunger,
storms  and  frost  overtaking  me  often  in
the  open  field  and  alone,  and  from  which
through  the  mercy  of  God,  Our  Lord,  I
escaped.  For  this  reason  I  did  not  go  out
trading  in  winter,  it  being  the  time  when  the
Indians  themselves  remain  in  their  huts  and
abodes,  unable  to  go  out  or  assist  each  other.
Nearly  six  years  I  spent  thus  in  the  coun-
try, alone  among  them  and  naked,  as  they
all  were  themselves.

The  reason  for  remaining  so  long  was
that  I  wished  to  take  with  me  a  Chris-
tian called  Lope  de  Oviedo,  who  still  lin-
gered on  the  island.  The  other  compan-
ion, Alaniz,  who  remained  with  him  after
Alonso  del  Castillo  and  Andres  Dorantes
and  all  the  others  had  gone,  soon  died,  and
in  order  to  get  him  (Oviedo)  out  of  there,  I
went  over  to  the  island  every  year,  entreat-
ing him  to  leave  with  me  and  go,  as  well  as
we  could,  in  search  of  Christians.  Eut  year
after  year  he  put  it  off  to  the  year  that  was
to  follow.  In  the  end  I  got  him  to  come,
took  him  away,  and  carried  him  across  the
inlets  and  through  four  rivers  on  the  coast,
76

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

since  he  could  not  swim.  Thence  we  pro-
ceeded, together  with  several  Indians,  to  an
inlet  one  league  wide,  very  deep  everywhere
and  which  seemed  to  us,  from,  what  we  saw,
to  be  the  one  called  of  the  Holy  Ghost.25

On  the  opposite  shore  we  saw  Indians
who  had  come  to  meet  those  in  our  com-
pany. They  informed  us  that  further  on
there  were  three  men  like  ourselves  and  told
us  their  names.  Upon  being  asked  about
the  rest  of  the  party,  they  answered  that  all
had  died  from  cold  and  hunger  and  that  the
Indians  beyond  had  killed  Diego  Dorantes,
Valdivieso  and  Diego  de  Huelva  wilfully,
only  because  these  had  gone  from  one  house
to  another,  and  their  neighbors  with  whom
was  now  the  Captain  Dorantes,  had,  in  con-
sequence of  some  dream  dreamt  by  these
Indians,  killed  Esquivel  and  Mendez  also.

25"Espiritu  Santo."  This  was  the  name  given
to  a  bay,  and  probably  to  the  mouth  of  a  large
river.  The  Letter  to  the  Audiencia,  Oviedo  (p.
593),  describes  it  as  follows:  "This  inlet  (or
bay)  was  wide,  almost  a  league  across,  and  it
makes  a  point  toward  the  direction  of  Panuco,
that  juts  out  into  the  sea  nearly  a  quarter  of  a
league,  with  some  great  dunes  of  white  sand  vis-
ible at  a  great  distance  from  the  sea;  and  from
this  they  suspected  that  it  must  have  been  the
Espiritu  Santo  river."

77

THE JOURNEY OF

We  asked  them  about  those  who  remained
alive,  and  they  said  they  were  in  a  very
sorry  condition,  as  the  boys  and  other  In-
dians, idlers  and  roughs,  kicked  them,
slapped  their  faces  and  beat  them  with
sticks,  and  such  was  the  life  they  had  to
lead.

We  inquired  about  the  country  further
on  and  the  sustenance  that  might  be  found
in  it.  They  said  it  was  very  thinly  set-
tled, with  nothing  to  eat,  and  the  people
dying  from  cold,  as  they  had  neither  hides
nor  anything  else  to  protect  their  bodies.
They  also  told  us  that,  if  we  wished  to  meet
the  three  Christians  about  two  days  hence,
the  Indians  would  come  to  a  place  about  a
league  from  there  on  the  shore  of  that  river
to  feed  on  nuts.  And  to  show  us  that  what
they  said  of  the  ill-treatment  of  our  people
was  true  the  Indians  with  whom  we  were
kicked  and  beat  my  companion.  Neither
did  I  remain  without  my  share  of  it.  They
threw  mud  at  us,  and  put  arrows  to  our
chests  every  day,  saying  they  would  kill  us
in  the  same  way  as  our  other  companions.
And  fearing  this,  Lope  de  Oviedo,  my  com-
78

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

panion,  said  he  preferred  to  go  back,  with
some  women  of  the  Indians  in  whose  com-
pany we  had  forded  the  cove  and  who  had
remained  behind.  I  insisted  he  should  not
go  and  did  all  I  could  to  prevail  upon  him
to  remain,  but  it  was  in  vain.  He  went  back
and  I  remained  alone  among  these  Indians,
who  are  named  Gnevenes,  whereas  those
with  whom  he  went  away  were  called
Deaguanes.

TWO  days  after  Lope  de  Oviedo  had
gone  the  Indians  who  kept  Alonso
del  Castillo  and  Andres  Dorantes
came  to  the  very  spot  we  had  been  told  of
to  eat  the  nuts  upon  which  they  subsist  for
two  months  in  the  year,  grinding  certain
small  grains  with  them,  without  eating  any-
thing else.  Even  of  that  they  do  not  al-
ways have,  since  one  year  there  may  be
some  and  the  next  year  not.  They  (the
nuts)  are  of  the  size  of  those  of  Galicia,  and
the  trees  are  very  big  and  numerous.

An  Indian  told  me  that  the  Christians
had  come  and  that  if  I  wished  to  see  them
79

THE JOURNEY OF

I should run  away  to  hide on the  edge
of a grove to which he pointed, as he
and some of his relatives were to visit
these Indians and would take  me along
to the Christians. I confided in them
and  determined  to  do  it  because  they  spoke
a  different  language  from  that  of  my  In-
dians. So  the  next  day  they  took  me  along.
When  I  got  near  the  site  where  they  had
their,  lodges,  Andres  Dorantes  came  out  to
look  who  it  was,  because  the  Indians  had
informed  him  also  that  a  Christian  was  com-
ing, and  when  he  saw  me  he  was  much
frightened,  as  for  many  days  they  believed
me  to  be  dead,  the  Indians  having  told  them
so. We  gave  many  thanks  to  God  for  being
together  again,  and  that  day  was  one  of  the
happiest  we  enjoyed  in  our  time,  and  going
to  where  was  Castillo  they  asked  me  whither
1  went. I  told  him  my  purpose  was  to  go  to
a  country  of  Christians  and  that  I  followed
this  direction  and  trail. Andres  Dorantes
said  that  for  many  days  he  had  been  urging
Castillo  and  Estevanico  to  go  further  on,
but  they  did  not  risk  it,  being  unable  to

swim  and  afraid  of  the  rivers  and  inlets  that
80

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

had  to  be  crossed  so  often  in  that
country.

Still,  as  it  pleased  God,  Our  Lord,  to  spare
me  after  all  my  sufferings  and  sickness  and
finally  let  me  rejoin  them,  they  at  last  deter-
mined upon  fleeing,  as  I  would  take  them
safely  across  the  rivers  and  bays  we  might
meet.  But  they  advised  me  to  keep  it  secret
from  the  Indians  (as  well  as  my  own  de-
parture) lest  they  would  kill  me  forthwith,
and  that  to  avoid  this  it  was  necessary  to
remain  with  them  for  six  months  longer,
after  which  time  they  would  remove  to  an-
other section  in  order  to  eat  prickly  pears.
These  are  a  fruit  of  the  size  of  eggs,  red
and  black,  and  taste  very  good.  For  three
months  they  subsist  upon  them  exclusively,
eating  nothing  else.

Now,  at  the  time  they  pluck  this  fruit,
other  Indians  from  beyond  come  to  them
with  bows  for  barter  and  exchange,  and
when  those  turn  back  we  thought  of  joining
them  and  escaping  in  this  way.  With  this
understanding  I  remained,  and  they  gave
me  as  a  slave  to  an  Indian  with  whom  Dor-
antes  stayed.  This  Indian,  his  wife,  their
81

THE JOURNEY OF

son  and  another  Indian  who  was  with  them
were  all  cross-eyed.  These  are  called  Mari-
ames,  and  Castillo  was  with  others,  who
were  their  neighbors,  called  Iguaces.

And  so,  being  here  with  them,  they  told  me
that  after  leaving  the  Island  of  Ill-Fate  they
met  on  the  coast  the  boat  in  which  the  purser
and  the  monks  were  going  adrift,  and  that
crossing  the  rivers,  of  which  there  were
four,  all  very  large  and  very  swift,  the
barges  in  which  they  crossed  were  swept  out
into  the  sea,  where  four  of  their  number
were  drowned.  Thus  they  went  ahead  until
they  had  crossed  the  inlet,  whic.i  they  did
by  dint  of  great  efforts.  Fifteen  leagues
from  there  they  met  another  of  our  parties,
and  when  they  reached  there,  already  two  of
their  companions  had  died  in  sixty  leagues
of  travel.  The  survivors  also  were  very
near  death.  On  the  whole  trip  they  ate
nothing  but  crawfish  and  yerba  pedrera.26

At  this,  the  last  cove,  they  said  they  saw
Indians  eating  blackberries,  who,  upon  per-
ceiving the  Christians,  went  away  to  an-

"I  have  been  unable  to  find,  as  yet,  any  refer-
ence that  might  serve  to  explain  this  term.
82

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

other  promontory.  While  seeking  a  way  to
cross  the  cove  an  Indian  and  a  Christian
came  towards  them,  and  they  recognized
Figueroa,  one  of  the  four  we  had  sent  ahead
from  the  Island  of  Ill-Fate,  who  there  told
them  how  he  and  his  companions  had  got-
ten to  that  place,  where  two  of  their  num-
ber and  one  Indian  had  died  from  cold  and
hunger,  because  they  had  come  and  re-
mained in  the  worst  weather  known.  He
also  said  the  Indians  took  him  and  Mendez.
While  with  them  Mendez  fled,  going  in
the  direction  of  Panuco  as  best  he  might,
but  the  Indians  pursued  and  killed  him.
So,  as  he  (Figueroa)  was  with  these  same
Indians  he  learned  (from  them)  that  with
the  Mariames  there  was  a  Christian  who  had
come  over  from  the  other  side  and  had  met
him27  with  those  called  Guevenes;  and  that
this  Christian  was  Hernando  de  Esquivel,
from  Badajoz,  a  companion  of  the  commis-
sary. From  Esquivel  he  learned  how  the
Governor,  the  purser  and  the  others  had
ended.

"Thus  in  original,  although it seems  unclear.
I  do  not  venture  to  make  or  suggest  a  change.
83

THE JOURNEY OF

The  purser,  with  the  friars,  had  stranded
with  their  barge  among  the  rivers,  and,
while  they  were  proceeding  along  the  coast,
the  barge  of  the  Governor  and  his  men  came
to  land  also.  He  (the  Governor)  then  went
with  his  barge  as  far  as  the  big  cove,
whence  he  returned  and  took  his  men  across
to  the  other  side,  then  came  back  for  the
purser,  the  monks  and  the  rest.  He  further
told  him  that  after  disembarking,  the  Gov-
ernor revoked  the  powers  he  had  given  to
the  purser  as  his  lieutenant,  giving  the
office  to  a  captain  that  was  with  him  called
Pantoja.

The  Governor  did  not  land  that  night,
but  remained  on  his  barge  with  a  pilot
and  a  page  who  was  sick.  They  had
neither  water  nor  anything  to  eat  aboard,
and  at  midnight  a  northerner  set  in  with
such  violence  that  it  carried  the  barge  out
into  the  sea,  without  anybody  noticing  it.
They  had  for  an  anchor  only  a  stone,  and
never  more  did  they  hear  of  him.  There-
upon the  people  who  had  remained  on  land
proceeded  along  the  coast,  and,  being  much

impeded  by  water,  built  rafts  with  great
84

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

trouble,  in  which  they  passed  to  the  other
side.

Going  ahead,  they  reached  a  point  of  tim-
ber on  the  beach,  where  they  found  Indians,
who,  upon  seeing  them  approach,  placed
their  lodges  on  the  canoes  and  crossed  over
to  the  other  side  of  the  coast,  and  the  Chris-
tians, in  view  of  the  season  and  weather,
since  it  was  in  the  month  of  November,  re-
mained in  this  timber,  because  they  found
water  and  firewood,  some  crawfish  and
other  sea-food,  but  from  cold  and  hunger
they  began  to  die.

Moreover,  Pantoja,  who  remained  as  lieu-
tenant, ill-treated  them.  On  this  Sotomayor,
brother  of  Vasco  Porcallo  (the  one  from  the
Island  of  Cuba,  who  had  come  in  the  fleet
as  Maestro  de  Campo),  unable  to  stand  it
longer,  quarrelled  with  Pantoja  and  struck
him  a  blow  with  a  stick,  of  which  he  died.
Thus  they  perished  one  after  another,  the
survivors  slicing  the  dead  for  meat.  The
last  one  to  die  was  Sotomayor,  and  Esquivel
cut  him  up  and  fed  on  his  body  until  the
first  of  March,  when  an  Indian,  of  those
who  had  taken  to  flight  previously,  came  to
85

THE JOURNEY OF

look  if  they  were  dead  and  took  Esquivel
along  with  him.

Once  in  the  hands  of  this  Indian,  Fi-
gueroa  spoke  to  Esquivel,  learning  from  him
what  we  have  told  here,  and  he  entreated
him  to  go  in  his  company  towards  Panuco.
But  Esquivel  refused,  saying  he  had  heard
from  the  monks  that  Panuco  was  in  their
rear,  and  so  he  remained,  while  Figueroa
went  back  to  the  coast  where  he  formerly
had  been.28

ALL  this  account  Figueroa  gave  after
Esquivel's  narrative,  and  thus,  from
one  to  the  other,  it  came  to  me.
Through  it  the  fate  of  the  whole  fleet  will
be  learned  and  known,  and  what  happened
to  every  one  in  particular.  And  he  said  fur-
thermore that  if  the  Christians  would  go
about  there  for  some  time  they  might  possi-
bly meet  Esquivel,  because  he  knew  that  he
had  run  away  from  the  Indian  with  whom
he  was  and  gone  to  others  called  Mariames,
who  were  their  neighbors. And,  as  I  have

"This  is  substantially  corroborated  in  Oviedo.
86

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

just  said,  he  and  the  Ashman  wished  to  go
to  other  Indians  further  on,  but  when
those  with  whom  they  were  found  it  out,
they  beat  them  severely,  undressed  the  As-
turian  and  pierced  one  of  his  arms  with  an
arrow.

At  last  the  Christians  escaped  through
flight,  and  remained  with  the  other  Indians,
whose  slaves  they  agreed  to  become.  But,
although  serving  them,  they  were  so  ill-
treated,  that  no  slaves,  nor  men  in  any  con-
dition of  life,  were  ever  so  abused.  Not
content  with  cuffing  and  beating  them  and
pulling  out  their  beards  for  mere  pastime,
they  killed  three  out  of  the  six  only  because
they  went  from  orte  lodge  to  another.  These
were  Diego  Dorantes,  Valdivieso  and  Diego
de  Huelva.  The  three  remaining  ones  ex-
pected to  meet  the  same  fate  in  the  end.

To  escape  from  that  life  Andres  Dorantes
fled  to  the  Mariames,  and  they  were  the  ones
with  whom  Esquivel  had  been.  They  told
him  how  Esquivel  stayed  with  them  and  how
he  fled  because  a  woman  dreamt  he  would
kill  her  son,  and  the  Indians  pursued  and
killed  him.  They  also  showed  Andres  Dor-
87

THE JOURNEY OF

antes  his  sword,  his  rosary,  his  prayer  book
and  other  things  of  his.

It  is  a  custom  of  theirs  to  kill  even  their
own  children  for  the  sake  of  dreams,  and
the  girls  when  newly  born  they  throw  away
to  be  eaten  by  dogs.  The  reason  why  they
do  it  is  (as  they  say)  that  all  the  others  of
that  country  are  their  enemies  with  whom
they  are  always  at  war,  and  should  they
marry  their  daughters  they  might  multiply
so  much  as  to  be  able  to  overcome  them  and
reduce  them  to  slavery.  Hence  they  prefer
to  kill  the  girls  rather  than  see  them  give
birth  to  children  who  would  become  their
foes.

We  asked  them  why  they  did  not  wed
the  girls  among  themselves.  They  replied
it  was  bad  to  marry  them  to  their  own  kin,
and  much  better  to  do  away  with  their
daughters  than  to  leave  them  to  relatives  or
to  enemies.  This  custom  they  have  in  com-
mon with  their  neighbors,  the  Iguaces,  and
no  other  tribe  of  that  country  has  it.  When
they  want  to  get  married  they  buy  their
wives  from  their  enemies.  The  price  paid
for  a  woman  is  a  bow,  the  best  to  be  had,

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

with  two  arrows,  and  if  he  has  no  bow  he
gives  a  net  as  much  as  a  fathom  in  width
and  one  in  length.  They  kill  their  own  chil-
dren and  buy  those  of  strangers.  Marriage
only  lasts  as  long  as  they  please.  For  a
mere  nothing  they  break  up  wedlock.

Dorantes  remained  only  a  few  days  with
those  Indians  and  then  escaped.  Castillo
and  Estevanico  went  inland  to  the  Iguaces.
All  those  people  are  archers  and  well  built,
although  not  as  tall  as  those  we  had  left
behind  us,  and  they  have  the  nipple  and  lip
perforated.  Their  principal  food  are  two
or  three  kinds  of  roots,  which  they  hunt  for
all  over  the  land ;  they  are  very  unhealthy,
inflating,  and  it  takes  two  days  to  roast
them.  Many  are  very  bitter,  and  with  all
that  they  are  gathered  with  difficulty.  But
those  people  are  so  much  exposed  to  starva-
tion that  these  roots  are  to  them  indispensa-
ble and  they  walk  two  and  three  leagues  to
obtain  them.  Now  and  then  they  kill  deer
and  at  times  get  a  fish,  but  this  is  so  little
and  their  hunger  so  great  that  they  eat
spiders  and  ant  eggs,29  worms,  lizards  and

^The  pupas.

89

THE JOURNEY OF

salamanders  and  serpents,  also  vipers  the
bite  of  which  is  deadly.  They  swallow
earth  and  wood,  and  all  they  can  get,  the
dung  of  deer  and  more  things  I  do  not  men-
tion ;  and  I  verily  believe,  from  what  I  saw,
that  if  there  were  any  stones  in  the  country
they  would  eat  them  also.  They  preserve
the  bones  of  the  fish  they  eat,  of  snakes  and
other  animals,  to  pulverize  them  and  eat  the
powder.

The  men  do  not  carry  burdens  or  loads,
the  women  and  old  men  have  to  do  it,  for
those  are  the  people  they  least  esteem.  They
have  not  as  much  love  for  their  children  as
those  spoken  of  before.  Some  among  them
are  given  to  unnatural  vices.  The  women
are  compelled  to  do  very  hard  work  and  in
a  great  many  ways,  for  out  of  twenty-four
hours  of  day  and  night  they  get  only  six
hours'  rest.  They  spend  most  of  the  night  in
stirring  the  fire  to  dry  those  roots  which
they  eat,  and  at  daybreak  they  begin  to  dig
and  carry  firewood  and  water  to  their
houses  and  attend  to  other  necessary  mat-
ters. Most of these Indians are great

thieves,  for,  although  very  liberal  towards
90

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

each  other,  as  soon  as  one  turns  his  head,
his  own  son  or  the  father  grabs  what  he  can.
They  are  great  liars  and  drunkards  and  take
something  in  order  to  become  intoxicated.
They  are  so  accustomed  to  running  that,
without  resting  or  getting  tired,  they  run
from  morning  till  night  in  pursuit  of  a  deer,
and  kill  a  great  many,  because  they  follow
until  the  game  is  worn  out,  sometimes  catch-
ing it  alive.  Their  huts  are  of  matting
placed  over  four  arches.  They  carry  them
on  their  back  and  move  every  two  or  three
days  in  quest  of  food;  they  plant  nothing
that  would  be  of  any  use.

They  are  a  very  merry  people,  and  even
when  famished  do  not  cease  to  dance  and
celebrate  their  feasts  and  ceremonials.  Their
best  times  are  when  "tunas"  (prickly  pears)
are  ripe,  because  then  they  have  plenty  to  eat
and  spend  the  time  in  dancing  and  eating
day  and  night.  As  long  as  these  tunas  last
the  squeeze  and  open  them  and  set  them  to
dry.  When  dried  they  are  put  in  baskets
like7  figs  and  kept  to  be  eaten  on  the  way.
The  peelings  they  grind  and  pulverize.

While  with  them  it  happened  many  times
9i

THE JOURNEY OF

that  we  were  three  or  four  days  without
food.  Then,  in  order  to  cheer  us,  they
would  tell  us  not  to  despair,  since  we  would
have  tunas  very  soon  and  eat  much  and
drink  their  juice  and  get  big  stomachs  and
be  merry,  contented  and  without  hunger.
But  from  the  day  they  said  it  to  the  season
of  the  tunas  there  would  still  elapse  five  or
six  months,  and  we  had  to  wait  that  long.

When  the  time  came,  and  we  went  to  eat
tunas,  there  were  a  great  many  mosquitoes
of  three  kinds,  all  very  bad  and  troublesome,
which  during  most  of  the  summer  perse-
cuted us.  In  order  to  protect  ourselves  we
built,  all  around  our  camps,  big  fires  of
damp  and  rotten  wood,  that  gave  no  flame
but  much  smoke,  and  this  was  the  cause  of
further  trouble  to  us,  for  the  whole  night
we  did  not  do  anything  but  weep  from  the
smoke  that  went  to  our  eyes,  and  the  heat
from  the  fires  was  so  insufferable  that  we
would  go  to  the  shore  for  rest.  And  when,
sometimes,  we  were  able  to  sleep,  the  In-
dians roused  us  again  with  blows  to  go  and
kindle  the  fires.

Those  from  further  inland  have  another
92

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

remedy,  just  as  bad  and  even  worse,  which
is  to  go  about  with  a  firebrand,  set-
ting fire  to  the  plains  and  timber  so  as  to
drive  off  the  mosquitoes,  and  also  to  get
lizards  and  similar  things  Which  they  eat,  to
come  out  of  the  soil.  In  the  same  manner
they  kill  deer,  encircling  them  with  fires,
and  they  do  it  also  to  deprive  the  animals  of
pasture,  compelling  them  to  go  for  food
where  the  Indians  want.  For  never  they
build  their  abodes  except  where  there  are
wood  and  water,  and  sometimes  load  them-
selves with  the  requisites  and  go  in  quest
of  deer,  which  are  found  mostly  where  there
is  neither  water  nor  wood.

On  the  very  day  they  arrive  they  kill  deer
and  whatever  else  can  be  had  and  use  all
the  water  and  wood  to  cook  their  food  with
and  build  fires  against  the  mosquitoes.  They
wait  for  another  day  to  get  something  to
take  along  on  the  road,  and  when  they  leave
they  are  so  badly  bitten  by  mosquitoes  as  to
appear  like  lepers.  In  this  manner  they
satisfy  their  hunger  twice  or  thrice  a  year
and  at  such  great  sacrifice  as  I  have  told.
Having  been  with  them  I  can  say  that  no
93

THE JOURNEY OF

toil  or  suffering  in  this  world  comes  near
it.

All  over  this  country  there  are  a  great
many  deer,  fowl  and  other  animals  which  I
have  before  enumerated.  Here  also  they
come  up  with  cows ;  I  have  seen  them  thrice
and  have  eaten  their  meat.  They  appear  to
me  of  the  size  of  those  in  Spain.  Their  horns
are  small,  like  those  of  the  Moorish  cattle ;
the  hair  is  very  long,  like  fine  wool  and  like
a  peajacket ;  some  are  brownish  and  others
black,  and  to  my  taste  they  have  better  and
more  meat  than  those  from  here.  Of  the
small  hides  the  Indians  make  blankets  to
cover  themselves  with,  and  of  the  taller  ones
they  make  shoes  and  targets.  These  cows
come  from  the  north,  across  the  coun-
try further  on,  to  the  coast  of  Florida,
and  are  found  all  over  the  land  for  over
four  hundred  leagues.  On  this  whole
stretch,  through  the  valleys  by  which  they
come,  people  who  live  there  descend  to  sub-
sist upon  their  flesh.  And  a  great  quantity
of  hides  are  met  with  inland.30

80In  print,  this  is  the  earliest  notice  extant  of
the  American  Bison,  or  Buffalo. The  Letter  to
the  Audiencia  does  not  mention  the  "cows,'* It
94

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

WHEN  I  had  been  with  the  Chris-
tians for  six  months,  waiting  to
execute  our  plans,  the  Indians
went  for  "tunas,"  at  a  distance  of  thirty
leagues  from  there,  and  as  we  were  about  to
flee  the  Indians  began  fighting  among  them-
selves over  a  woman  and  cuffed  and  struck
and  hurt  each  other,  and  in  great  rage  each
one  took  his  lodge  and  went  his  own  way.
So  we  Christians  had  to  part,  and  in  no
manner  could  we  get  together  again  until
the  year  following.  During  that  time  I
fared  very  badly,  as  well  from  lack  of  food
as  from  the  abuse  the  Indians  gave  me.  So
badly  was  I  treated  that  I  had  to  flee  three
times  from  my  masters,  and  they  all  went  in
my  pursuit  ready  to  kill  me.  But  God,  Our
Lord,  in  His  infinite  goodness,  protected
and  saved  my  life.

When  the  time  for  the  tunas  came  we
found  each  other  again  on  the  same  spot.

is  probable,  however,  that  the  first  report,  sent
to  Spain  by  Mendoza,  contained  a  reference  to
it.  The  Relation  does  not  reach  beyond  the  time
when  they  arrived  at  the  bay,  or  river,  of  Espiritu
Santo.  Oviedo  speaks  of  the  cows  after  the  book
of  1542.

95

THE JOURNEY OF

We  had  already  agreed  to  escape  and  ap-
pointed a  day  for  it,  when  on  that  very  day
the  Indians  separated  us,  sending  each  one
to  a  different  place,  and  I  told  my  compan-
ions that  I  would  wait  for  them  at  the  tunas
until  full  moon.  It  was  the  first  of  Septem-
ber and  the  first  day  of  the  new  moon,  and
I  told  them  that  if  at  the  time  set  they  did
not  appear  I  would  go  on  alone  without
them.  We  parted,  each  one  going  off  with
his  Indians.

I  remained  with  mine  until  the  thirteenth
of  the  moon,  determined  to  escape  to  other
Indians  as  soon  as  the  moon  would  be  full,
and  on  that  day  there  came  to  where  I  was
Andres  Dorantes  and  Estevanico.  They
told  me  they  had  left  Castillo  with  other
people  nearby,  called  Anagados,  and  how
they  had  suffered  many  hardships  and  been
lost.  On  the  following  day  our  Indians
moved  towards  where  Castillo  was  and  were
going  to  join  those  who  kept  him,  making
friends  with  them,  as  until  then  they  had
been,  at  war. So  we  got  Castillo  also.

During  all  the  time  we  ate  tunas  we  felt
thirsty. To  allay  our  thirst  we  drank  the
96

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

juice  of  the  fruit,  pouring  it  first  into  a  pit
which  we  dug  in  the  soil,  and  when  that  was
full  we  drank  to  satisfaction.  The  Indians
do  it  in  that  way,  out  of  lack  of  vessels.
The  juice  is  sweet  and  has  the  color  of
must.  There  are  many  kinds  of  tunas,  and
some  very  good  ones,  although  to  me  all
tasted  well  alike,  hunger  never  leaving  me
time  to  select,  or  stop  to  think  which  ones
were  better.  Most  of  the  people  drink  rain-
water that  collects  here  and  there,  for,  as
they  never  have  a  fixed  abode,  they  know
no  springs  nor  established  watering  places,
although  there  are  rivers.

All  over  the  land  are  vast  and  handsome
pastures,  with  good  grass  for  cattle,  and  it
strikes  me  the  soil  would  be  very  fertile
were  the  country  inhabited  and  improved  by
reasonable  people.  We  saw  no  mountains
as  long  as  we  were  in  this  country.  These
Indians  told  us  that  further  on  there  were
others  called  Camones,  who  live  nearer  the
coast,  and  that  they  were  those  who  killed
all  the  people  that  came  in  the  barge  of
Penalosa  and  Tellez.  They  had  been  so
emaciated  and  feeble  that  when  being  killed
97

THE JOURNEY OF

they  offered  no  resistance.  So  the  Indians
finished  with  all  of  them,  and  showed  us
some  of  their  clothes  and  weapons  and  said
the  barge  was  still  there  stranded.  This
is  the  fifth  of  the  missing  ones.  That  of  the
Governor  we  already  said  had  been  swept
out  into  the  sea,  the  one  of  the  purser  and
the  monks  was  seen  stranded  on  the  beach
and  Esquivel  told  us  of  their  end.  Of  the
two  in  which  Castillo,  I  and  Dorantes  were
I  have  told  how  they  sank  close  to  the  Isle
of  Ill-Fate.

TWO  days  after  moving  we  recom-
mended ourselves  to  God,  Our
Lord,  and  fled,  hoping  that,  al-
though it  was  late  in  the  season  and  the
fruits  of  the  tunas  were  giving  out,  by  re-
maining in  the  field  we  might  still  get  over
a  good  portion  of  the  land.  As  we  proceeded
that  day,  in  great  fear  lest  the  Indians  would
follow  us,  we  descried  smoke,  and,  going
towards  it,  reached  the  place  after  sundown,
where  we  found  an  Indian  who,  when
he  saw  us  coming,  did  not  wait,  but  ran
98

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

away.  We  sent  the  negro  after  him,  and
as  the  Indian  saw  him  approach  alone  he
waited.  The  negro  told  him  that  we  were
going  in  search  of  the  people  that  had  raised
the  smoke.  He  answered  that  the  dwellings
were  nearby  and  that  he  would  guide  us,
and  we  followed.  He  hurried  ahead  to  tell
of  our  coming.  At  sunset  we  came  in  sight
of  the  lodges,  and  two  crossbow  shots  before
reaching  them  met  four  Indians  waiting  for
us,  and  they  received  us  well.  We  told  them
in  the  language  of  the  Mariames  that  we
had  come  to  see  them.  They  appeared  to  be
pleased  with  our  company  and  took  us  to
their  homes.  They  lodged  Dorantes  and
the  negro  at  the  house  of  a  medicine  man,
and  me  and  Castillo  at  that  of  another.
These  Indians  speak  another  language  and
are  called  Avavares.  They  were  those  who
used  to  fetch  bows  to  ours  and  barter  with
them,  and,  although  of  another  nation  and
speech,  they  understand  the  idiom  of  those
with  whom  we  formerly  were  and  had  ar-
rived there  on  that  very  day  with  their
lodges.  Forthwith  they  offered  us  many
tunas,  because  they  had  heard  of  us  and  of
99

THE JOURNEY OF

how  we  cured  and  of  the  miracles  Our  Lord
worked  through  us.  And  surely,  even  if
there  had  been  no  other  tokens,  it  was  won-
derful how  He  prepared  the  way  for  us
through  a  country  so  scantily  inhabited,
causing  us  to  meet  people  where  for  a  long
time  there  had  been  none,  saving  us  from
so  many  dangers,  not  permitting  us  to  be
killed,  maintaining  us  through  starvation
and  distress  and  moving  the  hearts  of  the
people  to  treat  us  well,  as  we  shall  tell  fur-
ther on.

ON  the  night  we  arrived  there  some
Indians  came  to  Castillo  complain-
ing that  their  heads  felt  very  sore
and  begging  him  for  relief.  As  soon  as  he
had  made  the  sign  of  the  cross  over  them
and  recommended  them  to  God,  at  that  very
moment  the  Indians  said  that  all  the  pain
was  gone.  They  went  back  to  their  abodes
and  brought  us  many  tunas  and  a  piece  of
venison,  something  we  did  not  know  any
more  what  it  was,  and  as  the  news  spread

that  same  night  there  came  many  other  sick
ioo

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

people  for  him  to  cure,  and  each  brought  a
piece  of  venison,  and  so  many  there  were
that  we  did  not  know  where  to  store  the
meat.  We  thanked  God  for  His  daily  in-
creasing mercy  and  kindness,  and  after  they
were  all  well  they  began  to  dance  and  cele-
brate and  feast  until  sunrise  of  the  day  fol-
lowing.

They  celebrated  our  coming  for  three
days,  at  the  end  of  which  we  asked  them
about  the  land  further  on,  the  people  and
the  food  that  there  might  be  obtained.
They  replied  there  were  plenty  of  tunas  all
through  that  country,  but  that  the  season
was  over  and  nobody  there,  because  all
had  gone  to  their  abodes  after  gathering
tunas;  also  that  the  country  was  very  cold
and  very  few  hides  in  it.  Hearing  this,  and
as  winter  and  cold  weather  were  setting  in,
we  determined  to  spend  it  with  those  In-
dians. Five  days  after  our  arrival  they  left
to  get  more  tunas  at  a  place  where  people  of
a  different  nation  and  language  lived,
and  having  travelled  five  days,  suffering
greatly from hunger, as on the way

there  were  neither  tunas  nor  any  kind  of
101

THE JOURNEY OF

fruit,  we  came  to  a  river,  where  we  pitched
our  lodges.

As  soon  as  we  were  settled  we  went  out
to  hunt  for  the  fruit  of  certain  trees,
which  are  like  spring  bittervetch  (orobus),
and  as  through  all  that  country  there
are  no  trails,  I  lost  too  much  time  in
hunting  for  them.  The  people  returned
without  me,  and  starting  to  rejoin  them
that  night  I  went  astray  and  got  lost.  It
pleased  God  to  let  me  find  a  burning  tree,
by  the  fire  of  which  I  spent  that  very  cold
night,  and  in  the  morning  loaded  myself
with  wood,  took  two  burning  sticks  and
continued  my  journey.  Thus  I  went  on  for
five  days,  always  with  my  firebrands  and
load  of  wood,  so  that  in  case  the  fire  went
out  where  there  was  no  timber,  as  in  many
parts  there  is  none,  I  always  would  have
wherewith  to  make  other  torches  and  not  be
without  firewood.  It  was  my  only  protec-
tion against  the  cold,  for  I  went  as  naked
as  a  new-born  child.  For  the  night  I  used
the  following  artifice :

I  went  to  the  brush  in  the  timber  near  the

rivers  and  stopped  in  it  every  evening  be-
102

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

fore  sunset.  Then  I  scratched  a  hole  in  the
ground  and  threw  in  it  much  firewood  from
the  numerous  trees.  I  also  picked  up  dry
wood  that  had  fallen  and  built  around  the
hole  four  fires  crosswise,  being  very  careful
to  stir  them  from  time  to  time.  Of  the  long
grass  that  grows  there  I  made  bundles,  with
which  I  covered  myself  in  that  hole  and  so
was  protected  from  the  night  cold.  But  one
night  fire  fell  on  the  straw  with  which  I  was
covered,  and  while  I  was  asleep  in  the  hole
it  began  to  burn  so  rapidly  that,  although  I
hurried  out  as  quick  as  possible,  I  still  have
marks  on  my  hair  from  this  dangerous  acci-
dent. During  all  that  time  I  did  not  eat  a
mouthful,  nor  could  I  find  anything  to  eat,
and  my  feet,  being  bare,  bled  a  great  deal.
God  had  mercy  upon  me,  that  in  all  this  time
there  was  no  norther ;  otherwise  I  could  not
have  survived.

At  the  end  of  five  days  I  reached  the
shores  of  a  river  and  there  met  my  Indians.
They,  as  well  as  the  Christians,  had  given
me  up  for  dead,  thinking  that  perhaps  some
snake  had  bitten  me. They  all  were  greatly

pleased  to  see-  me,  the  Christians  especially,
103

THE JOURNEY OF

and  told  me  that  thus  far  they  had  wan-
dered about  famishing,  and  therefore  had
not  hunted  for  me,  and  that  night  they  gave
me  of  their  tunas.  On  the  next  day  we  left
and  went  where  we  found  a  great  many  of
that  fruit  with  which  all  appeased  their  hun-
ger, and  we  gave  many  thanks  to  Our  Lord,
whose  help  to  us  never  failed.

EARLY  the  next  day  many  Indians
came  and  brought  five  people  who
were  paralyzed  and  very  ill,  and
they  came  for  Castillo  to  cure  them.  Every
one  of  the  patients  offered  him  his  bow  and
arrows,  which  he  accepted,  and  by  sunset  he
made  the  sign  of  the  cross  over  each  of  the
sick,  recommending  them  to  God,  Our  Lord,
and  we  all  prayed  to  Him  as  well  as  we
could  to  restore  them  to  health.  And  He,
seeing  there  was  no  other  way  of  getting
those  people  to  help  us  so  that  we  might
be  saved  from  our  miserable  existence,  had
mercy  upon  us,  and  in  the  morning  all  woke
up  well  and  hearty  and  went  away  in  such
good  health  as  if  they  never  had  had  any
104

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

ailment  whatever.  This  caused  them  great
admiration  and  moved  us  to  thanks  to  Our
Lord  and  to  greater  faith  in  His  good-
ness and  the  hope  that  He  would  save  us,
guiding  us  to  where  we  could  serve  Him.
For  myself  I  may  say  that  I  always  had
full  faith  in  His  mercy  and  in  that  He  would
liberate  me  from  captivity,  and  always  told
my  companions  so.

When  the  Indians  had  gone  and  taken
along  those  recently  cured,  we  removed  to
others  that  were  eating  tunas  also,  called
Cultalchuches  and  Malicones,  which  speak  a
different  language,  and  with  them  were
others,  called  Coayos  and  Susolas,  and  on
another  side  those  called  Atayos,  who  were
at  war  with  the  Susolas,  and  exchanging
arrow  shots  with  them  every  day.

Nothing  was  talked  about  in  this  whole

country  but  of  the  wonderful  cures  which

God,  Our  Lord,  performed  through  us,  and

so  they  came  from  many  places  to  be  cured,

and  after  having  been  with  us  two  days

some  Indians  of  the  Susolas  begged  Castillo

to  go  and  attend  to  a  man  who  had  been

wounded,  as  well  as  to  others  that  were  sick
105

THE  JOURNEY OF

and  among  whom,  they  said,  was  one  on  the
point  of  death.  Castillo  was  very  timid,  es-
pecially in  difficult  and  dangerous  cases,  and
always  afraid  that  his  sins  might  interfere
and  prevent  the  cures  from  being  effective.
Therefore  the  Indians  told  me  to  go  and
perform  the  cure.  They  liked  me,  remem-
bering that  I  had  relieved  them  while  they
were  out  gathering  nuts,  for  which  they  had
given  us  nuts  and  hides.  This  had  happened
at  the  time  I  was  coming  to  join  the  Chris-
tians. So  I  had  to  go,  and  Dorantes  and
Estevanico  went  with  me.

When  I  came  close  to  their  ranches  I  saw
that  the  dying  man  we  had  been  called  to
cure  was  dead,  for  there  were  many  people
around  him  weeping  and  his  lodge  was  torn
down,  which  is  a  sign  that  the  owner  has
died.  I  found  the  Indian  with  eyes  up-
turned, without  pulse  and  with  all  the  marks
of  lifelessness.  At  least  so  it  seemed  to  me,
and  Dorantes  said  the  same.  I  removed  a
mat  with  which  he  was  covered,  and  as  best
I  could  prayed  to  Our  Lord  to  restore  his
health,  as  well  as  that  of  all  the  others  who

might  be  in  need  of  it,  and  after  having
106

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

made  the  sign  of  the  cross  and  breathed  on
him  many  times  they  brought  his  bow  and
presented  it  to  me,  and  a  basket  of  ground
tunas,  and  took  me  to  many  others  who
were  suffering  from  vertigo.  They  gave
me  two  more  baskets  of  tunas,  which  I  left
to  the  Indians  that  had  come  with  us.  Then
we  returned  to  our  quarters.

Our  Indians  to  whom  I  had  given  the
tunas  remained  there,  and  at  night  re-
turned telling,  that  the  dead  man  whom
I  attended  to  in  their  presence  had  resus-
citated, rising  from  his  bed,  had  walked
about,  eaten  and  talked  to  them,  and  that
all  those  treated  by  me  were  well  and  in
very  good  spirits.  This  caused  great  sur-
prise and  awe,  and  all  over  the  land  noth-
ing else  was  spoken  of.  All  who  heard  it
came  to  us  that  we  might  cure  them  and
bless  their  children,  and  when  the  Indians
in  our  company  (who  were  the  Cultal-
chulches)  had  to  return  to  their  country,  be-
fore parting  they  offered  us  all  the  tunas
they  had  for  their  journey,  not  keeping  a
single  one,  and  gave  us  flint  stones  as  long

as  one  and  a-half  palms,  with  which  they  cut
107

THE JOURNEY OF

and  that  are  greatly  prized  among  them.
They  begged  us  to  remember  them  and  pray
to  God  to  keep  them  always  healthy,  which
we  promised  to  do,  and  so  they  left,  the  hap-
piest people  upon  earth,  having  given  us  the
very  best  they  had.

We  remained  with  the  Avavares  Indians
for  eight  months,  according  to  our  reckon-
ing of  the  moons.  During  that  time  they
came  for  us  from  many  places  and  said  that
verily  we  were  children  of  the  sun.  Until
then  Dorantes  and  the  negro  had  not  made
any  cures,  but  we  found  ourselves  so
pressed  by  the  Indians  coming  from  all
sides,  that  all  of  us  had  to  become  medicine
men.  I  was  the  most  daring  and  reckless  of
all  in  undertaking  cures.  We  never  treated
anyone  that  did  not  afterwards  say  he  was
well,  and  they  had  such  confidence  in  our
skill  as  to  believe  that  none  of  them  would
die  as  long  as  we  were  among  them.

These  Indians  and  the  ones  we  left  be-
hind told  us  a  very  strange  tale.  From  their
account  it  may  have  occurred  fifteen  or  six-
teen years  ago. They  said  there  wandered

then  about  the  country  a  man,  whom  they
108

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

called  "Bad  Thing,"  of  small  stature  and

with  a  beard,  although  they  never  could  see

his  features  clearly,  and  whenever  he  would

approach  their  dwellings  their  hair  would

stand  on  end  and  they  began  to  tremble. In

the  doorway  of  the  lodge  there  would  then

appear  a  firebrand. That  man  thereupon

came  in  and  took  hold  of  anyone  he  chose,

and  with  a  sharp  knife  of  flint,  as  broad  as  a

hand  and  two  palms  in  length,  he  cut  their

side,  and,  thrusting  his  hand  through  the

gash,  took  out  the  entrails,  cutting  off  a

piece  one  palm  long,  which  he  threw  into

the  fire. Afterwards  he  made  three  cuts  in

one  of  the  arms,  the  second  one  at  the  place

where  people  are  usually  bled,  and  twisted

the  arm,  but  reset  it  soon  afterwards. Then

he  placed  his  hands  on  the  wounds,  and  they

told  us that  they  closed  at  once. Many

times  he  appeared  among  them  while  they

were  dancing,  sometimes  in  the  dress  of  a

woman  and  again  as  a  man,  and  whenever

he  took  a  notion  to  do  it  he  would  seize  the

hut  or  lodge,  take  it  up  into  the  air  and  come

down  with  it  again  with  a  great  crash.  They

also  told  us  how,  many  a  time,  they  set  food
109

THE JOURNEY OF

before  him,  but  he  never  would  partake  of
it,  and  when  they  asked  him  where  he  came
from  and  where  he  had  his  home,  he
pointed  to  a  rent  in  the  earth  and  said  his
house  was  down  below.31

We  laughed  very  much  at  those  stories,
making  fun  of  them,  and  then,  seeing  our
incredulity  they  brought  to  us  many  of
those  whom,  they  said,  he  had  taken,  and
we  saw  the  scars  of  his  slashes  in  the  places
and  as  they  told.  We  told  them  he  was  a
demon  and  explained  as  best  we  could  that
if  they  would  believe  in  God,  Our  Lord,  and
be  Christians  like  ourselves,  they  would  not
have  to  fear  that  man,  nor  would  he  come
and  do  such  things  unto  them,  and  they
might  be  sure  that  as  long  as  we  were  in  this
country  he  would  not  dare  to  appear  again.
At  this  they  were  greatly  pleased  and  lost
much  of  their  apprehension.

The  same  Indians  told  us  they  had  seen
the  Asturian  and  Figueroa  with  other  In-
dians further  along  on  the  coast,  which  we

"There  is  no  mention  of  this  story  in  Oviedo.
What  may  be  the  basis  for  it  is  impossible  to
conjecture.  It  may  have  been  a  tradition,  but
completely  misunderstood,  hence  misreported,  by
the  Spaniards.

no

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

had  named  of  the  figs.  All  those  people  had
no  reckoning  by  either  sun  or  moon,  nor  do
they  count  by  months  and  years ;  they  judge
of  the  seasons  by  the  ripening  of  fruits,  by
the  time  when  fish  die  and  by  the  appear-
ance of  the  stars,  in  all  of  which  they  are
very  clever  and  expert.  While  with  them
we  were  always  well  treated,  although  our
food  was  never  too  plentiful,  and  we  had  to
carry  our  own  water  and  wood.  Their  dwell-
ings and  their  food  are  like  those  of  the
others,  but  they  are  much  more  exposed  to
starvation,  having  neither  maize  nor  acorns
or  nuts.  We  always  went  about  naked  like
they  and  covered  ourselves  at  night  with
deer  skins.

During  six  of  the  eighteen  months  we
were  with  them  we  suffered  much  from
hunger,  because  they  do  not  have  fish  either.
At  the  end  of  that  time  the  tunas  began  to
ripen,  and  without  their  noticing  it  we  left
and  went  to  other  Indians  further  ahead,
called  Maliacones,  at  a  distance  of  one  day's
travel.  Three  days  after  I  and  the  negro
reached  there  I  sent  him  back  to  get  Castillo
and  Dorantes,  and  after  they  rejoined  me  we

THE JOURNEY O-F

all  departed  in  company  of  the  Indians,  who
went  to  eat  a  small  fruit  of  some  trees.  On
this  fruit  they  subsist  for  ten  or  twelve  days
until  the  tunas  are  fully  ripe.  There  they
joined  other  Indians  called  Arbadaos,  whom
we  found  to  be  so  sick,  emaciated  and  swol-
len that  we.  were  greatly  astonished.  The
Indians  with  whom  we  had  come  went  back
on  the  same  trail,  and  we  told  them  that  we
wished  to  remain  with  the  others,  at  which
they  showed  grief.  So  we  remained  with
the  others  in  the  field  near  their  dwell-
ings.

When  the  Indians  saw  us  they  clustered
together,  after  having  talked  among  them-
selves, and  each  one  of  them  took  the  one  of
us  whom  he  claimed  by  the  hand  and  they
led  us  to  their  homes.  While  with  those  we
suffered  more  from  hunger  than  among  any
of  the  others.  In  the  course  of  a  whole  day
we  did  not  eat  more  than  two  handfuls  of
the  fruit,  which  was  green  and  contained  so
much  milky  juice  that  our  mouths  were
burnt  by  it.  As  water  was  very  scarce,  who-
ever ate  of  them  became  very  thirsty.  And
we  finally  grew  so  hungry  that  we  pur-

112

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

chased  two  dogs,  in  exchange  for  nets  and
other  things,  and  a  hide  with  which  I  used
to  cover  myself.  I  have  said  already  that
through  all  that  country  we  went  naked,  and
not  being  accustomed  to  it,  like  snakes  we
shed  our  skin  twice  a  year.  Exposure  to
the  sun  and  air  covered  our  chests  and  backs
with  big  sores  that  made  it  very  painful  to
carry  the  big  and  heavy  loads,  the  ropes  of
which  cut  into  the  flesh  of  our  arms.

The  country  is  so  rough  and  overgrown
that  often  after  we  had  gathered  firewood
in  the  timber  and  dragged  it  out,  we  would
bleed  freely  from  the  thorns  and  spines
which  cut  and  slashed  us  wherever  they
touched.  Sometimes  it  happened  that  I  was
unable  to  carry  or  drag  out  the  firewood
after  I  had  gathered  it  with  much  loss  of
blood.  In  all  that  trouble  my  only  relief  or
consolation  was  to  remember  the  passion  of
our  Saviour,  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  blood  He
shed  for  me,  and  to  ponder  how  much
greater  His  sufferings  had  been  from  the
Ihorns,  than  those  I  was  then  enduring.  I
made  a  contract  with  the  Indians  to  make
combs,  arrows,  bows  and  nets  for  them.
113

THE JOURNEY OF

Also  we  made  matting  of  which  their  lodges
are  constructed  and  of  which  they  are  in
very  great  need,  for,  although  they  know
how  to  make  it,  they  do  not  like  to  do  any
work,  in  order  to  be  able  to  go  in  quest  of
food.  Whenever  they  work  they  suffer
greatly  from  hunger.

Again,  they  would  make  me  scrape  skins
and  tan  them,  and  the  greatest  luxury  I  en-
joyed was  on  the  day  they  would  give  me
a  skin  to  scrape,  because  I  scraped  it  very
deep  in  order  to  eat  the  parings,  which  would
last  me  two  or  three  days.  It  also  happened
to  us,  while  being  with  these  Indians  and
those  before  mentioned,  that  we  would  eat  a
piece  of  meat  which  they  gave  us,  raw,  be-
cause if  we  broiled  it  the  first  Indian  coming
along  would  snatch  and  eat  it;  it  seemed
useless  to  take  any  pains,  in  view  of  what
we  might  expect ;  neither  were  we  particular
to  go  to  any  trouble  in  order  to  have  it  broil-
ed and  might  just  as  well  eat  it  raw.  Such
was  the  life  we  led  there,  and  even  that
scanty  maintenance  we  had  to  earn  through
the  objects  made  by  our  own  hands  for
baiter.

114

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

AFTER  we  had  eaten  the  dogs  it
seemed  to  us  that  we  had  enough
strength  to  go  further  on,  so  we
commended  ourselves  to  the  guidance  of
God,  Our  Lord,  took  leave  of  these  Indians,
and  they  put  us  on  the  track  of  others  of
their  language  who  were  nearby.  While  on
our  way  it  began  to  rain  and  rained  the  whole
day.  We  lost  the  trail  and  found  ourselves
in  a  big  forest,  where  we  gathered  plenty  of
leaves  of  tunas  which  we  roasted  that  same
night  in  an  oven  made  by  ourselves,  and  so
much  heat  did  we  give  them  that  in  the
morning  they  were  fit  to  be  eaten.  After
eating  them  we  recommended  ourselves  to
God  again,  and  left,  and  struck  the  trail  we
had  lost.

Issuing  from  the  timber,  we  met  other
Indian  dwellings,  where  we  saw  two  women
and  some  boys,  who  were  so  frightened  at
the  sight  of  us  that  they  fled  to  the  forest  to
call  the  men  that  were  in  the  woods.  When
these  came  they  hid  behind  trees  to  peep  at
us.  We  called  them  and  they  approached
in  great  fear.  After  we  addressed  them
115

THE  JOURNEY OF

they  told  us  they  were  very  hungry  and  that
nearby  were  many  of  their  own  lodges,  and
they  would  take  us  to  them.  So  that  night
we  reached  a  site  where  there  were  fifty
dwellings,  and  the  people  were  stupefied  at
seeing  us  and  showed  much  fear.  After
they  had  recovered  from  their  astonishment
they  approached  and  put  their  hands  to  our
faces  and  bodies  and  afterwards  to  their
faces  and  bodies  also.  We  stayed  there  that
night,  and  in  the  morning  they  brought
their  sick  people,  begging  us  to  cross  them,
and  gave  us  of  what  they  had  to  eat,  which
were  leaves  of  tunas  and  green  tunas
baked.

For  the  sake  of  this  good  treatment,  giv-
ing us  all  they  had,  content  with  being  with-
out anything  for  our  sake,  we  remained  with
them  several  days,  and  during  that  time
others  came  from  further  on.  When  those
were  about  to  leave  we  told  the  first  ones
that  we  intended  to  accompany  them.  This
made  them  very  sad,  and  they  begged  us  on
their  knees  not  to  go.  But  we  went  and  left
them  in  tears  at  our  departure,  as  it  pained
them  greatly.

116

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

FROM  the  Island  of  Ill-Fate  on,  all  the
Indians  whom  we  met  as  far  as  to
here  have  the  custom  of  not  cohabit-
ing with  their  wives  when  these  are  preg-
nant, and  until  the  child  is  two  years  old.32

Children  are  nursed  to  the  age  of  twelve
years,  when  they  are  old  enough  to  gather
their  own  food.  We  asked  them  why  they
brought  their  children  up  in  that  way  and
they  replied,  it  was  owing  to  the  great  scar-
city of  food  all  over  that  country,  since  it
was  common  (as  we  saw)  to  be  without  it
two  or  three  days,  and  even  four,  and  for
that  reason  they  nursed  the  little  ones  so
long  to  preserve  them,  from  perishing
through  hunger.  And  even  if  they  should
survive,  they  would  be  very  delicate  and
weak.  When  one  falls  sick  he  is  left  to  die
in  the  field  unless  he  be  somebody's  child-.
Other  invalids,  if  unable  to  travel,  are  aban-
doned;  but  a  son  or  brother  is  taken
along.

There  is  also  a  custom-  for  husbands  to

"Not  in  Oviedo. He  mentions  it,  however  (on
p.  617),  as  stated  by  Cabeza  de  Vaca  in  his  book.
The  same  in  regard  to  the  following  sentences.
117

THE JOURNEY OF

leave  their  wives  if  they  do  not  agree,  and
to  remarry  whom  they  please ;  this  applies  to
the  young  men,  but  after  they  have  had  chil-
dren they  stay  with  their  women  and  do  not
leave  them.

When,  in  any  village,  they  quarrel  among
themselves,  they  strike  and  beat  each  other
until  worn  out,  and  only  then  do  they  sepa-
rate. Sometimes  their  women  step  in  and
separate  them,  but  men  never  interfere  in
these  brawls.  Nor  do  they  ever  use  bow
and  arrow,  and  after  they  have  fought  and
settled  the  question,  they  take  their  lodges
and  women  and  go  out  into  the  field  to  live
apart  from  the  others  till  their  anger  is
over,  and  when  they  are  no  longer  angry
and  their  resentment  has  passed  away  they
return  to  the  village  and  are  as  friendly
again  as  if  nothing  had  happened.  There
is  no  need  of  mediation.  When  the
quarrel  is  between  unmarried  people  they
go  to  some  of  the  neighbors,  who,  even  if
they  be  enemies,  will  receive  them  well,  with
great  festivities  and  gifts  of  what  they  have,
so  that,  when  pacified,  they  return  to  their
village  wealthy.

118

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

They  all  are  warriors  and  so  astute  in
guarding  themselves  from  an  enemy  as  if
trained  in  continuous  wars  and  in  Italy.
When  in  places  where  their  enemies  can
offend  them,  they  set  their  lodges  on  the
edge  of  the  roughest  and  densest  timber  and
dig  a  trench  close  to  it  in  which  they  sleep.
The  men  at  arms  are  hidden  by  brushwood
and  have  their  loopholes,  and  are  so  well
covered  and  concealed  that  even  at  close
range  they  cannot  be  seen.

To  the  densest  part  of  the  forest  they
open  a  very  narrow  trail  and  there  ar-
range a  sleeping  place  for  their  women
and  children.  As  night  sets  in  they
build  fires  in  the  lodges,  so  that  if  there
should  be  spies  about,  these  would  think
the  people  to  sleep  there.  And  before
sunrise  they  light  the  same  fires  again.
Now,  ditches,  without  being  seen  or  dis-
covered.

In  case  there  are  no  forests  wherein  they
can  hide  thus  and  prepare  their  ambushes,
they  settle  on  the  plain  wherever  it  appears
most appropriate, surrounding the place

with  trenches  protected  by  brushwood. In
119

THE JOURNEY OF

these  they  open  loopholes  through  which
they  can  reach  the  enemy  with  arrows,  and
those  parapets  they  build  for  the  night.
While  I  was  with  the  Agitenes  and  these
not  on  their  guard,  their  enemies  surprised
them  at  midnight,  killing  three  and  wound-
ing a  number,  so  that  they  fled  from  their
houses  to  the  forest.  As  soon,  however,  as
they  noticed  that  the  others  had  gone  they
went  back,  picked  up  all  the  arrows  the
others  had  spent  and  left  and  followed  them
as  stealthily  as  possible.  That  same  night
they  reached  the  others'  dwellings  unnoticed,
and  at  sunrise  attacked,  killing  five,  be-
sides wounding  a  great  many.  The  rest
made  their  escape,  leaving  homes  and
bows  behind,  with  all  their  other  belong-
ings.

A  short  time  after  this  the  women  of
those  calling  themselves  Guevenes  came,
held  a  parley  and  made  them  friends  again,
but  sometimes  women  are  also  the  cause  of
war.  All  those  people  when  they  have  per-
sonal questions  and  are  not  of  one  family,
kill  each  other  in  a  treacherous  way  and  deal

most  cruelly  with  one  another.
120

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

THOSE  Indians  are  the  readiest  peo-
ple with  their  weapons  of  all  I  have
seen  in  the  world,  for  when  they
suspect  the  approach  of  an  enemy  they  lie
awake  all  night  with  their  bows  within
reach  and  a  dozen  of  arrows,  and  before  one
goes  to  sleep  he  tries  his  bow,  and  should
the  string  not  be  to  his  liking  he  arranges
it  until  it  suits  him.  Often  they  crawl  out
of  their  dwellings  so  as  not  to  be  seen  and
look  and  spy  in  every  direction  after  danger,
and  if  they  detect  anything,  in  less  than  no
time  are  they  all  out  in  the  field  with  their
bows  and  arrows.  Thus  they  remain  until
daybreak,  running  hither  and  thither  when-
ever they  see  danger  or  suspect  their  ene-
mies might  approach.  When  day  comes
they  unstring  their  bows  until  they  go  hunt-
ing.

The  strings  of  their  bows  are  made  of
deer  sinews.  They  fight  in  a  crouching  pos-
ture, and  while  shooting  at  each  other  talk
and  dart  from  one  side  to  the  other  to  dodge
the  arrows  of  the  foe.  In  this  way  they  re-
ceive little  damage  from  our  crossbows  and
121

THE JOURNEY OF

muskets.  On  the  contrary,  the  Indians
laugh  at  those  weapons,  because  they  are  not
dangerous  to  them  on  the  plains  over  which
they  roam.  They  are  only  good  in  narrows
and  in  swamps.

Horses  are  what  the  Indians  dread  most,
and  by  means  of  which  they  will  be  over-
come.

Whoever  has  to  fight  Indians  must  take
great  care  not  to  let  them  think  he  is  dis-
heartened or  that  he  covets  what  they  own ;
in  war  they  must  be  treated  very  harshly,
for  should  they  notice  either  fear  or  greed,
they  are  the  people  who  know  how  to  abide
their  time  for  revenge  and  to  take  courage
from  the  fears  of  their  enemy.  After  spend-
ing all  their  arrows,  they  part,  going  each
their  own  way,  and  without  attempting  pur-
suit, although  one  side  might  have  more
men  than  the  other ; such  is  their  custom.

Many  times  they  are  shot  through  and
through  with  arrows,  but  do  not  die  from
the  wounds  as  long  as  the  bowels  or  heart
are  not  touched;  on  the  contrary,  they  re-
cover quickly. Their  eyesight,  hearing  and

senses  in  general  are  better,  I  believe,  than
122

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

those  of  any  other  men  upon  earth.  They
can  stand,  and  have  to  stand,  much  hunger,
thirst  and  cold,  being  more  accustomed  and
used  to  it  than  others.  This  I  wished  to
state  here,  since,  besides  that  all  men  are
curious  to  know  the  habits  and  devices  of
others,  such  as  might  come  in  contact  with
those  people  should  be  informed  of  their
customs  and  deeds,  which  will  be  of  no
small  profit  to  them.

I  ALSO  do  wish  to  tell  of  the  nations
and  languages  met  with  from  the  Is-
land of  Ill-Fate  to  the  last  ones,  the
Cuchendados.  On  the  Island  of  Ill-Fate
two  languages  are  spoken,  the  ones  they  call
Capoques,  the  others  Han.  On  the  main-
land, facing  the  island,  are  others,  called  of
Charrnco,  who  take  their  name  from  the
woods  in  which  they  live.  Further  on,  along
the  seashore,  are  others,  who  call  themselves
Deguenes,  and  in  front  of  them  others
named  those  of  Mendica.  Further  on,  on
the  coast,  are  the  Quevcnes,  in  front  fur-
ther inland  the  Mariames,  and  following
123

THE  JOURNEY OF

the  coast  we  come  to  the  Guaycones,  and  in
front  of  them  inland  the  Yeguajces.  After
those  come  the  Atayos,  and  behind  them
others,  called  Decubadaos,  of  whom  there
are  a  great  many  further  on  in  this  direc-
tion. On  the  coast  live  the  Quitoles,  and  in
front  of  them,  inland,  the  Chauauares.
These  are  joined  by  the  Maliacones  and  the
Cultalchiilches  and  others  called  Susolas
and  Comos,  ahead  on  the  coast  are  the
Camolas,  and  further  on  those  whom  we  call
the  people  of  the  figs.33

All  those  people  have  homes  and  villages
and  speak  different  languages.  Among  them
is  a  language  wherein  they  call  men  mira
aca,  arraca,  and  dogs  xo.

In  this  whole  country  they  make  them-
selves drunk  by  a  certain  smoke  for  which
they  give  all  they  have.  They  also  drink
something  which  they  extract  from  leaves  of

83Oviedo  gives  no  names  of  tribes.  How  far
they  may  be  reliable  is  extremely  problematic.  In
the  first  place,  it  is  very  doubtful  if  Cabeza  de
Vaca  understood  as  much  of  the  language  of  the
different  tribes  as  he  insinuates ;  and  next,  even
if  they  are  really  names  of  distinct  tribes  or  bands,
we  cannot  determine  whether  they  were  those
which  they  gave  to  themselves  or  those  given  to
them  by  others,  which  is  always  a  great  dif-
ference.

124

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

trees,  like  unto  water-oak,  toasting  them  on
the  fire  in  a  vessel  like  a  low-necked  bottle.
When  the  leaves  are  toasted  they  fill  the
vessel  with  water  and  hold  it  over  the  fire
so  long  until  it  has  thrice  boiled ;  then  they
pour  the  liquid  into  a  bowl  made  of  a  gourd
cut  in  twain.  As  soon  as  there  is  much  foam
on  it  they  drink  it  as  hot  as  they  can  stand,
and  from  the  time  they  take  it  out  of  the
first  vessel  until  they  drink  they  shout,
"Who  wants  to  drink?"  When  the  women
hear  this  they  stand  still  at  once,  and  al-
though they  carry  a  very  heavy  load  do  not
dare  to  move.  Should  one  of  them  stir,  she
is  dishonored  and  beaten.  In  a  great  rage
they  spill  the  liquid  they  have  prepared  and
spit  out  what  they  drank,  easily  and  without
pain.  The  reason  for  this  custom,  they  say,
is  that  when  they  want  to  drink  that  water
and  the  women  stir  from  the  spot  where
they  first  hear  the  shouts,  an  evil  substance
gets  into  the  liquid  that  penetrates  their
bodies,  causing  them  to  die  before  long.  All
the  time  the  water  boils  the  vessel  must  be
kept  covered.  Should  it  be  uncovered  while
a  woman  comes  along  they  pour  it  out  and
125

THE JOURNEY OF

do  not  drink  of  it.  It  is  yellow  and  they
drink  it  for  three  days  without  partaking  of
any  food,  each  consuming  an  arroba  and  a
half  every  day.

When  the  women  are  ill  they  only  seek
food  for  themselves,  because  nobody  else
eats  of  what  they  bring.34

During  the  time  I  was  among  them  I  saw
something  very  repulsive,  namely,  a  man
married  to  another.  Such  are  impotent  and
womanish  beings,  who  dress  like  women  and
perform  the  office  of  women,  but  use  the
bow  and-  carry  big  loads.  Among  these  In-
dians we  saw  many  of  them ;  they  are  more
robust  than  the  other  men,  taller,  and  can
bear  heavy  burthens.

A'fter  parting  from  those  we  had  left  in
tears,  we  went  with  the  others  to  their  homes
and  were  very  well  received.  They  brought
us  their  children  to  touch,  and  gave  us  much
mezquite-meal. This  mezquiquez36  is  a  fruit

"Not  in  Letter  to  Audiencia,  but  Oviedo  men-
tions it  as  contained  in  Cabeza  de  Vaca.

3GThe  well-known  Mesquite  tree.  The  report
in  Oviedo  does  not  make  mention  of  it,  but  in
Chapter  VII,  of  Book  XXXV,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  617,
Oviedo  copies  almost  literally  this  passage  rela-
tive to  Mesquite,

126

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

which,  while  on  the  tree,  is  very  bitter  and

like  the  carob  bean. It  is  eaten  with  earth

and  then  becomes  sweet  and  very  palatable.

The  way  they  prepare  it  is  to  dig  a  hole  in

the  ground,  of  the  depth  it  suits  them,  and

after  the  fruit  is  put  in  that  hole,  with  a

piece  of  wood,  the  thickness  of  a  leg  and  one

and  a  half  fathoms  long  they  pound  it  to  a

meal,  and  to  the  earth  that  mixes  with  it  in

the hole they add several handfuls and

pound  again  for  a  while. After  that  they

empty  it  into  a  vessel,  like  a  small,  round

basket,  and  pour  in  enough  water  to  cover  it

fully,  so  that  there  is  water  on  top. Then

the  one  who  has  done  the  pounding  tastes

it,  and  if  it  appears  to  him  not  sweet  enough

he  calls  for  more  earth  to  add,  and  this  he

does  until  it  suits  his  taste. Then  all  squat

around  and  every  one  reaches  out  with  his

hand  and  takes  as  much  as  he  can. The

seeds  and  peelings  they  set  apart  on  hides,

and  the  one  who  has  done  the  pounding

throws  them  back  into  the  vessel,  pouring

water  over  them  again. They  squeeze  out

the  juice  and  water,  and  the  husks  and  seeds

they  again  put  on  hides,  repeating  the  opera-
127

THE JOURNEY OF

tion  three  or  four  times  at  every  pounding.
Those  who  take  part  in  that  banquet,  which
is  for  them  a  great  occasion,  get  very  big
bellies  from  the  earth  and  water  they
swallow.

Now,  of  this,  the  Indians  made  a  great
feast  in  our  behalf,  and  danced  and  cele-
brated all  the  time  we  were  with  them.  And
at  night  six  Indians,  to  each  one  of  us,  kept
watch  at  the  entrance  to  the  lodge  we  slept
in,  without  allowing  anybody  to  enter  be-
fore sunrise.

When  we  were  about  to  leave  some
women  happened  to  come,  that  belonged  to
I  Indians  living  further  on,  and,  informing
ourselves  where  their  abodes  were,  we  left,
although  the  Indians  entreated  us  to  remain
a  day  longer,  since  the  place  we  wanted  to
go  to  was  very  far  away,  and  there  was  no
trail  to  it.  They  showed  us  how  the  women
who  had  just  arrived  were  tired,  but  that
if  we  would  let  them  rest  until  the  next  day,
they  then  would  accompany  and  guide  us.
We  left,  nevertheless,  and  soon  the  women
followed  with  others  of  the  village.

There  being  no  trails  in  that  country,  we
128

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

soon  lost  our  way.  At  the  end  of  four
leagues  we  reached  a  spring,  and  there  met
the  women  who  had  followed  us,  and  who
told  us  of  all  they  had  gone  through  until
they  fell  in  with  us  again.  We  went  on,
taking  them  along  as  guides.

In  the  afternoon  we  crossed  a  big  river,
the  water  being  more  than  waist-deep.  It
may  have  been  as  wide  as  the  one  of  Sevilla,
and  had  a  swift  current.  At  sunset  we
reached  a  hundred  Indian  huts  and,  as  we
approached,  the  people  came  out  to  receive
us,  shouting  frightfully,  and  slapping  their
thighs.  They  carried  perforated  gourds
filled  with'  pebbles,  which  are  ceremonial  ob-
jects of  great  importance.  They  only  use
them  at  dances,  or  as  medicine,  to  cure,  and
nobody  dares  touch  then*  but  themselves.
They  claim  that  those  gourds  have  healing
virtues,  and  that  they  come  from  Heaven,
not  being  found  in  that  country;  nor  do
they  know  where  they  come  from,  except
that  the  rivers  carry  them  down  when  they
rise  and  overflow  the  land.

So  great  was  their  excitement  and  eager-
ness to  touch  us  that,  every  one  wanting  to
129

THE JOURNEY OF

be  first,  they  nearly  squeezed  us  to  death,
and,  without  suffering  our  feet  to  touch  the
ground,  carried  us  to  their  abodes.  So  many
crowded  down  upon  us  that  we  took  refuge
in  the  lodges  they  had  prepared  for  our  ac-
commodation, and  in  no  manner  consented
to  be  feasted  by  them  on  that  night.

The  whole  night  they  spent  in  celebration
and  dancing,37  and  the  next  morning  they
brought  us  every  living  soul  of  that  village
to  be  touched  by  us  and  to  have  the  cross
made  over  them,  as  with  the  others.  Then
they  gave  to  the  women  of  the  other  village
who  had  come  with  their  own  a  great  many
arrows.  The  next  day  we  went  on,  and  all
the  people  of  that  village  with  us,  and  when

"It  is  perhaps  not  amiss  to  call  attention  here
to  the  fact  that  an  Indian  dance  is  much  more
of  a  religious  performance  than  a  mere  rejoicing.
This  Cabeza  de  Vaca,  of  course,  did  not,  and
could  not,  know.  The  dances  may  just  as  well
have  been,  in  part  at  least,  conjurations,  either
to  implore  the  spirits  to  intercede  for  them  with
the  mysterious  strangers,  or  to  protect  the  In-
dians from  any  evil  the  newcomers  might  intend
to  inflict,  by  rendering  them  harmless.  Of  course,
the  further  on  the  Spaniards  went,  and  the  better
it  became  known  that  their  actions  were  beneficial,
the  more  these  ceremonies  had  to  assume  the
character  of  intercession  only,  coupled  with
thanks  for  the  coming  (or  sending)  of  such  pow-
erfully beneficial  beings.

130

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

we  came  to  other  Indians  were  as  well  re-
ceived as  anywhere  in  the  past;  they  also
gave  us  of  what  they  had  and  the  deer  they
had  killed  during  the  day.  Among  these  we
saw  a  new  custom.  Those  who  were  with
us  took  away  from  those  people  who  came
to  get  cured  their  bows  and  arrows,  their
shoes  and  beads,  if  they  wore  any,  and
placed  them  before  us  to  induce  us  to  cure
the  sick.  As  soon  as  these  had  been  treated
they  went  away  contented  and  saying  they
felt  well.

So  we  left  there  also,  going  to  others,  by
whom  we  were  also  very  well  received,  and
they  brought  us  their  sick,  who,  after  we
had  made  the  sign  of  the  cross  over  them,
would  say  they  were  healed,  and  he  who
did  not  get  well  still  believed  we  might  cure
him.  And  at  what  the  others  whom  we  had
treated  told  they  rejoiced  and  danced  so
much  as  not  to  let  us  sleep.

131

THE JOURNEY OF

After  we  left  those  we  went  to  many  other
lodges,  but  thence  on  there  prevailed  a  new
custom.  While  we  were  received  very  well
everywhere,  those  who  came  with  us  would
treat  those  who  received  us  badly,  taking
away  their  belongings  and  plundering  their
homes,  without  leaving  them  anything.  It
grieved  us  very  much  to  see  how  those  who
were  so  good  to  us  were  abused.  Besides,
we  dreaded  lest  this  behavior  might  cause
trouble  and  strife.  But  as  we  could  not  ven-
ture to  interfere  or  punish  the  transgressors,
we  had  to  wait  until  we  might  have  more
authority  over  them.  Furthermore,  the  suf-
ferers themselves,  noticing  how  we  felt,
comforted  us  by  saying  we  should  not
worry ;  that  they  were  so  happy  at  seeing  us
as  to  gladly  lose  their  own,  considering  it
to  be  well  employed,  and  besides,  that  fur-
ther on  they  would  repay  themselves  from
other  Indians  who  were  very  rich.  On  that
whole  journey  we  were  much  worried  by
the  number  of  people  following  us.  We
could  not  escape  them,  although  we  tried,

because  they  were  so  anxious  to  touch  us,
132

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

and  so  obtrusive  that  in  three  hours  we
could  not  get  through  with  them.

The  following  day  they  brought  us  all  the
people  of  the  village ;  most  of  them  had  one
eye  clouded,  while  others  were  totally  blind
from  the  same  cause,  at  which  we  were
amazed.  They  are  well  built,  of  very  good
physique,  and  whiter  than  any  we  had  met
until  then.  There  we  began  to  see  mountains,
and  it  seemed  as  if  they  swept  down  from
the  direction  of  the  North  Sea,  and  so,  from
what  the  Indians  told  us,  we  believe  they
are  fifteen  leagues  from  the  ocean.38

From  there  we  went  with  the  Indians  to-
wards the  mountains  aforesaid,  and  they
took  us  to  some  of  their  relatives.  They  did
not  want  to  lead  us  anywhere  but  to  their
own  people,  so  as  to  prevent  their  enemies
having  any  share  in  the  great  boon  which,

^Elsewhere  I  have  observed  that  the  terms,
north,  or  south,  sea,  indicate,  not  the  north  and
south  respectively,  but  east  and  west ;  the  north
sea  being  the  Atlantic  and  the  south  sea  the
Pacific.  Hence  the  mountains  here  mentioned
extended,  at  least  approximately,  from  east  to
west.  As  will  be  seen  further  on,  the  slopes  of
these  mountains  were  covered  with  "iron  slags,"
indicating  volcanic  rock.  This  may  lead  to  the
identification  of  the  chain  of  mountains  described
by  Cabeza  de  Vaca.

133

THE JOURNEY OF

as  they  fancied,  it  was  to  see  us.  And  as
soon  as  we  would  arrive  those  that  went
with  us  would  sack  the  houses  of  the  others ;
but  as  these  knew  of  the  custom  before  our
coming,  they  hid  some  of  their  chattels,  and,
after  receiving  us  with  much  rejoicing,  they
took  out  the  things  which  they  had  concealed
and  presented  them  to  us.  These  were  beads
and  ochre,  and  several  little  bags  of  silver.39
We,  following  the  custom,  turned  the  gifts
immediately  over  to  the  Indians  who  had
come  in  our  company,  and  after  they  had
given  these  presents  they  began  their  dances
and  celebrations,  and  sent  for  others  from
another  village  near  by  to  come  and  look  at
us.  In  the  afternoon  they  all  came,  and
brought  us  beads,  bows,  and  other  little
things,  which  we  also  distributed.

The  next  day,  as  we  were  going  to  leave,
they  all  wanted  to  take  us  to  others  of  their

"In  place  of  "silver,"  the  edition  of  1555  has
"margarita,"  which  may  stand  for  mica,  or  else
foliated  gypsum.  Mica  is  more  likely.  Oviedo
(ut  supra)  says:  "This  last  relation  [the  one  of
1542]  says  the  Indians  gave  to  those  Christians
[Cabeza  de  Vaca  and  his  companions]  some  little
bags  with  silver,  which  is  a  mistake  of  the  printer,
who  should  have  put,  little  bags  with  margarita
(mica),  and  not  'with  silver.'  "
134

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

friends,  who  dwelt  on  a  spur  of  the  moun-
tains. They  said  there  were  a  great  many
lodges,  and  people  who  would  give  us  much,
but,  as  it  was  out  of  our  way,  we  did  not
want  to  go  there,  and  continued  on  the  plain,
though  near  the  mountains,  thinking  them
to  be  not  far  from  the  coast.  All  the  people
there  are  very  bad,  and  we  preferred  to  cross
the  country,  as  further  inland  they  were  bet-
ter inclined,  and  treated  us  better.  We  also
felt  sure  to  find  the  country  more  thickly
settled  and  with  more  resources.  Finally,
we  did  it  because,  in  crossing  the  country,
we  would  see  much  more  of  its  particulars,
so  that,  in  case  God  our  Lord  should  be
pleased  to  spare  one  of  us  and  take  him
back  to  a  land  of  Christians,  he  might  give
an  account  of  it.

When  the  Indians  saw  we  were  deter-
mined not  to  go  whither  they  wanted,  they
said  that  nobody  lived  where  we  intended
to  go,  neither  were  there  tunas  nor  any
other  food,  and  they  entreated  us  to  tarry
one  day  longer  with  them,  to  which  we  con-
sented. Two  Indians  were  sent  out  to  look
for  people  on  our  proposed  route.
i35

THE  JOURNEY OF

The  next  day  we  departed,  taking  many
of  them  along,  the  women  carrying  water,
and  so  great  had  become  our  authority  that
none  dared  to  drink  without  our  permission.
After  going  two  leagues  we  met  the  men
sent  out  in  search  of  people,  but  who  had
not  found  any.  At  this  the  Indians  seemed
to  show  grief,  and  again  begged  us  to  take
the  way  of  the  mountains,  but  we  persisted,
and,  seeing  this,  they  took  mournful  leave
of  us  and  turned  back  down  the  river  to  their
homes,  while  we  proceeded  along  the  stream
upwards.

Soon  we  met  two  women  carrying  loads.
As  they  descried  us  they  stood  still,  put
down  their  loads,  and  brought  us  of  what
these  contained,  which  was  cornmeal,  and
told  us  that  higher  up  on  the  river  we  would
meet  with  dwellings,  plenty  of  tunas,  and
of  that  same  meat.  We  left  them,,  as  they
were  going  to  those  from  whom  we  had
just  taken  leave,  and  walked  on  until  at  sun-
set we  reached  a  village  of  about  twenty
lodges,  where  they  received  us  with  tears
and  deep  sorrow. They  already  knew  that,

wherever  we  arrived,  the  people  would  be
136

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

robbed  and  plundered  by  those  in  our  com-
pany. But,  seeing  us  alone,  they  lost  their
fear,  and  gave  us  tunas,  though  nothing
else. We  stayed  there  over  night.

At  daybreak  the  same  Indians  we  had
left  the  day  before  surprised  the  lodges,  and,
as  the  people  were  unprepared,  in  fancied  se-
curity, and  had  neither  time  nor  place  to
hide  anything,  they  were  stripped  of  all  their
chattels,  at  which  they  wept  bitterly.  In
consolation,  the  robbers  told  them  that  we
were  children  of  the  sun,  and  had  the  power
to  cure  or  kill,  and  other  lies,  bigger  even
than  those  which  they  invent  to  suit  their
purposes.  They  also  enjoined  them  to  treat
us  with  great  reverence,  and  be  careful  not
to  arouse  our  wrath ;  to  give  us  all  they
had  and  guide  us  to  where  there  were  many
people,  and  that  wherever  we  should  come
to  they  should  steal  and  rob  everything  the
others  had,  such  being  the  custom.

After  giving  these  instructions,  and  teach-
ing the  people  how  to  behave,  they  returned,
and  left  us  with  these  Indians,  who,  mind-
ful of  what  the  others  had  said,  began  to
treat  us  with  the  same  respect  and  awe,  and
i37

THE JOURNEY OF

we  travelled  in  their  company  for  three  days.
They  took  us  to  where  there  were  many  In-
dians, and  went  ahead  to  tell  them  of  our
coming,  repeating  what  they  had  heard  and
adding  much  more  to  it,  for  all  these  In-
dians are  great  gossipers  and  liars,  particu-
larly when  they  think  it  to  be  to  their  bene-
fit. As  we  neared  the  lodges  all  the  in-
mates came  out  to  receive  us,  with  much
rejoicing  and  display,  and,  among  other
things,  two  of  their  medicine-men  gave  us
two  gourds.  Thence  onward  we  carried
gourds,  which  added  greatly  to  our  author-
ity, since  they  hold  these  ceremonial  objects
very  high.40  Our  companions  sacked  the
dwellings,  but  as  there  were  many  and  they
only  few  in  number,  they  could  not  carry
away  all  they  took,  so  that  more  than  half
was  left  to  waste.  Thence  we  turned  inland
for  more  than  fifty  leagues,  following  the
slopes  of  the  mountains,  and  at  the  end  of
them  met  forty  dwellings.

There,  among  other  things  which  they
gave  us,  Andres  Dorantes  got  a  big  rattle

*°The  well-known  rattles  of  the  medicine-men,
also  used  largely  in  dances.
138

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

of  copper,  large,  on  which  was  represented
a  face,  and  which  they  held  in  great  esteem.
They  said  it  had  been  obtained  from  some  of
their  neighbors.  Upon  asking  these  whence
it  had  come,  they  claimed  to  have  brought
it  from  the  north,  where  there  was  much  of
it  and  highly  prized.  We  understood  that,
wherever  it  might  have  come  from,  there
must  be  foundries,  and  that  metal  was  cast
in  molds.41  Leaving  on  the  next  day,  we
crossed  a  mountain  seven  leagues  long,  the
stones  of  which  were  iron  slags.  At  night
we  came  to  many  dwellings,  situated  on  the
banks  of  a  very  beautiful  river.

The  inmates  of  these  abodes  came  to  re-
ceive us  halfways,  with  their  children  on
their  backs.  They  gave  us  a  number  of
pouches  with  silver42  and  powdered  anti-
mony  (or  lead),43  with  which  they  paint

41This  recalls  the  copper  plate  on  the  breast  of
a  chief  Quivira.  (Compare  the  "Journey  of
Coronado,"  in  this  series.)  That  Indian  did  as
little  know  the  origin  of  the  ornament  he  was
wearing  (although  Nebraska  lies  considerably
nearer  the  deposits  of  native  copper  than  Texas)
than  the  Indians  of  Cabeza  de  Vaca.  From  the
(of  course,  fancied)  belief  in  the  existence  of
foundries,  we  may  infer  that  the  rattle  was  cast.

^Should  be  mica  (margarita) .

^This  may  have  been  war-paint,  both  lead  and
antimony  procuring  a  dark-bluish  hue  on  the
139

THE JOURNEY OF

their  faces,  and  many  beads  and  robes  of
cow-skins,  and  loaded  those  who  came  with
us  with  all  their  chattels.  These  people  ate
tunas  and  pine-nuts ;  there  are  in  that  coun-
try small  trees  of  the  sweet  pine,44  the  cones
of  which  are  like  small  eggs,  but  the  nuts
are  better  than  those  of  Castilla,  because  the
husks  are  thin.  When  still  green  they  grind
them  and  make  balls  that  are  eaten.  When
dried  they  grind  the  nuts  with  the  husks,
and  eat  them  as  meal.  And  those  who  re-
ceived us,  as  soon  as  they  had  touched  our
bodies,  returned  to  their  houses  on  a  run,
then  came  again,  and  never  stopped  running
back  and  forth.  In  this  way  they  brought
us  a  great  many  things  for  our  journey.

Here  they  brought  to  me  a  man  who,  they
told,  a  long  time  ago  had  been  shot  through
the  left  side  of  the  back  with  an  arrow,  the
head  of  which  stuck  close  to  his  heart.  He
said  it  gave  him  much  pain,  and  that  on  this

skin.  In  New  Mexico  a  manganese  ore  is  used
for  war-paint.

"Pinus  edulis,  the  well-known  Pifion  tree  with
its  edible  nuts.  If  the  statement  of  Cabeza  de
Vaca,  "in  that  country,"  means  the  place  where
he  was  then,  it  must  have  been  somewhere  within
the  triangle  formed  by  the  Rio  Grande  and  the
Pecos  rivers,  where  the  nut  pine  exists  to-day.
140

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

account  he  was  sick.  I  touched  the  region
of  the  body  and  felt  the  arrowhead,  and  that
it  had  pierced  the  cartilage.  So,  with  a
knife,  I  cut  open  the  breast  as  far  as  the
place.  The  arrow  point  had  gotten  athwart,
and  was  very  difficult  to  remove.  By  cut-
ting deeper,  and  inserting  the  point  of  the
knife,  with  great  difficulty  I  got  it  out;  it
was  very  long.  Then,  with  a  deer-bone,  ac-
cording to  my  knowledge  of  surgery,  I  made
two  stitches.  After  I  had  extracted  the  ar-
row they  begged  me  for  it,  and  I  gave  it
to  them.  The  whole  village  came  back  to
look  at  it,  and  they  sent  it  further  inland
that  the  people  there  might  see  it  also.

On  account  of  this  cure  they  made  many
dances  and  festivities,  as  is  their  custom.
The  next  day  I  cut  the  stitches,  and  the  In-
dian was  well.  The  cut  I  had  made  only
showed  a  scar  like  a  line  in  the  palm  of  the
hand,  and  he  said  that  he  felt  not  the  least
pain.

Now,  this  cure  gave  us  such  fame  among
them  all  over  the  country  as  they  were  cap-
able of conceiving and respecting. We

showed  them  our  rattle,  and  they  told  us  that
141

THE JOURNEY OF

where  it  had  come  from  there  were  a  great
many  sheets  of  the  same  (metal)  buried,45
that  it  was  a  thing  they  valued  highly,  and
that  there  were  fixed  abodes  at  the  place.
We  believe  it  to  be  near  the  South  Sea,  for
we  always  heard  that  sea  was  richer  (in
metal)  than  the  one  of  the  north.

After  leaving  these  people  we  travelled
among  so  many  different  tribes  and  lan-
guages that  nobody's  memory  can  recall
them  all,  and  always  they  robbed  each
other;  but  those  who  lost  and  those  who
gained  were  equally  content.  The  number
of  our  companions  became  so  large  that  we
could  no  longer  control  them.

Going  through  these  valleys  each  Indian
carried  a  club  three  palms  in  length.  They
all  moved  in  a  front,  and  whenever  a  hare
(of  which  there  are  many)  jumped  up  they
closed  in  upon  the  game,  and  rained  such
blows  upon  it  that  it  was  amazing  to  see.
Thus  they  drove  the  hare  from  one  to  the
other,  and,  to  my  fancy,  it  was  the  most
agreeable  chase  that  could  be  thought  of,
for  many  a  time  they  would  come  right  to

45This  seems  an  allusion  to  native  copper.
142

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

one's  hands ;  and  when  at  night  we  camped
they  had  given  us  so  many  that  each  one  of
us  had  eight  or  ten  loads.46  Those  of  the
Indians  who  carried  bows  would  not  take
part,  but  went  to  the  mountains  after  deer,
and  when  at  night  they  came  back  it  was
with  five  or  six  deer  for  each  one  of  us,  with
birds,  quails,  and  other  game ;  in  short,  alt
those  people  could  kill  they  set  before  us,
without  ever  daring  to  touch  anything,  even
if  dying  of  hunger,  unless  we  blessed  it
first.  Such  was  their  custom  from  the  time
they  joined  us.

The  women  brought  many  mats,  with
which  they  built  us  houses,  one  for  each  of
us  and  those  attached  to  him.  After  this  we
would  order  them  to  broil  all  the  game,  and
they  did  it  quickly  in  ovens  built  by  them
for  the  purpose.  We  partook  of  everything
a  little,  giving  the  rest  to  the  principal  man
among  those  who  had  come  with  us  for  dis-
tribution among  all.  Every  one  then  came
with  the  share  he  had  received  for  us  to
breathe  on  it  and  bless  it,  without  which  they

"This  recalls  the  ceremonial  rabbit-hunt  of  the
Pueblo  Indians  of  New  Mexico.
143

THE JOURNEY OF

left  it  untouched.  Often  we  had  with  us
three  to  four  thousand  persons.  And  it  was
very  tiresome  to  have  to  breathe  on  and
make  the  sign  of  the  cross  over  every  morsel
they  ate  or  drank.  For  many  other  things
which  they  wanted  to  do  they  would  come
to  ask  our  permission,  so  that  it  is  easy  to
realize  how  greatly  we  were  bothered.  The
women  brought  us  tunas,  spiders,  worms,
and  whatever  else  they  could  find,  for  they
would  rather  starve  than  partake  of  any-
thing that  had  not  first  passed  through  our
hands.

While  travelling  with  those,  we  crossed
a  big  river  coming  from  the  north  and,  tra-
versing about  thirty  leagues  of  plains,  met
a  number  of  people  that  came  from  afar  to
meet  us  on  the  trail,  who  treated  us  like  the
foregoing  ones.

Thence  on  there  was  a  change  in  the  man-
ner of  reception,  insofar  as  those  who  would
meet  us  on  the  trail  with  gifts  were  no
longer  robbed  by  the  Indians  of  our  com-
pany, but  after  we  had  entered  their  homes
they  tendered  us  all  they  possessed,  and  the

dwellings  also. We  turned  over  everything
144

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

to  the  principals  for  distribution.  Invariably
those  who  had  been  deprived  of  their  be-
longings would  follow  us,  in  order  to  re-
pair their  losses,  so  that  our  retinue  became
very  large.  They  would  tell  them  to  be
careful  and  not  conceal  anything  of  what
they  owned,  as  it  could  not  be  done  with-
out our  knowledge,  and  then  we  would
cause  their  death.  So  much  did  they  frighten
them  that  on  the  first  few  days  after  join-
ing us  they  would  be  trembling  all  the  time,
and  would  not  dare  to  speak  or  lift  their
eyes  to  Heaven.

Those  guided  us  for  more  than  fifty
leagues  through  a  desert  of  very  rugged
mountains,  and  so  arid  that  there  was  no
game.  Consequently  we  suffered  much  from
lack  of  food,  and  finally  forded  a  very  big
river,  with  its  water  reaching  to  our  chest.
Thence  on  many  of  our  people  began  to
show  the  effects  of  the  hunger  and  hard-
ships they  had  undergone  in  those  moun-
tains, which  were  extremely  barren  and  tire-
some to  travel.

The  same  Indians  led  us  to  a  plain  be-
yond the  chain  of  mountains,  where  people
i45

THE JOURNEY OF

came  to  meet  us  from  a  long  distance.  By
those  we  were  treated  in  the  same  manner
as  before,  and  they  made  so  many  presents
to  the  Indians  who  came  with  us  that,  un-
able to  carry  all,  they  left  half  of  it.  We
told  the  givers  to  take  it  back,  so  as  not  to
have  it  lost,  but  they  refused,  saying  it  was
not  their  custom  to  take  back  what  they
had  once  offered,  and  so  it  was  left  to  waste.
We  told  these  people  our  route  was  towards
sunset,  and  they  replied  that  in  that  direction
people  lived  very  far  away.  So  we  ordered
them  to  send  there  and  inform  the  inhabi-
tants that  we  were  coming  and  how.  From
this  they  begged  to  be  excused,  because  the
others  were  their  enemies,  and  they  did  not
want  us  to  go  to  them.  Yet  they  did  not
venture  to  disobey  in  the  end,  and  sent  two
women,  one  of  their  own  and  the  other
a  captive.  They  selected  women  because
these  can  trade  everywhere,  even  if  there
be  war.

We  followed  the  women  to  a  place  where
it  had  been  agreed  we  should  wait  for  them.
After  five  days  they  had  not  yet  returned,

and  the  Indians  explained  that  it  might  be
146

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

because  they  had  not  found  anybody.  So
we  told  them  to  take  us  north,  and  they  re-
peated that  there  were  no  people,  except  very
far  away,  and  neither  food  nor  water.
Nevertheless  we  insisted,  saying  that  we
wanted  to  go  there,  and  they  still  excused
themselves  as  best  they  could,  until  at  last
we  became  angry.

One  night  I  went  away  to  sleep  out  in
the  field  apart  from  them;  but  they  soon
came  to  where  I  was,  and  remained  awake
all  night  in  great  alarm,  talking  to  me,  say-
ing how  frightened  they  were.  They  en-
treated us  not  to  be  angry  any  longer,  be-
cause, even  if  it  was  their  death,  they  would
take  us  where  we  chose.  We  feigned  to  be
angry  still,  so  as  to  keep  them  in  suspense,
and  then  a  singular  thing  happened.

On  that  same  day  many  fell  sick,  and
on  the  next  day  eight  of  them  died!  All
over  the  country,  where  it  was  known,
they  became  so  afraid  that  it  seemed  as  if
the  mere  sight  of  us  would  kill  them.  They
besought  us  not  to  be  angry  nor  to  procure
the  death  of  any  more  of  their  number,  for
they  were  convinced  that  we  killed  them
147

THE JOURNEY OF

by  merely  thinking  of  it.  In  truth,  we  were
very  much  concerned  about  it,  for,  seeing
the  great  mortality,  we  dreaded  that  all  of
them  might  die  or  forsake  us  in  their  terror,
while  those  further  on,  upon  learning  of  it,
would  get  out  of  our  way  hereafter.  We
prayed  to  God  our  Lord  to  assist  us,  and  the
sick  began  to  get  well.  Then  we  saw  some-
thing that  astonished  us  very  much,  and  it
was  that,  while  the  parents,  brothers  and
wives  of  the  dead  had  shown  deep  grief  at
their  illness,  from  the  moment  they  died  the
survivors  made  no  demonstration  whatso-
ever, and  showed  not  the  slightest  feeling;
nor  did  they  dare  to  go  near  the  bodies  until
we  ordered  their  burial.

In  more  than  fifteen  days  that  we  re-
mained with  them  we  never  saw  them  talk
together,  neither  did  we  see  a  child  that
laughed  or  cried.  One  child,  who  had  be-
gun to  cry,  was  carried  off  some  distance,
and  with  some  very  sharp  mice-teeth  they
scratched  it  from  the  shoulders  down  to
nearly  the  legs.  Angered  by  this  act  of
cruelty,  I  took  them  to  task  for  it,  and  they

said  it  was  done  to  punish  the  child  for  hav-
148

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

ing  wept  in  my  presence.  Their  apprehen-
sions caused  the  others  that  came  to  see  us
to  give  us  what  they  had,  since  they  knew
that  we  did  not  take  anything  for  ourselves,
but  left  it  all  to  the  Indians.

Those  were  the  most  docile  people  we  met
in  the  country,  of  the  best  complexion,  and
on  the  whole  well  built.

The  sick  being  on  the  way  of  recovery,
when  we  had  been  there  already  three  days,
the  women  whom  we  had  sent  out  returned,
saying  that  they  had  met  very  few  people,
nearly  all  having  gone  after  the  cows,  as
it  was  the  season.  So  we  ordered  those
who  had  been  sick  to  remain,  and  those
who  were  well  to  accompany  us,  and  that,
two  days'  travel  from  there,  the  same
women  should  go  with  us  and  get  people
to  come  to  meet  us  on  the  trail  for  our
reception.

The  next  morning  all  those  who  were
strong  enough  came  along,  and  at  the  end
of  three  journeys  we  halted.  Alonso  del  Cas-
tillo and  Estevanico,  the  negro,  left  with  the
women  as  guides,  and  the  woman  who  was
a  captive  took  them  to  a  river  that  flows
149

THE JOURNEY OF

between  mountains,47  where  there  was  a  vil-
lage, in  which  her  father  lived,  and  these
were  the  first  abodes  we  saw  that  were  like
unto  real  houses.  Castillo  and  Estevanico
went  to  these  and,  after  holding  parley
with  the  Indians,  at  the  end  of  three  days
Castillo  returned  to  where  he  had  left  us,
bringing  with  him  five  or  six  of  the  In-
dians. He  told  how  he  had  found  perma-
nent houses,  inhabited,  the  people  of  which
ate  beans  and  squashes,48  and  that  he  had
also  seen  maize.

Of  all  things  upon  earth  this  caused  us
the  greatest  pleasure,  and  we  gave  endless
thanks  to  our  Lord  for  this  news.  Castillo
also  said  that  the  negro  was  coming  to  meet
us  on  the  way,  near  by,  with  all  the  people
of  the  houses.  For  that  reason  we  started,
and  after  going  a  league  and  a  half  met  the
negro  and  the  people  that  came  to  receive

"This  being  the  last  important  stream  met  by
the  wanderers  before  they  reached  the  Pacific
states  of  Mexico,  it  may  be  permitted  to  inquire
whether  it  was  not  perhaps  the  Rio  Grande,  in
which  case  the  stream  previously  mentioned,  and
along  which  the  "cows"  were  roaming,  was  the
Pecos.

^The  originals  have  "melones,"  but  I  have  no
doubt  that  a  species  of  squash  is  meant.
150

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

us,  who  gave  us  beans  and  many  squashes
to  eat,  gourds  to  carry  water  in,  robes  of
cowhide,  and  other  things.  As  those  people
and  the  Indians  of  our  company  were  ene-
mies, and  did  not  understand  each  other,
we  took  leave  of  the  latter,  leaving  them
all  that  had  been  given  to  us,  while  we  went
on  with  the  former  and,  six  leagues  beyond,
when  night  was  already  approaching,
reached  their  houses,  where  they  received  us
with  great  ceremonies.  Here  we  remained
one  day,  and  left  on  the  next,  taking  them
with  us  to  other  permanent  houses,  where
they  subsisted  on  the  same  food  also,  and
thence  on  we  found  a  new  custom.

The  people  who  heard  of  our  approach
did  not,  as  before,  come  out  to  meet  us  on
the  way,  but  we  found  them  at  their  homes,
and  they  had  other  houses  ready  for  us.
They  were  all  seated  with  their  faces  turned
to  the  wall,  the  heads  bowed  and  the  hair
pulled  over  the  eyes.  Their  belongings  had
been  gathered  in  a  heap  in  the  middle  of  the
floor,  and  thence  on  they  began  to  give  us
many  robes  of  skins.  There  was  nothing
they  would  not  give  us.  They  are  the  best
151

THE JOURNEY OF

formed  people  we  have  seen,  the  liveliest
and  most  capable ;  who  best  understood  us
and  answered  our  questions.  We  called
them  "of  the  cows,"  because  most  of  the
cows  die  near  there,49  and  because  for  more
than  fifty  leagues  up  that  stream  they  go  to
kill  many  of  them.  Those  people  go  com-
pletely naked,  after  the  manner  of  the  first
we  met.  The  women  are  covered  with  deer-
skins, also  some  men,  especially  the  old  ones,
who  are  of  no  use  any  more  in  war.

The  country  is  well  settled.  We  asked
them  why  they  did  not  raise  maize,  and  they
replied  that  they  were  afraid  of  losing  the
crops,  since  for  two  successive  years  it  had
not  rained,  and  the  seasons  were  so  dry
that  the  moles  had  eaten  the  corn,  so  that
they  did  not  dare  to  plant  any  more  until
it  should  have  rained  very  hard.  And  they
also  begged  us  to  ask  Heaven  for  rain,
which  we  promised  to  do.  We  also  wanted  to
know  from  where  they  brought  their  maize,
and  they  said  it  came  from  where  the  sun
sets,  and  that  it  was  found  all  over  that

"Which is to  say,  that  they  are hunted and
killed  in  that  vicinity.

152

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

country,  and  the  shortest  way  to  it  was  in
that  direction.  We  asked  them  to  tell  us
how  to  go,  as  they  did  not  want  to  go  them-
selves, to  tell  us  about  the  way.

They  said  we  should  travel  up  the  river
towards  the  north,  on  which  trail  for  seven-
teen days  we  would  not  find  a  thing  to  eat,
except  a  fruit  called  chacan,  which  they
grind  between  stones ;  but  even  then  it  can-
not be  eaten,  being  so  coarse  and  dry ;  and
so  it  was,  for  they  showed  it  to  us  and  we
could  not  eat  it.  But  they  also  said  that,
going  upstream,  we  would  always  travel
among  people  who  were  their  enemies,  al-
though speaking  the  same  language,  and
who  could  give  us  no  food,  but  would  re-
ceive us  very  willingly,  and  give  us  many
cotton  blankets,  hides  and  other  things ;  but
that  it  seemed  to  them  that  we  ought  not
to  take  that  road.

In  doubt  as  to  what  should  be  done,  and
which  was  the  best  and  most  advantageous
road  to  take,  we  remained  with  them  for
two  days.  They  gave  us  beans,  squashes,60
and  calabashes. Their  way  of  cooking  them

""Original  has  "melones!'
153

THE JOURNEY OF

is  so  new  and  strange  that  I  felt  like  de-
scribing it  here,  in  order  to  show  how  dif-
ferent and  queer  are  the  devices  and  indus-
tries of  human  beings.  They  have  no  pots.
In  order  to  cook  their  food  they  fill  a  middle-
sized  gourd  with  water,  and  place  into  a
fire  such  stones  as  easily  become  heated,  and
when  they  are  hot  to  scorch  they  take  them
out  with  wooden  tongs,  thrusting  them  into
the  water  of  the  gourd,  until  it  boils.  As
soon  as  it  boils  they  put  into  it  what  they
want  to  cook,  always  taking  out  the  stones
as  they  cool  off  and  throwing  in  hot  ones
to  keep  the  water  steadily  boiling.  This  is
their  way  of  cooking.

After  two  days  were  past  we  determined
to  go  in  search  of  maize,  and  not  to  follow
the  road  to  the  cows,  since  the  latter  car-
ried us  to  the  north,  which  meant  a  very
great  circuit,  as  we  held  it  always  certain
that  by  going  towards  sunset  we  should
reach  the  goal  of  our  wishes.51

"By  following  the  Rio  Grande  from  the  mouth
of  the Pecos, they  indeed would  have  travelled
almost  due  west  for  about  a  hundred  and  fifty
154

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

So  we  went  on  our  way  and  traversed  the
whole  country  to  the  South  Sea,  and  our
resolution  was  not  shaken  by  the  fear  of
great  starvation,  which  the  Indians  said  we
should -suffer  (and  indeed  suffered-)  during
the  first  seventeen  days  of  travel.  All  along
the  river,  and  in  the  course  of  these  seven-
teen days  we  received  plenty  of  cowhides,
and  did  not  eat  of  their  famous  fruit  (cha-
can),  but  our  food  consisted  (for  each  day)
of  a  handful  of  deer-tallow,  which  for  that
purpose  we  always  sought  to  keep,  and  so
endured  these  seventeen  days,  at  the  end  of
which  we  crossed  the  river  and  marched
for  seventeen  days  more.  At  sunset,  on  a
plain  between  very  high  mountains,  we  met
people  who,  for  one-third  of  the  year,  eat
but  powdered  straw,  and  as  we  went  by
just  at  that  time,  had  to  eat  it  also,  until,  at
the  end  of  that  journey  we  found  some
permanent  houses,  with  plenty  of  harvested
maize,  of  which  and  of  its  meal  they  gave
us  great  quantities,  also  squashes  and  beans,
and  blankets  of  cotton,  with  all  of  which

miles, and thence northwest for about eighty
miles  more, by  air line; whereas, by  ascending
the  Pecos  they  had  to  go  due  north,
155

THE JOURNEY OF

we  loaded  those  who  had  conducted  us
thither,  so  that  they  went  home  the  most
contented  people  upon  earth.  We  gave  God
our  Lord  many  thanks  for  having  taken  us
where  there  was  plenty  to  eat.

Among  the  houses  there  were  several
made  of  earth,  and  others  of  cane  matting;
and  from  here  we  travelled  more  than  a
hundred  leagues,  always  meeting  permanent
houses  and  a  great  stock  of  maize  and  beans,
and  they  gave  us  many  deer  (-hides?)  and
blankets  of  cotton  better  than  those  of  New
Spain.  They  also  gave  us  plenty  of  beads
made  out  of  the  coral  found  in  the  South
Sea ;  many  good  turquoises,  which  they  get
from  the  north ;  they  finally  gave  us  all  they
had;  and  Dorantes  they  presented  with  five
emeralds,  shaped  as  arrow-points,  which  ar-
rows they  use  in  their  feasts  and  dances.52
As  they  appeared  to  be  of  very  good  qual-
ity, I  asked  whence  they  got  them  from,  and

82The  "emeralds"  are  not  mentioned  in  the  re-
port published  by  Oviedo,  but  Oviedo  himself  re-
fers to  them  (p.  618)  from  the  1542  edition.  It
is  not  unlikely  they  were  malachites.  I  saw,  in
possession  of  a  prominent  medicine-man  from  the
Pueblo  of  San  Juan,  in  New  Mexico,  a  plate  of
malachite  shaped  like  a  large,  blunt  knife,  which
he  said  had  come  from  Chihuahua.  It  was,  of
156

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

they  said  it  was  from  some  very  high  moun-
tains toward  the  north,  where  they  traded
for  them  with  feather-bushes  and  parrot-
plumes,  and  they  said  also  that  there  were
villages  with  many  people  and  very  big
houses.

Among  those  people  we  found  the  women
better  treated  than  in  any  other  part  of  the
Indies  as  far  as  we  have  seen.  They  wear
skirts  of  cotton  that  reach  as  far  as  the  knee,
and  over  them  half-sleeves  of  scraped  deer-
skin, with  strips  that  hang  down  to  the
ground,  and  which  they  clean  with  certain
roots,  that  clean  very  well  and  thus  keep
them  tidy.  The  shirts  are  open  in  front  and
tied  with  strings ;  they  wear  shoes.

All  those  people  came  to  us  that  we  might
touch  and  cross  them ;  and  they  were  so  ob-
trusive as  to  make  it  difficult  to  endure  since
all,  sick  and  healthy,  wanted  to  be  crossed.
It  happened  frequently  that  women  of  our
company  would  give  birth  to  children  and

course,  not  transparent,  but  had  a  fine  emerald
hue,  with  dendrites.  In  South  America  (Peru
and  Bolivia)  among  the  common  people  emeralds
having  a  so-called  "garden"— that  is,  imperfectly
transparent  specimens — are  highly  prized,  pro-
vided their  color  is  deep  green.
157

THE JOURNEY OF

forthwith  bring  them  to  have  the  sign  of  the
cross  made  over  them  and  the  babes  be
touched  by  us.  They  always  accompanied
us  until  we  were  again  in  the  care  of  others,
and  all  those  people  believed  that  we  came
from  Heaven.  What  they  do  not  under-
stand or  is  new  to  them  they  are  wont  to
say  it  comes  from  above.

While  travelling  with  these  we  used  to  go
the  whole  day  without  food,  until  night,  and
then  we  would  eat  so  little  that  the  Indians
were  amazed.  They  never  saw  us  tired,  be-
cause we  were,  in  reality,  so  inured  to  hard-
ships as  not  to  feel  them  any  more.  We
exercised  great  authority  over  them,  and
carried  ourselves  with  much  gravity,  and,
in  order  to  maintain  it,  spoke  very  little  to
them.  It  was  the  negro  who  talked  to  them
all  the  time ;  he  inquired  about  the  road  we
should  follow,  the  villages — in  short,  about
everything  we  wished  to  know.  We  came
across  a  great  variety  and  number  of  lan-
guages, and  God  our  Lord  favored  us  with
a  knowledge  of  all,  because  they  always
could  understand  us  and  we  understood
them,  so  that  when  we  asked  they  would
158

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

answer  by  signs,  as  if  they  spoke  our  tongue
and  we  theirs;  for,  although  we  spoke  six
languages,53  not  everywhere  could  we  use
them,  since  we  found  more  than  a  thousand
different  ones.  In  that  part  of  the  country
those  who  were  at  war  would  at  once  make
peace  and  become  friendly  to  each  other,  in
order  to  meet  us  and  bring  us  all  they  pos-
sessed ;  and  thus  we  left  the  whole  country
at  peace.

We  told  them,  by  signs  which  they  under-
stood, that  in  Heaven  there  was  a  man  called
God,  by  us,  who  had  created  Heaven  and
earth,  and  whom  we  'worshipped  as  our
Lord ;  that  we  did  as  he  ordered  us  to  do,
all  good  things  coming  from  his  hand,  and
that  if  they  were  to  do  the  same  they  would
become  very  happy ;  and  so  well  were  they
inclined  that,  had  there  been  a  language  in
which  we  could  have  made  ourselves  per-
fectly understood,  we  would  have  left  them
all  Christians.  All  this  we  gave  them  to
understand  as  clearly  as  possible,  and  since
then,  when  the  sun  rose,  with  great  shout

"The  acquiring  of  six  Indian  languages  in  the
course  of  eight  years, through  practice  imposed
by  necessity,  is  not  impossible.
159

THE JOURNEY OF

ing  they  would  lift  their  clasped  hands  to
Heaven  and  then  pass  them  all  over  their
body.  The  same  they  did  at  sunset.  They
are  well  conditioned  people,  apt  to  follow
any  line  which  is  well  traced  for  them.

In  the  village  where  they  had  given  us
the  emeralds,  they  also  gave  Dorantes  over
six  hundred  hearts  of  deer,  opened,  of  which
they  kept  always  a  great  store  for  eating.
For  this  reason  we  gave  to  their  settlement
the  name  of  "village  of  the  hearts."  Through
it  leads  the  pass  into  many  provinces  near
the  South  Sea,  and  any  one  who  should  at-
tempt to  get  there  by  another  route  must
surely  be  lost,  as  there  is  no  maize  on  the
coast,  and  they  eat  powdered  fox-tail  grass,
straw,  and  fish,  which  they  catch  in  the  sea
in  rafts,  for  they  have  no  canoes.  The
women  cover  their  loins  with  straw  and
grass.  They  are  a  very  shy  and  surly
people.

We  believe  that,  near  the  coast,  in  a  line
with  the  villages  which  we  followed,  there
are  more  than  a  thousand  leagues  of  inhab-
ited land,  where  they  have  plenty  of  victuals,
160

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

since  they  raise  three  crops  of  beans  and
maize  in  the  year.  There  are  three  kinds
of  deer,  one  kind  as  large  as  calves  are  in
Castilla.  The  houses  in  which  they  live  are
huts.  They  have  a  poison,  from  certain  trees
of  the  size  of  our  apple  trees.  They  need  but
pick  the  fruit  and  rub  their  arrows  with  it ;
and  if  there  is  no  fruit  they  take  a  branch
and  with  its  milky  sap  do  the  same.  Many
of  those  trees  are  so  poisonous  that
if  the  leaves  are  pounded  and  washed
in  water  near  by,  the  deer,  or  any  other
animal  that  drinks  of  it  burst  at  once.54  In
this  village  we  stayed  three  days,  and  at  a
day's  journey  from  it  was  another  one,
where  such  a  rain  overtook  us  that,  as  the
river  rose  high,  we  could  not  cross  it,  and
remained  there  fifteen  days.

During  this  time  Castillo  saw,  on  the  neck
of  an  Indian,  a  little  buckle  from  a  sword-
belt,  and  in  it  was  sewed  a  horseshoe  nail.
He  took  it  from  the  Indian,  and  we  asked

"Not  in  the  report  given  by  Oviedo,  but  men-
tioned by  him  as  from  the  edition  of  1542  (p.
618).  The  village  of  the  "hearts"  is  a  point  well
established  in  southern  central  Sonora.  (See
"The  Journey  of  Coronado,"  in  this  series,  by
Mr.  Winship.)

l6x

THE JOURNEY OF

what  it  was;  they  said  it  had  come  from
Heaven.  We  further  asked  who  had
brought  it,  and  they  answered  that  some
men,  with  beards  like  ours,  had  come  from
Heaven  to  that  river ;  that  they  had  horses,
lances  and  swords,  and  had  lanced  two  of
them.

As  cautiously  as  possible,  we  then  in-
quired what  had  become  of  those  men ;  and
they  replied  they  had  gone  to  sea,  putting
their  lances  into  the  water  and  going  into
it  themselves,  and  that  afterwards  they  saw
them  on  top  of  the  waves  moving  towards
sunset.

We  gave  God  our  Lord  many  thanks  for
what  we  had  heard,  for  we  were  despairing
to  ever  hear  of  Christians  again.  On  the
other  hand,  we  were  in  great  sorrow  and
much  dejected,  lest  those  people  had  come  by
sea  for  the  sake  of  discovery  only.  Finally,
having  such  positive  notice  of  them,  we  has-
tened onward,  always  finding  more  traces  of
the  Christians,  and  we  told  the  Indians  that
we  were  now  sure  to  find  the  Christians,
and would tell  them  not to  kill Indians

or  make  them  slaves,  nor  take  them  out  of
162

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

their  country,  or  do  any  other  harm,  and  of
that  they  were  very  glad.

We  travelled  over  a  great  part  of  the
country,  and  found  it  all  deserted,  as  the
people  had  fled  to  the  mountains,  leaving
houses  and  fields  out  of  fear  of  the  Chris-
tians. This  filled  our  hearts  with  sorrow,
seeing  the  land  so  fertile  and  beautiful,  so
full  of  water  and  streams,  but  abandoned
and  the  places  burned  down,  and  the  people,
so  thin  and  wan,  fleeing  and  hiding;  and
as  they  did  not  raise  any  crops  their  desti-
tution had  become  so  great  that  they  ate
tree-bark  and  roots.  Of  this  distress  we  had
our  share  all  the  way  along,  because  they
could  provide  little  for  us  in  their  indigence,
and  it  looked  as  if  they  were  going  to  die.
They  brought  us  blankets,  which  they  had
been  concealing  from  the  Christians,  and
gave  them  to  us,  and  told  us  how  the  Chris-
tians had  penetrated  into  the  country  be-
fore, and  had  destroyed  and  burnt  the  vil-
lages, taking  with  them  half  of  the  men  and
all  the  women  and  children,  and  how  those
who  could  escaped  by  flight.  Seeing  them
in  this  plight,  afraid  to  stay  anywhere,  and
163

THE JOURNEY OF

that  they  neither  would  nor  could  cultivate
the  soil,  preferring  to  die  rather  than  suf-
fer such  cruelties,  while  they  showed  the
greatest  pleasure  at  being  with  us,  we  began
to  apprehend  that  the  Indians  who  were  in
arms  against  the  Christians  might  ill-treat
us  in  retaliation  for  what  the  Christians  did
to  them.  But  when  it  pleased  God  our  Lord
to  take  us  to  those  Indians,  they  respected
and  held  us  precious,  as  the  former  had
done,  and  even  a  little  more,  at  which  we
were  not  a  little  astonished,  while  it  clearly
shows  how,  in  order  to  bring  those  people
to  Christianity  and  obedience  unto  Your
Imperial  Majesty,  they  should  be  well
treated,  and  not  otherwise.

They  took  us  to  a  village  on  the  crest  of
a  mountain,  which  can  be  reached  only  by
a  very  steep  trail,  where  we  found  a  great
many  people,  who  had  gathered  there  out
of  dread  of  the  Christians.  These  received
us  very  well,  giving  us  all  they  had:  over
two  thousand  loads  of  .maize,  which  we  dis-
tributed among  the  poor,  famished  people
who  had  led  us  to  the  place. The  next

day  we  dispatched  (as  we  were  wont  to  do)
164

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

four  runners,  to  call  together  as  many  as
could  be  reached,  to  a  village  three  journeys
away ;  and  on  the  next  day  we  followed  with
all  the  people  that  were  at  the  place,  always
meeting  with  signs,  and  vestiges  where  the
Christians  had  slept.

At  noon  we  met  our  -messengers,  who  told
us  they  had  not  found  anybody,  because  all
were  hidden  in  the  woods,  lest  the  Chris-
tians might  kill  or  enslave  them;  also  that,
on  the  night  before,  they  had  seen  the  Chris-
tians and  watched  their  movements,  under
cover  of  some  trees,  behind  which  they  con-
cealed themselves,  and  saw  the  Christians
take  many  Indians  along  in  chains.  At  this
the  people  who  were  with  us  became  fright-
ened, and  some  turned  back  to  give  the
alarm  through  the  land  that  Christians
were  coming,  and  many  more  would  have
done  the  same  had  we  not  told  them  to  stay
and  have  no  fear,  at  which  they  quieted
down  and  were  comforted.  We  had  Indians
with  us  at  the  time  who  came  from  a  dis-
tance of  a  hundred  leagues,  and  whom  we
could  not  induce  to  go  back  to  their  homes.
So,  in  order  to  reassure  them,  we  slept  there
165

THE JOURNEY OF

that  night,  and  the  next  day  went  further,
and  slept  on  the  road;  and  the  day  after
those  we  'had  sent  to  explore  guided  us  to
where  fhey  had  seen  the  Christians.  Reach-
ing the  place  iif  the  evening,  we  clearly
saw  they  had  told  the  truth,  and  also,  from
the  stakes  to  which  the  horses -had  •beerftied,
that  there  were  horsemen  among  them.

From  here,  which  is  called  the  river  of
Petutan,55  to  the  river  which  Diego  de  Guz-
man reached,  there  may  be,  from  the  place
where  we  first  heard  of  the  Christians,
eighty  leagues ;  thence  to  the  village  where
the  rain  overtook  us,  twelve  leagues ;  and
from  there  to  the  South  Sea  twelve  leagues.56
Throughout  all  that  country,  wherever  it  is
mountainous,  we  saw  many  signs  of  gold,
antimony,  iron,  copper  and  other  metals.
Where  the  permanent  houses  are  it  is  so  hot
that  even  in  January  the  air  is  very  warm.
From  there  to  the  southward  the  land,  which
is  uninhabited  as  far  as  the  Sea  of  the  North,
is  very  barren  and  poor.  There  we  suffered
great  and  almost  incredible  starvation;  and

"Petlatlan.

MThe  distances  must,  of  course,  be  taken  with
due  reserve.

166

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

heard  that  on  the  shores  of  the  South  there
are  pearls  and  great  wealth,  and  that  the
richest  and  best  is  near  there.

At  the  village  of  San  Miguel  we  remained
until  after  the  fifteenth  of  May,  because
from  there  to  the  town  of  Compostela —
where  the  Governor,  Nufio  de  Guzman,  re-
sided— there  are  one  hundred  leagues  of  de-
serted country  threatened  by  hostiles,  and
we  had  to  take  an  escort  along.  There
went  with  us  twenty  horsemen,  accompany-
ing us  as  many  as  forty  leagues ;  afterwards
we  had  with  us  six  Christians,  who  escorted
five  hundred  Indian  captives.  When  we
reached  Compostela,  the  Governor  received
us  very  well,  giving  us  of  what  he  had,  for
us  to  dress  in ;  but  for  many  days  I  could
bear  no  clothing,  nor  could  we  sleep,  except
on  the  bare  floor.  Ten  or  twelve  days  later
we  left  for  Mexico.  On  the  whole  trip  we
were  well  treated  by  the  Christians ;  many
came  to  see  us  on  the  road,  praising  God
for  having  freed  us  from  so  many  dangers.
We  reached  Mexico  on  Sunday,  the  day  be-
fore the  vespers  of  Saint  James,  and  were
very  well  received  by  the  Viceroy  and  the
183

THE JOURNEY OF

Marquis  of  the  Valley,  who  presented  us
with  clothing,  offering  all  they  had.  On  the
day  of  Saint  James  there  was  a  festival,  with
bull-fight  and  tournament.

After  taking  two  months'  rest  at  Mexico
I  desired  to  come  over  to  this  realm,  but
when  ready  to  sail  in  October,  a  storm
wrecked  the  vessel  and  it  was  lost.  So  I  de-
termined to  wait  until  winter  would  be  over,
as  in  these  parts  navigation  is  then  very
dangerous  on  account  of  storms.

When  winter  was  past,  Andres  Dorantes
and  I  left  Mexico,  during  Lent,  for  Vera
Cruz,  to  take  a  ship  there,  but  had  again  to
wait  for  favorable  winds  until  Palm  Sunday.
We  embarked  and  were  on  board  more  than
fifteen  days,  unable  to  leave  on  account  of  a
calm,  and  the  vessel  began  to  fill  with  water.
I  took  passage  on  one  of  the  ships  which
were  in  condition  to  leave,  while  Dorantes
remained  on  the  first  one,64  and  on  the  tenth
day  of  the  month  three  craft  left  port.

We  navigated  together  for  one  hundred

"This  explains  why  Dorantes  remained  in  Mex-
ico, where  he  afterwards  attempted  to  set  on  foot
an  expedition  to  the  North,  but  failed.
184

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

and  fifty  leagues;  afterwards  two  of  the
ships  dropped  behind,  and  in  the  course  of
a  night  we  lost  track  of  them*.  It  seems  that,
as  we  found  out  later,  their  pilots  and  skip-
pers did  not  venture  any  further,  and  re-
turned to  port  without  giving  us  any  warn-
ing; neither  did  we  hear  any  more  from
them.  So  we  kept  on,  and  on  the  fourth  of
May  reached  the  port  of  Habana,  on  the
Island  of  Cuba,  where  we  waited  until  the
second  of  June,  still  hoping  for  the  other
two  vessels  to  arrive. Then  we  left.

We  were  afraid  of  falling  in  with"  French
craft  that  only  a  few  days  before  had  cap-
tured three  of  ours.

At  the  altitude  of  the  Island  of  Bermuda
a  storm  overtook  us,  as  is  quite  usual  in
those  parts — according  to  the  people  who  are
wont  to  travel  in  them — and  for  a  whole
night  we  considered  ourselves  lost.  But  it
pleased  God  that,  when  morning  came,  the
storm  abated  and  we  could  proceed  on  our
way.  Twenty-nine  days  after  sailing  from
Habana  we  had  made  eleven  hundred
leagues,  said  to  be  the  distance  from  it  to  the
settlement  of  the  Azores,  and  the  next  day
i85

THE JOURNEY OF

we  passed  the  island  called  of  the  raven,65
and  met  with  a  French  vessel  at  noon.  She
began  to  follow  us,  having  with  her  a  car-
avel taken  from  the  Portuguese,  and  gave
us  chase.  That  same  evening  we  saw  nine
more  sail,  but  at  such  a  distance  that  we
could  not  distinguish  whether  they  were  of
the  same  nation  as  our  pursuer,  or  Portu-
guese. At  nightfall  the  Frenchman  was  but
a  cannon-shot  from  our  ship,  and  as  soon
as  it  was  dark  we  changed  our  course  so
as  to  get  away  from  him.  As  he  was
close  upon  us  he  saw  our  manoeuvre  and
did  the  same,  and  this  happened  three  or
four  times.

The  Frenchman  could  have  taken  us  then,
but  he  preferred  to  wait  until  daylight.  It
pleased  God  that,  when  morning  came,  we
found  ourselves,  as  well  as  the  French  ship,
surrounded  by  the  nine  craft  we  had  seen
the  evening  before,  and  which  turned  out
to  belong  to  the  Portuguese  .navy.  I  thank
Our  Lord  for  having  allowed  me  to  escape
from  peril  on  land  and  sea.

MCorvo, one of the Azores; northwestern
group.

186

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

When  the  French  saw  it  was  the  fleet  of
Portugal  they  released  the  caravel,  which
was  filled  with  negroes.  They  had  taken  it
along  in  order  to  make  us  believe  they  were
Portuguese  and  to  induce  us  to  expect  them.
On  separating  from  the  caravel  the  French-
man told  the  skipper  and  pilot  we1  were
French  also,  belonging  to  their  own  navy;
then  they  put  into  their  vessel  sixty  oars-
men, and  thus,  by  oar  and  sail,  went  away
with  incredible  swiftness.

The  caravel  then  approached  the  galley
warning  its  captain  that  both  our  vessel  and
the  other  were  French,  so  that  when  we
came  up  to  the  galley  and  the  squadron  saw
it,  believing  us  to  be  French,  they  cleared
for  action  and  came  to  attack  us.  But  when
we  were  near  enough  to  them  we  saluted,
and  they  saw  we  were  friends.  They  had
been  deceived,  suffering  the  privateer  to  es-
cape by  means  of  his  strategy  in  telling  that
we  were  also  French.  Four  caravels  went
in  pursuit  of  him.  Having  come  up  with
the  galley  and  presented  our  respects,  the
captain,  Diego  de  Silveira,  asked  where  we

came  from  and  what  we  had  on  board. We
187

THE JOURNEY OF

told  him  from  New  Spain,  and  that  we  car-
ried silver  and  gold.  He  inquired  how  much
it  might  be,  and  the  skipper  informed  him
that  we  had  about  three  hundred  thousand
Castellanos.  Thereupon  the  captain  ex-
claimed :  "Faith,  you  come  back  very  rich,
although  you  have  a  bad  craft  and  miserable
artillery.  That  dog  of  a  French  renegade
has  lost  a  fat  morsel,  the  bastard !  Now,  go
ahead,  since  you  escaped ;  follow  me  closely,
and,  God  helping,  I  shall  lead  you  back  to
Spain."

The  caravels  that  had  gone  in  pursuit  of
the  French  soon  returned  because  the  latter
sailed  too  fast  for  them  and  they  did  not
want  to  leave  their  squadron,  which  was  es-
corting three  ships  loaded  with  spices.

We  reached  the  Island  of  Tercera,68
where  we  rested  fifteen  days  and  took  in
supplies,  also  waiting  for  another  ship  from
India,  with  the  same  kind  of  cargo  as  the
three  our  fleet  was  escorting.  At  the  end
of  the  fifteen  days  we  sailed,  all  together,
for  the  port  of  Lisbon,  where  we  arrived

83Terceira, another of the Azores; central
group.

188

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

on  the  ninth  of  August,  vespers  of  Saint
Laurentius  day,  of  the  year  1537.

And,  in  Testimony  of,  that  what  I  have
stated  in  the  foregoing  narrative  is  true,  I
hereunto  sign  my  name  :

CABEZA  de  VACA.

The  document  which  this  is  taken  from
was  signed  with  his  name  and  bore  the  seal
with  his  coat  of  arms.

Since,  in  the  foregoing  narrative,  I  have
related  the  Journey,  the  arrival  at,  and  the
departure  from,  the  country,  and  return  to
this  realm,  I  now  wish  to-  tell  also  what  hap-
pened to  the  ships  and  to  the  people  who
remained  on  board  of  them.  I  have  not
said  anything  about  them  as  yet,  for  the  rea-
son that  we  heard  nothing  of  their  fate  until
after  our  return,  when  we  found  many  of
the  survivors  in  New  Spain  and  some  here
in  Castile,  through  whom  we  learned  every-
thing that  occurred  to  them  after  we  had
forsaken  the  three  vessels,  one  having  been

lost  previously  on  the  wild  coast.
189

THE JOURNEY OF

These  vessels  were  in  great  peril,  and  had
on  board  a  hundred  persons  with  few  sup-
plies. Among  these  people  were  ten  mar-
ried women,  one  of  whom  had  foretold  the
Governor  many  things  that  afterwards  hap-
pened to  him.

When  he  marched  inland  she  warned  him
not  to  go,  as  neither  he  nor  any  of  his  com-
pany would  return,  and  that,  should  any
come  back,  God  would  work  miracles
through  him,  as  she  felt  sure  that  few,  or
none,  would  escape.  The  Governor  retorted
that  he  and  all  who  went  with  him  expected
to  fight  and  conquer  many  and  very  strange
people  and  countries,  so  that,  while  many
would  have  to  die  in  the  conquest,  he  was
sure,  from  the  accounts  he  had  of  the  rich-
ness of  the  country,  that  the  survivors  wouM
be  fortunate  and  become  very  wealthy.  He
entreated  the  woman  to  tell  him  who  it  was
that  had  acquainted  her  with  the  things,  past
and  present,  of  which  she  had  spoken.  She
answered  that  in  Castile  a  Moorish  woman
from  Hornachos  had  told  her  what  she  said
to  us  before  we  left  there,  all  of  which  took

place  as  predicted,

190

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

After  the  Governor  had  appointed  for  his
lieutenant  and  commander  of  all  the  vessels
and  their  crews  one  Carvallo,  a  native  of
Cuenca  de  Huete,  we  marched  off,  the  Gov-
ernor leaving  orders  that  they  embark  at
once  and  proceed  to  Panuco,  hugging  the
coast  always  and  keeping  a  lookout  for  the
port  where,  when  found,  they  should  wait
for  us.

At  the  time  the  people  were  embarking,
some  saw,  and  distinctly  overheard,  the
woman  before  mentioned  saying  to  the  other
women  that,  since  their  husbands  had  gone
inland  to  affront  such  imminent  peril,  they
should  not  think  of  them  any  longer,  but  at
once  look  for  other  husbands ;  that  she  was
going  to  do  it,  for  her  part.  So  she  and  the
others  married,  and  lived  with  those  that
were  on  board  the  vessels.

The  vessels  set  sail  and  went  on,  but  did

not  find  the  port  in  the  direction  they  were

proceeding,  so  they  turned  around  and  went

back  where,  five  leagues  further  down  from

our  landing-place,  they  struck  the  harbor.

It  stretched  inland  for  seven  or  eight  leagues

and  was  the  one  we  had  already  discovered
191

THE JOURNEY OF

and  where  we  had  found  the  boxes  from
Spain,  as  told  before,  and  where  were  the
bodies  of  Christians.  From  this  harbor  and
along  that  coast  the  three  vessels,  together
with  one  that  rejoined  them  from  Habana
and  the  brigantine,  cruised  in  search  of  us
for  nearly  a  year,  and  then,  not  finding  us,
they  went  to  New  Spain.

That  harbor  is  the  best  on  earth.  It
sweeps  inland  for  seven  or  eight  leagues ;
the  water  is  six  fathoms  deep  at  the  mouth
and  five  near  the  shore ;  the  bottom  is  mud,
and  there  are  no  tides  inside  the  bay,  nor
heavy  storms.  There  is  space  in  it  for  many
vessels,  and  it  has  many  fish.  The  distance
from  it  to  Habana,  a  Christian  town  on
Cuba,  is  one  hundred  leagues  on  a  line  from
north  to  south.  The  breezes  are  constant,
and  the  trip  is  made  from  one  place  to  the
other  in  four  days,  because  the  vessels  go
and  come  with  little  trouble.

And  now  that  I  have  given  an  account  of
the  ships,  it  may  be  well  to  record  also  who
those  are  and  where  from,  whom  it  pleased
God  to  rescue  from  all  these  dangers  and
hardship.  The  first  is  Alonso  del  Castillo
J  92

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

Maldonado,  a  native  of  Salamanca  and  son
of  Doctor  Castillo  and  Dona  Aldonza  Mal-
donado. The  second  is  Andres  Dorantes,
son  of  Pablo  Dorantes,  born  at  Bejar,  but
a  resident  of  Gibraleon.  The  third  is  Alvar
Nunez  Cabeza  de  Vaca,  son  of  Francisco  de
Vera  and  grandson  of  Pedro  de  Vera,  who
conquered  the  Canarian  Islands.  His  mo-
ther was  called  Dona  Teresa  Cabeza  de
Vaca,  and  she  was  a  native  of  Xerez  de  la
Frontera.  The  fourth  was  Estevanico,  an
Arab  negro  from  Azamor,

153

Ynictooci(>edrooeveradqoc5ano^CandTfer:y*fo

nndrcfcllamauaooiia  'Kerch  cabc^aoe  vaca  natu-
ral oc  3Eere5©clafrontera,£I  quarto  fe  llama  fcfteua*
nico  C0  negro  2Uarab  c  natural  o  e  'B^moz.u
€.fm.u

cf uet'mp:eflbd  piekntctra*

tadoenlamagninca^noblc^Yanttquiminaiiudad

t>e  Zamo*a:po?  log  bonrradog  varoneg&ugu*

fttn  t>e  pa5  y  3*uan  uMcardo  compancros  inv

p:cflb:cgoelib:o0r^inogocla  tricbatfa

dad*S  cofta  y  efpenfag  oel  virtuofo  ra

ron^uan  pedro  mufetti  mercader

t>cIib:oove5tnot>c Medina  t>el

campo*  acabofcenfefg^iag

ocl  meg&e0ctub:e*  Sno

t>e!  oaftfmiento  tf  nf  ofal

uado:$du  Criftooe

milfquinicntosf

quarentay  so*

«no0!  M*

COLOPHON  OF  EDITION  OF  1542.
Reduced  from  original  in  Lenox  Branch  of  N.  Y.
Public  Library.

LETTER  OF  MENDOZA  AND  REPORT  OF
FATHER  MARCOS  OF  NIZZA.— INTRO-
DUCTORY NOTE.

IN  order  to  furnish  the  reader  the  avail-
able data  concerning  the  fate  of  the
two  companions  of  Cabeza  de  Vaca,
who  remained  in Mexico  after  his
return  to  Spain,  it  has  been  deemed  proper
to  add  the  two  documents which follow.
There  is  first  a  letter  of  the  Viceroy  Don
Antonio  de  Mendoza  in  which,  as  far  as  I
am  able  to  ascertain,  the  only  (very  meagre)
data  concerning  the subsequent career  of
Andres Dorantes in America are found.
This  is  followed  by  the  well-known  report
of  Father  Marcos  of  Nizza  on  his  expedition
to  Cibola  (Zuhi),  in  which  the  Moor  Este-
vanico  acted  as  his  guide  and  perished. The
text  of  the documents  is taken from  the
edition  of  1810  of  "Hackluyt's  Collection  of
the  Early  Voyages,  Travels,  and  Discoveries
of  the  English  Nation,"  Vol.  III.,  pp.  436
to  4446. The  translation  is  known  to  be
quite  indifferent, still  the  main  points  are
reliable and it fully serves the purpose,
which  is  not  to  furnish  a  critical  study  of
Father  Marcos  of  Nizza,  and  his  achieve-
ments, but  simply  to  supply  the  information
indicated,  and,  at  the  same  time,  establish
the  logical  connection  of  this  narrative  with
the "Journey of Coronado," already pre-
sented in  "The  Trail-Makers."

Ad.  F.  Bandelier.
195

A  LETTER  WRITTEN  BY  THE  MOST  HON-
ORABLE LORD  DON  ANTONIO  DE
MENDOZA,  VICE-ROY  OF  NUEVA  ES-
PANNA,  TO  THE  EMPERORS  MAIES-
TIE.

Of  Certaine  Noblemen  Which  Sought  to  Dis-
cover the  End  of  the  Firme  Land  of  Nueva
Espanna  Toward  the  North.  The  Arrivall  of
Vazquez  de  Coronado  with  Frier  Marco  at  S.
Michael  of  Culiacan,  with  Commission  to  the
Governors  of  Those  Partes,  to  Pacifie  the  Indians,
anl  Not  to  Make  Them  Slaves  Any  More.

IN  the  ships  that  went  last  from  hence
(whereof  Michael  de  Usnago  was
Admiral)  I  wrote  into  your  maies-
tie,  how  I  had  sent  two  Franciscan
Friers  to  discover  the  end  of  this  firme
land,  which  stretcheth  to  the  North.
And  because  their  iourney  fell  out  to
greater  purpose  than  was  looked  for,  I
will  declare  the  whole  matter  from  the  be-
ginning. It  may  please  your  Maiestie  to
call  to  mind  how  often  I  wrote  unto  your
Highnesse,  that  I  desired  to  know  the  ende
of  this  Province  of  Nueva  Espanna,  because
it  is  so  great  a  countrey,  and  that  we  have
yet  no  knowledge  thereof.  Neither  had  I
onely  this  desire;  for  Nunno  de  Guzman  de-
parted out  of  this  city  of  Mexico  with  400
horsemen,  and  14,000  Indians  footemen
borne  in  these  Indias,  being  the  best  men
and  the  best  furnished,  which  have  bene
seene  in  these  parts ;  and  he  did  so  little  with
197

JOURNEY  OF  ALVAR  NUNEZ

them,  that  the  most  part  of  them  were  con-
sumed in  the  enterprize  and  could  not  enter
nor  discover  any  more  then  already  was  dis-
covered. After  this  the  saide  Nunno  Guz-
man beeing  Governour  of  Nueva  Galicia,
sent  Captaines  and  Horsemen  foorth  divers
times,  which  sped  no  better  then  he  had
done.  Likewise  the  Marques  de  valle  Her-
nando Cortez  sent  a  captaine  with  2  ships
to  discover  the  coast :  which  2  ships  and  the
captaine  perished.  After  that  he  sent  again
2  other  ships,  one  of  the  which  was  divided
from  her  consort,  and  the  master  and  cer-
taine  mariners  slue  the  captaine  and  usurped
over  the  ship.

After  this  they  came  to.  an  Island,  where
the  Master  with  certaine  mariners  going  on
land,  the  Indians  of  the  Country  slew  them,
and  tooke  their  boat :  and  the  ship  with
those  that  were  in  it,  returned  to  the  coast
of  Nueva  Galicia,  where  it  ran  on  ground.
By  the  men  which  came  home  in  this  ship,
the  Marques  had  knowledge  of  the  countrey
which  they  had  discovered :  and  then,  either
for  the  discontentment  which  hee  had  with
the  bishop  of  Saint  Domingo  and  with  the
Judges  of  this  royal  audience  in  Mexico,  or
rather  because  of  his  so  prosperous  successe
in  all  things  here  in  Nueva  Espanna,  with-
out seeking  any  farther  intelligence  of  the
state  of  that  Island,  he  set  forward  on  that
voyage' with,  3  ships,  and  with  certaine  foote-
men  and  horsemen,  not  throughly  furnished
with  things  necessary ;  which  fell  out  so  con-
trary to  his  expectations  that  the  most  part
of  the  people  which  he  carried  with  him,
198

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

heard  that  on  the  shores  of  the  South  there
are  pearls  and  great  wealth,  and  that  the
richest  and  best  is  near  there.

At  the  village  of  San  Miguel  we  remained
until  after  the  fifteenth  of  May,  because
from  there  to  the  town  of  Compostela —
where  the  Governor,  Nufio  de  Guzman,  re-
sided— there  are  one  hundred  leagues  of  de-
serted country  threatened  by  hostiles,  and
we  had  to  take  an  escort  along.  There
went  with  us  twenty  horsemen,  accompany-
ing us  as  many  as  forty  leagues ;  afterwards
we  had  with  us  six  Christians,  who  escorted
five  hundred  Indian  captives.  When  we
reached  Compostela,  the  Governor  received
us  very  well,  giving  us  of  what  he  had,  for
us  to  dress  in ;  but  for  many  days  I  could
bear  no  clothing,  nor  could  we  sleep,  except
on  the  bare  floor.  Ten  or  twelve  days  later
we  left  for  Mexico.  On  the  whole  trip  we
were  well  treated  by  the  Christians ;  many
came  to  see  us  on  the  road,  praising  God
for  having  freed  us  from  so  many  dangers.
We  reached  Mexico  on  Sunday,  the  day  be-
fore the  vespers  of  Saint  James,  and  were
very  well  received  by  the  Viceroy  and  the
183

THE  JOURNEY OF

Marquis  of  the  Valley,  who  presented  us
with  clothing,  offering  all  they  had.  On  the
day  of  Saint  James  there  was  a  festival,  with
bull-fight  and  tournament.

After  taking  two  months'  rest  at  Mexico
I  desired  to  come  over  to  this  realm,  but
when  ready  to  sail  in  October,  a  storm
wrecked  the  vessel  and  it  was  lost.  So  I  de-
termined to  wait  until  winter  would  be  over,
as  in  these  parts  navigation  is  then  very
dangerous  on  account  of  storms.

When  winter  was  past,  Andres  Dorantes
and  I  left  Mexico,  during  Lent,  for  Vera
Cruz,  to  take  a  ship  there,  but  had  again  to
wait  for  favorable  winds  until  Palm  Sunday.
We  embarked  and  were  on  board  more  than
fifteen  days,  unable  to  leave  on  account  of  a
calm,  and  the  vessel  began  to  fill  with  water.
I  took  passage  on  one  of  the  ships  which
were  in  condition  to  leave,  while  Dorantes
remained  on  the  first  one,64  and  on  the  tenth
day  of  the  month  three  craft  left  port.

We  navigated  together  for  one  hundred

"This  explains  why  Dorantes  remained  in  Mex-
ico, where  he  afterwards  attempted  to  set  on  foot
an  expedition  to  the  North,  but  failed.
184

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

and  fifty  leagues;  afterwards  two  of  the
ships  dropped  behind,  and  in  the  course  of
a  night  we  lost  track  of  them*.  It  seems  that,
as  we  found  out  later,  their  pilots  and  skip-
pers did  not  venture  any  further,  and  re-
turned to  port  without  giving  us  any  warn-
ing; neither  did  we  hear  any  more  from
them.  So  we  kept  on,  and  on  the  fourth  of
May  reached  the  port  of  Habana,  on  the
Island  of  Cuba,  where  we  waited  until  the
second  of  June,  still  hoping  for  the  other
two  vessels  to  arrive. Then  we  left.

We  were  afraid  of  falling  in  with  French
craft  that  only  a  few  days  before  had  cap-
tured three  of  ours.

At  the  altitude  of  the  Island  of  Bermuda
a  storm  overtook  us,  as  is  quite  usual  in
those  parts — according  to  the  people  who  are
wont  to  travel  in  them — and  for  a  whole
night  we  considered  ourselves  lost.  But  it
pleased  God  that,  when  morning  came,  the
storm  abated  and  we  could  proceed  on  our
way.  Twenty-nine  days  after  sailing  from
Habana  we  had  made  eleven  hundred
leagues,  said  to  be  the  distance  from  it  to  the
settlement  of  the  Azores,  and  the  next  day
185

THE JOURNEY OF

we  passed  the  island  called  of  the  raven,65
and  met  with  a  French  vessel  at  noon.  She
began  to  follow  us,  having  with  her  a  car-
avel taken  from  the  Portuguese,  and  gave
us  chase.  That  same  evening  we  saw  nine
more  sail,  but  at  such  a  distance  that  we
could  not  distinguish  whether  they  were  of
the  same  nation  as  our  pursuer,  or  Portu-
guese. At  nightfall  the  Frenchman  was  but
a  cannon-shot  from  our  ship,  and  as  soon
as  it  was  dark  we  changed  our  course  so
as  to  get  away  from  him.  As  he  was
close  upon  us  he  saw  our  manoeuvre  and
did  the  same,  and  this  happened  three  or
four  times.

The  Frenchman  could  have  taken  us  then,
but  he  preferred  to  wait  until  daylight.  It
pleased  God  that,  when  morning  came,  we
found  ourselves,  as  well  as  the  French  ship,
surrounded  by  the  nine  craft  we  had  seen
the  evening  before,  and  which  turned  out
to  belong  to  the  Portuguese  .navy.  I  thank
Our  Lord  for  having  allowed  me  to  escape
from  peril  on  land  and  sea.

MCorvo, one of the Azores; northwestern
group.

186

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

When  the  French  saw  it  was  the  fleet  of
Portugal  they  released  the  caravel,  which
was  filled  with  negroes.  They  had  taken  it
along  in  order  to  make  us  believe  they  were
Portuguese  and  to  induce  us  to  expect  them.
On  separating  from  the  caravel  the  French-
man told  the  skipper  and  pilot  we  were
French  also,  belonging  to  their  own  navy;
then  they  put  into  their  vessel  sixty  oars-
men, and  thus,  by  oar  and  sail,  went  away
with  incredible  swiftness.

The  caravel  then  approached  the  galley
warning  its  captain  that  both  our  vessel  and
the  other  were  French,  so  that  when  we
came  up  to  the  galley  and  the  squadron  saw
it,  believing  us  to  be  French,  they  cleared
for  action  and  came  to  attack  us.  But  when
we  were  near  enough  to  them  we  saluted,
and  they  saw  we  were  friends.  They  had
been  deceived,  suffering  the  privateer  to  es-
cape by  means  of  his  strategy  in  telling  that
we  were  also  French.  Four  caravels  went
in  pursuit  of  him.  Having  come  up  with
the  galley  and  presented  our  respects,  the
captain,  Diego  de  Silveira,  asked  where  we
came  from  and  what  we  had  on  board,  We
187

THE JOURNEY OF

told  him  from  New  Spain,  and  that  we  car-
ried silver  and  gold.  He  inquired  how  much
it  might  be,  and  the  skipper  informed  him
that  we  had  about  three  hundred  thousand
Castellanos.  Thereupon  the  captain  ex-
claimed: "Faith,  you  come  back  very  rich,
although  you  have  a  bad  craft  and  miserable
artillery.  That  dog  of  a  French  renegade
has  lost  a  fat  morsel,  the  bastard !  Now,  go
ahead,  since  you  escaped ;  follow  me  closely,
and,  God  helping,  I  shall  lead  you  back  to
Spain."

The  caravels  that  had  gone  in  pursuit  of
the  French  soon  returned  because  the  latter
sailed  too  fast  for  them  and  they  did  not
want  to  leave  their  squadron,  which  was  es-
corting three  ships  loaded  with  spices.

We  reached  the  Island  of  Tercera,*8
where  we  rested  fifteen  days  and  took  in
supplies,  also  waiting  for  another  ship  from
India,  with  the  same  kind  of  cargo  as  the
three  our  fleet  was  escorting.  At  the  end
of  the  fifteen  days  we  sailed,  all  together,
for  the  port  of  Lisbon,  where  w£  arrived

63Terceira, another of the Azores; central
group.

188

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

on  the  ninth  of  August,  vespers  of  Saint
Laurentius  day,  of  the  year  1537.

And,  in  Testimony  of,  that  what  I  have
stated  in  the  foregoing  narrative  is  true,  I
hereunto  sign  my  name :

CABEZA  de  VACA.

The  document  which  this  is  taken  from
was  signed  with  his  name  and  bore  the  seal
with  his  coat  of  arms.

Since,  in  the  foregoing  narrative,  I  have
related  the  Journey,  the  arrival  at,  and  the
departure  from,  the  country,  and  return  to
this  realm,  I  now  wish  to*  tell  also  what  hap-
pened to  the  ships  and  to  the  people  who
remained  on  board  of  them.  I  have  not
said  anything  about  them  as  yet,  for  the  rea-
son that  we-heard  nothing  of  their  fate  until
after  our  return,  when  we  found  many  of
the  survivors  in  New  Spain  and  some  here
in  Castile,  through  whom  we  learned  every-
thing that  occurred  to  them  after  we  had
forsaken  the  three  vessels,  one  having  been

lost  previously  on  the  wild  coast.
189

THE JOURNEY OF

These  vessels  were  in  great  peril,  and  had
on  board  a  hundred  persons  with  few  sup-
plies. Among  these  people  were  ten  mar-
ried women,  one  of  whom  had  foretold  the
Governor  many  things  that  afterwards  hap-
pened to  him.

When  he  marched  inland  she  warned  him
not  to  go,  as  neither  he  nor  any  of  his  com-
pany would  return,  and  that,  should  any
come  back,  God  would  work  miracles
through  him,  as  she  felt  sure  that  few,  or
none,  would  escape.  The  Governor  retorted
that  he  and  all  who  went  with  him  expected
to  fight  and  conquer  many  and  very  strange
people  and  countries,  so  that,  while  many
would  have  to  die  in  the  conquest,  he  was
sure,  from  the  accounts  he  had  of  the  rich-
ness of  the  country,  that  the  survivors  wou4d
be  fortunate  and  become  very  wealthy.  He
entreated  the  woman  to  tell  him  who  it  was
that  had  acquainted  her  with  the  things,  past
and  present,  of  which  she  had  spoken.  She
answered  that  in  Castile  a  Moorish  woman
from  Hornachos  had  told  her  what  she  said
to  us  before  we  left  there,  all  of  which  took
place  as  predicted.

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

After  the  Governor  had  appointed  for  his
lieutenant  and  commander  of  all  the  vessels
and  their  crews  one  Carvallo,  a  native  of
Cuenca  de  Huete,  we  marched  off,  the  Gov-
ernor leaving  orders  that  they  embark  at
once  and  proceed  to  Panuco,  hugging  the
coast  always  and  keeping  a  lookout  for  the
port  where,  when  found,  they  should  wait
for  us.

At  the  time  the  people  were  embarking,
some  saw,  and  distinctly  overheard,  the
woman  before  mentioned  saying  to  the  other
women  that,  since  their  husbands  had  gone
inland  to  affront  such  imminent  peril,  they
should  not  think  of  them  any  longer,  but  at
once  look  for  other  husbands ;  that  she  was
going  to  do  it,  for  her  part.  So  she  and  the
others  married,  and  lived  with  those  that
were  on  board  the  vessels.

The  vessels  set  sail  and  went  on,  but  did
not  find  the  port  in  the  direction  they  were
proceeding,  so  they  turned  around  and  went
back  where,  five  leagues  further  down  from
our  landing-place,  they  struck  the  harbor.
It  stretched  inland  for  seven  or  eight  leagues

and  was  the  one  we  had  already  discovered
191

THE JOURNEY OF

and  where  we  had  found  the  boxes  from
Spain,  as  told  before,  and  where  were  the
bodies  of  Christians.  From  this  harbor  and
along  that  coast  the  three  vessels,  together
with  one  that  rejoined  them  from  Habana
and  the  brigantine,  cruised  in  search  of  us
for  nearly  a  year,  and  then,  not  finding  us,
they  went  to  New  Spain.

That  harbor  is  the  best  on  earth.  It
sweeps  inland  for  seven  or  eight  leagues;
the  water  is  six  fathoms  deep  at  the  mouth
and  five  near  the  shore ;  the  bottom  is  mud,
and  there  are  no  tides  inside  the  bay,  nor
heavy  storms.  There  is  space  in  it  for  many
vessels,  and  it  has  many  fish.  The  distance
from  it  to  Habana,  a  Christian  town  on
Cuba,  is  one  hundred  leagues  on  a  line  from
north  to  south.  The  breezes  are  constant,
and  the  trip  is  made  from  one  place  to  the
other  in  four  days,  because  the  vessels  go
and  come  with  little  trouble.

And  now  that  I  have  given  an  account  of
the  ships,  it  may  be  well  to  record  also  who
those  are  and  where  from,  whom  it  pleased
God  to  rescue  from  all  these  dangers  and
hardship.  The  first  is  Alonso  del  Castillo
192

ALVAR  NUNEZ  CABEZA  DE  VACA

Maldonado,  a  native  of  Salamanca  and  son
of  Doctor  Castillo  and  Dona  Aldonza  Mal-
donado. The  second  is  Andres  Dorantes,
son  of  Pablo  Dorantes,  born  at  Bejar,  but
a  resident  of  Gibraleon.  The  third  is  Alvar
Nunez  Cabeza  de  Vaca,  son  of  Francisco  de
Vera  and  grandson  of  Pedro  de  Vera,  who
conquered  the  Canarian  Islands.  His  mo-
ther was  called  Dona  Teresa  Cabeza  de
Vaca,  and  she  was  a  native  of  Xerez  de  la
Frontera.  The  fourth  was  Estevanico,  an
Arab  negro  from  Azamor,

*93

Y  nfeto  &e  Pedro  oe"*era  d  que  gano  * CanaT&r :  fib
tuadrefeHamauaoona  Cerefacabesaoe  vaca  natu*
raloe  Xer^oelafrontera.lEl  quarto  fe  llama  JElteua*
rnco  eg  negro  Slarabe  natural  ©e^amo^n

C4  uetmpzeflbel  p:efentetrcM

tadoenla  magnifica^noblc^f  antiquifluna  tfudad

t>e  Zamo:a:po:log  bonrradog  varonesSugu*

ftinoepajf  5uaitKJ>tcardo  companeros  inv

p:eflb:eg  oe  Ub:og  rejinos  oela  oicba  (in

dad*S  coda  f  efpenfag  o  el  w'rtuofo  va

ron^uan  pedro  mufctti  tnercader

cc Itb:osrc5tnooe Medina  ocl

campo*  ^cabofeenfefgQiag

fcd  incsoe  0ctub:e.  ftiio

eel  nafsimfento  tf  nf  ofal

uado:$efu  Criftooc

milyquintcntosY
quarentaffcos  .._

H Snog!  ''4*

COLOPHON  OF  EDITION  OF  1542.

Reduced  from  original  in  Lenox  Branch,  of  N.  Y.
Public  Library.

LETTER  OF  MENDOZA  AND  REPORT  OF
FATHER  MARCOS  OF  NIZZA.— INTRO-
DUCTORY NOTE.

IN  order  to  furnish  the  reader  the  avail-
able data  concerning  the  fate  of  the
two  companions  of  Cabeza  de  Vaca,
who remained  in Mexico  after  his
return  to  Spain,  it  has  been  deemed  proper
to  add  the two  documents which follow.
There  is  first  a  letter  of  the  Viceroy  Don
Antonio  de  Mendoza  in  which,  as  far  as  I
am  able  to  ascertain,  the  only  (very  meagre)
data  concerning  the subsequent career  of
Andres Dorantes in America are found.
This  is  followed  by  the  well-known  report
of  Father  Marcos  of  Nizza  on  his  expedition
to  Cibola  (Zuni),  in  which  the  Moor  Este-
vanico  acted  as  his  guide  and  perished. The
text  of  the documents  is  taken from  the
edition  of  1810  of  "Hackluyt's  Collection  of
the  Early  Voyages,  Travels,  and  Discoveries
of  the  English  Nation,"  Vol.  III.,  pp.  436
to  4446. The  translation  is  known  to  be
quite  indifferent,  still  the  main  points  are
reliable and it fully serves the purpose,
which  is  not  to  furnish  a  critical  study  of
Father  Marcos  of  Nizza,  and  his  achieve-
ments, but  simply  to  supply  the  information
indicated,  and,  at  the  same  time,  establish
the  logical  connection  of  this  narrative  with
the "Journey of Coronado," already pre-
sented in  "The  Trail-Makers."

Ad.  F.  Bandelier.
i95

A  LETTER  WRITTEN  BY  THE  MOST  HON-
ORABLE LORD  DON  ANTONIO  DE
MENDOZA,  VICE-ROY  OF  NUEVA  ES-
PANNA,  TO  THE  EMPERORS  MAIES-
TIE.

Of  Certaine  Noblemen  Which  Sought  to  Dis-
cover the  End  of  the  Firme  Land  of  Nueva
Espanna  Toward  the  North.  The  Arrivall  of
Vazquez  de  Coronado  with  Frier  Marco  at  S.
Michael  of  Culiacan,  with  Commission  to  the
Governors  of  Those  Partes,  to  Pacifie  the  Indians,
anl  Not  to  Make  Them  Slaves  Any  More.

IN  the  ships  that  went  last  from  hence
(whereof  Michael  de  Usnago  was
Admiral)  I  wrote  into  your  maies-
tie,  how  I  had  sent  two  Franciscan
Friers  to  discover  the  end  of  this  firme
land,  which  stretcheth  to  the  North.
And  because  their  iourney  fell  out  to
greater  purpose  than  was  looked  for,  I
will  declare  the  whole  matter  from  the  be-
ginning. It  may  please  your  Maiestie  to
call  to  mind  how  often  I  wrote  unto  your
Highnesse,  that  I  desired  to  know  the  ende
of  this  Province  of  Nueva  Espanna,  because
it  is  so  great  a  countrey,  and  that  we  have
yet  no  knowledge  thereof.  Neither  had  I
onely  this  desire ;  for  Nunno  de  Guzman  de-
parted out  of  this  city  of  Mexico  with  400
horsemen,  and  14,000  Indians  footemen
borne  in  these  Indias,  being  the  best  men
and  the  best  furnished,  which  have  bene
seene  in  these  parts ;  and  he  did  so  little  with
197

JOURNEY  OF  ALVAR  NUNEZ

them,  that  the  most  part  of  them  were  con-
sumed in  the  enterprize  and  could  not  enter
nor  discover  any  more  then  already  was  dis-
covered. After  this  the  saide  Nunno  Guz-
man beeing  Governour  of  Nueva  Galicia,
sent  Captaines  and  Horsemen  foorth  divers
times,  which  sped  no  better  then  he  had
done.  Likewise  the  Marques  de  valle  Her-
nando Cortez  sent  a  captaine  with  2  ships
to  discover  the  coast :  which  2  ships  and  the
captaine  perished.  After  that  he  sent  again
2  other  ships,  one  of  the  which  was  divided
from  her  consort,  and  the  master  and  cer-
taine  mariners  slue  the  captaine  and  usurped
over  the  ship.

After  this  they  came  to.  an  Island,  where
the  Master  with  certaine  mariners  going  on
land,  the  Indians  of  the  Country  slew  them,
and  tooke  their  boat :  and  the  ship  with
those  that  were  in  it,  returned  to  the  coast
of  Nueva  Galicia,  where  it  ran  on  ground.
By  the  men  which  came  home  in  this  ship,
the  Marques  had  knowledge  of  the  countrey
which  they  had  discovered :  and  then,  either
for  the  discontentment  which  hee  had  with
the  bishop  of  Saint  Domingo  and  with  the
Judges  of  this  royal  audience  in  Mexico,  or
rather  because  of  his  so  prosperous  successe
in  all  things  here  in  Nueva  Espanna,  with-
out seeking  any  farther  intelligence  of  the
state  of  that  Island,  he  set  forward  on  that
voyage' with,  3  ships,  and  with  certaine  foote-
men  and  horsemen,  not  throughly  furnished
with  things  necessary ;  which  fell  out  so  con-
trary to  his  expectations  that  the  most  part
of  the  people  which  he  carried  with  him,
198

LETTER  OF  MENDOZA

dyed  of  hunger.  And  although  he  had
ships,  and  a  Countrey  very  neere  him
abounding  with  victuals,  yet  could  hee  never
finde  meanes  to  conquer  it,  but  rather  it
seemed,  that  God  miraculously  did  hide  it
from  him :  and  so  he  returned  home  without
achieving  ought  else  of  moment.  After
this,  having  heere  in  my  company  Andrew
Dorantez,  which  is  one  of  those  who  were  in
the  voyage  of  Panphilo  Naruaez,  I  often  was
in  hand  with  him,  supposing  that  he  was
able  to  doe  Your  Maiestie  great  service,  to
imploy  him  with  fortie  or  fiftie  horses,  to
search  out  the  secret  of  those  parts:  and
having  provided  all  things  necessary  for  his
iourney,  and  spent  much  money  in  that  be-
halfe,  the  matter  was  broken  off,  I  wot  not
how,  and  that  enterprise  was  given  over.
Yet  of  the  things  which  were  provided  for
that  purpose,  I  had  left  mee  a  negro,  which
returned  from  the  foresayde  voyage  of
Naruaez  with  Dorantez,  and  certaine  slaves
which  I  had  bought,  and  certaine  Indians
which  I  had  gathered  together  who  were
borne  in  those  North  partes,  whome  I  sent
with  Frier  Marco  de  Niga,  and  his  compan-
ion a  Franciscan  Frier,  because  they  had
bene  long  travelled,  and  exercised  in  those
partes,  and  had  great  experience  in  the  af-
faires of  the  Indies,  and  were  men  of  good
life  and  conscience,  for  whom  I  obtained
leave  of  their  superiours :  and  so  they  went
with  Frances  Vazquez  de  Coronado,  gov-
ernour  of  Nueva  Galicia  unto  the  Citie  of
Saint  Michael  of  Culiacan,  which  is  the  last
Province  subdued  by  the  Spaniards  towarde
199

JOURNEY  OF  ALVAR  NUNEZ

that  quarter,  being  two  hundred  leagues  dis-
tant from  this  Citie  of  Mexico.  As  soone
as  the  governour,  and  the  Friers  were  come
unto  that  Citie,  hee  sent  certaine  of  those
Indians  which  I  had  given  him,  home  into
their  Countrey,  to  signifie,  and  declare  to
the  people  of  the  same,  That  they  were  to
vnderstand,  that  youf  Maiestie  had  com-
manded they  should  not  hereafter  bee  made
slaves,  and  that  they  should  not  be  afrayd
any  more,  but  might  returne  unto  their
houses,  and  live  peaceably  in  them,  (for  be-
fore that  time  they  had  bin  greatly  troubled
by  the  evill  dealings  which  were  used
toward  them)  and  that  your  maiestie  would
cause  them  to  be  chastened,  which  were  the
causes  of  their  vexation.  With  these  In-
dians about  twentie  dayes  after  returned
about  400  men ;  which  coming  before  the
governour  said  unto  him,  that  they  came  on
the  behalfe  of  al  their  countrey-men,  to  tell
him,  that  they  desired  to  see  and  know  those
men  which  did  them  so  great  a  pleasure  as
to  suffer  them  to  returne  to  their  houses,
and  to  sow  maiz  for  their  sustenance,  for  by
the  space  of  many  yeres  they  were  driven  to
flee  into  the  mountaines,  hiding  themselves
like  wild  beasts,  for  feare  lest  they  should  be
made  slaves,  and  that  they  and  all  the  rest
cf  their  people  were  ready  to  doe  whatsoever
should  bee  commanded  them :  whom  the
governour  comforted  with  good  wordes,  and
gave  them  victuals,  and  stayed  them  with
him  three  or  foure  dayes  wherein  the  Friars
taught  them  to  make  the  signe  of  the  crosse,
and  to  learne  the  name  of  our  Lorde  Jesus
200

LETTER  OF  MENDOZA

Qirist,  and  they  with  great  diligence  sought
to  learne  the  same.  After  these  dayes  hee
sent  them  home  againe,  willing  them  not  to
be  afraid,  but  to  be  quiet,  giving  them  ap-
parel, beades,  knives,  and  other  such  like
things,  which  I  had  given  hjm  for  such  pur-
poses. The  sayde  Indians  departed  very
well  pleased,  and  said,  that  whensoever  hee
would  send  for  them,  they  and  many  others
would  come  to  doe  whatsoever  he  would
command  them.  The  entrance  being  thus
prepared,  Frier  Marco  and  his  companion,
with  the  Negro  and  other  slaves,  and  In-
dians which  I  had  given  him,  went  forward
on  their  voyage  10  or  12  dayes  after.  And
because  I  had  likewise  advertisement  of  a
certaine  Province  called  Topira  situate  in  the
mountaines  and  had  appointed  the  gov-
ernour  Vazquez  de  Coronado,  that  he  should
use  meanes  to  learne  the  state  thereof :  he
supposing  this  to  be  a  matter  of  great  mo-
ment determined  himselfe  to  goe  and  search
it,  having  agreed  with  the  said  Frier,  that  he
should  returne  by  that  part  of  the  moun-
taine,  to  meete  with  him  in  a  certaine  valley
called  Valle  de  los  Coragones,  being  120
leagues  distant  from  Culiacan.  The  Gov-
ernour  travelling  into  this  province  (as  I
have  written  in  my  former  letters)  found
great  scarcity  of  victuals  there,  and  the
mountaines  so  craggy,  that  he  could  finde  no
way  to  passe  forward,  and  was  inforced  to
returne  home  to  Saint  Michael :  so  that  as
well  in  chusing  of  the  entrance,  as  in  not
being  able  to  finde  the  way,  it  seemeth  onto
all  men  that  God  would  shut  up  the  gate  to

201

JOURNEY  OF  ALVAR  NUNEZ

all  those,  whrch  by  strength  of  humane
force  have  gone  about  to  attempt  this  enter-
prise, and  hath  reveiled  it  to  a  poore  and
bare-footed  Frier.  And  so  the  Frier  be-
ganne  to  enter  into  the  Land,  who  because
he  found  his  entrance  so  well  prepared,  was
very  well  received;  and  because  he  wrote
the  whole  successe  of  his  voyage,  according
to  the  instruction  which  I  had  given  him  to
ondertake  the  same,  I  wil  not  write  any
more  at  large,  but  send  your  Maiestie  this
copy  of  all  such  things  as  he  observed  in  the
same.

202

A  RELATION  OF  THE  REVEREND  FA-
THER FRIER  MARCO  DE  NICA,
TOUCHING  HIS  DISCOVERY  OF  THE
KINGDOM  OF  CEUOLA  OR  CIBOLA,
SITUATE  ABOUT  30.  DEGREES  OF
LATITUDE,  TO  THE  NORTH  OF
NUEUA  ESPANNA

CHAPTER  I.

Frier  Marco  de  Niga  Departeth  from  Saint
Michael  in  the  Province  of  Culiacan,  Standing  in
24.  Degrees  of  Northerly  Latitude :  and  Coming
to  the  Towne  of  Petatlan,  Receiveth  Many  Cour-
tesies of  the  Indians  There.  Departing  from
Thence,  He  Had  Information  of  Many  Islands,
and  of  a  Great  Countrey  Inhabited  with  Civil
People ;  He  Cometh  to  Vacupa :  Where  During
His  Aboad,  He  Heard  Newes  of  Cevola,  and  of
the  State  of  the  7  Cities,  and  of  Other  Provinces,
and  of  the  Rich  Islands  of  Pedes,  which  Extend
Northward  Upon  the  Coast.

I  FRIER  MARCO  DE  NICA  of  the
order  of  S.  Francis,  for  the  execu-
tion of  the  instruction  of  the  right
honourable  lord  Don  Antonio  de
Mendoga,  Vice-rov  and  captaine  Gen-
erall  for  the  Emperors  Maiestie  in  New
Spaine,  departed  from  the  towne  of  S.
Michael  in  the  province  of  Culiacan  on  Fri-
day the  7.  of  March,  in  the  yeere  1539.  hav-
ing for  my  companion  Frier  Honoratus,  and
carying  with  me  Stephan  a  Negro,  belonging
to  Andrew  Dorantez,  and  certaine  of  those
203

JOURNEY  OF  ALVAR  NUNEZ

Indians  which  the  sayde  lord  Vice-roy  had
made free, and bought for  this  purpose:
whom  Frances  Vazquez  de  Coronado  gov-
ernour  of  Nueva  Galicia  delivered  me,  and
with  many  other  Indians  of  Petatlan,  and
of  the  towne  called  Cuchillo,  which  is  some
50.  leagues  from  Petatlan,  who  came  to  the
valley  of  Culiacan, shewing  themselves  to
bee  exceeding  glad,  because  they  were  cer-
tified by  the  Indians  which  had  bin  set  free,
whom  the  said  governour  had  sent  before
to  advertise  them  of  their  libertie,  that  none
of  them  from  thenceforth  should  be  made
slaves,  and  that  no  man  should  invade  them,
nor  use  them  badly;  signifying  onto  them,
that  the  Emperors  Maiesty  had  willed  and
commanded  that  it  should  be  so. With  the
foresaid company I went  on my  voyage
vntil  I  came  to  the  towne  of  Petatlan,  find-
ing all the way  great  intertainment, and
provision  of  victuals, with roses, flowers,
and  other  such  things,  and  bowers  which
they  made for  me of  chalke  and  boughs
platted  together  in  all  places  where  there
were  no  houses. In  this  towne  of  Petatlan
I  rested  3. dayes,  because  my  companion
Honoratus fell so  sicke,  that I was con-
strained to  leave  him  there  behinde.

Then,  according  to  my  said  instruction,  I
followed  my  iourney  as  the  holy  Ghost  did
leade  me,  without  any  merit  of  mine,  having
in  my  company  the  said  Stephan  the  Negro,
Dorantez,  and  certaine  of  the  Indians  which
had  bin  set  at  liberty,  and  many  of  the  people
of  the  countrey,  which  gave  me  great  inter-
tainment and  welcome  in  all  places  where  I
204

MARCOS  OF  NIZZA

came,  and  made  mee  bowers  of  trees,  giving
me  such  victuals  as  they  had,  although  they
were  but  small:  because  (as  they  said)  it
had  not  rained  there  in  3  yeres,  and  be-
cause the  Indians  of  this  countrey  sought
means  rather  to  hide  themselves,  then  to
sowe  corne,  for  feare  of  the  Christians  of
the  Towne  of  S.  Michael,  which  were  wont
to  make  in-roades  even  to  that  place,  and
to  warre  upon  them,  and  to  carry  them  away
captives.  In  all  this  way,  which  may  be
about  25  or  30.  leagues  from  that  part  of
Petatlan,  I  saw  nothing  worthy  the  noting,
save  that  there  came  to  seeke  me  certaine
Indians  from  the  Island,  where  Fernando
Cortez  the  Marques  of  the  valley  had  bin,  of
whom  I  was  informed,  that  it  was  an  Island,
and  not  firme  land,  as  some  suppose  it  to  be.
They  came  to  ye  firme  land  upon  certaine
rafts  of  wood :  and  from  the  maine  to  the
island  is  but  halfe  a  league  by  sea,  little
more  or  lesse.  Likewise  certaine  Indians
of  another  island  greater  then  this  came
to  visit  me,  which  island  is  farther  off,  of
whom  I  was  informed  that  there  were  30.
other  small  islands,  which  were  inhabited,
but  had  smal  store  of  victuals,  saving  2.
which  have  maiz  or  corne  of  the  countrey.
These  Indians  had  about  their  necks  many
great  shels  which  were  mother  of  Pearle.  I
shewed  them  pearles  which  I  carryed  with
me  for  a  shew,  and  they  told  me  that  there
were  in  the  Islands  great  store  of  them,  and
those  very  great :  howbeit  I  saw  none  of
them.  I  followed  my  voyage  through  a
desert  of  4  dayes  iourney,  having  in  my
205

JOURNEY  OF  ALVAR  NUNEZ

company  both  the  Indians  of  the  islands  and
those  of  the  mountaines  which  I  had  passed,
and  at  the  end  of  this  desert  I  found  other
indians  which  marvelled  to  see  me,  because
they  had  no  knowledge  of  any  Christians,
having  no  traffike  nor  conversation  with
those  Indians  which  I  had  passed,  in  regard
of  the  great  desert  which  was  between  them.
These  Indians  intertained  me  exceeding
courteously,  and  gave  me  great  store  of
victuals  and  sought  to  touch  my  garments
and  called  me  Hagota,  which  in  their  lan-
guage signifieth  A  man  come  from  heaven.
These  Indians  I  advertised  by  my  inter-
preter, according  to  my  instructions,  in  the
Knowledge  of  our  Lord  God  in  heaven,  and
of  the  Emperor.  In  these  countries  and  in
all  places  els  by  all  wayes  and  meanes  pos-
sible, I  sought  information  where  any
Countreys  were  of  more  Cities  and  people  of
civilitie  and  onderstanding,  then  those  which
I  had  found :  and  I  could  heare  no  newes  of
any  such :  howbeit  they  tolde  mee,  that  foure
or  five  dayes  iourney  within  the  Countrey,  at
the  foote  of  the  mountaines,  there  is  a  large
and  mightie  plaine,  wherein  they  tolde  mee,
that  there  were  many  great  Townes,  and
people  clad  in  Cotton:  and  when  I  shewed
them  certaine  metals  which  I  carryed  with
mee,  to  learne  what  riche  metals  were  in
the  Lande,  they  tooke  the  minerall  of  Golde
and  tolde  mee,  that  thereof  were  vesselles
among  the  people  of  that  plaine,  and  that
they  carryed  certaine  round  greene  stones
hanging  at  their  nostrilles,  and  at  their
eares,  and  that  they  have  certaine  thinne
206

MARCOS  OF  NIZZA

plates  of  that  Golde,  wherewith  they  scrape
off  their  sweat,  and  that  the  walles  of  their
Temples  are  covered  therewith,  and  that
they  use  it  in  all  their  household  vessels.
And  because  this  Valley  is  distant  from  the
Sea-coast,  and  my  instruction  was  not  to
leave  the  Coast,  I  determined  to  leave  the
discovery  thereof  ontill  my  returne;  at
which  time  I  might  doe  it  more  commo-
diously.

Thus  I  travelled  three  dayes  iourney
through  Townes  inhabited  by  the  sayde  peo-
ple, of  whome  I  was  received  as  I  was  of
those  which  I  had  passed,  and  came  onto  a
Towne  of  reasonable  bignesse,  called  Va-
cupa,  where  they  shewed  mee  great  cour-
tesies, and  gave  mee  great  store  of  good
victuals,  because  the  soyle  is  very  fruitfull,
and  may  bee  watered.  This  Towne  is  fortie
leagues  distant  from  the  Sea.

And  because  I  was  so  farre  from  the  Sea,
it  being  two  dayes  before  Passion  Sunday,
I  determined  to  stay  there  until  Easter,  to
informe  myselfe  of  the  Islandes,  whereof  I
sayde  before  that  I  had  information.  And
so  I  sent  certaine  Indians  to  the  Sea  by
three  severall  wayes  whom  I  commaunded
to  bring  mee  some  Indians  of  the  Sea-coast
and  of  some  of  those  Islandes  that  I  might
receive  information  of  them:  And  I  sent
Stephan  Dorantez  the  Negro  another  way,
whom  I  commaunded  to  goe  directly  north-
ward fiftie  or  threescore  leagues,  to  see  if
by  that  way  hee  might  learne  any  newes  of
any  notable  thing  which  wee  sought  to  dis-
cover, and  I  agreed  with  him,  that  if  hee
207

JOURNEY  OF  ALVAR  NUNEZ

found  any  knowledge  of  any  peopled  and
riche countrey which were of great im-
portance, that  hee  should  goe  no  further  but
should  returne  in  person,  or  should  sende
mee  certaine  Indians  with  that  token  which
wee  were  agreed  upon,  to  wit,  that  if  it  were
but  a  meane  thing,  hee  should  sende  mee  a
White  Crosse  of  one  handfull  long;  and  if
it  were  any  great  matter,  one  of  two  hand-
fuls  long;  and  if  it  were  a  Countrey  greater
and  better  then  Nueva  Espanna,  hee  should
send mee a great crosse. So the sayde
Stephan  departed  from  mee  on  Passion-sun-
day  after  dinner:  and  within  foure  dayes
after  the  messengers  of  Stephan  returned
vnto  me  with  a  great  Crosse  as  high  as  a
man, and they brought me word from
Stephan,  that  I  should  forthwith  come  away
after  him,  for  hee  had  found  people  which
gave him information of a very mighty
Province,  and  that  he  had  certaine  Indians
in  his  company,  which  had  bene  in  the  sayd
Province,  and  that  he  had  sent  me  one  of
the  said  Indians. This  Indian  told  me,  that
it  was  thirtie  dayes  iourney  from  the  Towne
where  Stephan  was,  vnto  the  first  Citie  of
the  sayde  Province,  which  is  called  Ceuola.
Hee  affirmed  also  that  there  are  seven  great
Cities  in  this  Province,  all  vnder  one  Lord,
the  houses  whereof  are  made  of  Lyme  &
Stone,  and  are  very  great,  and  the  least  of
them  with  one  lofte  above  head,  and  some
two  and  of  three  loftes,  and  the  house  of  the
Lorde  of  the  Province  of  foure,  and  that
all  of  them  ioyne  one  onto  the  other  in  good
order,  and  that  in  the  gates  of  the  principall
208

MARCOS  OF  NIZZA

houses  there  are  many  Turques-stones  cun-
ningly  wrought, whereof hee sayth they
have  there  great  plentie :  also  that  the  people
of  this  Citie  goe  very  well  apparelled:  and
that  beyond  this  there  are  other  Provinces,
all  which  (hee  sayth)  are  much  greater  then
these  seven cities. I gave  credite  to  his
speach  because  I  found  him  to  bee  a  man  of
good  vnderstanding:  but  I  deferred  my  de-
parture to  follow Stephan  Dorantez,  both
because  I  thought  hee  would  stay  for  mee,
and  also  to  attend  the  returne  of  my  mes-
sengers which  I  had  sent  vnto  the  Sea,  who
returned  vnto  me  upon  Easter  day,  bringing
with  them  certaine  inhabitants  of  the  Sea-
coast,  and  of  two  of  the  Islands. Of  whom
I  vnderstoode,  that  the  Islandes  above  men-
tioned were  scarce  of  victuals,  as I had
learned  before,  and  that  they  are  inhabited
by  people,  which  weare  shelles  of  Pearles
upon  their  foreheads,  and  they  say  that  they
have  great  Pearles,  and  much  Golde. They
informed  mee  of  foure  and  thirtie  Islandes,
lying  one  neere  vnto  another:  they  say  that
the  people  on  the  sea-coast  have  small  store
of  victuals,  as  also  those  of  the  Islandes,  and
that  they  trafficke  one  with  the  other  upon
raftes. This  coast  stretcheth  northward  as
is  to  bee  seene. These  Indians  of  the  Coast
brought  me  certaine  Targets  made  of  Cow-
hydes very well dressed, which were so
large,  that  they  covered  them  from  the  head
to  the  very  foote,  with  a  hole  in  the  toppe
of  the  same  to  looke  out  before :  they  are  so
strong,  that  a  Crossebow  (as  I  suppose)  will
not  pierce  them.

209

JOURNEY  OF  ALVAR  NUNEZ

CHAPTER  II.

He  Hath  New  Information  of  the  Seven  Cities
by  Certaine  Indians  Called  Pintados,  and  of  Three
Other  Kingdomes  Called  Marata,  Acus,  and  To-
tonteac.  Being  Countreys  Very  Rich  in  Turqueses
and  Hides  of  Cattel.  Following  His  Voyage
Through  Those  Countries  He  Taketh  Possession
Thereof  for  the  Emperors  Maiestie,  and  of  the
Indians  Is  Much  Honoured  and  Served  with
Victuals.

THE  same  day  came  three  Indians
of  those  which  I  called  Pintados,
because  I  saw  their  faces,  breasts
and  armes  painted.  These  dwel
farther  up  into  the  countrey  towards  the
East,  and  some  of  them  border  upon  the
seven  cities,  which  sayd  they  came  to  see
mee,  because  they  had  heard  of  mee:  and
among  other  things  they  gave  me  informa-
tion of  the  seven  cities,  and  of  the  other
Provinces,  which  the  Indian  that  Stephan
sent  me  had  tolde  mee  of,  almost  in  the  very
same  manner  that  Stephan  had  sent  mee
worde ;  and  so  I  sent  backe  the  people  of  the
sea-coast:  and  two  Indians  of  the  Islands
sayde  they  would  goe  with  mee  seven  or
eight  dayes.

So  with  these  and  with  the  three  Pintados
above  mentioned,  I  departed  from  Vacupa
upon  Easter  Tuesday,  the  same  way  that
Stephan  went,  from  whom  I  received  new
messengers  with  a  crosse  of  the  bignesse  of
210

MARCOS  OF  NIZZA

the  first  which  he  sent  me :  which  hastened
me  forward,  and  assured  me  that  the  land
which  I  sought  for,  was  the  greatest  and
best  countrey  in  all  those  partes.  The  sayd
messengers  told  mee  particularly  without
fayling  in  any  one  poynt,  all  that  which  the
first  messenger  had  tolde  mee.  and  much
more,  and  gave  mee  more  plaine  informa-
tion thereof.  So  I  travelled  that  day  being
Easter  Tuesday,  and  two  dayes  more,  the
very  same  way  that  Stephan  had  gone:  at
the  end  of  which  3  dayes  they  tolde  mee  that
from  that  place  a  man  might  travell  in  thir-
tie  dayes  to  the  citie  of  Ceuola,  which  is  the
first  of  the  seven.  Neither  did  one  onely  tell
me  thus  much,  but  very  many ;  who  tolde  me
very  particularly  of  the  greatness  of  the
houses,  and  of  the  fashion  of  them,  as  the
first  messengers  had  informed  me.  Also
they  told  me,  that  besides  these  seven  Cities,
there  are  3  other  Kingdomes  which  are
called  Marata,  Acus  and  Tontonteac.  I  en-
quired of  them  wherefore  they  travelled  so
farre  from  their  houses:  They  said  that
they  went  for  Turqueses,  and  Hides  of
Kine,  and  other  things ;  and  that  of  all  these
there  was  great  abundance  in  this  Coun-
trey. Likewise  I  enquired  how,  and  by
what  meanes  they  obtained  these  things:
They  tolde  me,  by  their  service  and  by  the
sweat  of  their  browes,  and  that  they  went
unto  the  first  citie  of  the  province  which  is
called  Ceuola,  and  that  they  served  them  in
tilling  their  ground,  and  in  other  businesses,
and  that  they  give  them  Hydes  of  oxen,
which  they  have  in  those  places,  and  tur-
211

JOURNEY  OF  ALVAR  NUNEZ

queses  for  their  service,  and  that  the  people
of  this  city  weare  very  fine  and  excellent
turqueses  hanging  at  their  eares  and  at  their
nostrils.  They  say  also,  that  of  these  tur-
queses they  make  fine  v/orkes  upon  the
principall  gates  of  the  houses  of  this  citie.
They  tolde  mee,  that  the  apparell  which  the
inhabitants  of  Ceuola  weare,  is  a  gowne  of
cotten  downe  to  the  foote,  with  a  button  at
the  necke,  and  a  long  string  hanging  downe
at  the  same,  and  that  the  sleeves  of  these
gownes  are  as  broad  beneath  as  above.  They
say,  they  gyrded  themselves  with  gyrdles  of
turqueses,  and  that  over  these  coates  some
weare  good  apparel,  others  hides  of  Kine
very  well  dressed,  which  they  take  to  bee
the  best  apparell  of  that  countrey,  whereof
they  have  there  great  quantitie.  Likewise
the  women  goe  apparelled,  and  covered
downe  to  the  foote.  These  Indians  gave  me
very  good  intertainment,  ana  curiously  en-
quired the  day  of  my  departure  from  Va-
cupa,  that  at  my  returne  they  might  provide
me  of  foode  and  lodging.  They  brought
certaine  sicke  folkes  before  mee,  that  I
might  heale  them,  and  sought  to  touch  my
apparell,  and  gave  mee  certaine  cow-hydes
so  well  trimmed  and  dressed,  that  by  them
a  man  might  coniecture  that  they  were
wrought  by  civile  people,  and  all  of  them
affirmed,  that  they  came  from  Ceuola.

The  next  day  I  followed  my  iourney,  and
carrying  with  mee  the  Pintados,  I  came  to
another  Village  where  I  was  well  received
by  the  people  of  the  same :  who  likewise
sought  to  touch  my  garments,  and  gave  mee
212

MARCOS  OF  NIZZA

as  particular  knowledge  of  the  Lande  afore-
saide,  as  I  had  received  of  those  which
mette  mee  before :  and  also  tolde  mee,  that
from  that  place  certaine  people  were  gone
with  Stephan  Dorantez,  foure  or  five  dayes
iourney.  And  here  I  found  a  great  crosse,
which  Stephan  had  left  mee  for  a  signe,  that
the  newes  of  the  good  Countrey  increased,
and  left  worde,  that  with  all  haste  they
should  send  mee  away,  and  that  hee  would
stay  for  me  at  the  ende  of  the  first  Desert
that  he  mette  with.  Heere  I  set  up  two
Crosses,  and  tooke  possession  according  to
mine  instruction,  because  that  the  Countrey
seemed  better  unto  mee  then  that  which  I
had  passed,  and  that  I  thought  it  meete  to
make  ar»  acte  of  possession  as  farre  as  that
place.

In  this  maner  I  travailed  five  dayes,  al-
wayes  finding  inhabited  places  with  great
hospitalitie  and  intertainments,  and  many
Turqueses,  and  Oxe-hides,  and  the  like  re-
port concerning  the  countrey.  Heere  I  un-
derstood, that  after  two  dayes  iourney  I
should  finde  a  desert  where  there  is  no
foode,  but  that  there  were  certaine  gone  be-
fore to  build  mee  lodgings,  and  to  carrie
foode  for  me:  whereupon  I  hastened  my
way,  hoping  to  finde  Stephan  at  the  ende
thereof,  because  in  that  place  hee  had  left
worde  that  hee  would  stay  for  mee.  Before
I  came  to  the  desert,  I  mette  with  a  very
pleasant  Towne,  by  reason  of  great  store  of
waters  conveighed  thither  to  water  the  same.
Heere  I  mette  with  many  people  both  men
&  women  clothed  in  Cotton,  and  some  cov-
213

JOURNEY  OF  ALVAR  NUNEZ

ered  with  oxe-hydes,  which  generally  they
take  for  better  apparell  then  that  of  cotton.
All  the  people  in  this  village  go  in  ca-
conados,  that  is  to  say,  Turquesses  hanging
at  their  nostrilles  and  eares,  which  Tur-
quesses they  call  Cacona.  Amongst  others,
the  Lord  of  this  Village  came  unto  me ;  and
two  of  his  brethern,  very  well  apparrelled
in  cotton,  who  also  were  in  Caconados,  each
of  them  having  his  collar  of  Turquesses
about  his  necke;  and  they  presented  unto
mee  many  wild  beastes,  as  conies,  quailes,
Maiz  nuttes  of  Pine  trees,  and  all  in  great
abundance,  and  offered  me  many  Turqueses,
and  dressed  Oxe-hydes,  and  very  fayre  ves-
sels to  drinke  in,  and  other  things ;  whereof
I  would  receive  no  whit.  And  having  my
garment  of  gray  cloth,  which  in  Spaine  is
called  garagoqa,  the  Lord  of  this  Village  and
the  other  Indians  touched  my  gowne  with
their  handes,  and  tolde  mee,  that  of  such
cloth  there  was  great  store  in  Tontonteac,
and  that  the  people  of  that  Countrey  wore
the  same.  Whereat  I  laughed,  and  sayde
that  it  was  nothing  else  but  such  apparell
of  Cotton  as  they  wore.  And  they  replyed :
We  would  have  thee  thinke  that  we  vnder-
stand,  that  that  apparell  which  thou  wearest,
and  that  which  we  weare  are  of  divers
sortes.  Understand  thou,  that  in  Ceulo  all
the  houses  are  full  of  that  apparrell  which  we
weare,  but  in  Totonteac  there  are  certaine
litle  beasts,  from  whom  they  take  that  thing
wherewith  such  apparell  as  thou  wearest  is
made.  I  prayed  them  to  informe  mee  more
playnely  of  this  matter.  And  they  tolde  mee
214

MARCOS  OF  NIZZA

that  the  sayde  beastes  were  about  the  big-
nesses of  the  two  braches  or  spaniels  which
Stephan  caryed  with  him,  and  they  say  that
there  is  great  store  of  that  cattell  in  To-
tonteac.

215

JOURNEY  OF  ALVAR  NUNEZ

CHAPTER  III.

He  Entreth  into  a  Desert,  and  the  Indians
Suffer  Him  to  Want  Nothing  Necessary.  Fol-
lowing His  Voyage,  He  Commeth  into  a  Fertile
Valley,  and  Hath  Certaine  Knowledge  Given  Him
(as  He  Had  Before)  of  the  State  of  Ceuola,  and
of  Totonteac ;  and  That  the  Coast  of  the  Sea  in
35.  Degrees  Trendeth  Much  to  the  Westward;
and  Also  the  Kingdomes  of  Mavata  and  Acus.

THE  next  day  I  entered  into  the
Desert,  and  where  I  was  to  dine,
I  found  bowers  made,  and  victuals
in  abundance  by  a  rivers  side :  and
at  night  I  found  bowers  and  victuals  in  like
sort,  and  after  that  maner  I  found  for  4
dayes  travell:  all  which  time  the  wildernesse
continueth.

At  the  ende  of  these  foure  dayes,  I  entred
into  a  valley  very  well  inhabited  with  people.
At  the  first  village  there  mette  me  many
men  and  women  with  victuals  and  all  of
them  had  Turqueses  hanging  at  their  nos-
trils and  eares,  and  som ?  had  collars  of
turqueses  like  those  which  the  Lord  of  the
Village  before  I  came  to  the  Desert,  and
his  two  brethern  wore :  saving  that  they
ware  them  but  single  about  their  neckes,
and  these  people  weare  them  three  or  foure
times  double,  and  goe  in  good  apparrell,  and
skinnes  of  Oxen :  and  the  women  weare
of  the  said  Turqueses  at  their  nostrils  and
216

MARCOS  OF  NIZZA

eares,  and  very  good  wast-coates  and  other
garments.  Heere  there  was  as  great  Knowl-
edge of  Ceula,  as  in  Nueva  Espanna  of
Temistitan,  and  in  Peru  of  Cuzco;  and  they
tolde  us  particularly  the  maner  of  their
houses,  lodgings,  streetes  and  market-places,
as  men  that  had  bene  oftentimes  there,  and
as  those  which  were  furnished  from  thence
with  things  necessary  for  the  service  of  their
householde,  as  those  also  had  done,  which  I
already  had  passed.  I  told  them  it  was  im-
possible that  the  houses  should  be  made  in
such  sort  as  they  informed  mee,  and  they
for  my  better  vnderstanding  tooke  earth  or
ashes,  and  poured  water  thereupon,  and
shewed  me  how  they  layd  stones  upon  it,
and  how  the  buylding  grewe  up,  as  they  con-
tinued laving  stones  thereon,  vntill  it  mount-
ed aloft.  I  asked  them  whether  the  men  of
that  countrey  had  wings  to  mount  up  unto
those  loftes;  whereat  they  laughed,  and
showed  mee  a  Ladder  in  as  good  sort  as
I  myself e  was  able  to  describe  it.  Then
they  tooke  a  Staffe  and  helde  it  over  their
heads,  and  said  that  the  lofts  were  so  high
one  above  another.  Likewise  heere  I  had
information  of  the  woollen  cloth  of  Toton-
teac,  where  they  say  are  houses  like  those
of  Ceuola,  and  better  and  more  in  number,
and  that  it  is  a  great  Province,  and  hath
no  governour.  Here  I  onderstood  that  the
coast  of  the  sea  trended  much  toward  the
West;  for  vnto  the  entrance  of  this  first
desert  which  I  passed,  the  coast  still
stretched  Northward  ;and  because  the  trend-
ing of  the  coast  is  a  thing  of  great  impor-
217

JOURNEY  OF  ALVAR  NUNEZ

tance,  I  was  desirous  to  Knowe  and  see  it;
and  I  saw  plainely,  that  in  35.  degrees  the
coast  stretcheth  to  the  West,  whereat  I  re-
ioyced  no  lesse,  then  of  the  good  newes
within  land,  and  so  I  returned  back  to  pro-
ceede  on  my  iourney.

Through  the  foresayd  valley  I  travailed
five  dayes  iourney,  which  is  inhabited  with
goodly  people,  and  so  aboundeth  with  vic-
tuals, that  it  sufficieth  to  feede  above  three
thousand  horsemen :  it  is  all  well  watered
and  like  a  garden :  the  burroughs  and
townes  are  halfe  and  a  quarter  of  a  league
long,  and  in  all  these  villages,  I  found  very
ample  repprt  of  Ceuola,  whereof  they  made
such  particular  relation  onto  me,  as  people
which  go  yeerely  thither  to  earne  their  liv-
ing. Here  I  found  a  man  borne  in  Ceuola,
who  told  me  that  he  came  thither,  having
escaped  from  the  governour  or  Lieutenant
of  the  towne;  for  the  Lord  of  these  seven
Cities  liveth  and  abideth  in  one  of  those
townes  called  Ahacus,  and  in  the  rest  he
appoynteth  lieu-tenants  under  him.  This
townesman  of  Ceuola  is  a  white  man  of  a
good  complexion,  somewhat  well  in  yeeres,
and  of  fame  greater  capacitie  then  the  in-
habitants of  this  valley,  or  then  those  which
I  had  left  behind  me.  Hee  sayde  that  hee
would  goe  with  mee,  that  I  might  begge  his
pardon :  and  of  him  I  learned  many  par-
ticulars :  he  tolde  me  that  Ceuola  was  a  great
Citie,  inhabited  with  great  store  of  people,
and  having  many  streetes  and  market-
places :  and  that  in  some  parts  of  this  Citie
there  are  certaine  very  great  houses  of  five
218

MARCOS  OF  NIZZA

stories  high,  wherein  the  chiefe  of  the  Citie
assemble  themselves  at  certaine  dayes  of  the
yeere.  He  sayeth  that  the  houses  are  of
Lyme  and  Stone,  according  as  others  had
tolde  mee  before,  and  that  the  gates,  and
small  pillars  of  the  principall  houses  are  of
Turqueses,  and  all  the  vessels  wherein  they
are  served,  and  the  other  ornaments  of  their
houses  were  of  golde:  and  that  the  other
sixe  Cities  are  built  like  onto  this,  whereof
some  are  bigger:  and  that  Ahacus  is  the
chiefest  of  them.  Hee  sayth  that  toward
the  Southeast  there  is  a  Kingdome  called
Marata,  and  that  there  were  woont  to  be
many,  and  those  great  Cities,  which  were
all  built  of  houses  of  Stone,  with  divers
lofts:  and  that  these  have  and  doe  wage
warre  with  the  Lord  of  the  seven  Cities,
through  which  warre  this  Kingdome  of  Ma-
rata is  for  the  most  part  wasted,  although
it  yet  continueth  and  maintaineth  warre
against  the  other.

Likewise  he  saith,  that  the  Kingdome
called  Totonteac  lyeth  toward  the  West,
which  he  saith  is  a  very  mightie  Province,
replenished  with  infinite  store  of  people  and
riches.  And  that  in  the  sayde  Kingdome
they  weare  woollen  cloth  like  that  which
I  weare,  and  other  finer  sorts  of  woollen
cloth  made  of  the  fleeces  of  those  beastes
which  they  described  before  onto  me:  and
that  they  are  a  very  civile  people.  More-
over hee  tolde  me,  that  there  is  another
great  Province  and  Kingdome  called  Acus;
for  there  is  Acus,  and  Ahacus  with  an
aspiration,  which  is  the  principall  of  the
219

JOURNEY  OF  ALVAR  NUNEZ

seven  cities :  and  Acus  without  an  aspiration
is  a  Kingdome  and  Province  of  it  selfe.  He
told  me  also,  that  the  apparrel  which  they
weare  in  Ceuola  is  after  the  same  maner
as  they  before  had  certified  me,  and  that
all  the  inhabitants  of  the  Citie  lie  upon
beddes  raysed  a  good  height  from  the
ground,  with  quilts  and  canopies  over  them,
which  cover  the  sayde  Beds :  and  hee  tolde
mee  that  hee  would  goe  with  me  to  Ceuola
and  farther  also,  if  I  would  take  him  with
me.  The  like  relation  was  given  vnto  me
in  this  towne  by  many  others,  but  not  so
particularly.  I  travelled  three  dayes  iourney
through  this  valley :  the  inhabitants  whereof
made  me  exceeding  great  cheere  and  inter-
tainment.  In  this  valley  I  saw  above  a  thou-
sand Oxe-hides  most  excellently  trimmed
and  dressed.  And  here  also  I  saw  farre
greater  store  of  Turqueses  and  chaines  made
thereof,  then  in  all  places  which  I  had
passed ;  and  they  say,  that  all  commeth  from
the  city  of  Ceuola  whereof  they  have  great
Knowledge,  as  also  of  the  Kingdome  of
Marata  and  of  the  Kingdomes  of  Acus  and
Totonteac.

220

MARCOS  OF  NIZZA

CHAPTER  IV.

Of  a  Very  Great  Beast  with  One  Home  Upon
His  Fore-head ;  and  of  the  Courtesies  which  the
Indians  Shewed  Frier  Marcus  of  Niga,  in  His
Voyage.  Also  How  Cruelly  Stephan  Dorantez
and  His  Companions  Were  Used  Upon  Their
Arrivall  at  Ceuola,  by  the  Lorde  Thereof.

HERE  they  shewed  me  an  hide  halfe
as  bigge  againe  as  the  hide  of
a  great  oxe,  and  tolde  me  that
it  was  the  skin  of  a  beast  which
had  but  one  home  upon  his  forehead,
and  that  this  home  bendeth  toward  his
breast,  and  that  out  of  the  same  goeth  a
point  right  forward,  wherein  he  hath  so
great  strength,  that  it  will  breake  any  thing
how  strong  so  ever  it  be,  if  he  runne  against
it,  and  that  there  are  great  store  of  these
beasts  in  that  Countrey.  The  colour  of  the
hide  is  of  the  colour  of  a  great  Goat-skin,
and  the  haire  is  a  finger  thicke.  Here  I  had
messengers  from  Stephan  which  brought
me  word,  that  by  this  time  'he  was  come  to
the  farthest  part  of  the  desert,  and  that  he
was  very  ioyful,  because  the  farther  he  went,
the  more  perfect  Knowledge  he  had  of  the
greatnesse  of  the  countrey,  and  sent  me
word,  that  since  his  departure  from  me,  hee
never  had  found  the  Indians  in  any  lye ;  for
even  vnto  that  very  place  he  had  found  al
in  such  maner  as  they  had  informed  him
221

JOURNEY  OF  ALVAR  NUNEZ

and  hoped  that  he  should  find  the  like  at  his
arrivall  in-  the  valley  which  he  was  going
vnto,  as  he  had  found  in  the  villages  before
passed.  I  set  up  crosses  and  used  those  acts
and  ceremonies,  which  were  to  be  done  ac-
cording to  my  instructions.  The  inhabitants
requested  me  to  stay  here  three  or  foure
days,  because  that  from  this  place  there  were
four  days  iourney  vnto  the  desert,  and  from
the  first  entrance  into  the  same  desert  vnto
the  citie  of  Ceuola  are  15  great  dayes  iour-
ney more;  also  that  they  would  provide  vic-
tuals, for  me  and  other  necessaries  for  that
voyage.  Likewise  they  told  me,  that  with
Stephan  the  Negro  were  gone  above  300
men  to  beare  him  company,  and  to  carry
victuals  after  him,  and  that  in  like  sort  many
of  them  would  go  with  me  to  serve  me,
because  they  hoped  to  returne  home  rich.  I
thanked  them,  and  willed  them  to  set  things
in  order  with  speede,  and  so  I  rested  there
three  dayes,  wherein  I  always  informed  my
selfe  of  Ceuola,  and  of  as  many  other  things
as  I  could  learne,  and  called  many  Indians
vnto  mee,  and  examined  them  severally  and
all  of  them  agreed  in  one  tale,  and  told  me
of  the  great  multitude  of  people,  and  of  the
order  of  the  streetes,  of  the  greatnesse  of
the  'houses,  and  of  the  strength  of  the  gates,
agreeing  altogether  with  that  which  the  rest
before  had  told  me.  After  three  dayes  many
assembled  themselves  to  go  with  me,  30  of
the  principal  of  whom  I  tooke,  being  very
well  apparrelled,  and  with  chaines  of  tur-
queses,  which  some  of  them  weare  five  or
sixe  times  double,  and  other  people  to  cajy
222

MARCOS  OF  NIZZA

things  necessary  for  them  and  me,  and  so
set  forward  on  my  voyage.

Thus  I  entred  into  the  second  desert  on
the  9  of  May,  and  travelled  the  first  day
by  a  very  broad  and  beaten  way,  and  we
came  to  diner  vnto  a  water,  where  the  In-
dians had  made  provision  for  me;  and  at
night  we  came  to  another  water,  where  I
found  a  hou^e  which  they  had  fully  made
up  for  me,  and  another  house  stood  made
where  Stephan  lodged  when  he  passed  that
way,  and  many  old  cottages  and  many  signes
of  fire  which  the  people  had  made  that
travelled  to  Ceuola  by  this  way.  In  this
sort  I  travelled  12  dayes  iourney  being  al-
way  well  provided  of  victuals,  of  wild  beasts,
Hares,  and  Partridges  of  the  same  colour
and  tast  with  those  of  Spaine  although  they
are  not  as  big,  for  they  be  somewhat  lesse.
Here  met  us  an  Indian  the  sonne  of  the
chiefe  man  that  accompanied  mee,  which
had  gone  before  with  Stephan,  who  came  in
a  great  fright,  having  his  face  and  body  all
covered  with  sweat,  and  shewing  exceeding
sadnesse  in  his  countenance;  and  he  told
mee  that  a  dayes  iourney  before  Stephan
came  to  Ceuola  he  sent  his  great  mace  made
of  a  gourd  by  his  messenges,  as  he  was  al-
ways woont  to  send  them  before  him,  that
hee  might  knowe  in  what  sort  hee  came
onto  them,  which  gourd  has  a  string  of
belles  upon  it,  and  two  feathers  one  white
and  another  red,  in  token  that  he  demanded
safe  conduct,  and  that  he  came  peaceably.
And  when  they  came  to  Ceuola  before  the
magistrate,  which  the  Lord  of  the  citie  had

22$

JOURNEY  OF  ALVAR  NUNEZ

placed  there  for  his  Lieutenant,  they  deliv-
ered him  the  sayde  great  gourd,  who  tooke
the  same  in  his  hands,  and  after  he  spyed
the  belles,  in  a  great  rage  and  fury  he  cast
it  to  the  ground,  and  willed  messengers  to
get  them  packing  with  speed,  for  he  knew
well  ynough  what  people  they  were,  and
that  they  should  will  them  in  no  case  to
enter  into  the  citie,  for  if  they  did  hee  would
put  them  all  to  death.  The  messengers  re-
turned and  tolde  Stephan  how  things  had
passed,  who  answered  them  that  it  made  no
great  matter,  and  would  needes  proceed  on
hisvoyage  till  he  came  to  the  citie  ofCeuola:
where  he  found  men  that  would  not  let  him
enter  into  the  towne,  but  shut  him  into  a
great  house  which  stoode  without  the  citie,
and  straightway  tooke  all  things  from  him
which  hee  carried  to  truck  and  barter  with
them,  and  certain  turqueses,  and  other
things  which  he  had  received  of  the  Indians
by  the  way,  and  they  kept  him  there  all  that
night  without  giving  him  meate  or  drinke,
and  the  next  day  in  the  morning  this  In-
dian was  a  thirst,  and  went  out  of  the  house
to  drinke  at  a  river  that  was  neere  at  hand,
and  within  a  little  while  after  he  saw
Stephan  running  away,  and  the  people  fol-
lowed him,  and  slewe  certain  of  the  Indians
which  went  in  his  company.  And  when  this
Indian  saw  these  things,  he  hid  himselfe  on
the  banks  of  the  river,  and  afterward  crossed
the  high  way  of  the  desert.  The  Indians  that
went  with  me  bearing  these  newes  began
incontinently  to  lament,  and  I  thought  these
heavie  and  bad  news  would  cost  mee  my
224

MARCOS  OF  NIZZA

life,  neither  did  I  feare  so  much  the  losse
of  mine  owne  life,  as  that  I  should  not  bee
able  to  returne  to  give  information  of  the
greatnesses  of  that  Countrey,  where  our
Lord  God  might  be  glorified :  and  streight
way  I  cut  the  cords  of  my  budgets  which
I  carried  with  me  ful  of  merchandise  for
traffique,  which  I  would  not  doe  till  then,
nor  give  anything  to  any  man,  and  began  to
divide  all  that  I  carried  with  mee  among  the
principall  men,  willing  them  not  to  be  afraid,
but  to  goe  forward  with  me,  and  so  they  did.
And  going  on  our  way,  within  a  dayes
iourney  of  Ceuola  wee  met  two  other  In-
dians of  those  which  went  with  Stephan,
which  were  bloody  and  wounded  in  many
places :  and  as  soone  as  they  came  to  us,  they
which  were  with  me  began  to  make  great
lamentation.  These  wounded  Indians  I
asked  for  Stephan,  and  they  agreeing  in  all
poynts  with  the  first  Indian  sayd,  that  after
they  had  put  him  into  the  foresayd  great
house  without  giving  him  meat  or  drinke  all
that  day  and  all  that  night,  they  tooke  from
Stephan  all  the  things  which  hee  carried
with  him.  The  next  day  when  the  Sunne
was  a  lance  high,  Stephan  went  out  of  the
house,  and  some  of  the  chiefe  men  with  him,
and  suddenly  came  store  of  people  from  the
citie,  whom  as  soone  as  hee  sawe  he  began
to  run  away  and  we  likewise,  and  foorthu  ith
they  shot  at  us  and  wounded  us,  and  cer-
taine  dead  men  fell  upon  us,  and  so  we  lay
till  night  and  durst  not  stirre,  and  we  heard
great  rumours  in  the  citie,  and  saw  many
men  and  women  keeping  watch  and  ward
225

JOURNEY  OF  ALVAR  NUNEZ

upon  the  walles  thereof,  and  after  this  we
could  not  see  Stephan  any  more,  and  wee
thinke  they  have  shot  him  to  death,  as  thoy
have  done  all  the  rest  which  went  with  him,
so  that  none  are  escaped  but  we  onely.

226

MARCOS  OF  NIZZA

CHAPTER  V.

The  Situation  and  Greatnesse  of  the  Citie  of
Ceuola,  and  How  Frier  Marcus  Tooke  Posses-
sion Thereof  and  of  Other  Provinces,  Calling
the  Same  The  New  Kingdomes  of  S.  Francis,
and  How  After  His  Departure  from  Thence
Being  Reserved  by  God  in  So  Dangerous  a  Voy-
age, He  Arrived  at  vCompostella  in  Nueva  Galicia.

HAVING  considered  the  former  re-
port of  the  Indians,  and  the
evill  meanes  which  I  had  to  pros-
ecute my  voyage  as  I  desired,  I
thought  it  not  good  wilfully  to  loose  my
life  as  Stephan  did ;  and  so  tolde  them,  that
God  would  punish  those  of  Ceuola,  and  that
the  Viceroy  when  he  should  understand
what  had  happened,  would  send  many  chris-
tians to  chastise  them:  but  they  would  not
believe  me,  for  they  sayde  that  no  man  was
able  to  withstand  the  power  of  Ceuola.  And
herewith  I  left  them,  and  went  aside  two  or
three  stones  cast,  and  when  I  returned  I
found  an  Indian  of  mine  which  I  had
brought  from  Mexico  called  Marcus,  who
wept  and  sayde  unto  me :  Father,  these  men
have  consulted  to  kill  us,  for  they  say,  that
through  your  and  Stephans  meanes  their
fathers  are  slaine,  and  that  neither  man  nor
woman  of  them  shall  remaine  unslaine.
Then  againe  I  divided  among  them  certaine
other  things  which  I  had,  to  appease  them,
227

JOURNEY  OF  ALVAR  NUNEZ

whereupon  they  were  somewhat  pacified,  al-
beit they  still  shewed  great  griefe  for  the
people  which  were  slaine.  I  requested  some
of  them  to  goe  to  Ceuola,  to  see  if  any  other
Indian  were  escaped,  with  intent  that  they
might  learne  some  newes  of  Stephan ;  which
I  could  not  obtaine  at  their  handes.  When
I  saw  this,  I  sayd  unto  them,  that  I  purposed
to  see  the  citie  of  Ceuola,  whatsoever  came
of  it.  They  sayde  that  none  of  them  would
goe  with  me.  At  the  last  when  they  sawe
mee  resolute,  two  of  the  chiefe  of  them
sayde  they  would  goe  with  me ;  with  whome
and  with  mine  Indians  and  interpreters  I
followed  my  way,  till  I  came  within  sight  of
Ceuola,  which  is  situate  on  a  plaine  at  the
foote  of  a  round  hill,  and  maketh  shew  to  bee
a  faire  citie,  and  is  better  seated  then  any
that  I  have  seene  in  these  partes.  The
houses  are  builded  in  order,  according  as
the  Indians  told  me,  all  made  of  stone  with
divers  stories,  and  flatte  roofes,  as  farre  as
I  could  discerne  from  a  mountaine,  whither
I  ascended  to  viewe  the  citie.  The  people
are  somewhat  white,  they  weare  apparell,
and  lie  in  beds,  their  weapons  are  bowes,
they  have  Emeralds  and  other  iewels,  al-
though they  esteeme  none  so  much  as  tur-
queses  wherewith  they  adorne  the  walles  of
the  porches  of  their  houses,  and  their  ap-
parell and  vessels,  and  they  use  them  instead
of  money  through  all  the  Countrey.  Their
apparell  is  of  cotton  and  Oxe  hides,  and
this  is  their  most  commendable  and  honour-
able apparell.  They  use  vessels  of  gold  and
silver,  for  they  have  no  other  mettall,  where-
228

MARCOS  OF  NIZZA

of  there  is  greater  use  and  more  abundance
then  in  Peru,  and  they  buy  the  same  for  tur-
queses  in  the  province  of  the  Pintados,
where  there  are  sayd  to  be  mines  of  great
abundance.  Of  other  Kingdomes  I  could
not  obtaine  so  particular  instruction.  Divers
times  I  was  tempted  to  goe  thither,  because
I  knewe  I  could  but  hazard  my  life,  and
that  I  had  offered  unto  God  the  first  day
that  I  began  my  iourney :  in  the  ende  I  be-
gan to  bee  afraid,  considering  in  what  dan-
ger I  should  put  my  selfe,  and  that  if  I
should  dye,  the  knowledge  of  this  countrey
should  be  lost,  which  in  my  iudgement  is
the  greatest  and  the  best  that  hitherto  hath
beene  discovered :  and  when  I  tolde  the  chief
men,  what  a  goodly  citieCeuola  seemed  unto
mee,  they  answered  me  that  it  was  the  least
of  the  seven  cities,  and  that  Totonteac  is  the
greatest  and  best  of  them  all,  because  it  hath
so  many  houses  and  people,  and  there  is  no
ende  of  them.  Having  seene  the  disposition
and  situation  of  the  place,  I  thought  good
to  name  that  countrey  El  Nueva  reyno  de
San  Francisco:  in  which  place  I  made  a
great  heape  of  stones  by  the  helpe  of  the
Indians,  and  on  the  toppe  thereof  I  set  up
a  small  slender  crosse  because  I  wanted
meanes  to  make  a  greater,  and  sayd  that  I
set  up  that  crosse  and  heape  in  the  name  of
the  most  honourable  Lord  Don  Antonio  de
Mendoga  Viceroy  and  Captaine  generall  of
Nueva  Espanna,  for  the  Emperour  our
Lord,  in  token  of  possession,  according  to
mine  instruction.  Which  possession  I  sayd
that  I  tooke  in  that  place  of  all  the  seven
229

JOURNEY  OF  ALVAR  NUNEZ

cities,  and  of  the  Kingdomes  of  Totonteac,
of  Acus,  and  of  Marata.  Thus  I  returned
with  much  more  feare  then  victuals,  and
went  untill  I  found  the  people  which  I  had
left  behind  mee,  with  all  the  speede  that  I
could  make,  whome  I  overtooke  in  two
dayes  travell,  and  went  in  their  company  till
I  had  passed  the  desert,  where  I  was  not
made  so  much  of  as  before :  for  both  men
and  women  made  great  lamentation  for  the
people  which  were  slaine  at  Ceuola,and  with
feare  I  hastened  from  the  people  of  this
valley,  and  travelled  tenne  leagues  the  first
day,  and  so  I  went  daily  eight  or  ten  leagues,
without  staying  until  I  had  passed  the  sec-
ond desert.  And  though  I  were  in  feare,  yet
I  determined  to  go  to  the  great  plaine,
whereof  I  said  before,  that  I  had  informa-
tion, being  situate  at  the  foote  of  the  moun-
taines,  and  in  that  place  I  vnderstoode,  that
this  plaine  is  inhabited  for  many  dayes
iourney  toward  the  East,  but  I  durst  not
enter  into  it,  considering,  that  if  hereafter
wee  shoulde  inhabite  this  other  countrey  of
the  seven  cities,  and  the  kingdomes  before
mentioned,  that  then  I  might  better  discover
the  same,  without  putting  my  selfe  in  hazard,
and  leaue  it  for  this  time,  that  I  might  give
relation  of  the  things  which  I  had  now
seene.  At  the  entrance  of  this  plaine  I  sawe
but  seven  Townes  onely  of  a  reasonable  big-
nesse,  which  were  a  farre  off  in  a  lowe  valley
beeing  very  greene  and  a  most  fruitfull
soyle,  out  of  which  ranne  many  Rivers.  I
was  informed  that  there  was  much  golde  in
this  valley,  and  that  the  inhabitants  worke
230

MARCOS  OF  NIZZA

it  into  vessels  and  thinne  plates,  wherewith
they  strike  and  take  off  their  sweat,  and
that  they  are  people  that  will  not  suffer  those
of  the  other  side  of  the  plaine  to  traffique
with  them,  and  they  could  not  tell  me  the
cause  thereof.  Here  I  set  up  two  crosses,
and  tooke  possession  of  the  plaine  and  valley
in  like  sort  and  order,  as  I  did  at  other
places  before  mentioned.  And  from  thence
I  returned  on  my  voyage  with  as  much  haste
as  I  coulde  make,  untill  I  came  to  the  citie
of  Saint  Michael  in  the  province  of  Culiacan,
thinking  there  to  have  found  Francis  Vaz-
quez de  Coronado  governour  of  Nueva  Ga-
licia,  and  finding  him  not  there,  I  proceeded
on  my  iourney  till  I  came  to  the  citie  of
Compostella,  where  I  found  him.  I  write
not  here  many  other  particularities,  because
they  are  impertinent  to  this  matter :  I  only
report  that  which  I  have  seene,  and  which
was  tolde  me  concerning  the  countreys
through  which  I  travelled,  and  of  those
which  I  had  information  of.

231

to

IN

to

a

CD

-a
as

N

CD

td

o

Q)

P

O
P

> ^

4

td
2>J

cd

cd o

9  u  i

•H .p *M

cd •*

„  h  E  W
<D  0)  O  <0
3  p  O  H
I
CO 00

g

N

0)
-Q
cd <D

^,3  lO

e

ISO.
cd «H  .£

cd «H  ^

cd cd

>  Oh

C\2

2k

University  of  Toronto
Library

SUPPLIED b.  J

THE SEVEN BOOKHUNTERS

STATION 0, BOX 22  -  NEW YORK CITY
Out-of-Print Books

DO  NOT

REMOVE

THE

CARD

FROM

THIS

POCKET

Acme  Library  Card  Pocket
LOWE-MARTIN  CO.  UMTTED
