Lessons in Truth (H. Emilie Cady, 1896)
==========================================================
Cady's 1896 Lessons in Truth — the Unity classic by the movement's foremost teacher; twelve lessons that built a denomination. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

KANSASCITY.MO  PUBLIC  LIBRARY


by
H.  Emilie  Cady


IJJ  NITY  BOOKS  •  LEE'S  SUMMIT,  MO.


Lessons  in  Truth

was  first  published  in  1 894.

This  is  the  forty- fourth

printing.


u,


NITY  is  A  link  in  the  great  ed-
ucational movement  inaugurated  by
Jesus  Christ;  our  objective  is  to
discern  the  truth  in  Christianity  and
prove  it.  The  truth  that  we  teach  is
not  new,  neither  do  we  claim  spe-
cial revelations  or  discovery  of  new
religious  principles.  Our  purpose  is
to  help  and  teach  mankind  to  use
and  prove  the  eternal  Truth  taught
by  the  Master. — Charles  Fillmore,
founder  of  Unity


CONTENTS

Bondage  or  Liberty,  Which?      -  5

Statement  of  Being 19

Thinking            28

Denials       -                     43

Affirmations 58

Faith 70

Personality  and  Individuality  83

Spiritual  Understanding  97

The  Secret  Place  of  the  Most  High      -       -  112

Finding  the  Secret  Place      -       -       -     '  -  126

Spiritual  Gifts          - 143

Unity  of  the  Spirit 156

A  Study  Guide 171

CIT¥  (MO)


Bondage  or  Liberty,
Which?


* 'Finally,  brethren,  whatever  is  true,  whatever
is  honorable,  whatever  is  just,  whatever  is  pure,  what-
ever is  lovely,  whatever  is  gracious,  if  there  is  any
excellence,  if  there  is  anything  worthy  of  praise,
think  about  these  things"  (Phil.  4:8).

Every  man  believes  himself  to  be  In  bond-
age to  the  flesh  and  to  the  things  o£  the  flesh.
All  suffering  is  the  result  of  this  belief.  The
history  of  the  coming  of  the  Children  of  Israel
out  of  their  long  bondage  in  Egypt  is  descriptive
of  the  human  mind,  or  consciousness,  growing
up  out  of  the  animal  or  sense  part  of  man  and
into  the  spiritual  part.

"Then  the  LORD  said  ^speaking  to  Moses],
1  have  seen  the  affliction  of  my  people  who  are
in  Egypt,  and  have  heard  their  cry  because  of
their  taskmasters;  I  know  their  sufferings,  and


6  Lessons  in  Truth

I  have  come  down  to  deliver  them  out  of  the
hand  of  the  Egyptians,  and  to  bring  them  up
out  of  that  land  to  a  good  and  broad  land,  a
land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey'  "  (Exod.
3:7,8).

These  words  express  exactly  the  attitude  of
the  Creator  toward  His  highest  creation,  man.

Today,  and  all  the  days,  He  has  been  say-
ing to  us,  His  children:  I  have  seen  the  afflic-
tion of  my  people  who  are  in  Egypt  [darkness
of  ignorance],  and  have  heard  their  cry  be-
cause of  their  taskmasters  [sickness,  sorrow,  and
poverty];  and  I  have  [not  I  will,  but  I  am
now]  come  down  to  deliver  them  to  a  good  and
broad  land,  a  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey"
(Exod.  3:7  adapted).

Sometime,  somewhere,  every  human  being
must  come  to  himself.  Having  tired  of  eating
husks,  he  will  "arise  and  go  to  my  father"
(Luke  15: 18).
*  Tor  it  is  written,
'As  I  live,  says  the  Lord,  every  knee  shall  bow

to  me,

and  every  tongue  shall  give  praise  to  God/  "

(Rom.  14:11).

This  does  not  mean  that  God  is  a  stern  auto-
crat who  by  reason  of  supreme  power  compels
man  to  bow  to  Him.  It  is  rather  an  expression
of  the  order  of  divine  law,  the  law  of  all  love,


Bondage  or  Liberty,  Which?  7

all  good.  Man,  who  Is  at  first  living  In  the  self-
ish animal  part  of  himself ,  will  grow  up  through
various  stages  and  by  various  processes  to  the
divine  or  spiritual  understanding  wherein  he
knows  that  he  is  one  with  the  Father,  and  where-
in he  Is  free  from  all  suffering,  because  he  has
conscious  dominion  over  all  things.  Somewhere
on  this  journey  the  human  consciousness,  or  In-
tellect, comes  to  a  place  where  it  gladly  bows
to  its  spiritual  self  and  confesses  that  this  spiri-
tual self,  its  Christ,  is  highest  and  Is  Lord.  Here
and  forever  after,  not  with  sense  of  bondage,
but  with  joyful  freedom,  the  heart  cries  out:
"The  LORD  reigns''  (Psalms  93:1).  Everyone
must  sooner  or  later  come  to  this  point  of  ex-
perience.

You  and  I,  dear  reader,  have  already  come
to  ourselves.  Having  become  conscious  of  an
oppressive  bondage,  we  have  arisen  and  set  out
on  the  journey  from  Egypt  to  the  land  of  liberty,
and  now  we  cannot  turn  back  If  we  would.
Possibly  there  will  come  times  to  each  of  us,
before  we  reach  the  land  of  milk  and  honey
(the  time  of  full  deliverance  out  of  all  our
sorrows  and  troubles) ,  when  we  shall  come  into
a  deep  wilderness  or  against  a  seemingly  im-
passable Red  Sea,  when  our  courage  will  seem
to  fail.  Yet  God  says  to  each  one  of  us,  as  Moses
said  to  the  trembling  Children  of  Israel:  "Fear


8  Lessons  m  Truth

not,  stand  firm,  and  see  the  salvation  of  the
LORD,  which  he  will  work  for  you  today"  (Exod.
14:13).

Each  man  must  sooner  or  later  learn  to  stand
alone  with  his  God;  nothing  else  avails.  Noth-
ing else  will  ever  make  you  master  of  your  own
destiny.  There  is  in  your  own  Indwelling  Lord
all  the  life  and  health,  all  the  strength  and  peace
and  joy,  all  the  wisdom  and  support  that  you
can  ever  need  or  desire.  No  one  can  give  to
you  as  can  this  indwelling  Father.  He  is  the
spring  of  all  joy  and  comfort  and  power.

Hitherto  we  have  believed  that  we  were
helped  and  comforted  by  others,  that  we  re-
ceived joy  from  outside  circumstances  and  sur-
roundings; but  it  is  not  so.  All  joy  and  strength
and  good  spring  up  from  a  fountain  within
one's  own  being;  and  if  we  only  knew  this  truth
we  should  know  that,  because  God  in  us  is  the
fountain  out  of  which  springs  all  our  good,
nothing  that  anyone  does  or  says,  or  fails  to  do
or  say,  can  take  away  our  joy  and  good.

Someone  has  said,  "Our  liberty  comes  from
an  understanding  of  the  mind  and  the  thoughts
of  God  toward  us/'  Does  God  regard  man  as
His  servant,  or  as  His  child?  Most  of  us  have
believed  ourselves  not  only  the  slaves  of  cir-
cumstances, but  also,  at  the  best,  the  servants
of  the  Most  High.  Neither  belief  is  true.  It  is


"Bondage  or  Liberty,  Which?  9

time  for  us  to  awake  to  right  thoughts,  to  know
that  we  are  not  servants,  but  children,  "and  if
children,  then  heirs"  (Rom.  8:17).  Heirs  to
what?  Why,  heirs  to  all  wisdom,  so  that  we
need  not,  through  any  lack  of  wisdom,  make
mistakes;  heirs  to  all  love,  so  that  we  need
know  no  fear  or  envy  or  jealousy;  heirs  to  all
strength,  all  life,  all  power,  all  good.

The  human  intelligence  is  so  accustomed
to  the  sound  of  words  heard  from  childhood
that  often  they  convey  to  it  no  real  meaning.  Do
you  stop  to  think,  really  to  comprehend,  what
it  means  to  be  "heirs  of  God  and  fellow  heirs
with  Christ"  (Rom.  8:17)?  It  means,  "Every
man  is  the  inlet,  and  may  become  the  outlet,  of
all  there  is  in  God."  It  means  that  all  that  God
is  and  has  is  in  reality  for  us,  His  only  heirs,  if
we  only  know  how  to  claim  our  inheritance.

This  claiming  of  our  rightful  inheritance,
the  inheritance  that  God  wants  us  to  have  in
our  daily  life,  is  just  what  we  are  learning  how
to  do  in  these  simple  talks.

Paul  said  truly:  "I  mean  that  the  heir,  as
long  as  he  is  a  child,  is  no  better  than  a  slave,
though  he  is  the  owner  of  all  the  estate;  but  he
is  under  guardians  and  trustees  until  the  date
set  by  the  father.  So  with  us;  when  we  were  chil-
dren [in  knowledge},  we  were  slaves  to  the
elemental  spirits  of  the  universe.  But  when  the


10  Lessons  in  Truth

time  had  fully  come,  God  sent  forth  his  Son  .  .  .
And  because  you  are  sons,  God  has  sent  the
Spirit  of  his  Son  into  our  hearts  {or  into  our
conscious  minds],  crying,  'Abba!  Father!'  So
through  God  you  are  no  longer  a  slave  but  a
son,  and  if  a  son  then  an  heir"  (Gal.  4:1-7).

It  is  through  Christ,  the  indwelling  Christ,
that  we  are  to  receive  all  that  God  has  and  Is,  as
much  or  as  little  as  we  can  or  dare  to  claim.

No  matter  with  what  object  you  first  started
out  to  seek  Truth,  it  was  in  reality  because  it
was  God's  "fulness  of  the  time"  for  you  to  arise
and  begin  to  claim  your  inheritance.  You  were
no  longer  to  be  satisfied  with  or  under  bondage
to  the  elements  of  the  world.  Think  of  it!  God's
"fulness  of  the  time"  now  for  you  to  be  free,
to  have  dominion  over  all  things  material,  to  be
no  longer  bond  servant,  but  a  son  In  possession
of  your  inheritance!  "You  did  not  choose  me,
but  I  chose  you  and  appointed  you  that  you
should  go  and  bear  fruit"  (John  15:16),

We  have  come  to  a  place  now  where  our
search  for  Truth  must  no  longer  be  for  the  re-
wards; it  must  no  longer  be  our  seeking  a  creed
to  follow,  but  it  must  be  our  living  a  life.  In
these  simple  lessons  we  shall  take  only  the  first
steps  out  of  the  Egyptian  bondage  of  selfishness,
lust,  and  sorrow  toward  the  land  of  liberty,
where  perfect  love  and  all  good  reign.


Bondage  or  Liberty,  Which?  11

Every  right  thought  that  we  think,  our  every
unselfish  word  or  action,  is  bound  by  immutable
laws  to  be  fraught  with  good  results.  But  in  our
walk  we  must  learn  to  lose  sight  of  results  that
are  the  "loaves  and  the  fish"  (Matt.  15:36).
We  must  rather  seek  to  be  the  Truth  conscious-
ly, to  be  love,  to  be  wisdom,  to  be  life  (as  we
really  are  unconsciously),  and  let  results  take
care  of  themselves.

Every  man  must  take  time  daily  for  quiet
and  meditation.  In  daily  meditation  lies  the
secret  of  power.  No  one  can  grow  in  either
spiritual  knowledge  or  power  without  it.  Prac-
tice the  presence  of  God  just  as  you  would  prac-
tice music.  No  one  would  ever  dream  of  be-
coming a  master  in  music  except  by  spending
some  time  daily  alone  with  music.  Daily  medi-
tation alone  with  God  focuses  the  divine  pres-
ence within  us  and  brings  it  to  our  consciousness.

You  may  be  so  busy  with  the  doing,  the  out-
going of  love  to  help  others  (which  is  unselfish
and  Godlike  as  far  as  it  goes) ,  that  you  find  no
time  to  go  apart.  But  the  command,  or  rather
the  invitation,  is  "Come  away  by  yourselves  .  .  .
and  rest  a  while"  (Mark  6:31).  And  it  is  the
only  way  in  which  you  will  ever  gain  definite
knowledge,  true  wisdom,  newness  of  experi-
ence, steadiness  of  purpose,  or  power  to  meet
the  unknown,  which  must  come  in  all  daily  life.


12  Lessons  hi  Truth

Doing  is  secondary  to  being.  When  we  are  con-
sciously the  Truth,  it  will  radiate  from  us  and
accomplish  the  works  without  our  ever  running
to  and  fro.  If  you  have  no  time  for  this  quiet
meditation,  make  time,  take  time.  Watch  care-
fully, and  you  will  find  that  there  are  some
things,  even  in  the  active  unselfish  doing,  which
would  better  be  left  undone  than  that  you  should
neglect  regular  meditation.

You  will  find  that  some  time  is  spent  every
day  in  idle  conversation  with  people  who  "just
run  in  for  a  few  moments"  to  be  entertained.  If
you  can  help  such  people,  well;  if  not,  gather
yourself  together  and  do  not  waste  a  moment
idly  diffusing  and  dissipating  yourself  to  gratify
their  idleness.  You  have  no  idea  what  you  lose
by  it.

When  you  withdraw  from  the  world  for
meditation,  let  it  not  be  to  think  of  yourself  or
your  failures,  but  invariably  to  get  all  your
thoughts  centered  on  God  and  on  your  relation
to  the  Creator  and  Upholder  of  the  universe.  Let
all  the  little  annoying  cares  and  anxieties  go  for
a  while,  and  by  effort,  if  need  be,  turn  your
thoughts  away  from  them  to  some  of  the  sim-
ple words  of  the  Nazarene,  or  of  the  Psalmist.
Think  of  some  Truth  statement,  be  it  ever  so
simple.

No  person,  unless  he  has  practiced  it,  can


Bondage  or  Liberty,  Which?  13

know  how  It  quiets  all  physical  nervousness,  all
fear,  all  oversensitiveness,  all  the  little  raspings
of  everyday  life — just  this  hour  of  calm,  quiet
waiting  alone  with  God.  Never  let  It  be  an  hour
of  bondage,  but  always  one  of  restfulness.

Some,  having  realized  the  calm  and  power
that  come  of  daily  meditation,  have  made  the
mistake  of  drawing  themselves  from  the  world,
that  they  may  give  their  entire  time  to  medita-
tion. This  is  asceticism,  which  is  neither  wise
nor  profitable.

The  Nazarene,  who  is  our  noblest  type  of
the  perfect  life,  went  daily  apart  from  the
world  only  that  He  might  come  again  into  it
with  renewed  spiritual  power.  So  we  go  apart
into  the  stillness  of  divine  presence  that  we  may
come  forth  into  the  world  of  everyday  life  with
new  inspiration  and  increased  courage  and  pow-
er for  activity  and  for  overcoming.

"We  talk  to  God— that  is  prayer;  God  talks
to  us — that  is  inspiration."  We  go  apart  to  get
still,  that  new  life,  new  inspiration,  new  power
of  thought,  new  supply  from  the  fountainhead
may  flow  in;  and  then  we  come  forth  to  shed  it
on  those  around  us,  that  they,  too,  may  be  lifted
up.  Inharmony  cannot  remain  In  any  home
where  even  one  member  of  the  family  dally
practices  this  hour  of  the  presence  of  God,  so
surely  does  the  renewed  infilling  of  the  heart


14  Lessons  in  Truth

by  peace  and  harmony  result  In  the  continual
outgoing  of  peace  and  harmony  into  the  entire
surroundings.

Again,  In  this  new  way  that  we  have  un-
dertaken, this  living  the  life  of  Spirit  instead
of  the  old  self,  we  need  to  seek  always  to  have
more  and  more  of  the  Christ  Spirit  of  meekness
and  love  Incorporated  into  our  daily  life.  Meek-
ness does  not  mean  servility,  but  It  means  a
spirit  that  could  stand  before  a  Pilate  of  false
accusation  and  say  nothing.  No  one  else  Is  so
grand,  so  godlike  as  he  who,  because  he  knows
the  Truth  of  Being,  can  stand  meekly  and  un-
perturbed, before  the  false  accusations  of  the
human  mind.  "Thy  help  made  me  great"  (II
Sam.  22:36).

We  must  forgive  as  we  would  be  forgiven.
To  forgive  does  not  simply  mean  to  arrive  at  a
place  of  indifference  to  those  who  do  personal
injury  to  us;  It  means  far  more  than  this.  To  for-
give is  to  give  for — to  give  some  actual,  definite
good  in  return  for  evil  given.  One  may  say:  "I
have  no  one  to  forgive;  I  have  not  a  personal
enemy  In  the  world."  And  yet  If,  under  any  cir-
cumstances, any  kind  of  a  "served-him-right"
thought  springs  up  within  you  over  anything
that  any  of  God's  children  may  do  or  suffer,  you
have  not  yet  learned  how  to  forgive.

The  very  pain  that  you  suffer,  the  very  fail-


Bondage  or  Liberty,  Which?  15

ure  to  demonstrate  over  some  matter  that  touches
your  own  life  deeply,  may  rest  upon  just  this
spirit  of  unforgiveness  that  you  harbor  toward
the  world  in  general  Put  it  away  with  resolu-
tion.

Do  not  be  under  bondage  to  false  beliefs
about  your  circumstances  or  environment.  No
matter  how  evil  circumstances  may  appear,  or
how  much  it  may  seem  that  some  other  per-
sonality is  at  the  foundation  of  your  sorrow  or
trouble,  God,  good,  good  alone,  is  really  there
when  you  call  His  law  into  expression.

If  we  have  the  courage  to  persist  in  seeing
only  God  in  it  all,  even  "the  wrath  of  men"
(Psalms  76:10)  shall  be  invariably  turned  to
our  advantage.  Joseph,  in  speaking  of  the  action
of  his  brethren  in  selling  him  into  slavery,  said,
"As  for  you,  you  meant  evil  against  me;  but
God  meant  it  for  good"  (Gen.  50:20).  To
them  that  love  God,  "all  things  work  together
for  good/'  or  to  them  who  recognize  only  God.
All  things!  The  very  circumstances  in  your  life
that  seem  heartbreaking  evils  will  turn  to  joy
before  your  very  eyes  if  you  will  steadfastly  re-
fuse to  see  anything  but  God  in  them.

It  is  perfectly  natural  for  the  human  mind
to  seek  to  escape  from  its  troubles  by  running
away  from  present  environments,  or  by  plan-
ning some  change  on  the  material  plane.  Such


1(5  Lessons  in  Truth

methods  of  escape  are  absolutely  vain  and  fool-
ish. "Vain  is  the  help  of  man"  (Psalms  60:11).

There  is  no  permanent  or  real  outward  way
of  escape  from  miseries  or  circumstances;  all
help  must  come  from  within.

The  words,  "God  is  my  defense  and  deliver-
ance" held  in  the  silence  until  they  become
part  of  your  very  being,  will  deliver  you  out  of
the  hands  and  the  arguments  of  the  keenest
lawyer  in  the  world.

The  real  inner  consciousness  that  "the  LORD
is  my  shepherd,  I  shall  not  want"  (Psalms  23:1)
will  supply  all  wants  more  surely  and  far  more
liberally  than  can  any  human  hand.

The  ultimate  aim  of  every  man  should  be
to  come  into  the  consciousness  of  an  indwell-
ing God,  and  then,  in  all  external  matters,  to
affirm  deliverance  through  and  by  this  divine
One.  There  should  not  be  a  running  to  and  fro,
making  human  efforts  to  aid  the  Divine,  but  a
calm,  restful,  unwavering  trust  in  All-Wisdom
and  All-Power  within  one  as  able  to  accomplish
the  thing  desired.

Victory  must  be  won  in  the  silence  of  your
own  being  first,  and  then  you  need  take  no  part
in  the  outer  demonstration  of  relief  from  con-
ditions. The  very  walls  of  Jericho  that  keep
you  from  your  desire  must  fall  before  you.

The  Psalmist  said:


Bondage  or  Liberty,  Which?  17

"I  lift  up  my  eyes  to  the  hills  [or  to  the  highest

One].

From  whence  does  my  help  come?
My  help  comes  from  the  LORD,
who  made  heaven  and  earth.
The  LORD  [your  indwelling  Lord]  will  keep

you  from  all  evil;  .  .  .
The  LORD  will  keep

your  going  out  and  your  coming  in
from  this  time  forth  and  for  evermore"
(Psalms  121:  1,2,7,8).
Oh,  if  we  could  only  realize  that  this  mighty
power  to  save  and  to  perfect,  to  deliver  and  to
make  alive,  lives  forever  within  us,  and  so  cease
now  and  forever  looking  away  to  others!

There  is  but  one  way  to  obtain  this  full  reali-
2ation — the  way  of  the  Christ.  "I  am  the  way,
and  the  truth,  and  the  life"  (John  14:6),  spoke
the  Christ  through  the  lips  of  the  Nazarene.

Your  holding  to  the  words,  "Christ  is  the
way/'  when  you  are  perplexed  and  confused
and  can  see  no  way  of  escape,  will  invariably
open  a  way  of  complete  deliverance.

Commentary

When  watching  an  evening  sunset,  has  it  ever
occurred  to  you  that  someone  around  the  world
might  be  thrilling  to  the  sight  of  a  sunrise  at  that
very  same  moment?  Life,  like  the  sun,  becomes  to  us


18  Lessons  in  Truth

what  we  see  It  as  being.  Looking  westward  (to  ap-
pearances) ,  life  Is  a  deteriorating  experience  of  us-
ing, losing,  and  aging.  Looking  eastward  (to  God
within),  life  Is  a  dynamic  experience  of  new  life,
new  substance,  and  new  opportunities.

"Choose  this  day  whom  you  will  serve."  You
can  have  bondage  or  liberty,  sickness  or  health,  lack
or  abundance.  You  always  have  a  choice — not  to  set
things  right,  but  to  see  them  rightly.  Turn  about  and
face  the  dawn.  Look  within  and  "inherit  the  king-
dom/7 Know  the  Truth  and  be  free!

Eric  Etittenvonh


of


WHO  AND  WHAT  GOD  IS

WHO  AND  WHAT  MAN  IS

"When  Jesus  was  talking  with  the  Samaritan,
woman  at  the  well,  He  said  to  her,  "God  is
spirit,  and  those  who  worship  him  must  wor-
ship in  spirit  and  truth/'  (John  4:24  A.S.V.
reads,  "God  is  a  Spirit,"  but  the  marginal  note
is,  "God  is  spirit,"  and  some  other  versions
render  this  passage,  "God  is  Spirit")  To  say  "a
Spirit"  would  be  to  imply  the  existence  of  more
than  one  Spirit.  Jesus,  in  His  statement,  did  not
imply  this.

19


20  Lessons  m  Truth

Webster  in  his  definition  of  Spirit  says:  "In
the  abstract,  life  or  consciousness  viewed  as  an
independent  type  of  existence.  One  manifesta-
tion of  the  divine  nature;  the  Holy  Spirit."

God,  then,  is  not,  as  many  of  us  have  been
taught  to  believe,  a  big  personage  or  man  re-
siding somewhere  in  a  beautiful  region  in  the
sky,  called  "heaven,"  where  good  people  go
when  they  die,  and  see  Him  clothed  in  ineffable
glory;  nor  is  He  a  stern,  angry  judge  only  await-
ing opportunity  somewhere  to  punish  bad  peo-
ple who  have  failed  to  live  a  perfect  life  here.

God  is  Spirit,  or  the  creative  energy  that  is
the  cause  of  all  visible  things.  God  as  Spirit  is
the  invisible  life  and  intelligence  underlying  all
physical  things.  There  could  be  no  body,  or
visible  part,  to  anything  unless  there  were  first
Spirit  as  creative  cause.

God  is  not  a  being  or  person  having  life,  in-
telligence, love,  power.  God  is  that  invisible,
intangible  (but  very  real)  something  we  call
life.  God  is  perfect  love  and  infinite  power.
God  is  the  total  of  these,  the  total  of  all  good,
whether  manifested  or  unexpressed.

There  is  but  one  God  in  the  universe,  but
one  source  of  all  the  different  forms  of  life  or
intelligence  that  we  see,  whether  they  be  men,
animals,  trees,  or  rocks.

God  is  Spirit.  We  cannot  see  Spirit  with


Statement  of  Being  21

these  fleshly  eyes;  but  when  we  clothe  ourselves
with  the  spiritual  body,  then  Spirit  is  visible  or
manifest  and  we  recognize  it.  You  do  not  see
the  living,  thinking  "me"  when  you  look  at  my
body.  You  see  only  the  form  which  I  am  mani-
festing.

God  is  love.  We  cannot  see  love,  nor  grasp
any  comprehension  of  what  love  is,  except  as
love  is  clothed  with  a  form.  All  the  love  in  the
universe  is  God.  The  love  between  husband  and
wife,  between  parents  and  children,  is  just  the
least  little  bit  of  God,  as  pushed  forth  through
visible  form  into  manifestation.  A  mother's
love,  so  infinitely  tender,  so  unfailing,  Is  God's
love,  only  manifested  in  greater  degree  by  the
mother.

God  is  wisdom  and  intelligence.  All  the  wis-
dom and  intelligence  that  we  see  in  the  universe
is  God — wisdom  projected  through  a  visible
form.  To  educate  (from  educare,  to  lead  forth)
never  means  to  force  into  from  the  outside,  but
always  means  to  draw  out  from  within  some-
thing already  existing  there.  God  as  infinite  wis-
dom lies  within  every  human  being,  only  wait-
ing to  be  led  forth  into  manifestation.  This  is
true  education.

Heretofore  we  have  sought  knowledge  and
help  from  outside  sources,  not  knowing  that  the
source  of  all  knowledge,  the  very  Spirit  of  truth,


22  Lessons  in  Truth

Is  lying  latent  within  each  one  of  us,  waiting  to
be  called  on  to  teach  us  the  truth  about  all
things — most  marvelous  of  teachers,  and  every-
where present,  without  money  or  price!

God  is  power.  Not  simply  God  has  power,
but  God  is  power.  In  other  words,  all  the  power
there  is  to  do  anything  Is  God.  God,  the  source
of  our  existence  every  moment,  is  not  simply
omnipotent  (all-powerful) ;  He  Is  omnipotence
(all  power).  He  is  not  alone  omniscient  (all-
knowing)  ;  He  Is  omniscience  (all  knowledge).
He  Is  not  only  omnipresent,  but  more— omni-
presence. God  Is  not  a  being  having  qualities,
but  He  Is  the  good  Itself.  Everything  you  can
think  of  that  is  good,  when  in  its  absolute  per-
fection, goes  to  make  up  that  invisible  Being
we  call  God.

God,  then,  Is  the  substance  (from  sub,  un-
der, and  stare,  to  stand) ,  or  the  real  thing  stand-
ing under  every  visible  form  of  life,  love,  intelli-
gence, or  power.  Each  rock,  tree,  animal,  every
visible  thing,  is  a  manifestation  of  the  one  Spirit
— God — differing  only  in  degree  of  manifesta-
tion; and  each  of  the  numberless  modes  of  mani-
festation or  individualities,  however  Insignifi-
cant, contains  the  whole.

One  drop  of  water  taken  from  the  ocean  is
just  as  perfect  ocean  water  as  the  whole  great
body.  The  constituent  elements  of  water  are


Statement  of  Being  23

exactly  the  same,  and  they  are  combined  in  pre-
cisely the  same  ratio  or  perfect  relation  to  each
other,  whether  we  consider  one  drop,  a  pailful,
a  barreiful,  or  the  entire  ocean  out  of  which  the
lesser  quantities  are  taken.  Each  Is  complete  in
itself;  they  differ  only  in  quantity  or  degree.
Each  contains  the  whole;  and  yet  no  one  would
make  the  mistake  of  supposing  from  this  state-
ment that  each  drop  is  the  entire  ocean.

So  we  say  that  each  Individual  manifestation
of  God  contains  the  whole;  not  for  a  moment
meaning  that  each  individual  is  God  In  His
entirety,  so  to  speak,  but  that  each  is  God  come
forth  (shall  I  say?)  In  different  quantity  or
degree.

Man  Is  the  last  and  highest  manifestation
of  divine  energy,  the  fullest  and  most  complete
expression  (or  pressing  out)  of  God.  To  man,
therefore,  is  given  dominion  over  all  other  mani-
festations.

God  is  not  only  the  creative  cause  of  every
visible  form  of  Intelligence  and  life  at  its  com-
mencement, but  each  moment  throughout  Its
existence  He  lives  within  every  created  thing  as
the  life,  the  ever-renewing,  re-creating,  upbuild-
ing cause  of  it.  He  never  is  and  never  can  be  for
a  moment  separated  from  His  creations.  Then
how  can  even  a  sparrow  fall  to  the  ground  with-
out His  knowledge?  And  "y°u  are  of  more


24  Lessons  in  Truth

value  than  many  sparrows"    (Matt.    10:31).

God  is.  Man  exists  (from  ex,  out  of,  and
sister e,  to  stand  forth) .  Man  stands  forth  out  of
God.

Man  is  a  threefold  being,  made  up  of  Spirit,
soul,  and  body.  Spirit,  our  innermost,  real  be-
ing, the  absolute  part  of  us,  the  /  of  us,  has  never
changed,  though  our  thoughts  and  our  circum-
stances may  have  changed  hundreds  of  times.
This  part  of  us  is  a  standing  forth  of  God  into
visibility.  It  is  the  Father  in  us.  At  this  central
part  of  his  being  every  person  can  say,  "I  and
the  Father  are  one"  (John  10:30),  and  speak
absolute  Truth.

Mortal  mind — that  which  Paul  calls  "the
mind  of  the  flesh" — Is  the  consciousness  of  error.

The  great  whole  of  as  yet  unmanifested
good,  or  God,  from  whom  we  are  projections
or  offspring,  in  whom  "we  live  and  move  and
have  our  being"  (Acts  17:28)  continually,  is  to
me  the  Father — our  Father;  "and  you  are  all
brethren"  (Matt.  23:8),  because  all  are  mani-
festations of  one  and  the  same  Spirit.  Jesus,
recognizing  this,  said:  "Call  no  man  your  father
on  earth,  for  you  have  one  Father,  who  Is  in
heaven"  (Matt.  23:9) .  As  soon  as  we  recognize
our  true  relationship  to  all  men,  we  at  once  slip
out  of  our  narrow,  personal  loves,  our  "me  and
mine,"  into  the  universal  love  that  takes  in  all


Statement  of  Being  25

the  world,  joyfully  exclaiming:  "Who  Is  my
mother,  and  who  are  my  brothers?  And  stretch-
Ing  out  his  hand  toward  his  disciples,  he  said,
'Here  are  my  mother  and  my  brothers'  "  (Matt.
12:48,49).

Many  have  thought  of  God  as  a  personal
being.  The  statement  that  God  is  Principle  chills
them,  and  in  terror  they  cry  out,  "They  have
taken  away  my  Lord,  and  I  do  not  know  where
they  have  laid  him"  (John  20: 13).

Broader  and  more  learned  minds  are  always
cramped  by  the  thought  of  God  as  a  person,  for
personality  limits  to  place  and  time.

God  is  the  name  we  give  to  that  unchange-
able, inexorable  principle  at  the  source  of  all
existence.  To  the  individual  consciousness  God
takes  on  personality,  but  as  the  creative  under-
lying cause  of  all  things,  He  is  principle,  im-
personal; as  expressed  in  each  Individual,  He
becomes  personal  to  that  one — a  personal,  lov-
ing, all-forgiving  Father-Mother.  All  that  we
can  ever  need  or  desire  is  the  infinite  Father-
Principle,  the  great  reservoir  of  unexpressed
good.  There  is  no  limit  to  the  Source  of  our
being,  nor  to  His  willingness  to  manifest  more
of  Himself  through  us,  when  we  are  willing  to
do  His  will.

Hitherto  we  have  turned  our  heart  and  ef-
forts toward  the  external  for  fulfillment  of  our


26  Lessons  in  Truth

desires  and  for  satisfaction,  and  we  have  been
grievously  disappointed.  The  hunger  of  every-
one for  satisfaction  is  only  the  cry  of  the  home-
sick child  for  its  Father-Mother  God.  It  is  only
the  Spirit's  desire  in  us  to  come  forth  into  our
consciousness  as  more  and  more  perfection,  un-
til we  shall  have  become  fully  conscious  of  our
oneness  with  all-perfection.  Man  never  has  been
and  never  can  be  satisfied  with  anything  less.

We  all  have  direct  access  through  the  Father
In  us — the  central  "I"  of  our  being— to  the
great  whole  of  life,  love,  wisdom,  power,  which
is  God.  What  we  now  want  to  know  Is  how  to
receive  more  from  the  f ountainhead  and  to  make
more  and  more  of  God  (which  is  but  another
name  for  all-good)  manifest  in  our  daily  life.

There  is  but  one  Source  of  being.  This
Source  is  the  living  fountain  of  all  good,  be  It
life,  love,  wisdom,  power — the  Giver  of  all
good  gifts.  This  Source  and  you  are  connected,
every  moment  of  your  existence.  You  have  pow-
er to  draw  on  this  Source  for  all  of  good  you
are,  or  ever  will  be,  capable  of  desiring.

Commentary

In  this  chapter  the  author  reveals  man  to  him-
self. In  so  doing,  she  gives  profound  insight  into  the
true  nature  of  God.  She  reminds  us  that  "God  is
Spirit/'  but  she  also  reveals  the  Important  Truth


Statement  of  Being  27

that  this  same  divine  Spirit  is  the  motivating  spirit
of  man.

In  this  chapter  we  are  told  about  the  nature  of
this  indwelling  Spirit  in  man.  It  is  the  spirit  of  love,
so  that  the  expression  of  divine  love  through  man
gives  an  immortal  dimension  to  his  capacity  to  love.
It  is  the  spirit  of  wisdom,  enabling  the  mind  of  man
to  dispense  the  "inspiration  of  the  Almighty/'  It  Is
the  spirit  of  power,  giving  man  the  substance  with
which  to  meet  the  challenges  of  life  with  ultimate
success.

"Statement  of  Being"  offers  the  reader  an  out-
line of  the  basic  truths  about  the  character  of  God
and  man's  relationship  to  God,  as  taught  by  Jesus
Christ.

'William  L.  Fischer


Thinking


We  learned  in  the  second  chapter  that  the
real  substance  within  everything  we  see  is  God;
that  all  things  are  one  and  the  same  Spirit  in
different  degrees  of  manifestation;  that  all  the
various  forms  of  life  are  just  the  same  as  one
life  come  forth  out  of  the  invisible  into  visible
forms;  that  all  the  intelligence  and  all  the  wis-
dom in  the  world  are  God  as  wisdom  in  various
degrees  of  manifestation;  that  all  the  love  which
people  feel  and  express  toward  others  is  just  a
little,  so  to  speak,  of  God  as  love  come  into
visibility  through  the  human  form.

When  we  say  there  is  but  one  Mind  in  the
entire  universe,  and  that  this  Mind  is  God,  some
persons,  having  followed  understandingly  the

28


Thinking  29

second  lesson,  and  recognized  God  as  the  one
Life,  one  Spirit.,  one  Power,  pushing  Him-
self out  into  various  degrees  of  manifestation
through  people  and  things,  will  at  once  say,
"Yes,  that  is  all  plain."

But  someone  else  will  say,  "If  all  the  mind
there  is,  is  God,  then  how  can  I  think  wrong
thoughts,  or  have  any  but  God  thoughts?"

The  connection  between  universal  Mind  and
our  own  individual  minds  is  one  of  the  most
difficult  things  to  put  into  words,  but  when  it
once  dawns  on  one,  it  is  easily  seen.

There  is  in  reality  only  one  Mind  (or  Spirit,
which  is  life,  intelligence,  and  so  forth)  in  the
universe;  and  yet  there  is  a  sense  in  which  we
are  individual,  or  separate,  a  sense  in  which  we
are  free  wills  and  not  puppets.

Man  is  made  up  of  Spirit,  soul,  and  body.
Spirit  is  the  central  unchanging  "I"  of  us,  the
part  that  since  infancy  has  never  changed,  and
to  all  eternity  never  will  change.  That  which
some  persons  call  "mortal  mind"  is  the  region
of  the  intellect  where  we  do  conscious  thinking
and  are  free  wills.  This  part  of  our  being  is  in
constant  process  of  changing.

In  our  outspringing  from  God  into  the  mate-
rial world,  Spirit  is  inner — one  with  God;  soul
is  the  clothing,  as  it  were,  of  the  Spirit;  body
is  the  external  clothing  of  the  soul.  Yet  all  are


30  Lessons  m  Truth

in  reality  one,  the  composite  man — as  steam,
water,  and  ice  are  one,  only  in  different  degrees
of  condensation.  In  thinking  of  ourselves,  we
must  not  separate  Spirit,  soul,  and  body,  but
rather  hold  all  as  one,  if  we  would  be  strong  and
powerful.  Man  originally  lived  consciously  in
the  spiritual  part  of  himself.  He  fell  by  descend-
ing in  his  consciousness  to  the  external  or  more
material  part  of  himself.

"Mortal  mind,"  the  term  so  much  used  and
so  distracting  to  many,  is  the  error  conscious-
ness, which  gathers  its  Information  from  the  out-
side world  through  the  five  senses.  It  Is  what
Paul  calls  "the  mind  of  the  flesh"  In  contradis-
tinction to  spiritual  mind;  and  he  flatly  says:
"The  mind  of  the  flesh  [believing  what  the
carnal  mind  says}  Is  death  [sorrow,  trouble,  sick-
ness]; but  the  mind  of  the  Spirit  [ability  to  still
the  carnal  mind  and  let  the  Spirit  speak  within
us]  is  life  and  peace/'

The  Spirit  within  you  is  Divine  Mind,  the
real  mind.  "Without  It  the  human  mind  would
disappear,  just  as  a  shadow  disappears  when
the  real  thing  that  casts  it  is  removed.

If  you  find  this  subject  of  human  mind
and  universal  Mind  puzzling  to  you,  do  not
worry  over  it.  Just  drop  it  for  a  time,  and
as  you  go  on  with  the  lessons,  you  will  find
that  some  day  an  understanding  of  it  will


Thinking  31

flash  suddenly  upon  you  with  perfect  clearness.

There  are  today  two  classes  of  people,  so  far
as  mentality  goes,  who  are  seeking  deliverance
out  of  sickness,  trouble,  and  unhapplness,  by
spiritual  means.  One  class  requires  that  every
statement  made  be  proved  by  the  most  elaborate
and  logical  argument,  before  It  can  or  will  be
received.  The  other  class  is  willing  at  once  to
"become  like  children"  (Matt  18:3)  and  just
be  taught  how  to  take  the  first  steps  toward
pure  understanding  (or  knowledge  of  Truth
as  God  sees  it),  and  then  receives  the  light  by
direct  revelation  from  the  All-Good.  Both  are
seeking  and  eventually  both  will  reach  the  same
goal,  and  neither  one  should  be  unduly  con-
demned.

If  you  are  one  who  seeks  and  expects  to  get
any  realizing  knowledge  of  spiritual  things
through  argument  or  reasoning,  no  matter  how
scholarly  your  attainments  or  how  great  you  are
in  worldly  wisdom,  you  are  a  failure  In  spiritual
understanding.  You  are  attempting  an  utter  Im-
possibility— that  of  crowding  the  Infinite  into
the  quart  measure  of  your  own  intellectual  ca-
pacity.

"The  unsplrltual  man  does  not  receive  the
gifts  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  for  they  are  folly  to
him,  and  he  is  not  able  to  understand  them  be-
cause they  are  spiritually  discerned7'  (I  Cor.


32  Lessons  in  Truth

2:14).  Eventually  you  will  find  that  you  are
only  beating  around  on  the  outside  of  the
"kingdom  of  heaven/'  though  in  close  proximity
to  it,  and  you  will  then  become  willing  to  let
your  intellect  take  the  place  of  the  little  child,
without  which  no  man  can  enter  in.

"Eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither
have  entered  into  the  heart  of  man,  the  things
which  God  hath  [not  wilf\  prepared  for  them
that  love  him.

"But  God  hath  revealed  them  unto  us  by
his  Spirit.  .  .  .

"For  who  among  men  knoweth  the  things
of  a  man,  save  the  spirit  of  the  man,  which  is
in  him?  even  so  the  things  of  God  none  know-
eth, save  the  Spirit  of  God"  (1  Cor.  2:9-11).

For  all  those  who  must  wade  through  months
and  perhaps  years  of  this  purely  intellectual  or
mental  process,  there  are  today  many  books  to
help,  and  many  teachers  of  metaphysics  who
are  doing  noble  and  praiseworthy  work  in  pilot-
ing these  earnest  seekers  after  Truth  and  satis-
faction. To  them  we  cry:  "All  speed!"

But  we  believe  with  Paul  that  "the  foolish-
ness of  God  is  wiser  than  men"  (I  Cor.  1:25),
and  that  each  man  has  direct  access  to  all  there
is  in  God.  We  are  writing  for  the  'little  chil-
dren" who,  without  question  or  discussion,  are
willing  at  once  to  accept  and  to  try  a  few  plain,


Thinking  33

simple  rules,  such  as  Jesus  taught  the  common
people,  who  '  'heard  him  gladly" — rules  by
which  they  can  find  the  Christ  (or  the  Divine)
within  themselves,  that  through  it  each  man  for
himself  may  work  out  his  own  salvation  from
all  his  troubles.

In  other  words,  there  is  a  short  cut  to  the
top  of  the  hill;  and  while  there  is  a  good  but
long,  roundabout  road  for  those  who  need  it,
we  prefer  the  less  laborious  means  of  attaining
the  same  end — by  seeking  directly  the  Spirit  of
truth  promised  to  dwell  in  us  and  to  lead  us
into  all  Truth.  My  advice  is:  If  you  want  to
make  rapid  progress  in  growth  toward  spiritual
understanding,  stop  reading  many  books.  They
only  give  you  someone's  opinion  about  Truth,
or  a  sort  of  history  of  the  author's  experience
in  seeking  Truth.  What  you  want  is  revelation
of  Truth  in  your  own  soul,  and  that  will  never
come  through  the  reading  of  many  books.

Seek  light  from  the  Spirit  of  truth  within
you.  Go  alone.  Think  alone.  Seek  light  alone,
and  if  it  does  not  come  at  once,  do  not  be  dis-
couraged and  run  off  to  someone  else  to  get
light;  for,  as  we  said  before,  by  so  doing  you
get  only  the  opinion  of  the  intellect,  and  may
be  then  farther  away  from  the  Truth  you  are
seeking  than  ever  before;  for  the  mortal  mind
may  make  false  reports.


34  Lessons  in  Truth

The  very  Spirit  of  truth  Is  at  your  call  "The
anointing  which  you  received  from  him  abides
In  you"  (I  John  2:27),  Seek  It  Wait  patiently
for  it  to  "guide  you  into  all  the  truth"  (John
16:13)  about  all  things.

"Have  this  mind  among  yourselves,  which
you  have  In  Christ  Jesus"  (Phil.  2:5).  This  Is
the  universal  Mind,  which  makes  no  mistakes.
Still  the  Intellect  for  the  time  being,  and  let
universal  Mind  speak  to  you;  and  when  it
speaks,  though  It  be  but  a  "still  small  voice"
(I  Kings  19:12),  you  will  know  that  what  it  says
is  Truth.

How  will  you  know?  You  will  know  just
as  you  know  that  you  are  alive.  All  the  argu-
ment in  the  world  to  convince  you  against  Truth
that  comes  to  you  through  direct  revelation  will
fall  flat  and  harmless  at  your  side.  And  the  Truth
that  you  know,  not  simply  believe,  you  can  use
to  help  others.  That  which  comes  forth  through
your  spirit  will  reach  the  very  innermost  spirit
of  him  to  whom  you  speak.

What  is  born  from  the  outside,  or  intellec-
tual perception,  reaches  only  the  intellect  of  him
you  would  help.

The  intellect  that  is  servant  to  the  real  Mind,
and  when  servant  (but  not  when  master)  is
good,  loves  to  argue;  but  when  its  information
is  based  on  the  evidence  of  the  senses  and  not


Thinking  33

on  the  true  thoughts  of  the  Divine  Mind,  it  is
very  fallible  and  full  of  error.

Intellect  argues.  Spirit  takes  the  deep  things
of  God  and  reveals  Truth  to  man.  One  may  be
true;  the  other  always  is  true.  Spirit  does  not  give
opinions  about  Truth;  it  is  Truth,  and  it  reveals
itself.

Someone  has  truly  said  that  the  merest  child
who  has  learned  from  the  depths  of  his  being
to  say,  "Our  Father/'  is  infinitely  greater  than  the
most  intellectual  man  who  has  not  yet  learned  it.
Paul  was  a  man  of  gigantic  intellect,  learned  in
all  the  law,  a  Pharisee  of  the  Pharisees;  but  after
he  was  spiritually  illumined  he  wrote,  'Tor  the
foolishness  of  God  is  wiser  than  men,  and  the
weakness  of  God  is  stronger  than  men"  (I  Cor.
1:25).

It  does  make  a  great  difference  in  our  daily
lives  what  we  think  about  God,  about  ourselves,
about  our  neighbors.  Heretofore,  through  igno-
rance of  our  real  selves  and  of  the  results  of  our
thinking,  we  have  let  our  thoughts  flow  at  ran-
dom. Our  minds  have  been  turned  toward  the
external  of  our  being,  and  nearly  all  our  infor-
mation has  been  gotten  through  our  five  senses.
We  have  thought  wrong  because  misinformed
by  these  senses,  and  our  troubles  and  sorrows  are
the  results  of  our  wrong  thinking.

"But,"  says  someone,  "I  do  not  see  how  my


3(5  Lessons  in  Truth

thinking  evil  or  wrong  thoughts  about  God,  or
about  anyone,,  can  make  me  sick  or  my  husband
lose  his  position/'

Well,  I  will  not  just  now  try  to  explain  all
the  steps  by  which  bad  results  follow  false  think-
ing, but  I  will  just  ask  you  to  try  thinking  true,
right  thoughts  awhile,  and  see  what  the  result
will  be.

Take  the  thought,  "God  loves  me!'  Think
these  words  over  and  over  continually  for  a  few
days,  trying  to  realize  that  they  are  true,  and
see  what  the  effect  will  be  on  your  body  and
circumstances.

First,  you  get  a  new  exhilaration  of  mind,
with  a  great  desire  and  a  sense  of  power  to  please
God;  then  a  quicker,  better  circulation  of  blood,
with  sense  of  a  pleasant  warmth  in  the  body,
followed  by  better  digestion.  Later,  as  Truth
flows  out  through  your  being  into  your  surround-
ings, everybody  will  begin  to  manifest  a  new
love  for  you  without  your  knowing  why;  and
finally,  circumstances  will  begin  to  change  and
fall  into  harmony  with  your  desires,  instead  of
being  adverse  to  them.

Everyone  knows  how  strong  thoughts  of
fear  or  grief  have  turned  hair  white  in  a  few
hours;  how  great  fear  makes  the  heart  beat  so
rapidly  as  to  seem  about  to  "jump  out  of  the
body,"  this  result  not  being  at  all  dependent


Thinking  37

on  whether  there  be  any  real  cause  of  fear  or
whether  it  be  a  purely  Imaginary  cause.  Just  so,
strong  negative  thoughts  may  render  the  blood
acid,  causing  rheumatism.  Bearing  mental  bur-
dens makes  more  stooped  shoulders  than  does
bearing  heavy  material  loads.  Believing  that
God  regards  us  as  "miserable  sinners,"  that  He
Is  continually  watching  us  and  our  failures  with
disapproval,  brings  utter  discouragement  and
a  sort  of  half-paralyzed  condition  of  mind  and
body,  which  means  failure  In  all  our  under-
takings.

Is  it  difficult  for  you  to  understand  why,  if
God  lives  in  us  all  the  time,  He  does  not  keep
our  thoughts  right  instead  of  permitting  us
through  ignorance  to  drift  into  wrong  thoughts,
and  so  bring  trouble  on  ourselves?

Well,  we  are  not  automatons.  Your  child
will  never  learn  to  walk  alone  if  you  always  do
his  walking.  Because  you  recognize  that  the  only
way  for  him  to  be  strong,  self-reliant  in  all
things — in  other  words,  to  become  a  man — is
to  throw  him  on  himself,  and  let  him,  through
experience,  come  to  a  knowledge  of  things  for
himself,  you  are  not  willing  to  make  a  mere
puppet  of  him  by  taking  the  steps  for  him,  even
though  you  know  that  he  will  fall  down  many
times  and  give  himself  severe  bumps  in  his  on-
going toward  perfect  physical  manhood.


38  Lessons  in  Truth

We  are  in  process  of  growth  into  the  high-
est spiritual  manhood  and  womanhood.  We  get
many  falls  and  bumps  on  the  way,  but  only
through  these,  not  necessarily  by  them,  can  our
growth  proceed.  Father  and  mother,  no  matter
how  strong  or  deep  their  love,  cannot  grow  for
their  children;  nor  can  God,  who  is  Omnipo-
tence, at  the  center  of  our  being,  grow  spiritually
for  us  without  making  of  us  automatons  instead
of  individuals.

If  you  keep  your  thoughts  turned  toward  the
external  of  yourself,  or  of  others,  you  will  see
only  the  things  that  are  not  real,  but  temporal,
and  which  pass  away.  All  the  faults,  failures,  or
lacks  in  people  or  circumstances  will  seem  very
real  to  you,  and  you  will  be  unhappy  and  sick.

If  you  turn  your  thoughts  away  from  the
external  toward  the  spiritual,  and  let  them  dwell
on  the  good  in  yourself  and  in  others,  all  the  ap-
parent evil  will  first  drop  out  of  your  thoughts
and  then  out  of  your  life.  Paul  understood  this
when  he  wrote  to  the  Philippians:  "Finally,
brethren,  whatever  is  true,  whatever  is  honor-
able, whatever  is  just,  whatever  is  pure,  what-
ever is  lovely,  whatever  is  gracious,  if  there  is
any  excellence,  if  there  is  anything  worthy  of
praise,  think  about  these  things"  (Phil.  4:8).

We  all  can  learn  how  to  turn  the  conscious
mind  toward  universal  Mind,  or  Spirit,  within


Thinking  39

us.  We  can,  by  practice,  learn  how  to  make  this
everyday,  topsy-turvy,  "mind  of  the  flesh"  be
still  and  let  the  mind  that  is  God  (all- wisdom,
all-love)  think  in  us  and  out  through  us.

Imagine,  if  you  will,  a  great  reservoir,  out  of
which  lead  innumerable  small  rivulets  or  chan-
nels. At  its  farther  end  each  channel  opens  out
into  a  small  fountain.  This  fountain  is  not  only
being  continually  filled  and  replenished  from
the  reservoir  but  is  itself  a  radiating  center
whence  it  gives  out  in  all  directions  that  which
it  receives,  so  that  all  who  come  within  its  radius
are  refreshed  and  blessed.

This  is  our  relation  to  God.  Each  one  of  us
is  a  radiating  center.  Each  one,  no  matter  how
small  or  ignorant,  is  the  little  fountain  at  the
far  end  of  a  channel,  the  other  end  of  which
leads  out  from  all  there  is  in  God.  This  fountain
represents  the  individuality,  as  separate  from  the
great  reservoir — God — and  yet  as  one  with  Him
in  that  we  are  constantly  fed  and  renewed  from
Him,  and  without  Him  we  are  nothing.

Each  of  us,  no  matter  how  insignificant  he
may  be  in  the  world,  may  receive  from  God
unlimited  good  of  whatever  kind  he  desires,
and  radiate  it  to  all  about  him.  But  remember,
he  must  radiate  if  he  would  receive  more.  Stag-
nation is  death.

Oh,  I  want  the  simplest  mind  to  grasp  the


40  Lessons  in  Truth

Idea  that  the  very  wisdom  of  God — the  love,  the
life,  and  the  power  of  God  are  ready  and  wait-
Ing  with  longing  impulse  to  flow  out  through  us
in  unlimited  degree!  When  It  flows  in  unusual
degree  through  the  Intellect  of  a  certain  person
men  exclaim,  "What  a  wonderful  mind!"  When
It  flows  through  the  hearts  of  men  it  is  the  love
that  melts  all  bitterness,  envy,  selfishness,  jeal-
ousy, before  it;  when  It  flows  through  their
bodies  as  life,  no  disease  can  withstand  its  on-
ward march.

We  do  not  have  to  beseech  God  any  more
than  we  have  to  beseech  the  sun  to  shine.  The
sun  shines  because  It  is  a  law  of  its  being  to
shine,  and  it  cannot  help  it.  No  more  can  God
help  pouring  into  us  unlimited  wisdom,  life,
power,  all  good,  because  to  give  is  a  law  of  His
being.  Nothing  can  hinder  Him  except  our  own
lack  of  understanding.  The  sun  may  shine  ever
so  brightly,  but  if  we  have,  through  willfulness
or  ignorance,  placed  ourselves,  or  have  been
placed  by  our  progenitors,  in  the  far  corner  of
a  damp,  dark  cellar,  we  get  neither  joy  nor  com-
fort from  its  shining;  then  to  us  the  sun  never
shines.

So  we  have  heretofore  known  nothing  of
how  to  get  ourselves  out  of  the  cellar  of  igno-
rance, doubt,  and  despair;  to  our  wrong  think-
ing, God  has  seemed  to  withhold  the  life,  wis-


Thinking  41

dom,  power,  we  wanted  so  much,  though  we
sought  Him  ever  so  earnestly.

The  sun  does  not  radiate  life  and  warmth
today  and  darkness  and  chill  tomorrow;  It  can-
not, from  the  nature  of  its  being.  Nor  does  God
radiate  love  at  one  time,  while  at  other  times,
anger,  wrath,  and  displeasure  flow  from  His
mind  toward  us.

''Does  a  spring  pour  forth  from  the  same
opening  fresh  water  and  brackish?  Can  a  fig
tree,  my  brethren,  yield  olives,  or  a  grapevine
figs?"  (James  3:11,  12).

God  Is  All-Good — always  good,  always  love.
He  never  changes,  no  matter  what  we  do  or
may  have  done.  He  Is  always  trying  to  pour  more
of  Himself  through  us  into  visibility  so  as  to
make  us  grander,  larger,  fuller,  freer  individ-
uals.

While  the  child  is  crying  out  for  Its  Father-
Mother  God,  the  Father-Mother  is  yearning
with  infinite  tenderness  to  satisfy  the  child.
"In  the  heart  of  man  a  cry,
In  the  heart  of  God,  supply."

RECAPITULATION

There  is  but  one  Mind  in  the  universe.

Human  mind,  or  intellect,  makes  mistakes
because  it  gathers  much  information  from  with-
out


42  Lessons  in  Truth

Universal  Mind  sees  and  speaks  from  with-
in, it  is  all  Truth.

Our  ways  of  thinking  make  our  happiness
or  unhappiness,  our  success  or  nonsuccess.  We
can,  by  effort,  change  our  ways  of  thinking.

God  is  at  all  times,  regardless  of  our  so-
called  sins,  trying  to  pour  more  good  into  our
lives  to  make  them  richer  and  more  successful.

Commentary

While  there  is  but  one  Mind  in  the  universe,
universal  Mind,  man  has  been  given  free  will  and
has  the  responsibility  of  thinking  his  own  thoughts.
In  this  way  he  has  dominion  over  his  own  life.  Man
is  a  threefold  being — spirit,  soul,  and  body — and
he  finds  joy,  health,  and  success  as  he  turns  within
to  universal  Mind  for  direction.  But  he  reaps  trou-
ble, sorrow,  and  sickness  if  he  is  unduly  influenced
by  the  reports  of  his  senses.

The  will  and  intention  of  God  for  man  is  always
all  good.  Universal  Mind  desires  to  express  unlim-
ited life,  health,  and  bounty  through  all  mankind.
This  good  can  only  flow  into  a  man's  life  as  he  per-
mits it,  by  thinking  in  harmony  with  Spirit.  Ac-
cordingly, he  should  resolutely  turn  his  attention
away  from  distressing  symptoms  and  appearances,
and  instead  concentrate  his  thoughts  on  the  positive
things  of  Spirit.

Charles  Neal


"Then  Jesus  told  his  disciples,  If  any  man  would
come  after  me,  let  him  deny  himself  and  take  up  his
cross  and  follow  me"  (Matt.  16:24).

All  systems  for  spiritualizing  the  mind  in-
clude denial.  Every  religion  In  all  the  ages  had
some  sort  of  denial  as  one  of  Its  foundations.
We  all  know  how  the  Puritans  believed  that
the  more  rigidly  they  denied  themselves  com-
fort the  better  they  pleased  God.  So  far  has  this
idea  taken  possession  of  the  human  mind  dur-
ing some  ages  that  devout  souls  have  even
tortured  their  bodies  in  various  ways,  believing
that  they  were  thus  making  themselves  more
spiritual,  or  at  least  were  in  some  way  placating
an  angry  God.  Even  today  many  interpret  the
above-quoted  saying  of  Jesus  as  meaning:  If  any
man  wants  to  please  God  he  must  give  up  about
all  the  enjoyment  and  comfort  he  has,  all  things
he  likes  and  wants,  and  must  take  up  the  heavy
cross  of  constantly  doing  the  things  that  are
repugnant  to  him  in  his  daily  life.  This  is  why

43


44  Lessons  in  Truth

many  young  people  say,  ''When  I  am  old  I  will
be  a  Christian,  but  not  now,  for  I  want  to  en-
joy life  awhile  first."

There  could,  I  am  sure,  be  nothing  farther
from  the  meaning  of  the  Nazarene  than  the
foregoing  interpretation.  In  our  Ignorance  of
the  nature  of  God,  our  Father,  and  of  our  re-
lation to  Him,  we  have  believed  that  all  our  en-
joyment came  from  external  sources,  usually
from  gaining  possession  of  something  we  did
not  have.  The  poor  see  enjoyment  only  In  pos-
sessing abundance  of  money.  The  rich,  who  are
satiated  with  life's  so-called  pleasures  until  their
lives  have  become  like  a  person  with  an  over-
loaded stomach.,  compelled  to  sit  constantly  at
a  well-spread  table,  are  often  the  most  bitter
in  the  complaint  that  life  holds  no  happiness
for  them.  The  sick  one  believes  that,  were  he
well,  he  would  be  perfectly  happy.  The  healthy
but  hard-working  person  feels  the  need  of  some
days  of  rest  and  recreation,  that  the  monotony
of  his  life  may  be  broken.

So  ever  the  mind  has  been  turned  to  some
external  change  of  condition  or  circumstance  in
pursuit  of  satisfaction  and  enjoyment.  In  after
years,  when  men  have  tried  all,  getting  first  this
thing  and  then  that,  which  they  thought  would
yield  them  happiness,  and  have  been  grievously
disappointed,  in  a  kind  of  desperation  they  turn


Denials  45

to  God  and  try  to  find  some  sort  of  comfort  in
believing  that  sometime,  somewhere,  they  will
get  what  they  want  and  be  happy.  Thenceforth
their  lives  are  patient  and  submissive.,  but  they
are  destitute  of  any  real  joy.

This  same  Nazarene,  to  whom  we  always
return  because  to  us  He  Is  the  best-known  teacher
and  demonstrator  of  Truth,  spent  nearly  three
years  teaching  the  people — the  common  every-
day people  like  you  and  me,  who  wanted,  just
as  we  do,  food  and  rent  and  clothing,  money,
friends,  and  love — to  love  their  enemies  and  to
do  good  to  those  who  persecuted  them,  to  re-
sist not  evil  in  any  way,  but  to  give  double  to
anyone  who  tried  to  get  what  belonged  to  them;
to  cease  from  all  anxiety  regarding  the  things
they  needed  because  "your  heavenly  Father
knows  that  you  need  them  all"  (Matt.  6:32).
And  then  in  talking  one  day  He  said,  'These
things  I  have  spoken  to  you,  that  my  joy  may  be
in  you,  and  that  your  joy  may  be  full"  (John
15:11).  And  He  continued,  "Whatever  you  ask
the  Father  in  my  name,  he  may  give  it  to  you"
(John  15:16).  "Ask,  and  you  will  receive,  that
your  joy  may  be  full  ...  I  do  not  say  to  you
that  I  shall  pray  the  Father  for  you;  for  the
Father  himself  loves  you"  (John  16:24-27) .  We
have  further  learned  that  God  is  the  total  of  all
the  good  in  the  universe  and  that  there  is  in


46  Lessons  in  Truth

the  mind  which  Is  God  a  perpetual  desire  to
pour  more  of  Himself — the  substance  of  all
good  things — through  us  into  visibility,  or  into
our  lives.

Surely  all  these  things  do  not  make  it  look
as  though,  when  Jesus  said  that  the  way  to  be
like  Him  and  to  possess  a  like  power  was  to
deny  oneself.  He  meant  that  we  are  to  go  with-
out the  enjoyable  comforts  of  life  or  In  any  way
deprive  or  torture  ourselves.

In  these  lessons  we  have  seen  that,  besides
the  real  Innermost  self  of  each  of  us — the  self
that  is  the  divine  self  because  it  is  an  expression
or  pressing  out  of  God  into  visibility  and  is
always  one  with  the  Father — there  Is  a  human
self,  a  carnal  mind,  which  reports  lies  from  the
external  world  and  is  not  to  be  relied  upon
fully;  this  is  the  self  of  which  Jesus  spoke  when
He  said,  "let  him  deny  himself."  This  Intellec-
tual man,  carnal  mind,  or  whatever  you  choose
to  call  him,  is  envious  and  jealous  and  fretful
and  sick  because  he  Is  selfish.  The  human  self
seeks  its  own  gratification  at  the  expense,  If
need  be,  of  someone  else.

Your  real  self  Is  never  sick,  never  afraid,
never  selfish.  It  is  the  part  of  you  that  "does  not
Insist  on  its  own  way;  it  is  not  Irritable  or  re-
sentful" (I  Cor.  13:5).  It  is  always  seeking  to
give  to  others,  while  the  human  self  is  always


Denials  47

seeking  its  own.  Heretofore  we  have  lived  more
in  the  human  region.  We  have  believed  all  that
the  carnal  mind  has  told  us,  and  the  consequence
is  that  we  have  been  overwhelmed  with  all  kinds
of  privation  and  suffering.

Some  people  who,  during  the  last  few  years,
have  been  making  a  special  study  of  the  mind
find  it  a  fact  that  certain  wrong  or  false  beliefs
held  by  us  are  really  the  cause  of  all  sorts  of
trouble — physical,  moral,  and  financial.  They
have  learned  that  wrong  (or,  as  they  call  them,
error)  beliefs  arise  only  in  the  human  mind;
they  have  learned  and  actually  proved  that  we
can,  by  a  persistent  effort  of  the  will,  change
our  beliefs,  and  by  this  means  alone  entirely
change  our  troublesome  circumstances  and  bod-
ily conditions.

One  of  the  methods  that  they  have  found
will  work  every  time  in  getting  rid  of  trouble-
some conditions  (which  are  all  the  result  of
erroneous  thinking  and  feeling)  is  to  deny  them
in  toto:  First,  to  deny  that  any  such  things  have,
or  could  have,  power  to  make  us  unhappy;
second,  to  deny  that  these  things  do  in  reality
exist  at  all.

The  word  deny  has  two  definitions,  ac-
cording to  Webster.  To  deny,  in  one  sense,  is
to  withhold  from,  as  to  deny  bread  to  the  hun-
gry. To  deny,  in  another  sense  (and  we  believe


48  Lessons  in  Truth

It  was  in  this  latter  way  that  Jesus  used  it),  is
to  declare  to  be  not  true,  to  repudiate  as  utterly
false.  To  deny  oneself,  then,  is  not  to  withhold
comfort  or  happiness  from  the  external  man,
much  less  to  inflict  torture  upon  him,  but  it  is
to  deny  the  claims  of  error  consciousness,  to
declare  these  claims  to  be  untrue.

If  you  have  done  any  piece  of  work  incor-
rectly, the  very  first  step  toward  getting  it  right
is  to  undo  the  wrong,  and  begin  again  from  that
point.  We  have  believed  wrong  about  God  and
about  ourselves.  We  have  believed  that  God
was  angry  with  us  and  that  we  were  sinners  who
ought  to  be  afraid  of  Him.  We  have  believed
that  sickness  and  poverty  and  other  troubles  are
evil  things  put  here  by  this  same  God  to  torture
us  in  some  way  into  serving  Him  and  loving
Him.  We  have  believed  that  we  have  pleased
God  best  when  we  became  so  absolutely  sub-
dued by  our  troubles  as  to  be  patiently  sub-
missive to  them  all,  not  even  trying  to  rise  out
of  them  or  to  overcome  them.  All  this  is  false,
entirely  false!  And  the  first  step  toward  freeing
ourselves  from  our  troubles  is  to  get  rid  of  our
erroneous  beliefs  about  God  and  about  our-
selves.

"But,"  objects  one,  "if  a  thing  Is  not  true
and  I  have  believed  a  lie  about  it,  I  do  not  see
just  how  my  believing  wrong  about  it  could


Denials  49

affect  my  bodily  health  or  my  circumstances.3'

A  child  can  be  so  afraid  of  an  imaginary
bugaboo  under  the  bed  as  to  have  convulsions.
Should  you,  today,  receive  a  telegraphic  message
that  your  husband,  wife,  or  child,  who  is  absent
from  you,  had  been  suddenly  killed,  your  suf-
fering, mental  and  physical,  and  perhaps  ex-
tending even  to  your  external  and  financial  af-
fairs, would  be  just  as  great  as  though  the  re-
port really  were  true;  and  yet  it  might  be  en-
tirely false.  Exactly  so  have  these  messages  of
bugaboos  behind  the  doors,  bugaboos  of  divine
wrath  and  of  our  own  weakness,  come  to  us
through  the  senses  until  we  are  overcome  by
our  fears  of  them.

Now,  let  us  arouse  ourselves.  Denial  is  the
first  practical  step  toward  wiping  out  of  our
minds  the  mistaken  beliefs  of  a  lifetime — the
beliefs  that  have  made  such  sad  havoc  in  our
lives.  By  denial  we  mean  declaring  not  to  be
true  a  thing  that  seems  true.  Negative  appear-
ances are  directly  opposed  to  the  teachings  of
Truth.  Jesus  said,  "Do  not  judge  by  appear-
ances, but  judge  with  right  judgment"  (John
7:24).

Suppose  you  had  always  been  taught  that
the  sun  really  moved  or  revolved  around  the
earth,  and  someone  should  now  try  to  persuade
you  that  the  opposite  is  the  truth.  You  would


50  Lessons  In  Truth

see  at  once  that  such  might  be  the  case,  and  yet
as  often  as  you  saw  the  sun  rise,  the  old  Impres-
sion, made  on  your  mind  by  the  wrong  belief
of  years,  would  come  up  and  seem  almost  too
real  to  be  disputed.  The  only  way  by  which  you
could  cleanse  your  mind  of  the  impression  and
make  the  untrue  seem  unreal,  would  be  by  re-
peatedly denying  the  old  beliefs,  saying  over
and  over  to  yourself  as  often  as  the  subject  came
up  in  your  mind:  'This  is  not  true.  The  sun  does
not  move;  it  stands  still,  and  the  earth  moves/'
Eventually  the  sun  would  only  seem  to  move.

The  appearances  are  that  our  bodies  and  our
circumstances  control  our  thoughts,  but  the  op-
posite is  true.  Our  thoughts  control  our  bodies
and  our  circumstances.

If  you  repeatedly  deny  a  false  or  unhappy
condition,  it  loses  its  power  to  make  you  un-
happy.

What  everyone  desires  is  to  have  only  the
good  manifested  in  his  life  and  surroundings—
to  have  his  life  full  of  love;  to  have  perfect
health;  to  know  all  things;  to  have  great  power
and  much  joy;  and  this  is  just  exactly  what  God
wants  us  to  have.  All  love  is  God  in  manifesta-
tion, as  we  have  learned  in  a  previous  lesson.
All  wisdom  is  God.  All  life  and  health  are  God.
All  joy  (because  all  good)  and  all  power  arc
God.  All  good  of  whatever  kind  is  God  come


Denials  5 1

forth  into  visibility  through  people  or  some
other  visible  form.  When  we  crave  more  of  any
good  thing,  we  are  in  reality  craving  more  of
God  to  come  forth  into  our  lives  so  that  we  can
realize  it  by  the  senses.  Having  more  of  God
does  not  take  out  of  our  lives  the  good  things —
it  only  puts  more  of  them  in.  In  the  mind  that  is
God  there  is  always  the  desire  to  give  more,  for
the  divine  plan  is  forever  to  get  more  good  into
visibility.

Intellectually  we  may  see  the  fact  of  our
own  God-being,  which  never  changes.  What
we  need  is  to  realize  our  oneness,  with  the
Father  at  all  times.  In  order  to  realize  it  we
deny  in  ourselves  and  others  the  appearances
that  seem  contrary  to  this — deny  them  as  reali-
ties; we  declare  that  they  are  not  true.

There  are  four  common  error  thoughts  to
which  nearly  everyone  grants  great  power.  Per-
sons who  have  grown  out  of  sickness  and  trou-
ble through  prayer  have  found  it  good  to  deny
these  thoughts,  in  order  to  cleanse  the  mind  of
the  direful  effects  of  believing  them.  They  can
be  denied  like  this.

First:  There  is  no  evil.

There  is  but  one  power  in  the  universe,  and
that  is  God — good.  God  is  good,  and  God  is
omnipresent.  Apparent  evils  are  not  entities  or
things  of  themselves.  They  are  simply  apparent


52  Lessons  in  Truth

absence  of  the  good,  just  as  darkness  Is  an  ab-
sence of  light.  But  God,  or  good,  Is  omnipresent,
so  the  apparent  absence  of  good  (evil)  Is  un-
real. It  is  only  an  appearance  of  evil,  just  as  the
moving  sun  was  an  appearance.  You  need  not
wait  to  discuss  this  matter  of  evil  or  to  under-
stand fully  all  about  why  you  deny  it,  but  be-
gin to  practice  the  denials  In  an  unprejudiced
way,  and  see  how  marvelously  they  will,  after
a  while,  deliver  you  from  some  of  the  so-called
evils  of  your  daily  life.

Second:  There  is  no  absence  of  life,  sab-
stance,  or  intelligence  anywhere.

We  have  seen  that  the  real  is  the  spiritual
"The  things  that  are  seen  are  transient,  but  the
things  that  are  unseen  are  eternal"  (II  Cor.
4: 18) .  By  using  this  denial  you  will  soon  break
your  bondage  to  matter  and  to  material  condi-
tions. You  will  know  that  you  are  free.

Third:  Pain,  sickness,  poverty,  old  age,  and
death  cannot  master  me,  for  they  are  not  real.

Fourth:  There  is  nothing  in  all  the  universe
for  me  to  fear,  for  greater  is  He  that  is  within
me  than  he  that  is  in  the  world.

God  says,  "I  will  contend  with  those  who
contend  with  you"  (Isa.  49:25).  He  says  It  to
every  living  child  of  His,  and  every  person  is
His  child.

Repeat  these  four  denials  silently  several


Denials  53

times  a  day,  not  with  a  strained  anxiety  to  get
something  out  of  them,  but  trying  calmly  to
realize  the  meaning  of  the  words  spoken:

There  is  no  evil.

There  is  no  absence  of  life,  substance,  or
intelligence  anywhere.

Pain,  sickness,  poverty,  old  age,  and  death
cannot  master  me,  for  they  are  not  real.

There  is  nothing  in  all  the  universe  for  me
to  fear,  for  greater  is  He  that  is  within  me  than
he  that  is  in  the  world.

Almost  hourly  little  vexations  and  fears
come  up  in  your  life.  Meet  each  one  with  a  de-
nial. Calmly  and  coolly  say  within  yourself,
"That's  nothing  at  all  It  cannot  harm  or  dis-
turb me  or  make  me  unhappy."  Do  not  fight  it
vigorously,  but  let  your  denial  be  the  denial  of
any  thought  of  its  superiority  over  you,  as  you
would  deny  the  power  of  ants  on  their  little  hill
to  disturb  you.  If  you  are  angry,  stand  still,  and
silently  deny  it.  Say  that  you  are  not  angry;  that
you  are  love  made  manifest,  and  cannot  be
angry  and  the  anger  will  leave  you.

If  someone  shows  you  ill  will,  silently  deny
his  power  to  hurt  you  or  to  make  you  un-
happy. Should  you  find  yourself  feeling  jealous
or  envious  toward  anyone,  instantly  turn  the
heel  of  denial  on  the  Hydra-headed  monsters.
Declare  that  you  are  not  jealous  or  envious;


54  Lessons  m  Truth

that  you  are  an  expression  of  perfect  love  (an
expression  which  is  God  pressed  out  into  visi-
bility) and  cannot  feel  negation.  There  is  really
no  reason  for  jealousy  or  envy,  for  all  persons
are  one  and  the  same  -  Spirit.  "And  there  are
varieties  of  working  [or  manifestations},  but  it
is  the  same  God  who  inspires  them  all  in  every
one"  (I  Cor.  12:6),  says  Paul.  How  can  you  be
envious  of  a  part  of  yourself  that  seems  to  you
more  comely?

Shall  the  foot  be  envious  of  the  hand,  or  the
ear  of  the  eye?  Are  not  the  seemingly  feeble
members  of  the  body  just  as  important  to  the
perfection  of  the  whole  as  the  others?  Do  you
seem  to  be  less,  or  to  have  less,  than  some  others  ?
Remember  that  all  envy  and  all  jealousy  are  in
the  error  consciousness  and  that  in  reality  you,
however  insignificant,  are  an  absolute  necessity
to  God  in  order  to  make  the  perfect  whole.

If  you  find  yourself  dreading  to  meet  any-
one, or  afraid  to  step  out  and  do  what  you  want
or  ought  to  do,  immediately  begin  to  say,  fflt  is
not  true;  I  am  not  afraid;  I  am  perfect  love,  and
can  know  no  fear.  No  one,  nothing  in  all  the
universe,  can  hurt  me!9  You  will  find  after  a
little  that  all  the  fear  has  disappeared,  all  trepi-
dation has  gone.

Denial  brings  freedom  from  bondage,  and
happiness  comes  when  we  can  effectually  deny


Denials  55

the  power  of  anything  to  touch  or  to  trouble  us.

Have  you  been  living  in  negation  for  years,
denying  your  ability  to  succeed,  denying  your
health,  denying  your  Godhood,  denying  your
power  to  accomplish  anything,  by  feeling  your-
self a  child  of  the  Devil  or  of  weakness?  If  so,
this  constant  negation  has  paralyzed  you  and
weakened  your  power.

When,  in  the  next  lesson,  you  learn  some-
thing about  affirmations,  the  opposite  of  denials,
you  will  know  how  to  lift  yourself  out  of  the
realm  of  failure  into  that  of  success.

All  your  happiness,  all  your  health  and
power,  come  from  God.  They  flow  in  an  un-
broken stream  from  the  fountainhead  into  the
very  center  of  your  being  and  radiate  from
center  to  circumference.  When  you  acknowl-
edge this  constantly  and  deny  that  outside
things  can  hinder  your  happiness  or  health  or
power,  it  helps  you  to  realize  health  and  power
and  happiness.

No  person  or  thing  in  the  universe,  no  chain
of  circumstances,  can  by  any  possibility  inter-
pose itself  between  you  and  all  joy — all  good.
You  may  think  that  something  stands  between
you  and  your  heart's  desire,  and  so  live  with
that  desire  unfulfilled;  but  it  is  not  true.  This
"think"  is  the  bugaboo  under  the  bed  that  has
no  reality.  Deny  it,  deny  it,  and  you  will  find


56  Lessons  in  Truth

yourself  free,  and  you  will  realize  that  this  seem-
ing was  all  false.  Then  you  will  see  the  good
flowing  into  you,  and  you  will  see  clearly  that
nothing  can  stand  between  you  and  your  own.

Denials  may  be  spoken  silently  or  audibly,
but  not  in  a  manner  to  call  forth  antagonism
and  discussion.

To  some,  all  this  sort  of  mechanical  work-
ing will  seem  a  strange  way  of  entering  into  a
more  spiritual  life.  There  are  those  who  easily
and  naturally  glide  out  of  the  old  material  life
into  a  deeper  spiritual  one  without  any  external
help;  but  there  are  thousands  of  others  who  are
seeking  primarily  the  loaves  and  fishes  of  bod-
ily health  and  financial  success,  but  who  really
are  seeking  a  higher  way  of  life,  who  must
needs  take  the  very  first  steps.  For  such,  the
practicing  of  these  mechanical  steps  in  a  whole-
hearted way,  without  prejudice,  is  doing  the
very  best  thing  possible  toward  attaining  purity
of  heart  and  life,  toward  growth  in  divine
knowledge  and  fullness  of  joy  in  all  things
undertaken.

Commentary

Dr.  Cady  has  shown  that  denials  free  the  con-
sciousness of  any  erroneous  belief  standing  in  the
way  of  spiritual  development.  This  is  compatible
with  Jesus'  method  of  using  denials,  not  to  teach  that


Denials  57

enjoying  life  is  wrong,  but  to  assert  that  no  power
other  than  God  can  be  operating.

Is  there  a  person  who  does  not  need  to  use  de-
nials? Yes,  if  he  is  one  who  has  never  thought  or
acted  negatively.  If  a  person  has  miscalculated  about
something,  realizing  his  mistake  is  part  of  his  ed-
ucation. It  precedes  the  establishing  of  the  right
method  in  his  thinking.

Used  faithfully,  the  four  sweeping  denials  in
this  chapter  will  enable  us  to  rise  above  any  mis-
calculation we  may  have  made  about  ourself .  Having
freed  the  consciousness  of  limitation  we  are  now
ready  to  receive  the  benefits  of  the  wise  and  loving
action  of  God.

Dale  New  sum


Affirmations


You  will  make  your  prayer  to  him,  and  he  will  hear

you;

and  you  will  pay  your  vows.
You  will  decide  on  a  matter,  and  it  will  be  established

for  you,

and  light  will  shine  on  your  ways"   (Job  22:27,
28).

Most  persons,  when  they  first  consciously  set
out  to  gain  a  fuller,  higher  knowledge  of  spiri-
tual things,  do  so  because  of  dissatisfaction — or
perhaps  unsatisf  action  would  be  the  better  word
— with  their  present  conditions  of  life.  Inherent
in  the  human  mind  is  the  thought  that  some-
where, somehow,  it  ought  to  be  able  to  bring  to
itself  that  which  it  desires  and  which  would
satisfy.  This  thought  is  but  the  foreshadowing
of  that  which  really  is.

58


Affirmations  59

2.    Our  wishes,  it  is  said,  do  measure  just
Our  capabilities.  Who  with  his  might
Aspires  unto  the  mountain's  upper  height,
Holds  in  that  aspiration  a  great  trust
To  be  fulfilled,  a  warrant  that  he  must
Not  disregard,  a  strength  to  reach  the  height
To  which  his  hopes  have  taken  flight.

— Author  Unknown.

The  hunger  that  we  feel  is  but  the  prompting
of  the  Divine  within  us,  which  longs  with  an
infinite  longing  to  fill  us.  It  is  but  one  side  of  the
law  of  demand  and  supply,  the  other  side  of
which  is  unchangeably,  unfailingly,  the  prom-
ise: "Whatever  you  ask  in  prayer,  believe  that
you  receive  it  and  you  will"  (Mark  11:24) .  The
supply  is  always  equal  to  the  demand,  but  there
must  first  be  a  demand  before  supply  is  of  use.

There  is,  attainable  by  us,  a  place  where  we
can  see  that  our  doing  can  cease,  because  we
realize  that  Spirit  is  the  fulfillment  of  all  our
desires.  We  simply  get  still  and  know  that  all
things  whatsoever  we  desire  are  ours  already;
and  this  knowing  it,  or  recognizing  it,  has  power
to  bring  the  invisible  God  (or  good) — the  in-
nermost substance  of  all  things — forth  into  just
the  visible  form  of  good  that  we  want.

But  in  order  to  attain  this  place  of  power,
we  must  take  the  preliminary  steps,  faithfully,
earnestly,  trustingly,  though  these  steps  at  first


60  Lessons  in  Truth

glance  seem  to  us  as  useless  and  as  empty  as  do
the  ceremonial  forms  and  religious  observance
of  the  ritualistic  churchman.

To  affirm  anything  Is  to  assert  positively
that  It  Is  so,  even  In  the  face  of  all  contrary
evidence.  We  may  not  be  able  to  see  how,  by
our  simply  affirming  a  thing  to  be  true,  a  thing
that  to  all  human  reasoning  or  sight  does  not
seem  to  be  true  at  all,  we  can  bring  this  thing
to  pass;  but  we  can  compel  ourselves  to  cease
all  futile  quibbling  and  go  to  work  to  prove  the
rule,  each  one  in  his  own  life.

The  beautiful  Presence  all  about  us  and
within  us  is  the  substance  of  every  good  that
we  can  possibly  desire — aye,  infinitely  more
than  we  are  capable  of  desiring;  for

"What  no  eye  has  seen,  nor  ear  heard,
nor  the  heart  of  man  conceived,
what  God  has  prepared  for  those  who  love
him/'

(I  Cor.  2:9).

In  some  way,  which  It  is  not  easy  to  put  Into
words — for  spiritual  laws  cannot  always  be
compassed  In  words,  and  yet  they  are  none  the
less  infallible,  immutable  laws  that  work  with
precision  and  certainty — there  is  power  in  our
word  of  faith  to  bring  all  good  things  right  Into
our  everyday  life.


Affitmat/oHs  61

We  speak  the  word,  we  confidently  affirm,
but  we  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  "establish-
ing" of  the  word,  or  bringing  it  to  pass.

"You  will  decide  on  a  matter,  and  it  will  be
established  for  you,"

(Job  22:28).

So  if  we  decree  or  affirm  unwaveringly,  stead-
fastly, we  hold  God  by  His  own  unalterable
laws  to  do  the  establishing  or  fulfilling.

They  who  have  carefully  studied  spiritual
laws  find  that,  besides  denying  the  reality  and
power  of  apparent  evil,  which  denying  frees
them  from  it,  they  also  can  bring  any  desired
good  into  their  lives  by  persistently  affirming  It
is  there  already.  In  the  first  instructions  given
to  students,  the  denials  and  affirmations  take  a
large  place.  Later  on,  their  own  personal  ex-
periences and  inward  guidance  lead  them  to  an
understanding  of  divine  law  that  makes  it  easy
for  them  to  follow  simple  rules  which  at  first
seemed  difficult.

The  saying  over  and  over  of  any  denial  or
affirmation  is  a  necessary  training  of  a  mind
that  has  lived  so  long  in  error  and  false  belief
that  it  needs  this  constant  repetition  of  Truth
to  unclothe  it  and  to  clothe  it  anew.

As  it  Is  with  the  denials,  so  with  the  affirma-
tions. There  are  four  or  five  sweeping  affirma-


62  Lessons  in  Truth

tions  of  Truth  that  cover  a  multitude  of  lesser
ones,  and  which  do  marvelous  work  In  bring-
ing good  to  ourselves  and  to  others.

First:  God  is  life,  love,  intelligence,  sub-
stance, omnipotence,  omniscience,  omnipres-
ence.

These  ideas  you  learned  In  the  second  lesson
— ''Statement  of  Being/'  As  you  repeat  the  af-
firmation, please  remember  that  every  particle
of  life,  love,  intelligence,  power,  or  of  real  sub-
stance in  the  universe,  is  simply  a  certain  de-
gree, or,  so  to  speak,  a  quantity  of  God  made
manifest  or  visible  through  a  form.  Try  to  think
what  it  means  when  you  say  that  God  is  om-
nipresent, omnipotent,  omniscient.

God  is  omnipresence  (everywhere  present),
and  God  is  good.  Then  why  fear  evil?  He  is
omnipotence  (all-powerful).  Then  what  other
power  can  prevail?

Since  God  is  omnipotence  and  omnipres-
ence, put  aside  forever  your  traditional  teaching
of  an  adverse  power,  evil  (Devil),  that  may  at
any  moment  thwart  the  plans  of  God  and  bring
you  harm.

Do  not  disturb  yourself  about  the  appear-
ance of  evil  all  about  you;  but  in  the  very  pres-
ence of  what  seems  evil  stand  true  and  un-
wavering in  affirming  that  God,  the  good,  is
omnipresent.  By  so  doing,  you  will  see  the


Affirmations  63

seeming  evil  melt  away  as  the  darkness  before
the  light  or  as  the  dew  before  the  morning  sun,
and  good  come  to  take  its  place.

Second:  J  am  a  child  or  manifestation  of
God,  and  every  moment  His  life,  love,  wisdom,
power  ftow  into  and  through  me.  I  am  one  with
God,  and  am  governed  by  His  law.

Remember  while  repeating  this  affirmation
that  nothing — no  circumstance,  no  person  or
set  of  persons — can  by  any  possibility  interpose
between  you  and  the  Source  of  your  life,  wis-
dom, or  power.  It  is  all  "hid  with  Christ  [the
innermost  Christ  or  Spirit  of  your  being]  in
God"  (Col.  3:3) .  Nothing  but  your  own  ignor-
ance of  how  to  receive,  or  your  willfulness,  can
hinder  your  having  unlimited  supply.

No  matter  how  sick  or  weak  or  inefficient
you  seem  to  be,  take  your  eyes  and  thoughts
right  off  the  seeming,  and  turn  them  within  to
the  central  fountain  there,  and  say  calmly,  quiet-
ly, but  with  steadfast  assurance:  "This  appear-
ance of  weakness  is  false;  God,  manifest  as  life,
wisdom,  and  power,  is  now  flowing  into  my  en-
tire being  and  out  through  me  to  the  external."
You  will  soon  see  a  marvelous  change  wrought
in  yourself  by  the  realization  that  this  spoken
word  will  bring  to  you.

You  do  not  change  God's  attitude  toward
you  one  iota  by  either  importuning  or  affirming.


54  Lessons  m  Truth

You  only  change  your  attitude  toward  Him.  By
thus  affirming,  you  put  yourself  in  harmony  with
divine  law,  which  is  always  working  toward
your  good  and  never  toward  your  harm  or
punishment.

Third:  /  am  Spirit,  perfect,  holy,  harmoni-
ous. Nothing  can  hurt  me  or  make  me  sick  or
afraid,  for  Spirit  is  God,  and  God  cannot  be
sick  or  hurt  or  afraid.  I  manifest  my  real  self
through  this  body  now.

Fourth:  God  works  in  me  to  will  and  to  do
whatsoever  He  wishes  me  to  do,  and  He  cannot
jail.

Our  affirming  His  mind  working  both  to
will  and  to  do,  makes  us  will  only  the  good;
and  He,  the  very  Father  in  us,  does  the  works,
hence  there  can  be  no  failure.  Whatsoever  we
fully  commit  to  the  Father  to  do,  and  affirm  is
done,  we  shall  see  accomplished.  These,  then,
are  the  four  comprehensive  affirmations.

First:  God  is  life,  love,  intelligence,  sub-
stance, omnipotence,  omniscience^  omnipres-
ence.

Second:  I  am  a  child  or  manifestation  of
God,  and  every  moment  His  life,  love,  wisdom,
power  flow  into  and  through  me.  1 4m  one  with
God,  and  am  governed  by  His  law.

Third:  I  am  Spirit,  perfect,  holy,  harmoni-
ous. Nothing  can  hurt  me  or  make  me  sick  or


Affirmations  65

afraid,  for  Spirit  is  God,  and  God  cannot  be
sick  or  hurt  or  afraid.  I  manifest  my  real  self
through  this  body  now.

Fourth:  God  works  with  me  to  will  and  to
do  whatsoever  He  wishes  me  to  do,  and  He  can-
not fail.

Commit  these  affirmations  to  memory,  so
that  you  can  repeat  them  In  the  silence  of  your
own  mind  in  any  place  and  at  any  time.  Strange-
ly will  they  act  to  deliver  you  out  of  the  greatest
external  distresses,  places  where  no  human  help
avails.  It  is  as  though  the  moment  you  assert
emphatically  your  oneness  with  God  the  Father,
there  is  instantly  set  into  motion  all  the  power  of
omnipotent  love  to  rush  to  your  rescue.  And
when  it  has  undertaken  to  work  for  you,  you
can  cease  from  external  ways  and  means,  and
boldly  claim:  fflt  is  done;  I  have  the  desires  of
my  heart !}

"Thou  openest  thy  hand,

thou  satisfiest  the  desire  of  every  living
thing"  (Psalms  145:16).

In  reality  God  is  forever  in  process  of  move-
ment within  us,  that  He  may  manifest  Himself
(All-Good)  more  fully  through  us.  Our  affirm-
ing, backed  by  faith,  is  the  link  that  connects
our  conscious  human  need  with  His  power  and
supply.


66  Lessons  in  Truth

They  who  have  claimed  their  birthright  by
thus  calmly  affirming  their  oneness  with  God
know  how  free  they  can  be  from  human  plan-
ning and  effort,  after  they  have  called  into  op-
eration this  marvelous  power  of  affirmation.
This  power  has  healed  the  sick,  brought  joy  in
place  of  mourning,  literally  opened  prison  doors
and  bidden  the  prisoner  go  free,  without  the
claimants  calling  for  human  assistance.

Understand,  it  is  not  necessarily  the  using
of  just  this  form  of  words  that  has  availed  in
each  individual  case.  It  is  the  denying  of  ap-
parent evil,  and,  in  spite  of  all  contrary  evidence,
the  affirming  of  good  to  be  all  there  is,  affirming
oneness  with  God's  omnipotent  power  to  accom-
plish, even  when  there  were  no  visible  signs  of
His  being  present,  that  has  wrought  the  de-
liverance. In  one  case  within  my  knowledge,
just  simply  claiming,  ffGod  is  your  defense  and
deliverance/3  for  a  man  who  had  for  five  years
been  an  exile  from  home  and  country  (through
a  series  of  deceptions  and  machinations  that  for
depth  and  subtlety  were  unparalleled)  opened
all  the  doors  wide  and  restored  the  man  to  his
family  within  a  month,  without  any  further  hu-
man effort  on  the  part  of  himself  or  his  friends,
and  this  after  five  years  of  the  most  strenuous
human  efforts  of  lawyers  had  failed  utterly  to
bring  the  truth  to  light  or  to  release  the  prisoner.


Affirmations  67

Some  minds  are  so  constituted  that  they  get
better  results  from  repeated  use  of  denials;
others,  from  using  denials  less  and  affirmations
more.

No  definite  rules  can  be  laid  down  as  to
which  will  work  most  effectually  in  each  in-
dividual case  to  eradicate  apparent  evil  and
bring  the  good  into  manifestation,  but  some
little  hint  that  may  be  helpful  can  be  given.

Denials  have  an  erasive  or  dissolving  ten-
dency. Affirmations  build  up,  and  give  strength
and  courage  and  power.  Persons  who  remember
vividly,  and  are  inclined  to  dwell  in  their
thoughts  on  the  pains,  sorrows,  and  troubles  of
the  past  or  present,  need  to  deny  a  great  deal;
for  denials  cleanse  the  mind  and  blot  out  of
memory  all  seeming  evil  and  unhappiness,  so
that  they  become  as  a  faraway  dream.  Again,
denials  are  particularly  useful  to  those  who  are
hard  or  intolerant,  or  aggressively  sinful;  to
those  who,  as  a  result  of  success,  have  become
overconfident,  thinking  the  human  is  sufficient
in  itself  for  all  things;  to  the  selfish,  and  to  any
who  do  not  scruple  to  harm  others.

Affirmations  should  be  used  by  the  timid  and
by  those  who  have  a  feeling  of  their  own  in-
efficiency; those  who  stand  in  fear  of  other
minds;  those  who  "give  in"  easily;  those  who
are  subject  to  anxiety  or  doubt,  and  those  who


68  Lessons  in  Truth

are  In  positions  of  responsibility.  Persons  who
are  In  any  way  negative  or  passive  need  to  use
affirmations  more;  the  ones  who  are  self-confi-
dent or  unforgiving,  need  denials  more.

Deny  the  appearance  of  evil;  affirm  good.
Deny  weakness;  affirm  strength.  Deny  any  un-
desirable condition,  and  affirm  the  good  you  de-
sire. This  Is  what  Jesus  meant  when  He  said,
"Therefore  I  tell  you,  whatever  you  ask  in
prayer,  believe  [or  claim  and  affirm]  that  you
receive  it,  and  you  will  "  (Mark  11:24).  This
is  what  is  meant  by  the  promise:  "Every  place
that  the  sole  of  your  foot  will  tread  upon  £or
that  you  stand  squarely  or  firmly  upon]  I  have
given  to  you,  as  I  promised  to  Moses"  (Josh.

1:3>-

Practice  these  denials  and  affirmations  silent-
ly on  the  street,  in  the  cars,  when  you  are  wake-
ful during  the  night,  anywhere,  everywhere,  and
they  will  give  you  a  new,  and,  to  you,  a  strange,
mastery  over  external  things  and  over  yourself.
If  there  comes  a  moment  when  you  are  In  doubt
as  to  what  to  do,  stand  still  and  affirm,  ffGod  in
me  is  infinite  wisdom;  I  know  just  what  to  do!9
For  I  will  give  you  a  mouth  and  wisdom,  which
none  of  your  adversaries  will  be  able  to  with-
stand or  to  contradict"  (Luke  21:15).  Do  not
get  flustered  or  anxious,  but  depend  fully  and
trustingly  on  your  principle,  and  you  will  be


Affirmations  69

surprised  at  the  sudden  Inspiration  that  will
come  to  you  as  the  mode  of  procedure.

So  always  this  principle  will  work  in  the
solution  of  all  life's  problems — I  care  not  what
the  form  of  detail  is — to  free  us,  God's  children,
from  all  undesirable  conditions,  and  to  bring
good  into  our  lives,  if  we  will  take  up  the  simple
rules  and  use  them  faithfully,  until  they  lead  us
into  such  realization  of  our  Godhood  that  we
need  no  longer  consciously  depend  on  them.

Commentary

Affirmative  prayer  is  a  simple  method  of  making
contact  with  God's  infinite  power.  By  af  fir  wring  we
establish  firmly  in  our  own  mind  a  statement  of
absolute  Truth  which  will  help  us  to  understand  our
true  relationship  to  God.

As  we  take  the  essence  of  a  divine  idea  and
structure  it  into  word  form,  we  begin  to  accept  its
Truth  deep  within  us.  It  becomes  a  part  of  us.  It  is
our  Truth,  We  can  use  it.  We  can  work  with  it  to-
ward a  greater  understanding  of  our  real,  perfect
self.

In  affirmative  prayer  we  acknowledge  our  spiri-
tual unity  with  the  all-providing  Principle  of  the
universe  and  we  build,  within  ourself,  a  conscious-
ness that  will  act  through  us  to  achieve  our  highest
desires.

Tom  Newman


Faith


'Truly,  I  say  to  you,  whoever  says  to  this  moun-
tain, 'Be  taken  up  and  cast  into  the  sea/  and  does  not
doubt  in  his  heart,  but  believes  that  what  he  says
will  come  to  pass,  it  will  be  done  for  him"  (Mark
11:23).

Science  was  faith  once. — Lowell.

The  word  faith  is  one  that  has  generally
been  thought  to  denote  a  simple  form  of  belief
based  mostly  on  ignorance  and  superstition.  It
is  a  word  that  has  drawn  forth  something  akin  to
scorn  from  so-called  "thinking  people" — the
people  who  have  believed  that  intellectual  at-
tainment is  the  highest  form  of  knowledge  to  be
reached.  ''Blind  faith' '  they  have  disdainfully

70


Faith  71

chosen  to  call  It — fit  only  for  ministers,  women,
and  children,  but  not  a  practical  thing  on  which
to  establish  the  everyday  business  affairs  of  life.

Some  have  prided  themselves  on  having  out-
grown the  swaddling  clothes  of  this  blind,  un-
reasoning faith,  and  having  grown  to  the  point,
as  they  say,  where  they  have  faith  only  in  that
which  can  be  seen,  or  intellectually  explained.

The  writer  of  The  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,
obviously  a  most  intellectual  man,  and  a  learned
theologian,  before  writing  at  length  on  the
nature  of  faith  and  the  marvelous  results  attend-
ing it,  tried  to  put  Into  a  few  words  a  condensed
definition  of  faith:

"Now  faith  Is  the  assurance  of  things  hoped
for,  the  conviction  of  things  not  seen"  (Heb,

11:1).

In  other  words,  faith  takes  right  hold  of  the
substance  of  the  things  desired,  and  brings  into
the  world  of  evidence  the  things  that  before
were  not  seen.  Further  speaking  of  faith,  the
writer  said,  "So  that  what  is  seen  was  made  out
of  things  which  do  not  appear"  (Heb.  11:3);
that  is,  things  that  are  seen  are  not  made  out  of
visible  things,  but  out  of  the  invisible.  In  some
way,  then,  we  understand  that  whatever  we  want
is  in  this  surrounding  invisible  substance,  and
faith  is  the  power  that  can  bring  it  out  into
actuality  to  us.


72  Lessons  m  Truth

After  having  cited  innumerable  instances  of
marvelous  things  brought  to  pass  in  the  lives  of
men,  not  by  their  work  or  efforts,  but  by  faith,
the  Epistle  says,

"And  what  more  shall  I  say?  For  time  would
fail  me  to  tell  of  Gideon,  Barak,  Samson,  Jeph-
thah,  of  David  and  Samuel  and  the  prophets —
who  through  faith  conquered  kingdoms,  en-
forced justice,  received  promises,  stopped  the
mouths  of  lions,  quenched  raging  fire,  escaped
the  edge  of  the  sword,  won  strength  out  of
weakness,  became  mighty  in  war,  put  foreign
armies  to  flight.  Women  received  their  dead  by
resurrection"  (Heb.  11:32-35).

Do  you  want  any  more  power  or  any  greater
thing  than  is  here  mentioned — power  to  subdue
kingdoms,  to  stop  the  mouths  of  lions,  quench
fire,  turn  to  flight  whole  armies,  raise  the  dead
to  life  again?  Even  if  your  desires  exceed  this,
you  need  not  despair  or  hesitate  to  claim  their
fulfillment,  for  One  greater  than  you,  One  who
knew  whereof  He  spoke,  said:  "All  things  are
possible  to  him  who  believes  (Mark  9:23).

Until  very  recently,  whenever  anyone  has
spoken  of  faith  as  the  one  power  that  can  move
mountains,  we  have  always  felt  a  sort  of  hope-
less discouragement.  While  we  have  believed
that  God  holds  all  good  things  in  His  hand,  and
is  willing  to  be  prevailed  upon  to  dole  them


Faith  73

out  according  to  our  faith,  yet  how  could  we,
even  by  straining  every  nerve  of  our  being  to-
ward faith,  be  sure  that  we  had  sufficient  to
please  Him?  For  does  it  not  say,  "And  without
faith  it  is  impossible  to  please  him"  (Heb.
11:6)?

From  the  moment  we  began  to  ask,  we  be-
gan to  question  our  ability  to  reach  God's  stan-
dard of  faith  on  which  hung  our  fate.  We  also
began  to  question  whether,  after  all,  there  is
any  such  power  in  faith  to  prevail  with  the
Giver  of  "every  good  gift"  so  as  to  draw  out  of
Him  something  that  He  had  never  let  us  have
before.

Viewing  faith  in  this  light,  there  is  not  much
wonder  that  logical  minds  have  looked  on  it
as  a  sort  of  will-o'-the-wisp,  good  enough  for
women  and  children  to  hang  their  hopes  on,
but  not  a  thing  from  which  any  real,  definite
results  could  ever  be  obtained — not  a  thing  that
the  business  world  could  rest  upon.

There  is  a  blind  faith,  to  be  sure.  (Someone
has  truthfully  said  that  blind  faith  is  better  than
none  at  all;  for,  if  held  to,  it  will  get  its  eyes
open  after  a  time.)  But  there  is  also  an  under-
standing faith.  Blind  faith  is  an  instinctive  trust
in  a  power  higher  than  ourselves.  Understand-
ing faith  is  based  on  immutable  principle.

Faith  does  not  depend  on  physical  facts,  or


74  Lessons  in  Truth

on  the  evidence  of  the  senses,  because  It  is  born
of  intuition,  or  the  Spirit  of  truth  ever  living  at
the  center  of  our  being.  Its  action  is  infinitely
higher  than  that  of  intellectual  conclusions;  it
is  founded  on  Truth.

Intuition  is  the  open  end,  within  one's  own
being,  of  the  invisible  channel  ever  connecting
each  individual  with  God.  Faith  is,  as  it  were,  a
ray  of  light  shot  out  from  the  central  sun — God
— one  end  of  which  ray  comes  into  your  being
and  mine  through  the  open  door  of  intuition.
With  our  consciousness  we  perceive  the  ray  of
light,  and  though  intellect  cannot  grasp  it,  or
give  the  why  or  wherefore  thereof,  yet  we  in-
stinctively feel  that  the  other  end  of  the  ray
opens  out  into  all  there  is  of  God  (good) .  This
is  "blind"  faith.  It  is  based  on  Truth,  but  a
Truth  of  which  everyone  is  not  at  the  time
conscious.  Even  this  kind  of  faith  will,  if  per-
sisted in,  bring  results.

What  is  understanding  faith?  There  are
some  things  that  God  has  so  indissolubly  joined
together  that  it  is  impossible  for  even  Him  to
put  them  asunder.  They  are  bound  together  by
fixed,  immutable  laws;  if  we  have  one  of  them,
we  must  have  the  other.

This  is  illustrated  by  the  laws  of  geometry.
For  instance,  the  sum  of  the  angles  of  a  triangle
is  equal  to  two  right  angles.  No  matter  how


Faith  75

large  or  small  the  triangle,  no  matter  whether
it  is  made  on  the  mountaintop  or  leagues  under
the  sea,  if  we  are  asked  the  sum  of  its  angles
we  can  unhesitatingly  answer,  without  waiting
an  instant  to  count  or  reckon  this  particular
triangle,  that  it  is  just  two  right  angles.  This  is
absolutely  certain.  It  is  certain,  even  before  the
triangle  is  drawn  by  visible  lines;  we  can  know
it  beforehand,  because  it  is  based  on  unchange-
able laws,  on  the  truth  or  reality  of  the  thing.  It
was  true  just  as  much  before  anyone  recognized
it  as  it  is  today.  Our  knowing  it  or  not  knowing
it  does  not  change  the  truth.  Only  in  proportion
as  we  come  to  know  it  as  an  eternal  truth,  can
we  be  benefited  by  it.

It  is  also  a  simple  truth  that  one  plus  one
equals  two;  it  is  an  eternal  truth.  You  cannot
put  one  and  one  together  without  two  resulting.
You  may  believe  it  or  not;  that  does  not  alter  the
truth.  But  unless  you  do  put  the  one  and  one  to-
gether you  do  not  produce  the  two,  for  each  is
eternally  dependent  on  the  other.

The  mental  and  spiritual  world  or  realms
are  governed  by  laws  that  are  just  as  real  and
unfailing  as  the  laws  that  govern  the  natural
world.  Certain  conditions  of  mind  are  so  con-
nected with  certain  results  that  the  two  are
inseparable.  If  we  have  the  one,  we  must  have
the  other,  as  surely  as  the  night  follows  the  day


76  Lessons  m  Truth

— not  because  we  believe  some  wise  person's
testimony  that  such  is  the  case,  not  even  because
the  voice  of  intuition  tells  us  that  it  is  so,  but
because  the  whole  matter  is  based  on  laws  that
can  neither  fail  nor  be  broken.

When  we  know  something  of  these  laws,
we  can  know  positively  beforehand  just  what
results  will  follow  certain  mental  states.

God,  the  one  creative  cause  of  all  things,  is
Spirit,  and  visible  to  spiritual  consciousness,  as
we  have  learned.  God  is  the  sum  total  of  all
good.  There  is  no  good  that  you  can  desire  in
your  life  which,  at  its  center,  is  not  God.  God  is
the  substance  of  all  things — the  real  thing  with-
in every  visible  form  of  good.

God,  the  invisible  substance  out  of  which  all
visible  things  are  formed,  is  all  around  us  wait-
ing to  come  forth  into  manifestation.

This  good  substance  all  about  us  is  unlim-
ited, and  is  itself  the  supply  of  every  demand
that  can  be  made;  of  every  need  that  exists  in
the  visible  or  natural  world.

One  of  the  unerring  truths  in  the  universe
(by  "universe"  I  mean  the  spiritual  and  natural
worlds  combined)  is  that  there  is  already  pro-
vided a  lavish  abundance  for  every  human  want.
In  other  words,  the  supply  of  every  good  al-
ways awaits  the  demand.  Another  truth  is  that
the  demand  must  be  made  before  the  supply  can


Faith  77

come  forth  to  fill  it.  To  recognize  these  two
statements  of  Truth  and  to  affirm  them  are  the
whole  secret  of  understanding  faith — faith
based  on  principle.

Let  us  square  this  by  the  definition  of  faith,
given  earlier  in  the  lesson:  "Now  faith  is  the
assurance  of  things  hoped  for,  the  conviction
of  things  not  seen"  (Heb.  11:1).  Faith  takes
hold  of  the  substance  of  the  thing  hoped  for,
and  brings  into  evidence,  or  visibility,  the  things
not  seen.

What  are  usually  called  the  promises  of
God  are  certain  eternal,  unchangeable  truths
that  are  true  whether  they  are  found  in  the  Bible
or  in  the  almanac.  They  are  unvarying  state-
ments of  truth  that  cannot  be  altered.  A  prom-
ise, according  to  Webster,  is  a  something  sent
beforehand  to  indicate  that  something  unseen  is
at  hand.  It  is  a  declaration  that  gives  the  person
to  whom  it  is  made  the  right  to  expect  and  claim
the  performance  of  the  act.

The  Nazarene  recognized  the  unchangeable
truth  that,  in  the  unseen,  the  supply  of  every
want  awaits  demand.  When  He  said,  "Ask,  and
you  will  receive"  (John  16:24),  He  was  simply
stating  an  unalterable  truth.  He  knew  that  the
instant  we  ask  or  desire  (for  asking  is  desire
expressed)  we  touch  a  secret  spring  which  starts
on  its  way  toward  us  the  good  we  want.  He


78  Lessons  hi  Truth

knew  that  there  need  not  be  any  coaxing  or
pleading  about  it;  that  our  asking  is  simply  our
complying  with  an  unfailing  law  which  is  bound
to  work;  there  is  no  escape  from  it.  Asking  and
receiving  are  the  two  ends  of  the  same  thing.
There  is  a  very  close  connection  between
them.

Asking  springs  from  desire  to  possess  some
good.  What  Is  desire?  Desire  In  the  heart  is  al-
ways God  tapping  at  the  door  of  your  con-
sciousness with  His  Infinite  supply — a  supply
that  Is  forever  useless  unless  there  be  demand
for  It.  "Before  they  call  I  will  answer"  (Isa.
65:24).  Before  ever  you  are  conscious  of  any
lack,  of  any  desire  for  more  happiness,  for  full-
ness of  joy,  the  great  Father-Mother  heart  has
desired  them  for  you.  It  is  He  in  you  desiring
them  that  you  feel,  and  think  it  is  only  yourself
(separate  from  Him)  desiring  them.  With  God
the  desire  to  give,  and  giving,  are  one  and  the
same  thing.  Someone  has  said,  "Desire  for  any-
thing Is  the  thing  itself  In  incipiency";  that  is,
the  thing  you  desire  is  not  only  for  you,  but  has
already  been  started  toward  you  out  of  the  heart
of  God;  and  it  is  the  first  approach  of  the  thing
itself  striking  you  that  makes  you  desire  it,  or
even  think  of  it  at  all.

The  only  way  God  has  of  letting  us  know
of  His  infinite  supply  and  His  desire  to  make  it


Faith  79

ours  is  for  Him  to  push  gently  on  the  divine
spark  living  within  each  one  of  us.  He  wants
you  to  be  a  strong,  self -efficient  man  or  woman,
to  have  more  power  and  dominion  over  all  be-
fore you;  so  He  quietly  and  silently  pushes  a
little  more  of  Himself,  His  desire,  into  the
center  of  your  being.  He  enlarges,  so  to  speak,
your  real  self,  and  at  once  you  become  conscious
of  new  desire  to  be  bigger,  grander,  stronger.
If  He  had  not  pushed  at  the  center  of  your  be-
ing first,  you  would  never  have  thought  of  new
desires,  but  would  have  remained  perfectly  con-
tent as  you  were.

You  think  that  you  want  better  health,  more
love,  a  brighter,  more  cheerful  home  all  your
very  own;  in  short,  you  want  less  evil  (or  no
evil)  and  more  good  in  your  life.  This  is  only
God  pushing  at  the  inner  door  of  your  being,  as
if  He  were  saying:  "My  child,  let  Me  in;  I  want
to  give  you  all  good,  that  you  may  be  more  com-
fortable and  happy."  "Behold,  my  servants  shall
eat,  .  .  .  behold,  my  servants  shall  drink,  ...  be-
hold, my  servants  shall  rejoice,  .  .  .  behold,  my
servants  shall  sing  for  gladness,  .  .  .  They  shall
build  houses  and  inhabit  them"  (Isa.  65:13,
14,21).

Remember  this:  Desire  in  the  heart  for  any-
thing is  God's  sure  promise  sent  beforehand  to
indicate  that  it  is  yours  already  in  the  limitless


80  Lessons  m  Truth

realm  of  supply,  and  whatever  you  want  you
can  have  for  the  taking.

Taking  is  simply  recognizing  the  law  of
supply  and  demand  (even  If  you  cannot  see  a
sign  of  the  supply  any  more  than  Elijah  did
when  he  had  affirmed  for  rain,  and  not  a  cloud
even  so  big  as  a  man's  hand  was  for  a  long  time
to  be  seen) .  Affirm  your  possession  of  the  good
that  you  desire;  have  faith  In  it,  because  you
are  working  with  divine  law  and  cannot  fail;
do  not  be  argued  off  your  basic  principle  by  any-
one; and  sooner  will  the  heavens  fall  than  that
you  fail  to  get  that  which  you  desire.

"Therefore  I  tell  you,  whatever  you  ask  In
prayer,  believe  that  you  receive  it,  and  you  will"
(Mark  11:24).

Knowing  the  law  of  abundant  supply,  and
the  truth  that  supply  always  precedes  the  de-
mand, demand  simply  being  the  call  that  brings
the  supply  into  sight;  knowing  that  all  desire  in
the  heart  for  any  good  is  really  God's  desire  in
us  and  for  us,  how  shall  we  obtain  the  fulfill-
ment of  our  every  desire,  and  that  right  speed-
ily?

'Take  delight  in  the  LORD,

and  he  will  give  you  the  desires  of  your
heart"

(Psalms  37:4).


Faith  81

Take  right  hold  of  God  with  an  unwavering
faith.  Begin  and  continue  to  rejoice,  and  thank
Him  that  you  have  (not  will  have)  the  desires
of  your  heart,  never  losing  sight  of  the  fact  that
the  desire  is  the  thing  itself  in  incipiency.  If  the
good  were  not  already  yours  in  the  invisible
realm  of  supply,  you  could  not,  by  any  possibil-
ity, desire  it.

Someone  asks:  "Suppose  I  desire  my  neigh-
bor's wife,  or  his  property;  is  that  desire  born
of  God  ?  And  can  I  see  it  fulfilled  by  affirming
that  it  is  mine ?5>

You  do  not  and  cannot,  by  any  possibility,
desire  that  which  belongs  to  another.  You  do
not  desire  your  neighbor's  wife.  You  desire  the
love  that  seems  to  you  to  be  represented  by  your
neighbor's  wife.  You  desire  something  to  fill
your  heart's  craving  for  love.  Affirm  that  there
is  for  you  a  rightful  and  an  overflowing  supply,
and  claim  its  manifestation.  It  will  surely  come,
and  your  so-called  desire  to  possess  your  neigh-
bor's wife  will  suddenly  disappear.

So  you  do  not  in  reality  desire  anything  that
belongs  to  your  neighbor.  You  want  the  equiva-
lent of  that  for  which  his  possessions  stand.
You  want  your  own.  There  is  today  an  unlimited
supply  of  all  good  provided  in  the  unseen  for
every  human  being.  No  man  must  needs  have
less  that  another  may  have  more.  Your  very  own


82  Lessons  m  Truth

awaits  you.  Your  understanding  faith,  or  trust,
is  the  power  that  will  bring  it  to  you.

Emerson  said  that  the  man  who  knows  the
law  "is  sure  that  his  welfare  is  dear  to  the  heart
of  being  .  .  .  He  believes  that  he  cannot  escape
from  his  good."

Knowing  divine  law  and  obeying  it,  we  can
forever  rest  from  all  anxiety,  all  fear,  for

"Thou  openest  thy  hand,

thou  satisfiest  the  desire  of  every  living
thing"

(Psalms  145: 16).

Commentary

The  thoughts  expressed  in  this  chapter  on  faith
point  toward  some  most  inspiring  conclusions.  Faith
is  a  dynamic  power.  It  is  not  something  we  get;  it
is  something  we  have.  Faith  Is  not  magic,  it  is  not
anti-rational;  it  is  super-rational.  Faith  opens  the
way  to  the  higher  nature  where  we  find  the  answer
to  our  longing  for  something  more  than  that  which
is  found  in  material  existence.  It  enables  us  to  inter-
pret life  from  the  spiritual  and  adds  an  entirely  new
dimension  to  our  life.  It  helps  us  to  step  from  the
transitory  pleasures  into  the  permanent  goodness
of  God.

Because  faith  is  "as  a  grain  of  mustard  seed/'
we  can  begin  with  what  we  have,  and  nurture  it  and
let  it  grow  in  power,  until  it  becomes  a  bush  so
strong  that  all  our  birds  of  life  can  nest  in  it.

Ralph  Rhea


Personality


One  of  the  greatest  beauties  of  the  Sermon
on  the  Mount  is  the  childlike  simplicity  of  its
language.  Every  child,  every  grown  person,  be
he  ever  so  uneducated,  if  he  can  read  at  all  can
understand  it.  Not  a  word  in  it  requires  the  use
of  a  dictionary;  not  a  sentence  in  it  that  does
not  tell  the  way  so  plainly  that  "the  unclean
shall  not  pass  over  it,  and  fools  shall  not  err
therein"  (Isa.  35:8).  And  yet  the  Nazarene
was  the  fullest,  most  complete  manifestation  of
the  one  Mind  that  has  ever  lived;  that  is  to  say,
more  of  the  wisdom  that  is  God  came  forth
through  Him  into  visibility  than  through  any-
one else  who  has  ever  lived.  The  more  any

83


84  Lessons  m  Truth

person  manifests  the  true  wisdom,  which  is  God,
the  more  simple  are  his  ways  of  thinking  and
acting;  the  more  simple  are  the  words  through
which  he  expresses  his  Ideas.  The  greater  the
truth  to  be  expressed,  the  more  simply  can  it
(and  should  it)  be  clothed.

Emerson  said,  "Converse  with  a  mind  that
Is  grandly  simple,  and  all  literature  looks  like
word-catching."

In  the  metaphysical  literature  of  today  a
good  many  terms  are  used  that  are  very  confus-
ing to  those  who  have  not  taken  a  consecutive
course  of  lessons  on  the  subject.  It  seems  to  me
wise  to  give  here  a  clear,  simple  explanation  of
two  words  frequently  used,  so  that  even  the
most  unlearned  may  read  understandingly.

You  will  often  see  the  words  "thought  tran-
ference."  This  simply  means  the  sending  of
thought  from  one  person's  mind  to  another  with-
out using  either  written  or  audibly  spoken
words.  There  was  a  time,  when,  in  order  to
communicate  with  anyone  not  in  our  presence,
our  thoughts  must  be  laboriously  written  down
on  paper  and  carried  from  one  to  another.  Then,
in  the  progress  of  things,  came  a  time  when  the
Spirit  within  a  certain  man  revealed  to  the  in-
tellect of  that  man  that  a  subtle  fluid  which  was
not  tangible,  could  neither  be  seen  nor  handled,
called  electricity,  could  be  used  to  convey  a


Personality  and  Individuality  85

message  from  point  to  point  If  It  only  had  a
connecting  wire  between  the  two  points  on
which  to  run,  with  proper  batteries  at  either
end  of  the  wire  to  keep  up  the  supply  of  electric-
ity.

More  recently  scientific  people  are  learning
that  they  can  dispense  with  the  batteries  and
the  connecting  wire  between  two  points,  and
can  so  project  the  silent  thought  of  their  own
mind  out  through  space  to  another  mind  that
the  latter  can  inwardly  hear  or  receive  the  mess-
age; as  we  say,  the  other  mind  '  'catches  the
thought."  It  is  a  sort  of  mental  telegraphy,  and
is  called  telepathy.

If  this  is  a  new  idea  to  you,  you  may  not
believe  it  possible  that  one  mind  can  thus  re-
ceive the  message  from  another.  But  you  can
convince  yourself  of  it  as  a  fact  by  trying  it  for
yourself.  Suppose  someone  is  in  the  next  room.
Close  your  eyes  (in  order  better  to  concentrate
your  mind),  and,  directing  your  thought  posi-
tively to  him,  call  the  name  of  the  person  (si-
lently of  course),  and  vehemently  say  to  him,
"Come  out  here  to  me,  come  out  to  me,  come
out  to  me."  Continue  to  repeat  these  words
silently,  but  vigorously  and  imperatively,  and
the  person  spoken  to  will  come  to  you  without
knowing  what  he  came  for  or  why  he  came.
This,  of  course,  is  a  simple  experiment  which


g^  Lessons  in  Truth

might  be  followed  by  others  if  you  desire  to
test  the  possibility  of  thought  transference.

You  can  make  other  people  hear  in  this
silent  way,  and  you  can  make  them  do  what
you  command.  But  you  have  no  moral  right  to
use  the  power  of  thought  transference  to  cause
anyone  to  carry  out  any  plan  which  you  may
make  for  them.  You  may  think  your  neighbor
rich,  and  may  silently  send  him  thoughts  to  give
something  to  some  good  cause  in  which  you  are
interested,  or  to  some  poor  person,  justifying
yourself  by  saying,  "This  is  not  selfish;  I  do  not
want  him  to  give  to  me,  and  it  must  be  right  for
me  to  help  others/'  You  may  feel  justified  in
silently  sending  your  thought  into  another  one's
mind  to  cause  him  to  go  to  prayer-meeting,  or
some  other  good  place,  because  you  desire  him
to  lead  a  moral,  upright  life.  Beware  how  you
use  this  power  of  thought  transference  on  your
neighbor  for  any  such  specific  purpose,  though
it  may  seem  to  your  mortal  mind  as  though  the
thing  you  want  him  to  do  is  the  only  right
thing  for  him.  You  cannot  know,  for  only
the  Spirit  within  a  man  can  know  for  himself.
You  have  no  right  to  interpose  yourself  between
him  and  the  God  in  his  own  soul;  no  right
to  steal  silently  into  the  inner  portals  of  his
being  to  turn  him  one  way  or  the  other.  If
you  do  so,  remember  the  wrong  you  thus


Personality  and  Individuality  87

do  another  will  Invariably  react  upon  yourself.

The  only  right  you  have  to  use  the  law  of
thought  transference  on  another  is  to  call  out
the  Divine  Self  of  him,  saying  to  him  silently
something  like  this:  "God  lives  in  you;  He
guides  all  your  actions;  He  leads  you  where  He
would  have  you  go;  He  works  in  you  to  will
and  to  do  whatsoever  He  would  have  you  do,"
etc.,  etc.;  and  then  let  the  external  manifestation
be  what  It  will,  believing  that  it  Is  just  what
God  would  have  it  for  the  present,  even  If  It  is
exactly  the  opposite  of  what  you  had  planned.

Another  term  often  used,  and  not  always
clearly  understood,  is  "chemicalization."

Did  you  ever  put  soda  into  sour  milk,  cider,
or  other  acid  fluid,  and  witness  the  agitation  or
excited  action  which  takes  place?  One  of  the
substances  neutralizes  the  other,  and  something
better  results  from  the  action.

This  is  a  good  illustration  of  what  takes
place  sometimes  in  the  minds  and  bodies  of
people.  Suppose  one  has  lived  in  wrong  thought,
and  moulded  his  body  by  wrong  thought  for
years,  until,  as  you  might  say,  he  has  become
solidified  in  that  wrong  belief.  You  introduce
the  truth  to  him  by  strong  denials  and  affirma-
tions, as  has  been  taught.  The  very  newness  of  It
(and  because  it  is  truth)  creates  the  first  few
days  new  hope,  new  joy,  and  health.  After  a


gg  Lessons  m  Truth

little  time  a  sort  of  mental  ferment  or  agitation
takes  place.  One  is  apt  to  feel  very  nervous  and
scared  way  down  in  the  depths  of  himself.  If
he  has  ever  been  sick,  he  will  begin  to  feel  the
old  diseases;  if  he  has  been  morally  bad,  the  old
desires  and  habits  will  take  possession  of  him
with  new  force;  if  he  has  been  holding  denials
and  affirmations  about  business  affairs,  until
they  have  looked  hopeful,  all  at  once  they  col-
lapse and  seem  darker  and  more  hopeless  than
ever.  All  the  new  beliefs  which  lifted  him  into
a  new  world  for  a  few  days  seem  failures,  and
he  seems  on  the  very  verge  of  breaking  up
generally.

What  has  happened?  Why,  simply  this:
There  has  been  a  clash  between  the  old  condi-
tion— which  was  based  on  falsehood,  fear  and
wrong  ways  of  thinking — and  the  new  thought
or  truth  entering  into  you.  The  old  mortal  is
kicking  vigorously  against  the  truth.  You  have
a  feeling  of  discouragement  or  of  fear — a  feel-
ing such  as  one  would  have  if  caught  at  some-
thing disreputable.  Do  not  be  frightened.  That
which  you  feel  is,  on  the  spiritual  plane,  a
similar  excitement  and  agitation  to  that  which
was  seen  in  the  chemical  action  between  the
alkali  and  acid  on  the  material  plane,  and  some-
thing higher  and  better  always  results.

This  agitation  does  not  always  take  place


Personality  and  Individuality  89

with  everyone,  but  is  most  apt  to  occur  with
those  who  have  been  most  fixed,  and,  as  it  were,
solidified  in  the  old  beliefs.  Such  people  break
up  with  more  resistance.  Those  who  are  not
very  settled  in  their  convictions  are  more  malle-
able mentally  and  physically,  and  are  not  so  apt
to  chemicalize.  Vigorous  use  of  denials  are  also
more  apt  to  produce  chemicalization  than  is  the
use  of  affirmations.  There  is  always  less  re-
sistance by  the  mortal  when  it  is  gently  led  into
the  truth  than  when  its  errors  are  directly  and
vigorously  combated.  Should  you  find  yourself
at  any  time  in  this  state  of  internal  excitement
with  aggravation  of  old,  bad  conditions,  it
needs  only  that  you  constantly  affirm,  * 'There
is  nothing  to  fear,  absolutely  nothing  to  fear;
perfect  love  reigns,  and  all  is  good;  peace,  be
still,"  etc.,  and  very  soon  the  brighter  condi-
tions will  appear  and  you  will  find  yourself  on
a  much  higher  plane  than  you  have  ever  been
before.

Do  not  be  afraid  of  this  word  (or  the  con-
dition) "chemicalization,"  as  many  have  been,
for  truly  there  is  nothing  to  fear  in  it.

The  words  personality  and  individuality
present  distinct  meanings  to  the  trained  mind,
but  by  the  untrained  mind  they  are  often  used
interchangeably  and  apart  from  their  real  mean-
ings.


90  Lessons  in  Truth

Personality  applies  to  the  human  part  of  you
— the  person,  the  external  It  belongs  to  the
region  governed  by  the  intellect.  Your  per-
sonality may  be  agreeable  or  disagreeable  to
others.  When  you  say  that  you  dislike  anyone,
you  mean  that  you  dislike  his  personality — that
exterior  something  that  presents  itself  from  the
outside.  It  is  the  outer,  changeable  man,  In  con-
tradistinction to  the  inner  or  real,  man.

Individuality  is  the  term  used  to  denote  the
real  man.  The  more  God  comes  into  visibility
through  a  person  the  more  individualized  he
becomes.  By  this  I  do  not  mean  that  one's  in-
dividuality is  greater  when  one  is  more  religious.
Remember,  God  is  wisdom,  intelligence,  love,
power.  The  more  pronounced  the  manner  in
which  any  one  of  these  qualities — or  all  of  them
— comes  forth  into  visibility  through  a  man,
the  greater  his  Individuality.

Emerson  was  a  man  of  large  individuality,
but  retiring  personality.  He  was  grandly  simple.
He  was  of  a  shrinking,  retiring  nature  (or
personality).  But  just  in  proportion  as  the  hu-
man side  of  him  was  willing  to  retire  and  be
thought  little  of,  did  the  immortal,  the  God  in
him,  shine  forth  in  greater  degree.

John  the  Baptist  represents  the  illumined
intellect,  the  highest  development  of  human
consciousness.  We  may  think  of  him  as  stand-


Personality  and  Individuality  91

ing  for  personality,  whereas  Jesus  typifies  the
divine  self  or  individuality.  John,  recognizing
the  superiority  of  Jesus,  said,  "He  must  increase,
but  I  must  decrease"  (John  3:30).

One's  individuality  Is  that  part  of  one  that
never  changes  its  Identity.  It  is  the  God  self.  It
Is  that  which  distinguishes  one  person  from
another.  One's  personality  may  become  like  that
of  others  with  whom  one  associates.  Individual-
ity never  changes.

Do  not  confound  the  terms.  One  may  have
an  aggtessive,  pronounced  personality,  or  ex-
ternal man,  which  will,  for  a  time,  fight  its  way
through  obstacles  and  gain  its  point.  But  a
pronounced  individuality  never  battles;  it  is
never  puffed  up;  it  Is  never  governed  by  likes
and  dislikes  and  never  causes  them  in  others;
it  is  God  come  forth  in  greater  degree  through
a  man,  and  all  mere  personality  instinctively
bends  the  knee  before  it  in  recognition  of  its
superiority.

We  cultivate  individuality  by  listening  to
the  "still  small  voice"  (I  Kings  19:12)  down
deep  within  us,  and  boldly  following  it,  even  if
it  does  makes  us  different  from  others,  as  it
surely  will.  We  cultivate  personality,  in  which
live  pride,  fear  of  criticism,  and  all  manner  of
selfishness,  by  listening  to  the  voices  outside
ourselves  and  by  being  governed  by  selfish


92  Lessons  m  Truth

motives,  instead  of  by  the  highest  within  us.
Seek  always  to  cultivate,  or  to  bring  into  visi-
bility, individuality,  not  personality.  In  propor-
tion as  one  increases,  the  other  must  decrease.

Whenever  we  fear  a  man,  or  shrink  before
him,  it  is  because  his  personality,  being  the
stronger,  overcomes  ours.  Many  timid  persons
go  through  life  always  feeling  that  they  are
inefficient,  that  others  are  wiser  or  better  than
they.  They  dread  to  meet  a  positive,  self-pos-
sessed person;  and  when  in  the  presence  of  such
a  one,  they  are  laid  low,  just  as  a  field  of  tall
wheat  is,  after  a  fierce  windstorm  has  swept
across  it.  They  feel  as  though  they  would  like
to  get  out  of  sight  forever.

All  this,  dear  timid  ones,  is  not  because  your
fellow  really  is  wiser  or  better  than  you,  but  be-
cause his  personality — the  external  man — is
stronger  than  yours.  You  never  have  a  similar
feeling  in  the  presence  of  strong  individuality.
Individuality  in  another  not  only  produces  in
you  an  admiration  for  its  superiority,  but  it  also
gives  you,  when  you  are  in  its  presence,  a  strange
new  sense  of  your  own  inherent  possibilities,  a
sense  that  is  full  of  exhilaration  and  comfort
and  encouragement  to  you.  This  is  because  a
pronounced  individuality  simply  means  more
of  God  come  forth  into  visibility  through  a
person,  and  by  some  mind  process  it  has


Personality  and  Individuality  93

power  to  call  forth  more  of  God  through  you.

If  you  want  to  know  how  to  avoid  being
overcome  and  thrown  off  your  feet  by  the  strong
personality  of  others,  I  will  tell  you:

Always  remember  that  personality  is  of  the
human  and  individuality  is  of  God.  Silently
affirm  your  own  individuality,  your  oneness  with
God,  and  your  superiority  to  personality.  Can
God  fear  any  person?

If  you  are  naturally  inclined  to  be  timid  or
shrinking,  practice  of  the  following  will  help
you  overcome  it.  As  you  walk  down  the  street
and  see  anyone  coming  toward  you,  even  a
stranger  to  you,  silently  affirm  such  words  as:
ffl  am  a  part  of  God  in  visibility;  I  am  one  with
the  Father;  this  person  has  no  power  over  me,
for  I  am  superior  to  all  personality."  Cultivate
this  habit  of  thinking  and  affirming  whenever
you  approach  any  person,  and  you  will  soon
find  that  no  personality,  however  strong  and
aggressive,  has  the  power  to  throw  you  out  of
the  most  perfect  poise.  You  will  be  self-pos-
sessed because  God-possessed.

Some  years  ago  I  found  myself  under  a
sense  of  bondage  to  a  strong,  aggressive  per-
sonality with  whom,  externally,  I  had  been  quite
intimately  associated  for  several  months.  I
seemed  to  see  things  through  another's  eyes;
and  while  I  was  more  than  half  conscious  of


94  Lessons  m  Truth

this,  yet  I  could  not  seem  to  throw  it  off.  This
personality  was  able,  with  a  very  few  words,  to
make  me  feel  as  if  all  that  I  said  or  did  was  a
mistake,  and  that  I  was  a  most  miserable  fail-
ure. I  was  always  utterly  discouraged  after  be-
ing in  this  presence,  and  felt  that  I  had  no
ability  to  accomplish  anything.

After  vainly  trying  for  weeks  to  free  my-
self, one  day  I  was  walking  along  the  street,
with  a  most  intense  desire  and  determination
to  be  free.  Many  times  before,  I  had  affirmed
that  this  personality  could  not  affect  or  over-
come me,  but  with  no  effect.  This  day  I  struck
out  farther  and  declared  (silently  of  course),
"There  is  no  such  personality  in  the  universe
as  this  one,"  affirming  it  again  and  again  many
times.  After  a  few  moments  I  began  to  feel
wondrously  lifted,  and  as  if  chains  were  drop-
ping off.  Then  the  voice  within  me  urged  me  on
a  step  farther  to  say,  "There  is  no  personality  in
the  universe;  there  is  nothing  but  God."  After
a  short  time  spent  in  vigorously  using  these
words,  I  seemed  to  break  every  fetter.  From  that
day  to  this,  without  further  effort,  I  have  been
as  free  from  any  influence  of  that  personality
as  though  it  had  never  existed.

If  at  any  time  the  lesser  affirmation  of  Truth
fails  to  free  you  from  the  influence  of  other
minds,  try  this  more  sweeping  one,  ffThere  is  no


Personality  and  Individuality  95

personality  in  the  universe;  there  is  nothing  but
God'3  and  you  are  bound  to  be  made  free.

The  more  you  learn  to  act  from  the  "still
small  voice'7  within  you,  the  stronger  and  more
pronounced  will  be  individuality  in  you.

If  you  are  inclined  to  wilt  before  strong  per-
sonalities, always  remember  that  God  has  need
of  you,  through  whom,  in  some  special  man-
ner, to  manifest  Himself — some  manner  for
which  He  cannot  use  any  other  organ — what
need  have  you  to  quail  before  any  person,  no
matter  how  important?

However  humble  your  place  in  life,  however
unknown  to  the  world  you  may  be,  however
small  your  capabilities  may  seem  at  present  to
you,  you  are  just  as  much  a  necessity  to  God  in
His  efforts  to  get  Himself  into  visibility  as  is
the  most  brilliant  intellect,  the  most  thoroughly
cultured  person  in  the  world.  Remember  this
always,  and  act  from  the  highest  within  you.

Commentary

The  secret  of  life  is  hidden  in  the  relationship  of
God  and  man.  The  truth  that  sets  us  free  forever  is
to  know  that  God  is  man  and  man  is  God,  and  that
there  is  no  separation.  God  is  all,  "who  is  above  all
and  through  all  and  in  all."  God  is  the  Expressor,
man  is  the  expression.

Personality  comes  from  the  Latin  word  persona,
which  means  "mask."  The  world  sees  only  the  mask.


Lessons  m  Truth

the  outer;  behind  the  mask  is  the  God-presence  called
the  whole  man.  The  individuality  is  this  whole  man.
Individuality  comes  from  the  Latin  word  individ-
uus,  which  means  "not  divisible."  God  and  man  are
inseparable:  "The  Lord  our  God,  the  Lord  is  one/'
Individuality  is  our  spiritual  identity,  and  personality
is  our  physical  identity.  Personality  is  not  evil  nor  is
it  to  be  destroyed;  it  and  individuality  are  two  parts
of  the  same  One.  Our  personality  should  be  an  outer
expression  of  the  real  Self  within.  "I  and  the  Father
are  one/'  Personality  is  what  we  think  we  are  at  any
given  time.  Individuality  is  what  we  really  are  at  all
times.

Sue  Sikking


Spiritual
Understanding


"Happy  is  the  man  who  finds  wisdom,

and  the  man  who  gets  understanding,
for  the  gain  from  it  is  better  than  gain  from

silver

and  its  profit  better  than  gold.
She  is  more  precious  than  jewels,

and  nothing  you  desire  can  compare  with

her.
Long  life  is  in  her  right  hand;

in  her  left  hand  are  riches  and  honor.
Her  ways  are  ways  of  pleasantness,

and  all  her  paths  are  peace.
She  is  a  tree  of  life  to  those  who  lay  hold
of  her;

97


98  Lessons  in  Truth

those  who  hold  her  fast  are  called  happy.
The  beginning  of  wisdom  Is  this:   Get  wis-
dom/'

(Prov.  3:13-18;  4:7).

What  is  this  understanding  on  the  getting
of  which  depends  so  much?  Is  It  intellectual
lore,  obtained  from  delving  deep  into  books  of
other  men's  making?  Is  it  knowledge  obtained
from  studying  rocks  (geology),  or  stars  (as-
tronomy), or  even  the  human  body  (physiol-
ogy) ?  Nay,  verily,  for  when  did  such  knowl-
edge ever  insure  life  and  health  and  peace,  ways
of  pleasantness,  with  riches  and  honor?

Understanding  is  a  spiritual  birth,  a  revela-
tion of  God  within  the  heart  of  man.  Jesus
touched  the  root  of  the  matter  when,  after  hav-
ing asked  the  apostles  a  question  that  was  an-
swered variously,  according  to  the  intellectual
perception  of  the  men,  He  asked  another  ques-
tion to  which  Peter  gave  a  reply  not  based  on
external  reasoning,  but  on  intuition.  He  said
to  Peter,  "Blessed  are  you,  Simon  Bar-Jona!
For  flesh  and  blood  has  not  revealed  this  to
you,  but  my  Father  who  is  in  heaven"  (Matt.
16:17).

You  may  have  an  intellectual  perception  of
Truth.  You  may  easily  grasp  with  the  mind  the
statement  that  God  is  the  giver  of  all  good  gifts


Spiritual  Understanding  99

— life,  health,  love — just  as  people  have  for
centuries  grasped  it.  Or  you  may  go  farther,  and
intellectually  see  that  God  is  not  only  the  giver,
but  the  gift  itself;  that  He  is  life,  health,  love,
in  us.  But  unless  Truth  is  "revealed  .  .  .  unto
thee"  by  "my  Father  who  is  in  heaven"  (Matt.
16: 17) ,  it  is  of  no  practical  benefit  to  you  or  to
anyone  else.

This  revelation  of  Truth  to  the  consciousness
of  a  person  is  spiritual  understanding.

You  may  say  to  yourself,  or  another  may  say
silently  to  you,  over  and  over  again,  that  you
are  well  and  wise  and  happy.  On  the  mental
plane  a  certain  "cure"  is  effected,  and  for  a  time
you  will  feel  well  and  wise  and  happy.  This  is
simply  a  form  of  hypnotism,  or  mind  cure.  But
until,  down  in  the  depths  of  your  being,  you
are  conscious  of  your  oneness  with  the  Father,
until  you  know  within  yourself  that  the  spring
of  all  wisdom  and  health  and  joy  is  within  your
own  being,  ready  at  any  moment  to  leap  forth
at  the  call  of  your  need,  you  will  not  have
spiritual  understanding.

All  the  teachings  of  Jesus  were  for  the  pur-
pose of  leading  men  into  this  consciousness  of
their  oneness  with  the  Father.  He  had  to  begin
at  the  external  man — because  people  then  as
now  were  living  mostly  in  external  things —
and  teach  him  to  love  his  enemies,  to  do  good


XOQ  Lessons  in  Truth

to  others,  and  so  forth.  These  were  external
steps  for  them  to  take— a  sort  of  lopping  off  of
the  ends  of  the  branches;  but  they  were  steps
that  led  on  up  to  the  place  of  desire  and  attain-
ment where  finally  the  Master  said,  "I  have  yet
many  things  to  say  to  you,  but  you  cannot  bear
them  now"  (John  16: 12 ) .

He  told  them  of  the  Comforter  that  should
be  in  them,  and  which  should  teach  them  all
things,  revealing  the  "depths  of  God"  (I  Cor.
2:10)  to  them,  showing  them  things  to  come.
In  other  words,  He  told  them  how  they  might
find  the  kingdom  of  heaven  within  themselves
— the  kingdom  of  love,  of  power,  of  life.

The  coming  of  the  Comforter  to  their  hearts
and  lives,  giving  them  power  over  every  form
of  sin,  sickness,  sorrow,  and  over  even  death  it-
self, is  exactly  what  we  mean  by  understanding
or  realization.  The  power  that  this  conscious-
ness of  the  indwelling  Father  gives  is  for  us
today  as  much  as  it  was  for  those  to  whom  the
Nazarene  spoke.  Aye,  more;  for  did  He  not  say,
"He  who  believes  in  me  will  also  do  the  works
that  I  do;  and  greater  works  than  these  will  he
do"  (John  14: 12)?

All  the  foregoing  lessons  have  been  step-
pingstones  leading  up  to  the  point  where  man
may  realize  the  ever-abiding  inner  presence  of
the  Most  High,  God.  "Do  you  not  know  that


Spiritual  Under  standing  101

your  body  is  a  temple  of  the  Holy  Spirit  within
you?"  (I  Cor.  6: 19).

I  cannot  reveal  God  to  you.  You  cannot  re-
veal God  to  another.  If  I  have  learned,  I  may
tell  you,  and  you  may  tell  another,,  how  to  seek
and  find  God,  each  within  himself.  But  the  new
birth  into  the  consciousness  of  our  spiritual
faculties  and  possibilities  is  indeed  like  the
wind  that  * 'blows  where  it  wills,  and  you  hear
the  sound  of  it,  but  you  do  not  know  whence  it
comes  or  whither  it  goes;  so  it  is  with  every
one  who  is  born  of  the  Spirit"  (John  3:8) .  The
new  birth  takes  place  in  the  silence,  in  the  in-
visible.

Intellectual  lore  can  be  bought  and  sold;
understanding,  or  realization,  cannot.  A  man,
Simon  by  name,  once  attempted  to  buy  the
power  that  spiritual  understanding  gives,  from
another  who  possessed  it.  "But  Peter  said  to
him,  'Your  silver  perish  with  you,  because  you
thought  you  could  obtain  the  gift  of  God  with
money!  You  have  neither  part  nor  lot  in  this
matter,  for  your  heart  is  not  right  before  God'  "
(Acts  8:20,  21).

Nor  will  crying  and  beseeching  bring  spir-
itual understanding.  Hundreds  of  people  have
tried  this  method,  and  have  not  received  that
for  which  they  earnestly  but  ignorantly  sought.
They  have  not  received,  because  they  did  not


102  Lessons  in  Truth

know  how  to  take  that  which  God  freely  of-
fered. Others  have  sought  with  selfish  motives
this  spiritual  understanding,  or  consciousness
of  the  Indwelling  Father,  because  of  the  power
it  would  give  them.  "Yon  ask  and  do  not  re-
ceive, because  you  ask  wrongly  to  spend  it  on
your  passions"  (or  to  serve  selfish  ends)  (James
4:3).

Understanding,  or  realization  of  the  pres-
ence of  God  within  us.  Is  as  Peter  said,  "the  gift
of  God"  (Acts  8:20).  It  comes  to  any  and  all
who  learn  how  to  seek  It  aright  Emerson  said,
"This  energy  {consciousness  of  God  in  the
soul]  does  not  descend  into  individual  life  on
any  other  condition  than  entire  possession.  It
comes  to  the  lowly  and  simple;  it  comes  to
whomsoever  will  put  off  what  is  foreign  and
proud;  it  comes  as  insight;  it  comes  as  serenity
and  grandeur.  When  we  see  those  whom  it  in-
habits, we  are  apprised  of  new  degrees  of  great-
ness. From  that  inspiration  [consciousness]  the
man  comes  back  with  a  changed  tone.  He  does
not  talk  with  men  with  an  eye  to  their  opinion.
He  tries  them.  .  .  .  But  the  soul  that  ascends  to
worship  the  great  God  is  plain  and  true;  has
no  rose  color,  no  fine  friends  ...  no  adventures;
does  not  want  admiration;  dwells  in  the  hour
that  now  is."

"You  will  seek  me  and  find  me;  when  you


Spiritual  Understanding  103

see  me  with  ail  your  heart"  (Jer.  29:13).  In
that  day  when,  more  than  riches  and  honor  and
power  and  selfish  glory,  you  shall  desire  spiri-
tual understanding,  in  that  day  will  come  to
you  the  revelation  of  God  in  you,  and  you  will
be  conscious  of  the  indwelling  Father,  who  Is
life  and  strength  and  power  and  peace.

One  may  so  desire  a  partial  revelation  of
God  within  himself,  a  revelation  along  one  line
— as,  for  instance,  that  of  health — as  to  seek  it
with  all  his  heart.  And  if  he  has  learned  how  to
take  the  desired  gift,  by  uncompromising  affir-
mation that  it  is  his  already,  he  will  get  under-
standing, or  realization,  of  God  as  his  perfect
health.  So  with  any  other  desired  gift  of  God.
This  is  a  step  in  the  right  direction.  It  is  learning
how  to  take  God  by  faith  for  whatever  one  de-
sires. But  in  the  onward  growth,  the  time  will
come  to  every  man  when  he  will  hear  the  di-
vine voice  within  him  saying,  "Come  up  high-
er," and  he  will  pass  beyond  any  merely  selfish
desires  that  are  just  for  his  own  comfort's  sake.
He  will  desire  good  that  he  may  have  the  more
to  give  out,  knowing  that  as  good  (God)  flows
through  him  to  others  it  will  make  him  "every
whit  whole."

In  the  beginning  of  Solomon's  reign  as  king
over  Israel,  the  divine  Presence  appeared  to  him
in  a  dream  at  night,  saying:  "Ask  what  I  shall


104  Lessons  in  Truth

give  you"  (I  Kings  3:5).  And  Solomon  said:
"Give  thy  servant  therefore  an  understanding
mind"  (I  Kings  3:9).

"It  pleased  the  LORD  that  Solomon  had
asked  this.  And  God  said  to  him,  'Because  you
have  asked  this,  and  have  not  asked  for  your-
self long  life  or  riches  or  the  life  of  your  ene-
mies, but  have  asked  for  yourself  understanding
to  discern  what  is  right,  behold,  I  now  do  ac-
cording to  your  word.  Behold,  I  give  you  a  wise
and  discerning  mind,  so  that  none  like  you  has
been  before  you  and  none  like  you  shall  arise
after  you*  I  give  you  also  what  you  have  not
asked,  both  riches  and  honor,  so  that  no  other
king  shall  compare  with  you,  all  your  days'  "

(Kings  3: 10-13).

Thus  in  losing  sight  of  all  worldly  goods
and  chattels,  all  merely  selfish  ends,  and  desir-
ing above  all  things  an  understanding  heart  (or
a  spiritual  consciousness  of  God  within  him  as
wisdom,  life,  power),  Solomon  received  all  the
goods  or  good  things  included,  so  that  there  was
none  among  the  kings  like  unto  him  in  worldly
possessions.  "But  seek  first  his  kingdom  [con-
sciousness*] and  his  righteousness,  and  all  these
things  shall  be  yours  as  well"  (Matt.  6:33) .  "For
whoever  would  save  his  life  [the  things  of  his
life]  will  lose  it,  and  whoever  loses  his  life  for
my  sake  [that  is  willing  to  forget  the  so-called


Spiritual  Understanding  105

good  things  of  this  life  for  the  Truth's  sake,
choosing  before  all  things  the  finding  of  God
in  his  own  soul]  will  find  it"  (Matt.  16:25).

When  you  first  consciously  desire  spiritual
understanding,  you  do  not  attain  it  at  once.  You
have  been  living  in  the  external  of  your  being
and  have  believed  yourself  cut  off  from  God.
Your  first  step  after  coming  to  yourself  like  the
prodigal  son  is  to  say  as  he  did,  "I  will  arise
and  go  to  my  father"  (Luke  15:18)  to  turn
your  thoughts  away  from  the  external  seeming
toward  the  central  and  real;  to  know  Intellec-
tually that  you  are  not  cut  off  from  God,  and  that
He  forever  desires  to  manifest  Himself  within
you  as  your  present  deliverance  from  all  suffer-
ing and  sin.  Just  as  Jesus  taught,  we  begin  our
journey  toward  understanding  by  cutting  off  the
branches  of  our  selfishness.  We  try  to  love  in-
stead of  to  hate.  Instead  of  avenging  ourselves,
we  begin  to  forgive,  even  if  it  costs  us  great
mental  effort.  We  begin  to  deny  envy,  jealousy,
anger,  sickness,  and  all  imperfection,  and  to
affirm  love,  peace,  and  health.

Begin  with  the  words  of  Truth  that  you
have  learned,  and  which  perhaps  you  have  as
yet  only  comprehended  with  the  intellect.  You
must  be  willing  to  take  the  very  first  light  you
receive  and  use  it  faithfully,  earnestly,  to  help
both  yourself  and  others.  Sometimes  you  will  be


106  Lessons  m  Truth

almost  overcome  by  questions  and  doubts  aris-
ing in  your  own  mind  when  you  are  looking  in
vain  for  results.  But  you  must  with  effort  pass
the  place  of  doubt;  and  some  day,  in  the  fullness
of  God's  time,  while  you  are  using  the  words
of  Truth,  they  will  suddenly  be  illumined  and
become  to  you  the  living  word  within  you —
"The  true  light  that  enlightens  every  man  was
coming  into  the  world "  (John  1:9).  You  will
no  longer  dwell  in  darkness,  for  the  light  will
be  within  your  own  heart;  and  the  word  will  be
made  flesh  to  you;  that  is,  you  will  be  conscious
of  a  new  and  diviner  life  in  your  body,  and  a
new  and  diviner  love  for  all  people,  a  new  and
diviner  power  to  accomplish.

This  is  spiritual  understanding.  This  is  a
flash  of  the  Most  High  within  your  conscious-
ness. "The  old  has  passed  away,  behold,  the
new  has  come"  (II  Cor.  5:17).  This  will  be  the
time  when  you  will  not  "talk  with  men  with  an
eye  to  their  opinion."  This  is  when  you  will
suddenly  become  plain  and  true;  when  you  will
cease  to  desire  admiration;  when  all  words  of
congratulation  from  others  on  your  success  will
fill  you  with  an  inexpressible  sense  of  humility;
when  all  mere  compliments  will  be  to  you  as
"a  noisy  gong  or  a  clanging  cymbal"  (I  Cor.
13:1).  Truly,  from  that  inspiration  a  man  comes
back  with  a  changed  tone!


Spiritual  Understanding  107

With  spiritual  understanding  comes  new
light  on  the  Scriptures.  The  very  Spirit  of  truth,
which  has  come  to  abide  with  you  forever  in
your  consciousness,  takes  the  deep  things  of
God  and  reveals  them  to  you.  You  will  no  long-
er run  to  and  fro,  seeking  teachers  or  healers
and  rely  solely  on  them  for  guidance.  You  will
gladly  let  them  help  you  reach  the  point  where
you  will  know  that  the  living  light,  the  living
word  within  you,  will  "guide  you  into  all  the
truth"  (John  16:13).

What  we  need  to  do  is  to  seek  the  revelation
of  the  living  Christ  within  our  own  being,  each
for  himself,  knowing  that  only  this  divinity
come  forth  can  make  us  powerful  and  happy.

Every  person  in  his  heart  desires,  though  he
may  not  yet  quite  know  it,  this  new  birth  into
a  higher  life,  into  spiritual  consciousness.  Every-
one wants  more  power,  more  good,  more  joy.
And  though  to  the  unawakened  mind  it  may
seem  that  it  is  more  money  as  money,  or  more
goods  that  he  wants,  it  is,  nevertheless,  more
of  good  (God)  that  he  craves;  for  all  good  is
God.

Many  today  are  conscious  that  the  inner
hunger  cannot  be  satisfied  with  worldly  goods,
and  are  with  all  earnestness  seeking  spiritual
understanding,  or  consciousness,  of  an  imma-
nent God.  They  have  been  seeking  long,  with  a


108  Lessons  in  Truth

great  desire  of  unselfishness  and  a  feeling  that
when  they  have  truly  found  God  they  will  be-
gin to  do  for  others.  Faithful  service  for  others
hastens  the  daydawning  for  us.  The  gifts  of
God  are  not  given  In  reward  for  faithful  service,
as  a  fond  mother  gives  cake  to  her  child  for  be-
ing good;  nevertheless  they  are  a  reward,  in-
asmuch as  service  Is  one  of  the  steps  that  lead
up  to  the  place  where  all  the  fullness  of  God
awaits  men.  And  while  spiritual  understanding
is  In  reality  a  "gift  of  God/'  it  comes  to  us  more
or  less  quickly  in  proportion  as  we  use  the  light
that  we  already  have.

I  believe  that  too  much  introspection,  too
much  of  what  people  usually  call  "spiritual
seeking/'  Is  detrimental  rather  than  helpful  to
the  end  desired — spiritual  growth.  "Spiritual
seeking"  is  a  sort  of  spiritual  selfishness,  para-
doxical as  this  may  seem.  From  the  beginning
to  the  end,  Jesus  taught  the  giving  of  what  one
possesses  to  him  who  has  none.

"Is  not  this  the  fast  that  I  choose  [said  the  Spirit
of  God  through  the  prophet  Isaiah]:

to  loose  the  bonds  of  wickedness,

to  undo  the  thongs  of  the  yoke,
to  let  the  oppressed  go  free,  .  .  .
Is  it  not  to  share  your  bread  with  the  hungry,

and  bring  the  homeless  poor  into  your  house;


Spiritual  Understanding  109

when  you  see  the  naked,  to  cover  him,  .  . .
Then  shall  your  light  break  forth  like  the  dawn,
and  your  healing  shall  spring  up  speedily;

Then  you  shall  call,  and  the  LORD  will  answer;

Here  I  am

if  you  pour  yourself  out  for  the  hungry

and  satisfy  the  desire  of  the  afflicted,
then  shall  your  light  rise  in  the  darkness

and  your  gloom  be  as  the  noonday.
And  the  LORD  will  guide  you  continually,

and  satisfy  your  desire  with  good  things,

and  make  your  bones  strong;
and  you  shall  be  like  a  watered  garden,

like  a  spring  of  water,

whose  waters  fail  not"

(Isa.  58:6-11).

Stagnation  is  death.  A  pool  cannot  be  kept
clean  and  sweet  and  renewed  unless  there  is  an
outlet  as  well  as  an  inlet.  It  is  our  business  to
keep  both  the  inlet  and  outlet  open,  and  God's
business  to  keep  the  stream  flowing  in  and
through  us.  Unless  you  use  for  the  service  of
others  what  God  has  already  given  to  you,  you
will  find  it  a  long,  weary  road  to  spiritual  un-
derstanding.

We  cry  out  and  strain  every  nerve  to  obtain


110  Lessons  hi  Truth

full  understanding,  just  as  sometimes  we  have
heard  earnest  people,  but  people  wholly  igno-
rant of  divine  laws,  beseech  God  for  the  full
baptism  of  "the  Holy  Spirit51  (Luke  3:16)  as  in
the  day  of  Pentecost.  Jesus  said,  "I  have  yet
many  things  to  say  to  you,  but  you  cannot  bear
them  now"  (John  16:12).  We  grow  by  using
for  others  the  light  and  knowledge  we  have.  We
expand,  as  we  go  on  step  by  step  in  spiritual
insight,  until  in  the  fullness  of  time — which
means  when  we  have  grown  spiritually  up  to
the  place  where  God  sees  that  we  are  able  to
bear  the  many  things — we  receive  the  desire  of
our  hearts,  understanding.

Seek  your  own  Lord.  Take  the  light  as  it
is  revealed  to  you,  and  use  it  for  others;  and
prove  for  yourselves  whether  there  be  Truth  in
this  prophecy  of  Isaiah,  that  "then  shall  your
light  rise  in  the  darkness  and  your  gloom  be  as
the  noonday"  (Isa.  58:10)  and  "then  shall  your
light  break  forth  like  the  dawn,  and  your  heal-
ing shall  spring  up  speedily"  (Isa.  58:8).

Commentary

Spiritual  understanding  is  working  knowledge
of  God.  It  comes  only  through  intuition  and  direct
experience.  Learning  through  outer  sources,  wonder-
ful and  indispensable  as  it  is  in  our  growth  and
unfoldment,  is  still  " secondhand"  knowledge  of


Spiritual  Understanding  111

God,  the  creative  Spirit.  Ultimately  each  one  comes
to  the  final  Teacher,  the  Spirit  of  truth  promised  by
Jesus.  This  inner  teacher  has  the  responsibility  and
"know-how"  to  lead  us  into  all  Truth,  and  it  will
do  its  work  when  we  surrender  completely  to  it.

Start  with  what  you  have  now,  urges  the  author.
Keep  working,  praying,  listening  until  you  receive
"a  flash  of  the  Most  High  within  your  conscious-
ness/' "This  is  spiritual  understanding/'  From  this
experience  you  emerge  a  new  creature,  living  in  a
new  world  in  which  new  doors  of  good  are  being
constantly  opened  by  your  spiritual  understanding,
your  working  knowledge  of  God.

/.  Sig  Paulson


of


There  is  nothing  the  human  heart  so  longs
for,  so  cries  out  after,  as  to  know  God,  '  'whom
to  know  aright  is  life  eternal."

With  a  restlessness  that  is  pitiful  to  see,
people  are  ever  shifting  from  one  thing  to  an-
other, always  hoping  to  find  rest  and  satisfac-
tion in  some  anticipated  accomplishment  or
possession.  Men  fancy  that  they  want  houses
and  lands,  great  learning  or  power.  They  pur-
sue these  things  and  gain  them,  only  to  find
themselves  still  restless,  still  unsatisfied.

At  the  great  heart  of  humanity  there  is  a
deep  and  awful  homesickness  that  never  has
been  and  never  can  be  satisfied  with  anything
less  than  a  clear,  vivid  consciousness  of  the  in-
dwelling presence  of  God,  our  Father.  In  all


112


The  Secret  Place  of  the  Most  High  113

ages,  earnest  men  and  women  who  have  rec-
ognized this  inner  hunger  as  the  heart's  cry  after
God  have  left  seeking  after  things,  and  have
sought,  by  devoted  worship  and  by  service  to
others,  to  enter  into  this  consciousness;  but  few
have  succeeded  in  reaching  the  promised  place
where  their  "joy"  is  "full"  (John  16:24) .  Others
have  hoped  and  feared  alternately;  they  have
tried,  with  the  best  knowledge  they  possessed,
to  "work  out"  their  "own  salvation"  (Phil
2:12),  not  yet  having  learned  that  there  must
be  an  inworking  as  well  as  an  outworking.  "For
by  grace  [or  free  gift}  you  have  been  saved
through  faith;  and  this  is  not  your  own  doing
[nor  of  any  human  working],  it  is  the  gift  of
God — not  because  of  works,  lest  any  man  should
boast"  (Eph.  2:8,9).

To  him  who  "dwells  in  the  shelter  of  the
Most  High,"  there  is  promised  immunity  from
the  "deadly  pestilence"  and  "the  snare  of  the
fowler,"  from  "the  terror  of  the  night,"  and
"the  arrow  that  flies  by  day"  (Psalms  91) ;  and
even  immunity  from  fear  of  these  things.  Oh,
the  awfully  paralyzing  effect  of  fear  and  evil!  It
makes  us  helpless  as  babes.  It  makes  us  pygmies,
whereas  we  might  be  giants  were  we  only  free
from  it.  It  is  at  the  root  of  all  our  failures,  of
nearly  all  sickness,  poverty,  and  distress.  But  we
have  the  promise  of  deliverance  from  even  the


114  Lessons  In  Truth

fear  and  evil  when  we  are  in  the  "secret  place/'
"You  will  not  fear  the  terror  of  the  night"
(Psalms  91:5),  and  so  forth.
"For  he  will  hide  me  in  his  shelter  in  the  day  of

trouble;
he  will  conceal  me  under  the  cover  of  his  tent"

(Psalms  27:5).
"In  the  covert  of  thy  presence  thou  hidest  them

from  the  plots  of  men;
thou  boldest  them  safe  under  thy  shelter

from  the  strife  of  tongues"

(Psalms  31:20).

The  secret  place!  Why  called  a  secret  place?
What  is  it?  Where  may  we  find  it?  How  abide
in  it?

It  is  a  secret  place  because  it  is  a  place  of
meeting  between  the  Christ  at  the  center  of  your
being,  and  your  consciousness — a  hidden  place
into  which  no  outside  person  can  either  induct
you  or  enter  himself.  We  must  drop  the  idea
that  this  place  of  realization  of  our  divinity  can
be  given  to  us  by  any  human  being.  No  one  can
come  into  it  from  the  outside.  Hundreds  of
earnest  persons  are  seeking,  night  and  day,  to
get  this  inner  revealing.  They  run  from  teacher
to  teacher,  many  of  them  making  the  most
frantic  efforts  to  meet  the  financial  obligations
thus  incurred.

You  may  study  with  human  teachers  and


The  Secret  Place  of  the  Most  High  115

from  man-made  books  until  doomsday;  you
may  get  all  the  theological  lore  of  the  ages;  you
may  understand  intellectually  all  the  statements
of  Truth,  and  be  able  to  prate  healing  formulas
as  glibly  as  oil  flows;  but  until  there  is  a  definite
inner  revealing  of  the  reality  of  an  indwelling
Christ  through  whom  and  by  whom  come  life,
health,  peace,  power,  all  things — aye,  who  is  all
things — you  have  not  yet  found  "the  friendship
of  the  LORD"  (Psalms  25 : 14) .

In  order  to  gain  this  knowledge — this  con-
sciousness of  God  within  themselves — many
are  willing  (and  wisely  so,  for  this  is  greater
than  all  other  knowledge)  to  spend  all  they
possess.  Even  Paul,  after  twenty-five  years  of
service  and  of  most  marvelous  preaching,  said:
"Indeed  I  count  everything  as  loss  because  of
the  surpassing  worth  of  knowing  Christ  Jesus
my  Lord  .  .  .  and  count  them  as  refuse,  in  order
that  I  may  gain  Christ"  (or  the  consciousness  of
His  divine  self)  (Phil.  3:8) .

Beloved,  that  which  you  so  earnestly  desire
will  never  be  found  by  your  seeking  it  through
the  mental  side  alone,  any  more  than  it  has  here-
tofore been  found  through  the  emotional  side
alone.  Intuition  and  intellect  are  meant  to  travel
together,  intuition  always  holding  the  reins  to
guide  intellect.


116  Lessons  in  Truth

"Come  now,  let  us  reason  together,
says  the  Lord" — (Isa.  1:18).

If  you  have  been  thus  far  on  the  way  culti-
vating and  enlarging  only  the  mental  side  of
Truth,  as  probably  is  the  case,  you  need,  in  order
to  come  into  the  fullness  of  understanding,  to
let  the  mental,  the  reasoning  side  rest  awhile.
"Become  like  children"  (Matt  18:3),  and,
learning  how  to  be  still,  listen  to  that  which  the
Father  will  say  to  you  through  the  intuitional
part  of  your  being.  The  light  that  you  so  crave
will  come  out  of  the  deep  silence  and  become
manifest  to  you  from  within  yourself,  if  you  will
but  keep  still  and  look  for  it  from  that  source.

And  conscious  knowledge  of  an  indwelling
God,  which  we  so  crave,  is  that  of  which  Paul
wrote  to  the  Colossians,  as  "the  mystery  hidden
for  ages  and  generations  but  now  made  mani-
fest .  .  .  Christ  in  you,  the  hope  of  glory"  (Col.
1:26,  27).  "The  shelter  of  the  Most  High"
(Psalms  91:1),  where  each  one  of  us  may  dwell
and  be  safe  from  all  harm  or  fear  of  evil,  is  the
point  of  mystical  union  between  man  and  Spirit
(or  God  in  us),  wherein  we  no  longer  believe,
but  know,  that  God  in  Christ  abides  always  at
the  center  of  our  being  as  our  perfect  health,
deliverance,  prosperity,  power,  ready  to  come
forth  into  manifestation  at  any  moment  we
claim  it.  We  know  it.  We  know  it.  We  feel  our


The  Secret  Place  of  the  Most  High  117

oneness  with  the  Father,  and  we  manifest  this
oneness.

To  possess  the  secret  of  anything  gives  one
power  over  it.  This  personal,  conscious  knowl-
edge of  the  Father  in  us  is  the  secret  that  is  the
key  to  all  power.  What  we  want  is  the  revelation
to  us  of  this  marvelous  ' 'secret. "  What  will  give
it  to  us — who  can  give  it  to  us  except  Him,  the
"Spirit  of  truth,  who  proceeds  from  the  Father"
(John  15:26)  ?  Surely  none  other.  That  which
God  would  say  to  you  and  do  through  you  is  a
great  secret  that  no  man  on  the  face  of  the  earth
knows,  or  ever  will  know,  except  yourself  as  it
is  revealed  to  you  by  the  Spirit  that  is  in  you.  The
secret  that  He  tells  me  is  not  revealed  to  you,
nor  yours  to  me;  but  each  man  must,  after  all  is
said  and  done,  deal  directly  with  the  Father
through  the  Son  within  himself.

Secrets  are  not  told  upon  the  housetop;  nor
is  it  possible  to  pass  this,  the  greatest  of  secrets,
from  one  to  another.  God,  the  creator  of  our
being,  must  Himself  whisper  it  to  each  man  liv-
ing in  the  very  innermost  of  himself.  "To  him
who  conquers  [or  is  consciously  in  process  of
overcoming]  I  will  give  some  of  the  hidden
manna,  and  I  will  give  him  a  white  stone  [or  a
mind  like  a  clean  white  tablet],  with  a  new
name  written  on  the  stone  which  no  one  knows
except  him  who  receives  it"  (Rev.  2:17).  It  is


118  Lessons  m  Truth

so  secret  that  it  cannot  even  be  put  into  human
language  or  repeated  by  human  lips.

What  you  want  today  and  what  I  want  is
that  the  words  that  we  have  learned  to  say  as
Truth  be  made  alive  to  us.  We  want  a  revelation
of  God  in  us  as  life,  to  be  made  to  our  own
personal  consciousness  as  health.  We  no  longer
care  to  have  somebody  just  tell  us  the  words
from  the  outside.  We  want  a  revelation  of  God
as  love  within  us,  so  that  our  whole  being  will
be  filled  and  thrilled  with  love — a  love  that  will
not  have  to  be  pumped  up  by  a  determined  ef-
fort because  we  know  that  it  is  right  to  love  and
wrong  not  to  love,  but  a  love  that  will  flow
with  the  spontaneity  and  fullness  of  an  artesian
well,  because  it  is  so  full  at  the  bottom  that  it
must  flow  out.

What  we  want  today  is  a  revelation  to  our
consciousness  of  God  within  us  as  omnipotent
power,  so  that  we  can,  by  a  word — or  a  look —
"accomplish  that  which  I  purpose  and  prosper
in  the  thing  for  which  I  sent  it"  (Isa.  55:11).
We  want  the  manifestation  to  us  of  the  Father
in  us,  so  that  we  can  know  Him  personally.  We
want  to  be  conscious  of  God  working  in  us
"both  to  will  and  to  work"  (Phil.  2 : 13 ) ,  so  that
we  may  "work  out"  our  "salvation"  (Phil.  2:
12  ).  We  have  been  learning  how  to  do  the  out-
working, but  have  now  come  to  a  point  where


The  Secret  Place  of  the  Most  High  119

we  must  learn  more  of  how  to  place  ourselves
in  an  attitude  where  we  can  each  be  conscious
of  the  divine  inner  working.

Mary  talked  with  the  risen  Jesus,  supposing
that  He  was  the  gardener,  until  suddenly,  as  He
spoke  her  name,  there  flashed  into  her  conscious-
ness a  ray  of  pure  intuition,  and  in  an  instant
the  revelation  of  His  identity  was  made  to  her.

According  to  the  same  sacred  history,
Thomas  Didymus  had  walked  daily  for  three
years  with  the  most  wonderful  teacher  of  spiri-
tual things  that  has  ever  lived.  He  had  watched
this  teacher's  life  and  had  been  partaker  of  His
very  presence,  physical  and  mental.  He  had  had
just  what  you  and  I  have  thus  far  received  of
mental  training  and  external  teaching.  But  there
came  a  time  when  there  was  an  inner  revealing
that  made  him  exclaim,  "My  Lord  and  my  God!"
(John  20:28) .  The  secret  name,  which  no  other
man  could  know  for  him,  had  that  moment
been  given  to  him.  There  had  come,  in  the
twinkling  of  an  eye,  the  manifestation  to  his
consciousness  of  the  Father  in  him  as  his  Lord
and  His  God.  No  longer  simply  our  Father  and
our  Lord,  but  my  Lord  and  my  God — my  divine
self  revealed  to  me  personally.

Is  not  this  that  which  you  are  craving?

Each  man  must  come  to  a  time  when  he  no
longer  seeks  external  helps,  when  he  knows  that


120  Lessons  m  Truth

the  inner  revelation  of  "my  Lord  and  my  God"
to  his  consciousness  can  come  to  him  only
through  an  indwelling  power  that  has  been
there  all  the  time,  waiting  with  infinite  longing
and  patience  to  reveal  the  Father  to  the  child.

This  revelation  will  never  come  through  the
intellect  of  man  to  the  consciousness,  but  must
ever  come  through  the  intuitional  to  the  intellect
as  a  manifestation  of  Spirit  to  man.  "The  un-
spiritual  man  does  not  receive  [nor  can  it  impart
them]  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  for  they
are  folly  to  him,  and  he  is  not  able  to  under-
stand them  because  they  are  spiritually  dis-
cerned" (I  Cor.  2 : 14) ,  and  they  must  be  spiritu-
ally imparted.

In  our  eagerness  we  have  waited  upon  every
source  that  we  could  reach  for  the  light  that  we
want.  Because  we  have  not  known  how  to  wait
upon  Spirit  within  us  for  the  desired  revelation,
we  have  run  to  and  fro.  Let  no  one  misunder-
stand me  in  what  I  say  about  withdrawing  him-
self from  teachers.  Teachers  are  good  and  are
necessary,  up  to  a  certain  point.  "But  how  are
men  to  call  upon  him  in  whom  they  have  not
believed?  And  how  are  they  to  believe  in  him
of  whom  they  have  never  heard?  And  how  are
they  to  hear  without  a  preacher?"  (Rom.  10:
14).

Books  and  lectures  are  good,  teachers  are


The  Secret  Place  of  the  Most  High  121

good,  but  you  must  learn  for  yourself  that
Christ.,  the  Son  of  God,  lives  in  you;  that  He
within  you  is  your  light  and  life  and  all.  "When
you  have  once  grasped  this  beyond  a  doubt  with
the  intellect,  you  cease  looking  to  teachers  to
bring  you  spiritual  insight.  That  Christ  lives  in
you.  Spirit  itself  must  reveal  to  you.  Teachers
talk  about  the  light,  but  the  light  itself  must
flash  into  the  darkness  before  you  can  see  the
light.

Had  the  Master  remained  with  the  apostles,
I  doubt  whether  they  would  ever  have  gotten
beyond  hanging  on  His  words  and  following
in  the  footsteps  of  His  personality,

Jesus  knew  that  His  treatments  for  spiritual
illumination,  given  to  His  apostles  from  His
recognition  of  Truth,  would  act  in  them  as  a
seed  thought,  but  He  also  knew  that  each  man
must  for  himself  wait  upon  God  for  the  inner
illumination  which  is  lasting  and  real.  God
alone  can  whisper  the  secret  to  each  one  sep-
arately.

The  induement  of  power  was  not  to  come
to  them  by  the  spoken  word  through  another
personality,  not  even  through  that  of  Jesus,
with  His  great  spiritual  power  and  discernment.
It  was  to  come  from  "on  high"  (Isa.  32:15)  to
each  individual  consciousness.  It  was  the  '  'prom-
ise of  the  Father,  which  .  .  .  you  heard  from


122  Lessons  in  Truth

me"  (Acts  1:4).  He  had  merely  told  them
about  It,  but  had  no  power  to  give  It  to  them.

So  to  each  of  us  this  spiritual  illumination
that  we  are  crying  out  after,  this  Induement  of
power  for  which  we  are  willing  to  sell  all  that
we  have,  must  come  from  "on  high,"  that  is,  to
the  consciousness  from  the  Spirit  within  our  be-
ing. This  is  the  secret  that  the  Father  longs  with
an  infinite  yearning  to  reveal  to  each  individual.
It  is  because  of  the  Father's  desire  within  us  to
show  us  the  secret  that  we  desire  the  revelation.
It  is  the  purpose  for  which  we  came  into  the
world — that  we  might  grow  step  by  step,  as  we
are  doing,  to  the  place  where  we  could  bear  to
have  the  secret  of  His  inner  abiding  revealed
to  us.

Do  not  be  confused  by  seeming  contradic-
tions In  the  lessons.  I  have  said  heretofore  that
too  much  introspection  is  not  good.  I  repeat  it;
for  there  are  those  who,  in  earnest  desire  to
know  God,  are  always  seeking  light  for  them-
selves, but  neglect  to  use  that  which  they  al-
ready have  to  help  others.

There  must  be  an  equal  conscious  receiving
from  the  Father  and  giving  out  to  the  world,  a
perfect  equilibrium  between  the  inflowing  and
the  outgiving,  to  keep  perfect  harmony.  We
must  each  learn  how  to  wait  renewedly  upon
God  for  the  infilling,  and  then  go  and  give  out


The  Secret  Place  of  the  Aiost  High  123

to  every  creature  that  which  we  have  received,
as  Spirit  leads  us  to  give,  either  in  preaching,
teaching,  or  silently  living  the  Truth.  That
which  fills  us  will  radiate  from  us  without  effort
right  in  the  place  in  life  where  we  stand.

In  nearly  all  teaching  of  Truth  from  the
purely  mental  side,  there  is  much  said  about  the
working  out  of  our  salvation  by  the  holding  of
right  thoughts,  by  denials  and  affirmations.  This
is  all  good.  But  there  is  another  side  that  we
need  to  know  a  little  more  about.  We  must  learn
how  to  be  still  and  let  Spirit,  the  I  AM,  work
in  us,  that  we  may  indeed  be  made  "a  new
creation"  (Gal.  6:15),  that  we  may  have  the
mind  of  Christ  in  all  things.

When  you  have  learned  how  to  abandon
yourself  to  infinite  Spirit,  and  have  seasons  of
doing  this  daily,  you  will  be  surprised  at  the
marvelous  change  that  will  be  wrought  in  you
without  any  conscious  effort  of  your  own.

It  will  search  far  below  your  conscious  mind,
and  root  out  things  in  your  nature  of  which  you
have  scarcely  been  conscious,  simply  because  they
have  lain  latent  there,  waiting  for  something  to
bring  them  out.  It  will  work  into  your  conscious-
ness light,  and  life,  and  love,  and  all  good,  per-
fectly filling  all  your  lack  while  you  just  quietly
wait  and  receive.  Of  the  practical  steps  in  this
direction  we  will  speak  in  another  lesson.


124  Lessons  in  Truth

Paul,  who  had  learned  this  way  of  faith,
this  way  of  being  still  and  letting  the  I  AM
work  itself  into  his  conscious  mind  as  the  full-
ness of  all  his  needs,  was  neither  afraid  nor
ashamed  to  say:

'Tor  this  reason  I  bow  my  knees  before  the
Father,  from  whom  every  family  in  heaven  and
on  earth  is  named,  that  according  to  the  riches
of  his  glory  he  may  grant  you  to  be  strengthened
with  might  through  his  Spirit  in  the  inner  man,
and  that  Christ  may  dwell  in  your  hearts  through
faith;  that  you,  being  rooted  and  grounded  in
love,  may  have  power  to  comprehend  with  all
the  saints  what  is  the  breadth  and  length  and
height  and  depth,  and  to  know  the  love  of
Christ  which  surpasses  knowledge,  that  you
may  be  filled  with  all  the  fulness  of  God"

(Eph.3:l4-19).

And  then  he  gives  an  ascription:  "Now  to
him  who  by  the  power  at  work  within  us  is  able
to  do  far  more  abundantly  than  all  that  we  ask
or  think"  (Eph.  3:20).

Commentary

The  "secret  place  of  the  most  high"  is  the  inner
altar.  It  is  the  place  of  prayer  where  no  other  man
can  enter,  yet  where  all  men  dwell  together  in  love,
peace,  the  joy  of  spirit.


The  Seer  el  Place  of  the  Most  High  125

Basic  to  man's  outer  experiences — the  rushing  to
do,  the  seeking  to  feel,  the  pushing  to  possess — is  the
insatiable  hunger  to  know  himself.  "Who  am  I?"
This  search  for  meaning  is  the  urge  to  discovery.

The  answer  to  the  search  lies  in  the  "secret  place/'
the  feeling  nature,  the  emotional  field,  for  it  is  here
that  man  comes  to  know  God — as  he  com.es  to  feel
the  presence  of  God  as  naturally  as  the  breath  he
breathes.

It  is  in  the  ' 'secret  place"  that  all  ideas  find  fertile
soil  in  which  to  germinate.  Ideas  have  their  begin-
ning in  the  feeling  nature  of  man  and  move  into  the
intellect  where  they  are  shaped  and  formed  through
the  action  of  thought.  The  "secret  place"  is  then  the
place  of  conception,  for  here  God  speaks  to  man
through  impressions,  through  the  depth  of  feeling.

In  this  sanctuary  man  unifies  with  his  God,  dis-
covers himself,  experiences  the  revelation  of  ideas;
he  comes  to  know  fulfillment  as  he  lives  and  moves
from  center  to  circumference.

Jean  Stewart


How  to  seek  the  secret  place — where  to  find
it — how  to  abide  in  it — these  are  the  questions
that  today,  more  than  at  any  other  time  in  the
history  of  the  world,  are  engaging  the  hearts
of  men.  More  than  anything  else  it  is  what  I
want.  It  is  what  you  want.

All  the  steps  that  we  are  taking  by  speaking
words  of  Truth  and  striving  to  manifest  the
light  which  we  have  already  received  are  carry-
ing us  on  swiftly  to  the  time  when  we  shall  have
consciously  the  perfect  mind  of  Christ,  with  all
the  love  and  beauty  and  health  and  power  which
that  implies.

"We  need  not  be  anxious  or  in  a  hurry  for
the  full  manifestation.  Let  us  not  at  any  time
lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  our  desire,  great  as  it
is,  is  only  God's  desire  in  us.  "No  one  can  come

126


Finding  the  Seer  el  Place  127

to  me  unless  the  Father  who  sent  me  draws  him"
(John  6:44).  The  Father  in  us  desires  to  reveal
to  us  the  secret  of  His  presence,  else  we  had  not
known  any  hunger  for  the  secret,  or  for  Truth.

"You  did  not  choose  me,  but  I  chose  you
and  appointed  you  that  you  should  go  and  bear
fruit"  (John  15: 16).

Whoever  you  are  that  read  these  words,
wherever  you  stand  in  the  world,  be  it  on  the
platform  preaching  the  gospel,  or  in  the  hum-
blest little  home  seeking  Truth,  that  you  may
make  it  manifest  in  a  sweeter,  stronger,  Jess
selfish  life,  know  once  and  forever  that  you  are
not  seeking  God,  but  God  is  seeking  you.  Your
longing  for  greater  manifestation  is  the  eternal
energy  that  holds  the  worlds  in  their  orbits,  out-
pushing  through  you  to  get  into  fuller  mani-
festation. You  need  not  worry.  You  need  not
be  anxious.  You  need  not  strive.  Only  let  it.
Learn  how  to  let  it.

After  all  our  beating  about  the  bush,  seek-
ing here  and  there  for  our  heart's  desire,  we
must  come  right  to  Him  who  is  the  fulfillment
of  every  desire;  who  waits  to  manifest  more  of
Himself  to  us  and  through  us.  If  you  wanted  my
love  or  anything  that  I  am  (not  that  I  have),
you  would  not  go  to  Tom  Jones  or  to  Mary
Smith  to  get  it.  Either  of  these  persons  might  tell
you  that  I  could  and  would  give  myself,  but


128  Lessons  hi  Truth

you  would  have  to  come  directly  to  me,  and  re-
ceive of  me  that  which  only  I  am,  because  I
am  it

In  some  way,  after  all  our  seeking  for  the
light  and  Truth,  we  must  learn  to  wait,  each
one  for  himself,  upon  God  for  this  Inner  rev-
elation of  Truth  and  our  oneness  with  Him.

The  light  that  we  want  Is  not  some  thing
that  God  has  to  give;  It  is  God  Himself.  God
does  not  give  us  life  or  love  as  a  thing.  God  is
life  and  light  and  love.  More  of  Himself  in  our
consciousness,  then,  Is  what  we  all  want,  no
matter  what  other  name  we  may  give  it.

My  induement  of  power  must  come  from
"on  high,"  from  a  higher  region  within  myself
than  my  present  conscious  mind;  so  must  yours.
It  must  be  a  descent  of  the  Holy  (whole,  entire,
complete)  Spirit  at  the  center  of  your  being  into
your  conscious  mind.  The  illumination  we  want
can  never  come  in  any  other  way;  nor  can  the
power  to  make  good  manifest.

We  hear  a  great  deal  about  "sitting  in  the
silence."  To  many  it  does  not  mean  very  much,
for  they  have  not  yet  learned  how  to  "wait .  .  .
In  silence  for  God  only,"  or  to  hear  any  voice
except  external  ones.  Noise  belongs  to  the  out-
side world,  not  to  God.  God  works  in  the  still-
ness, and  we  can  so  wait  upon  the  Father  of  our
being  as  to  be  conscious  of  the  still,  inner  work-


Finding  the  Secret  PLtce  129

ing — conscious  of  the  fulfillment  of  our  desires.
"But  those  who  seek  the  LORD  lack  no  good
thing"

(Psalms  34: 10).

"But  they  who  wait  for  the  LORD  shall  renew
their  strength"

(Isa.  40:31).

In  one  of  Edward  Everett  Male's  stories,  he
speaks  of  a  little  girl  who,  amidst  her  play  with
the  butterflies  and  birds  in  a  country  place,
used  to  run  into  a  nearby  chapel  frequently  to
pray;  and  after  praying  always  remained  per-
fectly still  a  few  minutes,  "waiting,"  she  said,
"to  see  if  God  wanted  to  say  anything"  to  her.
Children  are  often  nearest  the  kingdom.

When  beginning  the  practice  of  sitting  in
the  silence,  do  not  feel  that  you  must  go  and  sit
with  some  other  person.  The  presence  of  another
personality  is  apt  to  distract  the  mind.  Learn  first
how  to  commune  alone  with  the  Creator  of  the
universe,  who  is  all-companionship.  When  you
are  able  to  withdraw  from  the  outside  and  be
alone  with  Him,  then  sitting  with  others  may
be  profitable  to  you  and  to  them.

"Sitting  in  the  silence"  is  not  merely  a  sort
of  lazy  drifting.  It  is  a  passive,  but  a  definite,
waiting  upon  God.  When  you  want  to  do  this,
take  a  time  when  you  are  not  likely  to  be  dis-
turbed, and  when  you  can,  for  a  little  while,  lay


130  Lessons  in  Truth

off  all  care.  Begin  your  silence  by  lifting  up  your
heart  in  prayer  to  the  Father  of  your  being.  Do
not  be  afraid  that,  if  you  begin  to  pray,  you  will
be  too  "orthodox."  You  are  not  going  to  suppli-
cate God,  who  has  already  given  you  things
"whatsoever  ye  desire. "  You  have  already
learned  that  before  you  call  He  has  sent  that
which  you  desire;  otherwise  you  would  not
desire  It.

You  know  better  than  to  plead  with  or  to
beseech  God  with  an  unbelieving  prayer.  But
spending  the  first  few  moments  of  your  silence
in  speaking  directly  to  the  Father  centers  your
mind  on  the  Eternal.  Many  who  earnestly  try  to
get  still  and  wait  upon  God  have  found  that,
the  moment  they  sit  down  and  close  their  eyes,
their  thoughts,  instead  of  being  concentrated,
are  filled  with  every  sort  of  vain  imagination.
The  most  trivial  things,  from  the  fixing  of  a
shoestring  to  the  gossipy  conversation  of  a  week
ago,  chase  one  another  in  rapid  succession
through  their  minds,  and  at  the  end  of  an  hour
the  persons  have  gained  nothing.  This  is  to  them
discouraging.

This  is  but  a  natural  result  of  trying  not  to
think  at  all.  Nature  abhors  a  vacuum,  and  if  you
make  (or  try  to  make)  your  mind  a  vacuum,
the  thought  images  of  others  that  fill  the  at-
mosphere about  you  will  rush  in  to  fill  it,  leav-


'Binding  the  Secret  Place  131

Ing  you  as  far  away  from  the  consciousness
of  the  divine  presence  as  ever.  You  can
prevent  this  by  beginning  your  silence  with
prayer.

It  is  always  easier  for  the  mind  to  say  realiz-
ingly,  f(Thy  will  is  being  done  in  me  now"
after  having  prayed,  "Let  Thy  will  be  done  in
me."  It  is  always  easier  to  say  with  realization,
ffGod  flows  through  me  as  life  and  peace  and
power/'  after  having  prayed,  "Let  Thy  life  flow
through  me  anew  while  I  wait."  Of  course
prayer  does  not  change  God's  attitude  toward
us,  but  it  is  easier  for  the  human  mind  to  take
several  successive  steps  with  firmness  and  as-
surance than  for  it  to  take  one  big,  bold  leap
to  a  point  of  eminence  and  hold  itself  steady
there.  While  you  are  thus  concentrating  your
thoughts  on  God,  in  definite  conversation  with
the  author  of  your  being,  no  outside  thought
images  can  possibly  rush  in  to  torment  or  dis-
tract you.  Your  mind,  instead  of  being  open
toward  the  external,  is  closed  to  it,  and  open
only  to  God,  the  source  of  all  the  good  you
desire.

Of  course  there  is  to  be  no  set  form  of  words
used.  But  sometimes  using  words  similar  to  the
first  few  verses  of  the  103d  Psalm,  in  the  be-
ginning of  the  silent  communion,  makes  it  a
matter  of  face-to-face  speaking:  "Thou  forgivest


132  Lessons  in  Truth

all  mine  iniquities  {or  mistakes];  Thou  healest
all  my  diseases;  Thou  redeemest  my  life  from
destruction,  and  crownest  me  with  loving  kind-
ness, now,  now,  while  I  wait  upon  Thee."  Some-
times we  may  enter  into  the  inner  chamber  with
the  words  of  a  familiar  hymn;  as:

Thou  art  the  life  within  me,
O  Christ,  Thou  King  of  Kings;

Thou  art  Thyself  the  answer
To  all  my  questionings.

Repeat  the  words  many  times,  not  anxiously
or  with  strained  effort,  not  reaching  out  and  up
and  away  to  an  outside  God;  but  let  the  petition
be  the  quiet,  earnest  uplifting  of  the  heart 'to  a
higher  something  right  within  itself,  even  to
"the  Father  in  me"  (John  14:11).  Let  it  be
made  with  the  quietness  and  assurance  of  a
child  speaking  to  his  loving  father.

Some  persons  carry  in  their  faces  a  strained,
white  look  that  comes  from  an  abnormal  "sitting
in  the  silence,"  as  they  term  it.  It  is  hard  for
them  to  know  that  God  is  right  here  within
them,  and  while  in  the  silence  they  fall  into  the
way  of  reaching  away  out  and  up  after  Him.
Such  are  earnest  men  truly  feeling  after  God  if
haply  they  may  find  Him,  when  all  the  time  He
is  near  them,  even  in  their  very  hearts.  Do  not
reach  out  thus.  This  is  as  though  a  seed  were


Finding  the  Secret  Place  133

planted  In  the  earth,  and  just  because  It  recog-
nized a  vivifying,  life-giving  principle  In  the
sun's  rays,  It  did  nothing  but  strain  and  stretch
Itself  upward  and  outward  to  get  more  of  the
sun.  You  can  see  at  a  glance  that  by  so  doing
It  would  get  no  solid  roots  In  the  earth  where
God  intended  them  to  be.  The  seed  needs  to
send  roots  downward  while  it  keeps  its  face
turned  toward  the  sun,  and  lets  itself  be  drawn
upward  by  the  sun.

Some  of  us,  in  our  desire  to  grow,  and  hav-
ing recognized  the  necessity  of  waiting  upon
God  In  the  stillness  for  the  vivifying  and  re-
newing of  life,  make  the  mistake  of  climbing
up  and  way  from  our  bodies.  Such  abnormal
outstretching  and  upreaching  is  neither  wise
nor  profitable.  After  a  little  of  it,  one  begins  to
get  cold  feet  and  congested  head.  While  one  Is
thus  reaching  out,  the  body  is  left  alone,  and  it
becomes  correspondingly  weak  and  negative.
This  is  all  wrong.  We  are  not  to  reach  out  away
from  the  body  even  after  the  Son  of  righteous-
ness. We  are  rather  to  be  still,  and  let  the  Son
shine  on  us  right  where  we  are.  The  sun  draws
the  shoot  up  as  fast  as  it  can  bear  it  and  be
strong.  We  do  not  need  to  grow  ourselves,  only
to  let  the  Son  "grow"  us.

But  we  are  consciously  to  let  It;  not  merely
to  take  the  attitude  of  negatively  letting  it  by


134  Lessons  m  Truth

not  opposing  It,  but  to  put  ourselves  consciously
where  the  Son  can  shine  on  us,  and  then  "be
still,  and  know"  (Psalms  46:10)  that  while  we
wait  there  it  is  doing  the  work.  While  waiting
upon  God,  we  should,  as  much  as  possible,  re-
lax ourselves  both  mentally  and  physically.  To
use  a  very  homely  but  practical  illustration,  take
much  the  attitude  of  the  entire  being  as  do  the
fowls  when  taking  a  sun  bath  in  the  sand.  Yet
there  is  something  more  than  a  lax  passivity  to
be  maintained  through  it  all.  There  must  be  a
sort  of  conscious,  active  taking  of  that  which
God  gives  freely  to  us.

Let  me  see  if  I  can  make  it  plain.  We  first
withdraw  ourselves  bodily  and  mentally  from
the  outside  world.  We  "go  into  your  room  and
shut  the  door"  (Matt.  6:6)  (the  closet  of  our
being,  the  very  innermost  part  of  ourselves),
by  turning  our  thoughts  within.  Just  say,  "Thou
abides*  within  me;  Thou  aft  alive  there  now;
Thou  hast  all  power;  Thou  art  now  the  answer
to  all  1  desire;  Thou  dost  now  radiate  Thyself
from  the  center  of  my  being  to  the  circumfer-
ence, and  out  into  the  visible  world  as  the  full-
ness of  my  desire!3  Then  be  still,  absolutely  still.
Relax  every  part  of  your  being,  and  believe
that  it  is  being  done.  The  divine  substance  does
flow  in  at  the  center  and  out  into  the  visible
world  every  moment  you  wait;  for  it  is  an  im-


Finding  the  Secret  Place  135

mutable  law  that  ''every  one  who  asks  receives' '
(Matt.  7:8).  And  substance  will  come  forth  as
the  fulfillment  of  your  desire  If  you  expect  It  to.
" According  to  your  faith  be  it  done  to  you"
(Matt.  9:29).

If  you  find  your  mind  wandering,  bring  It
right  back  by  saying  again:  f(It  is  being  done;
Thou  art  working  in  me;  I  am  receiving  that
which  1  desire/'  and  so  forth.  Do  not  look  for
signs  and  wonders,  but  just  be  still  and  know
that  the  very  thing  you  want  is  flowing  In  and
will  come  forth  into  manifestation  either  at  once
or  a  little  farther  on.

Go  even  beyond  this  and  speak  words  of
thanksgiving  to  this  innermost  Presence,  that  it
has  heard  and  answered,  that  it  does  now  come
forth  into  visibility.  There  is  something  about
the  mental  act  of  thanksgiving  that  seems  to
carry  the  human  mind  far  beyond  the  region  of
doubt  into  the  clear  atmosphere  of  faith  and
trust,  where  "all  things  are  possible"  (Matt.
19:26) .  Even  if  at  first  you  are  not  conscious  of
having  received  anything  from  God,  do  not
worry  or  cease  from  your  thanksgiving.  Do  not
go  back  of  it  again  to  the  asking,  but  continue
giving  thanks  that  while  you  waited  you  did  re-
ceive, and  that  what  you  received  is  now  mani-
fest; and  believe  me,  you  will  soon  rejoice  and
give  thanks,  not  rigidly  from  a  sense  of  duty,


1 36  Lessons  m  Truth

but  because  of  the  sure  manifest  fulfillment  of
your  desire.

Do  not  let  waiting  in  the  silence  become  a
bondage  to  you.  If  you  find  yourself  getting  into
a  strained  attitude  of  mind,  or  "heady,"  get  up
and  go  about  some  external  work  for  a  time.  Or,
if  you  find  that  your  mind  will  wander,  do  not
insist  on  concentrating;  for  the  moment  you  get
into  a  rigid  mental  attitude  you  shut  off  all  in-
flow of  the  Divine  into  your  consciousness.
There  must  be  a  sort  of  relaxed  passivity  and
yet  an  active  taking  it  by  faith.  Shall  I  call  it
active  passivity?

Of  course,  as  we  go  in  spiritual  understand-
ing and  desire,  we  very  soon  come  to  the  place
where  we  want  more  than  anything  else  that  the
desires  of  infinite  wisdom  and  love  be  fulfilled
in  us.
'Tor  my  thoughts  are  not  your  thoughts,

neither  are  your  ways  my  ways,  says  the

LORD.
For  as  the  heavens  are  higher  than  the  earth,

so  are  my  ways  higher  than  your  ways

and  my  thoughts  than  your  thoughts"

(Isa.55:8,9).

Our  desires  are  God's  desires,  but  in  a  lim-
ited degree.  We  soon  throw  aside  our  limita-
tions, our  circumscribed  desires  (as  soon,  at
least,  as  we  see  that  more  of  God  means  more  of


Finding  the  Secret  Place  137

good  and  joy  and  happiness),  and  with  all  our
hearts  we  cry  out  in  the  silent  sitting:  "Fulfill
Thy  highest  thought  in  me  now!"  We  make  our-
selves as  clay  in  the  potter's  hands,  willing  to  be
molded  anew,  to  be  "changed  into  his  likeness"
(II  Cor.  3:18),  to  be  made  after  the  mind  of
the  indwelling  Christ.

We  repeat  from  time  to  time,  while  waiting,
words  something  like  these:  "Thou  art  now  re-
newing me  according  to  Thy  highest  thought
for  me;  Thou  art  radiating  Thy  very  self
throughout  my  entire  being,  making  me  like  to
Thyself — for  there  is  nothing  else  but  Thee.
Father,  I  thank  Thee,  I  thank  Thee."  Be  still,  be
still  while  He  works.  "Not  by  might,  nor  by
power,  but  by  my  Spirit,  says  the  LORD  of  hosts"
(Zech.4:6).

While  you  thus  wait,  and  let  Him,  He  will
work  marvelous  changes  in  you.  You  will  have
a  strange  new  consciousness  of  serenity  and
quiet,  a  feeling  that  something  has  been  done,
that  some  new  power  to  overcome  has  come  to
you.  You  will  be  able  to  say,  "I  and  the  Father
are  one"  (John  10:30),  with  a  new  meaning,  a
new  sense  of  reality  and  awe  that  will  make  you
feel  very  still.  Oh!  how  one  conscious  touch  of
the  Oversoul  makes  all  life  seem  different!  All
the  hard  things  become  easy;  the  troublesome
things  no  longer  have  power  to  worry;  the  rasp-


138  Lessons  in  Truth

Ing  people  and  things  of  the  world  lose  all
power  to  annoy.  Why?  Because,  for  the  time,  we
see  things  from  the  Christ  side  of  ourselves;  we
see  as  He  sees.  We  do  not  have  to  deny  evil;  we
know  in  that  moment  that  it  is  nothing  at  all.
We  no  longer  rigidly  affirm  the  good  from  sense
of  duty,  but  with  delight  and  spontaneity,  be-
cause we  cannot  help  It.  It  is  revealed  to  us  as
good.  Faith  has  become  reality.

Do  not  be  discouraged  if  you  do  not  at  once
get  conscious  results  in  this  silent  sitting.  Every
moment  that  you  wait,  Spirit  is  working  to  make
you  a  new  creature  In  Christ — a  creature  pos-
sessing consciously  His  very  own  qualities  and
powers.  There  may  be  a  working  for  days  before
you  see  any  change;  but  it  will  surely  come.  You
will  soon  get  so  that  you  can  go  into  the  silence,
into  conscious  communion  with  your  Lord,  at  a
moment's  notice,  at  any  time,  in  any  place.

There  is  no  conflict  or  inconsistency  between
this  waiting  upon  God  to  be  made  perfect,  and
the  way  of  * 'speaking  the  word"  out  toward  the
external  to  make  perfection  visible.  Waiting
upon  and  consciously  receiving  from  the  Source
only  make  the  outspeaking  (the  holding  of
right  thoughts  and  words)  easy,  instead  of
laborious.  Try  it  and  see.

Clear  revelation — the  word  made  alive  as
Truth  to  the  consciousness — must  come  to  every


"Binding  the  Secret  Place  139

man  who  continues  to  wait  upon  God.  But  re-
member, there  are  two  conditions  imposed.  You
are  to  wait  upon  God,  not  simply  to  run  in  and
out,  but  to  abide,  to  dwell  "in  the  shelter  of  the
Most  High"  (Psalms  91:1).

Of  course  I  do  not  mean  that  you  are  to  give
all  the  time  to  sitting  alone  in  meditation  and
silence,  but  that  your  mind  shall  be  continually
in  an  attitude  of  waiting  upon  God,  not  an  at-
titude of  clamoring  for  things,  but  of  listening
for  the  Father's  voice  and  expecting  a  manifesta-
tion of  the  Father  to  your  consciousness.

Jesus,  our  Master  in  spiritual  knowledge  and
power,  had  many  hours  of  lone  communion  with
the  Father,  and  His  greatest  works  were  done
after  these.  So  may  we,  so  must  we,  commune
alone  with  the  Father  if  we  would  manifest  the
Christ.  But  Jesus  did  not  spend  all  His  time  in
receiving.  He  poured  forth  into  everyday  use,
among  the  children  of  men  in  the  ordinary  vo-
cations of  life,  that  which  He  received  of  the
Father.  His  knowledge  of  spiritual  things  was
used  constantly  to  uplift  and  to  help  other
persons.  We  must  do  likewise;  for  newness  of
life  and  of  revelation  flows  in  the  faster  as  we
give  out  that  which  we  have  to  help  others.  " . . .
preach  .  . .  Heal  the  sick  . .  .  You  received  with-
out pay,  give  without  pay"  (Matt.  10:7,  8),  He
said.  Go  manifest  the  Christ  within  you,  which


140  Lessons  m  Truth

you  have  received  of  the  Father.  God  works  in
us  to  will  and  to  do,  but  we  must  work  out  our
own  salvation.

The  second  indispensable  condition  to  find-
ing the  secret  place  and  abiding  in  it  is  "my  ex-
pectation is  from  him" :

'Tor  God  alone  my  soul  waits  in  silence,
for  my  hope  is  from  him"

(Psalms  62:5).

'Truly  the  hills  are  a  delusion,
the  orgies  of  the  mountains.
Truly  in  the  LORD  our  God
is  the  salvation  of  Israel"
(Jer.3:23).

It  is  good  that  a  man  should  both  hope  and
quietly  wait  for  the  salvation  of  the  Lord.

Is  your  expectation  from  Him,  or  is  it  from
books,  or  teachers,  or  friends,  or  meetings,  or
societies?

4 'The  King  of  Israel,  the  LORD,  is  in  your
midst"  (Zeph.  3:15).  Think  of  it;  In  the  midst
of  you — at  the  center  of  your  being  this  moment
while  you  read  these  words.  Say  it,  say  it,  think
it,  dwell  on  it,  whoever  you  are,  wherever  you
are!  In  the  midst  of  you!  Then  what  need  for  all
this  running  around?  What  need  for  all  this
strained  outreaching  after  Him?
"The  LORD,  your  God,  is  in  your  midst  [not
God  in  the  midst  of  another,  but  in  the


Finding  the  Secret  Place  141

midst  of  you,  standing  right  where  you
are],

a  warrior  who  gives  victory;
he  will  rejoice  over  you  with  gladness,

he  will  renew  you  in  his  love;
he  will  exult  over  you  with  loud  singing"

(Zeph.  3:17).

You  are  His  love.  It  is  you  that  He  will  rejoice
in  with  singing  if  you  will  turn  away  from  peo-
ple to  Him  within  you.  His  singing  and  joy  will
so  fill  you  that  your  life  will  be  a  great  thanks-
giving.

Your  Lord  is  not  my  Lord,  nor  is  my  Lord
your  Lord.  Your  Lord  is  the  Christ  within  your
own  being.  My  Lord  is  the  Christ  within  my
own  being.

There  is  one  Spirit,  one  Father  of  all,  in  us
all,  but  there  are  different  manifestations  or  in-
dividualities. Your  Lord  is  He  who  will  deliver
you  out  of  all  your  troubles.  Your  Lord  has  no
other  business  but  to  manifest  Himself  to  you
and  through  you,  and  so  make  you  mighty  with
His  own  mightiness  made  visible;  whole  with
His  health;  perfect  by  showing  forth  the  Christ
perfection.

Let  all  your  expectation  be  from  your  Lord.
Let  your  communion  be  with  Him.  Wait  upon
the  inner  abiding  Christ  often,  just  as  you
would  wait  upon  any  visible  teacher.  When  you


142  Lessons  in  Truth

are  sick  'wait  thou  In  silence  for  God  only"
as  the  Most  High,  rather  than  upon  healers.
When  you  lack  wisdom  In  small  or  large  mat-
ters, "wait  thou  In  silence  for  God  only/'  and
see  what  marvelous  wisdom  for  action  will  be
given  you.  When  desiring  to  speak  the  word
that  will  deliver  another  from  the  bondage  of
sickness  or  sin  or  sorrow,  "wait  thou  In  silence
for  God  only/'  and  exactly  the  right  word  will
be  given  you,  and  power  will  go  with  it,  for  it
will  be  alive  with  the  power  of  Spirit

Commentary

"Behold,  the  kingdom  of  God  is  in  the  midst  of
you,"  said  Jesus.  Emilie  Cady  calls  this  heavenly
state,  known  only  to  ourself  and  God,  the  secret
place  of  the  Most  High.  It  is  the  abode  of  silence;
it  is  like  the  rest  in  a  musical  composition,  where  all
activity  ceases  as  preparation  is  made  for  further  de-
velopment. We  prepare  for  it  by  meditating  on  the
presence  of  God  within  us  and  all  around  us.

We  may  gaze  at  the  stars  and  think  of  our  one-
ness with  the  almighty  Power  that  holds  them  in
space.  We  may  think  of  the  beauties  of  nature  and
rejoice  that  we  share  in  that  radiant  life  energy.  We
visit  with  God,  talking  to  Him  in  prayer  as  we  re-
joice in  His  power  and  glory.  Then,  from  thinking
about  God,  we  relax  into  feeling  His  presence.  We
surrender  thinking  to  feeling,  and  return  to  daily
activity  spiritually  refreshed  and  strengthened,

Georgiana  Tree  West


It  is  very  natural  for  the  human  heart  first
to  set  out  in  search  of  Truth  because  of  the
"loaves  and  the  fish"  (Matt  15:36).

Perhaps  it  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  the
majority  of  people  first  turn  to  God  because  of
some  weakness,  some  failure,  some  almost  un-
bearable want  in  their  lives.  After  having  vainly
tried  in  all  other  ways  to  overcome  or  to  satisfy
the  want,  they  turn  in  desperation  to  God.

There  is  in  the  heart  of  even  the  most  de-
praved human  being,  though  he  would  not  for
worlds  have  others  know  it,  an  instinctive  feel-
ing that  somewhere  there  is  a  power  that  is  able
to  give  him  just  what  he  wants;  that  if  he  could

143


144  Lessons  In  Truth

only  teach  that  which  to  his  conception  is  God,
he  could  prevail  on  Him  to  grant  the  things  de-
sired. This  feeling  is  itself  God-given.  It  is  the
divine  self,  though  only  a  spark  at  the  center  of
the  man's  being,  suggesting  to  him  the  true
remedy  for  all  his  Ills.

Especially  have  people  been  led  to  seek
Truth  for  the  reward,  "for  the  sake  of  the  works
themselves"  (John  14:11),  during  the  last  few
years,  since  they  have  come  to  know  that  God
is  not  only  able,  but  willing,  to  deliver  them
from  all  the  burdens  of  their  everyday  life.
Everyone  wants  to  be  free,  free,  free  as  the  birds
of  the  air — free  from  sickness,  free  from  suffer-
ing, free  from  bondage,  free  from  poverty,  free
from  all  forms  of  evil;  and  he  has  a  right  to  be;
it  is  a  God-given  desire,  and  a  God-given  right.

Thus  far  nearly  all  teaching  has  limited  the
manifestation  of  infinite  love  to  one  form — that
of  healing.  Sickness,  seemingly  incurable  dis-
ease, and  suffering  reigned  on  every  side,  and
every  sufferer  wanted  to  be  free.  We  had  not  yet
known  that  there  was  willingness  as  there  was
power — aye,  more,  that  there  was  intense  de-
sire— on  the  part  of  our  Father  to  give  us  some-
thing more  than  sweet,  patient  submission  to
suffering.

When  first  the  truth  was  taught  that  the  di-
vine presence  ever  lives  in  man  as  perfect  life,


Spiritual  Gifts  145

and  can  be  drawn  on  by  our  recognition  and
faith  to  come  forth  Into  full  and  abounding
health,  It  attracted  widespread  attention,  and
justly  so.  Both  teachers  and  students  centered
their  gaze  on  this  one  outcome  of  a  spiritual
life,  losing  sight  of  any  larger,  fuller,  or  more
complete  manifestation  of  the  indwelling  Fa-
ther. Teachers  told  all  their  pupils  most  em-
phatically that  this  knowledge  of  Truth  would
enable  them  to  heal,  and  they  devoted  all  their
teaching  to  explanation  of  the  principles  and  to
giving  formulas  and  other  instructions  for  heal-
ing the  body.  Time  has  shown  that  there  are
larger  and  broader  views  of  the  truth  about
spiritual  gifts.

Healing  of  the  body  Is  beautiful  and  good.
Power  to  heal  is  a  divine  gift,  and  as  such  you
are  fully  justified  in  seeking  it.  But  God  wants
to  give  you  infinitely  more.

Why  should  you  and  I  restrict  the  limitless
One  to  the  bestowal  of  a  particular  gift,  unless,
indeed,  we  be  so  fairly  consumed  with  an  in-
born desire  for  it  that  we  are  sure  that  it  is
God's  highest  desire  for  us?  In  that  case  we  shall
not  have  to  try  to  heal.  Healing  will  flow  from
us  wherever  we  are.  Even  in  a  crowd  of  people,
without  any  effort  of  our  own,  the  one  who
needs  healing  will  receive  it  from  us;  that  one
will  "touch"  (Matt.  9:21)  us,  as  did  the  one


146  Lessons  in  Truth

woman  in  all  the  multitude  jostling  and  crowd-
ing against  Jesus.  Only  one  touched  Him.

Healing  is  truly  a  "branch"  of  "the  vine"
(John  15:4),  but  it  is  not  the  only  branch.  There
are  many  branches,  all  of  which  are  necessary
to  the  perfect  vine,  which  is  seeking  through
you  and  me  to  bear  much  fruit.  What  God
wants  is  that  we  shall  grow  into  such  conscious
oneness  with  Him,  such  realization  that  He  who
is  the  substance  of  all  good  really  abides  in  us,
that  "ask  whatever  you  will,  and  it  shall  be
done  for  you"  (John  15:7).

If  you  are  faithfully  and  earnestly  living
what  Truth  you  know,  and  still  find  that  your
power  to  heal  is  not  so  great  as  it  was  at  first,
recognize  it  as  all  good.  Be  assured,  no  matter
what  anyone  else  says  to  you  or  thinks,  that  the
seeming  failure  does  not  mean  loss  of  power.
It  means  that  you  are  to  let  go  of  the  lesser,  in
order  that  you  may  grasp  the  whole,  in  which
the  lesser  is  included.  Do  not  fear  for  a  mo-
ment to  let  go  of  just  this  one  little  branch  of
divine  power;  choose  rather  to  have  the  high-
est thoughts  of  infinite  mind,  let  them  be
what  they  may,  fulfilled  through  you.  We
need  to  take  our  eyes  off  the  ends  of  the  bran-
ches, the  results,  and  keep  them  centered  in
the  vine.

You  are  a  vessel  for  some  purpose.  If,  when


Spiritual  Gifts  147

the  time  comes,  you  let  go  cheerfully,  without
humiliation  or  shame  or  sense  of  failure,  your
tense,  rigid  mortal  grasp  on  some  particular
form  of  manifestation,  such  as  healing,  and
"earnestly  desire  the  higher  gifts"  (I  Cor.  12:
31),  whatever  they  may  be  in  your  individual
case,  you  will  do  "works"  in  the  one  specific
direction  that  will  be  simply  marvelous  in  the
eyes  of  men.  These  works  will  be  done  without
effort  on  your  part,  because  they  will  be  God,
omnipotent,  omniscient,  manifesting  Himself
through  you  in  His  own  chosen  direction.

Paul  said,  "Now  concerning  spiritual  gifts,
brethren,  I  do  not  want  you  to  be  uninformed.
.  .  .  Now  there  are  varieties  of  gifts,  but  the
same  Spirit;  ...  To  one  is  given  through  the
Spirit  the  utterance  of  wisdom,  and  to  another
the  utterance  of  knowledge  according  to  the
same  Spirit,  to  another  faith  ...  to  another  gifts
of  healing  ...  to  another  the  working  of  mira-
cles, to  another  prophecy,  to  another  the  ability
to  distinguish  between  spirits,  to  another  various
kinds  of  tongues,  to  another  the  interpretation
of  tongues"  (I  Cor.  12:1,  4,  8-10).

The  same  Spirit,  always  and  forever  the
same,  and  one  God,  one  Spirit,  but  in  different
forms  of  manifestation.  The  gift  of  healing  is
no  more,  no  greater,  than  the  gift  of  prophecy;
the  gift  of  prophecy  is  no  greater  than  faith,


148  Lessons  m  Truth

for  faith  (when  It  Is  really  God's  faith  mani-
fested through  us),  even  as  a  grain  of  mustard
seed,  shall  be  able  to  remove  mountains;  the
working  of  miracles  Is  no  greater  than  the  pow-
er to  discern  spirits  (or  the  thoughts  and  Intents
of  other  men's  hearts,  which  are  open  always  to
Spirit).  And  "greatest  of  these  is  love"  (I  Cor.
13:13) ;  for  "love  never  ends"  (I  Cor.  13:8)  to
melt  down  all  forms  of  sin,  sorrow,  sickness,  and
trouble.  "Love  never  faileth."

"All  these  are  inspired  by  one  and  the  same
Spirit  who  apportions  to  each  one  individually
as  he  wills.  For  just  as  the  body  is  one  ...  all
the  members  of  the  body,  though  many,  are  one
body,  so  it  is  with  Christ.  ...  If  the  whole  body
were  an  eye  [or  gift  of  healing],  where  would
be  the  hearing?  If  the  whole  body  were  an  ear,
where  would  be  the  sense  of  smell?  .  .  .  The
eye  cannot  say  to  the  hand,  'I  have  no  need  of
you/  nor  again  the  head  to  the  feet,  1  have  no
need  of  you/  But  as  it  is,  God  arranged  the
organs  in  the  body,  each  one  of  them,  as  he
chose"  (I  Cor.  12:11,  12,  17,  21,  18).

Thus  Paul  enumerates  some  of  the  free
"gifts"  of  the  Spirit  to  those  who  will  not  limit
the  manifestations  of  the  Holy  One,  but  yield
themselves  to  Spirit's  desire  within  them.  Why
should  we  so  fear  to  abandon  ourselves  to  the
workings  of  Infinite  love  and  wisdom?  "Why


Spiritual  Gifts  149

be  so  afraid  to  let  Him  have  His  own  way  with
us,  and  through  us  ?

Has  not  the  gift  of  healing,  the  only  gift
we  have  thus  far  sought,  been  a  good  and
blessed  one,  not  only  to  ourselves,  but  to  all
with  whom  we  come  In  contact?

Then  why  should  we  fear  to  wait  upon  God
with  a  perfect  willingness  that  the  Holy  Spirit
manifest  itself  through  us  as  it  will,  knowing
that,  whatever  the  manifestation,  It  will  be
good — all  good  to  us  and  to  those  around  us!

Oh,  for  more  men  who  have  the  courage  to
abandon  themselves  utterly  to  infinite  will —
men  who  dare  let  go  every  human  being  for
guidance,  and,  seeking  the  Christ  within  them-
selves, let  the  manifestation  be  what  He  wills!

Such  courage  might  possibly  mean,  and
probably  would  mean  at  first,  a  seeming  failure,
a  going  down  from  some  apparent  success  that
had  been  in  the  past.  But  the  going  down  would
only  mean  a  mighty  coming  up,  a  most  glorious
resurrection  of  God  into  visibility  through  you
in  His  own  chosen  way,  right  here  and  now.
The  failure,  for  the  time,  would  only  mean  a
grand,  glorious  success  a  little  later  on.

Do  not  fear  failure,  but  call  failure  good;
for  it  really  is.  Did  not  Jesus  stand  an  utter
failure,  to  all  appearances,  when  He  stood  dumb
before  Pilate,  all  His  cherished  principles  come


150  Lessons  m  Truth

to  naught,  unwilling  to  deliver  Himself,  or  to
"demonstrate"  over  the  agonizing  circumstances
of  His  position?

But  had  He  not  seemed  to  fail  right  at  that
point,  there  never  would  have  been  the  infinitely
grander  demonstration  of  the  Resurrection  a
little  later  on.  * 'Unless  a  grain  of  wheat  falls
into  the  earth  and  dies,  it  remains  alone;  but  if
it  dies,  it  bears  much  fruit"  (John  12:24).  If
you  have  clung  to  one  spiritual  gift  because  you
were  taught  that,  and  you  begin  to  fail,  believe
me,  it  is  only  the  seeming  death,  the  seeming
disappearance,  of  one  gift,  in  order  that  out  of
it  may  spring  many  new  gifts — brighter,  higher,
fuller  ones,  because  they  are  the  ones  that  God
has  chosen  for  you.

Your  greatest  work  will  be  done  in  your
own  God-appointed  channel.  If  you  will  let
Spirit  possess  you  wholly,  if  you  will  to  have
the  highest  will  done  in  you  and  through  you
continually,  you  will  be  quickly  moved  by  it
out  of  your  present  limitations,  which  a  half
success  always  indicates,  into  a  manifestation
as  much  fuller  and  more  perfect  and  beautiful
as  is  the  new  grain  than  the  old  seed,  which  had
to  fall  into  the  ground  and  die.

Old  ways  must  die.  Failure  is  only  the  death
of  the  old  that  there  may  be  the  hundredfold
following.  If  there  comes  to  you  a  time  when


Spiritual  Gifts  151

you  do  not  demonstrate  over  sickness,  as  you  did
at  first,  do  not  think  that  you  need  lean  on  others
entirely.  It  is  beautiful  and  good  for  another  to
"heal"  you  bodily  by  calling  forth  universal
life  through  you;  but  right  here  there  is  some-
thing higher  and  better  for  you.

Spirit,  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  is  God  in
movement,  wants  to  teach  you  something,  to
open  a  bigger,  brighter  way  to  you.  This  ap-
parent failure  is  His  call  to  you  to  arrest  your
attention  and  turn  you  to  Him.

' 'Agree  with  God,  and  be  at  peace;
thereby  good  will  come  to  you"

(Job  22:21).

Turn  to  the  divine  presence  within  yourself.
Seek  Him.  Be  still  before  Him.  Wait  upon  God
quietly,  earnestly,  but  constantly  and  trustingly,
for  days — aye  weeks,  if  need  be!  Let  Him  work
in  you,  and  sooner  or  later  you  will  spring  up
into  a  resurrected  life  of  newness  and  power  that
you  never  before  dreamed  of.

"When  these  transition  periods  come,  In
which  God  would  lead  us  higher,  should  we  get
frightened  or  discouraged,  we  only  miss  the
lesson  that  He  would  teach,  and  so  postpone  the
day  of  receiving  our  own  fullest,  highest  gift.
In  our  ignorance  and  fear,  we  are  thus  hanging
on  to  the  old  grain  of  wheat  that  we  can  see,
not  daring  to  let  it  go  into  the  ground  and  die,


152  Lessons  In  Truth

lest  there  be  no  resurrection,  no  newness  of  life,
nothing  bigger  and  grander  to  come  out  of  it.

Oh,  do  not  let  us  longer  fear  our  God,  who
is  all  good,  and  who  longs  only  to  make  us  each
one  a  giant  instead  of  a  pygmy!

What  we  all  need  to  do  above  everything
else  is  to  cultivate  the  acquaintance  or  con-
sciousness of  Spirit  within  ourselves.  We  must
take  our  attention  off  results,  and  seek  to  live
the  life.  Results  will  be  * 'added  unto"  us  in
greater  measure  when  we  turn  our  thoughts  less
to  the  "works"  and  more  to  embodying  the  in-
dwelling Christ  in  our  entire  being.  We  have
come  to  a  time  when  there  must  be  less  talking
about  Truth,  less  treating  and  being  treated
merely  for  the  purpose  of  being  delivered  from
some  evil  result  of  wrong  living;  there  must  be
more  living  of  Truth  and  teaching  others  to  do
so.  There  must  be  more  incorporating  of  Truth
in  our  very  flesh  and  bone.

How  are  you  to  do  this  ?

"I  am  the  way,  and  the  truth,  and  the  life"
(John  14:6),  says  the  Christ  at  the  center  of
your  being.

"I  am  the  vine,  you  are  the  branches.  He
who  abides  {consciously}  in  me,  and  I  in  him
[in  His  consciousness},  he  it  is  that  bears  much
fruit,  for  apart  from  me  [or  severed  from  me
in  your  consciousness}  you  can  do  nothing.  .  .  .


Spiritual  Gifts  153

If  you  abide  in  me,  and  my  words  abide  In  you?
ask  whatever  you  will,  and  It  shall  be  done  for
you"  (John  15:5, 7).

I  do  assure  you,  as  do  all  teachers,  that  you
can  bring  good  things  of  whatever  kind  you
desire  into  your  life  by  holding  to  them  as  yours
In  the  invisible  until  they  become  manifest.  But,
beloved,  do  you  not  see  that  your  highest,  your
first — aye,  your  continual — thought  should  be
to  seek  the  abiding  In  Him,  to  seek  the  knowing
as  a  living  reality,  not  as  a  finespun  theory  that
He  abides  in  you?  After  that,  ask  what  you  will,
be  it  power  to  heal,  to  cast  out  demons,  or  even
the  "greater  works"  (John  14:12),  and  "it
shall  be  done  for  you"  (John  15:7).

There  Is  one  Spirit — "One  God  and  Father
of  us  all,  who  Is  above  all  and  through  all  and
In  all  But  grace  [or  free  gift]  given  to  each  of
us  according  to  the  measure  of  Christ's  gift"
(Eph.4:6,7).

"Hence  I  remind  you  to  rekindle  the  gift
of  God  that  is  within  you"  (II  Tim.  1:6).

Do  not  be  afraid,  "for  God  did  not  give  us
a  spirit  of  timidity  but  a  spirit  of  power  and  love
and  self-control"  (II  Tim.  1:7) .

It  is  all  one  and  the  same  Spirit.  To  be  the
greatest  success,  you  do  not  want  my  gift,  nor
do  I  want  yours;  each  wants  his  own,  such  as
will  fit  his  size  and  shape,  his  capacity  and  de-


154  Lessons  in  Truth

sires,  such  as  not  the  human  mind  of  us,  but
the  highest  in  us,  shall  choose.  Seek  to  be  filled
with  Spirit,  to  have  the  reality  of  things  in-
carnated in  larger  degree  in  your  consciousness.
Spirit  will  reveal  to  your  understanding  your
own  specific  gift,  or  the  manner  of  God's  de-
sired manifestation  through  you.

Let  us  not  desert  our  own  work,  our  own
God  within  us,  to  gaze  or  pattern  after  our
neighbor.  Let  us  not  seek  to  make  his  gift  ours;
let  us  not  criticize  his  failure  to  manifest  any
specific  gift.  Whenever  he  "fails,"  give  thanks
to  God  that  He  is  leading  him  up  into  a  higher
place,  where  there  can  be  a  fuller  and  more
complete  manifestation  of  the  divine  presence
through  him.

And  "I . .  .  beg  you  to  lead  a  life  worthy  of
the  calling  to  which  you  have  been  called,  with
all  lowliness  and  meekness,  with  patience,  for-
bearing one  another  in  love,  eager  to  maintain
the  unity  of  the  Spirit  in  the  bond  of  peace"
(Eph.4:l-3).

Commentary

A  sophisticated  young  English  writer  who  loved
gardens  wandered  alone  through  his  garden  one  day
when  its  blooms  were  at  their  height.  He  had  a  long-
ing to  thank  someone  for  Its  beauty,  but  believing
himself  to  be  an  atheist,  there  was  no  one  to  thank!


Spiritual  Gifts  155

In  our  preoccupation  with  the  created  we  sometimes
fail  to  acknowledge  and  rejoice  in  the  Creator.

The  miller  is  back  o£  the  mill,  and  the  thinker
is  back  of  the  thought;  and  back  of  all  God  has
wrought  is  His  will,  His  purpose  and  compassion.
In  this  remarkable  chapter  she  has  approached  the
central  theme  from  several  angles,  to  inspire  us  with
a  responsiveness  to  God's  greatest  gift — the  gift  of
Himself.

Ernest  C.  Wilson


of


Did  we  not  know  it  as  a  living  reality  that
behind  all  the  multitude  and  variety  of  human
endeavors  to  bring  about  the  millennium  there
stands  forever  the  master  Mind,  which  sees  the
end  from  the  beginning,  the  master  Artist  who
Himself  is  (through  human  vessels  as  His
hands)  putting  on  the  picture  here  a  touch  of
one  color  and  there  a  touch  of  another,  ac-
cording to  the  vessel  used,  we  might  sometimes
be  discouraged.

Were  it  not  at  times  so  utterly  ridiculous,  it
would  always  be  pitiful  to  see  the  human  mind
of  man  trying  to  limit  God  to  personal  compre-
hension. However  much  any  one  of  us  may

156


Unity  of  the  Spirit  157

know  of  God,  there  will  always  be  unexplored
fields  In  the  realms  of  expression,  and  it  is  an
evidence  of  our  narrow  vision  to  say:  "This  is
all  there  Is  of  God."

Suppose  that  a  dozen  persons  are  standing
on  the  dark  side  of  a  wall  In  which  are  various
sized  openings.  Viewing  the  scene  outside
through  the  opening  assigned  to  him,  one  sees
all  there  is  within  a  certain  radius.  He  says,  "I
see  the  whole  world;  in  it  are  trees  and  fields."
Another,  through  a  larger  opening,  has  a  more
extended  view;  he  says:  "I  see  trees  and  fields
and  houses;  I  see  the  whole  world."  The  next
one,  looking  through  a  still  larger  opening,
exclaims:  "Oh!  you  are  all  wrong!  I  alone  see
the  whole  world;  I  see  trees  and  fields  and
houses  and  rivers  and  animals."

The  fact  is,  each  one  looking  at  the  same
world  sees  according  to  the  size  of  the  aperture
through  which  he  is  looking,  and  he  limits  the
world  to  just  his  own  circumscribed  view  of  it.
You  would  say  at  once  that  such  limitation  was
only  a  mark  of  each  man's  ignorance  and  nar-
rowness. Everyone  would  pity  the  man  who  thus
displayed — aye,  fairly  vaunted — his  ignorance.

From  time  immemorial  there  have  been
schisms  and  divisions  among  religious  sects  and
denominations.  And  now  with  the  newer  light
that  we  have,  even  the  light  of  the  knowledge


158  Lessons  in  Truth

of  one  God  immanent  In  ail  men,  many  still
cling  to  external  differences,  so  postponing,  in-
stead of  hastening,  the  day  of  the  millennium;
at  least  they  postpone  it  for  themselves.

I  want,  if  possible,  to  help  break  down  the
seeming  *  'dividing  wall  of  hostility"  (Eph.  2:
14),  even  as  Christ,  the  living  Christ,  does  in
reality  break  down  or  destroy  all  misunder-
standing. I  want  to  help  you  to  see  that  there
is  no  real  wall  of  difference  between  all  the
various  sects  of  the  new  theology,  except  such
as  appear  to  you  because  of  your  circumscribed
view.  I  want  you  to  see,  if  you  do  not  already,
that  everytime  you  try  to  limit  God's  manifesta-
tion of  Himself  in  any  person  or  through  any
person,  in  order  to  make  that  manifestation  con-
form to  what  you  see  as  Truth,  you  are  only
crying  loudly:  "Ho!  everyone,  come  and  view
my  narrowness  and  my  ignorance!"

I  want  to  stimulate  you  to  lose  sight  of  all
differences,  all  side  issues  and  lesser  things,  and
seek  but  for  one  thing — that  is  the  conscious-
ness of  the  presence  of  an  indwelling  God  in
you  and  your  life.  And  believe  me,  just  as  there
is  less  separation  between  the  spokes  of  a  wheel
the  nearer  they  get  to  the  hub,  so  you  will  find
that  the  nearer  you  both  come  to  the  perfect
Center,  which  is  the  Father,  the  less  difference
will  there  be  between  you  and  your  brother.


Jnity  of  the  Spirit  159

The  faith  healer,  he  who  professes  to  be-
ieve  only  In  what  he  terms  "divine  healing' '
(as  though  there  could  be  any  other  healing
:han  divine) ,  differs  from  the  so-called  spiritual
scientist  only  in  believing  that  he  must  ask,
seek,  knock,  importune,  before  he  can  receive;
while  he  of  the  Truth  teaching  knows  that  he
has  already  received  God's  free  gift  of  life  and
health  and  all  things,  and  that  by  speaking  the
word  of  Truth  the  gifts  are  made  manifest.  Both
get  like  results  (God  made  visible)  through
faith  in  the  invisible.  The  mind  of  the  one  is
lifted  to  a  place  of  faith  by  asking  or  praying;
the  mind  of  the  other  is  lifted  to  a  place  of
faith  by  speaking  words  of  Truth.

Is  there  any  real  difference?

The  mental  scientist  usually  scorns  to  be
classed  with  either  of  the  other  two  sects.  He
loudly  declares  that  "all  is  mind"  and  that  all
the  God  he  knows  or  cares  anything  about  is
the  invincible,  unconquerable  I  within  him,
which  nothing  can  daunt  or  overcome.

He  talks  about  conscious  mind  and  subcon-
scious mind,  and  he  fancies  that  he  has  some-
thing entirely  different  from  and  infinitely  high-
er than  either  of  the  other  sects.  He  boldly  pro-
claims, "I  have  Truth;  the  others  are  in  error,
too  orthodox,"  and  thus  he  calls  the  world's  at-
tention to  the  small  size  of  the  aperture  through


160  Lessons  m  Truth

which  he  Is  looking  at  the  stupendous  whole.

Beloved,  as  surely  as  you  and  I  live,  it  is  ail
one  and  the  same  Truth.  There  may  be  a  distinc-
tion, but  it  is  without  difference.

The  happy  Methodist  who  will  from  his
heart  exclaim,  "Praise  the  Lord!"  no  matter
what  occurs  to  him,  and  who  thereby  finds  that
"In  everything  God  works  for  good  with  those
who  love  him"  (Rom.  8:28),  is  In  reality  say-
ing the  "all  is  good"  of  the  metaphysician.  Each
one  does  simply  "in  all  your  ways  acknowledge
him  £or  God,  good}"  (Prov.  3:6),  which  is
indeed  a  magical  wand,  bringing  sure  deliver-
ance out  of  any  trouble  to  all  who  faithfully
use  it

The  teachings  of  Spirit  are  intrinsically  the
same,  because  Spirit  is  one.  I  heard  an  uned-
ucated woman  speak  in  a  most  orthodox  prayer
meeting  some  time  ago.  She  knew  no  more  of
religious  science  than  a  babe  knows  of  Latin.
Her  face,  however,  was  radiant  with  the  light
of  the  Christ  manifest  through  her.  She  told
how,  five  or  six  years  before,  she  had  been  ear-
nestly seeking  to  know  more  of  God  (seeking  in
prayer,  as  she  knew  nothing  about  seeking  spiri-
tual light  from  people),  and  one  day,  in  all
earnestness,  she  asked  that  some  special  word
of  His  will  might  be  given  directly  to  her  as  a
sort  of  private  message.  These  words  flashed


Unity  of  the  Spirit  16 1

Into  her  mind:  "So,  If  your  eye  Is  sound,  your
whole  body  will  be  full  of  light;  .  .  .  No  one
can  serve  two  masters"  (Matt  6:22-24).

She  had  read  these  words  many  times,  but
that  day  they  were  illumined  by  Spirit;  and  she
saw  that  to  have  an  eye  '  'single"  meant  seeing
but  one  power  in  her  life;  while  she  saw  two
powers  (God  and  Devil,  good  and  evil)  she
was  serving  two  masters.  From  that  day  to  this,
though  she  had  passed  through  all  sorts  of
troublous  circumstances — trials  of  poverty,  ill-
ness in  family,  intemperate  husband — she  found
always  the  most  marvelous,  full,  and  complete
deliverance  out  of  them  all  by  resolutely  ad-
hering to  the  "single"  eye — seeing  God  only.
She  would  not  look  even  for  a  moment  at  the
seeming  evil  to  combat  it  or  rid  herself  of  it,
because,  as  she  said,  "Lookin'  at  God  with  one
eye  and  this  evil  with  the  other  is  bein'  double-
eyed,  and  God  told  me  to  keep  my  eye  single."

This  woman,  who  had  never  heard  of  any
science,  or  metaphysical  teaching,  or  laws  of
mind,  was  combating  and  actually  overcoming
the  tribulations  of  this  world  by  positively  re-
fusing to  have  anything  but  a  single  eye.  She
had  been  taught  in  a  single  day  by  infinite  Spirit
the  whole  secret  of  how  to  banish  evil  and  have
only  good  and  joy  in  her.  Isn't  it  all  very  simple?

At  the  center,  all  is  one  and  the  same  God


162  Lessons  in  Truth

f  orevermore.  I  believe  that  the  Hottentot,  or  the
veriest  heathen  that  ever  lived,  he  who  wor-
ships the  golden  calf  as  his  highest  conception
of  god,  worships  God.  His  mind  has  not  yet  ex-
panded to  a  state  where  he  can  grasp  any  idea  of
God  apart  from  a  visible  form,  something  that
he  can  see  with  human  eyes  and  handle  with
fleshly  hands.  But  at  heart  he  is  seeking  some-
thing higher  than  his  present  conscious  self  to
be  his  deliverance  out  of  evil.

Are  you  and  I,  with  all  our  boasted  knowl-
edge, doing  anything  more  or  different?

The  Spirit  at  the  center  of  even  the  heathen,
who  is  God's  child,  is  thus  seeking,  though
blindly,  its  Father-God.  Shall  anyone  dare  to
say  that  it  will  not  find  that  which  it  seeks — its
Father?  Shall  we  not  rather  say  it  will  find,  be-
cause of  that  immutable  law  that  "he  who  seeks
finds"  (Matt  7:8)?

You  have  now  come  to  know  that,  at  the
center  of  your  being,  God  (omnipotent  power)
ever  lives.  From  the  nature  of  your  relationship
to  Him,  and  by  His  own  immutable  laws,  you
may  become  conscious  of  His  presence  and
eternally  abide  in  Him  and  He  in  you.

The  moment  that  any  man  really  comes  to
recognize  that  which  is  absolute  Truth — namely,
that  one  Spirit,  even  the  Father,  being  made
manifest  in  the  Son,  ever  lives  at  the  center  of


Unity  of  the  Spirit  163

all  human  beings — he  will  know  that  he  can
cease  forever  from  any  undue  anxiety  about
bringing  others  Into  the  same  external  fold  that
he  is  in.  If  your  friend,  or  your  son,  or  your  hus-
band, or  your  brother  does  not  see  Truth  as  you
see  it,  do  not  try  by  repeated  external  argu-
ments to  convert  him.

"And  I,  when  I  am  lifted  up  from  the  earth,
will  draw  all  men  to  myself  (John  12:32).
That  which  is  needed  is  not  that  you  (the  hu-
man, which  is  so  fond  of  talk  and  argument)
try  to  lift  up  your  brother.  The  Holy  Spirit,  or
Christ  within  him,  declares:  "And  I,  if  I  be
lifted  up,  will  draw  all  men."  You  can  silently
lift  up  this  I  within  the  man's  own  being,  and  it
will  draw  the  man  up  unto — what?  Your  teach-
ing? No,  unto  Christ,  the  divine  in  him.

If  your  loved  one  seems  to  you  to  be  going
all  wrong,  say  nothing  at  all.  Keep  your  own
light  lifted  up  by  living  the  victorious  life  of
Spirit.  And  then,  remembering  that  your  dear
one,  as  well  as  yourself,  is  an  incarnation  of  the
Father,  keep  him  silently  committed  to  the  care
of  his  own  divine  Spirit.  You  do  not  know  what
God  wants  to  do  in  him;  you  never  can  know.

If  you  fully  recognize  that  the  God  that
dwells  in  you  dwells  in  all  men,  you  know  that
each  one's  own  Lord,  the  Christ  within  each  one,
will  make  no  mistake.  The  greatest  help  that  you


164  Lessons  in  Truth

can  give  to  any  man  Is  to  tell  him  silently,  when-
ever you  think  of  him:  tfThe  Holy  Spirit  lives
within  you;  He  cares  for  you,  is  working  in  you
that  which  He  would  have  you  do,  and  is  mani-
festing Himself  through  you"  Then  let  him
alone.  Be  at  perfect  rest  about  him,  and  the  re-
sult will  be  infinitely  better  than  you  could  have
asked.

Keep  ever  In  mind  that  each  living  person
In  all  God's  universe  is  a  radiating  center  of
the  same  perfect  One,  some  radiating  more  and
some  less,  according  to  the  awakened  conscious-
ness of  the  individual.  If  you  have  become  con-
scious of  this  radiation  in  yourself,  keep  your
thought  centered  right  there,  and  the  Spirit  of
the  living  God  will  radiate  from  you  in  all  di-
rections with  mighty  power,  doing  without
noise  or  words  a  great  work  in  lifting  others
up.  If  you  want  to  help  others  who  are  not  yet
awakened  to  this  knowledge,  center  your
thought  on  this  same  idea  of  them — that  they
are  radiating  centers  of  the  All-Perfect.  Keep
your  eye  '  'single"  for  them,  as  did  the  woman
for  herself,  and  Spirit  will  teach  them  more  in
a  day  than  you  could  in  years.

Throughout  the  ages  man  has  leaned  to  the
idea  of  separateness  instead  of  oneness.  He  has
believed  himself  separate  from  God  and  sep-
arate from  other  men.  And  even  in  these  latter


Unity  of  the  Spirit  163

days  when  we  talk  so  much  about  oneness,  most
teachers  of  metaphysics  manage  again  to  sep-
arate God's  children  from  Him  by  saying  that
while  the  child  may  suffer  the  Father  knows  no
suffering  nor  does  He  take  cognizance  of  the
child's  suffering;  that  we,  His  children,  forever
a  part  of  Him,  are  torn  and  lacerated,  while  He,
knowing  nothing  of  this,  goes  on  as  serenely  and
indifferently  as  the  full  moon  sails  through  the
heavens  on  a  winter  night.

It  is  little  wonder  that  many,  to  whom  the
first  practical  lessons  In  the  gospel  of  the  Christ
came  as  liberation  and  power,  should  in  time  of
failure  and  heartache  have  turned  back  to  the
old  limited  belief  of  the  Fatherhood  of  God.

There  is  no  real  reason  why  we,  having  come
to  recognize  God  as  infinite  substance,  should  be
by  this  recognition  deprived  of  the  familiar
fatherly  companionship  that  in  all  ages  has  been
so  dear  to  the  human  heart.  There  is  no  necessity
for  us  to  separate  God  as  substance  and  God  as
tender  Father;  no  reason  why  we  should  not,
and  every  reason  why  we  should,  have  both  in
one;  they  are  one — God  principle  outside  of  us
as  unchangeable  law,  God  within  us  as  tender,
loving  Father-Mother,  who  has  compassion  for
our  every  sorrow.

There  is  no  reason  why,  because  in  our
earlier  years  some  of  us  were  forced  into  the


166  Lessons  m  Truth

narrow  puritanical  limits  that  stood  for  a  re-
ligious belief,  we  should  now  so  exaggerate  our
freedom  as  to  fancy  that  we  are  entirely  self-
sufficient  and  shall  never  again  need  the  sweet,
uplifting  communion  between  Father  and  child.
The  created,  who  ever  lives,  moves,  and  has  his
being  in  his  Creator,  needs  the  conscious  pres-
ence of  that  Creator,  and  cannot  be  entirely
happy  in  knowing  God  only  as  cold,  unsym-
pathetic Principle.  Why  cannot  both  concep-
tions find  lodgment  in  the  minds  and  hearts?
Both  are  true,  and  both  are  necessary  parts  of
a  whole.  The  two  were  made  to  go  together,  and
in  the  highest  cannot  be  separated.

God  as  the  underlying  substance  of  all
things,  God  as  principle,  is  unchanging,  and
does  remain  forever  uncognizant  of  and  un-
moved by  the  changing  things  of  time  and  sense.
It  is  true  that  God  as  principle  does  not  feel
pain,  is  not  moved  by  the  cries  of  children  of
men  for  help.  It  is  a  grand,  stupendous  thought
that  this  power  is  unchanging  law,  just  as  un-
changing in  its  control  of  our  affairs  as  it  is  in
the  government  of  the  starry  heavens.  One  is
fairly  conscious  of  his  entire  being's  expanding
into  grandeur  as  he  dwells  on  the  thought.

But  this  is  not  all,  any  more  than  the  emo-
tional side  is  all.  True,  there  is  law;  but  there  is
gospel  also.  Nor  does  gospel  make  law  of  no


Unity  of  the  Spirit  167

effect;  it  fulfills  law.  God  is  principle,  but  God
is  individual  also.  Principle  becomes  individ-
ualized the  moment  it  comes  to  dwell  in  ex-
ternal manifestation  in  a  human  body.

Principle  does  not  change  because  of  pity
or  sympathy,  even  "as  a  father  pities  his  chil-
dren" (Psalms  103:13).  The  Father  in  us  al-
ways moves  into  helpfulness  when  called  on
and  trusted.  It  is  as  though  infinite  wisdom  and
power,  which  outside  are  Creator,  Upholder,
and  Principle,  become  transformed  into  in-
finite love,  which  is  Father-Mother,  with  all
the  warmth  and  tender  helpfulness  that  this
word  implies,  when  they  become  focalized,  so
to  speak,  within  a  human  body.

I  do  not  at  all  understand  it,  but  in  some
way  this  indwelling  One  does  move  to  lift  the
consciousness  of  His  children  up  and  to  place
it  parallel  with  God,  Principle,  Law,  so  that  no
longer  two  are  crossed,  but  the  two — aye,  the
three — the  human  consciousness,  the  indwelling
individual  Father,  and  the  Holy  Spirit — are
made  one.  In  every  life,  with  our  present  lim-
ited understanding,  there  come  times  when  the
bravest  heart  goes  down,  for  the  moment,  under
the  apparent  burdens  of  life;  times  when  the
strongest  intellect  bends  like  a  "reed  shaken  by
the  wind"  (Matt.  11:7),  when  the  most  self-
sufficient  mind  feels  a  helplessness  that  wrings


168  Lessons  in  Truth

from  It  a  cry  for  help  from  "the  rock  that  is
higher  than  I"  (Psalms  61:2).

Every  metaphysician  either  has  reached,  or
must  In  the  future  reach,  this  place;  the  place
where  God  as  cold  principle  alone  will  not
suffice  any  more  than  in  the  past  God  as  per-
sonality alone  could  wholly  satisfy.  There  will
come  moments  when  the  human  heart  is  so  sud-
denly struck  as  to  paralyze  it,  and  for  the  mo-
ment it  Is  impossible,  even  with  strained  effort,
to  think  right  thoughts.

At  such  times  there  will  come  but  little  com-
fort from  the  thought:  "This  suffering  comes
as  the  result  of  my  wrong  thinking;  but  God,
my  Father,  takes  no  cognizance  of  it:  I  must
work  it  out  unaided  and  alone/'  Just  here  we
must  have,  and  we  do  have,  the  motherhood  of
God,  which  is  not  cold  Principle  any  more  than
your  love  for  your  child  is  cold.  I  would  not
make  God  as  Principle  less,  but  God  as  in-
dividual more.

The  whole  business  of  your  Lord  (the  Fa-
ther in  you)  is  to  care  for  you,  to  love  you  with
an  everlasting  love,  to  note  your  slightest  cry,
and  to  rescue  you.

Then  you  ask,  "Why  doesn't  He  do  it?"
Because  you  do  not  recognize  His  indwelling
and  His  power,  and  by  resolutely  affirming
that  He  does  now  manifest  Himself  as  your


Unity  of  the  Spirit

all-sufficiency,  call  Him  forth  into  visibility.
God  (Father-Mother)  is  a  present  help  in
time  of  need;  but  there  must  be  a  recognition
of  His  presence,  a  turning  away  from  human
efforts,  and  an  acknowledgment  of  God  only
(a  single  eye)  before  He  becomes  manifest.

Commentary

God  is  one  life,  infinite,  eternal,  and  within  us
all.  The  barriers  erected  by  differing  beliefs  about
Him  are  dissolved  as  we  move  closer  to  our  indwell-
ing  Christ  and  realize  His  all-pervading  Spirit.
Though  prayer  is  the  means  of  making  this  contact,
the  method  used  is  unimportant.  What  is  necessary
is  to  "see  God  only"  in  ourself,  our  loved  ones,  and
conditions.  This  establishes  a  consciousness  of  one-
ness with  Him  and  releases  His  healing  power.

While  some  Truth  students  think  of  the  Crea-
tor as  law  or  Principle,  others  are  reluctant  to  sur-
render their  belief  in  a  personal  God.  He  is  both
Principle  and  Father.  Outside  ourself  God  is  the
impersonal  law  of  the  universe  and,  as  such,  is
unmindful  of  human  woes.  But  within  us  He  is  the
loving  Father- Mother  God,  ever  aware  of  our  needs
and  ever  ready  to  fulfill  them  when  we  call  upon
Him  in  faith.

Elizabeth  Sand  Turner


Lessons  in  Truth  171

A

If  you  would  like  to  join  other  readers  In  a
personal  study  of  Lessons  in  Truth,  you  may  use
the  following  lessons,  which  cover  a  one-week
span.  (They  are  particularly  suitable  for  use
during  Lessons  in  Truth  "Week  in  September  of
each  year,  but  of  course  they  may  be  used  with
equal  effectiveness  at  any  time. )  While  studying
each  day's  lesson,  find  the  answers  to  the  ques-
tions in  the  chapters  under  consideration.

Monday

I  am  unfettered }  unbound }  triumphant,  glorious }
splendid,  free!

Jesus  said,  "Ye  shall  know  the  truth,  and
the  truth  shall  make  you  free/'  Freedom  then  Is
a  goal  of  our  Truth  seeking.  Hence  it  is  fitting
that  Lessons  in  Truth  begins  with  a  lesson  on
''Bondage  or  Liberty/'

The  first  three  lines  contain  the  reason  for
any  lack  of  freedom  man  may  feel.  No  matter
what  may  be  the  cause  of  any  bondage  you  may
feel,  it  resolves  itself  into  bondage  to  the  flesh.
But  it  can  be  removed  by  your  "knowing  the
truth' '  about  it.  And  what  does  "knowing  the
truth"  mean?  Should  an  "heir  of  God  through
Christ"  be  in  bondage  to  anything?


172  Lessons  hi  Truth

For  encouragement  In  seeking  your  freedom,
try  to  accept  these  words  as  a  very  direct  per-
sonal message  to  you,  as  if  they  were  coming
from  a  Truth  counselor  right  at  your  side.  Re-
member that  "the  very  circumstances  in  your
life  that  seem  torturing,  heartbreaking  evils
will  turn  to  joy  before  your  eyes  if  you  will
steadfastly  refuse  to  see  anything  but  God  in
them."

The  blessings  of  Unity  are  ever  with  you  as
you  gain  a  greater  realization  of  your  indwelling
God,  and  then  in  all  external  matters  keep  a
calm,  unwavering  trust  that  He  will  accomplish
your  highest  good.  God  bless  you.

These  things  I  have  spoken  to  you,  that  my
joy  may  be  in  you,  and  that  your  joy  may  be  full.
—John  15:11.

1.  What  is  the  cause  of  all  suffering  in  the
world?

2.  What  did  God  mean  by  "to  me  every  knee
shall  bow"?

3.  What  is  the  secret  of  power  in  daily  living?

4.  What  is  real  forgiveness  and  why  is  it  im-
portant?

5.  Is  there  any  situation  in  which  God  cannot
be  found  ?

6.  When  there  seems  to  be  no  way  out  for  us,
what  prayer  is  mighty  to  help  ?


Lessons  in  Truth  173

Tuesday

There  is  but  one  presence  and  one  power  in  my
life,  God}  the  good,  omnipotent.

Meditate  (preferably  during  short,  frequent
periods)  upon  this  statement  of  Truth  until  you
find  that  it  has  helped  you  see  in  its  true  light
every  condition  that  may  be  troubling  you,  un-
til you  realize  that  this  condition  has  no  power
except  that  which  you  have  conceded  to  it
through  the  power  of  your  own  thinking.

Let  the  introductory  paragraph  be  a  very
personal  message  to  you.  Then  as  you  read,
make  an  earnest  resolve  to  apply  immediately
the  Truth  ideas  gained  in  this  first  day's  study.
These  lessons  can  help  you  see  yourself  and  your
affairs  in  the  light  of  Truth.  (You  may  wish
to  underline  for  emphasis  and  further  study  the
statements  that  seem  especially  significant  to
you.)  As  you  read,  become  receptive  to  the  one
Presence  and  one  Power;  accept  without  delay
the  buoyancy  of  spirit,  soul,  and  body  that  Spirit
will  give  you.  Release  every  difficulty  and  every
decision  to  God.  Leave  the  outworking  to  Him;
for  "The  Lord  will  fight  for  you,  and  you  have
only  to  be  still  ....  stand  firm,  and  see  the
salvation  of  the  Lord."

Do  you  find  the  command  "Stand  firm"
difficult  to  obey?  If  so,  it  is  the  fearful  state  of


174  Lessons  in  Truth

mind  In  you  that  must  be  stilled,  else  you  can-
not receive  the  guidance  of  Spirit.  You  will
find  very  clear  and  definite  instructions  for  this
important  step  in  these  pages.

And  he  who  sent  me  is  with  me;  he  has  not
left  me  alone }  for  I  do  what  Is  always  pleasing
to  him. — John  8: 29-

1.  What  is  the  nature  of  God?

2.  What  is  His  relationship  to  us?

3.  What  is  "mortal  mind"  ?

4.  What  is  the  short  cut  to  spiritual  under
standing  and  strength?

5.  Can  our  thinking  affect  material  conditions?
Explain.

6.  Why  does  not  God  force  us  to  think  and
act  aright?

7.  Is  It  necessary  for  us  to  beg  for  God's  help?


Lessons  in  Truth  175

Wednesday

1  am  Spirit,  perfect,  holy,  harmonious.  Nothing
can  hurt  me  or  make  me  sick  or  afraid,  for  Spirit
is  God,  and  God  cannot  be  sick  or  hurt  or
afraid.  I  manifest  my  real  self  now.

As  you  continue  your  study  of  Lessons  In
Truth  today  by  reading  the  chapters  on  "De-
nials" and  "Affirmations,"  try  to  enlarge  your
conception  of  what  Jesus  meant  when  He  said,
"Follow  me."  (See  verse  quoted  at  the  begin-
ning of  Chapter  4. )  Surely  He  did  not  mean  the
halfhearted  following  by  which  one  continues
to  look  upon  external  sources  for  his  enjoyment
Such  a  plan  is  not  in  accord  with  harmonious
living.

The  tenth  paragraph  in  this  chapter  explains
what  Doctor  Cady  means  by  denying  the  self.
Thus  we  see  that  instead  of  denying  (failing  to
see)  our  good  we  are  to  learn  to  appropriate  it;
that  is,  to  unify  ourselves  with  it.  Later  we  are
told  what  blessings  we  may  have  by  appropriat-
ing God,  by  following  Jesus'  way  of  claiming
His  inheritance  of  "all  ...  the  Father  has."

In  the  lesson  on  affirmations  you  will  find
four  fundamental  precepts,  which  Doctor  Cady
suggests  should  be  committed  to  memory.  These
precepts  are  given  more  than  once.  How  long
should  you  repeat  these  precepts?  "Until  they


176  Lessons  in  Truth

lead  [you]  into  such  realization  of  [your]  God-
hood  that  [you]  need  no  longer  depend  upon
them."

//  a  man  loves  me,  he  will  keep  my  word,
and  my  Father  will  love  him,  and  we  will  come
unto  him,  and  make  our  home  with  him. — John
14:23.

1.  Did  Jesus  teach  denial  of  the  comforts  of
life?

2.  What  is  a  denial  in  Truth?

3 .  What  are  the  four  great  denials  ?

4.  Can  anyone  possibly  keep  your  good  from
you?

5 .  What  does  our  longing  for  something  mean  ?

6.  What  are  the  four  great  affirmations?

7.  Why  is  it  helpful  to  commit  our  favorite
denials  and  affirmations  to  memory?


Lessons  in  Truth  177

Thursday
My  faith  is  of  God  and  in  God.

If  you  sometimes  question  the  kind  or
amount  of  faith  you  have,  today's  assignment,
the  chapter  on  "Faith,"  gives  you  an  opportu-
nity to  examine  your  faith  in  the  light  of  Doctor
Cady's  teaching.

While  you  will  wish  to  read  the  entire  les-
son, you  should  give  especial  attention  to  the
paragraphs  which  explain  that  faith  Is  bom  of
intuition,  a  higher  power  of  mind  than  your  in-
tellect. Doctor  Cady  illustrates  the  manner  In
which  your  intuition  helps  you  perceive  Truth.

The  author  also  explains  what  is  meant  by
understanding  faith  and  of  how  by  it  your  de-
sire is  transformed  into  the  visible  blessings  In
your  life.

This  chapter  tells  you  why  you  can  demon-
strate desired  blessings.  As  your  faith  grows
and  increases  on  the  secure  foundation  of  your
understanding  of  God's  laws  your  prayers  be-
come more  and  more  effective.

How  can  you  have  your  desires  fulfilled?
Doctor  Cady  tells  you  in  precise  detail.  God
bless  you  as  you  go  forth  in  understanding  faith
to  calm  the  sincere  desires  of  your  heart

lake  delight  in  the  Lord,
and  he  will  give  you  the  desires  of  your  heart.


178  Lessons  in  Truth

Commit  your  way  to  the  Lord;
trust  in  him,  and  he  will  act.

—Psalms  37:4,  5.

1.  What  Is  faith?  What  attitude  toward  faith
must  we  overcome?

2.  What  is  the  difference  between  blind  faith
and  understanding  faith?

3.  What  is  God's  law  of  supply  and  demand?

4.  What  means  does  He  use  of  urging  us  to
understand  this  law?

5.  Can  we  ever  want  too  much  from  God?

6.  Is  it  possible  for  us  to  really  desire  some-
thing that  belongs  to  someone  else?


Lessons  in  Truth  179

Friday

1  trust  God  to  establish  that  which  is  right,  good,
and  orderly,  because  I  know  He  is  present  in  all
persons  and  situations.

Chapters  7  and  8,  which  constitute  today's
assignment,  present  phases  of  Truth  highly  im-
portant for  a  life  of  success  and  harmony.

In  Chapter  7  Doctor  Cady  interprets  the
meaning  of  the  words  personality  and  individ-
uality in  a  manner  that  will  help  you  understand
the  cause  of  any  inharmony  you  may  feel  toward
another  person.  Her  discussion  also  shows  you
that  you  can  develop  your  individuality  and  be-
come more  loving,  more  lovable,  by  expressing
your  Christ  self.  Remember  that  you  can  call
forth  the  Christ  self  of  another  by  seeing  only
the  Christ  in  him.  "The  Christ  in  me  beholds
the  Christ  in  you"  is  a  splendid  thought  to  use
in  this  connection.

In  Chapter  8  you  will  find  Doctor  Cady's
views  on  intellectual  perception  versus  spiritual
understanding.  For  the  devoted  Truth  seeker
spiritual  understanding  is  a  higher  goal  than
intellectual  perception.  Doctor  Cady  says  that
spiritual  understanding  is  the  revelation  of
Truth  to  the  consciousness  of  a  person.  As  you
read  this  chapter  try  to  realize  what  "the  rev-


180  Lessons  in  Truth

elation  of  Truth  to  the  consciousness"  means  to
you.

This  is  a  very  challenging  and  significant
chapter.  Bless  you  as  you  go  forward  in  Truth,
seeking  "the  deep  things  of  Spirit.'5

Now  we  have  received  not  the  spirit  of  the
world,  but  the  Spirit  which  is  from  God,  that
we  might  understand  the  gifts  bestowed  on  us
by  God.— I  Cor.  2:12.

1.  Is  the  highest  teaching  complex  or  simple?

2.  What  is  the  difference  between  personality
and  individuality?

3.  How  can  we  keep  from  being  intimidated
by  stronger  personalities  ?

4.  Is  every  person  important  ?

5.  What  is  understanding,  and  how  does  it
differ  from  intellectual  knowledge?

6.  What  are  some  of  the  steps  we  can  take  to
gain  understanding?

7.  Is  it  possible  to  do  too  much  "spiritual  seek-
ing'?


Lessons  in  Truth  181

Saturday

The  glory  of  the  Christ  consciousness,  now
awakened  in  my  soul}  quickens,  illumines,  and
heals


me.


For  today's  assignment  it  would  be  most
beneficial  to  you  to  correlate  the  91st  Psalm
with  lessons  9  and  10.  This  psalm  tells  you  of
the  benefits  of  dwelling  in  the  "secret  place"
and  shows  how  powerful  is  the  Almighty  and
how  willing  to  answer  your  call.

Doctor  Cady  tells  you  where  the  secret  place
is.  Here  in  this  "place  of  meeting  between  the
Christ  at  the  center  of  your  being,  and  your
consciousness' '  you  find  the  secret  of  your  di-
vinity, your  immortal  nature,  which  transcends
all  mortal  pain,  doubt,  and  frustration:  "No
evil  shall  befall  you."

What  is  meant  by  "the  Most  High"  ?  Doctor
Cady  will  help  you  find  your  answer  in  chapter
10.  The  "Most  High?  that  you  want  is  the  high-
est spiritual  illumination.  Jesus  Christ  expressed
the  secret  of  His  divinity  in  these  words:  "I  and
the  Father  are  one/'

Also  included  in  chapter  10  are  instructions
for  entering  the  silence.  Does  "waiting  in  the
silence"  seem  to  be  difficult  for  you?  But  you
do  wish  to  attain  results,  do  you  not?  As  a  child
of  God,  of  course  you  do.  Here  is  Doctor  Cady's


182  Lessons  in  Truth

message  to  you  of  the  reward  that  awaits  you
when  you  still  your  senses  and  listen  for  what
God  has  to  say  to  you.

As  you  proceed  with  today's  study  and  con-
template the  Truth  in  these  chapters,  "all  your
hope  be  from  your  Lord."

I  and  the  Father  are  one, — John  10:30.

1.  What  is  man's  greatest  desire?

2.  What  is  the  "secret  place"  ?

3 .  What  is  the  key  to  all  power  ?

4.  What  is  the  "white  stone"  on  which  one's
spiritual  name  is  written  ?

5.  What  is  "the  silence"  ?

6.  What  steps  can  we  take  to  bring  concentra-
tion of  mind  during  our  times  of  silent  prayer?

7.  How  does  the  attitude  of  thankfulness  act
upon  the  fulfillment  of  our  desire?

8.  What  are  some  of  the  changes  that  come  as
the  result  of  true  prayer?


Lessons  in  Truth  183

Sunday

Became  I  work  with  the  indwelling  power  of
God  I  reap  the  perfect  expression  of  His  gifts
in  my  life  and  a j  airs.

The  first  eighteen  paragraphs  of  Chapter  11
have  to  do  with  God's  gifts  to  man,  and  they
will  help  you  to  see  that  you  "are  a  vessel  for
some  purpose."  It  is  recommended  that  you
now  give  up  seeking  one  gift,  one  demonstra-
tion, at  a  time.  The  highest  way  is  to  seek  God
Himself  immediately;  the  manifestation  will
be  good,  all  good!

If  you  feel  that  you  have  failed  in  some
effort,  the  words  of  this  chapter  can  help  you
find  that  even  your  seeming  failure  has  been  a
blessing.

Chapter  12,  "Unity  of  the  Spirit; '  calls  up-
on the  earnest  seeker  after  Truth  to  be  tolerant
of  the  beliefs  and  opinions  of  others.  It  explains
what  should  be  our  attitude  toward  those  we
want  to  help.

Our  attention  is  called  to  man's  idea  of
separateness,  an  idea  difficult  to  remove  from
our  consciousness.  Try  to  gain  an  increased
awareness  of  what  it  means  to  you  to  "be  one
with"  God.  Because  they  are  beautifully  ex-
pressive of  this  idea  of  oneness,  verses  27-30  of


184  Lessons  in  Truth

the  10th  chapter  of  John  should  be  read  at  this
time.

You  have  a  part  to  perform  In  finding  your
unity  with  Spirit:  you  are  to  "recognize  His
indwelling  and  His  power,  and,  by  resolutely
affirming  that  He  does  now  manifest  Himself  as
your  all-sufficiency,  call  Him  forth  into  visi-
bility."

Seek  first  Ms  kingdom  and  his  righteousness 3
and  all  these  things  shall  be  yours  as  well,
—Matt  6: 33.

1.  What  causes  most  people  to  turn  to  God?

2.  Are  some  spiritual  gifts  greater  than  others  ?

3.  What  does  Paul  list  as  spiritual  gifts?

4.  What  is  the  "grace  of  God"?

5.  What  is  keeping  the  eye  "single"?

6.  If  God  is  principle,  can  He  also  be  our  per-
sonal helper?

7.  If  God  loves  us,  why  do  we  suffer  trials?


PRINTED  U.S.A.
3D  aSM-8-67


115977
