The Dialogue on Miracles, Vol. II (Caesarius of Heisterbach (H. von E. Scott and C. C. Swinton Bland, trans.), 1929)
======================================================================
Vol. II of Caesarius's Dialogue on Miracles (Scott & Bland, 1929) — visions, temptations, and the moralized tales of the Cistercian novices; closes with the full index. Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1929 edition (https://archive.org/details/caesariusthedialogueonmiraclesvol.2).

Edited by

G. G. Coulton and Eileen Power


tEty t ©talogue on jfltracles


Volume II


pSroabtoap ftletiiebal library

Edited by G. G. Coulton and Eileen Power


The Unconquered Knight

By Gutierre Diaz de Gamez

Miracles of the Blessed Virgin Mary
By Johannes Herolt

The Dialogue on Miracles

By Caesarius of Heisterbach

The Goodman of Paris

By A Bourgeois of Paris, c. 1393

The Autobiography of Ousdma
Anecdotes from English MS. Sermons
Anecdotes from Thomas of Chantimpre

r

Published by

HARCOURT, BRACE AND COMPANY


PLATE I


THE LAVATORY IN HEISTERBACH CLOISTER


®j )t ©talogue on jUtratleo

//


CAESARIUS OF
HEISTERBACH
(1220-1233)

Vol. II


Translated by H. VON E. SCOTT and C. C. SW1NTON BLAND
with an Introduction by G. G. COULTON


Published by

HARCOURT, BRACE AND COMPANY
NEW YORK
1929


rvi»Tmo IM QUIT nut Ala by uiadla y Mnwni,
it. diw—iu imiT. mx . t : up ubpou. opt,


CONTENTS


BOOK

viii :

OF DIVERS VISIONS


PAGE

I

BOOK

ix :

OF THE SACRAMENT OF THE

AND BLOOD OF CHRIST

BODY

103

BOOK

x :

OF MIRACLES


171

BOOK

xi :

CONCERNING THE DYING


231

BOOK

xii :

OF THE PUNISHMENT AND

GLORY OF THE DEAD .

THE

289


INDEX .


347


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


PLATE

I The Lavatory in Heisterbach Cloister. From Boisseree
lx., plate 44. These two enormous stone basins were
marvels of masons’ skill; a similar basin, perhaps the largest
existing, may still be seen in the grounds of the Cistercian
Abbey of Pontigny in Burgundy Frontispiece

II Limburg on the Lahn. On a peninsula of rock, with what
is now the episcopal palace behind it (unseen in this view).
One of the finest specimens of Rhineland architecture of
about the date of Caesarius To face p. 10

III Heisterbach Abbey Church. From Boisseree l.c., plate 41.

The lay-brethren worshipped in the western half of the nave,
marked by the four less ornamental clerestory windows, and
shut off by screens from the choir (with more ornamental
clerestory) in which the monks sang their daily and nightly
hours. Masses were sung at altars in the apse. The
destination of the vault underneath the lay-brethren’s
portion is uncertain To face p. 36

IV Chapels at Heisterbach and Pontigny. Very few Cister¬

cian churches had anything but a plain square east end ;
hence the interest of this comparison. The High Altar at
Heisterbach was pretty certainly situated as marked here,
with its steps; the easternmost altar was probably that of
the B. V. M.; in Caesarius’s time there were apparently
only two other altars in these nine chapels To face p. 100
V Plan of Fountains Abbey. Built almost exactly at the same
time as Heisterbach. This shows the separation of the lay-
brethren in church (their altar up against the separating
screen); also their separate quarters, with frater (refectory)
on the ground-floor and dormitory above, and steps down
into church. The dormitory of the choir-monks, with
similar stairs leading to the south transept, ran over the
chapter-house and the sub-vault. By courtesy of Prof.

A. Hamilton Thompson and the Syndics of the Cambridge
University Press To face p. 268

VI Templars’ House at Boppard. From Seddon, lx., p. 97.

The Templars of Boppard are recorded to have been the first
to storm the breach at Acre on the Third Crusade (1191)

To face p. 342


BOOK VIII


OF DIVERS VISIONS


CHAPTER I.

The reason why divers visions are to be treated in
the eighth boo\.

You may wonder why I have postponed the book of divers
visions to the eighth place. You muff know that this was
done not without reason and for a sacramental cause. For as
Chris! in the gospel set up a ladder formed of eight beatitudes,
by which every Christian might climb to heaven, so in this
book a ladder is to be set up from as many Steps, by which
the celeStial army may come within sight of human vision.
The two sides of this ladder are the two kinds of visions, to
wit, bodily and spiritual, in such a way nevertheless, that
every vision is to be understood through the spiritual side,
in which the spirit alone works.

Novice. —What is the meaning of bodily vision?

Mon\. —When anything is by the gift of God seen with
the bodily eye and some teaching is conveyed through it,
as for instance, we read that Elisha saw a chariot of fire in the
ascent of Elijah, and as king Balthazar saw the fingers of a
hand writing upon the wall. By this kind of vision often
angels, and also the souls of saints, are seen by mortal bodily
eyes in bodies that they have assumed, as afterwards will be
told in examples.

Novice. —What is a spiritual vision ?

Monk_. —That which takes place by means of images with¬
out bodies, as for instance, in ecstasies and in dreams. Under

I


The Dialogue on Miracles

this we muSt include also the intelledual vision, although it
differs greatly from the spiritual. Indeed some say that it
is triple ; for instance, it is doubtful and obscure for the toiler
along the narrow way, it is full and clear for the saint, while
Adam and Eve before the fall experienced something between
these two extremes.

Novice. —What is intellectual vision ?

Mon\. —Intellectual or mental vision, is when no bodies
or representations of things are seen, but the gaze of the mind
is fixed upon incorporeal substances by the wonderful power
of God. On the higheSt Step of this ladder let us place ChriSt,
who is God and man, the Head and origin of all saints ;
on the second Step as we go down, the order of angels ; on
the third Step, the order of patriarchs and prophets ; on the
fourth Step, the order of apoStles ; on the fifth Step, the order
of martyrs ; on the sixth Step, the order of confessors ; on
the seventh Step, the order of virgins, widows, and the
undefiled, on the eighth Step, the vision of all miraculous
appearances.

Novice. —In what way and under what forms do heavenly
spirits, whether angelic or human, show themselves to mortals,
I should like to learn rather by illustrations than by teaching,
of course, putting before all others the vision of our Lord
and Saviour Jesus ChriSt.

Mon\. —Join me in calling upon the Holy Spirit, who
proceeds from Him, and concerning whose marvellous
appearances I hope to say something, that He will help me
to carry out worthily what you ask for. For although the
works of the Holy Trinity are indivisible, and we believe that
the Son is consubStantial with the Father, and the Holy Spirit
with both, yet never is the Father found to have appeared to
mortals under the form of a subjeCt creature, which cannot
be said of the Son or of the Holy Spirit, since we confess
that there are two natures in the person of ChriSt, the divine
and human. According to the former, He dwelleth in the
light which no man can approach unto, and where no man
hath seen Him at any time (i Tim. vi. 16). According to
the latter, that is, the human nature, He appeared on earth,
and lived amongSt men. For He was seen by the fathers


2


Or Divers Visions


before the Law, and under the Law, but in some subjefl
creature ; but in the dispensation of grace He was seen in
human nature. And although once for all He was born of the
Virgin, nourished and fed, once for all adored by the magi,
presented in the temple, suffered, and raised again from the
dead, and ascended into heaven, nevertheless even to the day
of judgment He does not cease to renew the same sacraments
in wonderful fashion showing His presence according to the
aforesaid kind of vision to His beloved eledl, sometimes in
infancy and boyhood, sometimes in youth and manhood, as
the following examples will show.


CHAPTER II.

Of a pried to whom the nativity of Chris I was
revealed in a dream.

A certain pries! of our house, when thinking deeply over
the sacrament of the incarnation of Chriff, was rapt one night
in a vision into the inn of that nativity. And there, when
he heard that a virgin was about to give birth to a son, he
replied : “ Chriff has been born once for all ; He cannot be
born again. If this virgin is about to bring forth a son, some
great prophet will be born of her, but not Chriff.” Scarcely
had he finished speaking when behold ! she without any
pain brought forth a son, and held Him out wrapped in
swaddling clothes to the monk. And when he took Him
into his arms and kissed Him, he underflood the myftery,
and awakened by the emotion of that happiness he realised
that those former meditations, had been rewarded by so
blissful a vision. Here you have a spiritual vision, but one
which took place in a dream. I will add to it another vision,
but I cannot determine about it, whether it took place in a
dream, or in a mental ecftasy, owing to the way it is told by
different people.


3


The Dialogue on Miracles


CHAPTER m.

Also of sifter Chriflina and the nativity.

The Lord, willing to delight with the vision of His nativity
the venerable virgin Christina, whose memory is preserved
in foregoing pages, a nun on the hill of S. Walburgis, once
appeared to her with His Mother and Joseph, wrapt in
swaddling clothes and lying in a manger. These swaddling
clothes were of white wool, and of the same Stuff as the
robes of the siSters. But the bands with which His limbs
were bound appeared of the colour of grey. You see how
great humility, how great pity there is in the Son of God.
He deigned to allow His swaddling bands to be like the robes
of the Order so that that happy nun might rejoice the more
in the dress she had assumed. You have a similar example
in the sixteenth chapter of the former book, where He with
His Mother appeared, wearing a cowl, to the dying Dom
Christian of Hemmenrode.

Novice. —Which kind of vision seems to you to be the
more excellent, that which comes in sleep, or that which is
seen in ecStasy?

Mon\. —That I may make the answer to your question
more plain, I will firSt show you the different causes of
dreams.


CHAPTER IV.

Of the diversity of dreams, and of spiritual visions.

Sometimes a dream arises out of the fragment of thought
and care ; sometimes from excess of indulgence ; some¬
times from excess of abstinence ; sometimes from the
mockery and fantastic imagination of the enemy without


4


Of Divers Visions


any preceding thought ; sometimes from a preceding
thought accompanied by illusion ; and sometimes by the
revelation of the Holy Spirit, which comes about in many
ways ; and this is the molt worthy kind of dream. It is
however, not a whit less but rather more blessed if holy
meditation has gone firft. Therefore in whatever way the
nodturnal vision is brought about, in my judgment that which
comes through mental ecftasy is to be preferred, because it
is surer and rarer and more full of heavenly bliss. The firfl
vision when it is of heavenly things, is rightly called revela¬
tion ; the second is called contemplation. In both the out¬
ward man dies, and the inward man is the more fully alive.
The former is within reason, and so contains merit ; the
latter is beyond reason, and so seems rather to partake of
reward. When the mind reaches God in contemplation, the
rational sense fails. This is why Rachel died at the birth of
Benjamin. Rachel, which being interpreted is headship,
signifies reason ; Benjamin which means the son of the right
hand, signifies contemplation. Moreover, Rachel dies when
Benjamin is born, since contemplation is born from reasoning
on heavenly things. How weak is the faculty of reason, the
mind discovers within itself. Moreover if that were not true,
the apofUe, when describing his ecffasy, would not say
whether in the body or out of the body I cannot tell, God
\noweth (2 Cor. xii. 2).

Novice .—Although the spiritual vision is of greater dignity
than the corporeal, nevertheless I love better to hear examples
of the latter, because I think it a greater thing than any vision
to be able to see with the bodily eye heavenly spirits, or what
is even ftill greater, the creator of spirits Himself.

Mon \.—I will now tell you of a vision concerning which
you muff judge for yourself, whether it is spiritual, or
corporeal ; it too is a vision of the nativity of Chrift.


5


The Dialogue on Miracles


chapter v.


Of a mon\ who saw Chrifl as a new-born child,
with Mary and Joseph.

In Hemmenrode there was a certain monk of deep devotion,
who seemed to have upon him the good hand of God. He
was indeed one who was Strenuous in manual labour, devoted
in prayer and praise, mighty in vigil, and fervent in fulfilling
all commands.

Now since, about the feaft of All Saints, he had so willing a
mind, and experienced little or no weariness for several days,
he began, not so much boldly, as reverently, to beseech the
Lord in prayer to comfort him with some sort of visitation
on the feaft of His moft holy nativity. Chriftmas Eve had
already come, and his devotion was as eager as ever, and
he had not failed in the aforesaid longing, already foretafting
and apprehending something of the divine condescension.

Now in the night, when they all got up for matins, so
great a languor overwhelmed both his body and soul that
even to live became a weariness to him. Nevertheless he
went into church with the reft, though unable and unwilling
to sing, so that he seemed to be about to lose entirely the whole
of that moft sweet service for his part, and to be utterly
fruftrated of his desire. But another monk came up to him,
and made signs that he himself should chant the ioth response.
But he, prevented not so much by his weakness, but lacking
all desire, refused the offered privilege. Thus, therefore, he
completed that glorious vigil and that solemn delight in
unhappy languour, as one who had no pleasure in rising to
sing or to make responses. Now when it came to the ioth
leftion, he was sitting down, awake indeed, but with closed
eyes, and was dwelling on his troubles in bitterness of soul.
And he said, as he reasoned with himself ; “ Lo ! this is
the answer to your prayers ; which were so different. Where
now is that devotion? where now those hopes? and where
the pious foretafte of the divine pity? What is now your
case? ” And he added : “ You had prayed that some revelation

6


Of Divers Visions


might come to you. And if now it should come, what would
you most desire to see? Assuredly the Lord Christ or His
moft gracious Mother, or indeed, both at once.” And while
he thus sat, occupied with these and similar thoughts awake,
as we have said before, but with closed eyes, the reader said:
" Thou too " and the precentor rose in his place and replied
Blessed he he that cometh in the name of the Lord. And
behold there flood before that fainting monk, a matron of
reverend countenance and incomparable beauty, having in
her arms an infant so small, as if only now born, wrapped
in very cheap and poor swaddling clothes, so cheap and so
poor that he was even filled with compassion for their poverty.
Further, there flood behind her, an old man clad in a tunic
with a cloak over his shoulders, and wearing upon his head
an old crushed hat, but all these seemed to be made of clean
white wool. Yet he could not see the old man’s face, because
the set of the hat prevented it. He saw also a spindle with
its belt, hanging at the matron’s side, but he does not remember
noticing a diflaff. He saw, but because he longed to see
flill more clearly, he loft the sight of what he saw. For he
opened his carnal eyes, and so loft all that glorious vision.
And he realised that that matron had been the Blessed Virgin,
the infant Chrift and the old man Joseph. And in that hour
he recovered his right mind, and completed the reft of that
holy service full of great joy. This vision took place in the
year of grace 1213.

Novice .—Because I am unable to determine the nature of
this vision, I muft hand it over to you to determine for me.

Mon \.—It should be the part of those who have experienced
such things, to refine them. Moreover, if I were to say that
this vision was spiritual, there arises the difficulty that it did
not take place in sleep, because the monk was awake at the
time ; nor in ecftasy, because at that time his outward senses
were well under control. Further if I were to decide that it
was corporeal, you would reply, that he could not see it cor¬
poreally, because his bodily eyes were closed. What then?
I will tell you what I think, though I make no assertion on
the point. So far as I can gather from other visions, I judge
that this was corporeal, and that so thin a barrier as that


7


The Dialogue on Miracles


of the eyelids, could not shut out the bright vision of ChriSt
and of the saints. And this is how when a certain recluse
was mocked frequently by Satan under the appearance of
an angel, and had confessed this to a certain learned priest,
because she did not understand the wiles of the devil, he
replied to her: “ When next he appears to you, close your
eyes. If it be a good angel of the Lord, you will Still see him :
but if it be an evil angel, you will see him no longer when
your eyes are closed.” And she learnt the truth of this by
experiment.


CHAPTER VI.

Of a prior, who saw a Jlar over the heads of singers
on the night of ChriSlmas Eve.

The Lord, under another form, revealed the myStery of
His nativity to another prieft, who was then prior of the afore¬
said monastery. When on the fourth Sunday in Advent
the cantor began the response: See how great is He who
cometh to save the nations, and part of the convent Standing
by the book, went on with what he had begun, he saw a bright
circle in the choir of the abbot shining over the bench upon
which the singers were leaning, and in the midSt of the circle
a dazzlingly bright Star. And at once he realised, as he
was bound to realise, that that Star represented ChriSt ; and
that that bright circle signified the world illuminated by His
coming (Apoc. xxii. 16, John viii. 12). Let this be enough
that I have told you about the nativity of ChriSt. Know that
I heard this vision from the mouth of him who was given
grace to see it. You shall hear in the following book how
glorious a vision was shown to one of our prieSts at Christmas
time concerning ChriSt.

Novice .—I beg that you will ascend gradually from feaSt
to feaSt, and from the infancy to the youth of our Saviour.

8


Of Divers Visions


Mon\. —I will do so by telling you the visions which I have
heard of Him which took place in those feaSts.


CHAPTER VII.

Of Richmud, who, on the feafl of the Epiphany,
saw Chritt in the manger and heard the voice of
the Father from on high.

A virgin who died about three years ago, named Richmud,
wore a secular dress, but was exceedingly religious and
spiritual in her life. She spent all her spare time in failing
and prayer, very often passing into ecStasy, so that she had
a share in the secret things of heaven, and often saw the king
of heaven with the saints and angels. Once when she was
taking part in matins on a certain feail of the Epiphany on
the hill of S. Walburgis, and the abbess had begun the twelfth
response, to wit, in the form of a dove, she watching in prayer,
passed into ecilasy, and saw before her the infant Chriit,
wrapped in swaddling clothes, and lying in a manger, and
round Him a sort of aerial throne in the fashion of a rainbow.
On either side of Him there was a multitude of angels,
adoring Him with outspread hands, and with their gaze
fixed immutably upon Him (Ps. xlv. 3, 1 Pet. i. 12). And
when they came to that place the Father’s voice was heard,
that blessed one, whose external senses had failed at that
moment, heard, not the brotherhood, but the Father Himself
saying: This is My beloved Son in Whom l am well pleased
(Matt. iii. 17). For that Son of God was of such human beauty,
and the voice of the Father was of so great sweetness, as it
is impossible for me to describe. When I asked her about
the appearance of the angels, she replied : “ They are of human
Stature, with faces very like maidens, with cheeks blushing
like roses, and their other limbs where uncovered, whiter
than snow.” She told me also other visions, which I will


9


The Dialogue on Miracles


repeat in suitable places. But on the feaff of the purification,
you have in the twentieth chapter of the preceding book, a
wonderful vision of the Virgin of Quida.

Novice .—I think that revelations of this kind are some¬
times gained by the fervency of prayer.

Mon \.—That is very true.


CHAPTER VIII.

0 / a virgin to whom Chritt appeared as a child three
years old.

A certain virgin in France eagerly desiring to see Chrifl
as a three-year-old child, juft able to speak, prayed earneflly
that this might happen to her. For she was of such perfed
life that it was not undeservedly that she aspired to such a
blessing, and hoped that her prayers might be heard. One
day, when mass was over, and all the people had gone out
and she was lingering behind alone in the church and praying,
she saw a little boy of about three years old, walking round
the altar, and she thought that he muff have been left there
and forgotten by his mother. For he was so beautiful and
his face so full of grace, that she was delighted at the sight
of him, and called him to her, and fondled him with her
hands, saying: “ Tell me, my dear little man, where is your
mother? ” And when he made no reply, she, thinking him
too young to be able to speak, continued : “ Can you say
your paternofler? ” And when he ft ill did not answer,
she added : “ Say after me, Hail Mary, full of grace, the Lord
is with you." And the little boy said after her those words
so joyfully, and so diftinftly, that she marvelled. The same
thing happened in regard to the second clause, to wit, Blessed
art thou among women. But when she said to him : " And
blessed is the fruit of thy womb," the king of all humility,
knowing what was written by his own inspiration : Let another
man praise thee and not thine own mouth (Prov. xxvii. 2),


10


PLATE il


LIMBURG ON THE LAHN


Vol. II)


[ fact p. 10


Of Divers Visions


would not say that clause, and very soon while she looked
on, he went up into heaven in visible form. Then for the
firfl time, that venerable virgin realised that her prayers had
been heard, and gave thanks to the Lord, Who Himself had
so quickly fulfilled her desire. For in very truth, the Lord
Jesus is that blessed fruit, of whom Isaiah sang (Isaiah iv. 2) :
The fruit of the earth is the Son of Mary (Psal. lxxxxv. 1).
A land which has been blessed, can only produce blessed
fruit.

Novice .—It seems to me worthy of remark, that the Lord
refused to repeat with his own mouth the prayer which had
been uttered, and did not hesitate to use words in which His
Mother was glorified.

Monk .■—He gave us an example to do likewise. We have
already spoken much both in the present book, and in former
books of the appearances of the Saviour in infancy ; would
you like now to hear some of those visions in which He deigned
to show Himself to His friends, in perfect manhood?

Novice .—I greatly desire it, and especially at the time of
His passion.

Monk -—You are rightly moved. For the passion of the
Lord is the next feast after the purification. It is itself a
feast of propitiation. By it hell was destroyed, paradise was
opened, captivity taken captive and the fling of death
removed. The passion of the Lord is the antidote to all
human ills. It excites contrition, and draws forth tears, and
reflrains temptation.


CHAPTER IX.

0 / the aforesaid Richmud, who saw the Saviour
in the house of the high priefl, among His
persecutors.

Once, I think it was during the season of Holy Week, when
the aforesaid Richmud was deeply moved while meditating


11


The Dialogue on Miracles


thereupon, she was quickly carried by the Spirit in an ecflasy
into a vaSf, cold hall, where she saw the Saviour Standing,
bare-footed, and with a multitude of Jews surrounding Him.
He Stood there, with down-caSt countenance, clad in a single
tunic loosely girt, and with His hands hanging down. His
tunic seemed to be of a yellow colour. And as she told me,
there were in the corners of the hall groups of ten or twelve
angels, clustering together and whispering, like Storks, as
they spoke of His death. For this was the house of the high
prieSt, in which these things took place according to history,
and were shown spiritually to this handmaid of the Lord.
To what an extent visions of this kind make an impression
upon religious minds, is shown by the following vision, which
is corporeal.


CHAPTER X.

Of a virgin to whom, while she continued watching,
ChriSl appeared upon the cross.

Lately, a certain religious virgin who hitherto had never¬
theless remained in secular dress, told our sub-prior Gerlach,
with many tears, that she was accustomed to see the Saviour
hanging upon the cross with bleeding wounds. “ None the
less, ” she said, “ do I see Him, when compelled by compassion
and grief I close my eyes.” Lo here you have a plain proof
that the vision of which we spoke above in the 5th chapter was
corporeal. Indeed this woman profited so much by these
visions that she could never think or speak of the passion of
the Lord without tears and contrition. Moreover that torrents
of tears are derived from this moff blessed passion, as from a
fountain, the following ftory shows. Tears are compared to
a torrent, because they are quickly dried.


12


Of Divers Visions


CHAPTER XI.

Of the mon\ Daniel to whom Chrifl appeared on
the cross and brought the grace of tears.

In Hemmenrode a prieSt who died a few years ago, a
simple and unlearned man, by name Daniel, had lived a very
hard life in the convent. He used to spend unwearied hours
in prayer and supplication for pardon and used to refuse all
the better food that was brought to him. Once when he had
refused a fish which had been sent him by the abbot, the next
night during service, he saw a demon Standing near him and
eating the fish which he had despised. For this aft of disobed¬
ience he gave satisfaction indeed in bodily discipline, but did
not wholly depart from his obStinancy. But being come to his
agony and being now already dead in all his senses he Still
moved his lips in prayer, and as he prayed inwardly, no voice
was heard and so at laSt Still praying he gave up his soul. This
Daniel had many revelations and saw many wonders, but told
of very few. He did confess however that the Lord had
appeared to him three times. FirSt on the cross before the
chancel Steps ; next in white veStments before the high altar,
and laStly in a form of fire over the altar. And when the
Saviour said to him, I think it was at his firSt appearance:
“ Daniel ask of me what thou wilt and it shall be done unto
thee,” he, as one of the elders of that house told me, replied :
“ Lord, Thy grace is sufficient for me and I ask of Thee
nothing but that I may have the grace of tears so often as I
think upon Thy passion.” And the Lord: “ This grace
shall be thine.” And from that hour, as I have heard, when¬
ever he began to think or to speak of the passion of Christ,
immediately his tears burSt forth. And no wonder ; for Jesus
ChriSt Himself is that moSt limpid rock who supplied to the
children of Israel in the desert the waters that they lacked
(i Cor. x. 4).

Novice.— How ought we to understand what is written in
the psalm (Ps. cv. 41) : He smote the roc\ and the waters
gushed out and rivers flowed in dry places.


>3


The Dialogue on Miracles

Monk -—The history of this is well known and the allegory
much used ; therefore I wish to tell you something which
agrees with the present vision, and which will give you moral
edification.


CHAPTER XII.

How we are to understand he smote the rock,, etc.

He smote the rock,, etc. According to the figurative that
is the moral meaning, Moses is a monk, whom the king’s
daughter, that is divine grace, rescued in pity from the river
of worldly life. For the meaning of Moses is “ taken out
from the water.” The rock is hardness of heart ; the rod is
the cross of the Lord ; the Stroke is the recollection of ChriSl’s
passion. The cleaving of the rock is the compulsion of the
heart. We read that Moses twice smote the rock and then
only did it pour forth water. The firSf blow represents the
memory of ChriSf’s passion, the second the sympathy with the
sufferer. The Jew smote the rock once because whenever
he thought of the suffering of ChriSt, he did not sympathise,
and so his heart could not be broken to tears, with which he
might wash away his sins. But so do thou smite the rock twice
if thou wouldSt add compassion to remembrance, and then it
can scarcely fail but that thy heart shall be cleft to compunction,
and rivers of tears, breaking forth from thence shall pass from
thine eyes and run down thy cheeks and like rivers in a dry
place even bedew the earth with their flow.

Novice .—I like what you say.

Monk ■—I will show you by examples that the passion of
Chrift is a medicine againft temptation.


14


Of Divers Visions


CHAPTER XIII.

Of Peter, a mon\ of Hemmenrode.

There had been in this monastery a certain youth of good
and praiseworthy temperament as well as life, named Peter,
who came from Coblenz, to whom the Lord God gave very
frequent revelations. Some of those which I am about to
tell you, I have already related above, but I think it worth
while to repeat them, because afterwards I learnt them more
fully and more accurately from a brother who is his moil
intimate friend. Sometimes he heard the voices of those
who were singing on high. Once when he was about to aS
as server to the abbot Dom Charles, formerly of Villers, he
had made his confession, and was receiving his absolution
with extreme devotion, when, he heard a voice from heaven
saying to him: “ All thy sins are forgiven.” Again at
another time, when he was Sanding by the sacristan who was
about to celebrate mass, and the lamp had gone out, he wished
to bring a light from elsewhere, but having no time because he
was too busy, he relit the lamp with his breath. Indeed this
youth made a wise and earneft praAice of meditating on and
reciting to himself once a day at leaf! the moft holy and most
sweet reproaches of the passion of Christ, which he found
to be the moft efficacious Simulants of spiritual graces. And
in this pursuit he suffered so much difficulty for about half
a year, that he was compelled to think that meditations of this
kind were of no value to him. At length while he Sill
continued knocking and unweariedly resifted the injuries
and difficulties offered to him, he suddenly was admitted to
those secret things of ChriS, and thenceforward without
difficulty, and as if they were feaSs ready made to his hand,
with great joy he made use of those moS comforting medita
tions. Even during the canon he did not greatly busy himself
with prayer, but meditated on the passion of ChriS. He also
held in the utmoS desire, and longed with as much humility
as vehemence, that the face of the Saviour might be revealed
from on high to him under some form, so that when he had to


15


The Dialogue on Miracles


meditate, he might be able in imagination, to turn more easily
the gaze of his soul on that countenance, as something
clearly seen and well known. And the Lord, who had
inspired this desire in him, did not disappoint him of his
longing. Therefore He wrought out indeed with wonderful
and manifold annoyance to the ease-desiring flesh, confusion
to the devil, but under the guidance of God, great profit to
himself in temptation. Wherefore when once he had lain
proflrate in a corner of the choir of lay-brethren in very long
and devoted prayer, imploring the divine help, that he might
not be permitted to fall into sin, after an hour he got up and
withdrew, since there came to his memory something else
which he had to do under obedience. Passing therefore
through the flails, he made his way pafl the altar of the sick
and of the lay-brethren. And when he came thither, quickly
to receive pardon in front of the altar, and then to depart,
he fell on his knees under the lamp ; and behold there flood
before him the Lord Jesus Himself, or rather as if He were
hanging upon the cross. And He withdrawing His most
merciful arms from the cross, embraced His servant and
drawing him to His breafl as one being dear to Him, in sign
of mutual friendship, He clasped him close, and by that clasp
deflroyed his flrongefl temptations. Certainly when he fell
forward upon the earth, he was in full possession of his senses ;
but he was so entranced by that blessed vision, and so sweetly
moved that he could not tell certainly whether he had received
that revelation through his bodily eyes or through the spirit
only. Yet though he had many visions both before and after
this, ftiil he always confessed that this surpassed them all.
Truly he had received so great a grace of tears from the Lord,
that at matins scarcely ever were his eyes dry. I myself am
witness of this, for I used to ftand next to him at the singing
of the psalms. For so deeply did he glow in the passion of
Chrift, that in the hope of martyrdom he followed Theodoric,
bishop of Livonia, without the permission of his own abbot.
Theodoric had received authority from the lord pope Innocent
to take with him any who were willing to go to plant the
vine of the Lord of Sabaoth amongfl that barbarous people.
This man of God is Still alive and by the order of his abbot

16


Of Divers Visions


rules a parish in Livonia, where he preaches and baptises,
where he edifies many both by word and example, and con¬
firms them in the faith.


CHAPTER XIV.

Also of a mon\ of the same monastery who was
suffering under temptation and saw the wounds of
the crucified being anointed.

In the aforesaid monastery of Hemmenrode there was
another brother who had suffered a great and wearisome
temptation, all his meditations telling him that he ought to
become a hermit. He was so overcome by this temptation
that he even wandered through various places, trying to find
a fit cell for himself. At length he turned to the Blessed
Virgin, and threw himself wholly upon her mercy, asking
her to be surety for him, and promising that whatsoever she
should suggeSI this he would unhesitatingly carry out. And
when he again and again betook himself to the Blessed Virgin
under these conditions, once when he was praying before
her altar, he heard a voice saying : “ Thou haft made me thy
surety but I desire to be loosed from that responsibility.”
Then he rising up, saw a man of venerable appearance Stand¬
ing before the altar, and holding the cross in his hand and
placing his finger upon the five sacred wounds of the crucified,
and saying thus to him as he looked : “ Thus every one anoints
our Lord as you see me doing if he serves well that Order
whose vows you have taken.” And so he was delivered
from his temptation.


i2


17


The Dialogue on Miracles


CHAPTER XV.

Of the nun ChnBina to whom the crucified appeared
and an old man who was anointing His wounds.

The crucified also appeared to Christina of VolmuntSleine
of blessed memory, whom I have already mentioned, and
an old man by Him, who anointed His wounds from a
box which he held in his hand. But I cannot tell what was
the nature of the vision.


CHAPTER XVI.

Of a nun under temptation who was embraced by
the Saviour.

The Lord Jesus ChriSt who is the spouse of His whole
church, appeared visibly to another nun of our Order, whose
name I do not wish to give, at a time when she was grievously
tempted, and by His embrace changed all her trouble into
the greatest peace. So in all these examples you see how
the vision of the Lord’s passion, and also meditation upon
it and sympathy with it, are the greatest antidote againSt
temptation. In it also there are manifold consolations as
the following testimony will show.


CHAPTER XVII.

Of two lay-brethren of Hemmenrode, who saw,
uplifted in the air, ChriB hanging upon the cross.

Two lay-brethren of Hemmenrode were once living in a
certain grange of that monastery. Once they were Standing
together, and were fulfilling their day’s task of service to God

18


Of Divers Visions


at the hour of compline. When compline was over, one of
them looking up to heaven saw on high a shining cross, and
the crucified Lord on it. Indeed that cross was so dazzling
that each could easily see the other by its light. For apart
from it, darkness was over the whole face of the earth ; for
it was winter. And because their Rule forbade them to speak,
he made a sign to his companion as if asking whether the other
saw anything. But the other made signs that he saw nothing.
Then the firSI signed to him that he should fall on his knees
and pray. And when they had both done this together,
the second rose up after a little while, having become the
sharer and witness of that wonderful vision. I believe that
they are both alive Still, but I may not give their names.

Novice .—What do you think was the cause of so marvel¬
lous a vision being granted to those lay-brethren? Was it
reward or rebuke ?

Mon \.—If the same vision took place for their sakes, the
cause seems to have been one of these, namely, a good life
or some fault or perhaps both. That this is true, or may
be true, the following vision will show.


CHAPTER XVIII.

Also of a lay-brother of Luc\a who saw ChriH
crucified in the s\y with fifteen other Religious.

In Lucka a house of our Order which I remember to have
mentioned in the twenty-fourth chapter of the preceding book,
there is a certain lay-brother, as was told me by Adam a
monk of the same house, a man of excellent and well dis¬
ciplined life, by name Rudolph, who received many revelations
from on high. One night he was Standing in the open air
before dawn, after matins, and was saying certain prayers,
when he saw in the sky ChriSf hanging fixed upon a cross,
and round Him fifteen men each on his own cross. Of


19


The Dialogue on Miracles


these ten were monks and five were lay-brethren, all well-
known to him as members of his community. The sky was
rendered so bright by the presence of ChriSt, that he could
distinguish each one plainly. And while he was Standing
Stupified at so marvellous a vision, the Lord cried from the
cross: “ Do you know, Rudolph, who these are that you
see crucified round me?” When the lay-brother replied:
“ Yea, Lord, I know who they are, but I do not understand
the meaning of what I see ” ; the Lord continued: “ These
alone of all the community are crucified with me, because
their life is conformed to My passion.

Novice. —Wherein did they show themselves conformed?

Mon\. —In obedience, in patience, in humility, in the
renunciation of all private property and of their own will.
These and suchlike things make monks into martyrs (Ps. xliv.
22, Luke ix. 23, Matt. x. 38). As I heard lately from tbe afore¬
said monk, all those fifteen are Still alive except one who
already sleeps in the Lord.

Novice .—No cloiSlered person ought to be ignorant of
this vision.

Mon{. —You speak truly, because many who think them¬
selves to be monks, are not so (Gal. vi. 14).

Novice .—Tell me I pray you, how we ought to under¬
stand what the apoStle says. They then who are Christs
have crucified the flesh with the affedions and luH (Gal. v. 24).

Mon\. —I think it ought to be understood in accordance
with what we have been saying.


CHAPTER XIX.

Of the crucifixion of the Religious.

When the apoStle, after enumerating the works of the
flesh, had set forth the fruits of the spirit, he added: But


20


Of Divers Visions


they who are ChriSl’s, etc. (Gal. i. 24). The crucifixion of
the Religious is twofold, that of the inward man in compasion
for others, and of the outward man by the mortification of
his own flesh. The word cross is derived from torture. The
cross of monks is the Strictness of the Order, both in watching
and prayer, and in faffing and discipline, and also in silence
and manual labour, and in the restraint of appetite and the
roughness of bed and clothing. But they who are Christ’s,
who can say with the apoStle: We are crucified with ChriSl
(Gal. ii. 20); they have crucified their flesh, i.e. they have nailed
it to the cross, contending againSt all faulty works and all
affeClions and luSts. And those two words (works and luSts)
are not used subjectively but objectively because they are
slain by the virtues in the mortification of the flesh. The
three nails by which the body of a monk ought to be fixed
to the cross, are three virtues, which the martyrs used, as
Jerome bears witness, namely obedience, patience, and
humility. Let the right hand of the monk be nailed by
obedience without complaint ; the left hand by patience with¬
out pretence. Let the love of higher liberty drive in the nail
of obedience, the fear of the pains of hell hammer home the
nail of patience. True humility fastens his feet, that for
Christ’s sake he is subject not only to his superiors but even
to his brethren (Ps. cxiv. 107, Ps. lxvi. n). The two feet
represent the two kinds of pride bodily and mental. And
although pride is the head of all vices, yet it is not unsuitably-
signified by the feet which are the loweSt parts of the body.
For what we greatly hate and despise, this we tread upon
with our feet (Josh. x. 24).

Novice .—I am glad to hear what you say ; will you now
explain to me the other visions of the Lord’s passion ?

Mon \.—That the Lord reveals His passions to the upright,
sometimes to encourage them and sometimes to rebuke them,
here is an example.


21


The Dialogue on Miracles


chapter xx.

Of the lay-brother Conrad, who fell into an ecSlasy
and saw ChriSl upon the cross.

There was a certain lay-brother who died in our midSt a
few years ago, an upright man, and full of the fear of the
Lord, named Conrad. It was he who saw a serpent upon
the back of brother William, who was sleeping in church,
as has been told in the thirty-second chapter of the fourth
book. He was once alone in our house of Doilendorf over
which he presided, and felt a great failure of the heart, and
said within himself: “ O unhappy man that I am, muff I
die thus without any to comfort me.” Scarcely had he
finished speaking, when he fell into an ecstasy, and lo, he saw
before him the Saviour hanging upon the cross. And He
said: “ Do you see, Conrad, how great things I suffer for
your sake?" And immediately He added these words of
consolation: “ All that you do is well pleasing to Me with
one exception alone.” At these words the lay-brother com¬
forted by so health-giving a vision, came back to himself,
and when he opened his eyes and perceived Him whom he
had seen in the spirit, the vision disappeared. And when he
had recited the vision to brother Richard a spiritually-minded
lay-brother, who asked him if he had enquired of the Lord
concerning that displeasing work, he replied: “ No, there
was no time for such a question.”

Novice. —Can you tell me why the Saviour blamed the
action of the holy man but yet was unwilling to point out
to him what that adtion was?

Monl^.—l think because He desired him to be more careful
about all his adlions, so that while he did not know which
one was blame-worthy, he might watch carefully over every
one. Before his death this lay-brother confessed to our abbot
that one night he had heard angels’ voices in the sky. And
truly he died on that moSt glorious feflival of the assumption
of Our Lady, and as he had been her devoted servant in his
prayers I hope that he himself was carried up from earth to


22


Of Divers Visions


heaven on that day. Not only is there consolation in ChriSl’s
passion but also in the sacred images which represent that
blessed passion. For Chrift honours and rewards those who
pay honour to them ; and punishes the undevout and negli¬
gent and careless.


CHAPTER XXI.

Of a \night to whom the crucifix bowed its head,
because he had spared his enemy for the love of
ChriSl.

In our times and in our province as I have been told, a
certain knight had killed the father of another knight. Now
it happened by chance that the slayer fell into the hands of
the son of the slain. And when he, drawing his sword, was
minded to slay him in revenge for his father, the other fell
at his feet and said : “ I beseech you sir for the honour of the
moft holy cross on which God hung in pity for the world,
that you take pity on me.” He, touched to the heart by
these words, was handing over him and deliberating what
he should do when pity overcame him, and he lifted up the
other and said: “ See ! for the honour of the holy cross,
and.that He who suffered thereon for me, may forgive my
sins, not only do I pardon you your fault, but I will also
be your friend.” And he gave him the kiss of peace. Not
long afterwards this same knight took the cross and passed
over the sea, and when he entered the church of the Holy
Sepulchre, accompanied by other pilgrims, honourable men
from his own province, and passed close before the altar,
the image of the Lord’s body bowed very plainly to him
from the cross. Now when some of them were considering
this, and could not tell to whom so great an honour had been
shown, they determined to go back one by one, but the sign


23


The Dialogue on Miracles


was made to none of them except the aforesaid knight. Then
when they desired to find out the reason, and he assured
them that he was altogether unworthy of so great an honour,
there came to his memory what I have told above. And
when he had related this Story to his brethren, they wondered
at the vaft humility of God, recognising that the image had
bowed its head in sign of thanks.


CHAPTER XXII.

Of a nun for whom the crucified lightened the
darkness.

A certain sifter of our Order had entered a chapel of the
church and was reading the psalms before the altar in the
presence of the crucified, and it was already grown late, and
the caretaker not knowing she was there, shut the door from
outside and withdrew. Now she from within heard him
do this, but did not like to knock, and so spent the night there.
And as she herself told me, a ray came forth like a ftar from
the arm of the crucifix, and gave her so much light that by
its help she was able to read her psalms. Above that altar
there was a wooden image of the Blessed Virgin holding
her Son in her lap. And once, when this nun was reading
her psalter in the presence of the image, the little child came
to her unexpectedly, and as if He desired to know what she
was reading, looked at the book and went back to His
mother. This nun had been a lay-woman much venerated
and a widow, and was always very fervent and devoted towards
our Order, and had received very many consolations from
God.


24


Of Divers Visions


CHAPTER XXIII.

Of a novice on whose forehead the cross was
impressed when he bowed his head at the Gloria.

When a certain novice in Hemmenrode was bowing his
head with much reverence in church at the Gloria, he felt
a cross impressed upon his forehead, and I think that at that
moment he was meditating on the Lord’s passion.

Novice .-—I think that sculptors and painters of the sacred
images might gain some special reward thereby.

Monk ..—You should have no doubt of this provided that
there be more devotion than desire for reward in their work.


CHAPTER XXIV.

Of a painter mon\ who died on Good Friday.

A few years ago there died a certain Benedidfine monk
in the diocese of Mainz. He was a good painter, and so
devoted to our Order, that refusing every reward but his bare
expenses, he painted crucifixes of wonderful beauty over
various altars in many of our monasteries. For he himself
made nearly all our crucifixes, and refused to take anything
from us. The crucified Himself in whose image we have
all been made, wishing to show His workmen how dear to
Him was that moil holy labour, to the wonder of a vaft
number, deigned to take him up from this world on Good
Friday, on the very day on which His passion is specially-
set before us. As though the Lord should say: “ Because
thou haft laboured devotedly both with mind and body con¬
cerning My passion, by meditating upon it, and by displaying
it to others by pidfures, behold 1 I take thee to My reft from
all thy toil on the day of My passion, on which thou shalt
behold Me no longer in meditation or figuratively through


25


The Dialogue on Miracles


pictures but in My presence face to face.” Let these Stories
be enough to show how the Lord honours and rewards those
who hold in honour representations of His passion. Now
I will show you how He punishes and brings to confusion
those who negledf or despise such things.


CHAPTER XXV.

Of the crucifix in the church of S. George in
Cologne which smote the bellman.

In the church of S. George the martyr in Cologne, there
is a metal cross carrying a figure of the Saviour, by which
many miracles and cures have been wrought. Wherefore
the matrons of the city have been accustomed to burn before
it many candles. Nevertheless the chief cause of these signs
and wonders is believed to have been a portion of the true
cross which it carried within it, and which now has been taken
out and surrounded with gems and gold. But the maffer
bellringer of that church showed no reverence to it, but on
going to bed, used frequently to take away the candles from
it, and use them for himself, and one night when he was lying
in bed ftill awake, the same cross came to him and with a
voice of rebuke smote him so heavily that he fell sick and
spat forth blood for many days. I well remember this
miracle, and it was well known through the whole city, so
that from that time forward this cross was held in deeper
veneration.


CHAPTER XXVI.

Of the punishment which fell upon soldiers who
slew their enemies in a church.

A few years ago in the county of Altenberg, such grievous
hatred broke out between two bands of knights that they

26


Of Divers Visions


captured and slew each other. One day when several of one
party had colledfed in the church of the village called Weft
Kotten, they were betrayed by an old woman to their enemies.
For she had given them a sign, saying: “ The number of
Strokes that I make upon the bell, will show you how many
have entered.” This she did, and when a great number had
entered the church, their armed enemies attacked them
unarmed. When they saw this they snatched up the sacred
images, and held them before them, hoping by their help,
to gain mercy for themselves. But the attackers showed no
honour to the sacred place, nor any reverence for the holy
images, so athirSt were they for the blood of their enemies,
that they multilated the images that Stood in their way, and
even cut off the arms of the very crucifix, and slew about 8,000
soldiers in the church. And this adf of sacrilege was very
severely punished. For within a short time a numerous
multitude of the slayers were destroyed by the sword, by the
relations of the slain, so that scarcely two were left alive.
And the old woman who had betrayed them was suffocated
during mass by a heat Stroke. But why should I speak of
wicked Christians, when at Damietta, Saracens who know
not ChriSt, were heavily punished for an insult to His image?


CHAPTER XXVII.

Of God’s punishment againdl the people of
Damietta, who dragged along a crucifix with a rope.

When at the siege of Damietta, the bulk of the Christian
army had fought with the Saracens, and by some judgment
of God, the unbelievers had gained the victory over the
faithful, and put them to flight, they slew many of them and
carried off many more as prisoners. And when those who
were besieged in the city, learnt this, they went so mad with
joy, that they threw a rope round the neck of the crucifix


The Dialogue on Miracles


in order to pour confusion upon our faith, and drew that
sacred image along all the Streets of the city, with many
other insults, while the crowd cheered and clapped their hands,
ascribing the vidtory to their God. But Chris'! who was
dead and seemed to be powerless, soon showed Himself
terribly alive again in vengeance for so execrable a crime.
For He smote the people of Damietta with ulcers in the
throat, as a fitting punishment for the injury offered, so that
they could not even swallow their food. Shortly afterwards
He took away from them their impregnable city by His own
power, in such a way that not a single Christian fell in its
deffrutffion. I could tell you many other miracles about
sacred images, but I will keep them till we come to the roth
book. Be sure of this at leaSt, that even to this day ChriSt
is crucified in His members, sometimes by Jews, sometimes
by Saracens, and sometimes by false Christians (Mai. iii. 9).
I have even heard that in our times, Christians have been
crucified by Jews ; but I have never yet heard that anyone
has been literally crucified by Christians ; but I understand
that some have been lately crucified by Saracens.


CHAPTER XXVIII.

Also of the fellow citizens whom they crucified
when they desired to desert to the Chriflians.

When the aforesaid Damietta was in great Straits through
the long siege, some of the Pagans went out of the city, desiring
both to become Christians and to escape death and began
to desert to our people. The Saracens pursued them, captured
them and took them back, and hanging each one upon a
separate cross, they set them all upon the walls to bring con¬
fusion upon the Christians.

Novice .—What are we to think about them?


28


Of Divers Visions


Mon\. —If they really were athirSl for the faith, and
remained constant in the faith in spite of the fear of punish¬
ment there is no doubt that they are martyrs. Not only is
Chrift martyred by infidels, but also He is daily pierced and
scourged by evil Christians, through injuries done to His
poor.


CHAPTER XXIX.

How ChriSl in form of a poor man complained
to a lay-hrother that He had been beaten.

Not long ago a certain poor man, driven by some necessity,
wished to speak to Henry, duke of Louvain, who is Still living,
and tried to approach him. And when one of the duke’s
chamberlains angrily pushed him by the shoulders, and merci¬
lessly Struck him at random with his Stick, a certain lay-
brother of our Order saw this and mourned over it showing
his compassion even by weeping. The following night the
Saviour appeared to him in a dream, Standing over the altar
in great glory and said : “I thank thee that yeSterday thou
hadSt so much compassion upon Me, when the duke's
chamberlain beat Me so mercilessly without any cause.” At
these words the lay-brother awoke and realised that the Lord
Still suffers in His members.

Novice. —Tell me, I pray you, is there Still any other
despised form, under which ChriSl deigns to appear to
mortals ?

Mon\. —Yes. So great is His humility that sometimes He
appears to us under the form of sick men and sometimes which
is Still more wonderful, taking the form of lepers (Matt. xxv. 36,
Isa. liii. 4) “ Although in the dialogue of S. Gregory and

in other places many examples of this occur, nevertheless
according to my promise I will not tell you anything except
what is new, i.e. what has happened in our own times.


29


The Dialogue on Miracles


CHAPTER XXX.

Of Henry the crippled mon\ of Clairvaux, who in
a dream saw Chntt asleep in his arms, at a time
when a sic\ man was dying.

Henry the crippled monk of Clairvaux, whom I mentioned
in the sixteenth chapter of the firff book, died a few years
ago, after having the charge of the monaftery infirmary.
Once when he had a very sick man among the patients, already
very close to death, when he got up in the night at the bell
for matins, and was looking upon this sick man in the hope
that he might live on a little, he went into the church with
a heart free from care on his account. And while he was
sitting in his Stall, he went to sleep for a while, and behold
the Saviour appeared in the form of the sick man, and leaning
upon his breafl went to sleep. Now when Henry was
terrified by this and wished to rise, the Lord restrained him,
saying: “ Dear friend, suffer Me to sleep.” Being fully
awakened by this word he remembered immediately his
patient, and rising hurried to the infirmary where he found
him already in agony. And when he wished to place him
on the floor, the sick man expired in his arms, in the manner
of the vision. Further, the following examples will show,
how the Lord sometimes takes the form of lepers.


CHAPTER XXXI.

Of the count Theobald, who washed the feet of
Chrifl, under the form of a leper.

The molt noble prince Theobald count of Champagne,
of whose works of mercy we read marvellous things in the
life of S. Bernard abbot of Clairvaux, was so profoundly
humble that he even used in his own person to visit the huts


3°


Or Divers Visions


of lepers. There are those alive to-day who knew him in
the flesh. Now he had a certain leper who lived in front
of a caSlle of his, and as often as he happened to pass his
little house, he would dismount from his horse, and going
to him would firSl wash his feet, and then give him an alms,
and come away. After a short time this leper died and was
buried without the count’s knowledge. One day the count
was going along the same road again, and as soon as he came
before the hut so well known to him, he dismounted saying :
“ I mufl go and visit my father.” And when he entered,
his eyes fell upon no leper, but the Lord Himself in the form
and dress of a leper. And when he had performed his
accustomed work of mercy to Him, and all the more devotedly
as he was the more Strongly inspired by his HoSf, he left the
hut greatly uplifted. And when he said to his people : “ I
am delighted to have seen my leper again ” ; some of them
made answer to him : “ Sir, be assured that he has been dead
a long time, and was buried in such a place. And when
the moSt pious prince heard this, he exulted in spirit because
he had been found worthy in his own person to look upon,
and minister to Him, whom for a long time he had wor¬
shipped in His members. But that the Lord Jesus might
reward so great humility in so great a prince even in this
present world (Matt. xxv. 45), He deigned to show Himself
to him. Hear also another vision even more excellent than
this.


CHAPTER XXXII.

Of a bishop who touched with his tongue the
noSlrils of a leper, and received a gem which fell
from them.

At the time when the Albigensian heresy was beginning
to spread, the Story which I now tell, is said to have happened.

3 1


The Dialogue on Miracles


There was in France a certain bishop, young in years but
of deep spirituality. I do not remember his name or his
diocese. But he was of so great piety, mercy and humility
that whenever he rode along the road, he would never pass
by any one of the lepers who met him, without giving him
alms. Often indeed he would dismount, and, forestalling
their petitions, would place money in their hands as if he
were placing it in Christ’s treasury, and beStowing upon
them the kiss of peace would remount and go on his way.
One day, when passing along the highway, there was a
certain leper Standing in the field by the side of the road,
who called, in a very hoarse voice, that he should take pity
upon him. Now the sight of him was so dreadful, and he
was so eaten up by leprosy that the human eye could not
look upon him without repulsion. But when the holy bishop
saw him, he was moved with pity, hastily dismounted from
his horse, hurried to him and offered him alms. But the
leper said to him: “ I have no need of your money.” And
when the bishop answered: “ What then do you wish me
to do for you?” The leper replied: “That you would
wipe away the filth of this my disease,” pointing with his
finger to a piece of flesh which hung from his nose horrible
to look upon and of very evil odour. And when the blessed
man kindled with the love of Christ, was about to wipe it
away with his hand, the other cried out saying: “ No, no,
I cannot bear the roughness of your fingers.” Whereupon
he took a piece of his shirt which was of the fineSt cambric, but
was Slopped with a similar cry. Then the bishop said:
“ If you cannot bear my hand, nor this moSf delicate cambric,
how do you wish me to wipe it away? ” The leper replied:
“ I cannot endure anything except perhaps the touch of your
tongue.” Forthwith at this word a terrible Struggle arose
at the heart of the bishop between grace and nature, the
former desiring that this should be done and the latter
opposing it. But the grace of God co-operating and doing
violence to nature, he applied his tongue and wiped off the
protuberance due to elephantiasis. Then a marvellous thing
happened. Immediately from the noSIrils of him who
seemed to be a leper, a priceless gem dropped into the mouth


32


Of Divers Visions


of the bishop. And that He might show that He was indeed
ChriSf, who had taken the form of a leper to make trial of
the bishop’s devotion, He ascended up into heaven in great
glory before his eyes and as He went up, He promised the
bishop that he should be partaker of the same glory. Dom
Gevard, our abbot, told us this when he came back from
the general chapter, and assured us that it had happened
quite recently.

Novice .—What is co-operating grace?

Mon\. —The grace of God is twofold, aftive, by means of
which the bishop desired to do so great a good work ; and
co-operative, by means of which he performed it (Gen.
xxxii. 30).

Novice .—This is a marvellous Story.

Mon\. —But to show every word Stands faithful in the
mouth not only of two but of three witnesses, I will add a
third vision not unlike these laSl two, but perhaps in your
judgment Still more aStonishing.


CHAPTER XXXIII.

Also of a bishop of Salzburg who was giving the
sacrament to a leper, and who consumed the sacra¬
ment when the leper vomited it forth.

For a long time now there have been spiritually-minded
bishops in the diocese of Salzburg ; and One of them, either
the immediate predecessor of the present bishop or perhaps
the one before him, used eagerly to visit the homes of the
sick or of lepers, sometimes even going alone. One day he
entered a certain hut and found as it seemed to him a leprous
man lying on the bed and groaning, and asked him if he
wanted anything. To whom the leper replied: “I am
longing for the body of ChriSl ; whereupon the bishop


The Dialogue on Miracles


hastened away and brought it, and with all possible caution
placed it in the mouth of the leper, which seemed very repul¬
sive to him. But He in order to try the faith of the bishop,
before He swallowed the Eucharist, pretended nausea, and
quickly threw up what He had received together with the
fouleSt of vomiting. The bishop indeed was terrified, and
placing his hands below His chin received the filth thrown
out and forthwith placed it in his mouth in reverence for the
sacrament. When afterwards he desired to revisit this leper
and could not find Him, he was told by the neighbours that
for a long time there had been no leper living in that house.
Then the man of God realised, both from the testimony of
the neighbours and from the grace which he had received
from the eating of the aforesaid sacrament, that it was ChriSt
who is accuftomed to try in various ways the constancy of
His eleefl. All these Stories are about the Person of ChriSt.
But with regard to His resurretflion and ascension, I have
heard no visions worth repeating, except perhaps one, if indeed
it may be called a vision.


CHAPTER XXXIV.

Of an aromatic odour on Eafler morning.

One of our priests, who himself told me the story, was
Standing in his Stall laSt year, on the most holy night of
EaSter Eve, at matins, and when the twelfth response was
finished at the beginning of the Te Deum, he perceived
around him so Strong an odour of spices, which laSted so
long, that he wondered what it could be and whence it came,
and his own heart answered him: “ This aromatic odour
comes from nothing less than from the presence of those holy
women, of whom we have been singing all night long, that
they came With spices to anoint Jesus.”


34


Of Divers Visions


CHAPTER XXXV.

Of the passion of Chrtli.

Novice .—Seeing that the resurrection is of Still greater
honour than the passion, can you tell me why it is that so
many revelations have been received of the latter and so few
of the former?

Mon {.—This is firft of all to be ascribed to Christ’s
humility that He may not seem to show forth boaStfully
those things which He did gloriously, or to suppress those
things which He suffered shamefully. Secondly because
there is none of the sacraments, which is so powerful an
incentive of divine love, as the reproaches of the passion (t Cor.
ii. 2). Therefore the passion of Christ was the subject of
all His Study. O how greatly did Job desire to read in the
book of Chriff’s passion (Job. xxxi. 35, 36). ChriSl is the
book of life, sealed with seven seals (Apoc. v. 1) according
to John, wherein lies as Paul saith, salvation, life and resur¬
rection for us, the book which the apoStles carried like a crown
through the whole world, with great glory of miracles. And
when firSl they offered it to the wise, that is the Jews, and
they rejected it as if sealed, next they offered it to the unlearned,
to wit, the Gentiles, and when they could not understand
it, they expounded it to them, as Philip expounded it to the
Eunuch (ACt. viii). The Author of this book was ChriSt
Himself, because He suffered of His own will. The small
and black letters of it were written on the parchment as it
were of His own body, by the bruising blows of the scourge ;
the red letters and capitals by the piercing of the nails ; and
the full Stops and commas by the pricking of the thorns.
Well had that parchment been polished beforehand by many
a blow, marked by buffeting and spitting, and lined with the
reed.

Novice .—I rejoice indeed to have learnt so fruitfully some¬
thing new to me.

Mon \.—I will tell you now some visions of the Holy
Spirit.


35


The Dialogue on Miracles


Novice. —I beg you firSt to explain to me about the Holy
Spirit, whether there be any difference between Him ana
the Spirit which ChriSt gave up upon the cross.

Mon\. —With His help I will do this, and as fully as I
can.


CHAPTER XXXVI.

Of the Holy Spirit.

The Holy Spirit is God, the third Person in the Trinity,
eternally proceeding from the Father and the Son, consub-
Stantial with Them, and of equal wisdom and power.
Wherefore it is said in the psalm: By the word of the Lord
were the heavens made ; and all the hoHs of them by the
breath of His mouth (Ps. xxxiii. 6). That the Holy Spirit
proceeds from the Father, the Son makes plain : For it is not
you who speaks but the Spirit of your Father (Matt. x. 20).
Also : Who proceedeth from the Father (John xv. 26). That
He proceedeth from the Son, the apoStle beareth witness
saying: God hath sent the Spirit of His Son into your hearts
(Gal iv. 6). Further the Holy Spirit Himself bloweth where
He liHeth (John iii. 8). He is holy, manifold, unique,
subtle, modeft, eloquent, full of movement, undefiled, sure,
persuasive, loving what is good, penetrating, irresistible, bene¬
ficent, humane, benignant, constant, care-dispelling, possess¬
ing every virtue, foreseeing everything, the Father of souls,
understanding, pure, discerning. And when the apoStle had
enumerated the various gifts He beStows on man, he thus
concluded ; but all these wor\eth but one and the selfsame
Spirit dividing to every man severally as He will (1 Cor.
xii. 11). Between Him, i.e. the Holy Spirit, and that which
ChriSt at His death commended into the hands of the Father,
there lies juSt so much difference as there is between the
creature and the creator. For this spirit is understood as the

3<?


Uj

I


Vol. II) [fact ft. 36


Of Divers Visions


soul of ChriSt, which was separated from His body by death,
a thing which were unlawful to say of the Holy Spirit.

Novice. —Under what form is the Holy Spirit wont to
manifest His presence to mortals?

Mon!{.~ I find only two forms of manifestation under
which He appeared in the New Testament. He appeared
over the Lord in the form of a dove, and over the apoStles
in tongues of fire. And there is a reason for this. For the
dove, which is the simplest of birds, has seven natural virtues ;
and through them the gifts of the Holy Spirit are mystically
represented. In fire there is heat and splendour and the Holy
Spirit burns with love and illuminates by the operation of
wisdom.

Novice .—I admit that I am satisfied with regard to my
petition by your teaching ; now I pray that if you know any
illustrations, you will add them.

Mon \.—I will show you by moSt true examples that He
has appeared in our own times both under the form of a dove
and of fire.


CHAPTER XXXVII.

Of the lay-brother Henry, and of the dove which he
saw above the head of the prior Herman.

When Dom Herman was abbot in Hemmenrode, he used
to go round with the brethren to Stir them up to devotion
on feaStdays while the choir meanwhile was chanting the
Te Deum, and when according to cuStom he went aside into
the choir of the lay-brethren, the lay-brother Henry whom I
mentioned in the fifth chapter of the fifth book, saw a white
dove descend from the cross which Stood upon the altar of
the lay-brethren, and descend upon the head of the choir.
For a long time she sat there quietly whilst the prior went
round the whole of the church. Then she flew away and


37


The Dialogue on Miracles


took up her place again upon the cross. But when the hymn
was finished and the reading from the gospel began, this
molt sacred bird flew upon the column which stands next
to the reading desk, sitting there and listening, and lending
a moll attentive ear to the holy reading. When it was
finished, she again returned to the cross. And this lay-brother
bore witness that he had very often seen the same vision on
weekdays. Whenever he entered the choir of the lay-brothers,
and according to his cuftom made a deep reverence before
the altar, immediately the aforesaid dove left the cross and
settled upon his head. And in this atflion she made so great
a noise by the beating of her wings and so great splendour
by the shining of her plumes that she could have been heard
and seen by everybody, if hearing and sight had been granted
them. I think that this lay-brother was the same who saw
a dove over the head of a novice when the abbot was blessing
him on his conversion, as has been told in the firff book.


CHAPTER XXXVIII.

Of a monk. on whose head a dove was seen while
he was reading the gospel.

When in the same monastery a certain young monk was
reading the gospel, the aforesaid Henry saw a snow-white
dove come down upon his head, sitting quietly there until
the end of the gospel. For this same monk was a gueSf at
the convent and was held worthy of so great an honour by
reason of his excellent life. When in process of time he
became a prieSl, a certain secular pricft said to one of his
brethren, “ I frequently see a dove over the head of that monk
when he celebrates mass.” Yet I do not think that he was
sometimes present at that mass in body but only in spirit. For
he was a spiritual man who received many revelations from
God.


38


Of Divers Visions


Novice .—What are we to think of doves of this kind ?

Mon\.—~ I have explained to you all I know on this head,
in the fifth chapter of the second book, when I told you of
the ffory of the unclean prieft, from whom the dove carried
off the sacrament of the altar and brought it back after his
penitence. The dove is the sign of the coming of the Holy
Spirit. If there had been nothing divine in these doves, they
would have been also seen by all.

Novice .—Yes I can understand that.

Monl (.—But that the Holy Spirit also sometimes declares
His presence in fire we shall hear in the thirty-fourth chapter
of the ninth book. And as I have now told you several
visions of Chris! and some also of the Holy Spirit, I will
now tell you one of the Holy Trinity.


CHAPTER XXXIX.

Of a nun, to whom was shown spiritually the sacra¬
ment of the Holy Trinity.

Not long ago a certain nun of our Order was Standing at
prime on a certain Sunday, and the choir was chanting the
Athanasian Creed, when she, meditating upon the myStery
of the glorious Trinity, fell into an ecStasy. And in this
ecStasy such marvellous truths were revealed to her concern¬
ing that glorious and eternal Trinity, that she was unable
to explain to her confessor even the method of that vision.
See how abundantly the Lord condescends to show Himself
to our sight. He it is whom Jacob saw in his dream leaning
upon the ladder. But the angels ascending and descending
are the reft, as it is said, of the orders of heavenly hoff,
descending to appear to us and ascending again to withdraw
themselves from our sight. For they are the body and limbs
of Chriff.

Novice. —By what similitude?

Mon \.—I will tell you a very clear similitude.


39


The Dialogue on Miracles


CHAPTER XL.

Under what similitude the eledl may be said to be
members of Chrifl.

The head of Chnft is God ; the head of the church is
Chrift. The angels are the eyes of ChriSt, who always behold
the face of the Father. The patriarchs are His ears, always
listening to the law of God. The prophets are His noStrils,
scenting the future from afar. The apostles are His
mouth, preaching to the world what they have seen and
heard from Him. The martyrs are Christ’s beard showing
in their torment the fortitude of mind which the beard
marks. The confessors are the breaSts of ChriSt, nourishing
the weak by word and example. The virgins and the celibates
are his belief, preferring the love of chaStity to the fruit of
the flesh (Cant. v. 14). Ivory which is icy cold, represents
virginity ; but the jacinth which is of the colour of copper,
represents widowed perfection.

Novice .—Having firSt given me this useful lesson, I beg
you to add visions of each Order if you know any.

Mon \.—Willingly will I do this, and to begin with here
is one about angels.


CHAPTER XLI.

Of angels.

Novice .—How many orders of angels are there?

Mon \.—Nine. Angels, archangels, virtues, powers, prin¬
cipalities, dominations, thrones, cherubin and seraphin. Now
they are called angels, that is, messengers, because they bring
messages to us by suggesting the divine will. Every man
has an angel appointed to him by God for his protection,
from the hour of his birth up till the day of his death. How
necessary their ministry is to men, I will show you by certain
examples.


40


Of Divers Visions


CHAPTER XLII.

Of a virgin who was delivered by an angel from the
Slings of the flesh.

In France Satan moSt grievously buffeted a certain spirit¬
ually-minded virgin recluse with fleshly temptations. She,
not knowing that Strength is made perfect in weakness,
unceasingly besought God with many tears that her piety
might find the grace of deliverance from so horrible a
temptation. One day when she was praying, the angel of
the Lord appeared to her in visible form, and said : “ Do you
wish to be delivered from this temptation? ” and she
replied : “ I do wish it, my Lord, with all my heart I wish it
whereupon the cclcsh.il messenger went on : “ Repeat that
verse of the psalm : My flesh trembleth for fear of Thee and
l am afraid of Thy judgments (Ps. cxix. 120), and you shall
be delivered. Now when the angel retired, or rather dis¬
appeared, she chanted that verse, and forthwith the tempta¬
tion vanished. Then a wonderful thing happened. No
sooner had the spirit of uncleanness been put to flight, than
immediately the spirit of blasphemy took its place, by whom
she was the more Strongly as the more dangerously tempted.
For she began to doubt both God and the Christian faith.
Then more earneSUy than before, she besought the divine
pity, and with many tears prayed that she might be delivered
from so awful a temptation. Then the angel of the Lord
appeared to her a second time and said: “ How goes it with
you now my siSfer? ” She replied: “ Worse than ever, my
Lord.” Then the angel: “ Do you imagine that you can
possibly live without temptation? You muSf have either
one or other of these, choose which you will.” To this the
maiden replied: “ My Lord, if it be necessary, I choose the
firSt temptation. For although it was filthy, it was at least
human. But that under which I now suffer, is altogether
devilish.” Then said the angel: “ Repeat this verse : l deal
with the thing that is lawful and right; O give me not over
to mine oppressors (Ps. cxix. 121), and you shall be delivered.


41


The Dialogue on Miracles


Now when she had done this, after the departure of the
angel, the spirit of blasphemy left her, and the temptation of
the flesh returned.

Novice .—Who do you think that angel was?

Mon\. —He was, as I think, the spirit of Him, who pre¬
ferred her to suffer in the flesh rather than to fail in grace.
For temptation is the guardian of humility and the means of
practising virtue. Virgins and those who have not sinned
are accustomed to be greatly troubled by vainglory and pride.
How anxiously the holy angels watch over the good works
of those committed to their charge, that they may present
them before God, the following Story will show.


CHAPTER XLIII.

Of a lay-brother who frequently saw an angel,
and loSl grace by speaking of his visions.

There was a certain lay-brother of Hemmenrode, an upright
man and well-disciplined who was mailer of a certain grange
belonging to that monastery. By his side whenever he went
out to manual labour or to the business of his grange, an
angel of the Lord was frequently seen walking by another
simple-minded lay-brother. Now when he told this to Dom
Herman his abbot, the abbot replied : “ Because you have
told me of this vision you will never again see an angel. '
And that indeed happened.

Novice. —This brother does not seem to me to have done
any wrong in telling his own abbot what had been revealed
to him from on high.

Mon\. —I am sure that the lay-brother repeated this vision
not without some boaStfulness of spirit. And because the
abbot considered this, he foretold what he thought would
happen. For he was a prudent man and well versed in


4*


Of Divers Visions


letters before his conversion, having been dean of the church
of the Holy Apoftles in Cologne.

Novice.— Since as you say every man has two angels
assigned to him, the good to suggest good, and the evil to
suggefl ill, why is it that the will of a man consents so
easily to follow the evil angel and sin ? Is he more persuasive
than the good in his advice, or Stronger in bringing force to
bear?


CHAPTER XLIV.

Of the powers of the good and evil angel with
regard to man.

Mon \.—Although man has a good angel for protection
and an evil angel to Strengthen his powers of resistance, yet
neither of them can bring force to bear upon his human will,
so that he cannot be bent forcibly to good by the advice of
the one, nor dragged into ill by the suggestion of the other.
For God has conferred upon man free will.

Novice .-—What is the definition of free will?

Mon \.—The power of will and reason, by which a man
chooses the good when grace helps him, but the evil when
grace is absent. It is called free because the will is free and
the decision voluntary, and because the reason decides upon
and distinguishes what the will desires. And although the
reason often follows the will in consenting to sin, neverthe¬
less it never approves the evil. And there is a reason why
the will is so prone to sin. For the devil has two satellites
even more cruel than himself, by which the will is driven,
namely, the fuel of the flesh which is always ready to take
fire, called in the scripture a tyrant, and secondly the world.
The flesh conceives the desire, the devil inflames that desire,
and the world proteCfs the fire from being extinguished.
Many vices arise from the fuel of sin, and the devil adds


43


The Dialogue on Miracles


many helps ; while the world offers countless delights. See
how the chariots and horses of the king of Syria, i.e. of the
devil, were sent to capture Elisha, i.e. a righteous man.
As soon as they are seen, i.e. as soon as they come within
your vision, if with the servant of Elisha you cry out: Alas
mailer what shall we do (2 Kings 6), I answer you with
the voice of the prophet: Fear not; for they that he with us
are more than they which he with them. Open your eyes
and see. For you have within you reason to oppose the
fuel of the flesh, and around you angels to oppose the devil,
host against host. And behold, he says, the mountain was
full of horses and chariots of fire, i.e. protestors, not of one
but many angels round about Elisha, i.e. any of the eledt.
To the temptations of the flesh you are to oppose the natural
virtues. And above all these you have divine grace which
is poured into your mind, as soon as you fall into sin, which
retrains the temptations of the flesh, drives away the devil,
and changes for you the glory of the world into a thing of
hatred. Know also this, that we do some things without
impulse from either angel. And if these things be good,
we win more grace in doing them ; but if they be evil we
sin the more deeply.

Novice. —You have clearly explained to me about these
things, now tell me anything else that you know of angelic
visions.

Mon \.—That they present to God the souls of those com¬
mitted to them, you may be sure from what follows.


CHAPTER XLV.

Of sifter Chriflina, who saw an angel presenting
souls to God.

Sifter Chriftina of Volmuntfteine, a nun in Bergen whom
I mentioned above, was of such great perfection, that she


44


Of Divers Visions


held this life to be a weariness, and longed for death. Once
in Lent, when she believed that she was to die at the coming
Eafter, she fell into an ecstasy, and was carried into a molt
delightful place, which no doubt was paradise. Here she
saw an altar of wonderful beauty, and {landing before the
altar a very majeftic being, whose beauty was paft all
imagining. And when she asked him who he was and what
was his office, he replied : “ I am the archangel, whose office
it is to present souls before God.” And she said: “ Sir,
do you also present souls of our Order? ” “ Yes ” he replied

“ I present to God the souls of all those in your Order who
live a good life, namely, monks, lay-brethren and nuns.”
And he added: “ You will not die now, but at the coming
Eafter.” Which indeed happened. For when she had been
ill for some days, and with difficulty made her communion
every day, she fell into her agony, and besought that the
viaticum might be given her, and gave up her spirit to heaven
before she had fully mailicated it. Now when the venerable
virgin Christina was {till in the aforesaid ecftasy, she saw
hanging above the altar a crown of great beauty. And when
she asked the angel what would happen to the soul of a
certain prie{t whom she specially honoured, and of whom at
that time she was thinking, he replied : “ At his death I shall
place this crown upon his head and present him to the Lord.”

Novice .—Who do you think that angel could have been?

Mon/^.—S. Michael, who, as we are told, is the guardian
of paradise. For of all angels he is the moft eager to help
the human race. Wherefore we read in Daniel that he was
the prince of the children of Israel. This is the reason why
he desired that his name should be kept in remembrance upon
the earth, so that he might be recognised, loved and
worshipped by men for whose salvation he is always eagerly
anxious.

Novice .—What if anywhere less veneration is paid to him
who is thus appointed.

Mon \.—In such places his benefits are always less
experienced, so that sometimes even he seems personally to
depart, according to the tefhmony of the following vision.


45


The Dialogue on Miracles


CHAPTER XLVI.

Of the men who saw the relics of Mount Gudinsberg
carried away to Stromberg.

At the time when Dom Frederic, the archbishop of Cologne,
who is still living, was building a caftie on Gudinsberg, a
certain religious priest returning from Cologne, as he drew
near the aforementioned mountain, saw S. Michael the
archangel in his wellknown form flying with widespread
wings from Gudinsberg to the neighbouring mountain of
Stromberg, where the chief apoftle S. Peter is held in sacred
memory. At the same time a certain layman named
Theodoric, who was hastening with his wife to the church
from the nearest village, saw a reliquary containing relics
which he knew well, carried through the air to Stromberg
from the aforesaid mountain. Both saw the reliquary and
to this day both are witnesses of this great vision. If you
find difficulty in believing me, go ana ask Dom William
the prieft of Stromberg, who will tell you how he heard the
Story direct from those who saw the vision. For the holy
archangel had, and Still has, in Guidinsberg, or as some say
Weedinsberg, a church dedicated to his name. And though
this mountain was very Strong and well placed as a protection
to the province, yet no one had dared to build a caStle upon
it because the inhabitants said that this could not be done,
owing to the aforesaid memory. But the archbishop
Theodoric paid no attention to words of this kind, and built
a caStle there, but was removed from his office before he had
finished its walls. Nor do I wonder that the angelic support
departed from that caftle, for nearly all the buildings had
been constructed from the usury of a certain Jew, whom the
before-mentioned bishop had taken. You shall hear in the
fifth chapter of the twelfth book how mightily the holy Michael
defends the souls of the eleCt from their enemies at death.
Not only does the blessed Michael join the reft of the heavenly
hoft in protecting the faithful when they die, but also defends
them from visible enemies in this present life.

46


Of Divers Visions


CHAPTER XLVII.

Of certain Templars who became invisible to the
pagans while repeating their hours.

Not long ago six knights of the Temple proSfrated them¬
selves to say a certain canonical hour in the neighbourhood
of the Saracens. When the pagan army came up unexpectedly,
and they wished to rise up and flee, their leader signed to
them to lie {fill. Then a wonderful thing happened. That
the King of heaven might show how clear to Him were the
faith of the leader and the obedience of the disciples He sent
His angels, by whom the infidel holt was thrown into con¬
fusion, some being captured and more slain. And when
the Templars signed to those whom the angels had bound,
and they said to them : “ Where is the army which we saw
juft now, and by which we have been captured and slain? ”
they replied : “ When we have need they come to our aid ;
when we no longer need them, they return to their tents.’’
For they understood that those whom they themselves could
not see, were the holy angels, who always Stand by the
worshippers of God, and guard them. In very truth they
are the hosts of God, who came to the help of Jacob when he
was returning to his own country in great fear (Gen. xxxii. i,
2). When this miracle was told to king Philip, when he was
returning to his camp after the siege of Cologne, he replied:
“ Well, even if I had been saying Teach me Thy way
(Ps. xxvii. 13), I should have left the psalm and run away.”
Enough has now been said of visions of angels. But indeed
I have a few words to say of the visions of the patriarchs
and prophets, because they were but rarely shown to the New
Testament saints.

Novice .—I beg you to explain what is the reason of this
rarity, and also to tell me who the patriarchs were, and who
the prophets, and why they were so called ; and then to add
any visions that you know about them.

Mon {.—I will answer your questions as briefly as I can.


47


The Dialogue on Miracles


CHAPTER XLVIII.

Of the patriarchs and prophets.

The patriarchs are those upright and glorious men with
whom God spoke, namely Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and
several others who both preceded and followed them in time.
And they are called patriarchs as being the princes of the
fathers, because they became to others the way of walking
uprightly before God, and the rule of a holy life. Their
successors were the prophets, who were also great and
renowned men, who so clearly foresaw and foretold the
sacraments of ChriSt and the church and other future events
as if they had been laid before their bodily eyes. This is
why one of them said : “ Surely the Lord God will do nothing
but He revealeth his secret unto His servants the prophets
(Amos iii. 7). The prophets were Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel,
Daniel and twelve others, who also perpetuated in writing
what they foresaw or foretold. Wherefore the prophets are
called seers or more significantly they are spoken of as fore¬
tellers, or as those who speak from afar, i.e. from long before.
The reason why also they more rarely appear among us than
apoStles or martyrs, seems to be, that in respedt of the already
mentioned orders, there is little or scarcely any remembrance
of them in the Latin church. The Greeks indeed keep the
feaSt of their birth, and so perhaps they appear more often
to them. I will add several visions of S. John the BaptiSt,
whose memory is celebrated through the universal church.
For he is the laSt of the prophets, and more than a prophet
(S. Matt. xi. 13).


CHAPTER XLIX.

Of a mon\ of Clairvaux, who dearly loves S. fohn
the Baptist.

In the monastery of Clairvaux there is a young monk
named John, who is wonderfully devoted to S. John the

48


Of Divers Visions


Baptift. Indeed he was born on the day of his nativity, and
for this reason was called John by his parents. He loves
him above all other saints, and whenever anything referring
to him is sung, such as the canticle of his father Zacharias,
he joins in it with all his heart and voice. One night when
he was singing with the choir this canticle and they came
to that verse : And thou child shalt be called the prophet of
the HigheU etc. (Luke i. 76), a prieSf who was Standing in
the opposite Stalls, saw a flame of fire rise from his head.
Now this prieSt’s name is William, a spiritually-minded man,
to whom many visions from on high have been revealed.
When matins were over he went to Dom Siger, the prior,
and told him what he had seen concerning brother John.
Immediately the prior sent for John and said: “ Tell me, my
good brother John, what was in your mind at lauds, when
we began the canticle Blessed be the Lord God of Israel ? "
The other replied: “ Believe me, sir, I was thinking, that
if you were in heaven, your voice would never grow hoarse,
and that you would be always praising God with the angels.”
Then the prior: “ What were you thinking of at that verse.
And thou child shalt be called the prophet of the HigheSl? "
To which he made answer: “ My heart was so kindled at
that hour at the thought of S. John, whom I love deeply
that I could scarcely contain myself with joy.” And the
prior realised that that flame had been the sign of the fervent
love of the young monk going up to heaven from his heart.
This vision was told laft year by the aforesaid prior of Clair-
vaux to the prior of Hemmenrode, who told it to me.


CHAPTER L.

Also of a nun deeply devoted to the same forerunner.

The lady Irmingardis, the abbess of the Island of S.
Nicholas, told me laft year of a nun, well known to her for her
wonderful devotion for the aforesaid Forerunner of the Lord.
More than all saints did she love him. Nor was she satisfied


The Dialogue on Miracles


with meditating upon him, with honouring him with worship
and prayer, with preaching his prerogatives to her sifters,
but she further wrote verses about his annunciation and nativity
and the joy of his parents to perpetuate his memory. For she
had been well taught in letters and so was eager to write
verses of anything she had read concerning his sanftity. Also
she urged and begged all secular persons with whom she came
into contaft, to call their sons either John or Zacharias, and
their daughters Elisabeth. Now when she was on her death
bed, the monk John came from Hemmenrode to visit her.
And knowing her affeftion for S. John he said: “Sifter,
after your death, what mass would you like me to say firft
for your soul, that for the dead, or that of S. John the
Baptift?” To which she replied without any hesitation:
“ That of S. John, that of S. John.” And when she came
to her agony, taking compassion on the sifter who was serving
her, she said: “ Sifter go up to the solar and reft awhile.”
And when she had done this and was refting in a light sleep,
she heard in a dream words of this kind : “ Why are you
lying here? S. John the Baptift is below with sifter
Hildegund.” For this was her name. At these words the
nun awoke and without dressing she hurried downftairs in
her nightdress, and found that she had juft breathed her laft.
And all around there was so delicious an odour, that she did
not doubt that the presence of S. John was there, and that he
had joined the soul of his worshipper to the choirs of the
angels. She told me also another vision more amusing than
this which she said had been told her by the abbess of the
convent in which it was seen.


CHAPTER LI.

Of two nuns who were contending one for S. John
the BaptiSl, and the other for the Evangelifl.

There were two nuns and, as I think, they are ftill living
in the convent of Luter in the diocese of Treves, one of whom


5°


Of Divers Visions


was specially devoted to S. John the BaptiSt, but the other to
S. John the Evangelist. Now as often as they met, they
used to argue together as to which was the greater, so that
sometimes the abbess could scarcely restrain them. The
one brought forward all the privileges of her chosen saint,
while the other met them very effectively with the prerogatives
of hers. One night before matins S. John the BaptiSt
appeared in a dream to his worshipper, and said: “ SiSter,
you muSt know that S. John the Evangelist is greater than
I. Never was there a man more pure than he, untouched
both in mind and body ChriSt chose him to the apoStolate and
loved him more than all the other apoStles, and showed him
the glory of His transfiguration. He was moSt blessed that he
was reclined on Jesus’ breaSt at the laSt supper ; he was
present at His death ; to him a virgin, the Virgin ChriSt
committed His virgin mother. He soaring higher than the
other evangelists, and fixing more fully the eyes of his mind
upon the throne of God, thus began his gospel. In the
beginning was the word etc. He also wrote the Apocalypse,
which reveals the very deepeSt things in heavenly pictures.
Also he suffered very many tortures for Christ’s sake, scourg-
ings, boiling oil, and exile. See how for these reasons and
many other of his privileges he is greater and worthier than
I. In the morning therefore, ask your siSter to go with you
before your abbess and falling before her feet beseech her to
pardon you, because you have so often exasperated her for
my sake.” At the bell for matins she awoke and began to
meditate upon so clear a vision. Then after matins, when
the other siSter had returned to sleep, S. John the Evangelist
appeared to her in a vision, and addressed his partisan in
words which carried this meaning: “ SiSter, you muSt know
that the Blessed John the BaptiSt is a far greater saint than I.
The Lord Himself bears witness that among those born of
women there hath not risen one greater than he (Matt. xi. n) !
He is a prophet and more than a prophet. His birth was
announced by an angel, he was supernaturally conceived by a
mother hitherto barren, he was supernaturally sanctified when
Still unborn, he lived sinlessly in the desert. None of this
can be said of me, for I was born of wealthy parents, and lived

5‘


The Dialogue on Miracles


as a layman in worldly fashion, among worldly people. He
recognised the Saviour when flill unborn, among all the
crowd He pointed him out as he came to Him, and in the
Jordan he baptised him with His holy hands. He saw the
heaven open, he heard the Father’s voice, he looked upon
the Son in the form of a man, and upon the Holy Spirit in
the form of a dove. At laft he was martyred because of his
uprightness. Therefore he is greater than I. Now to-day
you muff call your sifter into the presence of your abbess,
and throwing yourself at her feet, you muff beg her to pardon
you, because you have so often exasperated her by contentiously
preferring me to the Lord’s Forerunner.” In the morning
they both went to the abbess and told their visions. Then
together they threw themselves down, and, as had been com¬
manded them, sought pardon from each other, and were
reconciled by the mediation of their spiritual Mother, who
warned them never to contend in the future concerning the
merits of the saints, which are known to God alone.

Novice .—I am greatly edified by such wonderful humility
in the citizens of heaven.

Mon \.—There is no ftrife about greater or less reward in
the kingdom of heaven, as you may gather from this vision,
because there, as the apoftle bears witness, all preference is
done away with. Know this however that as the dwellers
on high visit their lovers with much consolation, so also some¬
times they visit those who despise them with rebukes and
blows.


CHAPTER LII.

Of a canon of Bonn who was smitten by S. John
the Baptifl.

There was a certain canon in the cathedral of Bonn who
with his companions used frequently to visit the nuns in


52


Of Divers Visions


Ditkirgen. But in this visitation there was nothing spiritual,
but rather levity and danger to souls. For as often as he had
to enter the cloister through the monastery which is dedicated
to the honour of the blessed Peter and S. John the Baptist, he
passed through with head eredt, nor did he ever bow his head
before their altars. One night the venerable Baptist appeared
to him in a dream, and eyeing him askance, spoke as follows:
“ Wretched man who passed so often through my church,
never have you shown me any honour even so far as once
to bend your neck before my altar.” And lifting his foot
he smote him so Strongly in the belly, that he woke up both
from the terror of the upbraiding and rebuke and from the
pain of the blow. For from that hour he began to fall sick,
and gradually to become dropsical with swollen Stomach,
and so continuing until he died as the disease grew. And
if you wish to know, his name was John. Perhaps from
this very fadt the saint was the more troubled, because this
identity of name had impressed on his heart neither remem¬
brance nor reverence for him.

Novice .—Since the perfedtion of heaven is greater than that
of the way to it, why do saints so severely punish insults
to them?

Mon \.—The will of those who have attained is so closely
united to the divine will, that they cannot will anything
except what they know that He wills. Now those who are
Still on the way are bound to pray for their enemies and
those who have attained, to conform to the divine justice.
Mercurius the martyr, when now reigning with Chriff, slew
Julian, although, if he had been Still on the way, he would
probably have prayed Chriff on behalf of his murderers.

Novice .—That is a satisfadlory explanation. But why, I
pray you, did the holy Baptift, than whom there is none
greater among those born of women, suffer such mockery
in death, as to be killed by the plotting of an adulteress at
the petition of a dancing woman?

Mon \.—In order that no one may shrink from the death
of any juff man. For even to this day the same greateff of
prophets undergoes mockery in his relics.


53


The Dialogue on Miracles


CHAPTER LIII.

Of a merchant who bought from a harlot the arm
of S. fohn the BapttH.

Not long ago a merchant of our country, crossed the sea,
and saw the arm of S. John the Baptift in the hospital dedicated
to his honour, and longing to gain possession of it, he
discovered that the guardian of the relics was wooing a certain
woman, and as he knew that there is nothing which women
of that kind cannot extort from men, he sent for her and
said : “ If you help me to gain possession of the relics of S.
John the BaptiSt, which are under the protection of your
lover, I will give you 140 pounds of silver.”

She, eager to gain the offered money, refused to give any
consent to the keeper of the hospital, until she obtained the
holy arm, which she immediately handed over to the merchant,
and received the promised weight of silver.

Do you see how great a mockery? Juft as long ago the
head of S. John was given by Herod to a wanton girl as a
reward for her dancing, and by her given to her adulteress
mother, so even in these days, the arm of the same saint was
given to a vile woman as the reward for adultery by the
keeper of the hospital, juSt as by wicked Herod, and by her
was sold to the merchant.

But he did not bury it in the earth like Herodias, but
wrapped it in purple, and fleeing to almoSfc the uttermost parts
or the earth, he came to the city of Groningen, which is on
the boundary of Friesland. There he built a house, and
hiding the arm in one of its pillars, began to grow very rich.
One day when he was sitting in his shop, a friend of his
said to him: “ Behold the whole city is on fire, and already
the flames are approaching your house ” ; but he replied :
I have no fears for my house, for I have left a good guardian
in it.” Nevertheless he arose and went to his house, and
there for some time gazed upon the pillar which was Still
untouched, and then returned to his shop, while all wondered
what could be the cause of such confidence. When questioned


54


Of Divers Visions


about the protestor of his house, when he replied ambiguously
and noticed that this very £a< 5 t made his fellow citizens
suspicious, he became fearful that they might perhaps use
force to discover the truth ; wherefore he took out the arm
and gave it to a certain recluse. But she, not knowing how
to keep the secret, handed over her charge to another, who
gave it to the citizens. And they immediately taking the
relics and carrying them to the church, roughly answered the
depositor when he begged with tears to have his property
restored to him. When they asked him to what saint the relics
belonged, he said that he did not know his name, because
he was unwilling to give them up to them. Nevertheless in
his grief he left the city, and falling into poverty, not long
afterwards was taken with a grievous sickness. When he
was afraid of death, he disclosed to his confessor the name
of the saint, and how he had obtained the relics. When
the citizens learnt this, they made a silver gilt receptacle in
the shape of an arm, and adorned it with precious Stones,
and therein they placed the relics. I myself, two years ago,
saw this arm and it was Still clothed with flesh and skin. I
saw there also a small golden cross full of relics which had
been given to this man at he same time as the arm ; this
cross belonged to the emperor Frederick.

Novice .-—Since no one of the saints is believed to be greater
than S. John, why do we read that he performed no miracle
during his life ?

Mon \.—In order that the Lord might show that saintship
does not consist in miracles but in holiness of life. After his
death He glorified him with innumerable great signs. The
citizens of Groningen fearing for the safety of these relics
of S. John, made a shrine behind the altar, built very Strongly
with planks and on the top of it they caused a prieSt to
sleep at night. The firSt night he slept there, the church was so
shaken under him, that it Struck into him no little terror ;
but the second night the sleeper was thrown off his bed, and
fell upon the pavement. Also when one of the leading men
of the city fell sick, and Theodoric the prieSt of that church
carried at his request the sacred arm to his house, and
uncovered it, he found both the arm and the purple in which


55


The Dialogue on Miracles


it was wrapped Sained with fresh blood. He told me this
with his own mouth. When the prieft had cut off a small
piece of flesh from this arm, and was carrying it hidden in
his hand, he felt a heat arising from it, as if he were carrying
burning coal. Indeed many signs and cures were wrought
in that city by these relics, through the merits of S. John the
Baptist


CHAPTER LIV.

Of a tooth of the same saint which is in our posses¬
sion, and of the mighty worlds wrought by it.

We have in our monastery a large molar tooth with three
fangs, of the same Forerunner of the Lord ; I am going to
tell you how it came to us, and what the Lord wrought
amongSt us by its means. When the city of Constantinople
was laid waSe by the crusaders, and some of them were
carrying off various booty, Henry, a knight of Ulm, amongSt
other moSt precious relics, took from the church of S. Sophia
this tooth of S. John. He brought it home, and treasured
it so much that he built a chapel in his caStle, meaning to
place it there in the altar. Now his siSter was abbess of S.
Nicholas on the Island, and because of the affedtion which
she had, and Still has towards our monastery, she tried to
persuade him to give it to us, but at that time could not
succeed. A little time later Henry was taken prisoner by
Warner de Bonlant, and in hope of gaining our prayers he
ordered the tooth to be sent to us. Meanwhile a siSter of
the aforesaid convent had it revealed to her in a dream, that
as soon as the tooth came to our monastery, Henry would
be set free ; and we afterwards learnt that this actually took
place. Now our prior, who was the bearer of the tooth,
escaped imminent danger on the river Rhine through its
virtue. Henry, Count of Sayn had in his service a knight,

56


Of Divers Visions


who was honourable, but afflidted in mind, who came with
it to us, hoping that he might be cured, both by the virtue
of the relic, and the help of our prayers. Now when he
was crossed and touched with that moil sacred tooth, he
perceived the effe< 5 f of its virtue so swiftly, that he had scarcely
gone a Slone’s-throw from the monastery, than he congratu¬
lated himself on being healed. For this tooth is, as I said
above, both great and mighty, and all the more powerful in
curing sicknesses, as it had been the less used to maflicate
delicate food. Let this be enough said about the prophets.
But of the apoStles who follow the prophetic order in point
of time, I will subjoin for you several visions.

Novice. —I pray you firfl to tell me why the apoflles were
chosen by Christ to the number of twelve, and why they are
called apoflles.

Mon\. —Both these fails contain a great sacrament.


CHAPTER LV.

Of the apoSlles.

As the gospels say, Chrifl went up into the mountain and
called to Him whom He would, whom He also named
apollles (Mark iii. 13, Luke vi. 13). The word aposlle, being
interpreted means sent, according to the words of the Lord :
he that is sent is not greater that He that sent him (John xiii.
16). For very good reasons twelve were called to preach to
others the myfteries of the faith, because the number twelve
consists of four times three or three times four. And for
this reason twelve were chosen, that they might be sent to
the four quarters of the world to announce to all men the
faith of the Holy Trinity, and to summon believers to the
one glory of eternal happiness. The twelve apoflles are
the twelve signs of the Zodiac, the twelve months of the year,
the twelve hours of the day, the twelve flars in the crown of

57


The Dialogue on Miracles


the bride (Apoc. xii. i). For ChriSf indeed is the heaven.
He is the year of eternity, He is the light of the crown of
the saints. The apoftles are the twelve sons of Jacob, that
is of Christ ; the twelve fountains of the desert ; the twelve
Stones on the breaSlplate of the high prieSI ; the twelve loaves
of the shewbread ; the twelve Stones of the altar ; the twelve
Stones taken out of Jordan ; the twelve oxen which support
the brazen sea ; the twelve foundations of the heavenly
Jerusalem.

Novice .—After this helpful preface, will you now give
me their visions in order?

Mon\. —Although the holy apoStles appear to many in
visions, and many miracles are daily wrought by them, yet
I will tell you briefly only about a few, but enough to serve
for examples.


CHAPTER LV 1 .

Of a woman who chose by lot S. Andrew for her
patron saint, but rejected him.

There is a widespread cuStom in our province for matrons
to choose for themselves a special apoStle by lot as follows.
The names of the twelve apoSHes are written one by one on
twelve separate candles, which are then blessed by the prieSI
and placed together on the altar. A woman then goes up
and draws a name by taking a candle, and then she pays
more honour and worship to him than the reft In this
way a certain matron drew S. Andrew, and as she was not
satisfied with him, she put back the candle and wished to
take another, but the second showed the same name. To
shorten the Story, at length she drew one who satisfied her.
And when she had shown him much reverence all the days
of her life, and had now come to the point of death, she saw
that it was not he but the blessed Andrew who came to help

58


Of Divers Visions


her. “ Lo,” said he, “ I am that Andr-w you despised.”
Whence we may gather that sometimes the saints, even of
their own accord, offer themselves for human devotion. How
mighty a help this blessed apoStle is to those who call upon
him, the following Story will show.


CHAPTER LVII.

Of a bearskin which was bought for S. Andrew,
and which calmed a raging sea.

There were two young men who lived near the church of
S. Andrew, and who in their trading journeys were
accustomed to go to far-off lands. Once when they were
about to set out for Norway, brother Rener, our fellow monk,
who was then canon of S. Andrew in Cologne, as he himself
told me, gave them five gold marks, begging them to buy
with the money a white bearskin, such as that region produces,
for a carpet before the altar of S. Andrew. Now when they
had done this, and were on their way back, there arose so
great a Storm in the sea, that the whole ship’s company
despaired of their lives. I think that this happened then,
that the Lord might declare the power of his apoSUe. For
the aforesaid youths remembered the bearskin of S. Andrew,
and with the utmoSl confidence held it up againSI the increas¬
ing Storms and raging wind. And behold the Lord, at the
entreaty of the merits of His apoSUe, whom He called from
the sea shore, commanded the wind and the sea, and
immediately there fell so great a calm, that all in the ship
wondered. Now when they reached Cologne they restored
the money, and made an offering of the skin to the blessed
Andrew, in memory of the benefit beStowed upon them.


59


The Dialogue on Miracles


CHAPTER LVIII.

Of a man who was delwered from hanging by the
help of S. James.

A certain citizen of Utrecht set out with his son to the
shrine of S. James of CompoSlella. If I remember rightly,
it happened that in a certain place his hoSt loft something,
and being suspicious of this man, he charged him with theft
before the magistrate of the city. He denied and said : “ God
knows and S. James is my witness that I have never been a
thief nor a companion of thieves ” ; the judge however did
not believe him, but condemned the innocent and sentenced
him to be hanged. The son seeing his father condemned,
and the testimony of his brother pilgrims unavailing, weeping
and crying aloud, said to the judge : “ I beg you, sir, that for
the sake of God and S. James you will hang me and let my
father go. For I know his innocence.” At length the judge,
overcome by his tears and insistence freed the father and
hanged the son. Then the father, in great sadness went on
his way with his friends, and visited the shrine of the blessed
James, making supplication to him for the soul of his son ;
and when he returned to the place of the hanging, he said
to the brethren : “ See, brethren, here is my son ; I pray you
to halt a little, while I take him down and bury him.”
When he heard the voice of his father the son replied:
“ Welcome, father, for I am Still alive.” When taken down
by his father questioned as to the cause of this great
miracle, he said: “ From the hour when I was hanged upon
this gallows until now, S. James the apoStle has supported
me with his hands. I have felt no hunger nor thirSt, nor
any sort of pain, and have indeed enjoyed greater happiness
than in all the reSt of my life.” Forthwith they both
hastened back to the shrine of the blessed apoStle, the son
to perform his vow, the father to give thanks, and then
returned safely to the city of Utrecht. This miracle was
very celebrated and well known in that city, as was reported
to us by our fellow monk William who was canon there.

60


Of Divers Visions


Novice .—This is a Stupendous thing you tell me.

Mon\. —I will tell you also another miracle of the apoftle
S. Thomas, a Still greater one in my judgment.


CHAPTER LIX.

Of the \night Gerard, who was carried in a moment
of time into his own country by the devil from the
church of S. Thomas in India.

In a small town called Holenbach there lived a certain
knight named Gerard. His grandsons are Still alive, and
there is scarcely anyone in that town who has not heard of
the miracle I am about to tell of him. This man so ardently
loved S. Thomas the ApoStle, and so specially honoured him
above all other saints, that he never refused alms to a beggar
who pleaded in that saint’s name. Besides many private
services, such as prayers, he used to pay him fafts and the
celebrations of masses. One day God permitted a devil,
the enemy of all good, to knock at the knight’s door, in the
appearance and dress of a pilgrim, and to seek for hospitality
in the name of S. Thomas. When he was admitted with all
haSte, since it was cold, and he pretended to be shivering,
Gerard gave him his own good fur cloak, with which he was
wont to cover himself when he went to bed. But in the
morning when the seeming pilgrim did not appear, and the
cloak, though sought for, could not be found, his lady said
angrily to her husband: “ Often have you been mocked by
rascals of this kind, and yet you do not give up your super¬
stitions.” But he answered her quietly : “ Do not be troubled,
S. Thomas will well make up to us for this loss.” The devil
did this in order to provoke the knight to impatience by the
loss of his cloak, and extinguish his love of the apoSUe in his
heart. But what the devil had devised for the ruin of the
knight, only turned out to his glory, and from that time he

61


The Dialogue on Miracles

was the more inflamed with love, so that the devil was thrown
into confusion and punished. For after a short time Gerard
wishing to go to tne church of the blessed Thomas, since
he was in its neighbourhood, broke in two a gold ring
in his wife’s presence, and joining them together in her
sight, gave one to her and kept the other for himself, saying:
“ 1 want you to truft this sign. I ask you also to wait five
years for my return, and when they are over, marry
whom you like.” And she promised. And he, going by
the longest way, at length with great expense, and very great
toil, reached the city of S. Thomas the Apoflie. Here he
was greeted mofl kindly by the citizens and received with as
much affe<5lion as if he had been one of them, and very well
known to them. Ascribing this favour to the blessed apoflie,
he went into his church and prayed, commending to him
himself, his wife, and all that belonged to him. After this
he remembered the limit of time he had set himself, and
realising that the five years was completed on that very day,
he groaned and said: “ Alas, already my wife is marrying
some other man.” For God had hindered his journey for
the reason which now follows. And when he was looking
sadly around, he saw the aforesaid demon walking about in
his cloak. And the demon said: “ Do you recognise me
Gerard? ” “ No ” he said, “ not you, but my cloak.” “ I

am he who sought hospitality from you in the name of the
apoflie, and carried off your cloak, because of which I am
heavily punished.” And he added: “ I am a devil, and
orders are laid upon me, that before men go to bed, I muS
carry you back to your own house, because your wife has
married another man, and is already sitting at the nuptial
feafl with him.” Taking him up, he carried him in a part
of the day from India to Germany, transporting him from
the eaft to the weft, and set him down at dusk, uninjured,
in his own courtyard. And he, entering his own house like
a ftranger, when he saw his own wife eating with her spouse,
placed his part of the ring in her sight in a cup and went
away. And when she saw it, she immediately drew out the
other part and fitting them together, she recognised that he
was her own husband. And leaping up she ran to embrace

6 ?


Of Divers Visions


him immediately, crying out that this was her own husband
Gerard, and bidding the new husband farewell. Neverthe¬
less Gerard detained him that night to do him honour. See
how both in this and the aforesaid miracle it is sufficiently
shown how the blessed apoftles love and glorify those who
love them.

Novice. —I am not surprised that they loved those who
love them, after what you told me about S. Andrew, that he
offered himself to befriend a woman who despised him.

Mon\. —As was shown above about S. John the Baptist,
as the apoftles give rewards to those who love them, so also
do they punish those who despise them.

Novice. —Give me an example.

Mon!{. —1 will firSt put before you a miracle of S. Bartho¬
lomew, and then I will follow it with the example that you
ask.


CHAPTER LX.

Of a tooth of S. Bartholomew, from which blood
exuded when it was proposed to divide it.

On the hill of S. Saviour near Aix la Chapelle, there lately
died a certain recluse, who amongSt her other relics possessed
also a tooth of S. Bartholomew the ApoStle. A prieft, who
used to say masses for her, found this out, and asked for it,
and when she refused, he threatened to go away, unless she
gave him at leaSt half of it. Now she held the tooth in great
reverence, and was also unwilling to lose the services of the
prieft, and so very unwillingly she consented that it should
be divided. But as soon as the prieft held a knife over the
tooth, blood gushed forth from it drop by drop, as if the saint
were suffering pain afresh. When he saw this, the prieft
was terrified, and gave back the tooth uninjured to the recluse.
Indeed, laft year 1 saw this very tooth in the possession of

6 3


The Dialogue on Miracles


the nuns of Burscheid. Here is an example of how some¬
times the apoftles punish those who despise them.


CHAPTER LXI.

Of a woman who despised S. Jude.

A certain matron, wishing to have a patron apoftle, when
in the way which I told you above about S. Andrew, after she
had drawn the blessed Jude by means of a candle, she grew
angry and put back the candle marked with his name into
the box behind the altar. For she wished to have one of
the wellknown apoftles, such as S. John the Evangelift or
the blessed James. In the night he appeared to her in a
dream and upbraided her severely, complaining that she had
despised him, and had thrown him unworthily behind the
altar. Nor did he leave her, until blows had been added to
his words. For a whole year she lay paralysed in her bed.

Novice .—Is it lawful thus to choose apostles by lot?

Mon \.—Matthias the apoftle, was, as we read, chosen by
lot. But he was not elefted so as to seem preferred to the
reft, but only to fill up the number of twelve, which had
been diminished by Judas. I think, however, that such
lots have found their origin in that same eletftion. I have
heard a certain learned prieft in Cologne, openly in the church
denouncing such elections. All the apoftles, he said, are
equally holy, and therefore they ought all to be equally
honoured by us. Moreover if special honour is to be shown
to any of them, I think it ought to be paid to the blessed
Peter through whom our country was converted. Chrift
deftined him to be our special apoftle. Moreover the blessed
Heribert and his successor Peregrine, archbishops of Cologne,
founded in the city of Cologne a single conventual church in
honour of all the apoftles, in which equal honour and the

64


Of Divers Visions


same service was shown to ail at once. How great grace
they win who serve worthily Christ and His apostle in the
same church, you will be able to underhand a little from
what follows.


CHAPTER LX1I.

Of a woman who made beer for the church of the
Holy ApoSlles, whose house was miraculously
preserved amid a conflagration.

When that very great conflagration, which took place when
Adolphus was archbishop, had consumed a great part of the
city of Cologne, a certain woman who had been accustomed
to be paid for preparing beer for the church of the Holy
Apostles, lived in a wooden house close by. And when the
fire drew near to her from the neighbouring houses, her
daughter began to carry out the vessels and furniture. When
the mother learnt this, she Stopped her, saying: “ Do not,
my daughter, do that, but bring back everything into the
house.” And so, shut up within her house, the mother
placed all her hope in the Holy ApoStles, and then went into
their church and prayed as follows: “ O Holy ApoStles, if ever
I have served you worthily and faithfully, guard now my
house and your vessels that are therein.” Wonderful was
the faith of the woman, and wonderful the power of the
apoftles. For they suffered their own church to be partly
burnt, but took care to preserve untouched their servant’s
house, though it Stood in the very midSt of the flames ; and
the citizens greatly wondered thereat.

Novice. —The apoStles are to be highly honoured since by
them this world will be judged.

Monl(. —Your words recall to my memory a word and a
deed of a certain citizen, which are worthy to be told.

65

it


The Dialogue on Miracles


CHAPTER LXIII.

Of the citizen Charles, who offered Clones for the
foundations of the apoflles.

In Cologne there was a certain burgess, a man both rich
and powerful named Charles, the father of Dom Charles,
at one time abbot of Villers. When he heard that the apoflles
would judge the world, he thought within himself and said:
“ Sin is a weighty matter and anchor Clones' are very heavy.
I will therefore buy such Slones for the future work on the
church of the holy apoflles, so that when, in the day of judg¬
ment my good and evil works shall be placed in the balance,
the apoflles who will be the judges, will put these ftones into
the scale with my good works, and they will quickly prove
the greater weight.” So he bought a shipload of Slones, and
caused them to be carried in carts and set down by the church
of the apoflles. Now when the canons asked what he meant
by bringing these Slones, he replied: “ One of these days
this church is to be restored and then you will find
them necessary.” Soon after when the church was extended,
I think because they happened to have those Aones, they were
laid down as a foundation. Let this be enough said of visions
of the apoflles. Now I will tell you some about martyrs.

Novice .—What makes a martyr, why are they called
martyrs, and how many kinds of martyrdom are there? Will
you firfl answer me these queflions?

Mon\. —There is no difficulty in answering any of them.


CHAPTER LXIV.

Of martyrs.

It is the cause, not the penalty, that makes a martyr.
For there were two thieves crucified, one on either

1 Heavy ftones used for anchoring ships.

66


Of Divers Visions


side of ChriSt; one became a martyr owing to the
virtue of his confession, to the other his penalty was
only the beginning of eternal punishment. For they are
called martyrs in Greek, but witnesses in Latin, because they
are slain for their witness to the faith. Now there are four
kinds of martyrdom. Some have been killed for their inno¬
cence alone, as Abel ; some for their uprightness, as the
prophets and S. John the Baptifl ; others for zeal of the law,
as the seven Maccabaean brethen ; others for the faith of
Chrift, as the apoStles and their successors, and these are by
the exaft meaning of the name, called martyrs, i.e. witnesses,
because by the effusion of their own blood, they have sub¬
scribed to the faith of ChriSt.

Novice .—Do the saints take notice when they are
worshipped by us?

Moni{. —-Yes. For till to-day they manifest their relics
to mortals by their various appearances, so that they may
become the debtors of those who pay them reverence.


CHAPTER LXV.

Of the relation given by our martyr.

When the cathedral of Bonn was being restored, there were
found there some bodies of martyrs of the Theban legion.
And when the whole body of one of them, and moreover
part of another martyr had been given to us, this vision about
them was shown to a certain young monk. In a dream he
thought he was Standing near the casket containing those
relics. And when someone said to him: “ Do you know
what is contained in that casket ? ” and the monk replied:
“ Yes, the body of our martyr ” ; the other went on : “ You
are mistaken, for a man and a half lie within.” Now this
was unknown to us all up dll that time. Of so great virtue
were these sacred bones, that water poured over them was a

67


The Dialogue on Miracles


cure for various sicknesses. Especially however did it cure
tumours and swellings. But the following vision will show
how they came to the aid of the faithful in danger.


CHAPTER LXVI.

Of the saints who were seen in the air before
Alcazar, by whose help the ChriSlians obtained the
viftory.

In the year of grace 1217 the crusaders from the whole
of Germany and Friesland with about 300 ships entered the
port of Lisbon about the 13th of July. And whilst they
tarried there some days, waiting there for more ships, at the
petition of Severus, the bishop of the above city, and the
bishop of Evora, and also both of the Templars and Hos¬
pitallers, they laid siege to a caStle of the Saracens named
Alcazar, which means the prison of all. But on the Friday
after the nativity of Mary the Blessed Mother of God, four
Saracen kings were gathered againSt them, having in their
army about 100,000 fighting men. Now the ChriSlians were
far fewer in number but Stronger in faith, and calling upon S.
James and the blessed Vincent, the patron of that country, and
any other saints they could, they went to meet the enemy.
Now in the firSl onslaught one of the kings fell ; but the
number of the slain was not great ; though a large number
were taken prisoners. And when they were led through the
army, they asked the ChriSlians to let them see the Standards
of the victors, asserting that a whiteclad hoSf, wearing red
crosses upon the breaSt, had put their multitude to flight.
Furthermore also, the galleys which they had brought over
the sea againSt the ChriSlians were put to flight by the terror
of that celeStial vision. When the pilgrims heard this, they
gave thanks to ChriSt, who deigned to send from heaven the
support of His martyrs to their aid. These things were told

68


Of Divers Visions


me by some who were present at the battle, and heard from
the mouths of the Saracens what I have related.

Novice. —Is there any sin in going to satisfy the needs of
nature with the relics of martyrs?

Mon\. —There is sin, unless necessity excuses those who
carry them. The saints do not shrink from the foulness of
nature but from that of sin.


CHAPTER LXVII.

Of the relics of the martyrs which spurred Bernard
in the side when he was sinfully inclined.

Our fellow monk Bernard once before his conversion was
making some journey and was carrying in a box at his side
the relics of the blessed martyrs S.S. John and Paul. Now
when fleshly desires cried aloud for satisfa< 5 lion, the blessed
martyrs, because he did not attempt to retrain his unlawful
wishes, began to rowell his sides very severely through the
box. But when he paid no attention to it, as soon as his law¬
less desires quieted down, they also ceased for several hours
their attacks, but when again temptations arose, the roweliings
were also renewed. As if the saints were upbraiding their
carrier with the voice of the prophet (Isa. lxii. 11). For the
bodies of the saints are the vessels of the Lord. This is why
David replied to Ahimelech the prieft, when he hesitated to
give the holy bread to the servants of David (i Sam. xxi. 5).
And as the aforesaid Bernard told me, as soon as he began to
notice their punishment, he retrained his fault with all his
might, learning from this that the saints desire, not only
cleanliness of thoughts, but also of bodies.

Novice. —What do you think of those preachers who carry
round the relics of the saints only for gain, and deceive many ?

Mon\. —To show you how angry the saints are at the
wickedness of such men, I will tell you what a certain monk
of Brauweiler told me.


69


The Dialogue on Miracles


CHAPTER LXVIII.

Of a tooth of S. Nicholas in Brauweiler.

When the monks of this monastery desired to extend their
church, they sent the tooth of their patron the blessed pope
Nicholas into different provinces, using for the purpose certain
secular prieffs, who were eloquent speakers, and skilful in
getting money. Now this tooth was inclosed in crystal.
One day when these preachers were carrying round the vessel
of this holy relic, and extorting money by behaving dishoneSUy,
the cryftal cracked, as if the moft reverend Pontiff could not
endure their blasphemies. When the monks saw this miracle,
they took home the tooth, nor did they ever suffer it to be
taken out of the monastery again for such a purpose I myself
have seen the break in that crystal.

Novice. —Why do certain martyrs work greater wonders
than others after death ? Does this come from any particular
sanctity ?

Mon\.— As I said above, miracles are not in themselves
meritorious, but signs of sandfity. Certain saints work great
miracles during their life, and after death show no signs.
Others, on the contrary, because they have given no marks
of their sandfity in the world, after death become illuSfrious
by their miracles.


CHAPTER LXIX.

Why the blessed Thomas of Canterbury is more
resplendent in miracles than any other martyr.

Now the blessed Thomas, archbishop of Canterbury, who
in our time contended even to death for the liberty of the
church, was glorified with no miracles during his persecutions,
and after his death there was a great controversy about him.


70


Of Divers Visions


Some said he was a losi soul as a betrayer of his country ;
others that he was a martyr as a defender of the church.
This question was debated at Paris between the authorities.
For mafter Ruger swore that he had been worthy of death,
even if not of such a death, judging the constancy of the
blessed saint to be mere obstinacy. On the other hand,
maSter Peter Cantor swore that he was a worthy martyr of
God, since he had been killed for the liberty of the church.
The Saviour Himself solved their debate, when He glorified
him with many wonderful works. Even so, he is not to be
preferred to the apoStles or the other great martyrs in merit
though we do not read that they wrought after death such
great and such frequent miracles. The same may be said
about S. Hanno the archbishop of Cologne. For after his
death when many were belittling him, saying that he had
been one who created schism in the churches, and had put out
the eyes of his fellow citizens, the Lord God at his trans¬
lation showed his sandfity by many wonderful works.

Novice. —What you say seems very probable to me ; but
there is another thing which troubles me. For it often
happens that other things are held to be relics of the saints,
and are falsely venerated inftead of the true relics.

Mon\. —In my judgment ignorance in such matters excuses
the fault; and piety always wins grace. It is certain that
this seems to be true, since sometimes the Lord works miracles
through false relics to the honour of the saints to whom they
are ascribed, and for those who do honour to them in good
faith. Here is an example.


CHAPTER LXX.

Of the bridle through which many miracles were
wrought, when it was believed misla\enly that it
belonged to this martyr.

A certain knight who ardently loved the aforesaid blessed
martyr Thomas of Canterbury, sought everywhere if he might

7i


The Dialogue on Miracles


find any relic of his. When a certain crafty priefl, in whose
house he was lodging learnt this, he said to the knight: “ I
have in my possession a bridle which the blessed Thomas
used for a long time, and 1 have often experienced its virtues.’’
When the knight heard this and believed him, he gladly gave
the prieff the money he asked and took the bridle with much
devotion. Moreover God to Whom nothing is impossible,
willing to reward the faith of the knight, deigned to perform
many miracles in honour of His martyr by means of this
bridle. And the knight in consideration of this, built a
church in honour of the martyr, and inftead of relics, placed
in it the bridle of this rascally prieft. Let this be the close
of the visions of martyrs, because wishing to be brief, I haffen
on to the order of confessors.

Novice .—Explain to me firfl, who confessors are, and why
they are so called ; and afterwards tell me their visions.


CHAPTER LXXI.

Of confessors.

Mon \.—To the order of confessors belong popes, abbots,
clerks, monks, and also spiritually-minded lay-folk, who
live religiously and confess Christ by their lives and with their
mouths, and pass to Him whom they have confessed, without
any effusion of their blood. At a time of persecution all
Christians are called confessors, who confess Christ in their
tribulations both with heart and mouth, but especially those
who have suffered for His sake. These afterwards were
called martyrs according to the right meaning of the word,
and the name of confessor was especially assigned to the priest s
of the Lord, who receive the confessions of sinners, and to
whom the Lord has given the power of binding and loosing.

Novice .—Which seem to you to be the greater, martyrs or
confessors ?


7 2


Of Divers Visions


Mon \.—This question mufl be answered on the merits
of each person and case. Although the order of martyrs
excels in dignity the order of confessors, yet some confessors
are far superior in merit to some martyrs. Whence you have
in the hymn :

Martyrs may suffer ’neath the lash
Or yield their blood to axe or knife
Yet greater he who holds the faith
Unshaken, through long years of life.

Here is an example. It is certain that the order of bishops
has greater dignity than the order of abbots, yet some great
abbots are far above some bishops in glory and honour.

Novice.—I admit that.

Mon \.—I will explain to you in a few words how great
comfort there is in visions of the blessed confessors.


CHAPTER LXXII.

Of a lay-brother to whom S. Nicholas appeared in
church.

There is among us a certain lay-brother, whose name I am
not allowed to give, a man of good life and especially devoted
to S. Nicholas. He, as he told me himself, on a certain feast
day at matins, saw the before-mentioned confessor Standing
in the choir, robed in full pontificals. At this vision which
filled him with great reverence, he felt so great a joy at his
heart, that he thought he was lifted up two feet from the
earth. Not only is this moSt blessed Pontiff the visitor of
the good, but he is also known to be the deliverer of the
wretched in their supreme need.


73


The Dialogue on Miracles


CHAPTER LXXIII.

Of a thief whom the same confessor delivered from
the gallows.

Scarcely two years have elapsed, since in a village near
Cologne, as I lately heard when I was passing through it, a
man was arrefled as a thief. Whether he was guilty or
innocent they could not tell me. Now when he was sentenced
to death, and a noose being put round his neck, they hanged
him on the gallows, he felt no pain, and when they thought
him to be dead, he cried with a loud voice : “ You are toiling
in vain, you cannot Strangle me, for my lord bishop S. Nicholas
is helping me. Lo, I can see him.” Many heard this, and
finding it to be so on trial, and thinking him innocent, in
honour of S. Nicholas they took him down and permitted
him to depart. And he, running to Brauweiler gave thanks
to the memory of his deliverer, proclaiming aloud that by his
merits he had been set free from hanging.

Novice .—I have always heard from my boyhood, that S.
Nicholas excels all other bishops in pitifulness.

Monk.. —He is a saint of so great goodness and mercy, that
as has been said, he often delivers the wicked from death in
the hope that they may make a good end and wants the good
to die. Those that they may amend ; these that they
may enjoy eternal happiness. In truth, to depart and be with
Chrifl is far better (Phil. i. 23). And, Blessed are the dead
which die in the Lord (Apoc. xiv. 13).


CHAPTER LXXIV.

Of the mon\ sidam, who was recovered from his
sickness by S. Nicholas and S. Paternianus.

Adam a monk of Lucka, whom I mentioned above, attended
the schools in the conventual church of Saxony which is called


74


Of Divers Visions


Boeke. And since many bricks were piled up in the cemetery
for work on the church, he himself as a boy, carried one of
them, and began to carve it. But when his mailer saw this,
he terrified him by saying: “ Put down that brick because you
are excommunicate.” At this the boy was so terrified that
he soon fell ill. And when the disease increased upon him,
and he became in extremis, and a candle had been placed in his
hand, as if he were juft about to die, he saw Standing before
him, and recognised two Pontiffs, to wit, the blessed Nicholas
and S. Paternianus the patron of the church. They flood
before him very clearly robed in pontificals. And the blessed
Nicholas said to S. Paternianus : “ Shall we take this lad with
us?” And the other replied: “No, because he will die in
another Order.” And then they disappeared. In that same
hour the boy grew well and got up, and when he told his
mailer, who was present at that time, the miracle that had
happened, the bells were rung in the church, and they sang
the Te Deum in honour of the two great Pontiffs. This
ilory was lately told me by Adam himself.


CHAPTER LXXV.

Of a shepherd boy, whose death was foretold to him
by S. Nicholas.

In a small town which is called Leiglinge, and which is
about two miles from Cologne, there happened about seven
years ago, what I am going to tell you. A certain simple-
minded boy used to feed the flock of a matron there. This
lad was so devoted to the blessed Nicholas, that every day
he set aside half of his bread for the poor in honour of the
saint. Also he besought his pity with continual prayers.
The blessed Pontiff, pleased with his devoted worship, one

75


The Dialogue on Miracles

day appeared to him in the field, in the appearance and dress
of an old man, and said to him: “ My good lad, take your
flock home.” And when he replied: “ Sir, it is Still quite
early, and if I should do this my miStress would scold me ” ;
the saint went on: “ Do what 1 have said, for to-day before
sunset you will die.” The boy was terrified at this word,
and asked : “ Sir, who are you ? ” The other replied : “ I
am the bishop Nicholas, to whom you always pray, and with
whom you have been accuftomed to share your breakfast ;
now I have come to reward you. Go home and take the body
of the Lord and make your preparations, because you will
die to-day as I have said.” And then he disappeared. And
when the boy returned with the sheep, and his miStress asked
him why he had come back so early, he replied: “ I was
driven by necessity, because I am going to die before nightfall.”
And she: “ You are mad. Take back the flock at once to
the paflure, for there is no question of your dying.” But he
immediately went to bed and asked for a prieSt, to whom,
when he came, the matron said: “ I fear that boy has seen
some vision ; do all you can to find out from him what he
has seen, what is the matter with him, and why he speaks
in such a way.” When the prieSt had done this, the boy
told him the vision juSt as it had occurred. And when he
had received the sacred sacrament from his hand, he died
at the hour foretold. So, in the case of these two boys you
can learn the pitifulness of the holy Pontiff. He differed
from the advice of S. Paternianus in the case of the scholar,
in the hope of bringing him to a better life ; but this faithful
shepherd he took with him to the eternal green pastures.

Novice.- —Because S. Nicholas is represented in churches
both in sculpture and in pictures more frequently than any
other Pontiff, I should be glad to know if it is possible to see
any real likeness of his face, so that his memory may be more
laStingly impressed upon my mind.

Mon\.- —I will show you a certain image of wonderful
workmanship which is said to have been wrought by one who
saw S. Nicholas in the flesh, and sculptured it according to
his likeness.


76


Of Divers Visions


CHAPTER LXXVI.

Of the picture of S. Nicholas at Burscheid.


In the monastery of Burscheid, which is near Aix la
Chapelle, is a picture about a foot and a half long, representing
the likeness of the blessed Pontiff Nicholas from the waist
and upwards, which the blessed Gregory the son of the king
of Greece, and the founder and firSf abbot of that monastery
brought thither. It is said to be the same picture, which a
barbarian, as we read in the Miracles of S. Nicholas, carried
off, and set it up to guard his tolls and was by its means con¬
verted to the faith, after he had loSt his goods and recovered
them on beating the image. Many wonders were wrought
through it, especially in the case of women who were with
child. On one occasion it was carried to the house of a
certain noble matron who was in childbed, and was hung
up opposite her on the wall. And at the season when she was
delivered, in the sight of all who were present, the pidlure
turned its face to the wall, as though to avoid seeing the woman
in her labour. Now the face in the pidure is long and
emaciated, very earnest and venerable. The brow is bold,
the hair of the head and beard quite white. Lately when
the monks retired, nuns of our Order came into possession
both of the place and the pidure.

Novice. —I am much edified by the humility of this blessed
confessor, who thought himself delicately fed on the bread of
a poor shepherd.

Mon \.—Who is greater than Chrift, who will say at his
judgment “ I was hungry and ye gave me to eat (Matt. xxv.
35)? No one. But in the following vision you shall be
shewn how much Chriff and his blessed confessors are pleased
with almsgiving and how powerfully they aid those who
give alms.


77


The Dialogue on Miracles


CHAPTER LXXVII.

Of mailer John to whose help in his sickness came
S. Martin and S. Gotthardt.

When mafter John dean of Aix was a scholar, he once
fell so grievously sick, that he made his confession and was
anointed, since nothing but death seemed to await him.
While he was lying alone, he fell in ecftasy, and saw men
unknown to him come in, carrying in their hands scales,
with small square wooden weights, which they placed before
him. And as they flood on one side of his bed, he saw enter
three renowned confessors, to wit, S. Martin, bishop of Tours,
S. Gotthardt, bishop of Hildesheim, and the blessed Bernard,
and they flood all round him on the other side. As they
looked on, the boy John was placed in one scale, and the
wooden weights in the other, and when the balance was
raised, the sick youth was found to be the lighter, and the
aforesaid confessors placed on his breast a little beggar boy,
and the two together drawing up the opposite scale, showed
that they were heavier than the weights. And forthwith
John who told me this vision himself, broke out into a sweat
and passed the crisis of his fever, and quickly recovered from
that sickness.

Novice .—I do not in the leafl understand the meaning of
the weighing of the sick scholar, or the meaning of the addition
of the beggar boy.

Mon\. —This boy was very poor and despised, and John
took so great pity upon him that he often gave him bread
and commended him to his mother. I suspeifl that the
barbarous men who weighed him in the balance were demons,
who always make attacks upon the dying ; and that the
wooden weights were the sins of the youth. And because
these seemed heavier than his merits, the holy confessors,
upon whom he had often called, added his alms to the scale,
and by their benefit he was helped. But that human life is
sometimes saved from death by alms, you have an example
in the life of S. John the Pitiful, about Peter the taxgatherer,

78


Of Divers Visions


an almoft similar case, and a similar vision. This is why
Daniel advised Nebuchadnezzar the king when he saw himself
in a vision under the form of a tree, that was about to be
cut down by the angel, to redeem his sins by alms giving.
And the same Daniel witnesses that sometimes the life of a
man is cut off prematurely because of his sins. And when
Belshazzar, the son of the aforesaid king, aroused the wrath
of God, by feaffing with his wives and concubines, in the
vessels of the temple of the Lord, he saw on the wall over
againft him the fingers of a hand writing these three words,
Mene, Tekel, Upharsin. And this Daniel interpreted to the
king this writing. Mene. i.e. prematurely, God hath
numbered thy kingdom and completed it. Tekel ; Thou
art weighed in the balance and found wanting ; i.e. in
uprightness. And because his sins weighed him down, that
same night he was slain and his kingdom was given to the
Medes and Persians.

Novice .—I am grateful for your explanation.

Monf{. —The three aforesaid pontiffs bring back to my mind
a vision worth telling about three others who were bishops.


CHAPTER LXXVIII.

Of Gerard abbot of Clairvaux, to whom S. Eucharius
appeared with his companions.

Dom Gerard of happy memory, who was abbot of Clair¬
vaux in our time, once went to Hemmenrode to carry out a
visitation, entertained by the religious brethren of S. Matthias ;
the night after matins was said he went alone to the crypt
of the church and prayed very devotedly at the tombs of
S.S. Eucharius, Valerius, and Maternus, who were the firft
bishops of Tr&ves, and the apoftles of our country. Now
his special prayer was, that he might be vouchsafed a divine


79


The Dialogue on Miracles


revelation, as to whether it would be better for him to remain
in his office of abbot, or to resign. And those three glorious
leaders appeared to him together in great splendour, and said :
“ Brother, you muff certainly not resign your office, because
very soon you will come to us with the palm of martyrdom.”
And so they disappeared. In the morning when he was about
to leave, the provoff of S. Simeon besought him that when
he returned he would deign to come to his house ; and he
made this promise. But when he had finished the visita¬
tion and returned to Treves, he deeply regretted this promise,
because he wished to go and pray again in the same place as
before, hoping that certain things which had been omitted in
the firSt vision, might now be revealed to him.

Novice .—What were those things?

Mon \.—One was where the soul of S. Maternus had been,
in the thirty days that followed his burial. What need of
further words? Not unmindful of his promise, he went to
the house of the provost, and as he himself had arranged,
that same night he rose earlier than usual, and sang matins,
and leaving the monk and taking a lay-brother with him,
he went to the church of S. Eucharius, entered the crypt,
and knelt down to pray. And here grace was given him to
see the above-mentioned pontiffs, juSl as he had seen them
before. And S. Eucharius said to him: “ I know why you
have come. Here is Maternus, ask him what you want to
know.” And when he had done this, Maternus replied:
“ During those thirty days my soul was in paradise. And
because it knew that it muff return to the body, it was not
able to enjoy the reward prepared for it in the heavens.
Remain therefore in your office, for you shall quickly join
us through the palm of martyrdom.” And this happened
so. For he was secretly slain by some miserable wretch on
account of his zeal for his Order. Then the blessed pontiff
added: “ While I was in paradise, there was nothing that
happened in the world which I did not see. Do you con¬
sider how great muff be the power of the eleft soul when
delivered from the body ? If it sees so much in the terreffrial
paradise, how much do you suppose it sees when admitted
to the presence of God? ”


80


Of Divers Visions


Novice. —I have no doubt that then it sees and knows every¬
thing. If S. Benedict while ftill in this corruptible life, by
the help of one soul which was entering heaven, could see
the whole world gathered before his eyes under one ray of
the sun, there is no wonder that the soul, which is united to
God, should behold everything.

Monk. ■—You have judged rightly ; and let this be enough
said of confessors. But I shall tell you also something of the
visions of certain virgins ; but firff I will explain to you about
the order of virgins.


CHAPTER LXXIX.

Of virgins.

So great is the glory of virgins that they are compared to
the angels, as those who neither marry nor are given in
marriage, but shall be as the angels of God (Matt. xxii. 30).
This is why in the tabernacle of the convenant the third
covering was made of rams’ skins dyed red, and a fourth had
been placed over it of skins dyed of the colour of a jacinth.
By the skins dyed red is signified martyrdom, which is the
coping ftone of all virtues ; by those of jacinth colour, which
is the colour of the sky, is signified virginity, which as some
say, is above all other virtue, and is akin to the life of angels.
Virgins follow the lamb withersoever He goeth (Apoc. xiv. 4),
and on either foot, that is, in purity of mind and body.

Novice. —Therefore are they greater than pure virgins who
are also married?

Monk- —They are greater it you compare condition with
condition, because the order of virgins is more worthy than
that of the married. Nevertheless in the order of married
or widows, there are many who are much greater in merit
than many virgins, because merit does not consist in the
unspottedness of the flesh, which of itself is no virtue, and

81


The Dialogue on Miracles


which infidels may have, but it consists in charity. Who
indeed would dare to prefer even the moft holy virgins to
patriarchs, prophets, and apoffles, who were nearly all of
them married.

Novice .—What then is the reason that the saints commend
virginity so highly?

Mon \.—That they may show how dear chaflity is to God.
In virgins this is called virginity or virginal continence ; in
married folk, conjugal modeffy ; in widows, widowed con¬
tinence. Wherefore from the same seed which falls from
the hand of the sower into good soil some bring forth fruit
thirty fold some sixty, and some a hundred (Matt. xiii. 5). The
firs'! is due to the married, the second to continent widows,
the third to virgins. The thirty fold is also often in reward
greater than the hundredfold, and this because of the greater
charity. Hence it is that the church in her Litanies gives
preference to the Blessed Mary Magdalene above virgins, that
she may not appear inferior to them because of her ruin.
Nevertheless be sure that it is better to refrain than to marry,
because Chrift, Who is the mirror of wisdom, chose virginity ;
and the desire of keeping virginity for Christ's sake, shows
the greatest virtue of charity. The following {lories will
make plain how delightful and how health-bringing are the
visions of the holy virgins.


CHAPTER LXXX.

Of Theodoric bishop of Livonia, who saw S. Mary
Magdalene helping the widows, and S. Margaret
helping the virgins when they were taking the veil.

The venerable Theodoric bishop of Livonia, whom I
mentioned above, was once admitting some nuns to the veil,
when one of the monks saw S. Mary Magdalene attending to
the widows, and the blessed Margaret to the virgins. They

82


Of Divers Visions


walked about amidst them as they Stood there, presented them
when they were called up, and arranged their garlands and
veils. He was worthy of such a vision, being a man both
upright and spiritually-minded.


CHAPTER LXXXI.

Of Arnold the monk of Villers, who was cured
by the touch of S. Mary Magdalene.

In Villers, a house of our Order in the diocese of Liege,
there is a monk named Arnold, of praiseworthy life and of
great zeal for the rule of the order. When he, from too much
facing, was afflidted with a chill in his Stomach to such an
extent that he lay down on his bed and expected death,
the blessed Mary Magdalene appeared to him during the night
visibly, and uncovering his breaft, she laid her hand upon the
place and cured him. Indeed he was so Strengthened by the
touch of her sacred hand, that in the morning he got up quite
well, and to the great astonishment of his brethren went into
the church to service.


CHAPTER LXXXII.

Of the abbess in Hovene, whose eyes were cured
by S. Linthild.

I remember how the lady Gertrude the abbess of Hovene,
who, as she herself told me, was cured very wonderfully by
the vision of a certain holy virgin. She, for nearly half a
year, had been terribly tormented with a pain in her eyes,
and she set herself to invoke S. Linthild, a virgin whose

83


The Dialogue on Miracles


memory is cherished in that convent, in the hope that she
might be helped by her merits. One morning she was lying
wakeful in her bed, almofl blind, when she saw, {landing
by her in white robes, the aforesaid virgin. And when she
had wiped her eyes, both with her robe, and her hands, forth¬
with she saw clearly, and as the virgin went away, all the
pain departed with her.


CHAPTER LXXXIII.

Of the image of S. Catharine in the same place.

On the altar of this same holy virgin Linthild, there was
accuftomed to {land as an ornament, an image of the glorious
martyr and virgin Catharine, decently sculptured in wood.
One day an honourable matron named Alice, the wife of
Wiric, knight of Guzene, was {landing in prayer before her
with her attendant. Now this image had, I think by care¬
lessness, been so placed that its countenance was turned almofl
wholly towards the wall. And when it turned round very
morosely, while the said women were looking on, the servant
cried out: “ Look lady, look, how this image is turning
round.” Her miflress replied: “ Yes, I see.” Some other
women who were {landing there also saw this. It is barely
a year now since this wonderful vision took place.

Novice .—Because the bones of this mo{l holy virgin
Catherine do not cease to di{lil oil, it is clear that she must
be very gentle and pitiful.

Mon \.—The oil that drips from her bones is a mark of
those very virtues.


84


Of Divers Visions


CHAPTER LXXXIV.

Of a bone of S. Catharine which dripped oil.

Dom Henry, abbot of Scimenu, told us that while he was
breaking off a particle of her bone for us, a drop of oil exuded.
With difficulty he prevented it from falling to the ground.
But why should I speak of a drop, when her sacred tomb,
as those who have lately returned from Syna testify, is full
of oil ? For they saw her head and hair and bones swimming
in oil. And when the monks of the place had filled various
vessels with this sacred liquor, when they returned they
divided it both amongSt us and other religious houses as a
blessing.

Novice. —I should like now to hear some visions of the
virgins of our house, for instance the eleven thousand, that
they might incite us to greater veneration of them.

Mon\. —I will tell you some things which would be a terror
to those who have their relics, if they are negligent of them,
but a consolation if they hold them in reverence.


CHAPTER LXXXV.

Of the two holy virgins who returned from Volcken-
rode to Cologne.

In Volckenrode, a house of the Cistercian Order, which is
situated in Thuringia, a certain abbot died a few years ago,
who had shown especial devotion to the relics of the saints.
For this cause the Lord Himself deigned to show him the
following vision.

One night he saw himself transported in a dream to Cologne,
to the church of the eleven thousand holy virgins, and there
he was given to understand that the bodies of two virgins
were buried close to a certain wall outside the boundaries of

85


The Dialogue on Miracles


the church. At once he went to Cologne and discovering
by unmistakable signs the place revealed to him, he went to
the abbess, told her his vision and begged and obtained his
request, to be allowed to look for those he had seen.

A man named Ulrich was brought to him, whose business
it had been to bury the bodies of these holy martyrs. Guided
by the abbot, he found two Stone coffins in the place pointed
out, and opening one of them, he saw amongSt the sacred
bones a very beautiful comb, which he coveted and took,
and placing it in his glove thruSl it into his bosom. But
when he found it in his way while digging, he took it out,
and placed it on a little rising ground above the grave. One
of the siSters coming up, was so delighted with the rarity as
well as the sandtity of the comb, that she secretly took it up
and went away. When the bodies were now dug up, and
decently placed in a coffin, in the morning the abbot proposed
to set out with them, but that night they appeared to him
in a dream, in the guise and dress of virgins, and said to him :
“ We cannot go with you.” And when he answered them:
“Why O moSl beloved ladies?” One of them added:
“ Because I have loSt my comb, which my mother gave me
when I left home.” And he: “ Who has it, lady? ” She
replied: “ When Ulrich opened my sepulchre and saw it,
he placed it in his glove and hid it in his breaSf. But when
he drew it out, and placed it on the edge of the grave, a
certain nun named Frederina came by and Stole it.”

In the morning he went to the abbess and said: “ What
is the name of the man who dug up these virgins? ” She
replied : “ Ulrich.” And he continued : “ Have you here
a nun named Frederina? ” And when she replied : “ Yes ” ;
he said : “ I beg you to call both of them.” When this had
been done, he said to Ulrich : “ When you dug up the sacred
bodies, you found with them a comb,” adding the reft which
has been related above. When he replied : “ Sir, it is true ” ;
he turned to Frederina and said: “ And you lady, took it
away.” When she confessed this, he went on: “I beg you
to reftore the comb, because without it they refuse to go with
me.” It was quickly brought back and placed by the abbot
in the coffin, wherefore he carried them to his monastery,

86


Of Divers Visions


where they were received with great joy, and laid in an
honourable place. There they were held in great veneration,
but this laftcd only as long as the life of the abbot to whom
they had been revealed.

In the time of the civil war between Otto and Philip,
kings of the Romans, when the different armies occupied
Thuringia, the fear of them caused these same sacred bodies
together with other relics and ornaments to be carried away
and placed in a certain vault, a very secret place. When peace
was restored to the land, and the various treasures were
restored to their homes, the coffin containing the two virgins
was forgotten, and left in the aforesaid vault. Being indignant
at this treatment, twice they shook their refling place so
violendy, that the shock could be heard by all. Twice also
they appeared in dreams to the sacriStan saying that they
wished to leave the place where they were thus held in con¬
tempt. But since neither these shocks nor revelations brought
them any profit, one night on a solemn feflival they appeared
to all at matins Standing before the presbytery flep, clad in
mofl comely robes, firfl they made their reverence towards the
altar, and then turning round as those who need to be guided
on their way, they bowed to the abbot and to all, and passed
out through a certain door which is almoft always kept closed.

Although all had seen them, yet each thought that the
vision had been vouchsafed to him alone. After matins one
of the monks took the abbot aside and confessed that he had
seen two mofl beautiful virgins Standing before the Slep at
the aforesaid hour and in the aforesaid manner. And when
he answered: “I saw them myself ” ; there came up the
others and received the same reply. And when he realised
that all had seen them, he opened the question with them
all, who they could be, and what was the cause of that vision.
After one had replied one thing and one another, one said,
I think he muSt have been inspired from heaven: “ I think
that they muSt have been those sacred virgins, which were
brought to us from Cologne and which have been so long
neglected by us, and whose coffins were left lying upon such
and such an arch.” Immediately they all went to the cheft, and
when they found nothing in it, they were terrified and begged

87


The Dialogue on Miracles


the abbot to go to Cologne and bring them back. But when
he reached Cologne and had told the whole Story to the
abbess of the convent, and they discovered that these virgins
were in the place from which they had been taken, the whole
convent made answer that these beloved maidens had been
reffored to them at their prayer : “ MoSt gladly do we welcome
these noble maidens, moSt gladly. MoSt assuredly we shall
not send them back to you, since they have shown that they
are unwilling to abide with you.” They gave him a head
of one of the virgins when he was setting out sadly home¬
wards. I believe that this same Frederina is Still alive and
there is scarcely any sifter in that convent who does not know
the pleasant Story.


CHAPTER LXXXVI.

Also two virgins out of the eleven thousand, who
were found by revelation and given to us.

We have two holy virgins from the same sacred college,
who were discovered even by revelation. Two virgins
appeared to the lady abbess Euphemia, who died a few years
ago, while she was asleep when Still a girl at school, and
complained that they were left to he unworthily under the
far end of the dormitory which is next to the cellar. She,
like a girl, remained silent regarding her dream as merely
a dream. When later she grew up, they appeared to her a
second time, in the same place, in the form and dress of
moSt beautiful virgins, as far as the waiSt. As if they said:
“ We cannot get out of this place except by your help.” Then
she remembered her firSt dream, and the one who seemed
the more important appeared to her and asked her this
question: “What is your name?” She answered:
AnaStasia.” From that time Euphemia began to suggeSt
earnestly to the convent that they should extend the cellar

88


Of Divers Visions


hs far as the end of the dormitory, saying openly that they
would find two virgins lying there. She promised also that
she would give three pounds towards the common expenses.
At laSt the convent agreed, and as I was told, by Rembodo,
our lay-brother, to whom the work was entrusted, when all
the earth had been thrown out in the presence of the said
nun, those two sacred bodies were found under the founda¬
tion of the wall. Before she became abbess she handed them
over to us and on the same day a solemn mass was said for
them in the convent.

Novice.— I did not think that nightly dreams were of so
much efficacy in these days.

Mon\. —Often they show where their bodies were lying
by burning flames, yet nevertheless these flames cannot be
seen by any body as people say unless that person is virgin
in body. Conrad the prior of Marienburg was accustomed
to tell many Stories of this kind of vision, but I omit them
not to be too long.

Novice.- —Are these holy virgins pleased that their bodies
should be thus distributed through different provinces?

Mon^.—They think it right to show themselves for this
purpose that their memory may be held in honour in many
places.


CHAPTER LXXXVII.

About a traveller who obtained by a miracle some
relics of them.

A certain holy man of the Order of travelling monks, was
being entertained by a lady at Deutz and complained that
he had been toiling for ten years to try and get a relic of the
eleven thousand holy virgins and nevertheless had never
been able to gain one from them. He implored the lady
to come to his aid, and she taking compassion on the man

89


The Dialogue on Miracles


went to their church, wishing to offer prayers to her sifters
on his behalf. And while she was praying at the tomb of
one of the virgins, she leant her knee againft a very great
ftone which covered it and tried to push it through, of course
never hoping to be able to move it. Now see the wonder¬
ful kindness of the holy martyrs. As soon as this weak
woman put a little pressure upon the ftone, it gave way so
that she could see all that lay within. And when she saw
there was no one in sight, she put in her hand and taking
as many bones as she wished, she gave them to the travelling
monk. Forthwith the ftone which six men could scarcely
have moved with the help of levers, easily returned to its
former position, and after giving thanks to the holy virgins,
she went back joyfully to her house. Although the souls
of the saints always look upon the divine face, nevertheless
they have respeft to their bodies, and when they see us devoted
to them, they are much pleased.


CHAPTER LXXXVIII.

Of a lay-brother who was pissed in a dream by a
holy virgin.

A certain lay-brother of our Order was carrying to his
monaftery some heads of the same eleven thousand virgins
and from devotion washed them with wine, kissing them
when thus washed. That same night a very beautiful virgin
appeared to the lay-brother in his sleep and putting her arm
about his neck said : “ Yefterday when you washed my head,
you kissed me in a very gentle way ; I now pay you back
the same courtesy.” He, considering his profession, how
it behoved him to avoid the kiss of a girl, drew back his head
and thus by that very movement woke himself, and
immediately perceived that it was a vision.


90


Of Divers Visions


Novice .—Since bones of the eleven thousand blessed virgins
are found everywhere in the Streets and gardens of the city
of Cologne, it seems to me scarcely possible that Strange
bones should not be mixed with theirs.

Mon^.—A certain monk of Oldberg where there are said
to be a thousand bodies, told me they do not allow any false
relics to be mixed up with them.


CHAPTER LXXXIX.

Of the bone of a horse which was miraculously call
forth from among their relics.

Once when a great number of bodies had been brought
to us, a monk set to work to wash them. And when they
had arranged them upon the seats of the chapter house placing
them on clean cloths that they might dry, an intolerable Stench
seemed to exhale from them, and to infeSt the noStrils of
everybody. Then lord abbot Goswin fearing that this Stench
had been created by some demon to mock them, in order
that he might extinguish by it the devotion of the brethren,
towards the martyrs’ relics, took with him some prieSts, and
putting on his sacred robes Stood with them at the door of
the chapter house, and thus cried : “ I adjure thee, O unclean
spirit, by Him who is to come to judge the quick and the
dead, and the world by fire that if there is any of your handi¬
work in this Stench, it be made plain and annihilated, and
you give honour to God and to these saints. Then a wonder¬
ful thing happened. Scarcely had he finished speaking when
behold an immense bone of a horse leapt out of the midSt of
the relics in sight of all, and was hurled out of the chapter
house as if driven by a whirlwind. And with it all the Stench
disappeared, and in its place there came a moSt delightful
odour. Then all gave thanks to God, who confounded the
demon in the midSt of his work, and glorified his saints. Let


The Dialogue on Miracles


this be enough for you to hear about virgins. I will tell you
also a wonderful vision, which was seen by a virgin, which will
be equally suitable to the above mentioned Orders, and may
well close the visions of virgins.


CHAPTER XC.

Of a girl who at the singing of the Te Dcum saw
the singers carried up to heaven.

A certain prieSt of Saxony told me lately that there was
a little girl in a certain convent whose name he could not tell
me, who was permitted to take part in the solemn vigils on
festival nights and was compelled to go to bed before the end
of the services. One festival when her governess was taking
the girl by the shoulder, I think it was about eleven o’clock,
she resisted without success, and at laSt went out very
sadly, but Stayed near the choir because she wished to hear
the reSt. And when they began the Te Deum, she saw the
heavens opened, and the whole choir with the singers lifted
up thither. When they came to the verse, To Thee all angels
cry aloud, etc., she saw whole orders of angels and individual
angels bend down their heads, and on their knees adore God
with outstretched hands, at the same time all of them crying
out, Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God of Hofis, and confessing
the Trinity of Persons in the Unity of Being. JuSt in the
same way did the apoStles at the verse The glorious company
of the apofiles praise Thee. And when the choir began
The goodly fellowship of the prophets praise Thee, all the
patriarchs and prophets made their adoration in the same
way. Also the martyrs came in their varied ranks at the
next verse: The noble army of martyrs praise Thee, and
broke out in praise and fell before His presence. She saw
the same thing when it came to confessors and virgins. And
when the laSl verse of the hymn was being sung, i.e. In Thee


92


Of Divers Visions


O Lord have l trailed let me never be confounded, the choir
came down to earth again, and the heavens were closed. The
girl seeing all this, with many sighs complained that she
was defrauded of so great a privilege, which she had seen
with her own eyes. And when she wept so abundantly in
the morning, the sifters found out the cause, but she was
unwilling to tell of her vision, when her governess came up
to her. And she replied to her: “ May God pardon you
for taking me away from so glorious a grace this night.” Then
she repeated to her her vision. The governess said: “ Do
not weep, my daughter, never again will I compel you to
leave.”

Novice .— These are wonderful things that you tell me.

Mon\. —Would you like now to hear in the eighth place
some of those things which have been recognised by sight,
hearing and tafte, and yet could not be included among the
aforesaid ranks, owing to their diflance.

Novice .— I greatly wish it, indeed I greatly wish it.

Mon\. —As was promised at the beginning of this book,
I have set up a ladder, by means of which the saints may con¬
descend to human vision which has two sides, which I have
called two kinds of visions, one corporeal, and the other
spiritual. Also I have put in eight Stages, assigning the
highest to our Lord, and the other six to the six orders of the
saints, about which I have said enough. I shall place the
visions of divers things in the eighth place, and I shall begin
with one which was seen from our monastery.


CHAPTER XCI.

About the things which the abbot Herman saw from
our monastery.

A long time before our community had been sent forth
from Hemmenrode, Dom Herman, now the abbot of Marien-
Slatt, but then a simple monk in Hemmenrode, one night


93


The Dialogue on Miracles


thought, in a vision that he was Standing before the Step of
the presbytery, and there was given into his hands the crucifix,
as is customary in the sending forth of any community. And
there Stood around him men clothed in white robes. Also
he saw in the choir a pure and limpid Stream, which flowed
through both the choirs and upon it a boat. Upon this he
embarked when its course was so swift, that the boat would
have dashed againSt one of the columns, if it had not been
turned aside with difficulty by its rudder, and it did not Stop
until it came to a place very near our present infirmary.
There came also with him the above-mentioned men in white
robes. Dry human bones fell beyond the wall from outside,
together with skulls from every side by some miraculous power.
For they were as I remember in the vision of Ezekiel, very
numerous. As the community was Standing between the
mountain of Stromberg and the above-mentioned place, the
Saviour, who seemed to be Standing among them, drew back
one of the monks, with considerable violence, and placed
another aside, moving him away more gently. This was the
nature of the vision.

Novice .—What is the interpretation of it?

Mon \.—God showed him beforehand what the future
would be for our monastery, which was then indeed hidden
though plain enough now. Dom Philip, archbishop of
Cologne, knowing how our Order was flourishing in Hem-
menrode, and eager to water the dryness of his diocese with
that moSt limped Stream, gained his prayer that a community
should be given him from the same house. Twelve of the
monks were chosen and the aforesaid Herman was ordained
as their abbot. And when he Stood before the Step of the
presbytery to take the cross, as he had foreseen long before,
he went with them in a ship to the mountain of Stromberg.
And when they had lived there for three years, they went
down into the valley now called the valley of S. Peter and
there they built a wall about which we spoke before. Those
dry bones represent laymen without any spiritual grace, who
in the valley were converted to the religious life. The river
which flowed with such force through the church represents
the religion of that house. It is dear through the purity


94


Of Divers Visions


of its traditions, and full flowing by the fervour of its
observances. It was not without reason that he turned the
boat away from the column. For when the convent arrived
at the before-mentioned mountain and found itself in want
of many necessaries, some of them called to mind the buildings
and many other things which they had left, and murmured
because they desired to return. The abbot Dom Herman
after warning them without result of the necessity of perse¬
verance, sailing the boat by pushing away from the column
as if with a boat hook, said : fland Still, not one of you shall
go back, I have turned my rudder againSt it. But the one
whom ChriSt drew back, with violence, although indeed he
had been enrolled and nominated with the others, but subse¬
quently withdrawn on earnest petition it was John, prieSt
whom the Lord drew quietly aside and caused him to Stand
by himself. When the convent was sent out, he did not
form part of it, because he had only gone by a permission
which he had wrung from the abbot.

This is the interpretation of the vision as I heard it from
abbot Herman himself.

Novice .—It shows me plainly how nothing takes place
without the divine will.

Mon \.—While they were travelling on the Rhine, as all
of them who flill survive, bear witness, they saw over their
heads a bright circle in the sky, and seven suns within it.

Novice .■—What is meant by the circle and what do you
think is to be underflood by the seven suns?

Mon\.—fiy the circle I understand the eternity of the
Blessed Spirit and by the seven suns, His sevenfold gifts with
which the province was to be lighted by the good example
of this congregation.


95


The Dialogue on Miracles


chapter XCII.

Of Rudolph who shrank from touching the asper-
sorium with unwashed hands.

A certain lay-brother who went out with this community,
by name Rudolph, a good and religious man, one day on
coming from retirement entered our church with hands
unwashed, and according to the cuflom of our Order, it was
his duty to sprinkle himself with holy water, when the thought
arose within him : “ This water is holy and blessed, and it
is not fitting that you should sprinkle yourself with it while
your hands are unclean.”

And forthwith he heard a clear voice answer him from
heaven: “ What I have cleansed, thou canft not make
unclean.” And he understood thereupon that the unclean¬
ness of the heart was more displeasing to God than that of
the body. It is purity of heart that is be£f pleasing to God.


CHAPTER XCIII.

Of the mon\ who in an ecRasy saw his own soul.

God, wishing to show to a certain monk the purity of his
soul, led him into an ecstasy of mind. And in this ecstasy
he contemplated a moSl beautiful boy lying within him.
When he returned to himself, he realised that this was his
own soul purified, by the mercy of God, from every Slain
of guilt. For a boy is called puer owing to his purity.

Novice .— I think that it is not safe for a man to tell so much
of his spiritual comforts.

Mon\. —Divine consolations are obtained secretly through
many labours and temptations, and are readily withdrawn if
they are made public. I will show you by separate examples
that both these statements are true.

96


Of Divers Visions


CHAPTER XCIV.

Of a nun, who received a miraculous consolation,
for the loss of one choice dish.

When a little time ago, in fad: during this year in a certain
convent of nuns of our Order, extra dishes were being dis¬
tributed throughout the whole convent (in this case it was fried
eggs), by some mishap one of the nuns was forgotten and left
out. Yet I do not think it happened by chance, but by the
divine will that the glory of God might be shown in her. She
bore this omission mod patiently, nay, rather she congratu¬
lated herself that she had been left out, and when she returned
thanks to God, He, the supreme abbot, sent her an invisible
choice dish, and with its ineffable sweetness so filled her
mouth, her throat and all her body that never in her life had
she task'd anything like it. Thus far the material delights.
And further, in her mind and soul, God so abundantly visited
her with spiritual delight, that she told our abbot, she would
be glad to do without all choice dishes, all the days of her life,
if only she might be allowed once more to experience such
sweetness in similar joys. And this same abbot of ours, in
return for her privilege, enjoined upon each of us to say the
hymn, Te Deum, at her petition, to give thanks for the event.

Novice. —If God so wonderfully rewards such a little thing
in this present life I cannot doubt that He will marvellously
reward great tribulations in the future.

Mon \.— That consolations of this kind are easily forfeited
in this life, I will give you an example.


CHAPTER XCV.

Of a lay-brother who forfeited the refreshment
granted from heaven by speaking of it.

A certain lay-brother in Hemmenrode had received from
heaven a mo9 sweet refreshment in his prayers, and owing

97


The Dialogue on Miracles


to this he often neglefted his tasks, and his mafter frequently
upbraided him, saying: “ Brother, there are fixed times for
prayer, and fixed times for work.” The other, being a
simple-minded man, and wishing to appease his mailer,
replied: “ O mafter if you only knew the reason, you would
not blame me. I beg you to give me a kiss.” For he thought
that the contaft of his lips would convey the same impression
of delight. But as soon as the mafter gave the required kiss,
the other loft, as I think permanently, and irrecoverably, that
grace, as I told above in the forty-third chapter, about the lay-
brother, who was granted the power of seeing an angel fre¬
quently, but loft that favour by making it known. Elsewhere
I have explained that there are many reasons for the with¬
drawal of grace in this life. Although they may speak
frequently of things revealed to them from heaven, yet it is
not for this reason that they lose the grace, as has been said
above of the lay-brother Henry of Hemmenrode.


CHAPTER XCVI.

Of a travelling mon\ who had a spirit of prophecy,
who appeared to the lay-brother Henry.

This same Henry was in charge of the grange which
is called Hart. One day when he was saying his
prayers and meditating while wandering alone round the
crops of the farm in the month of May, he noticed under a
pear tree which there ftands by itself in the field, a man
ftanding opposite him. He was of goodly presence, white
haired, with a long beard, and wearing a huttoned-up tunic
down to his ankles, and a broad cape which came to his knees,
and his face was like that of an angel. He drew near to him,
and saluted him saying: “Give me your blessing brother.”
And the other replied: “ May the Lord bless you.” Then
he went on: “ How do you like your Order, my brother? ”

98


Of Divers Visions


When the lay-brother answered : “ Very well ” ; he added
further: “ It certainly ought to please you, since there is no
manner of life so perfedf in the whole Church of God.” Now
since his appearance filled the lay-brother with much reverence,
the latter, wishing to give him an opportunity of asking for
some favour, said: “ Why do you walk abut in this way
with bare feet ? ” When the other replied : “ That is our
cuftom ” ; he went on : “I beg you to let me give you shoes
and dine with us.” He refused both offers, saying : “A very
little food is all that I and my companions need.” And when
they had talked together privately for a little while longer,
he who appeared to be a travelling monk appointed another
day for the lay-brother to meet him in the same place. And
then going away a little distance in the open field he vanished
suddenly out of his sight. Henry was terrified at this sight,
and hurried off to Hemmenrode, to his prior Herman, who
is now abbot of Marienberg, and told him in order all that
had taken place. He replied: “ You muff be cautious my
brother, because not everything which looks like truth, is true.
As soon as you see him again in the diffance, make the sign
of the cross, and when you draw near to him, cross yourself
again so that he can see you, and say, Benedicite.” And
when he had done this, the other smiled and said : “ You are
quite right to cross yourself, because not everything which
appears true, is true. Nor have you learnt this of yourself, but
your prior has taught it to you.” “ I,” he said, “ love him
because he is spiritually-minded, and a lover of discipline and
because he prays every day for the church and for his Order. ”
And this indeed was true. He also made mention of Dom
Eufface the abbot of Hemmenrode and of Dom Henry our
abbot, blaming some things in the former, and praising ffill
more in the latter. Also he repeated all the things which
had been spoken in the conclave with the prior or others, like
Elisha. Afterwards when the same lay-brother was one day
after compline trying to obtain some petition from God by
prayers and tears, and did not succeed, he, though the court¬
yard was shut, and the door of the church carefully locked,
entered, and went to him upbraiding him, and saying: “ Fool,
do you imagine that you can get anything from God by


99


The Dialogue on Miracles


violence? If you had not been spared juft now for the sake
of your prior, perchance you would have run the risk of mad¬
ness.” One night this same Henry was sitting before the
altar of the sick when a corpse was brought into the church.
A certain passer-by, I cannot say whether he was a man or
angel, asked by signs where the prior was, and when the other
made responsive signs to him that he was in the infirmary,
he answered with a sign “ Yes, I knew that ; it is well with
him there.” And making his reverence before the same
altar, he departed, and doing the same before the three altars
in the apse, he entered the monks’ choir and did not appear
again. He often teftified that he had seen him in the choir
walking round in great splendour. And when the lay-brother
offered him a tunic and a girdle on behalf of the prior, he
refused the tunic but accepted the girdle. “ I will give it,”
he said, “ to one of the good monks of Eberbach ; it will be
more profitable to him than if I were to use it.” Then he
gave back the woollen girdle which was indeed cheap enough
in intrinsic value, but had become precious by its virtue.
And by it cures have been wrought, and it is of especial value
in temptations of the flesh. And when he asked to be allowed
to show it to the prior, the answer came: “ Our Lord sends
us frequently to Jerusalem and other equally remote place,
and if the prior were to see me, my errand might be delayed
by his queftions." And he went on : “ Tell the prior to lie
eager to kindle the brethren that they shall not go to sleep
while singing psalms for the dead, because they are like
soldiers gathered to a tournament ; juft so do souls colled: for
the offices of the dead.

Noi/icc .—I think that while the dead need the help of the
living and their zeal in this office, they repay full measure
of charity.

Mon \.—I will show this by a single example.


too


Of Divers Visions


CHAPTER XCVII.

Of Rudolph, canon of Oldenziel, to whom men in
white apparel sang the canonical hours.

There is a canon named Rudolph in Oldenziel, an aged
man and very anxious to fulfil all the divine offices. Never
was he absent from his place in the choir at any service, so
long as he could walk, as our novice Allard testifies, who was
once his fellow canon.

Once when he was suffering under a natural weakness
so that he was not able to get out of his bed and walk, though
he suffered no pain, he was unable to recite the office, and
he saw some singers robed in white, wearing surplices and
the clerical tonsure who came at the hour of service and
chanted all the office.

When they had finished, they said: “ Let us go away
now and allow him to reft”

Now when he often saw them, and found out that the
sifter who was nursing him could not see any one, he under-
ftood that they were the souls of his fellow canons on whom
he had himself beftowed benefits.

Now because I want to hurry on to speak of the sacrament
of the body and blood of Chrift, I put an end here to these
various visions.


IOI


BOOK IX


PROLOGUE.

Of the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Chrifl.

Before I speak with you of the sacrament of the body and
blood of ChriSt, I muSt remind you ere I approach the subjeft
with fear and trembling, that where faith alone is operative
and reason is altogether excluded, discussion cannot be
held without danger. Wherefore I do not presume to say
anything about it that is new or untried, but rather to sum¬
marise what has been said by holy and learned men about it,
as they themselves have experienced it.

I shall also add many illustrations which I remember have
been told me by trustworthy persons. If in these there should
occur any things worthy of discussion, we can raise it on
your questions so that all doubt may be removed.


103


The Body and Blood of Christ


chapter I.

Of the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Chrifl.
Examination of the nature of a Sacrament, its
matter, the cause of its institution and the method
of conversion or reception.

All the sacraments of the church are far excelled by the
sacrament of the body and blood of Chrifl.

In this is found the way, the truth and the life.

The way, because it leads to God those who approach it
worthily, wherefore it is also called viaticum.

The truth, because those who receive it, are incorporated
into Chrifl. Wherefore it is also called Holy Communion.

The life, because it does not allow the death of the soul to
pass over those who are thus incorporated into Chrifl. And
from this it receives the name of Eucharifl which means
hearty than\s.

Of the firfl the Saviour says : "lam the living vine which
came down from heaven." There you have the way.

He who came down from heaven is the same who ascended
into heaven, carrying with Him all His members, some in
fa< 5 l, but others in hope. Of the second He says My flesh
is meat indeed and My blood is drinks indeed " (John vi. 51,
56, 59). There you have the truth.

He says also of the 3rd: " Whoso eateth this bread shall
live for ever." There you have the life. The same thing
is to be underflood about the chalice.

And I imagine that there is myftic significance in treating
of the body and blood of Chrifl in a ninth book, because the
number 9 is assigned by philosophers, i.e. as the end of all
things it is allotted to death, and Chrifl who is the life of
all gave up His soul on the cross, at the ninth hour of the
day.

This sacrament is also performed in commemoration of
the Lord’s death.

Wherefore the apoflle writing in the ifl Epiflle to the
105


The Dialogue on Miracles


Corinthians (xi. 26) uses these words: “ As often as ye eat
this bread and drin\ this cup, ye do show the Lord's death
till He come " i.e. you represent it until He come, i.e. until
the judgment day.

That is how the commentary explains it.

When He appears in glory, types will vanish away. Every¬
thing which has been said in the former books, to wit, of
contrition, of confession, of satisfaction and by singleness of
mind are only preparations for this sacrament.

Also, nothing more Strengthens faith than those visions,
in which we behold with our bodily eyes the actual body
and blood which we believe to be hidden under the species
of bread and wine.

Novice. —Before you relate the visions I beg you briefly
to explain to me what this sacrament is and what the matter
of this sacrament is, why it was instituted, what is the method
of the change and what the method of reception.

Mon\. —We muft handle with fear and reverence the
sacrament of the EuchariSf, because in it faith does much
more than human reason. However, I will tell you briefly
what our forefathers thought about it. There are three
things to be considered in this sacrament, one which is pure
sacrament ; and a second which is sacrament and matter ;
and the third which is matter and not sacrament.

Novice. —What is the pure sacrament?

Mon{. —Visible species of the bread and wine.

Novice.- —What is sacrament and matter?

Mon\. —The actual flesh and blood of ChriSf.

Novice. —What is the real subftance and not sacrament?

Monl(. —The myftical body of Chrift, to wit, the one holy
church.

Novice. —Why do we call it a sacrament?

Mon\. —Because it is the sign of a heavenly thing. In it,
one thing is seen and quite another believed to exiSl.

Novice. —What is the cause of its institution?

Mon\. —Because when the Lord, in the words of Eusebius
Emisenus, was about to take away from our sight the body
He had assumed, and to carry it up to heaven, it was necessary
at the time of the lafl supper to offer the sacrament of His

106


The Body and Blood of Christ


body and blood, and consecrate them, that He might be
worshipped continuously through which a myffery was offered
once for all for our redemption.

Novice. —Where lies the usefulness of this institution?

Mon\. —It has a double usefulness, because by the reception
of it virtue is increased, that is charity and it is the healer of
daily infirmity. Hence Auguffine says: “ This offering is
repeated daily, although Chriff suffered but once, because
we sin daily in sins without which mortal infirmity cannot
live ; and because we fall daily Chriff is sacrificed for us
daily in myffic fashion.

Novice. —What is the form of this sacrament?

Mon\. —The form lies in both words and actions. In
words, because when these words are uttered “ This is my
body,” and afterwards “ This is my blood,” the change takes
place of bread and wine into the body and blood of Chriff.
Wherefore Ambrose says: This sacrament is completed in
the word of Chriff, because the word of Chriff changes the
creature, and thus, the body of Chriff is fashioned from the
bread, and His blood from the wine which mixed with water
in the chalice, by the consecration of the heavenly word.

Novice. —How does this change take place?

Mon\. —The change takes place in an ineffable fashion.
As has been said when these words are uttered: “ This is
My body ” the bread changes into the body of Chriff by
the power of God through the miniffry of tbe prieff. The
same is to be underffood about the wine, the unessentials
remaining nevertheless unchanged, to wit, the colour, weight
and taffe.

Novice. —Can this sacrament be performed in any other
grain than corn?

Mon\. —As the blood can only be made out of wine, and
that pressed from the grape, in like manner the body of
Chriff can only be made out of wheat when it has been made
into bread ; because the Lord compares Himself to a grain
of corn as also to bread.

Novice. —What is the method of reception?

A lort\. —It is received in a twofold manner, spiritually and
sacramentally. The good receive it in both senses but the

1 °7


The Dialogue on Miracles


wicked receive it only sacramentally. So that He that eateth
not, eateth and vice-versa.

Novice .—Why is it received in both kinds since the whole
Chrift is present in each kind ?

Mon \.—In order that it might be made clear that He
took upon Him the whole human nature to redeem the whole
of it for bread refers to the body and wine to the soul. Let
this brief account be enough for you since it is more fully
treated of in the catechism.

Novice .-—Now I believe what has been said, but, never¬
theless, I desire to have four points proved to me by illustration
rather than by explanation.

The firSl is that the true body of ChriSl born from the
virgin is present under the species of bread ; the second is:
that the adtual blood is present under the species of wine ;
the third : that those who worthily celebrate or communicate,
are deserving of grace : and {fourthly ) of punishment, if
unworthily.

Monl^.—l will give several examples of each, for they
are very necessary to our faith and have been told me oy
trustworthy persons.


CHAPTER II.

Of Gotteschal\, of Volmarslein, who saw in his
hands Chrin under the form of an infant.

There was in our house a monk named Gotteschalk, born
indeed, in the fort of VoimarStein, a canon of Cologne
cathedral.

Before his conversion he had been a moSf wanton man,
but Still of great nature. He had a fair knowledge of litera¬
ture ; but a spirit of patience and piety carried him forward
to a perfection of the higher life. Six years before this when
he was before a certain private altar on ChriStmas day filled
with devotion and shedding many tears, as he was wont,

108


The Body and Blood of Christ


and had begun as usual, to wit, “ Unto us a son is born,”
and the transubSlantiation had taken place, forthwith he
found in his hands and saw with his eyes no longer the
appearance of bread, but a moil glorious infant, indeed, Him
who is moft beautiful in form compared with the sons of
men on whom also angels desire to look. Kindled with
His love and transported with His wondrous beauty, he
embraced Him and kissed Him. Being afraid that any
delay might upset the others who were there, he laid the
Beloved on a corporal and he took again the sacramental
form in order that the mass might be accomplished. So long
as that blessed saint saw the appearance of the child, he saw
there no species of bread and vice-versa. And when he had
revealed the vision to another, keeping back his own part in
it and that other had repeated again to others, one day he
was questioned about the author of so great a vision and
replied: “ In my hearing most certainly on that day Christ
was seen here ; ” and he would say no more. Afterwards,
he disclosed the vision to two pricSts, Theophilus of Lureke
and ConStantine. And when Winandus our infirmarian
understood this, whilst the other was in the infirmary, he
said to him: “ Good brother Gotteschalk did you see the
Saviour in the mass? And when he replied quite simply,
he asked further : “ In what form? and he answered: “ In
the form of a child.” And the other said : “ What did you
do to Him? ” He replied: “ I kissed Him on the mouth.”
Winandus said : “ What happened afterwards?” He said : “I
laid Him upon the altar, He resumed His former appearance
and I received Him.”

He told the same Story at his death when he was making
his confession to Dom Henry our abbot.

Novice. —These are glorious things that you tell, but I
marvel that such revelations should be made even to a monk.
As the Lord deigns to show Himself to the righteous to
reward them, so also does He sometimes to unrighteous prieSts
for their improvement. Here is an example.


109


The Dialogue on Miracles
chapter III.

Of Adolph, the pricfl who saw the hod transform
itself into the virgin and child and then into a lamb,
and tail of all into the crucified.

When the lord abbot, on his way into Friesland to make
a visitation, had told the aforesaid vision to a certain knight,
the latter repeated the flory to Adolph, prieft of Dieveren.
And when he heard it, he sighed and said : “ To what purpose
does the Lord God show such visions to holy men who are
perfect in the faith. They ought to be revealed to a sinner
and others like me who often have doubts about this sacrament.

One day when this Adolphus was celebrating mass and
before the “ Agnus Dei ” had lifted up the hofl to break it, be
saw the virgin in the hofl itself, sitting upon a throne and
holding the infant to her breafl. Wishing to know what
was on the other side, as soon as he turned to the hofl he
saw a lamb in it and when he again turned, he saw in it,
as if through a glass, Chrifl hanging on the cross with bent
head. When he saw this, the priefl was terrified and flood
for a long time thinking whether he ought to flop there, or
finish the office. When he had appeased the Lord with his
tears, the sacrament took again its former appearance and
he completed the mass. And when the congregation
wondered at the delay, he went up into the pulpit and told
the people the vision with many tears and that very hour
fifty men took the cross at his hands. For it was the oftave
of the apoflles Peter and Paul.

And I do not wonder that Gotteschalk was not able 'o
look upon Him so clearly and so joyfully whom he daily
sacrificed and received to his own condemnation. For he
lived with a concubine.

I have heard lately that he began to amend his life on the
occasion (as I hope) of this vision and placed the woman in a
convent of nuns in Rennengen. This flory was told me by
our fellow monk Bernard and he heard it from Adolphus
himself. The Saviour condescends, as I said at the beginning,


no


The Body and Blood of Christ

to show the reality of His body, in this sacrament to good
prieSts in order that they may be comforted ; to those who
are wavering in their faith that they may be Strengthened ;
to those who are living ill that they may be warned. Here
are examples.


CHAPTER IV.

Of the bishop of Livonia who saw the Lord on the
altar.

The venerable bishop of Livonia and maSter Lambert,
dean of the Holy ApoSties in Cologne when, a few years ago
they were going together to the imperial court and on the
road were talking together on the scriptures, fell upon the
subject of the body of the Lord. When the dean set forward
the Christian faith in this sacrament, the bishop replied: “ I
know a prieSt who a little while ago saw Christ on the altar
with his bodily eyes. And when the dean tried to find out
what person was worthy of so great a vision and did not
succeed, on the laSt day before they separated, the bishop
confessed to him that it was himself. The dean told this
Story to the provoSf of Ober-Pleiss, and he told it to me.

The following Story declares how God also shows His
flesh to those who are in doubt about this sacrament.


CHAPTER V.

Of the prieH of Wic\indisburg who felt a doubt in
saying the canon and beheld raw flesh.

And it is less than two years ago since a prieSt who was
in doubt about the sacrament of the body of Christ celebrated


in


The Dialogue on Miracles


in the caSlle which is called Wickindisburg and when at the
canon he was hesitating about so wonderful a change of the
bread into the body of ChriSf, the Lord showed him raw
flesh in the hoSf, when also, this was seen by a nobleman
named Widekin who was Standing behind him, after the
mass was over, he drew the prieSt apart and confessed that he
also had been in doubt about the sacrament at that very time.
And each told the other how he had seen raw flesh in the
bos). This Widekin had a daughter, married to Syfrid of
Runkel, a niece, a daughter of his siSfer the abbess of
Rheindorf who told me that she had seen the same vision the
year before.

Would you like to hear how the Lord shows two prieSls
of evil life that He is crucified by them?

Novice.—Very much.

Mon\. — LiSfen then to this terrible vision.


CHAPTER VI.

Of a prieft who peeping the hofl in his mouth with
wicked intent, found himself unable to leave the
church.

A certain licentious prieSt made love to a woman, and
when he could not gain her consent, while saying mass, he
kept in his mouth the moSt pure body of the Lord, hoping,
if he were to kiss her that her will would be bent to his by
the power of the sacrament. But the Lord whom we find
saying by Zacharias the prophet about such prieSfs " And
your people crucify Me all day " prevented his wickedness
in the following way.

When he desired to go out of the door of the church, he
seemed to have grown in such a way that he knocked against
the ceiling of the church with his head. The unhappy man
in terror, drew the hoSf from his mouth, and because he was
nearly out of his mind, tried to bury it in the corner of the


112


The Body and Blood of Christ


church. In fear that divine vengeance would quickly fall
upon him, he confessed his sacrilege to a friend of his who
was a prieSt. Both prieSls went together to the spot and
moving away the duff, found not the species of bread, but
the figure of a man hanging upon a cross, small indeed
in size, but wholly composed of flesh and blood. What they
afterwards did with it or what the prieSl did, I do not relate,
because it is a long time since these things were told to me
by the precentor Herman who knew the Story well. That
man was worse than those who crucified Christ actually.

Mon\.— It is true that if they had known, they would
never have crucified the Lord of glory. This man showed
contempt for Him whom he knew and by his contempt
re-crucified Him. I think I have shown you enough that
the true body of Christ lies under the form of bread and in
that the transubSfantiation takes place as much at the hands
of evil prieSts as of good.

Novice. —If all priest s knew this Story and believed what
they heard, I think that they would honour more than they
do now the God made sacramen's.

Mon\. —It is a very miserable thing that this sacrament
which was instituted for us men and for our salvation, should
find us so lukewarm about it when the brute beaSts, and even
the worms and reptiles, recognise the creator in it.


CHAPTER VII.

Of the body of the Lord which was Stolen from a
church and its place of concealment revealed by
oxen in a field.

In a small town called Comede some thieves by night
broke into a church and among other things carried off the
vessel containing the body of the Lord. But when they found
in it nothing but relics and the pyx with the sacrament, they


113


*8


The Dialogue on Miracles


took no more care of it and laying down the pyx in a furrow
on a field close to the town they went off in confusion. When
in the morning a peasant was ploughing the same field with
oxen and the animals came near to the pyx, they flood ftill
in terror. And when the ploughman urged them forward
and they would not go, sometimes drawing back and some¬
times wheeling out of the way, he cried angrily: “ What
devil has got into these oxen? ” For he could not see plainly
because he was working at dawn. But when he looked more
carefully, he discovered the pyx juft in front of the feet of the
oxen and close by it the vessel of the church. Then under-
ftanding the cause of their rebellion he let them loose in the
field and ran back to the town and told all that had happened,
both to the prieft and to everybody else. A troop of asses
showed Him a similar honour by coming down from the
road into the mud, as I remember I related in the ninety-
eighth chapter of the fourth book. Hear now visions glorious
enough about tiny creatures.


CHAPTER VIII.

Of bees who built a shrine for the body of the Lord.

Once a woman kept a large number of bees, which were
no profit to her, but kept dying off, and when she tried to
find a remedy for this misfortune, she was told that if she
placed the Lord’s body among them, the plague would
quickly be flayed. She therefore went to the church, and
pretending that she wished to communicate, she received the
Lord’s body ; which she immediately withdrew from her
mouth when she returned from the altar, and placed it in one
of the hives. Wonderful power of God! The insedls
recognised their creator, and built a mofl beautiful chapel
with wonderful skill from their sweetefl honeycomb for their
moil gracious gueft, and placed in it an altar of the same
material, and laid upon it the mofl sacred body. And the


The Body and Blood of Christ


Lord gave His blessing to all their work. And when in
course of time the woman opened the hive, and saw the
aforesaid shrine, she was terrified, and ran to the prieft, and
confessed to him all she had done and seen. Thereupon he
took with him his parishioners and they came to the hive,
drove away the bees flying round and buzzing loudly to
the praise of the creator, while they admired the walls of the
chapel, its windows, roof, bell tower, porch and altar, and
carried back to the church the Lord’s body with songs of
praise and thanksgiving. For although God is marvellous
in His saints, He is shown yet more wonderful in these the
leaft of His creation. Left anyone should show such presump¬
tion in the future, I will tell you a terrible happening, which
was related to me laft year by the abbess of the Island of
S. Nicholas.


CHAPTER IX.

Of a woman who was Stricken with paralysis because
she had spread the Lord's body over her cabbages.

In the same island there was a girl possessed of a devil ;
she was a lay-woman and I myself saw her there. When
the devil was asked by a prieft why he so cruelly tormented
Hartdyfa de Cochem for so long a time, he replied by the
girl’s mouth: “ Because she has deserved it over and over
again. She has spread the Moft High Himself over her vege¬
tables.” And when the prieft did not fully underftand what
he meant, yet the other was unwilling to explain, he went to
the woman and told her what the devil had said about her,
urging her not to deny if she underftood. And she
immediately confessed her fault and said: “ I quite well
underftand what he meant, a thing which I have never dis¬
closed to any man before now. When I was a young girl
and undertook the duty of cultivating the garden, one night
I took in a vagabond woman and gave her hospitality. When


JI 5


The Dialogue on Miracles


I had put before her the losses of my garden telling her that
all my vegetables were devoured by caterpillars, she replied:

‘ I can tell you of a good remedy. Take the Lord’s body
and break it up small and sprinkle it over the vegetables, and
immediately the plague will be flayed.’ Foolish woman that
I was, I was more anxious about my garden than about the
sacrament, and when on Eafter Day I received the Lord’s
body and took it out of my mouth and did with it as I had
been told, it became a torment to me as well as a remedy
for the cabbages, as the devil can witness.”

Novice. —This woman was more cruel than Pilate’s
servants, who spared the Lord when dead, that a bone of
Him might not be broken.

Mon\. —That is why even to this day she is atoning for
her terrible sin, and suffers unheard of pain. Let those who
use the divine sacraments for wordly gain, or what is worse
wickedness, for wrong doing, consider not the guilt but its
punishments. If even inseeffs forget the reverence due to the
sacrament, they will one day pay the penalty.


CHAPTER X.

Of the fly which hovered over the Lord's body at
the hour of reception and was punished with death.

Laft year one of our priefts was celebrating the daily mass
in honour of Our Lady in the presence of the bishop Theodoric,
and a big fly began to hover over the chalice so importunately
at the very moment of consecration that it seemed almofl
determined to enter the chalice by force. The prieft trembling
and fearing since he had his hands occupied and failed in his
attempt to blow away the fly, again and again by a cough
called to his aid Henry the deacon, who at that moment was
giving the pax to the bishop. Then the fly rising higher in
swift flight, there paid the penalty of its presumption because

u6


The Body and Blood of Christ


soon afterwards when the reception and the absolution were
over and the priefl whom it had annoyed was Still looking
on, it fell dead like a Slone between the corporal and the
chalice. And the deacon threw it away from the altar.

Novice. —I am greatly pleased with this account.

Mon\. —The Lord also sometimes works miracles in simple
bread, which has been set aside for this great sacrament.


CHAPTER XI.

Of the mice, who when gnawing round the outside
of the blessed wafers which had not yet been con¬
secrated did not touch the sacred monogram.

I think that less than a year has passed since several wafers
which had been rejected by the ministers on account of cracks
or swellings were thrown away in Eberbach onto a window
close by the altar. But several mice came and ate up all
that part which lay outside, and the rim, and in no way
injured the sacred letters which lay within. The sacriSlan
saw this and considered it miraculous.

Novice. —May I ask what it is that mice or worms can
consume in the sacrament of the altar.

Mon\. —Only the species of bread, but in it ChriSt is seen
and touched and it is an insult to Him if anything unworthy-
approaches. Because His true body lies hidden beneath it,
it is glorified. And because it is immortal, it cannot see
corruption ; and because it is so splendid we cannot see
it; and because it is spiritual we cannot touch it. It
is not even touched by the prieft who takes it in his
hand, except through the means of the species of bread.
The species itself may be seen broken, eaten, may
satisfy, may see corruption, and be insulted. When
any of these things is attributed to the body of Christ,
you mufl understand it of the species only. So great is the

117


The Dialogue on Miracles


glory of this sacrament that not only animals who possess a
moving life, but even the invisible elements feel its power.
Here is an example.


CHAPTER XII.

Of the Lord's body which when caH into the river
drowned some heretics.

At that time when the Albigensian heresies began to show
themselves some wicked men supported by the power of the
devil displayed certain signs and wonders by which they
bolstered up these heresies and overthrew the faith of many.
They walked upon the waters and did not sink. A man
of sound faith and religious life perceiving this and knowing
that true signs could not co-exiSt with false dcxftrine carried
the Lord’s body in the pyx to the river where these men were
to display their power to the people, and he said in the hearing
of everybody: “ I adjure thee, O devil, by Him whom I
carry in my hands that you exercise no tricks on this river
to pervert this people by means of these men. After these
words the priell much troubled caff the Lord’s body into
the Stream on whose waters these men were walking. Behold
the wonderful power of ChriSt. As soon as the sacrament
touched the elements, trickery gave way to truth, and
those false saints went down like lead into the deep
and were drowned. And immediately the pyx con¬
taining the sacrament was carried away by angels. When
the prieSt saw all these things, he rejoiced indeed over
the miracle but grieved at the loss of the sacrament.
Passing all that night in tears and lamentations in the
morning he found the pyx with the sacrament on the
altar. This Story was told me at the time it happened.
Another miracle happened in the sea regarding the Lord’s
body and I will not pass it over in silence.

1x8


The Body and Blood of Christ


CHAPTER XIII.

Also of the Lord's body which when a ship was
wrecked, floated to the other ships.

When in that great expedition ships collected from alt
parts of Germany entered upon their voyage, the prieSts were
ordered for various reasons not to have the Lord’s body in
any of the ships. And all obeyed these orders, one ship
only of the Frisians refusing to obey, and quickly paid the
penalty of its disobedience. It was wrecked as if by a judg¬
ment of God and the pyx containing the Lord’s body with
everything else which had been placed in the ship. But
the men were saved by the other ships which came to their
help. And behold they saw at a distance the pyx floating
in the sea, and it came to the ships with so swift a motion
that it seemed to have been driven by sails. And when it
had been taken up into one of the ships, another miracle was
seen to take place. Though its lid was open and unfastened
by any hand, yet not even a drop of water got in among all
those Stormy waves. Herman, dean of Gereon in Cologne,
who was there and saw all this, used to tell the Story as if
it were a great miracle. The earth itself recognised its creator
in the sacrament.


CHAPTER XIV.

Of the Lord’s body which fell from the hands of
the prieSl and made a miraculous mar\ upon the
Slone pavement.

When on a certain feaSt day the parish prieSt of S. Columba
in Cologne was communicating the people at EaSter, a wafer
slipped from his hand and fell upon the pavement which


•9


The Dialogue on Miracles


was laid with tiles. But that the Lord might show that He
was Lord of the earth as well as of the sea, immediately the
wafer touched the flone although it was so light a weight to
all appearance, it overcame the hardness of the tiles so that
both the rim and the monogram showed clearly upon the
pavement, as would happen if it impressed upon the softefl
of wax. The priefl in terror immediately picked it up and
dug out the tile, both he and many others being terrified at
the sight of so great a miracle. The priefl not knowing
what to do scraped the miraculously marked tile with the
wafer and placed the duff among the relics. Our fellow
monk Arnold told us that he was present. And that the
Lord might show His power over the air he permitted some¬
thing like this to take place.


CHAPTER XV.

Of the wafers which were thrown out at Haynrode
by the madness of the priefls.

In the town which is called Haynrode, there lived a priefl
named Everard. A few years ago he invited the priefts of
the neighbourhood to come to the feflival of his church.
While they were solemnising vespers and rejoicing rather
excitedly round the altar, one of them accidently overthrew
the pyx containing the Lord’s body hung over the altar and
shook five wafers out of it. When the others saw this, they
immediately flopped the service. Having looked for the
wafers and not being able to find them, they dismissed the
congregation and locked the doors while they searched every
corner. And when they flill had no success, one of them
by the divine will climbed up a gallery which ran round the
wall and saw the wafers arranged in the form of a cross.
Now this gallery was much higher than the pyx. The air


120


The Body and Blood of Christ


was obedient to its creator whose body in falling was upheld
by the air that it might not reach the ground, but it was taken
up by angels and carried to this lofty place. This Story was
told to me by Matilda, the abbess of Fiissenich. Fire also
has acknowledged the power of this sacrament.


CHAPTER XVI.

How a church was burnt down and the Lord's
body left untouched.

Not long ago a certain church in our province was burnt
down. And when everything which could be burnt, had been
reduced to ashes and the flames had died down, men who
went in, found only the pyx with Christ’s body lying uninjured
on the altar. When this Story was told to Conrad, the prior
of Marienftadt, and to several as a great miracle, as indeed
it was, they gave glory to God and were very greatly
Strengthened in their faith by this. You see from these Stories
which I have told you, the plainest proofs that every creature,
whether, like men, rational, or, like the animals, irrational,
and indeed all insensible elements, such as water, earth, air,
and fire plainly recognise the power of this divine sacrament.

Novice .—You have shown me quite plainly that the true
body of ChriSt lies beneath the species of bread ; but now I
beg you to show me by similar illustrations that this true
blood lies beneath the species of wine.

Mon !{.—You shall learn that there are similar causes of
the following visions as of the preceding. For instance the
appearance of blood is shown to some, like the good, as a
reward for their devotion, and for the comfort of those who
have doubts about the sacrament, and to rebuke those who
are living in sin. Here are examples.


121


The Dialogue on Miracles


chapter XVII.

How abbot Daniel saw the appearance of blood in
the chalice.

Daniel, abbot of Schonau of blessed memory, who was
once our prior, was one day celebrating mass, when he saw
in the chalice the appearance of human blood. And as at
that time he knew himself to be free from mortal sin, he
did not think it was granted him for his condemnation, but
hoped it was sent for his consolation. A witness of this vision
was Gerard, one of our monks, who at one time was his fellow
canon in Cologne cathedral. This vision may be compared
with that of Gotteschalk, who saw the Lord in the shape cf
a child beneath the appearance of bread, as I told you in the
second chapter. Further, that the appearance of blood is
sometimes shown to those who doubt about the sacraments,
to Strengthen their faith, the following Slory shows.


CHAPTER XVIII.

Of Heylard, a priefl of Wuninsdorp, who saw the
appearance of human blood in the chalice.

Heylard, priefl of Wunisdorp, one day was saying mass
in the church of the aforesaid town and by the suggestion
of the devil was perilously wavering about the reality of the
sacrament, and when he came to the Lord’s Prayer at which
the uncovered chalice is generally placed upon the altar, he
saw in it human blood in the place of the wine and was
terrified. As if the Lord were saying to him: “ If you do
not believe in the sacrament, let this experience teach you
the truth. And since faith is the road to sight, let this sight
of my blood recall you to faith.” Now that appearance
lafted until the reception. There were present at that mass


122


The Body and Blood of Christ


Hildebold, count of Limber, a man who was not very Catholic
either in faith or works. But Heylard being fearful for
himself told the vision to mafter John, the dean of Aix, who
told it to me. And the following illustration shows that
sometimes visions of this kind take place not only owing to
the fault of the prieft, but also through the want of faith of
those who are present.


CHAPTER XIX.

How a citizen of Hildesheim saw at the canon the
chalice overflowing with the blood of the Lord.

The aforesaid maSter John also told me of another very
terrible vision of the Lord’s blood. When a prieSt named
Albero was celebrating the mass in the church of S. Walburgis
in Hildesheim, which was his native place, a citizen who was
Standing behind him, and did not believe in what was being
done, saw the liquid in the chalice overflow so that it covered
the whole surface of the altar, boiling over like a boiling
vessel. He was very much frightened by this vision and I
hope that by it he was brought back to his faith in the sacra¬
ment. And indeed this overflowing had the appearance of
human blood. It was as if the voice of Christ were saying
to him: “ I suffered on the altar of the cross for your sake
and my blood was poured out like water, and do you have
any doubts about your healing? ”


CHAPTER XX.

Of the scholar Hertwig who saw the appearance of
blood in the chalice in Reysene.

John, paSlor of Reysene, own brother to our monk Bernard,
was one day saying mass and a certain adult scholar named


123


The Dialogue on Miracles


Hertwig was serving him. And when he after the reception
of the body and blood of ChriSl was pouring wine into the
chalice, he saw in it the appearance of human blood plainly
visible. The prieSl however was not able to see it and this
perhaps because he was not in a Slate of sin. When he grew
up, this same scholar deserted the prieSlhood and became a
soldier and never up to this day revealed that he had poured
out the blood of ChriSl, because he became a robber and
persecutor of many. I will tell you of another vision about
which it is uncertain whether it appeared because of any merit
or fault of the prieSl or the congregation.


CHAPTER XXI.

Of Hildebrand, the prieSl of NeynSlede near
Covorde who with two soldiers saw the appearance
of blood in the chalice.

Hildebrand, prieSl of NeynSlede near Covorde, was one day
saying mass and when the transubSlantiation took place, he
saw in the chalice the sacramental blood transformed in the
way we have often related. Desirous of having witnesses of
so great a miracle he called up two soldiers of his parishioners
who were present at this mass and when with the prieSl they
saw no wine in the appearance of blood, they were greatly
terrified ; but nevertheless their faith was much Strengthened.

Novice .—I see clearly enough that this would be true of
the prieSl and of those who were present ; but I wonder if
ever a miracle of this kind happens for the sake of those who
are not there.

Mon\. —Yes, indeed and not only once, but frequently.


124


The Body and Blood of Christ
chapter XXII.


Of a corporal which was flained with the sacrament
and could not be cleaned until a recluse who was in
doubt, had seen it.

A certain prieft in the diocese of Cologne, when he was
once saying mass, by the wisdom of God spilt a chalice con¬
taining the blood at the canon on the corporal. And
immediately it took on the appearance of human blood. And
when after saying mass the priest was deeply grieved over
this accident and was washing it over the chalice carefully,
he was yet unable to wash out the ruby colour. Then being
the more terrified he begged for the prayers of all his
parishioners and washed the corporal again, but Still the Stain
persisted. When he saw this, he took with him the sacred
linen and went to Rudolf, scholaSticus of Cologne, a man of
great reputation, and told him of the mishap shewing him
the corporal and how no water would wash away the Stain
of blood and protested that it could not be removed by any
art or prayer. And this wise man answered him as follows :
“ Is there anyone in your parish who has any doubts about
this sacrament? ” The prieSt replied: “ There is a recluse
who has frequently been in doubt about it.” Then the other
said : “ Go and show it to her ; perhaps it is on her account
that God does not suffer the marks of blood to be removed
from this corporal, so that when she sees them her faith may
be Strengthened.” And when he had done this, the woman
was terrified and believed and forthwith God restored its
ancient pure colour to the linen.


CHAPTER XXIII.

Also of a Rained corporal on which human blood
was visible.

A similar accident happened in our neighbourhood, but it
had a different ending. A prieSt was saying mass hurriedly

i 2 5


The Dialogue on Miracles


and carelessly in a church whose name as well as that of the
priefl has escaped me, when he spilt the chalice. But being
afraid if such carelessness should come to the ears of the
authorities, he might be suspended for a long time from offi¬
ciating at the altar, he said nothing about the accident and
when the mass was over, he folded up the corporal and went
away. For he thought that no one had seen the mishap.
Now that priefl happened to be of an ill life, very unsteady
and careless. But the bell-ringer who had noticed his care¬
lessness, unfolded the corporal after the prieSt had gone and
he saw to his astonishment a red wet Stain everywhere where
the wine from the chalice had been spilt. Immediately the
man terrified by a sight so wonderful hurried to Cologne
and told Conrad who is now provoSt of the cathedral and
was then dean and called together the other priors and told
them exactly what had happened to the prieSt and what he
had seen. Then they ordered him to come back to Cologne
on a certain day and bring with him the corporal that they
might be the more sure of the truth and might consult how
such negligence ought to be more fully atoned for. At the
time I happened to be at Cologne and all this was told me
by Bernard who was a canon of the cathedral. What was
done after this I never heard. Are you satisfied with all
these examples or do you desire more ?

Novice. —What you have said has so thoroughly satisfied me
that I do not say I shall believe, but more than that, I know
that the wine becomes the true blood of ChriSt after the
consecration.' For when the apoflle said that faith is the
sub fiance of things hoped for, the proof of things not seen
(Heb. xi. i), things which are seen so plainly as you have
told me, can no longer be said to be believed but known.
And what has been seen under such ample testimony, I count
myself to have seen.

Mon \.—I will further add two examples by which you may
learn that God even works miracles in simple water to give
glory to this great sacrament.


126


The Body and Blood of Christ


CHAPTER XXIV.

Of the sic\ man for whom the water of the ablutions
was changed into blood.

A certain prieff, as was told me by another who was both
a pries'! and a religious, was visiting a sick man. The invalid
was a layman. And he said to the prieft: “ Sir, have you
said mass to-day ? ” And when he replied: “ Yes,” the sick
man went on: “I beseech you in my presence to wash the
hands which have handled the sacred body and blood of
Chrift, and this water will serve as an antidote for my sick¬
ness.” And when he had done this, the water was placed
in a clean phial. And when the sick man had drunk from
it, he bade them place the reSt in a box and cover it over
carefully. After this when he desired the same water, a
servant went to the box and found in the phial not water,
but pure blood. And when he told this, the sick man sent
for the prieSf, who carried off the phial to the church and
placed it among the relics.

Novice.— What is your opinion about that blood?

Mon\. —I do not think it was the blood of Chris'!, because
water is never turned into it, nor even wine without the due
benediftion of a priest. But God transformed the pure
elements because of the man’s devotion that he might show
that all the faithful everywhere may take spiritually that same
blood which the prieft takes daily in church sacramentally.


CHAPTER XXV.

Of a noble lady who received the lafl ablution by
means of the bread and found it turned to blood.

A certain noble lady of Endenich, as she had been taught
by someone, received upon bread the laft ablution from the

127


The Dialogue on Miracles


fingers of the prieft, believing that if she buried it in the
four quarters of her land, no inclemencies of weather nor
hail would injure her crops. Meanwhile she placed the
bread in her box until a suitable time should come, when
she might scatter it over her land ; but she found it changed
into congealed blood. Greatly terrified she showed it to her
husband and the prieft. Then all were summoned by the
priors of Cologne and the prieSl was heavily punished, the
others with difficulty clearing themselves of any wicked pur¬
pose as the cause. For it is displeasing to God if the sacrament
is used for any temporal advantage.

Novice. —I am glad to hear what you say and now I beg
you to give me illustrations of those who use it worthily.

Mon\. —First I wish to show you how the life of prieSls
who consecrate worthily, ought to be regulated.


CHAPTER XXVI.

What sort of life priefls ought to live.

The glory of a prieSt’s life lies chiefly in two things, namely,
chaStity and knowledge. He ought to be both chafte and
learned. You have an example of chaftity in Zacharias, the
father of John the Baptist, about whom S. Luke says: And
it came to pass that as soon as the days of his minidlration
were accomplished, he departed to his own house (Luke i. 23).
For during the term of their office in the temple the priefts who
were occupied with so many duties, were not only bound to
abstain from the embrace of their wives, but even from entering
their homes. But our priests who have no carnal succession,
but are only selefled for spiritual aptitude and who have to
be at the altar every day, from these complete chaffity is
expected. That moreover he ought to be learned Malachi
witnesses when he says: For the priedl's lips should \eep
knowledge and they should see If the law. at his mouth, for

128


The Body and Blood of Christ


he is the messenger of the Lord of hotts (Mai. ii. 7). This
is the reason why Eli took his seat before the door of the
tabernacle that he might answer every questioner. Also
Hos. iv. 6.

Novice .—Are all ignorant priefts to be rejected by the
Lord?

Mon\. —No, those who have not the opportunity for out¬
ward knowledge, let them have, as was said before, their loins
girded and their lights burning, that is, good works (Luke
xii. 35). Moreover if they are not able to give light to those
committed to their charge by preaching, let them be zealous
to kindle them to divine love by the example of a good life.
When the priest goes to the altar of God, he ought to wash
his face, his mouth and his hands, that is from the Stains of
thought, word and deed in the brazen bowl which Moses
made from the mirrors of the women. The water Stands for
contrition, the hand-cloth for confession. What he washes
with the one, he wipes with the other. The mirrors of the
women are the examples of saintly souls, such as the faith
of Abraham, the obedience of Isaac, the gentleness of Jacob,
the courtesy of Moses, the humility of David, the zeal of
Elijah, the piety of Josiah, the chaStity of Daniel. If the
prieSf reckon himself among these, he will easily recognise
his own imperfedl aftions.

Novice .—You have shown me what ought to be the quality
of the celebrant ; now will you show me wherein lies the
power of celebrating.

Mon \.—I will tell you in a few words all that I have read
or heard about this.


CHAPTER XXVII.

What is needed in the prieH to perform the ail of
consecration.

Three things are required in the prieft that he may be able
to consecrate and these are ritual, words and intention. A


The Dialogue on Miracles

fourth may be said to be the material substance of bread and
wine.

Novice .—Supposing that after the blessing of the bread
there is found to be no wine in the chalice through some
carelessness ?

Mon \.—According to the cuStom of our Order we are com¬
pelled to believe that the body of ChriSt is present, because
we do not repeat the blessing of the bread but only of the
chalice. My opinion is that this is the case if the prieSt after
uttering those words “ This is my body,” should Slop or be
unable to proceed to the blessing of the chalice. Mafter Peter
the precentor and his followers do not agree with this and
say that the transubStantiation of the bread into the body of
Chrift cannot take place until those other words are uttered
“ This is my blood etc.” Many docftors seem to contradict
this in their writings and so also do the words of the gospel.
FirSt the Lord blessed the bread offering it to His disciples
as no longer bread but His body. And later when the supper
was over, after an interval he blessed the cup. Who would
dare to say that Christ’s body was not there until the blessing
of the cup ? No one in the world.

Novice .—Is the blood of ChriSt present in such a case?

Mon\.— Yes, but in the body, not in the chalice. For
Christ’s body is not bloodless, nor is it there by any change
because before the utterance of the words “ This is my blood,”
the wine is not yet changed into blood.

Novice .—Give me an illustration to show how the body
of ChriSt is present under the form of bread before the
blessing of the cup.

Monl ^.—In the second chapter above you have an illustra¬
tion in the vision of Gotteschalk, who, as soon as these words
were uttered, “ This is my body,” beheld ChriSt in human
form.

Novice .—If the whole ChriSt is there immediately, it seems
to me superfluous to consecrate the cup.

Mon —The church celebrates the sacrament under both
species that the reception of the body and soul in ChriSt and
the deliverance of both may be signified to us. And there is
nq less reality in either nor is the sacrament less effectually


> 3 °


The Body and Blood of Christ


received under either form. For there is the same principle
according to Hilarius in the body of Chrift as was previously
in manna ; of which he who collected more than he needed,
had none over, and he who had gathered less, found he had
no lack.

Novice .—I am clear now about these things.

Monl (.—Having premised this, it will not be without profit
to see how much grace and glory are deserved by priefts who
worthily perform the aft of consecration.


CHAPTER XXVIII.

Of a priefi in Hcmmenrodc in whose hands Chriit
was seen during the canon.

A certain aged priest in Hemmenrode named Henry died
a few months ago, a holy and juft man, who for many years
had been sacriftan in that monaftery. When he was cele¬
brating one day at the altar of S. John the Baptift in the
chapel of the lay-brothers, one of them who was present,
saw the Saviour in human form in the hands of the prieft,
though he himself saw him not. One of the elder brethren
of that house told me this ftory.


CHAPTER XXIX.

Of the abbot Herman, in whose hands Henry of
Hart saw Chris] in the mass.

When the lord abbot Herman was one day saying mass
in the same monaftery and, I think, at the same altar, Henry,
a lay-brother of Hart, of whom I have often spoken above,


I 3 I


The Dialogue on Miracles


at the canon he saw a dove of wonderful whiteness situng
close to the chalice. Also before reception, leaving the hands
of the abbot it was seen to go up to the top of the cross. Then
presently coming down under the appearance of bread He
was received by the priefl. And from this vision we gather
that the true body of the Lord lies beneath the species of
bread and that this ineffable transubffantiation is wrought
by the power of the Holy Spirit. Herman however did not
see the vision.

Novice .—I have no doubt about the case of ill-living prieffs,
but why good priefts do not see Him whom they believe to
be present on the altar, I greatly wonder.

Mon \.—So that their merit may be greater by not seeing
and yet believing. Gregory says that that faith has no merit
to which human reason offers experience. When this same
Herman was living as prior in Hemmenrode and was praying
during matins to God one night that He would deign to
reveal to him something about his spiritual condition, as
soon as he sat down and closed his eyes, a certain one who
was present with him, pointed out the tray on which silver
cups are wont to be carried by communicants. And he, as
he told me, remembering his prayer said within himself:
“ How can this vision of a humble tray have anything to do
with our spiritual condition? ” Inmmediately he lifted up
the upper cover whose top ended in the shape of a knot and
lo! he saw the pyx containing the Lord’s body hanging from
that knot by a golden chain and forthwith the vision dis¬
appeared. And the prior recognised that it had been the
Lord’s body which was continually enclosed by memory in
the covering of his heart and he hoped from this that his
condition was less despicable than before in the eyes of the
Lord. How greatly grace is increased in priests who celebrate
rightly and how their merit grows, is shown by the following
visions.


132


The Body and Blood of Christ
CHAPTER XXX.

Of a pact l who during the canon was lifted up above
the ground.

I know a priest of our Order who received from the Lord
this favour that every time he celebrates the mass with devotion
he feels himself raised up in the air to the height of a foot
from the beginning of the canon until the reception of the
sacrament.

And no wonder, for devotion is like a fire and ever tends
upwards. Nor is it much to be wondered at if sometimes it
draws with it its outward shell. Certainly the mind is its
inward shell or domicile. And it has the greater power over
it because it raises it to heaven. And when I found so great
grace in another priest, who was his dear friend, I wished to
know the truth and not without fear I began to make enquiries
of him about what I had heard. And he immediately covered
with shame yet confessed that it was so because he was unwil¬
ling to put me to confusion. And whenever he celebrated
hurriedly and without real devotion or when he was diffracted
by the noise of the people, the aforesaid grace was taken from
him.

Novice .—I gather from this of how great importance is the
complete silence of those present that the prieSl may find full
devotion in saying mass in silence.

Mon \.—You are quite right. If a prieSt under the law
entered into the holy of holies to pray for the people and
all the people, as we read in the case of Zacharias, flood with¬
out for the hour of incense that they might not interrupt him
in his prayers, how much more ought the prieft of grace who
is offering to the Father not any corruptible sacrifice for one
nation, but the Son for the salvation of the whole world, to
receive at the altar the greatefl peace and silence ? Wherefore
also the blessed Ambrose used to warn the congregation after
the gospel that they should restrain themselves from any
coughing or any movement at the time of the canon. But
how devotion is like fire and how it tends upwards, as I said
before, will be shown by the following vision.


133


The Dialogue on Miracles


CHAPTER XXXI.

Of Ulrich, a mon\ of Villers.

Two years ago a monk named Ulrich died in the convent
of Villers in Brabant. He was a young man of a well-regu¬
lated life and full of grace in manner and virgin both in mind
and body. Fifteen days before his death he was celebrating
mass in Namur, as the prior of that place told me, when a
venerable recluse named Uda to whom God often made many
revelations, saw a fiery ball over his head. He was at that
time maSter of a grange. Now when he felt sick and had
come to his laSt hour, and the abbot was away, one of the
bystanders said to him: “ Would you like to receive the lord
abbot now? ” “ Yes,” he replied : “ I want to see him very

much that he may be here to rejoice with me when I go to the
marriage supper.” And he went on: “ To-morrow you will
hold a feaSt for me, that is, two masses.” And this was done.
For while one mass was said in the convent after prime (for it
happened to be the firSt of October) he breathed forth his pure
soul which was carried by the angels into the heavenly bride-
chamber of the lamb and was brought to the embrace of the
bride-groom.

But three days later a mass was said solemnly for him in
the convent as he had foretold and he was buried. As Dom
William then prior and now abbot, of Villers, told me, he
could not discover even one mortal sin in his laSI general
confession. He had indeed been a youth of great hopes
having an angelic countenance, praiseworthy for his good
character and a native of Cologne. But I am not permitted
to give the name of that prieft, for he is a man of such great
holiness and held in such high eSeem, that if his name were
made known, you would consider it a sacrilege not to believe
his words.

Novice .—In respect of this vision I consider Ulrich was like
S. Martin on whose head too a globe of fire shone when he
was blessing the altar.

Mon \.—In both cases it was the sign of great devotion and
it was wrought by the Holy Spirit who appeared in fire above


>34


The Body and Blood of Christ


the heads of the apoSlles. Wherefore it is not without mean¬
ing that we are exhorted by the prieSf before the canon to lift
up our hearts.


CHAPTER XXXII.

Of a priell on whom the Lord bellowed so great
devotion that his belly burJl asunder as he was going
up to the altar.

I knew another prieSt there on whom, as he was going
to the altar, the Lord be Stowed such great devotion that his
belly was, as is written in Job, like new wine that has no
vent, but is ready to burSf new bottles and as he told me,
for he is Still alive, his devotion sometimes Stirred up such
violent emotion in his heart that his breaSt seemed ready to
burs'. He was compelled to restrain these emotions on
account of those present. What chains of sin are not broken
by impulses of this kind (Ps. cxv. 16, 17).

Novice .—I think that those that have so burning a heart
will sacrifice with pure hands.

Mon\.— -The following examples will show that prieSts
ought to have not only pure hands at the time of sacrifice,
but also shining hands at the time of sacrifice.


CHAPTER XXXIII.

Of Richmude who at the elevation saw the hoi!
transparent as a crySlal.

One day a prieSf at Mount S. Walpurgis was celebrating
mass when a nun named Richmude whom I mentioned in


‘35


The Dialogue on Miracles


the seventh chapter of the eighth book, at the elevation saw
the hofl shine as brightly and as transparently as a cryflal
lit up by the rays of the sun. Nor did the fingers of the
prieft with which he was holding it, anyway interfere with
the brightness of the hoft, because the fingers were granted
the same property of transparency, and yet I believe transub-
flantiation had not yet taken place. The name of that prieft
was William, young indeed as far as age went, but living
under rule and having taken the vows in a chapel near Neuss.
The nun told his vision about Richmude with her own lips
to our sub-prior Girlach and he told it to me.

Novice. —If such brightness was to be seen in the bread,
which, as you think, had not yet been blessed, surely the
splendour in the adtual body of the Lord muft be great indeed.

Mon\. —-The following vision will show you this.


CHAPTER XXXIV.

Also of the same priest's devotion in communicating
and the light which he saw over the altar at the
canon.

When the same nun Richmude, as she told me with her
own lips, was standing in the aforesaid church at morning
mass, she saw a very great brightness surround the sacrament
during the canon. Thinking at firft that a sunbeam was
lighting up the altar through the window she drew nearer
and lo this light came from the splendour of Chrifl’s body
and not from the light of the sun, for at this time the sun
was not yet risen. Now of this nun herself and her devotion
towards the sacrament I shall soon tell you a wonderful tale.
When she drew near to the altar to communicate sometimes
before reception and sometimes afterwards, she slipped but
was upheld and drawn forward experiencing now an ecstasy
and now a faintness of the whole body (Jer. xx. 9). When

136


The Body and Blood of Christ


the priefls saw this, they were troubled and the bystanders
were full of wonder. Let what I have said be enough.
Would you like now to hear something about those who
approach worthily and yet are not priefts?

Novice. —I very much desire to hear.

Mon\. —How much glory and delight they win from God,
how much grace and Strength, how much health and honour,
who communicate, I will show you by various illuStrauons.


CHAPTER XXXV.

Of a nun of Brabant to whom ChriJl gave the sacra¬
ment with his own hands.

It is not yet two years since a certain nun in Brabant named
Uda of a town which is called Torembais, being eagerly
desirous to communicate very humbly and insistently begged
her parish prieSt to give her this favour. But she met with
a repulse because he said he ought not to communicate lay-
women at their pleasure, but only at fixed times, whereupon
she shed tears and loudly lamented. The great High Priest
regarding her eagerness did not allow her long to be defrauded
of her desire. That same night when she was lying awake
in her bed occupying the time in prayer, the Saviour Himself
entered her room in great splendour carrying in His own
hands the pyx in which His body was accuSlomed to be
placed in the church. Also around Him there was a wonder¬
ful odour and a great gathering of angels who sang with all
their hearts the antiphon, Speciosus forma prae filiis hominum
etc., and while she was bewildered at being blessed with so
glorious a sight the Lord flood before her and said: “ Because
the priefl refused you My body, I will give it you with My
own hands.” And this He did taking a wafer from the pyx
and so departed. There was also another nun, her com¬
panion, who was lying awake in the same cell and she saw


'37


The Dialogue on Miracles


everything which I have related. And since the other was
ignorant of this and thinking that she had been overcome
by sleep, she asked her in the morning whether she had seen
anything. She replied : “ Yes, indeed. I saw such and such
things happen to you.” Then being assured of the vision
she immediately went to the church, drew near to the altar
and asked the prieSt in certain ambiguous words what he
was wont to do with the Lord's body or where he generally
put it away. And when he showed her the place, she went
on : “ Oh, if I might be allowed to flay here always and to
look at this holy place! ” And she besought him to open
the pyx for her. And when this was done, she said to the
prieSt: “ Do you know, sir, how many wafers you placed in
here? ” For that is the name which they use for the sacra¬
ment. And when the prieff answered: “ Yes, certainly,”
the woman continued: “ I beg you to count them.” And
after doing this and finding one of them missing and being
almoSt driven out of his mind he sank down and wept, for
all the faftenings of the pyx as well as of the cover were found
to be intafl. Then the woman comforted him and told
him what she had seen and what had been done with regard
to the wafer, advising him in future never to repel so earnest
a desire which sought so great a favour. This Story was
told me by our fellow monk, John, who came at the time
from the aforesaid town and knew exadtly what had happened
there.

Novice.—Blessed be the glory of the Lord from His Holy
place (Ez. iii. 12).

Mon \.—There is no less glory in the following Story even
if it is not so striking.


CHAPTER XXXVI.

Also of the widow Hildegund who received the
sacrament from Chrifl Himself.

In the village of Liblar which is two miles from Cologne,
there lived a widow honourable and religious, Hildegund by

138


The Body and Blood of Christ


name, a friend of Dom Henry, our abbot. She departed
not from the temple in the manner of those widows of the
gospel serving God with faff and prayer. Now she had a
young soldier son named William who paid her small tribute
of respect, love or comfort. And although he was rich, he
forgot his natural affection and suffered her to be in want,
embittering her in many ways (Eccles. iii. 18). She suffered
similar treatment from her daughter-in-law. And when she
grew ill and had now come to the end of her life, she said
to her hand-maiden : “ Bring the priest that I may make my
communion.” The girl took these words of hers to her
daughter-in-law saying: “ My mistress asks for a priest.” To
whom she replied in anger : “ This very week she received
the sacrament and nevertheless she seems to be ftill living on.”
And she went on saying indignantly : “ Go, call him.” And
when he arrived with the body of the Lord, the sick woman
said: “Why have you come, sir? ” And when the priest
answered : “ To give you Holy Communion,” she replied :
“My Lord, whose body I asked for, has already been here
juft now and communicated me with His own hand. Here¬
after I will not receive it from any man.” And indeed after
a few days she died. As it is written: “ Whoso doth not
honour his father and mother, shall have no joy in his sons,”
the Lord the same week took away William’s firft-born, and
the reft of his children, when they were scarcely twelve years
old, died all one after another within a short time.


CHAPTER XXXVII.

Of a lay-brother of Livonia who was very eager to
make his communion and found the host in his
mouth.

A very glorious ftory was told us by Dom Bernard, abbot
of Lippa in Livonia, who is now bishop in the same place.


139


The Dialogue on Miracles


A certain lay-brother, if I remember rightly, who had lately
embraced the faith and saw the monks making their com¬
munion, knew that it was by no means possible for him to
do the same yet, and he flood opposite the altar and sighed
in longing to communicate. And lo ! the gracious Lord
condescended to come down by the sacrament from the altar
into his mouth without the help of the priest. And he
immediately opened his mouth and showed the host there and
manifefled the cause of so much favour and threw all those
who were present into a bewilderment of wonder. For they
found that this wafer was wanting on the altar. A like
thing to this happened two years ago which was more
wonderful as it touched human senses more profoundly.


CHAPTER XXXVIII.

Also of Er\enbald of Burbay to whom the same
thing happened when he was refused the sacrament
owing to the filling of a kinsman.

Erkenbald of Burbay, a powerful noble, was so great a
lover of juflice that he had no respetfts of persons in the
sentences he pronounced. When this man was grievously
ill and lying upon his bed, he heard a tumult and the cries
of women in the next room. And when he had made
enquiries about the cause, none of those {landing round him
ventured to tell him the truth. Then he sent for one of his
servants and said : “ I order you under pain of losing your
eyes to tell me the simple truth.” And he in terror answered :
“ Sir, my esquire, your nephew wished to assault a woman
by force and.this was the reason of the shouting.” At which
he was much diflurbed and said to the soldier: “ Go and
hang him.” The soldiers pretended obedience, but after
they had gone out, they said to one another : “ If we put
this young noble to death and our mailer, as everyone thinks


140


The Body and Blood of Christ


should die soon afterwards, we shall be punished by death
or banishment.” Nevertheless they told everything to the
young man and advised him to keep out of his uncle’s sight
for the present, and after a few hours they went to their
lord and told him they had fulfilled his orders. But five
days later the young man thinking his uncle had forgiven
his fault or forgotten it looked in at the open door. And
when the sick man saw him, he called to him with gentle
words and bade him sit down beside him. Then putting one
arm round his neck and secretly drawing out his dagger with
the other hand, he Slabbed him in the throat and so killed
him. They carried him away accompanied by the tears and
grief of many and the whole province was Struck with terror.
But Erkenbald’s sickness grew worse and worse so that he
sent for the bishop beseeching that the holy sacrament might
be brought to him. On his arrival Erkenbald confessed all
his sins with many tears and heartfelt contrition, but said
nothing about the killing of the young man. Whereupon
the bishop in aSlonishment asked him: “ Why are you silent
about the murder which you committed upon your nephew ? ”
And when the other said: “ Was that a murder? ’’ he went
on: “ Yes and a very cruel one.” Then said Erkenbald:
“ I do not consider it a sin, nor do I ask God to forgive me
for it.” And when the bishop answered: “ I will not give
you the body of Chrifl, unless you confess this murder,” the
noble continued: “ Be assured, sir, that I did not kill him
for any grudge or movement of anger but only from the fear
of God and my zeal for juflice. Never could anyone love
his nephew better than I loved that young man. If you
refuse to give me the Lord’s body, I commend my body and
soul to His keeping.” He said and did this for example
to others that he might not seem to do anything derogatory
to juflice and judgment. And scarcely had the bishop left
the house, when behold the sick man called him back saying:
“ Come back, lord bishop, come back. Look and see if you
have in the pyx ChriSl’s body.” And when he had done
this and found nothing in it, the other added: “ You see
what you denied me, He Himself has given me.” And he
showed the hofl in his mouth (Wis. i. I, 2). And the bishop


The Dialogue on Miracles


in terror spread everywhere the news of so great a miracle
and amongfl others told it to some abbots of our Order, who
lafl year related it in the general chapter, all of them giving
praise to God who alone doth wondrous things.

Novice. —This ftory rejoiceth me greatly.

Mon \.—Hear now how great material sweetness there is
in the body of Christ.


CHAPTER XXXIX.

Of the material sweetness which a nun perceived
in the Holy Communion.

I knew a nun of our Order, who has obtained this favour
from the Lord, that whenever she makes her communion, she
tables as much sweetness in the sacred body, as if she had
received honey. And all that day she has a tafle in her mouth
not of bread, but, as I said, of honey, especially before taking
any material food, with a honey-sweet flow of saliva. And
this is not to be wondered at, for we read of manna that it
had a tafte very like that of honey. Now that nun is a
virgin of venerable life, whose name I do not mention because
she is ffill alive and does not wish it to be made known.


CHAPTER XL.

Also of the sweetness after Holy Communion
experienced by Alice the abbess of MiinHer.

A similar grace perhaps even greater I have heard was
given to the lady Alice the firfl abbess of Munfter, a town of
Weflphalia. As often as she received from the prieff the


I 4 2


The Body and Blood of Christ

Lord’s body, she perceived between her teeth no solidity of
bread nor flavour of bread, but the sacrament itself like a
honeycomb passed through her throat without any chewing,
so that she was inwardly filled with wonderful sweetness.
When she died Dom Florentius, the abbot of S. Marienfeld,
who had been her spiritual father and confessor, promised
to all those who came together after her funeral that they
should have the same favour.

Novice .—If from the body of a lion, as we read in Judges,
sweetness came forth, 1 do not wonder if it came forth from
the body of Chrifl, who is the lion of the tribe of Judah.

Mon \.-—You have spoken well. What is said of the spouse
in the song of songs seems to agree well with this blessed
one (Cant. iv. n).

Novice .—What do you think was the reason for that sweet¬
ness and melting in the sacrament ?

Mon \.—The heat of perfect charity with which she was
boiling, for although she was naturally always pale and
emaciated chiefly from faffing and toil, it happened as often
as she made her communions, that she was so kindled with
love, that her face shone with a colour as of fire. We read
in Exodus that the manna melted away as soon as the sun
rose. The manna with its whiteness and sweetness repre¬
sents Chrifl (John vi. 51, Ps. lxxviii. 25). The sun which
gives warmth and life represents perfect charity. If then the
manna melted when the sun arose, it is no wonder if each
archetype grows sweeter and melts under the burning of
charity. And although in the holy communion material
sweetness of this kind, or melting be rarer, it is not however
more health-giving than that sweetness or melting which
takes place spiritually in the soul. Well had he perceived
the sweetness of Chrifl (Ps. xxv. 7, cxix. 103 and Cant. v. 6).

Novice .—What you say pleases me.

Mon \.—The body of the Lord is the hidden manna, having
in it every delightful thing and sweetness of every pleasant
savour.

Novice .—If there is so great grace in the sacraments of
the altar why do some communicate more seldom than others?

Mon \.—Some keep away because they judge themselves


! 43


The Dialogue on Miracles


in their humility to be unworthy ; others careless, but owing
to the biting of conscience do not dare to come. The firSt
communicate spiritually, the others deprive themselves of
great grace. Some there are who both frequently communicate
and also show themselves worthy of so great grace ; these are
blessed indeed. Let us grant that if two are equal in charity
and one of them approaches simply to the body of Christ but
the other also in simplicity of heart omits to do so, in Him
who communicates, I believe charity is intended, and there
soon arises a difference of merit.

Novice. —How do you prove that?

Mon\. —The manna did not fall without dew, so neither
is the body of ChriSt received by the good without increase of
grace. How good it is for the good to make a communion
I will show you by the two following examples.


CHAPTER XLI.

Of a lay-brother who when about to ma\e his com¬
munion saw the blood of ChriSl appearing to drip
into the chalice.

In Hemmenrode, of which I have many memories, one
of the prieSts of that monastery wrote to me, that on a certain
Chriffmas festival, the brethren were making their prepara¬
tion for the holy communion. And when they reached the
point of receiving the pax, after the Agnus dei, and had
prostrated themselves according to cuStom, one of the brothers
saw the boy Jesus, not indeed as an infant, but as if He had
already suffered upon the cross, and all His wounds were
dripping blood all of which was received into a holy chalice
held below them.

Whereupon the brother regarding himself as unworthy to
receive such tremendous sacraments went across to the upper
Stalls, and when the others signed to him to proStrate himself,

144


The Body and Blood of Christ


he signed to them that he did not intend to go on to the
reception. But when prime was over and the others had gone
to the chapter, he went to pray, as some often did. And
coming to the altar he made an intention in his prayer towards
the holy cross, and the time seemed short to him owing to
the greatness of his devotion. While he prolonged his prayer
and did not notice that it was time to go away, there appeared
to him the Blessed Mother of God and condescended to speak
with him. “ Why,” she asked, “ did you not receive to-day
the blessed body and blood of my beloved Son.” And he
not with his mouth, but with his heart cried out that he was
unworthy. To which the Blessed Virgin replied: “ You
think yourself unworthy, and who do you think can be worthy
of so great a thing. Therefore I will pardon you the offence ;
but be careful that you do not offend again in the same way.”
And so being intent upon his prayer and delighted with the
converse of the Blessed Virgin, he was wrapped in ecstasy,
but at length came back to himself and hurried after the others
to join the chapter. As he was going there met him several
brethren who were going about attending to the sacred things
of the altar. The chapter however was finished, and he
thinking that he had plenty of time to go to the chapter,
continued praying ; but a monk coming in rang the bell for
the third hour. Then at length realising what was going on
about him, he asked this monk to absolve him from his fault
in having thus kept away.


CHAPTER XLII.

Of a lay-brother who saw the prieSl place a very
beautiful child in the mouth of another lay-brother.

After this a certain brother went to holy communion on
Maunday Thursday. He was evidently in very great languor
and diffidence, so much so that even if it had been possible,

H5


The Dialogue on Miracles


he did not wish to be present at the holy communion. He
went therefore to the altar, or rather in going he withdrew
himself as it were, so that he became troublesome to those
who were following, and they pushed him forward. When
they arrived at the presbytery Steps, the lay-brother saw another
brother following of whom we have written above. And a
certain vision came to his memory which he had learnt from
this other, and suddenly being transformed into another man,
he went forward breathing heavily and panting, kindled with
a spirit of judgment and eagerness and burning like a furnace,
so that he was scarcely able to retrain himself. And whilst
he was in such a State of mind and had now hastened eagerly
towards the altar, that other following him, saw what
happened and conjectured the State of mind of his inner man
from the outward signs. And as he knelt down that other
who was behind him saw a moSt beautiful child taken down
from the altar by the hands of the prieSt and placed in the
mouth of that brother. And when he saw it, he proStrated
himself on the ground and adored Him whom he had seen.
But some were disturbed by this indulgence to that brother,
because it seemed to have been out of place. And one sum¬
moned him in the hearing of many, threatening to denounce
him. But he committed his cause to Him who knew every¬
thing, that he might be kept from this shame. And He
breathed into him a spirit of quietness, and he was not
disturbed. Further he who had received and carried the child
Jesus, went and returned in the shape of dancing lightning.
He walked or rather was carried in the joy of his heart, in
the eagerness of the burning spirit, and reached such a con¬
dition of ecSlasy that as though he had loSt his senses he was
not aware of himself, and so with difficulty returned to his
Stall without falling. Whereupon, he kept its secret in every
way from that other though often and much besought until
he was compelled at length to disclose the matter to him who
had conjeffured his condition of ecSlasy. And so at length
they told each other by mutual agreement what they had seen
and experienced.

Novice .—If those who withdrew themselves are thus
rebuked by the Blessed Mother of God ; if the Son of God

146


The Body and Blood of Christ


Himself is so truly and so gloriously received under the same
sacrament, and from that reception grace is given, henceforth I
will communicate more frequently.

Mon \.—The following examples will show how manifold
is the grace in the Holy EuchariSt, and how manifold its
power and healing.


CHAPTER XLIII.

Of Maurice the bishop of Paris who at his end
recovered his senses by means of the Holy
Communion.

Master Maurice the bishop of Paris was so grievously sick
before his death, that certain material passed into his brain
and deprived him of his senses. While in this condition he
eagerly demanded the Lord’s body, but those around him
did not dare to give it him because of the failing of his senses,
and so they arranged with the prieSt to bring an unblessed
wafer. And when he arrived with much reverence as was
becoming in one who was about to give the communion to
the bishop, as soon as the prieSt crossed the theshold, the
bishop cried out in a clear voice : “ Take it away, take it
away, it is not the Lord God.” For God had taken the cloud
from his hearing so that he understood what was being done
around him. The prieSt being Struck with bewilderment
as well as some of the others, went away and came back bring¬
ing the true body. And the bishop devotedly received it,
adoring with Catholic prayers and with many words of
compunction, and with the body he received back his senses
perfectly which had been taken from him to the greater
glory of God. And so after making a good confession he
departed to the Lord, full of faith and charity.


147


The Dialogue on Miracles


CHAPTER XLIV.

Of a little boy who perceived that an unconsecrated
wafer was not the body of the Lord.

A similar thing happened to a certain little boy, as was
told me by his blood brothers Ludolph and Heydenric, fellow
monks of ours. When he was ill, inspired by the Holy
Spirit, he asked that Chrift’s body might be given to him.
And when his parents restrained him, he cried out loudly:
“ Give me the body of the Lord.” They told the parish
prieft what he had said. And he answered that it was not
safe to give the Lord’s body to so young a boy, who does
not understand the meaning of it, and so he took to him an
unconsecrated wafer and when he was offering it to him
and saying: “ Lo, here is the Lord’s body ” ; that the Lord
might perfeft praise from the mouth of the child, and might
destroy the unfaith of many, who have wrong beliefs about
this sacrament, he inspired the boy to make reply : “ Why
do you wish to deceive me ? This which you offer me is not
the Lord’s body,” and the priest wondering at this saying, and
judging that the boy was divinely inspired, brought him the
holy communion, which the lad received with great devotion.

Novice. —In my opinion the eager desire for the Eucharifl
was the reason why both of these merited the spirit of prophecy.

Mon\. —Of so great value is the desire for it, that some
have even been illuminated with revelations by it. Here is
an example.


CHAPTER XLV.

Of a lay-brother who in his desire to communicate,
won for himself the spirit of prophecy.

A certain lay-brother of Marienfield, on a certain festival,
begged from his mafter permission to go to the monastery

148


The Body and Blood of Christ


to communicate, but he would not let him go, and while the
others were going, he remained behind in great sadness. For
he had a very eager desire to make his communion. That
night and all the next day every thing which was done
spiritually within the monastery, was divinely revealed to him.
And although he was absent in body yet he was present in
spirit, and communicated spiritually even if not sacramentally.
When the brethren returned, he told them firft who celebrated
high mass, next who read the epiflle and who the gospel ;
likewise the monks who sang the responses and what lessons
were read at evensong, he told them all to their amazement.

Novice. —From this I feel flrongly that they who hinder
so wholesome a desire in others, do not do well.

Mon\. —That is very true as the following story will show.


CHAPTER XLVI.

Of a religious woman who when she was refused
communion perceived a great sweetness in her
throat, at the same time noticing a sweet odour
which came to her from afar off.

A certain religious maiden but secular, begged the Lord’s
body from her prieft and he angrily replied with some indig¬
nation : “You women are always wanting to make your
communions according to your own pleasure.” And he did
not give it her. She however through the whole mass and
long afterwards felt so great a sweetness in her mouth and
throat, that she had no doubt that the giver of all sweetness
was present. This virgin on a certain day saw the Lord’s
body being brought from afar, and perceived a wonderful
odour proceeding from it. And she noticed this all the more
plainly as she drew nearer to the sacrament. Gerlach our
sub-prior told me this, saying that he had heard it from the
lips of the aforesaid virgin.


M9


The Dialogue on Miracles


Novice .—Since the Lord’s body is of such sweetness and
such fragrance, I wonder why bodies are not refreshed by
the eating of it alone.

Mon \.—Although the Lord’s body is received with the
mouth, yet it is much rather food for the soul than for the
body and it is not incorporated with us but incorporates us
with Christ. Nevertheless that the body of the communicant
is refreshed by it I will show you by a double example.


CHAPTER XLVII.

Of a woman who lived on the body of ChriSl alone.

A certain woman as was told me by our monk Rener
formerly scholafticus of S. Andrew’s in Cologne, was
accuftomed owing to her great devodon to communicate very
frequently. And the more she began to long after this
heavenly food so much the more did she begin to dislike
bodily food. And when she noticed this, she gained permis¬
sion from her prieft to communicate every Lord’s Day. And
that life-giving food gave her so much strength that she
waited till the following Sunday without any bodily hunger.
After continuing this for a long rime she confessed to the
aforesaid prieft: the grace that had been given her. Now
he told so wonderful an event to his bishop, and the bishop
fearing that there might be some deception in the reason for
it, answered like a wise man : “ When she next comes to
you, give her an unconsecrated wafer instead of the Lord’s
body and in this way you will find the truth of this Story very
soon. When the prieft did this, the woman not knowing
that she was being tefted, as soon as she was at home, began
to be so desperately hungry, that she thought she would die
if she did not immediately get something to eat. But firft
she ran to her prieft thinking that this hunger was due to
her sins, and threw herself at his feet and with many tears


150


The Body and Blood of Christ


explained to him how the grace which had been beStowed
upon her had now been withdrawn. And when he heard
this, he rejoiced greatly and gave thanks to God who alone
doth wondrous things, and gave her the true body of ChriSf.
And when the bishop heard this from the prieSl, he too
glorified God.

Novice .—This is a marvellous Story you tell me.

Mon\. —If Elijah the prophet could go in the Strength of
barley bread for forty days and forty nights to Horeb the
mount of God, why should you wonder if this woman could
live in full health on the wafer of life? Manifold is the
Strength which comes from it, not only of soul but also of
body. You have another example quoted above about the
virgin of Quida, who ate nothing except the body of Christ
besides a grape which she sucked. You will find this Story
in the twentieth chapter of the 7th book. Listen now to a
Story which is full of glory.


CHAPTER XLVIII.

Of a tonight who triumphed in battle by virtue of
the Holy Communion.

Ludwig count of Lootz, father of the present count, held
his county from Renthicke and on a certain high-born knight
inflicted many wrongs in his absence, by usurping his
property, and by plundering men who belonged to his county
and when the count complained of this to all his friends one
day he said to a noble who held property of him : “ Why do
you not capture him for me as a robber? ” He answered:
“ I could take him well enough if 1 could be sure that you
would not do him a bodily injury.” And when he received
his promise, he captured the knight, but the count, by an
ingenious evasion of his promise immediately ordered a grave
to be dug in which he had the knight wrapt in soft clothes


The Dialogue on Miracles


and placed without doing him any injury ; and so slew him
by burying him alive. But immediately his kindred were
enraged and went to the emperor Frederick, the grandfather
of the present emperor, and made their charge againft the
aforesaid nobleman with loud outcries, saying that the man
had betrayed the knight to the count because he had been
bribed by him. And then the emperor grew very angry,
and was ready to condemn an innocent man, but an honourable
knight went up to the tribune and sought and obtained
permission to speak: “ Sir,” he said, “ you have scarcely
heard the half of what is to be said. If the knight himself
were present he would perhaps fully clear himself.” And
when the emperor replied: “ You are free to go and fetch
him,” the knight went and fetched the other knight. And
when he had fully cleared himself through his advocate, the
emperor replied at the instigation of the adversaries: “These
are only words which will not gain immunity for him.” The
knight who had brought the other into court opposed this
and said: “ Sir, if you punish him, your word will never
be believed in future.” The emperor was softened and went
on: “ Let him go away now a free man, but if he comes
after this into my hands, or into those of my servants, he
shall pay the penalty for his treachery.” And when the
nobleman reached the gate of the palace, remembering how
long were the arms of kings, he flood Still and thought awhile,
and then went back to the tribunal and said: “ Sir 1 cannot
escape from your hands ; only I take courage from my inno¬
cence and from the mercy of God, so that I am at once ready
to make my defence according to juStice. And since I am
of noble birth I claim my right.” The emperor replied:
“ Now you speak like an honeSt man.” On the other side
they sought out a very powerful knight to meet him in single
combat. On the appointed day, the nobleman after making
his confession received the Lord’s body. And so putting
his trufl in that sacrament, he entered the lifts to fight with
his adversary. And when that man, being very Strong,
attacked him and drove him before him, they came together
in the hearing of the emperor and of his princes sitting round
him, the fighting man cried out in a loud voice to the knight:


152


The Body and Blood of Christ


“ Tell me, have you eaten anything to-day,” when he
replied: “ Yes, I have eaten the body of the Lord,” that
wretched man added: “ Even if you had eaten the devil,
this day, 1 will lay you low.” But that the faithful Lord
might show the Strength of His sacrament. He took away
the Strength of the blasphemer immediately after his
blasphemous words and so Strengthened His knight that the
other behaved before him like a boy and could not Stand up
to him. And so having obtained the viStory by feeding upon
the Lord’s body, the faithful knight returned in freedom
with much glory to his own lands. This was told me hy
our fellow-monk Theodoric, formerly count in Witten, who
was present at the combat and saw and heard all that has
been written here. So you see that the holy communion
means safety both for body and soul.


CHAPTER XL 1 X.

Of a \night who when hanged could not die until
he received C hr ill's body.

A certain noble knight who held both lands and a caSfle
was accused by many before the aforesaid emperor Frederick
that he had laid the province waSfe. And when he had often
summoned him to appear but he did not come, at laSl, he
proscribed him and ordered his own people to arreSl him.
And while he lay in hiding and yet none the less continued
his plundering, he was by chance captured by a certain officer
and was hanged on a gallows according to the orders of the
emperor. Three days afterwards a knight passing by that
way saw him and said to his servant: “My God what a
splendid man that was.” Then the servant answered : “ He
was indeed a nobleman and your kinsman.” Then they
drew near to take him down and bury him. Then he called
out from the gallows to them: “ Take me down for I am


153


The Dialogue on Miracles


Still alive,” and when they thought that it was his ghoSt, he
added: “ Don’t be afraid, because I am a Christian.” But
when taken down he said as follows: “ Sinner that I am, I
have paid a little worship to God, for which he has had pity
on me. I have been accustomed to say to the Holy Trinity
every day three pater-noSters and the same number of prayers
for pardon preceded by the angelic salutation, besides five
prayers with five pardons and an Ave Maria to the five
wounds of ChriSt. And in the same way one prayer i.e. a
pater-noSter to the angel to whom I am entrusted. Also,
in the same way one to the body of ChriSt which every day
is sacrificed through the whole world, so that I might deserve
to be fortified so far by a viaticum at the end of my life. And
this the Lord will grant me by His mercy. Wherefore I
pray you will call to me a prieSt from whom I may receive
it.” And when the prieSt came, he made his confession and
communicated and soon after breathing out his spirit, he
departed in happiness to Him in whom he had been incor¬
porated. And they buried him in the cemetery and spread
everywhere the news of so great a miracle.

Novice. —From this I now see that holy communion is the
salvation both of the mind and body.

Mon\. —That it is the salvation of the mind you have an
example in the 16th chapter of the 2nd book, concerning the
soldier of Rheims who by eating Him was brought to peni¬
tence. That it is also the salvation of the body, not only the
present knight is an instance, who was kept alive by its power,
so that he did not die, but you will see it more plainly by the
following example.


CHAPTER L.

Of the maidservant of a priett who by means of the
Lord's body recovered her senses.

LaSt year in Witten a city of Westphalia when the maid¬
servant of the prieSt was going out of the house late one


154


The Body and Blood of Christ


night and saw the devil in the shape of one of her suitors,
being terrified at the sight of him, she crossed herself and
immediately the monfter disappeared. The devil appeared
again to her and said: “ If you had not made this sign, you
would not have got back to the house alive.” And when he
summoned her again and she refused to go out, he added :
“ Take off that cloak.” For it was of many colours. And
she discovering him both by his voice as well as by the horror
she felt, fell backwards, and completely loft her senses. But
the prieft put in her mouth as a remedy an unconsecrated
wafer, and when it did her no good, he wetted his finger
with his tongue and touched the real body of the Lord. And
when he had placed his finger in her mouth, immediately
she recovered her senses, regained her power of speech and
ftood up in full health. This ftory was told us by a certain
Premonftratensian canon, who asserted that he had been in
that city at the time. The aforesaid miracle I also heard
from an abbot of the Benedictine Order. Hear now how
much honour they gain who do honour to Chrift’s body.


CHAPTER LI.

Of a soldier who in the presence of the body of
Chrifl proslrated himself in the mud and did not
feel any filth of it.

During the rivalry between Philip and Otto, the lord
cardinal Wido, formerly Ciftercian abbot, being sent to
Cologne to confirm the eleftion of Otto, inftituted an excellent
cuftom there. For he ordered that at the elevation of the hoft
all the people in the church should proftrate themselves at
the sound of the bell and should so remain until the chalice
was blessed. He ordered further that whenever the Lord’s
body was to be taken to a sick man, the prieft should be
preceded by a scholar or bell-ringer, who should announce

155


The Dialogue on Miracles


its coming by a bell ; and so all the people both in the Streets
and houses at the time might adore the presence of ChriSL
And he told them a very wonderful happening at the same
time. A certain knight in France was so devout that when¬
ever he saw ChriSl’s body elevated or carried paSf, he proSlrated
himself and made his adoration. It happened that one day
he entered the city clothed in his moSt coStly garments and
when he found the Street in which he was riding to be
exceedingly muddy, he was suddenly confronted with the
Lord's body. And when he saw it, he deliberated for a while
secretly and said to himself: “ What are you going to do
now ? If you throw yourself down in this depth of mud, these
delicate garments of yours will be ruined, but if you do not
get down, your conscience will always accuse you of being
a transgressor of so excellent a cuStom.” Why say more?
Devotion prevailed, he leapt from his horse, threw himself
into the mud where on his bended knees and with upraised
hands, he adored the body of Chrift. And because the moil
gracious Lord not only rewards in the future those who do
honour to Him, but also, sometimes gives them back honour
in this present life, was so wrought by His power that not
a single speck of mud clung to his robes. Then remounting
his horse with much wonder and being marvellously
Strengthened in faith he gave glory to God. A similar thing
happened to a nun in our own province.

Novice. —I am greatly pleased to hear such miracles.

Mon\. —Know this also, that as the Lord repays with
honour those who do honour to His sacraments as we have
shown, so He sometimes brings confusion as a penalty in the
present life on those who blaspheme them.


CHAPTER LII.

Of heretics who Stole the Lord’s body in the churches
and how one of them was hanged for this.

It is not long since some heretics, under pretext of religion,
went into the diocese of Cologne and from several churches

156


The Body and Blood of Christ


Sole the Lord’s body. But for other portable property, such
as chalices, books or robes of the priefts, they cared not at
all. But one of them was caught in our province, and when
asked what he had done with the Lord’s body, he replied:
“ I threw it in the mud.” For this answer the wretched
fellow was hanged and went down into the sewer of hell.
But in the following synod it was laid down by the lord
bishop Engelbert that in all churches of his diocese the Lord’s
body should be kept under lock and key.

Novice .—Why do heretics so eagerly attack the sacrament ?

Monlf .—Because the faithful venerate it above all things,
that is why heretics hold the same sacrament in the greatest
abhorrence. I remember that I said many things in the 22nd
chapter of the fifth book, and perhaps I spoke too Strongly,
for I am afraid that some might be scandalised by what 1
said there ; but God is my witness that all I said was to the
glory of ChriSt and of the church, and to the confusion of
heretics.

Novice .—I confess that I am convinced how much grace
they deserve who communicate worthily ; now will you go
on to show me about those who consecrate unworthily.

Mon\. —FirSt, I will show you from the scriptures, how
perilously and how grievously those priefls sin who consecrate
unworthily.


CHAPTER LIII.

Of prieSis who consecrate unworthily.

As we read in the book of Kings, Uzzah the prieSf,
when the oxen kicked, Stretched out his hand to the Ark that
it might not fall, and immediately the Lord slew him for his
rashness. It is said that he had been with his wife that
night. If a prieft going to raise the figurative ark is punished
with death for this cause, what punishment do you think


157


The Dialogue on Miracles


the prieSts deserve if being adulterers and fornicators,
they touch the true body of Christ with defiled hands. If
John as said S. AuguStine had lived in a hermitage from his
youth up, and as he was sanctified even in the womb of his
mother did not dare to touch that tremendous Head of the
hoSt so revered by angels, how should you a polluted sinner
presume not only to touch but as it were to shut up and
imprison in a part of your defiled body I do not say the head
only, but the whole Chrift both God and man? I would
give you many other examples againft wicked prieSls but I
would rather give you examples which will edify you.


CHAPTER LIV.

Of a prieSl in Hadenmare who was seen to be
chewing coals when he received the sacrament.

In Hadenmare a town of the diocese of Treves when a
certain prieSl, who is Still alive, was saying mass, Theodoric
a monk of Eberbach, saw him chewing the blackeSl of coals
at the moment of reception. Now this Theodoric is a prieSt
of simple nature and upright and has been vouchsafed many
divine revelations. I was living laSt year with my abbot in
the same town ; for the house of Eberbach has a grange in
that town, and it looks to the aforesaid prieSl to supply
divine offices there ; the maSter of the grange told us saying :
“ I am obliged to give so much money to the aforesaid prieSl
that he may not negleCl the services ; for he is a man of
perverse and luxurious life, and will often celebrate three
masses in the day.” And the abbot replied : “ I would sooner
give him money not to celebrate For whoso eateth unworthily
eats and drinks to himself condemnation (i Cor. xi. 29).

Novice .—What is the meaning of his being seen to chew
coals ? Do then the wicked actually receive the Lord’s body ?

Monk -—Yes they receive it juSt as the good do, but only

158


The Body and Blood of Christ


sacramentally. Fire makes charcoal and charcoal which is
extindt is the fuel. For whoso handles and eats unworthily
the body of ChriSt, prepares for himself everlasting flames,
and unless he repents of so great a fault shall be for burning
and the fuel of eternal fire (Isa. ix. 5).


CHAPTER LV.

Of a Frisian priesl who trod upon the Lord’s body.

A certain religious prelate in the country of Friesland, told
me laSt year a very terrible thing about a priest. For his
hands were so tremulous that he could not receive the Lord’s
body except by means of a tube. One day the sacrament
fell from his hands to the ground and fearing that he might
be seen by someone who would make known his fault, fearing
indeed the authorities of the church more than his own soul,
he is said to have trodden it under foot.

Novice. —In all the suffering of ChriSt I have not read
any instance of such contempt.

Mon\. —That is why Augustine says upon that passage
they gave me gall to eat (Ps, lxix. 22), of those who crucified
Him, they are like these who receive and consecrate unworthily
he says. For those who despised ChriSt when reigning in
the heavens sin more grievously than those who crucified Him
when He was walking upon the earth. And that He is
trodden underfoot by them, he says in another place: “ He
treads Christ underfoot who sins deliberately, and he who
receives Him unworthily.” It was for excesses of this kind
that during our time Frisia was moft grievously Stricken, as I
remember I said in the third chapter of the 7th book, where
I spoke of the boxer who Struck the body of ChriSt from the
hands of the prieSt.

Novice. —I think that if wicked prieSts really believed that
Christ’s body was present on the altar they would never dare
such things.


•59


The Dialogue on Miracles


Mon^.—Some believe and some do not. To say no more
about the wicked I will give you an example about good
priefls.


CHAPTER LVI.

Of Peter who believed that the blessed sacrament
only, and no reality lay beneath the species of bread.

In the church of S. Andrew at Cologne there was a certain
canon in orders a priest, by profession a doctor, by name
Peter. One day one of his fellow canons was ill and there¬
fore wished to communicate in his presence, and the priefl
said to him : “ Do you believe that this is the true body of
the Lord, which was born of the Virgin and suffered on the
cross for you.” The other replied : “ I do believe ” ; the
aforesaid Peter noticing what each said was terrified. After¬
wards meeting with Everard, the scholafticus of the church,
by himself who also was present at the communion, he said:
“ Did the priefl rightly ask the queflion of the sick man
and did the other rightly reply? ” “ Yes,” he said, “whoso

believeth otherwise is a heretic.” Then Peter crying aloud
and beating his breafl exclaimed : “ Woe is me unhappy priefl
that I am, how have I up till now celebrated my masses?
For up till now I thought that the species of bread and wine
were only sacraments after the consecration, I mean that
they were only a sign and representation of the Lord’s body
and blood. But afterwards for the undoing of this ignorance
which was very great, he built a chapel and hospital where
preachers now live, in honour of the Blessed Mary Magdalene
in Stolckgasse. But if a well-read priefl and also a man of
good life could thus err, what shall I say of private people
and the wicked ?

Novice. —If Chrifl upon the altar is handled and received
by the wicked as well as by the good, I think that He mufl
look in anger upon the wicked.

160


The Body and Blood of Christ


Mon\. —The look of ChriSf cannot be pitiless, but accord¬
ing to the following example you will see how dangerous it
is when He turns away His face from them.


CHAPTER LVII.

Of a wicked priefl from whom the infant Chriil
in the mass turned away His face.

A certain priesl was once saying mass, and was holding
ChriSl’s body in his hand when some one of those present
saw Him as a boy with His face turned away from him.
And when he realised this, he rightly imputed this turning
away to his sins, and was so troubled that he might say with
the psalmiSl: “ Thou didst turn Thy face from me and I was
troubled ” (Ps. xxx. 8). I hope indeed that after this he
amended his life. Indeed from some prieffs who consecrate
unworthily, the merciful Lord takes away the sacrament,
that they may not receive it to their condemnation.


CHAPTER LVIII.

Of Erwin the priefl who loSl the Lord's body in the
mass.

A priest Erwin in the church of the blessed Peter at
Cologne was accustomed to say masses at the altar of the
holy cross. One day after transubSlantiation had taken place,
he put down the hoSt and it rolled off the altar. And when
he sought it everywhere round the altar and the people helped
him, it was not to be found. There is no doubt that it had
been carried to the sublime altar of God by the hands of holy

161

ui


The Dialogue on Miracles


angels, that a self-indulgent pricft might not consume it 10
his own condemnation. For he had a concubine and lived
with her openly. You have a similar Story in the fifth
chapter of the second book, of the prieft from whom a dove
had carried off the sacrament on account of his fornication.
There are other prieSts so negligent about the sacrament of
the altar, and so much without devotion, that from habit
of consecrating the Lord’s body they do not discern it from
ordinary food.


CHAPTER LIX.

Of the abbot Daniel who found raw flesh in the
chalice.

Abbot Daniel of Schonau when he was prior of our house,
entered the chapel of S. Reynold as he told us himself, this
chapel lying next the church of the Holy ApofUes in Cologne.
When he was clothed with prieStly robes and the people
had been summoned by a bell to hear mass whilst he was
preparing the chalice, he found within it a particle of raw
flesh adhering to it. Very much terrified, while he was
debating within himself whether he should go on with the
mass or should Stop, fearing to scandalise the people if he
were to take off his robes, he placed the head upon the
chalice, poured in wine and water, and so continuing the
celebration he consumed the whole together. When the mass
was over, he asked a recluse to whom the care of the chalice
had been entrusted, who had laSt used this chalice for a
celebration. She replied: “ Dom Bertolph, who is called
the guzzler of bacon.” For he was canon of the aforesaid
church of the holy apoftles, a very worldly prieft having no
spark of religion or devotion or the fear of God. I think
that I was present at this very mass. The aforesaid Daniel
confessed to us, if not to me at that time, that never had he


162


The Body and Blood of Christ


had so much comfort in any mass either before or afterwards
as he had in that one. Afterwards when this Bertolph was a
guefl among us, our abbot told him this ftory of his
negligence ; but I do not know how he made satisfaction to
God.

Novice.— It would be better for priefts of so wretched a
way of life of whom you have juft been speaking, to make
a pretence of celebrating without words or any intention
rather than to consecrate the Lord’s body and receive it to
their own condemnation.

Mon\. —Some authorities say that such men sin the more
grievously because in this sacrament nothing ought to be
done by pretence, or by trickery or otherwise than is laid
down in the church. We ought to hold the same opinion of
those who say mass when not ordained and ape-like copy
others.

Novice .—How do you prove this?

Mon/{. —Uzziah, king of Judah, when he usurped the
prieftly office through excess of devotion, was ftricken with
leprosy by the Lord. I do not doubt that there were many
wicked priefts under him making unworthy sacrifices, who
nevertheless received no punishment. The fault may be seen
from the punishment. Liften while I tell you a modern
example of this.


CHAPTER LX.

Of a prieft who celebrated without having been
ordained, and his hands were devoured by fire from
on high.

As the above-mentioned Daniel told me, there was a prieft,
when he was ftudying at Paris, who presented a very terrible
sight to the congregation in the church of the holy Mother
of God. For his hands had been almoft entirely consumed

163


The Dialogue on Miracles


by fire from on high. And when the bell-ringer asked him
secretly to what Order he belonged, he answered: “ A priefl ”
and went on : “ Never have these hands been anointed with
the holy undtion.” And he perceiving by the spirit of
prophecy that he was discovered confessed his fault. How
greatly displeasing to Chrift is so great presumption will be
shown by the following example.


CHAPTER LXI.

Also about another who being unordained was
celebrating and saw the crucified weeping over him.

A deacon of Steinveld of the Premonflratensian Order,
Gerard by name, apoftatising, pretended that he had received
priefls’ orders about four times and the unhappy man was
celebrating as it were his firft mass, a priefl msTrucling him,
in Cologne in the church of S. Michael’s which is situated
near the gate of Mars. I was then a scholar and was present
at that mass ; whereat I noticed that he received many
oblations. He afterwards confessed to the prieff who was
helping him and from whom I heard it that, as often as he
turned to the people, he saw the crucified Standing over
againft him and weeping. For this image is a large one
of great antiquity and well carved. For the gracious Lord
who in former times wept over the evil nature of the city
of Jerusalem, condescended to weep again over so great pre¬
sumption. And considering from the tears of the divine
image the greatness of his fault and led thither by penitence,
he sought the apoftolic see and ended his life on the journey
thither. Let what I have said be enough about priefts who
consecrate unworthily.

I will give you a few examples of those who receive
unworthily.


164


The Body and Blood of Christ


CHAPTER LXII.

Of how the holy EuchariSl ought to be received.

In Exodus the Lord laid down that the paschal lamb should
be eaten roaSt with fire and with wild herbs and with loins
girt up. If this is laid down of the figurative lamb as a
representation, how will anyone dare to come to the eating
of the true lamb without the fire of charity, without bitter¬
ness of heart and purity of body. Nicodemus brought about
too lbs. of myrrh and aloes and wrapped the Lord’s body in
pure linen and afterwards buried Him in a new tomb in
which no man had yet been laid and doff thou, whoever thou
art, being in sin dare to lay the Lord in a filthy tomb without
myrrh and aloes, i.e. without bitterness of penitence and
contrition of heart? The paschal lamb was taken away on
the 10th day of the month and was sacrificed on the 14th ;
by which it is shown that no man ought to approach the
EuchariSl unless he has fulfilled the commands of the Deca¬
logue and the teaching of the four evangelists. Listen now
what they deserve who communicate unworthily.


CHAPTER LXIII.

Of Wiricus the lay-brother who was seen to eat
coals in the place of the sacrament.

In Hemmenrode there was a lay-brother named Wiricus.
This man, before he took the vows, had lived ill and had
amended his life only to a moderate extent when he entered
the Order. One day when he was going to holy communion
with the reSt of the brethren, at the moment when the prieSt
offered him the Lord’s body another lay-brother spiritually-
minded saw, not the sacrament, but blackest coal put into
his mouth. Let the reason cited above in the 54th chapter,

165


The Dialogue on Miracles


be assigned concerning the prieSt of Hadenware. Some are
not allowed to consume the Lord’s body that their guilt may
be manifested.


CHAPTER LXIV.

Of a lay-brother who had not given up his property
and who was not able to eat Chrifl's body.

It is scarcely two years ago since a lay-brother of our Order
fell greviously sick in the house of Poitou called Fumoringens.
When the abbot heard his confession and very carefully warned
him to cleanse his conscience diligently, they brought him
the Lord's body. Which indeed he received with open mouth
but found himself unable to close his mouth in order to
maSticate it. When all present were astonished, the prieSt
withdrawing the sacrament gave it to another sick man who
received it with devotion and consumed it without any
impediment. Not long afterwards this same lay-brother
died ; and the cause which flood in the way of his
salvation, was made known. For they found round him
when he was washed five shillings not of silver but of
brass. And it was not lawful for him to have any money.
And when they saw this, they glorified God. And at the
command of the abbot they buried him in the open country
and threw upon him these same shillings, all who were
present, saying: “ Thy money perish with thee.” When the
same abbot was telling the Story at the next general chapter,
he went on : “ And that you may know it was not sickness
that was the reason why he could not eat the Lord’s body,
that same day he had eaten a whole fowl.”

I consider that I have now satisfied you that the true
body of ChriSl is beneath the appearance of bread and the
true blood of ChriSt after the consecration beneath the species
of wine, and that those who worthily consecrate and those

166


The Body and Blood of Christ


who worthily receive, win for themselves grace and those who
do the same unworthily, win punishment.

Novice. —Even if I had doubted about these things, hence¬
forth I could not doubt any longer.

Mon —Finally, I will tell you now how far this distinction
is pleasing to God, if those things be done purely and care¬
fully which are necessary to so great a sacrament.


CHAPTER LXV.

Of the hod which in belle leapt up from the corporal
because a worm had been coo\ed in it.

This thing which I relate took place in a town near Cologne
within the la£f two years. One day when the prieSt was
saying mass and the gospel was said, as is the cuStom for
seculars and when the scholar who was serving, had placed
the hoft on the paten and put it down upon the corporal, it
immediately leapt off. The prieSl, thinking that this had
happened by chance, and that the hoff had not been properly
placed, forthwith covered the same, which as he looked, leapt
again further than before. And when he tried the third
time, it was hurled from the altar as if driven by a whirlwind.
He was greatly terrified when he saw this and thinking that
he was unworthy of so high an office and ordering the scholar
to put aside this particular hoSf, he consecrated another which
the scholar brought. But when mass was over, he took with
him the aforesaid hoSt, hurried to Cologne and finding the
priors at the church of the Holy Apoflles, he showed them
the hoSf, and told them what had taken place concerning it.
While all were wondering what the cause could be, one of
the clergy held it up againSt the light and saw a spot in it.
When they broke it into small pieces, they found cooked into
it a bug, which is commonly called a louse. All who were
present, glorified God. There is no doubt that it was rejected

167


The Dialogue on Miracles


by the holy angels, who did not suffer that bread polluted
by so filthy a worm should pass into the body of the Lord by
the miniflration of the prieSL Hellewic, prior of Mount S.
Walburgis testified that he himself saw the same wafer and
the priest is Still alive. If anybody disbelieves me let him ask
him.

But you see how great is the negligence of our prieSts. In
ancient times regular prieSts themselves cultivated the ground
for wafers that were to be used, they sowed the seed, threshed
the corn, ground it, formed the wafers and baked them. And
they were of purest form. Nevertheless, in those wafers
there was only a type or figure. Alas, nowadays the wafers
under which the truth resides, that is the body of ChriSI after
consecration are only kneaded, formed and baked carelessly
by the wives of bellringers and such, and that is why examples
of negligence occur.

Therefore when our abbot was about to celebrate mass one
day in a certain church and the wafers appeared very black, he
said to the bell-ringer: “ Of what corn are these wafers
made? ” And when he replied : “ Of oats,” he would not
celebrate, rightly urging that it would be null and void, since
there was nothing there for consecration.

Novice.— What do you think about spelt?

Monk. ■—When asked about this, the lord pope Honorius
by letter from a certain abbot of our order, replied that spelt
is rather belonging to the barley tribe than to wheat. I will
give you an example, however, of a corporal.


CHAPTER LXVI.

Of a corporal which grew spotted with blood
through the touch of a pregnant nun.

In a convent of nuns when one day the guardian of the
nunnery, a spiritually-minded woman was washing a
corporal, a certain young girl who had been appointed to

168


The Body and Blood of Christ


help her, spread it out to dry when it was washed. At her
touch there quickly appeared a spot of blood and when the
guardian saw this, she again washed the corporal and washed
away the spot ; but, as soon as the girl touched it with her
hand, the same spot re-appeared. The miracle was reported
to the abbess ; prayers were appointed, and the cause revealed ;
the fad was sought out and discovered. For, she had been
impregnated secretly and was thus unworthy to touch the
corporal. How pleasing to God are clean hands for this
office, the following example shows.


CHAPTER LXVII.

Also of a corporal which Gottcschalf tore in drying
and which was repaired by divine fire.

One day when Gotteschalk of Volmarftein, whom 1
mentioned above, had with our sacriftan spread out the
corporal to smooth it, he tore it in the middle, and the sacriflan
folding it up, put it back in the chef!. Afterwards, when
he unfolded it and found it whole, he wondered greatly,
putting it down to the sandlity of of the priefl of whom I spake.
You have heard above, in the 20th chapter of the 7th book
how much grace the virgin of Quida won in the drying
of a single corporal. Therefore, is Chrifl our passover
sacrificed. For He Himself is the true lamb who has taken
away the sins of he world.

Without eating this lamb, we do not go out of Egypt
safely, i.e. out of this world. The differences and methods
of consumption are clearly enough shown in the firfl chapter
of this book.

Let us ftudy so to eat it, that by its flrength, we may be
able to come out of the desert of our religious life into the
true land of promise ; in which we may win grace by His
help and with Him celebrate the laft and eternal passover.
Amen.


169


BOOK X


OF MIRACLES


CHAPTER I.

What is a miracle? By whom are they performed,
or in whom? Further, what is the cause of
miracles?

Not without good reason do I think that we ought to
handle miracles after the sacrament of the body and blood
of Chrift, because those who worthily consecrate or participate
in it, are sometimes lit up by the glory of miracles. For
although all that has been said in the former books, is
miraculous enough, yet in the present book, I propose to say
something about things that are miraculous and I think it
is fitting that this should be done in the xoth book, because
Egypt was Stricken very miraculously with ten plagues.

Novice .—What is a miracle?

Mont {.—We speak of a miracle whenever anything is done
contrary to the wonted course of nature, at which we marvel.
A miracle which takes place according to higher causes is
nothing.

Novice .—By what agent or agents are miracles performed ?

Mon \.—God is the author of all miracles (Ps. lxxvii. 15).
Miracles are even wrought by wicked men as well as by the
good. Of the good there is no question ; but, of the wicked
the Saviour says: " Many shall say to Me in that day, Have


The Dialogue on Miracles

we not in Thy name prophesied and in Thy name cast out
devils, etc.” up to " I \now you not" (Matt. vii. 22, 23).

Novice. —What is the reason of miracles?

Mon\. —The reason is manifold and not to be explained
by me. Sometimes God works miracles as in the elements
that he may show His power to mortals. Sometimes He
beftows various tongues, or the spirit of prophecy that He may
show His own wisdom. Sometimes He grants the favour of
healing, that He may declare to us His great pity.

Novice. —In what do miracles take place ?

Mon\. —In men, in the elements, to wit, fire, air, water
and earth, in birds, fish, beafts and reptiles. And in order
that these things may be better underflood by you, I will
add some examples of each. Further, of the saints who
were before our times, I could easily tell you of a vafl number
of miracles ; but the writing of others impose silence upon
me. Nevertheless I will tell you some things at which you
will wonder greatly.

What follows, happened in our own times.


CHAPTER II.

Of Winand who was carried from ferusalem into
the diocese of Liege in less than an hour.

In the diocese of Liege, there is a town called Elzelo, where
lived a layman of holy life named Winand, the uncle of our
monk Winand from whom he got his name. He, at one
time, set out for Jerusalem with some friends from his own
province to make a pilgrimage, but when on Eafter Day
after the solemnity of mass, they were preparing for their
return, the aforesaid Winand, as it became a devoted man,
said: “ It is convenient my brethren that we should reft on


172


Of Miracles


this mo$t sacred day and listen to the voice of God through
all its hours,” yet he could not persuade them. And so they
hastened to the harbour while he himself remained behind
and attended to all the duties of that day and afterwards on
the next day took up his journey alone. And a person of
reverent character and appearance met him riding on a horse
and saluted him saying: “ Why, my good friend, are you
going thus alone and whence have you come? ” and he
replied: “ I have come from Jerusalem and thus and thus
it happened to me ” ; the other forthwith added : “ Climb
up and sit behind my back, we will soon overtake your
friends. And when he had done this, he put him down the
same day near the town we mentioned saying: “ Do you
know where you are ? ” When he said “ 1 indeed recognise
the province, but I do not know what is going on around
me,” the horseman added: “ Because you have honoured
ChriSt, therefore was I sent to take you home. See there is
your house, go and tell them what wonderful things He
hath wrought on your behalf.” But when his acquaintances
saw him, they said : “ Where are your companions? ” He
answered: “ I was in Jerusalem, and they left me there yeSter-
day, setting out before me.” And they did not believe him
and said to each other: “ That old man is mad.” But he
leaving the jeSts of his fellow-citizens, with the money
which he had over, thanks to his celeStial escort, went to the
church of the blessed James the apoSlle and came back again
before his fellows returned. Therefore God was glorified
by double witness, to wit, that of the pilgrims, that he had
been left behind in Jerusalem on EaSter Day and of his fellow-
citizens, that the next day he had been seen in Elzelo ; so the
Lord was magnified by both parties, spreading abroad every¬
where such wonderful things.

Novice. —If Gerard of Gotenbach, as was said in the 8th
book and the 59th chapter, was translated in a moment of time
from India into our province, by the ministry of the devil,
yet, by the order of God, I do not wonder at this Story of the
heavenly messenger. Ancient miracles are renewed again
in our time. Elijah the Tishbite was carried to paradise by
chariot and horses ; but this man, no less miraculously, was

173


The Dialogue on Miracles


borne in a moment of time by a horse and its rider over many
vafl spaces of sea and land.

Mon —I agree with you. Listen now to some miracles
of persons of our Order.


CHAPTER III.

Of an idiot mon\ who in sleep received the know¬
ledge of preaching.

What I am going to tell you, I have heard from some abbots
of our Order. A certain monk by a noflurnal vision saw
himself carried to a temple in heaven, where he was clad in
alb and Stole and read the gospel in the presence of the Lord.
This man was a deacon and feeble-minded. But when he
sought from the Lord the blessing of being able to read,
he received this answer: “ From henceforth have power and
Strength to preach the word of God, whenever it shall be
laid upon you.” But when the gospel was finished he
understood that it was a dream. Yet wondering about so
manifest a vision, he said to himself : “ To-day, you are going
to read the gospel at mass ; if you find the Stole of the same
colour as you saw in heaven, the vision is true.” But, by the
will of God, it happened that a similar Stole was put out by
the sacriStan. Immediately, as if certified about the vision,
he related to the abbot what he had seen and being commanded
by him to preach the word of God, he expounded it so
excellently and so efficaciously, though entirely unprepared up
to this day, that he utterly bewildered all his hearers. At
other times indeed, he possessed no learning.

Novice. —The miracle of Solomon who received all know¬
ledge in his sleep, was fulfilled in this man.

Mon\. —Yes, for God is the Lord of wisdom. By giving
them knowledge miraculously, as has been said, and in other
cases by taking away by no less a miracle what they have held.


m


Of Miracles


chapter IV.

Of a cler\ who lofl his knowledge of letters through
being bled and after the passing of a year recovered
it by another blood-letting.

The abbot of Michaelftein, when passing through Hem-
menrode at the time of a general chapter, recounted there
an exceedingly wonderful event. “ There was amongst us,"
said he, “ a clerk with quite a good knowledge of letters.
One day on being bled he so entirely loft his learning that
it seemed as if it had passed out of him with his blood. From
that moment he knew not a single letter and could neither
understand nor utter a single word of Latin. And that you
may be sure that the mere loss of understanding was not
the cause, but the power of God, he fully retained his know¬
ledge of all faifts experienced before this. Having with
sorrow explained to many this wonderful deprivation he was
was advised by one as follows: “ When the time comes round
in the year, be bled again on the same day and at the same
hour. Perhaps you will recover what has been taken from
you.” And when he had done so, he recovered his former
knowledge. “ This was the Lord’s doing, as also were the
preceding miracles, and it is wonderful in our eyes.” Through
the agency of this one or that has the Lord granted the
blessing of renewed health.


CHAPTER V.

Of the lay-brother of Eberbach by whose touch the
sick were healed.

There lived in Eberbach a lay-brother who was a plain
good man enfeebled by age. On him the Lord had con¬
ferred such favour that at the touch of his hand all kinds of


175


The Dialogue on Miracles


disease were driven away. When this was discovered by
people in the world, rich and poor of either sex flocked to
the monastery for healing and experienced the power of his
blessing.

The abbot seeing the quiet of the brothers disturbed by
the crowds and the house not a little burdened by the expense,
ordered that brother in future not to lay his hands on any
seculars. And from that hour the power in him to work
miracles came to an end. This was told me by the monks
two years ago when I was at Eberbach. Now I visited the
holy man and when I asked him to pray for me, he replied
simply: “ Every day I pray for you and for the whole
world.”

Novice. —By what works is such power won ? ”

Mon \.—To answer that I will give you an illustration.


CHAPTER VI.

Of a mon\ who despised temporalities, the touch of
whose garments cured the sic\.

Recently an abbot of our Order told me of a certain monk
on whom such favour had been conferred by the Lord that
many were cured by the virtue in his garments. Often, if
he is Still living, the brothers are restored to health by putting
on his clothes or girding on his belt. Once on a time his
abbot pondering on this and seeing nothing remarkable in
the man, spoke to him privately as follows: “ Tell me, my
son, what is the cause of these great miracles ? ” He replied:
“ I know not, my lord. I do not pray more than the
rest of the brothers, I do not faSt more, I do not take less
sleep, I do not work harder ; but one thing I know, that
success cannot puff me up nor failure break my spirit, whether
in my own person or in that of others.” And when the
abbot said : “ Were you not disquieted by the recent burning
of our grange by that knight? ” he replied: “ No, I committed

176


Of Miracles


myself wholly to God. If I have a little, I accept it with an
offering of thanks ; if much, again I thank God.” And
the abbot perceived that the cause of such powers was his
love of God and his scorn for the things of earth. The
sacred virtues, faith, that is, hope and charity, juflice,
humility, obedience, zeal for discipline and pity are often
rewarded by the glory of miracles, as is shown by the follow¬
ing instances.


CHAPTER VII.

Of a countryman shut up in a dungeon in Hemers-
bach who was freed by S. fames.

Near Cologne two families of countrymen carried on a
very bitter feud. One being the weaker removed to the
neighbouring caffle of Hemersbach. From this they inflidfed
considerable loss on the opposite party and having one day
taken one of them, three of the number wanted to extort
money from him saying: “ If you do not give us money, we
shall punish you for it.” To which he replied : “ I have
three halfpence. Buy cakes with them and eat them, for
you will get nothing more.” And having faith in God and
S. James he added : “ I have five marks at home in my chefl,
and new shoes, in which I am going to the shrine of S.
James ; I will not give you that money. On S. Stephen’s
day I shall set out and leave you before daybreak.” They
were surprised at the boldness with which he spoke, but
bound him with fetters and put him into the dungeon,
appointing eight men to guard him that night. Once and
again they asked him if he was ftill there, and each time
heard his reply that he was. Making the same enquiry a
third time they got no answer, because the power of faith
had already taken him out of the closed dungeon. On hope
much has been said in earlier chapters, but the following
shall set forth the virtue of charity.


177


A 12


The Dialogue on Miracles


CHAPTER VIII.

Of the abbot who when lovingly admonished by his
mon\, ate meat.

A certain abbot of our Order commanded one of his monks
who was ill, to eat meat. He at once obeyed him, but
reluctantly, and replied to the abbot “ I too ask you in the
same loving spirit to eat meat with me.” The other at once
falling in with his desire sat down, took a morsel from the
monk’s trencher and ate it. Next day, if I remember
aright, he went into a church where a man was being
tormented by an evil spirit. Being asked by the bystanders
to exorcise the demon he burSt into these words: “ With
the same spirit of love with which I ate meat for the sake
of my monk, I adjure thee, foul spirit, to come out of this
man.” Immediately at that word he came out and fled, as
if he could not endure the flame of his love. How pleasing
to God is love, is shown more fully through the vice of
disobedience.


CHAPTER IX.

Of a mon\ who proceeded to eat putrid meat
through unwillingness to eat meat in obedience to
his abbot.

Another abbot having a sick monk ordered him to eat
meat to recover his strength ; but he was exceedingly
obstinate and would not obey the order. The Lord however,
to show that obedience was better than the sacrifices of fools,
presently made the monk go mad, and he ran into the fields,
where Stumbling upon a dead dog, he began with much greed
to eat the putrid flesh. And because he did wrong in the
matter of flesh, in flesh was he punished. What afterwards

178


Of Miracles


became of him, I know not. These two miracles were
related to me by John, the dean of Aix, who averred that the
tale told to him was true. Monks should listen to these
and obey, and not prefer their ignorant abstinence to a loving
spirit. I will adduce Slill another instance, by which you
will see how good is the virtue of charity and how dangerous
the fault of disobedience.


CHAPTER X.

Of a woman delivered from a devil and then crushed
by him for disobedience.

A certain noble lady in Saxony was grievously tormented
by a devil who haunted her. Her servants to reSlore her
sanity, took her to various shrines of the saints and one day
a prieSf coming up, a man of mean appearance, but endowed
with the grace of God, felt pity for her torments. For out
of his abounding charity he besought the Lord and drove
out the devil, restoring the woman to her right mind. But
he charged her to receive the sacrament for thirty days whilst
remaining in the same place, and to hear the services of the
canonical hours for those days. After she had done it for
nine days, her people thinking it no harm, took her away.
On the way she was Struck by a great guSt of wind, thrown
down and so utterly dashed to pieces by the devil that all
her limbs looked juSt like human entrails.

Novice. —What was the reason for so cruel a punishment?

Monk_. —Disobedience. You have a similar case in the
dialogue of S. Gregory concerning a cleric possessed with a
devil, who was freed by S. Benedict. He had ordered him
never to take holy orders, but after many years he disobeyed
and at once the devil entered into him, tormenting him until
he breathed his laSf.


179


The Dialogue on Miracles


chapter XI


Of a demon whom Albert Scothart drove out in
droll fashion.


The abbot of Ahringberg, a rich abbey of the Black Order
in Saxony, lately passing our way, told us of a very droll
miracle of the healing of a certain demoniac woman. “ There
is,” said he: “ among us, a pious knight named Albert
Scothart. He before taking the vows was so vigorous a
soldier and so famous in war that almoSt all the nobles of our
land rivalled one another in sending him gifts, such as war-
horses and coSHy garments, so as to win his friendship.

One day, as a girl of twelve years old, the daugner of a
knight, sitting in a church was being exorcised by monks,
breaking out into a laugh she cried : “ See, here comes my
friend, here comes my friend.” When they asked about whom
she was speaking, she answered: “ You will see him all
right.” For she meant that knight, who at the moment had
been some way off the church. But the nearer he came, the
more she showed her delight. When he entered the church,
she rose up to meet him clapping her hands, and bade him
“ Good Day,” saying: “ Here is my friend, go, go and let him
come here. Now he was dressed in slashed scarlet and coming
up to her he said“ Am I your friend ? ” To which the devil
replied by the mouth of the girl: “Yes, my beSf friend, for you
do everything I want.” At these words the knight was much
confused, although pretending not to be. He said however
with a smile: “ You are a Stupid and silly devil. If you
had any sense, you would go with us to the tourneys, where
men are taken and slain ; for why do you without reason
torment this innocent girl? ” But when the devil said If
you want me to go with you, let me enter into your body,”
the knight replied : “ You shall certainly not enter into me.”
And the devil said: “ Let me sit on your saddle.” And
when he refused to do that, he begged for a place on some
part of the horse or the bridle, but to all he said ‘ no.’ Again

180


Of Miracles


the devil said to him: “ I cannot run afoot. If you wish
me to go with you, give me at leaf! some place near your
person.” Now the knight feeling pity for the girl, said to
the devil: “ If you will leave her, I will allow you one opening
in my coat on condition that you in no wise harm me and only
Stay with me whilst on my way to the tourney. When I
give you the order, you will go of your own free will and
without dispute.” And the devil took an oath and said : “ I
will not harm you, but advance you.” And going out of
the girl he leapt into the opening of his coat, passing with
marvellous speed. From that hour such glory came to the
knight in the tourneys that he overthrew whom he would
with his lance, and at will took captives. Wherever he went,
the devil went too and they talked with one another. When
the knight prayed too long in church, the other would say:
“Now you are mumbling overmuch.” When he sprinkled
himself with holy water, again he would say: “ Mind you
touch me not.” And the knight said to him: “ If a single
drop touches you, I shall be sorry.”

At the time when the cross was being preached and
the knight entered a church to take it, the devil Strove
to draw him back saying: “ What are you doing
here?” The knight replied: “I propose to serve
God and to renounce you. Therefore flee from me.”
When the knight said that, Satan answered: “ What have
I done to displease you? I have never hurt, but enriched
you. Through me you have become exceedingly famous.
Yet I cannot remain with you without your consent, for so
I promised.” Then said the knight: “ Behold, I now take
the cross, and I adjure you in the name of the crucified to
leave me and never to return.” And the devil left him.
Presently signed with the cross he passed over sea and there
he fought for Christ two years. Then he returned and built
a great and very rich gueSt-house for poor travellers ; for
he had an income of more than three hundred pounds accord¬
ing to the aforesaid abbot. In that gueSf-house to this day
he and his wife in religious habit serve the members of
ChnSt, devoted upholders of all men of religion and especially
of our Order. To them he used to say in jeft: “ Ye lords

181


The Dialogue on Miracles


abbots and ye monks are not holy ; we knights are the holy
ones who busy ourselves with tourneys, for the devils obey
us and we drive them out.”

Novice.— I did not know that devils could be caSt out in
such a merry fashion.

Mon \.—-Not jeSting but the power of pity caSt that one
out. What power with God charity and brotherly pity have,
is declared by the next miracle.


CHAPTER XII.

Of Theodoric, the knight of Rulant, who when
suffering from a bloody flux, put the Saracens to
flight in a miraculous way.

Brother Walter, a monk of Hemmenrode, often tells of a
wonderful miracle which he witnessed. When the crusaders
in their firs! expedition were besieging the city of Askalon,
it chanced one day that the Saracens made a sortie and drove
the ChriSfians by a violent attack into their own camp. Now
there was there at the time a young knight named Theodoric,
the brother of Conon of Rulant who is Shill living. He was
so ill and weak through a bloody flux that he was turned
over on his bed not by his own effort but in the sheet. He
when he heard the uproar and the shouting of the fugitives,
asked what it was. And being told the truth, he ordered
his armour to be brought and put upon him as he sat on the
bed. Finally his war-horse was harnessed and he girded
with his sword asked to be lifted upon it, and the blood flowed
even over the saddle. Taking his lance he sallied forth
saying: “ God help me and the Holy Sepulchre.” And he
burSt with such fury on the Saracens, passing through and
circling round, finking and driving them, that all the
Chriffians were inspirited and encouraged by him alone to
the point of expelling the foe from the camp. This done,
he returned to his bed of sickness and died three days later.

LiSlen now to a very famous miracle of juStice.

182


Of Miracles


CHAPTER XIII.

Of a knight whose vineyard after the crop had been
gathered, was miraculously replenished because of
the liberality of his tithe payment.

A certain knight in the payment of his tithes used to show
such piety and honeffy that it was his desire to offer them
without delay, deceit or annoyance. Now he had a vine¬
yard which produced about ten wagon loads annually. One
season, more by the dispensation of God, as was afterwards
made clear, than by the inclemency of the weather, when
the grapes were gathered and the wine came from the press,
there was found to be only one wagonload. When he heard
this, the knight made a reply to his servant which deserves
to be remembered. “ What was mine,” said he, “ The
Lord gave me. I will not take from Him His portion. Go
and give the load to the prieil for his tithe.” And that was
done. At the same time the knight’s brother, a priest, passing
close to the vineyard, saw it crowded with grapes ; and
presently going to his brother, he charged him with negledt,
saying: “ Why is not your grape harvest gathered? ” And
he replying: “ It has been gathered in,” the prieft rejoined:
“ Certainly not; for I have juft seen it full of grapes.”

Enquiry was made and the truth discovered ; and in no
year did it ever produce a more abundant crop than in that
one. The ffory was told to me at the time when it happened
and I am very sorry I have forgotten the name of the knight
and the place. I will tell you of another miracle of humility
of some consequence.


ib 3


The Dialogue on Miracles


chapter XIV.

Of a lay-brother by whose prayer a broken pot was
miraculously mended.

There was in Hemmenrode a worthy lay-brother named
Everard, who was a porter at the middle gate. At times
he went out with the wood-cutter brothers into the woods,
took charge of their tools and prepared their food. One of
these days, waking later than usual after the brothers had
already gone out to their work, he hurried his prayers that
he might prepare their food for them in good time. Whilst
at prayer he placed a brazen pot on the fire, but forgot to
pour in water. After a time meaning to put the herbs into
the pot, he found it red-hot ; and being flustered and losing
his head, to save the pot he poured in cold water. And it,
as pots will do, bursting asunder broke. But not having
another pot, in which he could make provision for the
labourers, he bent his knees in prayer, humbly with tears
beseeching God to give him pity and counsel, that the labourers
might not through his fault lose the meal they expected. The
good Lord marking His servant’s humility listened to his
prayer. And he rising from it saw that very pot Standing
whole near him. Giving thanks therefore to God, he seized
the pot, poured in water, placed it on the fire, put in herbs
and cooked them with all the speed he could. When they
were sufficiently cooked, he sounded the nine o’clock summons
and the brothers having said grace sat down for refreshment.
After their refection they declared that the whole of the time
they had been there they had never eaten such good herbs
and at the same time they expressed their wonder that he had
signalled nine o’clock earlier than usual, whereas on the
contrary he had supposed them to be angry, that he had Struck
the hour later than usual. No doubt he had thought a very
long time had passed in the cooking, because he did not fully
realise the valuable aid of divine co-operation. On the sub-
je<ft of obedience however I will add a miracle Still more
remarkable than that juSt told.

184


Of Miracles


CHAPTER XV.

Of a lay-brother through whose obedience the peas
drying in a field were miraculously turned over.

In the aforesaid house the lay-brothers had reaped a crop
of peas. As it lay scattered over the field for drying, these
lay-brothers went to the prior and said: “ Unless the whole
brotherhood come out quickly, the sick as well, and turn
over the peas, the whole crop will be lofl.” For they were
afraid of rain which threatened. And the prior gave orders
for all who were able to get ready. At once a lay-brother
from the infirmary, a simple man in the abounding heat of
zeal hurried there before them all. And when he came near
the field where the peas lay, they were turning themselves
before his eyes in various places in a wonderful way. When
he saw this, he returned giving thanks to God, and the prior
meeting him asked: “Why are you returning, brother?’’
And he replied: “Lord, there is no need for you to go any
farther, for the peas are all turned.” “ Who turned them? ”
said he. And the lay-brother humbly replied: “ He who
could well do it.” Then the prior finding it to be so, went
back with the brothers not without great amazement.

Novice. —I have no doubt now that great is the power of
obedience, which is rewarded with such a miracle.

Mon\. —As God loveth obedience in subordinates, so
loveth He zeal for discipline in prelates.


CHAPTER XVI.

Of the abbess Sophia whose small beer was turned
into wine.

In Hoven, a convent of nuns of our Order in the charge
of our abbot, their died la& year an abbess named Sophia.

185


The Dialogue on Miracles

She was so zealous and unbending in discipline, that the
sifters often annoyed by it, regarded what was a virtue as
only a fault, but once her small beer was turned into wine,
and one night as she came from matins, an angel of the Lord
went before her with a lantern. These two miracles in her
laft moments she confessed to our lord abbot Henry.

When he was a canon in the church of Bonn, and she a
nun in Ditkirgen, a house of the Black Order, by the inspira¬
tion of God he came to our house to take the vows, whilft
she prayed as fervently as she could, for his perseverance in
them. After a few days had elapsed, before he had taken
the cowl, he was forcibly carried off by his brothers in the
flesh, and she, now in despair, gave up praying for him.
But he himself in a dream chided her for this and begged
her to resume her prayers adding: “ You shall hear my
firft mass in the Ciftercian Order.” By God’s will that was
what happened ; for he came back to us, and she changed
her habit, and so at the Hill of S. Walpurgis, where she was
now prioress, she heard his firft mass.

Novice .—I do not wonder that God changed the quality
of that pious woman’s drink, when he changes bitter to sweet
for me a mere novice, to say nothing of full monks. Our
plain herbs without sauce have a better relish for me than the
moil dainty dishes of meat had before I became a monk.

Mon \.—The meal of Elisha, that is the grace of Chrift,
doth this. But, what was ftill more miraculous, Jordan, a
monk of Hemmenrode, by training in abftinence for some
years abftained from all drink, although he worked with
the reft in the field in time of harveft in great heat. To return
to what was said before, as God by the operation of grace
changes bitter to sweet for the good, so at times he turns
sweet into bitter for the ungrateful.


186


Of Miracles


chapter XVII.

Of a blasphemous ba\er-woman, whose dough was
turned to filth.

After the establishment of Otto on the throne, when there
was such an abundance of corn that in the Bishopric of
Cologne for a long time the maltra (four bushels) was sold
for five or six pence, there occurred in a certain manor of
the diocese, the name of which I have forgotten, a miracle
worthy of mention. A baker-woman had made up some
loaves for baking. And because in a time of abundance
bakers get small profits, she in her annoyance cried out to her
boy : “ Let us put the filth into the oven.” By the righteous
judgment of God she received according to her words, and
excellent dough was changed by her cooking into filth.
Drawing out the loaves and finding them so in appearance
only, but not in subSlance, she became afraid, and mingling
filth with filth was unable to keep the miracle to herself.
Markmann, our monk, at that time the cellarer, brought us
a piece of one loaf, in which on careful examination we found
nothing but filth glued together. Very famous was this
miracle at the time. For God often makes the punishment
fit the crime. For instance :


CHAPTER XVIII.

Of Otto of Sconinburg who throughout Lent ate
meat, and after Eafler was unable to swallow it.

A nobleman, Otto of Sconinburg, whilst his father was
overseas serving the Lord, himself behaved wickedly againSl
the Lord and againSl His servant, even his own father. For
by a plot with his followers he proposed to take captive by
craft the citizens of the town belonging to the caSlle by calling
them together as if for some business and then to extort ransom

187


The Dialogue on Miracles


from them. They being forewarned, escaped, but he robbed
their wives and children. And because he had dealt with
them so wickedly, the Lord visited him with an incurable
disease and a further miraculous punishment. Now the
previous Lent his greed for meat was so great that he would
not go without it and even compelled his cook to eat it with
him. After so doing persistently throughout Lent, the Friday
before Eaiter having come, some said to him : “ Lord, to-day
is the day of our Lord’s passion, the day of Christian tribu¬
lation, to-day we do not eat meat at all.” But he replied to
them: “ I shall eat to-day as I have eaten hitherto." Then
a wonderful thing happened. On that moSt holy day of
EaSter, when meat is blessed and the faithful after communion
have permission to eat it, he, because of his disobedience was
by the juSt judgment of God unable to swallow it and there¬
after ate fish to the day of his death.

Novice. The Lord is juSt.

Mon\. —In honour of the Lord, our Saviour, I will bring
in some miracles of His holy image ; then I will pass to the
elements.


CHAPTER XIX.

Of the crucifix wounded at the church of S. Goar,
from which issued blood.

At the time of the quarrel between Otto and Philip, people
of the province removed their persons and property to the
oratory of S. Goar, the confessor situated in the territory
of Treves, a very Strong place both by natural position and
by fortification. That being known, Warner de Bonlant,
a rich and powerful man, brought up his battering rams and
artillery to Storm it, but without success and those who were
inside, set up againSt the enemy a wooden image of the cruci¬
fied in a certain window, hoping that through respeSt for it
they would spare the place. But one of the artillerists caring

188


Of Miracles


nothing for the cross and angry with the man who had put it
there, shot a bolt and wounded the sacred image deep in the
arm. At once in a wonderful way the miracles of old are
renewed and blood begins to drip from the place of the wound,
as if from human veins. Frightened by this miracle Warner
afterwards took the cross. Hearing of these wonderful things,
Philip, the lord abbot of Ottirburg, visited the place and
enquired into the truth of the Story. And when the account
I have given above, was told to him by everyone, a Jew who
happened to be present, drew the abbot aside and said:
“Verily, my lord, you have heard the very truth.” As he
told me, he was much more pleased with the testimony of
an enemy. The shaft is Still preserved there, the wound and
the marks of blood Still shown. Our abbot testifies that he
has seen both.


CHAPTER XX.

Also of a cross pierced by a lance, to which a similar
thing happened.

About the same time Otto went up againSt Philip with
an army and penetrated as far as Wizenburg. There his
followers entered a certain church and one of them seeing
the crucified set up in a high place covered with a linen tunic
finely embroidered, desired to have it. But not being able
to reach it with his hand, he Strove to pull it off with his lance,
but as it was firmly fixed to the figure, he pierced the latter
in several places. The Lord to show that any damage or
insult inflitffed upon His image was done to Himself, by His
power made blood gush freely from each of the wounds. For
once only whilSf a man He was pierced with a lance on
earth, and yet each day sitting at the right hand of the
Father He complains in the words of the prophet, that He
is pierced saying : " And ye people pierce me all day." But
what a punishment comes upon such, the following miracle
shows.


The Dialogue on Miracles


chapter XXI.


Of thieves who Hole a cross at Utrecht and were
hanged.


In lower Utrecht this year thieves breaking into a shrine
in the church of S. Martin carried off some treasure and a
very precious cross adorned with gems and gold. And as
there were several of them, entrufting the cross to two of their
number the reft went off with the treasure. In the morning
when this great sacrilege came to the knowledge of the bishop
and canons, in much grief and especially for the cross, because
of a piece of the Lord’s cross, they sent soldiers by different
roads to pursue the fugitives. Now those who were carrying
the cross, were going along the high road. The soldiers
overtaking them, but suspedting nothing wrong, passed them
by. But Chrift againft whom the thieves sinned, robbed
them of their senses and blocked their path so that turning
aside from the road, they entered a marsh and could make
no progress however much they moved their feet. Now the
next day those soldiers returned and seeing them almoft in
the same place hard at work trampling the mud, one of them
said: “ My good fellows, your going is bad. Why do you
not get up on the high road ? ” And they replied: “ Our
going is all right. Do not trouble yourselves about our
travelling.” Then one of the soldiers by the inspiration of
God said to his comrades: “ There’s something ftrange in
this ; perhaps they are the guilty men. Let us arreft them.”
But when they went down to them, they sank the cross in
the swamp, and being queftioned about the theft they replied :
“ We took the cross and we know where it is ; but unless
we are sure of our lives, we will not show you.” To make
a long ftory short, they were brought before the bishop and
for the sake of the cross were promised freedom from punish¬
ment. The cross was discovered and taken back, and they
were conduced outside the province. And because the juft
God leaves no sin unavenged, and often punishes the sinner


Of Miracles


through his sin, he allowed them to break into a church the
following day, when they were caught and hanged.

Novice.—' This miracle is a clear proof.

Mon\. —So great is the power of the cross that, as has been
said, it brings punishment on those who despise it, and restores
health to those who reverence it.


CHAPTER XXII.

Of a matron who gave birth to her child without
pain after she had consented to her husband’s taking
the cross.

When Oliver, the scholastic of Cologne, was preaching
the cross in Flanders, according to the tale which he told us,
amongSt others a knight took the cross who was a rich and
honourable man. But when his wife found it out, she was
distressed even to death ; for she was near child-birth. Oliver
at the request of her husband visited her and amongSt other
words of comfort added these : “If you listen to my advice
and allow your husband to fight for ChriSt, you will be
delivered from your imminent peril without pain." And
after she had been soothed by his words, the scholastic added :
“ At the time of the birth of your child cover yourself with
your husband’s cloak marked with the cross and you shall
feel its power ” ; for her birth-pangs were usually very
great. Wonderful mercy of ChriSt ! the hour when she
should bring forth, being at hand, remembering his advice
she covered herself with her husband’s cloak and brought
forth her child almoSt without any pain. Other miracles of
the cross as great I will tell you in what follows, for I am
passing on quickly to miracles of the elements.

Novice .-—How many elements are there?

Mon \.—Four ; fire that is, air, water and earth. In these
seems to be fulfilled in our times that which is spoken by the


The Dialogue on Miracles


Saviour in the gospel, " And there shall be signs in the sun
and in the moon and in the liars, and upon the earth diSlress
of nations with perplexity, the sea and the waves roaring ;
men’s hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after those
things which are coming on the earth " (Luke xxi. 25, 26)
and so on. In another place he fortells earthquakes, plagues
and famine, terrors from heaven and great signs. Although
all these muS be fulfilled before the day of judgment, yet
in part we have seen them fulfilled, as the cases given below
will show. For we have seen signs in the ffars and diftress
of nations ; we have heard the roaring of the sea and waves ;
we have heard too that the Son of Man has been seen in the
clouds, and terrors from heaven and great signs. In the
firft place I muff speak of fire and the upper element to
which the ftars belong, afterwards of the ref! in order.


CHAPTER XXIII.

Of the division of the sun into three parts.

In the year of our Lord twelve hundred and six, when
king Philip was holding high court with his nobles, there
appeared a great sign in the sun. It was divided, that is,
into three parts like the lily which has three petals. When
it was firft noticed, people came together in crowds discussing
the great miracle. Now Hermann, the Landgrave, gave
this interpretation of it that one of the imperial princes would
die that year ; but his interpretation was not satisfactory.
After a long time the parts united and the body of the sun
became whole again. Abbot Karl of Villers and his monk,
Wiger, who were present at that council, saw what has been
described, and told us. This appearance took place on the
30th of January.

Novice. —What do you think this triple division of the
sun meant?


192


Of Miracles


Monk -—God wished to set forth the condition of the empire
to the assembled princes. The sun seems to mean the Roman
Empire. As the sun in size and splendour excels all the
Stars of heaven, so does that empire shine with greater majesty
than all the other kingdoms of the world. In the Roman
Empire there was at times sovereign rule, so that as the
Stars get their light from the sun, so princes derived their
authority to reign from the emperor. The triple division of
the sun meant a schism in the empire divided among three
princes who usurped the title of Roman king. The firSt
was Frederic, who in his father’s lifetime had been elected
king by the princes all taking the oath to him. The second
was his uncle Philip, elected king after the death of his
brother, Frederic being passed over. The third was Otto
substituted by the archbishop of Cologne and his followers.
These had both been crowned king at Aix. One of them
being slain, the other deposed and dead, Frederic was eledted
who rules to-day in sole power, the sun, as it were, regaining
the fullness of its orb. In some provinces that day there
appeared five parts. By three of the parts I understand the
three kings mentioned ; by the two, the fourth and fifth,
Bernard, duke of Saxony and Bertolph, duke of Zahringen,
both of whom Strove hard to get the imperial crown.


CHAPTER XXIV.

Also of the eclipse of the sun and the death of king
Philip.

In the following month, that is on the 28th of February,
another sign appeared in the sun, not, I would say, a
miraculous one, because it was natural, but a prediction of
a great event. There occurred, that is, an eclipse of the
sun of such extent at midday that hardly any of its splendour

193


A 13


The Dialogue on Miracles


remained. Many seeing it were much alarmed saying some¬
thing great was going to happen.

Novice. —What do you think the eclipse symbolised?

Mon^.—l am no Daniel, and therefore my interpretation
is not a positive Statement, but only an opinion. I think
that the failure of the sun foreboded the death of Philip,
who died the following year and so was eclipsed. That tiny
bright portion which began to grow and wax again, was
Otto, who after Philip’s death became great and glorious.
And at the same time, I believe, was fulfilled what the Lord
says in the gospel: " For the powers of the heavens shall
be moved" (Luke xxi. 26). Heaven at times means
the present universal church ; the heavens, the particular
churches. The powers of the heavens are the prelates of
the churches, the bishop, that is, the abbots and provofts.
In the division mentioned above not only the secular chiefs,
but the spiritual too were involved, for partly through greed
of money, partly through love or fear, they became unstable,
taking oath firft to one and then to another. For the Head
himself of the bishops, Pope Innocent, firft supported Otto
and crowned him, and afterwards, for a reason known to
many, deposed him, raising up Frederic againft him. More¬
over in the moon were not wanting signs ; for she suffered
great eclipses more often than usual. But if you ask for
signs in the ftars, I will tell you what I have seen.


CHAPTER XXV.

Of a dlar that was seen at Cologne after midday.

After the death of the emperor Henry, when the queftion
of his successor was being debated in the palace at Cologne,
after midday there appeared a very brilliant ftar. As we
flocked into the bishop’s court, we all saw it, but what so
unusual a sight portended, we could not know.


194


Of Miracles


CHAPTER XXVI.

Also of a very great Bar which appeared after sunset.

Similarly this year lor two weeks there was seen after sun¬
set a ftar of such magnitude that it sent out a brilliancy like
that of fire. The Jews declare it was the sign of the coming
of their Messiah. So much for signs in Stars. Proceeding
to fire in the heavens, that is, lightning and thunder, which
arise from the collision of clouds, I will put forward some
instances, for you to see that according to the words of the
Saviour, terrors from heaven and great signs have taken
place in these times.


CHAPTER XXVII.

Of thunder and lightning at the vigil of S. Matthew.

At the vigil of S. Matthew, the ApoSUe, two years ago there
occurred at Cologne an event quite miraculous, and miraculous
because unusual. Falling from the sky in the dusk of that
night, it set fire to the tower of S. Andrew, likewise to the
fence round the court of a certain canon, which was
extinguished only by the efforts of many citizens. Moreover
that same night ice had formed. Hence it was reputed a
miracle that thunder could be heard and lightning seen. I
will mention another very terrible inftance.


CHAPTER XXVIII.

Of a theatre flrucp by lightning in Saxony.

A prieft of Saxony recently told me of an amazing miracle.
“ This year,” said he, “ in our country in a certain theatre


'95


The Dialogue on Miracles


twenty men were Struck by lightning, a prieft only escaping,
who fled when he saw the others burning. For it was
fitting that by fire, which is lighter than any thing else,
lovers of lightness should be punished.

Novice .—I wonder that the priefl was not punished, for
one would think he was a worse sinner than the others.

Mon \.—God often spares prieSts because of their orders,
as is said of Aaron, who was not Struck with leprosy, but his
siSter was, although it is not said that he sinned less than
his siSter ; or perhaps in him God saw some good for which
he spared him. We have however ready for you an instance
that God sometimes punishes prieSts for lightness of this
kind.


CHAPTER XXIX.

Of a prieSl struck, by lightning in Eltz.

There is a village in the bishopric of Treves called Eltz,
in which laSt year on Wednesday before the nativity of S.
John there happened a great and terrible miracle. A local
prieSt, named Henry, was sitting in a tavern when a great
Storm came on. As he hastened with his bellman into church,
where the bells were rung, the Storm increased, and there
was a miSt accompanied by an indescribable crashing sound
in the church. And suddenly there came the blaSt of a
whirlwind which dashed to the ground both the cleric and
the bellman, the latter lying under the cleric. But whereas
the bell-ringer was entirely unharmed, the cleric was dead,
and his privy members were consumed, but the reSt of his
body untouched; his son running up put out the fire
in them by trampling upon them and tearing them out:
from this it is evident that he was a fornicator. Moreover
his clothes were so torn that no fragment held to a sound
part, nor was any of it sound except that small portion in

196


Of Miracles


which the maniple used to hang on his left arm. But even his
shoes which were new, were torn to pieces as if they had been
pulled apart by forks ; moreover the soles were as if they
had been Slewed in boiling water. Now the bellman lying in
very great fear and amazement, saw devils scoffing in the
church ; but the cheSl which was behind the altar, flew up
on to it, and a hole was made which remains to this day.
Furthermore the saints whose relics are there, came forth
and Sloutly withstood the demons and a moSt violent
Struggle took place between the saints and the demons. At
laSt the demons being overcome and unable to carry off the
body, took away part of the roof with them. The bellman
also declares that the body of the prieSt was carried at times
by the violence of the devils right up to the roof of the tower,
under which the ringers Stood, and under which they were
lying Stretched, but thanks to the saints it fell back again.
They say that this cleric had won again the crown for dancing,
which as victor he had hung up near the house for foolish
men to play and dance there.

Novice .—My opinion with regard to this prieSt is that
God punished pride by tearing his robes and shoes to pieces
and his luSt by the burning of his privy parts.

Mon \.—You are right in your opinion, for the punishment
often fits the sin. I would have you know this too and will
prove it by an instance, that whilst God, as has been said,
punishes the wicked by thunder and lightning from heaven,
so at times he succours the good by the same means.


CHAPTER XXX.

Of Richwin, who was freed from robbers by
thunder.

Richwin, our cellarer, going out one day at the time of
the quarrel between the kings of Cologne mentioned above,


197


The Dialogue on Miracles


not far from the city saw a number of armed men sitting
on their war-horses at the side of the high road. He was
much afraid on seeing them, and one of them coming up
at full speed, seized his horse by the bridle and insolently
addressed him with these words : “ Mafter monk, get down ;
I muff have that horse.” Hardly had he spoken, when behold
the Lord replied to the robber on his servant’s behalf not
with words, but with thunder. For whereas the whole of
that day no thunder had been heard, a very loud clap suddenly
sounded so that the soldier’s horse fell on its knees to the
ground and he could hardly keep his seat on his tottering
Seed. At once removing his hand from the monk’s bridle
he said quite humbly: “Go in peace, for you are a good
man.” Thanking him the other went gladly on his way,
realising that he had been freed by divine interposition.
Richwin told me the ftory with his own lips.

Novice. —Much to be feared is He whom even the air
serves.

Mon \.—Not only the fire of the air, but also that of earth,
which is fed with wood and lighted by men, serves Him,
now by checking its natural force at the will of the creator,
now by exercising the same no less miraculously on cold
material.


CHAPTER XXXI.

Of a widow who set her measures againfl a fire and
saved her house from burning.

In the bishopric of Cologne in a royal town called Duisberg,
a certain widow used to brew and sell beer. One day the
town accidentally caught fire and the flames coming close to
her house, she had no hope in human aid, but had recourse
to God. Putting against the flames at the door all the pots
in which she used to measure out beer to her customers in

198


Of Miracles


much simplicity of heart thus she prayed: “ O Lord God,
juft and merciful, if I have cheated any man with these
measures, I am willing that this house be consumed. But
if I have done what is right in Thine eyes, I implore Thy
juftice mercifully to look upon my need in this hour and to
deign to spare me and my furniture.” Wonderful faith in
the woman, wonderful condescension in God ! He who
said : " With what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to
you ” (Matt. vii. 2) as though the matter had been settled by
the prayer of the faithful widow, checked the flames which
devoured all around. At the house of that woman, to the
amazement of all, the raging flames licked but did not set
alight inflammable Stuff. Hear now other cases equally
miraculous.


CHAPTER XXXII.

Of a citizen of Soefl, whose garment was consumed
but a cross miraculously protected.

In the city of Soeft, in the diocese of Cologne, a certain
citizen took the cross in the laft crusade. At the same time
the Lord to try his soldier, as we read of the holy Job,
allowed his house to perish by fire. When the flames sank
down and everything which could burn had been reduced to
ashes, a small portion of his cloak covered by the cross was
found untouched amongst the ashes. And all wondered and
noised abroad the great power of the holy cross. A like
miracle occurred in another place as I have heard from master
John, the dean of Aix.


199


The Dialogue on Miracles
CHAPTER XXXIII.

Also of an apple that was consumed, whilst a band
of a cross tied round it was unhurt.

He told me of another miracle of the power of the cross.
A matron, he said, took a cross and tied it round an apple
and so putting them both together on a bar near the hearth
where a fire was burning, she went away. By accident, nay,
more truly by God’s will, the apple fell with the cross on to
the coals. After a little the woman returned, and looking
for what she had put there, and not finding it, she sadly
searched the fire for the cross ; and behold she saw the apple
reduced to ashes, but its girdle she lifted out untouched.
Thinking it a great miracle she told the aforesaid John about
it.

Novice .—It is quite wonderful that the same element in
the same moment should differ in its nature in opposite
directions.

Mon\. —I will show you by several instances that this
occurs owing to a difference in merit.


CHAPTER XXXIV.

Of a cleric who was slandered by a harlot and felt
no pain from fire.

Gerung, the scholastic of Bonn, lately coming from Study
at Paris, told me quite a wonderful Story, declaring it happened
in recent times. The household, said he, of a powerful noble
of France was followed by a beautiful harlot. Many with¬
out distinction sinned with her and a pious cleric, the noble¬
man’s chaplain, grieved for the ruin of the household, and
spoke to his lord as follows: “ AlmoSt all your household
is corrupted by intercourse with this harlot and all their sins
God will require of your hand. And be it known to your


200


Of Miracles


excellency that if she is not sent away, you will no longer
have my services.” At once she was summoned and the
priest’s words communicated to her, to which she replied:

“ Lord, he says this out of envy. Because I would not con¬
sent to his desire, therefore he persecutes me.” When he
replied: “ You lie, for the man is pure,” she immediately
added : “ I will have you teSf his truth.” Soon going to the
cleric in the guise of a penitent and suffused with tears, after
a feigned confession she added : “ Sir, so Strongly have I been
tempted by your person, that unless you extinguish the fire
you have lighted, I cannot live.” At these words the good
man crossed himself and that time drove her away with what
words he could, but the next day she came again and repeated
what she had said before, further adding : “If you do not do
as I ask, see, I shall certainly kill myself.” Much afraid
at hearing this, but by no means proposing to consent to her
luff, he replied: “ At such a time and place, if you wish
me to sleep with you, I will on condition that you do not
kill yourself.” »

So she going joyfully away went at once to the lord and ■
in wanton words showed him that his chaplain had promised
such and such things. Meantime the cleric told his pupil
to place a bed of plain wood in a place he showed him and to
put under it dry logs and Straw and then to cover it decently
with a sheet. And this was done. Now on the day
appointed the cleric came, the woman came ; but the cleric
firSf set fire to the Sfraw before climbing on to the bed, and
then invited her to get on to it too. She seeing the flames
rising on ail sides, shrank back and although invited again
and again, refused to come to such terrible embraces. Now
the cleric by God’s gracious aid felt that fire no more than a
breeze that brings the dew, nor was his hair singed nor his
garments in any way injured. When the wretched woman
saw this, terrified and Conscience-Stricken at such a great
miracle, she publicly confessed to her lord and the reSf that she
had slandered the holy man wrongfully and out of sheer hatred
and anger to revenge herself for the charge made againSt her.
But the good man himself, not ungrateful to God, went over
to the Order of the Preachers.


201


The Dialogue on Miracles
CHAPTER XXXV.

Of the fornicating fisherman, who through making
confession was uninjured by red-hot iron, but after¬
wards burnt by cold, water through relapse into sin.

Lord Bernard of Lippa, once abbot, now bishop of Livonia,
aften relates a miracle which was the exact opposite of the one
juft told. “ I know,” said he, “ a fisherman in the bishopric
of Utrecht, who had many times committed fornication with
a certain woman. And because his sin was too well-known,
he feared to be accused at a synod soon to be held and said
to himself: “What will you do now, unhappy man? If
you are accused at the synod of fornication and confess, you
will be forced at once to marry her ; if you deny it, you will
be convifted by the ordeal of hot iron and be the worse
confounded.” And going at once to a prieft, more, as was
clear afterwards, through fear of punishment than love of
right, he confessed his sin, asked for counsel and got it. “ If
you have,” said the prieft, “ a firm resolve never to sin with
her again, you will be able to carry the hot iron fearlessly
and to deny the sin. I hope that the virtue of confession
will save you.” And so it happened to the amazement of
all who knew of his fornication.

See how this fire by the power of God, as in the former
example, contrary to its nature held its force in check, and, as
you shall learn in what follows, in a ftill more wonderful
way blazed out contrary to its nature. To be brief ; the
man was acquitted. After many days he was sailing with
another fisherman on the river practising his craft, and seeing
the house of the woman, said the one to the other: “ I am
much aftonished, and many others with me, that the iron
did not burn you at the synod, when your sin had been so
patent." He unworthily boafting of the favour conferred
on him, because he had now conceived a wish to sin with her
again, ftruck the water of the river with his hand and said:

“ Look you, the fire hurt me juft as much as that.” Wonder¬
ful juftice of God 1 He who mercifully protefted the peni¬
tent, righteously and miraculously punished the back-slider.


202


Of Miracles


As soon as he touched the water, it became for him red-hot
iron. Suddenly drawing back his hand with a loud cry,
he left the skin in the water ; and telling all that had
happened to him to his companion, he was led to a late
repentance. Not unlike this miracle is that which our monk
Lambert used to tell.


CHAPTER XXXVI.

Of an incendiary traveller, who was burnt by cold
iron.

A certain countryman, having a quarrel with another,
gave money to a fellow belonging to the fraternity of tramps,
a rascal like many of them, to set fire to his enemy’s house.
Entering it under the guise of religion, at a convenient
moment he set fire to it. Forgetful of the hospitality he had
received the miserable man, after the house had been rebuilt,
Started another fire for a bribe. Disturbed by the repetition
of his loss the man accused all of whom he had suspicion,
but they cleared themselves by the ordeal of hot iron. Again
was the burnt house rebuilt and the iron used thrown into
a corner of it. To be brief ; again came that false traveller
corrupted by his former greed and seeing the said iron asked
what it was used for. The man replied: “ Some one burnt
this house a second time. I suspected certain men, but they
carried that red-hot and were not burnt.” Then said he:
“ It might be used for something, “ and by God’s will taking
it up, he was so burnt in his hand, that he threw it away
with a loud cry. Seeing that, the head of the house held him
by his coat saying : “ Surely you are the guilty man.” Taken
at once before a judge, do what he might, he had to confess
his crime and so was condemned to be broken on the wheel.
But you will find many miracles of this kind in the section
on confession. Now let us pass on and see what miracles


203


The Dialogue on Miracles


God has wrought in our time in the air. That Jesus himself,
God’s Son, was seen in the clouds of heaven, not in his
majeffy but in his humility, I can prove to you by some true
instances.


CHAPTER XXXVII.

Of crosses which appeared in the air in Friesland
at the time of the preaching of the cross.

When Oliver, scholastic of Cologne, whose words I here
use, was preaching the cross in Friesland in the diocese of
MiinSter and the manor of Bedian, in the month of May on
the Friday before Pentecoff, as I remember I said elsewhere,
the triple form of a cross appeared in the air, a white one
in the North, another of the same colour and shape in the
South, a third coloured in the middle, having a forked cross
and the figure of a man hanging on it with arms raised and
extended, his hands and feet fastened with nails and his head
drooping. This was in the middle between the other two,
on which was no image of human form.


CHAPTER XXXVIII.

Also of a cross which appeared in the manor of
Suthcrhusen close to the sun.

At another season and place in the Frisian manor of
Sutherhusen, when the cross was being preached, there
appeared near the sun a single cross blue in colour.


204


Of Miracles


CHAPTER XXXIX.

Also of another cross seen in the manor of Docheym
in the province of Friesland.

There was a third appearance in the diocese of Utretch
in the manor of Docheym, where S. Boniface was crowned
martyr. There on that martyr’s day, when many thousands
had come to the place appointed, there appeared a great white
cross like a beam artificially fastened crosswise to another.
This sign we all saw (the words are those of the aforesaid
Oliver) but it gradually moved from North to South. An
eyewitness of this vision was our lord abbot Henry and
Winandus his monk, both of whom saw it with their own
eyes.


CHAPTER XL.

Also of crosses which were seen at the same time
near Cologne in the manor of Helendorp.

A certain nun told me this year that a little while before
the preaching of the cross, in a manor which is called Helen¬
dorp, not far diSlant from Cologne, after sunset she saw
two crosses in the air, one larger and one smaller, which
gradually moved from WeSf to EaSf. Wishing to have
witnesses of such a miracle, she called some people, who
also saw it. Similar visions, I remember, I have spoken of
before in the eighth book and the seventeenth chapter and
also in the eighteenth, firSt of two lay-brothers, who saw
the Lord in the air hanging on a cross; then of Rudolph
the lay-brother of Lucka who saw Chriff crucified in the
air, as did fifteen with him. Listen now to a miracle that
happened in the air, a very terrible one.


205


The Dialogue on Miracles


CHAPTER XLI.

Of a cloud which, falling in Saxony, drowned many.

This year in Saxony a whole cloud fell from the air between
two mountain ranges and proved destructive more of life
than property. Such a volume of water was in it, that it
went through a monastery situated in the neighbouring valley
and annihilated every living thing in it, man and beaSl alike.
It overthew the outbuildings, carried away the furniture and
broke down the fences. Only five monks who fled to the
tower, were saved out of the whole number. Now the name
of the monastery is Winendenburg and it belongs to the
Black Order. After that this torrent with irresistible might
passing on to the neighbouring town, named Eisleben,
wrought like havoc there. All the churches, as well as all
the dwellings of the town, it violently entered, and drowned
men and beaSts. And to prove that God has no care for
cattle, but for men, he deigned to show a great miracle in
the case of the drowned which is worthy of mention. For
all those who after the passing of the flood were found in
churches and houses, were a bright snow-white colour, but
those who perished in tents and sheds, looked blacker than
coal. By such a Slamp did God distinguish between the
good and the bad.

Novice .—This plague makes me think that we are
chaStened not by accident but by the juSt judgment of God.

Mon\. —You will be able to note this more fully in the
flood in Friesland in which more than a hundred thousand
people perished and three years later forty thousand. I have
sufficiently set forth the time and cause of this plague in the
seventh book and third chapter.

Novice. —These separate floods seem to me to herald the
sudden coming of the Judge.

Mon\. —It is true that at the same time was fulfilled in
part, what He Himself promised when He said: "There
shall be on the earth diUress of nations by reason of the roar¬
ing of the sea and waves, men’s hearts failing them through
fear." For as the abbot of S. Bernard told me, there was

206


Of Miracles


such alarm in Friesland, that every man expected death and
their hearts failed them as it were in expectation. And
therein was such distress of nations that many Frisians
migrated to other provinces.

Novice. —I heard about it at the time.

Mon\. —As I am beginning to speak about water, I wish
to show you what miracles God has wrought therein in our
times.


CHAPTER XLII.

Of a deformed boy cured after baptism.

Godfrey, the mafter of our novices, before taking the vows,
ruled over a certain parish. One day when baptising a boy,
from whose side hung flesh wondrously horrible, the moment
he drew the child out from immersion in the name of the
Holy Trinity, that monftrous appendage was nowhere to be
seen. Seeing that, those present glorified God and preached
everywhere the power of baptism.


CHAPTER XLIII.

Of a pagan who was baptised at Babylon and healed.

At the time when, because our sins required it, the
Chriftian army at the siege of Damietta was given into the
hands of the Saracens, the bishop of Beauvais was taken
captive to Babylon and many others with him, and were
treated with kindness by the Soldan. A certain pagan woman
of Babylon had a son so ill that there was no hope of his life.

207


The Dialogue on Miracles


One night it was shown to her in a dream that if the afore¬
said bishop should baptise him, he would soon regain com¬
plete bodily health. She, anxious for her son, went in the
morning with her family and parents to the bishop, described
what she had seen, and humbly begged him to baptise the
boy. Her requeft was granted and according to Henry,
knight of Ulmene, who was present, the heathen {food round
the font and mocked ; but their mocking was turned to
wonder. For the young man who entered despairing of life,
was baptised and went out in perfedt health. I hope that
he remains firm in the faith of Christ and perhaps others
through him have believed. But why do I commend the
virtues of baptism in others, when I have had a wonderful
experience of them in my own person.


CHAPTER XLIV.

Also of the author of this dialogue who gained
health through the benefits of baptism.

When {fill a little boy at school, I was at one time extremely
ill, and once and again had come back to life after being
anointed. Now it happened ju{f then that a little pagan
girl whom my aunt had bought, was baptised, who was
about ten years old. And my mother was advised to
wrap me in the sheet in which she had gone to baptism,
whilft it was {fill wet, being assured that the blessing of
health would soon follow. This was done and at the touch
of that mo{f holy water I at once broke out into a sweat
and became well. For although baptism is medicine for
the soul, yet many have found its virtue a cure for their
bodies, as is said of Tarquilinius and of Cromatius, the city
governor.

Novice. —I should like to hear of a miracle wrought with
plain water, to which neither consecration, nor the infusion
of holy oil, had imparted virtue.

208


Of Miracles


Mon\. —I will firSt tell you another concerning baptism,
in which you will see its power a thing in an opposite direction.


CHAPTER XLV.

Of a dog that turned mad when baptised by {Indents.

Once some Students imitating the manner of a prieSt,
baptised a dog in a Stream in the name of the Trinity. But
the dog unable to bear the power of that great name, at
once went mad before their eyes. Yet the boys were spared
by God, because they are a mad set, and He knew that the
outrage on the sacrament had been done not in wickedness,
but in folly. Of plain water, however, you have an earlier
instance in the thirty-fifth chapter, about the fisherman who
was scorched by water. You have also another example in
the third book and twenty-firSf chapter, about the sinner
through whose crimes the sea rose high, and became calm
again after his confession. I will relate a similar one which
will cause you some astonishment.


CHAPTER XLVI.

Of Richard, l^ing of England, and his peril on the
sea.

In the firSt expedition to Jerusalem, Richard, king of the
English, with a hoSt of pilgrims and mighty forces crossed
over sea. One day about dusk there arose at sea a very
violent Storm, so that the ships were beaten by the blaSts and


209


414


The Dialogue on Miracles


driven by the fury of the winds and threatened with death.
But the king like the reft, with death ftaring him in the face,
all that night cried out: “ O when will the hour be here
when the grey monks are wont to rise to praise God? For
I have given them all those possessions that I might have no
doubt they would at once begin to pray for me, and God
be compelled to regard us.” Wonderful faith of the king !
But the Lord (Matt. xvii. 19), by a manifeft miracle rewarded
the faith of that king. For about the eighth hour of the
night the Lord roused by the prayers of the risen monks,
and himself rising in all his power, rebuked the winds and
the waves, and there arose a great calm, so that all wondered
at the great change in the sea. But the king on his return
honoured the Order more than ever in his gratitude for that
miracle, enriching some houses with his alms and building
some anew. Let these examples of miracles of water which
I have given, suffice, for I am haftening on to miracles of
the earth.


CHAPTER XLVII.

Of distresses that occurred in our time.

In our time seems to have been fulfilled what the Lord
says in the gospel " Nation shall rise againSl nation and
\ingdom againSl kingdom and there shall be great earth¬
quakes in divers places and peSlilences and famine and terrors
from heaven and great signs." Although I have given some
examples of these, I will now add more. In our time the
Saracen people under Saladin, King of Syria, as their leader,
have risen againft the Chriftian people and by him Jerusalem
and the Holy Land have been captured. Againft this
treacherous race we have seen three great expeditions of
believers. The firft was under Frederic the emperor, the


210


Of Miracles


second under Henry, his son, the third under Frederic now
ruling. In our time, I say, the people of the Latins rose
againSt the Greeks, provoked by their treachery and took
Constantinople with a great part of Greece. About the same
time the heresy of the Albigenses began to be made public.
Hence the nations of the Catholics were disturbed by the zeal
of faith, Spain that is and France, for its deStrucftion ; but
the end is not yet. For to say nothing of the kingdoms of
infidel races, what great wars there have been between believ¬
ing nations, the French againSt the English, and Germany
againSt Gaul, we all know. LaSt year too a certain people
entered the kingdom of Ruthenia and there destroyed the
whole of one people ; what people this was, whence it came
and where it was going, I am not sure. Of pestilences and
famines we have learnt enough, not in books but in our suffer¬
ings. After the death of the said Henry, the emperor, there
was such a great famine that a maltra of winter wheat was
sold for a mark of Cologne and in some provinces for
eighteen shillings, and a countless number of people were
exterminated by the severity of the famine. Of earthquakes
in divers places I will tell you some recent great miracles.


CHAPTER XLVII 1 .

Of an earthquake in Cyprus.

In the present year, the twelve hundred and twenty second,
since the Incarnation of our Lord, a tale is told by some who
came from the same parts, that two cities in Cyprus fell in
ruins by an earthquake. Moreover in one of them, as the
bishop was Standing at the altar and celebrating mass, the
church shook and fell, destroying both the bishop and the
reSt of the people.


211


The Dialogue on Miracles


CHAPTER XLIX.

Of an earthquake in Brescia.

At the Advent of the Lord the heretics in Milan sent those
in Brescia many wagons of victuals. On the very day how¬
ever of the nativity of our Lord, as they were feafting, the
Lord shook the earth and destroyed more than twelve thousand
people under the falling buildings. Others flying to the
fields heard the cries of the dying, but did not dare to return
to the town to succour them. But the people of Milan, for¬
saking their own city, dwelt in tents for more than eight
days in fear of that earthquake. At Bergamo, Como, Venice,
in Cyprus, at Paphos and in many other provinces and cities
at the same time many were terrified by earthquakes. And
no wonder. So many towers, so many buildings collapsed
that nothing less than the end of the world seemed to be at
hand. A thing unheard of in our generation, as mafter
Oliver of Cologne said in his sermon on faffing, two mountains
in Paphos having a lake between them united and became
one mountain. Moreover the lord of the land was making
a way for the water through the mountain when it burft out
with such violence as to sweep away all in its path.


CHAPTER L.

Of an earthquake in Cologne.

A short time after the earthquake juft mentioned, that is,
on the eleventh of January, there occurred at Cologne a fresh
earthquake so violent that the walls of buildings were shaken,
and threatened to fall. At the same moment our abbot, at
Mount S. Walpurgis, who was celebrating mass before sun¬
rise, was so shaken that he feared the church would fall by
the same movement, and the altar at which he was ftanding,


213


Of Miracles


would be swallowed up by the earth. Next, about two weeks
later, the people of Aix experienced another earthquake.
Winds too so exceedingly Strong blew, as you know, at this
time as to Strike us with no little terror. In this same year
of which we are speaking, there happened the two miracles
aforesaid, that is, the burning of the theatre and the fall of
the cloud, as you have it in the twenty-eighth and forty-firft
chapters.


CHAPTER LI.

Of the fire from heaven which was seen in the land
of the Count de Montfort.

In this week the watchmen of a certain caSlle of the Count
de Montfort, as I am credibly informed, looking at the sky
opposite, saw it open and a fire come out of it. This falling
to the lower air moved in a terrible and wonderful way to
one place after another, foreboding some great event.

Novice .—The description of these is very alarming.

Mon\.- —1 have something further to say about miracles of
earth.


CHAPTER LII.

Of a man miraculously delivered from a pit in which
he had lain crushed for a year.

In the diocese of Treves, in a manor named Wanebach,
near a church in the same manor, two men were working
in a silver mine, one below and the other above on the edge
of the pit. As they did so the sides of the pit collapsed and

213


The Dialogue on Miracles


the man who was at the bottom, was buried under masses
of earth and rock ; but the one at the top falling with them
was so crushed that he died in three days. Now the wife
of the buried man, supposing him to be dead, had a mass
celebrated for his soul. And because she was a poor woman
and could not afford to have masses sung, every day she burned
incense for the salvation of his soul in the church before the
altar, only neglecting to do so on three days. After she had
done this for a whole year, some men in pursuit of gain, began
to clear out the mine. And when they came close to the
buried man, he called out: “ Spare me, spare me ; take out
the earth so as not to bury me.” They at firft supposing
it to be only fancy, when they heard his voice, yet did as he
demanded. Now when he was laid bare and was asked how
he could have lived so long there, he answered: “ Every
day at such an hour I was so sufficiently refreshed by an
aromatic perfume that the whole of that day until the same
hour I had no desire to eat or drink. Throughout this year
for three days only have I missed that perfume and then I
almoft perished of hunger.” He could not however describe
the virtue or the cause of the perfume. His wife being
questioned about it at once understood ; she explained, as
has been said above, what she had done for his soul.

Novice. —If spiritual offices conferred on souls thus benefit
bodies, I suppose they can do much for those lying in punish¬
ment.

Mon\. —Of that you will be satisfied in what follows.
Whatever benefits faith and devotion bring the humble in the
sacraments of the church, so much does mockery of the same
sacraments injure the foolish and proud.


CHAPTER LIII.

Of a man who was cho\ed with ashes whiltt mock¬
ing the sacrament of ashes.

We have been told by our monk Theodoric, once count in
Wiede, of a very remarkable event. “ I know,” said he,


214


Or Miracles


“ an executioner in Coblentz, a man of good Standing in his
office (giving me his name). Once on Tuesday before Ash
Wednesday, having spent almost all the night in feaSting,
in the morning he went to a tavern with his comrade to wash
down the meat as it were. And when the bell rang for mass,
and the faithful flocked to the church, some from that tavern,
and these two were left alone drinking, the other said to the
executioner: “ We are certainly waiting too long ; let us go
therefore to the church for the Ash service.” But he deriding
the mystery of the Ashes, answered: “ Sit down, 1 will give
you the ashes and you shall give them to me ” ; and taking
some ashes from the hearth, he threw them over his head.
See the immediate punishment for his mockery that followed ;
for at once round his head and face he felt a cloud of ashes
as if they were blown upon him by bellows. With a cry of
alarm he swallowed so many ashes that he was almoft
suffocated. Many ran up seeing so wonderful a plague.
He was taken to an island where there was no duff but grass
only ; but it was no good. On the Rhine, in an orchard,
in the solar, in no place could he protecff himself againff the
cloud of ashes ; by them he was at laSt suffocated and so
paid the penalty for his mockery. See how the man I spoke
of above, could through the grace of devotion live even under
the earth, whereas this man was suffocated in the air through
that sin of his. I will now bring in two miracles ; the firff
won by virtue of humility, the second by the virtue of purity.


CHAPTER LIV.

Of a lay-brother who was a swineherd and of the
tree felled by his merits.

Liffard whom I mentioned in the fourth book, chapter
four, was a lay-brother in Hemmenrode. Being a man of
good birth and therefore his humility the more meritorious,


215


The Dialogue on Miracles


he did not scorn to feed the pigs of the monastery, and even
begged to have that office. One day after feeding his herd
of pigs hard by a wood, he saw there two trees growing out
of one trunk. Being much pleased with one and saying in
his heart: “ O God, how suitable that one would be for
making troughs for the pigs ! ” at once it fell as if it had
been hewn down by an axe. See how the wood obeyed not
his spoken prayer, but his mere thought. So much for
humility. Hear another miracle of purity.


CHAPTER LV.

Of a girl and a flint that was split to prove her
Steadfastness.

Allard, our novice, himself told me that he has an aunt
named Julia who before taking the veil, although in body
pure, yet in manner showed herself too light and wanton ;
and she was of marriageable age. As she was playing one
day with one of her sifters, her brother, a cleric of much
gravity was present. He grieved by his sifter’s lightness,
took a very hard flint from the river and said: “ This flint
will split in my hand before my sifter Julia becomes fteadfaft
and a nun.” But God, that He might show that no one
was to be judged by the outward appearance, at once split
the flint in his hand. When she knew it, her conscience
being pricked both by her brother’s words and the miracle
of the ftone, she bade farewell to marriage and the world,
and took the habit of religion in a convent of nuns called
Bethbure, and to this day she keeps that ftone to witness to
her purity and change of life. So much for the elements.
Would you like to hear now of the miraculous in those which
move in them, birds, that is, fishes, animals and reptiles?

Novice .—I should.


216


Of Miracles


Mon \.—Whether what I am going to tell you has been
recorded or not, I do not know, for I had it not from a book
but the narrative of a certain man of religion.


CHAPTER LVI.

Of a little bird that was freed from a l(ite by the
merits of S. Thomas of Canterbury.

A certain matron, who was a great lover of the blessed
Thomas of Canterbury, suffered from conflant illness, and
tortured with pain called upon that martyr in these words:
“ Holy Thomas,” said she, “ help me.” Now she had a
little bird of some species, which from continually hearing
her had learnt to utter that prayer exactly. One day a kite
seeing it outside its cage, seized and flew off with it. In the
moment of its seizure, when it was crushed by the talons of
the bird, and in the hearing of all present, she cried out from
the air: “ Holy Thomas, help me.” Now that God of
wonders might set forth the precious merits of His martyr,
He commanded the kite to drop the little bird, which at
once with great joy returned to its miftress. But the kite
paid the penalty for its pillage, falling dead to the ground.

Novice .—How was it that the saint succoured the little
bird in its peril, but not his sick servant ?

Monl j.-—-Because that had no other life, such as she by
faith looked for, He wished also to show her that delay in
healing her was not due to want of power but was of set
purpose, because virtues are learnt by sickness. Liffen to
another miracle.


217


The Dialogue on Miracles


CHAPTER LVII.

Of doves which a kjiight set free.

A certain knight of the manor of Lisere, named Anselm,
used to rear many doves. He was told that he was com¬
mitting a grievous sin in keeping them, because they damaged
the crops and barns of neighbours. One day as he threw
corn to them to eat, with all of them gathered together before
him, in a loud voice heard by all present, he said : “ You doves,
if it is God’s will that you should flay with me, flay ; but if
not, I bid you in His name to leave me at once.” At those
words at once all the doves rising together, flew away and
never again returned to those dovecotes.

Novice .—How could they remain there againfl the divine
will?

Mon \.—It was not God’s will that the knight should keep
the doves, and they could not remain there againfl His will.
God’s will is His power. Do you suppose it pleases God
when sparrowhawks, falcons, cranes and other birds of the
kind are reared for amusement. Yet some, ftorks for inftancc,
may be reared or entertained by the religious for necessary
purposes ; concerning which I will take this opportunity to
tell you a miracle.


CHAPTER LVIII.

Of the floras to which the CiSlercian prior gave a
blessing.

At Citeaux, where is the head of our Order, many florks
nefl. This is permitted by the brothers of the Order, because
by them not only the monaflery but all the places round are
cleared of foul worms. When winter comes, they depart,
and at a fixed time they come back. One day when they

218


Of Miracles


had marshalled their ranks for travelling abroad, that they
might not be thought ungrateful for the hospitality granted
them, they sought out the brotherhood which at that moment
was working in the fields, and flew round them with many
hoarse cries and made them all wonder, not knowing what
they wanted. And the prior said to them: “ I suppose they
are asking permission to go ” ; and raising his hand blessed
them. At once, wonderful to say, with great cheerfulness
they flew off together, making the monks feel ashamed, who
think little of receiving or waiting for the blessing, when
they set out for a journey.

Novice .—What are reasoning men, who are ungrateful
for God’s gifts, to say when they hear of doves obeying and
Storks giving thanks?

Mont{. —This is the reproach of the Lord through Jeremiah
againSt his people Israel saying : "The turtle dove and the
swallow and the flor\ watched for the time of his coming ;
but my people knoweth not the judgment of the Lord its
God " (Jer. viii. 7 ).

Novice. —Where do these birds live in winter?

Monl(. —In very hot places.


CHAPTER LIX.

That swallows always return to their wonted
dwellings.

I have been told by a certain prieSt, that the father of a
family had very many swallows’ neSts in his house, and
wishing to find out that very point about which you ask
me, he took one of them and fastening a piece of parch¬
ment to its foot containing these words: “O swallow, where
do you five in winter? ” he let it go ; for he knew by
experience that they always return to their wonted haunts
and dwellings. The swallow coming to Asia with the rest,


219


The Dialogue on Miracles


built its neSt in the house of a certain Peter. Seeing on
its foot in its daily coming and going that parchment, and
wishing to know what it was, he caught the bird, read and
removed the parchment tying on another which thus
answered the question: “ In Asia in the house of Peter.”
When the said householder learnt this on the return of the
swallow, he told the Story to me as a remarkable fa<5t. But
about Storks I could tell you many wonderful things, if I
were not passing on to more useful topics. The males are
very jealous of the females and punish adultery with great
severity. Yet the females have one very remarkable remedy.
If before the arrival of her mate she can bathe in water, he
knows nothing of her adultery and so she escapes the penalty
of death.


CHAPTER LX.

Of a florb that was billed for adultery.

In the court of a certain knight, as I have been credibly
informed by a monk, there was a neSl of Storks, that is, a
male and a female. In the absence of the male she com¬
mitted adultery and frequently plunged into a ditch near
the house. The knight having noticed this and wishing to
know the cause ordered the ditch to be blocked up. To
be brief, she, after committing the offence, sought the water
as usual, and could not get into it. Meantime the male
arriving discovered her crime and attacked the adulteress
with his beak. Not being Strong enough by himself to kill
her, he flew away in a rage and returning after a time with
many Storks accompanying him, before the eyes of all the
people in the court slew the wretched female.

Novice .—I suppose that the jealousy contains in it some
sacred meaning.

Monb -—Your supposition is right. For often in the
scriptures God compares Himself to birds. His spouse is


220


Of Miracles


the faithful soul ; adultery, every mortal sin which separates
men from him and joins them with the devil ; baptism with
water is repentance, which is ever being repeated and washes
away guilt, that God may not see or know it for vengeance.
This being said by way of example, I will tell you something
wonderful about fishes, which are made of the same element,
water, as birds.


CHAPTER LXI.

Of the ring of the provoB Conrad, that was found
in a pike.

Conrad, the president of S. Severin in Cologne, was also
provost of Xanten. When sailing once on a time to that
town, and washing his hand outside the boat in the stream,
he let slip a very good golden ring from his finger which
fell into the Rhine. But the following year going in a boat
again to the town, he met some fishermen near the place,
where he had loft the ring, and he ordered enquiries to be
made of them if they had taken any fish. They replied:
“ We have one pike which belongs by right to the provoft
of Xanten and we dare not sell it.” When they were told :
“ See, here is the provoft,” they offered him the fish. When
the cook had disembowelled it, the ring was found in its
entrails. Being neither able nor willing to hide it, he showed
it to the provoft, who recognised it at once and so recovered
it by a great miracle.


CHAPTER LX1I.

Of water turned into blood with the fishes in it.

A certain prieft of the Black Order laft year told me a
very wonderful ftory about water and fishes. “ In our


221


The Dialogue on Miracles


province,” said he, “ as many can testify to-day, all the marshes
and Streams at a certain time change to blood. The fish
being unable to bear their bitterness leave the waters and
seek dry land. Moreover eels climbing the banks and Stick¬
ing there are found in that plight. But a number of fishes
perish in the waters, as in the plague in Egypt. I will now
add something wonderful about the animals and beaSts that
move on land.


CHAPTER LXII.

Of the oxen that filled their peeper.

When William, our novice, was returning to Rome in
the firSt expedition to Jerusalem, he heard of a recent occur¬
rence there, which caused wonder to many. A certain ox¬
herd had fed oxen near the city for more than twenty years.
One day as he slept in the field not far from the grazing
cattle, four of them collecting put their heads together as
if in talk and after a little came running to their keeper,
trampling upon him with their hoofs and tossing him with
their horns, until they tore him to pieces and killed him.


CHAPTER LXIV.

Of a she-wolf who filled a boy in Kerpen.

Abbot Daniel told me a very remarkable Story about a
she-wolf. “ In Kerpen,” he said, " where I was a scholastic,
the scholars one day had had permission to go to the woods.
Finding a wolf’s lair there, they drove out all the whelps and
one of them cut off their feet with an axe. As they were


222


Of Miracles


going away, the wolf came back and when she saw her
whelps’ feet cut off, followed them as they retreated, and
furiously attacked him only who had done this. He in his
fright climbed a tree. Not being able to follow him, she
began to dig round the roots with her claws, and finding this
useless, she summoned other wolves. Meanwhile the scholars
reported it and men from the manor with swords and forks
and cudgels came to his help and drove off the wolves, taking
him away in their midft. The wolves who had been called
in, followed for a little and then returned and the she-wolf
alone persisted in trying to avenge herself by repeated attacks.
And when they were near the manor, giving her life to
avenge her whelps, she broke into the guards of armed men
and leaping at the throat of the scholar at once killed him.
She was immediately slain.

Novice .—I am much surprised that she could know the
scholar from the reft.

A lon \.—Many such things happen by the judgment of
God, of which kind is what follows.


CHAPTER LXV.

Of a man who had all his children throttled by
wolves.

A certain man near Aix had three children. Now at the
time when Philip was crowned there, many wolves were
seen in the province. One of these catching the infant son
of that man outside the house, carried him off, throwing
him over his shoulder. A soldier by chance riding along
the road, in pity for the child galloped after the Wolf and
rescued him alive and unharmed from its teeth. Not long
after the same boy by some judgment of God was carried orf
by a wolf, ftrangled and eaten. That child had a sifter older
than himself. She was sent one day into the fields to draw


“3


The Dialogue on Miracles


water from a spring. A wolf in the sight of many people
ran to her and before they could help her, killed the girl and
was devouring the entrails. So this man robbed of his two
children, having in time of war taken his wife with the
furniture to the town, left a third boy to guard the house
until his return. He never saw him again and it is possible
that he was taken and Strangled by a wolf like the others.
Since we are speaking of wolves, I will tell you something
about a wolf, which I heard lately, at which I wondered a
good deal.


CHAPTER LXVI.

Of a wolf that dragged a girl into a wood, that she
might draw out a bone from the throat of his mate.

Near a manor, whose name I have forgotten, a wolf
attacked a grown-up girl, holding her arm in its teeth.
Dragging her with him, as often as she began crying out,
he gripped her hard, and spared her when she was silent.
To be brief, she was led by him into the wood to another
wolf, in whose throat a bone had Stuck. It was in very great
pain and the hand of the girl was thruSt into the gaping jaws
by the mouth of the other and by it the bone extradled which
had Stuck there. Thus cured, he at once with his friend
led the girl back to the manor.

Novice. —I have seen a young man who was carried off
by wolves when a child and reared by them to manhood,
so that in the manner of wolves he would run about on his
hands and feet and howl.

Mon\. —So much then for animals. Now I will add
something about reptiles and so conclude this seStion.


224


Of Miracles


CHAPTER LXVII.

Of a toad that persecuted Theodoric Cancer.


In the manor of Kerpen in the diocese of Cologne, which
I have mentioned before, there had lived a man of whom I
am not certain whether he is Still alive, a monk but blind,
named Theodoric Cancer. Once in his youth, when lifting
a harrow in a field, he found a great toad under it. As it
rose on its hind legs as if to fight, in anger he seized a piece
of wood and killed the reptile. Wonderful to say, when
Theodoric was expecting nothing less, he saw the dead toad
following his track. Having pierced it afresh and reduced
it to ashes by burning it again and again, he found it of no
use. There was no place so remote, so foul, which was
safe for him to sleep in. At night he hung in a shield from
a rafter in fear of it. When he rode out with a hunter friend
and complainingly told him of these wonderful things, behold,
he saw the reptile clinging to the tail of his horse and quickly
climbing up to him. The other at once called out: “ Take
care, take care, see, the devil is climbing your horse,” and
he leapt down at once and killed it. Another time too, as
he was sitting with his friends, he saw that reptile on a post
in the next wall. “ Look,” said he, “ where that devil is.
Never shall I be free from him, unless he gets his revenge.”
At once baring his head, he allowed the reptile to approach,
and when it had bitten him, he threw it off as it did so and
quickly cutting out the bitten part with a razor prepared
for this, he threw it away. Soon the cut swelled up wonder¬
fully through the infection of the poison to the size of his
fifl and burfl. Thus he was freed from that moft foul
reptile. Afterwards this Thomas was accidentally deprived
of an eye by a soldier and gave himself up to such a pious
life that he always went barefoot and thus visited the home
of the blessed apoffles, Peter and Paul, also S. James of
Gompoftella many times.

Novice .—1 have never heard of such things.


225


i !5


The Dialogue on Miracles


Mont {.—God often punishes sinners by monflers like this,
that they may know how great a punishment is prepared in
the future, where their worm shall not die nor their fire be
extinguished, for the false and gluttonous, the luflful and
unclean. Of triflers, such as sportsmen, I have already spoken.
Of the luflful you have an example in the life of S. Malachi,
where a luflful man was driven by a toad from a nun. Of
gluttons, I remember, I spoke in the fourth book chapter
eighty-six, where the entrails of a hen were turned into a
toad. I will tell you another recent example of this.


CHAPTER LXVIII.

Of a toad that was found in the bottle of a drunken
prieil.

In the manor of Berge in the diocese of Cologne a priest
celebrates, who is a very remarkable man and wholly given
up to gluttony. I do not wish to give his name ; I hope
that he may yet amend his life. It was his habit in the
summer for the gratification of his appetite to drink from
bottles, that is, glass vessels. One day as he lifted his bottle
filled with wine, and offered it to someone to drink, there
was a great toad sitting at the bottom of it. Much terrified
at the sight, they wondered how so great a body could have
entered, since the lower part of the vessel spread out, and
the neck was very long and narrow. And as the prieft could
not get the reptile out and was unwilling to break the vessel,
he put it back in the place from which he had taken it, but
returning after a season he found nothing in it. No doubt
the liquor had been changed into the horrid reptile, that by
this warning the prieff might be turned againfl drunkenness.

236


Of Miracles


CHAPTER LXIX.

Of a toad that was found on the altar of the feu/s,
when they were celebrating their fettival.

Not long ago God miraculously confounded the Jews who
are altogether foul in person and worship, by a reptile of this
kind. In the next manor called Wintere, the Jews living
there were once celebrating certain solemnities in the house
of a knight which they had hired. After they had covered
the altar with many fine cloths, they entered together at the
time of the evening sacrifice and the priefl going up to the
altar, on rolling off the cloths, underneath about the middle
of the altar found a very great toad. At his sudden loud
cry in exceeding great fear, Jews and Chriflians came running
up, and there was the monflrous sight plain for all to see.
And many knights and their wives flocked there to see and
broke into laughter, increasing the confusion of the Jews.
The tale was told by them at the time to our lord abbot
Gevard from whom I heard it.

Novice .—I am much pleased at miracles of this sort, which
are destructive of error and vice and some of them incen¬
tives of faith and virtue.

Mon\. —Be assured that even poisonous reptiles have some
natural virtues.


CHAPTER LXX.

Of a serpent that sucked the wound of a soldier
and healed it.

I was told by Henry de ForeSl, an honourable and truth¬
ful knight, a very wonderful tale about a serpent. “ A
soldier," said he, “wounded near me laSt year in the side
and making a bad recovery, was in very great pain through
a discharge of matter from the wound. One day when he

227


The Dialogue on Miracles

had lain down on the trunk of a felled tree with his side
bare that the matter might escape, he fell asleep. Mean¬
while there came a snake and sucked the wound. He awoke
and shook off the snake. And although he was alarmed
because of the poison, yet he soon felt much better. He
was advised to give the snake an opportunity of sucking it
again in the same place and in the same way ; perhaps he
might be entirely cured. This he did and now being in
perfect health, he began to be so much beloved by the snake
that he could hardly sleep in any place without its coming
to his bed. The man disliking its company, went into
another province and for about half a year did not see it.
On his return however he was again persecuted by the snake,
and when it could not get in where he was sleeping, in the
morning it would be found at the door. He was advised
to kill the beaSt and replied : “ 1 will not kill that which
healed me.” But at laSt enraged by the persistency of the
snake, he did kill it and so was freed from it.

Novice. —That was a better serpent than that mentioned
in the sixth book and twenty-second chapter.

Mon{. —That one punished a very great sin. How
serpents spare men, I will illustrate by two miracles.


CHAPTER LXX1.

Of a matron of Flanders who swallowed a sna\c
in the dar\ and expelled it in child-birth.

A certain matron of Flanders as I have heard from the
monk Wiger of Villers, brought forth a child, about whose
waiSt was bound an enormous snake. A discussion arising
how it was to be drawn away without danger to the child,
by some one’s advice a sword was placed upon it. The
snake alarmed by the cold feeling, raised its head and fell
away from the child. The latter was baptised and lived a
few days. It is said that the mother had swallowed the
snake in the dark.


228


Of Miracles


CHAPTER LXXII.

Also of a woman whose mouth a snathe entered
when she was sleeping, and escaped when she
brought forth her child.


Something very similar happened in the diocese of Utrecht
in the manor of Dulre. The nurse of Allard, our novice,
as he himself told me, being asleep one day near a hive of
bees, a huge snake entered her belly through her mouth.
Her husband coming up to wake the sleeping woman, saw
the tail left outside a finger’s length. He was unable to
draw it out and she awoke saying: “ I have had a very
uncomfortable sleep.” And the husband would not tell her
what had happened, left she should die of fright, for she was
near the time of her delivery. By the advice of the husband
honey and sweet things were given to her by her mother,
that the snake might drink them and be quiet. But at
the time of her delivery the woman ejefted the snake with
the child. Her husband was waiting for it with a drawn
sword, and the snake retreated to the woman with the
cunning natural to it, but the way being blocked, it was
killed. That woman is ftill alive. If I were to tell you of
all the things that in my time have happened miraculously,
time would fail me before the abundance of my material.
In the meantime remember those that have pleased you, for
I pass on to subjects of greater profit. For it has been written
of God : " Remember ye the wonderful things that he hath
done." Let us remember what has been said, saying with
the prophet: "Thou art God who alone doeil wondrous
things. Not to us, O Lord, not unto us but to Thy name,
give the glory." The name of the Father is Chrift, by whom
all things were made. To whom with the same Father and
Holy Ghoft be honour and rule for ever and ever. Amen.


229


BOOK XI


CONCERNING THE DYING


CHAPTER I.

What death is ; whence the name is derived ;
of four kinds of dying people.

The eleventh hour of the day draws the sun to its setting.
This is the decrepit age which is nigh unto death. Not with¬
out myffery, I imagine, muff we treat in this Eleventh
Book of the dying ; for the number eleven, as it passes one
beyond ten in which number are embraced the commands
of the divine law, denotes transgression. By the transgression
of the firs'l-created death entered into the world. Hence death
(mors) took its name from “biting" (morsus). When man bit
the apple of the forbidden tree, he incurred death and sub-
jetffed himself with all his posterity to its certainty. Death also
is derived from bitterness (amaritudine), because, as it is said,
no pain in this life is more bitter than the separation of body
and soul. Now there are three kinds of death, as saith
Ysidorus, sharp, untimely and natural. Sharp is that of
infants ; untimely that of the young ; due, that is, natural,
that of the old. And because we propose to speak of the
dying, know that there are four classes of dying men. Some
live well and die well ; others live ill and die ill ; others
live ill, but by the grace of God die well ; and there be those
who have lived well, but by the righteous judgment of God
die ill. This difference God hath well expressed by the
mouth of Ezekiel. Now he says of those that live well and


231


The Dialogue on Miracles


die well: If a man hath been juft and hath done that which
is lawful and right,” after enumerating many good works,
he ends thus, “ he is juft, he shall surely live,” that is,
eternally, “ saith the Lord God.” Of him that lives ill and
dies ill, he at once adds: “ But if he beget a son that is a
robber, a shedder of blood,” enumerating many works of
wickedness, in the end he saith : “ Shall he live? He shall
not live. Since he hath done all these abominable deeds,
he shall surely die,” that is eternally, “ his blood shall be
upon him.” But concerning him who hath lived ill, and
finally repents, thus he saith: “ Again when the wicked
man turneth away from the wickedness that he hath com¬
mitted, and doth that which is lawful and right, he shall
surely live, he shall not die. All his transgressions that he
hath committed, I will not remember. In the righteousness
that he wrought shall he live.”

Novice. —A great comfort.

Mon\. —Not less terrible is that which follows. “ But
when the righteous turneth away from his righteousness and
committeth iniquity according to all the abominations that
the wicked man doth, shall he live? All his righteousness
that he hath done shall not be mentioned. In his sin that
he sinned shall he die ” (Ezek. xviii). Peter lived well and
ended well. Simon Magus on the contrary lived ill and
ended ill. The robber on the cross had lived ill, but made
a good end. Nicolaus the ftranger is believed to have lived
well at the beginning, but he did not finish well.

Novice. —Why good men die well and the wicked ill, I
have no doubt, but why men for a long time living well, do
not persevere, and those long living an evil life depart by a
good end, I should like to be informed.

Mon\. —I am not Chusi, David’s counsellor. For who
knoweth the mind of the Lord or who hath been his coun-
cellor (Rom. xi. 34 )?

Novice. —What is a good death and what a bad death ?

Mon\. —He who departs in love, shall by means of his
light see eternal light. Hence is it that those dying in the
world hold a blazing light in their hands. But he who dies
without love, shall be sent into outer darkness. For in one

232


Concerning the Dying


sentence is all this diversity summed up. Saith he : “ Such
as I find thee, such shall I judge thee.”

Novice .—I acknowledge that I am satisfied with your
expositions ; now I pray you to add examples.

Mon —I will do what you ask and in the order men¬
tioned. How precious is the death of the saints in the sight
of the Lord, and how dreadful is the death of sinners, the
following examples will show.


CHAPTER II

Of the death of Meyner, the priefi of Hemmenrode.

At the time when the blessed David, monk of Hemmen¬
rode, passed from this world, there was great mortality in
that house which goes by the name of Hemmenrode, the
Lord taking to himself those whose holier life commended
them, like those doves that are fed with better corn. There
was there a priefi named Meyner, at one time canon of the
church of S. Simeon in Treves and then by S. Bernard’s
profitable exhortations becoming a monk of the Order. More
than thirty years had he passed in the Order and through
many efforts had reached a lofty pinnacle of holiness. And
being for his worth elected to various offices, prior, that is,
cellarer, granger, mailer of novices, Hep by Hep, after
adminiffering each without blame he fell into severe illness
and his sharp pains told him that death was at hand. The
abbot in consideration of his labours, caused him to be
placed in a retired part of the house and set apart four monks
to wait on him. But he, although rejoicing in solitude,
was rather vexed by the honour shown to him, saying to the
abbot: “ These brothers are wearied with watching and
working and are not needed by me. Solitude is pleasing to
me, and I shall not be lonely when I am by myself, for he
is not alone who has with him his maffer and guardian, the


233


Thf. Dialogue on Miracles

Lord. If I have not men’s care, I believe I shall not want
care from heaven.” When the abbot was going and was
paying little attention to his talk, he himself compelled the
brothers to leave him and to put out the light. At mid¬
night by the prior’s order the monks who had been bled,
assembled in the same house to say the hours and a fire was
lighted because it was winter. Then matins were said and the
prior visited him while the brothers flood round the bed.
To them he said : “All night I was holding a solemn service.
If I had a hundred tongues I could not express the joy of
my inward happiness. I saw a divine light, I heard heavenly
harmony, I was amongfl the choirs singing in heaven. Ah !
with what precision, what clearness, what reverence did they
sing 1 Their voices were many and different, but juft as
on the harp a variety of firings gives a united harmony, so
did that concord in diversity blend in one melody delightful
beyond human underflanding. The deep tones of the bass,
the rising girlish voices making diapason. The sweetness
of that organ human weakness cannot measure. As I
wondered at all this, there flood by me one in majeflic robe,
saying: “Why doft thou wonder? This is the praise of
the word of God.” And when he had said that, he joined
the singers and sang with all his might. Meantime there
was seen a pleasing sight. I saw a beautiful flreet firetch¬
ing above me, making a road from earth to heaven. One
of our Order suddenly appeared in the midft, who entering
this road sought the realms above. Full of joy and uttering
praises, fenced in by troops of angels, having suffered no
agony at all, he was taken into heaven. Yet that brother
was not named to me. Moreover some were blaming our
brothers, charging them with two offences, that when brothers
died, they were negligent in the payment of what was due,
and that they did not give up at once the old tunics when
they received new ones. On the one point I grieve that I
am to blame, for with urgent reason I had not paid the masses
that I owe, but have sung how many more psalms inflead.
For I thank God, my lips have never been slothful in
His praises. Such talk he carried on, and thereafter being
withdrawn from this world, proved the truth of his words.


234


Concerning the Dying

They say of him that when abroad on business it was his
practice to repeat two psalms each day. It is plain that that
brother who suddenly appeared in the midft and was con¬
ducted with heavenly honours, very fitly meant Meyner
himself, clearly indicating that when death came quickly, he
would pass without a Struggle from distress to glory, from
death to life, from the world to ChriSt, to whom be honour
and rule for ever and ever. Amen.


CHAPTER III

Of the death of Ysenbard, the sacriSlan of the same
monastery.

In the same community the prieSt named Ysenbard, the
guardian of the church, who had lived more than thirty years
in the Order and had come to his laSt days, fell sick. In
the middle of the night, whilst the attendants were carefully
watching by him, they heard him lightly whisper some words.
Fearing that he, being near to death, was rambling in his
talk, they put their ears to the mouth of the speaker and
heard sublime words, full of edification, concerning the glory
of the heavenly beings and the indescribable happiness of the
saints. Thinking it right that a capable witness of those
things should be present, they told the abbot, who was him¬
self in a very weak Slate of health. The abbot was summoned
and came. Meantime the clock ran down, and seizing the
occasion he said : “ Ah ! how sweet a night have I passed !
the timing of what a delightful a clock have I been busied
with ! How sweet and pleasant the harmony I have heard ;
and the bands of minStrels I have been with ! How in con¬
cert, how delightfully did they sing ! In our singing there
is wont to be discord, weariness and slackness ; there it is
far otherwise. They all unite in one melody, sweeter than
anything that gives delight. Unwearyingly they cease not to


235


The Dialogue on Miracles


offer praise, and the more they praise, the more does their
desire to praise grow in a wonderful and unutterable way
leading up to the enjoyment of a moft pleasing reft, for they
never cease praising the creator. There I saw men of your
Order conspicuous in honour before others and high in favour.
For they who have been moft humbled here, contented with
a mean lot for Chrift’s sake, rejoice there in the greater glory,
receiving abundant consolation, brilliant of countenance, lofty
in ftature, gloriously arrayed. With these I held intimate
converse and was refreshed with friendly talk. There
appeared also to me our brothers, Dom Warner, the prior,
Dom Michael, Dom Arnold, Dom Conon, and Dom David
who was higher in honour, all clad in the whiteft cowls, the
brightness of which my eyes could not endure, like the flash
of dazzling lightning. Delighted with their great brilliancy
of garb, I asked eagerly, if I should have such. And they
said : “ He who lives blamelessly, may hope for such garments.
But if vice be hidden in his conversation, a spot will appear
in his robe. A fault in life makes a blemish in the robe.
Therefore shall he deserve to have a spotless robe, who keeps
himself free from spot.” And I said: “ What are those
spots? ” And they said : “ Murmuring, slander, envy, negleft
and whatsoever ftains and deftroys the purity of the heart.
They who do such things cause a spot in the brightness of
their garments. But thou for thy many efforts and the
honefty of thy life shalt be awarded such a robe.” His throat
being dry after speaking thus and his Strength exhausted, he
ceased talking. After a little being refreshed with a few drops
of water and recovering his breath, he prepared to speak and
raised the hopes of his hearers. And he said : “ Would God
I might have time till I could fully tell of the works of God
to you, sirs. Ah ! what a messenger of joy I should be !
What glad and amazing things should I relate ! which I
have seen and heard and felt, which are prepared for those
that love God and are active in his praises.” And the abbot
said: “ Brother, how did you see these things? ” And he
said : “ Four times this night was I carried before God. My
breaft: was opened and my spirit drawn forth and at once
I was amongft the choirs of angels and I saw Our Lady

236


Concerning the Dying


amongSt her holy virgins with extreme clearness, and she
promised that she would be with me in my need and that S.
Michael with a great army of angels was ready to give me
aid ; for I was ever paying honour to his altar and his
memory ; and presently I was aware of a countless hoSt cf
saints and those whom I had never seen before.” Again
failing in breath and strength, he Stopped speaking and so
being compelled, he took a little to drink, and tailing it he
said: “ How sweet is the Lord to those that taSte Him !
How great is the abundance of his sweetness, how bountiful,
how unfailing and overflowing with plenty of all delights,
with which he was deigned to refresh me this night! O that
sweetness, moSt pleasing sweetness, desirable and very excel¬
lent ! O how matchless, how surpassing and ineffable !
For however well I may remember it in my heart, yet over¬
come by its exceeding greatness, I cannot express it in words.
Fed on such happy food, needless is it to add to it this. This
affords slight and brief nourishment, that refreshes and satis¬
fies for ever. How blessed are they who will enjoy it end¬
lessly! ” At the bidding of the abbot some novices were
called, men once famous in the world, distinguished for
prowess in war ; these he thus comforted : “ Truly happy
are ye who have been called from your unreal life to take your
part in heaven with the righteous ; for your salvation is certain,
if only ye persevere. The lord David unceasingly pours
out prayers for you to the Lord, that as ye have begun your
salvation, so ye may happily complete it. Speaking of one
by name he said of him : “ Had he not entered the gates of
the Cloister, he would not have escaped the gates of everlast¬
ing death. There were present gueSts called from their homes
for the purpose of becoming monks but held back by excessive
love of temporalities, they hesitated whether to enter upon
that hard path. They coming to the man of God, confessed
the wavering of their purpose, because, forsooth, to will was
present with them, but how to perform the good they found
not, and they begged that assisted by his prayers they might
be worthy to be established in goodness. And said he : “ As
long as ye cling to the world in your hearts, ye cannot perfectly
please God, nor be Strengthened in good, having your will


237


The Dialogue on Miracles


fixed on evil. Wherefore go ye away altogether from those
things which ye love without profit, and there shall not be
wanting to you the Saviour’s love. If ye had seen what I
have seen, ye would account all the glory of the world worth¬
less.” Then many asked him various questions, this one
about his father, another about his son, another about his own
future State, and another of the present. But the man of
God so ordered his answers to each that he was proved to
be a revealer of secrets and a seer into their consciences. Soon
when the Lord called, that holy soul was freed from the flesh
to return no more to the pains of the body, but, as we believe,
to be clothed in the light of immortality and to be refreshed
with the sweetness of everlasting joys. These two chapters,
as also the five which follow, have, I hear, beeen noted by
one, who says that he saw and heard what has been described,
and which I have not allowed to perish. There are besides
many witnesses to that now living.

Novice .—I beg you to go on with the reft, for they are the
more pleasing to your hearers that they have occurred recently
according to your testimony and been committed to wridng.


CHAPTER IV.

Of the death of the mon\ Siger.

Mon \.—There was in the same house a prieft monk, Siger,
a young man and a lover of the Order, a severe chaSIiser of
his body, who amongst other aSts of goodness, ardently loved
the Holy Mother of God, and by all the ways he could urged
others to love her. When the hour of his summons was at
hand, his sickness and weakness being very great, a lay-brother,
forewarned by the favour of God, whom the Lord
frequently designed to comfort by his secret consolations, saw
this vision. He thought that the board of the dead was being
beaten, and he Started to aid in the passing of a brother. And

2 3 8


Concerning the Dying


it chanced that whilff going through a palace wonderfully
built, he found living in it a matron of venerable bearing,
whose face showed angelic grace and her garments snowy
whiteness. Therefore he flopped with his eyes fixed on her,
certain that in so desirable a person there resided divine power.
Finally, the presence of such divinity giving him courage, he
came nearer, having no fear of the danger of rebuff, and
joined in friendly talk, saying: “ Moff lovely miflress, what
reason you have for coming in here to us, since matrons are
not allowed here? ” Said she: “ I have a special right in
your house and I come to visit my friends and members of
my household.” Said he, having a pious care for his brothers :
“ Behold our brothers depart one by one, young and old and
middle-aged, and there is no acceptance of persons. What
then muff we do?” She said: “You muff sing the Te
Deum.” She made a further reply, but he being a plain
illiterate man remembered only these words. Meantime the
board was actually beaten and the symbolical vision came to
an end. We believe that the good mother of God, as the
mother of pity, did not fail her faithful servant in death and
gave him that sign of her coming.


CHAPTER V.

Of the death of a young layman, with whom angels
talked when he died.

At the season a young layman came to take the vows, being
pure himself and shrinking from the corruption of the world,
having kept his body chaffe by the grace of divine pity. He
presented himself at the chapter, but being seized immediately
afterwards with sickness, he was anointed. After he was
anointed, another died. When all were at the funeral and
the sick were left without an attendant, this young

239


The Dialogue on Miracles


man heard the choirs of angels celebrating the dead man’s
obsequies and was wonderfully delighted by the sweetness of
the musicians. Moreover, some of them flood close by him
and spoke to him saying : “ Friend, what sayest thou? Does
it please thee to come to us this time? And he said : “ I
earnestly desire dissolution and to be with ChriSt.” And
the Angels said: “ Be prepared ; when this present ceremony
is over, immediately shalt thou come to us.” He having no
doubt of this promise from on high, having now a foretaste
of the firSt fruits of future joys, cheerfully and gladly, when
the keeper of the infirmary returned, made the matter known
throughout the brotherhood, and he added: “ Spread the
mat and beat the board and make with all haSte all the
preparations, for I am about to go to the Lord.” And that
was done. Moreover a sick man who lay next to him, almoft
touching, with a thin wall between, heard the angels talking
with him, and he is a faithful surviving witness, whose testi¬
mony is confirmed by his praiseworthy life.


CHAPTER VI.

Of the lay-brother Obert, who when dying heard
celeHial music.

There was in the same house, that is, at Hemmenrode, a
man of refined character and prudent conduct, who from
early youth had served in the Order, cheerful and ready to
obey any command. He after rendering for about thirty
years devoted and assiduous service to the sick brothers, was
himself visited with various bodily irregularities, and living
on in much pain for twenty years, endured a long martyrdom.
Yet although weak in body, there was no foresight wanting
in him to supply the brothers’ needs, nor a wise administra¬
tion of his duties. At laSt as the rising Storm of mortality
pressed hard upon him and his weakness increased, ending
his life, he left it and his pains behind him. On the eve of


240


Concerning the Dying


the blessed S. Stephen, next to the nativity of the Lord, the
board of the dying was beaten for him and rising in hafte the
brothers came to Strengthen their brother in his departure
with their prayers. Now he was lying, as is the custom,
Stretched upon the mat, drawing his laSt breath. The litany
being said, whilst there Still seemed to be some breath
left in him, they began the seven psalms. As they said these,
he rousing as if from a light sleep, came to life, turning his
eyes all round, and at the bidding of the abbot, he was placed
on his bed again and we went away. Some Struck by the
Strangeness of the occurrence, remained about him, waiting
until his breathing should grow Strong, and desiring to hear
from him, what miracle this was. When he came to him¬
self, he began to speak as follows: “ What am I doing here?
Assuredly I do not wish to be here. But now I was amongSt
the angels, soothed by the sweetness of heavenly music and
I had been appointed to the blessed protomartyr to be his
companion and colleague in his glory. What do I here?
Truly I desire to return.” After a little the board was beaten
again and with joy going to sleep in the Lord, as we believe,
he was not cheated of his wish, but will have his part in the
lot of the saints. But that he loft the glory firft shown to
him, returning for a season, we do not doubt that in this our
cowardice was considered, that is to make us less anxious and
to spur us on to better aims.


CHAPTER VII.

Of a blind lay-brother who heard the angels
adminiHering the funeral service.

In the same house was a blind lay-brother, to whom God
had given the light that lighteth the inner man, changing
his bodily loss to a heavenly gain. For he gave him to see
visions from above, sometimes of the glory of the saints, often


241


116


The Dialogue on Miracles


of the pains of the wicked, constantly of the devil himself,
belching out flame and breathing balls of fire. Wonderful
was this and the gift of God. But often he suffered their
attacks and battles, they rushing upon him and he Striking
them down with his fiSt and cudgel. These assaults he was
wont to suffer in any place, but more in churches, and most
of all when he prayed for the dead. At that time he began
at the funerals of the dead to hear the choirs of angels singing
now with the monks and now by themselves. But when
the bodies were carried out, the brothers going before them,
the angels remained in the choir, finishing the service of the
dead. But at the Sandlus and the Pater-noSfer he used to
hear indescribable jubilant cries, sweet beyond human con¬
ception. These heavenly measures were sweeter and plainer
after the burial of the lord Daniel. Once it came to pass
that the lord abbot went to this blind man for edification and
he admitted that he had received this amongft other tokens
of kindness. Moreover he was earnestly warned by the abbot
that he should be grateful for God’s favour and shut out all
human pride, keeping to himself the divine gift and not throw-
ing what was sacred to dogs. And he replied that he had
told it to one of his brothers in the flesh. And the abbot
perceived the man’s backsliding. Some days later when the
abbot came again, he humbled himself before him and con¬
fessed with tears that he had loff the heavenly blessing. After
a severe penance had been imposed on him, the favour which
had been withdrawn from him in his pride, was restored to
the penitent.


CHAPTER VIII.

Of the death of brother Hildebrand, whose soul
under the shape of a beautiful boy was carried to
his grave by a brotherhood of white monks.

When brother Hildebrand was on the verge of death, the
board was beaten and the brotherhood hastened to him. As


24a


Concerning the Dying


they flood round the dying man and were duly celebrating
the laft rites, amongft the others flood a brother, to whom
God deigned to reveal the following vision. He looked and
behold another band of white-clad men came up, who in the
place where the dying man lay, received a very beautiful youth
and went off with much joy and song. And so the twin¬
being of this happy brother was carried out and escorted by
twin bands, the soul that is, by the band of white-clad beings
to its blessed refl, the body by the brotherhood one day to
be clad in white to the church, both companies though
separate singing in harmony to the praise of God for that
which they carried.

Novice. —Why at the death of some good men are such
wonderful things seen, but at those of others, who are of equal
merit, no signs are shown ?

Mon\. —One reason is that the hidden holiness of holy
men should be manifefled to the living ; another that men
may imitate their virtues, whereby they earn their reward ;
the third is that the innocence of good men may be clearly
shown, if they have been slandered, as often happens, for
example:


CHAPTER IX.

Of a dead lay-brother about whose body brother
Warner saw candles Handing.

In the same convent at the infligation of a brother named
Warner, some of the brothers slandered a lay-brother without
cause, so that he was driven out by them. After this the
brother happened to die and the said Warner was present at
his funeral. Now it was the cuflom at that time, when any
one had been placed upon the mat, for the brothers to go
there not in procession and to fland round the dying man in
no particular order, jufl as they ran up or their devotion gave

2 43


The Dialogue on Miracles


them a place, the lay-brothers Standing here and there round
the monks. The body of the dead man therefore being
washed and brought there, this Warner saw many candles
set up round the bier and all of them burning. Now in
the part where he was Standing, all the candles alike were
extinguished. Wondering and alarmed at this, when the
body had been carried into the church, he took Dom Syfrid
aside and made confession, putting down to his own fault
the extinction of the candles and to the manifestation of the
innocence of the brother. Returning to the church he found
the same candles all burning on every side.


CHAPTER X.

Of the death of prior Herwic.

Laft year the lord prior Herwic died in the same place, a
man of advanced age and a very zealous disciplinarian. When
late in life it was thought he was on the point of death, he
said in a clear voice to those who had assembled: “ I shall
not die now, but to-morrow at the ninth hour I shall be before
the supreme judge to give an account there of all my deeds.”
And at that very hour he did actually expire. Some declared
that at his passing they had heard angels. You have a like
instance in the monk Ulrich of Villers in the ninth book and
thirty-firSt chapter.

Novice .—Pray why did the one predict that he was going
to his marriage and the other to judgment?

Mon /(.—The one because he took the vows when a youth
and had good hopes from his guarded chaStity ; the other
was alarmed about his sins committed over a long period ;
for he had come to be a monk late in life.

Novice .—Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord.

Mon \.—How great is the blessedness of those who die in
the Lord, the next examples will show.

244


Concerning the Dying


chapter XI.

Of the death of Mcngoz, a lay-brother who returned
to life at the bidding of abbot Gisilbert.

In the oft-mentioned Hemmenrode there was a lay-brother
named Mengoz, a simple, good man, who served in the
kitchen of the monastery. One day he happened to he
chopping wood with a young monk who was taking his week’s
turn in the kitchen ; and not taking enough care to avoid
cutting it, the monk wounded his foot. Being carried to
the infirmary and being in much pain, he was anointed. As
the time for going to the general chapter was at hand, abbot
Gisilbert of blessed memory said to him: “ Brother Mengoz,
you mull not die, but you will wait for me.” When he
said: “ If possible, I will do so,” the abbot replied : “ I order
you to do so.” And so he went away to the chapter and
flayed a long time. On his return as he reached the gate,
the board was beaten and the bell rung. The abbot asked the
reason for this and the porter saying it was for brother Mengoz,
the abbot replied : “ I had something to say to him.” As he
was haftening to the prayers and had reached the infirmary,
the man expired. Bending down over the dead man, he
said in a loud voice: “ Brother Mengoz ! ” But there was
neither voice nor breath from him. And when he had
repeated his name a second time, the prior said: “ Do not
trouble yourself, for he had breathed his laft." Then the
abbot bending lower down to his ear, called out: “ I ordered
you not to die until I came. Again I command you to answer
me.” At that word the man as though waking from a deep
sleep, opened his eyes and groaned: “ Oh, father, what have
you done? It was well with me and so why did you recall
me? ” “Where,” said he, “were you? ” The lay-brother
replied : “ In paradise. A golden seat was set for me at the
feet of our Lord and when you called me back, Dom Ysenbard,
our sacriftan, came and dragged me from that seat, saying:
“ You shall not sit here. You came here in disobedience.
Return to your abbot.” And so I returned. Yet I was
promised that that seat should be kept for me. I saw Ysenbard

245


The Dialogue on Miracles

in great glory, but on his foot appeared a spot, because when
he was with us, he went out to work unwillingly.”

Novice .—As the saints are without spots before the throne
of God, why did a spot appear on the glory of an inhabitant
of heaven ?

Mon \.—That vision was shown for the sake of the living,
that the glory might be a comfort to a monk of good life
and the spot a warning to those who are careless. Although
he went unwillingly with the brothers to manual labour, yet
he was extremely careful at divine service. He cheerfully
rang the bell in good time for matins and gladly sang the
high notes.

Novice .—I am satisfied with what you say.

Mon \.—Mengoz bore witness that he saw Dom Daniel
there and many others who had recently died. He said also
that within thirty days some were to be freed from purgatory.
And when he began to repeat these and like things, the
novices, men of consequence in the world, were called in,
Gerard, that is, and Marcmann and Carolus, afterwards abbot,
from whose hand he ate in sign of real recovery. After this,
when he asked leave to return, the abbot replied: “ Now go
in peace,” and blessed him. At that word he at once closed
his eyes and expired. This was told to me by our seniors
and by that Marcmann jufl mentioned, who was present at
this great miracle.

And when the aforesaid Ysenbard was at the point of
death and Gerard Waschart sat at his feet, with prophetic
spirit he urged him to fteadfaffness, saying: “ Gerard, see
you do not leave the Order, for many thousand devils wait
for you before the gate.” What happened afterwards to
this Gerard, we all know.


246


Concerning the Dying


chapter XII.

Also of the death of Gozbert the lay-brother, who
coming to life again recounted what he had seen.

A similar miracle happened in the same house. When
Dom Hermann was a novice in it, who is now abbot of
Marienffatt, he told me that there came to him one day one
of the seniors, saying: “ Come with me ; and I will forth¬
with make you hear what will please you.” And he brought
him to a lay-brother named Gozbert, who had died and come
to life again. I know not how many lay-brothers followed
him, hoping to hear something Strange. To them he said:
“ MaSters, ye count the years since ye took orders, some forty,
some twenty, some ten. I tell you that blessed is that monk,
or lay-brother, who has led a good life in the Order for one
year or a month or even a week.” When he would not say
more, they left him, but the novice said to him: “ I ask you,
my good brother, to tell me something for my edification.”
He replied : “ When I was lately sick and in the greatest pain,
something came to my bed. And having touched firSt my
feet, ascending Step by Slep, it touched my belly and then
my breaSl and yet I felt no harm from that touch. But when
my head was touched, at once I expired and was brought to
a very pleasant and moSl delightful place, where I saw different
kinds of trees and flowers of many colours. There met me
too a youth of great beauty, by whom I was moSl courteously
saluted and led before Our Lady the queen of heaven with
much joy. A seat was placed for me at her feet, but as I
sat in it in much happiness of heart, I was ordered to go back
to the body. Grieving much thereat I was comforted by
them with these words: “ Be not sad, for this seat shall be
kept for thee and after a few days thou shalt return to it.”
And when I asked them on going about the future Slate of
our house, they answered: “ Its present Slate under abbot
Gisilbert is good,” nor could I get more from them. But
about three days later Gozbert expired.

Novice. —Since it was said in the firSt chapter of this book,

247


The Dialogue on Miracles


that no pains in this life were more bitter than death, why
did neither of those two lay-brothers complain of its bitterness?

Mon\.— I think that is only to be underflood of those whose
souls are separated from the body without returning again
except at the day of judgment. I read that Lazarus, a youth
and a girl were brought to life, Tabitha that is, and Maternus,
besides many others, none of whom makes this complaint.
Some also we see dying as peacefully as if they were sinking
into slumber. Hence I can make no definite flatement on
this point.

Novice. —If there is any more about those of that house,
I beg you will tell me.

Moni —To do this I muff change the order I had proposed,
so as to insert it now, speaking now of those who live well
and die well, now of those who live ill and die well and then
returning to the others.

Novice. —So long as you tell me what is edifying, I care
little about the order.

Monk. ■—Hear then how great is God’s mercy.


CHAPTER XII.

Of the final contrition of a priefl who had once
been a Black Monk-

Some years earlier a priefl died in Hemmenrode, whose
life was as follows. He had become a monk and priefl in
the Black Order and had made such advance in it as to
attain to the office of prior. But through the malice of the
devil and his own rashness, the citadels of chaflity and inno¬
cence were abandoned and he turned away into a region
of different charafler to make a compaft with his own
pleasures. But at length in a penitent mood he became a
regular of the Premonflratensian Order. Then again over¬
come by Satan, he fell into his former errors. After that he
betook himself to our Order. Again becoming a worthless
apoflate he gave the reins to his desires, being shameless

248


Concerning the Dying


enough to live with a wife in his house. Laft of all in those
days the eye of God the Father was turned upon him, he
abandoned the world with its lufls and coming to Hemmen-
rode sought to obtain admission. Forthwith having recourse
to the armour of penitence, by conflant confessions, tears,
prayers and faffing, he showed to all the appearance and
example of true repentance. After a brief time had run its
course, not more than halfway through the year, being visited
with bodily infirmities he took to his bed, but obtaining no
greater ease, he manfully completed the agonies of death that
had begun, now singing, now praying, now saluting the Holy
Mother of God. For he practised certain of her salutations,
which he was never known to miss, awaking or going to
sleep, and which before the hour of his death he bound about
his neck, in token of his great trufl and good hope. More¬
over he asked the lord abbot to flay by him with a few brothers,
and to these he said: “ Reverend father and ye, sirs, I a sinner
and a penitent, desire you to be witness before God for me
to my sincere confession and true penitence. For I am ready
to make full satisfaction, to undergo any torments, any hard¬
ships, if God will grant me life. Nothing will be too hard
or difficult or impossible for one who loves Him and is truly
penitent.” Thus with blessings and pleadings for grace on
his lips, he gave up his happy spirit to the Lord. At his
passing the following vision was revealed to a monk. He saw
angels in the infirmary rejoicing in feafting and many joys,
and in the midft Solomon sitting and sharing in this solemn
gladness, for he was called Solomon. And there came other
angels too bringing with them six of our brothers, who had
died at that time, priefls in splendid white robes, shining
more brilliandy than the light. And they said: “ To these
six their sins have been forgiven them and to this seventh
one,” pointing out Solomon. Meantime the board was
beaten, and the brother who had seen these things, woke up
and came and found him breathing his iaft in that place,
where he had seen him taking part in the feafl of angels.

Novice .—I suppose that those who are perfected, often
entreat God for their brethren who are ftill pilgrims.

Monk ,.—The following words will prove it.


The Dialogue on Miracles


chapter XIV.

Of Rudinger, a mon\ to whom the blessed David
foretold his own end.

There was in the same doifter a monk named Rudinger,
who like his name was rude in his way of life. He had
lived in the Order in by no means orderly fashion, and what
was worse by frequently apoftatising, he had to no profit
waded the opportunity granted to him of repentance. To¬
wards the end of his life returning to them and being admitted,
he was seized with dropsy. And as one day he sat upon his
bed and repeated some prayers, the blessed David who had
died the year before, entering in his well-known form with
two who had died at the same time, said : “ Brother Rudinger,
what are you doing and how are you.” He replied : “ Like
a poor sick man. My body is enlarged with swelling, but
what pains me more, my conscience is burdened with the
weight of many sins.” The saint comforted him by saying:
“ You have certainly lived ill for a long time, but know that
to-day you will die. I have besought Our Lady the Holy
Mother of God and the reft of the saints for you, and I have
found them ftern, but if I am not liftened to I will move
the whole hoft of heaven.” And so he vanished. And
when he told this to the lord abbot Hermann, once dean of
the Holy Apoftles and then prior in the Cloifter, he replied :
“ Good mafter Rudinger, you are of advanced age and in
ill health and you will soon die ; do not speak anything but
the truth,” for he knew what his life had been. The sick
man replied: “ If I am not dead to-day at the ninth hour,
what I told you was false.” To be brief, at the hour men¬
tioned the monk dies and the prior is assured of his vision.

Novice .—I imagine the devils groan heavily when such
are rescued from them.

Mon\. Juft as the holy angels ftrive to win the souls of
the dying for heaven, so the evil angels try to thruft them
down to hell.


250


Concerning the Dying

chapter xv.

Of the death of Gerung, whom blac\ men and
vultures watched as he lay a-dying.

In the same house died a lay-brother named Gerung. He
before taking vows was Steward to a bishop of Treves and a
cruel oppressor of the poor. At laft induced by the counsels
of certain persons he came to Hemmenrode, where for some
time he lived on his property in secular dress. Visited with
serious ill-health he put on the habit more through dread of
hell than love of the Order and was carried to the infirmary
of the lay-brothers. Being come to his laff end as he lay
alone on his bed, according to the vision of a lay-brother
named Ludo, vultures flying up alighted on the bar of his
bed, and with them were horrible men, gigantic and mis¬
shapen, who came and flood round him. This Ludo at
firfl wondered at the vision, but after a little seeing they were
devils, who waited for the souls of the dying as their food,
he shouted out aloud : “ Why do you ftand there, sirs ? Away
with you.” And when they were very far from obeying him,
he shouted a second time: “ 1 command you in the name of
the Lord to depart.” At that word at once the men went
out and the vultures flew away and were no more seen. Now
this Ludo who lay sick on the opposite bed was an old and
pious man pure in body. This vision as well as the following
one was related to me by the lord abbot Hermann, who was
at that time prior there. How the prayers of brothers present
help monks in their death agony, will be shown by that vision.


CHAPTER XVI.

Of the death of a lay-brother, above whom crows
perched, when he was in his death agony, and were
driven out by a dove.

About the same time another lay-brother was dying there,
a heavy slow man, and on that account despised by the refl.


251


The Dialogue on Miracles


He being placed on the mat and near his end, two crows
suddenly flying up circled round him and at lad perched on
the beam, which was over his head. When brother Henry,
whom I have mentioned above, saw them, suspeding them to
be devils, he waited to see what they would do. Meantime
the board was beaten and the brotherhood hastened there.
And when the cross was carried in, a snow-white dove entered
the door of the infirmary in front of it and flying above the
beam mentioned alighted in the rntdd of those crows. And
fighting with them and beating them this way and that with
its wings at lad it won the vidory and expelled them from the
house, settling down in the place of the crows until such time
as the lay-brother expired, and until washed and put upon
the bier he had been replaced. And when the brothers were
carrying him into the oratory, the dove flew away ahead of the
cross and was no more seen.

Novice .—What do you think that dove was?

Monk -—Some angel person, who aided the prayers of the
lay-brothers and drove for the soul of the dying man with
the devils. How great is the gathering of devils to the place
where those who served them, are dying, the following narra¬
tive will show.


CHAPTER XVII.

Of the death of Conon of Malebech, a monl{ ‘ n
Hemmenrode.

Conon, a great lord of the cadle of Malebech, powerful
and rich in the world, as mighty in war and in wicked¬
ness, as he was drong in worldly wisdom, before the end of
his life took the habit of a regular in the oft-mentioned Hem¬
menrode. And because he could not make atonement by
long service of God, he busied himself in halving the time
by living a good life. In this he made such progress that


252


Concerning the Dying


being made perfedt in a short time he fulfilled a long time,
for his soul pleased God. Hence he who had called him into
his service, not only gave him pardon for his sins, but also
let him know his end beforehand in this way. The convent
had a very beautiful Stallion, which it had sent to its Stud to
beget well-bred colts. A nobleman, Henry of Ysenberg,
coveting this and not being able to buy it, made arrangement
for it to be secretly taken and sent to him. When he did not
give it back, the aforesaid Conon was sent to him, as he had
been very friendly with that Henry in the world. Being
unsuccessful and seeing the man was determined, the spirit
of God rushing upon him, as was afterwards made evident,
he summoned him before the judgment of God naming a day.
To be brief, Henry took no notice of his summons, but Conon
returning home prepared himself in every possible way for
the day. Therefore he said to the abbot: “ Lord, I took the
cross on Friday, I crossed the seas on Friday, on Friday I
submitted myself to you at the chapter, on Friday I put on the
dress of a monk, on Friday God will give me the reward for
my efforts.” After completing three years in holy vows he was
seized with a fever. Visited by friends he said he would die
in three days. Now they wished to leave him, as his com¬
plaint was a trifling one and there were no signs of death
coming on, but he asked them not to fail him at so solemn a
time. And so it came to pass that he died on the third day,
that is, on the eve of S. James as he had predicted. About that
time there was a woman possessed by a devil in the manor of
Meyne who was set free at the moment when Conon died and
went to her prieSt to tell him that the devil bad gone out.
After a little, however, the devil returning began to trouble
the wretched woman grievously. Therefore she was brought
to the prieSt who, as though debating with the devil, began
to question him, saying: “Wretch, had you left her?”
“ That is so,” said he. “ And where have you been, miser¬
able one? ” He replied : “ At Hemmenrode.” “ And what
did you there?” said he. To which the devil replies:
“ Conicho was lying on a mat and was certain to die. To his
passing some fifteen thousand of my comrades hastened and
with much gay dancing came there. And I thought I should

253


The Dialogue on miracles


be sorry for it ever afterwards if I did not go with them. And
knowing that this vessel was delivered over to me and I could
not lose it, I left it for a time and went with them.” And the
prieft said: “What happened there? ” The devil replied:
“ Those cursed tonsured monks came and flood round the
corpse and began to preach so flrongly that none of us dared
go near.” Again the priefl said : “ And where did the sold
go? ” The devil replied: “ To the feet of the Mofl High ;
and see, ye good people, what a wrong has been done to us.
That man had served us more than forty years, moft ready to
do our will by day or night, and for three years only he served
another mafter, who has robbed us of him. When therefore
he was taken from us, ftirred with rage, we went completely
mad. And I do not know how to avenge myself except on
this little vessel which has been delivered over to me.” But
a few days after the ftory was known at the Cloifter, a monk
Herwic was passing through those parts. He knowing that
the devil is a liar and the father of lies, wished to tefl the
truth of the matter. Turning aside therefore to see the
possessed woman, he sought from the devil a token by which
it might be tefled. The devil at firft was unwilling to speak
out, but being conftrained by the adjurations of the monk, he
said: “ It was because your little abbot held the dying man’s
hand in his own.” The monk being aware of that fail,
agreed that the refl of his tale might be believed. But Henry
of Ysenberg hearing that he had died on the day fixed before¬
hand, was much afraid for his own person and coming barefoot
in great hafte to Hemmenrode with his own hand delivered
up the ftallion he had insolently kept, doing penance with it.
All these flories I have found out concerning the death of
monks of Hemmenrode.

Novice .—If the devils are so troublesome to the ele< 5 l in the
hour of death, what becomes of the reprobate, whose sins
bar the aid of the holy angels.

Mon \.—On that I shall have enough to say in what follows.
The death of Conon recalls to my memory the death of other
knights who had lived ill, but had a happy end.


254


Concerning the Dying


CHAPTER XVIII.

Of the death of the mon\ Ludolph of Schulpforte.

There was a knight in Saxony, Ludolph by name, a tyrant
in adf. One day when clothed in new scarlet clothes he was
riding along the road, he met a countryman with a wagon.
And his clothes being spattered with mud through the splash¬
ing of the wheels, he like an arrogant soldier being exceedingly
annoyed, drew his sword and cut off the man’s foot, fly
God’s mercy he afterwards repented of his sins and became a
monk in a house of our Order, called Schulpforte. Not long
afterwards falling seriously ill, he mourned every day the evil
deeds done by him, especially the cutting off of the man’s
foot, and he replied to the infirmarian who was trying to
comfort him: “ I can get no comfort, unless I see the signs
of Job in my body.” And behold a few days later he saw
a scar like a red thread round his ankle on the same foot and
in the same place where he had cut off the countryman’s foot.
This gradually began to fefter and worms swarmed out of it.
Then he was filled with joy and said: “ Now I have hopes
of pardon, for I see the signs of job in my body.” And so
in much contrition of heart and by act of grace, as the disease
made progress, he rendered up his spirit. This was told to
me by the abbot of Livonia, who is a son of that house.


CHAPTER XIX.

Of the death of the monk Allard of Lucka, to whom
ChriH appeared with His Mother and the saints,
when he died.

The very precious death of another knight was related to
me by the monk Adam of Lucka, whom I have mentioned


255


The Dialogue on Miracles


before. “ There was,” said he, “ a knight in Saxony named
Allard, who was a man of such approved valour that at the
firSt tourney where he was knighted, he won fourteen war-
horses by his might. Like a wise man he ascribed his worldly
glory not to his own Strength but to God, gave back all and
saying farewell to his companions and the world, took the
habit in Lucka, a monastery of our Order. And because
God tries His chosen people, he scourged him with such
sickness that worms without ceasing swarmed from his body.
His attendants being unable to endure the Stench and disguSt
of these said to that Adam : “ What shall we do, brother,
with this man? ” He replied: “Let me have four linen
sheets, and I will undertake to cure him for Christ’s sake.
When this had been done, by constant changing of the cloths
he mastered the foulness for himself and the sick man. And
the day of reward for so much endurance being at hand, he
said to Adam: “ Lay me on that mat and beat the board,
for the Lord calls me.” And he did so. The brotherhood
assembled, the litany was said, and after he had moved all
almoSt to tears by his words of much penitence, he added :
“ Now go, beloved sirs, and say your masses, for the Saviour
of the world and His glorious Mother with the angels and a
hoSt of saints are coming here. Afterwards return with them,
for they will take up my soul.” Meanwhile, as they said
mass, according to the Story told to me by the said Adam,
Allard with prophetic spirit made known all that was passing
in the oratory, saying : “ Such masses are being sung by such
and such prieSts at such and such an altar.” And he was
much astonished about a layman. When the brotherhood
returned, with a cheerful contenance he said: “ See, ChriSt
with His Mother and His saints is present, laying His hands
under my chin and they will receive my soul. Believe me
not, if I do not this inStant die.” At that word he at once
expired, proving his words by his death. From his body
came forth such a perfume that all Standing around were
refreshed with its sweetness.

Novice .—I am much refreshed with their prayers.

Mon \—We are now speaking of knights but I will return
to men of religion and tell you something Still more edifying.

256


Concerning the Dying


chapter xx.

Of a slain knight who was saved by calling on the
name of God.

A certain very wicked knight was caught and killed by
his enemies. As he was dying, these were his laSl words:
“ Lord, pity me.” At his death a certain man who was
possessed, was freed. But being very terribly tormented a
few days later, as has been said above in the case of Conon
in the seventeenth chapter, when questioned about it, he said :
“ Many of us were gathered together at the death of that
knight, and because we got nothing there, I am taking the
greater revenge on this vessel of mine.” Being asked the
reason he added: “ Only three words did the dying man
utter, and by them he escaped our power.” See, how through
calling on the name of God this robber’s torments were turned
into martyrdom, as in the case of the thief on the cross.

Novice. —-By this I am satisfied that true repentance is
never too late.

Mon\. —-I will add two examples by which you will know
that contrition at the end comes through the abundant mercy
of God.


CHAPTER XXI.

Of a Frisian who died without the sacraments,
although well warned by his son.

In Friesland lately a rich man fell ill. Now he had a son
who was a monk and pries; at Klaar-Kamp a house of our
Order. When he had sent for him to give salvation to his
soul, by some judgment of God he died without confession,
viaticum or anointing.


257


i!7


The Dialogue on Miracles


chapter XXII.

Also of a Frisian u/ho was slain and before death
received all the sacraments.

About the same time in that province another Frisian meet¬
ing his enemies was wounded to death and his two sons were
also slain. The murderers thinking the father dead went
away. This great crime being known, the master of the
grange in Bethwerde, taking a wagon put the dead men in
it, but seeing the father Still breathing, he cried out: “ Are
you Still alive, lord? ” But the other made no reply, fearing
they were enemies, and the lay-brother continued: “ It is I,
be not afraid.” Then said he: “ Yes, I am Still alive.”
Presently being lifted on the wagon he was carried away to
the grange, confessed his sins, took the sacrament, was
anointed and so gave up his spirit. You see, whereas the
firff had time for repentance and his son every day warned
him about his salvation, he neglected everything and died
impenitent. But the other, although half-dead, treated with
the oil of pity and the wine of repentance, passed from a hovel
to a palace (i Rom. ix. 18).


CHAPTER XXIII.

Of the h night Wiger who was slain by the Saracens.

In the diocese of Utrecht there lived a knight named
Wiger, of high renown for his exploits in war. In the firft
crusade, goaded on by God’s grace, he took the sign of the
cross and went oversea, fighting againft the Saracens with
such courage and determination that he was beloved and
praised both by the king of Jerusalem and by the other

258


Concerning the Dying


Christians and exceedingly hated by the enemies of Chnft.
Having served vigorously in war for the Saviour a whole year,
as we have said, he determined to return home, but one day
his servant was slain in a skirmish before his eyes. Seeing
his soul entering heaven in the form of a dove and being
Struck by the vision, he said to himself: “ What do you
propose to do, unhappy man ? If you return, you will repeat
the faults you had given up and your laSI State will be worse
than the firSt.” Then fighting with greater bravery than
usual one day he fell in battle. His head was cut off by
the Saracens and carried round with much boaSting. But
the Christians took the body, buried it and built a church
over it.


CHAPTER XXIV.

Of Theodoric of Rulant who was granted death by
his prayer at the Sepulchre of the Lord.

About that time Theodoric of Rulant, a rich and powerful
man, set out for Jerusalem to worship there. Then prostrate
before the tomb of the Lord, he uttered this prayer: “ Lord
Jesus ChriSl, who knoweSt all things, if I cannot purge myself
of my former vices, permit me not to return to my country,
but grant that I may die here.” Another knight, a fellow-
countryman, heard this prayer and said: “ Have you prayed
well to-day, friend? ” “ I have,” said he. And the other

saying: “ And to whom do you wish to leave your wife and
children? ” he replied: “ It is better for me to desert them
than to lose my soul.” In brief, the prayer of the devout
soldier was heard, and dying a few days later he was united
to the citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem. How near the
Lord is to those who call upon Him in sincerity, the death
of a certain other man will show.


259


The Dialogue on Miracles


CHAPTER XXV.

Of the death of a mon\ of Oesbroeck^, who refused
to live because the abbot was unordained.

In the monastery of Oesbroeck in the diocese of Utrecht
there was a monk who was tenacious of right and zealous
for discipline. And when on the death of the abbot of that
time, another was put by election in his place, he knowing
him to be a worldly man and an incontinent, said with a
groan : “ Alas I now the discipline of this house will be
ruined.” Now it is a monastery of the Black Order at one
time very rich. And he said: “ Lord Jesus ChriSl I beg
that you will not let me live any longer, that I may not see
the desolation of this monastery.” And he could not be
induced to vote for that man’s election or to swear obedience
to him, and he said to him quietly : “ God knows that I love
you, but I know that the religion of this house will be
destroyed by you.” In the morning after saying mass, he
begged to be anointed by the abbot and with difficulty
obtained his request, the abbot opposing it because he seemed
to be in perfect health. He replied : “This day I muSt die.”
Then when the mat had been laid out, he put himself upon
it and had the brotherhood summoned by the board. When
the prayers were finished and he was by no means dying, he
arose and placing on his neck the Stole, in which he used to say
mass, he laid himself down in front of the altar like those
in the agony of death, uttering this prayer: “ Holy Lady,
Virgin Mary, if ever I have celebrated mass in this Stole in
a manner pleasing to thee, take my soul in this hour.” The
good man was heard to say this and expired, and according
to his prophecy that house fell away both in spiritual and in
temporal prosperity. This was told to me by an abbot of
our Order and also by Everard, a monk and prieSt of the
same monastery.

Novice. —I am not surprised that God sometimes takes
away the good that they may not repeat the sins that they
have given up, or that they may not see the evils that threaten,

260


Concerning the Dying


as Josiah, but I am terrified at this, that the good are sometimes
suddenly taken off, or what is more dreadful, perish by water,
fire or an accident.

Mon \.—By whatever death the good are taken, they will
have consolation. For to omit many reasons that may be
assigned, one is that their hidden virtues may be manifested.


CHAPTER XXVI.

Of the abbot who was suffocated in a fire in Bavaria
and who wrought miracles after his death.

Five years ago he who is now duke of Bavaria, called one
of the abbots of our Order to him, to talk with him about
something or other, and his bed was prepared for the night
in a barn. After compline had been said, he went to bed
and the light which had been fixed to a poft by the lay-brother,
fell on to the Straw and set it alight. The abbot being aroused
and not being able to get out of the door, threw himself on
the ground in the shape of a cross and commended himself
to the Lord. When the fire was discovered, the duke with
his men and all that were there, ran up and throwing away
the timbers and the Straw, drew out the abbot, half-consumed
and dead. And behold about his breaSt was seen a little
casket of relics ; moreover his middle was encircled by an iron
chain. Seeing this the duke was filled with remorse and
said: “ See how the roughness of his habit could not satisfy
the holy man without the addition of a chain.” And he was
buried at Ratisbon in the great church. A few days later
when two soldiers were hearing mass in that place, one of
them mounted on his tomb. But, that God might show the
merits of him who was buried there, the soldier began to get
so extremely hot in his feet that he leapt down with a cry.
When he saw it, the other said : “ It is the tomb of the abbot
who was burnt.” From that day he was held in great venera¬
tion in that church.


The Dialogue on Miracles


CHAPTER XXVII.

Of the death of an inmate of S. Maximin in
Cologne.

In the church of S. Maximin of Cologne in my time there
was a monk who had founded that convent. For there is
a sisterhood of nuns there. Here before becoming a monk
he had had a concubine. And as they had sinned together,
they did the same penance, so severe that each bound a ring
of iron about the waiil. He however shutting himself up
in that place gave all his time to the Lord, celebrating masses.
And she in the habit of a nun, yet going abroad, supplied
his needs. When the time came for his summons, he called
to him Dom Ensfrid, dean of S. Andrews, whose life I have
described in the sixth book and fifth chapter, and made his
confession to him, revealing his life. He bade him by the
virtue of holy obedience to have the iron ring taken off
which he did. And so when he was dead, a few days later
the woman began to fail in health and because she was
afraid of what had happened to the prie£t, she would not
reveal her secret. But God did not allow her virtues to be
hidden. At the moment when she expired, He burft the
ring. And as the ends of that iron bond on either side-
caught in the tunic in which she died, many matrons and
holy women who waited for her end saw it and praised
God for such a miracle. This was told to me by the daughter
of the si si or of the pneSt. Those chains remind me of the
precious death of a nun.


CHAPTER XXVIII.

Of the death of Clementia, a nun of Nivelle, around
whose waifl were found nine iron bands.

At Nivelle in Brabant, in the convent of S. Gertrude the
Virgin, there lived a girl of noble birth, named Clementia.

262


Concerning the Dying


She having through the temptations of the devil committed
a sin of the flesh, gave her whole time to washing with tears
each day the tunic of her innocence, that she had polluted.
So much did she devote herself to works of mercy that
spending all her income on the poor she kept hardly anything
for herself. Once about the beginning of winter when she
was almofl deftitute and in exceeding want, sitting by the
altar of S. Gertrude she prayed thus: “ Sweetefl mistress,
how shall I serve thee this winter, having nothing ?” That
moment a pilgrim coming up, having offered a prayer in
memory of that virgin, threw five shillings into the lap of
dementia and departed. This was told by her to Wiger as
a miracle and he told it to me. Now when she was dying,
there were found round her body nine iron bands.

Novice .—God worketh wonders in the frail sex.

Mon \.—Although it is my purpose in this sedtion to treat
only of the dying, yet I will take the oportunity afforded by
the tale of this man to tell you of the deep penitence of another
woman.


CHAPTER XXIX.

Also of Osilia of Liege who had bound herself
with iron bands.

Not long since a certain maiden of Liege named Osilia
had married a man of Metz. When he died, as she was
very beautiful, a certain canon of Liege married her and
loved her so much that he shut her up away from the sight
of the world. After his death she grieving for her sins,
became a nun near the church of S. Severin, where in
exceeding great remorse she often shed tears of blood :
moreover she had bound herself with bands of iron. But
as she flood at prayer with these upon her, they all burff

263


The Dialogue on Miracles


asunder. Now fearing that those chains had not been
acceptable to God, she bound herself again. When she
revealed this to the abbot of S. Lambert, he said to comfort
the sorrowing woman: “ He who said to Mary Magdalen
‘ Thy sins are forgiven thee,’ has broken thy bonds.” And
so she was comforted.

Novice .—If there are any more {lories left about the
deaths of good people, I beg they may be related.

Mon \.—I will tell you something about them which will
at the same time comfort and terrify you.


CHAPTER XXX.

Of the death of Gerbrandt, abbot of Klaar-Kamp.

Four years before Gerbrandt, abbot of Klaar-Kamp in Fries¬
land, returning with our abbot from a General Chapter, was
taken ill on the road and reached Foigny with the greatest
difficulty, and there he came to the end of his life. At the
very hour of his death a nun of Syon, which is a house of
our order belonging to Klaar-Kamp, went into a trance and
saw his spirit being carried to heaven by angels. She des¬
cribed, too, the house and the place of his burial, and even
the habit in which he was buried. Moreover, she saw two
{faffs given to Wido, his successor, that is to say crosiers,
the firfl of which he rejected but kept the second. This
Wido had been prior in Klaar-Kamp, from which he was
translated to be abbot of S. Bernard’s. A short time after,
when Gerbrandt died, who had lived to a great age, a good
and disciplined man, this Wido in the presence of the abbot
and myself, was made abbot of Klaar-Kamp. And so in
accordance with what had been foreshown concerning him,
he rejected the first {faff and {fill keeps the second.


264


Concerning the Dying


CHAPTER XXXI.

Of the death of the nun Udeldoldis.

In Mount S. Walpurgis there was a nun named Udeldoldis,
a good woman and very zealous in her profession. Being at
laft in the agonies of death, as I have heard from sifters
present, she ftretched out her hand to the door, saying: “ See,
there ftands God’s messenger, waiting for my spirit.” And
so after a little she rendered up her spirit to be led by that
angel to Paradise. Know, too, that the living are often
summoned by the dead. For example :


CHAPTER XXXII.

Of the death of Conrad, our Cellarer.

A few years before Heydenric, a senior prieft and cellarer
of ours, appeared in a dream to his successor Conrad and gave
him his own tunic to put on. After putting it on he was
seized with illness and within a few days was dead.


CHAPTER XXXIII.

Of the death of our mon\ Conrad who was sum¬
moned by Rich win.

Not a year later Lambert, a monk of ours, on the night
of Sunday, falling asleep in the choir, saw Richwin, our
cellarer, who died some years before, enter the choir. And
beckoning with his hand he said to him: “ Brother Lambert
come ; we will go together to the Rhine.” He knowing he
was dead, shook his head and said : “ Believe me, I will not
go with you.” Receiving this rebuff from him he turned to

265


The Dialogue on Miracles


the choir on the opposite side and called with a like sign and
word to an old monk named Conrad, who had served in the
order about fifty years. And he followed him, putting his
cowl over his head. The same day after supper the Prior
called some of the brothers to him and this Conrad was present,
and Lambert said to him in my hearing: “ Truly, Mailer
Conrad, you will soon die. For I saw you in that cowl
following Richwin to-night,” and told him of the vision all
in order. And he replied to him, “ I care not. I should like
to be dead.” Now the following day, if I recoiled aright,
he fell ill and in a short time died, and was buried in that
same cowl.


CHAPTER XXXIV.

Of the death of Gregory the Armenian, who was
called by his dead mother.

A certain woman of religion in Armenia came to Cologne
with her son and daughter and there served God in the great
church with faffing and prayer. Now the name of her son
was Gregory, a plain man and a prieft ; and his sifter’s name
was Mary. The mother having died laft year, within thirty
days Gregory too became ill unto death. And whiift his
sifter sat weeping bitterly in his presence, he said to comfort
her : “ Do not weep, for my mother is calling me.” And she
said : “ Where is she? ” He replied : “ See, she ftands before
me.” And so that holy soul was freed from the flesh. But
his body was buried with much honour among the canons of
that church.

Novice .—I think they muft be very advanced saints, whose
spirits, when loosed from the flesh, ascend at once to their
reft.

Novice. —-You are right. And do. not forget that very little
in the judgment of men are the things which hold back the
advanced, especially monks from entering into glory.

266


Concerning the Dying


CHAPTER XXXV.

Of a lay brother of Zinna, who returned to his body
because of a halfpenny.

A certain lay-brother of Zinna, which is a house of our
order, being sent one day on business by his abbot, was cross¬
ing the river Albia, which flows through Saxony, in a boat,
when the ferryman asked him for the fare. And when he
said he had no money with him, the other replied: “ Give
me your knife or belt in pledge.” “ I cannot be without
those,” said he, and added : “ I promise you on the security
of my Order that I will send you the halfpenny.” And the
ferryman let him go. The lay-brother after leaving him,
thought little of his promise, as it was only a small
matter, and never sent anything. Not long after he fell ill
and when everyone present believed him to be dead, his soul
left him and wished to ascend to its reft, but saw before its
eyes, that half-penny, which he had forgotten to mention in
his confession. And it grew to such a size that it seemed
bigger than all the world. And as it ftood continually in
his way when he pressed upwards, with nothing else to ftop
his soul, at the prayer of the angels he was allowed to return
to the body. He told his vision to the astonishment of all
and a whole penny was sent by the abbot to the ferryman with
all speed. As soon as he received it, in the very same moment
according to their calculations the lay-brother expired. This
tale was told to me by the abbot of Livonia, who declared
that he was informed by that abbot. Therefore the greater
the reward men of religion hope to get more than laymen,
the more ought they to be careful, that when they die they
do not take any of the duft of the world with them.


267


The Dialogue on Miracles


CHAPTER XXXVI.

Of a monk, who was not allowed to enter paradise

because he had thrown off his cowl when dying.

A few years before in the kingdom of France in a certain
house of the Ciftercian Order a monk of good life was suffer¬
ing from a very painful illness. Being tortured by the double
heat of his fever and the air, he begged the infirmarian to
allow him to take off his habit and to put on a scapular. He
in pity for the sick man allowed him, but as he was going
away he came back and found the sick man dead. A little
disturbed at this he closed the cell, took off the scapular, put
on the hood again and laid him on the mat, afterwards beating
the board. He was carried into the oratory and the next
night, as the monks were reading the psalms round the body
according to cuffom, he sat up on the bier and looking round
called to the monks. They in terror fled into the dormitory
except the sub-prior who had greater courage, and he said :
“ Be not afraid; I am that brother of yours that was dead and
have come to life again. Call the abbot to me.” Meantime
the monks who had fled, let it be known that the dead man
had risen, and there was a great commotion in the dormitory,
and a gathering of the brothers. The abbot went to the bier
and the man said : “ Lord, I confess to you that I died in such
and such a way; but being taken by the angels to paradise,
when I thought I could enter freely, S. Benedhff came to the
door and said,' Who are you ? ’ And when I answered that
I was a monk of the Ciffercian order, the saint rejoined:
‘Certainly you are not. If you are a monk, where is your
habit? This is a place for reff, and are you going to
enter in your working dress? ’ After I had gone round the
walls of that blessed mansion, through the windows I saw
some older men of venerable appearance, and one of them
looking kinder than the reft, I begged him to intercede for
me. On his interposition I was allowed to return to the body,
that resuming my habit I might attain to the promised flare
of bliss.” After hearing this the abbot took off the habit in

268


Concerning the Dying


which the man was lying and put on him again that which
he had Stripped off in his sickness. And so having received
his blessing, he expired again. Now the house in which these
things happened is called Szere. The abbot of Relaxhusen
passing our way told us this miracle and said he heard it from
the prior and the brotherhood of the said house.


CHAPTER XXXVII.

Of a citizen of Strasburg whose soul returned to
his body.

Similar in part was what happened this year at Strasburg.
A citizen died there, he was placed on the bier and his soul
returned to his body. When he cried out: “ How did I come
here, how did I come here? ” his wife was called. To her
he said: “ By the mercy of God I have been brought back
and I tell you this, unless we relinquish all we have, we cannot
be saved.” And so after disposing of everything as far as they
could for their salvation, within three days he died. Their
property had been ill-gotten.

Novice .—What can beft help the dying?

Mon\. —Sincere confesson and contrition. Here is an
example.


CHAPTER XXXVIII.

Of Matter Thomas, the theologian, who saw the
devil at his death.

Mafter Thomas, the theologian, in the present crusade was
lying on his bed in a certain room in the camp of the pilgrims
on the point of death, when he saw the devil standing in a

269


The Dialogue on Miracles


corner. Recognising him he addressed him in the words of
the Blessed Martin, saying: “ Why do you Stand there, you
bloody beaSt ? Tell me what hurts you moft.” And when
he made no reply, the scholastic added, “ I adjure you by
the living God, who will judge the living and the dead, and
the world through fire, give me a true reply to that question.”
To that the devil replied : “ There is nothing in the church
which hurts us so much and weakens our might, as frequent
confession.” “ When,” said he, “ a man is in sin, I mean
mortal sin, all his limbs are tied and he cannot move. But
when he confesses those sins, immediately he is free and able
to move in all that is good.” When he heard that, this good
dcxftor and preacher of the cross of Christ, died in joy.

Novice. —I do not doubt that confession is very good, as
very many instances in the third book show.

A lon\. —Let what we have said on the subjedt of the death
of the good suffice, there being an abundance of examples
in the earlier part which I forbear to repeat, because I am
haftening on to the deaths of the wicked. How miserably,
how horribly die usurers, misers, money-seekers, crafty, proud,
robbers, murderers, quarrelsome, luStful and vidtims of like
vices, which the ApoStle calls works of the flesh, I shall unfold
to you by certain instances.


CHAPTER XXXIX.

Of the usurer of Metz, with whom at his death
was buried a purse of money.

In the city of Metz, as I have been told by an abbot of our
order, a certain usurer died who was exceedingly avaricious.
Being at the. point of death he begged his wife to put a purse
filled with pence in his tomb. She did this as quietly as she
could, but was unable to keep it quite secret, and some people
went to the grave and Stealthily opened it. And behold they


Concerning the Dying


saw there, two toads, one in the neck of the purse and the
other on the man’s breaSf. One with its mouth was extracting
coins from the purse, the other taking those that had been
extracted and putting them into his heart. It was as if they
said: “ We will satisfy that insatiable heart with money.’’
Seeing this the people threw back the earth and fled in fright.
What do you suppose this man’s soul suffers in hell from the
undying worm, if such terrible things were manifested in his
body in the grave? Not less horrible is what follows.


CHAPTER XL.

Of a woman usurer in Frechen, who at death
imitated men counting pence.

In the manor of Frechen which is a mile diftant from
Cologne, there lived a woman named Jutta, quite Steady in
character, but a moneylender. Being often rebuked for this
vice by our sub-prior Gerlac, who at that time ruled the church
in the manor, she promised amendment, but did not keep her
promise. At laft she died in her sins and as her body swelled,
to prevent its becoming offensive she was placed on the earth.
And behold a devil moved her arms and hands, as though
she was counting money. Gerlac was sent for to exorcise
and prevent the devil from tormenting the body. This done
the corpse became Still, but when he broke off his adjuration,
it began again, moving now the legs and now the hands.
Then lifting the shroud he dipped it in holy water and put
some in her mouth, and this she began to swallow eagerly.
At laft he took his Stole and bound it round her neck as he
uttered the exorcism, and in this way he drove the devils
from the body. There was present at the time a countryman,
who said to the prieSt: “ Know, lord, that the devil will work
amazing things on this body this night.” I will tell you
something similar that happened when I was a boy.


271


The Dialogue on Miracles
CHAPTER XLI.


Also of a woman usurer of Bacheim, whose soul
was torn from her by demons in the form of crows.

There had lived in Bacheim, the nearest manor, a notorious
woman usurer. She when about to die saw all the fields
covered with crows and ravens. And she cried aloud : “ See,
they are coming near me,” adding, “ Oh, Oh ! now they
are on the roof, now in the house, now they are tearing
my breaft, now they are dragging out my soul.” And so
with a shriek she breathed out her soul to be conduced by
devils to hell. The same night in the sight of many who
were present, they caught up the body from the bier and
dashing it againff a beam, let it fall near the door and broke
it to pieces. The light went out, people fled and in the
morning they found the corpse in the place mentioned ; and
they gave it the burial of a brute beaft.


CHAPTER XLI1.

Of Theodoric, the usurer, who when dying, chewed
money.

In the diocese of Cologne a few years ago a knight died
named Theodoric, a very well-known usurer. At Taft fall¬
ing sick, and matter going up to his brain, he went mad.
As he was continually moving his teeth and mouth, his
attendants said to him: “What are you eating, mafter? ”
He replied: “ I am chewing money.” He had believed
that devils were pouring money into his mouth. “ I cannot,”
said he, “ bear those devils. Carry me to the monastery of
Rode ; there are good men there ; perhaps by their help
I may be freed from these devils.” Being carried there,
he said: “ Carry me back, carry me back, I see here more
devils than in my house.” Now it belonged to the manor

272


Concerning the Dying


of Wiirm. So the wretched man being taken back was
worried by the devils and expired, shewing by his many
torments how accursed is the sin of usury. Some said that
they saw the coins in his mouth and throat.

Novice. —Well does the apoStle call avarice serving idols,
since the devils are its servants.

Mon\. —Alas 1 avarice is not only to be found amongft
worldly people, but even in churchmen it rules, and they are
its slaves.


CHAPTER XLIII.

Of the death of the cleric Walter, the steward of
Luther the provoSl of Bonn.

Luther, the provoft of Bonn had a very miserly cleric,, a
canon of the monastery church. And as the warden relied
on his advice, Walter accumulated a great deal of money,
but when he was dying, he left not a penny for his soul’s
good. In the very hour of his death, Godfrey, the canon
of the church of S. Andrew’s in Cologne, in the presence
of his lord Adolph, then dean of the great church and after¬
wards archbishop, was sleeping in the Gate of the Clerics and
the following vision was shown to him. He thought that
this Walter was counting money from a great heap on a
board and that a devil sitting on the other side in the shape
of an Ethiopian, was very intently regarding his calculations.
In his counting Walter frequently hid some of the money
steathily under his garment. When it had been counted, the
devil broke out into these words: “ Walter counts silver
and Steals it.” Then clapping his hands with a great laugh
he added: “ Lord Walter has Stolen more than two hundred
marks.” For that was what he used to be called because
of his pride. Godfrey arousing his lord told him what he
had seen. And it was discovered that he died that very hour.
But the warden took all his money asserting it was his own.

2 73


il8


The Dialogue on Miracles


CHAPTER XLIV.

Of the death of Godfrey canon of S. Andrew's.

But Godfrey died no less miserably. He was indeed
exceedingly avaricious and had accumulated a great sum of
money at court. One day in the time of king Philip, the
Roman emperor, he had made a great banquet in his house
to the debtors of his lord out of the money of the said Philip,
which he had given Adolph for the coronation, proposing
to pay back the loans. Before he had tailed the feail, he
was seized with apoplexy, became dumb and without con¬
fession or holy communion breathed his lail. After his
death the following vision concerning him appeared to a
prieil. He saw him placed on an anvil before the Mint at
Cologne and Jacob, the Jew, the bishop of the Jews, with
whom he was friendly, hammered him with a mallet, until
he was as thin as a penny. And the punishment well fitted
his crime ; for he had been mailer of the mint and the
associate of coiners ; and because he had amassed there a
great sum of money, in the same place he was seen to pay
the penalty for his greed. I will not omit what I have heard
about the death of Hermann, the second dean in Cologne.


CHAPTER XLV.

Of the death of Hermann, the second dean of
Cologne.

This Hermann was a very miserly man and a lover of
money. It happened that two years before this a canon of
Bonn named Winric, surnamed Stempel, died. Immediately
after death he appeared in a dream to Erwin, a canon of
the great church in Cologne and said: “I beg you to come


2 74


Concerning the Dying


on ray day before the chapel of S. Nicholas.” And when
Erwin refused, knowing him to be dead, he added, “ I beg
you to tell this to the second dean, that the day will be the
eighth.” Awaking and wondering at the vision, in the
morning he told the dean what he had seen, and what message
Winric had given him. He at once understood the vision
and said : “lam much afraid that I shall have to keep that
date forthwith, for I am old and feeble. From that day
he began to grow worse and died on the day foretold. When
Erwin knew it, fearing he was himself going to die, he began
to prepare for it by confession and the holy communion. To
him the higher warden said: “To-morrow sing a high mass
to him in the convent and bury him, and so you will have
satisfied his requeSt.” This was done and he was buried by
him near the chapel of that confessor. Erwin is Still alive and
from his lips I heard what I have told you. Among the
avaricious the advocates too will be punished, such as receive
fat salaries and pervert juStice.


CHAPTER XLVI.

Of the death of a lawyer in Saxony who was
deprived of his tongue when dying by divine decree.

A prieSt of Saxony a few months ago told me: “ In our
land a well-known man learned in the Decretals, died. As
he lay his mouth agape, it was discovered he had no tongue
in it. And he deserved to lose his tongue when he died,
for he had often sold it when alive.”

Novice. —I remember you told me something like this
about Henry Ratz in the sixth book and twenty-eighth
chapter.

Mon \.—I call to mind now certain words ironically
uttered about advocates of this kind. At the time when the


275


The Dialogue on Miracles


said Henry died, there expired also master Folco o£ Treves ;
many nobles of the land too died. “ Rightly,” said a certain
canon : “do those nobles aR in taking with them their advo¬
cates when they die ; for they will need them.”

Novice. —There neither the Saxon nor Ratz will avail
them, for without tongues and with their mouths closed
they certainly cannot utter words.

Mon\. —At God’s reckoning, when the books shall be
opened and Jerusalem shall be searched with lights, no advo¬
cate will be able for himself or for others to quote false cases
from the laws or the decretals. So much for the avaricious.
But concerning the crafty who have avarice too, I will now
add a few examples.


CHAPTER XLVII.

Of Henry, the countryman who when dying saw
a fiery Hone threatening his head, through which
he had llolen his neighbour's land.

In the diocese of Cologne in the manor of Putt there was
a countryman named Henry. Being near unto death he
saw a great burning Rone hanging over his head in the air.
The sick man was exceedingly heated by its flames and cried
out in a terrible voice : “ See, the Rone threatening my head
is wholly consuming me.” A prieR is called ; he confesses :
but it did him no good. “Consider,” said he, “whether you
have defrauded anyone of that Rone.” At that the man
after reflection said: “ I remember that I moved that
Rone over into another man’s boundaries to enlarge my own
fields.” The prieR replied: “ That is the reason,” and he
confessing his crime and promising reRitution, so was freed
from that terrible vision.


276


Concerning the Dying


CHAPTER XLVIII.

Also of a countryman into whose mouth, as he was
dying, a devil threatened to thrufl a blazing iiafe
for the same fault.


A like thing happened in the manor called Rotheim. A
countryman there was at the point of death, and the devil
Standing by threatened to thruSf a fiery Slake into his mouth.
He being fully aware of his fault, wherever he turned, always
found the devil there with the Slake. Now he had moved
a Slake of the same size and shape from his land into that
of an honourable knight of the same manor named Godfrey,
taking for himself that of which he had robbed the other.
Under the aforesaid compulsion he sent his friends to him
and promised to reSlore what he had taken from him and
by them begged to be forgiven for the offence. But the
knight replied : “ I will not forgive him ; let the son of his
mother be well tortured." Again he was terrified as before,
and again he sent messengers, but did not obtain pardon.
But when they went a third time and entreated with tears,
saying: “ We implore you, lord, before God, to take back
your own and forgive the unhappy man his fault, for he
cannot die and may not live,” he replied : “ I have now been
well avenged ; I will now pardon him.” From that hour
all fear of the devil ceased. By these instances it is suffi¬
ciently proved that according to the kind of fault God shapes
too the kind of punishment. Hear now what will comfort
you, and those like you, concerning the rich and proud.


277


The Dialogue on Miracles


CHAPTER XLIX.

Of the death of a cleric who returned and cried out
that he had been judged and delivered into the
hands of the wicked.

There was in the kingdom of France a cleric, noble and
rich, two things which often raise a man high and expose
him to many vices. When he was dead and placed on the
bier, whilst a crowd of people sat round both of clergy and
laity, he sat up and in the hearing of all broke into these
words: “ The juft judge has judged and condemned the
judged and given over the condemned into the power of
the wicked.” With these words he fell back, and, I will
not say, slept, but passed from reft to toil, from luxury to
wretchedness.


CHAPTER L.

Also of a dying cleric who testified that he heard
a trumpet from hell.

In the same kingdom there was another cleric, full of
faults like the laSt. Being urged by his friends to confession,
and the body of the Lord being brought to him by a pries!,
he would not receive it and turning to the wall said : “ The
trumpet sounds in hell ; let us go hence.” And so he expired
and followed the call of that trumpet of hell.

Novice. —If God thus curses riches and pride, I suppose
he severely punishes blasphemy.

Mon \.—God at times severely punishes that crime, even
in infidels, as I have lately learnt from the account of a monk
of Villers, who with the lord cardinal Conrad did good work
in the affair of the Albigensian heresy.

278


Concerning the Dying


CHAPTER LI.

Of the death of Count Ful\, the heretic who was
put to death for blasphemy.

Count Fuik, the heretic and associate of heretics, when he
retook his laSI caffle, broke out into such blasphemy as to say:
“ God willing or not, willing or not the church of Rome
and all saints, I shall retake my land.” Immediately he fell
from the horse, on which he was sitting, and was fearfully
injured ; and being lifted up by soldiers, again he fell, pay¬
ing the penalty for his blasphemy. Taken back to his house
he began to feel pains firSt in his feet, then in his legs and
later in his breaSt. The use of his tongue was left to him,
and he wished to repent, but actual confession he scorned
and died impenitent about four months after he was seized.
So much concerning riches, pride and blasphemy. That
punishment has been prepared for robbers, let the end of
one show.


CHAPTER LII,

Of the death of fohn Dan who saw the devil when
dying.

About the time when king Philip was the enemy of Cologne
because of Otto, a follower of his named John Dan raided
the province. Being at the point of death after doing much
evil, he was exceedingly troubled by the devil when dying.
Pale and trembling at seeing him, he cried to those Standing
round : “ Give me a sword, that I may drive off this black-a-
vised man, who is attacking me.” When they said: “ We
see no one here. Call upon God,” the wretched man in
despair replied: “ What good could that do me, even if I
did call upon him? ” “Much,” say they. Then said he:
“ If thou canft, O God, help me,” and so expired. I much
fear that so weak and extorted a cry was little good to him.

279


The Dialogue on Miracles


CHAPTER LIII.

Of a servant whom two dogs tore, when he
pretended to be a bishop.

At the same time a servant, once a footman of Otto, arch¬
deacon of Liege deserted his duty and joined a band of
robbers, commonly called a “ rutta.” Among them he called
himself the bishop, playing the bishop with his chasuble,
and used to give his comrades absolution from their sins.
One day in the sight of one of them the Lord sent againft
him two dogs, by whom he was torn to pieces and killed,
so paying the penalty for his robberies and his mockery of the
holy sacraments. That murders frequently follow on rob¬
bery, I will show you by some instances of the wretched
deaths of murderers.


CHAPTER LIV.

Of the death of Bernard of M uniter who filled
his siHer's husband.

Scarcely two years ago a certain citizen of Munfter died,
leaving his house and a good deal of money to his only son.
He by riotous living with harlots and in taverns squandered
the whole of his personal property. Moreover he sold his
house to his sifter’s husband and going away spent the price
of it in a short time. Compelled by necessity he returned
to his sifter’s husband, who for the sake of his wife
and the property sold to him, kept him with him. Treated
at firft with consideration but later with negleft, in indig¬
nation he left him and asked to have the house he had sold
given back, complaining he had been cheated. Unable
to get it fairly or by threats, he killed him in the middle of
the market place with an axe and flying immediately to the
church of S. Paul, where the clergy were celebrating service,

280


Concerning the Dying


he began to cry out: “ Defend your liberties, my makers.”
And this they did. The good men came to him and were
willing to take him under their protedlion, desiring to arrange
matters between him and the friends of the slain man through
pity for him. At firft he agreed to this, but presently taking
counsel with himself, he said : “ I will not go out; be absolved
from the oath ye took.” After a little one of his companions
called out and said: “ Come out, Bernard, come out ; there
is excellent wine sold at such and such a tavern." Following
them he was soon after betrayed and taken. Asked why
he had left the church, he replied: “ Its pavement seemed to
grow so hot under my feet that I could not bear it.” When
he was placed on the wheel and scholars came in the morn¬
ing saying: “ Bernard, are you ftill alive? ” for he had been
a man of letters, he replied : “ I am ftill living,” and presently
he added: “ Laft night I saw that plain full of devils.” But
they could get no word or sign of penitence from him.


CHAPTER LV.

Of the robbers of Cologne who were placed on the
wheel.

Once three robbers near to Cologne were condemned to
be broken on the wheel, and the next day with other scholars
I ran there and heard what was said by one of them who
was flill living. Asked what hour his two comrades had
died, he replied: “ This night, when the one sitting next
to me died, the whole plain was filled with crows. These
we knew to be devils in the guise of crows waiting for the
soul to leave the body.” And when the wretched man had
seen this more than once, in our hearing he called on God
without feeling any contrition. From which we gather that
those who live ill, very often die ill, undeserving pity in
the present or the future. How cruel a deed it is to shed
blood and to foment enmity, is exemplified by the following.

281


The Dialogue on Miracles


CHAPTER LVI.

Of the countrymen who fought after death in the
grave.

In the bishopric of Cologne two families of countrymen
carried on a mortal feud. Now they had two leaders, two
countrymen that is, of great courage and pride, who were
ever Stirring up fresh conflidts and keeping them up when
Started, allowing no peace to be made. Therefore by the
will of God it came to pass that both died in one day. And as
they belonged to one parish, called Nuenkirgen, it so pleased
the Lord, who wished to show the evil of quarrelling, that
their bodies were placed in one grave. Wonderful and
unheard-of result! In the sight of all present they turned
their backs on one another, their heads, heels and even their
backs dashing together with such violence that you might
think them wild horses. Immediately they took one out
and buried him farther off in another grave. And the quarrel
between those dead men became the cause of peace and agree¬
ment among the living.

Novice .—I should think their souls had a great conflict in
hell.

Mon \.—Of that there can be no doubt.

Novice .—If God thus punishes discord, quarrelling and
anger in worldly people, I suppose he has a great hatred of
the same vices in cloistered monks.

Mon \.—I will show you by this one example.


CHAPTER LVII.

Of the sudden death of a lay-brother who was a
plotter.

Not long ago in a house of our Order a certain building
was being constructed for the use of the monks. One of
the lay-brothers seeing it and feeling envy, was inflamed at

282


Concerning the Dying


heart by the devil, who ftirred him up to overthrow the work.
But when they came with their implements in front of the
refectory, the originator of the conspiracy fell down and died.
Seeing this the reft were exceedingly frightened and came in
much hafte and humbleness to the feet of the abbot, confess¬
ing their sin and receiving a penance from him. Now the
body of the conspirator was buried in the fields. But after¬
wards at the requeft of the lay-brothers, as our abbot told
us who heard it, that abbot asked leave at the general chapter
to be allowed to put the body so expelled in the cemetery ;
but I do not remember whether his petition was granted or
refused, I will tell you now some inftances of the vice of
riotous living, which are enough to frighten evil livers.


CHAPTER LVIII.

Of the death of a canon who debauched a veiled
nun.

In lower Utrecht a few years ago, as his fellow-canon told
me, a cleric died who had corrupted a veiled nun. That
Chrift might show how grave is the crime of violating one
espoused to him, he placed such a sign on his genitals, that
it was a terror to all who could see or were told of it. I am
unwilling to describe it, sparing the modefty of women who
might perhaps read what we relate.


CHAPTER LIX.

Of the death of a girl in whose grave dogs bit one
another.

In a manor of the diocese of Cologne called Luzheim, a
girl, the handmaid of an honourable matron, died some years
ago. She was very wanton, very roving and extremely

28 3


The Dialogue on Miracles


worldly. One night in a dream she was carried before the
judgment seat of ChriSf, around which she saw angels, apofiles,
martyrs and an endless number of saints of other ranks.
When the souls were brought before them, some were
adjudged to glory, some to punishment. And this handmaid,
seeing and trembling because her conscience accused her.
Stretched out her hands humbly to the judge. And he in
pity said : “ Why do you beseech me? Give me your little
finger and I will give you my hands.” As though he had
said: “ Give me the leaf! promise that you will amend your
faults and I will give you my grace.” And so she awoke.
And when she told her vision to a woman of religion named
Aleidis, who is Sfill living, of the manor of Gurzenich, she
answered : “ Wretched woman, amend your life. You have
had a sufficient warning.” And when she fell again into
her former vices, to admonition was added scourging.
After intense sufferings she expired and when she was
Stripped and laid on the ground covered only with a sheet,
two dogs worried one another in the court in front of the
house. Then came a third and a fourth and then all the
dogs of the village biting one another, entered the house
and dragging away the sheet covering her, tore her with their
teeth ; and they were with difficulty driven off by the coun¬
trymen with cudgels. But when the corpse was buried, the
dogs that had been driven off, returned and renewed their
interrupted batdes over her tomb. I fear that her soul had
little peace, as was interpreted by many. And because women
of this kind often practise magical arts so as to be passionately
loved, I will cite a very dreadful warning againSt that
wickedness.


CHAPTER LX.

Of a sorceress whom the devils carried off.

In the village of Haslo in the diocese of Utrecht a wretched
woman one day put her feet in a basin and then jumped out
of it backwards, saying these words: “ Here I jump from

284


Concerning the Dying


the power of God into the power of the devil.” The devil
seizing her at once and lifting her into the air in sight of
many in the manor and outside it, carried her off over the
tops of the trees, so that she was never more seen up to the
present day. These fads have been discovered about those
who live ill and die ill. Concerning those who were believed
to have lived well, but did not make a good end, I will tell
you one indance that I heard recently.


CHAPTER LXI.

Of an innkeeper who drowned himself.

This year when our abbot was going to the general chapter
near Vitry, he and the abbot of Scimenu were entertained
very hospitably by an innkeeper. As they were at supper, this
innkeeper, who was the master of the place, sat by the side
of our cellarer Henry. After dining he said to the abbot:
“ Do you know that man well? ” “ Yes,” said he, “ He is

a good man and religious.” Henry replied: “ Believe me,
he is in a bad date. He has jud had a vision from hell at
the table.” In the morning, when the cellarer was saying
mass, our abbot, he knew not why, as he told us, kept offer¬
ing up no other prayer than this, “ O Lord, grant me a good
end.” The same night the innkeeper went alone to a river
near, dripped off his clothes and jumped from the bank into
the river. But not being able to drown himself there, he
went higher up seeking for a deeper place. The sentinels
of the cadle seeing it, cried out: “ My good man, it is not
the right season for bathing.” For it was the eve of the
nativity of Our Lady. To be brief, the wretched man threw
himself from the bank, duck in the mud in a deep place and
was drowned. They were terribly alarmed on hearing this,
knowing that the man had served the poor for more than

285


The Dialogue on Miracles


thirty year*. A similar thine happened to a lay-brother in
our Order who was regarded as a very holy man.

Novice. —I admit that my oueflion has been fully
answered ; but there is Hill one thing which I should like
to know. Some suppose that death is a person and they
are agreed that death is represented in pictures in the shape
of a man with a scythe.

Mon{. —The Jews believe this ftory and say that there
is one angel by whom the whole human race is slain. More¬
over they draw their authority from the passage where all
the firfl-born of Egypt are flruck down by an angel. But
what death is, has been sufficiently Hated in the firft chapter
of that book. I will tell you however, as your queftion gives
me the opportunity, something which will surprise you.


CHAPTER LX11.

Of a matron in her death agony, whom death relin¬
quished to attach a cleric {landing by.

I have been credibly informed that a certain noble matron
in the diocese of Cologne fell ill a year ago, and as she
appeared to be at death’s door, she was anointed, many matrons
of noble degree as well as her servants, Handing round her.
At the laft colled! however, calling her sifter to her, although
hardly able to speak, she said: “ Fear not, 1 shall not die
now, for I have seen death retreating from me, and calling
his eye on that cleric," pointing with her finger. Wonderful
to say, that very moment the woman whose life had been
despaired of, began to get better and the cleric to fall ill and
die eight days later.

Novice. —In what shape did she see death?

Novice. —I do not know. If you want to know his shape,
liften to the following.


>86


Concerning the Dying


CHAPTER LXIII.

Of a monfler in the shape of a woman who deflroyed
the family of two halls, by looking upon them.

In the diocese of Cologne in a manor named Stamheim
lived two knights, one called Gunther, the other Hugo. One
night when the said Gunther was oversea, a maid took his
sons, juft before they went to bed, into the court to satisfy the
needs of nature. As she flood by them, behold a woman’s
shape in a white dress with a pallid face looked ftraight at
them from beyond the enclosure. Saying nothing, but
frightening the maid by her appearance, the monfler went to
Hugo’s land which was next, looked over the fence, as I have
described and then returned to the graveyard from which it
had come. After a few days Gunther’s elder child was taken
ill and said: “I shall die in seven days’ time; seven days
later my sifter Dirina will die and then my younger sifler
after a week.” And so it happened. Moreover, after the
deaths of the children, the mother and the maid of whom we
have spoken, both died. At the same time perished the
knight Hugo and his son. A credible witness to these fads
is Gerlac, our prior.


CHAPTER LXIV.

Also of a monfler, who came out of one grave at
Bonn and entered another.

A like thing happened in the Church of Bonn. Once on
a time when vespers had been sung and the scholars were
playing in the dusk in the cloiflers, they saw a creature
of human shape come out of one of the graves where the
canons are wont to be buried, and after walking about over
some graves, it descended into another. After a little

287


The Dialogue on Miracles


a canon died in that church and was put in the tomb where it
had entered. Chriffian of Bonn, a monk of ours, was an
eye witness to that vision. By visions of this kind the future
is sometimes predicted.

Novice .— According to what has been said, blessed are
those whom the Lord finds watching.

Mon\. —As to that, I will tell you what I heard lately.


CHAPTER LXV.

Of a mon\ in Aulne who fell and died whilSl
reading the gospel: " Watch, for ye know not,
etc."

After a deacon had read the gospel for confessors, that is,
“ Watch, for ye know not at what hour your Lord will come,”
in Aulne, a house of our Order, as he finished those words,
a monk in the choir fell down and expired. And all were
afraid considering the effeft of the Lord’s words. There¬
fore, brothers, because we know not at what hour our Lord
will come, let us watch faithfully, let us watch while working
that when he comes and shall afflicil us with death, we may
at once open to Him. May our Lord Jesus Chrift deign to
grant us that, who will come to judge the living and the
dead and the world by fire. Amen.


288


BOOK XII


PUNISHMENT AND GLORY OF THE DEAD


CHAPTER I.

Of the punishment and the glory of the dead.

As the eleventh hour draws to sunset, so doth the twelfth
bring it to a close. Now it is well that we should in the
twelfth book, I consider, treat of the rewards of the dead,
because when the day is ended, the labourers in the vineyard
receive their pay. Every man hath his day in the present
life ; let him see to it how he laboureth in the church. That
day is made shorter for some, longer for others, brighter for
some, darker for others. This day is wintry for some, that
is, for those who are sick and in want; for others it is
summerlike, for those who live a life of honour and pleasure ;
for some springlike, who are in the flower of their youth ;
for some autumnal, that is, for such as being of ripe age sink
down under the weight of eld. There be two places etern¬
ally prepared by God, in which their daily toil is rewarded,
heaven and hell. In heaven is the recompense of the good,
in hell that of the wicked. Of the one the judge
shall say at the end to the good: “Come ye blessed of
my Father, receive the kingdom prepared for you from the
beginning of the world ” (Matt. xxv. 34) ; but of the other,
“ Go ye wicked into everlafting fire, which is prepared for
the devil and his angels ” (Matt. xxv. 41). How great is the
reward of the good, how indescribable, how wonderful, how
beyond all words, Isaiah concludes in a few words: “ Eye hath
not seen, nor ear heard, what thou haft prepared for those that

289


The Dialogue on Miracles


love Thee ” (Isaiah Ixiv. 4). Of the pains of hell, which are
countless, nine are specially noted, which are comprehended in
the following verse: “ Pitch, snow, darkness, the worm,
scourging, chains, feStering, shame, and terror.” These nine
torments have no end or limit. There is Still a third place
after this life appointed for some chosen for their purging
and from that faift called purgatory. This is for a season,
lafting until the day of judgment. But how great will he
the glory of the good, or the punishment of the wicked, by
what advocacy they may be aided who are in the pains of
purgatory, you may, if not fully, which is impossible, from
these examples following estimate what is greater.

Novice .—FirSt show to me the torments of the wicked,
then the pains of purgatory for the good and laStly the
glory and joy of the righteous, that in this way our comparison
of them may finish in gladness.

Mon \.—How great are the torments of tyrants, oppressors,
usurers, adulterers and the proud, or of others who have
gravely offended God and have not repented, according to
the teaching of men of religion, I will show you by several
instances.


CHAPTER II.

Of the punishment of Ludwig, the Landgrave.

Ludwig the Landgrave was a very great tyrant of whom I
have spoken in the firSt book and the thirty-fourth chapter.
When he was at the point of death, he gave this order to
his friends: “ Presently when I am dead, put on me the cowl
of the CiStercian Order and take the greatest care that this
is done whilst I am Still alive.” They obeyed him ; he died
and was dressed in a cowl, and when a knight saw it he
said ironically to his companions: “ Certainly he is not like
my lord in all virtue. When he was a knight, he had no


290


Punishment and Glory of the Dead


equal in military prowess ; now when he has become a monk,
he is a model to all of discipline. See how carefully
he keeps the rule of silence. Not a single word does he
speak.” But when his soul was drawn from his body, it
was presented to the chief of the devils, as was clearly
revealed to some one. As that inhabitant of hell sat over
the pit and held a cup in his hand, he saluted the Landgrave
with these words: “ Welcome to our beloved friend ; show
him our banqueting room, our Stores, our cellars and then
bring him back. The wretched man was taken to the places
of punishment, in which there was nothing but wailing,
tears and gnashing of teeth, and was then brought back and
thus addressed by one prince to another : “ Drink, friend from
my cup.” And in spite of his wild but useless Struggles
he was compelled to drink, the burning brimStone bursting
from his eyes, ears and nose. After that he begins thus:
“ Now you shall inspedt my pit, the gulf of which is bottom¬
less.” And taking off the cover, he thruSt him into it and
carried him off. Behold, that is the pit in which a cleric saw
him, as was Stated in the chapter above.


CHAPTER III.

Of the punishment of a prince of Germany.

Not long ago, Hermann, the Landgrave, son of the said
Ludwig, died. After his decease a certain prieSt, on whom
he had conferred many benefits, was praying to God for his
soul day and night with tears and groans and some one of
the saints or other Stood by him as he prayed and said : “ Why
do you take this trouble for a condemned man? It does
him no good, nay rather harm, since his soul is plunged in
the depths of hell.” The prieSt replied: “ Lord, he did me
much good and therefore I am deeply indebted to him,” but


291


The Dialogue on Miracles


he rejoined : “ Cease to pray for him, for a whole year before
he was buried, he died and his body was quickened by an
evil spirit in the place of his soul.” That Hermann had
been a very great tyrant like his father, caring nothing about
his robberies and wrong-doing and suchlike.

Novice .—I did not suppose a human body could eat, drink
and sleep without a soul.

Mon\. —A similar thing occurs in the life of S. Patrick,
bishop of Ireland, concerning a man who killed his chariot-
driver. In his body in the place of his soul a devil dwelt
for many years, and when he left it by the command of the
saint, the body collapsed and was reduced to duff. I have
heard also of a similar thing from our Gerard, formerly
scholastic of Bonn.


CHAPTER IV.

Of a cleric whose body a devil quickened inSlead
of a soul.

A certain churchman had so excellent and sweet a voice
that it was thought a delight to listen to it. One day a man
of religion coming and hearing the sweetness of that harp
said: “ That is not the voice of a man but of a devil. More¬
over to the astonishment of all he adjured the devil and he
came out of him, the body at once collapsing and becoming
putrid. Then all knew that body had long been abused by
the devil.

Novice.— I have no doubt that the devils in hell do exceed¬
ingly torture the souls of those whose bodies they abuse in
this life.

Mon\. —You are right. Let us now return to the torments
of tyrants, as the opportunity has been offered.


Punishment and Glory of the Dead
chapter v.


Of the punishment of William, count of fulich.

In the manor of Enthenich, which is situated in the terri¬
tory of Bonn, a noble knight named Walter dwelt,
who was very attentive to our house and Order. He being
once grievously ill and lying alone saw a devil appear in
visible form at the foot of the bed. Now his face, he told
us, was shaped like that of an ape and he had the horns of
a goat. Frightened at the sight of him at firff, he was after¬
wards reassured and said: “ Who or what are you, whence
do you come and what are you seeking? ’’ The monster
replied: “ I am the devil. I have come to take your soul.”
The soldier said : “ Away, letcher, you will certainly not take
my soul ; I commend myself to ChriSl." He replied:
“ Walter, if you will agree with me and do homage to me,
I will not only restore you to good health, but will enrich you
more than all your descendants.” Said the soldier : “ I have
enough ; I care not for your deceitful riches and whence will
you get your treasures? ” “ Within the bounds of your

court,” said he, “ is hidden infinite wealth.” The soldier
now took pleasure in talking to him and said : “ Tell me
where is the soul of my lord William, count of Julich, who
died recently ? ” The devil replied: “ Do you know the
neighbouring caSlles of Wolkinburg and Drachenfels? ” ‘I
do,” said he. Then said he: “ On my faith I tell you that
if the castles were as Strong as rocks and they were put in
the place where the soul of William is, they would melt before
the upper eyelid could close upon the lower.” After saying
that he added with a laugh : “ That heat is his bath of milk ;
in the future when the spirit shall regain the body, then first
shall he receive the punishment he deserves.” Asked about
the soul of Henry, count of Sayn, he replied : “ Certainly we
have it.” Yet he gave no account of his punishment. He
went on further to ask about his father. To that he answered :
“ We have had him for twenty-one years. But that one-eyed
woman, and that bald, lousy fellow who lies in the solar, have
taken him away from us.” He meant by the one-eyed one

293


The Dialogue on Miracles


his wife, who by conftant weeping for his soul had loft the
sight of one eye. By the bald fellow he meant his son Theo-
doric, our monk, who had gone to see his brother. Being
further queftioned about the matron, he answered: “ Truly
she was never given up into our power because she was a
good and holy woman. But your brother Lambert we have
so saddled that he cannot escape our power.” This man,
an avaricious money-lover, had died a few years before. The
knight again saying: “ Tell me from what place you have
come to me? ” the devil answered : “ I and my friends were
at the funeral of an abbess of the Black Order, waiting for
her spirit to come forth.” Then said the knight: “How
many are there of you?” The devil replied: “Do you
know the wood in Cottinforft? ” " I know it very well.”

Then said he : “ There are not so many leaves on the trees as
there are of our devils collected there, and there is not a
greater wood in this province.” “ And what,” said he, “ did
you get there? ” He replied : “ Alas nothing ; the woman
was pious ; and besides Michael the Archangel, coming up
with his iron staff, so belaboured us and by his beating put
us to flight that we were scattered like the duft driven before
the wind.”

Novice. —If so many devils were gathered at the coming
forth of one soul, it is certain that they are coundess, for
through the long ages many die.

Mon —Although the wicked spirits cannot be in two
places at the same time, yet so a(ffive is their nature, that in
one moment they pass to widely diftant pans of the earth.
It can even be said they press upon the good when they die,
in Stronger numbers than upon the wicked, of whom they
are certain.

Novice.— I am sadsfied with what you say.

Mon\. —Being asked also if he had been at the death of
our lord abbot Gevard recently, he replied: “ There is not
as much sand on the shores of the sea as our numbers there.
But we got little there, for those lousy fellows, like pigs
lying and grundng on the ground, would not let us come
near him. They have besides a whispering-house,” meaning
the chapter-house, “ in which the faults they commit, are

294


Punishment and Glory of the Dead


lost to us.” And the knight said: “ How were you so
foolish as to dare to go to the death of so good a man? ”
“ Dare I ’’ said he: “I was present when the Son of God
expired, sitting on an arm of the cross.” These words
uttered by the devil and repeated by a layman, I am Strongly
inclined to believe, because we read the same in a note on
Tobias. When Walter said : “ What was your gain at the
death of Christ? ” he said: “ None; we went there to our
sorrow, for confounded and harrassed by the goodness of the
dying man, we were thruSf down to hell.” Many another
talk had he with the devil, as often as he was alone, which
he told to many, when he recovered. Would you like now
to hear what was the end of the punishment of that count?

Novice. —Certainly.

Mon\.— Now he fell ill in his caSlle of Niethiecke and
because of some insult offered to him came to Cologne. On
his return he had a failure of the heart when travelling and
said: “ Ah ! I shall never see Cologne again.” He was
being placed on the ground, and the physician telling him
death was at his door, added ; “ I advise you to take back
your wife.” When he replied “ I will not do so,” he begged
him for pardon of a certain knight whom he had thrown
into prison. “ He shall by no means come out, whilst. I am
alive,” he answered. Then said the docffor: “ He will
come forth before to-morrow.” And so it was. Now when
he was about to die, he lay in the arms of his miffress, whom
he had taken from her husband. And when she said to
him: “ Lord, what shall I do when you are dead ? ” he
replied: “ You muff marry a young knight.” Those were
his laff words. That same night, as I have been told by an
abbot of our Order, a certain nun of S. Maurice in Cologne
was carried to the place of punishment, in which she saw a
very horrible pit covered with a fiery lid amid flames of
sulphur. When she questioned her conductor about this,
he replied: “ There are only two souls in it, the soul that is,
of the emperor Maxentius and that of William, count of
Julich.” In the morning she related her dream, and the
news of the death of that count being made known in Cologne,
she perceived that her vision was a true one


The Dialogue on Miracles


Novice .—I wonder why he was associated with Maxentius
in his punishment, when so many years had elapsed between
them and so many tyrants had died before him.

Mon \.—Because of the similarity of their crimes. It was
jusf that they who were equals in crime, should be partners
in punishment. I am acquainted with the lives of both,
of Maxentius from books, of William by hearsay from many.
Both were tyrants, both licentious to excess. As we read
in histones, there was no matron in the city of Rome, or out¬
side it, so noble or chafte, whom he did not take from her
husband’s house and debauch, if she pleased the eye of Maxen¬
tius. It was the same with maiden and widow. Husbands
saw these things and groaned, parents too were silent, fio
great was his cruelty that with hearts Stricken with excessive
grief they hid their sorrow. Such was his oppression that
everywhere he slew senators, citizens and soldiers of whom
he had the leaSt suspicion. Now the deeds that William
wrought were not unlike his ; if his power was not as great,
his will was the same. I have heard that he was so given
over to luSt and inceft, that he had hardly a servant whose
wife or daughter he had not corrupted, making no difference
between mother and daughter, between bond and free. How
great was his cruelty towards his subjetfts and fellow-country¬
men, the whole diocese of Cologne knows well. Maxentius
killed his own wife ; he shut two up. The firSt persecuted
the church, killing many of their faith ; the latter at the
time of the schism in the Roman Empire persecuted those
who obeyed the ApoStolic See, driving priefts from their liv¬
ings, mutilating some and plundering the property of the
churches. These things were done in the time of Pope Inno¬
cent. Last year a canon of Aix told me of a very terrible
vision concerning this William. After death, he said, he
appeared to a certain hermit, to whom he had shown kind¬
ness, with a livid and emaciated face, and said : “lam that
unhappy William, once count of Julich.” When he asked
about his condition he replied : “ I am all on fire.” And as he
lifted up the miserable dress in which he seemed to be clad,
at once flames burst out, and so with a shriek he vanished.
Whilft he was Still living, God, who is merciful, that he

296


Punishment and Glory of the Dead


might turn him from his sins, showed him some of his glory.
On the day of the birth of the Lord at the firft canon of the
mass, he permitted him to hear, as though in heaven, the
sweete£t voices with the moft delightful melody. Presently
asking Dom Engilbert, then warden of the great church in
Cologne and now archbishop, if he heard those voices, and he
saying he did not, he was the more amazed. But at the
canon of the second mass, also of the third, he heard the
same voices of different ages. When this was repeated to
the lord abbot of Marienftatt, he went to the count and
heard from his own lips what had been said. And the count
swore by God that he was not lying, adding with an oath,
that if he were allowed to hear such things once again, lie
was prepared to renounce all his sins. Yet that divine com¬
fort brought him little profit, because his great sins flood in
the way. The pit into which that count was thrown, reminds
me of the punishment of a wicked prieft.


CHAPTER VI.

Of the punishment of a prieft, whose own parish¬
ioners drove his soul into the pit.

There was in a certain manor a very wretched priefl who
gave all his time to gluttony and luft, and entirely neglefled
the souls committed to his care. When he was dead, his
parishioners deceased in his time, took up ftones in the
infernal regions and began to crowd round him and sav,
“ We were entrufted to you and you neglefled us ; when we
sinned, you prevented us neither by word nor example. You
have been the cause of our damnation.” Ana so they
pursued him with ftones until he fell into the pit and was
no more seen. This was revealed about him to a certain
nun.


297


The Dialogue on Miracles


chapter VII.

Of the punishment of a Steward of Kolmere, who
was sent into Stromboli.

Once upon a time when some Swedes were on pilgrimage
to Jerusalem and on their return were sailing near Stromboli,
whose fires are ever burning, these words sounded from
it: “ Welcome, welcome, our friend the Steward of Kolmere ;
it is cold, get ready a blazing fire for him.” They know¬
ing the person, noted the day and the hour, and when they
had returned to their own, they found that the same Steward
had died on that day and at that hour. Then going to
his wife, they told her what they had heard and she replied:
“ If matters are so, it is right that I should go to his aid.”
At once leaving everything she went on pilgrimage to the
shrines of the saints, beseeching God for his soul with alms
and prayers.


CHAPTER VIII.

Also of a Steward of Lcggenich who was sent
into the same mountain.

At another time a certain Fleming crossed the sea and
heard voices like this coming from the same Stromboli:
“ Here comes my good friend Syward ; admit him,” and he
was sent with much howling into Stromboli. Now he had
been a Steward in Leggenich. They noting the time and
the name of the person, on their return entered that manor
and when they had enquired for the Steward, they heard
that he had died on the day and at the hour when they
heard the voice on the sea. Now he was a very bad man
like the laSt.


2g8


Punishment and Glory of the Dead


CHAPTER IX.

Also of Bruno of Flitert, who was thrown into
the same Stromboli.

What follows is similar. A prieft of Rheinkassel named
Conrad once crossed the sea with other pilgrims of our
province and opposite the oft-mentioned Stromboli the fol¬
lowing words were heard in it: “ Here comes Bruno of
Flitert ; take him.” These words being heard by all, the
prieff said to his fellows: “ Ye are all witnesses to these
words,” and Straightway he noted on his tablets in their
presence the date and the hour saying: “ Of a truth the lord
Bruno is dead.” But when they returned from Jerusalem
they met some pilgrims of their own province. These they
questioned about the fate of the said Bruno and were told by
them that he was dead. Enquiring about the time they found
it was that date on which they had heard the voice in Strom¬
boli. Now Conrad not long after became a monk in Berg.


CHAPTER X.

Also of the punishment of Bruno, his son, whose
health was drun\ in hell.

That Bruno left a son of the same name, whom he endowed
more richly with his vices that with possessions. For he was
like his father very avaricious, an oppressor of the poor and
licendous to a degree. He is that Bruno of Flitere, who was
butler to the Count de Montfort. Hardly three months have
elapsed since his death. At his decease a certain woman
possessed with a devil was freed from it, but as she was tor¬
mented afresh five days later, some people said to the devil:
“ Tell us where you have been or why you have returned.”


The Dialogue on Miracles


He replied: “ Truly we had a great feast afterwards. We
flocked to the death of Bruno, like the duff of the earth in
number. With rejoicing we conduced his soul below, placed
it in the abode which it had earned, and pledged him a
cup of hell.”


CHAPTER XI.

Of Everard the \night who sat up on his bier.

At the same time there died in that province another knight
named Everard who was also a man of crime like the laft.
At midnight the devil by raising his body upright on the
bier terrified all who were present. His friends fearing out¬
rage by the devils, bound the body before the mass and buried
it.


CHAPTER XII.

Of the dean of Palermo, whom k} n g Arthur invited
to Mt. Gyber.

At the time when the emperor Henry conquered Sicily,
there was in the church of Palermo a certain dean, by nation,
I believe, a German. One day having loft a very good palfrey
he sent his servant to various places to look for it. An old
man meeting him said: “ Where are you going and what
are you seeking? ” And when he said : “I am looking for
my mafter’s horse,” he replied: “ I know where it is.”
“ And where is it? ” said he. He answered : “ In Mt. Gyber.
There my mafter king Arthur has it.” Now that mountain
sends forth flames like Etna. The servant being amazed at
his words, he added: “ Tell your mafter to come there to
his high court in fourteen days’ time. But if you omit to

300


Punishment and Glory of the Dead


tell him, you will be severely punished.” The servant
returned and told his mailer what he had heard, but with
fear. The dean hearing he had been invited to the court
of king Arthur, laughed at it, but fell ill and died on the day
appointed. This was told me by Gotteschalk, canon of Bonn,
who said he was there at the time.

Novice .—The Slories you tell are wonderful.

Mon\. —I am going to tell you something more about that
mountain.


CHAPTER XIII.

Of the punishment of Bertolph, liuke of Zahringen,
who was put into Etna.

About three years ago some men walking near this Mt.
Gyber, heard a loud voice saying: "Get ready the fire.”
After a short interval there was the same cry, and a third
time: “ Get ready a great fire.” Someone replied : “ For
whom shall I prepare it.” Said the other : “ A beloved friend
of ours, the duke of Ziihringen is coming here, who has served
us well.” Noting the day and the hour, they sent by letter
an account of what they had heard to king Frederic, asking
whether a duke of Zahringen had died in his empire. And
it was discovered that the same day and hour Bertolph, duke
of Zahringen, had died. Now that duke was a monSlrous
tyrant, a chsinheritor of noble and mean alike and an apoSlate
from the Catholic faith. As he had no children, urged by
the vice of avarice, he had amassed a very great sum of money.
But when he was about to die, he asked his friends to melt
all his treasure into one lump. Being questioned about it,
he replied : “ I know my kinsmen rejoicing at my death will
divide my wealth amongSt them. But if it is reduced to
one lump, they will kill one another.” You see his great
malice. This was told to me by two abbots, one of whom
belonged to the Duchy Zahringen and the other declared


The Dialogue on Miracles


it had been related to him by an abbot who heard the laft-
mentioned read in the presence of the king Frederic.

Novice .—What muS we think of these mountains Strom-
boli, Etna and Gyber ? As souls are sent into them, is pur¬
gatory there, or hell? ”

Mon \.—They are said to be the jaws of hell, because none
of the eleft, but the wicked only are sent into them, as we
read in the dialogue of Theodoric, king of the Goths. Hell
is supposed to be in the heart of the earth, so that the wicked
may not see the light of heaven. I will tell you some instances
of the punishment of robbers.


CHAPTER XIV.

Of the punishment of Frederic, tonight of Kelle.

A citizen of Andernach named Erkinbert, the father of our
monk John, going one day before light for a certain purpose,
was met by someone on a very black war-horse from whose
nostrils shot smoke and fire. Now he was on the high road,
but turning off it he galloped in a different direction over
the fields. Seeing this Erkinbert at firSt was exceedingly
frightened, and because he could not get out of the way, he
took courage, signed himself with the cross againSf the devil
and armed his right hand with a sword againSf the man ;
for he knew not what he was. Coming close to him, he
saw that he was a knight of repute lately dead, named Frederic,
of the manor of Kelle. Now he appeared to be clothed in
sheepskins and carried a great load of earth on his shoulders.
To him Erkinbert said : “ Are you the lord Frederic? ” And
when he replied: “I am,” he went on : “ Whence do you
come and what mean these things which I see? ” “ I,” said

he, “ am in very great pains ; those skins I took from a
widow and now I feel them red-hot. Likewise I made an
unjufl claim to a portion of land, under whose weight I am
now crushed. If my sons reftore this property, they will


302


Punishment and Glory of the Dead


much lighten my punishment. And so he vanished from
sight. When he told the sons next day their father’s words,
they preferred that he should remain for ever in his pains
than themselves give up what had been left to them.

Novice. —I remember you said something similar in the
second book and seventh chapter about Elias of Runingen.

Mon\. —Here is another instance.


CHAPTER XV.

Of Henry Nodus, who after his death appeared
visibly to many.

In the diocese of Treves, where the former vision also
occurred, there was another knight named Henry Nodus.
Now he was extremely full of wickedness, regarding rapine,
adultery, inceft, perjury and the like as virtues. When he
died in the province of Menevelt, lie appeared to many in
a sheep-skin, as was his wont in life, haunting the house of
his daughter. He could not be driven away by the sign of
the cross, or by a sword. He was often Struck with a sword
but could not be wounded, giving off the sound of a soft bed
being Struck. His friends consulted John the lord bishop of
Treves and he advised them to pour water on a nail of cruci¬
fixion and to sprinkle the house and his daughter and the
man himself, if he was present. That being done he never
appeared again. The daughter had been born of his hand¬
maid, although he had a lawful wife, and when she grew up,
the wretch debauched her. It is not long since these things
happened.

Novice.— What muSt we think of those who die in war or
at tourneys?

Mon\. —If the wars are juSt, as the defence of one’s coun¬
try, those who die defending it, will not suffer thereby. How
much delighted the devils are with those who attack the
innocent, the following example shows.

303


The Dialogue on Miracles


chapter XVI.

Of the tourney of those who were slain near
Montenake.

The night after the army of the duke of Louvain was slain
by the people of Liege, a servant of the count of Lootz near
Montenake, passing by the place of slaughter, early in the
night saw there a very great tourney of devils. I do not
suppose that there had been such exaltation of the foul spirits,
if they had not taken great spoils there. But of those who
fall in tourneys, there is no question that they go to hell, if
they have not been helped by the benefit of contrition.


CHAPTER XVII.

Of Walter of Milene.

A prieSl of Spain this year passing at dusk near the camp
of the count of Lootz, from one manor to another, saw on a
plain hard by a very great tourney of the dead making a
great outcry of: “ Walter, Lord Walter of Milene! ” This
Walter was famous in war and lately dead. The prieff know¬
ing that they were those who represented that cursed market
of soldiers, pulled up and fetched a compass round them.
And when the vision ceased and he went on, seeing them
again, he did as before and so toiled on until it was light.
These two visions were told to me by Wiger, monk of Villers.
I will now give you an inilance of the punishment of usurers.


304


Punishment and Glory of the Dead


chapter XVIII.

Of a dead \night who at night hung snakes and
toads inficad of fish in front of his son’s door.

A certain knight at his death bequeathed his property
acquired by usury to his son. One night he knocked loudly
at the door and when a page ran and asked why he knocked,
he replied: “ Let me in ; I am the lord of this land,” and
gave his name. The boy looked out through the grille and
recognising him, said : “ My mafter is certainly dead ; I will
not let you in.” And when the dead man went on knocking
without any effed, at laft he said : “ Take these fish on which
I live, to my son ; look you, I am hanging them on the door.”
In the morning, when they went out, they found in a sort
of bundle a quantity of toads and snakes. In fad that is the
food in hell and it is cooked in the sulphurous flames.

Novice .— What do you think of those who live ill but give
much alms?

Mon\.— It is of no advantage to them for eternal life.


CHAPTER XIX.

Of a Bavarian who appeared after death to his wife
and told her that almsgiving had done him no good.

Not many years since a certain very rich official of the duke
of Bavaria died. One night the caflle in which his wife
was sleeping, was so shaken, that they thought there had
been an earthquake. And behold the door of the room, in
which she lay, opened and her husband entered driven by a
gigantic black man pushing him by the shoulders. Seeing
and recognising him, she called him to her and made him sit
on the seat by the bed. She was in no way frightened and


3°5


A 20


The Dialogue on Miracles


because it was cold she threw a part of the bed coverlet over
his shoulders. Being asked by her about his condition, he
replied sadly : “ I have been consigned to eternal punishment.”
At these words she was exceedingly alarmed and answered:
“ What do you say ? Have you not given much alms and
was not your door open to all pilgrims? Are your good deeds
of no avail? ” He replied : “ They are useless for giving me
eternal life, because they were done for vain glory and not
out of charity.” When she wanted to queftion him about
other matters, he again replied: “ I have been allowed to
appear to you, but I may not flay here. Behold my devil
condudfor outside waits for me. If all the leaves of the trees
were turned into tongues, they could not describe my tor¬
tures.” After this he was called out and driven on, the whole
caftie being shaken at his departure as before and his cries of
woe long heard. This vision was much talked of and Still
is in Bavaria, as Gerard, our monk was witness, at one time
Canon of Ratisbon, who related it to us. See, how in all that
has been said the scripture is fulfilled, which saith: “ The
mighty men shall be mightily tormented.”

Novice .—This and like examples should be preached to
the mighty.

Mon \.—Because the prieSfs themselves in great part live
bad and incontinent lives, they do not prick the hearts of the
mighty, but flatter them. How grave a vice is the licentious¬
ness of priests, the following infiance proves.


CHAPTER XX.

Of the punishment of a prieSl’s miHress, whom the
devil hunted.

I have been told by a man of religion that the miftiress of a
prieft when about to die, with much importunity asked for
new shoes of the beff sort to be made for her, saying : “ Bury

306


Punishment and Glory of the Dead


me in them ; they are very necessary to me.” This being
done, next night long before light whilft the moon was shin¬
ing, a certain knight and his servant were riding along the road
and they heard the shrieks of a woman. As they wondered
what this might be, behold, a woman running rapidly to them,
cried out: “ Help, help! ” At once the knight dismounted and
whirling his sword in a circle round him took the woman well-
known to him within its protection. Now she was clad only
in a shift and those shoes. And behold, from a distance there
came a sound like the horn of a hunter; moreover the baying
of hounds were heard going before him. When she heard
these, she trembled exceedingly, and the knight when he had
heard from her what it was, delivered his horse to his servant,
bound three locks of her hair round his left arm and held his
sword Stretched out in his right. When that hellish hunter
drew near, the woman said to the knight: “ Let me run, let
me run ; see, he approaches.” And though he bravely held
her back, the wretched woman Struggled againSt him beating
the knight with her hands and at length breaking the hair
escaped. Then the devil pursued and caught her and threw
her on his horse with her head and arms hanging down on
one side and her legs on the other. After a little meeting
the soldier again like this he carried off his victim. He
going back in the morning to the manor, told what he had
seen and showed the hair ; and when they would not believe
his tale, they found on opening the grave that the woman
had loSl her hair. This happened in the archbishopric of
Mainz.

Novice .—If God so punishes the sin of fornication in con¬
cubines, I suppose that his punishment is much more severe for
priefts, who make them sin.

Mon \.—You are right. Besides their orders and their
knowledge much aggravate their offence. In the same class
of sin the sin of the priest is greater than that of the layman,
of the monk than the secular. It is the same in the female
sex.


3°7


The Dialogue on Miracles
chapter XXI.

Of a nun who carried in flames a child filled by her.

A nun of a convent near us which I will not name, con¬
ceived, and that her adultery might not be made known,
killed the child within her. Afterwards falling very
grievously ill, through excessive shame, although she con¬
fessed her other sins, she was silent about the adultery and
child-murder and so expired. To a kinswoman who Strove
hard for her soul, the dead woman appeared visibly in her
prayers, carrying a child alight in her hands and saying: “ l
conceived and brought forth this infant and killed it with its
life within it. Therefore without ceasing I carry it round
with me in torment and its fire burns and devours me. But
if when I was dying, I had confessed this, my greatest sin, I
should have found grace.” From which we gather that sins
which have not been disclosed in confession, are in the future
laid bare in the confusion of punishment.

Novice .—When the soul goes out of the body, does it know
at once what will become of it ?

Mon \.—-This seems to be proved by scripture saying in
the case of the wicked: “ They spend their days in wealth,
and in a moment go down to the grave ” (Job. xxi. 13). By
which is proved that the souls of the ele< 5 t who are of a more
atffive nature, at once come before God. But if there is any¬
thing to be purged in them, with equal speed are they taken
to purgatory, in which there is a certainty of salvation.

Novice .—Different visions seem to contradict this, in which
we read that good deeds and evil ones roo are placed and
weighed in the balance. With this seems to agree a vision
in the dialogue of S. Gregory, which he by no means explains,
about a man who being placed on a bridge was drawn up¬
wards by his hands by angels because of his works of mercy,
and downwards by the legs and sides. Which however had
the victory, he who saw, knew not.

Mon \.—Although the authority of scripture mull be pre¬
ferred to visions of this sort, yet I will tell you what I heard
lately.


308


Punishment and Glory of the Dead


chapter XXII.

Of the cardinal Jordan.

A few years ago a cardinal died at Rome called Jordan.
He had been admitted to the Ciflercian Order, but his life
was by no means in accordance with his vows. For I have
been told by an abbot he was very avaricious. Now he had
a notary named Pandulph and when this man was on some
business of his, he expired. The same hour the other having
finished his business was returning, and in the morning before
light he saw a miserable crowd in the fields. Men were sitting
on beafls, having their tails in their mouths, and their backs
turned to their heads. Following them in a cowl and bare¬
foot, was Jordan led by two devils. At sight of these the
notary being in a great fright, the cardinal cried out: “ Pan¬
dulph, Pandulph, Pandulph I ” and when the cleric flopped
and said: “ Who are you and why do you call out? ” he
replied: “ I am Jordan, your mafler, and I am dead.” The
other said: “ Where are you being taken ? ” and he answered :
“ Before Chrifl's tribunal.” And he: “ Do you know what
will happen to you? ” “ I do not,” said he, “ God knows.

But when I come there the blessed Peter is going to give an
account of my cardinalship on my behalf and S. Benedidf of
my conduit as a monk. And if he can do it for me, I shall
be saved, but if not, I shall be damned.” And so he was
taken from his eyes.

Novice.— I do not like the presence of devils in that Duchy
and the absence of angels.

Mon\. —This was said of the punishment of the wicked.

Novice. —Although visions of this kind are true, yet I
should rather believe one who returned from hell and told
what he had seen.

Monl(. —-Job denies that this can be done. “ As,” says he,
“ the cloud is consumed and vanisheth away, so he that goeth
down to the grave shall come up no more. He shall return
no more to his house, neither shall his place know him any
more.” I will tell you however what I heard two years ago.


The Dialogue on Miracles


chapter XXIII.

Of Everwach who was ta\en to the punishment of

hell.

Theodoric, bishop of Utrecht, who came from the cattle
of Niirburg, had a servant named Everwach, a thrifty fellow,
who managed his property in various places. He was faith¬
ful in what was entrufled to him, efficient in management,
diligent and tadlful. Therefore he was beloved by his master
and therefore some of the officials belittled him, accusing him
to the bishop through envy, saying: “ Lord, Everwach does
not, as you imagine, faithfully manage your property. We
advise you to go into your accounts with him.” This being
done, he rendered so careful an account as to take away ail
suspicion from the bishop, for he had everything noted down
on a parchment. When his accusers enquired about the
rendering of his accounts and the bishop replied: “He gave
an excellent one,” they said to him: “ By no means is it so.
Let him give it in our presence and he will be convided of
causing you very great loss.” This was communicated to him
by the bishop, and he fearing the plots of his rivals and
especially because he had lofl his parchment, said to himself :
“If I make but a slip in my calculations, I shall certainly oe
tortured in body or in the filth of a prison suffer till I die.”
And so driven on by the devil, who had prompted his envious
rivals, he went all alone into the fields and calling on the
devil himself thus addressed him: “ Lord if you will aid
me in my need, I will do homage to you and obey you in all
things.” The devil replied to him : “ If you will renounce
the Moil High and His Mother, I will admit you and you
shall be delivered from all dangers to the great confusion of
your rivals.” To be brief, the wretched man renounced
ChriS, did homage to the devil and passed his accounts with
complete success. From that time he began to exalt the
powers of the devil and to blaspheme Chrift saying: “ Those
who serve God, are miserable and needy, whereas they who
put their truS in the devil, are gladdened by prosperity and

310


Punishment and Glory of the Dead


success. And, as Bernard our monk, told me who knew
him at that time, so wholly given up to magical arts was he,
that if he knew of any ftudent of such learning, he bribed
him with money to learn something of him. After persist¬
ing in this blasphemy for eleven years, it so happened that
maSler Oliver, scholastic of Cologne, was preaching the cross
in the bishopric of Cologne. This man opposed his preach¬
ing to such an extent that one day Oliver in vexation said to
him in the hearing of all the people : “ Silence, unhappy one ■
for thou art the devil’s vessel, and the devil speaks through
thy mouth,” although he was ignorant of the man’s State.
Everwach thinking he could do his maSter no better service
than by slaying his enemy, for three days followed the scholastic
to his various poSts with a long knife obtained for the purpose,
proposing to Stab him, if he could be caught away from the
crowds of people. And behold, on the third day being seized
with a sudden sickness, after a few days he died impenitent
and was conducted by him to whom he had delivered himself,
to the place of punishment. FirSt of all (as he himself when
he rose from the dead, confessed to John, scholastic of Xanten,
from whom I heard what I am going to tell you) he was sent
into a fire of such intolerable heat that he said: “ If one fire
were made of all the wood in the world, I would rather burn
in it until the day of judgment than for the space of an hour
endure that. Being drawn out of this, he was thrown into
a place so exceedingly cold that he would gladly have returned
to the fire. After that he was brought into darkness that
could be felt and so horrible that he said to himself: “ HadSl
thou served God for a hundred years, it would have been
sufficient reward to be allowed to go back to the cold.” In
this way he passed through six other torments mentioned in
scripture. And when he was subjedfed to the laSt punish¬
ment, God thinking on his earlier deeds, and that he might
tell all that he had suffered there to the living, took pity on
him and sent his angels to him to say : “ Behold, such reward
have they who serve the devil,” and he added : “ If you were
allowed to return to life, would you make satisfaction to God
for your sins?” At that word he with a sigh replied:
“ Lord, if this were possible, I would refuse no atonement.”


The Dialogue on Miracles

Then the angels said : “ It is the Lord’s will that thou shouldsf
return to the body, and because thou didst sin in the matter
of the cross, by the cross make atonement.” At once he sat
up on the bier and put all to flight except two young men who
had greater courage. To them he said : “ Do not fear, for
it is I.” And at once going to a prieft he confessed his sins,
took the cross and with the lord Otto, the bishop, successor
of the said Theodoric, he crossed the sea. On the way he
faffed every day on bread and water and ran barefoot by
his horse, which carried his clothing and arms. And when
the blood flowed and marked his footffeps, because the ftones
cut him, he was blamed by his companions but replied : “ I
have endured much worse things.” And after spending
almoft all that he had in the service of Chrift, he returned
with that bishop and mafter John over the sea, and when
the shipman demanded payment for his passage and he had
no money, he said : “ I will serve you as long as you please.”
But at the prayer of those others the mafler of the ship let him
go. On his return to his wife he was Struck by lightning. And
one night when he was at fever heat, he was told in a dream
that if he went to the church of S. Nicholas, he would at once
recover. There he prayed and after repeating fourteen prayers
without being healed, he said in his despair: “ Holy Nicholas
why do you delay ? ” At once as he said the fifteenth prayer,
he recovered entirely. And to this day there is the mark of
fire on his body but no pain. Having rebuilt out of his heri¬
tage the church which is situated in the manor of Stalum, in
the habit of a monk he served God and S. Nicholas in it with
his wife.

Novice .—I should like to know exactly whether he was
recalled from hell or purgatory.

Mon \.—The point has been much debated. That he was
not in purgatory, is proved by this, that it is the place of the
ele<S, into which no one enters, unless he departed in love.
If this objection is raised that in hell is no redemption, it can
be answered that it muff be underftood of those who will
not return to the body, for whom none can avail for redemp¬
tion. Opposites are bound by one law. If God, as is said
in the dialogue, at times recalls the souls of some to their bodies


312


Punishment and Glory of the Dead


from the joys of paradise, why not the souls of the wicked from
the pains of hell? As has been said in the firft book and
thirty-fourth chapter, a certain cleric was conduced in the
body under the guardianship of the devil to hellish punish¬
ment and was brought back safe.

Novice .—I am satisfied with your explanation.

Monk .■—Now with regard to the pains of purgatory I will
bring forward some instances, proceeding from the sharper
to the milder, and adding some good reasons for purgatory.


CHAPTER XXIV.

Of the purgatory of a usurer of Liege.

A certain usurer of Liege died in our time and was for¬
bidden burial in the cemetery by the bishop. But his wife
went to the Apoflolic See and begged for his burial there and
when the pope refused, she pleaded in this way for him: “ I
have heard, lord, that man and wife are one and that the
apoftle says, an unbeliever can be saved by a believing wife.
Hence whatever shortcomings there may have been in my
husband, I will moft gladly make up for these and give satis-
faftion to God for his sins.” And the cardinals pleading her
cause, by the order of the lord pope, the man is restored to
the cemetery. Hard by his grave she had a house made for
herself, in which she shut herself up and by alms, prayer and
faffing and by watching day and night Strove to please God
for his soul’s sake. But when seven years were gone, he
appeared to her in a black dress and thanked her saying:
“ God reward thee, for I have been rescued from the pit of
hell and from the greatest pains by thy efforts. But if for
Still another seven years thou wilt confer like benefits upon
me, I shall be entirely freed.” And when she had done so,
again appearing to her in a white dress and with joyful face,

313


The Dialogue on Miracles

he said: “ Thanks to God and to thee that to-day I am
delivered.”

Novice .—Why did he say he was freed from the deep of
hell, where there is no redemption in it ?

Monk ..—The deep of hell means the bitterness of purgatory.
It is like the prayer which the church makes for the dead:
“ Lord Jesus Chnft deliver the souls of all the faithful from
the power of hell and from the pit of the lake etc.” It does
not pray for the damned, but for those that are to be saved ;
and the power of hell or the pit of the lake or the mouth of
the lion is understood as the bitterness of purgatory. By no
means would that usurer have been freed from punishment,
if he had not repented in the end. But how much God
punishes avarice in his ele&, the following narrative shows.


CHAPTER XXV.

Of the purgatory of a certain prior of Clairvaux.

In the monastery of Clairvaux a prior died in our time
who was a very pious man and a conspicuous lover of disci¬
pline. After death he appeared in visible form to Acselina,
a handmaid of the Lord, in prayer and showed his condition
by his shape and dress. For his face was pallid and emaciated,
his habit thin and worn. When asked how he was, he
replied: “ Hitherto I have been in great pain ; but thanks
to a brother who has given me great help, at the next feafl
of Our Lady I shall be freed.” In amazement she said:
“We thought you a very holy man,” and he replied: “ God
has punished nothing else in me but my excessive desire to
increase the possessions of the monastery, under a show of
virtue being deceived by the vice of avarice.” So much for
that punishment of avarice. Now hear something about that
of licentiousness.


3H


Punishment and Glory of the Dead


CHAPTER XXVI.

Of the purgatory of a certain Mary in Friesland.

Three years ago our lord abbot after visiting at Klaar-Kamp
in Lent, also visited the sifters in Nazareth. That night
when matins had been said and he had lain down a little
while, he saw this vision. He thought he was in a place
shut in by walls, in which he heard very heavy sighing and
groaning ; but when he looked carefully all round, he could
see no one there. And as the sighs he heard, went on,
wondering at the cause, he said: “ I adjure you by our lord
Jesus Chrift to declare to me who you are.” But hearing
no reply to that, he repeated the adjuration. Then feeling
as it were something approaching and seeing nothing, he
heard this answer: “1 am one unhappy soul.” Said he:
“ Your groans are miserable enough, but yet I do not know
the cause of your misery.” She replied: “I am in the
bittereft pains.” To that the abbot said : “ What is the cause
of your pains? ” “ Because I have not preserved my

chaftity.” And he: “Were you male or female?” She
answered: “ A woman.” “ And what is your name.”
When she said: “ Mary,” he at once rejoined: “ Can you
be helped?” To that she made no reply, but turning to
entreaty, she said: “ I implore you by the Almighty God '.o
say for me at leaft one psalm and besides some masses.”
When the lord abbot had gladly consented to her prayer, he
forthwith added : “ Could I see you? ” And behold, as he
finished speaking, he saw ftanding before him a beautiful
young girl with the tonsure of a cloiftered nun in a dark dress.
Desiring to ask her further queftions about her condition and
that of some other spirits, he awoke. When prime was
sung he told what he had seen to the abbot of Klaar-Kamp
and some of his monks as well as to myself, who was present ;
and there was no one who understood the vision or could
interpret it. The vision was related to the sifters of Nazareth,
but Mary was not known there. And the abbot being sure
that so manifeft a vision had not been sent without reason,


315


The Dialogue on Miracles


coming to Syon, which is also a house of nuns of our Order
like Nazareth, after words of exhortation, mentioned the
dream, seeking for the Mary of it. And behold, one of the
nuns, aunt of that Mary, hearing with wonder, talked in
private with the abbot and said : “ Lord, this Mary was the
daughter of my sifter and a nun in a convent of Frisia of
the Black Order, called Bredehorn, and she died eight years
ago. When she was at a grange of the monaftery, a cleric
debauched her so that she conceived. When however she
was in the peril of child-bed, she called her father and mother
and two married sifters, as well as her aunt’s daughter at
Syon and confessed her sin to them with heart-rending groans
and so expired. But they despairing of her salvation paid
for no masses for her.” The lord abbot hearing this, gave
thanks to God, who delivers not up to beafts the soul
that confesses at the end to him, knowing that in her was
fulfilled, “ In whatsoever hour the sinner groaneth, he shall
be saved.” Hope at his encouragement being conceived in
the parents, they began to pay for benefits to her soul ; but
the abbot himself also both in the monafleries of Friesland
and in religious houses of our province solicited masses and
prayers and many psalms for her, besides those which he
himself specially bellowed on her.


CHAPTER XXVII.

Of the purgatory of a matron for practising magic.

A knight visiting his sifter Bertrada, a cloiftered nun of
Volmuntffeine, according to a tale which abbot Daniel of
Schonau heard from his own lips, and repeated to us, begged
her to pray for the soul of his wife lately deceased. On her
praying she appeared and complained she was in great pain.
Being asked the cause of her pain, because she had been

3r6


Punishment and Glory of the Dead


regarded as an honourable and good woman, she replied :
“ Because of my magical arts. For I was afraid that my
husband might sin with other women, if he disliked me, and
I should thus be the cause of his adultery. Hence by certain
arts, as I had been inflru&ed, I influenced him to love me.
And because lu£l was not the cause, but a good intention,
I may rightly be helped.” When the knight had been told
this, he was much grieved for his wife, and by prayers, fail¬
ings and alms tried to help her, commending her soul in
every way that he could.

Novice. —It is a terrible thing that God so severely punishes
faults that in our judgment are so very slight.

Mon!{. —Of this I will give you an example.


CHAPTER XXVIII.

Of the mon\ who appeared to his friend after death
and said : “ I did not suppose the Lord was so
severe."

A monk of our Order recently appeared to some one after
death, and when questioned about his condition, thus replied :
“ I should never have thought that the Lord was so severe.
For he notices the very smalleil faults which have not been
blotted out by atonement.” Then he added this: “ May God
forgive our prelates, who often subject us to many great
penalties. Their commands are very binding. For when
without consideration they give an order and those placed
under them negledt it, or think little of it, it is reserved for
future judgment.”

Novice. —What do you say about self-willed monks?

Mon\. —Self-will is a vice that deserves punishment, even
in a good man who defies the commands of prelates.


317


The Dialogue on Miracles


CHAPTER XXIX

Of a scholattic, who after death Struck and broke a
board in Preuilly.

In the realm of France there is a house called Preuilly of
the Ciflercian Order. In this there recently occurred a very
wonderful event related to us by our abbots when returning
from a general chapter ; for some testified that they heard
it from the abbot of the house in which the vision was seen.
A young man became a novice in that house and his master
soon followed him. Having become a monk he treated him¬
self so severely and was so solitary, that the abbot feared for
him and often reproved him for his indiscreet zeal. But
he did not bow to his wholesome warnings and persisted in
his obstinacy and so after a year died. One night as the
abbot was Standing in his Stall at lauds on Thursday and was
looking towards the presbytery, he beheld three persons like
three burning candles coming towards him. As they came
nearer he knew them all. In the middle was that scholastic
and on either side of him two lay-brothers, all recently
deceased. Then the abbot remembering the self-will of the
scholastic, asked him : “In what State are you? ” When he
replied: “ Quite well,” presently he added: “ Have you
suffered at all for your disobedience?” "Yes,” said he:
“ Many very great torments. But because my intention was
good, though indiscreet, the Lord had pity on me and I was
not condemned.” And the abbot said: “ Why is that lay-
brother,” pointing to him with his finger, “ brighter than the
other, since he gave up his orders as a monk and the other
never from the time he entered the Order, fell away at all
seriously ? ” The monk replied : “ Because after his fall he
rose resolutely and was much more zealous than the other.”
Meantime, as the choir was chanting the verse: “He shall
keep the feet of his saints and the wicked shall become silent
in darkness ” (Sam. ii. 9), the scholastic, wishing to leave a
token of his presence there, Struck the board lying under the
feet of the singers so hard with his heel that it was broken

318


Punishment and Glory of the Dead


and so he vanished. But the abbot to teSlify to so clear a
miracle, would not allow the broken board to be repaired
or replaced.

Novice. —Tins ought to be read to monks who out of indis¬
creet zeal become unprofitable to themselves and others.

—On their account S. Benedict says in his rule that
the eighth ftep of humility is for a monk to do nothing except
what the common rule of the monastery or the precedents
of former monks enjoin.

Novice. —As some in their Stiffness are too obstinate, so
others in word or sign are too careless.

Mon \.—These too are deserving of punishment.


CHAPTER XXX.

Of John, the sacriflan of Villers, who appeared to
the abbot.

A sacriStan at Villers died in my time, who was quite pious
but showed himself a trifler in words and signs. One day
after his death, as Ulrich, then lord abbot, was about to enter
the oratory and had put one foot inside, the said John appear¬
ing to him in a bright light fell down at his feet and begged
for his prayers. Terrified at the sight, the abbot withdrew
his foot and closed the door after him. And it was decided
by the brothers that the cause of his purgatory was chiefly
his laxity.

Novice. —What if the abbots themselves have not taken
good care of their Order?

Mon \.—As will be proved by the next instance, they too
will be subjedf to punishment.


319


The Dialogue on Miracles


CHAPTER XXXI.

Of the purgatory of the abbot who went unwillingly
to manual wor\.

Recently Henry, the chief cellarer of the doifter related to
me a very remarkable vision. “ It happened,” said he,
“ that I had one day as my fellow-traveller a monk of our
Order. And when we were exchanging edifying talk, he
said to me: ‘I will tell you what happened recently in our
house. We had an abbot who was quite perfed in the dis¬
cipline of the Order with this one exception, that hardly ever
was he willing to go forth with the brothers to manual labour.
When he was about to die, and a monk whom he loved more
closely than the reft, was waiting on him, that monk said to
him : “ Lord, I beg you in consideration of my love to appear
to me within thirty days and let me know about your condi¬
tion.” The abbot replied: “ If I am allowed, I will gladly
do so.” And so he died. But the monk, because he had
shown him much kindness, with tears every day before some
altar tried to appease God for his faults. On the thirtieth
day when the monk had despaired of the abbot’s return, he
appeared to him when praying and said: “ Behold, here I
am, as I promised you.” Now from his belt upwards he
was very bright in body and garments, but his legs were
ulcered and black as coals. Questioned about his condition,
he replied: “ The torments which I have endured in my
legs, no tongue could express.” When the monk said:
“ What was the cause of such torments? ” he replied: “ Be¬
cause frequently I did not go to work, very often when no
pressing need detained me, such as the entertainment of
guefts, or the hearing of confessions. In the reft of my body
I have suffered no pains. Therefore for my sake beg the
brotherhood to offer some prayers for me to God and I hope
I shall be more speedily delivered.” “ How shall I know,”
said he, “that you are freed?” He replied: “I shall
appear before this altar.” This was told to the prior ;
prayers were ordered ; again he appeared to the monk and


320


Punishment and Glory of the Dead


expressed his joy that he had been rescued from all his
pains.’ ”

Novice. —I wonder whether prayers or alms do greater
good to the dead.

Mon\. —Hear the answer of a dead man to that.


CHAPTER XXXII.

Of a dead man who preferred alms to prayers.

A man appeared after death to his friend and being
questioned by him whether he would rather have prayers or
alms given for him, answered: “ Alms, alms, for prayers are
lukewarm. Here the devout prayers of the good which pene¬
trate heaven, are shut out.”

Novice. —What do you think about masses ?

Mon\. —No prayers, no alms can be compared with mass
for the saving of souls. In the mass Christ prays, whose body
and blood are the alms. Such alms one poor soul asked to
have given to him after death, as the following example
shows.


CHAPTER XXXIII.

Of a dead man who ashed for three masses in our
Order.

A young noble coming to Clairvaux, was admitted as a
lay-brother. He was not wise in high subjects, but sub¬
missive to humble duties, and being sent to a grange, became
a shepherd of sheep. As he fed the sheep in his charge one
day in the fields, there appeared to him a cousin who had
died young. Wondering at his unexpected coming, he said
to him: “ Whence do you come so suddenly and what are
321


121


The Dialogue on Miracles


you looking for ? ” Said he: “I am dead and am racked
with very severe pains.” And the lay-brother said: “ Can
you be helped or not ? ” He replied: If I may have three
masses said in your Order, I shall quickly be delivered.”
Hearing this the lay-brother got leave from his mailer to go
to Clairvaux, where after telling the prior what he had seen
and heard, he begged that three masses might for his sake
be granted to that dead man. The prior gladly consented
and said: “ I will celebrate one and order two prieSls to
take the others.” But when the masses had been said, the
dead man appeared again to the lay-brother as before and
thanked him, saying: “ Thanks to the three masses which
have been said for me, I have been delivered from all my
punishment.” Nor ought you to wonder if the sacrifice of
the Lord’s body has such power when the brief words of
the absolution succeed in liberating some souls.


CHAPTER XXXIV.

Of the purgatory of the mon\ Christian in PeterSlhal.

When our monk ChriSlian of blessed memory, mentioned
in the fourth book and thirtieth chapter was dying, Abbot
Gevard was not at home. Presiding in the chapter seven
days later when the precentor said in accordance with the
cuStom of the Order, “ Lord, give absolution to our dead
brother,” he absolved him with the words, “ May he refl in
peace.” The same night Christian appeared in a dream to
the senior priefl named Syfrid, but at that time a novice, who
knew nothing about this absolution, and said: “ To-day I
have been freed.” He repeated his dream to his mailer
Ludolph, and he remembering the absolution, was much
astonished at the power of the words.

Novice .—I wonder if the saints, under whose rule the
religious live, after death give help any more to the reSt of
the saints.

Mon\. —Yes, as is set forth in the following vision.


322


Punishment and Glory of the Dead
CHAPTER XXXV.

Of the purgatory of a nun of the convent in
Rindorp, whom S. Benedidl helped.

Not long since a nun of the convent of Rindorp, near Bonn,
named Elizabeth, paid the debt of the flesh. Now this con¬
vent was under the rule of S. Benedict and this Elizabeth
had especial love for S. John, the Evangelift, paying him all
the honour she could. She had a sifter in the flesh, named
Aleidis and one night after matins had been sung, sitting on
her bed and saying the office for the dead for the soul of her
sifter, she heard a voice near her. Asking who it was she
was answered: “ I am your sifter Elizabeth.” Said the
other : “ How are you, my sifter, and whence do you come? ”
And she replying: “ I have been in an evil ftate, but now
am well,” Aleidis rejoined: “ And did S. John, whom you
loved so ardently, help you at all? ” She answered: “Not
at all. He who aided me, was our holy father Benedict.
He bent his knees before God for me.”

Novice. —Since with difficulty does anyone escape from
purgatory, I am terribly afraid that, as some say, the very
leaft punishment in purgatory is greater than any pain which
can be imagined in this world.

Mon\. —A great theologian who was questioned by me on
this point, answered: “ It is quite untrue, unless it is under¬
stood of the same kind of punishment. For example, fire is
hotter there than our fire, cold worse than our cold and so on
with other things.” With this assertion the following visions
agree.


CHAPTER XXXVI.

Of the purgatory of Margaret, a nun of S. Saviour's.

About three years ago a little girl, I suppose, about nine
years old in Mount S. Saviour, a house of our Order, died
at the Advent of our Saviour. In bright daylight, when the


323


The Dialogue on Miracles


sifterhood were Standing in the choir, she entered it, and as
she did so, she bowed profoundly before the altar, and so
went to her place where she used to Stand. Another girl of
almost the same age, seeing her Standing next and knowing
her to be dead, was Struck with such dread that it was noticed.
But being asked by the gracious lady abbess, from whose lips
I heard what I am telling you, why she was so frightened
in the choir, she replied: “ In such and such a way did the
siSter of Gertrude come into the choir and, when at vespers
mention was made of Our Lady, she prostrated herself. And
when the colled was finished, she rose and went away.” The
abbess fearing delusions of the devil said to the girl: “ SiSter
Margaret ” (that being her name) “ if siSter Gertrude should
come again, say to her ‘ Benedicite ’ and if she answers
‘ Dominus,’ ask her whence she comes and what she seeks.”
Next day she came again and being saluted and answering
“Dominus,” the girl added, “ Good siSter Gertrude whence do
you come at this hour and what do you want among us? ”
She replied: “ I came here to make atonement ; for I whis¬
pered with you in the choir at will uttering half-words ; there¬
fore I have been ordered to make atonement in the same place
where it happened that I sinned. And unless you beware
of the same fault, when you die, you will suffer the same
punishment.” When she had in this way made atonement
four times, she said to her cousin: “ Now I have completed
my atonement ; in future you will not see me.” And so
it was ; for as she looked at her, she went towards the ceme¬
tery passing through the wall by supernatural power. Such
was the purgatory of that maiden.

Novice. —He is not right in his mind who said that a
punishment of this kind is sharper than any pains in this
world.

Mon\. —This point shall be more fully discussed in the
next chapter. But Margaret was so terrified by the warning
of the dead woman that she fell ill and ended her life. Fall¬
ing into a trance she lay as if dead ; but returning to life
after a season she teftified that she had seen some of the
sifters in the presence of Our Lady and some she did not see.
She said also that the Glorious Virgin Mary had a crown in


324


Punishment and Glory of the Dead


her hand which she said belonged to the prieft Steppo. This
Steppo had been presbyter, a very pious man and wonder¬
fully full of charity, serving God and the sifters in that Mount.
But that you may know that one should not care by what
death a good man dies, this Steppo, was grievously sick the
year before, and matter going to his brain, he became entirely
mad so as to utter many blasphemies. When he died, and
was buried, the Lord wishing to show forth his deserts,
deigned to work miracles at his tomb. The sick, as I have
heard, sleep on it and rise cured.

Novice .—Now complete what is left on purgatory.

Mon \.—For some purgatory is nothing else than the loss
of God’s presence, as is plain by the following example.


CHAPTER XXXVII.

Of the purgatory of the mon\ William.

Twelve years ago a monk named William died amongft us.
He came as a boy into the Order, truly a boy, because he
was pure and unftained. He was of noble birth, but the
virtues of his character ennobled him flill more. When the
year of his probation was finished, on the next day he fell
ill and after a few days making a holy end he fulfilled many
seasons. Immediately after death he appeared to a certain
monk and being queftioned about his condition, said he
was in pain. And when the other in terror wept at those
words, and said: “ If thou art in pain, who didst never sin,
what will become of me a sinner and those like me ? ” Com¬
forting him the dead man said: “ Do not weep, for the only
pain I suffer, is that I have not yet seen God,” thinking the
deferring of glory a pain. And rightly so. Hope deferred
maketh the heart sick. And he added: “ Ah, how splendid
will he be that shall come at once into the presence
of God.” “ Ask,” said he, “ on my behalf of the lord abbot


F5


The Dialogue on Miracles


that he will order prayers for me at the time in the chapter
and that he will himself say a collect for me and so I may
be freed.” And the monk saying : “ Which shall that colled!
be? ” he replied: “ That of S. Michael.” In the morning
when the vision was related to our lord abbot Henry, he
himself at once celebrated the mass of the Archangel and in
the chapter ordered the psalm: “ As the hart panteth after
the water-brooks ” to be said for seven days by all for him.
Wonderful the power of their prayers ! When Conrad, now
prior of Marienslatt, was standing in the choir, and at one
verse of that psalm : “ My God, early will I seek Thee,” was in
a light sleep, he saw the said William landing under the cloak
of the Blessed Mother of God saying with much thanksgiv¬
ing : “ Now I am altogether freed.” At the same time
appearing again to the monk, he testified that he had been
in purgatory seven days only, that is, absent from the face
of God, and told him many things about the condition of
certain souls.

Novice .—According to this purgatory is an earthly para¬
dise.

Mon \.—In fact if in it souls are freed from their bodies
and the sight of God is denied to them, that delightful place
is to them a purgatory. But with this seems to agree what
S. Gregory says in his dialogue in these words: “ For there
are souls of certain good men who are yet placed away in
mansions apart from the realm of heaven. In this loss by
being kept away what else is implied than this, that in some
resped: they fell short of perfedf goodness? As I have heard
from a certain great theologian, some are so far good that
after death they do not deserve to be punished and yet not
at once to enjoy the sight of God because of the duft of
trifling faults.


326


Punishment and Glory of the Dead


CHAPTER XXXVIII.

Of the purgatory of S. Patrick^.

Let us now say something about purgatory.

Novice .—Where is purgatory?

Mon {.—As far as can be gathered from various visions, it
is in several places in this world. Paschasius, acording to
Gregory, underwent purgatory in the heat of baths ; a monk
of S. Eucharius is said to have flood after death for a whole
year on a rock near Treves and to have been exposed there
to the inclemency of the weather. But let him who has his
doubts about purgatory, go to Ireland and enter the purgatory
of S. Patrick and he will have no more doubts about the
pains of purgatory.

Novice .—I should like to know something for certain about
that purgatory, what it is and what is the reason for its
exiftence.

Mon \.—When S. Patrick converted that people and
they had doubts about future punishments, by his prayers he
obtained such a place from God. Now there is a deep pit
there surrounded by a wall and men living under rule within
it. The greateft sinner there is, has imposed on him no worse
penance than to flay in that purgatory for one night. When a
man wishes to enter after making his confession, they give him
the sacrament and unction with incense and instruction.
“ You will see,” say they, “this night the assaults of demons
and horrible punishments, but they will not be able to hurt
you, if you have the name of Jesus ever on your lips. But
if through the enticements or the terrors of the devils you
give way and omit to call upon Jesus, you will perish.” In
the evening putting him above the pit, they close the place,
and returning in the morning, if he is not to be seen, they
wait for him no longer. Many have perished there ; many
too have returned. Their visions have been written down
by those brothers and are shown to those who wish to enter.


327


The Dialogue on Miracles


CHAPTER XXXIX.

Of a mon\ who wished to enter that purgatory.

Lately a monk o£ our Order, as I have learnt from the
account of an abbot, by permission of his own abbot wishing
to enter the purgatory of S. Patrick, although his brothers
and the prior, as was usual, tried to dissuade him, was placed
in the evening at the edge of the pit. Soon the place changed
to a great gulf; and behold, devils who, as it were, bubbled
up from the abyss said to the monk: “ If you wish to come
in to us, lay down the cross,” so calling the hood formed m
the shape of a cross. He replied: “ I will not put off my
habit. I am prepared to enter ; I am ready to fight with
you, but not without the garb of my profession.” All night
they disputed with him in this fashion, but did not touch
him and in the morning he was found in the place where he
had been left.

Novice .—Whence is your authority drawn that after this
life sins are remitted?

Mon \.—The Lord says in the gospel: “ Whosoever
speaketh againfl the Holy Ghoft, it shall not be forgiven him,
neither in this world, neither in the world to come.” From
which we gather that after death venial sins, as well as the
punishment of mortal sins, which would have to be punished
in purgatory, are remitted through the merits and prayers of
the saints in the sinner’s favour or by the prayers, alms and
other works of mercy of the church militant interceding for
them. Hence Judas Maccabaeus, we read, sent twelve
thousand drachms of silver to Jerusalem for the sins of the
slain. Enough of purgatory. You ought also to know this,
that the supremely good, such as martyrs, do not need these
after death ; to the supremely bad, such as unbelievers, they
are useless ; but they benefit the moderately good and the
moderately bad, but in different ways. The former are
delivered sooner ; the latter receive milder punishment. Yet
their punishment knows no end.

Novice .—I should like now to hear something about the
glories of the good.


328


Punishment and Glory of the Dead


Mon \.—Firfl I will give instances of the punishment of
the wicked, which were omitted in their right place, that
with this dark background, the bright colours may come out
more vividly.


CHAPTER XL.

Of the punishment of the abbot of Corvey.

At the time of the schism between Otto and Philip, kings
of the Romans, a pilgrim coming from overseas, pledged his
cloak for wine which is very Strong in those parts and drank
so much that through his drunkenness he lofl his wits and
they thought he was dead. That same hour his spirit was
conducted to the place of punishment, where he saw the prince
of darkness himself sitting over the pit covered with its fiery
lid. Meantime amongft other souls the abbot of Corvey was
brought there, and the devil giving him a hearty salutation
offered him a sulphurous draught from a fiery cup. When
he had drunk, the cover was taken off and he was put into
the pit. But as that pilgrim flood before the door of hell
and trembled at seeing those things, the devil cried out loudly :
“ Bring also the gentleman Standing outside, who lately
pledged his cloak for wine and became drunken.” Hearing
this the pilgrim looked at the angel who had brought him
and promised he would never get drunk again, if only he
would deliver him in that hour from his imminent peril.
By and by recovering his wits, he noted the day and hour
and returning to his own land learnt that the said abbot had
died. I saw that abbot at Cologne and he was a very worldly
man, behaving more like a soldier than a monk.

Novice .—Those who are here given to drunkenness, have
ill drinking, I suppose, below.

Mon \.—Of that I will give you another example.


329


The Dialogue on Miracles


CHAPTER XLI.

Of the punishment of Rudinger and of his draught.

In the diocese of Cologne and not far from Cologne, there
was a knight named Rudinger, so entirely given up to wine
that he frequented consecrations at various manors only for
the good wine. When he fell ill and was about to die, his
daughter asked him to appear within thirty days. He replied :
“ I will do this if I can,” and expired. And indeed after his
death he appeared to his daughter in a vision and said : “ Here
I am, as you asked.” And he was carrying a little earthen¬
ware vessel called a cruse in his hand such as that from which
he used to drink at taverns. His daughter said: “ Father,
what is in that vessel ? ” and he replied : “ My drink, made of
pitch and brimSlone. I am always drinking this and I can¬
not finish it,” and so he disappeared. And at once the girl
understood, as much from his previous life as by this punish¬
ment, that there was little or no hope of his salvation. Wine
indeed in this life goes down pleasantly, but in the end bites
like an adder.

Novice .—That, I consider, was the case both with that
abbot and with Rudinger.

Mon\. —The cloak of the pilgrim who saw the abbot in
punishment, brings back to my mind a very wonderful vision.


CHAPTER XLII.

Of the punishment of a prieil because of a cloa\.

Before the time when the bishop Conrad of Hildesheim,
was killed, a pilgrim dying in a certain manor, bequeathed
his cloak to a prieft, commending his soul to him. The
prieff took the cloak but troubled himself little about his soul,
and his servants or boys covered themselves at night with it.
Not long after this prieft became a novice in our Order. One
night when lying in the dormitory asleep, he was carried in


330


Punishment and Glory of the Dead


a dream to the place of punishment. There was there a very
great gathering and meeting of demons. Some were bring¬
ing souls, some were receiving those brought, others sending
those received into the punishment they had deserved. Great
were the outcries there, the confusion, the groaning and the
wailing. Meantime that bishop is presented at the barriers
of hell ; but the prince of darkness thus addresses those who
presented him, saying in a mournful voice : “ Take him, take
him back ; he is none of ours ; he was guiltless in his death.”
The priefl seeing this in fear hid himself behind the door.
But the devil seeing the cloak in a corner, said : “ Whose is
that garment? ” They answered : “ It belongs to that prieft
who ffands behind the door. Having received it from a
pilgrim for alms, he did nothing for the benefit of his soul.”
To that the devil said : “ We are much occupied. Let us
at once take it from him.” And when they had taken the
cloak, he dipped it, as it were, in the Sinking boiling lava.
As he struck the face and neck of the prieS with it, the latter
cried out loudly : “ Help, help ! ” When on hearing his
voice people tried to quiet him, he replied: “ Behold I die,
I burn.” Then they arose and found his head burnt all over
it and so they carried him only half alive to the infirmary.
With his usual carelessness he had made no confession.

Novice. —This vision ought to terrify exceedingly those
who having many churches and daily receiving many alms,
do no service for them.

Mon\. —Nor ought we to be without fear. Dropping
these gloomy subjects let us pass on to the rewards of the
heavenly country.


CHAPTER XLIII.

Of the glory of Ermentrude, abbess in Ditfirgen.

In the convent of nuns called Ditkirgen in the city of Bonn,
there was an abbess, named Ermentrude. She was a virgin
in body, a lover too and restorer of discipline in that house.


331


The Dialogue on Miracles


a rigid upholder of all goodness. But when she was about
to die, she had the Lord’s passion read before her, and when
they came to that passage: “ Into Thy hands I commend my
spirit,” out of the great goodness of her heart she uttered these
words, her laft: “ Moft loving of men ! ” and at once in
the agony of death with Chrift and into Chrift’s hands she
gave up her spirit. And appearing after death to the blessed
Acselina and being questioned about her condition, she
replied: “ At once in the moment when my spirit left the
body, it was before God.” Said the other: “ Why, sifter,
did you not appear to me within the thirty days? ” The
abbess replied : “ I was in glory and you were occupied about
the relics of the eleven thousand holy virgins and I was loath
to hinder you.” Her burial was foreshown to a sifter long
before she was made abbess. She had been taken in from
another house because of her piety by Bishop Philip and she
was sifter of our monk, C.xsanus, formerly abbot of Priim.


CHAPTER XLIV.

This Acselina had a spiritual sifter in the convent singularly
beloved by her. When she was dying, she was asked by the
blessed Acselina to appear to her after death. This she did.
One day as Acselina ftood at prayer, the dead sifter appeared
to her in a ball of fire, and when she asked about her con¬
dition, replied : “ As we have heard, so have we seen in
the city of the Lord of Righteousness, in the city of our God
etc.” Saying no more she was loft to sight.

Novice .—Very briefly, but very fully, did she show her
reward and the glory of the city above.

Mon \.—After the death of the monk David of blessed
memory of the Cloifter whose life was very famous for its
signs and virtues, one of his shirts was given to this Acselina.
Venerating it because of her love for that holy man, one
day she saw him appear and say: “ Good sifter, my shirt is
not needed by you, but a certain sinner has taken the vows
in the cloifter, named Gerard Waschart ; give it to him.”

332


Punishment and Glory of the Dead


This she did and when he knew it, her brother in the flesh,
our monk Frederic, asked for a part of that shirt to be given
to him. Dividing it in halves he kept part for himself and
gave the other to his brother. By it very many cures were
effected among us. With what quickness the spirits of the
good penetrate to heaven, I shall unfold by another example.


CHAPTER XLV.

Of the glory of a mon\ whose soul went like an
arrow before God.

A monk of our order appeared to another, his friend,
after death in much glory, and when he asked him about
his condition, he answered : “ No arrow shot from a bow
could fly so quickly to its mark, as did my soul, when it
left the body, go before God.” And no wonder, for it had
served ChriSt in the order for forty years and like an arrow
wounding many for their soul’s health by the example of a
right conversation was lifted on the wings of contemplation.
In the arrow are three things, the shaft, the feathers, the
iron point. By the wood is meant the fulness of good works
in their fruit, by the feathers the double love of God and
our neighbour, by the iron point which is sharpened, extreme
remorse. Note that the arrow is not sped Straight, if it be
not feathered and cannot so reach the mark. So a soul,
although it be well adorned with countless good works,
which are a sort of property and furnished by the iron of
sharpest suffering with the fear of sin, yet it will never
reach the mark of eternal reSl without wings of love. Of
that mark David saith in the psalm: “ Who shall give me
the wings of a dove and I shall be at reSl.”

Novice .—Often we read that souls under the form of a
dove have penetrated to heaven.

Monk .-—You are right, for I will tell you of an instance
of this that occurred in more recent times.


333


The Dialogue on Miracles


CHAPTER XLVI.

Of a scholar, whose soul was taken to heaven in
the form of a dove.

In the city of Bonn there was living inclosed a very
religious and devout woman. One night she saw a bright
light shining throught the chinks of her cell and thought
it was only daylight, and being afraid, because she had not
yet said her hours, she arose and opened the window looking
out on the cemetery, and behold, near the head of the tomb
of a certain scholar recently buried there, she saw a woman
of wondrous beauty Standing. The glory of her body had
caused th3t light. And a snow-white dove was Standing
on the tomb, which she took and put into her bosom. But
although the nun now understood what it was, yet with
reverence she asked what it might be. And it said to her:
“ I am the Mother of Christ and I have come to raise the soul
of this scholar who is in truth a martyr.” In fact scholars
if they live innocently and learn gladly, are martyrs. But if
afterwards they use the learning they have acquired, in love,
especially in the service of God, they earn a great reward by
this. Hear another instance of this.


CHAPTER XLVII.

Of the hand of a writer in Arinsburg.

In Arinsburg, a monastery of the PremonSIratensian Order,
as I have been told by a prieSt of that brotherhood, there was
a certain writer named Richard, an Englishman by race.
He had copied very many books in that monastery with his
own hand, looking for the reward of his labour in heaven.
When he was dead and buried in a place of honour, after
twenty years his tomb was opened and his right hand was


334


Punishment and Glory of the Dead


found as undecayed and life-like as if it had juft been cut
off his living body. The reft of his flesh was reduced to
duft. In teftimony to this great miracle, that hand is pre¬
served to this day in the monastery. The hand of this writer
was well-feathered, that is, his work was shaped by love.

Novice. —In the instrument God makes plain what was
the reward of his labour in heaven.

Monl(. —Liften to another.


CHAPTER XLVIII.

Of the perfume of mailer Peter, the precentor.

Mafter Peter, the precentor at Paris, by word, life and
example had edified many. He became a novice in Long-
Pont, a house of our Order and died within a year of his
probation, being buried in the chapter-house. When his
body had afterwards to be moved through building require¬
ments and the grave was opened, so great and so very sweet
a perfume breathed from it that the noftrils of all were
refreshed by its fragrance. That perfume was a token of
his teaching, the reward of which he had received in heaven.
But how much grace, how much glory teachers or preachers
win after this life, the following narrative shows.


CHAPTER XLIX.

Of a preacher of the PremonHratensian Order.

A certain prieft of the Premonftratensian Order in that
crusade which has juft taken place, was ordered to preach
the cross againft the Saracens. In the aft of preaching he
was seized with pains in the body, and shuffled off his mortal


335


The Dialogue on Miracles


self. After death he appeared to a companion and he asked
him how he was and whether at death he had endured any
pains, and he replied : “ My pains seemed to be long enougli ;
and when I was dying, I saw nothing but devils round me,
who began to carry off my soul as it came forth. One of
them said: ‘You have never kept your profession well nor
the obedience you promised to your abbot.’ And at once
another added: ‘You have never truly preached your Lord,
without reward, that is.’ And I underflood at once, my
conscience accusing me that both of them spoke the truth.
And when in this way some this, and some that, urged
different things againfl me and I was now made desperate,
because there was no one to speak in my favour, especially
when looking round I could see neither the Mother of God,
nor any of the angels or other saints, behold Chrifl coming
towards me, held me by the hand saying: ‘ Follow me, for
thou didst preach me.’ At once all the crowd of those foul
spirits vanished like smoke and I followed Chrifl to glory ;
for I suffered no other punishment but that terror.” For
those who are glad to pray, I will give an inftance that will
encourage them.


CHAPTER L.

Of a citizen on whose legs was written, " Are
Maria.”

A certain citizen of Cologne had a habit of always praying
when he was alone. Going to the church or returning, or
walking in the court, he meditated on the angelic salutation.
When he was dead, he appeared to his grand-daughter in a
shining dress and all over him and especially on his boots
was written in verse: “ Hail Mary, full of grace etc.”
Because as I have said, he had uttered that verse continually
as he walked about, it was seen written more often on his

33 ^


Punishment and Glory of the Dead


feet. From what has been said we gather that as God
punishes a sin according to kind and measure, so also he
rewards a good deed, putting the mark of glory mo ft of all
on those members by which it was earned.

Novice. —How is it that human nature shrinks so much
from death, when such glory has been prepared for it by
God?

Mon\. —The King Himself of glory, Jesus Chrift, God
and man, shrank from death through his sensibility so much
as to sweat blood in his fear. A soul naturally seeks to be
in the body and cannot be separated from it without great
bitterness.


CHAPTER LI.

Of a lay-brother who said when dying that his breaU
was pressed down as by a very great Ilone.

Four years before this the prior of an Order of monks had
gathered some guefts in a certain farm of the monastery and
the table being laid, he began to be so heavy with sleep that
he would have died if he had not slept quickly. He fell
back therefore on his bed and presently one of the lay-brothers,
who was in charge of the other grange came to him as he
slept and said : “ Lord, with your leave, I am going.” And
he said : “ Where are you going ? ” The lay-brother replied:
“T go to God, for I am juSt dead.” And the prior said:
“ Since many of the moSt righteous pass through purgatory,
why do you say with such assurance that you are going to
God? ” To which he replied: “ I had a cuStom of saying
this prayer whenever I passed in front of the cross, ‘ Lord, by
that anguish that Thou didff feel for me on the cross and
moff of all when Thy soul left the body, pity my soul as it
goes forth.’ And the Lord heard my prayer and had pity.”
And the prior said: “ How was it with you when you were


337


A22


The Dialogue on Miracles


a-dying? ” He answered: “ It seemed in my death agony
that the whole world was one ffone and pressing on my
breafl.”

Novice .—The words of this lay-brother agree with those
that say there is no pain in this world more bitter than the
separation of body and soul.

Mon \.—As I have said elsewhere, I dare not speak
decisively about uncertain things ; for 1 know that the very
righteous may sometimes for the sake of the future life
ardently long for death.


CHAPTER LII.

Of the death of Theodoric and Gunther.

Three young men of the city of Bonn came to Neuberg,
a house of our Order to take the vows and were all admitted
there. One of them was named Theodoric, another Gunther
and a third Siger. When the firfl died, Gunther thinking
on his own pilgrimage and the blessedness of heaven, to
which he believed his friend had been called, wept daily at
his tomb. One day a voice spoke to him from the tomb in
these words: “ Be comforted, be comforted, brother, for thou
shalt soon come to me.” The abbot seeing his sad looks
asked the cause of his sadness, but he refused to say, and
with difficulty the abbot succeeded in extracting from him
what had been said. A few days later, aided, I suppose, by
the prayers of Theodoric, he was himself called and united
to him in heaven, whose association with him in the world
he regretted with so many tears. This was related by Siger
at Bonn.

Novice .—I suppose that there are great rewards for the
good in heaven.

Mon \.—I will show you this in the next chapter.


338


Punishment and Glory of the Dead


CHAPTER LIII.

Of a lay-brother who said the Ciflercian Order had
the greateSl glory in heaven.

A certain lay-brother of the Black Order died a few
days ago. One day as two monks of his monaftery were
sitting in a room, he opened the door secretly and went in
to them. They were terrified at the sight knowing him to
be dead and he said: “Do you know me?” Replying,
“ We know you well. You are so-and-so, our brother,”
they began to question him about the condition of certain
souls. He informed them about each one by one, saying
that some were in a bad ftate and some very bad, some were
doing well, some very well. When they asked him about
the Grey monks, he answered: “ Their reward is greatest
and they shine as the sun in the realm of the sky.” This
was told to me by an abbot of the Black Order.

'Novice. —In agreement with this vision is what was said
above in the seventh book and fifty-ninth chapter, where our
Order was gathered under the mantle of the Mother of God.

Mon\. —You are right.

Novice. —As for what was promised anew by the Lord :
“ The juft shall shine as the sun in the kingdom of heaven ”
(Matt. xiii. 43), I do not know whether it muft be under¬
stood of the body or the soul.

Mon\. —The bodies of the eledt after resurrection shall
shine, we believe, as the sun shines not now, but as it shone
before the Fall, that is, sevenfold as brightly as now (Isaiah
xxx. 26). But the soul will shine much more than the body.

Novice. —Would that the brightness of their bodies could
be proved to me by some example.

Mon\. —To say nothing of the transfiguration of the Lord’s
body, I will tell you of an inftance that has lately come to
my ears.


339


The Dialogue on Miracles


CHAPTER LIV.

Of the glorification of the feet of a certain mailer.

A certain mafter of Paris fell ill and thinking with doubt
on the glorification of the body, said in his heart: “ How
can it be possible for these bodies of clay which decay, to shine
in the future as the sun? ” looking at his feet which he had
lifted from under the coverlet. And behold such brightness
shone forth from them that his eyes were dazzled and not
able to look at them. And soon coming to himself he gave
thanks to Chrift, by whose power he was brought, before he
died, to believe in the resurrection.

Novice .—How will eyes be able to bear such brightness?

Mon \.—As saith Auguftine, they will be of far different
power then than now, for they too will be glorified.


CHAPTER LV.

Of the mon\ David who fixed his eyes on the sun.

When Dom David, a monk of holy memory at the Cloister,
was ftill in the body, often, as he sat at labour, he gazed at
the very ball of the sun with eyes undazzled as an eagle’s.
Of this our seniors were witnesses, who often saw what has
been described. Now if God has given such power to weak
eyes, why wonder concerning glorified eyes?

Novice .—Tell me, pray, what is the glory of the bodies,
what the glory of the souls.

Mon \.—The glory of either part is beyond explanation by
us.


34 °


Punishment and Glory of the Dead


CHAPTER LVI.

Of the dowry of the elect after the resurrection.

In the last day, according to the apoStle, we shall all rise,
but we shall not all be changed. The eleCt alone will be
changed by the glorification of both body and soul. The
glory of the body consists in four endowments, in fineness,
that is, in brightness, in immortality and in activity. There
will be four endowments of the body to glorify its whole
nature. The body consists of four constituents, blood, gall,
bile, phlegm, which agree with the four elements. Blood
agrees with air, gall with fire, bile with earth, phlegm with
water. There is further another agreement of these with
ages and seasons, which is irrelevant to this subject. Now
whatever the human body has from the air will pass into
fineness ; what of fire, into brightness ; what of earth, into
immortality ; what of water, into activity. Of these four
endowments it is written : “The juSt shall shine and as sparks
in a reed shall run about ” (Wis. iii. 7). “ They shall shine,”

here is brightness ; “ and as sparks,” here is fineness.

Nothing is finer than a spark. “ They shall run about
in a reed,” here is activity. Running about means activity.
By what follows: “ And they shall reign for ever,” is meant
immortality, or freedom from suffering. Moreover the
endowments of the soul are knowledge, love, enjoyment.
The blessed soul shall know God, shall love him when
known, shall enjoy Him when loved. After the general
resurrection, the number seven will be added to the Trinity
of persons, and the fortunate ten promised to the elect will
be completed. Yet in unequal brilliancy there will be
equality of joy, as saith Augustine, which is not to be under¬
stood of the affeCtion of the heart, but of the things which
cause rejoicing. Each one there will rejoice in the glory of
another. That gifts muSt be unequal, the apoftle saith : “ As
one Star differs from another in brightness, so also will be
the resurrection of the dead ” (1 Cor. xv. 41, 42).

Novice .—-I should like now to be informed concerning the
day of judgment.


34i


The Dialogue on Miracles


Mon \.—Of that day no man knoweth, because the day
of the Lord shall come as a thief in the night (i Thess. v. 2),
that is, suddenly and unexpectedly.

Novice .—Where will be the judgment ?

Mon \.—In the air above the valley of Jehoshaphat.

Novice .—How many classes of people will there be at the
judgment?

Mon\. —Four. Some being supremely good will both
judge and be saved. The supremely bad will be condemned
without judgment. The moderately good will be judged
and saved. The moderately bad will be judged and con¬
demned.

Novice .—In what form will ChriSl appear?

Mon \.—He will appear as the servant of all, but in a
glorified form.

Novice .—Will he show to all the same countenance?

Mon\. —No. To the good he will appear mild, to the
evil terrible. This I will show you by an example.


CHAPTER LVII.

Of Eynolph, the Templar.

About two years ago there died in Briseke, a manor of
the diocese of Cologne, a priest named Eynolph of the Order
of Templars, a very pious man. What I am going to say
about him, he told me with his own lips not once only but
often. When he was itill a boy, falling ill in the house of
his aunt, he received the holy communion. But when he
asked for extreme unftion, it was deferred because some did
not advise it and so he expired without that sacrament. And
an angel of the Lord came who said: “ It was bad for that
boy that he died without holy unCtion.” And he anointed
him when his soul was already leaving the body. And when
it had left, he presented it before the face of God. His face the

342


Punishment and Glory of the Dead


boy saw as through a veil and it appeared to him very severe.
And behold the devil was there. He wishing to accuse the
boy and finding no cause, said to the Lord: “ Lord, that
boy ftole a half-penny from his brother and never did penance
for it. Thou art juft and ought to judge juftly.” The
Lord replied to him : “ Wouldft thou have me condemn this
boy for such a little thing? My juftice is not without mercy.”
The twenty-four elders who sat round the throne, pleaded
for his soul and his sin was remitted ; and presently by the
command of God he was taken and thrown into a fiery pit.
In this he suffered such pains that he afterwards could not
describe them in words. After a season he was drawn out
by the angel by whom he had been thrown into it and pre¬
sented to the judge. His face he now saw clearly with the
veil removed showing such love, cheerfulness and sweetness
to the boy that he could have kissed it, had he allowed it. And
whereas he had seen Chrift before his sin in human form,
after purgatory he earned the right to contemplate Him in
His Godhead. Near Him he saw His Glorious Mother
sitting on a splendid throne and around them a multitude
of angels, patriarchs, prophets, apoftles, martyrs, confessors,
virgins and other righteous. But the devil fearing to lose
that soul said to God: “ It is good that he should be brought
back to his body that he may serve Thee ftill more.” And
the Lord answered him: “ Not for his salvation doft thou
say this but out of thine own wickedness. For thou haft
hope that through sinning in the body he may come over to
thy side.” Yet sentence being given, the soul is reftored
to the body to the wonder of all who were present, because
they were compelled to believe his words through the signs
which they saw in the boy. But he through desire of glory
and fear of punishment, leaving his own country came to a
house of our Order to take the vows. A lay-brother, a wicked
and proud man, who was in charge of the gueft-house, know¬
ing his desire spoke thus in his hearing: “ Take care, when
such brats become monks ; at once they wish to become our
mafters.” At his words the boy was so offended that he
gave up his intention and went over to the Order of Templars.

Novice .—Many visions are daily recounted concerning the


343


The Dialogue on Miracles


end of the world. I know not whether credit should be
given to them.

Mon\. —Because many have been deceived about 'the
advent of Antichrist and the end of the world, I have been
reluctant to write down what I have heard. By chance, nay,
not by chance, but because of the prayers of the saints, the
time of judgment has been postponed, as we gather from the
following vision.


CHAPTER LVII 1 .

Of the Holy Mary, who obtained from the Lord

that the angel should not sound the second trump.

In Clairvaux there is a prieSt named William, whom I
mentioned in the eighth book and the forty-ninth chapter.
Many things were revealed to him from heaven. In the present
year, as he Stood at prayer in a trance he was carried to the
tribunal of ChriSt. At his right hand he saw an angel
Standing with a trumpet. ChriSt with a loud voice in the
hearing of all the armies of the heavenly country said this:
“ Sound the trump.” And when this was done, so loud was
the sound of that trumpet that the whole world shook like
a leaf on a tree. And when He was saying a second time :
“ Sound the trump once more,” the Mother of Mercy, the
Virgin Mary, knowing that the world would be ended if he
sounded again, whilst the reSt of the saints remained silent,
rose and threw herself at the feet of her Son and urgently
entreated Him to defer His sentence and spare the world.
To her ChriSt replied : “ Mother, the world is now so evilly
disposed and so vexes me daily with its sins that I ought not
to suspend judgment or spare man who has deserved it. Not
only laymen, but clerics and monks have utterly corrupted
their ways and offend me from day to day.” Then said she :
“ Spare, my beloved Son, spare, if not for their own sakes,
at leaSt for the sake of my friends, those of the Cistercian


344


Punishment and Glory of the Dead


Order that they may prepare themselves.” Our abbots return¬
ing this year from a general chapter told us this.

Novice .—As far as I can gather from this vision, their
dwelling together with the juft is of much profit to the wicked.

Mon \.—If there had been ten juft men in Sodom, the Lord
would have spared the people.

Novice .—This vision agrees with the miracle in the second
chapter of the seventh book, where the image of the Mother
of God is said to have sweated with fear of imminent judg¬
ment.

Mon \.—That the day of judgment is at our gates, the earth¬
quakes in various places and other signs of which we have
spoken above, declare. It is a great comfort that the Saviour
admonishes the juft when these things begin to happen : “ Lift
up your heads,” that is, be encouraged, “ for your redemption
draweth near ” (Luke xxi. 28).


CHAPTER LIX.

Of the heavenly Jerusalem and the glory of the
saints.

Let us hasten to enter into that city where there are no
earthquakes, no groans or sighs, but the praise of God con¬
tinually ; in which no dangers, but ftrong security ; in which
there is no death, but life eternal ; in which no hatred, no
discord, but perfect peace ; in which no one is hungry, no
one thirfty, because there is entire satisfaction. These four
good things does the prophet include in three verses: “ Praise
the Lord, Jerusalem ; praise thy God, Zion.” Praise with
the heart, praise with the lips. Why ? “ Because he hath

Strengthened the bars of thy gates.” What security ! “ He
hath blessed thy children within thee.” What immortality I
In his right hand is length of days. “ He maketh peace in
thy borders.” What peace and concord ! “ And filleth

thee with the fineft of the wheat.” What satisfaction 1 Of


345


The Dialogue on Miracles


the joy of the citizens of that blessed country in another place
the same psalmift says: “ The habitation of all that rejoice,
is in thee.” Briefly he sums up what could not be set forth
in a long discourse. “ Of those that rejoice,” he says, “ that
is of those who really rejoice, so that it is the expression of
reality and not a mark of resemblance, as there, “as of the
only-begotten of the Father,” that is, in reality only-begotten.
The aftion of those who rejoice, is seven-fold. They live
eternally ; they know the secrets of God ; they love God
and their neighbour. They praise “ What the eye doth not
see,” because such things are invisible, and “ what the ear doth
not hear,” for they are in the molt perfeft: peace, “ nor hath
entered into the heart of man,” for they are incomprehensible.
They rejoice with ineffable joy ; they are swift and without
care. Blessed are those who have come there led by the Lord,
where every thought is realised and all desires attained, where
such happiness is felt as can be loft by no opposition.

Novice .—Wretched are they who aspire not to such bliss.
Mon \.—As we mult bring our dialogue to an end, let us
at the same time pray to Chrift who is the end of all consum¬
mation, that what has passed with your queftioning and my
answering, may profit readers and lifteners for their good,
that so there may be edification of our neighbours as the
fruit of our labours. This may he of whom we speak, Jesus
Chrift, our Lord, deign to grant us, the Redeemer of the
world, the brother of the cleft, the King of angels, and to
sum up all, the life, reward and joy of all saints. To whom
with the Father and the Holy Spirit be honour and glory
and rule, world without end. Amen.

Loath to betray who wrote so poor a book,

Yet dares his pen to lay a trail of words
In order ftrange, praying that gentle hands
May smooth what’s roughly writ, more gently ftill
Amendment make. So shall the critic’s mark,

Sincerely juft, enhance its moral worth. 1

1 The initial letters of all the words in the four Latin lines thus translated, if
placed together, form the pentameter line:

“ Cesarii munus sumat arnica manue.”

346


INDEX

[The references are in Roman numerals to Books , and Arabic to
Chapters.]


Aachen (Aix), i. 43, vi. 5, vii. 50,

viii. 60, 76, ix. 18, x. 9, 23, 31,
50, 65, xii. 5

Aaron, vi. 6, 18, x. 28
Abdo, iv. 73
Abel, vi. 34, viii. 64
Abigail, iv. 22

Abraham, ii. 5, iv. 20, 58, viii. 21,

ix. 26

Abraham of Cologne, vi. 9
Absalom, Abt. of Sprenkirsbach, !
iv. 89

Accidie, iv. 2, 27, 33, 37, 38, 39, 1
40, 41, 44, 45, 52, v. 5
Acharon, x. 12
Achan, iv. 59
Achimelech, viii. 67
Acre, iv. 15
A&ors, ii. 12

Aczelina (nun), iv. 59, vi. 10,
xii. 25, 43, 44

Adam, iv. 73, 74, 75, 77, vii. 20,
viii. 1, 18, 74

Adam of Lucka, vii. 17, 20, 24,
viii. 18, 74, xi. 19
Adam, Prieft of St. Andrews,
Cologne, vi. 5
Admirald, iv. 15

Adolph, Bp. of Osnaburg, i. 22,
ii. 20

Adolph, Prieft of Ditkirge, v. 8
Adolph, Count of Berg, v. 21
Adolph, Dean of Cologne, vi. 5,
viii. 62, ix. 3, xi. 43, 44
Adolph, Conv. of St. Agatha, v. 29


Adolph, Prieft of Dieveren, ix. 3
Adoration of Hoft, ix. 51
Adultery, ii.45,iii. 2, 3, 31, vii. 26
Advocate, ii. 6, 7, 25, iv. 45, 72,
ix. 48, xi. 46
iEgidius (St.), iii. 27
yEgidius, Count of, v. 21
Agatha (St.), iv. 30
Agatha (St.), Abbot of, at Liege,
v. 29

Agnes, i. 40

Agnus Dei, ix. 3

Agriculture, iv. 43, v. 51, x. 15

Ahab, vi. 25

Aix, see Aachen

Alba, iv. 79

Alban (St.), Ch. at Namur, ii. 17
Alberic, Abbot, i. 1
Albero, Conv. in Heisterbach,
v. 28

Albero, Prieft in Hildesheim,
ix. 19

Albert, Bp. of Mainz, i. 8
Albert, Canon at Cologne, vii. 5 5
Albert, Scothart, x. 11
Albia (R), xi. 35

Albigenses, v. 21, 22, vii. 23,
viii. 33, ix. 12, x. 47, xi. 50
Aleidis, Abbess of Miinfter, Weft-
phalia, ix. 40

Aleidis, of Molsburg, v. 5, vii. 7
Aleidis of Gurzenich, xi. 59
Aleidis, nun in Langwade, iii. 13
Aleidis, nun in Rindorp, xii. 35
Alexander III.,Pope,ii. 18, vii. 49


347


Index


Alexander, Prior in Hemmenrode,

v - 5

Alcacer do Sal, Lusitania, viii. 66
Allard, Monk at Lucka, xi. 19
Allard, Novice in Heifterbach,

viii. 97, x. 55, 72

Allod, ii. 12, iv. 65, v. 21, vii. 7
All Saints, iii. 53, v. 14, viii. 5
Almeric of Chartres, v. 22
Almoners, iv. 68
Almsgiving, viii. 75, 77
Altenahr, i. 25, v. 32
Altenberg (Mons Vetus), see Berg
Amandus, vi. 34
Ambo (pulpit), ix. 3
Ambrose, ix. 1, 30
Ammon, iv. 2
Amos, iv. 2, vi. 25
Anaftasia, viii. 86
Anchorites, i. 40, iv. 87, v. 46, 47,

vii. 26, 29, 49, viii. 5, 42, 60,

ix. 31, 59, xi. 27, xii. 5, 27, 36
Anchorftones, xiii. 63
Andernach, v. 37, xii. 14
Andrew St., Ch. of, Cologne, i. 3,

ii. 16, iv. 49, 74, vi. 4, 5, 24,
vii. 46, viii. 56, 57, ix. 47, 56,

x. 27, xi. 27, 43, 44
Andrew, St., of Paris, i. 19
Andrew, St., of Speyer, iv. 65
Angels, i, 6, 16, 40, ii. 31, v. 33,

vii. 16, 20, 26, 54, viii. 39, 40,

41. 42. 43, 44. 45. 4 6 . 47. 95.
ix. 58, x. 16, xi. 2, 13, 57
Angelic Salutation (Ave Maria),

iii. 6, 13, iv. 96, 99, v. 44,

vii. 8, 19, 24, 26, 32, 40, 49,

viii. 3

Ann, St., i. 17

Anno, St., Archbp. of Cologne,
ii. 27, viii. 69

Anointing, ii. 7, 15, iii. 23, iv.
6, vii. 9, 56, xi. 21, 25


Anrath, ix. 5

Anselm (Knight of Lisere), x. 57
Anthony (Abbot), viii. 18
Apocalypse, vii. 1, viii. 6, 51
Apoftasy, i. 4, 6, 10, 11, 12, 13,
14, ii. 2, 3, iv. 6, 10, 17, 50,
54, 55, v. 16, 17, vii. 10, 18,

ix. 61

Apoftles, iv. 1, viii. 55, 56, ix. 4,

5»9

Apoftles, Ch. of, at Cologne, iv.

82, viii. 43, 62, 63, xi. 14
Apoftolic See, i. 1, 6, iv. 1, 88,

vi. 27, ix. 61, xii. 5
Apulia, iv. 30
Arabia, v. 36
Archdeacon, i. 40
Area, vii. 45

Argentina (Strasburg), iii. 16, 17,
20, xi. 37
Armenia, xi. 34
Arnsburg, iv. 87, v. 47, xii. 47
Arnold (heretic of Cologne), v. 19
Arnold (monk of Hemmenrode),

vii. 8, xi. 3

Arnold (monk of Heifterbach),

iii. 9, iv. 82, ix. 14
Arnold (prieft of Bonn), iii. 8
Arnold (monk of Villers), viii. 81
Arnold (paftor in Burgende),

iv. 11

Arnold (bailiff at Aix), i. 43
Arnold (servant of Walter of
Birbech), vii. 38

Arnold (Ciifn. Abt. and Archbp.

of Narbonne), v. 21, vii. 50
Arras, iii. 15

Art and artists, viii. 24, 76
Arthur, iv. 36, xii. 12
Artillery, x. 19
Ash Wednesday, iv. 86, x. 53
Aspersion, viii. 92


Asses, iv. 98, v. 37, vii. 45

348


Index


Assumption, vii. 21, 37
Aftrada (of Cologne), vi. 16
Athanasius, viii. 39
Augsburg (Augufta), i. 40
Auguftine (St.), ii. 13, 14, 35,

iii. 27, iv. 8, v. 22, ix. 1, 53, 55,
*ii. 54, 56

Austria (Queen), iii. 33
Avarice, iv. 57

Babylon, v. 22, vii. 37, x. 43
Bacheim, iv. 88, xi. 41
Bacon, vi. 5, 7, ix. 59
Bailiff, i. 43, ii. 6,12, iv. 22, vi. 26
Baking, iv. 65, v. 28, 32, vi. 5,

x. 17

Balaam, vii. 45
Baldemar, vii. 42
Baldwin (Vth Count of Flanders),
ii. 17

Baldwin (Vlth Countof Flanders),
ii. 17

Baldwin (monk in Relaxhusen),

iv. 45

Balthazar, viii. 1, 77
Baptism, ii. 1

Barba Jovis, see House-leek
Barley Bread, iv. 80.

Baron’s robberies, xii. 5
Basins, i. 35, v. 38
Bath, iv. 76
Bam, xi. 26
Basket, v. 43
Bathsheba, iii. I, iv. 92
Battering ram, x. 19
Battle (trial by), iii. 18
Bavaria, xi. 26, xii. 19
Beards, iv. 62
Bears, iv. 91, viii. 57
Beatitudes, viii. 1
Beatrix (nun), vii. 34
Beauvais, x. 43
Bedbur, x. 55


Bede, iii. 23

Bedian (Friesland), x. 37
Beds, iv. 6, 26, viii. 77, x. 34,

*i. 15.

Beer, v. 44, vii. 3, viii. 62, x. 16,31
Begging, i. 40
Beguine, ii. 20
Behemoth, iv. 92, vii. 33
Belle, see Buschbell
Belphegor, iv. 92
Bells and bellringers, ii. 12, iv. 28,
45, v. 45, 56, 85, vi. 6, vii. 19,
21, viii. 26, ix. 23, 51, 60, 65,
x - 2 9

Benedift (St.), i. 15, 40, iii. 49,

iv. 79, vi. 18, 35, vii. 8, viii. 78,

x. 10, xii. 22, 35.

Benedi&ines, i. 1, 35, 40, ii. 22,

31, iii. 49, iv. 12, 46, 61, 68,
71, 72, v. 33, viii. 24, x. 41,

xi. 13, 25, xii. 5, 26, 53
Benedidlion, vii. 6

Benigna (Abbess, St. Saviour’s),

xii. 36

Benjamin, viii. 4

Berg (Mons), x. 51, xii. 10

Bergamo, x. 49

Berge (village, near Altenahr),

v. 55, x. 68

Bergis,/^ Walburgis and Walber-
berg

Bergis (see Altenburg), iv. 62,
vii. 8, viii. 88, xii. 9
Bernard (St.), i. I, 6, 7, 8, 9, 16,
19, ii. 3, 15, 16, 18, iii. 6, 7, 38,
iv. 1, 7, viii. 31, xi. 2, 30
Bernard (St., Abbot of Groot
Aedwert), vii. 3, x. 41, xi. 30
Bernard of Lippa, ix. 37, x. 35.
Bernard, Canon of Cologne, ix. 23
Bernard, Duke of Saxony, x. 23.
Bernard, Monk of Clairvaux, iv.
97


349


Index


Bernard, Monk of Heifterbach,
i. 21, ii. 6, 7, iii. 6, iv. io, viii.
67, ix. 3, xii. 23
Bernard, of Munfter, xi. 54
Bernard, Subdeacon at Paris,
heretic, v. 22

Bertolph (Duke of Zahringen),

x. 23, xii. 13

Bertolph (Palatine of Witillin-
bach), vi. 26

Bertolph (Canon at Holy
Apofiles, Cologne), ix. 59
Bertolph, of Holchoim, ii. 6
Bertrade, v. 47, xii. 27
Bertram (Bp. of Metz), v. 20
Bertram (Monk of Carre to), vii. 37
Bernard (St.), viii. 79
Besan^n, v. 18
Bethaven, iii. 41
Bethel, iv. 73, 88
Bethwerde, xi. 22
Beziers, v. 21

Birbech (Bierbais), iii. 33, iv. 54,
v. 6, vii. 16, 25, 37, 38
Birds, i. 15, v. 17, x. 56, 57, 58,
59,6°

Bishops’ worldliness, ii. 27, 28,

29, 30

Bishops reprobate, ii. 28
Black Monks, see Benedictines
Bloody flux (of Jews), ii. 23
Blood-letting, ii. 21, iv. 49, x. 4,

xi. 2

Boats, i. 23, iv. 43, x. 61, vii. 38,
xi. 35 __

Bocke, vii. 74
Bodenheim, xi. 47
Bolanden (Bonlant), viii. 54, x. 19
Bonn, i. 1 3 ,' 35 , ii. 15, iii. 8 , 13,

30, 36, 46, iv. 30, 37, 58, v. 5,
8 > 37> 53> vi. 3, viii. 52, 65,
x. 16, 34, xi. 43, 45, 64, xii. 5,
35 > 43


Bonnevaux, i. 38, iii. 25

Boniface (St.), x. 39

Bordeaux, ii. 28

Bourbon, l’Archambaud, ix. 38

Boy Canon, vii. 41

Brabant, ii. 20, iii. 6, 47, iv. 60,

ix. 31, 35, xi. 28
Braubach, vii. 28
Braunschweig (Brunswick), iv. 45
Brauweiler (Bruwilre), viii. 68, 73
Bredehom, xii. 26

Breeches, ii. 33, vi. 5, vii. 16
Breisig (Nieder), iii. 9, v. 26, 38,

xii. 57

Brescia (Brixa), x. 49
Brewing, viii. 62, x. 31
Bruges, iv. 10
Brumbach, iv. 39
Bruno (St., Bp. of Cologne), ii. 27,
vi. 5

Bruno (Bp. of Cologne and Count
of Sayn), vii. 39
Bruno de Flitert, xii. 9, 10
Brunswick, see Braunschweig
Bruwilre, see Brauweiler
Bucka, see Bocke
Bude, see Putt
Bull, Papal, v. 37, vii. 6
Burban, see Bourbon l’Archam¬
baud

Burge, see Berge, village
Burgende, iv. 11
Burgrave, ii. 7, v. 38, vii. 7
Burgundy, i. 1
Burial in the field, iv. 40
Burial alive, ix. 48
Burning at Stake, iii. 15, 16, 17
Burtscheid (Porcetum), i. 43,
v. 50, vi. 9, viii. 60, 76
Buschbell, ix. 65
Cabbages, ix. 9

Ctesarius (author), i. 17, iv. 94,

x. 44


350


Index


Csesarius (Abbot of Priim), ii. 3,
v. 2, 30, vi. 29, xii. 43.

Csesarius (Knight of Wintere),
iv. 58

Calefactory, iv. 7
Calixtus (Pope), ii. 18
Cambrai, iii. 16, v. 25
Campania, see Champaigne
Campus, see Kloiter Camp
Campus of St. Mary, see Mayen-
feld

Cancer (Theodoric), x. 67
Candles, ii. 9, iii. 7, iv. 8, v. 45,
vii. 20, 22, 46, 58, viii. 25, 56,
61, 74, ix. 7, xi. 11
Canons, i. 3, 6, 7, 11, 13, 14,
18, 22, 23, 29, 35, 38, ii. 15,
23, iii. 5, .8, 13, 28, 40, iv. 15,
30. +9. 58, 74- 75> 89, v. 8,
S3, vii. s, 8, 11, 41, 55, viii.
52 . 57 . 97 , 5 °, 5 6 > 59 . xi-

2, 29, 44, 45, 46, 58, 64, xii.
5 > 12

Canon (rule), ii. 5, iv. 83, vii. 38,
ix. 5, 29, 30, ix. 34
Canonical Hours, see Hours
Canticles, i. 4, vii. 29
Cardinals, ii. 11, 30,^.32,33,53,
iv. 79, v. 37, vii. 6
Carolus, see Charles
Carpania, see Kerpen
Carpenters, vii. 46
Cassele (Ober-Cassel), iv. 21
Cassino (Monte), iv. 8
Castellan, iii. 18
Caterpillars, ix. 9
Cats, iv. 33, vi. 7, 36
Cattle, iv. 62, vii. 57
Cecilia (St.), iv. 94
Celia, see Chelles
Celibacy, ii, 3, iii. 41, vi. 5, 35,
ix. 3,6,26, 53, 58, xi. 13,27
Cellarium (Theodoric of), vii. 51


Cellarium (part of Monastery),

iv. 85, v. 44, viii. 86
Cellarer, ii. 34, iv. 19, 59, 61, 67,

7 *> 8 3 > 9 °> 94 > v.43, vi. 2, 5, 7,
8, 14, vii. 3, 7, viii. 94
Cemetery, ii. 7, 9, 26, iv. 4,

v. 22, 34, vii. 38, viii. 74,
ix. 49, xi. 57, xii. 24, 46

Census, vii. 38
Ceringia, see Zahringen
Ceuta (Septia), iv. 10
Chaldaea, vii. 42
Chamberlain, vi. 14, viii. 39
Champaigne, viii. 31
Champion, iii. 18
Chapter General, i. 1, 16, 39,
ii. 25, iii. 24, 32, iv. 62, 69,

v. 42, vi. 14, vii. 6, 20, 36, 37,
viii. 32, ix. 38, 64, x. 4, xi. 30,

57,61

Charles the Great, iii. 27
Charles (Abbot of Villers), i, 35,
41, iii. 13, 43, iv. 78, vi. 1, 17,
viii. 13, 63, x. 23, xi. 11
Charles of Cologne, father of the
Abbot, viii. 63
Chelles, v. 22

Cheminon-l’Abbaye, vii. 9, viii.

84, xi. 61
Cherries, vi. 5

Childbirth, viii. 76, x. 71, 72
Christian (Cellarer Bruwilre),

vi. 8

Christian (Dean of Bonn), vi. 3,
21

Christian (Bp. of Mainz), ii. 29
Christian (Monk in Hemmen-
rode), v. 6, vii. 16
Christian (Monk of Heifterbach),
iv. 30, xiii. 34

Christina (of St. Walburgis), vii.

21, viii. 3,15,45
Chrysanthus, iv. 62, vii. 31


351


Index


Church building, vii. 3
Chusa, xi. 1

Citeaux, i. I, iv. 62, v. 42, vii. 11,

x. 58

Cistercians, i. 1, 6, 7, 13, 31, 32,
33, 34, ii. 2, 25, iii. 23, 32, 33,
iv. 9, 39, 46, 62, 69, 79, v. 16,
21, 29, vi. 2, 5, vii. 9, 11, 37
Clairvaux, i. 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 16, 17,

18, 19, 33, ii. 16, 25, 28, iii. 7,
33, 38, vii. 11, 43, viii. 30, 31,
49, 78, xii. 25, 33> 58

Clarocamp Klaar-Kamp),

xi. 21, 30, xii. 26
Clauftrum, see Hemmenrode
Clement (Pope), iv. 79
dementia (Nun), xi. 28
Clerical Incontinence, ii, 23, 24,

iii. 2, 8
Cloaca, iii. 5
Cloaks, i. 38, 41, iv. 49
Clocks, xi. 3
Cloud (St.), v. 22
Cluny, i. 1, vii. 23, 59
Coblentz, iv. 66, vii. 39, viii. 13,
x- 53

Cochem, ix. 9

Colemies (grange of Aulne), iii. 33
Colmar (Kolmere), xii. 7
Cologne, i. 3, 7, 11, 14, 17, 22,
29. 32 , 35 > 38 , 40, 4 i> »• 7 > * 5 >
16, 25, 27, 30, 32, iii. 6, 13, 15,

19, 31, 36, 37, 40, 46, iv. 4, 6,
10,26,43,44,49, 58, 62, 71,75
78, 79, 82, 88, 94, 98, v. 10, 16,
19. H, 29, 34, 39, 55, 56,

vi. 2, 5, 6, vii. 3, 5, 8, 21, 28,
39 . +1. 53 . 55 . ™i. 25, 43, 46,
47, 57, 61, 62, 63, 69, 73, 75,
85, 88, 91, ix. 2, 4, 13, 14, 17,
22,23, 36,47, 51, 52, 58,59,61,
65, x. 17, 22, 25, 27, 30, 31,
32,37,40,47,49,50,61,67,


68, 3 D. 27, 34, 40, 42, 45, 47,
52, 55, 54 59, 62, 63, xii. 5,

23, 4i, 50, 57

Columba (St.), ix. 14
Como, x. 49

Compline, i. 35, iv. 90, 100,

vii. 15, 33, 37, 51, viii. 17,
xi. 26

Compoftella (St. James of), v. 29,
vi. 25, 33, viii. 58, x. 7, 67
Concubines (priests’ wives), iii.

29, ix. 3, xi. 27, xii. 20
Confession, vii. 57, viii. 39, 53,

ix. 64, xi. 38, 45, 50, 51
Confessions of St. AuguStine,

iii. 27

Confessors, viii. 71
Conrad, Cellarer of HeiSterbach,
xi. 32.

Conrad, Laybrother of Heifter-
bach, iv. 32, viii. 20
Conrad, of Thiiringen and of
Heifterbach, i. 27, 34, v. 4, 18,

xi. 33

Conrad, Rufus, iv. 65
Conrad, Canon of St. Andrews,
Cologne), v. 5

Conrad, ProvoSt, Cologne, ix. 23
Conrad, ProvoSV, St. Severin,

x. 61

Conrad, Scholar of Cologne, iv. 74
Conrad, Dean of Speyer, iii. 14
Conrad, Bishopof Halberstatt, ii. 5
Conrad, Bishop of Hildesheim,

xii. 42

Conrad, Bishop of Porto and
Cardinal, iii. 33, v. 21, xi. 50
Conrad, Knight of Linse, ii. 26
Conrad, Prior of Marienftatt,

viii. 86, ix. 16, xii. 37
Conrad II., Emperor, i. 6
Conrad, Prieft of Rheinkassel,

xii. 9


352


Index


Consiftory Court, i. 12
Constantinople, iv. 30, vii. 6,

viii. 54, x. 47

Conftantine of HeiSterbach, vi.
12, ix. 2

Contrition i. 2 and ii. passim
Conversion, i. passim, vii. 16, 25,

ix. 63, xi. 5, 15, xii. 52
Corporal, vii. 20, ix. 10, 23, 65,

66, 67

Corbeil, v. 22
Corvey, xii. 40
Cottingforft, xii. 5
Coughing in Church, ix. 30
Covorden, ix. 21
Cows, ii. 7, iii. 41
Cowl (virtue of), i, 3, 43, xii. 2
Creed, iii. 6, vii. 46
Crier, ii. 33
Cromartius, x. 44
Crosier, vii. 39, xi. 30
Cross, ii. 7, iv. 29, 30, viii. 17, 19
Crossbowman, i. 16, x. 19
Crows, i. 15, xi. 16
Crusades, I, 6, 16, ii. 7. iii. 21,
iv. 10, 15, vii. 3, 6, 22, 23, 25,
56, viii. 21, 27, 66, ix. 13,

x. 12, 46, 63, xi. 23, 38, xii. 23
Cuckoo, v. 17

Cussele (Kussel), vii. 42
Cynna (Zinna), xi. 35
Cyprus, x. 48, 49

Damascus, iv. 2, 15
Damietta, v. 21, vii. 3, viii. 26,
27, 28, x. 43
Dancing, iv. 11

Daniel (prophet), iii. 24, viii. 45,
77, ix. 26

Daniel (Prior of HeiSterbach and
Abbot of Schonau), i. 31, ii. 33,
iv. 4, 48, vii. 40, ix. 17, 59, 64,
xii. 27


Daniel (Monk in Hemmenrode),
vii. 36, viii. 11

Daniel (ScholaSticus of St. Chry-
santhus), vii. 31.

Dan (John), xi. 52

David, iii. 1, 26, iv. 92, v. 1, vi. 10

vii. 37, viii. 67, ix. 26
David Florentinus (Monk of

Hemmenrode), i. 4, ii. 18,

xi. 2, 3, 7, II, 14, xii. 44, 55
David Dinantius of Paris, v. 22
Death Angel, xi. 61, 62, 63, 64
Death Board (tabula), i. 35, 40,
xi. 16, 19, 25, 36
Death Duty (Curmedia), iv. 62
Debts, i. 12. 14
Dedication of Church, vii. 42
Demons, i, 15, 34, ii. 31, iii. 3, 5,
6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 26,

xi. 7,15, 16,17,40, 43, 55, 59,
60, xii. 4, 5, 22 and v. passim

Demoniac Possession, iii. 2, 3, 5,

iv. 5,10, v. 9,10,11, 12,13,14,
25, 26, 29, 37, 38, vii. 2, 7,
38, 57, ix. 9, x. 10, 11, xi. 17,
20

Denys (St.), vi. 14
Dern (Derlar), vii. 5
Deutz (Tuitium), vi. 7, viii. 87
Devil, i, 32, 34, ii. 12, 22, iii. 5,
6, 14, iv. 4, 10, 81, 83, 84,

v. 29, 30, 31, vii. 7, 25, 38,

viii. 59, ix. 50, xi. 17, 38, 40,
48, 51, xii. 2, 4, 5, 10, 11, 14,
19, 20, 23, 52

Devil’s Contrail, ii. 12
Dice, iv. 6, v. 34
Diet of Frankfort, iii. 14
Dietkirchen, v. 8, viii. 52, x. 16,

xii. 43

Dieveren, ix. 3
Dijon, v. 42
Dinge, i. 17


A 23


353


Index


Dirina (of Stamheim), xi. 63
Discipline, i. 22, 35, 40, iii. 5,
x. 16, xi. 26

Dispensation by Pope, i. 15
Ditldrch, v. 8
Divination, viii. 56, 61
Divorce, v. 37
Dogs, x. 45, xi. 53, 59
Dokkum (Docheym), x. 39
Dollendorf, viii. 20
Dormitory, i. 43, iii. 13, iv. 45,
v. 28, 33, 44,45, vii. 14,33, viii.
86, xi. 36.

Doves, 1, 3, 40, ii. 5, vi. 35, 36,
vii. 15, viii. 7, 37, 38, 51, ix. 29,
x. 57, xi. 16, 23, xii. 46
Drachenfels, xii. 5
Dreams, vii, 14, viii. 4
Dress, i. 11, 38, ii. 5, 33, iv. 15,

v. 45. vi. 5, 96, 97, ix. 50,
x. II, 22, xi. 18, xii. 19

Dropsy, vii. 36, viii. 52
Drunkenness, v. 33, x. 68
Du do (heretic), v. 22
Duels, iii. 18, ix. 48
Duentia, see Twente
Duisburg, x. 31

Earthquakes, x. 4, 8, 49, 50
Eberbach (near Mainz), v. 17, 29,

vi. 4, vii. 54, ix. 11, 54
Eclipse, x. 24

Ecftasy, i. 2, vii. 30, viii. 1, 7, 9,
20 . 39 , 45 , 77 , 93
Edom, iv. 2
Eggs, fried, viii. 94
Eginhardt, iii. 40
Egypt, iv. 1, 17, 86, vi. 1, ix. 67,
x. 1

Eisleben, x. 4
Eli, iv. 92, ix. 26
Elias (of Rhenen), ii. 7, v. 38,
xii. 4


Elijah, vii. 37, viii. I, 44, 96, x. 2
Elisha, iii. 33, viii. 1, 44, 96, x. 2
Elizabeth (mother of John
Baptift), vii. 15

Elizabeth (Abess of Hovene), v. 44
Elizabeth (Nun of Hovene), v.45
Elizabeth (Nun of Rindorp), xii.
35

Elizabeth (Nun of Schonau), vii.

3 °

Ele&uaries, vii. 1, 47
Ellendorp, x. 40
Elmandus, v. 22
Elsloo (Elzelo), x. 2
Eltz, x. 29

Embezzlement, iii. 36
Emelric, vi. 13
Endenich, ix. 25, xii. 5
Engilbert (Archbp. of Cologne),
ii. 25, iii. 33,v.2i, vi.20, vii. 28,
ix. 52, xii. 5

Engilbert (blind man of Ziilpich),
vi. 10

England, ii. 23, 25, 27, iii. 12, 22,
iv. 103

Enfrid (Dean of St. Andrew’s),
vi. 4, 5, xi. 27
Enoch, vii. 37
Erkenbald, ix. 38
Erkinbert, xii. 14
Erwin (Canon), xi. 45
Erwin (Prieft), ix. 58
Esau, iv. 73
Essen, iv. 25, vii. 3, 46
Eucharius (St., Bp. of Treves),
viii. 78

Eucharius (Monastery of), xii. 38
Eucharift, ix. 1, 44
Eufemia (Abbess), viii. 86
Eufemia (Nun of Hovene), v. 44
Eugenia (St.), i. 39
Euphrosyna (St.), i. 39
Eusebius Emisenus ix. I


354


Index


Euftachius (Abbot), iv. 90, v. 5,
vii. 20, 21, 38, 45, viii. 96
Euftachius (Prieft of Cologne),
in. 19

Eustachius (Abbotof Villers), vii.

38

Eve, ii. 12, iv. 76, viii. 1
Evergeld, iii. 33
Everard (Burgrave), vii. 7
Everard (of Hildesheim), vi. 6
Everard (Laybrother of Hemmen-
rode), x. 14

Everard (Canon of St. Gereon),

v. 24

Everard (Knight of Amel), v. 37
Everard (of Oeftbroeck), xi. 25
Everard (Parish prieft of St.
James, Cologne), i. 7, iv. 98,

vi. s

Everard (Scholafticus of
Cologne), ix. 56
Everard (of Anrath), ix. 15
Everwach, xii. 23
Evora, viii. 66

ExadHons by princes, vi. 2,

vii. 6, 7

Exadtions by bishop, ii. 9
Eynolph (Templar), xii. 57
Exchange, iv. 6, 7
Excommunication, ii. 9, vii. 3,
iv. 10

Execution, by Burning, iii. 15,16,

17

Execution, by Wheel, ii. 16, x.
30, xi. 54, 55

Execution, by Hanging, see
Gallows

Exorcism, iii. 17, x. 11, xi. 40
Expulsion from Monastery, vii.
36

Ezekiel, ii. 2, iii. 46, iv. 7, 9, v. 1,
vii. 37, viii. 91, xi. 1


Faith (Loss of), iv. 39, 40
Falkenftein, v. 2
Failing, x. 18

Fees (at Confession), iii. 35
Ferrari (Lombardy), vi. 33
Ferte (La), i. 1
Festivals, vii. 6, viii. 5
Fiefs, ii. 12, v. 21
Fikere, iv. 91

Fish, fishing, etc., iv. 87, 89, v. 7,

vi. 5, x. 35, 61, 62
Fishpond, iv. 41, 60, vi. 27
Fiftula, vii. 22

Flanders, ii. 17, iv. 10, 54, 100,
x. 22, 71

Flasse (Ulrich), iv. 78
Flemings, xii. 8
Flesh-eating, vi. 2, 3, 4, 5
Flies, ix. 10
Flittard, xii. 9
Flogging, iv. 62
Floods, vii. 3
Floreffe, ii. 12, vii. 10, 45
Florentius, ix. 40
Florinus, iv. 89
Foigny, xi. 30

Folcoldesrode, see Volcenrode
Folco, xi. 46
Fontenella, xii. 48
Food (monks’), iv. 78, 80, vi. 2,

vii. 37, x. 14
Ford, vii. 16
Foreftum, x. 70
Fortimonte, see Montfort
Frankfort, iii. 14, v. 37
Frechen (Fregenne), xi. 40
Frederic I., Emperor, i. 34, 40,

ii. 18, 29, 30, iv. 15, 65, 74, 79,
v. 24, vi. 15, vii. 16, ix. 48, 49,
x - +7

Frederic II., Emperor, iii. 14,
iv. 14, x. 23, 47, xii. 13.
Frederic, Kinsman of Enfrid, vi. 5


355


Index


Frederic, Knight of Kelle, xii. 14
Frederic of Hemmenrode and
Heifterbach, i, 7, iv, 34
Frederic, Monk of Heifterbach,
vi. 5, xii. 44

Freusburg (Froizbreth, v. 5)
Frideruna, viii. 85
Friesland, i. 18, iv. 35, vii. 3, 46,
viii. 53, 66, ix. 3, 13, 55, x. 37, :
38,41, xi. 21, 30, xii, 26.

Fulk (Count), xi. 57
Fumoringens, ix. 64
Funeral, i. 21
Furftinberg, vii. 28
Fussenich, i. 42, ix. 15

Galleys, iv. 15

Gallows, iv. 40, v. 16, 21, vi. 24,
25, vii. 58, viii. 58, 73, ix. 49 I
Galo (Cardinal), iii. 53
Gambling, i. 11, 12, 32, iv. 44,
v. 8, 34, vii. 43

Games, i. 32, xi. 64 (in cloifter)
Garinus, v. 22
Gartzen, viii. 83
Gatekeeper, i. 37
Gate of Mars (Cologne), iii. 19
Gaza, iv. 2
Gehazi, iii. 33
Gehenna, ii. 10, iii. 46
Gennadius, v. 15
Genuflexions, vii. 38, 48
George (St.), iv. 98, viii. 25
Gerard (Abbot of Clairvaux),
viii. 78

Gerard (of Steinvelt), ix. 61
Gerard (Knight of Brubach),

vii. 28

Gerard (Knight of Holenbach),

viii. 59, x. 2

Gerard (Monk of Heifterbach),
iii. 8, xii. 3


Gerard (Canon of Cologne and
Monk of Heifterbach), ix. 17
Gerard (Canon of Regensburg and
Monk of Heifterbach, xii. 19
Gerard (Novice of Aulne), iv.
54

Gerard (Provoft of Ober-Pleiss),
vi. 13, ix. 4

Gerard (Provoft of St. Simeon,
Treves), iv. 66

Gerard, Waschart, iv. 78, xii. 44
Gerard, Marcmann, xi. 11
Gerbrandt, xi. 30
Gereon (St.), ii. 32, v. 24, 25,

vi. 5, 7, vii. 5, ix. 13
Gerresheim, v. 56
Gerlac (of Dinge), i. 18
Gerlac (Prieft of Heifterbach),

i. 24

Gerlac (Sub-Prior of Heifterbach),
viii. 10, ix. 33, 46, xi. 40
Gertrude (of Hovene), viii. 82
Gertrude (Nun of St. Salvator),
xii. 36

Gertrude (St.), Nivelle, xi. 28
Gening (Laybrother of Hemmen¬
rode), xi. 15

Gerung (of Bonn), x. 34
Gevard (Abbot), i. 7, 11, 16, 17,
21, iii. 24, iv. 36, 37, 50, 65, 98,

vii. 16, x. 69, xii. 5, 34
Ghent, iv. 10
Gideon’s fleece, vii. 1
Giemenich, vi. 10
Girzene, see Gartzen
Gisilbert (Abbot), iii. 51, iv. 78,

91, vii. 51, xi. 11
Goar (St.), x. 19
Goats, vi. 37

Godfrey (Canon of St. Andrews),
vi. 5, xi. 43, 44

Godfrey (Scholafticus of St.
And.), i. 3, ii. 16, iv. 39


356


Index


Godfrey (Citizen of Cologne),

v. 39

Godfrey (Laybrother of Hemmen-
rode), vii. 51

Godfrey (Knight of Rotheim),
xi. 48

Godfrey (Monk of Villers), i.

35

Godfrey (Mafter of Novices),
x. 42

Godfrey (Prior of Hovene), ix.

7

Godehard, viii. 77
Goldsmith, v. 22
Goswin (Prieft), i. 10
Goswin (Abbot), viii. 89
Goths, iii. 12

Gotteschalk (usurer), ii. 7, iv.

10

Gotteschalk (Canon of Bonn),

iii. 33, xii. 12

Gotteschalk (of Volmundfteine),

iv. 67, 87, v. 4, vi. 4, ix. 2, 3
Gotteschalk, Visions, v. 44,

ix. 17, 27
Gozbert, xi. 12
Gozman, v. 35

Grace of Tears, see Tears
Grafting, v. 6

Granges, i, 3, iii. 33, iv. 62, 96,

v. 5, 33, vii. 37, 51, viii. 17,
43, 96, ix. 31, 54, xi. 22, xii. 26,
51

Gregory (St.), ii. 16, iii. 46,
iv. 2,8,101, v. 8, viii. 29, ix. 29,

x. io

Gregory Armenius, xi. 34
Gregory (Abbot of Burtscheid),
viii. 76

Groningen, vii. 46, viii. 53
Gudinsberg, viii. 46
Guefthouse, i. 10, 13, iv. 7,

vi. 21, x. 11


Gueftmafter, vii. 38, xi. 61
Guldolph, v. 42
Gunther of Bonn, xii. 52
Gunther of Stamheim, xi. 63
Gurzenich, iv. 88, xi. 59
Gyber, xii. 12, 13

Habakuk, i. 40, iv. 55, v. I, vii. 37

Hairshirt, iv. 103

Hadenmare, ix. 54, 63

Halberffadt, ii. 5, v. 16

Hanging, see Gallows

Harderard, vii. 5

Hart, i, 3, v. 5, viii. 96, ix. 29

Hartdyfa, ix. 9

Hartmann, viii. 23

Harthausen, ii. 6

Harvest, iv. 21

Hasban, xii. 17

Haslo, xi. 60

Haymo, i. 26

Hawking, vii. 7

Headaches, common, iv. 30, 44,

54> v “* # 2 4

Healing, i. 14, v. 36, vii. 16, 24,
x. 5, 6

Healing Spring, vii. 24
Heginnand, see Eginhardt
Heilige, vi. 5

Heifterbach, see Peterfthal
Hellewic, ix. 65
Helfenftein, vii. 7
Hell, i. 34, ii. 6, 31, xii. 23
Helswindis of Giemenich, vi. 10
Helswindis (Abbess of Burtscheid),
i* 43

Hemmenrode (Clauftrum), i. 14,
37, ii. 18, iii. 33, 51, iv. 33> 34>
37, 51, 66, 78, 81, 90, 91, 95,
v. 6, 48, 51, vi. 3, vii. 12, 16,
35, 38, vii. 45, 51, viii. 13, 23,
43, 91, 95, ix. 28, 63, x. 12, 14,
16, 54, xi. 13, 15, 17


357


Index


Henry (Abbot of Scimenu), vii. 9,
viii. 84

Henry (of Heiilerbach), i. 12,
13, 18, iv. 6, 30, vii. 7, ix. 36,
x. 16, 39, xii. 26, 37
Henry (Chamberlain of Heifter-
bach), i, 23, iv. 89
Henry (Cellarer of Heiilerbach),
iv. 6, 94, xi. 61

Henry (Cellarer of Hemmenrode),
xii. 31

Henry, (Canon of St. Kunibert),

vii. 8

Henry (Cardinal), iv. 79
Henry (Count of Sayn), vii. 7,

viii. 54, xii. 5

Henry (Cripple of Clairvaux), i.
16, viii. 30

Henry (Grangekeeper of Hart), i,
3, v. 5, vii. 12, 13, 15, viii. 37,
38, 95, 96, ix. 29, xi. 16.

Henry (Laybro ther, Heiilerbach),

ii. 14

Henry (Laybrother, Villers), iv.
31, vii. 16

Henry (Deacon, Cologne), ix. 10
Henry (Duke of Louvain), vii. 38,
viii. 29

Henry (Duke of Saxony), ii. 35,
iv. 76, vi. 10

Henry, the Fig, iv. 91, v. 49
Henry, the Gem, iii. 11
Henry, the Knot, xii. 15
Henry Ratz, vi. 28, xi. 46
Henry of Foreil, x. 70
Henry (brother of Ludwig vii.)
i. 19

Henry V. (Emperor), i. 8
Henry VI. (Emperor), ii. 30,

iii. 18, vii. 11, x. 25, 47, xii.
12

Henry (Marshal of King Philip),
vi. 26


Henry (Knight of Bonn), iv. 37
Henry (Knight of Falkenftein),
v. 2

Henry (Knight, then Monk at
Hemmenrode), vii. 35
Henry (Monk of Hemmenrode),
vii. 36

Henry (Monk of Heiflerbach),
vii. 28

Henry of Molsberg, vii. 7
Henry of Moselle, vi. 22
Henry Palatine, i. 31
Henry, Prior of the Preachers,
Cologne, vi. 37
Henry of Bude, xi. 47
Henry (Prieft of Eltz), x. 29
Henry (Prieft of Hemmenrode),
x. 28

Henry (Scholafticus, St. Gereon),
v. 25

Henry of Ulme, iv. 30, viii. 54,
x. 43

Henry of Wied, iv. 76
Henry of Soe£l, iii. 11, v. 27
Henry of Alba (Cardinal), iv.
79

Heresy, ii. 11, iii. 16, 17, 20,
v. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25,
vii. 23, ix. 12, 52, x. 49, xi. 51
Heribert (St.), ii. 27, viii. 61
Herlisheim, iv. 49
Hermann (Abbot, Marienftatt),
i. 1, 32, iii. 13, iv. 51, 95, 96,
98, v. 5, vii. 45, viii. 91, 96, xi.
12, xii. 5

Hermann (Abbot, Hemmenrode),

iv. 4

Hermann (Precentor, Heifler-
bach), iv. 91, v. 49
Hermann (Laybrother, Hemmen¬
rode), vii. 51

Hermann (Dean of Bonn), iii. 30,

33 , 3 6 > 4 6 > 5 2 > v - 2 5 > vii. 4 °


358


Index


Hermann of Hildesheim, vi. 6
Hermann of St. Gereon, ix. 13
Hermann (2nd Dean, Cologne),
xi. 45

Hermann of Arnisberg, iv. 87,
v. 47

Hermann (Landgrave), i. 27, 34,
x. 23, xii. 3

Hermann (Monk of Schonau), i.
40

Hermann of Soeft, iv. 99
Hermits, vii. 32, viii. 14
Herod, ii. 24, v. 21, viii. 53
Herodias, viii. 53
Hersethusin, see Harthausen
Hertwic (Scholar), ix. 20
Herwic (Monk), xi. 17
Herwic (Prior, Hemmenrode),
v. 5, xi. 10
Heifterbach, vii. 28
Heydenric (Cellarer), xi. 32
Hevdenric (Monk), ix. 44
Heyland, ix. 18
Heyleka, vi. 5
Hezekiah, i. 26, ii. 1
Hildebold, ix. 18
Hildebrand (Monk, of Hemmen¬
rode), xi. 8

Hildebrand of Meftede, ix. 21
Hildebrand (Robber of Holchoim),
ii. 6, iii. 15

Hildegund, of Libbar, ix. 36
Hildegund (Nun), viii. 50
Hildegund of Neuss, i. 40
Hildesheim, ii. 35, vi. 6, viii. 77,
ix. 19

Hind, viii. 75, x. 54
Hirminold, iv. 58
Hochftrasse, Cologne, iv. 98
Hogs, iv. 35
Holchoim, ii. 6
Holenbach, viii. 59
Holland (Countess of), vii. 38


Holland (Count of), vii. 38
Holy Land, iii. 21, iv. 15
Holy Sepulchre, v. 37
Holy Water, iii. 13, v. 7, viii. 92
Homilies, i. 13, ii. 16, v. 5, vi. 32
Homage to Devil, ii. 12
Honorius III. (Pope), iii. 33, v. 21,

vii. 3, ix. 65
Hood, xi. 33, 36, xii. 2
Horcheim, vii. 7
Horeb, ix. 47

Horses, iv. 34, vii. 38, 42, x. 30,
xi. 17, xii. 12, 14
Hosea, iii. 23, 41, iv. 92, ix. 26
Hospital, iv. 31
Hospitality, iv. 57
Hospitallers, viii. 66
Ho ft, vii. 3

Hours, i. 6, iv. 52, vii. 16, 29,' 37,

viii. 47, 97, x. 10

House Leek (Barba Jovis), vii. 16
Hovene, v. 45, viii. 82, ix. 7, x. 16
Hugo (Abbot of Bonnevaux),
iii. 25

Hugo (Bishop of Liege), ii. 25
Hugo (Bishop of Lyons), i. 1
Hugo (Knight of Stamhcim), xi.

63 .

Huns iii. 12
Huorft, ii. 7
Hylarius, ix. 27

Idida, vii. 3
Illegitimacy, iv. 30, 31
Images, vii. 21, 24, 44, 45, 46, 76,
viii. 76, x. 19
Incense, iii. 13
Inclusi (ae), see Anchorite
Incubus, iii. 7, 8, 9, 10, 12
India, viii. 59

Infirmary, i. 35, ii. 5, iv. 96, v. 6,
33, vii. 13, 48, viii. 30, 96,
x. 15, xi. II, 15, 16


359


Index


Infirmarian, i. 35, vii. 16, ix. 2,

xi. 18, 36
Initiation, i. 12

Innocent III. (Pope), ii. 6, 7, 9,
II, 30, iii. 31, 32, 33, v. 21, 37,

vi. 29, vii. 6, viii. 13, x. 24,

xii. 5

Insula, St. Nicolai, see Stuben.
Ireland, iii. 38, xii. 38
Irmingardis, viii. 50
Irmintrudis, xii. 43
Iron Seller, iii. 46
Isaac, ix. 26

Isaiah, i. 2, 26, ii. 10, 32, iii. 1,

iv. 2, v. 1, vi. 1, 25, vii. 24,
viii. 29

Isleve, see Eisleben
Isenbard, xi. 3, 11
Isenberg, x. 17
Isidorus, xi. 1
Israel, iv. 1, 62, 86, 92

Jacob the Jew, xi. 44

Jacob (Patriarch), iv. 57, vi. 1,

vii. 20, viii. 32, 39, ix. 26
James (St.), i. 18, iv. 16, 22,

v. 39, vi. 20

James (S.) of Compoftella, v. 29,

vi. 25, 33, viii. 58, x. 7, 67
James (St.), of Cologne, i 7,

iv. 98

Jeremiah, ii. 1, iii. 41, vi. 20
Jericho, iv. 59

Jerome, iv. 73, vii. 37, viii. 19
Jerusalem, i. 34, 40, ii. 30, iv. 15,
73, v. 37, vii. 37, x. 2, 47
Jews, ii. 23, 24, 25, 26, v. 19, 21,

viii. 9, 27, x. 69, xi. 61

Job, i. 26, iv. 1, 92, 98, vi. 1, 2,
viii. 35, x. 32
John Baptift, ii. 5, iv. 4
John (St.), iv. 23, v. 1, vii. 1
John (Abbot, St. Victor), vi. 12


John (Archbp., Treves), i. 3,

vii. 39, xii. 15

John (Burgrave of Rheineck), v.

38

John Capot, ii. 30

John Dhan, see Dan

John (Dean of Aix), vi. 5, viii. 77,

ix. 18, 19, x. 9, 32

John Eleymon, iii. 27, viii. 77
John (Bishop of Cambrai), v. 25,
vii. 40

John of Horcheim, vii. 7
John (Monk of Clairvaux), viii. 49
John (Monk of Heifterbach), ix.
35, xii. 14

John (Monk of Hemmenrode),

vii. 16

John of Ryssen, ix. 20
John (Prieft, Hemmenrode), viii.
9 1

John (Prieft, Uncinis), v. 22
John (Sacriftan, Villers), xii. 30
John (Scholar), iv. 86
John (Scholafticus, Priim), iii. 10
John (Scholafticus, Xanten), ii. 7,
iii. 21, vii. 23, xii. 23
Joel, iv. 2, 92
Jonah, iii. 21
Jordan (Cardinal), xii. 22
Jordan (River), viii. 51
Jordan (Monk, Hemmenrode),

x. 16

Joseph (Monk), i. 40
Joseph (Patriarch), iii. 24, iv. 92,
93 , 99 , vi - h 7

Joseph (Husband of Mary), iii. 24,

viii. 3, 5

Joshua, iv. 59, viii. 19
Josiah, ix. 26
Judah, iv. 2, v. 1
Judas, ii. 5, vi. 5
Jude, viii. 61

Julian (St., Ch. at Soeft), v. 35


Index


Julian (Apo&ate), viii. 52
Julich, v. 21, xii. 5
Jutta (Matron Veldenz), vii. 45
Jutta (of Frechen), xi. 40
Jutta (Nun of Bedberg), x. 55

Karixtus, see Carre to
Katharine (St.), viii. 83, 84
Katharine (Jewess, Louvain), ii.

2 S

Kelle, xii. 14
Kerpen, x. 64

Kitchen, i. 35, 43, v. 6, vi. 5, 7,
xi. 11

Kites, iii. 13

Klaar-Kamp, xi. 21, 30, xii. 26
Klofter Kamp (Campus), i. 22,
iv. 62, v. 16
Klofter-Cumbd., vi. 32
Kolmere, see Colmar
Komele, ix. 7

Kflnigswinter (Wintere), iv. 22,

Kono of Ziilpich, vii. 56
Kono of Malberg, xi. 17, 20
Kono of Rulant, x. 12
Kono (Monk, Hemmenrode), xi.

3

Kortui, v. 22

Kummede, see Klofter-Cumbd.
Kunibert (St.), v. 5, vii. 8
Kunincskirgen, v. 31

Laach, iv. 71, v. 43
Laban, iv. 57
Lahn (Logona), vii. 5
Lambert (St., Ch.), xi. 29
Lambert (Citizen of Cologne),
y i- 5

Lambert (Dean, Holy Apoftles),
ix- 4

Lambert of Endenich, xi. 5

36!


Lambert (Monk, Heifterbach),

vi. 31, vi. 13, vii. 10, x. 35,
xi- 33

Langwaden (Lancwade), iii. 13
Landmarks, xi. 47, 48
Langres, i. 1, v. 22
Laon, vi. 13
Latin, vi. 29, vii. 5
Laurence, v. 19
Lavatory, v. 28
Lawyers, xi. 46
Laxity, iii. 49

Laybrothers (Conversi), i. 3, 4,
iii. 33, iv. 4, 31, 32, 33, 41,
42, 62, 83, 85, 93, 100, v. 27,

vii. 12, 13, 15, 25, 29, 52,

viii. 17, 18, 20, 29, 37, 43, 72,
88, 95, ix. 41, 45, 63, 64,

x. 5, 14, 15, 40, 54, xi. 4, 6,
9, II, 12, 16, 35, 57, xii. 53

Laybrothers’ jealousy of Monks,

xi. 57

Laybrothers’ choir, i. 35
Laybrothers’ Altar, iv.' 4
Laybrothers’ Chapel, iv. 4
Legate (Papal), i. 12
Leggenich, xii. 8
Leggings, iv. 12, 13, 15
Leichlingen, viii. 75
Lent, iii. 20, 26, 29, 31, 40, 44,
45, 5 2 > i y - 37, 98, viii. 45, x. 18
Leo, i. 14

Leopold (Duke of Austria), v. 21
Leopold (Bishop of Worms), ii. 9
Leprosy, viii. 31, 32, 33
Liblar, ix. 36
Lice, iv. 48, 103
Liege, i. 6, 43, ih 12, 25, 26,
iii. 20, v. 29, vi. 5, viii. 81,
x. 2, xi. 29, xii. 16, 24
Lieser (Lisere), x. 57
Liffard, iv. 4, x. 54
Lightning, x. 28, 29


Index


Lignum fusile, see Spindle tree

Limburg, v. 37, vii. 5

Limmer, ix. 18

Lintheldis (St.), viii. 82

Linz, ii. 26

Lippa, x. 35

Lire, v. 22

Lisbon, viii. 66

Lisere, see Lieser

Livonia, viii. 13, ix. 4, 37, x. 35,

xi. 18, 35.

Logona, see Lahn
Lombardy, ii. 27, 29, iii. 18,

v. 24, 37, vi. 33, vii. 3

Lootz (Lossa), vii. 16, ix. 48,

xii. 16, 17
Lorch, i. 25, vii. 21
Lorraine (Duke of), vii. 38
Lothaire (Emperor), i. 8
Louvain, ii. 25, vi. 34, vii. 38,

xii. 16

Lvibeck, v. 27
Lubbelare, see Liblar
Lucifer, iii. 26, v. 1, 10, 13, 35
Lucius III. (Pope), i. 40, v. 24
Lucka, vii. 17, 24, 52, viii. 18, 74,
x. 40, xi. 19
Ludo, xi. 15

Ludolph (Mafter of Novices),
xii. 34

Ludolph (Monk, Heifterbach),
ix. 44

Ludolph (Monk of Porta), xi.
18

Ludwig I. (Count of Lootz), ix.
48 .

Ludwig II. (Landgrave), i. 27,
34, xii. 2

Ludwig III. (Landgrave), i. 34
Ludwig (Knight of Are), i. 25
Ludwig (Monk, Heifterbach),

vi. 36

Lueri, see Lire


Lunbere, see Limmer
Lureke, see Lorch
Lutere, see Lutzerath
Luther of Bonn, xi. 43
Lutzerath, vi. 37, viii. 51
Luxemburg, v. 3, vii. 42
Liixheim, xi. 59

Maccabees, iii. 1, viii. 64
Magi, iii. 24, iv. 97, vii. 38,

viii. 1, xi. 60

Magic, i. 33, iv. 42, v. 2, 3, 4,
xii. 27

Mainz, i. 8, ii. 9, 29, v. 7, vii.

40, viii. 24, xii. 20
Malachi (St.) of Ireland, iii. 38
Malachi (Prophet), vii. 20, viii. 27,

ix. 26

Malberg, xi. 17

Manegold (Monk, Heifterbach),

vii. 28

Manichaeus, v. 21
Manna, iv. 81, ix. 40
Manual Labour, v. 6, 51, vii. 38,
51, x. 14, 15, xii. 31
Mannetum, see Nantes
Marcadellus, vi. 33
Marcmann, xi. 11
Margaret (Nun, St. Salvator),
xii. 36

Margaret of Louvain, viii. 80
Marienstatt (Locus St. Mary),
Prol., i. 32, iii. 13, v. 5, vii. 7,

41, 45, viii. 91, 96, ix. 16,
xi. 12, xii. 5, 37

Mary, B.V.M., vii. passim and
i. 17, 20, 33, 35, ii. 12, 30, 33,
35, iii. 14, iv. 30, v. 44, vi. 10,

viii. 5

Mary, B.V.M. Convent, Cologne,
iii. 23

Mary (St.) ad Gradus, Cologne,
i. 7, 14, vi. 28


362


Index


Mary Magdalene, ii. i, io, iv. 2,

vii. 15, 16, viii. 79, 80, 81,
ix. 56, xi. 29

Mary Magdalene’s Chapel,
Stolgingaze, ix. 56
Mary of Armenia, xi. 34
Mary (Nun in Bredehorn), xi.

26

Marina (St.) i. 39
Marroch, v. 21
Marsilius, vii. 49
Martin (St.), Bishop of Tours),
i. 40, iii. 26, v. 5, vi. 5, viii. 77,
ix. 31, xi. 38

Martin’s (St., Ch. Utrecht), xi.

21

Martin’s (St., Ch. Cologne), iii.
4 6 .. 52

Martin’s (Little, Ch. Cologne),

iii. 31

Martyrs, viii. 28, 63, 64, 65, 66,
67, 68, 69, 70

Mascelin (Bishop’s Clerk, Mainz),
i. 8

Mass, i. 22, 24, ii. 2, 4, 5, 21,

iv. 22, 83, 98, v. 5, 11. vii. 7, 15,

16, 20, 22, 23, 38, 40, 45, 51,

viii. 59, 60, ix. 2, 3, 4, 5, 10,

17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 28,

29, x. 52, xi. 16, 25, 27, xii. 5,
IL 33 -

Mafter of Novices, Prol., x. 42,
xi. 2

Matemus (St.), viii. 78, xi.12
Matilda (Metheldis)

Matilda of Smithusen, iii. 33
Matilda, of Fiisennich, i. 42,

ix. 15

Matins, ii. 3, 5, 19, iii. 13, iv. 28,
2 9 > 39 >+ 5 . 96 . v - 5 . 18, 44,45,

54, 56, vi. 9, 10, vii. 5, 17, 19,
24, 35, 37, viii. 5, 7, 30, 49,51,
72, 78, 85, xi. 2, xii. 26

363


Matthew (Apoflle), viii. 61
Matthew’s (St.) Monastery,
Treves, viii. 78
Manbach, see Molbach
Maundy Thursday, ix. 42
Maurice (Bp. of Paris), ii. 33,

vi. 19, ix. 43

Maurice (St.), Convent, Cologne,

vii. 53, xii. 5

Maxentius (Emperor), xii. 5
Maximin (St.), xi. 27
Mayen, xi. 17

Mayenfeld, iv. 89, xi. 17, 43,
“>• >5

Measures, iii. 41, iv. 66, v. 4,
13 , 17 , 47
Meat, x. 8, 9
Medicine, i. 14
Mendicants, vii. 10
Menevelt, see Mayenfeld
Mengoz (Knight), v. 42
Mengoz (Laybrother, Hemmen-
rode, xi. II )

Mercurius (Martyr), viii. 52
Merenberg, vii. 5
Merlin, iii. 12
Messiah (Jewish), ii. 24
Mestede, ix. 21
Methildis, see Matilda
Metz, v. 20, xi. 29, 39
Meyne, see Mayen
Meyner (Monk, Hemmenrode),
xi. 2

Mice, ix. 11

Michael (Archangel), v. 13, viii.
45, 46, rii. 5

Michael (Monk, Hemmenrode),
xi. 3

Michael (Prieft), v. 55
Michael’s (St.) Ch., Cologne,
ix. 61

Michaelftein, x. 4
Midday sleep, v. 33


Index


Midianites, iv. 92
Milan, x. 49
Milene, xii. 17
Mills, ii. 7
Mines, x. 52
Mint, xi. 44
Miralimelinus, v. 21
Missionaries, viii. 13
Mitre, i. 22, xi. 53
Moab, iv. 2
Molbach, vi. 10
Molsberg, vii. 7

Monks’ food, iii. 49, iv. 78, 79,
80, vi. 2, 3, 4, 5, vii. 37, viii.

11

Monks’ dress, i. 1, 3, 7, 43, ii. 3,

iii. 14, vi. 5, 10, vii. 14, 38,
xi. 2, 3, 36, xii. 2

Monks’ trading, vii. 4
Monks, wandering, i. 3
Monk’s theft, i. 3
Mons (Berg), x. 51, xii. 10
Mons Vetus, see Altenberg
Mons, S. Salvatoris (Convent
near Aix), i. 43, v. 11, viii. 60
Mons S. Walburgis, see Walburgis
Monte Cassino, iv. 8
Montenake, xii. 6
Montfort (Simon de) v. 21, xii.
10

Montpellier, v. 20, vii. 2, 4
Morimund (Abbey), i. 1, 32,

iv. 39> v. 8

Mortgage, ii. 12, 31, iv. 62
Moselle, i. 31, iv. 40, vi. 22
Moses, iv. 1, 79, 81, v. 21, vi. 12,
viii. 12, ix. 26
Mummart, vii. 45
Miinfter (Weftphalia), iii. 5,
vii. 5, 24, ix. 46, x. 37, xi. 54


Name-giving, viii. 50
Namur, ii. 17, iv. 31
Nantes, iii. 7
Narbonne, v. 21
Nathan, vi. 10
Naumuticum, see Nemours
Nazareth, vii. 6
Nazareth (Convent), xii. 26
Nebuchadnezzar, vii. 42, viii. 77
Necromancy, i. 33, 34, v. 2,
3 , 4 >

Needles, vi. 15, 16, 17
Nemours, v. 22
Netherlands, iii. 33
Neuberg (AJsace), xii. 52
Neuss, i. 40, ix. 33
Nicholas (St.) vii. 38, 46, viii. 72,
73 . 74 . 75 - 76 . *>'• *3
Nicholas (St., Ch., Cologne), xi.

45

Nicholas (St., Ch., Lubeck), v.

}7

Nicholas (St., Monastery), vi. 8
Nicholas (Archpoet), ii. 15
Nicolai Insula, see Stuben
Nicodemus, ix. 62
Nienburg, x. 11
Niedeggen (Niethiecke), xii. 5
Nile, iv. 2

Nivelles, iii. 6, 14, iv. 84, xi.
28

Noah, v. 33
Nolo episcopari, ii. 28
Noradin, iv. 15
Normandy, v. 21
Norway, viii. 57
Notary, iii. 33, vi. 5
Notre Dame (Paris), ii. 15, 33
Novices, i. 3, 4, 7, 9, 12, 14, 15,
18, 21, 29, 35, 40, ii. 22,
iii. 25, 33, iv. 6, 45, 50, 51, 52,
53, 54, 80, 81, 94, v. 5, 6, 28,
vii. 9, viii. 23, 37, xi. 3, 12


Nabal, iv. 22
Naboth, vi. 23


364


Index


Novices’ bench, iv. 45
Novices (Mafter of), Prol., iv. 44,
x. 42, xi. 2
Nuenkirgen, xi. 56
Nuinburg, see Nienburg
Nuns, i. 30, 42, ii. 19, iii, 12, 28,
33, iv. 40, 42, 56, 89, 94, 103,
v. 8, 14, 33, 44, 45, 54, vi. 32,
vii. 5, 14, 16, 21, 30, 33, 34,

48, 53, viii. 16, 22, 39, 45, 51,
85, 94, ix. 39, 66, x. 16, xi. 27,
28, 29, 31, 58, xii. 5, 21, 26,
35,36,43,44,

Niirburg, xii. 23
Oath of profession, i. 24
Ober-Pleiss, v. 13
Obert (of Hemmenrode), xi. 6
Obsequies, i. 35, xi. 19, 45, 57
Odo (Duke of Burgundy), i. 1
Odo (Deacon of Paris, heretic),
v. 22

Oeilbroeck, xi. 25
Oil, vii. 9, 56, viii. 83, 84
Oldenziel, viii. 97
Oliver (demon), v. 4, 35
Oliver (Scholafticus, Cologne),
ii. 7, iii. 6, iv. 10, x. 22,37, 39,

49, xii. 23

Orchards, iv. 74, vi. 6, 37
Ordeal, i. 40, iii. 16, 17, x. 35
Ordination, vii. 39, 40, ix. 60
Organ, vi. 7
Origen, iv. 76
Osilia of Liege, xi. 29
Osnaburg, i. 22

Ottenburg, i. 38, iv. 53, 55, 90,
x. 19

Otto IV., Emperor, i. 31, ii. 9,
35, iv. 71, v. 21, 25, 37, vi. 2,
10, 16, viii. 85, ix. 51, x. 17,
19, 20, 23, 24, xi. 52
Otto of Sconinberg, x. 18
Otto Xanten, vii. 22


Otto (Cursor Liege), xi. 53
Otto (Bp. of Utrecht), xii. 23
Oven, v. 28, x. 7, 17
Ovid, v. 22

Oxen, vii. 51, ix. 7, x. 63

Pafnutius (St.) vii. 58
Pages, v. 30
Painters, viii. 23, 24
Palermo, xii. 12
Palm Sunday, i. 35, vi. 5, vii. 39
Palmirsdorp, i. 15
Pandulph (Notary), xii. 22
Pantaleon (St.), i. 35, iii. 36,
vi. 5

Papal letters, vii. 7
Paphos, x. 49
Paradise, i. 14
Paradisus (Parvis), vii. 10
Paralytic, vii. 20
Parascheve (Good Friday), v. 55,
viii. 24

Parc Aux Dames, ii. 25
Paris, i. 18, 19, 32, 38, ii. 10, 15,
27, 33, iii. 27, iv. 20, 46, 89,
v. 22, vi. 23, vii. 10, viii. 69,
X. 34, xii. 48, 54
Parish, i. 24, ii. 3, iii. 14, iv. 40,
v. 8, 37, 40, vi. 5
Parish prieft, i. 7, iii. 31, 40, 44,
45, 52, V. 8, 40
Parvis, vii. 10
Paschal (Pope), vii. 49
Paschal Lamb, ix. 62
Paschasius (St.), xii. 38
Passover, ix. 62
Paternianus (St.), viii. 74
Patrick (St.), xii. 3, 38
Patron Saints, viii. 61
Paul (St.), v. 26, viii. 67
Paul Simplex, vi. 29
Paul, St. Paul’s Miinfter, xi. 54
Pax, ix. 41

365


Index


Peacock, vii. 52
Peas, iv. 80, x. 15
Penance, vii. 6
Penitentiary, iii. 27, iv. 88
Pentapolis, iv. 92
Pentecoft, iv. 1
Perche (Pertica), vii. 9
Peregrinus (Archbp., Cologne),
viii. 61

Pergamum, see Bergamo
Periarchon, v. 21
Peter (Apoftle), i. 6, ii. 5, iv. 98,
v. 1, 26, vi. 11, viii. 18, 61,

xi. 1

Peter’s (St.) Ch., Cologne, iii. 13,
iv. 79, v. 10, vi. 9
Peter’s (St.), Rome, v. 21
Peter’s (St.), Treves, vii. 39
Peter (Abbot, Clairvaux), vi. 11,

vii. II, 38

Peter (Precentor, Paris), ii. 33,

viii. 69, ix. 27, xii. 48
Peter of St. Cloud, v. 22
Peter of Coblentz, viii. 13
Peter, Builder of Preacher’s

Monas., Cologne, ix. 56
Peter, Cardinal, vi. 28
Peter, Telonarius, viii. 77
PeterSlhal (Heifterbach), i. 1,
7, 17, iv. 65, viii. 91
Petrissa, v. 54
Petronilla, iii. 6
Pharaoh, iv. 2, vi. 1
Philip (Abbot Ottenburg), i. 38,
iv- 53 , 55 , 9 °, x. 19
Philip (Archbp., Cologne), ii. 16,
iv. 64, 98, viii. 91, xii. 43
Philip, Count of Namur, ii. 17
Philip Necromancer, v. 2
Philip, King of the Romans, i. 17,
ii. 9, iv. 13, v. 37, vi. 2, 10, 27,
viii. 47, x. 23, 65, xi. 44, 52,

xii. 40


I Philip, King of France, iv. 12,
v. 22, vi. 12, 22
Philip, Eunuch, viii. 35
Physicians, vii. 47, ix. 55
Pillow, iv. 26

Pilgrims, i. 6, 17, 40, iii. 21,
iv. 22, 99, v. 39, 42, vi. 25,
vii. 56, viii. 59, 85, x. 2, 12,
67, xi. 28
Pills, i. 21
Pirates, vii. 38, 41
Piscina, see Fishpond
Pit (of hell), i. 34, xii. 2, 5, 6
Pitch and brimstone, vii. 7, xii.

2, 5 , 4 *

Plantation, vii. 7
Plays, ii. 12

Pleysensis, see Ober-Pleis
Plittersdorp, iv. 65
Ploughing, x. 67
Pluralities, v. 55, vi. 29
Poitou, v. 21, 22, ix. 64
Polch (Polege), vii. 29
Pontigny, i. 1

Pope, i. 15, 40, ii. 6, 7, 9, II, 18,
25, 30, iii. 31, 32, 33, iv. 8, 10,
88, v. 21, 22, 24, 37, vii. 3
Porcetum, see Burtscheid
Porta, see Schulpforte
Porta, Clericorum, vi. 5, xi. 43
Porta, Martis, ix. 6
Porto (Italy), iii. 33, v. 21
Portz (Portenses), vii. 36
Prayers for Dead, ii. 2, xii. 3
Preachers’, Mon., Cologne, ix.
56

Preaching of Crusade, i. 6,
xii. 49

Prebends, i. 14, iv. 49, 50, vi. 5,
28

Precentor, iv. 74
Predestination, i. 26, 27, vii. 20,

I 37

366


Index


Premonftratensians, ii. 12, iii. 5,
22, 48, iv. 62,85,91, vii. 59, ix.
50, 61, xi. 13, xii. 47, 49
Presbytery, i. 35, v. 5, vii. 19,

viii. 85, 91, ix. 42
Preuilly, xii. 29
Priests’ wives, see Wives
Priors, i. 3, 4, 35, 40, ii. 6, 10, 14,

21, 25, iii. 5,13, 14,25,33, 49,
53, iv. 5, 6, 18, 19, 40, 51, 54,
96, 97, v. 14, 51, vi. 4, 20, 32,

37, vii. 3, 9, 11, 12, 16, 38, 39,
46, 50, viii. 49, 54, 86, 96,

ix. 7, 16, 23, 25, 29, 65, x. 15,
58, xi. 3, 11,14,15, 33, xii. 25,

33 , 37 , 39 , 5 /

Prioress, i. 42, iv. 25
Privilege, vii. 6, ix. 48
Privy, iv. 6, v. 6
Probation, i. 3, 4, 9, 10, II, 12,
15, 18, 21, 40, ii. 2, iv. 6, 51,
93 , v. 6

Profession, i. 3, 10, xii. 49
Provo ft, iv. 62

Priim, ii. 3, iii. 10, iv. 86, v. 2, 30,
vi. 29, xii. 43
Pulpit, viii. 37, ix. 3
Pumerane (Rio-Seco), vii. 50
Purgatory, ii. 2, vii. 16, xii. 23,
24, 25, 26, 27, 31, 34, 36, 37,

38, 39, 40, 41,42, 51
Purification (B.V.M.), vii. 20,

viii. 7

Piitt (Bude), xi. 47
Pyx, iv. 75, vii. 3, 47, ix. 12, 13,
IS, 29 , 35

Quida (Guildo), vii. 20, ix. 47, 67

Rachel, iv. 57, viii. 4
Ransom, ii. 7, x. 7
Ratisbon (Regensburg), xi. 26,
xii. 19


Ratz (Ratio), Henry, vi. 28, xi.

46

Razor, iv. 51

Refeftory, i. 35, iv. 91, vi. 5
Refeftorian, vi. 5
Regular Theologhe, vii. 16
Regulars, vii. 59
Relapse of Novices, i. 3
Relaxhusen, see Rittershausen
Relics, i. 35, vii. 19, 38, viii. 46,
53, 54, 60, 65, 66, 67, 68, 70,
85,86, 87, 88, ix. 7, x. 21, xi. 26
Remagen, v. 37
Remedies, Medical, vii. 16
Remigius (St.), Ch., Bonn, iii. 8
Remigius (St)., Bishop, v. 42
Renbodo (Laybrother, Heifter-
bach), viii. 86

Rener (Confessor of Pope Inno¬
cent), vii. 6

Rener (Chaplain of Duke of
Louvain), ii. 25

Rener (Scholafticus, St. And.,
Cologne), iv. 50, vi. 5, 24,

viii. 57, ix. 47
Renhecke (Rieneck), ix. 48
Runnengen, ix. 3
Renunciation, ii. 12, xii. 23
Resurreftion, vii. 16, 20
Reviving dead, i. 16
Reynaldus (Archbp., Cologne),

v. 19

Reynold (St., Chapel, Cologne),

ix. 59

Rheineck, iii. 9, v. 38
Rheinold, iv. 62

Rhine, iii. 8, iv. 43, 62, xi. 61,
xi. 33

Richard, (K. of England), ii. 30,

x. 46

Richard, Scrip tor, xii. 47
Richard (Laybrother, Heifter-
bach), iv. 32, v. 49, 55, viii. 20


Index


Richmudis, viii. 7, 9. ix. 33, 34
Rich win (Cellarer), iv. 83, 94,

x. 30, xi. 3 3

Rindorp (Gran-Rheindorf), xii.

.35

Rindorp (Schwarz-Rheindorf), xi.

. 5 .

Riningen (Rhenen), ii. 7, xii. 14
Rinkasle (Rheinkassel), xii. 9
Rings, x. 61

Rio-Seco (Pumerane), vii. 50
Risene (Ryssen), ix. 20
Rittershausen, iv. 45, xi. 36
Roads, ix. 51, x. 21, xi. 18, xii. 14
Robbers, i. 27, 31, ii. 2, 6, 7,
vii. 42, 58, ix. 48, 49
Roberts (Abbot of Molesme),
i. 1

Robert de Kortui, v. 22
Robert of Paris, v. 22
Rocamadour, i. 17, vii. 24
Rode (Klofterrath), xi. 42
Rodinkirchen, iv. 43
Rome, i. 31, ii. 11, 30, iii. 53,
v. 22, 25, 37, vii. 3
Rotheim, xi. 48
Rudinger (Knight), xii. 41
Rudinger (Monk, Hemmenrode),

xi. 14

Rudolf (Canon), viii. 97
Rudolf (Laybrother, Heifter-
bach), viii. 92
Rudolf of Lucka, viii. 18
Rudolf (Bishop of Liege), vi. 5
Rudolf of Nemours, v. 22
Rudolf of Trives, i. 40
Rudolf (Scholasticus, Cologne),
i. 38, iv. 26, vi. 5, ix. 22
Ruger, viii. 69
Rulant, x. 12, xi. 24
Runningen (Convent), ix. 3
Runkel, ix. 5
Ruthenians, x. 47


Sabbath, i. 35, vii. 38, 58
Sacrament for sick, ix. 51
Sacriftan (Cuftos), i. 35, vi. 14,
45, vii. 14, 17, 19, 34, 46,

viii. 13, 22, 85, ix. 66, 67,

x \ 3, 3 ..

Sacrilege, vii. 42, viii. 26, 27,

ix. 7, 52, 55, x. 21
Saladin, iv. 15, x. 43, 47
Saleberg (Dean of), v. 22
Salve Regina, vii. 29
Saviour’s (Hill of St.), i. 43,

v. 11

Salzburg (Bishop of), viii. 33
Samaria, iii. 41
Samson, iv. 92.

Sanctuary, xi. 54
Sandals (Calciamenta), iv. 4, 12,
13, 15, 26, x. 7

Saracens, i. 6, 16, iv. 10, 15, 79,

viii. 26, 27, 28, 47, 66, x. 43,
47, xi. 23

Sardanay (Sarnay), vii. 24
Saul, i. 19

Saxony, ii. 30, 31, iv. 45, 71, 76,

vi. 31, vii. 17, viii. 74, 90,

x. 10, 28, 41, xi. 18, 19, 46
Sayn (Count of), see Henry
Scales, viii. 77

Schism (Papal), ii. 18, vii. 49
Schism (Roman Empire), ii. 9,
30, iv. 71, v. 21, vi. 27, viii. 85,

ix. 51, x. 19, 23, xii. 40
Schism (Bishopric of Utrecht),

vii. 22

Schism (Treves), i. 40
Schmithausen, iii. 33
Scholars, i. 32, ii. 10, iii. 33, iv. 20,
74, 86, v. 4, 20, vi. 5, vii. 16,
24, 38, 41, viii. 77, ix. 20, 51
61, 65, x. 34, 44, xi. 55, 64
Schools, i. 32, 38, 40, v. 25, vi. 5,
vii. 16, 24, viii. 74, xi. 64


368


Index


Schoolmafter (Scholafticus), i.
32, 38, 40, ii. 7, 10, 16, iii. 6,
8,10, iv. 10, 26, 46, 49, 50, 62,
vi-4» 35 * v »- 3 1
Scholaftica (St.), i. 40, vi. 35
Schonau, i. 31, 40, ii. 33, iv. 48
vii. 30, 31, 37, ix. 17, 59
Schonberg, x. 18
Schulpforte, xi. 18
Scimenu, see Cheminon-l’Abbaye
Scodehart, x. 11
Sconinburg, see Schonberg
Scocia, see Ireland
Scotus (Prieft, Cologne), vi. 5
Scourging, i. 22, 40
Sea and ships, i. 40, iii. 21, iv.
10, 15, 100, vii. 38, 41, viii. 57,
63, 66, 91, ix. 13, x. 46, xi. 35
Sebaftian (St.), vii. 49
See, Apoftolic, i. 6
Seffelingen, v. 42
Seneca, iv. 27
Sens, v. 22
Sephadin, v. 37
Septia, see Ceuta
Septuagint, iii. 1
Sepulchre (Holy), v. 37
Sequences, i. 4, vii. 29, 30
Serfs, vii. 38

Serpents, iv. 32, x. 70, 71, 72,
xii. 18

Servants (Monks’), iv. 17
Severin’s (St.), Archbp., Cologne,
I. 40

Severin’s (St.) Ch., Liege, iv.

75, vii. 49, xi. 29
Severus (Bp. Lisbon), viii. 66
Seville, v. 21
Sewer, iii. 15
Sext, vii. 16
Sext, of Our Lady, i. 6
Sheep and Shepherds, i. 40,
iv. 62, viii. 75, xii. 33


Sheepskins, xii. 14, 15
Shoes, iv. 4, 7, 12, 13, 15, 26, 98,

vii. 38, viii. 96, x. 7, xii. 20
Shrove Tuesday, iv. 86, x. 53
Sibilia, see Seville

Siege, x. 19

Sigeberg (Siegburg), vi. 5
Sigeberg (Abbey), v. 13, vi. 4
Siger of Bonn, xii. 52
Siger (Monk, Hemmenrode), xi.
.4

Siger (Prior, Clairvaux), iii. 53,

viii. 49

Siger (Prieft), iv. 10

Sign of Cross, ii. 6, iii. 13, 14,

iv. 49, v. 27, vii. 17
Silence, i. 40
Silversmith, iii. 15
Silver Mine, x. 52

Simeon (St.), Ch., Treves, iv.

66, viii. 78, xi. 2
Simon (Abbot, Foigny), iii. 33
Simon de Montfort, v. 21, xii. 10
Simon (Laybrother, Aulne), iii.
33

Simon (Monk), ii. 30
Simon Magus, xi. 1
Singing, iv. 9

Siftappus of Cologne, v. 39
Sleeping in Church, ii. 29, 32,

33 . 34 . 35 . 36 , 37 . 38 ,

Sodom, iv. 73, 79, 92

Soeft, iii. 11, 29, 40, iv. 99,

v. 27, 34, 35, x - 32

Solar, iii. 8, 31, iv. 44, 100,
v. 44, vi. 5, 9, vii. 16, viii. 50,
xii. 5

Soldan, see Saladin.

Solomon, i. 2, 40, iv. 16, 22, 27,
28, 47, 57 > 59 * 73 * 9 2 , 93 *
vii., x. 3

Solomon (Monk, Hemmenrode),
xi. 13


A24


369


Index


Sophia (Abbess, Hovene), x. 16
Sophia (St.), Constantinople,
iv. 30, viii. 54
Sorcery, v. 2, 3, 4
Soul, i. 32, iv. 39, vii. 16
Speyer, iii. 14, iv. 65, vii. 11
Spindle, viii. 5
Spindle-tree, vii. 24
Springiersbach, iv. 89
Stalum, xii. 23
Stamheim, xi. 63
Stempel, xi. 45
Steinhard, iv. 88
Steinvelt, iii. 5, iv. 62, ix. 61
Stephen Harding, i. 1
Stephen (Canterbury), v. 22.
Stephen (Deacon, Corbeil), v. 22
Stephen (PrieSt), v. 22
Stephen (PrieSt of Chelles), v. 22
Stephen (of Vitry), i. 9
Steppo, xii. 36
Stole, xi. 25, 40
Stolgengaze (Stolckgasse), ix. 56
Storks, viii. 9, x. 58, 60
Strata Alta, see Hochstrasse,
Cologne

Strasburg (Argentina), iii. 16,
17, 20, xi. 37

Stromberg, ii. 1, ii. 30, iv. 64,
vii. 38, viii. 46, 91
Stromboli (Mons Vulcanus), xii.
9, I2 > 1 3

Stuben (Stupa), viii. 50, 54, see
Insula S. Nicolai
Sueder (Knight of Dinge), i. 18
Sueverbach, v. 29
Suicide, iii. 14, iv. 40, 41, 42, 43,
44,45,30.61.

Superbia, iv. 13
Supper (Lord’s), ix.i
Surplice, viii. 97
Susanna, iv. 92
Sutherhusen, x. 38


Swallows, x. 39
Sweating of image, vii. 2
Swine and Swineherds, iv. 4, 35
Sybodo (Knight), vii. 42
Syfrid of Runkel, ix. 5
Syfrid (Prieft, Hemmenrode),
9

Syfrid (Prieft, Heifterbach), vii.

39, xii. 34
Syna, viii. 84

Synod, ii. 7, 25, ix. 52, x. 35

Syon (Monastery, Friesland), xi. 30

Syria, 1. 47

Syward, xii. 8

Szere (Abbey), xi. 36

Taverns, iii. 9, 11, v. 32, 40,

vii. 3, viii. 53, x. 53, xi. 54
Tablets, xii. 9

Talking in Church, iv. 22
Tarquilinius (St.), x. 44
Tears (Grace of), i. 24, 35, ii.
18, 19, 20, 21, 22, iv. 30, viii.
11, 12, 13

Templars, iv. 10, viii. 47, 66,
xii. 57

Temporal power (of Bishops),

ii. 27

Thais (St.), ii. 1
Theban martyrs, viii. 65
Theft and thieves, i. 10, 29, 40,

iii. 19, 53, iv. 1, vi. 10, 24, 25,
33, viii. 73, ix. 7, x. 21

Theobald (Abbot, Schonau), i.
40

Theobald (Abbot, Eberbach), v.

1 7 > vi- 4

Theobald, Countof Champaigne,

viii. 31

Theobald (Monk, Heifterbach),

iv. 6

Theobald (Usurer, Paris), ii. 33
Theodoric of Bonn, xii. 52


370


Index


Theodoric Cancer, x. 67
Theodoric of Rulant, x. 12 (2),

xi. 24

Theodoric of Erinportze, vi. 27
Theodoric of Cellarium, vii. 51
Theodoric of Lureke, i. 35, vii.
21, ix. 2

Theodoric (Monk, Eberbach), ix.
54 .

Theodoric (Count in Wiede),
ix. 48, x. 53, xii. 5
Theodoric (Count of Are and Bp.

Utrecht), xii. 23
Theodoric (Bp., Cologne), vii.

40, viii. 46, ix, 10
Theodoric (Bp., Miinfter), vii. 3
Theodoric (Bp., Livonia), viii. 13,
80, xii. 23

Theodoric (a young Knight), vii.
28

Theodoric (Count in Wurme),ci.
42

Theodoric (Prior of Yesse), vii. 3
Theodoric (King of Goths),

xii. 13

Theodoric (Prieft, Groningen),
viii. 53

Theodoric of Soeft and Heifter-
bach, i. 21, iii. 11, 29, v. 27
Theophilus (Bp., Alexandria),
vi. 4. vii. 10

Thiemo (Knight of Soeft), v. 34
Tholosa, see Toulouse
Thomas (Apoftle), viii. 59
Thomas (Ch. in India), viii. 59
Thomas of Canterbury, vii. 4,
viii. 69, 70, x. 56
Thomas of Canterbury, Convent,
Treves, i. 42

Thomas (Monk, Heifterbach),
v. 22

Thomas (Monk, Hemmenrode),
v.51


Thomas Theologus, xi. 38
Thorinbus (Thorenbais), ix. 35
Thuin, iv. 54

Thiiringen, i. 27, 34, viii. 85
Tithes, x. 13

Toads, ii. 32, iv. 86, x. 67, 68,
69, xi. 39, xii. 18
Tolls, xi. 35

Tonsure, i. 7, 39, 40, iv. 51,

viii. 97

Toulouse, v. 21

Tournaments, ii. 12, vii. 38,
x. 11, xi. 19, xii. 15, 16, 17
Tours, viii. 77
Trade, viii. 57

Transubstantiation, ii. 5, ix. 33,
56,58

Trappe (La), vii. 9
Treasurer, vi. 14
Treasury (Church) pledged, ii.
31

Trent, vii. 58

Treves, i. 3, 23, 40, 42, iv. 66,
71, 89, v. 51, vi. 37, vii. 29,
36, 38, 39. 44, ™i. 51, 78,

ix. 54, x. 19, 29, 52, xi. 15, 46,
xii. 15

Trial by battle, iii. 18, ix. 49

Tricafter, v. 42

Trisch vii. 7

Troyes, v. 22, 23

Trudo (St.), vi. 31

Trump, xii. 58

Tulpetum, see Ziilpich

Tumour, vii. 38

Tun, iii. 49

Tuscia, ii. 27, vii. 49

Tuyciensis, see Deutz

Twente, iv. ii

Tyre, i. 40, iv. 2

Uda of Namur, ix. 31
Uda of Thorinbus, ix. 35


37 1


Index


Udellolt, xi. 31
Ulmen, iv. 30, x. 43
Ulrich of Cologne, viii. 85
Ulrich of Flasse, iv. 78
Ulrich (Abbot of Villers), xi. 31
Ulrich of Steinvelt, iv. 62
Ulrich of Luer, v. 22
Ulrich (Monk of Villers), iii. 33,

xi. 10

Uncinis (place in France), v. 22
Undlion, ii. 7, 15, iii. 23, iv. 6,

vii. 9, 56, xi. 21, 25
Urban II. (Pope), i. 1

Usury, ii. 7, 8, 31, 32, 33, 34,

iii. 52, v. 20, xi. 39, 40, 41, 42,

xii. 18, 24

Utrecht, i. 18, 38, 42, ii. 6, 7,

iv. 15, vii. 22, viii. 58, x. 21,

35. 39. 7*. *»• 23. 25, 58, 60.
xii. 23

Uzzah, ix. 53

Vagabonds, i. 3
Valdosian, see Waldensia n
Valerius (St.), Bp. of Tr&ves,

viii. 78

Vaucelles, vii. 22
Veldenze, vii. 44
Vendetta, viii. 26, xi. 56
Vengeance of God, vii. 2, 3, 7,
42, 44, viii. 26, 27, x. 45
Venice, x. 49
Vercellae, see Vaucelles
Verona, i. 48, v. 24
Veftments, vii. 20, ix. 52, 59,
x * 3

Viaticum, ii. 2, 7, 15, v. 8, 19,
vii. 56, viii. 45, ix. 49
Vicar, iii. 13, vii. 5
Viftor (St.), Abbey at Paris,

ii. 10, iv. 89, v. 22, vi. 12
Villers, i. 21, 35, ii. 19, 20, 25,

iii. 13,14, 33, iv. 31, 60, vi. 34,


j vii. 12, 22, 38, viii. 13, 63, 81,
! ix. 31, x. 71, xi. 10, 28, 50,
xii. 17, 30

Vincent (St.), viii. 66

Vines and vineyards, iv. 59, v. 43,

x. 13

Virgins (Eleven Thousand), viii.

85, 86, 87, 88, 89
Visions (of B.V.M.), vii. 3, 4, 5,
6, 7, 9, 11 and viii. passim
Visions (Book of), i. 33
Visitation, i. 1, iii. 30, iv. 24, 39,
vi. 20, vii. 21, 39
Vitaspatrum, iii. 9, 36, iv. 96,
vi. 35
Vitry, i. 9

Vitry-le-Franfois (Fitriacum),

xi. 61

Volckenrode (Abbey), viii. 85
Volmunftein, iv. 67, v. 4, 47,

vi. 4, viii. 15, 45, ix. 2, 67,

xii. 27

Vulcanus Mons., see Stromboli
Vultures, xi. 15
Wafers, vii. 3, ix. 11
Wagons, xi. 18, 22
Walburgis (St.), Ch. Hildesheim,

ix. 19

Walburgis, Mons. (Walberberg),
i. 17, 41, 42, v. 54, vi. 10,

vii. 21, viii. 3, 7, 45, ix. 19, 33,
65, x. 16, 50, xi. 31

Waldensian heresy, v. 20
Waleram, v. 3, 37, vii. 42
Walewan, i. 37

Walter (Abbot, Villers), ii. 19,
20, 21, 25, iii. 14, 33, vii. 22
Walter of Birbech, iii. 33, iv. 54,

v. 6, vii. 16,25.37.38
Walter of Milene, xii. 17
Walter (Clerk, Louvain), ii. 25
Walter (Dispensator), xi. 43
Walter (Bishop of Chalons), i. 1


37 2


Index


Walter (Knight, Endenich), xii. 5
Walter (Monk, Aulne), i. 6
Wandering Clergy, i. 3, 10
Wanebach, x. 52
Warner of Bonlant, viii. 54,

x. 19

Warner (Monk, Eberbach), vii. 54
Warner, (Prior, Hemmenrode),

xi. 3

Warner (Monk, Hemmenrode),
xi. 9

Waschart (Gerard), xi. 11, xii. 44
Waihing, ix. 26
Washing of feet, i. 35
Washing Basins in Cloisters, v.

28

Well, iii. 13
Werinbold, vi. 7
Westcupe (Wisdorf or West-
kotten), viii. 26

Westphalia, iv. 67, v. 47, vii. 24,
ix. 40

Wettin, see Witin.

Wheel (torture), ii. 6, x. 36,
xi. 54, 55.

Whispering, v. 29
Widrindisburg, ix. 5
Wida (Wied), iv. 76, ix. 48, 50
Wide (Witten), x. 53
Widekin, ix. 5

Wido (Abbot, Clairvaux), ii. 25
Wido (Abbot, Klaar-Kamp), xi. 30
Wido (Bp. and Cardinal), vi. 2,
ix. 51

Wied, see Theodoric
Wiger (Knight), xi. 23
Wiger (Monk, Villers), x. 23, 71,
xi. 28, xii. 17

Wilhelm (Abbot, St. Agatha),
v. 29

Wilhelm (Abbot, Clairvaux), iii.
S 3

Wilhelm (Abbot, Villers), ix. 31


Wilhelm (heretic goldsmith),
v. 22

Wilhelm II. Count of Jiilich,

xii. 5

Wilhelm III. (Count of Jiilich,
v. 21

Wilhelm (Bishop of Bourges),

ii. 28

Wilhelm of Helpenftein, vii. 7
Wilhelm of Liblar, ix. 36
Wilhelm (Novice, Heifterbach),
X. 63

Wilhelm (Monk, Heifterbach),
xii. 37

Wilhelm (Laybrother, Heifter-
bach), iv. 32

Wilhelm (Canon, Utrecht), iv. 15
Wilhelm (Subdeacon Poitou),
v. 22

Wilhelm (Prieft near Neuss),
^ 33

Wilhelm (Prieft, Clairvaux),
viii. 43

Wilhelm (Prieft, Stromberg),
viii. 46

Winandus of Elsloo, x. 2
Winandus (Monk, Heifterbach),
x. 2, 39

Winandus (Infirmarian), ix. 2
Winemar (of Aldindorp), vii. 38
Winendenburg, x. 41
Winric of Bonn, xi. 45
Wineseller, iii. 11
Wintere (Ober-Winter), iv. 22,
58, x. 59

Wiric (Laybrother, Hemmen¬
rode), ix. 63

Wiric (Knight of Girzene), viii.

83

Witbold, vii. 3

Witin (Visions of), v. 44

Wives of priefts, ii. 3, 28, 29,

iii. 13, 29, 41


373


INDEX


Wizinburg (Weissenburg), x. 20
Wolkinburg, xii. 5
Wolmar, i. 40

Wolves, vii. 45, x. 64, 65, 66
Worms, i. 40, ii. 9, 24
Wiirm, xi. 42

Xanten, ii. 7, iii. 21, v. 16, vii.
22, 23, x. 61

Ydid, see Idida
Yesse, see Essen

Ysenbard (Prior, Heifterbach),
v. 6


Ysenbard (Sacriftan, Hemmen-
rode), xi. 3, ii

Ysinburg (Caftle), v. 56, xi. 17

Zachariah, iv. 57, viii. 49, 59,
ix. 6, 26, 30

Zahringen (Ceringia), x. 23,
xii. 13

Zealand, vii. 38, 41

Zegenberg, vii. 7

Zinna, xi. 35

Ziilpich (Tulpetum), vi. 10,
vii. 56