MEMORIAL, qr BRIEF,

F 0 It THE

COMTE DE'CAGLIOSTRO,

DEFENDANT:

AGAINST THE

KING’S ATTORNEY- GENERAL^

P L A 1 N T / F F:

IN THE CAUSE OP THE

CARDINAL DE ROHAN,

COMTESSE D E L A MOT T. E, ...

AND OTHERS.

1 \

From the Fr-ench Or iG inal^ publiihed in
Paris, in February laflj

W 1 r H A M

INTRODUCTORY PREFACE.

By P A R K Y N S M A C M A H O N.

Monfieur (fe Cacliostro nc demamte cjuc TranquUlite, & Surety,

* I'Hofpiftlite les lul allure. T>

Lett re J t M. U C:mU it Vergemts^p*,^,

DUBLIN:

Printed for. L. White, P. Byrne, W. MKf.nrie, S ‘-
R. M a rchbank, J. Moor % „ a nd ]. Jones.


ii.&cCjLxrtvx.

PREFACE.

There is hardly an inftance upon record*
of a queftion fo intricate, fo loft as it were,
in a wiidernefs of complicated incidents as that
of the famous necklace, fuppofed to have been
bought of the very Jewellers of the Crown , for
the ufe of the Sovereign. And by whom ?
By a man of the firft rank both in temporal
and clerical dignities, By Prince Lours de
Rohan, a defcendant of one of the firft fami-
lies in France, whofe anceftors have had inde-
pendent principalities of their own in Britany.
Hinrfelf a Prince of the Roman Empire, in
right of his Bifhoprick of Strafburgh, Grand-
Almuner to his moil Chriftian Majefly, and a
Cardinal ; to crown the whole, a man poflefled
of livings and church preferments to the yearly
amount of 6o,cool. Sterling, befides a large
patrimony of his own.

Such is tlie perfon charged with the com-
ma ho n of a crime which would put even the
moll confummate depravity to the blufti. Virtue
and vice they fay have each their progreffive
degrees. No one can be all at once a wretch.
Thus far therefore I think that probabilities
militate ftrongly in favour of the Cardinal,
that the fads may do fo likewife, muft be the
wifti of all thofe who have at heart the dignity
of Man.

But

IV

PREFACE,

But my objcd is not at prefent to dive into
this iniquitous myftery. It is the Cardinal’s
pretended or real accomplices, if not rather his
feducers, who call up my attention.

The firft, who is involved in this affair, and
may, in all likelihood, prove the very contriver
of the whole Plot, is the Comteffc De la
Motte, This Lady’s defcent from Henry the
II. of France, by the baflard line, is eftablifhed
beyond contradidion ; but the obfcurity in
which ihe lived, before the benevolent hand of
the Marchionefs de Boulainviliierswas flreteh’d
out to her alliftance, was by no means favour-
able to the difplay of thofc noble fentiments
wiiich the world naturally looks for in perfons,
whofe birth fets them above the vulgar.
Brought up to the bufmefs of a mantua-maker,
Ihe early imbibed that fpirit of intrigue infe-
parable (! fpeak of Paris) from that occupa-
tion. The firft 1 can trace her to have carried
on, on her own account , is her intimacy with
one La Motte , Ay led in the memorial of the
Comtefle, an officer of Gendarms ; though in
fad he never rofe above the fituation of a pri-
vate in that corps, and who is now dubbed a
Comte , with as much right to that title, as
thoufands of our French vilitors here can pre- .
tend to that of Chevalier, Marquis, &c. &c.

The next in fucceffion, though he certainly
deferves to be mentioned firjl, is the celebrated
Comte de Cagliostro. The extraordinary
charader of that unaccountable being has too
long puzzled the inquifitive part of mankind,
(and few of us indeed can plead an exception),

V

PREFACE.

not to merit the immediate attention I pay to
him, in preference to the Comteffe. My in-
tention being to give, hereafter, a full account
of the whole tranfaCtion ; that Lady’s memo-
rial will have its turn next, together with
every particular concerning the Cardinal, and
the authenticity of my correfpondence will
enable me to do it in a full and fatisfaftory
manner, fo far as relates to plain matter of
fait.

Comte de Cagliostko leaves the public in
perfect darknefs ab-mt his birth and parents.
Hence fo many conjectures made by idle fpe-
culators. One of them, determined at all
events to give a father, at leaft, to the Comte,
has fixed upon the late Grand Matter of Malta,
Pinto. He gravely tells the world, that a
Maltefe Galley, captured, about 37 years ago,
a Turkifh pleafure- boat, with feveral young !
Ladies of the firlt diflindtion on board, one of
them exchanged hearts with the Grand Mafter,
who by his holy vow of celibacy, could make
of his fair capture any thing, but a lawful wife.
Some little time after the Grand Signior, by the^
interpofition of the French Court, obtained,,
that the Ladies lhould be returned to their dif- ;
confolate parents. They all fet off together,
not even the Grand Mijirefs excepted. The
latter could not eafily conceal her fiiame ; file
was brought to bed of a boy. Her father
enraged at this, though a very common acci-
dent, w'ould have defiroyed the fruit of hi
daughters unlawful amour; but file foun<
means to have the child put in a place of fa fit y

an

VI

PREFACE.

and foon after died by poifon or of a broken
heart. Thus runs the tale of the day.

But I am happy to have it in my power to
refute the above fi&ion, by an account of
Caglioftro's real birth. My Author is the
Courier de l’Europe of the 10th inftant.
A paper which, in point of French informa-
tion, I look upon as the only criterion of au-
thenticity.

The imperial family of the Comments have
long reigned independent over the Chriftian
Empire of Trebifond ; but, by procefsof time,
they became tributary to the Turks. From
that noble fource Comte deCaglioftro derives
his origin. This is now proved beyond any
difpute. He was born in the capital of that
empire, and is acknowledged to be the only
furviving fon of the Prince who, about 35
years ago, fway’d the precarious fceptre of
Trebifond. At that period, when Comte
Caglioftro was in, or near the third year of
his age, a revolution took place, the reigning
Prince his father was matfacred by the fedi-
tious, and himfelf by fome trufty friend to the
weaker party, carried to Medina, where the
Cherif had the unprejudiced generofity to have
him brought up in the religion of his Chriftian
parents.

Whether Comte de Caglioftro has thought
proper, from political reafons, to remain,
as it were, in a cloud, or adiuated by the
fpirit of a becoming pride, has difdained to
gratify the curiofity of a nation, where he has
aeen treated with fo much indignity : certain

it is, that his high defcent is no longer con-
tefted : but even circumftantially proved in his
memorial, wherein he recites, that the black
Have in his fervice, told him, of all things to
beware of the city of TrebiJond> and predicted
the misfortunes that were to befall him, after
his departure from Mecca.

CONTENTS.

J. ‘ ‘

Page

State of the ^ feflion , - 4

Confession of the Comte deCagliostro, 7

Copy of the Minijlerial Letters in Behalf
of ditto , - - - 21

Examination of Comte de Cagliojlro, - 33

Reflection on Madame de la Motte’s
Memorial. - - - 41

I

M E M O R I A L

FOR THE

COMTE DE CAGLIOSTRO.

I AM opprefled — accufed — defamed! — Have
I deferved this fate? — I confult with my con-
fidence, and there I find that peace which men
refufe me,

i have travelled much — I am known all
over Europe, and the greateft part of Africa

and Afia. 1 have, in every place, fhewn

myfelf a friend to my fellow-creatures.

My knowledge, my time, my fortune, have
conftantly been employed in adminiliering
comfort to the unfortunate. I have ftudied,
pradlifed phyfic; but never difgraced that no-
bleft and moft comforting icience by any lu-
crative fpeculations. Yielding to a fecret. an
irrefiftibte impulfe, I flew to the relief of
fuffering humanity, and thus became a pby-
fician.

*

Riel)

B

( 2 )

Rich enough to move eafy within that
fphere of benevolence which I had traced out
for myfelf, I found means to prefer ve my in-
dependence by giving, but never receivings
my delicacy was fuch, that l refufcd rewards,

even from the hands of Sovereigns. The

wealthy I have alii fled with remedies and ad-
vice — to the poor I have given both money

and remedies. Debts I never contracted ;

in my morals 1 am chafte, nay, I will fay it,
auftere ; I never gave offence to any one,
either in my words, deeds, or writings. The
injuries offered to me i have freely forgiven ;
the good I have done, was done in filence.
A fi ranger every- where, I have every- where
fulfilled the duties of a good citizen — every-
where i have refpe&ed the religion, the laws,

and government. Such is the hiftory of mv

life.

Settled for thefe fix years among! a fen-
fible, generous, and hofpitable people, f
thought to have found at lafi a country that
I could adopt for my own. — I already enjoyed
the flattering profpeCt of doing good to my
new countrymen : — A fudden clap of thunder
has difpelled the fond illufion, and I find my-
felf entombed within the dungeon of the Ba-
flile. — My wife, too ! the moft amiable, the
moft virtuous of women, has been dragged
into the fame abyfs. — The thicker! walls, bolts
without number, part her from me. — She la-
ments her fate, and [ cannot hear her moans !
— If 1 interrogate my gaolers, they are filent.
Alas! perhaps file is no more! How could

her

{ 3 )

her tender frame refill to fuch fufferings ?
Hath it been poflible for her to live fix months
in a place, where man himfdf has occafion
for all his ftrength, all his fortitude, all his
refignation, to ftruggle againft defpair? — But
I entertain the reader with my own woes, for-
getting that I am doomed to enter into my
juftification.

I have been apprehended and call into a
prilbn ! — What crjme have I committed ? —
What is the charge brought againftme? —
Who is my accufer ? — is there any witnefs to
depofe againft me? — I am completely in the
dark. — Even the nature of the complaint, on
which the warrant is grounded, is not known
to me; and yet they will have me to juftify
tnyfelf! — How can I ward of!' a blow ’ll ruck
by an invifible hand ? — I am anfwered, that
the criminal law here will have it fo. — I am
filent, and with an aching heart I humbly fub-
mit to a law fo fevere, and fo alarming to im-
peached innocence.

All I can do. therefore, is to furmife wdiat
may be the nature of the charge. If I con-
jecture right, I fhail have combated againft
mere chimeras; but I lhall have fpoken in
favour of truth, and given to the fenfible part
of the public, an opportunity of fetting a pro-
per value on the libels publithed againft a
wretched man, at the very time that he lingers
in captivity, threatened with the two-edged
fvvord of juftice and power.

B 2

State

( + )

State ok the Question.

That Me firs. Boh me r and Ba flanges have
delivered, to the Cardinal de Rohan, a neck-

lace valued at 1,600,000 livres, is a fa ft which
feems now fully eflablifhed.

It feems equally certain, that the Cardinal
has declared to the jewellers, that he adted
only as an agent in the bufincfs ; that the real
purehafer was the Queen; and that, to this
eftedt, he produced a written inft rumen t, re-
citing the terms under which the pure hale was
to be made, and having, in the margin, thefe
words : 4 Bon — bon — approuve Marie — An-

“ to'/Jette de France.”

Her Majefty has declared, that “ fhe Had
“ never given any orders for the purchafe of
“ the necklace; that fhe never had approved
“ of the fuppofed terms, and that Hie never
“ received the necklace.”

it is then beyond difpute, that the reality
of a mifdemeanour is fully eflablifhed — but
of what nature is the offence?

Common fenfe tells me, and my counfel’s
opinion confirms it, that there is no material
forgery in the cafe; not the leaft pain has been
taken to imitate the Queen’s hand-writing ;
nay the fignature, fubferibed to the paper, by
which the jewellers have been deceived, is
not, they fay, that which her Majefty ufually
aflumes.

What

( 5 )

What then muli it be called? — 4 fuppojiii-
tious fignaturc , with an intent to defraud the
jewellers and entice them to deliver up, upon
trull, a trinket of great value, which, per-
haps, they would not .have confen ted to, had
they known that it was intended for any other
perfon bat the Queen herfelh

What have the laws decreed againtl this
crime? What punilhment is provided to pu
nifh the abufe of a facred name? 1 know
not, nor does it concern me to be informed of
it : all 1 have to do in this affair, is to afk jul-
tice for myfelf, and pardon for the offender. —
Submilfive innocence hath perhaps a right to
hold this language.

But who is the offender ?

Did Cardinal de Rohan know that the fig-
nature was an impofition ? — Did he know,
that the Opeen had, in fad, given no order
concerning the necklace? — Did he know, in
fine, that the necklace was not to be delivered
to the Queen ?

On the very contrary : has he not been the
innocent accomplice in a fraud, to which he
was the firftto fall a vidim ? Did bethink, —
had he not a right to believe, that he had been
chofen as negotiator in a tranfadion accept-
able to the Oueen, and which her Majefty
wiflied, for a time, to be kept fecret.

Involved, 1 know' not how, in fuch mate-
rial concerns, I fball not degrade in this cir-
cumflance, the title of the friend of mankind ,
which has at times been conferred upon me,
perhaps not unworthily; I {hall expofe my

innocence

( « )

innocence without declaring for any party.
Traduced in the moft unaccountable manner
by a woman whom I have never injured, I moft
ftncerely with that fhe may fully clear herfelf.
Happy if juftice can find no more than one
perfon guilty in this affair !

The Cardinal pretends, that he has been
impofed upon by the Comtefie de la Motte.
The latter has, in the greateft hurry, and be-
fore any decree had been obtained, publifhed
a memorial in which fhe charges me with be-
ing a fliarper — a forcerer — a thief, and name-
ly, that i had laid, and carried into execu-
tion, a plan for ruining Cardinal de Rohan ;
and alfo that I had fecreted the necklace, de-
pofited with me, in order to add fo much
more to the hidden treaj tires of an unexampled
fortune.

Such are, in a few words, the imputations
laid to my charge. Their being inferted in
a miniftcrial interrogatory, has brought me
and my wife to the dungeons of the Baftile :
and their having been repeated in a printed
memorial with the moft aggravating eircum-
ftances, invented at leifure, is tbecaufeof my
having been apprehended by virtue of a war-
rant granted for that purpofe.

1 fhall refute, fince I am compelled tp do
it, thofe imputations, which, in any other
circumftance, 1 would have only treated with
contempt. But before 1 go any further, I
muft fhew rayfelf what i really am. It is time
the world fhould know who is that Comte de
Cagliostro, concerning whom fo many ab-

furd

( 7 )

Ami tales have been related. As long as I
have been permitted to remain in peaceful
obfcurity, 1 have conftantly refufed to fatisfy
the curiolity of the public ■, now, that 1 dwell
in captivity; now, that the laws call me to an
account of my adlions — i lhall lpeak. All f
know of myfeif 1 lhall relate with candor, and
perhaps the hilfory of my life will not be the
molt unimportant article of my juflification.

The Confession of Comte de Cagliostro.

t

I cannot fpeak pofitively as to the plaice of
my nativity, nor to the parents who gave me
birth. From various circumltances of my life
1 have conceived fome doubts, in which the
reader perhaps will join with me. But 1 re-
peat it : all my enquiries have ended only in
giving me fome great notions, it is true, but
altogether vague and uncertain concerning my
family.

I fpent the years of my childhood in the
city of Medina in Arabia. There I was
brought up under the name of Acharat, which
I preferved during my progrefs thro’ Africa
and Ada. I had my apartments in the palace
of the Muphti Salahaym. It is needlefs to
add, that the Muphti is the chief of the
Mahometan Religion, and that his couftant
refidence is at Medina.

I recolledt perfectly that I had then four
perfons in my lervice ; a governor, between
55 and 6o years of age, whofe name was Al-
thotas, and three fervants, a white one who

attended

attended me as valet-de-chambre, and two
blacks, one of whom was condantly about me
night and day.

My governor always told me that I had been
left an orphan, when only three months old,
that my parents were chridians, and nobly
born ; but he left me abfolutely in the dark,
about their names and the place of my nati-
vity : a few words which he drop’d by chance,
have induced me to fufpedt that I was born
at Malta; but this circumftance I never have
been able to afcertain.

ALTHQTAS, whofe name I cannot fpeak
without the tendered emotion, treated me
with great care and all the afR diion of a father
he thought it a pleafure to improve the dif-
poftion which I difcovered for the fcicnces,
I may truly fay, that he knew them all, from
the mod abdrufe down to thofc of mere
amufement. My greateft progrefs was in the
dudy of Botany and Phyfic,

By him I was taught to worth ip God, to
love and affid my neighbours, to refpedi, every
where, religion and the laws.

We both d re fled like muffulmen, and con-
form’d outwardly to the mode of Mahometan
worfhip ; but the true religion was imprinted
in our hearts.

The Muphti, who vif ted me often, always
treated me with great goodnefs, and feem’d
to entertain the highed regard for my gover-
nor. The latter indru&ed me in mod of the
eadern languages. He would often converfe
with me, on the pyramids of Bgypt ; on thofe
vad fubterraneous caves dug out by the ancient

Egyptians,

f

( 9 )

Egyptians, to be made the repofitory of human
knowledge, and fheltcr the precious truft from
the injuries of fucceeding times. „

J was now in my twelfth year. The defire
of travelling, and of being an eye-witnefs of
the wonders which he fpoke of, grew fo ftrong
upon me, that Medina and my youthful fports
there, loft all the allurements I had found in
them before.

At laft the day came, when Althotas ap-
prifed me that we were going to enter upon
our travels. A caravan was by him prepared,
and we fet out after having taken our leave of
the Muphti, who was pleafed to exprefs his
concern at our departure, in the moft obliging
manner.

On our arrival at Mecca, we alighted at the
palace of the Cherif, who is the Sovereign of
Mecca, and of all Arabia, and always cbofen
from amongft the defeendants of Mahomet.

1 here alter’d my drefs from a fimple, which
I had worn hitherto, to a more fplendid one.
On the third day after our arrival, I was, by
my governor, prefen ted to the Cherif, who
honour’d me with the moft endearing carefles.
At fight of this prince, my fenfes experienced
a fudden emotion, which it is not in the power
of words to exprefs ; my eyes drop'd the moft
delicious tears l ever- filed in my life. His 1
perceived he could hardly contain.

This is a period of my life which it is im-
poffible for me to recall to mind, without being
deeply affeded at the recoil edion.

I remained

i

( IO )

1 remained at Mecca for the fpace of three
years ; not one day patted, without my being
admitted to the Sovereign’s prefence, and
every hour increafed his attachment, and
added to my gratitude. I fometimes furprized
his eyes ri vetted upon me, and then looking
up to heaven, with every expreftion of pity and
commiferation. Thoughtful 1 would go from
him, a prey to an ever fruitlefs euriofity. I
dared not afk any queftion of my governor,
who always rebuked me with great fever ity,
as if it had been a crime in me to with for
fome information concerning my parents, and
the place where I was born.

At night, I would converfe with the black,
who flept in my apartment, but I attempted
in vain to get the fccret from him. If I
chanced to talk about my parents, be would
turn a deaf ear to my queftions. One night,
that J was more preifing than ufual, he told
me that if ever I fhould leave Mecca, f was
threatened with the greateft misfortunes, but
above all, bid me beware of the city of
Trebifond.

My inclination to travel got the belter of
his forebodings. — I was tired with the unifor-
mity of the life 1 led at the Cherif’s court.

One day as I was alone, the prince entered
my apartment ; fo great a favour firuck me
with amazement; he {train’d me to his bofom
with more than ufual tendernefs, bid me never
ceafe to adore the Almighty, telling me that
as long as I fhould pertttt in ferving God
faithfully, I fhould at ! aft be happy, and come

to

C 11 )

to the knowledge of my real defiiny ; then he
added, bedewing my cheeks with tears, —
— “• adieu, thou nature’s unfortunate child.” —
Thefe words, and the affecting manner in
which he delivered them, will for ever remain
imprinted in my memory.

This was our laft interview. The caravan
waited only for me, I fet off, and quitted
Mecca never to re-enter it more.

I began the courfe of my travels by vifiting
Egypt. I inlpeCted tliofe celebrated pyramids,
which, to the eye of a fuperficial obferver,
only prefent an enormous alfemblage of mar-
ble and granite. I got acquainted with the
minillers of the different temples, who had the
complaifance to introduce me into fuch places,
as no common traveller ever entered before.

I next fpent three years in my progrefs
through the principal kingdoms of Africa, and
Alia.

It is not here the place to give the reader
an account of the obfervations 1 have been
able to make, in the courfe of my travels; nor
of the truly fingular adventures that befell me.
This part of the hiftory of my life will come
at a more favourable opportunity.

As the care of clearing my character is the
only thing that can now engrofs my attention,
I lhall confine myfelf to my travels in Europe.
I fhall give the names of thofe who have known
me, and it will be then an eafy matter for my
well- withers, to come at the truth of mod of
the fads which I am about to relate.

Accompanied

( 12 )

Accompanied by my Governor and the three
attendants who continued in my fervicc, I ar-
rived, in the year 1766, at the bland Rhodes;
and there embarked on board a French fhip
bound to Malta,

Notwithftanding the general rule, by which
all vctfels, coming from the Levant, are obliged
to perform quarantine, I obtained on the fe-
cond day leave togoafhore. The Grand Ma-
tter Pinto gave us apartments in his palace, and
I pe-rfe&ly recoiled!, that mine were near the
laboratory.

The fir ft thing the Grand- mailer was pica fed
to do, was to requeil the Chevalier D’ Aquino,
of the princely houfe of Caramanica, to bear
me company, and do me the honours of the
ifland.

Here, for the firtt time, I attorned the Eu-
ropean drefs, and with it the name of Comte
de Cagliottro, nor was it a fmall matter of fur- 1
prife for me, to fee my Governor appear in a
clerical drefs, and with the inlignia of the or-
der of Malta.

Chevalier D’ Aquino introduced me to the
acquaintance of the chiefs, or as they are called,
Grand Croix de l’ordre ; I remember that
I dined at the table of the Bailli de Rohan,
the now reigning Grand- matter. How' far it
was then from me to imagine that, 20 years
after that period, I fhould be apprehended
and dragged to the Baftile, for being ho-
noured with the friend fhip of a prince of that
name !

I have

( *3 )

I have every reafon to believe, that the
Grand- matter Pinto was acquainted with my
real origin. He often fpoke to me of the
Cberif, and mentioned the city of TrcbiJ'ond ;
but never would confent to enter into further
particulars on the fubje£t.

Meanwhile he treated me with the utmoft
diftindlion, and affured me of a very rapid pre-
ferment if I would confent to take the crofs.
But Hill my tafte for travelling and the predo-
minant delire of pra£tifing phyfic, induced me
to decline offers, equally generous as they were
honourable.

It was in the ifiand of Malta, that I had the
misfortune of lofing my beft friend and m after,
the wifett as the moil learned of mankind, the
venerable Althotas : in his laft moments, grafp-
ing my hand, he faid to me with an almofl
expiring voice : “ my fon, keep for ever before
your eyes the fear of God, and the love of
your fellow- creatures ; you will foon be con-
vinced by experience of the truth of what you
have been taught by me.”

The fpot where I had parted for ever from
the friend, who had been as a father to me,
foon became odious. I begged leave of the
Grand- matter to quit the ifiand, in order to tra-
vel over Europe; he contented not without re-
luctance, and he made me promife that I fbould
return again to Malta. The Chevalier D Aquino
was lb obliging as to take upon him the trou-
ble of accompanying me, and of fupplying my
wants during our journey.

Ifet

( H )

I fet out with that gentleman. Our firft
trip was to Sicily, where the knight introduced
me to the nobility of that country. From
thence we went over the different i Hands of
the Archipelago. And, after having once
more failed over the Mediterranean, we put
fafc into Naples, the birth-place of my com-
panion.

The Chevalier, on account of his own af-
fairs, having been obliged to undertake fome
private voyages, T proceeded alone to Rome,
being provided with a letter of credit upon the
banking houfe of the Sieur Bellone.

Jn the capital of the chriftian world, I re-
folvedupon keeping the ftri&eft incognito. One
morning, as I was (but up in my apartment,
endeavouring to improve myfelf in the Italian
language, my va!et-de-chambre introduced to
me the fecretary of Cardinal Urfini, whofe bu-
finefs was to requeft I would wait on his Emi-
nence; I repaired immediately to his palace.
The Cardinal received me with the molt flat-
tering civility, invited me often to his table,
and procured me the acquaintance of feveral
Cardinals and Roman Princes, namely, amongft
the reft, Cardinals York and Ganganelli, who
was afterwards Pope Clement XIV. Pope
Rezzonico, who then filled the papal chair,
having exprefted a defire of feeing me, 1 had
the honour of conferring repeatedly with his
Holinefs.

1 was then (1770) in my 22d year. Fortune
procured me the acquaintance of a young lady
of quality, Serafim Felicbiani ; flic was hardly

out

( *5 )

out of her infancy, her dawning charms kindled
in my bofom a flame, which fixteen years mar-
riage have only ferved toftrengthen. It is that
unfortunate woman, whom neither her vir-
tues, her innocence, her quality of ftranger
could fave from the hard fh ip of a captivity as
cruel, as it is unmerited.

Having neither time, or inclination to write
a voluminous work, I fhall not enter minutely
into the particulars of my travels through all
the kingdoms of Europe; I fhall only mention
thofe perfons to whom I have been known.
Moft of them are (fill in being, their teftimo-
ny I challenge aloud. Let them declare whe-
ther I was ever guilty of any aCtion difgrace-
ful to a man of honour. Let them fay whe-
ther I have at any time fued for a favour; if
ever I have courted the protection of thofe
Sovereigns, who were defirous of feeing me ;
let them declare in fine, whether 1 have at any
time, in any place, done more, than cure the
fick gratis, and aflift the indigent.

The perfons, whom I have been mofl known
to, are,

In Spain.

Duke D’Alba, his fon Duke de Vefcard,
Comte de Prelata, Duke of Medinaceli, Comte
de Riglas, a relation of the Comte D’Aranda,
his Catholic Majefty’s AmbafTador at the Court
of France.

Comte Sanvincenti, who introduced me at
court. My Banker at Liibon was Anfelmola
Cruce.

In London.

t

The Nobility, and the People.

In Holland.

The Duke of Brunfwick, to whom I had
the honour to be introduced.

In Courland.

The prcfent reigning Duke and Dijchefs.
All the courts in Germany.

At Petersburgh.

Prince Potenebin, Mr. Narifcin, General
Gelacin, the General of the Coffacs, General
Medecino, Chevalier De Corberon, the French
charge d’affaires at that Court,

In Poland.

Countefs Comcefka, Comte Gevufki, the

Princefs of , now Princefs of Naf-

fau, & c-

( n )

I fhall here obferve that, from a defire of
not being known, l have often travelled un-
der different names ; I fucceflively affumed
thofe of, Comte Slarat, Comte Fenix, Mar-
quis D’Anna. But the name by which I am
mod generally known in Europe, is that of
Comte de Caglioflro.

1 arrived at Strafburgh on the 19th of Sep-
tember, 1780, and, a few day 9 after, being
met by Comte Gavufki, who knew me again,
1 was forced to give way to the earneft felici-
tations of the inhabitants, and of all the Al-
facian nobility, to make my knowledge' in
phyfics ufeful to the public. Amongft the
acquaintances I had in that city are the Mar-
fiial de Contades, Marquis de la Salle, Barons
Fraxilande, Del’Or, Vorminfer, and Diederick,
Princefs Chridina, and others.

All thofe who have known me at Strafburgh,
are acquainted with my conduit there, and my
occupations. If I have been libelled by feme
obfeure fcribblers, the public newfpapers and
feme equitable writers have done me juftice.
I fhall refer the reader to the valuable work
intituled Letters fur la Suijfc. Vol. I. p. 5.
where the refpe£table author pays a due ho-
mage to truth.- — Let the re&ors of the diffe-
rent parifhes be confulted; they will declare
the good 1 have done to their poor. The
Corps of Artillery, and the other regiments
then garrifened at Strafburgh, will alfo vouch
to the number of foldiers cured by me.

Afk

C

( i8 )

Afk the inn- keepers; they will tell you if
their houfes, their hotels, &c. could fuffice to
the concourfe of Grangers who reforted to
Strafburgh on my account

The apothecary whom I employed, will tef-
tify to the quantity of medicines which I pre-
feribed for the indigent, and always payed for,
ready money.

The keepers of the different gaols know
how 1 have behaved towards the poor prifon-
ers, and the number of thofe I have releafed
from confinement,

I appeal to the principal men of that city,
to the magiftrates, to the public at large ; let
them declare whether I ever gave offence ; and
whether, in all my tranfa&ions, a Angle deed
of mine could be reprobated as contrary to the
laws, to morality, to religion.

If, ever fince my arrival in France, I have
offepded any one, let the injured fpeak, and
rife up in judgment againft me — I do not mean
to become my own panegyrift. I have done
good, becaufe it is my duty. Yet what is in
the end my reward for all the fervices I have
done to the French nation? in the bitternefs
of woe fhall I fpeak it ? Libels, and the Bas-
tile.

I had been at Strafburgh near a twelve-
month, when one evening, entering my houfe,

1 met there, watting for my return, Chevalier
d' Aquino. My furprife, the reader will eafily
guefs, muff have been of the agreeable kind,
fince this was the very perfon who had accom-
panied me from Malta to Naples, and who,

hearing

( r 9 )

hearing of ray refidence at Strafburgh, was
come there for no other pur pole than that of
ttrengthening the bonds of our mutual friend-
fhip.

The Chevalier has been in company with
the heads of the city, to whom he may have
given an account of what he knew of me
at Malta, and of the very flattering diftinc-
tion with which I had been treated by theGrand
Matter.

Some little time after my arrival at Straf-
burgh, Cardinal de Rohan had fignified to me
by Baron de Millinens, his Matter of the
Hounds, that he wifhed to be acquainted with
me. As long as I fuppofed the Prince aduated
by mere curiofity, i refufed to gratify it; but,
having been informed foon after, that he was
attacked with an afthma, and defired to con-
fult with me, 1 repaired inftantly to the epif-
copal palace. I gave him my opinion con-
cerning his complaint; he feemed fatisfied,
and requefted I would call upon him from time
to time.

In the courfe of the year 178 1, the Cardi-
nal honoured me with a vifit, in order to con-
fu It with me about the ilinefs of Prince Sou-
bife, who was afflided with a mortification,
and I had been fo fortunate as to cure the Se-
cretary of the Marquis de la Salle, of a fimilar
diforder, after he had been given up by the
phyficians. I a ll<ed fome queflions about the
Prince; but the Cardinal, inftead of anfwer-
ing, earneftly entreated me to accompany him
to Paris. He pretted me with fo much polite-

C 2 nefs.

C 20 )

nefs, that it was not poffible for . me to refufe.
I therefore took my departure, after having
given proper directions to the furgeon and to
my friends, that the neceifitous, and the pa-
tients i had under my care, might not fuffer
by my abfence.

We got to Paris, and the Cardinal would
have carried me directly to the Prince ; but
this 1 declined, telling the Cardinal that, be-
ing determined to have no manner of dif-
*, pute with the faculty, I fhould noL fee the
Prince till his phyficians had declared him paft
all cure. The Cardinal obligingly complied,
and on his return told me, that the faculty
had declared the Prince to be on the mending
pace. I then told the Cardinal, that 1 was re-
iolved not to fee the patient, being unwilling
to reap the glory of a cure, which could not
be afcribed to me,

My arrival in the capital being known pub-
licly, fo many perfons came to confult with
me, that during the thirteen days 1 {laid in
Paris, my whole time was taken up in vifiting
patients every day, from five in the morning
till midnight.

I employed an apothecary ; but I diflributed,
at my own expence, more medicines than he
fold ; for a confirmation of what I here ad-
vance, I appeal to thofe who had occafion to
apply to me. If there can be found a fin'gle
per fon who can fay with truth, that 1 have
ever been prevailed upon to accept of any
gratuity, either in money or prefents, 1 con-
fent to be deemed unworthy of any confi-
dence.

Prince

/

V

21 )

Prince Louis (the Cardinal) carried me back
as far as Saverne ; where, after many thanks,
he defiled me to call upon him as often as I
could. We parted, and 1 returned immedi-
ately to Strafburgh, where I refumed my ufual
occupations. What good 1 did gave rife
to various libels, in which I was ftyled Anti-
chrift — the wandering Jew — the man of 1400
yearso!d,&c. Unable to bear fo much illufage,
1 was refolved to leave the place. Several let-
ters, which the King's Miniflers were pleafed
to write on my account, made me alter my
mind. I think it is very important to myfuit,
to lay before my judge and the public thofe re-
commendations, which are the more honour-
able that I had never folicited thofe teftimo-
nies, either diredfly or indiredtly.

LETTER I.

Written by Monfieur le Comte de Vergennes,
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs , to
Monfieur Gerard, Pretor of Strafburgh.

Vcrf; il!e\s 1 3th March, 1783

Comte de Cagliosi RO, Monfieur, is not
perfonally known to me ; but common report,
ever fince he fettled at Strafburgh, is fo very
much in his favour, that humanity requires
he fhould find there both regard and tranquil-
lity. His being a ftranger, and the good which
he is faid to have done, is a double title which
authorifes me to recommend him to you, and

to

( 22 )

to the magift rates over whom you prefid e.
Monfieur de Caglioftro only afks for peace
andfecurity. Thefe are infured to him by
the laws of hofpitality ; and, acquainted as
I am with your natural difpofuions, I am
fully perfuaded you will eagerly maintain him
in the enjoyment of both, as well as of all other
advantages which he may perfonally deferve.

I have the honour, &c,

(Signed)

DE VERGENNES.

L E T T E R II.

From the Marquis de Mjrominil, Keeper of
the Seal , to the fame. *

S I R,

Versailles, March 15, 1783,

THE Comte de Caglioftro has zealouily em-
ployed his time, fince he has fettled in Straf-
burgh, in relieving the poor and neceflitous, '
and, to my knowledge, that foreigner has, in
feveral inftances, adted witti that humanity
which makes him worthy of a peculiar pro-
tection. I beg you will as far as concerns you
and the magiftrates, whofe chief you are, pro-
cure him all that fupportand tranquillity which
every ftranger ought to enjoy within his Ma-
jefty’s dominions, efpecially when he makes
himfelf ufeful to the nation.

I am, &c.

(Signed)

MJROMINIL.

LET-

( 23 )

LETTER III.

From the Marquis ds Segur to the Marquis
de la Salle.

Same date.

THE good conduct which I am well allured
Comte Caglioftro has fupported in Strafburgh,
the very laudable employ he makes in that city
of his knowledge and abilities, and the re-
peated proofs of his humanity there to the in-
dividuals labouring under various complaints,
who had recourfe to him, entitle that foreigner
to the prote&ion of Government. The King
gives you charge to fee not only that he be not
molefted at Strafburgh, whenever he thinks fit
to return to that city, but even that he may
be treated with that regard which he deferves,
for the good he does to the diftrefled.

(Signed)

SEGUR.

• It is on the faith of thofe letters, and of the
Monarch’s difpofition towards me, that I fondly
confidered France as the laft ftage of my tra-
vels. What reafon had I to imagine, that,
two years after, it would be my fate to claim —
but to claim in vain, for myfelf and for my
unfortunate wife, thofe facred rights of huma-
nity, fo folemnly acknowledged, fo nobly ex-
preffed in the letters written in his Majefiy’s
name !

The tranquillity which the minifterial letters
procured me was but of a tranfient nature.

Perfecuted

C 24 )

*

Perfecuted by a fet of men who, for a long
time, had witneffed my fucccfs with an eye of
diffatisfadion, 1 determined to leave Strafburgh,
fully refolved not to expofe myfeifin future to
the malevolence of envy.

Such was the Rate of my mind, when I re-
ceived a letter from the Chevalier D’ Aquino,
which informed me that he was taken dan-
geroufly ill. J fet off immediately ; but, not-
withfUnding the utmoli expedit|pn,- I reached
Naples only time enough to receive the laft
farewell of my unfortunate friend.

Soon after- my arrival at ' Naples, I was met
by the Spanifh Ambaffador, and others, who
had known me before. Finding myfelf teazed
again to refume the pra&ice of phytic, I refolv-
ed to take a tour to England ; to this effedi,
I croffed the fouthern parts of France, and
arrived at Bourdeaux on the 8th of November,
1783.

I went to the play, where 1 was difcovercd
by an officer of Cavalry. The latter having
informed the Jurats who I was, one of them,
Chevalier Roland, in the name of his colleagues
in office, offered me and my wife a feat in their
box, any time 1 fhould think proper to vifit
the play-houfe. The Jurats, and the inhabi-
tants having given me the moft difhnguifhed
reception, and requeued me to give up my
time to theaflifiance of the fick and infirm, as
I had before done at Strafburgh, 1 fuffered
myfelf to be prevailed upon, and began to give
advice at home, and difiribute amongft the poor
remedies and pecuniary fupplies. Such was

the

( *5 )

the concourfe of people, that 1 found myfelf
obliged to folicit the Jurats to let me have a
military guard, that my houfe might be kept
in due order.

It was here that I had the honour of being
introduced to the Marefchal de Mouchi, the
Comte de Fumel, Vifcomte du Hamel, and
other perfons of credit, who will, if required,
bear teflimony to the manner in which 1 con-
ducted myfelr'-.during my rtay at Bourdcaux.

At the end of eleven months, finding myfelf
haraffed as 1 had been at Strafburgh, 1 left
Bourdeaux, and reached Lyons the latter end
of October, 1784. After flaying there only
three months, I let out for Paris,, where I ar-
rived on the 30th of January, 1783. I took
up my refidence at one of the ready-furnifhed
hotels of the Palais-Royal, and, fomc days
after, removed to a houfe I had hired in
the Rue St. Claude, near the Boulevard.

The firft flep 1 took was to fignify to my
acquaintance, that i wifhed to live in quiet
privacy, and that I was refolved not to prac-
tife phyfic any longer ; 1 have kept my word,
and have obftinately perfifled in rejecting
all felicitations to the contrary.

Prince Louis has honoured me with occa-
fional vifits, and I remember that he once offer-
ed to introduce me to a lady named Valois
de la Mottk, on the following occafion.

“ The Queen,” faid the Cardinal to, me,
“ is a prey to the deeped melancholy, on ac-
count of a predidtion that fhe is to die in child-
bed. It would be the higheft fatisfadtion to me

if

/

( 26 )

if I could, by any means, undeceive her, and re-
ftore her peace of mind. Madame de Valois
is every day with her Majefty : you cannot
oblige me more, if the former fliould afk your
opinion, than by telling her that the Qpeen
will be fafely brought to bed of a Prince.”

To this propofal J freely affented ; the more
readily, that, whilft I obliged the Cardinal, I
had the profpeCt of contributing indirectly to
the prefervation of the Queen’s health.

The next day I waited on the Prince at his
houfe, where I found the ComtefTe de la Motte >
who, after having faid many civil things to me,
opened the bufmefs in the following words :

“ I am acquainted with a lady of great
diftindlon at Verfailles, who has been fore-
warned that fhe and another lady were to die
in child-bed. The prediction hath already
been accompli fhed on one of them •> and the
furvivor waits, in the utmoft uneafinefs, the
fatal minute. If you know the truth of what
will happen, or if you think it poflible to find
it out, I fhall repair to Verfailles to-morrow,
and make my report to the perfon concerned,
who,” added the ComtefTe, “ is the Qpeen
herfelf.”

My anfwer to Madame de la Motte was,
that all predictions were mere nonfenfe ; that,
meanwhile, fhe might tell the lady to recom-
mend herfelf to Divine protection that her
firft lying-in had been fortunate, and that her
approaching one would prove equally fo.

The ComtefTe did not feem fatisfied with

the

C 27 )

the anfwer, but infifled upon having Tome
more politive affu ranee.

I then recollected the promife I had made to
the Cardinal. 1 afTumed a ferious counte-
nance, and told the lady, with all the gravity
I could muiter, “ You know. Madam, that
I am an adept in the fcience of nature, as a
phyfician ; nor am I without knowledge of
fome of the properties contained in the ani-
mal magnet tfm, My opinion is, that a being
perfectly innocent may, in this cafe, operate
more powerfully than any other. Therefore,
if you would know the truth, the firft thing
you have to do is, to find out that innocent
creature,’’

“ If you want no more,” replied
tefle, “ I have a niece of that very defeription.
— I (hall bring her with me to-morrow. 1 ' - ■

I figured to myfelf that this niece, fo per-
fettly innocent , was a child not above fix years
old ; 1 leave you to judge of my furprife-, when
the next morning I met at the Prince’s a grown
lady about fifteen years of age, whom the
Comte fie p re fen ted to me as the very innocent
creature, of whom the had fpoken the preceding
day. 1 had occafion to compofe my features,
to refrain from burfling out into a loud laugh.
However, I flood it out, and a iked Mademoi-
felle la Tour ^that was the niece’s name), whe-
ther fhe was truly innocent $ Her politive an-
fwer in the affirmative betrayed more affix -
ranee than ingenuity. — “ Well, Mifs, I ihati
know the truth of it in an inflantj commend
yourfelf to God, and your innocence. Step

behind

( 28 )

behind that fcreen, fhut your eyes, and think
within your felf, what objedt you moll will) to
fee; if you are innocent, it will appear to
you; but if you are not, you fhall fee no-
thing.”

' Mademoifelle la Tour followed my direc-
tions, and I remained on the outfide of the
icreen with the Prince, who flood near the
fire place, not loft in ext dcy , as Madame de
la Motte is pleafed to cxprefs it; but holding
the hand to his mouth, left, by an indifcreet
laugh, he fhould difturb our grave ceremo-
nies.

Whilft the young lady flood behind the
fcreen, I bufied myfelf for a while in making
fome magnetifing geftures; then 1 faid to her,
“ Stamp on the floor with your innocent foot,
and tell me if you fee any thing/’ — Her an-
fwer was in the negative. “ Then, Mifs,”
faid I, ftriking againft the fcreen with great
force, •“ you are not innocent.” This obfer-
vation piqued the lady’s pride. — “ Hold," cried
fhe, “ methinks I fee the Qiteen/’ — 1 was then
convinced that proper inflrudfion had been
given to the niece innocent , by an aunt who
was no fuch a thing.

Wifhing to try how file could go through
her part, I requefted her to deferibe the phan-
tom then before her eyes. She anfwered, that
the lady was pregnant, and that file was dref-
fed in white. Then fhe deferi bed all the fea-
tures minutely, which were exactly tbofe of
the Queen. “ Afk the lady,” faid I, “ whether
fhe is to be brought to bed fafely ?” She faid,

the

A 2 9 )

the lady bowed her head, and that no bad con-
fequenccs fhould attend her lying-in. “ I or-
der you,” concluded I, raoll refpeftfully to
kifs the lady’s hand.” The innocent creature
kitted her own hand, and came forth from
behind the fereen, perfectly happy in the
thoughts of having convinced us of her inno-
cence. ■ ,

The two ladies eat foroe fweet- meats, drank
lemonade, and, in about a quarter of an hour,
retired at a back flair. The Prince faw me
home, thanking me for the complaifance i had
fhewn on the occafion.

Thus ended a farce, as harmlefs in itfelf, as
it was laudable from its mqtive.

Three or four days afterwards; meeting with
the Comtefle at the Cardinal’s, they both re-
queued me to repeat the fame badinage with a
little boy of five or fix years old; I did not
think the requeft defer ved a refufal. — Could I
forefee, then, that this focial recreation fbould
one day be reprefented to the magiftrate, as an
act of witchcraft, a facrilegious prophanation
of the Chriftian myfteries!

The Prince having thus brought me ac-
quainted with the ComtelTe, was pleafed to
afk me, what I thought of her ? I have al-
ways pretended to feme knowledge in physi-
ognomy. — 1 am fincere — and I anfwered that
I took the Comtefle to be a deceitful in-
triguing woman. The Prince interrupted me,
by faying, that fhe was a very honeft creature,
but in ditt retted circumftances. Upon this I
obferved, that were it true, as fhe faid, that

fhe

( 3 ° )

Ihe enjoyed the fpecial patronage of the Qpeen,
Ihe wouid be better provided, and that fhe
would have no occafion for any other protec-
tion, The Prince and I perfevered in our re-
IpeCtive opinion on the fubjech

The Cardinal fet out foon after forSaverne,
where he remained one month or fix weeks.
From the time of his return to Paris, he be-
came more frequent in his vifits to me. I
perceived he was uneafy, thoughtful, chagrined.
I refpe£led his private furrows ; but whenever
we had occafion to talk of the ComtefTe, I
would tell him, with my ufual franknefs, “ that
•woman deceive! you.''

A fortnight before the Cardinal was arrefl-
ed, he faid to me, “ dear Comte, I begin to
think that you are right in your conjectures —
and that Madame de Valois is the woman you
have defcribed." He then, for the firft time,
related to me the tranfaCtion about the neck-
lace, and imparted to me the fufpicions as
well as the fears he entertained, that the neck-
lace had not been delivered to the Qpeen.
This ftrengtbened, and made me perfilt the
more, in my opinion.

The next day, after this converfation had
pafl"ed, the Prince informed me, that the Com -
teffe and her hulband had fled for Ihelter to his
houfe, fearing the confequences that the above
affair might bring after it, and that they re-
quelled of me fome letters of recommendation
for England, or the environs of the Rhine.
The Prince alked my advice : I told him there
was but one way left, namely, to deliver that

woman

( 31 )

woman into the hands of the Police, and pro-
ceed diredlly to Court to lay the whole matter

open to the King and his Minifiers. The

Cardinal objecting, that fo rath a ftep he could
not reconcile to his feelings and generality,
“ In this cafe,” faid I, “ God is your only re-
fourcej he muft, and I wilh he may, do the
reft.” The Cardinal, however, having refufed
to give to the Comte and the Comtefle the let-
ters of recommendation which they required,
they fet out for Burgundy, and I have heard
nothing of them lince that period.

On the 1 5th of Auguft I was informed, as
well as all Paris, that the Cardinal de Rohan
had been arrefted that day. Several perfons
obferved to me, that as I was amongft the
Cardinal’s friends, I might perhaps lhare, the
fame fate. But confcious of my innocence,
I anfwered, that I was perfectly religned, and
Ihould wait at home with patience for what-
ever God or the Government Ihould ordain.

About half paft feven o’clock in the morn-
ing, on the 22d of Auguft, a Commilfary, one
exempt, and eight Satellites of the Police en-
tered my houfe. They began their plunder in
my very light — I am compelled to open my
ferutoires. All that there was of elixirs, bal-
fams, rich cordial drops, became the prey of
the wretches appointed to efcort me. I re-
quefted of the Commilfary, Maitre Chenon , jun.
to grant me the ufe of my own carriage — this
trifling comfort, his inhumanity denied. They
dragged me on foot in the moft opprobrious
manner, till we reached half way to the Baftile ;

. a hackney

( 32 )

a hackney coach happening to pafs by, I was
permitted to enter it. The awful draw-
bridge is let down, and I any led to .

My wife has experienced the fame fate

Here I recoil with horror — I fhall fay nothing
of what 1 have fufFercd, determined not to
wound the feelings of the reader, by a recital
equally fad and Shocking. I lhall only add a
fingle obfervation, and, Heaven can witnefs,

it is the exprelfion of truth. Were f left

to chufe between an ignominious death, and
fix months imprifonment in the Baftile, 1

would fay, without helitation “ Lead me

on to the fcaffold.”

Who could fuppofe, that an innocent man
can be reduced to that abyfs of misfortune, as
to look on a warrant for apprehending his body,
as a favour from Providence? Yet fuch was
the cafe with me. When after five months
captivity, the warrant was fignified to me, that
is, when I knew what had been alleged again ft
me 5 the officer who brought it was to my fight
an angel of light come from heaven to tell me,
that, in the fame time that judges were appoint-
ed, I was at liberty to fee counfel, and had it
now in my power to enter into a juftification.

The decree or warrant bears date the 15th
of December 1785 — It was notified to me on
the 30th January 1786, and the fame day I
underwent an examination ' -

I fhould think myfelf wanting in thepro-
mife I have made to the public, of (hewing
myfelf what I really am, were 1 not to lay be-
fore them a voucher, by which they may obtain
a further knowledge of my charade r, my inno-
cence,

( 33 )

cence, and the nature of the charge brought
againit me. And although recollection alone
has affined me, in penning down the following,
interrogatory, my memory is good ; and I can
affine the reader, that 1 have not omitted any
efTential circum fiance.

Examination of Comte de Cagliostro, on
the 30 th of January 1786.

Q. How old are you ?

A, 37 or 38 years.

Q; Your name ?

A. Alexander Caglioftro.

Q; Where born ?

A. I cannot fay for certain, whether it was
at Malta or at Medina; I have lived under
the tuition of a governor, who told me that I
was of noble birth, that I was left an orphan
when only three months old, &c.

Q, How long have you been in Paris ?

A. I arrived here on the 30th of January
1785.

Q. On your arrival where did you take
apartments ?

A. In the Palais Royal, at a ready furnifh-
ed hotel, where I lodged twenty days, more
or lefs.

O. Had you, when you came to this capital,
money requifite to keep houfe?

A. Moft afifu redly, I had brought with me
every thing necefiary for houfe-keeping.

Oj Where did you fix upon a houfe ?

D A. In

( 34 )

A. In the Rue St, Claude, on the Boule-
vard.

O. Who hired the houfe ? was it you or
the Prince (Cardinal de Rohan) ?

A. J requeued Monfieur de Carbon ieres (a
gentleman in the Prince’s houfehold) to ftrike
the bargain for me, as I had entered into no
one of the kind before in any part of the
world. This was my reafon for entreating
Monlieur de Carbonieres to fettle every thing
concerning the houfe, furniture, carriages, &c.
and I fupplied him, from time to time, with
the cafh neeeffary to anfwer thofe exigencies,
for which he afterwards produced the receipts.

O; Who provided you with necefTaries?

A. 1 alone, in every thing.

Oj But the Prince boarded with you ?

A. Though he did fo, it was always at my
expence ; yet, fometimes, as he was wont to
bring his friends, or fome perfons patronized by
him, he would order from his own houfe, one
or two difhes ; nevertbelefs, at night 1 allowed
my cook for the whole expence of the day.

Q, Did you fee the Prince immediately on
your arrival here ?

A. No; but two or three days afterwards.

O, Was the Prince at your table every day f

A. He at firft came but feldom to dinner;
but fince, he was regular three or four times
in the week.

Qj Were you acquainted with a Lady of the
name of La Motte ?

A. Certainly — the firft time I met her, fhe
told me that I had feen. her before, in man's

cloaths.

C 35 )

cl oaths, at the foot of my flair cafe at Strafburgh*
where (lie allied me whether I could give her
any tidings of the March ioncfs de Boulainvil-
liers; when I anfwered, the Lady was then at
Saverne, and that Ihe had fet off the fame day
to meet her.

Q, Did you fee her fince, at the Prince’s

ho u fe ?

A. Mod a flu redly.

Qs Was Ihe not then in company with one
of her nieces f
A. No.

Qj Yet you have feen that niece?

A. Give me leave to relate the fad : (quoted
before, fee p. 26).

O, it is faid that you put a crucifix round
the girl’s neck, together with black, green,
red, and other coloured ribbons, with an apron
fringed with filver, and that you made her
kneel and take an oath ?

A, It is falfe. 1 only think, to the befl of

my recoiled ion, that the Prince added to her
ornament a few ribbons to pleafe her fancy,
i alfo believe, that I had then about me a
common mafonic apron j but I am not certain
that fhc made ufe of it. Whether or not, l
truft implicitly to the Prince’s recoledion, and
whatever he may fay on the fubjed I fhall
take for granted,

Q, Have you laid a fword, in what manner
I know not, on the young Lady ?

A. All I know is, that, having my fword
on, I laid it down.

Q, But what of the oath adminiftered ?

D 2 A. The

( 3 6 )

A. The affertion is falfe. — I have already in-
formed you of my reafons for doing what i did.

O, Is it true, that after the fecond trial, the
young girl being withdrawn, you, in company
with the Prince and Madame de la Motte, re-
tired to another room, in the middle of which
were placed a dagger, croffes of St. Andrew and
of Jerufalem, a fword, Agnus Dei, befides a
great number of wax lights ; that then, and
there, you had made Madame de la Motte take
an oath, telling her it was neceffary fhe fhould
fwear not to reveal to any one what fhe might
fee : that next, addrefling the Cardinal, you
fpoke to him in thefe words : “ Well, Prince,
bring here— you know what.” That immedi-
ately the Cardinal opened a bureau,, out of
which he took a wooden box of an oval form,
and full of loofe diamonds ; when you faid :
“ Mind, Prince, that there is another which
you know of:” that the Prince took it up, and
faid to Madame de la Motte, “ I make you a
prefentof 6000 livres, and thefe diamonds you
mull give to your hufband, directing him to
fet off immediately for London to fell fome of
them, and have the others fet, and not to
return till the whole of his errand is fulfilled ?”

A. This is falfe — very falfe, and I can prove
it.

O. What proof can you adminifter ?

A. In the firft place, when any magaetifing
operation was to be performed, the care of
preparing the room devolved upon Monfieur
De Carbonieres ; and after the fecond trial was
over, there came in a refpcdtable perfonage,

whofe

( 37 )

whofe name I will not mention. But prince
Louis will tell you who that perfon was, becaufe
I will not call a more refpedtable man as a
witnefs of fuch a trifling frolic. The Prince
and the two pcrfons alluded to will tel! yon,
that there was in the room neither crolles,
dagger, &c. That whatever may have been
reported on the fubjedf is falfe ; that no oath
was ever taken ; the Prince’s Houfehold may
be called as witnefs, concerning the tale of the
30 wax lights j all the fervants will declare
whether the room was lighted more than ufual.

Q Is it true that you have given the
Prince any hopes of his being advanced to
the mi niff ry?

A. Falfe again ; for 1 have always advifed
him to leave Paris, and rdide entirely at
Saverne, becaufe on that fpot he could do more
good, and lead a quieter life.

0. Is it true that yon told, or made the Prince
believe that your wife was the Queen's inti-
mate friend and confidant, and that the kept
a daily corrcfpondence with her Majefiy?

A. By heavens that’s -too much ! and if
the Prince will fay fuch a thing, in fpite of
all the regard he has a right to expedt from
me, I fav it is a falfehood.

(The judge or reporter, fhewed me then a
fmall piece of written paper ; and continued.)

Q Do you know any thing of this note ?
Yea or nay?

Having infpedfed it narrowly, and finding it
to be a forged hand- writing, I anfvvercd.)

A, I

A. I know nothing of this billet, noram
I acquainted with the hand-writing j neither
I or my wife have ever been at Verfailles, we
have not the honour of being known to the
Queen, never went out of Paris, and befides,
as my wife cannot write, how fliould all this

be poffible ?

1 ■

Q, Has the Prince never

your wife with diamond^:

A, Nothing more than whist''! fiiall here
recount ever came to my kno wtedge.

Whilfl I lived at Strajburgh, I was jn pnf-
feffionofa very curious cane-head, containing
a repeater fet round with diamonds, of this I
made a prefent to the Ptince, who offered to
barter fome jewels againft it; but I refufe-d,
having always been more plea'fcd to give than
to receive. It is true, that, on the anniver-
fary of my wife's birthday, the Prince ufed to
make her prefents ; but I believe the whole
confifled in a dove (Holy Ghojl in the French),
my portrait originally fet round with pearls,
which the Prince can fed to be replaced by
fmall diamonds, and a fmall watch with a
chain, fet with fmall brilliants, fome of which
were larger than the reft. As to my other
diamonds, they are known in all the courts of
Europe where i have' travell’d. This may be
eafily afeertained. I am fhutup in the Baitiie,
fo is my wife, as well as the whole bulk of my
fortune; you need but fearch to be convinced
of ths truth.

Q, But your manner of living is expenfive ;
you give much away, and accept of nothing

( 39 )

in return ; you pay every body; how do you
contrive to get money ?

A. This quefiion has no kind of relation to
the cafe in point ; however I am wilting to
give you forne fatisfaddion. Yet, where is the
importance of knowing whether I am the fon
of a monarch, or that of a beggar, and why I
travel without making myfelf known, by what
means I procure the money 1 want ? As long
as ■ I regard religion and the laws, and pay
every one his due, that I always do good
and never any harm, the quefiion you now put
to me is idle and unbecoming. But, know
that I have always taken a pleafure in refuting
to gratify the public’s curiolity on this account,
notwithstanding all that has been faid of me,
when I was called the man of 14.00 years, the
Wandering Jew, the Antich rift, the unknown
Philofopher, in fine all thofe enormities which
malice can invent. Nevertheless i’ll conde-
feend to tel! you that which I never revealed to
any one before. Know then that the princi-
pal refource 1 have to boali of is, that, as loon
as I fet my foot iiMoany country, 1 find there
a banker who Supplies me in every thing I
want, and is afterwards repaid. For inftance,
1 have, for France, Sarah n de Rafle, who
would give me up his whole fortune, were I
to afk for it, fo would Monfieur Sancotar at
Lyons : but I have always requeued thefe
gentlemen never to fay that they were my
bankers ; and belides thofe refources, I derive
further afliflance from many tilings which are
known to me.

O Did

( 40 )

Q, Did the Prince ever fbew you a writing
fubfcribed, Marie Antoinette de France.

A. I believe he did, 15 or 20 days before
he was arrefted.

O What did you fay concerning it?

A. I faid that I could coiije&ure nothing
elfe, but that Madame de la Motte was a
cheat, and that fhe deceived the Prince. In
fa£t, I have at ali times warned the Prince to
be on his guard, tniri 4iiit that file was a dan-
gerous woman; but the Prince never would
believe me, and I have always look’d on the bill
as a forged one.

Q, Look at this paper, and tell me whether
it is the fame ?

(The judge fhew’d me then a written paper,
on which 1 perceived the name Marie — An-
toinette de France. But having obferved
that it was full of figures; which 1 had never
remarked before, my anfwer was.)

A. I cannot fwear to its identity, as there
are now figures, which were not on the paper
fbewn to me before.

Q. But theft figures have been fet down
by us ?

A. That’s a matter of indifference to me ;
} tell you that in confcience, I cannot fwear
this to be the fame ; befides I had taken but
a flight furvey of it, as the affair did not con-
cern me, it was very immaterial for mp to know
whether it was a real or a forged inftrument.

Q, Is it true that, previous to your being
confined, you propofed laying out 1 50,000
crowns in the purchafe of a houfe ?

A. It

C 4 1 )

A. It is falfe. — I recoiled indeed that one
day, as I was under the hand of the bair-
dreffer, fome perfons then prefent, talked of a
pavilion which a company of my friends in-
tended to buy, and that I anfwered, I very
willingly would take it of them *, but this was
fpoken at random, and undefignedly. The
intended purchafers were Monfieur de Bondi
and others.

N. B. The examination was clofed, when
I recollected the above circumflance, but the
reporter did not think it neceffary to infert the
lallanfwer, in addition to the reil.

I have promifed, that, after I had given
fome account of myfelf, I fhould put in. an
anfwer, as far as it concerns me, to the im-
putations which Madame de la Motte has
taken upon herfelf to propagate. The taik
will be as trying for me, as it will prove te-
dious to the reader. No matter : i fhall go
• minutely through it, requeuing however
thole who know, or can appreciate me, not
to take the trouble of peruling this part of
my Defence.

Refutation of Madame de la Motte’s Memo-
rial in that part which concerns the Comte
de Cagliostro.

Extract from the Memorial.

The ComtefTe De la Motte, begins thus.

“ Here enters the feene, one- of thofe per-
fonages whom the vulgar in their ignorance,

flyle

( 42 )

ftyle extraordinary beings; an empiric, a mean
alchymift, a dreamer on the phyfofopher’s
ftone. falfe prophet in the fefts, into which he
pretends to have been initiated, a profaner of
the true worfbip, in fine, the felf-created
Comte de Caglioftro. Yes, intruded by the
Cardinal de Rohan, with the fplendid neck-
lace, Caglioftro has taken it to pieces, in order
to add to the treafure of a fortune unknown
and unheard of before.

Remarks.

t I

Whatever may have been faid about the
Ryle confpicuous throughout the whole of
the Comtefle’s defence, it certainly can boaft
of an undoubted advantage, which is to con-
tain a great deal of abufive language within a
fmall compafs : — to the proof :

An Empiric.

This word I have heard from the mouth of
certain perfons ; but 1 never could learn ex-
actly what it meant. If intended to point
out a man who, without being a do&or, has
fome knowledge in phyfics and takes no fee,
who cures the. poor and the rich, and receives
no money from either ; if fo I confefs it,— 1 am
an Empiric.

Mean Alchymist.

Alchymift, or not, the epithet mean , is ap-
plicable to thofe only, who beg and cringe,
and it is well known whether the Comte
de Caglioftro ever fued for favour, or pen-
fions.

A Dreamer

C 43 )

A Dreamer on the Philofopher's Stone.

Whatever my opinion may be concerning
the Philofopher’s Rone, I have been Client, and
never troubled the public with my dreams.

False Prophet, &c.

Not always Co neither. — Had the Cardinal
de Rohan taken my advice, he would have
been aware of the Comteflc de la Motte, and
we thould not be where we are.

Profane r of the true Worship.

This is more furious. — I have refpedted re-
ligion at all times. My life and my outward
condudt I freely fubmit to the enquiries of the
laws : as to what palfes inwardly, God alone
has a right to call me to an account.

Self- created Comte de Cagliostro.

1 have gone all over Europe by the name of
Caglioftro: as to the appellation of Comte,
from the education which 1 have received, the
attention paid to me by the Muphti Salahaym,
the Cherif of Mecca, the Grand -mailer Pinto s
Pope Rezonnico, and moft of the Sovereigns
in Europe, one may judge whether that is not
rather a difguife not to appear what 1 am, than
a title of honour.

Intrnjled with the Splendid Necklace.

I never had it in my poffeffion ; never
Caw it.

Cagliostro

Cagliostro took it to Pieces , &c.

If I am poffeffed of a fortune never heard
of before, of an hidden treafure, I certainly
had no occafion to take the necl^U?ce to pieces
with a view to enrich myfelf.

When a man is rich enough, when he car-
ries greatnefs of foul even fo far as to decline
favours offered by Sovereigns, and co nftantly
rejedl fuch gifts as the generality of men can
accept of without meannefs, it cannot be fup-
pofed that he will, in an inflant, ftain the
glory of an irreproachable life ; nor will he of
a fudden fioop from the magnificence of a
Prince, to deeds of di (honour, which can only
be the confequence of an excefs of mifeondudt
and extravagance.

Extract.

[The Comtejfe De la Motte goes 071.]

!t In order to conceal his theft, Caglioftro
commanded the Cardinal de Rohan, by that
empire which he has aflumed over that Prince,
to have the necklace fold, fome final! parcels
to be fet in Paris by means of Madame de la
Motte ; and employ her hufband to have the
* more confiderable ones fet and fold in Eng-
land.

Remarks.

The intention of the Comteffe, by trump-
ing up a tale destitute of probability, has been
to caft a ridicule on the Cardinal, by repre-

fenting

( 45 )

ienting him, not as my friend, but as a Have
fo much at my command, that he does not he-
fitate a moment to obey; when I order him
to become an accomplice in a robbery, of which
I alone was to reap the benefit.

This aflertion, wherein impertinence and
indecency go hand in hand, defer-ves not any
ferious anfwer.

Yet it may have great weight in the pre-
fent caufe, in that it contains a formal acknow-
ledgment, that fome of the diamonds, taken
from the necklace, have been difpofed of in
Paris by the Comtefle, and another parcel fold
in England by her hufband.

Extract.

“ We fee here the unbounded projects of
Caglioftro,w r hich, concealed atfirfi, unravelled
the mfe Ives through a feries of progrefiive mo-
tions leading to an end, equally fatal to the
Cardinal and the Comtefle De la Motte.

Remarks.

Thofe unbounded projects alluded to, in their
gradual progrefllon, muft fuppofe at leaft a
whole year of intrigue, before the necklace
could be obtained. — But how can the fuppo-
fition be reconciled to matter of fad! ?

I came for the firft time to Paris in the year
1783; but I ftaid only 13 days in the capital,
employed from morning to night in vifiting
my patients ; it was not then affuredly that
I was at leifure to fpeculate and intrigue.
Let us now fee, whether it has been more in

my

( 46 )

my power to do it in my laft journey to this
city.

The information, filed by the Attorney Ge-
neral, ftates that the negotiation concerning
the necklace, took place the latter end of Ja-
nuary, 1785 ; it fays, that on the 29th of the
fame month, the jewellers fubfcribed their ap-
probation of the terms propofed by the Car-
dinal, and that the faid necklace was delivered
on the firft day of February following.

Now it is a fa<£t, which may be eafily afeer-
tained, that 1 arrived in Paris the 30th of Ja-
nuary, 1785, at nine o’clock in the evening.

The whole of the bufinefs there lore was
already tranfadled, except the delivery of the
necklace, which was effedled 36 hours after
my arrival . — 1 was at Lyons when the negoti-
ation was on foot.

I was at Bourdeaux at the time of the ap-
parition of a fuppofed Opeen in the grove at
Trianon.

It muft therefore be fuppofed that I polled
to Paris for theexprefs purpofe of reaping the
benefit of plots cbntrived by another. — What
an abfurdity! — And I linger in confinement !
— And the walls of the Baftile have for thefe
fix months refounded with my doleful com-
plaints, — with tbofe of my ill-fated wife.

Yet the cries of opprefied innocence have not
reached the ear of the Left of kings ! ! — ^But
let us go on with the libel.

Extract.

The Comtefie, after having endeavoured
to prove the necelfity of apprehending me j

after

( 47 )

after having held me out as a fbarper, &c.
proceeds :

“ What anfwer can he give to the drft ar-
ticle of his examination ? His name, his fur-
name, his qualifications. Comte, the wo-

man who follows his fortune, Comteffe de
Caglioftro ”

Was it not then enough for the counfel of
the ComteiTe De la Motte to calumniate, to
load me with obloquy. — He mud dill attack
me in the tendered part of myfelf.

Oh ! I could have forgiven what was only
perfonal to me. — But my wife! — what has die
done to him? — What has fhe done to the Com-
teffc? — How can a man, who bears a public
character, abufe it to faturate with bitrernefs
and woe, the heart of an innocent and vir-
tuous woman, who has nothing to do with the
caufe he defends, againft whom, though die is
confined, there is no decree, no complaint laid
— a woman to whom he himfelf can reproach
no other crime, than the misfortune of having
linked her dediny to mine.

This I can fay with truth., that, during the
fpace of i6 years now elapfed, fince I had the
honour of being united to the Comtede of
Cagliodro by the mod lawful and honourable
ties, die never left me; that fhe never took a
dep, which could not be owned by the mod
audere decency, the mod fcrupulous delicacy ;
and that, if there is a woman in being whom
dander diould have refpedfed — it is my wife.

Jn regard to the certificate of our nuptials,
which fome think tbemfelves author! fed to re-
quire,

C 48 )

quire, I pledge myfelf, if needful, to make
them public when i fhall be at liberty, and re-
pofTeffed of my papers.

Extract.

“ The Comteffe de la Motte dares to affert
that one of my men makes a boafl of having
been 1 50 years in my fervice. That I fome-
times acknowledge myfelf to be only 300 years
old ; at others, that 1 brag of having been pre-
fent at the nuptials in Cana, and that it was
to hurlefque the Holy Sacrament of the Eu-
charift, the tranfubftantion, that I had ima-
gined to multiply the necklace, taken to pieces,
into an hundred different manners, and yet
it was delivered, as it is faid, in its full com-
plement to an auguff Queen.

That I am by turns, a Portuguefe Jew, a
Greek, an Egyptian of Alexandria, from
whence I have imported into France hiero-
glyphics and for eery.

That I am one of thofe infatuated Rofecru-
cians, who have the power of making the dead
converfe with the living; that 1 attend the
poor gratis, but that I fell for Jbmelhing, to the
rich, the gift of immortality.

That my fociety confifts of vifionaries of all
denominations.

The Comteffe concludes by infinuating that
I have been guilty of fome mifdemeanor in
certain courts of Europe, and that Madame
Bohmer is well acquainted with fome of thofe
criminal t ran factions.”

Remarks.

( 49 )

Remarks,

It cannot be expected that I fhall repel, as it
were one by one, every urge of that torrent
of calumnies andabfurdities.

I have fa id it already, my education was that
of a child born of chriftian parents J never
was a Jew, nor a Mahometan. Thefe two
religions leave on their fedlaries an -outward
and indelible mark. The truth, therefore of
what I here advance, may be afcertained : and
rather than let any doubt remain on this af-
fair, I am ready, if required, to yield to a
verification, more fhameful for him who re-
quires, than for the perfon who fubmits to it.

I fhould will), moreover, that the ComtefTe
would be more explicit, as to the fails fhe lays
to my charge. Let her boldly declare where
is that wealthy man to whom 1 have fold im-
mortality. Let her relate one fing.le particu-
lar of tbofe high mifdemennors by which I
have diftinguifhed myfelf in Europe; but above
all, I challenge her to point out fuch of thofe
mifdeeds as are known to Madame Bohmer.

Jf the ComtefTe de la Motte, contented to
load me with opprobrious language, and to
make ufe of infidious reticences, does not ac-
cept of this format challenge, I muft declare
to her, once for all, (hat 1 fhall give to all her
reticences, to all her obloquy, pad, prefent,
and to come, an anfvver very laconic perfectly
clear, moft energetic, which the author of the
Provincial Letters gave formerly, in a fimilar

E circumftance,

C 5° )

circumftance, to a potent (oc\ety of learned men;
an anfwer which politenefs forbids me to fet
down in French, but which the ComtcfTe’s
counfel may tranflatc to her — Mentirts im-

PCTDENT1SS1ME.

Extract.

The Comteffe fpeaks next of the magnetiz-
ing of her niece, which the relates in her own
way ; that is, with the addition of a world of
circumflances, the very reverfe of truth, con-
ne&ing therewith the account of the necklace,
but with that aukwardnefs and improbability
which the does not even take the trouble to
conceal.

She makes the Cardinal, a courtier, and an
academician, exprefs hivnfelf in fuch low, dif-
guftiqg a language, that the meaneft footman
would blufli to make ufeof fuch jargon. She
hears from behind the icreen the clattering of
kiffes which her niece was exchanging with a
beautiful angel.

On a table flood a huge heap of inflru merits,
the befl calculated to ftrike terror and difmay.
Swords laid acrofs on each other, ribbons of
-various colours, the infignia of different or-
ders of knighthood, a dagger, and a decanter
of very limpid water, and to complete the
horrid fight, “ the dark feene was lighted up
\vith an extraordinary number of wax tapers.

Surrounded with this whimfieal apparatus,
I adminifter an oath of fecrecy to the Comteffe ;
and then command the Cardinal to fetch me a
large white box; we open it, and the Prince

gives

C 5 r )

gives charge to Madame de la Motte to fell,
and procure to be fold by her hufband, a certain
quantity of diamonds.

Rema r sc s.

It raufl be owned either that tire ComtefTe is
out of her fenfes, or that the implicitly trufh to
the credulity of her judges, if file hopes to ex-
tricate herfelf by palming upon the world tales
fo incoherent and unaccountable.

I have already explained the whole tran fac-
tion, how every thing paffcd, and What lau-
dable motive actuated me to take a part in
the farce. The Prince of Luxembourg!! and
Monfienr de Carbonieres, can, if called upon,
vouch to the truth of my anfwer as fet down
in the following interrogatory.

Extract.

“ On the firft or fecond day of Auguft, the
Cardinal fhewed to Madame de la Motte a
fmall letter witli a flouritbed border, the upper
and lower part of which he folded up careful-
ly, that file might read only what was written
in the middle. Madame de la Motte read
(this deferves attention') thefe words : I fetid
by the little Lomtejfe — then followed a number
of figures which Madame de la Motte could
not fum up together *, then the read again — to
quiet thofe poor wretches, 1 Jbquld be J'orry tr
fee them in trouble. — After the had perufed the
letter, the Cardinal exclaimed — Can 1 be de-
ceived by her? — by the little ComtefTe ?— Im-
pofTible ! I know Madame de Caglioftro too

well.

( 5 2 )

v;ell, — There is no equivocation here in re-
gard to the Comtcffc de la Motte, who was
prefent, and to whom the Prelate fhouid have
faid — Can I fuppofe that you have deceived
me ? But — I know Madame de Caglioflro too
well.”

Remarks.

For ever dealing in fi&ions ! never a proof,
not even a probability— what means the Com-
teffe de la Motte by thus entangling the bu-
finefs ! whom was the letter di reded to ? She

fays not a word about the fuperfeription. —

Who wrote it ? was it my wife ? 1 have al-
ready declared that fhe cannot write. Am I
the author of it ? I never write in French, fel-
dom in Italian. Is it the Cardinal? why fhouid
he read only part of the letter to the Comtefie,
and conceal the reft from her with fo much
caution? why break out into fuch an excla-
mation, after the perufal of a few words out
of a letter written by himfelf ? — Of what nature
is that impofition of which my wife is for a
moment fbfpedtcd by him? How comes it
that, fpeaking of her, he ftyles her with fami-
liarity, at one time, the little Comtejfe , and at
another, with refpedt, calls her Madame de
Caglioftro? All that appears clearly throughout
this part of the memorial, is, that the Com-
teffe de la Motte, in order to wound me on
all Tides at once, has endeavoured to entangle
my wife in an affair, of which fhe never had
even the moft diftant knowledge.

Extract.

( 53 )

Extract.

The Comteffe concludes her invedtives in
thefe words — “ It is neceffary, that man should
learn, by a frefh inqueft, that, if the wifdom
of the courts of juflice have fo long 'given up
the practice of making for eery , properly fo
called, a capital offence, thofe very courts have
referved to themfelves the right of cenfure
againft that forcery, when accompanied with
malefices, thefts, impolitions, and above all,
when the evil is daily increafing, by means of
proper fchools to rear up pupils,”

Remarks.

So the Comteffe is forty not to live in thofe
bleffed times, when a change of forcery would
have led me to the ffake ! Thus the Comtefle
de la Motte reprefents me as a profeffor in
forcery, delivering lectures on the art of thiev-
ing and fwindling to my pupils. Who are
thofe men fo vilely degenerate, as to take lef-
fons from fuch a teacher? Surely the Comteffe
will not find them amongft my acquaintance,
I think it fuperfiuous to give here a lift of
thofe perfons who did me the honour to vifit
at my houfe j but this I can fay with truth,
that there is not one of them all whom the
moll wary of all men, the moll format in the
choice of his acquaintance, would not deem it
an honour to be connected with.

After all, I verily believe, that the Comteffe
de la Motte, in doing me all the harm in her

power,

• ( 5 + )

power, was not fo much impelled by a fpirit
of hatred againft me, as by the defire of
clearing herfelf. But, be her intention what
it may, I forgive her, as far as I can, the
tears of bitternefs I have thed through her
means: let her not imagine, that my mo-
deration is a piece of mere affectation. From
the bottom of the very abyfs'into which
fhe has plunged me, I fhall raife my voice
to implore in her behalf the clemency of the
laws ; and if, after my innocence and that
of ray wife is acknowledged, the beft of
Kings fhould think an unfortunate ft ranger,
who had fettled in France on the faith of
his royal word, of the laws of hofpitality,
and of the common rights of nations, is in-
titled to fome indemnity ; the only fatisfadtion I
fhall require will be, that his Majefty may
be pleafed, at my requeft, to pardon and
let at liberty the unfortunate Coixiteffe de la
Motte.

This favour, if it fhould be granted, cannot
offend ju-:ice. However guilty the Comteffe
may be fuppofed, fhe is already fufficiently
puni fned. — Alas ! my fad experience deferves
fome credit. There is not a crime, ever fo
great, but may be atoned for by fix months
confinement in the Baftile !

Ye Judges, ye Citizens! ye have read! —
Such is the man who made himfelf known
at Strafburgb, Bourdeaux, Lyons, Paris, under
the name of Comte de Cagliostro. I have
wrote as much as the laws of the country re-
quire

( 55 )

quire of me, as much as will gratify all other
fentiments, but thofeof an idle curiofity.

Do you pretend to fay, that it is not enough ?
Will you Dili infiit upon having farther parti-
culars concerning the name, the motives, the
rcfources of that Granger ? What matters
it to you, Frenchmen ? My country is, in re-
gard to you, the fpot within your empire
where J firft fubmitted to your laws ; my name
is that which I have caufcd to be reverenced
amongft ye; my motive, God; my refources
— my own fecret. When, for the purpofe of
relieving the fick, or of giving food to the
needy, i fhall crave admittance into your Me-
dical Colleges, or your Benevolent Societies,
then you may queftion : but to do, in the
name of God, all the good I can, is a right
which, to be fupported, requires neither name
nor country ; neither proofs or pledges.

Frenchmen ! are ye only guided by curiofity ?
Then perufe thofe futile publications, where
malice and levity have combined to direct the
envenomed fliafts of fatire and ignominy
again ft th e friend of mankind.

Do ye, on the contrary, mean to be fair and
juft ? be not inquifitive : but hear, and love
the man, who ever honoured the Kings, be-
caufe they are in the hand of God ; Govern-
ments, becaufe he protects them ; Religion,
becaufe it is his law ; Law, becaufe it is its
fupplement ; Mankind, in fine, becaufe, like
himfelf, they are his children.

Once more— afl< noqueftions ; but hear and
love the man, who came amongft you to do
