THE CELESTIAL TELEGRAPH; or, Secrets of the Life to Come revealed through Magnetism.
By L. Alph. Cahagnet. London: Geo. Peirce, 1850 (English translation of the 1848 French original).
Public domain. Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/b29295713).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

CELESTIAL  TELEGRAPH ;

OR,

SECRETS  OF  THE  LIFE  TO  COME


REVEALED  THROUGH


MAGNETISM  :

WHEREIX  THE  EXISTENCE,  THE  EORM,  THE  OCCUPATIONS,  OF  THE
SOUL  AFTER  ITS  SEPARATION  FROM  THE  BODY  ARE  PROVED
BY  MANY  years’  EXPERIMENTS,  BY  THE  MEANS  OF


EIGPIT  ECSTATIC  SOMNAMBULISTS,


WHO  HAD

EIGHTY  PERCEPTIONS  OF  THIRTY-SIX  DECEASED
PERSONS  OF  VARIOUS  CONDITIONS.

A DESCRIPTION  OF  THEM,  THEIR  CONVERSATION,  ETC.,

WITH

PROOFS  OF  THEIR  EXISTENCE  IN  THE  SPIRITUAL  WOULI>.


3Y  L.  ALPH.  CAHAGNET.


LONDON:

PUBLISHED  BY  GEO.  PEIRCE,  310,  STRAND


LONDON !

PKINTED  BV  GEO.  PEISCE,  350,  STEA.HD.


INTRODUCTION.


“ Death  is  but  one  of  the  hours  of  our  dial,  and  our  dial  must  turn  for
ever.” — Saint  Martin.


The  object  of  this  work  is  not  a desire  to  create  or
annihilate  such  or  such  a system  to  favour  any  particular
religion  or  creed,  more  or  less  prominent  in  our  age ;
its  sole  object  is  to  commune  with  men  who,  like  me,
seek  the  truth  with  all  the  strength  of  their  soul.
Pursue  the  track  wherein  I believe  it  to  be,  and  you
will  find  it.  Be  prudent;  admit,  reject  nought  without
mature  examination,  and  what  you  do  not  comprehend
never  proclaim  to  be  impossible  !

Somnambulism,  ecstasy,  promoted  by  magnetism,  are
the  only  means  of  attaining  the  ends  I have  proposed
to  myself ; any  other  state,  effected  by  the  ordinary
means  of  narcotics,  leaves  the  individual  too  much  de-
pendent on  the  resources  of  his  belief,  the  influence  of
his  desires,  and  nought  but  very  suspicious  results  are
obtained.  If,  on  the  contrary,  divers  subjects,  taken
from  amongst  all  the  conditions  of  civilised  life,  are
directed  by  men  who  have  no  other  object  but  that  of
procuring  information,  the  results  will  be  more  com-
plete ; — and  why  ? because  the  isolated  ecstatic  is  like
unto  a frail  skiff  on  a boundless  ocean,  having  no  de-


IV


INTRODUCTION.


cided  course ; the  account  that  he  will  give  of  his
voyage  will  pourtray  the  ensemble  of  the  picture  he  has
seen,  without  describing  its  parts;  if  he  is  conducted  by
a will  stronger  than  his  own  towards  a proposed  object,
we  shall  arrive  at  the  truth.

Once  in  this  track,  it  would  be  wrong  in  us  to  be
stopped  by  the  desire  of  knowing,  comprehending,  and
denning  the  existence  of  God  ; to  doubt  him,  would
be  to  erase  one’s- self  from  the  list  of  reasonable  beings;
to  demonstrate  him,  would  be  to  suppose  him  inca-
pable of  doing  so  himself ; to  speak  of  his  goodness,
his  justice,  that  is  but  right ! but  of  his  wrath,  that
w’ould  be  assimilating  him  to  ourselves  ; to  give  him
the  form  of  the  sun,  of  a man,  of  a tortoise,  of  vege-
tables, would  be  to  repeat  a multitude  of  systems,  all  of
which  do  but  end  in  keeping  our  language  in  an  eternal
movement,  and  demonstrate  how  foolish  man  is  to  wish
to  explain  what  he  cannot  rationally  and  mathematically
comprehend;  we  will  restrict  ourselves  to  the  confession
that,  before  explaining  God,  we  should  wish  to  be  able
to  explain  ourselves.

The  word  God,  or  Jehovah,  designates  a Being  to
whom  we  attribute  the  innumerable  mysteries  surround-
ing us  ! — a thinking  Being,  the  author  of  all,  the  central
focus  towards  which  all  beings  gravitate,  and  to  which
all  are  indebted  for  being  what  they  are.  This  ought
to  suffice  us.

Immersed  in  these  explorations,  we  will  not  imitate
prophets  or  their  commentators,  who  have  written  only
for  a few,  whose  intelligence,  more  or  less  expanded,
alone  profited  by  their  writings.  No  symbolical,  caba-
listical,  or  mystical  figures;  such  is  not  my  purpose.
I desire,  if  possible,  .to  say  to  all  beings ; — This  work


INTRODUCTION.


V


M’ill  offer  you  the  proof  of  a better  world  than  ours,
wherein  you  will  live  after  having-  left  3’our  body  in  this,
and  wherein  a God,  infinitely  good,  will  reward  you  a
hundredfold  for  the  evils  it  was  profitable  for  you  to
suffer  in  this  world  of  grief.  I am  about  to  prove  to
you  that  your  relations,  your  friends,  therein,  await  you
Avith  impatience ; that  you  can,  although  on  this  globe,
enter  into  communication  with  them,  speak  to  them,'
and  obtain  from  them  the  information  you  deem  fit : to
effect  this,  deny  not  the  existence  of  the  soul,  or  at
least  strive  conscientiously  to  obtain  the  proofs  you
desire ; by  somnambulism  you  may  have  as  many  as
you  please.

I cannot  pass  over  the  word  soul  Avithout  addressing
these  questions  to  Avhomsoever  belicA^es  not  in  its  exist-
ence. What  man  of  sense  is  there  who  can  answer  that
there  is  not  a being  within  our  body  that  seems  sepa-
rate from  it,  although  intimately  united  to  it?  This
self  that  responds  to  the  least  desire  of  reason,  this
mover,  this  mother-thought,  around  AAdiich  are  grouped
the  thousand-and-one  thoughts  constituting  our  AAdiole
existence,  something  that  invariably  says  to  us  : — I am
here,  I exist  Avith  you,  I am  a unity  for  you  and  a frac-
tion for  the  mass ; in  my  unity,  I am  as  complicated  as
the  mass.  I am  termed  soul,  spirit,  moA'er,  essential
part  of  God,  Avithout  knowing  positively  the  nature  of
my  essence ; AAdiether  I be  matter  in  its  most  ethereal
life,  or  a luminous  substance  apart,  I am  the  slave  of
this  matter  but  for  a moment  in  eternity,  I undergo  its
laAvs  only  because  I am  identified  Avith  it  through  ne-
cessity ; AA’hether  I be  of  its  nature  or  another,  there
nevertheless  comes  a moment  AA-hen  I separate  from
it : — Avhat  represents  death,  restores  to  the  earth  the


VI


INTRODUCTION.


atoms  which  the  body  borrowed  from  it,  and  I restore
to  space  the  particle  of  spiritual  substance  of  which  I
am  formed.  I,  immortal  child  of  eternity,  a traveller
halting  for  a. moment  on  this  petty  heap  of  dust,  return
to  my  vast  domain  never  more  to  quit  it,  and  there
enjoy  the  properties  with  which  my  Creator  has  en-
dowed me.

If  matter  had  me  not  to  animate  it,  to  think  in  it,
and  cause  it  to  act,  this  body,  which  would  be  but  a
compound  of  material  fluids  and  molecules,  according
to  your  philosophy,  could  be  set  in  motion  by  the
harmony  of  these  same  fluids.  When  I quit  the  body,
with  the  combinations  possessed  by  chemistry,  physics,
and  medicine,  why  do  they  not  succeed  in  re-har-
monising  these  molecules,  and  restoring  to  them  ex-
istence ! Galvanism  has  succeeded  in  setting  in  play
the  nervous  mechanism  after  I had  abandoned  my  en-
velope ; but  there  stops  its  power, — thought,  my  inse-
parable property,  can  be  communicated  only  by  myself ;
myself,  alone.  I am  the  grand  lever  that  can  cause  all
these  organs  with  whose  ramifications  1 am  ac-
quainted to  perform  their  functions ; no  motion  can
replace  me  — think  and  act  for  me  ! Wherefore  ?
Because  I am  the  life ; because  I am  an  individualised
thought,  and  protected  by  my  Creator.  I alone  can  be
this  self,  this  spirit,  this  soul ! which  can  no  more  end
than  the  nature  of  its  substance,  w^hich  is  whatso-
ever is  !

Because  you  cannot  see  me  or  touch  me  with  your
material  organs,  you  say  that  I am  not  a being  apart,  a
power  apart.  Were  it  necessary  to  admit  only  what
your  material  organs  can  see  and  touch,  you  might
deny  thought,  speech,  electricity,  galvanism,  sympathy,


INTRODUCTION.


VI


antipathy,  attraction,  repulsion,  the  properties  of  the
loadstone,  in  short  the  aggregations  of  the  three  king-
doms, from  the  ethereal  molecule  in  which  are  found
the  principles  of  the  diamond  to  that  of  the  plant  and
the  animal ! How  many  things,  however,  exist,  which
the  eyes  see  not,  or  the  hands  touch ; we  cannot,  in
presence  of  the  effects,  deny  the  causes  which  we
know  not  how  to  explain.

Man  alone  possesses  the  power  of  becoming  ac-
quainted wdth  the  various  conditions  of  the  matter  con-
stituting him,  but  not  through  the  ordinary  means  of
material  science;  to  arrive  at  this  knowledge  man  must
divest  himself  of  his  envelope,  and  render  himself  ho-
mogeneous to  the  state  of  the  thing  with  which  he
desires  to  become  acquainted.  He  may,  in  his  ma-
terial, ea^ist,  divide  matter  ad  infinitum,  combine  it,  but
he  cannot  become  acquainted  with  its  life.  This  life  is
comprehensible  only  in  the  spiritual  state  wherein  is
the  source  of  whatsoever  exists ; we  can  explain  laws
only  in  the  state  in  which  we  are.  Let  us  not,  then,
deny  the  existence  of  the  soul,  which  we  are  compelled
to  acknowledge,  though  not  beholding  it.

In  the  spiritual  state  the  soul  represents  in  man  his
whole  form  and  each  of  his  parts;  his  passions  and
pleasures,  superiority,  inferiority,  and  intelligence  finds
itself  individualised  as  on  earth,  has  the  recollection  of
its  terrestrial  existence,  its  family  affections  and  friends,
all  which  will  be  proved  by  psychological  apparitions
and  discussions  hereafter.  My  experiments  had  been
followed  by  no  reflections  since  their  commencement,
which  goes  back  many  years,  because  I wished  to  ac-
quire an  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  subject  I pur-
posed treating  of;  to  take  my  time,  in  order  to  judge


Vlll


INTRODUCTION.


without  enthusiasm  the  facts,  of  which  I have  collected
a pretty  large  number,  and  learn  where  to  abide.  I
shall  endeavour,  therefore,  to  explain  as  clearly  as  pos-
sible whatsoever  appears  to  me  important  and  con-
soling for  humanity  in  each  revelation ; happy  if  I
succeed  in  confirming  in  others  that  belief  which  I have
acquired  of  the  existence  of  a world  of  consolation,  and
penetrating  a few  souls  with  all  the  happiness  which  I
experience  from  so  sweet  a hope  !


THE  SECRETS  OE  THE  FUTURE


REVEALED  THROUGH


M A G N E T I S M.


FIRST  ECSTATIC.

1st  Sitting. — Binet  (Bruno),  my  first  ecstatic,  was  a
young  man,  twenty-seven  years  of  age,  of  mild  disposi-
tion, and  very  limited  intelligence  in  point  of  spiritualism,
having  read  and  heard  but  little  of  magnetism.  He  sub-
mitted to  my  action  with  confidence,  and  presented  me
with  somewhat  rare  phenomena ; he  was  not  isolated,
recollected  all  he  said  in  his  crises,  was  sent  to  sleep  by
a single  look  from  me,  underwent  the  laws  of  magnetic
attraction  with  a great  sensibility,  was  completely  de-
penda.  t on  m}’’  influence,  and  recovered  his  independ-
ence instantaneously ; he  beheld  perfectly  the  interior
of  bodies,  and  gave  salutary  counsels,  possessed  a re-
trospective view  of  events  and  actions  dating  from  a
few  years  to  half  a centuv)’,  and  described  them  remark-
ably wellj  he  beheld  not  objects  near  him,  but  distin-
guished them  perfectly  well  at  a distance,  and  gave
me  great  proofs  of  singular  lucidity.  I kept  a journal
devoted  to  his  material  views,  from  which  I have  ex-
tracted whatsoever  related  to  metaphysics  and  the
spiritual  world.  It  was  about  a week  ago  that  I was
magnetising  him,  when  I beheld  him  thrown  off  his  seat
as  if  by  a thunderbolt,  his  countenance  inflamed,  and


2


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


himself  under  the  influence  of  a fear,  which  he  sought
to  disguise  from  me  under  the  semblance  of  a courage
he  no  longer  possessed.  What  is  the  matter  with
you  ?”  said  I to  him.  “ I have  just  heard  a voice  on
my  right,  that  told  me  your  complaint  was  incurable,
and  that  I am  no  longer  to  trouble  myself  about  it ; I
thought  no  one  was  near  me,  and  then  I was  struck
with  a commotion  that  I cannot  account  for.^^ — “Ask
who  it  was  spoke  to  you  ?”  “ It  was  my  guide,”  is  the

reply. — “ What  is  this  guide’s  name  ?”  Gabriel.” —
Bruno  answered  me  in  a low  voice  as  the  voice  spoke
to  him.  He  was  at  least  a week  in  habituating  himself
to  this  voice,  which  was  hereafter  to  be  the  oracle  to
answer  the  questions  I put  to  him  with  respect  to  the
sjDiritual  vrorld.

As  Bruno  served  me  more  particularly  in  medical  ex-
periments, and  as  I was  by  no  means  disposed  at  that
period  to  speak  of  spiritualism,  he  invariably  reverted
to  his  communications.  Whereupon,  I took  note  of
them,  and  assumed  that  mystical  language  seriously
only  when  I discovered  in  them  arguments  sufliciently
strong  to  be  in  oppugnancy  to  my  reason.

I numbered  these  sittings  in  order  to  avoid  relating
the  thousand-and-odd  details  which  ordinarily  precede
and  follow  these  sorts  of  communications,  which  we
cannot  always  provoke  at  our  will,  but  which  should  be
seized  upon  whenever  they  present  themselves.  As  the
multitude  of  questions  which  I address  to  these  ecstatics
are  naturally  distanced  by  intervals  which  cannot  be
avoided,  it  will  be  impossible  to  find  in  them  the  regu-
larity of  an  ordinary  dialogue,  seeing  that  the  most  pre-
cious communications  often  arrived  at  the  moment  I
least  expected  them  ; therefore,  I beg  the  reader  to  be
patient,  not  to  lose  sight  of  the  most  trivial  questions,
which  he  may  afterwards  arrange  so  as  to  form  an  in-
structive whole,  worthy  of  meditation.

2.  Could  your  voice  tell  me  what  magnetism  is —
what  its  properties  are  ?”  Magnetism  is  a remedy


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


3


tliat  can  cure  all  curable  cliseases.^^ — Is  magnetism  a
property  of  the  body  or  the  soul  ?”  “ It  is  a property

of  the  soul : the  body  is  the  machine  through  which  it
filters,  the  soul  is  the  prime  mover.” — What  are  the
other  properties  of  the  soul  ? — is  it  free  to  do  whatso-
ever it  wills  ?”  “ No,  the  soul  is  influenced  by  other

souls ; it  is  the  latter  that  guide  it  in  magnetism,  as  in
all  its  other  actions.” — “ They  are,  then,  guides  similar
to  yours  ?”  “ Yes.” — Have  we  all  any  ?”  Yes,  a

good  and  a bad  one.” — “ Where  are  they  placed  ?”
‘‘Mv  irood  angel  is  before  me,  hovering  on  the  road  to
virtue,  which  he  points  out  to  me,  and  the  bad  one  is
on  my  left.” — “ Is  there  a means  of  withdrawing  one^s-
self  from  the  influence  of  the  bad  one  ?”  They  are
there  to  fulfil  their  mission ; it  is  ordained  so  ; man  can
scarcely  avoid  one  more  than  the  other.”

3.  You  spoke  to  me  of  souls  the  last  time,  could
you  tell  me  what  form  they  take  after  their  sej)aration
from  the  body?”  ‘‘No  answer  is  made  to  your  ques-
tion.”— “Ask  if  your  father  lives,  and  is  happy  ?”  “Yes,
my  father  lives,  and  is  very  happy.” — “ Could  you  see
him?”  “Yes.” — “When?”  “He  will  appear  to  me
suddenl}’’,  at  the  moment  I am  least  thinking  of  him.” —
“ Do  you  think  there  is  a means  of  communicating  with
angels  or  spirits  ?”  “Yes.” — “What  is  it  ?”  “ Praj’er.”
— “What  kind  of  prayer?”  “That  from  the  heart;
but,  in  the  state  I now  am,  we  have  greater  facility  for
being  with  them — we  have  only  to  desire  them,  and
they  approach.”

4.  “ Why  have  you  had  more  difficulty  in  falling

asleep  to-day  than  at  other  times  ?”  “ It  is  on  you  that

that  depends.” — “Why  have  you  moments  of  excellent
lucidity  and  others  far  inferior?”  “That  depends  on
ourselves.” — “We  fail,  then,  in  something?”  “We
should  pray.” — “ When  ?”  “ At  night,  before  getting

into  bed;  you  on  your  behall’,  I on  mine.”— “ What
prayer  should  be  said  ? Can  it  be  dictated  to  us  ?”
“No;  it  must  proceed  from  the  heart.” — “ Should  it  be


4


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


said  aloud  or  inwardly?”  Inwardly.” — “Are  all  pos-
tures good?”  “No;  we  should  pray  on  our  knees,
with  our  eyes  to  heaven.^^ — ‘‘  Why  rather  on  our  knees
than  otherwise  ?”  ‘‘^Because  we  ought  to  humble  our-
selves before  the  Being  to  whom  we  are  indebted  for
life;  we  owe  him  submission,  and  it  is  not  standing  with
pride,  or  lying  at  our  ease,  that  we  ought  to  address  a
Being  so  superior,  so  good ; we  can  well  make  this
slight  sacrifice  to  him  who  bestows  with  so  much  gene-
rosity. Infinitely  insignificant  as  we  are,  prostrate  our-
selves to  the  dust,  we  can  but  crawl  at  his  feet.” —
“ Should  we  also  pray  to  our  good  angel.”  Yes ; not
for  him  who  could  not  accept  what  belongs  to  God
alone ; but  being  nearer  his  throne,  by  his  nature  and
virtue,  he  serves  us  as  an  intermediate,  by  offering  our
prayer  to  God,  and  the  more  we  place  ourselves  under
his  protection,  the  more  he  can  inspire  us  with  good
thoughts.” — “You  have  told  me  that  we  had  a bad
spirit,  whose  influence  we  w'ere  obliged  to  undergo ;
this  is  not  unlike  destiny.”  “ Destiny  is  only  in  in-
fluences, and  I will  tell  you  how  to  provide  against  bad
influence.  We  conceive  a \vicked  thought ; from  the
first  stroke  that  we  feel  of  its  influence,  we  should  have
recourse  to  the  good  angel,  that  he  may  not  allow  it  to
take  root  in  us,  that  it  may  not  return  to  the  charge
seven  or  eight  times,  until  it  draws  us  on  to  commit
the  bad  action  with  which  it  inspires  us ; we  may,  by
placing  ourselves  under  the  protection  of  our  good
angel,  that  is  divine  protection,  avoid  the  snare  laid  for
our  ignorance.” — “ Suppose  that  bad  actions  cannot  be
avoided,  as  we  perceive  every  day,  is  he  who  commits
the  evil  punished  for  it  ?”  “ Yes ; for  at  his  death  he

appears  before  God,  who  has  ever  counselled  him  to
do  good,  who  desires  nought  but  good ; he  their  re-
primands him  by  reminding  him  of  all  the  bad  acts  of
ins  life,  pointing  out  to  him,  with  mildness,  the  road  he
ought  to  have  taken ; recommends  him  to  improve  his
conduct,  and  2:)laces  him  in  a society  suitable  to  his


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


tastes.” — “There  is  no  hell,  then,  or  place  of  punish-
ment ?”  “ 1 beg  your  pardon,  there  are  different  places
where  suffering  exists,  not  as  it  is  presented  to  us  ; they
are  places  of  trial,  wherein  you  are  purified,  without
suffering,  except  that  of  being  deprived  of  the  sight  of
God.  As  I have  told  you,  God  is  so  good,  he  has  so
great  love  for  us  that  he  punishes  us  merely  by  a repri-
mand ; but  this  punishment  is  very  sensitive,  seeing
that  it  is  inflicted  before  all  in  heaven,  then  it  would
be  an  impossibility  for  us  to  do  evil,  since  the  bad
thoughts  which  engender  it  are  of  the  domain  of  the
earth,  which  is  the  real  hell,  and  rest  buried  there  with
our  mortal  remains.  Then,  again,  in  heaven,  our  whole
interior  is  laid  bare ; we  cannot  have  a thought  which
may  not  be  instantly  perceived  by  all  those  around  us;
even  if  you  had  an  evil  thought,  but  that  is  an  impossi-
bility— it  would  be  impossible  for  you  to  put  it  in  exe-
cution : the  rest,  seeing  our  body  laid  bare,  and  our
utter  inability  to  conceal  a weak  part  of  it,  would  ad-
vise us  to  think  better.” — “ You  speak  of  bodies  ; we
have  one,  then?”  “Yes;  we  are  exactly  as  on  earth,
dress  apart.'” — Swedenborg  spoke  of  these  things,
does  your  angel  know  him  ? Was  he  inspired  by
God  r”  My  angel  does  know  Swedenborg ; he  was
inspired  by  God.” — “ Is  all  that  he  revealed  relative  to
the  spiritual  world  exact?”  “No.” — “He  has  com-
mitted errors,  then  ?”  “ No  answer  is  made  me  to  your
question.” — “You  have  told  me  that  in  heaven  ail  live
in  society,  what  do  they  do  there ; is  prayer  your  sole
occupation?”  “Oh,  no!  one  is  there  as  on  earth,
with  one^s  family,  wife,  children,  friends.” — “Can  we
gratify  there  our  passions  for  love,  reading,  music?”

Yes ; but  not  such  love  as  on  earth ; it  is  a holy,
intimate  friendship,  a pleasure  at  finding  ourselves  re-
united to  those  whom  we  have  always  loved ; but  we
know  not  there  the  love  of  woman,  in  such  an  accepta-
tion of  the  word  as  you,  no  doubt,  mean.  We  read,
play  music,  have  usages  as  on  earth ; we  demonstrate


6


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


what  we  desire  to  know,  with  this  difference,  that  there
are  no  haughty  masters  as  on  earth,  but  all  are  friends,
who  take  a pleasure  in  serving  you ; we  learn  there
much  quicker  than  here  below — in  a few  lessons  we
know  what  we  desire/’ — ‘^Do  we  return  to  the  earth  ?’’
‘•No.” — “Do  we  remember  what  we  have  done  on
earth?”  “Yes  and  no.  No,  because  it  is  a state  so
different  from  the  terrestrial  one,  we  find  ourselves  so
happy  that  we  are  not  tempted  to  think  of  the  earth  ;
but  we  know  that  we  have  lived  there,  left  relations  and
friends  there  whom  we  long  to  see  again.” — “ How  can
we  meet  again  amongst  such  an  immense  number,  and
after  a time  more  or  less  long  ?”  “ That  is  accom-

plished by  the  power  of  God  ; it  is  an  enchantment
incomprehensible.” — “You  say  that  we  all  meet  again
in  families  ; but  those  poor  foundlings  that  have  neither
father  nor  mother,  who  receives  them?”  “There  are
no  fatherless  and  motherless  children  ; if  they  are  for-
saken by  their  parents,  they  find  them  again  in  heaven,
where  nothing  is  lost ; in  the  meanwhile,  they  are  re-
ceived by  their  grandfather  or  grandmother,  they  find  a
family  awaiting  them,  and  are  placed,  although  amongst
millions  and  millions  of  beings,  as  quickly  as  you  would
place  a book  in  your  library ; I tell  you,  it  is  so  mira-
culous that  it  cannot  be  comprehended  or  explained.” —
“ Is  it  still  Gabriel  who  tells  you  these  things  ?”  “ Yes ;
then  again  I am  sensible  of  and  comprehend  them.”

Here  are  two  answers  on  which  I beg  to  fix  for  a
moment  the  attention.  Bruno  says  that  in  heaven  it  is
impossible  to  have  an  evil  thought,  because  our  interior
is  laid  bare.  Swedenborg  has  already  said  that  in  his
Treatise  on  Heaven  and  Hell;  this  revelation  contains
nothing  incomprehensible  before  the  communication  of
thoughts  in  the  somnambulic  state.

The  second  answer  is  that  in  heaven  we  meet  again
our  family  and  friends  as  if  by  enchantment.  We
behold  the  same  miracle — must  we  say  on  earth —
through  the  facility  that  clairvoyants  have  of  seeing  at


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


7


immense  distances,  designated  places,  without  having
any  communication  with  them.

Bruno,  as  I have  said,  has  no  notion  of  psychology,
is  by  no  means  inclined  to  devotion  ; I cannot  influence
him  by  my  manner  of  thinking,  which,  as  will  be  seen,
is  almost  always  heterogeneous  to  his  own.  It  is  in
order  that  the  reader  may  judge  of  my  impartiality  that
I give  an  account  of  all  my  questions  and  the  answers
obtained,  without,  in  the  least,  perverting  their  meaning.

5.  I should  be  much  more  lucid  v/ere  you  not
possessed  by  an  evil  spirit.” — What  do  you  mean  by
that?”  “I  mean  that  a person  with  whom  you  have
no  longer  friendly  relations  is  the  cause  of  your  being
beset  by  an  evil  spirit.” — What  power  can  this  spirit
have  over  me;  I in  no  wise  dread  him ; I have  never  ex-
perienced any  effect  from  him?”  “Ah!  such  are  men
who  dread  nothing  I but  know,  once  for  all,  that  your
power  is  a complete  nullity  before  the  spirit ; it  is  the
spirit  that  moves  matter;  it  is  that  which  possesses
action  and  force,  and  God  alone  knows  w^hat  force  a
spirit  can  display ! You  say  that  you  have  never  felt
the  influence  of  the  one  I speak  of;  do  you  not  re-
collect that  about  three  years  ago,  you  experienced  a
painful  oppression  in  your  slumbers ; you  had  dreadful
visions,  and,  if  you  would  confess  it,  you  were  raised
up  in  your  bed,  and  even  now  you  must  experience  much
difficulty  in  going  to  sleep.” — “True  it  is  that  for  a long
time  I have  had  at  night  nervous  attacks  which  I attri-
bute to  the  weakness  of  my  constitution.  I have  had
also  painful  dreams;  but  that  does  not  prove  to  me  that
it  is  a spirit  sent  especially  by  the  person  you  have
mentioned,  who  can  have  caused  this  trouble.”  “ Let
it  suffice  you  to  know  that  you  ought  to  have  been
aware  of  the  power  of  a spirit,  because  you  desired  to
see  one,  touch  one  ; you  have  been  heard.  You  do  not
tell  me  the  whole  truth,  my  guide  says  so,  and  he  adds
that  if  the  angel  of  light  who  guides  you  had  not  been
so  powerful  you  would  have  seen  others;  you  might


8


THE  SECRETS  OF  TflE  FUTURE


have  been  beaten,  thrown  out  of  your  bed ; you  are
fortunate  at  having  got  off  witli  so  little;  pray,  and  you
will  soon  be  rid  of  it.” — I do  not  very  well  understand
what  you  tell  me ; things  have  passed  which  in  truth
have  caused  me  much  surprise  and  suffering ; but  I
always  attributed  these  facts  to  nervous  irritation  or
some  other  material  cause.^^  It  is  true  that  the  suffer-
ings you  have  experienced  are  owing  to  your  nervous
system  : but  all  that  has  reference  to  the  intelligence
was  under  the  dependence  of  this  evil  spirit,” — You
say  that  it  was  a spirit  sent  to  me  ; this  person  is  alto-
gether innocent  of  intriguing,  and  I am  certain  that  you
are  in  error.^’  I will  explain  to  ^mu  how  it  has  lieen
brought  about.  The  difference  that  happened  between
you  and  this  person,  who  is  several  leagues  off,  took
place  by  correspondence;  you  wrote  something  that
offended  this  person,  who  has  ever  been  jealous  of  you;
he  answered  you  under  the  influence  of  the  contrariety
he  experienced.  This  person  has  very  acrid  humors,
very  ardent  desires,  he  could  have  wished  you  at
the  very  deuce;  he  wrote  to  you  things  that  gave  you
much  pain  ; the  letter  was  the  conductor  of  this  bad
choleric  fluid  ; the  nervous  state  in  which  you  then  were
conduced  to  your  being  invaded  by  this  fluid ; the  dis-
position of  mind  in  which  you  were,  independent  of
this  circumstance,  facilitated  the  introduction  of  this  '
spirit  within  you ; under  the  nature  of  this  fluid,  you
directly  asked  to  see  spirits,  in  which  you  did  not  then
believe,  and  both  circumstances  contributed  towards
placing  you  in  a state  of  obsession.  Drive  back  with
all  your  might  this  fluid  on  the  person  I have  named  ;
pray,  and  you  will  be  released,  and  I shall  be  lucid.”

As  may  be  naturally  supposed,  I made  minute  re-
searches to  confront  the  date  he  gave  me  with  that  of
this  soi-disant  letter.  The  very  next  day  a person  to
whom  I spoke  of  this  revelation  set  me  on  the  right
track  of  this  quarrel,  which  dated,  indeed,  from  the
time  when  I received  a letter  producing  such  an  effect


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


9


of  contrariety  on  my  mind  that  I passed  more  than  three
hours  in  a wood,  a prey  to  such  agitation  that  I knew
not  what  had  become  of  me.  It  is  true  that  from  this
period  I had  extraordinary  visions  ; it  is  certain  that  1
experienced  effects  of  attraction  in  bed  tliougli  wide
awake,  that  I was  obliged,  once  especially,  to  cling  to
it,  seeing  that  I was  being  carried  away,  and  that  half
my  body  was  quite  out  of  bed.  It  is  true  that  at  that
period  I wrote  down  a few  conjurations  in  order  to  enter
into  communication  with  spirits,  and  satisfy  myself
respecting  them  ; then  kept  a journal  of  those  visions
and  corporeal  phenomena,  and  afterwards  classed  the
facts  amongst  those  of  nervous  diseases,  and  I do  not
understand  how  Bruno  can  otherwise  class  them ; I am
unable  to  perceive  in  this  revelation  any  communication
of  thought,  since  I could  not  think  myself,  as  1 was
presumed  to  be  under  the  influence  of  possession,  and
he  was  totally  unacquainted  with  those  facts  to  which  I
attached  no  importance.

6.  ^’'To-day  will  you  be  able  to  see  your  father  better

than  the  last  time  “ I see  him.^^ — Can  you  speak
to  him  “ Yes.” — How  is  he  dressed  ?”  He  is  in

the  same  dress  as  he  wore  on  earth — blue  waistcoat,
pantaloons  of  striped  velvet,  felt  hat,  somewhat  w'orn.”
— ‘^Ask  him  where  he  is  now.”  In  heaven.” — ‘’Is
he  happy  ?”  He  is  very  happy.” — “ What  are  his
occupations  r”  “ He  reads  a great  deal  and  prome-
nades, as  he  did  on  earth.” — ‘‘  Can  he  protect  you  ?”
“He  can  give  me  wholesome  advice:  he  will  come
and  see  me  again  when  I ask  for  him.” — “Who,
pray,  thus  awakes  you  at  the  moment  I least  ex-
pected itr”  “Gabriel.” — For  what  reason?”  “Be-
cause he  foresees  that  the  evil  genius  could  answer  me
in  his  place,  and,  in  order  to  thwart  his  designs,  he  will
awake  me  thus  whenever  he  deems  it  not  fit,  for  the
moment,  to  answer  your  questions.”

7.  “ Have  evil  spirits  a chief  whom  we  term  the

Hevil  ?”  “ No.” — “ Have  all  spirits  existed  on  earth  ?”

B


10


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


“Yes.” — “'Angels  and  spirits,  are  they  not  equal
“ No : angels  and  spirits  are  men  who  have  inhabited
the  earth,  but  there  is  a great  difference  in  their  attribu-
tions, understanding,  and  wisdom.  The  angels  are
nearer  to  God,  better  acquainted  with  his  designs,  and
put  them  in  execution.”  — “ Have  angels  wings
“ The  wings  represented  on  their  shoulders  are  merely
symbols,  figurative  of  the  speed  with  which  they  clear
space,  seeing  that  for  them  there  is  no  space.  Posi-
tively speaking, , they  have  none  ; but  to  those  who
believe,  and  desire  to  see  them  with  wings,  they  appear
thus.” — “Do  spirits  work  in  heaven? — do  they  eat  and
drink  ?”  “ They  do  in  heaven  precisely  what  is  done

on  earth,  with  this  difference,  that  it  is  no  longer  a want,
but  a pleasure.  It  is  not  for  money  that  they  work,
but  for  pleasure’s  sake.” — “ Can  spirits  carry  material
objects  ?”  “ Some  have  this  property  : their  strength

is  incomprehensible,  when  thej^  are  allowed  to  make  use
of  it.”

8.  At  this  sitting  I obtained  no  information  worth
mentioning.  Bruno  is  aroused,  and  if,  perchance,  I put
to  him  a question  previously  submitted  to  him  (a  cir-
cumstance fraught  with  great  difficulties  to  me,  unable
as  I am  to  recollect  exactly  whether  I have  put  such  or
such  a question),  he  is  suddenly  aroused,  saying,  “ You

have  ahead v been  answered.”  This  has  occurred  several
¥

times,  even  in  medical  consultations.  I am,  conse-
quently, obliged  to  take  ever}'^  possible  precaution.

9.  “ What  is  the  substance  of  a spirit?”  “It  is  a

substance  similar  to  air,  for  which  reason  it  can  traverse
all  bodies  without  encountering  obstacles.” — “ What  is
the  special  form  of  a spirit?”  “ That  of  man,  since  all
spirits  have  been  men  on  earth ; but  it  can  assume  the
form  it  desires  when  disengaged  from  matter.” — “ You
say  that  there  are  wicked  spirits  around  the  earth : are
there  any  also  in  heaven  ?”  “ There  are  no  wicked

spirits  in  heaven : they  wander  around  the  earth.”
— “Why  is  it, thus?”  “To  gratify  their  desire  to  do


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


11


evil,  which  is  rather  the  accomplishment  of  a mission,
which,  when  terminated,  restores  them  to  the  state  of
the  good,  and  then  they  go  to  heaven,  as  the  rest.  No
one  is  excluded.” — ^^Who  orders  them  to  do  evil?”
“ Evil  is  useful ; without  it  there  would  be  no  good.
We  could  not  appreciate  the  one  without  the  other.
Evil  is  the  consequence  of  good  ; the  good  of  one  is  the
evil  of  another,  and  the  latter  tends  to  the  good  of  the
former.  God  has  deemed  fit  thus  to  act,  and  we  must
be  satisfied.”

10.  Bruno  is  in  a powerful  ecstasy : he  goes  to
heaven  for  the  first  time ; sees  there  his  father,  who  is
reading  whilst  seated  at  a small  table.  “ What  book  is
that  your  father  has  in  his  hands  ?”  “ It  is  similar  to

ours,  but  the  impression  is  not  the  same.” — Of  what
form  is  the  impression  ?”  There  are  letters  in  the
form  of  a D ; then,  again,  others  similar  to  a school-
boy’s pot-hooks,  &c.  I can  scarcely  describe  it  to  you.
My  father  closes  the  book,  and  says  that  we  should  not
comprehend  this  writing.  Suffer  me  a moment  to  re-
turn to  heaven.”  At  the  lapse  of  a quarter  of  an  hour
he  awakes,  looks  at  his  bed  with  an  air  of  contempt,
and  exclaims,  Oh  ! I can  very  well  understand  why
the  dead  regret  not  the  earth.  Who,  pray,  would  desire
to  vegetate  on  this  heap  of  dust,  after  seeing  what  I
have  just  seen  ?”  — “ What,  then,  have  you  seen  ?”

Heaven.” — “ Well,  let  me  hear  all  about  it.^’  “Oh  !
I was  in  a place  having  no  horizon,  illumed  by  a superb
light ; before  me  was  a being  whom  I believe  to  be  God,
seated  on  a throne.  On  his  head  was  a brilliant  cap ;
his  beard  was  gray,  I believe ; his  arm  resting  on  that  of
his  fauteuil ; and  he  wore  a robe  of  crimson  velvet
spangled  all  over  with  golden  flowers-de-luce.  His  air
was  majestic.  He  was  speaking  to  his  Ministers,  six  or
seven  in  number;  I did  not  count  them.  They  were  all
seated  on  the  steps  of  the  throne,  and  attired  in  a robe
of  the  same  stuff  and  colour  as  that  of  God ; but  I do
not  think  I saw  any  gold  embroidery  on  them.  Around

B 2


12


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


them,  and  in  the  distance,  were  a multitude  of  beings,
promenading.  Oh  ! how  ugly  are  the  men  of  the  eartli,
compared  with  those  beautiful  countenances  — those
complexions  so  fair ! Over  one  shoulder  they  had  a
covering  of  gauze  in  the  form  of  a scarf,  then  a small
robe  of  gauze  so  fine  that  their  whole  form  was  easily
l^erceived  ; their  feet  were  in  sandals  fastened  to  bus-
kins; but,  oh'God,  how  beautiful  it  was!  I was  raised
into  the  air ; I beheld  the  earth  under  my  feet,  and  all
those  insignificant  beings,  men,  so  vain,  so  proud,  that
they  appeared  to  me  paltry  and  mean  compared  with
the  divine  beings  before  me  ! How  dirty  and  dark,
too,  appears  to  me  this  room  compared  with  the  places
I beheld.  Oh ! I could  have  wished  never  to  wake
again.  I can  very  well  understand  the  Colonel  who
attaches  no  value  to  the  200,000  francs  he  has  lost.
What  are  the  riches  of  the  earth  compared  with  those
of  heaven  ? What  would  I not  have  given  could  you
but  have  beheld  this  sublime  sight  1”  “ My  dear
Bruno,  you  were  in  a superior  ecstasy.  I am  sorry
that  I was  not  aware  of  it ; I should  have  counselled
you  to  a thorough  observation  of  many  things.  We
ought,  how’’ever,  to  deem  ourselves  fortunate  that  you
have  the  pow'er  of  recollection,  as  it  gives  you  so  much
pleasure  and  me  precious  information,  only  I think
that  you  have  been  mistaken  with  respect  to  the  per-
sonage you  take  for  God  ; it  could  not  be  the  Supreme
Being.  We  will  inquire  by  and  by.”

11.  “ Ask  your  guide  whether  it  was  God  whom  you,
in  your  ecstasy,  saw  the  other  day  “ No,  it  was
Gabriel  himself.” — “ Why  did  he  appear  to  you  thus
presiding  at  his  council  “ He  was  not  presiding  at  a
council  that  day,  he  wished  to  give  me  a sitting.” —
“ For  what  purpose'?”  “To  display  to  me  the  glories
and  riches  that  God  has  in  store  for  those  who  love
him.” — “ What  do  you  mean  by  glories  and  riches  ?

I mean  the  faculties  with  which  the  soul  obtains
what  constitutes  its  joy.” — “ Is  he  always  attired


REVEALED  THROL’GII  MAGNETISM.


13


thus  ?”  “ No  ; it  was  to  impart  more  charms  to  my

vision.” — “ Ask  him  if  Gabriel  is  his  real  name
‘^No;  the  angels  in  heaven  have  no  name;  they  may
take  one  to  visit  men  : that  of  Gabriel  signifies  God’s
angel  of  light.”

12.  ‘‘You  once  told  me  that  Gabriel  was  also  my
angel ; he  may  then  be  the  guide  of  several  persons  at
once  r”  “ Thousands.” — ‘‘  But  how  can  that  be  ? It
is  incomprehensible.”  Precisely,  because  it  is  extra-
ordinary, it  is  so ; did  it  seem  an  easy  matter  to  us,
they  would  not  be  our  superiors ; from  the  fact  of  their
accomplishing  things  which  we  do  not  comprehend,
they  surpass  us.”

1.3.  Ask  Gabriel  why,  despite  my  wish  to  believe
all  I see,  all  you  predict,  I am  still  incredulous,  and
unable  to  attain  that  faith  which  is  said  to  be  so  ne-
cessary to  arrive  at  great  mathematical  solutions.”
“ You  will  believe  by-and-bye,  doubt  is  not  forbidden  ;
the  more  one  has  doubted  the  stronger  the  faith
becomes.  You  will  believe;  follow  your  impulsions,  it
is  no  crime.  Important  revelations  are  prepared  for
you,  you  will  be  instructed  by  degrees.”

14.  You  have  told  me  that  you  beheld  heaven  as
an  immensity  without  bounds,  could  you  give  me  a
fuller  description  of  it  ?”  “ It  is  an  immensity  bound-

less, ever  illumed  by  a most  brilliant  light,  conse-
quently there  is  no  night.” — Is  time  reckoned  there
as  on  earth?”  ^^No.” — Do  angels  like  yours  behold
God?”  “Yes.” — “In  what  form?”  “That  of  the
sun  ?” — “ Is  it  our  terrestrial  sun  ?”  “ No  ; there  is  in

heaven  but  one  sun  which  is  the  spiritual  sun,  in  the
form  in  which  God  appears  ; our  terrestrial  sun  is  itself
but  the  reflector  of  the  rays  he  receives.”  “ Are  there
distances  in  heaven  for  those  who  dwell  in  it  ?”  “They
know  none ; for  no  sooner  do  they  desire  to  be  in  a
particular  place  than  they  are  there.” — “How  are
spirits  found  there  ? assembled  or  dispersed  ?”  “ They
are  in  societies,  according  to  their  tastes,  and  walk


14


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


about  as  on  earth.” — “Are  there  several  heavens
Yes ; there  are  three.” — Give  me  some  idea  of
them.”  “They  are  placed  one  above  another  like
clouds ; according  to  their  qualities,  men  after  their
death  go  to  one  or  the  other.”

15.  “ You  told  me  there  were  three  heavens  placed
one  above  another  like  clouds  ?”  “ Yes ; they  are

kinds  of  spheres,  for  all  that  exists  has  a sphere.
Gabriel  can  envelop  in  his  every  being  under  his  eegis ;
in  like  manner,  man  has  a particular  circle  surrounding
him,  and  within  which  is  contained  all  that  it  is  neces-
sary for  him  to  possess.” — “ Some  authors  have  already
spoken  of  these  kinds  of  spheres,  and  even  gone  so  far
as  to  say  that  man  contained  within  his  own  a universe
in  miniature.”  “ Do  not  let  that  astonish  you ; man,  it
is  true,  possesses  a material  universe  in  miniature.”

Those  heavens,  no  doubt,  are  the  beautiful  azure
field  studded  with  stars,  which  we  admire  above  our
heads  ?”  “No,  it  is  above  us,  above  our  earth;  but  in
an  atmosphere  more  pure  and  of  immense  extent,  and
these  heavens  seem  to  form  but  one,  they  present  no
difficulty  to  traverse.” — “ How  after  death  do  we
ascend  to  heaven?”  “As  a bubble,  a little  air  ascend-
ing on  water.” — “ Have  we  a form  when  quitting  the
body?”  “No;  but  it  delineates  itself  gradually,  and
on  entering  heaven  has  that  of  man,  which  it  ever
preserves,  without,  as  you  may  suppose,  undergoing
change  as  on  earth.”

IG.  Bruno  furnishes  me  with  still  further  details  as  to
spirits.  “ A spirit  is  air,”  said  he,  “ but  it  can  assume
the  form  it  desires,  carry  very  heavy  burdens.  In  the
state  I am  now,  I am  a spirit  like  them ; I am  out  of
my  body,  I perceive  it  seated  on  the  chair  ; I walk  about
in  my  room  without  being  seen  or  felt  by  you  whom  I
touch.  I even  see  m.yself  at  my  shop-board  preparing  to
go  to  work.  I see  myself  wherever  I wish  ; this  would
make  me  believe  that  I am  several  beings.  As  images  im-
pressed in  each  place,  I regard  my  soul — at  this  moment


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


15


it  is  similar  in  everything  to  anybody,  only  I perceive
in  it  a whiter  brow,  and  I am  more  comely  than  my
body.’^

17*  “Why  at  times  do  you  answer  me  almost  before
I have  finished  questioning  you — you  cannot  have  time
to  reproduce  my  words  ?’^  “ That  astonishes  you,  and

you  will  be  still  more  astonished  when  I tell  you  that  I
myself  am  at  times  a quiet  spectator  of  the  words  pro-
nounced by  my  mouth ; it  often  happens  that  1 take  no
part  in  the  discussions  carried  on  between  you  and
Gabriel,  it  is  he  who  insinuates  himself  into  my  body,
answers  by  my  voice  your  questions,  and  I find  myself
a mere  auditor  of  your  discussions  ; you  cannot  believe
this  since  you  do  not  believe  in  spirits.” — “ I think  I
have  sufficiently  proved  to  you  that  I believed  in  the
existence  of  the  soul  after  its  separation  from  the  body,
and  consequently  in  the  existence  of  spirits,  since  the
soul  is  one  ; but  I cannot  comprehend  and  place  a blind
faith  in  all  you  tell  me,  without  annihilating  the  facul-
ties of  the  soul : I cannot  very  well  appreciate  them
without  unexceptionable  proofs.”  “ You  will  not  want
for  proofs ; but  they  will  not  always  respond  to  those
demanded  by  material  reason,  because  I have  already
told  you  that  the  two  states  of  being  are  so  incompatible
(although  linked  with  each  other)  that  they  cannot  be
proved  by  each  other ; one  appears  to  exist  only  by  the
other,  and  it  is  the  spiritual  which  is  the  real  life,  the
material  life  being  only  a copy  of  the  former,  and  en-
compassed with  errors.”

18.  For  some  time  I had  not  magnetised  Bruno,
when  one  day  he  came  to  me  quite  ill,  and  making
many  apologies  for  his  neglect  towards  me,  begged  me
to  cure  him  as  I had  already  done  several  times  before.
Scarcely  was  he  sent  to  sleep  than  he  said  to  me  : “ You
would  never  believe  that  the  complaint  I labour  under
is  caused  by  evil  spirits  that  have  taken  up  their  abode
in  my  stomach.”  Had  I not  known  Bruno  for  a frank
and  kind  friend,  I should  have  thought  that  he  wanted


in  THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE

to  mystify  me ; but  I was  assured  of  his  good  faith  in
all  he  said  to  me,  and  could  only  fancy  that  he  was  very
susceptible  of  hallucination.  However,  it  came  into  my
head  that  Sv/edenborg  affirmed  in  his  writings  that  spirits
often  assembled  in  society  in  some  part  of  the  body.
The  possessions  operated  at  Loudun,  and  a thousand
otlier  analogous  facts  seem  to  impart  a sort  of  truthful-
ness to  this  assertion.  I let  Bruno  utter  before  me  his
system  at  his  ease,  contenting  myself  with  always  ques-
tioning whenever  he  appeared  ol)scure.  I said  to  him,
therefore — “ Explain  to  me  how  that  appears  to  you
possible  ?”  “ People  often  say,  my  complaint  lies  here,

I have  a swelling,  a pain,  complaints  that  we  attribute
to  a cold,  or  something  else,  when,  properly  speaking,
it  is  the  work  of  spirits  that  insinuate  themselves  into
our  bodies  to  disturb,  by  all  possible  means,  the  har-
mony of  life,  to  create  distress  and  unhappiness,  in
order  to  gratify  their  propensity  for  mischief  and  trouble.
The  world  would  look  upon  him  as  a madman  who
should  say  that  a spirit,  in  the  form  of  wind  or  a
swelling,  produced  the  cholic  or  inflammation,  in  order
to  paralyse  our  action  by  keeping  us  in  bed,  or  confined
to  our  room  at  a moment  when  we  ou^ht  to  be  out
attending  to  business,  which  often,  by  an  apparently
trifling  delay,  suffers  much,  and  sometimes  the  most
important  effects  thus  depend  on  the  most  insignificant
causes.  The  cause  is  otherwise  seen,  or  to  speak  more
correctly,  not  seen  at  all,  and  poor  humanity  finds  itself
blinded  by  its  foolish  pride,  which  would  be  unwilling
to  descend  so  low  as  to  admit  what  I say.’’

19.  You  told  me  yesterday  that  spirits  in  some
form  or  other  introduced  themselves  into  our  bodies,  to
torment  us  at  their  pleasure  under  the  mask  of  disease ;
we  are,  then,  the  veriest  slaves  of  the  universe  ; it  is  by
no  means  to  be  presumed  that  we  are  the  sport  of  such
or  such  a spirit,  according  to  his  caprice  ?”  “ What  I

told  you  yesterday  is  the  fruit  of  my  knowledge  in  the
state  I am ; it  is  my  conviction.  I speak  of  what  I


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.  17

behold  with  my  own  eyes,  and  I defy  any  somnambulist,
having  the  light  1 have,  to  belie  me.*’ — “ How  is  it  that
a spirit  that  must  have  some  form,  can  take  that  of  a
trifling  swelling,  of  wind,  cScc. ; it  is  impossible,  incom-
prehensible I”  It  is  owing  to  our  inability  to  com-
prehend it  that  they  do  so  ; were  there  nothing  miracu-
lous in  their  actions,  they  wmuld  not  be  superior  to  us;
could  they  do  the  mischief  to  each  other  that  they  do
■us,  they  would  not  make  us  their  victims,  but  as  they
can  neither  deceive  nor  influence  one  another,  they,  of
•necessitVj  torment  us  ; and,  as  I have  alread}"  told  you,
the  man  who  by  their  counsels  devotes  himself  to  the
doins:  of  evil,  calls  them  even  to  his  assistance.  When
he  quits  the  earth,  he  takes  the  place  of  the  spirit  who
led  him  into  evil,  and  the  latter  passes  into  a sphere
where  his  evil  thoughts  no  longer  accompany  him  ;
thus  proceeds  that  purification  from  the  earth  to  God.^’ —
“ You  have,  however,  told  me  that  wicked  spirits  had
a mission  for  evil;  that  this  evil  was  beneficial;  that
God  punished  not  the  guilty.”  “ I told  you,  it  is  true,
that  evil  was  beneficial,  but  in  order  to  be  put  in  exe-
cution it  must  assume  a form.  It  is  not  yOur  good
angel  who  will  give  a form  to  evil ; his  mission  is  to
give  or  apply  a form  to  good : it  is,  therefore,  the  evil
one  that  is  obliged  to  apply  evil  in  order  to  satisfy  his
want  of  enjoying  his  work.  If  he  had  not  the  taste  of
acting  thus,  evil  could  not  exist ; then  he  can  draw
from  it,  and  raise  up  for  us  a host  of  evils,  each  of
which  represents  an  evil  spirit  or  its  action.  The  good
one  acts  quite  the  reverse,  and  thus  it  happens  that
this  perpetual  conflict  of  good  and  evil  cannot  termi-
nate so  long  as  the  material  man  exists.  This,  then,
was  the  reason  for  my  telling  you,  and  I repeat  it,  that
all  the  angels  and  the  evil  spirits  that  are  on  the  earth
in  pairs  beside  us  to  lead  us  to  good  and  evil,  as  we
lead  a child,  have  been  men  on  earth ; it  is  only  since
they  quitted  it  that  they  are  what  they  are,  and  it  may
easily  be  divined  from  his  very  inclinations  what  part  a


18  THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE

man  living  on  earth  will  play  after  quitting  it : the  more
he  has  desired  to  do  evil,  the  more  he  will  cause  to  be
done  when,  in  his  turn,  he  shall  be  called  upon  as  a
guide,  instead  of  being,  as  he  was  on  earth,  guided  ; it
is  a chain  that  runs  ad  infinitum,  many  links  of  which
are  still  hidden  from  us/^ — “ You  just  now  told  me
that  spirits  cannot  influence  each  other,  how  is  it  that
a little  ptisan  or  a cataplasm  cures  the  swelling  or  in-
flammation which  you  represent  as  an  evil  spirit  ?'^  I
told  you  that  they  had  no  influence  over  each  other  in
the  spiritual  world  ; but  on  earth  it  is  different,  seeing
that  it  is  on  this  continual  influence  that  our  life  de-
pends ; and  I will  answer  you  that  the  remedy  you
apply  is  the  influence  of  the  good  spirit  in  the  form  of
a flower  or  grain,  and  thus  it  is  that  they  drive  each
other  out  by  remedial  applications,  or  their  contraries,
in  material  forms  which  they  can  influence  at  will.” —
In  that  case  all  that  exists  is  but  a compound  of
spirits  ?”  Certainly,  in  so  far  as  they  can  invest  all
the  forms  of  it,  that  there  is  nothing  dead  in  nature,
and  that  all  that  exists  is  divided  into  two  camps,  the

one  good,  the  other  bad,  or  1 should  rightly  say^’

Whilst  you  are  about  it,  say ; keep  back  nothing ;
your  system  does  not  displease  me.”  “ Well,  I will
tell  you  that  good  and  evil  are  what  they  are  only  be-
cause we  find  ourselves  in  positions  wherein  we  are
unable  to  appreciate  their  effects ; for,  according  to  the
position,  evil  is  a good  for  one,  and  good  is  an  evil  for
the  other.  Such  we  perceive  to  be  the  case  with  fire,
which  effects  the  greatest  good  when  we  stand  in  need
of  it,  and  annoys  when  it  is  not  required ; not  that  I
pretend  by  this  that  a man  who  breaks  his  thigh  de-
rives good  from  it ; but,  although  this  accident  in  our
eyes  is  in  the  category  of  evil,  the  doctor,  and  all  those
who  live  on  the  evil  of  others,  find  therein  as  much
good  as  the  patient  does  evil : so,  judge.” — “ I acknow-
ledge that  you  are  ingenious.”  1 am  right.” — “ I
doifft  deny  it.”  I must  not  terminate  this  sitting  with-


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


19


out  making  mention  of  a somewhat  similar  revelation
of  which  I was  once  a witness  at  a party  to  which  I had
been  invited  to  see  a somnambulist  who  was  singularly
susceptible  of  the  physical  influence  of  her  magnetiser.
A gentleman  approaches  her  to  consult  her  as  to  an
indisposition  he  experienced,  and,  I believe,  to  know  at
the  same  time  what  to  think  of  somnambulism.  Scarcely
was  she  in  communication  with  him  than  she  said  to
him:  “ Your  complaint  is  not  in  the  least  dangerous;
it  is  an  inflammation  caused  by  an  unfortunate  passion
you  have.^^ — “What  passion?’^  asked  he.  “You  will
not  take  offence  if  I mention  it  before  company.^’ —
Mention  it,  I have  nought  to  reproach  myself  v/ith.”
“ You  are  too  often  thirsty.”  Every  one  began  to
laugh,  following  the  example  of  the  consulter.  “ I have
not  always  had  this  failing,”  replied  he.  “ I perceive
it,  and  I also  perceive  the  cause.” — “ What  is  it  ?”  “A
long,  long  time  ago,  you  passionately  loved  a young-
person  ; she  did  not  return  your  love,  because  you  were
not  disposed  to  wed  her,  for  good  reasons  which  you
then  had.  You  left  that  part  of  the  country  in  which
she  lives,  and  since  that  time  she  conceived  such  a
hatred  towards  you  that  she  wished  you  all  possible
harm ; you  became  a victim  to  her  evil  influence.” —
What  do  you  mean  by  that  ? ” “ I mean  that  from

that  period  you  have  been  under  the  influence  of  an
evil  spirit,  that  has  disordered  your  conduct,  by  kindling
in  you  a fire  which  you  always  thought  you  could
extinguish  or  moderate,  by  giving  yourself  up  to  drink;
and,  what  is  more,  those  desires  for  drink  are  in  you
periodical.” — “ What  you  tell  me  is  exact  as  to  the
circumstance  and  my  failing;  but  I cannot  believe  that
such  is  the  real  cause.”  “You  clearly  perceive,  however,
that  I tell  you  the  truth  on  one  point,  I do  not  deceive
you  on  the  other;  but  doiflt  be  down-hearted,  there  is  a
remedy.” — “ Drinking  no  more,  doubtless  ?”  “ Oh  ! you
could  not  leave  it  off  of  yourself ; there  is  no  power  but
that  I shall  point  out  to  you  that  can  set  you  free.” — “ Tell


20


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


me  wliat  that  power  is  ?”  “ At  night,  before  going  to  bed,
kneel  down,  pray  to  God  from  the  bottom  of  your
heart  to  deliver  you  from  this  failing  ; then,  rise,  animate
your  thoughts  by  the  recollection  of  what  1 tell  you,
strive  to  pass  into  a state  of  exaltation,  then  raise  your
arms,  fancying  to  yourself  that  this  person  is  present
before  you,  and  cast  at  her,  with  disdain  and  wrath,  the
evil  iiuid  with  which  you  are  impregnated,  saying,

^ Evil  spirit  who  besettest  me,  flee  far  from  me,  in  the
name  of  God,  the  sole  Creator,  thy  master  and  mine ;
return  to  the  source  whence  thou  earnest.’  Pray  your
good  angel  to  aid  you  in  this  operation  ; do  this  until
you  are  released,  and  you  will  not  be  long  before  being
so,  I assure  you.” — How  would  you  have  the  fluid  of
which  you  speak  rejoin  that  woman  who  is  more  than  a
hundred  and  fifty  leagues  from  here  r”  ‘‘  Fancying  to
yourself  that  she  is  in  your  room,  she  will  no  longer  be
a hundred  and  fifty  leagues  off.” — “ I can’t  comprehend
that.”  “ x\ct  without  comprehending,  and  you  will  see.”

The  magnetiser,  who  believes  not  in  spirits,  but  takes
much  delight  in  rendering  his  somnambulist  cataleptic,
resumed  his  experiments  without  paying  any  attention
to  what  he  liad  just  heard.  As  this  revelation  bore  so
close  an  affinity  to  those  of  Bruno  and  my  other
ecstatics,  I took  note  of  it,  and  now  mention  it,  deem-
ing this  to  be  an  appropriate  place,  in  order  to  fix  the
thoughts  of  the  reader  on  this  kind  of  possession.
True  that  this  is  raising  new  difficulties  as  to  the  ex-
istence or  non-existence  of  free-will,  and  apparently  in
favour  of  the  latter  belief.  However,  this  kind  of
alienation  of  the  faculties  of  men  could  not  be  gei^e-
ralised,  and  this  power  of  a few  beings  over  their
fellows  would  rather  seem  merely  an  assemblage  of  two
organizations,  one  of  which  is  destined  to  subdue  or
dominate  the  other  for  a time  and  similar  enough  to  the
power  of  magnetism,  which  is  null  before  an  organiza-
tion that  enters  not  into  correspondence  with  it;  un-
fortunate, indeed,  would  it  be  were  it  otherwise ; the


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


21


mere  wish  of  an  enemy  would  suffice  to  reduce  you  to
a state  the  most  abject  and  dependent ; I repeat,  how-
ever, that  it  is  possible.

20.  After  a moment’s  concentration,  Bruno  perceives
coming  towards  him  an  angel,  in  celestial  costume —
transparent  robe,  wavy  hair,  feminine  physiognomy,
legs  bare,  feet  in  buskined  sandals  ; this  angel  carries
off  Bruno,  who  tells  me  he  is  leaving  his  body  and
going  away;  at  the  lapse  of  an  ihstant,  he  says : — “ 1
have  traversed  clouds  ; my  angel  conducted  me  to  my
father,  and  left  me  alone  with  him.” — “ What  was  your
father  doing?”  “^He  is  still  reading.” — ^‘Is  he  happy?”
“ Yes.” — “ Does  he  eat,  drink,  and  sleep  ?”  He  eats,

drinks,  and  sleeps  only  when  disposed  to  do  so  for
pleasure’s  sake,  and  not  through  necessity ; if  he  has  a
mind  for  a pear  or  any  other  fruit,  he  gathers  it  and  eats
it ; but,  I repeat,  it  is  not  through  necessity,  for  spirits
have  no  wants  of  this  kind  in  heaven.” — ‘‘  What  are
their  usages  and  occupations  ?”  The  same  as  on
earth,  what  best  pleases  them.” — “ What  are  their
acquirements  ?”  “ Such  as  they  are  pleased  to  have,

they  study  and  learn  by  themselves  what  they  desire  to
know.” — “ Can  your  father  be  deceived  ?”  “ No.” —

Can  he  answer  me  a few  questions^”  ^^Yes.” —
Was  it  a good  spirit  that  came  at  the  last  sitting  ?”
No,  I suspected  him ; but  they  are  all  so  very
malicious,  and  wrap  themselves  up  in  so  much  pre-
caution, that  one  has  some  difficulty  in  recognising
them.” — “W^hat  now  tells  you  that  it  is  really  your
father  who  speaks  to  you  ? Can  an  evil  spirit  assume
his  form  ?”  “ Yes  ; but  my  father  will  make  himself

known  by  placing  his  hand  on  his  breast,  a sign  that  an
evil  spirit  cannot  take,  because  God  permits  only  the
good  to  make  use  of  these  kinds  of  signs  : — an  angel,
for  instance,  will  be  recognised  by  a star,  a crescent,  a
diamond,  or  precious  stone.  Were  it  not  for  this  we
should  never  distinguish  betv.’een  a good  and  an  evil
spirit.”


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


90


21.  “I  see  an  angel  that  I can  scarcely  fix  my  eye
on.  Oh!  it  is  an  angel  of  light — ‘‘Ask  him  his
name  1’^  “ He  answers  me,  Gabriel ; but  I cannot

speak  to  him,  because  he  himself  is  speaking  to  a
throng  of  persons  assembled  around  him  ; he  is  holding
two  crowns  which  he  displays  to  me ; they  are  for  us
two.” — When  will  he  give  us  these  crowns?”
heaven.” — “We  have  plenty  of  time.”  “ You  have  less
than  you  imagine.” — - How  should  you  know  ?”  I
can  perceive  it.” — “ How  so  ?”  “ I am  shown  a very

brilliant  six,  v/hich  signifies  six  years;  then  again  I
perceive  your  body  l^efore  me  deprived  of  life,  or  at
least  life  quitting  it.”- — “ Look  at  it  dying,  no  doubt  it  is
from  a disease  of  the  chest.”  “No,  of  the  side,  which
will  work  its  way  up  to  the  throat  and  suffocate  you —
must  I say  it — suddenly.” — “ Look  and  describe  to  me
this  scene.”  “ I perceive  your  soul  in  the  form  of
smoke  from  incense,  issuing  through  all  your  pores,
gradually  assuming  the  form  of  your  body,  then  you
ascend  as  graduall)’-,  traverse  the  two  circles,  arrive  at
the  third;  you  receive  the  remonstrance  due  to  your
faults  from  the  part  of  God;  you  are  not  pure  enough  to
remain  in  this  circle  which  is  the  most  divine,  you
descend  again  to  complete  your  purification ; there,  I
perceive  you  receiving  the  crown  of  a green  colour
which  has  been  just  shown  me ; you  are  of  a dazzling
whiteness ; your  figure  is  more  graceful,  your  hair  glossy,
forehead  open,  in  short  like  all  spirits,  without  losing
the  form  of  your  features,  they  are  more  delicate,  and
set  off  by  that  celestial  whiteness  which  renders  all
spirits  so  beautiful  to  behold  1 You  give  yourself  up  to
the  study  of  books ; you  have  pens,  ink,  and  paper,  you
write,  and  as  you  are  very  fond  of  little  children,  you
have  several  around  you ; you  are  holding  a little  boy
who  is  indebted  to  you  for  life ; you  will  not  be  long
before  you  go  up  to  the  higher  heaven.  How  singular
it  is  I I see  you  in  heaven  without  ceasing  to  perceive
you  on  earth ! You  appear  to  me  clad  in  white  like


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


23


many  others.’^ — ‘^You  see  me  read  and  write;  since  we
obtain  a knowledge  of  all  we  desire  without  having  re-
course to  those  means,  they  appear  to  me  useless !”  “I
have  already  told  you  that  in  heaven  we  were  not
as  mummies,  we  possess  there  the  same  passions  as  on
earth,  especially  those  which  render  us  as  happy  as
possible ; so,  you  who  love  study  devote  yourself  to  it,
you  write  clown  your  reflections;  but,  as  you  may
imagine,  on  subjects  otherwise  grave  and  curious  than
on  earth:  they  are  true  writings,  whilst  on  earth  they
are  but  romances,  trifles  ; you  will  know  as  much  as
you  desire,  and  you  will  not  fail  desiring.^^ — “ When  my
soul  left  my  body,  did  it  appear  to  you  to  form  a body
similar  to  mine  in  all  its  organs  I .have  just  told

you  that  it  was  delineated  perfectly  well,  but  became
more  distinct  as  it  rose,  and  when  at  length  conveyed  to
its  abode  in  heaven,  it  was  in  all  similar  to  the  body,
apart  the  delicacy  of  the  features  and  the  whiteness  of
the  skin.  In  the  circle  you  will  be,  you  will  have  the
power  of  visiting  the  earth.”

21  d.  “ ]\ly  guide  is  near  me,  have  you  any  questions
to  put  to  him  ?”  Can  your  guide  see  matter  ?”  “ Yes.”
— Other  spirits  answer  the  contrary  !”  “ Because

they  have  not  that  power,  mine  can  see  it.  If  certain
spirits  could  not  see  matter,  how  would  you  have  them
convey  objects,  cause  obsessions,  upset  furniture  and  all
material  things.  To  strike  a blow  on  this  chest  of
drawers,  it  is  necessary  to  see  it ; to  ring  this  bell  it  must
be  seen  ; to  upset  this  vase  it  must  be  known  where  it
stands  ; to  bring  a letter  or  anything  else  it  must  be  held.
My  guide  says  that  he  can  see  at  will  material  objects.”
— “ Whether  is  it  matter  or  spirit  that  is  sensible  ?”  “ It
is  spirit  that  renders  matter  sensible  and  supports  it.” —

If  spirit  supports  matter,  why  should  a person  whose
leg  has  been  amputated  stand  in  need  of  a wooden  leg,
seeing  that  he  has  a spiritual  leg,  since,  according  to
you,  the  soul  is  in  all  similar  to  the  body  ?”  Such
person  has  a spiritual  leg  that  no  power  in  the  world  can


24


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


separate  from  his  body;  but  this  leg  no  longer  having
the  material  organs  in  which  it  performed  its  functions,
it  cannot,  any  more  than  a workman  without  tools,  do
anything  where  they  are  necessary.’^ — It'  it  be  matter
animated  by  the  spirit  which  suffers  or  is  sensible,  why
should  this  same  person  suffer  at  times  as  if  he  had  his
material  leg  ; the  sj)irit  then  can  suffer  alone  ?'^  “ I see

at  this  moment  one  who  has  undergone  an  operation.  I
perceive  his  spiritual  leg,  which  is  much  whiter  than  the
other,  I assure  you,  although  I equally  perceive  the
wooden  leg  that  supports  him ; and  my  guide  makes  it
clearly  perceptible  to  me  that  the  suffering  which  this
man  experiences  owes  its  sensibility  merely  to  its
alliance  with  th^  material  body,  it  is  subject  to  all  the
sensations  of  this  material  leg  of  which  it  is  the  prolon-
gation ; but  this  painful  sensibility  cannot  exist  when  the
perishable  body  is  totally  separated  from  the  soul.^^ —
“ Could  you  tell  me  how  it  was  that  the  Fanatics  of
the  18th  century  who  M^ere  subject  to  convulsive  fits,
being  submitted  to  tests  which  metals  cannot  resist,
were  not  crushed  by  these  experiments  r’  “ All  that
w’as  operated  by  the  will  and  power  of  God,  and  as  you
are  aware,  nothing  is  impossible  to  him,  the  spirit  with-
drew from  these  bodies ; this  rendered  them  insensible,
and  then  God  supported  them  in  these  cruel  experi-
ments ; it  is  impossible  for  us  to  comprehend  this
miracle.^’ — The  spirit  of  God  lent  itself,  therefore,  to
such  farces  ?”  “ I have  no  answer  for  your  question,

God  is  not  an  actor,  whom  we  may  hiss  or  applaud  ! \'^
22.  ‘‘  Ask  your  guide  whether  we  are  reunited  in
heaven  to  the  woman  we  loved  on  earth  ?”  “ Not

always  ; we  are  reunited  to  the  wmman  who  was  created
after  our  own  image,  having  the  same  affections,  wants,
and  tastes  as  ourselves.^-’ — “ What  am  I to  understand
by  this  ? the  wife  of  the  earth  may  not  be  the  wife  of
heaven.’^  “ No,  in  heaven,  as  I have  told  you,  we  can
neither  dissemble  nor  conceal  aught  from  each  other ;
every  one  can  read  in  your  heart  and  know  your  real


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETlSJr.


25


affections ; on  earth  it  is  very  different,  the  material  body
conceals  the  defects  of  the  soul;  we  fancy  the  existence
of  a mutual  feeling,  we  meet ; but  as  soon  as  our  gross
passions  are  satisfied,  directly  the  body  has  no  longer  any
want,  we  resume  our  liberty  of  acting,  thinking ; we  no
longer  dissemble,  and  perceive  too  late  that  we  should
be  best  far  away  from  each  other.  As  every  one  bears
with  him  to  heaven  his  earthly  affections,  as  we  cannot
make  a sacrifice  of  them  to  any  one,  but,  on  the  con-
trary, must  gratify  them,  we  no  longer  seek  each  other
to  give  rise  to  mutual  vexation,  but  to  add  to  our  bliss  ;
then,  the  woman  whom  you  have  lived  with  on  earth
not  being  what  you  could  wish,  God  bestows  on  you
another  who  is  the  half  of  yourself.” — “ Herein  you
seem  to  explain  as  the  Bible — that  man  was  created
male  and  female.  Can  it  be  that  a material  body  con-
tains  two  bodies  which  undouble  themselves  at  death  ?”
“ No,  it  is  not  thus  man  was  created  male  and  female  ;
but  not  androgynus,  nor  two  bodies  in  each  other,  as
you  say,  but  separately,  that  is,  he  is  born  double  and
lives  separately.  Every  being  has  his  complement
awaiting  him  in  heaven.” — “ I don’t  understand  this
explanation.’’  “ I tell  you  that  every  being  that  is  born
is  double,  v/hether  man  or  woman;  that  we  meet  each
other  in  heaven  even  though  we  may  not  have  met  on
earth.” — “Then,  according  to  you,  on  earth  we  are  dis-
joined?” “Yes,  the  better  to  make  you  understand,
my  guide  presents  to  me  a picture  showing  the  manner
in  which  this  is  performed.  I see  before  me  several
women,  the  first  of  whom  being  enceinte  brings  into  the
world  a boy  w'ho  undoubles  himself  instantly,  enabling  me
to  see  a little  girl  who  issues  from  him,  resembles  him  in
all,  and  she  enters  like  a germ  into  the  body  of  the
second  woman  in  order  to  be  bred  there  and  receive  life
in  its  entirety.  This  little  girl  will  be  the  complement
or  wife  of  the  little  boy  from  whom  she  issued,  and
whom  we  should  rather  take  for  her  little  twin  brother;
they  wfill  rejoin  each  other  in  heaven,  no  matter  at  what

c


26


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


time  and  in  what  place  they  are  born,  because  my  guide
tells  me  that  the  little  girl  who  is  the  half  of  the  little
boy,  may^  according  to  the  order  and  will  of  God,  not
be  bred  in  due  succession  nor  in  the  same  country,  yet
for  all  this  they  meet  again  at  the  same  time  in  heaven ;
but,  though  born  at  a different  period,  she  will,  never-
theless, rejoin  her  half  to  complete  it,  and  live  with  it
in  a union  as  pure  as  holy ; when  this  second  half  is
born  the  same  process  will  be  renewed,  and  from  the
girl  will  issue  a boy,  who  cannot  be  completed  until
there  issues  from  him.  a half  in  the  same  manner,  which
w'ill  be  a little  girl,  and  so  on  ad  infinitum.  Now  do
you  understand  ? I explain  to  you  herein  the  mystery
of  our  appearance  on  earth  which  is  revealed  to  you.”
— “ I thank  you ; if  it  be  thus  God  is  infinitely  good  !”
“ Can  you  comprehend  the  goodness  of  God  in  your
wretched  state  of  ignorance  ? What  would  the  learned
say  of  such  a mystery,  which  they  should  take  for  a
system,  they  who  have  formed,  and  will  continue  to
form,  so  many,  if  they  perceived,  like  me,  that  there  is
no  possible  simple  unity,  that  all  is  in  pairs  ; each  thing
to  infinity  possesses  two  halves,  two  sides,  the  union  of
the  two  constitutes  happiness,  their  separation  unhap-
piness.”— “ Thus  3mu  believe  that  every  being  has  a
half  of  himself  undoubled,  ad  infinitum  Yes.” —

You  believe  that  the  first  half  rejoins  or  awaits  the
second  ?”  “ Yes.” — “ That  when  they  meet  in  heaven,

their  happiness  is  real,  and  their  union  eternal  ?”
‘‘Yes;  I neither  should  nor  could  have  believed  this  in
my  ordinary  state,  because  it  is  a truth,  and  we  accept
only  errors.”

Here  is  a revelation  which  I am  unable  to  prop  up
with  my  reflection ; if  not  true,  it  is,  at  least,  conso-
latory.

23.  “The  other  day,  through  the  medium  of  my
somnambulist,  Adele,  I asked  the  spirit  Mallet,  whe-
ther there  were  any  cities  in  heaven  as  on  earth ; he
said  he  did  not  know,  can  your  guide  tell  you  ?”  “ Yes ;


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.  2/

there  are  cities  in  heaven  for  him  who  desires  to  dwell
in  cities.  If  Mallet  did  not  answer  you  clearly,  it
arises  from  the  circumstance  . of  his  having  no  taste
for  studying  and  frequenting  cities.^^ — “ Mallet  seems
cramped  in  his  answers,  I don^t  know  why  ?”  “ Because
you  ask  him  things  which  he  is  not  permitted  to  ac-
quaint you  with,  and  others  with  which  he  is  unac-
quainted. I have  already  told  you  that  a spirit  in
heaven  knew  only  what  it  desired  to  know ; its  hap-
piness consists  in  the  knowledge  of  one  thing,  little
matter  to  it  the  rest.” — Still,  all  spirits  must  behold
cities,  groups  of  houses  and  people,  since  they  are  in
places  inhabited  as  on  earth  ?”  “ Spirits  see  only  what

they  wish  to  see ; if  they  delight  in’  a house,  they  see
only  a house ; if  in  a city,  they  see  a city ; the  same
with  gardens,  the  country,  public  places,  and  assem-
blies ; if  they  wish  to  travel  they  do  so.  There  is  some-
thing of  everything  in  heaven,  and  there  is  nothing.” —
“ How  nothing?  I cannot  understand  how  something
should  be  nothing.”  “But  I do,  I can  understand  it;
they  are  images,  appearances  ; they  are  trees,  furniture,
effects,  and  nothing,  since  the  desire  once  gone,  all  dis-
appears, nothing  remains  : they  are  images  appropriated
by  the  goodness  of  God  to  the  nature  of  beings.” — “ Is
it  really  your  guide  who  answers  you  these  things  ? You
answer  me  so  quick  that  I much  doubt  it.”  “ I answer
you  quicker  than  I should,  were  it  not  my  guide  who
does  it  in  my  place.” — “ Your  guide,  then,  is  in  you  ?”
“ I have  already  told  you  that  a spirit  may  be  in  me,
speak  through  my  mouth,  without  my  knowing  how ;
my  lips  move  despite  myself,  and  I articulate  words
briefly ; sometimes  I hear  words  beside  me.  Frequently
I await  the  answers — sometimes  I do  not  obtain  them ;
but  from  the  moment  my  guide  is  not  positively  in  me,
he  is,  perhaps,  five  hundred  leagues  off.  I communicate
with  him  by  a sympathetic  thread,  a sort  of  ray ; to
express  my  meaning  better,  I regard  myself  as  the
speaking-trumpet  in  which  he  speaks  at  a distance.” —

c 2


2S


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


‘‘  It  is  very  surprising  that  you  should  hear  thus,  and
operate  by  the  means  of  this  sympathetic  wire.”  All
appears  to  you  astonishing,  but  it  is  not  the  same  with
me ; a spirit  might  speak  to  me  from  the  end  of  the
universe,  had  the  universe  an  end ; distance  does  not
exist  for  us.  What  will  astonish  you  still  more  is,  that
a spirit  can  speak  with  several  persons  at  once,  though
in  different  places,  and  appear  to  them  at  once,  but
know  that  very  often  it  is  only  his  image,  a sort  of  un-
doubling of  his  person,  which  can  assume  all  forms,
costumes.  Sec.,  and  be  at  different  places  without  quitting
the  one  he  occupies  in  heaven.  I am  not  the  only  per-
son whom  my  guide  answers,  he  has  many  others  under
his  influence.” — ‘^By  answering  us  thus  he  takes  de-
light, then,  in  the  science  of  which  we  speak  ?”  ‘‘  It  is

his  speciality.” — “I  push  my  inquiries  further,  but  the
reply  is,  ‘ One  cannot  answer  those  questions,  what  is
revealed  to  you  by  other  somnambulists  is  effected  by
the  assistance  of  spirits  whom  God  appoints  to  instruct
you;  spirits  do  not  prejudice  each  other,  and  cannot
always  answer  what  is  asked  them;  as  for  me  I com-
municate to  you  a certain  light,  another  does  the  same
in  another  way.  You  have  no  reason  to  complain,  as
you  know  many  hidden  things.^  ”

I was  for  a moment  astonished  at  learning  that  a
spirit  can  be  in  different  places  at  once,  and  speak  with
several  persons ; but  reflection  has  confirmed  in  me
this  fact,  taking  invariably  for  point  of  departure,  and
as  material  proofs  what  we  see  somnambulists  do  on
earth  for  whom  distance  exists  not ; they  could,  there-
fore, were  they  in  that  state,  at  once  see  at  the  same
instant  a designated  place  or  person,  speak  with  him
and  give  similar  information.  To  these  seers  a spirit
resembles  an  orator  on  whom  all  eyes  are  fixed,  though
parting  from  different  points,  and  in  like  manner  all
intelligences,  receiving  at  once  the  word  which  is  only
one  for  him  wdio  utters  it,  and  a thousand  times  one  for
the  thousand  and  one  persons  who  have  received  it.


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


29


Another  point  may  also  be  cleared  up — the  image  or
undoubling  of  the  man  and  the  thing.  We  have  also
material  proofs  of  those  facts  in  magnetic  experiments,
where  the  image  of  a thing  remains  impressed  in  the
place  where  it  has  stood.  M.  Teste,  in  his  journal,  cites,
with  respect  to  this,  a curious  experiment : — A female
somnambulist  enters  a room,  and  exclaims,  “ What  a
pretty  girl  is  sitting  on  that  chair  ! ” At  this  exclama-
tion, M.  Teste  observes  to  her  that  she  is  mistaken,
that  no  pretty  girl  is  there.  Far  from  giving  in  to  this
declaration,  she  sees  one  on  each  chair,  and  there  were
six  of  them.  Unable  to  account  for  this  hallucination,
M.  Teste  contented  himself  with  gathering  exact  details
of  the  dress  of  these  little  girls,  and  confessed  that
a little  girl  precisely  similar  had  been  playing  for  a
moment  before  the  somnambulist  entered  the  room,
and  had  jumped  on  the  six  chairs,  one  after  the  other,
sitting  down  on  them.  This  vision  of  her’s  alone  w^ould
prove  this  sort  of  undoubling  or  image,  even  did  we  not
possess  similar  ones  everyday.  There  is  not  a mag-
netiser  who  has  not  in  the  distant  views  of  his  seers
discovered  a multitude  of  errors,  surrounded  wdth  a
large  number  of  truths  ; without  endeavouring  to  explain
the  cause  of  this,  they  pass  over  it  in  silence,  wdien,  on
the  contrary,  there  is  often  wherewith  to  amply  gratify
curiosity.  A seer  says : — I perceive  in  this  room  a
comuLode,  a scrutoire,  objects  not  there ; you  exclaim
against  the  error,  the  sorry  lucidity,  without  taking  into
consideration  the  state  of  the  seer,  or  wdiether  there
have  not  previously  been  in  the  room  the  articles  of
furniture  which  he  designates,  but  which  are  no  longer
there.  I have  made  this  sort  of  experiment  and  re-
searches. I have  often  recognised  that  the  image  of
material  objects  set  in  a certain  place  remained  there
for  a long  time.  Any  one  may  verify  the  fact,  and
thereby  rectify  his  judgment  on  the  pretended  errors
of  clairvoyants.  There  is  even  another  influence  which
equally  leads  astray — that  is  foresight.  A somnambulist


30


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


can  see  as  present  at  such  a place,  a house,  a garden,
which  are  not  there,  not  even  likely  to  be  there ; and  yet
the  place,  the  object,  exist  for  the  seer,  and  will  one
day  exist  in  all  the  details  given  and  foreseen.

The  third  revelation  in  this  sitting  is — that  in
heaven  there  are  only  sorts  of  images.  I am  unable,  as
yet,  to  decide  respecting  this,  without  fuller  information.
Already,  on  earth,  the  spirit  has  the  assurance  to  fancy
that  it  creates  what  it  pleases,  a creation  unappreciated
by  our  senses,  but  apparently  quite  real  to  the  spirit  in
a state  of  somnambulism.  No  one  exists  who  may  not
have  assured  himself  of  the  pretended  reality  of  this
creation.  This  creating  power,  which  belongs  only  to
God,  which  man  draws  from  the  world,  his  type,  can
attain  such  a degree  of  force  that  matter  finds  itself
dependent  and  paralysed  by  it.  All  the  harmony  of  its
laws  finds  itself  annihilated  by  the  facts  of  attraction
and  suspension.  It  should  not  be  denied  that  an
ecstatic  can  stand  materially  on  a stool  created  spiritually.
These  facts,  without  saying  that  in  heaven  the  objects
W'hich  surround  us  are  the  olfsprings  of  our  imagination,
tend,  nevertheless,  to  prove  it;  when,  on  the  contrary,
being  then  of  the  nature  of  the  world  of  causes,  we  can
dispose  of  them  to  our  advantage^  floating  in  that
atmosphere  of  images,  they  group  around  us,  according
to  the  divine  thought  w’hich  presides  over  them,  in
order  to  satisfy  our  w'ants  by  which  they  find  themselves
denominated  or  called.

24.  “ Since  a spirit  can  introduce  itself  into  our
body,  and  make  us  speak  despite  ourselves,  can  it  make
us  act  also?”  “Yes.” — “This  question  I put  to  you
has  reference  to  possessions ; the  possessed  have  alw’ays
affirmed  what  you  advance.”  “ It  is  a truth  which,  in
my  ordinary  state,  I should  never  wish  to  believe ; but
I believe  it  now  because  I am  fully  conscious  of  it.”
— “ In  this  kind  of  possession,  since  they  can  make
use  of  our  body  to  operate  what  they  desire,  have  they
any  influence  over  the  destiny  of  man  ?”  “ Yes ; in  this


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


31


way  : — A man,  such  as  Napoleon,  any  other  warrior,  or
a savan,  no  matter,  finds  himself  destined  by  the
Creator  to  be  born  into  the  material  world,  and  accom-
plish great  things ; he  is  then  handed  over  by  God  to
the  care  of  spirits,  who  are  charged  to  protect  his  birth,
life,  and  actions.  The  father  and  mother  are  merely  the
machines  destined  alike  to  co-operate  materially  with
that  which  is  ordained  spiritually;  then,  in  this  case,
there  is  a spirit  specially  charged  to  preside  over  the
introduction  of  this  child  into  the  woman,  and  watch
over  its  welfare.” — “ In  that  case  an  evil  spirit  could
act  a contrary  part,  and  influence  in  an  evil  way  the
rising  germ  ?”  “ Yes  ; it  is  even  useful ; but  God

never  allows  such  a being  to  be  born  without  placing
near  him  a good  guide  to  counteract  the  evil  one.^^

25.  At  the  last  sitting,  you  told  me  that  your  guide
could  speak  to  you  at  500  leagues  distance;  this  reve-
lation, for  a moment,  astonished  me ; but,  in  presence
of  daily  experiments,  by  the  distant  communications
that  take  place,  I have  yielded  to  this  truth,  that  there
is  no  distance  appreciable  to  spirits.  I return  to  other
revelations  you  have  made  me ; you  told  me  that  in
heaven  are  cities,  places,  according  to  the  desire  of  the
spirit  of  each ; you  told  me,  also,  that  one  beheld  only
the  object  desired,  and  this  would  induce  me  to  thinlc
that  this  must  be  an  effect  of  the  creation  of  the  spirit,
and  not  places  existing  eternally.”  “ They  are  places
that  exist  eternally ; but  the  facility  which  one  has  of
communicating  with  them,  and  the  same  facility  of  no
longer  seeing  them  would  make  us  think  that  they
have  no  real  existence  like  terrestrial  objects.  I will
give  you  an  example ; I am  beside  you,  in  any  part
of  heaven ; I desire  to  be  on  a plain,  in  a garden  or
house,  1 myself  find  and  see  what  I desire,  without
stirring  from  the  spot,  if  such  be  my  wish  ; you  also
form  a desire,  but  you  wish  to  be  in  a churcli,  a
ball-room,  or  any  other  place,  you  are  there  instan-
taneously, without,  however,  quitting  me  for  a mo-


32


TPIE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


ment;  in  like  manner,  instead  of  a library,  another
will  desire  to  see  a picture,  these  two  objects  exist
together,  visible  to  the  two  desires,  and  at  the  same
place.  Thus,  you  see,  it  is  a mystery  altogether  incom-
prehensible, which  men  will  deny,  although  a grand
truth.” — “ The  description  you  give  me  would  make
me  doubt  whether  there  be  anything  real  in  heaven.”
‘‘All  that  is  there  is  more  real  than  on  earth,  where
everything  perishes  or  changes  its  form.  As  to  heaven,
all  these  objects  are  imperishable,  and  constitute  your
eternal  joy : only,  not  being  subject  to  the  same  laws  as
matter,  there  is  no  need  of  pulling  down  a house  to
build  another  in  its  place  ; it  disappears,  and  another
replaces  it.  Although  disappeared,  it  nevertheless
exists,  because  it  cannot  be  destroyed  ; but,  as  I repeat
to  you,  it  presents  no  obstacle  to  the  admission  of  an-
other in  its  stead.” — “ Then,  in  heaven,  every  one,
according  to  his  inclination,  may,  no  doubt,  build  cities,
temples,  palaces  ?”  “ No  ; the  desires  which  spirits

have  are  communicated  to  them  by  God,  who  is  the  sole
and  grand  architect.  Man  fancies  himself  the  artificer
of  all  these  things,  when  he  merely  forms  the  wish  for
them  ; but  the  cities  there  are  uniform,  the  palaces  a
hundred  times  finer  than  all  that  human  conception
could  bring  forth  or  believe  ; and  all  this  is  appropriated
to  the  tastes  and  wants  of  the  societies  inhabiting  them.
There  is  so  much  harmony  between  your  spiritual  tastes
that  you  could  not  desire  what  another  spirit  would  not
wish,  especially — mark  it  well — if  this  spirit  were  a
member  of  your  society,  who  would  Ire,  as  it  were,  a
fibre  of  your  body ; for  spirits  cannot  influence  each
other,  and  where  they  foresee  what  reigns  not  in  ac-
cordance with  their  desires,  they  associate  not.  They
assemble  to  exercise  usages  which  are  but  pleasures,
and  not  wants.  In  like  manner,  they  isolate  themselves,
if  they  think  fit.” — “ If  I wish  to  compose  a book  and
have  it  read,  what  means  can  I employ  to  gratify  this
desire  ?”  “ You  compose  your  book,  you  desire  to


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


33


possess  five  hundred  copies  of  it ; you  desire  to  give
them  away,  advertise,  or  sell  them  : all  this  is  performed
as  on  earth — with  this  difference,  however,  that  happi-
ness is  the  result,  and  not  trouble,  as  on  earth.  You
possess  this  work  for  ever,  if  such  be  your  wish.  The
spiritual  life  may  be  explained  in  a few  words  : — you
desire  only  what  it  is  agreeable  to  you  to  possess,  and
the  goodness  of  God  gratifies  you  instantaneously.” —
But  if  I desired  the  wealth  of  my  neighbour  ?” — “We
can  desire  in  heaven  only  what  we  are  able  to  obtain ;
we  do  not  enter  heaven  with  thoughts  of  robbery,  dis-
turbance, falsehood  : all  such  thoughts  are  of  the  domain
of  the  earth,  and  cannot  accompany  us  on  high.” —
“ You  have  told  me  also  that  a spirit  could  appear  in
several  places  at  once  ; how  is  that  ?”  “ They  are  only

images  of  the  spirit  that  appear;  he  may  have  as  many
as  he  pleases,  and  send  them  to  you.” — “ Good  ; but
do  these  images  speak?”  “Yes.” — “They  are,  then,
so  many  individuals  ?”  “ No  ; it  is  ever  the  same  one.”

— “ All  these  images,  you  say,  appearing  in  different
places  at  once,  and  answering  different  questions,  would
make  us  suppose  them  masses  of  spirits,  instead  of
one  ?”  “ It  is  difficult  enough  to  explain  to  you  this

mystery ; but  I will  endeavour  to  do  so  for  your  instruc-
tion. 'The  spirit  who  directs  me,  and  who  is  in  heaven,
can  draw  from  himself,  by  a sort  of  radiation,  a multi-
tude of  threads,  extending  and  serving  as  a means  of
communication  with  those  who  desire  to  correspond
with  him.  The  spirit  can  impart  to  each  thread  the
resemblance  and  sound  of  his  speech,  although,  amongst
themselves,  spirits  speak  but  little,  thought  being  the
only  bond  of  communication.  Then  he  can  at  the  same
instant  convey  his  thought,  which  answers  the  questions
of  those  in  communication  with  him  bv  means  of  these
sympathetic  threads;  he  is  but  one,  multiplying  himself
according  to  circumstances,  ad  infinitum,  and  is  seen  by
all  at  once,  as  the  entire  audience  at  a theatre  sees  an
actor.  We  fancy  him  in  a hundred  places  at  once,


34


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


when,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  a hundred  spirits  that  are
enabled  to  see  him,  and  in  the  place  where  he  is  ; but
his  image  can,  in  like  manner,  fulfil  this  office,  and  this
would  make  one  believe  in  the  existence  of  a hundred
individuals.  This  image  proceeding  from  him  is  in
correspondence  with  his  thoughts,  and  can,  like  him,
represent  them,  for  thoughts  are  unalterable.  I am
fatigued.^^

This  sitting  was  the  last  that  Bruno  gave  me.  His
summing  up  has  a reference  to  the  observations  I made
at  the  close  of  the  twenty-third  sitting,  to  the  eflfect
that  the  image  may  remain  impressed  on  a place
where  the  object  has  sojourned,  and  this  proves  mate-
rially that  spirits  may  possess  the  pov/er  of  undoubling
themselves  better  than  material  objects  do.  These
phenomena  cannot  be  explained,  nor  can  they  be  denied.
As  I wish  to  keep  within  the  limits  I proposed  to  myself,
to  borrow  nothing  from  the  books  I have  read,  and
which  would  no  more  be  believed  than  my  word,  I cite
none  of  those  proofs  which,  however,  are  very  curious
and  instructive.  Suffice  it  for  me  to  recommend  the
reader  to  experimentalise  by  himself  on  all  those  facts
and  the  following  ones,  which  are  not  less  curious.  We
can  see  w^ell  only  by  our  own  eyes,  comprehend  only  by
our  own  judgment.  I shall  see  hereafter  whether  I can
throw  any  light  on  these  revelations.

I regretted  Bruno,  but  1 have  been  consoled  for  his
loss  by  the  ecstatic  Adele,  who  will  appear  in  a proper
time  and  place  to  reveal  as  much  as  it  is  desirable  to
the  eyes  of  the  studious,  the  proof  of  the  existence  of
man  after  his  separation  from  matter.  In  the  mean-
time I will  introduce  a few  ecstatics  who  have  furnished
me  with  no  less  evident  proofs  of  what  I propose  to
myself  demonstrating  to  men.


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


35


SECOND  ECSTx\TIC.

26.  Mademoiselle  Fanny  Binet,  sister  of  Bruno,  a
young  girl  of  17  years  of  age,  the  very  model  of  can-
dour and  virtue,  said  to  me  one  day — “ I had  a very
extraordinary  dream  last  night ; you  were  magnetising
me  and  I fell  asleep  like  my  brother ; I saw  on  the  table
a sphere,  such  as  professors  have  to  teach  astronomy,
a prodigious  quantity  of  circles  surrounded  it ; I saw
issuing  from  this  globe  a sort  of  smoke,  which  you  pro-
jected into  the  pit  of  my  stomach.”  I induced  her  to
be  magnetised,  as  her  dream  augured  well ; she  con-
sented to  it,  and  in  about  twenty  minutes  fell  into  an
ecstatic  sleep.  At  this  sitting  and  the  following  ones  I
sought  to  turn  to  account  this  state,  and  recognise  her
speciality  ; it  was  ecstacy,  and  here  is  the  result : — “ I
perceive  something  coming  towards  me.” — “What  is  this
something?” — “ It  is  a person,  I believe.” — “Look  well;
have  you  asked  for  any  one  ?”  “No.” — “ It  is  a person
of  your  acquaintance  ?”  “ No.” — “ Is  it  a man  ?”

“ Yes.” — “ What  sort  of  a man  ?”  “ His  deportment  is

noble  and  very  imposing ; he  is  wrapped  in  a beautiful
mantle  of  red  velvet,  edged  with  gold ; he  is  sitting  on
a throne,  I believe,  covered  with  blue ; he  has  on  his
head  a large  and  very  beautiful  crown  of  gold  ; he  is
holding  ajittle  child  in  his  arms ; he  seems  to  wish  to
get  rid  of  it ; this  child  is  quite  naked.” — “ Do  you  see
this  man’s  face  ?”  “ No,  not  very  distinctly.” — Beg

him  to  draw  nearer  to  you,  and  tell  you  who  he  is  ?”  “ I
don’t  see  him  better  ; he  does  not  approach.” — “ Then,
repeat  from  the  bottom  of  your  heart  these  words — In
the  name  of  God,  thy  Creator  and  mine,  stranger,  whom
I behold,  if  thou  comest  not  from  Him,  and  art  not  a
spirit  of  light,  withdraw;  I have  no  need  of  thy  ser-


3G


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


vices.”  “ He  is  gone ; but  a new  face  now  presents
itself  much  nearer.” — “Repeat  the  same  invocation,  and
you  will  see  how  this  spirit  will  act.”  “ It  stays  ; it  is
a woman.  Oh ! what  a beautiful  countenance,  never
did  I see  such  a one.” — “ In  what  position,  with  respect
to  you,  is  she  ?”  “ Before  me,  a little  to  the  right.” —

“ Does  she  appear  to  you  alive?”  “ She  does,  indeed  ;
she  is  borne  on  clouds,  and  quite  surrounded  with  such
an  azure  as  I never  before  saw,  so  lively,  fresh,  and
transparent  is  it.” — “ How  is  she  attired  r”  “ In  a
beautiful  robe  of«red  velvet,  descending  to  her  feet,  bor-
dered with  bands  of  gold ; her  hair  is  black,  and  falls
down  upon  her  shoulders,  which  are  of  an  incomparable
whiteness  ; on  her  head  is  a crown  of  gold,  but  much
narrower  than  that  of  the  first  figure;  she  has  on  a robe
of  light  gauze.  But,  good  heavens,  how  beautiful  she
is,”  tiniidl}^  said  the  young  girl,  her  head  drooping  on
her  bosom. — “Ask  her  if  she  is  your  angel  or  guide ? —
request  her  to  speak  to  you  and  tell  you  her  name  ?”

Oh  ! she  smiles  on  me ; but  I am  so  overcome  with
respect  and  admiration  for  it,  that  I don’t  seem  worthy
of  her  answering  me.” — “ Venture,  however,  she  is  a
celestial  creature,  who,  no  doubt,  desires  only  your  good,
and  comes  in  order  to  be  of  service  to  you ; she  will
answer  you.”  Fanny  is  so  absorbed  in  admiration  that
I am  obliged  to  wake  her,  without  obtaining  any  results
but  this  vision.  Scarcely  is  she  awake  than  she  sees
herself  in  the  glass,  and  hides  her  face  in  her  hands,
exclaiming,  “ Oh  ! how  ugly  I am  compared  to  the
beautiful  creature  I saw.” — “ Eh  ! what  ? you  recollect,
then,  what  you  have  seen  ?”  “ I recollect  but  too  well,

as  it  furnishes  me  with  a comparison  which  is  all  to  my
disadvantage.” — “ You  are  wrong,  I never  saw  you  look-
ing more  beautiful  than  at  this  moment.”  It  is  true
that  this  young  person  has  a prepossessing  countenance  ;
she  had  at  this  moment  that  angelic  expression  that  all
ecstatics  have  in  the  height  of  ecstacy,  and  it  was  im-
pressed on  all  her  features.  She  could  not  be  induced


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


37


to  look  upon  herself  in  such  a light,  and  remained  the
whole  day  under  the  influence  of  this  vision,  recounting
it  in  all  its  details  to  the  persons  around  her.

27.  Fannv  heartily  desires  to  see  again  the  same
beautiful  person  ; I put  the  question  to  her  : — ‘^Do  you
see  anything  ?*’  “ Yes ; but  it  is  not  the  same  figure.”

— “ How  is  this  one  ?”  It  is  a young  man,  who  is  on
his  knees,  and  apparently  praying  to  God  with  great
humility.” — “ On  what  is  he  kneeling  ?”  “ On  an

estrade,  to  which  there  are  two  steps.” — He  does
not  seem  to  you  in  the  air,  then,  as  the  other  day  ?”
‘‘  No.” — “ How  is  he  dressed  ? Give  me  a description  of
him  ?”  “ He  is  a dark  man  ; on  his  head  is  a crown  of

gold,  the  form  of  which  is  very  different  from  that  worn
by  the  last  apparition ; he  has  on  him  a beautiful  mantle
of  red  velvet,  worked  all  over  with  stars  of  gold,  and
descending  to  his  feet  in  the  form  of  a robe  d queue ;
I perceive  a white  robe  under  this  mantle ; his  skin  is
very  white.” — Make  an  effort  to  speak  to  him ; tell
him  to  look  at  you ?”  “ I dare  not;  he  seems  so  deeply
absorbed  in  prayer  that  it  "would  be  more  than  indiscreet
in  me  to  disturb  him ; he  looks  very  happy,  and  I am
not  less  so  at  gazing  at  him.” — Bruno,  Fanny^s  brother,
was  present  when  I magnetised  his  sister,  and  desired
to  be  sent  to  sleep  with  her.  He  soon  beheld  the
vision  of  his  sister,  and  gave  a full  description  of  it
almost  in  the  same  words  as  Fanny,  only  he  beheld  the
hands  of  the  apparition  joined  below,  "whilst  Fanny  saw
them  raised  on  high.  Who  is  this  young  man  ?”
asked  I of  Bruno.  “ It  is  Gabriel.” — “ What  is  he
doing  ?”  Praying  for  us,  and  giving  us  at  the  same
time  a lesson  of  humility.” — “ Your  sister,  considering
her  religious  practices,  might  dispense  with  this  lesson ;
but  to  you  it  is  necessary.”  “ It  is  necessary  to  all
three  of  us,  we  no7ie  of  us  know  how  to  pi'ay.^’ — How
is  it  that  you  see  his  hands  in  a different  position  to
what  your  sister  does?”  “Because  he  never  shows
himself  to  two  persons  at  once  precisely  in  the  same


38


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


position/^ — “ How  is  that }”  “ Because  we  should

believe  in  influence  and  fascination,  and  that  proves
to  me  that  what  I told  you,  some  time  ago,  respecting
the  power  they  had  of  undoubling  themselves.” — I woke
them  both.

I tried  several  times  to  magnetise  Fanny,  and  re-
conduct her  to  her  visions,  but  I could  not  succeed ;
she  had  no  longer  any  wish  to  be  sent  to  sleep.  I have
thought  fit  to  make  mention  of  these  two  ecstasies,  as
one  cannot  collect  too  many  proofs  of  spiritual  ap-
paritions. Here  is  a fact  contradicting  what  many  mag-
netisers  advance,  when  they  affirm  that  all  these  visions
are  merely  the  fruit  of  a fatigued  or  disordered  imagi-
nation, and  that  clairvoyants  possess  the  faculty  of
creating  for  themselves  images ; on  this  last  point,  I
agree  with  them.  Thus  a clairvoyant  who  has  created
for  himself  such  visions  will  ever  have  them  at  his  dis-
position, and  see  them  whenever  he  pleases,  obtain
from  them  answers  sympathising  with  his  thoughts  and
his  tastes;  but  Fanny  is  not  in  such  a position;  she
sees  not  what  she  desires,  and  sees  what  she  does  not
expect.  It  is  not  for  want  of  being  in  the  lucid  state,
as  we  may  believe,  since  in  these  two  visions  she  sees
to  the  same  degree,  and  with  the  same  facility.  More-
over, we  have  other  facts  to  set  forth  which  will  easily
do  away  with  this  objection.


THIRD  ECSTATIC.

28.  A YOUNG  lady,  named  Frangoise,  having  consulted
my  somnambulist  Adele  on  the  state  of  her  health,  the
latter  advised  her  to  get  magnetised.  She  was  in  a
hopeless  condition,  apd  begged  me  to  cure  her  if  I
could ; I undertook  her  case,  and  she  derived  great
benefit  from  my  treatment.  Without  being  cured,  on
account  of  the  disordered  state  of  her  organs,  she  fur-


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


39


nished  me,  after  a few  magnetisations,  with  the  follow-
ing phenomena : —

At  one  sitting,  she  tells  me  that  she  can  see  her
father  and  mother,  who  had  been  dead  a long  time,
that  they  appear  to  her  really  alive.  Her  mother  was
surrounded  by  a beautiful  blue  sky,  on  her  right,  and
ventured  not  to  approach  her ; she  was  precisely  in  the
same  dress  as  she  w'ore  before  her  death  ; her  father,
too,  was  attired  as  on  earth,  and  sought  to  conceal  him-
self behind  a bush  on  her  left.  She  contemplated  them
a long  time  without  speaking  to  them.  This  was  the
first  day  she  had  been  clairvoyant,  and  perceived  her
hopeless  condition,  assuring  me  that  if  I continued  to
magnetise  her  I should  have  to  take  the  greatest  pre-
cautions, for  my  life  was  at  stake,  as  I had  been  already
told  by  two  clairvoyants.  I took  no  further  account  of
these  warnings  than  by  guarding  against  her  baneful
emanations.  On  awaking,  she  recollected  having  seen
her  father  and  mother,  but  had  not  the  least  recollec-
tion of  her  hopeless  condition,  or  what  she  had  said
respecting  it.

29.  After  a moment’s  sleep,  I hear,”  said  she,
^^the  voice  of  God  telling  me  that  my  niece,  who  is  at
this  moment  in  her  confinement,  will  die  in  three
weeks  ; she  cannot  get  over  it !”  Frangoise  w-as  very
fond  of  this  niece ; she  began  to  cry  bitterly.  I wished
to  make  her  believe  that  it  was  a mere  rambling  of  her
imagination,  occasioned  by  the  warm  affection  she  felt
for  her  niece ; that  it  was  not  the  voice  of  God  she  had
heard.  She  was  highly  offended  at  my  doubts,  and  re-
plied— It  was  assuredly  God  who  spoke  to  me ; they
who  live  long  enough  will  see.”

30.  “ There^s  my  father,”  said  she,  I know  not
why  he  dares  not  approach  me.” — ^‘Ask  him  why?”

lie  answers  me  that  he  desired  to  see  me  before  his
death,  and  that  I did  not  come  to  receive  his  last  fare-
w^ell.  He  seems  angry  with  me.^’ — After  this  reproach
he  moves  away;  then  appears  before  her  a little  girl


40  THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE

she  had  had,  and  lost  at  the  age  of  18  months,  whilst
out  at  nurse ; the  child  seemed  to  her  bigger  than  when
she  parted  Avith  it,  being  then  only  six  days  old. —
‘Mdow  does  this  child  appear  to  you?”  “Very  well;
only  she  has  a somewhat  suffering  air  ; she  is  naked,
has  little  wings,  and  a pink  cap  on  her  head.” —
“What!  naked,  and  a cap  on  her  head?”  “Yes,  ’tis
just  so  that  I see  her.” — “ Ask  her  where  she  is  ?”
“ In  heaven.” — “With  v^hom  ?”  “ Her  grandmother.”

— “ What  does  she  do  there  ?”  “ She  plays  with  little

girls  whom  she  delights  to  teaze.” — She  appears  to
you  suffering,  ask  her  whether  she  suffers  ?”  She
longs  for  me  ; but,  that  apart,  suffers  not ; she  says  she
is  very  happy ; she  has  often  seen  God,  and  goes  to
him.” — “ How  does  the  Deity  appear  to  her  ?”  “Like
a man  amidst  a cloud  of  dazzling  whiteness.  She  tells
me  that  I shall  live  a long  time  yet  in  pain.” — “Why  is
not  your  grandmother  with  this  ehild,  since  she  is  under
her  care ; you  should  see  her  at  least  ?”  “ She  tells  me

that  at  this  moment  she  is  praying  to  God  for  me  ; my
little  girl  has  blue  eyes;  I don’t  know  what  colour  they
were.  Here  is  a little  boy  whom  I don’t  know,  hut  he
calls  himself  my  nephew ; he  died  when  nine  years  old,
of  convulsions,  brought  on  by  fits  of  passion,  which
have  not  yet  left  him,  although  dead.  He  says  that  he
has  at  times  seen  God ; he  entertains  the  hope  of  being
with  him  by-and-bye,  when,  he  improves  in  disposi-
tion; he  announces  to  Fran^oise  that  his  mother,  is
suffering  from  a disease  in  the  chest  that  will  by-and-
bye  become  a catarrh.  Fran^oise  sees  many  persons
who  claim  relationship  with  her,  although  she  does  not
know  them  ; she  does  not  even  remember  ever  having
seen  them ; she  desires  to  see  her  daughter  when
awake,  and  points  out  the  means  of  effecting  this,
which  succeeds  perfectly  well ; she  no  longer  recollects
anything.  This  greatly  astonishes  her,  and  especially
the  cap  w'hich  she  sees  when  awake  on  her  child’s  head.

31.  Fran9oise  says  that  she  hears  again  the  voice  of


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


41


God,  telling  her  that  the  little  girl  her  niece  is  brought
to  bed  with  will  die  soon  after  her.  “ Have  you  any
presentiments  of  these  events  when  awake  ?”  No,
none  ; my  niece  is  not  well,  but  still  I have  no  reason
to  be  alarmed  at  her  condition.” — “ And  her  little  girl  ?”

She  is  at  nurse,  and  I see  her  only  in  my  sleep  ; but
nothino-  makes  me  forebode  that  she  will  die  soon.” —

O

“ Your  nephew  told  you  the  last  time  that  his  mother,
your  sister,  was  ill,  did  you  know  it  ?”  “ I knew  it

only  to-day,  I have  heard  from  her,  and  she  is  not  well ;
but  before  I knew  nothing  about  it.” — “ Could  you
learn  why  your  little  girl  appeared  to  you  naked,  and
with  only  a pink  cap  on  her  head  ?”  “ I will  ask  her.”

— After  a momentary  pause  she  said  to  me — “ I gave
her  nurse  some  good  baby-linen,  which  she  returned  to
me  after  the  child’s  death.  I desired  her  to  put  in  the
coffin  one  of  the  child’s  best  caps,  she  afterwards  told
me  that  she  had  done  so,  but  I had  my  doubts  about
the  matter,  and  presumed  that  she  had  not,  especially
with  respect  to  the  cap  in  which  the  child  appears  to
me  at  this  moment,  by  the  permission  of  God,  who
desires  that  I should  no  longer  deem  this  woman  guilty
of  theft.  I could  never  have  believed  that  she  would
have  acted  thus,  especially  with  an  expensive  cap  like
this,  and  having  such  a large  family,  to  whom  it  would
have  been  more  useful  than  to  this  child.”

I had  no  more  revelations  from  Frangoise ; she  got
better,  and  I saw  her  no  more.  I w'ill  make  a few  ob-
servations on  what  has  been  just  stated.  Fran^oise
possessed  a singular  clairvoyance  for  distant  views,  re-
produced conversations  held  in  remote  places,  of  which
I obtained  unanswerable  proofs ; she  was  of  a frank
disposition,  and  by  no  means  cunning;  she  did  not
deceive  me  when  announcing  her  sister’s  illness,  of
which  she  had  no  knowledge  till  two  days  after.  Was
it  really  her  little  deceased  nephetv,  whom  she  had
never  seen,  that  confided  this  to  her  ? or  was  it  a view
at  distance  that  she  had  taken  ? One  can  onlv  decide

D


42


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


from  her  good  faith  and  aversion  to  falsehood.  I believe
that  this  child  appeared  to  her  because  she  said  that  he
was  still  irascible,  a truth  that  will  be  proved  by-and-
bye.  Man  p^rts  not  at  once  with  his  manners  and
propensities  on  entering  the  next  world,  a thing  that
she  could  not  possibly  learn  or  perceive  in  my
thought,  seeing  that  then  I neither  knew  nor  suspected
such  things,  and  even  now’  can  scarcely  comprehend.
I also  believe  in  this  revelation,  because  I have  had
similar  ones  since  w’hich  have  determined  me  not  to
reject  it.  I therefore  beg  the  reader  not  to  lose  sight
of  this  observation.

A voice,  which  she  takes  to  be  that  of  God,  an-
nounces to  her  that  her  niece  and  daughter  w'ill  die
within  a short  time  of  each  other.  This  prediction  was
literally  accomplished.

She  perceives  her  little  girl,  who  had  been  dead  a
very  long  time.  The  particularity  of  the  cap  w'hich
Fran^oise  could  not  invent  in  order  either  to  appear
ridiculous  in  my  eyes,  or  to  make  me  appear  so  (by
admitting  such  thoughts  we  might  doubt  our  own  ex-
istence, if  everywhere  w’e  perceived  but  cunning  and
falsehood),  this  particularity  alone  is  an  undeniable
proof  of  the  existence  of  the  spiritual  "world  ; to  sup-
port it  wnth  commentaries  W'ould  be  injuring  it,  let  us,
therefore,  preserve  it  in  all  its  purity.  A man  may
doubt  and  cry  out  hallucination,  on  seeing  with  his
eyes,  and  touching  with  his  hands  a person  dead,  be-
cause images  may,  for  a moment,  paralyse  our  senses ;
such  a man  w’ill  gradually  lose  the  impression  of  w’hat
he  has  seen,  and  end  by  doubting  himself  of  his  own
good  sense.  It  is  not  the  same  when  it  is  reasoning
that  speaks,  and  is  maintained  by  facts  which  he  can-
not destroy,  despite  his  inclination.  A man  vanquished
by  reasoning  wall  be  for  ever  vanquished,  and  a man
overcome  by  the  senses  will  easily  recover  from  this
state  which  he  will  class  amongst  those  of  fear,  halluci-
nation, and  absence  of  mind.


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


43


FOURTH  ECSTATIC.

32.  Being  one  clay  at  Colonel  R — ’s,  I saw  a lady  who
had  been  magnetised  during  six  months  for  a malady
by  this  gentleman,  and  afterwards  by  several  somnam-
bulists ; she  had  never  slept  despite  their  assurance  that
she  would  one  day  sleep.  She  begged  me,  after  hear-
ing what  had  been  said  respecting  me,  to  try  and  send
her  to  sleep.  In  the  course  of  five  minutes  she  slept
and  was  in  the  state  of  a somnambulist.  “Why  have
you  not  slept  until  to-day  ?”  “ You  alone  were  able  to

send  me  to  sleep,  because  your  fluid  is  in  much  better
communication  with  mine  than  those  of  the  persons
who  have  hitherto  magnetised  me.^^  This  lady,  the
wife  of  one  of  the  first  artists  of  the  capital,  had  re-
ceived a good  education,  and,  though  she  had  been
cured  by  magnetism,  she  could  not  altogether  believe
in  the  marvellous  effects  of  somnambulism ; she  wished
to  judge  for  herself,  and  this  no  one  was  better  enabled
to  do,  considering  the  reiterated  physical  experiments  I
made  on  her.  Her  speciality  was  for  maladies,  and  the
communication  of  thoughts,  I magnetised  her  for  some
time,  and  she  presented  me  at  one  sitting  with  a scene
that  I will  relate.

33.  “ Madame,”  said  I to  her,  “ hitherto  we  have
not  occupied  ourselves  with  serious  things  in  your
sleep  ; you  have  received  a good  education,  which  has
developed  in  you  very  sceptical  thoughts ; you  are
strong-minded,  and  would  not  allow  yourself  to  be
imposed  upon  by  mere  reveries ; will  you  endeavour  to
enter  into  communication  with  the  inhabitants  of  the
other  world?”  “I  do  not  believe  in  their  existence j
but  if  you  can  let  me  see  them,  I shall  be  most  happy.” —
“ In  that  case,  desire  with  all  your  heart  to  see  your
angel,  I will  request  him  to  appear  to  you.”  “ Here  he
is.” — “ Already  ?”  “ Yes.” — “ Give  me  a description
of  him  ?^’  “His  countenance  seems  to  me  noble  and
gracious,  though  rather  stern.” — “ Angels,  it  is  said,  are


44


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


not  ordinarily  stern  ; no  doubt  it  is  an  evil  spirit,  who,
as  usual,  presents  himself  first ; if  he  is  not  an  angel  of
light,  pray  God  that  he  may  disappear/^  “ He  is
gone.’^ — “ Come,  madame,  no  error  on  the  part  of  your
imagination ; you  are  in  a condition  to  enter  into  com-
munication with  the  inhabitants  of  the  other  world  ; be
pleased  to  regard  with  circumspection  that  you  may  be
the  better  convinced  of  the  results  we  shall  obtain.”
“ I saw  perfectly  well  this  person,  whose  sombre  and
stern  physiognomy  struck  me  so  forcibly  that  I have  no
wish  to  recommence  the  trial.  I should  prefer  seeing
another,  particularly  my  father,  who  has  been  dead  a
very  long  time,  in  order  to  assure  myself  whether  or
not  he  still  lives ; let  us  leave  the  angels.” — “ Since  you
prefer  seeing  your  father,  call  him.”  “ Oh  ! here  is
another,  a little  angel — oh  ! oh  !”  Madame  F.  then  goes
off  into  a state  difficult  to  describe  ; she  weeps,  calls  on
me  to  rouse  her,  falls  back  with  her  head  against  the
the  wall,  her  bosom  swollen  by  sobs  ; she  seems  to  suf-
focate under  the  weight  of  her  grief,  and  it  is  only  at  the
expiration  of  a few  minutes  that  I can  obtain  an  answer
to  this  question. — “What,  then,  do  you  see?”  “My
son  ! my  poor  little  Ernest ; wake  me !” — Wake  you
because  you  see  your  son  ; what  is  there  so  dreadful  in
seeins:  one’s  son  ? How  do  vou  see  him  ? alive  or  dead.”
“ Alive ; although  he  has  been  dead  these  fourteen
years.” — “ A reason  the  more  to  rejoice  at  seeing  jmur
child  again  ; what  age  was  he  at  his  death  ?”  “ Six

months.” — “How  old  does  he  seem  to  vou  now?”
“About  three  years  old.” — “Since  he  would  now  be
fourteen,  why  does  he  appear  to  you  only  three  years  of
age ; one  w'ould  think  that  he  would  rather  appear  to  you
not  more  than  six  months  old.”  “ God  wills  it  thus ; cliil-
dren  that  die  before  they  are  three  years  old,  seem  not
to  exceed  that  age.” — “ How  is  he  dressed  ?”  “He  is
quite  naked  ; he  has  little  wings.” — “ Are  you  quite  sure
he  is  your  son  ? Repeat  the  same  invocation  as  that  you
addressed  to  the  wicked  angel.”  “ Oh  ! it  is  really  my
son ; he  stays,  assuredly ; I can  recognise  him  ; how  fair


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


45


he  is  ! ” And  she  continued  weeping. — “ Would  you
like  to  see  him  when  you  are  wide  awake,  to  satisfy  your
curiosity  and  overcome  your  incredulity  “ Oh  ! yes  ”
She  becomes  somewhat  calm.  I ask  her  if  she  can  still
see  her  son.  “Yes;  he  is  calling  to  some  one  who
seems  to  be  unwilling  to  advance.” — “ Do  you  wish  to
see  another  person?”  “ Y'es;  a friend  whom  I lost  a
very  long  time  ago ; but  I cannot  see  her” — “ You  ought
not  to  have  asked  for  this  friend  before  obtaining  the
result  of  your  first  wish,  which  was  to  see  your  father ;
vou  ought  to  have  waited  for  him.^’  “ It  is  he  whom
my  son  is  calling  ; he  has  no  wish  to  come.” — “That  is,
as  I repeat  to  you,  because  you  have  a greater  desire
to  see  another  person  in  preference  to  him.”  She
awaits  a few  minutes  longer,  but  her  father  does  not
appear.  She  requests  me  to  wake  her.  When  I believe
her  to  be  thoroughly  aroused,  I put  to  her  several  ques-
tions which  prove  to  me,  as  before,  that  she  has  no
recollection  of  what  she  has  seen  or  said.  She  fixes
her  eyes  on  one  point  on  her  right,  and  cries  out,
“ Wake  me,  then.”  I disengage  her  as  quickly  as
possible,  her  eyes  still  remaining  fixed  in  the  same
direction.  I ask  her  what  she  perceives  there  ? “ I

don’t  know ; it  is  a dark  point  that  draws  my  atten-
tion thither,  and  I am  unable  to  turn  my  eyes  away.” —
Look  at  me.”  She  does  so,  and  exclaims,  “ What
do  all  this  mean,  monsieur?”  “ I know  less  than  you,
madame;  but  you  will  explain  it  to  me  presently.”
I place  my  hand  on  the  region  of  her  heart,  and  she  then
cries  out  that  she  perceives  her  son  amidst  the  clouds
that  attracted  her  attention ; and  says  to  me,  “ It  is  my
first  child,  whom  I thought  little  of,  having  at  his  death
bestowed  all  my  affections  on  his  brothers  and  sister.  It
is  very  astonishing  that  this  child,  who  was  then  but  six
months  old  and  would  now  be  fourteen  years  of  age,
should  appear  in  your  room : I should  like  to  know
w’hat  this  means  1”  “ It  means  what  you  sought  to

know,  madame,  that  the  dead  exist  as  well  as  w^e  do ;
you  desired,  in  your  sleep,  to  see  your  father,  no  doubt


46


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


lie  preferred  sending  you  this  child,  whom  you  say  you
no  longer  thought  of,  in  order  that  you  may  not  think
that  in  desiring  to  see  your  father,  and  having  seen  him,
that  it  is  a mere  effect  of  the  imagination  or  an  halluci-
nation. You  expressed  a wish  to  see  this  child  when
you  were  awaked  in  order  to  remove  all  your  doubts  in
this  respect;  you  ought  to  be  satisfied.’^ — ‘‘Did  you
really  see  liim  “ Yes,  monsieur.^’ — “Did  you  really
recognise  him  “Yes,  but  you,  did  you  not  see
him  “No,  madame,  I was  not  in  your  state.^^ —
“ How  surprising  all  this  is  ! it  is  enough  to  derange  the
strongest  mind.  Assuredly  1 saw  him;  I dare  not
think  of  it,  ^tis  miraculous ; a child  that  I had  not
thought  of  for  so  many  years  “ lie  still  thinks  of
you,  madame  ; those  in  heaven  are  not  so  forgetful  as
we  are.^’  The  effect  experienced  by  this  lady  was  not
the  same  as  in  her  sleep,  she  looked  upon  her  son  with-
out emotion,  matter  had  resumed  its  sway.  She  quitted
me  inveighing  against  magic  and  natural  philosophy;  I
did  not  become  attached  to  this  somnambulist,  as  it  re-
quired much  labour  to  obtain  from  her  satisfactory
results.  This  sitting  is  not  devoid  of  interest,  and
proves  again  that  the  desire  is  not  always  the  sole  mover
of  spiritual  visions.  This  lady  desires  to  see  her  father,
and  she  sees  a little  creature  that  she  was  far  from
thinking  of  at  the  moment;  a scene  ensues.  The  father
seems  unwilling  to  obey  the  request  of  the  mother  and
son,  the  latter  appears  with  little  wings  ; like  the  child
of  Fran^oise  he  is  about  three  years  old  ; like  the  other,
he  is  naked  ! Hence,  conformity  of  apparition.  Is  it
to  be  attributed  to  this,  that  appearing  in  a more
advanced  age,  they  would  be  less  easily  recognised,  or
do  they  remain  in  this  state  of  innocence  ? We  shall
see  hereafter  in  a revelation  of  the  same  kind.  This
lady,  I think,  was  not  gifted  with  an  inventive  imagina-
tion, since  she  thought  she  should  see  nothing,  and
what  she  did  see  she  sought  not,  without  being  able  to
obtain  what  she  desired.  This  is  a very  singular  appa-
rition, and  sets  all  doubt  aside.


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


47


FIFTH  ECSTATIC.

34.  I HAD  been  devoting  for  some  time  my  attention
to  a young  person  afflicted  with  a disease  of  the  chest :
— one  day,  Madame  Reviere,  her  aunt,  who  was  always
present  at  ray  sittings,  requested  me  to  try  and  send  her
to  sleep : I succeeded  in  doing  so.  After  being  acted
upon  magnetically  for  about  twenty  minutes,  she  was  in
a state  of  somnambulism,  and  begged  of  me  not  to
question  her,  but  leave  her  in  the  happy  state  she  then
was.  Scarcely  had  a few  minutes  elapsed  before  I could
perceive  that  she  was  in  an  ecstatic  state,  from  which  I
roused  her  when  I thought  necessary,  knowing  that  it  is
often  dangerous  to  prolong  it;  she  bitterly  reproached
me  on  my  want  of  patience,  saying  that  she  had  never
experienced  like  happiness.  “ Where  were  you  and
what  have  you  seen  asked  I.  “I  was  in  a magni-
ficent open  country,  illumed  by  a superb  day-light,  the
vegetation  was  admirabl)’’  rich ! I felt  that  I had
abandoned  m}’-  body,  and  I proceeded  towards  a spot
where  I beheld  beautiful  sheep  grazing,  and  judge  of  my
surprise,  when  I perceived  my  good  father  watching
them.  When  I begged  of  you  to  leave  me  alone  for  a
moment,  I had  been  wishing  to  see  my  father,  having
heard  you  say  that  in  this  state,  one  can  see  and  speak
with  the  dead.  I had  reason  to  be  astonished  at  per-
ceiving him  Tvatching  a flock.  It  is  no  dream ; and  had
you  not  interrupted  me,  I should  have  spoken  to  him.’^
— “ We  will  recommence  the  experiment  when  you
please,  madame.  Did  your  father  ever  tend  flocks
Oh  ! no ; I am  certain  that  I was  not  dreaming,  I saw
perfectly  well,  and  experienced  a happiness  unknown  to
me.  Were  I at  liberty  to  open  my  eyes  I should  believe
that  they  are  not  closed,  so  conscious  am  I of  being  in
my  normal  condition  ; I beg  you  will  open  them  for  me,
Tor  it  is  singular  enough  that  I can^t  do  it  myself?^
When  this  lady  was  roused  she  had  a perfect  re-


48


THE  SECRETS  OP  THE  FUTURE


collection  of  her  ecstasy,  and  v/as  not  less  surprised  at
it  than  when  in  her  sleep  ; she  could  not  conceive  why
her  father  had  appeared  to  her  as  the  keeper  of  a flock.
I told  her  that  the  ecstatics  I had  hitherto  known  assured
me  that  in  the  other  world  every  one  was  occupied
agreeably  to  his  tastes.  “ In  that  case/^  replied  she,
he  would  be  a trader,  for  I never  knew  him  to  quit
Paris,  and  am  not  aware  that  he  had  any  taste  for  rural
pursuits.^^  That  very  day  this  lady  recounted  her
vision  to  her  mother,  whom  she  expressly  went  to  in
order  to  inquire  whether  her  father  had  ever  been  a
shepherd.  Her  mother  replied  that  to  her  knowledge
he  had  never  been  engaged  in  a like  occupation ; but
that  she  perfectly  remembered  having  heard  him  say
that  when  very  young,  he  had  an  uncle  in  the  country
at  whose  house  he  often  passed  some  time  and  took
delight  in  playing  the  part  of  a little  shepherd  ; that  he
had  even  told  her  that,^he  had  never  been  so  happy  as
at  that  period,  amidst  his  little  flock.  The  surprise,  as
may  be  supposed,  was  great  on  both  sides  ; but  for  me
this  revelation  was  useful,  inasmuch  as  it  proved  to  me
that  what  Swedenborg  said  (I  had  studied  him  after
acquiring  by  myself  proofs  of  a spiritual  existence)  was
correct  on  this  point.  Bruno  had  often  said  to  me
It  is  ordained  that  you  shall  believe  in  these  mys-
teries ! You  will  believe  in  them  because  in  your
respect  means  will  be  employed  that  will  leave  no  room
for  doubt.  You  shall  have  proofs  He  was  not
deceived ; for  ten  years  have  1 been  collecting  facts  of
this  kind.  This  lady  having  removed  to  a distance  I
obtained  from  her  but  one  sitting.

O


SIXTH  ECSTATIC.

S5.  We  are  now  come  to  our  best  and  most  powerful
ecstatic  ; the  one  whose  light  has  opened  our  eyes  ; th  e
one  who  refuses  no  spiritual  experiment.  Theology,
metaphysics,  psychology,  she  answers  all  in  a sense


REVEALKD  THROUGH  IMAGNETISM.


49^


neither  tinctured  with  pride  nor  error.  Should  the  ■
materialist  not  obtain  from  her  the  proofs  he  desires,  he  ,
cannot  accuse  her  of  entangling  the  question,  or  of  bad  i
faith.  For  several  years  past,  in  her  magnetic  sleep,
she  lives  with  the  beings  of  the  other  world;  give  her
but  the  Christian  and  sirname  of  the  deceased  persons,
no  matter  at  what  period  we  desire  her  to  perceive  or
consult,  and  she  sees  and  converses  with  them  at  will.
Hitherto,  she  has  never  failed  in  one  experiment,  and
we  shall  be  astonished  at  her  clairvoyance,  and  the
exact  details  she  gives  of  persons  who  have  departed
this  life.

Adele  Magnot,  whom  I have  known  for  a long  time,
is  a somnambulist  by  birth.  In  her  childhood  she  was
sorely  afflicted  with  somnambulic  fits,  compelling  her
to  get  up  at  night  to  terminate  or  continue  her  day^s
labours.  I advised  her  to  be  magnetised,  in  order  to
cure,  or,  at  least,  divert  the  course  of  her  fits  of  somnam-
bulism ; she  consented  to  it,  and  since  then  her  sleep  is
undisturbed.  From  the  first  sitting  she  was  a somnam-
bulist, and  her  first  speciality  is  for  maladies.  She
possesses,  in  this  respect,  a clairvoyance  equivalent  to
that  she  has  for  spiritual  views,  and  for  which,  from  her
charitable  disposition,  she  had  more  taste.  No  interested
views  have  ever  guided  her;  she  gives  and  receives  not.

I kept  a journal  devoted  to  all  she  could  tell  me  or  do
in  her  slumbers,  and  will  now  collect  from  it  whatsoever
bears  upon  spiritualism.  I again  claim  the  indulgence
of  the  reader  for  a work  which  is  above  my  knowledge
and  strength ; let  none  behold  in  me,  as  I have  said  at
the  commencement,  any  other  pride  but  that  of  opening
or  strengthening,  in  all  who  read  me,  a belief  that  con-
stitutes all  my  happiness.  It  is  a debt  which  I owe
to  humanity,  and  would  wish  to  discharge  as  I best  can.

36.  Adele  possesses  all  the  qualities  desirable  in  som-
nambulism; she  is  wffloily  isolated,  totally  independent
of  the  magnetiser,  sleeps  the  desired  time,  and  has  no
recollection  on  aw’akin^.

O

“ What  is  magnetism  ?”  It  is  an  influence  of  the


50


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


nerves  conveying  the  greatest  good  wherever  it  is
directed,  particularly  if  we  are  animated  with  the  love
of  God  and  what  is  good.” — “ And  spiritually  ?”  “ It

is  the  quintessence  of  what  exists  most  pure  in  manj  it
is  a divine  influence,  the  very  purity  of  God.”

37.  “What  creates  in  you  this  surprise?”  “ It  is
my  little  niece.” — “ Who  is  this  niece  ?”  “ My  sister’s

little  child  who  died  two  year’s  ago.” — How  old  was
she  then  ?”  “ Twelve  years  old.” — “ Give  me  a descrip-
tion of  her  person  ?”  “ She  is  taller  than  she  was  on

earth ; her  complexion  is  of  a dazzling  whiteness ; she
is  dressed  in  white.” — “ Ask  her  where  she  lives  ?”  “ In
heaven.” — “Is  she  happy  there?”  Yes.” — “What
does  she  do  there  ?”  “ She  plays,  walks  about,  and  is

surrounded  by  my  numerous  family,  who  often  speak
of  me:  my  mother,  father,  and  brothers  would  be  glad
if  I could  soon  rejoin  them.” — “The  dead  remember,
then,  their  earthly  existence  ?”  “ No  one  is  dead  in

heaven ; all  are  alive,  more  alive  than  we  are ; they
remember  the  relatives  they  left  on  earth,  and  pray  to
God  for  them.” — “ Do  we  recollect  the  details  of  onr
past  life,  or  only  remember  our  relatives?”  “We
do  not  remember  the  details  that  concern  evil,  or  the
earthly  passions  appertaining  to  it;  all  is  forgotten  in
this  respect.” — “ Are  all  happy  in  Heaven?”  “Indeed
are  they;  we  have  no  notion  of  such  happiness  on
earth ! we  live  there  in  an  atmosphere  so  mild — neither
too  warm  nor  too  cold.  How  can  we  dread  leaving  this
earth ! My  little  niece  recommends  me  to  pray  if  I
wish  to  go  to  heaven  with  her  : it  was  for  that  that  she
came  to  me  last  night  at  a moment  when  I was  in  a
similar  state  to  what  I am  now,  and  exhorted  me  to  go
and  fetch  a small  chaplet  which  she  wore  on  her  neck
before  her  death,  and  pray  to  God  with  it.  This  I did,
though  it  was  hidden  in  my  commode.  She  pretends
that  it  was  the  prayer  that  procured  me  a speedier  ad-
mission into  this  state,  and  the  happiness  of  seeing
each  other  again.  My  surprise  was  great  when  in  the


REVEALED  THROUGH  AIAGXETISM.


51


morning  I found  this  chaplet  in  niy  bed.  I should
wish  to  remember  this  particularity,  in  order  to  remove
the  inquietude  it  has  caused  rne.^’ — “ You  knew,  then,
perfectly  well  how  to  find  it,  despite  the  darkness.”
“ In  the  state  I was,  there  w’as  no  darkness  for  me.” —

It  is  necessary,  then,  to  enter  into  this  state,  in  order
to  see  and  speak  to  spirits  ?”  Yes ; without  that  it  is
impossible  to  see  them.” — “ Some  persons,  however,
w'hen  wfide  awake,  have  seen  them  ?”  They  seemed
awake,  but  they  were,  although  in  communication  with
the  two  worlds,  in  a state  which  is  not  normal.” — “ Is  it
really  her  hand  that  you  seemed  to  clasp  in  yours  ?”
“ Oh,  it  is  indeed  ! I feel  it  better  than  yours,  as  she
presses  it  aftectionately.” — Ask  your  niece  if  it  is  true
that  we  all  have  two  angels  beside  us  ?”  “No,  we  have
but  one  ; the  other  is  not  an  angel ; it  is  an  evil  spirit.”
— “ Can  you  see  your  angel  ?”  “ No  ; she  tells  me  that

it  is  near  my  right  shoulder,  but  I see  nothing.”

38.  “ Do  you  think  you  wfill  soon  see  your  mother  ?”
“ I don’t  know'  ; but  here  is  my  little  niece  ; she  tells
me  I must  pray ; to  hear  her,  we  should  do  nought  but
pray — we  cannot,  however,  be  continually  praying.” —
“Perhaps  you  don’t  pray  often  enough?”  “1  pray  as
every  one  does — morning  and  night.” — ^‘When  she
speaks  to  you,  has  she  a childish  or  rational  air  ?”
“ She  looks  just  as  frolicsome  as  wdien  she  was  on
earth,  is  always  washing  to  be  olf,  and  laughs  heartily  at
my  questions  and  ignorance  ! You  don’t  hear  her  then
laugh?” — “You  know'’  that  I am  not  in  your  state.”

True ; let  her  go,  as  she  wdll  not  answer  my  ques-
tions. You  seem  very  blunt  with  this  young  girl,
W'ho  seems  so  glad  to  see  you  ; that  is  not  right !”

39.  Louise,  Adele’s  niece,  comes  in  haste  to  tell  her

that  her  brother  is  about  to  appear  to  her. — “ Oh,  here
he  is  ! It  is  my  brother  Alphonse,  wdio  died  in  Africa.”
— “ When  ?”  “ Four  years  ago.” — “ On  wLat  day  ?”

“ I don’t  knov/.” — “ Ask  him  ?”  “ The  11th  August.”

— “ How  is  he  attired  ?”  “In  the  uniform  of  a


52


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


Dragoon.” — “Is  that  his  dress  in  heaven?”  “No;  it
is  that  of  the  corps  in  which  he  served  before  his  death,
and  it  was  in  this  costume  that  I saw  him  on  earth.”
— “Why  is  he  dressed  thus?”  “Spirits  must  surely
appear  in  the  costume  and  condition  by  which  they
were  known  on  earth,  otherwise  we  should  be  unable  to
recognise  them.” — “Since  you  did  not  ask  for  him  who
told  him  to  come  and  see  you  ?”  “ My  little  niece.” —

“ Is  she  with  him  at  this  moment  ?”  Yes  ; but  how’
beautiful  she  is  ! her  fine  black  hair  falls  in  ringlets  on
her  shoulders,  as  on  the  day  of  her  first  communion.” —
‘^And  Alphonse,  does  he  appear  to  you  handsome?”
“ Oh  ! indeed  he  does.  His  forehead,  which  was,  how-
ever, very  dark,  appears  to  me  as  white  as  snow”;  he
tells  me  that  it  will  not  be  long  before  I see  my  mother,
father,  and  brother-in-law.  I have  no  wish,  however,
to  see  the  last-named  one ; he  was  too  wicked  on
earth.” — “ If  in  heaven  there  is  no  wickedness,  you
must  not  think  of  the  past.”  “ I won’t  see  him  !” —
Adele  stretches  out  her  arm  to  detain  her  niece,  who
has  just  quitted  her,  despite  her  efforts ; it  is  surprising
to  see  the  mimicry — the  apparent  mutual  understanding,
the  contrariety  ; one  cannot  doubt  the  reality  of  the
scenes  in  which  the  imagination,  as  we  may  believe,  is
not  always  strongest,  for  nothing  appears  to  respond  to
the  caprices  of  the  clairvoyant.

40.  Louise,  true  to  the  promise  she  had  made  Adele
at  the  last  sitting,  announces  to  her  her  second  brother.
“What  brother  is  this?”  “It  is  .lean  Marie,  who  also
died  in  Africa,  three  years  ago.” — Adele  contemplates
with  delight  these  three  members  of  her  family ; the
latter  is  also  in  the  uniform  of  a Dragoon  ; she  talks,  as
in  the  preceding  sittings,  a long  time  with  them,  and
acquaints  me  not  with  the  subject  of  their  conversation,
“What  do  your  brothers  do  in  heaven?”  “They
amuse  themselves,  promenade.” — “We  can  neither
amuse  ourselves  nor  promenade  a whole  eternity  with-
out an  object  ?”  “ Oh  ! they  play  music,  study  the


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


53


sciences;  they  occupy  themselves  better,  and  with  more
pleasure  than  we  do.’’

41.  “Here  they  are.” — “Do  they  appear  glad  to

see  you?”  “ They  do,  indeed.” — “Is  your  niece  with
them  ?”  “ No.” — “ Are  they  glad  that  they  are  dead  ?”

“ Who  would  not  be  ? They  are  so  happy.  I am  going
to  see  my  mother,  they  tell  me.” — Adele  awaits  a mo-
ment, then  suddenly  extends  her  arms,  and  seems  to
embrace  her  mother ; her  heart  beats  violently,  her
physiognomy  is  expressive,  she  is  quite  joyous  and
sheds  tears.  “ Does  your  mother  seem  to  be  as  glad  to
see  you  as  you  her  ?”  “ Oh  ! yes.” — “ What  does  she

do  in  heaven  ?”  “ She  is  with  my  father,  my  brothers,

in  short,  my  whole  family ; she  is  very  uneasy  about
me,  but  withal  very  happy.  She  reads,  and  delights  in
hearing  my  brothers  play  music.” — “ There  are  books,
then,  in  heaven  ?”  “ I beg  you  to  believe  that  there

are,  and  not  such  romances  as  on  earth.” — “ Of  what
do  they  treat  ?”  “ Of  the  mysteries  of  God,  and  of

science;  but  they  are  not  written  as  on  earth,  my
mother  tells  me.  How  I should  like  to  be  with  them.
Let  me  go,  I should  soon  be  in  heaven  !” — “ Yours  is  a
very  generous  idea  ; what  should  I do  with  your  body  ?”
“ Bury  it,  or  do  what  you  please  with  it.” — “And  what
should  I say  to  justice?”  “That  I am  gone.” — Adele
makes  a few  efforts  to  rise  to  the  highest  degree  of
ecstasy.  I wake  her.

42.  “ You  were  not  very  reasonable  in  your  last

sleep,  it  was  a suicide  you  would  have  committed,  and
you  know  that  that  is  very  wrong  !”  “ True,  but  once

committed,  one  must  needs  enter  like  the  rest.” —
“What  is  the  punishment  that  God  reserves  for  sui-
cide?” “That  which  he  inflicts  on  all  those  who  do
evil,  a public  reprimand  ; after  that,  God  renders  it
impossible  for  them  to  do  evil,  by  consigning  them  to
some  place  apart.” — “ What  sort  of  place  is  it  ? Is  it
the  hell  of  which  men  speak  ?”  “ There  is  no  such

hell  as  is  depicted  on  earth  ; there  are  places  of  purifi'


54


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


^ cation,  which  are  termed  places  of  punishment,  because
one  is  there  deprived  of  the  sight  of  God  and  his  divine
light;  but  those  who  are  there  are  happy.^’ — “And  all
great  criminals,  wdiere  are  they  ?”  “In  similar  places,
assembled  in  society  ; but,  as  God  is  so  good,  he  pro-
vides for  all,  prevents  evil,  and  re-establishes  good  in
the  hearts  of  all.” — “ We  are,  then,  in  societies  in
heaven  ?”  “ We  seek  one  another,  and  assemble  toge-

ther according  to  our  tastes,” — “ Is  there  any  disturb-
ance sometimes  in  these  societies  ?”  “No,  because  the
thoughts  of  every  one  are  laid  bare;  consequently,  none
can  be  deceived.  The  criminal,  the  passionate  man,
the  virtuous  and  good  man  can  not,  the  one  any  more
than  the  other,  appear  what  they  are  not,  or  disguise
their  thoughts  as  on  earth ; it  is  a sort  of  stamp  en-
graved within  us,  and  not  to  be  effaced.” — “ In  that
case  we  ought  to  recollect  all  we  have  done  on  earth  ?”
“ No  ; for  the  simple  reason  that  we  set  no  value  on  it,
all  that  is  forgotten ; we  no  longer  occupy  ourselves
with  such  things,  we  merely  study  the  thoughts,  the
affections  present  and  necessary  to  the  common  happi-
ness ; we  pity  those  wdio  are  still  on  earth,  pray  to  God
for  them,  and  are  delighted  when  they  rejoin  us ; for
them  it  is  a time  of  trial,  which  each  must  undergo
in  his  turn.” — “ Do  we  meet  again  among  friends  ?”
“ Yes ; but,  if  the  affections  are  different,  we  separate,
each  to  enjoy  apart  what  is  agreeable  to  him.” — “ We
receive  there  instruction  as  on  earth,  I suppose,  as  every
one  is  not  learned  on  entering  heaven — the  child'as\vell
as  the  old  man  ?”  “ Instruction  is  not  the  same  there

as  on  earth,  because,  on  our  arrival,  our  spirit  compre-
hends fortlnvith  whatever  it  desires  to  know  ; we  speak
there  but  one  language,  which  is  that  of  thought ; all,
from  the  infant  to  the  old  man,  can  speak  and  compre-
hend it  from  their  very  entrance ; in  like  manner,  all
can  read.  It  is  only  for  the  superior  sciences,  the
knowledge  of  the  laws  of  the  spiritual  world  and  the
mysteries  of  God,  that  there  are  teachers,  who  are  more


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


like  friends  than  masters,  and  we  learn  in  a short  time
what  we  desire  to  know.” — “ Who  tells  you  these
things  “ My  mother,  who  gives  me  to  understand
that  I want  to  learn  a great  deal  in  one  day.^^ — Ask
your  mother  whether  we  see  God  in  heaven  “Yes.^’
— “ In  what  form  ?”  That  of  a sun,  so  dazzling  that
we  cannot  fix  our  eye  on  itj  no  one  can  form  an  idea  of
its  brilliancy.”

The  answers  at  this  sitting  are  so  much  the  more
astonishing,  as  Adele,  in  her  state  of  vigil,  is  unac-
quainted with  my  way  of  thinking  on  spiritual  things,
and  which  is  not  exactly  in  accordance  with  what  she
tells  me  in  her  sleep  ; I cannot,  therefore,  influence  her
in  this  respect ; she  has  not  the  speciality  for  the  com-
munication of  thoughts,  and  this  should  remove  the
idea,  which  might  be  conceived,  of  her  reading  in  mine.
I have  sufficiently  studied  her  to  this  effect  in  circum-
stances w'herein  she  had  a powerful  interest  to  do  so,
but  never  was  1 able  to  succeed  in  making  her  compre*
hend  a single  thought.  I have  equally  maintained  the
greatest  reserve,  by  never  recounting  what  my  somnam-
bulists tell  me  in  their  sleep.  How  does  she  happen  to
accord  so  w’’ell  with  Bruno  and  others  who  preceded
him,  and  especially  in  all  the  reiterated  questions  that
I shall  address,  by-and-bye,  to  various  deceased  per-
sonages ? — questions  far  beyond  the  ordinary  intelli-
gence of  Adele.

43.  “ Here  is  my  mother”  (same  emotion  as  usual).
She  announces  to  me  the  arrival  of  her  father.  “ Here
he  is  !”  Adele  opens  her  arras,  as  she  did  at  the  first
visit  of  her  mother ; her  agitation  and  joy  are  no  less
great ; she  clasps  her  hands,  and  humbly  bends  her
head  to  receive  her  father’s  blessing;  then  talks  of
family  affairs ; her  brothers  are  present.  What  sur-
prises me  most  is,  that  she  could  see  all  her  relations
only  at  intervals  of  time — more  or  less  long;  had  it  been
merely  the  fruit  of  imagination  in  her,  she  could  have
seen  them  at  the  same  sitting,  or  the  following  one,  at


5G


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


least ; but  their  arrival  was  announced  by  her  niece,  or
her  brothers,  at  fixed  periods.

44.  Can  your  mother  answer  me  a few  questions  ?”
“ Yes;  according  to  the  nature  of  them.*’ — “Can  she
tell  me  what  sort  of  sensations  we  experience  when
dying  ?”  “ We  experience  a painful  sensation,  for  the

internal  quits  not  the  external  body  without  suffering ;
but  scarcely  is  it  disengaged,  than  it  thinks  no  more  of
it,  and  finds  itself  of  inconceivable  lightness ; it  ascends
forthwith  to  heaven,  where  it  is  reunited  to  its  family.
All  this  takes  place  in  so  short  a time  that  it  knows  not
how  it  could  have  been  accomplished.” — In  what  form
does  the  soul  quit  the  body  ?”  “ In  that  of  the  body.” —

“ Is  it  composed,  like  the  body,  of  all  its  exterior  and
interior  organs,  such  as  arms,  legs,  heart,  lungs,  and  all
the  other  viscera.”  “The  soul  is  in  all  similar  to  the
body ; one  cannot  be  better  assured  of  it,  since  we  see
all  these  interior  organs  like  the  works  of  a watch  under
a glass.” — “ But  how  does  such  a body  manage  to  peiife-
trate  matter  without  obstacles,  and  unperceived  ” “ As

my  relations,  who  are  four  in  number,  here  present,  and
unseen  by  you ; there  are  no  obstacles  for  the  spirit.” —
“ Is  it  really  your  mother  who  still  answers  you  ?”  “Yes  ;
and  my  father  and  brothers  applaud.” — “ Since  I have
just  asked  you  a few  particulars  as  to  our  exit  from  the
world,  I should  wish  to  obtain  others  on  our  entrance
into  it  ?”  Adele  seems  embarrassed ; modesty  apparently
commands  her  to  elude  my  questions.  I reassure  her
as  to  my  intentions,  telling  her  I only  seek  for  instruc-
tion. “ God  creates,  man  sows,  and  woman  performs
the  office  of  a hen  ; she  broods.  God  does  the  rest.” —
“ Has  the  germ  any  form  ?”  “ Yes ; the  human  form.”  —
“Woman  then  stands  for  nought  in  this  creation?”
“ The  woman  broods  ; supplies  the  juices  necessary  for
the  material  Ijody,  that’s  all.  My  mother  is  going  away.”

45.  “ Are  all  your  relatives  with  you?”  There  are  four
of  them  present.” — “ Do  you  expect  others  ?”  “ I

expect  my  sister,  who  also  is  dead,  and  whom  I have


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.  5'J

not  yet  seen.  Oh!  here  she  is  ! and  how  beautiful!  Good-
ness me  ! how  we  improve  in  looks  after  death!” — “How
is  she  attired  ?’*  “ In  her  betrothal  dress  ; she  died  on  the
eve  of  the  day  fixed  for  her  wedding  ; she  is  in  white ;
her  hair  is  turned  back  : she  is  also  bare-footed,  like  my
little  niece.  How  droll.” — “ Ask  them  why  they  have
not  chaussures  ?”  “ My  mother  answers,  that  where  they
are,  there  are  no  stones.”' — “On  what,  then,  are  they  ?”
“ On  a beautiful  green  turf.” — “ What  have  they  around
them  ?”  “ A vast  and  beautiful  blue  horizon.” — “ What
kind  of  light  illumes  this  horizon  ?”  “A  very  pure  light,
which  I may  compare  to  that  at  the  close  of  a fine
summer  day.” — “ You  once  told  me  that,  in  order  to
have  the  perception  of  spiritual  bodies,  we  had  to  enter
a state  necessary  for  that  purpose.  Is  it  the  same
with  them,  or  do  they  see  our  material  bodies  ?”
“ Spirits  see  only  our  spiritual  bodies  ; but  no  sooner  do
we  desire  to  see  a deceased  relative,  than  he  is  forthwith
with  us.  If  we  can  enter  into  this  state,  we  see  him ; if
not,  it  is  not  he  who  is  at  default,  but  we  who  cannot
see  him.” — “Your  father’s  countenance;  does  it  seem
to  you,  as  on  earth,  older  than  your  brother’s  ?”  “ Yes  ;
and  that  you  ought  easily  to  conceive,  it  being  absolutely
necessary  that  the  dead  should  appear  to  us  just  as  they
were  on  earth,  in  order  to  be  recognised;  but  it  is  not
their  real  heavenly  countenance.  There  they  all  appear
to  be  of  the  same  age,  excepting  those  who  die  when
children : in  that  case,  they  continue  growing,  and
become  like  the  rest  in  respect  to  the  uniformity  of  age
stamped  on  their  physiognomy.  Although  they  all  appear
to  be  of  the  same  age,  each  preserves  his  individual
look,  apart  the  beauty  which  is  common  to  them  all,
and  which  surpasses  all  that  the  imagination  can  conceive
on  earth.” — “ What  appears  to  be  the  general  age  ?”
“ Thirty  to  forty ; but  this  age  would  be  taken  by  us  for
about  twenty.” — “ Negroes,  I suppose,  are  of  a beautiful
black  there?”  “The  souls  of  negroes  are  as  white  as  ours  ;
it  is  only  in  the  skin  they  differ  from  us ; but  in  heaven

E


58


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


every  one  is  white.” — “ Since  we  meet  again  in  families,
no  doubt  the  husband  rejoins  his  wife?”  “Yes;  but
they  do  not  live  as  on  earth,  on  our  impure  love,  they
live  like  brother  and  sister.” — “ What ! there  is  no  love
in  heaven?”  “There  is  a love  unknown  to  the  earth,
and  incomprehensible  to  those  who  are  on  the  earth ; it
may  be  compared  to  a chaste  and  pure  friendship.” —
“ Are  all  beings  assembled  there  in  pairs  ?”  “ Yes.” —

“ But  there  are  beings  that  delight  in  isolation,  and  have
never  known  love  on  earth  ; they  have  loved  no  one  ?”
“ Not  a being  exists  but  has  loved  some  one  on  earth,
or  felt  the  want  of  loving;  this  want  has  ever  existed,
and,  perhaps,  there  are  no  beings  in  existence  who  may
not  have  said  to  themselves,  ‘ T should  have  dearly  loved
such  a woman,  or  such  a man.’  This  union  of  two  beings
is  the  foundation  of  all  happiness.” — “ I am  aware  of
that ; but  it  seems  to  me  that  there  is  one  difficulty :
many  beings  have  not  loved  because  they  could  not  love
conjointly  the  same  person,  and  hence  spring  the  rivalries
which  cause  so  much  trouble.”  “ It  is  not  thus  in
heaven.  Analyse  earthly  love,  which  is  a passion  of
possession,  and  you  will  find  that  it  is  in  order  to  possess
the  same  woman  to  one’s  self  that  rivalry  springs  up:  in
heaven  it  is  the  eontrary ; we  love  not  for  the  happiness
of  possessing,  but  for  that  of  loving.” — “ You  have,
however,  told  me,  that  in  heaven  we  are  in  pairs,  a proof
that  we  possess  there,  as  on  earth,  the  object  of  our
affections.  Then,  again,  a woman  who  has  had  two  or
three  husbands,  how  is  that  managed  ? I think  you
will  be  puzzled  to  give  me  an  answer  ?”  “ By  no  means  ;

every  being  is  created  double,  and  sooner  or  later  united
to  his  half;  but  in  the  world  of  spirits,  of  which  we  now
speak,  we  know  not  earthly  love,  or  the  want  of  being
united  to  the  object  of  our  affection.  Thus,  we  dream
not  there  as  on  earth  of  the  possession  of  the  being  that
often  remains  long  unknown  to  us ; and  then,  again,  we
love  those  around  us  like  brothers  and  sisters.” — “ You
told  me  that  your  brother  was  united  there  to  his


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISAI.


59


betrothed “ Yes ; because  it  is  she  who  is  his  half ; but
every  one  meets  not  forthwith  with  his  own,  and  such
union  is  in  nowise  similar  to  our  earthly  love.  A woman
might  be  loved  by  a score  of  men,  since  none  would
desire  to  possess  her  to  himself  alone.  You  perceive,
therefore,  that  you  cannot  comprehend  such  mysteries.”

I fully  comprehend  that  the  idea  of  possession,  in  love,
as  in  everything  else,  is  the  foundation  of  all  earthly
troubles ; but  if  this  affection  is  at  times  misplaced,  it,
nevertheless,  procures  for  the  man  and  the  woman  a
happiness  which  it  seems  to  me  no  easy  matter  to  replace
by  aught  else  ?”  It  is  not  said  that  it  is  replaced,
since,  on  the  contrary,  I have  already  told  you,  that
in  heaven  all  beings,  without  distinction,  were  completed
there ; but  I replied  to  your  question  of  a woman  who  has
had  several  husbands.  In  heaven,  she  may  love  them
all  at  once,  as  a mother  loves  all  her  children,  and  may
be  loved  by  them  all,  as  this  mother  is  loved  by  all  her
children.  Were  there  a hundred  to  love  her,  they
would  not  be  too  many ; if  the  whole  hundred  wish
always  to  be  in  her  j)resence  and  enjoy  the  pleasure
of  her  conversation,  they  may  all  do  so,  without  jealousy,
since  we  possess  all  that  we  can  desire  to  possess.  So
much  for  the  heaven  of  spirits.  But  in  the  superior
heaven,  where  the  re-union,  the  junction,  of  bodies  is
definitively  effected,  each  is  penetrated  with  a holy  love
for  his  partner,  whom  none  can  either  envy  or  dispute
with  you,  each  having  his  own,  from  whom  he  could
not  divert  the  least  affection.”

46.  “ You  told  me  at  the  last  sitting  that  spirits  could
pass  without  difficulty  through  all  bodies ; this  would
induce  the  belief  that  their  substance  is  but  a compound
of  air ; can  these  spirits  assume  any  other  form  besides
the  human  one  ?”  “ Yes,  whatever  form  they  desire,

especially  evil  spirits,  who  take  delight  in  all  sorts  of
disguises.” — This  would  make  me  believe  in  the  mali-
cious spirits  who  cause  those  apparitions  so  indus-
triously circulated  in  the  country.^’  “ It  is  a reality ;

E 2


60


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


they  take  delight  only  in  troubles  of  this  kind/’ —
you  believe  that  these  spirits  have  the  strength  to  upset
articles  of  furniture  and  a thousand  other  things,  as  it
is  said  ? I cannot  accord  such  power  to  air,  a light  fluid
cannot  disturb  a heavy  one.”  “ You  don’t  believe  it!
it  is,  however,  this  light  fluid,  as  you  term  it,  that  im-
parts motion  to  your  body,  and  can  also,  by  transport-
ing it  from  one  place  to  another,  charge  it  with  a heavy
burden,  without  your  knowing  that  it  is  the  spirit  alone
that  possesses  the  strength  to  move  this  matter,  though
shackled  as  it  is  by  its  bonds.  Why  should  you  refuse
it  a double  or  triple  force  when  it  is  freed  from  it  ?
Know  that  the  s])irit  can  bear  the  heaviest  burthens,
light  fluid  as  you  believe  it  to  be,  and  can  effect  things
of  which  you  have  no  conception.” — ‘‘I  accorded  it  this
power  within  us  because  we  furnish  it  with  organs  and
fluids  wherewith  to  operate,  but  I do  not  think  that  out
of  matter  it  has  any  power  over  it.”  “ It  is  as  I have
just  told  you;  you  cannot  conceive  that  it  has  the  same
organs,  that  it  is  it  which  is  the  life,  the  strength,  the
action,  the  mover  of  matter;  and  what  has  moved  it  a
minute  can  also  move  it  an  eternity.” — “ Can  these
spirits,  as  it  is  affirmed,  repair  to  your  orders  to  obey
you  ?”  They  desire  nothing  better  ; they  obey  you  a
few  instants  in  order  to  draw  5*ou  into  their  societ)*,
and  become,  at  a later  period,  their  slaves.” — “ What
do  you  mean  by  that  ? — they  have  a leader,  then  ?”

No,  they  are  all  free  and  independent ; but  you  be-
come their  slaves,  as  the  gambler  is  the  slave  of  the  *
places  he  frequents,  of  the  passions,  the  consequences,  of
which  he  undergoes;  they  aided  you  to  do  evil,  after
your  death  you  aid  them  to  do  what  you  took  a delight
in  seeing  them  do  for  you.” — ‘‘  Many  persons  doubt
what  you  now  say,  because  they  have  sought  to  enter
into  commuication  with  them  and  have  not  succeeded.”

“ That  may  be  accounted  for  thus : in  the  first  place,
their  good  angel  diverted  them  from  such  a course ;
secondly,  if  you  ask  for  a spirit  out  of  the  mass,  as  you


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


G1


would  for  a soldier  out  of  an  army,  none  will  answer
only  to  his  name ; we  should  know,  therefore,  to  whom
we  address  ourselves;  do  so  in  proper  form,  and  not
make  the  request  whilst  dreading  its  execution.  A truce
to  such  conversation  ; I don’t  like  it.” — Can  you  tell
me  the  name  of  my  angel  ?”  Gabriel.” — “ And  the
name  of  yours  ?”  “ Raphael.” — “ There  are,  then,
many  angels  named  Gabriel  ?”  There  is  no  dearth  of
them — it  is  a society.” — “ Can  an  angel  convey  mes-
sages and  objects,  as  some  religious  persons  and  mag-
netisers  have  said  ?”  “ Yes,  but  that  happens  very

seldom  ; it  can  be  effected  only  by  quite  a special  pro-
tection of  God.  My  mother  tells  me  that  I wish  to
know  a great  deal.”  “ Tell  her  that  it  is  in  order  to
instruct  yourself,  and  avoid  being  laughed  at  by  your
brothers  for  your  ignorance.” — “ Could  your  mother  be
deceived  ?”  No.” — “ And  your  niece  ?”  “ She  might,
because  she  is  very  young  and  thoughtless  ; no  doubt
she  has  been  forbidden  to  speak  to  me,  as  she  is  much
more  quiet  now.”

4/.  For  several  sittings  Adele’s  mother  did  not  come,
but  at  this  one  she  appears,  and  complains  to  her
daughter  of  my  incredulity  in  her  presence,  telling  her
that  I had  carried  my  doubts  so  far  the  last  time  as  to
try  and  lay  hold  of  her  with  my  hand ; that  if  ever  I
recommenced  such  an  experiment  she  would  come  no
more  to  visit  her  ; that  I ought  to  have  as  much  confi-
dence in  her  as  she  had  in  me ; and  that,  moreover,  I
could  never  feel  or  touch  a spirit.  Adele  is  very  much
astonished  at  this  communication.  I wish  to  assure  her
of  the  contrary,  but  she  believes  her  mother  in  pre-
ference to  me.  It  is  quite  true  that  I mechanically
put  out  my  arm  tow'ards  the  spot  where  I supposed
Adele’s  mother  to  be,  without  for  a moment  consider-
ing that  I could  not  feel  a spiritual  body ; but  this  silly
experiment  on  my  part  has  presented  me  with  a solu-
tion which  I was  far  from  expecting,  as  it  assures  me
that  no  other  being  but  Adele’s  mother  could  have  been


62


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


acquainted  with  my  then  present  thoughts.  .Adele,  as
I have  observed,  not  having  this  speciality,  and  had  she
possessed  it  she  would  have  given  me  to  understand
forthwith  that  I was  doing  a silly  act;  neither  has  she
the  speciality  of  seeing  bodies  or  objects  present,  she
sees  only  the  interior  of  sick  persons  : she  could  not  be
aware  of  this  incident,  and,  had  she  divined  it,  she  is
incapable  of  dissembling  so  far  with  me.  We  shall  see,
by-and-bye,  that  she  is  worthy  of  all  confidence ; a
single  fact  of  this  nature  proved  may  admit  a hundred.
This  sitting  was  to  be  pregnant  with  good  results : —
Adele’s  mother  predicting  that  one  of  her  daughters,
Adele’s  sister,  would  get  married  in  a short  time,  that
she  w’ould  not  be  the  first  to  acquaint  her  with  this
change  in  her  position,  but  that  her  brother,  who  was  in
the  country,  would  bring  her  the  news.  She  also  tells
her  the  name  of  the  person  to  whom  her  sister  was  to
be  married,  though  he  was  then  unknown  both  to  the
latter  and  Adele.  Her  father  informs  her,  at  the  same
time,  that  she  will  shortly  hear  that  another  of  her  sis-
ters had  been  brought  to  bed  of  a girl.  The  prediction
was  realised,  point  for  point,  two  years  after,  and  the
communication  was  perfectly  true.  Here,  then,  are
three  facts  emanating  from  real  communications,  and
not  from  any  other  combination.

48.  Adele  exclaims  : Oh,  here  is  a pretty  little
angel ! How  fair,  and  how  beautiful !” — “ Who  is  it }”
“ My  little  godson,  who  died  in  my  arms  w’hen  only
a fortnight  old.^’  “That’s  three  years  ago.”  I had
magnetised  Bruno  the  same  day  with  Adele;  he  also
sees  this  little  angel.  He  declares  that  it  has  wings  ;
Adele  says  the  contrary.  After  a moment’s  contem-
plation, she  appears  to  be  afraid.  “ What  makes  you
afraid  ?”  “ My  brother-in-law,  who  is  come  to  see  me,

and  wants  to  take  me  by  the  hand.  I could  very  well
dispense  with  his  visit.  I told  my  parents  that  I had
no  wish  to  see  him.  Why  does  he  come?  I won’t
have  him  touch  me ; let  him  go.”  Adele  turns  away  in


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


63


a pet  from  this  man,  who  appears  to  her  on  her  left;
whilst,  on  the  contrary,  all  good  spirits  ordinarily
appear  on  the  right.  I observed  to  her  that  it  is  very
wrong  and  unjust  on  her  part;  that  she  ought  not,  in
the  state  she  is,  to  entertain  ill-will  towards  any  one.
I desire  her  to  give  her  hand  to  her  brother-in-law.
She  obstinately  refuses,  saying  that  he  is  in  a position
well  adapted  for  his  malicious  purposes  ; that  he  had
made  her  sister  miserable;  that  he  still  did  all  he  could
to  inspire  her  with  disagreeable  thoughts,  but  that
when  he  had  passed  over  to  the  good  side  she  would
forgive  him.  I am  obliged  to  order  off  this  man.
One  cannot  take  this  apparition  for  an  effect  of  the
imagination,  as  she  in  nowise  desired  it,  and  was  hor-
ribly surprised  and  vexed  at  it.  Never  before  had  I
seen  her  so  harsh  and  wilful  as  towards  this  man.

49.  Second  apparition  of  Adele’s  little  godson.  She
seems  to  take  the  greatest  interest  in  this  little  being ;
and  when  she  beheld  him  depart  it  seemed  to  her  that
he  was  going  to  fall.  She  followed  him,  and  entered
into  the  complement  of  ecstacy,  from  which  it  was  no
easy  matter  for  me  to  withdraw  her.  She  signified  her
displeasure  at  my  attempts,  saying  to  me  as  before,
“ Why  force  me  to  return  to  this  world  of  trouble  and
misery  ? I was  so  happy  in  accompanying  this  little
being,  who  has,  indeed,  pretty  little  white  wings,  such
as  M.  Bruno  described.  It  was  I who  was  wrong  on
this  point.” — How  far  did  you  go  ?”  “ I ascended  to

a great  height,  then  passed  through  an  immense  vault,
at  the  end  of  which  were  beautiful  gardens,  containing
all  that  is  remarkable  for  freshness  and  elegance.  A
great  many  persons  were  walking  in  the  alleys,  some
reading,  others  playing  music — all  seemed  very  happy.
The  harmony  amongst  them  appeared  so  perfect,  that
one  could  only  desire  to  be  with  them.  I saw  my
father  there,  my  mother,  the  whole  of  my  family.  I
wanted  to  stay,  but  my  mother  and  your  will  obliged
me  to  descend  again.” — ‘‘  How  were  all  those  people


64


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


dressed  ?”  “ In  a sort  of  gauze  robe,  of  all  colours.

Their  physiognomy  was  totally  different ; but  I fully
recognised  my  relations,  although  if  they  appeared  to
us  thus  attired  it  would  be  more  difficult  to  recognise
them.  God  has  done  right  in  contriving  otherwise.” —
“ How  can  males  be  distinguished  from  females  ?”
“ By  their  form  ; for  their  light  dress  is  no  mark  of
distinction.  If  the  passions  were  the  same  in  heaven
as  on  earth,  we  should  be  ashamed  to  see  ourselves
thus.  No  attention  is  paid  there  to  such  things.” —
“ Bruno  has  already  told  me  the  same  thing ; this  attire,
however,  is  very  indecent.”  ‘‘Yes,  for  us  here  below,
where  love  exists,  with  its  impure  empire ; but  there,
no  such  thoughts  are  entertained.”

50.  “ Here  is  the  partner  of  my  brother  Alphonse,
Rosine,  one  of  my  old  friends,  who  was  betrothed  to
him,  as  I have  told  you,  before  he  set  off  for  Africa ;
she  died  four  years  after  him.” — “ Ask  her  if  she  is  dis-
posed to  answer  a few  questions  I wish  to  put  to
her.”  “Yes.” — “ Since  you  told  me  that  she  is  united
to  her  betrothed  in  heaven,  would  she  tell  you  how  this
reunion,  which  is  now  a real  union,  was  accomplished  ?
Were  there  any  ceremonies  for  this  purpose  ?”  “Good
heavens ! no.  Alphonse  awaited  Rosine,  because  he
knew  her  end  was  approaching.  No  sooner  had  she  en-
tered than  they  were  reunited  without  any  ceremony —
without  requiring  the  approbation  or  consent  of  a third
party ; they  were  reunited  to  each  other  as  friends,  and
not  as  lovers,  as  she  also  says  that  there  is  no  love  in
heaven.  They  are  like  brother  and  sister,  perfectly  in
accord,  since  it  cannot  be  otherwise.” — “ Do  they  sleep
together  ?”  “ We  do  not  go  to  bed  in  heaven  ; there

is  no  night  as  on  earth ; we  merely  repose  when  we
desire  it,  for  it  is  not  fatigue  that  compels  us  to  do  so.”
— “Does  Rosine  repose  beside  her  friend?”  “Cer-
tainly.”— “On  what?”  “On  a divan,  cushions,  what-
ever she  pleases.” — “ Are  they  always  together  ?”
No,  she  goes  to  see  him,  and  he  her.” — “ Have  they


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


65


a room  for  two  ?”  No,  they  live  in  families  and
societies.” — There  are  no  rooms,  then,  in  which  we
can  meditate  apart  ?”  “ Positively  speaking,  there  are

no  houses  as  on  earth,  but  separations  that  stand  in  their
stead,  which  every  one  may  occupy  according  to  his
taste;  but  nothing  on  earth  can  be  compared  to  them
in  beauty  and  magnificence.” — ‘‘  We  may,  then,  me-
ditate or  perform  usages  agreeable  to  us  for  an  infinite
time  ?”  Yes,  we  may  read  a book,  a page,  a phrase,
for  a time  without  end,  seeing  that  there  is  no  time  in
heaven,  and  still  less  of  it,  for  aught  that  is  agreeable  to
us ; we  find  incessantly  the  same  pleasure,  the  same
enjoyment  in  the  idea  we  delight  in.  My  brother-in-
law  is  exasperated  at  my  rancour  towards  him  ; but  he
indemnified  himself  for  it  last  night,  by  suggesting  to  me
bad  dreams.  I dreamt  that  1 was  cutting  the  throat  of
his  daughter,  my  little  niece,  who  is  in  heaven  and
comes  to  see  me  habitually;  I concealed  her  thus
assassinated  under  my  bed.  Good  heavens,  how  I
suffered  \” — “ It  was  a mere  rambling  of  the  imagina-
tion ; a spirit  cannot  thus  inffuence  us,  were  such  the
case,  we  should  be  slaves,  a hundred  times  worse  off
than  the  brutes.’’  It  is  so,  however,  not  in  all  dreams,
but  in  some,  spirits  prefer  the  moment  when  the  body
is  left  to  repose,  without  any  defence,  and  when  the
soul  is  less  vigilant  over  it,  by  seeking  to  avail  itself  of
the  body’s  sleep  to  give  itself  up  to  researches,  experi-
ments, travels.  Then  it  is  that  evil  spirits  torment  us,
and  we  can  rid  ourselves  of  their  presence  only  by  in-
voking the  name  of  God  who  drives  them  out  forthwith.
What  I tell  you  is  a truth  at  which  I should  laugh  in
my  watchful  state,  but  now  appreciate  at  its  proper
value.  It  was  my  brother-in-law  who  represented  to
me  those  horrible  images.^’ — “ But  the  good  angel,
beside  us,  can  he  not  prottect  us  under  such  circum-
stances?’’ “Not  always;  our  soul  stands  in  need  of
his  counsels  for  a multitude  of  other  actions,  of  which
it  has  no  recollection ; for  the  spirit  sleeps  not,  and  our


6f>  THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE

angel  cannot  always  prevent  by  night,  any  more  than
by  day,  the  power  of  evil  spirits/^

We  are  now  come,  without  the  least  desire,  to  the
persuasions  of  M.  Berbiguer,  with  his  hobgoblins.  1
have  thought  fit  to  give  this  sitting  entire,  that  every
one  may  judge  of  it  as  he  pleases.  As  one  of  the  objects
of  this  work  is  to  engage  all  magnetisers  to  make  similar
researches  on  the  spiritual  laws,  I doubt  not  but  that
many  will  be  found  to  obtain  similar  results.  In  all
that  has  been  hitherto  told  me,  it  is  impossible  to  per-
ceive aught  but  mere  sickly  or  dreamy  organisations;
there  is  too  much  affinity  between  them  not  to  admit  at
least  a mental  indisposition,  the  symptoms  of  which
should  be  precisely  the  same  in  each  individual ; but
how  admit  such  connection  in  the  ideas,  without  con-
cluding therefrom  that  it  is  the  magnetiser  himself  who
insinuates  them.  In  that  case  I will  reply:  Do  as  I do
and  you  will  know  what  to  think  of  it.  Continue  the
perusal  of  this  work  to  the  end,  and  you  will  see  that  a
magnetiser  is  not  a god,  that  his  properties  must  be
limited  to  his  belief  and  his  knowledge  ; but  that  he  is
unable  to  influence  what  he  knows  not,  what  he  believes
not,  and  if  you  meet  not  with  the  solution  you  seek,  do
not  say  that  my  ecstatics  were  wearisome  fools.

51.  “My  niece  tells  me  that  my  brother  is  ill,  that
he  has  had  medical  advice  in  time,  but  that  he  will  be
attacked  again  with  the  same  malady  and  will  die
young.  (This  proved  to  be  true.)  Here  is  my  mother,
she  does  not  seem  pleased.^’ — “ Perhaps  she  is  dis-
pleased at  your  propensity  for  the  ecstatic  state  in
despite  of  her  counsels  ; ask  her  if  such  be  the  case.”
“ True ; she  says  that  this  state  is  a very  dangerous  one
for  me.” — “ How  long  ought  you  to  remain  in  it?”  “ Five
minutes.” — “ Why  does  your  little  godson  who  eomes
to  see  you  appear  to  you  as  an  angel  ?”  “Because  he  is
really  one  ?” — “ Why  should  he  be  one,  any  more  than
your  nieee  ?”  “ Because  he  had  not  attained  the  age  of
three  years  at  his  death.” — “Why  rather  this  age  than


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.  fi7

any  other “ My  mother  tells  me  that  all  children
that  die  before  this  age  grow  no  bigger.  God,  who
dearly  loves  them  on  account  of  the  state  of  purity  in
which  they  died  (seeing  that  they  have  not  yet  com-
mitted any  evil),  delights  in  being  surrounded  by  them;
they  are  much  nearer  to  him  than  any  of  the  rest.^^

52.  “ When  you  rise,  through  ecstasy,  towards
heaven,  the  sensation  you  experience  is,  I suppose,
similar  to  that  experienced  by  a person  dying  “ No ;
I rise  in  good  health,  experience  no  obstacle,  whereas
at  death,  the  soul  is  much  more  cramped  in  quitting  the
body  disorganised  by  illness ; then  there  is  suffering,
but  I feel  none  in  the  state  I am.” — “ What  effect  is
produced  in  you  when  you  behold  beneath  you  the
earth,  which  must  appear  very  obscure  compared  to  the
brilliant  light  of  heaven  }”  We  make  no  reflections;
we  neither  think  of  the  earth  nor  of  any  one;  we  rise  in
a sensation  of  happiness — of  joy  impossible  to  describe —
we  would  wish  to  remain  there.^^ — May  it  not  be  an
error  of  your  senses  this  pretended  elevation  towards
heaven,  or  rather  an  interior  nervous  expansion,  illumed
by  bright  electric  rays  surrounding  the  soul,  which,
possibly  is,  in  its  corporeal  interior,  and  enjoys  the
happiness  of  this  sight  which  it  fancies  it  tastes  from
without?”  “ How  admit  such  an  error,  when  one  feels
as  I feel,  sees  what  I see;  traverses  clouds,  space,  and
arrives  in  the  midst  of  relations,  friends,  who  all  stretch
out  to  you  their  arms,  overwhelm  you  with  caresses,  and
seek  by  all  possible  means  to  prove  to  you  the  pleasure
they  feel  in  seeing  you,  and  desire  with  a common
accord  that  you  should  soon  rejoin  them.  If  we  look
upon  all  this  as  error,  I know  not  then  how  we  are  to
recognise  truth.” — “There  are  narcotics  which  produce
hallucinations  more  or  less  agreeable,  and  display  to  us
pictures,  scenes,  somewhat  similar  to  ecstasy,  and  such,
however,  are  errors.”  “There  you  are  again  at  discussion
and  doubt.  It  is  a practice  with  men  to  treat  as  errors  what
they  do  not  comprehend  ; it  is  an  easy  way  of  settling  the


68


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


matter.  Narcotics  convey  trouble  into  the  nervous  sys-
tem, disturb  the  soul  in  its  vital  functions,  throw  it  into
the  world  of  causes,  when  it  makes  unheard-of  efforts  to
remain  in  the  world  of  effects.  The  soul  confounds  the
domain  of  the  memory;  the  pictures  of  the  ineffaceable
actions  which  all  men  have  within  them,  with  the
pictures  of  the  world  of  causes  in  which  it  wanders  for
a moment.  It  can  perceive  in  this  state  the  most
burlesque  scenes  tacked  on  to  rational  ones ; because  it
knows  not  how  to  separate  them,  knows  not  where  it  is,
knows  not  what  they  are ; the  reservoir  of  its  imagina-
tion overflows,  and  hurries  it  into  the  absurd.  But  is
it  the  same  in  ecstacy  : is  all  that  I tell  you  under  the
empire  of  folly  ? What  is  predicted  to  me  and  which  is
accomplished,  is  it  of  the  domain  of  error  ? The  views
at  distances,  the  descriptions  of  places?  what  is  done  or
said  there  ? are  they  errors  ? All  the  somnambulists
who  thus  see,  do  they  not  prove  that  they  are  no  longer
in  their  body,  since  they  reproduce  to  you  facts,  scenes,
conversations  of  which  you  have  never  heard  speak,  and
which  take  place  for  the  first  time  at  the  very  instant
they  are  communicated  to  you.  What  can  you  say  to
those  facts  ? Be  reasonable,  then,  and  believe  that  all
the  savans  in  the  world  cannot  deny  what  I have  just
cited,  and  which  is  operated  every  day  at  each  instant;
they  will  be  obliged  to  extend  the  properties  of  the
body,  if  they  are  unwilling  to  give  it  a soul,  and  these
properties  will  be  as  obscure  in  their  solution  as  those
of  the  soul,  or  they  will  accept  the  latter ; then  they  will
give  it  the  power  of  travelling  out  of  the  body,  reading
thoughts,  seeing  actions  past  and  future,  and  when  they
have  acknowledged  such  a soul,  they  will  not  refuse  its
going  in  search  of  repose  to  a place  of  recompense  for
all  the  sufferings  which  it  has  endured  in  this  world  of
grief.^’  I thank  you  for  your  ingenious  and  frank
explanation.  I have  nothing  to  say  against  it.”

53.  “ Once  more,  allow  me  to  make  an  observation
on  the  last  sitting.  My  reason  for  doubting  that  vour


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


69


soul  was  out  of  your  body,  is,  that  scarcely  have  I
spoken,  than  you  answer  me;  and  I do  not  perceive
your  body  making  any  movement  when  you  say  that
you  are  receiving  the  caresses  of  your  relatives.”  It
is,  however,  this  want  of  movement  in  my  body,  in  my
grand  ecstatic  movements,  which  ought  to  prove  to  you
that  I am  no  longer  in  it ; when  my  relativ’^es,  on  the
contrary,  come  on  earth  to  see  me,  you  perceive  my
spiritual  hand  pressing  theirs,  my  body  gesticulating,
because  they  are  really  there  present  and  I also ; but
when  I am  in  heaven,  my  body  can  no  longer  make  the
same  gestures,  since  there  is  no  longer  a soul  within  it.
If  I answer  you  immediately,  it  is  because  I still  cling
to  my  body  by  sympathetic  threads  which  you  seem  to
me  to  hold  like  cords,  forcing  me,  when  you  draw  them,
to  descend  to  the  power  of  your  will.” — In  views,  at
distances,  although  the  somnambulists  are  in  other
places,  their  body  is  not  deprived  of  movement  ?”  “ The
comparison  holds  not  good.  They  are  on  earth  at  slight
distances,  comparatively,  with  those  of  heaven ; they
are  not  in  the  ecstatic  condition  necessary  to  communi-
cate with  heaven,  and  hence  the  separation  of  the  soul
and  body  is  not  the  same.” — I perceive  that  Adele
purposes  entering  into  the  ecstatic  state ; I make  up  my
mind  to  try  a decisive  experiment,  and  leave  her  to  her
will;  I forthwith  send  Bruno  to  sleep,  put  him  enrapport
with  her,  and  beg  him  to  follow  her  as  far  as  possible,
recommending  him  not  to  be  alarmed,  and  to  warn  me
only  if  he  should  ^see  danger.”  I wished  to  be  assured
by  myself  of  the  pretended  dangets  of  ecstacy.  Fre-
quently had  Adele  told  me  that  she  had  been  on  the
point  of  not  coming  back  to  re-enter  her  body,  and  as  I
thought  that  she  only  wanted  to  alarm  me,  I wished  to
know  what  opinion  to  come  to.  At  the  lapse  of  a
quarter  of  an  hour,  Bruno  exclaims  in  great  alarm,  ‘ I
have  lost  sight  of  her  I had  relied  upon  him,  and
paid  little  attention  to  Adele,  whose  body  in  the  mean-
while had  grown  icy  cold  ; there  was  no  longer  any  pulse


70  THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE

or  respiration ; her  face  was  of  a sallow  green,  her  lips
blue,  her  heart  gave  no  sign  of  life.  1 placed  before
her  lips  a mirror,  but  it  was  by  no  means  tarnished  by
them.  I magnetised  her  powerfully,  in  order  to  bring
back  her  soul  into  her  body,  but  for  five  minutes  my
labour  was  vain.  Bruno,  alarmed  at  my  want  of  success,
as  well  as  the  persons  present  at  this  sitting,  tended
greatly  to  disturb  me.  I thought  for  a moment  that
the  work  was  consummated,  and  that  I had  an  indubi-
table proof  that  the  soul  had  departed  from  her  body.
I was  obliged  to  request  the  persons  present  to  pass
into  another  room,  in  order  tliat  I might  recover,  by
myself,  a little  energy.  At  the  lapse  of  a few  moments,
I entertained  the  hope  that  I should  not  have  such  a
misfortune  to  deplore ; but,  physically  speaking,  I was
utterly  powerless.  Falling  on  my  knees,  I asked  back,
of  God,  in  my  prayer,  the  soul  that  I had  in  my  doubts
suffered  to  depart.  I seemed,  by  an  effect  of  intuition,
to  know  that  my  prayer  was  heard  : after  a minute^s
further  anguish,  I obtained  these  words : ‘ Why  have
you  called  me  back  ? it  was  all  over  with  me  ! but  God,
moved  at  your  prayer,  sent  me  back  to  you.  No  more
shall  I be  permitted  to  return  to  heaven  ; I am  punished.”
— ^‘Of  what  punishment  do  you  speak?”  ‘^Raphael
has  forbidden  my  mother  and  all  my  relations,  except
Alphonse,  to  come  and  see  me  again,  until  further  orders,
and  it  is  to  you  that  I am  indebted  for  this  privation.
I shall  no  longer  be  able  to  ascend  to  heaven,  but  had
it  not  been  for  you  I should  have  been  there  now  and
for  ever.”  It  may  be  naturally  supposed  that  I paid  but
little  attention  to  her  complaints  and  reproaches.

I was  only  too  happy  to  hear  her  speak  to  me,  and
promised  myself,  as  my  readers  may  imagine,  never  to
recommence  such  experiments.  I advise  those  who
should  be  disposed  to  imitate  me,  never  to  make  such  a
trial,  for  no  spectacle  can  be  more  alarming,  and  the
issue  of  such  experiment  might  terminate  fatally.

It  was  all  over  with  her  ecstasies,  just  as  she  had  pre-


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


71


dieted  ; no  one  came  any  more  to  see  her.  Her  brother
often  instructed  her  in  what  was  agreeable  to  her ; but
the  self-will  of  Adele,  and  her  little  regard  for  his  com-
plaisance, drove  him  away.  It  was  more  than  six  months
before  she  recovered  this  kind  of  clairvoyance;  I was
not  sorry  for  it,  as  I was  determined  not  to  magnetise
her  again.  There  was  a continual  combat  of  subtlety
between  us  two  ; if  I lost  sight  of  her  for  an  instant,
she  had  ever  the  same  intention,  suicide  in  ecstacy !
Several  times  since  she  sought  to  re-enter  this  state,  but
she  invariably  felt  a hand  which  pushed  her  head  for-
ward, sometimes  she  heard  boisterous  music,  which  di-
verted her  from  her  purpose,  and  once  a voice  exclaimed
in  her  ear — ‘^That  is  forbidden  you.^^  It  w^as  her  bro-
ther Alphonse  who  worked  all  these  miracles;  he  never
came  to  see  her  without  diverting  her  by  an  air  on  a
flute,  although  before  his  death  he  knew  not  how  to
play  that  instrument ; he  often  rendered  perceptible  to
her  a divine  music,  which  she  could  hear,  though  wide
awake,  by  the  secret  she  had  taught  me  to  employ  to
this  effect.  She  equally  saw  all  her  relations  after  she
awoke,  a circumstance  that  excited  her  astonishment,
and  made  her  believe  in  magic;  she  could  not  compre-
hend, be  it  understood,  these  kinds  of  visions,  which
made  me  pass  in  her  eyes  for  a sorcerer.  We  are  bound
to  conclude  from  all  these  experiments,  which  lasted
whole  months,  and  which  I compress  into  one  sitting,
that  it  would  be  more  than  ridiculous  that  a woman  so
firm  should  not  perceive  at  will  the  freaks  of  her  ima-
gination, if  such  they  were  ; but,  on  the  contrary,  that
all  these  facts  presented  such  a variety  only  the  better
to  dispose  me  to  believe  in  their  merit.

We  will  pass  on  to  more  decisive  experiments,  in  the
same  kind  of  clairvoyance,  in  order  that  it  may  not  be
said,  it  is  her  relations  whose  image  is  imprinted  in  her
imagination,  whom  she  continually  sees ; that  is  not  as-
tonishing, and  proves  nought.

54.  New  Spiritual  Clairvoyance. — Adele  was


72


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


consulted  by  an  Abbe  on  a speculation.  When  he
learnt  that  she  had  the  facility  of  conversing  with  spirits,
he  expressed  a wish  for  her  to  see  his  father,  who  had
been  dead  some  months.  Here  he  is,”  said  she.
“Describe  to  me  his  appearance  and  dress,  if  you
please  ?”  Adele  did  so,  to  the  great  satisfaction  of  this
gentleman,  and  related  to  him  a few  particulars  of  the
life  of  his  father,  such  as  he  alone  could  be  acquainted
with.  Nought  more  was  required  to  convince  the  Abbe
of  the  excellent  clairvoyance  of  Adele,  consequently  he
returned  a few  days  after  to  beg  me  to  put  some  ques-
tions to  her  on  alchymy  ; I promised  him  that  I would
do  so  with  pleasure.  Adele  was  not  at  ray  house  that
day.

55.  “Will  you  request  your  brother  to  come,  I have
a few  questions  to  put  to  him  ?”  She  requests  his  at-
tendance, and  all  at  once  seems  overcome  as  if  with
surprise.  “ What  is  the  matter  with  you  ?”  asked  I.
“ It  is  a Capuchin  friar  who  is  come  to  me  ; he  is  on  his
knees,  and  praying  to  God.” — “ Who  is  this  friar  ?”  “ I
don^t  know  whether  he  is  a Capuchin,  but  he  has  a cowl
on  his  head;  I can’t  see  his  face.” — “ Ask  him  what  he
wants  with  you  ?”  “ I dare  not  speak  to  him.” — “ In

that  case  I’ll  send  him  away.’’  I give  the  usual  com-
mand, but  the  man  does  not  budge,  Adele  and  I both
laugh  ; she  experiences  no  alarm,  still  she  persists  in  not
speaking  to  him.  At  last  he  disappears,  and  she  again
asks  for  her  brother,  who  forthwith  comes.  “ I beg  her
to  ask  him  who  this  man  is  r”  “ It  is,”  replied  he,
laughing,  “ Father  Lauriot;  I sent  him  to  you  that  you
might  question  him  for  the  Abbe.”  Adele  laughs  at
this  name,  and  thinks  that  her  brother  is  making  sport
of  her.  (Lauriot  signifies  a baker’s  tub.)  “ Request
your  brother  to  tell  you  positively  the  name  of  this  man  ?”
“ His  name  was  Achilles  ; he  was  a priest,  and  one  of
the  abbe’s  friends.  I know  not  whether  this  gentleman
is  aware  that  he  devoted  himself,  when  on  earth,  to
hermetic  researches;  but  in  heaven  he  is  in  societies


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


73


that  follow  such  pursuits,  and  for  that  reason  I addressed
him  to  you.” — “ You  were  aware,  then,  that  I was  to
question  you  on  this  subject  ?”  Yes,  I perceived  it  in
your  thoughts,”  replies  her  brother ; and  as  I do  not
trouble  myself  with  such  matters,  I thought  I could  not
do  better  than  place  you  in  communication  with  one
who  could  instruct  you.” — That  being  the  case,  you
ought  to  have  warned  me,  and  I should  not  have  given
this  man  so  cool  a reception.”  “ He  will  return.” —
“ They  make,  then,  the  philosopher’s  stone  in  heaven  ?”

No ; but  every  one  occupies  himself  there  accord-
ing to  his  taste.  He  whose  whole  affection  it  was  on
earth  takes  no  delight  in  making  it  after  his  death,  but
in  associating  with  societies  that  protect  and  instruct
those  on  earth  who  w'ork  at  it,  and  have  recourse  to
them.” — “The  stone,  then,  exists?”  “Yes.”  I put
several  questions  to  him  on  this  subject,  which  he  an-
swered according  to  their  value.

56.  I had  acquainted  the  Abbe  with  this  apparition,
which  he  took  for  an  hallucination,  never  having  known
a priest  by  that  name.  I informed  him  of  the  answers
I had  obtained  from  Adele’s  brother,  and  these  were
satisfactory  to  him.  After  his  departure  I determined
on  sending  the  young  girl  to  sleep  again,  that  I might
obtain  from  her  fuller  information.  Scarcely  asleep,
Adele  requested  his  presence.  He  came,  and  I put  the
following  questions: — “ Is  Lauriot  your  real  name?”
“ I was  nicknamed  thus.” — “ What  is  your  family
name?”  No  answer. — “When  did  you  die?”  “In
1831.” — “Where?”  “At  the  Hospital  Sainte-The-
rese.” — “ How  old  were  you  ?”  “ Fifty-six.” — “ In

what  name  is  your  death  registered  ?”  “ Achilles.” —

“Do  you  know  the  Abbe?”  “Yes;  when  he  was
lying  ill  at  the  Hospital  Sainte-Thercse,  I was  one  of
those  with  whom  he  most  frequently  conversed.” —
“ But  he  says  he  does  not  know  you.”  “ He  will
recollect  me.” — “You  employed  your  time,  then,  on
earth,  in  search  of  the  stone  ?”  I don’t  come  here


F


74


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


to  answer  all  the  questions  you  think  fit  to  put  to  me ;
I come  out  of  pure  complaisance,  and  shall  answer
only  what  I think  fit.” — “Then  what  can  you  say  to
the  Abbe  respecting  his  operations  ?”  “ They  go  on

very  well.  He  is  in  the  right  road,  only  let  him  throw  a
little  more  heat  into  his  furnace.” — “ Do  you  know  how
long  the  Abbe  has  been  engaged  in  his  operations  ?”
“ Four  years.” — This  man  again  falls  on  his  knees,
recommending  an  augmentation  of  heat.  “ Give  me  a
description  of  him  ?”  “ He  appeared  to  me  standing.

He  had  on  his  head  a cowl,  which  he  took  off  to  speak
to  me.  He  is  a dark  man ; his  face  is  pale  and  long,
and  his  eyes  black.  He  does  not  appear  to  be  so  old
as  fifty-six.  He  is  taller  than  the  Abbe,  and  has  a
somewhat  taciturn  and  very  meditative  air.  He  had
a small  leather  cap  on  his  head.  I scarcely  dare  speak
to  him,  though  he  is  far  from  uncivil  in  hfe  answers ;
but  his  tone  is  severe,  especially  when  he  told  me  that
he  should  ansvver  at  the  orders  of  no  one,  but  at  his
own  pleasure.” — “Are  you  really  assured  of  the  truth
of  this  apparition  ?”  “ I maintain  that  this  man  is  still

there  on  his  knees  before  me.  Be  he  a good  or  an  evil
spirit,  I see  him  full  well,  and  have  really  spoken  to
him.  He  is  calm  at  this  moment.  He  has  a chaplet
at  his  side,  to  which  is  attached  a medal  about  the  size
of  a five-franc  piece,  on  which  are  characters  of  fantas-
tical forms.  They  are  somewhat  like  V’s  and  Y’s ; I
can’t  very  well  see.” — “ Can  you  see  your  brother  to-
day ?”  “ This  gentleman  tells  me  that  he  will  not

come.”

57.  I forwarded  to  the  Abbe  an  account  in  writing  of
all  that  I had  obtained  at  this  sitting ; then,  this  gen-
tleman, unable  to  call  to  mind  any  such  name,  pro-
ceeded forthwith  to  the  library  of  the  archbishoprick,
where  a register  was  kept  of  the  priests  who  died  in  the
diocese  of  Paris.  Next  day  he  came  to  my  house  with
a copy  of  the  registers  for  the  last  three  years,  but  we
could  neither  find  such  a name  nor  any  one  of  that


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


75


age.  We  were  convinced  that  Adele  had  been  under
the  influence  of  hallucination,  a circumstance  which  had
never  occurred  since  she  had  been  a clairvoyante.  I
was  all  the  more  vexed  at  this  as  her  brother,  who  had
never  before  deceived  her  in  any  of  his  revelations  and
predictions,  was  the  author  of  this  trick,  which  came
somewhat  late,  but  in  time  to  tell  me  not  to  cease
entertaining  distrust  of  spirits.

58.  Two  days  after  this  presumed  mystification,
and  still  without  the  knowledge  of  the  Abbe,  I once
more  sent  Adele  to  sleep,  requesting  her  to  ask  for
Father  Lauriot. — “ Here  he  is.” — “You  gave  me  false
information.  What  was  your  object  in  doing  so  ?”
“ To  conceal  my  name ; but  I came  with  a good  in-
tention— to  oblige  by  my  counsels,  and  I did  so  sin-
cerely.”— “ Why  do  you  conceal  your  name  ?”  “ I

have  no  answer  to  make  to  your  question.  Men  forgive
not,  but  God  does.” — “ In  short,  whoever  you  be,  have
you  a borrowed  name,  or  any  other?”  “ I was  called
Lauriot,  which  was  not  my  name;  but  I bore  that
of  Achilles,  which  was  my  Christian  name.^’ — “ In
what  name  is  your  death  registered  ?”  “ I have  no

wish  to  say.^’ — “ Why  did  you  not  tell  me  your  name
at  once,  without  deceiving  me  as  you  have  done  ?”  “ I
had  not  the  least  intention  to  deceive  vou,  as  I told
you  that  my  name  was  Achilles  Lauriot.  I was  obliged
to  resort  to  this  subterfuge  in  order  to  conceal  my  real
name,  which  would  make  you  curse  me,  and  take  in
bad  part  the  good  I am  willing  to  do.^^ — “In  short,
did  you  really  die  at  Sainte  Therese  ?”  “Yes.” — “In
what  year?”  “In  1831.” — “Was  it  there  that  you
became  acquainted  with  the  Abbe  ?”  “ It  was  there

that  I had  much  conversation  with  him  respecting
the  stone.  I knew  and  still  know  the  Abbe,  who,
you  may  rely  upon  it,  will  recollect  me.” — “ In  what
church  were  you  employed  ?”  “ I don’t  mean  to

furnish  such  information.” — Adele  again  addresses  to
him  a few  questions,  to  which  he  answers  : “ Your

F 2


7f)  THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE

head  is  poorly/^  and  then  recommences  praying.  It
was  true  that  Adele  had  a violent  headache  brought  on
by  this  discussion,  which  advanced  us  not  a jot.  I
asked  for  Adele’s  brother,  who  came  immediately.
— “ Tell  us  candidly  who  this  man  is  ?”  “ He  is  a

man  who  wishes  to  do  good,  and  is  incapable  of  evil.”
— “ But  can’t  you  give  us  fuller  information  than  he
did  ? Who  is  he  ? What  was  he  ?”  I cannot
answer  what  he  is  unwilling  to  answer  himself.  He  is
a man  who  is  continually  walking,  as  on  earth  ^ he  had
no  fixed  locality  there ; it  is  the  same  with  him  now
in  heaven.” — Can  you  not,  as  a spirit,  read  his
thoughts?”  ‘^When  a spirit  is  unwilling  that  we
should  do  so,  we  cannot.” — “ He  can,  then,  conceal
them  from  your  researches  ?”  “Yes  ; but  he  could  not,
were  he  a wicked  man  ; it  is  because  I know  his  good-
ness that  I addressed  him  to  you.”  Adele,  provoked
at  not  having  a more  satisfactory  answ^er,  begs  her
brother  never  to  send  this  man  to  her  again.

59.  As  before,  I forw^arded  the  particulars  of  this
sitting  to  the  Abbe,  w'ho  came  to  me  two  days  after,
more  enlightened  on  the  point.  “ I now  know  this
man,”  said  he,  “he  really  died  at  Sainte  Therese,  not,
however,  in  1831,  but  only  two  years  ago,  and  not  at
the  age  of  fifty-six  but  fifty-four.  When  I was  lying  ill
at  Sainte  Therese,  I knew  this  man,  who  w'as  possessed
of  great  information,  was  an  amateur  of  magnetism,
medicine,  and  alchemy.  He  sacrificed  his  time  and
fortune  in  the  research  of  the  secrets  of  nature,  in-
variably maintaining  that  magnetism  conceals  mysteries
worthy  of  being  fathomed,  and  that  plants,  concerning
the  juices  of  which  he  had  made  valuable  discoveries,
possess  virtues  which  men  do  not  sufficiently  study.
Ever  running  from  one  part  of  the  country  to  the  other,
gathering  herbs,  in  the  research  of  the  occult  sciences ;
delighting  to  conceal  his  name  in  the  blessings  he
spread  around  him  with  profusion,  as  in  the  relations
he  established  with  the  vrorld;  he  was  Peter  for  one,


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


77


Philippe  for  another;  it  was  a sort  of  mania  with  him.
He  usually  wore  under  his  bourgeois  dress  a crape
cassock;  in  short,  the  multiplicity  of  his  studies  de-
ranged his  intellects,  and  he  fell  into  a most  painful
state  of  imbecility,  was  obliged  to  be  nursed  at  the
hospital  Sainte  Therese,  where  in  his  childish  condition,
he  constantly  muffled  himself  up  in  a capuchin,  and
never  left  off  wearing  his  little  leather  cap.  He  had  at
his  side  a large  chaplet  with  which  he  continually
prayed  ; he  conversed  with  spirits  and  fancied  himself
God  ; he  was  the  sport  of  all,  one  calling  him  the
“capuchin father,’^  another  “Father  eternal,^’  and  so  on.
This  unfortunate  man  died  in  the  most  frightful  misery;
he  who  had  been  surrounded  by  a numerous  and
wealthy  family,  and  a considerable  circle  of  friends,  had
not  two  living  beings  to  follow  him  to  the  grave  ! I
was  the  only  one  to  say  a prayer  over  him ! This  man,
the  laughing-stock  of  his  fellow-beings,  has,  perhaps,
preserved  an  aversion  for  men  ; this  accounts  for  his
saying  that  his  name  would  create  in  them  horror!
This  mania  of  not  disclosing  his  name,  has,  perhaps,
accompanied  him  to  heaven  ; the  dress  is  precisely  the
same  as  that  he  wore  on  earth  before  his  death,  and  the
medal  fastened  to  the  chaplet  alone  confirms  me  in  my
recognition  of  his  person,  as  he  bought  it  on  one  of  the
quays,  and  it  was  covered  with  cabalistical  characters.
The  mania  he  has  of  never  resting  in  one  place,  as  the
brother  of  your  clairvoyante  says,  is  just  as  it  was  on
earth;  in  short,  he  says  truly  enough  that  when  I was
at  Sainte  Therese,  we  used  to  talk  of  the  stone  ; he  was
the  only  one  who  showed  me  any  friendship  at  that
time.  So,  after  all,  it  is  easy  to  account  for  the  slight
mistake  into  which  he  led  us.  The  description  given
him,  joined  to  what  passed  at  Sainte  Therese,  would
alone  be  sufficient  for  me  to  recognise  him,  and  the  par-
ticulars he  gives  as  to  the  time  when  I commenced  my
operations,  are  exact.  At  first  I could  not  trace  the
date  further  back  than  two  years  and  a quarter,  but  now


78


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


I recollect  having  commenced  my  experiments  on  the
same  work  by  another  system  twenty-one  months  be-
fore, and  this  makes  up  the  four  years.  I have  full
confidence  in  this  apparition,  and  will  prepare  a few
questions  which  you  will  have  the  kindness  to  put  to
him  by  and  by.”

60.  The  Abbe  expresses  a wish  to  put  the  follow-

ing questions  to  him  himself : — “ Can  you  give  me  any
proofs  that  I am  not  deceived  respecting  you,  and  that
you  are  really  present  at  this  moment  ?”  ‘‘  I will  tell

you  that  I am  right  glad  at  your  recollection  of  me ; I
was,  as  I announced,  quite  sure  that  you  would  call  me
to  mind  again ; you  are  not  mistaken  as  to  my  name,
which  I wish  to  conceal  from  every  one  but  you,  since
you  are  well  acquainted  with  it ; but,  as  a convincing
proof,  be  pleased  to  recollect  that  I was  the  only  per-
son at  Sainte  Therese  to  whom  you  spoke  of  the  work  ;
hereby  you  wfill  plainly  perceive  that  you  are  not  in
error.” — Can  you  tell  me  whether  my  w^orks  are  going
on  right  ?”  “ Yes,  quite  so ; but  increase  the  heat

five  degrees  more.  My  fire  is  not  to  be  measured  as
ordinary  fire.”  ‘‘To  you,  no;  but  for  me  I perceive
that  what  you  did  this  morning  ought  to  be  continued,
and  thus  you  will  obtain  the  additional  heat  I re-
commend.” This  communication  excites  the  Abbe’s
astonishment;  he  said  to  me  : — “ In  fact,  this  morning
I did  something  which  must  accelerate  the  heat.”
Then  he  continued  thus : “ I have  two  operations  *in
hand,  one  of  much  later  date^than  the  other,  which  is
the  best  one  ?”  “ The  last,  that  on  the  right.” — The

Abbe  had  already  received  the  same  answ’er  from
several  clairvoyantes.  He  goes  on  putting  further  ques-
tions, needless  to  mention,  at  which  he  appears  quite
satisfied.

61.  A few  days  after  this  sitting  the  Abbe  submits  to
me  a few  doubts  he  has  conceived  as  to  the  moral  con-
dition of  Father  Lauriot.  To  clear  up  his  doubts  in  this
respect  he  proposes  putting  a few  questions  to  him  in


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


79


Latin,  thus  enabling  them  both  to  converse  in  secret  on
hermetic  operations,  as  neither  I nor  my  clairvoyante
was  acquainted  with  Latin.  He  put  his  questions,
which  Adele  did  her  best  to  reproduce  to  M.  Lauriot ;
she  rendered  his  answers  in  French,  saying:  Just  so,
just  so.”  The  Abbe  observed  to  me  that  these  answers
were  quite  irrelevant  to  his  questions,  the  purport  of
which,  he  tells  me  (and  I believe  without  disguise),
was : — “ Do  you  know  the  lady  now  present  ?”  The
question,  under  such  circumstances,  was  as  absurd  as
the  answer,  since  he  was  aware  that  a spirit  cannot  per-
ceive matter.  Adele  observes  to  M.  Lauriot  that  he
answers  at  random  the  questions  she  puts  to  him  in
Latin.  Then  he  begins  talking  Latin  to  her  with  a
volubility  precluding  the  possibility  of  her  transmitting
his  long  discourse  to  the  Abbe.  Fatigued  with  this
sort  of  experiment,  she  finally  refuses  to  continue,  and
I take  it  upon  myself  to  question  her  in  order  to  re-
establish the  conversation  on  a surer  footing.  In  the
state  you  now  are,  do  you  still  recollect  the  Latin  tongue?”
“Yes,  as  you  may  know  from  my  having  just  answered  in
that  tongue.’’ — “The  answers  are  not  such  as  we  desired.”
“ The  Abbe  knows  that  we  took  a three  days’  trip  to-
gether to  Versailles,  and  that  it  was  then  I made  him
acquainted  with  the  matter.” — “ Monsieur  says  that  he
certainly  did  take  a trip  with  you,  not  to  Versailles,
however,  but  to  Saint  Cloud — not  of  three  days,  but
one  only ; that  you  spoke  to  him  on  the  matter,  but  did
not  make  him  acquainted  with  it.  You  perceive,  there-
fore, that  you  commit  errors  which  ought  not  to  be.
We  always  see  you  on  your  knees  ; you  do  nothing  but
pray,  then  ?”  “ I pray  to  God  for  men  in  general,

and  for  my  relations.” — “ You  have,  then,  relations  on
earth  ?”  “ Yes.” — “ Have  you  any  brothers  ?”  “ No.”

— “ Sisters  ?”  “ Yes.” — “ Is  your  mother  dead  ?”
“ No.” — “ The  Abbe  says  the  contrary ; your  mother
died  before  you.  It  is  quite  true  that  your  father  is
dead,  that  you  have  no  brother,  and  only  one  sister


80


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


but,  as  to  your  mother,  you  are  mistaken/^  After  this
fresh  mistake  we  conclude  that  the  man  is  not  altoge-
ther in  his  right  senses ; the  Abbe  observing  to  me  that
his  mother  died  whilst  he  was  in  a state  of  insanity,  and
this  accounts  for  his  having  no  knowledge  of  her  death.
We  request  the  presence  of  Adele’s  brother,  to  whom
we  put  the  following  question: — ’‘This  man,  no  doubt,
is  deranged  ?”  “ He  is  a very  honest  man,  thoroughly

good,  and  remarkably  well-informed,  but  has  at  times
rambling  ideas ; he  is  constantly  running  about,  resting
nowhere  long  at  a time ; he  is  seen  by  us  every  where.^^
— “This  man  had  on  earth  hallucinations,  which  he
has,  doubtless,  preserved  ?”  “ He  has  preserved,  as  I

have  told  you,  his  strongest  predilections,  and  his  mind
seems  in  consequence  disordered.’^ — “ Those  who  die
deranged  are  not,  then,  restored  to  a sane  condition  ?”
“No,  their  infirmity  constitutes  their  chief  happiness;
they  meet  together,  think  alike,  and  are  happy.” —
“But  comes  there  a time  W'hen  these  men  recover
their  reason  ?”  “ Yes,  God  purifies  them  gradually,

and  they  enter  a more  enlightened  circle.” — “ We  can-
not trust  to  this  man,  who  wmuld  make  us  participate
in  his  errors  in  operations  w'here  none  should  exist.”
“ I will  send  you  another,  who  has  had  some  experience
in  the  same  kind  of  operations ; after  putting  his  clair-
voyance to  the  test,  you  will  attend  to  his  counsels,  if
you  think  fit ; as  for  me,  I have  already  told  you,  I
do  not  devote  myself  to  such  pursuits.”

63.  Curious  to  know  w'hat  sort  of  personage  Alphonse
was  to  send  us,  I demanded  his  presence ; but,  to  my
surprise.  Father  Lauriot  again  made  his  appearance.
The  obliging  air  he  assumes  delights  Adele,  and,  at  my
request,  she  consents  not  to  beg  of  him  to  withdraw.
I held  with  him  the  following  discourse: — “The  in-
formation you  give  us  is  fraught  wdth  errors,  and  this
makes  us  presume  that  your  clairvoyance  is  not  suffi-
ciently powerful  to  be  of  use  to  us.”  “The  Abbe  is
not  reasonable.  I came  to  oblige  him  ; he  desired  to


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


81


know  a heap  of  things  which  had  nothing  to  do  with
the  mission  I purposed  fulfilling ; I have  been  over-
whelmed with  questions,  with  a singular  suspicion,  as  if
my  passage  on  earth  had  been  agreeable  enough  to  me
to  preserve  an  exact  recollection  of  it ; what  more  could
I do  than  appear  in  the  same  garb  that  I wore  on  earth
in  my  folly,  and  say  that  I had  known  the  Abbe  at  the
hospital,  and  furnish  him  with  the  particulars.  He  has
the  certainty  of  my  having  spoken  the  truth,  that  I
died  there ; what  more  did  he  want  ? He  ought  not  to
overwhelm  me  with  questions  that  demand,  on  my  part,
researches  which  would  snatch  a few  instants  from  the
happiness  which  I enjoy,  and  which  I cannot  sacrifice
to  such  trifles.  You  believe  that,  because  I died  insane,
I am  so  now?  undeceive  yourself;  I may  seem  absent
in  mind,  but  I could  wish  that  the  men  of  the  earth
were  not  more  insane  than  I am,  and  knew  what  is
known  in  the  state  I am.^^ — ‘‘The  Abbe  wn^uld  have
wished  you  to  inspect  his  works  “ I cannot  inspect
them,  excepting  in  his  thoughts,  because  it  is  not  in  the
power  of  a spirit  to  perceive  matter.^^ — “ I thought  the
contrary,  as,  in  order  to  predict  material  events,  a spirit
must  see  them.^^  “It  is  an  error;  he  perceives  the
causes  of  them,  sums  them  up,  and  comments  upon
them  according  to  his  judgment.” — “ Is  insanity  an  in-
fluence of  matter  or  spirit  ?”  “ Of  both,  though  matter

plays  the  principal  part  in  it,  that  only  being  diseased
from  the  impediments  it  opposes  to  the  spirit  in  the
ascension  of  ideas.  The  latter  being  obstructed  in  their
course,  convey  the  greatest  trouble  to  the  harmony  of
the  system.  Frequently  a single  idea,  on  which  the
mind  is  fatigued,  suffices  to  convey  all  this  disorder
into  the  intelligence.” — “Are  you  happy  in  heaven?”
“Yes;  this  happiness  cannot  be  described.” — “What
are  your  occupations  ?^’  “ Reading,  prayer,  study,  pro-

menading— in  short,  whatever  1 desire  to  do  or  obtain,
I both  do  and  obtain.”

We  have  just  made  acquaintance,  I believe,  with  one


82


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


of  the  most  curious  apparitions  in  this  book.  Should
any  doubts  remain  as  to  M.  Lauriot’s  sanity  of  mind,  it
is  easy  to  destroy  them  in  part ; but  there  can  be  none
as  to  iiis  identity.  We  have  had,  then,  the  apparition
of  one,  a perfect  stranger  to  us,  a man  whom  we  did
not  ask  for.  Ten  days  were  passed  in  troublesome
researches  before  his  friend  could  fully  recognise  him. .
It  remains  to  be  settled  how  Adele^s  brother  could  have
sent  to  us  a man  known  to  the  Abbe.  The  latter  and
Alphonse  had  never  seen  or  been  acquainted  with  each
other  on  earth ; neither  had  Adele  even  seen  the  Abbe
or  any  of  his  friends.  Explain  this  who  can.  Let  us
pass  on  to  a second  question.  Why  was  this  man  so
obscure  in  certain  communications,  and  so  true  in
others  ? either  he  really  preserved  his  earthly  mania  of
concealing  his  name,  or  fancied  this  name  incurred  public
reproach.  The  first  supposition  is  the  most  feasible
one,  since  the  Abbe  makes  honorable  mention  of  him
in  the  conversation  held  in  Latin.  Wherefore  do  we
perceive  in  it  so  many  errors  ? Either  Adele  was  a bad
interpreter,  or  M.  Lauriot  did  not  think  fit  to  answer
these  questions,  or  possibly  the  Abbe  hid  from  me  the
truth,  struck,  as  he  must  have  been,  with  the  idea,  that
he  placed  me  in  communication,  without  having  foreseen
it,  with  a man  whose  indiscretion  might  one  day  make
me  acquainted  with  things  w’hich  he  had  no  wish  that  I
should  know.  I believe  the  Abbe  honest  and  true,
from  the  eagerness  he  displayed  in  this  circumstance,  to
throw  the  best  light  he  could  on  this  apparition ; and,
therefore,  conclude,  that  M.  Lauriot,  not  thoroughly
comprehending  the  questions,  having,  like  all  spirits,
but  a very  imperfect  recollection  of  their  earthly  actions,
might  be  likely  enough  to  make  mistakes  on  this  subject ;
his  justification  even  stands  in  no  need  of  commentaries.
Remains  his  mother,  who  died  before  him,  a circum-
stance which  could  not  be  forgotten  by  a man  of  sound
mind ; but  being  at  that  period  under  the  influence  of
hallucination,  he  had  no  knowledge  of  her  death.  He


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


83


is  now  in  a somewhat  similar  frame  of  mind,  and  has
not  troubled  himself  about  it.  He  has  been  dead  two
years,  which  are  for  him  but  a second.  Under  the
influence  of  the  moral  sufferings  which  have  just  quitted
him,  and  under  those  of  the  happiness  in  which  he
lives,  he  may  well  be  ignorant  of  a particular  of  which
he  had  been  unable  to  think.  After  what  we  begin  to
know  respecting  the  properties  of  the  spiritual  life,  we
ought  to  be  less  exigent ; it  remains  indubitably  proved
to  us,  by  the  singular  description,  the  chaplet,  the
medal,  the  small  leather  cap,  the  appearance,  the  stature,
&c.,  that  he  is  the  man  whom  the  Abbe  knew.  Should
not  this  be  sufiicient;  there  remain  for  us  the  conversa-
tion, the  particularities  at  the  hospital,  Sainte  Therese.
The  jaunt  to  Saint  Cloud  is  not  the  less  true,  though
badly  described ; the  precise  date  of  the  works,  the
recommendation  to  continue  what  he  had  done  that
very  morning  of  which  he  alone  was  aware,  the  exact
description  of  the  work  which  other  clairvoyants  sup-
posed to  be  the  best,  the  explanations  not  less  exact  as
to  the  members  of  his  family,  alive  and  dead,  with  the
exception  of  his  mother.  I do  not  think  it  necessary  to
insist  on  these  particulars  to  admit  this  apparition  into
the  rank  of  the  most  conclusive  ones.  The  Abbe
accepted  it  frankly  as  such,  as  well  as  myself ; but  we
are  about  to  see  that  it  did  not  answer  his  expectations.

63.  Before  introducing  other  personages,  I ought  to
give  an  account  of  another  apparition  of  M.  Lauriot,
the  results  of  which  are  as  follows  : — “ I told  you  at  the
last  sitting  that  we  could  not  accept  your  advice.  You
have  not  been  asked  for,  why  did  you  come  ?”  Adele
says,  that  she  takes  a delight  in  seeing  this  man,  whose
goodness  she  can  appreciate  to  its  full  extent,  and  that
he  may  come  to  her  at  all  times  without  the  risk  of  her
driving  him  away. — ‘‘Then  ask  him  why  he  told  you
that  his  mother  was  not  dead,  since  she  died  before
him  }”  “ He  answers,  that  he  did  not  say  so ; that

I wrongly  interpreted  his  words,  as  he  knew  very  well


84


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


that  she  was  dead,  and  could  not  have  said  the  contrar3\”
— And  the  Latin  which  he  answered  you  at  random  ?”
“ I cannot  understand  material  words,  and  you  did  not
transmit  to  me  those  that  were  addressed  to  me;  you
said  to  me,  ‘ They  speak  Latin  to  y^ou/  I thought  it
w’as  on  the  subject  of  the  works;  hence  it  was  that
I replied  to  you  affirmatively/’ — “ Why  did  j'ou  not  re-
produce the  Abbe’s  words  to  M.  Lauriot  ?”  “ Because

it  w'as  a wearisome  task ; as  I was  conscious  that  I had
to  do  wnth  a man  who  believes  in  nothing,  I preferred
committing  an  error  to  continuing  this  kind  of  com-
munication.”— I observed  to  Adele  that  she  did  wTong ;
that  she  ought  rather  to  have  said,  that  such  a mode  of
speaking  was  not  agreeable  to  her,  and  that  I perceived
that  M.  Lauriot  could  easily  have  answered  the  obser-
vations of  the  Abbe  (who,  after  hearing  him,  thought,
like  me,  that  M.  Lauriot  w^as  still  insane.)  Thus  ter-
minated the  apparitions  of  this  personage.

64.  Here  is  the  gentleman  that  my  brother  said  he
would  send  to  me.” — “ What  is  his  name  ?”  “ He

answers,  that  we  do  not  and  should  not  know  him.” —
“ Has  he  lived  on  earth  ?”  “ Yes  ; but  he  is  a foreigner.”
— ‘‘  Where  was  he  born  ?”  “ In  Spain.” — “ Where  did
he  die  ?”  “ In  Spain.” — “ In  wdiat  city  ?”  “ He  has  no
information  to  give  on  this  point;  w^e  should  not  know
him.” — “ Give  me  a description  of  him  ?”  “ He  is  tall,
stout,  and  may  be  about  seventy-five  ; his  hair  is  still
very  black,  although  there  are  a few  white  hairs  in  his
beard ; he  is  very  fresh,  and  has  the  appearance  of  having
been  a rich  and  very  respectable  man.” — I put  several
questions  to  this  gentleman,  all  wffiich  he  answered  very
correctly  ; but  it  would  be  superfluous  to  mention  them
here.  Having  no  wish  to  make  this  wmrk  a treatise  on
alchymy,  I reserve  the  information  he  gave  me  for  a
separate  w'ork.  I made  the  Abbe  acquainted  with  this
new  apparition  in  all  its  details,  and  he  appeared  satis-
fied. VVe  devoted  a few  sittings  to  conversation  with
this  man,  whom  we  found  obliging  and  sensible ; but


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


85


the  Abbe,  who  was  very  changeable,  incredulous,  and
inconstant,  proposed  to  me  a decisive  experiment,  which
I accepted  as  much  for  my  own  instruction  as  to  afford
him  pleasure;  for  man  cannot  too  highly  cherish  within
him  a belief  in  the  spiritual  world,  by  making  experi-
ments called  for  by  the  least  of  his  doubts.  We  were
agreed  on  this  point,  both  the  Abbe  and  myself.  I had
doubted,  and  at  times  still  doubted,  for  a pure  spiritualist
is  not  to  be  instantaneously  made  out  of  an  extra-
materialist, and  the  Abbd  had  one  doubt  more  than  I ;
as  he  feared,  on  my  part,  charlatanism.  He  had  a right
to  do  so,  as  he  knew  me  not,  and  I,  for  my  part,  was
glad  to  meet  with  such  a man  whose  doubts  were  to
turn  to  my  advantage.

65.  The  Abbe  said  to  me,  “ You  will  have  the  good-
ness to  ask,  at  the  next  sitting,  for  M.  De  Mallet  (Chris-
tophe  Edouard),  and  send  me  word  whether  he  appeared,
and  in  what  condition.’^  I much  doubted  this  experi-
ment, for  which  we  had  so  little  information  to  work
upon.  I asked  for  him,  however,  and,  to  my  great
satisfaction  he  appeared.  I ask  this  gentleman  if  he
will  be  good  enough  to  answer  a few  questions  which
the  Abbe  desires  to  put  to  him  ?”  Yes,^^  replied  he ;
I told  him  that  at  the  first  sitting  they  would  dis-
course together ; meanwhile  I beg  Adele  to  give  me  a
description  of  this  gentleman.  “He  is  a priest,  or,  at
least,  he  wears  the  costume  of  one : a black  robe,  with-
out surplice ; he  is  a little  taller  than  the  Abbe,  stout
in  proportion ; he  has  a noble  countenance,  a promi-
nent nose,  the  nostrils  somewhat  pinched  up;  he  has  a
mark  on  his  cheek,  under  the  left  eye  ; his  hair  is  gray,
and  he  may  be  sixty.” — “ Are  you  quite  sure  that  he
has  a mark  on  his  left  cheek,  under  the  eye  ?” — “ Yes,
it  is  evident  enough.”  “ What  kind  of  mark,  a pock-
mark ?” — “ I cannot  see  because  he  is  a pretty  good
distance  off;  but  I am  certain  that  he  has  a mark  of
some  kind.”  This  gentleman  retires.  Adele  is  afraid
that  the  Abbe  should  raise  any  difficulties  as  to  this


86


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


apparition,  and  says  that  she  won’t  ask  for  any  more  if
she  has  been  deceived.

66.  I had  sent  an  account  of  this  sitting  to  the  Abbe,
but  I neither  saw  him  nor  heard  from  him.  I thought
that  Adele  had  made  some  mistake.  Three  days  after
he  arrived  with  his  servant-girl,  who  brought  me  a por-
trait of  M.  Mallet,  which  he  had  been  to  borrow  of
one  of  his  friends.  Only  judge  of  my  surprise,  equal  to
his,  when  I beheld  feature  for  feature  the  man  so  well
depicted  by  Adele,  and  especially  the  mark,  which  was
no  less  than  the  scar  of  a sabre  wound,  which  this  gen-
tleman had  received  in  the  army.  The  Abbe  said  to
me,  “ I may  now  acquaint  you  with  the  history  of  the
Count  de  Mallet.  He  was  one  of  the  grand  dignitaries
of  the  empire,  having  held  a very  high  rank  in  the
army.  At  the  death  of  his  wife  he  embraced  the  Church
party  with  not  less  zeal  than  he  had  served  the  empire.
He  was  superior  of  the  nuns  of  Sainte  Marie  deLorette,
and  died  in  the  parish  of  Saint  Sulpice,  the  26th  Au-
gust, at  the  age  of  sixty,  regretted  by  the  upright  and
good;  he  devoted  much  time  to  metaphysics,  and  wrote
a work  on  this  science,  which  I will  lend  you;  it  is  the
fruit  of  elevated  and  not  superstitious  reasonings.”

The  Abbe  is  quite  delighted  at  this  experiment ; he
can  no  longer  doubt  the  truth  of  these  apparitions,  con-
vinced as  he  is,  that  I did  not  know  this  gentleman,
seeing  that  I had  no  particulars  furnished  me  respecting
him,  that  he  had  expressly  avoided  being  present  at
this  sitting,  in  order  not  to  establish  any  communication
of  thoughts.  What  astonished  him  most  was  this  mark —
this  gash — and  he  himself  did  not  know  whether  it  was
under  the  right  eye  or  the  left ; to  make  sure  of  it  he
had  been  to  borrow  the  portrait  which  he  showed  me,
in  order  that  I might  judge  of  the  correct  likeness  of
the  apparition ; he  looked  upon  this  fact  as  conclusive,
and  declared  himself  convinced.  He  wished  me  to  send
Adele  to  sleep,  in  order  to  put  a few  questions  to  her.
I forthwith  complied  v;ith  his  request.  Adele  was


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


87


struck  at  the  likeness  of  the  portrait  which  she  had  seen
before  going  to  sleep,  to  that  of  M.  Mallet.  The  latter
answered  the  questions  of  the  Abbe  with  an  exactitude
that  enraptured  the  priest,  who  also  put  to  him  the  fol-
lowing one  : ‘‘  M , the  person  who  lent  me  your  por-

trait, and  was  one  of  your  friends  on  earth,  has  begged
of  me  to  ask  you  whether  you  had  anything  to  say  to
him  ?” — “ Yes ; let  him  take  good  care  of  his  health,  he
is  poorly.”  “ The  Abbe  thought  that  this  answer  ac-
corded but  little  with  what  he  had  just  seen  of  this  per-
son, who  was  not  in  the  least  indisposed;  then  he  left
me.  The  Abbe  returned  the  next  day  to  tell  me  that
he  had  imparted  to  his  friend  the  advice  of  M.  Mallet,
and,  to  his  great  astonishment,  found  that  he  had  really
been  unwell  for  a fortnight,  that  he  had  been  obliged  to
neglect  his  business,  and  that  his  maid-servant  w^as
saying  to  him  only  three  days  ago — If  M.  Mallet  w^ere
still  alive,  assuredly  he  w'ould  recommend  you  to  take
better  care  of  yourself.  This  particularity  conferred  more
value  on  the  revelation  than  w^e  had  at  first  thought.

67*  After  having  asked  of  M.  Mallet  what  the  Abbe
desired  to  know,  I put  to  him  in  my  turn  the  follow-
ing questions  : — The  D^Orval  predictions,  as  they  are
termed,  in  which  you  had  so  great  faith  when  on  earth,
that  you  even  had  them  reprinted  in  1840,  wdiat  do  you
think  of  them  now  ? Do  you  still  believe  in  them  ?”
‘‘Yes.” — “Can  you  foresee  w'hether  the  events,  of
which  they  make  mention,  wdll  come  ♦’o  pass  ?”  “ Yes  ;
but  those  predictions  are  exaggerated.” — “Those  con-
cerning the  destruction  of  Paris,  will  they  take  place  ?”
“ Yes  ; but  not  to  so  great  an  extent  as  is  predicted.”
— “ When  will  that  happen  ?”  “ I cannot  answer  your

question.” — “ By  what  scourge  will  it  happen  ? Fire
or  war  ?”  “ By  a revolution.”

“ What  government  will  reign  then?”  “It  is  then
that  it  wdll  be  said  : ‘ Co??ie,  ijoung  prince,^  as  the  pre-


88


THE  SECRETS  Of  THE  FUTURE


diction  says.” — “ Do  you  know  whether  the  son  of
Louis  XVI.  is  dead?”  “ No,  he  is  not  dead.”  “Do
you  know  him  ? Is  the  Baron  of  Richemont  this
son  ?”  “ I don’t  know\” — “ Do  you  think  that  it  is  the
people  alone  that  will  cause  all  the  disorders  pre-
dicted ? The  people  and  the  foreigner  ?” — “ Of  how
many  is  a number  composed  ?”  “ Of  20.”  * * *

“ For  my  personal  safety,  I should  like  to  know  w^hen
this  w'ill  happen.”  “ The  events  preceding  such  catas-
trophe will  be  a sufficient  warning.” — “ Will  the  banish-
ment of  the  priests  take  place  ?’  “ The  priests  will

escape  from  France.” — “ The  end  of  the  world,  an-
nounced in  eighty  years,  will  it  take  place  ?”  “ You

will  not  then  be  on  earth,  wherefore  trouble  yourself
about  it  ?” — “ So  you  look  upon  these  prophecies  as
true?”  “Yes,  in  the  main,  but  not  in  the  exaggera-
tions. There  will  be  mischief  enough  without  making
more  of  it.”  Adele  says  that  this  gentleman  has  no
wish  to  alarm  any  one.

68.  M.  Mallet  is  preceded,  according  to  Adele,  by  a
light  which  she  has  hitherto  perceived  only  before  her
mother.  I ask  this  gentleman  if  he  is  disposed  to
answer  a few  psychological  questions  ? “That  depends
on  the  nature  of  them.” — “ Have  w'e  a soul  ?”  “ You

perceive  it,  since  I am  one.” — “ What  is  the  form  of
it  ?”  “ That  of  the  body — that  which  I at  this  moment

bear.” — “ Whither  does  it  go  after  its  separation  from
the  body  ?”  “ Into  celestial  places.” — “ What  does  it

do  in  those  places  ? — does  it  eat  and  drink  ?”  “ It

satisfies  its  principal  affections.” — “Are  there  good  and
bad  places  ?”  “ Yes.” — “ Are  the  bad  ones  what  Chris-
tians denominate  hell?”  “Yes.” — “Are  w’e  burned
there,  as  they  say  ?”  “ They  say  what  they  do  not  be-

lieve.”— “ But  you  were  a priest,  you  yourself  taught
this  doctrine  ?”  “ I never  believed  in  it.” — “ Then  what
do  we  do  in  these  bad  places,  do  we  suffer  there  ?”

“ We  satisfy  there  our  affections ; are  happy  there,
although  they  are  places  of  purification,  in  which  God


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


89


places  us  to  call  us  in  due  time  to  him,  when  he  forgives
us.” — ‘‘  Are  they  places  or  states  in  which  the  soul  is  ?”

Places.” — ‘‘Do  we  remain  in  them  for  ever  ?”  “ In

the  good  places,  yes;  and,  as  I have  just  told  you,  not
in  the  bad  ones.” — “ In  what  does  the  knowledge  of  the
soul  consist  in  those  places  ?”  “ In  what  it  desires  to

possess,  and  what  it  acquires  at  will.”  Adele  is  unwil-
ling to  be  importunate.  I receive  these  revelations  with
confidence,  because  they  appear  independent  of  all  sec-
tarian calculation,  and  are  of  much  greater  value  in  the
mouth  of  a priest  who  has  enjoyed  an  honourable  repu-
tation on  earth  than  in  that  of  any  other  person.

69.  “ Has  the  soul  any  recollection  of  the  earth  and
of  what  it  was  there  ?”  “ Yes.” — “ Can  it  perceive

matter  ?”  “ No.^’ — “ Does  it  regret  the  material  life  ?”

“ No.” — “ Can  it  at  will  visit  its  relations,  its  friends  ?”
“ Yes ; when  it  is  requested  in  the  state  necessary  to  be
seen  as  your  clairvoyante  is.” — “Can  it  in  aught  influ-
ence their  existence  r”  “ Yes  ; in  the  good  which  it
invariably  counsels  them  to  do.” — “ Can  it  inform  them
of  any  particularity  in  their  destiny  ?”  “ Yes ; but  it  does
so  with  much  prudence,  especially  when  it  foresees  the
effect  that  the  revelation  will  create  in  the  moral  being ;
for  this  reason  it  is  compelled  not  to  tell  all.” — “ Does
it  suffer  much  in  quitting  its  body  ?”  “ More  or  less.” —
“ Is  it  long  before  it  becomes  acquainted  with  the  state
into  which  it  enters  ?”  “ It  becomes  acquainted  with

it  immediately.”  “You  have  just  told  me  that  a spirit
cannot  perceive  matter;  how  can  you  come  into  this
house,  close  to  us,  without  seeing  us  ?”  “ I am  con-

scious of  this  young  lady’s  spirit  which  attracts  me,  and
I find  myself  with  her,  agreeably  to  her  desire  and  mine.”
— “ Still,  proofs  exist  that  some  spirits  see  matter,  since
they  upset  articles  of  furniture,  vases,  &c.,  convey  mes-
sages and  objects.”  “Those  are  evil  spirits  that  are  in  the
circle  surrounding  the  earth,  that  still  hover  over  it,  and
do  these  things.” — “ It  is  net  only  evil  spirits,  however,
that  possess  this  property.  I have  read  several  works  of

G


90


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


saints  who  have  performed  or  seen  some  of  those  pheno-
mena. M.  Billot,  a very  pious  man,  has  received  messages
of  the  kind  from  the  hands  even  of  angels  ?”  “ It  is

very  seldom  that  the  Deity  permits  these  kinds  of  con-
veyances; they  cannot  take  place  unknown  to  heaven.^^
— “ M.  Possin  not  long  ago  said  that  he  received  a
crown  through  the  medium  of  his  clairvoyant  ?”  “ There
has  been  nothing  similar  to  this  in  heaven  of  late.” —
In  short,  we  have  also  a Cure  who,  in  a small  pro-
vincial parish  where  there  was  a scarcity  of  corn,  had  his
granary  filled  agreeably  to  his  wishes ; he  distributed
this  godsend  amongst  his  parishioners,  and  yet,  it  is
said,  the  granary  was  not  exhausted.  There  are  multi-
tudes of  similar  facts  in  the  holy  books  ?”  “ There  are

many  things  written  which  have  never  existed,  many
others  which  are,  as  I have  told  you,  the  province  of
spirits  occupied  in  things  of  this  kind ; but  in  order  for
a man  to  obtain  such  favours  from  heaven,  his  soul
must  be  very  pure,  have  in  view  but  the  happiness  of
his  fellow-beings,  and  an  ardent  desire  to  render  him-
self acceptable  to  God.  Such  men  and  such  facts  are
rare;  but  they  do  exist  and  have  existed.  VVe  should
ever  suspect  conveyances  and  messages  of  this  kind,  as
they  are  frequently  but  a stratagem  of  evil  spirits  that
wish  to  flatter  our  pride  and  incredulity  the  better  to
obtain  dominion  over  us.” — In  short,  since  you  say  that
such  things  may  exist  through  the  intercession  of  angels,
as  through  that  of  evil  spirits,  it  must  needs  be  that
they  see  the  object  which  they  convey  ?”  “ Certainly

they  see  it;  but  they  take  it  from  the  earth,  for  in
heaven  there  is  nothing  material ; when  such  a thing
happens,  it  is,  as  I have  told  you,  as  great  a miracle
for  heaven  as  for  the  earth.” — ‘^You  conclude  that  the
spirits  of  heaven  do  not  perceive  matter  ?”  “ I have

told  you  so,  saving  under  the  conditions  which  1 have
just  made  known  to  you.” — “ You  told  me  that  you  felt
yourself  attracted  by  the  will  of  my  clairvoyante,  could
you  not  correspond  in  thought  with  me,  by  answering


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


91


through  her  the  questions  1 should  mentally  transmit  to
jmu  “ I could  do  so  ; but  that  presents  difficulties
which  would  bring  in  their  train  errors,  and  require
much  more  time,  inasmuch  as  you  are  not  in  the  spiritual
state,  and  such  communication  is  too  difficult.^^  I deem
it  fit  to  address  these  questions  to  M.  Mallet,  although
we  have  already  seen  them  addressed  to  other  spirits ; we
cannot  receive  too  many  confirmations  in  this  respect ;

, we  should  question  all  persuasions,  in  order  to  come  to
a correct  understanding.

70.  M.  Mallet  is  more  or  less  time  before  appearing.
He  invariably  gives  Adele  his  blessing  at  his  coming  and
going ; it  seems,  from  what  the  Abbe  tells  us,  that  such
was  a practice  with  him  on  earth.  I shall  pass  over  the
Abbe’s  questions,  which  have  no  reference  whatever  to
what  I desire  to  know  about  the  spiritual  world. — “ What
do  you  think  of  possessions,  particularly  the  Loudun
ones?”  “They  are  merely  the  malicious  tricks  of  evil
spirits,  because  the  good  spirits  do  nought  but  good.” —

“ What  do  you  think  of  the  Convulsionnaires  of  Saint-
Medard,  &c.?”  “Amongst  them  are  found  both  good
and  very  wicked  actions  : things  incredible  appertaining
to  good  and  to  evil  spirits,  deeds  ordained  by  God,
others  which  are  condemned  by  him.  We  even  appre-
ciate all  those  things  only  by  a judgment  enlightened
by  the  divine  light,  and  disengaged  from  all  haughty
and  egotistical  calculation.  I can  answer  all  you  ask
me  only  by  counselling  you  to  be  circumspect,  and  to
prav  to  God  to  enlighten  your  intelligence.” — “ Do
you  think  that  we  can  render  ourselves  invisible  to
several  persons  at  once?”  “Yes,  by  drugs  and  pacts  ^
with  evil  spirits  ; but  there  is  nought  so  displeasing
to  God  as  those  things  by  which  we  may  do  all  possible
harm.^’ — “ Could  you  tell  me  this  secret,  I believe  my-
self incapable  of  abusing  it?”  “ You  are  incapable  of
it,  at  this  moment,  because  you  do  not  possess  it;  but
no  sooner  should  you  know  it  than  the  pride  of  having
such  power  at  your  command  would  take  possession  of

G 2


92


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


you  and  lead  you  to  do  evil,  as  the  rest.  God  suffers
not  the  good  spirits  to  divulge  those  things.” — “Fas-
cination plays  the  principal  part  in  it,  does  it  not?”
“ Did  you  send  for  me  merely  to  read  you  a course
of  magic  ?” — “ No ; but  in  order  to  know  what  to  think
of  those  mysteries;  so  many  things  have  been  written
on  this  subject  that  I should  wish  to  be  enabled  to
form  an  opinion  respecting  them.”  “ Do  not  trouble
yourself  about  them.  There  are  many  good  things
written  ; but  there  are  also  many  falsehoods,  and  wicked
doctrines.  Say  no  more  about  them.”

71.  A friend  of  mine,  M.  Renard  de  Rambouillet,  to
whom  I regularly  communicate  the  contents  of  my
journal,  requested  me  to  put  the  following  questions  to
M.  Mallet.  Desiring  to  know  what  a Catholic  priest
could  reveal  of  heaven,  I comply  with  his  wishes  at
this  sitting: — “I  desire  the  truth  with  all  my  heart,
Would  M.  Mallet  be  so  kind  as  to  instruct  me  in  it
through  you,  b)’^  answering  a few  questions  which  are
put  to  me  by  a friend  ?”  “ M.  Mallet  answers  that  he

will  do  so,  according  to  the  will  of  God.” — “ How  do
you  find  yourself  in  the  world  you  live  in  ?”  “ Quite

comfortable  and  happy?” — “Are  you  really  what  we
term,  and  what  you  termed,  a soul,  when  you  were  on
earth?”  “Yes.” — “The  form  of  your  soul,  is  it  still
precisely  the  same  as  that  of  the  body  it  dwelt  in  ?”
“Yes.” — “Do  you  sleep?  do  you  eat?”  (This  ques-
tion is  often  repeated,  because  it  is  a very  natural  one,
and  the  first  to  present  itself  as  the  most  necessary  one,
in  any  state  of  existence.)  “ Sleep  and  eat  who  please,
it  is  not  a necessity  as  on  earth,  but  a real  pleasure  to
those  who  do  so  ?” — “ Do  you  live  in  a house,  as  on
earth  ?”  “ I am  in  a house ; there  are  houses  in  this

world,  as  on  earth.” — “Are  there  also  towns  and
villages  ?”  “ I know  not  what  towns  are  termed  in

heaven ; suffice  it  to  say  that  there  are  houses.  I do
not  busy  myself  with  the  rest.” — “ What  are  your
ordinary  occupations  ?”  “ I read,  write,  and  pass  a


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


93


part  of  my  time  in  giving  good  advice  to  the  wicked  ?”
— ‘‘You  can  then  communicate  with  them?”  “Yes,
with  their  spirit.” — “Who  supplies  you  with  those
books  and  houses  ? Do  you  build  them,  as  on  earth  ?”
“Those  houses,  and  all  that  exists  in  heaven,  are  unal-
terable, indestructible,  imperishable,  have  been  created
by  God  from  all  time,  and  can  undergo  no  alteration.”
— “Are  unions  or  marriages  formed  in  the  place  where
you  are  ?”  “ We  marry,  as  on  earth,  with  this  dif-

ference, that  it  is  for  eternity.  We  can  never  more
separate,  inasmuch  as  we  cannot  be  united,  unless  an
exact  resemblance  exists  in  the  affections,  the  mode  of
thinking,  and  all  that  constitutes  perfect  happiness.”
— “ Is  the  woman  we  have  married  on  earth  the  one
who  becomes  our  wife  in  heaven?”  “Not  always.
We  are  much  better  acquainted  with  the  affections  and
defects  of  each  other,  and  God  would  not  suffer  an
unequal  match,  as  on  earth  ?” — “ When  you  desire  it,
are  you  in  the  company  of  friends,  relations,  dead  like
yourself?”  “Yes;  but  if  our  ideas  do  not  accord,
we  cannot  remain  together — we  separate.”  — “Are
many  languages  spoken  in  the  other  world  ?”  “ I have

never  spoken  any  other  language  but  the  one  I now
speak  to  you ; but,  between  ourselves,  we  mutually
comprehend  without  speaking — it  is  seldom  that  we
make  use  of  speech.” — “ Do  you  remain  a long  time  in
the  state  you  are  in  ?”  “ Our  happiness  is  so  great

that  none  desire  to  change  it ; when  we  have  all  w’e
desire,  there  is  nothing  more  to  wish  for.” — “ Can
spirits  visit  the  globes,  as  the  moon,  the  stars  ?”  “ By

the  permission  of  the  Deity,  they  go  wherever  they
desire.” — Adele  tells  me  that  I abuse  the  complai-
sance of  M.  Mallet,  whose  venerable  looks,  fraught
with  goodness,  inspire  her  with  respect.  I put  this
last  question: — “Has  God  appeared  to  you?  In
what  form?”  “I  have  never  absolutely  seen  God.”
— Adele  is  unwilling  to  continue,  and  this  gives  rise
to  a dispute  between  us  two ; I making  the  obser-


94


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


vation  that  if  I put  questions  to  a spirit  it  is  in
order  to  gain  information,  with  respect  to  the  future
life,  through  his  light;  that  being  aware  of  my  ig-
norance and  the  purity  of  my  intentions,  he  cannot
take  olfence.  “ What  he  sees,  before  all,  is  your  in-
credulity. When  one  knows  what  I know  there  is
but  little  inclination  to  abuse  the  complaisance  of  a
venerable  man,  who,  in  a few  hours,  will  pass  in  your
eyes  for  an  hallucination,  and  his  answers  for  errors
of  my  imagination.  Spirits  no  longer  cling  to  the
things  of  the  earth  ; they  trouble  themselves  no  more
about  them  than  we  should  of  a street  we  had  passed
through  twenty  years  ago.  Can  we  think,  with  plea-
sure, of  the  scenes  of  life  which  have  caused  us
troubles?  No;  what  exists  within  us  is  indifference
for  the  past,  and  this  indifference  is  still  greater  in  spirits
that  are  never  to  revisit  the  earth ; you,  not  long  ago,
sufficiently  tormented  my  brother  by  your  questions,
fraught  with  doubt.  Spirits  may  be  deceived,  though
such  would  not  be  case  did  they  set  more  value  on  the
things  of  the  earth  ; they  are  not  criminals  put  to  the
question  ; and  bear  this  ever  in  mind,  if  you  don’t  wish
to  drive  away  all  the  spirits  who  may  come  to  see  you,
but  to  obtain  from  them  right  solutions,  lay  aside  in
their  presence  doubt  and  objection.”  This  long  moral
lesson  of  Addle  naturally  surprised  me ; it  is  true  that
I had  just  started  several  objections,  and  intended  ask-
ing for  fresh  proofs.  So  difficult  is  it,  T repeat,  to  con-
vince an  unbeliever  and  draw  a parallel  between  the
future  life  and  the  present  one ; our  carping  reasoning
is,  above  all  things,  least  suited  to  a good  clairvoyant ;
we  cannot,  in  the  presence  of  such  traits,  for  ever  say
that  the  clairvoyant  is  the  mirror  of  the  magnetiser’s
thoughts;  in  such  a case,  Adele  would  invariably  agree
with  me.  True,  there  are  somnambulists  of  this  kind,
but  she  is  not  one  of  them.  I have  put  her  in  com-
munication with  other  magnetisers,  who,  no  more  than
I,  have  been  able  to  influence  in  aught  her  will.  She


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


95


is  isolated  on  this  head,  and  wholly  independent  of  all
influence;  her  system  is  not  always  mine;  she  has  no
knowledy;e  of  psychology;  and  the  answers  just  given
by  M.  Mallet  sufficiently  prove  that  she  Interlards  them
with  nought  of  her  own ; she  has  too  much  respect  for
churchmen  to  misconstrue  their  words  to  the  profit  of
my  persuasions,  which  she  oppugns,  in  order  to  esta-
blish in  their  stead  those  we  have  just  heard,  and  which,
as  we  perceive,  are  by  no  means  in  conformity  with
those  of  the  Church,  as  I have  nowhere  seen  that  the
Church  admits  houses,  occupations,  affections,  and  mar-
riages in  heaven.  I have  seen  these  things  only  in
Swedenborg,  and  these  revelations  seemed  to  me  so
foreign  to  what  I then  believed  (in  annihilation,  like  the
materialists),  that  I can  admit  them  only  from  the  mul-
tiplicity of  those  made  to  me  by  persons  of  all  creeds,
whom  I cannot,  wish  not  to,  influence;  and  from  the
comparisons  which  reasoning  should  make  between  the
material  magnetic  effects  which  we  see  every  day,  and
those  spiritual  ones  which  seem  to  be  the  source  of  the
causes,  whilst  ours  are  but  the  effects.  As  there  can
be  no  effects  without  causes,  and  the  latter  must  be  the
type  of  the  effects,  the  spirit,  being  itself  a cause,  must
return  into  the  sphere  where  all  is,  and  whence  all  is
manifested.  We  shall  naturally  find  there  houses,  gar-
dens, men,  and  usages.

72.  The  8th  July,  1846,  I magnetise  Adele  in  order
to  put  her  in  communication  with  the  soul  of  a young
woman  who  died  on  the  2nd  of  the  same  month,  at  the
age  of  twenty-four.  Her  presence  was  scarcely  re-
quested when  she  appeared  with  an  infant  in  her  arms,
which  she  had  lost  almost  at  its  birth ; the  apparition
of  this  child  astonished  us,  inasmuch  as  we  little  ex-
pected it.  Adele  is  not  much  disposed  to  ask  her  any
questions,  saying  to  me:- — ‘‘Leave  me  an  instant  with
her,  and  give  her  at  least  time  to  recollect  herself  in  her
new  state.’’  Adele  experiences  a painful  emotion  at
the  apparition  of  this  woman,  whose  name  was  Elisa,


96


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


and  weeps  bitterly.  These  tears  were  sufficient  evidence
of  her  good  faith;  Elisa  appears  to  her  clad  in  white,
with  a crown  on  her  head ; she  says  that  she  is  very
happy,  and  cannot  understand  why  she  was  afraid  to
die.  She  wished  she  had  quitted  the  earth  sooner.  She
says  to  Adele: — “When  you  followed  me  to  the  grave,
you  entertained  the  thought  of  placing  a souvenir  on  my
tomb  : it  would  afford  me  much  pleasure  if  you  would
do  so.’’  I ask  Adele  whether  she  had  had  a like  thought  ?
“ Yes,  I bargained  for  a small  medallion,  but  did  not
purchase  it.”  I beg  Adele  to  sw^ear  to  me,  by  the  ashes
of  her  mother,  that  wffiat  she  just  told  me  is  exaet,  and
that  it  was  really  Elisa  wffio  divined  her  thought.  Adele
fervently  protests  to  me  that  she  has  told  the  truth,  and
that  in  such  a circumstance  it  would  be  a sacrilegious
falsehood  to  deceive  me.  “ I do  not  think  you  have
deceived  me  ; but,  possibly,  you  asked  her  if  she  w'ould
wish  for  this  medallion  which  you  had  a mind  to  buy
for  her  ?”  “ No,  it  was  she  who  told  me  of  it,  I no

longer  thought  of  it.” — “ Does  Elisa  attach  any  value
to  her  body,  that  she  desires  to  see  it  adorned  with  a
medallion  ?”  “ No  ; but  the  dead  always  like  to

ceive  kind  tokens  of  remembrance  in  the  hearts  of  those
they  have  left  behind.”  Elisa’s  husband  was  present
at  this  sitting,  and  could  not  believe  in  such  appari-
tions; he  said  to  me: — “Adele  watched  over  the  last
moments  of  Elisa ; she  was  struck  at  such  a death  ; the
attachment  she  bore  my  w'ife  may  possibly  re-act  on
her  imagination;  could  you  furnish  me  wnth  another
proof  of  the  truth  of  those  apparitions?”  “Yes,  on
one  condition,  which  is,  that  you  consider  well  of  the
person  whose  apparition  you  request ; you  wdll  so
manage  that  we  shall  have  never  seen  nor  heard  of  this
person;  take  all  your  precautions;  I will  only  ask  you
for  the  name.  After  this  proof,  ask  no  more,  endeavour
to  make  it  conformable  to  your  wishes.  Ah!  I will  pre-
pare this  for  you,  and  to-morrow  wee’ll  see.” — “ Very
well.”


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.  97

73.  M.  Demarest,  Elisa’s  husband,  came  the  next
day,  according  to  appointment.  I magnetised  Adele.
He  then  said  to  me — “ I lost  a sister,  whose  name  I
hand  you  ; be  so  kind  as  to  request  her  attendance.”

Here  she  is.” — “ Give  me  a description  of  her  ?”  said
he.  (He  was  not  en  rapport  with  Adele.)  The  latter
replied,  “She  is  rather  taller  than  this  gentleman,  her
brother;  her  hair  is  of  a dark  flaxen  colour,  her  face  is
long,  and  she  has  large  blue  eyes  of  a very  sweet  ex-
pression.” On  the  observation  of  M.  Demarest,  as  to
whether  Adele  has  a good  view  of  her  eyes,  the  latter
draws  nearer  to  her  the  gentleman’s  sister,  and  says  that
“ the  right  eye  seems  to  her  as  if  somewhat  dimmed.”
“It  is  a web,”  said  this  gentleman,  “that  grew  in  her
eye,  in  consequence  of  an  accident.” — “ Her  mouth  is
small,”  resumes  Adele,  “ skin  very  white,  complexion
pale,  but  the  cheeks  are  somewhat  flushed  like  those  of
consumptive  persons,  and  her  deportment  is  melan-
choly.” Adele  feels  conscious  that  she  must  have  been
dearly  loved  on  earth,  and  she  reckons  her  about
eighteen  years  of  age.  There  is  in  her  voice  something
sweet,  but  drawling.  She  tells  her  brother  that  their
father,  supposed  by  those  around  him  to  be  on  his
death-bed,  sixty  leagues  from  Paris,  was  out  of  danger ;
that  he  should  be  consoled  for  the  loss  of  Elisa;  that
she  herself  appeared  to  him  expressly  to  convince  him
of  the  reality  of  another  existence  after  death.  She
was  accompanied  by  a young  girl  whom  her  brother
could  not  recognise  from  the  description  given  of  her
by  Adele,  and  whom  his  sister  said  was  one  of  her  old
school  friends.  M.  Uemarest  acknowledged  all  the
details  of  the  description  as  exact  apart  the  age,  which
Adele  gave  her  as  an  approximation  to  the  real  one,
his  sister  being  twenty-one  when  she  died ; apart  the
colour  of  the  hair,  which,  said  he,  was  of  a chesnut
colour  ; Adele  saw  it  of  a dark  flaxen  ; then  again  the
e}^,  which  she  had  not  discovered  at  once,  inasmuch  as
this  person  was  on  one  side  and  at  a distance  from


98


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


Adele ; the  rest  was  very  exact,  even  to  the  revelation
of  the  recovery  of  their  father,  which  they  did  not  hear
of  till  some  days  afterwards.  Would  it  be  believed,
these  three  facts  sufficed  M.  Demarest  to  doubt  the
reality  of  the  apparition.  A somnambulist  who  makes
a mistake  of  three  years  in  the  appreciation  of  age,  and
this  gentleman  declares  that  his  sister  was  not  that  age  ;
then  again,  as  to  a shade  more  or  less  dark  of  the  hair,
and  a slight  delay  in  the  discovery  of  a web  in  the  eye !
this  is  sufficient  for  this  man  to  doubt  so  detailed  an
apparition  ; all  the  other  particularities,  even  to  the
tone  of  her  voice,  are  strictly  exact;  her  father,  whom
he  thought  dead,  and  whose  recovery  was  announced  to
him,  sufficed  not  this  uneasy  and  suspicious  man  ; much
less  was  required  to  make  me  believe,  and  1 had  been
as  far  off  as  he  from  such  persuasions.  I will  observe
that  at  the  sitting  he  believed,  and  was  greatly  as-
tonished; it  was  only  at  a later  period  that  these  facts
disappeared  from  his  memory  to  make  way  for  these
three  trifling  objections.*  We  cannot  say,  after  such
a sitting,  that  Adele  saw  or  read  his  thoughts,  had  it
been  so  they  would  have  agreed  as  to  the  age,  the  colour
of  the  hair;  and,  above  all,  the  eye,  which  was  the  most
distinctive  sign  of  the  apparition,  would  have  been
cited  first.  Men  of  right  understatiding,  who  consider
well  of  this  apparition,  wdll,  1 think,  come  to  a different
conclusion,  particularly  if  I inform  them  that  I had  a
little  somnambulist,  ten  years  of  age  (he  will  be  seen
hereafter),  possessing  the  speciality  of  views  at  distances,
who  one  day,  placed  e?i  rapport  with  this  M.  Demarest,
and  visiting  his  abode  made  the  remark  that  he  saw  on
a small  table  a blue  surtout.  M.  Demarest  would  not
accept  this  view,  because,  instead  of  a surtout  it  was  a


* Eight  days  had  not  elapsed  before  Elisa  took  upon  herself  the  task
of  proving  to  her  husband  that  she  existed  as  really  and  more  so  than  he,
by  apparitions  he  had  of  her  in  his  watchful  state  and  in  his  sleep.  Many
things  occurred  in  this  respect  that  troubled  him  very  much,  and  dissipated
in  him  all  doubts  as  to  a future  life.


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


99


paletot.  A small  sou  of  ten  centimes,  no  longer  circu-
lated but  for  a Hard,  being  put  in  a box,  the  child  says,
“ I see  a Hard,”  whereupon  this  gentleman  exclaimed,
“ This  child  is  not  asleep ; he  knows  not  what  he  says.”

74.  M.  Renard,  of  whom  I have  already  spoken,  a
man  to  whom  I am  indebted  for  the  little  knowledge  I
possess  in  magnetism,  being  called  to  Paris  on  business,
begged  me  to  send  Adele  to  sleep  and  give  him  a sitting
similar  to  what  he  had  read  of  in  my  journal.  I was
most  happy  to  comply  with  the  wishes  of  so  sincere
a friend,  and  so  judicious  and  well-informed  a man.
Scarcely  was  Adele  asleep  than  he  asked  for  a person
named  Desforges,  an  old  friend  of  his,  who  had  been
dead  fifteen  years.  Desforges  appeared.  M.  Renard
had  so  minute  a description  given  him  of  his  friend,
that  left  no  doubt  as  to  the  reality  of  this  apparition.
A dispute  took  place  between  him  and  Ad^le  (though
he  was  not  en  rapport  with  her)  as  to  the  dress  of  this
person;  Adele  maintaining  that  he  appeared  to  her  in  a
blouse  slit  in  front,  whilst  M.  Renard  declared  that  he
had  never  seen  him  in  such  an  article  of  dress  ; and  that
he  usually  wore  a jacket  or  round  vest.  After  puzzling
his  brains  for  some  time,  M.  Renard  recollected  in  fact
that  some  time  before  he  left  his  friend,  people  began  to
wear  in  his  part  of  the  country  blouses  of  this  kind,  and
that  he  wore  such  a one  as  Adele  described.  It  would
be  useless  to  mention  the  minute  details,  attitudes,
language,  &c.,  with  which  Adele  persuades  persons  con-
sulting her  on  such  a point.  There  remained  nought
for  M.  Renard  to  desire.  He  was  sensibly  moved  at
this  apparition ; M.  Desforges  was,  on  earth,  a very
studious  man,  well  informed  in  physics  and  the  occult
sciences.  M.  Renard  feels  disposed  to  avail  himself  of
his  presence  in  order  to  ask  him  for  some  information
respecting  the  fabrication  of  magic  glasses.  M.  Des-
forges answers ; “ Why  do  you  trouble  yourself  about
such  trifles,  that  would  only  tend  to  injure  you  in  the
minds  of  the  fools  around  you ; do  you  not  appear  to


100


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


them  superior  and  incomprehensible  enough  already  ?
what  would  you  be  then  ? you  would  pass  for  a sorcerer,
thus  incurring  their  hatred  and  bringing  on  yourself
disputes  that  would  trouble  the  short  time  remaining
you  to  pass  amongst  them  ; believe  me,  as  a true  friend,
do  not  trouble  yourself  about  such  matters,  it  will  not
be  long  before  you  rejoin  me,  and  then  you  will  know
whatever  you  desire/^  Upon  a fresh  observation  of
M.  Renard,  his  friend  replies  to  him  : Such  kinds  of
experiments  ever  bring  in  their  train  vexations  which,
when  too  late,  we  would  have  wished  to  avoid.  For
these  mirrors  to  have  an  absolute  and  a general  pro-
perty, it  is  necessary  to  be  in  correspondence  with
spirits  that  make  you  pay  dear  in  the  end  for  the  slight
complaisance  they  have  shown  you.^^

M.  Renard  expresses  a wish  to  have  M.  Emmanuel
Swedenborg  summoned.  Adele  sees  him,  gives  a de-
scription of  him,  which  M.  Renard  acknowledges  to  be
conformable  to  his  ideas ; it  ran  thus : — “ I see  a fine
portly  man;  he  has  brown  hair,  an  austere  countenance;
though  by  no  means  intimidating,  and  thick  eye-brows.
What  a droll  dress  ! he  wears  a coat  such  as  no  one
sees  now-a-days,  has  trimmings  to  his  sleeves  which  are
very  large  and  tucked  up,  and  lined  with  a different
coloured  stuff  to  that  of  his  coat.  Ha ! what  large
buttons!  He  has  buckles  on  his  shoes  too.’^ — “^‘How
old  does  he  look  ?”  asks  M.  Renard.  “About  sixty-six.’’
M.  Renard  says  that  he  was  more  than  eighty  when  he
(lied  ; but  that  in  his  part  of  the  country  (the  North)
men  do  not  show  their  age.  Adele  adds  that  his  hair  is
curled,  and  that  he  appears  of  a green  old  age.

M.. Renard  receives  a little  advice  from  Adele  as  to
the  state  of  his  health,  proving  to  him  that,  inde-
pendently of  her  spiritual  clairvoyance,  she  possesses  in
an  equal  degree  the  same  faculty  in  respect  to  the  ail-
ments of  the  body.

75.  Adele  again  requested  the  presence  of  Elisa,  who
came  immediately  with  her  infant,  which  she  gave  to


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


101


Adele  to  kiss ; then  she  sat  down  in  the  lap  of  our
clairvoyante  (apparently  not  much  to  the  satisfaction  of
the  latter).  She  put  to  her  the  following  questions: —

“ You  told  me,  last  time,  that  you  saw  in  my  thought
that  I had  the  intention  to  place  a medallion  on  your
tomb ; your  soul,  then,  followed  your  body  to  the
grave  ?”  “ Yes,  I knew  also  that  my  aunt,  who  was
with  you,  desired  to  place  on  it  a bouquet  of  flowers.’’
This  second  communication  is  quite  true.  “ How  do
you  find  yourself  now  ?”  Very  happy.” — What  are
your  occupations  ?”  “ I promenade  ; all  that  I behold

appears  to  me  so  pretty  that  I am  never  tired  of  admir-
ing what  is  around  me.”  Adele  suddenly  exclaims :
“Ah!  the  glutton!  she  is  eating  a beautiful  pe'ach  ; I
well  recognise  her  in  that,  promenading  and  gluttonis-
ing  ! such  are  her  pleasures,  she’ll  never  forsake  them.”
— “ Would  Elisa  be  so  kind  as  to  tell  me  what  sort  of
feeling  she  experienced  at  the  moment  of  her  death,
and  how  her  resurrection  was  effected?”  “I  found
myself  in  heaven,  as  if  waking  out  of  sleep ; I still
thought  all  of  you  at  my  bed-side,  I called  to  you,  when
other  persons  who  were  around  me  told  me  that  I was
no  longer  on  earth,  that  I had  just  died  ; I could  not
believe  what  was  told  me ; but  at  length  I perceived
that  I was  no  longer  amongst  you,  on  beholding  my
father  and  my  child,  who  have  not  quitted  me  since
that  day.  I saw,  also,  the  little  companion  beside  me,
who  has  been  dead  these  five  years.  I knew  her  in
the  house  where  I was  brought  up,  and  where  she
died ; her  name  was  Heloise.” — Adele  tells  me  that  she
perceives  beside  Elisa  this  young  girl,  who  is  very
pretty,  and  looks  very  amiable : she  is  fair.  Were  it
necessary  for  me  to  add  a proof  to  those  I possess  in
abundance,  I should  make  inquiries  respecting  this
young  person.  I ask  Elisa  if  her  husband  will  not  fall
ill  from  the  grief  caused  by  her  death  ?” — “ ’Twill  be
nothing,”  said  she  ; “ when  he  returns  from  the  country
he’ll  think  no  more  of  it.” — Elisa  knew  of  this  journey,  '


102


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


as  she  had  known  of  Adele’s  and  her  aunt’s  thoughts.
I wish  to  put  more  questions  to  her ; but  Adele  says  to
me: — “Let  her  promenade  a little ; she  has  but  just
entered  heaven  ; she  cannot  answer  all.”  I ask  her
whether,  on  her  entering  heaven,  she  saw  God  ?
“No,’^  said  she,  “I  have  not  seen  Him  yet.” — “Have
you  seen  any  angels?”  “No;  but  persons  who  speak
to  you  in  the  name  of  God,  as  corning  from  him ; and  I
do  not  think  those  persons  are  angels.”

76.  I ask  again  for  M.  Swedenborg.  He  appears. —
“ You  will  have  the  goodness  to  answer  a few  questions
as  to  the  spiritual  world,  now  that  you  inhabit  it;  your
answers  would  carry  greater  weight  with  them  in  your
present  state.” — M.  Renard  attended  at  this  sitting.  W e
ask  M.  Swedenborg  if  he  has  nothing  to  rectify  in  the
writings  he  left  on  earth,  treating  of  the  spiritual  world  ?
He  answers,  that  they  contain  a fewerrors  of  little  import-
ance. He  says  that  he  is  not  satisfied  with  some  of  his
disciples,  who  do  not  conduct  themselves  as  they  ought.
M.  Swedenborg  promises  to  return  to  us  when  we  stand
in  need  of  him.  Adele  says  : — “ He  lays  his  hands  on  us
as  if  to  give  us  his  blessing,  and  goes  away.’’ — We
consulted  together,  ]SL  Renard  and  I,  as  to  what  we
ought  to  think  of  the  apparition  of  this  great  ecstatico-
prophet.  Was  it  really  he  ? We  had  not  the  least
doubt  of  it;  but  we  might  be  imposed  upon  by  an  evil
spirit ; in  that  case,  said  we,  God,  whom  we  will  call
to  our  aid,  and  M.  Swedenborg  will  not  suffer  us  to  be
deceived  thus.  Moreover,  we  shall  discover  him
sooner  or  later,  and  know  what  value  to  set  on  his
revelations ; but  I ought  to  observe,  that  if  an  evil
spirit  has  the  power  of  presenting  himself  in  the  place
of  a good  one,  he  may  be  driven  away  by  a command,
in  the  name  of  God.  Such  a course  has  invariably
succeeded  with  me,  and  it  is  what  I do  at  each  ap-
parition. Once  the  person  summoned  is  seen,  we
should  demand  of  him  a token  of  recognition,  which  he
displays  to  you,  whether  by  a particular  sign,  a jewel,


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


103


or  aught  else,  God  never  suffering  evil  spirits  to  coun-
terfeit in  this  respect.  Neither  should  we  suppose —
because  an  evil  spirit  may  happen  to  commit  a few
mistakes  in  his  revelations,  especially  in  his  earthly  re-
miniscences, mistakes  to  which  they  are  very  liable,
that  it  is  an  evil  spirit  that  deceives  us.  No  ; we  must
expect  miscalculations.  Spirits  cannot  answer  all  that  is
asked  them,  because  their  knowledge  is  confined  to  their
peculiar  affection.  Thus,  we  should  seek  spirits  that
participate  in  ours,  if  we  desire  to  obtain  correct  so-
lutions ; but  it  seldom  happens,  however,  that  relations
or  friends  are  replaced  by  malicious  spirits.

77-  I summon  M.  Swedenborg,  who  forthwith  pre-
sents himself.  I order  him,  in  the  name  of  God,  to
withdraw  if  he  is  a false  spirit ; on  the  contrary,  he
advances,  takes  Adele  by  the  hand,  and  says  to  her  : —
“ Fear  nought,  I am,  indeed,  Swedenborg.”  “ Could
you  be  replaced  by  an  evil  spirit?”  “No;  so  long  as
you  desire  my  presence,  with  the  pure  intention  of
instructing  yourself,  I will  come  ; but  if,  on  the  con-
trary, you  act  with  contempt  and  authority,  I should
not  present  myself,  and  another  would  come,  in  order
to  deceive  you.” — “ Can  you  communicate  with  me,  by
thought,  through  the  medium  of  my  clairvoyante  ?”
“ No ; your  thought  is  too  deeply  buried  in  matter.  I
could  do  so  ; but  it  is  best  to  avail  ourselves  of  this
young  lady  in  order  to  avoid  mistakes.” — “ Could  you
inform  me  of  a means  whereby  I could  enter  into  the
state  necessary  to  communicate  directly  with  you,  by
the  aid  of  certain  narcotic  combinations  ?”  “ The

only  practicable  means  is  magnetism  ; any  other  state,
provoked  by  narcotics,  irritates  the  nerves,  influences
the  ideas  by  disorganizing  them,  and  cannot,  conse-
quently, be  so  good  as  the  magnetic  state.” — “ I ask
you  this,  because  I should  wish  to  be  enabled  to  ex-
press to  you  questions  myself  to  prevent  the  possibility
of  their  being  altered  ?”  “ In  that  case,  I advise  you

to  get  powerfully  magnetised  behind  your  ears;  it  is


104


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


your  sensitive  part,  and  probably  you  will  succeed.” —
“ Can  you  answer  this  question — Did  God  create  man
male  and  female,  as  the  Bible  says  ?”  “ The  Bible  is  an
excellent  book,  containing  very  good  things  for  study.
God  did  create  a man  and  a woman.” — “ Do  you  mean
thereby  that  every  man  whom  God  has  created  has  a
woman  equally  created  for  him?”  Yes,  every  being
has  his  complement;  woman  and  man  are  created  in
pairs.” — “These  two  beings,  are  they  born  and  do  they
die  at  the  same  time  ?”  “ Time  stands  for  nought  in

the  matter ; they  meet  again  in  heaven  when  God  wills
it.” — “These  two  beings,  are  they  in  every  respect
similar  in  thought  and  form?”  “Yes.” — “In  their
intimate  union  are  they  acquainted  wdth  love  in  its
carnal  acts  as  on  earth?”  “ Heavenly  love  cannot  be
described  by  material  language,  it  is  an  inexplicable
sensation.” — “ Are  single  persons  seen  in  heaven  ?”
“ Yes,  but  no  being  can  be  perfectly  happy  without
being  reunited  to  its  half,  which  is  its  complement  of
life.” — “ Can  they  be  separated  by  a caprice  depending,
or  not  depending,  on  them  ?”  “No,  we  cannot  be  se-
parated from  what  constitutes  our  happiness.” — “ Can
the  happiness  of  souls  at  rest  be  influenced  in  heaven
by  evil  spirits  ?”  “ No  ; they  are  separate,  and  an

inferior  spirit  can  in  no  wise  trouble  the  superior
spirit.” — “ Have  you  the  conviction  that  we  return  not
to  a second  material  existence  ?”  “ We  are  in  heaven

for  eternity.” — “ Can  we  count  the  time  we  pass  in  this
state  of  happiness  and  the  spaces  we  travel  over  ?”
“Time  is  not  reckoned  there  ; a thousand  years  are  as
one  day  in  eternity ; space  presenting  no  difficulty  to
its  being  cleared  is  not  measured  there.  The  body  is  so
light  that  it  finds  itself  conveyed  wherever  it  desires
without  perceiving  the  distance  over  which  it  has  tra-
velled.”— “ Independent  of  the  affections,  are  there  any
states  through  which  w'e  must  pass  to  arrive  at  this
superior  degree  of  felicity  ?”  “ The  affection  constitutes
the  states.  The  latter  succeed  each  other  according  to

O


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


105


the  strength  of  the  affection  which  engenders  them,  and
leads  them  to  the  height  of  happiness.^’

78.  ^‘Uoes  a lunatic  recover  forthwith  the  use  of  his
reason  ?”  “ He  recovers  his  reason,  but  lie  requires

more  or  less  time  to  arrange  his  ideas  which  continue
yet  awhile  more  or  less  disorganised.” — “ Does  insanity
proceed  from  matter  or  spirit ?”  “It  proceeds  from  the
spirit.” — “ I was  told  that  it  proceeded  from  both.”
“ Certainly  matter  clogs  the  spirit ; but  we  have  suffi-
cient proof  that  the  spirit  only  remains  affected,  from
the  fact  of  its  being  still  affected  after  its  separation
from  matter.” — “ How  do  you  think  this  is  brought
about?”  “A  man  ardently  devoted  to  study  fatigues
his  ideas,  and  the  too  great  contention  of  spirit  on  a
single  one  disorganises  the  rest.” — “ We  have,  also,
other  cases  of  insanity  in  beings  not  devoted  to  study,
which  are  often  produced  by  very  material  accidents,
falls,  fears,  afflicting  news,  &c.”  “ Such  accidents  are

only  secondary  causes,  which  would  have  produced  no
effect  on  well-organised  brains  ; there  are  many  men
whose  external  appearance  conceal  from  our  judgment
very  vigorous  thoughts,  no  matter  their  tendency ; they
are  pent  up  thoughts,  which,  on  a sudden  commotion,
overflow  the  other  ideas  and  disorganise  the  whole  in-
dividual.”— “ Can  evil  spirits  derange  our  intellects  on
earth?”  “No.” — “Can  they  hallucinate  us  by  appa-
ritions, removal  of  furniture,  noises,  and  a thousand
other  things  of  this  kind  ?”  “They  can  do  so  only  in
the  conditions  wherein  you  find  yourself  impressionable,
but  most  frequently  these  hallucinations  are  to  be  attri-
buted to  material  persons  of  a very  evil  influence,  who,
by  their  property,  or  those  which  they  obtain  through
pacts  formed  with  spirits  that  possess  this  affection,
take  delight  in  deranging  our  ideas  and  tormenting  us ;
the  influence  of  poisons  has  much  to  do  with  it.” — “ I
did  not  believe  in  such  pacts.”  “ They  exist,  but
nought  is  more  displeasing  to  God.” — “ What  is  the
means  of  ridding  one’s  self  of  such  a possession  ?”

H


106


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


Doing  as  you  do  when  an  evil  spirit  appears  before
your  clairvoyante,  command  it,  in  the  name  of  God,  to
withdraw.” — “ In  the  possessions  of  Loudun  and  others
such  means  did  not  always  suffice.”  “ In  many  pos-
sessions there  have  often  been  too  many  interests  at
stake ; the  prayers  were  not  always  as  pure  as  they
seemed  to  be,  for  the  power  of  God  inundates  all  the
powers  of  the  universe,  and  no  possession  could  resist
were  he  invoked  from  the  bottom  of  the  heart.  It  is
the  sole  and  noblest  power  given  to  man  to  make  use
of.” — “ What  do  you  think  of  talismans  ?”  “ There

are  very  good  ones,  but  we  must  deserve  them  : it  is  a
gift  of  God.” — “Could  you  give  me  the  design  of  a good
one  ?”  “ I cannot ; but  there  is  one  worth  them  all —

placing  ourselves  under  the  Divine  protection,  with
purity  of  heart;  no  other  is  equal  to  this.” — “ What  do
you  think  of  perception  obtained  by  the  means  of  what
are  called  magic  glasses,  which  are  made  use  of  to  dis-
cover thieves  or  hidden  things,  and  useful  to  our
safety?”  “They  exist.” — “What  spirits  can  facilitate
operations  of  this  sort?”  “The  good  and  the  bad.” —
“Could  you  tell  me  this  secret?”  “Yes;  but  I must
first  study  you,  then  we  will  see.” — “ What  do  you
think  of  astrology?”  Adele  says  that  M.  Swedenborg
answers  only  by  a gesture,  apparently  signifying  his
doubt  in  respect  to  this,  and  that  he  does  not  occupy
himself  with  it.  Adele  finds  me  also  wearisome  ; I put,
however,  this  question — “ What  do  you  think  of  al-
chymy  ?”  “ The  stone  exists ; this,  also,  is  a gift  of

God.  We  must  be  very  pure  to  possess  it.”  We  have
a long  discourse  on  this  subject,  which  I cannot  report.

79.  “ You  told  me,  at  the  last  sitting,  that  you  would
consider  whether  I was  worthy  of  possessing  the  secret
of  the  magic  mirror,  may  I hope  to  receive  from  your
generosity  this  revelation  ?”  “ Yes.  ^Tis  very  difficult

of  execution  ; you  will  go  to  work  in  this  way —


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.  107

I had  a very  good  one.” — “ Since  your  death,  have  you
increased  your  stock  of  knowledge,  which,  on  earth,
was  already  very  considerable  ?”  “ No,  on  the  con-

trary, I have  lost  more  than  I have  gained  of  that  de-
scription which  is  no  longer  my  affection  ; when  on
earth,  I wished  to  instruct  men  in  what  it  was  useful
for  them  to  know ; but  now  this  desire  no  longer  pur-
sues me,  and  all  the  knowledge  necessary  to  material
life  ceased  being  explained  to  me  when  I went  to
heaven.” — “What  is  your  predominant  affection  now?”
“ I am  in  the  society  of  a few  friends  ; we  occupy  our-
selves with  celestial  philosophy ; in  the  state  I am,  we
know  whatever  we  desire  to  know,  and  this  is  a con-
tinual source  of  felicity.” — “ Have  you  any  knowledge
of  the  primitive  creation  of  man  ?”  “ Yes  ; but  I do

not  think  fit  to  explain  it  to  you.” — “ Could  you  explain
to  me  his  properties  and  relations  with  the  universe ;
men  believe  now  in  a system,  and  you  seem  to  approve
of  such  a one  in  your  works,  which  demonstrates  man
as  representing  in  miniature  the  entire  universe  ?”
“ Man  is  really  a representative  of  what  may  be  con-
fined to  his  globe,  seeing  that  he  possesses  within  him
all  the  essences  composing  it ; but  there  ends  his  re-
semblance with  the  universe.” — Some  have  gone  so
far  as  to  say  that  he  had  in  him,  independently  of  all
that  exists  materially,  places,  actions,  universal  thoughts,
inasmuch  as  he  finds  himself  in  the  places  he  desires  to
see ; knows  the  actions  and  thoughts  which  exist  and
no  longer  exist.  How  explain  such  a power  ?”  The
material  man  is  a compound  of  all  that  exists  materially ;
that  is  to  say,  he  has  in  him  the  essences  of  each  of  the
kingdoms,  but  not  places  and  distances.  The  spiritual
man  has  alone  the  faculty  of  knowing  places,  actions,
and  thoughts,  which  are  rightly  without  the  material
body  and  not  in  it ; as  the  terrestrial  essences,  he  may
clear  these  distances,  which  for  him  exist  not;  he  may
know  past  actions,  since  for  him  there  is  nothing  anni-
hilated, but  the  present,  the  past,  and  the  future  are

H 2


108


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


only  a condition  6f  being  presented  to  him  by  matter.
He  may  communicate  with  all  these  things,  which  are
so  many  unities  without,  and  form  but  one  with  him,
according  to  the  power  of  his  desire.” — “ Were  you
acquainted  with  magnetism  before  your  death ; you
seem  to  indicate  as  much  in  your  works  ?”  “ I was  not

acquainted  with  its  properties  in  all  their  development,
I had  but  a confused  knowledge  of  them.” — “You
equally  appear  to  indicate  in  them  phrenology,  by  say-
ing that  thoughts  are  agglomerated  in  the  head  in  kinds
of  societies,  separately  incased  ?”  “ Our  head  is  but

a compound  of  confused  thoughts,  which,  when  not
directed  and  incased  by  the  spiritual  man  with  discern-
ment, lead  to  the  love  of  evil.” — “ Could  you  give  me
a clear  description  as  to  the  nature  of  thoughts  ?”
“ God,  in  creating  man,  provided  us  all  ivith  an  equal
number  of  thoughts ; there  exists  not  a single  being  who
possesses  one  more  than  another.  It  is  for  man  to  sepa-
rate the  good  from  the  bad,  if  he  wishes  to  be  honest
and  eschew  evil.” — “ How  should  he  manage,  since  he
appears  not  free  to  act  according  to  his  wishes  ?”  “ He

could  do  so  by  dismissing  the  first  thought  that  leads
him  towards  evil.  If,  on  the  contrary,  he  does  not
repel  it,  by  asking  of  God  the  strength  necessary  to  do
so,  this  thought  engenders  others,  which,  in  a short
time,  form  a mass  of  thoughts  leading  man  towards  evil
or  good.” — “The  thoughts,  then,  according  to  you,
engender  like  living  beings  ?”  “ They  assemble  and

engender  of  each  other.  I will  endeavour  to  give  you
a material  example; — Get  a couple  of  ants  (seeing  that
everything  is  by  pairs  in  the  creation),  separate  them,
instead  of  bringing  them  together,  by  putting  them
each  in  a small  hole ; they  will  be  quite  at  their  ease,
and  will  not  propagate ; if,  on  the  contrary,  you  bring
them  together  both  in  the  same  hole,  in  a short  time
the  society  they  have  engendered,  unable  any  longer  to
contain  itself  in  this  hole,  will  burst  forth,  seeking  else-
where a more  suitable  space.  In  like  manner  with  the


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


109


thoughts ; master  the  first  one  by  preventing  it  from
uniting  with  another,  and  you  will  have  no  trouble  to
fear.^’ — I approve  of  your  comparison;  but  since  God
is  the  author,  the  creator  of  all  things,  he  has  deemed
fit,  then,  to  create  good  and  evil  thoughts  ? Were  it
not  for  this  assemblage  of  good  and  evil,  half  the  human
species  distributed  as  kings,  judges,  priests,  soldiers,
entrusted  with  the  keeping  of  the  other  half,  would  be
useless  }”  “ I have  told  you  that  every  man  possessed

the  same  quantity  of  thoughts,  which  he  was  at  liberty
to  class  and  govern  according  to  his  idea.  If  the  Deity
has  deemed  fit  to  create  such  or  such  thoughts,  he  owes
us  no  account  of  it,  since  he  does  not  render  us  respon-
sible for  the  direction  we  have  given  them,  by  not
punishing  us  for  them.” — “ These  thoughts,  which,
from  your  comparison,  are  nought  less  than  living
beings,  coupling  and  engendering,  under  what  form  are
they  seen  in  heaven  and  on  earth  ?”  “ On  earth  they

represent,  e?i  tableau,  the  action  they  concur  in  causing
to  be  executed,  and  in  heaven  they  are  represented  as
characters  written  in  gold.” — Adele  is  surprised  at  not
having  seen,  when  she  went  to  heaven  to  see  her  rela-
tions, such  a representation  of  thoughts.  M.  Sweden-
borg tells  her  that  she  was  unable  to  see  them,  inas-
much as  she  was  still  in  a state  wherein  a diaphanous
body  is  imperceptible.  “I  saw,”  replies  she,  “in  the
body  of  my  relations  as  in  crystal !”  He  answers  : —
“You  saw  what  might  be  compared  to  crystal;  but,
were  you  to  see  a diaphanous  body  in  all  its  brightness,
you  would  find  it  infinitely  superior.” — “ Where  does
that  writing  in  gold  appear  to  be  placed  ?”  “ In  the

heart  and  the  head.” — “ Are  the  bad  thoughts  also  re-
presented in  the  same  way  ?”  “ Yes,  but  the  bad  ones

cannot  enter  heaven.”

80.  “ Do  you  still  think,  as  you  seem  to  affirm  in
your  books,  that  heaven  has  the  form  of  a man  ?”
“ Heaven  has  not  the  form  of  a man.  I made  use  of
this  figurative  comparison  only  the  better  to  make  my


110


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


readers  comprehend  the  affinities  of  the  affections  of
the  soul  with  the  organs  of  the  body  of  which  I repre-
sented heaven  as  a type/^ — ‘‘You  told  me  at  the  last
sitting  that  it  was  seen  en  tableaux  how  earthly  thoughts
are  accomplished  ; but  our  clairvoyants  go  so  far  as  to
tell  us  or  predict  to  us  words  which  will  not  be  pro-
nounced till  a period  very  remote.  How  can  speech  be
represented  ?”  “ Clairvoyants  have  two  ways  of  be-

coming acquainted  with  thoughts:  1st,  by  sensation;
2nd,  by  view  in  pictures.  Future  speech  as  present  is
not  more  difficult  to  be  represented  in  pictures  than
actions;  speech  is  the  picture  or  description  of  an  action
and  every  action  may  be  represented  in  a picture.  I
will  take  for  example,  slander:  you  say  of  a person  that
he  is  a thief,  an  idle  fellow,  or  so  forth  ; the  person  who
shall  pronounce  these  words  is  seen  pointing  out  him
whom  he  slanders,  and  the  latter  doing  the  action  of
which  the  former  speaks;  and  the  clairvoyant,  judging
from  the  apparent  degree  of  candour  the  person  slandered
may  tell  whether  it  is  a truth  or  a falsehood.  Sensation
is  more  difficult  to  be  defined  ; there  must  be  an  in-
timate relation  with  the  person  and  the  events.^^ — “ Are
the  thoughts  liable  to  external  influences  }”  “ V’es,  by

the  good  and  the  evil  spirits.” — “ We  see  every  day
actions  committed  which  appear  to  be  the  result  of  an
instantaneous  thought : are  they  to  be  attributed  to  the
influence  of  spirits  ?”  “ No,  not  always;  the  influence

of  spirits  consists  in  the  enhancing  or  abasing  of  a
thought,  or  they  contrive  to  prevent  the  effect  of  it,  for
some  purpose  or  other;  but  there  is  limited  their  power.
The  spiritual  man  is  ever  free  to  appreciate  it  at  its
exact  value,  there  is  nought  instantaneous  in  his  actions;
all  that  appears  externally  is  the  fruit  of  interior  com-
binations, sometimes  unknown  to  the  material  body,
hence  they  are  fancied  to  be  instantaneous.” — “What
makes  me  disbelieve  in  free-will  are  the  predictions  of
clairvoyants  who,  very  often  announce  to  us  things  that
we  have  no  reason  to  suppose  will  happen.  How  can


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


Ill


that  be  ? Make  me  understand  it.”  “As  I have  already
told  you,  the  thoughts  agglomerate  around  a mother-
thought,  a type  which  it  is  easy  to  recognise.  The
clairvoyant  sees  this  progression  of  ideas  and  can  judge
with  assurance  in  what  time  they  will  overflow,  in  order
then  to  hurry  on,  by  the  trouble  they  convey  into  the
harmony  of  the  material  body,  the  latter  to  execute  the
action  they  are  preparing.  The  pettiest  equally  as  the
strongest  thoughts  have  all  one  and  the  same  source
and  object.” — “ Your  solution  is  a very  good  one  for
animated  matter;  but  we  have  also  predictions  as  to
whole  nations  and  individual  beings  still  unborn,  how
can  that  which  does  not  yet  exist  be  seen  ?”  “ There

exists  not  an  action  but  what  has  ever  existed,  either  in
germ  or  vibration ; for  the  clairvoyant  time  exists  not,
1 repeat  to  you,  if  his  attention  is  directed  to  dates
epochs,  he  sees  in  the  world  of  causes  that  which  will
happen  at  such  a period;  he  is  also  and  most  frequently
apprised  of  these  predictions  by  the  divine  power  which
desires  that  thev  should  be  known  before-hand,  that  men
may  prepare  themselves  to  receive  or  execute  them.”
— “ I am  too  much  obliged  to  you  for  your  revelations
to  have  the  least  wish  to  raise  objections  to  what  you
say  to  me ; but  if  God  permits  these  things  to  be  known
of  men,  it  is  in  some  sort  saying  to  them,  you  cannot
hinder  them,  and  all  this  proves  not  free-will.  I will
make  but  one  objection  more : if  we  have  not  the
intelligence  of  directing  aright  our  thoughts,  and  have
beside  us  a guide  who  can  influence  us  to  this  effect,
why  does  he  not  employ  his  power  at  this  moment  in
order  to  be  of  service  to  us?”  “He  ever  employs  it;
but  his  power  is  submitted  to  yours,  which  repels  it,
because  it  sympathises  not  with  it,  with  that  affection
especially  which  predominates  in  you  for  the  execution
of  your  project.” — “You  conclude  that  man  is  free?”
“ All  men,  on  coming  into  the  world,  having  re-
spectively the  same  number  of  thoughts,  may  dispose  of
them  at  will;  far  from  free  would  he  indeed  be  who  had


112


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


not  all  that  is  necessary  for  liberty;  but  if  you  are  in  a
library  containing  all  sorts  of  works,  you  consult  the  one
which  is  to  your  taste ; you  cannot  in  aught  reproach
the  lil)rary  which  contains  all  that  it  is  possible  for  you
to  desire.  What  makes  you  believe  that  man  is  not  free
is,  that  the  exterior  has  no  knowledge  of  the  affections
of  the  soul,  which  prepares  the  execution  of  them.”

81.  Does  matter  really  exist,  in  the  full  accepta-
tion of  the  word,  for  the  spirit,  which  is  no  longer  sub-
jected to  its  laws,  as  it  exists,  for  the  spirit  which
groans  in  its  bosom  “ Matter  is  quite  as  existent  for
us  as  for  you.” — “Do  you  behold,  in  your  state,  this
firmament  studded  with  stars  that  you  admired  so
much  on  earth  ?”  “ I behold  it  better  than  when  I

was  on  earth.” — “ Since  that  you  have  a constant  day-
light, how  do  you  distinguish  these  stars?”  “ A spirit
perceives  whatever  it  desires,  without  the  least  fatigue.”
— “ Are  these  stars  inhabited  ?”  “ Yes.” — “ By  whom
“ By  spirits.” — “ What ! spirits ; not  men,  then,  like
us?”  “No,  spirits,  like  me.” — “These  stars,  then,
are  not  material,  as  it  is  said  ?”  “ They  are  adapted  to

our  substance.” — “ I thought  that  the  spirit,  after  its
separation  from  the  body,  hovered  in  the  atmosphere
surrounding  the  globe  it  inhabited,  itself  being  a com-
pound of  air  floating  in  its  substance,  and  that  it  was
as  well  there  as  on  a more  solid  globe?”  “You  are
wrong;  the  spirit  for  you  is  a substance  comparable  to
air ; but  for  us,  it  is  a substance  demanding  space,  in
spite  of  the  belief  of  men  who  think  th-at  a spirit,
because  it  penetrates  matter  without  the  least  difficulty,
takes  up  no  space;  our  bodies  take  up  as  much  room
as  on  earth,  and  as  such  countless  myriads  of  human
beings  have  died,  if  there  were  not  other  worlds  created
by  the  goodness  of  God,  the  space  of  your  atmo-
sphere, or  eartli,  would  no  longer  suffice,  as  well  for  the
spirits  as  the  places  surrounding  them.” — “ I thought
the  stars  material  globes,  as  you  yourself  advanced  ?”
“ I committed  many  errors.  I was  a man — that  ac-


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


113


counts  for  it.”  You  have  also  said  that  the  sun  was
pure  fire,  vv'hat  do  you  think  of  it  now  ?”  “ The  sun
that  you  behold  is  the  God  of  heaven  and  earth.” —
“ What  do  you  mean  by  that  ?”  “ Spirits  know  no

other,  and  God  has  never  been  seen  in  any  other  form.”

82.  On  reflecting  upon  what  had  been  told  me  in
the  preceding  sitting,  I needed  more  ample  explana-
tions, as  I could  not  but  suspect  that  we  had  made
some  mistake  as  to  the  stars,  which,  according  to  reve-
lation, are  not,  as  astronomy  supposes,  material  globes.
I longed  to  obtain  more  precise  information. — “You
told  me,  the  other  day,  that  the  stars  were  inhabited  by
spirits  ; is  there  no  other  material  globe  in  the  universe
but  our  own  ?”  “ There  are  many  others  besides

yours. What  are  those  stars  of  which  you  spoke  to
me  ?”  “ What  we  name  stars  are  spiritual  globes.” —

“ Has  each  material  globe  a spiritual  one?”  “Yes.” —
Does  this  spiritual  globe  form  a continuation  of  the
material  one?”  “No,  it  is  very  remote  from  it;  the
distance  would  appear  immense  to  you,  material  men,
but  it  is  nothing  for  us.” — “ Do  we  go,  out  of  preference,
into  one  globe  more  than  another?’’  “We  go  to  the
one  we  desire  to  go  to  ; God  has  set  no  bounds  to  our
desires.” — “ Where  are  these  globes  situated  ?”  “In
heaven.”— “ Those,  then,  are  the  globes  which  we  see
over  our  heads,  and  name  stars?”  “You  cannot^see
these  globes,  inasmuch  as  they  are  spiritual ; those  are
material  globes  which  you  see  and  name  stars  ; but  in
reality  there  are  no  stars  except  in  the  world  of  spirits.”
— “ In  that  case  I perceive  that  I explained  myself
badly,  or  was  mistaken.  According  to  what  you  tell
me,  the  material  world  has  its  firmament  filled  with
material  globes  named  stars,  and  the  spiritual  one  has
also  its  firmament  and  stars  ?”  “Yes  ; but  know  that
we  name  not  firmament  that  material  immensity  which
is  over  our  heads ; ours  is  an  infinite  space,  strewed
with  worlds,  like  yours ; we  know  but  one  firmament,
which  is  the  spiritual  firmament.” — “ Where,  then,  is


114


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


this  firmament?”  Far  beyond  the  immense  space
which  your  eyes  can  perceive.” — “ Are  there  many
material  luminous  globes,  similar  to  that  we  name  the
sun  ?”  No,  there  is  but  one  sun,  which  is  spiritual ;
which  is  the  God  of  heaven  and  earth,  which  enlightens
all  that  exists.” — “ You  were  acquainted  on  earth  with
astronomy,  and  you  know  that  it  admits  many  luminous
globes,  as  the  centre  of  worlds  grouped  around  them,
and  to  which  they  give  light  ?”  “ Astronomy  is  mis-

taken ; there  is  but  one  orb  which  lights  up  the  uni-
verse !” — “ How  is  it  that  being  lighted  up  only  by  one
sun,  the  spiritual  world  can  enjoy  continual  light  ?’^
“We  are  much  nearer  to  this  sun  than  you  are;  our
globe  turns  not  like  yours — it  is  not  opaque  like  youi  s —
hence  it  is  that  it  presents  no  obstacle  to  the  light  which
traverses  it  in  every  direction  as  through  a glass.  Its
essence  is  in  affinity  with  this  light  and  cannot  alter  its
rays.” — “The  spiritual  earths, are  they  in  every  respect
comparable  to  ours ?”  “The  globes  which  we  inhabit
cannot  be  compared  with  yours,  which  is  not  worthy  of
the  comparison.”

83.  “ I was  once  told  by  the  ecstatico  Bruno,  that
spirits  possessed  forthwith  whatever  they  desired  ; for
instance,  two  spirits,  assembled  in  one  place,  desiring
to  be,  one  on  a plain,  tlie  other  at  sea,  could,  without
quitting  each  other,  find  themselves  in  the  places,
though  so  incompatible,  which  they  desired.  Would
not  such  places  be  mere  imaginary  creation  of  the
spirit,  and  having  no  real  existence  in  heaven  ?”  “ Y^our
question  embraces  one  of  the  greatest  mysteries  of
heaven.  All  is  not  quite  exact  in  what  was  told  you;
it  is  true,  however,  that  four  persons  around  a tree,
from  which  each  shall  desire  to  gather  different  fruit,
one  will  be  able  to  gather  from  it  a peach  ; the  second,
cherries ; the  third,  plums,  and  the  fourth  apples,
which  all  shall  eat  with  equal  pleasure  ; but  what  you
say,  that  two  spirits  can  perceive  at  the  same  point
two  different  places,  is  not  correct,  as  this  would  an-


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


115


nihilate  places  and  the  spaces  separating  them.  It  is
otherwise,  for  places  really  exist;  but  by  a mystery
not  less  great,  these  two  friends  shall  transport  them-
selves into  the  places  they  desire,  without,  however,
quitting  each  other,  inasmuch  as  they  have  not  the
desire  to  do  so.  This  it  is  that  would  make  those  un-
acquainted with  the  mystery  believe  that  places  exist
not,  as  you  say.  They  have  the  faculty,  which  you
possess  on  earth,  of  being  in  different  places,  answering
a person,  and  putting  questions  to  another  who  is  really
very  far  from  you.^’ — “ I was  also  told  that  if  a spirit,
in  heaven,  desires  a library  in  his  apartment,  and  that,
this  desire  gratified,  he  wishes  to  replace  this  library
by  something  else,  that  he  had  no  need  of  disturbing
the  former,  which  would  disappear  as  if  it  had  not
existed?”  “It  disappears  as  it  came,  certainly ; they
are  of  a nature  so  light,  so  incomprehensible,  that  they
exist,  or  can  exist,  only  for  us,  only  by  our  desire ;
hence  springs  celestial  felicity,  that  is,  possessing
whatever  we  desire.  Being  deprived  of  nothing,  we
can  experience  no  pain  ; being  embarrassed  with
nothing,  we  experience  no  inconvenience;  Places  really
exist,  but  objects  exist  only  according  to  the  desires,
or,  at  least,  we  obtain  possession  of  them  only  accord-
ing to  the  desires,  by  the  infinite  goodness  of  God.”  —
“ Since  your  death,  have  you  experienced  any  incon-
venience, fatigue,  or  contrarieties  ?”  “ I have  been

so  happy  since  then  that  I should  not  be  able  to  tell
you  whether  it  was  only  the  other  day  that  I quitted
the  earth  ; time  is  no  longer  aught  for  us  : the  spirit
suffers  only  when  imprisoned  in  matter;  but  in  heaven,
there  is  no  longer  a thought  that  can  grieve  you.” —
“ You  are  convinced  that  we  never  more  appear  on
earth,  to  be  again  materialized  ?”  “We  are  born,  and
die  but  once ; when  we  are  in  heaven,  it  is  for  eter-
nity.”— “ Do  we  well  recollect  our  earthly  existence?”
“ Yes,  and  our  anterior  one  also.” — “ What,  anterior
existence ! Have  we  then  already  existed  on  any


116


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


globe  before  appearing  on  earth  ?”  “ Before  appearing

on  eartli  man  lived  in  a spiritual  world  similar  to  the
one  in  which  he  lives  on  quitting  the  earth.  Each
awaits  his  turn  in  this  world  to  appear  on  earth,
an  appearance  necessary;  a life  of  trials,  none  can
escape  it.”

Adele  observes  to  me  that  her  brother  had  already
told  her  as  much,  that  she  gave  no  credit  to  it,  but  was
glad  to  hear  M.  Swedenborg  say  the  same  thing.  “ I
was  shown,”  said  she,  “ a little  girl  who  was  one  day  to
be  born,  and  who  is  still  in  this  spiritual  world  ; this  is
extraordinary.  As  it  seemed  to  me  a very  fine  child,  I
would  have  taken  it  in  my  arms  and  kissed  it;  I was
unable  to  do  so,  however,  and  asking  my  brother  the
cause,  he  told  me  that,  not  having  yet  appeared  on
earth,  no  earthly  spirit  could  feel  or  touch  her.  I have
taken  down  a description  of  this  child,  and  should  be
much  pleased  to  see  it  when  born.”

84.  Adele  expresses  a wish  to  see  Elisa,  whom  we
have  already  seen.  She  appears,  and  I say  to  her : —
‘‘  It  is  now  about  six  months  since  you  left  us  ; tell  us
all  about  what  you  have  been  doing  since  then,  and
what  your  present  occupations  are  ?”  “ I should  be

very  much  puzzled  to  tell  you ; I am  so  happy  that  it
seems  to  me  that  it  was  only  the  other  day  1 left  you.”
Adele  says  that,  as  before,  she  perceives  she  is  eating
a peach.  I make  the  observation  to  Adele  that  it
seemed  to  me  that,  in  heaven,  there  must  surely  be
some  change  in  pleasure.  She  replies : — “ On  earth,
where  we  vegetate  a few'  seconds,  we  hasten  to  enjoy
pleasures ; but  they,  know  you  not,  that  they  have  before
them  eternity  !”

I asked  Adele  what  impression  she  experienced  at
the  approach  of  a spirit  ? She  replied  : — “ I am  fearful,
timid,  and  bashful  whilst  it  is  speaking  to  me;  I find
myself  but  little  worthy  of  approaching  so  near  to
beings  so  pure,  so  beautiful,  so  sylph-like,  and  with  such
benignant  looks ; I compare  myself,  in  their  presence.


REVEALED  TIIROUGEl  MAGNETISM.  Il7

to  a lifeless  block,  and  am  at  times  glad  when  they  depart,
that  I may  no  longer  behold  so  coarse  a contrast;  their
visit  leaves  the  mind  in  a sweet  calm,  the  air  seems
more  pure ; in  short,  one  is  quite  happy  !”

85.  “ M.  Swedenborg,  you  told  me  that  we  had
already  lived  on  another  globe  before  8j)pearing  on
earth,  could  you  furnish  me  with  any  information
respecting  this  existence?”  ‘‘What  kind  of  informa-
tion do  you  desire  ?” — “ Could  you  tell  me  the  names
of  these  globes  ?”  “ They  are  names  unknown  upon

earth.” — “ Did  we  exist  there  in  the  human  form  ?”
“Yes.” — “What  did  we  do  on  these  globes?  did  we
marry  there  ? had  we  a family  ? a form  of  worship  ?
usages?”  “The  life  anterior,  which  we  have  all  passed
through,  was,  so  to  speak,  a life  of  nothingness,  of  child-
birth, of  happiness,  like  that  which  we  enjoy  on  our  exit
from  the  earth;  but  this  happiness  cannot  be  compre-
hended, because  it  is  not  accompanied  with  actions  and
sensations  to  prove  its  sweet  and  true  reality,  wherefore
God  has  deemed  fit  that  we  should  pass  through  three
successive  lives  ; the  first  life  on  the  globes  of  which  I
speak  to  you,  not  unlike  the  one  depicted  to  you  through
Adam,  a life  unknown,  a life  of  beatitude,  devoid  of
sensation  ; the  second  is  the  one  you  enjoy,  a life  of
action,  sensation,  affection,  a painful  life  placed  between
the  two,  to  demonstrate,  through  its  contrast,  the  sweet-
ness of  the  third,  and  to  delineate  the  wants,  joys,  and
troubles,  which  establish,  as  you  perceive,  this  neces-
sary contrast,  in  order  that  we  may  become  acquainted
with  good  and  evil,  for  without  evil  in  this  troublesome
life  we  should  not  be  able  to  appreciate  the  happy  state
reserved  for  us.” — “You  have  just  told  me,  that  the
future  life  is  similar  to  the  anterior  one  ?”  “ Yes,  by

the  spiritual  state  in  whicli  we  find  ourselves,  for  it  is
only  on  earth  that  we  are  material.  The  first  life  offers
the  same  joys  as  the  future  one;  but  I observed  to
you  that  we  could  appreciate  them  only  through  the
comparison  of  the  material  life,  which  it  was  necessary


118


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


to  have  lived,  in  order  to  be  conscious  of  this  happy-
state,  and  to  delineate  its  actions  and  affections.” —
“ On  these  globes  are  we  in  families  ?”  “ No,  we

are  pellinell,  all  friends ; it  is  only  on  earth  where
families,  societies,  pleasures  and  pains  are  delineated.”
— “ This  first  world,  may  it  be  in  the  material  sun
which  we  behold  ?”  “ No,  there  is  no  material  sun  ;

I reiterate  to  you  that  there  is  but  one  sun,  which  is  the
spiritual  sun.” — ‘‘  Be  so  indulgent  as  to  listen  to  me,
that  I may  make  you  understand  me  : — This  luminous
globe,  which  you  perceived  when  on  earth,  and  named,
like  us,  the  sun,  is  it  an  earth  like  ours  ?”  “ No  ; this

orb,  which  you  term  the  sun,  is  not  an  earth — not  a
globe  ; it  is  but  a very  feeble  ray  of  the  spiritual  sun,
which  penetrates  on  earth  through  space,  as  a candle
behind  a door  in  which  is  a small  crevice ; this  crevice
would  appear  to  you  as  fire,  letting  pass  this  luminous
ra}’,  which  would  give  light  to  the  places  on  which  it
fell.  This  fiction  should  represent  to  you  what  you  be-
lieve a sun,  an  earth,  or  a globe  to  be.” — “ So  I am  to
understand  that  this  luminous  orb,  which  we  term  the
sun,  is  but  a ray  of  the  grand  spiritual  sun  ?”  “Exactly
so  ; but  a ray  so  faint,  that  it  is  scarcely  comparable  to
a small  live  coal  in  a large  fire.” — “ And  those  other
globes,  all  which  appear  to  us  more  or  less  luminous,
whence  do  they  borrow  their  light  ?”  “ From  the  same
ray  ; there  are  not  two  of  them  for  your  terrestrial  sys-
tem, this  one  suffices,  and,  according  to  their  position,
they  reflect  to  you,  more  or  less,  the  spiritual  light
which  lightens  them  as  well  you.” — “ Are  these  globes
inhabited  ?”  “ Yes.” — “ Could  you  give  me  any  notion
of  them  ?”  “ No,  because  I do  not  occupy  myself  with

them  ; I have  enough  to  do  to  occupy  myself  with  the
spiritual  worlds,  without  thinking  of  those  I shall  never
see  again.” — “Are  the  worlds  that  you  inhabit  very  far
from  the  spiritual  sun  ?”  “ They  are  as  far  from  it  as

they  are  from  terrestrial  bodies,  and  were  they  to  ap-
proach nearer  to  it  they  would  be  consumed.”


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


119


86.  All  the  beings  that  inhabit  the  universe,  were

they  created  by  God  at  a single  throw  ?”  “ Yes,  they

were  created  at  his  vvord.’^ — “ All  the  beings  that  people
the  different  material  worlds,  do  they  bear  the  human
form  Yes,  as  to  those  that  are  of  the  same  species,
apart  the  types.” — “Are  they  all  subject  to  the  same
laws  of  creation  and  death  as  we  ?”  “ Yes.” — “ Have

they,  like  us,  places  whither  they  go  after  their  death  ?”
“Yes,  and  they  are  quite  as  happy;  for  God  has  in
view  only  the  happiness  of  us  all.”  To  be  still  further
assured  that  I have  made  no  mistake  in  the  details
given  me  by  M.  Swedenborg  on  the  sun,  I ask  him  for
fresh  ones,  which  have  the  same  result;  he  says  to  me:
“Why,  you  understand  nothing,  then,  you  ask  the  same
question  twice  over.  No,  your  sun  is  not  an  earth,  is
not  a globe,  but  simply  a ray  of  the  spiritual  sun.  No,
there  is  no  globe  of  fire  amongst  your  stars,  they  borrow
all  their  light  from  these  same  rays.”  Not  being  so  well
prepared  as  to  be  enabled  to  judge  of  the  value  of  this
revelation,  1 leave  it  to  those  who  have  the  capacity  of
so  doing.

87.  “ You  have  told  me  that  our  earthly  existence

was  necessary  to  delineate  our  actions  and  enable  us
to  comprehend  the  anterior  and  future  happiness  of
spiritual  existences ; but  children  that  die  before  they
are  able  to  appreciate  the  material  existence,  how  can
they  judge  of  it  ?”  “ All  children  that  die  before  the

age  of  three  years  are  protected  by  God,  who  dearly
loves  them;  they  are  little  angels  that  remain  in  this
state  of  innocence,  and  stand  in  no  need,  in  order  to  be
happy,  of  having  lived  longer  a material  life.”' — “ What
is  their  knowledge  ?”  “ They  are  not  so  elevated  as  the
angels,  nor  as  those  who  die  at  a more  advanced  age,
because  the  latter  acquire  knowledge  according  to  that
they  had  acquired  on  earth  ; this,  however,  is  no  bar  to
their  being  very  happy.  In  their  angelic  infantile  state,
they  are  aware  that  they  have  lived  on  earth  and  in  the
life  anterior;  to  this  are  confined  all  their  desires  of


120


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


knowledge,  they  prefer  the  innocence  surrounding  them
to  any  other  state.” — “ And  still-born  children,  what
become  of  them  ?”  “ It  is  with  them  as  with  the  fore-

going ones.” — “ Wherefore  this  difference  of  existence
between  the  old  man  and  the  child  ?”  “ It  is  by  a pro-

tection of  God  that  the  child  lived  not  a longer  time
upon  earth,  whereon  it  desired  not  to  appear ; but  as  it
is  a law  generally  applicable  to  all  spirits  that  they
should  come  upon  earth,  God  condemns  men  to  pass
thereon  a time  proportionate  to  the  desire  they  had  to
quit  their  first  existence,  in  which  they  found  them-
selves unhappy,  and  the  more  they  were  so,  the  more
fit  God  deems  it  to  let  them  sojourn  in  this  material
life,  in  order  that  they  may  drink  plentifully  of  all  its
sorrows,  and  find  the  future  life  sw'eet  and  agreeable.”
— “ In  that  case  it  is  a kind  of  punishment?”  “It  is  an
imposition,  and  not  a punishment,  it  is  a necessity.” —
“ Then,  according  to  what  you  say,  the  more  we  have
desired  to  come  upon  earth,  the  longer  we  remain
on  it?”  “Yes,  but  we  are  no  more  acquainted  with
its  painful  existence  than  are  you  in  your  material
state  with  the  joys  of  the  future  life.” — “ What  say
those  whom  we  thus  quit  to  appear  on  earth  ? Do
we  seem  to  them  dead,  as  'we  are  thought  when
we  quit  the  earth?”  “No;  every  one  knows  that
he  must  come  upon  earth,  and  awaits  his  turn.” —
“ You  have  said  in  your  Celestial  Arcana  that  man
had  two  memories,  which  he  took  wfith  him  into  the
future  life,  one  corporeal  and  the  other  spiritual,  do
you  still  think  the  same?”  “Yes;  but  these  twm
memories  form  but  one.” — “I  can  understand  what
the  material  memory  may  include ; but  I do  not  per-
ceive what  peculiarity  the  spiritual  memory  can  con-
tain ; can  you  explain  it  to  me?”  “Yes;  the  spiritual
memory,  or  that  of  the  soul,  is  the  recollection  of  its
life  anterior  to  the  material  life  ; the  soul,  though  in
the  material  body,  is  well  aware  that  it  has  lived  in
another  world,  and  that  it  must  quit  this  world  to  enter


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


121


into  a future  one ; but  it  can  no  more  communicate  to
its  body  its  inmost  thoughts  than  a tortoise  can  inform
its  shell  of  what  it  thinks.  As  the  tortoise,  it  drags
along,  with  difficulty,  this  necessary  and  cramping
prison,  which  prevents  it  from  rising  to  the  object  of  its
desires,  as  it  was  enabled  to  do  primitively,  for,  as  to  it,
to  desire  and  to  possess  was  the  same  thing.  In  its
prison,  it  is  very  different;  it  is  wholly  clogged,  makes
unheard-of  efforts  to  procure  for  itself,  through  the
view  of  its  material  body,  the  faculty  of  seeing  or  pos-
sessing imperfect  objects,  and,  again,  its  desires  are  at
each  instant  but  ill  understood  by  the  body,  whose
tortuous  ligaments  suffer  only  perverted  thoughts  to
reach  exteriorly.  It  is  so  contraried  at  such  restraint
that  this  reacts  on  the  harmony  of  its  desires,  which
are  ever  troubled  and  deceived,  thus  rendering  it  as  it
were  insane.  Could  it  quit  this  body  it  would  soon  do
so  ; but  the  divine  power  keeps  it  imprisoned  the  time
necessary  for  its  purification  ; it  can  but  form  wishes
and  undergo  its  sad  position.^^ — “ xVre  spirits  in  your
state  permitted  to  make  use  of  these  two  memories  ?”
“ Yes,  since  they  exist  eternally  ; but  that  of  the  material
life  is  so  opposed  to  being  exercised  that  we  never  force
it ; all  the  oddities  we  have  been  guilty  of  in  this  existence
are  so  repugnant  to  behold  that  the  spirit  is  ashamed
of  them,  and  unwilling  to  call  them  again  to  mind.” —
“ I have  been  already  told  that  a spirit  could  appear  in
several  places,  and  answer  several  persons  at  once,
could  you  explain  to  me  how  this  can  be  ?”  “ A spirit

can  be  but  in  one  place  and  answer  but  one  person  at
the  same  time ; its  material  body  can,  it  is  true,  be  in
another  place,  but  the  spirit  sees,  and  is  only  in  one
place  at  a time.  Wliat  would  incline  to  a contrary
belief  is  the  facility  with  which  it  finds  itself  there.
This  swiftness  is  inestimable  by  the  laws  of  time,  hence
we  fancy,  because  in  less  than  a second  it  can  be  swifter
than  our  thought,  in  several  cities  successively,  that  it
really  is  in  several  at  once : but  it  is  otherwise ; onlv,


122


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


being  as  I am,  disengaged  from  matter,  I have  a faculty
the  more,  that  of  responding,  by  thought,  to  those  who
question  me,  much  more  quickly  than  you  can  by
speech,  and  this  would  give  me  the  time  to  answer
another  person,  whilst  you  are  reproducing  my  words  ;
thus  this  would  be  taken  for  several  answers  at
once,  whereas  it  is  otherwise.” — “On  earth,  we  have
examples,  however,  of  such  undoublings “ It  is  the
spirit  that  makes  you  believe  this,  because  it  can  repre-
sent its  body  in  a place  where  it  really  is  not;  but
neither  is  in  more  than  one  place  at  a time.’^ — “ In
magnetism,  we  often  perceive  impressions  of  images  or
objects  that  have  stood  in  places  where  they  no  longer
are,  when  the  clairvoyant  perceives  them  still  there.^’
“ The  soul  always  leaves  behind  it  something  of  itself,
wherever  it  rests — a sort  of  image;  but  the  spirit  of
the  person  may  still  very  well  be  present,  when  its
body  is  no  longer  there.  The  clairvoyant  may  also
communicate,  by  the  aid  of  this  impression,  with  the
spirit  that  has  left  it,  and  fancy  that  it  is  really  present
in  this  place,  inasmuch  as  there  is  no  time  nor  space
for  it.  It  is  impossible  to  explain  this  to  you  other-
wise, because  a spirit  cannot  positively  be  in  more  than
one  place  at  a time.” — “ I have  still  a question  to  put
to  you  respecting  the  ray,  of  which  we  have  before
spoken,  and  which  lightens  us  as  a sun;  can  you  tell
me  why  our  astronomers  perceive  spots  on  its  image,
reflected  by  their  instruments  ?”  “ There  are  and  can

be  no  spots  in  this  ray ; no  doubt  it  is  the  interposition
of  certain  material  globes,  which  check  its  passage,
and  appear  to  them  like  spots  or  dark  points/^ — “ If,
as  you  have  told  me,  we  are  all  created  male  and
female,  or  in  pairs,  and  reunited  in  heaven  to  our  half,
how  is  it  with  respect  to  children  dead  in  embryo,  or  at
an  age  wherein  this  necessity  of  completing  themselves
is  not  yet  formed?”  “It  is  with  children,  as  with
grown-up  persons,  those  dead,  after  the  age  of  three
years,  grow  up  and  complete  themselves,  and  those


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


123


under  that  age  are  coupled  in  like  manner  to  beings
of  their  own  age ; their  felicity  is  not  less  great  than
ours.  The  Deity,  in  his  works,  has  displayed  the
greatest  impartiality ; we  are  all  equal  in  happiness,
children  and  men,  rich  and  poor;  in  heaven  is  perfect
equality  !’■’

REFLECTIONS  ON  WHAT  HAS  BEEN  COMMUNICATED
TO  ME  BY  M.  SWEDENBORG  AT  THE  FOREGOING
SITTINGS.

I HAD  never  read  any  of  the  productions  of  this  cele-
brated ecstatico-prophet,  excepting  his  ‘^Treatise  on
Heaven  and  Hell,^^  a work  which  assuredly,  for  a ma-
terialist, offers  not  very  mathematical  solutions.  It  has
been  seen  that  I made  a few  observations  to  Bruno  on
this  subject,  when  his  guide  told  him  something  relative
to  what  I had  superficially  read  in  this  work;  accord-
ingly, when  my  friend,  M.  Renard,  who  had  come  from
Rambouillet  expressly  to  see  my  ecstatic  Adele,  solicited
the  apparition  of  M.  Swedenborg,  I purposed,  if  I had
the  honour  to  converse  with  him,  submitting  to  him
whatever  I could  not  admit  in  the  little  I knew  of  his
writings ; reflection  proved  to  me,  however,  from  all  I
had  seen  and  heard  for  ten  years,  that  it  would  not  be
right  to  reject  with  silly  pride  facts  which,  quite  inex-
plicable as  they  are  to  matter,  are  not  the  less  true ; I
was  hunted,  harassed,  by  my  clairvoyants  to  surrend^
to  these  truths,  the  genuineness  of  which  I had  com-
bated from  the  very  first;  consequently,  I lent  an  ear.
My  hand  on  my  heart,  either  I was  a madman  or  what
I heard  was  possible;  the  unity  that  reigned  in  all  that
my  somnambulists  told  me  made  me  no  longer  hesitate
a moment,  this  kind  of  madness  appearing  to  me  as
rational  as  our  reason  ; I perceived  that  it  was  far  best
that  the  latter  should  be  subdued  by  such  truths  than
by  aught  that  could  impose  on  the  senses.  For  had  I
seen  with  my  own  eyes,  and  touched  with  my  own
hands,  an  apparition,  or  a thousand  other  similar  facts.


124


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


I
few


should  have  thought  it  mere  hallucination,  and  m .
lew  days,  have  said  All  madmen  see  like  things,  1
have  be^en  mad  for  a moment ; but  it  is  otherwise  witn
ieason,  when  satisfied  on  all  points  ; when  I -ad  o^xl
attain  every  day  these  revelations,  ivhich,  to  me,  are
much  more  palpable  proofs  than  even  appari  ions,
Remain  convinced  that  this  kind  of  madness  is  very
reasonable  and  consoling,  and  M.  Sivedenborg  is  for
me  the  god  of  ecstatics ; I now  read  his  works  w ith
pleasure,  because  I have  already  obtained  similar  secrets
without  being  acquainted  wdth  his  ; if  I am  puzzled  to
comprehend  others,  1 have  the  assistance  of  magnetism,
which  I advise  all  to  make  use  of,  as  now-a-days  we
must  have  persuasions  based  on  proofs  let  us  not
believe  all  that  is  told  us ; let  us  simply  believe  our  own

judgment!  ^ _ , • • ^

Should  any  one  succeed  in  explaining  the  spiritual

phenomena  of  somnambulism  otherwise  than  by  the
existence  of  spirits  and  their  influence  ; if  it  can  be
proved  to  me  how  thousands  of  clairvoyants,  in  every
corner  of  the  globe  which  we  inhabit,  and  in  every  reli-
gious condition  of  life,  can  so  perfectly  agree  on  the
main  point  of  the  question,  namely,  that  w’e  have  a soul
bearing  the  human  form,  for  wdiich  is  reserved  a happy
and  immortal  life  1 and  the  recollection  of  its  self,  the
philosophical  trinity  of  all  clairvoyants  ! — if,  I say,  their
error  is  proved  to  me,  I wdll  forthwith  burn  this  work,
and  put  myself  under  medical  treatment,  as  I must  be
disordered,  and  have  been,  though  involuntarily,  under
the  influence  of  hallucination  ; but,  as  I know  thht  it  is
not  given  to  man  to  annihilate  this  truth,  I have  con-
sequently a right  to  admit  that  this  soul,  in  the  human
form,  living  in  a future  life,  having  recollection  of  its
self,  cannot  exist  without  usages — cannot  be  unhappy
because  it  must  have  compensation  for  Avhat  it  has  suf-
fered on  earth  ; a just  God  cannot  act  otherwise  I

I have,  therefore,  collected  wdth  pleasure  all  we  have
just  read  of  the  grand  ecstatico-prophet.  We  cannot


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


125


doubt  the  purity  of  his  intentions  ; nothing  in  his
teachings  can  give  rise  to  the  suspicion  that  he  aims  at
deceiving  us  ; either  he  preaches  error  in  the  interest
of  an  infernal  spirit,  or  he  preaches  the  truth  for  the
love  of  God  ! If  he  preaches  for  evil,  he  goes  to  work
in  a very  sorry  way,  by  vaunting  only  the  bounty  of  the
Creator  and  the  respect  due  to  his  omnipotence.  If  he
preaches  for  the  love  of  God,  he  owes  it  to  truth  to
retract  a few  errors  he  may  have  committed  in  his
books  ; as  he  says  himself,  I was  a man  ! We  see  what
he  says  of  the  creation  of  man,  male  and  female ; it
cannot  be  otherwise.  If  two  sexes  exist,  it  must  be
with  a view  of  union,  and  to  unite  there  must  be  homo-
geneousness ; one  must  have  been  created  for  the  other,
as  its  complement,  as  the  part  most  in  harmony  with
its  self  and  its  affections.  As  there  is  diversity  in  the
creation,  by  the  types,  thoughts,  affections,  we  cannot
suppose  that  an  affection  has  been  created  in  order  not
to  exist,  it  can  exist  only  by  what  constitutes  its  life,
which  is  the  possession  of  what  it  desires,  and  it  cannot
desire  any  thing  which  wounds  its  harmony^,  since  on  .
this  harmony  depends  its  happiness.  It  is  necessary,
therefore,  that  the  object  of  its  affection  be  similar  to
itself,  or  sincere,  durable,  eternal  union  is  not  possible;
’twould  be  just  as  on  earth,  trouble  and  disorganisation !
We  have  already  seen  that  Bruno’s  guide  perfectly
agrees  with  M.  Swedenborg,  and  every  one  will  perceive
that  it  must  be  thus — it  is  only  with  our  own  image,
male  or  female,  that  we  can  find  concord  and  happiness  !

We  will  next  pass  on  to  the  revelation  on  insanity ;
he  tells  us  that  it  leaves  a trouble  in  the  spirit  after  its
separation  from  the  body.  We  have  had  a proof  of  this
in  the  apparition  of  J\I.  Lauriot,  who  came  very  ajjrojws
to  remove  all  doubts  in  this  respect.  We  have  others
in  the  rambling  of  the  thoughts  and  judgment  daily
presented  to  us  by  clairvoyants  in  their  confidences
and  their  appreciations.  Whoever  should  think  of
invariably  obtaining  from  spirits  precise  information


126


the  secrets  of  the  future


would  be  greatly  mistaken.  Should  we  from  this  suppose
that  we  have  had  to  do  with  evil  spirits  the  mistake
would  be  the  same  ; it  must  be  ever  borne  in  mind  that
they  can  answer  only  according  to  their  affection  only
on  such  matters  as  God  permits  them  to  speak  only
according  to  the  justness  of  their  judgment,  which
attains  not  at  once  to  the  plenitude  of  universal  know-
ledge, only  according  to  the  goodness  of  their  memory,
their  taste  in  cultivating  it,  and  a thousand  other  fetters
which  we  believe  we  should  refuse  them  as  spirits.  If
these  impediments  did  not  exist,  the  secrets  of  heaven
would  be  those  of  the  earth,  and  the  roles  of  the  two
existences  would  be  changed.

M.  Swedenborg  equally  says  that  pacts  and  talismans
exist;  in  this  he  agrees  with  M.  Mallet  and  Bruno’s
guide.  I should  be  tempted  to  leave  this  assertion  to
be  judged  to  whom  of  right  it  belongs.  It  is  the
sanctuary  of  cabal:  enters  not  he  W’ho  wdshes;  but  I
cannot  let  slip  this  opportunity  of  expressing  ray
thoughts  in  this  respect.  We  cannot  admit  that  there
. are  intermediate  beinsrs  between  the  Divinitv  and  the

O w

human  species,  who  compound  with  God  I>y  pacts  in
some  interested  view;  because  the  Deity,  appreciated
as  he  ought  to  be,  cannot  figure  in  any  affair  of  this
kind.  The  fatalists,  by  this  judgment,  would  not  assi-
milate God  to  a being  trafficking  in  or  executing  what
the  foolish  or  enlightened  judgment  of  a spirit  would
claim  from  his  goodness  or  justice,  by  striking  or  par-
doning a being  who  may  have  lieen  more  or  less  the
friend  or  the  protege  of  a spirit,  I do  not  believe  in
this  falling  off  of  the  divine  goodness,  and  the  fatalists
who  are  convinced  of  the  human  destiny  by  predictions,
have  a right  to  say  that  man  came  from  the  hands  of
his  Creator  as  a watch  from  those  of  the  watch-maker,
all  the  works  of  which  concur  in  attaining  a proposed
end — namely,  to  mark  the  quantities  of  time ; let  but  a
wheel  be  put  out  of  order  by  an  accident,  similar  to  the
pacts  in  the  life  of  man,  the  proposed  end  is  anhihi-


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


127


lated.  No  more  harmony,  no  more  ensemble^  no  more
possible  movement.  Then  he  says  : Pacts  and  talis-
mans would  annihilate  the  order  established  by  the
Creator;  they  cannot  exist.  Free  will  exists  not,  since
the  most  trilling  actions  of  our  existence  are  predicted
to  us  long  before  their  execution  ; spirits  cannot  inter-
vene in  tile  order  of  things  established  by  God.  They
have  a right  to  speak  thus  ; but  there  exists  another
manner  of  viewing  the  question.  God  is,  indeed,  the
Creator  who  can  create  nothing  imperfect ; consequently,
he  has  created  man  as  perfect  as  possible.  In  this  state
of  perfection  which  represents  the  purest  happiness,
man,  from  what  we  have  seen,  knew  not  how  to  taste
this  sweet  position.  God  beheld  himself  under  the
•necessity,  in  order  to  prove  to  him  how  harmonised
was  his  work,  and  how  free  he  had  created  him,  of
creatins:  for  him  a second  state,  a less  perfect  one — the
material  state,  a state  of  restraint!  of  grief!  pain  and
trial ! and  condemning  him  to  pass  in  this  state  a time
more  or  less  long,  in  order  that  man  might  be  confined
and  dependent  in  this  new  state,  from  ivhich,  were  it
permitted  him,  he  would  soon  free  himself.  God  has
confided  this  painful  infancy  to  the  care  of  spirits  pro-
vided with  the  rights  and  power  necessary  to  make  man
sensible  of  the  comparison  of  this  state  with  the  pre-
ceding one,  and  that  his  only  object  was  thereby  to
raise  him  from  this  sort  of  fall  and  prove  to  him  what
the  liberty  he  possessed  was,  compared  with  the  de-
pendence in  which  he  finds  himself  under  the  govern-
ment of  spirits  whom  He  has  appointed  to  this  guar-
dianship, to  transform,  restrain  our  desires  and  affections,
knowing  above  all  that  they  cannot  annihilate  the  crea-
ture of  his  choice,  and  intrusting  them  with  it  only  for
a limited  time,  which  is  but  a few  seconds  in  eternity.
God,  by  this  proposition,  would  be  by  no  means  ac-
cusable.  Quite  the  contrary,  he  has  created  us  all,
wfithout  the  least  distinction,  with  the  same  portion  of
happiness  and  intelligence,  and  does  what  he  thinks


128  THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE

necessary  to  penetrate  us  with  it.  God,  by  this  piopo-
sition,  suggested  to  me  an  anterior  life,  is  not  the
author  of  our  troubles,  since  he  leaves  the  government
of  him  to  man,  even  man  become  a spirit,  who,  by  the
appreciation  it  has  been  in  his  power  to  form  on  earth,
directs,  unsuspectedly  to  us,  all  our  actions  and  thoughts
towards  one  object — happiness.  By  this  same  proposi-
tion, the  cabal  would  be  authorised  in  its  persuasions,
its  mysteries,  pacts,  and  talismans,  as  it  would  ever  be
possible  for  the  superior  spirits  that  govern  us  to  miti-
gate at  their  pleasure  our  earthly  position,  elevate  rnore
or  less  our  intelligence,  according  to  the  dispositions
they  perceived  in  us  and  the  right  and  good  use  we
made  of  them.

In  such  way  do  I find  explicable  the  non-existence
of  free  will ; for  the  material  man  is  not  free,  there  can
be  no  doubt  of  it.  And  we  should  see  likewise  hereby
that  the  Christians  who  tell  us  that  evil  proceeds  from,
and  is  produced  only  by,  man,  do  not  deceive  us  ; but
it  should  be  the  spiritual  man  \vho  has  the  government
of  us,  and  not  the  material  man.  This  evil  becomes  a
good,  since  it  is  necessary  to  replace  man  in  the  state
of  happiness  from  which  he  has  fallen.  We  ought  to
complain  only  of  ourselves,  accuse  only  ourselves,  and
absolve  ourselves,  if  we  can.  Our  material  state,  buried
in  the  grossest  ignorance,  permits  us  not  to  define  evil :
what  is  evil  for  one  is  good  for  another.  Even  the  sun,
which  is  the  purest  source  of  terrestrial  life,  bears  the
germ  of  what  we  call  evil,  since  it  burns  what  it  nou-
rishes, destroys  what  it  protects ! Evil  is  only  the  false
position  in  which  we  place  good ; the  w^ant  of  knowing
how  to  appropriate  it  to  ourselves.  It  is  the  disorga-
nisation of  its  harmony,  the  disaggregation  of  its  parts.

We  must,  therefore,  think  that  cabal  and  sorcery  are
the  work  of  spirits,  and  that  if  there  is  nothing  very
precise  and  general  in  their  results,  it  is  that  the  power
of  such  society  invoked  finds  itself  dependent,  inferior,
or  friendly  to  the  society  under  wdiose  care  is  placed  the


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


129


individual  against  whom  enchantments  or  spells  remain
without  effect.  Without  this  proposition  we  should
every  day  see  disappearing  under  the  baneful  inffuence
of  a few  individuals  thousands  of  victims ! But  we  are
not  to  deduce  from  this  conclusion  that  the  power  of
doing  evil,  whether  through  magnetism  or  sorcer}’,  exists
not ; that  cabal  has  not  its  powers,  its  secrets,  its  laws,
and  its  rites.  I repeat  it,  the  essential  condition,  and
one  very  frequently  unknown  to  the  malicious  indi-
vidual, is  in  the  power  of  the  society  to  which  he
belongs  over  that  of  his  victim.  We  must  conclude
from  all  this  chaos  of  evil  that  God  is  not  the  author
of  it ; but  that,  on  the  contrary,  he  is  ever  our  saviour
when  we  invoke  him  with  all  our  heart.

There  is  nothing  incredible  in  what  I have  just  said,
since  all  religions,  in  general — sects,  societies,  govern-
ments even — place  themselves  under  the  tegis  of  those
spiritual  societies  and  the  chiefs  who  have  founded  their
material  societies ; so  strictly  true  and  rational  is  the
view  which  appears  irrational  to  man — termed  super-
stitious. In  order  to  develope  the  proofs  of  what  I
advance  it  would  be  necessary  to  write  a treatise  on
purpose  ; such  is  not  the  object  of  this  work,  which  per-
mits us  not  to  enlarge  on  every  secret,  as  so  doing  would
only  disturb  the  ensemble,  already  too  often  interrupted,
of  our  revelations.  We  will  pass  on  to  sittings  7^^
and  80.  The  notions  supplied  by  our  good  Swedenborg
on  the  assemblage  of  thoughts,  their  aggregation,  must
agree  with  the  phrenological  system,  with  the  adepts  of
that  of  corpuscules,  and  conffrm,  above  all,  that  ex-
clamation of  the  learned  English  chemist,  Davis,  after
an  ecstasy  occasioned  by  the  laughing  gas: — “The
whole  human  organism  is  but  an  assemblage  of  thought
We  see  by  the  notions  given  us  how  they  are  perceived
in  heaven  and  on  earth ; we  remain  convinced,  no
matter  how  they  are  so,  that  they  are  indestructible  and
survive  the  actions  they  have  brought  forth  ; we  obtain
this  proof  through  the  revelations  made  to  us  by  clair-


130


the  secrets  of  the  future


voyaiits  on  the  past.  This  single  fact  alone  suffices  to
estaljlish  the  existence  of  the  soul  after  its  separation
from  the  body,  and,  above  all,  the  unity  of  its  self ; for,
to  speak  logically,  of  what  use  would  be  the  survivor-
ship of  these  thoughts,  these  actions,  after  the  anni-
hilation of  the  being  who  had  l)een  their  author?  Why-
should  it  be  impossible  for  the  soul  to  continue  its
existence,  since  ail  that  concurs  in  surrounding  it
in  its  material  life  exists  for  eternity  ? We  see  every
day  our  clairvoyants  depicting  to  us  as  present  events,
individual  actions  that  took  place  years  ago,  and  the
knowledge  of  which  could  not  have  reached  them  in

O

any  other  state.  Were  this  still  the  effect  of  the  com-
munication of  thoughts,  it  would  not  the  less  prove
that  the  memory  is  perpetuall)^  enriched  by  whatever
man  has  seen,  done,  known,  or  thought,  that  nothing  is
lost  or  effaced  on  these  tablets  of  the  book  of  life !
What  I have  just  said  is  the  plainest  side  of  the  medal;
but  the  other  is  much  more  positive.  For  it  is  possible
for  a clairvoyant  (since  it  is  seen  every  day)  to  enter
into  communication  with  beings  that  have  disappeared
centuries  ago  from  our  globe,  and  find  again  in  their
memory  the  most  trivial  of  their  earthly  actions,  which
are  as  unknown  to  the  clairvoyant  as  to  the  magnetiser;
here,  there  is  no  longer  any  communication  of  thoughts  !
They  can  equally  foresee  the  action  which  will  be  exe-
cuted in  a century  or  two,  and  the  individual  who  will
perform  it,  &c.  In  actions  vffiich  seem  most  deeply
buried  in  oblivion,  we  perceive  that  to  the  clairvoyant
they  are  as  full  of  life  as  if  they  had  but  just  been
executed ; and  we  would  have  the  soul  alone  not  to
profit  by  this  immortal  life,  its  individuality,  its  self,
after  its  separation  from  the  body,  though  all  that  we
have  just  cited  is  immortal,  individualised  ! For  shame  !
apparitions  become  useless  before  such  phenomena ;
wisliing  to  think  otherwise  is  no  longer  to  think.

Idle  82nd  sitting  offers  us  the  solution  of  a question
which  all  men  have  put  to  themselves  without  being


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


131


able  to  solve  it ; it  is  this : — If  we  live  after  our
departure  from  this  globe,  whither  do  we  go  ? We  are
aware  of  all  the  systems  to  which  this  question  has
given  birth.  India,  the  cradle  of  almost  all  our  Euro-
pean religions  and  beliefs,  places  our  soul  in  that  which
most  flatters  the  sectarian  spirit — from  the  sun  whence
all  has  emanated  and  whither  all  returns,  to  the  tender
flower,  the  caressing  animal,  these  two  grand  systems  of
absorption  and  metempsychosis ! China,  not  less  en-
lightened than  India,  prefers  placing  us  under  the  care
of  its  mountains  and  smiling  valleys.  The  Christians,
true  mosaic  of  all  these  beliefs,  place  us  in  hell ! under
the  earth,  or  in  heaven,  that  azure  space  over  our
heads.  No  one  better  than  the  clairvoyant  can  serve  us
as  a guide  in  so  dark  a route  ; so  have\ve  seen  M.  Swe-
denborg, ever  in  accord  with  the  laws  of  the  creation,
give  spiritual  globes  to  material  globes,  as  a com-
plement of  that  famous  binary,  number  two,  wdiich
reigns  in  the  simplest  as  in  the  most  complicated  par-
ticle of  creation.  Everv  man  of  good  faith  who  shall
recognise  in  us  two  distinct  beings,  one  material  and
the  other  of  an  indefinable  substance,  must  admit,  in
order,  that  this  second  being  exists  independent  of
matter,  globes  in  affinity  wdtli  its  substance,  and  these
globes,  every  one  will  perceive,  cannot  be  compressed
between  the  atmospheres  of  ours,  but  float  in  atmo-
spheres appropriated  to  their  nature,  and  this  can  exist,
as  he  very  justly  observes,  only  far  beyond  the  material
worlds.

Sitting  83  offers  us  a solution  less  comprehensible,
as  to  the  manner  in  which  objects  are  perceiv'ed  in
heaven ; how  explain  what  surpasses  our  intuition  ?
Only,  we  see  that  his  description  corresponds  with
what  our  clairvoy^ants  do  daily,  when  they  find  a very’’
good  piece  of  sugar  in  a bit  of  Candle;  complete  in-
toxication in  a glass  of  w^ater,  an  impassable  barrier  in
a train  of  fluid,  &c.  We  can  catch  a glimpse  of  this
incredible  power  or  hullucination  only  in  two  ways.


132


the  secrets  of  the  future


Man  may,  after  the  image  of  the  Eternal,  create,  by
the  sole  act  of  his  will,  by  investing  his  desire  with
the  form  necessary  to  it ; or  man,  in  the  state  wherein  is
his  clairvoyant,  may,  without  suspecting  himself,  place
it  in  the  world  of  causes.  It  may  be  objected,  that  a
magnetiser  like  the  Honourable  AI.  Dupotet,who  lately
traced  a white  line  on  the  lloor  of  his  apartment,  de-
siring that  it  should  be  a road,  more  or  less  agreeable,
abutting  on  a precipice,  &c.,  had  no  other  intention
than  that  of  delineating  or  creating  this  perilous  route.
I will  answer  that  it  is  sufficient  that  M.  Dupotet  desired
to  place  his  clairvoyant  in  a road  which,  though  exist-
ing not  materially  in  our  eyes,  existed  with  far  superior
details  in  his  In’ain  ! with  an  ensemble  wherein  nothing
was  wanting.  Then,  will  it  be  thought  that  M.  Dupotet
created  this  image  ? No,  he  could  but  think  a thing
possible — a thing  existing  in  one  of  the  two  worlds  ; he
is  too  well-informed  to  think  the  contrarj-,  for  the  first
act  of  the  thought  is  of  existing  from  all  eternity  ; the
second,  investing  the  form  of  which  it  is  the  soul,  by
presenting  itself  thus  to  the  eyes  of  our  spirit ; and  the
third  act  awaits  being  materialised  by  the  action,  in
order  to  be  perceived  by  the  eyes  of  the  body,  aiid
what  more  has  M.  Dupotet  done  ? He  has  presented
to  his  clairvoyant  a thought  invested  with  its  spiritual
form  ! What  has  the  clairvoyant  done  ? He  has  seen
perfectly  a road,  a precipice,  which  existed  quite  as
well  for  him  as  the  Boulevards  for  us.  The  precipice
would  have  caused  the  death  of  the  body,  as  if  it  had
been  material ; oidjq  it  is  necessary,  in  order  to  com-
prehend these  truths,  never  to  separate  ourselves  from
the  idea  that  our  material  body  lives  only  for  matter,
and  that  our  soul  lives  only  for  the  spiritual.  They
are  two  worlds  quite  distinct,  in  w'hich,  without  in  the
least  suspecting  it,  we  live  daily;  for  how  think,  with-
out thoughts?  and  where  do  we  get  these  .thoughts  ?
In  their  world.  What  is  it  ? Of  their  nature.  Where
is  it  ? M ithin  and  without  us.  How  does  this  world


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


133


exist  ? By  God,  he  is  the  type- world.  What  is  a
type- world?  A world  of  form.  Then,  therefore,  a
thought,  not  materialised,  nevertheless  exists  for  the
clairvoyant,  who  is  ever  in  this  world  of  thoughts,  the
causes  of  all  that  exists,  sees  in  them  their  forms,  and
the  simple  word  forest  must  represent,  in  the  world  of
causes,  a forest,  v/ith  all  its  accidents.  Incomprehen-
sible as  this  proposition  may  be,  we  have  the  proof  that
it  is  true.  The  word  forest  is  the  material  envelope  of
the  thought  itself^  which  is  a forest.  Let  it  not,  there-
fore, be  supposed  that  a clairvoyant  who  struggles  at
your  feet  is  hallucinated  ■ he  is  in  the  centre  of  reason,
whilst  we  stand  around  the  circle.  The  mere  desire  of
M.  Dupotet  to  fictitiously  create  a road  was  sufficient  for
his  thought  to  place  his  clairvoyant  in  a state  fit  to
explore  the  world  of  causes  where  this  road  exists,
since  it  is  a thought,  and  a thought  is  a form  typical  of
the  thing  itself.  The  clairvoyant  finds  himself  on  this
road,  which  causes  him,  spiritually  and  materially,  the
greatest  fatigues,  which  might  lead  to  the  death  of  the
body  ! As,  without  quitting  your  abode  at  Paris,  fixing
his  eyes  on  your  knees,  he  sees  Bordeaux,  where  you
have  the  assurance  that  he  is,  from  all  that  he  de-
scribes to  you.  These  two  terrible  problems,  which
our  reason  cannot  admit,  will  ever  be  detrimental  to
its  comprehension  of  these  things ; for,  whoever  says
that  neither  time  nor  space  exists  for  the  spirit,  says
that  which  is  contrary  to  our  reason,  though,  at  the
same  time,  he  gives  utterance  to  the  greatest  spiritual
truth.

This  is  the  way  in  which  I am  able  to  explain  these
phenomena  ; for  God  alone  creates,  and  man  admires  !

We  will  pass  on  to  the  revelation  of  a life  anterior  to
the  material  life.  No  one,  I believe,  now-a-days,  admits
that  God  is  continually  creating  the  human  species,  al-
though a poet  has  said  that  the  Deity  could  not  think
without  creating  his  image.  We  generally  believe  that
all  created  things  existed  from  all  eternity,  and  we  ought


134  ' THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE

not  to  confound,  as  I have  said  in  the  foregoing  article,
the  enjoyment  of  the  sight  of  the  world  of  causes  with
the  creation  of  the  causes  themselves.  God  can  indeed,
in  a far  superior  manner  to  man,  enjoy  the  harmony  of
his  thoughts,  which,  with  him,  form  but  a perfect  unity,
and  wdhch  with  man  form  two,  because  man  proceeds
from  the  divine  thought,  and  is  not  God ; he  enjoys
like  God,  when  he  is  spiritualised,  the  view  of  the
thoughts  under  their  typical  forms,  but  he  does  not
create  these  thoughts ; thus  it  remains  proved  to  us,
that  the  thoughts  of  the  Eternal  being  from  all  eternity,
since  they  are  of  him,  cannot  be  annihilated  without
parcelling  out  the  divine  person ; man,  who  is  one  of
these  innumerable  thoughts,  exists  like  them  from  all
eternity,  he  changes  his  condition  like  them  all  when
they  become  materialised,  and  this  gives  rise  to  the
belief  in  a spontaneous  birth,  because  w^e  take  the  elfect
for  the  cause,  come  to  a stop  at  appearances,  and  not  at
the  reality.  Thus  the  soul  having  existed  before  dwell-
ing in  our  body,  has  existed  somewhere,  in  some  form
or  other,  and  lived  a life  of  activity,  for  there  is  no
possible  repose  in  nature;  all  conduces  to  movement,
without  the  latter  it  is  nothingness,  it  is  the  parcelling
out  of  the  great  Being;  as  I have  said,  it  is  impossible.
It  must,  therefore,  be  admitted  that  if  the  soul  has  ex-
isted from  all  time,  it  mav  have  lived  under  the  form  of
a germ ; and  again,  this  form  of  a germ  might  be  man
himself,  for  every  germ  has  its  form  within  it  and  all  its
attributes,  so  then,  a form  and  all  its  attributes,  with-
out movement,  without  vibration,  cannot  exist.  Even
though  we  should  assimilate  the  germ  man  to  the  germ
flower,  it  would  not  the  less  be  proved  that  these  two
germs  contain  within  them  all  that  they  must  one  day
develope  wnthout  them,  are  not  the  less  as  complicated
as  full  of  life,  bound  up  in  their  envelope  as  in  their
bloom ; then  we  are  constrained  to  admit  a prior  exist-
ence to  the  material  one,  and  are  equally  constrained  to
place  ourselves  somewhere.  This  somew’^here  for  us
should  be  a place ; this  place  should  be  appropriated  to


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


135


our  mode  of  being.  Thus,  we  must  have  lived  in  this
place,  and  in  order  to  live  it  is  necessary  to  act — we
have  acted ; in  order  to  live  it  is  necessary  to  feel — we
have  felt,  but  imperfectly,  as  has  been  just  proved  tons.
We  stood  in  need  of  a new  position,  in  order  to  render
an  account  to  ourselves  of  the  first  one ; all  beings  are
conscious  of  this  pre-existence,  and  I cannot  do  better
than  quote  on  this  head  what  I am  at  this  very  moment
reading  (six  months  after  the  revelation  was  made  to
me)  in  a work  of  M.  Loisson  de  Guinaumont,  entitled,
Somnologie  Magnetique,^’  74.  Never  was  de-

scription more  explicit  and  of  better  effect,  especially
from  the  affinitv  it  has  with  this  article.  It  is  M.  P.,
who  speaks  in  his  magnetic  sleep,  the  21st  May  : —
When  God,  the  essence  of  love,  intelligence,  and
goodness,  created  our  soul,  he  created  it  with  a view  to
final  happiness,  but  he  thought  proper  to  leave  to  our
soul  the  free-will  of  its  destiny ; beside  the  virtues  he
thought  proper  to  place  vices,  and  leave  it  the  liberty  of
choice.  If  we  follow  the  first  road  we  return  towards
God ; but  of  what  nature,  then,  are  the  rewards  that
await  us  ? Here  it  is  that  the  feebleness  of  man’s  ima-
gination and  the  poverty  of  his  language  find  an  insur-
mountable obstacle.  How  form  to  himself  an  idea  of
celestial  joys  ? of  what  nature  are  they  ? how  are  we
affected  by  them  ?

‘‘  No  images,  no  words,  can  give  the  least  idea  of
them.”

Let  us  suppose,  however,  that  under  the  sunny  sk}’-
of  Italy,  amidst  the  marble  city  of  Venice,  a child
belonging  to  the  highest  class  of  the  patricians,  is  just
born ; this  child  wdll  grow  up  surrounded  wdth  the  love
of  his  parents — in  one  word,  experiencing  all  the  enjoy-
ments that  fortune  can  bestow ; arrived  at  the  age  of
adolescence,  this  child  shall  be  suddenly,  and  without
transition,  snatched  from  the  arms  of  his  parents,  and
transported  by  the  power  of  a wdll,  which  nothing  can
oppose,  to  the  depths  of  Lapland.  There,  instead  of
his  brilliant  sky,  instead  of  all  the  enjoyments  of  luxury


13G  THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE

with  which  he  was  before  surrounded,  lie  will  no  longer
have  but  a snowy  sky,  a hut  and  garments  Aade  of
skins  ; at  the  same  time  that  he  has  experienced  a
change  in  his  condition,  he  shall  have  lost  even  the
very  recollection  of  what  he  previously  was.  Let  us
suppose  also  that  a confused  tradition  informs  him  that
there  exists  a country  wherein,  instead  of  this  misty
sky,  a bright  and  vivifying  sun  is  constantly  felt ; that
instead  of  those  miserable  huts  there  exist  marble
palaces,  adorned  with  all  the  magnificence  that  imagina-
tion can  conceive  ; that  instead  of  those  miserable  hides
that  cover  him,  silk,  velvet,  gold,  shine  in  all  parts  on
the  garments  of  the  inhabitants  of  this  country,  his  con-
fined imagination  will  not  be  able  to  conceive  it ; but
if,  by  a new  transition  as  rapid  as  the  first,  he
were  restored  to  his  first  condition,  with  the  difference
only  that  this  time  he  should ‘preserve  the  recollection
of  the  miserable  life  he  had  led  during  what  he  will
term  his  exile,  his  soul,  then,  would  be  inundated  with
delight;  the  joy  which  he  would  experience  on  once
more  finding  all  that  he  had  lost — above  all,  on  once
more  finding  his  parents  full  of  affection,  would  annihi-
late him,  if  I may  so  speak,  in  an  ocean  of  happiness.
Well!  whatever  be  the  happiness  he  would  experience,
it  is  no  more  to  be  compared  with  the  joy  we  shall  one
day  feel  on  finding  ourselves  again  in  the  presence  of
God,  than  could  the  light  shed  by  a candle  be  compared
with  that  of  the  sun.  Our  joy,  our  happiness,  will  be
augmented  by  the  happiness  that  God  experiences,  if  I
may  so  speak,  on  beholding  return  to  him  a soul  which
might  have  been  lost  ; for  the  goodness  of  God,  his
love  for  us,  is  incommensurable.”

I repeat  it,  what  can  we  find  more  explicit?  What  a
coincidence  between  this  revelation  and* those  we  have
read,  which  certainly  were  not  the  result  of  a combina-
tion between  two^  magnetisers,  who  never  saw  each
other,  between  clairvoyants  who  never  knew  each  other,
and  who  accord  so  well,  without  communication,  since


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.  137

I did  not  read  this  work  till  more  than  six  months  after
what  had  been  told  me  on  the  subject.

By  the  S5th  sitting,  we  perceive  that  God,  infinitely
good,  wholly  devoid  of  partiality,  invites  to  the  enjoy-
ment of  his  munificence  every  being  of  every  globe
without  distinction  of  sects ; all  that  tends  to  good
ascends  towards  him  to  enjoy  the  harmony  after  which
it  aspires  5 all  that  tends  to  evil  performs  the  opposite
evolution  by  removing  farther  from  the  divine  unity.

M.  Swedenborg  makes  us  an  unexpected  revelation
on  the  nature  of  the  globe,  which  we  take  for  such,  and
name  the  sun  ; it  will  be  far  from  satisfying  all  exigen-
cies and  all  beliefs,  still  I know  not  whether  it  be  possible
for  man  and  science  to  pronounce  on  this  matter  which
of  the  two,  science  or  spirit,  disengaged  from  material
fetters,  is  most  liable  to  err  ? I believe  that  it  is  science,
because  the  things  proved  mathematically  by  it  are
annulled  before  the  spiritual  laws,  and  what  appears
rational  is  not  always  true.  There  was  a difficulty
which  prevented  me  from  admitting  this  revelation,  viz.,
those  spots  which  the  solar  image  leaves  on  reflectors ;
we  have  seen  at  the  8Cth  sitting  what  answer  he
made  to  this  objection,  and  the  fresh  assurance  he  gave
that  he  spoke  the  truth.  Thus  all  religions  that  wor-
shipped and  still  worship  the  sun,  of  which  Christians
are  the  most  devoted  disciples,  had  the  intuition  of  a
rational  and  wise  worship,  and  what  appeared  to  us  very
ridiculous  yesterday  may  be  very  sensible  to-day.  In
such  way  marches  human  intelligence,  which,  if  it  were
acquainted  with  the  pure  truth  as  to  the  mysteries  of
creation,  would  flee  from  it,  shun  it  as  a thing  heteroge-
neous to  its  reason,  such  being  its  thirst  after  ignorance
and  absurdity  ! We  are  about  to  pass  on  to  a new
ecstatic,  who,  I believe,  will  not  be  supposed  to  have
any  system  of  his  own  on  psychology,  being  but  ten
years  of  age.  In  the  little  I am  about  to  present,
enough  will  be  found  to  satisfy  the  studious  spiritualists
who  have  read  me  so  far.


K


138


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


SEVENTH  ECSTATIC.

88.  Emile  Rey,  ten  years  of  age,  of  a waggish  and
very  curious  disposition,  was  a little  neighbour  of  mine,
and  frequently  came  to  spend  an  evening  at  my  house,
when  I used  to  make  him  recite  a few  pieces  in  verse.
When  I had  made  the  magic  glass  I have  already  spoken
of,  the  composition  of  which  was  given  me  by  M.  Swe-
denborg, I had  a mind  to  try  the  first  experiment  on
Emile,  though  I did  not  think  his  turbulent  nature
well  adapted  to  these  kinds  of  visions,  for  which  a little
submission  is  required.  He  perceived  nothing  in  it,
but,  as  1 have  just  said,  he  was  very  inattentive.  One
of  his  little  comrades,  of  a more  quiet  disposition,  per-
ceived in  it  different  things  which  he  desired  to  see,  and
this  gave  me  the  assurance  that  my  mirror  was  a good
one.  I had  a mind  to  try  again  on  Emile,  by  the  ex-
periment of  the  water  bottle,  which  Cagliostro  often
employed  to  convince  his  auditors  of  his  magic  power :
he  beheld  very  distinctly  divers  remote  places;  per-
ceiving, from  this,  that  he  had  propensities  for  the  mag-
netic sleep,  I magnetised  him,  and  in  a few  minutes  he
slept ; his  curious  disposition  led  him  to  travelling ; he
acquired,  in  a very  short  time,  this  speciality,  and  left
me  no  doubt  as  to  the  worth  of  his  clairvoyance.  It
was  this  child  of  whom  I spoke  farther  back,  whose
sleep  was  called  in  question  by  M.  Demarest,  because,
in  a distant  view  at  that  gentleman’s  house,  he  took  a
surtout  for  a paletot,  and,  in  a closed  box,  a small  two-
sous  piece  for  a hard.  I tried  to  put  this  child  in  com-
munication with  spirits  disengaged  from  matter;  I told
him  to  ask  to  see  his  angel.  “Here  he  is.^^ — “How
is  he  dressed  ?”  “ He  is  quite  naked."’— I repeated  a

prayer  for  the  dismissal  of  this  spirit  if  he  were  not  sent
by  God ; Emile  said,  “ I no  longer  see  anything,  he  is
gone.”  I summon  the  good  one.  “ Here  he  is ; ’tis


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


139


no  longer  the  same^  why  so  ? this  one  is  dressed ; he
has  a blue  robe,  a pink  girdle,  beautiful  white  wings,
fine  flaxen  hair ; he  is  much  handsomer  than  the
other  I desire  the  latter  to  be  gone,  as  the  former;
he  remains,  and  tells  Emile  that  he  is  sent  by  God.
“ By  what  sign  may  you  be  recognised,  in  case  the  evil
one  should  think  proper  to  take  your  place  ?'^  He
points  out  to  Emile  a small  white  spot  on  his  forehead.

Have  you  lived  on  earth?’’  “ Yes.’^ — ^MVhen  did
you  die  I don^t  know.’^ — What  do  you  do  in
heaven  'r’  “ I play  there ; we  have  plenty  of  amuse-

ment.’’— With  whom  do  you  play  ?”  “ With  children
of  my  own  age ; I ride  on  horseback.” — I ask  Emile  how
old  this  angel  appears  to  be.  He  replies : — About
my  age.” — ‘‘Are  you  fond,  too,  of  riding?”  ‘‘Very;
my  angel  is  on  a fine  dapple-grey  horse.” — “ What ! at
this  moment  ?”  “ Yes.” — “ What  is  there  in  heaven  ?”

“ A fine  garden,  fine  fruits,  fine  flowers.” — “ Can  we
eat  these  fruits  and  pluck  these  flowers  ?”  “No,  God
forbids  it.”  “ Does  your  angel  see  the  earth  ?”  “ No,

he  can  see  only  heaven.” — “ Does  he  see  the  men  of
the  earth  ?”  “ No,  he  can  see  but  me.” — “Can  he  see

me  also  ?”  “ He  could  do  so,  since  you  are  en  rappo7't

with  me.” — “ Would  your  angel  be  so  good  as  to
show  himself  to  you  w'hen  you  have  been  waked  up  ?”
“Y’es.” — 1 terminate  this  sitting.  Emile,  on  awaking,
perceives  his  angel  when  I lay  my  hand  on  his  heart,  as
he  had  recommended  me  to  do ; he  gives  me  the  same
details  as  to  his  dress  as  w^hen  sleeping.

89.  “ Here  is  my  angel.” — “ What  is  his  name  ?”
“ He  calls  himself  Angel.” — “ He  has  no  name,  then  ?’’
“ He  has  no  need  of  one.” — “ I should  wush  him  to
take  one  when  he  comes  to  see  you.”  “ He  tells  me
to  call  him  Ais.” — “ Do  you  still  see  him  on  horse-
back ?”  “ Yes.” — “ On  what  does  his  horse  stand  ?”

“ On  nothing ; he  has  wings  also,  and  he  flies.” — -
“ What  do  you  perceive  around  him  ?”  “ Nothing.” —

“ Could  Ais  conduct  you  to  heaven  to  see  that  fine  gar-


140


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


den  ?”  “ He  tells  me  that  I shall  go  after  my  death.”

— “ Why  not  immediately  ? — in  the  state  you  are,  you
might  go.”  “ He  won’t  let  me ; he  says  that  my  body
could  not  go,  only  my  soul.” — “ Well ! let  him  conduct
it,”  “ He  cannot,  because  he  fears  the  wicked  angel.”
— “ You  have,  then,  a good  and  a bad  angel  ?”  The
latter  is  not  an  angel,  for  we  have  but  one  we  call  angel,
the  other  is  a wicked  spirit.” — A is  told  you  that  he
had  dwelt  on  earth  ; where  did  he  live  ?”  “ In  France.”
— “ What  city  ?”  “ Paris.”— “ What  street  ?”— “ Rue

Neuve  des  Petits  Champs,  No.  9.” — “The  name  of  his
father  ?”  “ Gustave  Jules.” — “ What  is  he  ?”  “ A

tailor.” — “ At  v^hat  age  did  he  die  ?”  At  the  age  of
eleven  years.” — “How  long  ago?”  “He  does  not
know.” — “ When  he  died,  what  effect  did  that  create  in
him  ?”  “ None;  he  found  himself  forthwith  high,  very

high,  then  he  entered  paradise.” — “What  is  paradise  ?”
“ ’Tis  the  same  thing  as  heaven.” — “Is  there  a hell  ?”
“ Yes,  but  far,  very  far  from  heaven.” — “ What  do  we
do  in  this  hell?”  “We  burn  there.” — “Has  Ais  seen
hell?”  “ No  ; never.” — “ He  told  you  that  he  played
in  heaven  ; with  whom  ?”  “ With  playfellows  and  toys.”
— “Where  does  he  get  those  toys?”  “ He  desires
them,  and  God  gives  them  to  him  ; but  he  has  not
always  what  he  desires.” — “ WJien  he  has  no  longer  a
mind  for  those  toys,  what  does  he  do  with  them  ?” —
“ He  keeps  them,  because  he  can  neither  break  them
nor  destroy  them  in  any  way,  as  on  earth.” — “ Do
children  grow  in  heaven  ?”  “ Yes.” — “ Who  instructs

them  ?”  “ Comrades  more  advanced  than  they.” —

“ How  does  Ais  know’  that  it  is  God  who  gives  him
those  toys  ? does  he  see  him  give  them  to  him  ?”  “ No ;
he  has  never  seen  God,  who  cannot  be  seen  by  any  one  :
God  is  a soul  that  fills  the  w'hole  universe,  w^ho  is  every-
where, and  whom  none  can  see ; but  in  heaven  he  is
represented  by  a picture  whereon  is  seen  a man  bound
to  a cross.” — “ Is  there  any  night  in  heaven  ?”  “ Both
night  and  day.” — “ I have  heard  say  the  contrary.”


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


141


Those  who  wisli  to  sleep  see  nighty  and  those  who  do
not  wish  to  sleep  always  behold  day.^’ — How  are  we
dressed  in  heaven?^’  “Every  one  wears  robes.’^ —
“ What  are  those  robes  “ They  are  of  all  colours,
blue,  pink,  red,  green.” — “ How  are  the  men  recognised
there  ?”  “ They  are  easily  recognised  by  their  fringed

girdles.” — “Do  we  grow  old  in  heaven?”  “We  do;
but  we  never  die  again,  never,  never.” — “ Are  old  men
to  be  seen  there  as  on  earth  ?”  “ Yes.” — “ I have

heard  say  the  contrary.”  ^^Ais  will  tell  us  that  the
next  time;  he’ll  ask  his  companions,  who  know  more
about  it  than  he ; his  father  told  him  not  to  be  long.” —
“His  father,  then,  is  dead,  too?”  “Yes.” — I awake
Emile,  who,  as  before,  perceives  his  angel  near  him  an
instant.

90.  “ Did  you  not  know  your  guide  or  angel  on
earth?”  “Yes;  1 went  to  school  with  him.” — “Did
you  ask  to  see  him  ?”  “ No  ; I asked  to  see  my  angel,

and  he  came.” — You  see  him  with  wings;  have  all
the  angels  wings  ?”  “ No  ; kind  Providence  gives  them
to  those  only  who  have  been  religious,  and  as  Ais  was
particularly  so  on  earth,  he  has  wings.” — “ He  told  you,
last  time,  that  he  would  inquire  whether  we  grow  old
in  heaven,  can  he  answer  you  to-day  ?”  “ Yes  ; he

tells  me  that  in  heaven  we  preserve  the  countenance
we  had  on  earth,  and  do  not  change.” — “Let  us  rightly
understand  each  other ; you  know  that  on  earth  old
men  no  longer  have  any  teeth  and  their  skin  is  wrinkled
all  over,  are  they  the  same  in  heaven?”  “No;  every
one  there  has  teeth  and  no  wrinkles ; we  are  much
handsomer  there  than  on  earth.” — “ In  that  case  we
don’t  grow  old  ?”  “ No  ; but  children  alter  as  they

grow  up ; they  remain  not  as  they  were  when  they
died.”- Could  your  guide  show  you  your  little  bro-
thers who  are  dead  ?”  “Yes.” — “To  assure  myself  of
this  I will  summon  a person  of  my  acquaintance  who  is
dead,  and  whose  name  was  Isidore  Verdure.”  “ Here
he  is  !” — “Already  ?”  “ Yes.” — “ What  kind  of  a man


142


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


is  he  ?”  He  is  taller  than  you,  has  a black  beard,  and
is  dressed  in  a surtout  and  a hat.”> — “ Ask  him  if  he
knows  me?”  “He  answers  that  he  is  your  cousin.”
I cause  other  questions  to  be  put  to  him,  to  which  he
makes  no  answer.  He  is,  indeed,  the  person  I asked
for,  from  the  answer  and  details  given;  for  this  child
knows  not  how  to  frame  a description,  scarcely  can  he
appreciate  colours.  According  to  him  this  man  was
about  thirty-six  years  of  age,  his  real  age  was  forty.  I
ask  for  my  cousin’s  mother.  Here  she  is,”  said  he.
— “What  kind  of  a woman  is  she?”  “She  is  very
small,  has  grey  hair  and  black  eyes.”  Such,  indeed,
she  was.  I can  get  no  other  answer  from  her  but  to
this  question  : — “ How  many  children  had  you  on
earth  ?”  “Three,”  said  she.  I was  aware  that  she  had
lost  children  at  a very  tender  age,  but  I did  not  know
how  many;  I inquired  of  my  father,  who  is  her  brother,
he,  like  the  child,  told  me  she  had  had  three.

91.  Emile’s  guide  reproaches  him  for  not  having
conducted  him  to  a remote  place  whither  I had  sent
him,  and  of  which  Emile  gave  him  a fine  description ;
on  my  observation  that  he  could  not  have  seen  those
places  which  are  material,  he  replied  that  he  should
have  been  delighted  to  accompany  him.  I compre-
hended that  Emile’s  guide  thought,  because  he  saw
Emile  disengaged  from  his  body,  he  could  see  at  will
material  places,  that  he  would  have  had  the  same  power.
This  would  tend  to  prove  that  the  progression  of  in-
telligence in  heaven  is  not  so  extended  as  one  would
imagine,  and  that  this  child,  given  as  guide  to  another
child,  was  himself  only  a little  superior  to  him  in  point
of  wisdom.

Emile’s  mother  having*  heard  say  that  her  son  could
communicate  with  spirits,  expressed  a wish  that  he
should  ask  to  see  one  of  his  little  brothers ; I summoned
him  vfithout  putting  Emile  en  rapport  with  his  mother.
“ Here  he  is.” — “ Describe  him.”  “ He  is  taller  than
I,  fair,  and  blue-eyed ; he  has  a rosy  colour,  he  is  much


REVEALED  TIIROUGII  MAGNETISM.


143


handsomer  than  I,  and  wears  a blue  blouse  and  a sash
round  his  body.^^ — When  did  he  die  “ He  does
not  know.’’ — “What  did  he  die  of?”  “He  does  not
know.” — “ How  old  was  he  when  he  died?”  “Nine
years  old.”  Madame  Rey  says  that  this  description  is
quite  exact,  with  the  exception  of  the  age;  she  also
says,  and  it  is  what  astonishes  her  very  much,  that
Emile  never  knew  this  child ; to  be  more  assured  of
what  she  had  just  heard  and  what  she  ought  to  think  of
it,  she  desires  that  her  grandmother,  who  had  been  dead
upwards  of  twenty  years,  should  appear,  if  possible.
“ Here  she  is.” — “ Give  us  a description  of  her  ?”
“ She  is  very  old;  her  hair  is  quite  white,  her  eyes
black,  she  has  a pimple  on  her  cheek  and  a scar  near  her
left  eye,  a cap  that  ties  under  the  chin,  a handkerchief
en  ficJm  round  her  neck,  and  a black  gown ; she  is  not
very  good-looking.”  All  this  is  very  exact,  even  to  the
scar  which  was  occasioned  by  a fall  on  the  chimney-
corner ; as  far  as  regards  the  left  side,  Madame  Rey  is
obliged  to  make  inquiries  of  her  mother,  and  finds  it
perfectly  correct ; as  to  the  pimple,  they  think  they  can
recollect  it,  but  not  precisely.  She  had  a very  sallow
complexion,  and  this  accounts  for  Emile’s  description  of
her  looks ; she  was  in  mourning  for  her  husband  when
she  died.  In  short,  Madame  Rey  is  confounded  with
astonishment,  she  exclaims: — “Emile  never  knew  my
grandmother,  as  she  died  ten  years  before  he  was  born,
he  never  heard  me  speak  of  her  but  in  a vague  manner ;
but  how  could  he  know  what  I did  not  know  mvself,  I
who  was  obliged  to  make  inquiries  to  be  assured  of
what  he  says?  It  is  very  astonishing.  Ask  her  what
she  does  ?”  “ She  is  very  happy.” — “ Where  is  she  ?”

“ In  heaven.” — “ With  whom  >”  “ All  her  grand-

children.”  “ How  many  of  them  are  there  ?”  “ She

replies.  Seven.  I say,  mother,  what,  have  I seven
little  brothers  dead  ?”  “Yes,  my  child,  reckoning  with
them  your  little  sisters.”  Emile  had  never  been  more
explicit  or  more  clairvoyant.  Madame  Rey  smiled  with


144


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


delight,  at  thinking  of  all  she  had  just  heard,  and  the
sweet  hope  of  a life  of  felicitj^,  where  she  might  again
press  all  her  children  to  her  bosom.

I removed  from  this  house  and  had  no  further  oppor-
tunity of  magnetising  Emile,  who  would,  in  the  course
of  time,  have  been  an  excellent  clairvoyant;  I much
regretted  him.  These  slight  tokens  obtained  from  a
child  of  ten  years  of  age  are  by  no  means  out  of  place
in  this  work;  I could  leave  them  to  be  commented  on
by  the  reader,  who,  if  he  were  initiated  into  the  laws  of
spiriUudism,  could  do  so  quite  as  well  as  myself;  but
how  avoid  adding  reflections  to  reflections  on  subjects
which  stand  in  so  much  need  of  them  ? I was  surprised
at  the  apparition  of  the  child  that  Emile  had  known  on
earth,  and  whom  God  gave  to  the  latter  as  a guide ; I
could  not  comprehend  how  a child,  who  seemed  not  to
knoAv  much  more  than  the  other,  could  be  his  guide,
when  my  worthy  friend  Renard  sent  me  the  celestial
secrets  of  the  good  Swedenborg,  wherein  I read  what
follows  as  to  the  state  of  children  in  the  other  life : —

When  children  are  not  in  this  state,  but  in  an  interior
sphere — to  wit,  in  the  angelic  sphere,  they  can  in  no
wise  be  infected  by  spirits,  even  though  in  the  midst  of
them  ; sometimes,  also,  the  children  that  are  in  the
other  life  are  sent  by  the  Lord  to  the  children  of  the
earth,  although  the  child  on  earth  is  absolutely  ignorant
of  it.  The  former  experience  the  greatest  pleasure  at  this.

“ 2296.  It  has  been  also  shown  to  me  how  all  is  in-
sinuated into  them  by  pleasures  and  charms  suited  to
their  inclinations  ; in  fact,  it  has  been  given  me  to  see
children  clad  with  the  greatest  elegance  : they  had
around  their  breast  garlands  of  flowers  that  sparkled
with  ravishing  and  celestial  colours,  and,  moreover,  they
had  them  around  their  tender  arms  ; it  has  been  given
me,  also,  once  to  see  children,  wdth  virgins  charged  with
their  education,  in  a paradisiacal  garden,  ornamented
not  with  trees  but  bowers  like  laurels,  forming  porticoes,
with  alleys  to  lead  to  the  interior,'^  &c.,  &c.


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


145


I solemnly  protest  that  I had  never  read  this  work
of  the  great  ecstatico-prophet,  and  I should  think,
indeed,  that  my  little  clairvoyant  had  not  read  it  at
his  tender  age  any  more  than  L Let  us  compare
what  the  venerable  Swede  said  a century  ago  with
what  we  have  just  read  of  this  child  entering  into
life.  Had  I not  since  had  a knowledge  of  these  celes-
tial secrets  I am  conscious  that  1 should  not  know
how  to  reconcile  to  myself  what  was  presented  to  me
as  strange  by  this  young  guide  of  eleven  years  of  age ;
I have,  therefore,  done  right  to  preserve  this  little
journal,  which,  from  what  we  have  just  read,  proves  that
Swedenborg  saw  right,  and  the  latter  proves  that  my
clairvoyant  was  in  a good  state.  We  shall  no  longer
be  astonished  at  seeing  this  guide  on  a winged  courser,
especially  if  we  continue  the  perusal  of  all  that  Sweden-
borg says  on  the  subject.  Children,  like  grown-up
persons,  enjoy  the  possession  of  the  objects  of  their
affection,  and  their  spiritual  knowledge  is  very  confined,
as  we  have  seen  by  the  answers  of  Emile’s  guide.  How,
in  presence  of  such  revelations,  can  we  remain  shut  up
in  an  egotistical  materialism ; especially  when  we  have
it  in  our  power  to  procure  similar  ones  to  those  I ob-
tained, surrounded  with  so  much  prudence  and  mistrust  ?
Every  one  can  obtain  them  by  his  practice,  which  will
leave  him  nothing  to  wish  for,  and  largely  indemnify
him  for  his  pains.  Set  to  work,  you  that  shall  have
read  me  ; say  not  that  I was  a visionary ; neither  say
that  I was  a mirror  in  which  my  clairvoyants  looked.
You  will  perceive,  by  yourself,  that  such  logic  is  totally
false,  at  least  you  cannot  accuse  me  of  a want  of  sin-
cerity and  impartiality  : my  questions  are  just  as  1 put
them  ; the  answers  such  as  were  transmitted  to  me  ; all
that  I have  been  able  to  collect  I give  to  the  reader,
keeping  nothing  back  ; I wish  not  to  establish  a system
but  a truth,  which  consists  in  the  existence  of  the  soul
and  its  identity  after  its  separation  from  the  body.
Emile’s  little  guide  recognises  a hell;  we  can  compre-


146


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


hend  tliis  belief,  he  has  never  seen  it,  and  I should  have
deemed  myself  false  to  truth  had  I ))assed  over  in  silence
this  revelation,  which  ought  to  take  its  place  in  this
work  as  contrary  revelations  have  taken  theirs.  The
same  guide  also  says  that  we  cannot  see  God,  who  is  a
soul,  &c.,  but  that  he  is  represented  in  heaven  by  a
picture  whereon  is  seen  a man  bound  to  a cross.  Con*
suit  the  secret  2299  of  the  aforesaid  work  of  Sweden-
borg, as  to  children  that  have  died  in  Christianity,  and
the  coincidence  of  these  two  revelations  will  be  clearly
seen.  I should  never  conclude  did  I wish  to  fix  the
reflections  of  the  reader  on  all  that  has  been  unveiled
to  me ; the  right-minded  will  know  full  well  how  to
draw  from  it  consoling  consequences.

Let  us  pass  on  to  the  relations  of  an  eighth  ecstatic,
belonging  to  Catholicism  from  conviction.


EIGHTH  ECSTATIC.

Madame  Gouget,  forty-eight  years  of  age,  having
heard  speak  of  magnetism,  had  herself  magnetised  by
several  persons,  the  last  of  whom,  according  to  what
she  told  me  in  her  sleep,  had  completely  upset  her.  I
knew  this  woman  to  be  a very  good  kind  of  person,  and
was  grieved  one  day,  when  she  came  to  pa)’  me  a visit,
to  hear  her  give  utterance  to  a mass  of  incoherences,  as
proved  to  me  that  she  was  under  a very  baneful  in-
fluence, and  that  her  mind,  which  already  suffered  from
it,  would  sooner  or  later  sink  under  it.  She  had  left
off  being  magnetised ; but  she  felt  the  want,  in  order
to  recover  her  normal  condition,  of  finding  a magne-
tiser  who  could  rid  her  of  the  evil  influence  of  the  last
one ; she  begged  me  to  render  her  this  service.  Not
feeling  myself  equal  to  such  a task,  I gave  her  the
address  of  the  Baron  Dupotet,  to  whom  she  went.
He  magnetised  her,  examined  her  by  the  power  of  his


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


147


art  internally,  and  perceived  that  she  was  deranged.
He  did  not  refuse  her  his  services  (he  is  known  to  be
too  good  for  that),  but  this  poor  woman  durst  not
return  to  him.  She  was  advised  to  go  to  her  first  mag-
netiser,  but  this  was  needless,  inasmuch  as  the  man
was  unacquainted  with  magnetism.  Grieved  at  seeing
this  woman  combating  the  influence  of  her  baneful
inagnetiser,  who  employed  all  the  energy  of  his  will  to
bring  her  back  to  him,  in  order  to  profit  by  her  at  his
pleasure,  I undertook  to  snatch  her  from  this  secret
obsession.  I succeeded  in  doing  so  at  the  close  of  five
sittinofs,  and  restored  the  unfortunate  creature  to  a
state  of  thinking  and  acting  as  before  her  disorgani-
zation. I have  just  given  a few  details  which  are
necessary  to  persons  engaged  in  magnetism,  and  which
show  how  scrupulous  we  ought  to  be  in  the  choice  of  a
good  magnetiser.

The  principal  speciality  of  this  woman  v/as  for  views
at  distance;  she  beheld  the  exterior  of  bodies  with  re-
markable facility,  and  described  maladies  perfectly  well.
I could  cite  many  psychological  facts  which  would  not
be  out  of  place  in  this  work,  but  I will  content  myself
with  the  following  ones  : —

92.  Madame  Gouget  says  that  she  receives  salutary
advice  from  her  angel.  “ Who  is  your  angel  ?”  Saint
Paul.” — “There  are  two  Saints  Paul,  is  it  the  apostle
or  the  hermit  ?”  The  hermit.” — “ How  does  he
appear  to  you  ?”  “ He  is  a venerable  old  man,  with  a

grey  beard  and  a majestic  air.” — “ Ask  to  see  your  real
angel  ?”  “ Here  he  is.” — “ Is  it  still  the  same  r”  “ Yes.”
— “ Ask  for  another  ?”  “I  see  a group  of  them  on  my
right.” — Beg  one  of  them  to  approach  and  tell  you  his
name  ?”  “ Here  is  one.” — “ Describe  him  to  me.”  “He

is  old,  very  old.” — “What  do  you  call  old?  is  his  face
wrinkled  ?”  “ No,  but  he  quitted  the  earth  ages  ago.  ” —
“Angels  have  lived,  then,  on  earth?”  “Yes.” — “Pro-
ceedwithyour  description  of  him.  “ His  hair  is  red  and  he
has  a very  fine  countenance.” — “ What  is  his  dress  ?”


148


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


“He  wears  a sort  of  dress  like  a priest’s  chasuble,  but  it  is
not  one  however.  I cannot  describe  to  you  its  form —
it  is  not  unlike  a mantle.  He  has  on  a coloured  gauze
scarf  which  passes  over  one  shoulder  and  is  tied  on  the
opposite  side  under  the  arm ; his  legs  are  bare  and  he
has  a kind  of  slippers  fastened  to  coloured  buskins.” —
“ Desire  him  to  go  away  if  he  is  not  an  envoy  of  God  ?”

Oh  ! he  stays ; he  is  an  angel  of  light,  and  no  power
can  drive  him  away  from  me.” — ‘‘  What  is  his  name  ?”
“ He  has  no  name.” — Let  him  take  one  !”  “ He  tells

me  to  call  him  the  angel  of  Paradise.” — Since  he  has
been  dead  so  long  he  ought  to  be  well  acquainted  wdth
heaven,  can  he  give  you  a description  of  it  ?”  “ Yes,

he  is  going  to  show  it  me.” — After  her  ecstasy,  I ask
her  : “ What  does  he  do  in  heaven  ?”  “ He  is  happy.”

— “Are  there  gardens,  houses,  temples  in  heaven
“There  are  no  gardens  or  houses,  but  there  is  a temple
where  all  the  angels  are  assembled.” — “ A temple  is  a
house.^^  “ Yes  ; there  is  also  one  higher,  much,  very
much  higher,  but  into  which  all  enter  not  that  would.”
— Where  is  this  temple  placed  ?”  “ In  the  third

heaven.” — “There  are  several  heavens,  then  ?”  “ Yes ;

there  are  three.” — “ Where  are  these  heavens  r”  “ Very
high,  very  high.” — “ Is  there  a hell  wherein  we  are
burned  ?”  “ No;  there  is  only  a purgatory  wherein  we

suffer  much  at  being  deprived  of  the  sight  of  God,
momentarily,  and  this  is  very  painful.” — “ xVre  we
burned  there?”  “No  ; there  is  no  other  suffering  but
what  I have  just  told  you.” — Do  we  remain  there
eternally?”  “No;  God  is  so  good  that  he  withdraws
us  from  it.”  “ In  what  form  is  God  seen  in  heaven  ?”
“ In  the  form  of  a brilliant  sun,  impossible  to  describe;
its  rays  are  like  the  purest  gold,  and  so  dazzling  that
we  cannot  look  on  them ; they  give  out  such  beautiful
colours  as  we  have  no  conception  of  upon  earth.  God
is  a spirit  whom  we  can  see  only  under  this  brilliant
form.”  “ Are  these  things  told  you  or  have  you  seen
them  ?”  “ My  angel  tells  me,  and  I have  seen  them  in


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


149


heaven  whither  he  just  now  led  me.  Good  God,  how
beautiful  it  was  1 My  angel  says  that  here  is  enough
for  to-day.”

Madame  Gouget,  once  out  of  this  ecstasy,  experienced
much  difficulty,  for  want  of  expressions,  in  telling  me
what  she  had  seen  ; she  is  very  religious,  and  believes
in  her  watchful  state  the  dogmas  of  her  religion,  which
are  by  no  means  in  accordance  with  what  she  has  just
said  in  respect  to  hell,  purgatory,  the  three  heavens,
&c.  It  suffices  that  this  woman  renders  homage  to  the
Creator,  by  representing  him  not  as  a mischievous  and
vindictive  being,  for  my  receiving  her  testimony  with
pleasure.  Her  angel  says  that  there  are  no  gardens,
&c.,  in  heaven,  because  his  principal  affection  being
prayer,  he  beholds  but  a temple,  where  he  joins  in
chorus  with  the  beings  who,  like  him,  sing  the  praises
of  God.  From  all  that  we  have  read,  we  perceive  that
our  happiness  exists  in  our  principal  affection.  He  who
loves  solitude  would  not  wish  to  be  in  a noisy  city  ; he,
on  the  contrary,  who  is  fond  of  bustle,  diversion,  would
desire  a city.  Thus  it  is  that  each  thing  exists  for  the
affection,  and  what  is  contrary  to  it  exists  not  for  it ; in
this  sense  was  it  that  Madame  Gougjet  answered  me
hereafter.  I stuck  to  proving  that  in  the  three  pre-
liminary secrets  of  the  spiritual  world  she  agreed  with
my  other  ecstatics,  that  the  soul  exists  after  the  death  of
its  body  in  the  form  of  the  latter ; that  it  has  a recol-
lection of  its  self.

93.  Up  to  this  day  I had  never  desired  that  my  clair-
voyants should  see  any  of  the  deceased  members  of  my
own  family,  for  a reason  that  will  be  appreciated,  viz.,
that  they  might  have  depicted  to  me  an  image  engraven
in  my  memory ; I had  a mind  to  try  Madame  Gouget.
I asked  for  my  mother  by  her  Christian  name  and  also
by  her  maiden  name,  and  was  very  much  surprised
when  Madame  Gouget  told  me  she  saw  a very  old
woman.  After  a very  minute  description,  and  parti-
cularly as  to  a mark  that  she  told  me  she  perceived  on


150


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


the  left  cheek  of  this  woman,  I recognised  in  her  my
grandmother,  who  was  precisely  as  Madame  Gouget
described  her  to  me.  This  apparition,  uncalled  for,  and
which  I was  far  from  expecting,  was  owing  to  the  re-
semblance of  the  names  of  my  mother  and  grandmother;
I ought  not  to  have  asked  for  my  mother  by  her  maiden
name.  I had  already  fallen  into  a like  error  with  Adele,
when  several  members  of  the  same  family  presented
themselves  on  account  of  the  resemblance  in  the  names.
To  make  sure  whether  Madame  Gouget  really  beheld
my  grandmother,  I put  to  her  questions  the  answers  to
which  removed  all  my  doubts  in  this  respect.  IVIy
mother  appeared  at  the  same  time,  and  the  portrait  she
painted  of  her  was  quite  true.

Madame  Gouget  offered  me  also  a speciality  which
all.  somnambulists  possess  not  to  the  same  degree.  I
put  her  en  rapport  with  Adele,  and  desired  she  would
see  the  latter  at  the  period  she  was  suffering  a cruel
malady,  twenty  years  ago ; she  entered  into  details  on
this  subject  that  lasted  half-an-hour,  minutely  described
the  places,  furniture,  personages,  words  uttered  at  the
time,  even  to  the  flowers  and  legumes  in  the  garden,
which  certainly  no  longer  exist,  as  well  as  a multitude
of  objects  she  saw.  She  even  recounted  to  Adele  par-
ticulars as  to  the  very  habits  of  the  young  girl,  trifling
things,  that  no  human  being  would  give  himself  the
trouble  to  commit  to  writing  for  the  purpose  of  recol-
lecting them.  We  were  utterly  astonished  at  the  per-
spicuity of  these  details.  “I  see  you,’^  said  she,  “in  a
bed  with  blue  curtains,  in  a room  having  two  doors.  A
large  clothes-press  is  at  the  foot  of  your  bed.  There  is  a
large  fire-place,  in  which  are  stout  hand-irons.  There  is
a kind  of  little  white  pot  before  the  fire,  in  which  your
ptisan  is  being  warmed ; it  is  your  mother  whom  I see,
and  she  has  no  wish  that  any  one  but  herself  should
attend  upon  you  and  nurse  you.  I hear  her  giving  you
consolation ; she  also  forbids  you  to  scratch  your  face,
which  is  the  principal  seat  to  which  your  malady  has


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


151


flown ; your  eyes  are  covered  with  it,  you  are  blind  for
some  time.  What  kind  attentions  your  good  mother  pays
you  1 she  passes  whole  nights  with  you,  and  will  suffer
no  one  to  take  her  place.  I see  under  the  bed  a pair
of  light  wooden  shoes.  Over  the  mantelpiece  is  an
old-fashioned  glass,  the  gilding  is  all  off  the  frame.
There  is  also  a sort  of  little  bureau  near  the  door;  we
go  out  by  this  door  to  enter  another  room,  and  by  this
we  go  down  into  a garden.  Ah  ! I see  you  there
plucking  roses,  and  concealing  them  under  your  dress  ;
then  gathering  fruit,  whilst  you  look  behind  you  to  see
that  no  one  is  coming.  It  is  especially  when  you  are
going  to  gather  some  fine  chervil  that  I see  you  by  the
wall,  under  an  apricot  tree.  Ah  ! there  is  a rabbit-hut
at  the  end  of  the  wall,  pretty  well  stocked ; there  are
both  large  and  small  rabbits ; it  has  an  iron-grated
door,  a large  stone  keeps  it  shut.  I see  your  mother
rooting  out  some  fine  carrots  with  a wooden  picket ;
she  seems  pleased;  she  is  very  fond  of  fine  carrots.
There  are  flowers  and  salad  in  this  alley;  there  are
yellow  flowers.  Ah ! where  does  this  lead  to  ? It
is  a stable.  There  is  a beautiful  vine  alongside  the
waiy^  &c. — Adele  acknowledges  the  exactitude  of  all
these  details.  Whilst  Madame  Gouget  is  in  the  garden,
Adele  fancies  every  moment  that  she  is  about  to  tell
her  that  there  is  a well  there ; but  though  passing  close
by  it,  she  does  not  perceive  it,  and  this  gives  rise  to
Adele^s  observation : — “ If  she  sees  all  this  in  my
thought,  since  I think  and  wish  to  draw  her  attention
to  this  well,  why  does  she  not  see  it  ?”

This  communication  is  no  longer  a vision  of  things
and  objects  existing,  since  all  this  disappeared  many'
years  ago.  Madame  Gouget  hears  the  words,  sees  the
gestures  as  if  this  scene  were  full  of  life.  Even  though
we  admit  that  these  things  w'ere  imprinted  in  the  memory
of  Adele,  which  is  true  enough,  it  nevertheless  remains
to  be  explained  how  such  an  impression  should  be  full
of  activity  at  all  times.  Who  causes  her  to  act  ? and


152


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


on  what  site  does  she  stand  ? We  fancy  we  have  said
all  v/hen  we  say,  she  sees  in  the  thought ! I think,  on
the  contrary,  that  we  increase  the  difficulty  of  answer-
ing. If  it  be  possible  for  the  clairvoyant  to  perceive  in
the  memory  facts  such  as  I have  just  described,  and  the
history  of  magnetism  supplies  us  with  not  less  incredible
ones,  it  is,  therefore,  possible  for  him  to  find  again  there
all  that  man  has  been  able  to  see,  hear,  say,  or  do  during
his  whole  life.  Partial  facts  may  be  imprinted  on  this
memory  not  only  once  but  thousands  of  times;  and
this  impression  of  the  shortest  scene  of  our  life  offers
the  clairvoyant  space  enough  to  discover  in  it  a heaven,
an  earth,  places  in  which  he  promenades  at  his  ease.
What  then  is  the  space  that  a soul  can  fill  in  com-
parison of  that  which  these  images  must  hold  in  our
memory?  Answer,  princes  of  science  ! it  is  a spiritualist
who  asks  you  this  question,  and  condemns  you  to  the
ridicule  with  Mhich  you  cover  him  if  you  are  unable  to
resolve  it.  I repeat  to  you,  know  that  the  clairvoyant
sees  in  your  thought  what  you  no  longer  think,  but  what
you  have  thought ; what  you  no  longer  see,  but  what  you
have  seen ; what  you  no  longer  hear,  but  what  you  have
heard.  Thus  the  secret  oaths  that  you  have  made  to
the  young  girl  whom  you  have  deceived  ! dishonoured  !
abandoned  ! he  sees  them  and  will  tell  you  of  them  ;
he  sees  also  the  tears  that  you  have  caused  to  be  shed ;
he  hears  you  singing  the  romance  that  captivated  her
heart  and  you  forgot,  together  with  the  victim  whose
image  has  not  left  you ; you  will  possess  her  again  in
eternity  ! She  forms  part  of  you,  you  cannot  shake  her
off;  all  is  present  and  full  of  life  to  the  eyes  of  the
clairvoyant.  When  the  bodies  that  have  committed
these  actions  are  gnawed  by  the  worms,  he  sees  them
acting,  hears  them  speaking,  speaks  with  them,  pro-
menades in  places  that  are  no  more;  he  finds  of  these
pictures,  of  these  scenes  in  the  domain  of  your  memorv,
as  many  as  can  pass  in  the  universe ! Hear  you,  the
universe  ! you  are,  then,  a universe,  answer  ? No ; since


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


153


the  universe  is  a compound  of  a multitude  of  unities,
and  that,  on  the  contrary,  these  unities,  these  places,
these  scenes,  may  exist  in  you  thousands  of  times  ! You
are,  then,  a thousand  universes!  You  are  still  more!
Well ! if  you  cannot  answer  this  question,  study  this  soul,
the  master-piece  of  creation  ! you  will  surely  accord  it
a little  of  immortality,  since  the  most  infamous  actions
have  as  much  ! Say  that,  in  default  of  better,  you  will
study  the  revelations  that  M.  Swedenborg  has  made  to
me  on  the  subject  of  the  nature  of  thoughts,  which  are
living  beings,  engendering,  immortalising  themselves,
like  us.  Systems  of  corpuscules,  emanations,  images
foreknown,  demonstrated  under  a multitude  of  phases,
from  Pythagoras  to  Saint  Martin,  from  M.  Dela-
chambre,  in  his  treatise  on  the  System  of  the  Soul,  to
the  learned  propositions  of  Dr.  Gall,  by  his  protu-
berances, progressing,  overflowing,  and  troubling  the
other  localities.  This  assemblage  of  atoms  cannot  act
without  life  ! The  word  atom- bears  with  it  some  kind
of  form  ; the  word  life  bears  also  a self-.  Thus  what
forms  will  you  give  to  the  thoughts  of  Dr.  Gall  ? What
life  will  you  give  to  this  atom,  if  not  the  form  of  the
thing  itself?  If  not  a self  that  unites  with  another
self?  This  atom,  small  as  it  is,  moves  towards  a
certain  end,  that  issues  from  a will.  See  at  what  we
arrive,  for  there  is  nothing  dead  in  nature;  all,  there-
fore, is  alive,  with  a life  divided  ad  infinitum.  Pro-
ceeding from  forms  to  infinity,  we  perceive  that  human
thoughts  and  actions  are  not  lost  to]  the  clairvoyant
— that  they  are,  indeed,  acting;  in  one  word,  living
images  ; sounds,  song,  vibrate  in  his  ear  ! Only  think,
a sound  ! which  appears  to  us  to  have  materially  en-
tered into  vibration  twenty  years  ago,  and  more,  falls
with  the  same  force  and  harmony  on  the  ear  of  the
clairvoyant ; it  will  resound  thus  to  all  eternity,  and
this  impression  of  actions  of  images  will  never  be
effaced!  it  will  ever  act;  for  there  is  not  a particle  of
the  material  and  spiritual  creation  at  rest:  we  cannot,

L


154


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


therefore,  deprive  these  actions,  these  sounds,  these
thoughts,  these  images,  in  short,  with  a life  not  gene-
ralised, confounded  in  the  torrent  of  universal  exist-
ence, but  individualised,  having  a form  proper  to  them,
since  the  clairvoyant  finds  them  again  at  all  times;
they  are,  therefore,  spiritually  speaking,  as  we  have
been  told  by  Binet’s  guide,  by  Messrs.  Mallet  and
Swedenborg,  indestructible,  unalterable,  eternal ! How-
ever strange  this  revelation  may  appear,  we  have  only
to  reflect  in  order  to  admit  it ; it  is  not  the  same,  if  we
wish  to  explain  it.  I shall  endeavour  to  do  so  in  a
work  forming  a sequel  to  this.

To  resume  Adele,  who  has  this  speciality  only
through  revelation,  in  a consultation  asked  for,  in  her
turn.  Toy  Madame  Gouget,  took  her  revenge,  telling  the
latter  many  hidden  particularities  of  her  life,  which  the
good  woman  had  some  difficulty  in  calling  to  mind.
Never  had  I obtained  a more  curious  sitting ; self-love
was  mixed  up  with  it,  without  turning  to  jealousy,  and
I acquired  the  certainty,  and,  as  I have  said,  inten-
tionally, that  if  the  last  thoughts  and  actions  are  re-
served with  such  care  in  the  domain  of  the  memory,
and  survive  the  annihilation  of  the  body,  wherefore
should  the  soul  which  has  elaborated  these  thoughts
be  alone  destroyed,  or  not  have  the  recollection  of  its
self,  its  individuality,  since  all  that  constituted  this
individuality  is  by  no  means  dispersed  in  the  domain
of  the  universe  ! but,  on  the  contrary,  seems  to  form
in  it  a bundle  more  compact,  and  much  better  to  be
appreciated,  than  in  the  material  life.

I must  make  a last  observation  on  the  manner  in
which,  as  we  have  seen  at  the  commencement  of
Madame  Gouget^s  sitting,  I wished  to  dismiss  the
Saint  Paul,  in  whom  I had  but  little  confidence.  I
desired  to  appreciate,  for  the  last  time,  the  power  of
the  will  of  the  magnetiser  over  the  magnetised,  and
perceive  how  far  the  influence  of  the  former  extended.
I acquired  the  certitude,  as  every  one  might,  in  this


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


155


kind  of  researches,  that  this  pretended  power  of  the
will  lost  all  its  empire  in  spiritual  experiments,  for  I
have  maintained  many  a time,  to  my  clairvoyants
persuasions,  which  they  could  not  annihilate  in  me ; I
have  horribly  contraried,  fatigued  them  by  captious
reasonings,  and  never  could  obtain  their  assent  to  ideas
not  their  own.  None  would  admit  the  non-existence
of  free  will ; not  one  has  represented  God  otherwise
than  as  a brilliant  sun ; not  one  would  admit  the  hell
of  the  Catholics;  not  one  'would  have  it  that  Christ*
was  the  only  true  God  of  heaven — Christian  spirits  and
others  have  all  agreed  on  this  head  ; not  one  would
have  the  heaven  of  Christians,  or  the  complete  bea-
titude of  a soul  devoid  of  form,  that  breath,  incom-
prehensible, without  some  form  or  other ; all,  on  the
contrary,  have  recognised  in  the  soul  the  human  form ;
and  in  heaven,  a place  wherein  there  are  usages,  as  on
earth,  whither  all  men  are  called  to  enjoy  a happiness
they  deserve,  from  the  evils  they  have  suffered  on  this
globe.  They  have  all  been  agreed  to  maintain  their
thesis  of  free  will,  by  recognising  places  of  purification,
wherein  we  suffer  from  privation  of  the  sight  of  God,
for  a period  more  or  less  long ; but  none  has  recog-


* It  was  said  to  me:  “Confound  not  the  Father  with  the  Son,  as
Christians  do.  The  sole  Creator  of  the  universe  never  came  down  on
earth  to  be  crucified  by  men.  Christ  was  the  Son  of  God,  as  we  all  are.
He  accomplished  a special  mission,  and  returned  to  the  bosom  of  the
Eternal,  as  we  all  shall  one  day  return  to  it !’’  When  I have  made  the
observation  that  Christians  affirm  that  there  is  no  salvation  saving  in
the  divinity  of  Christ,  I have  been  answered : “ Heaven  is  open,  without
distinction  of  sects,  to  all  who  believe  in  the  existence  of  God,  serve  him
with  love  and  respect ; heaven  is  but  an  assemblage  of  an  infinity  of
societies,  each  of  which  represents  creeds  and  usages  peculiar  to  itself,
each  society  being  able  to  admit  into  its  bosom  only  beings  of  similar
persuasions,  and  thus  it  is  that  heaven,  or  the  bosom  of  these  societies,
is  shut  against  contrary  creeds,  and  all  have  a right  to  say,  saving  Moses,
Christ,  Mahomet,  Luther,  Calvin,  &e.,  there  is  no  salvation  ; that  is
to  say,  you  will  not  be  admitted  into  our  heaven,  our  society,  the  society
founded  by  sucli  or  such  man,  because  your  persuasions  would  not
accord  with  it ; you  would  be  miserable  there  yourself,  and  would  trouble
others.

L 2


156


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


nised  an  avenging  God,  wrathful  and  vindictive  ; all
have  made  God  worthy  of  being  loved,  adored,  re-
spected, admired.  And  it  is  because  I ought  not,  in
order  to  cry  up  the  goodness  of  God,  who  cannot  be
extolled  by  the  mouth  of  a weak  mortal,  and  needs
no  other  advocate  but  hiis  beneficent  acts,  it  is,  I say,
in  order  to  combat  the  errors  that  have  been  propa-
gated by  all  sects  down  to  this  very  day,  with  a view  to
the  moralising  of  men,  and  whose  maxims  are  offensive
to  God,  that  I have  freely  committed  to  writing  all  that
has  been  told  me  by  my  clairvoyants ; and,  in  order,  at
the  same  time,  to  render  homage  to  the  divine  justice,
which  we  can  no  longer  doubt,  now  that  we  are  ac-
quainted with  the  object  of  our  material  existence.  By
the  revelations  that  have  been  made  to  us  on  this  head,
God  has  no  hand  in  our  afilictions,  but  is  all  in  all  in
our  happiness.


APPENDIX.

M.  Renard,  the  gentleman  already  mentioned,  being
aware  that  I intended  publishing  by  subscription  the
present  work,  desired,  on  a journey  he  took  to  Paris,  to
put  further  questions  to  Adele,  in  order  to  judge  once
more  of  the  value  of  her  perceptions,  and  at  the  same
time  thank  this  excellent  clairvoyante  for  a prevision
she  had  had  in  his  respect,  a prevision  which  had  been
realised,  and  the  details  of  which  are  as  follow : —

At  one  of  the  last  sittings  we  had  obtained  from  the
venerable  Swedenborg,  M.  Renard  had  requested  me  to
submit  to  him  a few  questions,  which  were  answered
agreeably  to  his  wishes  ; but  to  one  that  was  addressed
to  him,  as  to  whether  M.  Swedenborg  had  a spouse  in
heaven,  and  could  address  her  to  us,  we  were  answered,
“ She  is  about  to  present  herself  from  me.”  What  was
my  surprise  when,  on  asking  Adele  to  give  me  some


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


157


description  of  her,  to  hear  her  say,  Why  it  is  the  future
partner  of  M.  Renard  who  is  now  speaking  to  me/^ —
‘‘  How  is  that  ?”  resumed  I ; “it  was  M.  Swedenborg’s
partner  that  was  asked  for.”  ‘‘  In  faith,  I have  made  a
mistake  unwittingly,”  replied  she.  “ I addressed  to  M.
Swedenborg  questions  on  the  part  of  M.  Renard ; I
told  him  that  he  would  be  glad  to  know  his  partner.
M.  Swedenborg,  like  me,  understood  it  to  be  M.  Re-
nard’s  spouse  that  was  asked  for,  and  hence  the  mis-
take.” “ In  short,”  said  I,  “ give  me  a description  of
this  person.”  “ She  is  a pretty  brunette,  with  a sweet
air,  features  perfectly  regular,  fine  black  eyes,  fresh-
coloured  cheeks,  a small  mouth,  rosy  lips,  and  a round
dimpled  chin  ; she  is  not  very  tall,  wears  a white  robe,
and  has  a crown  of  white  roses  on  her  head.  Mind
you,  she  appears  to  me  not  as  she  was  on  earth,  but  as
she  is  in  the  spiritual  world.” — “ Ask  her  what  her  name
was?”  “Juliette  Pichot.” — “Where  was  she  born?”
“ At  Aurillac,  in  Auvergne.” — “ Where  did  she  die  ?”
“At  the  abode  of  an  old  aunt  she  had  at  Frenay.” —
“How  old  was  she?”  “Forty-seven.” — “How  long
has  she  been  dead  ?”  “ She  does  not  know.” — “ Did

M.  Renard  know  her  on  earth  ?”  “ He  knew  her  at  an

inn  where  he  came  sometimes  to  take  his  meals,  in  a
small  town  near  Mans,  and  where  she  was  a servant.”
— “What  was  the  sign  of  the  inn?”  “The  Golden
Sun.” — ■“  How  old  M'as  she  at  that  period?”  “About
sixteen.” — “ Did  M.  Renard  pay  his  addresses  to  her  ?”
“ No,  he  never  breathed  a word  of  love  to  her.” — “ How
will  he  be  able  to  remember  her ; he  left  that  part  of
the  country  a very  long  time  ago.”  “ She  will  appear
to  him,  and  he  will  remember  her.” — “ She  is,  then,  the
companion  destined  him  by  God?”  “Yes,  she  tells
me  that  he  will  soon*  join  her.” — “Has  she  anything


* \Vhenever  a date  is  demanded  of  spirits  they  all  reply — “ It  will  be
soon.”  This  word  admits  not  of  the  same  acceptation  spiritually  as  we
give  it  materially.  There,  where  hours  and  time  are  not  reckoned,  the
moments  appear  short ; an  hour  is  an  age  for  a happy  expectation  ; a
second  for  a contrary  one.


158


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


particular  to  make  known  to  liim  No,  she  loill  ap-

pear to  him  in  a dreamy  and  avjaken  him  to  a remembrance
of  her.”

I forwarded  to  my  friend  all  these  details,  which,  as
may  be  supposed,  caused  him  much  surprise ; he  had
not  the  least  recollection  of  this  young  girl;  he  had,  in-
deed, lived  at  Mans,  and  travelled  in  all  the  small  towns
dependent  on  it — had  necessarily  taken  his  meals  at
several  inns;  but  time  (a  period  of  thirty  years)  had
effaced,  in  respect  to  this,  all  recollections  from  his
memory.  I endeavoured,  at  several  succeeding  sittings,
to  obtain  more  precise  dates  and  places  : it  was  ever
the  same  answer: — “Why  would  you  have  me  trouble
myself  about  this  earth  where  I was  so  unhappy  ? — with
this  condition  in  which  I suffered  so  much,  and  with
the  numerous  places  at  which  I was  in  service  ? It
will  not  be  long  before  we  meet  again,  and  then  we
shall  give  up  all  thoughts  of  the  earth  \”  I abandoned
all  research  in  this  respect,  and  thought  no  more  of  the
matter,  when  one  day  I received  from  my  friend  a letter
couched  in  these  terms  : — “ I cannot,  my  friend,  resist
the  desire  of  giving  you  the  analysis  of  an  ecstatic
dream,  in  which  I beheld  Juliette:  I found  myself  at  a
large  inn,  where  I called  for  some  refreshment,  and  was
served.  Opposite  to  me,  at  the  same  table,  was  a man
with  whom  I made  acquaintance.  When  he  was  about
to  depart,  I accompanied  him  to  the  street-door;  he
was  no  sooner  gone  than  a serv'ant  girl  whom  1 had
observed  going  to  and  fro  came  up  to  me,  saying : — ‘ I,
too,  am  going  away.’  I spoke  to  this  girl  and  advised
her  to  stay;  I took  her  civilly  round  the  waist  in  order
to  detain  her,  and  she  turned  round  and  fixed  her  eyes
on  me.  Her  countenance  was  that  of  a pale  brunette,
somewdiat  sickly  and  expressive  of  suffering,  but  having
a very  tender  look.  I was  greatly  moved,  and  my  heart
bade  me  give  her  a parting  kiss,  but  so  many  persons
were  passing  by  that  I durst  not;  at  the  same  time  she
disengaged  herself*  from  my  grasp,  leaned  towards  me


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


159


and  said  : — ^ M.  Cahagnet,  your  friend,  has  told  you  that
an  angel  awaited  you  in  the  spirituat  world!  Then,
taking  wing,  I lost  sight  of  her.  These  last  words  struck
me,  and  I forthwith  awoke.  Dreams  are  real  excursions
in  the  spiritual  world ; thus,  what  your  clairvoyant  pre-
dicted has  come  to  pass.  Do  not  for  a moment  suppose
that  it  was  the  thought  of  this  revelation  that  influenced
me;  I had  long  forgotten  all  about  it,  since  this  girl,
whom  I take  to  be  Juliette,  was  obliged  to  remind  me,
and  that  in  a very  laconic  way,  of  what  your  clairvoyante
had  said.  The  effect  of  the  dream  over,  I immediately
awoke.  Modern  savans  have  never  been  able  to  ex-
plain the  cause  of  dreams,”  &c.,  &c.  Here  we  have
some  of  those  proofs  that  square  not  with  our  material
exigencies,  but  overshoot  them.  What  was  Juliette’s
object  in  this  circumstance?  No  doubt  to  rejiresent  to
M.  Renard  the  inn  where  she  had  known  him.  What
did  M.  Renard  do  ? He  could  not  recognise  a place,
and  a servant  girl  who  had  served  him  occasionally  with
refreshments;  the  personal  appearance  of  M.  Renard
might  have  made  an  impression  on  her,  when  probably
he  had  paid  no  attention  to  her.  Juliette,  in  this  dream,
replaces  him  in  the  same  conditions  in  which  he  was
thirty  years  ago ; perceiving  that  he  did  not  seize  upon
these  images,  and  that  his  reminiscences  remained
dumb,  she  says  to  him  : — “ M.  Cahagnet,  your  friend,
has  told  you  that  an  angel  awaited  you  in  the  spiritual
world,’’^  and  she  disappears  after  rousing  him  ! This
apparition,  which  had  been  predicted  by  Adele,  but
which  might  be  resolved  into  a simple  vision  and
nought  else,  made  such  an  impression  on  my  friend,
that  on  his  journey  to  Paris  he  testified  to  us  all  his  joy,
and  declared  that  he  was  more  convinced  by  this  dream
than  by  anything  he  could  have  seen  in  any  other  cir-
cumstance.

94.  M.  Renard  asks  for  Juliette;  she  says  that  she
suggested  to  him  this  dream  for  the  purpose  of  being
recognised ; that  she  is  often  near  him,  speaking  to  his


ino  THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE

spirit,  but  that  he  cannot  materially  perceive  her  pre-
sence ; she  assures  him  that  she  will  do  her  best  to  let
him  see  her  again.

We  ask  for  M.  Swedenborg?  “Here  he  is/’ — “ M.
Renard  desires  to  put  a few  questions  to  him.”  “ Let
him  speak.”  “Are  spirits  sensible  of  sleep  ?”  “ Sleep

who  will ; sleep  is  not  a necessity  for  the  spirit ; if  the
spirit  gives  itself  up  to  it,  it  is  merely  for  pleasure’s
sake  ; with  the  material  body  it  is  quite  the  contrary ;
the  latter  stands  in  need  of  repose  whilst  given  up  to  it ;
the  soul  which  never  sleeps  takes  advantage  of  this  re-
pose to  distribute  and  learn  its  actions,  arranges  them,
prepares  them  for  the  day  following  this  rest;  the  soul
can  sleep,  but  it  never  does  ; the  vital  spirits  alone  that
surround  it  give  themselves  up  to  repose.”

“You  told  M.  Cahagnet  that  the  star  which  gave
light  to  our  material  globe  lighted  up  the  whole  uni-
verse, how  can  that  be  ?”  “ I told  you,  on  the  con-

trary, that  it  was  but  a ray  of  the  divine  sun  that  lighted
up  your  planetary  system  ; there  are,  in  like  manner,
thousands  of  other  rays,  departing  from  the  same  divine
sun,  that  light  up  all  the  other  systems.” — “ The  rays
of  this  star  that  lights  up  our  earth,  are  they,  like  all
other  spiritual  objects,  invested  with  a material  sub-
stance ?”  “ Yes,  the  nearer  they  are  to  the  centre

whence  they  emanate  the  purer  they  are.” — “ The
nations  that  adore  this  star  ought,  in  that  case,  to  be
nearer  the  truth  ?”  “All  religions  that  adore  God,  no
matter  under  w'hat  form,  are  equally  acceptable  to  him.”
— “ The  objects  found  around,  and  for  the  use  of  spirits,
according  to  the  thoughts  of  their  affection,  were  they
created  before  the  thoughts  of  this  affection,  or  are  they
created  only  at  the  very  moment  of  the  thought  ?”
“ Yv^iatsoever  man  sees  and  possesses  is  within  him  and
without  him,  it  is  the  fruit  of  his  thoughts  wdiich  were
created  by  God  ; man  creates  nothing,  he  desires,  sees,
and  possesses  the  object  of  his  desire.” — “But  can  he
perfect  the  object  he  perceives,  as  he  does  on  earth,  by


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


161


cutting  stone,  polishing  \Yood  and  metals  V’  He  can
do  what  he  desires,  since  there  are  usages  ; he  lives  in
the  spiritual  world  as  on  earth  ; he  constructs  with  ma-
terials, if  such  be  his  pleasure  ; if,  on  the  contrary,  he
desires  objects  already  constructed,  he  possesses  them
instantaneously.^^

95.  M.  Kenard  expresses  a wish  that  Adele  should
ask  for  his  father.  “ Here  he  is.” — Give  me  a de-
scription of  him,  if  you  please  ?”  (M.  Renard  was  not

671  rappoi't  with  Adele.)  He  appears  to  me  taller  than
you,”  said  she,  “and  stouter;  he  is  dark,  has  small
eyes,  a large  nose,  and  an  agreeable  look ; he  has  a grey
vest  on  him,  with  pockets  behind,  and  one  at  the  side
in  which  he  puts  w^aste  paper ; he  has  a waistcoat  that
comes  down  very  low,  and  having  two  pockets ; he  has
blue  gaiters  on,  and  I perceive  a stick  in  his  hand.” —
M.  Renard  says  that  this  description  is  exact,  and  begs
Adele  to  put  the  following  questions  to  his  father: —
“Are  you  reunited  to  my  mother,  your  first  wife?”
“ Yes,  there  she  is,”  replied  he,  pointing  her  out  in  the
distance  to  Adele. — “Did  you  love  her  more  than  your
second  wife?”  “Yes,  for  my  second  did  not  render
me  happy.” — “ Are  you  happy  were  you  are  ?”  “ Yes,

I have  nothing  to  wish  for.” — Adele  says  that  this  gen-
tleman is  easy  of  speech,  and  has  a cheerful  look ; that
is  exact.  What  we  deem  most  remarkable  in  this
apparition  is  the  stick,  which  had  become  quite  a ne-
cessary for  him  in  consequence  of  falls,  in  which  he  had
had  both  his  legs  broken.

M.  Renard  had  no  need  of  this  new  apparition  to
believe  in  the  existence  of  his  father;  he  wished  to
judge  by  himself,  a second  time,  of  Adele^s  excellent
clairvoyance,  which,  far  from  falling  off,  continued  in-
creasing.

We  ask  again  for  M.  Swedenborg,  to  whom  we  address
the  following  questions : — “ If  we  existed  on  another
globe  before  appearing  on  earth,  we  must  all  be  of  an
equal  age  ?”  “ Certainly.” — “ If  we  are  of  the  same


162


THE  SECRETS  OP’  THE  FUTURE


age,  one  cannot  be  the  child  of  the  other  }”  “ No,  not

spiritually,  it  is  only  materially  that  it  is  so  from  ne-
cessity/^— “ If  we  are  equal  in  age,  we  should  be  equal
in  corpulence  “ Yes,  in  the  spiritual  world  every
one  there  appears  pretty  nearly  of  the  same  corpulence
and  age  ; if  there  are  differences,  they  exist  only  in
human  affections.” — “ If  we  are  all  equally  old,  and  of
the  same  size,  there  can  be  no  children  ?”  “ There  are

children  only  for  those  who  desire  to  see  them  ; but
children  amongst  each  other  see  themselves  as  tall  as
men.” — If  it  be  thus  for  the  equality  of  ages  and
forms,  it  should  be  the  same  in  regard  to  intelligence  ?
When  a child  dies  as  such  on  our  globe,  he  ought  to
recover  forthwith  all  his  knowledge,  which  should  be
equal  to  that  of  the  rest  ?”  “ No,  were  it  so,  it  would

no  longer  be  a life  of  progression.  To  learn  constitutes
the  happiness  of  spirits  ; they  appeared  on  earth  to  de-
lineate there  their  affections,  which  multiply  to  infinity.
He  who  died  when  a child  knows  not  what  he  knows
who  has  seen  much  and  desired  much.  What  all  spirits
equally  know  is,  that  they  have  all  lived  on  earth,  and
on  an  anterior  globe ; they  are  all  acquainted  with  the
language  of  heaven  ; but  each  helps  the  other  to  develop
his  intelligence,  which  is  much  quicker  than  upon  earth,
but  nevertheless  leaves  a very  great  difference  between
the  knowledge  of  each  ; it  is  only  children  under  three
years  of  age  that,  by  the  effect  of  the  divine  thoughts,
remain,  or  appear  to  remain,  in  this  state  of  innocence
which  they  would  be  unwilliino;  to  change.” — I don’t
understand  how  an  embryo  of  fifteen  days  should  be  able
to  become  acquainted  with  the  earthlv  sufferings  for
which  it  was  beneficial,  you  say,  it  should  be  born  ?”
‘‘  I have  already  explained  to  you  that  men  remained  on
earth  a time  proportioned  to  the  desire  they  had  of
changing  their  position ; that  children,  dying  as  such,  had
less  desired  to  appear  on  this  earth  than  others  ; hence
it  is  that  God,  who  can  commit  no  injustice,  leaves
them  there  the  time  calculated  bv  him  as  necessary  to


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


1G3


instruct  them  in  the  false  position  felt  there.  Do  not
fancy  that  the  embryo  that  has  not  seen  the  light  of
your  earth  has  not  suflfered  a sufficient  long  time  to
prove  to  it  that  it  was,  and  is  about  to  be  happy.  Al-
though in  the  bosom  of  its  mother,  it  suffers  more  than
you  imagine;  for  it,  it  is  a prison  that  may  be  compared
to  your  prisons  on  earth,  in  which  if  you  passed  fifteen
days,  you  would  suffer  as  much  and  more,  perhaps,  than
a man  who  thinks  it  mere  sport  to  spend  a few  years  in
one  : the  last  pang  is  ever  the  one  that  makes  the  deepest
impression  on  us,  and  renders  us  forgetful  of  the  rest.
Thus  the  necessary  imprisonment  of  this  child  in  the
body  of  its  mother  for  some  time  is  as  painful  to  it  as
long  years  of  earthly  existence  to  others — believe  it,  all
is  for  the  best,  and  for  the  justest  purpose/’ — “ Still,  if
this  false  terrestrial  apparition  suffices  to  become  ac-
quainted with  the  painful  sensations  necessary  to  our
future  existence,  I don’t  see  why  I should  vegetate  so
many  years  on  earth,  when  I might  have  undergone  the
same  transformation  as  this  child.”  Were  such  the
case,  the  earth  would  not  be  inhabited  : you  cannot
comprehend  the  wise  laws  of  the  Infinite,  hence  you
talk  in  this  way.  A uniformity,  such  as  you  understand
it,  would  be  absolute  repose — ’twould  be  nothingness,,
and  there  is  no  repose,  no  nothingness  ; the  variety  of
forms,  of  existences,  assures  you  of  an  eternity  of  hap-
piness.” Adele  is  fatigued  and  unwilling  to  proceed.
I put  to  her  this  last  question : — If  all  spirits  are
equal  in  age,  the  name  of  brothers  suits  them  better
than  those  of  fathers,  mothers,  and  children  ?”  “ Yes  ;

but  such  names  nevertheless  exist  for  those  that  take  a
delight  in  them.”

96.  For  some  time  past  I have  had  a great  wish  to
ask  you  whether  the  language  spoken  amongst  spirits
has  sounds  similar  to  our  languages  of  the  earth  ?”
“ On  earth,  I address  to  spirits  the  questions  you  submit
to  them  in  French,  and  they  answer  me  in  that  language,
but  in  heaven  I do  not  speak  that  language ; vre  know,


1G4


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


we  feel,  this  penetrates  from  one  heart  to  another  with-
out the  assistance  of  speech.’^ — “ Suppose,  for  instance,
I put  you  in  communication  with  a deceased  foreigner,
whose  language  was  unknown  to  you,  and  he  in  like
manner  was  ignorant  of  yours,  how  would  you  manage
to  transmit  to  him  my  questions,  and  he  to  answer
them  ?”  “If  your  questions  were  in  French  they  would
be  understood  by  the  foreign  spirit,  for  deceased  spirits
understand  all  languages ; but  if,  on  the  contrary,  the
questions  were  addressed  to  me  in  a foreign  tongue,  I
should  not  rightly  comprehend  them,  consequently  I
should  transmit  them  incorrectl)^  as  I did  to  M.  Lauriot ;
hence  mistakes  would  occur.  1 doiFt  like  communica-
tions of  this  kind.^^ — “ It  is  said  that  there  are  clair-
voyants who  speak  languages  which  they  have  never
learned  “ We  cannot  speak  a language  which  is
unknown  to  us.  Those  clairvoyants  have  a taste  for
experiments  of  this  kind ; to  succeed  in  them,  they
dispose  of  the  faculty  they  possess,  as  spirits  disengaged
from  matter,  of  comprehending  the  thoughts.  I would
not  take  upon  myself  to  speak  any  other  language  than
my  own,  because  I am  persuaded  that  if  I rightly  com-
prehend the  questions  put  to  me,  the  spirit  to  whom  I
submit  them  will  have  more  facility  also  in  compre-
hending and  answering  them.^^ — “ Then,  to  speak  to  a
foreign  spirit,  you  would  wish  the  questions  to  be  put
to  you  in  French  “ Yes.'^ — “But  how  manage  to

transmit  them  to  him  ?”  “Since  I have  just  told  you
that  spirits  comprehend  and  speak  all  languages,  they
have  also  the  faculty  of  reading  in  my  thought,  and
answering  the  question  put,  provided  I comprehend  it
myself.  Hence,  as  I have  already  told  you,  the  liability
to  mistakes  to  which  I am  exposed  like  all  clairvoyants ;
a thought  or  question  not  rightly  understood,  not  rightly
rendered  on  both  sides,  may  spoil  all.” — “ Ask  for  M.
Swedenborg  “ Here  he  is.” — “ All  material  objects,
you  have  told  me,  have  a spiritual  representation  r”
“ Yes.” — “ So,  if  spirits  desired  it,  they  could  see  and


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


165


be  present  at  all  our  actions  Yes,  they  could,  but
such  is  not  their  practice.’^ — They  could  equally,  if
they  have  taken  a fancy  to  any  part  of  the  earth,  this
room  for  instance,  occupy  it,  if  such  was  their  desire,
and  be,  consequently,  with  us  W'ithout  our  being  aware
of  it.^^  “They  can  do  whatever  they  please.” — “I
would  thank  M.  Swedenborg  to  answer  me  a few  ques-
tions of  another  kind.”  “Speak.” — “Can  he  explain
to  me  how  a clairvoyant  is  able  to  see  in  his  eye  whether
the  latter  is  disordered  ?”  “ It  is  the  spiritual  eye  that

issues  from  the  material  one  and  visits  it.” — “ There
are  cataleptics  who  see  through  the  pit  of  the  stomach,
or  any  other  part  of  the  body,  how  is  that  ?”  “ It

happens  in  this  way  : the  soul  no  longer  being  the  slave
of  the  organs,  as  in  the  material  body,  it  can  convey  its
spiritual  view  where  it  thinks  fit,  especially  in  the  con-
ditions you  have  just  set  forth.”- — “ In  that  case  the
soul  would  not,  therefore,  have  a body,  alike  in  all  to
the  material  body,  for  the  reproduction  of  all  its  organs,
if  it  can  transpose  them  from  one  point  to  another,  the
eye  under  the  foot,  for  instance  ?”  “The  soul  does  not
transpose  them  for  this;  it  can  see  where  it  thinks  fit,
since  there  is  no  obstacle  for  it ; if  it  can  see  to  the  depth
of  a hundred  feet  under  ground,  a sheet  of  water,  or
a mine  which  may  happen  to  be  there,  it  may  surely  see
under  its  material  foot.  The  soul  can  see  wherever  it
wishes,  be  where  it  seems  to  it  fit,  be  in  all  and  every-
where, be  all  and  nothing ; the  soul  takes  up  no  mate-
rial room,  is  liable  to  no  deterioration,  is  unalterable,
and  incomprehensible.  If  you  wish  to  dwell  upon  com-
parisons of  volume,  size,  space,  and  time,  you  w'ill  never
comprehend  the  spiritual  laws;  know  that,  the  soul  can
be,  without  filling  it,  in  the  smallest  point  of  the  mate-
rial creation,  and  can  fill  the  universe  by  its  relations
with  it.”

M.  Renard,  of  an  integrity  proof  against  anything,
delighted  with  the  results  I had  obtained,  desiring  to
proclaim  them  whenever  an  opportunity  occurred,  and


1G6


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


wishing  to  support  them  with  all  the  weight  of  truth
of  which  he  is  one  of  the  most  fervent  disciples,  had
been  long  anxious  to  procure  the  portrait  of  the  vene-
rable Swedenborg,  in  order  to  compare  the  description
given  of  him  by  Adele  with  the  likeness  of  this  great
man ; for  this  purpose  he  applied  to  the  society  of  the
disciples  of  the  New  Jerusalem,  expressing  a wish  to
purchase  the  engraving,  wdiich,  as  it  is  said,  so  faithfully
portrays  him.  Scarcely  had  he  it  in  his  possession  than
he  forwarded  it  to  me ; I exhibited  it  to  Adele,  in  her
watchful  condition,  in  order  that  she  might  compare  it
with  the  original  in  her  somnambulic  state.  I put  to
her  the  following  questions: — “What  do  you  think  of
the  engraving  I showed  you  in  your  watchful  state  ?”
“ It  is  t^he  very  image  of  M.  Swedenborg,  but  he  seems
to  me  a little  older,  although,  in  the  spiritual  state  in
which  he  appears  to  me,  he  is  infinitely  more  handsome
than  in  this  engraving ; according  to  the  light  w-e  are
in,  the  countenance  is  more  or  less  vouthful  and  fresh.”
— “You  told  me  at  the  time  that  he  wmre  a coat,  the
facings  of  which  w’ere  of  a different  colour ; it  is  not
possible  to  distinguish  them  in  this  engraving,  would
you  be  so  good  as  to  describe  to  me  the  colours  ?”
“ He  appears  to  me  wearing  a coat  of  the  cut  that  I
before  described  to  you,  similar  to  that  in  the  engraving,
with  large  buttons ; it  is  of  a chesnut  colour,  the  facings
are  green,  as  well  as  the  trimmings  of  the  sleeves  ; he
has  coarse  blue  breeches  on,  with  knee-buckles,  and
also  buckles  to  his  shoes  ; he  is  a strong  man ; his
phyr  iognomy  is  still  imposing  to  me,  although  there  is
not] ling  harsh  or  malicious  in  it,  but  grave  and  vene-
rable.”— “ Do  you  see  him  wdth  his  hair  powdered
“ No,  it  is  curled,  as  I before  told  you,  and  as  the  en-
graving represents  it ; it  is  browm,  and  very  thick ; his
eye-brows  also  are  very  thick  ; in  short,  I had  told  you
all  this.” — “ Do  you  think  that  this  was  the  official
dress  he  wore  at  the  Swedish  Academy  ?”  “ No ; I

asked  him  before,  and  he  told  me  that  I saw  him  in  his


REVEALKD  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.  167

usual  dress,  wliich  he  preferred  to  any  mark  of  distinc-
tion.”

These  fresh  particulars  were  in  nowise  necessary  to
me ; the  revelations  he  had  made  me  through  the
medium  of  Adele,  which  tally  so  well  with  his  works,
which  I had  not  then  read,  as  I have  before  said,  were
sufficient  to  confirm  me  in  the  belief  that  I was  not  in
the  presence  of  a deceiving  spirit ; the  religious  senti-
ments with  v/hich  all  his  teachings  are  stamped  are  not
of  a spirit  of  darkness,  and  such  a spirit,  could  it  have
searched  into  the  memory  of  this  great  man  so  far  as
to  reproduce  to  me  what  we  have  read,  with  so  much
truth,  it  would  have  done  the  same  with  respect  to  his
dress,  the  one  not  being  more  impossible  than  the
other ; but  this  supposition  would  destroy  the  belief
we  have,  in  theology,  that  the  inferior  spirits  can
neither  influence  nor  purloin  the  thoughts  of  a superior
spirit.  I merely  add  this  reflection  for  the  sake  of  a
few  timorous  consciences  that  see  the  Evil  One  every-
where and  in  all ; I am  far  from  addressing  it  to  per-
sons whose  minds  are  free  from  such  childish  fears.  I
have  done  my  best  to  depict  and  recognise  a man  vdiom
I have  never  seen  ; assuredly,  I cannot  do  more ; let
those  who  have  it  in  their  power  to  confront  the  colour
of  the  hair  and  garments  do  so,  inasmuch  as  this,  I be-
lieve, will  ever  be  out  of  my  power.

I advise  no  one  to  seek  to  obtain  any  other  definition
of  the  soul  than  the  one  we  have  just  read  ; it  would  be
fatiguing  a clairvoyant  to  no  purpose.  We  shall  never
be  able  to  explain  the  primitive  nature  or  properties  of
the  soul  and  thoughts  by  our  material  solutions  ; it  is
the  same  with  respect  to  the  laws  that  regulate  the
spiritual  world  ; it  is  useless  perplexing  spirits  with  our
huts,  our  ifs,  our  ivhys ; let  us  listen  to  them,  sum  up
what  we  see  and  hear,  let  us  compare,  judge,  and  never
finally  pronounce,  as  our  judgment  may  ever  be  appealed
against.

Above  all  let  us  ever  bear  in  mind  that  in  questioning


168


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


a spirit  we  are  not  the  master^  but,  indeed,  the  scholar ;
should  an  inferior  spirit  plunge  you  into  too  palpable
errors,  no  longer  address  him;  but  do  not  contrary  him,
do  not  use  him  rouyhly  / You  know  not  whom  you  have
to  do  with ; you  might  be  a victim  to  your  silly  pride,
as  well  as  your  clairvoyant.

These  precautions  are  needless  in  simple  apparitions  ;
they  are  useful  only  in  the  metaphysical  discussions  you
may  have  with  them.

In  the  captious  question  I addressed  to  Adele  on  the
power  v/ith  which  the  spirit  disposes  to  see  where  he
thinks  fit,  I try  (from  what  she  affirms  that  the  soul
bears  the  form  of  the  body)  to  make  her  understand
that  it  cannot  have  the  visual  organ  under  its  feet,  but
in  its  head,  or  in  that  case  this  organ  would  be  the  soul
itself  transporting  itself  wherever  it  pleases.  The  answer
she  gives  me  is  the  one  she  already  gave  me  two  years
ago,  and  which  has  been  read  in  this  work.  The  body
of  the  soul  is  of  a substance  similar  to  crystal,  like  all
around  it,  and  every  part  of  which  it  can  perceive  with-
out the  least  difficulty ; this  is  admissible,  since  it  has
this  power  over  matter  itself,  this  proves  that  there  is
but  one  single  substance  in  the  creation  the  degrees  of
which  are  more  or  less  luminous  for  our  material  state,
a substance  that  the  soul  can  penetrate,  whether  by
lighting  them  up  with  its  own  light,  or  seeing  them  by
the  mere  assistance  of  theirs.

She  tells  me  in  the  preceding  answer  that  the  spiritual
eye  quits  the  material  one  to  visit  the  latter;  she  means
by  this,  that  a somnambulist,  to  this  degree,  is  himself
out  of  his  material  body ; and  hence  it  is,  says  she,  they
can  perceive  whether  a person  is  asleep  or  merely  pre-
tends to  be  so,  by  the  mere  inspection  of  the  individual’s
head  which  appears  to  them  empty  if  he  sleeps  magne-
tically. In  this  way  the  body  would  no  longer  be  an
obstacle  to  the  vision.  Many  other  clairvoyants  will,
perhaps,  say  the  contrary;  judging  only  from  them,
although  out  of  their  body  they  perform  their  functions


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


169


within;  they  will  ever  believe  themselves  in  this  body,
although  they  are  only  intimately  united  to  it,  and  being
instantaneously  where  they  wish  to  be,  they  will  never
be  able  to  explain  how  they  should  find  themselves
entire,  present  in  a remote  space,  material,  infinitely
small,  and  find  themselves  at  the  same  time  filling  ail
their  material  body.  Possibly  Adele  would  have  been
unable  to  define  this  incredible  proposition,  had  not  the
spirits  defined  it  for  her  themselves.  Oh  ! abyss  of  our
reason  !


CONCLUSION.

What  conclude  from  such  a collection  of  facts?  To
pronounce,  must  we  possess  a distinguished  education  ?
No.  Is  it  more  necessary  to  have  a subtle  and  superior
mind?  No;  it  is  necessary  to  stand  aloof  from  all
religious  parties,  implore  the  divine  light  of  our  divine
master,  that  he  may  enlighten  our  intelligence,  bestow
on  us  a sound  judgment,  strip  it  of  all  the  passions  left
in  it  by  false  maxims  ; annihilate  ourselves,  as  it  were,
before  the  infinite  greatness  of  the  Creator  and  his
creation,  instead  of  proclaiming  ourselves,  with  silly
pride,  his  master-piece.  We  must  make  every  effort  to
shake  off,  whatever  matter  teaches  and  exacts  from  us
by  its  laws,  for  the  law's  of  matter  are  not  always  in
accord  with  the  laws  of  the  spiritual  world ; they  cannot,
as  I have  said,  fraternize  together,  though  not  being
disunited,  and  forming  but  one  inexplicable,  yet  sensible
whole.  To  form  a conclusion  on  this  collection  of
revelations,  we  should  be  wise  in  the  full  acceptation  of
the  word,  and  the  wise  are  rare  in  our  times.

I will  not  permit  myself  to  pretend  to  so  great  an
honor,  or  to  add  one  revelation  to  another  in  order  to
establish  a system  or  beliefs  wdiich  might  possibly  be

M


170  the  secrets  of  the  future

revoked,  as  not  being  sufficiently  luminous.  I leave  to
each  the  right  of  judging,  of  pronouncing ; I will  merely
beg  permission  to  gather  together  the  principal  ques-
tions I have  put,  the  whole  as  laconically  as  possible,
and  set  down  their  answers  in  due  order ; all  this,  in  a
few  pages  which  will  close  this  book,  and  leave  in  the
intelligence  of  the  reader,  without  perplexing  his
memory,  a summary  of  what  I have  said  and  heard.
Let  him  take  these  questions,  disorderly  as  they  are,
as  a model  or  starting  point  for  those  I advise  him  to
address  to  clairvoyants*  himself,  then  he  will  see
whether  I was  WTong  in  submitting  to  him  this  summary
of  my  experiments  or  falsified  the  truth.  May  he  gather
from  it  the  sum  of  happiness  which  I possess  ! It  is
the  most  ardent  wish  of  a heart  that  would  be  glad  to
to  see  all  men  a little  less  wretched  and  a little  more
enlightened.


PSYCHOLOGICAL  QUESTIONS.

I AM  about  to  submit  only  questions  relative  to  the
existence  of  the  soul  after  its  separation  from  matter.

1.  “ Whence  comes  magnetism  “ From  God.”

2.  "May  its  action  be  both  good  and  bad.”  "Yes.”

3.  " What  are  the  conditions  to  be  observed  for  the  good  ?”
" The  desire  to  do  good,  which  proceeds  from  God.”

4.  " What  are  those  to  be  observed  for  the  bad?”  "The
desire  to  do  evil,  which  proceeds  from  man.”

5.  " Does  the  body  alone  possess  the  power  of  magne-
tising ?”  " It  is  in  this  action  but  a machine.”


* After  having  driven  away  by  prayer  the  spirit  of  darkness,  invoked
the  assistance  of  the  divine  light,  made  the  clairvoyant  swear  that  he  will
not  alter  the  truth  in  the  interest  of  any  religion,  to  render  him  responsible
for  his  conduct,  and,  as  a greater  security,  employ  the  organ  of  a child  to
put  the  questions  to  the  said  clairvoyant,  who  by  this  means  would  be
isolated  from  the  person  consulting  him.


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.  1^1

6.  “ What  moves  this  machine  ?”  “ Our  soul.”

7.  “ The  soul,  then,  stands  for  something  in  the  action  of

magnetism  ?”  “ It  is  the  principal  agent  in  it.”

8.  “ Is  it  aided  in  this  operation  ?”  “ Yes.”

9.  “ By  whom  ?”  “ By  beings  disengaged  from  matter.”

10.  “What  is  its  mode  of  magnetising?”  “Prayer  to
God,  and  an  ardent  desire  to  relieve.”

11.  “ Has  the  soul  beside  it  a good  and  a bad  spirit?”  “Yes.”

12.  “Can  it  avoid  the  influence  of  both?”  “Yes,  in
certain  cases.”

13.  “ Is  it  free  to  act  according  to  its  will.”  “ Yes.”

14.  “But  if  it  is  influenced  by  spirits?”  “It  is  coun-
selled, and  remains  at  liberty  to  act.”

15.  “ Has  the  soul  already  lived  on  another  globe  ?”  “ Yes.”

16.  “ Why  did  it  quit  it  ?”  “In  consequence  of  a neces-
sary law  imposed  by  God  on  all  beings,  without  exception.”

17.  “What  did  it  do  in  those  places?”  “It  was  very
happy  there  ?”

18.  “ In  what  form  did  it  inhabit  them?”  “The  human
form.”

19.  “ Had  it  a familv  there  as  on  earth  ?”  “ No  : it  had

■»  '

but  friends.”

20.  “Had  it  affections  there  as  on  earth?”  “No;  for  it
nothing  was  designed  but  perfect  happiness,  which  it  could
not  appreciate,  for  want  of  never  having  experienced  the  least
obstacle  to  its  desires.”

21.  “Hoes  it  live  after  the  death  of  its  material  body?”
“ Yes.”

22.  “Whither  does  it  go  ?”  “ To  heaven.”

23.  “ What  sensation  does  it  experience  when  it  quits  the

earth  ?”  “ None,  it  ascends  with  all  the  affections  necessary  to

its  new  existence,  and  finds  itself  placed  in  heaven.”

24.  “ Is  it  long  before  coming  acquainted  with  this  new

state  ?”  “ It  becomes  acquainted  with  it  immediately.”

25.  “Of  what  form  is  this  heaven  ? is  it  not  rather  a state

of  the  soul  ?”  “ It  is  an  immense  boundless  extent,  repre-

senting accidents  of  places  as  on  earth.  It  is  a place  which
can  be  appreciated  only  in  a desired  state,”

26.  “ Are  there  several  of  them  ?”  “There  are  three.”

27.  “ Are  there  bad  ones?”  “There  are  no  bad  heavens;
there  are  only  places  of  purification.”


M 2


172


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


28.  “ For  whom  are  these  places  of  purification  ?”  “ For

great  criminals.”

29.  “ What  do  they  do  in  these  places  “They  suffer  at
being  deprived  of  the  sight  of  God.”

30.  “ Is  there  a hell  wherein  w^e  are  burned  ?”  “ No.”

31.  “On  entering  the  heavens  does  the  soul  see  God?”
“ Yes.”

32.  “ In  what  form  ?”  “That  of  a dazzling  sun.”

33.  “What  does  he  say  to  it?”*  “He  reproaches  it  for
its  bad  conduct  on  earth  before  all  the  assembled  spirits,
which  is  very  painful  to  the  self-love  of  the  soul  receiving
these  remonstrances;  but  God  is  so  good,  and  so  dearly  loves
man,  that  he  pardons  it,  and  consigns  it  to  a place  where  it  is
purified  and  prepared  for  its  admission  into  heaven.”

34.  “ In  what  form  does  the  soul  live  in  these  places  ?”
“ The  human  form.”

35.  “Are  its  organs,  in  every  respect,  similar  to  those  of  its
material  body  ?”  “Yes.”

36.  “ Is  it  perfectly  happy  there  ?”  “ Yes.”

37.  “Has  it  any  recollection  of  having  inhabited  the
earth?”  “Yes.”

38.  ‘‘  Does  it  recollect  its  relations  ?”  “ Yes.”

39.  “Does  it  regret  the  earth  ?”  “ No.”

40.  “ Can  it  see  the  earth  at  will  ?”  “ No.”

41 . “ Can  it  see  its  relations  and  friends  there  ?”  “ It  can

only  see  their  spirit.”

42.  “ Can  it  be  of  any  assistance  to  them  ?”  “ Yes.”

43.  “ In  what  way  ?”  “ Hy  wise  counsellings.”

44.  " In  the  state  of  somnambulism,  how  do  they  appear  to
it?”  “A  beautiful  blue  sky  is  seen,  and  in  the  distance  a
small  luminous  point,  which  draws  near,  preceding  the  person,
and  admits  of  your  seeing  this  person  before  vou,  or  at  vour
side.”

45.  “ In  what  form  do  they  appear  ?”  “ In  the  corporeal

form  they  had  before  death.”

46.  “What  is  their  dress?”  “Such  as  they  wore  on
earth.”

* We  should  be  astonished  at  hearing  that  a sun  spoke,  if  we  had  not,
to  prove  it  to  us,  even  the  declaration  of  IMoses,  and  that  of  the  prophets
and  ecstatieo-proplrets,  who  all,  without  exception,  hear  words  issuing
from  a brilliant  light,  which  they  call  the  voice  of  Jehovah.


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.  l73

47.  “Why  rather  this  than  any  other  ?”  ‘‘Because  in  any
other  they  would  be  less  easily  known.”

48.  “ In  heaven,  do  they  wear  this  dress  ?”  “No.”

49.  “ How  are  they  attired  there  ?”  “ Ordinarily,  they

have  only  light  gauze  robes  of  different  coloui's,  according  to
the  inclination  they  have  for  them ; their  dress  is,  as  on  earth,
a matter  of  taste.”

50.  “ What  do  they  do  in  heaven  ?”  “ Whatever  is  best

suited  to  them  ; children  play,  grown  up  persons  study,  play
music,  and  promenade ; they  do  there  what  they  take  most
pleasure  in.”

51.  “Are  they  reunited  there  to  their  family?”  “Yes,
those  who  desire  it.”

52.  “Are  they  all  married  there?”  “Yes;  when  God
deems  fit.”

53.  “ How  long  a time  do  we  remain  in  heaven  ?”  “An
eternity.”

54.  “ Is  there  day  and  night,  heat  and  cold  ?”  “ In

heaven  there  is  invariably  a mild  temperature,  and  a con-
tinual day.”

55.  “ Is  time  reckoned  there  ?”  “ No.”

56.  “ And  space  ?”  “ Space  is  not  known,  inasmuch  as  we

are  instantaneously  wherever  we  wish  to  be.”

57.  “Are  there  houses,  cities,  gardens,  temples  ?”  “There
is  all  that  can  be  desired.”

58.  “What  language  is  spoken  there.”  “Thatof  thethought."

59.  “Are  angels  seen  there?”  “Yes.”

60.  “ Angels  or  spirits,  are  they  the  same  thing  ?”  “Angels
are  more  advanced  in  wisdom  than  spirits.”

61.  “Have  both  inhabited  the  earth?”  “Yes,  all  that
heaven  contains  has  lived  upon  earth.”

62.  “ Do  we,  after  a certain  time,  inhabit  again  the  earth  ?”
“ No.”

63.  “Are  we  all  equal  in  heaven?”  ‘‘Yes,  in  regard  to
happiness,  each  possesses  it  to  the  same  degree,  but  intelli-
gence alone  separates  us ; every  one  there  has  not  the  same
amount  of  instruction.”

64.  “ Are  there  any  baneful  spirits  ?”  “ Yes.”

65.  “ Do  pacts  and  talismans  exist  ?”  “ Yes.”

66.  “Of  what  use  are  they?”  “To  protect  you  against
such  or  such  a thing.”


174


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


67.  “ What  are  their  results  “ That  you  find  yourself
hound  with  the  spiritual  societies  that  have  protected  you,  and
must  undergo  the  consequences  of  this  dependence  in  which
you  have  placed  yourself  by  doing  for  others,  hereafter,  what
you  were  glad  they  should  do  for  you.”

68.  “ What  do  you  mean  by  that  ?”  “That  when  you  are
in  the  spiritual  world,  you  must  render  to  man  the  same  ser-
vice as  spirits  have  rendered  you  ; this  makes  you  dependent.”

69.  “ Is  it  true  that  there  are  obsessions  ?”  “ Yes.”

70.  “ By  whom  are  they  occasioned  “ By  evil  spirits.”

71.  “Those  evil  spirits,  have  they  a chief  named  Satan

“ No  ; every  one  is  at  liberty  to  act  as  he  pleases  in  the  inte-
rest of  his  society’s  affections.”

72.  “ Can  thev  perform  all  the  incredible  things  related  of

them  ?”  “ Yes.’'’

73.  “ What  are  the  means  of  freeing  one’s-self  from  them  ?”
“ Sincere  prayer  to  God.”

74.  “ Are  thex*e  any  elementary  spirits  ?”  “ Yes.”

75.  “ What  is  their  form  ?”  “ The  human  form,”  &c.

Every  one  may,  according  to  the  kind  of  information
he  desires,  put  questions  relative  to  it ; but,  above  all,
let  him  learn  to  consult  the  taste  of  his  clairvovant,  and
the  present  affection  of  the  spirit  invoked,  for  were  we
not  to  take  these  precautions  we  should  be  cast  into  a
labyrinth  of  errors,  whence  we  could  issue  only  less  en-
lightened than  before ; a few  truths  scattered  amongst
these  errors  would  cause  the  latter  to  be  accepted  as
true,  and  this  would  be  a grand  miscalculation  for  the
too  credulous  individual.  Spirits  taking  with  them
their  principal  affections,  are  not  totally  divested  of
pride,  the  greatest  sore  that  gnaws  the  human  species,
and  they  often  wish  to  appear  to  know  more  than  they
really  do.  We  should  be  firm  in  our  questions,  ever
mistrustful,  yield  only  to  what  is  beyond  our  judgment,
not  carry  this  mistrust  so  far  as  to  be  unwilling  to  admit
anything,  because  we  cannot  comprehend  what  we  hear ;
neither  should  we  reject  any  revelation,  but  keep  a cor-
rect journal  of  it,  change  as  often  as  possible  our  clair-
voyants, question  them  all  in  like  manner,  and  judge


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.  1*J5

according  to  the  agreement  in  their  answers.  If  we
have  any  belief  in  God,  invariably  to  beseech  him  from
the  bottom  of  our  heart  to  keep  away  the  spirits  of
darkness  from  the  clairvoyants ; to  implore^  on  the  con-
trary, the  spirit  of  light,  and  not  accept  the  first  spirit
that  presents  himself,  no  matter  his  firm  and  imposing
demeanor;  you  must  beg  of  your  clairvoyant  to  join
with  you  in  driving  him  away  with  a firm  will,  if  he  is
not  an  envoy  of  God.  These  are  the  few  words  by
which,  under  such  circumstances,  I operate : —

In  the  name  of  God,  thy  Creator  and  mine,  I com-
mand thee  to  withdraw,  if  thou  art  not  sent  to  us  from
him  !”  He  who  resists  this  command,  if  you  have  a
pu7'e  clairvoyant,  is  a beneficent  spirit ; question  him.
If  he  commits  a few  errors  do  not  accuse  him  of  them,
he  has  no  intention  to  deceive  you,  but  he  has  little
relish  for  such  questions,  especially  if  they  relate  to  the
earth.  Their  memory  is  rich  in  all  that  they  have  seen
there,  but  they  like  not  to  search  into,  or  speak  of  it.
His  likeness,  his  dress,  the  few  revelations  he  may
make  to  you  will  give  you  the  assurance  that  he  exists.
Be  not  too  exigent  in  his  respect,  put  to  him  no  mis-
trustful questions,  such  as,  “ What  is  your  name  since
he  came  to  his  name.  ‘‘  What  is  your  family  }”  since
you  know  it  as  well  as  he ; or,  should  the  contrary  be
the  case,  you  may  question  him.  Ask  him  not  how
long  he  has  been  dead,  he  knows  nothing  about  it ;
leave  him  at  liberty  to  answer  you  without  interruption,
for  he  reads  in  your  thought ; he  is  of  good  faith ; he
thinks  that  his 'presence  ought  to  suffice  you  in  all  the
details  that  surround  him  to  make  you  believe  in  his
existence.  Have  the  same  good  faith,  and  you  will
learn  more  than  you  could  have  possibly  desired.

To  initiate  your  clairvoyant  in  this  kind  of  apparition,
first  look  out  for  a subject  as  independent  as  possible  of
your  will ; make  no  physical  experiment  wherein  the
communication  of  thoughts  is  often  necessary.  Seek
for  a natural,  voluntary  clairvoyant,  and  not  a sickly


176


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


onCj  if  possible.  Conduct  his  speciality  towards  these
communications,  without  ever  demanding  of  him  any
but  those  appertaining  to  maladies.  Begin  by  interest-
ing him  in  an  apparition,  asking  him  if  he  would  not  be
glad  to  see  some  departed  friend  who  had  been  dear  to
him ; he  will  be  curious,  his  desire  will  be  strong,  and
the  person  mentally  demanded  by  you  and  by  him  will
shortly  present  himself.  Continue  this  kind  of  ex-
periment, changing  the  personage  as  often  as  you  can.
As  soon  as  you  perceive  that  the  view  of  a deceased
being  greatly  affects  your  clairvoyant,  that  he  appears
delighted  at  seeing  him  again,  tell  him  to  ask  this  spirit
to  have  the  goodness  to  conduct  him  into  the  places  he
inhabits  ; he  will  readily  do  so,  on  one  condition,  which
is  that  the  clairvoyant  shall  descend  again  to  earth,  after
a short  interval  of  time,  not  exceeding  ten  minutes,
according  to  the  susceptible  nature  of  the  subject.  To
aid  him  in  his  departure,  place  him  under  the  care  of
God  and  his  guide ; place  your  hand  at  some  distance
from  the  crown  of  his  head,  your  fingers  downwards
and  brought  together  to  a point,  desire  them  to  attract
and  open  the  fictitious  space  necessary  to  the  passage  of
the  soul.  When  you  see  him  leaning  back,  his  arms
languidly  dropping  down,  his  face  flushed  and  assuming
an  expression  of  beatitude,  leave  him  for  the  time  agreed
upon  in  this  esctatic  contemplation.  For  prudence
sake,  ever  keep  your  eyes  fixed  on  the  plexus,  principally
the  solar  or  pit  of  the  stomach,  retaining  by  your  will
sufficient  life  in  the  body  to  prevent  all  risk.  If  your
clairvoyant  should  not  return  at  the  appointed  time,
and  you  perceive  that  his  countenance  is  getting  dis-
colored, assuming  a dark  sallow  hue,  proceed  no  further,
death  is  at  hand.  Close  the  door  upon  him,  making
with  a determined  force  of  wdll,  a few  transversal
passes  over  his  head  and  before  his  face ; if  it  be  long
before  he  answ'ers  you,  doift  be  disturbed,  do  as  if  vou
were  pulling  him  from  on  high  with  a cord,  blow  w^armly
on  his  heart,  and  you  will  see  him  pass  again  into  the


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


177


ordinary  state  of  magnetic  sleep.  Ask  him  what  he  has
seen,  do  not  laugh,  or  you  will  learn  nothing.  Be  of
good  faith,  see  in  his  revelations  an  act  of  madness  or
truth  without  telling  him  of  it,  and  think  what  you
please.  All  the  counsels  I have  just  given  are  dictated
only  by  a wise  prudence  ; there  are  many  ecstatics  of
different  shades,  with  whom  we  have  no  need  of  this
prudence;  but  there  are  some  with  whom  we  cannot  be
too  circumspect,  as  I well  know  by  experience.  We
ought  to  consider  ourselves  as  warned  on  this  head;
death  or  insanity  might  be  the  consequence  of  such
attempts.  The  ecstasy  by  which  we  communicate  with
spirits  on  earth  presents  no  danger;  it  is  one  of  the
tasks  which  somnambulists  perform  with  the  greatest
facility.  I also  recommend  that  if  the  clairvoyant,  in
speaking  with  spirits,  should  solicit  from  you  certain
marks  of  respect  or  assent  to  certain  gestures,  still  pre-
serving your  dignity  as  a man,  who  ought  to  bend  the
knee  to  his  Creator  only,  refuse  not  doing  what  could
not  in  the  least  affect  you.  Be  confiding,  reserved,
voluntary,  reasonable,  devoid  of  passion,  and  you  will  be
indemnified  for  your  pains,  rendering  yourself  more
happy  than  you  ever  were  before ; you  will  be  less
inclined  to  curse  the  earth  and  its  sorrows,  inasmuch  as
you  will  perceive  that  those  sorrows  are  beneficial ; you
will  no  longer,  in  your  sufferings,  accuse  God,  because
you  will  know  that  he  is  infinitely  good  ; you  will  no
longer  be  puffed  up  with  your  knowledge,  because  the
further  you  go,  the  more  you  will  perceive  that  you
know  nothing;  you  will  patiently  admire  this  terrestrial
mechanism,  so  beautiful,  so  grand,  in  one  point  of  view,
so  insignificant  on  another ; you  will  be  in  haste  to
again  inhabit  your  former  dwelling  and  be  less  attached
to  your  material  baubles.  You  will  no  longer  tremble
before  your  coffin,  which  is  the  gate  to  the  temple  of
happiness  wherein  you  are  to  live  for  ever  ! !


178


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


MAGIC  MIRROR.

I PROMISED  not  to  reserve  to  myself  anything  I had
learnt  from  spirits  ; I will  keep  my  word  by  giving  to
the  reader  the  secret  of  the  magic  mirror,  revealed  to
me  by  M.  Swedenborg,  who,  himself,  possessed  one,
and  of  which  I have  already  spoken.  This  mirror  is
very  much  like  one  possessed,  in  the  eighteenth  cen-
tury, at  Paris,  by  a Jew  named  Leon,  which  I have  seen
mentioned  somewhere,  and  which  made  a great  noise  at
the  time.  I made  two  in  the  way  recommended  to  me,
one  of  which  I presented  to  my  friend  M.  Renard,  who,
after  several  experiments,  gave  a favourable  report  of
it ; mine  was  equally  good.  This  is  how  we  should  go
to  work : — Procure  a piece  of  glass  as  fine  as  possible,
cut  it  the  required  size,  place  it  over  a very  slow  fire,  at
the  same  time  dissolving  some  very  fine  black  lead  in
a small  quantity  of  fine  oil  to  give  it  the  consistence  of
a liquid  pomade,  which  may  easily  be  spread  over  the
glass  when  well  diluted,  as  it  soon  is.  The  glass  being
hot,  incline  it  on  both  sides,  in  order  that  the  mixture
may  spread  of  itself  all  over  alike ; then,  the  glass  being
placed  on  something  quite  straight  and  flat,  let  the  mix-
ture dry  without  disturbing  it;  in  a few  days  it  will
become  as  hard  as  pewter,  presenting  a very  fine  dark
polish  ; put  your  glass  in  a frame,  and  after  well  wiping
its  surface,  on  which  some  dross  will  be  found,  hang  it
up  on  a wall,  as  you  would  a looking-glass,  but  always
in  a false  light.  Place  the  person  who  desires  to  see  a
thielj  a spirit,  or  a place,  before  this  mirror,  station
yourself  behind  him,  fixing  your  eyes  steadily  on  the
hinder  part  of  the  brain,  and  summon  the  spirit  in  a
loud  voice,  in  the  name  of  God,  in  a manner  imposing
to  the  individual  looking  in  the  mirror.

It  may  be  naturally  supposed  that  this  kind  of  ex-


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM,  l79

periment  requires  certain  conditions,  the  first  of  which
is  to  find  an  individual  endowed  with  this  kind  of  vision.
Nothing  is  general  in  psychological  facts.  There  was
much  talk  at  one  time  of  the  magic  mirror  of  Doctor
Dee,  which  was  sold,  in  1842,  amongst  the  curiosities
in  the  possession  of  Horace  Walpole,  at  Strawberry
Hill,  for  the  enormous  sum  of  three  hundred  and
twenty- six  francs.  It  was  simply  a bit  of  sea-coal,
perfectly  polished,  cut  in  a circular  form,  with  a handle ;
this  curiosity  formerly  figured  in  the  cabinet  of  the
Earl  of  Peterborough.  In  the  catalogue  it  was  thus
described  : — “ A black  stone,  by  means  of  which  Doctor
Dee  evoked  spirits.’^  It  passed  from  the  hands  of  the
Earl  into  those  of  Lady  Elizabeth  Germaine,  then  be-
came the  property  of  John,  last  Duke  of  Argyll,  whose
grandson.  Lord  Campbell,  presented  it  to  Walpole.
The  author  of  the  “ Theatrum  Chemicum,^^  Elias  Ash-
mole,  speaks  of  the  same  mirror  in  the  following  terms  :
— “ By  the  aid  of  this  magic  stone,  we  can  see  whatever
persons  we  desire,  no  matter  in  what  part  of  the  world
they  be,  and  were  they  hidden  in  the  most  retired
apartments,  or  even  in  the  caverns  in  the  bowels  of  the
earth.’^  John  Dee,  born  in  London,  in  1527,  was  the
son  of  a wine-merchant ; he  studied  the  sciences  Avith
success,  and  devoted  himself,  at  an  early  period,  to
judicial  astrology;  Gueen  Elizabeth  took  him  under  her
protection  ; he  composed  several  useful  works,  employed
much  of  his  time  in  the  science  of  magic,  conjured
spirits,  made  predictions,  and  beheld  the  invisible;  when
he  had  discovered  his  mirror  he  returned  thanksgivings
to  God,  He  Avas  occupied  during  his  AA'hole  life  in  the
search  of  the  philosopher’s  stone,  and  died  in  London
at  the  age  of  eighty-four,  in  a state  of  abject  poverty.

The  Count  de  Laborde  brought  us  a someAvhat  similar
secret  from  Egypt.  The  Baron  Dupotet  communicated
a like  one  to  his  subscribers,  in  his  Journal  de  Mag-
netisme ; one  is  much  more  simplified  than  the  other,
and  succeeds  equally  as  well.  M.  de  Laborde  posi-


180


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


lively  evokes  ; he  makes  use  of  perfumes,  stands  in
need  of  the  eo-operation  of  spirits,  and  M.  Dupotet
seems  only  to  employ  the  magnetism  of  thought.  Cag-
liostro  also  employed  a magnetism  but  little  suspected^
by  placing  one  hand  on  the  head  of  his  pupils.  The
sorcerers  of  our  country  places  proceed  in  like  manner
with  the  first  mirror  met  with,  imploring  the  assistance
of  the  spirits  that  facilitate  such  experiments.  M.  de
Laborde  makes  use  of  a brilliant  ink  which  he  puts  in  the
hollow  of  the  looker’s  hand,  and  stimulates  his  nervous
system  by  perfumes.  M.  Dupotet  makes  use  of  a piece
of  coal  with  which  he  describes  a circle  on  the  floor,  with
the  intention  of  makingperceptible  to  the  person  operated
upon  such  picture  as  the  latter  desires ; he  keeps  the  sub-
ject inclined  for  this  experiment  by  thought.  Sorcerers
have  their  reputation  which  is  of  great  assistance  to
them.  Certain  prepossessions  against  such  or  such  a
person  suspected  of  theft  or  aught  else,  their  imposing
air,  their  supplication  to  such  spirit  familiar  to  them,
without  knowing  positively  the  meaning  of  what  they
say — this  suffices,  and  they  operate  ! Leon,  of  whom
I have  spoken,  followed  in  their  steps  ; prayer,  faith,
and  a disposition  of  the  visual  organ  facilitated  his  ex-
periments. Cagliostro,  preceded  by  his  reputation  as
an  incomprehensible  man,  was  often  successful  in  con-
sequence of  the  tact  he  displayed  in  selecting  his  pupils,
the  occult  magnetism  he  employed,  &c. ; but  if  I ask
Messrs.  De  Laborde,  Dupotet,  Cagliostro,  the  sorcerers,
Leon  and  others,  whether  they  saw  themselves  in  their
mirrors  or  reflecting  body,  they  will  reply  no  ; therefore,
there  must  be  a disposition  for  this  kind  of  experiment,
we  must  be  influenced  by  an  imposing  display,  an
occult  magnetism,  or  the  aid  of  invoeations  and  per-
fumes. Wherefore,  in  order  to  profit  by  my  mirror,  I
would  advise  the  ceremony  to  be  performed  with  a
certain  dignity,  and  to  have  recourse  only  to  what  may
act  on  the  imagination  or  nerves ; as  much  by  a
moral  or  spiritual  magnetism  as  by  the  assistance  of


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


181


perfumes.  All  those  that  bear  or  shed  a svreetj  pleasant
smell,  are  suitable  for  the  good  spirits,  such  as  incense,
rruisk,  gum-lac,  &c.  ; and,  for  evil  spirits,  the  seeds  of
henbane,  hemp,  belladonna,  anise,  or  coriander,  &c.
Each  seeks  his  own  atmosphere,  or  one  akin  to  it;
but,  above  all,  shun  the  assistance  of  evil  spirits.  Let
the  spirit  of  justice,  discretion,  humanity,  predominate
in  3^ou;  or,  otherwise,  woe  betide  you  !

It  will  not,  perhaps,  be  comprehended  why  I should
recommend  shunning  the  invocation  of  evil  spirits,  and
yet  make  known  the  perfumes  they  delight  in.  I
presume  that  I shall  be  thought  sufficiently  consistent
with  myself  to  speak  here  only  of  the  apparitions  we
desire  to  obtain,  on  the  score  of  thefts,  or  other  crimes,
committed  to  your  prejudice.  It  is  the  spirits  of  those
culprits  who  will  obey  your  command  to  present  them-
selves, and  seek  the  nauseous  smell  of  these  perfumes.
You  have  nothing  to  fear  from  them,  since,  on  the
contrary,  they  have  everything  to  fear  from  you.  What
I recommend  you  to  avoid,  when  demanding  appa-
ritions of  those  you  desire  to  see,  is  pronouncing  words,
the  meaning  of  which  is  unknown  to  you,  that  invite
baneful  spirits  to  your  assistance.  This  is  true  magic.*
For  the  sake  of  a little  earthly  glory,  lose  not  celes-
tial happiness.  In  all  our  experiments  of  views  at
distance  on  earth,  we  can  dispense  with  their  as-
sistance ; we  have  the  power  of  doing  it  by  ourselves,
aided,  as  I have  said,  by  auxiliaries  placing  us  in  the
conditions  necessary  to  obtain  these  results.  If  I
seemed  to  fear  the  assistance  of  strange  spirits,  it  was
because  the  simplest  judgment  we  can  pass  on  the
spiritual  phenomena  of  magnetism  will  prove  that
spirits  exist  after  being  freed  from  their  material
envelope  ; but  they  cannot  be  immediately  delivered
from  their  affection  for  evil.  We  should  have  the  con-

* Confound  not  angelic  magic,  the  miraculous  blessings  of  God,  with
the  spiritual  and  the  human  magic  ; each  has  its  views  and  its  aim.  They
are  separated  in'o  two  camps — harmony  and  trouble.


182


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


viction  that  they  cannot  gratify  it  on  the  spirits  that
surround  them,  and  have  the  same  inclinations  as  they
have  ; vve  are,  therefore,  the  only  beings  placed  at  their
disposal,  and,  under  a shoM'^  of  eagerness  to  be  of
service,  they  do  not  act  for  the  sake  of  obliging  us,
inasmuch  as  their  sole  happiness  consists  in  doing
evil.  It  is  needless  entering  into  further  explanation
of  all  that  might  result  from  allying  ourselves  to  them.

Magnetism,  and  all  its  properties,  sufficiently  prove
the  dependence  of  certain  intelligences  under  the  power
of  the  raagnetiser,  to  render  us  as  cautious  as  possible.
The  philosophy  of  this  science  has  so  upset  every  idea
hitherto  received  that  vve  no  longer  know  what  to
think,  what  believe,  and  what  do.  If  we  dread  the
services  of  a friend  whom  we  believe  we  well  know,
still  more  must  we  dread  those  of  beings  unknown  !
Consult  on  this  head  the  Journal  of  Magnetism,  by
M.  Dupotet,  wherein  I read  at  this  very  moment: —
“ The  souls  of  the  cursed  are  the  first  to  answer,  as
they  are  still  disposed  to  serve  sinister  projects.
Expect  from  them  nothing  more  ; they  have  only  this
power.’^  What  an  authority  forthwith  comes  in  sup-
port of  the  counsels  I give ! Go  on,  estimable

and  sincere  man,  you  also  have  great  things  to
reveal  to  us  ! Speak  ; fear  not  the  name  of  vdsionary  ;
it  is  never  too  soon  to  enlighten  our  brethren  ; but  ever
too  late  when  we  know  them  to  be  in  error.


CAN  CURES  BE  PERFORMED  THROUGH

PRAYER  ?

Happening  to  go  to  work  one  day  at  the  abode  of
Madame  Ferriere  Penona,  a lady  to  whom  I am  in-
debted for  many  marks  of  kindness,  I found  her  bathed
in  tears  and  absorbed  in  the  most  profound  grief.  Yen-


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


183


turing  to  ask  her  the  cause  of  her  sorrow,  and  whether
any  misfortune  threatened  lier,  she  replied  : — I have
a little  niece  whom  I dearly  love,  who  is,  perhaps,  at
this  very  moment  breathing  her  last.^^  “ How  old  is
the  child  ?”  Fourteen.” — ‘‘It  is  hard  at  such  an  age
to  leave  the  world,  and  kind  parents,  whose  sole  happi-
ness we  are  ! What  is  her  complaint  ?”  “The  doctors
donT  know.  My  poor  brother  has  just  arrived  to  re-
ceive her  last  embrace ; he  will  assuredly  die  of  grief,  as
he  has  but  this  child,  and  is  dotingly  fond  of  her.” —
“ Do  you  think  there  is  no  remedy  ?”  “ The  doctors

say  no,  and  look  upon  her  as  doomed  !” — “ Has  mag-
netism been  tried  on  her  ?”  “ Oh  ! my  brother  has  no

faith  in  it ; he  is  an  old  officer,  who  would  think  he  had
run  mad  were  he  to  take  up  with  such  an  idea;  and
then,  again,  we  know  no  one  to  whom  to  apply  !” — “ I
devote  much  time  to  this  science,  and  am  pretty  fortu-
nate ; I know  not  what  I feel,  but  it  seems  to  me  that
all  hope  is  not  lost.”  “ If  I could  but  think  so,  and
you  were  so  good  !” — “ I should  be  the  happiest  of
men,  Madame,  could  I but  dry  up  your  tears  !”  “ What
can  I do  ?”  “ Mention  it  to  your  brother.”  Two

mortal  hours  passed  away  before  coming  to  an  arrange-
ment ; the  susceptibility  of  the  doctor,  the  painful  posi-
tion of  the  relatives  were  extreme ; disorder  was  in  all
hearts  : at  length  the  doctor  said  that  he  saw  no  objec-
tion. This  news  was  announced  to  me  by  a servant ;
I hastened  off  to  the  hotel,  and  was  ushered  to  the  bed-
side of  the  dying  child;  not  a word  was  uttered  by
those  present ; I inspired  but  little  confidence — I wore
the  livery  of  a proletarian  !

Never  did  I see  a countenance  more  angelic  or  inte-
resting, a languishing  look  which  seemed  to  shun  the
sight  of  death  to  fix  itself  on  a few  toys,  a few  flowers
which,  like  it,  were  languishingly  drooping  on  the  edge
of  a vase  where  they  were  no  longer  nurtured  by  the
water  of  heaven.  At  fourteen  life  is  so  rich  in  hope
and  emotions  ! I drew  near,  asked  her  how  she  was.


184


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


and  if  she  would  permit  me  to  take  her  hand  ? To
what,  good  heavens  ! did  I speak  ? Speech  was  no
longer  at  her  service.  She  let  me  perceive,  by  putting
out  her  hand,  that  I had  been  understood.  The  father
and  the  nurse  of  this  interesting  child  stood  by  the
window,  shedding  tears ; I conveyed  my  looks  on  the
beautiful  eyes  of  this  frail  creature.  I no  longer  know
what  passed  within  me.  I recollect  that  I spoke  to
her  mentally  for  some  time,  lavished  on  her  the  most
tender  consolations,  the  firmest  hope.  I implored  the
mercy  of  the  Lord,  and  the  beneficent  influx  of  the
sacred  legions  of  the  angels.  I attracted  her^  soul  to
my  soul,  opened  to  her  my  heart  to  revivify  her  by
the  sweet  emotions  that  agitated  it ; the  eyes  of  her
body  were  closed,  mine  shed  a phosphorescent  light
wherever  they  were  conveyed ; I breathed  a sweet
odour — a mild  atmosphere  surrounded  me  ; I was  no
longer  on  earth,  we  were  in  heaven.  Ah  ! you  who
laugh  at  all,  respect  this  recital,  it  is  that  of  a frank  and
loving  heart,  which,  for  the  first  time,  played  the  sweet
part  of  a father,  and  was  happy  that  day,  that  hour
only.  It  no  longer  thought  of  its  own  painful  exist-
ence ; it  was  all  in  that  child,  and  that  child  was  all  in
it.  I will  not  tell  you  how  long  this  scene  lasted,  what
thought  the  persons  present,  and  what  I think  of  it
now.  She  ivas  saved ; in  the  evening  she  took  her  first
meal  since  a fortnight,  slept  all  night  for  the  first  time
since  a week  ; and  three  days  after  trod  with  a firm
step  on  the  dead  leaves  in  the  garden  of  the  Tuileries.
I met  her  but  this  once:  we  shall  meet  again  in  heaven.

Pray ! Essay !

I ought  to  return  thanks  to  the  sole  and  only  Creator
of  the  universe  for  the  divine  inspiration  of  this  work,
as  well  for  myself  as  for  men  in  general,  to  whom  it
Vvdll  convey  the  greatest  calm  by  regenerating  from  the
experiments  it  proposes,  faith  in  the  next  world,  so


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


185


wavering  here  below,  by  imparting  to  the  tender  mo-
ther, tlie  faithful  spouse,  the  inconsolable  lover,  the
means  of  beholding  in  their  magnetic  sleep  the  objects
of  their  affection  j speaking  with  them,  receiving  and
giving  each  other  proofs  of  their  mutual  attachment  and
their  grateful  recollection.

Oh  ! you  cataleptisers  of  limbs,  who  would  believe  you
compromised  the  little  you  pretend  to  know,  if  you
bestowed  a few  minutes  on  your  subjects  to  pour  their
hearts  into  the  bosom  of  those  immortal  spirits  who
laugh  at  your  ignorance  and  foolish  pride ; you  who
fling  back  the  cloak  of  ridicule,  which  should  cover  you,
on  spiritual  magnetisers  ! If  there  remains  but  a spark
of  good  faith  in  you,  say  with  me,  that  you  know  nothing^
can  do  nothing,  loill  never  know  anything ; if  you  consult
not  your  clairvoyants  on  what  you  are  ignorant  of,  and  if
you  acquire  not  the  proof  that  you  are  not  empty
pitchers,  but,  on  the  contrary,  that  there  is  in  them  a
being  far  superior  to  them  ; that  this  being  is  not  a
molecule  of  ambient  air  which  returns  into  space,  after
quitting  the  body  it  animated,  as  a drop  of  water  re-
turns to  the  sea;  but  is  really  a being  individualised  for
eternity,  having  a recollection  of  its  material  existence
and  acquainted  with  your  foolish  reasonings;  that  this
being  is  beside  you  according  to  your  desires  and  asks
but  to  answer  your  questions;  if  you  cannot  see  it  or
touch  it,  it  is  because  your  prison  is  too  material,  your
eyes  too  veiled,  and  your  judgment  too  vain.  I counsel
you,  therefore,  to  look  well  to  your  decisions,  to  avoid
the  two  extremes — denying  all,  as  you  did,  or  believing
all,  as  some  ma2:netisers  have  done.  I have  said  enoucrh
in  this  work  not  to  lead  you  towards  Brahma  or
Mahomet.  Be  men ! children  of  God,  prostrated  at
H is  feet;  but  not  at  the  feet  of  your  fellow-beings  !

I ought  also  to  return  thanks  to  my  subscribers,
whose  intuitive  confidence  will  not,  I trust,  be  abused.
Not  yet  living  in  a cloudless  atmosphere  of  liberty  of
conscience,  I must  be  silent  as  to  the  names  of  a few

N


186  THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE,  ETC.

benevolent  men  who  have  more  or  less  contributed
to  the  publication  of  this  work,  by  facilitating  my
acquisition  of  the  number  of  subscribers  I desired,  un-
willing, as  I am,  to  render  any  one  responsible  for  a
work  which  was  possibly  accepted  too  favourably,  before
being  known.  Would  that  1 could  cite  the  name  of  a
confiding  disciple  of  Swedenborg,  who  advanced  me
the  funds  necessary  for  the  printing,  and  that  of  a
generous  friend  to  enlightenment  who  subscribed  a
hundred  francs  !

But  shame  to  the  savans  to  whom  I addressed  my-
self, and  who  did  not  even  do  me  the  honour  of  answer-
ing my  application  ! What  can  be  the  reason  ? I wished
to  prove  to  them  mathematically  the  existence  of  a soul,
of  which  they  speak,  but  in  which  they  do  not  believe !
I wished  to  point  out  to  them  a school  to  w^hich  men
in  general  should  be  compelled  to  resort  for  new  studies.
I came  humbly  to  solicit  a trifle  from  philanthrophy  to
aid  me  in  this  publication.  To  whom,  alas  ! did  I
address  myself?  I wanted  to  enlighten  those  who
teach  ! I asked  of  those  who  beg  ! I offered  to  bar-
gain with  the  princes  of  trade  ! I ought  to  exclaim
with  Saint  Martin: — ‘^Nothing  is  easier  than  to  arrive
at  the  door  of  truths;  nothing  more  rare  and  difficult
than  entering  it;’^  and  such,  indeed,  is  the  case  with
most  of  the  philosophers  of  this  world  !


END  OF  VOLUME  THE  FIRST.


INDEX


TO

VOLUME  THE  FIRST.


PAGE

Introduction  • • ••  ••  ••  ••  «•  ••  11

Sitting  1. — T'irst  Ecstatic. — Bruno  Binet — His  clairvoyant  pro-
perties— His  relations  with  the  spiritual  world  . . . . 1

2.  Notions  on  magnetism  and  the  properties  of  the  soul  ..  ..  2

3.  Facility  of  communicating  with  spirits  ..  ..  ..  ..  3

4.  Mode  of  praying  and  avoiding  evil  thoughts — Details  on  the

punishment  inflicted  by  God  on  criminals — Occupations  in
heaven — Happiness  and  observations  ..  ..  ..  4

5.  Notions  on  a soi-disant  enchantment  to  which  I was  a victim —

Details,  reflections  on  this  subject  ..  ..  ..  ..  7

6.  Apparition  of  Bruno’s  father — Description  of  him  ..  ..  9

7.  Details  on  angels  and  spirits — What  they  do  in  heaven..  ..  9

8.  Varieties  of  Bruno’s  sleep  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  10

9.  Corporeal  substance  of  spirits — Notions  on  evil  ..  ..  10

10.  Second  apparition  of  Bruno’s  father — Description  of  heaven  and

the  costume  of  the  angels,  &c.  ..  ..  ..  ..  11

11.  Continuation  of  the  preceding  details  ..  ..  ..  ..  12

12.  Properties  of  angels  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  13

13.  Doubt  prevents  not  revelation  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  13

14.  Under  what  form  God  is  seen  in  heaven — There  are  three  heavens

where  spirits  are  in  societies  . . . . . . . . . . 13

15.  Metajfliysical  discussion — Form  under  which  the  spirit  of  man

ascends  to  heaven  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..14

16.  Fresh  details  on  the  power  of  spirits  ..  ..  ..  ..  14

17.  Spiritscan  insinuate  themselves  into  the  body  of  clairvoyants  to

answer  the  questions  submitted  to  them  . . . . . . 15

18.  Bruno,  ill,  declares  himself  under  the  influence  of  spirits  that

cause  his  illness — Explanation  ..  ..  ..  ..  15

19.  What  man  owes  to  spirits  who  have  rendered  him  services — Ob-

sessions— Citation  in  support  of  Bruno’s  assertion  .,  ..  16


188


INDEX.


PAGE

20.  Third  appearance  of  Bruno’s  father — What  he  does  in  heaven —

Apparition  of  an  angel  ..  ..  ..  ..  ••  21

21.  Second  apparition  of  an  angel — Description  of  the  separation  of

the  soul  from  the  bod}’ — Its  entrance  into  heaven  ..  ..  22

21i.  Discussion  on  the  power  of  spirits,  their  relation  to  matter — A

few  words  on  the  Convulsionnaires  of  tlie  last  century  . . 23

22.  Revelation  as  to  the  creation  of  man,  male  and  female — The

reunion  of  both  sexes  in  heaven — Explanatory  comparison  in
respect  to  this  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..24

23.  Notions  on  the  manner  in  which  spirits  perceive  celestial  and

terrestrial  things  ; their  power  of  communicating  with  men —
Reflections  on  this  subject  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..26

24.  Possessions  ; their  causes,  &c.,  &c.  . . . . . . < . 30

25.  Fresh  notions  on  the  manner  in  which  objects  are  perceived  in

heaven — Details  as  to  the  societies  that  inhabit  it ; their
usages — How  clairvoyants  see  things  that  no  longer  exist  but
in  image  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31

26.  Second  Ecstatic. — Mdlle.  Fanny  Binet — Her  dream,  her

magnetic  sleep — Apparition  of  an  angel — Description  of  the
lat.er  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  3o

27.  Fresh  apparition  of  the  angel — Bruno  magnetised  with  Fanny —

Agreement  of  their  visions — Loss  of  this  speciality  . . . . 37

28.  Third  Ecstatic. — Mdlle.  Franfoise — Apparition  of  her  father

and  mother — Description  of  their  person  . . . . . . 38

29.  Prediction  of  death  fulfilled  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  39

30.  Second  apparition  of  the  father  of  Francoise  ; her  grand-daughter

and  nephew — Curious  details  ..  ..  ..  ..39

31.  Fresh  prediction  of  death  fulfilled  — Explanation  of  the  marvel  in

the  foregoing  sitting-— Observations  ..  ..  ..  ..  40

32.  Fourth  Ecstatic. — Mde.  F.,  her  speciality  ..  ..  ..  43

33.  Apparition  of  a strange  spirit — Ditto  of  her  son — Details — Ob-

servations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43

34.  Fifth  Ecstatic. — Mde.  Riviere — Apparition  of  her  father —

Surprise  caused  him  by  this  apparition,  the  details  of  which
are  curious  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..47

35.  Sixth  Ecstatic. — Mde.  Adcle  Angelot — Her  speciality  ..  48

36.  Notions  on  magnetism  . . . . . . . . . . . . 49

37.  Apparition  of  Adele’s  niece — Description  of  celestial  happiness  50

38.  Second  apparition  of  Adt^le's  niece — Conversation  between  them  51

39.  First  apparition  of  Alphonse,  Adele’s  brother — Details  respecting

h 1 m ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  51

40.  Apparition  of  Jean  jMarie,  Adele’s  second  brother  ..  ..  52

41.  Apparition  of  her  mother,  brothers,  and  niece — What  they  do

in  heaven  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..53

42.  Adcle’s  attempt  at  suicide  in  her  ecstacy,in  order  to  accompany  her

relations  in  heaven — Discussion  on  this  subject — Notions  on
heaven — The  societies  that  inhabit  it ; what  they  do  there —

In  what  form  God  appears  ..  .,  ..  ..  ..  53

43.  Apparition  of  Adele’s  father,  &c.  . , . , . . . . 55


INDEX.


189


PACK

44.  Notions  as  to  the  sensations  we  experience  when  dying — How

and  wherewith  our  soul  is  composed  after  the  death  of  the
body — On  mankind  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..56

45.  Another  apparition  of  her  relatives;  they  answer  all  my  ques-

tions— Description  of  celestial  light — Why  the  dead  appear
in  their  earthly  forms  and  dress — Notions  on  love  in  heaven,
on  the  creation  of  man,  male  and  female,  in  pairs — Their
marriage  in  heaven  ; comparison  in  this  respect  ..  ..  56

46.  Spirits  can  assume  any  form  agreeable  to  them,  operate  posses-

sions, &c — Notions  on  the  names  of  angels,  &c.  . . . . 59

47.  Curious  cause  for  which  Adele’s  mother  would  come  no  more  to

see  her — Prediction  fulfilled  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  61

48.  Apparition  of  Adele’s  nephew — Contradiction  between  her  and

Druno  as  to  this  apparition — Apparition  of  Adele’s  brother-
in-law  ; contrariety  she  experiences  at  seeing  this  man  . . 62

49.  Pow'erful  ecstacy  ; Adele  eaters  heaven,  and  gives  a detailed

description  of  it ; she  acknowledges  that  Bruno’s  vision  was
more  correct  than  hers  at  the  foregoing  sitting  . . . . 63

50.  Apparition  of  the  companion  of  Alphonse,  AdMe’s  brother;  what

she  does  in  heaven — Description  of  usages,  &c.,  there — Notions
on  dreams — Observations  on  revelations  . . . . . . 64

51.  Prevision  justified — Dangers  of  ecstasy — State  of  children  in

heaven  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66

52.  Description  of  ecstatic  sensations. — Proofs  of  the  existence  of

heaven — Discussion  on  these  details  . . . . . . . . 67

53.  Fresh  notions  on  ecstacy — Dangerous  experiment,  near  costing

Adele  her  life — Reflection  on  experiments  of  this  kind —
Punishment  of  Adele,  who  can  no  longer  see  any  of  her  rela-
tions ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  68

51.  New  spiritual  clairvoyance — Apparition  of  M.  M***,  father  of
the  Abb^,  solicited  by  the  latter,  who  had  heard  speak  of
Adele’s  speciality  . . . . . . . . . . . . 71

55.  Apparition  of  Father  Lauriot,  who  declares  himself  a friend  of

the  Abbe,  unknown  to  the  latter  and  us — Curious  details  on
this  apparition  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..72

56.  Second  apparition  of  Father  Lauriot,  who  gives  a few  particulars,

which  in  nowise  tend,  however,  to  his  being  recognised  . . 73

57.  Doubts  as  to  the  purity  of  this  apparition,  which  we  cannot

verify,  not  knowing  Father  Lauriot  ..  ..  ..  ..  74

58.  Fresh  details  of  M.  Lauriot — Fruitless  researches  ..  ..  75

59.  M.  Lauriot  is  recognised — Solution  of  the  enigma  of  his  appari-

tion, and  what  he  was  on  earth  ..  ..  ..  ..  76

60.  Fresh  experiment  tried  by  the  Abbe,  to  account  to  himself  for

this  apparition  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  78

C 1 . Doubts  of  the  Abbe  — M.  Lauriot  has  not  answered  his  expectations

— New  apparition  of  the  latter  producing  no  better  results  ..  78

62.  Apparition  again  of  M.  Lauriot,  who  explains  the  cause  of  his  mis-

takes— Debates  on  this  subject  between  us  two — Reflections  80

63.  Continuation  of  the  foregoing  one  . . . . . . . , 83


190


INDEX.


PAGE

64.  Appaiition  of  a Spanisli  Alchymist  ..  ..  ..  ..  84

65.  Apparition  of  the  Count  de  Mallet,  solicited  by  the  Abbe — A

descrip' ion  of  the  Count  ..  ..  ..  ••  ..85

60.  Wliat  M.  de  Mallet  was  on  earth — Counsels  he  gives  his  friends  86

67.  Revelations  as  to  the  D’Orval  predictions,  by  M.  de  Mallet,  as

to  their  realization — As  to  the  existence  of  Louis  XVI.  ..  87

68.  Psychological  notions  as  to  the  acquirements  of  the  soul  after  its

exit  from  this  world — On  the  pretended  hell  of  tiie  Catholics  88

69.  Recollection  of  self — Notions  on  the  celestial  state — On  Miracles

— Spirits — Messages,  &c.  . . . . . . . . . . 89

70.  Notions  on  possessions, — the  invisibility  of  the  material  man —

Counsels  in  this  respect  ..  91

71.  Questions  addressed  to  M.  de  Mallet,  on  the  nature  of  the  soul  ;

what  it  does  in  heaven.  Its  marriage  there — Discussion
with  Adele  on  this  sitting — Reflections  of  M.  de  Mallet  . . 92

72.  Apparition  of  Elisa ; her  revelations  as  to  what  the  persons

thought  who  followed  her  to  the  grave  . . . . . . 95

73.  Apparition  of  the  sister  of  Elisa’s  husband,  solicited  by  the

latter.  A description  of  her  . . . . . . . . . . 97

74.  Apparition  of  M.  Desforges  solicited  by  his  friend,  M.  Rcnard

— Description — Counsels  to  M.  Renard  ..  ..  ..  99

75.  Second  Apparition  of  Elisa  with  one  of  her  compaoions — Reve-

lation as  to  what  she  experienced  when  dying  and  on  her
ascension  to  heaven  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  100

76.  First  Apparition  of  M.  Swedenborg — Descripti  n of  him —

Notions  on  the  veracity  cf  his  writings  ..  ..  102

77.  Solution  as  to  the  means  of  coa'.municating  by  thought  between

man  nia'eiiul  and  man  spiritual  — On  those  of  falling  into  a
state  of  somnolency  by  narcotics — Notions  on  magnetism — •

Man,  male  and  female.  His  union  in  heaven.  His  love — On

time — Space  in  the  spiritual  world — On  the  affections  of  spirits  103

78.  Notions  on  insanity ; its  causes  and  consequences  in  the  spiritual

world — Hallucinations  caused  by  evil  sjnrits — Pacts — Posses-
sions— Talismans — Magic  mirrors — AIcbymy — .Astrology  ..  105

79.  Secret  of  the  mirror  given  by  AL  Swedenborg — What  he  does

in  heaven — Notions  on  the  material  and  spiritual  properties  of
man  ; his  rclaticms  with  the  universe — On  magnetism,  phre-
nology—the  nature  and  assemblage  of  thoughts,  free-will,  the
diaphanous  body — How  thoughts  are  perceived  in  heaven  by
spiri's  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  106

80.  Heaven  bears  not  the  human  form — Discussion  on  free-will  ;

proof  of  the  latter  by  the  arrangement  of  tlie  thoughts —

How  they  are  perceived  by  clairvoyants — Predictions,  their
source  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  109

81.  Notions  on  the  substance  of  the  spiritual  world — On  the  spiritual

stars,  on  the  spiritual  sun ; tho  latter  recognised  by  spirits  as
the  only  God  ..  ....  ..  ..  ..  ..112

82.  Fresh  explanation  of  M.  Swedenborg  on  the  stars — The  material

worlds — The  places  where  God  stations  spirits — Difl’erence
between  the  stars  and  the  material  globes  ..  ..  ..113


INDEX.


1.91


PAGE

83.  Notions  on  the  hnppi  less  of  the  future  life — How  places  and

objects  are  perceived  in  heaven — Revelation  on  our  anterior
existence,  utility  of  the  material  existence  which  prepares  us
for  the  happiness  of  the  life  to  come — Possibility  of  seeing  a
child  whose  future  birth  is  remote  ..  ..  ..  ..114

84.  Third  apparition  of  Elisa ; what  she  does  in  heaven  —What  the

ecstatic  experiences  on  the  appearance  of  a spirit  . . . . 116

85.  Fresh  apparition  of  M.  Swedenborg — Continuation  of  the  notions

on  the  ii'e  anterior — On  the  sun,  which  is  not  an  inhabited  globe  117

86.  God  created'all  men  by  his  word — Last  notions  on  the  sun  ..  119

87.  Fresh  notions  on  the  necessity  of  appearing  upon  our  globe —

Why  we  live  in  it  from  a day  to  a hundred  years — Bondage  of
the  soul  in  the  body  ; its  properties — Why  do  we  perceive
spots  in  the  sun  ? — Observations  and  reflections  on  all  that  has
been  said  in  the  foregoing  sittings  by  M.  Swedenborg  ..  119

88.  Seventh  Ecstatic. — Emile  Rey,  ten  years  of  age — The  appa-

rition of  his  school-fellow — His  revelations  on  heaven  . . 138

89.  Continuation  of  the  revelations  on  the  spiritual  world — On  the

attire  of  spirits — On  God  . . . . . . . . . . 139

90.  Apparition  of  M.  Verdure  and  his  mother  ..  ..  ..  141

91.  Ditto  of  Emile’s  brother — of  his  grandmother — What  she

does  in  heaven — Reflections  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  142

92.  Eighth  Ecst.xtic. — Madame  Gouget — Her  first  ecstasy —

Description  of  God — Of  heaven — Reflections  on  this  sitting. . 146

93.  Apparition  of  my  grandmother — Of  my  mother — Retrospective

view  of  actions  20  years  ago — Adele’s  revenge — Observations  149
Appendix. — Apparition  of  Juliette,  M.  Renard’s  partner — In-
formation on  this  head — M.  Renard  sees  her  in  a dream  as
Adele  had  predicted — Curious  answer  made  him  by  Juliette  . 156

94.  Further  questions  addressed  by  M.  Renard  to  M.  Swedenborg

on  the  sun — Notions  as  to  the  manner  in  which  objects  are
perceived  in  heaven,  and  how  they  can  be  disposed  of  . . 159

95.  Apparition  of  M.  Renard’s  father — Description  of  him — Ques-

tions to  M.  Swedenborg  as  to  the  age  and  condition  of
children  in  heaven — Are  they  children  of  God  or  men — Facul-
ties of  deceased  persons — What  becomes  of  an  embryo  a
fortnight  old ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  161

96.  Spiritual  language,  has  it  sounds  ? — How  can  a foreign  spirit

understand  our  language  ? — M.  Swedenborg  gives  details  on
the  spirituality  of  material  objects — How  a clairvoyant  can  per-
ceive in  his  eye  what  room  the  soul  takes  up — Comparison
of  the  portrait  of  M Swedenborg  with  the  latter — Details  as
to  the  colour  and  cut  of  his  garments  ..  ..  ..  163

Conclusion  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  169

Psychological  Questions — Lists  of  the  questions  and  answers  con-
tained in  this  work  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..170

Mode  of  promoting  ecstasy  and  guiding  the  clairvoyant . . . . 175

Secret  for  making  the  magic  glass,  and  on  the  manner  of  operating  178
Can  CURES  BE  PERFORMED  through  PRAYER  ? ..  '. . ..  182

Thanks  to  the  subscribers,  and  counsels  to  the  savans  ,,  ,,  185


' >


T '■’•

*

pu  "^  '

j»;  i r J

f.'  fl  M‘  - Ifc  •15“'

Ml  .a-^*  *.  -

. -p  i *-.  *•

Jk  ■ • <74  *7  0 l|J  •'

• '

, •■>  p..;  *4  Jv  '’  • *'

. . 4.4

>Tr  .,  ' .■:

, , ti«  ■•2*

lut)  ;c  r^f  •n^9l'

?II,..  ..

' *•  . V ’.  •■  ^

>''•  .»  pi! ' ‘■^  '■

, ,s,.kr>-.v

1 1 [ T.1  .

, , , i it*  r.-  • . .

W l . . 'V

i'.-i  j.i.-’i

, .Vi

. -il**

1.  ...  A " ■■

• ✓


i .r-  .

-;t  ■(,  1

■ .1  » i


V , !.  i;rT  / 1

» •-  I,  o i} mH  .r.f;

' _,ni  ' / *5  >;  a»  •*  <•"  ,

. . ..  I * af  I A > t I.  * ' 'i  a b ^


♦j  « >r


. ■<»  ■ •'


t;’-  «1  ^ T"  — 4 — - ' - .

.Mn..i  i.  r-.  ’ -■•-  ••  ‘'■  '•.  "r?;

CII  ..  . ■y**i  ■ '■  -.  .;c  *..' -'■  - ' " '

^ ,»  t.  . a t'-J’  - '-

T»v')-  — dIio'w  I'  -■>♦  i'’  "

"TO  :*■*  ■'  •“■i-.  -.  . ■ .'i  •••  •


■l  ^


- .Bb.
» .»'B


Ijf  ? . .

!ir  ,r  ■ -v

0 ' ' » '

sn  .-.


,rA  •_•■'<

* -•  ' i»<0>  ‘ ' .1'.  V>  • w<Jii  -OC

'"-If  ,■.'  w—ri.  '.^3^

. H ni:r lii-fjol*


^ -C  .S^'i  * <«*.  '‘-i-  - wii’ui.f

DU  ./mhiKf*!?)  row.  ’ ,

-•/.V-j  Hit’rOi T
Oit  ..nfr  <l:  !n — ajfia.M  ..,/tVU£»X  .

: .•bT.n.U  *M

‘‘an fii  i-‘*l  *• . ■ . - ' •'>  nik*i  - c rM  j

DC  I ‘-’’.i  !.*-*»? -V**/*

l.,;.fa:.ft?  S ••'■  r*  ^n’  : •>•■«•  I ' ■ '.'  •

5n’a  to  - - ■ ■'’  ‘f*  I’n^-

p.r  IJ,  f ^ ,W,ih  MOf  t^f  ’ •!  ’ < - k*l  4»  • -.'I  - •»‘  I -.

.«  ■ ■ .‘/-O.-fri  i «vWf.-.v4C-  .»  .Uf  . ■ it-u.nA^  •*•'

■Jo  „r«.;.:»rcr>  ^^>■  •<'-  <•»  *•’

.rjjr-o’!— tWia  -.  ■ ■■  f ^ !«A— ^4<i-  .>  » '

ft  0,1  rro  Itt  * *'>  u >.'  a^a/;-Wy*r..j  - ; - ''’

^ . i.i’  **  « '

“ rto'kl'atiri  ^•'  .- f.u..  <»*.  • ti*i‘  >

’ .Uw  ■<  n»  'i— J,  kf^tsu  -■  f OU

■•  •■;  '■  V '\\^]

rVJ  ’W  ■ ’ ’ ► *■.  kill  I*»  / i - ki  ''  * jH  OJ  H

..  HriW4>HO>

“ ■ = -='  ^ -a-jp4*5H.  Ji’wor**!

.,  ..  ..  -ViyuMi:  i i..*i

c?f  ..  " 'iW***  ^'’^T .i>foorni-T»  .

8^1  •InvantnuMk.  iw»Ji^ii*raht  ■iJ  ‘t

Itii  ‘.:  ..  «>  tAftloB  ' W..  ,na‘l»»i»?n  -j>'A0

Cfcl  ..*  ••  tjiTs4:>i  9.’^3  <?♦ 0 ^


THE  SECRETS  OE  THE  FUTURE


REVEALED  THROUGH

MAGNETISM,


VOL.  II.

CONTAINING  PERCEPTIONS  OF  FIFTY  MORE  PERSONS  WHO  DIED  AT
DIFFERENT  PERIODS A PERSONAL  DESCRIPTION  OF  THEM,  CON-

VERSATIONS HELD  WITH  THEM,  AND  CERTIFICATES  AS  TO  THEIR

IDENTITY; ALSO,  A NUMEROUS  COLLECTION  OF  SUPERNATURAL

FACTS  COMMUNICATED  BY  MAGNETISERS,  AND  aUOTATIONS  FROM
SPIRITUALIST  PHILOSOPHERS  ON  THE  IMMORTALITY  OF  THE  SOUL,
ETC.,  ETC.


“ What  magnetism  rigorously  demonstrates  is  the  spirituality  of  the
soul  arid  its  immortality ; also,  that  souls  separated  from  the  body  can  in
certain  cases  put  themselves  in  communication  with  living  beings,  and
convey  to  them  their  sentiments.  The  study  of  the  phenomena  of  som-
nambulism is  ill  this  respect  more  important  than  in  that  of  curing
diseases." — Deleuze,


When,  in  January,  1848,  I presented  the  public  with
the  first  volume  of  the  “ Secrets,^^  I was  unable  to  sup-
port the  facts  therein  contained  by  any  testimony  but
my  own.  My  position  as  a simple  workman,  my  very
confined  social  relations,  absolutely  null  in  the  scientific
world,  could  give  no  weight  to  the  persuasions  I had
just  propounded ; I felt  that,  despite  their  truth,  and
the  facility  of  being  assured  of  it,  I should,  perhaps,
throw  out  only  a few  doubts,  which  would  pass  to  the

B


9


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


state  of  definitive  beliefs,  if  I supported  these  revela-
tions by  honourable  testimonials ; consequently,  to
attain  this  end,  I hastened  to  give  apparition-sittings  to
persons  who  solicited  them,  and  now  I can  surround
my  own  name  with  names  that  the  public  venerate  as
autliorities.  In  this  second  volume  I present  to  the
world  a sufficient  number  of  testimonials  to  apparitions
obtained,  recognised,  and  signed  as  true,  by  princes,
counts,  viscounts,  generals,  colonels,  pastors  of  different
creeds,  landholders,  merchants,  men  of  letters,  mag-
netisers,  and  artisans,  personages  of  different  nations,
&c.,  &c.,  all  ready  to  confirm  by  their  verbal  testimony
wdiat  they  signed  at  my  abode.

I do  not  think  that,  with  such  supporters,  and  such
frankness  on  my  part,  any  charlatanism,  bad  faith,  and,
above  all,  hallucination  can  be  suspected  ; my  judgment
may  be  confined  to  the  little  instruction  I have  received,
and  to  a few  persuasions  more  or  less  true  and  admis-
sible ; but  the  persons  whose  testimonials  will  be  read
are  competent  witnesses,  savans  interested  in  this  ques-
tion, magnetisers  who  had  not  till  then  pushed  their
experiments  in  this  direction,  and  who  much  doubted
the  possibility  of  causing  to  appear  thus  deceased  per-
sons, in  conditions  necessary  to  admit  of  their  being
recognised  and  holding  converse  with  them  ; a great
question,  assuredly,  was  that  which  I sought  to  resolve
with  all  the  force  of  my  intelligence,  and  which  I have
succeeded  in  causing  to  be  resolved  by  others  with  more
facility  than  one  could  have  ventured  to  hope.

I come,  therefore,  to  present  to  the  public  this  second
volume,  in  which  I have  thought  proper  to  answer,  by
way  of  refutation,  certain  objections  made  to  different
propositions  set  forth  in  the  first  volume.

1 have  thought  fit  to  reconcile  this  faculty  of  clair-
voyants with  that  which  our  fathers  must  have  pos-
sessed, as  well  in  ancient  times  as  in  the  middle  ages,
thus  permitting  them  to  open  different  schools,  where
similar  beliefs  were  taught,  which  demonstrated,  a priori.


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


3


the  existence  of  the  soul  after  its  separation  from  matter,
living  individualised  in  a better  world,  under  the  human
form,  having  recollection  of  its  self,  and  its  terrestrial
existence,  re-uniting  itself  according  to  its  affections
to  its  relatives  or  friends,  dead  like  itself,  and  having
sensations,  usages,  affections,  as  here  below;  this  is
what,  in  a few  words,  I have  desired  to  demonstrate  as
mathematically  as  possible  by  the  aid  of  somnambulism
and  apparitions.  I may  applaud  myself  for  this  under-
taking, because  up  to  the  present  moment  it  has  com-
pletely succeeded  with  all  those  who  have  engaged  in
it.  Some  magnetisers  have  been  so  obliging  as  to
respond  to  the  general  appeal  I made,  and  have  fur-
nished me  with  several  experiments  which  will  be  read,
after  mine,  and  with  no  less  interest.

May  I not  encounter  on  my  road  those  bourns,  ob-
stacles past,  present,  and  future,  placed  on  all  roads,  to
operate  as  a bar  to  the  truths  that  enlighten  the  human
species.  I engage  those  who  accompany  me  in  thest
experiments  not  to  halt  from  the  desire  of  throwing  light
on  any  obscurity.  It  would  be  pure  loss  of  time,  and
injurious  to  the  proposed  end.

REPLY  TO  THE  MAGNETISERS  WHO  BELIEVE  THAT  THE  APPA-
RITIONS MENTIONED  IN  THE  FIRST  VOLUME  OP  THE  SECRETS

ARB  BUT  AN  EFFECT  OF  TRANSMISSION  OF  THOUGHTS.

On  the  first  appearance  of  the  “ Secrets  of  the  Future
Life  Revealed,”  the  spiritualist  magnetisers  who  had
made  similar  experiments,  gave  a kind,  I may  say  a
grateful,  reception  to  this  work,  because  it  strengthened
in  them  beliefs  which  were  yet  in  a mere  nascent  state.
This  work  had  necessarily  to  encounter  adversaries  in
shallow  magnetisers,  who  refer  all  the  phenomena  of
magnetism  and  somnambulism  to  matter.  I know  not
whether  such  kind  of  men  believe  in  the  existence  of
God  and  the  soul.  They  say  yes,  for  decency’s  sake,
and  deny  through  passion.

In  such  frame  of  mind,  contrary  to  the  spirit  of
this  work,  they  exclaimed,  with  a certain  assurance —


4


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


These  pretended  revelations  are  but  a transmission  of
thoughts.”  I then  wrote  to  M.  Hebert  de  Garnay,
editor  of  the  “Journal  du  Magnetisme,”  to  have  the
kindness  to  address  to  me  one  of  those  formidable  savans
who  alone  produce,  see,  and  judge,  in  order  to  put  to
him  questions  worthy  of  his  lofty  intelligence ; silence
was  the  only  adversary  I found  on  the  place  of  combat.
As  bourns  are  ever  accidents,  hidden  and  acting  in  the
dark,  I looked  upon  myself  as  w'arned.

I had  dedicated  the  first  volume  of  the  “ Secrets”  to
M.  Dupotet,  as  being  the  most  distinguished  character
in  magnetic  science,  and,  consequently,  the  fittest  per-
son to  appreciate  its  value ; he  would  naturally  give  an
analysis  of  it  in  his  estimable  journal,  in  v’hich  he  was
so  obliging  as  to  announce  the  subscription.  Several
months  elapsed  before  the  subscribers  to  this  journal
knew  what  they  were  to  think  of  this  work.  One
evening  M.  Dupotet  came,  in  company  with  several
persons,  to  ask  me  for  an  apparition-sitting ; he  was
satisfied,  as  we  shall  see  farther  on.  But  still  this  ana-
lysis did  not  appear.  At  length,  on  the  12th  December,
in  the  75th  number  of  the  “ Journal  du  Magnetisme,”
we  read  a critique,  from  which  we  extract  the  following
passages : —

“ 1.  M.  Cahagnet  dedicating  to  us  his  book,  w'e  are
in  a measure  bound  to  say  what  we  think  of  it.

“Wishing  to  assure  myself  of  this  incredible  fact,  1
askedfor  a deceased  friend  of  mine,whollyunknown  to  the
clairvoyante  and  her  magnetiser ; this  ecstatic  described
to  me  my  friend,  and  enumerated  all  the  singularities  cha-
racteristic of  him  ; nothing  was  forgotten,  insomuch  that
I verily  thought  that  I beheld  him  myself.  This  spectre
disappeared  abruptly,  frightening  the  somnambulist ; a
single  word  had  caused  its  sudden  disappearance,  and
my  astonishment  was  at  its  height,  for  this  very  word
invariably  tended  to  infuriate  it.*  This  fact,  which


* Vide  117th  Sitting.


REVEALED  TPIROUGH  MAGNETISM.  5

I guarantee,  gives  a sort  of  semblance  of  truth  to  M.
Cahagnet’s  doctrine  concerning  the  apparition  of  the
dead.  His  book  is  full  of  similar  phenomena  ; still  I
am  not  fully  convinced.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  an  in-
termediate who  sees,  and  to  any  one  familiarised  with
somnambulism  it  might  be  attributed  to  communication
of  thoughts.^^

2.  Then  comes  a somewhat  illiberal  critique  on  the
work  as  a whole,  its  poverty  in  poetical  images,  in
scientific  and  logical  solutions,  accompanied  with  these
words — “ I renounce  making  quotations  from  the  ‘Se-
crets,^ as  some  would  prove  too  much  for  many  per-
sons, and  others  not  enough.^^

3.  Farther  on  we  find  the  following : — “ Be  that  as
it  may,  the  ‘ Secrets^  have  created  some  sensation  in  the
magnetic  world.  The  book  is  a step  farther  towards
the  unknown.^^

4.  And  this  observation — “ How’  is  it  that  in  all  the
answers  of  the  spirits,  M.  Cahagnet  has  not  yet  met
wfith  aught  that  distinguishes  genii  from  simple  mor-
tals, nor  collected  any  of  those  important  truths  with
W’hich  heaven  is  full  ?”

I wdll  answer,  in  a few  words,  these  four  principal
observations  of  the  Honorable  M.  Dupotet.  With
respect  to  the  first,  if  you  believed  in  the  communica-
tion of  thoughts,  you  should  not  have  asked  for  a person
of  your  acquaintance.  If  you  are  not  fully  convinced
of  the  truth  of  these  apparitions,  how  would  you  have
the  persons  whom  you  invite  to  verify  those  that  you
publicly  provoke  every  Sunday  in  your  saloons,  in  a circle
traced  with  charcoal,  be  convinced  any  more  than  you.  As
to  the  second,  that  the  work  is  devoid  of  poetical  images,
scientific  and  logical  solutions,  ending  with  these  words,
“ The  ‘ Secrets’  w’ould  prove  far  too  much  for  certain
folks,  and  not  enough  for  others  first,  1 am,  as  I have
already  said,  the  man  of  nature  w’ithout  any  instruction,
consequently  as  devoid  of  the  genius  of  Virgil  as  of  the
captious  definitions  of  Kant.  The  “ Secrets,”  how'-


6


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


ever,  contain  more  than  twelve  hundred  solutions,  as
well  metaphysical  as  psychological,  the  analysis  of  which
you  neglect,  if  they  are  not  scientific  or  logical,  it  was
intended,  at  any  rate,  that  they  should  be  so  ; again,  if
they  prove  too  much  for  certain  folks,  and  not  enough
for  others,  there  must  be  something  in  them  useful  or
ridiculous.  This  seems  to  me  logical.  As  to  the  third
observation,  you  say  that  “ the  ‘ Secrets’  have  created
some  sensation  in  the  magnetic  world,  that  this  book
is  a step  taken  towards  the  unknown.”  If  they  have
created  a sensation  it  is  from  pleasure  or  pity;  let  those
who  have  read  them  judge.  If  it  is  a step  taken  to-
wards the  unknown,  it  proves,  then,  something  more
logical  than  you  say.  At  the  fourth  observation  M.
Dupotet  is  astonished  that  certain  genii  did  not  come
to  reveal  to  me  certain  truths  of  which  heaven  is  full.
I will  answer,  that  it  is  for  the  reason  that  like  seek  like ;
as  I am  not,  and  never  shall  be,  a genius,  I sought
beings  of  my  own  nature.  Still,  the  Secrets  ” have
created  a sensation^  have  proved,  have  caused  a step  to  be
taken  towards  the  unknown  / The  fact  is,  that  those
who  came  to  inspire  me  knew  more  than  1.  M.  Swe-
denborg, who,  no  doubt,  according  to  M.  Dupotet,
never  was  a genius,  has  told  me,  however,  that  the  sun
which  we  behold  was  not  a material  globe,  that  thoughts
were  living  beings ; that  a man  had  a universe  inclosed
in  his  sphere,  and  a hundred  revelations  of  the  kind.
In  one  of  the  three  that  I have  just  mentioned,  there  is
a total  overthrow  of  all  received  philosophy  and  where-
with to  acquire  genius.

T 1.  Dupotet  is  surprised,  as  well  as  many  other
philosophers,  at  learning  nothing  in  what  they  read  as  to
a future  life,  from  the  little  harmony,  as  they  say,  which
exists  between  the  system  of  each  clairvoyant.  I am  not
surprised  at  it,  not  I.  These  philosophers  did  not  write
my  book,  and  they  wish  to  submit  the  whole  creation
to  their  own  arguments,  and,  through  affection,  they
argue  incessantly.  What  would  you  say  to  us  if  we


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


7


gave  the  key  of  these  contradictions  in  three  words  ;
mj,  three  words  only.  We  will  do  so;  free  to  ^^ou  to
see  opened  to  us  the  doors  of  Charenton  (Bedlam)  ;
here  they  are : All  is  in  all,  and  everywhere.  The
heavens  of  the  clairvoyants,  the  earth  of  mortals,  are
not  places  for  them,  but  states.  Each  takes  a delight
in  his  own  when  it  corresponds  with  his  afi’ection  ; he
makes  of  it  either  a heaven  or  a hell.  Swedenborg  has
told  us  this,  and  the  state  of  our  clairvoyants  proves  it ;
they  are  wherever  they  will,  in  what  they  will,  do  what
they  will ; without  ceasing  to  be  there,  they  are  here
below,  they  are  in  all,  everywhere,  and  all.  Judge,
now,  from  such  a property,  whether  there  can  be  any
agreement  in  w^hat  they  reveal  to  us;  it  is  the  infinite  of
the  infinite.  I fear  not  telling  you  that  the  spirit  can
quite  as  well  be  in  the  speech,  in  a single  word,  as  this
spjeech  and  this  word  are  in  it.  See  whither  I am
leading  you,  since  you  drive  me  to  it.  Come,  have  a
little  indulgence,  gentlemen  of  science,  I am  but  a poor
workman  who  earns  his  bread  by  the  SAveat  of  his  brow,
who  meditates  and  writes  at  night.  Aid  me,  and  do
not  shackle  me.  I promise  you  that  I will  develop
these  propositions  in  another  work  whi(di  I am  now
about,  merely  wishing  to  prove  to  you  in  this  the  in-
dividualised existence  of  the  soul,  after  its  separation
from  matter,  and  the  possibility  of  communicating  with
it.  I return  to  our  reply  to  magnetisers,  on  their
argument  as  to  the  communication  of  thoughts.

I take  the  liberty  of  putting  to  them  the  following
questions  : —

1st.  Is  it  true  that  a clairvoyant  can  see,  hear,  feel,
and  converse  with  another  being,  at  a distance  ?

2nd.  Is  it  true  that  it  merely  suffices  to  put  him  en
rapport  with  the  name  of  the  places  and  persons  desired
to  be  perceived  at  these  distances,  in  order  that  he  may
perceive  them  ?

If  you  answer  these  two  questions  in  the  affirmative
(and  you  cannot  answer  them  otherwise),  you  admit  an


s


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


intelligent  being  or  fluid,  independent  (in  this  state)  of
the  material  body,  able  to  know  such  things  ; such  being
or  fluid  rightly  deserves  a name ; we  will  term  it  a soul.

This  soul,  no  matter  its  mode  of  perceiving  places  or
objects  at  a distance,  proves  to  us  that  the  material  body
is  deprived  of  this  faculty,  since  it  is  necessary  that
some  agent  or  other  should  annihilate  it  (shall  I say  ?),
to  facilitate  the  intelligence  which  animates  it  in  thus
performing  functions  without.  This  soul,  fluid,  spirit,
whatever  you  please,  which  encounters  no  obstacle,  and
finds  itself  independent  of  material  laws,  cannot  be
more  subject  to  annihilation  than  this  matter,  whose
immortality,  in  an  infinity  of  states,  you  acknowledge.

We  cannot  admit  a special  law  of  annihilation  for  the
spirit,  when  we  admit  none  for  matter,  the  soul  sur-
vives its  envelope ; we  cannot  doubt  it,  or  we  must
prove  the  contrary.  If  it  survives  its  envelope,  it  is
somewhere.  It  is  not  more  unfindable  for  the  clair-
voyant than  the  place,  the  person,  or  the  earthly  object,
which  he  sees  at  a distance,  without  being  in  com-
munication with  them ; but,  will  you  answer,  the
person  consulting  is  en  rapport  himself  with  the  thing
asked  for?  I will  ansv/er,  in  my  turn,  yes,  in  certain
cases  ; but,  in  many  others,  he  is  not  so.  It  happens
to  all  magnetisers  to  make  perceptible  to  their  clair-
voyants, places,  persons,  or  objects,  of  which  the
consulting  individual,  the  magnetiser,  and  the  clair-
voyant, have  no  notion  ; the  information  and  descrip-
tions are  found  to  be  correct.  These  experiments  are
ordinarily  performed,  in  regard  to  persons  that  have
disappeared,  objects  that  have  been  mislaid  or  stolen.
The  clairvoyant  finds  both  the  one  and  the  other ; it
must,  therefore,  be  that  these  objects  present  them-
selves to  his  view  at  his  desire,  or  that  he  has  a means,
unknown  to  us,  of  putting  himself  en  rapport  with  them.

If  you  admit  that  at  the  mere  desire,  or  at  the
mere  mention  of  the  name  of  the  being  or  object  lost
by  the  clairvoyant,  the  being  or  object  is  forthwith


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


9


present  to  his  eyes,  you  will  surely  grant  a being  so  in-
telligent as  the  soul  when  disengaged  from  and  lost  to
matter,  the  faculty  of  presenting  itself  to  the  clair-
voyant, according  to  its  desire,  as  this  apparently  inert
object  did.

I have  already  observed,  that  it  is  needless  con-
ducting the  clairvoyant  towards  the  objects,  that  in
order  to  see  them  at  hand  it  suffices  to  desire  their
presence.  The  perception  of  lost  or  stolen  objects  is
a proof  of  this ; not  knowing  where  these  objects  are,
you  cannot  conduct  your  clairvoyant  towards  them;
they  must,  therefore,  present  themselves  to  him,
agreeably  to  his  desire.  It  may  be  the  same,  with
regard  to  all  views  at  distance.  I ask  for  the  place,
without  being  acquainted  with  it,  and  it  is  instanta-
neously present  to  me.  (These  facts,  which  are  within
the  reach  of  all,  cannot  be  denied.)  If  we  cannot
refuse  the  clairvoyant  this  property,  we  cannot,  for  the
same  reason,  refuse  him  that  of  finding  out  the  soul
separated  from  matter;  by  this  deduction,  we  shall
come  to  enchaining  ourselves  by  undeniable  facts,  and
to  confessing  the  possibility  of  the  other  proposition.
Were  we  to  conclude  otherwise,  we  should  be  but  an
extinguisher.  We  may  object,  with  our  ifs  and  our
whijs,  but  we  shall  end  by  acknowledging  what  we  can-
not deny ; some  formidable  advocates  of  this  sacri-
legious cause  of  obscureness  will  argue  thus : — The
clairvoyant,  in  all  these  facts,  sees  but  material  objects,
for  the  reason  that  these  objects  exist ; it  may  be  the
same  with  the  soul,  whose  individualised  existence,
after  separation  from  matter,  is  still  a problem.

My  answer  to  such  objection  is,  that  in  the  search  of
these  hidden  or  stolen  objects,  the  clairvoyant  sees  not
only  these  objects,  he  sees  the  traces  left  by  them,  he
brings  back  to  you  the  scenes,  the  words  pronounced  by
the  thieves ; these  traces  or  words  exist  not  materially,
how  can  he  see  them  ? How  hear  them  ? Hear  what
has  been  said,  and  is  no  longer  being  said  ! Hoes  he

c


10


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


not  go  farther  ? — does  he  not  see  a certain  theatre,  a
certain  battle  field,  with  what  was  acted  on  this  scene,
and  the  blood  that  was  shed  on  the  earth  a hundred
years  before  we  were  born  ? If  he  sees  these  things,  in
what  state  does  he  see  them  ? No  doubt,  in  the  spiritual
state,  since  this  theatre  or  battle  field  is  replaced  by
other  ornaments  or  constructions.  Do  you  admit  these
facts  ? — these  revelations  that  you  produce  and  obtain
every  day  ? — that  you  mention  in  all  your  books  ? You
will  answer,  yes.  Then  I will  ask  you  w^hy  you  should
admit  that  this  theatre,  and  what  passed  on  it,  should
have  left  an  image  in  the  place  where  it  formerly  existed,
so  powerful  that  your  clairvoyant  could  receive  from  it
an  impression  as  active  as  a similar  existing  or  present
scene  could  produce,  and  yet  not  admit  that  the  beings
that  co-operated  in  the  representation  of  these  scenes
were  alive  like  them.  (This  is  already  the  second  time
that  I have  made  this  observation.)  After  such  a com-
parison, if  3mu  deny  the  individualised  existence  of  the
soul  apart  from  matter,  I say  it  with  regret,  you  are  ex-
tinguishers or  of  bad  faith ; in  presence  of  such  revela-
tions apparitions  are  needless.  If  I continue  collecting
them,  I do  so  less  to  demonstrate  their  reality  than  to
console  my  brethren  for  the  miseries  of  this  sorrowful
earthly  existence ; this  is  what  I had  to  say  to  the  de-
tractors of  “ The  Secrets  of  the  Life  to  Come  Revealed,”
and  I terminate  by  saying  to  them  : — No,  the  clair-
voyant sees  not  in  your  thought  what  cannot  be  in  it.
No,  the  clairvoyant  clears  no  space,  and  knows  no  time,
in  order  to  communicate  wdth  places,  objects,  or  deeds
remote,  past,  present,  or  future.

Let  me  once  more  remind  you,  since  it  is  the  fruit
of  our  own  experiments,  that  in  the  first  views  at
distance  you  obtained  from  your  clairvoyants,  you  ex-
claimed : — It  is  because  I,  myself,  have  seen  these  places
that  he  sees  the  image  of  them  in  me  ; the  contrary  was
proved  by  describing  to  you  changes  operated  in  your
absence,  recounting  to  you  what  the  persons  were  doing


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


11


at  the  very  instant  you  caused  them  to  be  visited  hun-
dreds of  leagues  off.  You  acknowledged  that  these
things  could  not  be  in  your  thought,  and  you  confessed
that  the  clairvoyant  really  saw  at  a distance ; now,  you
again  take  up  this  worn-out  argument  to  combat  the
perceptions  of  souls : but  we  have  come  to  presenting
you  with  apparitions  that  vull  remove  all  your  doubts
in  this  respect,  and  that  you  will  read  in  this  volume.
We  have  perceived  deceased  persons,  unknown  to  the
asker,  to  ourselves,  and  the  clairvoyant ; we  have  ob-
tained information  that  could  not  be  in  any  human
memory ; where  did  the  clairvoyante  find  these  persons
and  this  information  ? In  the  world  of  causes,  which
we  term  the  spiritual  world,  wherein  is  found  whatso-
ever was,  is,  and  shall  be.

Know,  then,  once  for  all,  how  to  make  a distinction
between  the  communication  of  thoughts  and  the  per-
ception of  the  images  which  man  has  in  him,  represent-
ing whatsoever  of  material  he  has  seen  in  the  course  of
his  life.  The  communication  of  thoughts  is  mental
speech,  it  is  the  mental  answer  that  follows  this  speech.
No  one  exists,  having  obtained  such  apparitions,  who
can  say  that  the  details  given  him  were  a communica-
tion of  thoughts,  a mental  answer  to  a mental  question,
forming  no  communication  with  the  clairvoyante.  With-
out questioning,  and  obtaining  such  information  as  can-
not be  in  the  domain  of  their  memory,  in  case  there
were  communication,  it  would  be  merely  a communi-
cation of  images,  the  whole  confined  to  those  we  might
have  in  ourselves ; but,  going  no  farther,  should  it  be
admitted  that  such  must  be  the  case,  it  would  remain  to
be  explained  how  these  images  are  alive,  speak,  and  act  ?
Should  we  succeed  in  this  ? it  could  be  done  only  by
admitting  that  one  is  a universe  in  abridgement!  we
should  be  then  far  from  denying  the  existence  of  the
soul,  since  we  should  have  made  of  it  an  incomprehen-
sible and  admirable  masterpiece,  which  would  be  the
infinite  of  the  infinite,  and  thousands  of  times  the  in-

c 2


12


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


finite  of  the  infinite ! Only  think,  then,  possessing  in
yourself  the  whole  universe  in  miniature ! — all  that  has
been,  is,  and  shall  be — all  that  has  been  thought,  thinks,
and  shall  think.  Oh  ! you  w'ill  not  have  this  vast  de-
finition ; your  science  is  not  sufficiently  powerful  to
admit  and  explain  it,  you  prefer  returning  to  the  simple
existence  of  the  soul  inhabiting  places  appropriated  to
its  nature  and  state ; but  I,  without  possessing  your
science,  I repeat  to  you  that  all  is  in  all  and  throughout
all.  Were  you  a little  less  learned  you  would  give
yourselves  up  to  the  study  that  I propose  to  you ; it  is
well  worth  the  pains.  If  you  admit  human  immortality
only  in  history,  your  progeny  or  your  statue  on  a public
monument,  may  you  be  placed  in  your  niche  to  the
admiration  of  gaping  crowds,  and  let  us  venture  into  a
world  that  you  reject  because  you  know  that  equality
and  fraternity  reign  there.  Remain,  I say,  clad  in  doc-
torial  ornaments,  seigneurial  or  royal  ones,  in  your
niches,  which  are  the  emblem  of  the  statu  quo ; we
will  practise  science  without  you,  and  more  consoling
science  than  yours.

Fourier  said : — “The  civilised  are  so  hateful  that  they
would  disdain  heaven,  if  every  one  entered  it,  and  they
delight  in  the  thought  that  a good  round  number  will
go  to  the  devil.’’  Fourier  knew  you  !

REFUTATION  OF  A WHOLE  LIFE  OF  BEATITUDE  IN  THE  WORLD

OF  SPIRITS.

Some  persons,  after  reading  the  “Secrets,”  have  objected
that  there  could  not  be  any  usages  in  the  world  of
spirits  as  on  earth,  still  less  objects  adapted  for  such
usages ; one  of  them  thought  it  extraordinary  that  there
should  be  houses,  furniture,  &c.,  and  exclaimed  whilst
ridiculing  this  assertion : — “ Masons  and  tapestry- makers
can’t  want  for  work  there,  then  !”  I have  but  a few
observations  to  make  in  this  respect: — What  is  under-
stood by  life  ? Is  it  not  thinking  ? Thinking  of  what  ?
Of  something.  What  is  this  something?  All  that  can


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


13


be  perceived  by  the  eye,  heard  by  the  ear,  and  that  can
fall  under  the  other  senses.  1st.  Places,  accidents  of
places,  ornaments  of  places.  2nd.  Living  beings  and
of  our  own  nature,  with  whom  we  shall  be  in  com-
munication. To  be  in  communication  it  is  necessary  to
speak.  Speak  of  what  ? Of  things  past,  present,  or
future.  These  somethings  ought  to  represent  images
to  our  eyes  as  they  do  on  earth.  Without  this  I should
not  comprehend  a life  in  which  we  should  not  think.
Thought  is  the  sight  of  something,  speech  is  the  name
of  this  thing,  sensation  is  the  touch  of  this  thing.  Take
away  these  properties  from  spiritual  life,  what  remains
for  it  ? Nothingness  ! Give  it  these  properties,  they
cannot  exist  without  the  things  thought.  From  the
moment  you  admit  thought,  you  admit  the  view  of  it;
thus  the  thought  of  a place  must  represent  a place  in  its
entire  form  and  with  its  accidents  ; there,  a garden  with
trees,  fruits,  and  dowers ; an  atmosphere,  light  of  some
kind  ; farther  on,  beings  of  a nature  similar  to  yours,
grouped,  standing,  seated  or  lying  on  what  bears  them.
These  beings  cannot  remain  standing  or  lying  an
eternity ; they  must  admire  these  fruits,  intoxicate
themselves  with  the  perfume  of  these  flowers,  breathe
this  sweet  atmosphere,  contemplate  the  light  by  which
they  see  these  things ; but  if  a whole  eternity  were
spent  in  seeing  only  trees,  fruits,  flowers,  and  grass,  we
should  be  soon  tired  of  such  a state ; there  must,  we
are  sensible  of  it,  be  a progression,  a succession  in  the
thoughts  to  feed  the  sensations,  and  this  succession  of
thoughts  gives  rise  to  the  supposition,  as  I have  said  of
thinking,  seeing,  and  feeling  something  else.  It  is  the
infinite  of  the  creation  that  is  before  us;  palaces,  houses,
furniture,  usages,  in  short,  must  exist  there.  If  all  this
exists  there,  it  is  for  the  purpose  of  gratifying  our
sensations,  our  affections,  and  our  infinite  desires.  It
will  be  objected  that  all  these  things  may  exist  in
heaven  without  our  being  bound  to  fabricate  them  as
on  earth,  I answer  that  that  is  true.  Scarcely  have


14


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


you  desired  an  object  than  it  presents  itself  to  your
view,  because  it  is  the  type  of  your  thought,  and  bears
the  very  form  of  the  object  thought ; but  this  does  not
do  away  with  there  being  affections  that  wish  to  fabri-
cate, co-arrange,  or  embellish  the  object  thought  as  they
do  on  earth.  If  man  progresses  in  each  of  his  thoughts
and  desires  to  take  notes  on  what  he  observes,  makes  a
book  of  them  in  order  to  communicate  his  observations
to  his  fellow-beings,  he  must  find  paper  and  things
necessary  to  form  this  book,  another  will  have  the
affection  of  printing  it,  a third  of  publishing  it,  and  so
on.  If  I wish  to  play  music,  although  it  be  possible
for  me  to  have  or  to  hear  it  at  my  pleasure,  if  I prefer
playing  myself,  I must  have  instruments  that  I can
make  or  find,  ready  made  it  is  true,  without  any  other
pains  than  merely  desiring  them  ; but  he  who  has  a
taste  for  making  such  instruments  has  a right  to  make
them,  since  for  him  it  is  no  longer  a necessity  in  order
to  live,  but  an  affection  that  constitutes  his  whole
happiness.  An  architect  has  the  same  right ; it  is  his
supreme  felicity  to  produce  a master- piece;  the  mason^s,
to  show  his  superiority  in  the  details  of  this  palace,  and
so  on.  Take  away  one  of  the  things  I have  just
enumerated  from  the  spiritual  life,  because  this  thing
comes  not  within  the  range  of  your  tastes  ; your  neigh-
bour will  have  the  same  right.  I,  too,  and  we  shall  end
with  annihilating  all  that  constitutes  the  future  life.
Heaven  will  no  longer  be  even  a place,  a state,  it  will  be
nothingness.  Ido  not  think  it  necessary  to  carry  these
conclusions  any  farther  in  order  to  prove  the  absurdity
of  such  an  argument.  Those  who  believe  that  singing
the  praises  of  God  for  a whole  eternity  is  the  sole  occu-
pation of  spirits  must  necessarily  divest  spirits  of  forms,
because  forms  demand  usages,  walking,  seeing,  hearing,
feeling,  touching,  &c.  There  is  no  need  of  forms  for
singing;  but  wdiat  sing?  The  marvels  of  creation.
And  what  marvels  since  you  refuse  them  admission
into  heaven  ? Can  it  be  those  you  have  seen  on  earth


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


15


where  all  is  but  wretchedness  and  grief?  May  God
inspire  you,  bigot  souls ! 1 remain  mute,  and  cannot

praise  God  for  a creation  which  I do  not  understand;
if  he  gives  me  the  means  of  understanding  it,  being
stripped  of  my  material  garment,  it  could  only  be  from
observation.  Observation  supposes  two  contrary  things;
if  I annihilate  these  things  and  their  typical  forms,  how
should  I observe  and  judge  ? Come,  then,  you  who  will
have  neither  objects  nor  usages  in  the  spiritual  world,
you  shall  be  placed  like  Napoleon  on  the  column
Vendome,  when  you  are  fatigued  with  the  posture  you
will  ask  God  to  change  it.

If  we  admitted  such  a stats  of — imbecility,  shall  I
call  it  ? — on  our  exit  from  this  world,  we  must  likewise
be  deprived  of  our  respective  sexes,  for  love  supposes
an  agglomeration  of  sensations.  What ! feel  where
there  is  no  usage  ? Wherefore,  then,  the  creation  male
and  female  ?

If  it  must  be  that  one  day  I cannot  admire  and  render
justice  to  the  works  of  my  divine  Father,  cannot  com-
prehend their  beauty,  the  utility,  the  harmony  of  their
creation,  I am  not  the  creature  of  his  choice.  If  it  be
otherwise,  he  will  make  me  comprehend  the ^ro  and  the
con.  I must  observe,  compare,  progress.  If  you  take
away  from  me  the  materials  for  comparison,  I shall  not
know  whether  the  arts,  usages,  or  objects  which  I have
been  acquainted  with  on  earth  were  more  or  less  perfect,
more  or  less  useful ; if,  on  the  contrary,  you  admit  the
future  life  as  a sequel  to  the  terrestrial  one,  without
sudden  transition,  I comprehend  in  that  case  Eternity.
I have,  therefore,  discovered  nothing  ridiculous  in  what
my  clairvoyants  have  told  me  on  this  head,  though  not
one  of  them  has  told  me  that  usages  similar  to  tJiose  I have
just  described  caused  excitement  there.  But  I,  for  my
part,  comprehend  them;  I feel  the  utility  of  them  as  an
affection  of  happiness,  and  not  as  a necessary  impost,
comparable  to  earthly  wants.  I have  found  nothing
ridiculous  in  what  the  learned  Swedenborg  advances,  in


16


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


his  works,  on  this  subject.  I beg  my  readers  to  consult
them  for  more  detailed  information,  and  worthy  of  being
meditated  upon.

OBSERVATIONS  ON  THE  CONTRADICTIONS  CONTAINED  IN  THE
1st  VOL.  OP  THE  “secrets.”

Other  persons  have  objected  to  me  that  the  first  volume
of  the  “ Secrets’^  contained  a few  contradictions  of  this
sort : — “ Bruno,  inspired  by  his  guide,  says  that  man  is
not  free  ; Adele,  inspired  by  M.  Swedenborg  says
the  contrary  \”  It  was  because  I wished  to  retrench
nought  from  these  “ Secrets”  that  I allowed  these  con-
tradictions and  a few  more  to  remain.  I owed  to  the
science  that  occupies  us,  before  all  things,  the  truth.
My  opinions  in  this  respect  are  not  in  favour  of  free-
will, as  may  have  been  seen  in  the  course  of  this  book
by  reasonings  which  all  the  works  I have  consulted,
and  the  discussions  I have  had  on  this  subject  have
been  unable  to  destroy.  Man  referring  all  in  his
scientific  discussions  to  his  pride,  his  wants  and  his
manner  of  seeing,  can  but  err.  He  who,  on  the
contrary,  detaches  himself  from  matter,  rises  from
humility  above  this  human  comedy,  best  discovers  all
its  springs.  I am  bound,  therefore,  to  enlighten  the
reader  on  this  question.  Adele  erred  voluntarily.  One

day  the  Abbe  A , M.  Lemoine  and  myself,  decided  on

summoning  St.  John  to  decide  a religious  question  ; it

was  the  Abbe  A who  was  in  communication  with

Adele  and  questioned  her.  At  the  commencement  of
the  sitting  we  all  three  prayed  God  to  deign  to  enlighten

us  with  his  divine  light.  M.  A , in  his  capacity

as  a priest,  was  to  preserve  the  clairvoyante  from  all
evil  influence,  the  more  so  as  I had  left  him  at  liberty
to  exorcise  and  purify  her  agreeably  to  his  desire.  All
the  answers  that  he  obtained  were,  according  to  the
expression  of  this  venerable  Abbe,  strictly  logical ; he
had  not  addressed  any  question  on  the  subject  of  free-
will, but  touching  on  one  connected  with  it,  Adele  said


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


17


to  him — “John,  here  present,  orders  me  to  tell  you
that  man  material  is  not  free  ; that  every  being  on  earth
has  a mission  to  fulfil,  from  which  he  cannot  depart.  I
objected  to  him  that  I could  not  communicate  such  an
answer  to  men ; but  he  ordered  me,  in  the  name  of
God,  to  transmit  it  to  you,  and  I do  so.”  “ Why,”  said
I to  her,  “ should  you  refuse  revealing  to  us  the  truth  ?”

I have  ever  revealed  it  hitherto,”  replied  she  ; “ but  I
could  not  make  up  my  mind  to  say  to  men — you  are  not
free  to  do  evil.  This  doctrine  was  repugnant  to  my
heart ; it  seemed  much  more  just  to  let  man  believe
that  he  is  free  in  his  good  and  bad  actions;  but  John
said  to  me  : ‘ It  is  better  to  be  silent  than  to  alter  an
answer  to  the  profit  of  falsehood  ; I advise  you  never
to  do  so.’  ” Adele,  out  of  a religious  feeling,  had  hitherto
concealed  from  me  this  truth,  and  consequently  had
perverted  the  answers  of  M.  Swedenborg.  Her  self-love
seemed  hurt  at  confessing  this  little  subterfuge,  which,
however,  cannot  be  regarded  otherwise  than  as  favorable
to  virtue.

I was  unwilling  to  make  known  this  particular,  be-
cause, I repeat  it,  I infinitely  respect  ail  beliefs ; I wish
not  to  speak  against  any,  only  I adhere  to  telling  the
truth  and  nothing  but  the  truth.  Had  I not  been
guided  by  this  feeling,  I should  have  allowed  no  contra-
diction to  subsist.

Let  every  one  experiment  without  seeking  in  any
manner  to  influence  the  clairvoyant,  and  in  most  cases
the  truth  will  be  obtained.  Adele  is  not  easily  influenced,
for  she  has  ever  maintained  against  me  a position  con-
trary to  that  we  have  just  read.  We  must,  moreover,
be  convinced  that  the  spirit  disengaged  from  matter  is  not
the  more  for  that  freed  from  its  errors.  There  is  pro-
gression for  it  in  its  ideas  ; but  if  the  ideas  delight  in  such
or  such  a system,  they  will  ruU  astray  there  as  on  earth,
the  Roman  Catholic  will  not  depart  from  his  beliefs,  the
Jew  from  his,  and  so  on  with  all  others,  especially  those
who  passionately  delight  in  their  beliefs.  Many  persons


18


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


think  that  to  know  all  it  suffices  to  be  a spirit ; let  them
undeceive  themselves  in  this  respect ; they  can  do  so,  it
is  true,  if  such  is  their  affection ; but  as  there  is  no
sudden  transition  between  one  and  the  other  state,  the
earthly  affections  are  not  forthwith  annihilated ; conse-
quently, a man  who  on  earth  took  a delight  in  the
mechanical  arts,  will  not  give  you  the  solutions  of  a
jurisconsult;  a miller  will  not  demonstrate  to  you  the
science  of  metallurgy.

Behold  a clairvoyant  given  up  to  himself,  it  is  the
exact  representation  of  the  first  state  of  the  world  of
spirits;  ask  him  what  he  did  or  thought  after  remain-
ing for  a moment  in  this  state,  the  answer  he  makes
will  give  you  a notion  of  his  then  predominant  affec-
tion : thus  you  will  not  make  of  a clairvoyant  who  de-
lights in  travelling  a famous  mathematician.  True,  this
comparison  is  liable  to  dispute,  because  the  clairvoyant
is  still  under  the  empire  of  material  laws  and  impres-
sions, but  it  gives  an  idea  of  the  future  life:  thus  the
progression  is  not  such  as  is  thought,  and  I venture  to
affirm  that  many  men  in  their  material  state  are  much
more  advanced  than  certain  spirits  that  quitted  the  earth
ages  ago.  It  is  a study  that  I propose  to  the  spi-
ritualists of  a contrary  belief ; they  will  see  that  they
will  be  disabused.  For  this  reason,  therefore,  we  ought
to  make  mention  of  all  the  answers  made  us  by  clair-
voyants, the  interpreters  of  spirits,  without  retrenching
from  them  a syllable,  in  order  to  study  what  connection
there  is  between  them,  and  draw  conclusions  on  certain
points,  as  I have  on  these.  1.  Spirits  issuing  from  this
globe  progress  in  the  affection  which  they  have  for
such  or  such  positive  or  negative  science.  2.  Hence
it  is  that  certain  spirits,  as  we  have  already  seen,
wander  about  earthly  places  in  which  they  took  delight.

3.  These  spirits  are  attached  to  our  globe,  and  have  not
yet  passed  into  one  of  the  superior  heavens ; hence
it  is  that  living  in  darkness  they  can  teach  but  error.

4.  Error  is  as  common  to  them  as  upon  earth.


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


19


Spirits  accord  only  in  these  few  truths : —

1.  They  live  in  a happy  state.

2.  None  of  them  has  seen  God  in  any  other  form
than  that  of  the  sun.

3.  They  obtain  forthwith  what  they  desire.

4.  They  have  usages  and  experience  sensations  as  on
earth.

5.  They  know  that  thes^  lived  prior  to  their  terrestrial
life.

6.  They  acknowledge  the  utility  of  the  earthly  life  in
all  its  joys  and  griefs.

/.  They  are  grouped  in  societies  of  kindred  affections.

8.  They  have  no  knowledge  of  time  or  space.

9.  They  know'  that  there  are  different  heavens  in
which  we  are  very  happy.

10.  They  are  W'ell  aware  of  their  immortality.

11.  They  have  a recollection  of  their  earthly  exist-
ence, speak  of  it  with  more  or  less  pleasure ; but,  on  a
mass  of  details,  they  contradict  each  other,  each  letting
his  responses  flow  from  his  present  affections,  and  re-
ferring them  to  the  sects  of  which  he  forms  a part : we
ought,  therefore,  to  be  very  circumspect  in  accepting
such  or  such  an  answer  more  than  another.  It  is  pru-
dence that  elevates  man — passion  causes  him  to  err:  let
us  be  content  with  w'hat  God  permits  to  be  revealed  to
us  on  the  future  life,  and  not  argue — we  are  too  w'eak
to  handle  this  arm  with  success ; let  us  humble  ourselves
before  what  we  cannot  comprehend — hope  that  one  day
God  will  suffer  us  to  know  more,  and  give  him  a thousand
thanks  for  the  generosity  he  displays  towards  us  ! He
only  knows  the  truth  and  the  utility  of  all  the  things  he
has  created ; let  us  walk  with  confidence  in  the  road
traced  out  for  us  ; — it  is  useful  for  us  !


20


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


APPARITIONS.

I HAVE  deemed  it  fit  to  continue  the  same  order  in
numbering  the  sittings  as  in  our  first  volume.

Sitting  98. — M.  Lucas,  a carrier  at  Rambouillet,
was  very  uneasy  as  to  the  fate  of  his  brother-in-law,
who  disappeared  from  the  country  twelve  years  ago,
after  an  altercation  that  took  place  one  evening  between
him  and  his  father.  This  man,  on  quitting  his  family,
made  the  observation  that  they  should  never  hear  from
him  again.  Since  that  period  his  father  died,  and  his
succession  (to  which  this  man  was  the  principal  heir)
remained  vacant  through  the  inability  of  obtaining  any
information  as  to  his  son’s  being:  alive  or  dead.  This
very  much  crossed  the  other  heirs,  whose  affairs  re-
mained in  suspense,  as  they  could  not  produce,  as
legally  bound,  a certificate  of  his  death.  M.  Lucas,
having  heard  M.  llenard  say  that  I possessed  a clair-
voyants who  could  remove  all  his  inquietude  on  this
score,  came  and  asked  me  for  a sitting.  Scarcely  was
Adele  asleep  than  she  asked  for  this  man  by  his  name,
as  she  usually  does  towards  deceased  persons.  She  then
said  to  us : — “ I see  him  ; he  is  not  dead ; on  the  earth
is  he,  and  not  in  the  spiritual  world.”  She  gave  so
exact  a description  of  him  to  M.  Lucas  that  the  latter,
who  no  doubt  for  the  first  time  beheld  a somnambulist,
was  quite  astounded  at  all  he  heard,  and  declared  even
the  very  gestures  true  to  life.  “ I see  him,”  said  she,
“ in  a foreign  country,  where  there  are  trees  like  those
in  America;  we  don’t  see  such  in  France  : he  is  busy
gathering  seeds  from  small  shrubs,  not  much  more  than
three  feet  high.  He  has  no  wish  to  speak  to  me,  and
consequently  does  not  answer  the  questions  I put  to
him  about  the  country  he  lives  in ; I see  no  one  from


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM,


21


whom  I can  obtain  any  information.  I am  afraid  of
meeting  with  wild  beasts  ! wake  me  ! wake  me  !”  I did
so  instantly.

Both  M.  Lucas  and  myself  w'ould  have  wished  to  be
made  acquainted  with  this  country.  I told  him  that  it
was  impossible  to  make  a spirit  speak  despite  itself,
especially  if  such  spirit  is  interested  in  concealing  the
place  of  its  retreat,  as  appeared  to  be  the  case  with  this
man.  M.  Lucas  fully  appreciated  this  reasoning,  and
left  me  quite  convinced  that  it  was  really  his  brother-
in-law  whom  Adele  had  perceived,  and  seemed  disposed
to  believe  him  as  really  alive  as  she  declared  she  beheld
him.  I promised  him  that  I would  do  my  best  by-and-
by  to  learn  more  about  the  matter.

99.  M.  Lucas,  the  person  interested  at  the  foregoing
sitting,  returned  a few  days  after  to  ask  me  if  I had
heard  anything  new  respecting  his  brother-in-law  ? I
had  not  paid  any  attention  to  the  matter.  The  mother
of  the  lost  man  accompanied  M.  Lucas,  and  asked  me
if  I could  give  her  a sitting.  I made  a slight  objection,
because  I was  holding  a conference  with  several  per-
sons ; but  on  the  observation  of  M.  Lucas,  who  told
me  that  this  lady  had  come  several  leagues  expressly  to
obtain  fresh  information,  and  that  the  coach  was  wait-
ing for  her,  I begged  the  persons  present  to  excuse  me,
and  judge  of  the  experiment  about  to  take  place.  Adele
once  asleep,  said,  “ I see  him.” — “ Where  do  you  see
him  ?”  “ Here,  present.” — “ Give  us  once  more  a

description  of  him,  as,  also,  of  the  place  where  he  is  ?”

He  is  a fair  man,  browned  by  the  heat  of  the  sun  ;
very  corpulent,  features  pretty  regular,  hazel  eyes,
mouth  large,  air  sombre  and  meditative.  He  is  in  the
garb  of  a working  man — a sort  of  small  blouse ; as  the
last  time,  he  is  at  work,  gathering  seeds  like  enough  to
peppercorns,  but  I don’t  think  they  are,  as  they  seem
bi^ser.  This  seed  is  found  in  small  shrubs  about
three  feet  high.  I see  a negro  near  him,  who  is  doing
the  same  thing.” — Try  and  obtain  an  answer  to-day ;


09


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


let  him  tell  you  the  name  of  the  country  where  you  see
him  ?”  “ He  won’t  answer  me.” — “ Tell  him  that  it  is

his  good  mother  whom  he  was  so  fond  of,  who  is  with
you,  and  bids  you  inquire  after  him  ?”  “ Oh  ! at  the

name  of  his  mother  he  turned  round  and  said  to  me,
"^My  mother!  I shall  not  die  before  seeing  her  again,
comfort  her,  and  tell  her  that  1 am  always  thinking  of
her;  I am  not  dead!’” — “Why  does  he  not  write  to
her  ?”  “ He  has  written  to  her,  but,  no  doubt,  the

vessel  was  wrecked,  at  least  he  presumes  so,  as  he  re-
ceived no  answer.  He  tells  me  that  he  is  at  Mexico,
he  followed  the  Emperor,  Don  Pedro;  was  five  years  a
prisoner,  suiFered  much,  and  vdll  make  every  effort  to
return  to  France  ; they  will  see  him  again.” — “ Can  he
name  the  place  he  lives  in  ?”  “ No,  it  is  far  up  in  the

country ; such  places  have  no  names.” — “ Is  he  with  a
European?”  “No,  with  a man  of  color.” — “Why
does  he  not  write  to  his  mother  ?”  “ Because  where

he  is  no  vessels  come  ; he  knows  not  to  whom  to  apply;
then,  again,  he  scarcely  ever  knew  how  to  write,  and
now  less  than  ever;  no  one  near  him  can  render  him
this  service,  no  one  speaks  his  language,  he  has  much
pains  in  making  himself  understood;  withal,  he  never
was  of  an  open  or  communicative  disposition  ; he  has  a
somewhat  unsociable  look.  It  is  a hard  matter  to  get
a word  out  of  him ; one  would  think  he  was  dumb.” —
In  short,  how  manage  to  write  to  him  or  hear  from
him  ?”  “ He  can’t  tell ; all  he  can  say  is,  ‘ I am  in

Mexico,  I am  not  dead,  they’ll  see  me  again.’  ” — “ Why
did  he  thus  forsake  his  parents  without  saying  a word
to  them,  since  he  was  happy  with  them  ?”  This  man
was  far  from  being  communicative  ; he  scarcely  ever
spoke,  was  very  fond  of  his  mother,  but  had  not  the
same  affection  for  his  father,  who  was  a stern,  sour
kind  of  man,  and  often  used  him  roughly.  The  cup
had  been  long  filled  up  to  the  brim ; it  was  not  the
slight  altercation  he  had  with  his  father  the  night  before
his  departure  that  induced  him  to  leave ; it  was  a plan


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


23


decided  on  long  before ; he  communicated  it  to  no  one,
and  started  off  stealthily.  Having  embraced  them  all
over  night,  he  sneaked  off  the  next  morning,  without
saying  a word.  Make  yourself  easy,  madame,  you  will
see  him  again  \”  The  good  woman  melted  into  tears
as  she  recognised  the  truthfulness  of  each  detail  given
her  by  Adele;  she  had  not  a word  to  retrench  from
this  description;  the  character,  the  instruction,  and  the
departure  of  her  son  were  precisely  such  as  Adele
described ; but  what  gives  an  air  of  greater  probability
to  the  clairvoyante^s  recital  as  to  the  country  he  lives  in,
is  that  some  of  his  relatives  entertained  the  idea  that  he
had  enlisted  into  Don  Pedro^s  army,  and  took  steps  at
the  time  to  acquire  a certainty  of  it.  M.  Lucas  fur-
nished me  with  this  particular  some  time  after  when  on
a visit  to  Paris;  no  information,  however,  could  be
obtained  in  this  respect.  What  no  less  contributed  to
astonish  this  good  woman  as  well  as  M.  Lucas  and  the
person  present  at  this  curious  sitting  was  to  see  Adele,
who  to  screen  herself  from  the  burning  rays  of  the  sun
of  these  countries  put  her  hand  up  to  the  left  side  of
her  face  as  if  suffocating  with  heat ; but  the  most
marvellous  part  of  the  scene  was  that  she  received  a
violent  coup-de-soleil  that  rendered  all  this  side  of  her
face  from  the  forehead  to  the  shoulder  of  a reddish  blue,
whilst  the  other  side  remained  perfectly  white ; and  full
twenty-four  hours  elapsed  before  this  deep  colour  com-
menced disappearing.  The  heat  was  so  violent  there
for  a moment,  that  it  was  impossible  to  keep  one’s  hand
on  it.  Present  at  this  sitting  was  M.  Haranger  Pirlot,
formerly  a magnetiser  and  honorably  known  for  more
than  thirty  years  in  the  magnetic  world.  Pie  told  me
that  he  never  saw  the  like  of  this.  The  good  woman
took  her  leave  quite  consoled,  unable  to  account  to  her-
self how  that  her  son  who  was  in  Mexico  could  be
between  her  and  Adele,  and  how  the  latter  could  have
received  a coup-de-soleil  when  nobody  felt  the  heat,  the
weather  that  day  being  very  gloomy.  I am  not  more


24


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


advanced  than  she,  and  believe  that  many  others  in  our
place  will  be  like  us.  We  submit  this  question  to  the
learned  ; awaiting  their  answer,  let  us  pass  on  to  another
sitting.

100.  M.  Renard,  whom  we  have  already  mentioned,
begged  me  to  address  the  following  questions  to  M.
Swedenborg  through  the  medium  of  Adele  ; although
they  have  been  solved  in  the  first  volume  of  the  “ Secrets,
to  make  myself  agreeable  to  my  worthy  friend,  I felt
bound  to  submit  them  once  more,  whilst  Adele  was  in
her  sleep,  to  this  great  ecstatico-prophet  who  presented
himself  with  his  wmnted  kindness.  “Tell  this  good
brother  that  M.  Renard  desires  to  know  from  his  lips
whether  Christ  really  existed?’^ — “Yes.’’  “Does  he
think  that  we  might  ask  for  him  in  order  to  address  to
him  a few  questions  as  to  his  life  and  doctrine  ?” — “]\[.
Swedenborg  inquires  whether  you  have  a mind  to  cause
all  the  spirits  in  heaven  to  appear,  and  if  he  is  wanting
in  complaisance  to  answer  the  questions  you  ordinarily
put  to  him  ; there  is  no  inconvenience  in  asking  for
Christ;  but  M.  Renard  and  you  are  insatiable,  spirits
are  like  folks  of  the  earth,  w’hen  they  pay  a visit  to  anv
one  with  a view  to  oblige,  they  like  confidence  to  be
placed  in  them,  especially  when  they  do  not  deceive
you.  All  spirits  are  not  at  your  orders,  nor  as  com-
plaisant as  M.  Swedenborg;  the  mode  of  answering  of
one  is  not  that  of  another;  if  the  least  disagreement
is  perceived,  w'e  profit  by  it  to  oppugn  and  deny  all.
Believe  me,  preserve  M.  Swedenborg,  and  put  not
yourself  in  communication  with  all  the  spiritual  so-
cieties. He  shows  more  kindness  tow'ards  you  than
towards  any  other;  if  he  sacrificed  the  same  time
to  all  those  who  should  desire  to  speak  to  him,  he
would  have  none  left  for  himself. — “ I see  no  doubt
nor  harm  in  our  questions.”  “ There  is  no  harm,  but
doubt ; in  short,  what  would  you  know  of  Christ  ?”
“ We  desire  to  know  whether  Christ  was  God,  in  the
full  acceptation  of  the  word,  or  merely  the  son  of


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


25


God  “ Christ  was  not  God — lie  was,  like  ns  all,  the
son  of  God  ; he  had  a special  mission  to  fulfill ; he
acquitted  himself  of  it,  and  returned  to  heaven,  as  the
rest ; that  is  all.^^ — “ Is  he  the  chief  of  the  doctrine  he
tauo'ht  on  earth  ?”  ‘‘  There  are  no  chiefs  in  heaven  but

O ^

God — all  the  members  of  the  societies  are  there  equal:
some  speak,  propose,  discuss ; others  listen,  and  think
like  them.  . There,  where  there  is  no  disagreement,
there  is  no  occasion  for  chiefs  or  masters,  harmony-
reigns  there  by  the  power  divine.  I have  already  told
you  this — you  are  constantly  asking  me  the  same
tliing.^^ — Do  the  celestial  societies  influence  those  of
the  earth  ?”  “ The  celestial  societies  are  occupied  with

themselves,  and  no  longer  think  of  the  earth.  If  any
earthly  societies  believe  themselves  in  communication
Vv’ith  heavenly  societies,  they  are  m.istaken  ; and  are  so
only  with  scattered  members  that  W’ander  around  them,
and  do  not  yet  make  common  cause  with  the  heavenly
ones.  It  is  only  when  God  sees  fit,  that  it  is  other-
w'ise;  but,  in  general,  celestial  spirits  have  no  inclina-
tion for  recalling  to  mind  the  earth,  or  holding  com-
munication with  it,  for  they  find  our  atmosphere  heavy
and  bad ; those  that  visit  us  must  be  good  indeed  to  do
so.^’ — For  that  reason,  I beg  you  each  time  to  thank
them  for  me.  Inquire,  also,  why  we  have  a knowledge
of  a mass  of  apparitions  of  souls  in  pain,  who  claim  the
assistance  of  our  prayers  to  procure  them  peace,  as
they  say  ?''’  Those  are  persons  who  are  pursued  by
ideas  of  remorse  ; they  wander  around  the  earth  be-
cause they  have  not  an  ardent  desire  to  purge  them-
selves of  those  thoughts  that  beset  them  ; they  believe
that  our  prayers  are  beneficial  to  them,  deem  them-
selves unworthy,  from  their  faults,  of  entering  societies
that  would  not  admit  them  into  their  bosom,  because
they  wmuld  create  trouble ; they  are  such  men  as  Father
Lauriot,  who  make  mountains  of  a mole- hill;  others
that  are  really  criminals,  but  sufter  at  not  being  called
to  God  ; they  frequent  the  company  of  persons  like

D


26


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


themselves,  with  whom  they  form  a society.  It  may
be  said  that  their  ideas  are  not  harmonised,  they  create
for  themselves  false  positions,  they  have  no  lively
affection ; but  God  insinuates  into  them,  when  he
deems  fit,  other  thoughts,  and  they  enter  heaven  with
the  rest.” — How  is  Christ  looked  upon  in  heaven  ?”
“As  a very  good  spirit;  he  is  dearly  loved,  that  is  all.”
— “ And  those  who  worship  him  as  God,  what  does
he  think  of  them  ?”  “ Those  who  worship  him  as

God,  believe  him  such  ; and  it  is  God  who  receives  the
homage  of  those  adorations.  I have  told  you  that  all
religions  were  equally  agreeable  to  him.  Christ,  know-
ing that  he  is  not  God,  glories  not  more  in  that  which
he  taught  men  than  the  other  founders  in  theirs.” —
“ His  disciples  declare  to  us  that  there  is  no  salvation
but  in  his  name  ; they  teach  us  errors,  then  ?”  “ All

religions  teach  them.  What  they  possess  of  pure
ascends  to  God,  who  is  the  sole  and  only  object  to
whom  they  address  themselves  ; and  what  they  possess
of  impure  remains  on  earth,  in  the  heart  of  men  who
knowingly  do  evil !”

This  sitting  confirms  what  we  have  already  said  on
this  subject.  Heaven  is  but  a compound  of  societies,
each  representing  the  religious  or  philosophical  doctrines
that  have  existed  on  earth  ; every  one  after  his  departure
from  this  globe  joins  that  which  represents  his  predomi-
nant affection,  and,  through  a gross  error,  each  believes
that  his  neighbour  is  damned  if  he  has  not  the  same
beliefs  as  himself,  without  considering  that  religious
beliefs  are  at  bottom  the  same,  inasmuch  as  thev  all
address  themselves  to  God,  to  receive  his  blessings  or
thank  him  for  his  generosity.  The  details  alone  differ ;
each  believes  himself  more  acceptable  to  God  by
offering  him  what  he  himself  admires  most  on  earth,
without  considering  that  what  God  prefers  above  all
things  is  the  heart  and  love  of  his  children.  Thus  we
are  assured  that  these  religious  beliefs,  so  full  of  con-
trasts, have  left  such  an  impression  on  the  spirit  of  the


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.  27

man  who  quits  the  earth,  that  they  continue  for  a
certain  time  to  constitute  all  his  happiness.  Hence  he
seeks  societies  in  which  these  beliefs  are  admitted,  and
becomes  a member  of  the  said  societies  until,  elevated
towards  truer  thoughts,  he  enters  a heaven  or  superior
state,  where  the  pure  truth  shines  before  him  in  all  its
splendor;  then  the  fusion  becomes  general.  These
souls  become  acquainted  with  the  true  light,  the  divine
light  they  have  so  ardently  desired,  and  which  they
enjoy  in  happiness.  It  is,  therefore,  those  different
beliefs  continually  misleading  man  on  his  exit  from  this
globe  that  cause  our  clairvoyants  to  present  to  us  in  their
religious  revelations  contradictions  so  obvious.  They
make  acquaintance  with  spirits  that  possess  their  affection,
and  answer  in  accordance  with  this  affection.  If,  on  the
contrary,  the  clairvoyant  is  not  positively  a slave  to  any
belief,  his  magnetiser  the  same,  and  both  address  them-
selves to  a spirit  that  on  earth  thought  as  they,  there  is
a much  greater  chance  of  approaching  the  truth.  This
is  what  we  have  hitherto  done,  and  I believe  that  the
major  part  of  the  revelations  made  us  bear  with  them
the  seal,  not  of  absolute  truth,  but  of  an  ensemble  leading
to  it.  What  we  can  affirm  is,  that  in  the  superior  heaven
there  exists  a perfect  equality  in  age,  beauty,  form,  posi-
tion, affection  ; one  has  not  a jot  more  than  another  ; it
is  the  reign  of  happiness  of  which  we  all  dream,  and
which  we  shall  all  one  day  possess.

101.  After  many  indifferent  questions  which  I had
addressed  to  M.  Swedenborg,  I put  to  him  the  following
ones  (through  the  medium,  be  it  understood,  of  Adele) ; —
“ I have  not  the  means  of  printing  the  first  volume  of
the  ‘Secrets,’  a good  part  of  which  you  dictated  to
me.  I have  spoken  of  it  to  several  publishers,  who
politely  refused  me  because  I had  not  a literary  name  ;
could  you  point  out  to  me  the  means  of  attaining  my
object  without  their  assistance?”  “No;  it  is  a very
difficult  matter.  I know  the  trouble  mine  cost  me  to
publish.” — “ Hid  you  publish  them  at  your  own  expense,

D 2


28


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


or  did  God  supply  you  with  the  means  by  occult  causes
or  transmissions  of  money  ?”  “ I printed  my  works

at  my  own  expense,  but  sold  very  few  in  my  time.
Nobody  would  read  them.  In  fifty  years  it  will  be  the
same  with  yours  as  with  mine  at  the  present  time;  they
will  be  read  with  pleasure.  I received  nothing  from
spirits.” — ‘‘  Still  they  have  the  power  of  making  such
transmissions  ?”  Yes  ; but  it  is  never  good  to  ask  them
for  them.’^ — Why  so  ?”  “ Because  it  is  ordinarily  evil

spirits  that  have  this  affection. — For  what  object?”
‘•'To  draw  you  into  their  society.” — ‘WVhat  is  the  con-
sequence of  such  alliance  wuth  them  ?”  Living  with
them,  and  doing  for  others  w^hat  they  have  done  for
you.” — I can  see  in  that  but  good.”  ‘‘Yes,  so  far;
but  this  s:ood  is  alwavs  done  in  some  interest  or  other
that  must  sooner  or  later  be  paid  for.” — “ Is  any  suffer-
ing the  result  for  the  person  obliged  ?”  “ Yes,  in  this

sense,  that  he  finds  himself  allied  with  a society  whose
usages  are  not  in  harmony  with  his  affections.  We
cannot  extricate  ourselves  from  this  constraint  before  a
certain  time.  If  you  had  the  affections  of  these  societies,
you  would  not  suffer  with  them ; but,  not  having  them,
I advise  you  to  maintain  your  independence.” — “None
but  evil  spirits  have  the  power  of  making  such  trans-
missions ?”  “ The  good  have  likewise  this  power.” —

“ Why  do  they  not  oftener  make  use  of  it  ?”  “ Be-

cause, to  deserve  these  favours  of  God,  we  ourselves
must  be  as  pure  as  beneficent.  Few  men  exist  who
merit  them.  The  good  spirits  know  that  the  more  we
sutler  on  earth,  the  more  agreeable  w^e  find  the  joys  of
heaven  ; and  then,  again,  they  trouble  themselves  so
little  about  the  earth  !” — “ One  of  my  friends,  M.  R***,
assured  me  that  he  found,  some  time  ago,  fifty  francs
scattered  about  the  place  where  he  locks  up  his  money.
He  was  in  great  difficulties,  having  but  ten  francs  to
last  him  out  the  month.  He  prayed,  and  the  following
morning  he  found  this  sum.”  “ M.  R***  may  have
been  mistaken ; possibly  he  had  laid  by  this  money


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


29


somewhere,  but  could  not  recollect  where ; for  my  part,
I do  not  believe  that  there  is  any  transmission  in  this
circumstance,  but  still  I may  be  mistaken.” — ‘“^You
grant  that  there  exist  good  and  evil  spirits  that  have
this  property  ?”  “ Yes.” — Could  you  direct  one  to
me  ?”  “No,  I have  no  wish  to  do  so ; 1 advise  you
not  to  try  it,  we  should  be  well  acquainted  with  a spirit
before  thus  giving  ourselves  up  to  it.”  Adele  is  un-
willing to  proceed,  telling  me  that  she  will  never  be
an  interpreter  to  such  arrangements ; that  I have  no
reason  to  be  uneasy  about  my  book,  as  it  would  be
published  by  some  one  who  would  appear  in  time
for  that  purpose.  I went  on  submitting  to  her  several
questions,  which  she  answered  agreeably  to  my  wishes,
and  continued  thus  : — “ For  my  part,  I don’t  think
it  possible  for  me  to  tell  you  any  more.  Your  work
recapitulates,  in  this  sense,  all  that  it  is  possible  to
teach  men  as  to  the  future  life.  Did  they  know
more  of  it,  they  would  bitterly  curse  the  earth,  and
find  the  joys  of  heaven  much  less  sweet.  Though
we  cannot  form  a just  idea  of  celestial  happiness,  we
find  a pleasure,  which  we  trace  little  by  little  before-
hand, less  captivating.  Besides,  there  exist  mysteries
which  cannot  be  explained.  All  this  is  so  foreign  to
our  material  laws,  that  the  time  would  be  spent  to
no  purpose  in  wishing  to  make  you  comprehend  what
it  is  not  given  you  to  comprehend.  We  are  conscious  of
these  mysteries,  but  cannot  explain  them  by  speech.” —
“ In  short,  are  all  the  deceased  initiated  into  these  mys-
teries ?”  “ Yes  ; more  or  less  promptly.” — “ Can  they

give  an  account  to  themselves  of  their  departure  from
the  earth,  their  present  state,  the  places  they  inhabit,
their  spiritual  form  and  that  which  they  assume  to  ap-
pear to  us  on  earth  ?”  “ They  account  for  all  this  to

each  other,  for  each  other,  in  their  state,  but  they  could
not  explain  to  you,  material  man,  how  it  is  they  per-
ceive that  they  are  called  on  earth — how  they  resume
their  material  countenance,  and  dress  so  faithfully — how


30


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


they  can  appear  to  us,  if  we  desire  it,  in  all  the  cos-
tumes they  have  worn  on  earth  as  in  all  the  physiogno-
mies they  have  had  at  different  ages  during  their  earthly
existence.  For  this  reason  it  is  that  a person  who  de-
mands the  appearance  of  a deceased  friend,  if  he  ask
the  clairvoyant — ^ Do  you  see  him  with  mustachios  (for
instance)  or  whiskers  ?’  The  clairvoyant  will  be  able
to  see  what  is  asked  of  him  for  two  causes  ; — 1st.  Speech
is  a creator  ; it  is  never  good  to  question  in  experiments
of  this  sort,  but  let  the  clairvoyant  give  the  description
without  interrupting  him,  unless  such  description  in  no
w'ise  resemble  that  of  the  deceased.  2nd.  The  deceased
may  have  worn  in  the  course  of  his  earthly  existence
those  moustachios  or  whiskers  which  we  desire  the
clainmyant  to  see,  and  yet  not  have  worn  them  at  the
time  of  his  decease.  It  is  the  same  with  regard  to  the
dress  and  the  colour  of  it;  whatsoever  man  has  worn
on  earth  is  imi^rinted  on  him,  nothing  is  lost.  Accord-
ing to  the  penetration  of  the  clairvoyant’s  view  through
these  impressions,  which  are  repeated  hundreds  of
times  in  one  and  the  same  year  on  our  bodies,  the
description  will  more  or  less  correspond  with  the  one
desired.  It  often  happens  that  at  a later  period,  aided
by  some  information,  we  shall  know  that  the  deceased
was  really  in  the  conditions  in  which  he  appeared  to
the  clairvoyant.  He  will  never  happen,  for  instance,  to
perceive  a fair  man  for  a black,  a bearded  man  fori
beardless  one,  an  old  man  for  a young  one ; but  all  the
visions  I have  just  detailed  may  take  place,  and  this
very  often  will  cause  a doubt  as  to  the  apparition.  A
sceptic  may  also,  by  ironical  or  captious  questions,  be
the  cause  of  the  greatest  mistakes.  We  must  be  pene-
trated with  a certain  religious  respect,  for  the  spirits  of
darkness  are  ever  ready  to  lay  hold  of  the  least  oppor-
tunity to  sow  error.  He  who  seeks  to  make  the  clair-
voyant err  is  punished  in  his  turn  ; he  sought  error,
and  he  finds  it.  There  are,  also,  some  that  may  be  in-
voluntary on  both  sides,  some  arising  from  the  want  of


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


31


habit  in  the  deceased  of  setting  in  play  all  the  springs
of  the  seemingly  material  envelope  in  which  he  appears ;
speech  is  as  strange  to  him  as  the  earth  on  which  lie
lived.  He  may  render  his  thoughts  badly,  seeing  that
in  heaven  language  is  wholly  made  up  of  sensation  ;
thus  you  perceive  that  matter  can  neither  appreciate  nor
judge  of  spiritual  laws  as  it  would  wish.”

I leave  to  the  reader  the  task  of  judging  of  the  pre-
cious information  of  this  sitting.  Is  this  the  language
of  a madman  or  mere  visionary  ? I think  not.

As  we  have  seen,  Adele  tells  me  not  to  be  uneasy
about  the  printing  of  my  book ; that  some  one  will  come
to  mij  assistance.  I will  not  attempt  to  retrace  here  the
history  of  the  tribulations  this  publication  gave  me,  but
I will  say  with  gratitude  that  one  day  M.  Pirlot,  a
respectable  old  man,  presented  himself  at  my  house  to
inquire  whether  the  subscription  I had  opened  was  filled
up.  On  my  reply  in  the  negative,  and  telling  him  how
uneasy  I was,  seeing  that  I had  not  required  beforehand
from  the  subscribers  the  amount  of  their  subscription,
this  leaving  me  in  the  same  embarrassment  as  if  I had
none  at  all,  inasmuch  as  the  printer  was  unwilling  to
take  this  subscription  as  payment,  this  gentleman  drew
out  of  his  pocket-book  a bank-note  of  500  francs  {£20),
and,  handing  it  to  me,  said : — “ This  will  do  away  with
all  your  difficulties.”  I kne\v  not  whether  I was  dream-
ing or  awake.  I offered  a receipt,  which  this  gentleman
would  not  accept,  saying  to  me: — ‘‘You  will  return  it
me  when  your  money  comes  in.  I would  that  it  were
in  my  power  to  make  you  a present  of  it,  but  I am  not
rich,  and  have  sufficient  confidence  in  you  to  trust  to
you.”  This  was  the  second  time  of  my  seeing  this  gentle-
man. I cultivated  the  acquaintance  of  this  honourable
citizen,  and  received  with  pleasure  wise  counsels  from
him  whenever  I stood  in  need  of  them.  Another  bene-
ficent friend  of  science,  equally  unknown  to  me  as  the
former,  made  up  the  remainder  of  the  sum  necessary
for  the  printing,  which,  as  Adele  had  predicted,  was  not


32


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


to  disturb  me.  Oh ! Secret  Power  that  clirectest  us,
who  can  divine  thee  ?

102.  Madame  Lortne,  a grocer  at  Rarabouillet,  having
heard  speak  of  Adele’s  speciality  of  communicating  with
the  deceased,  having  long  been  desirous  of  making  sure
by  herself  of  the  degree  of  belief  due  to  such  recitals,
undertook  this  journey  expressly  to  solicit  the  appari-
tion of  her  grandmother.  Adele,  after  having  visited
(spiritually)  this  lady,  says  that  she  sees  the  person
asked  for,  giving  the  following  description  : — “ This
woman  is  not  so  tall  as  the  lady  here  present ; she  ap-
pears to  be  stronger,  and  about  seventy  or  seventy-two
years  of  age  ; she  seems  to  me  still  very  fresh  ; her  hair
is  gray — it  must  have  been  of  a chesnut  colour ; her
chin  is  rather  long  and  face  wrinkled,  like  that  of  all
old  people.  I see  her  in  a cap  with  flat  bands  that  go
round  just  so  (Adele  designates  the  form  of  a cap  worn
by  country  people)  ; she  has  over  her  shoulders  a red
square  handkerchief ; her  dress  is  that  of  a country-
woman— a flat  corsage  and  a striped  woollen  under-
petticoat. I see  her  with  something  in  her  hand  ; if

\ not  a snuff-box,  it  is  a spectacle-case.  This  woman  has

I surely  been  very  mirthful,  good,  and  dearly  loved.  For
iny  part,  I should  be  very  fond  of  her.  She  suffered
much  during  her  life,  is  now  happy,  and  would  not
come  back  on  earth  for  all  the  gold  in  the  world.^’

Madame  Lorme  declares  herself  highly  satisfied  with
the  exactitude  of  these  details.

103.  Madame  Lorme,  of  whom  we  have  just  spoken,
on  her  return  to  Rambouillet,  received  a visit  from
M.  Renard,  who  had  addressed  her  to  me,  and  on  the
inquiry  of  my  friend,  this  lady  told  him  that  Adele  had
rightly  hit  upon  the  sufferings  she  experienced  ; but
that  she  had  made  a mistake  as  to  the  apparition,  it  not
being  her  grandmother  that  she  had  perceived.  My
friend  sent  word  to  me  what  this  lady  had  told  him,
regretting  that  the  apparition  experiment  had  failed.  I
was  naturally  astonished  at  such  a communication — I


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


33


who  had  heard  this  lady  say  at  each  detail  given  her  by
Adele  on  the  person  that  appeared — ’Tis  just  so,  ^tis
just  so”  I forthwith  forwarded  to  my  friend  a copy  of
the  testimonial,  and  begged  him  to  clear  up  this  affair.
A few  clays  after  I received  the  following  letter : —

“ I have  good  news  to  tell  you.  Proceeding  forthwith  to
Madame  Lorme’s,  I showed  her  your  letter,  when  she  said  to
me  : — ‘ Good  heavens  ! the  clairvoyante  hit  rightly  enough
on  mv  bodilv  ailments,  but  it  was  not  rav  grandmother  who
came.’  The  following  Saturday,  I again  spoke  to  her  about
it ; same  ‘answer.  ‘ Perhaps,'  said  I,  ‘ there  are  two  ladies  of
this  name  in  your  family?’ — ‘No,’  replied  she.  I returned
the  next  day,  Sunday  evening ; Alonsieur  Lorme  was  absent.
She  exclaimed  : — ‘ Oh  ! my  poor  M.  Renard,  yesterday,  when
you  were  gone,  it  all  at  once  came  into  nry  head  that  I had  an
aunt.  Dame  Vailee,  which  is,  indeed,  the  name  of  my  grand-
mother, and  who  was  her  sister-in-law  ; she  lived  at  Nogent,
and  died  four  or  five  years  ago  at  the  age  of  seventy  or  seventy-
tsvo.  She  was  small,  very  mirthful,  a Roger  bon  temps.  She
wore  caps  with  flat  bands,  a square  handkerchief,  a striped
woollen  under-petticoat,  and  a bodice  without  skirts,  such  as  is
worn  in  Beauce ; she  had  always  her  spectacle  case  about  her,
as  she  often  sewed  up  coarse  liuen  bags.  Ah ! she  is,  indeed,
the  woman,  ’lis  I who  was  wrong ; goodness  me,  how  I
repent,’  &c.,  &c.  She  repeated  this  version  to  me  a number  of
times.  You  may  imagine,  my  friend,  what  pleasure  this  re-
cital gave  me  ; I am  still  quite  joyous  at  the  thoughts  of  it.
You  know  me  ; having  an  idea  that  the  good  Dame  Lorme
might  tell  me  this  to  console  us,  I repaired  to  her  mother’s  at
Grenonvillers ; there  the  same  account.  M.  Maillard,  her
father,  told  me  the  same  thing.  It  is,  indeed,  our  aunt,  a
merry  little  creature  ; in  short,  such  a one  as  your  clairvoyante
described.  This  fact  confirms  us  in  the  belief  that  Adele  has
not  the  communication  of  thoughts.  I will  write  to  M.  Dupotet;
I should  think  that  he  will  insert  this  fact  in  his  Journal  whilst
speaking  of  your  work.  If  Adele  had  the  transmission  of
thoughts,  she  would  have  depicted  the  grandmother  of  Madame
Lorme;  seen  her  in  her  brain.  This  is  a very  precious  incident.”

As  my  friend,  I look  upon  this  incident  as  a very
precious  one.  But,  it  will  be  asked  me,  why  Madame


34


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


Lorme  replied,  “ Just  so^just  so”  when  it  was  not  what
she  desired  ? To  this  observation  I will  reply,  that  this
lady  lost  all  consciousness  w^hen  Adele  visited  her  (spi-
ritually) ; it  was  not  without  some  trouble  that  I re-
stored her  to  the  use  of  her  senses.  This  lady  found
herself  in  this  state  for  the  first  time  in  her  life ; she
knew  not  what  to  think  of  it,  and  I believe  that  she  ■was
in  haste  to  quit  us,  fearing  a relapse.  This,  no  doubt,
induced  her  to  say,  “’Tis  just  so,  His  just  so.  Let  me
escape  as  soon  as  possible,  for  I no  longer  know  where
I am.”  Without  the  perseverance  of  my  friend,  this
precious  apparition  would  be  looked  upon  as  false.
My  friend,  in  his  letter,  that  w'as  delivered  to  me  by
Madame  Lorme,  gave  me  merely  the  surname  of  the
deceased.  I asked  for  her  by  this  name  onhq  and
hence,  no  doubt,  the  mistake.  M'e  have  already  made
mention  of  two  similar  ones  in  our  first  volume,  others
will  be  seen  in  this ; great  precautions,  therefore,
should  be  taken  in  this  resj)ect.  A false  application  of
names  would  cause  a failure  in  the  desired  apparition,
and  often  lead  to  the  rejection  of  a truth,  which  would
be  perverted  only  through  the  fault  of  the  asker.  Take
note  of  all  the  incidents,  however  strange  they  appear  j
by-and-by  we  shall  find  the  solution  of  them.

In  the  apparition  we  have  just  cited,  the  communi-
cation of  thoughts  cannot  exist,  as  rightly  observes  my
friend,  who  thus  terminates  his  letter: —

“ Madame  Lucas  afforded  me  much  pleasure  from  the
account  she  gave  of  your  admirable  sitting,  when  your  good
clairvoyante  had  a coup-de-soleil,  in  the  perception  of  Mexico.
These  facts  confound  all  the  religious  and  philosophical  writers.

“ Receive,  he.,

“ Ch.  Renard,

“ Employe  aux  hypotheques  de  Rambouillet.”
104.  M.  Renard,  whom  we  have  just  mentioned,
begged  me  to  get  a small  bottle  of  water  magnetised
for  him,  by  Adeie,  when  she  should  be  in  her  sleep,  in
order  to  cure  or  calm  an  irritation  of  the  conjunctiva.


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


35


which  prevented  him  from  reading  and  looking  steadily
on  an  object.  I begged  Adele,  whilst  asleep,  to  render
my  friend  this  slight  service.  M.  Swedenborg  was
present  at  the  sitting ; Adele  begged  him  to  strengthen
by  his  action  the  virtue  of  the  water ; this  good  spirit
did  so  with  pleasure.  Adele  held  the  bottle  up,  pre-
senting it  thus  to  M.  Swedenborg,  who  magnetised  it,
and  breathed  on  it.  She  returned  it  to  me,  saying,  “ It
is  good.” — I was  about  to  paste  some  labels  on  different
bottles ; I put  one  on  this  bottle,  on  which  I afterwards
wrote  magnetised  water.  Three  hours  had  scarcely
elapsed  when  I no  longer  saw  on  the  label  but  the
word  water,  the  other  word  had  disappeared.  I again
wrote  on  it  the  word  magnetised,  and,  next  day,  at  the
moment  of  sending  this  bottle  to  my  friend,  the  word
magnetised  had  again  disappeared,  leaving  no  trace
behind  it.  I wrote  it  a third  time,  then  forwarded  the
bottle  to  its  destination.  I was  naturally  surprised  at
the  disappearance  of  one  word  out  of  two.  I had
written  with  a goose-quill,  touched  no  acid,  made  this
label  as  large  as  a hard,  out  of  the  same  paper  as  the
rest.  On  none  had  the  ink  disappeared — the  paste
was  the  same;  what,  then,  could  have  caused  this
disappearance?  Why  had  the  word  ivater  undergone
no  alteration  ?

Already  had  I forgotten  this  incident  wdien  my  friend
wrote  to  me  that  he  had  received  the  bottle,  bearing  a
label  with  merely  the  word  water  on  it;  he  gave  me  to
understand  that  I ought  at  least  to  have  indicated  what
water  it  was,  since  I had  put  on  a label.  I answered
him  that  I had  even  written  on  it  three  times  magnetised
water,  and  could  not  understand  how  it  was  that  one
word  only  should  remain.  I could  not  inform  myself
better  in  this  respect  than  by  applying  to  M.  Sweden-
borg. I begged  Adele  to  mention  to  him  this  pheno-
menon, in  order  to  know  what  he  thought  of  it.  M.
Swedenborg  replied  to  her — “ I told  you  to  beg  your
magnetiser  to  put  on  the  bottle  divine  water  spi^^


36


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


ritualised^  Adele  confessed  that  she  had  forgotten
this  injunction.  I inquired  wh)’’  it  should  be  more  ne-
cessary to  put  on  it  divine  water  spiritualised  than  water
magnetised.  She  answered — Because  it  was  by  the
permission  of  God  that  IM.  Swedenborg  spiritualised,
and  not  magnetised  it.  It  is  only  material  men  who
magnetise,  spirits  spiritualise.”  “ For  my  part,’^  re-
plied I,  “ this  action  seems  to  me  similar  to  the  other,
since  this  water  has  not  passed  to  a spiritual  state,  as
we  see  by  our  distillations.” — Who  tells  you  that  it
has  not  been  in  the  spiritual  state  ? Let  M.  Renard
preserve  it,  it  v.dll  do  him  a great  deal  of  good.” — ‘‘  It
was  M.  Swedenborg,  then,  who  took  care  to  efface  the
word  magnetised?”  “ No,  he  no  longer  thought  of  the
matter ; it  is  the  water  itself  that  carried  away  this
word  whilst  filtering  through  the  pores  of  the  glass.” —

I can’t  understand  that ; it  could  not  have  filtered,  or
the  label  would  have  come  off,  and  the  word  ivater
would  likewise  have  been  effaced.  Explain  this  phe*
nomenon  more  clearly.”  There  is  no  phenomenon  ;
the  will  and  the  fluid  of  M.  Swedenborg  were  in  this
water,  which  was  not  to  bear  the  word  magnetised;
consequently  the  water  caused  it  to  disappear.” — “You
affirm  that  it  was  not  M.  Swedenborg,  nor  any  spirit,
that  effaced  this  word  ?”  “ It  was  the  water  itself.” —

To  perform  such  a work  this  water,  then,  has  a will  ?
It  is  alive,  then  ?”  “ It  had  the  will  and  the  fluid  of

^1.  Swedenborg,  that  sufficed  it.” — “ Then  this  is  as
much  as  saying  that  it  was  j\I.  Swedenborg  himself
who  effaced  this  word  ?”  “ He  troubled  himself  no

more  about  it;  be  content  with  this  explanation.  I find
myself  forced  to  be  so,  let  every  one  do  as  I.”  My
friend  wrote  word  to  me  that  he  was  cured  in  two  hours ;
he  applied  it,  also,  to  a contusion,  the  consequence  of
a fall  he  had  had  ; at  the  lapse  of  a few  instants  lie  felt
nothing  more  of  it.  I looked  upon  this  fact  as  mar-
vellous enough  to  take  its  place  in  the  “ Secrets.”

105.  M.  Mirande,  director  of  the  printing-office,


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETIS?^!.


37


Belin-Mandar^  at  St.  Cloud,  to  whom  I entrusted
the  impression  of  the  first  volume  of  the  “ Secrets,”
experienced  much  pleasure  in  reading  the  proofs,  and
knew  not  what  to  think  of  such  marvellous  facts.
One  day  he  confided  to  me  that  he  was  acquainted
with  magnetism  only  by  name,  and  begged  me  to  tell
him  sincerelv  whether  all  I said  in  this  work  was
strictly  true.  I repeated  to  him  what  I said  in  my
Introduction,  “ that  I should  deem  myself  the  most
contemptible  being  on  earth  if  I speculated  on  such
falsehoods.  All  that  I recounted  was  the  sacred  truth.”
He  then  said  to  me  : “Would  you  be  so  kind  as  to  give
me  a sitting  ?”  I eagerly  offered  to  gratify  his  wish.
Adele  visited  (spiritually)  his  daughter  and  wife,  who
could  not  for  a single  moment  doubt  her  excellent
clairvoyance.  Madame  Mirande  cannot  make  use  of
the  thumb  of  her  right  hand.  Adele  asked  her  if  she
had  not  magnetised  some  one  ? This  lady  replied  that
she  was  acquainted  with  magnetism  only  by  name  ; but
that  from  what  she  had  seen  Adele  do,  when  showing
M.  Mirande  how  he  should  magnetise  his  daughter,
whose  is  arm  paralysed,  she  recollected  that  a doctor  had
once  taught  her  how  to  perform  frictions  on  the  arm  of  one
of  her  friends  who  had  lost  the  use  of  it.  She  had  ren-
dered her  this  service  for  nearly  a fortnight ; but  finding
that  it  fatigued  her  and  gave  her  pains  in  the  thumb,
she  left  off;  and  it  is  only  since  then  that  her  thumb
has  been  in  this  state.  Adele  said  to  her : “ It  was
magnetism  that  you  performed  then ; the  doctor  ought
to  have  warned  you  to  shake  your  fingers  to  disengage
yourself  from  the  bad  fluid  you  absorbed,  and  wash  your
hands  in  water  acidulated  with  vinegar,  as  I recommend
your  husband  to  do  after  each  magnetisation.”  This
lady  acknowledged  that  Adele^s  was  a just  observation,
since  her  thumb  was  not  in  this  state  previous  to  the
above  time,  and  that  she  had  received  no  blow  or  any
injury  that  could  have  occasioned  what  she  felt.  (A
warning  to  those  who  do  not  believe  in  the  transmission


38


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


of  disease).  M.  Mirande,  from  the  first  sitting  of
somnambulism  he  had  ever  seen,  was  convinced  of  the
reality  of  what  was  said  with  respect  to  maladies.  But
he  wished  to  know  what  opinion  to  come  to  as  to  the
revelations  of  the  “ Secrets consequently  he  begged
A dele  to  ask  for  the  apparition  of  his  brother,  whom  he
believed  killed  in  the  Russian  campaign.  Adele,  not
seeing  him  in  the  spiritual  world,  said  that  he  was  not
dead ; that  she  saw  him  on  earth.  She  gave  the  fol-
lowing description  of  him  : — I see  a tali  stout  man,
with  brown  hair,  fine  black  lively  eyes,  and  of  a tender
expression  ; a mouth  neither  large  nor  small,  beautiful
teeth,  nose  well  made,  cheeks  coloured,  air  gracious,
and  very  cheerful.  He  seems  to  me  about  thirty  years
of  age,  and  is  rather  taller  than  M.  Mirande.  He  wears
the  uniform  of  a sub-officer  (I  believe),  because  I see
him  with  only  one  epaulette,  blue  coat,  pantaloons  of
the  same  colour,  with  scarlet  edgings,  shako  with  visor ;
altogether  he  is  a fine  man.” — “ Ask  him  in  what  country
he  is  ?”  He  does  not  know,  or  he  has  no  mind  to  tell
me.  He  says  that  he  has  undergone  much  suffering.
He  was  made  a prisoner  and  sent  to  the  very  interior  of
Russia,  in  countries  bordering  on  China,  I believe;  he
tells  me  that  his  brother  will  see  him  again.” — AVhy
has  he  not  written  to  him  ?”  He  did  write,  but  the
letters  have  either  been  lost  or  miscarried.” — “Why
does  he  no  longer  write  ?”  “ He  knows  not  whether

his  brother  is  still  alive.^’ — “ Tell  him  that  he  is  alive
and  takes  upon  himself  to  find  out  the  place  of  his
retreat.”  “ He  answers  that  he  cannot  say  when,  but
that  he  is  in  hopes,  one  day,  of  taking  his  brother  by
surprise.” — “ AVhat  does  he  do  there?”  “ He  is  very
comfortable,  has  lands  of  his  own,  turns  them  to
account,  and  employs  many  persons.  Could  he  have
managed  to  dispose  of  his  property,  he  would  have  been
before  this  in  France ; but  thereabouts  purchasers  are
not  to  be  found  as  with  us ; he  can’t  tell  when  he  shall
succeed  in  selling  off.” — “ Let  him  write  to  his  brother.”


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


39


He  has  no  opportunity.  You  think  it  an  easy  matter;
he  is  very  far  from  the  sea ; then  again  he  has  a wish
to  take  his  brother  by  surprise,  when  he  returns,
rich  and  happ)'.  He  is  not  selfish,  he  has  an  excellent
heart,  but  he  is  not  free  from  ambition ; he  always  was
ambitious.  He  has  dreamed  of  only  one  thing  in  his
life, — being  rich  in  his  old  days,  and  he  is  at  the  height
of  his  wishes.” — “ Is  he  married  ?”  Yes  ; but  he
has  no  children.  Next  time  I will  beg  him  to  show
me  the  country  he  lives  in,  as  well  as  his  house  and
wife.” — Adele  is  fiitigued,  and  desires  to  be  roused.
M.  Mirande  asks  for  further  particulars  as  to  the
costume  of  his  brother.  Adele  repeats  what  she  has
already  said,  and  adds  that  she  believes  she  saw  gold
lace  on  his  breast,  what  we  call  brandebourgs ; she  like-
wise thinks  that  he  had  white  facings  to  his  coat.”
M.  Mirande  acknowledged  that  all  the  details  as  to
the  personal  appearance  were  exact,  as  well  as  those,
in  respect  to  the  character,  and  so  forth,  of  his  brother.
The  brother  of  this  gentleman  had  served  in  the  De-
partmental Guard  previous  to  the  Russian  campaign.
M.  Mirande  believes  that  such  was  the  costume,  only
he  did  not  know  that  he  was  a sub-officer.  He  is
much  surprised  that  his  brother,  who  must  be  fifty-six
years  old,  should  look  no  more  than  thirty.  Adele
makes  the  observation  to  him  that  she  sees  him  at
the  moment  he  left  France. — At  that  time,”  replies
M.  Mirande,  ^Hie  was  not  above  one-and-twenty.  He
looks  to  you  full  thirty ; no  doubt  the  fatigue  he  un-
derwent made  him  grow  old  soon.” — Ad^le  resumes  : —
“ As  you  knew  him  only  a soldier  of  one-and-twenty,
he  appears  to  me  an  officer,  and  older.  Several  years
may  have  elapsed  since  that  time  and  the  moment  I see
him.  This  is  very  admissible.  If  I beheld  him  at  the
age  of  one-and-twenty,  it  would  be  said  that  I see  in
the  thought.  If,  on  the  contrary,  I saw  him  at  the  age
he  is  now — fifty-six,  his  brother  would  not  recognise
him.”  M,  Mirande  can  very  well  understand  this.  He


40


THE  SECRET.®  OP  THE  FUTURE


has  not  the  least  doubt  but  that  it  was  his  brother
who  appeared.  He  cannot  recover  his  astonishment.
— I will  add,  as  a reflection,  to  this  apparition  : — 1st.
If  Adele  had  seen  this  man  in  M.  Mirande’s  thought,
she  would  have  seen  him  as  a private  soldier,  about
twenty-one  years  of  age.  2nd.  It  would  have  been
sufficient  for  her  to  have  given  this  gentleman  a few
particulars,  then  to  have  broken  off  with  the  obser-
vation that  his  brother  was  dead.  Such  was  M.
Mirande’s  opinion.  Adele,  on  the  contrary,  gives
details  as  to  the  existence  and  life  of  this  man  ; she
makes  judicious  observations.  If  she  saw  him  at  his
present  age,  and  in  his  present  dress  and  occupations,
his  brother  could  never  have  recognised  him.  The
only  objection  admissible  is,  that  he  ought  to  have
given  the  name  of  the  place  he  lives  in.  Ilemains  to
know  w'hether  he  is  able  or  willing  to  do  so.  To  be
able,  this  place  must  have  a name;  and  all  the  countries
of  the  globe  are  not  like  France,  wdiere  each  hamlet
is  dependent  on  a city,  this  city  on  a department,  &c.
Those  uncultivated,  remote  countries,  but  little  knowm
to  geography,  possess  not  names  so  easy  to  class  as  with
us.  We  experienced  the  same  difficulty  in  our  per-
ception of  Mexico.  Then,  again,  if  this  man  is  un-
willing to  acquaint  us  with  the  place  he  lives  in,  for
reasons  of  his  own,  we  cannot  force  him.  He  evades
the  question  by  saying  : — “ I have  been  a prisoner ; I
have  wu'itten ; I have  no  opportunity ; I know'  not
w'hether  my  brother  is  still  living,^’  &c. — The  future
will  tell  us  more  about  it.  This  apparition  proves  to  us
that  if  men  still  on  earth  can  appear  in  the  dress,  the
features,  and  age  they  no  longer  have,  souls  disen-
gaged from  matter  may  surely  have  the  same  powder;
and  w'e  acquire  the  certitude,  by  this  fact,  that  all  that
I have  said,  in  this  respect,  is  correct.  Each  garment,
each  year  imprints  an  ineffaceable  image  on  our  bodies,
W'hich  may  be  found  again,  at  all  times,  agreeably  to  the
desire  of  the  spirit.  I have  made  this  expeiiment  several


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


41


times;  I have  asked  for  persons  living  on  earth  at
different  periods  of  their  life  ; they  have  appeared  at  the
age  demanded,  clad  in  the  costume  they  then  wore.  I
have  made  inquiries  of  them,  and  obtained  the  as-
surance that  this  was  correct.  I was  far  from  having
known  these  persons  when  of  the  age  at  which  I asked
for  them.  In  somnambulism,  there  is  a continual  source
of  observation.  To  succeed  we  must  not  argue;  we
must  stud}^ — not  believe  without  proofs,  and  not  deny
without  knowing.  I will  even  go  so  far  as  to  say  that
we  have  no  right  to  deny  what  we  cannot  comprehend.

106.  I take  advantage  of  a visit  paid  me  by  Emile
Rey,  of  whose  sittings  we  have  read  in  the  first  volume
of  the  ‘^Secrets,^^  to  beg  him  to  allow  me  to  magnetise
him,  as  I had  a few  questions  to  put  to  him.  It  was
not  without  some  trouble  that  I could  prevail  on  him  to
consent  to  my  wishes,  his  family  having  told  him  that
such  experiments  would  make  him  ill.  This  child  is
but  twelve  years  of  age,  and  would  be  an  excellent  clair-
voyant if  conducted  with  perseverance ; but  he  prefers
playing  to  sleeping,  which  is  natural  enough  at  his  age.
A few  days  before  I had  submitted  to  him  a few  ques-
tions, wdiich  his  guide  was  unable  to  answer ; I had  a
mind  to  get  a solution  of  them.  Once  asleep,  I tell  him
to  ask  for  his  guide.  Here  he  is,’^  said  he. — Ask
him  if  there  are  any  books  in  heaven  He  tells  me

there  are  none.^^ — “ Ask  him,  once  more,  if  we  have-
already  lived  on  a material  globe  before  appearing  on
earth  He  answers — ‘ No.^  What  is  the  festival

called,  at  which,  the  last  time  you  saw  him,  he  told  you
he  had  been  crowned  The  feast  of  the  angels.^^ —

“ What  kind  of  pleasure  did  they  take  that  day
“ They  danced  a great  deal  in  a circle.-’^ — “What  is  this
day  called  “ St.  Nicholas^  day — it  W’as  Monday.-’^ —
But  you  saw  your  guide  before  Monday,  and  the  feast
had  already  taken  place;  ask  him  again,  very  slowly.'^
“'He  replies  that  it  was  St.  Nicholas^  feast.’^ — “Your
guide,  then,  is  very  fond  of  dancing  in  a circle,  that  he

E


42


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


took  so  much  delight  in  it  ?’^  Ah  ! yes.” — “ And,
whilst  he  was  dancing,  what  had  become  of  his  horse —
no  doubt  he  had  put  it  in  a stable  ?”  “ There  are

neither  stables  nor  houses  in  heaven;  there  is  but  a
large  garden,  a beautiful  one.  He  put  his  horse  in  this
garden.  Horses  are  not  so  vicious  there  as  on  earth,
they  destroy  nothing.” — “Are  they  all  little  boys  to-
gether?” “ Yes;  but  there  are  also  little  girls.” — “Do
the  boys  play  with  them  ?”  “Yes;  each  plays  with  his
own.” — “ How  his  own  ?”  “ Each  little  boy  has  a little

girl,  whom  he  terms  his  companion,  and  with  whom  he
always  plays.” — “ Has  your  guide  also  a companion  ?”
“ Yes.” — Does  she  ride  on  horseback  with  him  ?”
“ No,  she  is  not  adroit  enough.” — “ Could  he  let  you
see  her?”  “ He  is  going  to  fetch  her.”  Emile  waits  a
moment,  then  exclaims  : — “ Here  she  is  ; she  is  a
black.” — “A  black? — what  do  vou  mean?”  “Yes,  she
is  a negress.” — Fearing  it  might  be  an  evil  spirit  that
had  a mind  to  play  us  some  trick  of  his  own,  I attempted
to  drive  her  away  in  the  name  of  God,  but  Emile  said: —
“They  are  really  sent  by  God,  you  can’t  drive  them
away.” — “ Then,  tell  me  how  this  negress  is  dressed  ?”

She  is  in  a beautiful  white  robe ; she  is  rather  taller
than  A"is.” — “ Where  was  she  born  ?”  “ At  Neva.” —

“ That  is  a cold  country,  I believe.  Was  it  not  rather  at
Java  or  Nouga-Hiva  ?”  “ No,  she  says  Neva.” — “ Did

Ai’s  know  her  on  earth  ?”  “ Yes,  at  Paris,  but  he  saw

her  only  twice ; she  lived  opposite  his  house.” — “ Has
she  any  relations  with  her  in  heaven  ?”  “ No.” — “And

Ai's?”  “He  has  an  aunt.” — “You  once  told  me  that
he  had  his  father  there?”  “ He  replies  that  he  never
told  me  so ; ’tis  I who  made  a mistake.” — “The  parents
of  this  little  negress,  are  they  still  in  Paris  ?”  “ She

says  that  she  believes  that  they  have  returned  to  Neva.”
— “Is  she  black  in  heaven,  as  she  appears  to  you  on
earth?”  “No,  she  is  as  fair  as  Ais.” — “ What  is  the
colour  of  her  hair  in  heaven  ?”  “ Flaxen.” — “ And

Ais  ?”  “ He  has  fine  black  hair.” — “ Of  what  colour


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


43


are  their  eyes }”  Both  of  them  have  blue  eyes.^’ —
^^Do  they  never  quit  each  other  ‘^Ais  says  no;
but/’  observes  Emile,  “ since  he  came  to  see  me  with-
out her,  he  must  surely  quit  her.” — “Ask  him  again.”

He  replies  that  he  leaves  her  only  to  come  and  see
me,  and  to  go  and  see  his  aunt  in  heaven.” — “ Has  this
little  creature  also  seen  God  ?”  “ Yes.” — “ In  what
form  ?”  “ I have  already  told  you,  in  the  human  form.”
— “How  is  he  named  ?”  “Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.” —

Is  it  Jesus  Christ  who  is  the  God  creator  of  heaven
and  earth?”  “'No.” — “Who,  then?”  “It  is  God.”
— “ Who  is  Jesus  Christ  ?”  “ The  son  of  God.” —

‘^But  you  say  that,  in  heaven,  he  is  called  God  ?”  “He
is  called  God,  but  he  is  not  God;  he  is  the  son  of
God.” — “ What  you  tell  me,  is  that  really  the  answer
made  you  ?”  “ Yes.” — “ Does  your  guide  eat  in
heaven  ?”  “ Yes.”  — “ What  ?”  “ Fine  fruits.” —

“ What  fruits  are  they  ?”  “ Such  as  on  earth.” —

“'Does  he  undergo  any  sufferings  ? —experience  any
fatigue  ?”  “'  He  does  not  suffer,  and  is  never  fatigued.”

— “Does  he  sleep  sometimes?”  “Yes.” — “ On  what
does  he  lie  down  ?”  “ On  a beautiful  turf  in  the  gar-

den.”— “Ask  his  companion  if  she  dearly  loves  him,
and  whether  she  makes  much  of  him  ?”  “ She  says  that

she  does,  indeed.” — I awake  Emile.

As  I have  already  observed,  it  is  very  difficult  to  put
questions  compre’hensible  to  children  of  this  age,  and
from  Emile’s  answers  we  perceive  that  he  is  in  accord
with  many  of  the  revelations  we  have  read.  This  way
in  which  children  perceive  God  proves  to  us  that  each
enters  the  society  that  corresponds  with  the  belief  in
which  he  was  brought  up  on  earth,  and  continues  there
the  same  usages.  Christ  is  the  God  of  the  Christians ;
the  Mahometans,  Jews,  &c.,  have  each  their  own.  The
true  philosopher  has  but  one  who  is  neither  the  one  nor
the  other  of  these  teachers,  but  who  is  all,  in  all,  and
throughout  all.  It  remains  for  us  to  know  if  in  heaven
a negro  preserves  his  colour,  and  can  be  united  to  a

E 2


44


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


white ; in  Adele’s  next  sleep  we  will  submit  to  her
these  questions,  though  she  has  already  answered  the
first  one.  We^ee^hat  Emile  has  sufficient  judgment
not  to  be  the  dupe  of  an  illusion,  by  the  judicious
observation  he  makes  when  his  guide  tells  him  that  he
never  quits  his  companion.

I will  observe,  for  my  part,  that  I should  not  com-
prehend the  utility  of  a guide  such  as  that  of  Emile,
and  all  those  who  are,  it  is  said,  constantly  beside  us.
If  I admitted  that  they  were  charged  with  a continual
surveillance  of  our  actions,  they  would  be  slaves  like  our-
selves, by  sacrificing  to  us  all  their  time.  It  must  be  other-
wise, or  our  life  would  be  theirs.  I do  not  believe  that
they  are  bound  to  us  in  any  other  way  than  in  proffering
tis  counsel  when  we  address  ourselves  to  them  ; were  it
not  so,  it  would  be  difficult  to  reconcile  their  happy  occu-
pations with  our  troubles.  We  see  that  we  are  not  called
on  to  explain  all  in  our  present  state.  Eternity  is  before  us !

We  will  study  in  this  the  question  of  free-will;  for
either  we  are  or  are  not  free.  If  we  are  free,  why  in-
fluence us;  if  we  are  not  free,  the  influence  becomes  in
like  manner  unlawful.  We  will  refer,  on  this  head,  to
what  has  been  said  in  our  first  volume.

107.  Adele  is  not  apprised  of  Emile’s  sitting.  I
have  prepared  the  following  questions,  which  I beg  her
to  submit  to  M.  Swedenborg : — ‘‘  The  two  beings  created
for  each  other,  are  they  in  every  respect  alike  as  to
physiognomy?”  “No,  they  are  only  exactly  similar  as
to  affections.” — “ May  one  be  a white  and  the  other  a
black  ?”  “Yes.” — “Can  a white  be  united  to  a negress  ?”
“ Yes.” — “ Do  negroes  preserve  their  black  complexion
in  heaven  ?”  “ In  heaven  all  men  are  white ; it  is  only

on  earth,  from  the  effect  of  climate,  that  they  are  of
different  colours.”* — When  blacks  re-appear  on  earth.


* An  old  sailor,  who  has  made  many  a voyage  to  the  colonies,  assures
me,  on  the  authority  of  a medical  man,  at  Port-au-Prince  (St.  Domingo),
that  negroes,  at  their  birth,  are  as  white  as  Europeans.  My  father  has
likewise  assured  me  that  he  has  seen  many  drowned  negroes  whose  wounds
bore  a skin  as  while  as  oars  after  remaining  a short  time  in  the  water


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


45


do  they  resume  their  blach  colour  ?”  Yes,  it  must  be
so,  otherwise  they  would  not  be  recognised.^’ — ^‘Negroes
amongst  each  other  do  they  see  themselves  black,  if
such  is  their  affection  ?”  “ There  are  no  negroes  who

like  their  colour.  When  they  compare  it  with  that  of
the  whites,  they  envy  the  white  colour.  They  prefer  us
in  all.  Black  women  seek  after  white  men,  and  black
men  after  white  wom.en.  They  have  no  affection  for
their  colour,  had  they  any  they  would  be  deprived  of  it
in  heaven  where  all  men  are  white.’’ — Can  a black
child  be  united  with  a white  child,  each  having  died  in
its  own  colour  ?”  Yes.” — Have  children,  amongst
each  other,  books  to  study  ?”  “ Those  that  desire  it

have  them.” — “Is  each  pair  of  children  under  the
special  care  of  a superior  spirit  charged  with  their  in-
struction ?”  “The  spirit  charged  with  this  instruction
has  not  less  than  a number  of  children,  and  that  number
is  twenty.” — “ What  kind  of  instruction  is  given  them  ?”
“ That  which  God  deems  suitable.” — “ Are  children
crowned  at  a feast  which  is  general  with  them  ?”  “ There
are  religious  festivals  and  usages  in  heaven  as  on  earth;
but  all  children  are  generally  crowned  at  the  age  of  seven
years.”  “ There  are  years,  then,  in  heaven  ?”  “ Time,  as
1 have  before  said,  is  not  reckoned  there  as  on  earth ; it  is
no  longer  a necessity,  one  is  not  obliged  to  put  off  till
the  morrow  the  desire  which  is  satisfied  as  soon  as
formed;  the  calculation  of  time  becomes  needless  there.
It  is  only  for  children  still  subject  to  the  usages  neces-
sary to  complete  their  instruction  that  time  is  counted.”
— “ Children,  from  their  earliest  age,  can  they  be  united
if  they  died  at  about  the  same  time?”  “ Yes,  but  they
are  not  ultimately  united  before  the  age  of  fifteen  years;
it  is  the  age  of  eternal  union.” — “ Can  a child  be  igno-
rant of  its  having  lived  spiritually  on  another  globe
before  appearing  on  earth?”  “No  one  is  ignorant  of
such  existence  ; it  is  for  want  of  thought  if  some  do  not
speak  of  it;” — “ Children  perfected,  do  they  caress  each
other  by  kisses  or  other  demonstrations  ?”  “ Yes  ; but

their  ordinary  caress  is  shaking  hands  affectionately


46


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


until  they  are  ultimately  united.” — “ There  have  ap-
peared to  us  children  who  did  not  seem  to  have  made
any  progress  since  their  departure  from  the  earth ; do
they  remain  long  in  such  state  ?”  “ A time  more  or

less  long.” — “ Can  they,  like  grown-up  persons,  remain
an  unlimited  time  in  innocent  pleasures  ?”  Yes.” —
“Do  children  believe  that  they  speak  through  speech
or  thought  ?”  “ They  believe  that  they  speak  through

speech.”  I had  put  this  question  to  Emile’s  guide,  and
he  answered  me  in  the  same  sense.  Having  exhausted
the  questions  I had  prepared  for  this  sitting,  I was
about  to  rouse  A dele  when  she  made  a gesture  of  sur-
prise, and  tendered,  with  the  greatest  vivacity,  her
hand  to  some  one  who  was  near  her,  and  caused  her  so
powerful  an  emotion  that  she  shed  tears  in  abundance.
“What  creates  in  you  this  surprise?”  said  I to  her.
“ It  is  Alphonse.” — “ What ! Alphonse,  who  for  so  long
a period  has  not  paid  you  a visit  ?”  (About  eighteen
months.)  “ He,  himself,”  replied  she.  “ Has  he  any-
thing to  tell  you?”  “It  seems  to  him,  he  says,  but
two  days  ago.” — “ He  does  not  grow  weary  where  he
is  ?”  “ I perceive  as  much.”  Adele  expressed  a wish

to  chat  with  this  cherished  brother  ; I left  her  a mo-
ment, but  soon  perceived  that  she  was  entering  the
complement  of  ecstasy.  I felt  her  pulse,  to  guide  my-
self by  its  pulsations,  when  I thought  it  time  to  recall
her  to  earth  ; I did  so,  and  she  obeyed  me  without  a
murmur,  exclaiming — “Yes,  our  departure  from  this
miserable  globe,  our  descent  into  the  grave,  is  the  first
step  we  take  towards  perfect  equality  ; fortune,  title,
grandeur,  ugliness,  deformity,  grief,  misery — all  this
passes  under  the  spiritual  level,  and  emerges  from  it,
equalised  for  ever  ; love,  fraternity,  replace  egotism  and
ambition.  Oh  ! my  God,  wherefore  men  do  they  not
appreciate  thy  divine  mercy  ? wherefore  dost  thou  send
me  back  amongst  them  ? My  time  is  not  ended,  let  us
re-enter  this  prison  and  hope.”  I had  sacrificed  this
sitting,  as  I have  said,  to  verify  whether  all  that  Emile’s


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


47


guide  told  me  was  correct ; we  have  seen  that  there  is
accord  : — 1.  As  to  the  colour  of  the  hair,  which  may  be
dilferent  between  two  beings,  as  we  have  the  proof
direct  in  x\i3  and  his  companion,  hers  being  flaxen  and
his  black.  2.  As  to  the  possible  union  of  a white  with
a negress.  3.  As  to  the  disappearance  of  the  lilack
colour  in  heaven,  where  all  beings  are  white.  4.  On
the  necessity  of  appearing  on  earth  in  the  colour  we
bore  there.  5.  On  the  possibility  of  having  books  in
heaven,  if  children  are  fond  of  them,  6.  On  a Mentor,
who  superintends  their  education ; Ais  had  told  me  ,
in  a former  sitting,  that  a saint  instructed  them.  This
child  is  so  lively  that  he  scarcely  awaits  the  answers
made  him  ; to  this  may  be  attributed  the  mistake  he
made  as  to  the  decease  of  the  father  of  Ais.  We  see
by  M.  Swedenborg,  as  by  M.  Mallet,  that  a number
consists  of  20.  7th.  There  is  also  accord  as  to  the
coronation.  8th.  As  to  the  festivals.  9th.  As  tothe
possible  union  and  caresses  of  two  children.  10th.  As
to  their  belief,  in  communicating  with  each  other,
through  speech ; this,  also,  Emile  had  told  me,  when,  on
the  contrary,  it  is  through  thought,  through  sensation.
Here,  then,  are  ten  secrets  in  which  they  perfectly
agree.  It  is  necessary  to  observe  that  I did  not  mag-
netise this  child  once  in  two  months,  his  mother
having  an  objection  to  it.  We  may  judge  what  facility
is  prepared  for  somnambulists  in  communicating  with
the  deceased,  especially  when  rightly  brought  up  for
this  purpose,  and  prudently  guided  in  this  speciality.

I return  to  an  observation  to  which  I did  not  give
sufficient  importance ; that  is,  to  prepare  the  questions
we  desire  to  address,  not  to  suffer  ourselves  to  be  led
away  by  those  raised  by  the  answers  we  obtain ;
keep  them  for  the  next  sitting,  you  will  have  had  time
to  reflect  on  them,  and  prepare  them  better.  They
may,  sometimes,  accord  with  others  that  have  preceded
them,  which  would  be  a needless  repetition,  for  we
have  been  enabled  to  appreciate  that  an  answer  very


48


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


often  contains  several  solutions ; hence  it  is,  that  at  tire
first  sitting,  Binet  used  to  say  to  me: — You  have
already  been  answered  that  question.” — I did  not
believe  it;  I had  not  comprehended  him,  and  1 found
at  a later  period  that  he  was  right.  Such  conver-
sations, likewise,  present  in  the  reading  a void  which
is,  at  times,  painful.  It  will  be  understood  that  this  is
not  a history  whose  every  detail  should  be  consigned
with  harmony  and  a certain  elegance  of  style,  in
order  to  amuse.  Here  we  instruct  ourselves,  pick
up  information  in  the  road  of  the  infinite,  the  un-
known, to  construct  the  universal  history  of  creation
and  the  human  destination.  We  are  but  a very  poor
workman  for  a monument  so  colossal.  A skilful  archi-
tect will  one  day  come  to  unite  these  materials,  and
adorn  with  them  the  edifice  at  which  we  have  been
courageously  working  for  so  many  years.  Many
questions,  also,  are  found  unanswered  ; the  spirit,  no
doubt,  perceiving  that  our  intelligence  is  not  open  to
such  revelations.  It  is  silent — and  we  insist  not.  We
ask  for  the  spiritual  obole  with  humility,  and  stop  in
time  when  wm  find  that  we  are  importunate.

Many  magnetisers  are  easily  enough  disgusted  with
somnambulism  ; good  somnambulists  are  always  useful
to  consult;  it  is  very  frequently  the  magnetisers  W'ho
disorganise  them  by  the  strangeness  of  their  questions.
We  should  be  convinced,  once  for  all,  that  it  is  ne-
cessary to  train  every  somnambulist  to  one  specialit}*,
suited  to  his  tastes  and  the  kind  of  instruction  we
desire.  How  conceive  that  a somnambulist  should
answer  at  the  same  sitting  questions  hurried,  and  so
little  in  accord,  as  these : — “ Can  you  tell  me  what
I have  in  my  pocket  ?”  Can  you  read  this  letter  ?”
“ Can  you  see  where  I suffer  ?”  “ Can  you  tell  me

what  my  brother  is  doing  in  Africa  ?”  “ Can  you  see

W'hether  I shall  gain  such  a law-suit?”  ‘'Can  you  tell
what  such  a person  thinks  of  me  ?”  “Will  the  lottery-
ticket  I have  purchased  turn  up  a prize  ?”  “ Can  you


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGXETISM.


49


tell  me  what  has  become  of  my  husbandj  whom  I have
not  seen  these  twenty  years  ?”  and  a thousand  other
like  questions.  The  world  thinks  that  a somnambulist
who  sees  and  knows  a certain  thing  can  see  and  know
all.  The  magnetiser  himself  is  no  less  insatiable.
Consider  that  mistakes  must  be  the  consequence  of
such  a mode  of  operating ; too  many  are  often  made
even  in  following  a route  with  great  circumspection.
What  can  we  expect  from  such  a chaos  of  questions  ?
Deception  for  all,  shame  and  vexation  for  the  mag-
netiser, and  insanity  or  stupidity  for  the  somnambulist
thus  tortured;  fortunate  for  him  if  physical  tortures
be  not  added  to  moral  ones.  I am  not  at  all  surprised
that  somnambulism  should  lose  in  the  public  mind  its
sacred  and  divine  character.  You  wish  to  learn  so
much  from  it  that  you  know  nothing.  If,  in  spiritual
researches,  we  were  to  proceed  in  this  way,  we  should
obtain  but  very  little.  It  is  necessary,  as  I have  said,
to  write  down  beforehand  the  questions  we  intend
putting,  acquaint  the  clairvoyant  wdth  them,  that  he
may  prepare  for  them.  These  questions  should  be
clear,  and  few  in  number  touching  only  on  one  subject,
with  no  objections,  and  thus  terminating  the  sitting.
The  answers  obtained  will  supply  new  questions  for
the  following  sitting.  Never  make  two  similar  experi-
ments at  the  same  sitting,  if  you  would  succeed  ; no
pride,  no  interested  calculation.  Be  patient,  kind;
the  stone  that  caused  your  fall  to-day,  should  warn
you  to  pick  out  a better  road.  It  is  for  you  to  guide
your  clairvoyant  in  it  carefully  and  firmly.

108.  When  I entrusted  to  the  printer  my  manuscript
of  the  Secrets,^’  I had  not  a duplicate  of  it,  my  em-
nloyment  permitting  me  not  to  copy  such  a work  ; I
recommended  it,  therefore,  to  M.  Mirande,  director  of
the  printing  office,  harassed  as  I was  by  a secret  in-
quietude, still  further  augmented  by  the  somewhat
unfavorable  disposition  of  mind  into  which  my  pro-
spectus had  thrown  certain  members  of  different  sects.


50


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


Several  of  them  having  come  to  me  for  more  ample
information  as  to  the  religious  tendency  of  this  work,  I
had  frankly  answered  them  that  my  object  was  to  tell
all  that  had  been  revealed  to  me  without  in  aught  per-
verting the  meaning  to  the  advantage  of  any  particular
belief.  I ajrreed  not  with  these  'gentlemen  for  two
reasons: — 1st.  I believe  God  to  be  infinitely  good,  not
subject  to  fits  of  vengeance  and  cruelty.  2nd.  I believed
that  in  all  religions  we  might  be  saved  ; no  more  was
necessary  for  these  stupid  and  egotistical  men  to  make
them  augur  ill  of  the  soundness  of  my  work.  One  day
a disciple  of  Swedenborg  quitted  me,  saying : “ Mon-
sieur, with  such  disposition  of  mind  you  can  but  have
written  your  work  under  a very  bad  influence.  It
could  not  have  been  M.  Swedenborg  who  came  to  you ;
but  I predict  to  you  that  in  a few  days  from  this  he  will
appear  in  person  to  you  yourself,  to  undeceive  you  and
forbid  you  printing  it.”  I answered  this  gentleman,
that  the  day  I should  have  the  honor  of  such  a visit
would  be  one  of  the  happiest  of  ray  life.”  He  quitted
me  in  a very  bad  humour,  being  unable  to  contain  his
displeasure  before  a lady  present,  who  was  a follower  of
Swedenborg,  and  worthy  of  respect  from  her  great  age
and  enlightened  understanding,  the  fruit  of  long  and
painful  meditations.  Matters  stood  thus.  A vexatious
Idea  came  into  my  head  that,  if  it  were  possible,  certain
persons  inimical  to  this  work  might  make  away  with  it.
One  day  I received  a proof  to  correct,  with  a part  of  the
manuscript,  of  which  it  was  the  reproduction.  "What
was  my  surprise  on  seeing  that  twenty-six  pages  of  the
manuscript  had  been  so  burnt  that  it  was  very  difficult
to  read  their  contents.  These  pages  were  actually  those
containing  all  the  revelations  of  M.  Swedenborg.  I
was  confounded.  Next  day  M.  Mirande  came  to  my
house ; I begged  him  frankly  to  tell  me,  since  this  acci-
dent had  been  attended  by  no  untoward  results,  whether
it  had  occurred  before,  during  or  after  the  composition.
This  gentleman  replied  that  it  happened  before  the


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


51


composition,intheroomof  tbereacler.  Thelatter  was  about
looking  over  tbe  manuscript,  some  one  came  to  speak
to  him,  be  laid  down  this  part  on  tbe  top  of  bis  stove,
which  was  very  hot  at  that  moment,  and  perceived  his
distraction  only  from  a strong  smell  of  burning;  he
instantly  withdrew  my  manuscript,  which,  had  it  re-
mained there  a second  longer,  would  have  been  annihi-
lated. I knew  not  what  to  think  of  such  an  accident,
when  yesterday  I asked  M.  Swedenborg  the  cause  of  it.
He  replied  : — “ This  accident  was  prepared  by  evil
spirits  who  wanted  to  annihilate  the  truths  I have
revealed  to  you/’ — Is  it  to  you  that  I am  indebted
for  its  non-execution  ?”  Let  it  suffice  you  to  know
that  good  spirits  watched  over  its  preservation  as  they
watch  over  yours  and  your  clairvoyante’s.  Had  these
evil  spirits  the  power  they  would  lay  a spell  on  you ;
but  fear  not,  those  who  conceived  such  vengeance  will
be  the  first  to  read  you,  and  will  learn  to  repent  of  their
error.  You  ought  to  remember  that  I came  the
morning  after  this  accident,  to  assure  you  that  your  work
would  appear  unshackled,  for  such  is  the  will  of  God.
Becalm  ; amongst  my  disciples,  as  in  all  religions,  there
are  false  men  who  pervert  to  their  profit  my  writings,
but  they  will  not  succeed  in  establishing  their  doc-
trines.” I did  not  exactly  recollect,  not  liaving  taken
down  the  date,  whether  M.  Swedenborg  came  to  see
Adele  the  morning  after  this  accident ; but  I still  await
the  fulfilment  of  the  prediction  of  his  disciple,  and  I
think  that  after  reading^  this  work  he  will  be  enabled  to
judge  whether  it  has  been  dictated  by  the  Evil  One,  or
by  a beneficent  spirit.  I availed  myself  of  the  presence
of  M.  Swedenborg  to  put  to  him  the  following  ques-
tion : — “ At  the  last  sitting  you  explained  to  me  how
years  were  estimated  in  heaven ; but  I did  not  perfectly
comprehend  your  explanation  ; could  you  furnish  me
with  a little  additional  information  on  this  point  ?”  In
heaven  there  are  no  years  as  on  earth  ; I have  told  you
that  children  dying  before  the  age  of  seven  years,  were


52


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


all  crowned  at  that  age,  and  those  fifteen  years  old  in
like  manner.  I merely  borrowed  the  word  \'ears  as  a
figurative  expression  to  make  myself  understood  by
your  clairvoyante,  for  in  heaven  they  are  degrees.  The
age  of  seven  years  represents  the  degree  of  knowledge ;
that  of  fifteen  the  degree  of  love,  and  so  on.”  Adeie
said  to  me — It  is  true  that  M.  Swedenborg  always
spoke  to  me  of  degrees ; but  not  comprehending  these
degrees,  I begged  him  to  explain  this  to  me  otherwise,
in  order  that  I might  the  better  reproduce  to  you  what
he  said  to  me;  for  if  I do  not  myself  comprehend,  how
should  I make  you  do  so  ? Then,  again,  he  told  me
that  time  was  not  reckoned  in  heaven,  where  all  was  by
degrees  of  affection.  On  earth,  children  seven  years  of
age  are,  it  is  said,  at  the  age  of  knowledge  ; it  is  this
want  of  knowledge  that  is  crowned  in  heaven  ; the
child,  were  it  not  to  enter  this  degree  till  after  twenty
of  our  years,  represents  the  child  of  seven  years  with
us.  It  is  the  same  with  respect  to  the  age  of  fifteen,
when  we  feel  on  earth  the  first  approaches  of  love.  In
heaven  it  is  a degree,  an  affection  similar  to  that  of  the
child  entering  the  state  of  knowledge.  There  is  no
limited  time ; when  this  affection  enters  the  person,  we
say  he  is  in  the  degree  of  love,  which  corresponds  to  the
age  of  fifteen  on  our  earth.”  I am  aware  that  some  of
M.  Swedenborg’s  works  treat  of  degrees,  but  I am  not
acquainted  with  them.  (I  leave  the  reader  to  judge  of
the  revelations  of  this  sitting,  in  respect  to  the  accident
that  befell  my  manuscript.)

109.  The  Count  D’ , honourably  known  to  all  the

magnetisers  in  the  capital,  one  of  the  most  devoted  and
generous  disciples  of  magnetism,  a subscriber  to  the
“ Secrets,”  consequently  aware  of  Adcle’s  speciality,
solicited  from  this  clairvoyante  a sitting  for  the  appari-
tion of  a deceased  person,  possessed,  at  the  time  of  his
death,  of  a brilliant  fortune,  and  having  made  a will  in
favour  of  devoted  servants  and  other  persons.  At  his
decease  all  papers  of  this  kind  disappeared,  and  it  was


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


53


to  obtain  information  in  this  respect,  without  informing
us  of  the  object  of  his  solicitation,  that  this  gentleman
requested  me  to  magnetise  Adele.  I asked  for  the  de-
ceased, this  gentleman  being  in  no  wise  en  rapport  v/ith
Adele,  and  the  latter,  not  knowing  the  object  of  the  ap-
parition, she  said — I see  near  me,  and  seated,  an  old

man,  who  says  he  is  M.  D ; he  is  wrapped  up  in  a

sort  of  dressing-gown,  of  a brown  colour ; he  must
surely  support  himself  difficultly  on  his  legs,  which  I
see  trembling  under  him,  inasmuch  as  he  has  just  risen.
He  seems  to  me  not  quite  so  tall  as  M.  D’ , here  pre-

sent ; he  is  thin,  but  his  frame  is  sufficiently  developed,
betokening  that  he  must  have  been  pretty  strong ; his
hair  is  grey,  no  doubt  it  was  once  brov/n.  He  has  a
very  open  and  remarkably  fine  forehead,  hazel  eyes,
his  face,  though  thin,  is  pretty  wide,  his  nose  rather
pointed,  the  complexion  fresh  and  healthy  enough.  He
must  have  been  a fine-looking  man,  what  we  term  a
nice  old  man”  The  whole  of  this  description  is  exact,
with  the  exception  of  the  dressing-gown  ; this  gentleman
having  worn  only  a riding-coat  when  at  home.  Adele
observes  that  in  that  case  it  must  have  been  wide  enough
to  cross  over  the  chest  like  a dressing-gown,  and  over
his  knees  where  he  crosses  it  as  if  afraid  of  the  cold.^^

This  observation  is  acknowledged  as  true  j M.  D’

cannot  call  to  mind  whether  his  nose  was  pointed ;
Adele  takes  her  own  in  her  hand  and  gives  it  the  form
of  the  one  she  wishes  to  describe,  what  we  term  an
aquiline  nose,  but  somewhat  sharp  at  the  end.  We

verify  a portrait  which  M.  D’ has  in  his  hand ; the

nose  in  this  is  of  the  same  shape  as  Adele  has  shown,
the  nostrils  having  this  remarkably  peculiarity  that
they  are  much  shorter  and  more  arched  than  the  part
separating  them,  thus  giving  it  the  form  described  by
Adele.  The  latter  could  not  have  seen  this  portrait,
which  she  did  not  know  was  in  the  pocket-book  of  M.

D’ , particularly  as  she  had  not  the  faculty  of  seeing

objects  at  hand ; had  she  seen  it  she  could  not  have


54


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


described  the  old  gentleman  as  seated.  The  portrait
representing  only  the  bust,  she  had  seen  him  in  a
riding-coat  and  not  in  a dressing-gown.  Let  us  con-
tinue. “ This  man  has  a very  meditative  air,  he  was
not  very  communicative  with  persons  of  a different
persuasion  to  himself ; he  was  well  informed,  and
possessed  a fine  library.  He  has  an  excellent  heart,
upright,  just,  and  open  ; he  is  much  hurt  at  the  turn  his
affairs,  relative  to  the  propert}^,  have  taken.  He  had
with  him  twm  women,  one  taller  than  the  other,  one
older  than  the  other.  The  tallest  often  entered  his
room  ; through  her  ministration  is  it  that  important
papers  have  disappeared  to  the  profit  of  a third  woman
who  stood  in  no  need  of  this  increase  of  fortune,  but  she
has  a hard,  selfish,  covetous  heart.  She  possesses  those
papers  which  have  made  her  richer  and  at  the  same
time  more  detestable,  by  the  spoliation  she  operated  to
the  prejudice  of  unfortunate  creatures  who  had  more
need  of  the  property  than  she.  This  woman  is  not
alone,  she  has  accomplices : — in  the  first  place  those
who  gave  up  to  her  these  papers,  inasmuch  as  she  did
not  take  them  herself;  she  could  not  do  so,  but  there
were  others  deposited  with  certain  persons,  which  she
knew  of  and  bought  up.  This  is  the  cause  of  her  pre-
sent uneasiness;  she  is  far  from  being  liappy,  she  fears
their  indiscretion,  she  will  give  up  the  papers,  and  the
unfortunate  persons  they  concern  will  enter  upon  their
rights.’^  At  my  observation  that  it  depends  only  on  her
will  to  destroy  these  papers,  Adele  resumes : — “ That
does  not  depend  on  her,  the  finger  of  God  is  there  ;
she  cannot  do  it,  she  has  taken  them  up  several  times  to
throw  them  into  the  fire,  but  an  invisible  hand  held  her
back,  and  she  was  let  off  to  hide  them  anew  ; they  were
first  in  a clothes-press,  then  secreted  in  the  wainscotting,
then  under  the  floor ; she  knows  not  where  to  put  them.
She  is  already  eaten  up  with  remorse,  and  the  beneficent
spirits  will  so  prevail  over  her  that  she  will  find  an
opportunity,  a pretence,  to  deliver  up  these  papers.


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


55


This  gentleman  assures  me  that  the  heirs  whom  they
concern  have  no  reason  to  be  discouraged — that  right
will  be  done  them  "withcut  any  legal  proceedings  ; for
nothing  could  be  proved.  It  must  come  of  itself
through  obsession,  and  this  will  take  j^lace  sooner  than
it  is  thought.  This  woman  is  so  monstrous  that  she
herself  accuses  the  unfortunate  creatures  she  has
robbed.  Oh  ! miserable  wretch,  you  already  suffer
much ; your  torments  are  not  at  an  end  exclaims
Adele. — By  what  means  can  they  recover  this  succes-
sion ?”  “ Through  the  means  of  M.  D’ , here  pre-

sent, who  was  left  executor  to  the  will ; who  is  the  only
one  who  can  do  it,  and  is  interested  in  it  by  his  duties

as  testamentary  executor."’ — M.  D’ is  so  moved,

and  convinced  of  the  reality  of  what  he  hears,  that  he  is
unable  to  hide  a few  tears  offered  by  his  sensibility  to
misfortune.  A servant  of  the  deceased,  who  faithfully
discharged  his  duties  to  his  master  for  twelve  years,  and
who  is  better  enabled  than  any  other  to  recognise  the
truth  of  these  details,  asks  if  he  was  not  put  down  in
the  will  ? “ Yes,”  replies  his  master ; I am  grieved

at  the  injustice  of  this  woman,  whom,  when  on  earth,  I
knew  well  enough  to  mistrust  her,  but  not  well  enough
to  baffle  her  intrigues.  You  will  lose  nothing,  justice
will  be  done.” — ‘‘  Did  you  not  put  out  at  interest  some
money  for  me  ?”  “ No,  I did  intend  doing  so,  but  I

put  you  down  in  my  will.  I spoke  of  this,  my  inten-
tion, to  some  one.” — M.  D’ says  that  it  was  to

himself  that  this  gentleman  made  this  confidential  com-
munication, and  that  he  is  the  only  person  who  can
settle  the  business,  provided  he  had  the  papers.  The
poor  servant  cries  out  to  Adcle  : — Could  we  not  seize
these  papers  ?”  The  latter  replies : — “ You  want  to
know  if  1 could  deliver  them  up  to  you  ? I see  them
very  well ; but  to  take  them,  where  they  are,  we  must  be
authorised.  How  effect  a legal  seizure  without  more
proofs  ? She  is  rich  and  you  are  poor ; do  not  grieve,
he  who  rules  all  is  more  powerful  than  this  wretch.


56


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


Let  those  act  who  concern  themselves  spiritually  with
this  affair;  it  cannot  long  resist  their  obsession.’^ — Fur-
ther questions  being  needless,  I rouse  Adele.  M.  D’

congratulates  her  on  her  excellent  clairvoyance,  and
declares  himself  convinced  of  what  I have  advanced  in
the  “ Secrets/^  Persons  who  can  see  only  matter  will
never  believe  but  that  this  woman  would  make  away
with  these  papers;  but  materially  speaking  and  think-
ing, she  would  make  away  wdth  them,  as  she  would  fear
the  indiscretion  of  those  who  gave  them  up  to  her  and
those  who  aided  her  in  this  spoliation.  The  papers
by  this  fact  being  a primary  cause,  would  become  a
secondary  one.  This  woman  must  have  made  this  re-
flection, which  diverted  her  from  all  thought  of  destruc-
tion : she  still  finds  it  in  her  power,  by  preserving  them,
to  repair  at  a later  period  the  wrong  she  has  done  ; no
longer  having  them,  and  being  denounced  by  her  accom-
plices, she  would  fall  into  greater  difficulties  than  ever,
having  thus  no  proof  of  the  quantity  and  value  of  the
gifts,  which  might  then  be  estimated  at  more  consider-
able sums.  Without  admitting  the  intervention  of
spirits,  if  we  stop  at  this  thought  it  is  sufficient;  but,
for  my  part,  I believe  wffiat  I heard.  Adele  was  so  lucid
in  all  she  said,  that  she  surely  spoke  the  truth  as  to
the  spiritual  obsession  this  woman  wmuld  undergo,  and
which,  sooner  or  later,  will  force  her  to  repair  her  wrongs.

110.  The  Abbe  A , a Doctor  of  Divinity,  a man

of  profound  learning,  travelling  to  acquire  fresh  know-
ledge, of  an  open  and  sincere  heart,  a Spaniard  by  birth,
on  his  arrival  in  Paris  heard  in  all  quarters  much  talk
of  the  phenomena  of  magnetism ; which  so  piqued  his
curiosity  that  he  addressed  himself  to  the  Baron  Du-
potet,  as  the  man  of  the  highest  standing  in  this  science,
and  best  enabled  to  demonstrate  its  reality,  possessing
saloons,  and  a journal,  in  which  the  most  curious  and
novel  facts  are  brought  to  light  after  verification  and  an

impartial  judgment.  M.  A became  acquainted,

through  this  channel,  with  the  publication  of  the


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


57


Secrets  of  the  Life  to  Come  Revealed,”  to  which  he
subscribed,  as  it  might  possibly  be  in  consonance  with
his  beliefs,  and  throw  light  on  a few  psychological  ques-
tions which  had  hitherto  remained  unsolved;  scarcely
had  he  read  the  work,  than,  as  a studious  man,  he  has-
tened to  pay  me  a visit,  and  submit  to  me  some  reflec-
tions suggested  to  him  by  different  passages  in  my
work.  I took  upon  myself  to  give  him  a proper  solu-
tion of  them ; he  then  said  to  me  : — “ Monsieur,  it  is  a
matter  of  discussion  between  us,  if  you  wish  to  ac<'ept
it ; but  there  is  a more  positive  fact  on  which  I desire
to  be  enlightened,  that  is,  to  see,  by  myself,  whether  it
be  possible  to  evoke  the  souls  of  the  deceased.  I believe,
above  all  men  (by  my  ministry)  in  their  existence  ;
but  I very  much  doubt  the  possibility  of  our  entering
into  communication  with  them  in  the  manner  vou
announce.”  Try,”  replied  I ; you  v/ill  better  believe
by  your  own  experience  than  my  word.”  To  try,”  re-
sumed he,  “ there  must  be  suitable  subjects,  and  I have
none.  If  a clairvoyant  could  only  describe  to  me  a
brother  I lost  now  about  two  years  ago,  I would  then
believe  in  what  you  announce,  and,  what  is  more,  I
would  say  that  your  book  is  an  immense  event  for
psychology.”  Adele,  present  at  these  observations,
seeing  how  desirous  this  gentleman  was  of  being  con-
vinced, and  assured,  above  all,  of  his  good  faith,  said  to
me  : “ If  you  wish  to  send  me  to  sleep,  we  will  beg  of
God  to  grant  us  this  favor.”  As  we  perceive,  all  was
improvised,  and  the  gentleman  stranger,  delighted  at
Adele’s  offer,  eagerly  accepted  it.  Scarcely  was  she  in  the
state  to  answer,  than  I asked  for  the  name  of  the  de-
ceased, not  wishing  any  communication  to  exist  between

him  and  Adele;  he  answered  me  “Joseph  A .”

We  asked  for  the  latter.  After  a moment’s  waiting,
Adele  said ; “ I see  before  me  a man  rather  taller  than
the  gentleman  here  present,  with  brown  hair,  a mild  and
expressive  look,  of  a pretty  good  mien,  slightly  coloured.
He  seems  to  me  an  affable  man,  but  severe  in  his

F


58


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


ministry,  for  I see  him  in  a very  droll  dress  ; he  has  a
sort  of  wide  pantaloons  made  in  a queer  fashion,  and  of
the  colour  of  pansy;  I can’t  see  the  colours  very  well,
he  is  rather  too  far  off.  He  has  small  open  shoes,  and
I see  a sort  of  mantle  over  his  shoulders.  Oh  ! but  it  is
a fine  costume,  I never  saw  anything  like  it ; this  mantle
seems  to  be  a silk  one  and  of  a deep  scarlet  colour,  it
comes  down  to  a point  as  far  as  his  knees ; he  wears
also  a small  white  collar  that  comes  down  over  this
mantle  or  cloak;  I don’t  know  what  it  is  called,  but  it
has  no  cowl,  such  as  our  priests  have  to  their  cloaks.
Ah  ! good  heavens,  ’tis  pretty,  this  costume,  I should
never  grow  tired  of  looking  at  it;  he  has  a small  hand.
What  could  this  man  be  ? Not  a priest,  he  has  not  the
dress  of  one.” — “Ask  him  where  he  died  ?”  “ He  is  a

foreigner,  he  answers  me  a droll  name,  I can’t  repeat  it.
He  could  not  speak  French,  he  makes  signs  to  me.” —
“ Did  he  not  say  Alicant  ?”  “ Yes,  with  two  other  out-

landish words.  I’faith,  I don’t  know,  not  I.” — “ Of
what  disease  did  he  die  ?”  “ A disease  of  the  chest.

Oh  ! he  was  long  ill,  he  supported  his  illness  with  great
resignation  and  fortitude.  I am  certain  that  he  was  a
good  and  open-hearted  man;  he  was  very  fond  of  his
brother.  I told  him  that  he  was  here,  and  he  made
signs  to  me  that  he  was  always  thinking  of  him.” —
“What  age  does  he  appear  to  be?”  “I  should  say
about  five-and-forty.”

Observations. — M.  A acknowledged  the  ex-

actitude of  all  these  details.  What  AdHe  takes  for  a
sort  of  pantaloons  is  an  ornament- similar  enough  to  a
priest’s  stole,  appearing  to  the  eye  like  the  two  legs  of  a
pantaloon.  This  gentleman  was  fifty-one  years  of  age,
but  did  not  look  so  old.  He  was  a Spanish  Canon,  and

unacquainted  with  the  French  language.  M.  A

finds  not  a syllable  to  retrench  from  these  details;  he
puts  his  hands  up  to  his  face,  and  exclaims ; “ ’Tis
enough  to  upset  all  reason — all  received  ideas ; I am
convinced — thanks,  thrice  thanks.  The  details  of  the


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


59


dress  were  sufficient  for  me;  there  is  nothing  like  it  ira
France;  you  can  have  no  notion  of  it.”  Astonishment,
admiration,  M^ere  the  accompaniments  of  this  sitting.
It  remains  for  me,  however,  to  explain  why  this  man
could  not  answer.  When  I said  that  the  language  of
spirits  was  unique,  universal,  the  language  of  sensations,
still  there  are  exceptions ; the  fact  being  that  the  clair-
voyant must  be  in  a very  elevated  state  to  communicate
by  sensation  and  interpret  the  meaning  of  it  in  material
language.  Adele  gave  us  a proof  of  her  good-will  by
answering  us  questions  which  she  herself  must  have
interpreted  to  the  deceased  by  the  aforesaid  language  ;
but  as  this  requires  much  study  on  the  part  of  clair-
voyants in  order  to  steer  clear  of  errors,  they  generally
dislike  this  kind  of  communication.  If  clairvoyants
answer  not  suitably  the  questions  put — the  effect  of  a
bad  interpretation — it  appears  ridiculous,  as  we  have
seen  in  the  case  of  Father  Lauriot ; they  feel  that  they
cannot  thus  compromise  the  truth  of  these  perceptions
by  needless  questions  in  the  very  presence  of  the  appari-
tion. This  proves  that  there  is  no  communication
of  thoughts,  as  they  would  answer  all.  I am  not  always
able  to  know  what  I desire;  and  what  I do  not  desire  is
often  explained  to  me  with  details  that  leave  less  room
for  doubt  than  the  solutions  I demand.  Therein,  then,
is  a mission  which  God  alone  knows.

111.  M.  B , a magnetise!’  and  subscriber  to  the

Secrets,”  desires  an  apparition-sitting.  No  sooner  is

Adele  in  the  required  state  than  we  ask  for  M.  B ,

Ernest  Paul,  a deceased  brother  of  M.  B ; the

mother  of  this  gentleman  is  present  at  the  sitting.
Adele  says,  “ Here  he  is  !” — ‘‘  Give  us  a description  of
him  ?”  “ I see  him  with  bright  chesnut  coloured  hair,

and  fine  open  forehead ; eyes  approaching  a hazel
colour,  ])rows  sufficiently  well  arched,  nose  somewhat
coming  down  to  a point,  mouth  middling  size ; he
wears  moustachios,  which  are  lighter  than  his  hair;  he
has  a clear,  pale,  delicate  complexion ; round  chin,  de-

F 2


GO


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


licate  frame,  though  he  must  liave  been  pretty  strong  ;
illness  has  weakened  him  considerably ; he  wears  a
dark-coloured  coat — an  olive  colour,  I believe  ; he  has
a doleful,  calm,  suffering  look:  he  has  surely  laboured
under  some  affection  of  the  heart  and  chest,  and  expe-
rienced great  v'eakness  in  the  legs.  lie  was  not  with-
out his  sorrows — he  inwardly  tormented  himself  without
showing  it ; he  was  at  times  meditative  and  absorbed
in  gloomy  ideas  ; he  loved  some  one,  and  this  was  the
principal  cause  of  his  sorrow ; he  was  very  sensitive.^^ —
How  old  does  he  look  ?”  “ About  one-and-twenty  ;

his  stomach  has  been  greatly  weakened  by  youthful  ex-
cesses.^’— “To  whom  is  he  united  in  heaven?”  “I
know  not  whether  it  be  his  sister  that  he  points  out  to
me.  I see  a dark  young  girl,  with  fine  black  eyes  and
rosy  cheeks.” — “ Ask  him  who  this  young  girl  is;  he
has  no  sister  dead  ; is  it  a relative?”  “No,  this  young
man  did  not  always  live  in  Paris  ; he  knew  this  voung
girl  in  the  country.” — “ Is  it  his  companion  ?”  “ No,

his  companion  is  still  on  earth  ; this  young  girl  is  a
friend.” — By  whom  was  he  received  in  heaven  ?”
^‘By  his  grandfather.” — “His  father  had  a dream,  in
which  he  beheld  his  son  in  heaven,  with  his  grand-
mother ?”  “ The  dream  is  true,  but  the  first  person

who  received  him  was  his  grandfather,  his  father’s
f ather ; he  whom  he  knew  on  earth  ; he  opened  to  him
his  arms,  the  young  man  rushed  into  them.  His
grandmother  was  amongst  the  rest  of  the  persons  who
awaited  him.  It  is  impossible  to  seize  at  once  the  pic-
ture of  such  a reception.  He  still  found  himself  under
the  influence  of  a sort  of  bad  dream  ; it  was  his  grand-
father whom  he  first  recognised.  He  had  scarcely  any
agony.  He  did  not  believe  in  magnetism  ; he  desires
me  to  tell  his  brother  that  he  believes  in  it  now.” —
Vf  ho  watched  over  his  dead  body  r”  “ His  family.”
— “ Where  was  it  deposited  ?”  “ In  Pere-La-Chaise.” —
Hid  it  remain  in  the  same  grave  ?”  “ No  ; it  was  re-

moved to  that  of  his  grandfather,  the  person  who  first


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


61


received  him  in  heaven.*^ — ‘‘  Who  were  the  persons
who  followed  him  to  the  grave  ?’^  “ He  noticed  his

brother  more  than  any  of  the  rest.”  Adele  is  fatigued,
and  we  leave  off.  M.  B , the  brother,  is  quite  de-

lighted at  this  experiment,  but  his  mother  is  plunged
into  the  most  profound  grief;  her  son  tells  her,  through
Adele,  not  to  mourn  for  him,  as  he  is  much  happier
than  she  is  ; he  would  that  her  time  of  trial  were  over ;
he  came  to  visit  her  several  times  in  her  sleep,  in  order
to  comfort  her;  he  did  not  come  to  remind  her  of  him
in  order  to  add  to  her  grief,  as  he  well  knew  the  bitter-
ness of  her  regret.  He  appeared  likewise  to  his  brother,
he  will  appear  to  him  again ; he  thanks  his  brother  for

having  buried  him.  M.  B finds  not  a syllable  to

retrench  from  this  mass  of  details  ; his  mother  preserves
but  a single  doubt  as  to  the  shade  of  the  eves  ; thev
cannot  exactly  recollect  what  colour  they  were.  God
has  permitted  that  our  faith  should  be  strengthened

more  and  more.  M.  B , desirous  of  concealing  his

name,  out  of  family  considerations,  signed  the  duplicate
of  this  sitting  to  guarantee  me  in  future  against  the
reservations  that  some  forgetful  and  wrangling  men
might  raise  as  to  the  reality  of  what  they  have  heard
and  acknowledged  as  true.  Henceforth,  I shall  act  in

the  same  wa5^  The  morning  after  this  sitting,  M.  B

came  to  my  house  to  tell  us  that  he  bad  called  together
his  family,  to  make  sure  of  the  precise  colour  of  his
brother’s  eyes,  and  that  the  generality  of  reminiscences
was  in  favour  of  the  colour  described  by  Adele.  This
particularity  gave  me  great  pleasure,  inasmuch  as  this
gentleman  having  said  to  iVdele,  “ You  are  wrong  ; my
mother  thinks  his  eyes  were  blue;  do  you  persist  in
seeing  them  of  a hazel  colour?”  AdMe  replied,  “It
would  be  very  easy  for  me  to  say  as  your  mother,  since
she  believes  them  such,  and  that  would  add  to  the  truth
of  all  1 told  you,  but  I should  be  telling  a falsehood
and  not  saying  what  I saw ; to  me  they  are  as  I have
described  them.”  It  was  in  consequence  of  this  decla-


62


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


ration  that  the  gentleman  convoked  a family  meeting,
-■^nd  thought  himself  bound  to  inform  me  of  the  result.

A.  B confided  to  me  that  he  had  often  had  a visit

from  his  brother  in  his  dreams ; that  some  time  ago  he
dreamt  that  after  his  brother  was  dead  and  laid  out,  he
beheld  the  lid  of  the  coffin  raised,  his  brother  rise  up  on
his  feet,  extend  his  arms,  tearing  the  shroud,  and  say  to
him  in  a calm,  steady  voice,  ‘‘  Why  do  you  weep  for
me  ? Don’t  you  see  that  I am  not  dead ; on  the  con-
trary, I am  born  to  life,  this  is  the  entrance  to  it  (point-
ing to  his  coffin),  we  shall  meet  again ; be  calm  and
hope.”

When  M.  B found  a somewhat  similar  phrase

in  my  Secrets,  he  was  struck  at  the  coincidence  of  such
revelation  with  the  assertion  of  his  brother.  This
coincidence,  alone,  God  be  praised,  made  a spiritualist
of  a materialist.

112.  The  Abbe  A , already  mentioned,  appearing

to  be  no  longer  convinced  by  the  details  given  him  by
Adele,  on  his  brother’s  apparition,  which  he  solicited
at  the  noth  sitting,  came  to  acquaint  me  with  his
doubts  on  this  head.  At  this  moment  Adele  was
aleep.  He  proposed  calling  for  the  sister  of  his  maid-
servant, whose  name  w’as  Antoinette  Carre,  and  who
had  been  dead  many  years.*  I asked  for  this  person,
and  Adele  said  : — “ I see  a person  of  middling  stature,
with  light  brown  hair,  about  five-and-forty  years  of
age,  not  pretty,  small  grey  eyes,  large  nose,  rather
thick  at  the  bottom  ; sallow'  complexion,  wdde  mouth ;
she  has  wffiat  w^e  call  a thick  neck ; she  has  lost  some
of  her  front  teeth  ; and  the  remainder  are  little  better
than  stumps ; she  w^ears  wffiat  is  termed  in  the  country
an  undress — corsage,  of  a brown  colour,  striped  under-


* This  gentleman  afterwards  told  me  that  all  the  details  of  the  ap-
parition of  his  brother  were  strictly  true,  but  some  doubts  had  been
raised  in  his  mind  by  the  observation  that  “ these  apparitions  were  but  a
transmission  of  thought it  was  to  convince  himself  of  the  contrary
that  he  asked  for  a person  unknown  to  him.


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


63


petticoat,  somewhat  short;  a full  apron,  such  as
countrywomen  wear ; she  has  a square  handkerchief
on  her  neck ; her  hands  betoken  hard  work.  She
used  to  work  in  the  fields  ; she  had  a brother,  who
died  after  her,  but  he  is  not  in  the  same  radius  as
she,  for  without  being  altogether  a worthless  fellow,  he
was  not  very  steady.  This  woman  seems  to  me  to
have  been  a very  good  kind  of  creature.

M.  A took  away,  in  writing,  these  details,  and

answered  me  through  the  same  medium.  I extract  the
following  passages : — After  four  times  reading  over  to
Marie-Frangoise  Rosalie  Carre  the  above  description,
she  declared  it  so  exact  that  she  could  not  do  less
than  recognise  her  own  sister,  Antoinette  Carre,  in  the
woman  who  appeared  to  the  somnambulist ; as  to  her
brother,  she  declares  that  he  died  after  her  sister,  as
Adele  has  said.  She  couples  with  all  this  a circumstance
not  unworthy  of  attention.  She  says  that  she  dreamed,
on  the  night  of  the  30th  January  (the  eve  of  the
sitting),  that  she  was  by  the  grave  of  her  brother  and
sister ; but  that  her  attention  was  directed  most  to  her
sister’s  grave.  (She  had  never  before  dreamed  of  her
since  her  death.)  Signed  A.’’

I will  observe,  in  my  turn,  that  M.  A , as  well

as  his  maid-servant,  were  not  aware,  not  even  the
very  day  of  the  sitting,  that  we  should  ask  for  this
woman.  It  was  quite  on  a sudden  that  I put  the
following  question  to  this  gentleman  : — “ Do  you  know
any  deceased  person  whose  apparition  could  convince
you  To  which  he  answered:  “Ask  for  the  sister
of  my  maid-servant ; so  there  will  be  no  influence  nor
communication  of  thought,  as  she  is  not  here,  and  is
wholly  unaware  of  what  is  about  to  take  place.”  As
we  have  just  seen,  we  met  with  perfect  success;  this
woman,  the  better  to  prove  to  her  master  that  what
he  had  heard  was  true,  declared  that  she  herself  had
given  her  sister  the  square-necked  handkerchief  de-
scribed by  Adele.  The  apparition  of  Antoinette  Carre


G4


THE  secri:ts  of  the  future


must  destroy  the  malevolent  objection  of  the  trans-
mission of  thoughts — or,  indeed,  we  are  all  insane  in
attempting  to  prove  the  existence  of  a soul  to  fools.

Fresh  Particulars. — M.  A came  a few  days

after  this  sitting  to  my  house,  and  informed  me  that
his  maid-servant  had  seen  the  night  before  a man
from  her  own  part  of  the  country,  to  whom  she  read
over  the  description  given  of  her  sister,  which  she  had
in  her  hands,  asking  him  if  he  knew  such  a person  ?
The  man  replied:  “Why,  it  is  your  deceased  sister
whose  portrait  you  have  drawn ; there’s  no  mistake

about  that.” — M.  A ’s  maid-servant  observed  to

him  that  the  description  made  mention  of  a small
pimple  on  the  cheek,  and  that  she  had  never  seen  on
her  a mark  of  the  kind.”  The  man  replied:  “You  are
wrong ; for  she  had  one  there,”  pointing  out  to  her
the  place.  This  woman  at  last  recollected  it,  and  was

but  the  more  convinced,  as  well  as  M.  A , who

desired  this  perfect  exactitude,  that  left  no  room  for
doubt.  The  arrival  of  a third  person  was  necessary
to  confirm  the  truth  of  this  particularity,  which,  con-
sequently, could  not  have  been  seen  in  the  thought  of
any  one.  (1  had  forgotten  to  make  mention  of  this
little  mark  in  the  description  that  has  been  read.)  —

M.  B , of  the  111th  sitting,  came  yesterday  to  tell

me  that  he  had  a female  somnambulist,  who  perceived
his  brother  precisely  as  Adele  had  seen  him ; she  had
told  him  the  very  same  thing  as  to  his  reception  in

heaven  by  his  grandfather.  M.  B asked  her  for

a few  particulars  as  to  the  young  person  who  accom-
panied him  at  the  time  of  his  appearing  to  AdMe.
His  brother  replied:  “You  knew  her  at  Paris;  you
have  been  in  her  company.  Don’t  you  recollect  an
excursion  that  a party  of  us  made  on  the  water  to  a
certain  place,  vdiere  we  spent  the  whole  day ; there
were  two  persons  with  us — it  was  this  little  brunette,
to  whom  some  one  you  know  paid  his  court.”  M.
B has  a perfect  recollection  of  this  particularity.


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.  f)5

Here,  then,  is  a fact  extraordinary  enough,  to  which  I
had  attached  no  importance  at  first.  This  young  girl,
who  appeared  unasked  for,  and  to  whom  we  paid  no
attention,  finds  herself  described  and  recognised  by  a

second  clairvoyante,  whom  M.  B questions  on  this

subject.  In  these  experiments,  there  is  a concatenation
which  it  is  not  given  to  man  to  define.

113.  M.Favre,  of  Lyons,  a subscriber  to  the  “Secrets,”
being  at  Paris  on  business,  came  to  ask  me  for  an  appari-
tion-sitting ; he  expressed  a wish  for  Adele  to  see  his  wife,
Madame  Favre  (Marie  Helene,  nee  Mathieu).  AdHe
said — “ I see  a woman  still  young,  of  middling  stature,
with  auburn  hair,  hazel  eyes,  hollow  and  encircled  with
black  and  blue  spots  ; nose  pretty  well  formed,  rather
long  than  short ; middling  sized  mouth,  thin  lips,  pale
complexion  set  off  by  a slight  colour,  chin  rather  long,
beautiful  hands,  although  thin,  well  formed  nails,
physiognomy  mild  and  languid.  Her  ailing  condition
grieved  her  very  much  from  the  pain  it  occasioned  her
husband  and  the  persons  who  nursed  her.  She  rhust
have  had  an  inflammation  of  the  stomach,  she  was  not
treated  rightly,  she  must  have  suffered,  too,  from  the
chest,  and  an  affection  of  the  heart.  I perceivx  that
she  was  greatly  beloved,  for  she  seems  to  me  of  a very
sweet  disposition ; she  had  so  little  will  of  her  own  that
she  must  have  pleased  everybody  ; she  suffered  with
fortitude.  Without  her  disease  she  would  have  been  of
a pretty  strong  constitution.  She  is  an  angel,  this
woman.  She  is  very  happy,  but  her  happiness  will  not
be  perfeet  till  she  is  re-united  to  her  husband.  They
were  born  for  each  other,  she  dearly  loved  him  ; she  is
often  with  him  ; fearing  to  affect  him,  she  keeps  his
material  body  in  ignorance  of  this,  but  she  promises  me
that  he  shall  see  her  in  a dream.  I see  beside  her  an
aged  woman,  smaller  than  she  is ; she  tells  me  that  it  is
her  mother  who  died  before  her,  and  received  her  in
heaven  ; she  had  always  dearly  loved  her,  and  prayed
God  for  her.  This  woman  has  gray  hair,  but  it  must


6G  THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE

have  been  darker  than  her  daughter’s ; she  stoops  a good
deal,  and  this  makes  her  look  as  if  hump-backed,  and
gives  her  a very  ungraceful  air.  She  had  an  asthma,
from  which  she  must  nave  suffered  much.”

“ All  these  details  aclcnowledgea  quite  correct.

(Signed)  “ Fatre,  of  Lyons.”

M.  J.  Vermale,  of  Paris,  who  had  accompanied  M.
Favre,  begs  Adhle  to  ask  for  Madame  Anne  Louise  Ver-
male (wee  Chardon).  Adele  says  ; — ‘‘  I see  a very  little
old  woman  with  grey  hair,  she  is  very  gay,  lively,  and
cheerful  ; she  has  a very  pleasant  air  and  is  always
smiling.  She  has  very  expressive  eyes,  a very  open
forehead,  thick  eye-brows ; she  is  open-hearted  and
frank,  not  in  the  least  afraid  to  offend  persons  by  telling
them  her  mind ; her  thoughts  are  as  lively  as  her  move-
ments. This  woman  tells  me  that  she  is  your  mother;
she  was  very  fond  of  you,  she  had  no  other  son  but  you,
you  were  very  good  to  her,  so  that  she  was  able  to
appreciate  you.  She  suffered  in  her  legs  which  w'ere
very  swollen  and  painful.  Her  death  was  easy  enough;
her  stomach  was  swollen  in  her  last  moments,  she  was
very  much  oppressed,  could  scarcely  breathe;  she  must
even  have  had  the  death-rattle,  this  was  caused  by  the
inflammation  of  the  stomach.  She  was  very  courageous ;
she  has  small  feet,  and  must  have  been  very  pretty  in  her
day.  She  is  very  happy,  always  thinking  of  you  as
when  she  was  upon  earth  ; she  tells  me  that  she  has
already  appeared  to  you  in  a dream  and  will  appear  to
you  again.”

“ Acknowledged  as  perfectly  exact  all  the  above  details.

(Signed)  “ J.  Vermale.”

These  two  gentlemen,  as  magnetisers,  appreciate  with
enthusiasm  the  precious  lucidity  of  Adele,  take  her  by
the  hands  and  thank  her  with  an  overflowing  heart.
One  would  say  that  their  soul  was  confined  in  the  sphere
of  the  departed  spirits  ; no  more  constraint,  a demon-
strative happiness  ; a few  tears  are  almost  always  the


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.  67

result  of  these  sweet  emotions.  We  see  in  this  sitting
three  persons  appear,  one  of  whom  was  unasked  for.
The  details,  this  time,  speak  not  of  their  dress,  but,  by
way  of  a change,  give  a description  of  their  qualities,
heir  ailments,  their  sufferings;  all  this  proves  to  us  that
if  the  body  or  the  image  of  the  material  body  as  well
its  accompaniments  are  not  annihilated,  the  actions,  the
sensations,  even,  are  from  all  eternity  ! In  presence  of
such  facts  not  a single  doubt  can  be  raised.

114.  AdMe  was  suffering  from  a nervous  pain  through-
out the  entire  left  part  of  her  head.  At  first  we  thought
it  a fluxion,  then  an  epidemic  malady  attacking  all
nervous  constitutions.  This  pain  varied  in  its  crises ;
we  thought  it  over  at  night,  on  the  morrow  it  returned.
Ad^le  could  not  visit  herself  (magnetically)  m her
accesses,  which  were  not  unlike  fits  of  madness ; her
face  became  of  a dark  purple  colour,  the  lower  jaw
trembled  convulsively,  a tremor  that  gained  the  whole
body  ; anger  was  the  result,  she  struck  her  head  with
her  fists  violently.  Scarcely  could  I prevent  her  from
becoming  a victim  to  her  passion.  In  the  intervals  of
these  crises  she  no  longer  felt  anything,  and  was  un-
willing to  visit  herself,  for  fear,  as  she  said,  that  the  pain
would  return.  As  I have  before  said,  Adele  is  very
obstinate,  and  independent  of  my  influence  in  her  sleep
as  in  her  watchful  state.  I could  not  by  any  means
induce  her  to  procure  for  herself  relief ; we  employed
fumigations,  cataplasms,  we  cleared  the  lower  passages,
and  I magnetised  her  perseveringly,  but  all  was  of  no
avail.  Nearly  three  weeks  had  passed  away,  and  we
still  had  the  misfortune  to  see  her  suffering  without
being  able  to  afford  her  any  relief,  when  I had  recourse
to  another  somnambulist,  who  prescribed  a few  remedies,
which,  however,  were  attended  with  no  favorable  result.
I was  ill  myself,  consequently  not  in  a fit  state  to  mag-
netise her.  If  I attacked  the  part  affected  by  passes,
I only  made  her  suffer  more.  At  first  I took  this  addi-
tional suffering  for  favourable  crises,  and  as  the  pre-


68


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


cursors  of  a cure ; but  it  was  no  such  thing.  An  idea
came  into  my  head  to  magnetise  her  at  a great  distance,
by  the  look  only,  fixing  the  extremities  of  her  feet  for
a longer  or  shorter  period  of  time.  This  kind  of  mag-
netisation procured  but  momentary  relief.  We  were  in
hopes  that,  cleared  of  the  redundancy  of  blood,  she
would  be  cured  : such,  however,  was  not  the  case.  M.
Blesson,  a friend  of  mine,  and  a magnetiser,  one  of  the
best-hearted  men  on  earth,  perceiving  my  inability  to
perform  a cure,  proposed  trying  himself.  I accepted  his
offer  with  joy  and  confidence,  thinking  that  it  was  a
beneficent  spirit  which,  having  pity  on  us,  animated  M.
Blesson,  and  would  remove  all  our  inquietude.  Under
anv  other  circumstance  I should  never  have  allowed
any  one,  however  well  intentioned,  to  operate  on  Adele,
but  at  this  moment  it  would  have  been  egotism  ; she
suffered  too  much,  and  my  impotence  commanded  me
to  attempt  all.  This  gentleman  did  all  that  it  is  hu-
manly possible  to  do  under  like  circumstances,  and
obtained  no  better  result  than  mvself.  On  the  19th  of
February  she  took  it  into  her  head  to  snuff  up  pow-
dered camphor  in  great  quantities ; this  so  irritated  her
that  she  found  fault  with  ray  purchasing  a pair  of  under
stockings,  which  I had  procured  for  her  that  very  morn-
ing, in  the  idea  that  they  would  keep  up  a gentle  heat
in  her  feet  and  disengage  her  head  from  the  blood  or
fluid  which  might  thus  cause  her  suffering.  At  any
other  time  Adele  would  have  thanked  me  for  such
attention,  being,  as  she  was,  of  a just,  upright,  and
grateful  disposition.  It  was  otherwise ; she  tried  to
pick  a quarrel  with  me.  I did  my  best  to  persuade  her
by  calm  and  logical  reasonings,  but  this  brought  on  in
her  an  alarming  fit  of  madness.  Her  face  became
injected  with  a dark  blood  ; she  took  up  a table  and
dashed  it  aside,  opened  the  window,  and  was  about
precipitating  herself  from  a fifth  story,  when,  as  quick
as  she,  and  endued  with  a strength  I never  before
knew,  I seized  her  round  the  waist,  pressed  her  against


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM,


69


me  with  violence,  and  breathed  coldly  on  her  fore-
head, with  such  conviction,  such  power,  that  her  teeth
clacked,  her  whole  body  bent  backwards,  and  she  uttered
shrieks  of  pain,  as  if  I were  breaking  her  bones.
(Adele  is  a very  stout,  strong  woman.)  She  begged
me  to  cease  this  powerful  breathing,  which  I cannot
too  highly  recommend  to  magiietisers,  as  having  suc-
ceeded with  me  in  many  circumstances  wherein  all
medical  and  human  means  appeared  impotent.  Could
man  produce,  by  other  emanations  of  the  body,  what
he  is  capable  of  producing,  through  breath,  he  would
fancy  himself  a God.  His  error  would  be  a very  par-
donable one ; for  it  is  necessary  to  have  done  what  I
have  many  a time  done,  to  appreciate  so  magical  a
power.  When  her  head  appeared  to  me  cool,  and  her
mind  calm,  we  advised  her  to  go  to  bed,  which  she
did,  without  any  resistance.  The  blood  flew  up  to  her
head,  and  an  hour’s  delirium  was  the  consequence.  I
magnetised  her  to  bring  back  the  blood  to  the  ex-
tremities. Exhausted  as  I was,  obtaining  no  result,  I
threw  myself  on  a seat,  my  heart  broken  with  grief
and  fear,  the  tears  in  my  eyes.  I entered  the  state  I
have  already  once  known,  and  the  result  of  which  I
mentioned  in  my  “ Secrets,”  under  the  article,  ‘‘Can
Cures  be  performed  through  Prayer  ?”  I prayed  the
Lord  to  extend  his  infinite  goodness  even  to  me,  to
restore  to  reason  this  unfortunate  creature,  who,  I
believed,  had  lost  it  for  ever.  I called  to  my  aid
the  good  Emmanuel  Swedenborg,  who,  in  so  many  cir-
cumstances, shielded  us  with  his  powerful  protection,
and  enlightened  us  with  his  divine  light.  I remained
at  prayer  for  some  time ; half-an-hour  had  scarcely
elapsed  when  we  saw  Adele  kneeling  in  her  bed,
turning  towards  the  right,  and  apparently  speaking  to
some  one.  I asked  her  who  was  there  ?”  “ It  is

M.  Swedenborg,”  replied  she;  “he  is  good,  he  is  just,
all-powerful,  humane;  he  magnetises  me,  and  wishes
me  but  good.”  I thought  that  she  was  still  in  her


70  THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE

delirium.  I attached  no  importance  to  this  scene,
which,  however,  greatly  affected  us ; she  lay  down
again,  after  an  instant,  and  appeared  pretty  calm.  I
then  proposed  replacing  her  handkerchief  on  her  head
to  keep  away  the  cold,  which  w’as  so  inimical  to  her
pain.  She  said  to  me  : — “ My  pain  ! M.  Swedenborg
has  taken  it  away.  I shall  have  it  no  more;  he  has
thoroughly  assured  me  of  that.” — I perceived  that  she
was  asleep.  1 said  to  her  : — “ Who  put  you  in  this
state  r”  “ M.  Swedenborg.  You  may  wake  me ; I
am  well.” — I opened  her  eyes.  She  was  in  her  or-
dinary state,  very  much  astonished  at  finding  herself
in  bed,  and  having  no  recollection  of  what  had  passed.
She  was  calm  all  night.  The  next  morning  she  had  no
pain  ; the  external  sensibility,  which  had  not  left  her
for  a minute  since  the  invasion  of  the  malady,  as  well
as  a few  small  ulcers  and  large  sw’ellings  gorged  with
blood,  which  she  had  on  her  gums,  all  had  disappeared.
She  could  eat  at  her  ease,  which  she  had  been  unable  to
do  since  the  commencement  of  the  attack,  especially
of  warm  dishes,  which  redoubled  her  pain.  I was  dis-
posed to  believe  in  a miracle — if  there  be  any  miracles
in  nature — at  any  rate,  in  a superior  action.  On  the
21st,  I threw  her  into  a sleep  for  the  preceding  appa-
ritions, and  asked  her  what  we  were  to  think  of  her
pain.  She  answered  : — “ We  ought  to  thank  God,
who,  alive  to  your  prayer,  favourably  heard  it.  Our
protector,  M.  Swedenborg,  magnetised  me,  and  re-
moved ray  pain ; he  sent  me  to  sleep,  and  assured
me  that  I should  feel  it  no  more.”

I leave  every  one  to  think  of  this  cure  as  he  deems
fit.  I prayed  mentally  ; Adele  was  in  a delirium,  and
certainly  did  not  hear  me.  Half-an-hour  after,  at  the
moment  I least  thought  of  it,  so  invaded  was  1 by  a
thousand  confused  thoughts,  M.  Swedenborg  took
possession  of  her,  agreeably  to  ray  wishes,  and  per-
formed, in  a few  minutes,  whar,  in  three  weeks,  the
magnetism  of  two  persons — somnambulism  and  medi-


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


71


caments — had  been  unable  to  effect.  He  restored
reason,  health,  and  peace  to  a heart  that  was  bereft
of  them !

Note. — AdMe  has  never  since  experienced  a similar
attack.  Thrice  thanks.  Lord!  thanks,  good  Swedenborg.

115.  The  6th  March,  the  Abbe  A asked  of  me  a

medical  consultation  for  a person  at  a distance,  in  whom
he  interests  himself.  The  consultation  over,  this  gentle-
man desired  to  put  the  following  questions  to  Adele  : —
“ Which  is  the  state  of  mind  or  thought  most  agreeable
to  God  }”  “ That  of  having  a holy  confidence  in  him,

and  an  ardent  love  for  our  neighbour.^’ — “ Are  all  re-
ligions agreeable  to  God  “ Yes,  when  they  are
founded  on  these  two  principles.^^ — “ But  the  practices'
of  these  religions,  are  they  approved  by  him  }’’  “ Yes,

when  they  aim  at  the  object  I have  just  defined.^^ —
“ Still,  human  reason  is  less  repugnant  to  accepting  the
offerings  or  sacrifices  made  to  God  in  certain  mild
religions,  than  in  others  which  seem  ridiculous  or
savage.’’  “ There  are  no  ridiculous  or  savage  practices
in  the  eyes  of  God,  the  disciples  of  such  religions  be-
lieve they  make  themselves  agreeable  to  him  by  offering
him  such  a thing,  or  praying  to  him  in  such  a manner.
It  is  the  love  with  which  they  are  penetrated  for  God
that  animates  them,  and  God  accepts  with  the  same
impartiality  whatsoever  is  offered  him  with  a view  of
being  agreeable  to  him!” — There  existed,  and  there
still  exist,  nations  that  offer  up  human  victims  to  God
in  tlieir  sacrifices,  is  that  agreeable  to  God?”  ‘‘Yes,
for  these  men  offer  up  to  him  their  dearest  possessions
in  the  persons  of  their  children,  brethren,  and  friends ;
they  give  him  a proof  of  a superior  love  which  God
cannot  reject,  especially  when  these  men  are  convinced
of  the  value  of  their 'offering,  and  make  it  not  with  in-
difference.”— “ In  that  case,  in  what  does  evil  consist?”
“ In  doing  it  wittingly.” — “ Deign  to  be  more  clear?”
“ The  rational  being  who  coolly  resolves  on  an  action
which  he  knows  to  be  bad  in  itself,  and  the  results  of


72


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


which  he  has  the  conviction  must  create  trouble,  and
are  condemned  by  morality,  such  a one  does  evil,  since
he  calculates  it,  appreciates  it,  and  executes  it  for  plea-
sure’s sake.” — “ ^^diat  punishment  does  God  reserve
for  him?”  “God  consigns  him  after  his  material
death  to  a place  apart,  where  his  thoughts  are  gradually
purified,  and  make  room  for  thoughts  of  love  towards
his  neighbour ; thoughts  he  has  never  known.” — “ Why
has  he  not  known  them  ?”  “ Because  he  has  had  no  con-
fidence in  God,  who  is  the  principal  basis  of  all  happi-
ness.”— “ What  is  the  effect  of  this  confidence  ?”  “ That
of  receiving  in  one’s  heart  a ray  of  the  divine  light,  and
driving  from  it  darkness.” — “What  do  you  understand
by  light  and  darkness  ?”  “ Good  and  evil  thoughts.”

— “ How  unravel  these  thoughts  ?”  “ This  divine  ray

thoroughly  unravels  them,  it  gives  birth  to  all  the  good
thoughts  that  seek  its  influence,  and  drives  away  the
evil  ones  that  dread  it.” — “ And  in  what  way  ?”  “ In

this  way  : the  heart  of  man  is  more  and  more  purified,
stripped  of  the  evil  thoughts  that  oppressed  it,  and
becomes  acquainted  with  the  greatest  happiness  desira-
ble— the  love  of  God  and  the  love  of  all  !”  M.  A

says  that  Adele  is  in  accord  with  the  case  of  conscience
we  admit  in  theology;  evil  exists  only  in  the  knowledge
we  have  of  doing  it.  Reflect  on  this  somnambulic  mo-
rality, ye  learned  of  the  age  ! study  it,  and  tell  me  if
ever  anything  grander,  more  reasonable,  and  more  ad-
missible, ever  emanated  from  your  thoughts?

116.  M.  Duteil,  a member  of  the  Magnetological
Society  of  Paris,  and  a subscriber  to  the  “ Secrets,”  de-
sires like  the  foregoing  persons  to  judge  by  himself  of
the  precious  clairvoyance  of  AdHe  ; he  solicits  the  ap-
parition of  Madame  Duteil,  his  wife,  by  her  maiden
name,  without  apprising  us  that  it  was  his  wife.  AdHe
sees  a young  lady,  who  may  be  from  about  eighteen  to
twenty  years  of  age  (she  was  twenty-eight),  whose  hair
is  of  a deep  flaxen,  eyes  of  a dark  blue,  forehead  pretty
open,  smooth  and  handsome,  nose  rather  pointed,  slight


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


73


rosy-coloured  cheeks,  ordinary  mouth,  thin  lips,  round
chin,  hanging  down  a little,  and  forming  the  hollow
under  the  lower  lip;  doleful  air;  she  is  not  stout,  her
hand  is  long  and  thin.  She  must  have  been  of  a very
mild  disposition  and  possessed  of  a good  heart.  She
suft'ered  in  the  chest  and  from  violent  palpitations  of  the
heart.  Her  speech  is  gentle.  M.  Duteil  asks  whether
she  was  married?^’  She  replies  to  Adele:  ‘‘Yes,”
adding,  “ you  know  my  husband  well  enough,  and  so
does  the  person  who  tells  you  to  ask  the  question.”
Adele  says  : “ He  may,  but  I don’t.”  M.  Duteil  asks
whether  she  had  any  children  ? She  answers  that  she
left  behind  her  a little  girl.  “ Has  she  been  long  dead?”
“Yes/’  replies  she  (she  had  been  dead  six  years).
Adele  again  asks  her  the  name  of  her  husband  ? She
repeats  : “ You  know  him  well  enough  and  so  does  the
person  present.”  M.  Duteil  then  informs  us  that  he
knows  this  lady’s  husband  well,  inasmuch  as  it  is  he
himself;  this  removes  the  inquietude  in  which  Adele
appears  to  be  in  trying  to. find  out  who  this  man  can  be,
and  proves  to  M.  Duteil  as  to  all  those  who  believe  in
the  communication  of  thoughts,  that  if  such  were  the
case,  Adele  would  have  seen  immediately  who  this  lady’s
husband  was.

“ I acknowledge  the  above  details  as  exact,  excepting  the  age.

“ Duteil,

“ Magnetiser,  246,  Rue  de  Saint  Denis.”

Adele  adds  that  she  perceives  near  Madame  Duteil
an  aged  woman,  sixty  years  old  at  least,  with  grey  hair,
face  wrinkled  all  over  ; she  must  have  been  very  corpu-
lent; she  seems  to  her  rather  shorter  than  Madame
Duteil,  whom  this  woman  says  that  slie  received  in
heaven  in  her  capacity  as  grandmother  by  the  mother’s
side.  She  has  a very  cheerful  and  pleasant  look,  and
wears  spectacles;  this  seems  rather  droll  to  Adele,  inas-
much as  it  is  the  first  person  she  has  seen  wearing
them.  This  apparition  uncalled  for,  so  much  the  more

G


74


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


astonishes  M.  Duteil  as  he  declares  he  never  knew  or
saw  this  woman ; it  was  not  without  some  trouble  that
he  was  able  to  gather  the  following  particulars : —

“ I,  the  undersigned,  certify  that  the  grandmother  whom  I
never  saw,  and  of  whom  I could  not  have  been  thinking,  as  she
died  a very  long  time  ago,  at  the  age  of  seventy,  constantly
wore  spectacles,  and  was,  in  fact,  of  a very  cheerful  disposition  ;
this  I have  learned  from  her  only  grandson.

“ Duteil.

“ Paris,  10th  April,  1848.”

117.  The  Prince  of  Kourakine,  Secretary  to  the
Russian  Ambassador  at  Paris,  having  read  the  “Secrets,’^
presented  himself  at  my  house  with  the  Baron  Dupotet,
M.  Hebert  de  Garnay,  and  a fourth  person,  to  ask  me
for  an  apparition-sitting.  I sent  Adele  to  sleep,  and

told  her  to  ask  for  the  Princess  K , the  sister-in-

law  of  this  gentleman.  Ad^e  replied  : “ I see  a tall
dark  young  lady,  about  28  years  of  age  (she  w’as  22),
with  dark  hazel  eyes,  rather  small  than  large,  pale
complexion,  fine  forehead,  nose  rather  thick  at  the  top,
but  pretty  w'ell  formed,  upper  lip  thick,  eye-brows
pretty  thick  and  arched ; a supine  carriage,  speech  mild,
air  calm  and  resigned.  This  lady  suffered  much  from
the  heart  and  the  left  side  of  her  bosom.  I perceive  that
that  side  is  quite  black  ; she  suffered  also  in  the  lower
part  of  the  body,  in  the  bladder,  and  very  much  in  the
head.  She  w'as  not  much  of  a talker.  I see  beside  her
a little  boy  of  a fair  complexion,  about  five  years  of
age  ; she  was  surely  fond,,  of  children.”

This  gentleman  acknowledged  the  truth  of  these
details,  apart  the  colour  of  the  complexion,  wdnch  in  her
latter  days  was  of  a violet  colour.  He  does  not  know
this  child,  and  prefers  addressing  metaphysical  questions
to  his  sister-in-law,  through  AdHe,  to  obtaining  any
fresh  particulars  as  to  her  dress.  She  gives  him  very
satisfactory  answers,  amongst  others  she  tells  him  that
.she  has  already  appeared  to  her  sister  (the  wife  of  this
gentleman)  in  dreams ; this  is  quite  true.  She  speaks


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


75


with  difficulty,  with  constraint,  as  she  did  on  earth;  this
arose  from  her  sickly  condition  which  caused  her  much
suffering.  I did  not  get  this  sitting  signed  by  the
Prince  as  he  was  to  return ; but  the  events  that  suddenly
took  place  in  France,  forced  his  dejiarture;  the  testimony
of  the  Baron  Dupotet  and  M.  Hebert  de  Garnay  would
guarantee,  if  necessary,  the  truth  of  the  above  particulars.

M.  Dupotet  desires  in  his  turn  to  summon  one  of  his
old  friends.  Dr.  Dubois,  who  had  been  dead  about
fifteen  months.

Adele  says : — I see  a man,  whose  hair  is  quite  grey,
and  very  scanty  in  front ; he  has  an  open  forehead,
prominent  near  the  temples,  thus  making  his  head  as  if
square.  Fie  may  be  about  sixty.  He  has  a couple  of
wrinkles  on  each  side  of  his  cheeks,  a fold  under  his
chin,  making  it  appear  double  ; neck  very  short — he  is
a short  thick-set  man ; eyes  small,  big  nose,  mouth
rather  large,  chin  flat,  hands  thin  and  small.  Fie  does
not  appear  to  be  quite  so  tall  as  M.  Dupotet;  if  he  is
not  stouter,  he  is  broader  shouldered.  He  wears  a brown
riding-coat,  with  pockets  at  the  side.  I see  him  draw
out  of  one  a snuff-box,  and  taking  a pinch.  FTe  has
quite  a droll  gait;  he  did  not  stand  firm  on  his  legs,  he
must  have  suffered  from  weakness  in  them.  Flis  trow-
sers  are  rather  short.  Ah  ! he  did  not  clean  his  shoes,
for  they  are  covered  with  mud.  Altogether,  his  dress
is  not  a rich  one.  He  had  an  asthma,  for  he  breathes
with  difficulty.  I see  also  that  he  has  a swelling  in  the
lower  part  of  his  body;  he  wears  something  that  presses
on  it.  I told  him  that  it  was  M.  Dupotet  w'ho  asked
for  him.  He  talks  to  me  of  magnetism  with  incredible
volubility;  he  speaks  of  everything  at  once,  mingling
all  together  ; I doidt  understand  a word  of  what  he  says  ;
he  speaks  so  fast  that  he  even  sputters.’’

M.  Dupotet  begs  Adele  to  ask  him  why  he  has  not
appeared  to  him  as  he  had  promised  ? He  answers  : —
Give  me  time  to  consider  wdiere  I am;  I have  but
just  arrived  ; I am  studying  whatsoever  I see.  I will


7G  THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE

give  you  an  account  of  all  when  I appear  to  you.” —

What  day  did  you  promise  me  you  would  do  so  ?”

One  Wednesday.”  Adele  adds: — “This  man  must
have  been  forgetful ; I am  certain  that  he  was  very
absent  in  mind.” — M.  Dupotet  again  asks : — “ When
will  you  appear  to  me  ?”  “ I cannot  fix  the  time,  I will

endeavour  to  do  so  within  six  weeks.” — “Ask  him  if  he
liked  the  Jesuits  ?”  At  this  name  he  takes  such  a leap
in  the  air,  extending  his  arms,  and  exclaiming — “ The
Jesuits  ?”  that  Adele  quickly  moves  away,  and  remains
so  alarmed  that  she  no  longer  dares  speak  to  him.  M.
Dupotet  declares  that  all  these  details  are  so  very  exact
that  he  cannot  retrench  from  them  a syllable.  “ This
man,”  said  he,  “ was  of  an  inexhaustible  conversation,
mingling  all  the  sciences,  of  which  he  was  a great
amateur,  and  so  voluble  of  speech  that  he  actually  sput-
tered, as  your  clairvoyante  says.  He  was  very  careless
of  his  person,  and  was  so  absent  in  mind  that  he  some-
times forgot  to  take  his  meals.  Whenever  any  one
spoke  to  him  about  the  Jesuits  he  would  jump  in  the
manner  Adele  has  described.  FTe  was  always  very
dirty ; it  is  not  surprising  that  the  clairvoyante  should
see  him  in  shoes  covered  with  mud.”  He  had,  indeed,
promised  M.  Dupotet  that  he  would  appear  to  him  on
a Wednesday  or  Saturday,  M.  Dupotet  acknowledged
the  exactitude  of  this  apparition  in  No.  75  of  the
“ Journal  du  Magnetisme.”

118.  Madame  D , possessing,  like  every  one  else,

her  share  of  incredulity,  wishing  to  trust  to  her  own
judgment,  in  preference  to  that  of  her  husband  (pro-
fessionally versed  in  such  matters),  desires  in  her  turn

an  apparition.  She  is  accompanied  by  M.  H ; and

begs  Ad^le  to  ask  for  M.  B , Jacques.  Adele

says  : “ I see  a man,  about  thirty-six  years  of  age,  of
middling  stature ; black  hair,  rather  long,  coming  down
to  the  bottom  of  the  ear,  but  not  as  is  worn  in  the
present  day;  complexion  pale,  face  thin;  hazel  eyes,
large  and  hollow^,  but  of  a mild  expression,  nose


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM,  77

rather  long  and  sharp,  air  sad  and  downcast/^  Madame

D interrupts  Adele,  to  inquire  the  malady  of  which

this  man  died.  The  latter  replies : “ I don’t  perceive
any  grave  malady  in  him — I see  only  indisposition  ;
but,  good  gracious  ! this  man  has  been  killed  ! by  a
fire-arm — a pistol.  He  has  blown  out  his  brains !
Oh,  the  wretch  ! I can  understand  his  sorrowfulness.
I told  you  so,  those  who  commit  suicide  enter  not
forthwith — they  wander  around  the  earth  !” — “ What,
then,  is  their  suffering  ?”  ‘‘  That  of  being  unable  to

enjoy  light  as  the  rest.” — “ When  does  he  hope  to
enjoy  it  ?”  “ When  the  time  that  he  should  have  ac-

complished on  earth  is  terminated  ?” — That  is  to  say
that  he  will  thus  wander  to  the  age  of  sixty,  were  he
to  have  lived  to  that  age  materially  ?”  “ Yes.” — Madame
D inquires  whether  this  gentleman  knows  her?

Yes ; she  is  related  to  him  by  marriage.” — This
gentleman  only  knew  Madame  by  her  maiden  name;
he  could,  perhaps,  tell  you  the  degree  of  this  relation-
ship ?” — I asked  him  whether  Madame  was  his  cousin,
he  replied:  ‘She  is  more  than  that  to  me!  more  than
that!’  From  this  exclamation,  one  would  say  that
Madame  is  his  mother,  or  as  much  as  a mother — at
any  rate,  he  seems  to  be  as  attached  to  her  as  if  such
were  the  case.” — “Tell  him  she  has  married  the  Baron
D — — : and  ask  him  if  she  has  acted  agreeable  to  his
wishes  !”  “ Oh,  my  poor  wife  1”  exclaimed  he  ; “ maj?’

you  be  happy — it  is  the  sole  wish  of  my  heart.”  Adele

turns  towards  Madame  D , and  says  to  her,  with

an  air  of  astonishment,  “ You  were,  then,  the  wife  of
this  gentleman  ?”  The  lady  replies  in  the  affirmative
— Adele  continues : “ He  says  that  he  applauds  this
union;  but,  at  the  same  time,  he  seems  pained  at  it,
for  he  was  very  fond  of  Madame.  This  man,  without
being  positively  wretched,  is  not  happy  ; his  ideas  have
suffered — they  are  still  agitated,  and  under  the  influence
of  those  that  drove  him  to  suicide.”

When  Ad^le  asked  for  this  gentleman,  there  first


78


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


appeared  a person  about  sixty  years  of  age — a tall,
strong,  handsome  man,  decorated  with  orders,  &c.

Madame  D , not  recognising  in  this  personage

her  husband,  pays  no  attention  to  him,  and  has  no
recollection  of  his  being,  or  having  been,  as  he  terms
himself,  a friend  of  her  husband’s.  Towards  the  close
of  the  sitting  I put  a few  questions  to  him,  seeing  that

he  did  not,  for  a moment,  quit  M.  B . He  answers

me  that  he  appeared  first,  because  M.  E , his  in-

timate friend,  who  was  asked  for,  had  no  mind  to
appear;  that  he  dragged  him  along — must  we  say,  by
force;  that  we  are  indebted  to  his  entreaties  for  M.

B appearance.  This  gentleman  says  that  he

never  quits  his  friend,  whose  mental  condition  gives
him  much  pain.

Madame  D acknowledges  all  the  details  of  the

apparition  of  her  husband  as  quite  exact,  and  is  con-
firmed in  the  belief  that  it  was  impossible  to  read
in  her  thought,  seeing  that  Adele  would  have  forth-
with seen  and  told  her  that  she  was  the  wife  of  this
gentleman — a revelation,  for  which  we  were  indebted,
as  we  have  seen,  to  a question  foreign  to  this  commu-
nication. Madame  D is  also  further  convinced,

by  the  double  apparition,  which  she  had  not  asked  for,
and  the  personage  of  which  is  unknown  to  her,  and,
consequently,  not  in  her  thoughts.

119.  M.  Hebert  (de  Garnay)  editor  of  the  “ Journal
du  Magnetisme,”  more  inclined  to  believe  in  the  com-
munication of  thoughts  than  in  the  reality  of  the  appa-
rition, asks  for  that  of  M.  J.  Hebert,  his  uncle,  whom
he  says  he  never  saw.  Adele  perceives  a man  about
the  same  size  as  M.  Hebert,  but  stronger,  with  auburn
hair,  beginning  to  turn  grey;  he  is  round  shouldered.
H ere  M.  Hebert  interrupts  Adele,  saying  that  he  can-
not appreciate  such  description,  and  desires,  in  order  to
be  convinced,  but  one  thing — let  her  tell  him  of  what
kind  of  malady  he  died.  Adele  replies,  ‘‘  His  complaint
lay  in  the  head,  this  man  was  insane.  Ah  ! how  disor-


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.  7^

derecl  are  his  ideas.  I see  that  he  died  mad,  but  I
could  not  affirm  that  madness  was  the  cause  of  his
death ; I rather  believe  it  was  the  treatment  he  under-
went.” M.  Hebert  resumes,  “ My  uncle  became  blind
in  his  insanity;  is  this  accident  to  be  attributed  to  his
sad  condition  ?”  I do,  in  fact,  perceive  that  his  eyes
are  shut,  and  this  proves  to  me  that  he  could  not  see ;
but  they  were  not  completely  closed.  I see  them  half
open.  I cannot  tell  whether  this  arose  from  his  insane
condition ; I believe  it  is  an  effect  of  it,  a congestion  of
blood.  Ah  ! how  droll  is  a madmaffis  head.”

M.  Hebert  asks  what  could  have  been  the  cause  of
his  insanity  ? Adele  replies,  “ I perceive  that  an  idea
of  interest  is  predominant.” — ‘‘Is  it  a commercial  inte-
rest?” “ No,  not  a commercial  interest,  but  a private
one.”  M.  Hebert  says  that  this  man  became  insane  at
the  age  of  eighteen  or  twenty,  and  died  at  upwards  of
fifty,  having  been  neither  rich  nor  in  trade.  W e think
that  if  Adele’s  judgment  is  correct  he  must  have  been
in  love  with  some  young  person  richer  than  himself,  and
wished  to  be  wealthy  enough  to  wed  her.  With  madmen
the  objects  of  their  insanity  do  not  always  correspond
with  their  position  in  the  world.

To  the  name  of  Hebert  there  first  appeared  a young
man  from  twenty  to  twenty-four  years  of  age.  I ask
Ad^le  who  this  young  man  could  be  whom  M.  Hebert
had  forthwith  dismissed  as  not  being  the  person  he
asked  for.  Adele  replies,  “ It  was  no  doubt  the  same
gentleman  who  \vished  to  appear  to  me  as  he  was  before
being  insane.  M.  Hebert  having  desired  to  know  of
what  he  died,  he,  perhaps,  re-appeared  in  the  wTetched
state  in  which  he  ended  his  days.  This  is  merely  a
supposition  of  mine,”  repeats  Adele.

“ M.  Hebert  (De  Garnay)  acknowledges  as  true  only  the  re-
velation of  insanity,  merely  knowing,”  said  he,  “ this  particu-
larity respecting  his  uncle.”

(Signed)  “ Hebert  (de  Garnay).”

Next  day  I requested  M.  Hebert  to  sign  his  name  to


80


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


this  sitting,  and  this  he  did  with  a very  good  grace.
But,  would  it  be  believed  that  this  gentleman,  who
ought  to  have  been  convinced  by  the  revelation  of  the
insanity  alone,  which  for  any  other  would  not  have
been  sufficient,  seeing  that  it  could  be  read  in  the
thought,  took  advantage  of  this  circumstance  to  give
utterance  to  these  absurd  remarks.  “ The  somnam-
bulist has  failed ; she  reads  in  the  thought.  I was
aware  that  my  uncle  died  mad,  it  was  not  difficult  for
her  to  read  this  in  my  thought.'^  “ I reply  to  M.
Hebert— If  she  saw  this  particularity  in  your  thought,
she  has  not,  therefore,  failed  ; if  she  has  failed,  she  does
not,  therefore,  see  in  the  thought.  To  be  consistent
and  impartial,  you  ought  not  to  have  stopped  her  in  the
midst  of  the  particulars  she  gave  you  of  the  person,
whom,  as  you  say,  you  had  never  seen.  A reason  the
more  to  be  convinced  that  you  had  not  this  image  in
your  own  thought.  But  no,  you  wish  this  system  to
prevail,  and  you  hasten  to  put  a question  that  deviates
from  the  true  one  ; you  are  answered  right,  and  then
you  exclaim  that  you  were  aware  of  this  answer.  Why
put  the  question  ? If  you  were  answered  wrong,  you
would  cry  out  still  louder.

120.  Hitherto  I have  omitted  no  error  of  my  clair-
voyante  nor  any  of  her  truths.  I have  said  in  my  pre-
face of  the  “Secrets”  that  I should  deem  myself  the
most  contemptible  man  on  the  face  of  the  earth  if  I
speculated  in  falsehoods.  Because  penetrated  with  this
truth,  I make  mention  of  the  slightest  details  concern-
ing these  apparitions,  of  which  I could  give  a summary
without  entering  into  those  minute  particulars  for  which
the  reader  may  blame  me,  but  which  he  wdll  not  despise
at  the  bottom  of  his  heart.  Since  I have  just  cited  an
inconsistent  contradiction,  I ought  to  follow  it  up  with  a
ridiculous  personage  who  acknowledges  the  thing  he
denies.  This  type  of  a man  will  form  a diversion,  by  its
eccentricity,  to  the  types  hitherto  known.  The  Abbe
A whose  curious  sittings  and  frank  conversion  we


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


81


have  here,  desired  to  have  his  conviction  shared  in  by  a
Protestant  minister,  named  Rostan.  The  latter  had  two
sittings,  and  was  convinced  at  the  last  one,  of  which  I
shall  make  mention  after  this,  seeing  that  at  the  first
one  there  was  an  involuntary  error  on  his  part  in  asking
for  the  deceased.  This  gentleman  signed  the  testimonial
of  this  sitting  with  pleasure,  because  he  declared  himself
satisfied ; he  made  known  his  conviction  to  one  of  his
colleagues  who  is  the  person  we  are  about  to  converse
with,  and  whose  incredulity  and  ambiguous  answers  will
be  appreciated.

He  asks  for  M.  Francisco  Solano  Constantio.  Adele
says  that  she  perceives  a person  from  50  to  56  years  of
age  (true),  a fine  corpulent  man — that  is  to  say — very
broad  across  the  shoulders  and  chest  (not  very  so),
smaller  than  Alphonse  (true),  dark  brown  hair  (it  was
black),  half  grey  (true),  high,  open  forehead  (true),
sensitive  sight,  what  is  termed  weak  sight  (true),  middling
size  eyes  of  a dark  blue  (true,  but  they  were  large),  eye-
brows turning  grey  (possible),  nose  broad  at  the  top  (I
know  not),  I see  a scar  on  his  right  cheek  (I  know  not),
countenance  meditative  and  agreeable  (true),  rather
cheerful  than  austere  (true),  he  has  a sweet  smile  (true) ;
he  has  still  all  his  front  teeth  (true) ; he  has  suffered
from  oppressions  (true) ; he  had  an  affection  of  the  heart
causing  violent  palpitations.  He  was  weak  on  his  legs
and  forced  to  sit,  as  if  subject  to  fits  of  fainting  (I  know
not),  I presume  that  he  had  the  gout  in  his  right  leg  (I
know  not),  I see  no  mortal  malady  in  this  man,  only  his
ideas  seem  to  me  disordered,  wild  (he  died  of  apoplexy).
He  often  felt  a great  heat  in  the  lower  part  of  his  body,
and  this  often  disturbed  the  whole  system  (I  know  not).
He  had  grey  whiskers  (true) ; wore  a black  riding-coat,
white  cravat,  his  shirt-collar  turned  down  (I  know  not).

“ He  was  exceedingly  corpulent ; a particularity  which  the
somnambulist  neither  made  mention  of  nor  saw.

(Signed)  “ C.  D.  Bosnkville,

“Minister  at  Lisieux.’*


82


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


“ Do  you  recognise  in  the  portrait  just  shown  you  that
of  the  man  you  asked  for?^’  “ No/’ — “For  what  reason  ?”
“ Because  he  was  exceedingly  stout,  and  this  particularity
has  not  been  spoken  of  as  very  remarkable.” — “ When
the  clairvoyante  told  you  at  the  commencement  that  he
was  a fine  corpulent  man,  you  replied:  ‘Not  very  so;’
this  scarcely  accords  with  what  you  now  observe  to  me.
Did  you  know  this  man  well,  and  did  you  see  him  at
the  time  of  his  death  ?”  “ I knew  him  very  well ; I even
dined  with  him  a few  days  before  his  death.” — “ How  is
it  that  knowing  him  so  well,  you  cannot  say  whether  he
was  dressed  in  the  manner  described  to  you  ? In  this
apparition  are  found  six-and-twenty  particulars,  fifteen
of  which  you  acknowledge  as  true ; to  six  of  them  you
answer — I know  not ; to  one — it  is  possible.  That
which  you  acknowledged  as  possible,  and  the  ten  that
you  are  not  aware  of,  may  very  well  correspond  with  the
fifteen  you  confess  to,  thus  not  one  could  be  rejected.
You  are  not  convinced  ; we  will  ask  for  another  appa-
rition, but  first  swear  to  me  that  the  person  you  are
about  to  ask  for  is  really  dead,  and  that  your  intention
is  not  to  gainsay  or  influence  the  clairvovante  in  order  to
make  her  err?”  “ I swear  it.” — “ What  is  the  name  of
the  person  you  demand  ?”  “ Robert  Fitter.”

AdHe  says  : “ I see  a person  older  than  the  first  one
(true)  ; he  is  tail  and  rather  thin  than  stout  (true)  ; hair
more  of  a flaxen  than  auburn  (true) ; face  very  thin
(true) ; forehead  rather  prominent  than  flat  {true) ; nose
long  (true)  ; nostrils  open  (tolerably  so)  ; eyes  hollow
(on  account  of  his  thinness)  ; they  do  not  seem  large
(they  were  large,  not  extraordinarily  so) ; cheek  bones
prominent  (on  account  of  his  thinness)  ; mouth  rather
large  than  small  (true)  ; chin  long  (true) ; the  neck  ap-
pears long  (true)  ; a frill  to  his  shirt  (sometimes) ; dark
coloured  pantaloons  (true)  ; he  did  not  wear  boots,  he
wore  shoes  (true)  ; he  had  a dry  cough  (pretty  often)  ;
he  suffered  in  the  chest  and  stomach  (when  dying,  yes).
The  seat  of  his  complaint  was  there.


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


83


Now,  this  is  what  the  gentleman  writes  at  the  bottom
of  the  testimonial : —

“ She  presumes  that  his  lungs  were  affected.  The  doctor
says  that  it  was  the  gout  in  his  stomach.  He  had  an  aquiline
nose.  Apart  this,  the  description  is  exact.

(Signed)  “ C,  de  F^osneville,

“ I\Iinister  at  Lisieux.”

“ Well,  monsieur,  are  you  convinced?”  ‘^No;  she
did  not  say  that  he  had  an  aquiline  nose.” — “ Recollect,
monsieur,  that  she  could  not  find  the  expression,  and
the  better  to  make  you  comprehend  how  she  saw  it,  she
dwelt  upon  the  end  of  his  nose,  thus  making  it  bent  in
the  middle,  and  consequently  aquiline.”  I did  not
perceive  that.” — “ M.  Rostan,  your  friend,  M.  Blouet,
and  mj'self,  all  three  of  us  perceived  it  and  rightly
understood  it.”  Possibly ; but  I cannot  believe  that
the  person  who  came  was  the  one  I asked  for.” — Will
you  read  over  again  the  written  description,  and  point
out  in  your  handwriting  where  you  find  there  is  any
error  ?”  “ Yes.” — This  gentleman  returns  to  me  the

paper  we  have  just  read,  signed  with  his  own  hand,
with  the  words  as  I have  given  them  between  paren-
theses.

If  I let  you  speak  with  this  person  and  he  answers
your  questions,  will  you  believe  ?”  Yes.” — “ Ask

what  you  please?”  “ Was  Jesus  Christ  God,  as  to  his
human  part  as  in  his  spiritual  part  ?”  Pie  was  God
in  his  divine  part,  and  not  God  in  his  human  part.” —

In  heaven  is  he  looked  upon  and  recognised  as  God?”
“Yes.” — “Was  he  conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghost?”

Yes.” — This  gentleman  declares  himself  satisfied  with
these  three  answers;  but  Adele  seems  not  to  lie  in  the
least  so,  she  says  to  me : I can  but  reproduce  the
truth  ; these  things  were  answered  me,  I was  bound  to
tell  you  them ; as  they  accord  not  with  what  M.  Mallet
once  told  me,  aid  me  in  asking  for  him  that  I may  see
what  he  will  oppose  to  the  minister  who  has  just  made
me  these  answers.”  This  observation  of  Adele  sharpens


84


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


our  curiosity ; we  are  eager  to  obtain  an  answer.  M.
Mallet  comes  and  throws  light  on  the  question  by  these
M^ords  : — “ Monsieur  is  a Protestant  minister  and  belongs
to  a society  of  similar  persuasions.  It  is  the  same  with
all  spiritual  societies,  they  continue  holding  the  same
beliefs  as  they  had  on  earth.^^  “But  you,  a Catholic
minister,  what  do  you  think  of  these  things,  your  reli-
gion admits  them  likewise  ?” — “ I am  not  of  the  same
opinion  in  this  respect.”  I observe  to  Adele  that  in
such  case  it  is  very  difficult  for  us  to  obtain  the  truth,
and  advise  her  to  search  for  it  by  herself.  She  was  very
much  fatigued,  and  unable  to  give  us  the  solution.

M.  Rostan  asks  M.  De  Bosneville  what  he  thinks  of
an  image  that  makes  such  answers  ? The  latter  says —
“ They  would  induce  me  to  believe  in  the  real  presence
of  our  pastor;  but  I am  not  convinced  of  it.”  “\yhere
do  you  think  that  she  could  get  the  exact  description
she  has  given  you,  and  the  words  you  have  heard  ?”

She  may  suppose  all  this.”  I ask  this  gentleman  in  my
turn  whether  he  could  by  the  same  suppositions  reproduce
to  me  the  same  amount  of  particulars  as  he  has  just  heard,
with  respect  to  my  mother,  who  is  dead.  He  replies  :
“ I could  not;  but  that  does  not  prove  to  me  that  this
gentleman  was  present  here.”  I reply  to  him  in  my
turn — “God  bless  you.”  This  gentleman  finds  himself
in  the  sorry  position  of  denying  what  he  affirms,  as  I
have  already  said.  It  is  a contradiction  that  I should
never  have  thought  it  possible  to  meet  with  in  an
educated  man.  What  must  he  think  of  a testimonial
which  he  signs  as  exact,  and  denies  as  true  ?

121.  On  the  evening  of  the  foregoing  sitting  M.  Le-
moine,  a magnetiser  and  an  excellent  somnambulist,
came  to  beg  of  me  to  magnetise  a lady,  his  somnam-
bulist, in  order  to  see  if  I could  obtain  more  decided
effects  than  himself.  Scarcely  had  I begun,  than  AdMe,
having  absorbed,  no  doubt,  all  the  fluid  that  I gave  this
lady,  fell  asleep  and  into  a state  of  catalepsy.  I quitted
the  lady  to  attend  to  AdMe,  whose  arms  only  were


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


85


paralysed.  I asked  her  the  cause  of  this ; she  replied
that,  having  been  magnetised  in  the  afternoon,  she  was
not  yet  freed  from  the  magnetic  currents  passing  from
her  to  me  ; that  these  same  currents  had  invaded  her,
bringing  in  their  train  the  nervous  irritability  of  the
lady  I was  magnetising,  and  this  had  occasioned  the  cata-
lepsy. I disengaged  her,  and  left  off  magnetising  the
lady,  seeing  that  a third  person  was  beginning  to  feel
my  influence,  M.  Lemoine  himself,  who  could  scarcely
keep  himself  awake.  We  altered  the  arrangements  of
this  sowee,  foreseeing  that,  otherwise,  I should  have
three  clairvoyants  at  once  to  guide  and  question.  This
soirte  was  solely  at  Adele^s  expense,  and  we  had  no
reason  to  repent  of  it;  she  gave  a medical  consultation
to  the  lady,  whom  she  saw  for  the  first  time ; this  proved
(from  the  lady’s  own  affirmations)  to  all  the  persons
present  that  she  was  as  powerful  a clairvoyante  for
diseases  as  for  spiritual  perceptions.  I addressed  to  her

the  following  questions,  which  the  Abbe  A , present

at  this  sitting,  begged  me  to  put  to  her: — “Was  Jesus
Christ  God,  in  his  humanity  as  in  his  spirituality
“ He  was  God  only  in  his  spirituality  ?” — “ Had  he  two
bodies,  one  material  and  tiie  other  spiritual?”  “Yes,
and  for  this  reason  he  died  materially  and  lives
spiritually.” — “ Is  he  looked  upon  in  heaven  as  God  ?”
“ Yes,  by  those  who  believe  in  his  divinity.” — “He  was
not,  therefore,  positively  God  ?”  “ He  was  the  son  of

God,  like  us  all.” — “ Was  he  begotten  by  the  Holy
Ghost  ?”  “ Yes,  it  is  the  Spirit  that  begets  all.” —

“ Was  he  begotten  like  all  other  men,  through  the
medium  of  a man?”  “No,  herein  it  is  that  he  is
superior  to  them.” — “You  fall  again  into  the  same  error
as  just  now,  when  the  Protestant  minister  put  to  you
the  same  questions.”  “ Just  then  I could  not  explain
what  I know  now,  that  I am  in  a superior  state.  What
raised  Christ  above  other  men  is  this — that  by  the  way
in  which  he  was  made  flesh,  spiritually  and  not  mate-
rially, he  had  a recollection  of  his  former  spiritual


S6


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


existence^  the  one  ^ve  have  all  had,  and  which  we  do
not  remember^  from  the  force  of  our  materialisation.
Not  having  undergone,  like  us,  the  laws  of  matter,  he
was  not  subjected  to  them,  and  remembered  on  earth
what  we  shall  remember  in  heaven,  lie  had,  therefore,
this  degree  of  spirituality  more  than  we ; hence  his  say-
ing— ‘ 1 am  not  the  Son  of  man,  my  Father  is  in  heaven  ;
and  not  upon  earth.’  if  all  men  were  aware  of  their  primi-
tive existence  they  would  not  call  themselves  fathers,  they
wmulcl  all  know  that  they  have  but  one  Father,  who  is
the  only  true  God,  and  they  would  term  themselves
brethren  as  Christ  termed  them.  If  the  power  of  Christ
was  great,  consider  how  great  was  his  suffering — he
who  came  down  from  heaven  upon  earth,  where  he  was
to  fulfill  a mission  so  painful — he  w’ho  had  constantly
before  his  miiid  the  joys,  the  felicity  of  heaven,  and
the  troubles  and  anguish  of  the  earth.  If  you  can
understand  his  position,  you  will  conceive  his  having  the
right  to  speak  as  he  did  ; but  you  will  also  know'  that  he
never  said  that  he  was  God,  he  was  but  his  son,  his
envoy  on  earth,  and  he  was  continually  saying  to
men  : Pray  to  my  father,  who  is  in  heaven.”  “What,
then,  is  the  mission  he  had  to  fulfil  r”  “ To  instruct
men  in  the  existence  of  God,  in  which  at  that  period
there  was  little  belief,”  If  he  had  not  appeared  on
eartli,  could  men  have  been  saved  in  the  sense  under-
stood by  the  Church  ?”  “ Those  who  lived  before  his

appearance  on  earth  are  equally  saved  with  those  who
since  then  h.ave  not  heard  and  never  will  hear  of  him.”
“ The  men  who  preceded  Christ,  were,  according  to
Scripture,  in  direct  communication  with  God — as  Abra-
ham, Moses,  &c.”  “ Those  W'ho  put  Christ  to  death  w'ere

not  in  communication  with  him,  since  they  disowmed
the  wmrd  of  God,  which  Christ  came  to  re-establish
amongst  them,”  “ All  men  who  exist  and  have  ap-
peared on  earth,  do  they  descend  from  one  man  alone
named  Adam,  and  one  woman  only  named  Eve  ?”
“ This  first  man  and  this  first  w'oman  are  but  a fiction.


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


87


an  allegory.  The  world  has  always  existed,  and  will
ever  exist,  just  as  it  is,  or  nearly  so.’' — Did  the
Virgin  Mary  really  remain  a virgin  after  bringing
forth  Christ  ?”  Yes,  since  he  was  begotten  without
the  aid  of  men.  She  is  not  in  the  same  condition
as  other  women.” — “ Had  Christ  any  brothers  through
the  medium  of  the  same  woman  ?”  He  did  not
want  for  brothers,  since  we  are  all  his  brothers  ; but
never  man  knew  the  Virgin,  She  had  too  high  an
idea  of  her  mission,  after  bringing  into  the  world  such
a son  of  God,  to  give  herself  away  to  a man.” — “Are
the  Jews  guilty  of  the  sin  of  Christ’s  death  ?”  “Mate-
riall}’-,  in  our  eyes,  yes  ; and,  spirituall)^,  he  was  doomed
to  be  crucified.  All  passed  in  his  mission  just  as
had  been  decided  upon.  They  did  but  execute  what
they  were  destined  to  execute.” — “Is  St.  Peter  the
representative  of  Christ  on  earth  ? Has  he  the  power
to  bind  and  unbind  men  ?”  “ One  being  only  has  the

power  to  punish  or  absolve — that  is,  God.” — “ Does  he
who  observes  the  ten  commandments  of  God  stand  in
need  of  submitting  to  others  ?”  “ He  who  observes

to  the  letter  the  Ten  Commandments  of  God  can  dis-
pense with  the  rest.” — “Jesus  Christ,  however,  con-
ferred on  the  Church  the  right  of  making  command-
ments ?”  “ Jesus  Christ  taught  the  sublimest  of  morals ;
and  gave  counsels,  which,  if  followed,  would  not  have
given  birth  to  all  the  calamities  of  which  we  have  been,
and  still  are,  victims ; but  men  have  perverted  his
morals,  his  precepts,  his  actions.” — “ He  did  not  teach
the  communion  as  it  is  practised  ; baptism,  as  it  is
administered,  and  all  the  other  ceremonies,  which  the
Church  practises  in  his  name?”  “There  is  very  little
of  him  in  what  the  Church  teaches  at  the  present
time.” — “The  Gospel,  however,  ought  to  be  sacred  in
this  respect?”  “The  Gospel  is  like  the  rest — what-
soever the  hand  of  man  touches  it  spoils.” — “ Was  the
birth  of  Christ  predicted,  or  not,  by  prophets  ?”  No.”
“The  prayers  which  are  addressed  to  Christ  as  God,


88


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


or  mediator  between  God  and  man,  are  they  more
agreeable  to  God  than  through  any  other  medium
“ In  the  first  place,  it  is  better  to  address  ourselves  to
God  than  to  his  saints  ; in  the  second  place,  w'hatsoever
is  addressed  to  Christ,  in  the  name  of  God,  reaches
God,  since  whatsoever  is  addressed  to  God,  no  matter
where  we  be,  is  known  to  him,  himself  being  every-
where, and  in  all.” — God,  then,  has  no  preference
for  any  particular  religion?”  ‘‘All  religions,  without
exception,  are  agreeable  to  him.” — “ Still  this  diversity
of  creeds,  which  bring  in  their  train  so  many  disorders
and  errors,  ought  not  to  exist  under  a God  who  should
wish  to  make  known  the  truth  ?”  “ Much  rather

should  you  say  that  something  else  ought  not  to  exist.
If  man  retrenched  all  that  displeases  him  in  the
creation,  and  all  that  he  cannot  account  for,  he  would
find  very  few  useful  things;  but  God  thinks  otherwise
and  we  cannot  be  judges  of  his  actions.”

I beg  to  observe  that  I am  not  responsible  for  the
repetition  of  the  questions  that  wdll  be  found  in  my
work  on  this  head.  It  was  M.  A — • — who  put  all
those  mentioned  at  this  sitting  ; and  it  must  be  granted
that  Adele  answers  them  quite  logically.  The  defini-
tion she  gives  us  of  the  nature  of  Christ  and  his  pro-
perties is  unexceptionable.  Though  matter  has  some
difficulty  in  admitting  it,  it  would  account  for  the  state
we  name  the  ecstatico  state  in  which  he  lived.

This  sitting  merits  the  attention  of  studious  men.

M.  A appreciates  the  powerful  lucidity  of  Ad’de

without  accepting  all  her  definitions,  and  finds  her  very
consistent  in  her  answers.  I make  the  observation  to
this  gentleman,  that  if  it  be  impossible  for  history  to
prove,  documents  in  hand,  the  period  of  the  appearance
of  Christ  upon  earth,  he  might  very  w^ell  have  preceded
the  pretended  prophets  who  announced  his  appearance,
and  would  give  ground  for  Adze’s  reply  on  this  point.
But  it  remains  for  us  to  find  out  how  a material  being
should  be  engendered  without  the  participation  of  an-


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


89


other  material  being?  To  enter  upon  the  subject  we
will  observe,  that  if  there  was  a first  material  man  he
was  born  without  the  assistance  of  his  species,  and  still
more  miraculously  than  Christ,  who  was  fecundated  in
the  bosom  of  a woman  to  imbibe  there  all  the  juices
necessary  to  form  the  material  tissues.  So,  then,  what
God  may  have  once  done,  he  could  do  again  ; what
even  he  may  not  hitherto  have  done  he  can  do  w'hen-
ever  he  pleases ! We  have  seen  in  the  first  volume,
from  the  explanation  given  us  by  Binet  of  the  act  of
procreation,  that  when  a Newton,  a Voltaire,  a Napo-
leon, or  any  other  superior  genius,  is  to  appear  in  the
world,  God  entrusts  the  care  of  his  introduction  into
the  organs  of  the  woman  to  angelic  spirits,  who  strip
the  material  seed  (which  serves  as  an  envelope  to  the
spirit  becoming  incarnate)  of  all  the  material  particles
that  could  disturb  the  ascension  of  ideas,  and  the  ac-
complishment of  the  great  things  which  these  spirits
are  destined  to  promote.  Is  there  not  a certain  affinity
between  this  definition  and  that  of  the  incarnation  of
Christ,  the  latter  having  a far  superior  mission  to  fulfil
to  that  of  Newton,  Voltaire,  or  Napoleon;  being  about
to  be  the  direct  intermediate  between  the  word  of  God
and  the  heart  of  men,  between  heaven  and  earth,  to
live  in  a continual  ecstacy,  work  miracles,  which  matter
approaches  through  magnetism,  but  which  it  cannot
produce  in  all  their  force  and  splendour  ? It  is,  there-
fore, matter  only  that  paralyses  us  in  this  property
which  we  find  more  perfect  in  magnetic  ecstasy,  wherein
cures,  and  the  most  miraculous  things  are  produced,
because  the  soul  is  less  dependent  on  matter,  a property
which  we  find  divine,  through  the  aid  of  prayer,  wherein
all  men  then  are  direct  ministers  of  God.  We,  there-
fore, naturally  acknowledge: — 1.  That  if  we  perform
not  miracles,  it  is  because  matter  is  opposed  to  this.
2.  That  all  spirits  being  created  from  all  eternity,  with
the  same  faculties,  the  same  number  of  thoughts,  if
they  be  not  all  equal  in  genius  on  earth,  the  fault  lies


90


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


with  matter.  3.  That  this  inequality  presents  itself
from  the  cradle.  Therefore,  the  germ  must  have  been
impaired  in  its  course,  or  by  long  abode  in  the  being
from  which  it  shoots.  It  is  more  probable  that  its
defect  lies  in  the  germ,  since  Binet  tells  us  that  angelic
spirits  are  destined  to  purify  it  at  the  moment  of  its
introduction.  If  it  be  thus,  wherefore  should  not  God,
desiring  to  form  a man  more  perfect  than  the  rest,
deposit  direct  in  the  bosom  of  a woman  (of  a very  pure
material  nature),  a spirit,  without  having  recourse  to
the  assistance  of  a second  being,  which,  in  such  a cir-
cumstance, performs  pretty  closely  the  functions  of  a
machine,  by  depositing  there  an  object  which  it  has
received  elsewhere.  The  woman  performs  a contrary
office — she  supplies  this  spirit  with  the  material  dress.
Had  God  dispensed  with  her  assistance,  he  would  have
transgressed  the  laws  that  rule  nature.  I see  no  trans-
gression in  freeing  the  spirit  from  this  law  of  cohabi-
tation, which  serves,  as  we  have  seen,  only  to  impair
the  germ  in  the  impure  deposit  wherein  it  is  obliged  to
sojourn,  without  any  utility  to  itself.  I see  nothing
more  incredible  in  the  birth  of  Christ  than  in  the
creation  of  the  first  man  ; and  what  I have  just  said,
proves  the  almost  possibility  of  cabalistical,  and  even
Catholic  assertions  ! But  it  is  far  from  my  intention  to
conclude  that  such  is  the  case.

122.  The  pastor  Rostan,  of  whom  mention  is  made
in  the  preceding  sitting,  after  the  conversion  of  the
Abbe  A , desired  to  obtain  in  his  turn  an  appari-

tion. He  asked  for  a person  unknown  to  him,  whose
name  had  been  given  him: — but  a mistake  had  been
made  in  handing  over  to  him  the  name,  hence  a person
presented  himself,  whose  description  we  took,  but  whom
we  could  not  recognise  ; such,  at  least,  is  the  version  of
this  gentleman,  and  I do  not  imagine  that  he  wished  to
impose  on  me.  I proposed  to  him  a second  sitting,
seeing,  above  all,  that  he  clings  to  asking  for  a person
wholly  unknown  to  him,  so  influenced  had  he  been  by


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


91


the  arguments  of  M.  Hebert.  lie  then  requested  his
maid  servant  to  give  him  the  name  of  one  of  her
acquaintances,  who  had  been  dead  scvme  time  ; he  came
with  this  name,  and  asked  for  Je'annette  Jex.  Adele
replied  :— ‘a  see  a woman  who  is,  not  tall;  she  may  be
rom  thirty  to  forty  years  of  age;  if  she  is  not  hump-
backed she  must  be  bent  a gofjd  deal,  for  she  has  a very
^kward  deportment.  I ca  n^t  make  her  turn  round.
Her  hair  IS  of  a brown  colour,  approaching  a red;  she
as  small  grey  eyes  and  a large  nose.  She  is  not  good
ooking ; she  has  a long^  chin,  a receding  mouth,  and
t im  lips.  Her  dress  is  'that  of  a countrywoman.  I see
er  in  a cap,  with  two  flat  bands  rounded  over  the  ear.
S e must  have  sufferf^d  from  a determination  of  blood
to  the  head,  and  she  was  troubled  with  pains  in  the
stomach.  I see  a swelling  on  the  lower  part  of  her
body,  on  the  left,  side,  and  a s ort  of  tumour  on  her
bosom.  She  wa.-j  ill  a long  time.

M.  Rostan  presented  the  wri  tten  description  of  his
maid  servant,  'and  returned  it  to  me  after  adding  thereto
his  signature  and  the  following  ( ,bservations

This  is  true  as  regards  the  statu  re,  age,  dress,  deportment,
malady,  and  the  deformity.

(Signed)  “ J.  J.  Rostan.”

This  gentleman  went  and  upon  M.  H , ac-
companied by  M.  A , to  ' te.ll  him  that  he  was  con-

vmced,  and  could  not  doubt  f e truth  of  this  apparition.

j replied  : — It  is  ^ ot  thus  that  I should  pre-

tend to  make  an  experimf  _.nt;  • your  maid  servant  gave
you  the  name  of  this  wo'  mrixi,  it  suffices  her  being  in
your  service  for  the  clairv  oyante  to  see  in  her  thought.^^
M.  A observed  to  the  clairvoyante  had

never  seen  this  gentlem  gj,  ^ qj.  fljg  servant ; that  she  had
had  no  correspondence  ^ one;  that  she  had  been

unable  to  tell  him  th  gf  father,  which  he

caused  to  be  asked  o^/fljg  j leceased  brother.  This  name,
and  many  other  thin  gs  whi  ch  she  answers  not,  are,  how-


92


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


ever,  in  the  thought.  If  a name  pronounced  be  suffi-
cient to  create  a speaking,  gesticulating  image,  answering
questions  that  have  no  material  solution,  representing
maladies  very  often  unknown  to  all,  deformities  that
have  been  seen  by  none  of  the  persons  present,  to  obtain
counsels,  find  out  hida’en  things,  why,  then,  in  faith,
you  present  to  me  a mu'ch  greater  difficulty  than  that
of  admitting  that  the  soul  .can  come  to  a clairvoyant,  as
we  cause  to  appear  to  thetu  every  day  material  places
which  are  at  very  great  distai.^ces.  Then,  tell  me  how
you  would  go  to  work  to  believ  e ? I would  give  a name
to  a person,  who  should  traniL'init  it  to  half  a score
more,  from  mouth  to  mouth,  and  the  last  one  only
should  ask  for  the  apparition.  "N^ffiat  you  therein  pro-
pose is  the  same  thing.  It  is  not'  because  this  name
shall  have  passed  through  half  a score  mouths  that  the
clairvoyante  will  lose  the  trace  of  it;  .and,  if  the  person
who  shall  have  given  the  name  recognises  the  appari-
tion as  true,  you  will  saiy  what  you  say  of  all  those  who
confess  to  you  that  they  are  convinced — you  will  say
that  they  are  simpleton;?.

I should  advise  this  gentleman  to  say  at  once : — I
believe  not  in  the  existence  of  the  soul;  ^tis  sooner
done.  As  a chemist,  1 admit  the  life  of  aggregation,
but  I refuse  its  individuality,  for  the  reason  that  I can
spread  out  or  divide  the  tdements  into  myriads  of  parts,
and  collect  them  into  one  and  the  same  essence.  I will
ask  chemistry,  in  my  t urn  . whether,  because  it  is  easy
for  me  to  collect  in  a bag  mi.llions  of  grains  and  separate
them  individually,  to  form  fi  gures  and  numbers  ad  in-
finitum with  their  assistance,  i can  snatch  from  them  or
deny  them  their  life  individui  dised  in  each  of  them  ?
Whether,  for  instance,  because  I should  have  the  pre-
tension to  take  them  from  a multitude  of  different
species,  and  make  them  one  »;omp  act  mass,  from  which
I would  draw  a juice  or  diffe  rent  j uices,  and  having  no
affinity  with  the  nature  of  t'ne  spec  ies  which  they  were
each  called  upon  to  propag  ate ; wht'ther  I am  right  in


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


93


thinking  that  the  multitudes  of  essences  composing
them,  because  I have  united  them,  will  not  separate
hereafter,  to  return  to  their  primitive  individuality,
without  mingling  and  losing  in  aught  their  property,
and  one  day  again  compose  the  same  grain  that  I have
pounded  ? If  you  answer  in  the  negative.  Monsieur
Chemist,  you  will  condemn  yourself;  for,  if  you  com-
promise the  forms  and  essences  in  the  vast  laboratory
of  nature,  I know  not  how  you  will  maintain  the  pro-
creation of  each  species  by  the  laws  of  affinity  and
attraction,  these  two  great  intelligent  creators  that  know,
so  fondly,  how  to  find  and  join  each  other  again,  to
separate  and  still  rejoin  for  an  eternity,  without  having
the  power  to  annihilate  themselves.  You  hear  ! Ah !
savans,  you  wish  to  explain  the  possible  by  the  impos-
sible ; you  wish  not  to  refuse  a sort  of  intelligence  to
the  flower,  the  mineral,  to  gas,  to  ethers,  and  you  would
refuse  it  to  man,  or,  at  least,  if  you  admit  it,  you  do  so
only  momentarily;  you  annihilate  the  intelligence  we
term  soul,  to  the  profit  of  the  mass,  though  you  know
that  the  mass  is  but  the  assemblage  of  the  infinity  of
individualities.  What  ! I shall  hear  you  maintain  to
me  that  such  a colour  or  shade  of  colour  cannot  blend
with  a different  colour,  that  it  will  come  to  decorate  this
petal  of  a flower,  without  ever  being  deceived  ? — re-
generate such  form  without  ever  changing  it  ? This
flower  and  this  form  will  restore  to  space  the  particles
of  which  they  have  been  but  an  aggregation.  These
particles  can  never  be  annihilated,  according  to  your
physical  notions,  and  can  never  re-aggregate  to  create
other  forms.  Thus  the  violet  will  be  ever  such ; the
rose  in  like  manner,  in  the  same  corner  of  the  earth,  in
the  same  pot;  the  molecules  and  the  aroma  composing
these  flowers  will  be  individualised  to  eternit)’^,  that  is
to  say  that  the  violet  will  not  be  formed  of  the  particles
of  the  rose,  because  each  grain  has  its  essences  of
attraction,  and  Nature,  to  millions  and  millions  of  com-
binations, in  no  wise  mixing  them,  will  ever  restore  to


94


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


the  attraction  of  the  grain  the  particles  belonging  to  it.
What ! I shall  see  this  with  my  eyes  every  year ; all  my
life ; and  you  would  deprive  my  species  of  this  indi-
vidualised immortality.  What ! it  shall  not  be  possible
for  my  soul  to  communicate  with  its  species,  as  this
flower  communicates  with  the  invisible  colours  which
are  soon  to  decorate  it ! What ! this  law  of  attraction,
of  universal  individuality  of  all  the  particles  of  the  crea-
tion, exists  for  all,  excepting  for  me  ! Come,  come,
gentlemen  chemists,  you  take  phlegm  for  spirit,  corrup-
tion for  a matrass ; leave  for  a moment  your  distillations
and  your  cohobations,  convey  your  eyes  to  heaven,  with
your  hand  on  your  heart ; pray  the  great  distiller  of  life
and  light  to  enlighten  you  on  this  question,  meditate
on  the  phenomena  of  somnambulism,  and  you  will  no
longer  believe  that  you  are  only  mere  clods  without  life
and  hope !

I still  thank  you  for  your  kindness  in  conceding  us
such  an  album  of  images  ineffaceable  and  full  of  life  ; in
our  first  volume  we  ventured  to  propound  that  we  must
have  within  us  a sort  of  living  panorama  of  all  that  we
could  have  seen  or  known  in  the  course  of  our  existence.
We  confined  ourselves  to  this,  and  did  not  think  that
you  would  be  so  well  prepared  to  admit  a proposition
which  appears  at  first  sight  so  incredible ; you  who  refuse
to  admit  the  soul,  a thing,  however,  very  admissible.
No  doubt  it  is  because  I expatiated  less  on  the  first
proposition  than  on  the  second  one  that  you  return  to
it  now.  Well ! I am  more  generous  than  you  : I grant
you  that  a clairvoyant  may  see  this  impression  of  living
images,  or  at  least  appearing  such ; but  I will  ask  you
in  my  turn  how  it  is  possible  to  have  in  one’s-self  the
impression  of  images  of  things  or  objects,  one  has  never
seen  and  never  heard  of?  You  will  say  that  it  is  by  a
sympathetic  thread,  that  from  body  to  body  the  clair-
voyant communicates  to  the  object.  In  the  sitting
about  to  follow  you  will  perceive  that  you  are  wrong ;
for  the  person  appearing  died  in  1578.  No  being  on


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


95


earth  could  have  known  him,  consequently  the  sympa-
thetic thread  is  destroyed.  Since  you  do  not  admit  it,
you  concentrate  it  merely  in  this  material  existence.
How  will  you  account  for  such  a person  being  seen  ?
That  is  beyond  your  proposition.  There  are  more  than
ten  persons  forming  the  chain  of  1848  back  to  1578;
you  may,  if  you  please,  assure  yourselves  of  the  descrip-
tion, whether  as  regards  the  person  or  dress.  As  for
me  I have  no  need  of  these  proofs.  Had  you  read
those  which  I present  in  this  second  volume  you  would
not  thus  venture  to  compromise  your  reputation  as
savans.  You  must  be  aware,  however,  that  I could
not  have  known  M.  Swedenborg,  Father  Lauriot,
and  many  others  mentioned  in  this  work,  who  came
unasked  for,  and  declared  themselves  either  friends  or
relatives  of  the  persons  appearing,  and  wholly  unknown
to  those  who  asked  for  the  apparition.  You  perceive
it ; ^tis  an  infinite  maze,  that  requires  to  be  studied,  and
I can  assure  you  that  I will  tell  you  much  more  about  it
in  the  fore-mentioned  work.  In  this  I content  myself
with  establishing  facts  which  shall  serve  me  as  materials
for  the  other.  Oh  ! then  you  will  see  that  we  shall  be
able  to  understand  one  another,  especially  by  leaving  to
CcBsar  the  things  that  are  Cmsar’s.  Now  only,  as  a
guide  to  you,  remember  that  the  clairvoyant  can  spi-
ritually see  men,  places,  and  actions  passed  ages  ago,
that  are  in  no  human  living  memory ; that  he  can  also
see  places  and  actions  that  will  happen  but  in  the
course  of  ages,  and  this  is  still  less  in  the  memory  of
any  one  !

You  have  written,  and  all  magnetisers  have  made
these  experiments,  and  still  make  them  every  day.  If
these  things  exist,  be  so  kind  to  this  soul,  this  image  of
the  Divinity,  as  to  admit  of  its  being  one  of  these  things,
and  you  will  believe  in  its  individuality  as  in  that  of  all
these  things.  It  will  not  be  more  difficult  for  the  clair-
voyant to  perceive  than  the  action  which  it  is  to  perform
in  a century  or  two.  You  understand,  the  action  is  the-


96


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


effect,  the  soul  the  cause,  in  simple  physics.  Good
faith,  chemists;  I know  your  sensitive  part — you  did
not  write  this  book.

123.  M.  Lemoine,  the  magnetiser,  desires  to  enter
into  communication  (through  the  medium  of  Adele)
with  a spirit  that  used  to  be  engaged  in  astronomical
pursuits.  He  begs  of  me  to  ask  for  M.  Antoine  Mizaud,
the  author  of  several  works  treating  on  this  science,  and
who  died  in  1578.  AdMe  says  that  she  perceives  a man
about  seventy-five  years  of  age.  His  hair  is  grey.  He
wears  a dark  brown  great  coat  coming  down  to  his  legs,
with  black  velvet  cuffs  to  his  sleeves ; large  buttons ;
white  breeches  made  of  stuff  striped  as  dimity  used  to
be;  white  ribbed  stockings,  sharp  pointed  shoes  with
buckles  ; good  broad  countenance,  eyes  hollow  and
small ; large  nose,  low  forehead,  face  wrinkled,  though
pretty  full  ; air  cheerful,  &c.,  &c. — “ Ask  him  if  he
still  pursues  the  study  of  astronomy  and  meteorology.”
“ It  is  his  predominant  passion.” — “ Can  he  give  me
any  information  on  this  head  ?”  “ That  depends.” —

“ Does  he  believe  it  possible  to  foresee  and  predict  the
changes  of  weather,  their  influence  on  the  earth  and  the
harvests  ?”  ‘‘  It  may  be  : but  on  earth  he  had  not

arrived  at  the  degree  of  knowledge  necessary  for  such
results.” — “ Could  he  answer  a few  questions  M.
Lemoine  would  wish  to  put  to  him  on  this  subject  ?”

He  will  answer  what  God  permits,  because  there  are
limits.” — “ Could  he  tell  whether  there  are  any  elemen-
tary spirits  ?”  “ All  the  elements  are  penetrated  with

spirits — are  but  a compound  of  spirits.” — “ That  is  not
what  I desire  to  know ; the  cabalists  pretend  that  these
elements  are  inhabited  by  spirits  bearing  the  human
form,  which  they  name  elementary  spirits,  and  which
unite  themselves  to  men  according  to  the  desire  of  the
latter  ?”  “ This  gentleman  tells  me  that  whatsoever

exists  materially,  exists  spiritually.  Thus  in  heaven  are
found  air,  fire,  earth,  and  water  as  here  below ; the
spirits  disengaged  from  matter  that  desire  to  inhabit  the


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.  97

elements  can  do  so  according  to  their  affection.  He
knows  no  other  spirits  but  these  in  the  human  form.
He  does  not  busy  himself  with  caballism.’^  ‘’You  are
one  of  the  oldest  spirits  inhabiting  the  spiritual  world
we  have  hitherto  asked  for ; have  you  noticed  this
length  of  time,  and  do  you  think  there  are  any  spirits  that
reappear  on  earth  ?”  This  gentleman  bursts  into  a
laugh  and  replies  that  where  one  is  comfortable,  there  is
no  wish  to  change  quarters;  that  he  has  had  no  time  to
grow  weary,  and  that  we  come  but  once  upon  eartli.
When  in  heaven  we  are  there  to  eternity,  &c.,  &c.

I beg  those  persons  who  may  be  enabled  to  assure
themselves  of  the  exactitude  of  the  description  given
by  Adele  to  do  so  for  their  own  sake.  This  apparition^
of  itself,  destroys  the  objection  of  communication  of
thoughts.

124.  General  de  Wagner,  a Prussian,  and  a learned
magnetiser,  desires  the  apparition  of  Marie-Helene
Wagner,  his  wife,  and  best  somnambulist,  who  died
some  years  ago.  Adele  says  that  she  perceives  a
woman,  from  forty-six  to  fifty  years  of  age,  not  very
tall,  having  auburn  hair,  dark  blue  eyes  (this  gentleman
says  that  they  were  light  blue) ; a very  expressive  and
lively  look,  a fine  smooth  forehead,  like  that  of  a
woman  of  thirty ; nose  well  formed,  but  rather  large ;
slight  flush  on  her  cheeks,  proceeding  from  her  illness ;
pale  complexion,  dimpled  chin,  thin  breast,  but  de-
veloped ; broad  shoulders,  small,  well-formed  hands,
beautiful  nails ; the  state  of  her  blood  was  the  chief
cause  of  her  illness;  she  sulfered  from  violent  palpi-
tations of  the  heart  (she  had  an  aneurism)  ; her
stomach  was  also  weak.  She  must  have  experienced
an  uneasiness  in  the  lower  part  of  the  body,  a heaviness
in  the  matrix,  the  ligaments  of  which  were  relaxed  on
one  side,  and  contracted  on  the  other;  she  must  have
suffered  from  the  stitch  in  her  left  side ; the  blood
flew  up  to  her  throat  and  head ; she  must  have  expe-
rienced fainting  fits,  syncopes.  She  was  weak  on  her


98


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


legs ; for  I see  her  seated ; she  also  experienced  a las-
situde in  the  arms ; she  was  assuredly  good,  frank,
and,  above  all,  endued  with  great  fortitude,  more  ready
to  pity  others  than  herself.”

The  General  inscribes  these  words  at  the  foot  of  the
testimonial —

“Very  exact.”  “ General  db  Wagner,

“ 39,  Rue  de  Crenelle,  Saint-Germain.”

M.  Gilot  L’Etang,  a wealthy  planter  of  the  Isle  of
Bourbon,  a magnetiser  also,  having  accompanied  his
friend  the  General,  asks,  in  his  turn,  for  Fran9oise
Grayelle.  Adele  says  : — “ I see  a woman,  older  than
the  last  one,  with  grey  hair  (it  was  white),  middling
size  (she  passed  as  tall)  ; she  is  thin,  and  has  black
eyes,  that  look  hollow,  on  account  of  the  thinness  of
her  face ; nose  pretty  long,  chin  long,  hands  thin,  back
rather  crooked ; she,  assuredly,  was  subject  to  fits  of
passion  that  were  soon  over ; her  movements  are  still
lively.  She  suffered  in  her  chest,  and  had  a dry
cough ; she  must  have  been  very  much  oppressed  in
her  last  moments — she  had  great  difficulty  in  digesting
what  she  took;  she  suffered  in  the  back — this  pain
reached  up  to  her  neck;  she  also  experienced  a pain
in  the  right  leg.  She  was  a very  religious  woman  ; her
being  so  tendered  to  make  her  calmly  bear  her  suffer-
ings. She  was,  also,  a good  woman,  but  not  very
communicative  out  of  her  own  circle  of  friends.  Her
physiognomy  wears  an  air  of  marked  dejectedness  ?” —

Whence  proceeds  the  pain  of  which  you  speak  ?”

From  a fall.” — That  is  true ; she  put  her  hip  out  of
joint,  and  suffered  much  from  this  accident. — “ Did  she
take  snuff  ?”  Adele  immediately  takes  a pinch  of  snuff
offered  her  by  this  lady.  The  gentleman  says  that  this
lady,  who  was  his  grandmother,  merely  inhaled  the
smell  of  snuff. — “ What  fruits  was  she,  above  all,  fond
of?”  “Peaches,  strawberries,  and  the  quince.”  “That
is  very  true.” — “ What  odour  did  she  prefer  breathing  ?”


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


99


The  jasmine.”  It  is  true  that  she  had  one  at  the
foot  of  her  window,  which  she  tended  carefully,  and
with  pleasure.” — “But  there  was  another  odour  that
she  was  fond  of  ?”  The  lady  makes  no  answer.”
— The  gentleman  says  that  it  was  that  of  the  citron,
which  she  was  constantly  scraping  in  her  illness.
Adele  exclaims,  when  I put  to  her  the  question,  “ I
did,  indeed,  see  her  with  an  orange  in  her  hand,  and
not  a citron.”  The  gentleman  says,  “ Possibly  she
prefers  now  the  smell  of  the  orange.  Will  you  be  so
kind  as  to  ask  her  whether  she  has  not  any  recom-
mendation to  make  her  grandson  ?”  “ Let  him  observe
moderation  in  an  enterprise  he  is  about  to  engage  in,  and
abstain  from  obliging  a gentleman  who  solicits,  or  will
solicit  him.”

This  gentleman  thus  signs  the  sitting : —

“ The  whole  is  conformable  to  the  truth.”

“ Gilot  L’Etang,

“ Quai  de  la  Tournelle,  43.”

I forgot  to  mention,  at  the  sitting  of  General  Wagner,
that  he  begged  his  wife  (an  ex-somnambulist,  as  we
have  seen)  to  visit  him,  and  acquaint  him  with  a few
remedies  for  his  health  ; what  she  prescribed  for  him
was  precisely  what  he  was  then  taking,  and  what  she
had  already  pointed  out  to  him  when  on  earth.  Adble,
at  this  moment,  appeared  much  astonished,  exclaiming,
“ Here  is  a droll  fact.  I see  this  woman,  of  ordinary
size,  gradually  entering  her  husband’s  body ! I lose
sight  of  her,  find  her  again,  and  then  lose  her  again.
How  can  it  be — since  she  appears  to  me  as  big  as  he —
that  she  can  thus  dissolve  herself,  shall  I say,  in  his
breast — and  in  still  less  too  ? Oh,  my  God  ! how
great  art  thou,  and  insignificant  are  we  to  comprehend
such  miracles !”  We  have  no  time  to  discuss  here
these  phenomena  which  theology  remarkably  well
treated  of  in  former  times,  and  the  solutions  which
it  has  given  us,  in  this  respect;  solutions  that  have


100


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


not  been  accepted  for  want  of  proofs ; magnetism  is
destined  to  supply  them,  and  to  revivify  many  beliefs
w'hich  have  passed  for  so  many  follies.  We  will  treat
of  this  article  in  the  work  that  will  form  a sequel  to
and  the  complement  of  this.  I will  observe  that,  in  the
two  foregoing  sittings,  there  is  wherewith  to  puzzle
the  detractors  of  these  apparitions.  Let  them  be  read
over  again,  meditated  upon,  and  the  conclusion  come
to  will  be  that  the  communication  of  thoughts  stands
for  nought  in  them,  from  the  few  errors  which  ought
not  to  exist  in  them,  and  which  I have  taken  care
to  mention,  with  exactitude,  in  order  to  disburthen  my
conscience  from  all  accusation  of  partiality,  and  prove  to
men  that  I seek  the  truth  with  all  the  strength  of  my
soul,  and  will  combat  error  with  the  like  devotedness.

125.  Colonel  Roger,  having  read  the  “Secrets”  and
noticed  in  them  an  article  respecting  the  son  of  Louis
XVI.,  begs  me  to  ask  for  the  monarch  himself,  who
could  give  me  better  information  on  this  head  than  M.
Mallet  had  done.  Adele  says  that  she  perceives  a cor-
pulent young  man  of  handsome  physiognomy;  but  she
makes  the  observation  that  having  seen  his  portrait  she
can  but  give  such  a description  as  every  one  is  acquainted
with ; only  she  says  that  she  sees  him  in  a coat  without
any  decoration ; he  wears  a white  cravat,  and  his  hand
appears  to  her  small  and  well  made.  “ Ask  him  if  his
son  is  still  living  on  earth  ?”  He  replies ; “ Yes.”
— “ Does  he  know  where  he  is  ?”  “ He  does,  but  has

no  wish  to  say.  He  makes  the  observation  : With  your
republic,  did  you  find  him,  you  would  guillotine  him !”
“ ()bserve  to  him  that  under  our  republic  no  one  is
guillotined.”  “ Oh  ! says  he,  I have  no  wish  to  tell
you,  he  has  suffered  enough  as  it  is,  poor  child  ! He
weeps,”  says  Adele ; the  latter  shares  in  his  sensi-
bility.— “ How  did  he  escape  from  the  Temple  ?”  “ By
the  assistance  of  a man  wholly  devoted  to  him,  and  who
himself  suffered  a great  deal !” — “ Who  was  this  man  ?”
“He  won’t  name  him,  he  is  always  in  fear  of  com-
promising.”— Will  his  son  be  one  day  called  upon  to


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


101


reifin  over  France?”  “He  answers,  no;  there  is  a
sufficient  number  of  pretenders  without  him.” — “ Can
he  tell  us  any  more  about  him  ?”  “ No.” — “ Is  he  him-
self happy  ?”  “ Yes.” — “ Is  he  with  his  wife  ?”  “ No,

he  knows  her  too  well  now.”  “ Did  he  suffer  much
in  dying  ?”  He  did  not  suffer  a single  instant,  he  was
no  more  before  the  instrument  struck  him  !” — “ Still  he
displayed  much  courage,  he  even  wished  to  speak  ?”
“Yes;  but  he  fainted  away  on  the  block  and  felt
nothing!” — “What  did  he  wish  to  say  when  he  was
forbidden  to  speak  ?”  “ He  wished  to  make  his  con-

fession to  the  people,  for  he  was  a very  good  man ; he
was  by  no  means  culpable,  he  was  the  victim  of  in-
triguers; he  still  weeps.  I won’t  question  him  any
more.  I perceive  that  I recall  painful  things  to  him.
’T would  be  wrong  in  me  to  continue.”

Copy  given  of  this  sitting  to  Colonel  Roger,  the  7th
May,  1848.

126.  The  Viscount  D’Orsay,  President  of  the  Magne-
tological  Society,  an  enlightened  magnetiser,  in  no  wise
doubting  the  future  life  of  the  soul,  but  desirous  of
knowing  how  far  a clairvoyant  could  communicate  with
it,  begged  me  to  give  him  an  apparition-sitting  the  11th
May,  1848.

He  desires  that  Madame  Marie  Rose  Blanche  Boulen-
ger  should  be  asked  for.  Adele  says  that  she  perceives
a tall  woman  about  forty  years  of  age  (she  was  but
thirtv-five),  with  auburn  hair,  fine  forehead,  fine  black
eyes  with  long  lashes  and  of  a sweet  expression,  nose
aquiline  and  well  formed,  cheeks  slightly  coloured  with  a
rosy  tint,  mouth  small,  beautiful  white  skin,  very  dis-
tinguished air,  queenly  port;  sweet  look,  affable  and
severe  in  certain  circumstances;  small  well-formed  hand,
and  beautiful  nails.  She  must  have  suffered  from  the
heart,  and  also  experienced  a heaviness  in  the  lower
part  of  the  body ; she  was  very  courageous,  and  not
sufficiently  careful  of  her  health.  I think  she  died  of
an  ulcer  in  the  womb.

M.  D’Orsay  puts  the  following  questions:  “Is  she


102


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


happy  ?”  “ She  is  happy  like  all  virtuous  women.” —

“Does  she  think  of  and  take  an  interest  in  her  children?”
“ She  was  very  fond  of  her  children  whom  she  left
behind  her  with  regret,  especially  her  last  child  who  was
of  a very  tender  age.” — “ Is  she  satisfied  with  all  of
them?”  “Yes;  excepting  one  whom  she  is  unwilling
to  name ; she  says  that  her  son  knows  this  gentleman
very  well.” — “ Is*she  reunited  to  her  husband  ?”  “ That
is  to  say,  her  husband  is  reunited  to  her,  because  he
died  after  her;  they  are  together,  because  they  were
very  fond  of  each  other.  This  lady’s  complaint  must
have  been  the  cause  of  her  sitting  a good  deal,  for  I see
her  seated  in  an  arm-chair  covered  with  scarlet  velvet.
I see  beside  her  a little  boy  from  four  to  five  years  of  age,
with  curly  flaxen  hair ; she  was  very  fond  of  children,
she  tells  me  that  this  child  died  before  her;  his  name
was  Edward ; you  have  seen  him  at  times  at  her  house,
with  his  mother.  On  the  answer  of  ]\1.  D’Orsay  that
he  cannot  recollect  this  child,  it  is  told  him  that  he  will
do  so.  M.  D’Orsay  thus  signs  the  testimonial : —

“ I certify  that  the  above  details  are  perfectly  correct,  and
that  I was  greatly  astonished,  as  well  as  delighted,  to  find  once
more  in  this  description  all  the  reminiscences  left  me  of  my
mother,  who  died  thirty-three  years  ago.

“Viscount  D’Orsay,

“ Citd  Veron,  Montmartre.”

At  this  sitting  we  see  appear,  before  this  lady,  a child
that  died  more  than  thirty-three  years  ago,  and  this
child  even  now  does  not  look  above  four  or  five  years
old.  We  have  before  seen  that  children  dying  at  this
age  continued  growing — a law  to  which,  as  some  persons
will  say,  this  one  appears  not  to  have  been  subjected,
had  we  not  a declaration  of  the  same  kind  telling  us
that  children  dying  as  such  appear  to  each  other  as  full
grown  as  men,  and  that  the  latter  see  them  as  children
only  with  respect  to  their  afi'ection,  which  is,  to  be  fond
of  children.  The  law  that  prevails  over  all  the  laws  of
the  spiritual  world  seems  to  be  this — whatsoever  sur-


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


103


rounds  us  is  conformable  to  our  affection.  Thus,  if  this
lady  be  pleased  to  see  this  child,  a time  that  corre-
sponds with  a thousand  years  of  our  earth,  she  will  ever
see  it  at  such  age,  inasmuch  as  a more  advanced  age,
requiring  a more  fully  developed  form,  will  suit  her
less.  It  will  be  asked  if,  in  fact,  the  child  is  fall  grown
or  not  ? I will  answer ; It  is  of  the  form  and  size  of  all
spirits  ; but  the  spirit  that  sees  this  lady  enjoys  only
faculties  and  appearances  of  properties  which  the  child
had  at  this  age — properties  that  may  be  detached  from
him,  ad  infinitum^  and  may  satisfy  a whole  multitude,
without  aught  being  taken  away  from  his  personal
individuality,  as  the  flame  of  a taper  is  in  nought  dimi-
nished because  it  has  communicated  a hundred  or  a
thousand  particles  of  its  flame  to  a hundred  or  a thou-
sand other  tapers.

We  need  but  meditate  to  come  to  a conclusion;  in
combating  we  come  to  no  conclusion  !

127.  M.  Blesson,  a zealous  propagator  of  beliefs  in
spiritualism,  as  a pure  and  beneficent  magnetiser,
brought  to  my  house  one  of  his  friends,  to  whom  he
had  praised  up  Adele’s  lucidity  for  perceiving  and  con-
versing with  the  folks  of  the  other  life  (as  is  vulgarly
said).  This  gentleman  asked  for  his  mother.  Adele
sees  a woman  of  ordinary  size,  about  sixty  years  of  age
(this  gentleman  observes  that  his  mother  was  but  forty-
four  when  she  died).  I made  the  observation  to  Adele,
who  answers : “ Possibly  ; but  in  the  state  she  appears
to  me  I should  take  her  to  be  this  age.  I am  certain
that  it  is  the  gentleman’s  mother.  Doubtless  her
malady  pulled  her  down  very  much.”  This  gentleman
grants  that  such  may  be  the  case.  Adele  continues  :
“ I see  that  she  has  light,  even  grey,  hair;  a forehead
more  prominent  than  flat ; eyes  large,  and  very  dark,
but  not  black;  nose  rather  sharp;  and  a very  thin  face.
This  woman  was  very  mild  and  kind-hearted,  of  a lively
disposition,  but  good  and  frank.  She  has  a very  thin
hand,  even  a skinny  one.  She  breathes  with  difiiculty.


104


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


She  must  have  been  frequently  obliged  to  unfasten  her
dress,  wliich  I see  open  in  front ; she  suffered  princi-
pally from  a disease  of  the  heart.  Her  chest,  also,  was
out  of  order.  Ah  ! I see  a lentil  on  her  neck.”  Her
son  wishes  to  know  whether  she  is  happy  ? She  replies  ;
“ Yes  ; but  I shall  be  more  so  when  my  husband  has
rejoined  me.”  She  adds  that  she  was  very  fond  of  him.
Her  son  again  wishes  the  following  questions  to  be  put
to  her: — “Have  you  anything  to  announce  to  me  to
my  advantage  ? Do  any  misfortunes  threaten  me  ?”
“ No,”  replied  she,  “ my  son  is  as  happy  as  one  can
wish  to  be  on  earth  ; but  I strongly  enjoin  on  him  to
be  very  prudent,  or  some  misfortune  might  happen  to
him.” — “ Does  she  see  her  daughter  who  is  dead  ? Are
they  in  the  same  radius  ?”  “ No  j they  did  not  sym-

pathise too  much  with  each  other  on  earth  ; she  merely
sees  her  at  times.” — “ Does  she  see  her  son  Auguste
oftener ; he,  too,  is  dead  ?”  “ Yes  ; he  seldom  quits

her.  She  was  very  fond  of  him.” — “ Has  she  anything
to  say  to  her  son  Adolphe,  who  is  still  on  earth  ?”

He  has  no  fixed  position.  He  will  not  be  exempt
from  trouble,  but  eventually  he  will  be  very  happy.” —
“ And  her  other  son,  Victor,  what  does  she  think  of
him  ?”  “ He  would  not  have  been  in  his  present  posi-

tion had  he  gone  on  with  what  he  had  undertaken  ; but
he  will  succeed,  God  protects  him.”  This  lady,  before
disappearing,  recommends  her  son  present  to  take  good
care  of  himself.  The  gentleman  thus  acknowledges  the
exactitude  of  the  above  details : —

“ I certify  that  all  the  particulars  given  by  the  somnam-
bulist are  very  exact,  and  conformable  to  the  truth.

(Signed)  “ C.  Witt,

“ Paris,  this  22nd  May,  1848.”

Allow  me  an  observation  as  to  the  remarkable  mis-
take Adele  made  in  the  appreciation  of  this  lady^s  age,
according  to  her  son.  If  Adele  had  not  been  sincere,
she  would  have  gone  from  this  estimation,  but,  on  the
contrary,  she  answers  that  she  should  be  more  inclined


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


105


to  think  her  above  sixty  than  under  that  age.  This
gentleman’s  lady,  who  was  present  at  this  sitting,  makes
the  observation,  that  the  great  sufferings  this  person
has  endured  have  possibly  made  her  look  much  older;
that  her  son  is  unable  to  judge  of  this,  inasmuch  as  he
had  not  seen  her  for  a long  time  when  she  died.
This  simple  observation  destroys  all  idea  of  communi-
cation of  thoughts ! The  rest  is  perfectly  exact.  The
answers  made  by  this  lady  as  to  the  position  of  her
children,  still  on  earth,  prove  that  she  is  not  so  sepa-
rated from  them  as  might  be  supposed.  ..

At  the  same  sitting,  M.  Blesson  desires  the  appari-
tion of  his  grandfather.  Adele  says  that  she  perceives
a man  about  seventy  years  of  age.  A stout  man,  with
grey  hair,  very  open  forehead,  the  top  of  the  head  bald,
eyes  neither  large  nor  small.  By-the-by,  he  has  a
large  nose,  well  formed,  but  prominent  enough ; the
lower  lip  hangs  over  a little  : this  gives  his  mouth  the
appearance  of  jutting  out  instead  of  receding,  as  is  usual
at  such  an  age ; air  very  agreeable.  He  is  very  upright,
and  still  appears  very  nimble ; he  died  from  a rush  of
blood  to  the  throat.  He  was  surely  very  fond  of  walk-
ing, as  it  now  forms  his  delight.  He  was  very  partial
to  M.  Blesson,  and  has  dandled  him  many  a time  on
his  knees.  He  recommends  him  not  to  torment  him-
self, as  all  will  turn  out  better  than  he  thinks  for ; he
prays  to  God  for  him.  He  says  he  is  very  happy.
Surely  he  must  have  had  a habit  of  shaking  hands,  as
he  gives  me  his,  saying  that  he  has  business  to  attend
to.  He  still  thinks  of  his  daughter,  whom  he  was  very
fond  of,  and  who  was  very  good  to  him.  He  again  re-
commends his  grandson  to  make  himself  easy,  as  all  will
turn  out  well.

“Acknowledged  the  above  details  as  strictly  true  in  every
respect.  (Signed)  “ Blksson,

“ Entrepreneur  de  Peintures,  36,  Rue  aux  Ours,  Paris.”

Note. — M.  Witt  came  to  me  the  day  after  the  fore-
going sitting  to  tell  me  that  he  had  questioned  a person

I


106


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


who  had  nursed  his  mother  in  her  last  illness,  and  she
had  acknowledged  all  the  particulars  as  quite  exact,
particularly  those  concerning  the  unfastening  of  her
dress  in  front,  inasmuch  as  she  was  unable  to  bear  any
pressure  on  the  chest.  M.  Witt  had  not  seen  his
mother  for  eight  years  before  her  death;  he  could  not
be  aware  of  this  particularity,  which  is  no  proof  of  the
communication  of  thoughts.

128.  Madame  C asks  for  Madame  S.  B .

xVdele  says  that  she  perceives  an  old  lady,  with  grey
hair,  projecting  forehead,  eyebrows  pretty  thick,  fine,
large  eyes,  nose  ordinary,  mouth  well  made,  rather  small
than  large ; chin  well  formed,  a pretty  cut  figure,  slight
rosy  colour  on  the  cheek-bones,  small  well-made  hands,
middling  stature,  and  altogether  a lady-like  looking
woman.  She  was  lively  and  good  ; of  an  open  disposi-
tion, speaking  freely  her  mind,  and  sorry  for  it  the  mo-
ment after.  She  suffered  in  the  stomach,  and  from
palpitations  of  the  heart;  she  had  rheumatic  pains,  and
suffered  from  lowness  of  spirits.  She  was  long  ill,  and
supported  her  illness  with  fortitude,  told  no  one  the
full  amount  of  her  suffering,  took  consolation  in  reli-
gion, but  in  a religion  of  the  heart.  She  must  also
have  experienced  a sort  of  weight  in  the  lower  part  of
her  stomach.  I believe  she  died  of  a suffocation,  M^hich,
I think,  was  the  consequence  of  a neglected  cold.  I
see  that  her  lungs  are  choked  up — this  was  the  cause  of
her  difficulty  of  breathing,  especially  when  dying ; her
agony  was  a very  long  one.  Despite  her  great  suffer-
ings, she  has  an  air  of  sweetness  overspreading  her
countenance.  She  is  an  angel,  who  quitted  the  earth,
regretting  only  those  she  left  behind  her.  From  her
virtues  she  had  no  fear  of  death ; she  tells  me  that  she
is  your  mother.  She  must  have  had  a son  whom  she
dearly  loved  as  she  did  you.  She  is  happy,  and  desires
you  to  be  informed  that  you  have  passed  through  trials
that  will  never  be  renewed.  She  recommends  you  to
take  good  care  of  your  husband,  saying  that  he  is  a


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.  10/

worthy  man,  deserving  all  your  attention  ; she  adds
that  her  position,  happy  as  it  was  on  earth,  was  not
sufficiently  so  to  prevent  her  from  tormenting  herself
very  much,  and  that  she  was  not  truly  happy  till  she-
entered  the  world  of  spirits.

“ Acknowledged  all  the  above  details  as  very  exact,

(Signed)  " C.  C.”

Madame  C expresses  a wish  that  M.  F.  C.  should

he  asked  for.  Adele  perceives  a man,  less  aged  than
the  lady  who  just  appeared,  with  black  hair  mixed  with
grey — a fine,  tall  man,  forehead  open,  eyes  middling
size,  eye-bro^vs  thick,  and  standing  out  a little,  nose
ordinary,  but  pretty  large,  mouth  middling  size,  chin
round,  forming  a hollow  under  the  lower  lip,  agreeable
countenance,  short  neck,  broad-chested,  shoulders
rather  thick,  a good  round  belly,  fine  manly  air.  He
must  have  had  something  the  matter  with  his  right
leg;  he  apparently  died  of  apoplexy.  I discover  no
disease ; I only  see  the  blood  rushing  violently  to  the
heart,  which,  perhaps,  was  taken  for  an  aneurism*
He  was  badly  doctored,  it  was  but  a thick  blood  that
stood  in  need  of  being  purified — that’s  all.  He  has  a
fine  constitution.  He  was,  doubtless,  brave,  delicate,
loyal ; there  are  few  like  him.  lie  is  happy,  and  even
blesses  the  doctor  who  so  ill  understood  his  complaint.
He  would  not  have  committed  a base  action,  even  to
save  his  life;  however,  he  was  not  unliappy  on  earth.
He  sees  his  family,  with  whom  he  is  not,  at  all  times,  in-
asmuch as  he  was  and  still  is  fond  of  walking.  He  is  al-
ways thinking  of  those  he  left  behind,  and  still  preserves
for  them  all  his  affection, excepting  one  friend,  who  caused
him  much  sorrow  in  return  for  the  good  he  did  him.

“Acknowledged  the  above  details  as  very  exact,  leaving  to
the  clairvoyante  the  responsibility  of  her  opinion  as  to  the
malady  of  this  gentleman,  who  really  died  suddenly,  and  was
treated  by  the  physician  for  an  aneurism.

(Signed)  “ C.  C.

“This  28th  May,  1848.”


108


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


This  lady  desires,  out  of  family  considerations,  to
conceal  her  name,  making  no  objection,  however,  to
signing  for  me  the  testimonial,  and  affixing  thereto  her
address,  to  be  made  use  of  if  necessary.

129.  M.  Petiet  asks  for  M.  Jerome  Petiet.  Adele
sees  a young  man,  about  twenty-four  or  twenty- six
years  of  age  (he  was  thirty),  not  so  tall  as  his  brother
now  present.  Auburn  hair,  rather  long;  open  fore-
head, arched  eyebrow’s,  black,  and  rather  hollow’  eyes,
nose  rather  long,  pretty  well  formed ; complexion  fresh,
skin  very  white  and  delicate,  mouth  middling  size,
round,  dimpled  chin.  He  w^as  w’eak  in  the  chest;  he
would  have  been  strong  had  it  not  been  for  this.  He
wears  a large  grey  vest,  old-fashioned  buttons,  such  as
are  scarcely  ever  seen  now\  I don’t  think  they  are
brass  ones,  nor  of  the  same  stuff  as  the  vest.  They
don’t  look  to  me  very  bright ; his  pantaloons  are  of  a
dark  colour,  and  he  w’ears  low- quartered  shoes,  without
any  instep.  This  man  w’as  of  a stubborn  disposition,
selfish,  devoid  of  sensibility,  had  a sinister  look,  was
not  very  communicative,  devoid  of  candour,  and  having
but  little  affection  for  any  one.  His  death  was  natural,
though  sudden ; he  experienced  suffocation. — Adele
stops  her  breath  as  he  did,  and  coughs  as  he  did  ; she
says  that  “ he  must  have  had  moxas,  or  a plaster  ap-
plied to  his  back — and  this  accounts  for  the  sore  I see
there.  He  had  no  disease,  how’ever,  in  that  part ; the
spine  was  sound  ; those  who  applied  such  remedy  to
him  did  not  know  the  seat  of  the  disease ; his  carriage
is  bad,  back  round,  without  being  humped.”

M.  Petiet  finds  nothing  to  retrench  from  these  de-
tails, which  are  very  exact,  and  confirm  him  in  his  belief
that  the  application  of  this  plaster,  advised  by  a man,  a
stranger  to  medicine,  brought  on  his  brother’s  death,
which  was  almost  sudden.

“ Signed  the  testimonial  as  very  exact.

“ Petiet,

“ 19,  Rue  Neuve-Coqucnard.”


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


109


Note. — The  buttons  that  Adele  was  unable  to  define
were  in  metal,  of  a dirty  white  ground,  and  surrounded
by  a blue  circle.  In  this  apparition  is  a phenomenon
extraordinary  enough,  that  is  to  say,  Adele  experienced
the  same  kind  of  illness  as  this  man.  I was  obliged  to
disengage  her  by  passes ; she  sulfered  horribly.  What
answer  can  we  make  to  such  facts  ? unless  it  be  that  the
past,  present,  and  future,  are  only  conditions  of  being
with  matter ; only  a succession  of  different  states,  which
in  a particular  state  are  ever  represented  in  the  present,
and  this  would  confirm  (for  this  state  only)  the  belief  in
a creation  without  beginning  or  end — that  is  to  say,  an
actual,  momentaneous  one.  Stop  not  to  observe  what
precedes  and  what  follows  creation,  the  state  which  it
represents  to  you  is  for  you  whatsoever  is.  I shall  be
asked  whether  this  man  himself  suffered  at  this  moment
as  Ad^le  appeared  to  suffer?  I will  answer,  no.  He  is
in  the  world  of  causes,  wherein  harmony  reigns.  Had
AdMe  been  totally  disengaged  from  her  material  body,
the  latter  would  not  have  suffered ; it  is  only  the  sight
of  the  state  of  the  material  body  of  this  man  at  the  time
he  suffered,  that  awakens  in  Adele  sympathetic  effects
in  the  material  molecules,  and  produces  this  suffering,
the  impression  of  which  remained  on  the  spiritual  body
of  this  man.  We  have  already  said  that  it  was  possible
for  a clairvoyant  to  perceive  a deceased  being  at  any  age
of  his  life,  as  well  as  in  any  dress  he  may  have  worn  at
different  periods  of  his  life.  It  must  be  the  same  with
all  external  wounds  and  internal  diseases;  nothing  is
effaced ; they  are  so  many  impressions  left,  to  recall,  no
doubt,  to  the  individual  possessing  them  what  he  has
suffered  or  done  at  such  an  age,  and  to  facilitate  in  him
the  comparison  of  his  actual  state  with  his  prior  one,  and
this  must  ever  be  to  him  a source  of  happiness ; his
present  position  is  ever  preferable,  and  that  to  which  he
aspires,  as  an  eternal  progression,  must  surpass  all  the
rest.  Thus  how  many  persons  on  earth  are  there  who
feel  sick  at  the  sight  of  a sore,  or  the  letting  of  blood ;


110


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


how  many  sympathetic  etfects  are  there  that  are  com-
municated in  all  nervous  effects,  such  as  gaping,  laughter,
crying,  epilepsy,  convulsions ; how  many  persons  that
are  unable  to  follow  the  respiration  or  diction  of  another
person  without  stifling,  &c.,  &c.  I once  noticed  in
Ad^le  a fact  of  this  nature  which  I find  it  impossible  to
account  for.  She  was  consulted  by  an  asthmatical
person,  she  was  seized  with  sympathetic  fits  of  asthma,
and  in  a few  seconds  expectorated  great  quantities  of
thick  mucus  of  a yellowish  green,  with  the  same  efforts
and  as  often  as  the  patient.  Her  pocket-handkerchief
was  full  of  these  thick  humours  in  a few  minutes !
Adele  never  spits!  and  habitually  she  perceives  rather
than  feels  the  ailments  of  sick  persons,  although  she
has  the  two  properties  at  once.  I leave  medicine  to
explain  this  phenomena,  as  I shall  leave  many  others
to  psychology  and  physics.

130.  I 'ask  for  my  father  who  had  been  dead  two
months.  Adele  sees  him  as  she  knew  him  on  earth.  I
put  to  him  the  following  questions  : “ Well  1 you  who
dreaded  death  so  much,  are  you  satisfied  with  being
dead  ?”  “ What,  dead  ! who  told  you  that  I was  dead  ?”

He  feels  of  himself,  and  exclaims : Zounds  ! I am  as
much  alive  as  3'^ou.^’ — “ But  you  have  left  the  earth  ?”
“Zounds  1 that’s  true.  I didn’t  think  of  that.” — “Are
you  reunited  to  my  mother?  have  you  seen  her.”
“Yes,  I am  with  her.  Magnetism  did  me  good,  ’twas
that  that  drew  me  out  of  this.” — What  1 drew  you
out  of  this,  you  don’t  think  then  that  you  are  no
longer  amongst  us?”  “No  longer  amongst  you,  where
am  I,  then?” — “In  the  spiritual  world.”  “Zounds!

that’s  true:  but  I don’t  always  go .”  He  feels  of

his  stomach  and  says  to  AdMe  : “Something  must  be
done  for  this.”  The  latter  replies  : “ In  the  place  where
you  are  there  are  no  like  wants.”  “ How  stupid  I am ;
that’s  true.  I have  some  trouble  to  habituate  myself;  I
always  fancy  I am  on  earth.” — “What  do  you  think  of
the  contents  of  the  book  your  son  has  published  on  the


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


Ill


spiritual  world,  and  which  he  was  so  pleased  at  com-
municating to  you  to  console  you  and  give  you  hope  of
a better  world  }”  What  book,  pray  ? All  right ; I
remember:  it  is  the  truth.  When  is  he  coming  to  see
me?” — ^^You  know  that  he  is  still  upon  earth,  and
cannot  come  to  you  before  his  time.”  “ True,  I didn^t
give  that  a thought.  And  you,  pray  are  you  going  away
already  ?” — “ I am  not  going  away ; on  the  contrary,  it
was  I that  called  you  here.  Tell  me  how  you  pass  your
time?” — 1 admire  whatever  I see;  all  this  is  so  sur-  '
prising,  that  it  can  hardly  be  believed ; sometimes  I see  ;
myself  still  in  my  own  room ; then  I feel  and  see  that  I 1
am  no  longer  upon  earth ; it’s  enough  to  make  one  lose
his  wits.  However,  I no  longer  suffer,  and  feel  very  1
happy.”  Adfele  breaks  off  the  discourse,  observing  to
me  that  my  father  has  been  in  this  state  too  short  a
time  to  be  able  to  give  a good  account  of  it.

My  father  was  eighty  years  of  age  at  the  time  of  his
death.  Formerly  a captain  in  the  merchant  service,
habituated  to  an  active  life,  and  having  lived  sixty  years
with  seamen,  by  whom  he  was  generally  esteemed,  he
had  preserved  in  his  conversation  a few  terms  not  in
use  with  educated  persons.  Adele  says  that  she  heard
them.  What  will  no  less  astonish  those  who  read  these
curious  observations,  is  the  seeming  doubt,  the  uncer-
tainty he  preserves  as  to  his  present  state ; at  times  he
confounds  it  with  the  terrestrial  state,  and  this  sitting,
strange  as  it  may  appear,  fully  confirms  the  assertions
of  Swedenborg,  in  this  respect,  in  his  “ Treatise  on
Heaven  and  Hell,”  where  he  says : — “ Many  spirits
possessing  very  strong  earthly  affections  cannot,  on
their  arrival  in  the  spiritual  world,  believe  that  they  have
quitted  the  earth;  they  often  remain  a long  time  in  this
uncertainty.”  And  this  is  what  happens  to  my  father
on  this  occasion.  Oh,  men ! study  this  science,  and
reject  not  the  works  of  a great  ecstatic-prophet,  a pro-
found thinker,  as  a heap  of  reveries  or  hallucinations
valueless  to  science  and  by  no  means  conducive  to  the


112


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


happiness  of  mankind.  We  will  pass  on  to  another
apparition  of  a similar  kind  to  the  last  one,  presenting
in  another  way  the  same  solutions.

131.  M.  Blouet,  knowing  the  speciality  of  Adele  from
experiments  he  had  solicited  of  her  and  verified  by
other  clairvoyants  (in  his  capacity  as  a magnetiser),
came  one  day  to  impart  to  me  an  idea  that  had  just
come  into  his  head,  and  of  which  the  following  is  a
summary : — One  of  his  friends  possessed  a house  at
Beauvais,  in  which  lived  a woman  who  had,  it  was  said,
fifty  francs  {£2  Is.  8d.)  a-day  to  expend.  This  woman,
as  the  tale  goes,  did  not  expend  this  money,  but  every
day  put  by  two  louis  (£l  12s.),  which  she  took  care  to
procure  at  a money-changer’s.  She  died  forty  years
ago.  This  gentleman  purchased  the  house  she  lived
in,  ransacked  it,  and  found  nothing.  He  sold  the  pro-
perty to  a third  person,  reserving  to  himself  the  right  of
making  at  any  period  of  time,  researches  in  this  house,
guaranteeing,  however,  to  defray  all  expenses,  make
good  any  damage  done  to  the  premises,  and  reward  the
proprietor  with  an  equal  share  of  the  treasure.  This
gentleman  had  told  his  tale  to  M.  Blouet,  when  the
latter  entertained  the  idea  of  asking  for  the  said  deceased
woman,  and  endeavouring  to  obtain  information  on  this
head.  He  asked  his  friend  for  her  name,  I magnetised
Adele,  and  we  summoned  this  person.  Adele  saw  a tall
thin  woman,  about  sixty  years  of  age,  with  grey  hair,
large  nose,  watchful  air,  sharp  in  speech,  miserly,
common  and  maniacal.  She  was  in  bed  over  the  shop,
said  Adele.  I see  a large  rusty  key  in  her  hand  ; I
perceive  that  she  is  afraid  lest  her  gold  should  be  dis-
covered ; I ask  her  where  she  hid  it  ? She  replies  that
she  put  none  away.  She  must  have  been  troubled  with
an  asthma.  She  tells  me  that  she  had  three  cellars.”
Ad^le  tries  to  make  this  woman  speak  in  a more  straight-
forward manner ; she  cannot  succeed,  and  begs  us  to
inquire  whether  the  description  she  has  just  given  is
exact;  this  would  encourage  her  to  ask  the  woman  a


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


113


second  time.  M.  Blouet  having  no  knowledge  of  this
person,  took  away  with  him  the  written  description  to
send  it  to  his  friend.

Second  Sitting. — We  again  ask  for  the  woman
with  the  treasure,  though  we  did  not  as  yet  know
whether  it  was  really  she  who  presented  herself,  having
no  certain  information  on  this  point.  Adele  sees  her,
and  says  to  us: — “This  woman  has  preserved  her
earthly  affection — the  enjoyment  of  gold  ; avarice  has
not  quitted  her,  I shall  have  a hard  job  to  get  anything
out  of  her. — “Try  and  make  her  understand/^  said  I,

“ that  her  material  gold  is  no  longer  of  any  use  to  her,
she  may  have  as  much  of  it  as  she  likes  spiritually.^’

— “ She  makes  answer,”  said  AdMe,  “ that  she  is  well
aware  of  that.  But  when  she  returns  upon  earth,  how  is
she  to  live  ?” — “ She  thinks,  then,  of  returning  upon
earth  ?”  “ Yes,  she  is  the  first  person  I have  heard  make
this  observation ; she  has  not  left  the  earth,  she  is  ordi-  \
narily  in  her  cellar,  which  is  the  place  where  I see  her,  and
where  I suppose  she  has  hidden  her  treasure  ; she,  but  a
moment  ago,  said,  how  shall  I live  when  I return  upon
earth,  and  now  she  says  to  me  that  she  did  not  so  much
as  put  by  a couple  of  sous  a day.” — Then  takes  place
between  Adele  and  this  woman  a contradictory  dispute,
in  which  the  former  strives  to  entangle  her  in  order  to
snatch  from  her  her  secret,  but  all  the  clairvoyante’s
efforts  are  fruitless.  Adele  says  to  me : — “ This  money
must  surely  be  buried  at  the  bottom  of  the  lowest  cellar,
at  the  foot  of  the  wall ; there  must  be  in  that  spot  a
wooden  box,  under  a large  stone.  Let  me  be  put  in
correspondence  with  some  one  who  has  lived  in  the
house,  I shall  see  best  by  myself;  it  is  useless  trying  to
get  any  information  from  this  woman,  and  I won’t  speak
to  her  any  more;  she  listens  to  nothing,  she  wishes  to
conceal  from  me  her  thoughts,  and  treats  me  as  a thief.”

I make  the  observation  to  Adele  that  it  has  often  hap-
pened that  she  has  seen  places  at  a distance  without
being  acquainted  with  them ; that  she  may,  in  like  man-


114


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


ner,  try  and  find  out  this  house  and  these  cellars  } She
replies  : — “ I do  not  say  that  it  is  impossible  ; but  it
has  never  happened  to  me  to  see  places  without  being
in  communication  with  persons  who  are  acquainted  with
some  one  dwelling  in  those  places ; then,  when  the  per-
son who  is  in  communication  with  me  desires  to  render
perceptible  to  me  another  person,  whose  place  of  resi-
dence, I suppose,  he  is  ignorant  of,  I find  that  I have  a
starting  point  and  an  object.  I desire  the  fluid  of  the
person  at  a distance  to  come  and  join  that  of  the  per-
son whose  hand  is  in  mine ; an  effect  of  attraction  is
operated,  uniting  the  two  fluids  which  touched  each
other  formerly,  and  thereby  I obtain  a conductor  that
directs  me;  but  there  is  nothing  similar  to  this  with
this  woman,  who  is  no  longer  of  the  earth.”  Adele
appears  very  much  fatigued,  and  I rouse  her.

Third  Sitting. — M.  Blouet  gave  an  account  of  this
fresh  sitting  to  his  friend,  who  came  himself  to  the
house  a few  days  after,  and  assured  us  that,  from  the
information  he  had  obtained  as  to  this  woman,  Adele
had  given  a correct  description  of  her  as  well  as  of  the
place  where  she  used  to  go  to  bed,  and  the  three  cellars
which  still  exist.  I put  this  gentleman  in  correspondence
with  Adele,  who  told  him  the  spot  where  she  thought
the  treasure  would  be  found.  The  gentleman  acknow-
ledged that  the  particulars  relative  to  the  cellars  were
exact,  and  as  to  the  treasure  researches  only  could  prove
how  far  she  was  right.

Note. — A fortnight  after  the  above  sitting,  M.  Blouet
and  his  friend  searched  the  cellar  in  the  spot  pointed
out  by  Adele,  and  discovered,  three  feet  under  ground,
a large  stone,  which  they  had  much  difficulty  in  raising
even  a little.  M.  Blouet  slipped  his  hand  underneath,
and  felt  a sort  of  puddle;  this  discouraged  him.  They
gave  up  their  search.  Three  days  after  he  recounted
these  particulars  to  Adele,  who  declared  that  that  signi-
fied nothing,  as  she  had  seen  a treasure  there ; that  he
ought  to  have  raised  the  stone  and  continued  his  search.


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


115


Had  he  found  nothing,  the  treasure  must  have  been
removed  ; but  she  was  certain  that,  were  it  no  longer
there,  it  must  have  been  there.  He  went  after  his
friend.  They  raised  the  stone ; dug  to  the  depth  of  two
feet ; discovered  a bed  of  flint  stones  and  a good  deal  of
mud,  a consequence  of  the  infiltration  of  water  that  rose
to  this  height ; they  acquired  the  certainty  that  this
stone  had  been  cemented,  that  something  extraordinary
had  taken  place  here.  The  stone  was  of  granite,  two
feet  and  a half  long,  nearly  as  wide,  and  four  inches
thick.  They  thought  that  the  treasure  had  been  pre-
viously removed.  For  my  part,  I think  that  my  friend
was  very  wrong  not  to  raise  the  stone  higher ; and  to
leave  it  thus  for  some  days  at  the  mercy  of  strangers,
who,  assuredly,  would  not  hesitate,  considering  why  and
how  it  came  to  be  cemented  in  such  a place.  Had  the
treasure  been  previously  removed,  no  one  would  have
taken  the  trouble  to  replace  the  stone  in  the  same  state
and  cement  it  again.  My  friend  was  more  confident,
and  less  curious,  than  I.

At  these  three  sittings  we  have  arrived  at  proving  two
truths  : —

1.  That  a deceased  person  may  be  seen  by  the  mere
aid  of  his  name,  without  leaving  room  to  suspect  com-
munication of  thoughts,  which  cannot  exist  in  this
experiment  as  in  many  others  we  have  already  read,
for  M.  Blouet  and  his  friend  never  knew  this  woman;
they  cannot,  therefore,  represent  the  image  of  her.

2.  That  spirit  disengaged  from  matter  is  not,  for
that  reason,  disengaged  from  material  affections,  and
that  the  elevation  of  the  state  in  which  it  finds  itself  in
the  spiritual  world  depends  much  on  the  affection  it
had  on  earth  for  such  or  such  celestial  or  terrestrial
belief.  The  affection  only  constitutes  the  state  in  which
the  spirit  finds  itself.  If  you  are  under  the  empire  of  a
fixed  idea  (would  it  not  correspond  with  all  the  hea-
venly joys  which  w’e  figure  to  ourselves  in  the  world  of
spirits),  you  are  not  the  less  its  slave  for  a longer  or


116


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


shorter  period  of  time.  We  are  called,  we  acknowledge
it,  to  register  truths  which  it  would  cost  many  others
much  to  unveil ; but  as  we  have  not  hitherto  feared
ridicule,  we  will  say  all  we  know;  it  is  the  duty  of  every
man  who  loves  science  and  truth.  There  are  few
magnetisers,  engaged  in  treasure-finding,  who  have  not
experienced  very  great  deceptions,  which  can  be  occa-
sioned only  by  three  causes: — 1.  The  clairvoyant  may
be  too  weak  in  his  lucidity,  and  suffer  himself  to  be  in-
fluenced by  spiritual  images,  which  will  lead  him  into
error.  2.  He  may  still  see  the  treasure  in  the  spot
where  it  was  deposited,  though  it  may  have  been  re-
moved since  that  time.  It  must  be  the  same  with
treasures  as  with  objects  set  in  any  place,  and  whose
image  remains  in  the  same  place,  as  I have  said  in  my
first  volume.  This  fact  cannot  be  called  in  question;
I have  obtained  convincing  proofs  of  this,  and  here  is
one  of  them.  One  day  a somnambulist,  named  Victor
Dumez,  then  in  great  repute  at  Paris,  told  the  Abbe

M that  he  perceived  in  a certain  house  a hidden

treasure,  and  recommended  this  gentleman  to  purchase
the  house,  which  was  then  to  be  sold.  The  Abbe  paid
down  forty  thousand  francs  (about  :£l,666)  made  re-
searches on  the  spot  where  the  clairvoyant  assured  him
he  beheld  the  treasure,  but  found  nothing.  The  som-
nambulist was  so  convinced  of  what  he  saw,  that  he
proposed  being  at  half  the  expense  in  the  search.  The
gentleman,  encouraged  anew,  made  fresh  researches,
without  any  further  result.  One  day  he  came  to  my
house  to  consult  Adele  on  the  subject.  She  summoned
the  person  who  had  concealed  the  treasure,  and  learnt,
through  this  person,  that  he  had  withdrawn  it  before
his  death  ; that  it  was  useless  troubling  ourselves  about
it.  He  furnished  Adele  with  particulars  as  to  what  the
hidden  box  contained,  which  details  fully  corresponded
with  what  Victor  had  seen.  The  Abbe  was  now  enabled
to  make  sure  of  the  truth  of  this  assertion,  as  the  trea-
sure had  been  hidden  under  the  floor.  All  was  raised.


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


117


but  nothing  found.  The  image  of' the  treasure  had,
therefore,  remained  in  the  place  where  it  had  been  de-
posited. AdMe  beheld  it  like  the  other  clairvoyant,  and
had  it  not  been  for  the  information  given  her  by  the
spirit,  she  would  possibly  have  made  the  same  mistake.

Not,  indeed,  in  the  present  times  is  it  that  men  be-
lieve that  spirits  who  have,  during  their  materialisation
on  earth,  hidden  treasures  still  enjoy  them  after  their
departure  from  the  earth,  and  fascinate  the  sight  of
those  who  attempt  to  discover  them.  Although  these
material  treasures,  as  I have  observed  in  the  preceding
sitting,  are  no  longer  of  any  use  to  the  spirit  disengaged
from  matter,  they,  nevertheless,  remain  the  property
of  such  spirit.  There  is  no  doubting  it;  if  it  is  possible
for  an  earthly  man  to  say  this  piece  of  land,  this  house,
or  this  furniture,  &c.,  belongs  to  me,  that  constitutes
a deed  of  property,  as  very  justly  observed  to  me  my
friend  Binet ; a spirit  that  has  earned  this  gold,  which  he
can  hide  more  easily  than  a house  or  any  other  object,
may  surely,  at  his  pleasure,  make  of  it  a deed  of  pro-
perty which  he  has  a mind  no  one  should  enjoy  ; the
act  of  removing  such  a treasure  is  a positive  theft — a
bad  action.  He  has  aright  to  hallucinate  you,  the  only
means  left  him  to  defend  this  property,  which  he  has
honestly  acquired.  If  we  admit  in  them  a series  of  ter-
restrial affections  we  cannot  refuse  them  this  one  any
more  than  the  rest,  and  the  observation  of  my  friend  is
strictly  logical.

As  to  fascinations,  there  is  no  doubt  of  their  existence,
though  they  be  not  followed  by  more  marked  and
dangerous  effects.  We  may  read  on  this  head  the
“ Demonomania”  of  Bodin,  1558,  where  we  shall  find
certain  facts  fully  corresponding  with  these.  I know  a
person  who  has  passed  through  such  deceptions  and
been  unable  to  discover  the  treasure  revealed  to  him  by
half-a-score  of  clairvoyants.  Three  of  them  underwent
hallucinations,  which  could  not  be  recounted  in  this
age  without  exposing  one’s-self  to  ridicule.  Every  one


118


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


has  heard  speak  of  the  diggings  at  Mount  Jalut^  con-
ducted by  so  many  clairvoyants  of  the  first  order  and
at  different  times  ; one  beheld  in  one  place,  another  in
another,  and  all  the  shareholders  in  these  diggings  per-
ceived that  they  expended  therein  their  fortune  to  no
purpose.  I know  a gentleman  at  Niort  who  found  him-
self in  the  same  conditions,  and  under  the  same  influ-
ences. What  he  then  experienced  is  still  so  fresh  in
his  memory  that  his  hair  stands  on  end  whenever  he
speaks  of  it.  He  was  very  near  losing  an  excellent
clairvoyante  on  this  occasion.  He  could  not  wholly
recall  her  to  life  till  several  hours  after.  He  himself
was,  as  well  as  two  other  persons  who  accompanied
him,  subjected  to  moral  tortures  impossible  to  describe.
I am  unwilling  to  be  thought  to  accept  tales  w’hich  ap-
pear at  first  sight  ridiculous ; but  I beg  of  magnetisers
each  to  say  of  them  as  much  as  I,  and  the  ridicule  will
" be  less  overwhelming  than  on  one  alone.  I will  con-
] elude  this  article  by  observing  that  out  of  a hundred
indicated  treasures,  not  more  than  two  or  three  are  dis-
covered. There  is,  therefore,  some  cause  for  this,  re-
siding in  hallucination.  If  it  be  possible  for  magnetisers
to  subject  clairvoyants  to  hallucination,  all  may  be  ex-
plained by  this  property  which  spirits  disengaged  from
matter  must  possess,  as  well  as  those  that  are  still  con-
fined to  it.

132.  Madame  G.  C desires  the  apparition  of  M.

E.  C.  C . Adele  says  that  she  sees  a tall  slender

man,  with  auburn  hair,  splendid  forehead,  fine  well-
formed  eyes,  long  lashes,  well-formed  nose  but  rather
wide  at  the  bottom,  large  mouth,  chin  rather  long,  air
severe ; he  is  not  very  old,  he  wears  a black  dress,  a
white  cravat.  I perceive  that  he  has  a frill  or  a little
lace  on  his  shirt  crossing  his  waistcoat,  w’hich  is  rather
open  ; he  suffered  much  from  oppression  in  the  chest,
from  palpitation  of  the  heart;  his  moral  sufferings  were
also  great  and  of  long  continuance.  During  the  latter
part  of  his  illness  he  was  very  w^eak  in  his  legs ; he  did


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


119


not  complain  in  proportion  with  his  sufferings ; he  was
very  courageous  and  well-informed.  Though  severe,  he
was  affectionate,  frank,  pure,  strong-minded ; he  loved  i
above  all  what  is  good ; he  died  in  the  conviction  that
his  soul  would  survive  his  body.  He  says  that  he  is
very  happy  now;  he  is  occupied  in  spiritual  sciences,
the  conformation  of  the  place  he  dwells  in,  and  above
all  in  the  study  of  men.  He  had  travelled  a great  deal
on  earth,  and  still  delights  in  doing  so  in  heaven.  He
tells  me  that  it  was  not  at  the  moment  of  dying  that  he
suffered  most,  for  his  soul  was  already  detached  from  his
body.  He  will  not  be  perfectly  happy,  however,  till
those  whom  he  loved  on  earth  are  reunited  to  him.  I
am  much  pleased  with  him,  for  he  is  a good  and  highly
educated  man.

This  lady,  of  high  condition  and  elevated  mind,
acknowledges  the  exactitude  of  all  these  details  : she
begs  AdHe  to  ask  for  a second  person,  so  happy  does
she  seem  to  be  in  the  sphere  of  those  spirits  invisible
to  the  eyes  of  our  material  body,  but  very  sensible
to  persons  whose  hearts  are  open  to  their  influence.

We  ask  for  M.  W B , who  forthwith  appears.

AdHe  says: — ‘^This  man  is  older  than  the  last  one;
his  hair  is  almost  white,  and  he  has  a bald  place  on  the
crown  of  his  head ; his  forehead  is  not  very  high ; he
has  fine  eyes,  rather  hollow,  and  a benevolent  look ;
flat  mouth,  rather  long  face — altogether  a good-looking
old  man.  He  seems  to  me  very  cheerful  and  amiable  ;
he  must  have  been  strong;  he  is  corpulent  enough;
he  had  an  asthma,  and  suffered  shooting  pains  (from  the
gout)  ; he  was  not  long  ill ; he  wears  a riding-coat,
rather  long;  and  I see  a stick  in  his  hand.  He  tells
me  that  he  is  fond  of  walking ; his  intelligence  was  of  a >
less  elevated  kind  than  that  of  the  preceding  gentleman ;
he  loved  life,  also,  more  than  the  ktter,  consequently,
he  has  some  difficulty  in  comprehending  the  spiritual
world;  he  tells  me,  however,  that  our  life  is  not  to  be
compared  with  his,  which  alone  is  life  in  perfection.  I


120


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


am  much  pleased  with  this  man  on  account  of  his
amiable  manners/^

“ Certified  the  above  two  experiments  as  perfectly  correct.

(Signed)  “ G.  C

I ought  to  observe  that  some  persons  holding  a dis-
tinguished position  in  the  world  beg  of  me  not  to  pub-
lish their  names,  for  fear  of  the  ridicule  that  certain
individuals  too  well  informed  to  descend  to  such  beliefs
would  not  fail  throwing  on  experiments  of  this  kind  ;
but  I take  care  to  make  all  persons  who  solicit  these
perceptions  sign  testimonials,  observing  to  them  that  I
shall  hold  them  at  the  disposition  of  all  my  readers
demanding  such  communication.  'J'hus  the  abridged
names  are  given  in  full  length,  with  their  address,  in
the  said  testimonials.  If  I make  this  concession  to
such  timorous  persons,  it  is  only  on  the  above  con-
dition ; for  I desire  the  truth,  and  nothing  but  the
truth.  If  I do  not  fear  ridicule,  I wish  to  be  able  to
proVe  that  I am  not  deserving  of  it.  I might  have  dis-
pensed, some  readers  will  say,  with  all  these  descriptive
details,  which  are  not  very  agreeable  to  read  ; I will
answer  that  there  would  be  nothing  left  me  to  say,  and
that  these  details  present  each  in  their  individuality
certain  shades  more  and  more  persuasive.  As  in  these
last  two  perceptions,  if  we  are  disposed  to  find  any-
thing insignificant,  we  are  forced  to  acknowledge  that
the  bald  head  of  the  old  man,  his  stick,  his  long  riding
coat,  his  tastes,  are  persuasive  details  ; so  persons  to
whom  merely  one  of  these  particularities  is  revealed,  ex-
perience at  each  of  the  others  a very  decided  movement
of  astonishment,  which  instantaneously  overcomes  their
doubts,  and  gives  rise  to  the  exclamation:  “^Tis  in-
credible ! — his  miraculous  !”  I say  with  them  : — Yes,
it  is  miraculous  ; draw  from  it  consoling  conclusions,
and  death  will  no  longer  be  to  you  a cause  of  anguish ;
on  the  contrary,  it  is  the  gaoler  who  comes  to  restore
you  to  liberty.


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


121


133.  The  lady  who  solicited  the  foregoing  sitting
(an  Englishwoman  by  birth),  after  recounting  what  she
had  heard  to  one  of  her  compatriots,  brought  him  to
me  the  following  day.  I shall  retrench  nought  from  this
sitting,  which  demonstrates  how  far  the  eccentricity
of  this  good  people  can  go.  The  lady  asks  for
Mr.  John  Wilson.  Adele  perceives  two  gentlemen
together,  one  an  old  man,  the  other  younger.  The  old
man  has  grey  hair,  is  tall  and  thin,  and  wears  spec-
tacles; he  has  hollow  eyes,  a long,  pinched-np  nose,
wide  mouth,  large  dry  hands,  the  general  aj)pearance
of  the  countenance  is  serious.  The  youngest  may  be
about  forty-five  to  fifty  years  of  age,  he  is  of  the
ordinary  stature,  corpulent,  and  broad-chested  ; he  has
black  hair,  a prominent  forehead,  what  we  term  an
intellectual  forehead  ; thick  eye-brows,  and  this  gives
him  a stern  look  ; nose  well  formed,  complexion  clear,
middling-size  mouth,  chin  rather  prominent  and
round,  neck  short;  he  wears  a coarse  blue  coat.  He
died  of  an  apoplexy.  He  was  a very  good  man,  of  an
enlightened  mind;  he  seems  to  me  even  an  extra-
ordinary man,  having  very  elevated  thoughts.  He
suffered  much  from  not  being  able  to  do  all  the  good
he  desired ; he  must  have  been  beloved  ; he  would  wish
to  be  reunited  to  a person  who  is  very  dear  to  him.

This  ladv  observes  that  she  believes  she  can  call  to
mind  the  old  man,  from  the  details  she  has  heard,
but  she  is  not  sure  of  it;  it  was  the  second  one  she
asked  for,  who  must  have  been  the  old  man’s  grand-
son. She  also  observes  that  this  man  was  ten  years
older  than  Adele  supposes  him  to  have  been,  and  that
his  complexion  was  not  what  is  termed  in  England  a
clear  complexion.  For  what  concerns  the  elevated
thoughts,  she  thinks  the  phrase  might  be  rendered
better  thus  : “He  had  good  common  sense,  and  ele-
vated sentiments.”  All  the  other  details  are  very
exact.  She  refused  to  sign,  for  fear  of  compromising
her  name  in  the  learned  world ; but  I have  the  name

K


122


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


of  two  persons  accompanying  her  who,  if  necessar)',
would  affirm  the  truth  of  this  perception,  and  the
exactitude  of  tlie  details  acknowledged  by  the  lad}",
to  whom  I observed  that  if  I had  forgotten  to  acquaint
her  Math  this  condition,  indispensable  to  my  sittings,  I
trusted  she  would  have  the  goodness  to  inform  those
persons  of  it  she  M'as  to  send  to  me ; for  I make  it  a
great  point,  in  the  interest  of  truth  and  science,  to
support  my  citations  v.'ith  the  testimony  of  those  M’ho
acknowledge  their  exactitude.  It  remains  for  me  to
observe  M’hat  distinction  may  be  draM'n  betM'een  udiat
we  call  a clear  complexion,  and  M'hat  the  English,  mIio
have  a superior  colour  to  us,  call  a clear  complexion.
We  appear  to  them  very  dark,  and  a dark  Englishman
Math  them  would  appear  to  us  of  a fine  carnation ; this
makes  me  think  that  the  difference  in  the  eyes  of
Adele  and  this  lady  M’as  but  a matter  of  taste.  Her
second  observation,  as  to  the  meaning  of  elevated
thoughts,  is  sufficient  to  prove  to  us  that  M’e  can  attach
no  importance  to  the  first  one,  because  this  man  M"as
not  of  illustrious  birth,  nor  had  he  received  a liberal
education.  He  could  have  had  but  good  common
sense  and  elevated  sentiments,  although  this  lady
assured  us  that  he  M'as  habituallv  consulted  bv  all  the
inhabitants  of  the  toMai  in  M'hich  he  resided  in  in-
numerable matters  connected  Math  art,  mechanics,
taste,  and  justice.  Adele,  having  made  the  observation
to  her  that  he  M'as  not  in  her  sphere,  she  replied.
No  ; he  had  no  M'it,  received  no  education.’’  I know
not  Mdiether  M’it  be  included  in  education,  or  M’hether
the  latter  does  but  give  it  the  form ; and  M’hether
elevated  thoughts  are  aught  else  than  elevated  senti-
ments. I leave  this  question  to  be  decided  by  those
who  have  Mat  and  education.

134.  Madame  C.  C , already  mentioned,  at  sitting

128,  desires  another  apparition.  She  begs  Adele  to  ask

for  Madame  A.  D . Adele  perceives  a lady  about

thirty  years  of  age  M’ith  dark  hair,  M"hite  smooth  fore-


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


123


head,  fine  dark  eyes,  long  lashes,  rather  large  nose,
middling  size  mouth,  an  agreeable  smile,  and  white
teeth.  I see  an  empty  space  at  top,  on  the  left  side,
and  this  makes  me  presume  that  she  has  lost  a tooth  on
that  side.  Neck  short,  cheat  broad,  graceful  air  and
manners,  easy  carriage.  This  lady  must  have  suffered
at  the  heart.  She  died  of  an  ulcer  in  the  womb,  not
rightly  treated  ; she  was  strong  in  the  chest,  but  must
have  suffered  from  cramp  in  the  stomach.  She  has  not
long  been  dead.  She  speaks  to  me  of  a child  she  was
very  fond  of  though  not  her  own.  She  would  wish  to  be
re-united  to  several  persons  whom  she  was  very  partial
to.  Her  husband  must  still  be  on  earth.  No  doubt
she  was  beloved,  as  she  herself  was  loving,  good,  and
virtuous.  I donT  know  whether  she  used  to  like
flowers,  but  at  this  moment  she  is  passionately  fond  of
them.”

At  the  request  of  Madame  C.  C , Adcle  follows

the  apparition  to  heaven ; a period  when  ecstasy  is  at
its  height,  for  ten  minutes.  I call  her  back  to  earth  ;
she  then  gives  us  the  following  account : — “ I followed
this  lady  up,  very  high  up.  She  was  dressed  in  white,
her  hair  in  ringlets,  a wreath  of  orange  flowers  round
her  head.  Oh,  good  heavens,  how  beautiful  she  was  !
why  are  we  so  ugly  on  earth  ? How  graceful  and  pretty
she  was  ! Shall  I one  day  be  as  beautiful  as  she  ! No
matter  what  idea  we  form  of  heaven,  we  shall  always
come  far  short  of  the  reality.  If  you  did  but  behold
the  beautiful  group  of  dark,  fair,  fresh-looking  women,
with  white  and  transparent  skins,  modest  looks,  all
crowned  with  flowers  ; one  with  white  or  red  roses,
another  with  jasmine,  another  with  orange  flowers,  each
according  to  her  affection.  Some  play  music,  others
draw,  others  study;  those  singing,  these  promenading.
Why,  goodness  me  ! what  is  this  earth  in  comparison
with  heaven  ? a sink  beside  a palace.  Fancy  to  yourself
the  Palais- Royal,  with  its  countless  streams  of  gas  and
a dark  cave;  it  is  still  less  than  that.  What  light

K 2


124


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


dresses  they  had  ! with  what  simplicity,  what  grace  they
wear  them  ! When  we  compare  our  tanned,  dark,
wrinkled  skins,  our  irregular  features,  our  sorry  looks,
all  our  deformities  with  these  celestial  bodies ! Oh  !
filthiness,  oh!  disgust,  and  we  pity  those  who  are  dead,
those  who  died  at  the  barricades;  why,  my  God,  let  the
rest  be  shot  1 1 Why  should  1 go  to  ask  pardon  for
them  ? That  they  may  live  1 that  they  may  suffer !
Oh  1 no,  death  is  preferable  to  what  you  term  life.”
Adele  is  in  a state  of  inconceivable  exaltation.  I make
the  observation  to  her  that  all  these  unfortunate  creatures
have  wives  and  children  who  stand  in  need  of  them.
She  replies — “ What  worse  (according  to  us)  can  happen
to  them  in  their  turn  than  death.  Well ! they  will  be
happy;  the  sooner  they  die  the  better  for  them.  Those
^ . poor  misled  creatures  who  fought,  killed  each  other —
only  consider  what  was  their  surprise  at  meeting  each
other  in  heaven,  without  hatred,  without  vengeance,
really  alive,  and  satisfied  of  their  earthly  error  ! There,
and  there  only,  is  the  true  reign  of  fraternity.  Oh  1
human  weakness,  pride,  error  1 why  can  I not  preserve
the  courage  I at  this  moment  possess ; I would  mount
with  them  the  barricades  and  hearten  them  on  to  death  I
For  death  is  happiness

I succeeded,  with  difficulty,  in  proving  to  Adele  that
she  was  wandering,  and  that  she  ought  to  return  to
sentiments,  if  not  more  true,  at  least  more  in  consonance
with  our  existence.

“ Certified  the  whole  as  very  exact.

' (Signed)  C.  C

“ Paris,  this  11th  July,  1848.”

At  this  sitting  it  will  be  found  that  Ad^le  fails  in  her
usual  morality  by  preaching  up  in  a manner  suicide.
The  observation  1 made  to  her  was  to  this  effect.  But
let  any  human  being  put  himself  for  a moment  in  her
place,  issuing  from  a state  so  superior,  returning  to  this


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


125


sink  of  pains,  passions,  and  saying  to  himself:  “There,
Vtfe^  happmesSy  here  annihilation  and  tears  ; there,  liberty,
immortality,  here  slavery  and  death  ; I must  descend
again  into  this  pitcher  called  the  body,  there  to  undergo
for  years  the  pangs  of  what  is  termed  existence,  and
quit  places  where  I feel  myself  so  happy ; is  it  not  ex-
cusable in  the  galley-slave  to  curse  his  chains  before
garlands  of  flowers,  in  the  old  man  his  wrinkles  in  the
presence  of  youth ; in  the  blind  the  darkness  before  the
light.  Oh,  my  God  ! Adele  is  more  virtuous  than  1.
Were  I but  once,  like  her,  to  leave  my  body,  I should
never  return  to  it ; for  I know  nothing  worse  than  it
and  the  earth  it  inhabits.^^

135.  Madame  Osborn  asks  for  Madame  Elizabeth
Osborn,  her  grandmotlier.  Adele  says  : — “ I see  a
woman  of  about  fifty  years  of  age  (she  was  older),  of
the  ordinary  size,  broad-chested,  figure  pretty  slender,
hair  grey,  forehead  prominent  and  open,  dark  hollow
eyes,  nose  rather  long  than  short,  mouth  rather  large
than  small,  chin  somewhat  long,  and  her  hand,  which
must  have  been  very  beautiful,  is  long.  This  lady
surely  found  it  a difficult  matter  to  keep  on  her  legs
during  the  latter  part  of  her  illness.  She  suffered  from
stoppages,  and  a pain  in  one  leg;  this,  however,  did  not
prevent  her  from  being  very  alert.  Though  of  a good
heart,  she  was  severe,  open-minded,  and  possessed  of
much  wit ; she  appears  to  me  smiling,  and  very  elevated
in  the  spiritual  world.  She  is  surrounded  by  a brilliant
light,  and  this,  no  doubt,  contributed  towards  my  taking
her  for  a younger  woman  than  she  was  on  earth.  She
tells  me  that  she  is  with  her  son,  to  whom  she  was  very
indulgent  on  earth  ; she  loved  him,  and  still  loves  him
dearly.  She  was  more  indifferent  about  a daughter  she
had,  and  whose  heart  she  can  now  better  appreciate,  as
she  has  inwardly  studied  it.  Consequently,  she  will  be
perfectly  happy  when  she  has  rejoined  her.  She  says
that  she  lost  one  son,  who  perished  at  sea;  she  lost
another,  not  less  painfully,  in  battle,  where  he  was  killed


126


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


by  a cannon  ball.  Adele  inquired  the  kind  of  death
this  gentleman  met  with  only  at  the  request  of  Madame
Osborn.  Consequently,  she  experiences  an  inex-
plicable shock  at  hearing  the  report  of  the  cannon,
and  seeing  the  unfortunate  man  mortally  wounded.
She  perceives  the  battle  raging,  and  turns  away  her
eyes,  to  look  no  longer,  as  she  says,  on  so  frightful  a
picture.  She  recommends  Madame  Osborn,  on  the
part  of  her  grandmother,  to  take  care  of  her  health,  for
she  has  often  pains  in  the  stomach,  and  a very  great
oppression  all  over  her,  occasioned  by  the  disordered
state  of  the  blood.  She  predicts  that,  in  a short  time
from  this,  one  of  her  granddaughters  present  will  give
birth  to  a little  boy.

“ Acknowledged  all  as  correct,  apart  the  age  and  prediction,
which  time  only  can  prove.

(Signed)  “ E.  Osborn,

“ 6,  Rue  des  Vignes,  Chaillot.”

Observations. — At  the  apparition  of  Madame  Os-
born we  have  heard  this  lady  give  a few  details,  not
devoid  of  interest,  as  to  the  children  she  had  lost.
Scarcely  had  Madame  Osborn,  her  grandmother,  said
to  Adele — “See  to  what  kind  of  death  my  uncle  was
a victim,”  than  the  latter,  instead  of  asking  this  of  the
grandmother,  desires  to  see  this  man  at  the  moment  of
his  death,  and  does  see  him  struck  by  a cannon  ball  in
battle.  This  scene  appears  to  her  full  of  activitv ; she
hears  the  cannon  growling,  as  if  let  off  that  very  instant.
Still,  as  Madame  Osborn  says,  many  years  have  passed
away  since  then.  This  fact  confirms  what  we  have
already  said  in  the  first  volume  (at  sitting  93).  The
questions  of  time,  produced  by  the  state  in  which  we
find  ourselves,  alone  engender  the  intervals  separating
the  events.  But  in  somnambulism  all  is  in  the  present.
We  are  conscious,  however  short  a time  we  dwell  on
this  proposition,  and  inconceivable  as  it  may  appear,
that  it  cannot  be  in  the  w'orld  of  causes  as  in  the  W’orld


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


127


of  effects.  In  the  first,  forms  are  eternal,  and  unalter-
able to  the  clairvoyant  who  is  in  direct  communication
with  this  world.  When  he  desires  to  see  a certain
thing,  it  forthwith  presents  itself  to  his  view  as  a certain
volume  presents  itself  to  ours  on  a shelf  of  our  library.
It  is  impossible  for  us,  in  taking  this  volume,  to  say : —
It  has  been,  since  it  is  whenever  we  think  of  it  and
desire  to  handle  it.  It  is  the  same  in  the  world  of
causes.  A certain  cause  always  is ; it  is  only  the  ma-
terial effect  which  such  cause  engenders  whose  action
or  form  disappears  from  our  sight,  and  fetters  our  judg-
ment, that  is  to  say — that  has  been,  is,  and  will  be.
But,  in  a state  where  these  things  cannot  change  their
forms,  they  are  ever  in  the  present.  Thus,  an  action
consists  not  in  the  assemblage  of  several  forms  and  the
movement  impressed  on  them.  This  movement  itself
is  an  action,  a cause  that  ever  vibrates  to  the  clair-
voyant, easy  for  him  to  comprehend,  but  quite  negative
for  our  state,  which  can  assign  it  no  form.  It  is  the
same  with  all  the  sensations  of  sounds  and  attractions;
because  we  cannot  represent  them  ourselves  by  forms
that  catch  our  material  eye,  they,  nevertheless,  exist,
since  they  so  far  touch  us  as  to  produce  sensation.  In
metaphysics,  as  in  physics,  we  can  feel  and  see  only
what  touches;  therefore,  sensations  of  any  kind,  or
attraction,  must  be  from  bodies,  since  they  make  them-'
selves  felt  by  bodies : if  they  cannot  be  proved  by  a
view  of  their  forms,  they  are  proved  by  a sensation  of
their  touch.  Without  losing  our  way  in  metaphysical
figures,  which  would  not  be  out  of  place  in  this  work,
we  will  say  that  this  battle  is  represented  in  the  world
of  causes  by  a living  picture  of  a life  present,  not  passed,
nor  to  come.  The  existence  of  this  book  is  what  I have
taken  as  a point  of  comparison,  which  is,  and  has  not
been.  We  will  treat  more  amply  of  these  questions  in
the  work  already  mentioned,  wherein  we  will  j)oint  out
the  means  by  which  a person  may  enter  of  himself
into  a particular  state,  independent  of  magnetism,  and


128


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


wherein  this  trutli  will  be  comprehended  by  a view  of
the  solutions  desired.

136.  M.  Roustan,  a magnetiser,  and  member  of  the
Magnetological  Society  of  Paris,  asks  for  M.  Fran9ois
Xavier  Roustan.  Adele  perceives  “a  man  with  grey
hair,  about  your  size  (says  she  to  M.  Roustan),  open
forehead,  pretty  large  eyes,  but  hollow’,  nose  thick  at
the  bottom,  broad  shoulders,  back  rather  crooked.  He
died  of  an  apoplectic  stroke.  He  was  a good-looking
man,  lively,  and  very  agreeable,  and  of  a mild  dispo-
sition. He  tells  me  that  he  thinks  of  you.  You  have
already  had  him  asked  for  by  other  clairvoyants,  and
have  seen  him  yourself.  He  inspires  you,  but  for  some
time  past  you  have  not  received  the  signs  that  he  w'as
in  the  habit  of  making  you,  because  you  are  too  ab-
sorbed in  w’orldly  affairs.  You  are  very  light  in  ymur
thoughts  and  actions;  then,  again,  there  are  persons
about  you  wdro  contest  your  opinions,  you  find  yourself
influenced  by  them  because  you  are  naturally  fickle  ;
your  ideas  are  not  matured.  He  tells  that  you  had  a
tw’in  brother.  He  had  something  to  enjoin  on  you,
when  dying ; but  matters  having  changed,  he  is  no
longer  permitted  to  apprise  y’ou  of  it.’^  M.  Roustan
puts  a question  to  his  father  relative  to  Louis  XVI.  ;
he  receives  for  answ'er  that  he  still  retains  the  same
opinions  respecting  him  as  he  did  when  on  earth.  Adele
says  that  this  man  is  in  the  second  radius.

M.  Roustan  finds  these  details  in  conformity  with  the
truth,  and  thus  signs : —

“ This  is  exact.”  " Roustan.”

137.  Madame  Vedeaux,  for  fifteen  years  a student  of
magnetism,  finding  herself  momentarily  at  Paris,  desires
to  avail  herself  of  this  opportunity  of  paying  a visit  to
several  clairvoyant  subjects.  She  took  a sitting  at  a
young  person’s,  whose  clairvoyance  she  had  been  pre-
viously enabled  to  judge  of.  To  a question  put  by  this
lady,  the  clairvoyante  replied — I know^  but  one  som-


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


129


nambulist  in  Paris  who  can  give  you  a solution  to  the
question  you  ask;  go  to  No.  175  P-ue  Tiquetonne,  you
will  lind  there  a subject  surrounded  by  angels  and  de-
parted spirits  that  direct  her,  so  that  she  is  much  more
elevated  than  I am.^’  Acting  upon  this  advice,  the  lady
came  and  asked  me  for  a distant  view  sitting.  I did
not  promise  her  a clairvoyance  of  the  first  order,  such
views  not  being  Adele’s  speciality,  and  not  having  for
the  moment  any  subject  at  my  disposition.  Agreeably
to  the  wishes  of  my  fair  visitor,  I begged  AdMe  to  look
over  this  lady’s  property,  and  tell  us  whether  there  was
any  hidden  treasure  there.  She  replied  thus — I see
some  water,  apparently,  to  me,  in  a cistern  ; it  is  dark ;
then  a turret  not  unlike  a dove-cot.  It  is  contiguous
to  a house  that  stands  by  itself,  and  surrounded  with
fields.  There  is  a room  on  the  ground  floor  with  two
windows ; on  the  first  floor  there  is  a room  which  also
has  two  windows.  This  house  is  three  stories  high  ; the
main  building  has  two  wings,  with  which  there  is  a com-
munication by  the  stair- cases  and  corridors  where  the
turret  stands ; it  is  quite  a small  room  in  which  I see  a
spirit  wandering — it  is  a person  who  was  murdered
there  a very  long  time  ago.”  Adele  shrinks  back  in
affright,  I quiet  her,  and  she  says  that  she  is  dragged
towards  a small  store-room  on  the  ground-floor,  in
which  she  can  scarcely  stand  upright ; she  sees  there
some  wine,  and  declares  that  under  this  spot  has  been
hidden  a treasure  contained  in  a small  strong  box,  in
which  she  perceives  jewels,  silver,  and  plate.  She  goes
on  giving  descriptions,  superfluous  for  the  reader  to
know,  but  very  agreeable  for  this  lady  to  hear.  The
day  after  this  sitting  the  lady  returned  to  acquaint  me
that  she  had  been  again  to  see  her  somnambulist,  who
held  with  her,  as  near  as  may  be,  this  discourse : — “ You
ought  to  be  satisfied  with  the  clairvoyante  1 made  you
acquainted  with.  I fear  but  one  thing,  which  is,  that
her  lucidity  should  deprive  me  of  your  kind  visits,  for  I
am  very  much  attached  to  you;  it  was  to  give  you  a


130


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


proof  of  this  that  I feared  not  making  you  acquainted
with  another  clairvoyante  more  powerful  than  myself.
I perceive  that  she  spoke  to  you  of  a spirit  that  wan-
dered about  the  property  she  visited,  the  result  of  a
murder ; that  is  very  true,  I see  it  also.  It  is  a pity
that  this  clairvoyante  should  be  too  reserved  and  too
much  afraid  of  telling  us  all  she  sees  ; there  would  be
moments  wherein  she  would  confound  the  most  in-
credulous. She  is  too  fearful  of  committing  mis-
takes ; her  magnetiser  ought  to  know  that/’  I replied
to  this  lady,  that  it  was  true  that  if  Adele  was  a
little  less  afraid  of  committing  mistakes,  she  would
be  capable  of  greater  things.  It  is  her  reserve
that  proves  her  lucidity;  she  is  aware  how  pictures
which  present  themselves  to  the  eyes  may  lead  to  error,
seeing  that  they  represent  the  past,  present,  and  future,
as  present,  although  in  the  world  of  causes  wherein  are
perceived  the  various  states  of  their  manifestation,  there
can  be  no  errors;  however,  they  are  possible  in  their
material  effects,  which  are  or  are  not  manifested.  If
man  studied  with  great  attention  this  somnambulic  or
spiritual  state,  which  he  yet  knows  but  imperfectly,  he
would  not  be  so  ready  to  inveigh  against  errors,  especially

if  unable  to  verifv  the  revelations  of  the  clairvoyants.

•/

I have  spoken  of  this  curious  sitting  merely  to  have  an
opportunity  of  repeating  what  I have  already  said  in  the
first  volume,  that  it  was  not  necessary  to  guide  clair-
voyants step  by  step  towards  the  object  we  desire  to
have  visited  by  them  ; for  Adele,  at  this  sitting,  formed
no  communication  with  the  lady;  she  asked  for  the
chciteau  and  it  forthwith  appeared.  What  has  made  me
thus  act  is  that  knowing  a clairvoyant  able  to  find  out
the  traces  of  an  object  stolen  or  lost,  of  a person  missing,
&c.,  in  these  researches,  he  can  be  guided  by  no  human
thought,  the  desired  object,  therefore,  must  present
itself  at  the  call  of  the  clairvoyant,  or  the  latter  must  pro-
ceed towards  it  without  any  itinerary.  It  may  then,  I say
to  myself,  be  the  same  with  all  views  at  a distance;  of  this


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


131


I have  obtained  proof  a hundred  times.  Even  yester-
day, a doctor  of  high  repute,  who  believes  in  magnetism
because  he  is  so  under  my  influence  that  I force  him  to
confess  it  (whenever  he  seems  disposed  to  deviate  from
the  truth)  that  he  can  offer  no  opposition  to  my  closing
his  eyes,  for  instance,  if  I will  it,  until  he  begs  of  me  to
open  them  for  him  (and  he  does  not  sleep) ; he  was  in
the  same  disposition  of  mind  with  regard  to  somnam-
bulism and  views  at  a distance,  when  yesterday,  as  I was
saying,  I somnambulised  my  little  Emile,  and  intrusted
him  to  the  doctor  to  question  him  at  his  ease.  Out  of
more  than  forty  answers,  he  raised  doubts  onl}?-  on  two
or  three  made  by  a spirit  whom  he  caused  to  be  ques-
tioned at  a distance.  His  surprise  was  not  less  great
when  I assured  him  that  the  really  living  person  whose
spirit  responded  to  that  of  my  little  clairvoyant  of  twelve
years  of  age,  knew  nothing  of  this  little  secret  intriguing
and  those  contidences,  in  which,  however,  he  would
have  taken  good  care  not  to  compromise  himself  by
answers  injurious  to  him.  The  doctor,  before  taking
the  hand  of  the  clairvoyant  had  already  a description  of
the  house  into  which  he  sent  him.  On  this  simple  in-
vitation from  me  to  the  child  : “The  doctor  desires  that
you  should  see  a house  into  which  he  wishes  you  to
enter.”  “ I see  it,”  forthwith  said  the  child,  “ it  is  a
new  house,  &c.”  This  method  of  proceeding  would  not
be  admissible  unless  it  succeeded  as  well  as  the  other;
but  is  it  not  demonstrated  by  the  forementioned  experi-
ment for  researches,  thefts,  &c.,  so  common  in  our  days?
What  makes  me  more  attached  to  these  experiments  is
that  I wish  to  prove  that  if  an  object  unknown  to  the
clairvoyant  presents  itself  to  his  view,  agreeably  to  his
wishes,  if  actions  passed  like  those  attending  all  the
circumstances  of  a theft,  or  the  journey  of  a person
whose  trace  has  been  lost,  present  themselves  to  him,  I
say,  the  person  who  has  done  or  produced  these  actions,
must  exist  equally  as  well  as  those  actions  which  appear
to  our  material  eyes  completely  dead,  and  the  soul  which


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


has  produced  such  things  can  no  more  refuse  to  come  at
the  call  of  the  clairv(jyant,  than  these  scenes  refuse
appearing.  I wish  also  to  observe  that  the  clairvoyante
wlio  addressed  Madame  Devaux,  has  not  the  least
knowledge  of  Adele  in  her  watchful  state,  and  the  same
may  be  said  of  Adele  with  regard  to  her.  I will  say,
moreover,  that  in  the  view  at  distance  Adele  took,  it
must  be  observed  that  she  declares  it  impossible  for  her
to  stand  upright  in  the  store-room,  which  really  is,  as
this  lady  has  said,  too  small  to  admit  of  her  doing  so
materially.  It  is,  therefore,  not  the  view  alone  that  goes
towards  that  spot,  it  is  the  w-hole  spiritual  individual,  as
I have  already  remarked  at  the  commencement  of  this
volume,  in  my  answer  to  raagnetisers  who  believe  that
apparitions  are  a transmission  of  thoughts,  and  as  I
have  proved  in  the  view  Adele  took  of  Mexico,  in
which  she  received  a coup-de-soleil  (though  it  was  rainy
weather).  It  cannot  be  for  a moment  doubted  but  that
the  clairvoyant  is  wholly  in  the  places  he  visits  at  a dis-
tance, although  answering  our  questions  by  the  organs
of  his  material  bod)’’,  as  if  still  within  it.  If,  perchance,
it  should  be  aro-ued  that  he  sees  these  thinsrs  in  the
thought  of  the  questioner,  although  the  contrary  is
mathematically  proved  by  the  details  present,  w’hich
he  gives  you  of  places  you  have  not  seen  for  many
years,  and  the  changes  that  have  taken  place  since
your  departure ; these  details  cannot  be  in  vour
thoughts,  since  you  are  not  acquainted  with  them,
and  ulterior  information  only  proves  to  you  their
reality.  This  is  a logical  proof,  admitting  of  no  reply;
but,  as  there  are  persons  who  have  a reply  for  all,
and  who,  prejudiced  in  their  belief  of  the  transmission
of  thoughts,  see  but  it,  I beg  them  to  tell  me  how  a
clairvoyant  can  walk  about  in  the  least  of  their
thoughts,  which  represents  a place  capable  of  con-
taining thousands  of  spirits  similar  to  the  one  visiting
them.  If  I ask  a solution  of  this  from  these  savans,
it  is  less  to  combat  the  truth  of  it  than  to  fix,  fur  an


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


133


instant,  their  vast  conception  on  this  explanation,  by
which  they  believe  they  have  nothing  more  to  reply.
I will  tell  them  that  it  deserves  a little  more  attention,
and  cannot,  though  really  existing,  answer  the
question  I address  to  them.  Does  the  clairvoyant  see
only  what  you  have  seen  or  thought?  Certainly  not;
since  every  day  you  obtain  proofs  of  the  contrary;  in
that  case,  then,  where  does  he  see  these  things  ?
Where  they  are,  no  doubt.  And  they  are,  where  we
suppose  them  materially  to  be,  far  from  us.  If  they
are  far  from  us,  and  the  spirit  goes  to  visit  them,  in
body,  and  not  in  sight,  as  it  is  easy  for  you  to  make
sure  of,  who  can  convey  it  to  these  places,  the  doors
being  shut,  and  the  walls  well  cemented  ? Answer,  I
say  to  you.  Is  it  the  places  that  come  to  your  clair-
voyant ? Who  brings  these  places  into  your  room  ?
I puzzle  you  a little  more  than  I shall  be  puzzled  in
answering  you,  that  the  soul,  disengaged  from  matter,
has  no  more  difficulties  to  encounter  in  coming;  at
your  request  than  the  clairvoyant  experiences  in  going
unseen  by  your  material  eyes  to  those  remote  places,  or
than  those  places  have  in  coming  to  you.

Madame  Devaux,  as  a studious  woman,  whose  posi-
tion is  as  honourable  as  honoured,  desired,  in  order  to
complete  her  magnetic  studies,  to  witness  an  appari-
tion, in  the  second  visit  she  paid  me;  we  asked  for
M.  Antoine  Simon  (her  father).  Adele  says: — “1  see
a man,  with  grey  hair,  not  quite  so  tall  as  Madame,
pretty  corpulent,  neck  short,  fine  open  forehead,  lively
eyes,  expressive  and  mild ; countenance  fresh,  nose
rather  large  at  the  bottom,  middling-size  smiling
mouth;  chin  round;  altogether  a good-looking  old
man.  His  death  must  have  been  caused  by  the  state
of  his  blood,  as  I perceive  it  is  black,  thick,  and  cir-
culating with  difficulty.  He  was  subject  to  stoppages  ;
he  was  treated  for  an  aneurism,  but  it  was  not  one ;
his  medical  adviser  ought  rather  to  have  diverted  the
course  of  the  blood.  He  must  have  experienced  a sort


134


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


of  weight  ill  the  lower  part  of  the  body,  and  lassitude
ill  the  limbs  ; also  a pain  in  his  left  leg.  I see  him  in  a
dark-coloured  riding-coat,  lighter-coloured  waistcoat,
coarse  blue  pantaloons  he  wore  shoes,  and  not  boots  ;
for  his  size  as  a man,  his  hand  was  not  large.  He
had  a look  commanding  respect,  was  good  and  just.
In  his  last  moments,  he  was  easily  provoked.  He  was
not  fond  of  showing  off  his  kind  feelings,  preferring
to  keep  them  pent  up  within  himself;  this  caused  him
to  be  looked  upon  as  very  cold,  though  he  was  not  so.
His  domestic  happiness  was  often  disturbed,  his  wife^s
character  not  being  in  sympathy  with  his  own.  He
tells  me  that  your  son  is  intended  for  the  bar — that
he  will  be  an  advocate.  He  often  comes  to  inspire
you  with  good  thoughts.  He  has  appeared  to  you  in
dreams ; your  position  will  be  changed  in  two  years’
time,  and  you  will  reside  in  Paris.”  This  lady  is  greatly
surprised  at  the  minuteness  and  truth  of  these  details,
especially  those  concerning  her  son ; from  the  earliest
age  of  the  latter,  the  grandfather  used  to  say,  “ My
little  grandson  shall  be  a little  advocate.”

“ Recognised  as  very  exact,  all  these  details.

(Signed)  Pauline  Vedeaux,

“ Chateau  de  Malbouquet,  Toulon.

“ 17th  August,  1848.”

138.  M.  Dejean  asks  for  M.  Joseph  Noel  Dejean,  of
Caderousse.  Adele  perceives  a bald-pated  old  man,
with  a few  grey  hairs.  “ He  appears  to  me,”  said  she,
“ rather  taller  than  the  gentleman  here  present ; broad
across  the  shoulders,  high  forehead,  more  prominent
than  flat,  light  blue  eyes,  lively  and  expressive,  nose
rather  crooked,  and  slightly  turned  up  at  the  tip;
ruddy  complexion,  chin  round,  neck  thick.  He  must
have  suffered  in  his  respiration,  and  in  the  right  arm,
up  to  his  shoulder,  and  also  from  weakness  in  the  legs.
I see  that  his  chest  and  heart  are  affected,  though  not
with  any  mortal  disease;  he  was  afflicted  with  an  in-
flammation of  the  bladder  and  the  lower  part  of  his


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


135


body  ; he  limps  on  his  left  leg  and  leans  on  a walking-
stick;  this  proceeds  from  a fall  he  once  had.  In  the
other  hand  he  has  a spectacle-case,  which  I took  at
first  for  a pipe.  I believe  that  he  has  been  a sailor.
He  used  to  wear  a riding  coat  folded  across  the  chest,
and  longer  than  they  are  now  worn ; it  appears  to  me
of  a coarse  blue  cloth  : I see  him  in  shoes,  not  boots,
and  dark  pantaloons.  He  was  very  fond  of  walking  ; a
quiet  life  was  most  agreeable  to  him  ; he  was  good,
severe,  but  upright  and  just.  He  is  not  communicative
with  me.  I believe  that  he  suffered  great  losses ; this
made  him  taciturn.  He  lost  also  many  objects  of  his
affection  ; he  says  that  he  was  wronged,  deceived,  abso-
lutely cheated;  he  underwent  many  catastrophes;  he
must  have  had  a large  fortune.  He  was  separated  from
some  one,  and  this  gave  him  much  pain.  At  last  he
took  to  writing ; he  had  a good  head  and  a sound  judg-
ment. His  advice  was  often  asked.  He  tells  me  that
this  gentleman  is  his  son.  You  have  a share  in  some
enterprise ; you  do  not  reside  in  Paris ; he  advises  you
to  be  cautious,  as  some  loss  threatens  you;  he  recom-
mends you  to  leave  Paris  as  soon  as  possible,  as  grave
events  are  about  to  take  place  there.  He  says  that  he  is
very  happy ; he  has  progressed ; he  has  been  long  dead.^^

At  every  sitting  1 recommend  persons  before  signing
the  testimonial  to  make  mention  of  whatever  in  the
given  details  does  not  appear  to  them  exact ; for  I seek
the  truth  with  my  whole  heart,  and  always  experience
fresh  joy  whenever  I give  others  satisfaction.  The  fol-
lowing are  the  observations  of  this  gentleman  : —

“ The  nose  was  not  turned  up,  but  large  and  aquiline ; the
cheeks  were  not  ruddy,  but  pale  ; the  neck  was  not  long  but
short,  and  rather  small  than  large.  1 never  knew  him  to  suffer
in  his  respiration,  in  his  right  arm,  or  bladder.  He  had  never
been  a sailor.  All  the  rest  is  very  exact.

(Signed)  “ Dejean  de  la  Bastie,

“ Delegate  of  the  Isle  of  Bourbon  to  the  Government,
“ Rue  Neuve-du-Luxembourg,  18  bis.”

“ 18th  August,  1848.”


136


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


There  are  persoDS  who,  when  called  upon  to  sign  a
testimonial,  make  it  a case  of  conscience,  and  are  un-
willing to  pledge  themselves  to  the  truth  of  a thing
respecting  which  they  have  any  doubts.  Under  the
influence  of  this  thought  was  it  that  M.  Dejean  made
the  foregoing:  observations.  Adele  told  him  that  the
nose  was  crooked,  which  meant  aquiline,  but  she  main-
tains that  it  turns  up  slightly  at  the  tip;  she  likewise
sees  the  cheeks  ruddy,  and  the  neck  thick  (a  short  neck
always  seems  thicker  than  any  other),  and  as  this  gen-
tleman had  left  his  father  many  years  before  his  death,
at  which  he  was  not  present,  he  could  not  be  acquainted
with  his  sufferings,  or  know  whether  the  blood  had  not
flown  up  to  his  head  in  his  last  moments.  AdMe  does
not  afiirm  that  this  person  was  a sailor,  she  says — “ I
think  that  he  has  been  a navigator,”  because  she  per-
ceives that  his  thoughts  take  a nautical  direction.  At
last,  his  son  observes  to  us  that  it  was  he  himself  who
had  been  to  sea,  and  that  his  doing  so  had  caused
his  father  much  uneasiness.  This  explains  to  us  why
Adele  perceives  his  thoughts  turned  towards  navigation.
These  five  little  observations  remain,  therefore,  worth-
less, and  prove  that  if  these  apparitions  were  trans-
mission of  thoughts  they  would  not  exist.  We  find
in  this  apparition  full  forty  details  acknowledged  as
true.  I think  that  it  ought  to  be  received  as  one  of
the  best.

139.  M.  Fandar,  usher  to  the  tribunals  at  Troyes,
WTote  to  me  about  the  beginning  of  August,  to  beg  me
to  send  him  two  copies  of  the  first  volume  of  the
“ Secrets,^’  expressing,  at  the  same  time,  a wish  that  I
would  cause  his  father,  M.  Nicolas  Fandar,  to  appear,
telling  me  that  if  I could  give  a description  of  him  he
should  experience  from  it  the  greatest  pleasure.  I sum-
moned the  deceased.  Adele  said  to  me — “ I have  but
little  liking  for  such  apparitions,  because  the  spirits
themselves,  conscious  that  none  of  their  own  friends  are
with  me,  come  with  more  difflcultv  and  answer  mv


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


137


questions  with  constraint.”  I did  not  wish  to  refuse
such  consolation  to  this  gentleman,  whom  we  had  not
the  pleasure  of  knowing ; I desired,  at  the  same  time,
to  convince  all  that  we  may,  by  the  mere  assistance  of
a name,  obtain  apparitions  as  exact  as  if  the  persons
W'ere  present;  this  does  away  with  all  idea  of  communi-
cation of  thought,  as  may  be  seen  in  the  following  per-
ception : — Adele  says,  1 see  a man  with  grey  hair,
full  ruddy  countenance,  large  nose,  stern  look,  smiling
mouth,  and  this  betokens  a lively  and  good  disposition  ;
short  neck,  and  breathing  with  difficulty.  I perceive
pimples  caused  by  heat  of  the  blood  on  his  face.  He  is
pretty  corpulent  and  of  middling  stature.  I should  say
that  he  suffered  in  his  legs.  He  wears  a brown  vest,
and,  I think,  coarse  grey  pantaloons.  He  is  happy,  and
reunited  to  his  wife,  whom  he  dearly  loved  on  earth,  and
who  was,  as  he  says,  very  kind  to  him.”

I forwarded  this  description  to  M.  Fandar,  who  sent
me  the  following  letter: —

“My  Dear  Monsieur — The  indications  given  bv  our
somnambulisf  are  very  exact ; two  years  before  death  snatched
him  from  me,  my  father  suffered  at  intervals  from  oppressions,
which  so  increased  that  the  fatal  day  rapidly  approached ; his
letrs  became  so  swollen  that  he  was  unable  to  stir  a sinffie
step.  My  father  usually  wore  a brown-coloured  vest,  and
coarse  grey  woollen  pantaloons  ; as  he  was  of  a very  sanguine
temperament  it  often  happened  that  he  had  large  pimples  on
his  face.  He  was  very  hasty,  so  that  I am  not  surprised  at
vour  clairvoyante’s  having  looked  upon  his  countenance  as
kern  ; but  his  passion  over,  he  was  one  of  the  best  of  men.
You  perceive,  monsieur,  that  the  indications  of  your  clair-
voyante  are  conformable  to  the  truth.  I authorise  you  to
make  such  use  of  this  letter  as  you  shall  deem  fit.

(Signed)  “Fandar,

“ Usher  to  the  Tribunals  at  Troyes,

“ Rue  de  la  Levrette,  No.  3.”

“The  18th  August,  1848.”

I shall  make  no  reflection  on  this  letter.  I thank  the

L


138


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


gentleman  for  his  frankness ; may  it  contribute  towards
convincing  the  adversaries  of  these  apparitions  ! I beg
the  reader  will  pardon  me  my  repetitions  on  this  head  ;
but  having  only  one  objection  to  combat — that  of  the
transmission  of  thoughts,  I am  bound  to  set  forth  what-
soever each  apparition  contains  contrary  to  this  foolish
argument,  in  order  to  disarm  for  ever  the  person  more
foolish  still,  who  would  wish  to  make  use  of  it  against
so  positive  a truth.

140.  M.  Blesson  asks  for  M.  Pierre  Blesson,  his
father.  Adele  sees  in  this  gentleman  “ a person  about
the  same  size  as  his  son  he  appears  to  her  “ scarcely
fifty  years  old  ; his  hair  is  darker  than  yours,”  said  she
to  his  son  ; “he  has  a splendid  countenance,  fine  fore-
head, soft,  lively  and  atfable  eyes;  he  wears  a dark
brown  riding  coat  with  pockets  at  the  sides,  dark  blue
or  black  pantaloons ; he  surely  died  of  the  cholera,  as  I
think  I recognise  the  symptoms  of  that  disease.  He  was
buried  in  the  common  grave.”  His  son  inquires  wdiether
it  really  was  his  body  which  he  caused  to  be  exhumed
and  buried  in  a grave  apart  ? He  replies  yes,  and  assures
him  that  he  is  highly  pleased  with  his  I’egret,  and  also
with  his  kind  attentions  towards  his  mother.  He  tells
him  that  he  wnll  succeed  in  his  affairs,  but  not  without
some  trouble,  and  gives  him  advice  on  this  head.  He
assures  him  that  he  will  be  satisfied  with  his  children
when  they  are  grown  up.  He  often  w’^anders  near  his  wife,
whom  he  loved  and  still  loves  very  much.  He  awaits
the  happy  moment  of  their  being  reunited  to  have  no
longer  aught  more  to  desire.

“ Acknowledged  the  above  details  as  perfectly  exact.

(Signed)  “ Blesson,

“ 36,  Rue-aux-Ours.

“This  20th  August,  1848.”

This  gentleman,  after  the  perusal  of  the  first  volume
of  the  “ Secrets,”  and  an  apparition  I had  already  given
him,  experimented  himself  on  his  somnambulists  and


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


139


obtained  the  same  results.  He  handed  to  me  a note  of
certain  facts  whichl  will  be  found  at  the  close  of  these
sittings.

141.  M.  Dejean  de  la  Bastie,  already  mentioned  at
sitting  138,  desires  a fresh  apparition  ; he  asks  for  M.
Marie  Joseph  Theodore  de  Guigne.  Adele  perceives
“ a man  about  forty  years  of  age,  pretty  tall,  and  with
dark  hair.”  M.  Dejean  here  interrupted  Adele,  telling
her  that  this  is  not  the  portrait  of  the  person  he  re-
quires. We  see  that  this  gentleman  wishes  for  particulars
admitting  of  no  doubt.  At  the  words  : “ He  is  pretty
tail  and  dark,”  he  says  to  us : He  was  tall  but  not
dark.”  Adele  replies  that  the  person  she  was  describing
to  him  must  certainly  have  borne  his  name  and  belonged
to  his  family,  that  she  is  conscious  of  it.  But  he  asks
again  for  this  gentleman  and  a second  personage  appears,
the  first,  however,  still  remaining.  “ This  one,”  said
she,  is  about  thirty  years  of  age,  tall  and  thin,  \vith
dark  flaxen  hair,  pale  countenance,  dark  blue  eyes  of  a
tolerably  mild  expression,  nose  long,  mouth  rather  large
than  small,  chin  long  ; I see  him  in  a sort  of  great  coat,
such  as  persons  no  longer  wear,  it  is  devoid  of  grace,
and  not  unlike  a dressing  gown  ; it  is  of  a dark  blue  or
black  colour;  this  costume  denotes  to  me  a man  in
office,  a priest,  or  other  functionary;  he  has  an  austere
look  ; he  must  have  suffered  in  the  chest,  I see  that  his
Jungs  are  gorged  with  blood.  He  suffered  a long  time.
He  was  very  weak.  I believe  that  privations  were  the
cause  of  his  illness  and  rendered  his  chest  so  weak.  I
do  not,  however,  see  in  him  the  seeds  of  any  mortal
maladv,  and  this  induces  me  to  believe  that  he  died  a
violent  death,  accidentally  and  unexpectedly.  His  hand
is  large  and  thin.  I see  a medal  on  his  breast,  about  as
large  as  the  hollow  of  one’s  hand ; he  wears  open  shoes,
such  as  are  no  longer  worn.  He  is  unwilling  to  speak
to  me,  and  this  makes  me  presume  that  he  did  not
speak  French.”

The  following  are  the  observations  that  precede  the

L 2


140


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


signature  of  M.  Dejean  : — This  person  had  a disposi-
tion more  remarkable  for  mildness  and  goodness  than
severity  ; he  died  of  a violent  fever,  accompanied  with
a delirium  that  lasted  several  days,  and  attributed  by
the  physician  to  the  want  of  a vigorous  constitution,
worn  out  by  absolute  abstinence.”

“ Acknowledged  the  details  as  exact.

(Signed)  “ Dejean  de  la  Bastie.”

I pledged  myself  to  making  mention  of  the  sittings
just  as  I should  obtain  them,  in  the  interest  of  truth,
which  I love  and  seek  with  a laudable  intention  ; but,
if  I do  so,  and  engage  persons  to  make  such  observa-
tions as  they  deem  fit  previous  to  signing,  I ought  also
to  give  notice  that  I have  to  fear  intelligences  little  pre-
pared for  such  revelations,  and,  on  the  part  of  my  clair-
voyante,  moments  more  or  less  lucid;  then,  again,
errors  which  spirits  wandering  continually  around  us
strive  to  make  clairvoyants  commit,  as  their  whole
affection  consists  in  misleading,  and  we  are  their  vic-
tims. However,  we  have  no  reason  to  complain  of  the
preceding  apparition  ; on  the  contrary,  we  ought  to  ,
think  that,  if  this  gentleman  accepts  it  in  all  its  details,
the  observations  that  he  adds  do  not  destroy  what  Adcle
has  said — far  from  this  being  Hie  case,  they  strengthen
it ; she  perceives  no  germ  of  any  malady  ; a violent
fever  that  takes  off  a man  in  a few  days,  is,  indeed,  as
she  says,  an  unexpected,  accidental  death.

This  gentleman  observes  that  the  nhvsician  accuses

'TJ  A.  ar

the  abstinence,  which  the  deceased  imposed  on  himself,
as  being  the  cause  of  the  destruction  of  his  constitution,
and  having  brought  on  death.

Adcle  says  : — He  must  have  suffered  in  the  chest,
been  very  weak  for  a long  time ; I believe  that  priva-
tions are  the  cause  of  this.”  For  my  part,  I sec  no
difference  between  the  word  privation  and  abstinence;
what  we  abstain  from,  we  deprive  ourselves  of.

Adcle  does  not  say  that  this  man  is  wanting  in  kind-


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


141


ness ; on  the  contrary,  she  says  that  he  has  a mild  look,
but  that,  taken  altogether,  he  seems  to  have  an  austere
air.  I will  observe,  in  respect  to  this,  that  the  gentle-
man was  a priest,  and  so  devoted  to  religious  ideas  that
he  constantly  wore  a hair  cloth.  Judge  whether  suck
a man  should  have  a smiling  air ; thus,  in  the  observa-
tion of  M.  Dejean,  I see  nothing  that  can  cause  us  to
suspect  any  reservation.

This  gentleman  asks  for  a second  apparition,  in  the
person  of  Olympe  Pascale.  Adele  says : — I see  a
little  old  woman  of  sixty The  gentleman  forthwith
wishes  to  stop  Adele,  saying  to  me  : “ The  person  I
asked  for  was  but  twenty-seven.”  I encourage  Adele,
however,  to  continue,  seeing  that  she  seems  vexed  that
persons  unasked  for  should  present  themselves.  She
observes  to  this  gentleman  that  their  appearing  is  to  be
attributed  to  his  wishing  for  a multitude  of  persons  at
once.  The  mere  thinking  of  one  of  them  is  sufficient
for  its  instantaneous  appearance  in  our  sphere ; hence
it  is  that  she  sees  them  present  themselves  to  her
almost  before  their  name  is  pronounced.  She  is  certain
that  the  first  one  who  presented  himself  was  a relative,
of  the  same  name  as  the  person  asked  for,  of  whom,
no  doubt,  the  gentleman  had  been  thinking.  M.
Dejean  acknowledges,  with  me,  the  justness  of  Adze’s
observation  by  saying  : — “ True ; all  this  is  so  sur-
prising that  a persofi  would  wish  to  summon  all  his
friends  to  acquire  the  certitude  of  their  all  being  really
alive ; and  I do,  indeed,  desire  to  ask  for  many  of
them.  It  does  not  appear  to  me  astonishing,  when
I think  of  a relative,  that  he  should  be  near  me,
he  is  near  your  clairvoyante,  who  is  less  acquainted,
with  him  than  1.  If  the  mere  w’ish  suffices,  I ought
to  have  a pretty  good  number  around  me.”  AdMe's
observation  refers  to  that  which  we  have  read  in.
the  apparition  of  M.  Fandar,  namely,  “that  spirits
come  wfith  less  pleasure  when  there  is  no  one  with,
the  clairvoyante.”  We  beg  of  her  to  continue  her


142


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


description  : — “ She  has  grey  hair,”  resumed  she ;
“ she  was  very  lively,  quick  in  her  movements  ; well
proportioned.  I see  a cap  on  her  head  ; she  has  three
small  ringlets  hanging  down  the  sides  in  front ; grey
hollow  eyes ; I believe  she  was  a fair  woman,  and  that
her  eyes  were  of  a light  blue  ; nose  rather  sharp,  mouth
somewhat  sunken,  and  back  rather  round.  She  wears
a dark,  striped  robe,  in  the  form  of  a peignoir,  fasten-
ing in  front ; I see,  too,  that  she  wears  a high  collar.”

The  following  is  the  gentleman’s  observation  : —

“ With  the  exception  of  the  ringlets,  these  details  appeal'
to  me  to  correspond  precisely  with  the  mother  of  the  person
asked  for.

(Signed)  “ Dejkan  de  la  Bastie,

“ 18,  Rue  Neuve  du  Luxembourg.

“ This  25th  August,  1848.”

We  have  already  made  an  observation  to  the  effect
that  some  persons  may  possibly  experience  a sort  of
weariness  at  reading  this  mass  of  testimonials  ; but  if
they  have  the  good  inspiration  to  remark  that  each
apparition  has  quite  a pecidiar  type,  they  will  the
better  know  how  to  appreciate  the  chain  and  ensemble
they  are  called  upon  to  form,  to  establish  in  them  a
firm  belief,  which  should  bring  them  sweet  consolation
and  hope.

142.  This  is  the  extract  of  a sitting,  written  down  by
a third  person,  who  was  witness  to  it,  which  will  give
a more  exact  idea  of  my  not  having  amplified  or  omitted
aught  in  the  preceding  sittings  as  to  the  futility  of  the
details  comprised  in  them,  and  as  to  the  facility  which
Adele  possesses  in  expounding  them.

Madame  de  Longueville,  who  has  great  doubts  as  to
the  possibility  of  spirits  appearing  to  somnambulists,
begs  Madame  Adele  to  ask  for  her  son  and  daughter,
who  had  been  dead  some  time.  Mademoiselle  Noem.ie
appeared,  as  having  died  first;  the  clairvoyante  thus
describes  her  : — “ She  appears  to  me  taller  than  her


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


143


mother ; she  has  auburn  hair,  a fine  forehead,  beautiful
eye-brovvSj  expressive  eyes,  lively,  intelligent,  and
steady  ; mouth  small,  chin  round,  slight  rosy-coloured
cheeks,  beautiful  hands,  roseate  nails;  she  appears  to
be  about  two-and-twenty  years  of  age ; she  suffered
from  an  affection  of  the  heart ; she  had  a slight  dry
cough,  and  was  troubled  with  pain  in  the  back;  the
blood  rushed  to  her  chest,  and  caused  an  inflammation  ;
she  was  also  frequently  troubled  with  a sore  throat,  and
pains  in  the  head ; she  wears  a dark-coloured  dress.^^

Madame  de  Longueville  acknowledsfes  the  exactitude
of  the  description,  and  the  morbid  symptoms  ; there
is  but  one  particular  inexact,  that  is  the  colour  of  the
hair,  which  was,  as  this  lady  expressed  herself,  of  a
mahogany  colour.  Adele  rej^lies,  that  no  doubt  this
young  lady  used  a good  deal  of  pomatum,  thus  making
her  hair  look  rather  darker.

Not  waiting  to  be  asked  for  appears  M.  Emile  de
Longueville,  whom  the  clairvoyante  thus  describes  : —
“ He  has  flaxen  hair,  very  fine  eyes  shaded  with  long
lashes ; forehead  not  so  high  as  his  sister’s ; he  is  thinner
than  she,  and  yet  he  has  a plump  white  hand  like  a
woman’s ; he  has  a small  mouth  in  the  form  of  a heart,
nose  well  formed,  but  not  of  the  same  shape  as  his
sister’s ; chin  rather  longer  than  hers ; he  was  melan-
choly and  suffered  in  the  chest;  the  cerebrum  was  too
small  to  lodge  all  the  great  ideas  that  he  would  have
entertained.  He  was  unfortunate  from  his  childhood,
very  good,  much  given  to  reflection,  and  this  no  doubt
considerably  enervated  him.”

Madame  de  Longueville  acknowledges  not  only  the
exactitude  of  the  physical,  moral,  and  intellectual  por-
trait of  her  child,  but  also  the  disease  of  the  lungs  of
which  he  died.

The  clairvoyante  then  sees  what  she  never  before  saw :
a ray  of  thread  of  a thousand  colours,  proceeding  from
the  hearts  of  the  two  children,  drawing  them  together
and  meeting  in  the  heart  of  the  mother;  the  two


144


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


children  say  that  they  are  constantly  around  their
mother ; it  was  they  who  gave  her  the  strength  to
undergo  all  the  trials  she  has  j^assed  through.  The
mother  desires  them  to  be  asked  whether  she  has  any
precautions  to  take  in  the  political  events  which  may
endanger  her  life  ; their  answer  is  to  the  effect  that  they
could  never  think  of  ■warning  her  of  obstacles  that  would
prevent  her  from  rejoining  them.  They  are  very
happy,  but  they  desire  her  to  be  with  them.  A lady
present,  who  was  acquainted  with  the  two  spirits  in  the
time  of  their  terrestrial  incarnation,  knowing  that  both,
beingjoA«/««5^mffW5,  believed  in  the  renewed  incarnation
of  souls  upon  earth,  desires  that  Emile  should  be  asked
whether  the  soul  is  incarnated  anew  on  earth  ; he
replies,  “No,  the  soul  does  not  return  into  a material
body,  il  is  sufficient  to  have  entered  it  once.”

The  clairvoyante  says  that  the  brother  and  sister  are
together  in  a beautiful  light,  more  brilliant  than  that  of
many  persons  who  died  before  them.  She  desires  to
see  Mademoiselle  Noemie  in  her  celestial  costume.  Her
hair  is  in  ringlets,  ornamented  with  a wreath  of  white
roses  ; she  is  dressed  in  white.  The  clairvoyante  accom-
panies her  when  the  latter  return  to  heaven.  She  enters
into  the  ecstatic  state;  her  magnetiser  brings  her  back  to
the  earth.  “ You  are  insupportable,”  said  she,  “I  should
not  have  stayed  very  long.  All  is  so  beautiful  there  and
she  played  such  delightful  music.”  “ On  earth,  too,
much  is  beautiful,”  replies  M.  Cahagnet.  “Anything
beautiful  on  earth  ? — what  horror  !”  exclaims  the  clair-
voyante. The  apparition  sitting  terminates.  She  then
AHsits  (spiritually)  Madame  de  Longueville  and  another
lady  present,  whom  she  tells  with  great  accuracy  what
they  suffer.  Left  alone  with  one  lady,  she  repeats  to
* her  exactly  what  the  clairvoyante  of  this  lady  had  told
her  a few  days  previously,  discloses  things  it  was  im-
possible for  her  to  have  known,  and  gives  her  advice
on  matters  this  lady  little  expected,  but  which  are  per-
fectly true.


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


145


“ Signed  the  v/hole  as  quite  exact.

Mesdames  Dk  Longukville,

I.  D’H  iiRicouHT,

“ Ve.  BiiioiN’x.”

143.  M.  Delaage,  a skilful  and  conscientious  mag-
netiser,  the  author  of  the  Initiations  into  the  Mysteries
of  Magnetism,  ” the  “ Classes  Disinherited,^’  &c.,  a
grandson  of  the  great  Chaptal,  a young  man  passionately
fond  of  the  study  of  the  occult  sciences,  and  better
enabled  than  any  other,  from  his  profound  kno\Yiedge  of
the  Hebrew,  Greek,  and  Latin  languages,  to  make  re-
searches in  the  sacred  sanctuary  of  mysticism,  came  one
day  to  ask  of  me  an  apparition-sitting,  desiring  to  con-
verse, as  he  said,  through  the  medium  of  Adhle  .with
the  solitaire  D’Orval,  whose  prophecies  he  had  com-
mented upon  in  the  “Almanach  de  la  Science  du
Diable,”  of  which  he  is  the  editor,  and  in  which  he  was
so  obliging  as  to  insert  my  cabalistic  calculation  as  to
the  probable  duration  of  the  republic  in  France.  I
hastened  to  gratify  his  wish.  Scarcely  was  iVdele  asleep
than  we  summoned  the  recluse  by  the  title  of:  The
author  of  the  IT  Orval  Prophecy.  This  man  forthwith
appeared.  I resolved  to  drive  him  away  in  the  name  of
God,  if  he  were  not  the  person  we  asked  for : despite
this  command  he  remained,  assuring  us  that  he  Avas  the
very  man.  Adels  says  to  us ; ‘‘I  am  certain  that  he  is
the  man.  Fie  appears  to  me  endowed  with  singular
goodness.  Fie  bears  the  stamp  of  gentleness  on  each
feature  of  his  physiognomy.  Fie  is  not  stout,  far  from
it,  he  is  very  thin  ; he  has  very  hollow  eyes,  a prominent
forehead,  sallow  complexion,  as  if  he  had  been  subject
to  privations,  or  fatigued  by  deep  study.  He  is  sur-
rounded by  a very  beautiful  light.  He  tells  me  that  he
made  his  exit  from  the  earth  more  than  two  hundred
years  ago.  But  you  are  not  aware,”  observes  Adelc,
“ that  time  with  them  being  no  more,  it  is  very  difficult
for  them  to  mark  it.” — “ Does  he  still  believe  in  the
fulfilment  of  his  prophecies,  concerning  France  and  the


146


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


destruction  of  Paris  “ Yes,  but  he  says  with  M.
Mallet  that  there  will  be  much  less  mischief  done  than
he  predicted.” — ^‘Was  he  mistaken  as  to  the  dates?”
“ He  thinks  not ; but  possibly  he  might ; at  any  rate
these  dates  will  be  odd  numbers,  5,  'J,  or  9.” — “Who
according  to  him,  will  succeed  the  republic  ?”  “ The

young  prince  in  question.” — “ I believe  that  this  solitaire
is  mistaken.  In  short  what  means  this  cock  and  this
lion  spoken  of  in  his  prophecy  ?”  “ It  is  an  alliance

that  he  will  contract  with  a friendly  power,  representing
force  by  the  lion  and  purity  by  the  lily.” — “ Does  he
think  that  war  between  those  who  have  and  those  who
have  notwill  exist?”  “'It  already  exists:  it  is  those
who  have  who  make  war  on  those  who  have  not.”
— “ But  those  who  have  not  will  they  make  war  on
those  who  have  ?”  “ Certainly,  and  they  will  prevail.”

— “ What  then  will  happen  ? Will  the  republic  reign  ?”

“ not  more  than  it  reigns  at  present;  it

will  be  terror,  such  as  now  r (reigns)  ; you  wdll

have  wished  it  to  r (reign),  you  will  have  given  the

example.” — “ Who  then  will  be  the  chiefs  ?”  “ They

will  emerge  from  obscurity.  They  will  awaken  like
spectres.  Oh ! blood  ! blood  ! there  will  be  oceans  of
blood !”  Adele  is  very  much  agitated.  I beg  of  M.
Delaage  not  to  question  her  any  more  on  this  subject.
She  exclaims : “ I see  a 3.  I know  not  whether  it
means  three  months  or  three  years  ! ! ! Poor  people,
thus  to  butcher  each  other  for  one  man  ! ! Oh  ! grief ;
oh  ! civilization.”

M.  Delaage  desires  that  his  grandfather  M.  J.  B.
Chaptal  should  appear.  Adele  forthwith  sees  him.  He
has,”  said  she,  “ grey  hair ; lively,  intelligent  eyes,
magnificent  forehead,  smooth  and  not  wrinkled  as  old
men^s  usually  are ; there  is  a small  protuberance  on
each  side,  complexion  clear  and  rosy,  nose  well  formed,
but  rather  long,  middling-sized  mouth,  thick  lips,  chin
rather  long,  fine  corpulence.  He  wears  a great  coat,
such  as  we  no  longer  see  now-a-days,  with  large  pockets


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


14/


at  the  sides,  and  trimmings  to  his  sleeves  of  a very  dark
colour ; ^tis  like  hair,  or,  at  least,  it  seems  to  me  so.
He  was  a meditative  man,  having  very  elevated  ideas.
Oh  ! how  learned  he  was.  He  devoted  himself  much
to  science,  and  believed  in  the  immortality  of  the  soul.
This  man  wrote  a great  deal.”  M.  Delaage  causes
several  questions  to  be  put  to  him  concerning  his  future
prospects.  The  gentleman  advises  his  grandson  to  con-
tinue his  researches  in  the  occult  sciences,  and  termi-
nate the  great  philosophical  work  he  is  about.  He
promises  him  complete  success.  After  several  ques-
tions, quite  personal  to  himself,  M.  Delaage  thanks
Adele,  and  assures  her  that  all  the  details  he  has  heard
are  very  exact.  I was  about  to  awaken  her,  when  she
exclaims  : — Ah  ! M.  D’Orval  is  still  there.  I no
longer  noticed  him.  This  honest  man  appears  to  me
so  good  that  I repent  not  having  bid  him  good  by.”
“ Since  he  is  still  present,  ask  him  where  we  might  find
a copy  of  his  prophecies  ?”  He  answers  that  there
are  several  of  them  With  different  persons,  who  would
be  unwilling  to  part  with  them.  There  is  one  copy  in
the  possession  of  an  old  woman  at  Verdun.”  M.  De-
laage says  that  scarcely  a week  ago  he  heard  what  the
solitaire  has  just  stated — that  an  old  woman  at  Verdun
actually  does  possess  a copy  of  the  prophecies.  The
solitaire  retires,  and  Adele  continues  answering  psycho-
logical questions  put  to  her  by  M.  Delaage,  and  also
M.  Roustan,  who  was  present  at  this  sitting.  The
latter  desires  to  know  whether  we  are  born  more  than
once  on  earth  ? Adele  says,  “ No,”  and  strives  to  per-
suade him  of  this  truth  by  arguments  as  ingenious  as
they  are  sensible.  She  loses  her  time,  becomes  fatigued,
and  I rouse  her.  M.  Delaage  shares  not  in  the  opinion
of  narrow-minded  magnetisers.  He  is  far  from  be-
lieving in  the  transmission  of  thoughts,  and  congra-
tulates Adele  on  the  happy  doctrine  she  has  been  called
upon  to  teach  men,  by  affording  them  the  means  of  so
easily  verifying,  through  somnambulism,  the  immortal
and  individualised  existence  of  the  soul.


148


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


I


OBSERVATIONS.


As  I have  said  in  the  first  volume,  this  work  is  far  from
presenting  the  interest  of  romance  by  its  necessarily
broken  and  abrupt  style.  Hence  it  will  be  found  better
suited  to  the  amateurs  of  science  than  to  readers  pas-
sionately fond  of  the  poetical  descriptions  in  our  ro-
mances of  the  day.  I have  sought  to  render  the  style
as  clear  as  possible  by  stripping  it  of  that  entourage  of
questions  and  scenes  foreign  to  revelations  of  this  kind.  I
hold  less  to  writing  well  than  to  persuading  thoroughly.
Had  I made  my  clairvoyants  speak  like  the  actors  in
the  “Thousand-and-One  Nights,^’  it  might  have  been
thought,  and  with  reason,  that  I presented  a sequel  to
it.  No,  I have  remained  within  the  limits  of  austere
truth,  acting  the  part  of  an  impartial  historian,  present-
ing to  the  philoso])hy  of  the  day  facts  in  ail  their
nudity,  but  also  in  all  their  sincerity.  I have  followed
up  each  apparition  with  observations  independent  of
any  systems ; connecting,  in  order,  each  fact  with  the
ensemble  of  the  facts  pre-cited,  in  order  to  assist  the
reader  in  drawing  from  the  whole  the  consequences  he
deems  fit.  I have  not  thought  it  necessary  to  offer  him
a greater 'number  of  testimonials,  thinking  that,  if  he
admits  but  one,  the  rest  are  superfluous,  and  would
appear  to  him  wearisome.  1 have  not  omitted  the
address  of  the  persons  who  signed  them,  and  I hold  the
originals  at  the  disposition  of  those  who  may  think
proper  to  see  them.  I believe  I now  ought  to  present
the  facts  which  have  been  communicated  to  me  by  mag-
netisers,  and  other  estimable  persons  who  have,  like  me,
made  a sacrifice  of  their  name  to  truth,  for  they  are
aware  of  the  appellation  reserved  for  them.  I beg  the
reader  to  peruse  them  calmly,  and  not  reject  the  mar-


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


149


vellous  which  some  of  them  contain.  If  I give  pub-
licity to  them,  it  is  because  I believe  that  I shall  have
it  in  my  power  to  demonstrate  the  possibility  of  them
in  the  work  on  occult  philosophy  I am  about.  Since  I
announced  myself  as  willing  to  replace  faith  by  experi-
ment, it  would  be  ridiculous  enough  in  me  to  announce
facts  which  could  be  accepted  only  through  faith.  To
be  consistent  with  what  I advance,  and  not  to  be  de-
serving of  the  name  of  a madman,  which  might  then  be
rightly  decreed  me  if  I no  longer  kept  in  the  path  I
traced  out  for  myself,  I ought  to  give  a receivable  ex-
planation of  what  I take  leave  to  publish,  and  I will
keep  my  word.

The  fore-mentioned  facts  are  about  to  be  preceded  by
two  scenes  of  departure  from  this  globe,  which  are  not
devoid  of  a certain  interest  for  the  science  in  w'hich  we
are  engaged.


LAST  MOMENTS  OF  ELISA.

We  were  devoting  all  our  care  to  a young  woman,  named
Elisa,  of  whom  mention  is  made  in  the  first  volume  of
this  wmrk.  She  was  about  twenty-four  years*  of  age,
and  dying  slowly  of  consumption.  Adele  follow'ed  the
progress  of  the  disease  without  being  able  to  arrest  it;
she  knew  v/hat  dread  this  frail  creature  had  of  death,
and  perceived  the  unheard-of  efforts  she  made  to  cling
to  life.  Oh  ! what  a life  was  hers ! for  a thousand
others  it  would  have  been  a dreadful  torture.  This
unfortunate  came  every  day  to  receive  the  consolations
of  our  good  clairvoyante,  who  tried  to  persuade  her  that
in  less  than  a month  she  would  be  radically  cured ; to
me,  however,  she  wmuld  say,  In  a month  she  wdll  be
no  longer  amongst  us.”  How  painful  w'as  it  to  see  this
poor  w-oman  ascend  one  by  one  our  stairs,  take  rest  by


150


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


sitting  down  on  the  last  stair  of  each  floor,  in  order  to
come  and  hear  her  friend  say  that  she  would  not  die  ;
with  what  an  outpouring  of  the  heart  did  she  press  her
hands  when  she  gave  her  this  consolation.  She  would
go  away  with  renewed  strength,  to  purchase  a few  drugs
to  make  an  emollient  ptisan,  and  go  to  bed  ; it  was  one
day  more  passed  in  this  so  cherished  an  existence.  At
length,  one  evening,  a message  was  brought,  begging  us
to  visit  her  at  a distance,  inasmuch  as  she  could  no
longer  leave  her  bed.  Adele  said,  “ She  has  not  twenty-
four  hours  to  be  amongst  us.”  We  were  soon  with  her,
to  assure  her  that  she  was  in  a salutary  crisis,  the  issue
of  which  would  be  a most  happy  one.  ‘‘  May  God  hear
you,”  replied  she.  We  watched  over  her  all  night,  and
gathered  the  following  words,  which  she  addressed  to
each  of  us  : —

To  her  husband — “Why  do  you  weep  since  Adele
says  that  I am  not  consumptive,  and  that  there  is  no
danger  ? Still,  I spit  a good  deal ; how  thick  and  dis-
gusting are  my  expectorations.  Oh  ! she  is  deceived  ;
she  sees  me  dying  and  strives  to  console  me — ’tis  quite
natural — Tis  humane.  Thanks,  my  good  AdMe,  thanks  ;
but  I — I,  too,  am  a seer ; heaven  and  eternity  are  open
to  me.  I know  what  my  complaint  is  now  !”  (To  me)
“Alphonse,  w^hy  are  you  so  sad?  Do  you  fear  seeing
me  happy  ?”  “ No,”  replied  I,  “ but  I suffer  at  seeing

you  suffer.” — “ You  deceive  me.  I read  in  the  thoughts,
and  you  are  not  sufficiently  strong  in  your  beliefs  to  see
your  friends  pass  into  the  future  existence.  It  is  need-
less any  longer  concealing  from  me  my  position.  I see
beside  me  this  poor  corpse  in  which  I suffered  so  much,
and  which  still  makes  me  suffer  so  much  in  quitting  it.
Ah  ! could  you  but  see  within  it ; ’tis  like  a butchery  in
ruins,  every  morsel  in  which  is  spoiled ; the  heart  is
dead  like  the  rest,  and  to  think  that  I was  and  am  able
to  depart  only  when  I shall  have  turned  out  all  this.
Ah  ! there  is  enough  yet  for  some  hours.  Do  not  grow
out  of  patience — it  must  be  so;  I cling  to  it  by  its


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


151


very  rottenness.  Oh  ! my  father,  you  are  happy,  you —
what — you  expect  me  ? and  you,  little  angel,  you  that
hold  out  to  me  your  arms — pretty  creature  that  I bore
in  my  bosom.  I am  about,  then,  to  be  reunited  to  you,
never  more  to  part.  A whole  eternity  you  shall  be  with
me  ; how  foolish  I was  to  fear  death — I long  now  to
be  dead.  I feel,  on  the  contrary,  that  I am  being  born.
What  beautiful  things  the  heavens  contain  ! Ah  ! God
of  goodness,  forgive  me.  Friends,  pray  for  me — but  no,
it  is  I that  will  pray  for  you.  I have  no  longer  but  a
small  morsel,  about  as  big  as  the  thumb,  to  spit  out —
but  it  still  clings  fast.  My  God,  rid  me  of  it ! Al-
phonse, believe  in  another  life  ; the  only  regret  I have
is,  not  seeing  you  reduced  to  my  state.  Adele  said  that
we  had  the  same  disease ; she  was  mistaken.  You  have
yet  a long  time  to  suffer  ; you — I am  happy — I go.  Be-
lieve in  the  divine  goodness.  Farewell  V’

Thus  ended  this  young  woman,  who  so  dearly  che-
rished existence,  who  used  to  laugh  whenever  I spoke
to  her  of  the  life  to  come,  whilst  admiring  her  beautiful
black  hair,  and  saying  : — “ It  is  better  to  stand  still
than  run.  I don^t  say  nay,  but  I have  no  wish  to
assure  myself  of  it.^^

For  twenty-four  hours  she  was  in  a continual  ecstacy,
describing  her  disease,  just  as  Adele  had  seen  it,
knowing  our  thoughts  like  ourselves,  speaking  of  death
with  the  irony  produced  by  a contrary  conviction ;
praising  the  beauties  of  heaven  with  that  admiration,
of  which  all  beings  detached  from  the  earth,  and  re-
turning to  the  places  of  their  first  childhood,  are  sus-
ceptible. I wept ; I know  not  whether  it  was  from
regret  at  losing  her,  or  vexation  at  not  being  able  to
accompany  her.  Laugh,  men  of  the  age — the  scene
invites  laughter  ; you  will  pass,  like  us  all,  through  this
last  trial,  which  you  cannot  shun ; to  prepare  your-
selves for  it,  be  present  at  the  last  moments  of  the
dying — they  are  almost  all  seers  at  this  solemn  hour.
They  will  make  you  comprehend  that  between  you  and


152


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


tlie  grave  there  is  but  one  step;  and  that,  between
your  incredulity  and  the  truth,  there  is  an  abyss  that
vou  will  never  be  able  to  clear,  if  you  remain  under
the  empire  of  your  satirical  judgment.  Close  not,
therefore,  your  hearts  and  ears  against  men  more
humble  than  ^murself — men  who  desire  to  cure  you  of
the  fear  of  death;  for,  at  this  supreme  moment,  you
will  be  in  fear,  w'hen  you  behold  that  lugubrious  piece
of  furniture,  composed  of  five  planks,  awaiting  this
dearly-loved  body,  v/hich  forms  the  ornament  of  your
civilization ; what,  it  must  be  thrown  into  this  hole,
where  a multitude  of  worms  await  it  to  make  off  it  a
splendid  feast;  what  is  it  then  to  be  the  object  of
such  abandonment,  and  such  contempt?  What  it  was
— nothing  ! It  is  because  I know  that  you  already
tremble  at  the  thought  of  this  sad  cerem.ony,  that  I
write  these  lines,  to  teach  you  how  to  die,  to  calm  the
fear  that  gains  upon  you.  If  I succeed  in  gaining  this
victory  by  the  experiments  I recommend  you  to  make,
you  will  not  treat  me  as  a madman ; you  will  believe
in  God,  in  a better  life,  and  you  will  know  how  to
prepare  for  this  departure  with  calm  and  courage — ay,
more — with  joy  !


THE  LAST  MOMENTS  OF  MY  FATHER.

The  2nd  of  April,  1848,  I was  devoting  all  my  care  to
my  dearly-beloved  father,  formerly  a long-course  Captain
in  the  commercial  navy ; a man  possessed  of  a dispo-
sition far  from  credulous,  and  a soul  thoroughly  steeped
in  the  effluvia  of  a materialism,  admitting  only  what
matter  sees  and  touches.  lie  was  eighty  years  old,
and  greatly  dreaded  death,  constantly  repeating  : — “ I
well  know  where  I am,  but  I don’t  know  wiiither  I am
going.  I cast  anchor  on  this  globe,  and  may  God  hold
It  here  as  long  as  possible.”


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


153


I had  rejoiced  at  the  time  of  the  printing  of  the
“ Secrets/^  thinking  that  I should  dispose  his  heart,  by
their  perusal,  to  beliefs  more  cheering  as  to  the  future
than  those  taught  by  the  philosophy  of  the  day;  he
contented  himself  with  a toss  of  the  head,  and  said  to
me  : — “ I like  better  to  believe  it  than  going  there  to  see
it ; I believe,  however,  in  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  but
am  not  sure  of  its  individuality,  though  I am  disposed
to  admit  it,  from  the  magnetic,  somnambulic,  and
ecstatic  experiments  of  which  you  have  rendered  me
witness.  Were  I tvA^'enty  years  younger,  I would  study,
with  all  my  heart,  to  modify  my  belief  in  this  respect ;
but  now  it  is  somewhat  late  to  do  so  with  success.
Besides,  I shall  soon  know  what  to  make  of  it !”

In  such  frame  of  mind  was  it  that  he  fell  ill,  and
remained  eight  days  a prey  to  the  acute  sufferings  of  a
suffocating  asthma ; the  doctor  could  afford  him  no
relief ; several  persons  magnetised  him  as  well  as  myself,
each  in  his  turn.  His  delirious  state  admitted  not  of
his  thinking  himself  so  near  to  attaining  this  solution
of  the  individuality  of  the  soul,  but,  at  the  moment
supreme,  reason  appeared  to  make  a last  effort,  and
tame  the  disorder  of  his  ideas.  He  said  to  us  : — What
the  doctor  has  hitherto  prescribed  has  produced  nought
and  will  produce  nought,  because  I am  going  ! My
body  has  already  been  dead  for  some  hours.  I am
still  bound  to  it  by  a few  fibres  that  you  can  aid  me  to
burst  by  magnetising  me  to  the  tips  of  my  toes.  Give
me  but  magnetised  water,  that’s  all  I want  for  the
moment.”  “ Why  speak  to  me  of  death  ? — why  think
of  it  ? You  are  much  better  than  you  were  yesterday,
and,  in  a few  days,  you  will  be  re-established.” — “You
are  right,  I shall  shortly  be  better;  my  agony  will  be
long,  because  the  soul  cannot  quit  the  body  before  cast-
ing out  all  that  is  destined  to  come  out,  and  facilitate
its  passage.  Hence  it  is  that  there  still  remains  for
me  a great  deal  to  spit  out.  The  magnetised  water
loosens  all  this,  give  me  some  pretty  often.” — “ Do  not

M


154


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


be  thus  cast  down,”  replied  I ; “ your  condition  is  not
so  hopeless  as  you  imagine.”  My  condition  is  not
unknown  to  me  : I see  my  body  stretched  out  on  this
bed,  it  is  really  dead,  and  you  will  have  it  buried  to-
morrow ; I am  no  longer  within  it,  I merely  cling  to  it
by  a few  threads,  the  hour  is  not  yet  come.  You  will
calm  this  crisis — but  I shall  have  another,  which  will
be  the  last.  They  expect  me  up  above — patience,
patience — I shall  soon  be  with  you.”  A few  hours  had
scarcely  elapsed,  and  this  departure  had  taken  place  !

During  this  long  agony  I searched  with  my  look  and
my  thought  on  the  edge  of  those  lips  through  which
the  last  breath  was  to  pass,  that  breath  named  the  soul,
because  it  is  the  life  of  it ! I looked  by  the  bedside,
saying  to  myself : — “ He  says  that  his  soul  is  there —
and  still  causes  his  body  to  act ! Oh ! problem  in-
soluble ! speech,  doubtless  dragged  from  the  soul  to  the
body  by  a current,  a sympathising  thread,  which  this
half  disorganised  matter  still  breathes,  forms  an  echo  in
its  interior,  as  we  obtain  an  echo  in  places  adapted  to
produce  such  effect.  So  long  as  this  inappreciable
breath  is  in  activity,  the  whole  machine  works,  though
it  is  proved  to  me  that  the  soul  has  issued  from  it
through  every  pore ; the  breath,  then,  is  the  drop  of  oil
which  the  wheels  await  in  order  to  move  !

O God,  infinitely  great ! O departure  infinitely  de-
sired, hurry  me  on  in  thy  eternal  course,  that  I may
measure  with  the  eye  and  the  spirit  that  immensity
which  separates  me  from  the  true  light;  come  and  tear
off  the  material  bandage  that  covers  my  eyes  ! come
and  purify  this  atmosphere,  which  poisons  my  soul  with
errors  ; oh  ! divine  light,  descend  on  me  !

O,  my  God  ! couldst  thou  have  animated  me  to  refuse
me  reason  ? for  what  we  term  reason  is  folly — what  we
name  life  and  movement  is  death! — is  nothingness!
Scarcely  a few  seconds  ago,  I had  near  me  a father,  a
friend — where  is  he  ? Has  he  lived  eighty  years  to
arrive  at  the  state  of  a corpse  ? Oh ! no,  he  told  me


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


155


he  was  departing  to  another  world;  at  that  moment
supreme  the  word  of  man  is  sacred ; I am  bound  to
believe  him,  and  hope  to  rejoin  him.  This  departure
is  but  an  infinite  chain,  dragging  after  it  myriads  of
beings  in  the  stalls  joined  to  each  of  its  rings.  He  is
in  one,  I in  another,  we  shall  arrive  at  the  same  port,
within  a few  days  of  each  other,  never  more  to  part !


CORRESPONDENCE.

TO  M.  CAHAGNET,  AUTHOR  OP  THE  ‘ SECRETS  OP  THE  LIFE
TO  COME  REVEALED.’

“ Monsieur — I have  read  your  work  of  the  ‘ Secrets,’  and,
though  believing  you  sincere,  its  perusal,  nevertheless,  left  a
doubt,  which  I wished  wholly  to  remove.  Having  sometimes
the  facility  of  being  in  communication  with  a somnambulist,
whose  excellent  clairvoyance  I am  well  acquainted  with,  I pro-
posed to  myself  requesting  her  to  ask  for  a few  apparitions.
If  I succeeded,  the  evidence  was  there  for  me.  If  I failed,
should  not  from  this  infer  that  you  were  an  impostor,  but  I
should  not  be  satisfied,  and  should  have  endeavoured  to  seize
another  opportunity.  At  my  first  trial,  however,  I was  des-
tined to  be  positively  enlightened ; for  this  is  what  happened
to  me  : —

“ I will  say,  in  the  first  place,  that  this  somnambulist  is  one
of  my  sisters,  who  resides  at  a distance  of  fifteen  leagues  from
Paris,  and  this  accounts  for  my  not  being  often  with  her.  On
the  5th  of  February,  1848,  I magnetise  my  sister,  and  hold
with  her  the  following  discourse  : — ‘ Have  you  not  already
told  me  that  we  could  cause  deceased  persons  to  appear  ?’

‘ Yes.’ — ‘ Will  you  try  now  ?’  ‘ Yes.  What  person  do  you

desire  to  see?’  ‘My  father.’ — ‘Well,  let  us  both  ask  for
him.’  At  the  lapse  of  a few  instants  she  says  : — ‘ Here  he  is.’
— ‘ How  do  you  see  him  ?’  ‘ In  striped  grey  pantaloons,  white

waistcoat,  brown  riding  coat ; he  has  the  same  features  as  we
knew  him  to  have.’ — ‘ Ask  him  if  he  will  answer  a few  ques-
tions ?’  ‘ He  makes  no  reply.’ — ' Earnestly  beg  him  to  answer

M 2


156


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


you  ?’  ‘ He  tells  me  that  he  is  willing  to  do  so,’ — ‘Ask  him

if  he  is  happy?’  ‘Yes.’ — ‘Has  he  seen  God?’  ‘Not  yet;
but  he  is  in  hopes  of  seeing  him  shortly.’ — ‘ Has  he  seen  our
grandmother  ?’  ‘ No.’ — ‘ How  is  that  ?’  ‘ Because  she  is  not

with  him.’ — ‘ Does  he  think  that  you  can  see  her  ?’  ‘ Yes.’ —

‘ What  means  employ  ?’  ‘The  same  as  for  him.’ — My  father
disappeared.  This  apparition  is  indeed  real,  I am  convinced
of  it  now  ; but  I feared  lest  it  should  he  the  image  of  my
father  presenting  itself  to  my  sister’s  memory.  Two  days  after
I asked  for  another;  this  time  it  was  my  wife’s  brother,  whom
I never  saw,  and  my  sister  has  not  the  least  knowledge  of ; he
died  eight  years  ago.  All  I know  of  him  is  his  name  ; I asked
for  him.  She  says  to  me : — ‘ Here  he  is.’ — ‘ On  what  side
does  he  appear  to  you  ?’  ‘ On  my  right.’ — ‘ Give  me  a descrip-
tion of  him.’  ‘He  is  rather  light,  has  dark  blue  eyes,  long
face ; wears  blue  trowsers,  dark  brown  w'aistcoat,  dress  coat.’
— ‘ Has  he  already  appeared  to  his  sister  ?’  ‘ Yes,  once  only.’

— ‘Is  he  happy?’  ‘Yes.’ — ‘Where  is  he?’  ‘ In  heaven.’ —
‘Are  there  several  heavens  ?’  ‘ Yes.’ — ‘ How  many  ?’  ‘ Three.’
— ‘ Has  he  seen  God  ?’  ‘ Yes.’ — ‘ Has  he  always  seen  him  ?’

‘ No.’ — ‘ Since  when  has  he  seen  him  ?’  ‘ Since  his  appearing

to  his  sister.’ — ‘ In  what  form  does  he  see  God  ?’  ‘ God  is  a

spirit.’ — ‘ Could  he  tell  me  whether  God  has  any  form  ?’  ‘ He

sees  him  only  in  the  form  of  a sun.’ — ‘ Can  it  be  the  sun  that
enlightens  us  ?’  ‘ Yes.  But  stop,  he  tells  me  that  I am  mis-

taken, that  he  did  not  say  that ; this  sun  cannot  be  visible  to
us.’ — ‘ Is  it  true  that  we  have  each  beside  us  a good  angel  and
an  evil  spirit  ? I can’t  believe  it.’  ‘ It  is  true,  however.’ —

‘ Is  there  a hell  wherein  we  are  everlastingly  burned?’  ‘ No.’
— ‘ Then  what  is  the  punishment  allotted  to  those  who  have
done  evil  ?’  ‘ They  are  deprived  of  the  sight  of  God  for  a time

more  or  less  long.’ — ‘ The  Jews,  Mahometans,  &c.,  do  they,
equally  with  the  Catholics,  enjoy  the  sight  of  God  ?’  ‘ Oh  !

yes,  certainly.’ — ‘ Ask  him  if  you  can  see  your  good  angel  ?’

‘ Yes.’ — ‘What  must  be  done  to  effect  this  ?’  ‘ We  must  pray
to  God  to  grant  us  this  favour.’ — My  brother-in-law  disap-
pears, We  both  put  up  prayers  to  the  Almighty  to  permit  his
angel  to  appear  ; at  the  lapse  of  an  instant,  she  says  : — ‘ Here
he  is’. — ‘ Where  is  he  ?’  ‘ On  my  right.’ — ‘ How  does  he  ap-

pear?’ ‘ In  white  ; he  has  flaxen  hair  and  wings.’ — ‘ What  is  his
name?’  ‘Gabriel.’ — ‘ Has  he  lived  on  earth  ?’  ‘Yes.’ — ‘When


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


157


deceased  persons  appear,  is  it  the  body  in  which  we  have  known
them  on  earth  that  appears  ?’  ‘ No.’ — ‘ Then  why  are  they  so

much  alike,  and  dressed  as  they  were  amongst  us  ?’  ‘ Be-

cause, otherwise,  it  would  be  impossible  to  recognise  them.’ —

‘ What  form,  then,  has  this  soul  when  separated  from  its
material  body  ?’  ‘ It  resembles  the  body  in  form.’ — ‘ Do  we

live  in  heaven  as  on  earth  ?’  ‘ It  is  not  the  same  existence.’ —

‘ What  do  we  do  there  } — have  we  desires,  and  can  we  gratify
them  ?’  ‘ Yes.’ — ‘ Do  we  see  again  the  persons  w^e  loved  on

earth?’  ‘Yes,  there  comes  a time  when  we  meet  again.’ —

‘ Are  there  houses,  gardens  ?’  ‘ It  is  a garden.’ — ‘ Could  he

conduct  you  to  heaven  ?’  ‘ Yes,  by-and-by.’ — He  disappears.

“ On  my  return  to  Paris,  I hastened  to  make  my  wife
acquainted  with  the  description  of  her  brother ; she  was  quite
astonished,  and  acknowledged  the  whole  as  very  exact.  What
seemed  to  her  most  extraordinaiy  was  the  apparition  she  had
once  seen  just  as  my  sister  had  said,  and  her  brother  wore  the
dress  described  by  ray  clairvoyante,  a dress  precisely  the  same
as  what  he  used  to  put  on  every  Sunday.  My  wife  added  : —
What  is  most  singular  is,  that  I never  dreamt  of  my  brother
but  this  once  I now  speak  of,  till  last  night,  when  he  again
appeared  to  me  just  as  before.

“ Thus,  monsieur,  as  to  the  questions  I addressed  to  her,  as
well  as  to  ray  sister’s  angel,  it  was  simply  to  see  how  far  their
answers  would  correspond  with  those  you  recount  in  your
work.  I have  seen  with  pleasure  that  they  were  almost  in  all
points  alike.

“ Since  then  I have  obtained  three  more  apparitions,  which
have  succeeded  perfectly  well.  I had  but  one  error,  in  a date
of  thirty  years  instead  of  thirty-four,  and  I am  surprised  that
the  persons  who  appear  thus  do  not  make  mistakes  oftener ;
for  all  that  has  taken  place  on  earth  becoming  quite  worthless
to  them  in  the  state  they  are,  and  no  longer  setting  any  value
on  earthly  things,  I cannot  conceive  how  they  can  answer  with
so  much  precision.

“ Thus,  monsieur,  I have  obtained  five  apparitions  quite  real
in  my  mind ; three  of  the  personages  who  appeared  were
wholly  unknown  to  me,  as  well  as  to  my  clairvoyante.  I can,
therefore,  no  longer  entertain  the  least  doubt ; and  whatever
be  the  opinion  of  simple  or  titled  persons,  who  should  attempt,
from  the  Christian  pulpit  or  the  Academic  chair,  to  deny  the


158


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


truth  of  these  perceptions,  it  would  be  impossible  for  them  to
shake  my  faith  in  this  respect ; and  I say  more — I do  myself
an  honour  in  sharing  the  name  they  will  give  you,  even  were
it  that  of  impostor.  We  are  now  a great  body  of  sincere
magnetisers,  who  would  say  to  them  : — We  are  in  the  truth,
and  you  in  the  darkness  !

“ Receive  my  sincere  salutations.

(Signed)  “L.  J.  Lecocq,

“ Marine  Clock-maker,  9,  Rue  de  Calais,  Argenteuil.”

I will  not  take  the  liberty  of  making  any  observation
on  the  sitting  we  have  just  read,  wishing  to  leave  the
reader  sole  judge  in  this  grave  question,  and  subject  him
to  no  influence.  However,  I begged  M.  Lecocq,  when
he  should  have  an  opportunity  of  seeing  his  sister  again,
to  submit  to  her  the  following  questions ; this  he  did
with  an  obliging  eagerness,  and  sent  me  the  answer  we
are  about  to  read.

“ I caused  to  appear  a spirit  that  has  enjoyed  for  some  time
the  presence  of  God  ; I suppose  him  in  a fit  state  to  answer
your  questions,  the  result  of  which  I communicate  to  you.  I
caused  this  spirit  to  be  asked  ; —

“ 1st.  On  leaving  its  material  body  whither  goes  the  soul }

“ In  the  first  place  the  soul  goes  straight  up  to  its  Creator,
to  be  judged  according  to  its  works;  then  finds  itself  placed  in
a state  correspondent  with  its  actions.  In  this  state  we  find
ourselves  in  heaven.

“ 2nd.  What  does  it  do  in  those  places  ?

“ It  ends  with  enjoying  celestial  happiness,  perfect  joy.  It
can  no  longer  desire  anything  better.

“ 3rd.  What  is  there  in  those  places  ?

“ Whatsoever  we  desire  to  see  there.

“ 4th.  How  long  a time  does  it  remain  in  those  places  ?

“ It  remains  there  for  ever.

" 5th.  But,  however,  if  it  again  inhabits  material  bodies,
how  can  that  be  ?

“ Since  it  remains  in  heaven  for  ever,  it  does  not  inhabit
again  other  material  bodies.  God  has  said : ‘ Whosoever
dwells  in  the  heavens  with  me,  dwells  in  them  for  ever  !’

“ 6th.  Does  every  one  finally  dwell  in  heaven  or  only  a few?


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


159


“ Every  one  finally  dwells  there  ; only  there  are  some  who
are  a very  long  time  before  being  in  this  state.

“ 7th.  How  does  the  soul  know  that  it  is  asked  for  on  earth  ?

“ That  depends  in  the  first  place  on  God,  who  permits  men
to  be  convinced,  by  these  apparitions,  of  the  immortality  of  the
soul.

“ 8th.  How  does  it  manage  to  appear  thus  in  all  the  details
of  its  material  body,  and  in  the  dress  it  wore  on  earth  ?

“ It  is  an  image  imprinted  on  it.

“ 9th.  At  times  there  is  something  wanted  in  its  features,  or
the  ensemble  of  its  costume ; what  is  the  cause  of  this  }

“ That  cannot  and  ought  not  to  exist,  but  there  maybe  causes
which  I am  unable  to  apprehend.

“ 14th  September,  1848.”

If  I caused  these  questions  to  be  put  by  M.  Lecocq
to  his  clairvoyante,  it  was  in  order  to  obtain  a clear
solution  on  them  as  a whole,  foreseeing  that  his  sister
was  of  an  order  sufficiently  elevated  to  answer  them.

To  the  eight  questions  she  replies  that  the  features
and  dress  in  which  spirits  appear  are  imprinted  on  them.
Such  is  Adble’s  explanation,  and  this  accounts  for  the
mistakes  (very  rare,  it  is  true)  which  clairvoyants  may
make  in  the  descriptions  they  give  us  of  these  spirits.
Each  dress  worn  during  the  life  of  the  individual  being
imprinted  on  his  spiritual  body,  as  each  point  of  view  or
exterior  image  is  imprinted  in  the  domain  of  his  memory,
better  named  imagination,  it  is  not,  therefore,  astonishing
that  if  the  spirit  asked  for  wore  a blue  dress  coat  at  the
age  of  thirty  (for  instance),  and  a surtout  at  fifty,  the
clairvoyant’s  eye,  according  as  it  is  more  or  less  piercing,
will  be  able  to  traverse  three  or  four  similar  impresses
which  cannot,  as  we  may  suppose,  be  very  deep,  and
then  commit  involuntary  errors,  the  cause  of  which  being
unknown  would  give  rise  to  the  supposition  of  a real
error  or  a false  apparition.  Let  the  reader  consult  on
this  head  what  Adele  has  said  at  sitting  101.  I have
deemed  these  observations  necessary  for  persons  who
study  this  kind  of  perceptions,  and  warn  them  not  to


160


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


reject  every  apparition  the  details  of  which  they  may  not
recognise  as  very  exact.  The  clairvoyance  of  the  subject
may  be  of  great  weight  in  the  goodness  of  the  perception.

" Monsieur. — Allow  me  to  discourse  with  you  a moment  on
the  extraordinary  things  I have  read  in  your  ‘ Secrets,’  I
thought  myself  knowing  in  magnetism  before  reading  your
work,  but  now  I find  myself ‘like  a man  wdio  springs  out  of
nothingness  and  only  commences  his  birth.  What  obligation
am  I not  under  to  you.  Monsieur,  for  having  enlightened  me
on  matters  which  I suspected,  and  left  me  tugging  in  a torrent
of  doubts.  I required  a little  aid,  and  I have  found  it  in  your
book.  I return  you  my  most  sincere  thanks  for  it,  and  beg
you  to  thank  in  my  name  Madame  Adele,  the  earthly  angel
who  has  been  so  kind  as  to  initiate  us  into  the  holy  mysteries
of  the  divine  power.  How  happy  I deem  her  w^hom  God  has
made  use  of  as  an  instrument  to  reveal  to  men  truths  which  had
been  hitherto  almost  hidden  from  or  doubtful  to  their  intelli-
gence. I beg  the  Almighty  to  be  pleased  to  continue  his
work,  trusting  by  his  divine  support,  that  all  men  will  become
less  proud  on  earth  and  learn  that  they  are  but  atoms  compared
with  the  great  ruler  of  the  universe.  I venture  to  hope  that
the  harmony  which  ought  to  reign  amongst  those  infinitely
petty  beings  is  not,  doubtless,  far  from  its  dawn.  * * * ♦

I do  not  pretend  to  have  a wish  to  refute  anything  in  your
excellent  work  ; on  the  contrary,  my  feeble  mind  is  assuredly
unable  to  comment  on  revelations  so  sublime !

“ Still,  reflections  innumerable  have  come  to  puzzle  my
brains  when  1 read  in  many  passages  that  ^ce  eat  in  heaven  ; I
knew  not  what  to  make  of  this  word  eat,  which  was  no  longer
in  harmony  with  all  that  is  so  beautiful  ih  the  descriptions  of
your  terrestrial  angel.  Most  fortunately  I am  somewhat  of  a
somnambulist.  I begged  of  my  brother  to  be  so  kind  as  to
send  me  to  sleep,  that  I might  clear  up  this  expression,  which
ofibred  me  some  doubts.  When  1 was  in  a crisis  and  after  a
short  time  given  to  reflection,  I began  to  laugh.  My  brother
asked  me  the  cause  of  my  doing  so,  and  I said  to  him —

‘ Harkye,  my  friend,  I am  about  to  make  clear  to  you  what  just
now  engaged  my  thoughts.  The  expression  eat  is  a terrestrial
word  which  the  spirit  could  not  render  otherwise  to  be  under-
stood of  men  ; in  many  circumstances  it  is  obliged  to  proceed


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


161


thus,  otherwise  it  would  be  beset  with  questions  which  by
being  recapitulated  tend  to  fatigue  it ; for  oftentimes  a questioner
reverts,  unwittingly,  half  a score  times,  to  the  same  subject,
and  the  celestial  spirit  must  be  endowed  with  singular  goodness,
if  it  does  not  move  off  and  leave  such  catechiser  unanswered.
To  return  to  the  word  eat,  it  is  correct  enough ; but  it  is  un-
derstood in  two  different  wavs.  The  first  is  terrestrial  eatinsr
which  relates  to  matter;  the  second  spiritual  eating  which
relates  to  the  divine  essence.  The  last  is  a problem  difficult
enough  to  solve,  especially  by  men,  seeing  that  in  heaven  all
is  ideal,  and  performed  only  through  emanation.  No  matter
what  you  desire  to  see  or  have,  it  presents  itself  to  your  eyes;
thus  I desire  to  eat  a peach,  it  presents  itself  forthwith  to  my
view,  and  then  I can  satisfy  myself.  But  take  care,  earthly
men,  and  consider  that  this  peach  is  but  a celestial  emanation,
and  that  the  spirit  desiring  it  can  taste  only  its  emanations ;
this  fully  satisfies  him,  without  being  any  the  more  for  that
subjected  to  earthly  functions.  For  instance,  a person  asleep
dreams  that  he  is  eating  a peach,  certainly  he  savours  in  his
state  all  its  deliciousness,  still  he  has  not  one  ; this  prevents
him  not  from  having  had  the  same  enjoyment  as  if  it  had  been
a real  peach.  This  spirit,  disengaged  from  matter,  has  placed
him  on  a level  with  the  celestial  essence,  where  he  will  be  after
his  departure  from  this  globe.

“ Excuse  me.  Monsieur,  and  accept  the  assurance  of  my
high  consideration.

(Signed)  “ Lkmoine.

“ 15,  bis,  Rue  de  la  Madeleine,  Paris.”

The  observations  we  have  just  read  are  not  those  of
a feeble  somnambulistj  as  this  gentleman  has  the
humility  to  say.  I ought  to  add  that  now  at  the  age  of
sixty’-,  for  thirty  years  he  has  been  a inagnetiser  and
occasionally  a clairvoyant,  and  that  the  definition  he
gives  us  is  not  in  contradiction  with  good  sense,  but
quite  the  contrary,  as  it  maintains  what  Binet,  Adele,
and  all  good  clairvoy’^ants  affirm  in  this  respect.  The
celestial  state  is  a kind  of  eternal  creation.  I say  a kind,
because  God  alone  has  created  all  from  all  eternity,  but
the  facility  which  spirits  possess  of  obtaining  desired


162


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


objects  M^ould  make  believe  that  they  themselves  create
these  very  objects,  had  we  not  proof  to  the  contrary.
Let  the  sittings  of  Binet  on  this  subject  in  our  first
volume  be  read  over  again.

As  I have  already  said,  for  fear  of  rendering  this  work
wearisome  to  read,  I have  not  thought  fit  to  continue
giving  an  account  of  all  the  apparition  sittings  I obtain ;
hence  it  is  that  I have  made  no  mention  of  one  which
M.  Lemoine  solicited  from  Adele,  to  assure  himself
whether  she  perceived  his  father  as  he  himself  perceived
him  in  his  dreams.  This  gentleman  had  taken  a note  of
this  sitting,  and  forwarded  an  account  of  it  to  me  a few
days  after,  with  a request  that  I would  insert  it  just  as
he  had  written  it ; this  I hasten  to  do,  as  much  to
comply  with  his  just  request,  as  to  give  the  reader  one
proof  more,  if  he  still  needs  it.

“SITTING  OF  THE  IOtH  AUGUST,  1848,  GIVEN  BY  MADAME
ADELE,  THE  ECSTATIC  OF  M.  CAHAGNHT.

“ I had  been  to  M.  Cahagnet’s,  to  beg  of  Madame  Adble  to
suffer  herself  to  be  sent  to  sleep,  in  order  to  visit  anew  my
body,  which  had  been  ailing  for  a long  time.  T had  benefited
by  her  former  prescriptions,  and  this  sitting  has  only  con-
firmed the  advice  which  she  recommended  me  to  follow  about
a fortnight  ago.  Finding  myself  much  stronger,  and  in
better  health,  I am  heartily  glad  that  I availed  myself  of  her
specia  lity

“ I had  long  desired  that  she  should  summon  my  father,  who
died  in  1824,  at  the  age  of  sixty-six,  in  order  to  be  more  con-
vinced, if  that  could  be  possible,  than  by  what  I am  able  to
see  myself  when  asleep,  inasmuch  as  I have  no  recollection  of
it  on  awaking.  It  was  no  longer  a doubt  on  my  part,  it  was
a want.  Madame  Adble  had  never  known  my  father  ; she
kindly  consented  to  ask  for  him.  At  the  lapse  of  an  instant,
I saw  her  make  a pretty  decided  movement  which  announced
to  me  his  arrival.  In  fact,  it  was  mv  father.  The  ecstatic
said  to  me — ‘ I see  a man  whose  hair  is  quite  white,  with  a
pig-tail  and  sides.’ — (This  is  true,  my  father  preserved  to  the
day  of  his  death  his  old-fashioned  head-dress.)  ‘ He  is  a man
of  lofty  stature,’  said  she,  ‘ having  several  scars  on  his  face.’ —


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


163


(My  father  was  above  six  feet,  and  had  been  ill-used  by  the
small-pox)  ; ‘ bis  nose  is  broken  and  broad  at  the  tip  he  is
very  corpulent  and  round-shouldered.’ — (All  this  is  true.)
‘He  was  afflicted  with  rheumatism  in  the  arms,  and  particu-
larly in  the  lower  part  of  the  loins.  He  died  of  this  rheu-
matism, which  flew  up  into  his  chest.  He  must  have  sufi’ered
very  much ; he  used,  also,  to  suffer  pretty  often  from  a cough,
which  was  occasioned  by  a prickling  he  felt  in  the  throat.’ —
(All  this  is  true.)  She  says  ‘ that  my  father  is  very  happy,  in
a state  he  would  not  change  to  come  back  upon  earth.  He
was,’  continues  she,  ‘ of  a pretty  cheerful  disposition ; pos-
sessed a good  and  feeling  heart,  and  was,  in  short,  a thorough
honest  man.  I like  him  very  much,’  says  she,  ‘ and  have  great
pleasure  in  seeing  him  ; I hope  this  will  not  be  the  last  time.’

“ I requested  her  to  ask  my  father  whether  I should  do  right

to  go  and  settle  in  Touraine,  in  the  commune  of  F . ‘As

you  will  not  go,’  said  he  to  me,  ‘ I have  no  details  to  give  you
on  the  matter.’  ‘ I perceive,’  says  the  ecstatic,  ‘ that  you
would  be  exposed  there  to  vengeance,  and  that  some  misfor-
tune might  befall  you ; the  persons  you  would  have  to  do  with
are  treacherous  and  wicked,  and,  withal,  not  over  scrupulous.*
As  I had  read  the  first  volume  of  the  ‘ Secrets’  of  M.  Cahagnet,
where  similar  sittings  are  found  in  great  numbers,  I was  less
astonished  than  any  other  person  would  have  been.  However,
the  presence  of  my  father  who  had  been  dead  so  long  a time,
the  pleasure  of  knowing  that  he  was  by  my  side  penetrated
me  with  a holy  respect  difficult  to  describe ; the  idea  of  know-
ing that  he  was  happy ; the  hope  of  a future  which  would  re-
unite me  to  him,  made  such  an  impression  on  me  that  my  soul
could  at  this  instant  have  embraced  death  as  a sovereign  good.

“ Yours  in  heart  and  friendship,

“ Lemoine.”

I ought  to  add  that  M.  Lemoine  afterwards  made
inquiries  respecting  the  place  offered  him  as  a steward
of  a castle.  He  knew  that  the  persons  who  had  hitherto
filled  this  place  had  been  very  severe  with  the  people
round  about; — this  had  rendered  the  latter  disaflfected
towards  the  castle,  and  the  person  who  should  succeed
the  late  steward  might  indeed  suffer  for  him,  seeing
that  the  inhabitants  of  this  part  of  the  country  are,  as


164


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


he  was  told,  vicious  and  vindictive.  He  refused  the
place  for  this  reason  and  others  that  remain  unknown
to  me ; the  prediction  of  his  father  thus  became
verified.

“Monsieur — From  the  appeal  you  make  in  your  first
volume  of  the  ‘ Secrets  of  the  Life  to  Come  Revealed,’  to
person^  who  may  have  any  facts  to  communicate  to  you  for
insertion  in  the  second  volume  you  intend  publishing,  I beg
to  respond  to  this  invitation  in  the  interest,  be  it  understood,
of  the  occult  sciences ; and,  in  order  to  prove  to  you  that  I
have  been  in  nowise  astonished  at  the  contents  of  your  book,
vdiich  I have  read  with  great  pleasure.  Formerly  a theatrical
artiste,  I devoted  myself  passionately  to  the  study  of  cabalism,
as  offering,  by  its  studious  meditations,  a counterpoise  to
the  lighter  studies  of  the  theatre.  I made  acquaintance  with
a society  (of  madmen,  the  world  says  ; of  savans,  I reply),
into  which  I was  admitted,  not  without  some  difficulty.  To
tell  you  all  that  took  place  in  this  society,  all  the  time  I was  a
member  of  it,  would  be  to  undertake  a work  in  three  volumes.
I will  cite  one  fact,  out  of  a thousand  similar  ones,  which  cor-
responds with  what  your  somnambulist  Binet  says  relative  to
the  strength  and  power  of  spirits.  The  chief  of  our  circle
possessed  a small,  strong  box,  about  a foot  long,  ten  inches
wide,  and  six  in  depth,  in  which  he  secured  very  valuable
articles.  One  day  it  was  stolen  from  him  ; he  was  in  great
distress,  when  he  sent  to  sleep  a young  man  whom  we  ordi-
narily employed  at  our  sittings.  He  questioned  him  as  to
the  disappearance  of  the  box,  and  begged  him  to  find  it.
He  went  further — he  ordered  the  spirit,  who  habitually  came
at  our  call,  to  bring  back  to  him  the  box.  The  somnambulist
was  lying  on  the  bed,  which  was  at  the  farther  end  of  the
apartment,  in  a complete  state  of  catalepsy;  I was  in  the
middle  of  the  room  with  this  gentleman,  and  two  other  gen-
tlemen, of  the  name  of  Revole,  father  and  son.  The  clair-
voyant issued  a command,  told  us  to  open  the  window,  which
I did  instantly,  and  M.  Picolet  beheld  arriving  the  precious
box,  which  he  received  in  his  hands  at  the  moment  I was
going  to  take  it  myself.  We  saw  nothing  else ; and  were  no
mor  surprised  at  this  conveyance  than  we  were  at  all  that
took  place  daily  before  our  eyes.  Yes,  monsieur,  a spirit  can


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


165


convey  objects.  Write  this  in  my  name — say,  moreover,
that  I am  78  years  old,  and  that  I should  not  wish,  at  such
an  age,  to  be  a madman,  or  to  impose  on  my  fellow-men.

“ I assure  you  of  this,  in  the  presence  of  the  Divine
Power,  whom  I should  dread  offending  if  I fabricated  such  a
falsehood.

“ I have  the  honour  to  be,  Monsieur,  &c.,

“ Borde,

“ 24,  Rue  Saint-Laurent,  Belleville.”

Shall  I annex  any  observations  to  such  a relation  ?
I should  not  want  for  them,  if  I had  a mind  to  seek  for
them  in  the  library  of  supernatural  facts,  which  would
prove  the  possibility  of  them.  It  w'ould  be  to  enter  upon
a series  of  arguments  on  both  sides,  not  suited  to  the
limits  of  this  work.  I ought  to  say  that  I have  studied
this  venerable  old  man,  for  the  sole  purpose  of  assuring
myself  of  his  moral  condition  ; and  I confess  that  I
should  wish  to  possess  his  excellent  lucidity  and  superior
information.  He  must  be  a man  of  veracity,  since  he
is  of  sound  mind,  and  calls  heaven  to  testify  to  the
truth  of  his  assertions.  For  my  part,  I never  obtained
any  spiritual  conveyance.  One  of  my  clairvoyants
once  showed  me  one  that  he  had  received  over-night.
I studied  the  fact,  deemed  it  possible ; but  not  having
seen  it  with  my  own  eyes,  I made  no  mention  of  it.
I set  forth  only  what  I have  seen  ; however,  I believe
in  such  conveyances,  and  will  demonstrate  the  possi-
bility of  them  by  laws  wholly  physical.  I will  treat  of
this  proposition  in  the  philosophical  work  I have
already  spoken  of.  If  we  ought  to  admit  nothing,
without  mature  examination,  let  us,  in  like  manner,
deny  nothing  without  mature  examination.

We  borrow  from  the  journal  Tm  Republique,  of  the
,3rd  February,  1849,  a recital  of  this  nature,  extracted
from  the  Gazette  des  Tribunaux.  This  fact  is  not  the  only
one  of  which  we  have  a knowledge ; studious  men  will
judge  it  with  the  impartiality  necessary  to  examina-
tions of  this  kind,  and  will  not  conclude,  I am  certain.


166


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


as  would  the  savans,  who  deny  when  they  cannot
explain  : —

“ One  of  the  most  singular  facts — a fact  reproducing  itself
every  night  for  the  last  three  weeks,  and  baffling  all  ima-
ginable plans  that  have  been  adopted  to  discover  the  cause  of
it,  sets  in  commotion  the  whole  of  the  populous  quarter  of  the
Montagne-Sainte-Genevifeve,  the  Sorbonne,  and  the  Place
Saint-Michel.  The  double  inquiry,  judicial  and  adminis-
trative, which  has  been  going  on  for  some  days  past,  verifies,
in  accord  with  public  clamor,  the  following  statement : —

“ In  the  work  of  demolition  commenced  for  the  opening  of
a new  street  which  is  to  join  the  Sorbonne  to  the  Pantheon,
and  the  Ecole  de  Droit,  traversing  the  Rue  des  Gr^s  up  to  the
old  church  which  has  successively  been  used  as  a school  and
barracks,  at  the  extremity  of  a piece  of  ground  where  once
stood  a public  ball-room,  is  a wood  and  charcoal  yard,  bounded
by  a dwelling-house  one  storey  high  with  lofts.  It  is  this
house,  standing  at  a certain  distance  from  the  street,  and  sepa-
rated from  the  adjoining  buildings  now  in  course  of  demolition,
by  the  large  excavations  of  the  old  enclosure  wall  of  Paris,
constructed  under  Philippe  Auguste,  laid  open  by  the  works,
which  every  evening  and  all  night  is  assailed  by  a shower  of
projectiles,  which,  from  their  size,  from  the  violence  with
which  they  are  hurled,  produce  such  havoc  that  the  windows
are  smashed,  the  doors  broken  open,  altogether  presenting  the
appearance  of  a place  that  has  been  attacked  by  the  catapulta
or  grape-shot.

“ Whence  come  these  projectiles,  consisting  of  paving-
stones,  fragments  of  ruins,  huge  blocks,  which,  considering
their  weight  and  the  distance  they  come  from,  evidently  could
not  be  hurled  by  the  hand  of  man  } This  is  what  it  has  been
hitherto  impossible  to  find  out.  In  vain  has  been  exercised,
under  the  personal  direction  of  the  commissary  of  police,  and
able  agents,  a surveillance  by  day  and  night;  in  vain  have
been  let  loose  every  night  in  the  surrounding  enclosures,
watch-dogs  ; nothing  has  been  able  to  explain  the  pheno-
menon which,  in  their  credulity,  the  people  attribute  to  mys-
terious causes  ; the  projectiles  have  continued  showering  down
with  a crash  on  the  house,  hurled  at  a great  height  above  the
heads  of  those  placed  on  the  look-out,  even  on  the  roof  of  the
neighbouring  houses,  apparently  coming  from  a great  distance,


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


167


and  reaching  their  object  with  a precision  in  some  sort  mathe-
matical, not  one  appearing  to  deviate  in  its  parabolic  course
from  the  object  invariably  aimed  at.

“We  will  not  go  into  more  ample  details  respecting  this
fact,  which,  no  doubt — thanks  to  the  solicitude  it  has  awakened
— will  soon  be  accounted  for.  Already  the  inquiry  extends
over  whatsoever  could  attach  in  this  object  to  the  explanation
of  the  adage,  Cui  prodest  is  auctor.  Nevertheless,  we  will
remark  that  in  circumstances  somewhat  analogous,  and  which
equally  created  a certain  sensation  in  Paris,  when,  for  instance,
a shower  of  small  pieces  of  money  attracted  every  evening  the
simpletons  of  Paris  to  the  Rue  de  Montesquieu ; or,  when  all
the  bells  of  a house  in  the  Rue  de  Malte  were  set  going  by  an
invisible  band,  it  was  impossible  to  succeed  in  any  discovery,
find  an  explanation,  a first  cause,  whatever  it  might  be.  Let
us  hope  that  this  time  we  shall  arrive  at  a more  precise  result.”

The  Republique,  of  the  4th  February,  continues: —

“ The  Gazette  des  Trihunaux  still  speaks  of  the  famous  war-
machine,  so  formidable,  and,  above  all,  so  mysterious,  which
sets  in  commotion  the  inhabitants  of  the  quarter  Saint-
Jacques.  To-day  this  paper  says : —

“ ‘The  singular  fact  of  the  throw  of  projectiles  against  the
house  of  a dealer  in  wood  and  charcoal.  Rue  Neuve-de-Cluny,
near  the  Place  du  Pantheon,  has  continued  being  reproduced
up  to  this  very  day,  despite  the  incessant  surveillance  exercised
on  the  very  spot.

“ ‘ At  eleven  o’clock,  although  agents  were  stationed  at  all
the  adjacent  points,  an  enormous  stone  struck  against  the
door  (barricaded)  of  the  house.  At  three  o’clock,  the  chief
ad  interim  of  the  safety  service,  and  five  or  six  of  his  principal
subordinates,  being  busily  engaged  in  making  inquiries,  con-
cerning different  circumstances,  of  the  occupiers  of  the  house,
an  immense  rough  stone  fell  shivering  at  their  feet,  like  the
bursting  of  a bomb.

“ ‘ We  are  lost  in  conjectures.  The  doors,  the  windows
are  i*eplaced  by  planks  nailed  up  inside,  to  prevent  the  inmates
of  the  house  from  being  struck,  as  their  furniture,  and  even
their  beds,  have  been  smashed  by  the  projectiles.”

We  possess  a great  number  of  similar  accounts,
which  we  shall  not  attempt  to  relate.  We  assure  the


1G8


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


police,  that  but  one  thing  is  wanted  to  discover  the
authors  of  this  devastation,  that  is  the  somnambulic
view.  We  will  revert  to  this  aflfair  in  our  journal,  the
“ Magnetiseur  Spiritualiste.’^

“Paris,  the  3rd  September,  1848.

“Monsieur  and  Friend — The  impression  made  on  me  by
a perusal  of  your  book  is  : — That  you  seem  to  me  a man  who
seeks  after  the  truth,  and  that  your  desire  has  led  you  to  raise
a corner  of  the  veil  which  concealed  from  mankind  the  future
life — a life  to  me  as  certain  as  the  present  one.  In  your  first
volume,  you  ask  magnetisers  for  facts  similar  to  those  you
therein  treat  of ; to  comply  with  this  request,  I supply  you
with  one  which  affected  me  personally.  For  the  sake  of
truth,  I will  do  my  best  to  recount  it  to  you.  This  extra-
ordinary fact  happened  to  me  one  night  in  the  month  of
April,  1839.  T woke  up,  about  two  o’clock  in  the  morning,
in  a frightful  state  of  moral  suffering.  I felt  myself  overcome
by  a secret  power,  that  held  me  down,  as  if  crucified  on  ray
bed,  by  the  side  of  my  wife,  who  was  asleep,  and  whom  the
power  that  thus  overcame  me  had  prevented  me  from  waking.
All  my  moral  force  seemed  to  me  concentrated  in  my  heart.  I
retained  my  presence  of  mind,  and,  although  it  was  im-
possible for  me  to  move  my  body,  I possessed  my  whole
power  of  observation.  I felt  my  heart  full  of  a fluid,  which
made  me  suffer  as  if  silken  threads  had  been  drawn  through
it ; but,  despite  the  power  that  thus  grasped  me,  my
resistance  was  in  a ratio  with  my  great  confidence  in  God,
and  I doubted  not  being  extricated  from  this  miserable  state.
When  my  eyes  opened,  I perceived  the  moon  reflecting  her
light  into  my  room  ; and  when  I closed  them,  I found  myself
in  conversation  with  a being  I had  known  when  he  was  alive
— on  earth.  In  the  first  place,  he  drew  near,  and  asked  me
for  something  : he  was  dressed  in  a sorry  black  riding-coat,
and  his  shirt  was  very  dirty  ; in  short,  his  appeai-ance  bespoke
the  most  profound  misery ; he  concluded  by  ordering  me  to
pray  for  him ; but,  as  I hate  constraint,  I refused  doing  so,
braving  the  consequences.  I then  felt  his  breath  enter  into
my  nostrils,  and  poison  me  with  an  insupportable  and  infernal
odour;  but,  thanks  to  God,  I made  an  effort  on  myself,  despite
those  he  made  to  prevent  me.  I roused  iny  wife,  and  begged


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


169


her  to  push  me  out  of  bed,  which  she  did.  I walked,  bare-
footed, in  my  room  ; but  I was  still  battling  with  this  man  bv
ray  interior  senses.  I drank  a glass  of  fresh  water,  handed
me  by  my  wife,  and  begged  her  to  kneel  down  with  me,  and
pray  to  God  for  my  deliverance.  We  prayed  ferventlv.  I
found  myself  better  ; there  no  longer  remained  in  m.e  but
those  pangs  of  the  heart,  from  the  force  of  the  bonds  in
which  it  seemed  to  me  grasped.

“ In  the  morning,  by  way  of  diverting  my  thoughts,  I
walked  to  the  exhibition  of  the  products  of  industry,  and  this
greatly  alleviated  me.

“ I durst  not  speak  of  my  singular  adventure  to  any  one,
knowing  how  ignorant  and  incredulous  the  world  is  in  such
matters.

“ Oh  ! Monsieur,  if,  at  that  period,  I had  had  the  happiness
of  knowing  a man  as  I now  know  you,  your  heart,  I love  to
think  so,  w^ould  have  become  the  refuge  of  mine  ; but,  poor,
and  without  support,  against  this  world  of  wicked  spirits,  I
remained  in  my  painful  condition  for  several  mbnths.  The
pain  at  ray  heart  never  left  me,  my  physical  faculties  were
not,  however,  disordered;  God,  I was  sure  of  it,  v.muld,
sooner  or  later,  raise  up  for  me  a means  of  relief,  and  throw
a light  on  this  mystery  of  the  human  soul.  However,  I had
given  a hint  of  my  adventure  to  our  worthy  friend,  M.  Pirlot.
I perceive  that  my  letter  might  become  wearisome,  but  from
the  love  I know  you  have  for  the  truth,  joined  to  that  I have
of  rendering  homage  to  Divine  Providence,  I beg  permission
to  relate  how  I recovered  my  tranquillity.  Now,  it  happened,
one  day,  that  the  wife  of  M.  Pirlot  was  indisposed,  and
Madame  Pirou  was  sent  for,  a somnambulist,  whom  I did
not  know,  notwithstanding  her  high  reputation  for  clair-
voyance. As  M.  Pirlot  knew  what  a wretched  state  of
obsession  I was  in.  he  told  me  to  come  to  the  consultation  that
w'as  to  be  held.  I repaired  thither,  with  the  desire  of  getting

myself  visited  by  this  lady.  Colonel  R was  the  person

who  sent  her  to  sleep.  I asked,  in  my  turn,  the  favour  of
presenting  my  hand  to  the  clairvoyante,  that  she  might  have
the  kindness  to  examine  me.  Scarcely  had  she  touched  me
than  she  uttered  a cry  of  alarm  as  to  my  condition,  saying
that  I was  beset  by  a spirit  she  saw,  in  a hideous  form,  coiled
under  ray  nose,  and  enveloped  in  a most  disgusting  atino-

N


170


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


sphere.  The  most  infectious  odours  surrounded  it ; and  she
■was  not  at  all  surprised  at  my  unfortunate  situation.  She
invited  all  present  to  join  with  her  in  supplicating  the  angels
to  intercede  with  God  for  me.  A few  days  after  this  ceremony,

I was  wholly  relieved.

“ Here,  Monsieur,  is  a fact,  in  all  its  truth.  You  are  quite
at  liberty  to  publish  it,  if  you  deem  fit.

“ Receive,  &c.,

“ Binet,

“ Manufacturer  of  Chymical  Utensils,

5,  Rue  Neuve-Saint-Sabin,  Paris.”

The  fact  narrated  here  by  M.  Binet  has  nought  of
ridiculous  in  it  for  me  who  was,  through  the  effect  of
my  own  will,  beset  for  three  years,  and  saw  infinitely
more  than  this  estimable  and  intelligent  citizen,  who
has  acquired,  in  his  quarter,  w^herein  he  has  lived
full  forty  years,  a claim  to  the  esteem  of  all  his  neigh-
bours, who  occasionally  find  in  his  wise  counsels  hints
that  are  not  within  the  jurisdiction  of  a man  labouring
under  the  influence  of  hallucination.

“Paris,  the  20th  August,  1848.

“ My  dear  Friend — Your  work,  of  the  ‘ Secrets  of  the
Life  to  Come  Revealed,’  is  the  most  curious  and  instructive
book  that  can  possibly  be  read.  I congratulate  you  on  the
courage  you  have  displayed  by  publishing  it,  for,  sooner  or
later,  it  will  produce  beneficial  eflfects.

“ I do  not  expect  that  men,  in  general,  will  adopt  the  con-
soling truths  you  publish,  and  the  practice  of  which  you
recommend,  by  employing  the  same  means  as  you  have
employed  in  order  to  discover  the  mysteries  of  celestial
happiness.  I so  much  the  less  expect  it,  as  I feel,  on  the
contrary,  rising  up  against  the  principles  so  true  of  the  im-
mortality of  the  soul,  and  the  joys  eternally  in  store  for  it,
the  cortege  of  materialists  and  sceptics,  whose  mind  is  fed  •
only  with  ideas  stamped  with  errors,  prejudices,  and  religious
superstitions.  People  who  believe  only  what  they  touch
and  see  by  their  material  eyes,  rejecting,  as  dangerous,  all
that  they  have  learnt  at  the  schools ; and  yet,  if  one  and  the
other  would  but  read  your  book,  they  would  see  that  all


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.  I7I

that  takes  place  in  heaven  amongst  souls,  is  the  most  complete
condemnation  of  the  state  of  society  on  our  earth.  On  the
latter,  man  struggles  incessantly  against  the  storm  of  free-
will ; words,  ill  understood.  What  victims  fall  into  the  abyss
of  evil.  In  heaven,  the  definition  of  good  and  evil  is  un-
known : the  latter  never  existed  there ! I pass  on  to  the
object  of  my  letter.  Initiated  into  and  familiarised  for  long
years  with  the  world  of  spirits,  I will  not  say  that  your  work
has  taught  me  nothing  ; I should  deceive  you.  You  mention
therein  : —

“ 1st.  That  spirits  can  see,  touch,  and  carry,  in  certain  cir-
cumstances, material  objects.

“ 2nd.  That  a spirit  can  visit  us  on  earth  in  a material  form.

“ 3rd.  That  man  material  may  render  himself  invisible.
Your  book  is  deficient  in  facts,  in  support  of  these  assertions.
Allow  me,  therefore  (as  you  suspect  neither  my  good  faith
nor  my  conscientiousness,  and  as  I detest  falsehood),  to  offer
you  some  real  facts  on  what  you  announce.

“The  following  are  the  initials  of  the  persons  who  were
present  at  what  I am  about  to  recount  to  you  : — 1st,  M.
Pi — ; 2nd,  M.  Bar — ; 3rd,  M.  Bou — ; 4th,  M.  Rev — ;
5th,  M.  A.  Rev — , junior;  6th,  Ad — , the  somnambulist,  and.
7th,  myself.

“ FIRST  FACT.

“ M.  Rev — , senior,  and  myself,  were  taking  a walk  on  the
high  road  of  a town  in  Brittany.  On  entering  the  hotel,
M.  Rev — perceived  that  he  had  lost  his  gold  seal,  which  was
of  great  value.  After  dinner,  he  sent  Ad — to  sleep,  saying
to  her  : ‘ Call  such  a spirit,  beg  him,  and  order  him,  if  need
be,  to  go  and  look  for  my  seal  amongst  a heap  of  stones  by
the  sea-side,  at  a league’s  distance  from  here.’  The  com-
mand was  scarcely  given,  when  the  spirit  delivered  the  seal
to  Ad — , who  said  to  M.  Rev — , ‘ Thank  the  spirit,  and
dismiss  him.’

“ SECOND  FACT.

“ On  our  return  to  Nantes,  whence  we  had  first  set  out.
Ad — , being  sent  to  sleep,  said  to  M.  Rev — , sen.: — ‘The
Colonel  is  not  wholly  recovered  from  his  illness ; to  cure  him
we  must  ask  for  a few  drops  of  medicine,  prepare  a glass  of
sugar  and  water,  and  cut  a piece  of  white  paper  in  the  form  of
a triangle.  Describe  a circle  on  the  floor,  place  the  triangle

N 2


172


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


in  tlie  middle  of  the  circle,  set  down  the  glass  of  sugar  and
water  on  the  triangle,  and  let  the  vertical  angle  look  towards
the  east.’  All  these  dispositions  made.  Ad — said  to  M,
Ivev — : — ‘ Call  the  angel  of  the  Lord,  and  beg  him  to  pour
into  the  glass  of  sugar  and  water  the  number  of  drops  suffi-
cient for  the  cure  of  the  Colonel.’  Whilst  M.  Rev — was
commencing  the  invocation.  Ad — stopped  him,  telling  him
that  the  triangle  was  not  due  east.  As  at  this  moment  mv
eyes  were  directed  towards  the  glass,  I beheld  with  the  greatest
astonishment  the  paper  triangle  and  the  glass  turn  of  them-
selves towards  the  east,  after  the  invocation  and  when  the
sugar  and  water  v/as  drunk  up.  God  and  the  angel  were
thanked  by  us.  Needless  to  say  that,  in  less  than  an  hour,  I
was  wholly  relieved.  This  took  place  in  the  month  of  April,
1827.

"Apropos  of  the  facts,  I ought  to  observe  that  the  seal  was
brought  back  by  a spirit  of  an  inferior  order,  whom  Ad —
qualified  as  an  elementary  spirit  of  the  earth,  and  whose  imme
w'as  Miknas;  this  was  invariably  the  spirit  we  employed  for
sending  or  receiving  material  objects.  As  to  the  drops  put
into  the  glass  of  sugar  and  water,  they  were  introduced  into  it
by  an  angel  of  high  degree.

“ These  observations  are  indispensable,  to  enable  vou  to  dis-
tinguish, in  the  divers  facts  I purpose  revealing  to  you,  by
what  order  of  spirits  these  facts  were  accomplished.  Never-
theless, I believe  that,  when  it  concerns  them  to  lend  their  aid
to  the  man  who  fears  and  loves  God,  the  spirits  that  he  invokes
are  always  good  ; for  the  bad,  far  from  serving  him,  seek  onlv
to  injure  him,  and  excite  him  to  evil  by  the  most  seducing  and
even  the  most  atrocious  temptations,  when  they  perceive  that
the  man  yields  to  their  attacks  without  the  intention  of  having
recourse  to  God.  Allow  me  this  reflection,  which  is  rather  a
sudden  inspiration  than  the  result  of  long  experience,

“ THIRD  FACT.

“ Before  returning  to  Paris,  and  whilst  I was  still  residing  at
Nantes,  those  who  received  me  at  a later  period  into  the
bosom  of  their  society,  which  was  presided  over  by  M.  Pi — ,
a gentleman  of  great  merit  and  extraordinary  scientific  attain-
ments (it  was  he  who  magnetised  Ad — ),  assembled  one  even-
ing at  M.  Pi — ’s,  to  take  part  in  a ceremonv  relative  to  occult
pursuits.  M.  Pi — sent  Ad — to  sleep,  and  each  member  sat


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


173


down  in  a chair,  placed  for  him  within  a large  circle  drawn
on  the  floor,  each  having  at  his  feet,  and  right  in  front  of  him,
a lamp,  the  wick  of  which  was  burning  in  alcohol.  M.  Pi —
having  first  called  down  the  blessing  of  God  on  those  present^
the  ceremony  commenced.  Scarcely,  however,  had  it  begun,
than  shrill  cries,  immoderate  laughter,  and  horrible  hissing
resounded  in  the  room  ; the  lamps  were  quickly  extinguished,
and  on  all  sides  fell  pieces  of  old  iron,  bars  of  iron,  &c. ; but
all  these  projectiles  lodged  on  the  edge  of  the  circle,  without
striking  any  one.  Forthwith,  M.  Pi — , armed  with  his  talis-
man, drove  out,  in  the  name  of  God,  these  evil  spirits,  who
decamped,  leaving  us  their  projectiles.

“ This  third  fact  responds  in  the  affirmative  to  the  questions
you  addressed  to  Swedenborg,  to  inquire  whether  evil  spirits
could  create  disorder  in  a room  by  displacing  and  upsetting
the  furniture.  Swedenborg  affirmed  that  they  could  do  so,  and
I have  just  given  you  a proof  of  the  truth  of  his  assertion.

“I  pause;  my  bad  sight  and  trembling  hand  prevent  me
from  continuing.  Soon  you  shall  have  the  sequel ; in  the
meanwhile,  believe  me,  &c.,  &c.

“ Colonel  Roger,

“4,  Rue  Neuve  de  I’Universite,  Paris.”

Well,  my  lords  of  science,  we  grow  amusing,  we  take
our  patent  as  madmen,  which  we  present  to  you  to
sign.  What  think  you  of  it  ? We  could  have  ventured
to  hope  for  absolution  at  the  commencement  of  this
work;  but  towards  its  close,  we  fall  into  the  absurd.
The  absurd  ! be  it  so  ; I accept  your  definition,  on  con-
dition that  you  will  read  us  to  the  end,  were  it  only  to
your  children,  by  way  of  recalling  to  their  memory  their
old  ghost  tales.  Thus  you  perceive  that  we  are  not
very  exacting ; we  know  you  to  be  infinitely  learned,
and  that  we  do  but  excite  your  pity ; consequently  are  we
sure  of  success.  But  you,  men  of  good  faith,  we  do  not
address  ourselves  to  you  to  laugh  at  your  expense  or  to
make  you  laugh  at  ours ; we  certify  to  you  that  we  will
mathematically  prove  to  you  the  possibility  of  these
marvels  ; what  we  now  present  to  you  is  but  a sketch,
we  leave  aside  facts  which  will  serve  us  by  and  by  to


174  THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE

*»

regain  your  confidence  should  we  lose  it  now.  We
assure  you  that  we  have  frequented  the  company  of
Colonel  Roger  for  these  two  years  past,  with  the  sole  view
of  studying  him.  For  we  too  have  our  share  of  doubts;
we  have  caused  him  to  be  magnetically  visited,  and  in
his  presence,  by  our  best  clairvoyants ; we  have  gone  so
far  as  to  make  inquiries  as  to  certain  acts  (without  his
knowledge),  and  have  obtained  the  assurance  that  he
was  in  the  full  enjoyment  of  a sound  mind,  and  that  the
facts  recounted  by  him  were  true ; eye-witnesses  have
affirmed  this  to  us.  It  is  from  notions  so  positive  that
we  give  publicity  to  the  three  facts  that  have  been  read,
out  of  twenty  others  which  remain  in  my  portfolio.
But  let  us  continue,  all  madmen  are  not  yet  at  Charenton
(Bedlam) : —

“ Monsieur — Having  read  with  pleasure  your  first  volume
of  the  ‘ Secrets  of  the  Life  to  Come  Revealed/  and  desiring
to  acquire  by  myself  proofs  of  the  facility  which,  as  you
announce,  all  good  clairvoyants  possess  of  communicating  with
the  souls  of  deceased  persons,  I actively  busied  myself  in  pro-
voking such  apparitions,  and  had  the  happiness  to  succeed  more
easily  than  by  the  aid  of  the  magic  mirror;  the  visions  are
much  better  delineated,  make  a greater  impression  on  the
clairvoyant,  and  offer  him  the  two-fold  advantage  of  conversing
with  those  blessed  souls  ! As  in  your  first  volume  you  beg  all
magnetisers  who  may  possess  facts  similar  to  those  you  publish
to  communicate  them  to  you,  I send  you  the  following,  taken
from  amongst  many  others,  and  authorise  you  to  make  such
use  of  them  as  you  deem  fit.

“ For  a long  time  I have  been  in  the  habit  of  magnetising
a person  whom  I have  known  from  my  childhood,  and  who  for
some  months  was  very  ill  and  given  over  by  the  physicians ; I
had  the  happiness  to  restore  her  to  health.  From  the  first  davs
of  her  treatment,  she  gave  me  proofs  of  singular  clairvoyance,
of  which  I took  advantage  to  put  her  in  correspondence  with
several  deceased  relatives  and  friends.  I addressed  to  her
questions  similar  to  yours ; all  her  answers  were  similar,  in  a
religious  and  psychological  point  of  view.  Yesterday,  I asked
for  a little  sister  of  mine,  whom  I never  saw  and  who  died  at  the
age  of  eight  months.  She  forthwith  exclaimed  : ‘ I see  a pretty


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


175


little  girl ! oh  ! good  heavens  ! how  beautiful  she  is ! But  she’ll
fall,  don’t  you  see  her  ? Hold  out  your  arms  to  her.’  I reassured
her  by  telling  her  that  a spirit  could  not  fall.  She  resumed  :
‘ The  fact  is  that  the  clouds  she  is  upon  are  so  light ! so  trans-
parent ! that  1 can’t  understand  how  they  can  support  this
beautiful  child.’  ‘ Make  her  draw  near,’  said  I.  ‘ She  keeps  at  a
distance  and  smiles  on  me,  but  how  pretty  she  is ! Never  before
did  I see  such  an  angelic  countenance.’  ‘What  age  may  she  be  ?’
‘ From  about  two  and  a half  to  three  years  of  age.’  ‘ How  is
she  dressed ‘ She  is  quite  bare.’  ‘ What  is  the  colour  of
her  hair  ?’  ‘ Her  hair  is  of  a flaxen  colour  and  curly.  But  how
beautiful  she  is !’  I could  not  rouse  this  lady  out  of  the
admiration  in  which  she  was  absorbed.  Then,  suddenly,  she
appears  very  much  surprised  and  exclaims : ‘ She  is  going
away ! — she  is  going  away  ! Oh ! I am  wrong,  she  is  going
to  meet  her  good  mother.’  In  fact,  my  mother  was  coming  up
stairs  at  this  instant,  for  she  entered  almost  immediately  after.
I was  so  much  the  more  surprised  as  my  clairvoyante  does  not
see  material  persons  at  hand.  I could  not,  therefore,  doubt  but
that  it  was  as  she  said.  She  resumed  : ‘ Ah  ! how  pleased  she
is  at  seeing  her  mother,  she  smiles  on  her  with  such  a beautiful
expression ! Why  cannot  her  mother  herself  see  her  ?’  At
this  instant,  she  stretched  out  her  arms  and  caught  her.  I told
her  to  embrace  her,  but  she  replied  : ‘ No,  I should  not  dare.
I am  not  worthy  of  doing  so.’ — ‘ Do  you  really  feel  the  weight
of  this  child’s  body  you  hold  in  your  arms,  as  if  it  were
material  ?’  ‘ Certainly,  how  can  you  doubt  it — ‘ I am  far

from  doubting  it,’  replied  I ; ‘ for  at  this  moment  I feel  some-
thing extraordinary  passing  within  me ; the  influence  of  this
little  angel  must  surely  be  the  cause  of  it.  This  would  suffice
to  remove  all  my  doubts  had  I any  remaining.’  I then  inquired
of  my  mother  whether  this  child  had  flaxen  hair,  and  whether
she  was  as  beautiful  as  my  clairvoyante  described  her.  She
replied  : ‘ All  this  is  very  true ; the  neighbours  used  to  say  that
they  never  beheld  such  a beautiful  little  creature.’

“Only  think,  monsieur,  what  was  my  joy,  and  whether  I
could  still  doubt  the  truth  of  such  apparitions.  I recognised  in
this  one  what  your  clairvoyants  affirm  relative  to  children  that
die  before  the  age  of  three  years,  that  they  seem  not  to  exceed
that  age.  Were  it  otherwise,  it  w'ould  be  next  to  impossible
to  recognise  them,

“ I never  knew  this  little  sister  of  mine,  as  she  died  before


176


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


I was  born  ; my  clairvoyante  could  not,  therefore,  perceive
the  image  of  her  in  my  thought.  Such  supposition  is  as  ab-
surd as  if  it  were  said  that  a clairvoyant  perceives  in  the
thought  places  and  persons  that  one  has  never  seen  one’s  self,
as  does  Alexis  and  a thousand  others,  every  day.

“ 1 here  give  the  result  of  the  questions  you  begged  me  to
address  to  my  clairvoyante  : —

“ 1st.  Whither  goes  our  soul  after  leaving  our  material  body

‘‘  It  ascends  and  traverses  several  radii,  hears  the  voice  of
God  who  judges  it,  and  consigns  it  to  a place  suited  to  its
affections.

“ 2nd.  What  does  it  see  in  those  places  ?

“ Spirits  like  itself,  open  countries,  gardens : in  short,  what-
ever it  desires  to  see.

“ 3rd.  What  does  it  do  in  those  places  ?

“Whatsoever  it  finds  agreeable  to  do.

“ 4th.  What  length  of  time  does  it  remain  in  those  places  ?

“It  remains  in  them  for  a longer  or  shorter  period  of  time  ;
then  passes  into  other  places  and  remains  there  eternally.

“ 5th.  Does  it  return  to  take  again  a material  body  on  this
earth  ?

“ Never.

“ 6th,  How  does  it  know  that  it  is  asked  for  on  earth  ?

“ It  is  an  effect  of  sensation.  Our  thought  joins  its  thought
in  an  instant,  and  it  is  with  us.

“ 7th.  The  dress  which  it  wears  when  it  comes  to  see  us,  is
it  that  which  it  wears  in  heaven  ?

“ No,  it  wears  there  much  lighter  dresses,  a sort  of  gauze  of
different  colours.

“ 8th.  Where  does  it  procure  the  dress  in  which  it  appears
to  us  ?

“ It  is  an  effect  of  its  thought ; it  can  present  itself  in  any
form,  assume  all  the  costumes  it  has  worn  ; it  desires  to  appear
to  us  in  this  or  that  one,  and  it  presents  itself  thus,

“ 9th.  At  times  something  is  w'anted  in  this  attire,  or  in  its
personal  appearance ; how  is  this  }

“ It  is  to  be  accounted  for  in  this  way' — in  its  haste  to  appear
to  us,  it  forgets  something;  for  no  longer  having  the  same
countenance,  or  the  same  dress,  it  may  make  a mistake.  But
on  its  second  appearance  this  can  no  longer  exist,  it  suffices  to
have  a single  doubt.


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.  177


“ 10th.  We  can  perceive  even  the  maladies  it  has  had  in  the
course  of  its  earthly  life,  how  is  that

“It  desires  to  appear  to  us  in  such  conditions;  it  is  its
thought,  or,  more  correctly  speaking,  its  desire,  which  sup-
plies all ; for,  in  heaven,  there  are  neither  maladies  nor  in-
firmities.”

As  may  be  seen,  if  I had  it  in  my  power  to  address
the  same  questions  to  all  the  clairvoyants  in  the  world,
I should  do  so  in  the  interest  of  truth,  and  in  order  to
avoid  hearing  say  that  it  is  an  effect  of  influence  on  my
part ; it  might  be  objected  that  M.  Blesson  having  read
the  first  volume  of  these  Secrets,^^  drew  therefrom
answ'ers  which  his  influence  over  his  clairvoyante  might
possibly  reproduce ; I will  observe,  that  there  are  in  the
latter  questions  which  are  not  to  be  found  in  the  first
volume ; that  they  are  to  be  met  with  only  at  the  com-
mencement of  this,  which  M.  Lecocq  and  M.  Blesson
have  not  read ; their  answers  are  in  conformity  with
those  of  Adele  ; there  is  no  influence  in  the  case.

“ I cannot  resist,”  continues  M.  Blesson,  “ the  desire  of
relating  to  you  a fact  for  which  I cannot  account  : — One  day  I
had  just  sent  my  wife,  who  is  a somnambulist,  to  sleep  ; I
begged  her  to  ask  for  my  father,  who  has  been  dead  these
sixteen  years.  Forthwith  presented  himself  an  individual,  of
whom  she  gave  me  such  a description  as  corresponded  exactly
with  that  of  my  father,  with  this  exception,  he  appeared  to  her
very  stern  ; my  father,  on  the  contrary,  was  very  affable.  I
entertained  the  notion  that  this  might  be  an  evil  spirit,  and,
as  you  recommend,  I ordered  him  away  in  the  name  of  God,
if  he  were  not  my  father.  My  wife  beheld  him  move  off  and
replaced  by  an  old  woman  of  a hideous  countenance,  who
caused  her  so  much  fear  that  she  begged  me  to  wake  her,
v/hich  I forthwith  did,  as  she  seemed  to  me  very  much
afritated.  Having  no  recollection  of  what  she  had  seen  in  her
dream,  she  set  to  work  picking  legumes  to  cook  them  for
dinner  ; she  lighted  a large  charcoal  fire  (for  she  was  behind
hand),  set  over  it  a pot  of  water,  and  was  not  a little  surprised,
after  having  used  a scuttle  full  of  charcoal  in  keeping  «p  a


178


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


large  fire,  at  being  unable  to  make  the  water  boil.  We  were
astounded,  as  well  as  the  persons  present,  at  this  phenomenon,
to  me  till  then  unknown.

“ A fortnight  after  this,  the  weather  was  very  stormy,  my
wife  w^is  close  to  me,  and,  as  before,  preparing  legumes  for
dinner.  She  fell  asleep,  oppressed  with  the  heavy  atmosphere
which  prevailed  this  day.  I took  advantage  of  her  sleep  to
magnetise  her,  and  plunge  her  into  the  somnambulic  sleep ; I
succeeded  in  doing  so  in  a very  short  time.  I asked  for  the
apparition  of  a friend  ; an  owl  presented  itself  to  her  eyes,  and
so  frightened  her  that  I was  obliged  to  wake  her  as  before.
She  then  put  her  water  on  the  fire,  this  time  in  a copper  vessel
(the  other  was  an  earthenware  one) ; the  same  phenomenon,
was  reproduced,  the  water  did  not  boil  till  after  a lapse  of  six
hours,  and  then  not  before  I had  addressed  a prayer  to  God  to
disenchant  our  pot,  in  case  there  was  a spell  upon  it.  We
were  then  able  to  cook  oar  legumes.

“ I know  not  whether  there  be  aught  ridiculous  in  these
facts,  but  I do  know  that,  being  unable  to  account  for  them  by
the  ordinary  laws  of  nature,  I am  obliged  to  class  them
amongst  the  extraordinary  ones.  ‘ It  was  an  evil  spirit  that
played  us  that  trick,’  since  said  to  me  my  wife  when  again  in  a
somnambulic  sleep.

“ Believe  me,  most  respectfully,  &c.,

“ Blesson.

“ Entrepreneur  de  peintuie,  36,  Rue  aux  Ours,

“ Paris,  the  2nd  September,  1848.”

“ Monsieur. — The  following  I can  vouch  for  as  a fact,  as
it  took  place  in  my  presence,  at  Lyons,  in  1815  : —

“ Three  females  of  ray  acquaintance,  wishing  to  take  tickets
in  the  lottery  which  then  existed,  fancied  that  a death’s  head
might  be  of  service  to  them  by  indicating  to  them  the  numbers
which  would  ensure  success.  I will  make  no  reflections  as  to
the  value  of  such  a belief ; it  suffices  me  to  say  that  such  was
the  case.

“ It  was,  therefore,  settled  that  one  of  them  should  go  to

the  cemetery  of in  search  of  a death’s-head,  and  bring  it

home.  The  head  was  brought  into  the  presence  of  the  three
women  and  another  female  who  was  lying  ill  in  the  room  where
the  four  persons  were  thus  assembled.  A discussion  took  place
as  to  the  sex  to  which  this  head  belonged  ; one  saying  it  was


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


179


that  of  a man,  another  thinking  it  the  contrary.  At  this
moment  there  was  a knock  at  the  door ; embarrassment  and
fear  were  manifested  ; the  ladies  resolved  not  to  open  ; but  the
knocks  redoubled,  it  was  necessary  to  yield.  In  haste  they
placed  the  head  under  the  pillow  of  the  sick  woman  and  then
opened  the  door.  A few  minutes  elapsed,  when  suddenly  the
woman  who  was  in  bed  uttered  a piercing  shriek,  drawing  her
arm  out  of  bed.  The  persons  present  asked  her  the  cause  of
her  crying  out,  and  what  was  the  general  astonishment  when
she  declared  that  she  had  been  bitten  with  great  violence.  Of
this  they  convinced  themselves  by  looking  at  her  arm,  on  which
were  the  marks  of  five  teeth  with  the  blood  ready  to  gush  out ;
the  pain  must  have  been  acute.  I will  not  say  what  passed
at  this  moment;  it  may  be  naturally  supposed  that  they  got
out  of  the  scrape  as  well  as  possible,  and  that  when  once  free
they  quickly  carried  back  the  head  to  the  place  whence  they
had  taken  it.

“This  fact,  which  had  no  echo  beyond  the  spot  where  it
took  place,  was  never,  be  it  understood,  made  public.  I can
vouch  for  the  truth  of  it,  as  I was  a witness  to  it ; I heard  the
shriek  at  the  moment  the  pain  was  felt,  and  saw  the  marks  of
the  teeth.  Moreover,  I certify  that  the  woman  had  her  arm
in  the  bed  at  the  moment  she  uttered  the  cry.  So  much  is
certain,  and  I guarantee  the  truth  of  it  with  all  the  force  of  my
conscience.  I affirm  and  set  my  signature  to  this  statement,
regardless  of  the  ridicule  with  which  some  persons  may  treat  it.

(Signed)  “ Dame  Beliiot,

“ Argenteuil.”

This  kind  of  facts  is  not  more  incredible  than  those
marks  which  have  been  seen  at  all  times  on  the  bodies
of  the  possessed,  or  the  clairvoyants  and  ecstatics  of
our  times.  To  admit  the  possibility  of  them,  is  to  con-
firm that  of  conveyances.  What  can  thus  break  into
matter,  can  very  well  raise  it ; one  is  a consequence  of
the  other.  We  have  still  at  this  moment  the  stigmatised
of  the  Tyrol,  &c.,  who  have  wounds  out  of  which  the
blood  is  seen  to  run.  There  is  no  dearth  of  similar  facts
which  it  would  be  curious  to  verify,  and  there  is  a means
of  eliciting  them.  We  will  revert  to  the  subject  in  our
work  on  philosophy,  under  the  head  of  magnetism,  as


180


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


we  hold  it  a matter  of  greater  importance  to  be  true  and
frank  rather  than  enthusiastic.

“ Monsibur — To  comply  with  the  request  made  in  your
‘ Secrets,’  I transmit  you  a fact  which  happened  to  me  in  the
month  of  May,  1818.

“ I had  gone  with  my  wife  and  young  child  to  Vetheuil,  a
village  situated  near  Mantes,  to  the  house  of  my  late  parents,
and  which  then  belonged  to  one  of  my  sisters.  The  ground-
floor  of  this  house  was  composed  of  a room  at  the  entrance,  in
which  we  slept,  and  of  another  next  to  it  in  which  my  sister
slept.

“ One  night  we  were  all  in  bed,  I,  my  wife,  and  the  child
between  us  (in  the  same  bed  be  it  understood)  when  at  about
eleven  o’clock,  my  child,  then  about  two  years  and  a quarter
old,  was  taken  up  from  between  us  and  conveyed  to  the  foot  of
the  chimney,  which  was  about  ten  paces  distant  from  our  bed.
My  wife,  alarmed,  uttered’ a cry  that  woke  up  my  sister,  who
inquired  into  the  cause  of  this  noise.  After  being  told,  she
replied : ‘ Oh ! don’t  be  surprised  at  that,  it  is  Louis  Metro
playing  off  some  of  his  tricks.’  This  reply  was  not  of  a nature
to  make  us  easy ; but,  however,  I got  up  and  went  for  the
child,  which  at  the  moment  I picked  it  up,  was  accompanied  by
a strong  light.  I will  not  deny  it — although  an  old  soldier,  I
was  frightened.  I once  more  laid  down  the  child  in  the  same
position,  that  is  to  say  between  us  two ; ten  minutes  had  not
elapsed,  when  it  was  again  raised  up,  but  only  to  the  height  of
a foot,  and  then  let  down  again  in  the  same  place.

“Now,  here  you  have  not  a tale  that  w^as  told  me,  but  a
reality  that  happened  to  me — an  old  soldier,  living  in  the
country,  and  following  my  old  trade  of  a cooper.  Moreover,
there  were  with  me  at  the  time  two  witnesses,  who  can  vouch
for  the  truth  of  my  statement.  I am  not  an  educated  man,  and,
consequently,  I am  unable  to  account  for  it.  I merely  relate
what  happened  to  me.

“ I remain,  most  respectfully,  &c.,  &c.,

(Signed)  “ Jean  Lemaitre.

“15th  October,  1848.”

Who  could  have  removed  this  child  ? Those  that
convey  objects. — Who  convey  objects  ? Those  that
have  the  power  of  doing  so. — You  decidedly  wish,  then,
my  poor  senseless  fellow  (will  those  say  to  me  who  are


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


ISl


rich  in  sense),  to  make  us  believe  that  the  spirit  can  act
on  matter.  To  regain  the  esteem  of  those  sensible
persons,  I will  answer, — No,  it  is  matter  that  bears  the
spirit ; a spirit  is  air,  and  air  cannot  bear  matter.  We
perceive  this  by  our  globe,  which  is  supported  on  the
shoulders  of  Hercules,  and  the  moon  which  is  in  the
lap  of  Venus.  What  an  error  to  think  that  a light
body  can  support  a heavy  one  ! Reasoning  thus,  the
dose  of  physic  which  was  being  prepared  for  me  will  be
diminished,  and  I shall  not  be  sorry  for  it : long  live
the  reasoning  of  our  davs  !

We  are  about  to  pass  on  to  an  author  well  known  by
his  feuilletons  in  the  Populaire  and  other  highly  esteemed
works,  who  has  had  the  kindness  to  communicate  to  me
the  paper  we  are  about  to  read.  An  esteemed  author  is,
however,  a being  recognised  as  superior  by  our  savans
to  this  good  and  honest  soldier  whose  narrative  we  have
just  perused — a narrative  as  simple  as  it  is  full  of  truth-
fulness. After  reading  this  one,  they  will  be  tempted  to
cry  out  hallucination  ! but  there  is  no  lack  of  hallucinated
individuals  of  this  kind ; the  satirical  Balzac,  the  astound-
ing Alexandre  Dumas,  the  austere  patriot  Alphonse
Esquiros,  the  piquant  Alphonse  Karr,  the  philanthropic
Eugene  Sue,  &c.,  &c.,  all  believe  in  magnetism  and  its
marvels.  It  was  to  those  well  taught  men  that  it  apper-
tained to  handle  the  subject  which  I have  ventured  to
treat  upon  very  superficially.  What  success  would  it  not
have  obtained,  set  forth  by  those  pens  as  elegant  as  they
are  witty.  In  short,  since  I have  opened  the  march,  let
us  proceed,  and,  you,  readers,  be  indulgent.

“Monsieur — Having  perused  your  ‘Secrets’  I am  induced
to  relate  to  you  a few  facts  from  which  you  may  possibly  derive
some  information.  As  it  seems  to  me  necessary  to  make  a few
prefatory  remarks  in  order  to  fix  the  amount  of  confidence  that
may  be  accorded  me,  I will  do  so,  but  in  a few  words.

“ My  natural  tendencies  are  spiritualist  ones,  my  aspirations
are  directed  towards  the  world  of  causes  ; but  three  motives
paralysed  ray  tendencies  and  my  aspirations;  the  philosophy
of  our  days,  with  which  I was  classically  impregnated ; my


182


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


pride,  which  made  me  consider  as  weakness  of  mind  the  least
faith  in  whatsoever  departs  from  physical  and  chemical  possi-
bilities ; in  short,  the  fear  of  being  a dupe  even  to  my  own
illusions,  therefore  laughed  I disdainfully  at  the  recitals  of
supernatural  things.  ‘ Your  father,’  once  said  my  mother  to
me,  ‘ was  not  a weak-minded  man,  and  yet  he  affirmed  having
seen  on  two  occasions,  in  the  course  of  his  life,  two  human
forms  clad  in  white;  in  one  he  perfectly  well  recognised  his
betrothed,  in  the  other  his  aunt.  In  fact,  these  two  persons
were  dving,  far  away  from  him,  when  he  saw  them.’  At  this
affirmation  I gave  an  incredulous  shake  of  the  head.  ‘ Your
grandmother,  at  the  moment  her  father  took  to  his  death-bed,
beheld  him  distinctly,  wrapped  up  in  a sheet,  and  seated  on
their  garden  wall.’  ‘ A mere  illusion,’  replied  I ; ‘ childish
fright.’ — ‘ For  several  years  we  had  not  seen  my  father’s  bro-
ther ; one  night  we  were  all  aroused  by  his  voice,  which,  from
the  yard,  was  calling  my  father.  We  ran  out  to  welcome  our
uncle,  no  one  was  there,  and  we  were  all  thoroughly  convinced
of  the  fact,  since  your  grandfather  had  been  thrice  named.’

‘ Hallucination  of  the  hearing,'  replied  I ; ‘a  spirit  cannot
speak.’  ‘ When  he  whom  I loved  died,’  added  my  mother,

‘ several  blows  were  struck  on  a small  spinning-wheel  hanging
from  the  wall,  and  it  commenced  rapidly  turning  round.
Weeping,  I conveyed  the  spinning-wheel  to  the  bedside  of  my
father,  who  laughed  at  me,  and  the  fact  was  renewed  in  the
presence  of  a score  persons,  who  felt  the  agitation  of  the  air
under  the  invisible  wand,  and  beheld  not  onlv  the  wheel  turn
but  a cloud  of  dust  gather  around  it.’  ‘ It  was  probably  some
sorry  trick  of  legerdemain  that  was  played  you,’  replied  I.

‘ When  my  sister  died,’  resumed  my  godmother,  ‘ I did  not
even  know  that  she  had  been  ill.  1 woke  up  during  the  night ;
the  moon  threw  its  light  into’my  room,  and  I distinctly  beheld
my  sister  walking.  When  my  husband  died,  far  away  from
me,  I felt  myself  raised  thrice  in  my  bed.’  ‘ These  are  illu-
sions, my  dear  godmother,’  replied  I,  ‘ for  such  things  can’t
be ; the  spirit  has  no  form ; the  spirit  has  no  action  over  the
matter  it  animates,  and  acts  physically  only  through  the  me-
dium of  organs.’  My  incredulity  on  such  matters  was  so  great
that  I would  not  believe  that  three  violent  rings  given  at  our
door,  whilst  we  were  on  the  landing-place,  were  a sign  of
farewell  sent  by  a female  friend  of  my  mother,  although  the


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


183


hour  of  her  death  coincided  with  that  of  the  three  pulls  at  the
bell.  I preferred  believing  that  a mouse  had  run  along  the
bell  wire,  and  when  my  sister,  at  that  time  in  Scotland,  in-
quired of  us  by  letter  whether  Madame  O , of  whose  illness

W'e  had  not  sent  her  word,  had  not  died  ©n  such  a day,  at
such  an  hour,  because  she  had  heard  herself  thrice  called  by
the  voice  of  that  lady,  although  the  coincidence  was  exact,  my
incredulity  remained  unshaken.  ‘ Some  such  thing  will  happen
to  yourself,’  said  my  mother,  ‘ and  then  you  will  believe.’  ‘ I
will  search  into  it,’  said  I,  ‘ and  find  out,  be  you  assured,  some
physical  cause  for  it.’

“ I was  in  this  disposition  at  the  age  of  eighteen,  when,
working  at  my  thesis  on  the  divine  presence  and  human  free-
will, I heard  a knocking  over  my  head;  the  noise  became
so  fatiguing  by  its  monotonous  continuance,  that  I went  up  to
the  room  whence  it  proceeded ; no  one  was  there.  I thought
that  it  was  some  effect  of  acoustics.  I was  about  to  descend,
when  the  same  noise  was  renewed  over  my  head  in  a garret.
I went  up  to  it.  No  one  again.  I explored  the  garret,  and
the  rooms  under  it,  looked  out  of  the  window : no  physical
cause  within,  no  noise  without  that  could  possibly  be  re-
percussed. I once  more  took  up  my  pen ; but  scarcely  was  I
seated  than  the  same  uniform  knocks  were  again  heard,  and
forthwith  a thought  took  possession  of  my  mind.  Fritz  is  ill,
and  will  not  recover ! This  young  man  was  my  betrothed,
and  loved  me  with  infinite  sincerity  and  tenderness.  I
hastened  to  recount  to  my  mother  what  had  passed,  apprise
her  of  my  intention,  and  beg  her  to  accompany  me  to  the
abode  of  the  parents  of  Fritz,  who,  in  fact,  was  ill  in  bed.
He  told  me  that  for  several  hours  his  wishes  had  been  calling

O

for  me.  Ten  days  after  he  was  very  bad.  My  mother,  at  that
time  ailing,  and  my  sister  falling  almost  every  night  into  horrible
convulsions,  I had  made  up  my  mind,  in  order  to  w'atch
over  these  two  objects  of  my  affections,  to  sleep  with  the
former,  and  make  the  other  sleep  in  our  room.  On  the
night  of  the  tenth  day  of  Fritz’s  illness,  a violent  shock  was
given  the  bed  occupied  by  me  and  my  mother.  Thinking  that
this  shock  had  been  imprinted  by  a kick  from  my  mother,
I did  not  trouble  myself  about  it,  but  placed  my  hand  softly
on  her  leg,  and  assured  myself  when  the  second  shock  arrived
that  it  did  not  proceed  from  my  mother.  The  third  was  so


184


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


violent  that  my  mother  woke  up  in  a fright,  asking  me  what  I
was  doing.  After  hearing  my  reply,  she  said  to  me  : ‘ Fritz
is  dying,  my  child ; he  is  come  to  bid  us  farewell.’  I get  up
gently,  light  the  candle,  explore  the  room,  and  the  adjoining
ones;  then  resume  my  place.  Almost  immediately  after,  at
the  foot  of  the  bed,  we  hear  the  sound  of  two  fists  falling
alternately  on  the  bedstead,  uninterruptedly  and  regularly.
My  sister,  in  her  turn,  wakes  up  in  her  fright,  exclaiming,

‘ Good  God  ! what  noise,  pray,  are  you  making  I speak
to  her,  strive  to  reassure  her : useless  pains  ; she  dares  not
remain  in  her  bed.  My  mother  goes  to  take  her  place,  and
she  comes  to  occupy  her  mother’s.  The  regular  strokes  pass
along  the  side  1 lay  on  ; the  shocks  made  the  candle  flare.
I commenced  reading:  aloud  to  divert  the  attention  of  mv
sister,  and  the  noise  does  not  cease  for  several  hours.  In
fact,  my  betrothed  was  dead ! From  that  day  my  in-
credulity fell.

“ Amongst  facts  of  the  same  order,  here  are  two  which  I
have  from  persons  worthy  of  belief.  One  of  these  persons,
a grave  and  profoundly  studious  man,  related  that  whilst  he
was  a professor  at  the  college  of  Aix,  something  quite  inex-
plicable took  place  there.  One  evening,  when  the  professors
were  assembled  in  the  common  hall,  the  laundress  entered
looking  quite  scared,  and  pretending  that  she  durst  not  return
home,  because  no  sooner  did  she  set  foot  on  the  threshold  of
her  room  than  she  heard  blows  struck  on  her  furniture,  and  a
great  noise  of  broken  dishes  and  plates.  The  professors,
pupils  of  Voltaire  and  the  Encyclopedia,  burst  out  in  chorus
into  a wild  laugh  ; but,  as  the  laundress  persisted  in  her  tale,
one  of  them  accompanied  her  home,  and  was  thus  enabled  to
make  sure  of  the  truth  of  her  statement.  Then  he  returned
for  his  colleagues  who  made  the  same  trial,  which  was  attended
by  the  same  result.  The  room  was  visited,  every  hole  and
corner  explored,  but  nothing  discovered  that  could  be  assigned
as  a cause  for  this  strange  noise.  The  following  day  the
laundress  heard  that  her  father,  a waggoner,  had  been  crushed
to  death  at  the  very  hour  all  seemed  as  if  being  smashed  at  her
abode.

“ A ladv  recounted  to  me  the  following:  fact  : — Her  niece
fell  ill  at  Paris.  The  aunt  who  lived  at  Granville,  is  aware  of
her  niece’s  illness,  but  makes  no  mention  of  the  circumstance  to


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


185


her  sister,  the  mother  of  the  young  woman.  A few  days  after
the  two  sisters  met.  It  was  at  dusk.  The  mother  of  the
patient  goes  out  of  the  apartment  on  the  ground  floor,  then
returns  to  it  in  great  alarm.  All  hasten  to  her,  ask  her  what
is  the  matter  with  her,  ‘ Thdrese  is  dead  ! my  child  is  dead  !’'
exclaims  she  as  soon  as  she  could  speak.  ‘ I just  now  saw  her
standing  under  the  peristyle ; I recognised  her  full  well,  although

she  was  clad  in  white.’  In  fact,  young  Madame  B died

that  very  day,  at  that  very  hour.

“ Other  facts,  no  less  extraordinary,  have  happened  to
persons  of  my  acquaintance  ; they  have  a different  bearing,
arising  from  the  same  order  of  things,

“ One  of  my  intimate  friends,  a woman  scarcely  believing
in  God,  and  not  at  all  in  the  devil,  related  to  me  that  having
passed  the  evening  with  a widower,  and  induced  him  to  marry
again,  even  offering  to  find  him  a wife,  a very  astonishing
vision  happened  to  her.  She  was  in  the  habit  of  reading  in
bed,  she  held  in  her  hand  one  of  Paul  de  Kock’s  novels,  and
was  laughing  to  herself  at  the  countless  comicalities  of  the
author,  when  she  thought  she  perceived  something  white.
She  raises  her  head,  the  widower’s  wife  was  before  her  clad  in
a white  robe,  her  thick  black  head  of  hair  spread  over  her
shoulders  enveloped  her  like  a veil ; she  gesticulated  warmly,
her  lips  quivered.  The  spectatress  of  this  apparition  compre-
hended that  she  was  entreated  not  to  advise  her  husband  to
marry  again.  This  lady,  getting  the  better  of  her  fear  and  wish-
ing to  bring  such  a visit  to  a speedy  termination,  said  to  her : —
‘ Make  yourself  easy,  I will  never  speak  again  of  matrimony  to
your  husband.’  The  phantom  disappeared,  and  never  returned  !

“ A lady  of  Coutances  had,  for  forty  years,  a sort  of  imp
attached  to  her  house  ; two  persons  assured  me  that  they  had
been  victims  to  its  malicious  tricks.  It  used  to  snatch  from
them  their  cards,  dice,  or  dominos,  whilst  they  were  playing;
knock  at  the  doors,  seat  itself  on  the  heels  of  the  servants
when  at  prayers,  operate  noises  of  broken  dishes  and  plates.
The  lady  to  whom  it  thus  clung,  being  at  first  very  much
alarmed,  performed  numerous  acts  of  devotion,  &c,,  but  all  to
no  purpose.  Her  house  was  exorcised,  but  the  imp  would  not
budge.  She  saw  nothing  but  twice  in  her  life  : the  first  time
a frightful  man,  the  second  a hideous  woman.  All  her  friends
were  so  habituated  to  the  malicious  tricks  of  the  imp  that  they

o


186


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


took  no  further  notice  of  it  than  by  giving  vent  to  their
laughter,  and  the  lady  herself  philosophically  made  up  her
mind  to  tolerate  the  nuisance.

“ A Captain  of  the  Navy,  who,  from  his  triple  capacity  as  a
sailor,  an  Englishman,  and  a heretic  (!),  could  not  be  accused
of  superstitious  credulity,  related,  one  day,  to  a friend  of  mine
the  following  fact : — He  arrived  at  Idsbon  with  his  wife  and
servants,  and  was  unable  to  procure  a lodging,  except  in  a
palace,  which  was  forsaken  on  account,  as  it  was  said,  of  being
haunted  by  ghosts.  Our  Captain  at  first  laughed,  but  so
many  details  were  given  him  that  he  came  to  the  conclusion
that  it  might  possibly  be  a haunt  for  brigands  or  false
coiners.  He  orders  his  servants  to  make  up  a bed  for  them-
selves alongside  the  doors  of  his  room,  leaves  his  candle  burn-
ing, and  lays  a brace  of  pistols  on  his  night  table  ; then  awaits,
fully  resolved  to  supply  the  place  of  the  Portuguese  execu-
tioner. All  was  sleep  and  silence  in  the  city,  when,  at  mid-
night, the  doors  of  his  room  appeared  to  open  violently,  and
an  impetuous  wind  forces  its  passage  in,  a noise  of  chains
dragging  along  makes  the  floor  groan.  The  Captain,  however,
sees  nothing,  his  doors  had  not  been  opened ; he  fires  off  his
pistols,  the  light  is  put  out,  and  all  noise  ceases;  he  jumps  out
of  bed,  gropes  along  all  over  the  room,  but  can  find  nothing.
He  wakes  up  the  servants,  who  had  seen  nothing,  heard
nothing — not  even  the  report  of  the  pistols.  He  explores  the
walls,  the  partitions  ; all  attests  that  there  is  no  vacant  space.
The  next  day  he  so  stations  himself  that  he  may  perceive  the
secret  door,  of  the  existence  of  which  he  has  not  a doubt,  but
no  issue  is  disclosed,  and  the  noise  is  absolutely  the  same,  and
the  sleep  of  the  domestics  as  sound.  The  third  day,  same
phenomenon,  and  the  cool  Englishman  would,  nevertheless,
have  obstinately  continued  in  his  abode  amidst  spirits,  had  his
wife  consented  to  so  doing;  but,  pretending  that  she  should
be  frightened  to  death,  they  quitted  the  haunted  palace.

“ A lady  of  my  society,  residing  in  a small  town,  hears  that
her  Cur^  is  ill ; she  goes  to  see  him,  inquires  into  the  cause  of
his  illness,  and  is  very  much  surprised  when  he  tells  her  a
tale,  the  substance  of  which  I am  about  to  recount  to  you  : —

‘ Three  days,  or  rather  three  nights  before,  the  sacristan
starts  out  of  his  sleep,  and  perceives  a light  in  the  church.
Thinking  that  thieves  are  there,  he  jumps  out  of  bed,  and


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


187


cautiously  advances  towards  the  point  lighted  up  ; what  was
his  fright,  his  terror  on  beholding  at  the  altar,  ready  to^say
mass,  a priest  who  had  died  some  weeks  previously  ; his  hair
stands  on  end,  a cold  sweat  inundates  his  body,  he  runs
off,  and  goes  to  wake  up  a priest  who  had  been' a friend  of  the
defunct.  Both  return  to  the  church,  but  nothing  now  was  to
be  seen.  The  following  night  the  church  is  again  lighted
up;  the  priest,  no  sooner  informed,  proceeds  to  make  sure
of  the  fact,  but  he  is  overtaken  with  the  same  fear  as  the
sacristan,  and  dares  not  proceed.  He  gives  an  account  of  the
apparition  to  his  Cure,  a resolute  man,  who  having  had  some
trifling  differences  with  the  deceased,  made  up  his  mind  to
render  liirn  the  service  he  solicited,  and  charged  the  sacristan
to  let  him  know  whether  the  church  was  illuminated  again.
That  very  night  it  w’as  once  more  lighted  up.  The  Cure
advanced  with  a firm  step.  ‘ Do  you  desire  that  I should
serve  you  by  saying  mass  ?’  said  he  to  tlm  defunct.  ‘ Yes,’
replied  the  latter,  and  mass  commenced.  Y/hen  it  was  over,
the  dead  man  turned  round,  and  said  to  the  Cure,  in  a voice
of  emotion  : ‘ I thank  you.’  Then  all  disappeared,  the  lights
were  extinguished,  and  the  Cure  groped  his  way  back  to  the
vestrv.  But  this  half  hour’s  t6te-a-tete  with  a dead  man
made  such  an  impression  on  him  that  he  took  to  his  bed,
and  three  months  after  this  narrative,  the  lady,  who  recounted
it  to  me,  attended  the  funeral  obsequies  of  the  good  Cure  !

“This. fact,  the  truth  of  which  1 cannot  doubt,  would  suffi-
ciently prove  to  me  what  vou  say — that  man  loses  neither
his  beliefs  nor  his  habits,  on  quitting  the  terrestrial  life,  and,
indeed,  the  grand  law  of  analogy  demands  that  there  should
be  progression  and  shades  in  the  various  states  of  man,  as
there  are  shades  in  nature.  After  all  these  apparitions,  shall
speak  to  you  of  dreams  ? Are  they  not  of  the  domain  oi
the  most  clairvoyant  somnambulism  ? Was  not  Mahomet
right  in  saving  that  ‘ when  man  sleeps,  his  soul  is  with  God —
is  no  longer  in  his  body  ?’  Be  that  as  it  may,  I have  never
been  incredulous  on  this  point,  because  my  mother  was  a true
Pythoness.  Never  did  a relative' — a friend  die — without  her
being  warned  of  it  in  a dream.  She  foretold  the  death  of
mv  father  a year  before  it  happened  ; on  that  occasion,  she
said  to  a friend,  ‘I  shall  fall  ill,  very  ill,  but  I shall  not  die;
my  husband  will  die  first,  and  my  sister-in-law'  will  soon


188


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


follow  him  and  all  took  place  as  she  had  predicted.  Often-
times would  she  say  to  me,  ‘ So  and  so  is  happening  to  so
and  so ; I am  going  to  receive  a letter,  &c.’  and  never  was
she  mistaken.  The  eve  of  her  death,  she  said  to  us,  ‘ Prepare
yourselves,  my  children,  my  mother  has  come  for  me.  I
depart,  to-morrow,  with  her.’  She  had  several  crises  previous
to  final  dissolution.  After  the  last  but  one,  she  calmly  said  to  us,
‘ One  more,  and  all  will  be  over  with  me  in  this  world  as  she
said  to  us,  before  the  others,  ‘ Not  yet ; it  is  not  the  last !’

“ This  somnambulic  faculty  is  in  me  for  certain  grand  things  :
thus,  on  the  eve  of  the  fatal  ordonnances  of  July,  being  a very
young  girl,  and  never  hearing  talk  of  politics,  I dreamt  that  I
beheld  Christ  in  the  clouds;  in  his  left  hand  he  held  a number
of  tri-coloured  favours,  which  he  waved  in  the  eyes  of  the
people,  on  whom  he  smiled  whilst  saluting  them  ; and,  in  his
right  hand,  he  had  a thunderbolt.  I beheld  his  eyebrows  knit
when  he  fixed  his  looks  on  the  royal  family  ; then  he  hurled
his  thunderbolt.  A few  davs  after,  the  dvnastv  took  the  road
to  Cherbourg.

“A  Prince  will  soon  die,  said  I,  to  my  brother,  on  the  13th
of  July,  1841  ; for  I saw,  last  night,  a magnificent  hearse,  pre-
ceded and  followed  by  troops  of  all  arms.  And,  in  the  after-
noon, the  Duke  of  Orleans  was  killed.

“ ‘ Has  nothing  been  heard  say  of  the  King  ?’  asked  I,
another  day,  of  my  brother,’  ‘ No,  why  — ‘ Because  I have
had  a dream,  which  signifies  that  an  attempt  will  be  made  on
his  life.’  Next  morning  Lecomte  w'as  arrested.  On  the  eve
of  New  Year’s-day,  I ask  of  God  to  reveal  to  me  the  most
important  events  that  would  happen  to  me  in  the  course  of  the
year.  I behold,  in  a dream,  a hearse ; and  my  mother  died  on
the  20th  March.  At  the  moment  she  met  with  the  fall  that
caused  her  death  I dreamt  that  we  were  removing,  and  that
my  mother  was  carried  awa)\  I was  started  out  of  my  sleep
by  the  cries  of  my  sister.  We  placed  our  mother  on  a bed.
Three  weeks  after,  she  returned  to  the  bosom  of  her  God.

“ I was  dreaming,  one  night,  that  I was  in  another  world,
with  my  father  and  godfather ; the  latter  wished  to  detain  me,
but  my  father  objected  to  this,  saying  : — ‘ No,  no,  let  her  go,
it  would  cause  her  mother  too  much  grief.’  At  that  time  I
was  in  very  good  health;  two  days  after,  I had  so  violent  an
attack  of  brain  fever  that  it  was  near  taking  me  off.


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


189


“ What  conclusion  draw  from  all  these  facts,  and  many
others  I could  cite  ? Is  it  not  this,  that  the  intellectual  world
is  represented  by  zero  in  our  philosophy,  which  is  no  less  than
what  say  our  sages  of  the  day  ? May  we  not  ask  ourselves
whether  the  soul  remains  not  in  communication  of  love,  of
sympathy,  of  recollection  with  those  it  leaves  on  earth  ?
Whether  the  communion  of  souls  is  not  universal,  and  inde-
pendent of  the  accidents  of  matter  ? Whether  time  and  space
exist  for  the  pure  spirit  ? Whether  the  soul  is  really  in  need
of  the  organs  of  the  body  to  operate  physical  effects  ? — and
whether  it  cannot  act  on  all  matter,  even  foreign  to  that  which
constitutes  its  envelope  ? We  may  ask  ourselves  whether  the
spirit  is  not,  or  has  not,  an  immortal  form,  an  interior  mould,
as  it  were,  of  the  body  ? Whether,  in  short,  it  would  not  be
possible  to  find  out  a law  which  might  direct  and  regulate  the
clairvoyant  somnambulism  of  magnetic  and  of  natural  sleep  ?
Here  is  a pretty  number  of  questions : their  solution,  I am
certain  of  it,  will  destroy  our  philosophy,  our  metaphysics,
considerably  modify  physics  and  chymistry  ; but  what  matters
destroying  a scaffolding  raised  on  false  hypotheses : far  pre-
ferable doubt  than  error ; far  preferable  a truth  painfully
acquired  than  a system  perfectly  logical  but  remote  from  the
truth.  Humanity  marches  ; let  us  hope  that  a ray  of  the
eternal  sun  will  enlighten  its  intelligence,  and  that,  finally,  it
will  enter  the  road  of  truth.

“ F.  Lamb,

“ 17,  Rue  Tiquetonne.”

I will  not  take  the  liberty  of  making  any  observation
on  the  interesting  facts  that  have  been  just  read ; the
person  who  relates  them  is  worthy  of  all  my  confidenccj,
and  I recommend  the  reader  to  accord  her  his.  I will
merely  take  leave  to  reply  to  the  questions  of  this  lady
with  these  words — Yes,  you  may  address  these  ques-
tions to  science  and  the  savans,  but  beware  of  believing
in  the  solution  which  will  be  given  you  by  their  mighty
conceit;  beware,  at  the  same  time,  of  communicating
to  them  that  which  your  judgment  shall  intuitively  dic-
tate ; theirs  would  be  the  work  of  pride  in  your  eyes,
and  yours  would  be  in  theirs  that  of  a lunatic  ; ay.


190


the  secrets  of  the  future


a lunatic,  you  hear,  because  you  would  indubitably
conclude  that  there  is  an  active,  intelligent  being  seated
in  our  material  body,  causing  its  springs  to  work,
communicating  to  it  all  forces,  thoughts,  movement.
Oh  ! utter  not  that  word  m.ovement,  for  what  internally
moves  a body  may  externally  move  it;  they  will  grant
you  the  one,  but  refuse  you  the  other.  You  will  answer,
perhaps,  by  asking  them  wdiether  it  is  the  earth,  the
other  globes  and  their  kingdoms,  that  move  of  them-
selves or  are  moved ; if  they  move  of  themselves  they
are  the  life,  if  moved  they  are  death.  As  life  is  in  all
and  throughout  all,  for  our  savans  neither  will  nor  can
admit  death,  or  nothingness,  which  is  the  same  thing,
they  will  wish  to  extricate  themselves  from  the  diffi-
culty in  which  you  place  them,  by  replying,  by  way  of
criterion — Globes  and  reigns  have  their  point  of  attrac-
tion. You  will  answer,  what  they  attract  is  no  more
dead  than  they  themselves;  otherwise,  attraction  be-
comes impossible, 'life  cannot  attract  death,  therefore,
the  particles  attracted  have  a positive  individuality,
forming  one  with  the  mass,  but  forming,  likewise,  one  in
the  mass.  They  will  reply  to  you — Yes ; then,  since
this  particle  attracting  and  attracted  forms  one  with  the
mass,  and  one  again  in  the  mass,  its  individuality  is
thus  found  guaranteed,  and  the  immortality  of  the  soul,
as  an  individual,  or  particle  of  the  mass,  is  found  proved  ;
that  which  is  not  so  is  the  action  of  the  particle  on  the
whole.  Thus  the  soul,  which  is  but  a particle  of  the
human  material  body,  cannot  dominate,  raise  at  its
will  that  mass  a thousand  times  heavier  than  it ; this  is
contrary  to  simple  physical  notions.  Yes,  in  appear-
ance, but  have  you  discovered  where  the  active  force  is  ?
Can  you  say  whether  it  is  in  the  whole  or  in  the  par-
ticle ? If  you  answer  that  it  is  in  the  whole,  the  mate-
rial body  could  move  without  the  assistance  of  the
particle  soul ; if,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  the  particle  that
possesses  the  active  force,  the  more  it  is  disengaged
from  similar  aggregations,  the  more  j^owerful  it  must


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


191


be;  see  you  not  a proof  of  this  in  homoeopathy,  is  it  the
part  or  the  whole  that  operates  ? It  is  the  part,  there
is  not  a doubt  of  it.  By  this  fine  discovery  you  obtain
the  material  proof  of  the  sublime  axiom,  all  is  in  all,
and  throughout  all.  The  part,  therefore,  contains  the
force  of  the  whole ; containing  the  force  it  contains  all.
You  represent  to  yourselves  force  by  the  volume  of  the
thing ; that  is,  retreating,  recoiling  before  the  contrary
demonstration  of  gunpowder,  steam,  galvanism,  mag-
netism ; only  study  the  last-named  science,  and  you
will  see  whether  force  is  represented  in  it  by  volume.

Excuse  me,  this  sorceress  metaphysics  hurries  me
away  despite  myself ; I had  promised,  however,  that  I
would  not  touch  upon  this  point  in  the  present  work ;
but  if  I made  mention  of  all  these  extraordinary  facts
without  olfering  the  least  observation,  it  would  be  said :
— This  poor  spiritualist  is  barely  spirituel ; let  him  hold
his  peace  or  support  his  fantastical  tales  with  some
admissible  considerations.  It  is  because  I hear  the  stern
voice  of  the  savans  thus  accusing  me,  that  I throw  out
at  random  a few  observations  which  will  be  found  more
demonstrative  in  the  forementioned  work.

So,  my  dear  lady,  content  yourself  with  listening  to
what  will  be  said  to  you  respecting  the  tricks  which  are
of  the  domain  of  physics  ; above  all,  make  up  your  mind
to  hear  this  fine  objection  that  by  a thread  conductor
cleverly  concealed  in  certain  places,  we  may  turn  topsy-
turvy plate,  furniture,  men,  and  animals ; ask  them,
then,  whether  this  spark  so  powerful  accorded  to  the
metallic  kingdom  ought  and  can  be  refused  to  the  soul,
the  master-piece  (say  they)  of  the  Divinity  ; the  master-
piece ought,  at  least,  to  possess  the  property  of  the
inferior  part,  if  not  more.

They  will  speak  to  you  also  of  the  havoc  occasioned
bv  the  effects  of  the  thunder-bolt,  the  grandest  juggler
in  the  universe.  This  fluid  recoils  not  before  convey-
ances; it  would  not  dare  compromise  its  high  reputation
by  conveying  a box,  a letter,  a seal,  to  such  or  such  a


192


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


place,  for  shame  ! tell  it,  on  the  contrary,  to  tear  out  all
the  nails  in  the  wooden  shoes  of  those  good  villagers
who  pray  to  God  to  preserve  them  for  them,  and  it  will
acquit  itself  admirably.  It  will  convey  this  rock  to  a
distance  of  more  than  thirty  feet,  reduce  this  tree  into
finer  laths  than  man  could,  unshoe  this  horse  without
killing  him,  disarm  this  cavalier  before  he  is  av^are  of  it,
break  all  these  windows,  demolish  this  chimney,  clear
this  table,  and  what  more  ? This  is  not,  however,  the
master-piece  of  the  creation,  since  you  spit  it  with  your
pikes  touched  with  loadstone.  Oh  ! poor  mortals,  you
believe  and  see  these  things,  you  know  that  it  is  an
electric  spark  attacking  indistinctly  each  kingdom,  and
yet  you  would  refuse  the  divine  spark,  named  the  soul,
the  power  of  operating  such  things.  Yes,  you  are  pre-
found.

“Monsieur — The  prospectus  of  your  work — ‘ Secrets  of  the
Life  to  Come  Revealed,’  having  excited  my  curiosity,  I hastened
to  subscribe  to  it,  and  after  a perusal,  which  has  made  a deep
impression  on  me,  I was  bound,  before  pronouncing  on  the
value  of  the  revelations  it  contains,  to  follow  the  advice  you
give  to  all  magnetisers,  viz.,  to  experiment.  You  trace  a route;
I ventured  to  proceed  in  it,  though  fearful  of  missing  my  aim.
At  length  I have  obtained  a conviction  of  the  reality  of  those
apparitions,  and  surprising  answers  have  been  made  me.
Having  called  on  you  for  information  on  this  subject,  the  appa-
rition that  you  had  the  kindness  to  procure  for  me  had  already
convinced  me.  Still,  in  consequence  of  what  may  be  termed
a remnant  of  doubt,  I assured  myself  of  the  truth  of  this
phenomenon  by  experiments  of  my  own.  I will  not,  however,
tell  you  that  all  the  clairvoyants  to  whom  I applied  possess  this
faculty  in  a like  degree.  I don’t  think  it  necessary  to  give  you
the  particulars  of  my  experiments  ; I merely  consider  it  a dutv
to  render  homage  to  this  singular  and  useful  truth,  in  the
common  interest  of  men  ; thanking  you  at  the  same  time  for
having  received  from  you  this  key  which  served  me  in  finding
out  another  phenomenon,  well  worthy  also  of  fixing  the  attention
of  psychologists  and  especially  of  spiritualists.

“This  is  the  fact : — The  mere  Christian  name  of  a person  who


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


193


is  ill.  no  matter  where,  suffices  a clairvoyante  whom  I magnetise,
to  inoculate  herself  sympathetically  with  the  malady,  to  anv
degree,  whatever  be  its  nature ; above  all,  know  that  the
thought  has  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  it,  since  neither  1 nor
my  clairvoyante  know  aught  else  but  the  name  which,  despite
its  infinite  repetition  in  the  material  world,  represents  to  us
instantaneously  all  the  details  of  the  malady  of  the  person  who
is  suffering  it.  This  sort  of  appeal  which  I make  in  the  world
of  spirits  still  on  earth,  confirms  that  which  you  make  in  the
spiritual  world  with  so  much  facility.

“ Accept,  Monsieur,  &c.,  &c.,

Duteil,

“ Member  of  the  Magnetological  Society,

“ 246,  Rue  Saint  Denis.

“The  20th  October,  1848.”

The  success  which  M.  Duteil  obtains  in  experiments
of  this  kind  confirms  what  we  have  said  in  our  first
volume,  that  it  was  losing  precious  time  to  make  clair-
voyants travel  step  by  step  towards  the  place  we  wish
them  to  explore.  I ask  for  the  place  which  I know  not
any  more  than  my  clairvoyante,  and  the  place  forth-
with appears.  If  it  is  possible  for  the  place  which  is
devoid  (no  doubt)  of  a soul,  to  present  itself  thus  at  the
mere  call  of  its  name,  it  ought  to  be  as  easy  for  a spirit
to  do  so.  It  remains  only  to  comprehend  how  Jean,
who  is,  perhaps,  the  ten  thousandth  of  this  name  in
France,  should  present  himself  rather  than  another
Jean  ? It  may  be  replied  to  this  question  that  there  is
a communion  between  souls  in  general ; that  the  isolated
scene  which  we  play  during  the  day  is  the  result  of  a
fact  secretly  determined  on  by  our  soul,  which  leaves
its  material  body  in  ignorance  of  the  cause  and  object
of  its  decisions,  and  its  relations  with  other  souls  ; this
would  not  prove  the  free  will  of  the  material  body,  far
from  it.

Here  are  two  facts,  one  of  which  took  place  at  my
house  whilst  I was  penning  this  reflection.  Three
ladies  came  to  ask  me  for  a view  at  distance.  Having


194


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


no  subjects  present  for  this  speciality,  I asked  Emile,
who  happened  at  that  moment  to  pay  me  a visit,  to
suffer  himself  to  be  sent  to  sleep ; after  demurring  a
short  time  he  consented.  I asked  these  ladies  what
they  desired  ; one  of  them,  Madame  Bimont,  an
Icarian,  told  me  that  she  was  very  uneasy  respecting
her  brother,  who  had  been  amongst  the  first  to  set  out
with  his  brethren  for  Icaria.  I inquired  of  her  his  name
and  summoned  the  man.  Emile  gave  an  exact  descrip-
tion of  him.  I told  him  to  see  where  this  man  was.
“ Oh  !”  immediately  replied  the  child,  “ the  road  is  not
a very  good  one  to  get  there.  I see,  also,  a very  fine
field — a pretty  farm — a small  pond — a well  that  looks
like  a new  one — horses  that  are  very  vicious  ; I have  no
mind  to  mount  them.  They  are  white.  The  trees  have
droll  kind  of  leaves  ; they  are  large  and  notched,  &c..
See.” — “ Ask  the  gentleman  why  he  does  not  write  to
his  sister  “ He  has  written  to  her.^’ — When  ?”

About  the  end  of  August.  He  is  displeased  with  her
for  not  having  answered  him.^^  After  several  more
questions  of  a like  nature,  I woke  the  child,  and  this
lady  (who  was  not  en  rapport  with  him)  said  to  me  : —

So  far  as  regards  the  description  of  my  brother  and
the  places,  it  seems  to  me  to  have  an  air  of  truth,  but
with  respect  to  the  letter  said  to  have  been  written,  it
must  be  an  error,  otherwise  I should  have  received  it.”
Two  days  after  this  lady  received  the  very  letter,  dated
from  the  25th  August ; she  had  the  goodness  to  come
and  inform  me  of  it.  The  child  had  therefore  really
conversed  with  the  spirit  of  this  man,  whilst  the  latter
was  not  aw'^are  of  it.

The  second  fact  is  quite  personal  to  myself.  A
respectable  female  neighbour  of  mine  whom  I had  taught
to  magnetise,  possesses  a clairvoyante  that  promises
being  very  powerful.  She  said  to  me : “ Last  night  my
clairvoyante  declared  that  she  beheld  you  taking  the
place  of  her  good  guide ; she  W'as  quite  surprised  at  it,
she  exclaimed : “ Ah  ! there’s  M.  Cahagnet  with  his


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


195


arms  crossed  over  his  breast,  looking  kindly  on  me.” —
‘‘  Ask  him  what  he  wants  with  you  ?”  Then  ensued  a
conversation  between  my  spirit  and  this  clairvoyante,
which  it  is  needless  to  mention  ; but  what  I can  affirm
before  God  is  that  this  lady  told  me  my  inmost  thoughts,
which  I had  communicated  to  no  one,  and  much  less
still,  I am  persuaded,  to  a clairvoyante  whose  influence
I in  nowise  felt.  At  this  moment  when  I was  reading
aloud,  I had  entertained  these  thoughts  for  the  first  time
that  day.  What  an  abyss  for  our  reasoh  !

“My  DEAR  Friend — Since  its  first  appearance  you  have
been  aware  of  the  opinion  I entertain  of  your  book  ; scarcely
had  I read  it  than  I tried  experiments  of  the  same  kind  myself,
and  succeeded  beyond  my  expectations.  I will  not  recount
to  you  here  any  of  the  sittings  I had,  you  have  so  many
similar  ones,  and  more  curious  still,  that  it  seems  to  me
needless.

“ However,  I declare  to  you  here,  and  publicly,  that  I
have  been  fully  convinced  of  the  existence  of  a future  life,
by  the  perusal  of  your  work.  I believe  that  all  those  who
make  themselves  acquainted  with  its  contents,  will  think  as
I do,  and  will  have  no  reason  to  complain  of  having  read  it,

“In  one  w’ord,  the  opinion  I come  to  respecting  your
‘ Secrets’  is  that  they  are  called  to  bestow  happiness  on
humanity.

“ Make  my  letter,  my  dear  friend,  as  public  as  possible,
and  receive  the  assurance  of  my  fraternal  friendship.

“ Wholly  yours,

(Signed)  “ A.  Blouet,

“Man  of  Letters,  Rue  D’Enfer,  85.

28th  October,  1848.”

“ FROM  MADAME  LEVI,

?|“You  would  already  have  received,  Monsieur,  my  letter
of  thanks,  had  I not  first  wished  to  read  your  excellent  work.
Any  ‘one  may  clearly  perceive  that  you  have  been  inspired
by  very  lucid  somnambulists ; as  almost  all  the  definitions  are
in  accord  w'itli  the  works  of  the  ancient  sages.  For  my  part.
Monsieur,  I come  to  testify  to  you  my  gratitude  for  the


196


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


disinterested  obligingness  with  which  you  entertained  my
request  of  putting  me  in  communication  with  your  good
clairvoyante.  I herein  bear  witness  to  the  truth ; she  per-
fectly saw  and  described  the  deceased  person  I desired,  and
every  circumstance  of  the  said  person’s  relations  with  me.
It  cannot  be  said  that  she  saw  all  this  in  my  imagination ;
for  God  is  my  witness,  that  I was  in  ignorance  of  many  cir-
cumstances, which,  however,  turn  out  to  be  true.

‘‘  Accept,  Monsieur,  for  yourself,  and  your  obliging  clair-
voyante, the  assurance  of  my  esteem.

(Signed)  " Levi.

“ Publisher  of  the  Journal  U Hermes,

“ Boutigny,  par  Meaux  (Seine-et-Marne).

“ 18th  November,  1848.”

“ Monsieur — Whatsoever  I had  read  up  to  this  day  only
tended  to  plunge  me  into  the  most  desponding  atheism ;
and,  in  my  moments  of  trouble,  I had  ever,  to  put  an  end  to
all,  but  one  thought — that  of  self-destruction.

“ I have  read  your  “ Secrets  of  the  Life  to  Come  Revealed.”
This  book  has  given  me  a belief  in  God,  toleration  towards  my
brethren,  happiness  in  my  family,  and  sufficient  moral  force
to  support  with  fortitude  all  the  misfortunes  which  previously
caused  my  torments.

“ Such  happiness  I prefer  to  any  that  the  most  splendid
fortune  could  have  procured  me.

“ I have  no  doubt.  Monsieur,  that  were  it  not  for  the
political  events  which  absorb  all  minds,  these  revelations
would  already  have  conveyed  hope  to  the  very  bottom  of  a
greater  number  of  hearts  so  much  in  need  of  it.

“ Be  assured.  Monsieur,  of  my  high  consideration,

(Signed)  “ Constant  Flichy,

“ 19,  Rue  Vincent,  Belleville.”

“My  dear  Monsieur  Cahagnet — Pursuant  to  the  good
counsels  you  were  so  kind  as  to  give  me  relative  to  the  ap-
parition of  spirits,  I have  convinced  myself,  by  experiments,  of
the  reality  of  such  apparitions,  and  the  non-communication  of
thought  with  somnambulists.

“ Penetrated  with  this  firm  conviction,  I authorise  you  to


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


197


give  publicity  to  my  testimony  ; and  I assure  men  that  the
soul  exists  in  the  future  life,  in  the  form  of  its  material  bodv,
and  bavins:  recollection  of  its  individualitv.

“ Your  devoted  friend,

“ Rousseau,

“ Post  Office  Employe  (Dead  Letter  Office).”

“My  dear  Monsieur  Cahagnet — In  support  of  the  spi-
ritualist doctrines  which  you  seek  to  propagate  with  a zeal  that
does  you  honour,  and  prepares  for  you,  at  a future  period,
triumph  and  gratitude,  you  may  subjoin  the  two  following
facts  : —

“ One  night,  about  fifteen  years  ago,  I was  quietly  sleeping,
when  all  at  once  I felt  myself  struck  on  the  shoulder,  and.
suddenly  waking,  I beheld  before  me  one  of  mv  uncles  who
lived  at  Chatellerault.  He  said  to  me  in  a strong  and  per-
fectly accented  voice,  ‘ Ninive  is  destroyed.’  The  trouble  and
emotion  caused  me  by  this  apparition  and  these  words  were  s6
great  that  my  wife  was  suddenly  roused,  and  quickly  inquired
what  was  the  matter  with  me.  ‘ Ah  !’  said  I to  her,  in  a voice
of  em.otion  ; ‘ my  uncle  is  dead  ; he  was  here  just  now,  I saw
him  perfectly  well ; for  he  woke  me  up,  and  said  to  me  in  his
voice  of  Stentor,  ‘ Ninive  is  destroyed  now,  Ninive  was  he
himself,  he  who  had  spent  his  fortune  in  leading  the  life  of  a
Persian  satrap.

“My  wife,  despite  the  trouble  which  had  just  been  com-
municated to  her,  tried  to  calm  me,  endeavouring  to  persuade
me  that  it  was  but  an  effect  of  my  imagination  or  a deceitful
dream  ; but  all  her  reasoning  could  not  drive  out  of  my  head
the  idea  that  my  uncle  was  really  dead,  and  that  he  had  come
to  announce  his  death  to  me.  I went  to  sleep  again,  but  in
the  morning,  on  awaking,  my  first  thought  came  and  retraced
to  me  this  singular  apparition ; all  day  long  I heard  these
energetic  words — ‘ Ninive  is  destroyed  !’  A few  days  after  a
letter  came  and  announced  to  us  the  death  of  my  uncle  Fortin,
my  mother’s  brother.  He  had  died  a day  or  two  before  the
fact  which  I have  related  took  place.

“Second  Fact. — During  the  winter  of  1843,  I was  having
some  work  done  on  my  lands,  which  are  about  half  a league
from  Niort.  I had,  by  the  means  of  somnambulism,  discovered
a spring  of  water  at  the  top  of  a very  high  hillock  ; as  water  is


198


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


a very  useful  commodity  in  the  country,  and  spreads  a great
charm  on  all  around  it,  I was  insatiable,  and  often  questioned!
the  oracle  which  had  already  so  fortunately  directed  me.  One
day  from  Niort,  where  I reside,  a stream  of  w’ater  was  signalised
to  me  which  was  supposed  to  run  under  a large  rock,  which
was  scarcely  visible  on  the  surface  of  the  soil.  ‘ Have  it  re-
moved,’ said  the  oracle,  ‘ and  under  its  base  you  will  have
another  pretty  little  fountain.’  After  having  searched  for  and
discovered  this  mysterious  rock,  I gave  orders  to  Master
Griseau,  my  gardener,  to  have  it  removed,  and  to  look  for
the  spring  that  was  said  to  be  beneath  it ; but  Griseau,  who
was  not  fully  convinced  of  the  phenomena  of  somnambulism,
represented  to  me  that  it  was  folly  to  go  to  such  an  expense
in  order  to  arrive  at  a discovery  wholly  improbable  ; in  fact,
how  expect  to  find  w^ater  almost  at  the  crest  of  a hillock  w^hich
looks  over  the  river  almost  perpendicularly  to  a height  of  fortv
or  fifty  feet.  These  reasons  appeared  to  me  peremptory  ; but
I wanted  water,  as,  also,  a proof  more  of  the  magnetic  clair-
voyance ; so  I rejected  the  advice,  however  just  it  appeared  to
me,  and  reiterated  my  orders,  which  were  crowned  wfith  com-
plete success.

“ This  fact,  so  far  as  regards  the  clairvoyance  of  certain
somnambulists,  did  but  confirm  proofs  already  long  before  ac-
quired, but  the  one  which  is  about  to  follow  cast  into  mv  soul
new  thoughts,  which,  by  and  by,  with  God’s  help,  were  to  be
for  me  incontestible  truths.  No  ; man  is  not  isolated  on  this
earth,  he  is  surrounded  by  benign  spirits  w^ho  protect  him
against  evil;  every  being 'has  his  good  genius,  but  unfor-
tunately few  listen  to  him.  What  mysteries  surround  us,  and
how  ignorant  we  are  ! Somnambulism  is  a property  that  will,
I am  certain  of  it,  reveal  them  to  us  sooner  or  later  ; for  I am
of  the  number  of  those  to  whom  it  is  permitted  to  raise  a
corner  of  the  veil  which  conceals  them  from  our  eyes.  What
truths  must  there  be  to  alarm  vice  and  console  virtue ! Pardon
me  this  digression  ; I return  to  the  fact.

“ The  rock,  stripped  at  its  base,  remained  half  suspended,
awaiting  the  brick-work  which  was  to  secure  it  firmlv ; the
operations,  interrupted  by  the  bad  weather,  were  about  to  be
resumed,  and  I repaired  to  the  spot  over-night.  It  was  a
Sunday,  the  keeper  was  absent,  and  I found  myself  absolutely
alone.  It  was  three  o’clock  in  the  afternoon;  I took  a gar-


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


199


dening  tool,  animated  as  I was  with  the  desire  of  finding  water
in  greater  quantity.  I set  to  work,  ^nd  dug  up  the  earth  with
a courageous  hope.  I was  wholly  absorbed  in  this  thought,
when,  suddenly,  a voice  struck  my  ears  with  these  words,  said
in  an  abrupt  and  a hasty  tone  : — ‘ Go  away  !’  I made  a bound
backwards,  and  precipitately  withdrew  from  the  spot  where  I
was,  leaving  there  one  of  the  wooden  shoes  I had  had  on  my
feet.  I then  looked  upwards,  to  find  out  who  it  was  that
could  have  thus  spokea  to  me,  but  I perceived  no  one.  I was
quite  certain  of  being  alone,  so  I intuitively  perceived  that
some  danger  threatened  me,  inasmuch  as  the  rock  had  onlv
clayey  earth  as  a base.  Wholly  absorbed,  then,  in  my  own
preservation,  I cautiously  drew  back  my  wooden  shoe,  and
made  all  haste  to  get  away.  At  a few  paces  hence,  I asked
myself  what  voice  this  possibly  could  be  which  had  just  struck
my  ear  in  so  forcible  a manner;  it  was  sonorous,  and  its
sounds  still  vibrated  in  my  mind.  It  was,  therefore,  a warning
from  heaven,  sent  to  snatch  me  from  some  great  danger.  But
a few  minutes  more  at  this  work,  and  I should  have  been  killed.
Being  killed  was  not  the  worst  that  might  have  happened  to
me ; but,  hurled  down  by  the  mass,  I might  have  been  caught
by  an  arm  or  a leg  under  this  enormous  burthen.  ‘ Oh  ! my
God,  my  God!  I thank  thee,’  cried  I,  raising  my  hands  to
heaven  and  falling  on  my  knees,  ‘ thou  hast  saved  me,  and  I
return  thee  my  thanks.’  I know  not  what  passed  within  me-
for  the  few  seconds  I remained  on  my  knees,  but,  on  rising,  I
found  myself  bathed  in  tears.  After  recovering  from  the
emotion  I had  just  experienced,  I went  and  cast  a last  glance
on  my  rock ; it  was  still  silently  suspended.  I moved  away,
turning  round  more  than  once  with  terror.  It  was  five  o’clock
when  I lost  sight  of  it;  at  half-past  five,  the  hour  of  the
keeper’s  return,  this  superb  mass  had  fallen  in  ; falling  at  first
on  itself,  it  made  a turn  half  round  to  precipitate  itself  side-
ways, when  it  was  stopped  in  its  course  by  an  accident  of  the
soil.  At  the  nresent  time  (1849)  it  is  majestically  seated
under  an  enormous  grotto,  which  I raised  on  the  very  spot
where  it  once  was.  There,  still  proud  and  haughty,  it  pre-
serves its  threatening  air ; but  pass,  fearlessly  pass,  only  bow
before  the  words  of  my  good  angel,  inscribed  on  its  front
Go  away.  “ J.  B.  Eorrsau,

20th  January,  1849.”  " A Landholder,  at  Niort.


200


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


Our  worthy  friend,  M.  Borreau,  has  kindly  granted
us  permission  to  give  publicity  to  this  communication ;
requesting  us,  however,  at  the  same  time,  to  defer  to
a later  period  another  statement  concerning  facts,  still
more  mysterious,  applying  personally  to  himself.  We
feel  indebted  to  our  friend,  honourably  known  to  the
magnetic  notabilities,  for  his  generous  confidence.  He
has  comprehended  that  a spiritualist  is  not  an  egotist,
keeping  to  himself  this  divine  revelation  of  a moral
world,  which  may  convey  the  sweetest  consolations  to
those  who  believe  that  nothingness  is  the  apogeum  of
the  creation.

Were  it  possible  for  us  to  make  mention  of  all  the
persons  who  have  come  to  submit  to  us  similar  facts,  or
acquaint  us  with  their  success  in  the  experiments  we
have  taught  them  to  make,  we  should  be  obliged  to  go
on  with  a third  volume.  We  will  now'  proceed  to  the
questions  w'e  submitted  to  the  venerable  Almignana,
for  the  purpose  of  knowing  whether  these  apparitions
are  approved  or  condemned  by  the  Church.

“Monsieur — I herein  reply  to  your  letter  of  the  10th
instant,  in  which  you  express  to  me  the  wish  of  knowing
whether  the  belief  in  the  apparitions  of  spirits  individually,  and
in  human  forms,  is  contrary  to  the  Catholic  faith.

“After  God,  a pure  spirit,  and  the  father  of  spirits,  as  savs
the  Gospel,  theology  admits  two  sorts  of  spirits  dependent  on
God ; these  are  the  angels, — for  the  demons  are  fallen  angels,
— and  the  souls  of  men.

“ I have  looked  over  the  Holy  Scripture,  and  it  supplies  me
with  different  instances  of  apparitions  of  these  two  sorts  of
spirits,  individually,  and  in  human  forms.

“ Angels. — Those  are  three  angels  who,  in  the  form  of
men,  appear  to  Abraham,  and  even  converse  with  him. —
Genesis,  chap.  18.

“ It  is  an  angel,  also,  who,  in  the  human  form,  appears  to
Jacob,  and  wrestles  with  the  holy  patriarch,  to  give  him
to  understand  that  the  weakest  man  may  do  much,  wdth  the
assistance  of  heaven. — Genesis,  chap.  32.

“ It  is  also  an  angel,  w'ho,  in  the  form  of  a man,  appears  to


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


201


the  young  Tobias,  and  accompanies  him  on  his  journey  into
the  country  of  the  Medes. — Tobit,  chap.  5,  6,  7.

“ In  short,  after  the  resurrection  of  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,
it  was  an  angel,  who,  in  the  form  of  a young  man,  appears  to
Mary  Magdelene  and  the  other  Mary. — St.  Matthew,  chap.  *28.

“ Souls  op  Deceased  Men. — Samuel,  after  descending  to
the  grave,  appears  to  Saul  in  the  same  form  as  he  had  on
earth,  through  the  means  of  the  Witch  of  Endor,  of  whom
God  makes  use  to  execute  his  holy  designs,  with  regard  to  the
Hebrew  King. — First  Book  of  Samuel,  chap.  28.

“Moses,  many  ages  after  having  rendered  up  his  spirit  on
Mount  Nebo,  and  Elias,  long  years  after  having  quitted  the
earth,  appear  in  human  forms,  though  surrounded  with  glory,
on  the  Tabor,  a high  mountain,  to  John  and  James,  the  day  of
the  Transfiguration  of  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. — Chap.  17  of
St.  Matthew,  9 of  St.  Mark.

“ The  ‘ Lives  of  the  Saints’  furnishes  us  with  instances  of
similar  apparitions,  and  especially  the  ‘ Life  of  Saint  Theresa.’

“ M.  Chardel,  formerly  a counsellor  of  the  Court  of  Cas-
sation, and  Deputy  of  the  Seine,  whose  learning  and  good
faith  cannot  be  questioned,  does  he  not  recount  to  us,  in  his
‘ Essay  on  Physiological  Psychology,’  various  apparitions  of
deceased  persons,  who,  in  their  earthly  forms,  appeared  to
members  of  their  family,  asking  them  to  discharge  certain
works  of  pietv,  such  as  masses  and  pilgrimages,  promised  bv
the  deceased,  but  remaining  unperformed  at  the  time  of  their
death  ?

“ But  what  comes  to  confirm  what  we  have  just  said  is  the
honourable  testimony  of  a man  as  learned  as  orthodox,  such  as
the  Abbe  Duclos,  who,  in  his  reply  to  the  sarcasms  of  Voltaire
against  Chap.  32  of  Genesis,  relative  to  the  angel  who,  in  the
form  of  a man,  appears  to  Jacob  in  order  to  wi'estle  with  him,
when  he  sets  forth  his  opinion,  with  respect  to  the  apparition
of  spirits,  says  to  us  : —

“ 1st.  That  God  is  surely  the  master  of  appearing  whenever
he  pleases,  and  in  whatever  manner  he  pleases.

“ 2nd.  That  the  good  or  wicked  angels,  and  the  souls  of  men
mav  appear,  but  only  at  the  order  and  by  the  permission
of  God.

“3rd.  That  God  sometimes  gives  such  order  and  such
permission.

P


202


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


“ 4th.  That  this  occurred  more  frequently  in  the  early  ages
of  the  world,  for  reasons  deserving  of  it.

“ 5th.  That  this  may  again  occur,  even  now,  because  God  is
still  as  powerful  as  he  was  at  first.

‘‘  In  short,  that  the  apparitions  of  angels  and  the  dead
contain  not  more  difficulties  than  the  apparitions  of  God
himself.

“ From  what  I have  just  quoted,  I believe  it  may  be  rightly
concluded  that  the  belief  in  the  apparitions  of  spirits,  in  human
forms  and  individually,  is  very  far  from  being  contrary  to  the
Catholic  faith,  the  more  so  as  the  Church  has  not  yet  pro-
nounced against  the  apparitions  of  which  you  speak  to  me.

“ As  to  me,  monsieur,  with  this  conviction  was  it  and  not
otherwise,  that  I permitted  myself  to  wait  upon  you  to  witness
a few  apparitions,  which,  whilst  surprising  me  have  become  for
me  a fresh  proof  of  what  we  read  in  the  holy  books  with  respect
to  the  apparitions  of  spirits  in  human  forms,  and  I shall  never
cease,  whilst  I live,  returning  thanks  to  God  for  having  deigned
to  grant  me  a favor  so  great  as  that  of  knowing  physically  by
myself  the  immortality  of  the  soul.

“ As  to  you,  monsieur,  allow  me  to  congratulate  you  in  this
— that  in  the  midst  of  your  humble  position  in  the  eyes  of  the
world,  God  has  made  use  of  you  and  your  modest  somnambulist
to  confound  the  presumptuous  savaris  of  the  earth,  and,  above
all,  the  proud  materialists,  the  scourge  of  religion  and  real
plague-sore  of  society.

“ Yes,  monsieur,  it  is  thus  that  I view  the  grand  magnetic
phenomena  which  engage  our  attention,  and  I am  persuaded
that  it  was  in  allusion  to  certain  apparitions  of  deceased  per-
sons seen  by  some  somnambulist  as  privileged  as  our  good
Adele,  that  the  Rev.  Father  Lacordaire,  in  spite  of  the  acade-
micians and  sceptics,  proclaimed  from  the  sacred  tribune,  in  the
month  of  March,  1847,  that  Magnetism  was  a divine  preparation
to  humble  the  pride  of  materialists.  For  it  is  certain  that
amongst  the  arguments  made  use  of  by  theologians  to  prove
the  immortality  of  the  soul,  that  taken  from  the  apparition  of
Samuel  of  which  I have  just  spoken,  is  one  of  the  strongest,

“ But,  monsieur,  if  you  and  your  modest  somnambulist  have
a privilege  so  great,  do  not  however  glorify  in  it,  seeing  that  it
is  from  God  alone  that  you  have  received  it ; for,  as  very  wisely
says  the  Abbe  Duclos,  the  angels,  good  or  wicked,  can  appear


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


203


only  at  the  order  of  God  or  by  his  permission,  and  you  yourself
acknowledge  this  truth,  since  I have  perceived  that  all  your
operations  are  invariably  preceded  by  prayer,  imploring  the
favors  of  heaven.

“ Thus,  my  good  monsieur,  far  from  being  puffed  up  with
your  works,  say  with  St.  Paul:  Non  ego,  sed  gratia  Dei
mecum.  (Yet  not  I ; but  the  grace  of  God  that  was  with  me).
It  is  not  we  who  work  these  wonders,  but  the  grace  of  the
Lord,  the  divine  goodness,  the  omnipotence  of  the  Eternal,
who  has  been  pleased  to  make  use  of  us,  beings  weak  and  im-
perceptible in  the  eyes  of  the  world,  in  order  to  confound  the
mighty,  and  the  pretended  philosophers  of  the  earth.  Infirma
mundi  elegit  Deus  ut  confundat  fortia.  (And  God  hath  chosen
the  weak  things  of  the  world  to  confound  the  things  which  are
mighty.)  It  is  St.  Paul  who  speaks.

“ Accept,  monsieur,  I beg  you,  the  sincere  expression  of  my
respectful  sentiments,  with  which  I have  the  honor  to  be
“ Your  very  humble  and  most  obedient  servant,

“ L.  A.  Almignana,

“15,  Rue  de  I’Eglise.

“ Batignolles,  the  14th  February,  1848.”

We  are  most  happy  at  being  enabled  to  publish  the  tes-
timony of  a priest  so  honourable  as  M.  Almignana.  It
will  tend  to  reassure  a few  timorous  consciences  who
fancied  they  beheld  in  the  first  part  of  the  Secrets”
the  work  of  the  Evil  One.  If  the  Church  acknow-
ledges that  no  apparition  can  take  place  without  the
order  and  permission  of  God,  we  are,  in  this  case,  his
most  humble  and  obedient  servant.

Thus,  for  want  of  space,  we  terminate  a part  of  our
correspondence,  which  we  had  no  desire  to  keep  secret,
thinking  it  would  be  acceptable  to  a few  readers  who
might  wish  to  see  new  personages  brought  on  the  stage.
It  v/as  to  gratify  this  just  wish  that  we  have  published
this  extract  of  the  most  curious  facts  and  particulars
which  have  been  communicated  to  us,  and  that  w'e  are
now'  about  to  rummage  in  the  history  of  the  beliefs  of
different  nations  in  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  in


204


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


order  to  prove,  moreover,  if  possible,  that  we  have  been
actuated  by  a desire  to  accomplish  something  useful,
and,  at  the  same  time,  show  that  we  have  been  preceded
in  all  places  and  times  by  hallucinated  individuals  of  our
species.


OPINION  OF  PHILOSOPHERS  ON  THE
IMMORTALITY  OF  THE  SOUL,  FROM
ANTIQUITY  TO  OUR  DAYS.

Indies. — The  belief  in  the  immortality  of  the  soul  is
inherent  in  the  existence  of  man,  from  his  first  to  his
last  thought;  in  fact,  if  we  reascend  the  scale  of  ages
in  India,  what  do  w^e  find  amongst  those  nations  that
reckon  not  5,848  years  of  existence,  as  we  pretend,  but
131,400,007,205,000  years  from  the  birth  of  Brahma
down  to  our  days.  In  these  countries,  little  known,
badly  explored,  still  worse  described,  we  shall  possibly
find  psychological  science  more  advanced  than  amongst
us.  No  ; if  we  consult  their  sacred  books,  the  true
source  of  all  earthly  sects  and  superstitions,  we  shall
find  therein  the  belief  in  the  immortality  of  the  soul
established  from  the  most  remote  times,  in  the  form  of
a polytheism  which  we  seem  unable,  from  the  revela-
tions of  our  “ Secrets,^^  to  admit,  but  which  we  might
possibly  deduce  from  them  were  we  to  devote  ourselves
more  positively  to  the  detailed  study  of  a multitude  of
propositions  into  which  they  lead  us.

Unwilling,  at  any  price,  to  fall  again  into  metaphy-
sical quotations,  as  so  doing  would  destroy  all  the
charm  of  this  part,  we  accept  on  the  whole  our  revela-
tions, reserving  to  ourselves,  for  another  work,  proposi-
tions wherein  the  beliefs  in  the  metempsychosis  will
find  a place  in  certain  acceptations  only.  We  will
restrict  ourselves,  for  the  moment,  to  quoting  a passage
from  a learned  work,  entitled — “ A Picturesque  Voyage
Round  the  World,”  published  under  the  direction  of


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


205


the  unfortunate  Dumont-Darville,  presuming  that  we
shall  find  in  this  work  information  stripped  of  the  mar-
vellous things  related  by  the  old  voyagers.  We  find,  in
page  140,  vol.  i.  : —

“ * * * Such  is  a sketch  of  the  Indian  polytheism.

As  to  the  dogmas  connected  with  it,  a notion  of  them  may  be
summed  up  in  a universal  metempsychosis  ; a certain  quantity
of  spirit  and  matter,  each  imperishable,  is  found,  according  to
them,  in  a perpetual  state  of  transmigration.  The  punishment
of  spirits  consists  of  a falling  off  in  their  material  envelope.
Thus,  from  the  body  of  man,  they  descend  into  that  of  the
beast,  following  the  progression  of  animals  more  or  less  noble,
so  as  to  run  the  risk  of  dwelling  even  in  stones.  In  this  corn-
minatory  part  of  their  dogmas  the  Brahmins  have  never  enter-
tained the  thought  of  threatening  men  with  a perpetual  hell ;
when  we  speak  to  them  of  such  a place,  they  say  that  it  is  an
insult  to  the  Almighty,  setting  bounds  to  his  right  of  mercy,
prejudging  his  justice,  and  giving  him  hateful  passions  which
are  incompatible  with  his  essence.  ‘ However  great  be  a
crime,’  add  they,  ‘the  divine  goodness  is  still  greater.’

“ This  belief  in  the  metempsychosis  also  serves  them  to
explain  the  contrast  of  human  conditions  and  the  inequality  of
our  destinies.  With  them  compensation  exists  not  altogether
in  another  world,  it  is  in  this  transitory  world.  That  if,
destined  to  the  most  humble  lot,  a mortal  ends  a meritorious
and  pious  life,  his  reward  consists  in  being  born  again  rich,
honoured,  amidst  all  the  enjoyments  of  luxury  and  comfort.
Thus  the  Indian  metempsychosis  is  somewhat  mixed  up  with
predestination  and  fatalism ; free-will  cannot  go  so  far  as  to
efface  a word  of  what  Brahma  has  written  in  the  head  of  a
man,  but  certain  practices,  certain  expiations  can  be  set  down
to  his  account  in  the  balancing  of  his  good  or  bad  works.”

What  logic  Brahma  writes  in  the  head  of  such  man  :
Thou  shalt  do  such  a thing,  and  thou  shalt  ask  pardon,
of  me  for  having  done  what  I commanded  thee  to
do.  Do  we  not  recognise  in  this  moral  our  sublime
maxim  : “ Nothing  happens  in  the  world  without  the
permission  and  order  of  God  therefore  you  ought  to
ask  pardon  of  him  for  having  obeyed  him  ! !


206


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


China. — If  we  extend  our  researches  as  far  as  China,
we  are  assured  of  finding  there  this  l^elief  established
from  time  immemorial,  but  under  philosophical  forms
or  allegories  adapted  to  the  wants  and  usages  of  the
country.  It  is  still  the  same  encouragement  to  good
actions,  under  penalty  of  being  punished  by  a transmi-
gration in  the  scale  of  beings,  kingdoms,  and  elements,
corresponding,  by  their  life  or  state,  with  the  actions  of
which  man  has  been  guilty,  all  this  invariably  ending  in
an  eternity  of  happiness.  God  is  still  sufficiently
respected  amongst  these  peoples  to  have  a confidence  in
his  divine  goodness  and  the  hope  of  a better  life.
Eternal  punishment  forms  no  part  of  their  creed.

Oceania. — If  we  come  back  amongst  younger  and
less  civilised  nations  (Oceania),  we  find  ourselves  face
to  face  with  this  polytheism,  this  transmigration  of  souls
into  such  or  such  body,  corresponding  with  its  past
affections,  good  or  bad,  and  arriving  in  globes  where
the  felicity  is  as  sweet  as  our  earthly  sufferings  have
been  painful.  What  is  remarkable  in  the  beliefs  of  all
these  countries  is  that  our  earthly  globe  is  found  to  be
the  intermediate  between  a number  more  or  less  con-
siderable of  globes.  Able  only  to  progress  or  fall  back  in
quitting  it,  man,  in  this  mixed  state,  fills  pretty  nearly
the  role  described  in  our  first  volume,  a role  that  subjects
him  to  trials  of  sensations,  impressions,  comparisons,
hitherto  unknown  to  him.  Apart,  the  more  or  less  ad-
missible fictions  of  these  doctrines,  there  results  from
them  one  fact — a belief  in  the  individualised  immor-
tality of  the  soul  on  quitting  this  globe  and  its  eternal
felicity ; this  is  more  encouraging  than  the  nothingness
of  our  materialists  !

Since  we  are  in  these  countries,  let  us  see  what  is
thought  there  of  ecstasy.  We  find  in  the  occult
sciences  of  the  Portable  Enctjclopedia,  a small  ivork
written  with  great  impartiality  and  displaying  much
scientific  knowledge,  the  following  passage  (page  SOS)  : —


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


207


“ ^Vithout  wishing'  to  anticipate  the  discussions  that  w'ill
arise  on  this  important  question  (ecstasy)  we  will  nevertheless
observe,  in  order  to  add  a few  facts  to  facts  already  known,
that  one  of  our  friends  who  resided  for  fourteen  years  in  the
East  Indies,  has  frequently  seen  Hindoos  fall  at  will  into
ecstasy,  and  become,  in  this  state,  an  object  of  fear  or  venera-
tion to  their  fellow-countrymen.  The  North  and  South
Americans,  who  are  wrongfully  classed  amongst  nations  called
savage,  and  who  present  in  their  customs  and  language  the
remains  of  an  ancient  civilisation,  have  traditional  reminiscences
which  deliver  them  up  to  a state  of  ecstacy,  during  which  they
believe  themselves  to  be  in  communication  with  spirits.  The
phenomena  of  ecstasy  are  found  in  the  most  remarkable  manner
amongst  the  Kamtschatdales,  the  Yakoutes,  and  many  other
tribes  of  the  North,  where  the  soothsayers  sometimes  inflict  on
themselves  horrible  wounds,  without  apparently,  and  in  reality,
not  suffering  from  them.  The  ecstatic  state  is  also  to  be  met
with  at  Otaheite,  at  the  Sandwich  Isles,  in  Polynesia,  where  a
new  religion  is  imposed  on  the  natives,  and  whei'e  religious
persecutions  exalt  the  imagination  of  those  who  adhere  to  the
old  form  of  worship.  Mariner,  that  young  traveller  unjustly
accused  of  falsehood,  but  whose  truthfulness  is  now^  acknow-
ledged, during  his  residence  at  Tonga-Tabou,  the  metropolis
of  the  neighbouring  isles,  was  a witness  to  extraordinary  facts,
proving  in  a positive  manner  the  good  faith  of  those  who,
amongst  savage  as  amongst  barbarous  nations,  are  given  up
to  a I'eligious  state  of  ecstasy.  It  is  generally  acknowledged  at
Tonga,  that  some  persons  are  favored  by  the  gods  with  their
inspirations ; the  God  who  inspires  them  is  found  then  in  the
person  of  the  inspired  priest  who  becomes  capable  of  prophe-
sying the  future.

“ Mariner  so  describes  the  ecstatic  situation  of  the  priests
of  this  country  as  to  leave  no  doubt  with  respect  to  the  symp-
toms they  experience,  and  the  young  traveller  adds — That  he
has  no  reason  to  believe  that  these  demonstrations  are  the
result  of  imposture ; he  even  produces  proofs  of  what  he
advances  on  this  head.  Amongst  the  details  he  gives,  there
are  two  in  particular  worthy  of  examination,  inasmuch  as  they
above  all  attest  the  spirit  of  conviction  of  those  who  undergo
the  phenomena  of  the  ecstatic  state.  The  son  of  King  Finow
was  often  wont  to  repeat  to  the  incredulous  European  that


208


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


he  was  inspired  by  the  spirit  of  Toogo-Ahoo,  the  last  king  of
the  isles  of  Tonga,  that  he  no  longer  felt  conscious  of  bis  own
personal  existence,  and  that  his  body  seemed  to  him  animated
by  a soul  not  his  own.  Having  been  questioned  as  to  the
nature  of  the  spirit  that  disturbed  him,  and  how  this  spirit
descended  into  him,  the  young  prince  contented  himself  with
replying — What  a silly  question  ; can  T tell  you  how  I know
it  ? I know  it  because  1 feel  a conviction  of  it,  and  because  a
voice  warns  me  of  it.

“ We  might  accumulate  facts  of  this  nature,  but  space  is
refused  us,  and  we  will  content  ourselves  with  reminding  our
readers  that  they  exist  in  great  number  in  the  ancient  and  mo-
dern works  of  voyagers  of  all  nations.”

I will  add  to  this  curious  dissertation  on  ecstasy,  that
the  spirit  that  seizes  the  priests  of  these  countries,
taking  possession  of  their  material  body  to  prophesy
through  their  mouth,  is  not  unlike  the  spirit  that
seized  on  Binet,  the  first  somnambulist  mentioned  in
this  wmrk,  and  caused  him  to  say — “ It  is  not  I who
always  answer  your  questions,  it  is  the  spirit  that  speaks
through  my  mouth,  and  I am  a quiet  spectator  and
auditor  of  its  discussions  with  you.”  We,  however,  are
neither  amongst  savages  nor  barbarians ; no — but  we
are  amongst  madmen  and  visionaries  ; that  amounts  to
the  same  thing.

We  will  now  pass  into  Greece,  and  ask  Lamprias,  the
brother  of  Plutarch,  what  he  thought  of  the  immortality
of  the  soul.

Greece. — Plutarch. — Treatise  on  the  “Cessation  of
Oracles;  Annals  of  Magnetism,”  page  70*

“ One  of  the  interlocutors  of  the  treatise  in  question  having
set  forth  that  prophesying  was  merely  the  work  of  genii  that
animated  the  oracles  and  revealed  to  our  souls  what  was  pass-
ing at  a distance  and  at  a future  time,  Lamprias,  the  brother  of
Plutarch,  combats  this  system,  and  thus  expresses  himself —
Why  should  we  deprive  souls  united  to  bodies  of  this  faculty
natural  to  the  genii,  of  knowing  and  predicting  the  future  }
It  is  not  at  all  likely  that  souls  after  their  separation  from  the
body  acquire  any  properties  they  did  not  previously  possess  ;


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


209


they  have  ever  the  same  faculties,  but  merely  less  perfect  when
souls  are  united  to  the  body.  Of  these  faculties  some  are
obscure  and  hidden,  others  weak  and  languid  ; these  grown
dull  and  tardy,  as  are  our  looks  through  clouds,  they  stand  in
need  of  efficacious  remedies  to  re-establish  them  in  the  integrity
of  their  nature,  and  deliver  them  from  whatsoever  retards  their
activity.  As  the  sun  becomes  not  luminous  on  emerging  from
a cloud,  and  as  ever  brilliant  by  his  nature  he  appears  obscured
only  by  reason  of  the  cloud  hiding  him ; in  like  manner  the
soul  acquires  not  the  faculty  of  predicting  when  it  has  emerged
from  the  body  as  from  a cloud ; it  possesses  this  faculty  whilst
united  to  the  body,  but  its  intimate  union  with  a mortal  nature
deadens  its  activity  ”

Who  at  the  present  day  could  combat  the  opinion
pronounced  by  Lamprias,  and  the  fictions  he  employs
to  demonstrate  the  faculties  of  the  soul  in  the  material
and  in  the  spiritual  state.  It  is  right  to  admit  that
spirits  can  enlighten  our  clairvoyants,  to  save  them  the
trouble  of  making  researches  which  very  often  fatigue
them  ; but  it  is  not  less  just  to  admit,  that  these  clair-
voyants can  dispense  Muth  their  assistance,  inasmuch  as
they  possess  this  same  property.  What  progress  has
psychological  science  made  since  that  period  ? None  ;
as  at  this  day,  with  the  demonstrative  assistance  of
magnetism,  somnambulism,  and  ecstasy,  men  still  doubt
the  existence  of  the  soul.  Oh  ! reign  of  civilisation,
thy  locomotives  cause  thy  material  body  to  clear  space
ten  times  more  swiftly  than  of  yore,  but  thy  reasoning
stands  in  great  need  of  a spiritual  locomotive  to  return
to  Lamprias,  and  listen  to  his  lessons.

Let  us  ask  Aristotle,  whilst  we  are  in  the  classical
land  of  philosophy,  what  he  thought  of  the  immortality
of  the  soul.  “ In  the  Explanation  of  the  Doctrines  of
Aristotle,”  by  Cicero,  the  latter  makes  the  philosopher
thus  speak : —

“ Souls  derive  not  their  origin  from  the  earth.  They  admit
of  no  admixture,  no  concretion,  no  extract,  or  substance  of
terrestrial  bodies,  or  that  of  water,  air,  or  fire ; for,  in  the


210


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


diverse  natures  of  these  elements,  there  is  nothing  which  is
susceptible  of  the  faculties  of  the  memory,  the  understanding,
the  thought ; nothing  which  is  capable  of  retaining  the  past,
foreseeing  the  future,  embracing  the  present.  All  these  can
be  but  divine  gifts,  and  never  will  it  be  said  from  whom  man
received  them,  if  not  from  God  himself.  The  soul  is,  there-
fore, of  a singular  nature,  and  distinct  from  all  other  natures.
So,  whatsoever  that  be  within  us  which  feels,  thinks,  desires,
and  animates  us,  it  is  something  celestial,  divine,  and,  con-
sequently, imperishable.”

Since  we  are  with  Cicero,  let  us  take  advantage  of  it
to  inquire  into  his  opinions  on  this  head.


Rome. — Cicero. — Book  on  Old  Age. — The  orator
puts  in  the  mouth  of  Cato  these  remarkable  words : —

“ I am  persuaded  that  your  fathers,  those  illustrious  person-
ages whom  I so  much  loved,  have  not  ceased  living,  although
they  have  passed  through  death ; and  that  they  are  still  living
that  sort  of  life  which  alone  deserves  being  called  by  that
name  ; for  so  long  as  we  are  in  the  bonds  of  the  body,  we  are
like  slaves  at  the  chain,  since  our  soul  is  divine,  which,  from
heaven,  as  the  place  of  its  origin,  is  cast  down,  and,  as  it  were,
buried  in  this  low  I'egion  of  the  earth,  which  is  a place  of
exile  and  punishment  for  a substance  celestial  and  eternal
by  its  nature.

In  short,  when  T perceive  what  activity  there  is  in  our  minds,
what  memory  of  the  past,  what  foresight  of  the  future ;
when  I take  into  consideration  the  number  of  arts,  sciences,
and  discoveries  to  which  they  have  attained,  I believe,  and
am  fully  persuaded,  that  a nature  possessing  in  itself  the
groundwork  of  so  many  things  cannot  be  mortal  * *”

Discourse  of  Cyrus,  when  on  the  jwint  of  dying,  to  his  Children :
— “ Beware  of  believing,  my  dear  children,”  said  he  to  them ;
“ that  I am  no  longer  aught,  or  that  I am  no  longer  any-
where, when  I have  quitted  you ; for,  at  the  time  I was  with
you,  you  did  not  behold  my  spirit;  but  what  you  saw  me
do  made  you  think  that  there  was  one  within  my  body.
Doubt  not,  therefore,  that  this  spirit  will  subsist  even  after
it  has  been  separated  from  it,  although  no  longer  perceptible
by  anv  action.  ♦♦■**♦*


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


211


For  ray  part,  I have  never  been  able  to  persuade  myself  that
our  spirits  live  only  so  long  as  they  are  within  our  bodies  ;
and  that  they  die  when  they  quit  them,  or  that  they  remain,
stripped  of  intelligence  and  wisdom,  when  disengaged  from  a
body  that  has  by  itself  neither  sense  nor  reason  ; I believe,
on  the  contrary,  that  when  the  spirit,  disengaged  from  matter,
finds  itself,  in  all  the  purity  and  simplicity  of  its  nature,  it
is  then  that  it  possesses  most  light  and  wisdom.”

In  the  same  book,  Cato  exclaims: —

“ For  my  part,  I heartily  long  to  rejoin  your  fathers,  whom
I so  dearly  loved  and  venerated  ; and  not  only  those  great
men  whom  1 knew,  but  even  those  of  whom  I have  heard
speak,  and  of  whom  I have  read,  or  whose  actions  I myself
have  written.  I go,  therefore,  to  meet  them  with  so  much
joy  that  it  would  be  difficult  to  detain  me ; and  it  would
afford  me  no  pleasure  to  be  cast  over  again,  like  Pelias,  to  renew
me,  and  enable  me  to  recommence  life.  No,  though  some
god  should  wish  to  lead  me  back  to  childhood,  and  place
me  once  more  in  the  cradle  to  recommence  a new  life,  I
should  oppose  it  with  all  my  might,  and  from  the  end  of
the  career  in  which  I now  am,  I should  not  wish  to  be
replaced  at  its  commencement.

Oh  ! a happy  day  will  be  that  when  I shall  leave  this  impure
and  corrupt  crowd  to  rejoin  that  divine  and  happy  band  of
great  souls  that  left  the  earth  before  me.  I shall  find  there
not  only  those  great  men  of  wdiom  I have  spoken,  but  also
my  dear  Cato,  whom  I can  say  was  one  of  the  best  of  men,
of  the  best  of  dispositions,  and  one  of  the  most  faithful  to
his  duties  that  has  ever  been  seen.  I placed  bis  body  on  the
funeral  pile,  whereas  he  ought  to  have  placed  on  it  mine.
But  his  soul  has  not  left  me ; and  without  losing  sjght  of  me,
he  has  merely  preceded  me  into  a country  where  he  beheld
that  I should  shortly  rejoin  him.  If  I have  borne  the  loss  of
such  a son  with  some  degree  of  firmness,  it  is  not  that  I
was  not  touched  at  it  even  to  the  quick ; but  I consoled  myself
with  the  thought  that  we  were  not  separated  for  long.”

I shall  dispense  with  adding  any  reflections  to  so
eloquent  a morceau,  I am  too  penetrated  with  admiration
for  these  great  men  and  the  insufficiency  of  any  obser-


212


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


vations  of  mine,  to  make  the  attempt.  We  will  not
leave  the  queen  of  the  world,  now  simple  Italy,  before
addressing’  ourselves  to  Campanella,  that  model  of  the
philosophers  of  Christendom.  We  shall  find  him  worthy,
I believe,  of  the  fore-mentioned  great  men.

Italy.  — Cain2mnella.  — Madame  Louise  Collet’s
Translation. — “Poesies,”  page  67-

“ Souls  in  the  mask  of  the  body  present,  on  the  theatre  of
the  world,  to  the  dwellers  in  heaven,  the  spectacle  of  their
agitation.

They  perform  the  actions  and  say  the  things  for  which
they  were  horn.  They  go  from  scene  to  scene,  and  from
choir  to  choir,  sometimes  joyous,  sometimes  sad,  according  to
wdiat  is  found  to  be  ordained  in  the  dramatic  book.

“ They  neither  know  nor  can  do  aught  else  but  what  infinite
wisdom  has  inscribed  therein  for  the  good  of  all.  (Page  1-12-0.)

“ Death  is  sweet  to  him  to  whom  life  is  bitter.  He  who  is
born  in  tears  should  die  smiling.  Let  us  at  last  give  up  these
miserable  rags  to  destiny  that  lends  them  to  us  at  such  a
usurious  rate.  Before  taking  back  altogether  this  mortal  body,
it  demands  of  us  our  hearing,  our  teeth,  and  our  eyes  so  dear.
Take  all  that  belongs  to  thee,  oh  avaricious  earth  ! and  where-
fore bearest  thou  not  me  myself  away  to  the  Styx.  Happy  he
who  escapes  from  time  !

“ Oh  my  body ! a living  death,  nest  of  ignorance,  sepulchre
I bear  with  me,  garment  of  sin  and  grief,  weight  of  miser\g  and
labyrinth  of  errors,  thou  detainest  me  here  below  by  caresses
and  by  fear,  lest  I should  turn  my  eyes  up  to  heaven,  the  good
supreme,  and  my  true  abode  ; thou  fearest  that  smitten  with  its
beauty,  I should  disdain  and  abandon  thee — a dead  coal.”

(1.)

Page  132. — “Wherefore  this  despondency,  oh,  my  soul!
thou  fearest,  perhaps,  that  I should  die  amidst  these  imm.ense
griefs  ; leave  terror  to  the  vulgar,  thou  well  knowest  that  dying
means  leaving  what  one  loves.  If  nothing  is  resolved  into
nothing,  never  he  who  is  not  dead  in  himself  should  fear  aught.
He  who  has  peace  within  him  can  dread  no  tribulation.  Let
no  other  reasoning  prevail  on  thee,  or  thou  wouldst  be  misled.


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


’213


“ If  a material  prison  did  not  hold  thee  enslaved,  no  tyrant
could  do  so  any  more  than  he  could  enslave  the  unchained
winds,  the  angels  and  the  stars.  Thy  torments  are  less  hurt-
ful to  thee  than  to  those  who  inflict  them  on  thee ; thy  torments
deliver  thee,  oh  my  soul ; they  resuscitate  thee  and  snatch  thee
from  thy  prison  and  thy  grave,  since,  for  thee  the  body  is  both.”

(7.)

Page  135. — “By  our  weak  understandings  and  confined
movements  we  perceive  only  the  material  things  which  strike
the  walls  of  our  prison ; but  things  powerful  and  divine  escape
us,  for  they  would  burst  our  frail  envelope.  We  are  unable
to  become  acquainted  with  the  secret  virtues  of  things  because
our  organisation  presents  an  obstacle  to  our  so  doing.  The
most  learned  here  below  possess  but  the  semblance  of  truth.”

(2.)

Page  138. — “Oh!  my  soul,  when  thou  shalt  have  once
quitted  this  body,  which  thou  now  fearest  to  abandon,  thou
wilt  entertain  such  an  aversion  to  it,  that,  were  God  to  pro-
pose restoring  it  to  thee,  formed  of  iron  and  glass,  that  it
might  fear  neither  shocks  nor  obscurity,  thou  wouldst  refuse
with  tears,  unless  it  were  restored  to  thee  wholly  celestial,  like
that  of  the  Saviour  w'hen  he  rose  from  the  dead.

“ On  beholding  the  immortal  world,  with  its  heavenly  de-
lights and  the  honours  which  spirits  render  to  God,  thou  wilt
be  astonished  that  he  should  deign  to  cast  a look  on  our  cir-
cumscribed earth,  obscure  and  devoid  of  beauty — on  this  earth,
where  resound  so  many  blasphemies  that  one  would  say  that
God  has  forsaken  it — on  this  earth,  inhabited  by  hatred,  death,
war,  and  ignorance.

(4.)

“ Thou  wilt  behold  heaven  and  earth  combating  even  as  heat
and  cold ; thou  wilt  see  how,  for  the  diversion  of  superior
beings,  nature,  with  all  this,  forms  wdnd,  water,  plants,  metals,
and  stones  ; thou  wilt  perceive  how’  pain  and  pleasure  trans-
form beings.

(5.)

“ Thou  wilt  see  the  whole  and  the  parts  participate  in  the
power  of  intelligence  and  reason,  and  how  God,  making  use  of


214


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


destiny  and  harmony,  ordains  the  universal  drama,  and  dis-
poses of  souls  with  a view  to  the  active  and  uninterrupted
enacting  of  this  drama.”

Poor  actor  in  this  human  comedy,  who  had  a part  so
painful  to  play,  how  many  times,  from  the  bosom  of  its
double  dungeon,  would  thy  soul  have  quitted  thy  body,
loaded  with  irons,  to  draw  from  the  heavens  the  courage
thou  knewest  how  to  oppose  to  the  executioners  who
tore  off  thy  flesh  with  red  hot  pincers  for  the  blind
pleasure  of  seeing  thy  blood  run.  If  thy  happiness  is
as  great  as  thy  sufferings  were  acute,  thou  art  surely
one  of  the  happiest  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  We  are
about  to  quit  thee  and  pass  into  Sweden,  to  our  dearly
beloved  brother  Swedenborg,  to  demand  of  him  some
new  revelations  for  those  who ‘have  not  read  his  works.

Sweden. — Swedenborg. — Page  9. — In  a preliminary
discourse,  to  serve  as  a guide  in  the  perusal  of  the  works
of  Swedenborg,  by  Captain  Fraiche  (brochure  in  8vo.,
1848),  we  find  the  following  particulars  respecting  this
celebrated  ecstatico-prophet : —

“ Emmanuel  Swedenboi'g  was  born  at  Upsal,  in  Sweden,
the  29th  January,  1688,  in  a distinguished  class  of  society.
He  was  placed  from  his  earliest  youth  in  an  important  tribunal,
and  distinguished  himself  there  by  his  knowledge  and  integrity  ;
solid  and  numerous  writings  on  mineralogy,  physics,  and  astro-
nomy soon  made  him  known  to  the  learned  world.  Esteemed
and  beloved  for  his  knowledge  and  virtue,  ever  useful  and  irre-
proachable, Swedenborg  gave  up,  about  the  year  1740,  tem-
poral affairs  to  engage  only  in  spiritual  matters.  In  1743,  he
received  the  first  favours  and  first  orders  from  heaven.”  * *

From  this  period  up  to  the  time  of  his  death,  which
took  place  in  London,  on  the  29th  of  March,  l77-j  he
published  several  works,  all  written  in  Latin,  on  spiritual
matters.

Note  5. — “Independently  of  the  communication  with  heaven,
and  the  inspiration  with  which  Swedenborg  was  favoured  the


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


215


rest  of  his  life,  he  astonished  his  fellow  citizens  by  several
marvellous  things.  We  will  cite  a few  of  the  most  interesting
and  best  attested  ones  : —

1st.  “A  demand  was  made  on  a lady  of  the  Court  of  Stock-
holm for  a debt,  which  she  well  knew  her  husband  had  dis-
charged previous  to  his  decease  ; but,  not  finding  the  receipt,
and  apprehensive  of  having  to  pay  twice  over,  she  went  to
Swedenborg.  He  told  her,  the  following  day,  that  he  had
spoken  with  her  husband,  who  had  told  him  where  the  receipt
w'as.  The  deceased  appeared  also  in  a dream  to  his  widow,
clad  in  the  dressing-gown  he  wore  before  his  death,  and  told
her  that  the  receipt  was  in  such  a place,  where  she  found  it.
She  used  to  relate  this  strange  adventure,  which  the  Queen  of
Sweden  has  since  confirmed  at  Berlin,  when  on  a visit  to  the
King,  her  brother,

“ *2nd.  Being  at  Gothembourg,  60  miles  from  Stockholm,
he  announced,  three  days  before  the  arrival  of  the  courier,  the
fire  which  ravaged  Stockholm,  and  the  precise  hour  it  broke
out,  and  without  having  received  any  news,  he  also  said  that
his  own  house  had  been  spared  by  the  flames,

“ 3rd,  Embai'king  at  London,  in  the  vessel  of  Captain
Dixon,  some  one  asked  the  latter  whether  he  had  laid  inplentv
of  provisions,  whereupon  Swedenborg  observed — ‘ TVe  don’t
want  such  a plerity,  for  in  a week  hence,  at  two  o'clock,  we  shall
he  at  Stockholm.’  The  prediction,  as  Captain  Dixon  has
attested,. was  literally  fulfilled.

Note  7. — “In  1758,  a short  time  after  the  death  of  the
King  of  Prussia,  Swedenborg  went  to  court,  whither  he  was
in  the  constant  habit  of  going.  Scarcely  had  he  been  seen  by
her  Majesty  than  she  said  to  him — ‘ Monsieur,  the  assessor,
have  you  seen  my  brother  ?’  Swedenborg  made  answer  that  he
had  not ; and  the  queen  replied,  ‘ If  you  should  meet  him,  re-
member me  to  him.’  In  saying  this  she  meant  merely  to  pass
a joke,  and  had  no  thoughts  of  asking  him  for  any  information
concerning  her  brother.  A week  after  Swedenborg  went  again
to  court,  but  at  so  early  an  hour  that  the  Queen  had  not  yet
left  her  apartment,  called  the  White  Room,  where  she  was
chatting  with  her  ladies  of  honour  and  other  ladies  of  the
court.  Swedenborg  waits  not  for  the  queen’s  coming  out ;
he  straightway  walks  into  the  apartment,  and  whispers  in  her
ear.  The  Queen,  struck  with  astonishment,  faints  away,  and


216


THE  SECHETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


was  some  time  before  she  recovered.  Brought  to  herself
again,  she  said  to  tliose  around  her,  ‘ Only  God  and  my  brother
could  have  known  what  he  has  Just  told  me/  She  confessed  that
he  had  mentioned  to  her  her  last  correspondence  with  that
prince,  the  subject  of  which  was  known  only  to  themselves.”

Note  8. — “As  a religion  the  doctrine  of  Swedenborg  is
already  propagated  in  Sweden,  Prussia,  the  Low  Countries,
Switzerland,  Germany,  and  even  in  Russia  ; in  England  forty-
four  towns  already  number  as  many  temples  ; in  the  United
States  there  were  seventy-two  of  them  in  1827.  Numerous
learned  journals  propagate  this  doctrine  in  Europe,  as,  also,  in
the  New  World,  &c,,  &c.”

This  is  a slight  sketch  of  the  reputation  of  the  man
with  whom  we  have  entertained  our  readers;  a man
worthy  of  the  respect,  admiration,  and  veneration  of
all  spiritualists,  the  greatest  and  truest  genius  of  the
eighteenth  century.

Some  ivould- be  philosophers  wish  to  refute  his  admira-
ble writings  by  arguments  worthy  of  their  knowledge.

He  was  a visionary,  say  they.  This  name  is  well
worth  that  of  blind  men  which  rightly  belongs  to  thenn

He  w'as  a madman — whom,  even  up  to  this  very  day,
they  have  been  unable  to  do  without  in  their  works  at
the  mines.

Let  us  not  discuss  with  these  learned  gentlemen ; w’e
could  not  raise  ourselves  up  to  them,  infinitely  insigni-
ficant as  w’e  are,  let  us  rather  pass  on  to  a few  extracts
from  the  treatise  on  heaven  and  hell,  by  this  maniac,
with  whom,  however,  w’e  should  be  most  happy  to  play
a game  of  tcarie  in  the  spiritual  world.

Art.  439. — “To  throw  more  light  on  this  truth  that  man  is
a spirit  as  to  his  interior,  I should  wish  to  recount,  from  expe-
rience, what  happens  when  man  is  removed  from  his  body,  and
how,  through  the  spirit,  he  is  conveyed  to  another  place.

Art.  440. — “ As  to  what  regards  the  first  point  of  being
removed  from  his  body,  this  is  the  way  in  which  it  is  effected.
Man  is  conducted  into  a certain  state,  holding  a medium  be-
tween sleep  and  wakefulness;  when  he  is  in  this  state  he


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


217


cannot  know  aught  else  but  tliat  he  watches ; for  all  his  senses
are  so  awakened  that  he  finds  himself  in  the  most  perfect
wakefulness  of  the  body — the  sight  and  hearing  are  per-
fect, and,  most  admirable  in  this  situation,  the  touch,  also,
which  finds  itself  more  exquisite  and  distinct  than  it  could
ever  be  in  the  operations^  of  the  body,  is  most  perfectly
awakened.  In  this  state  it  is  that  I have  seen  spirits  and
angels,  seen  them  ad  vivum,  even  heard  them,  and  what  at
first  strangely  surprised  me,  touched  them,  without  finding
scarcely  any  difference  in  them  from  the  touch  of  a body.
This  state  is  the  one  wherein  we  are  said  to  be  removed  from
our  body,  and  not  knowing  whether  we  are  in  or  out  of  our
body.  I have  been  three  or  four  times  transported  into  this
state,  merely  that  I might  become  acquainted  with  the  quality
of  this  state,  and,  at  the  same  time,  know  that  spirits  and
angels  have  the  enjoyment  of  all  their  senses,  and  that
man,  in  like  manner,  enjoys  them  as  to  the  spirit  when
removed  from  his  body.”

Is  it  possible  to  describe  ecstasy  better  ?

Art.  447. — “The  spirit  of  man,  after  the  separation,
remains  a short  time  in  the  body,  but  only  until  the  total
cessation  of  the  heart ; this  happens  differently,  according  to
the  nature  of  the  disease  of  which  the  man  dies,  for  the  move-
ment of  the  heait  in  some  lasts  a certain  time,  and  in  others
ceases  at  once ; no  sooner  does  this  movement  cease  than
man  is  resuscitated,  but  this  is  brought  about  by  the  Lord
alone.  By  resurrection,  w^e  mean  the  spirit  of  man  leaving
the  body,  and  introduced  into  the  spiritual  world;  correctly
speaking,  this  resurrection  should  be  termed  the  awakening.”

Art.  452. — “I  have  conversed  with  spirits  three  days  after
their  death,  and  all  the  operations  I have  detailed  in  Nos.  449.
450,  were  already  consummated.  I have  conversed  with
three  spirits  who  had  been  knowm  to  me  in  their  worldly  life,
told  them  that  their  obsequies  were  being  prepared,  and  their
bodies  being  buried  at  the  moment  I spoke  to  them  ; at  the  word
buried,  they  were  struck  with  the  greatest  astonishment,  saying
that  they  were  alive,  and  setting  in  order  what  was  of  use  to
them  in  the  world.  Then,  being  better  informed,  they  were
quite  astounded  that  all  the  time  they  had  lived  on  earth  thev
had  not  believed  in  the  possibility  of  such  a life  after  death.

Q


218


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


“ Hence,  all  those  who  come  from  the  world  into  the  other
life  are  extremely  surprised  at  perceiving  that  they  live,  and
are  men,  as  they  had  previously  been  ; at  perceiving  that  they
hear,  see,  and  speak  ; at  perceiving  that  even  their  body  enjoys
the  sense  of  touch,  as  before ; but  the  most  surprising  of  all  to
them,  when  they  have  ceased  wondering  at  this  new  situation
(No.  74),  is  perceiving  that  the  Church  knows  nothing  of
such  a state  for  man  after  death,  and,  consequently,  knows
nothing  of  heaven  and  hell,  when,  nevertheless,  all  those
who  have  lived  in  the  world  are  now  in  the  other  life,  and
live  as  men,  as  they  were  astonished,  also,  that  this  truth
was  not  manifested  to  man  by  vision,  since  it  is  so  essential
to  the  faith  of  the  Church.  It  was  told  them,  from  heaven,
that  this  might  be  done  ; for  there  is  nothing  more  easy
when  it  pleases  the  Lord,  but  that  never  would  those  who
have  been  confirmed  in  errors  against  truths  believe  those
truths,  even  were  thev  to  see  them.”

Peruse  once  more  the  132nd  sitting  of  the  “ Secrets,”
wherein  will  be  seen,  in  the  apparition  of  my  father,
the  truth  of  what  Swedenborg  here  reveals  as  to  the
momentary  ignorance  in  which  certain  spirits  find
themselves  who  do  not  believe  that  they  are  dead.

Art.  493. — “The  first  state  of  man  after  death  is  altogether
similar  to  his  state  in  this  world,  because  that  then  it  is  the
same  with  exteriors  ; thus,  his  physiognomy,  language,  cha-
racter— in  short,  his  moral  and  civil  life,  are  similar  to  what  he
has  been  in  the  world  ; hence,  he  who  is  in  the  world  of
spirits  knows  not  but  that  he  is  still  on  earth,  unless  he
notices  the  objects  which  are  before  his  eyes,  and  the  things
which  have  been  told  him  by  the  angels  at  the  moment  of
his  resurrection,  in  order  to  assure  him  that  he  was  now  a
spirit  (No.  450).  Thus,  a life  is  continued  in  another  life,
and  death  is  only  a passage.

“ As  the  new  spirit  of  man  after  his  life  in  the  world  is
such,  he  is  then  recognised  by  his  friends  and  those  w'hose
society  he  was  wont  to  frequent  in  the  world  ; for  the  spirits
recognise  him  not  only  by  his  physiognomy  and  language,  but
also  by  his  sphere  of  life  when  they  approach  the  newly-arrived
spirit.  Each,  in  the  other  life,  whilst  he  is  thinking  of  another,
has  immediately  the  physiognomy  of  the  person  who  occupies


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


219


him  in  his  thought,  and  at  the  same  time  several  deeds  and
actions  of  his  life  are  retraced  before  his  eyes  ; and  when  he  is
in  this  state  of  reminiscence,  the  object  remembered  becomes
to  him  present,  as  if  called  for  and  brought  before  him.  The
same  effect  exists  in  the  world  of  spirits,  because  the  thoughts
are  communicated  there,  and  because  there  space  is  no  longer
known  as  in  the  natural  world  (Nos.  191,199).  Hence,  as
soon  as  they  come  into  the  other  life,  they  are  recognised  by
their  friends,  their  relations,  their  parents,  by  those  even  who
had  but  a slight  connection  with  them.  They  speak  with  each
other,  and,  in  short,  renew  the  familiarities  and  friendships
which  had  united  them  in  the  natural  world.  Several  times
have  I heard  those  who  came  from  the  world  which  we  inhabit ;
they  were  transported  with  joy  at  beholding  again  their  friends,
and  their  friends  participated  in  this  joy  at  seeing  them  arrive
and  become  reunited  to  them.  It  is  a very  common  thing  for
husbands  to  meet  again  with  their  wives,  wives  with  their
husbands,  and  congratulate  each  other  at  their  meeting ; then
they  remain  together  for  a longer  or  shorter  period,  according
to  the  degree  of  attachment  they  felt  for  each  other  in  this
world;  and,  in  short,  if  a love  truly  conjugal  had  not  united
them  (a  love  which  is  the  conjunction  of  two  souls  by  heavenly
love),  a short  time  after  their  new  reunion  they  separate.  If  the
souls  of  married  couples  have  lived  in  dissension — if  they  have
inwardly  hated  each  other — they  now  display  openly  their
mutual  aversion,  and  oftentimes  even  abuse  each  other  and
fight,  without  being  able,  however,  to  separate  till  the  moment
of  their  passage  to  the  second  state,  of  which  I shall  treat  in
the  following  article.”

We  are  conscious  that  it  cannot  be  otherwise  : there
is  no  possible  transition  betAA'een  the  two  kinds  of
existing ; it  must  be,  as  we  have  seen,  a continuation  of
affections  which  cannot  disappear  suddenly.  In  the
harmony  of  nature,  there  cannot  be  any  such  escape-
ments ; there  is  progression,  but  by  the  catch  of  that
universal  and  eternal  wheel,  a single  tooth  of  which
cannot  be  broken  without  putting  out  of  order  the
machine.  Magnetisers,  who  know  with  what  facility
clairvoyants  communicate  with  places  and  persons  at  a
distance,  will  readily  admit  that  it  must  be  thus  in

Q 2


220


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


heaven,  where  spaces  exist  much  less  than  on  earth.  It
is  not,  therefore,  incredible  that  so  soon  as  we  think  of
a deceased  friend  he  should  be  forthwith  with  us ; if
we  do  not  see  him  and  feel  him,  it  is  because  our  organs
are  too  paralysed ; but  the  clairvoyant  soon  proves  to
us  the  truth  of  this  revelation,  by  describing  him  to  us
and  conversing  with  him.

AVho  would  still  dare  treat  Swedenborg  as  a madman
after  so  beautiful  a description  of  the  somnambulic  facul-
ties, which  certainly  were  not  known  in  his  time  as  in
our  days  ?

“ Art.  507. — When  spirits  are  in  this  second  state,  they
appear  just  as  they  were  when  in  the  physical  world  ; then,
the  things  which  they  have  done  and  pronounced  in  the  utmost
secresy  are  manifested  in  open  day ; for  then,  as  external
appearances  no  longer  enchain  them,  they  speak  openly,
endeavour  to  do  openly  things  similar  to  those  which  they  did
and  said  in  secret  in  their  earthly  life,  no  longer  fearing  the
loss  of  their  reputation,  and  no  longer  terrified  by  the  other
motives  which  kept  them  in  check  in  the  world  ; consequently,
are  they  shown  in  their  respective  sinful  states  that  they  may
appear  just  as  they  really  are  to  the  angels  and  good  spirits
who  examine  them.  Thus  it  is  that  the  most  secret  things  are
discovered,  the  most  clandestine  works  unveiled.  According
to  the  words  of  the  Lord  : — ‘ For  there  is  nothing  covered
that  shall  not  be  revealed ; neither  hid  that  shall  not  be  known.
Therefore,  whatsoever  ye  have  spoken  in  darkness  shall  be
heard  in  the  light,  and  that  which  ye  have  spoken  in  the  ear
in  closets,  shall  be  proclaimed  upon  the  housetops.’,  (St.
Luke,  xii.,  2,  3.)  ‘ But  I say  unto  you  that  every  idle  word

that  men  shall  speak,  they  shall  give  account  thereof  in  the  day
of  judgment.’ — (St.  Matthew,  xii.,  36.)”  '

On  earth  is  there  aught  that  we  can  hide  from  the
perception  of  a clairvoyant?  It  is  not,  therefore,  ridi-
culous to  admit  that  in  the  world  of  spirits  none  is  any
longer  able  to  conceal  aught;  it  is  the  book  of  life  which
will  be  open  to  all.  The  masks  of  calm  concealing
rage,  smiles  concealing  bitterness,  virtue  concealing  vice.


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


221


will  be  left  on  eartb.  We  cannot  deny  these  truths  after
having  studied  magnetic  somnambulism.  Need  we  in-
vite our  readers  to  a perusal  of  the  works  of  the  learned
Swede  ? No,  these  few  passages,  we  are  certain  of  it,
will  be  a better  invitation  than  any  we  could  give.  We
abstain,  therefore,  from  all  insinuation  in  this  respect.

We  are  about  to  proceed  into  Germany  to  consult  a
philosopher  highly  extolled,  and  deservedly  so,  by  our
savans  of  the  day,

Germany. — “Fichte,  on  the  Destiny  of  Man,”
translation  of  1836,  page  254  : —

“ Moreover  it  is  not  from  to-day  that  this  conviction  exists
in  me.  Long  before  conscience  had  spoken  with  its  irre-
sistible authprity,  I could  not  contemplate  the  actual  world  for
a single  instant,  without  feeling  rise  within  me,  shall  I say
hope  ? shall  1 say  desire  ? — No,  better  than  that,  more  than
that,  the  irrefragable  certitude  of  another  world.  At  each
glance  I let  fall  on  men  or  on  nature,  at  every  reflection
engendered  in  my  mind  by  the  singular  contrast  of  the  im-
mensity of  man’s  desires  and  his  actual  misery,  an  interior
voice  would  raise  itself  within  me  and  say  : — ‘ Oh  ! nothing
out  of  all  this  can  be  eternal;  be  persuaded  of  it,  another
world  exists,  another  and  a better  world.  * * *

I eat,  I drink,  in  order  that  I may  eat  and  drink  again.  The
grave,  incessantly  open,  seizes  its  prey ; I descend  into  it  to
become  the  food  of  worms ; I leave  behind  me  beings  similar
to  myself,  that  they  may  eat  and  drink  until  they  die,  them-
selves replaced  by  others  similar  to  them,  who  in  their  turn
will  do  the  same  things.  Such  is  my  life,  such  the  world ; it
is  a circle  revolving  eternally  on  itself;  it  is  a fantastic
spectacle,  wherein  all  is  born  to  die,  and  dies  to  be  born  again  ;
it  is  a hydra  with  innumerable  heads,  never  weary  of  devour-
ing itself  in  order  to  reproduce  itself,  and  reproducing  itself  to
devour  itself  again.  Shall  I believe,  then,  that  it  is  in  the
circle  of  those  monstrous  and  eternal  vicissitudes  all  the
efforts  of  humanity  must  waste  themselves  in  useless  efforts  ?
Shall  I not  rather  believe  that  if  humanity  undergoes  them,  it
is  but  momentarily,  with  the  view  of  arriving  at  a state  which
shall  remain  final,  in  order  to  reach  at  last  a place  of  rest.


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


9QO

Zj  1j


where,  recovering  from  so  many  fatigues,  it  will  remain  im-
moveable for  eternity,  above  the  agitated  waves  of  the  ocean
of  ages.”

Page  363. — “ Whilst  here  below  we  weep  for  a man,  as  we
should  have  but  too  just  a cause  for  doing  so  were  he  deprived
for  ever  of  the  light  of  the  sun,  were  he  to  go  wandering  for
eternity  in  those  immense  solitudes  wherein  exists  not  the  con-
sciousness of  self,  where  he  sunk  never  to  emerge  from  them
in  the  sombre  kingdoms  of  nothingness  ; above  us,  other
creatures,  no  doubt,  rejoice  at  the  birth  of  this  man  in  their
world  new  to  him,  as  in  this  we  rejoice  at  the  birth  of  one  of
our  children.

“ May  the  day,  then,  whereon  I am  to  rejoin  him  quickly
arrive ; I will  leave  mourning  and  sorrow  to  the  earth  which
I shall  quit,  and  that  day  shall  be  to  me  the  most  welcome
of  all.”

Let  us  return  to  France,  our  dear  country,  said  to  be
the  least  philosophical  and  most  light-minded  of  all
nations.  We  will  prove  to  its  enemies  that  they  have
uttered  a falsehood,  and  that  our  libraries  swarm  with
works  bespeaking  great  meditation  of  mind,  and  a love
of  spiritualism  more  refined  than  amongst  many  other
nations.  The  limits  of  this  work  not  admitting  of  our
citing  all  the  authors  we  are  acquainted  wuth  who  have
treated  on  this  grand  question,  w'e  will  select  from
amongst  them  a few  who  have  done  so  in  our  point  of
view.

f

France. — Pierre  le  Layer > — This  writer  of  the  seven-
teenth century  appears  to  the  eyes  of  the  present  gene-
ration as  a superstitious  character,  who  lived  only
amongst  demons.  Let  us  do  him  a little  more  justice ;
he  deserves  being  admitted  as  a conscientious  and  en-
lightened writer,  who,  having  been  enabled,  by  his
social  position,  to  see,  compare,  and  judge  the  facts
which  he  relates,  had  a right  to  pronounce  as  he  did.
Had  he  been  a little  less  of  a devotee,  he  would  have
been  but  a still  greater  philosopher.  One  destroys  not
the  other,  it  merely  injures  him  in  the  judgment  of  a


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


223


few  persons  who  concede  nothing  to  their  fellow  men.
Le  Loyer  represents  the  philosophy  and  beliefs  of  his
age.  In  his  treatise  on  “ Spectres  and  Apparitions,  or
Visions  of  Angels  and  Demons  showing  themselves
sensibly  to  Men”  (1586,  4th  book,  page  85),  he  says —

* * * * “And  after  him  (Mahomet),  I find  that  King

Avezoar  Albuma,  a great  philosopher  and  physician,  also
believed  in  the  apparition  of  souls ; for  he  has  left  on  record
that  having  a disease  in  one  of  his  eyes,  and  no  hopes  of  find-
ing a remedy,  he  beheld,  whilst  asleep,  a deceased  friend  of
his,  a physician,  who  told  him  what  remedies  to  apply  to
recover  his  sight ; and  Avicenna  follows,  for  the  most  part,
the  opinion  of  Plato  as  to  souls,  and  as  Plato  has  termed  the
body  the  grave  of  the  soul,  so  by  Avicenna  the  body  is  termed
the  paralysis  of  the  soul,  through  which  it  cannot  freely  per-
form its  functions  and  actions  ; and  as  to  the  felicity  of  the  soul
after  the  death  of  the  body,  he  still  agrees  with  Plato,  except
in  the  damnation  of  the  damned,  the  punishment  of  whom
consists,  he  says,  in  a continual  sorrow  at  being  deprived  of
what  they  have  most  desired,  believing  that  there  is  no  other
torment  for  the  soul  (which  is  the  everlasting  fire)  than  that
of  being  deprived  of  the  sight  of  God — which  doctrine  Plato
did  not  hold.”

Page  88, — “ Certainly  the  Brahmins,  the  priestly  disciples
of  the  Bragmans,  who  dwell  in  Calcutta,  in  the  East  Indies,
besides  believing  in  the  immortality  of  souls,  think  that  they
may  be  evoked  by  necromancy,  and  they  are  the  greatest  ma-
gicians in  this  part  of  the  Indies.”

Page  150. — “Do  we  require  a more  beautiful  solution  than
that  of  St.  Augustine,  who,  after  having  duly  and  diligently
discussed  the  question  of  the  apparition  of  the  dead,  at  length
unravels  and  disposes  of  it  in  this  way — ‘ If,’  said  he,  ‘ we
consider  as  false  the  apparitions  that  the  faithful  and  Catholics
declare  they  have  seen,  and  if  we  set  so  little  value  on  the
testimony  of  those  who  declare  that  they  have  seen  and  heard
with  their  corporeal  senses  the  souls  of  the  dead,  we  should
be  rightly  reputed  as  too  bold  and  incredulous.’  Thus,  St.
Augustine  founds  his  opinion  upon  what  the  generality  of
men  believe,  and  principally  good  faithful  Christians,  who,  in
his  time,  declared  and  maintained  that  souls  had  been  seen
after  separation  from  the  body.”


224


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


Wliat  was  believed  at  that  time  may  surely  be  believed
now,  when  God  permits  us  to  enter  into  communication
with  souls,  through  tlie  medium  of  somnambulism,  at
any  time  and  at  any  hour.

Delachambre. — The  system  of  the  soul,  by  Dela-
chambre,  published  in  1665,  gives  a pretty  good  sum-
mary of  the  beliefs  and  long  theological  disputes  of  the
seventeenth  century.  This  work,  highly  metaphysical,
is  worthy  of  being  studied  by  magnetisers.  We  find,
at  page  53,  these  reflections —

“The  greatest  difficulty  is  to  know  whether  the  communi-
cation which  men  have  with  angels  and  souls  separated  can
be  performed  in  the  same  manner  (by  meeting  forthwith) ; for
it  cannot  be  doubted  that  there  is  some  society  between  us
and  them,  since  there  is  such  between  all  intelligent  natures,
and  since  the  communication  we  must  have  together  is  a point
of  true  religion  ; angels  and  blessed  souls  can,  in  truth,  come
to  us,  penetrate  us,  and  unite  themselves  to  our  thoughts,  but
we  cannot  go  to  them  if  they  are  in  heaven  ; what,  then,  can
become  of  our  wishes  and  prayers  with  respect  to  them,  how
should  they,  being  so  far  off',  know  our  wants  and  wishes

Page  404. — “ It  must  not,  however,  be  supposed  that  the
form  of  the  soul  and  of  angels  is  fixed  and  determinate,  like
that  of  solid  bodies ; it  is  vague  and  changeable  like  that  of
the  air  and  the  liquids,  which  assume  the  form  of  all  the  solid
bodies  surrounding  them,  and  the  difference  is  this — that  the
vivacity  of  the  forms  that  supervene  to  the  latter  is  of  neces-
sity, and  that  which  is  found  in  spiritual  substances  depends
on  their  will ; for,  as  they  move  as  they  please  all  their  parts,
they  also  assume  whatever  form  they  desire.”

This  proposition  comes  in  support  of  what  has  been
revealed  to  us  relative  to  the  forms  which  souls  disen-
gaged from  matter  can  assume.  In  the  first  proposi-
tion, M.  Delachambre  (who  may  rightly  pass  for  a
philosopher  of  great  merit)  considers  it  a very  rational
idea  that  the  soul  of  deceased  persons  should  com-
municate instantaneously  with  that  of  terrestrial  men,
agreeably  to  the  wishes  of  the  latter.  He  thus  draws


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


225


his  conclusions  therefrom,  by  reasonings  not  systema-
tical, but  truly  theological.

Lebrun. — Let  us  see  what  the  Rev.  Father  Lebrun
thinks  of  it  in  his  “ Critical  History  of  Superstitious
Practices,^^  2nd  edit.,  2nd  vol.,  17^2,  page  227: —

“ Doubtless  it  was  an  abominable  superstition  to  pretend
to  make  the  dead  speak  in  order  to  pry  into  the  future.  God
had  distinctly  said  that  it  was  consulting  the  Evil  One,  and
was  a crime  deserving  of  death  ; still  Saul,  setting  at  defiance
the  prohibition  and  the  penalty,  ventured  to  consult  a witch,
and  ask  her  to  resuscitate,  and  cause  to  appear,  Samuel.
Although  the  Evil  One  had  no  power  over  this  prophet,  and
could  only  assume  his  countenance  and  voice,  God,  never-
theless, permits  Samuel  himself  to  come  and  speak  to  Saul,
reproach  him  for  his  crimes,  and  announce  to  him  his  destruc-
tion. I am  aware  that  it  is  disputed  whether  what  then
appeared  was  the  shade  of  Samuel  or  the  prophet  himself.  I
am  also  aware  that  some  persons  inquire  whether  it  was  super-
natural or  a sheer  imposture  ! But  this  is  a point  on  which
there  can  be  neither  question  nor  doubt.  Those  who  dispute
have  not  paid  attention  to  what  is  said  in  Ecclesiasticus,  for
this  sacred  book  distinctly  informs  us  that  Samuel,  being
dead,  made  known  to  the  King  what  would  happen  to  him : —
‘ And  after  his  death  he  prophesied,  and  showed  the  King  his
end,  and  lifted  up  his  voice  from  the  earth  in  prophecy,  to
blot  out  the  wickedness  of  the  people.’  Here,  then,  is  Samuel
prophesying  after  his  death,  and  God  doing,  amongst  the
abominable  superstitions  of  the  witch,  what  diabolic  art  could
not  have  operated.”

Don’t  let  that  astonish  you.  Father  Lebrun ; there
was  in  the  science  of  the  witch  nothing  more  reprehen-
sible than  what  you  may  be  pleased  to  approve  in  favour
of  your  doctrine.  An  apparition  is  a fact,  that  is  what
we  wished  to  register,  since  we  are  in  the  eighteenth
century.  Let  us  continue.

Voltaire. — Let  us  open  for  an  instant  the  Philoso-
phical Dictionary,”  the  panacea  of  materialists,  in  which
M.  Arouet  de  Voltaire  condescended  to  write  a few
pages.  Article — Man,”  vol.  v. : —


226


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


“ Where  is  the  man  who,  as  soon  as  he  withdraws  into
himself,  feels  not  that  he  is  but  a mere  puppet  of  Providence  ?
I think,  but  can  I impart  to  myself  a thought  ? Alas ! if  I
thought  of  myself,  I should  know  what  idea  I should  have  in
a moment ; no  one  knows  it.

“ I acquire  a knowledge,  but  I could  not  have  imparted  it
to  myself;  my  intelligence  could  not  have  been  the  cause
of  it,  as  the  cause  must  contain  the  effect;  now,  my  first
acquired  knowledge  not  being  in  my  intelligence,  not  being
in  me,  since  it  has  been  the  first,  it  has  been  imparted  to
me  by  him  who  formed  me  and  is  the  giver  of  all,  whatsoever
he  be.

“I  am  altogether  lost  and  humbled  when  I am  made  to
perceive  that  my  first  knowledge  cannot  of  itself  impart  to
me  a second,  as  it  would  be  necessary  that  it  should  contain
it  within  itself.

“ The  proof  that  we  do  not  impart  to  ourselves  any  idea  is,
that  we  receive  many  in  our  dreams,  and,  certainly,  it  is
neither  our  will  nor  our  attention  which  causes  us  to  think  in
a dream.  There  are  poets  who  compose  verses  whilst  asleep,
geometers  who  measure  triangles ; all  this  proves  to  us  that
there  is  a power  that  acts  within  us  without  consulting  us.

“ All  our  sentiments,  are  they  not  involuntary  ? — hearing,
sight,  taste,  are  nothing  of  themselves;  we  are  conscious,
despite  ourselves,  we  know  nothing — we  are  nothing  without
a supreme  power,  that  does  all.”

Who  now  would  venture  to  say  that  this  article  is
the  work  of  a materialist  ? What  spiritualist  ever  better
meditated  ?

Article — “ Magic,”  vol.  vi.  ed.  1785. — “ Magic  is  a science
much  more  plausible  than  astrology  and  the  doctrine  of
genii.  No  sooner  do  we  begin  to  think  that  there  is  in
man  a being  quite  distinct  from  the  machine,  and  that  the
understanding  subsists  after  death,  than  we  give  to  this
understanding  a delicate,  subtile,  aerial  body,  resembling  the
body  in  which  it  was  lodged ; two  reasons,  perfectly  natural,
invite  to  this  opinion  : — the  first  is  this,  that  in  all  lan-
guages the  soul  was  termed  breath,  spirit,  wind  ; this  spirit,
wind,  breath,  was  in  something  very  small,  and  very  delicate.
The  second — that  if  the  soul  of  a man  had  not  retained  a


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.  227

form  similar  to  that  it  possessed  during  its  life,  we  should
have  been  unable,  after  death,  to  distinguish  the  soul  of  one
man  from  that  of  another.  This  soul,  this  shadow  which
subsisted,  separated  from  its  body,  could  very  well  show
itself  in  a case  of  emergency,  see  again  the  places  it  had  dwelt
in,  visit  its  relatives,  its  friends,  speak  to  them,  instruct  them.
In  all  this  there  was  no  incompatibility ; what  is,  is  able  to
appear.”

Who,  pray,  after  such  a confession,  would  fear
ridicule,  by  making  a similar  one  ? To  find,  in  the
‘‘  Philosophical  Dictionary,”  these  words : — “ The  soul
can  see  again  the  places  it  had  dioelt  in”  What  novelty
is  there  in  what  we  have  just  said?  What,  then,  do
clairvoyants  tell  us  that  should  be  looked  upon  as
incredible  ? Nothing.  The  “ Philosophical  Dictionary”
has  been  as  far  as  possible.

Saint-Martin. — We  will  pass  on  to  the  perusal  of
a few  passages  contained  in  a highly-esteemed  work,
entitled,  “Errors  and  Truth,”  by  an  unknown  philo-
sopher (attributed  to  Saint-Martin),  vol.  1st,  page  .31 : —

“ No  one  of  good  faith,  and  whose  reason  is  neither
clouded  nor  prejudiced,  but  what  comprehends  that  h
corporal  life  of  man  is  a state  of  almost  continual  suffering
and  privation;  thus,  from  the  ideas  we  have  formed  of
justice,  it  is  not  without  reason  that  we  look  upon  the
duration  of  this  corporal  life  as  a time  of  chastisement  and
expiation,  but  we  cannot  look  upon  it  as  such,  without
forthwith  thinking  that  there  must  have  been  for  man  a
state  anterior  and  preferable  to  the  one  wherein  he  now
finds  himself,  and  we  may  say  that  in  proportion  as  his
actual  state  is  confined,  painful,  and  sown  with  disgust,  so  the
other  must  have  been  illimitable,  and  filled  with  delight.
Each  of  his  sufferings  is  an  index  of  the  happiness  wanting
in  him  ; each  of  his  privations  proves  that  he  was  made  for
enjoyment,  and  his  present  subjection  announces
an  ancient  authority ; in  one  word,  to  feel  now  that  he  has
nothing,  is  a secret  proof  that  once  he  had  all.

“ From  the  painful  perception  of  the  dreadful  state  in
which  we  now  see  him,  we  may,  therefore,  form  to  ourselves


228


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


an  idea  of  the  happy  state  in  which  he  was  previously.  He
is  not,  at  present,  the  master  of  his  thoughts ; and  it  is  a
torment  for  him  to  have  to  wait  for  those  he  desires,  and
repulse  those  he  fears ; hence  we  feel  that  he  was  made  to
dispose  of  these  same  thoughts,  and  that  he  could  produce
them  at  will ; whence  it  is,  also,  easy  to  presume  the  in-
appreciable advantages  attached  to  such  a power ; he  obtains,
actually,  a certain  amount  of  peace  and  tranquillity,  only  by
unheard-of  efforts  and  painful  sacrifices  ; hence,  we  conclude
that  he  was  made  to  enjoy,  perpetually,  and  without  labour,
a calm  and  happy  state,  and  that  the  abode  of  peace  was
his  true  dwelling.  Possessing  the  faculty  of  seeing  all  and
knowing  all,  he,  nevertheless,  crawls  in  darkness,  shuddering
at  his  blindness  and  ignorance.  Is  not  this  a certain  proof
that  the  light  is  his  element?  At  last,  his  body  is  subject
to  destruction ; and  this  death,  of  which  he  is  the  only
creature  in  nature  who  has  an  idea  of  it,  is  the  most  terrible
step  in  his  corporeal  career,  the  act  the  most  humiliating  to
him,  and  the  one  which  he  holds  most  in  horror,  AVhere-
fore,  should  not  this  law,  so  severe  and  dreadful  for  man,
induce  us  to  think  that  his  body  had  received  one  infinitely
more  glorious,  and  was  destined  to  enjoy  all  the  rights  of
immortality !”

Page  43.—  “ It  is,  therefore,  evident  that  this  material  body
which  we  bear  is  the  organ  of  all  our  sufferings ; it  is,  therefore,
it  which,  forming  dense  bounds  to  our  view  and  to  all  our
faculties,  keeps  us  in  privation  and  suffering.  Consequently,
I ought  not  any  longer  to  dissemble  that  the  junction  of  man
to  this  coarse  envelope  is  the  punishment  even  to  which  his
sin  has  subjected  him  temporarily,  since  we  see  the  horrible
effects  that  he  suffers  from  it  from  the  moment  he  is  invested
with  it  to  that  wherein  he  is  stripped  of  it,  and  that  hence  it
is  that  begin  and  are  perpetuated  the  trials  without  which  he
cannot  re-establish  the  relations  he  once  had  with  the  light  I”

I will  make  no  observation  on  this  passage,  which  is
the  full  and  entire  confirmation  of  what  has  been  revealed,
to  us  relative  to  a life  anterior,  in  which  we  were,  as  St.
Martin  says,  possessors  of  all  we  now  stand  in  need  of.

Here  are  a few  fragments  of  the  same  author,  extracted
from  his  last  pages  on  death.


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM,


229


“ The  society  of  the  world  in  general  has  appeared  to  me
like  a theatre  whereon  we  must  continually  pass  our  time  in
playing  our  part,  wherein  there  is  never  a single  moment  to
learn  it.  The  society  of  wisdom,  on  the  contrary,  is  a school
wherein  we  constantly  pass  our  time  in  learning  our  part,  and
where  we  only  wait  for  the  drawing  up  of  the  curtain,  that  is
to  say,  till  the  veil  of  the  universe  has  disappeared,  to  begin
playing.

“ From  the  way  in  which  worldly  folks  spend  their  time,
one  would  say  that  they  are  afraid  of  not  being  silly  enough.

“ Death  is  but  one  of  the  hours  of  our  dial,  and  our  dial
must  turn  for  ever.

“The  hope  of  death  forms  the  consolation  of  my  days;
therefore  would  I that  men  would  never  say  the  other  life,  for
there  is  but  one  life.

“ I have  seen  that  men  were  astonished  at  dying,  and  were
not  astonished  at  being  born;  this,  however,  should  more
justly  excite  their  surprise  and  admiration.

“ Is  it  not  grievous  to  the  thought  to  see  that  man  passes
his  life  in  learning  how  he  should  pass  it }

“ Nothing  is  easier  than  arriving  at  the  door  of  truth,
nothing  more  rare  and  difficult  than  entering  it,  and  such  is
the  case  with  most  of  the  learned  of  this  world.

“If  after  our  death  this  world  should  appear  to  us  but  a
trance,  wherefore  should  we  not  regard  it  as  such  from  this
moment  ? The  nature  of  things  cannot  change.

“ As  our  material  existence  is  not  life,  our  material  destruc-
tion is  not  death.

“ Man  has  warnings  of  all,  but  he  pays  no  attention  to
them ; in  fact,  all  is  in  our  atmosphere,  the  secret  is  to  know
how  to  read  in  it.”

What  think  you  of  this  last  passage,  my  dearly-beloved
savans  ? Your  spectacles  are  of  an  exquisite  polish,  but
they  do  not  penetrate  so  far,  and  yet  this  is,  this  can  be
seen,  comprehended,  demonstrated  with  little  trouble,
and  in  little  time ; but  we  cannot  raise  ourselves  up  to  you.
Let  each  remain  in  his  place  ; ours  is,  you  have  said,  at
Bicetre  (Bedlam)  ; peace  be  between  us.  Be  assured,
dear  readers,  that  the  authors  we  quote  have  never  been
the  inmates  of  Charenton  (also  a madhouse) ; they  have


230


THE  SECRETS  OP  THE  FUTURE


been  forgotten  at  the  door,  where  we  made  acquaintance
with  them.  We  will  now  introduce  to  you  the  famous,
or  if  you  please,  poor  Marmontel.

Marmontel. — “ Lessons  of  a Father  to  his  Children
on  Metaphysics,”  page  99  : —

“ You  perceive,”  said  he,  “ by  the  functions  performed  by
the  soul  of  animals  that  its  destination  ceases  with  the  term  of
its  life,  whereas  the  destination  of  the  soul  of  man  has  barely
commenced.  Contemplative  intelligence  ! it  has  seen  but
through  a cloud  the  marvels  with  which  the  Eternal  has  been
pleased  to  render  it  a witness,  and  only  by  disengaging  itself
from  these  material  veils  will  it  fully  enjoy  the  sight  of  the
great  work,  and  that  of  its  author.”

Page  118. — “ No,  my  children,  if  God  has  left  to  man  the
power  of  rendering  himself  worthy  of  reward  and  punishment,
and  if  both  are  not  distributed  in  this  life  with  a constant  and
strict  equity,  there  is  for  man  another  life  in  which  God
reserves  to  himself  to  be  just;  it  must  be  so,  otherwise  he  would
not  be  God.”

“ Possibly  I here  make  use  of  a very  bold  expression  ; for
what  is  the  right  of  the  creature  with  respect  to  his  Creator }
What  is  the  engagement  and  obligation  of  the  Creator  towards
the  creature  ? He  owes  him  nothing,  strictly  speaking,  but  he
owes  it  to  himself,  or  rather  it  appertains  to  his  divine  essence
and  the  excellence  of  his  nature,  to  desire  nought  which  is
not  perfectly  conformable  to  the  eternal  idea  of  justice  and
goodness.  We  have  reason  to  reproach  men  for  having  made
for  themselves  a God  after  their  own  image,  attributing  to
him  qualities  unworthy  of  him,  and  these*  are  errors  of  the
imagination  from  which  I hope  to  preserve  you.  * * * *

Annihilation  was  ever  the  horrible  hope  of  crime ; immortality
was  ever  the  consolation  of  oppressed  innocence  and  the
support  of  virtue.”  ***>(:***

130.  “ It  is  this  presentiment  of  a life  to  come  which,  in  all
times,  has  imparted  so  much  strength  and  elevation  to  virtuous
souls,  to  such  men  as  Socrates,  Theramenes,  Leonidas,  Cato,
Thraseas,  and  in  an  especial  degree  to  the  martyrs  of  this  holy
religion  whose  fundamental  doctrine  is  the  immortality  of  the
soul.  !Man,  occupied  with  a boundless  felicity  which  it  is  per-
mitted him  to  hope  for,  no  longer  regards  this  life  but  as  a
fugitive  flash  which  escapes  and  vanishes  through  light  clouds.


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


231


A serene  day  is  beyond,  and  this  day  which  never  night  will
darken  awaits  him.  It  is  in  eternity  that  he  beholds  what  sort
of  being  is  his  God,  and  there  it  is  that  he  recognises  him  as
supremely  good  and  just.  Physical  evil,  with  respect  to  man,
is  therefore  a fresh  proof  of  the  immortality  of  the  soul ;
moral  evil  still  adds  to  this  proof,  since  it  supposes  a free  will,
and  liberty  in  man  is  an  infallible  proof  of  immortality.”

Let  us  now  consult  a few  writers  who  have  devoted
themselves  to  the  study  of  magnetism,  for  all  bucklers
are  good  to  parry  the  blows  aimed  at  us ; we  are  not
sorry  at  sharing  ridicule  in  company.  We  will,  however,
first  introduce  the  celebrated  Ch.  Fourier.

Fourier. — We  find  in  his  ‘^Life  and  Theory,”  by  Ch.
Pellarin,  2nd  edition,  1843,  page  294: —

“ Fourier  expressed  himself  as  follows  in  a letter'to  Muiron,
dated  3rd  November,  1826  : — ‘ It  appears  that  Messrs.  G.  and
P.  have  given  up  their  work  on  magnetism ; I would  wager
that  they  don’t  succeed  with  the  fundamental  argument.  I
mean  that  if  all  is  knit  together  in  the  system  of  the  universe,
there  must  exist  a means  of  communication  between  the
creatures  of  the  other  world  and  this  one;  that  is  to  say,  a
communication  of  the  faculties  of  the  ultra-mundanes  or
deceased,  and  not  a communication  with  the  latter;  this  par-
ticipation cannot  take  place  in  the  watchful  state,  but  only  in
a mixed  state,  as  sleep  or  something  else.  Have  magnetisers
discovered  this  state?  I know  not;  but  in  principle  1 am
aware  that  it  must  exist,  and  if  it  is  the  state  of  artificial  som-
nambulism, no  advantage  will  be  derived  from  it  so  long  as  we
are  ignorant  of  the  calculation  of  the  sympathies  of  characters
in  identities  and  contrasts.  For  want  of  sorting,  according  to
this  theory,  magnetisers  and  the  magnetised,  we  shall  undergo
a score  failures  for  one  successful  result,  and  this  will  give  a
superiority  to  the  sceptics  and  detractors.”

What  you  foresaw  I have  put  in  execution.  I wanted
but  your  erudition  to  draw  from  it  the  sage  conclusions
that  you — worthy  man  for  such  a task  ! — would  have
drawn  from  it.


232


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


Bertrand.  — Let  us  pass  on  to  Doctor  Bertrand.
“ Treatise  on  Somnambulism,  1823.”

‘‘  It  is  evident  that  those  who  admit  an  immaterial  principle
within  us,  cannot  consider  it  as  confined  or  limited  in  any  part
of  space,  and  that  it  can  be  no  more  placed  in  our  body  than
anywhere  else,* *  and,  consequently,  that  nothing  can  limit  the
extent  of  its  perceptions.  ♦***=»=*

For  so  confirmed  a sceptic  as  Doctor  Bertrand,  this
proposition  is  not  a very  materialist  one  ! far  from  it.

“ The  soul  can  as  well  take  Cognisance  of  objects  the
farthest  oif  from  its  body  as  of  those  nearest  to  it ; for  the
view  at  the  greatest  distances  once  operated,  there  will  be
nothing  to  create  surprise,  or  what  may  not  even  seem  ne-
cessary ; for,  if  our  soul  is  quite  as  well  at  the  antipodes  as  in
our  body,  wherefore,  if  it  desires  to  direct  its  attention  on  an
object  fifteen  hundred  leagues  off,  should  it  not  equally  as
well  take  cognisance  of  it  as  of  that  within  a few  feet  of  it  ?”

Page  257. — “ Sometimes  the  somnambulist  was  shown
absent  persons,  or  those  who  had  been  long  dead.  When  she
opened  her  eyes,  seeing  before  her  a spectre  or  phantom,  she
was  sensibly  moved,  and,  at  times,  scenes  occurred  that  might
have  injured  her  health.  It  would  be  dangerous  to  repeat
such  experiments  often  ; I warn  magnetisers  who  should  be
tempted  to  make  similar  ones,  that  serious  consequences
might  be  the  result,  alike  injurious  to  the  health  and  mental
faculties.”  *****  ,j,

I reply  to  Doctor  Bertrand  that  the  magnetisers  who
have  made  experiments  of  this  kind,  doubtless,  knew
not  how  to  conduct  them  ; this,  it  is  true,  might
seriously  affect  the  clairvoyant’s  mind  ; but  those  which
I propose,  and  which  have  been  read,  can  present  na
inconvenience  of  the  kind,  and  ought,  on  the  contrary,

* If  we  are  induced  to  place  our  soul  in  our  body,  and  to  believe  that
it  is  maintained  there,  it  is  merely  because  we  feel  only  in  the  extent  of

the  matter  constituting  it,  and  because  we  cannot  act  on  any  particle

of  matter  beyond  the  limits.  We  ought  not,  therefore,  to  consider  our

body  as  containing  our  soul,  as  a thing  material  contains  another,  but  only
limiting  the  extent  of  the  matter  in  which  it  is  given  it  to  act  and  fee!.” —

{Note  to  the  above  work.)


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


233


to  establish  demonstratively  the  existence  of  the  soul
after  its  separation  from  the  body.  The  spectres  or
phantoms  which  the  said  clairvoyants  saw  were  nought
else  but  the  last  state  of  the  deceased  patients,  whom,
in  their  ecstatic  ignorance,  they  went  to  seek  in  the
graveyards,  and  which  the  ignorance,  not  less  great,  of
the  magnetisers  allowed  to  subsist  on  the  clairvoyant’s
awaking.  This,  it  is  true,  must  have  produced  injurious
effects ; but  which  ought  to  prove  to  the  magnetisers
that  these  corpses,  reduced  years  ago  to  dust,  neverthe-
less existed  for  the  clairvoyant,  and  demonstrated  to
them  the  immortality  of  material  forms  in  the  world  of
effects,  as  spiritualism  demonstrates  the  immortality  of
the  causes  in  the  type-world.  Doctor  Bertrand  is  far
from  wishing  to  believe  in  such  communications  between
the  two  worlds,  as  will  be  seen  by  the  following  article ;
but  his  citing  it  is  sufficient  for  us  to  reproduce  it,
thinking  that  those  who  may  have  been  convinced  by  the
experiments  we  have  cited  will  explain  it  otherwise  : —

“ The  members  of  the  Exegetical  Society  of  Stockholm
were  zealously  engaged  in  magnetising.  In  1787  and  1788,
they  had  come,  I know  not  how,  to  the  persuasion  that  the
marvellous  facts  of  somnambulism  could  not  appertain  to  the
material  man,  and  that  it  must  be  some  pure  intelligence
speaking  through  the  mouth  of  patients  fallen  into  this  state  !
Well ! all  the  sick  persons  sent  to  sleep  by  men  persuaded  of
this  idea,  not  only  were  persuaded  of  it  themselves,  but  also,
like  the  possessed,  they  identified  themselves  with  the  spiritual
substances  supposed  to  speak  through  their  mouth ; and  when
the  magnetiser,  after  sending  them  to  sleep,  put  to  them  the
usual  questions Who  are  you  who  speak?’  they  replied,
conformably  to  the  ideas  of  the  person  questioning  them,  I
am  the  brother,  the  father,  the  friend,  or  child  of  the  person
you  have  sent  to  sleep.  And  then  he  would  speak  of  the
head,  discuss  points  of  philosophy,  preach  the  doctrine  of
Swedenborg,  and  give  information  of  what  vvas  passing  in  the
other  world.  * * * * * ♦

I could  add  to  these  examples,  so  conclusive,  a great  number
of  others  not  less  so.”

R


234


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


Doctor  Bertrand  apparently  throws  out  a hint  to  the
effect  that  he  looks  upon  the  members  of  this  society
(one  of  the  most  learned  that  ever  existed)  as  poor
visionaries,  who  were  the  sport  of  their  imagination  and
of  the  more  or  less  nonsensical  ramblings  of  their  clair*^
voyants.  Had  the  Doctor  thought  of  experimenting
himself,  he  would  have  instantly  recognised  the  truth  or
falsehood  of  these  communications.  To  reject  an  asser-
tion supported  by  well-informed  men,  without  mature
examination,  is  not  being  logical,  and  above  all  to
terminate  with  this  phrase  : — ‘ I could  add  to  these
examples,  so  conclusive,  a great  number  of  others  not
less  so.^  If  these  examples  are  conclusive,  and  you  do
not  admit  them.  Doctor,  you  know  only  how  to  cite,
and  not  conclude.

Chardel. — We  will  pass  on  to  another  magnetiser,
whose  knowledge  and  veracity  cannot  be  doubted.  M.
C.  Chardel,  Counsellor  at  the  Court  of  Cassation  at
Paris,  in  his  “Essay  on  Psychology,'^  3rd  edit.,  1844,
page  111,  thus  expresses  himself: —

“ The  human  soul  seems,  therefore,  a stranger  on  earth — a
prisoner  in  a new  world  ; the  body  lends  it  organs  to  perceive
it,  and  life  gives  it  the  means  of  making  use  of  them,  but
in  opening  it  to  the  material  world  it  closes  against  it  the
spiritual  one.”

This  passage  comes  to  the  support  of  the  anterior
existence  of  which  we  have  already  spoken.

Page  357. — Appendix. — ‘‘  Antiquity  believed  in  commu-
nications with  the  other  world,  it  recounts  numerous  instances
of  such  which  the  present  age  classes  amongst  fables;  still,  in
our  days,  the  apparitions  of  spirits  are  not  more  rare  than  for-
merly, only  we  conceal  them  in  the  veil  of  ridicule  with
which  we  cannot  hide  the  truth  as  well  as  error.  I grant  that
kicts  of  this  kind  demand  an  explanation,  and  I will  give  one,
but  to  make  it  understood  it  is  necessary  that  it  should  be
preceded  by  an  inquiry  as  to  the  mode  of  existence  of  souls;
moreover,  1 beg  to  remind  the  reader  that  I have  studied  nature
in  a path  but  little  knovvn,  and  I make  an  appeal  not  to  his
credulity  but  his  examination.”


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


235


M.  Cliardel  taking,  tlien,  his  stand  on  the  writings  of
Swedenborg,  on  facts  of  ecstaiism,  and  several  appa-
ritions personal  to  himself  and  full  of  interest,  concludes
with  a firm  belief  in  the  world  of  spirits,  and  the  possi-
bility of  communicating  with  them ; he  believes  in  the
recollection  of  self,  and  all  that  can  constitute  indivi-
duality in  the  world  of  spirits.  He  continues  thus
(page  384) —

‘‘In  the  spiritual  world  there  are  no  longer  either  fathers
or  mothers,  brothers  or  sisters;  the  ties  of  family  are  broken,
all  the  sentiments  are  laid  bare,  and  the  nature  of  the  sen-
sibility of  each  once  determined  no  longer  has  occasion  to
change.”

Savans,  M.  Chardel  was  in  your  ranks,  and  believed
in  spirits !

Dm  Potet.- — Whilst  we  conceal  ourselves  behind  these
bucklers,  for  the  sake  of  a short  respite,  we  will  open
the  essay  on  the  “ Philosophical  Teaching  of  Mag-
netism,” by  M.  Du  Potet,  page  12,  wherein  we  find
these  severe  words,  which  you  merit  savans,  and  which
this  writer  ought  to  have  remembered  before  analysing
the  “ Secrets.”

“ You,  sava7is  of  our  country,  you  have  not  shown  your-
selves better  informed  than  the  Siamese,  as,  for  these  sixty
yeai's,  it  has  been  bawled  in  your  ears:  — The  magnetisers
march  to  the  discoveo-ij  of  a moral  world;  all  the  phe-
nomena they  produce  indubitably  prove  its  existence.  You
have  declared  that  they  were  impostors,  idiots,  and  of  you  all
those  are  the  most  illustrious  who  have  signed  the  judgment
which  will  attest  to  all  future  ages  your  ignorance  and  in-
sincerity.”

Page  68. — “ The  knowledge  of  man  and  his  destinies  is
within  the  science  of  magnetism  ; delay  not  too  long  to
assure  yourself  of  this — thy  days  are  limited,  no  eagle  eye  is
required  to  measure  their  extent.

“Let  thy  actions  be  virtuous,  for,  know  that  thy  soul  will
remember  them  all  after  thy  life  on  earth  and  the  remem-
brance of  them  will  be  ineffaceable.  d\'ot  on  sand  are  human


236


THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE


actions  graven,  hut  in  the  conscience.  The  torments  of
thy  crimes  will  have  no  end.  Thy  heart  may  perish  with-
out removing  the  least  stain  from  thy  soul ; this  )'ust  would
he  constantly  gnawing  it,  for  thou  couldst  no  longer  con-
ceal anything,  even  from  thyself,  and  thou  thyself  woiddst
he  thine  own  inexorable  judge.  JVhatsocver  thou  shalt
have  thought  shall  he  known  hy  all  who  shall  wish  to
know  it.  For  thee  no  more  dissimrdation  is  possible ; no
longer  any  mask.  As  thou  wilt  he  able  to  read  in  others,
so  they  in  thee,  and  thy  most  trifling  actions  will  appear
like  a cloud  under  a serene  sky.

“Pray  that  thy  life  may  be  short;  if  thou  hast  lived  well
thy  soul  will  quit  the  prison  that  confines  it,  it  will  issue
from  it  radiant  and  full  of  light.  This  world  of  mockers
and  fools  suspect  not  the  object  of  life  ; imitate  it  not,  it
believes  in  a prolonged  ball ; whatsoever  flatters  its  pride  and
intoxicates  its  senses  is  found  assembled  ; but  one  day  the
Amphytrion  of  this  banquet  will  dismiss  his  guests — their  life
will  then  be  extinguished  like  the  tapers  that  lighted  up  the
fate.”

Page  231  .• — “ The  sold — What  is  a sold  ? Who  has  ever
seen  a soul  ? Where  does  it  reside  } Let  it  he  shown  to
us.  Words  as  stupid  as  would  be  those  of  a person  who  should
say,  ‘ Where  is  the  wind  ? Who  has  ever  seen  the  wind  ?
Let  it  be  shown  to  us.’  And  many  seek  for  their  soul,  as
did  the  man  for  his  horse  when  on  his  back.  Oh  ! great
geniuses  of  our  time,  illustrious  immortals,  strike  but  a blow
on  your  shell,  pain  will  answer  you;  you  will  have  the  con-
sciousness of  your  existence — you  will  be  warned  that  there
is  within  you  something  that  w-atches  and  is  uneasy,  not  your
high  reason ; strike  again,  and  let  the  blood  run,  the  oc-
cupant will  take  leave  of  you,  quitting  its  domicile,  and
none  of  you  will  be  able  to  repair  it,  and  set  it  in  motion.
In  vain  may  you  cry,  the  air  will  resound  in  vain  with  your
cries;  the  closed  mouth  will  remain  dumb.  Should  it  be  that
of  one  of  your  orators,  one  of  those  mouths  that  in  this
world  have  a reply  for  all  ? Doubtless  he  who  explains,
accounts  for  all,  has  no  need  of  having  recourse  to  the
Divinity ; and  hence  it  is  that  the  savans  deny  what  they
cannot  conceive  or  explain.  A trumpery  penny  mirror,
could  it  but  spetdv  on  the  objects  it  reflects,  w'ould  reason  like


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.  237

our  savayis ; it  would  have,  however,  behind  its  surface  but
a little  mercury  and  tin  : of  what,  then,  are  the  brains  of
our  great  men  composed  ?

“ Before  the  soul  is  disengaged  from  matter,  it  can  already
converse  with  pure  spirits.  God  has  permitted  it,  but  in
an  imperfect  manner.  It  can  plunge  its  look  even  to  the
abode  of  those  who  have  for  ever  lost  the  human  form
(material,  meant  M.  Du  Potet) ; it  gives  up  its  secrets,
however,  only  with  very  great  reserve.”

M.  Du  Potet  then  cites  several  ecstatic  facts,  by
which  he  demonstrates  this  truth.  He  assures  us  that
he  himself  has  received  counsels  from  a spiritual  voice
similar  to  those  given  Bruno,  of  which  mention  is  made
in  the  first  volume.  We  cannot  doubt  the  highly
studious  and  upright  mind  of  this  savant,  who  may
be  heard  every  Sunday,  at  his  conferences,  develop-
ing his  beliefs,  which  are,  as  we  have  just  seen,  as
spiritualist  as  we  can  desire  them.  M.  Du  Potet  has
not  become  the  apostle  of  such  beliefs,  without  mature
examination,  and  thorough  conviction  of  their  truth.
We  venture,  therefore,  to  hope  that  with  such  support
we  shall  appear  less  ridiculous,  as  we  proclaim  nothing
more  than  he  does.  Had  the  limits  of  this  work
permitted  us,  we  would  have  opened  the  numerous
and  estimable  works  of  the  rich  library  of  magnetism,
in  which  we  could  have  collected  as  many  facts  of  this
nature  as  we  could  have  desired ; but  this  would  have
been  abusing  the  complaisance  of  our  readers ; we  will
content  ourselves  with  recommending  to  them  the
perusal  of  Mesmer,  Puysegur,  Deleuze,  Petetin,
Despine,  Billot,  Charpignon,  Ricard,  the  Abbe  Lou-
bert,  Loisson  de  Guinaumont,  Teste,  Gautier  (Aubin),
Possin,  Delaage,  and  those  whom  we  have  quoted,  &c.
They  will  find  in  these  authors  an  entire  confirmation
of  the  spiritual  communications  treated  of  in  this
work.  After  such  perusal,  we  believe  we  shall  no
longer  be  in  their  eyes  but  a man  who  may  have  erred
in  certain  propositions;  who,  for  want  of  sufficient


238  • THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE

education,  is  unequal  to  the  task,  but  who  has  done
his  best  to  communicate  to  his  brethren,  whom  he
loves  with  all  the  strength  of  hig  soul,  ideas  that  may
tend  to  mitigate  their  painful  position  on  earth.  He
has  done  so  conscientiously,  truthfully,  fondly ; may
he  succeed  agreeably  to  his  wishes.  I terminate,  by
solemnly  protesting  before  God,  that  in  all  that  I have
said  I have  in  nowise  perverted  the  truth,  in  favour
of  any  system  whatever;  that  of  all  the  sittings  that
have  been  read,  I possess  certificates,  and  keep  them
at  the  service  of  all  my  readers,  whom,  moreover,  I
would  recommend  to  experiment  for  themselves,  ac-
cording to  the  instructions  laid  down  in  the  first  volume
It  is  a general  property,  and  will  convince  them  better
than  all  that  could  be  written  on  the  subject.

I receive,  every  day,  fresh  confirmations  of  the  success
of  this  property  of  the  soul,  from  honest  magnetisers,
who  wish,  before  judging,  to  experiment,  without  par-
tiality. To  make  mention  of  all  the  facts  of  this
hature  would  far  exceed  the  limits  prescribed  me  in
this  work.  Having  just  founded  a society  of  spiritual-
ists in  Paris,  which  will  publish  its  works  in  a journal,
entitled  The  Spiritualist  Magnetiser,”  the  first  number
of  which  has  appeared,  we  will  report  in  its  columns
the  most  curious  facts  with  which  we  may  become
acquainted.


REVEALED  THROUGH  MAGNETISM.


239


DEVOTEDNESS.

In  these  days  of  trouble,  alarm,  and  mourning  in  which
we  live,  I despaired  of  the  prediction  which  our  good
brother  Swedenborg  had  made  in  saying  to  me; —
“Your  second  I part  of  the /Secrets’  will  be  printed;
such  is  the  will  of  God.  Do  not  be  disquieted ; when
the  time  comes,  some  one  will  aid  you.”  Who  could
have  believed  in  the  realisation  of  this  prophecy  at  a
time  when  nought  but  falsehoods  and  enmities  are  seen
issuing  from  the  press ; when  not  a single  publisher
dares  venture  to  publish  the  least  work  ; when  each
locks  up  his  money  in  the  painful  prevision  of  events  in
which  it  may  be  found  of  absolute  necessity.  Having
only  just  reimbursed  myself  for  the  expenses  of  the  first
volume,  I had  not  at  my  command  the  funds  necessary
for  printing  the  second,  when  the  venerable  and  benefi-
cent old  man  to  whom  I was  indebted  for  publishing
the  first,  one  day  came  and  handed  to  me  the  same
note  for  five  hundred  francs,  on  the  same  conditions
as  before.  At  my  observation  that  it  was  rash  to
venture  a second  trial ; that  this  time  I might  not  be  able
to  reimburse  him,  he  replied  to  me — “ May  God  be  with
us,  and  his  will  be  done ! Should  you  be  unable  to
repay  me,  you  will  not  have  to  reproach  yourself  with
having  asked  me  for  it,  and  as  for  me  I shall  think  no
more  of  it.”  Know  you,  reader,  the  age  and  the  means
of  this  devoted  friend  of  the  sciences  ? Why,  he  is  78
years  of  age,  and  has  an  income  of  600  francs  ! (£25.)

A few  days  after  this  offer,  I received  by  post  a letter
from  the  same  person  who  had  subscribed  100  francs
to  the  first  volume,  containing  a bank-note  of  the  same
amount  as  his  subscription  to  the  second,  with  a
request  not  to  mention  his  name,  and,  above  all,  to


240  THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  FUTURE,  ETC.

spare  myself  the  trouble  of  thanking  him.  Oh !
thanks  ! thrice  thanks,  generous  men,  this  fine  action
will  not  go  without  its  reward  ! I had  asked  nothing
of  these  two  persons  who  conducted  this  affair.  I
was  bound  to  question  M.  Swedenborg  to  inquire
whether  I ought  to  send  this  second  volume  to  the
press,  and  he  said  to  me,  ‘‘  This  volume  must  be
printed  by  the  20th  February,  for  certain  ev — • are
drawing  near ; it  is,  in  like  disasters,  that  consolations
are  needed.”

Here  it  is,  dear  reader,  without  having  met  with  any
accident ; may  it  answer  your  kind  expectations,  and
fortify  you  in  these  times  of  trouble,  when  it  is  precious
to  know  how  to  die,  and  still  more  precious  to  know
whither  we  go  !


THE  END.


INDEX


TO

VOLUME  THE  SECOND.


PAGB

Reply  to  magnetisers  who  believe  that  the  apparitions  mentioned  in
the  first  volume  of  the  “ Secrets  ” are  but  an  effect  of  trans-
mission of  thoughts  . . . . . . . . . . . . 3

Refutation  of  a whole  life  of  beatitude  in  the  world  of  spirits  . . 12

Observations  on  the  contradictions  contained  in  the  first  volume  of

the  “Secrets”  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  16

Apparitions. — Sitting  98. — Perception  of  the  brother-in-law  of

M.  Lucas  in  Mexico  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..20

99.  Continuation  of  the  foregoing  perception — Miraculous  coup-de~

so/ei7  received  by  Adele  at  this  sitting  ..  ..  ..  21

100.  Religious  questions  addressed  to  M.  Swedenborg  on  the  exist-

ence and  doctrine  of  Christ  . . . . . . . . . . 24

101.  Questions  addressed  to  M.  Swedenborg  to  procure  the  means

of  printing  the  “Secrets” — Information  as  to  the  different
methods  of  perceiving  spirits,  of  the  errors  that  may  occur,

Ac.  &c.  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  27

102.  Apparition  of  the  aunt  of  Madame  Lorrae,  of  Rambouillet  ..  32

103.  Continuation  of  the  foregoing  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  32

104.  Water  spiritualised  by  M.  Swedenborg — Marvellous  disappear-

ance of  the  word  magnetised  on  the  label — Explanation  . . 34

105.  Perception  of  M.  Mirande’s  brother  in  Russia,  &c.  ..  ..  36

106.  Apparition  of  Emile's  guide  and  his  companion — Details  as  to

the  usages  in  heaven  . . . . . . . . . . . . 4

107.  Questions  addressed  to  M.  Swedenborg  by  Adele  to  learn

whether  Emile’s  answers  are  true — Adele’s  ecstasy — Counsels
to  guide  clairvoyants  . . . . . . . . . . . . 44

108.  Accident  happened  to  the  “Secrets” — Comparison  of  the

terrestrial  age  with  what  M.  Swedenborg  names  degrees  . . 49

109.  Apparition  of  the  uncle  of  Count  D ..  ..  ..  52

110.  Ditto  of  the  brother  of  M.  A Observations  on  this  sitting. . 56

111.  Ditto  of  the  brother  of  M.  B Curious  details  ..  59

112.  Ditto  of  the  maid-servant  of  M.  A Particulars  ..  ..  62


242


INDEX.


PAGE

113.  Apparitions  of  Madame  Favre,  of  Lyons,  and  her  mother — Ap-

parition of  Madame  Vermale. . ..  ..  ..  ..  65

114.  Miraculous  cure  of  Adele  by  M.  Swedenborg  . . ..  ..  67

115.  Religious  questions  by  the  Abbe  A ..  ..  ..  71

116.  Apparitions  of  Madame  Duteil  and  her  mother  ..  ..  72

117.  Ditto  of  the  Princess  K and  Doctor  Dubois  ..  ..  74

118.  Apparition  of  M.  B Jacques  ..  ..  ..  ..  76

119.  Ditto  of  M.  J.  Hdbert  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  78

120.  Apparitions  of  M.  Solano  Constantio  and  M.  Robert  Fitter —

Religious  questions  . . . . . . . . . . . . 80

121.  Religious  questions  put  by  the  Abbe  A as  to  the  existence

and  power  of  Christ  . . . . . . . . . . . . 84

122.  Apparition  of  Jeannette  Jex,  followed  by  a metaphysical  disser-

tation on  the  communication  of  thoughts  . . . . . . 90

123.  Apparition  of  M.  Antoine  Mizaud — Questions  on  astrology  and

elementary  spirits  . . . . . . . . . . . . 96

124.  Apparition  of  Madame  Wagner — Apparition  of  Madame  Fran-

foise  Greyelle — Observations  on  the  apparition  of  Madame
Wagner  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  97

125.  Apparition  of  Louis  XVI. — Revelations  as  to  the  existence  of

his  son..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  100

126.  Apparition  of  Madame  Marie-Rose-Blanche  Boulenger  ..  101

127.  Ditto  of  Madame  Witt — Ditto  of  Madame  Blesson  ..  ..  103

128.  Ditto  of  Madame  S.  B Ditto  of  M.  F.  C ..  ..  106

129.  Ditto  of  Jerome  Petiet — Curious  notions  as  to  the  communi-

cation of  maladies  from  the  dead  to  the  living,  and  from  the
latter  to  each  other  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..108

130.  Apparition  of  M.  Cahagnet's  father — His  doubts  ..  ..  110

131.  Ditto  of  an  old  miser — 2nd  sitting:  Discovery  of  the  presumed

place  of  her  treasure — 3rd  sitting  : Explanations  as  to  hal-
lucinations on  this  head  ..  .,  ..  ..  ..  112

132.  Apparition  of  M.  E.  C.  C.  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..118

133.  Ditto  of  M.  John  Wilson  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  121

134.  Ditto  of  Madame  A.  B Addle’s  ecstacy  ..  ..  ..  122

135.  Ditto  of  Madame  Elizabeth  Osborn — Retrospective  view  of

events — Observations..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  125

136.  Apparition  of  M.  Roustan  (Franfois  Xavier)  ..  ..  ..  128

137.  View  of  a treasure  and  a spirit,  the  victim  of  an  assassination —

Apparition  of  M.  Antoine  Simon  ..  ..  ..  ..  128

138.  Apparition  of  M.  Noel  Dejean,  of  Caderousse..  ..  ..  134

139.  Ditto  of  M.  Nicolas  Fandar  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  136

140.  Ditto  of  M.  Pierre  Blesson  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  138

141.  Ditto  of  M.  Marie-Joseph  Theodore  de  Guigne — Ditto  of

Madame  Olympe  Pascale  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  139

142.  Apparition  of  Mdlle.  Noemie  de  Longueville — Ditto  of  M.

Emile  de  Longueville . . ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  142

143.  Apparition  of  the  Solitaire  D’Orval;  confirmation  of  his  pre-

dictions— Apparition  of  M.  J.  B.  Chaptal..  ..  ..  145

Observations  ..  ..  ..  ..  ,,  ..  148


INDEX,


243


PAGE


Last  Moments  of  Elisa  ..

Last  Moments  of  my  Father

Correspondence. — Letter  of  M.  Lecocq — Apparitions  ..
Letter  of  M.  Leraoine — Ps5'chological  reflections
Apparition  of  M.  Leraoine’s  father  ..

Letter  of  M.  Borde — Conveyance  of  a box  . .

Observation — Stone-throvring  in  the  quarter  of  the  Sorbonne
Letter  of  M.  Binet — Curious  obsession


..  149
..  152
..  155
..  160
..  162
..  164
..  165
..  168


Ditto  of  Colonel  Roger — Spiritual  conveyance — Medicine — Noises —

A fall  of  old  iron,  &c.  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..170

Letter  of  M.  Blesson — Apparitions — Supernatural  facts  ..  ..174

Ditto  of  Madame  Belhot — Bite  by  a death’s  head  ..  ..  ..  178

Ditto  of  M.  Jean  Lemaitre — Carrying  off  a child  ..  ..  ..  180

Ditto  of  Madame  Felix  Lamb — Marvellous  facts  ..  ..  ..  181

Metaphysical  reflections  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  189

Letter  of  M.  Duteil — View  at  distance  on  a Christian  name  ..  192

Sitting  of  Emile — View  of  Icaria — Communication  of  spirits  ..  194

Letter  of  M.  Blouet  on  the  “ Secrets  " ..  ,.  ..  ..  195

Ditto  of  Madame  L^vi  on  an  apparition  ..  ..  ..  ..  195

Ditto  of  M.  Constant  Flichy  on  the  “ Secrets  ” ..  . . ..  196

Ditto  of  M.  Rousseau  on  the  “ Secrets  ” ..  ..  ..  ..  196

Ditto  of  M.  Borreau  de  Niort — Mysterious  warning. . ..  ..  197

Ditto  of  the  Abbe  Almignana,  to  know  whether  these  apparitions


are,  or  are  not,  approved  by  the  Church

••

..  200

OPINION  OF  PHILOSOPHERS

ON  THE  immortality

OF  THE

SOUL,

FROM  ANTiaUITY  TO  OUR  DAY'S.

PAGE

PAGE

IndieTs. — Dumont  Durville  . .

204

France. — Delachambre

..  224

China. — Polytheism

206

Lebrun  . .

• •

..  225

Oceania. — Mariner . .

206

Voltaire  . .

• •

. . 225

Greece. — Lamprias,  Aristotle

208

Saint-Martin

• •

..  227

Rome. — Cicero, Cyrus,  Cato..

210

Marmontel

..  230

Italy. — Campanella. .

212

Fourier  ..

• •

..  231

Sweden. — Swedenborg

214

Bertrand. .

• •

..  232

Germany'. — Fichte  . .

221

Chardel  ..

% •

..  234

France. — Pierre  Leloyer  ..

222

Du  Potet

• «

..  235

Dey'otedness  . .

t

• • • • • *

« •

..  239

London:  Printed  by  G.  Peirce,  310,  Strand.


c.


.r  w:


- (

I


, f;.:


« ■


I .


{•


. • ' ,j  ..  . . • k ^ •'0  • .* »’  W

. ..  ..  '■'  t 'i-  -

i>ll^  ' ► ^ \40.

. ...  r,'  , .'  -I

I ♦ •• . ***>  • . — 7*- j I •<  ■',»  otw.'  '

•i  ' " • L J.'

I '<  • ' t : ' I.  •!

..  ..  V'li  ’ 'i.  .l»  >.  •••.

# • • • • » .^If^  *24'*  I ^ ^

i y ' . > . . • . ' I

‘ * '■*  * f -*  'i' . ^ ' . , V '


i>  -s  < ’,■’  ■ '


4j.


>

^■'*L


> .
« ‘


V.’  .


. ,.  . - '■  - I . (f  ^ r 1 <

:^:^t  /r-

*.  ^JiTf '

' • >.  -i  ; V ,J-


• • ' »

Nf-  . .


fd-^-


••  • ^ I.  -j


->  v'


JE3*.'  . . M M


«


, J»4>  M


X r >
H ♦ >.'


-fei  ‘•-  . *Mi

-•  , Ir  ;■<■  I < \.  . « • * f .<•!  I

••  ’ ' ' •'  . - -
r'  ■ ' • ► '.  • • . «»


i*'  I *«>*  -


J t — ^ . *4


• ‘


S “ i


’ . *
‘•'  'll-.,*


•>  k'  > '


; K »v  I .'  ■ .9  •.•.  :
