BY


j:^  e.  cairnes,  m.a.,

E.MEKITU3  rKOFESSOR  OF  rOLITIOAL  EOOXO.MT  IS  UNIVEESITT  COLLEGE,  LONDON.


NEW YORK:

HARPER  &  BROTHERS,  PUBLISHERS,

FRANKLIN  SQUARE.


Xe  Aeplaoe  lost  oopy

SEP27  1S44


O-O


PREFACE.  /5


Though  the  following  work  is  an  attempt  to  recast  some
considerable  portion  of  Political  Economy,  I  should  be  sorry
it  were  regarded  as  in  any  sense  antagonistic  in  its  attitude  to-
ward the  science  built  up  by  the  labors  of  Adam  Smith,  Mal-
thus,  Eicardo,  and  Mill.  On  the  contrary,  my  hope  is  that  it
will — should  its  reasonings  find  acceptance  —  strengthen,  in
some  sensible  degree,  and  add  consistence  to  that  fabric.  As
regards  those  assumptions  respecting  human  character  and  the
physical  conditions  of  external  nature  which  constitute  the  ul-
timate premises  of  economic  science,  the  position  I  have  taken
is  identical  with  that  of  the  four  great  writers  I  have  named ;
and  I  have  endeavored  also  to  follow  the  method  of  combined
deduction  and  verification  by  comparison  with  facts,  which  was
theirs,  and  which  is,  as  I  believe,  the  only  fruitful,  or  indeed
possible  method  in  economic  inquiry.  Nor  do  the  final  con-
clusions which  I  have  reached  differ  very  widely  on  any  im-
portant points  from  those  at  which  they  had  arrived.  The
points  on  which  I  have  ventured  to. join  issue  with  them  are
what,  in  Bacon's  language,  may  be  called  the  axiomata  media
of  the  science — those  intermediate  principles  by  means  of  which
the  detailed  results  are  connected  with  the  higher  causes  which
produce  them.  If  I  have  not  deceived  myself,  there  is  in  this
portion  of  Political  Economy,  as  at  present  generally  received,
no  small  proportion  of  faulty  material ;  and  the  present  work
may  be  regarded  as  an  attempt,  so  far  as  it  goes,  to  replace  this
element  of  weakness  with  matter  better  fitted  to  endure  the
strain  of  modern  criticism.

The  nature  of  the  undertaking  has  brought  me,  much  oft-
ener  than  I  could  have  wished,  into  collision  with  more  than
one  living  writer  for  whose  abilities  and  acquirements  I  feel


2  PREFACE.

high  respect,  and  with  whose  practical  aims  I  not  unfrequent-
ly  strongly  sympathize ;  and  in  particular  I  have  been  com-
pelled in  several  parts  of  the  book  to  express  my  strong  dis-
sent from  some  of  the  views  of  my  friend  Mr.  W.  T.  Thornton.
Mr.  Thornton,  in  his  vork  on  "Labor,"  has  contributed  much,
for  which  economists  will  be  grateful,  to  the  elucidation  of  the
relations  between  labor  and  capital  in  this  country;  but  he
has  also  taken  up  certain  theoretic  positions  which  it  seems
to  me  are  fundamentally  erroneous.  When  my  path  has  lain
across  these,  I  have  not  hesitated  to  challenge  them,  using
here  the  same  freedom  which  Mr.  Thornton  has  himself  em-
ployed when  criticising  the  views  of  preceding  writers.  I
trust  that  I  have  also  profited  by  the  example  he  has  set  me
of  courtesy  toward  opponents.

Though  the  main  purpose  of  the  book  is,  as  I  have  already
intimated,  to  aid  the  improvement  of  economic  theory,  I
have  nevertheless  embraced  every  opportunity  that  offered  of
bringing  theoretic  doctrines  into  comparison  with  the  facts
presented  by  modern  industry  and  commerce.  I  have  in  this
way  been  led  to  examine  the  power  and  pretensions  of  Trades-
"  Unions,  the  efiicacy  of  Strikes,  and  other  practical  questions
involved  in  the  relations  of  labor  and  capital ;  and,  in  the
portion  of  the  book  devoted  to  International  Trade,  I  have,
with  the  same  view,  considered  in  some  detail  the  present
position  of  the  external  trade  of  the  United  States,  as  well  as
the  system  of  Protection  which,  in  defiance  alike  of  theory
and  experience,  that  country  has  so  strangely  adopted.

I  can  not  conclude  these  remarks  without  once  again  grate-
fully acknowledging  my  deep  obligations  to  my  friend  Pro-
fessor Nesbitt,  who  has,  both  by  supervision  of  the  work  while
in  progress,  and  by  correction  of  the  proofs  as  it  passed  through
the  press,  very  materially  contributed  to  its  now  at  length  be-
ing brought  to  a  close.

J.  E.  Caienes.

KiDBROOK  Park  Koad,  S.E.,  March,  1874.


CONTENTS.


PAET  I.— VALUE.

CHAPTER  I.

preliminary.

Paob

§  1.  Meaning  of  Value 11

Value  and  price 13

"A  sum  of  values" 13

When  a  change  in  exchanging  relations  is  described  as  a  rise  or  fall
of  commodity  A,  rather  than  as  a  fall  or  rise  of  commodity  B,  what

is  meant  ? ■. 13

§  3.  Three  problems  concerning  Value 14

I.  Conditions  essential  to  the  existence  of  value 14

II.  Causes  which  determine  "market  values " 14

III.  Causes  which  determine  "normal  values " 14

§  3.  Problem  I. — Conditions  essential  to  the  existence  of  value 14

§  4.  Relation  of  value  to  utility.— Professor  Jevons's  theory  examined 16

CHAPTER  II.

SUPPLY  AND  DEMAND.

§  1.  Fundamental  truth  in  connection  with  Supply  and  Demand 33

§  3.  Analysis  of  the  phenomena 33

Supply  and  Demand  strictly  analogous  conceptions 35

Mr.  Mill's  criticism  on  this  point  unfounded 36

§3.  Demand,  as  "quantity  demanded,"  occasionally  a  convenient,  but  not

the  proper  sense  of  the  term 37

§  4.  Supply  and  Demand,  as  aggregates,  are  strictly  interdependent  phenom-
ena, and  increase  or  diminish  together 30

§  5.  Similarly,  Production  and  Consumption  are  interdependent  phenomena.  31
This  doctrine  not  irreconcilable  with  the  existence  of  an  idle  rich  class

who  are  consumers  merely 33

Case  of  foreign  residents  engaged  in  no  industiy,  but  simply  expend-
ing and  consuming 35

§  6.  Supply  and  Demand,  as  related  to  particular  commodities 36

In  this  sense  not  interdependent  phenomena:  either  may  increase  or

diminish  irrespective  of  the  other 36

What  is  meant  by  the  equality  or  inequality  of  Supply  and  Demand?. .  37

§  7=  The  supply  of  a  commodity  tends  to  adapt  itself  to  the  dema,nd  at  the

normal  price '. 41

CHAPTER  III.

NORMAL VALUE.

§  L  Nature  of  Normal  Value 43

i  3.  Current  theories,  which  confine  normal  value  to  exchanges  governed  by

cost  of  production,  too  narrow , 45

Mr.  Mill's  docrine  of  Cost  of  Production 46

1 3.  Criticism  of  the. received  theory 48

§  4.  Examples  of  practical  errors  resulting  from  the  received  view 54


4  CONTENTS.

Pagk

§  5.  Statement  of  the  theory  of  Cost  of  Production  as  governing  normal  value  57
EtTective  competitiou  an  indispensable  condition  in  order  to  the  action

of  the  principle  of  cost 58

Extent  to  which  effective  competition  is  actually  realized  in  industrial

communities 60

Non-competing  industrial  groups 66

Complication  of  results 69

Nature  of  the  law  of  "  cost " 72

§  6.  Analysis  and  characterization  of  the  constituents  of  "  cost " 73

The  labor  element  of  "  cost" 75

Relation  of  skill  to  "cost"  and  to  "value" 76

Nature  of  "  abstinence" 80

How  far  does  "  abstinence"  stand  in  need  of  reward  ? , 81

The  sacrifices  involved  in  cost  of  production  not  necessarily  under

gone  by  distinct  persons 83

In  computing  cost  of  i^roduction,  it  is  the  average  sacrifice  that  is  to

be  talicn  account  of 85

§  7.  Normal  value  as  determined  by  Reciprocal  Demand 87

Nature  of  Reciprocal  Demand  as  between  nations  and  non-competing

industrial  groups 91

Difference  in  the  modes  of  action  of  Cost  of  Production  and  of  Recip-
rocal Demand 93

Probable  effect  of  improved  popular  education  on  Reciprocal  Demand,

and,  through  Reciprocal  Demand,  on  normal  values,  in  this  country.  95

CHAPTER  IV.

MARKET VALUE

§  1.  Market  Value,  amenable  to  law 97

§  3.  Adam  Smith's  doctrine  of  Market  Price 98

§  3.  Mr.  Mill's  doctrine 101

§  4.  Proposed  theory  of  Market  Price  in  wholesale  markets 104

Play  of  forces  in  the  market 106

"  Proper  market  price  " 107

Function  of  Speculators 109

Subordinate  importance  of  the  theory 110

§  5.  Prices  in  retail  mai-kets 113

Capital  in  retail  trade  excessive 114

Co-operative  competition 115

CHAPTER  V.

ON  SOME DERIVATIVE  LAWS OF  VALUE.

§  1.  Character  of  the  industry  of  new  communities 117

Action  of  the  law  of  "  diminishing  productiveness  " 118

§  3.  Course  of  price  in  meat  and  timber 119

§  3.  Course  of  price  in  the  staple  food 123

§  4.  Reciprocal  movements  in  tillage  and  pasture 127

Effects  on  the  progress  of  rent 127

§  5.  Course  of  price  in  accessory  products 128

§  6.  Adam  Smith's  insight 130

§  7.  Course  of  price  in  mineral  products 131

§8. " " in  manufactures 133

" " in  coarse  and  refined  manufactures 135

§  9.  Derivative  laws  in  fluctuations  of  the  market 135

§  10.  Laws  of  fluctuation  as  affecting  manufactures 137

§  11. " " as  affecting  raw  products 141

" " as  affecting  the  staple  food  of  a  people 142

1 12.  Market  fluctuations  differ  in  intensity  and  in  duration 145

In  vegetable  products  more  intense 144

In  animal  products  of  longer  duration 144

Fish  and  game 145


CONTENTS.


PAET  IL— LABOR  AND  CAPITAL.

CHAPTER  I.

the  rate  of  wages.

Pagr
§  1.  The  problem  of  relative  wages  solved  by  the  theory  of  value,  but  not  that

of  positive  wages 149

§  3.  Reasons  for  treating  apart  labor  and  commodities  as  subjects  of  ex-
change value 150

§  3.  Are  we  justified  in  speaking  of  a  "general "  rate  of  wages ? Mr.  Longe's

objection  considered 15-4

§  4.  Present  state  of  the  controversy 157

I  5.  The  Wages- fund  theory 159

§  6.  Positions  taken  by  the  disputants  on  either  side 161

§  7.  Mr.  Longe's  doctrine  that  "  the  demand  for  commodities  determines  the

quantity  of  wealth  spent  in  the  wages  of  laborers  "  considered 163

§  8.  Exposition  of  the  Wages-fund  theory 167

Causes  determining  the  amount  of  investment 168

Three  leading  constituents  of  capital— Fixed  Capital,  Raw  Material,  and
Wages -fuiid. Causes  determining  the  proportions  in  which  they

combine 170

Mode  in  which  the  supply  of  labor  afieets  the  amount  of  the  Wages-fund  173

§  9.  Law  of  the  growth  of  of  the  Wages-fund 174

Social  consequences 177

§  10.  Industrial  crises — effects  on  the  Wages-fund 178

§  11.  Mr.  Thornton's  objections  to  the  Wages-fund  doctrine  considered 180

CHAPTER  II.

DEMAND  FOR COMMODITIES.

S  1.  Two  conditions  of  Demand  for  Commodities 189

1.  Where,  aggregate  expenditure  remaining  the  same,  a  change  takes

place  in  the  direction  of  demand 189

3.  Where  aggregate  expenditure,  and  therefore  the  aggregate  demand

for  commodities,  undergoes  increase 189

%  2.  Action  on  the  Wages-fund  of  changes  in  the  direction  of  the  demand  for

commodities 190

Where  competition  is  effective 190

Where  competition  is  not  effective 191

International  effects  produced  by  changes  in  the  direction  of  demand .  193
§  3.  Action  on  the  Wages-fund  of  an  increase  in  the  aggregate  demand  for

commodities 194

§  4.  Summary  of  results 199

§  5.  Wages  and  prices 800

Incomplete  theories 201

§  6.  Statement  of  the  relation  between  wages  and  prices 203

Corresponding  movements 304

§  7.  I.  Case  of  an  increase  in  wages  from  a  growtli  of  capital  more  rapid  than

of  population,  while  the  productiveness  of  industry  remains  unaltered  305
§  8.  II.  Case  of  an  increase  of  wages  due  to  improved  industrial  processes,  or

to  an  extension  of  trade 306

§  9.  III.  Case  of  an  increase  of  wages  due  to  an  enlarged  supply  of  money 307

Principle  connecting  wages  and  prices 309

§  10.  Monetary  paradox 310


6  CONTENTS.

CHAPTER  III.

TRADES-imiONISM. — NO.  I.

Pagb
§  1.  Question  of  the  limitation  of  tlie  Wages-fund  fundamental  in  Trades-
Union  controvei'sj' 214

§  2.  Economic  limits  of  the  Wages-fund 215

Law  of  the  tendency  of  profits  to  a  minimiim 216

Bearhig  of  this  on  the  question  of  limitation 217

§  3.  Thechavacterof  thelimitation  not  such  as  to  exclude  Trades-Union  action  219

Proper  i>rovince  for  this  action 224

Practical  utility  of  strikes  depends  upon  the  ability  of  leaders  to  dis-
criminate states  of  the  market 225

How  far  is  this  ability  likely  to  be  acquired 226

§  4.  The  foregoing  conclusions  applicable  to  countries  in  which  profits  are

above  the  minimum ;  for  example,  the  United  States 230

§  5.  Recent  advance  in  wages,  how  far  due  to  Trades-Union  action 231

§  6.  Power  of  capitalists  by  combination  to  control  the  labor  market 233

§  7.  Relation  of  wages  to  profits 235

Mr.  Brassey's  doctrine  as  to  the  uniform  cost  of  labor  examined 238

CHAPTER  IV.

TRADES-UNIONISM. — NO.  II.

§  1.  Three  methods  by  which  Trades-Unions  may  operate  on  the  rate  of  wages  242

§  2.  Their  mode  of  acting  on  the  supply  of  labor 243

Effectual  for  its  immediate  purpose ;  but  incapable  of  being  made  a
means  for  the  social  advancement  of  laborers 244

§  3.  Mode  of  acting  on  the  rate  of  wages  by  "  making  work  " 249

Theoretical  grounds  of  this  mode  of  action  plausible,  but  fallacious. . .  249

Mr.  Thornton' s  view  stated  and  examined 249

Notion  that  work  and  wages  are  convertible  expressions 254

Practical  refutation 255

Notion  that  the  quantity  of  work  to  be  done  at  any  given  time  is  fixed  2.56

Social  work  indefinite 257

True  and  only  limit  to  the  employment  of  labor 257

§  4.  Examples  of  Trades-Union  rules  for  "  making  work" 258

Analysis  and  characterization  of  such  rules 260

Principle  of  this  policy  not  confined  to  Trades-Unions 261

CHAPTER  V.

PBACTICAL  DEDUCTIONS  FROM  THE  FOREGOING  PRINCIPLES.

§  1.  Socialistic  objections  to  distribution  determined  by  economic  principles.  263

§  2.  Maxims  of  distributive  justice 263

"To  each  according  to  his  wants  " 264

"To  each  according  to  his  works" 264

"To  each  according  to  his  sacrifice" 264

§  3.  Examination  of  their  applicability  to  actual  problems 266

§  4.  Distribution  of  wealth  under  the  action  of  economic  laws,  how  far  co-
incident with  the  principles  of  abstract  justice 268

§  5.  Our  present  system  of  industry  defensible  on  utilitarian  grounds 270

Need  of  a  large  accumulated  capital 271

Pailure  of  socialist  schemes  to  provide  for  this 272

§  6.  Prospects  ofl"ered  to  the  laboring  classes  under  the  present  regime  of

industry 273

Productiveness  of  industry,  how  related  to  profits  and  wages 275

Coincidence  of  a  slight  increase  in  the  rates  of  wages  and  profits  with
a  greatly  increased  productiveness  of  general  industry  explained. . . .  277

The  phenomeuon,  in  what  way  related  to  rent 279

Discouraging  result  of  this  aspect  of  the  case 280


CONTENTS.  7

Page
§  7.  No  considerable  improvement  in  the  laborer's  condition  possible  while

he  remains  a  mere  recipient  of  wages 284

Kecognition  of  this  truth  by  socialistic  writers ;  but  their  expedients

for  meeting  the  difliculty  indefensible 285

§  8.  Practical  problem :  To  attain  the  socialistic  end  by  means  compatible

with  existing  institutions 287

DiflSculties  moral  and  intellectual,  not  physical 287

§  9.  Co-operation  offers  the  sole  escape  from  a  hopeless  position 289

Present  prospects  of  co-operation 290

§  10.  An  objection  answered 291


PART  III— INTERNATIONAL  TRADE.

CHAPTER  I.

DOCTRINE  OF  COMPABATIVE  COST.

§  1.  Are  there  grounds  for  a  separate  theory  of  International  trade? 297

Rationale  of  trade  in  general 298

Special  province  of  International  trade 300

Impediments  to  the  movement  of  capital  and  labor  between  nations. . .  302

§  3.  Character  and  relative  importance  of  such  impediments 305

§  3.  Development  of  the  doctrine  of  comparative  cost  of  production 307

"Comparative  cost"  to  be  understood  as  measured  by  the  sacrifices

undergone,  not  by  the  wages  and  profits  received,  by  producers 310

Costs  compared  are  the  respective  costs  in  each  country  of  the  ex-
changed commodities,  not  the  costs  of  the  same  commodity  in  the

exchanging  countries 313

Exapiples  of  the  practical  working  of  the  principle  in  the  trade  of  the

world 313

Verification  of  abstract  theory  in  the  occurrences  following  the  gold

discoveries 315

Trade  between  New  York  and  Barbados 316

Character  of  a  large  portion  of  International  trade  obscured  by  errone-
ous conceptions  of  cost 317

CHAPTER  II.

INTEKNATIONAL  TRADE  IN  ITS  RELATION  TO  THE  BATE  OP  VTAGES.

§  1.  Theory  of  International  trade  as  expounded  by  Ricardo  and  Mill,  not  in-
vulnerable 819

The  proximate  conditions  of  trade  are  prices,  not  cost 319

"Every  transaction  in  commerce  is  an  independent  transaction " , ....  320

Reply  from  Ricardo's  stand-point 321

Criticism  of  this  reply 322

§  3.  Proposed  modification  of  the  theory  of  International  trade 323

§  3.  Prevalent  opinion  as  to  the  connection  between  wages  and  International

trade 324

In  conflict  with  the  received  economic  doctrine  as  expounded  by  Ricardo  335

Grounds  of  the  popular  view,  superficial  and  untenable 336

§  4.  Illustrative  examples  showing  the  efiects  of  partial  movements  in  wages

on  International  trade 327

Sugar  cultivation  in  Queensland 329

Effects  on  the  external  trade  of  England  of  a  fall  of  wages  in  some  lead*

ing  branch  of  manufacture,  discussed 330

§  5.  Nature  of  the  connection  between  general  wages  and  foreign  trade 334

Illustration  offered  by  Australian  experience 335

Hypothetical  illustration  showing  the  nature  of  the  connection  as  it

would  be  developed  in  given  circumstances  in  England 337

General  wages  and  foreign  trade  connected  as  co-ordinate  effects  of  a
common  cause 339


8  CONTENTS.

CHAPTER  III.

international  values.

Pagr
§  1.  Statement  of  the  problem 342

§  3.  Doctrine  of  international  values  as  set  forth  in  the  received  text-books,
not  reconcilable  with  that  of  Cost  of  Production,  to  be  found  in  the

same  authorities 343

But  reconcilable  with  the  view  of  cost  here  contended  for 344

§  3.  Practical  criterion  showing  the  relation  of  exchange  value  to  cost 345

Application  of  this  criterion  to  the  circumstances  of  the  leading  com-
mercial countries 347

§  4.  Functions  respectively  of  Reciprocal  Demand  and  of  Cost  of  Production

in  relation  to  International  values ' 34S

Varieties  of  industrial  monopoly  in  International  trade — strict  and
qualified,  one-sided  and  reciprocal 349

§  5.  Conditions  of  commercial  equilibrium 353

§  6.  Effects  of  international  lending  and  borrowing  on  the  commercial  equi-
librium  359

§  7.  The  foregoing  principles  illustrated  by  the  course  of  the  United  States

external  trade  since  1860 364

§  8.  Present  state  and  immediate  prospects  of  that  trade 367

CHAPTER  IV.

FBEE-TRADE  AND  PROTECTION.

§  1.  Present  state  of  the  controversy 375

§  2.  Protection,  an  outgrowth  of  the  Balance  of  Trade  system 376

Either  system,  consistently  carried  out,  fatal  to  International  trade 377

§  3.  M.  Alby's  statement  of  the  protectionist  theory 379

Criticism  of  M.  Alby's  statement 380

§4.  Practical  issue  taken  in  the  United  States — the  cost  of  production  of

commodities 388

The  criterion  proves  too  much 383

And,  rightly  understood,  refutes  the  protectionist  argument 384

§  5.  Alleged  inability  of  the  United  States  to  compete  with  the  cheap  labor

of  Europe  examined 386

§  6.  Examination  of  a  ten  years'  experiment  of  Protection  in  the  United  States  388

DiflSculty  of  interpreting  an  industrial  experiment 388

Complication  of  results  "only  to  be  unraveled  by  the  deductive  method  389

Mr.  Wells's  contributions  to  the  investigation 391

Lesson  of  the  experiment 395

S  7.  Political  argument  in  favor  of  Protection,  as  favoring  variety  in  industry  395

Unfounded  in  the  domain  of  "extractive  industry" 397

And  not  better  founded  in  that  of  manufactures 399

Demoralizing  effects  of  a  protective  regime 403

CHAPTER  V.

ON  SOME  MINOR  TOPICS.

§  1.  Nature  of  a  country's  interest  in  the  scale  of  its  general  prices 407

Maxim  that  "gold  is  of  the  same  value  all  the  world  over"  examined.  408
A  nation  is  interested  not  in  having  its  prices  high,  but  in  having  its
gold  cheap 410

§  8.  Attempts  to  measure  the  gain  on  foreign  trade 415

The  problem  insoluble 4LS


I*A.IIT I.

VALUE,


SOME  LEADING  PEINCIPLES


POLITICAL ECONOMY,


nPA.RT  I.

VALUE.


CHAPTEE I,

PRELIMINABT.


§  1.  The  sense  proper  to  value  in  economic  discussion  may,
I  think,  be  said  to  be  universally  agreed  upon  by  economists,
and  I  may,  therefore,  at  once  define  it  as  expressing  the  ratio
in  which  commodities  in  open  market  are  exchanged  against
each  other.  This,  as  every  one  is  aware,  is  not  the  only  or
perhaps  the  most  common  meaning  borne  by  "value"  in  gen-
eral discourse,  and  hence  occurs  a  source  of  ambiguity  which
some  writers  have  proposed  to  avoid  by  eliminating  the  term
altogether  from  the  nomenclature  of  Political  Economy.  Pro-
fessor Jevons,  for  example,  would  substitute  for  "  value  "  the
expression  of  "ratio  of  exchange."  Something,  it  is  possible,
might  be  gained  in  point  of  clearness  by  the  substitution ;  but,
on  the  other  hand,  the  term  "value"  has  become  far  too  deep-
ly rooted  in  the  ordinary  modes  of  economic  thought  to  be
easily  displaced;  nor,  for  my  part,  do  I  think  this  extreme
course  needed ;  for,  though  no  doubt  there  is  the  danger — •
associated  as  the  word  is  witb  other  meanings,  and  more  par-


12  VALUE.

ticularly  with  the  idea  of  "utility" — of  sliding  in  argumenta-
tive discussion  from  the  scientific  into  some  other  sense,  this
may,  to  a  very  great  extent,  if  not  entirely,  be  precluded  by
the  simple  contrivance  of  qualifying  the  term,  in  all  doubtful
contexts,  with  the  prefix  "  exchange."  "  Exchange  value  "  in-
volves little  departure  from  ordinary  usage,  and  can  hardly
fail  to  remind  the  reader,  where  this  is  necessary,  of  the  spe-
cial and  limited  sense  in  which  the  word  is  employed.

Value  expressing  a  ratio  or  proportion  existing  between  the
commodities  exchanged,  it  follows,  of  course,  as  is  explained  in
all  treatises,  that  a  general  rise  or  a  general  fall  of  values  is  an
impossibility,  or,  rather,  a  contradiction  in  terms.  If  A  rise  in
relation  to  B,  B  must  fall  in  relation  to  A.  A  and  B  can  not
both  rise  or  both  fall  at  the  same  time  in  relation  to  each  oth-
er ;  and  what  is  true  of  two  commodities  is  true  of  any  num-
ber, and  of  all  commodities.  But  though  commodities  in  gen-
eral can  not  rise  or  fall  simultaneously  in  relation  to  each  other,
they  may  rise  or  fall  in  relation  to  any  selected  one  among  the
number;  and  if  gold  or  silver  be  the  one  selected,  commodi-
ties in  general  may  rise  or  foil  in  relation  to  gold  or  silver.
The  value  of  other  commodities  in  relation  to  a  commodity
thus  selected  is  called  "price."  It  is  plain,  then,. that  while
a  general  rise  or  a  general  fall  of  values  is  a  contradiction  in
terms,  a  general  rise  or  a  general  fall  of  prices  is  a  perfectly
possible,  as  indeed  it  is  a  not  uncommon,  event.

At  the  same  time,  although  "value"  expresses  a  relation,  I
apprehend  we  may  use  without  impropriety  such  expressions
as  "a  sum  of  values,"  or  "an  increase  or  diminution  in  the
aggregate  amount  of  values."  Where,  e.  g.,  the  quantity  of
valuable  things  possessed  by  a  community  has  been  increased,
the  conditions  of  production  remaining  the  same ;  or  where,
the  quantity  remaining  the  same,  the  conditions  of  producing
commodities  have  been  so  altered  as  to  cause  a  given  quantity
to  exchange  for  a  larger  quantity  than  before  of  commodities


"A  SUM  OF  VALUES."  13

of  which  the  conditions  of  production  have  remained  constant
— in  either  of  these  cases,  it  seems  to  me,  we  may  not  improp-
erly say  that  the  sum  of  values,  or  the  aggregate  amount  of
values,  has  increased  in  that  community.  The  usage  may  be
illustrated  and  justified  by  analogous  expressions  employed
with  reference  to  power.  Power,  like  value,  expresses  a  rela-
tion ;  and  a  general  increase  of  the  power  of  individuals  or  of
nations  in  relation  to  each  other  is,  of  course,  an  impossibility.
But  this  does  not  prevent  us  from  saying  that  the  aggregate
power  of  any  given  number  of  individuals  or  nations  has  in-
creased; meaning  thereby,  not  that  their  relative  position  has
been  altered,  but  that  the  elements  which  go  to  support  power
in  them  have  been  multiplied.  We  should  thus  say  that  the
power  of  European  nations  has  greatly  increased  within  the
last  century.  In  a  precisely  similar  sense  we  may  speak — and
it  will  often  be  convenient  to  speak — of  an  increase  or  dimi-
nution of  aggregate  values ;  value  being  only  another  name  for
purchasing  power.

One  word  more  of  explanation  may  be  given.  If  value  ex-
presses simply  a  relation,  what  is  meant  when  the  question  is
raised  whether,  in  the  case  of  two  commodities  of  which  the
proportions  in  exchanging  have  undergone  a  change,  the
change  is  to  be  attributed  to  a  fall  in  the  value  of  the  one,
or  to  a  rise  in  that  of  the  other?  Suppose,  for  example,  we
ask  whether  the  advance  in  the  price  of  butcher's  meat  is  due
to  meat  having  risen  or  to  money  having  fallen  in  value,  what
do  we  mean?  Value  expressing  simply  the  relation  of  the
commodities  in  exchange,  the  price  being  given,  that  relation
is  determined.  Obviously  there  is  a  tacit  reference  to  the
causes  on  which  value  depends ;  and  the  question  really  raised
is  not  strictly  as  to  the  change  in  the  exchange  value  of  meat
and  money,  but  as  to  the  cause  or  causes  which  have  produced
the  change.  If  we  believe  that  the  change  is  traceable  to  a
cause  primarily  affecting  meat,  we  say  that  meat  has  risen,  not


14  VALUE.

that  money  has  fallen,  in  value ;  while  in  the  opposite  case,  we
should  attribute  the  change  to  the  reduced  value  of  money.

§  2.  So  much  being  premised  as  to  the  meaning  and  use  of
the  term  "value"  in  Political  Economy,  let  us  now  endeavor
to  set  before  our  minds  as  distinctly  as  may  be  the  precise
problems  respecting  value  which  the  science  proposes  to  solve.
These  are  comprised  under  the  following  heads:

I.  We  may  inquire  as  to  the  circumstances  which  confer  on
a  commodity  the  power  of  commanding  other  things  in  ex-
change— in  other  words,  as  to  the  conditions  essential  to  the
existence  of  value.

IL  "We  may  inquire  as  to  the  circumstances  on  which  de-
pend the  particular  proportions  in  which  commodities  ex-
change; in  other  words,  as  to  the  conditions  which  determine
value — an  inquiry  which  resolves  itself  into  two  distinct  is-
sues. For,  first,  we  may  consider  value  as  manifested  in  a
given  act  of  exchange,  and  inquire  into  the  causes  which  de-
termine it  at  a  given  time  and  place ;  which  is  the  problem  of
"  market  values."  Or,  secondly,  we  may  regard  value  as  the
average  proportion  resulting  from  a  series  of  exchanges  nu-
merous enough  to  allow  of  the  neutralization  of  exceptional
influences;  and  this  is  the  problem  of  "normal  values."  The
general  problem  of  value,  accordingly,  embraces  these  three
distinct  inquiries:  1,  as  to  the  conditions  essential  to  the  ex-
istence of  value ;  2,  as  to  the  conditions  determining  market
values;  and,  3,  as  to  the  conditions  determining  normal  val-
ues.

§  3.  The  two  latter  inquiries  will  be  the  subject  of  future
consideration;  but  we  may  at  once  endeavor  to  dispose  of  the
first  of  the  three  problems.  And  here  it  is  obvious  that  one
of  the  circumstances  essential  to  the  existence  of  value  is  a
capacity  of  satisfying  some  human  desire. Plainly,  if  an  ob-


RELATION  OF  VALUE  TO  UTILITY.  15

ject  be  unable  to  fulfill  this  condition,  there  can  be  no  motive
for  seeking  to  obtain  it,  still  less  for  parting  with  something
we  possess  in  exchange  for  it :  such  an  object  would,  therefore,
be  incapable  of  exchange  value.  The  capacity,  therefore,  of
satisfying  a  desire — in  other  words,  the  possession  of  utility,  is
the  first  condition  essential  to  the  existence  of  value.

The  mere  circumstance,  however,  that  a  commodity  is  ca-
pable of  satisfying  a  human  desire  will  not  necessarily  confer
upon  it  the  power  of  commanding  other  things  in  exchange.
Human  beings  will  not,  in  pursuit  of  the  satisfaction  of  their
desires,  incur  sacrifice — such  a  sacrifice,  for  example,  as  is  im-
plied in  parting  with  something  they  possess — if  the  end  can
be  attained  without  submitting  to  this  condition;  and  there-
fore, in  order  that  a  commodity  should  have  the  power  of  com-
manding other  commodities  in  exchange,  not  only  must  it  be
capable  of  satisfying  a  desire,  it  must  also  be  unattainable  ex-
cept on  the  condition  of  undergoing  a  sacrifice  of  some  sort.
No  one  living  in  a  healthy  locality,  for  example,  will  give  any
thing  in  exchange  for  atmospheric  air;  nor,  where  water  is
abundant  and  also  universally  accessible,  will  water  fetch  a
price.  But  if  atmospheric  air  be  required  to  supply  a  diving-
bell,  or  if  water  can  only  be  had  by  going  some  distance  to
fetch  it,  water  and  atmospheric  air  will  both  acquire  exchange
value.  It  results,  then,  that  the  necessity  of  undergoing  sac-
rifice of  some  kind  as  a  condition  of  obtaining  the  commodi-
ty, or,  let  us  say,  "  difficulty  of  attainment,"  must  concur  with
utility  in  order  to  the  existence  of  exchange  value.  And  it  is
plain  also  that  we  must  add,  as  a  further  condition,  the  possi-
bility of  transferring  the  possession  of  the  articles  which  are
the  subject  of  the  exchange.

These  three  circumstances  then — utility,  difficulty  of  attain-  "
ment,  and  transferableness — are  the  conditions  essential  to  the
existence  of  value. Where  they  are  combined  in  a  commodi-
ty, that  commodity  has  the  power  of  commanding  other  things


16  VALUE.

in  exchange :  where  any  one  of  them  is  absent,  exchange  value
can  have  no  place.

§  4.  This  point  being  settled,  it  will  be  convenient  here  to
enter  so  far  into  the  larger  problems  of  our  subject  as  to  dis-
cuss a  question  much  debated  some  half- century  ago,  and
which  has  lately  been  revived :  Does  utility  alone  give  the
law  of  exchange  value?  in  other  words,  are  commodities  ex^
changed  for  each  other  simply  in  proportion  as  they  are  use-
ful? To  put  the  question  in  a  concrete  form — supposing  gold
and  silver  to  exchange  for  each  other  in  the  proportion  of  1  to
15 ;  silver  and  copper  to  exchange  in  the  proportion  of  1  to
30;  and  copper  and  iron  to  exchange  in  the  proportion  of  1  to
8 ;  are  these  ratios  due  to  the  fact  that  gold  is  fifteen  times
more  useful  than  silver;  that  silver  is  thirty  times  more  useful
than  copper;  and  that  copper  is  three  times  more  useful  than
iron?  Do  the  proportions  of  exchange  invariably  correspond
to  the  relative  utilities  of  those  metals?  And  does  this  rule
hold  in  all  cases  of  exchange?  Unsophisticated  readers  would,
I  should  think,  have  no  difficulty  in  answering  this  question
in  the  negative ;  and,  in  truth,  this  is  the  sense  in  which  it  has
in  general  been  answered  by  political  economists.  Widely  as
writers  have  differed  respecting  the  law  governing  value,  they
have  generally  at  least  agreed  in  the  negative  conclusion  that
it  does  not  simply  follow  the  utility  of  the  commodity.  In  a
passage  which  will  be  familiar  to  most  readers,  Adam  Smith
says:  "The  things  which  have  the  greatest  value  in  use  have
frequently  little  or  no  value  in  exchange ;  and,  on  the  contrary,
those  which  have  the  greatest  value  in  exchange  have  frequent-
ly little  or  no  value  in  use.  Nothing  is  more  useful  than  wa-
ter; but  it  will  purchase  scarce  any  thing;  scarce  any  thing
can  be  had  in  exchange  for  it.  A  diamond,  on  the  contrary,
has  scarce  any  value  in  use,  but  a  very  great  quantity  of  other
goods  may  frequently  be  had  in  exchange  for  it." To  the


RELATION  OF  VALUE  TO  UTILITY.  \1

same  effect  Eicardo  writes:  "When  I  give  2000  times  more
cloth  for  a  pound  of  gold  than  I  do  for  a  pound  of  iron,  does  it
prove  that  I  attach  2000  times  more  utility  to  the  gold  than  I
do  to  the  iron  ?  Certainly  not.  ...  If  utility  were  the  meas-
ure of  value,  I  should  probably  give  more  for  the  iron."  Again,
•'  If  I  give  one  shilling  for  a  loaf,  and  twenty-one  shillings  for
a  guinea,  it  is  no  proof  that  this,  in  my  estimation,  is  the  com-
parative measure  of  their  utility."

In  this  view  the  English  school  of  Political  Economy  have.
I  think,  very  generally  acquiesced.  The  principal  dissentients,
and  they  have  not  been  numerous,  have  been  in  France;  and
of  these  the  most  eminent,  perhaps,  has  been  M.  Say,  who  in
his  celebrated  Traite  takes  the  position  that  utility  is  not  only
essential  to  value,  but  also  constitutes  the  exclusive  condition
determining  in  all  cases  the  proportions  of  exchange.  '  The
arguments  by  which  M.  Say  supported  this  position  will  be
found  in  his  treatise.  They  were  answered  by  Eicardo  in  a
later  edition  of  his  great  work ;  and  I  have,  for  my  part,  been
accustomed  to  regard  the  controversy  as  settled  by  that  reply ;
nor  should  I  have  thought  it  necessary  here  to  refer  to  the
question  as  an  open  one,  but  that  the  view  of  M.  Say  has  quite
lately  been  revived  by  Professor  Jevons,  in  his  ingenious  work
on  the  "Theory  of  Political  Economy,"  Following  M.  Say,
Professor  Jevons  maintains  that  "  value  depends  entirely  upon
utility ;"  and  propounds  a  theorem  which  recognizes  the  degree
of  utility  possessed  by  a  commodity  as  the  exclusive  condition
determining  its  exchange  value.  Under  these  circumstances,
it  will  be  proper  to  consider  briefly  the  precise  significance  and
importance  of  this  view  of  the  law  of  value.

And  here  I  may  say  at  once — what  indeed,  with  the  pas-
sages which  I  have  quoted  from  Adam  Smith  and  Eicardo  be-
fore him,  will  already  be  evident  to  the  reader — that  the  ques-
tion raised  by  Professor  Jevons,  and  which  had  previously
been  raised  by  M,  Say,  is  primarily  a  question  of  words — a

2


18  VALUE.

question  as  to  what  is  the  proper  meaning  of  "  utility."  This.-
1  say,  is  evident,  because,  accepting  utility  in  the  sense  in  which
it  is  used  in  those  passages,  the  statements  advanced  are  real-
ly not  open  to  controversy.  Nor  can  there  be  much  doubt
or  difficulty  as  to  what  that  sense  is.  Manifestly  by  utility
Adam  Smith  and  Eicardo,  and  those  who  have  followed  their
doctrine  on  this  point,  have  understood  the  quality  of  being
suitable  to  human  purposes— this  quality  purely  and  simply,
and  irrespective  of  extraneous  considerations ;  while  they
would  doubtless  have  regarded  the  degree  of  utility  as  meas-
ured by  the  importance  of  the  purposes  to  which  the  useful
commodity  ministered.  In  this  sense  it  is  true  beyond  con-
troversy that  water  is  useful,  even  though  it  fetched  nothing
in  the  market,  and  more  useful  than  many  articles — e.  g.,  al-
cohol—  that  sell  for  more.  The  world  could  manifestly  get
on  better  without  alcohol  than  without  water.  Similarly,  it  is
true  to  say  that  a  diamond  is  less  useful  than,  e.g.,  coal,  and
that  gold  is  less  useful  than  iron  ;  or,  at  all  events,  that  the
degree  of  utility  of  these  several  products — the  importance  of
the  services  which  they  render  in  the  economy  of  human  soci-
ety— is  not  represented  by  the  proportions  in  which  they  ex-
change for  each  other.  These  propositions,  I  say,  are  indis-
putable in  the  sense  in  which  they  are  laid  down  ;  and,  ac-
cordingly, in  taking  the  position  that  value  depends  entirely
upon  utility,  and  is  measured  by  the  degree  of  utility,  Mr.
Jevons  must  be  understood  to  employ  the  term,  as  M.  Say  for-
merly employed  it,  in  a  different  sense  from  that  in  which  it
is  understood  by  those  who  maintain  the  ordinary  view.  In
point  of  fjict  this  is  so.  Professor  Jevons  means  by  utility,
not  what  Adam  Smith  and  Eicardo  meant,  but  their  idea,  plus
something  more.  If  we  ask  what  that  something  more  is,  we
find  it  to  consist  of  all  circumstances  and  considerations  what-
ever which,  in  any  given  act  of  exchange,  exert  an  influence
Dn  those  taking  part  in  it. Thus  the  fact  that  water  is  capa-


RELATION  OF  VALUE  TO  UTILITY.  19

ble  of  ministering  to  important  human  purposes  would  not,
as  I  understand  the  doctrine,  entitle  water  to  be  considered,  in
economic  estimation,  a  useful  commodity.  Before  pronoun-
cing on  the  point,  we  must  know  the  circumstances  under
which  any  given  dealings  in  the  commodity  take  place.  If
they  take  place  in  London,  where  water  can  not  be  pro-
cured in  the  quantity  required  by  the  population  without  ex-
pense, and  where  it  consequently  bears  a  price,  water  is  a  use-
ful commodity.  But  if  the  scene  be  changed  to  a  country
village,  where  water  is  abundant  beyond  the  needs  of  the  in-
habitants, and  consequently  fetches  nothing  in  exchange,  water
suddenly  becomes  useless.  Consistently  with  this  view,  the
degree  of  utility  is  measured,  not  by  the  importance  of  the
purposes  which  the  article  subserves,  but  by  the  effect  pro-
duced by  all  the  considerations  aforesaid  in  deciding  what  it
shall  sell  for.  A  woolen  coat  sells  for  less  now  than  it  did  a
century  ago;  therefore  it  is  less  useful  now  than  then.  It  sells
for  more  in  Australia  than  in  England ;  therefore  it  is  more
useful  in  Australia  than  in  England.  According  to  the  same
standard  of  utility,  every  improvement  in  production,  just  in
proportion  as  it  cheapens  a  commodity,  diminishes  its  utility;
while  every  thing  that  raises  the  cost  enhances  the  utility.  If,
then,  I  have  correctly  interpreted  Mr.  Jevons's  doctrine  (and  I
have  certainly  taken  every  pains  to  understand  it),  the  term
"utility"  stands  with  him  for  an  entirely  different  conception
from  that  which  it  expresses  in  the  language  of  Adam  SmiLli,
and  of  most  political  economists.  In  attempting,  therefore,  to
estimate  his  view,  we  have  to  consider  two  points  —  first,  a
question  of  nomenclature,  as  to  the  convenience  of  this  partic-
ular use  of  the  term  ;  and,  secondly,  one  of  scientific  theory,  as
to  the  light  thrown  by  the  doctrine — utility  being  understood
in  the  sense  explained — on  the  phenomena  of  exchange  value.
As  regards  the  question  of  nomenclature,  it  will  scarcely,  I
think,  be  denied  that  Mr.  Jevons's  use  of  the  term  "utility"  is


so  VALUE.

wide  of  the  common  significiation,  and  on  this  ground  open  to
serious  objection.  A  use  of  language  according  to  which  wa-
ter is  only  useful  where  it  is  paid  for,  and  in  proportion  as  it
is  paid  for ;  according  to  which  atmospheric  air  is  only  useful
in  diving-bells,  mines,  and  other  places  whither  it  is  costly  to
carry  it;  according  to  which  meat  and  corn  are  less  useful
commodities  in  the  United  States  than  in  England,  and  cloth-
ing and  cutlery  less  useful  in  England  than  in  the  United
States ;  according  to  which  diamonds  are  more  useful  than
coal,  and  iron  is  the  least  useful  of  the  metals — such  a  use  of
language,  it  will  be  admitted,  requires  strong  reasons  for  its
justification.  No  doubt,  in  framing  a  scientific  nomenclature,
it  is  often  necessary  to  depart  from  the  ordinary  use  of  words.
Political  Economy  draws  its  technical  terms  from  popular  lan-
guage ;  and  the  mere  circumstance  that  it  is  obliged  to  assign
a  precise  meaning  to  these  terms,  and  to  adhere  strictly  to  this
meaning  once  assigned — this  circumstance  alone  constantly
compels  a  deviation  from  the  more  or  less  vague  and  fluctu-
ating sense  which  attaches  to  all  words  in  extensive  popular
use.  So  much  must  be  admitted.  But  at  least  the  necessity
for  deviation  should  be  made  out.  If  a  new  sense  be  given  to
a  term  in  order  to  convey  a  novel  doctrine,  it  should  at  least
be  shown  that  the  innovation  is  needed  for  the  due  apprecia-
tion of  the  phenomena,  and  that  the  idea  is  best  expressed  by
the  term.  In  other  words,  it  should  be  shown  that  the  theory,
for  the  sake  of  which  the  term  is  employed  in  the  unusual
way,  can  justify  itself  by  the  only  test  by  which  a  theory  is
justified,  namely,  by  explaining  facts,  and,  if  it  be  a  new  theo-
ry, by  explaining  facts  not  explicable,  or  not  so  simply  expli-
cable, by  received  theories.  Now  I  must  frankly  say,  I  have
failed  to  find  in  Mr.  Jevons's  volume  any  such  justification  of
his  doctrine.

I, must  go  farther. The  current  theories  respecting  value,
though,  as  will  be  seen,  I  am  far  from  thinking  them  perfect,


BELATION  OF  VALUE  TO  UTILITY.  31

nevertheless  do  succeed  in  explaining  a  large  proportion  of  the
facts  actually  presented  in  the  dealings  of  commerce.  But  I
am  wholly  unable  to  conceive  how  any  thing  amounting  to  a
real  explanation  can  be  extracted  from  the  theory  we  are  now
considering.  What  does  it  really  amount  to  ?  In  my  appre-
hension to  this,  and  no  more — that  value  depends  upon  utility,
and  that  utility  is  whatever  affects  value.  In  other  words,  the
name  "  utility  "  is  given  to  the  aggregate  of  unknown  conditions
which  determine  the  phenomenon,  and  then  the  phenomenon
is  stated  to  depend  upon  what  this  name  stands  for.  Suppose,
instead  of  "  utility,"  we  call  the  unknown  conditions  cc,  we
might  then  say  that  value  was  determined  by  x;  and  the  prop-
osition would  be  precisely  as  true,  and,  so  far  as  I  can  see,  as
instructive,  as  Mr.  Jevons's  doctrine.  In  either  case  the  infor-
mation conveyed  would  be  that  value  was  determined  by  the
conditions  which  determine  it — an  announcement,  the  impor-
tance of  which,  even  though  presented  under  the  form  of  ab-
struse mathematical  symbols,  I  must  own  myself  unable  to  dis-
cern.*

There  seems,  therefore,  no  reason  for  departing  from  the
hitherto  commonly  received  sense  of  utility;  and  it  is  accord-
ingly in  this  sense — already  defined — that  I  shall  henceforth
employ  the  term.  Thus  understood,  utility,  however  essential
to  the  existence  of  value,  does  not  alone  and  exclusively  give
the  law  of  the  phenomenon.  That  law,  or  rather  (for,  as  I
have  already  observed,  the  phenomenon  is  twofold)  those  laws,
we  have  yet  to  find.


*  I  should  be  sorry  if  my  dissent  from  Mr.  Jevons  on  this  point  should  convey  i
an  impression  that  I  undervalue  the  work  in  which  the  doctrine  I  have  combated
is  advanced.  Though  my  ignorance  of  mathematics  disqualifies  me  for  entering
into  many  of  the  discussions,  I  am  far  from  being  insensible  to  the  lucid  statements
of  economic  doctrine,  and  to  the  numerous  original  and  suggestive  remarks,  with
which  the  volume  abounds.


CHAPTER  II.

SUPPLY  AND  DEMAND.

§  1.  Before  proceeding  to  deal  with  the  more  specific  prob-
lems of  value,  it  will  be  convenient  to  devote  a  brief  space  to  a
consideration  of  the  agencies  of  Supply  and  Demand.  If  we
were  to  judge  by  the  careless  freedom  with  which  these  terms
are  tossed  to  and  fro  in  popular  discussion,  we  should  be  apt
to  conclude  that  there  was  no  portion  of  economic  science
which  the  general  public  had  more  completely  at  its  fingers'
ends.  "  The  law  of  Supply  and  Demand  "  is  commonly  sup-
posed to  be  a  principle  capable  of  explaining  all  or  nearly  all
the  phenomena  of  wealth,  and  which  at  the  same  time  reveals
itself  by  its  own  light.  No  one  is  imagined  so  ignorant  as  not
to  know  wbat  it  means,  or  so  dull  as  not  to  perceive  its  mar-
velous efficacy  as  a  solvent  of  problems.  Indeed,  with  a  large
number  of  people,  Supply  and  Demand  would  seem  to  be  not
so  much  conditions  to  be  taken  account  of  in  solving  problems,
as  conjuring  terms,  by  pronouncing  which  difficulties  may  be
exorcised,  and  obstacles  of  all  sorts  removed  from  our  path.
In  point  of  fact,  I  believe  there  is  no  doctrine  of  Political  Econ-
omy more  generally  misunderstood,  or,  to  speak  plainly,  re-
specting which  a  more  complete  absence  of  all  clear  understand-
ing of  any  kind  prevails,  than  this  very  doctrine.  The  terms
are  used  and  the  supposed  "  law  "  is  appealed  to,  for  the  most
part,  without  any  distinct  ideas  being  attached  to  the  phrases
employed.  Nay,  even  among  not  a  few  of  the  professed  culti-
vators of  economic  science  there  seems  to  be,  in  respect  to  this
doctrine,  if  I  may  venture  to  say  so,  a  want  of  thoroughness


AGGREGATES.  23

and  clearness  of  view  singularly  prejudicial  to  sound  reason-
ing, and  which  has  not  a  little  tended  to  throw  a  haze  over
some  important  problems  of  the  science.

The  fundamental  truth  to  be  seized  in  connection  with  Sup-
ply and  Demand— the  failure  to  seize  which  is  the  source  of
most  of  the  loose  reasoning  and  fallacious  inference  of  which
those  terms  are  made  the  vehicle — is  that,  conceived  as  aggre-
gates, as  each  comprising  all  the  facts  of  that  kind  occurring  in
a  given  community,  Supply  and  Demand  are  not  independent
phenomena,  of  which  either  may  indefinitely  increase  or  dimin-  \\
ish  irrespective  of  the  other,  but  phenomena  strictly  connect-  '
ed  and  mutually  dependent;  so  strictly  connected  and  interde-  •
pendent  that  (excluding  temporary  effects,  and  contemplating  ■:
them  as  permanent  and  normal  facts)  neither  can  increase  nor
diminish  without  necessitating  and  implying  a  corresponding
increase  or  diminution  of  the  other.  Aggregate  demand  can
not  increase  or  diminish  without  entailing  a  corresponding  in-
crease or  diminution  of  aggregate  supply ;  nor  can  aggregate
supply  undergo  a  change  without  involving  a  corresponding
change  in  aggregate  demand.  These  propositions  seem  to  me
to  be  quite  fundamental,  and  indeed  elementary — expressing,
as  they  do,  consequences  which  arise  directly  from  the  nature
of  an  industrial  economy  founded  on  the  principle  of  separa-
tion of  employments.  Fundamental  and  elementary,  however,
as  they  are,  and  much  as  has  been  written  on  the  subject,
they  stand  in  need  of  all  the  aid  that  clear  exposition  and  apt
illustration  can  give  them.

§  2.  In  attempting  something,  however  inconsiderable,  to-
ward this  much  -  needed  elucidation,  I  would  ask  the  reader,
in  the  first  place,  to  set  before  his  mind  the  phenomena  in
their  most  elementary  form,  and  to  observe  their  essential
character  and  place  in  the  economy  of  industry.  Supply  and
Demand  are  evidently  facts  incident  to  the  exchange  of  the


24  SUPPLY  AND  DEMAND.

products  of  industry,  which  again  is  a  consequence  of  the  sep-
aration of  employments.  So  soon  as  people  engage  in  pro*
ductive  industiy  upon  the  principle  of  separation  of  employ-
ments, the  need  arises  of  exchanging  the  results  of  their  work ;
each  becomes  a  supplier  of  what  he  has  produced,  a  demander
of  what  he  seeks  to  consume.  Let  us  suppose  a  regime  of
barter:  under  such  circumstances  Supply  would  consist  in  the
commodities  offered  in  exchange  for  other  commodities.  In
what  would  Demand  in  such  a  case  consist?  We  can  only
give  the  same  reply :  in  the  commodities  offered  in  exchange
for  other  commodities.  In  other  words,  under  the  simplest
and  most  elementary  form  of  exchange.  Demand  and  Supply,
as  general  phenomena,  as  aggregates,  could  not  be  discrimi-
nated. Each  commodity  would  be  in  turn  Supply  and  Demand
— Supply  in  reference  to  the  person  seeking  to  obtain  it.  De-
mand in  reference  to  the  person  who  used  it  as  the  means  of
obtaining  something  else.  It  would  be  possible  indeed,  even
in  this  state  of  things,  to  use  the  terms  with  a  distinct  mean-
ing, so  long  as  we  referred  the  acts  to  individuals  or  to  par-
ticular products.  A.  B.  would  be  a  demander  of  certain  ar-
ticles, a  supplier  of  others ;  and  the  demand  for  meat  or  for
corn  would  be  a  perfectly  distinct  circumstance  from  the  sup-
ply of  meat  or  of  corn.  But,  so  soon  as  the  point  of  view  was
shifted  from  the  particular  to  the  general — so  soon  as  we  at-
tempted to  conceive  Supply  or  Demand  as  proceeding  from
the  community  at  large — the  phenomena  would  be  confound-
ed, or  rather  would  converge  into  one.  This,  I  say,  would  be
the  character  of  Supply  and  Demand  under  a  regime  of  bar-
ter. Let  us  now  observe  how  this  simple  character  is  modi-
fied by  the  introduction  of  a  medium  of  exchange.  A  me-
dium of  exchange  represents  general  purchasing  power;  and,
all  transactions  being  conducted  through  this  medium,  it  be-
comes possible  to  distinguish  Demand  and  Supply,  not  merely
in  reference  to  particular  persons  and  products,  but  as  general


ANALOGOUS  CONCEPTIONS.  25

ideas.  Every  act  of  exchange  may  now  be  regarded  either
from  the  point  of  view  of  him  .who  offers  general  purchasing
power,  or  from  that  of  him  who  offers  specific  commodities ;
all  acts  of  the  former  class  may  be  considered  together,  and
apart  from  all  acts  of  the  latter:  and  we  thus  arrive  at  dis-
tinct general  ideas  of  Demand  and  Supply.  Accordingly,
under  our  actual  regime  we  speak  of  Demand  and  Supply,  not
merely  as  of  this  or  of  that  person,  but  as  of  a  whole  commu-
nity, and  not  merely  with  reference  to  this  or  that  product,
but  with  reference  to  all  products :  aggregate  Demand  or  ag-
gregate Supply  thus  become  possible  ideas,  I  would,  there-
fore, define  the  terms  as  follows:  Demand,  as  the  desire  for
commodities  or  services,  seeking  its  end  by  an  offer  of  general  ^
purchasing  power;  and  Supply,  as  the  desire  for  general  pur-
chasing power,  seeking  its  end  by  an  offer  of  specific  commod-
ities or  services.

The  reader  will  not  fail  to  observe  that,  as  I  have  developed
the  ideas  in  question.  Demand  and  Supply  are  strictly  analo-
gous conceptions.  There  is  on  each  side  a  mental  element,  a
desire,  and  on  each  a  material  element,  specific  commodities
and  services*  in  one  case,  and  that  particular  commodity
which  is  taken  as  the  representative  of  general  purchasing
power  in  the  other;  and  as  in  each  case  the  desire  may  be  re-
garded as  indefinite  and  practically  unlimited,  so  in  each  case
the  complex  phenomenon  is  limited  by  its  material  element — •
Supply  by  the  quantity  of  specific  commodities  offered  for
sale,  and  Demand  by  the  quantity  of  purchasing  power  offered

*  It  will  be  said,  perhaps,  that  a  "semce"  is  not  a  material  condition.  But
conceding  this — though  in  truth  the  most  numerous  class  of  services  really  con-
sist in  their  material  effects — still  conceding  this,  the  capacity  to  render  a  service
is  always  embodied  in  a  material  form.  The  supply  of  services,  therefore,  will  be
measured  by  the  number  of  human  beings  able  and  willing  to  render  services.
The  supply  of  any  given  kind  of  labor,  e.  ^.,  will  be  measured  by  the  number  of
laborers  able  and  willing  to  perform  this  kind  of  labor.


26  SUPPLY  AND  DEMAND.

for  their  purchase.*  The  two  conceptions  are  thus  strictly
analogous — a  point  on  which  I  feel  it  the  more  necessary  to
insist,  inasmuch  as  the  contrary  view  is  countenanced,  in  one
portion  of  his  work  on  "  Political  Economy,"  by  the  high  au-
thority of  Mr.  Mill.  Criticising  the  expression  "  a  ratio  be-
tween Demand  and  Supply,"  Mr.  Mill  asks,  "  What  ratio  can
there  be  between  a  quantity  and  a  desire,  or  even  a  desire
combined  with  a  power?"  The  criticism  has  been  accepted
as  decisive,  as  far  as  I  have  observed,  by  all  later  writers :  nev-
ertheless, I  feel  bound  to  demur  to  it;  and  further,  I  must
contend  that  the  perception  of  the  strict  analogy  between  the
ideas  in  question  is  a  point  of  very  great  importance.  "  What
ratio  can  there  be  between  a  quantity  and  a  desire  combined
with  a  power?"  But  surely  it  is  not  correct  to  describe  Sup-
ply simply  as  a  quantity.  A  mere  quantity  of  goods  does  not
constitute  Supply  until  it  is  offered  for  sale,  that  is  to  say,'
until  the  quantity  is  connected  with  a  mental  feeling ;  and
though  it  is  true,  as  I  have  just  pointed  out,  that  the  phenom-
enon is  measured  by  the  quantity  and  not  by  the  feeling,  it
is  not  the  less  true  that  Demand  is  also  measured  by  its  ma-
terial element.  The  two  conceptions  are  thus  essentially  anal-
ogous; and  the  recognition  of  this  seems  to  be  indispensable
to  the  correct  apprehension  of  their  true  relation.  Accept
the  notion  that  Demand  and  Supply  are  facts  of  a  different
order,  incapable  of  comparison  and  measurement,  and  you  can
hardly  refuse  to  acknowledge  that  they  are  independent  facts
which  may  increase  or  diminish  irrespective  of  each  other.
But  this  is  precisely  the  idea  that  is  at  the  bottom  of  most  of
the  prevalent  fallacies  connected  with  those  terms.


*  I  say  quantity  of  purchasing  power,  because  ultimately  all  purchasing  power
is  resolvable  into  quantity — under  our  system  into  weights  of  gold  ;  under  others
into  weights  of  silver,  or  of  gold  and  silver ;  under  inconvertible  currencies  into
numbers  of  bits  of  paper  printed  in  a  certain  way.


DEMAND,  AS  "  QUANTITY  DEMANDED."  27

§  3.  Mr.  Mill,  indeed,  fully  recognizes — no  one  more  fully —
the  iniportance  of  keeping  in  view  the  strict  analogy  of  De-
mand and  Supply ;  and  it  is  apparently,  at  least  in  part,  with
a  view  to  this  end  that  he  gives  the  peculiar  definition  of  "  de-
mand "  which  is  to  be  found  in  the  chapter  from  which  I  have
quoted.  Demand,  as  there  defined,  is  to  be  understood  as
measured,  not,  as  my  definition  would  require,  by  the  quantity
of  purchasing  power  offered  in  support  of  the  desire  for  com-
modities, but  by  the  quantity  of  commodities  for  which  such
purchasing  power  is  offered.  There  is  no  doubt  that,  as  thus
conceived,  that  is  to  say,  as  quantity  demanded  and  quantity
supplied.  Demand  and  Supply  are  perfectly  analogous  facts;
but,  as  I  think  I  have  shown,  this  way  of  regarding  them  is  by
no  means  necessary  in  order  to  render  them  analogous,  while
it  seems  to  me  that  the  idea  of  "  demand  "  as  quantity  demand-
ed, though  not  foreign  to  economic  discussion,  is  very  far  from
being  adequate  to  the  general  purposes  of  the  science.

In  offering  a  few  remarks  in  justification  of  this  opinion,  let
me  here  say  that,  while  contending  for  the  idea  of  "demand,"
as  set  forth  above,  as  the  proper  meaning  of  the  term,  I  have
no  desire  to  restrict  the  term  exclusively  and  invariably  to
that  meaning.  I  quite  admit  that  it  may  be  convenient  occa-
sionally to  employ  "demand"  in  other  senses;  and  though  the
employment  of  the  same  economic  term  in  different  senses  is
not  free  from  objection,  it  is  an  expedient  to  which  the  econo-
mist must,  in  the  dearth  of  language,  occasionally  have  re-
course ;  nor  will  much  harm  result,  if  we  only  bear  in  miind
that  the  senses  are  distinct,  and  do  not  confound  them  in  ar-
gument. Moreover,  I  am  willing  to  allow  that  the  meaning
given  to  "  demand  "  by  Mr.  Mill  in  the  passage  in  question  ex-
presses a  sense  in  which  it  is  sometimes  convenient,  perhaps
necessary,  to  use  the  word.  But,  while  conceding  this  much,.
I  must  still  contend  for  the  correctness  of  my  own  definition,
as  expressing  the  principal  and  proper  sense  of  the  term  in


28  SUPPLY  AND  DEMAND.

economic  science — meaning  by  tbis  a  sense  more  important
and  fundamental  than  any  other  to  which  the  term  in  that  sci-
ence is  applied — a  sense  indispensable  to  economic  exposition,
and  which  "demand"  easily  and  naturally  expresses.

The  importance  and  fundamental  character  of  a  scientific
idea  must,  I  apprehend,  be  judged  by  the  place  which  it  occu-
pies in  the  theories  of  a  science.  Now  I  have  no  need  to  go
beyond  Mr.  Mill's  work  to  show  that  the  sense  assigned  to
"demand"  in  my  definition  may  be  justified  by  this  criterion.
I  take  three  capital  theories  of  the  science — wages,  money,  and
foreign  trade.  In  each  of  these  Supply  and  Demand  form
the  pivots  of  the  doctrine,  the  two  poles  on  which  the  exposi-
tion turns.  But  when  we  come  to  consider  in  what  sense  "de-
mand "  is  used  in  those  theories,  we  find  that  in  every  instance
it  is  regarded  as  represented  and  measured  by  the  purchasing
power  offered,  not  by  the  quantity  of  commodities  or  services
demanded.  It  is  fundamental  in  Mr.  Mill's  doctrine  of  wages,*
as  in  every  sound  exposition  of  that  subject,  that  demand  for
labor  should  be  understood  as  measured  by  the  quantity  of
^  ^'  capital  and  other  wealth  offered  in  exchange  for  labor.  When
the  economist  speaks  of  an  increased  demand  for  labor  as  tend-
ing to  raise  wages,  he  does  not  mean  a  demand  for  a  larger
number  of  laborers  —  a  condition  which  would  have  no  such
tendency,  unless  accompanied  by  an  increase  of  purchasing
power,  in  this  instance  of  capital  offered ;  and,  this  condition
being  present,  the  increased  demand  would  tend  to  raise
wages,  whether  the  numbers  actually  responding  to  the  call
were  larger  or  not ;  and  so  of  the  other  conclusions  affecting
wages  deduced  from  the  law  of  Demand  and  Supply :  the  sense
which  I  have  assigned  to  the  term  is  the  only  sense  in  which
they  will  hold  good  for  a  moment.  Similarly,  in  his  theory  of
money  Mr.  Mill  considers  the  demand  for  money  as  measured


'Principles  of  Political  Economy,"  sixth  edition,  book  ii.,  chap,  xi.,  §  1.


PROPER  SENSE  OF  DEMAND.  29

by  the  quantity  of  goods  of  all  sorts  offered  in  exchange  for
money,  not  by  the  quantity  of  money  demanded.*  And  again,
in  his  theory  of  foreign  trade,f  we  find  "demand"  steadily
employed,  as  it  seems  to  me,  in  the  same  sense.  As  the  im-
ports of  each  country  represent  in  relation  to  it  the  measure
of  foreign  supply,  so  its  exports  represent  the  force  of  its
demand  for  foreign  products.  Thus,  if  England  spent  more
largely  on  such  products,  that  expenditure  would  be  carried
into  effect  through  an  increase  of  exports ;  and  that  increase
of  exports  would  indicate  an  increase  of  international  demand
on  the  part  of  England,  whatever  might  be  the  quantity  of
commodities  imported.  The  exports  of  each  country  are  thus
the  measure  of  its  international  demand  ;  and,  as  when  we  ex-
tend our  view  from  a  particular  country  to  the  commercial
world,  the  same  commodities  are  in  turn  exports  and  imports,
Supply  and  Demand  become  (as  Mr.  Mill  is  careful  to  point
out)  "  Reciprocal  Demand.''  It  is  only  by  thus  understanding
the  term  that  I  am  able  to  assign  any  meaning  to  the  very  im-
portant principle,  as  I  regard  it,  developed  by  Mr.  Mill  in  the
chapter  to  which  I  am  referring,  and  which  he  designates  "  the
Equation  of  International  Demand.";]:


*  "Principles  of  Political  Economy,"  book  iii.,  chap,  viii.,  §  2.

t  Ibid.,  book  iii.,  chap,  xviii.,  §  4.

X  Mr.  Mill  indeed  states  that  "the  Equation  of  International  Demand  is  but  an
extension  of  the  more  general  law  of  value,  which  we  called  the  Equation  of  Sup-
ply and  Demand,"  and  refers  to  his  chapter  on  the  latter  subject ;  but  I  must  con-
fess  myself  unable  to  follow  his  reasoning  in  this  remark.  On  the  contrary,  the
two  doctrines  appear  to  me  to  be  perfectly  distinct.  The  equation  of  Supply  and
Demand,  in  the  chapter  on  that  subject,  refers,  as  I  understand  it,  to  an  equality
(realized,  it  is  alleged,  in  every  market)  between  the  qiiantity  of  a  commodity  de-
manded and  the  quantity  of  the  same  commodity  supplied.  The  equality  asserted,
therefore,  has  reference  to  quantity,  and  to  quantity  embodied  in  a  single  commod-
ity, that  which  is  the  subject-matter  of  exchange.  The  doctrine,  in  truth,  as  I  shall
hereafter  have  occasion  more  particularly  to  point  out,  amounts  to  an  assertion
that  what  is  bought  is  equal  to  what  is  sold,  that  a  given  quantity  of  a  given  com-


30  SUPPLY  AND  DEMAND.

§  4,  I  conceive,  therefore,  that  I  am  justified  by  Mr.  Mill's
practice,  if  not  by  his  precept,  in  understanding  Demand  and
Supply  in  the  sense  in  which  I  have  defined  them ;  and  what
I  wish  now  to  establish  is,  that,  as  thus  understood,  Demand
and  Supply,  in  their  general  character,  and  excluding  tempo-
rary effects,  are  not  independent  phenomena,  but  fundamentally
the  same  phenomena  regarded  from  different  points  of  view —
different  faces  of  the  same  facts;  and  that  consequently  nei-
ther can  increase  nor  diminish  without  a  corresponding  increase
or  diminution  of  the  other.

If  the  reader  will  recall  the  description  which  I  gave  a  few
pages  back  of  what  would  be  the  nature  of  Supply  and  De-
mand under  a  system  of  barter,  he  will  have  no  diflS.culty,  I
think,  in  admitting  the  essential  soundness  of  this  position,
though  he  may  not  find  it  easy  at  once  to  reconcile  it  with
some  facts  that  we  witness  under  our  actual  industrial  economv.
It  was  then  pointed  out  that  Demand  and  Supply,  on  the  sup-
position of  exchange  being  carried  on  by  barter,  though  dis-
tinct conceptions  so  long  as  we  refer  them  to  particular  indi-
viduals or  products,  become  incapable  of  discrimination,  so
soon  as  we  pass  from  the  particular  to  the  general  point  of  view
and  regard  them  as  aggregates.  The  total  demand  of  a  com-
munity would  under  such  circumstances  be  represented  by
all  the  commodities  and  services  there  offered  in  exchange  for
other  commodities  and  services ;  and  these  would  also  consti-
tute the  total  supply  in  that  community.  Now  the  essential
character  of  exchange  is  not  altered  by  the  employment  of  a
circulating  medium,  however  the  increased  complexity  of  the

modity  is  equal  to  itself.  But  the  equality  asserted  in  "the  Equation  of  Interna-
tional Demand,"  as  I  understand  it,  is  far  from  being  of  this  nature :  it  refers  not
to  quantity  but  to  valite,  the  value,  namely,  of  the  imports  and  exports  of  each
commercial  country ;  nor  is  it  realized  in  a  single  commodity,  but  in  two  distinct
groups  of  commodities,  namely,  those  issuing  from  and  those  entering  such  coun-
tries.


NOT  INDEPENDENT  PHENOMENA.  31

facts  may  tend  to  conceal  its  true  nature.  The  process  is  facil-
itated, but  what  happens  is  in  effect  the  same.  It  is  still  an
exchange  of  commodities  and  services  against  commodities  and
services:  and  the  relation  between  Demand  and  Supply  re-
mains what  it  was  in  the  simpler  case.  It  is  true,  where  we
have  a  medium  of  exchange,  we  can  form  the  conception  of
general  Demand  as  distinct  from  general  Supply — a  distinction
which  disappears  under  a  barter  regime — because  we  can  sepa-
rate in  our  thoughts  general  purchasing  power  from  specific
commodities.  But  in  point  of  truth  and  fact  the  two  things^
are  not  separable.  Purchasing  power,  in  the  last  resort,  owes
its  existence  to  the  production  of  a  commodity,  and,  the  condi-
tions of  industry  being  given,  can  only  be  increased  by  increas-  l-
ing  the  quantity  of  commodities  offered  for  sale ;  that  is  to  say,
Demand  can  only  be  increased  by  increasing  Supply.  The
purchasing  power  of  England  is  represented  by  the  aggregate
of  all  her  products ;  and  as  it  can  not  increase  except  through
an  increase  of  these,  so  an  increase  of  her  products  (if  adapted
and  duly  proportioned  to  the  requirements  of  human  beings),
will,  other  things  being  the  same,  carry  with  it  a  corresponding
increase  of  her  purchasing  power.  It  follows,  therefore,  that
the  relation,  of  general  Demand  and  general  Supply  to  each
other  is  not  affected  by  the  employment  of  a  circulating  me-
dium, but  continues  essentiall}^  the  same  under  a  monetary,  as
under  a  barter,  regime.  In  neither  case  are  they  independent
facts,  but  essentially  the  same  facts  presenting  themselves  under
different  aspects.  Demand,  as  a  general  phenomenon,  can  not
exist  without  Supply,  and  can  not  increase  except  in  propor-
tion as  Supply  increases.  This,  I  repeat,  is  fundamental  in  the
theory  of  exchange ;  and  all  assumptions  to  the  contrary  must
be  regarded  as  baseless  and  absurd.

§  5.  The  illusion  which  I  am  combating,  that  Demand  and
Supply  are  independent  economic  forces,  sometimes  assumes


32  SUPPLY  AND  DEMAND.

another  form  in  the  notion  that  producers  and  consumers  are
distinct  classes,  and  that  production  and  consumption  are  acts
which  may  go  on  irrespective  of  each  other.  It  is  true,  indeed,
there  are  consumers  who  are  not  producers  (and  the  bearing
of  this  fact  on  the  theory  just  expounded  I  shall  presently  con-
sider); but  in  the  main  the  relation  of  consumers  and  produ-
cers in  an  industrial  community  may  be  thus  illustrated.  A
certain  number  of  people.  A,  B,  C,  D,  E,  F,  etc.,  are  engaged
in  industrial  occupations — A  produces  for  B,  C,  D,  E,  F;  B  for
A,  C,  D,  E,  F ;  C  for  A,  B,  D,  E,  F,  and  so  on.  In  each  case
the  producer  and  the  consumers  are  distinct,  and  hence,  by  a
very  natural  fallacy,  it  is  concluded  that  the  whole  body  of
consumers  is  distinct  from  the  whole  body  of  producers ;  whei'e-
as  they  consist  of  precisely  the  same  persons.  Producers  ai-e
identified  with  Supply;  consumers  with  Demand;  and  thus
the  belief  in  the  independence  of  those  agencies  seems  to  find
confirmation.  The  prevalence  of  this  notion  was  brought  into
view  very  prominently  in  the  discussion  which  took  place  a
year  or  two  back  on  the  nine  hours'  movement.  By  several
of  those  who  took  part  in  that  discussion,  and  among  these  by
some  who  wrote  with  not  a  little  parade  of  economic  knowl-
edge, it  was  assumed  almost  as  axiomatic,  that  the  result  of  the
movement,  supposing  it  to  be  extended  to  the  whole  circle  of
industry,  would  be  a  general  increase  of  Demand  beyond  Sup-
ply, issuing  in  a  general  advance  of  prices.  The  producers,  it
was  seen  (unless  their  industry  gained  in  efficiency  what  it  lost
in  duration),  would  on  the  whole  produce  less ;  and  therefore
Supply  would  diminish ;  but,  not  perceiving  any  connection
between  Supply  and  Demand,  the  disputants  took  it  for  grant-
ed .that  Demand  would  go  on  as  before.  It  will  be  scarcely
necessary  now,  I  trust,  to  point  out  the  gross  fallacy  of  the  as-
sumption. The  producers  are  also  consumers;  and  if,  on  the
whole,  less  is  produced,  there  would,  on  the  whole,  be  fewer
commodities  to  be  exchanged. But  why  should  this  afiect  the


PRODUCTION  AND  CONSUMPTION.  33

proportions  in  which  they  are  exchanged?  or  why  should  it
affect  the  relations  between  commodities  in  general  and  money?
If  a  given  group  of  laborers  and  capitalists  produce  less  (how-
ever they  may  divide  the  produce  among  themselves),  they
have,  as  an  aggregate,  less  to  offer  for  sale ;  and,  as  all  other
groups  of  laborers  and  capitalists,  including  those  who  are  the
means,  direct  or  indirect,  of  bringing  gold  and  silver  into  the
country,  would  also  have  less  to  offer  for  sale,  the  relative  po-
sition of  each  to  the  community  would  not  be  disturbed ;  and
the  diminution  of  general  Supply  would  be  exactly  balanced
by  a  corresponding  diminution  of  general  Demand.  The  ab-
surdity of  the  supposition  might  indeed  be  more  easily  shown
by  simply  adverting  to  the  principles  governing  the  value  of
money,  and  by  showing  the  impossibility  of  its  being  altered
by  such  a  cause  as  the  movement  in  question  ;  but  the  error,  in
truth,  goes  deeper,  and  can  only  be  adequately  exposed  by  ref-
erence to  the  fundamental  character  of  industrial  exchange  as
determined  by  the  separation  of  employments.

But  a  formidable  obstacle  to  the  doctrine  of  the  mutual
interdependence  and  fundamental  identity  of  Demand  and
Supply  is  supposed  to  exist  in  the  presence  in  all  wealthy
communities  of  a  large  body  of  persons  who  are  consumers
merely,  the  idle  rich,  nati  consumere  fruges — people,  it  will  be
urged,  who  takes  a  large  and  effective  part  in  consumption  and
Demand,  but  who  produce  nothing,  and  contribute  nothing  to
Suppl3^  How,  it  will  be  asked,  is  the  existence  of  this  class
to  be  reconciled  with  the  doctrine  for  which  I  am  contending?
It  must  at  once  be  admitted  that  the  existence  of  an  idle  rich
class  shows  that  the  classes  of  producers  and  consumers  are  not
necessarily  and  always  conterminous ;  but  this  is  not  the  issue
I  have  raised,  but  the  dependence  of  consumptive  power  upon
production,  and  of  Demand  upon  Supply.  Let  me  here  ex-
plain that  by  "consumptive  power"  I  mean,  as  I  apprehend
those  who  employ  it  in  this  controversy  mean,  not  the  mere

3


34  SUPPLY  AND  DEMAND.

physical  capacity  to  consume,  but  tlie  economic  conditions
which  minister  to  the  physical  cnpacity.  Understanding  it  in
this  sense,  then,  I  contend  that  in  the  case  of  the  idle  rich,  as
in  all  other  cases,  consumptive  power  is  limited  and  measured
by  production,  and  Demand  by  Supply.  To  perceive  this,  we
have,  in  truth,  only  to  dip  just  below  the  surface.  Whence  is
their  purchasing  power  derived  ?  It  does  not  descend  to  them
from  the  skies;  nor  is  it  obtained  by  submarine  telegraph  di-
rect from  California  or  Australia ;  nor  is  its  existence  exhaust-
ively accounted  for  by  the  presence  of  certain  figures  on  the
credit  side  of  their  accounts  in  their  bankers'  books.  Let  ns
suppose  the  class  in  question  to  be  represented  by  certain  land-
lords, mortgagees,  and  fu,nd-holders.  In  the  first  two  cases  their
purchasing  power,  that  is  to  say,  their  rents  and  interest;  would,
of  course,  be  derived  from  the  sale  of  certain  agricultural  prod-
ucts; in  the  last,  also  from  the  sale  of  products — the  products,
namely  of  those  who  pay  the  taxes — in  all  cases  from  produc-
tion and  supply.  The  phenomenon  is  merely  one  of  a  transfer
of  purchasing  power  from  one  set  of  people  to  another,  who  in
virtue  of  contracts  are  entitled  to  receive  it.  If  the  idle  land-
lords, mortgagees,  and  fund-holders  were  to  vanish  into  space,
would  the  demand  of  the  community  diminish?  Certainly
not,  so  long  as  production  and  supply  continued  as  before.
The  only  difference  would  be  thatdifferent  persons  would  now
consume  and  determine  the  direction  of  demand.  It  was
formerly  certain  idle  landlords,  mortgagees,  and  fund-holders:
it  would  now  be  certain  producers  and  tax-payers,  who,  find-
ing themselves  in  possession  of  an  enlarged  purchasing  power,
would,  I  think  we  may  assume,  know  how  to  use  it.  That
useful  function,  therefore,  which  some  profound  writers  fancy
they  discover  in  the  abundant  expenditure  of  the  idle  rich,
turns  out  to  be  a  sheer  illusion.  Political  Economy  furnishes
no  such  palliation  of  unmitigated  selfishness.  Not  that  I  would
breathe  a  word  asrainst  the  sacredness  of  contracts. But  I  think


PRODUCTION  AND  CONSUMPTION.  35

it  is  important,  on  moral  no  less  than  on  economic  grounds,
to  insist  upon  this,  that  no  public  benefit  of  any  kind  arises
from  the  existence  of  an  idle  rich  class.  The  wealth  accumu-
lated by  their  ancestors  or  others  on  their  behalf,  where  it  is
employed  as  capital,  no  doubt  helps  to  sustain  industry;  but
what  they  consume  in  luxury  and  idleness  is  not  capital,  and
helps  to  sustain  nothing  but  their  own  unprofitable  lives.  By
all  means  they  must  have  their  rents  and  interest,  as  it  is  writ-
ten in  the  bond  ;  but  let  them  take  their  proper  place  as  drones
in  the  hive,  gorging  at  a  feast  to  which  they  have  contributed
nothing.

One  more  illustration  of  the  same  fallacy  will  not  perhaps
be  superfluous.  A  colony  of  rich  persons  establish  themselves
in  a  foreign  country,  where  they  practice  no  useful  industry  or
art,  but  simply  expend  and  consume.  We  may  take  as  our
example  the  English  and  other  foreign  residents  at  such  resorts
as  Pau,  Nice,  and  Eome.  Whether  such  residents  confer  ben-
efit of  any  sort  on  the  people  among  whom  they  settle  is  a!
point  which  I  do  not  now  raise :  I  may  possibly  find  occasion
to.  consider  it  farther  on.  But  what  I  wish  now  to  make  clear
is,  that,  if  any  benefit  does  arise  from  the  expenditure  of  such
people,  it  is  no  instance  of  a  good  accruing  to  a  community
from  Demand  as  distinct  from  and  independent  of  Supply.  The
demand  of  those  foreign  residents  owes  its  efficacy  (whatever
that  may  amount  to)  to  the  supply  by  which  it  is  supported,
as  certainly  as  if  they  each  and  all  rented  farms  and  lived  upon
the  direct  produce  of  their  own  exertions;  for  how  is  their
purchasing  power  conveyed  to  them?  They  receive  it  most
probably  in  circular  notes  or  bills,  which  are  perhaps  cashed
in  coin ;  but  how  are  these  instruments  finally  liquidated  ?
Simply  in  commodities  sent  from  England  or  the  other  coun-
tries from  which  the  residents  in  question  come.  In  other
words,  every  increase  in  the  demand  of  English  people  resid-
ing in  France  for  French  goods  is  accompanied  and  rendered


36  SUPPLY  AND  DEMAND.

possible  by  an  increase  in  the  supply  of  English  commodities
to  the  French  people.  There  is  no  other  way  in  which  in  the
long  run  it  can  be  supported — a  fact,  by-the-way,  which  throws
a  curious  light  on  the  absurdities  of  Protection.  None  are  so
anxious  to  encourage  such  idle  residents  from  foreign  countries
as  protectionists;  but  while  eager  to  accomplish  this  object,
they  do  all  in  their  power  to  render  it  impossible.  They  would
have  English  visitors  swarming  in  their  capitals,  and  spending
there  their  money  on  French  products;  but  they  would  at  the
same  time  put  under  interdict  the  only  possible  means  by
which  in  the  long  run  Englishmen  can  meet  their  expenses.
The  protective  system  is  thus  an  attempt  to  sever  Demand  and
Supply,  and  to  render  them  independent  of  each  other — a  feat
which  will  be  performed  when  the  circle  is  squared.

§  6.  I  have  so  far  spoken  of  Demand  and  Supply  as  general
facts,  as  related  not  to  particular  commodities  or  services,  but
to  commodities  and  services  in  general,  I  proceed  now  to  con-
sider them  as  they  stand  related  to  particular  commodities  and
services.  And  here  we  must  in  the  first  place  note  that  that
fundamental  identity  and  mutual  interdependence  which  have
been  found  to  characterize  the  phenomena  in  the  light  in  which
we  have  hitherto  regarded  them,  are  no  longer  observable  when
they  are  considered  with  reference  to  particular  commodities.
Thus,  as  I  have  shown,  it  is  impossible  for  the  general  demand
of  a  community  to  increase  or  diminish  save  through  a  corre-
sponding increase  or  diminution  of  the  general  supply  of  com-
modities in  that  community ;  but  it  is  perfectly  possible  that
'  the  demand  for  a  particular  commodity  or  service  should  in-
crease or  diminish,  the  supply  undergoing  no  corresponding
change ;  and,  as  every  one  will  recognize,  such  failure  of  cor-
respondence between  Supply  and  Demand  is  the  most  common
/  •  of  all  occurrences.  In  truth,  it  but  rarely  happens  that  the
/  supply  of  any  commodity  remains  for  any  length  of  time  in


OF  PARTICULAR  ARTICLES.  37

perfect  accordance  with  the  demand  for  it.  What  we  find  is  a
pretty  constant  state  of  fluctuation ;  the  demand  sometimes  in
excess  of  the  supply ;  the  supply  sometimes  in  excess  of  the
demand;  and  the  alterations  in  the  relation  indicated  by  par-
allel alterations  in  the  prices  of  the  commodity  so  affected.

I  have  spoken  of  supply  corresponding  with,  or  being  greater
or  less  than,  demand  in  the  case  of  a  given  commodity.  There
is  no  expression  in  more  frequent  use  in  commercial  and  eco-
nomic discussion ;  and  it  is  probable  that  most  people  will
think  that  it  stands  in  need  of  no  elucidation.  But  the  slight-
est reflection  will  show  that  its  meaning  is  by  no  means  so
clear  as  it  might  at  first  sight  be  considered.  What  is  meant
by  the  supply  of  a  given  commodity  being  equal  to  the  de-
mand for  it?  The  demand  varies  with  the  price;  and  so  does
the  supply.  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that,  to  give  meaning  to
our  assertion,  it  must  be  understood  as  made  with  reference  to
some  assumed  price;  but  what  price?  This  is  a  point  which
is  not  at  once  apparent.

Again,  supposing  this  difficulty  got  over,  and  that  we  have
settled  at  what  price  Demand  and  Supply  are  to  be  taken,  de-
mand at  a  given  price  may  be  measured  either  by  the  quantity
of  purchasing  power  offered,  or  by  the  quantity  of  the  commod-
ity demanded.  Which  standard  are  we  to  adopt?  I  have
already  stated  my  view  as  to  the  proper  sense  of  "  demand ;"
nor  do  I  see  any  necessity  for  departing  in  this  context  from
the  meaning  I  have  contended  for.  According  to  that  view,
as  Supply  would  be  measured  by  the  quantity  of  the  commod-
ity offered,  so  Demand  would  be  measured  by  the  quantity  of
purchasing  power  offered  ;  and  the  "correspondence"  (which  I
think  would  be  a  better  word  than  "  equality  ")  of  Supply  with  .
Demand  at  a  given  price  would  mean  such  a  state  of  Demand
and  Sitpply  as  would  result,  on  the  one  hand,  in  the  absorption
of  the  purchasing  power  forth-coming  at  this  price  by  the  sup-
ply at  the  same  price ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  in  the  absorp-


38  SUPPLY  AND  DEMAND.

tion  of  the  supply  by  the  purchasing  power ;  -while  the  non-
correspondence  of  Supply  and  Demand  would  mean  the  exist-
ence of  an  unsatisfied  residuum  on  either  side.  This^  1  confess,
is  the  sense  of  the  phrase  which  I  should  myself,  on  scientific
grounds,  prefer.  I  have  admitted,  however,  that  there  are  oc-
casions in  which  "  demand  "  may  conveniently  be  employed  in
other  senses ;  and  this  perhaps  is  one  of  them.  At  all  events
it  is  certain  that,  understanding  Demand  in  this  context  as
measured  by  the  quantity  demanded,  the  result  will  not  be  af-
fected by  the  change  of  standard.  When  Supply  corresponds
with  Demand  in  the  one  sense,  it  will  correspond  with  it  in  the
other ;  and  as  the  latter,  that  is  to  say  Demand,  as  measured
by  quantity  demanded,  is  perhaps  the  more  familiar  concep-
tion where  the  problem  has  to  do  with  particular  commodities,
it  will  on  the  whole,  perhaps,  be  more  convenient  to  adopt  this
sense  for  the  purposes  of  this  particular  discussion,  I  shall
therefore  understand  equality  or  correspondence  of  Demand
and  Supply  at  a  given  price,  when  particular  commodities  are
in  question,  as  meaning  equality  or  correspondence  of  quantity
demanded  with  quantity  supplied  at  that  price.

But  we  have  got  to  determine  what  is  the  price  assumed  or
contemplated  in  statements  regarding  the  equality  or  inequal-
ity of  Supply  and  Demand.  To  resolve  this  point,  two  sorts
of  such  statements  must  be  considered.  We  may  assert  the
equality  or  inequality  of  Demand  and  Supply  either  with  ref-
erence to  a  particular  occasion,  or  with  reference  to  a  continu-
ing state  of  things.  We  may  say,  for  example,  that  the  de-
mand for  wheat  exceeded  the  supply  in  a  particular  market;
or  we  may  say  that  the  demand  for  meat  has  for  some  time
exceeded,  and  is  likely  for  some  time  longer  to  exceed,  the
supply  of  that  article.  In  the  former  case,  it  seems  to  me,  the
price  assumed,  so  far  as  people  speak  with  distinct  meaning,
would  always  be  the  price  current  in  the  particular  market ;
and  the  statement  would  mean  that  there  were  people  in  that


OF  P ARTICULAR  ARTICLES.  30

market  who  at  the  current  price  would  have  purchased  more
wheat  had  it  been  at  that  price  obtainable.  I  am  aware  that,
in  assuming  the  possibility  of  such  an  occurrence  as  a  market
price  which  does  not  equalize  Supply  and  Demand,  I  am  put-
ting myself  in  conflict  with  a  celebrated  theory.  I  hope,  how-
ever, afterward  to  justify  this  boldness.  For  the  moment  I  as-
sume that  the  price  current  in  the  particular  market  is  the
price  with  reference  to  which  statements  of  the  kind  we  are
considering  are  made ;  and  common  language  certainly  pre-
supposes the  possibility  of  a  divergence  of  Demand  and  Sup-
ply at  this  price.  But  how  with  regard  to  assertions  of  the
other  kind  indicated,  where  we  declare  that,  as  a  continuing
state  of  things,  the  demand  for  a  commodity  is  in  excess  of  the
supply  of  it — shall  we  say,  following  the  analogy  of  the  expla-
nation just  given,  that  the  price  here  assumed  is  the  price  cur-
rent during  the  period  to  which  the  remark  applies ;  and  that
the  meaning  is  that  the  demand  at  that  price  has  been  and  is
likely  to  be  in  excess  of  the  supply  ?  If  we  attempt  to  deal
with  any  actual  case  we  shall  find  that  this  explanation  will
not  serve  us.  For  example,  most  persons  acquainted  with  the
present  state  of  the  iron  trade  would  say  that  the  demand  for
iron  at  the  present  time — meaning,  not  in  this  or  that  market,
but  in  the  country  generally  and  over  a  period  of  some  dura-
tion— is  greatly  in  excess  of  the  supply,  and  would  point  to
the  advance  in  price  as  evidence  of  this.  Now  it  is  certain
that,  in  the  opinion  of  those  most  competent  to  form  an  opin-
ion, in  the  opinion  of  dealers  and  speculators  in  the  article,  the
demand  for  iron  in  the  country  at  the  present  time  is  not  in
excess  of  the  supply  of  it  at  existing  prices;  for  did  they  think
so,  they  would  at  once  by  purchases  raise  the  price  beyond  its
present  level.  In  truth,  the  precise  function  which  such  per-
sons perform  is  that  of  adapting  demand  to  supply  by  acting
on  price ;  and,  however  the  adaptation  may  fail  in  particular
markets,  it  is  impossible  that,  as  a  phenomenon  of  some  dura-


40  SUPPLY  AND  DEMAND.

tion,  the  demand  at  existing  prices  should  remain,  and  be
known  to  be,  in  excess  of  the  supply.  How,  then,  are  we  to
deal  with  the  assertion  which  undoubtedly  would  be  made  by
those  very  persons?  It  is  perhaps  not  improbable  that  most
of  those  who  make  it  have  not  very  clearly  defined  their  mean-
ing. Still  it  would  be  unreasonable  to  assume  that,  where  so
many  people,  experts  in  the  matter  in  hand,  concur  in  mak-
ing the  same  statement,  their  assertion  is  absolutely  without
meaning.  I  shall  certainly  not  presume  to  find  a  meaning  for
any  one,  but  I  venture  to  lay  down  this  proposition,  that,  in
order  to  render  such  statements  as  those  of  which  I  have  given
examples  at  once  significant  and  true,  demand  must  be  under-
stood as  existing  at  some  price  other  than  that  actually  pre-
vailing in  the  markets ;  and  if  I  am  asked  to  say  what  that
price  is,  I  answer,  the  "  normal  price" — the  price  which,  in  the
absence  of  disturbing  causes,  people  consider  would  be  the
price  of  the  commodity.  Accordingly,  the  sense  in  which  I
understand  statements  of  the  kind  under  consideration,  which
apply  not  to  particular  markets  but  to  a  state  of  things  for
some  time  in  existence,  is  as  expressing  the  result  of  a  com-
parison between  demand  taken  as  it  loould  exist  at  the  normal
price,  and  supply  either  such  as  it- would  be  at  that  same  price,
or  such  as  it  actually  is.  Thus  understood,  such  statements  be-
come significant;  and,  if  founded  on  knowledge  of  the  facts  in
question,  convey  information  of  a  really  important  kind.  The
result,  then,  of  this  verbal  but  necessary  discussion  may  be
thus  summed  up :

1st.  Supply  and  Demand,  when  spoken  of  with  reference  to
particular  commodities,  must,  if  our  statements  are  to  be  sig-
nificant, be  understood  to  mean  Supply  and  Demand  at  a  given
price;  the  comparison  of  Supply  and  Demand  at  that  price,
being  made  by  comparing  the  quantity  of  the  commodit}'-  sup-
plied with  the  amount  of  purchasing  power  offered,  or  witli
the  quantity  of  the  commodity  demanded. For  consideratiocs


OF  PABTICULAB  ARTICLES.  41

of  practical  convenience,  the  latter  measure  of  Demand  is  em-
ployed in  this  particular  discussion,

2d.  Where  statements  respecting  the  supply  and  demand  of
particular  commodities  have  reference  to  particular  markets;
the  price  assumed  as  that  at  which  Demand  and  Supply  are
compared  is  the  price  current  in  that  market.

3d.  Where  such  statements  have  reference  to  the  country  at
large  and  to  a  continuing  state  of  things,  then  the  price  as-
sumed as  that  at  which  Demand  is  measured  is  the  normal
price  of  the  commodity,  while  Supply  is  considered  as  meas-
ured either  at  this  or  at  the  actual  price.  The  comparison  in-
stituted is  thus  between  Demand  at  the  normal  price,  and  Sup-
ply either  at  the  normal  or  at  actual  prices.

§  7.  The  meaning  of  this  part  of  our  phraseology  being  thus
ascertained,  I  proceed  to  lay  down  what  seems  to  me  the  fun-
damental law  of  Demand  and  Supply  considered  in  connection
with  particular  commodities.  It  is  as  follows:  The  supply
of  a  commodity  always  tends  to  adapt  itself  to  the  demand  at
the  normal  price.  I  may  here  say  briefly,  that  by  the  normal
price  of  a  commodity  I  mean  that  price  which  suffices,  and  no
more  than  suffices,  to  yield  to  the  producers  what  is  considered  /
to  be  the  average  and  usual  remuneration  on  such  sacrifices  asj
they  undergo ;  and  the  statement  is  that  the  supply  of  each
commodity  tends  to  adapt  itself  to  the  demand  at  this  price.
That  it  does  so  is  the  direct  consequence  of  the  motives  which
induce  people  to  engage  in  productive  industry",  and  which  at-
tract them,  so  far  as  circumstances  permit,  toward  those  occupa-
tions which  oEev  the  largest  rewards  in  proportion  to  the  sac-
rifices undergone.  It  follows  from  this  that,  where  the  price
of  a  commodity  is  above  the  normal  level,  and  where  con-
sequently the  producers  are  reaping  more  than  average  rewards,
more  producers  will  be  drawn  to  that  employment,  and  the
supply  of  the  commodity  will  be  increased. But  the  increase


42  SUPPLY  AND  DEMAND.

of  supply,  by  the  competition  for  sales,  will  tend  to  lower  price,
and  thus  to  bring  it  down  toward  the  normal  level.  If  the
increase  of  supply  is  not  sufficient  to  reduce  the  market  price
quite  to  the  normal  level,  then,  under  the  influence  of  the  same
industrial  motives,  supply  will  be  further  increased;  and  the
process  will  go  on  till  this  result  is  accomplished.  On  the
other  hand,  if  the  stimulus  to  production  carry  the  movement
too  far  and  price  fall  below  the  normal  level,  motives  of  the
opposite  kind  will  at  once  come  into  play  to  curtail  production,
and  the  price  will  rise  till  the  normal  level  be  once  more  reach-
ed. Such  is  the  law  of  Supply  and  Demand  in  relation  to  par-
ticular commodities :  it  is  described  by  Adam  Smith  under  the
figure  of  a  gravitation  of  market  toward  natural  price;  but,
however  described,  it  is  fundamental  in  this  part  of  our  sub-
ject, and  is  the  constant  assumption  running  through  all  reason-
ings which  have  to  do  with  value  and  price.  It  is  not,  how-
ever, necessary  to  advert  to  its  bearings  further  at  present;
these  will  sufficiently  appear  in  the  course  of  the  following
discussions.

I  recapitulate  briefly  the  results  of  the  present  chapter:

I.  Demand  and  Supply,  considered  as  general  facts,  are  not
independent  phenomena,  but  essentially  the  same  phenomena
regarded  from  different  points  of  view;  consequently  general
Demand  can  not  increase  or  diminish,  except  in  constant  rela-
tion with  general  Supply.  All  notions  and  doctrines  there-
fore that  proceed  upon  the  contrary  assumption  are  unfounded
and  fallacious.

II.  Demand  and  Supply,  considered  with  reference  to  par-
ticular commodities,  may  increase  or  diminish  (in  the  sense  ex-
plained) in  relation  to  each  other;  but  in  all  their  mutations
they  obey  this  law :  Supply  always  tends  to  adapt  itself  to
Demand  at  the  normal  price  of  the  commodity.


CHAPTER  III.

NORMAL VALUE.

%  1.  The  attribute  of  normal  or  usual  value  implies  system-
atic and  continuous  production.  We  can  not  predicate  normal
value  of  a  commodity  of  which  the  supply  is  limited  and  can
not  be  increased — for  example,  of  a  picture  of  Turner's;  be-
cause, although  it  would  be  possible  from  a  number  of  sales  of
such  pictures  to  strike  an  average,  this  average  would  merely
represent  the  mean  of  fluctuations  uncontrolled  by  any  presid-
ing principle,  and  so,  as  having  no  tendency  to  keep  themselves
within  any  certain  bounds,  incapable  of  being  made  the  ground
of  expectation  as  to  the  course  of  future  prices.  But  when  a
commodity  is  systematically  and  continuously  produced,  the
existence  of  a  normal  value  soon  reveals  itself.  It  is  perceived
that,  however  greatly  the  price  may  vary  from  time  to  time,
the  variations  do  not  occur  at  random,  but  obey  a  hidden  prin-
ciple, and  tend  to  conform  to  a  certain  rule.  The  price  of
wheat  may  be  unusually  high  one  year,  but  this  at  once  calls
into  action  forces  which  control  the  advance,  and  ultimately
bring  back  the  price  to  its  usual  level ;  or  the  price  may  be
exceptionally  low,  and  then  the  same  forces  are  ranged  on  the
opposite  side,  and  the  price  rises.  In  this  way  the  fluctuations
of  the  market  are  kept  within  certain,  not  perhaps  precisely
determinable,  but  still  real,  limits,  with  a  constant  tendency  to
approach  a  central  point — the  point  of  "  normal  value  "  of  which
we  are  in  quest.

I  have  remarked  that  an  average  of  the  actual  sales  effected
of  a  commodity,  that  is  to  say,  of  its  market  prices,  does  not


44  NORMAL  VALUE.

necessarily  represent  its  normal  price  or  value,  because  the
commodity  may  exist  under  conditions  whicli  do  not  supply
any  controlling  principle  to  its  fluctuations,  and  consequently
do  not  develop  any  tendency  in  these  to  revolve  round  a  cen-
tral point.  But  it  is  still  true  that,  where  the  conditions  for
evolving  a  normal  value  do  exist,  that  is  to  say,  where  a  com-
modity is  systematically  and  continuously  produced,  the  nor-
mal value  will  generally  be  coincident  with  the  average  of  act-
ual sales,  if  only  the  number  of  instances  taken  be  sufficient  to
eliminate  the  effects  of  what  we  may  call  disturbing  causes —
causes,  that  is  to  say,  which  interfere  with  the  adaptation  of
supply  to  demand.*  The  number  of  instances  necessary  to  ef-
fect such  elimination  will  vary  greatly  with  the  nature  of  the
commodity.  It  will  in  general  be  least  in  articles  of  ordinary
manufacture,  much  greater  in  those  of  raw  produce,  and  great-
est of  all  in  products  of  the  animal  kingdom.  These,  however,
are  points  which  will  be  more  conveniently  elucidated  in  con-
nection with  the  subject  of  market  values.

One  word  more  of  explanation.  Normal  values,  though,  in
contrast  with  market  values,  they  may  not  improperly  be  de-
scribed as  average  or  permanent  values,  must  not  be  supposed
to  represent  any  thing  absolutely  fixed  or  constant  in  the  ex-
change relation  of  commodities.  There  is  no  such  fixedness
or  constancy  to  be  found  in  that  relation.  All  that  we  can
properly  understand  by  the  permanency  predicated  of  such  val-
ues is  that  they  remain  the  same  so  long  as  the  conditions  of
production  remain  the  same.  In  point  of  fact,  the  conditions
of  production  of  all  commodities  undergo  change,  and  those  of
most  commodities  frequent  and  extensive  change.  In  general,
however,  these  changes,  where  they  are  of  much  importance,
occur  at  intervals  of  some  duration,  and  in  the  intervening

*  For  the  precise  sense  in  which  these  words  are  used  the  reader  is  referred  ta
ante  pp.  40,  41.  ,


COST  OF  PRODUCTION.  45

periods  the  normal  price  remains  constant.  The  centre  about
which  market  prices  oscillate  is  thus  not  a  fixed,  but  a  mov-
able centre;  moving,  however  (as  will  be  fully  set  forth  in  a
subsequent  chapter*),  for  the  most  part  in  constant  directions,
determined  by  the  character  of  the  commodity  and  the  cir-
cumstances under  which  it  is  produced.  Thus  in  most  manu-
factured goods  the  course  of  normal  prices  in  this  country  has
for  some  centuries  been  steadily  downward ;  while  on  the  oth-
er hand,  the  normal  prices  of  raw  produce,  and  more  particu-
larly of  produce  of  the  animal  kingdom,  have  pretty  constant-
ly risen.

So  far  as  to  the  character  of  the  phenomenon  which  now
claims  our  attention.  It  remains  to  consider  the  conditions
which  determine  it.

§  2.  The  current  theories  of  value  connect  normal  value
(called  by  Adam  Smith  and  Eicardo  "  natural  value,"  and  by
Mr.  Mill  "necessary  value,"  but  best  expressed,  it  seems  to
me,  by  the  term  which  I  have  usedf )  with  one  set  of  condi-
tions only,  those,  namely,  comprised  under  the  phrase  "  cost
of  production;"  and  some  writers  would,  under  this  notion,
distinguish  such  values  as  "cost  values."  But  this,  it  seems
to  me,  is  to  take  a  much  too  limited  view  of  the  range  of  this
phenomenon.  The  essence  lies  in  the  tendency  of  the  ex-
changes of  the  market  to  gravitate  toward  a  central  point;
wherever  that  tendency  is  observable,  we  can  predicate  of  the
commodities  which  exhibit  it  the  possession  of  a  central,  usual,
or  normal  value.  Now,  to  go  no  farther  at  present,  such  a
tendency  exists  in  the  relative  values  of  the  commodities  ex-
changed by  different  nations,  or,  as  they  are, called,  "interna-


*  See  chap.  v.  of  this  Part.

1 1  have  adopted  the  term  from  M.  Cherbuliez's  excellent  work,  "Precis  de  la
Science  Economique."


4i5  NORMAL  VALUE.

tional  values,"  In  other  words,  trading  countries  exchange
their  productions  in  certain  proportions,  which,  in  any  given
state  of  industry,  manifest  the  condition  of  normality.  Devia-
tions may,  and  do  occur,  but  forces  are  in  existence  which
tend  constantly  to  bring  back  the  proportions  to  the  normal
line.  International  values,  however,  are  admittedly — or  at  all
events  are  demonstrably — not  governed  by  cost  of  production,
and  we  have  thus  normal  values  which  are  not  connected
with  cost,  but  come  under  the  influence  of  some  other  princi-
ple. And  I  shall  afterward  have  occasion  to  show  that,  even
in  domestic  exchanges,  cost  of  production  is  by  no  means  co-
extensive with  the  range  of  this  phenomenon.

Cost  of  production,  however,  is  undoubtedly  the  principal
and  most  important  of  the  conditions  on  which  normal  value
depends.  Not  onlj^,  as  will  be  shown,  does  it  absolutely  de-
termine that  relation  over  a  very  wide  field  of  exchange  trans-
actions, but  over  perhaps  a  still  wider  it  exercises,  not  a  de-
cisive, but  a  powerful  influence,  and  within  certain  limits  con-
trols the  results.  It  is  therefore  necessary,  at  the  outset  of
our  discussion,  to  ascertain  the  true  nature  of  Cost  of  Produc-
tion, a  clear  perception  of  which,  I  may  observe,  quite  irre-
spective of  the  theory  of  value,  is  indispensable  for  the  solu-
tion of  most  of  the  problems  of  production  and  distribution.

The  following  is  the  analysis  of  Cost  of  Production  given
by  Mr,  Mill,  and  which,  so  far  as  I  know,  has  been  acquiesced
in,  either  expressly  or  implicitly,  by  economists  alike  in  this
and  in  other  countries :

"  The  component  elements  of  Cost  of  Production  have  been  set  forth
in  the  first  part  of  this  inquiry.  The  principle  of  them,  and  so  much  the
principle  as  to  be  nearly  the  sole,  we  found  to  be  Labor,  What  the  pro-
duction of  a  thing  costs  to  its  producer,  or  its  series  of  producers,  is  the
labor  expended  in  producing  it.  If  we  consider  as  the  producer  the
capitalist  who  makes  the  advances,  the  word  '  labor '  may  be  replaced  by
the  word '  wages :' what  the  produce  costs  to  him,  is  the  wages  which


COST  OF  PRODUCTION.  47

he  has  had  to  pay.  At  the  first  glance,  indeed,  this  seems  to  be  only  a
part  of  his  outlay,  since  he  has  not  only  paid  wages  to  laborers,  but
has  likewise  provided  them  with  tools,  materials,  and  perhaps  buildings.
These  tools,  materials,  and  buildings,  however,  were  produced  by  labor
and  capital ;  and  their  value,  like  that  of  the  article  to  the  production
of  which  they  are  subservient,  depends  on  cost  of  production,  which
again  is  resolvable  into  labor.  The  cost  of  production  of  broadcloth  does
not  wholly  consist  in  the  wages  of  weavers ;  which  alone  are  directly
paid  by  the  cloth  manufacturer.  It  consists  also  of  the  wages  of  spin-
ners and  wool-combers,  and,  it  may  be  added,  of  shepherds,  all  of  which
the  clothier  has  paid  for  in  the  price  of  yarn.  It  consists,  too,  of  the
wages  of  builders  and  brick-makers,  which  he  has  reimbursed  in  the  con-
tract price  of  erecting  his  factory.  It  partly  consists  of  the  wages  of  ma-
chine-makers, iron-founders,  and  miners.  And  to  these  must  be  added
the  wages  of  the  carriers  who  transported  any  of  the  means  and  appli-
ances of  the  production  to  the  place  where  they  were  to  be  used,  and  the
product  itself  to  the  place  where  it  is  to  be  sold."  .  .  .  .  "  Thus  far  of  la-
bor, or  wages,  as  an  element  in  cost  of  production.  But  in  our  analysis,
in  the  First  Book,  of  the  requisites  of  production  we  found  that  there  is
another  necessary  element  in  it  besides  labor.  There  is  also  capital ;  and
this  being  the  result  of  abstinence,  the  produce,  or  its  value,  must  be
sufficient  to  remunerate,  not  only  all  the  labor  required,  but  the  absti-
nence of  all  the  persons  by  whom  the  remuneration  of  the  different  class-
es of  laborers  was  advanced.  The  return  for  abstinence  is  Profit.  And
profit,  we  have  also  seen,  is  not  exclusively  the  surplus  remaining  to
the  capitalist  after  he  has  been  compensated  for  his  outlay,  but  forms,  in
most  cases,  no  unimportant  part  of  the  outlay  itself.  The  flax-spinner,
part  of  whose  expenses  consists  of  the  purchase  of  flax  and  of  machinery,
has  had  to  pay,  in  their  price,  not  only  the  wages  of  the  labor  by  which
the  flax  was  grown  and  the  machinery  made,  but  the  profits  of  the  grow-
er, the  flax-dresser,  the  miner,  the  iron-founder,  and  the  machine-maker.
All  these  profits,  together  with  those  of  the  spinner  himself,  were  again
advanced  by  the  weaver,  in  the  price  of  his  material— linen  yarn ;  and
along  with  them  the  profits  of  a  fresh  set  of  machine-makers,  and  of  the
miners  and  iron-workers  who  supplied  them  with  their  metallic  mate-
rial. All  these  advances  form  part  of  the  cost  of  production  of  linen.
Profits,  therefore,  as  well  as  wages,  enter  into  the  cost  of  production
which  determines  the  value  of  the  produce."  ....
*'  Profits,  however,  may  enter  more  largely  into  the  conditions  of  pro-


/


48  NORMAL VALUE.

duction  of  one  commodity  than  of  another,  even  though  there  be  no  dif-
ference in  the  rate  of  profit  between  the  two  employments.  The  one
commodity  may  be  called  upon  to  yield  profit  during  a  longer  period  of
time  than  the  other.  The  example  by  which  this  case  is  usually  illus-
trated is  that  of  wine.  Suppose  a  quantity  of  wine  and  a  quantity  of
cloth  made  by  equal  amounts  of  labor,  and  that  labor  paid  at  the  same
rate.  The  cloth  does  not  improve  by  keeping;  the  wine  does.  Sup-
pose that,  to  attain  the  desired  quality,  the  wine  requires  to  be  kept  five
years.  The  producer  or  dealer  will  not  keep  it,  unless  at  the  end  of  five
years  he  can  sell  it  for  as  much  more  than  the  cloth  as  amounts  to  five
years'  profit  accumulated  at  compound  interest.  The  wine  and  the  cloth
were  made  by  the  same  original  outlay.  Here,  then,  is  a  case  in  which
the  natural  values,  relatively  to  one  another,  of  two  commodities,  do  not
conform  to  their  cost  of  production  alone,  but  to  their  cost  of  production
plus  something  else.  Unless,  indeed,  for  the  sake  of  generality  in  the
expression,  we  include  the  profit  which  the  wine-merchant  foregoes  dur-
ing the  five  years  in  the  cost  of  production  of  the  wine :  looking  upon  it
as  a  kind  of  additional  outlay,  over  and  above  his  other  advances,  for
which  outlay  he  must  be  indemnified  at  last."*

And  finally  he  thus  sums  up:

"  Cost  of  Production  consists  of  several  elements,  some  of  which  are
constant  and  universal,  others  occasional.  The  universal  elements  of
cost  of  production  are  the  wages  of  the  labor  and  the  profits  of  the  cap-
ital. The  occasional  elements  are  taxes,  and  any  extra  cost  occasioned
by  a  scarcity  value  of  some  of  the  requisites."t

§  3.  Such  is  the  view  of  Cost  of  Production  which  must  be
considered  as  now  generally  accepted  by  economists.  But  in
spite  of  the  great  authority  properly  attaching  to  any  doctrine
propounded  by  Mr.  Mill,  and  enhanced  as  this  is  in  the  pres-
ent instance  by  the  general  concurrence  of  economists,  I  am
compelled  to  dissent  from  it.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  concep-
tion of  cost  which  it  suggests  is  radically  unsound,  confound-

*  "Principles  of  Political  Economy,"  book  iii.,  chap,  iv.,  §  1,  4,  5.
t  Ibid.,  book  iii.,  chap,  vi.,  §  1.


"COST"  AS  WAGES  AND  PROFIT.  4y

ing  things  in  their  own  nature  distinct  and  even  antithetical,
and  setting  in  an  essentially  false  light  the  incidents  of  pro-
duction and  exchange;  further,  I  think  it  will  appear  that  it
leads  to  practical  errors  of  a  serious  kind,  not  merely  witli  re-
gard to  value,  but  also  with  regard  to  some  other  important
doctrines  of  the  science.

Of  all  ideas  within  the  range  of  economic  speculation,  the
two  most  profoundly  opposed  to  each  other  are  cost  and  the
reward  of  cost — the  sacrifice  incurred  by  man  in  productive
industry,  and  the  return  made  by  nature  to  man  upon  that
sacrifice.  All  industrial  progress  consists  in  altering  the  pro-
portion between  these  two  things;  in  increasing  the  remuner-
ation in  relation  to  the  cost,  or  in  diminishing  the  cost  in  re-
lation to  the  remuneration.  Cost  and  remuneration  are  thus
economic  antitheses  of  each  other;  so  completely  so,  that  a
small  cost  and  a  large  remuneration  are  exactly  equivalent
expressions.  Now,  in  the  analysis  of  cost  of  production  which
I  have  quoted,  these  two  opposites  are  identified ;  and  cost,
which  is  sacrifice,  cost,  which  is  what  man  pays  to  nature  for
her  industrial  rewards,  is  said  to  consist  of  wages  and  profits,
that  is  to  say,  of  what  nature  yields  to  man  in  return  for  his
industrial  sacrifices.  The  theory  thus  in  its  simple  statement
confounds  opposite  facts  and  ideas,  and  further  examination
will  show  that  it  involves  conclusions  no  less  perplexed,  and
in  conflict  with  doctrines  the  most  received.

For,  first,  if  the  analysis  in  question  be  accepted,  and  wages
and  profits  be  taken  as  the  constituents  of  cost  of  production,
this  conclusion  follows :  that  the  cost  of  producing  commodi-
ties, taking  industry  as  a  whole,  is  a  constant  condition,  in-
capable, however  great  or  universal  the  progress  of  industrial
improvement,  of  undergoing  change.  Suppose,  for  example,
the  general  productiveness  of  industry  were  increased ;  this
would  mean  that  the  aggregate  results  of  industry  in  return
for  a  given  exertion  of  labor  and  abstinence  were  increased ;


50  NORMAL  VALUE.

in  other  words,  that  the  fund  from  which  wages  and  profits
were  paid  had  increased  in  relation  to  the  labor  and  absti-
nence expended.  Wages  and  profits,  therefore,  as  an  aggre-
gate would  rise  exactly  in  proportion  as  industry  had  become
more  productive ;  and  the  cost  of  producing  a  given  commod-
ity, measured  in  wages  and  profits,  would  thus  remain  precise-
ly as  before.  There  would  be  less  labor  and  abstinence  ex-
erted, but  this  smaller  exertion  being  more  highly  remuner-
ated, the  cost,  measured  in  the  remuneration,  would  suffer  no
change.  I  may  mention  that  this  is  no  fanciful  deduction  of
mine,  but  has  in  effect  been  applied  by  at  least  two  writers  to
the  solution  of  a  practical  question.  In  a  paper  read  some
years  ago  before  the  Dublin  Statistical  Society,  it  was  argued
by  Dr.  Hancock  that  the  cost  of  producing  gold  had  not  been
reduced  by  the  gold  discoveries ;  and  what  was  Dr.  Hancock's
proof  of  this  assertion?  Simply  this,  that  the  wages  and
profits  of  the  producers  of  gold  had  increased  as  much  as  the
labor  and  abstinence  required  for  the  production  of  a  given
quantity  of  gold  had  diminished,  leaving  thus,  he  said,  the
cost  of  production  unchanged.  The  facts  were  undoubtedly
as  the  argument  assumed,  and  the  inference  was  strictly  in  ac-
cordance with  the  accepted  view  of  cost  of  production.  But
the  inevitable  conclusion  (which  Dr.  Hancock  did  not  draw)
would  be  that  the  depreciation  of  gold  is  impossible.*

Take  another  example  of  the  consequences  involved  in  this
doctrine.  If  it  be  true  that  the  wages  and  profits  received  by.
the  producers  of  a  commodity  are  the  measure  of  its  cost  of
production,  then  it  follows  that  all  commodities  whatever,  it
matters  not  under  what  circumstances  produced,  whether  of
competition  or  of  monopoly,  exchange,  and  can  not  but  ex-
change, in  proportion  to  their  costs  of  production. This  re-

*  The  same  argument,  in  principle,  will  be  found  in  the  sixth  volume  of  Tooke
and  Newmarch's  "  History  of  Prices,"  part  vii.,  §  14.


"COST"  AS  WAGES  AND  PROFITS.  51

suits  at  once  from  the  consideration  that  the  value  of  a  com-
modity, where  it  is  continuously  produced,  constitutes  for  the
producers  the  fund  from  which  wages  and  profits  are  paid.
Accordingly,  such  as  the  value  is,  such  will  be  the  wages  and
profits  of  the  producers ;  but  such  as  are  the  wages  and  prof-
its of  producers,  such,  according  to  the  theory,  is  the  cost  of
production.  When,  therefore,  two  commodities  exchange  for
each  other,  or,  varying  the  expression,  when  their  values  or
prices  are  the  same,  their  costs  of  production,  according  to  the
view  we  are  considering,  will  necessarily  be  the  same.  It  is
evident  that  this  argument  applies  to  every  case  of  value  and
price,  and  is  wholly  irrespective  of  the  circumstances,  whether
of  freedom  or  monopoly,  under  which  commodities  are  pro-
duced. In  truth,  the  principle  that  "cost  of  production  de-
termines value"  becomes,  when  thus  understood,  little  more
than  the  assertion  of  an  identical  proposition,  since  it  merely
amounts  to  saying  that  values  are  in  proportion  to  the  aggre-
gate of  the  elements  of  which  they  are  made  up.

That  a  doctrine  open  to  objections  so  fundamental  should
have  obtained  the  currency  and  prestige  which  this  has  ac-
quired may  seem  scarcely  credible ;  and  I  am  in  some  dread
lest  I  should  be  suspected  of  misrepresenting  the  view  I  am
combating.  But  that  I  have  not  done  so  will  be  admitted  on
consideration  of  the  following  sentences  occurring  in  the  pas-
sage quoted  above,  in  which  Mr.  Mill  discloses  with  perfect
clearness  the  line  of  thought  by  which  the  view  in  question
has  been  reached:  "What  the  production  of  a  thing  costs  to
its  producer,  or  its  series  of  producers,  is  the  labor  expended
in  producing  it.  If  we  consider  as  the  producer  the  capitalist
who  makes  the  advances,  the  word  labor  may  be  replaced  by  tvages;
what  the  produce  costs  to  him  is  the  wages  which  he  has  had  to
pay."  In  other  words,  the  point  of  view  is  shifted  from  the
ground  of  human  interests  to  the  partial  and  limited  stand-
point of  the  capitalist  employer ;  and  the  cost  of  producing  an


52  NORMAL  VALUE.

article,  whicli  really  consists  in  the  sacrifices  required  of  hu-
man beings  for  its  production,  is  only  considered  so  far  forth
as  it  is  "  cost  to  him,"  that  much  more  important  portion  of
the  cost  which  is  cost  to  the  laborer  being  put  altogether  out
of  sight.  This  point  of  view  being  once  taken,  the  rest  fol-
lows simply  and  naturally.  What  is  cost  to  the  capitalist,
that  is  to  say,  his  advances,"  consisting  of  the  profits  of  previ-
ous producers  as  well  as  of  the  wages  of  laborers,  profits  as
well  as  wages,  must  evidently  be  included  in  cost;  and  not
only  the  profits  of  previous  producers,  but,  in  order  to  meet
the  case  of  different  periods  of  advancing  capital,  the  profits
of  the  producer  of  the  particular  commodity  whose  cost  is  con-
sidered— an  extension  of  the  theory  which  involves  this  curi-
ous consequence,  that  among  the  elements  of  the  cost  of  pro-
ducing a  commodity  is  counted  the  profit  obtained  on  that
commodity  by  the  producer,  a  profit  which  I  need  scarcely
say  is  not  realized  till  after  the  commodity  is  produced.  Such
is  the  line  of  thought  by  which  the  view  in  question  has  been
reached;  and  it  is  not  difficult  to  see  why,  once  adopted,  it
should  find  easy  and  general  acceptance.  The  vocabulary  of
commerce  is,  for  obvious  reasons,  fi'amed  almost  wholly  from
the  capitalist's  stand-point;  and  Political  Economy  is  for  the
most  part  compelled  to  draw  its  nomenclature  from  the  vocab-
ulary of  commerce.  A  doctrine,  therefore,  of  cost  of  produc-
tion which  resolved  all  cost  into  capitalist's  cost  would  easily
fall  in  at  once  with  the  general  phraseology  of  economic  sci-
ence, and  with  the  preconceptions  and  prepossessions  gener-
ated by  commercial  modes  of  thought.

That  the  laborer's  share  in  the  industrial  sacrifice  is  by  the
current  doctrine  excluded  from  the  conception  of  cost  of  pro-
duction does  not  appear  to  have  been  seen,  or,  if  seen,  to  have
been  adequately  appreciated  by  its  adherents.  Mr.  Mill's  lan-
guage seems  to  imply  that  the  wages  advanced  by  the  capital-
ist— though  he  admits  they  only  represent  "  the  cost  of  pro-


"COST"  AS  WAGES  AND  PROFITS.  53

ducing  to  him,^^  may  yet  in  some  way  be  taken  to  represent
the  cost  to  the  laborer  also,  for,  having  dealt  with  this  portion
of  the  case,  he  leads  on  to  the  next  with  the  words:  "Thus

far  of  labor  or  wages,  as  an  element  of  cost  of  production

There  is  also  capital,"  etc.  But  I  must  absolutely  deny  that
wages  can  in  any  sense  be  taken  to  represent  the  labor  element
in  cost  of  production.  Wages,  as  Mr.  Mill  observed  in  the
passage  already  quoted,  may  be  regarded  as  cost  to  the  capi-
talist who  advances  them ;  though  perhaps  it  would  be  more
correct  to  say  that,  so  far  as  they  go,  they  measure  his  cost,
which  really  consists  in  the  deprivation  of  immediate  enjoy-
ment implied  in  the  fact  of  the  advance.  But  to  the  laborer
wages  are  reward,  not  cost ;  nor  can  it  be  said  that  they  stand
in  any  constant  relation  to  that  which  really  constitutes  cost
to  him.  If  they  did,  wages  in  all  occupations,  in  all  countries,
and  in  all  times,  would  be  in  proportion  to  the  severity  of  the
toil  which  they  recompensed;  whereas  the  proportion  fails,
not  only  in  different  occupations  and  in  different  countries,
but  whenever  a  general  advance  or  decline  takes  place  in  the
conditions  of  productive  industry  in  the  same  occupations  and
in  the  same  countries.  That  it  fails  in  different  occupations  in
the  same  country  Mr,  Mill  himself  allows ;  rather,  let  rne  say,
he  has  been  the  first  economist  strongly  to  insist  upon  the  im-
portance of  this  fact ;  that  it  fails  on  a  comparison  of  the  condi-
tion of  labor  in  different  countries  is  too  obvious  to  need  proof;
and  that  it  fails  in  the  same  country  and  in  the  same  occupa-
tions on  the  occurrence  of  important  changes  in  the  conditions
of  productive  industry  we  may  satisfy  ourselves  by  simply  ob-
serving the  events  now  passing  before  our  eyes.  The  remu-
neration of  labor  has  for  some  years  been  pretty  steadily  ad-
vancing in  the  majority  of  occupations  in  this  country — ad-
vancing not  merely  in  its  money  amount,  but  in  the  real  re-
ward it  procures  for  the  laborer.  And  wherever  this  has  hap-
pened without  a  corresponding  increase  in  the  severity  of  the


54  NORMAL  VALUE.

toil  undergone  (and  in  general  it  has  been  accompanied  rather
bj  a  reduction  than  an  extension  of  working  time),  the  pro-
portion between  sacrifice  and  reward  has  been  altered.  I  re-
peat, therefore,  that  not  only  do  wages  not  constitute  the  la-
borer's share  in  the  cost  of  production,  but  they  can  not  be
taken  in  any  sense  to  represent  that  cost.  Where  they  are  ad-
vanced by  the  capitalist  they  measure,  so  far  as  they  go,  the
capitalist's  sacrifice,  and  the  capitalist's  alone ;  and  an  analysis
of  cost  of  production,  therefore,  which  takes  no  account  of  any
sacrifices  but  those  represented  by  wages,  simply  omits  alto-
gether the  most  important  element  of  the  case.

§  4.  The  point  for  which  I  am  contending  will  possibly  ap-
pear to  some  persons  to  involve  a  purely  theoretical  issue.  A
theoretical  issue  no  doubt  is  at  stake,  but  I  believe  a  better
example  could  not  easily  be  found  of  the  intimate  connection
between  theory  and  practice,  and  of  the  way  in  which  an  un-
sound theory  can  invert  for  people  the  true  relation  of  phe-
nomena and  mislead  in  the  practical  business  of  life,  than  is
furnished  by  this  doctrine.  The  truth  of  this  statement  will
only  fully  appear  in  the  later  chapters  of  this  work;  but  even
here  I  may  give  an  example  or  two.  What,  for  instance,  is
now  the  grand  argument  with  the  people  of  the  United  States
for  the  maintenance  of  protection?  Why,  the  high  cost  of
production  in  that  country.  And  what  is  the  evidence  of  this
high  cost  of  production?  Simply  the  high  rates  of  wages
which  prevail.  How,  they  ask,  can  we,  with  our  high-priced
labor,  compete  with  the  pauper  labor  of  Europe?  I  must
frankly  own  that,  accepting  the  point  of  view  of  the  current
theory  of  cost,  I  can  find  no  satisfactory  reply  to  this  question,
and  I  am  quite  sure  that  Mr.  Wells,  who  implicitly  adopts  this
point  of  view,  has  wholly  failed  to  furnish  one.  But  to  pursue
the  argument  further  here  would  be  to  anticipate  what  will  come
more  naturally  under  review  at  a  later  stage  of  our  investigation.


EESULTS  OF  ERRONEOUS  THEORY.  55

Nor  are  our  commercial  writers  here  entitled  to  plume  them-
selves on  the  superiority  of  their  economic  notions  to  those  of
American  protectionists,  at  least  as  regards  this  question  of
cost  of  production.  In  dealing  with  the  labor  question,  the
arguments  of  our  capitalists  do  not  differ  in  principle  from  that
which  I  have  just  criticised.  Consider,  for  example,  the  sig-
nificance of  such  passages  as  this  which  I  find  in  the  work
of  so  well-informed  and  thoughtful  a  writer  as  Mr.  Brassey,
and  which  fairly  represents  the  economic  doctrine  that  per-
vades it:

"  It  is  the  opinion  of  Mr.  Lothian  Bell,  one  of  our  highest  authorities,
that,  after  all  the  efforts  of  our  iron-masters  to  contend  with  the  difficul-
ty of  high-priced  labor  by  the  improvement  of  machinery,  labor  costs
fifteen  per  cent,  more  in  England  than  on  the  Continent,  and  this  disad-
vantage, in  his  opinion,  entirely  neutralizes  the  advantages  we  derive
from  our  great  facilities  in  the  proximity  of  our  iron-mines  to  our  coal-
beds.  Our  workmen  are  not  sufficiently  alive  to  the  necessity  for  the
exercise  of  the  utmost  efforts  of  ingenuity,  in  order  to  enable  capital
invested  in  England  to  hold  its  own  in  the  industrial  camj)aign."*

Now,  I  ask,  what  inversion  of  the  true  relations  of  things
can  be  more  complete  than  to  represent  high-priced  labor  as
an  obstacle  to  production  in  the  same  sense  in  which  the  prox-
imity of  our  coal-beds  to  our  iron-mines  constitutes  a  facility?
Dear  labor  neutralizing  the  advantages  of  our  coal-beds  and
iron-mines !  As  well  speak  of  the  large  fees  reaped  by  a  suc-
cessful barrister  as  neutralizing  the  advantage  of  his  skill ;  for
not  more  certainly  are  the  large  fees  the  consequence  of  the
barrister's  legal  skill,  than  the  high  wages  of  our  artisans  are
the  consequence  of  the  industrial  advantages  under  which  they
work.  Now  what  is  the  explanation  of  this  singular  confusion
of  thought  and  perversion  of  facts  ?  Obviously  this — the  whole
problem  of  industry  is  looked  at  exclusively  from  the  capitalist's

*  See  "  Work  and  Wages,"  p.  19.


56  NORMAL  VALUE.

point  of  view.  "  The  advantages  we  derive  "  from  our  coal-
beds  and  iron-mines  are  the  advantages  which  capitalists  derive
from  them.  "  British  trade"  means  capitalists'  profits;  and,  as
the  only  cost  taken  account  of  in  production  is  the  capitalists'
cost,  so  naturally  the  capitalists'  remuneration  is  the  only  remu-
neration thought  worth  attending  to.  Hence  high  wages  are
represented  as  "neutralizing"  industrial  advantages,  as  if  noth-
ing were  gain  which  did  not  come  to  the  capitalist's  maw ;  and
the  liberal  remuneration  of  the  working-people  is  deplored  as  a
national  calamity  because  it  sets  limits  to  the  capitalist's  share
in  the  produce  of  their  joint  exertions.  "  Dear  labor,"  says  Mr.
Brassey  (p.  142),  summing  up  the  argument  of  a  chapter,  "is
now  the  great  obstacle  to  the  extension  of  British  trade."*  It
does  not  occur  to  him  that  high  profits  are  an  obstacle  in  pre-
cisely the  same  sense.  If  British  laborers  and  capitalists  will
only  consent  to  accept  a  lower  scale  of  remuneration  for  their
services  they  may  have  the  satisfaction  of  indefinitely  extend-
ing British  trade  and  achieving  the  great  goal  of  commercial
ambition  by  underselling  all  the  nations  of  the  earth.  Each,
however,  halts,  and  would  prefer  that  the  other  should  take


*  I  can  not  resist  quoting  the  sentence  which  follows :  "But  we  see  how  cheap
labor  at  the  command  of  our  competitors  [continental  capitalist  employers]  seems
to  exercise  the  same  enervating  influence  as  the  delights  of  Capua  on  the  soldiers
of  Hannibal "  (p.  142).  To  which  this,  from  the  Times' s  money  article,  may  serve
as  a  pendant:  "  It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  no  discovery  of  fresh  supplies  [of
coal],  either  in  Europe  or  America,  would  cause  any  decisive  benefit,  because  the
present  difficulty  in  those  parts  of  the  world  is  not  from  want  of  coal,  but  from

want  of  labor The  East  is  the  only  quarter  wAere /a6or  is  Mwiramme/ec?;

and  it  would  be  interesting  to  the  English  public  to  learn,  as  far  as  the  coal  ques-
tion is  concerned,  why,  in  a  British  settlement,  where  labor  and  material  are  both
in  abundance,  nothing  can  be  accomplished  to  mitigate  an  evil  which  promises  to
become  one  of  the  most  serious  ever  inflicted  upon  tlie  industry  of  civilized  na-
tions." It  is  not  clear  whether  the  evil  deprecated  is  the  scarcity  of  coal  or  the
high  price  of  British  labor ;  but,  from  the  point  of  view  both  of  the  Times  and  of
Mr.  Brassey,  these  would  both  be  evils  of  the  same  order.


THEORY  OF  COST  OF  PRODUCTION.  57

the  initiative  in  the  patriotic  sacrifice,  desiring,  like  the  French
soldiers  at  the  battle  of  Fontenoy,  to  give  to  his  opponent  the
honor  of  iirinsr  first.

O

§  5.  It  seems  to  me  that  a  sufficient  case  has  now  been  made
out  to  justify  an  attempt  at  a  fresh  exposition  of  the  doctrine
of  Cost  of  Production.  I  therefore  proceed  to  submit  to  the
reader  that  view  of  it  which  such  reflection  as  I  have  been
able  to  give  to  the  subject  has  led  me  to  form.

And  here  I  must,  in  the  first  place,  insist  that  cost  means
sacrifice,  and  can  not,  without  risk  of  hopelessly  confusing
ideas,  be  identified  with  any  thing  that  is  not  sacrifice.  It
represents  what  man  parts  with  in  the  barter  between  him  and
nature,  which  must  be  kept  eternally  distinct  from  the  return
made  by  nature  on  that  payment.  This  is  the  essential  nature
of  cost ;  and  the  problem  of  cost  of  production  as  bearing  on
the  theory  of  value  is  to  ascertain  how  far  and  in  what  way
the  payment  thus  made  by  man  to  nature  in  productive  indus-
try determines  or  otherwise  influences  the  exchange  value  of
the  products  which  result.  To  find  an  answer  to  this  question
we  need  not  go  beyond  that  fundamental  principle  of  conduct
which  leads  men  to  seek  their  ends  by  the  easiest  and  shortest
means.  The  end  of  engaging  in  industry  is  the  acquisition  of
wealth ;  and  the  means,  self-denial,  toil,  forethought,  vigilance.
The  problem  of  industry  is,  therefore,  to  attain  wealth  at  the
least  expenditure  of  those  bodily  and  mental  exertions — or,  as
we  may  say,  at  the  least  sacrifice  or  cost.  And  the  law  of  cost
of  production,  as  governing  value,  is  merely  the  practical  con-
sequence and  outcome  of  the  pursuit  of  wealth  under  this  con-
dition.

In  order  to  perceive  this,  it  is  only  necessary  to  keep  stead-
ily in  view  the  two  following  facts:  First,  that  under  the  influ-
ence of  the  motive  just  indicated,  men,  in  selecting  their  occu-
pations, whether  as  laborers  or  as  capitalists,  will,  so/ar  aj  ihey


58  NOIiMAL VALUE.

have  the  power  of  choice,  select  those  which,  in  return  for  a  given
sacrifice,  yield,  or  promise  to  yield,  the  largest  rewards;  and
secondly,  the  fact  that,  under  a  system  of  separation  of  employ-
ments, industrial  rewards  consist  for  each  producer,  or,  more
properly,  for  each  group  of  producers,  employed  on  a  given
work,  in  the  value  of  the  commodities  which  result  from  tlieir
exertions.  I  say  in  the  value  of  the  commodities,  not  in  the
commodities  themselves;  for  it  is  not  always  that  the  man  who
is  engaged  in  industry  needs  the  particular  commodity  on  which
his  own  exertions  are  bestowed,  and  it  is  seldom  that  he  needs
more  than  at  most  an  insignificant  quantity  of  what  he  pro-
duces; consequently  his  remuneration  must  come,  not  from
the  direct  but  from  the  indirect  results  of  his  labors— from
those  things,  whatever  they  are,  which  the  commodity  he  pro-
duces enables  him  by  sale  and  purchase  to  command — in
other  words,  from  its  value.  Griven  the  productiveness  of  a
man's  industry,  this  alone  will  not  enable  us  to  determine  the
amount  of  his  remuneration.  In  order  to  this,  we  must  fur-
ther know  the  proportions  in  which  what  he  produces  will  ex-
change for  what  he  wants— that  is  to  say,  for  the  articles  of
his  consumption.  The  value  of  the  product  resulting  from  in-
dustry forms  thus  the  source  from  which,  under  the  actual
state  of  things,  industry  is  remunerated.  Nor  is  this  conclu-
sion invalidated  by  the  fact  that,  under  the  industrial  organiza-
tion prevailing  in  this  and  other  civilized  countries,  the  laborer
commonly  receives  his  reward  in  the  form  of  wages  advanced
by  the  capitalist  before  the  product  is  completed;  since  what
he  receives  is  subsequently  recouped  to  the  capitalist,  the  sum
being  drawn  from  the  value  of  the  product;  so  that  it  is  still
the  value  of  the  product  from  which  the  remuneration  of  all
concerned  in  the  creation  of  that  product  ultimately  comes.
Wages  and  profits  in  each  branch  of  industry  are  thus  derived
from  the  value  of  the  commodities  proceeding  from  that  branch
of  industry,  and,  as  (with  the  exception  of  the  case  where  rent


IMPLIES  FREE  COMPETITION.  59

is  also  an  element  in  the  value  of  commodities — a  case  which,
those  acquainted  with  the  economic  theory  of  rent  will  per-
ceive, does  not  affect  the  general  argument)  wages  and  profits
also  absorb  the  whole  of  that  value,  it  follows  that,  other
things  being  the  same,  the  aggregate  of  wages  and  profits  re-
ceived by  any  given  group  of  producers  will  always  vary  with
the  value  of  the  aggregate  of  commodities  which  they  pro-
duce. Where  wages  and  profits,  therefore,  in  different  occu-
pations are  in  proportion  to  the  sacrifices  undergone,  the
value  of  the  commodities  proceeding  from  those  occupations
will  also  be  in  proportion  to  the  same  sacrifices,  that  is  to
say,  the  commodities  will  exchange  in  proportion  to  their
costs  of  production.  Now  wages  and  profits  will  be  in  pro-
portion to  the  sacrifices  undergone  wherever,  and  only  so  far
as,  competition  prevails  among  producers  —  wherever,  and  so
far  only  as,  laborers  and  capitalists  have  an  effective  choice  in
selecting  among  the  various  occupations  presented  to  them  in
the  industrial  field.  Give  them  this  effective  choice,  and  the
correspondence  of  remuneration  to  sacrifice,  not  indeed  in  ev-
ery act  of  production,  but  as  a  permanent  and  continuing  state
of  things,  is  secured  by  the  most  active  and  constant  of  human
motives.  Each  competitor,  aiming  at  the  largest  reward  in
return  for  his  sacrifices,  will  be  drawn  toward  the  occupations
which  happen  at  the  time  to  be  the  best  remunerated ;  while
he  will  equally  be  repelled  from  those  in  which  the  remunera-
tion is  below  the  average  level.  The  supply  of  products  pro-
ceeding from  the  better  paid  employments  will  thus  be  in-
creased, and  that  from  the  less  remunerative  reduced,  until
supply,  acting  on  price,  corrects  the  inequality,  and  brings
remuneration  into  proportion  with  the  sacrifices  undergone.
Competition,  therefore,  is  at  once  the  security  for  the  corre-
spondence of  industrial  remuneration  with  sacrifice,  and  also,
and  because  it  is  so,  the  security  for  the  correspondence  of  the
values  of  commodities  with  the  costs  of  their  production.


60  NORMAL VALUE.

The  indispensable  condition  to  the  action  of  cost  of  produc-
tion £s  the  regulator  of  normal  values  is  thus  the  existence
of  an  effective  competition  among  those  engaged  in  industrial
pursuits ;  and  the  point  to  which  we  have  now  to  turn  our  at-
tention is  the  extent  to  which  such  effective  competition  is
actually  realized  in  industrial  communities.  Confining  our  at-
tention for  the  present  to  England,  we  find  competition  here
active  and  widely  prevalent.  In  trade,  as  distinguished  from
industry,  I  mean  in  the  buying  and  selling  of  commodities  as
distinguished  from  their  production,  it  may  be  said  to  be  uni-
versal and  unlimited.  Every  one  is  at  liberty,  and  not  only
at  liberty,  but  in  general  has  the  practical  power,  to  sell  his
commodity,^'  whatever  it  may  be,  in  any  market  in  the  coun-
try. Again,  every  one,  speaking  broadly,  is  free,  so  far  as
the  law  is  concerned,  to  engage  in  any  industrial  pursuit  he
pleases,  from  hedging  and  ditching  up^  to  the  learned  profes-
sions. But  for  the  present  purpose  something  more  than  this
is  necessary.  Not  only  must  there  be  for  dealers  the  right
and  power  of  selling  the  commodity  where  they  please,  and
for  workmen  the  legal  right  of  admission  to  whatever  occupa-
tion each  prefers,  but  there  must  be,  for  laborers  and  capital-
ists respectively,  the  practical  power  of  employing  their  labor
and  capital  in  whatever  direction  each  may  please — in  a  word,
an  effective  choice  in  deciding  on  the  destination  of  the  in-
strument of  which  they  have  each  to  dispose.  It  matters  not
what  the  obstacle  may  be  to  the  effectiveness  of  the  choice,
whether  law,  ignorance,  or  poverty — if  there  be  an  obstacle,  if
the  producer  can  not  pass  freely  from  the  less  to  the  more  lucra-
tive occupation,  competition  is  defeated,  so  far  as  regards  the  re-
quirements of  the  law  of  cost,  since  there  can  be  no  security


*  I  say  his  "commodity,"  not  his  "sen'ice."  The  grounds  for  not  including
labor  and  commodities  in  the  same  category,  in  an  exposition  of  the  theory  of
value,  will  be  found  stated  fin-ther  on  (part  ii.,  chap.  i.).


COMPETITION,  HOW  FAB  EFFECTIVE.  61

under  such  circumstances  that  remuneration  shall  be  brought
into  correspondence  with  sacrifice.  This  is  the  sort  of  com-
petition through  which  cost  of  production,  as  a  regulator  of
value,  works;  and  the  question  is.  How  far  does  competition
in  this  sense  prevail  in  this  and  other  industrial  communities  ?
There  is  a  school  of  reasoners  who  will  not  hesitate  to  an-
swer this  question  by  flatly  denying  the  existence  of  competi-
tion at  all  in  the  sense  defined.  I  shall  be  told  that  the  as-
sumption so  readily  made  by  economists,  that  capital  and  labor
may  be  shifted  about  from  one  occupation  to  another  in  search
of  the  highest  remuneration,  is  a  mere  figment  of  the  econom-
ical brain,  without  foundation  in  fact.  Once  embodied  in  a
form  suited  to  actual  wuik,  capital,  it  will  be  urged,  is  for  the
most  part  incapable  of  being  turned  to  other  uses.  The  build-
ings, plant,  and  material  required  for  one  kind  of  manufacture
can  rarely  be  adapted  to  any  other,  and,  even  where  the  con-
version is  possible,  the  process  will  only  be  accomplished  at
great  expense  and  loss.  The  difficulty  of  transferring  labor,  it
will  be  contended,  is  even  greater,  since  we  are  here  in  contact
with  mental  as  well  as  physical  obstacles.  Industrial  skill  is
not  a  thing  to  be  acquired  in  a  moment,  and  that  which  a  man
possesses  is  the  result,  in  general,  of  considerable  time  and  out-
lay devoted  to  its  acquisition.  Is  it  likely  that,  having  spent
his  time  and  money  in  acquiring  this  skill  and  fitting  himself
for  a  particular  occupation,  a  workman  will  desert  the  line  of
life  he  has  chosen  on  the  first  sign  of  an  advance  in  remunera-
tion elsewhere?  We  are  reminded  how  long  the  hand-loom
weavers  persisted  in  their  unprofitable  labors  after  power-looms
were  in  general  use ;  and  we  can  imagine  how  extreme  the
case  would  be  which  would  cause  a  carpenter  to  become  a
smith,  or  a  smith  a  carpenter,  still  more,  which  would  cause  ei-
ther to  take  to  hair-dressing  or  tailoring.  On  such  grounds,
it  has  been  contended  that  competition,  such  as  I  have  defined
it  as  necessary  to  the  action  of  the  principle  of  cost,  has  no  real


62  NORMAL VALUE.

existence,  and  that  consequently  all  theories  assuming  its  ex-
istence fall  to  the  ground.  Alike  with  regard  to  capital  and
labor,  it  is  held  that  either,  once  embarked  in  a  particular  em-
ploj^ment,  is  practically  committed  to  that  employment,  and
may  therefore  be  regarded  as  taken  out  of  the  field  of  compe-
tition with  agents  of  the  same  kind  engaged  in  other  branch-
es of  industry.  I  am  anxious  to  do  the  fullest  justice  to  the
quantum  of  truth  contained  in  this  argument,  and  I  admit  at
once  that  the  facts  alleged  are  substantially  true.  But  I  think
it  will  not  be  difficult  to  show  that  they  by  no  means  sustain
the  practical  conclusion  they  are  adduced  to  support,  and  that,
taking  account  of  other  conditions  of  the  case  which  the  argu-
ment overlooks,  they  are  perfectly  compatible  with  the  exist-
ence of  an  effective  industrial  competition.

In  the  first  place,  it  may  be  remarked  that,  in  order  to  secure
an  effective  industrial  competition — such  a  competition  as  shall
bring  rewards  into  correspondence  with  sacrifices — it  is  not
necessary  that  every  portion  of  capital,  or  that  every  laborer,
should  be  at  all  times  capable  of  being  turned  to  any  selected
occupation.  It  is  enough  that  a  certain  quantity  of  each  agent
• — varying  according  to  circumstances — should  be  thus  disposa-
ble. Suppose  some  branch  of  industry  to  be  specially  flourish-
ing and  to  be  realizing  exceptional  gains,  there  is  no  need  that
the  whole  industry  of  the  country  should  be  disturbed  to  cor-
rect the  inequality.  A  small  diversion  of  capital  and  labor —
small,  I  mean,  in  comparison  with  the  aggregate  embarked  in
any  important  industry  —  will  in  general  suffice  for  the  pur-
pose. Even  on  extraordinary  occasions,  when  unlooked-for
events  in  the  political  or  commercial  world  disturb  ordinary
calculations  and  give  an  enormous  advantage  to  particular  in-
dustries— such  occasions,  for  example,  as  occurred  in  the  early
years  of  railway  enterprise,  or  again  in  the  linen  trade  on  the
breaking  out  of  the  American  civil  war — even  on  such  occa-
sions, the  equilibrium  of  remuneration  and  cost  can  always  be


COMPETITION,  HOW  FAR  EFFECTIVE.  63

restored,  not  indeed  in  a  moment,  but  after  no  long  delay,
through  the  action  of  labor  and  capital  still  uncommitted  to
actual  industrial  employment,  and  without  any  sensible  en-
croachment on  the  stock  already  actively  employed.  All  that
is  necessary,  therefore,  with  a  view  to  an  effective  industrial
competition,  is  the  presence  in  a  community  of  a  certain  quan-
tity of  those  instruments  of  production  existing  in  disposable
form,  ready  to  be  turned  toward  the  more  lucrative  pursuits,
and  sufficiently  large  to  correct  inequalities  as  they  arise.
Now,  it  will  not  be  difficult  to  show  that  this  condition  is  ful-
filled in  many  industrial  communities,  completely  in  the  case
of  capital,  and  less  perfectly,  but  still  within  certain  limits  real-
ly and  effectually,  in  the  case  of  labor  also.

The  existence  of  a  large  amount  of  capital  in  commercial
countries  in  disposable  form — or,  to  speak  less  equivocally,  in
the  form  of  money  or  other  purchasing  power,  capable  of  being
turned  to  any  purpose  required — is  a  patent  and  undeniable
fact.  Nor  is  it  less  certain  that  this  capital  is  constantly  seek-
ing the  best  investments,  and  rapidly  moves  toward  any  branch
of  industry  that  happens  at  the  moment  to  offer  special  attrac-
tions.* It  is  plain,  too,  that  the  capital  thus  disposable  is  suffi-

*  "Political  economists  say  that  capital  sets  toward  the  most  profitable  trades,
and  that  it  rapidly  leaves  the  less  profitable  and  non-paying  trades.  But  in  ordi-
naiy  countries  this  is  a  slow  process,  and  some  persons,  who  want  to  have  ocular
demonstration  of  abstract  truths,  have  been  inclined  to  doubt  it  because  they  could
not  see  it.  In  England,  howevei",  the  process  would  be  visible  enough  if  you  could
only  see  the  books  of  the  bill-brokers  and  the  bankers.  Their  bill-cases,  as  a  rule,
are  full  of  the  bills  drawn  in  the  most  profitable  trades,  and  cceteris  paribus  and  in
comparison  empty  of  those  drawn  in  the  less  profitable.  If  the  iron  trade  ceases
to  be  as  profitable  as  usual,  less  iron  is  sold ;  the  fewer  the  sales  the  fewer  the  bills ;
and  in  consequence  the  number  of  iron  bills  in  Lombard  Street  is  diminished.  On
the  other  hand,  if  in  consequence  of  a  bad  han'est  the  com  trade  becomes  on  a  sud-
den profitable,  immediately  '  com  bills '  are  created  in  great  numbers,  and  if  good,
are  discounted  in  Lombard  Street.  Thus  English  capital  runs  as  surely  and  in-
stantly where  it  is  most  wanted,  and  where  there  is  most  to  be  made  of  it,  as  water
runs  to  find  its  level." — "Lombard  Street,"  p.  13,  by  Walter  Bagkhot.


64  NORMAL VALUE.

cient  for  the  purpose  we  have  here  in  view,  namely,  to  ren-
der competition  effective  among  the  various  industries ;  since
we  find  a  portion  of  it  constantly  moving  abroad  for  foreign
investment — a  destination  it  would  scarcely  receive  while  there
was  a  prospect  of  reaping  exceptionally  high  returns  from  in-
vestment within  the  country.  We  have,  therefore,  in  the  exist-
ence of  this  fund  all  that  is  required  for  a  practically  effective
competition,  so  far  as  one  instrument  of  production  is  concern-
ed, and  this  without  necessitating  any  serious  encroachment
on  the  capital  actually  engaged  in  productive  operations.  But
is  the  corresponding  condition  satisfied  in  the  case  of  labor?
A  little  consideration  will  show  that,  within  certain  limits  and
subject  to  certain  qualifications,  it  is  fulfilled  in  this  as  well.

For  here  also  we  have  a  disposable  fund,  capable  of  being
turned,  as  remuneration  may  tempt,  in  various  directions.
Granted  that  labor,  once  engaged  in  a  particular  occupation,
is  practically  committed  to  that  species  of  occupation  ;  all  la-
bor is  not  thus  engaged  and  committed.  A  young  generation
is  constantly  coming  forward,  whose  capabilities  may  be  re-
garded as  still  in  disposable  form,  fulfilling  the  same  function
in  relation  to  the  general  labor  force  of  the  country  which
capital,  while  yet  existing  as  purchasing  power,  discharges  in
relation  to  its  general  capital.  The  young  persons  composing
this  body,  or  others  interested  in  their  welfare,  are  eagerly
watching  the  prospects  of  industi-y  in  its  several  branches,  and
will  not  be  slow  to  turn  toward  the  pursuits  that  promise  the
largest  rewards.  Individual  tastes,  no  doubt,  will  go  for  some-
thing in  the  decision,  but  varieties  of  tastes,  taken  over  a  large
area,  may  be  assumed  pretty  well  to  balance  each  other ;  and
there  will  remain  a  steady  gravitation  of  disposable  labor  to-
ward the  more  remunerative  callings.  On  the  other  hand,
while  fresh  labor  is  coming  on  the  scene,  worn-out  labor  is
passing  off;  and  the  departments  of  industry,  in  which  remu-
neration has  from  any  causes  fallen  below  the  average  level,


COMPETITION,  HOW  FAB  EFFECTIVE,  65

ceasing  to  be  recruited,  the  numbers  of  those  employed  in  them
will  quickly  decline,  until  supply  is  brought  within  the  limits
of  demand,  and  remuneration  is  restored  to  its  just  proportions.
In  this  way,  then,  in  the  case  of  labor  as  in  that  of  capital,  the
conditions  for  an  effective  competition  exist,  notwithstanding
the  practical  difficulties  in  the  way  of  transferring  labor,  once
trained  to  a  particular  occupation,  to  new  pursuits.  But,  as  I
have  already  intimated,  the  conditions  are  in  this  case  realized
only  in  an  imperfect  manner,  and  this  involves,  as  a  conse-
quence, certain  limitations  on  the  action  of  competition  in  the
labor  market,  and  certain  corresponding  effects  on  the  values
of  commodities.  What  the  nature  of  those  limitations  are  I
shall  now  proceed  to  point  out.

I  remarked  just  now  that  the  youthful  labor  constantly  com-
ing forward  to  recruit  the  labor  market  might  be  compared  to
the  capital  still  existing  in  the  form  of  purchasing  power,  and
ready  to  be  applied  to  any  occupation,  according  as  the  pros-
pect of  profit  might  determine.  In  one  important  respect,
however,  the  analogy  fails.  Of  the  capital  existing  in  this  dis-
posable form  any  portion  may  be  applied  to  any  industrial  pur-
pose. But  of  the  disposable  labor  each  element — that  is  to  say,
each  individual  laborer — can  only  choose  his  employment  with-
in certain  tolerably  well-defined  limits.  These  limits  are  the
limits  set  by  the  qualifications  required  for  each  branch  of  trade
and  the  amount  of  preparation  necessary  for  their  acquisition.
Take  an  individual  workman  whose  occupation  is  still  undeter-
mined, he  will,  according  to  circumstances,  have  a  narrower. or
wider  field  of  choice  ;  but  in  no  case  will  this  be  co-extensive
with  the  entire  range  of  domestic  industry.  If  he  belongs  to  the
class  of  agricultural  laborers,  all  forms  of  mere  unskilled  labor
are  open  to  him,  but  beyond  this  he  is  practically  shut  out  from
competition.  The  barrier  is  his  social  position  and  circum-
stances, which  render  his  education  defective,  while  his  means
are  too  narrow  to  allow  of  his  repairing  the  defect,  or  of  defer-

5


86  NOBMAL  VALUE.

ring  the  return  upon  his  industry  till  he  has  qualified  himself
for  a  skilled  occupation.  Mounting  a  step  higher  in  the  in-
dustrial scale  —  to  the  artisan  class,  including  with  them  the
class  of  small  dealers  whose  pecuniary  position  is  much  upon
a  par  with  artisans,  here  also  within  certain  limits  there  is  com-
plete freedom  of  choice,  but  beyond  a  certain  range  practical
exclusion.  The  man  who  is  brought  up  to  be  an  ordinary  car-
penter, mason,  or  smith,  may  go  to  any  of  these  callings,  or  a
hundred  more,  according  as  his  taste  prompts,  or  the  prospect
of  remuneration  attracts  him ;  but  practically  he  has  no  power
to  compete  in  those  higher  departments  of  skilled  labor  for
which  a  more  elaborate  education  and  larger  training  are  nec-
essary, for  example,  mechanical  engineering.  Ascend  a  step
higher  still,  and  we  find  ourselves  again  in  presence  of  similar
limitations:  we  encounter  persons  competent  to  take  part  in
any  of  the  higher  skilled  industries,  but  practically  excluded
from  the  professions.  It  is  true,  indeed,  that  in  none  of  these
cases  is  the  exclusion  absolute.  The  limits  imposed  are  not
such  as  may  not  be  overcome  by  extraordinary  energy,  self-
denial,  and  enterprise;  and  by  virtue  of  these  qualities  indi-
viduals in  all  classes  are  escaping  every  day  from  the  bounds
of  their  original  position,  and  forcing  their  way  into  the  ranks
of  those  who  stand  above  them.  All  this,  no  doubt,  is  true.
But  such  exceptional  phenomena  do  not  affect  the  substantial
truth  of  our  position.  What  we  find,  in  effect,  is,  not  a  whole
population  competing  indiscriminately  for  all  occupations,  but
a.series  of  industrial  layers,  superposed  on  one  another,  within
each  of  which  the  various  candidates  for  employment  possess
a  real  and  effective  power  of  selection,  while  those  occupying
the  several  strata  are,  for  all  purposes  of  effective  competition,
practically  isolated  from  each  other.  We  may  perhaps  vent-
ure to  arrange  them  in  some  such  order  as  this:  first,  at  the
bottom  of  the  scale  there  would  be  the  large  group  of  unskill-
ed or  nearly  unskilled  laborers,  comprising  agricultural  labor-


NON-COMPETINQ  GROUPS.  67

ers,  laborers  engaged  in  miscellaneous  occupations  in  towns,  or
acting  in  attendance  on  skilled  labor.  Secondly,  there  would
be  the  artisan  group,  comprising  skilled  laborers  of  the  second-
ary order  —  carpenters,  joiners,  smiths,  masons,  shoe  -  makers,
tailors,  hatters,  etc.,  etc.,  with  whom  might  be  included  the
very  large  class  of  small  retail  dealers,  whose  means  and  po-
sition place  them  within  the  reach  of  the  same  industrial  op-
portunities as  the  class  of  artisans.  The  third  layer  would  con-
tain producers  and  dealers  of  a  higher  order,  whose  work  would
demand  qualifications  only  obtainable  by  persons  of  substantial
means  and  fair  educational  opportunities  —  for  example,  civil
and  mechanical  engineers,  chemists,  opticians,  watch-makers,
and  others  of  the  same  industrial  grade,  in  which  might  also
j&nd  a  place  the  superior  class  of  retail  tradesmen ;  while  above
these  there  would  be  a  fourth,  comprising  persons  still  more
favorably  circumstanced,  whose  ampler  means  would  give  them
a  still  wider  choice.  This  last  group  would  contain  members
of  the  learned  professions,  as  w^ell  as  persons  engaged  in  the
various  careers  of  science  and  art,  and  in  the  higher  branches
of  mercantile  business.  The  reader  will  not  understand  me  as
offering  here  an  exhaustive  classification  of  the  industrial  pop-
ulation. I  attempt  nothing  of  the  kind;  but  merely  seek  to
exhibit  in  rough  outline  the  form  which  industrial  organiza-
tion, under  the  actual  conditions  of  modern  life,  tends  to  as-
sume; my  object  being,  by  putting  the  fact  in  a  concrete
shape,  to  furnish  help  toward  a  more  distinct  apprehension
of  the  limitations  imposed  by  social  circumstances  on  the  free
competition  of  labor  than  would  be  obtained  from  more  gen-
eral statements.  As  I  have  already  said,  I  am  far  from  con-
tending for  the  existence  of  any  hard  lines  of  demarkation  be-
tween any  categories  of  persons  in  this  country.  No  doubt
the  various  ranks*  and  classes  fade  into  each  other  by  imper-
ceptible gradations,  and  individuals  from  all  classes  are  con-
stantly passing  up  or  dropping  down ;  but  while  this  is  so,  it


6S  NORMAL  VALUE.

is  nevertheless  true  that  the  average  workman,  from  whatever
rank  he  be  taken,  finds  his  power  of  competition  limited  for
practical  purposes  to  a  certain  range  of  occupations,  so  that,
however  high  the  rates  of  remuneration  in  those  which  lie  be-
yond may  rise,  he  is  excluded  from  sharing  them.  We  are
thus  compelled  to  recognize  the  existence  of  non-competing  in-
dustrial groups  as  a  feature  of  our  social  economy ;  and  this  is
the  fact  which  I  desire  here  to  insist  upon.  It  remains  to  be
considered  how  this  organization  of  industry  is  calculated  to
modify  the  action  of  the  principle  of  cost  of  production. •

The  reader  will  remember  that  there  are  two  distinct  sac-
rifices undergone  in  the  business  of  production — the  sacrifice
of  the  capitali^  and  the  sacrifice  of, the  laborer.  As  regards
the  former,  the  competition  of  capital  being,  as  we  have  seen,
effective  over  the  entire  industry  of  each  commercial  country,
it  follows  that  so  much  of  the  value  of  commodities  as  goes  to
remunerate  the  capitalist's  sacrifice,  and  which  may  be  regard-
ed as  the  "  profit  fund,"  will  correspond  throughout  the  range
of  domestic  industry  with  that  portion  of  the  cost  which  falls
to  the  capitalist.  The  defalcation  from  the  principle  of  cost
occurs  not  here,  but  in  that  other  and  larger  element  in  the
value  of  commodities  which  goes  to  remunerate  the  laborer.
The  nature  of  the  failure  may  be  thus  described :  The  ex-
change of  all  commodities  produced  by  laborers  belonging  to
the  same  industrial  group,  or  competing  circle,  will  be  govern-
ed by  the  principle  of  cost — this  results  necessarily  from  the
fact  that  competition  is  effective  within  such  groups  or  cir-
cles; but  the  exchange  of  commodities  produced  by  laborers
belonging  to  different  groups  or  competing  circles  will,  for  the
opposite  reason,  not  be  governed  by  this  principle.  Thus  all
the  products  of  unskilled  labor  will  exchange  for  each  other
in  proportion  to  their  costs ;  as  will  also  all  the  products  of
ordinary  artisan  labor  as  among  themselves.  But  the  latter
products  will  not  exchange  against  the  former  in  proportion


LIMITATION  ON  THE  LAW  OF  COST.  69

to  their  costs,  nor  will  the  products  of  artisan  labor,  or  of  un-
skilled labor,  exchange  in  proportion  to  their  costs  against
those  of  the  higher  industrial  groups.  The  price  of  a  deal
table  and  the  price  of  a  common  lock  will  be  found  to  corre-
spond to  the  sacrifices  actually  undergone  by  their  producers;
or  again,  the  price  of  a  barometer  and  the  price  of  a  watch  will
be  found  to  correspond  to  the  same  conditions ;  but  if  we  com-
pare the  price  of  either  of  the  latter  commodities  with  that  of
either  of  the  former,  we  shall  find  that  the  correspondence  fails ;
the  prices  of  the  barometer  and  of  the  watch  will  bear  a  far
larger  proportion  to  their  respective  costs  than  those  of  the
deal  table,  or  of  the  comm.on  lock,  to  theirs.  If  any  one  ques-
tions the  fact,  the  evidence  is  to  be  found  in  the  relative  re-
muneration of  the  producers  of  the  several  articles.  That  re-
muneration, as  I  have  shown,  comes  from  the  price  of  the  com-
modity in  each  case  ;  but,  while  it  is  in  proportion  to  the  rela-
tive sacrifices  of  production  in  the  case  of  the  workmen  who
are  in  competition  with  each  other,  it  is  not  in  proportion  to
those  sacrifices  where  the  workmen  are  excluded  from  mutual
competition.  The  result,  then,  is  that  the  principle  of  cost  of
production  controls  exchange  value  in  the  transactions  taking
place  within  certain  limited  industrial  areas;  while,  in  the  re-
ciprocal dealings  of  those  several  areas  with  one  another,  its
operation  fails.

This  is  the  principal  modification  suffered  by  cost  of  produ^^-
tion  in  consequence  of  the  circumstance  we  are  considering.
In  reality,  however,  the  effects  of  that  state  of  things  are  a
good  deal  more  complex  than  would  appear  from  the  state-
ment just  made;  for  in  that  statement  account  was  not  taken
of  the  fact  that  the  same  commodity  is  very  frequently  the
product  of  labor  belonging  to  different  industrial  circles.  For
example,  a  house  is  mainly  produced  by  masons,  brick-layers,
carpenters,  plasterers,  and  others,  who  would  all  rank  in  the
class  of  artisans; but  a  considerable  quantity  of  purely  un-


70  NOBMAL  VALUE.

skilled  labor  is  also  employed  in  attendance  upon  these,  as
labor  of  a  higher  degree  of  skill  than  that  of  the  ordinary  ar-
tisan is  employed  in  the  finishing  and  decoration  of  the  house.
Now  suppose  a  commodity  of  this  kind,  the  joint  production
of  workmen  of  different  orders,  to  be  exchanged  against  one
produced  by  workmen  belonging  to  some  one  industrial  group,
or  to  several  groups,  but  in  proportions  different  from  those
obtaining  in  the  other  case,  what  principle  would  here  govern
exchange  value,  or — to  express  the  conception  in  a  more  fa-
miliar form — the  relative  prices  of  the  commodities?  Mani-
festly more  than  one  principle  will  be  engaged  in  determining
the  result.  So  far  as  the  two  commodities  are  the  products  of
workmen  in  competition  with  each  other,. their  values  will  be
governed  by  cost  of  production,  but  so  far  as  they  proceed
from  workmen  not  in  mutual  competition,  they  will  be  gov-
erned by  that  other  principle,  yet  to  be  ascertained,  which
governs  normal  value  in  the  absence  of  competition.  Sup-
posing the  commodity  with  which  a  house  is  compared  were
produced  exclusively  by  the  artisan  class,  the  cost  principle
would  be  mainly  operative  in  determining  the  exchange  rela-
tion ;  but  it  would  not  be  entirely  so,  since  a  portion,  though
a  small  portion,  of  the  house  has  been  produced  by  workmen
not  in  competition  with  the  producers  of  the  other  article.  On
the  other  hand,  if  the  comparison  were  made  between  a  house
and  a  commodity  produced  either  wholly  by  unskilled  labor,
or  wholly  by  labor  of  a  degree  of  skill  superior  to  that  of  or-
dinary artisan  labor,  the  relative  values  would  follow,  but  in  a
slight  degree,  the  rule  of  cost  of  production,  being  mainly  con-
trolled by  the  principle  prevailing  in  the  absence  of  the  condi-
tions which  secure  the  action  of  cost.  This  example  will  serve
to  show  the  great  complication  that  arises  in  the  relative  values
of  commodities  under  the  actual  conditions  of  their  production.
And  if  we  bear  in  mind  that  all  manufactured  commodities  are
produced  from  raw  materials  which  are  very  frequently  the


LIMITATION  OF  TEE  LAW  OF  COST.  71

product  of  workmen  not  in  competition  with  those  who  per-
form the  manufacturing  process,  we  shall  see  how  widely  the
range  of  this  sort  of  complication  extendi  Still  we  must  not
exaggerate  its  importance.  What  mainly  happens  is,  that  the
bulk  of  the  value  of  each  commodity  follows  one  law — say  the
law  of  cost,  or  what  we  shall  afterward  find  to  be  the  law  of
reciprocal  demand,  while  a  small  remaining  element  is  govern-
ed by  a  different  principle.  Thus,  reverting  for  a  moment  to
a  previous  illustration,  a  barometer  and  a  watch  are  in  very
large  proportion  the  products  of  workmen  of  a  high  order  of
skill,  and  in  industrial  competition  with  each  other;  in  a  very
insignificant  degree,  of  workmen  of  an  inferior  order:  as,  on
the  other  hand,  a  deal  table  and  a  common  lock  are  mainly  the
products  of  ordinary  artisan  labor,  though,  it  may  be  in  some
small  degree,  also  of  labor  not  in  competition  with  the  labor
of  artisans.  In  so  far,  however,  as  any  portion  of  the  labor
employed  on  the  barometer  is  out  of  competition  with  some
portion  of  that  employed  on  the  watch,  and  in  so  far  as  the
same  is  true  of  the  labor  employed  on  the  other  compared  ar-
ticles, to  that  extent  we  were  not  justified  in  asserting  that  the
commodities  in  question  exchanged,  either  pair  of  them,  in  pro-
portion to  their  costs  of  production.  Nevertheless,  it  is  certain
tha,t  our  statement  was  substantially  true,  since  the  chief  por-
tion, and  so  much  the  chief  portion  as  to  be  nearly  the  whole,
of  the  labor  employed  on  each  pair  fulfilled  the  required  con-
dition ;  and  this  would  govern  a  corresponding  proportion  of
their  values.  A  similar  qualification  would  be  needed  in  the
case  of  most  assertions  of  a  like  nature.  In  strictness,  we  can  sel-
dom say  that  the  values  of  two  commodities  are  in  their  whole
extent  governed  by  their  costs  of  production :  we  can  only  say
that  they  are  so  mainly,  and  in  their  chief  elements.  In  effect
the  point  in  question  is  of  little  more  than  theoretic  importance.
As  a  point  of  theory  it  is  proper  to  notice  it,  but  the  circumstance
it  deals  with  has  little  sensible  effect  upon  the  facts  of  exchanga


72  NORMAL  VALUE.

The  mode  in  which  the  cost  of  producing  commodities  op-
erates in  regulating  their  values  has  now,  I  trust,  been  made
tolerably  clear.  It  will  probably  have  been  observed,  that  as
I  have  departed  from  the  current  doctrine  in  my  view  of  the
elements  of  cost,  so  also  have  I  departed  from  it  in  my  manner
of  representing  the  operation  of  the  law.  That  law  is  ordina-
rily regarded  as  a  principle  governing  value  universally  wher-
ever it  affects  value  at  all — governing,  that  is  to  say,  the  value
of  certain  classes  of  commodities  in  all  exchanges;  so  that,  the
conditions  of  their  production  being  known,  the  law  of  their
value  is  supposed  to  be  known,  whatever  may  be  the  nature
or  the  conditions  of  production  of  the  commodities  against
which  they  are  exchanged.  For  example,  the  price  of  calico
would  commonly  be  said  to  be  governed  by  its  cost  of  produc-
tion, and  this  would  be  laid  down  without  any  limitation  as  to
the  article  which  might  form  the  other  member  in  the  ex-
change. If,  however,  the  exposition  contained  in  the  forego-
ing pages  be  sound,  tin's  conception  of  the  law  can  not  be  cor-
rect. For  what  has  there  appeared  is  a  tendency  in  commodi-
ties to  exchange  in  proportion  to  their  costs  of  production  only
so  far  as  there  exists  free  competition  among  their  producers.
The  exchange,  therefore,  in  proportion  to  cost  would  only  take
place  within  the  limits  of  the  field  of  free  competition  ;  and  a
commodity  produced  within  this  field,  but  exchanged  against
one  produced  by  workmen  from  beyond  it,  would  not  in  such
case  exchange  in  proportion  to  its  cost  of  production.  Sup-
posing, for  example.  A,  B,  C,  D,  E,  F,  to  be  commodities,  the
producers  of  which  are  all  in  free  competition  with  each  other,
such  commodities  would  exchange  among  themselves  in  pro-
portion to  their  costs.  Again,  supposing  X,  Y,  Z,  to  be  com-
modities produced  by  workmen  also  in  free  competition  with
each  other,  but  excluded  from  competing  with  those  who  had
produced  A,  B,  C,  D,  etc. ;  here  again  the  values  of  X,  Y,  Z,  in
the  exchanges  of  these  commodities  ngainst  each  other  would


NATURE  OF  THE  LAW  OF  COST.  73

be  governed  bj  the  principle  of  cost.  But  now  suppose  the
exchange  to  be  made  of  a  commodity  belonging  to  the  former
category  against  one  belonging  to  the  latter — value  would  in
this  case  be  no  longer  governed  by  cost  of  production,  inas-
much as  there  was  no  longer  free  competition  among  those
who  had  produced  the  commodities  exchanged.  Now  if  the
reader  will  recall  the  description  that  has  been  given  of  the
various  non-competing  groups  of  which  our  industrial  system
is  made  up,  he  will  perceive  that  the  case  last  supposed  repre-
sents no  inconsiderable  proportion  of  all  the  exchanges  which
take  place  within  such  a  country  as  this ;  and  that,  therefore,
the  action  of  cost  of  production  in  regulating  value  is  by  no
means  as  extensively  prevalent,  even  within  the  limits  of  the
same  country,  as  the  current  theory  would  lead  us  to  suppose.
The  same  commodity  follows  the  law  of  cost  of  production  in
some  exchanges  and  does  not  follow  it  in  others;  nor  is  it  true
that  the  value  of  any  commodity  conforms  to  the  principle
of  cost  in  all  exchanges.  In  order  that  this  should  happen,
effective  competition  should  be  established  among  producers
over  the  entire  field  of  industry  —  a  condition  which,  I  need
hardly  say,  is  very  far  yet  from  being  anywhere  fulfilled.
The  true  conception  of  the  law  of  cost  is  thus,  not  of  a  law
governing  universally  the  values  of  any  class  of  commodities,
but  that  of  one  governing  the  values  of  certain  commodities  in
certain  exchanges.

§  6.  In  what  has  gone  before,  cost  of  production  has  been
discussed  without  more  than  a  passing  reference  to  the  nature
of  the  elements  which  compose  it.  There  was  no  need  to  dis-
criminate those  elements  with  particularity  while  we  were  oc-
cupied in  establishing  the  general  principle,  but  the  evidence
for  that  principle  having  now  been  set  forth,  it  will  be  desira-
ble to  attempt  some  analysis  and  characterization  of  the  con-
stituents of  cost.


74  NORMAL VALUE.

There  can  not  be  much  difficulty  in  determining  the  princi-
pal elements  of  cost  of  production,  once  we  have  firmly  seized
the  fact  that,  as  cost  means  sacrifice  and  not  reward,  so  cost
of  production  means  the  sacrifice  involved  in  production — in
the  act  or  acts  of  rendering  certain  objects  supplied  by  nature
fitted  for  human  purposes,  not  the  beneficial  result  or  return
upon  such  acts.  This  sacrifice,  so  soon  as  industry  has  passed
its  most  primitive  stage,  assumes  two  distinct  forms — first,  that
involved  in  the  physical  or  mental  exertion  incident  to  taking
part  personally  in  the  work  of  production,  which  we  may  call
briefly  the  sacrifice  of  "labor;"  and,  secondly,  that  involved  in
supplying  the  prerequisites  of  productive  operations,  or  capi-
tal— a  form  of  sacrifice  which  is  conveniently  expressed  by  the
term  "abstinence."  These  are  the  principal  kinds  of  sacrifices
involved  in  productive  industry ;  but  there  is  also  a  third,  the
liability,  namely,  of  producers  to  certain  evils  over  and  above
the  usual  and  calculable  sacrifices  incident  to  their  work,  which
we  may  call  "  risk."  There  is  no  reason  in  the  nature  of  things
that  these  several  sacrifices  should  not  be  undergone  by  the
same  person,  that  is  to  say,  that  the  same  person  should  not  be
at  once  laborer  and  capitalist,  and  also  incur  all  the  risk  of  the
industrial  operation  ;  and  in  point  of  fact  this  arrangement  has
place  more  or  less  in  every  country,  and  in  some  countries,
especially  those  in  which  peasant  proprietorship  prevails,  to  a
great  extent.  In  England,  however,  and  in  all  the  non-agri-
cultural industry  of  most  civilized  countries,  the  sacrifices  of
labor  and  abstinence  are,  for  the  most  part,  undergone  by  dis-
tinct classes,  who  are  named,  accordingly,  laborers  and  capi-
talists. The  sacrifice  of  risk,  on  the  other  hand,  falls  on  both
classes  of  producers  alike,  though  the  nature  of  the  risk  differs
according  as  it  affects  one  or  the  other.  Affecting  the  capital-
ist, it  is  risk  to  his  property ;  affecting  the  laborer,  it  is  risk  to
his  bodily  and  mental  faculties  or  life,  but  in  either  case  it  is
an  element  of  cost ;  being  a  real  sacrifice  incurred  by  a  pro-


THE  LABOR  ELEMENT.  75

ducer,  and  demanding  consequently  a  corresponding  compen-
sation in  the  value  of  the  product.*

Our  analysis,  then,  of  cost  of  production  resolves  it  into  three
principal  elements,  which,  I  may  remark,  are  also  ultimate  ele-
mentsf — Labor,  Abstinence,  and  Eisk;  the  first,  under  the
prevailing  industrial  arrangements  of  this  and  other  civilized
countries,  borne  by  the  laborer,  in  that  enlarged  sense  of  the
term  in  which  "laborer"  includes  all  who  take  a  personal  part
in  the  business  of  production ;  the  second  by  the  capitalist;
the  third  falling  upon  laborer  and  capitalist  alike.  A  few  re-
marks on  each  of  these  elements  will  suffice  for  my  present
purpose.

Considering  labor  as  an  element  of  cost  of  production,  the
principal  remark  that  seems  called  for  is  that,  in  estimating  it
in  this  character,  three  circumstfinces,  and  three  circumstances
only,  must  be  taken  account  of — namely,  the  duration  of  the
exertion,  the  degree  of  its  severity  or  irksomeness,  and  the  risk
or  liability  to  injury  of  any  kind  attending  it.  As  commodi-
ties differ  greatly  more  in  the  duration  of  the  exertion,  or  the
quantity  of  the  labor  required  for  their  production,  than  in  the
severity  of  this  labor  or  the  risk  attending  it,  the  former  is  ob-
viously the  most  important  circumstance  in  the  case,  and  it
was  to  it  alone  that  Eicardo,  in  his  analysis  of  cost,  had  re-

*  In  the  usual  exposition  of  t+ie  doctrine  of  cost  of  production  the  only  risk  taken
account  of  is  that  incurred  by  the  capitalist ;  but  this  is  merely  a  consequence  of
that  habit  of  contemplating  the  work  of  production  exclusively  from  the  capital-
ist's stand-point,  of  which  I  have  already  spoken.

t  As  I  understand  the  word,  "an  ultimate  element"  in  the  subject-matter  of
any  science  is  either  an  element  which  in  the  actual  state  of  knowledge  does  not
admit  of  being  farther  resolved,  or  one  the  resolution  of  which  belongs  to  some
other  department  of  knowledge.  In  this  sense  labor,  abstinence,  and  risk  are  ul-
timate elements  in  Political  Economy,  since,  though  they  all  admit  of  being  traced
to  prior  conditions  and  so  "explained,"  the  task  of  performing  this  process  falls
within  the  province  of  other  sciences.  In  what  sense  profits  and  wages  can,  in
any  case,  be  considered  ultimate  elements  of  cost  I  am  at  a  loss  to  understand.


76  NORMAL  VALUE.

gard ;  but  manifestly  his  exposition  was  in  this  respect  defect-
ive. The  labor  employed  in  producing  different  commodities
differs  in  severity  and  in  liability  to  accident  as  well  as  in  mere
quantity,  and,  in  proportion  as  it  is  more  severe  or  more  lia-
ble to  accident,  implies,  other  things  being  the  same,  a  greater
sacrifice,  and  therefore  a  larger  cost.  This  greater  sacrifice  will
require  corresponding  compensation,  which,  as  in  other  cases,
can  only  be  furnished  from  the  value  of  the  product.  Com-
modities, accordingly,  will  exchange — jf  we  confine  our  atten-
tion to  the  labor  element,  of  cost — not  simply  in  proportion  to
the  quantity  of  labor  employed  in  their  production,  but  in  pro-
portion to  this  multiplied  by  the  severity  of  the  labor  or  the
risk  attending  it.  When,  however,  we  have  taken  account  of
quantity,  irksomeness,  and  risk,  we  have  taken  account  of  ev-
ery incident  in  virtue  of  which  labor  is  an  element  of  cost  of
production,  and  affects  through  this  principle  the  value  of  com-
modities.

It  will  be  observed  that  in  the  brief  analysis  just  given  I
have  not  taken  any  account  of  skill  as  an  incident  of  labor  en-
tering into  the  cost  of  production.  In  making  this  omission,  I
have  no  doubt  I  shall  be  considered  by  many  to  have  omitted
a  principal  element  of  the  case.  Nevertheless,  I  must  main-
tain that  skill,  as  skill,  is  no  part  of  the  cost  of  production,
and  I  add,  that  no  article  is  dearer  than  another  simply  in  vir-
tue of  the  skill  bestowed  upon  it.  Let  me  explain.  Skill,  I
say,  is  no  element  of  cost,  but  it  may  be,  and  generally  is,  an
indication  of  that  which  is  an  element  of  cost — namely,  the
sacrifice,  whether  in  the  form  of  labor  or  abstinence,  under-
gone in  acquiring  the  skill.  Now,  so  far  as  skill  is  the  prod-
uct of  such  sacrifice,  it  undoubtedly  represents  an  element  of
the  cost  of  production ;  but  the  point  to  be  attended  to  is,  that
the  addition  thus  made  to  the  cost  of  production  is  in  propor-
tion, not  to  the  skill,  but  to  the  sacrifice  necessary  to  the
acquisition  of  the  skill. As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  products  of


RELATION  OF  SKILL  TO  "  COST."  77

most  kinds  of  skilled  labor  exchange  against  those  of  unskill-
ed in  a  proportion  much  more  favorable  to  the  former  than
cost  of  production,  as  I  have  defined  the  doctrine,  would  pre-
scribe. But  this  does  not  prove  that  skill  is  an  element  of
cost ;  because  it  will  be  found  that,  where  the  products  of
skilled  labor  command  these  high  terms  of  exchange,  the  con-
ditions of  production  are  not  those  in  which  cost  of  produc-
tion would  govern  value;  in  other  words,  the  result  in  ques-
tion only  occurs  where  skilled  labor  represents  a  monopoly.
If  we  desire  evidence  of  the  powerlessness  of  skill,  as  such,  to
affect  the  value  of  commodities,  we  have  only  to  consider  the
very  low  prices  which  many  works  of  the  highest  literary  and
scientific  excellence  fetch,  as  compared  with  products  of  a  far
lower  degree  of  skill.  The  eminent  skill  embodied  in  such
works  does  not  prevent  their  selling  at  a  price  far  below  their
cost  of  production,  as  measured  by  the  prices  of  commodi-
ties representing  skill  of  a  different  order;  and  if  in  other  in-
stances the  products  of  skill  command  prices  far  above  what
the  law  of  cost  would  prescribe,  no  more  is  this  elevated  value
due  to  the  skill  which  such  products  represent,  but  to  the  circum-
stances which  limit  the  possession  of  this  skill  to  a  small  num-
ber of  persons  as  compared  with  the  demand  for  their  services.*

*  The  reader  will  observe  that  the  doctrine  here  laid  down  as  to  the  relation  of
skill  to  the  valne  of  commodities  and,  as  depending  on  this,  to  the  relative  remu-
neration of  services,  relates  to  skill  of  different  kinds  as  existing  in  the  different
departments  of  industry.  Within  the  limits  of  the  same  trade  or  profession  dif-
ferences of  skill  will,  in  general,  under  free  competition,  be  accompanied  with
corresponding  differences  of  remuneration.  What  the  capitalist  employing  labor
looks  to  is  not  the  labor,  but  the  result ;  and,  consequently,  where  two  inferior
workmen  only  produce  the  same  result  as  one  of  superior  skill,  it  will  be  worth  his
while  to  pay  the  latter  double  what  he  could  afford  to  pay  either  of  the  former.
Relative  wages,  therefore,  within  the  same  occupation,  will,  where  competition  pre-
vails, be,  in  general,  pretty  accurately  adjusted  to  the  different  degrees  of  skill  :
in  different  occupations — and  it  is  only  with  these,  as  furnishing  the  occasion  of
exchange,  that  a  theory  of  value  has  to  do — they  will  be  affected  by  skill  only  in
the  manner  pointed  out  in  the  text.


78  NORMAL  VALUE.

The  true  relation  between  skill  and  value  may  be  expressed
in  the  following  propositions :

First,  skill,  as  skill,  produces  no  effect  upon  value ;  in  other
words,  commodities  do  not  under  any  circumstances  exchange
for  each  other  in  proportion  to  the  degree  of  skill  bestowed
upon  them.  Secondly,  skill,  though  in  itself  inoperative  on
value,  nevertheless  affects  it  indirectly  in  two  distinct  ways:
first,  where  competition  is  effective  among  producers,  through
the  cost  which  must  be  undergone  in  acquiring  the  skill — in
such  cases  the  value  of  skilled  products  will,  cceteris  paribus,
exceed  that  of  unskilled  by  the  amount  of  the  normal  returns
upon  this  cost;  and,  secondly,  in  the  absence  of  effective  com-
petition, through  the  principle  of  monopoly,  by  limiting  the
number  of  competitors  in  skilled  occupations,  and  so  acting  on
the  supply  of  skilled  products.  In  either  of  these  ways  skill
may  raise  value;  but,  as  skill,  that  is  to  say,  in  virtue  of  its
own  excellence,  whether  measured  by  the  standard  of  utility
or  of  artistic  merit,  it  is  powerless  for  this  result.

There  is,  indeed,  a  mode  of  speaking  sanctioned  by  the  lan-
guage of  some  economists,  and  much  in  favor  with  those  who
seek  to  justify  in  all  things  existing  industrial  arrangements,
which  implies  that  skill,  as  such,  is  a  source  of  value,  and  that
high  or  low  wages  and  prices  are  to  be  explained  by  reference
simply  to  the  results  of  the  skill  which  services  or  commodities
embody.  For  example,  we  constantly  hear  it  said,  in  reply  to
complaints  of  wages  being  unduly  low  in  certain  industries,
that  this  must  be  so,  inasmuch  as  the  services  remunerated  by
these  low  wages  are  of  little  worth,  while  the  higher  wages  ob-
tained in  others  are  explained  by  reference  to  the  high  worth
of  the  services  rendered  by  the  workmen  employed.  Em-
ployers, we  are  told,  can  not  afford  to  pay  any  class  of  work-
men more  than  their  services  are  worth.  Now,  what  is  the
standard  of  "  worth"  here  adopted?  There  would  seem  to  be
but. two  standards  possible;  first  that  furnished  by  the  ex-


RELATION  OF  SKILL  TO  "  COST:'  79

change  itself:  in  other  words,  the  "worth"  of  a  service  may
be  measured  by  the  money  it  commands.  According  to  this
conception  of  "worth,"  the  statement  that  wages  are  low  be-
cause the  services  they  remunerate  are  of  little  worth,  and  high
because  the  worth  of  the  services  is  high,  merely  means  that
wages  are  high  or  low  because  they  are  high  or  low,  which  does
not  much  elucidate  the  problem ;  while,  iri  the  assertion  that
employers  can  not  pay  their  workmen  more  than  their  services
are  worth,  the  point  at  issue  is  formally  begged,  since  —  the
standard  of  worth  being  the  actual  terms  of  the  exchange — it
amounts  to  saying  that  employers  can  not  afford  to  pay  their
workmen  more  than  they  actually  do  pay  them,  which  is  just
what  the  complainants  deny.  In  truth,  however,  though  this  is
the  standard  of  worth  upon  which  those  who  use  the  argument
I  am  considering  would,  if  pushed,  probably  rely,  their  language
really  suggests  something  more  than  this — the  idea,  namely,
that  industrial  "worth"  is  something  varying  with  the  utility
embodied  in  the  services,  or,  what  comes  nearly  to  the  same
thing,  with  the  skill  which  is  productive  of  this  utility.  Some
such  sense  as  this  must  be  assigned  to  their  words  if  they  are
not  to  be  taken  as  expressing  barren  truisms;  but  in  any  such
sense,  the  statements  in  question  are  wholly  unfounded.  jSo
such  connection  between  wages  (it  will  be  understood  that  1
speak  now  oi  comparative  wages)  and  the  utility  or  skillfulness
of  the  services  rendered  exists  as  the  language  assumes,  any
more  than  a  similar  connection  can  be  made  out  between  these
qualities  and  the  prices  of  commodities.  The  true  connection
is  not  with  either  utility  or  skill,  but,  where  competition  is
effective,  with  cost  of  production,  and  in  the  absence  of  effect-
ive competition,  with  monopoly,  more  or  less  qualified,  and
acting  through  supply  and  demand.  To  return  from  this  par-
tial digression,  we  find  labor,  as  an  element  of  cost  of  produc-
tion, measurable  by  reference  to  three  of  its  incidents,  and  to
three  of  its  incidents  only — 1st,  the  duration  of  the  exertion,  or


80  NOEMAL  VALUE.

the  quantity  of  labor;  2d,  its  severity  or  irksomeness;  and  3d,
tiae  risk  attending  it.  In  whatever  other  qualities  various  sorts
of  labor  may  differ,  unless  so  far  as  these  are  indications  of
onerous  effort  expended,  they  are  no  portion  of  the  labor  ele-
ment of  cost,  and  must  be  reg-arded  as  irrelevant  to  the  ques-
tion now  in  hand.

The  term  "  abstinence  "  is  the  name  given  to  the  sacrifice  in-
volved in  the  advance  of  capital.  As  to  the  nature  of  this
sacrifice,  it  is  mainly  of  a  negative  kind ;  consisting  chiefly  in
the  deprivation  or  postponement  of  enjoyment,  implied  in  the
fact  of  parting  with  our  wealth  so  far  at  least  as  concerns  our
present  power  of  commanding  it.  The  term,  indeed,  would  im-
ply that  the  sacrifice  is  wholly  negative;  but  I  am  inclined  to
include  in  it  a  certain  small  positive  element,  namely,  that  low
degree  of  risk  which  is  never  absent  from  the  advance  of  capi-
tal. That  some  degree  of  risk  always  accompanies  the  act  in
question  is  evident  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  since  it  implies
either  the  trusting  of  one's  wealth  to  other  persons,  or,  where
it  is  employed  by  the  owner  himself  in  productive  industry,
the  putting  of  it,  with  a  view  to  future  results,  into  forms  not
capable  of  being  directly  converted  to  his  uses.  It  will  be
more  convenient,  I  think,  to  consider  this  slight  and  inevitable
risk,  which  is  always  present  where  abstinence  is  exercised  for
economic  ends,  as  an  incident  of  that  sacrifice,  than  as  a  sub-
stantive element  of  cost  to  be  associated  with  "risk"  as  I  have
defined  it  in  that  character.  I  shall,  therefore,  so  understand  it,
and  shall  accordingly  define  "  abstinence  "  as  the  act  of  abstain-
ing from  the  personal  use  of  wealth  with  a  view  to  employing
it  in  productive  industry,  combined  with  that  low  degree  of
risk  inevitably  attaching  to  every  such  act.

This  being  the  nature  of  abstinence,  the  question  will  sug-
gest itself  how  far  it  may  be  properly  considered  as  an  indus-
trial sacrifice  needing  a  stimulus  to  its  exercise  in  the  form  of
specific  reward,  and  to  be  co-ordinated  with  labor  in  an  analy


DOES  ABSTINENCE  NEED  BEWABDf  81

sis  of  the  sacrifices  of  production.  It  must  be  admitted  that
its  connection  with  production  is  not  so  intimate  as  that  of
labor,  since  capital,  however  it  may  augment  the  efficiency  of
industry,  is  not  absolutely  indispensable  to  it.  What  we  have
to  deal  with,  however,  is  not  industry,  as  it  may  exist  among
savages  or  in  very  primitive  communities,  but  industry  as  it  ex-
ists in  civilized  countries ;  and  to  industry  in  this  sense,  to  in-
dustry as  it  must  be  carried  on  if  the  populations  now  inhabit-
ing civilized  countries  are  to  continue  to  exist,  capital  is  absolute-
ly indispensable.  But,  if  so,  then  abstinence,  the  act  by  which
capital  comes  into  existence,  must  be  regarded  as  a  necessary  con-
dition toward  the  efficacious  prosecution  of  industrial  pursuits.
But  is  it  properly  a  sacrifice?  a  sacrifice  which  needs,  in
order  that  it  be  undergone,  the  prospect  of  a  specific  reward  ?
To  put  the  question  in  another  form,  are  profits  to  be  placed
on  the  same  line  with  wages  in  an  analysis  of  the  economy  of
production?  As  to  the  economic  foundation  of  wages,  the
case  is  very  clear.  Wages  are  necessary,  first,  to  support  the
laborer,  and,  secondly,  in  a  free  community,  to  induce  him  to
work.  Capital  has  no  need  to  be  fed  and  clothed,  but,  in  order
to  its  existence,  there  must  be  an  adequate  motive  offered  to
the  owners  of  wealth  to  induce  them  to  employ  it  in  this  way.
At  present  this  inducement  is  found  in  profit;  and  the  ques-
tion to  be  considered  is,  whether,  consistently  with  the  main-
tenance of  capital,  this  inducement  can  be  dispensed  with.
There  are  those  who  think  it  may,  who  hold  that  capital  may
be  maintained  without  any  deduction  in  favor  of  the  capitalist
from  the  value  of  the  product  which  results  from  its  use,  and
which  they  would  assign  in  its  entirety  to  those  who  take  a
personal,  not  to  say  a  manual,  part  in  the  business  of  produc-
tion.* Assuming  that  those  who  take  this  view  understand

*  The  language  of  some  of  the  manifestoes  of  the  International  justifies  this
representation ;  but  I  argue  the  question  throughout  as  if  it  was  only  proposed  to
deprive  the  capitalist  of  his  profit.

6


82  NORMAL  VALVE.

the  process  by  which  capital  exists  and  grows,  we  must  sup-
pose them  to  regard  the  act  of  abstaining  from  present  enjoy-
ment as  in  itself  agreeable,  and,  coupled  with  the  risk  which
always  attends  abstinence  when  practiced  for  industrial  pur-
poses, as  constituting  in  some  inscrutable  way,  irrespective  of
the  gains  which  flow  from  it,  its  own  reward  ;  so  that,  the  pres-
ent inducement  being  removed,  the  accumulation  and  increase
of  capital  would  go  on  with  unabated  force.  It  is  scarcely
necessary  to  remark  on  the  perfect  gratuitousness,  not  to  say
preposterousness,  of  such  a  notion.  It  is  true,  indeed,  that  ab-
stinence may  be  for  the  rich,  with  whom  its  exercise  rarely
implies  any  sensible  encroachment  on  customary  comforts  and
luxuries,  and  still  less  on  necessaries,  but  a  trifling  sacrifice;
but  even  in  their  case,  when  practiced  with  a  view  to  indus-
trial investment,  it  means,  as  we  know,  risk  also;  which  is  cer-
tainly a  sacrifice  great  enough  not  to  be  undergone  without
the  clear  prospect  of  adequate  compensation.  And  even  if  we
grant  that  a  reservation  of  a  portion  of  their  wealth  from  im-
mediate consumption  would  still  be  practiced  by  prudent  and
well-to-do  people,  even  though  the  specific  reward  which  now
attends  it  were  taken  away  (since  there  w^ould  still  be  the  de-
sire to  provide  for  the  future),  it  does  not  follow  that  what  was
thus  reserved  would  necessarily  go  to  assist  productive  indus-
try ;  nay,  it  is  pretty  certain  that  this  would  not  be  its  destina-
tion, since  it  might  with  much  less  risk  be  converted  into  gold
or  silver,  and  hoarded.  Even  for  those,  therefore,  with  whom
the  sacrifice  of  abstinence  would  be  slightest,  a  specific  reward
would  be  needed  to  secure  its  exercise.  But  with  those  who
are  not  included  among  the  rich,  with  that  great  class  of
dealers  and  producers,  from  the  ranks  of  unskilled  labor  up-
ward, whose  aggregate  savings  form  the  main  support  of  the
capital  of  civilized  states,  abstinence,  far  from  being  a  slight,  is
always  a  serious,  and  often  a  very  severe  sacrifice.  The  mere
act  of  resisting  the  temptation  to  present  enjoyment,  and  of


INCREASE  OF  CAPITAL.  83

repressing  the  urgent  requirements  of  the  moment,  often  con-
stitutes in  itself  a  severe  discipline,  and  demands  for  its  accom-
plishment no  little  strength  of  character;  and  to  this  has  to
be  added  the  inevitable  risk  incident  to  industrial  investment.
Even  as  matters  stand  at  present,  the  inducement  is  found  for
many  to  be  all  too  weak ;  but  take  away  this  inducement,  ex-
clude the  prospect  of  future  gain  as  the  compensation  for  pres-
ent trials,  and  what  reason  have  we  to  suppose  that  such  trials
will  be  undergone  ?

I  seem  to  be  laboring  to  prove  a  truism ;  and,  indeed,  I  am
inclined  to  attribute  the  opinion  I  am  combating  rather  to
blank  ignorance,  or,  at  the  least,  profound  mystification,  on  the
part  of  those  who  hold  it,  respecting  the  nature  and  source  of
capital,  than  to  deliberate  acceptance  of  the  premises  on  which
alone  it  can  logically  rest.  That  the  conversion  of  wealth  to
the  purposes  of  productive  industry,  in  other  words,  the  crea-
tion of  capital,*  involves  self-denial,  is  what  probably  has  nev-
er crossed  their  imaginations:  much  more  likely,  if^they  have
speculated  on  its  origin  at  all,  it  would  be  connected  in  their
minds  with  the  issue  of  paper  money  and  other  operations  of
banking.  But,  however  unsettled  for  them  be  the  question  as
to  the  origin  of  capital,  on  one  point  they  have  no  hesitation
or  doubt.  Governments,  it  is  a  fixed  article  in  their  economic
creed,  have  an  unlimited  command  over  capital,  and  may  pos-
sess themselves  of  it  at  all  times,  in  any  quantity  required.
Where  such  notions  respecting  capital  prevail,  it  is  natural
enough  that  profits  and  interest  should  appear  superfluous
institutions.  Unfortunately  for  the  speculations  in  ques-
tion, capital  is  not  the  creation  of  Banks,  nor  has  Government

*  "Parsimony,  and  not  industiy,  is  the  immediate  cause  of  the  increase  of
capital.  Industry,  indeed,  provides  the  subject  which  parsimony  accumulates.
But  whatever  industry  might  acquire,  if  parsimony  did  not  save  and  store  up,
the  capital  would  never  be  the  greater." —  Wealth  of  Nations,  McCulloch's
edition,  p.  149.


84  NORMAL  VALUE.

any  means  of  obtaining  it,  except  through  the  crude  expedient
of  taking  it  from  those  to.  whom  it  belongs.  •  Unfortunately,
again,  the  process  by  which  capital  is  brought  into  existence,
maintained,  and  increased,  is,  for  the  great  mass  of  those  who
take  part  in  the  work,  a  really  painful  one.  Under  such  cir-
cumstances compensation  and  reward  for  those  who  perform
this  function  is  plainly  an  indispensable  condition  to  the  effect-
ual prosecution  of  industry — a  consideration  which  justifies  us
in  co-ordinating  abstinence  with  labor  among  the  elements  of
cost  of  production,  as  we  co-ordinate  profits  with  wages  in  re-
lation to  the  value  of  the  product.

Perhaps  it  may  be  well  here  to  guard  against  a  possible  mis-
apprehension of  the  doctrine  just  laid  down.  It  has  been  as-
sumed in  the  argument  that  capital  is  indispensable  to  the  pros-
ecution of  systematic  industry ;  and  the  act,  creative  of  capital,
saving,  parsimony,  or  abstinence,  has  been  characterized  as  a
sacrifice  distinct  from  labor.  It  must  not  be  supposed  from
this  that  there  is  any  economic  necessity,  or  any  economic  rea-
son whatever,  at  least  derivable  from  the  arguments  just  used,
that  capitalists  should  form  a  distinct  class  from  laborers.  The
distinctness  of  the  sacrifices  constitutes  no  ground  for  assign-
ing them  to  different  sets  of  persons.  The  same  person  may
both  labor  and  abstain,  and,  performing  the  double  sacrifice,
become  entitled  to  the  double  reward.  So  far,  indeed,  am  I
from  thinking  that  there  is  any  thing  in  this  combination  of
the  parts  of  capitalist  and  laborer  in  one  person  which  militates
against  the  true  economy  of  productive  industry,  that  it  is  pre-
cisely in  this  direction  that,  for  my  part,  I  am  disposed  to  look
for  an  escape  from  the  growing  embarrassments  and  difficulties
that  now  beset  the  relations  of  capital  and  labor.  But  this  is  a
point  the  consideration  of  which  will  more  properly  fall  within
another  part  of  this  work.

Another  possible  ambiguity  it  may  be  well  liere  to  clear  up.
As  was  intimated  just  now,  the  sacrifice  involved  in  a  given


INEQUALITIES  OF  SACRIFICE.  85

act  of  abstinence  is  very  different  in  the  case  of  di£ferent  per-
sons, A  rich  man  abstains  from  the  consumption  of  his  super-
fluous wealth,  and  is  scarcely  conscious,  perhaps  quite  uncon-
scious, of  having  suffered  any  deprivation  whatever:  his  sur-
plus income  goes  to  his  capital  account,  which  continues  to
grow,  while  his  expenditure  remains  precisely  as  before.  On
the  other  hand,  the  same  or  a  much  smaller  amount  of  wealth
reserved  from  personal  consumption  by  an  artisan  or  a  small
tradesman  will  frequently  demand  the  most  rigorous  self-de-
nial. The  same  individual,  too,  feels  very  differently  the
pains  of  abstinence  at  different  stages  of  his  career  —  in  the
struggling  outset  and  at  the  successful  close.  And  it  is  similar
with  labor.  The  laborious  effort  fitted  to  produce  a  given  re-
sult does  not  represent  the  same  sacrifice  for  different  people:
it  is  one  thing  for  the  strong,  another  for  the  weak;  one  for
the  trained  workman,  another  for  the  raw  beginner.  This
being  so,  the  question  arises — How  are  such  differences  to  be
dealt  with  in  computing  the  cost  of  production  ?  Are  we  to
take  account  of  what  is  personal  and  peculiar  to  the  actual
producers,  and  regard  the  cost  of  the.  commodity  as  higher  or
lower  according  as  it  has  been  produced  by  a  weak  or  a  strong
workman,  or  by  capital  the  result  of  painful  or  of  painless  sav-
ing? The  answer  must  be  in  the  negative.  The  sacrifices  to
be  taken  account  of,  and  which  govern  exchange  value,  are,
not  those  undergone  by  A,  B,  or  C,  but  the  average  sacrifices
undergone  by  the  class  of  laborers  or  capitalists  to  which  the
producers  of  the  commodity  belong.  A  few  remarks  will  en-
able us  to  make  this  clear.

What  at  bottom  maintains  the  connection  between  value
and  cost  of  production  is,  it  must  always  be  remembered,  the
power  of  choice  residing  in  laborers  and  capitalists  to  decide
between  different  occupations.  Now  what  is  it  determines
the  choice?  No  doubt  the  prospects  of  the  pursuit,  the  remu-
neration being  compared  with  the  sacrifice. But  what  sacri-


86  NORMAL  VALUE.

fice?  Plainly  the  sacrifice  about  to  be  undergone  by  the  par-
ticular workman  or  capitalist  who  has  to  make  the  choice.
Each  takes  account  of  the  incidents  of  the  course  proposed  as
it  bears  upon  himself,  and  considers  how  it  stands  in  the  com-
parison with  others  equally  open  to  him.  The  conclusion  he
arrives  at  on  this  point  determines  his  decisicm.  Through  a
process  of  this  kind  every  laborer  and  capitalist,  either  per-
sonally himself,  or  vicariously  through  a  parent  or  other  ad-
viser, passes.  Carried  on  over  any  given  field  of  industrial
competition,  it  is  evident  the  result  of  this  proceeding  must  be,
not  to  bring  the  remuneration  of  each  of  the  individuals  com-
prised within  it  into  conformity  with  the  sacrifice  which  each
undergoes,  but  to  establish  this  conformity  among  the  aggre-
gates of  those  engaged  in  the  several  competing  occupations;
so  that  the  total  remuneration  falling  to  each  branch  of  indus-
try shall  bear  the  same  proportion  to  the  total  sacrifices  un-
dergone in  that  branch  as  the  total  remuneration  falling  to  any
other  within  the  same  field  bears  to  the  sacrifices  undergone
in  that  other.  The  total  remuneration  falling  to  any  branch
of  industry,  however,  consists  of  the  total  value  of  the  comm.od-
ities  proceeding  from  it.  This  value,  therefore,  will  bear  the
same  proportion  to  the  sacrifices  undergone  in  producing  it^  as
the  value  proceeding  from  any  other  industry  within  the  same
field  of  competition  bears  to  the  sacrifices  of  which  it  is  the
result.  It  follows  that  the  relation  which  competition  estab-
lishes between  cost  and  value  is  one,  not  between  the  value  of
particular  commodities  and  the  sacrifices  of  the  individual  or
individuals  who  have  produced  each  such  commodity,  but  one
between  commodities  taken  as  sorts  and  their  cost  of  produc-
tion. We  can  not,  for  example,  assert  that  a  particular  pair
of  shoes  will  exchange  against  a  particular  coat  in  proportion
to  the  sacrifices  undergone  respectively  by  the  shoe-maker  and
the  tailor  in  the  actual  case ;  but  we  may  assert  that,  within  a
given  field  of  competition,  shoes,  as  one  sort  of  commodity,  will


AYEBAaE  SACRIFICE.  87

exchange  against  coats  as  another  in  this  proportion.  The
costs,  therefore,  to  which  the  values  of  particular  commodities
correspond  are  not  the  particular  sacrifices  undergone  in  pro-
ducing each  commodity,  but  the  average  sacrifice  undergone
in  producing  each  sort  of  commodity.  We  may,  therefore,
state  broadly,  that  differences  in  the  sacrifices  incident  to  pro-
duction, whether  of  labor  or  of  abstinence,  which  are  due  to
peculiarities  either  in  the  physical,  mental,  or  social  circum-
stances of  individuals,  are  to  be  excluded  from  consideration
in  estimating  cost  of  production.  What  we  have  to  do  with
is,  not  individual  sacrifice,  but  the  average  sacrifice  of  each  in-
dustrial class.

This  point  being  cleared  up,  we  can  have  no  difficulty  in
seeing  how  cost  in  its  principal  elements  is  to  be  computed.
In  the  case  of  labor,  the  cost  of  producing  a  given  commodity
will  be  represented  by  the  number  of  average  laborers  em-
ployed in  its  production — regard  at  the  same  time  being  had
to  the  severity  of  the  work  and  the  degree  of  risk  it  involves
— multiplied  by  the  duration  of  their  labors.  In  that  of  ab-
stinence, the  principle  is  analogous:  the  sacrifice  will  be  meas-
ured by  the  quantity  of  wealth  abstained  from,  taken  in  con-
nection with  the  risk  incurred,  and  multiplied  by  the  duration
of  the  abstinence.

§  7.  We  have  now  treated  the  subject  of  normal  value,  so
far  as  it  is  regulated  by  the  principle  of  cost  of  production.
But,  as  I  stated  in  the  opening  of  this  chapter,  the  phenomenon
in  question  is  by  no  means  confined  to  cases  in  which  the  con-
ditions necessary  to  the  action  of  cost  of  production  exist.  The
essence  of  normal  value,  as  I  then  remarked,  is  a  tendency  in
the  exchanging  proportions  of  commodities  to  gravitate  toward
a  central  point,  and  this  tendency  is  observable  in  departments
of  exchange  where  effective  competition  among  exchanging
producers  has  no  place. The  most  important  example  of  this


88  NORMAL VALUE.

kind  is  furnished  by  international  trade.  As  between  the  pro-
ducers in  different  nations,  whether  laborers  or  capitalists,  there
is  no  effective  competition,  nothing,  therefore,  to  secure  that
industrial  rewards  in  diflPerent  countries  shall  be  brought  into
correspondence  with  industrial  sacrifices;  nor,  consequently,
that  international  values  shall  correspond  with  cost  of  produc-
tion. Nevertheless  international  values,  or,  let  us  say,  the  rel-
ative prices  of  the  products  of  different  nations,  do  not  vary  at
random  irrespective  of  rule  or  measure,  but  exhibit  precisely
the  same  tendency  to  gravitate  toward  a  central  point  as  is
manifested  in  those  exchanges  which  are  governed  by  cost  of
production.  A  less  striking  and  hitherto,  so  far  as  I  know,
unnoticed,  example  of  the  same  kind  meets  us  in  domestic
trade.  As  I  have  pointed  out,  cost  of  production  does  not
control  value  universally  even  within  the  limits  of  a  single
country :  in  respect  to  a  considerable  class  of  exchanges — all
those,  namely,  which  take  place  between  what  I  have  called
non-competing  industrial  groups — its  action  fails.  Yet  not  the
less  we  observe  here,  as  in  international  trade,  the  phenomenon
of  normal  value.  The  exchanges  between  the  non-competing
groups — or,  let  us  say,  the  relative  prices  of  the  products  of
such  non-competing  groups — though  unamenable  to  the  law
of  cost,  are  not  without  a  controlling  force  which  restrains
their  fluctuations  and  guides  them  toward  a  normal  result.
This  is  the  phenomenon  with  which  we  have  now  to  deal;
and  the  question  to  be  considered  is  the  nature  of  the  force
or  forces  which,  in  such  cases,  come  into  play.

Fortunately  the  problem  has  already,  in  principle  at  least,
been  solved  for  us  by  Mr.  Mill.  Mr,  Mill  has  not,  indeed,  car-
ried his  solution  beyond  the  case  of  international  values;  but
his  doctrine  is  manifestly  applicable  to  all  cases  in  which
groups  of  producers,  excluded  from  reciprocal  industrial  com-
petition, exchange  their  products.  Such  cases,  as  I  have
shown,  occur  in domestic  trade in the exchanges  between


•^


"THE  EQUATION  OF  INTERNATIONAL  DEMAND."  89

those  non-competing  industrial  groups  of  which  I  have  spolven.
The  principle,  therefore,  which  operates  in  international  trade
must  operate  here ;  and  little  more  needs  to  be  done,  to  com-
plete the  theory  of  this  part  of  our  subject,  than  to  point  the
application  of  Mr.  Mill's  doctrine  to  this  strictly  parallel  case.

That  doctrine  may  be  thus  briefly  stated:  International  val-
ues are  governed  by  the  reciprocal  demand  of  commercial
countries  for  each  other's  productions,  or,  more  precisely,  by
the  demand  of  each  country  for  the  productions  of  all  other
countries  as  against  the  demand  of  all  other  countries  for  what
it  produces;  the  result  of  this  play  of  forces  being  that,  on  the
whole,  the  exports  of  each  country  discharge  its  liabilities  (of
which  the  principal  are  on  account  of  its  imports)  toward  all
other  countries.*  Whatever  be  the  exchanging  proportions —
or,  let  us  say,  whatever  be  the  state  of  relative  prices — in  dif-
ferent countries  which  is  requisite  to  secure  this  result,  those
exchanging  proportions,  that  state  of  relative  prices,  will  be-
come normal — will  furnish  the  central  point  toward  which  the
fluctuations  of  international  prices  will  gravitate,  the  rule  to
which  in  the  long  run  they  will  conform.  Such  is  the  law
governing  international  values,  called  by  Mr.  Mill  "  the  Equa-
tion of  International  Demand."  What  we  have  now  to  con-
sider is  the  mode  in  which  this  principle  operates  in  the  case
of  the  non-competing  groups  of  domestic  trade.

And  first,  in  what  sense  are  we  to  understand  "reciprocal
demand"  as  applied  to  non-competing  industrial  groups?
Manifestly,  in  conformity  with  the  analogy  of  the  international
case,  as  the  demand  of  each  group  for  the  products  of  all  oth-
er groups  comparecj  with  the  demand  of  all  other  groups  for
what  this  group  produces. How,  again,  are  we  to  measure


*  As  the  doctrine  is  ordinarily  stated,  the  exports  of  each  country  are  said  to
balance  its  imports,  but,  as  I  shall  hereafter  show,  this  mode  of  stating  it  is  not
accurate. See  post,  part  iii. ,  chap.  iii.


90  NORMAL VALUE.

such  demand?  Again  I  say,  in  conformity  witli  the  same
analogy,  by  the  quantity  of  the  products  of  each  group  avail-
able for  the  purchase  of  the  products  of  other  groups;  while
the  products  of  other  groups  available  for  the  purchase  of  the
products  of  any  given  group  will  measure  their  demand  for
the  products  of  that  group.  Lastly,  how  are  we  to  understand
the  "Equation  of  Demand,"  as  applied  to  non  -  competing
groups?  Still  following  the  international  analogy,  I  reply,  as
such  a  state  of  exchanging  proportions  among  the  products  of
the  various  groups — or,  let  us  say,  as  such  a  state  of  relative
prices  among  such  products  as  shall  enable  that  portion  of  the
products  of  each  group  which  is  applied  to  the  purchase  of  the
products  of  all  other  groups  to  discharge  its  liabilities  toward
those  other  groups.  The  two  cases  thus  run  strictly  on  all-
fours,  and  the  play  of  the  forces  in  action  is  in  all  respects
the  same.  As  in  international  trade  an  increased  demand  for
the  products  of  other  countries  will,  other  things  being  equal,
affect  international  values — or,  let  us  say,  aff'ect  the  relative
prices  of  the  products  of  different  countries — unfavorably  for
the  country  whose  demand  is  increased ;  and  as,  again,  the
converse  of  this  condition,  an  increased  demand  by  other  coun-
tries for  the  products  of  a  given  country,  will  operate  in  the
contrary  direction ;  so  it  will  be  in  the  exchanges  which  take
place  between  non-competing  domestic  groups.  Whatever  in-
creases the  demand  of  a  given  group  for  the  products  of  out-
side, that  is  to  say  non-competing,  industries,  or  (what  comes
to  the  same  thing)  whatever  increases  the  supply  of  its  prod-
ucts available  for  the  purchase  of  the  products  of  such  indus-
tries, will,  other  things  being  the  same,  depress  the  prices  of
its  products  in  relation  to  the  prices  of  the  products  of  the  in-
dustries against  which  they  are  exchanged,  and  vici  versa;
while  whatever  increases  the  demand  of  the  outside  industries
for  the  products  of  a  given  group  will  have  the  contrary  ef-
fect, and  will  raise  the  level  of  its  prices  in  relation  to  those


NATUBE  OF  RECIPROCAL  DEMAND.  91

of  tbb  non- competing  groups  with  which  it  trades,  and  vice
versa.  The  relative  position,  commercially  considered,  of  each
group  may  thus  be  affected  either  by  an  increase  or  diminu-
tion of  its  own  products  not  consumed  within  the  group,  or  by
an  increase  or  diminution  of  the  products  of  other  groups,  so
far  as  those  products  are  disposable  for  the  purchase  of  the
products  of  the  group  in  question.  Such  is  the  nature  of  "re-
ciprocal demand,"  and  of  its  mode  of  action  as  between  the
non-competing  groups  of  domestic  industry.  As  the  reader
will  observe,  it  is  simply  "  supply  and  demand  "  taken  twice
over,  first  in  the  sale  and  then  in  the  purchase,  or,  rather,  we
may  describe  it  as  Supply  and  Demand  contemplated  at  once
from  both  sides  of  a  completed  exchange.

But  it  may  not  be  at  once  apparent  how  a  principle  of  this
character  is  fitted  to  accomplish  the  result  ascribed  to  it — that
of  determining  normal^  as  distinguished  from  temporary  or
market,  value.  As  I  have  remarked,  Eeciprocal  Demand  is
merely  duplicate  Supply  and  Demand  regarded  in  its  full  sig-
nificance; but  Supply  and  Demand,  as  we  are  most  familiar
with  their  action,  are,  in  their  relation  to  prices,  merely  proxi-
mate agencies,  governing  indeed  the  fluctuations  of  the  mar-
ket, but  themselves  controlled  by  forces  lying  deeper  in  the
economy  of  production.  How  then  does  it  happen  that,  in
the  cases  under  consideration,  those  agencies  are  capable  of
doing  more  than  this — capable  of  determining,  not  simply  the
fluctuations  of  the  market,  but  the  rule  to  which,  in  the  long
run,  the  fluctuations  of  the  market  conform  ?

The  answer  to  this  question  is  to  be  found  in  the  circum-
stances which  give  stability  to  Eeciprocal  Demand  in  the  class
of  exchanges  we  are  now  considering.  Eeciprocal  Demand,
or,  if  the  reader  prefers  it.  Supply  and  Demand,  in  relation  to
a  particular  commodity,  or  even  to  a  considerable  number  of
commodities,  may,  as  we  know,  vary  in  almost  any  conceivable
degree,  and  with  great  rapidity. But  when  we  consider  them


92  NORMAL  VALUE.

as  affecting  aggregates  of  transactions  carried  on  between  limit-
ed bodies  of  producers — for  example,  between  independent  na-
J  tions,  or  between  non-competing  industrial  groups — the  case  is
very  different;  and  the  limits  within  which  variation  is  possi-
ble are  in  fact  pretty  strictly  determined ;  for  in  this  case  the
measure  of  the  aggregate  demand  of  each  trading  body  will  be
the  total  of  its  productions,  and  the  measure  of  its  demand  for
the  productions  of  the  bodies  with  which  it  trades  will  be  the
proportion  of  its  total  production  which  it  desires  to  apply  to
the  purchase  of  the  productions  of  those  bodies.  Now,  in  the
absence  of  any  great  changes  in  the  conditions  of  productive
industry,  and  of  legislation  specially  contrived  for  this  purpose,
neither  the  aggregate  production  of  a  community  nor  the  pro-
portion of  its  means  employed  in  interchanges  with  other  com-
munities can  easily  undergo  on  a  sudden  serious  variation.
The  total  production  will  depend  on  the  nature  and  extent  of
its  resources;  and  the  proportion  employed  in  external  trading
on  the  comparative  character  of  those  resources  as  they  stand
related  to  those  of  the  communities  with  which  it  trades.
These,  indeed,  are  not  circumstances  which  can  be  regarded  as
absolutely  fixed.  On  the  contrary,  the  conditions  of  produc-
tive industry  over  the  best  portion  of  the  industrial  world  are
and  have  for  long  been  pretty  steadily  progressive.  But  the
progress,  though  steady,  has  in  general  been  slow.  Sudden
changes,  at  least  on  a  scale  large  enough  to  effect  great  aggre-
gates of  transactions,  but  rarely  occur ;  and  further,  what  is
pertinent  to  our  purpose,  where  important  improvements  in
productive  industry  do  happen,  they  are  seldom  confined  to  a
single  community,  but,  after  an  interval  more  or  less  brief,  are
in  general  shared  by  other  communities,  so  that  the  relative
positions  of  the  various  trading  bodies  are  in  the  end  but
slightly  affected.  It  follows  that  the  demand  of  such  bodies,
however  it  may  vary  in  respect  to  particular  commodities,
can  not  easily  as  an  aggregate  undergo  any  great  or  sudden


NATURE  OF  BECIPBOCAL  DEMAND.  93

change;  while  their  reciprocal  demand  for  each  other's  pro-
ductions, which  expresses  their  relative  industrial  condition,
will  be  still  less  liable  to  serious  or  abrupt  disturbance.  Here,
then,  we  find  the  conditions  fitted  to  produce  that  stability  of
exchanging  relations  which  is  implied  in  the  term  "normal
value."  While  the  prices  of  particular  commodities  may  fluc-
tuate indefinitely  in  international  as  in  other  trade,  the  same
possibility  does  not  exist  for  the  prices  of  aggregates  of  com-
modities exchanged  by  definite  groups  of  producers,  such  as
independent  nations,  or  the  non-competing  sections  in  domestic
industry.  The  limits  to  such  fluctuations  are  set  in  the  limit-
ed purchasing  power,  incident  to  the  limited  productive  power,
at  any  given  time  possessed  by  such  trading  groups.  It  is  in
this  way  that  a  normal  relation  arises  in  the  terms  of  the  trans-
actions carried  en,  and  that  a  central  point  is  furnished  toward
which  the  fluctuations  of  the  market  gravitate,  performing  in
such  trade  the  same  function  discharged  under  a  regime  of  com-
petition by  the  principle  of  cost.

Cost  of  Production  and  Eeciprocal  Demand  in  the  sense  ex-l  /
plained,  it  thus  appears,  perform  in  certain  circumstances  sim-j
ilar  economic  offices.  It  remains  now  to  point  out  an  impor-
tant difference  in  their  modes  of  action  and  in  the  character
of  the  results  which  flow  from  them.  They  each,  as  I  have
said,  furnish  a  centre  about  which  market  values  gravitate;
but  there  is  this  difference  between  the  two  cases :  The  centre
furnished  by  Cost  of  Production  stands  related  to  the  fluctua-
tions of  the  individual  commodity ;  that  supplied  by  Eecipro-
cal Demand  to  the  average  fluctuations  of  considerable  aggre-
gates of  commodities.  A  reduction  in  the  cost  of  producing
a  hat  will  lower  its  price,  but  will  have  no  tendency  to  affect
the  price  of  any  other  thing.  But  an  alteration  in  the  recip-
rocal demand  of  two  trading  nations  will  act  upon  the  price,
not  of  any  commodity  in  particular,  but  of  every  commodity
which  enters  into  the  trade. What  such  an  alteration  necessi-


94  NORMAL  VALUE.

tates  is  a  change  in  the  average  terms  on  which  the  trade  is
carried  on ;  but  it  decides  nothing  as  to  the  details  by  which
the  required  average  shall  be  attained  and  maintained.  This
is  determined,  not  by  international  demand,  but  by  those  cir-
cumstances in  the  internal  industries  of  each  country  which
regulate  in  each  the  relative  prices  of  its  products.  And  sim-
ilarly in  the  interchanges  of  non-competing  domestic  groups,
what  the  reciprocal  demand  of  the  groups  determines  is  the
average  relative  level  of  prices  within  each  group  ;  the  distri-
bution of  price  among  the  individual  products  being  regulated
by  the  cause  which  governs  value  within  it,  namely  cost  of
production.

The  net  result  would  seem  to  be  this :  Eeciprocal  Interna-
tional Demand  determines  the  average  level  of  prices  through-
out the  entire  trade  of  each  commercial  country  in  relation  to
that  prevailing  in  other  countries  in  commercial  connection
with  it.  Eeciprocal  Domestic  Demand  determines  certain
minor  relative  averages  extending  over  classes  of  articles,  the
products  of  non-competing  industrial  groups;  while  Cost  of
Production  acts  upon  particular  commodities,  and,  in  each  case,
within  the  range  of  industrial  competition,  determines  their  rel-
ative prices.  The  actual  price,  therefore,  of  any  given  commod-
ity will,  it  is  evident,  be  the  composite  result  of  the  combined
action  of  these  several  ao;encies.

Another  distinction  needs  to  be  noticed  between  Reciprocal
Demand  and  Cost  of  Production  in  their  operation  upon  nor-
mal value.  The  former  is,  on  the  whole,  far  more  steady  and
equable  in  its  action  than  the  latter.  The  reason  is  plain.
Changes  in  cost  of  production  depend  mainly  on  the  progress
of  the  industrial  arts,  and  this  has  for  some  time  been  and,  we
may  perhaps  assume,  is  likely  for  a  long  time  to  continue  to
be,  remarkably  rapid.  Thus  we  find  in  the  course  of  the  pres-
ent century  an  immense  reduction  in  the  costs  of  producing  a
large  number  of  articles  of  general  consumption,  accompanied


NATURE  OF  BECIPBOCAL  DEMAND.  96

by  a  corresponding  reduction  in  their  value.  On  the  other
hand,  changes  in  reciprocal  demand  are  cliiefly  due  to  moral,
social,  and  political  causes,  operating  on  a  scale  large  enough
to  affect  the  relative  positions  of  considerable  bodies  of  men.
Such  changes  are  necessarily  of  slow  accomplishment;  and
consequently  the  variations  in  value  which  result  from  them
are  rarely  of  a  striking  character,  and  in  general  proceed  so
slowly  that  they  can  seldom  be  perceived  unless  the  compari-
son be  made  between  prices  taken  at  periods  separated  by  con-
siderable intervals  of  time.  Still  such  changes  do  occur,  and
international  values,  as  well  as  the  corresponding  class  of  values
in  domestic  trade,  respond  to  them.  For  example,  I  think  we
may  assume  that  the  adoption  of  free  trade  by  England  has
improved  her  international  position  in  the  trade  of  the  world.
I  do  not  refer  to  the  extension  of  her  trade,  which,  as  all  the
world  knows,  has  been  enormous,  but  to  the  terms  on  which
it  is  carried  on,  A  given  exertion  of  English  industry  will
now  command  in  the  exchange  with  foreign  countries  the
product  of  a  larger  exertion  of  foreign  industry  than  former-
ly. In  the  domestic  sphere,  probably  the  most  potent  agency
affecting  reciprocal  demand  is  the  progress  of  popular  educa-
tion. Supposing,  for  example,  that  the  system  of  primary  ed-
ucation now  being  established  in  this  country  proves  as  suc-
cessful as  the  friends  of  education  desire;  and  supposing  again,
and  more  particularly,  that  effective  provision  is  made  in  it  for
facilitating  the  ascent  of  promising  boys  from  the  lower  to  the
higher  educational  levels,  I  think  we  may  with  some  confi-
dence predict  that  the  movement  will  issue  in  a  considerable
change  in  the  relative  prices  of  certain  classes  of  commodities
in  this  country;  nor  can  we  have  much  difficulty  in  perceiving
what  will  be  the  general  direction  of  the  change.  Plainly  the
effect  will  be  to  augment  the  number  of  skilled  workmen  in
relation  to  the  unskilled,  and  of  highly  skilled  workmen  in
relation  to  workmen  possessing  f^kill  of  the  more  common


96  NOBMAL VALUE.

sorts.  The  social  wall  of  partition  which  now  divides  the
non-competing  groups  will  to  a  large  extent  be  broken  down,
and  many  of  those  occupying  the  lower  levels  will  take  ad-
vantage of  the  breach  to  press  into  those  above  them.  The
result  will  be  a  change  in  the  reciprocal  demand  of  the  several
groups.  The  demand  of  the  groups  representing  the  higher
sorts  of  industrial  skill  will  increase  relatively  to  that  of  the
groups  representing  the  lower;  or,  to  put  the  same  point  in  a
different  form,  the  supply  of  the  products  of  the  former  groups
will  increase  relatively  to  that  of  the  products  of  the  latter.
The  inevitable  consequence  must  be  a  change  in  relative  prices
unfavorable  to  the  higher,  and  in  a  corresponding  degree  fa-
vorable to  the  lower  sorts,  of  skilled  industry.  In  a  word,  the
qualified  monopolies  resting  upon  social  conditions  which  now
exist  will  be  still  farther  qualified :  the  range  of  competition
will  be  enlarged;  and,  just  in  proportion  as  these  results  are
attained,  relative  prices,  and  with  them  relative  wages,  will  be
made  to  approximate,  more  closely  than  at  present,  to  the  rCile
of  cost.  We  may  illustrate  the  case  by  the  state  of  things  in
new  colonies.  .  There,  owing  to  causes  precisely  similar  to  those
which  the  educational  movement  is  tending  to  develop  here —
owing,  that  is  to  say,  to  the  great  equality  of  conditions  pre-
vailing among  the  industrial  population — the  coarser  kinds  of
labor  and  the  lower  sorts  of  skill  are  not  merely  positively,
but  comparatively,  in  relation  to  the  finer  and  higher  sorts,  far
more  highly  remunerated  than  they  are  at  present  with  us.
The  explanation  is  that  which  has  just  been  given:  competi-
tion has  there  a  wider  range ;  and  wherever  this  is  so,  prices
and  remuneration  will  represent  more  truly  the  actual  sacri-
fices  undergone  by  producers.


CHAPTER lY.

MARKET  VALUE.

%  1.  The  nature  of  Normal  "Value  has  been  discussed  in  tlie
preceding  chapter.  As  was  there  pointed  out,  the  propor-
tion which  it  represents  is  not  necessarily  that  which  is  real-
ized in  any  actual  sale,  but  that  to  which  all  sales,  in  the  case
of  commodities  which  possess  normal  value,  tend  to  conform.
The  problem  which  we  have  now  to  consider  is  that  presented
by  actual  sales.  What  are  the  conditions  which  determine
the  proportions  in  which  commodities  exchange  for  each  other
on  any  given  occasion  in  any  given  market?  More  briefly,
what  is  the  explanation  of  market  prices?  This  question,
after  having  been  discussed  by  economists  from  Turgot  and
Adam  Smith  to  Mill,  was  at  length  supposed  to  have  received
its  definitive  solution  in  the  chapter  on  "  Demand  and  Supply  "
in  the  Principles  of  Political  Economy  by  the  latter  authority.
Tkiat  solution,  however,  has  lately  been  challenged  by  Mr.
Thornton,  I  must  own  it  seems  to  me,  so  far  as  the  negative
portion  of  his  criticism  is  concerned,  with  success.  As  re-
gards, however,  the  explanation  he  has  offered  in  lieu  of  that
which  he  has  displaced,  I  fail  to  discover  in  it  what  can  be
considered  a  satisfactory  account  of  the  phenomenon  under
discussion.  According  to  Mr.  Thornton,  market  prices  de-
pend upon  "competition;"  while  of  competition  he  tells  us
that,  "  if  it  can  properly  be  said  to  depend  on  any  thing,  it  de-
pends partly  on  individual  necessity,  partly  on  individual  dis-
cretion ;  and  as  for  the  first  of  these  there  is  proverbially,  and
for  the  other  manifestly,  no  law,  so  likewise  is  there  no  law  of

7


98  MARKET  VALUE.

competition,  Neither,  if  there  be  no  law  of  competition,  and
if  competition  be,  as  it  bas  been  shown  to  be,  the  determining
cause  of  price,  can  there  be  any  law  of  price."  As  I  do  not
admit  that  there  is  "  no  law  "  for  "  individual  necessity  "  any
more  than  I  admit  that  there  is  "no  law"  for  "individual  dis-
cretion " — understanding  "  law  "  in  the  scientific  sense  of  the
word,  which  alone  is  that  with  which  Political  Economy  is
concerned — I  should  be  unable  to  accept  Mr.  Thornton's  con-
clusion, even  though  his  analysis  of  "  competition  "  were  much
more  satisfactory  than  it  seems  to  me  to  be.  For  my  part,  I
believe  that,  whether  we  are  able  to  discover  it  or  not,  there
is  a  law  of  market  price,  as  there  is  a  law  of  normal  price,  as
there  is  a  law  of  wages,  of  profits,  of  rent,  as  there  are  laws  of
the  winds  and  tides  and  seasons,  and  of  the  phenomena  of
external  nature — a  law  in  the  only  sense  in  which  law  can  be
predicated  of  natural  objects ;  namely,  as  consisting  in  the  con-
stancy of  the  relation  between  facts  and  the  conditions  which
produce  them.

§  2.  Market  price  —  I  speak  now  exclusively  of  price  in
wholesale  markets — has  from  the  first  been  seen  to  be  con-
nected with  the  agencies  of  Supply  and  Demand  ;  it  has  al-
ways been  very  obvious  that  an  increase  of  supply  tends  to
lower  price,  and  an  increase  of  demand  to  raise  it;  but  be-
yond this  rather  crude  generalization  economic  speculation
did  not  for  some  time  pass.  To  furnish  what  deserves  to  be
called  a  law  of  the  phenomenon,  it  is  evidently  necessary  to
determine  with  some  degree  of  precision  the  elements  that  en-
ter into  Supply  and  Demand  when  acting  upon  the  prices  of
the  market,  and  the  mode  in  which  these  two  agencies  co-op-
erate to  produce  the  actual  result.  In  other  words,  Demand
and  Supply  must  be  defined,  and  the  manner  of  their  influence
ascertained.  The  following  was  Adam  Smith's  contribution
toward  the  solution  of  this  problem:  "The  market  price  of


ABAM  SMITH'S  DOCTRINE.  99

every  particular  commodity  is  regulated  by  the  proportion
between  the  quantity  which  is  actually  brought  to  market  and
the  demand  of  those  who  are  willing  to  pay  the  natural  price
of  the  commodity,  or  the  whole  value  of  the  rent,  labor,  and
profit  which  must  be  paid  in  order  to  bring  it  thither."*  Ac-
cording to  this,  "Supply"  is  to  be  understood  as  the  quantity
of  a  commodity  actually  brought  to  market,  and  "Demand"
as  the  desire  to  purchase  felt  by  those  who  are  willing  to  pay
the  natural,  or  (as  I  have  phrased  it)  the  normal,  price ;  the
terms  of  the  exchange  in  the  particular  market  being  regu-
lated by  the  "  proportion  "  between  these  two  things.  Every
economist  knows  the  criticism  passed  by  Mr.  Mill  on  this
doctrine.

"These  phrases,"  he  says,  "fail  to  satisfy  any  one  who  re-
quires clear  ideas  and  a  perfectly  precise  expression  of  them.
Some  confusion  must  always  attach  to  a  phrase  so  inappropri-
ate as  that  of  a  ratio  between  things  not  of  the  same  denomina-
tion. What  ratio  can  there  be  between  a  quantity  and  a  desire,
or  even  a  desire  combined  with  a  power ?"f  This  criticism
has  been  generally  acquiesced  in ;  but  I  have  endeavored  in
a  former  chapter;}:  to  show  that  it  is  not  conclusive;  that  in
truth  Supply  (in  the  sense  in  which  it  affects  price)  is  not  sim-
ply a  quantity,  but  a  quantity  accompanied  by  a  mental  feel-
ing, as  Demand  is  not  simply  a  mental  feeling,  but  a  mental
feeling  accompanied  by  a  quantity,  the  quantity,  namely,  of
purchasing  power  offered  by  the  demander ;  in  short,  that
Supply  and  Demand  are  things  essentially  of  the  same  order,
of  the  same  denomination,  and  such  therefore  as  may  properly
be  regarded  as  bearing  a  ratio  to  each  other.  But  though  not
open,  as  it  seems  to  me,  to  Mr.  Mill's  criticism,  Adam  Smith's


*  "Wealth  of  Nations,"  book  i.,  chap.  vii.

+  "Principles  of  Political  Economy,"  vol.  i.,  p.  549.

X  See  ante,  pp.  25,  26.


100  MARKET  VALUE.

doctrine  can  less  easily  be  defended  against  objections  of  an-
other kind.  It  is  not  quite  clear  from  the  passage  in  what
sense  he  uses  the  word  "market,"  whether  as  a  sort  of  abstract
term  to  comprise  all  places  where  things  are  bought  and  sold,
or  as  signifying  some  one  particular  or  given  place  of  this
kind.  I  am,  for  my  part,  disposed  to  understand  him  in  the
latter  sense ;  indeed  the  former  would  hardly  have  satisfied
the  requirements  of  the  problem  he  had  to  consider;  and  tak-
ing the  word  in  this  sense,  his  statement  is  that  the  price  of  a
commodity  in  any  particular  market  is  regulated  by  the  "pro-
portion "  which  the  quantity  of  it  in  that  market  bears  to  the
demand  for  it  (in  the  sense  defined)  there  existing.  Now  it
will  be  seen  on  reflection  that  this  statement  is,  as  a  matter  of
fact,  untrue.  The  price  of  corn,  for  example,  in  a  given  mar-
ket does  not  depend  (other  things  there  being  supposed  con-
stant) on  the  quantity  of  corn  brought  to  that  market,  under-
standing by  this  all  that  the  dealers  are  then  and  there  pre-
pared to  sell.  For  example,  it  often  happens  that  intelligence
received  during  the  holding  of  a  market  respecting  supply  in
some  remote  quarter  of  the  world  affects  price,  though  no
change  has  been  made  in  the  quantity  of  the  commodity  im-
mediately available  in  the  particular  market.  And  occasions
have  occurred  when  a  sudden  change  of  weather  in  some  criti-
cal period  of  the  year,  from  the  effect  it  is  supposed  likely  to
produce  on  the  harvest,  has  led  to  a  similar  result.  It  is  evi-
dent, therefore,  that  the  supply  which  constitutes  one  factor  in
the  determination  of  market  price  is  not  simply  the  quantity
of  a  commodity  present  in  a  particular  market.  A  similar
criticism  may  be  passed  upon  Adam  Smith's  definition  of  "de-
mand." It  is  not  true  that  the  demand  which  constitutes  the
other  factor  in  the  case  is  always,  or  necessarily,  "the  demand
for  the  commodity  at  its  natural  price."  Suppose  the  selling
price  at  a  particular  time  and  place  to  be  above  the  natural
price,  so  much  of  the  demand  as  refuses  to  rise  beyond  the


ME.  MILVS  DOCTRINE.  101

natural  price  ceases  to  affect  the  result ;  while,  on  the  other
hand,  on  the  supposition  that  the  selling  price  were  lower
than  the  natural  price,  the  result  would  be  affected  by  a  de-
mand at  a  lower  than  the  na,tural  price,  namel}'',  by  any  de-
mand which  is  content  to  give  the  selling  price,  or  any  price
above  that.  Lastly,  even  though  the  definitions  of  "supply"
and  "demand"  given  by  Adam  Smith  could  be  shown  to
satisfy  the  conditions  of  the  case,  which  we  have  seen  they  do
not,  the  statement  that  market  price  is  regulated  by  the  "  pro-
portion" between  them,  while  we  are  left  uninformed  as  to  the
nature  of  this  proportion,  can  not  but  be  regarded  as  too
vague  to  fulfill  the  requirements  of  a  scientific  theory.

§  3.  I  turn  now  to  Mr.  Mill's  doctrine  of  Market  Price.  As
I  have  just  said,  that  doctrine  has  been  challenged  by  Mr.
Thornton,  and,  in  my  opinion,  successfully ;  but  I  prefer  to
state  my  objection  to  it  in  my  own  way.  According  to  Mr.
Mill,  demand  is  measured,  not  by  the  purchasing  power  offered
in  support  of  the  desire  to  purchase,  but  by  the  quantity  of  the
commodity  demanded  at  the  selling  price  in  a  given  market;
and  similarly  the  measure  of  supply  is  the  quantity  offered  at
the  selling  price.  Understanding  Demand  and  Supply  in  these
senses,  he  laid  it  down  that  the  actual  price  ruling  in  any  given
market  is  the  price  which  equalizes  demand  and  supply.  As
a  matter  of  fact,  however,  it  may  be  pointed  out,  and  has  been
pointed  out  by  Mr.  Thornton,  that  the  demand  in  the  market
at  the  selling  price  may  be  greater  than  the  supply  forth-com-
ing in  that  market  can  satisfy  ;  as,  on  the  other  hand,  the  sup-
ply at  the  selling  price  may  be  in  excess  of  what  the  actual  de-
mand at  that  price  will  take  off.  In  either  of  these  cases  (and
one  or  other  of  them  is  the  case  of  almost  all  markets)  Supply
and  Demand  are  not  equalized.  In  all  such  instances,  there-
fore, Mr.  Mill's  theory  fails  to  explain  the  phenomenon  of  mar-
ket price. To  this  objection  Mr.  Mill  has  replied  by  saying


102  MABKET  VALUE.

that  "reserving  a  price  is  to  all  intents  and  purposes  withdraw-
ing supply  " — in  other  words,  so  much  of  the  supply  as  is  not
sold,  either  because  the  owner  is  dissatisfied  with  the  current
price,  or  can  not  find  sufiicient  purchasers  at  that  price,  is  not
to  be  counted  as  supply.

"  When  no  more  than  forty  shillings  a  head  can  be  obtained  for  sheep,
all  sheep  whose  owners  are  determined  not  to  sell  them  for  less  than  fifty
shillings  are  out  of  the  market,  and  form  no  part  at  all  of  the  supply  which
is  now  determining  price. They  may  have  been  offered  for  sale,  but  they

have  been  withdrawn In  the  mean  while,  the  price  has  been  de-

.termined  without  any  reference  to  his  [the  owner's]  withheld  stock,  and
determined  in  such  a  manner  that  the  demand  at  that  price  shall  (if  pos-
sible) be  equal  to  the  supply  which  the  dealers  are  willing  to  part  with  at
that  price.  The  economists  who  say  that  market  price  is  determined  by
demand  and  supply  do  not  mean  that  it  is  determined  by  the  whole  sup-
ply which  would  be  forthcoming  at  an  unattainable  price,  any  more  than
by  the  whole  demand  that  would  be  called  forth  if  the  article  could  be
had  for  an  old  song.  They  mean  that,  whatever  the  price  turns  out  to
be,  it  will  be  such  that  the  demand  at  that  price,  and  the  supply  at  that
price,  will  be  equal  to  one  another."*

It  is  evident  that  the  same  reasons  which  require  that  Sup-
ply should  be  limited  to  so  much  of  the  commodity  as  is  dis-
posed of  in  actual  sale,  would  make  it  necessary  that  Demand
should  be  limited  to  so  much  of  the  desire  to  purchase  as  finds
satisfaction  in  actual  purchase;  since  otherwise  there  would  be
no  security  that  it  might  not  exceed  Supply.  So  explained,  it
can  not  be  denied  that  Mr.  Mill's  position  is  logically  impreg-
nable. Unfortunately,  however,  the  same  limitations  which
render  it  logically  impregnable  make  it  also  not  worth  defend-
ing ;  for,  understood  in  the  sense  in  which  the  terms  have  now
been  defined,  the  doctrine  of  the  equality  of  Demand  and  Sup-
ply as  the  condition  of  market  price  becomes  a  mere  identical

*  Fortnightly  Review,  May,  1869,  Mr.  Mill's  review  of  Mr.  Thornton's  "  La-
bor," pp,  512,  513.


MB.  MILL'S  DOCTRINE.  103

proposition.  The  quantity  demanded  and  the  quantity  supplied
at  the  market  pribe  are  necessarily  equal  when  the  quantity
demanded  is  only  another  name  for  the  quantity  bought,  and
the  quantity  supplied  another  name  for  the  quantity  sold.
They  are  necessarily  equal,  since  they  are  one  and  the  same
quantity.  Mr.  Mill's  doctrine,  then,  limited  as  he  has  limited
it,  is  undeniably  true ;  but  the  question  remains,  what  light
does  it  throw  upon  the  phenomenon  it  undertakes  to  explain  ?
— how  far  can  it  be  considered  as  stating  the  law  of  market
prices?  We  desire  to  know  the  circumstances  which  deter-
mine price;  and  we  are  told  that  the  selling  price  is  always
such  that  the  quantity  of  a  commodity  purchased  in  a  given
market  is  equal  to  the  quantity  sold  in  that  market.  The
statement  is  incontrovertible,  but  I  fail  to  perceive  how  it  helps
us  to  understand  the  facts.  Further,  the  limitation  by  which
the  doctrine  is  rescued  is  itself  open  to  serious  objection.  In
the  passage  I  have  quoted  it  is  stated  that  the  portion  of  the
supply  which  is  reserved  for  future  sale  "  forms  no  part  of  the
supply  which  is  now  determining  price."  Here  I  join  issue  on
a  question  of  fact.  I  contend  that,  in  coming  to  a  decision  on
the  actual  price,  the  dealers  in  a  market  take  account,  not
merely  of  the  quantity  of  the  commodity  that  is  there  actually
sold,  but  of  all  the  commodity  in  the  market;  and  not  merely
of  this,  but  of  the  supply  obtainable  from  other  quarters.  On
this  point  I  can  only  appeal  to  facts.  It  appears  to  me  cer-
tain that  the  supply  which  determines  price  is  quite  as  much
the  supply  that  is  not  sold  as  the  supply  that  is  sold ;  and  the
demand  quite  as  much  the  demand  that  is  not  satisfied  as  the
demand  that  is  satisfied.  In  other  words,  supply  and  demand
outside  the  market  are  among  the  conditions  which  determine
price  within  the  market.  But  if  so,  Mr.  Mill's  doctrine  not
merely  fails  to  solve  the  problem  of  market  price,  but  pointed-
ly excludes  from  consideration  conditions  which  are  essential
to  the  solution  of  that  problem. Under  these  circumstances  I


104  MARKET  VALUE.

shall  perhaps  be  pardoned  for  attempting  some  more  precise
statement  of  the  facts  governing  the  phenomenon  than  is  fur-
nished by  the  current  doctrine.

§  4,  In  order  to  bring  the  terms  of  our  theory  into  conform-
ity with  the  facts  of  the  case,  it  appears  to  me  that  we  must
give  to  the  words  "supply"  and  "demand"  a  much  more  ex-
tended signification  than  is  given  to  them  in  the  formulas  ei-
ther of  Adam  Smith  or  of  Mill.  By  "suppl}'-,"  as  affecting
market  price,  I  would  understand  not  merely  the  quantity  of
a  commodity  sold,  offered  for  sale,  or  present  in  a  given  mar-
ket, but  the  quantity  intended  for  sale  wherever  it  exists  which
the  dealers  in  the  particular  market  know  or  believe  to  be
available,  to  meet,  within  certain  limits  of  time,  the  demand
which  falls  within  the  range  of  their  dealing ;  and  by  "  de-
mand," a  strictly  analogous  conception,  namely,  the  desire,  so
far  as  accompanied  by  purchasing  power  anywhere  existing
for  the  commodity,  which,  in  the  opinion  of  the  dealers  in  the
market,  admits  of  being  satisfied  within  certain  limits  of  time
by  the  attainable  supply;  the  "certain  limits  of  time"  in  each
case  being  the  period  intervening  between  the  time  of  sale  and
that  at  which  fresh  supplies  can  be  brought  forward  from  the
ordinary  sources  of  production.  I  am  far  from  thinking  that
these  definitions  are  free  from  flaw,  or  that  cases  of  supply  and
demand  affecting  market  price  may  not  be  found  which  will
not  easily  fall  within  their  scope,  but  I  believe  the}''  comprise
the  most  important  conditions  determining  the  result,  and  I
am  sure  that  no  less  extensive  definitions  would  be  even  ap-
proximately adequate.

Understanding,  then,  Demand  and  Supply  in  the  senses  de-
fined, as  the  factors  which  conjointly  produce  the  phenomenon,
we  have  next  to  consider  the  manner  of  their  operation.  This,
it  is  evident,  can  only  be  indirect,  since  price  expresses  a  con-
tract between  human  beings,  whose  wills,  therefore,  must  form


CONSTANCY  OF  RELATION.  105

the  primary  link  in  the  causal  chain.  As  we  have  seen,  the
notion  of  Adam  Smith  was,  and  this  is  probabl}'-  still  the  pre-
vailing idea,  that  the  result  is  regulated  by  the  "  proportion  "
between  demand  and  supply — this  proportion,  as  we  must  sup-
pose, producing  its  effect  through  the  minds  of  those  who  take
part  in  the  exchange.  I  have  already  stated  my  reasons  for
regarding  Demand  and  Supply  as  ideas  of  the  same  order,  be-
tween which,  therefore,  a  proportion  may  properly  be  assumed
to  exist.  But  to  render  Adam  Smith's  doctrine  effectual  for
its  purpose,  we  must  not  only  suppose  a  proportion  existing
between  demand  and  supply,  but  also  that  between  this  pro-
portion and  the  market  price  there  is  some  constancy  of  rela-
tion, such  that,  knowing  the  relation  in  any  given  case,  we
should  be  able  to  predict  what  the  price  would  be  in  the  event
of  a  change  in  the  conditions  of  the  market.  Now  this  is  what
I  believe  it  would  be  quite  impossible  to  establish.  At  all
events,  it  may  be  shown  that  the  formula,  if  it  were  possible  to
evolve  one,  would  need  to  be  different  for  every  different  kind
of  commodity,  and  to  be  altered  with  every  change  in  either
the  amount  or  the  distribution  of  purchasing  power  in  a  com-
munity. Thus  a  change  in  the  supply  of  a  necessary  of  life
is,  as  has  often  been  pointed  out,  capable  of  producing  effects
on  price  much  greater  than  in  proportion  to  the  extent  of  the
change.  A  reduction  of  one-fourth,  or  one-third,  for  instance,
in  the  food  of  a  people  might  easily  issue  in  a  twofold  or  three-
fold advance  of  price  ;  while  an  equal  change  in  the  supply  of
a  comfort  or  convenience,  which  may  easily  be  dispensed  with,
but  may  also  by  increased  cheapness  rapidly  attract  a  larger
demand,  is  generally  attended  with  effects  on  price  much  less
marked.  And,  as  I  have  said,  these  results  would  be  further
varied  by  every  change  in  the  amount  or  the  distribution  of
the  available  purchasing  power.  For  these  reasons  it  appears
to  me  that  the  idea  of  a  proportion,  as  furnishing  a  clue  to  the
connection  of  demand  and  supply  with  market  price,  must  be


106  MARKET  VALUE.

abandoned,  if  on  no  other  ground,  from  the  impossibility  of  de-
termining it ;  and  that,  instead  of  a  quantitative  formula,  we
must  content  ourselves  with  an  approximately  accurate  de-
scription.

Let  us  consider  the  circumstances  under  which  the  selling
price  comes  to  be  decided  in  any  wholesale  market.  We  will
suppose  the  commodity  dealt  in  to  be  corn.  An  intending
purchaser  enters  the  market,  having  previously  obtained  by
such  means  as  were  open  to  him  information  respecting  the
stock  of  corn  in  the  country,  or  likely  within  a  certain  period
to  be  forth-coming  from  abroad ;  and  he  there  finds  certain
quantities  offered  for  sale.  He  has  also  made  himself  acquaint-
ed with  the  demand  for  ordinary  consumption,  so  far  as  it
seems  likely  to  come  within  the  range  of  his  dealings.  On
these  data  he  founds  an  opinion  as  to  what  the  price  of  corn
ought  to.be.  The  opinion  thus  formed  is  not  absolutely  defin-
itive. He  allows  it  to  be  modified  more  or  less  by  the  opinions
which  he  finds  prevailing  in  the  market.  Under  the  influence
of  all  these  considerations  he  comes  to  a  conclusion  as  to  the
price,  which  —  while  anxious  to  procure  his  commodity  as
cheaply  as  he  can — he  will,  rather  than  go  without,  be  pre-
pared to  pay.  The  seller  of  corn  goes  through  a  similar  proc-
ess, with  of  course  the  converse  object,  availing  himself  accoid-
ing  to  bis  intelligence  of  similar  means  of  information.  Sup-
posing the  conclusion  he  comes  to  be  that  the  demand,  in  the
sense  I  have  defined  it,  is  capable  of  taking  off  the  supply,  un-
derstood also  in  the  sense  I  have  defined  it,  at  a  higher  price
than  that  which  formed  the  conclusion  of  the  buyer's  calcula-
tions, under  these  circumstances  there  would  be  no  transaction
between  them ;  and  if  their  opinions  represented  respectively
the  opinions  of  all  the  buyers  and  all  the  sellers  in  the  market,
no  trans'action  would  in  that  market  take  place.  This  of
course  is  what  rarely  or  never  happens.  Buyers  and  sellers  in
the  same  town  or  district,  having  mostly  the  same  opportu-


PROPER  MARKET  PRICE.  107

nities  of  information,  will  not  in  general  differ  very  widely  in
their  estimates  of  demand  and  supply ;  and  where  they  differ
but  slightly,  their  opinions  coming  in  so  limited  an  area  within
the  sphere  of  each  other's  attraction,  are  apt  to  issue  in  agree-
ment; the  exact  price  arrived  at  always  depending  in  some
dcOTee  on  the  firmness  and  shrewdness  of  individual  men.
This  is  what  is  called  the  'higgling  of  the  market' — the  proc-
ess on  which,  within  the  narrow  limits  of  variation  set  by  the
deliberate  opinions  of  experts,  the  final  result  depends.

The  influence  of  Demand  and  Supply  on  the  price-current
in  a  given  market  is  thus  exercised  through  the  opinions  of
the  dealers  in  that  market;  and  the  problem  to  which  the
dealers  in  forming  their  opinions  address  themselves,  is  to  as-
certain, having  regard  to  the  known  conditions  of  the  case,
what  the  price  of  the  commodity  ought  to  be.  Let  us  now
endeavor  to  determine,  with  as  much  precision  as  may  be,  the
nature  of  the  problem  thus  presented  to  buyers  and  sellers  in
a  wholesale  market.  I  grant  it  is  very  probable  that  most  of
those  who  speak  freely  of  the  price  which  happens  to  obtain
in  a  market  as  "too  high"  or  "  too  low,"  or  "such  as  it  ought
to  be,"  might  find  it  difficult,  if  challenged,  to  explain  the
meaning  of  their  words:  nevertheless,  I  believe  that  these  ex-
pressions do  at  least  point  to  a  meaning,  perhaps  a  latent  one,
in  the  minds  of  those  w^ho  use  them.  However  this  may  be,
it  can  at  all  events  be  shown  that  there  is  in  every  market  a
price  at  which  it  is  desirable  that  the  commodity,  whatever  it
may  be,  should  sell  at  that  time  and  place — desirable  ultimate-
ly in  the  interest  of  consumers,  but  in  a  certain  sense  desirable
also  in  the  interest  of  dealers,  taking  buyers  and  sellers  to-
gether, and  which  the  combined  operations  of  both,  so  far  as
they  are  well  informed  respecting  the  conditions  of  supply  and
demand,  really  tend  to  establish.  To  satisfy  ourselves  of  this,
it  is  only  necessary  to  consider  that,  in  all  states  of  supply  and
demand,  there  is  always  a  certain  price  beyond  which,  if  the


108  MARKET  VALUE.

markets  rise,  consumption  is  unnecessarily  checked,  and  tbe
stocks  in  the  country  pass  off  more  slowly  than  is  needful.
In  time  the  error  is  discovered,  and  a  competition  sets  in
among  holders  of  the  commodity,  which  issues  in  a  fall  of
price,  tending  to  stimulate  consumption  as  much  as  it  had  pre-
viously been  unduly  checked.  On  the  other  hand,  supposing
the  market  price  to  be  set  too  low,  stocks  become  exhausted
too  soon,  and  the  undue  fall  will  need  to  be  compensated  by
a  corresponding  advance  at  a  later  period.  Such  oscillations
are  at  variance  with  the  interest  of  the  consumer;  and  the
price,  therefore,  which  renders  them  unnecessary,  which  is  just
sufficient,  and  no  more  than  sufficient,  to  carry  the  existing
supply  over,  with  such  a  surplus  as  circumstances  may  ren-
der advisable,*  to  meet  the  new  supplies  forth-coming,  may,
I  think,  be  conveniently  designated  as  the  "proper  price"  of
the  market.f It  is  this  price  which,  it  seems  to  me,  the  deal-


*  It  is  necessary  to  introduce  this  qualifying  clause,  since  it  is  not  always  for
the  interest  of  the  consumer  that  consumption  should  proceed  at  such  a  pace  as
to  exhaust  existing  stocks  exactly  as  the  new  supplies  are  coming  into  the  market.
It  would  be  so  if  he  could  be  sure  that  the  new  supplies  would  sell  at  a  price  not
higher  than  that  which  had  been  previously  current ;  but  in  the  case  of  raw  prod-
ucts, and  more  especially  in  that  of  food  (for  reasons  which  will  presently  be
pointed  out),  he  can  not  be  sure  of  this.  It  is,  therefore,  in  the  interest  of  con-
sumers, that  is  to  say  of  the  community,  that,  in  the  uncertainty  as  to  what  may
be  the  degree  of  abundance  or  scarcity  of  forthcoming  supplies,  a  certain  surplus
should  be  kept  in  hand,  which  should  be  greater  or  less  according  to  the  prospects
of  the  incoming  season,  with  a  view  to  supplement  the  possible  deficiencies  of  fu-
ture supplies  ;  and  the  market  price  called  for  by  the  interest  of  consumers  would
manifestly  be  that  which  would  be  sufficient,  not  merely  to  carry  existing  stocks
over  to  the  arrival  of  new  supplies,  but  to  maintain  also  such  a  surplus.  (See
Tooke's  "History  of  Prices,"  vol.  v.,  part  i.,  §  22,  where  the  reader  will  find  the
subject  discussed  with  Mr.  Tooke's  usual  discrimination.)

t  According  to  Mr.  Mill,  the  actual  market  price  it>  the  price  which  equalizes
supply  and  demand  in  a  given  market :  as  I  view  the  case,  the  "proper  market
price "  is  the  price  which  equalizes  supply  and  demand,  not  as  existing  in  the
particular  market,  but  in  the  larger  sense  which  I  have  assigned  to  the  terms.


FUNCTION  OF  SFECULATOBS.  109

ers  in  the  market  have  dimly  in  view  when  by  implication
they  refer  to  a  standard  by  which  they  pronounce  the.  actual
price  to  be  "  too  high,"  or  "  too  low,"  or  "  what  it  ought  to  be."
I  would  define  it  as  the  price  which  suffices  to  adjust  in  the
most  advantageous  way  the  existing  supply  to  the  existing
demand  pending  the  coming  forward  of  fresh  supplies  from
the  sources  of  production.

I  have  now,  I  hope,  made  it  plain  that  in  a  given  state  of
demand  and  supply  there  is  a  certain  market  price  which  is
identified  with  the  consumer's  interest;  and,  in  doing  so,  I
have  observed  incidentally  that  the  price  satisfies  no  less  the
true  interest  of  dealers.  It  remains  to  show  somewhat  more
explicitly  how  it  comes  within  the  range  of  the  latter's  specu-
lations, so  as  to  become  the  point  toward  which  the  operations
converge ;  since  it  is  only  in  proponion  as  this  is  the  case  that
the  action  of  the  wholesale  market  has  any  tendency  to  evolve
what  I  have  called  the  "proper  price."  The  buyer,  as  we
know,  seeks  to  buy  as  cheaply  as  he  can ;  the  seller  to  sell  as
dearly  as  he  can ;  but,  with  all  this,  it  is  the  interest  of  both
to  know  the  price  beyond  which,  in  one  direction  the  buyer,
in  the  other  the  seller,  can  not  pass  without  loss;  and  this  is
precisely  the  price  which  stands  identified  with  the  consumer's
interest.  For,  as  we  have  seen,  if  the  price  rises  beyond  this
point,  consumption  is  checked,  stocks  accumulate,  and  a  fall
of  price  is  necessitated,  to  the  loss  of  all  dealers  loho  have  piLr-
chased  above  the  depressed  rate ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  if  the
price  falls  below  it,  the  result  is  an  advance  at  a  future  time,
to  the  loss  of  all  loho  had  sold  ivhile  the  lower  price  prevailed.  It
is  evident,  therefore,  that  dealers  are  interested  in  knowing
the  "proper  price"  of  the  market,  and  further,  it  is  evident
tnat  it  is  toward  this  point  that  the  combined  efforts  of  buyer

To  this  price  the  actual  market  j)rice  will,  according  to  my  view,  approximate,  in
proportion  to  the  intelligence  and  knowledge  of  the  dealers.


110  MARKET  VALUE.

and  seller,  in  proportion  as  tbey  are  well  informed  respecting
the  conditions  of  supply  and  demand,  really  converge.  Deal-
ers thus,  while  simply  pursuing  their  own  interests,  are  uncon-
sciously performing  for  the  community  a  service  of  first-rate
importance  —  a  service  which  has  been  well  compared  by
Archbishop  Whately  to  that  rendered  by  the  captain  of  a
ship,  who,  taking  account  of  the  stock  of  provisions  at  his  dis-
posal, and  the  length  of  his  intended  voyage,  adjusts  to  these
conditions  the  rations  of  his  crew.  Such  is  the  tendency  of
the  speculation  of  the  market,  and  the  end  is  attained  in  pro-
portion to  the  intelligence  and  the  knowledge  of  those  who
engage  in  the  pursuit;  and  such  are  the  grounds  on  which
freedom  of  commercial  speculation  may  be  justified.  Of
course  mistakes  are  often  made,  sometimes  very  serious  mis-
takes; and  then  we  have  reaction,  oscillation,  and  perhaps
commercial  crises.  But  under  all  circumstances  the  price  in
the  market  is  determined  by  the  opinions  of  dealers  in  the
market,  founded  upon  their  knowledge  of  demand  and  supply
—  of  dealers  pursuing  their  interests  under  circumstances
which,  in  proportion  to  the  intelligence  and  knowledge  at
their  command,  favor  the  establishment  of  the  "proper  mar-
ket price."

The  foregoing  is  the  nearest  approximation  I  can  make  to  a
statement  of  the  law  of  market  price,  I  can  well  believe  how
utterly  unsatisfactory  it  will  appear  to  some  economists  whose
views  in  connection  with  their  science  are  much  more  ambi-
tious than  my  own,  and  who  apparently  do  not  think  it  hope-
less that  we  should  have,  ere  long,  an  exposition  of  economic
principles  drawn  up  in  quantitative  formulas.  That  such  a
consummation  would  be  desirable,  assuming  the  exposition  to
be  sound,  I  should  be  the  last  to  deny,  though  I  own  I  do  not
expect  to  witness  it ;  and  I  can  not  but  think  that,  whatever
may  be  the  case  in  other  instances,  at  least  in  that  of  market
price  the  scientific  game  would  scarcely  be  worth  the  candle.


IMPORTANCE  OF  THE  THEORY.  Ill

In  effect,  questions  respecting  market,  as  distinguished  from
normal  price,  are  such  as  do  not  often  meet  us  in  the  field  of
economic  or  social  speculation.  The  circumstances  which  gov-
ern prices  in  the  latter  sense ;  which  regulate  the  relative  pro-
portions in  which  the  various  classes  of  goods  usually  ex-
change ;  which  cause  the  prices  of  some  of  the  most  important
articles  of  consumption  to  he  permanently  higher  in  some  coun-
tries than  in  others  —  these  are  topics  of  very  great  moment,
which  have  the  closest  connection  with  some  most  important
questions  of  national  and  class  well-being.  But  the  most  accu-
rate determination  of  the  conditions  which  issue  in  the  price-
current  in  a  particular  market  on  a  particular  day,  and  which
rule  the  fluctuations  of  the  market  from  day  to  day — however
important  such  knowledge  may  be  to  the  practical  merchant
and  speculator — can  furnish,  so  far  as  I  can  see,  but  slight  help
toward  the  solution  of  any  question  of  large  or  permanent  in-
terest.* I  do  not,  therefore,  affect  to  think  that  the  incom-


*  The  announcements  of  the  pending  famine  in  Bengal  warn  me  that  it  is  pos-
sible to  disparage  too  much  the  importance  of  the  doctrine  of  market  prices.  In
the  comments  on  this  subject  by  the  press  of  this  country,  much  anxiety  has  been
evinced  in  some  quarters  lest  merchants,  by  storing  supplies,  may  force  up  the
price  of  food  to  a  famine  rate  in  certain  isolated  districts.  A  slight  acquaintance
with  the  doctrine  of  market  price  might  serve  to  re-assure  such  writers.  Provided
that  the  merchants  in  question  have  not  the  power  to  exclude  supplies  from  the
isolated  districts,  any  advance  in  price  beyond  what  the  interest  of  the  consumers
in  the  district  requires  would,  as  I  have  shown  in  the  foregoing  pages,  be  at  the
cost  of  the  speculators  whose  operations  produced  it.  What  is  desirable  is,  that
the  price  should  be  raised  as  soon  as  possible  to  a  point  sufficient  at  once  to  com-
pel tlie  utmost  economy  in  consumption,  and  to  attract  supplies  from  the  largest
possible  area.  As  to  the  action  of  the  Government  for  the  relief  of  the  famine
being  a  "  setting  aside  of  the  laws  of  Political  Economy,"  it  would  be  just  as  rea-
sonable to  talk  of  precautions  against  a  hurricane,  or  against  a  high  tide,  being  a
setting  aside  of  tlie  laws  of  physical  nature.  Will  people  never  understand  that
a  "law"  of  Political  Economy  is  a  "law"  in  no  other  sense  than  the  law  of
e;ravitation,  and  that  it  is  not  an  act  of  Parliament,  or  a  rule  prescribed  by  any
one,  which  governors-general  can  "  set  aside  ?"


112  MARKET  VALUE.

pleteness  and  imperfection  which  are  apparent  enough  in  this
portion  of  economic  theory  are  very  much  to  be  deplored.
So  far  as  the  doctrine  of  market  price  is  concerned,  it  seems
to  me  to  suffice  for  the  purposes  of  Social  Philosophy,  if  we
are  enabled  to  set  forth,  in  a  general  way  the  connection  be-
tween the  fluctuations  of  the  market  and  the  more  fundament-
al conditions  on  which  production  and  exchange  depend.  And
so  much,  I  venture  to  think,  the  theory,  as  I  have  stated  it,
taken  in  connection  with  the  known  facts  of  particular  cases,
will  sufficiently  enable  us  to  perform.

§  5.  The  foregoing  discussion  has  been  confined  exclusive-
ly to  the  question  of  prices  in  wholesale  markets:  it  remains
to  consider  the  case  of  retail  prices ;  but  these  need  not  detain
us  long.  The  chief  circumstances  in  which  the  determination
of  price  in  retail  dealings  differs  from  its  determination  in
wholesale  markets  appear  to  be  these  two :  first,  competition
in  retail  markets  is  conducted  under  conditions  which  may  be
described  as  of  greater  friction  than  those  which  exist  in  whole-
sale trade.  In  the  wholesale  market,  the  sellers  and  purchas-
ers meet  together  in  the  same  place,  affording  thus  to  each
other  reciprocally  the  opportunity  of  comparing  directly  and
at  once  the  terms  on  which  they  are  severally  disposed  to
trade.  In  retail  dealing  it  is  otherwise.  In  each  place  of  sale
there  is  but  one  seller ;  and  though  it  is  possible  to  compare
his  terms  with  the  prices  demanded  elsewhere  by  others,  this
can  not  always  be  done  on  the  moment,  and  may  involve
much  inconvenience  and  delay.  A  purchaser  frequently  finds
it,  on  the  whole,  better  to  take  the  word  of  the  seller  for  the
fairness  of  the  price  demanded  than  to  verify  his  statements
by  going  on  the  occasion  of  every  purchase  to  another  shop.
It  is  probable,  indeed,  that  if  the  charge  be  excessive,  the  pur-
chaser will  in  time  come  to  discover  this,  and  may  then  trans-
fer his  custom  to  a  cheaper  market. This  shows  that  compe-


IN  RETAIL  DEALING.  113

dtion  is  not  inoperative  in  retail  trade,  but  it  shows  also  the
sort  of  friction  under  which  it  works,  and  helps  to  explain,
what  has  often  been  remarked  upon,  and  what,  as  a  matter  of
fact,  it  is  practically  important  people  should  bear  in  mind,
the  different  prices  at  which  the  same  commodity  is  frequent-
ly found  to  sell  within  a  very  limited  range  of  retail  dealing
— almost  in  what  we  may  call  the  same  market.  This  is  one
circumstance  that  distinguishes  retail  from  wholesale  trading.
The  other  lies  in  the  advantage  which  his  superior  knowledge
gives  the  buyer  ov«r  the  seller  in  the  transaction  taking  place
between  them — a  superiority  which  has  no  counterpart  in  the
relations  of  wholesale  dealers.  In  the  wholesale  market,  buy-
er and  seller  are  upon  a  strictly  equal  footing  as  regards
knowledge  of  all  the  circumstances  calculated  to  affect  the
price  of  the  commodity  dealt  in.  It  is  the  business  of  each  to
inform  himself  as  to  the  state  of  supply  and  demand,  and  if
he  fails  to  do  so,  he  hird  no  just  ground  of  complaint  if  the
other  party  to  the  transaction  gains  an  advantage  in  the  bar-
gain. The  advantage  so  obtained  is  the  natural  and  proper
reward  of  the  greater  skill  exhibited — skill  which,  as  I  have
shown,  it  is  for  the  interest  of  the  community  that  each  should
cultivate  to  the  highest  degree.  The  circumstances  of  retail
dealing  are  here  again  in  contrast  with  those  of  the  wholesale
trade.  The  transactions  do  not  take  place  between  dealers
possessing,  or  with  the  opportunities  of  acquiring,  equal  knowl-
edge respecting  the  commodities  dealt  in,  but  between  experts
on  one  side,  and  on  the  other  persons  in  most  cases  wholly
ignorant  of  the  circumstances  at  the  time  affecting  the  market.
Between  persons  so  qualified  the  game  of  exchange,  if  the  rules
be  rigorously  enforced,  is  not  a  fair  one ;  and  it  has  conse-
quently been  recognized,  universally  in  England,  and  very  ex-
tensively among  the  better  class  of  retail  dealers  in  continental
countries,  as  a  principle  of  commercial  morality,  that  the  dealer
saould  not  demand  from  his  customer  a  higher  price  for  his

8


114  MABKET  VALUE.

commodity  than  the  lowest  he  is  prepared  to  take.  Ketail
buying  and  selling  is  thus  made  to  rest  upon  a  moral  rather
than  upon  an  economic  basis,  and,  there  can  be  no  doubt,
for  the  advantage  of  all  parties  concerned.  The  practice,
however,  of  unprofitable  higgling,  as  all  travelers  know,  is
still  rife  in  most  parts  of  the  Continent,  and,  in  general,  every-
where among  the  class  of  smaller  dealers,  involving  a  great
waste  of  time,  by  which  perhaps  the  dealer  in  the  end  loses  as
much  as  he  now  and  then  gains  by  taking  advantage  of  his
superiority  over  his  customer  in  knowledge  of  the  game.

These,  it  seems  to  me,  are  the  principal  circumstances  which
distinguish  the  determination  of  price  in  the  retail  trade  from
its  determination  in  wholesale  markets ;  and  they  suffice  to  ac-
count for,  what  has  often  been  noticed  and  is  indeed  a  very
patent  fact,  the  much  greater  variety  to  be  found  in  the  prices
of  the  same  and  similar  commodities  in  the  former  than  in  the
latter  department  of  business.  I  do  not  think  ih^iX  fluctuations
of  price  (to  be  distinguished  from  variety)  are  greater  in  the  re-
tail than  in  the  wholesale  trade.  Perhaps,  on  the  whole,  they
may  in  this  country  be  somewhat  less;  as  the  practice  of  hav-
ing a  fixed  price  for  all  goods  would  make  the  prudent  .retail
dealer  unwilling  to  change  his  price,  and  so  disappoint  and
harass  his  customer,  with  every  slight  fluctuation  of  the  whole-
sale market.  But  though  fluctuations  of  price  may  be  some-
,  what  less,  varieties  of  price  are  undoubtedly  very  much  great-

\  er.  Not  only  in  different  localities,  but  often  in  different  shops
in  the  same  locality,  it  is  quite  usual  to  find  the  same  articles,
and  of  the  same  quality,  selling  at  widely  different  prices  at
the  same  time;  and  this  quite  in  excess  of  what  the  special
circumstances  of  particular  localities  or  situations  might  ac-
count for.  This  is  not  a  satisfactory  state  of  things ;  but
though  perhaps  in  some  degree  inevitable,  because  due  to  what
we  may  regard  as  essential  incidents  of  retail  trading,  the  evil
is,  at  least  in  this  country,  greatly  aggravated  by  a  cause  M-hioh
is  quite  removable,  and  which,  we  may  hope,  is  in  process  of


CO-OPEBATIVE  COMPETITION.  115

being  removed.  This  is  the  excessive  amount  of  capital  which,
from  one  cause  or  another,  has  found  its  way  into  the  business
of  mere  distribution.  The  inevitable  consequence  is  that  the
capital  thus  in  excess,  taking  it  as  an  aggregate,  turns  slowly —
more  slowly  than  it  need  turn  consistently  with  the  due  dis-
charge of  its  functions ;  and  that  those  who  have  embarked  in
retail  business  are  compelled,  in  order  to  obtain  average  profits
on  their  capital,  to  charge  higher  prices  for  their  goods  than
would  be  necessary  if  the  total  amount  of  capital  in  the  trade
were  less.  That  such  a  state  of  thino-s  should  exist  and  con-
tinue  is  doubtless  due  to  that  excessive  friction  in  the  action
of  competition  in  retail  dealing  of  which  I  have  spoken.  The
prices  charged  in  different  retail  establishments  are  but  rare-
ly compared,  and  continue  consequently  to  differ  widely  from
each  other,  as  they  no  doubt  differ  still  more  widely  from  what
they  might  be  in  a  more  healthy  condition  of  the  trade.  The
source  of  the  evil  is,  thus,  the  sluggish  action  of  competition ;
and  the  remedy  must  be  sought  in  the  quickening  of  this  ac-
tion. This  is  what  the  co-operative  retail  establishments  are,
in  effect,  doing.  By  adopting  a  lower  scale  of  prices,  and  tak-
ing good  means  to  advertise  their  terms,  they  draw  a  larger
amount  of  custom  to  their  shops  in  proportion  to  the  capital
embarked  than  other  competing  establishments.  The  result  is
that,  turning  their  capital  more  rapidly,  they  succeed  in  realiz-
ing as  high  profits  as  their  rivals,  wihile  charging  lower  prices.
The  opposition  given  to  this  movement  by  the  ordinary  retail
establishments,  however  little  ground  for  it  there  may  be  in
reason  and  justice,  is  perfectly  natural,  inasmuch  as  the  drift
of  it  unquestionably  is  toward  the  extrusion  of  some  of  them
from  the  trade.  Nothing  less  than  this,  it  is  clear,  will  satisfy
the  exigencies  of  the  case.  What  we  have  to  contemplate  as
the  proper  goal  of  co-operative  competition  is  a  general  fall  of
retail  prices;  but  to  reconcile  this  with  a  realization  by  the
■whole  trade  of  an  average  remuneration  on  the  capital  embark-
ed in  it,  it  would  be  necessary  that  this  capital  should  be  turn-


116  MARKET  VALUE.

ed  over  in  a  given  time  as  often  as  the  capital  of  the  co-opera-
tors. In  order  to  this,  however,  the  entire  capital  employed
in  the  trade  would  need  to  be  brought  into  the  same  propor-
tion with  the  business  to  be  cbne  as  the  co-operators'  capital
bears  to  their  business — that  is  to  say,  the  total  capital  now
employed  in  the  business  of  distribution  would  need  to  be
largely  curtailed.  The  necessity  of  this  is  not  always  per-
ceived ;  and  people  argue  that,  as  the  co-operative  stores  have
succeeded  in  turning  over  their  capital  rapidly  by  the  expe-
dient of  a  reduction  in  price,  so  the  same  end  may  be  attained
by  the  retail  trade  in  general  through  the  adoption  of  the  same
means.  But  this  is  just  one  of  those  cases,  so  common  in  Po-
litical Economy,  in  which  what  is  true  in  particular  instances
ceases  to  be  true  when  the  instances  become  the  rule.  •  How
is  it  that  co-operators  have  accomplished  the  more  rapid  turn-
ing of  their  capital?  Simply  by  drawing  off  custom  through
the  attraction  of  low  prices  from  other  shops.  Supposing  these
latter  now  to  adopt  the  same  policy,  we  may  assume  that  their
custom  would  flow  back  to  them.  The  capital  of  the  whole
would  then  turn  at  the  same  rate  as  formerly;  but  it  was  just
this  slow  rate  of  turning  that  necessitated  exorbitant  prices  in
the  retail  trade  ;  and  if  prices  are  to  range  lower,  other  things
being  the  same,  profits  must  decline  below  their  former  and
average  level.  Other  things,  indeed,  would  not,  in  the  case
supposed,  remain  for  any  long  time  the  same ;  for  a  fall  in  the
rate  of  profit  would  have  the  effect  of  driving  capital  from  the
trade,  or  at  all  events  of  preventing  the  capital  now  in  the
trade  from  being  recruited  by  the  accessions  that  otherwise
would  flow  to  it.  The  definitive  result  toward  which  such  a
process  would  tend  is  manifestly  a  reduction  of  the  existing
capital  of  retail  dealing  to  an  amount  which  would  be  no  more
than  adequate  to  perform  the  services  required  of  it.  This  point
reached,  while  the  public  would  enjoy  the  advantage  of  lower-
ed prices,  retail  dealers  would,  as  a  body,  derive  from  their
investments  the  rate  of  remuneration  current  in  the  country.


CHAPTEE  V.

ON  SOME  DERIVA  TIVE  LA  WS  OF  VAL  UE.

§  1.  I  PROPOSE  to  call  attention  in  this  chapter  to  some  ex-
amples of  value  which  I  think  may  not  improperly  be  called
"derivative  laws"  of  that  phenom.enon.  I  refer  to  those
changes  in  the  values  of  different  kinds  of  commodities  which
occur  when  the  general  laws  of  value,  such  as  we  have  found
them  to  be,  come  into  operation  under  the  actual  circumstances
of  progressive  societies.

When  a  colony  establishes  itself  in  a  new  country,  the
course  of  its  industrial  development  naturally  follows  the
character  of  the  opportunities  offered  to  industrial  enterprise
by  the  environment.  These  will  of  course  vary  a  good  deal,
according  to  the  part  of  the  world  in  which  the  new  society
happens  to  be  placed ;  but,  speaking  broadly,  they  will  be
such  as  to  draw  the  bulk  of  the  industrial  activity  of  the  new
people  into  some  one  or  more  of  those  branches  of  industry
which  have  been  conveniently  designated  "extractive."  Ag-
riculture, pastoral  and  mining  pursuits,  and  the  cutting  of
lumber,  are  among  the  principal  of  such  industries;  and  they,
together  with  the  rude  handicrafts  immediately  dependent  on
them,  are  what  we  find,  in  fact,  to  be  the  main  occupations  of
all  newly-settled  communities.  Now  it  is  mainly,  if  not  ex-
clusively, to  this  class  of  industrial  pursuits  that  that  law  of
Political  Economy,  or  more  properly  of  physical  nature,  ap-
plies, which  Mr.  Mill  has  rightly  characterized  as  the  most  im-
portant proposition  in  economic  science — the  law,  as  he  phrased
it,  of  "  diminishing  productiveness," Most  of  my  readers  will


118  DERIVATIVE  LAWS  OF  VALUE.

be  familiar  witli  the  principle  in  question,  but  it  may  be  well
to  recall  it  here.  It  may  be  thus  briefly  stated:  In  any
given  state  of  the  arts  of  production,  the  returns  to  human
industry  employed  upon  natural  agents  will,  up  to  a  certain
point,  be  the  maximum  which  those  natural  agents,  cultivated
with  the  degree  of  skill  brought  to  bear  upon  them,  are  capa-
ble of  yielding;  but  after  this  point  has  been  passed,  though
an  increased  application  of  labor  and  capital  will  obtain  an  in-
creased return,  it  will  not  obtain  a  proportionally  increased  re-
turn: on  the  contrary,  every  further  increase  of  outlay — al-
ways assuming  that  the  skill  employed  in  applying  it  contin-
ues the  same  as  before — will  be  attended  with  a  return  con-
stantly diminishing.  To  this  principle,  in  conjunction  with
the  varying  quality  of  different  soils,  is  due,  as  every  econo-
mist knows,  the  phenomenon  of  agricultural  rent;  but  this
has  been  so  fully  illustrated  in  works  now  in  every  one's
hands,  in  its  application  alike  to  agriculture  and  to  other
branches  of  extractive  industry,  that  I  may  content  myself
with  merely  referring  to  it  here.  What  I  am  concerned  now
to  show  is  the  manner  in  which,  with  the  progress  of  society,
the  law  in  question  affects  the  course  of  normal  values  in  all
commodities  coming  under  its  influence.

The  case  which  I  am  considering,  the  reader  will  remember,
is  that  of  newly-settled  communities,  among  whom  the  condi-
tions of  social  and  industrial  life  are,  on  the  whole,  much  more
equal  and  uniform  than  in  old  countries  like  this.  It  results
that  industrial  competition  among  the  several  social  classes
will  at  this  stage  of  social  growth — unless  where  restrained  by
laws  enacted  directly  for  this  purpose — be  more  general  and
effective  than  in  this  part  of  the  world  we  are  accustomed  to
find  it;  and,  as  a  further  consequence  from  the  same  state  of
things,  it  must  follow  that  the  principle  of  cost  of  production
as  governing  value  is  more  extensively  operative  in  such  so-
cieties than  with  us. For  the  purposes  of  our  present  investi-


INCREASE  OF  COST  OF  COMMODITIES.  119

gation  it  will  be  convenient  to  assume,  and  the  assumption
will  be  sufficiently  near  the  truth,  that,  in  the  case  of  their
domestic  exchanges,  the  principle  in  question  is  operative  uni-
versally. This  being  so,  it  is  evident  that  an  inquiry  into  the
course  of  normal  values  in  such  communities  resolves  itself
into  an  inquiry  into  the  changes  which  occur  in  the  costs  of
producing  the  several  classes  of  commodities  which  are  there
the  subject  of  exchange;  these  commodities  consisting  mainly,
as  we  have  seen,  at  least  during  the  earlier  stages  of  their
growth,  of  the  products  of  extractive  industry.

From  the  law  of  diminishing  productiveness  just  referred
to,  taken  in  connection  with  the  circumstance  that  the  settlers
in  a  new  country  naturally  have  recourse,  in  the  first  instance,
to  those  natural  agents  which,  from  their  superior  fertility  or
more  convenient  situation,  promise  the  largest  returns  to  in-
dustry, it  follows  that,  as  population  increases  and  larger  de-
mands are  made  upon  the  resources  of  the  country,  the  cost
of  producing  commodities  tends  constantly  to  rise.  This  tend-
ency may  indeed  be  counteracted  by  the  progress  of  mechan-
ical and  chemical  invention,  and  the  improved  industrial  proc-
esses which  usually  result.  But,  in  point  of  fact,  it  has  never
been  found  in  the  history  of  any  country,  that  such  inventions
have  kept  pace  with  the  declining  rate  of  return  yielded  by
natural  agents,  as  their  capabilities  have  been  subjected  to  the
increasing  demands  of  a  growing  community ;  and  it  is  there-
fore safe  to  assume  that  the  tendency  to  an  increase  of  cost
in  the  class  of  commodities  under  consideration  would  in  any
actual  case  be  realized.  The  degree,  however,  in  which  this
result  occurred  would  be  very  different  in  different  kinds  of
"extractive"  products,  and  this  would  lead  to  corresponding
differences  in  the  course  of  their  normal  values.

§  2.  The  class  of  commodities  in  the  production  of  which
the  facilities  possessed  by  new  communities,  as  compared  with


120  DERIVATIVE  LAWS  OF  VALUE,

old,  attain  their  greatest  height,  are  those  of  which  timber  and
meat  may  be  taken  as  the  type,  and  comprises  such  articles  as
wool,  game,  furs,  hides,  horns,  pitch,  resin,  etc.  The  character-
istic of  all  such  products  is,  that  they  admit  of  being  raised
with  little  previous  outlay,  and,  therefore,  with  comparatively
little  capital,  and  in  general  require  for  their  production  a
large  extent  of  ground.  Now  capital  is  the  industrial  agent
which  new  countries  are  least  able  to  command,  while  they
commonly  possess  land  in  unlimited  abundance.  There  can,
therefore,  be  no  difficulty  in  perceiving  that,  for  the  produc-
tion of  the  class  of  commodities  mentioned  above,  newly-set-
tled communities  are  especially  adapted,  and  that,  consequent-
ly, the  value  of  all  such  commodities  will  be  in  them  excep-
tionally low.

The  circumstance  which  most  powerfully  affects  the  course
of  values  in  the  products  of  extractive  industry,  and  in  the
commodities  just  referred  to  among  the  rest,  is  the  degree  in
which  they  admit  of  being  transported  from  place  to  place,
that  is  to  say,  their  portableness,  depending,  as  it  does,  partly
on  their  durability  and  partly  on  their  bulk.  Taking  timber
and  butcher's  meat  as  exemplifying  respectively  a  high  and  a
low  degree  of  portableness,  we  find  that  while  the  values  of
both  range  in  new  countries,  where  the  circumstances  are  fa-
vorable for  their  production,  at  a  very  low  point  compared
with  their  values  in  old,  the  difference  is,  even  at  the  outset,
considerably  greater  in  the  case  of  meat  than  in  that  of  tim-
ber; and  further,  that,  while  the  value  of  the  latter  rises  in
general  slowly,  and  never  attains  a  very  great  elevation,  reck-
oning from  its  height  at  starting,  that  of  the  former  rises  more
rapidly,  and  continues  to  rise  with  the  growth  of  the  commu-
nity, the  highest  point  which  it  is  capable  of  attaining  being,
in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge  at  least,  quite  indeter-
minable. The  explanation  of  this  contrast  lies  entirely  in  the
circumstance  to  which  I  have  adverted — the  different  portable-


MEAT  AND  TIMBER.  121

ness  of  the  two  commodities.  Timber,  notwithstanding  its
bulk,  being  a  very  portable  commodity,  easily  finds  its  way
from  the  forests  of  new  to  the  markets  of  old  countries.  As
soon,  therefore,  as  a  new  community  is  brought  into  commer-
cial connection  with  the  more  advanced  parts  of  the  world,
if  timber  be  there  an  article  of  production,  its  price  will  at
once  rise  to  a  level  lower  than  that  prevailing  in  old  countries
only  by  the  cost  of  transport.  This,  no  doubt,  in  so  bulky  a
commodity,  will  represent  a  considerable  proportion  of  the
whole  value ;  but  the  important  point  to  attend  to  is  that  the
price  thus  determined  will  in  future  bear  a  constant  relation  to
the  price  in  old  countries;*  the  difference  between  the  two  be-
ing always  such  as  the  cost  of  transport  will  render  it.  Meat,
on  the  other  hand,  unsuited  as  it  is,  owing  to  its  perishable  na-
ture, for  a  distant  traffic,  is  confined  for  a  market,  if  not  to  the
immediate  locality  where  it  is  produced,  at  least  to  the  border-
ing countries ;  and  being  raised  in  new  countries  at  very  low
cost,  its  value  during  the  early  stages  of  their  growth  is  neces-
sarily low. But  as  population  advances,  and  agriculture  en-

*  It  is  not  to  be  supposed  from  this  that  the  price,  as  compared  with  that  of  oth-
er commodities  raised  within  the  same  district,  will  cease  to  be  determined  by  its
cost  of  production.  If,  for  example,  the  opening  afforded  by  foreign  markets  had
the  effect  of  raising  the  price  of  timber  above  the  point  prescribed  by  its  cost  of
production  as  compared,  let  us  say,  with  agricultural  products,  the  higher  profits
of  the  lumber  trade,  in  the  circumstances  supposed,  would  have  the  effect  of  draw-
ing off  capital  and  labor  from  agriculture  to  lumber  cutting.  The  curtailment  of
the  area  of  cultivation  in  agriculture  would  be  attended  with  a  reduction  in  the
cost  of  its  products,  involving,  cceteris  paribus,  an  advance  in  agricultural  profits ;
M'hile,  on  the  other  hand,  the  extension  of  the  field  of  pi'oduction  in  lumber  cut-
ting, necessitating  a  resort  to  more  distant  forests,  would  be  followed  by  the  oppo-
site effect ;  and  this  process  would  manifestly  go  on  till  the  prices  of  timber  and
agricultural  products  were  brought  into  relation  with  their  respective  costs.  The
normal  price  of  timber,  therefore,  would  still  be  such  as  its  cost  of  production  pre-
scribed ;  but  this  cost  of  production,  as  happens  with  the  products  of  all  extract-
ive industry,  w^ould  tend  to  rise  with  the  increased  demands  made  upon  the  nat-
ural agent.


122  BEBIVATIVE  LAWS  OF  VALUE.

croaches  on  the  natural  pasture  lands  originally  available  for
the  rearing  of  cattle,  still  more  as  it  becomes  necessary  to  cul-
tivate land  for  the  purpose  of  pasture,  the  cost  of  meat  con-
stantly rises.  It  was  the  opinion  of  Adam  Smith,  that,  so
soon  as  this  last  stage  was  reached,  the  price  of  all  "  extractive  "
products  of  whatever  kind  attained  its  maximum  height,  and
that  no  farther  advance  (unless  so  far  as  this  might  arise  from
a  fall  in  the  value  of  money)  was  henceforth  to  be  expected.
The  only  reason  he  assigns  for  this  opinion  is,  that  if  the  price
rose  higher,  "  more  land  would  soon  be  turned  to  that  pur-
pose."* I  need  scarcely  point  out  the  entire  inadequacy  of
this  reason.  More  land  no  doubt  would  be  turned  to  the  pro-
duction of  the  article,  whatever  it  might  happen  to  be,  the  ad-
vancing price  of  which  made  it  profitable  to  cultivate  land  for
this  purpose  ;  but  it  does  not  follow,  that,  as  the  extension  of
cultivation  went  on,  the  cost  of  production,  and  with  it  the
price  of  the  article,  would  not  rise.  On  the  contrary,  this  is
what  we  know  does  happen,  and  has  happened  in  a  signal
manner  in  the  case  of  meat.  The  same  cause  which  depresses
the  price  of  meat  in  the  earlier  stages  of  a  nation's  career — its
perishable  nature  and  consequent  unfitness  for  transport — op-
erates to  raise  the  price  in  the  later  stages  by  practically  con-
fining each  country  to  what  it  can  itself  produce.  It  is  thus
led  with  the  increasing  demands  of  a  growing  population  to
extend  the  supply  at  a  constantly  increasing  cost.  The  price
of  meat,  accordingly,  has,  since  the  time  of  Adam  Smith,
though  with  numerous  fluctuations,  on  the  whole  steadily  ad-
vanced; and,  notwithstanding  the  unexampled  height  which
it  has  now  attained  in  this  country,  when  one  considers  the
peculiar  place  which  meat  holds  in  the  dietary  of  the  masses
of  a  people — that  it  is  the  article  on  which,  in  the  event  of  any
improvement  in  their  condition,  increased  expenditure  most

*  "Wealth  of  Nations,"  pp.  101-4,  5.


GRAIN.  123

certainly  finds  vent — one  can  not  doubt  but  that  its  progress
must  still  be  upward,*  even  irrespective  of  the  depreciation  of
money  now  going  on,  which  can  not  fail  to  accelerate  the
movement.

§  8.  Next  to  those  products  of  extractive  industry  of  which
meat  and  timber  are  the  type,  and  which  exhibit  in  the  high-
est degree  the  special  productive  aptitudes  of  new  countries,
the  commodity  which  offers  greatest  scope  for  their  special  re-
sources is  grain.  The  course  of  normal  price  in  this  article
differs  in  a  very  striking  way  from  that  of  those  which  we
have  just  considered.  Like  theirs,  indeed,  the  course  is  up-
ward ;  and  like  that  of  timber — corn  being  also  an  extremely
portable  commodity — the  price  is  at  an  early  stage  brought
into  relation  with  the  quotations  ruling  in  the  great  markets
of  the  world ;  with  this  difference,  however,  that  the  cost  of
carriage  being  for  corn,  in  proportion  to  its  value,  much  less,
than  for  timber,  its  price  in  the  new  community  approximates
more  closely  to  its  price  in  old  countries  than  does  that  of  the
latter  commodity.  But  the  noteworthy  circumstance  in  the
course  of  price  in  corn — so  far  at  least  as  corn  forms  the  staple
food  of  a  people — is  that  advancing,  with  of  course  much  fluc-
tuation, in  the  early  period  of  growth,  it  at  length  in  the  prog-
ress of  industrial  development  reaches  a  point  beyond  which
(unless  so  far  as  it  is  affected  by  changes  in  the  value  of  mon-
ey) it  manifests  no  tendency,  at  least  no  permanent  tendency,
to  advance  farther.  I  am  not  aware  that  this  peculiar  incident
in  the  price  of  corn  has  been  pointed  out  before,  and  it  is

*  In  connection  with  this  subject  one  perceives  the  immense  national  impor-
tance of  inventions  bearing  on  the  preservation  of  meat,  and  of  the  development
of  a  trade  in  preserved  meats,  between  new  countries  like  Australia  and  old  ones
like  this.  It  is  satisfactory  to  find  that  some  progress  has  been  made  in  this  di-
rection ;  but  apparently  the  art  will  need  great  improvement  before  the  preserved
meats  of  Australia  can  enter  largely  into  our  general  consumption.


124  DERIVATIVE  LAWS  OF  VALUE.

possible  it  may*  be  disputed  as  a  matter  of  fact :  nevertheless,
I  make  the  assertion  with  some  confidence,  inasmuch  as  I  find
grounds  for  it  in  the  economic  conditions  under  which  corn  is
produced,  taken  in  connection  with  the  purposes  to  which  it
is  applied.  Corn  is  raised  at  various  costs,  according  to  the
character  of  the  land  and  the  degree  of  skill  employed  in  its
cultivation ;  but,  as  every  economist  knows,  the  cost  which
governs  the  price  of  corn  is  the  cost  of  the  most  costly  portion
brought  to  market.  In  the  early  stages  of  a  nation's  career,
as  with  the  increase  of  population  resort  is  had  to  more  distant
and  inferior  soils,  the  cost  of  this  most  costly  portion  steadily
rises,  and  along  with  it  the  normal  price  of  corn.  But  an  in-
crease in  the  cost  of  corn  means  a  diminished  return  on  the  in-
dustry employed  in  producing  it;  and  this  diminished  return
— corn  being  the  principal  article  of  the  laborer's  consumption
—  involves  for  him  diminished  means  of  support.  It  needs
but  slight  reflection  to  perceive  that  this  circumstance  contains
within  it  a  necessary  limit  to  the  increasing  cost  of  producing
corn,  and,  consequently,  to  the  advance  in  its  price.  In  the
jcase  of  what  we  may  call  secondary  articles  of  consumption,
such  as  meat  and  dairy  produce,  the  same  consequence  does
not  arise,  because  an  advance  in  the  price  of  such  commodities,
entering  as  they  do  but  sparingly  into  his  consumption,  falls,
by  comparison  at  least,  lightly  on  the  laborer. These  articles

*  Unless  Adam  Smith's  view  as  to  the  steadiness  of  the  price  of  corn,  compar-
ing century  with  century,  in  contrast  with  the  market  fluctuations  from  year  to
year,  be  considered  as  tantamount  to  it.  Mr.  Mill,  indeed,  has  controverted
Adam  Smith's  doctrine,  which,  he  says,  "  we  noAV  know  to  be  an  error.  Corn
tends  to  rise  in  cost  of  production  with  every  increase  of  population,  and  to  fall
with  every  improvement  in  agriculture,  either  in  the  country  itself,  or  in  any  for-
eign countiy  from  which  it  draws  a  portion  of  its  supplies  "  ("Principles  of  Polit-
ical Economy,"  vol.  ii.,  p.  104).  I  venture  here  to  take  side  with  Adam  Smith  ;
for  though  the  tendencies  pointed  out  by  Mr.  Mill  do  exist  and  operate,  their
operation,  as  I  think  I  have  shown  in  the  text,  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  sub-
stantial truth  of  Adam  Smith's  assertion.


GBAIN.  125

may  continue  to  rise  indefinitely,  and  yet  population  may
continue  to  live  and  grow.  But  an  advance  in  the  price  of
the.  staple  food,  after  it  attains  a  certain  elevation,  inevita-
bly reacts  on  population,  and,  checking  the  demand,  arrests
the  extension  of  cultivation,  and  by  consequence,  the  ad-
vance of  normal  price.  The  progress  of  industrial  inven-
tion comes  no  doubt  in  time  to  affect  the  course  of  agri-
culture, and  then  ensues  a  succession  of  cyclical  movements
which  may  be  thus  described.  The  cost  of  producing
corn  on  the  worst  soils  cultivated  is  cheapened:  the  normal
price  of  corn  for  a  time  falls:  the  condition  of  the  laborer
improves,  and  with  the  improvement  in  his  condition  he  mar-
ries earlier,  and  brings  up  a  larger  family :  population  increases,
and,  the  demand  for  food  increasing  with  it,  cultivation  is  ex-
tended to  soils  which,  previous  to  the  introduction  of  the
better  agricultural  processes,  could  not  have  been  profitably
cultivated;  at  length  the  "margin  of  cultivation"  attains  a
range  where  the  inferior  quality  of  the  natural  agents  brought
into  requisition  just  neutralizes  the  gain  derived  from  the  ad-
vance in  agricultural  skill.  At  this  point  the  cost  of  produc-
ing the  most  costly  portion  of  the  nation's  food  is  just  where  it
was  before  improved  processes  had  been  introduced  into  agri-
culture ;  and  the  normal  price  of  food  attains  its  former  eleva-
tion. The  laborer's  condition,  unless  so  far  as  the  standard  of
comfort  has  been  raised  in  the  interval,  returns  to  its  former
level ;  and  the  high  rates  of  subsistence  once  more  react  on  and
control  population.  Under  the  influence  of  a  play  of  motives
of  this  kind,  the  normal  price  of  corn  has  in  all  long -settled
countries  been  kept,  as  a  permanent  state  of  things,  within  the
limit  which  it  had  reached  at  a  comparatively  early  stage  of
their  career,  in  this  respect  strongly  contrasting  with  the  course
of  price  in  meat,  and  in  most  other  secondary  articles  of  con-
sumption. M.  Cherbuliez,*  in  connection  with  this  subject,

*  "Precis  de  la  Science  feonomique,"  vol.  i.,  pp.  356,  357.


126  DEBIVATIVE  LAWS  OF  VALUE.

has  remarked  that,  comparing  the  present  prices  of  meat  and
corn  in  the  countries  of  Western  Europe  with  their  prices  in
former  times,  it  has  been  found  that,  in  the  same  period  in
which  the  price  of  corn  has  risen  in  the  proportion  of  one  to
two,  the  price  of  meat  has  risen  in  the  proportion  of  one  to  ten.
I  venture  to  assert  that,  at  all  events  since  the  beginning  of
the  seventeenth  century,*  the  normal  price  of  wheat  has  not
risen  in  England  more  than  the  depreciation  of  the  precious
metals  since  that  time  will  fully  account  for.  According  to
Adam  Smith,  the  average  price  of  wheat  during  the  first  sixty-
four  years  of  the  eighteenth  century  ruled  at  about  twenty-
eight  shillings  the  quarter,  and  this  price  he  considered  some-
what lower  than  it  would  have  been  had  not  the  period  been
marked  by  an  unusual  number  of  good  harvests.  In  the  last
sixty-four  years  of  the  preceding  century,  the  price  of  wheat,
according  to  the  same  authority,  stood  somewhat  higher.  Tak-
ing the  whole  hundred  and  twenty -eight  years,  the  average
price  of  wheat  probably  might  be  taken  as  ruling  between
thirty  and  five-and-thirty  shillings.  Its  price  in  average  years
now  would,  I  apprehend,  stand  at  somewhere  about  fifty  shil-
■  lings  the  quarter  ;  and  the  difference  is  certainly  not  more  than
a  reference  to  the  diminished  value  of  money  would  explain.
The  reader  will  not  understand  me  as  adducing  these  rough
and  summary  statements  in  proof  o^  the  principle  to  which  I
am  calling  attention.  I  give  them  merely  for  the  purpose  of
illustration;  but  I  have  little  doubt  that,  if  the  question  were
gone  into  statistically,  and  due  allowance  made  for  changes  in
the  value  of  money,  the  results  would  bear  out  the  conclusion
at  which,  on  purely  economic  grounds,  I  have  arrived.

*  I  have  no  doubt  the  date  might  be  put  some  centuries  farther  back  ;  but  as  the
question  of  price  in  the  preceding  centuries  becomes  complicated  by  the  combined
eft'ect  of  the  depreciation  of  money  and  the  deterioration  of  the  standard  coin,  and
as  my  object  is  to  illustrate  my  position,  not  to  prove  it,  T  think  it  better  to  avoid
entering  on  ground  that  might  be  disputed.


COURSE  OF  CULTIVATION.  127

§  4.  One  or  two  consequences  involved  in  the  state  of  things
I  have  been  describing  it  may  perhaps  be  worth  while  here  to
point  out.  We  have  seen  that  in  the  early  stages  of  a  nation's
history  the  tillage  of  the  soil  steadily  encroaches  upon  pasture
fanning,  until  the  latter  becomes  at  length  itself  a  branch  of
agriculture.  A  little  later  on,  the  nation,  instead  of  being  an
exporter  of  agricultural  produce,  becomes  an  importer;  and
then  agricultural  industry  takes  a  new  turn.  Corn  can  now
be  imported  from  abroad,  but  meat  can  not ;  and,  whether  im-
ported or  produced  at  home,  the  price  of  corn,  for  the  reasons
I  have  stated,  has  no  tendency  to  rise  permanently  beyond  the
level  it  has  already  attained,  whereas  the  price  of  meat  may
advance  indefinitely.  It  follows  from  these  facts  that,  as  the
nation  increases  its  numbers  and  needs  augmented  supplies  of
food,  it  naturally  resorts  to  foreign  countries  to  supplement  the
deficiency  in  its  corn  supply,  while  the  additions  needed  to  its
supply  of  meat  are  obtained  by  extending  the  area  under  pas-
ture at  home.  The  constant  tendency,  accordingly,  of  tillage
to  encroach  upon  pasture,  which  up  to  this  time  had  been  the
law  of  industrial  progress,  is  now  reversed ;  and  from  this
point  the  area  of  pasture  tends  steadily  to  increase,  that  of  till-
age to  diminish.  The  stage  in  question  had  been  reached  by
England  just  about  the  time  that  Adam  Smith  wrote;  and
notwithstanding  the  powerful  obstacles  offered  by  wars  and
corn-laws  to  the  natural  course  of  development,  the  movement
of  agriculture  has,  on  the  whole,  been  in  the  direction  I  have
indicated.  At  the  present  time  it  is  decidedly  and  unequivo-
cally so,  and  indeed  I  believe  the  fact  is  very  generally  recog-
nized. Another  consequence  depending  on  the  same  causes
is  exhibited  in  the  movements  of  agricultural  rent.  In  the
early  periods  of  a  nation's  history  the  lands  from  which  the
highest  rent  can  be  obtained  are  those  which  offer  the  greatest
advantages  for  tillage,  while  pasture  lands,  owing  to  the  low
price  of  their  produce,  yield  comparatively  low  returns  in  rent.


128  DEEIVATIVE  LAWS  OF VALUE.

But  so  soon  as  that  stage  in  its  advancing  career  is  readied
when  corn  begins  to  be  imported  from  abioad,  and  meat  is
raised  by  extending  the  area  of  pasture,  the  lands  which  thence-
forward yield  the  highest  rent  are  those  whose  special  excel-
lence lies  in  the  rearing  of  cattle.  I  have  no  statistics  which
would  enable  me  to  illustrate  this  point,  but  the  inference  from
the  facts  of  the  case  is  so  plain  that  I  think  it  may  be  advanced
with  little  hesitation.  There  will  be  lands,  no  doubt,  which
may  equally  well  be  turned  to  either  purpose ;  but  where
lands  have  special  aptitudes  for  one  of  the  two,  those  which
are  fitted  in  the  highest  degree  for  the  raising  of  meat  (and
with  meat  we  may  include  dairy  produce,  hops,  and  in  general
those  articles  which  I  have  called  "  secondary  "  in  relation  to
human  requirements)  are,  I  venture  to  think,  those  from  which
after  the  period  indicated  the  highest  rent:  will  be  obtained.

§  5.  There  is  a  class  of  commodities  which  in  the  industry
of  newjy  -  settled  countries  occupies  an  important  place,  the
course  of  whose  values  is  affected  by  rather  peculiar  conditions.
I  refer  to  what  are  called." accessory  products" — commodities
which  are  produced,  not  separately,  but  as  parts  of  a  common
industry,  and  of  which  the  most  obvious  examples  are  mutton
and  wool,  beef,  tallow  and  hides,  gas  and  coke,  and  the  like.
As  regards  the  values  of  such  commodities,  the  general  law
determining  them  has  been  stated  by  Mr.  Mill  in  his  chapter
on  "  Some  Peculiar  Cases  of  Value."*  It  is  to  the  following
effect:  Cost  of  production  here  operates,  but  in  a  peculiar
manner:  it  determines,  not  the  price  of  each  of  the  articles
conjointly  produced,  but  the  sum  of  their  prices ;  "  their  val-
ues relatively  to  each  other  being  those  which  will  create  a
demand  for  each  in  the  ratio  of  the  quantities  in  which  they
are  sent  forth  by  the  productive  process." The  working  of

*  "Principles  of  Political  Economy,"  vol.  ii.,  book  iii.,  chap.  xvi.


''ACCESSORY  PEODUCTS."  129

this  principle,  under  the  changing  circumstances  of  advancing
communities,  is  what  I  desire  now  to  call  attention  to.

I  have  already  explained  the  course  of  price  in  one  of  the
most  important  of  those  commodities — butcher's  meat ;  and  it
was  then  seen  how  powerfully  that  course  is  affected  by  the
difficulty  of  carriage  incident  to  that  article.  On  the  other
hand,  the  facility  with  which  the  products  accessory  to  the
production  of  butcher's  meat,  wool,  tallow,  and  hides,  are  con-
veyed, is  not  less  powerful  in  the  opposite  sense  in  affecting
the  course  of  their  prices.  Wool,  for  example,  rises  at  once  in
a  new  country  to  the  price  ruling  in  the  great  markets  of  com-
merce, minus  only  the  cost  of  carriage,  which,  owing  to  the
great  portableness  of  wool,  bears  but  a  small  proportion  to  its
total  value.  In  other  words,  the  demand  for  wool,  let  us  say
for  wool  grown  in  Australia,  is  only  limited  by  the  demand
of  the  entire  commercial  world ;  while  the  demand  for  meat
raised  in  the  same  country  is  practically  confined  to  the  local
markets.  It  is  evident  that  this  circumstance  must  lead,  in  the
industrial  development  of  the  colony,  to  a  complete  divergence
in  the  courses  of  price  of  the  two  commodities.  Indeed,  that
divergence  has  already  become  very  sensible  ;  for  though  it  is
true  an  advance  has  occurred  in  the  price  of  wool  since  the
early  days  of  Australian  settlement  (mainly  due,  as  I  believe,
to  a  fall  in  the  value  of  money),  the  price  of  meat  has  advanced
in  a  far  greater  degree.  Nor  is  it  difficult  to  foresee  that  it  is
in  the  directions  thus  indicated  that  the  future  prices  of  the
two  commodities  will  move.  In  both  cases  there  will  prob-
ably be  an  advance  due  to  the  declining  value  of  gold;  but
the  price  of  meat  will  be  urged  upward  by  other,  and  inde-
pendent, causes.  The  durable  character  and  slight  bulkiness
of  wool,  which  even  in  the  infancy  of  the  colony  sustained  its
price  at  a  level  but  little  below  that  of  European  markets,  will,
in  later  times,  when  the  now  sparse  communities  of  Australia

have  grown  into  nations,  confine  it  within  limits  not  greatiy

y


130  DERIVATIVE  LAWS  OF  VALUE.

larger  than  it  now  commands,  by  furnishing  the  same  facilities
for  its  importation  which  they  now  furnish  for  its  exportation
— a  result  exactly  the  converse  of  what  we  found  to  be  the
fate  of  meat,  of  which  the  perishable  nature,  as  it  excludes  it
from  exportation  when  nations  are  young,  so  prevents  its  im-
portation, at  least  on  any  great  scale,  when  the  increasing  de-
mand of  the  growing  community  outruns  the  internal  facilities
of  production.

§  6.  In  comparing  the  state  of  prices  in  old  and  new  com-
munities, the  circumstance  in  which  they  stand  perhaps  most
strikingly  contrasted  is  that  which  has  been  brought  out  in
the  foregoing  discussion — the  remarkable  difference  found  to
exist  in  the  two  cases  between  the  relative  prices  of  corn  or
other  products  of  prime  necessity,  on  the  one  hand,  and,  on
the  other,  those  of  butcher's  meat,  dairy  produce,  and  such
secondary  commodities.  The  contrast  was  not  unperceived
by  Adam  Smith,  and  has  been  commented  on  at  much  length
in  the  very  interesting  chapter  in  the  "Wealth  of  Nations"
which  he  devotes  to  this  subject.  The  notion,  however,  which
he  had  taken  up  as  to  a  limitation,  developed  with  the  prog-
ress of  society,  to  the  advancing  price  of  the  latter  class  of
articles,  prevented  him  from  seeing  the  full  significance  of  the
facts  to  which  he  drew  attention ;  nor  indeed  are  his  infer-
ences, even  within  the  range  of  what  he  had  perceived,  abso-
lutely unexceptionable.  Nevertheless,  his  remarks  in  sum-
ming up  the  results  of  his  investigation  are  sufficiently  strik-
ing, and  may  fitly  be  quoted  here :

"  But  though  the  low  money  price  either  of  goods  in  general,  or  of
com  in  particular,  be  no  proof  of  the  poverty  or  barbarism  of  the  times,
the  low  money  price  of  some  particular  sorts  of  goods,  such  as  cattle,
poultry,  game  of  all  kinds,  etc.,  in  proportion  to  that  of  corn,  is  a  most
decisive  one.  It  clearly  demonstrates,  first,  their  great  abundance  in
proportion  to  that  of  corn,  and  consequently  the  great  extent  of  the


MINERAL  PRODUCTS.  131

land  which  they  occupied  in  proportion  to  what  was  occupied  by  corn ;
and,  secondly,  the  low  value  of  this  land  in  proportion  to  that  of  corn
land,  and  consequently  the  uncultivated  and  unimproved  state  of  the
far  greater  part  of  the  lands  of  the  country.  It  clearly  demonstrates
that  the  stock  and  population  of  the  country  did  not  bear  the  same  pro-
portion to  the  extent  of  its  territory  which  they  commonly  do  in  civil-
ized countries,  and  that  society  was  at  that  time,  and  in  that  country,
but  in  its  infancy.  From  the  high  or  low  money  price  either  of  goods
in  general,  or  of  corn  in  particular,  we  can  infer  only  that  the  mines
which  at  that  time  happened  to  supply  the  commercial  world  with  gold
and  silver  were  fertile  or  barren,  not  that  the  country  was  rich  or  poor.
But,  from  the  hjgh  or  low  money  price  of  some  sorts  of  goods  in  propor-
tion to  that  of  others,  we  can  infer,  with  a  degree  of  probability  that
approaches  almost  to  certainty,  that  it  was  rich  or  poor,  that  the  greater
part  of  its  lands  were  improved  or  unimproved,  and  that  it  was  either
in.  a  more  or  less  barbarous  state,  or  in  a  more  or  less  civilized  one."

Strictly  interpreted,  the  line  of  this  inference  would  lead  to
the  conclusion  that  Australia  and  California  were  poor  coun-
tries, which  would  scarcely  be  considered  a  tenable  position;
but,  barring  this  slip,  as  we  may  regard  it,  of  substituting
"rich  and  poor"  for  "old  and  young,"  the  tenor  of  the  re-
marks is  essentially  sound  and  just,  and  shows,  considering
the  time  when  they  were  written^  a  remarkable  insight  into
the  causes  governing  industrial  development.

§7.  There  is  another  class  of  "extractive"  commodities
which  does  not  fall  properly  under  any  of  the  foregoing  heads,
on  which  a  few  remarks  seem  called  for  here.  These  are
mineral  products,  comprising  the  coarser  and  precious  metals,
coal,  and  a  few  other  articles.  The  circumstances  in  which
products  of  this  class  differ  from  those  which  we  have  just
considered  appear  to  be  chiefly  these  two :  In  the  first  place,
the  sources  from  which  they  are  obtained  are  distributed  over
the  earth  with  very  great  inequality  ;  some  countries  being  en-
tirely destitute  of  them,  others  possessing  them  in  great  aOu/i-


132  DERIVATIVE  LAWS  OF VALUE.

dance,  and  of  the  most  varied  degrees  of  fertility ;  and,  sec-
ondly, their  production  is  more  mechanical  in  its  nature  than
that  of  agricultural  or  pastoral  products,  from  which  it  results
that  their  cost  of  production  is  more  directly  dependent,  than
that  of  other  rude  products,  on  the  progress  of  mechanical  and
chemical  invention.  To  follow  out  the  consequences  involved
in  these  distinctions,  more  especially  in  the  instance  of  the
precious  metals,  would  take  me  very  far  afield  indeed ;  noi  do
I  propose  to  attempt  any  such  excursion  here.  I  shall  content
myself,  as  regards  this  part  of  my  subject,  with  observing  in  a
general  way,  that  the  circumstances  of  the  case  have  been  con-
ducive in  the  past  history  of  the  world  to  great  variation  in
the  normal  prices  of  mineral  products ;  nor  can  it  be  said,  in
spite  of  the  fact  that  they  come  so  largely  under  the  influence
of  scientific  invention,  that  the  movements  of  normal  price  in
their  case  have,  with  the  progress  of  communities,  been  in  any
constant  direction.  As  regards  future  movements  of  price  in
this  class  of  products,  so  much  depends  on  the  discovery  of
new  mines  and  coal  measures,  and  this  is  so  much  a  matter  of
accident,  so  large  a  portion  of  the  world,  moreover,  still  re-
mains unexplored,  that  I  do  not  think  we  can  be  said  to  pos-
sess the  data  for  even  a  probable  conjecture.

§  8.  I  turn  now  from  the  domain  of  raw  products  to  that
other  great  industrial  division — manufacturing  industry.  Be-
tween these  two  industrial  departments  it. is  not  indeed  possi-
ble to  draw  a  perfectly  hard  and  fast  line,  nor  is  it  at  all  neces-
sary that  we  should  do  so ;  it  is  sufficient  that  the  designations
— raw  products  and  manufactured  goods — indicate  a  real  and
important  distinction  in  things,  and  one  which  will  be  easily
and  with  sufficient  correctness  apprehended.  What  I  have
now  to  consider  is  the  course  which  normal  prices  take  with
the  progress  of  society  in  the  latter  of  these  two  classes.

And  here  this  remark  may  at  once  be  made :  that,  as  the


MANUFACTURES.  133

course  of  price  in  the  iield  of  raw  products  is,  on  the  whole,  up-
ward, so  in  that  of  manufactured  goods  the  course  is,  not  less
strikingly,  in  the  opposite  direction.  The  reasons  of  this  are
exceedingly  plain.  In  the  first  place,  division  of  labor — the
first  and  most  powerful  of  all  cheapeners  of  production,  but  for
which  there  is  in  extractive  industiy  but  very  limited  scope —
finds  in  manufacturing  industry  an  almost  unbounded  range
for  its  application;  and,  secondly,  it  is  in  manufacturing  indus-
try also  that  machinery,  the  other  great  cheapener  of  produc-
tion, admits  of  being  employed  on  the  largest  scale,  and  has  in
fact  been  employed  with  the  most  signal  success.  It  follows
at  once  from  these  facts,  taken  in  connection  with  the  further
fact  that  industrial  invention  does  not  take  place  per  saliuvi,
but  gradually — one  invention  ever  treading  on  the  heels  of  an-
other— and  that  its  advance  seems  to  be  subject  to  no  limita-
tion ;  it  follows,  I  say,  from  these  considerations,  that  that  por-
tion of  the  cost  of  manufactured  goods  which  properly  belongs
to  the  manufacturing  process  must,  with  the  progress  of  society,
undergo  constant  diminution.  We  can  not,  indeed,  infer  di-
rectly from  this  circumstance  that  the  value  of  such  goods
must  decline,  because  the  manufacturing  process  represents  but
a  portion  of  their  cost,  which  also  embraces  that  involved  in
raising  the  raw  material  out  of  which  they  are  manufactured;
and  we  have  already  seen  that  the  cost  of  this  element  tends  to
advance  with  the  progress  of  society.  Whether,  therefore,  the
price  of  manufactures  will  advance  or  decline  must  depend
upon  whether  the  tendency  to  fall,  incident  to  improvements  in
the  manufacturing  process,  will,  on  the  whole,  prevail  over  the
tendency  to  advance  inherent  in  the  raw  material,  or  be  sur-
passed by  the  latter  force.  On  this  point,  however,  save  in  the
case  of  a  few  very  slightly  manufactured  articles,  such,  for  ex-
ample, as  bread,  in  which  the  manufacturing  process  bears  but
a  small  proportion  to  the  value  of  the  raw  material,  there  is  no
room  for  a  moment's  doubt. In  all  the  great  branches  of  man-


134  BEBIVATIVE  LAWS  OF  VALUE.

-ufacturing  industry  the  portion  of  the  cost  incurred  in  the  man-
ufacturing process  bears  in  general  a  large  proportion  to  that
represented  bj  the  raw  material,  while  the  influence  of  indus-
trial invention,  in  reducing  this  portion  of  the  cost,  is,  as  every
one  knows,  great  and  unintermitting  in  its  action.  From  all
these  circumstances  it  results  that  the  tendency  to  a  reduction
of  cost  in  manufactured  goods  must,  at  least  as  the  conditions
of  production  stand  at  present,  prevail,  and  in  most  cases  pre<
vail  largely,  over  the  tendency  to  an  increase ;  and  that  conse-
quently the  course  of  normal  prices  in  this  class  of  commodities
is,  with  the  progress  of  society,  inevitably  and,  at  times,  rapid-
ly downward.  The  illustration  of  this  truth  is  to  be  found  in
the  history  of  all  manufacturing  countries,  and  pre-eminently  in
that  of  Great  Britain.  There  are  few  commodities  of  any  im-
portance falling  within  the  domain  of  manufacture  which  have
not  within  the  last  century  or  two  fallen  to  a  small  fraction  of
their  former  price.

But  among  manufactured  commodities,  as  among  raw  prod-
ucts, there  is  a  difference.  As  has  just  been  stated,  the  two
great  cheapeners  of  production  are  division  of  labor  and  ma-
chinery, and  the  degree  in  which  these  admit  of  being  ap-
plied to  manufacture  is  mainly  dependent  upon  the  scale  on
which  the  manufacturing  process  is  carried  on.  Those  manu
factures,  therefore,  that  are  produced  upon  a  large  scale  are  the
sort  of  manufactures  in  which  we  may  expect  to  find  the  great-
est reduction  in  cost ;  in  which,  therefore,  the  fall  in  price,  with
the  progress  of  society,  will  be  most  marked.  But  the  manu-
factures which  are  produced  upon  the  largest  scale  are  those
for  which  there  exists  the  largest  demand — that  is  to  say,  are
those  which  enter  most  extensively  into  the  consumption  of
the  great  mass  of  the  people.  They  are  also,  I  may  add,  those
in  which  a  fall  in  price  is  apt  to  stimulate  a  great  increase  of
demand.  All  the  common  kinds,  of  clothing,  furniture,  and
utensils  fall  within  the  scope  of  this  remark ;  and  it  is  in  these,


MANUFACTURES.  135

rather  than  in  the  commodities  consumed  exclusively  or  main*
ly  by  the  richer  classes,  that  we  should,  accordingly,  expect  to
find  the  greatest  marvels  of  cheapening.  There  is  indeed  one
incident  of  the  case  the  bearing  of  which,  so  far  as  it  goes,
would,  as  between  the  two  classes,  rather  favor  the  reduction
of  the  more  luxurious  products.  The  manufactured  articles
which  enter  into  the  consumption  of  the  masses  are,  as  a  rule,
less  manufactured  than  those  which  enter  into  the  consump-
tion of  the  rich — in  other  words,  the  amount  of  manufacture
bestowed  upon  them  bears  a  smaller  proportion  to  the  raw
material  than  is  the  case  with  the  more  elaborate  manu-
factures. Such  coarser  manufoctures,  therefore,  would  feel
the  effects  of  the  advancing  cost  of  the  raw  material  more
sensibly  than  the  refined  sorts.  Thus,  for  example,  compar-
ing a  piece  of  Brussels  lace  with  a  piece  of  common  calico,
it  is  evident  that  there  would  need  to  be  a  very  great  change
indeed  in  the  value  of  the  raw  material  to  produce  any  sen-
sible effect  in  the  price  of  the  former  article;  whereas,  as
recent  experience  has  taught  us,  an  advance  in  the  price  of
the  raw  material  of  common  calico  is  capable  of  causing  very
serious  effects  in  its  price.  This  circumstance,  therefore,  so
far  as  it  goes,  certainly  favors  in  the  race  for  cheapness  the
more  luxurious  as  against  the  commoner  and  less  elaborate
manufactures.  Nevertheless,  it  can  not  be  supposed  to  com-
pensate the  advantages  due  to  the  causes  I  have  pointed  out
which  fall  to  the  share  of  the  commoner  sorts.  It  is  in  this
class  of  goods  that  the  most  remarkable  reductions  in  price
have  been  accomplished  in  the  past ;  and  it  is  in  them  probably
that  we  shall  witness  in  the  future  the  greatest  results  of  the
same  kind.

§  9.  Hitherto  I  have  examined  the  derivative  laws  of  value
in  so  far  only  as  they  are-  exemplified  in  the  movements  of
normal  prices. It  will  be  interesting  now  to  consider  whether


136  DERIVATIVE  LAWS  OF  VALUE.

it  is  possible  to  discover  in  the  movements  of  market  prices
any  corresponding  phenomena;  whether,  that  is  to  say,  the
fluctuations  of  the  market,  as  they  occur  in  the  several  classes
of  commodities,  conform  to  any  modes  of  action  analogous  to
those  which  we  have  found  to  obtain  in  the  case  of  normal
price.

And  here  it  may  be  well  to  state  precisely  what  is  to  be  un-
derstood by  a  "fluctuation  of  the  market,"  as  distinguished
from  those  changes  of  normal  price  which  we  have  been  con-
sidering. Normal  price,  as  we  have  seen,  is  governed,  accord-
ing to  the  circumstances  of  the  case,  by  one  or  other  of  two
causes— cost  of  production  and  reciprocal  demand  (in  the  sense
explained  in  a  former  chapter).  A  change  in  normal  price,
therefore,  is  a  change  which  is  the  consequence  of  an  alteration
in  one  or  other  of  these  conditions.  So  long  as  the  determining
condition — be  it  cost  of  production  or  reciprocal  demand — re-
mains constant,  the  normal  price  must  be  considered  as  remain-
ing constant;  but,  the  normal  price  remaining  constant,  the
market  price  (which,  as  we  have  seen,  depends  on  the  opinion
of  dealers  respecting  the  state  of  supply  and  demand  in  rela-
tion to  the  particular  article)  may  undergo  a  change — may  de-
viate, that  is  to  say,  either  upward  or  downward  from  the  nor-
mal level.  Such  changes  of  price,  occurring  while  the  perma-
nent conditions  of  production  remain  unaffected,  can  only  be
temporary,  calling  into  action  as  they  do  forces  which  at  once
tend  to  restore  the  normal  state  of  things :  they  may,  there-
fore, be  properly  described  as  "fluctuations  of  the  market;"
and  the  question  now  to  be  considered  is  how  far  we  can  con-
nect such  phenomena  with  the  causes  which  determine  them,
and,  by  stating  this  connection,  bring  them  within  the  domain
of  scientific  law.

With  a  view  to  this  inquiry,  the  first  point  to  be  attended  to
is  the  condition  on  which  the  correspondence  of  market  with
normal  price  depends. It  is  evident  that  this  condition  can  be


MARKET  FL  UCTUA  TIONS.  137

no  other  than  such  an  adjustment  of  supply  to  demand — or,  to
speak  more  strictly,  such  a  state  of  opinion  among  dealers  re-
specting the  adjustment  of  supply  to  demand — as  shall  produce
the  correspondence  in  question — a  state  of  things  which  is  re-
alized when  the  disposable  supply  is  regarded  as  sufficient,  and
no  more  than  sufficient,  to  satisfy  the  demand  for  the  commod-
ity which  exists  at  the  normal  level  of  price,  or,  as  we  may
say,  in  Adam  Smith's  phrase,  to  satisfy  the  "effectual  de-
mand." Bearing  this  in  mind,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  devia-
tion of  the  market  price  from  the  normal  standard  will  be
mainly  influenced  by  the  difficulties  in  the  way  of  adapting
supply  to  "  effectual  demand ;"  or,  what  comes  to  the  same
thing,  that  the  closeness  with  which  the  market  follows  the
normal  price  will  depend  upon  the  facilities  available  for  this
adaptation.  On  what,  then,  do  these  facilities  depend?  Chief-
ly, it  appears  to  me,  on  the  three  following  circumstances :
first,  on  the  conditions  of  production  as  affecting  the  commod-
ity; secondly,  on  the  nature  of  the  commodity;  and  thirdly,
on  the  greater  or  less  urgency  of  human  wants  in  relation  to  it.
In  tracing  the  derivative  laws  of  normal  prices  we  found
that  the  most  fundamental  distinction  between  commodities,
with  a  view  to  the  purpose  then  in  hand,  lay  in  the  line  of  sep-
aration between  the  products  of  extractive  and  those  of  manu-
facturing industry.  For  our  present  purpose  the  same  dis-
tinction is  equally  important ;  and  I  shall,  therefore,  once  again
adopt  it.  Eegarding,  then,  commodities  as  falling  under  one
or  other  of  these  two  great  heads,  let  us  observe  how,  on  the
one  hand,  manufactures,  on  the  other,  agricultural  and  pastor-
al products,  stand  affected  by  each  of  the  three  conditions  just
named.

§  10.  Taking  manufactures  first,  it  is  evident  at  once  that,
as  regards  conditions  of  production,  the  circumstances  of  the
case  are  such  as  to  secure,  in  general,  great  rapidity  and  also


138  DERIVATIVE  LAWS OF  VALUE.

great  certainty  in  bringing  commodities  to  market.  A  deal
table  may  be  made  in  a  few  hours,  a  piece  of  cloth  in  a  few
weeks,  a  moderate-sized  house  in  a  month  or  little  more.  Ta-
bles, cloth,  and  houses  may  be  produced  with  certainty  in
any  quantity  required.  It  results  from  this,  that  it  is  scarcely
possible  that,  under  ordinary  circumstances,  the  selling  price
of  a  product  of  manufacture  should  for  any  long  time  much
exceed  its  normal  price ;  for  so  soou  as  the  excess  became  pal-
pable, inasmuch  as  this  would  imply  exceptionally  high  prof-
its for  the  producers,  production  would  receive  a  stimulus;
and,  the  facilities  for  producing  the  article  being  great,  the
supply  would  quickly  be  increased  until  it  overtook  the  "  ef-
fectual demand;"  whereupon  the  market  price  would  fall  to
the  normal  level.  This,  I  say,  is  what  would  happen  "  under
ordinary  circumstances ;"  for  in  order  that  the  supply  should
be  thus  rapidly  adjusted  to  the  increase  of  demand,  it  would
be  necessary  that  the  latter  should  not  exceed  certain  limits.-
In  all  the  most  important  branches  of  manufacture  fixed  cap-
ital, chiefly  in  the  form  of  machinery,  is  largely  employed;
and  the  limited  quantity  of  such  capital  existing  in  a  country
at  any  time  sets  limits  for  the  time  being  to  the  possible  aug-
mentation of  supply.  If  the  demand  then  exceed  what  the
means  of  production  thus  immediately  available  can  satisfy,
the  market  price  may  rule  for  some  considerable  time  in  ad-
vftnce  of  the  normal  price— until,  that  is  to  say,  time  is  allow-
ed for  erecting  buildings  and  machinery  suitable  to  the  in-
creased requirements  of  the  community.  Even  on  such  oc-
casions, however,  it  is  rare  that  the  elevation  of  price  which
results  is  very  great ;  for  here  come  into  play  those  other  con-
ditions of  which  I  have  spoken.  The  nature  of  manufactures
is,  in  general,  such  as  to  fit  them  admirably  for  distant  trans-
port. Any  considerable  elevation  of  price,  therefore,  is  pretty
certain  to  attract  supplies  from  remote  sources.  Further,  con-
sidered in  their  relation  to  human  needs,  I  think  it  may  be


FL UCTUATION  IN  MANUFACTURES.  139

said  of  manufactured  goods,  that  either  the  need  for  them  is
not  very  urgent,  or,  where  it  happens  to  be  so,  substitutes
more  or  less  suitable  for  the  commodity  or  commodities  whicli
happen  to  be  scarce  may,  in  general,  easily  be  found.  From
all  these  circumstances  it  results  that  an  advance  in  the  price
of  a  manufacture,  so  soon  as  it  becomes  at  all  considerable,
either  attracts  supplies  from  extraordinary  sources,  or  deters
purchasers,  or  brings  substitutes  into  the  field  —  by  one  or
more  of  such  means  setting  a  limit  to  deviations,  and  prevent-
ing any  great  departure  from  the  usual  terms  of  the  market.

So  far  as  to  deviations  from  the  normal  standard  upward.
With  regard  to  movements  in  the  opposite  direction,  the  cir-
cumstances under  which  they  occur  are  commonly  of  this
kind.  The  adaptation  of  supply  to  demand  is  a  tentative  proc-
ess, and  when  any  sudden  change  in  demand  happens,  it  is
not  easy  for  producers  at  once  to  determine  its  extent.  The
result  is  that  mistakes  are  made.  Commodities  are  produced
in  excess:  nay  more,  fixed  capital  is  created  in  excess;  and
capital  once  committed  to  a  "fixed"  form  is  rarely  capable  of
being  applied  to  any  purpose  other  than  that  for  which  it  was
intended.  Hence,  the  supply  once  carried  beyond  the  due
limits  of  the  "effectual  demand,"  it  becomes  difficult  to  reduce
it  to  its  proper  proportions.  Mills  and  machinery  once  set  up,
it  is  of  two  evils  often  the  least  to  continue  production  at  a
moiety,  or  less,  of  the  ordinary  profit,  rather  than  to  allow  cap-
ital to  lie  absolutely  unproductive :  one  hears  besides  that
production,  from  motives  of  humanity  to  the  workmen  em-
ployed, is  sometimes  carried  on  even  at  a  loss.  Owing  to
causes  of  this  kind,  the  markets  for  manufactured  products
sometimes  continue  for  many  months,  possibly  for  a  year  or
more,  below  the  level  of  normal  price.  Here  again,  however,
the  same  qualities  which,  as  we  saw,  keep  in  check  the  up-
ward movement,  come  into  play  to  prevent  a  very  great  de-
pression. Manufactures  not  being  in  general  quickly  perish-


140  DEEIVATIVE  LAWS  OF  VALUE.

able,  it  is  rarely  necessary,  in  their  case,  to  force  a  sale,  while
their  great  portability  gives  them  access  to  distant  markets.
On  the  whole,  then,  we  find  that,  having  regard  alike  to  the
conditions  of  production,  the  nature  of  the  commodity,  and  the
degree  of  urgency  of  human  needs  in  relation  to  it,  the  cir-
cumstances of  the  case  are  such  as  to  reduce  within  rather
narrow  limits  the  fluctuations  of  the  market  in  the  instance
of  manufactured  goods  *  And  this  is  the  more  noteworthy,
inasmuch  as  it  is  precisely  in  this  class  of  commodities  that,  as
we  have  seen,  the  changes  in  normal  price,  depending  as  they
do  on  changes  in  the  cost  of  production,  are  most  frequent  and
most  striking.

The  state  of  things  just  described,  and  which  exhibits,  on
the  whole,  a  somewhat  limited  range  of  variation  for  the  mar-
ket (as  distinguished  from  the  nOrmal)  value  of  the  products  of
manufacturing  industry,  might  at  first  sight  seem  to  offer  but
small  scope  for  the  sudden  creation  by  individuals  of  large  for-
tunes; and  yet  we  know  that  it  is  in  manufacturing  indus-
tries that  the  largest  and  most  rapid  fortunes  have  been  made.
What  is  the  explanation  of  this  circumstance?  I  apprehend
it  will  be  found  to  lie  mainly  in  the  rapidity  with  which  the
circulating  portion  of  manufacturing  capital  admits  of  being
turned.  The  same  rapidity  of  production  which  accelerates
the  reduction  of  price  facilitates  the  turning  of  capital.  Ac-
cordingly, when  such  a  chance  occurs  as  the  sudden  opening
of  a  large  and  unlooked-for  market — such  an  occasion,  for  ex-
ample, as  was  presented  by  the  rapid  growth  of  the  markets
of  California  and  Australia  consequent  on  the  gold  discoveries;
or  again,  such  as  the  American  civil  war  produced  for  the

*  The  chief  exception  to  this  is  where  a  fluctuation  of  the  market  connects  it-
self with  some  irregularity  in  the  supply  of  the  raw  material,  as  happened  during
the  cotton  famine.  But  in  this  case  the  phenomenon  should  rather  be  considered
as  falling  under  our  next  head,  which  deals  with  the  market  fluctuations  of  raw
products.


FLUCTUATION  IN  BAW  PRODUCTS.  141

linen  manufacturers,  when  the  failing  supply  of  calico  threw
a  large  and  unexpected  consumption  upon  linen — when,  I  say,
occasions  of  this  kind  occur,  those  whose  capital  is  already
embarked  in  the  trade  can  generally — such  are  the  facilities  for
rapidly  turning  capital  over  in  manufactures — contrive,  even
at  a  moderate  advance  of  price,  to  realize  large  gains  before
the  re-enforcements  of  fixed  capital  rendered  necessary  by  the
altered  state  of  trade  can  be  brought  into  the  field.  This  is
one,  and  the  principal,  source  of  the  very  large  fortunes  occa-
sionally achieved  by  individuals  in  this  branch  of  trade.  For
the  rest  I  should  conjecture  that,  where  exceptional  and  ex-
traordinary gains  have  been  made,  the  end  has  been  accomplish-
ed, less  through  manufacturing  operations  properly  so  called,
than  through  speculations  carried  on  in  the  raw  material  of  the
industry.  This,  at  least,  we  know,  was  notoriously  the  case
with  the  large  fortunes  made  during  the  continuance  of  the
American  civil  war.

§  11.  Turning  now  to  the  products  of  agricultural,  pastoral,
or,  more  generally,  "  extractive  "  industry,  we  find  the  circum-
stances under  which  this  class  of  goods  is  brought  to  market
in  all  respects  extremely  different  from  those  which  we  have
just  examined,  and  such  as  to  permit  a  much  wider  margin
of  deviation  for  the  market  from  the  normal  price.  Here  the
period  of  production  is  longer,  the  result  of  the  process  much
more  uncertain,  the  commodity  is  at  once  more  perishable  and
less  portable,  and  human  requirements  in  relation  to  it  are
mostly  of  a  more  urgent  kind.  The  shortest  period  within
which  additions  can  be  made  to  the  supply  of  food  and  raw
material  of  the  vegetable  kind  is  in  general  a  year,  and  if
the  commodity  be  of  animal  origin,  the  minimum  period  is  con-
siderably longer.  Again,  the  farmer  may  decide  upon  the
breadth  of  ground  to  be  devoted  to  a  particular  crop,  or  upon
the  number  of  cattle  he  will  maintain,  but  the  actual  returns


142  DERIVATIVE  LAWS  OF  VALUE.

will  vary  according  to  the  season,  and  may  prove  far  in  excess
or  far  in  defect  of  his  calculations.  These  circumstances  all
present  obstacles  to  the  adjustment  of  supply  to  demand,  and
consequently  tend  to  produce  frequent  and  extensive  devia-
tions of  the  market  from  the  normal  price.  Nor  are  the  other
conditions  of  the  case  such  as  to  neutralize  the  influence  of
such  disturbing  agencies.  The  nature,  indeed,  of  some  of  the
principal  agricultural  products  fits  them  sufficiently  well  for
distant  transport,  and  so  far  tends  to  correct  fluctuations  of
price.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  relation  of  these  products
to  human  wants  is  such  as  greatly  to  enhance  that  tendency  to
violent  fluctuation  incident  to  the  conditions  of  their  produc-
tion. More  especially  is  this  the  case  with  the  commodity,
whatever  it  may  be,  which  forms  the  staple  food  of  a  people.
For  observe  the  peculiar  nature  of  human  requirements  with
reference  to  such  a  commodity.  They  are  of  this  kind,  that,
given  the  number  of  a  population,  the  quantity  of  the  staple
food  required  is  nearly  a  fixed  quantitj?^,  and  this  almost  irre-
spective of  price:  except  among  the  very  poorest,  increased
cheapness  will  not  stimulate  a  larger  consumption,  while,  on
the  other  hand,  all,  at  any  cost  within  the  range  of  their  means,
will  obtain  their  usual  supp^3^  The  consequence  is,  that,  when
even  a  moderate  deficiency  or  excess  occurs  in  the  supply  of
the  staple  food  of  a  people,  in  the  one  case  the  competition  of
consumers  for  their  usual  quantum  of  food  rapidly  forces  up
the  price  far  out  of  proportion  to  the  diminution  in  the  supply;
in  the  other,  no  one  being  inclined  to  increase  his  usual  con-
sumption, the  competition  of  sellers,  in  their  eagerness  to  find
a  market  for  the  superfluous  portion  of  the  supph^,  is  equally
powerful  to  depress  it.  Those  who  have  studied  the  history
of  English  prices  while  England  was  yet  under  the  regime  of
Protection,  are  aware  of  the  enormous  and  sudden  fluctuations
which  from  time  to  time  occurred  under  the  influence  of  causes
of  this  description. Such  violent  fluctuations  will  scarcely  be


FLUCTUATION  IN  STAPLE  FOOD.  143

witnessed  again ;  but  even  under  the  moderating  regime  of
free  trade,  the  peculiar  character  of  the  staple  food  in  its  i-e-
lation  to  the  requirements  of  human  beings  continues  from
time  to  time  to  make  its  influence  felt,  and  to  produce  sudden
and  considerable  changes  in  the  quotations  of  the  market.
And  here  I  may  notice  the  converse  of  a  phenomenon  advert-
ed to  just  now  in  connection  with  the  market  prices  of  the
products  of  manufacture.  I  then  pointed  out  that,  while  cir-
cumstances, on  the  whole,  contributed  to  steadiness  of  market
value  in  such  products,  their  normal  values  were  in  an  especial
degree  liable  to  extensive  changes.  In  the  case  of  agricultural
products,  but  more  especially  in  the  case  of  staple  food,  this  re-
lation is  inverted.  I  ventured  to  assert,  and  in  doing  so  I  was
supported  by  the  authority  of  Adam  Smith,  that  of  all  com-
modities whatever,  that  which  forms  the  staple  food  of  a  peo-
ple is  the  commodity  of  which  the  normal  value  in  the  course
of  time  undergoes  the  least  variation.  As  I  have  already  said,
I  believe  we  should  find,  if  we  went  into  the  case,  that  during
the  course  of  some  centuries  the  normal  value  of  wheat  (I  do
not  say  the  normal  ^?7ce)  has  altered  very  little  in  the  more
advanced  countries  of  Europe.  On  the  other  hand,  for  the
reasons  which  have  been  just  set  forth,  wheat  is,  of  all  impor-
tant commodities,  that  one  which  exhibits,  in  the  movements
of  the  market,  variation  in  the  most  extreme  degree.  Inci-
dents of  this  kind,  it  may  be  observed  in  passing,  show  the
absolute  necessity,  if  we  desire  to  elucidate  the  phenomena  of
price,  of  distinguishing  between  market  and  normal  values  in
economic  discussion.  The  phenomena  are  perfectly  distinct,
and,  as  the  foregoing  examination  has  shown,  sometimes  fol-
low, even  in  the  instance  of  the  same  commodities,  opposite
laws.  What  likelihood,  then,  of  getting  a  correct  chart  of
their  movements,  if  they  are  treated,  as  frequently  happens  in
treatises  on  value,  as  one  and  the  same  manifestation,  and  con-
founded together  as  the  subject-matter  of  a  single  exposition?


144  DERIVATIVE  LAWS OF VALUE.

§  12.  It  will  serve  still  further  to  elucidate  the  fluctuations
of  market  price  within  the  sphere  of  extractive  industry  if  we
regard  its  deviations  from  normal  price  under  two  aspects :  1,
with  reference  to  its  intensity  ;  2,  with  reference  to  its  dura-
tion. A  commodity  may  rise  very  suddenly  and  greatly  in
price,  but  may  quickly  return  to  its  usual  terms  of  sale ;  or,
on  the  other  hand,  rising  slowly  and  not  very  greatly  above
its  ordinary  level,  it  may,  nevertheless,  continue  for  a  long  time
at  the  elevation  thus  attained.  If  now,  bearing  this  distinc-
tion in  mind,  we  compare  among  the  raw  products  of  industry
those  derived  from  the  vegetable  with  those  derived  from  the
animal  kingdom,  I  think  we  shall  find  the  following  rule  in  the
main  to  hold  true:  namely,  that  vegetable  products  are  for  the
most  part  subject  to  market  fluctuations  of  the  former  charac-
ter— the  fluctuations,  that  is  to  say,  are  apt  to  be  sudden  and
considerable,  but  comparatively  short;  while  the  market  prices
of  commodities  of  animal  origin  rarely  rise  rapidly,  but,  when
a  sensible  advance  is  established,  commonly  remain  for  a  long
time  at  the  enhanced  rate.  Thus  it  has  happened,  even  since
the  establishment  of  free  trade,  that  the  price  of  corn  has,
within  the  space  of  a  few  years,  been  halved  and  doubled
again,  and  then  in  another  year  or  two  fallen  once  more  to  a
medium  level  ;*  but  no  such  sharp  oscillation  has,  so  far  as  I
am  aware,  occurred  (at  least  in  recent  times)  in  the  price  of  any
animal  product.  Butcher's  meat  is  perhaps,  among  animal
products,  that  one  which  has  lately  exhibited  the  most  marked
advance. It  would,  however,  be  a  mistake  to  assume  that  the

*,  The  weekly  average  price  of  wheat,  for  example,  had  risen  in  1847  to  as  high
a  point  as  102s.  per  quarter :  within  a  year  from  that  time  it  fell  to  little  more
than  half  that  price,  and  in  1851  to  as  low  as  43s.  Within  two  years  more,  name-
ly, about  the  commencement  of  the  Crimean  war — having  in  the  interval  oscillated
slightly  about  the  point  of  45s. — it  rose  very  suddenly  to  73s. ;  and  in  January,  1854,
attained  its  maximum  elevation  of  84s.,  from  which  point  it  gradually  declined.
(See  Tooke's  "History  of  Prices,"  vol.  v.,  part  1,  §  14.)


ANIMAL  AND  VEGEtABLE  PRODUCTS.  145

great  rise  -whicli  has  occurred  in  this  article  within  the  last
twenty  years  represents  simply  a  market  fluctuation,  because
there  is  reason  to  believe  that,  if  not  the  cost  of  production  in
the  strict  sense  of  the  term,  at  all  events  the  cost  of  production
as  measured  in  money,  has  during  this  time  very  considerably
risen.  Unless,  therefore,  the  value  of  gold  were,  by  some  ex-
traordinary freak  of  economic  nature,  to  recover  what  it  has
lost,  there  is  not  the  smallest  probability  that  the  price  of  meat
will  ever  return  to  the  level  at  which  it  stood  twenty  years
ago.  The  present  advance,  therefore,  can  not  be  considered,  at
all  events  for  the  chief  portion  of  its  amount,  as  a  mere  phe-
nomenon of  the  market,  but  rather  as  a  definitive  rise  of  the
normal  price ;  and  it  may  be  added  that  the  same  is,  in  a  great-
er or  less  degree,  true  of  most  instances  of  augmented  price
that  have  recently  occurred.  To  return  to  the  difference  in  the
incidents  of  market  price  between  vegetable  and  animal  prod-
ucts, its  cause  is  mainly  to  be  found  in  the  conditions  of  their
production.  Commodities  drawn  from  the  vegetable  kingdom
can,  in  general,  be  multiplied  more  rapidly  than  those  taken
from  the  animal ;  and,  therefore,  deviations  from  the  normal
standard  of  price  require  for  their  correction,  in  this  case,  a
shorter  period  of  time.  On  the  other  hand,  the  same  commod-
ities are  subject  to  much  greater  uncertainty  in  the  process  of
production  than  those  of  animal  origin,  the  agencies  employed
being  here  far  less  amenable  to  human  control.  Animals  may,
at  least,  be  housed,  and,  b}'-  other  artificial  expedients,  sheltered
from  the  violence  of  natural  agencies,  but  few  such  means  of
mitigation  can  well  be  employed  when  the  production  of  veg-
etables on  a  large  scale  is  the  business  in  hand.  Hence  the
defalcations  of  supply  are  usually  more  considerable  in  their
case,  and  hence  the  oscillations  of  market  price,  though  short-
er, are  also  more  intense.

The  most  important  exception  to  the  rule  just  laid  down  oc-
curs in  the  case  of  fish  and  game,  but  it  is  an  exception  of  that

10


146  DERIVATIVE  LAWS OF VALUE.

kind  which  proves  the  rule;  for,  unlilve  animal  products  ob-
tained bj  domestication  and  breeding,  the  supply  of  fish,  and
in  a  less  degree  of  game,  is  singularly  at  the  mercy  of  causes
imcontrollable  by  man,  while  the  time  requisite  for  catching
them,  as  compared  with  the  time  required  for  the  completion
of  ordinary  industrial  processes,  is  extremely  short.  The  prin-
ciple, therefore,  on  which  the  rule  rests,  would  lead  us  to  ex-
pect here  violent  and  brief  fluctuations,  more  especially  when
we  take  into  account,  in  connection  with  the  conditions  of  their'
production,  the  extremely  perishable  nature  of  the  articles  in
question — a  circumstance  which  compels  the  dealers,  at  almost
any  sacrifice,  to  find  a  market  for  their  goods  within  a  strictly
limited  time.


]PA.RT II.

LABOR  AND CAPITAL,


FA.IIT II.

LABOR AND CAPITAL.

CHAPTER  I.

ts:e  bate  of  wages.

§  1.  In  discussing  the  laws  of  value,  we  have  already  par-
tially solved  the  problems  of  wages  and  profits.  For  it  has
appeared  that,  where  production  assumes  the  character  of  a
continuous  operation,  producers  are  in  effect  remunerated  out
of  the  values  of  their  products,  and  that  consequently  wages
and  profits  in  each  branch  of  production  must  stand,  in  the
normal  state  of  things  and  on  the  average,  to  wages  and  profits
in*  every  other  branch,  in  the  same  relation  as  the  values  of
the  products  from  which  they  are  derived.  "  Relative  wages
and  profits"  thus  follow  the  same  laws  which  govern  the  ex-
change value  of  commodities.  In  other  words,  our  reasoning
has  involved  this  conclusion,  that  wages  and  profits,  regarded
as  relative  phenomena,  are  governed  by  Cost  of  Production,
where  the  producers  are  in  effective  competition  with  one  an-
other, and,  where  they  are  not,  by  Reciprocal  Demand.  So
far  we  were  carried  toward  the  solution  of  the  wages  and
profits  problem  in  the  discussion  of  that  of  value;  but  it  is
important  that  we  should  not  overrate  the  progress  that  has
been  effected.  Let  me  repeat:  what  the  doctrine  of  value  re-
veals to  us  on  this  subject  is  the  causes  which  determine  the
relative  remuneration  of  laborers  as  among  themselves,  and
that  of  capitalists  as  among  themselves. It  tells  us  why  some


150  THE  BATE  OF  WAGES.

classes  of  workmen  and  some  classes  of  capitalists  receive  the
same  or  equivalent  remuneration,  while  in  other  cases  in-
equality in  various  degrees  prevails ;  but  it  tells  us  nothing  as
to  what  determines  the  positive  remuneration  which  any  class
of  capitalists  or  of  laborers  receives,  nor  as  to  the  causes  on
which  depend  the  average  well-being  of  all  classes.  In  a
word,  we  have  ascertained  what  produces  the  ripples  on  the
surface  of  the  industrial  stream ;  but  of  the  source  from  which
the  waters  are  derived,  and  of  the  depth  and  force  of  the  cur-
rent, nothing  has  yet  been  disclosed.  Why  is  the  remunera-
tion of  industry,  as  a  whole,  such  as  we  find  it  to  be  in  the  va-
rious countries  of  the  earth?  Why  is  it  maintained  at  one
level  in  England,  at  another  on  the  continent  of  Europe,  at  yet
another  in  Asia,  and  at  another  still  in  the  United  States?
And  why  again  is  this  level  progressive  in  some  countries,
stationary  in  others,  declining  in  a  third  class?  These  are
questions  on  which  the  doctrine  of  value  throws  no  light,  and
it  is,  therefore,  to  this  side  of  the  general  problem  that  we  have
now  to  direct  our  attention.

§  2.  I  shall  perhaps  here  be  reminded  that  the  question  of
the  rate  of  wages,  as  well  as  that  of  the  rate  of  profits,  under
whatever  aspect  we  regard  them,  are,  and  can  never  be  other
J  than,  problems  of  value;  since  they  are  simply  questions  of
the  value  respectively  of  labor  and  abstinence ;  and  that  they
should  be  dealt  with  in  connection  with  that  subject  in  the
general  theory  of  which  they  are  implicated.  I  am  certainly
not  going  to  dispute  the  allegation  that  wages  and  profits  are,
in  a  certain  sense,  phenomena  of  value.  "  Eate  of  wages"  and
"value  of  labor,"  "rate  of  profit"  and  "value  of  abstinence,"
are  no  doubt  equivalent  expressions;  and  for  my  part  I  see
no  objection  to  regarding  the  doctrines  elucidating  these  phe-
nomena as  constituting  branches  of  the  same  general  theory
with  that  which  explains  the  value  of  commodities. But  I


A  CASE  OF  EXCHANGE  VALUE.  151

apprehend  the  objection,  embodied  in  the  above  remark,  points
to  something  more  than  this.  What  some  students  of  Polit-
ical Economy  seem  to  desiderate  is  a  comprehensive  forirriila^
which  shall  embrace  in  a  single  solution,  along  with  the  laws
of  the  exchange  relations  of  commodities,  those  of  the  ex-
change relations  of  labor  and  abstinence,  and,  along  with  these
again,  the  laws  of  the  exchange  relations  of  land — that  is  to  say,
the  theory  of  rent.  Some  such  aim  seems  to  have  guided  the
speculations  of  Bastiat,  whose  work  on  the  "Harmonies  of
Political  Economy  "  is  in  effect  an  essay  toward  the  determi-
nation of  the  required  formula;  but  the  result  of  Bastiat's  at-
tempt is  not  encouraging  to  those  who  would  essay  the  same
path.  He  produces,  indeed,  generalizations  which  seem  to  sat-
isfy the  needed  conditions ;  but,  closely  examined,  they  either
collapse  into  mere  identical  propositions,  or  are  found  to  con-
tain some  flagrant  petitio  jprincvpii.  Where  not  open  to  either
of  these  objections,  they  will  be  found  to  relate  to  the  phe-
nomena of  comparative  remuneration — that  is  to  say,  to  that
portion  of  the  theory  of  wages  and  profits  which  I  have  ad-
mitted and  shown  may  be  treated  in  connection  with  the  gen-
eral laws  of  value.

The  truth  is,  the  fundamental  facts  of  the  two  problems  are
too  essentially  discrepant  to  admit  of  this  mode  of  treatment.
Verbal  generalizations  are  of  course  easy.  For  example,  noth-
ing is  easier  than  to  say  that  the  value  of  labor  (I  put  aside
abstinence  and  profit  as  not  included  in  my  present  inquiry),
like  the  value  of  other  things,  depends  upon  supply  and  de-
mand— we  may  find  the  formula  in  any  newspaper  we  take
up;  but  what  light  does  this  throw  upon  the  causes  which
govern  the  values  either  of  labor  or  of  commodities?  Simply
none  at  all,  or  next  to  none  at  all.  What  we  want  to  know  is,
not  whether  an  increase  of  supply  will  cheapen  a  commodity
or  will  cheapen  labor,  and  an  increase  of  demand  raise  the  price
of  each — every  coster-monger  will  tell  you  this  much — but  what


152  THE  RATE OF WAGES.

it  is  which  governs  supply  and  demand  in  each  case.  Now,  we
can  not  take  a  step  toward  dealing  with  this  question  without
being  brought  face  to  face  with  the  fact  that  the  motives  which
influence  human  beings  in  the  production  and  supply  of  com-
modities are  not  those  which  influence  them  in  the  production
and  supply  of  labor ;  in  other  words,  that  the  conditions  oper-
ative in  the  two  cases  are  essentially  distinct.  If  this  is  not
already  apparent  to  the  reader,  a  brief  consideration  will  suffice
to  make  it  so.

First,  then,  the  production  of  commodities  is  an  onerous
act,  which  will  only  be  undertaken  in  the  prospect  of  reward ;
whence  it  follows  that  the  supply  of  commodities  will  only
be  secured  on  the  condition  of  this  prospect  presenting  itself.
On  the  other  hand,  the  production  of  labor,  which  in  other
words  is  the  production  of  human  beings,  is  not  an  onerous
act,  but  a  consequence  of  complying  with  one  of  the  strongest
instincts  of  humanity — an  instinct  which,  so  far  from  needing
the  stimulus  of  reward,  can  only  be  kept  under  due  control  by
powerful  restraints.  In  the  one  case,  action  entails  self-denial ;
in  the  other,  self-denial  lies  in  abstaining  from  action.  Pro-
spective recompense  indeed  comes  into  requisition  in  both
cases;  but  in  the  one  it  is  needed  to  stimulate,  in  the  other  to
control.  Exclude  the  prospect  of  reward  from  productive  in-
dustry, and  the  supply  of  commodities  will  cease;  exclude  the
prospect  of  the  reward  which  results  from  providence  in  re-
producing human  beings,  and  the  supply  of  labor  will  run  to
excess.  Nor  shall  we  have  need  to  modify  seriously  our  con-
clusion upon  this  point,  if,  passing  from  the  primary  act  of
reproducing  human  beings,  we  take  account  of  what  is  neces-
sary in  order  to  fit  them,  once  in  existence,  for  an  industrial
career.  They  must  be  fed  and  clothed ;  they  must  be  broughl
up  in  a  certain  state  of  comfort ;  and  they  must  receive  a  cer-
tain education  —  conditions  which,  unlike  the  act  of  origina-
ting their  existence,  call  for,  in  order  to  their  fulfillment,  con-


LABOR  AND COMMODITIES.  153

tinuous  and  often  arduous  effort.  Here,  we  must  admit,  there
is  an  analogy  between  the  preparation  of  a  human  being  for
industrial  work,  and  the  production  of  a  commodity  for  the
market;  both  processes  involve  cost.  But  there  still  remains
this  broad  distinction,  which  effectually  discriminates  the  two
cases:  The  cost  in  the  production  of  a  commodity  is  under-
gone deliberately,  and  with  a  distinct  view  to  industrial  ends:
in  the  preparation  of  human  beings  for  their  career  in  life — I
will  not  say  that  industrial  ends  have  no  place  at  all  in  the
calculation,  but  I  will  assert  this,  that,  except  in  the  case  of
technical  or  professional  education — a  mere  bagatelle  in  the
general  expense  of  rearing  a  laborer — industrial  considerations
are  entirely  subordinate  to  considerations  of  a  wider  and  alto-
gether different  character.  A  man,  whatever  be  his  rank  of
life,  brings  up  his  children — I  speak  of  the  common  case — as
far  as  he  is  able,  according  to  the  ideas  prevailing  in  that  rank
of  life.  He  does  so  mainly  because  he  feels  certain  obligations
of  morality  and  affection  toward  them,  and  because  it  would
be  shameful  to  do  otherwise.  His  children  once  arrived  at
maturity,  no  doubt  his  views  and  theirs  will  take  a  direction
more  distinctly  governed  by  industrial  considerations,  or  at
least  considerations  bearing  upon  material  success  in  life;  but
at  this  point  the  supplj'-  of  labor  has  been  already  determined.
It  is  now  in  existence;  and  the  industrial  motive,  now  that  it
comes  into  play,  operates,  not  upon  the  aggregate  supply  of
labor,  but  merely  upon  the  mode  of  its  distribution.  I  do  not
deny,  indeed,  that,  in  a  certain  irregular  way,  and  taking  con-
siderable periods  of  time,  the  supply  of  labor  as  a  whole  fol-
lows the  demand  for  labor;  but  what  I  contend  is,  that  it  is
not  connected  with  demand  by  the  same  links  which  connect
the  supply  of  commodities  with  the  demand  for  them.  The
adaptation  of  the  supply  of  commodities  to  the  demand  is  de-
termined by  strictly  commercial  motives:  the  adaptation  of
the  supply  of  labor  to  the  demand  is  not  so  determined. Hu-


154  THE  BATE  OF  WAGES.

man  beings,  at  least  out  of  slave  countries,  are  not  produced
to  meet  the  requirements  of  the  market,  but  for  entirely  differ-
ent reasons.  Now,  this  beina;  so — the  conditions  determininsr
the  phenomena  in  the  two  cases  being  essentially  distinct —
what  can  come  of  forcing  the  solutions  by  dint  of  verbal  re-
finements into  a  single  formula?  Simply  this:  either  our
theory  will  be  flagrantly  untrue,  or  it  will  not  go  more  than
word-deep,  and  our  show  of  explanation  will  merely  serve  to
obscure  the  essential  facts  of  the  problem.

§  3.  These  preliminary  points  being  disposed  of,  I  turn  now
to  the  proper  subject  of  this  chapter — the  causes  determining
the  general  or  average  rate  of  w^ages.  But  here  an  objection
meets  me  on  the  threshold.  Are  we  justified  in  speaking  of  a
"general"  rate  of  wages?  Are  the  facts  expressed  by  wages
such  as  may  be  usefully  embraced  in  a  general  conception  and
reasoned  about  as  an  aggregate?  A  recent  writer,  Mr.  Longe,
has  denied  the  existence  of  any  facts  which  can  warrant  this
expression :

"  The  notion  of  all  the  laborers  of  a  country  constituting  a  body  of
general  laborers  capable  of  competing  with  each  other,  and  whose
"general"  or  "average"  wage  depends  upon  the  ratio  between  their
number  and  the  aggregate  wage-fund,  is  just  as  absurd  as  the  notion  of
all  the  different  goods  existing  in  a  country  at  any  given  time — for  ex-
ample, the  ships,  and  the  steam-engines,  and  the  cloth,  etc. — constituting
the  stock  of  general  commodities,  the  general  or  average  price  of  which
is  determined  by  the  ratio  between  the  supposed  quantity  of  the  whole

aggregate  stock  and  the  total  purchase-fund  of  the  community

How  could  the  shoe-makers  compete  with  the  tailors,  or  the  blacksmiths,
with  the  glass-blowers  ?  Or  how  should  the  capital  which  a  master-
shoe-maker  saved  by  reducing  the  wages  of  his  journeymen,  get  into  the
hands  of  the  master-tailor?"*

To  the  latter  questions  I  think  I  have  already  supplied  a

*  "A  Eefutation  of  the  Wage-fund  Theory  of  Modern  Political  Economy,  "by
F.  D.  Longe,  pp.  55,  56.


ME.  LONGE'S  IDEA.  155

sufficient  answer;  but  with  regard  to  the  objection  itself,  and
the  illustration  by  which  it  is  supported,  the  reader  will  ob-
serve to  what  length  it  goes.  The  author  of  the  passage  just
quoted  is  apparently  unable  to  conceive  a  general  or  average
rate  where  the  average  is  not  realized  in  each  individual  in-
stance; otherwise  where  is  the  absurdity  of  speaking  of  a
"general"  or  "average"  price  of  commodities?  If  the  no-
tion of  a  general  or  average  price  of  commodities  is  absurd,
then  what  does  the  writer  mean  when  he  speaks  of  a  rise  or
fall  in  the  value  of  money  ?  Or  is  that  idea  also  beyond  his
conceptive  power?  A  rise  or  fall  in  the  value  of  money  is
only  another  name  for  a  fall  or  rise  of  general  or  average
prices.  The  idea,  in  short,  which  Mr.  Longe  adduces  as  an
extreme  example  of  absurdity,  is  simply  one  of  the  most  fa-
miliar in  the  range  of  economic  speculation.  A  general  rate
of  wages  is  neither  more  nor  less  easy  to  conceive,  neither
more  nor  less  absurd,  than  general  prices.  I  think  I  know
what  I  mean  when  I  say  that  prices  and  wages  in  the  United
States,  measured  in  greenbacks,  have  risen  generally  as  com-
pared with  prices  and  wages,  measured  in  gold ;  that  the  aver-
age rate  is  higher  in  the  one  case  than  in  the  other ;  and  I  do
not  think  I  should  be  very  wide  of  the  mark  if  I  attributed
this  difference  to  the  different  proportions  in  which  purchasino-
power  measured  in  gold,  and  purchasing  power  measured  in
greenbacks,  stand  related  to  commodities  and  labor.  Yet
these  familiar  notions  are  what  Mr,  Longe  finds  it  impossible
to  conceive.

An  expression  in  the  passage  quoted  would  seem  to  imply
that  universal  competition  among  laborers  is  an  essential  con-
dition to  the  existence  of  an  average  rate  of  wages.  Why  it
should  be  so  (except  on  the  supposition  I  have  referred  to,  that
an  average  rate  requires  that  the  average  be  realized  in  each
particular  instance)  I  am  quite  at  a  loss  to  imagine ;  but  Mr.
Longe's  language  seems  further  to  imply  that,  as  a  matter  of


156  THE  BATE OF  WAGES.

fact,  the  several  departments  of  industry  in  tlhis  and  other
countries  are  so  practically  isolated  from  each  other,  that  wages
in  any  of  them  may  rise  or  fall  without  producing  any  effect
beyond  the  particular  department.  I  have  already  considered
the  extent  to  which  competition  is  really  effective  in  our  in-
dustrial life,  and  have  endeavored  to  show  in  what  way  its  ex-
istence or  non-existence  affects  relative  wages.  To  what  was
then  said  I  desire  now  to  add  that,  even  where  competition
among  laborers  is  not  effective,  and  where  consequently  wages
are  not  in  proportion  to  sacrifices,  it  is  very  far  from  being
true  that  any  such  industrial  isolation  obtains  as  Mr.  Longe's
argument  would  suggest.  A  rise  of  wages,  let  ns  suppose,  oc-
curs in  the  coal  trade :  does  any  one  suppose  that  this  could
continue  without  affecting  wages,  not  merely  in  other  mining
industries  in  full  competition  with  coal-mining,  but  in  indus-
tries the  most  remote  from  coal-mining,  industries  alike  higher
and  lower  in  the  industrial  scale?  Most  undoubtedly  it  could
not ;  and  if  any  one  questions  the  assertion,  he  may  have  his
doubts  resolved  by  what  is  now  going  on  before  our  eyes.
Nor  is  the  explanation  far  to  seek.  Though  laborers  in  cer-
tain departments  of  industry  are  practically  cut  off  from  com-
petition with  laborers  in  other  departments,  the  competition  of
capitalists,  as  I  have  already  pointed  out,  is  effective  over  the
whole  field.  The  communication  between  the  different  sec-
tions of  industrial  life,  which  is  not  kept  open  by  the  move-
ments of  labor,  is  effectually  maintained  by  the  action  of  capi-
tal constantly  moving  toward  the  more  profitable  employ-
ments. In  this  way  our  entire  industrial  organization  becomes
a  connected  system,  any  change  occurring  in  any  part  of  which
will  extend  itself  to  others  and  entail  complementary  changes.
Not  only,  therefore,  are  we  justified  in  generalizing  the  various
facts  of  wages  into  a  single  conception,  and  in  discussing  "gen-
eral" or  "average"  wages,  but  we  have  grounds  for  regarding
this  general  or  average  rate  as  constituted  of  elements  bound


POSITION  OF  THE  CONTROVERSY.  157

together  by  a  common  connection,  and  forming  parts  of  an
integral  whole.

§  4.  The  problem  of  the  general  rate  of  wages,  after  being
the  occasicii  of  perhaps  more  bitter  controversy  than  any  other
within  the  tield  of  social  inquiry,  seemed  some  years  ago  to
have  received,  so  far  as  the  essentials  of  the  matter  went,  its
definitive  solution.  The  great  stumbling-block  to  its  accept-
ance had  long  been  the  law  of  population,  which,  in  spite  of
the  overwhelming  evidence  adduced  in  its  support  by  Mai  thus,
provoked,  as  all  the  world  knows,  a  violent  opposition,  and  led
to  a  controversy  which,  extending  over  half  a  century,  has
only  died  out,  if  indeed  it  has  died  out,  within  a  few  years.
This  result  may  be  attributed  partly,  we  may  perhaps  assume,
to  the  gradual  progress  of  sound  reason  getting  the  better  of
the  strongest  prepossessions ;  but  it  has  of  late  been  powerfully
helped  forward  by  the  influence  of  Mr.  Darwin's  great  work,
in  which  the  obnoxious  principle — the  tendency  of  human  be-
ings to  increase  faster  than  subsistence,  which  had  been  de-
nounced as  at  once  demoralizing  to  man  and  discreditable  to
the  Author  of  the  Universe — was  shown  to  be  merely  a  partic-
ular instance  of  a  law  pervading  all  organic  existence.  How-
ever this  may  be,  in  point  of  fact  those  attacks  upon  the  eco-
nomic doctrine  of  wages  which  were  based  upon  objections  to
the  Malthusian  doctrines — attacks  upon  what  we  may  call  the
supply  side  of  the  wages  problem — have  for  some  time  come  to
an  end.  We  may  therefore  assume  that  so  much  of  the  prob-
lem has  been  solved  to  the  general  satisfaction  of  competent
thinkers,  and  are  consequently  dispensed  from  entering  on  its
consideration  here.

But  the  controversy  has  scarcely  been  closed  on  one  side
when  it  has  been  opened  on  another.  The  law  of  the  supply
of  labor  is  no  longer  called  in  question ;  but  several  able
writers  have  within  a  few  years,  in dissertations  directed


158  TBE  BATE  OF  WAGES.

against  what  is  known  as  the  "Wages-fund"  doctrine,  chal-
lenged the  view  hitherto  received  as  to  the  law  of  its  demand.
Foremost  among  these  has  been  Mr.  Thornton,  who,  in  his
book  on  "  Labor,"*  has  made  the  Wages-fund  doctrine  the  ob-
ject of  a  special  and  elaborate  attack ;  nor  is  it  possible  to  deny
the  ability  and  skill  with  which  the  assault  has  been  conducted,
when  we  find  that  he  can  boast,  as  among  the  first-fruits  of
his-.argument,  no  less  a  result  than  the  conversion  of  Mr.  Mill.
Such  all  event,  it  must  be  frankly  conceded,  affords  an  ex-
tremely  strong  presumption  in  favor  of  the  soundness  of  Mr.
Thornton's  view. Mr.  Mill  had  himself  been,  if  not  the  origi-
nator of  the  Wages-fund  doctrine,  certainly  its  most  able  and
effective  expositor;  and  this  doctrine,  supported  by  his  argu-
ment, and  implicated  in  his  general  theory,  he  has  been  led  by
Mr.  Thornton's  reasoning  to  discard. I  say,  it  can  not  be  de-
nied that  such  a  circumstance  constitutes  a  weighty  presump-
tion in  favor  of  Mr.  Thornton's  view ;  but  I  must  also  contend
that  it  amounts  to  no  more  than  a  presumption. In  the  free-
dom of  science,  I  claim  for  myself  the  right  of  examining  the
doctrine  on  its  merits. I  must  own  myself  unconvinced  by
Mr.  Thornton's  reasonings,  strengthened  and  enforced  though
these  have  been  by  the  powerful  comments  of  Mr,  Mill.f Not
indeed  that  I  am  prepared  to  defend  all  that  has  been  written
on  what,  for  convenience,  I  may  call  the  orthodox  side  of  this
question,  but  I  believe  the  view  maintained  by  those  who  have
written  on  that  side,  and  pre-eminently  the  view  maintained
by  Mr.  Mill  himself — taking  it  as  set  forth  in  his  original  work,
not  as  explained  in  his  retractation — to  be  substantially  sound,
though  needing,  as  it  seems  to  me,  at  once  fuller  development
and  more  accurate  determination  than  it  has  yet  received.

*  " On  Labor :  its  "Wrongful Claims  and  Rightful  Dues,"etc.,  by  W.  T.  Thorn-
ton. Second  Edition,  1870.

t  See  Fortnightly  Riview  for  May  1, 1869.


THE  WAGES-FUND  THEORY.  159

§  5.  I  can  not,  I  think,  better  open  the  examination  which  I
propose  to  make  of  this  subject,  than  by  quoting  the  following
statement  from  Mr.  Mill's  "Principles  of  Political  Economy,"
of  the  nature  of  the  Wages-fund,  and  its  place  in  the  industrial
economy  :

"  Wages,  then,  depend  mainly  upon  the  demand  and  supply  of  labor ;
or,  as  it  is  often  expressed,  on  the  proportion  between  population  and
capital.  By  population  is  here  meant  the  number  only  of  the  laboHng
class,  or  rather  of  those  who  work  for  hire ;  and  by  capital,  only  circu-
lating capital,  and  not  even  the  whole  of  that,  but  the  part  which  is  ex-
pended in  the  direct  purchase  of  labor.  To  this,  however,  must  be  add-
ed all  funds  which,  without  forming  a  part  of  capital,  are  paid  in  ex-
change for  labor,  such  as  the  wages  of  soldiers,  domestic  servants,  and
all  other  unproductive  laborers.  There  is  unfortunately  no  mode  of  ex-
pressing by  one  familiar  term  the  aggregate  of  what  may  be  called  the
Wages-fund  of  a  country :  and  as  the  wages  of  productive  labor  form
nearly  the  whole  of  that  fund,  it  is  usual  to  overlook  the  smaller  and
less  important  part,  and  to  say  that  wages  depend  on  population  and
capital.  It  will  be  convenient  to  employ  this  expression,  remembering,
however,  to  consider  it  as  elliptical,  and  not  as  a  literal  statement  of  the
entire  truth."*

As  I  understand  this  passage,  it  embraces  the  following
statements :  1st,  "  Wages-fund  "  is  a  general  term,  used  in  the
absence  of  any  other  more  familiar,  to  express  the  aggregate
of  all  wages  at  any  given  time  in  possession  of  the  laboring
population  ;  2d,  on  the  proportion  of  this  fund  to  the  number
of  the  laboring  population  depends  at  any  given  time  the  av-'^
erage  rate  of  wages ;  3(3,  the  amount  of  the  fund  is  determined
by  the  amount  of  the  general  wealth  which  is  applied  to  the
direct  purchase  of  labor,  whether  with  a  view  to  productive  or
to  unproductive  employment.  If  the  reader  will  carefully  con-
sider these  several  propositions,  I  think  he  will  perceive  that
they  do  not  contain  matter  which  can  be  properly  regarded  as

*  "  Principles  of  Political  Economy,"  book  ii,,  chap.  xi.


160  THE  BATE  OF  WAGES,

open  to  dispute.  The  first  is  little  more  than  a  definition  ;  at
most,  it  assumes  that  that  exists  in  the  aggregate  which  is  ad-
mitted to  exist  in  detail.  The  second  merely  amoants  to  say-
ing that  the  quotient  will  be  such  as  the  dividend  and  divisor
determine.  The  third  equally  contains  an  indisputable  asser-
tion ;  since,  whatever  be  the  remote  causes  on  which  the  wages
of  hired  labor  depend  (and  the  question  at  present  is  exclusive-
ly of  hired  labor)  the  proximate  act  deiermhiing  their  aggregate
amount  must  in  all  cases  he  a  direct  purchase  of  its  services.  In
truth,  the  demand  for  labor,  thus  understood,  as  measured  by
the  amount  of  wealth  applied  to  the  direct  purchase  of  labor,
might  more  correctly  be  said  to  be,  than  to  determine,  the
Wages-fund.  It  is  the  Wages-fund  in  its  inchoate  stage,  dif-
fering from  it  only  as  wealth  just  about  to  pass  into  the  hands
of  laborers  differs  from  the  same  wealth  when  it  has  got  into
their  hands.  Our  analysis  thus  leads  us  to  the  result,  that  the
passage  quoted  from  Mr.  Mill  can  not  be  taken  to  contain  con-
troversial matter.  The  statements  are  such  as  may  not  be  dis-
puted, once  their  meaning  is  clearly  understood.  At  the  same
time  it  must  be  freely  confessed  that  it  contains  no  solution  of
the  wages  problem :  it  is  not  a  solution,  but  a  statement  of
that  problem — a  statement,  as  it  seems  to  me,  at  once  clear,
comprehensive,  and  succinct,  presenting  in  clear  light  the  two
factors  which  constitute  the  phenomenon — the  Wages-fund  re-
sulting from  the  direct  demand  for  labor,  and  the  laboring
population  forming  the  supply.  The  solution  will  consist  in
connecting  these  factors  with  those  principles  of  tuman  nature
and  facts  of  the  external  world  whicli  form  the  premises  of
economic  science.*

*  "The  political  economy  of  the  wages  question,"  says  Mr.  Brassey  (p.  251),
"is  simple  enough."  Certainly  it  is,  if  it  consists  in  showing  that  every  rise  or
fall  of  Avages  is  traceable  to  a  change  in  the  relation  of  supply  and  demand.  But
it  seems  to  me  that  Mr.  Brassey  has  mistaken  the  statement  of  the  problem  for  its
solution. It  needs  no  proof  surely  to  see  that  if  £-10,000,000  be  added  to  the  ex-


THE  WAGES-FUND  THEORY.  161

§  6.  As  I  have  already  observed,  it  is  with  a  portion  only
of  this  problem  that  we  have  need  now  to  concern  ourselves.
The  causes  governing  the  supply  of  labor  may  be  taken  as
sufficiently  elucidated.  Our  business  is  with  the  causes  gov-
erning the  demand — governing  the  amount  of  wealth  applied
to  the  direct  purchase  of  labor,  or,  as  we  may  equally  well  ex-
press it,  governing  the  Wages-fund.

It  is  here  for  the  first  time  that  room  for  controversy  really
occurs ;  and  though  the  issue  has  not  always  been  taken  with
precision,  it  is  in  effect  on  the  point  just  indicated  that  the  re-
cent controversy  turns. By  the  upholders  of  the  Wages-fund
doctrine  the  view  taken  is,  that  the  amount  of  a  nation's  wealth
expended  in  wages  at  any  given  time  stands — the  character  of  i^
the  national  industries  and  the  methods  of  production  employ-  ^
ed  being  given — in  a  definite  relation  to  its  general  capital,
while  the  amount  of  its  general  capital  is  determined  by  cer-
tain economic  conditions  resulting  from  the  character  of  the
people  and  the  nature  of  their  environment.* The  Wages-  \
fund,  therefore,  according  to  this  view,  depends,  the  conditions  '
of  production  being  given,  proximately  on  the  amount  of  a
nation's  capital,  and  ultimately  on  those  more  remote  causes
which  control  the  growth  of  this  fund. It  is  against  this  view

isting  capital  of  a  country,  and  the  greater  portion  applied  to  the  direct  purchase
of  labor  (the  supply  of  labor  and  other  things  continuing  the  same),  wages  must
rise ;  or  that  the  withdrawal  of  a  great  sum  from  the  payment  of  wages,  as  on  the
occasion  of  a  commercial  collapse,  must  on  the  other  hand,  cceteris  paribus,  in-
A'olve  a  fall  of  wages.  To  tell  us  this  is  not  to  solve  the  wages  question,  but  to
state  it.  What  we  want  to  know  is  what  determines  the  relation  of  -supply  and
demand — of  the  Wages-fund  to  the  laboring  population.  Why  is  that  relation
such  as  to  yield  one  rate  of  wages  in  the  United  States,  another  rate  in  Great
Britain,  and  a  third  rate  on  the  continent  of  Europe  ?  If  Mr.  Brassey  would
foii'ly  address  himself  to  this  pioblem,  I  think  he  would  find  that  the  political
economy  of  the  wages  question  is  not  quite  so  "  simple  "  as  he  supposes.

*  As  set  forth,  for  example,  in  Mill's "Principles  of  Political  Economy,"
book  i.,  chap.  xi.

11


162  TH:E  bate  of  WAGEiS.

of  the  connection  of  facts  that  the  opponents  of  the  impugned
doctrine  have  directed  their  arguments.  According  to  Mr.
Thornton  there  is  no  portion  of  a  nation's  wealth  "  determined  "
toward  the  payment  of  wages.  The  amount  which  actually
reaches  the  laborer  is,  I  presume  he  would  say,  the  result  of
circumstances  (which,  as  not  being  "  determined,"  must  be  re-
garded as  accidental)  of  which  the  most  important  are  those  in-
cidents in  the  position  respectively  of  employer  and  employed
which  favor  or  restrict  the  capacity  for  bargaining.  And  sub-
stantially the  same  language  is  held  by  Mr.  Longe.  Rather  in-
consistently, however,  while  denying  the  determination  of  any
portion  of  the  general  wealth  to  the  payment  of  wages,  Mr.
Longe  propounds  a  theory  to  explain  the  fact  of  this  deter-
mination. The  determining  cause,  he  says,  is  not,  as  alleged
in  the  Wages-fund  theory,  the  economic  conditions  affecting
the  growth  of  capital,  but  "the  demand  for  commodities,"
"The  demand  for  commodities  certainly  does  not  directly  de-
termine the  quantity  of  labor  or  number  of  laborers  in  a  coun-
try, nor  the  quantity  of  corn  or  other  things  available  for  the
maintenance  of  laborers,  but  it  does  determine  the  quantity  of
labor  employed,  and  the  quantity  of  wealth  spent  in  the  wages
of  laborers"  (p.  46).  As  he  elsewhere  puts  it,  "the  demand
for  commodities  which  can  only  be  got  by  labor  is  as  much
a  demand  for  labor  as  a  demand  for  beef  is  a  demand  for
bullocks."

§  7.  Such  are  the  positions  taken  in  this  controversy  by  the
disputants  on  either  side.  In  proceeding  to  state  the  doctrine
in  question,  with  a  view  to  meet  the  objections  which  have
been  advanced  against  it,  it  will  be  convenient  in  the  first  place
to  examine  the  theory  put  forward  by  Mr.  Longe,  and  which
apparently  finds  favor  with  Mr.  Thornton  also,  as  to  the  bear-
ing of  the  demand  for  commodities  upon  the  remuneration  of
labor;  I  shall  then  set  forth  the  grounds  on  which  the  doctrine


THE  DEMAND  FOR  COMMODITIES.  163

of  the  Wages-fund  rests ;  and  having  done  this,  I  shall  be  in  a
position  to  consider  the  arguments  advanced  by  Mr.  Thornton
against  the  existence  of  any  "determining"  causes  in  the  case.

Mr.  Longe  has  refused  to  admit  the  existence  of,  and  has
thrown  doubt  upon  the  possibility  of  conceiving,  "  a  general
rate  of  wages."  He,  however,  allows,  at  least  by  implication,
that  we  may  conceive  an  aggregate  quantity  of  wealth  as  spent
in  wages,  or  what  I  call  a  Wages-fund ;  for  in  the  passage  just
quoted  he  tells  us  the  cause  which  determines  the  amount  of
this  fund.  It  is,  he  says,  "  the  demand  for  commodities."  I
need  scarcely  remark  that  the  view  here  expressed  is  not  pe-
culiar to  Mr.  Longe.  It  is  in  truth  about  the  most  popular  of
all  popular  fallacies.  From  this  root  has  sprung  a  whole  clus-
ter of  maxims,  such  as  that  "the  extravagance  of  the  rich  is
the  gain  of  the  poor,"  that  "profusion  and  waste  are  for  the
good  of  trade,"  and  others  of  like  import  which  have  in  their
time  done  much  to  perplex  and  demoralize  mankind,  and  are
still  far  from  being  extinct.  That  there  is  much  plausibility"
in  the  view  here  taken  of  the  economy  of  industry  can  not  in-
deed be  denied,  since  otherwise  how  should  it  have  obtained
the  almost  universal  vogue  which  it  enjoys?  It  will  therefore
be  worth  while  to  sift  with  some  care  the  grounds  of  an  opin-
ion which  has  certainly  exercised  no  small  amount  of  evil  in-
fluence on  modes  of  thinking  and  acting  in  economic  affairs.

To  state  in  its  strongest  form  the  argument  for  the  view
which  I  am  combating:  What,  it  may  be  asked,  is  the  primary
consideration  that  weighs  with  a  capitalist  in  investing  his
wealth  ?  Is  it  not  the  prospect  of  finding  a  sale  for  his  prod-
ucts— in  other  words,  the  demand  for  commodities?  And,  as
this  is  that  which  first  moves  him  to  action,  is  it  not  also  that
which  governs  the  proportions  of  his  operations  after  he  has  en-
tered upon  action  ?  Increase  the  demand  for  hi^  commodities,
and  he  will  increase  the  amount  of  his  investment ;  diminish
the  demand,  and  he  will  diminish  the  investment. But,  othel.


164  THE  BATE  OF  WAGES.

things  being  the  same,  the  greater  the  investment,  the  greater
will  be  the  amount  of  his  wealth  spent  in  the  wages  of  labor.
In  proportion,  therefore,  as  the  demand  for  his  commodity  is
large,  his  expenditure  in  wages  will  be  large.  This  is  true  of
every  capitalist  and  of  every  branch  of  production.  From
which  the  conclusion  seems  to  follow  that  the  quantity  of
wealth  spent  in  the  wages  of  labor — i  e.,  the  aggregate  Wages-
fund — is  determined  by  the  demand  for  commodities.

It  seems  to  follow,  but  it  does  not  follow ;  for,  looking  close-
ly into  the  above  reasoning,  we  find  that  while  the  conclusion
is  an  assertion  as  to  quantity,  the  premises  relate  to  propor-
tion. The  existence  of  a  demand,  for  example,  for  houses
in  a  given  degree  of  intensity  will  cause  a  certain  quantity  of
the  national  capital  to  be  directed  to  the  building  of  houses;
but  it  wnll  not  and  can  not  determine  what  that  quantity  shall
be.  This  will  depend,  in  the  first  place,  upon  the  amount  of
the  total  capital  available  for  investment ;  and  secondly,  on  the
relative  force  of  the  demand  for  houses  as  compared  with  the
demand  for  other  things.  What  the  demand  for  houses  and
for  other  things  determines  is  merely  the  proportions  in  which
the  available  capital  of  a  country  shall  be  distributed  over  the
field  of  production.  Those  proportions  will  adapt  themselves
to  the  proportions  of  the  various  demands  for  commodities.
Increase  the  demand  for  a  given  commodity,  and,  other  things
being  the  same,  a  larger  proportion  of  the  available  capital  will
be  directed  toward  its  production ;  diminish  the  demand  for  it,
and  a  contrary  result  will  ensue :  but  neither  in  the  one  case
nor  in  the  other  will  the  demand  for  the  commodity  determine
how  much  capital  shall  be  devoted  to  its  production;  nor  for
similar  reasons  will  the  demand  for  commodities  in  general
determine  a  like  result  with  regard  to  them.  It  is  as  if  we  ar-
gued,  that  because  a  man  distributes  his  income  in  the  propor-
tion of  his  various  needs,  spending  more  on  those  articles  to
purchase  which  a  larger  sum  is  wanted  to  satisfy  his  require-


THE  DEMAND  FOB  COMMODITIES.  165

ments,  therefore,  the  greater  his  needs  the  larger  must  be  his
income.  Large  or  small,  his  income  will  be  distributed  in  pro-
portion to  his  needs;  and,  large  or  small,  the  Wages-fund  will
be  distributed  over  the  various  industrial  occupations  in  the
proportions  indicated  by  the  demand  for  commodities.  But
this  tells  us  nothing  as  to  what  determines  either  the  amount
of  a  man's  income,  or  the  amount  of  the  Wages-fund,  We  are
thus  brought  to  Mr.  Mill's  conclusion,  that  the  demand  for  com-
modities determines  the  direction  of  investment  and  production',  '
but  not  the  more  or  less  of  what  the  laborer  on  an  average  re-
ceives.

But  it  may  be  well  perhaps  to  give  the  argument  a  more
practical  direction;  and  for  this  purpose  I  will  ask  the  reader
to  consider  some  of  the  consequences  which  would  follow  from
this  theory  of  which  Mr.  Longe  has  made  himself  the  expos-
itor, in  connection  with  the  condition  of  labor  in  different
countries.  Supposing  it  to  be  true  that  the  amount  of  wealth
spent  in  the  wages  of  labor  is  determined  by  the  demand  for
commodities,  then  it  will  follow  that,  given  the  demand  for
commodities,  we  are  given  the  amount  of  wealth  spent  in  the
wages  of  labor.  The  latter  will  vary  with  the  former,  and  the
Wages-fund  will,  on  this  view,  bear  a  constant  proportion  to
the  aggregate  demand  for  commodities.  Now,  as  has  been  ex-
plained in  a  former  chapter  of  this  work,*  the  aggregate  de-
mand for  commodities  depends  on  the  aggregate  production
of  commodities.  Speaking  broadly,  all  commodities  produced
under  a  regime  of  division  of  labor  are  produced  in  order  to  be
exchanged.  The  more  each  man  produces,  the  more  he  will
have  to  sell,  and  the  more  he  will  be  able  to  buy.  It  results,
therefore,  from  the  theory  we  are  considering,  that  the  aggre-
gate wealth  appropriated  to  the  use  of  the  laboring  population
must  always  bear  a  constant  proportion  to  the  gross  produce

*  See  ante,  pp.  23-26.


166  THE  BATE  OF  WAGES.

of  the  community.  Now,  how  does  this  accord  with  the  facts
of  wages  as  presented,  let  us  say,  in  England  and  in  the  United
States  ?  According  to  computations  made  bj  Mr.  Wells,*  the
United  States  Commissioner,  taken  in  connection  with  some
made  by  Mr,  Dudley  Baxter  for  this  country,  it  would  seem
that  the  annual  gross  produce  of  the  United  States  per  head
of  the  population  bears  to  the  annual  gross  produce  of  the
United  Kingdom  per  head  of  the  population  the  proportion  of
$140  to  $134.  The  United  Kingdom  includes  Ireland,  which
can  not  but  sensibly  reduce  the  average  for  this  country.
Omitting  Ireland,  the  annual  per  capita  produce  of  Great  Brit-
ain and  of  the  United  States  would,  therefore,  according  to
these  computations,  be  as  nearly  as  possible  the  same.  But
the  annual  gross  produce  would  determine  the  demand  for
commodities,  and  the  demand  for  commodities,  according  to
Mr,  Longe,  determines  the  quantity  of  wealth  spent  in  the
wages  of  labor.  From,  which  several  positions  the  conclusion
follows  that  the  Wages-fund  of  Great  Britain  stands  to  that  of
the  United  States  in  the  same  proportion  as  the  population  of
the  former  country  to  the  population  of  the  latter,  Now,  tak-
ing this  to  be  so,  and  assuming  further  that  the  proportion  of
the  population  working  for  hire  is  the  same  in  both  countries,
then  the  average  rate  of  wages  would  for  both  countries  be  the
same.  In  point  of  fact,  the  working  population  constitutes  a
smaller  fraction  of  the  entire  population  in  Great  Britain  than
in  the  United  States :  it  would,  therefore,  according  to  this
view,  bear  a  less  proportion  to  the  Wages -fund  here  than
there.  In  other  words,  we  are  led  by  "  the  demand  for  com-
modities" theory,  applied  to  the  results  ascertained  by  English
and  American  statisticians,  to  this  singular  conclusion,  that  the
rate  of  wages  in  Great  Britain  should  be  on  an  average  higher
than  in  the  United  States !

I  have  taken  for  comparison  Great  Britain  and  the  United


*  Wells's  Report,  1869,  p.  13.


TEE  DEMAND  FOB  COMMODITIES.  167

States,  because  the  requisite  data  were  here  easily  obtainable ;
but  any  one  who  has  followed  the  foregoing  argument  will
perceive  that,  had  the  comparison  been  made  between  Great
Britain  and  some  still  more  recently  settled  country— for  ex-
ample, some  of  the  Western  States  of  North  America,  or  one
of  our  own  Australian  colonies  —  the  redudio  ad  ahsurdum
would  have  been  yet  more  glaring.  In  effect,  statistical  de-
tails in  such  a  comparison  are  superfluous.  The  broad  facts
of  the  case  are  such  as  can  not  be  missed.  It  is  evident  at  a
glance  that  in  such  countries  as  our  Australian  colonies,  or  as
Illinois  or  California,  the  amount  of  the  entire  annual  produc-
tion appropriated  to  the  laboring  population  bears  a  far  larger
proportion  to  the  whole  than  in  old  countries  like  Great  Brit-
ain or  France ;  that  is  to  say,  the  Wages-fund  in  those  parts
of  the  world  bears  a  larger  proportion  to  the  demand  for  com-
modities than  in  Western. Europe.  The  demand  for  commod-
ities, therefore,  does  not  determine  the  Wages-fund.  Obser-
vation, moreover,  of  the  course  of  industrial  development  in
such  countries  exhibits  this  fact,  that,  while  with  the  progress
of  society  the  amount  of  wealth  which  goes  to  support  hired
labor  pretty  constantly  increases,  the  proportion  which  this
bears  to  the  total  produce  of  industry  nearly  as  constantly  de-
clines— growing  smaller  as  the  realization  of  fortunes  enables
a  larger  proportion  of  the  people  to  retire  from  active  work,
and  as  capital  assumes  more  extensively  a  fixed  form.  In  a
word,  the  most  prominent  features  in  the  industrial  economy
of  new,  old,  and  advancing  countries  absolutely  precludes  the
supposition  that  the  demand  for  commodities  has  any  such
connection  with  the  interests  of  the  laboring  population  as  the
doctrine  I  am  now  considering  assumes.

§  8.  So  far  as  to  Mr.  Longe's  theory  of  Wages.  I  proceed
now  to  state  the  doctrine  of  the  Wages-fund,  as  at  least  I  my-
self understand  it.


168  THE  BATE  OF  WAGES.

It  will  be  remembered  that  in  the  enunciation  which  I  quoted
from  Mr.  Mill  of  the  wages  problem,  the  Wages-fund  is  stated
to  consist  of  two  distinct  parts — one,  the  largest  and  by  much
the  most  important,  constituting  a  portion  of  the  general  cap-
ital of  the  country ;  while  the  other  is  derived  from  that  part
of  the  nation's  wealth  which  goes  to  support  unproductive  la-
bor, of  which  Mr.  Mill  gives  as  an  example  the  wages  of  sol-
diers and  domestic  servants.  In  proceeding  to  deal  with  the
wages  question,  it  will  be  convenient  to  omit  for  a  time  all
consideration  of  the  latter  part :  this  will  be  more  easily  dealt
with  when  we  have  ascertained  the  causes  which  govern  the
main  phenomenon.

Kestricting  our  view  then  for  the  present  to  that  portion  of
the  general  Wages-fund  which  goes  to  support  productive  la-
bor, we  have,  in  the  first  place,  to  observe  that  the  hiring  of
labor  for  productive  purposes  is  an  incident  of  the  investment
of  capital.  A  capitalist  engages  and  pays  a  workman  from
precisely  the  same  motives  which  lead  him  to  purchase  raw
material,  a  factory,  or  a  machine.  In  searching,  therefore,  for
the  causes  which  govern  the  amount  of  wealth  spent  in  the
hirins;  of  labor,  we  must  advert  to  the  considerations  which
weigh  with  men  in  devoting  their  means  to  productive  invest-
ment. Why,  for  example,  does  A.  B.  employ  his  wealth  in
productive  operations?  And  why  does  he  employ  so  much
and  no  more  in  productive  operations  ?  An  adequate  answer
to  these  questions  will  carry  us  some  way  toward  the  goal  we
have  in  view.

It  seems  to  me  that  the  proper  answer  is  as  follows :  A.  B.
invests  his  wealth  productively  in  order  to  obtain  a  profit  on
the  portion  of  his  means  so  employed ;  and  he  invests  so  much
and  no  more,  because,  his  total  means  being  what  they  are,  and
regard  being  had  on  the  one  hand  to  his  private  requirements
and  taste  for  indulgence,  on  the  other  to  his  desire  to  augment
his  means,  coupled  with  the  opportunities  afforded  him  of  do-


CAUSES  OF  INVESTMENT.  169

ing  so  by  making  profit,  this  is  the  amount  which  it  is  suit-
able to  his  disposition,  in  the  circumstances  in  which  he  is
placed,  so  to  invest.  In  other  words,  we  find  the  amount  of
A.  B.'s  investment  determined  by  the  following  circumstances:
First,  the  amount  of  his  total  means ;  secondly,  his  character
and  disposition  as  affected  by  the  temptation  to  immediate  en-
joyment on  the  one  hand,  and  by  the  prospect  of  future  ag-
grandizement on  the  other ;  thirdly,  the  opportunities  of  mak-
ing profit.  Alter  any  of  these  conditions — his  total  means,  his
character,  or  his  opportunities  of  making  profit,  and  the  effect
will  be  an  alteration  in  the  amount  of  bis  investment.  Increase
his  means,  and,  other  things  being  the  same,  he  will  invest  more
largely:  again,  increase  the  prospect  of  profit,  and,  other  things
being  the  same,  he  will  invest  more  largely :  lastly,  increase  the
strength  of  the  accumulative  principle  in  his  character  in  rela-
tion to  the  taste  for  immediate  enjoyment,  and  once  more,  other
things  being  the  same,  he  will  invest  more  largely  :  on  the  other
hand,  a  change  in  any  of  these  conditions  in  the  opposite  direc-
tion would  lead  to  his  investment  being  correspondingly  con-
tracted.

Applying  these  considerations  to  the  case  of  a  community,
it  seems  to  me  that  we  are  justified  in  laying  down  the  follow-
ing proposition :  That,  the  amount  of  wealth  in  a  country  be-
ing given,  the  proportion  of  this  wealth  which  shall  be  invest-
ed in  industrial  operations  with  a  view  to  profit  will  depend,
first,  upon  the  strength  of  those  qualities  in  the  average  char-
acter of  its  inhabitants  which  lead  to  productive  investment — ■
what  Mr.  Mill  calls  "the  effective  desire  of  accumulation;"  and
secondly,  on  the  opportunities  of  industrial  investment  open  to
the  community  offering  a  rate  of  profit  suflEicient  to  call  this
principle  into  activity — in  a  word,  on  "the  extent  of  the  field
for  investment."

Such  being  the  conditions  determining  the  investment  of
capital,  it  is  plain  that,  if  all  capital  consisted  in  wages,  or  if


170  THE  BATE  OF  WAGES.

wages  bore  always  the  same  proportion  to  a  given  quantity  of
capital,  the  problem  with  which  we  are  immediately  concerned
would  here  be  solved ;  and  we  might  refer  the  phenomenon  in
question — we  may  describe  it  as  we  please,  the  extent  of  the
demand  for  labor  or  the  amount  of  the  Wages-fund — simply
and  directly  to  the  conditions  which  have  just  been  stated,  viz.,
in  a  given  state  of  the  national  wealth,  to  the  strength  of  the
effective  desire  for  accumulation,  taken  in  connection  with  the
extent  of  the  field  for  investment.  In  point  of  fact,  however,
wages  constitute  but  a  portion  of  capital,  and,  what  greatly
complicates  the  inquiry,  this  portion  bears  no  constant  relation
to  the  ao-o-resate  amount.  It  therefore  still  remains  for  us  to
determine  the  circumstances  on  which  depends  the  distribution
of  capital  between  wages  and  the  other  elements  of  which  cap-
ital consists.

Those  other  elements  may  be  summed  up  under  the  heads
of  "  Fixed  Capital "  and  "  Eaw  Material."  Fixed  Capital,  Eaw
Material,  and  Wages-fund,  therefore,  form  the  three  constitu-
ents of  Capital,  and  the  problem  to  be  solved  is.  What  are  the
causes  which,  in  a  given  field  of  industry,  determine  the  pro-
portion in  which  these  three  constituents  combine?

Let  us  again  suppose  an  individual  A.  B.  contemplating  in-
vestment ;  he  has  decided  how  much  of  his  whole  means  he
intends  to  employ  in  productive  operations,  but,  this  point  hav-
ing been  settled,  he  has  yet  to  consider  in  what  proportions  the
amount  shall  be  divided  between  Fixed  Capital,  Eaw  Materi-
al, and  Wages.  What  is  to  prescribe  the  respective  quotas?
Manifestly,  in  the  first  place,  the  nature  of  the  industry  in
which  he  proposes  to  embark  his  capital.  Suppose,  for  exam-
ple, his  purpose  is  to  engage  in  cotton  or  woolen  manufacture,  a
very  large  proportion  of  his  whole  capital  will  assume  the  form
of  buildings,  machinery,  and  raw  wool  or  cotton ;  that  is  to
say,  of  fixed  capital  and  raw  material,  which  would  leave  a
correspondingly  small  proportion  available  for  the  payment  of


ELEMENTS  OF  CAPITAL.  171

wages.  Oa  the  other  hand,  if,  with  the  same  capital  to  invest,
he  had  selected  agriculture  as  the  field  for  its  employment,  the
bulk  of  his  capital  would  take  the  form  of  wages,  and  fixed
capital  and  raw  material  would  assume  a  relatively  unimpor-
tant place  in  his  outlay.  It  is  thus  evident  that  the  nature  of
the  industry  selected  for  investment  must  go  a  long  way  in  de-
termining the  proportions  in  which  the  capital  shall  be  distrib-
uted among  the  several  instruments  of  production,  and,  there-
fore, must  go  a  long  way  in  determining  the  proportion  which
the  wages  element  in  that  particular  capital  shall  bear  to  its
whole  amount.  Now  the  considerations  which  weigh  with  an
individual  capitalist  are  those  which  weigh  with  a  community
of  capitalists ;  and  we  are  therefore  justified  in  concluding  that
the  main  circumstance  governing  the  proportion  which  the
Wages-fund  shall  bear  to  the  general  capital  of  a  nation  is  the
nature  of  the  national  industries.

We  are  justified  in  concluding  that  this  is  the  main  circum-
stance; but  a  close  examination  will  show  that  other  circum-
stances also  enter  into  the  conditions  which  determine  the  final
result.  What  the  nature  of  the  national  industries  really  de-
termines is  the  proportion  in  which  labor  shall  be  combined
with  the  other  instruments  of  production — fixed  capital  and
raw  material — in  the  general  industry  of  a  country;  but  what
we  want  to  know  is  the  place  which  luages  shall  hold  in  this
combination.  Now  the  consideration  of  a  simple  example  will
show  that,  the  proportion  of  labor  to  the  other  instruments  of
production  being  given,  the  proportion  which  wages  shall  bear
to  the  total  capital  may  vary,

Let  us  suppose  a  capitalist  starting  with  £10,000.  He  finds
that  with  £5000  he  can  buy  fixed  capital  and  raw  material
which  will  give  full  employment  to  100  competent  workmen ;
and  if  we  suppose  the  rate  of  wages  for  these  workmen  to  aver-
age £50  a  year,  the  payment  of  their  wages  at  this  rate  would
absorb  the  rest  of  his  capital,  viz.,  £5000. His  entire  capital


172  THE  BATE  OF  WAGES.

would  thus  be  divided  into  £5000  for  fixed  capital  and  raw
material,  and  £5000  for  wages.  But  now  suppose  the  current
rate  of  wages  for  such  labor  as  he  required  to  have  been  £40
instead  of  £50  a  year,  he  would  have  been  able  to  procure  the
100  workmen  which  his  fixed  capital  and  raw  material  re-
quired for  £4000 :  £5000  having  as  before  been  invested  in
fixed  capital  and  raw  material,  he  would  thus  find  himself  with
£1000  of  capital  still  disposable.  This  we  may  suppose  he
would  invest  in  the  same  business,  and  it  would  accordingly
be  necessary  to  bring  together  the  instruments  of  production
purchasable  for  £1000  in  the  same  proportions  as  before — that
is  to  say,  he  would  have  to  distribute  the  £1000  nearly  as  fol-
lows: Fixed  capital  and  raw  material  (let  us  say  for  the  sake
of  round  numbers)  £550 ;  wages  £450.  His  whole  capital  will
now  be  divided  thus :

Fixed  capital  and  raw  material £5,550

Wages  (110  men  at  £40) 4,450

Total  capital £10,000

The  proportion  between  labor,  fixed  capital,  and  raw  ma-
terial would  here  be  the  same  as  before,  but  whereas  in  the
first  case  the  Wages-fund  represented  50  per  cent,  of  his  whole
capital,  it  now  represents  but  44  per  cent.  It  is  of  course  evi-
dent that,  had  I  made  the  opposite  supposition,  and  taken  the
current  rate  of  wages  at  £60  instead  of  £40,  it  would  have
been  necessary,  in  order  to  maintain  the  due  proportion  be-
tween labor  and  the  other  productive  instruments,  that  the
wages  element  should  have  been  increased  at  the  expense  of
fixed  capital  and  raw  material.  The  distribution  of  the  total
capital  would  then  have  stood  nearly  thus:

Fixed  capital  and  raw  material £4,550

Wages  of  90  men  at  £60  (nearly) 5,450

Total  capital £10,000


ELEMENTS  OF  CAPITAL.  173

In  other  words,  the  Wages-fand  would  now  constitute  54  per
cent,  of  the  total  investment.

These  examples  show  that  the  nature  of  the  national  indus-
tries do  not  determine  absolutely  the  distribution  of  the  na-
tional capital  among  the  three  leading  instruments  of  produc-
tion, but  that  the  result  is  liable  to  be  modified  by  the  rate  of
wages  which  happens  to  be  current.  Now,  so  far  as  this  is  the
case,  it  will  perhaps  strike  the  reader  that  our  reasoning  has
conducted  us  into  a  vicious  circle,  inasmuch  as,  while  seeking
a  solution  of  the  rate  of  wages  in  the  causes  determining  the
Wages-fund,  we  have  been  suddenly  confronted  with  the  phe-
nomenon itself  as  one  of  those  causes.  A  little  reflection,  how-
ever, will  show  that  the  circle  is  apparent  merely,  and  that  the
grounds  of  our  argument  are  really  independent  and  distinct.
For,  whatever  be  the  causes  which  determine  the  Wages-fund,
the  amount  of  that  fund  being  so  determined,  the  rate  of  wages
is  merely  the  industrial  outcome,  and  I  might  even  say,  the
concrete  expression,  of  the  supply  of  labor.  The  modifying
circumstance,  therefore,  in  the  case,  though  indicated  by  the
rate  of  wages,  is  really  the  supply  of  labor;  and  our  analysis'
accordingly  issues  in  the  following  conditions  as  the  determin-
ing causes  of  the  Wages-fund,  viz. :  the  total  capital  of  the
country  (determined  in  the  manner  already  explained);  the
nature  of  the  national  industries ;  and  the  supply  of  labor —
facts  at  once  distinct,  and  entirely  independent  of  the  subject
of  our  investigation.

It  would  seem,  then,  that  the  amount  of  the  Wages-fund
(which  the  reader  will  be  careful  to  distinguish  from  the  rate
of  wages)  is  to  some  extent  affected  by  the  number  of  compe-
tent laborers  offering  their  services,  wherever  those  laborers
are  employed  in  conjunction  with  fixed  capital  and  raw  ma-
terial. Now  it  may  be  worth  while  to  point  out  the  manner
in  which  this  influence  is  exerted.  Eeverting  to  our  previous
illustrations,  it  appears  that,  other  things  being  the  same,  a  rise


174  TEE  BATE  OF  WAGES.

ill  the  current  rate  of  wages  issues  in  an  expansion  of  the
Wages-fund,  and,  contrariwise,  a  fall  in  the  current  rate  in  its
contraction.  But,  the  r;ite  of  wages,  other  things  being  the
same,  varying  inversely  with  the  supply  of  labor,  this  is  equiva-
lent to  saying  that  the  Wages-fund  expands  as  the  supply  of
labor  contracts,  and  contracts  as  the  supply  of  labor  expands.
An  unexpected  consequence,  not,  so  far  as  I  know,  before  ad-
verted to,  results  from  this  play  of  economic  forces,  namely,
that  an  increase  or  diminution  in  the  supply  of  labor,  where  it
is  of  a  kind  to  be  employed  in  conjunction  with  fixed  capital
and  raw  material,  acts  upon  the  rate  of  wages  with  a  force
more  than  proportional  to  the  increase  or  diminution  in  the  sup-
ply ;  for  it  tells  at  the  same  time  upon  both  the  factors  on
which  the  result  depends,  modifying  them  in  opposite  direc-
tions— the  fund  undergoing  diminution  as  the  number  of  those
who  are  to  share  it  is  increased ;  or,  on  the  other  hand,  ex-
panding as  the  sharers  become  fewer.  This  occurs,  I  say,
where  labor  is  of  a  kind  to  be  employed  in  conjunction  with
fixed  capital  and  raw  material ;  and,  it  may  be  added,  that  the
effect  would  only  assume  sensible  dimensions  where  those
agencies  constituted  a  substantial  proportion  of  the  whole  capi-
tal invested.  Indeed  it  would  be  a  mistake  to  regard  this  par-
ticular condition — the  supply  of  labor  considered  as  a  cause
affecting,  not  the  rate  of  wages,  but  the  aggregate  Wages-fund
— as  under  any  circumstances  more  than  a  subordinate  and
modifying  influence  in  the  case.  The  point  is  one  of  theoretic
rather  than  of  practical  importance ;  and,  in  considering  the
variations  of  the  Wages-fund,  it  will  rarely  be  necessary  to  take
account  of  more  than  the  two  main  determining  conditions  of
that  phenomenon — the  growth  or  decline  of  capital,  and  the
nature  of  the  prevailing  industries.

§  9.  It  appears,  then,  that  the  aggregate  amount  of  wealth
appropriated  to  the  laboring  population  in  any  country  varies,


GROWTH  OF  THE  WAGES-FUND.  175

not  simply  with  the  progress  of  the  national  wealth,  nor  yet
with  the  progress  of  the  national  capital,  but  with  this  latter
circumstance  taken  in  connection  with  the  character  of  the  na-
tional industries,  the  result  being  also,  within  certain  narrow
limits,  modified  by  the  supply  of  labor.  In  other  words,  it  ap-
pears that  the  same  amount  of  capital  will  yield  under  different
circumstances  Wages-funds  of  different  dimensions,  and  will
consequently  be  capable  of  supporting  populations  of  different
magnitudes.  This  position  finds  its  illustration  and  verification
in  the  industrial  phenomena  of  different  countries.  For  ex-
ample, it  is  obvious  at  a  glance  that  a  given  amount  of  capital
invested  in  the  Western  States  of  North  America  supports  a
larger  laboring  population  than  the  same  amount  invested  in
the  New  England  States ;  and  the  reason  is  plain :  the  former
States  are  more  extensively  agricultural  than  the  latter,  and
consequently  employ  fixed  capital  and  raw  material  less  ex-
tensively in  their  staple  industries;  it  follows  of  course  that
the  proportion  of  the  total  investment  applicable  to  the  pay-
ment of  wages  is  correspondingly  greater  in  those  States.
Again,  a  comparison  of  an  average  investment  in  the  United
States — it  matters  not  in  what  part  of  them — and  in  Grreat
Britain  would  reveal  analogous  differences.  Fixed  capital  be-
ing more  largely  employed  in  the  industries  of  Great  Britain,  a
given  amount  of  capital  invested  in  those  industries  would
yield  a  smaller  Wages-fund  than  the  same  capital  invested  in
the  United  States,  and  consequently  would  support — allowance
made  for  the  different  rates  of  wages  in  the  two  countries — a
smaller  laboring  population.  Similarly,  if,  instead  of  compar-
ing different  countries,  the  comparison  were  made  between  dif-
ferent epochs,  we  should  still  find  the  power  of  capital  to  sup-
port labor  varying  with  the  changes  in  the  character  of  the  in-
dustries in  which  it  is  employed.  And,  in  connection  with
this,  we  may  notice  what  amounts  to  an  economic  derivative
law  in  the  industrial  development  of  progressive  communities.


176  THE  BATE OF  WAGES.

The  modifications  which  occur  in  the  distribution  of  capital
among  its  several  departments  as  nations  advance  are  by  no
means  fortuitous,  but  follow  on  the  whole  a  well-defined  course,
and  move  toward  a  determined  goal.  In  effect,  what  we  find
is,  a  constant  growth  of  the  national  capital,  accompanied  with
a  nearly  equally  constant  decline  in  the  proportion  of  this  cap-
ital which  goes  to  support  productive  labor.  This  is  the  inev-
itable consequence  of  the  progress  of  the  industrial  arts,  the
eficct  of  which  is  to  cause  a  steady  substitution  of  the  agencies
of  inanimate  nature  for  the  labor  of  man.  In  making  this
remark  it  is  perhaps  superfluous  to  add  that  it  is  not  to  be
inferred  from  the  circumstance  stated  that  the  progress  of
those  arts  is  unfiivorable  to  the  interests  of  labor.  Even  on
the  lowest  and  most  materialistic  view  of  the  interests  of  la-
bor the  reverse  is  the  fact;  for  what  industrial  progress  under
the  influence  of  the  advancing  arts  and  sciences  effects  is  a
diminution,  not  in  the  absolute  amount  of  the  Wages-fund,  but
only  in  the  loroportion  which  it  bears  to  the  total  capital  of  a
country  —  a  diminution  which  is  perfectly  compatible  with  a
steadily  progressive  increase  of  the  fund.  One  has  only  in-
deed to  consider  what  the  Wages-fund  of  such  a  country  as
Great  Britain  has  grown  to  under  a  regime  of  advancing  indus-
trial art,  and  reflect  on  what  it  would  probably  now  have  been
had  that  progress  been  arrested  a  century  ago,  to  perceive  the
utter  groundlessness  of  the  notion  that  industrial  art  can,  in  the
long  run,  be  antagonistic  to  labor.  Not  the  less,  however,  is  it
indispensable,  if  we  would  understand  the  most  salient  facts  of
modern  industrial  life,  to  keep  constantly  in  view  the  tendency
of  the  Wages-fund,  with  the  progress  of  wealth  and  art,  to  lag
behind  the  advances  of  the  other  factors  of  the  national  capi-
tal.* The  fact  is  one  of  very  great  significance,  and  highly  de-

*  These  remarks  receive  a  practical  illustration  from  the  important  and  suggest-
ive article  by  Professor  Fawcett  in  the  Fortnightly  Revieio  (Januarj',  1874),  in


SOCIAL  CONSEQUENCES.  177

serving  the  consideration  of  those  who  speculate  on  social  sub-
jects. For  it  involves  this  double  consequence  bearing  on  the
laws  of  social  growth — a  tendency  toward  a  relative  increase
of  the  classes  not  living  by  hired  labor  as  compared  with  those
who  do :  and  again,  a  tendency  toward  increased  inequality  in
the  distribution  of  wealth.*  I  say  it  involves  these  conse-
quences as  tendencies ;  and  I  may  add,  that  up  to  the  present
time  those  tendencies  have  in  general  been  very  fully  realized  in
the  actual  experience  of  the  world,  and  in  an  eminent  degree
in  the  experience  of  Great  Britain,  They  exist,  however,  as
tendencies  only,  and  may,  like  other  tendencies  or  laws  of  na-
ture, be  counteracted  through  the  influence  of  tendencies  of  an
opposite  kind ;  in  a  word,  the  balance  may  be  redressed  by
suitable  expedients.  Though  the  fund  for  the  remuneration
of  mere  labor,  whether  skilled  or  unskilled,  must,  so  long  as
industry  is  progressive,  ever  bear  a  constantly  diminishing  pro-
portion alike  to  the  growing  wealth  and  growing  capital,  there
is  nothing  in  the  nature  of  things  which  restricts  the  laboring
population  to  this  fund  for  their  support.  In  return,  indeed,
for  their  mere  labor,  it  is  to  this  that  they  must  look  for  their
sole  reward  ;  but  they  may  help  production  otherwise  than  by
their  labor:  they  may  save,  and  thus  become  themselves  the
owners  of  capital,  and  profits  may  thus  be  brought  to  aid  the

which  he  calls  attention  to  the  slight  increase  which  has  occurred  in  the  rate  of
wages  in  Great  Britain  contemporaneously  with  the  large  additions  recently  made
to  our  national  wealth.

*  This  latter  result  can  not  indeed  be  said  to  be  necessary ;  since  it  is  conceivable
that  laborers  by  limiting  their  numbers  might  keep  the  rate  of  their  remuneration  on
a  level  with  the  growing  incomes  of  other  classes.  To  do  this,  however,  two  con-
ditions would  have  to  be  fulfilled :  the  productiveness  of  industry  would  have  to
increase  in  a  degree  sufficient  to  permit  of  this  high  rate  of  remuneration  consist-
ently with  yielding  also  a  rate  of  profit  high  enough  to  attract  capital  toward  in-
vestment ;  and  secondly,  the  result  would  imply  such  a  degree  of  self-control  on
the  part  of  the  laboring  population  as,  I  fear,  experience  gives  us  no  warrant  for
expecting.

12


178  THE  BATE  OF  WAGES.

Wages-fund.  I  merely  note  this  point  ut  present  as  bearing
upon  the  controversy  respecting  the  future  of  the  laboring
classes,  reserving  the  full  consideration  of  the  latter  question
for  another  place.  There  are  those  who  regard  it  as  a  law  of
industrial  development  that  capital  should  ever  become  more
and  more  aggregated  in  a  few  hands,  and  that,  as  a  conse-
quence of  this,  the  position  of  the  laborer  in  the  future  m'ust
remain  substantially  what  it  is  at  present  in  the  more  advanced
industrial  countries — that  of  a  recipient  of  wages  merely.  I
do  not  pretend  here  to  pronounce  upon  this  question — the  eco-
nomic data  for  its  determination  have  not  yet  been  fully
worked  out ;  but  I  am  justified  even  here  in  asserting  this
much,  that  the  permanent  maintenance  of  a  regime  such  as  is
contemplated,  co-existing  with  a  progressive  industry,  can  only
issue  in  one  result — a  constant  exaggeration  of  those  features
already  beginning  to  mark  so  unpleasantly  the  aspect  of  our
social  state — namely,  a  harsh  separation  of  classes,  combined
with  those  glaring  inequalities  in  the  distribution  of  wealth
which  most  people  will  agree  are  among  the  chief  elements  of
our  social  instability.

§  10.  I  remarked  just  now,  that  under  a  progressive  state
of  industry,  though  the  proportion  of  the  Wages-fund  to  the
whole  capital  of  a  country  diminishes,  the  positive  amount  of
the  fund  for  the  most  part  undergoes  increase.  It  must  be
confessed,  however,  that  while  this  represents  the  ordinary
rule,  there  is  nothing  strictly  necessary  in  the  relation  of  the
plienomena  thus  presented ;  and  that  instances  do  occur,  and
sometimes  on  a  large  scale,  in  which  the  progress  of  wealth
and  industry  is  accompanied  with  a  positive  contraction  of  the
Wages-fund.  Such  a  result  happens  whenever  that  process
takes  place  which  is  described  by  economists  as  a  conversion
of  circulating  capital  into  fixed.

As  Mr.  Mill  has  remarked,  the  proceeding  in  question  is  not


INDUSTRIAL CRISES.  179

one  which  in  practice  is  frequently  resorted  to ;  the  introduc-
tion and  extension  of  fixed  capital  being,  as  a  general  rule,  ef-
fected through  the  agency  of  fresh  savings  rather  than  by  with-
drawal from  the  support  of  labor  of  funds  already  thus  employ-
ed. But  it  is  beyond  question  that  such  conversions  of  circu-
lating into  fixed  capital  do  sometimes  occur;  and,  in  this  event,
it  is  not  less  certain  that  the  Wages-fund  must,  at  all  events  for
a  time,  be  curtailed.  For  the  most  part,  however,  it  happens
that  movements  of  this  kind  are  on  a  limited  scale,  and,  the  re-
sulting arrangements  always  issuing  in  increased  efiiciencj''  of
production  (for  this  is  the  motive  for  adopting  them),  the  gaps
made  in  the  Wages-fund  are  quickly  filled  up ;  so  that  the  con-
sequences which  ensue,  though  perhaps  serious  enough,  are
rarely  of  large  dimensions.  I  say  this  is  what  usually  happens
when  circulating  capital  is  converted  into  fixed ;  but  there  are
times  when  the  process  is  conducted  on  something  like  a  na-
tional scale,  and  then  it  may  bo  productive  of  even  disastrous
results.  An  occasion  of  this  kind,  for  example,  occurred  in  the
industrial  history  of  England  during  the  sixteenth  century,
when  the  exchange  of  a  very  rude  and  primitive  agriculture
for  one  that  might  by  comparison  be  called  scientific,  and  more
particularly  an  extensive  conversion  of  tillage-lands  to  pasture,
under  the  influence  of  causes  then  affecting  her  general  trade,
issued  in  the  remarkable  phenomenon  of  a  rapidly  growing
national  capital,  with  improved  industrial  processes  and  ex-
tending trade,  accompanied  by  a  sudden  and  portentous  de-
velopment of  pauperism.  No  doubt  the  recuperative  power
of  progressive  industry  told  in  the  long  run ;  and  perhaps  be-
fore the  century  was  over,  or  the  new  Poor  Law  had  well  come
into  operation,  the  encroachment  made  on  the  laborers'  division
of  the  national  wealth  had  been  more  than  repaid :  but  it  is
nevertheless  true  that  the  event  amounted  to  a  crisis  in  the
national  industry,  and  was,  for  a  large  portion  of  the  people,
fraught  with  disaster  and  ruin. Something  of  the  same  kind


180  THE  BATE  OF  WAGES.

has  been  in  progress  in  our  own  clay  in  Ireland.  A  protective
Corn  Law,  combined  with  the  demoralization  of  the  people
from  political  and  social  causes,  had  generated  an  industrial
system  which  could  not  be  permanently  sustained.  Under  the
combined  influence  of  free  trade  and  the  potato  disease  this  sys-
tem suddenly  collapsed,  and  it  became  necessary  to  pass  from
a  crude  reghne  of  tillage  to  one  in  which  capital  was  extensive-
ly converted  into  fixed  and  permanent  forms.  The  result  has
been  the  introduction  of  an  agriculture  suited  to  the  country,
and  largely  carried  on  by  improved  modern  processes,  and  a
rapid  increase  in  general  wealth ;  but  simultaneously  with  this^
a  sudden  contraction  of  the  Wages-fund,  of  which  the  unequiv-
ocal evidence  is  found  in  a  population  reduced  in  a  few  years
from  eight  to  fi.ve  and  a  half  millions.  Occurrences  of  this
kind  place  it  beyond  doubt  that  extensive  changes  in  the
character  of  the  industry  of  a  country,  even  though  they  be
all  in  the  direction  of  scientific  progress,  improved  processes,
and  ultimately  and  even  immediately  augmented  wealth,  may
nevertheless  effect  a  reduction  in  the  means  for  supporting
productive  labor,  and  may  for  a  time  act  disastrously  on  its
interests.

§  11,  I  have  now  stated  the  doctrine  of  the  Wages-fund  as
I  understand  it,  in  connection  with  the  general  problem  of  the
rate  of  wages ;  but  before  proceeding  to  trace  its  bearing  upon
the  relations  of  capital  and  labor,  and  the  various  practical,
questions  arising  therefrom,  it  will  be  convenient  to  pause
here  for  a  short  time  in  our  development  of  the  general  theo-
ry, in  order  to  consider  the  objections  which  have  been  Urged
against  the  doctrine  by  Mr.  Thornton — objections  which,  as  I
have  already  informed  the  reader,  have  been  powerful  enough
to  effect  the  conversion  of  Mr.  Mill.  Mr.  Thornton's  argu-
ment ranges  over  a  considerable  portion  of  his  volume,  but
the  gist  of  it  will  be  found  in  the  following  passage :


MB.  THORNTON'S  OBJECTIONS.  181

"  If  there  really  were  a  national  fund,  tlie  whole  of  wliicli  must  neces-
sarily be  applied  to  the  payment  of  wages,  that  fund  could  be  no  other
than  an  aggregate  of  smaller  similar  funds  possessed  by  the  several  indi-
viduals who  composed  the  employing  part  of  the  nation.  Does,  then,
any  individual  employer  possess  any  such  fund  ?  Is  there  any  specific
portion  of  any  individual's  capital  which  the  owner  must  necessarily  ex-
pend upon  labor  ?  Of  course  every  employer  possesses  a  certain  amount
of  money,  whether  his  own  or  borrowed,  out  of  which  all  his  expenses
must  be  met,  if  met  at  all.  With  so  much  of  this  amount  as  remains  af-
ter deduction  of  what  he  takes  for  family  and  personal  expenses,  he  car-
ries on  his  business — with  one  portion  of  that  balance  providing  or  keep-
ing in  repair  buildings  and  machinery,  with  a  second  portion  procuring
materials,  with  a  third  hiring  labor.  But  is  there  any  law  fixing  the
amount  of  his  domestic  expenditure,  and  thereby  fixing  likewise  the
balance  available  for  his  industrial  operations  ?  May  he  not  spend  more
or  less  on  his  family  and  himself,  according  to  his  fancy — in  the  one  case
having  more,  in  the  other  less,  left  for  the  conduct  of  his  business  ?  And
of  what  is  left,  does  he  or  can  he  determine  beforehand  how  much  shall
be  laid  out  on  buildings,  how  much  on  materials,  how  much  on  labor  ?
May  not  his  outlay  on  repairs  be  unexpectedly  increased  by  fire  or  other
accident  ?  will  not  his  outlay  on  materials  vary  with  their  dearness  or
cheapness,  or  with  the  varying  demand  for  the  finished  article  ?  and
must  not  the  amount  available  for  wages  vary  accordingly  ?  And  even
though  the  latter  amount  were  exactly  ascertained  beforehand,  even
though  he  did  know  to  a  farthing  how  much  he  would  be  able  to  spend
on  labor,  would  he  be  bound  so  to  spend  the  utmost  he  could  afibrd  to
spend  ?  If  he  could  get  as  much  labor  as  he  wanted  at  a  cheap  rate,
would  he  voluntarily  pay  as  much  for  it  as  he  would  be  compelled  to
pay  if  it  were  dearer  ?  It  soimds  like  mockery  or  childishness  to  ask
these  questions,  so  obvious  are  the  only  answers  that  can  possibly  be
given  to  them ;  yet  it  is  only  on  the  assumption  that  directly  opposite
answers  must  be  given  that  the  Wages-fund  can  for  one  moment  stand.
For  if  in  the  case  of  individual  employers  there  be  no  Wages-funds — no
definite  or  definable  portions  of  their  capitals  which,  and  neither  more
nor  less  than  which,  they  must  severally  apply  to  the  hiring  of  labor —
clearly  there  can  be  no  aggregate  of  such  funds,  clearly  there  can  be  no
national  Wages-fund.  And  be  it  observed,  fixity  or  definiteness  is  the
very  essence  of  the  supi^osecl  Wages-fund.  No  one  denies  that  some
amount  or  other  must  within  any  given  period  be  disbursed  in  the  form


182  THE  BATE  OF  WAGES.

of  wages.  The  only  question  is,  whether  that  amount  be  determinate
or  indeterminate.  If  indeterminate,  it  can  not  of  course  be  divided,  and
might  as  well  not  exist  for  any  power  it  possesses  of  performing  the  sole
function  of  a  Wages-fund,  that,  viz.,  of  yielding  a  quotient  that  would
indicate  the  average  rate  of  wages."*

Mr.  Thornton,  the  reader  will  perceive  from  this  passage,
does  not  deny  the  existence  of  a  Wages-fand :  be  admits  the
legitimacy  of  contemplating  in  the  aggregate  those  funds — the
wao^es  of  individual  workmen — of  which  we  know  the  exist-
ence  in  detail ;  but  he  contends  that  neither  the  particular  sums
in  detail,  nor  therefore  the  aggregate  which  they  compose,  are
"  determinate  " — an  expression  under  which  he  includes  at  once
their  "predetermination"  toward  the  destination  they  after-
ward receive,  and  their  "  limitation  "  within  their  actual  bounds.
It  must  at  once  be  conceded  that,  in  the  sense  in  which  (as  ap-
pears from  this  passage  as  well  as  from  the  whole  tenor  of  his
argument)  Mr.  Thornton  understands  the  "predetermination"
and  "limitation"  of  the  Wages-fund,  his  position  is  unassail-
able. Undoubtedly  "  there  is  no  specific  portion  of  any  indi-
vidual's capital  which  the  owner  must  necessarily  expend  upon
wages."  "There  is  no  law  fixing  the  amount"  of  any  man's
"  domestic  expenditure,  and  thereby  fixing  likewise  the  balance
available  for  industrial  operations."  ISTor  is  any  man  "bound
to  spend,"  in  the  payment  of  .labor,  "the  utmost  he  can  afford
to  spend."  I  should  have  confidently  asserted,  I  will  not  say
that  no  economist,  but  that  no  reasonable  being  had  ever  ad-
vanced the  theory  of  a  Wages-fund  in  this  sense,  if  it  had  not
been  that  Mr.  Mill  had  accepted  the  reasoning  I  have  quoted
as  a  refutation  of  that  theory.f As  it  is,  I  can  only  say  that

*  "Labor,  etc.,"  pp.  84,  85.

t  Mr.  Mill's  acceptance  of  Mr.  Thornton's  argument  on  this  point  is  the  more
perplexing  as  he  has  himself,  in  more  than  one  passage  of  his  work,  strenuously
disclaimed  that  notion  of  an  economic  law  against  which  Mr.  Thornton's  reason-
ing is  directed,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  asserted  the  view  for  which  I  contend  in


MB.  THORNTON'S  OBJECTIONS.  183

this  is  not  the  sense  in  which  I  have  myself  understood  the
doctrine  (and  I  first  learned  it  from  Mr.  Mill's  pages);  and  fur-
ther, I  must  add,  that  if  economic  doctrines  in  general  are  to  be
understood  in  the  sense  here  assio-ned  to  the  Wao;es-fund  doc-
trine — namely,  as  expressing  principles  which  compel  human
beings  to  the  adoption  of  certain  courses  of  conduct  in  despite
of  their  own  inclination  and  will,  there  is  not  a  single  one  with-
in the  range  of  economic  science  that  could  endure  ten  minutes'
criticism.  The  doctrine,  for  example,  that  the  supply  of  a
commodity  tends  to  conform  to  the  quantity  demanded  at  the
normal  price,  is  as  well  established  as  any  principle  of  Political
Economy.  How  is  it  proved  ?  By  showing  that,  if  the  supply
of  the  commodity  falls  short  of  this  quantity,  the  market  price
will  rise  above  the  normal  price,  profits  on  the  production  will
be  exceptionallj''  high,  and,  as  a  consequence,  a  larger  amount
of  capital  and  labor  will  be  "  determined  "  toward  the  produc-
tion; while  in  the  contrary  case  the  "determination"  of  capi-
tal and  labor  would  be  in  the  opposite  direction.  But  if  bv
"determination"  of  capital  is  to  be  understood  some  force
which  compels  the  capitalist  irrespective  of  his  own  washes  and
views  of  his  own  interest,  the  reasoning  is  manifestly  ground-
less. Mr.  Thornton  might  say  here,  quite  as  truly  as  in  his
argument  against  the  Wages-fund,  there  is  no  law,  physical  or
legal,  there  is  no  moral  principle,  which  compels  any  capitalist
to  employ  his  capital  in  a  branch  of  production  simply  because
profits  in  that  branch  are  rising.  Again,  take  the  law  of  rent  :
how  is  that  law  established?  By  some  such  reasoning  as  this,
namely,  by  showing  that  the  competition  of  farmers  for  land

the  text:  for  example,  in  the  following:  "Demand  and  supply  are  not  physical
agencies,  which  thrust  a  given  amount  of  wages  into  a  laborer's  hand  without  the
participation  of  his  own  will  and  actions.  The  market  rate  is  not  fixed  for  him
by  some  self-acting  instrument,  but  is  the  result  of  bargaining  between  human  be-
ings— of  what  Adam  Smith  calls  '  the  higgling  of  the  market.' "  (Book  v.,  chap,
X.,  §  5.)


184  THE  BATE  OF  WAGES.

will  "determine"  to  the  possession  of  landlords  all  that  profit
upon  land  which  is  in  excess  of  the  ordinary  profits  upon  in-
dustry;  while  the  competition  of  other  occupations  with  agri-
culture will  prevent  the  amount  so  determined  from  rising  be-
yond the  limits  of  the  exceptional  profit.  But  what  is  to  pre-
vent Mr.  Thornton  from  interposing  here  the  same  series  of
objections  he  has  urged  against  the  Wages-fund?  "Kent,"
he  might  exclaim,  "  determined  by  the  law  of  exceptional  prof-
it! Is  there  any  specific  portion  of  a  farmer's  capital  which
the  owner  must  necessarily  expend  upon  rent?  And  who  can
tell  beforehand  what  the  amount  of  his  jcxceptional  profit  will
be?  May  not  his  outlay  on  repairs  be  unexpectedly  increased
by  flood  or  other  accident?  Will  not  his  outlay  on  materials
vary  with  their  dearness  or  cheapness,  or  with  the  varying  de-
mand for  the  produce?  and  must  not  the  amount  available
for  rent  vary  accordingly?  And  even  though  the  amount  of
exceptional  profit  were  exactly  ascertained  beforehand,  even
though  the  farmer  did  know  to  a  farthing  how  much  he  would
be  able  to  pay  to  the  landlord,  while  reserving  average  profit
to  himself,  would  he  be  bound  so  to  spend  the  utmost  he  could
so  afford  to  spend?"  And  so  the  theory  of  rent  would  collapse,
and  Mr.  Thornton  might  enjoy  an  easy  triumph  over  Eicardo
and  all  who  have  since  followed  in  his  wake.  In  short,  it  is
evident  that,  if  this  style  of  reasoning  be  legitimate,  the  whole
structure  of  economic  doctrine  must  inevitably  go  down.

What  then  is  the  answer  to  Mr.  Thornton  ?  Why,  I  take
it,  this:  that  his  reasoning  from  beginning  to  end  proceeds
upon  a  radically  erroneous  conception  of  the  nature  of  an  eco-
nomic law  —  of  what  is  meant  by  "predetermination"  and
"limitation"  in  the  sphere  of  economic  action.  A  "law"  in
Political  Economy  does  not  mean  either  legal  coercion  or
physical  compulsion,  or  yet  moral  obligation  ;  nor  does  the
"determination  "  expressed  in  an  economic  law  mean  the  nec-
essary realization  of  certain  results  independently  of  the  human


MB.  THORNTON'S  OBJECTIONS.  185

will.  What  an  economic  law  asserts  is,  not  that  men  must  do
so  and  so  whether  they  like  it  or  not,  but  that  in  given  circum-
stances they  will  like  to  do  so  and  so ;  that  their  self-interest
or  other  feelings  will  lead  them  to  this  result.  The  predeter-
mination in  question  is  of  that  sort  which  leads  a  hungry  man
to  eat  his  dinner,  or  an  honest  man  to  pay  his  debts,  and  de-
pends for  its  fulfillment,  not  upon  external  compulsion  of  any
sort,  but  upon  the  influence  of  certain  inducements  on  the  will,
our  knowledge  of  which  enables  us  to  say  how  in  given  cir-
cumstances a  man  will  act.  It  is  in  this  sense  that,  speaking
for  myself,  I  understand  the  "predetermination"  of  a  certain
portion  of  the  wealth  of  a  country  to  the  payment  of  wages.
I  believe  that,  in  the  existing  state  of  the  national  wealth,  the
character  of  Englishmen  being  what  it  is,  a  certain  prospect  of
profit  will  "determine"  a  certain  proportion  of  this  wealth  to
productive  investment ;  that  the  amount  thus  "  determined "
will  increase  as  the  field  for  investment  is  extended,  and  that
it  will  not  increase  beyond  what  this  field  can  find  employ-
ment for  at  that  rate  of  profit  which  s'atisfies  English  commer-
cial expectation.  Further,  I  believe  that,  investment  thus  tak-
ing place,  the  form  which  it  shall  assume  will  be  "  determined  "
by  the  nature  of  the  national  industries — "determined,"  not
under  acts  of  Parliament,  or  in  virtue  of  any  physical  law,  but
through  the  influence  of  the  investor's  interests;  while  this,
the  form  of  the  investment,  will  again  "determine"  the  pro-
portion of  the  whole  capital  which  shall  be  paid  as  wages  to
laborers.  It  is  in  this  sense  I  say  that  I  understand  the  "pre-
determination" implied  in  the  Vf ages-fund  doctrine;  and
against  the  doctrine  so  understood  I  can  not  find  that  there  is
any  thing  very  formidable  in  Mr.  Thornton's  criticisms.  They
are  simply  beside  the  mark  —  at  all  events,  beside  my  mark.
"Capitalists  put  aside  a  portion  of  their  means  with  a  de-
termination that,  whatever  happens,  they  shall  be  spent  in
wages!" — The  doctrine,  as  I  understand  it,  makes  no  such


186  THE  BATE OF WAGES.

assumption;  nor  am  I,  in  holding  it,  bound  to  maintain  any
such  absurdity.  "Employers  are  anxious  to  buy  their  labor
as  cheap  as  they  can,  to  spend  as  little  as  possible  in  wages."
— No  doubt  they  are  ;  but  while  they  are  anxious  to  get  their
labor  cheap,  they  are  also  anxious  to  place  certain  amounts  of
their  wealth  at  profitable  investment;  and,  to  do  this  in  the
most  advantageous  way,  a  certain  proportion  of  the  sums  so
invested  must  go  to  the  payment  of  wages.

I  say  deliberately  "  inust "  go  to  the  payment  of  wages,  for
this  is  the  consequence  involved  in  the  doctrine  I  have  endeav-
ored to  expound.  Assuming  a  certain  field  for  investment,
and.  the  prospect  of  profit  in  this  such  as  to  attract  a  certain
aggregate  capital,  and  assuming  the  national  industries  to  be
of  a  certain  kind,  the  proportion  of  this  aggregate  capital  which
shall  be  invested,  in  wages  is  not  a  matter  within  the  discre-
tion of  capitalists,  always  supposing  they  desire  to  obtain  the
largest  practical  return  upon  their  outlay.  To  accomplish  this,
the  instruments  of  production,  labor,  fixed  capital,  and  raw
material  must  be  brought  together  in  certain  proportions — a
condition  which  requires,  as  I  have  shown — the  supply  of  la-
bor being  given — a  distribution  of  the  aggregate  capital  in  cer-
tain proportions  among  those  instruments.  Supposing,  now,
capitalists  to  succeed  in  forcing  down  the  rate  of  wages  below
the  point  at  which,  having  regard  to  the  number  of  the  labor-
ing population,  the  amount,  which  the  fulfillment  of  this  con-
dition would  assign  to  the  payment  of  wages,  was  absorbed —
either  the  capital  thus  withdrawn  from  the  Wages-fund  must
remain  uninvested  and  therefore  unproductive,  or  if  invested,
and  not  invested  in  wages,  it  would  take  the  form  of  fixed
capital  or  raw  material.  But  by  hypothesis  the  fixed  capital
and  raw  material  were  already  in  due  proportion  to  the  labor
force,  and  they  would  consequently  now  be  in  excess  of  it.
A  competition  among  capitalists  for  labor  would  consequently
ensue;  and  what  could  this  end  in  but  a  restoration  to  the


MB.  THORNTON'S  OBJECTIONS.  187

Wages-fund  of  the  amount  withdrawn  from  it?  Mr.  Thorn-
ton probably  would  tell  me  that  the  amount  saved  from  the
payment  of  wages  might,  and  probably  would,  be  turned  to
swell  the  private  expenditure  of  capitalists,  who,  taking  out
the  results  in  this  form,  would  simply  continue  to  receive
larger  profits  at  the  expense  of  their  workmen.  No  doubt
this  is  a  possible  contingency  in  particular  cases,  but,  the  char-
acter of  the  wealthy  classes  remaining  on  the  whole  what  it  is,
increased  accumulations  in  other  quarters  would  neutralize  ex-
ceptional extravagance  in  some ;  and  larger  profits  would  not
be  less  powerful  than  before  to  attract  increased  investment.
In  a  word,  my  argument  brings  me  back  to  the  position  from
which  I  started,  tliat,  the  aggregate  investment  being  deter-
mined by  certain  mental  and  physical  conditions,  and  the  na-
tional industries  being  such  as  they  are,  there  is  but  one  dis-
tribution of  the  capital  invested  which  is  consistent  with  the
greatest  advantage  to  the  investors.  That  distribution  in-
volves a  certain  proportion  spent  in  the  payment  of  wages,  and
it  is  to  this  result  that  capitalists,  if  true  to  their  own  interest,
must  conform  their  conduct.*

*  The  notion  that  any  portion  of  the  wealth  of  the  country  should  be  "  deter-
mined "  to  the  payment  of  wages  would  seem  also  to  shock  Mr.  Longe's  sense  of
economic  propriety  ;  which  is  strange,  seeing  that  his  own  doctrine  that  it  is  "the
demand  for  commodities  which  determines  the  quantity  of  wealth  spent  in  the
payment  of  wages  "  plainly  involves  this  consequence.  He  puts  the  case  of  a  cap-
italist who,  by  taking  advantage  of  the  necessities  of  his  workmen,  eflFects  a  reduc-
tion in  their  wages,  and  succeeds  in  withdrawing  so  much,  call  it  £1000,  from  the
Wages-fund ;  and  asks  how  is  the  sum,  thus  withdrawn,  to  be  restored  to  the
fund  ?  On  Mr.  Longe's  principles  the  answer  is  simple — "by  being  spent  on  com-
modities;" for  it  may  be  assumed  that  the  sum  so  withdrawn  will,  in  any  case,
not  be  hoarded.  "  But,"  urges  Mr.  Longe,  "  it  might  be  spent  on  foreign  wines,
or  on  a  trip  to  Switzerland;"  the  suggestion  of  course  being  that  in  this  case  the
expenditure  could  do  no  good  to  English  labor.  If  so,  tlien  we  seem  to  have
made  a  mistake  in  repealing  our  protective  laws ;  nor  were  protectionists,  after  all,
80  very  wrong  in  seeking  to  encourage  native  industry  by  compelling  expenditure
toward  domestic  productions. May  I  venture  to  remind  Mr.  Longe  that  expendi-


188  THE  SATE  OF WAGES.

So  far  as  to  one  leading  objection  urged  against  the  Wages-
fund  doctrine.  It  is  further  contended  that  the  doctrine  as-
sumes the  existence  of  a  limitation  to  the  amount  of  that  fund
for  which  there  is  no  warrant  in  facts.  As  Mr.  Thornton  puts
it,  "  may  not  the  capitalist  spend  more  or  less  on  his  family  and
himself  according  to  his  fancy — in  the  one  case  having  more,
in  the  other  less,  left  for  the  conduct  of  his  business?"  The
aspect  of  the  question  here  brought  into  view  involves  consid-
erations of  so  much  importance  that  it  will  be  best  discussed  in
a  separate  chapter.

ture  on  foreign  wines  and  in  Swiss  travel  must  and  can  only  be  paid  for  by  an  ex-
port of  British  productions,  and  that  it  therefore  creates  a  demand  for  such  pro-
ductions, though  more  circuitously,  quite  as  certainly  as  if  it  took  a  more  direct
form.  The  answer,  therefore,  to  the  case  put  by  Mr.  Longe  is  easy  on  his  own
principles  ;  and  I  am  disposed  to  flatter  myself  that  the  reader  who  has  gone  with
me  in  the  foregoing  discussion  will  not  have  much  difiSculty  in  replying  to  it  upon
mine.


CHAPTER  II.

DEMAND  FOR  COMMODITIES.— WAGES  AND  PRICES.

§  1.  I  MUST  here  depart  for  a  space  from  the  main  line  of
my  argument  in  order  to  work  out  a  side  issue  already  partial-
ly dealt  with,  over  which  I  think  it  must  be  confessed,  not-
withstanding some  considerable  discussion  already  bestowed
upon  it,  no  small  amount  of  obscurity  still  hangs,  I  mean  the
question  as  to  the  relation  existing  between  the  demand  for
commodities  and  the  interests  of  those  who  live  by  labor.  We
have  already  seen  that  this  relation  is  not  what  it  is  commonly
supposed  to  be :  the  demand  for  commodities  does  not  deter-
mine the  quantity  of  wealth  spent  in  the  wages  of  labor.  Still,
it  is  not  to  be  denied  that  the  agency  in  question  stands  in  in-
timate relation  with  the  wealth  thus  expended,  or,  as  I  call  it,
the  Wages-fund ;  and  my  purpose  now  is  to  attempt  some
more  precise  determination  of  the  character  and  the  extent  of
the  connection  than  has  yet  been  given  by  writers  on  economic
science.

With  a  view  to  this  it  will  be  convenient  to  distinguish  two
conditions  of  demand  for  commodities :  (1)  Where,  the  aggre-
gate expenditure  on  commodities  remaining  the  same,  a  change
takes  place  in  its  direction,  as,  for  example,  when  a  country
passes  from  a  state  of  peace  to  one  of  war,  or  when  any  con-
siderable change  occurs  in  the  tastes  or  habits  of  the  people
leading  to  a  diversion  of  expenditure  from  certain  classes  of
objects  to  others ;  and  (2)  where,  as  the  consequence  of  a  posi-
tive growth  of  purchasing  power  in  a  community,  the  aggre-
gate demand  for  commodities  undergoes  increase.


190  THE  DEMAND  FOB COMMODITIES.

§  2.  I.  That  a  change  in  the  mode  in  which  the  general  in-
come of  a  country  is  spent,  if  occurring  on  a  considerable  scale,
is  capable  of  affecting  the  condition  of  labor  in  different  branches
of  industry,  is  extremely  obvious ;  nor  can  there  be  much  dif-
ficulty as  to  the  manner  in  which  the  results  are  brought  about.
A  change  of  fashion,  for  example,  taking  place,  certain  com-
modities are  brought  into  increased  demand,  while  the  demand
for  others  declines.  The  productive  and  distributive  arrange-
ments of  the  country  having  been  made  with  a  view  to  a  dif-
ferent state  of  the  public  requirements,  the  supply  of  the  for-
mer articles  will  be  insufficient,  and  they  will  therefore  rise  in
price ;  while  the  supply  of  the  latter  will  be  in  excess,  and  they
will  fall.  But,  as  I  have  pointed  out,  the  price  of  the  product
is  the  fund  from  which  the  remuneration  of  capital  and  labor
— viewing  production  as  a  continuous  act — is  derived ;  and  this
fund  has  now  been  increased  in  certain  branches  of  industry
and  curtailed  in  others.  It  follows  that  capital  or  labor,  or
both,  will  receive  in  the  former  employments  more,  and  in  the
latter  less,  than  average  rewards;  and  this  state  of  remunera-
tion will  continue  until,  by  increasing  the  supply  of  the  one
sort  of  products  and  reducing  that  of  the  other,  prices  are  re-
stored to  their  former  level — a  consummation  which  will  only
be  accomplished  when  capital  and  labor  in  the  industries  affect-
ed have  been  re-adjusted  to  meet  the  altered  conditions  of  the
public  demand.  The  immediate  result  will  thus  be,  as  regards
such  industries,  a  change  in  relative  wages  or  profits,  or  in
both.  In  point  of  fact,  as  we  shall  hereafter  see,  the  effect  is
generally  divided  between  both  branches  of  remuneration,  and
for  the  present  I  shall  assume  that  this  is  the  case.  Where,
however,  competition  among  workmen  is  eflfeclive,  such  a  change
can  not  be  permanent:  it  will  only  last  until  the  labor  force  of
the  country  has  adapted  itself  to  the  altered  conditions  of  the
market.  So  soon  as  this  is  accomplished,  prices,  profits,  and
vva2;es  will  return  to  their  former  condition.


EFFECT  ON  RELATIVE  WAGES.  191

This  is  what  will  happen  where  competition  is  really  effect-
ive. Bat  we  have  seen  that  competition  in  the  article  of  la-
bor is  not  effective  throughout  the  entire  field  of  industry  in  a
country  like  this. Certain  industrial  circles  or  groups  exist,
the  workmen  composing  each  of  which,  while  competing  among
themselves,  are,  from  social  circumstances,  excluded  from  effect-
ive competition  with  the  workmen  of  different  groups;  with
this  result,  that  the  relative  value  of  the  products  of  such  non-
competing  groups  are  determined,  not  by  cost  of  production,
but  by  reciprocal  demand. Now,  where  this  is  the  case,  a
change  in  the  mode  of  expending  the  general  income  of  a
community ma}^,  under certain circumstances,  be attended
with  more  than  temporary  consequences. For,  supposing  the
change  in  expenditure  to  involve  a  transfer  of  demand  from
the  products  of  one  of  those  non-competing  industrial  groups
to  those  of  another,  the  result  in  the  first  instance  would  be  the
same  as  in  other  cases ;  namely,  an  advance  in  the  rates  of  re-
muneration for  laborers  and  capitalists  within  the  group  profit-
ing by  the  enlarged  demand,  accompanied  by  a  corresponding
fall  in  the  other  group. But  this  would  not  be  followed  in  the
present  instance  by  the  same  consequences  as  in  the  case  in
which  effective  competition  prevailed. Capital,  indeed,  would
still  move  freely  to  the  more  lucrative  occupations ;  but  labor
would  not  follow,  or  would  follow  in  inadequate  proportions;
and  the  equalization  of  profits  would  be  effected,  not  by  a  re-
duction of  prices,  but  by  an  advance  of  wages. To  restore  the
prices  of  the  commodities  affected  by  the  change  in  demand  to
their  former  relative  level,  it  would  be  necessary  to  adjust  the
suppl}'-  of  these  commodities  to  the  altered  conditions  of  de-
mand; and  to  do  this  it  would  be  necessary  to  distribute  the
labor  force  of  the  country  in  conformity  with  the  altered  re-
quirements. But  this  is  just  what,  under  the  circumstances
we  are  supposing,  it  is  not  possible  to  do. The  occurrence,
therefore,  would  issue  in  an  advance  at  once  in  the  price  of  the


192  THE  DEMAND  FOR COMMODITIES.

products  falling  under  the  enlarged  demand,  and  in  the  wages
of  the  workmen  engaged  in  their  production,  while  profils,
after  some  fluctuation,  would  return  to  their  former  state;
and,  on  the  other  hand,  there  would  be  an  equivalent  decline
in  prices  and  wages  in  the  branches  of  industry  from  which
the  demand  had  been  withdrawn,  and  these  results  would  be
definitive — that  is  to  say,  they  would  continue  until  social  prog-
ress  had  removed  the  barriers  which  interfered  with  industrial
competition,  or  until  the  altered  condition  of  the  workmen  in
the  different  industrial  groups  should  have  acted  on  the  growth
of  population  within  the  groups.  In  this  way,  then,  a  mere
change  in  the  direction  of  national  expenditure  may  issue  in
permanent  effects  in  the  relative  remuneration  of  laborers.

It  need  scarcely  be  remarked  that  in  occurrences  of  this  na-
ture, whether  the  results  are  temporary  or  permanent,  no  ad-
dition would  be  made  to  the  aggregate  Wages-fund,  nor  there-
fore to  the  well-being  of  the  laboring  population  as  a  whole.*
The  effects  would  be  limited  to  a  mere  transference  of  wealth
from  certain  groups  of  workmen  to  others,  so  that  the  gains
would  always  be  compensated  by  corresponding  losses.  The
former  might  indeed  be  sometimes  concentrated  and  the  latter
diffused,  and  the  gains  might  in  consequence  be  seen  and  the
losses  not  seen  ;  or  the  contrary  result  might  happen.  But,
from  the  nature  of  the  case,  there  could  be  no  clear  gain:  if
Peter  were  enriched,  there  would  always  be  some  Paul  at
whose  expense  it  was  done.f

*  The  tendency  indeed  is  the  other  way ;  since  a  portion  of  the  products  of  in-
dustry having,  in  consequence  of  the  change  in  the  puhlic  tastes  or  requirements,
been  deprived  of  their  power  of  satisfying  human  wants,  a  certain  amount  of  pro-
ductive effort  would  have  been  wasted,  and  consequently  the  aggregate  wealth
must  for  a  time  have  suffered  diminution.  The  loss,  however,  would  not  necessa-
rily be  shown  in  the  average  rates  of  wages  or  profits  (measured  in  money,  Avhich
I  suppose  constant  in  value),  but  would  be  realized  by  the  public  at  large,  includ-
ing capitalists  and  laborers,  in  their  capacity  of  consumers.

t  In  theoretical  strictness,  this  position  needs  qualification. It  would  only  be


IN  THE  INTERNATIONAL  SPHERE.  193

And  what  may  happen  to  a  particular  industrial  group  in
its  relation  to  other  industrial  groups  in  the  community  of
which  they  form  parts,  may  happen  equally,  and  through  the
action  of  precisely  the  same  causes,  to  an  entire  community  in
its  relation  to  other  communities  in  the  larger  society  of  com-
mercial nations.  For,  as  has  been  already  pointed  out,  inde-
pendent nations  occupy,  as  regards  the  circumstance  of  indus-
trial competition,  a  position  entirely  analogous  to  that  of  the
industrial  groups  which  we  have  been  contemjolating.  Labor
passes  from  country  to  country,  indeed,  with  even  greater  diffi-
culty than  from  the  less  to  the  more  highly  skilled  industries
within  the  same  country ;  and  the  consequence  is  that  changes
in  the  international  demand  for  commodities  are  even  more
likely  to  issue  in  permanent  effects  on  the  rates  of  wages
in  different  countries  than  similar  changes  in  the  domestic
demand  to  produce  permanent  consequences  in  the  internal
rates.  Thus  any  circumstance  which  should  turn  any  consid-
erable portion  of  the  general  purchasing  power  of  commercial
nations  from  English  toward  French  productions,  or  vice  versa,
would  have  the  effect  of  enhancing  in  France  and  depreciating
in  England,  or  vice  versa,  the  general  value  of  products. The


strictly  true,  if  the  Wages-fund  bore  always  the  same  proportion  to  the  capital
employed  in  production,  which  is  not  the  fact.  Supposing,  e.  g.,  expenditure
were  largelj^  directed  from  clothing  to  food,  and  that  in  consequence  capital  were
transfeiTed  from  manufactures  to  agriculture,  inasmuch  as  a  given  amount  of  cap-
ital employed  in  agriculture  will  in  general  contain  a  larger  element  of  Wages-
fund  than  the  same  amount  of  capital  employed  in  manufactures  (owing  to  the
laiger  use  of  fixed  capital  in  the  latter  case),  it  follows  that  a  substitution  of  a  de-
mand for  food  for  a  demand  for  clothes  would  in  this  ease  issue  in  an  increase  of
the  aggregate  Wages-fund ;  as  a  substitution  in  the  contrary  sense  would  have
the  opposite  effect.  A  change  of  this  kind,  however,  occurring  in  Great  Britain,
would  not  probably  be  attended  with  any  such  consequences,  because  it  is  not
nvobable  that  it  would  lead  to  any  transference  of  capital  to  agriculture.  The  ad-
ditional food  would  be  obtained  from  foreign  countries  through  an  extension  of
©ur  exports.

13


194  THE  DEMAND  FOB  COMMODITIES.

wealtli  of  one  country  would  be  increased,  that  of  the  otlier
diminished,  and  the  results  just  traced  would  be  realized  on
an  international  scale.  Here,  however,  as  in  the  former  case,
although  the  laboring  classes  of  an  entire  community  might
be  benefited,  yet,  taking  an  international  or  cosmopolitan
view,  there  would  be  no  clear  gain  for  the  interests  of  labor.
It  would  be  merely  so  much  withdrawn  from  industrial  well-
being  in  one  country  in  order  to  be  added  to  the  same  cause
in  another.

§  8.  II.  Such  changes  in  the  demand  for  commodities  are
in  the  nature  of  mere  diversions  of  purchasing  power,  where
the  aggregate  amount  remains  the  same.  But  the  aggregate
purchasing  power  of  a  community,  or  of  the  world,  may  ex-
perience increase,  and,  in  fact,  is  pretty  constantly  increasing;
and  we  have  now  to  consider  what  may  be  the  effect  on
the  Wages-fund  of  an  increased  demand  for  commodities  aris-
ing under  this  state  of  things.  Now  here  it  is  most  impor-
tant to  observe  that  the  increased  demand  for  commodities
is  a  mere  incident  in  the  general  conditions  which  the  as-
sumed case  supposes.  An  increase  in  the  aggregate  demand
for  commodities,  resting  on  a  larger  aggregate  of  purchas-
ing power — putting  aside  the  case  of  a  mere  inflation  of  cred-
it unsustained  by  any  basis  of  real  wealth  —  means  an  in-
creased production  of  wealth ;  and  implies,  therefore,  a  corre-
sponding increase  in  the  aggregate  supply  of  commodities.
Supply  and  Demand,  in  short,  considered  as  aggregates,' are,  as  I
have  already  more  than  once  observed,  the  reciprocals  of  each'
other,  and  in  effect  the  opposite  faces  of  the  same  facts.  An
article  is  produced  and  is  offered  in  the  market :  it  is  now  sup-
ply, but  the  possession  of  that  article  confers  upon  the  owner
a  purchasing  power,  and  that  power  being  exercised,  the  arti-
cle becomes  a  source  of  demand ;  nor  is  there  any  other  source
from  which  demand  can  spring. Demand,  as  an  aggregate.


GROWS  AS  WEALTH  INCREASES.  195

can  not  increase  without  supply,  nor  supply  without  demand.
This  is  fundamental,  the  direct  consequence  of  industry  carried
on  upon  the  principle  of  division  of  labor.  But,  this  being  so,
we  are  led  to  ask,  what  is  the  significance  of  the  question
which  has  been  proposed?  Suppose  the  Wages-fund  to  in-
crease under  the  circumstances  imagined  ;  and  suppose  further,
that,  in  every  instance,  the  increase  is  found  to  be  connected
with  a  demand  for  commodities — what  then  ?  Have  we  sound-
ed the  problem  when  we  attribute  the  result  to  the  demand  for
commodities?  Or  rather,  is  it  not  very  evident  that,  in  offer-
ing this  as  a  solution,  we  are  confounding  the  mechanism  by
which  certain  results  are  brought  about  with  the  motive  forces
which  work  through  this  mechanism.  The  upward  and  down-
ward movements  of  the  piston  of  a  steam-engine  are  invariably
preceded  by  certain  movements  of  the  valves  which  admit  the
steam  alternately  above  and  below  it.  As  the  action  of  the
valves  becomes  more  rapid,  the  movements  of  the  piston  be-
come more  rapid,  and  if  the  former  ceases,  the  engine  stops.
Yet  it  will  scarcely  be  maintained  that  the  motion  of  the
steam-engine  is  explained  by  referring  it  to  the  action  of  the
steam-valves.  This,  however,  is  precisely  the  sort  of  explana-
tion that  satisfies  those  persons  who  undertake  to  explain  an
increase  of  wealth  by  reference  to  the  demand  for  commodities.
They  observe,  for  example,  a  sudden  increase  of  prosperity  in
some  branch  of  industry,  and  they  ]3erceivc  that  this  has  been
preceded  by  an  increased  demand  for  the  products  of  that  in-
dustry. They  perceive  also,  that  the  increased  prosperity  of
tbis  industry  will  extend  itself  to  others  through  the  medium
of  a  demand  for  products;  and  from  these  again  to  others,  in  a
still  widening  circle.  Further  they  perceive,  or  at  least,  if  they
carry  their  study  of  the  problem  so  far,  they  may  perceive,
that,  when  the  supply  of  each,  commodity  has  been  brought  up
to  the  enlarged  demand  for  it,  the  returns  on  the  industry  de-
cline to  their  normal  level;  and  again,  that,  where  the  exten-


196  THE  DEMAND  FOB COMMODITIES.

sion  of  supply  is  carried  beyond  this  point,  and  demand  falls
short,  the  gains  are  converted  into  losses.  Trading  gains  are
thus  found  in  every  instance  to  be  associated  with  a  demand
for  commodities,  and  trading  losses  with  a  failure  of  demand ;
and  our  philosophers,  struck  with  the  coincidence,  exclaim
"fiupjjica!"  and  exultingly  produce  "the  demand  for  commodi-
ties" as  the  key  to  the  industrial  problem.  It  never  occurs  to
them  to  inquire  what  set  the  economic  valves  in  motion,  or  to
reflect  that  the  increased  demand  for  commodities  is  itself  a
phenomenon  requiring  explanation  ;  but  having  traced  the  in-
dustrial movements  up  to  the  valves  of  supply  and  demand,
they  consider  their  task  accomplished,  and  all  searching  after
remoter  causes  as  supererogatory,  if  not  profane.

The  real  nature  of  the  connection  between  the  demand  for
commodities  and  the  progress  of  industrial  well-being  is,  after,
all,  not  mysterious — at  least  for  any  one  who  bears  in  mind
the  elementary  truth  that  our  industrial  system  is  founded
upon  division  of  labor.  It  results  from  this,  that  every  in-
crease of  wealth  implies  an  increase  of  products  to  be  ex-
changed— an  increase,  therefore,  at  once  of  demand  and  of  sup-
ply ;  and  it  results  also  from  this — seeing  that  the  satisfaction
of  reciprocal  needs  is  the  end  and  purpose  of  the  sj'^stem — that
a  demand  for  a  producer's  or  a  dealer's  commodities  must  al-
ways be  a  condition  precedent  to  the  realization  of  his  gains.
This  is  the  real  nature  of  the  connection  ;  which,  though  it  im-
plies a  constant  correspondence  between  the  aggregate  income
of  a  country  and  the  aggregate  demand  for  commodities  with-
in that  country,  does  not  imply  that  the  latter  phenomenon  is
the  cause  of  the  former ;  nor  that  any  particular  branch  of  the
aggregate  income,  such  as  that  which  supports  the  laboring
population,  must  increase  pari  passu  with  the  increase  of  the
whole,  or  with  that  of  the  aggregate  demand  for  commodities.
If  this  were  so,  as  the  same  argument  would  apply  equally  to
all  other  branches  of  the  aggregate  income,  it  would  follow


GROWS  AS  WEALTH  INCREASES.  197

that  the  several  constituent  parts,  into  which  the  income  of  ev-
ery community  resolves  itself,  should  always  bear  the  same
proportion  to  each  other,  and  that,  for  example,  wages,  prof-
its, and  rent  should  always  preserve  the  same  relative  mag-
nitude. This  ought  to  be  a  sufScient  reductio  ad  absurdum  of
the  doctrine.  But  I  have  already  given  direct  proof  of  its
fallacy.

Of  the  well-being  which  results  from  a  growth  of  national
wealth,  there  is,  however,  one  element  which,  though  not  prop-
erly attributable  to  the  increased  demand  for  commodities,  yet
connects  itself  with  this  agency  in  a  somewhat  special  and  pe-
culiar way.  Adam  Smith,  in  a  well-known  passage,  has  re-
marked that  the  division  of  labor  is  limited  by  the  extent  of
the  market,  and  it  is  obvious  that,  not  merely  division  of  labor,
but  the  use  of  machinery,  is  limited  by  this  condition.  Pj'o-
duction,  universally  in  manuftictaring  industry,  and  to  some
extent  in  agriculture,  must  be  carried  on  upon  a  certain  scale
of  magnitude  before  labor  can  be  duly  organized,  and  the  most
efficient  appliances  be  brought  into  operation  ;  but  production
on  this  scale  will  not  be  profitable  unless  the  demand  for  the
commodity  at  the  normal  price  be  sufficiently  great  to  take  off
the  whole  supply.  Where,  therefore,  the  scale  of  production
has  not  already  attained  the  maximum  of  efficiency,  an  en-
larged demand  for  commodities,  by  permitting  its  extension,
may  lead  to  a  more  efficient  organization  of  productive  forces,
and  thus  accelerate  the  growth  of  wealth.  This  consequence,
indeed,  has  no  special  connection  with  the  remuneration  of  la-
borers, any  more  than  with  that  of  any  other  industrial  class.
But  it  at  least  favors,  as  every  thing  that  tends  to  increase
wealth  and  render  industry  more  productive  must  favor,  the
growth  of  the  Wages-fund.  Even  here,  however,  the  attribu-
tion of  the  result  to  the  demand  for  commodities  fails  to  set
the  phenomenon  in  its  true  light;  while  this  mode  of  stating
the  case  is  open  to  the  objection  of  countenancing  the  notion


198  TEE  DEMAND  FOB COMMODITIES.

that  the  demand  for  commodities  may  increase  independently
of  the  supply — a  notion,  as  I  have  said,  at  the  bottom  of  nearly
all  the  confusion  of  thought  that  prevails  on  this  subject.  The
flict  only  receives  its  adequate  explanation  when  it  is  referred,
neither  to  demand  nor  to  supply,  but  to  that  extension  of  the
field  for  the  interchange  of  products  incident  to  an  increasing
production  of  wealth,  which  leads  to  an  augmentation  at  once
of  demand  and  of  supply.

In  the  remarks  just  made  I  have  had  in  view  the  effect  of
an  increase  in  the  demand  for  commodities  upon  the  condition
of  the  laboring  population  as  a  whole.  I  have  not  considered
its  effect  upon  relative  wages.  But  it  is  evident  that  what
has  been  already  said  upon  this  aspect  of  the  case  in  connec-
tion with  diversions  of  demand  will  apply  here,  with  this  dif-
ference, that  the  changes  in  relative  wages  whicb  may  result
from  an  increase  in  aggregate  demand  will  in  general  be  in  the
nature  of  different  degrees  of  advance,  and  will  not  necessarily,
or  in  fact  generally,  issue  in  the  positive  depression  of  wages
in  any  department  of  trade.  According  as  the  new  demand
takes  one  direction  or  another,  certain  industries  will  gain
more  or  less  largely  than  others;  and  the  capital  of  the  coun-
try will  be  distributed  to  meet  this  state  of  things;  but  as,  in
the  case  we  are  now  supposing,  the  aggregate  capital  of  the
country  would  almost  certainly  increase  — whether  in  propor-
tion to  the  increase  in  the  aggregate  demand  for  commodities
or  not  would  depend  upon  the  general  conditions  affecting  in-
vestment— the  larger  application  of  it  to  particular  industries
would  not  necessarily  imply  any  withdrawal  of  it  from  others.
Suchchanges,  therefore,  in  relative  wages  as  might  occur  would
generally  be  in  the  nature  of  different  degrees  of  advance;  and
these  relative  results  would,  as  in  the  case  of  diversions  of  de-
mand, be  temporary  merely  or  permanent,  according  as  there
was  or  was  not  an  effective  competition  among  the  workmen
in  the  industries  concerned.


SUMMARY  OF  RESULTS.  199

§  4.  Summing  np  the  results  of  this  discussion,  we  may  lay
down  the  following  propositions :

I.  Where  the  influence  exerted  by  the  demand  for  com-
modities arises,  not  from  an  increase  in  its  aggregate  amount,
but  from  a  change  in  its  direction,  the  effect  is  limited  to  a  y
change  in  the  distribution  of  the  Wages-fund,  without  affect-
ing the  aggregate  amount  of  wealth  placed  at  the  disposal  of
labor.

II.  Such  changes  in  the  distribution  of  the  Wages-fund  are
attended  with  changes  in  the  relative  rates  of  remuneration  in
different  branches  of  industry,  leading  to  a  rise  in  some  and  a
foil  in  others ;  and  those  changes  may  or  may  not  be  perma-
nent, according  as  labor  is  free  or  not  to  move  between  the  oc-  ^
cupations  affected.  Where  competition  among  workmen  is
effective,  the  relative  rates  will  after  a  little  time  be  restored
to  their  former  level;  but,  where  competition  is  not  effective,
the  changes  which  take  place  become  definitive — that  is  to  say,
will  continue  so  long  as  social  circumstances  remain  the  same
and  the  altered  conditions  of  remuneration  in  the  several  in-
dustrial groups  do  not  operate  to  disturb  the  relation  of  popu-
lation to  capital  within  those  groups.

III.  The  influence  thus  exerted  by  changes  in  the  demand
for  commodities  may  be  operative  on  an  international  scale,
and  may  thus  affect  the  average  level  of  wages  throughout  an  u'
entire  community;  the  gain,  however,  to  the  country  profiting
by  the  movement  being  always  compensated  by  a  correspond-
ing loss  incurred  by  some  other  country  or  countries.

IV.  When  the  change  in  the  demand  for  commodities  is  in
the  nature  of  an  increase  in  its  aggregate  amount,  arising  from
a  growth  of  general  wealth,  the  increase  of  demand  is  here  an
accompaniment  of  conditions  which  are  favorable  to  the  growth
of  the  Wages-fund ;  but  its  connection  with  the  consequences
that  ensue  is  not  that  of  a  causal  kind :  it  is  merely  an  inci-
dent of  the  industrial  mechanism  by  which,  under  a  system  of


200  THE  DEMAND  FOE  COMMODITIES.

division  of  labor,  the  results  of  increased  production  are  real-
ized by  individuals  and  classes.

V.  Such  an  increase  in  the  aggregate  demand  foi'  commodi-
ties may,  however,  produce  changes  in  the  relative  remunera-
tion of  labor,  analogous  to  those  produced  by  changes  in  the
direction  of  demand — changes  which,  as  in  the  former  case,  will
be  temporary  or  permanent  according  as  the  competition  among
the  workmen  concerned  is  effective  or  not.  i

§  5.  The  point  of  view  which  we  have  now  reached  will  en-
able us,  I  think,  to  set  in  a  somewhat  clearer  light  than  has
hitherto  been  done  a  problem  of  some  intricacy — the  nature
of  the  relation  between  wages  and  prices.  The  doctrine  laid
down  upon  this  subject  in  the  best  treatises  of  Political  Econ-
omy is  contained  in  two  propositions  to  the  effect,  first,  that
general  wages  (understanding  by  this  general  real  wages,  the
real  remuneration  received  by  the  workmen)  and  general  prices
have  no  necessary  connection.  High  wages,  we  are  told,  do
not  make  high  prices,  any  more  than  high  prices  make  high
wages.  And,  secondl}^,  that  when  the  wages  of  any  class  of
workmen  are  exceptionally  high  or  low — that  is  to  say,  either
above  or  below  the  rate  prevailing  in  other  occupations,  allow-
ance being  made  for  the  special  circumstances  of  each  case
— then  they  do  affect  prices.  Apparently  it  is  not  considered
that  in  any  case  prices  may  affect  wages.

The  first  of  these  propositions  I  hold  to  be  indisputably
sound  and  quite  fundamental.  It  is  scarcely  possible  indeed
that  any  one  reflecting  on  the  elementary  conditions  of  human
well-being  should  hesitate  to  admit  its  truth.  For  to  suppose
that  the  real  wages  of  labor — the  food,  clothing,  lodging,  and
other  comforts  and  conveniences  which  go  to  form  the  remu-
neration of  industry — have  any  necessary  connection  with  the
general  range  of  prices,  is  to  suppose  that  the  well-being  of  the
mass  of  mankind  is  linked  to  the  abundance  or  scarcitv  of  the


INCOMPLETE  TREOBIES.  201

particular  substance  which  happens  to  form  the  material  of
money ;  nay,  if  the  position  taken  be  that  mone^^,  wages,  and
prices  must,  as  general  facts,  fluctuate  together,  it  is  to  suppose,
not  only  that  the  condition  of  the  immense  majority  of  human
beings  is  determined  by  this  purely  artificial  circumstance,  but
also  that  it  is  fixed  and  unchangeable ;  since  there  could  man-
ifestly be  no  improvement  in  the  laborer's  condition  if  every
augmentation  of  the  money  paid  him  was  attended  with  a  cor-
responding diminution  of  its  purchasing  power.  The  first  of
the  propositions  laid  down,  therefore,  must  be  taken  as  incon^
trovertible ;  and  yet  perhaps  there  are  few  statements  in  eco-
nomic science  that  are  more  apt  to  strike  an  outsider  as  par-
adoxical. It  would,  on  the  contrary,  be  held  by  those  who
only  look  at  the  phenomena  from  the  practical  stand-point
that  wages  and  prices  are,  as  a  general  rule,  strictly  connected ;
that  high  wages  make  high  prices,  and  high  prices  high  wages ;
a  view  in  support  of  which  they  would  confidently  appeal  to
experience,  and  might  easily  adduce  facts  which,  at  all  events,
the  current  theory,  as  it  stands,  wholly  fails  to  explain.  In
short,  there  is  here  a  conflict  between  the  conclusions  of  theory
and  the  generalizations  of  practical  observers.  Now  where  this
happens,  we  may  pretty  confidently  assume,  even  though,  as
in  the  case  we  are  considering,  the  popular  inductions  can  be
shown  to  be  erroneous  and  even  absurd,  that  the  theory  also
is  in  fliult.  It  will  in  general  at  best  be  incomplete;  and  I
think  it  will  not  be  difficult  to  show  that  this  is  so  in  the  pres-
ent instance.

The  economic  doctrine  as  to  the  relation  between  wages  and
prices,  as  commonly  set  forth,  seems  to  be  defective  in  two
points.  First,  it  fails  to  recognize,  or  at  all  events  to  take  due
account  of  the  fact,  that  changes  in  general  wages  or  prices
never  take  place  per  saltum;  that  the  general  result  is  always
reached  by  a  succession  of  partial  movements,  usually  extend-
ing over  a  considerable  period  of  time. And,  secondly,  the


202  THE  DEMAND  FOB COMMODITIES.

recognition  given  to  the  connection  between  prices  and  wages
is  quite  inadequate.  According  to  the  current  doctrine,  prices
may  be  effected  by  wages,  where  wages  in  particular  trades
are  exceptionally  high  or  low:  this  is  the  sole  relation  ac-
knowledged to  subsist  between  the  phenomena;  and  the  lan-
guage suggests  that  the  connection  in  this  case  is  abnormal.
Now,  in  the  first  place,  it  is  not  true  that,  where  wages  and
prices  vary  together,  wages  are  always  the  cause  and  prices
the  effect.  In  point  of  fact,  the  rise  or  fall  of  price  more  fre-
quently precedes  than  follows  that  of  wages.  The  most  usual
order  of  yccurrence  would  probably  be — a  rise  or  fall  of  price;
then  a  movement  of  capital  toward  or  from  the  trade ;  and
lastly  an  advance  or  fall  of  wages.*  Instead  of  prices  rising,
in  order  to  allow  capital  the  current  profit  on  a  production  in
which  loages  have  already  risen  (which  is  the  usual  way  of  put-
ting, the  case),f  the  more  common  event  is — wages  for  a  time
quiescent,  until  the  exceptionally  high  profits  of  capitalists,  due
to  a  previous  rise  of  price  ^  attract  new  capital  to  the  trade ;  then
competition  for  labor,  issuing  in  an  advance  of  wages  and  a

*  Nearly  such  lias  been  the  order  of  proceedings  in  the  recent  movements  in
the  iron  and  coal  trades.  "It  is  clearly  shown,"  says  the  Select  Committee  on
Coal  (p.  xi.  of  tlieir  Report)  "that  the  real  order  of  events  has  been  the  rise  in
the  price  of  iron,  the  rise  in  the  price  of  coal,  and  the  rise  in  the  rate  of  wages."
I  say  "  nearly  such,"  because  in  this  case  the  movement  of  capital  toward  the  af-
fected trades  did  not  precede  the  advance  of  wages ;  the  two  latter  stages  of  the
process  having  been  accelerated,  and  made  to  synchronize,  by  the  action  of  strikes.

t  For  example,  Professor  Fawcett  writes:  "It  frequently  happens  that  the
wages  of  the  laborers  employed  in  the  manufacture  of  a  particular  commodity
advance  as  the  demand  for  the  commodity  increases.  If  this  occurs,  these  par-
ticular manufactured  goods  will  rise  in  price,  in  order  that  the  employer  may  be
compensated  for  the  higher  wages  he  is  now  obliged  to  pay"  ("Manual  of  Po-
litical Economy,"  p.  290).  That  is  to  say,  the  increased  demand  for  the  com-
modity will  cause  an  advance  in  the  wages  of  the  laborers  who  produce  it  before
producing  any  effect  upon  its  price,  I  confess  that  appears  to  me  to  be  a  scarce-
ly possible  occurrence :  at  least,  I  qfin  not  but  regard  it  as  an  inversion  of  the
nsual  order  of  events.


INCOMPLETE  THEOBIES.  20g

fall  of  profits  to  the  current  level.  Nor  is  the  close  corre-
spondence and  mutual  interaction  of  the  phenomena  in  any
sense  abnormal  or  exceptional :  it  may,  on  the  contrary,  be
said  to  be  the  rule ;  while  the  case  in  which  they  diverge  or
move  independently  of  each  other  is  the  exception.  The  act-
ual state  of  this  portion  of  economic  theory,  therefore,  however
irrefragable  so  far  as  it  goes,  is  plainly  inadequate ;  failing  as
it  does  to  elucidate  many  familiar  phenomena  of  wages  and
prices;  and  the  purpose  of  the  remaining  portion  of  this  chap-
ter will  be  to  supplement,  as  far  as  seems  needful,  existing  de-
ficiencies in  this  respect.

§  6.  And  here  T  must  premise  by  observing  that  the  relation
which  it  is  proposed  to  examine  is  that  between  prices  and
wages  measured  in  money^  not  that  between  prices  and  real
wages;  a  remark  which  needs  to  be  supplemented  by  an-
other, viz.,  that  it  is  not  to  be  assumed  on  this  account,  that
the  real  interest  of  the  laborer  is  not  involved  in  the  discus-
sion. A  parallel  movement  between  wages  and  prices  is  im-
material where  it  is  general,  where  all  wages  and  all  prices  are
affected  at  the  same  time  and  in  the  same  degree.  But,  as
I  have  already  observed,  this  is  what  never  happens.  The
changes  which  occur  in  prices  and  wages  are  always  confined,
for  a  period  longer  or  shorter,  according  to  circumstances,  to
particular  branches  of  trade;  and  where  this  is  so,  a  change
in  money  wages  will  generally*  involve  a  change,  though  not
necessarily  a  proportional  change,  in  real  wages  too;  since,
owing  to  the  circumstance  that  the  movement  is  not  general,
it  will  place  the  recipients  in  a  better  or  a  worse  position  (as
the  case  may  be)  in  reference  to  all  commodities  of  which  the
prices  remain  at  their  former  level. Where  in  one  or  more

*  Not  necessarily  always — e.g.,  if  the  things  which  did  not  rise  or  fall  were
commodities  only  consumed  by  the  rich,  the  laborer  would  be  none  the  better  or
worse  for  the  change.


204  THE  DEMAND  FOB COMMODITIES.

trades  wages  and  prices  advance  or  fall  equally,  the  workmen
in  the  ti'ades  thus  affected  will  neither  gain  nor  lose  so  far  as
they  consume  their  own  productions;  but  they  will  gain  or
lose  to  the  full  extent  of  the  advance  or  fall  in  their  wages  so
far  as  they  consume  the  productions  of  other  trades.  So  much
being  premised,  I  proceed  now  to  the  consideration  of  our
problem.

It  has  been  already  shown  that  a  change  in  the  demand  for
commodities,  proceeding  from  a  diversion  of  expenditure  from
its  ordinary  course,  may  produce  a  change  in  relative  wages,
raising  the  rate  in  some  branches  of  industry  and  lowering  it  in
others;  and,  further,  that  occurring  on  an  international  scale,
the  same  circumstance  may  affect  the  rate  of  wages  throughout
an  entire  communit}^  Now  in  all  such  cases — and  they  com-
prise a  large  proportion  of  all  fluctuations  in  wages — the  result,
if  not  brought  about  through  an  action  on  prices,  at  least  coin-
cides with  an  action  on  prices:  the  two  phenomena  move  al-
ways in  the  same  direction,  and  generally  in  parallel  lines.
The  reasons  for  this  have  been  already  partially  set  forth,  and
will  be  presently  more  fully  stated.  But,  again,  not  in  such
cases  only,  but,  with  a  single  important  exception  to  be  present-
ly noticed,  in  all  considerable  movemehts  of  prices  and  wages,
if  not  a  strict  parallelism,  at  least  a  general  correspondence  be-
tween the  phenomena  of  prices  and  wages  will  be  found  to  ob-
tain. An  advance  or  fall  of  prices  in  any  branch  of  production,
if  sustained  for  any  considerable  time,  will,  pretty  certainly,  be
followed  by  an  advance  or  fall  of  wages  in  the  same  industries;
as  an  advance  or  fall  of  wages  will  with  equal  certaintj'-  be  fol-
lowed by  an  advance  or  fall  of  prices.  In  order  to  exhibit  the
grounds  of  this  statement,  it  will  be  desirable  to  consider  the
several  sets  of  conditions  (irrespective  of  that  already  referred
to  which  consists  in  a  change  in  the  demand  for  commodities)
under  which  important  alterations  in  the  rate  of  wages  may
take  place. In  what  I  am  about  to  say  I  shall  confine  my  at-


COBBESPONDINa  MOVEMENTS.  205

tention  chiefly  to  the  case  of  an  advance  of  wages ;  but  it  will
be  obvious  that  precisely  analogous  considerations  apply  to
that  of  a  fall,

§  7.  We  may  take  then,  first,  the  case  of  a  new  country,  in
which  the  rate  of  profit  is  still  considerably  above  the  practical
minimum;  in  which,  consequent)}^,  wages  may  rise  at  the  ex-
pense of  profits,  and  therefore  without  any  increase  in  the  pro
ductiveness  of  industry  ;  and  we  will  suppose  that  the  advance
is  occasioned  by  a  growth  of  capital  more  rapid  than  that  of
population.  .  The  advance  of  wages  which  would  occur  under
such  circumstances  would  not  be  a  mere  relative  movement—
an  advance  in  some  industries  balanced  by  an  equivalent  fall
in  others,  such  as  occurs  under  the  action  of  a  demand  for
commodities,  but  an  advance  unaccompanied  by  any  fall,  and
implying  therefore  a  rise  of  the  average  rate.  Even  here,  how-
ever, though  the  movement  might  be  ultimately  general,  it
would  still  proceed  by  partial  and  limited  steps.  The  new
capital  would  not  be  distributed  indifferently  over  all  industries,
but  would  be  determined  toward  the  particular  industries  in
which  at  the  moment  there  M'as  the  best  prospect  of  an  en-
larged sale  for  products;  and  it  would  be  in  those  industries
that  wages  would  first  rise.  But  these  would  be  the  industries
in  which  the  products  were  selling  above  the  normal  rates.  In
other  words,  high  wages,  if  not  produced  by  high  prices,  would
at  least  attend  on  high  prices.  And  this  coincidence  would
not  be  confined  to  the  first  steps,  but  would  be  maintained
throughout  the  whole  course  of  the  ascending  movement;
which  would  be  realized  in  the  several  industries  in  the  order
in  which  the  prices  of  their  products  ranged  above  the  normal
level.  It  is  true,  indeed,  the  advance  in  wages  and  prices
would  not  necessarily  be  a  proportional  advance.  Wages
might  advance  more  than  prices,  or  prices  more  than  wages.
And  it  is  also  true  that  the  correspondence,  such  as  it  was,


206  WAGES  AND  PRICES.

might  not  be  of  long  continuance;  since  the  increased  produc*
tion  would  sooner  or  later  bring  down  the  abnormally  raised
prices,  while  (profits  not  being  at  the  minimum)  the  advance'
in  wages  might  be  maintained.  But,  conceding  all  this,  the
correspondence  would  still  be  generally  maintained  at  all  events
while  the  movement  was  in  progress ;  while  it  is  further  to  be
considered  that,  as  the  case  is  that  of  a  normal  growth  of  capi-
tal, unaccelerated  by  any  important  improvements  in  produc-
tion, it  is  probable  that  population,  under  the  stimulus  of  its
bettered  condition,  would  speedily  overtake  the  increase  of
capital,  in  which  event  wages  would  subside  to  their  former
level ;  and,  in  subsiding,  would  again  follow  the  course  indi-
cated by  prices,  falling  first  in  those  industries  in  which  prices
were  lowest.  On  the  whole,  then,  in  this  case,  though  I  do  not
pretend  to  say  that  the  parallelism  would  be  exact,  and  though
it  is  possible  the  ultimate  result  might  be  a  definitive  diver-
gence of  the  two  phenomena ;  still,  speaking  broadly,  we  may
say  that  a  general  correspondence  between  prices  and  wages
would  be  maintained,  a  correspondence  quite  sufficient  to  ac-
count for  the  popular  impression.

§  8.  Let  us  now  consider  another  case :  an  advance  in  wages
arising  under  a  growth  of  wealth  due  either  to  improved  in-
dustrial processes,  or  to  an  extension  of  foreign  trade.  The
latter  cause,  as  I  have  already  pointed  out,  would  operate  al-
ways through  a  demand  for  commodities,  and  the  advance  of
wages  would  therefore  in  this  case  be  always  preceded  or  at-
tended b}^  an  advance  of  prices — not  indeed,  it  must  always
be  remembered,  a  general  advance  of  prices,  but  an  advance
in  the  particular  industries  affected  by  the  extension  of  for-
eign trade.  But,  where  the  growth  of  capital  proceeded  from
improved  industrial  processes,  the  course  of  things  would  be
somewhat  different.  This  is  the  case  which  offers  the  most
striking  exception to the  general correspondence between


ADVANCE  IN  PRICES.  207

wages  and  prices;  for  here,  while  wages  would  rise,  prices  in
the  industries  profiting  by  the  improved  processes  would  fall.
Nevertheless,  though  the  rule  would  fail  in  the  instance  of
those  industries,  it  would  receive  abundant  illustration  from
the  accompanying  phenomena.  For  one  result  of  the  cheap-
ness effected  in  certain  products  would  be  to  leave  a  larger
amount  of  purchasing  power  available  for  expenditure  in  other
directions.  Hence  would  arise  an  increased  demand  for  the
commodities  of  other  industries,  which  would  be  followed  by
an  advance  in  their  prices,  by  a  larger  application  of  capital  to
their  production,  and  finally  by  a  rise  in  the  wages  of  the  pro-
ducers. The  advance  in  prices  would  not  indeed  in  this  case
(assuming  the  value  of  money  to  remain  constant)  be  perma-
nently maintained,  at  least  where  the  competition  among  work-
men was  effective ;  but  no  more — profits  being  at  the  practical
minimum — would  the  advance  in  money  wages ;  and  the  im-
provement in  the  real  wages  of  laborers,  so  far  as  it  was  per-
nanently  realized,  would  be  only  in  proportion  to  the  cheap-
ening of  products.  On  the  other  hand,  where  circumstances
had  given  a  virtual  monopoly  to  any  particular  class  of  work-
men, money  wages  and  prices  alike,  as  I  have  already  shown,
would  remain  permanently  above  the  normal  level;  and  such
workmen  would  be  enriched  by  a  double  process — they  would
receive  larger  money  returns  for  their  own  labor,  and  would
obtain  the  products  of  other  industries  at  a  reduced  price.  In
this  case  also,  then,  though  in  certain  branches  of  production
there  would  be  a  marked  divergence  between  wages  and  prices,
in  the  great  majority  of  industries  the  two  phenomena  would
fluctuate  together.

§  9.  One  case  still  remains  to  be  considered,  and  it  deserves
our  attention  the  more,  as  the  influence  which  it  exhibits  is
one  now  in  constant  operation — I  mean  the  effects  produced
on  wages  and  prices  by  an  increased  supply  of  the  precious


208  WAGES  AND  PRICES.

metals,  and  a  consequent  depreciation  of  money.  As  the  case
is  ordinarily  represented,  a  depreciation  of  money  takes  effect
in  a  uniform  and  simultaneous  advance  of  all  wages  and  prices ;
a  state  of  things  which  would  leave  the  real  well-being  of  the
several  classes  of  society  substantially  unaffected ;  each  person
receiving  a  larger  sum  of  mone}'',  and  paying  away  a  propor-
tionally larger  sum,  in  every  transaction.  But  such  a  state-
ment, though  it  expresses  truly  enough  the  final  result  of  an
increase  of  money,  after  the  disturbances  it  creates  have  found
their  due  correction — a  result  which  it  may  take  perhaps  half
a  century  to  accomplish — yet,  as  an  exposition  of  the  actual
phenomena  which  it  purports  to  describe,  must  be  pronounced
to  be  absolutely  erroneous.  The  supposition  that  wages  and
prices  advanced  par^  j;as5ii  over  the  whole  area  of  productive
industry  is  no  more  true  where  an  increase  of  money  is  con-
cerned than  in  any  other  case.  The  new  money  can  only  pi-o-
duce  its  effects  by  being  made  the  instrument  of  demand  ;  and
the  demand  is  not  distributed  indifferently  over  commodities
in  general,  but  is  directed  toward  particular  classes  of  commod-
ities according  to  the  needs  and  tastes  of  its  possessors.  What
happens,  therefore,  in  this  case  is  what  happens  in  all  others.
Certain  commodities  rise  in  price  first;  these  are  followed  by
others,  and  these  again  by  others,  the  interval  between  the  sev-
eral steps  being  often  of  considerable  duration ;  and  the  ad-
vance in  prices  is  followed  by  an  advance  of  wages.  What
chiefly  distinguishes  this  case  from  those  previously  adverted
to  is,  first,  that  the  movement  ultimately  extends  over  the  whole
area  of  industry,  embracing  all  occupations;  and,  secondly,  that,
though  the  prices  of  some  commodities  may  temporarily  drop
from  overproduction,  and  with  them  the  wages  of  the  producers,
the  normal  level  of  both  wages  and  prices  is  permanently  raised.*

*  I  say  the  "normal,"  not  the  actual,  level;  for  prices  might  be  actually  lower
than  formerly,  yet  if  production  had  been  cheapened  by  improved  processes  in  a
still  greater  degree,  the  lower  actual  price  would  indicate  a  higher  normal  price.


CONNECTING  PBINCIPLES.  209

The  result  of  our  examination,  then,  has  been  to  show  a
very  intimate  relation  subsisting  between  wages  and  prices.
The  movements  indeed  are  not  always  in  the  nature  of  strictly
parallel  movements ;  but  they  are  always  in  the  same  direc-
tion, and  are  manifestly  under  the  attraction  of  some  common
influence.  Nor  can  there  be  much  difficulty  in  determining
what  that  influence  is.  As  I  have  already  frequently  remark-
ed, the  real  source  of  the  remuneration  of  producers,  looking
at  production  as  a  continuous  act,  is  the  value  of  their  prod-
ucts. Money  wages  and  profits,  therefore,  as  an  aggregate,
must  vary  in  each  branch  of  trade  with  the  sum  representing
the  aggregate  products  proceeding  from  the  industry  of  the
producers  in  that  trade;  or  (assuming  the  efficiency  of  indus-
try in  the  trade  to  remain  constant)*  with  the  prices  of  the
specific  commodities  which  constitute  those  products.  If
wages,  therefore,  do  not  rise  or  fall  strictly  in  proportion  to
the  money  value  of  the  aggregate  products,  or  (in  the  absence
of  changes  in  productive  power)  to  the  prices  of  the  specific
commodities,  it  can  only  be  because  a  larger  share  of  the  re-
sult has  fallen  to  profits,  whether  in  the  form  of  loss  or  gain.
But  profits  will  not  remain  permanently  in  any  branch  of
trade  above  or  below  the  normal  level ;  and  the  competition
of  capitalists  will  result  either  in  lowering  prices  or  raising
wages,  or,  mutatis  mutandis,  in  raising  prices  or  lowering  wages.
In  any  case,  wages  and  prices  will  gravitate  toward  each  other.
Where,  indeed,  prices  have  been  reduced  through  improve-
ments in  production,  the  result  will  follow,  not  the  variations
in  the  price  of  the  specific  commodity,  but  those  in  the  money

*  The  reader  will  note  the  reason  for  this  qualification.  The  price  of  the  com-
modity may  rise  or  fall ;  but,  if  it  only  rises  or  falls  in  proportion  to  the  cost  of
production,  the  money  value  of  the  product  proceeding  from  a  given  exertion  of
industry  will  remain  the  same.  It  is  only  on  the  supposition  that  the  productive-
uess  of  industry  remains  constant,  that  the  price  of  the  specific  commodity  will
YSxy  with  the  money  value  of  the  product.


aiO  WAGES  AND  PRICES.

value  of  the  aggregate  product.  This  latter  will  be  larger  in
proportion  as  industry  is  more  productive ;  but  the  specific
price  falling  with  the  cost,  the  money  returns  divisible  among
the  producers  will  be  the  same  as  before:*  and  the  ultimate
gain  for  them  will  be  realized,  not  in  an  increase  of  either
wages  or  profits  (measured  in  money),  but  in  the  lowered  price
of  the  article  they  produce.  There  is  thus  a  real  and  funda-
mental connection  between  money  wages  and  prices.  Yet  I
conceive  it  would  be  incorrect  to  describe  either  phenomenon
as  the  cause  or  the  effect  of  the  other  :f  they  are  rather  co-or-
dinate results  of  a  common  cause — that  cause  being  the  in-
fluence, whatever  it  may  happen  to  be,  which  determines  the
products  of  a  particular  industry  to  exchange  for  those  of
others  on  more  or  less  favorable  terms  than  had  previously
obtained.

§  10.  One  point  in  connection  with  the  problem  we  are  con-
sidering remains  still  to  be  cleared  up.  It  has  been  strongly
asserted  that  there  is  absolutely  no  necessary  connection  be-
tween the  high  or  low  range  of  general  prices  and  the  real
well-being  of  workmen  ;  that  high  general  wages  do  not  make


*  I  assume  for  convenience  that  the  demand  for  the  article  would  increase  in
proportion  to  the  fall  in  the  price.  There  is,  of  course,  no  necessity  that  this
should  happen  ;  but  on  any  other  supposition,  with  regard  to  the  effect  of  the  fell
of  price  upon  demand,  the  argument,  though  a  little  more  complicated,  would  be
equally  valid.

t  In  the  cases  which  I  have  examined,  the  advance  or  fell  in  price  would  almost
always  precede  the  advance  or  fall  in  wages ;  but  it  is  quite  possible  that  the
change  in  wages  should  occur  first,  as  happens,  for  example,  when  laborers  by  a
strike  compel  an  advance  in  wages,  for  which  capitalists  are  led  afterward  to  in-
demnify themselves  by  putting  an  increased  price  upon  their  commodity — an  ex-
pedient which,  it  must  be  carefully  borne  in  mind,  is  only  possible  when  the  cir-
cumstances of  the  trade  or  the  conditions  of  production  are  such  as  would  in  any
case,  after  a  time,  lead  to  the  same  result,  and  probably  by  the  more  usual  process
in  which  the  rise  in  prices  precedes  the  rise  in  wages.


MONETAE Y  PARADOX.  211

high  general  prices,  nor  high  general  prices  high  general
wages  (understanding  wages  here  to  mean  the  real  remunera-
tion of  the  laborer) ;  and  yet  it  has  appeared  from  our  investi-
gation that  money  wages  stand  in  intimate  relation  to  prices,
to  a  very  great  extent  fluctuating  with  them ;  while  it  has
been  also  pointed  out  that  changes  in  money  wages  are  scarce-
ly ever  merely  nominal,  but  almost  always  entail  a  real  im-
provement or  deterioration  of  the  workman's  condition.  These
two  positions,  it  is  possible,  may  seem  contradictory  to  some
people;  and  it  will  therefore  be  desirable  to  look  a  little  more
closely  than  we  have  yet  done  into  the  reciprocal  action  of  the
several  phenomena.  For  this  purpose  I  will  consider  briefly
the  case  in  which  the  supposed  discrepancy  assumes  its  most
prominent  shape — that,  namely,  in  which  a  rise  of  wages  and
prices  results  from  an  increase  of  money.

To  put  the  supposed  contradiction  in  its  strongest  form —
what  results  in  wages  and  prices  as  the  final  outcome,  from
an  increase  of  money,  is  a  regime  of  higher  nominal  values  in
which  all  wages  and  all  prices  have  risen  in  an  equal  degree;
in  which,  therefore,  it  is  evident,  no  one's  real  position,  as  re-
gards command  over  the  necessaries  and  comforts  of  life,  is
substantially  altered :  and  yet,  in  each  step  toward  the  higher
nominal  level,  the  particular  advance  will  have  brought  to  the
workmen  whose  wages  are  affected  a  distinct  gain  in  real  well-
being.  The  final  outcome  of  a  process,  every  step  of  which  is
productive  of  positive  effects,  will  thus  be  purely  negative.
The  thing  to  be  shown  is,  the  process  by  which  these  several
partial  but  positive  movements  issue  in  this  general  negative
result ;  and  for  this  a  simple  illustration  will  sufiice.

As  I  have  already  remarked,  the  advance  in  wages  and
prices  under  an  increase  of  money  will  follow  the  direction
of  the  demand  for  commodities.  Now  let  us  suppose  the  com-
modity first  to  feel  the  effect  of  the  increased  money  demand
to  be  shoes  •,  shoes  will  then  rise  in  price,  and  in  due  time  the


21 J?  WAGES  AND  PBTCES.

money  wages  of  journeymen  shoe-makcis.  But  it  is  evident
that  this  will  be  for  the  shoe-makers  an  advance  of  real  wa^es;
since,  while  receiving  larger  money  wages  than  before,  the  only
article  of  their  consumption  of  which  the  price  will  have  pro-
portionally risen  will  be  shoes,  Next,  we  may  suppose  the
enlarged  demand  to  reach  clothes,  leading  to  a  rise  in  the
money  wages  of  journeymen  tailors;  but  this,  again,  will  be
for  the  tailors  a  rise  of  real  wages;  for  the  case  will  stand
thus :  shoes  have  already  risen ;  and  the  only  prices  aifected
as  the  condition  of  the  advance  in  their  wages  will  be  the  price
of  clothes:  on  all  commodities,  therefore,  except  clothes,  the
tailors  will  gain  in  full  proportion  to  the  rise  in  their  money
wages.  It  is  plain  that  the  same  considerations  will  apply  to
every  step  in  the  ascending  process,  until  the  entire  cycle  of
the  industries  is  completed ;  at  which  point  shoe-makers,  tai-
lors, and  producers  of  all  kinds  will  find  themselves  in  posses-
sion of  incomes  increased  exactly  in  proportion  as  prices  have
risen — that  is  to  say  (excluding  the  gains  and  losses  which  may
have  been  realized  during  the  period  of  transition),  neither  bet-
ter nor  worse  off"  than  at  starting.  The  solution  of  the  enigma
— if  enigma  it  is  to  be  considered — is  of  course  to  be  found  in
the  circumstance  that  the  gain  made  by  each  class  of  workmen
is  in  every  instance  obtained  at  the  cost  of  other  workmen,
those  namely  whose  wages  do  not  share  in  that  particular  ad-
vance. The  journeyman  shoe-maker  is,  in  the  first  instance,
benefited,  when,  receiving  a  larger  money  remuneration,  he
pays  the  same  sum  for  his  clothes,  hats,  and  bread ;  but  the
tailor,  hatter,  and  baker,  who,  receiving  the  same  money  re-
turns as  before,  have  to  pay  more  for  their  shoes,  lose  in  the
aggregate  precisely  what  the  shoe -maker  gains.  The  subse-
quent advance  in  their  wages  and  prices  deprives  the  shoe-
maker, for  the  future,  of  so  much  of  the  gain  accruing  from
the  advance  in  his  case,  and  places  them  at  an  advantage  as
regards  other  workmen; whose  wages  and  prices  rising  in


MONETARY  PARADOX.  213

their  turn  gradually  restore  them  to  their  original  position,
though  at  the  expense  of  those  who,  during  the  period  of
transition,  profited  by  their  depression.  Thus  each  class  of
workmen  gains  by  the  advance  of  money  wages  in  its  own
case ;  but  as  the  circle  extends,  and  the  advance  reaches  other
classes,  those  previously  benefited  part,  item  by  item,  with  the
advantage  they  had  apparently  secured,  until  in  the  end  the
real  condition  of  each  is  restored  to  the  original  footing.  It  is
like  the  gains  and  losses  at  a  round  game  of  cards.  Every  time
the  pool  is  won,  the  winner  is  richer  precisely  by  the  amount
of  the  pool ;  but,  if  the  pool  were  always  of  the  same  amount,
and  each  player  won  in  turn,  it  is  plain  that  at  the  end  of  the
evening  every  member  of  the  company  would  rise  from  the
table  neither  richer  nor  poorer  than  he  had  sat  down.*

We  may  now  resume  the  general  argument  interrupted  by
this  incidental  discussion.

*  Analogies  do  not  run  on  all  fours,  and  the  present  analogy  is  not  perfect.
The  card-players  at  the  close  of  the  game  would  not  merely  have  regained  the
relative  positions  from  which  they  started,  but  would  each  have  recovered  the
losses  he  had  incurred  during  the  progress  of  the  game;  on  the  other  hand,  the
gains  and  losses,  incident  to  the  period  of  transition  from  a  low  to  a  high  regime
of  prices,  would  be  definitive.


CHAPTER  III.

TBADES-UmomSM.—L

§  1.  The  question  whether  in  any  given  state  of  national
wealth  there  can  properly  be  said  to  be  a  limit  to  the  amount
of  wealth  available  for  the  payment  of  wages,  and  if  so,  what
the  nature  of  that  limit  is,  is  one  which  brings  us  into  imme-
diate contact  with  Trades-Unionism  in  its  most  ambitious,  if
not  its  most  important,  aims.  If  there  be  no  limit  to  the  fund
available  for  expenditure  in  wages,  or  if  such  limit  as  exists
be  of  a  kind  which  may  easily  be  overpassed ;  if  beyond  the
amount  actually  spent  on  wages  at  any  given  time  there  be  an
indefinite  margin  of  wealth  which  workmen  by  judicious  com-
bination may  conquer  ;  then  it  is  evident  Trades- Unionism  has
a  great  field  before  it,  and  workmen  will  naturally  and  prop-
erly look  to  this  agency  as  the  principal  means  of  improving
their  condition.  But  if,  on  the  other  hand,  the  amount  of
wealth  spent  in  wages  at  any  given  time  be  confined  within
limits  which,  the  conditions  of  industry  and  the  character  of
the  owners  of  wealth  being  what  they  are,  can  not  be  perma-
nently extended  by  the  action  of  workmen,  then  it  follows
that  the  scope  for  Trades-Union  action  is  proportionally  nar-
rowed; and  all  attempts  to  accomplish  a  permanent  increase
of  wages  by  such  means,  beyond  what  the  unassisted  action  of
supply  and  demand  would  ultimately  bring  about,  are  doom-
ed beforehand  to  disappointment  and  failure.  The  question,
therefore,  of  the  limitation  of  the  Wages-fund  is  evidently  one
of  paramount  importance  in  the  present  position  of  the  con-
troversy between  labor  and  capital  in  this  country  ;  and  we


LIMITS  OF  THE  WAGES-FUND.  215

should  approach  the  problem  with  all  the  care  and  circum-
spection which  so  momentous  an  issue  demands.

§  2.  And,  in  the  first  place,  I  need  scarcely  point  out  that
there  are  at  all  times  certain  limits  to  the  possible  Wages-fund
which,  if  not  strictly  physical  limits,  come  very  close  to  that
character.  The  Wages-fund  of  a  countr3^  at  any  given  time,
must,  at  all  events,  find  a  limit  in  the  total  wealth  of  the  coun-
try at  that  time,  and  manifestly,  under  any  circum.stances,  it
must  fall  very  much  short  of  that  total ;  for,  in  order  to  main-
tain the  stock  of  commodities  of  all  sorts  which  in  any  civil-
ized community  goes  to  support  the  laboring  jjopulation,  a  cer-
tain large  proportion  of  the  general  wealth  must  exist  in  the
form  of  fixed  capital  and  raw  material.  The  wealth  available,
therefore,  for  the  remuneration  of  labor  can  not  at  the  utmost
be  more  than  the  balance  which  remains  after  these  indispensa-
ble requirements  have  been  provided  for,  under  pain  of  a  com-
plete failure  of  the  fund.  These  are  what  we  may  describe  as
the  physical  limits  of  the  Wages-fund,  and  they  are  obviously
such  as  must  be  observed  under  all  forms  of  industrial  organi-
zation,  even  under  a  system  of  the  most  absolute  communism.
But  the  question  I  wish  now  to  consider  is  whether,  within
these  quasi  physical  limits,  there  are  not,  at  least  for  societies
organized  as  ours,  and  resting  on  the  institution  of  private  prop-
erty and  personal  freedom,  what  may  properly  be  called  eco-
nomic limits — that  is  to  say,  limits  arising  from  the  action  of
human  interests  operating  under  the  actual  circumstances  of
man's  environment  in  the  world.  JSTow  the  principles  already
established  in  this  work,  taken  in  connection  with  other  funda-
mental truths  of  economic  science,  will,  I  think,  lead  us  to  the'
conclusion  that  such  limits  do  exist,  and  will  also  enable  us  to
perceive  the  character  of  the  obstacles  which  they  oppose  to
the  indefinite  extension  of  the  Wao;es-fund.

The  reader  has  already  seen  the  conditions  on  which  depend


:/


216  TEA  DBS-  UNIONISM.— I.

the  investment  of  capital  in  productive  industr}^,  and  the  cir-
cumstances which  determine  its  distribution,  when  invested,
among  the  several  instruments  of  production.  He  has  seen
that  the  motive  to  its  investment  is  the  prospect  of  profit,  and
that,  the  character  of  the  owners  of  wealth  being  given,  the
strength  of  the  inducement  will  vary  as  this  prospect  varies.
Such  being  the  fundamental  facts  on  which  the  accumulation
and  investment  of  capital  depend,  there  exists  for  ever}^  in-
dustrial society,  as  Mr.  Mill  has  pointed  out,  a  certain  rate  of
profit  which  is  the  lowest  that  will  suffice  to  call  the  accumu-
lative principle  leading  to  the  investment  of  capital  into  action.
This  lowest  rate  of  profit  will  be  different  for  different  commu-
nities and  for  different  stages  of  civilization.  It  will  be  com-
paratively high  where  the  accumulative  principle  among  the
owners  of  wealth  is  weak,  since  here  the  inducement  will  need
to  be  proportionally  strong,  and  low  where  that  principle  is
strong.  But  under  all  circumstances  there  will  be  a  minimum
rate,  below  which,  if  the  return  on  capital  fall,  accumulation,
at  least  for  the  purpose  of  investment,  will  cease  for  want  of
adequate  inducement.  Mr.  Mill  has  further  shown  that  in  all
progressive  societies,  after  a  certain  stage  in  their  career  is
reached — that  stage,  namely,  at  which  the  best  soils  and  the
most  productive  natural  agents  of  all  kinds  have  been  brought
into  requisition  for  the  purposes  of  production' — the  tendency
of  profits  is  to  fall,  and  ultimately  to  approach  the  minimum
which  exists  for  each  society.  This  tendency  is,  indeed,  con-
stantly counteracted  by  the  progress  of  invention  and  improve-
ment in  the  industrial  arts  (including  under  this  head  the  ex-
tension of  the  field  for  division  of  labor  by  the  growth  of
trade),  but  nevertheless  it  continues  to  operate,  and  on  the
whole  prevails  against  the  opposing  forces.  With  every  in-
crease of  capital,  this  stage  in  the  economic  growth  of  u  coun-
try once  attained,  a  fiill  in  the  genergi  rate  of  profit  occurs,
unless  so  far  as  the  diminishing  productiveness  of  industry  is


THE  MINIMUM  BATE  OF  PROFIT.  217

compensated  by  these  incidents  of  progressive  societies,  until
at  length  capital  in  its  growth  reaches  the  point  at  which  the
rate  of  profit  is  at,  or,  to  borrow  Mr.  Mill's  expression,  within
a  hand-breadth  of,  the  minimum.  Lastly,  Mr.  Mill  has  shown
that  in  countries  in  which  capital  has  grown  to  this  point,  and
among  such  countries,  pre-eminently  in  Great  Britain,  the  prin-
ciple leading  to  accumulation  is,  as  a  rule,  always  strong  enough,
not  merely  to  keep  the  aggregate  capital  of  the  country  up  to
that  amount  at  which  profits  approximate  to  the  minimum,  but
even  to  cause  it  to  exceed  this  amount;  the  proof  of  which
lies  in  the  large  and  continuous  exportation  of  capital  which
occurs  in  such  cases  for  investment  in  colonies  or  in  foreign
states.  It  results  fiom  these  several  positions  that  the  amount
of  capital  actually  invested  in  Great  Britain  and  in  countries
similarly  circumstanced  is,  as  a  rule,  at  or  close  upon  its  max-
imum— that  is  to  say,  as  great  as,  economically  speaking,  it  can
be  in  the  actual  state  of  the  industrial  arts  and  of  general  trade.
Such  is  the  doctrine  of  the  "tendency  of  profits  to  a  mini-
mum," for  the  proof  of  which  I  must  refer  the  reader  to  Mr.
Mill's  chapter  on  tbat  subject  f  and  I  have  now  to  ask  him  to
consider  the  bearing  of  this  doctrine  upon  the  problem  we  have
undertaken  to  discuss.  As  he  has  seen,  it  is  of  the  essence  of
the  doctrine,  first,  that,  in  any  given  state  of  the  arts  of  indus-
try and  of  trade,  the  quantity  of  capital  which  can  be  employ-
ed in  a  country  is  strictly  limited,  limited  by  those  conditions
which  limit  the  inducement  to  save  and  invest — to  perform
those  acts,  that  is  to  say,  which  constitute  the  source  and  spring
from  which  capital  is  derived  and  fed ;  and,  secondly,  that,  in
countries  which  have  attained  that  stage  in  their  economical
development  which  England  has  long  ago  reached  and  passed,
the  accumulation  of  capital  under  the  influence  of  the  ordinary
motives,  is,  as  a  rule,  constantly  in  excess  of  the  amount  which

*  "Principles  of  Political  Economy, "book  iv.,  chap.  iv.


218  TEADES-UNIONISM.—L

can  be  invested  in  the  country  consistently  with  obtaining  the
minimum  rate  of  profit.  These  things  being  so,  what  can  be
the  effect  of  an  attempt  on  the  part  of  Trades-Unions  to  com-
pel, by  pressure  upon  capitalists,  an  increase  of  the  Wages-
fund?  Such  an  increase  can  only  be  accomplished  in  one  or
other  of  two  ways — either  by  an  increase  of  the  total  capital
invested,  or  by  a  change  in  its  distribution  among  the  several
agents  of  which  it  consists,  in  favor  of  labor,  for  example,  by  a
conversion  of  what  now  goes  to  maintain  machinery  to  the
payment  of  wages.  But  either  of  these  courses  would  inevita-
bly result  in  a  fall  of  profits,  and  profits  are  already  at  or  with-
in a  hand-breadth  of  the  minimum.  It  is  true  that  the  field
for  the  investment  of  capital  is  being  constantly  extended  in
this  and  other  progressive  countries.  Every  step  in  the  prog-
ress of  industrial  invention,  every  gain  in  the  efficiency  of
labor,  every  new  market  opened  to  our  trade,  pushes  farther
back  the  limit  set  by  the  minimum  of  profit,  and  creates  new
room  for  the  investment  of  capital.  But  the  doctrine  we  have
been  considering  shows  us  that  the  ordinary  motives  pressing
upon  capitalists  are  always  sufficient,  of  their  inherent  strength,
to  fill  UD  the  room  thus  constantly  created  for  fresh  investment,
and  do  in  fact  fill  it  up ;  and  this  being  so,  where  is  the  scope
for  Trades-Union  action  in  enlarging  the  Wages-fund?  I  con-
fess I  am  unable  to  see  how,  in  presence  of  these  considera-
tions, founded  as  they  are  on  incontrovertible  facts,  the  larger
pretensions  of  Trades-Unionism  can  be  sustained.  The  per-
manent elevation  of  the  average  rate  of  wages — or,  what  comes
to  the  same  thing,  the  permanent  elevation  of  the  rate  of  wages
in  any  branch  of  industry  not  accompanied  by  an  equivalent
fall  in  some  other  branch  or  branches — ^beyond  the  level  deter-
mined by  the  economic  conditions  prevailing  in  the  country,
is,  as  it  seems  to  me,  a  feat  beyond  its  power.  Such  is  the
broad  general  conclusion  to  which  economic  principles  applied
to  the  facts  of  the  case  appear  to  conduct  us.


LIMITS  OF  ITS  POWER.  219

§  3.  We  must  be  careful,  however,  not  to  strain  this  con-
clusion beyond  the  limits  which  its  terms  define.  The  reader
will  observe  that  it  applies  to  the  average  rate  of  wages,  as  a
permanent  state  of  things,  and  further,  that  the  question  is  left
open  as  to  the  possibility  of  accelerating  the  operation  of  eco-
nomic conditions,  by  action  on  the  part  of  those  whom  they
affect.  Now  it  will  be  found  that,  these  qualifications  of  the
position  just  laid  down  duly  considered,  a  certain  scope  still
remains  for  Trades-Union  action  on  the  rate  of  wages — a  cer-
tain scope,  but  of  a  range  altogether  more  limited  than  that
which  the  pretensions  of  those  bodies  to  control  the  labor  mar-
ket commonly  assume.

In  the  first  place,  it  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  general  con-
clusion arrived  at  that  an  advance  of  wages  in  certain  depart-
ments of  industry  should  be  effected  by  the  action  of  Trades-
Unions  where  this  is  accompanied  by  an  equivalent  fall  in
others ;  and,  supposing  the  workmen  in  such  departments  of
industry  had  it  in  their  power  to  exclude  the  competition  of
outsiders,  it  is  quite  possible  that  an  advance  of  wages  so  ef-
fected might  be  permanently  maintained.  Such  a  result  is  not
only  a  perfectly  possible  achievement,  but  one  which  has  oc-
casionally been  accomplished.* It  amounts,  however,  merely

*  According  to  Mr.  Thoniton,  this  has  hitherto  been  the  nature  of  all  Trades-
Union  victories,  and  must  be  so  until  Unionism  becomes  universal.  "In  a  coun-
try commercially  stationary — in  which  national  wealth  is  not  increasing — when  a
permanent  advance  of  the  rate  of  wages  is  obtained  artificially  by  Unionist  action,
there  must  needs  be  a  corresponding  lowering  of  wages  in  other  trades.  Even  in
a  country  commercially  progressive,  it  is  impossible  for  Unionism  to  i-aise  wages
in  any  particular  trade  without  causing  the  demand  for  the  produce  of  other  trades
to  be  less  than  it  would  have  been,  or  without  equally  checking  the  demand  for
labor  in  those  other  trades.  Whether  a  country  be  stationary  or  progressive,  an
exceptionally  high  rate  of  wages  can  not  be  maintained  in  any  particular  ti'ade,
unless  the  workmen  of  all  other  trades  are  prevented  from  entering  that  particular
trade,  and  endeavoring  to  get  the  same  rate.  Unionism  can  not  keep  up  the  rate
in  one  trade  without  keeping  it  down  in  others. It  can  not  benefit  one  portion  of


220  TBADES-UNIONISM.—L

to  a  change  in  the  distribution  of  the  Wages-fund,  while  its
aggregate  quantity  is  left  unaltered ;  and  for  the  present  it
will  be  more  convenient  to  confine  the  discussion  to  the  power
of  Trades-Unionism  in  relation  to  the  general  fund — its  power,
that  is  to  say,  to  effect  an  advance  of  wages  by  a  positive  in-
crease of  capital,  and  not  simply  by  drawing  off  capital  from
fields  in  which  it  was  already  invested,  at  the  cost  of  the  la-
borers in  those  fields.

Confining  our  view,  then,  for  the  present  to  this  aspect  of
the  case,  we  have  now  to  consider — Trades-Unionism  being,  as
we  have  seen,  powerless  to  effect  a  permanent  increase  in  the
average  rate  of  wages  beyond  what  the  economic  conditions
of  the  country  permit — how  far  it  is  capable  of  modifying  the
rate  for  a  time,  or  of  accelerating  an  advance  rendered  possible
by  the  state  of  trade  and  industry,  but  still  pending  and  un-
realized.

It  is  obvious  at  once,  even  apart  from  experience,  that,
where  workmen  have  the  power  of  combining,  it  will  always
be  possible  for  them,  by  taking  advantage  of  particular  exi-
gencies, to  compel  their  employers  to  a  temporary  advance  of
wao-es. For  example,  where employers  have  bound  them-


the  laboring  population  without,  during  a  period  of  stagnation,  injuring  the  re-
mainder nor  even  in  a  season  of  prosperity,  without  at  least  shutting  out  the
bulk  of  the  laboring  population  from  the  advantages  secured  for  a  portion."
("On  Labor,"  p.  310.)

I  confess  1  am  quite  unable  to  reconcile  the  drift  of  this  passage  with  Mr.
Thornton's  denial  of  the  existence  of  a  determinate  Wages-fund ;  but,  not  to  dwell
upon  this,  it  appears  to  me  that  the  inference  drawn  from  the  state  of  things  he
describes,  namely,  that  as  Unionism  is  extended  its  advantages  will  be  proportion-
ally enlarged,  until  finally,  becoming  universal,  they  will  represent  pure  gain  un-
qualified by  any  set-off,  is  exactly  the  reverse  of  what  the  facts  warrant.  An  ad-
vantage which  depends  upon  the  exclusion  of  others  can  not  but  be  impaired  by
the  admission  of  any  of  the  excluded,  and  can  not  but  be  wholly  lost  by  the  ad-
mission of  all.  But  I  have  dealt  with  this  point  more  fully  in  a  later  chapter,
post  pp.  246-248.


PROVINCE  FOB  ITS  ACTION.  221

selves  under  penalties  to  execute  certain  definite  work  within
specified  limits  of  time,  it  is  evidently  possible  for  workmen,
by  combination,  to  place  tbeir  employers  in  the  alternative  of
either  complying  with  their  demands  or  of  incurring  a  greater
loss ;  and  under  such  circumstances  a  strike,  it  may  be  as-
sumed, will  be  successful,  so  far  as  the  immediate  aims  of  the
workmen  are  concerned.  This,  if  an  extreme  case,  is  in  actual
life  a  very  common  one ;  and  the  principle  on  which  the  suc-
cess of  the  workmen  depends  has  a  much  wider  range  than
that  of  time  contracts.  To  a  certain  extent  all  persons  who
embark  their  means  in  business  are  at  the  mercy  of  those  on
whose  co-operation  they  rely  for  carrying  their  plans  into  ef-
fect; and  this  liability  to  be  injured  by  refusal  on  the  part  of
others  to  co-operate  will  evidently  become  greater  in  propor-
tion as  the  preliminary  outlay  incident  to  the  undertaking  is
large.  A  capitalist,  for  example,  who  has  committed  himself
to  an  industrial  enterprise  by  making  large  purchases  of  build-
ing and  plant,  wherewith  to  carry  it  on,  must  find  laborers  to
work  for  him,  or  suffer  heavy  loss ;  for  either,  his  capital  ly-
ing idle,  he  loses  the  interest  it  might  bring  him,  or,  if  he  at-
tempts by  sale  or  otherwise  to  convert  it  into  other  forms,  it  is
pretty  sure  to  be  largely  depreciated  in  the  process.  Under
these  circumstances,  supposing  the  workmen  on  whom  he  re-
lies to  strike  for  higher  wages,  and  that  he  has  reason  to  be-
lieve that  they  possess  the  resolution  and  are  in  command  of
funds  sufficient  to  enable  them  to  maintain  a  prolonged  strike,
it  may  be  his  wisdom  to  concede  their  demands,  even  though
the  result  should  be  not  merely  to  bring  his  profits  below  the
minimum,  but  to  annihilate  them  altogether,  or  even  convert
them  into  loss ;  since  the  entire  cessation  of  his  business  for  so
long  a  period  might  involve  him  in  still  greater  loss.  It  is  evi-
dent, therefore,  that  workmen  have,  by  means  of  combination
and  by  accumulating  sufficient  funds,  very  considerable  power
of  acting  upon  the  rate  of  wages. But  the  question  remains  as


223  TRADES  -  UXI  OXISM.—L

to  the  ultirante  consequences  of  such  action ;  as  to  its  effect  upon
the  workman's  well-being,  taking  an  extended  view  of  his  in-
terest. To  determine  this  point,  we  must  consider  two  distinct
states  of  industry  and  trade — one  where  the  business  of  the  coun-
try is  in  its  normal  or  average  condition,  and  where  consequent-
ly, in  old  countries  like  Great  Britain,  the  rate  of  profit  is  at  or
close  upon  the  minimum  ;  the  other,  where  trade  is  exception-
ally prosperous,  and  profits  may  be  assumed  to  be  considera-
bly in  advance  of  the  minimum  rate.  Taking  the  former  case
first,  what  will  be  the  definitive  result  under  those  circum-
stances of  a  successful  strike  for  higher  wages?  The  rate  of
profit  having  been  previously  at  or  near  the  lowest  point  at
which  there  is  an  adequate  inducement  to  invest  capital,  the
action  of  the  workmen  has  forced  it  below  this  point.  As  has
already  been  intimated,  capital  can  not,  except  at  great  loss,
be  withdrawn  suddenly  from  industries  in  which  it  has  once
been  embarked,  and  therefore  workmen  may  for  a  time  enjoy
the  fruits  of  their  success.  But  though  capital  can  not  be  with-
drawn suddenly,  it  may  be  withdrawn  by  degrees — at  the
worst  by  the  simple  process  of  not  renewing  it  as  it  is  worn
out.  And  this  is  what,  in  the  case  we  are  considering,  we  may
confidently  assume  would  happen.  Employers  whose  capital
is  bringing  them  a  rate  of  profit  below  what  (allowance  made
for  risk  and  other  drawbacks)  they  might  obtain  from  its  in-
vestment in  other  industries  or  in  other  places,  will  seize  ev-
ery opportunity  that  offers  for  withdrawing  it  from  an  employ-
ment so  unremunerative.  After  a  little  the  successful  work-
men will  find  that  their  services  are  not  required,  and  will  be
compelled  for  their  support  to  throw  themselves  on  the  general
labor  market.  The  inevitable  result  must  be  a  fall  in  the  gen-
eral rate  of  wages  at  least  to  its  former  level — to  a  level,  that
is  to  say,  which  is  consistent  with  giving  to  capitalists  what
they  conceive  to  be  an  adequate  return  upon  their  outlay.
This  is  the  least  unfavorable  consequence  which  could  ensue


PROVINCE  FOB  ITS  ACTION.  223

from  the  success  of  a  compulsorj  action  on  wages  where  the
condition  of  trade  is  what  we  may  describe  as  quiescent.  Sup-
posing, however,  that  proceedings  of  this  kind  were  not  mere-
ly isolated  and  exceptional,  but  became  sufficiently  frequent  to
be  looked  forward  to  by  capitalists  as  a  normal  incident  of  pro-
ductive investment,  the  consequences  for  workmen  would  be
much  more  serious  than  a  mere  return  to  the  former  state  of
things.  The  constant  liability  to  a  sudden  reduction  of  profits
from  such  causes  would  become  an  element  in  the  regular  cal-
culation of  capitalists,  and  before  embarking  in  an  industrial
undertaking  they  would  look  for  compensation  in  a  rate  of
profit  high  enough  to  cover  such  risks.  In  other  words,  the
action  of  Trades-Unions  in  forcing  up  wages  under  the  circum-
stances in  question,  however  it  might  for  the  moment  raise
wages  at  the  expense  of  profits,  would  have  for  permanent  con-
sequence precisely  the  opposite  result;  for,  by  increasing  the
risks  of  investment,  it  would  tend  to  raise  the  minimum  rate
of  profit,  and,  in  proportion  as  it  did  so,  to  narrow  the  field
for  the  employment  of  capital  in  the  country.  The  aggregate
capital  being  less,  the  Wages -fund,  cceteris  paribus,  would  be
less,  and  unless  laborers  consented  to  reduce  their  numbers,
the  general  rate  of  wages  would  flill.

Such,  it  seems  to  me,  must  be  the  inevitable  consequence  of
frequent  and  systematic  attempts  to  force  up  the  rate  of  wages
when  the  economic  conditions  of  the  country  do  not  war-
rant a  rise;  and  a  fortiori,  I  may  add,  these  disastrous  results
would  be  only  more  certainly  realized,  if  this  policy  were  at-
tempted in  a  depressed  condition  of  trade  when  profits  barely
reached  the  necessary  level.  But  let  us  now  consider  how  the
case  would  stand  supposing  the  demand  for  an  advance  to  oc-
cur when  trade  is  exceptionall}^  prosperous.  Mechanical  in-
ventions, we  may  suppose,  or  improved  processes,  have  cheap-
ened production ;  or  the  opening  of  new  markets  for  trade  has
enabled  our  manufacturers  to  exchange  their  commodities  on


224  TRADES -UNIONISM.— L

better  terms  with  foreign  countries.  Under  such  circum-
stances profits  may  advance  considerably  above  the  minimum ;
and  the  question  arises,  what  is  the  scope  for  Trades-Union  ac-
tion offered  by  a  contingency  of  this  kind.  We  have  already
seen  that,  even  under  the  ordinary  conditions  of  trade,  it  is
frequently  in  the  power  of  workmen,  by  skillfully  taking  ad-
vantage of  the  position  of  their  employers,  to  force  up  wages
1  above  the  actual  rate.  But  a  state  of  trade  in  which  profits
j  were  sensibly  above  the  minimum  limit  would  obviously  be

highly  favorable  for  such  operations.  For,  by  refusing  to
work,  the  men  could  now  not  merely  inflict  the  same  loss  as
before  on  their  masters,  but  could  compel  them  to  forego  the
opportunities  of  reaping  the  unusual  gains  which  the  time  of-
fered. There  can  be  no  doubt  at  all,  therefore,  that  under  such
circumstances  well-concerted  Trades -Union  action  would  be
capable  of  achieving  success.  This,  however,  does  not  in  itself
establish  the  wisdom  of  such  policy;  for  the  question  would
remain,  whether  the  game  were  worth  the  candle;  whether
the  results  attainable  by  this  course  would  compensate  for  the
trouble  and  risk  involved  in  the  movement.  For  it  must  be
remembered  that,  under  the  influence  of  the  ordinary  motives
which,  we  have  seen,  govern  the  growth  of  capital,  the  state  of
things  we  are  considering  would  act  as  a  powerful  incentive  to
accumulation  and  investment.  An  increased  demand  for  labor
would  sooner  or  later  spring  up,  and  ultimately  an  advance  of
wages  to  as  high  a  point  as  the  actual  state  of  things  permitted.
This  being  so,  it  may  be  asked  whether  the  action  of  Trades-
Unions,  mischievous  in  the  case  we  last  considered,  would  not
\  here  be  superfluous.  Now  the  answer  to  this  question  must,  I
think,  be  in  the  negative.  The  workman,  no  doubt,  is  interest-
ed in  the  final  result,  but  he  is  also  interested  in  its  speedy  re-
alization ;  and  the  process  by  which  the  fruits  of  exceptionally
prosperous  trade  issue  in  an  advance  of  wages  is  a  circuitous
one,  and  generally  covers  some  considerable  period  of  time.


PROVINCE  FOB  ITS  ACTION.  225

Employers  as  a  class,  we  may  take  for  granted,  will  not  propose
an  advance  of  wages  except  under  tlie  stress  of  competition,  and
before  competition  becomes  actually  operative  the  new  capital
may  lie  for  some  time  upon  the  market,  in  the  "floating"  con-
dition, seeking  investment,  but  not  at  once  linding  it.  Even
after- investment  has  been  found,  preliminary  arrangements
have  to  be  made,  and  a  considerable  time  may  elapse  before
the  new  demand  for  labor  is  practically  felt.  Throughout  this
period  wages,  in  the  absence  of  external  pressure,  may  remain
absolutely  unaffected,  and.  laborers  may  be  excluded  from  all
share  in  the  prosperity  of  which  the  entire  fi-uits  are  appro-
priated by  their  employers.  If,  then,  laborers  have  the  power,
as  we  have  seen  they  have,  of  shortening  or  of  annihilating  al-
together this  interval,  why  may  they  not  use  it?  It  seems  to
me  that  there  is  here  a  perfectly  legitimate  field  for  Trades-
Union  action.  The  state  of  trade  being  such  as  to  permit  an
advance  of  wages,  Trades -Unionism,  using  its  powers  judi-
ciousl}^,  may  determine  capital  at  once  toward  those  issue?
which,  under  the  influence  of  the  ordinary  motives  governing
industrial  investment,  it  would  indeed  in  any  case  ultimately
reach.  A  distinct  and  substantial  gain  may  thus  be  secured
for  labor  without  encroaching  on  the  indispensable  margin  for
the  remuneration  of  capital,  and  without  impairing  any  of  those
conditions  on  which  its  own  permanent  well-being  depends.*

It  results  from  the  foregoing  considerations  that  the  action
of  Trades-Unions,  directed  toward  raising  the  rate  of  wages  by
combination  among  workmen,  may  be  hurtful  or  beneficial  ac-
cording to  circumstances.  The  practical  utility,  therefore,  of
this  mode  of  action  will  depend  upon  the  abihty  of  those  who
control  the  conduct  of  these  bodies  to  discriminate  the  states  of

*  The  histoiy  of  the  Newcastle  engineering  strike  is  instructive.  It  was  in  that
case  admitted,  on  the  side  of  the  masters,  that  the  conditions  of  trade  from  the
beginning  permitted  an  advance  of  wages ;  yet  no  advance  was  proposed  till  the
pressure  of  Trades-Unionism  was  brought  to  bear.

15


226  TRADES -UNIONISM.— I.

the  market  in  which  fiction  may  be  taken  with  advantage  from
those  in  which  it  can  only  be  productive  of  harm.  It  thus
becomes  matter  of  deep  interest  to  know  if  the  working-class
leaders  possess  this  ability  or  may  be  expected  to  acquire  it.

And  here  I  touch  a  point  on  which  I  should  not  be  justified
in  speaking  otherwise  than  with  extreme  difl&dence.  I  fear  it
must  be  admitted  that,  up  to  the  present,  the  competency  of
Trades-Union  leaders  to  form  a  correct  judgment  on  the  state
of  trade,  even  in  the  particular  departments  with  which  they
each  happen  to  be  practically  conversant,  and  to  decide  upon
the  seasonableness  of  a  demand  for  increased  wages,  must  be
considered  as  at  least  problematical.  The  temporary  success
of  a  strike  does  not  necessarily  prove  its  wisdom  ;  but  the  fail-
ure of  a  strike,  immediate  or  ultimate,  is  decisive  evidence  that
it  ought  never  to  have  been  undertaken ;  and  hitherto  unsuc-
cessful strikes  have  been  extremely  numerous.

"  The  most  protracted  strikes  (says  Mr.  Brassey)  in  which  the  working-
men  have  been  engaged  have  generally  taken  place,  not  for  the  purpose
of  securing  an  advance  of  wages,  but  for  the  purpose  of  resisting  a  fall.
Resistance  to  a  proposed  reduction  was  the  caiise  of  the  engineers'  strike
in  1853;  of  the  strike  at  Preston  in  1853 ;  of  the  strike  in  the  iron  trade
in  1865;  and  of  the  strike  of  the  colliers  at  Wigan  in  1868.  In  each  of
these  cases  the  masters  had  found  it  necessary,  in  consequence  of  the  de-
pressed state  of  trade,  to  reduce  the  rate  of  wages ;  but  the  men,  ignor-
ing the  circumstances  of  the  trade,  and  looking  only  to  what  they  be-
lieved to  be  a  degradation  of  their  position  as  workmen,  I'efused  to  ac-
cept the  reduction.  They  therefore  went  out  on  strike ;  but,  after  a  pro-
tracted struggle,  were  compelled  to  accept  the  original  j^roposal  of  their
employers The  leaders  in  several  protracted  strikes  have  exhib-
ited a  melancholy  ignorance  of  the  state  of  their  own  trade,  and  even  of
the  market  value  of  the  goods  in  the  production  of  which  they  are  en-
gaged. How  much  suffering  might  have  been  spared  to  the  working-
classes,  if  they  had  but  known,  before  they  engaged  in  a  hopeless  strug-
gle, the  true  merits  of  their  case !  I  was  once  present  at  a  meeting  of
employers  during  a  large  strike  in  the  coal  trade.  I  had  the  means  of
knowing  that  the  washes  which  had  been  offered  were  the  highest  whicij


PROVINCE  FOB  ITS  ACTION.  22?

the  employers  could  afford  to  pay,  and  that  tlie  markets  were  so  over
stocked  that  it  was  a  positive  advantage  to  suspend  the  working  of  the
pits  for  a  time.  But  the  facts  which  I  had  the  means  of  knowing  were
apparently  unknown  to  the  miners ;  and  it  was  indeed  lamentable  to  see
the  hard-earned  accuumlations  of  many  years  exhausted  in  an  obstinate
resistance  to  a  reduction  of  wage,  which  had  not  been  proposed  by  the
employers  until  it  had  been  forced  upon  them  by  the  unfavorable  condi-
tion of  their  trade."*

Nevertheless,  I  think  there  is  evidence  to  show  that  Union-
ists are  gathering  wisdom  with  experience,  and  this  Mr.  Bras-
sey  admits.  The  great  mojority  of  recent  strikes  have  been
successful.  But  it  is  not  so  much  the  success  of  recent  strikes,
as  the  manner  in  which  the  success  has  been  achieved — the
moderation  and  good  sense  with  which  for  the  most  part  the
demands  of  the  men  have  been  put  forward  and  supported,
and  the  increasing  indications  in  their  various  manifestoes  of  a
growing  comprehension  of  the  true  conditions  of  the  problem
— that  constitutes  the  most  solid  ground  of  hope.  I  would
point  in  particular  to  the  Newcastle  engineers'  strike  of  the
year  1871  as  an  occasion  when  these  qualities  were  manifested
in  an  eminent  degree.  Certainly,  to  my  apprehension  as  a  dis-
interested spectator,  the  conduct  of  the  men  in  that  struggle
contrasted  favorably  with  that  of  their  employers.  But  in  or-
der to  convert  Trades-Unionism  into  an  agency,  not  merely
capable  now  and  then  of  achieving  an  advance  of  wages  by  a
coup  de  main,  while  on  other  occasions  it  leads  its  supporters
into  ruinous  contests,  from  which  they  only  emerge  enfeebled
and  impoverished,  to  accept  worse  terms  than  they  had  pre-
viously refused — in  order  to  convert  it  into  an  agency  perma-
nently and  constantly  beneficent,  workmen  must  learn  to  rec-
ognize more  distinctly  than  they  have  yet  done  the  essential
conditions  of  success;  and  not  merely  this,  but  also  to  adopt

*  "Work  and  Wages,"  pp.  6,  7,  and  10,  11.


l>28  TRADES-UNIONISM.— I.

the  needful  means  for  determining  in  each  case  as  it  arises
how  flir  these  conditions  are  fulfilled.  In  other  words,  Trades-
Unions  must  frankly  recognize  the  impossibility  of  forcing
profits  permanently  "below  that  rate  which  capitalists  regard,
and  show  by  their  conduct  that  they  regard,  as  only  an  ade-
quate return  upon  their  outlay;  and  they  must  organize  the
means  for  obtaining  sufficient  and  trustworthy  information  re-
specting the  actual  state  of  trade,  with  a  view  to  determine
whether  profits  are  or  are  not  in  advance  of  this  minimum
level.  It  has  been  said,  indeed,  that  workmen  can  not  know
the  state  of  profits  in  a  trade  so  long  as  they  are  excluded  from
access  to  their  employers'  books,  and  that  this  is  a  privilege
which  will  never  be  conceded  them.  But  for  the  purposes  of
Trades-Unionism  I  can  not  see  that  any  such  detailed  knowl-
edge as  might  be  obtained  by  inspection  of  tlie  books  of  em-
ployers is  necessar3^  The  object  in  view  is  not  to  know  the
precise  gains  of  particular  employers,  which  may  depend  quite
as  much  upon  individual  skill  and  management  as  upon  the
general  circumstances  of  the  trade,  but  whether  the  circum-
stances of  the  trade,  as  a  whole,  are  such  as,  with  average  man-
agement, to  admit  of  more  than  the  usual  gains.  The  data  for
this  lie  in  a  knowledge  of  the  state  of  prices,  at  different  pe-
riods, alike  of  the  finished  article  and  of  the  raw  material,  of
the  conditions  of  production  as  regards  mechanical,  chemical,
or  other  facilities,  and  of  the  greater  or  less  accessibility  of
markets.  These  are  circumstances  an  adequate  knowledge
of  which  is  quite  within  reach  of  Trades-Unions,  if  only  the
proper  means  be  taken  to  obtain  it;  and  Mr.  Brassey  in  the
following  passage  gives  an  e^^ample  of  what  these  means
should  be:

"  It  is  not' the  less  essential  to  keep  a  watchful  eye  on  all  that  is  taking
place  abroad.  The  organization  of  Trades-Unions  might  be  utilized  for
this  important  purpose.  The  resources  of  a  joint  purse  should  afford  the
means  of  sending  delegates  abroad,  for  whom  opportunities  ought  to  be


PBOriNCE  FOB  ITS  ACTIOX.  229

provided  of  studying  foreign  languages,  and  whose  duty  it  should  be  to
keep  the  artisans  of  England  closely  informed  of  the  fluctuations  in  the
activity  of  trade  and  the  reward  of  labor  in  the  countries  in  which  they
resided.  Trades-Unions  can  not  in  the  long  run  materially  influence  the
rate  of  wages,  but  there  are  many  valuable  services  which  they  can  ren-
der ;  and  none  would  be  more  practically  useful  than  the  frequent  publi-
cation of  faithful  reports  on  the  state  of  the  labor  market  from  well-j)laccd
observers  on  the  Continent."*

I  believe  the  influence  of  Trade-Unionism  organized  thus
with  a  dehberate  purpose  of  collecting  and  diffusing  sound  in-
formation among  its  supporters  would  be  in  more  ways  than
one  largel}^  beneficial.  The  collection  of  the  necessary  facts,
their  careful  study  and  examination,  and  the  discussions  to
which  these  would  lead,  combined  with  the  sense  of  responsi-
bility attaching  to  the  formation  of  opinions  on  which  practical
issues  of  the  gravest  import  depended,  would  in  themselves  be
for  workmen  a  means  of  practical  education  of  the  highest  val-
ue. But  the  more  obvious  advantages  of  this  course  of  action
would  lie  in  its  direct  consequences — in  the  immense  saving
which  would  result  both  to  men  and  masters  in  preventing
abortive  strikes.  Indeed  the  adoption  of  such  a  policy  by
Trades  -  Unions  would  powerfully  tend  to  the  cessation  of
strikes  altogether — at  least  for  the  purpose  of  effecting  an  ad-
yance  of  wages — by  rendering  them  unnecessary.  It  is  not
probable  that,  when  emploj'-ers  came  to  understand  that  work-
men had  mastered  the  real  facts  of  the  situation  and  knew  the
strength  and  weakness  of  their  reciprocal  positions,  the  refusal
of  reasonable  demands  would  be  long  persisted  in.  Each  side
would  perceive  that  both  alike  were  cognizant  of  what  the  cir-
cumstances of  the  case  permitted,  of  what  was  feasible,  and  of
what  was  not  so ;  and  neither  would  probably  seek  to  strain  its
pretensions  beyond  the  limit  thus  mutually  recognized.

*  "Work  and  "Wages," pp.  14,  15.


230  TRADES-UNIONISM.— I.

§  4.  The  foregoing  conclusions  as  to  the  power  of  combina-
tions of  workmen  to  effect  nn  advance  in  the  rate  of  wages  may
seem  to  be  applicable  only  to  old  countries,  in  which,  like  our
own,  the  rate  of  profit  is  normally  at  or  close  upon  the  mini-
mum point,  and  from  which,  consequently,  capital  is  from  time
to  time  flowing  off  into  foreign  investment.  In  countries  like
the  United  States,  in  which  the  rate  of  profit  is  still  far  above
the  minimum,  and  which,  instead  of  lending  capital  to  foreign
countries,  are  themselves  habitual  recipients  of  their  redundant
supplies,  it  will  perhaps  be  thought  that  the  arguments  which
have  been  used  would  cease  to  have  any  force.  It  can  not  be
denied  that  the  same  obstacles  which  set  limits  to  Trades-Union
action  in  the  Old  World  do  not  exist  in  the  New.  Never-
theless, I  apprehend  that  though  the  obstacles  may  not  be  the
same,  the  limitations  on  such  action  will  be  found  in  effect  to
be  scarcely  less  real  there  than  with  us.  If,  indeed,  capitalists
could  be  reduced  to  the  alternative  of  either  conceding  the  de-
mands of  Trades-Unions,  or  being  deprived  altogether  of  the
opportunity  of  investing  their  wealth,  one  can  imagine  that,
rather  than  accept  the  latter  course,  they  might  consent  to  so
great  an  advance  of  wages  as  would,  under  the  actual  condi-
tions of  productive  industrj^,  issue  in  a  decline  of  the  returns
on  capital  considerably  below  the  level  at  which  profits  in  the
United  States  now  ordinarily  stand ;  and  it  is  possible  that  the
change  in  distribution  thus  effected  might  be  permanent,  I
say  this  would  be  a  conceivable  result,  if  capitalists  could  be
reduced  to  the  alternative  just  stated.  But  in  a  country  of
such  vast  magnitude  as  the  United  States,  covering  as  it  does
the  greater  portion  of  a  continent,  what  grounds  are  there  for
believing  that  Trades-Union  organization  can  ever  become  at
once  so  complete  and  so  all-embracing  as  to  be  capable  of  pre-
scribing terms  such  as  these?  For  my  part,  I  find  it  impossible
to  contemplate  such  a  consummation  as  a  condition  of  things  to
be  taken  into  serious  account. Within  a  limited  area — with-


IN  NE  W  CO  UNTBIES.  231

in  perhaps  a  single  State — one  can  imagine  Trades-Unionism
absolute;  but,  limited  to  a  single  State,  or  even  to  half  a  dozen
States,  the  attempt  to  enforce  its  decrees  in  the  sense  described
would  issue,  not  in  raising  the  rate  of  wages  generally  over  the
American  continent,  or  even  in  raising  it  permanently  within
the  State  or  States  in  which  the  organization  was  dominant,
but  simply  in  driving  capital  from  one  State  to  another — in
sending  it  fi'om  New  England  or  New  York  to  Illinois,  Mis-
souri, or  California;  and  workmen  would  find  their  prize  es-
caping them  just  as  they  fancied  they  had  grasped  it.  In  this
way,  in  the  New  World  no  less  than  in  the  Old,  the  larger  aims
of  Trades-Unionism  must,  as  I  apprehend,  find  defeat  Under
all  circumstances  the  facilities  of  escape  open  to  capital  are  too
great  to  make  it  possible  to  hem  it  in,  and  so  to  compel  a  sur-
render at  discretion ;  and  we  shall  have  no  need  to  modify  the
conclusions  at  which  we  have  arrived  even  in  applying  them
to  a  country  in  its  economical  circumstances  and  development
so  widely  separated  from  our  own  as  the  United  States.

§  5.  As  the  reader  has  seen,  the  utmost  power  which  I  am
disposed  to  concede  to  Trades-Unions  over  wages,  where  they
seek  their  ends  by  compelling  a  positive  increase  of  investment,
is  that  of  accelerating  an  advance,  already,  so  to  speak,  in  the
air,  and  which  would  come  in  the  end  without  their  interven-
tion. Where  strikes  have  been  permanently  successful,  where
they  have  not  merely  gained  to-day  what  has  been  lost  to-mor-
row, but  have  issued  in  a  permanently  improved  condition  of
the  workmen,  I  believe  the  explanation  of  their  success  will
always  be  found  in  a  state  of  trade  exceptionally  prosperous
which  would  in  any  case  before  long  have  attracted  an  increase
of  capital,  and  resulted  in  an  enlarged  demand  for  labor.  But
this  explanation  of  the  success  of  strikes  is,  I  find,  strenuously
repudiated  by  Mr,  Thornton,  who  regards  Trades-Unionism  as
an  agency  capable  not  merely  of  raising  wages  in  anticipation


332  TBADES-UmomSM.—I.

of  the  ordinary  commercial  influences,  but  of  permanently  sus-
taining them  at  a  level  higher  than  they  would  without  its  ac-
tion ever  have  attained,  and  in  conformity  with  this  view  is
disposed  to  attribute  the  advance  of  wages  which  within  twenty
years  has  occurred  in  most  branches  of  industry  to  Trades-Un-
ion action  as  its  proper  cause.  I  confess  Mr.  Thornton's  ar-
gument on  this  point  is  to  me  singularly  unsatisfactory.  He
writes :

"  Of  course  it  is  open  to  any  one  to  question  whether  the  enhancement
of  labor's  remuneration  which  has  thus  been  going  on  at  both  ends  is
due  to  the  influence  of  Trades-Unions,  and  whether  it  would  not  have
taken  place  equally  if  the  price  of  labor  had  been  left  to  find  its  own
level  without  extraneous  interference.  The  questioner  here,  however,
may  very  properly  be  left  to  answer  himself,  as  he  may  satisfactorily  do,
by  ijrbceeding  to  inquire  how  often  any  portion  of  the  enhancement  re-
ferred to  has  been  volunteered  by  the  masters,  and  how  often  it  has  been
only  yielded  to  solicitation  with  force  in  the  background.  He  will  find
the  instances  of  masters  spontaneously  raising  wages  to  be  about  as  nu-
merous as  those  of  workmen  conscientiously  believing  themselves  to  be
overpaid  and  coming  forward  to  insist  that  their  wages  should  be  re-
duced."*

Mr.  Thornton  apparently  is  unable  to  conceive  a  middle
term  between  "volunteering"  an  advance,  and  "yielding  to
solicitation  with  force  in  the  background;"  as  if  it  were  not
the  essence  of  his  opponent's  case  that  there  is  this  middle
term — to  be  found  in  those  economic  influences  distinct  alike
from  mere  benevolence  and  from  coercion  from  without,  which
issue  in  increased  competition  for  labor,  and  as  a  consequence
an  advance  in  its  price.  I  commend  to  Mr.  Thornton  the  fol-
lowing fixcts  supplied  by  Mr,  Brassey  :

"  In  the  famous  engine-building  establishment  at  Creuzot,  founded  by
the  father  of  Mr.  Charles  Manby,  10,000  persons  are  now  employed,  and
the  annual  expenditure  in  wages  amounts  to  £400,000. Mechanics  were

*  "On  Labor," pp.  257,  258.


t

CAPITALISTS  IN  COMBINATION.  233

paid,  when  tlie  establishment  was  first  created,  at  the  rate  of  2^-  francs  a
day.  At  the  present  time  none  receive  less  than  5  francs  a  day.  Be-
tween 1850  and  1866  the  mean  rate  advanced  from  2s.  to  2s.  lid.  per  head,
or  thirty-eight  per  cent.,  and  some  men  earned  fr-om  6s.  8d.  to  8s.  4:d.  per

day Compare  what  has  occurred  in  this  country  with  what  has

taken  place  at  MM.  Schneider's  at  Creuzot At  MM.  Schneider's,

without  the  assistance  of  a  Trades-  Union,  the  working-people  have  obtain-
ed, during  the  last  seventeen  years,  an  augmentation  of  wage  of  thirty-
eight  per  cent.  In  England,  in  the  corresponding  period,  the  most  pow-
erful of  all  the  Trade  Societies,  with  an  accumulated  fund  of  £149,000,
has  found  it  impossible  to  secure  any  increase  in  the  earnings  of  its  mem-
bers."*

How  will  Mr.  Thornton  explain  the  advance  of  wages  at
Creuzot  ?  Trades-Union  pressure  not  being  there,  will  he  refer
it  to  the  spontaneous  benevolence  of  the  iron-masters?  A  lit-
tle reflection  will  probably  suggest  to  him  a  means  of  escape
from  his  own  dilemma.

§  6,  The  power  of  workmen  to  compel  by  combination  an
advance  of  wages  has  generally  been  considered  as  more  or
less  an  open  question ;  but  that  capitalists  possess  the  corre-
sponding  power  of  keeping  wages  down  by  combination  has,
for  the  most  part,  been  taken  for  granted.  In  a  well-known
passage  Adam  Smith  observes  that  employers  are  in  a  perma^
nent  conspiracy  to  keep  wages  down,  and  the  context  certainly
implies  the  writer's  belief  that  they  are  generally  successful  in
this  object.  Nevertheless  I  must  venture  to  question  the  as-
sumption, even  though  supported  by  Adam  Smith's  authority.
I  hold  that,  at  least  in  countries  in  which  the  industrial  and
commercial  spirit  is  strong,  the  power  of  capitalists  by  com-
bination to  depress  wages  or  to  keep  them  down  is  not  a  whit
more  real  than  that  of  workmen  by  similar  means  to  force
them  up. Either  may,  no  doubt,  effect  their  object  for  a  time,

*  "Work  and  Wages," pp.  159-161.


UU  TRADES -UNIONISM.— I.

but  neither,  as  I  believe,  can  be  permanently  successful.  The
grounds  of  this  opinion  will  be  apparent  to  those  who  have
followed  the  argument  by  which  in  a  former  chapter  I  have
endeavored  to  prove  the  "  determination  "  toward  the  Wages-
fund  of  a  certain  portion  of  the  national  wealth.*  It  is  quite
true,  no  doubt,  that  capitalists,  as  possessors  of  wealth,  have
both  the  physical  and  the  legal  power  of  employing  it  as  they
please.  They  may,  if  they  choose,  withdraw  all  their  capital
from  investment  and  squander  it  in  unproductive  consumption,
or,  for  that  matter,  sink  it  in  the  sea ;  and  the  effect  of  such
proceeding  on  their  part,  if  this  course  were  extensively  adopt-
ed, would  undoubtedly  be  to  depress  wages  in  the  country  for
a  considerable  period  of  time.  But  I  apprehend  the  real  ques-
tion is,  not  whether  capitalists  have  the  physical  or  legal  power
of  doing  such  things,  but  whether,  their  character  being  such
as  it  is,  it  is  morally  possible  for  them  to  adopt  these  or  any
other  effectual  expedients  for  accomplishing  the  object  the}^  no
doubt  much  desire.  The  whole  issue,  as  I  conceive  it,  turns
upon  the  character  of  capitalists  as  a  class,  and  more  particu-
larly on  the  balance  within  them  of  two  qualities  of  mind — on
the  one  hand,  the  strength  of  the  accumulative  propensity,  and,
on  the  other,  the  taste  for  luxurious  enjoyment,  by  which  the
former  is  constantly  counteracted.  Supposing  these  two  quali-
ties to  be  so  adjusted  in  the  owners  of  wealth  in  this  country
that  the  prospect  of  a  certain  rate  of  profit,  say  ten  per  cent.,
suffices  to  cause  a  certain  proportion  of  the  whole  national
wealth  to  be  turned  toward  productive  investment,  this  propor-
tion will  be  turned  to  this  destination.  It  is  true,  indeed,  that
those  who  thus  employ  their  wealth  would  be  very  glad  to  ob-
tain from  it  a  larger  return  than  they  are  likely  to  receive,  and
not  a  few  would  be  only  too  ready,  if  they  had  the  power,  to
force  down  the  rate  of  wages  with  this  view. But  this  is  pre-

Ante,  pp.  184-187.


CAPITALISTS  IN  COMBINATION.  235

cisely  what  they  can  not  do  consistently  with  gratifying  the
dominant  propensity  which,  under  the  temptation  of  a  cer-
tain rate  of  profit,  draws  them  toward  productive  investment.
Thus,  supposing  a  group  of  employers  to  have  succeeded,  as
no  doubt  would  be  perfectly  possible  for  them,  in  temjporarily
forcing  down  wages  by  combination  in  a  particular  trade,  a
portion  of  their  wealth,  previously  invested,  would  now  be-
come free  —  how  would  it  be  employed?  I  have  already
traced  the  consequences  of  such  an  occurrence,  and  need  not
weary  the  reader  by  repeating  the  deduction  here.  Suffice  it
that,  though  it  is  impossible  to  say  what  might  be  the  course
adopted  in  particular  instances — unless  we  are  to  suppose  the
character  of  a  Inrge  section  of  a  community  to  be  suddenly
changed  in  a  leading  attribute,  the  wealth  so  withdrawn  from
wages  would,  in  the  end,  and  before  long,  be  restored  to  wages.
The  same  motives  which  led  to  its  investment  would  lead  to
its  re-investment,  and,  once  re-invested,  the  interests  of  those
concerned  would  cause  it  to  be  distributed  among  the  several
elements  of  capital  in  the  same  proportions  as  before.  In  this
way  covetousness  is  held  in  check  by  covetousness,  and  the
desire  for  aggrandizement  sets  limits  to  its  own  gratification.
My  conclusion  is  that,  though  combination,  whether  employed
by  capitalists  or  by  laborers,  may  succeed  in  controlling  for  a
time  the  price  of  labor,  it  is  utterly  powerless,  in  the  hands  of
either,  to  effect  a  permanent  alteration  in  the  market  rate  of
wages  as  determined  by  supply  and  demand.

§  7.  Throughout  the  foregoing  discussion  it  has  been  con-
stantly assumed  that  an  advance  of  wages  involves  as  a  con-
sequence, ccEieris  paribus^  a  fall  of  profits.  I  beg  to  call  the
reader's  attention  to  the  condition  here  presupposed;  for  I
observe,  in  some  recent  publications  in  which  the  relation  of
profits  to  wages  is  discussed,  that  there  is  an  entire  omission
on  the  part  of  the  writers  to  say  w^hether,  in  challenging  the


236  TBABES-UNIONISM.—L

doctrine  just  stated,  thej  understand  it  as  subject  to,'or  irre-
spective of,  this  qualification.  Mr.  Brassey,  for  example,  de-
votes a  chapter  to  prove  that  "  the  cost  of  labor  can  not  be
determined  by  the  rate  of  wages;"  and  this  enunciation  is
characterized  by  Mr.  Harrison  in  the  Fortnightly  Review  as  a
"striking  law  of  industry,  which  the  book  before  us  boldly
formulates  and  completely  proves,"  and  he  proceeds  to  con-
trast it  with  the  "professorial  dicta  of  so-called  economists,
based  on  the  assumption  that  high  wages  inevitably  imply
dear  goods  and  low  profits,"  That  any  one  ever  maintained
that  the  cost  of  labor,  prices,  or  profits  were  determined  simply
by  the  rate  of  wages  irrespective  of  the  efficiency  of  the  labor,  is
what,  I  own,  I  find  it  hard  to  believe ;  and.  until  Mr.  Harrison
tells  us  who  the  economists  are  that  maintain  this  enlisfhtened
view — as  I  have  never  myself  happened  to  meet  with  a  speci-
men of  the  class  either  in  the  flesh  or  in  print — I  shall  be  dis-
posed to  regard  them  as  mythical  entities  evolved  from  the
moral  consciousness  of  writers  more  anxious  to  refute  than  to
understand  Political  Economy.  On  the  other  hand,  I  find  it
almost  equally  difficult  to  suppose  that  either  Mr.  Brassey  or
Mr.  Harrison  would  advisedly  maintain,  on  the  assumption  that
the  efficiency  of  labor  is  a  constant  condition,  that  the  cost  of  labor,
and,  as  depending  on  it,  the  rate  of  profit,  are  not  determined
by  the  rate  of  wages.  In  truth,  it  is  pretty  clear  that  the  en-
tire controversy  on  this  subject  has  arisen  from  some  people
not  taking  the  trouble  to  understand  what  other  people  say.
Eicardo,  for  example,  has  laid  it  dowi\  that  profits  are  inverse-
ly as  wages,  but  any  tolerably  careful  student  of  Eicardo
would  see  that  by  wages  he  meant  "proportional  wages" —
that  is  to  say,  the  laborer's  share  of  the  product,  or,  if  wages  in
the  ordinary  sense,  then  that  the  statement  was  to  be  received
subject  to  the  condition  that  the  efficiency  of  labor  remained
the  same.  Eicardo,  however,  has  not  been  fortunate  in  finding
careful  students ;  and  scores  of  writers  who  have  undertaken


PROFITS  AND  WAGES.  23f

to  refute  his  doctrine  have  in  reahty  refuted  merely  their  own
misconception  of  it.  And  what  in  effect  is  this  "striking  law
of  industry,"  now  for  the  first  time,  according  to  Mr.  Harrison,
"boldly  formulated  and  completely  proved,"  and  which  puts
to  shame  "the  professorial  dicta  of  so-called  economists?"
Why  simply  this,  that  it  often  pays  better  to  employ  a  good
workman  at  high  wages  than  an  inferior  one  at  low.  The  fact
is  indubitable,  but  why  it  should  be  called  "  a  striking  law  of
industry  "  rather  than  the  most  common  of  industrial  common-
places, still  more  why  it  should  be  represented  as  a  conclusive
refutation  of  all  that  economists  have  written  on  the  relation
of  wages  to  profits,  is  what  I  must  confess  myself  wholly  at  a
loss  to  discover.

It  is  possible,  indeed,  that  the  language  I  have  quoted  may
refer,  not  to  the  perfectly  sound  though  somewhat  trite  max-
im, that  efficient  labor  is  often  worth  more  than  inefficient,
but  to  a  doctrine  suggested,  rather  than  "boldly  formulated,"
in  the  chapter  under  consideration.  In  a  passage  headed
"  Uniform  Cost  of  Labor,"  Mr,  Brassey  writes  as  follows :
"High  wages  do  not  necessarily  imply  dear  labor,  just  as,  on
the  other  hand,  low  wages  do  not,  of  necessity,  make  labor
cheap.  On  my  father's  extensive  contracts,  carried  on  in  al-
most every  country  of  the  civilized  world  and  in  every  quarter
of  the  globe,  the  daily  wage  of  the  laborer  was  fixed  at  widely
different  rates ;  but  it  was  found  to  be  the  almost  invariable
rule  that  the  cost  of  labor  was  the  same — that  for  the  same
sum  of  money  the  same  amount  of  work  was  everywhere  per-
formed, Superior  skill,  extra  diligence,  and  a  larger  devel-
opment of  physical  power,  will  often  compensate  the  employer
who  finds  himself  obliged  to  pay  higher  wages  than  his  com,-
petitors."*

Let  me  here  say  that  I  have  not  the  slightest  disposition  to

*  "Work  and  Wages,"  pp.  74,  75.


238  TRADES-  UNIONISM.— I.

question  the  fact  of  a  real  connection  existing  between  good
wages  and  efficient  work,  and  still  less  would  I  dispute  the
probability  (to  refer  here  to  a  later  position  of  Mr.  Brassey's)
that  shortened  hours  of  work  may  up  to  a  certain  point  find
their  compensation  in  the  increased  energy  of  the  workman.
As  corroborative  of  these  assumptions,  I  regard  the  statement
of  Mr.  Brassey's  experience  furnished  in  this  work  as  extreme-
ly valuable.  But  the  reader  will  observe  that  there  is  some-
thing more  in  the  passage  just  quoted  than  a  mere  statement
of  specific  fact.  The  words  "  it  was  found  to  be  an  almost  in-
variable rule  that  the  cost  of  labor  was  the  same — that  for  the
same  sum  of  money  the  same  amount  of  work  was  everywhere
performed,"  coming  under  the  heading  "  Uniform  Cost  of  La-
bor," seem  to  point  to  the  existence  of  an  economic  law  accord-
ing to  which  the  efficiency  of  labor,  all  the  world  over,  varies
with  its  price.  An  economic  law,  indeed,  there  is  which  con-
nects efficiency  of  work  with  payment,  but,  as  I  have  else-
where shown,  this  operates  only  within  the  limits  of  competi-
tion.* Within  such  limits  the  tendency  very  obviously  will
be  to  adjust  wages  in  each  occupation  to  efficiency  in  that  oc-
cupation, and  thus  to  bring  out  as  the  result  a  uniform  cost  of
labor,  or,  as  I  prefer  to  call  it,  price  of  work.  But  Mr.  Bras-
sey  goes  far  beyond  this,  and  lays  down  the  rule  of  uniform
cost  of  labor  as  "  almost  invariable  in  every  country  of  the  civ-
ilized world  and  in  every  quarter  of  the  globe."  This,  indeed,
would  have  been  a  "striking  law  of  industry,"  had  our  author
made  the  position  good ;  but  it  is  singularly  disappointing  to
discover,  ere  we  read  many  pages  on,  that  the  so-called  law
can  only  be  regarded  as  a  rhetorical  expression.  At  page  84
we  find  that  it  must  be  understood  as  referring  to  "railway
work  executed  by  unskilled  labor,"  whiU^,  even  as  thus  lim-
ited, it  is  far  from  being  universally  true,  failing,  as  Mr.  Bras-

*  See  ante,  p.  77,  note.


COST  OF  LABOR.  239

sej  informs  us  it  does,  in  the  comparison  of  English  labor  with
the  labor  of  India  and  of  Italy  (pp.  87,  90),  and,  as  statistics
given  elsewhere  in  the  vcjlume  show  (pp.  88  and  49),  in  other
instances  also.  That  the  rule  does  not  hold  of  the  skilled  la-
bor of  different  countries  is  what  is  implied  in  nearly  every
other  page  of  Mr.  Brassey's  book ;  the  constant  moral  there
enforced  being  the  heavy  detriment  which  Great  Britain  suf-
fers from  her  dear  labor — a  detriment  so  heavy,  an  economical
drawback  so  serious,  that  only  her  great  resources  in  other  re-
spects enable  her  to  bear  up  under  it  against  the  strain  of  con-
tinental competition.

What,  then,  is  the  net  outcome  from  Mr.  Brassey's  facts  in
their  bearing  upon  the  question  as  to  the  connection  between
wages  and  the  cost  of  labor  or  price  of  work  ?  A  large  por-
tion of  those  facts  relate  to  the  wages  of  laborers  in  Great
Britain  in  free  competition  with  each  other;  and  so  far  his
statements  form  a  striking  and  usefnl  illustration  of  a  familiar
principle — the  tendency  of  competition,  within  any  given  de-
partment  of  industry,  to  adjust  payment  to  efficiency,  so  as  to
render  the  price  of  a  given  piece  of  work  pretty  nearly  the
same  whether  it  is  performed  by  labor  of  superior  or  of  only
moderate  and  ordinary  skill.  But  where  his  examples  are  of
broader  scope,  and  exhibit  the  relative  rates  of  wages  in  dif-
ferent countries  and  in  labor  markets  not  in  free  competition
with  each  other,  their  value  in  relation  to  the  question  in  hand
is  of  a  different  kind.  What  they  amount  to  would  seem  to
be  this:  in  the  comparison  of  different  countries,  a  very  low
rate  of  remuneration  for  labor  is  generally  found  to  be  accom-
panied with  a  very  low  degree  of  industrial  eflficiencj^,  while,
as  the  condition  of  the  laborer  improves,  his  efficiency  up  to  a
certain  point  is  found  to  increase  in  nearly  the  same  degree.
I  say  "up  to  a  certain  point;"  for  it  does  not  appear  that
the  correspondence  between  remuneration  and  efficiency  holds
good  beyond  the  range  of  those  employments  which  call  for


240  TRADES-UNIONISM.— I.

mere  physical  energy  and  endurance,  such  as  railway  work
performed  by  unskilled  labor;  nor  is  it  found  to  be  universal-
ly true  even  within  these  limits.  When  we  pass  from  the
ranks  of  unskilled  to  those  of  skilled  labor,  and  when  in  the
latter  we  confine  our  attention  to  those  cases  in  which  the  re-
muneration has  risen  above  the  point  at  which  it  still  contrib-
utes to  mere  physical  energy,  we  find  no  evidence  in  the  facts
adduced  by  Mr.  Brassey  of  the  existence  of  a  uniform  cost  of
labor  in  different  countries.  On  the  contrary,  the  main  tenor
of  his  work  goes  to  establish  the  opposite  position;  since,  as
I  have  already  remarked,  the  constant  moral  deduced  from  his
reasonings  is  the  heavy  disadvantage  which  England  under-
goes from  her  dear  labor  in  comparison  with  the  cheap  labor
of  the  Continent — a  disadvantage  so  great  as  only,  according
to  Mr,  Brassey,  to  be  just  compensated .  by  her  superior  re-
sources in  machinery,  raw  material,  and  coal.  It  follows  most
clearly  from  this  that,  in  Mr.  Brassey 's  opinion,  that  portion
of  English  work  which  is  performed  by  labor  is  more  highly
paid  for  here  than  abroad.  And  in  truth  we  have  only  to
consider  the  habits  of  the  great  majority  of  our  artisan  popu-
lation to  perceive  how  very  slight  the  connection  can,  in  the
nature  of  things,  be  between  efficient  labor  in  those  classes  and
the  rate  of  their  remuneration.  An  increase  of  wages  which
merely  results  in  an  enlarged  consumption  of  beer  and  spirits
is  not  likely  to  add  much  either  to  the  physical  powers  or  to
the  intelligence  and  skill  of  the  recipients;  and  notoriously
this  is  the  way  in  which  an  increase  of  wages  is,  for  the  most
part,  taken  out  in  this  countr3\  I  repeat  once  again,  I  have
no  desire  to  dispute  the  existence  of  a  real  connection  between
good  pay  and  efficient  work ;  only  let  us  note  well  the  nature
of  the  connection.  It  exists  so  far,  and  only  so  ftir,  as  the
larger  pay  is  applied  to  sustain  the  industrial  qualities,  phys-
ical or  mental,  of  the  workman.  At  present  it  would  seem
that  this  is  very  generally  the  case  while  wages  are  no  more


HOW  FAB UNIFORM.  241

than  sufficient  to  supply  the  primary  animal  wants.  But
where  they  exceed  this  limit,  the  increased  pecuniary  means
placed  at  the  laborer's  disposal  are  quite  as  often  employed  to
impair  as  to  improve  his  industrial  qualities,  and  the  connec-
tion between  remuneration  and  efficiency  is  at  an  end,  or  at
most  is  but  a  matter  of  accident.  I  am  one  of  those,  however,
who  live  in  hope  that  the  rule  may  not  alwaj^s  be  thus  limit-
ed. When  artisans  shall  learn  to  use  their  increasing  re-
sources to  help  their  intellectual  and  moral  progress,  instead  of,
as  now,  squandering  them  in  brutalizing  dissipation,  and  when
improved  education  shall  go  hand  in  hand  with  a  larger  com-
mand over  material  well-being,  we  may  hope  to  see  an  ap-
proximation toward  that  uniform  cost  of  labor  of  which  Mr.
Brassey  speaks,  but  of  which,  outside  the  lower  grades  of  la-
bor, the  indications  at  present  are,  it  is  to  be  feared,  somewhat
partial  and  rare.

So  much  for  Mr.  Brassey's  facts.  I  fail  to  discover  in  them
any  new  "law  of  industrial  life"  —  indeed  it  is  but  right  to
say  that  Mr.  Brassey  disclaims  for  them  any  pretensions  to  this
character — still  less  any  thing  in  the  least  at  variance  with  the
well  understood  doctrines  of  Political  Economy;  but  I  find
■evidence,  not  always,  as  it  seems  to  me,  very  accurately  inter-
preted, of  which  a  good  part  is  illustrative  of  a  very  familiar
economic  principle,  and  the  rest  supports  the  view  of  a  con-
nection pretty  widely  existing  between  wages  and  industrial
efficiency  in  the  lower  ranks  of  labor.

16


CHAPTER  lY.

TBADES-VNIOmSM.—IL

§  1.  The  methods  by  which  Trades-Unions  seek  to  operate
on  the  rate  of  wages  are  numerous ;  but  thej  all  find  a  place
under  one  or  other  of  the  three  following-  heads:

1.  Directly — by  calling  on  employers  to  raise  the  rate  of
wages,  or,  what  comes  to  the  same  thing,  to  reduce  the  num-
ber of  working  hours,  the  rate  of  wages  not  being  proportional-
ly reduced — a  demand  which  involves  either  increased  invest-
ment of  capital  in  the  form  of  wages ;  or — unless  so  far  as  the
reduction  in  working  hours  may  be  compensated  by  increased
efficiency — a  proportionally  diminished  production  from  the
same  investment.

2.  Indirectly — by  regulations  directed  toward  restricting  the
supply  of  labor.

3.  Indirectly- — by  regulations  directed  toward  increasing
the  demand  for  labor  by  increasing  the  need  for  it ;  or,  as  it  is
otherwise  expressed,  by  increasing  the  quantity  of  work  to  be
done.

The  first  of  these  methods  is  that  which  has  been  considered
in  the  last  chapter;  and  the  reader  has  seen  how  far  we  found
it  to  be  efficacious  and  legitimate.  The  two  remaining  methods
have  now  to  be  considered.

§  2.  And  first,  as  to  that  mode  of  action  which  seeks  to  at-
tain its  end  by  acting  on  the  supply  of  labor. In  order  to  form


MODE  OF  ACTING  ON  SUPPLY.  243

a  sound  judgment  on  this  portion  of  Trades-Union  policy,  it  is
important  to  discriminate  between  two  perfectly  distinct  meth-
ods by  which  the  supply  of  labor  may  be  controlled.  It  may,
in  the  first  place,  be  controlled  at  its  source  by  diminishing  the
number  of  people  born  to  the  calling  of  labor ;  and  this  is  a
result  which  Trades-Unions  might  in  many  ways  promote — for
example,  by  cultivating  among  the  laboring  classes  a  sounder
public  opinion  on  the  subject  of  population  than  at  present
prevails,  by  impressing  on  parents  their  responsibility  toward
their  offspring,  and  generally  by  encouraging  prudence  and
foresight,  which,  once  established  as  habits,  would  affect  con-
duct in  relation  to  marriage  and  its  consequences,  as  well  as
with  regard  to  other  aspects  of  life;  and  this  influence  might
be  brought  to  bear  either  upon  the  laboring  population  at  large,
or  upon  those  sections  of  the  population  with  which  eacli
Trades-Union  happened  to  be  immediately  in  contact.  This  is
one  method  by  which  it  may  be  attempted  to  operate  on  the
labor  market  through  the  supply  of  labor.  But  the  end  in
view  may  also  be  sought  by  another  path,  namely,  by  opposing
artificial  barriers  to  the  admission  of  workmen  to  particular
trades — for  example,  by  regulations  excluding  from  employ-
ment in  the  protected  trades  all  who  have  not  been  regularly
apprenticed  to  them,  setting  limits  at  the  same  time  to  the  num-
ber of  apprentices  which  each  master-tradesman  may  receive ;
the  multiplication  of  the  laboring  people  as  a  whole  and  of  each
portion  of  it  being  left  to  the  influences  which  at  present  deter-
mine it.  Of  these  two  methods  of  proceeding  we  may  confi-
dently pronounce  the  first  to  be  both  sound  and  legitimate —
sound,  because  the  means  adopted  are  fitted  to  attain  the  end
in  view,  and  legitimate,  because  the  course  pursued  would  be
free  from  all  attempts  at  coercion,  and  would  be  addressed  ex-
clusively to  the  reason  and  conscience  of  those  concerned.  We
have  no  occasion  here,  however,  to  enter  into  any  further  ex-
amination of  this  mode  of  restricting  the  supply  of  labor,  since


244  TRADES-UNIONISM.— II.

it  is  not  the  method  which  Trades-Unions  have  adopted.  Their
action  in  this  direction  has  been  confined  exclusively  to  that
other  mode  of  proceeding  which  consists  in  hedging  round  cer-
tain favored  trades  with  artificial  obstacles ;  and  this  according-
ly is  the  mode  of  action  we  are  now  called  upon  to  consider.

And  here  it  may  at  once  be  conceded  that  the  policy  in
question  is  capable  of  being  made  effectual  for  accomplishing
its  immediate  purpose — that  of  raising  the  rate  of'wages  in  the
regulated  occupations  above  the  level  which  in  an  open  labor
market  it  would  attain  ;  but  conceding  this,  the  question  still
remains  whether  this  mode  of  action  is  consistent  with  the  best
interests  either  of  the  laboring  people  as  a  whole,  or  even  of
that  section  of  them  in  whose  favor  the  restrictive  regulations
are  imposed.  To  enable  us  to  form  a  judgment  upon  this
point,  it  is  important  to  bear  in  mind  the  real  nature  of  the
monopoly  created  by  the  restrictive  rule.  That  monopoly  is
not,  as  might  at  first  be  imagined,  one  in  favor  of  certain  natu-
ral groups  of  population — the  collection  of  families,  namely,
who  suppl}^  candidates  to  the  highly-paid  trades- — as  opposed
to  the  laboring  population  at  large.  It  is  a  monopoly  of  a
much  narrower  and  more  artificial  sort  than  this.  The  line
drawn  is,  not  between  such  natural  groups  and  the  rest  of  the
laboring  people,  but  between  certain  selected  members  of  such
groups  and  all  who  are  not  included  in  the  selection.  Now
this  is  an  important  distinction  ;  because  if  the  purpose  were
to  reserve  certain  occupations  to  certain  groups  of  families,  say
to  those  who  at  present  fill  the  occupations  in  question  and
their  descendants — though  such  a  course  would  amount  to  the
creation  of  industrial  castes,  and  would  be  open  to  all  the  ob-
jections that  apply  to  a  caste  system — still  it  would  have  one
important  merit:  the  end  in  view — the  permanent  elevation
of  wages  in  the  favored  occupations  above  the  level  prevailing
in  the  country — would  need  for  its  attainment  something  more
than  the  mere  exclusion of  competitors  from  other  emploj^-


MODE  OF  ACTING  ON  SUPPLY.  245

ments:  it  would  require,  besides  this,  a  control  of  population
within  the  protected  groups,  and  consequently  could  only  be
accomplished  by  the  cultivation  of  feelings  and  habits  socially
so  valuable  that  they  might  almost  be  thought  to  compensate
for  the  serious  evils  inherent  in  every  such  plan.  Such,  how-
ever, is  not  the  object  or  character  of  the  policy  we  are  now
considering.  The  thing  aimed  at  is  not  the  permanent  eleva-
tion of  any  natural  groups  of  population,  but  simply  the  main-
tenance of  certain  individuals  who  happen  to  be  exercising
certain  callings  in  the  enjoyment  of  a  state  of  well-being  not
permitted  to  their  fellows.  Those,  therefore,  who  charge  upon
Trades-Unions  the  purpose  of  creating  industrial  castes  do  not
seem  to  have  hit  the  precise  weakness  leavening  the  conduct
they  condemn.  The  scheme  has,  in  truth,  nothing  in  it  so
large  or  liberal  as  the  social  idea  on  which  a  caste  system  rests.
It  is  conceived  in  a  far  narrower  spirit,  and  is  wholly  incapa-
ble of  promoting  any  end  that  can  properly  be  called  social.
Far  from  comprehending  in  its  aims  the  general  interests  of
labor,  it  is  not  even  large  enough  to  embrace  those  of  a  single
laboring  group,  or  even  of  the  ftmiily  in  its  narrowest  sense;
for,  as  Mr.  Thornton  tells  us,*  "  a  journeyman  is  not  permitted
to  teach  his  own  son  his  own  trade,  nor,  if  the  lad  managed  to
learn  the  trade  by  stealth,  would  he  be  permitted  to  practice  it,
A  master,  desiring  out  of  charity  to  take  as  apprentice  one  of  the
eight  destitute  orphans  of  a  widowed  mother,  has  been  told  by
his  men  that  if  he  did  they  would  strike.  A  brick-layer's  as-
sistant who  by  looking  on  has  learned  to  lay  bricks  as  well  as
his  principal,  is  generally  doomed,  nevertheless,  to  continue  a
laborer  for  life.  He  will  never  rise  to  the  rank  of  brick-layer,
if  those  who  have  already  attained  that  dignity  can  help  it."

The  rule is thus a  purely  mechanical  one,  and  operates
wholly  irrespective  of  any  of  the  conditions  on  which  indus-

*  "On  Labor,"  p.  343.


246  TRADES-UNIONISM.— IL

trial  progress  or  human  well-being  depends.  No  attempt  is
made  to  control  population  within  the  protected  trades,  any
more  than  outside  them.  Nor  are  the  privileges  enjoyed  con-
nected with  any  qualification  which  might  serve  as  an  edu-
cating influence  for  the  people  at  large.  On  the  contrary,  the
system  presents  to  them  the  unedifying  spectacle  of  a  portion
of  their  number  enjoying  exceptional  advantages  which  they
have  done  nothing  to  deserve,  and  which  they  obtain  at  the
expense  of  others  whose  natural  or  moral  claim  is  quite  as
good  as  theirs.  It  thus  at  once  creates  privileged  classes,  and
does  so  in  a  manner  which  precludes  even  such  partial  advan-
tages as  might  accrue  from  a  regime  of  privilege.

Mr.  Thornton,  indeed,  has  offered  a  plea  for  these  restrictions
which,  if  it  could  be  made  good,  might  go  some  way  toward
excusing  them.  He  writes:  "The  only  apology  that  can  be
offered  to  the  many  is,  that  without  the  sacrifices  exacted  from
them  the  piivileges  enjoyed  by  the  few  could  never  be  pre-
served; and  that,  moreover,  the  sacrifices  may  be  only  tempo-
rary, for  that  the  best  chance  the  whole  laboring  population
have  of  advancing  is  by  each  of  its  separate  sections  advancing
separately,  and  that  therefore  each  Trades-Union  is  best  con-
sulting the  general  good  by  attending  in  the  first  instance  ex-
clusively to  its  own,"  It  must  of  course  be  admitted  that  the
privileges  enjoyed  by  the  few  under  this  scheme  can  only  be
preserved  by  imposing  sacrifices  on  the  many;  but  Mr.  Thorn-
ton can  scarcely  have  intended  this  as  its  justification,  since
precisely  the  same  can  be  said  for  every  monopoly  that  ever
existed.  The  second  portion  of  his  plea,  that  the  plan  in  ques-
tion, though  confined  at  present  to  a  favored  few,  may  be
made  instrumental  for  gradually  elevating  the  whole  laboring
population,  would  be  more  to  the  purpose  if  the  fact  were  as
he  assumes.  But  this  is  precisely  what  I  must  deny  to  be
the  case.  The  essential  nature  of  the  plan  absolutely  precludes
the  possibility  of  its  being  applied  to  any  such  enlarged  pur-


HOW  FAB  JUSTIFIABLE?  247

pose.  For  on  what  does  its  efficacy  depend?  Let  the  reader
observe  that,  as  I  have  already  pointed  out,  it  makes  no  pro-
vision for  the  control  of  population  either  within  or  without
the  protected  trades  ;  and  further,  that,  while  it  leaves  popula-
tion to  proceed  as  the  unchecked  instincts  of  its  members  may
determine,  it  fails  equally  to  take  any  steps  for  making  labor
more  productive:  indeed,  as  I  shall  presently  have  occasion  to
point  out,  there  are  other  portions  of  the  Trades-Union  regu-
lations which  tend  directly  to  limit  and  even  positively  to  re-
duce the  productive  powers  of  industry.  On  what,  then,  does
the  efficacy  of  the  arrangement  depend?  Simply  and  exclu-
sively on  the  circumstance  of  the  monopoly  it  creates — on  the
fact  that  those  within  the  protected  trades  are  few  as  compared
with  those  who  are  outside  them.  Increase  the  numbers  within
the  protected  trades  in  relation  to  the  outsiders,  or,  on  the  oth-
er hand,  diminish  the  number  of  outsiders  in  relation  to  those
who  are  protected,  and  the  virtue  of  the  scheme  evaporates,
and  wages  inside  and  outside  return  to  their  natural  level.
The  entire  efficacy  of  the  system  thus  depending  upon  the  fact
that  it  is  partially  applied,  the  extension  of  its  privileges  to
the  whole  population  would  be  equivalent  to  their  complete
abrogation.  Such  a  sj^stem,  from  its  very  nature,  is  incapable
of  the  development  claimed  for  it.  At  the  utmost  it  can  only
do  what  it  actually  accomplishes — secure,  that  is  to  say,  ex-
ceptional advantages  for  a  select  few,  the  condition  of  their  en-
joyment being  that  the  same  advantages  shall  not  be  shared
by  the  many.  I  grant  it  is  not  for  the  richer  or  more  edu-
cated classes  to  throw  stones  here  at  Trades-Unionists;  and  I
have  certainly  no  desire  to  do  so.  There  is  no  class  that  has
not  shown  itself,  when  opportunity  offered,  quite  capable  of
sacrificing  the  most  important  interests  of  the  community  to
the  aggrandizement,  real  or  imaginary,  of  its  own  members;
and  the  working-classes  are  in  this  respect  neither  better  nor
worse  than  others. But  if  every  anti-social  regulation  is  to  be


248  TBADE8-UNI0NI8M,—IL

sanctioned  and  upheld  among  working-men  which  has  ever
obtained  footing  among  those  who  are  called  their  betters,  the
prospect  of  social  advancement  seems  but  small.  Into  these
class  questions,  however,  I  have  no  wish  to  enter  here.  My
purpose  has  been  simply  to  ascertain  the  real  character  and
bearing  of  this  particular  portion  of  Trades-Union  rules ;  and
this  is  the  result  to  which  I  am  led :  I  find  it  to  be  in  its  es-
sential character  a  monopoly  of  the  narrowest  kind,  capable
indeed  of  accomplishing  some  small  results  in  favor  of  a  priv-
ileged few,  but  wholly  destitute  of  efficacy  as  an  expedient  for
helping  social  improvement;  a  monopoly,  moreover,  founded
on  no  principle  either  of  moral  desert  or  of  industrial  efficiency,
but  simply  on  chance  or  arbitrary  selection,  and  which  there-
fore can  not  but  exert  a  demoralizing  influence  on  all  who
come  within  its  scope ;  in  all  its  aspects  presenting  an  ungra-
cious contrast  to  all  that  is  best  and  most  generous  in  the  spirit
of  modern  democracy.

"  If,"  says  Mr.  Mill,*  "  no  improvement  were  to  be  hoped  for  in  the
general  circumstances  of  the  working-classes,  the  success  of  a  portion  of
them,  however  small,  in  keeping  their  wages  by  combination  above  the
market  rate,  would  be  whollj^  a  matter  of  satisfaction.  But  when  the  el-
evation of  the  character  and  condition  of  the  entire  body  has  at  last  be-
come a  thing  not  beyond  the  reach  of  rational  effort,  it  is  time  that  the
better  paid  classes  of  skilled  artisans  should  seek  their  own  advantage  in
common  with,  and  not  by  the  exclusion  of,  their  fellow-laborers.  While
they  continue  to  tix  their  hopes  on  hedging  themselves  in  against  com-
petition, and  protecting  their  own  wages  by  shutting  out  others  from  ac-
cess to  their  employment,  nothing  better  can  be  expected  from  them  than
that  total  absence  of  any  large  and  generous  aims,  that  almost  open  dis-
regard of  all  other  objects  than  high  wages  and  little  work  for  their  own
small  body,  which  were  so  deplorably  evident  in  the  proceedings  and
manifestoes  of  the  Amalgamated  Society  of  Engineers  during  their  quar-
rel with  their  employers.  Success,  even  if  attainable,  in  raising  up  a
protected  class  of  working-people,  would  now  be  a  hinderance,  instead
of  a  help,  to  the  emancipation  of  the  working-classes  at  large."

*  "Principles  of  Political  Economy,"  vol.  ii.,  pp.  554,  555.


"MAKING  WORE."  249

§  8.  There  is  yet  another  Imc  ol'  comhict  by  which  Trades-
Unions  may  and  do  seek  to  act  upon  the  rate  of  wages — a
course  which  is  directed  neither  to  augmenting  the  sum  total
of  wealth  apphed  to  the  payment  of  wages,  nor  yet  to  restrict-
ing the  supply  of  labor,  but  to  enhancing  the  difl&culties  of
production,  arid  thereby  increasing  the  quantity  of  work  need-
ed to  be  done — :in  a  word,  it  seeks  to  raise  wages  by  "  making
work."

Now  this  portion  of  Trades- Union  policy  rests  upon  a  view
of  the  wages  problem  at  once  so  plausible  and  so  fallacious,
and  withal  so  pregnant  with  practical  mischief,  that  I  think  it
will  be  worth  our  while,  before  entering  into  the  particular
rules  by  which  it  is  sought  to  carry  it  into  effect,  to  consider
briefly  the  theoretic  principle  underlying  it ;  and  I  am  the
more  disposed  to  do  so,  because  I  find  that  those  who  favor
this  principle  are  by  no  means  confined  to  the  supporters  of
Trades-Unions.  In  point  of  fact,  in  the  discussions  which  have
lately  taken  place  on  the  wages  problem,  the  soundness  of  the
view  in  question  has  been  very  generally  taken  for  granted  on
both  sides.  In  Mr.  Thornton's  work  it  is  not  merely  taken  for
granted :  the  doctrine  is  deliberately  put  forward  and  formally
defended  as  an  indubitable  principle  of  economic  science.  Mr.
Thornton  indeed,  it  is  proper  to  say,  while  upholding  the  theo-
ry, strongly  denounces  its  practical  application  in  the  rules  of
Trades-Unions ;  but  this  logical  inconsistency  will  not  deprive
his  advocacy  of  the  weight  which  naturally  attaches  to  it ;  and
I  shall  therefore  make  no  apology  for  examining  the  doctrine
as  I  find  it  set  forth  and  defended  in  his  work.  The  character
and  scope  of  the  principle  to  which  I  refer  will  appear  from
the  following  passages.

At  page  87  Mr.  Thornton  writes;

"  The  quantity  of  labor  wMch  an  employer  needs  depends  upon  the
work  he  wants  to  have  done.  If  there  are  certain  jobs  which  it  is  essen-
tial to  him  to  get  finished  within  a  certain  time,  he  will,  if  labor  be  dear.


250  IBADES-UNIONISM.—IL

consent  to  pay  pretty  high  for  the  quantity  needed  to  complete  the  jobs
within  the  time.  But  he  will  not,  merely  because  labor  happens  to  be
cheap  instead  of  dear,  hire  more  than  that  quantity.  If,  on  Saturday
morning,  he  wants  his  hay  cut  or  carried  before  night,  and  if  fewer  than
ten  men  would  not  suffice,  he  will,  perhaps,  consent  to  give  ten  men  5s.
apiece,  but  he  would  not  engage  twenty  men  for  the  same  service,  even
if  he  could  get  tbero  for  Is.  a  head."

Again,  at  page  103 :

"  This  happens  [i.  e.,  the  demand  for  labor  is  urgent]  in  new  colonies, in
which  the  extent  of  land  to  be  tilled,  and  the  number  of  sheep  or  oxen
to  be  tended,  and  of  meals  to  be  cooked,  and  floors  to  be  scrubbed,  is
generally  out  of  all  proportion  to  the  number  of  available  hinds  and
herds,  cooks  and  house-maids."

And  lastly,  I  find  this  moxQ  decisive  passage  at  page  339 :

"  I  am  myself  unable  to  understand  how  mere  labor-saving  machinery
can  possibly,  if  no  counteracting  cause  intervene,  fail  to  diminish  the  de-
maud  for  labor.  If,  indeed,  the  machinery  increased  the  productiveness
of  labor  in  a  greater  ratio  than  that  in  which  it  saved  labor,  its  influence
on  employment  would  be  different.  If,  by  using  improved  implements,
one  man  were  enabled  not  merely  to  do  the  work  of  two,  but  to  turn  out
more  produce  than  the  two  together  had  formerly  done,  the  demand  for
labor  might  remain  unabated,  or  might  increase.  If  with  only  half  the
previous  expenditure  of  labor  two  ears  of  wheat  were  made  to  grow
where  but  one  grew  before,  or  twice  as  much  iron-stone  were  brought
to  the  pit's  mouth,  or  twice  as  many  herrings  were  caught,  those  men
for  whom  there  was  no  longer  place  in  the  corn-field,  or  in  the  mine,  or
on  the  fishing-ground,  might  yet  find  full  employment  in  making  the
additional  wheat  into  bread,  or  in  smelting  the  additional  ore,  or  in
curing  and  packing  the  additional  fish.  But  if  there  be  no  more  corn,
and  no  more  ore,  and  no  more  fish  than  usual,  if  the  new  machinery  has
created  no  new  work,  and  has  only  enabled  the  old  work  to  be  done
with  fewer  hands,  thereby  causing  some  old  hands  to  be  discharged,  how
can  it  be  asserted  that  the  field  of  employment  is  enlarged  ?  how  denied
that  it  is  diminished  ?"

The  theory  expressed  or  implied  in  these  passages  is  that
the  demand  for  labor,  in  so  far  as  it  affects  the  wages  of  labor,


'<  MAKING  work:'  251

depends  upon  and  is  measured  by  the  quantity  of  industrial
work  to  be  done,  which  quantity  of  industrial  work,  Mr.  Thorn-
ton tells  us,  is  "at  any  given  time  a  fixed  quantity"  (pp.  334,
335) ;  a  position  from  which  the  direct  inference  is — an  infer-
ence partially  drawn  by  Mr.  Thornton  himself — that  the  in-
terests of  labor  are  promoted  by  whatever  tends  to  increase
the  quantity  of  work  which  society  has  to  do ;  while  those  in-
terests are  proportionally  prejudiced  by  whatever  tends  to  cur-
tail the  quantity  of  needed  work.  Now  there  can  be  no  ques-
tion as  to  the  very  great  plausibility  of  this  doctrine.  I  sup-
pose there  are  very  few  working-men,  and  perhaps  not  a  great
many  outside  their  ranks,  who  would  not  accept  it  as  thus
stated.  We  all  see  at  ouce  that  labor  will  only  be  emplo3^ed
where  there  is  work  to  be  done ;  and  ngain,  that  the  more  work
there  is  to  do  of  a  particular  kind,  the  more  laborers  there  will
be  employed  iu  doing  that  particular  work ;  while  it  is  also
true  that,  where  the  work  required  is  of  a  very  urgent  kind,
employers  will  be  disposed  to  raise  their  offer  of  wages  in  or
der  to  attract  labor.  All  this  is  indisputably  sound  and  true;
and  the  conclusion  drawn  from  these  unquestionable  premises,
that  the  interest  of  the  laboring  classes  lies  in  the  work  needed
by  society  being  as  great  and  as  urgent  as  possible,  certainly
seems  plausible  enough.  Nevertheless  I  must  make  bold  to
say  that,  within  the  range  of  economic  reasoning,  no  more  pro-
found fallacy  finds  a  place  than  is  contained  in  this  inference;
nor,  I  must  add,  is  there  one  more  pregnant  with  practical  con-
sequences of  a  pernicious  kind.  Observe  some  of  the  conse-
quences that  flow  from  it.  If  the  interests  of  labor  require
that  the  quantity  of  work  to  be  done  by  labor  be  as  large  as
possible,  then  it  follows  that  all  labor-saving  machines  are  op-
posed to  the  laborer's  interests.  Mr.  Thornton,  as  we  have
seen,  admits  that  this  is  so  whenever  the  new  machinery  does
not,  as  in  the  instances  which  he  adduces,  create  as  much  new
"work  as  it  sets  aside  of  old  (p.  339). What  proportion  of  all


252  TRADES -UNIONISM.— 11.

the  machinery  employed  in  helping  industry  in  this  country
would,  under  this  qualification,  escape  condemnation,  as  not
injurious  to  the  laborer's  interests,  I  will  not  attempt  to  con-
jecture— I  should  expect  an  exceedingly  minute  fraction  of
it;  but  at  least  it  is  evident  that  so  much  of  it  as  is  used  in
the  later  stages  of  manufacture — certainly  all  connected  with
the  finishing  stages  of  the  process — would  fall  under  the  de-
scription of  machinery  which  created  no  new  work  to  take  the
place  of  what  it  superseded ;  and  would  therefore,  according  to
Mr.  Thornton's  view,  be  properly  characterized  as  hostile  to
the  interests  of  labor.  Again,  by  parity  of  reasoning,  separa-
tion of  employments  is  opposed  to  the  same  interests ;  for  what
else  is  th'e  purpose  of  thus  organizing  industry,  but  in  order  to
make  it  more  effective;  in  other  words,  to  abridge  the  amount
of  society's  work?  If  every  man  who  took  part  in  pin-mak-
ing were  compelled  to  make  the  entire  pin — to  draw  out  the
wire,  to  straighten  it,  to  cut  it,  to  point  it,  to  grind  it  at  the
top  for  receiving  the  head,  to  make  and  put  on  the  head,  etc.
— the  number  of  men  required  for  the  work  of  pin -making
would  be  indefinitely  greater  than  at  present,  and,  no  other
work  being  superseded,  the  field  for  the  employment  of  labor
would,  according  to  the  view  we  are  considering,  be  greatly
e^^tended.  Division  of  labor,  therefore,  which  narrows  this
field,  is,  according  to  this  principle,  plainly  opposed  to  the  in-
terests of  labor.  Nor  is  free  trade  less  clearly  condemned  by
the  same  doctrine.  The  international  exchange  which  it  pro-
motes is  merely  an  example  of  division  of  labor  on  a  great
scale,  and  works  toward  precisely  the  same  end  as  the  more
simple  forms — the  economy  of  labor  in  the  production  of  com-
modities. But  these  examples  only  represent  one  side  of  the
consequences  which  may  be  drawn  and  have  been  drawn  from
this  notable  principle ;  for  if  the  laborer  is  damnified  by  what-
ever tends  to  abridge  the  "  work  to  be  done,"  we  may  also
argue  conversely  that  he  must  be  proportionally  benefited  by


"MAKING  WORK."  253

whatever  increases  it,  more  particularly  if  the  additional  work
be  of  an  urgent  kind.  A  hurricane,  e.  g.,  which  strips  our
roofs,  and  smashes  our  windows,  and  sweeps  away  our  hag-
gards, becomes  in  the  light  of  this  theory  a  beneficent  influ-
ence, pregnant  with  riches  for  the  sons  of  toil — *

"  The  clouds  we  so  much  dread

Are  big  with  mercy,  and  shall  break
In  blessings  on  their  head."

It  increases  the  quantity  of  work  to  be  done,  and  so,  as  the
sa3'ing  goes,  "is  all  for  the  good  of  trade."  So  also  must  it
be  for  the  good  of  trade,  according  to  the  same  doctrine,  that
thieves  and  burglars  should  abound,  since  does  it  not  create
plenty  of  policeman's  work?  Does  it  not  compel  us  to  place
bolts  and  bars  upon  our  doors  and  windows,  thus  creating
work  for  smiths  and  carpenters?  Further,  consider  all  the
work  that  is  rendered  imperative  by  the  aggressive  instincts
and  ambitious  designs  of  nations  against  each  other :  standing
armies,  arsenals  and  fortifications,  arms  and  ammunition  —
M^hat  a  vast  amount  of  work  to  be  done  do  not  these  things
represent!  And  how  would  not  merely  the  soldier's,  but  the
productive  laborer's  occupation  be  gone,  or  at  all  events  be
seriously  abridged,  if  ever  the  disastrous  consummation  should
arrive  of  general  disarmament  and  universal  peace !  We  are
accustomed  to  laugh  at  the  celebrated  petition  of  the  chandlers

*  That  I  have  not  exaggerated  the  argument  will  be  seen  from  the  following  ex-
tract from  an  editorial  article  in  the  New  York  Tribune  (October  24,  1871)  apro-
pos of  the  burning  of  Chicago,  which  I  find  in  Mr.  Wells's  Essay  in  the  Cobden
Club  volume:  "The  money  to  replace  what  has  been  burned  will  not  be  sent
abroad  to  enrich  foreign  manufactures ;  but,  thanks  to  the  wise  policy  of  protec-
tion which  has  built  up  American  industries,  it  will  stimulate  our  own  manufac-
tures, set  our  mills  running  faster,  and  give  emploXftnent  to  thousands  of  idle  work-
men. Thus  in  a  short  time  our  abundant  natural  resources  will  restore  what  has
been  lost,  and  in  converting  the  raw  material  our  manufacturing  interests  will  take
on  a  new  activity."


254  TRADES-UNIONISM.— 11.

and  lamp-manufacturers,  recorded  by  M.  Bastiat,  for  excluding
the  light  of  the  sun.  But  the  simple  object  of  that  petition
was  to  increase  the  quantity  of  social  work  to  be  performed ;
and,  for  my  part,  I  am  unable  to  see  how  those  who  accept
the  theory  I  am  now  combating  could  consistently  refuse  their
signatures.

Where,  then,  is  the  fallacy  in  the  reasoning  which  leads
to  these  conclusions?  If  labor  will  only  be  employed  where
work  is  to  be  done,  and  will  be  employed  more  largely  in  any
given  work  in  proportion  as  there  is  more  of  that  work  to  do ;
and  if  again,  as  the  work  becomes  more  urgent,  the  laborer  is
more  sought ;  why  is  it  wrong  to  say  that  it  is  the  interest  of
the  laborer  that  the  quantity  of  work  to  be  done  should  be  as
large,  and  the  need  for  it  as  urgent,  as  possible  ?  The  answer
is  twofold :  in  the  first  place,  what  laborers  are  interested  in  is
not  work,  but  remuneration.  People,  said  Archbishop  Whate-
ly,  go  about  saying  "they  want  work,"  when  what  they  really
want  is  wages.  This  sounds  like  a  jest;  but  the  confusion  of
thought  it  exposes  is  precisely  the  confusion  embodied  in  the
argument  just  stated.  Work  and  w^ages  are  there  assumed
to  be,  if  not  strictly  convertible  terms,  at  least  facts  so  closely
bound  together  that  an  increase  of  the  one  may  be  taken  as
equivalent  to  an  increase  of  the  other.  ISTow,  before  going
further,  it  may  be  well  to  expose  the  utter  groundlessness  of
this  notion  as  a  matter  of  fact ;  and  a  Blue  Book  recently  is-
sued by  the  Government*  fortunately  supplies  me  with  what
is  necessary  for  this  purpose.

I  take  the  three  countries,  Germany,  England,  and  Califor-
nia: I  find  that  in  the  first  the  number  of  liours  in  a  working
day  varies  between  fourteen,  for  some  occupations,  and,  for  the
great  majority,  twelve.  In  England  it  is  now  mostly  ten,  but,
in  an  increasing  number  of  trades,  nine  only. In  California

*  "  Condition  of  the  Working-classes  in  Foreign  Countries,"  1871.


WOBK  AND  WAGES.  255

ten  is  the  maximum,  while  in  many  trades  the  number  is  as
low  as  eight.  Now  it  would  no  doubt  be  unwarrantable  to
assume  that  the  work  to  be  done  in  different  countries  varied
for  a  given  quota  of  working-people  with  the  number  of  hoars
in  a  working  day,  inasmuch  as  one  man  may  put  as  much
work  into  nine  hours  as  another  into  fourteen  ;  but  the  crite-
rion would  be  correct  unless  so  far  as  it  was  affected  by  the
different  efiiciency  of  labor  in  different  countries.  Taking  ac-
count of  this,  and  assuming,  what  I  imagine  is  quite  in  excess
of  the  truth,  that  English  labor  is  more  efficient  than  German
in  the  proportion  of  fourteen  or  twelve  to  ten  or  nine,  it  would
follow  that  the  work  to  be  done  in  Germany  would  bear  about
the  same  proportion  to  her  laboring  population  as  the  work^
to  be  done  in  England  bears  to  the  laboring  population  of
this  country.  With  regard  to  California,  I  do  not  suppose  it
would  be  contended  that  labor  there  is  more  efficient  than  in
England,  and  we  may,  therefore,  assume  that  the  w^ork  to  be
done  in  the  two  countries,  in  its  relation  to  the  laboring  popu-
lation of  each,  is  fairly  represented  by  the  respective  lengths
of  their  working-day.  The  result  of  our  comparison  then  is,
that  the  work  to  be  done  in  the  three  countries,  Germany,  En-
gland, and  California,  bears  about  the  same  proportion  in  each
to  the  number  of  the  laboring  population.  This  being  so,  if
the  connection  between  work  and  wages  be  such  as  the  the-  .
ory  we  are  considering  assumes,  wages  in  the  three  countries
should  be  about  the  same.  In  point  of  fact,  I  need  scarcely
say  wages  in  California,  even  after  making  all  due  allowance
for  the  difference  in  the  range  of  local  prices  here  and  there,
are  at  least  double  what  they  are  in  England,  and  at  least  four
times  what  they  are  in  Germany.  So  little  connection  is  there
in  reality  between  the  quantity  of  work  which  a  given  socie-
ty has  to  perform  and  the  rates  of  wages  prevailing  in  that
society.

This,  however,  is  neither  the  only,  nor  the  least  fallacy  in-


256  TBADES-UNI0NI8M.—IL

volved  in  the  doctrine  we  are  considering.  It  is  a  necessary
assumption  in  that  doctrine — indeed  the  position  is  formally
taken  by  Mr.  Thornton — that  "the  quantity  of  work  to  be
done"  is  at  any  given  time  a  "fixed"  quantity.  Now  this
must  at  once  be  met  by  a  direct  denial.  The  work  which  so-
ciety has  to  do  is  not  a  fixed  quantity.  On  the  contrary,  it
is  absolutely  indefinite  and  practically  unlimited:  indefinite,
as  varying  with  human  wants  and  desires;  and  practically  un-
limited, because  always  far  in  excess  of  what  human  hands
can  accomplish.  I  am  speaking  now,  not  of  society  in  its  early
stages,  when  human  desires,  and  therefore  the  work  of  socie-
ty, may,  with  some  truth,  be  said  to  be  confined  within  certain
,  narrow  and  tolerably  fixed  bounds,  but  of  society  as  we  know
it  in  Western  Europe  and  the  United  States,  after  civilization
has  kindled  those  insatiable  aspirations  and  created  those  in-
numerable needs  which  distinguish  the  civilized  from  the  un-
civilized man.  In  society,  when  it  has  reached  this  stage,
there  is  no  practical  limit  to  the  desires  of  human  beings,  nor
therefore  to  the  quantity  of  work  which  they  would  wish  to
have  done ;  and  even  though  the  course  of  civilization  should
be,  as  I  trust  it  may  be,  toward  the  adoption  of  simpler  tastes
and  habits  in  all  that  concerns  mere  physical  well-being,  the
introduction  of  more  simple  modes  of  life,  while  limiting  the
range  of  wants  in  one  direction,  would  not  fail,  we  may  rea-
sonably assume,  to  open  the  door  to  new  paths  of  expenditure
in  others.  Benevolence  and  public  spirit,  the  interests  of  sci-
ence and  literature,  would  become  powerful  and  exigent,  as
the  tastes  for  mere  physical  luxury  and  personal  indulgence
or  aggrandizement  declined,  and  would  rapidly  create  wants
to  take  the  place  of  those  which  would  now  be  no  longer  felt.
The  social  work  to  be  done,  therefore,  though  under  such  a
regime  as  we  are  contemplating  differing  much  from  that  which
now  occupies  industry,  would  still  be  as  indefinite  and  as  prac-
tically unlimited  as  ever. There  is  thus  no  practical  limit  to


SOCIAL  WORK,  INDEFINITE.  257

the  quantity  of  social  work  to  be  performed ;  and  we  may
now  see  the  true  nature  of  the  relation  in  which  all  the  vari-
ous contrivances — machinery,  separation  of  employments,  free
trade — which  tend  to  economize  and  abridge  human  labor,
stand  to  the  interests  of  those  whose  labor  they  supersede.
Their  effect  is  not  to  curtail  the  aggregate  amount  of  social
work — that,  as  I  have  said,  is  always  far  in  excess  of  what  hu-
man capacity  can  accomplish — -but  to  alter  the  nature  of  that
work.  So  much  labor  and  capital  are-  relieved  from  the  tasks
formerly  required  of  them,  and  set  free  for  the  performance  of
new  work,  for  the  satisfaction  of  cravings  hitherto  unfelt.  I
quite  admit  that  the  change  from  one  mode  of  production,  or
from  one  system  of  industry  to  another,  even  though  that  oth-
er be  a  better  one,  is  almost  always  attended  with  more  or  less
temporary  inconvenience,  and  sometimes  even  with  consider-
able suffering,  for  those  whose  occupations  have  been  dis-
placed; and  this  is  a  good  reason  for  society  doing  all  in  its
power  to  alleviate  and  repair  these  inevitable  but  transitory
evils.  But  we  have  now  to  do,  not  with  the  incidental  con-
sequences of  improvements,  but  with  their  essential  character
and  permanent  significance  as  regards  the  interests  of  labor;
and  I  say  that,  regarding  them  in  this  light,  their  tendency  is,
not  to  leave  society  without  occupation,  but  to  alter  from  time
to  time  the  occupations  with  which  society  busies  itself — to
provide  for  the  easier  satisfaction  of  its  primary  and  more
pressing  wants,  and  thereby  to  render  possible  the  further  sat-
isfaction of  numerous  secondary  wants  of  a  less  urgent  kind.
A  limit  indeed  there  is — a  very  real  limit — to  the  employment
of  labor  in  a  limited  area  of  country;  but  that  limit  does  not
lie  in  the  quantity  of  social  work,  but  in  the  productive  power
of  the  agents  employed  in  performing  it — in  other  words,  in
the  increasing  cost  of  production.  The  work  is  there  to  do,
but  the  efforts  needed  to  accomplish  the  work  are  greater  than
the  product  is  thought  to  be  worth. Here  is  the  true  and

17


258  TRADES -UNIONISM.— II.

only  limit  to  the  employment  of  labor ;  and  its  removal  or  ex-
tension is  to  be  sought,  not  in  multiplying  the  obstacles  that
oppose  the  satisfaction  of  human  desires,  and  so  "  making
work,"  but  in  precisely  the  opposite  direction — in  the  removal,
as  far  as  may  be,  of  such  obstacles,  and  in  freely  availing  our-
selves of  all  arts  and  contrivances  by  which  human  effort  may
be  rendered  productive  of  larger  result.  Increase  the  produc-
tive powers  of  industry,  extend  the  knowledge  of  the  industrial
arts  which  support  and  comfort  mankind,  and  there  is  little
danger  that  laborers  will  ever  fail  of  employment  for  want  of
work  to  do.

So  much,  then,  for  that  view  of  economic  doctrine  which
identifies  human  well-being  with  the  maintenance  and  mul-
tiplication of  the  obstacles  to  its  attainment ;  in  the  words
of  Bastiat,  confounding  obstacle  with  cause,  and  effort  with
result.

§  4.  Let  us  now  observe  its  practical  development  in  the
rules  of  Trades-Unions.  The  following  examples  I  take  from
Mr.  Thornton's  work:

"  Some  Unions  divide  tlie  country  round  them  into  districts,  and  will
not  iDermit  tlie  products  of  tlie  trades  controlled  by  tliem  to  be  used,  ex-
cept within  the  district  in  which  they  have  been  fabricated.  ....  At
Manchester  this  combination  is  particularly  effective,  preventing  any
bricks  made  beyond  a  radius  of  four  miles  from  entering  the  city.  To
enforce  the  exclusion,  paid  agents  are  employed ;  every  cart  of  bricks
coming  toward  Manchester  is  watched,  and  if  the  contents  be  found  to
have  come  from  without  the  prescribed  boundary  the  brick-layers  at
once  refuse  to  work The  vagaries  of  the  Lancashire  brick-mak-
ers are  fairly  paralleled  by  the  masons  of  the  same  county.  Stone,  when
freshly  quarried,  is  softer,  and  can  be  more  easily  cut  than  later :  men
habitually  employed  about  any  particular  quarry  better  understand  the
working  of  its  particular  stone  than  men  from  a  distance  ;  there  is  great
economy,  too,  in  transporting  stone  dressed  instead  of  in  rough  blocks.
The  Yorkshire  masons,  however,  will  not  allow  Yorkshire  stone  to  be


SOCIAL  WOEK,  INDEFINITE.  259

brought  into  their  district  if  worked  on  more  than  one  side.  All  the
rest  of  the  working,  the  edging  and  jointing,  they  insist  on  doing  them-
selves, though  they  thereby  add  thirty-five  per  cent,  to  its  price

A  Bradford  contractor,  requiring  for  a  stair-case  some  steps  of  hard
delf-stone,  a  material  which  Bradford  masons  so  much  dislike  that  they
often  refuse  employment  rather  than  undertake  it,  got  the  steps  worked
at  the  quarry.  But  when  they  arrived  ready  for  setting,  his  masons  in-
sisted on  their  being  worked  over  again,  at  an  expense  of  from  5s.  to  10s.
per  step.  A  master-mason  at  Ashton  obtained  some  stone  ready  polished
from  a  quarry  near  Macclesfield.  His  men,  however,  in  obedience  to  the
rules  of  their  club,  refused  to  fix  it  until  the  polished  part  had  be^n  de-
faced and  they  had  polished  it  again  by  hand,  though  not  so  well  as  at

first

"In  one  or  two  of  the  northern  counties,  the  associated  plasterers  and
associated  plasterers'  laborers  have  come  to  an  understanding,  according
to  which  the  latter  are  to  abstain  from  all  plasterers'  work  except  simple
whitewashing;  and  the  plasterers  in  return  are  to  do  nothing,  except
pure  plasterers'  work,  that  the  laborers  would  like  to  do  for  them,  inso-
much that  if  a  plasterer  wants  laths  or  plaster  to  go  on  with,  he  must  not
go  and  fetch  them  himself,  but  must  send  a  laborer  for  them.  In  conse-
quence of  this  agreement,  a  ]Mi\  Booth,  of  Bolton,  having  sent  one  of  his
plasterers  to  bed  and  point  a  dozen  windows,  had  to  place  a  laborer  with
him  during  the  whole  of  the  four  days  he  was  engaged  on  the  job,  though

any  body  could  have  brought  him  all  he  required  in  half  a  day

'  Not  besting  one's  mates '  has  by  several  Unions  been  riiade  the  subject
of  special  enactment.  '  You  are  strictly  cautioned,'  says  a  by-law  of  the
Bradford  Brick-layers'  Laborers,  '  not  to  overstep  good  rules  by  doing
double  work,  and  causing  others  to  do  the  same  in  order  to  gain  a  smile
from  the  master.  Such  fool-hardy  and  deceitful  actions  leave  a  great  por-
tion of  good  members  out  of  employment.  Certain  individuals  have  been
guilty,  who  will  be  expelled  if  they  do  not  refrain.'  The  Manchester
Brick-layers'  Association  have  a  rule  providing  that  '  any  man  found  run-
ning, or  working  beyond  a  regular  speed,  shall  be  fined  2s.  Qd.  for  the
first  offense,  5s.  for  the  second,  10s.  for  the  third,  and  if  still  persisting
shall  be  dealt  with  as  the  committee  think  proper.'  As  also  shall  be
'  any  man  working  short-handed,  without  man  for  man,'  ....  At  Liv-
erpool, a  brick-layer's  laborer  may  legally  carry  as  many  as  twelve  bricks
at  a  time.  Elsewhere  ten  is  the  greatest  number  allowed.  But  at  Leeds
'  any  brother  in  the  Union  professing  to  carry  more  than  the  comrnou


260  TRADES-  UNIONISM.  - 11.

number,  which  is  eight  bricks,  shall  be  fined  Is.;'  and  any  brother
'knowing  the  same  without  giving  the  earliest  information  thereof  to
the  committee  of  management,  shall  be  fined  the  same.'  .  .  ;  .  During
the  building  of  the  Manchester  Law  Courts,  the  brick  -  layers'  laborers
struck  because  they  were  desired  to  wheel  bricks  instead  of  carrying
them  on  their  shoulders."

The  purpose  and  general  tendency  of  these  regulations  can
not  be  mistaken.  Their  object  is,  by  enforcing  uneconomical
methods,  and  proscribing  recourse  to  the  facilities  offered  by
nature  and  circumstances,  to  create  a  necessity  for  work  which
otherwise  would  not  have  existed.  The  code  is,  from  first  to
last,  an  example  of  that  view  of  Political  Economy  of  which
the  culminating  triumph  would  be  the  exclusion  of  the  light
of  the  sun.  It  must  be  admitted  at  once  that  the  method  is
not  devoid  of  a  certain  efficacy.  It  does  tend  to  cause  a  larger
capital  to  be  invested  in  certain  trades  than  would  otherwise
find  entrance  to  them,  and  thus  either  to  raise  the  rate  of
wages  in  them,  or  to  increase  the  number  of  laborers  emploj^ed
at  a  given  rate.  So  much  must  be  admitted.  But  then  this
end  is  attained  at  the  cost  of  diminishing  the  sum  total  of  re-
sult from  human  industry,  so  that  whatever  gain  it  procures  for
the  individuals  or  classes  who  benefit  by  it  is  necessarily  pur-
chased at  the  cost  of  inflicting  a  more  than  equivalent  loss  on  so-
ciety as  a  whole.  I  say  a  more  than  equivalent  loss ;  for  the
total  return  upon  industry  being  diminished  by  this  preposter-
ous policy,  while  the  share  of  certain  classes  is  increased,  it  is
plain  that  what  falls  to  the  remainder  will  be  less,  not  merely
by  what  the  former  gain,  but  by  this  plus  the  loss  upon  the
entire  social  fund.  The  sort  of  selfishness,  therefore,  embodied
in  these  rules  of  Trades-Unions  is  not  selfishness  of  the  ordi-
nary humdrum  kind,  which  merely  grasps  for  one's  self  what
would  fairly  have  gone  to  another,  but  that  more  extreme  form
of  the  propensity  which  is  ready  to  inflict  a  great  evil  on  anoth-
er in  order  to  secure  a  small  good  for  one's  self — to  burn  down


MULES  FOB  "MAKING  WOBK."  261

our  neighbor's  house  in  order  to  roast  our  own  egg.  Nor  is
this  the  most  serious  objection  to  this  portion  of  the  Unionist
code.  It  carries  the  deeper  stigma  of  sinning  against  the  in-
terests of  civilization  itself;  for  its  spirit  is  antagonistic  to  all
progress  and  improvement,  and,  if  it  did  not  carry  us  back,  as
logically  it  ought,  to  a  rejection  of  all  the  labor-saving  contriv-
ances and  aids  which  art  and  science  have  won  for  industry,
would,  at  the  very  least,  tend  to  stereotype  industrial  operations
in  their  existing  forms.  The  very  meaning  of  industrial  prog-
ress is  the  increase  of  the  productive  result  in  proportion  to
the  labor  undergone ;  while  the  direct  tendency  of  the  rules  in
question  is  to  increase  the  labor  undergone  in  proportion  to  the
productive  result,  I  am  far,  indeed,  from  desiring  to  charge
these  consequences,  as  a  deliberate  purpose,  on  the  Unionist
leaders,  and  still  less  on  the  workmen  who  have  accepted  and
acted  on  their  legislation.  On  the  contrary,  I  am  persuaded
that  the  true  character  of  those  regulations  is  either  entirely
misconceived,  or,  at  the  utmost,  most  inadequately  appreciated,
by  those  for  whose  benefit  they  are  intended.  The  view  which
has  suggested  them,  far  from  being  confined  to  the  working-
classes,  has,  as  we  have  seen,  found  for  its  champion  so  able  and
dispassionate  a  writer  as  Mr.  Thornton,  who,  while  denouncing
in  language  which  certainly  leaves  nothing  to  be  desired  in
point  of  vigor  and  heartiness  those  elaborate  contrivances  for
rendering  man's  position  in  the  world  worse  than  it  might  be,
has  himself  furnished  the  theoretical  premises  which  would  be
quite  sufficient,  if  only  they  were  well  founded,  to  justify  the
most  extravagant  of  the  acts  which  he  reprobates.  It  must
also  be  frankly  confessed,  with  reference  to  this  as  with  refer-
ence to  other  parts  of  the  Unionist  policy,  that  the  better-off
classes  of  society  are  by  no  means  entitled  to  plume  themselves
at  the  expense  of  the  workmen.  In  the  practice  of  the  legal
profession,  e.  g.,  there  would,  I  fancy,  be  no  difficulty  in  finding
usages,  not  yet  perhaps  quite  obsolete,  conceived  in  this  same


362  TRADES-UNIONISM.— II.

spirit  of  aggrandizing  a  calling  by  "  making  work "  for  its
members.  One  has  only  to  watch  the  progress  of  an  ordinary
Chancery  suit,  or  to  read  through  an  ordinary  deed,  to  find  ex-
amples which  would  scarcely  lose  in  lustre  by  being  placed  be-
side some  of  the  brightest  of  those  furnished  by  the  Manches-
ter Brick-layers'  Association.  What,  indeed,  is  the  opposition
given  to  law  reform  by  too  large  a  section  of  the  legal  profes-
sion but  a  flagrant  example  of  this  very  spirit — a  readiness  to
sacrifice  the  interests  of  society  at  large  to  those  of  the  legal
profession,  to  arrest  the  progress  of  social  improvement,  in
order  that  work  may  be  found  for  a  few  lawyers  the  more?
The  notion  of  aggrandizing  one's  order  by  "making  work"
for  it  may  assume  in  Trades-Union  codes  a  somewhat  more  ex-
travagant and  grotesque  form  than  elsewhere ;  but  the  princi-
ple itself  is  deeply  embedded  in  the  practical  modes  of  think-
ing and  acting  of  nearly  all  classes ;  and  it  therefore  needs  all
the  more  to  have  its  true  character  and  tendencies  laid  bare
without  reserve,  and  to  be  duly  stigmatized  as  the  most  in-
tensely selfish  and  the  most  flagrantly  anti-social  of  all  the
plans  of  conduct  by  which,  at  various  times,  different  classes
of  society  have  attempted,  in  disregard  of  the  general  social
weal,  to  advance  their  several  interests.


CHAPTER  y.

PEACTIGAL  DEDUCTIONS  FROM  THE  FOREGOING  PRINCIPLES.

%  1.  In  the  foregoing  chapters  the  theoretical  conditions  gov-
erning the  position  of  the  laborer  and  the  rate  of  his  remuner-
ation, have,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  been  pretty  fully  set  forth.  It
remains  now  to  consider  the  practical  conclusions,  in  relation
to  his  actual  condition  and  future  prospects-,  which  may  be
drawn  from  the  premises  thus  furnished.

But  at  this  point  an  objection  would  probably  be  interposed
by  a  certain  class  of  thinkers  on  social  subjects,  and  I  may  be
challenged  to  say  why,  conceding  the  economic  principles  af-
fecting the  subject  to  be  such  as  I  have  stated  them,  the  dis-
tribution of  the  produce  of  industry  should  be  left  to  be  de-
termined by  those  principles;  why  it  should  not  rather  be  reg-
ulated by  the  laws  of  justice?  In  answer  to  which  I  must
reply,  in  the  first  place,  that  I  am  unaware  of  any  rule  of  justice
applicable  to  the  problem  of  distributing  the  produce  of  in-
dustry ;  and,  secondly,  that  any  attempt  to  give  effect  to  what
are  considered  the  dictates  of  justice,  which  should  involve  as
a  means  toward  that  end  a  disturbance  of  the  fundamental  as-
sumptions on  which  economic  reasoning  is  based — more  espe-
cially those  of  the  right  of  private  property  and  the  freedom
of  individual  industry — would,  in  my  opinion,  putting  all  other
than  material  considerations  aside,  be  inevitably  followed  by
the  destruction  or  indefinite  curtailment  of  the  fund  itself  from
which  the  remuneration  of  all  classes  is  derived.

§  2.  If  justice  be  the  principle  according  to  which  the  pro-
ceeds of  industry  ought  to  be  distributed,  those  who  advocate


/


264  PRACTICAL  DEDUCTIONS.

this  mode  of  distribution  are  bound  to  produce  some  work-
ing rule  according  to  which  the  principle  they  contend  for
is  to  be  carried  into  effect.  Several  such  rules  have  indeed
been  propounded,  and  others  may  easily  be  imagined,  which
would  have  quite  as  good  a  title  to  the  claim  of  representing
natural  justice  as  any  that  have  been  advanced  by  social
reformers.  For  example,  it  has  been  held  by  one  social  re-
former that  the  rule  of  distribution  required  by  justice  is  that
indicated  by  the  wants  of  human  beings  and  the  degree  of
their  urgency,  in  accordance  with  which  view  the  formula
of  distributive  justice  would  be — "to  each  according  to  his
wants."  In  the  opinion  of  another,  distribution  ought  to  be
regulated  by  the  degree  in  which  each  has  contributed  by
his  efforts  to  the  fund  available  for  distribution;  the  formula
of  distributive  justice  becoming  in  this  case — "to  each  ac-
cording to  his  works."  And  perhaps  as  plausible  a  principle
as  either  might  be  constructed  by  founding  the  rule  of  distri-
bution on  the  proportional  sacrifice  undergone  by  those  who
take  part  in  the  work  of  productive  industry;  in  which  case
we  should  have  as  our  formula  —  "to  each  according  to  his
sacrifice."  As  to  the  amount  of  truth  or  morality  which  these
several  maxims  embody,  I  am  not  concerned  here  to  inquire.
My  business  with  them  has  reference  exclusively  to  their  effi-
cacy as  rules  for  regulating  the  distribution  of  wealth.  But  in
proceeding  to  examine  them  with  this  view,  I  am  anxious  to
disclaim  all  desire  to  disparage  the  ideals  of  human  life  which
they  suggest,  provided  they  be  regarded  simply  as  ideals — as  a
goal  toward  which  one  may  work  and  strive,  due  consideration
being  had  of  the  actual  circumstances  of  the  external  world,
and  of  the  character,  as  hitherto  actually  developed,  of  human
beings  residing  upon  it:  indeed,  so  far  from  this,  I  have  no
hesitation  in  admitting  that  the  realization  of  any  one  of  them
would  imply  a  condition  of  society  incomparably  superior  to
any  that  now  exists,  or  is  likely  for  a  long  time  to  exist. So


SOCIALIST  MAXIMS.  265

far  I  am  quite  prepared  to  join  in  socialistic  aspirations.
Where  I  take  issue  with  the  Socialists  is  as  to  the  present
feasibility  of  their  schemes,  and  as  to  the  means  by  which  the
ends  they  desire  are  to  be  promoted.  I  altogether  deny  that
in  the  actual  circumstances  of  mankind  the  distribution  of
wealth  on  the  principles  they  contend  for  is  feasible ;  and  I  be-
lieve that  the  attempt  to  carry  those  principles  into  effect  by
invoking  for  this  purpose  the  powers  of  the  State — which  I
take  to  be  the  essential  characteristic  of  Socialism,  and  that
which  broadly  distinguishes  it  from  other  modes  of  social  spec-
ulation*— could  only  issue  in  disaster  and  ruin.

*  In  this  I  venture  to  differ  f.om  the  great  man  recently  taken  from  among  us,
whom  I  am  proud  to  call  my  friend  and  teacher.  In  a  remarkable  passage  of  the
"  Autobiography, "  Mr.  Mill  represents  himself  as  jjroperly  classed  "  under  the  gen-
eral designation  of  Socialists,"  because  his  ideal  of  ultimate  improvement  had  more
in  common  with  that  of  Socialistic  reformers  than  with  the  views  of  those  who
in  contradistinction  would  be  called  orthodox.  "While  we  repudiated  with  the
greatest  energy  that  tyranny  of  society  over  the  individual  which  most  socialistic
systems  are  supposed  to  involve,  we  yet  looked  forward  to  a  time  when  society
will  no  longer  be  divided  into  the  idle  and  the  industrious ;  when  the  rule  that
they  who  do  not  work  shall  not  eat  will  be  applied,  not  to  paupers  only,  but  im-
partially to  all ;  when  the  division  of  the  produce  of  labor,  instead  of  depending,
as  in  so  great  a  degree  it  now  does,  on  the  accident  of  birth,  will  be  made  by  con-
cert on  an  acknowledged  principle  of  justice;  and  when  it  will  no  longer  either  be,
or  be  thought  to  be,  impossible  for  human  beings  to  exert  themselves  strenuously  in
procuring  benefits  which  are  not  to  be  exclusively  their  own,  but  to  be  shared  with
the  society  they  belong  to."  ("Autobiography,"  pp.  231,232.)  If  to  look  forward
to  such  a  state  of  things  as  an  ideal  to  be  striven  for  is  Socialism,  I  at  once  acknowl-
edge myself  a  Socialist;  but  it  seems  to  me  that  the  idea  which  "Socialism  "  con-
veys to  most  minds  is  not  that  of  any  particular  form  of  society  to  be  realized  at  ;
a  future  time  when  the  character  of  human  beings  and  the  conditions  of  human  i
life  are  widely  different  from  what  they  now  are,  but  rather  certain  modes  of  ac-  ',
tion — more  especially  the  employment  of  the  powers  of  the  State  for  the  instant  \
accomplishment  of  ideal  schemes,  which  is  the  invariable  attribute  of  all  projects
generally  regarded  as  Socialistic.  So  entirely  is  this  the  case,  that  it  is  common
to  hear  any  proposal  which  is  thought  to  involve  an  undue  extension  of  the  powers
of  the  State  branded  as  Socialistic,  whatever  be  the  object  it  may  seek  to  accom-
plish. After  all,  the  question  is  one  of  nomenclature  merely ;  but  people  are  so


266  PRACTICAL  DEDUCTIONS.

§  3.  As  regards  the  first  of  the  formulas  to  "which  I  have
referred,  which  proposes  to  distribute  the  wealth  of  a  commu-
nity among  its  members  in  proportion  to  their  wants,  I  must
frankly  acknowledge  that  I  am  wholly  unable  even  to  con-
jecture the  method  of  its  application.  How  are  the  wants  of
individuals  to  be  ascertained  ?  Is  it  to  be  left  to  each  to  de-
scribe his  own  wants  ?  And  if  the  funds  are  not  adequate
to  meet  the  requirements  of  all,  who  is  to  decide  as  to  which
wants  are  the  most  urgent  ?  A  man  with  a  large  family  has
greater  wants  than  a  man  with  a  small  one.  Does  this  consti-
tute a  title  to  a  proportionally  larger  share  of  the  proceeds
of  industry  ?  And  if  so,  what  is  to  keep  the  population  of  a
country  within  the  necessary  limits  of  the  means  of  subsist-
ence ?  Such  are  some  of  the  questions  which  meet  us  on  the
threshold  in  seeking  to  apply  this  formula,  every  one  of  which,
it  seems  to  me,  leads  us  straight  into  a  cul  de  sac.  I  must
therefore  put  aside  this  particular  form  of  the  law  of  distribu-
tive justice  as  for  me  utterly  unmanageable.  The  two  latter
principles,  however,  of  which  one  would  assign  wealth  to  each
person  in  proportion  to  the  work  he  has  accomplished,  and  the
other  in  proportion  to  the  sacrifice  he  has  undergone,  are  not
at  once  and  obviously  impracticable;  and  in  point  of  fact  both
one  and  the  other  do  exert,  under  our  existing  system  of  in-
dustry, a  certain  influence  in  determining  the  distribution  of
wealth.  For  example,  wherever  the  results  of  industry  admit
of  being  measured  and  compared,  as  in  all  work  of  the  same
kind,  the  remuneration  of  the  workman,  if  only  competition  is
effective,  naturally  adjusts  itself  to  the  results  of  his  work.  A
workman  who  in  a  given  time  can  perform  twice  as  much  of
a  given  work  as  another  will  in  an  open  market  command
twice  as  much  wages. But  where  the  results  of  industry  are

greatly  governed  by  words  that  I  can  not  but  regret  that  a  philosophy  of  social  life
with  which  I  so  deeply  sympathize  should  be  prejudiced  by  verbal  associations  fit-
ted, as  it  seems  to  me,  only  to  mislead.


RULE  OF  SACRIFICE.  267

different  in  kind,  how  is  the  rule  of  distribution  in  proportion
to  results  to  be  applied  ?  O.ne  man  in  a  day  produces  a  coat,
another  a  table,  a  third  superintends  a  body  of  workmen — by
what  standard  shall  we  measure  these  several  results,  and  say
that  any  of  them  is  greater  or  less  than  any  other?  It  is  plain
that  the  rule  of  distribution  in  proportion  to  results  fails  us  ut-
terly here.  Similarly,  the  principle  of  distribution  in  propor-
tion to  sacrifice  has  also,  under  our  present  regime  (as  was  seen
in  a  former  portion  of  this  work),  a  certain  operation  in  deter-
mining the  distribution  of  wealth.  It  is  indeed  the  ruling  prin-
ciple of  distribution  wherever  competition  among  producers  is
really  free.  But,  as  was  then  pointed  out,  the  field  of  compe-
tition, though  large,  is  far  from  being  co-extensive  with  the  in-
dustry of  any  country,  and,  in  the  absence  of  competition,  it
is  not  easy  to  see  how  relative  sacrifice  is  to  be  determined.
More  particularly  does  this  difficulty  become  formidable  when
we  come  to  deal  with  what  may  be  regarded  as  the  crucial
problem  of  distribution — the  distribution  of  the  proceeds  of  in-
dustry between  laborer  and  capitalist.  Even  could  the  claims
of  laborers  as  among  themselves  be  adjusted,  there  would  still
remain  this  problem,  which,  the  least  consideration  of  the  facts
involved  will  show  to  be  wholly  unamenable  to  a  priori  treat-
ment, whatever  be  the  form  which  the  rule  of  justice  may
assume.

Let  us  suppose,  for  example,  a  benevolent  despot  desirous  of
applying  to  this  case  what  we  may  describe  as  the  principle  of
efficiency — "to  each  according  to  his  works."  He  finds  that
a  house  has  been  built  by  the  combined  action  of  a  master-
builder  and  workmen :  the  former  has  supplied  the  materials
for  the  building  and  the  means  of  supporting  the  laborers  dur-
ing the  performance  of  the  work,  the  latter  have  furnished  the
labor :  how  is  our  despot  to  determine  how  much  of  the  house
or  of  its  value  is  to  be  credited  respectively  to  him  who  has
supplied  the  capital,  and  to  those  who  by  their  labor  have  con-


268  PRACTICAL  DEDUCTIONS.

verted  this  capital  into  a  house?  Again,  a  master-tailor  sup-
plies a  sewing-machine  and  cloth  ;  journeymen  tailors  go  to
work  on  these  articles,  and  a  suit  of  clothes  is  the  result — what
proportion  of  the  clothes  is  to  be  credited  respectively  to  the
machine  and  to  the  workmen  ?  It  is  only  necessary  to  pro-
pound such  questions  to  perceive  that  they  are  absolutely  in-
soluble. As  well  might  we  seek  to  determine  the  proportions
in  which  the  oxygen,  the  hydrogen,  and  the  electric  flash  have
contributed  to  the  drop  of  water  which  results  from  their  com-
bined action.  Nor  would  the  standard  of  relative  sacrifice  be
any  more  to  our  purpose  here.  As  I  have  already  remarked,
it  is  not  easy  to  see  how  relative  sacrifice  is  to  be  estimated  in
the  absence  of  competition ;  and  more  particularly  is  this  the
case  where  the  sacrifices  to  be  compared  take  forms  so  widely
different  in  character  as  those  undergone  by  laborer  and  capi-
talist. What  are  those  sacrifices?  On  the  one  hand,  certain
physical  and  mental  efforts,  involving  weariness,  exhaustion,
and  sometimes  positive  pain  ;  on  the  other,  a  mere  abstinence
from  enjoyment  which  might  have  been  indulged  in,  accom-
panied with  a  certain  sense  of  insecurity  as  to  the  issue  of  an
undertaking.  Who  can  compare  and  appraise  two  such  sacri-
fices, and  undertake  to  assign  to  each  its  due  reward?  Mani-
festly at  this  point,  the  principle  of  sacrifice,  no  less  than  that
of  efficiency,  inevitably  breaks  down.  Even  could  they  have
solved  all  other  cases,  we  are  forced  to  confess  that,  in  pres-
ence of  the  most  important  and  pressing  of  all  —  the  relative
claims  of  labor  and  capital — both  principles  are  impotent  alike.
Eight  or  wrong,  therefore,  they  are  inapplicable  to  the  ques-
tion in  hand,  and  so  will  not  serve  our  turn.

§  4.  I  am  thus  unable  to  find  in  the  maxims  of  abstract  jus-
tice any  key  to  the  practical  problems  of  the  distribution  of
wealth;  and  I  am  bound  to  add,  that  just  as  little  can  I  dis-
cover in  the  actual  results  flowins;  from  the  action  of  econom-


JUSTICE  AND  ECONOMIC  LAW.  269

ical  laws  a  realization  of  the  principles  of  abstract  justice.
There  is  indeed  a  school  of  economists,  of  whom  M,  Bastiat
may  be  taken  as  the  prophet,  who  have  persuaded  themselves
that  such  a  realization  is  in  fact  accomplished,  who  hold  that
the  distribution  of  wealth  which  results  from  the  free  play  of
economic  forces  is  not  merely  that  which  the  circumstances  of
the  case  render  inevitable,  but  also  that  which  justice  and  nat-
ural right  prescribe.  I  must  frankly  own  that  I  am  wholly
unable  to  concur  in  this  view.  For  when  I  look  into  the  na-
ture of  those  economic  forces  on  the  play  of  which  the  actual
distribution  of  wealth  in  this  and  other  civilized  countries  de-
pends, what  do  I  find?  Certain  physical,  physiological,  and
mental  conditions — on  the  one  hand,  a  productive  capacity
in  the  soil  and  other  natural  agents ;  on  the  other,  certain  ele-
ments in  the  character  of  the  people,  such  as  the  desire  to
accumulate  wealth  and  provide  for  the  future,  and  constant-
ly counteracting  this,  a  love  of  present  ease  and  indulgence;
lastly,  the  animal  propensities  which  continue  and  multiply
the  race.  These  are  the  forces  which,  coming  into  play  under
a  regime  of  private  property  and  freedom  of  individual  indus-
try and  enterprise,  determine  the  proportions  in  which  wealth
is  divided  among  a  people.  But  what  is  there  in  such  cir-
cumstances to  make  it  necessary  that  the  distribution  which
results  shall  be  in  conformity  with  what  our  ideas  of  justice
would  require?  What  is  there  in  the  case  to  secure  that  the
action  shall  always  be  in  the  lines  of  moral  right?  The  agen-
cies in  operation  are  essentially  out  of  the  moral  sphere;  and
if  it  should  in  fact  happen  that  the  results  arising  from  their
free  action  in  any  given  case  prove  to  be  in  strict  accordance
with  the  claims  of  moral  justice,  and  with  so-called  "natural
rights,"  I  do  not  see  that  we  should  be  justified  in  regarding
the  coincidence  as  other  than  a  fortunate  accident.  In  point
of  fact,  the  practical  consequences  accruing  from  the  condi-
tions of  industry  in  this  and  other  civilized  countries  are  not


270  PRACTICAL  DEDUCTIONS.

such  as,  for  my  part,  I  should  find  it  easy  to  reconcile  with
any  standard  of  right  generally  accepted  among  men.*

§  5.  It  seems  to  follow  from  these  considerations  that  while,
on  the  one  hand,  mere  standards  of  abstract  justice  or  natural
right  are  inefficacious  as  means  of  solving  the  actual  problems
of  the  distribution  of  wealth,  on  the  other  the  solution  actual-
ly effected  of  those  problems  under  our  existing  system  of  in-
dustry is  not  such  as  entitles  us  to  claim  for  it,  as  a  necessary
consequence  of  the  agencies  through  which  it  is  worked  out,
the  character  of  satisfying  the  requirements  of  moral  justice.
If  our  present  system  of  industry  is  to  be  justified,  it  must,  ac-
cording to  my  view,  find  its  justification  in  quite  another  or-
der of  ideas  than  those  of  abstract  right  or  natural  law — nanxe-
ly,  in  the  considerations  of  practical  utility ;  and  more  specif-
ically in  the  fact  that  it  secures  for  the  mass  of  mankind  a
greater  amount  of  material  and  moral  well-being,  and  provides
more  effectually  for  their  progress  in  civilization,  than  any  oth-
er plan  that  has  been  yet,  or  apparently  can  be,  devised.

By  our  present  system  of  industry,  let  me  here  explain,  I
mean  simply  the  industrial  arrangements  and  the  mode  of
distributing  wealth  which  prevail  in  this  and  other  civilized
countries,  so  fiir,  and  so  far  only,  as  these  result  from  the  rec-
ognition of  private  property  and  freedom  of  individual  indus-
try and  enterprise.  These  latter  institutions,  it  is  true,  are  far
from  representing  fixed  and  absolute  conditions ;  and  the  mod-
ifications with  which  they  are  affected  in  different  countries
lead  to  important  differences  in  the  practical  outcome  accruing
from  their  maintenance. Into  the  question  of  such  modifica-

■ .  *  I  may  here  at  least  claim  Shakspeare  as  an  authoritj'  on  my  side :

"  Take  physic,  Pomp,
Expose  thyself  to  feel  what  wretches  feel ;
That  thou  may'st  shake  the  superflux  to  them,
AaA.  show  the  heavens  more  just,"


GROUNDS  OF  DEFENSE.  271

tions  I  do  not  enter  here.  The  issue  taken  by  those  who  ad-
vance socialistic  objections,  founded  on  allegations  of  inequali-
ty and  injustice,  against  existing  industrial  arrangements,  has
regard  to  the  principles  themselves,  not  to  their  modifications ;
and,  therefore,  in  defending  these  arrangements  against  such
objections,  it  is  with  the  principles  alone  that  we  need  con-
cern ourselves.  Nor,  indeed,  have  I  any  need  here  to  enter  at
large  into  the  controversy  between  Communism  and  private
property.  That  question  may  now,  I  think,  be  said  to  be,  so
far  as  argument  can  carry  it,  sufi&ciently  disposed  of:  at  all
events,  I  could  hope  to  add  nothing  to  what  Mr.  Mill  has  so
admirably  said  in  his  examination  of  the  subject — an  exami-
nation not  less  remarkable  for  its  thoroughness  than  for  the
candor,  and  even  tenderness  toward  those  whose  opinions  he
opposes,  which  it  displays.  But,  without  entering,  into  the
general  question,  I  may  venture  to  point  out  one  capital  con-
sideration of  a  purely  economic  kind  which,  apart  from  the
reasons,  chiefly  moral  and  political,  relied  on  by  Mr.  Mill,  ap-
pears to  me  to  justify  the  opinion  in  favor  of  our  existing  sys-
tem of  industry  in  its  essential  circumstances  which  I  have
ventured  to  express.

I  take  it  to  be  a  fundamental  and  indispensable  condition
of  all  progressive  human  society,  that  by  some  means  or  other
a  large  aggregate  capital  available  for  its  requirements  should
be  provided.  Without  such  a  fund,  accumulated  from  the
products  of  past  toil,  division  of  labor  and  continuous  industr}^
are  impossible;  population  can  not  attain  the  degree  of  density
indispensable  to  civilized  existence;  nor  can  that  amount  of
leisure  from  physical  toil  be  secured  for  any  considerable  por-
tion of  the  people,  which  is  required  for  the  cultivation  of
science  and  literature.  The  maintenance,  therefore,  of  an  ag-
gregate capital  capable  of  providing  for  these  requirements
must  be  regarded  as  an  indispensable  condition  to  be  fulfilled
by  every  industrial  system  which  undertakes  to  promote  the


272  PRACTICAL  DEDUCTIONS.

well-being  and  progress  of  mankind.  Now  cur  economic
investigations  have  shown  us  that  this  end,  the  storing  up
of  the  products  of  past  industry  for  the  purpose  of  sustaining
and  assisting  present  industry,  can  onl}^  be  attained  at  the
cost  of  certain  sacrifices — those  sacrifices,  namely,  implied  in
foregoing  the  immediate  use  of  what  people  have  the  power
of  using,  and  in  incurring  the  risk  which  attaches  in  a  great-
er or  less  degree  to  all  industrial  investment.  These  sac-
rifices may  be  regarded  as  trivial  or  severe;  but,  as  a  mat-
ter of  fact,  they  will  not  be  undergone  without  an  adequate
motive  in  the  form  of  a  compensating  reward.  Such  a  mo-
tive our  present  system  of  industry  provides  in  the  mainte-
nance of  private  property  and  industrial  freedom.  The  pros-
pect of  profit  is  the  prospect  of  enjoying  as  property  the
results  of  industrial  investment;  and  this  prospect  under  a
system  of  industrial  freedom  is  thrown  open  to  all  who  are
in  possession  of  wealth.  The  inducement  thus  offered  to  the
acquisitive  propensity  in  man  constitutes,  under  the  actual
system  of  things,  the  great  spring  and  support  of  productive
capital,  and,  in  the  last  resort,  the  ultimate  security  for  all  the
results  which  go  to  form  our  material  civilization.  The  feel-
ing appealed  to  may,  if  you  like,  be  a  coarse  one,  but  it  is  at
any  rate  efficacious;  it  does  lead  to  habitual  and  systematic
saving,  and  furnishes  society  with  the  necessary  material  basis
for  civilized  progress.  But  this  motive  every  system  which
annuls  private  property  and  freedom  of  individual  industry
takes  away ;  and  the  question  is.  What  do  such  sj^stems  sup-
ply in  its  place?  Two  possible  substitutes,  so  far  as  I  know,
and  two  only,  have  been  or  can  be  suggested — benevolence
and  public  spirit.  I  should  be  verj^  unwilling  to  disparage
such  principles  of  action,  or  to  deny  that  they  are  at  present
extensively  influential  in  human  affairs;  but  I  can  not  affect
to  believe  that  either,  or  that  both  together — taking  human
beings,  not  as  in  the  progress  of  human  improvement  they


BEMUNEBATION  OF  INDUSTRY.  273

may  possibly  become,  bat  as  we  now  actually  find  them —
could  be  trusted  to  supply  the  place  of  that  desire  for  individ-
ual advancement  and  well-being  to  which  the  institutions  of
private  property  and  industrial  freedom  make  appeal.  I  am,
therefore,  unable  to  see  how  any  system,  which  relies  upon  no
stronger  or  moi'e  universal  elements  of  human  character  than
these  for  its  support,  can  fulfill  that  primary  and  indispensable
condition  of  all  progressive  society — the  providing  of  a  mate-
rial basis  for  civilization  in  the  form  of  an  accumulated  capital.

§  6.  So  much  I  have  thought  it  well  to  say  in  justification
of  the  fundamental  bases  of  our  present  industrial  system :  it
remains  to  consider  what  are  the  prospects  offered  by  the  sys-
tem to  the  working-classes  living  under  it,  taking  their  con-
dition to  be  governed  by  the  economic  laws  developed  in  the
previous  portions  of  this  work.

The  remuneration  of  industry,  as  we  there  saw,  is  derived
from,  and  therefore  must  be  limited  by,  the  products  which
result  from  its  exercise.  In  this  exercise  two  distinct  func-
tions are  embraced  —  that  performed  by  labor  and  that  per-
formed by  capital,  each  implying  a  sacrifice  and  demanding  a
reward.  To  the  share  of  the  produce  to  be  assigned  to  the
laborer  Nature  has  herself  very  obviously  set  a  minimum  lim-
it in  the  requirements  essential  to  his  existence:  it  can  never
permanently  be  less  than  will  suffice  to  support,  in  such  phys-
ical and  mental  strength  as  the  work  performed  calls  for,  those
who  carry  it  on.  On  the  other  hand,  the  capitalist's  share  also
finds  a  minimum  limit  in  his  disposition  and  character:  it  must
at  least  be  such  as  shall  seem  to  him  a  sufficient  compensation
for  the  sacrifices  which  he  incurs  in  investment,  and  wnll,  there-
fore, in  a  given  community  be  high  or  low,  according  as  that
element  of  character  designated  by  Mr.  Mill  "  the  effective  de-
sire of  accumulation  "  is  weak  or  strong.  It  follows  from  this
that,  in  order  to  the  systematic  prosecution  of  industry,  the

18


274  PRACTICAL  DEDUCTIONS.

produce  resulting  must  at  least  be  sufficiently  great  to  cover
both  these  requirements — to  yield,  that  is  to  say,  a  minimum
wage  and  a  minimum  profit;  if  it  be  not  equal  to  this,  either
labor  will  fail  for  want  of  support,  or  capital  will  cease  to  be
invested  for  want  of  adequate  inducement.  But  the  produce
may  be  indefinitely  greater  than  this ;  and  hence  arises  a  mar-
gin of  return  over  and  above  what  the  satisfaction  of  the  min-
ima of  wages  and  of  profits  demands.  Now  it  is  evident  that
by  the  extent  of  this  fund  the  possibilities  of  the  laborer's  po-
sition must,  under  all  circumstances,  be  bounded.

Two  questions,  accordingly,  here  at  once  arise;  first,  as  to
the  possible  increase  of  this  margin  of  return  as  industry,  with
the  progress  of  industrial  art,  becomes  more  productive ;  and,
secondly,  as  to  the  degree  in  which  the  working -classes  are
likely  to  appropriate  such  augmentation  as  may  accrue.  As
regards  the  latter  point,  we  have  seen  that  profits  in  advan-
cing communities  tend  to  a  minimum,  from  which  we  are  justi-
fied in  concluding  that,  however  the  gain  may  for  a  time  be
divided  between  capitalist  and  laborer,  the  permanent  tend-
ency of  things  will  be  toward  an  absorption  of  the  whole  by
wages.  In  whatever  degree,  therefore,  the  margin  of  the  re-
turn on  industry,  beyond  what  is  needed  to  satisfy  the  minima
of  wages  and  profits,  may  increase  with  the  progress  of  soci-
ety, we  are  warranted  in  regarding  the  fund  thence  arising  as
available  for  the  improvement  of  the  laborer's  condition.  The
question  as  to  the  possibilities  of  his  future- — -supposing  him
to  remain  as  at  present  a  mere  receiver  of  wages — thus  turns
entirely  and  simply  upon  the  prospects  of  increase  in  this
fund.

And  here  I  regret  to  say  the  outlook  of  the  laborer  is  by  no
means  so  bright  as  a  superficial  view  of  the  case  might  lead  us
to  suppose.  Understanding  by  the  rate  of  wages  the  real  re-
muneration of  the  laborer,  and  by  the  rate  of  profit  the  ratio  of
the  return  upon  capital,  and  bearing  in  mind  that  wages  and


PRODUCTIVENESS  OF  INDUSTRY.  275

profits  are  derived  from,  and  in  fact  represent,  the  products  of
industry,  it  might  seem  a  safe  position  to  assume  that  the  fund
available  for  the  augmentation  of  the  rates  of  wages  and  profits
would  increase  pari  passu  with  every  extension  of  the  power
of  man  in  the  industrial  sphere.  Plausible,  however,  as  this
position  seems,  we  may  easily  convince  ourselves  that  it  can
not  possibly  be  true.  Let  us  consider  this  fact.  Within  the
last  century  an  enormous  increase  has  taken  place  in  the  pro-
ductiveness of  industry  in  Great  Britain.  A  given  exertion  of
labor  and  capital  will  now  produce  in  a  great  many  directions
five,  ten,  or  twenty  times,  in  some  instances  perhaps  one  hun-
dred times,  the  result  which  an  equal  exertion  would  have  pro-
duced a  hundred  years  ago :  it  is  not  probable  that  industry
is  in  any  direction  whatever  less  productive  now  than  it  was
then ;  yet  the  rate  of  wages,  understanding  this  in  the  sense
defined,  as  measured  by  the  real  well-being  of  the  laborer —
though  some  improvement  no  doubt  has  taken  place  in  his
condition  during  this  time — has  certainly  not  advanced  in  any
thing  like  a  corresponding  degree ;  while  it  may  be  doubted  if
the  rate  of  profit  has  advanced  at  all.  If  we  were  to  take  the
current  rate  of  interest  as  a  criterion,  we  should  be  inclined
to  say  that  it  had  even  positively  fallen.  It  is  certain,  at  all
events,  that  neither  the  rate  of  wages  nor  the  rate  of  profits,
nor  both  rates  combined,  have  experienced  any  increase  at  all
commensurate  with  that  which  has  occurred  in  the  general  pro-
ductiveness of  industry.  Some  one,  no  doubt,  has  benefited  by
the  enlarged  power  of  man  over  material  nature ;  the  world  is
beyond  question  the  richer  for  it ;  but  what  I  wish  to  call  at-
tention to  is  that  the  gain,  however  realized,  does  not  show
itself,  at  least  on  the  scale  of  its  actual  magnitude,  either  in  the
real  remuneration  of  the  laborer,  or  yet  in  the  ratio  of  return
upon  the  capitalist's  outlay.

What,  then,  is  the  relation  of  the  productiveness  of  industry
to  these  phenomena?  and  how  far  can  we  count  upon  the  prog-


S76  PRACTICAL  DEDUCTIONS.

ress  of  industrial  invention  and  improvement  for  enlarging
that  margin  of  return  out  of  which  all  additions  to  the  mini-
mum rates  of  wages  and  of  profits  must  be  made  ?  The  cor-
rect answer  to  this  question  may,  I  think,  be  thus  stated:
the  productiveness  of  industry  only  affects  the  rates  of  wages  and
profits  in  so  far  as  it  results  in  a  cheapening  of  the  coynmodities
which  enter  into  the  consumption  of  the  laborer.  This  is  a  point
not  in  general  correctly  apprehended,  but  it  will  not  be  diffi-
cult to  establish  its  truth.  Let  us  suppose  an  improvement  to
take  place  in  the  mode  of  producing  an  article  consumed  only
by  the  rich,  and  leading  to  a  cheapened  cost  of  production —
what  happens?  Assuming  that  there  is  no  monopoly,  and  al-
lowing time  for  supply  to  adjust  itself  to  demand,  there  will
occur  a  fall  in  the  value  of  the  article  in  proportion  to  the
fall  in  its  cost  of  production.  A  given  capital  will  yield  in
this  particular  commodity  a  larger  return,  but  this  increased
return  will  only  possess  the  same  value  as  the  smaller  return
previously  obtained.  The  ratio,  therefore,  of  the  value  pro-
duced to  the  value  expended  will  remain  undisturbed.  It
follows  that  an  improvement  in  industry  of  this  descrip-
tion, however  it  may  temporarily  profit  individual  producers
pending  the  adjustment  of  supply  to  the  altered  conditions  of
demand,  has  no  tendency  to  raise  the  rate  of  profit*  And
it  is  sufficiently  evident  that  it  will  not  affect  the  remunera-
tion of  labor.  Why  should  it?  It  has  not  increased  either
the  capital  of  the  country  (for  the  cheapened  article  is  by  hy-
pothesis an  article  of  luxurious  consumption)  or  the  value  of
its  products.  The  laborer's  wages,  measured  in  money  (which
we  assume  to  remain  constant  in  value)  continue  as  before,  and
the  only  article  cheapened  is  one  which  by  hypothesis  he  does

*  This  position  would  require  qualification  if  the  article  of  luxurious  consump-
tion which  I  have  supposed,  to  be  cheapened  could  be  made  the  means,  through
an  exchange  with  foreign  countries,  of  obtaining  on  cheaper  terms  food  or  othei
laborer's  commodities.


PRODUCTIVENESS  OF  INDUSTRY.  277

not  consume.  If  I  am  asked,  Who  then  are  the  persons  who
benefit  by  improvements  of  this  class?  I  answer,  those  who
consume  the  commodity.  If  capitalists  are  consumers,  then
they  will  benefit  as  consumers^  but  not  in  their  quality  of  re-
ceivers of  profits.  They  will  receive  the  same  rate  of  return
on  their  investment  as  before,  but  the  sum  resulting  from  this
rate  of  return  will  give  them  a  larger  command  than  before
over  the  articles  of  their  consumption.  We  thus  find  that  im-
provements in  productive  industry,  where  they  apply  to  com-
modities consumed  only  by  the  rich,  however  they  may  bene-
fit the  rich,  have  no  tendency  to  raise  the  rate  of  profit ;  while
they  leave  the  remuneration  of  the  laborer  entirely  unaffected.
But  now  observe  the  consequence  of  improvements  of  another
kind — those,  namely,  which  affect  commodities  entering  into
the  consumption  of  the  laborer.  Here,  again,  as  in  the  case
just  considered,  the  article  affected  by  the  improvement  would
fall  in  price  in  proportion  to  the  cheapening  of  its  cost;  but
one  or  other  of  the  following  consequences  would  also  happen  :
either  the  real  remuneration  of  the  laborer  would  increase  in
proportion  to  the  cheapening  of  the  commodity  multiplied
by  the  degree  in  which  it  entered  into  his  expenditure;  or,
failing  this,  the  rate  of  profit  would  rise.  It  is  probable  that,
in  the  first  instance  at  least,  the  former  result  is  that  which
would  occur.  There  is  nothing  in  the  cheapening  of  an  arti-
cle of  the  laborer's  consumption  to  diminish  the  investment
of  capital  or  at  once  to  increase  the  supply  of  labor.  Money
wages,  therefore  (the  value  of  money  being  assumed  to  remain
constant),  would  continue  as  before,  and  the  laborer,  in  com-
mon with  other  consumers,  would  reap  the  benefit  of  the  im-
provement in  the  diminished  price  of  the  commodity.  If  this
did  not  happen — if  money  wages  fell,  let  us  suppose,  so  as  just
to  neutralize  the  cheapened  cost  of  the  commodity,  leaving  the
laborer's  real  remuneration  unaffected — then  the  state  of  things
would  imply  an  advance  in  the  rate  of  profit ;  for  the  price  of


278  PRACTICAL  DEDUCTIOXS.

the  commodity  falling  in  proportion  as  its  cost  nad  diminished
'—that  is  to  say,  as  the  product  of  a  given  exertion  of  industry
employed  in  making  it  had  increased — the  value  of  the  aggre-
gate return  upon  industry  thus  employed  would  be  the  same
as  before;  but  the  value  of  the  outlay  upon  the  same  exertion
of  industry  would  have  declined  in  consequence  of  the  fall  in
money  wages,  and  the  ratio  of  the  return  to  the  outla}^,  that  is
to  say,  the  rate  of  profit,  would  therefore  have  increased.  It
is  thus  through  a  limited  class  of  commodities  only  that  the
progress  of  industrj^-  affects  either  the  rate  of  profit  or  the  la-
borer's well-being;  in  other  directions  improvements  may  oc-
cur and  commodities  be  indefinitely  cheapened  to  the  advan-
tage of  consumers,  but  without  extending  in  the  least  that  mar-
gin of  return  from  which  augmentations  of  wages  and  profits
are  derived.

And  now  I  am  in  a  position  to  explain  the  phenomenon  to
which  I  have  called  attention — the  fact,  namely,  that  so  little
impression  has  been  made  on  the  rate  of  wages  and  profits  by
the  immense  industrial  progress  of  recent  times.  The  expla-
nation lies  in  the  following  circumstances:  1st,  the  improve-
ments have  to  a  very  large  extent  affected  commodities  not
consumed  by  the  laborer ;  and,  so  far  as  this  has  been  the  case,
there  is,  as  we  haves  seen,  nothing  in  the  circumstance  of  an
increase  in  industrial  efficiency  to  cause  an  advance  in  either
wages  or  profits ;  and,  2dly,  when  the  improvement  has  affect-
ed commodities  consumed  by  the  laborer,  the  industrial  advan-
tage gained  has  rarely  been  maintained  to  its  full  extent,  and
frequently  after  a  time  has  been  entirely  lost.  What  has  hap-
pened has  been  a  temporary  improvement  of  the  laborer's  con-
dition, followed  by  an  increase  of  population  and  an  enlarged
demand  for  the  cheapened  commodity.  Laborers'  commodi-
ties, however,  are  for  the  most  part  commodities  of  raw  prod-
uce, or  in  which  the  raw  material  constitutes  the  chief  ele-
ment of  the  value  (clothing  is,  in  truth,  the  only  important  ex-


IN  RELATION  TO  BENT.  279

ception) ;  and  of  all  such  commodities  it  is  tKe  well-known  law
that  an  augmentation  of  quantity  can  only  be  obtained,  other
things  being  the  same,  at  an  increasing  proportional  cost.  Thus
it  has  happened  that  the  gain  in  productiveness  obtained  by
proved  processes  has,  after  a  generation,  to  a  great  extent  been
lost  —  lost,  that  is  to  say,  for  any  benefit  that  can  be  derived
from  it  in  favor  of  wages  or  profits;  and  though  our  industry
is  conducted  with  greater  skill  than  formerly,  yet  being  employ-
ed on  natural  agents  of  inferior  power  or  of  greater  remoteness,
to  which  the  needs  of  an  increasing  population  have  compelled
us  to  resort,  and  the  cost  of  the  portion  of  the  produce  raised
from  those  inferior  natural  agents  being  that  which  governs
the  price  of  the  whole — it  comes  to  pass  that  it  now  yields,
capital  for  capital  and  effort  for  effort,  no  greater,  or  but  a
slightly  greater,  return.  Not  indeed  that  the  introduction  of
improved  processes  into  agriculture  has  been  for  naught:  it
has  resulted  in  a  large  augmentation  of  the  aggregate  return
obtained  from  the  soil,  but  without  permanently  lowering  its
price,  and,  therefore,  without  permanent  advantage  to  either
capitalist,  or  laborer,  or  to  other  consumers.  The  large  ad-
dition to  the  wealth  of  the  country  has  gone  neither  to  profits
nor  to  wages,  nor  yet  to  the  public  at  large,  but  to  swell  a
fund  ever  growing  even  while  its  proprietors  sleep — the  rent-
roll  of  the  owners  of  the  soil.  Accordingly  we  find  that,  not-
withstanding the  vast  progress  of  agricultural  industry  effected
within  a  century,  there  is  scarcely  an  important  agricultural
product  that  is  not  at  least  as  dear  now  as  it  was  a  hundred
years  ago — as  dear  not  merely  in  money  price,  but  in  real  cost.
The  aggregate  return  from  the  land  has  immensely  increased ;
but  the  cost  of  the  costliest  portion  of  the  produce,  which  is
that  which  determines  the  price  of  the  whole,  remains  pretty
nearly  as  it  was.  Profits,  therefore,  have  not  risen  at  all,  and
the  real  remuneration  of  the  laborer,  taking  the  whole  field  of
labor,  in  but  a  slight  degree — at  all  events  in  a  degree  yerj


280  PRACTICAL  DEDUCTIONS.

far  from  commensurate  with  the  general  progress  of  Indus-
try*

The  reader  will  not  fail  to  perceive  the  intimate  bearing  of
the  conclusion  just  reached  upon  the  question  which  I  have
proposed  for  discussion  in  this  chapter — the  prospect  of  im-
provement in  the  laborer's  material  condition.  It  is  evident
that  this  condition  is  by  no  means  so  linked  to  the  general
progress  of  industrial  in)provement  that  we  can  count  upon  an
advance  in  it  2^ciri  passu  with  that  progress,  A  very  consid-
erable proportion  of  industrial  inventions  do  not  affect  his  well-
being  at  all ;  while  with  regard  to  those  which,  by  cheapening
the  commodities  of  his  consumption,  do  affect  his  well-being,
the  condition  of  permanent  advantage  to  him  from  this  source
is  that  his  numbers  shall  be  kept  within  such  limits  that  the

*  "How,"  asks  Mr.  (noAv  Sir  William)  Harcourt,  "is  the  laborer  to  get  high-
er wages,  and  yet  the  former  to  receive  a  reasonable  profit,  without  which  his  bus-
iness can  not  be  carried  on  ?  There  is  only  one  way  in  which  it  can  be  done,
and  that  is  by  increasing  the  productive  power  of  the  land,  which  is  the  fund  out
of  which  both  the  wages  and  the  profit  must  be  realized,  "Well,  how  is  the  pro-
ductive power  of  the  land  to  be  increased?  The  answer  to  that,  too,  is  sim-
ple enough,  and  is  universally  recognized,  by  applying  more  capital  to  the  soil"
(Times,  Jan.  2,  1873).  It  does  not  seem  to  have  occurred  to  Mr.  Harcourt  that
the  process  which  he  advocates  has  been  in  operation  on  a  great  scale  for  at  least
a  century,  and  yet  that  the  agricultural  laborer  remains  prettj'  nearly  where  he
was  before  it  commenced.  Had  he  turned  to  Belgium,  he  would  have  seen  the
same  experiment  in  operation  with  precisely  the  same  result.  Nowhere  has  cap-
ital been  more  liberally  applied  to  the  cultivation  of  the  soil  than  in  Belgium,  and
nowhere  is  agricultural  labor  more  wretchedly  paid  (see  Laveleye's  "L'Economie
Rurale  de  la  Belgique  ").  The  following  passage  may  be  commended  to  Sir  W.
Harcourt's  notice :  "Malgre  ces  diffe'rences  assez  notables,  le  mal  general  et  pro-
fond  qu'on  ne  peut  se  dissimuler,  c'est  qu'a  peu  pres  partout  le  salaire  des  ouvriers
agricoles  est  insuffisant  pour  faire  face  aux  besoins  de  leurs  families  dans  un  pays
oil  les  denrees  atteignent  le  plus  haut  prix  des  marches  europeens.  La  statistique
officielle  constate  elle-meme  que  la  population  rurale  de  la  Belgique  est  I'une  des
plus  mal  nourries  du  continent.  Les  produits  de  I'agriculture,  quelque  abondants
qu'ils  soient,  ne  sufBsant  point,  avec  la  repartition  actuelle,  pour  donner  a  tons  une
alimentation  convenuble  "  (p.  240).


DISCOURAGING  FBOSPECTS.  281

necessity  of  resorting  to  inferior  instruments  of  production
shall  not  neutralize  the  gain  in  industrial  efficiency.  This,
then — the  limitation  of  his  numbers — is  the  circumstance  on
which,  in  the  last  resort,  any  improvement  at  all  of  a  perma-
nent kind  in  the  laborer's  condition  turns.  For  my  own  part,
I  can  not  pretend  to  discern  in  the  circumstances  of  the  time
any  solid  ground  for  feeling  sanguine  on  this  point,  at  least  so
long  as  laborers  remain  what  they  are  mainly  at  present — mere
laborers,  hired  employes  depending  for  each  day  on  the  result
of  the  day's  work.  But  I  desire  to  go  further  than  this.  I
think  the  considerations  which  have  been  adduced  show  that
even  a  very  great  change  in  the  habits  of  the  laboring  classes
as  bearing  upon  the  increase  of  population — a  change  far  great-
er than  there  seems  any  solid  ground  for  expecting — would  be
ineffectual,  so  long  as  the  laborer  remains  a  mere  receiver  of
wages,  to  accomplish  any  great  improvement  in  his  state — any
improvement  at  all  commensurate  with  what  has  taken  place,
and  may  be  expected  hereafter  to  take  place,  in  the  lot  of  those
who  derive  their  livelihood  from  the  profits  of  capital.  This
is  a  point  which  perhaps  needs  some  clearing  up.  It  might
seem  to  result  from  one  doctrine  on  which  I  have  laid  some
stress  in  this  work  —  the  tendency  of  profits  to  a  minimum,
while  no  such  tendency  can  happily  be  asserted  of  wages  —
that  the  prospects  of  the  laborer  in  the  future  of  industry,  in
comparison  with  his  present  condition,  were  actually  brighter
than  those  of  the  receiver  of  profit.  But  any  such  inference
from  the  doctrine  in  question  would  imply  a  very  gross  mis-
apprehension of  the  facts  of  the  case.  It  is  perhaps  as  well
to  point  out  that  the  expressions  "rate  of  wages"  and  "rate
of  profit "  do  not  denote  analogous  facts  with  reference  to  the
recipients  of  those  two  kinds  of  income.  The  rate  of  real
wages  expresses,  so  far  as  the  laborer  derives  his  income  from
wages,  his  actual  material  condition;  but  the  "rate  of  profit  "
gives  no  clue  to  the  position,  in  this  respect,  of  the  capitalist.


282  PBACTICAL  DEDUCTIONS.

A  very  low  rate  of  profit  is  compatible,  and  in  fact  generally
co-exists,  with  very  great  wealth  among  those  who  derive  their
income  from  this  source.  The  explanation  lies  of  course  in
the  fact  that  the  income  of  this  class  is  measured,  not  by  the
rate  of  profit,  but  by  this  multiplied  by  the  amount  of  their
capital,  and  that  this  last  factor  may  increase  to  any  extent
whatever.  Nothing,  therefore,  can  be  inferred  from  the  tend-
ency of  profits  to  a  minimum  as  to  any  limitation  on  the
growth  in  wealth  of  those  who  live  upon  profits ;  while,  on
the  other  hand,  the  limitations  on  the  advance  of  wages  imply
limitations  on  the  laborer's  well-being.

The  possibilities  of  the  laborer's  position,  accordingly  —  so
long  as  he  remains  a  mere  laborer  —  must  be  considered  as
bounded  by  the  possibilities  of  an  advance  in  real  wages.  We
have  already  seen  the  conditions  on  which  this  depends.  Prof-
its being  at  the  minimum,  real  wages  will  advance  with  the
productiveness  of  industry  in  producing  such  real  wages — in
producing,  that  is  to  say,  the  commodities  of  the  laborer's  con-
sumption. As  I  have  already  remarked,  these  commodities
are  mostly  commodities  of  raw  produce,  of  which  an  augment-
ed production  always  implies  a  resort  to  inferior  sources  of
supply.  Unless,  therefore,  the  laborer  would  lose  in  the  re-
sort to  such  sources  of  supply  what  he  has  gained  from  the
increased  productiveness  of  industry,  he  must  be  content  to
impose  a  steady  restraint  on  the  increase  of  his  numbers.  And
now  I  will  make  an  extreme  supposition  on  this  subject:  let
us  suppose  the  providence  and  self-denial  of  the  masses  of  the
people  to  be  strengthened  to  such  a  point  that  the  demand  for
food  and  other  articles  of  their  consumption  can  be  satisfied
without  requiring  a  resort  to  any  natural  agents  inferior  in
point  of  productiveness  to  those  employed  in  the  United
States,  what  would  be  the  effect  on  real  wages  of  such  an
extreme  control  placed  upon  the  natural  tendency  of  popula-
tion to  increase  ? Its  effect  would  be  to  place  laborers  in  this


DISCOURAGING  PROSPECTS.  283

country  on  an  equal  footing  with  laborers  in  the  United  States ;
and  this  is  the  very  utmost  that,  on  the  most  extreme  supposi-
tion with  regard  to  the  control  of  population,  could  be  expect-
ed for  the  Icxboring  classes,  assuming  them  to  continue  mere
laborers.  The  supposition,  I  need  scarcely  say,  is  absolutely
Utopian.  Nothing  is  more  certain  than  that,  taking  the  whole
field  of  labor,  real  wages  in  Great  Britain  will  never  rise  to  the
standard  of  remuneration  now  prevailing  in  new  countries — a
standard  which  after  all  would  form  but  a  sorry  consummation
as  the  final  goal  of  improvement  for  the  masses  of  mankind.
We  see,  then,  within  what  very  narrow  limits  the  possibilities
of  the  laborer's  lot  are  confined,  so  long  as  he  depends  for  his
well-being  on  the  pi'oduce  of  his  day's  work.  Against  these
barriers  Trades-Unions  must  dash  themselves  in  vain.  They
are  not  to  be  broken  through  or  eluded  by  any  combinations,
however  universal ;  for  they  are  the  barriers  set  by  Nature
herself.  I  commend  the  consideration  to  those  patrons  of  the
laboring  classes  who  encourage  an  exclusive  reliance  on  Trades-
Unionism,  and  would  advance  their  interests  by  confining  them
to  their  present  role.  It  was  the  opinion  of  M.  Comte,  as  it  is
that  of  his  disciples,  that  the  true  ideal  of  industrial  society —
the  goal  toward  which  all  reforming  effort  should  be  directed
— is  a  more  and  more  complete  and  definitive  separation  of  the
laboring  and  the  capitalist  classes.  The  proper  model  for  our
industrial  organization  according  to  them  is  an  army  in  which
the  capitalists  are  as  the  captains,  and  the  laborers  as  the  rank
and  file.  I  do  not  know  whether  the  apostles  of  this  creed
have  ever  seriously  thought  out  the  consequences  as  regards
the  distribution  of  wealth  of  a  regime  of  this  kind ;  but  it
would  be  worth  their  while  to  master  at  least  so  much  Polit-
ical Economy,  before  committing  themselves  to  the  discour-
agement of  movements  which,  so  far  as  appears,  offer  to  the
laboring  class  the  sole  means  of  escape  from  a  harsh  and  hope-
less destiny.


284  PIIACTICAL  DEDUCTIONS.

§  7.  The  conclusion  to  which  1  have  been  led  by  the  line
of  argument  developed  above  is  precisely  the  opposite  of  that
which  the  Positivists  maintain.  It  appears  to  me  that  the  con-
dition of  any  substantial  improvement  of  a  permanent  kind  in
the  laborer's  lot  is  that  the  separation  of  industrial  classes  into
laborers  and  capitalists  whicb  now  prevails  shall  not  be  main-
tained ;  that  the  laborer  shall  cease  to  be  a  mere  laborer — in
a  word,  that  profits  shall  be  brought  to  re-enforce  the  Wages-
fund.  I  have  shown  that,  in  order  to  any  improvement  at  all
of  a  permanent  kind,  a  restraint  must  be  enforced  on  popula-
tion which  shall  prevent  the  increased  demands  for  subsistence
from  neutralizing  the  gains  arising  from  industrial  progress ;
and  that  even  a  very  great  change  in  this  respect  in  the  habits
of  the  people — a  change  far  greater  than  there  are  any  good
reasons  for  anticipating — would  still  leave  them,  while  they
remain  mere  laborers,  in  a  position  not  very  materially  better
than  at  present.  But  the  significance  of  these  considerations
becomes  much  enhanced  when  they  are  connected  with  anoth-
er doctrine  established  in  a  former  chapter  of  this  work.  It
was  there  shown  that,  in  the  order  of  economic  development,
the  Wages-fund  of  a  country  grows  more  slowly  than  its  gen-
eral capital.*  Now  the  Wages -fund  of  a  country  represents
the  means  of  the  laboring  classes  as  a  whole  ;  the  general  capi-
tal the  means  of  those  who  live  upon  profit — we  may  say
broadly  of  the  richer  classes.  It  appears,  therefore,  that  the
fund  available  for  those  who  live  by  labor  tends,  in  the  prog-
ress of  society,  while  growing  actually  larger,  to  become  a  con-
stantly smaller  fraction  of  the  entire  national  wealth.  If,  then,
the  means  of  any  one  class  of  society  are  to  be  permanently
limited  to  this  fund,  it  is  evident,  assuming  that  the  progress
of  its  numbers  keeps  pace  with  that  of  other  classes,  that  its
material  condition  in  relation  to  theirs  can  not  but  decline.

*  See  ante,  pp.  176, 177.


SOCIALISTIC  SCHEMES.  285

Now,  as  it  would  be  futile  to  expect  on  the  part  of  the  poorest
and  most  ignorant  of  the  population  self-denial  and  prudence
greater  than  that  actually  practiced  by  the  classes  above  them,
the  circumstances  of  whose  life  are  so  much  more  favorable
than  theirs  for  the  cultivation  of  these  virtues,  the  conclusion
to  which  I  am  brought  is  this,  that,  unequal  as  is  the  distribu-
tion of  wealth  already  in  this  country,  the  tendency  of  indus-
trial progress — on  the  supposition  that  the  present  separation
between  industrial  classes  is  maintained — is  toward  an  inequal-
ity greater  still.  The  rich  will  be  growing  richer;  and  the
poor,  at  least  relatively,  poorer.  It  seems  to  me,  apart  alto-
gether from  the  question  of  the  laborer's  interest,  that  these
are  not  conditions  which  furnish  a  solid  basis  for  a  progressive
social  state ;  but,  having  regard  to  that  interest,  I  think  the
considerations  adduced  show  that  the  first  and  indispensable
step  toward  any  serious  amendment  of  the  laborer's  lot  is  that
he  should  be,  in  one  way  or  other,  lifted  out  of  the  groove  in
which  he  at  present  works,  and  placed  in  a  position  compatible
with  his  becoming  a  sharer  in  equal  proportion  with  others  in
the  general  advantages  arising  from  industrial  progress.

In  the  conclusion  just  expressed  I  believe  I  shall  have  the
concurrence  of  many  who  would  probably  attach  little  value
to  the  reasoning  by  which  I  have  been  led  to  it.  In  all  so-
cialistic schemes  for  the  elevation  of  the  working-man,  the
necessity  of  raising  him  from  the  position  of  a  mere  laborer  is
generally  taken  for  granted.  I  am,  therefore,  on  this  point  at
one  with  the  Socialists ;  but  while  I  agree  with  them  so  far,  I
am  wholly  unable  to  accept  the  means  which  Socialism  pro=
poses  for  effecting  the  required  elevation.  The  leading  idea
in  most  schemes  of  socialistic  reform  is  the  notion  of  raising
laborers  from  dependence  on  the  labor  market  by  throwing  on
society,  in  the  person  of  the  State,  the  duty  of  providing  them
with  capital.  Now  by  whatever  means  it  is  sought  to  give
effect  to  this  idea — whether  through  the  mechanism  of  a  State


286  PRACTICAL  DEDUCTIONS.

bank  issuing  loans  in  inconvertible  legal-tender  notes,  or  by
special  taxation  directed  against  the  rich,  or  by  advances  made
to  laborers  without  adequate  security  or  on  terms  more  favor-
able than  can  be  obtained  in  the  market*  —  one  and  all,  they
are  open  to  the  objection  of  doing  violence  to  the  principle
of  property,  the  weight  and  scope  of  which  objection  I  have
already  sufficiently  insisted  on.  But  this  is  not  all.  Such
schemes  tend  in  the  most  direct  way  to  the  demoralization  of
the  laborer  himself,  by  relieving  him  from  the  obligation  of
sacrifices  which,  in  the  order  of  nature,  all  must  undergo  as
the  condition  of  the  rewards  which  attend  on  industry,  and  so
placing  him  in  a  position  of  privilege  in  relation  to  his  fellow-
men.  If  laborers  can  obtain  command  of  capital  by  simply
asking  for  it ;  or  if,  having  failed  in  their  undertakings,  they
are  to  be  relieved  from  the  consequences  of  failure,  and  to  be
started  anew  in  fresh  enterprises,  it  is  idle  to  expect  that  they
will  exhibit  the  self-denial  and  providence  through  the  exer-
cise of  which  capital  comes  to  exist  and  industrial  enterprise

*  It  may  be  said  that  this  principle  has  already  been  set  aside  in  favor  of  other
classes  than  laborers.  This  is  true ;  and  I  am  not  concerned  to  defend  such  vio-
lations of  the  rule  of  justice  and  of  sound  policy.  One  recent  example,  however,
of  the  practice  of  making  advances  for  industrial  purposes  on  terms  more  fiivor-
able  than  can  be  obtained  in  the  market — I  refer  to  what  are  known  as  "the
Bright  clauses"  in  the  Irish  Land  Act  of  1870 — may,  I  think,  be  justified  on  spe-
cial grounds.  I  need  not  enter  into  the  general  argument  here ;  but  it  is  scarcely
likely  that  any  set  of  workmen,  unable  from  their  own  resom'ces  to  start  a  co-op-
erative enterprise,  would  be  capable  of  furnishing  the  State  with  the  same  security
for  the  money  advanced,  or  Avith  the  same  evidence  of  their  industrial  capacity,
which  must  be  furnished  by  every  Irish  tenant  who  is  in  a  position  to  take  ad-
vantage of  the  "Bright  clauses."  How  little  any  such  deviation  from  sound
principle  is  called  for  in  the  present  case  is  strikingly  shown  in  the  past  history  of
co-operation.  "It  can  not,"  says  Professor  Fawcett,  "be  too  carefully  borne  in
mind  that  those  who  have  achieved  the  most  striking  success  in  co-operation  have
not  been  assisted  by  any  extraneous  aid.  They  have  placed  their  chief  reliance
in  union  of  effort,  in  prudence,  and  in  self-denial "  ("  Manual  of  Political  Econo-
my,"?. 279).


THE  PRACTICAL  PROBLEM.  2f?7

to  succeed.  The  practice  of  those  virtues  would  still,  indeed,
be  the  condition  of  attaining  the  industrial  results;  but  the
virtues,  if  practiced  at  all  when  the  motives  for  practicing
them  had  been  taken  away,  would  be  practiced  by  one  set  of
people,  and  the  results  reaped  by  another.  Unsatisfactory  as
may  be  the  actual  state  of  things,  I  can  not  believe  that  this
would  be  an  improvement  on  it.  As  matters  now  stand,  the
progress  of  the  laborer  is  at  least  connected  with  the  exercise
of  industrial  virtues ;  he  only  reaps  where  he  has  sown ;  but
under  a  system  in  which  he  would  find  himself  supplied  at
will  with  capital,  the  fruits  of  others'  savings,  what  would
there  be  to  develop  prudence  or  self-restraint?  What  motive
for  setting  bounds  to  the  most  reckless  self-indulgence.

§  8.  The  problem,  therefore,  for  those  who  accept  the  point
of  view  here  taken,  is  to  combine  the  socialistic  aim  with
means  for  giving  it  effect  consistent  with  the  maintenance  of
the  fundamental  bases  of  our  present  social  state — to  help  the
laborer  to  emerge  from  his  actual  position  without  doing  vio-
lence to  the  principle  of  property,  and  without  weakening  in
him  those  qualities  of  character  on  which  industrial  success
depends.  Keeping  this  object  in  view,  I  think  it  should  at  the
outset  be  clearly  laid  down  that  there  is  no  royal  road  to  the
possession  of  capital.  Capital  can  only  be  created  by  saving,
and,  where  people  have  not  saved  themselves,  can  only  be  hon-
estly obtained  by  offering  to  those  who  have  saved  an  ade-
quate, inducement  in  the  form  of  security  and  interest  to  pre-
vail on  them  to  part  with  it.  If,  then,  the  laborer  is  to  emerge
from  his  present  position  and  become  a  sharer  in  the  gains  of
capital,  he  must  in  the  first  instance  learn  to  save.  To  make
saving  practicable,  it  is  true,  there  must  be  a  margin  of  income
beyond  what  is  required  for  providing  the  necessaries  and  de-
cencies of  life ;  and  I  shall  perhaps  be  told  that  this  margin
the  laborer  does  not  possess. But  this  is  an  assertion  which


268  PRACTICAL  DEDUCTIONS.

can  not  for  a  moment  be  maintained  in  presence  of  the  evi-
dence furnished  by  our  Excise  returns.  From  these  returns
it  has  been  calculated  that  a  sum  of  no  less  than  £120,000,000
sterling  is  now  spent  annually  on  alcoholic  drinks.  In  what
proportion  the  working-classes  take  part  in  this  expenditure
we  have  no  means  of  accurately  determining;  but  I  imagine
it  will  not  be  disputed  that  by  much  the  largest  proportion
must  be  set  down  to  their  account;  and  I  am  certainly  within
the  mark  in  assuming  that  of  the  mone}^  so  spent  the  greater
portion — I  am  sure  I  might  say  three-fourths  of  the  whole —
so  far  from  conducing  in  any  way  to  the  well-being  of  those
who  spend  it,  is  both  physically  and  morally  injurious  to  them.
Here,  then,  is  a  sum  of,  let  us  say,  some  £60,000,000  sterling
which  might  annually  be  saved  without  trenching  upon  any
expenditure  which  really  contributes  to  the  laborer's  well-be-
ing. The  obstacles  to  this  saving  are  not  physical,  but  moral
obstacles;  and  supposing  laborers  had  the  virtue  to  overcome
them,  the  first  step  toward  what  might  be  fairly  called  their
industrial  emancipation  would  already  have  been  accomplish-
ed. This  indeed  would  be  only  the  first  step,  and  formidable
difficulties  would  still  remain.  For,  the  capital  being  saved,
it  would  need  to  be  invested,  and  invested  in  undertakings
which  would  yield  at  least  the  existing  rate  of  profit,  since  we
can  not  suppose  that  less  than  this  would  be  regarded  as  suf-
ficient compensation  for  sacrifices,  in  the  case  of  the  laboring
classes,  considerably  greater  than  those  which  the  present  rate
remunerates.  To  obtain,  however,  suck  a  rate  of  return,  mere
monetary  investment — advances,  I  mean,  on  loan  to  persons
giving  adequate  security — manifestly  would  not  suffice.  The
rate  of  interest  on  such  loans  at  present  rarely  rises  much  be-
yond four  or  five  per  cent.  Witb  some  £60,000,000  annually
thrown  upon  the  market  as  an  addition  to  our  present  loan
capital,  it  is  probable  the  rate  would  fall  to  one  or  two  per
cent.  —  a  return  ridiculously  inadequate  as  compensation  fol


CO-OPERATION  THE  SOLE  ESCAPE.  289

the  sacrifices  which  saving  would  impose  on  the  working-man.
It  would,  therefore,  be  necessary  that  the  new  capital  should
be  invested  directly  in  industrial  operations;  and  here  a  new
difficulty  presents  itself.  The  savings  of  working-men  would
necessarily  in  the  individual  case  be  small :  the  capital  arising
from  such  savings,  therefore,  however  large  in  the  aggregate,
would  be  held  in  small  portions  by  a  very  numerous  class.
But  we  know  that,  for  the  great  majority  of  industrial  under-
takings, a  large  scale  of  production  is  the  condition  of  efficiency.
How,  then,  is  this  condition  of  efficient  industry  to  be  reconciled
with  the  existence  of  a  capital  diffused  throughout  the  commu-
nity in  minute  independent  portions?  Obviously'-  there  is-  but
one  way  possible:  those  minute  independent  portions  must  be
made  to  coalesce  into  masses  large  enough  to  furnish  the  means
of  efficient  action.  In  other  words,  our  reasoning  brings  us  to
this  conclusion,  that  what  is  known  as  "co-operation"  —  the
contribution  by  many  workmen  of  their  savings  toward  a  com-
mon fund  which  they  employ  as  capital  and  co-operate  in  turn-
ing to  profit — constitutes  the  one  and  only  solution  of  our
present  problem — the  sole  path  by  which  the  laboring  classes
as  a  whole,  or  even  in  any  large  number,  can  emerge  from
their  condition  of  mere  hand-to-mouth  living,  to  share  in  the
gains  and  honors  of  advancing  civilization.

§  9.  To  say  this,  however,  is  by  no  means  to  say  that  the
laboring  classes,  as  a  whole,  are  now  prepared  to  enter  on  this
path,  or  that  any  very  great  change  in  our  modes  of  carrying
on  industry  can  soon  or  easily  be  effected.  I  am  far,  indeed,
from  thinking  so.  But  here  again  I  desire  to  point  out  that
the  obstacles  in  the  way  are  not  physical,  are  not  even  econom-
ic, but  moral  or  intellectual ;  or,  if  economic,  only  in  so  far  .as
economic  results  depend  on  intellectual  and  moral  conditions.
What  workmen  have  to  overcome  in  order  to  engage  effect-
ively in  co-operative  industry  is,  first,  the  temptation  to  spend

19


290  PBACTICAL  DEDUCTIONS.

their  means  on  indulgences  generally  pernicious,  and  which
at  all  events  may  without  detriment  be  dispensed  with ;  and,
secondly,  the  obstacles  incident  to  their  own  ignorance  and
generally  low  moral  condition.  In  using  this  language  I  have
no  desire  to  underrate  the  remarkable  progress  which  a  con-
siderable section  of  our  artisan  population  have  already  made
toward  fitting  them  for  taking  part  in  a  vsystem  of  co-operation ;
and  in  connection  with  this  subject  I  may  refer  to  the  very
satisfactory  evidence  adduced  by  Professor  Fawcett,  in  the  last
edition  of  his  "Manual  of  Political  Economy,"  of  the  recent
progress  of  the  co-operative  movement — evidence  which  fully
justifies  the  opinion  he  expresses,  that  "any  one  who  considers
what  it  has  already  effected,  and  what  it  is  capable  of  doing  in
the  future,  must,  we  think,  come  to  the  conclusion  that  we  may
look  with  more  confidence  to  co-operation  than  to  any  other
economic  agency  to  improve  the  industrial  condition  of  the
country."*  There  can  be  no  question,  therefore,  that  even  at
the  present  moment  there  is  a  considerable  section  of  the  work-
ing population  already  ripe  for  co-operation ;  though  I  fear  it
must  be  acknowledged  that  among  the  best  of  them  there  is
much  still  to  be  learned,  more  particularly  as  regards  the  qual-
ities of  mutual  trust,  forbearance,  and  submission  to  the  guid-
ance of  those  to  whom  they  may  assign  the  management  of
their  joint  concerns.  With  regard  to  the  masses,  however,  it
is  but  too  obvious  that  every  thing  has  yet  to  be  done.  In  the
first  place,  habits  of  saving  have  to  be  created,  and,  in  the  next,
the  intelligence,  and  still  more  the  moral  qualifications,  required
for  effective  co-operative  action  have  to  be  developed.  The
difficulties,  I  admit,  are  great,  but  I  can  not  see  that  they  are
insuperable;  and  this,  as  Professor  Fawcett  has  shown,  is  as-
suredly not  a  time  for  the  friends  of  co-operation  to  despair;
for  though  it  be  true  that  such  success  as  co-operation  has

*  "  Manual  of  Political  Economy,"  fourth  edition,  p.  279,


PROSPECTS  OF  CO'OPEBATION.  291

achieved  in  this  country  has  been  almost  exclusively  confined
to  the  comparatively  simple  problems  of  distributive  industv}',
the  experience  and  training  acquired  in  these  tasks  will  help
to  qualify  for  more  serious  undertakings.  Nor  is  it  irrelevant
to  remark  that  we  have  just  established,  or  at  least,  it  is  to  be
hoped,  are  on  the  eve  of  establishing,  a  system  of  universal
compulsory  education,  from  which  it  is  surely  not  extravagant
to  expect  that  substantial  improvement  in  the  laborer's  charac-
ter will  in  due  time  accrue.

The  all-important  point,  as  it  seems  to  me,  is  to  recognize
the  direction  in  which  the  emancipation  of  labor  from  what  is
called  (absurdly  enough)  the  tyranny  of  capital  lies.  This  I
repeat  is,  and,  so  far  as  I  see,  can  only  be,  that  of  co-operative
industr3^  It  is  of  course  open  to  any  one  to  question  the
feasibility  of  the  plan  ;  to  such  doubts  the  only  effective  an-
swer, and  it  has  already  to  some  extent  been  given,  will  be
actual  performance ;  but  what  I  think  the  foregoing  argument
establishes  is  that  the  alternative  lies  between  this  plan  and
none.  If  workmen  do  not  rise  from  dependence  upon  capital
by  the  path  of  co-operation,  then  they  must  remain  in  depend-
ence upon  capital ;  the  margin  for  the  possible  improvement
of  their  lot  is  confined  within  narrow  barriers  which  can  not
be  passed,  and  the  problem  of  their  elevation  is  hopeless.  As
a  body,  they  will  not  rise  at  all.  A  few,  more  energetic  or
more  fortunate  than  the  rest,  will  from  time  to  time  escape,
as  they  do  now,  from  the  ranks  of  their  fellows  to  the  higher
walks  of  industrial  life,  but  the  great  majorit}^  will  remain  sub-
stantially where  they  are.  The  remuneration  of  labor,  as  such,
skilled  or  unskilled,  can  never  rise  much  above  its  present
level.

§  10.  Before  quitting  the  subject  of  co-operation  there  is  an
aspect  of  the  case  on  which  I  would  offer  a  few  concluding  re-
marks. It  may  be  asked,  supposing  a  regime  of  co-operative


292  PRACTICAL  DEDUCTIONS.

industry  established,  does  it  follow  that  the  future  of  the  work-
ing-man  is  assured  ?  Such  a  rigime  would  indeed  bring  profits
to  the  aid  of  wages,  and  thus  largely  increase  the  fund  availa-
ble for  his  support;  but  that  fund,  after  all,  would  have  limits;
the  means  of  subsistence  could  not  be  increased  as  fast  as  hu-
man beings  could  multiply ;  and  at  bottom  the  great  Malthu-
sian  difficulty  would  remain.  Could  workmen  in  their  altered
position  be  trusted  to  keep  their  numbers  within  the  limits
which  the  conditions  of  prosperous  existence  inevitably  and
under  all  circumstances  prescribe?

Let  me  say  that  I  am  far  from  disposed  to  underrate  the
gravity  of  the  consideration  here  adduced ;  but,  while  fully
conceding  the  danger,  it  seems  to  me  that  we  may  yet  find
grounds  for  hopefulness  in  two  circumstances:  first,  the  fund
for  the  laborers'  support  would,  under  a  regime  of  co-operation,
be  derived,  not  as  at  present,  exclusively  from  the  Wages-capi-
tal of  a  country,  but  from  the  general  capital  in  all  its  forms.
Now  we  have  seen  that,  in  progressive  communities,  the  gen-
eral capital  grows  more  rapidly  than  the  Wages-capital ;  from
which  it  follows  that,  under  a  regime  of  co-operation,  the  fund
from  which  the  laborer  derives  his  support  would  not  only  be
greatly  larger  than  the  corresponding  fund  under  our  present
system,  but  would  be  a  more  rapidly  increasing  fund.  Al-
though, therefore,  the  necessity  for  restraining  population  would
continue  under  co-operation  as  under  all  systems  of  industry,
the  restraint  would  not  need  to  be  as  severe  as  it  is  when  the
laborer's  resources  are  restricted  to  the  most  slowly  growing
portion  of  the  whole  national  capital.  The  Malthusian  diffi-
culty, therefore,  would  not  be  removed  by  co-operation,  but
it  would  become,  under  that  system,  greatly  less  formidable.
But,  secondly,  as  we  have  seen,  successful  co-operation  requires,
and  therefore  presupposes,  qualities  of  character  which  are  not
to  be  found  at  present  in  the  masses  of  the  laboring  people —
a  capacity  of  self-denial,  a  tendency  to  look  forward,  and  to


AN  OBJECTION  ANSWEBED.  293

attach  increased  importance  to  the  future  as  compared  with  the
present  — in  a  word,  self-control  and  prudence.  Now  these
qualities  once  developed  in  a  human  being  do  not  operate  ex-
clusively in  any  one  direction  :  they  affect  his  whole  character,
and  will  manifest  their  influence  on  his  conduct  in  his  matri-
monial and  domestic  relations,  as  well  as  in  every  other  part
of  his  life.  For  this  reason  I  am  inclined  to  attach  much  more
importance,  as  a  means  of  controlling  population,  to  the  crea-
tion of  modes  of  existence  or  habits  of  life  in  which  the  pru-
dential faculties  are  called  into  energetic  play,  than  to  any
amount  of  direct  Malthusian  teaching.  No  doubt  the  plain
truth  on  this  subject  should  always  be  spoken ;  but,  unless  ac-
companied with  changes  in  the  workman's  condition  which
should  at  once  make  his  obligations  clearer  to  himself  and  also
fortify  him  for  their  performance,  I  must  own  I  should  have
little  faith  in  its  practical  efficacy.  As  matters  stand  now —
with  the  mass  of  the  laboring  population  in  absolute  depend-
ence on  the  labor  market — is  it  any  wonder  that  Malthusian
prophets  are  as  a  voice  crying  in  the  wilderness?  What  do
the  majority  of  laborers  know  of  the  conditions  determining
the  labor  market?  The  demand  for  labor  seems  to  come  and
go,  like  the  wind  blowing  where  it  listeth,  but  those  whose  for-
tunes are  governed  by  its  changes  know  as  little  as  they  do  of
the  wind,  whence  it  cometh  or  whither  it  goeth.  Why,  they
naturally,  ask  in  this  state  of  ignorance,  should  they  deny  them-
selves for  the  sake  of  their  children  ?  Is  it  not  all  an  affair  of
chance?  and  will  not  their  children's  chances  be  as  good  as
theirs?  Why,  then,  forego  such  enjoyment  as  the  present  of-
fers for  the  sake  of  a  future  which  is  wrapped  in  clouds  ?

"  The  present  moment  is  their  own  :
The  next  they  never  saw."

On  the  other  hand,  co-operation,  while  it  appeals  in  the  strong-
est way  to  those  attributes  of  character  which  are  concerned  in


294  PRACTICAL  DEDUCTIONS.

the  control  of  population,  makes  comparatively  definite  and
clear  the  limits  of  the  laborer's  resources.  He  is  now  a  payer
as  well  as  a  receiver  of  wages,  and,  seeing  the  wages  problem
from  both  sides,  is  likely  to  acquire  juster  views;  but,  even
though  wages  should  still  remain  a  mystery,  at  least  it  will  be
tolerably  clear  that  profits  will  grow  with  the  growth  of  capi-
tal, and  that  each  man  may  count  on  receiving  them  precisely
in  proportion  to  the  amount  of  capital  he  can  command.  Sup-
posing a  workman  to  have  achieved  comfortable  independence,
it  will  be  clear  to  him  that  to  maintain  it  he  must  maintain
his  capital  unimpaired ;  and  that  to  incur  responsibilities  which
should  compel  him  to  encroach  upon  his  capital  to  meet  cur-
rent expenses  would  be  tantamount  to  a  deliberate  descent  in
the  scale  of  well-being.  The  position  of  the  co-operator  would
in  this  respect  be  analogous  to  that  of  the  peasant  proprietor,
who,  like  him,  draws  his  subsistence  from  a  tolerably  definite
fund,  and  generally  contrives  to  keep  the  expenses  of  his
household  within  the  limits  which  that  fund  will  support.  In
these  circumstances,  it  seems  to  me,  there  is  good  ground  for
hopefulness.  Co-operation  at  once  renders  less  formidable  the
obstacles  to  human  improvement  inevitably  incident  to  our
animal  propensities,  and  tends  to  develop,  in  those  who  take
part  in  it,  a  type  of  character  fitted  in  a  high  degree  for  en-
countering them  with  success.


F_A.IIT III.

INTERNATIONAL TRADE,


PA^HT III.

INTERNATIONAL TRADE.


CHAPTER  I.

DOCTRINE  OF  COMPAEATIVE  COST. ^

§  1.  It  has  been  usual  hitherto  in  treatises  on  Political
Economy  to  consider  the  subject  of  international  trade  and
international  value,  apart  from  the  general  theory  of  exchange
and  exchange  value,  as  a  distinct  branch  of  economic  doctrine ;
but  the  question  has  been  lately  raised  whether  this  method
of  exposition  is  scientifically  warrantable — whether,  that  is  to
say,  it  does  not  suggest  a  false  view  of  the  phenomena  of  com-
merce by  implying  a  distinction  in  principle  where  in  reality
no  such  distinction  exists.  Assuming  that  the  objection  thus
taken  to  the  separate  treatment  of  international  trade  is  not  a
mere  quibble  on  the  use  of  the  term  "international,"  but  in-
tended to  apply  to  the  substance  of  economic  theory  as  com-
monly expounded,  the  question  raised  by  it  is  one  as  to  the
nature  of  the  phenomena  embraced  by  international  trade,  and
what  we  have  to  decide  is  whether  those  phenomena  are  such
as  to  find  their  solution  in  the  same  theory  of  exchange  which
furnishes  the  explanation  of  the  facts  of  domestic  commerce.
In  the  event  of  their  finding  their  solution  in  that  theory,  it  is
evident  that  the  objection  taken  to  th.e  ordinary  mode  of  expo-
sition is  well  founded ;  while,  in  the  opposite  case,  it  is  equally
clear  that  the  phenomena  of  international  trade  have  need  of  a
special  theory  for  their  satisfactory  elucidation.


298  DOCTRINE  OF  COMPARATIVE COST.

In  order  to  determine  this  point,  it  will  be  well  if  we  en-
deavor here  to  set  before  our  minds  in  the  most  general  way
the  fundamental  circumstances  on  which  trade,  or  the  inter-
change of  commodities,  in  all  its  forms,  rests.  These  funda-
mental circumstances  are  to  be  found  in  the  consequences  aris-
ing from  division  of  labor  or  separation  of  employments.  In
order  that  industry  may  be  carried  on  upon  this  plan,  and  that
advantage  may  be  taken  of  the  increased  efficiency  and  econo-
my thence  resulting,  the  exchange  of  products  among  those
carrying  on  the  separated  occupations  becomes  necessary,  and
in  this  fact  we  find  the  natural  basis  and  explanation  of  trade.
Trade,  therefore,  is  the  necessary  means  of  giving  effect  to  the
separation  of  employments,  and  the  advantages  arising  from  it
are  the  advantages  incident  to  this  scheme  of  things.  The
general  nature  of  these  advantages  is  familiar  to  all  readers  of
economic  works;  but  for  our  present  purpose  it  will  be  conven-
ient to  consider  them  under  two  leading  heads:  first,  we  may
consider  those  advantages  which  arise  from  the  separation  of
employments,  apart  from  any  special  circumstances  which  may
give  to  this  arrangement  a  peculiar  importance;  and,  secondly,
those  which  are  due  to  the  separation  of  employments,  as  fur-
nishing the  means  of  developing  special  faculties  of  production
possessed  by  particular  persons  or  places.  As  an  example  of
the  former  class  of  advantages  we  may  take  the  ordinary  hand-
icraft trades.  There  is  an  obvious  advantage  in  having  such
employments  as  tailoring,  boot-making,  hat-making,  and  the
various  callings  of  blacksmith,  locksmith,  mason,  joiner,  etc.,
separated  and  carried  on  as  distinct  occupations ;  but,  as  most
of  them  require  the  same,  or  nearly  the  same,  sort  of  qualifica-
tions for  their  performance,  it  makes  little  difference  to  which
of  the  group  any  particular  member  of  the  handicraft  class  de-
votes himself.  A  is  a  tailor,  B  a  shoe-maker,  and  C  a  hatter;
but  if  C  had  been  a  tailor,  A  a  shoe-maker,  and  B  a  hatter,
the  arrangement  would  probably  have  answered  equally  well.


SPECIAL  PROVINCE.  299

Nothing  is  here  gained  from  the  separation  of  employments
beyond  the  increased  dexterity  incident  to  the  increased  famil-
iarity of  each  workman  with  his  work,  together  with  the  sav-
ing of  so  much  time  as  would  be  wasted  if  the  laborer  had  oc-
casion frequently  to  change  his  occupation.  This,  then,  is  one
description  of  advantage  arising  from  the  separation  of  employ-
ments to  the  realization  of  which  trade  ministers.  But,  as  I
have  said,  this  advantage  may  be  combined  with  advantages
of  another  kind,  and  this  happens  where  the  separation  of  em-
ployments, while  promoting  the  results  just  noticed,  furnishes,
at  the  same  time,  the  means  of  developing  the  special  capacities
or  resources  possessed  by  particular  individuals  or  localities.

In  the  examples  given  above  the  advantage  obtained  was
derived  from  the  mere  fact  of  the  separation  of  employments,
altogether  independently  of  the  mode  in  which  the  separated
employments  were  distributed  among  the  persons  carrying
them  on,  as  well  as  of  the  places  in  which  they  were  conduct-
ed. But  a  further  gain  arises  when  the  employments  are  of
a  kind  which,  in  order  to  their  effective  performance,  call  for
special  capacities  in  the  workman  or  special  natural  resources
in  the  scene  of  operation.  There  would  be  a  manifest  waste
of  special  power  in  compelling  to  a  mere  mechanical  or  routine
pursuit  a  man  who  is  fitted  to  excel  in  a  professional  career;
and  similarly,  if  a  branch  of  industry  were  established  on  some
site  which  offered  greater  facilities  to  an  industry  of  another
sort,  a  waste,  analogous  in  character,  would  be  incurred.  In
a  word,  while  a  great  number  of  the  occupations  in  which  men
engage  are  such  as,  with  proper  preparation  for  them,  might
equally  well  be  carried  on  by  any  of  those  engaged  in  them,
or  in  any  of  the  localities  in  which  they  are  respectively  es-
tablished, there  are  others  which  demand  for  their  effective
performance  special  personal  qualifications  and  special  local
conditions;  and  the  general  effectiveness  of  productive  indus-
try will,  other  things  being  equal,  be  proportioned  to  the  com'


309  BOCTIUNE  OF  COMPARATIVE  COST.

pleteness  with  which  the  adaptation  is  accomplished  between
occupation  on  the  one  hand  and  individuals  and  localities  on
the  other.

There  are  thus  two  distinct  kinds  of  advantage  derivable
from  the  separation  of  employments ;  and  I  have  called  atten-
tion to  this  circumstance  in  order  to  say  that  it  is  one  only  of
those  sorts  of  advantao-e  that  international  trade  in  the  main

O

tends  to  develop.  The  great  trades  of  the  world  are  carried
on  between  countries  pretty  widely  removed  from  each  other
either  in  the  scale  of  civilization  or  in  respect  to  their  natural
resources  and  productions,  while  in  proportion  as  countries  ap-
proximate to  each  other  in  natural  resources  or  in  the  indus-
trial qualities  of  their  inhabitants,  the  scope  for  international
trade  is  narrowed :  it  is  even  possible  that  it  sUould  fail  alto-
gether. The  reason  of  this  is  by  no  means  mysterious.  The
advantage  to  be  derived  from  the  separatioa  of  employments,
where  this  separation  is  not  connected  with  any  special  facil-
ities of  production,  are,  in  countries  in  wdiich  industry  has
made  any  considerable  progress,  in  general  realized  in  their
full  extent  by  the  separation  which  takes  place  within  the
limits  of  each  of  those  countries.  It  is  only  when  population
is  very  sparse  that  the  home  market  is  not  large  enough  to
secure  this  result;  and  where  this  is  so,  it  generally  happens
that  any  gain  that  might  be  obtained  through  a  trade  wnth
foreign  nations  in  articles  in  the  production  of  which  no  spe-
cial facilities,  positive  or  comparative,  are  possessed  by  the
trading  countries,  is  more  than  counterbalanced  by  the  loss  in-
cident to  an  increased  cost  of  carriage.  Accordingly  in  coun-
tries or  districts  which  are  very  sparsely  peopled,  instead  of
the  separation  of  employments  in  the  simpler  industries  being
carried  out  by  an  interchange  with  foreign  nations,  what  usu-
ally happens  is  that  no  separation  of  employments,  or  a  very
imperfect  one,  takes  place,  and  that  things  continue  in  a  prim-
itive state. International  trade  may  thus  be  considered  as


SPECIAL  rnOVINCE.  301

practically  restricted  to  giving  effect  to  those  examples  of  the
separation  of  employment  in  which  the  more  ordinary  ad-
vantages flowing  from  that  principle  are  combined  with  those
which  are  due  to  the  adaptation  of  industrial  operations  to  the
special  circumstances  of  persons  and  places ;  while  again  it  is
tolerably  obvious  that,  of  these  two  sorts  of  adaptation,  that
which  relates  to  places  is,  in  the  international  sphere,  by  much
the  more  important.  The  only  case  indeed  in  which  personal
aptitudes  go  for  much  in  the  commerce  of  nations  is  where  the
nations  concerned  occupy  different  grades  in  the  scale  of  civili-
zation. In  the  trade,  for  example,  between  England  and  In-
dia it  is  probable  that  the  different  characters  of  the  two  peo-
ples, incident  to  the  different  stage  of  social  growth  to  which
each  has  attained,  go  a  considerable  way  in  determining  the
character  and  the  amount  of  their  commercial  dealings.  But
perhaps  the  most  striking  example  which  the  world  has  ever
seen  of  a  foreign  trade  determined  by  the  peculiar  personal
qualities  of  those  engaged  in  ministering  to  it  is  that  which
was  furnished  by  the  Southern  States  of  the  American  Union
previous  to  the  abolition  of  slavery.  The  effect  of  that  insti-
tution was  to  give  a  very  distinct  industrial  character  to  the
laboring  population  of  those  States,  which  unfitted  them  for
all  but  a  very  limited  number  of  occupations,  but  gave  them
a  certain  special  fitness  for  these.  Almost  the  entire  industry
of  the  country  was  consequently  turned  to  the  production  of
two  or  three  crude  commodities,  in  raising  which  the  indus-
try of  slaves  was  found  to  be  effective ;  and  these  were  used,
through  an  exchange  with  foreign  countries,  as  the  means  of
supplying  the  inhabitants  with  all  other  requisites.  This  is,
perhaps,  the  most  noteworthy  instance  on  record  of  personal
aptitudes  extensively  affecting  the  external  trade  of  a  country.
In  the  main,  however,  it  would  seem  that  this  cause  does  not
go  for  very  much  in  international  commerce.  The  principal
condition,  to  which  all  others  are  subordinate,  in  determining


302  DOCTBINE  OF  COMPARATIVE  COST.

the  existence  and  character  of  foreign  trade  must  be  looked
for  in  that  other  form  of  adaptation  founded  on  the  special  ad-
vantages, positive  or  comparative,  offered  by  particular  locali-
ties for  the  prosecution  of  particular  industries.

Here,  then,  we  have  a  well-dellned  characteristic  which  dis-
tinguishes international  trade  from  domestic;  but  its  presence
alone  would  scarcely  suffice  to  justify  a  special  theory  of  the
former.  To  satisfy  ourselves  on  this  point,  we  must  advert  to
another  circumstance  to  which  I  have  now  to  call  attention.

One  of  the  principal  conditions  determining  the  relative
profitableness  of  particular  occupations  and  the  terms  on
which  their  products  are  exchanged  consists  in  the  degree
of  fiicility  which  happens  to  exist  for  moving  capital  and  la-
bor from  one  to  the  other.  Now  this  liicility  is  very  different
in  the  case  of  occupations  carried  on  within  the  limits  of  a  sin-
gle country,  and  those  carried  on  in  different  countries;  and  in
this  difference  is  to  be  found  the  chief  fact  discriminating  the
phenomena  of  international  from  those  of  domestic  trade.  Let
us  endeavor  to  appreciate  in  a  general  way  the  range  and  the
degree  of  this  difference.

The  assumption  commonly  made  in  treatises  of  Political
Economy  is  that,  as  between  occupations  and  localities  within
the  same  country,  the  freedom  of  movement  for  capital  and
labor  is  perfect,  while,  as  between  nations,  capital  and  labor
move  with  difficulty  or  not  at  all.  In  strictness  neither  mem-
ber of  this  assumption  can  be  maintained.  Capital,  indeed —
so  long  at  least  as  it  exists  in  the  form  of  purchasing  power
available  for  productive  purposes  —  moves  freely  among  all
occupations  and 'places  within  the  same  country;  but  labor,
as  we  know,  encounters  impediments  at  certain  points;  the
laborers  belonging  to  the  lower  industrial  grades  being  hin-
dered by  the  circumstances  of  their  position  from  entering
into  competition  with  those  above  them ;  while  even  for  la-
borers occupying  the  same  industrial  stratum  the  obstacles  to


HINDEBANCES  TO  LOCOMOTION.  303

migration  between  distant  localities  are  often  very  considera-
ble, and  such  as  sometimes  to  amount  to  practical  prevention.
Nor  any  more  is  it  true,  without  large  qualification,  that  laboi'
and  capital  do  not  move  from  country  to  country.  Capital,  in
a  certain  sense,  is  every  day  becoming  less  national  and  more
cosmopolitan ;  and  though  labor  is  far  from  being  equally  mo-
bile, still  with  the  immense  emigration  taking  place  year  after
year  from  these  islands  and  other  countries  of  Western  Eu-
rope, and  with  the  fact  before  us  that  even  Asiatic  popula-
tions are  now  beginning  to  emigrate,  it  is  impossible  to  deny
that  labor  is  capable,  under  the  influence  of  economic  causes,
of  international  movement  on  a  great  scale.  The  assumption,
therefore,  in  the  unqualified  form  in  which  it  is  often  laid
down,  can  not  be  maintained  either  in  its  affirmative  or  in  its
negative  part.  But  while  so  much  must  be  freely  admitted,
it  may  still  be  affirmed  that  enough  of  truth  remains  in  the  as-
sertion, after  all  due  deductions  have  been  made,  to  warrant
the  inferences  that  have  been  drawn  from  it,  and  to  justify  the
distinction  contended  for.  For  it  is  by  no  means  necessary  to
the  truth  of  the  doctrine,  as  it  has  been  laid  down,  for  exam-
ple, by  Ricardo  and  Mill,  that  there  should  be  an  absolute  im-
possibility of  moving  capital  and  labor  from  country  to  coun-
try. What  the  doctrine  requires  is  not  this,  but  such  a  degree
of  difficulty  in  effecting  their  transference  as  shall  interfere  sub-
stantially and  generally — that  is  to  say,  over  the  whole  range
of  the  commodities  exchanged — with  the  action  of  industrial
competition.* The  one  and  sufficient  test,  as  I  have  pointed

*  The  reader  will  here  bear  in  mind  the  sense  in  which  I  use  the  phrase  "  in-
dustrial competition,"  as  expressing  the  competition  which  takes  place  between
tlie  producers  of  different  commodities — competition  which  tends  to  bring  wages
and  profits  into  correspondence  with  the  sacrifices  undergone,  in  contradistinction
to  that  which  takes  place  between  dealers  in  the  same  commodity  and  which  oper-
ates toward  equality  of  price.  The  latter  might  be  called  ' '  commercial  competi-
tion.'


304  DOCTBINE  OF  COMPABATITE  COST.

out,  of  the  existence  of  an  effective  industrial  competition,  is
the  correspondence  of  remuneration  with  the  sacrifices  under-
gone— a  substantial  equality,  that  is  to  say,  making  allowance
for  the  different  circumstances  of  different  industries,  of  profits
and  wages.  Such  a  test,  applied  to  domestic  transactions,  shows
the  existence  of  a  very  large  amount  of  effective  industrial  com-
petition operative  throughout  the  various  industries  carried  on
within  the  limits  of  a  single  country.  The  competition  of  dif-
ferent capitals  within  such  limits  may  be  said  to  be  universal-
ly effective ;  and  that  of  labor,  though  interrupted  at  certain
points,  is  effective  over  large  industrial  areas.  Profits  conse-
quently within  the  same  country,  however  great  may  be  the
fluctuations,  gravitate  steadily  toward  a  common  level,  as  like-
wise do  wages  within  the  limits  of  the  industrial  areas  to  which
I  have  referred.  The  same  test  applied  to  international  trans-
actions shows  an  entirely  different  state  of  things.  For,  though
capital  migrates,  it  does  not  do  so  upon  a  scale  large  enough
to  establish  an  equality  of  profits  in  different  countries,  and
profits  consequently  remain  at  a  permanently  higher  level  in
some  countries  than  in  others.  Indeed,  in  spite  of  all  we  hear
of  the  international  movements  of  capital,  the  amount  of  cap-
ital that  can  be  truly  called  cosmopolitan — disposable  for  in-
vestment in  countries  other  than  that  to  which  it  properly  be-
longs— is  after  all  but  a  mere  fraction  of  the  national  capital.
It  is  in  effect  confined  to  a  portion  of  what  is  called  the  "  float-
ing capital "  of  a  country — that  part  of  the  capitalist's  funds
which  he  does  not  mean  to  superintend  himself,  and  which
he  offers  on  loan.  All  that  immensely  larger  part  which  the
owners  are  not  disposed  to  part  with,  but  desire  to  superin-
tend and  work  themselves — all  this  is  practically  confined  to
the  capitalist's  country.  What  passes  off,  though  often  con-
siderable in  its  positive  amount,  is  thus  wholly  unequal  to
producing  a  sensible  impression  on  the  general  rate  of  prof-
it in  the  country  to  which  it  goes; and  so  profits  remain


HINDERANCES  TO  LOCOMOTION.  305

permanently  at  diflferent  levels  in  different  countries.  And
just  as  little  has  an  equilibrium  in  the  rates  of  wages  been
brought  about  by  the  international  movements  of  labor.  Great
as  has  been  the  emigration  from  Europe  to  the  United  States,
it  may  be  doubted  if,  outside  the  range  of  a  few  towns  on  the
eastern  coast,  any  appreciable  effect  has  been  produced  on  the
rates  of  wages  in  the  latter  countrj^  Throughout  the  Union
wages  remain  in  all  occupations  YQxy  considerably  higher  than
in  the  corresponding  occupations  in  this  country.  Nor  do  they
show  any  sign  of  declining.  It  thus  appears,  alike  with  regard
to  labor  and  capital,  that  notwithstanding  a  certain  amount  of
international  mobility  in  these  instruments  of  production,  the
impediments  to  their  transference  from  country  to  country  are
yet  sufficiently  great  to  prevent  effective  competition  from  tak-
ing place  between  the  industries  of  different  countries,  such  as
is  really  operative  in  each  separate  country  over  a  very  large
proportion  of  its  domestic  industry.  And  this,  and  no  more
than  this,  is  all  that  is  assumed  by  economists — all  at  least  that
is  essential  to  the  validity  of  their  arguments — when  they  con-
tend for  the  necessity  of  separating  the  facts  of  international
from  those  of  domestic  trade.

§  2.  It  will  aid  us  in  giving  the  due  circumscription  to  the
facts  with  which  we  have  to  deal  if,  before  developing  the  con-
sequences involved  in  the  state  of  things  just  described,  we
note  briefly  the  nature  of  the  obstacles  which  impede  the  move-
ments of  labor  and  capital  in  the  international  sphere.  The
most  important  of  these  are  the  following:  1.  Geographical  dis-^
tance;  2.  Difference  in  political  institutions;  3.  Difference  in
language,  religion,  and  social  customs — in  a  word,  in  form§  of
civilization.  Each  of  these  circumstances  is  capable  of  hinder-
ing, and  does  in  fact,  to  a  greater  or  less  extent,  hinder  the  free
movement  of  labor  and  capital.  As  regards  their  relative  im-
portance, the  social  and  political  causes  are  probably,  in  the

20


306  DOCTRINE  OF  COMPARATIVE  COST.

present  state  of  the  world,  more  powerful  than  the  physical,
more  particularly  when  the  former  happened  to  be  connected
with  differences  of  race;  while  geographical  distance  is  appar-
ently that  which  exerts  the  least  obstructive  force.

These  being  the  principal  obstacles  to  the  movements  of  la-
bor and  capital  from  place  to  place,  it  will  be  at  once  apparent
that  the  line  of  demarkation  which  would  result  from  their
interference,  though  largely  coincident  with  that  indicated  by
the  words  "international"  and  "domestic,"  is  by  no  means
strictly .  so.  Australia  and  Canada,  for  example,  are  portions
of  a  single  political  system,  but  the  geographical  obstacles  of-
fered to  trade  between  those  places,  or  between  either  of  them
and  England,  are  far  greater  than  those  which  exist  in  the
trade  of  many  independent  nations ;  and  the  same  may  be  said
of  the  trade  between  the  Atlantic  and  the  Pacific  States  of  the
American  Union.  Similarly,  we  find  within  the  same  country
differences  of  race,  of  language,  and  of  religion,  and  to  some
extent  of  social  tastes  and  habits.  It  is  thus  clear  that  no  hard
and  fast  line  can  be  drawn  between  domestic  and  international
trade  founded  on  the  character  of  the  obstacles  presented  to
the  movements  of  labor  and  capital ;  and  it  must,  therefore,  be
owned  that  the  terms  "international"  and  "domestic"  do  not
accurately  express  the  distinction  which  it  is  designed  to  mark.
What  we  want  is  a  term  which  would  cover  all  that  portion
of  the  trade  of  mankind  carried  on  between  localities  sufficient-
ly separated  from  each  other,  whether  by  moral  or  physical
obstacles,  to  prevent  the  action,  as  between  producers  in  the
trading  localities,  of  effective  industrial  competition,  and  which
would  exclude  the  trade  carried  on  under  those  more  favorable
corfditions  where  industrial  competition  is  effective.  So  far  as
I  know,  there  is  no  one  word  that  accurately  meets  this  require-
ment. "  International  "  is  that  which  perhaps  comes  most  near-
ly to  what  we  want.  In  the  intercourse  of  independent  nations,
all  or  most  of  the  obstacles  I  have  noted  come  into  operation,


CONSEQ  UENCES  WHICH  BES  ULT.  307

and  in  their  combination  offer  a  substantial  impediment  to  the
free  movement  of  capital  and  labor;  while,  as  among  different
localities  in  the  same  country,  they  do  not  exist  in  the  same
number  or  in  the  same  degree  of  intensity,  and,  where  they  do
exist  and  operate,  they  are  always  counteracted  and  largely
neutralized  by  the  powerfully  assimilating  influence  of  a  single
central  government.  In  the  case  of  colonies,  however,  the  po-
litical causes  tending  to  facilitate  the  movements  of  capital
and  labor  are,  on  the  whole,  overborne  by  the  geographical,  cli-
matic, and  physical  circumstances  which  obstruct  those  move-
ments; and  therefore,  for  the  purposes  of  economic  theory,  we
must  include  colonial  under  "  international "  trade.  Our  eco-
nomic nomenclature  in  this  part  of  our  subject  is  thus  not  free
from  objection;  but,  having  noted  its  imperfection,  we  shall
not  be  likely  to  be  misled  by  it.

§  3.  We  have  now  ascertained  the  grounds  in  the  facts  of
the  case  for  the  distinction  between  "international"  and  "do-
mestic "  trade,  and  the  sense  in  which  these  terms  are  to  be
understood.  It  remains  that  we  endeavor  to  trace  the  conse-
quences which  result  in  the  trade  of  nations  from  the  circum-
stances, such  as  they  have  been  shown  to  be,  under  which  it
takes  place.

First  among  these  consequences  we  may  note  the  following:
A  trade  may  arise  between  two  independent  countries  and
be  profitable  for  each  under  conditions  in  which  it  would  not
arise  if  the  trading  localities  were  within  the  range  of  a  single
countr}'-,  that  is  to  say,  if  they  were  so  situated  that  labor  and
capital  moved  freely  between  them.  To  perceive  the  grounds
of  this  statement,  we  may  consider  the  following  case.  Sup-
pose a  trade  between  North  Wales  on  the  one  side  and  Lan-
cashire and  Yorkshire  on  the  other,  the  articles  exchanged  be-
ing slates  on  the  part  of  North  Wales  against  woolen  and  cot-
ton manufactures  on  the  side  of  the  English  counties. North


308  DOCTRINE  OF  COMPABATIVE  COST.

Wales  has  evidently  a  great  and  unquestionable  advantage'
over  Yorkshire  and  Lancashire  in  the  production  of  slates;
and  it  is  probable  that  Yorkshire  and  Lancashire  have  an  ad-
vantage, less  decided,  but  still  real,  over  North  Wales  in  the
production  of  their  staple  products.  Of  one  thing  at  all  events
we  may  be  sure  :  neither  district  is  under  a  positive  disadvan-
tage, as  compared  with  the  other,  in  raising  or  manufacturing
the  product  which  forms  the  staple  of  its  trade;  for,  were  this
so,  the  product  in  question  would  no  longer  be  produced  in
that  locality :  the  capital  and  labor  employed  in  the  business
would  migrate  thence  to  the  other  locality,  which  offered
greater  advantage  for  the  production  of  this  article,  and  the
trade  between  the  places  would  cease.  In  a  word,  a  migration
of  the  instruments  of  production  would  take  the  place  of  a
trade  in  the  products.  This  is  what  would  happen  when  the
trading  districts  are  situated  within  the  same  country,  and  la-
bor and  capital  move  freely  between  them.  But  now  suppose
the  trading  localities  to  be  situated  in  different  countries,  be-
tween which  labor  and  capital  move  with  difficulty,  or  not  at
all.  Under  such  circumstances  either  might  have  an  advan-
tage over  the  other  in  respect  of  all  the  staples  of  their  trade —
in  the  case  supposed  in  respect  to  textile  fabrics  as  well  as  to
slates — and  the  trade  might  nevertheless  go  on  ;  for,  though  it
is  true  that  here  too,  as  in  the  case  just  considered,  there  would
be  a  gain  in  productive  efficiency  if  the  people  and  capital  of
the  less  favored  district  were  to  transfer  themselves  bodily  to
the  other,  yet,  as  in  point  of  fact  this  transference,  for  very
sufficient  reasons,  does  not  take  place,  the  question  arises  what,
imder  these  circumstances,  will  be  most  for  the  interests  of  the
two  countries  in  supplying  their  needs  by  means  of  industry?
A  very  little  consideration  is  needed  to  show  that,  under  the
circumstances  supposed- — the  superiority  in  productive  power
lying  in  the  case  of  every  branch  of  industry  on  the  side  of
one  country — it  may  yet  be  for  the  interest  of  both  to  satisfy


MODE  OF  ITS  ACTION.  309

their  wants  by  engaging  in  trade,  provided  only  that  the  advan-
tage enjoyed  by  the  country  possessing  the  superior  industrial  re-
sources he  not  equally  great  in  each  instance;  in  other  words,
provided  that  each  country  possesses,  in  respect  to  the  other,
a  greater  advantage  or  a  less  disadvantage  in  the  production
of  some  than  in  that  of  other  commodities.  If,  for  example,  it'
happened  that  North  Wales  and  the  manufacturing  districts
of  England  were  situated  in  independent  countries  between
which  labor  and  capital  refused  to  pass,  under  these  circum-
stances North  Wales  might  have  an  advantage  over  the  En-
glish counties  both  in  the  production  of  slates  and  also  in  the
production  of  textile  flxbrics;  but  if  her  superiority  was  not
the  same  in  both — if  it  were  greater  in  the  case  of  one  than  ift
that  of  the  other  class  of  commodity — greater,  say,  in  the  case
of  slates  than  in  that  of  cloths,  it  would  still  be  for  the  inter-
est of  the  two  districts  to  trade  in  those  articles;  for  Wales,
by  devoting  her  industry  to  the  production  of  slates,  in  which
her  superiority  was  greater  than  in  the  production  of  cloths,
and  using  her  slates  as  the  means  through  trade  of  procuring
cloths,  would  get  them  cheaper — with  less  real  cost  of  labor  and
abstinence  —  than  if  she  produced  them;  while,  on  the  other
hand,  Yorkshire  and  Lancashire  would  get  their  slates  cheaper
by  employing  their  industry  in  the  production  of  fabrics  in
which  their  disadvantage  was  less,  and  using  these  as  the  means
of  obtaining  their  slates  from  Wales,  than  by  attempting  to  pro-
duce slates  or  any  substitute  for  them  directly  for  themselves.  •
It  thus  appears  that  a  trade  may  take  place  between  two  dis-
tricts, as  independent  countries,  under  circumstances  in  which
no  trade  would  occur,  were  those  districts  situated  within  the
limits  of  a  single  country,  and  capital  and  labor  free  to  move
between  them.  This,  I  say,  is  a  possible  case,  and,  as  will  pres-
ently appear,  in  actual  experience,  a  very  common  one ;  indeed,
it  may  be  said  to  be  typical  of  a  large  proportion  of  the  entire
trade  carried  on  between  independent  countries. We  are  thus


310  DOCTRINE  OF  COMPARATIVE  COST.

brought,  in  the  domain  of  international  trade,  into  contact  with
a  phenomenon  of  which  the  theory  of  trade  in  its  simpler  cases
furnishes  no  explanation,  for  which  therefore  a  special  theory
is  needed.  The  writer  who  first  detected  the  fact,  and  sup-
plied the  theory,  was  Eicardo  ;  and  the  theory  involved  in  the
foregoing  exposition  is  in  effect  that  which  he  gave.  It  may
be  thus  stated:  In  order  to  the  existence  of  a  trade  between
different  countries,  the  essential  and  also  the  sufficient  condi-
tion is,  that  there  should  be  in  those  countries  a  difference  in
the  comparative  cost  of  producing  the  commodities  which  are
the  subject  of  the  trade.  The  commodity  forming  the  staple
of  a  trading  country  may  be,  and  frequently  is,  more  cheaply
produced  in  that  country  than  in  the  country  which  imports
it,  but  this  is  not  necessary  to  the  existence  of  the  trade ;  and
a  trade  between  nations  may  be  carried  on  where  the  superior-
ity in  point  of  productive  power  with  respect  to  all  articles
which  form  the  subject  of  the  trade  is  upon  the  side  of  one  of
them.  On  the  other  hand,  a  difference  in  the  absolute  cost  of
producing  commodities  in  different  countries  does  not  neces-
sarily render  a-  trade  between  them  possible,  since,  if  the  dif-
ference were  the  same  in  the  case  of  each  article,  there  would
be  no  motive  for  an  exchange.  The  one  condition,  therefore,
at  once  essential  to,  and  also  sufficient  for,  the  existence  of  in-
ternational trade,  is  a  difference  in  the  comparative,  as  contra-
distinguished from  the  absolute,  cost  of  producing  the  com-
■  modities  exchanged.*

Such  is  the  theory  of  international  trade  as  it  was  left  by
Eicardo,  and  expounded,  but  not  substantially  altered,  by
Mill.f It  can  not  be  doubted  that  it  sounds  the  depths  of  the

*  Ricardo's  Works  (M'Culloch's  edition),  chap.  vii. ;  Mill's  "Principles  of  Po-
litical Economy,"  book  iii.,  chap.  xvii.

t  I  say,  the  theory  of  international  trade  was  not  substantially  altered  by  Mill :
the  theory  of  international  values  was ;  Mill  having  here  supplied  an  important
condition  overlooked  by  Eicardo.


EXPLANATION  OF  TEBMS.  311

problem,  and  embraces  in  its  scope  all  the  most  important —
certainly  all  the  most  conspicuous — flicts  in  the  sphere  of  in-
ternational dealings.  Nevertheless,  as  I  shall  presently  at-
tempt to  show,  the  doctrine  as  it  stands  is  not  absolutely  com-
plete, and  in  fact  fails  to  take  account  of  certain  international
exchanges,  not  perhaps  very  extensive  in  their  range,  but  still
of  considerable  importance.  Such  criticisms,  however,  as  I
have  to  make  upon  this  point  will  be  more  conveniently  re-
served for  another  chapter.  For  the  present  I  shall  confine
myself  to  a  few  further  remarks  in  elucidation  of  the  doctrine
as  it  has  been  stated  above.

And,  first,  it  must  be  observed  that  by  "cost  of  production,"
as  employed  in  the  foregoing  context,  the  reader  is  to  under-
stand the  actual  difficulties  of  production  as  measured  by  the
sacrifices  which  production  requires,  not  the  amount  of  wages
and  profits,  whether  measured  in  money  or  produce,  comprised
in  the  capitalist's  outlay  and  return.  It  was  in  the  former
sense  that  Eicardo,  who  first  discovered  the  truth  in  question,
understood  the  words,  and,  notwithstanding  that  Mr.  Mill  has
in  his  chapters  on  Value  adopted  the  latter  conception  of  cost
of  production,  it  is  in  the  same  sense  that  he  has  employed  it
in  his  exposition  of  the  doctrine  of  international  trade.*  In-
deed, it  may  be  doubted  if  the  theory  of  comparative  cost  of
production  as  the  ruling  principle  of  international  trade  could
ever  have  been  worked  out  from  the  point  of  view  which  re-
gards cost  as  consisting  in  wages  and  profits;  and,  however
this  may  be,  it  is  at  least  quite  certain,  as  I  shall  hereafter
demonstrate,  that  the  theory  of  international  values,  adopted

*  The  only  sacrifice  taken  account  of  by  either  Eicardo  or  Mill  in  working  out
the  theory  of  international  trade  is  that  of  labor,  the  cost  being  always  reckoned
in  so  many  days'  labor  of  so  many  men.  Abstinence  is  entirely  overlooked.  The
omission,  however,  does  not  seriously  affect  the  reasoning,  since  labor  and  absti-
nence being  each  alike  a  sacrifice,  the  considerations  applicable  to  the  one  are,  so
far  as  the  argument  is  concerned,  for  the  most  part  applicable  also  to  the  othei'.


312  DOCTRINE  OF  COMPABATITE  COST.

alike  by  Mill  and  Eicardo,  is  absolutely  irreconcilable  with
that  view.

Secondly,  when  it  is  said  that  international  trade  depends
on  a  difference  in  the  comparative,  not  in  the  absolute,  cost
of  producing  commodities,  the  costs  compared,  it  must  be  care-
fully noted,  are  the  costs  in  each  country  of  the  commodities
which  are  the  subjects  of  exchange,  not  the  different  costs  of
the  same  commodity  in  the  exchanging  countries.  Thus,  if
coal  and  wine  be  the  subjects  of  a  trade  between  England  and
France,  the  comparative  costs  on  which  the  trade  depends  are
the  comparative  costs  of  coal  and  wine  in  France  as  compared
with  the  comparative  costs  of  the  same  articles  in  England.
England  might  be  able  to  raise  coal  at  one-half  the  amount  of
labor  and  abstinence  needed  in  France ;  but  this  alone  would
not  render  it  profitable  for  France  to  obtain  her  coal  from  En-
gland. If  her  disadvantage  in  producing  other  commodities
was  as  great  as  in  producing  coal,  she  would  gain  nothing  by
an  exchange  of  products,  and  the  conditions  for  a  trade  be-
tween the  two  countries  would  not  exist.  But  supposing  she
was,  in  the  case  of  some  other  commodity,  under  a  less  disad-
vantage than  in  that  of  coal,  still  more  if  she  had  with  regard
to  that  other — as  in  wine — a  positive  advantage,  it  would  at
once  become  her  interest  to  employ  this  commodity  as  a  means
of  obtaining  through  trade  her  coal  from  England,  instead  of
producing  coal  directly  from  her  own  mines.

So  much  in  the  way  of  explanation  of  terms.  Let  me  now
endeavor  to  set  before  the  reader  a  few  examples  of  the  prac-
tical working  of  the  principle  of  comparative  cost  in  the  act-
ual commerce  of  the  world.  For  this  purpose  I  shall  take,  in
the  first  place,  a  case  to  whicli  I  have  both  in  this  and  in  for-
mer publications  frequently  referred — the  external  trade  of  the
principal  Australian  colonies  before  and  since  the  discovery
of  the  gold-fields.  Previous  to  that  discovery,  which  occurred
in  1851,  no  gold  being  produced  in  the  country,  the  cost  to  the


PBACTICAL  EXAMPLES.  313

colony  of  such  gold  as  circulated  there  would  consist  in  the
cost — by  which  the  reader  will  bear  in  mind  I  mean  the  labor
and  abstinence  —  incident  to  the  production  of  those  articles
by  the  exchange  of  which  with  foreign  countries  Australia  ob-
tained her  gold.  Certain  quantities  of  wool,  tallow,  and  hides
were  exported,  and  sold  in  foreign  countries  for  certain  sums
of  the  precious  metals,  and  these,  or  their  equivalents  in  value,
came  back  to  the  Australian  producers,  to  whom  they  became
wages  and  profits.  These  wages  and  profits,  therefore,  meas-
ured in  the  precious  metals,  or,  let  us  say,  in  gold,  which  was
the  standard  of  value  in  the  colony,  would  be  the  return  upon
the  labor  and  abstinence  employed  in  producing  the  commod-
ities through  the  sale  of  which  they  were  obtained.  In  pro-
portion as  they  were  great,  the  cost  of  obtaining  gold  would
be  small;  in  proportion  as  they  were  small,  the  cost  of  obtain-
ing gold  would  be  great;  in  a  word,  the  cost  of  obtaining  gold
would  vary  inversely  with  the  money  rates  of  wages  and  prof-
its prevailing  in  the  colony.  Supposing,  for  example,  that  45.
a  day  was  the  wages  of  unskilled  labor  in  the  colony  in  1850,
and  ten  per  cent,  per  annum  the  ordinary  return  upon  capital,
then  the  cost  of  gold,  so  far  as  it  consisted  of  labor,  would  be
a  day's  unskilled  labor  for  45.  worth  of  gold,  and,  so  far  as  it
consisted  of  abstinence,  a  year's  abstinence  from  the  enjoymenl;
obtainable  by  means  of  £100  for  £10.  For  simplicity  of  illus-
tration, as  labor  is  so  much  the  principal  element  in  the  case,
we  may  confine  our  attention  to  it  exclusively,  and  say  brief-
ly that  the  cost  of  gold  in  Australia  previous  to  the  gold  dis-
coveries was  represented  by  a  day's  labor  for  as  much  gold  as
could  be  purchased  with  4s.  Under  these  circumstances  the
gold  discoveries  took  place;  and  now  mark  what  happened.
At  once  the  same  workman  who  previously  by  a  day's  labor
could  earn  but  4^.  worth  of  gold  could  now  by  washing  the
auriferous  sands  earn  from  155.  to  205.  worth.  The  same  ex-
ertion could  now  procure  for  him  four  or  five  times  as  much


314  DOCTRINE  OF  COMPARATIVE  COST.

gold  as  formerly;  in  other  words,  the  cost  of  gold  had  fallen
in  the  proportion  of  from  four  or  five  to  one.  But  while  the
cost  of  gold  in  the  colony  was  thus  reduced,  no  change  had
taken  place  there  in  the  cost  of  producing  other  things.  A
given  exertion  of  labor  and  abstinence  would  still  procure  the
same  quantity  as  before  of  corn,  of  meat,  of  wool,  of  tallow.
It  followed  that  the  comparative  cost  of  producing  gold  and
other  things  had  been  altered  in  the  immense  proportion  indi-
cated by  the  reduction  in  the  positive  cost  of  producing  gold;
in  other  words,  the  conditions  were  realized  under  which,  ac-
cording to  the  theory  of  Eicardo,  an  immense  change  ought  to
take  place  in  the  external  trade  of  the  colony ;  and  this  was
precisely  what  happened.  From  that  time  until  the  condi-
tions of  trade  were  again  modified,  partly  through  the  gradual
exhaustion  of  the  richer  gold  deposits,  and  partly  through
the  advance  of  prices  in  foreign  markets,  a  period  of  some  four
or  five  years,  Australia  became  an  importer  of  every  thing
that  from  its  nature  admitted  of  being  imported;  and,  what
is  especially  to  be  noted,  among  the  things  thus  imported
were  many  which  she  could  have  produced  herself  at  far  less
cost,  with  far  less  labor  and  abstinence,  than  they  were  pro-
duced at  in  the  countries  from  which  they  were  brought.
For  example,  timber  was  imported  from  the  Baltic,  although
there  were  forests  in  Australia  capable  of  yielding  timber
quite  good  enough  at  least  for  the  mining  purposes  for  which
timber  was  mostly  required.  Butter  was  largely  imported
from  Ireland,  and  I  believe  also  from  England  and  Holland,
though  the  advantages  possessed  by  Australia  for  dairy  farm-
ing in  her  unrivaled  pastures  and  abundant  cattle  were  excep-
tionally great.  Similarly,  with  unlimited  areas  of  fine  agricul-
tural land,  she  imported  nearly  all  her  food;  and  with  the  ma-
terials of  leather  cheaper  than  in  any  other  part  of  the  world,
she  imported  all  her  shoes.  What  was  the  explanation  of
these  facts? In  all  cases  one  and  the  same :  it  was  to  be  found


EXPERIMENTAL  VERIFICATIONS.  315

in  the  principle  of  comparative  cost.  x\ustralia  had  consider-
able advantages  over  other  countries  in  respect  to  timber,  but- iy
ter,  food,  and  shoes;  but  she  had  a  greater  advantage  still  in'
respect  to  gold ;  and  so  it  became  her  interest  to  obtain  the
former  things  by  means  of  the  latter,  I  have  always  regarded
the  commercial  results  of  the  Australian  and  Californian  dis-
coveries (for  things  in  California  followed  a  very  similar
course)  as  one  of  the  most  striking  experimental  verifications
which  a  purely  abstract  doctrine  has  ever  received.  Eicardo
was  considered,  and  is  still  considered  by  some  people,  a  dream-
er of  dreams,  a  spinner  of  abstract  fancies ;  but  his  dreams  and
abstractions,  when  brought  to  the  test  of  experiment,  as  com-
monly happens  with  the  dreams  and  abstractions  of  men  of
genius,  have  proved  to  be  far  more  practical,  far  more  closely
in  accordance  with  actual  occurrences,  than  the  prognostics  of
so-called  "  practical  men,"  based  though  these  may  have  been
upon  one  knows  not  what  collections  of  carefully  tabulated
statistics.  Compare  the  facts  which  I  have  stated  in  connec-
tion with  the  Australian  trade,  as  illustrating  his  doctrine  of
"comparative  cost,"  with  the  speculations  of  some  of  our  lead-
ing bankers  and  actuaries  at  the  time  of  the  occurrence  of  the
gold  discoveries,  as  to  the  probable  effects  of  those  events  on
the  course  of  the  money  market — speculations  in  which  one
writer  confidently  predicts  that  the  increased  abundance  of
gold  must  lead  to  a  fall  in  its  price;  another,  that  it  would
lead  to  a  fall  in  the  rate  of  interest ;  a  third,  that  the  exporta-
tion of  gold  from  Australia  would  cease  to  be  profitable,  and
would  therefore  cease  to  be  carried  on,  as  soon  as  the  price
of  gold  in  Sydney  rose  to  the  London  level !  All  these,  and
many  more  absurdities  no  less  glaring,  are  to  be  found  in
pamphlets,  and  even  in  pretentious  volumes,  published  soon
after  the  epoch  of  the  gold  discoveries,  by  commercial  men
who  piqued  themselves  upon  their  knowledge  of  practical  bus-
iness and  their  contempt  for  abstract  speculation.


316  DOCTRINE  OF  COMPARATIVE  COST.

The  external  trade  of  the  gold  countries  presents,  in  a  some-
what exaggerated  shape,  the  action  of  the  principle  of  compar-
ative cost.  The  superiority  of  productive  power  was  here,  in
almost  every  instance,  on  the  side  of  one  of  the  exchanging
parties — the  Australian  colonies.  The  reader  will  not,  how-
ever, suppose  that,  in  order  to  the  existence  of  a  trade  between
nations,  there  is  any  necessity  that  this  particular  state  of  things
should  occur.  In  point  of  fact,  it  is  probable  that  the  more
frequent  case  is  that  in  which  the  superiority  of  productive
power  is  divided  between  the  trading  countries,  each  having
a  positive  as  well  as  a  comparative  advantage  over  the  other
in  respect  of  the  commodities  which  form  its  own  staples.
Still  it  would  be  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  the  Australian  ex-
ample represents  a  purely  exceptional  case.  So  far  from  this,
I  am  inclined  to  believe  that  in  a  large  portion  of  the  trade
of  the  world — in  most  of  the  trade,  for  example,  carried  on  be-
tween tropical  and  temperate  regions,  as  well  as  in  the  trade
between  old  and  new  countries — the  condition  which  we  found
so  prominent  in  the  Australian  commerce — a  superiority  of
productive  power  in  respect  to  the  staples  on  both  sides  pos-
sessed by  one  of  the  exchanging  parties — will  also  be  found  to
obtain.  One  instance,  which  I  find  in  the  work  of  Mr.  Bowen,
an  American  economist,  may  here  be  given.'^  It  occurs  in  the
case  of  the  trade  between  the  State  of  New  York  and  some
adjoining  districts  and  the  Island  of  Barbados.  The  trade
consists  chiefly  of  an  exchange  of  breadstufFs  and  meat  on  the
side  of  the  former  country  against  various  kinds  of  tropical
produce  furnished  by  the  latter.  As  will  be  readily  under-
stood, Barbados  has  an  immense  advantage  over  the  State
of  New  York  in  the  raising  of  tropical  products,  such  as  sug-
ar, coffee,  spices,  etc.;  but  Mr.  Bowen  informs  us  that  it  has
also  a  decided  advantage  over  the  same  regions  in  the  produc-

*  Bowen's  "Political  Economy,"  p.  460.


OBSCUBEB  BY  FAULTY  THEORY.  317

tion  of  food — that  a  given  exertion  of  industry  employed  for
a  given  time  in  raising  food  in  Barbados  would  be  attended
with  a  larger  result  than  the  same  exertion  employed  for  the
same  time  in  the  United  States.  The  advantage,  therefore,  in
respect  to  both  the  staples  of  the  trade  is  on  the  side  of  Bar-
bados, and  the  phenomenon  of  the  Australian  trade  is  here
repeated.  The  explanation,  of  course,  lies  once  more  in  the
law  of  comparative  cost.  Barbados  and  the  United  States
find  their  account  in  developing  those  of  their  resources  in
which  either  possesses  the  greatest  comparative  superiority,  or
the  least  comparative  inferiority,  in  respect  of  the  other,  em-
ploying the  products  thus  obtained  as  the  means  of  supplying
themselves,  through  trade,  with  others  in  the  production  of
which  the  advantage  of  either  is  relatively  less  pronounced,  or
its  disadvantage  greater.  I  have  said  that  this  is  by  no  means
an  exceptional  case,  but  rather  the  rule,  in  certain  great  depart-
ments of  cosmopolitan  trade.  It  is  probable,  for  example,  that
in  a  large  portion  of  the  trade  carried  on  between  the  United
States  and  Europe  the  advantage  of  production  in  respect  to
the  staples  on  both  sides  lies  with  the  United  States ;  but  this
fact  is  kept  out  of  sight  through  the  misty  conception  ordina-
rily prevailing  as  to  the  nature  of  cost  of  production.  Thus,
in  comparing  the  costs  of  production  of  different  commodities
in,  say  this  country  and  the  United  States,  people  allow  their
thoughts  to  run  off  on  questions  of  comparative  wages  and
profits;  and  finding  wages  and  profits  higher  in  the  United
States  than  here,  they  are  apt  to  jump  to  the  conclusion  that
this  is  evidence  of  higher  cost  of  production  in  the  former
country.  In  truth,  so  far  as  wages  and  profits  are  indications
of  cost  of  production  at  all — a  point  to  which  I  shall  hereafter
recur — high  wages  and  profits  are  indications  of  a  low  cost  of
production,  since  they  are  indications — being  in  fact  the  direct
results  of — high  industrial  productiveness ;  and  accordingly,  if
wages  and  profits  are  higher  in  the  United  States  than  here,  it


318  DOCTRINE  OF  COMPARATIVE  COST.

is  because  those  things  in  which  wages  and  profits  consist  are
more  easily  obtained — that  is  to  say,  are  obtained  at  less  cost
— there  than  here.  The  prevailing  theory,  which  makes  cost
of  production  consist  in  wages  and  profits,  has  thus  thrown  a
dense  haze  over  the  working  of  the  principle  on  which  the  in-
terchange of  commodities  between  different  nations  is  carried
on.  Indeed,  as  I  shall  hereafter  show,  the  doctrine  in  question
is  answerable  for  some  of  the  most  plausible  fallacies  of  the
Protectionist  school.  For  the  moment,  however,  I  am  merely
concerned  to  point  out  how  this  erroneous  notion  of  cost  tends
to  conceal  the  true  nature  of  no  small  portion  of  the  trade  of
the  world.


CHAPTER  11.

INTEBNATIONAL  TRADE  IN  ITS  RELATION  TO  THE  RATE  OB'

WAGES.

§  1.  I  HAVE  endeavored  in  the  foregoing  chapter  to  set  forth
the  theory  of  international  trade,  as  it  was  first  thought  out  by
Ricardo,  and  subsequently  expounded  by  Mill.  In  doing  so,
I  remarked  that  the  doctrine,  though  undoubtedly  comprising
the  more  fundamental  conditions  determining  the  interchange
of  nations,  is,  nevertheless,  in  certain  respects  defective.  It
remains  for  me  now  to  point  out  wherein  consists  the  short-
comings then  referred  to.

In  the  first  place,  I  must  observe  that  cost  of  production,
though  it  may  be,  and  generally  is,  the  ultimate  condition  gov-
erning international  exchange,  is  never  in  any  case  the  proxi-
mate or  immediate  cause.  That  proximate  or  immediate  cause
is  not  cost,  but  price.  The  ordinary  merchant  whose  business
leads  him  into  foreign  trade  knows  nothing  of  "cost  of  pro-
duction," as  consisting  of  labor  and  abstinence,  and  still  less
does  he  know  of  "  comparative  cost  of  production."  The  con-
siderations which  determine  his  conduct  are  far  more  simple.
He  attends,  not  to  the  cost — the  expenditure  of  labor  and  ab-
stinence— at  which  commodities  may  be  produced,  but  to  the
prices  at  which  they  may  be  bought  and  sold,  and  the  only
comparison  he  enters  into  is  a  comparison  of  the  prices  of  the
articles  he  deals  in  as  they  are  in  his  own  country  and  in  the
foreign  market  with  which  he  trades.  When  the  state  of
prices  in  these  different  localities  is  such  as  to  render  it  prof-
itable to  transport  commodities  from  one  to  the  other  for  the


320  WAGES  AND  FOREIGN  TRADE.

purpose  of  sale,  be  engages  in  this  operation  and  looks  no  far-
ther :  when  the  state  of  prices  does  not  admit  of  this,  he  ceases
to  operate.  Further,  as  Eicardo  himself  pertinently  reminds
us,  "every  transaction  in  commerce  is  an  independent  transac-
tion ;"  and  if  there  be  a  prospect  of  profit  on  the  export  or  im-
port of  any  single  commodity,  that  commodity  will  be  export-
ed or  imported  wholly  irrespective  of  what  may  be  the  state
of  the  markets  as  regards  other  commodities.  How  are  these
facts  to  be  reconciled  with  the  theory  expounded  in  the  last
chapter,  that  international  trade  is  governed  by  comparative
cost  of  production  ?  Eicardo's  answer  would  run  in  some
such  form  as  this:  first,  he  would  say,  by  virtue  of  the  fact
that  relative  prices  within  each  country  correspond  to,  and
vary  with,  the  relative  costs  of  commodities  produced  within
that  country;  so  that  a  state  of  relative  prices  which  would
make  it  profitable  to  export  certain  commodities  and  import
others  would  indicate  a  corresponding  condition  of  the  relative
costs  of  production  of  the  commodities  thus  exchanged.  And,
secondly,  he  would  meet  the  difficulty  as  to  the  independent
character  of  each  commercial  transaction  by  showing  that,
though  independent,  in  the  sense  of  being  undertaken  with-
out reference  to  any  transaction  beyond  itself,  each  commer-
cial transaction  nevertheless  entails  consequences  which  con-
nect it  with  subsequent  commercial  transactions.  The  case
may  be  illustrated  by  a  hypothetical  example.  Suppose  the
price  of  some  commodity  suitable  for  international  commerce
to  be  lower  in  country  A  than  in  country  B — I  assume  the
difference  in  price  to  be  sufficient  to  yield  a  profit  on  the  in-
vestment during  the  period  between  purchase  and  sale,  and  I
put  aside,  for  simplicity  of  illustration,  the  element  of  cost  of
transport — nothing  more  than  this  is  necessary  in  order  that
the  commodity  should  be  sent  from  the  former  to  the  latter
country.  It  will  accordingly  be  sent ;  and  the  merchant  who
undertakes  the  transaction  will  get  his  profit. But  this  is  not


PROXIMATE  CONDITIONS.  321

the  end.  The  commodity  being  sold,  its  value  must  be  trans-
mitted from  country  B,  in  which  the  sale  took  place,  to  coun-
try A.  The  question  arises,  in  what  form  will  it  be  sent  ?  If
it  be  sent  in  the  form  of  some  commodity  produced  in  country
B,  the  price  of  this  commodity,  to  make  the  transaction  profit-
able, will  need  to  be  lower  in  country  B  than  in  country  A.
The  former  commodity  was  lower  in  country  A  than  in  coun-
try B:  the  latter  will  be  lower  in  country  B  than  in  country
A.  The  comparative  prices  of  the  two  commodities  will
therefore  be  different  in  the  two  countries,  and,  prices  being
ruled  by  costs,  the  transaction  will  only  be  profitable  when  the
comparative  costs  are  different.  But  country  B  might  pay
for  its  import,  not  by  the  export  of  a  commodity  of  its  own
produce,  but  by  remitting  gold.  Let  us  consider  this  case.
There  are  two  suppositions  possible.  Country  B  either  pro-
duces gold  or  it  does  not.  If,  taking  the  former  supposition,
and  assuming  therefore  that  gold  is  for  country  B  a  staple  of
merchandise,  the  gold  price  of  the  imported  commodity  is  high-
er in  country  B  than  in  country  A — this  proves  that  the  cost  of
obtaining  gold  is  lower  relatively  to  the  cost  of  the  commodity
in  the  former  than  in  the  latter  country.  There  is  thus  a  dif-
ference in  the  comparative  costs  of  gold  and  of  the  commodity
in  the  two  countries,  and  the  trade  would  be  carried  on  by  an
exchange  of  one  for  the  other  in  strict  conformity  with  Ricar-
do's  doctrine.  But  now  take  the  other  supposition.  Gold,  we
will  suppose,  is  not  a  product  of  country  B.  Under  these  cir-
cumstances, and  assuming  further,  for  simplicity  of  illustration,
that  the  two  countries  trade  exclusively  with  one  another,  it  is
evident  that  the  trade  can  not  be  carried  on  permanently  upon
the  terms  of  an  exchange  of  a  commodity  on  the  side  of  coun-
try A  against  gold  on  that  of  country  B ;  for  the  continued
transference  of  gold  from  the  latter  to  the  former  country
would  sooner  or  later  act  upon  prices  in  the  two  places,  lower-
ing them  in  B  and  raising  them  in  A ;  and  then  one  of  two

21


'/


322  WAGES  AND  FOREIGX  TT.ADE.

things  would  happen  :  either  the  commodity  which  formed  the
subject  of  the  trade  would  rise  in  price  in  country  A  till  it  be-
came no  longer  profitable  to  export  it,  and  then  the  trade  would
come  to  an  end ;  or  before  this  occurred,  the  price  of  some
commodity  in  country  B  would  be  brought  below  the  level  of
its  price  in  country  A;  and  this  commodity  would  become
then  for  B  the  means  of  paying  for  its  import.  There  would
thus  be  established  a  difference  in  the  comparative  prices  of  the
exchanged  commodities  in  the  two  countries ;  and,  prices  with-
in the  limits  of  each  country  being  governed  by  cost  of  pro-
duction, this  would  imply  a  corresponding  difference  in  their
comparative  costs.  Under  all  circumstances,  therefore,  it  would
be  concluded,  notwithstanding  that  prices  are  the  immediate
consideration,  and  notwithstanding  that  each  commercial  trans-
action, so  to  speak,  stands  upon  its  own  merits,  the  fundament-
al condition  underlying  the  whole,  supplying  the  motives  and
determining  the  result,  is  the  comparative  costs  of  producing
commodities.

The  logic  of  the  foregoing  argument,  which  is  in  substance
the  argument  employed  in  Eicardo's  exposition  of  the  doctrine,
appears  to  me  to  be  without  flaw.  But  to  one  of  the  premises
involved  in  it  I  have  already  taken  exception,  and,  unless  my
reasoning  is  fallacious,  it  can  no  longer  be  admitted.  It  is  as-
sumed throughout  that  the  relative  prices  of  commodities  with-
in the  limits  of  each  country  are  universally — or  at  least  so
generally  that  the  exceptions  are  not  worth  noticing — governed
by  the  relative  costs  of  their  production.  Now  I  have  endeav-
ored to  show  in  an  early  chapter  of  this  work*  that  this  as-
sumption is  not  well  founded.  Cost  of  production,  as  a  princi-
ple regulating  value,  is  only  operative  within  the  limits  of  ef-
fective competition  ;  and,  though  this  condition  is  largely  real-
ized in  this  and  most  civilized  countries,  and  still  more  exten-


*  Part  i. ,  chap.  iii.


PROPOSED  EMENDATIONS.  323

sively  in  new  communities  like  our  Australian  colonies  and
some  American  States,  it  is  yet  far  from  being  universal,  and,
especially  in  countries  in  which,  as  in  England,  the  social
structure  is  very  complex  and  of  long  standing,  suffers  numer-
ous and  serious  checks.  The  consequence  is,  that  cost  of  pro-
duction, though  the  principal  influence  in  the  case,  is  not  the
only  one.  To  a  considerable  extent  in  countries  of  old  civiliza-
tion, to  a  less  extent  in  new  communities,  Eeciprocal  Demand  /
takes  the  place  of  Cost  of  Production  as  the  regulator  of  do-
mestic prices.  In  all  those  exchanges,  for  example,  carried  on
between  what  I  have  called  non-competing  industrial  groups,
the  law  governing  such  exchanges,  and  therefore  governing
the  relative  prices  of  the  products  proceeding  from  such  groups,
is  that  furnished  by  the  former,  not  that  furnished  by  the  latter
principle.  But  prices,  as  we  have  seen,  are  the  proximate  con-
ditions determining  international  exchange.  It  follows,  there-
fore, that  international  exchange  is  sometimes  determined,  not
merely  proximately  but  ultimately  by  other  conditions  than
cost  of  production ;  and  that  the  theory  of  that  branch  of  trade,  >^
as  left  us  by  Ricardo,  is  by  no  means  as  complete  and  ex-
haustive as  he  and  his  most  distinguished  successors  have
regarded  it.

§  2.  It  remains,  then,  that  we  endeavor  to  bring  the  theory
into  correspondence  with  the  facts  sucli  as  we  have  found  them
to  be ;  and  in  order  to  this  it  will  be  necessary  to  subject  it  to
some  such  modification  as  the  following :  The  proximate  con-
dition determining  international  exchange  is  the  state  of  com-
parative prices  in  the  exchanging  countries  as  regards  the  com-
modities which  form  the  subject  of  the  trade.  But  compara-
tive prices  within  the  limits  of  each  country  are  determined
by  two  distinct  principles — within  the  range  of  effective  indus-
trial competition,  by  Cost  of  Production  ;  outside  that  range,
by  Eeciprocal  Demand. The  ultimate  conditions,  therefore,


324  WAGES  AND  FOREIGN  TRADE.

on  which  international  trade  depends  are,  where  the. commodi-
ties are  produced  in  each  country  under  a  regime  of  competi-
tion, a  difference  in  the  comparative  costs  of  producing  them ;
where  effective  competition  does  not  obtain  such  a  state  of  Re-
ciprocal Demand  among  non-competing  groups  as  shall  issue
in  a  difference,  in  the  exchanging  countries,  in  the  comparative
prices  of  the  products  proceeding  from  such  groups.

§  3.  And  now,  in  order  to  exhibit  the  practical  consequences
involved  in  the  modification  of  the  received  doctrine  just  pro-
posed, and  to  satisfy  the  reader  that  the  point  raised  is  some-
thing more  than  a  mere  formal  and  barren  criticism,  I  will  ask
his  attention  to  a  question  which  has  been  of  late  a  good  deal
discussed — the  connection,  namely,  between  the  rate  of  wages
prevailing  in  a  country  and  the  course  and  character  of  its  ex-
ternal trade.

It  is  a  very  general  opinion  among  commercial  men  in  this
country  that,  if  not  the  most  important,  at  least  at  the  present
time  the  most  urgent,  condition  required  for  promoting  the  de-
velopment of  British  commerce,  is  that  the  rate  of  wages  should
generally  be  reduced,  or,  at  the  least,  should  not  be  permitted
to  rise  above  its  present  level.  "  Dear  labor,"  says  Mr.  Brassey,
expressing  an  opinion  which  has  since  been  echoed  in  many  a
leading  column,  "is  the  great  obstacle  to  the  extension  of  Brit-
ish trade."  Nor  is  this  opinion  by  any  means  confined  to
Great  Britain.  Ask  a  New  England  merchant  why  the  United
States  are  unable  to  compete  with  Great  Britain  in  the  manu-
facture of  cotton  fabrics,  and  it  is  one  hundred  to  one  he  will
tell  you  it  is  owing  to  the  high  price  of  labor  in  the  Union  as
compared  with  the  low  rates  prevailing  on  this  side  of  the  At-
lantic. Ask,  again,  a  Melbourne  merchant  why  Victoria,  not-
withstanding her  fine  agricultural  resources,  still  continues  to
import  a  portion  of  her  food,  and  the  answer  will  be  similar:
the  higher  price  of  labor  in  Victoria  than  in  the  other  Aus-


THE COMMERCIAL  VIEW.  325

traliaii  colonies,  or  in  the  districts  of  South  America  from
which  corn  may  be  obtained,  will  be  considered  as  telling  us
all  it  is  needful  to  know  in  order  to  a  full  comprehension  of
the  fact.

Such  is  the  nearly  universal  opinion  on  this  subject  among
commercial  men ;  and  yet  it  needs  but  little  consideration  to
show  that  it  is  in  direct  conflict  with  the  received  economic
doctrine,  as  expounded  by  Ricardo,  as  to  the  causes  governing
foreign  trade.  For  it  must  be  remembered  that  by  cost  of  pro-
duction, at  all  events  in  connection  with  the  theory  of  foreign
trade,  both  Ricardo  and  Mill  understood  what  I  have  maintain-
ed to  be  in  all  cases  the  proper  signification  of  the  phrase —
namely,  cost  as  measured  in  number  of  days'  labor  and  absti-
nence; and  it  is  by  comparative  cost  as  thus  measured  that,
according  to  the  theory,  international  trade  is  governed.  But
inasmuch  as  a  rise  or  fall  in  the  rate  of  wages  has  no  effect  on
the  comparative  quantities  of  labor  required  for  the  production
of  different  commodities,  it  is  evident  that  if  the  received  theo-
ry be  true,  this  circumstance  must  be  incapable  of  altering  in
any  way  the  course  of  foreign  trade ;  and  this  was  undoubted-
ly Ricardo's  opinion.  Indeed  it  was  a  leading  doctrine  in  his
scheme  of  ideas,  on  which  he  insisted  with  reiterated  emphasis,
that  high  wages  do  not  make  high  prices — a  position  which  of
itself  involves  the  negative  of  the  prevailing  view.  There  can
be  no  question,  therefore,  that  the  opinion  so  widely  entertain-
ed as  to  the  effect  of  wages  on  foreign  trade  finds  no  sanction
whatever  in  the  theory  of  Ricardo.  I  have  already,  however,
shown  reasons  for  regarding  that  theory  as  imperfect.  As  I
view  the  case,  external  trade  is  governed  proximately  by  rela-
tive prices,  and  relative  prices  are,  in  some  instances,  not  in-
deed determined  by  wages,  but  so  intimately  connected  with
wages  that  the  movements  of  the  two  phenomena  are  steadi-
ly coincident.  The  theory  of  international  trade,  therefore,  as
I  hold  it,  does  not  exclude  the  possibility  of  its  course  being


326  WAGES  AND  FOREIGN  TRADE.

affected  by  movements  in  the  rate  of  wages  :  at  the  same  time
I  believe  that  what  may  be  described  as  the  commercial  'view
of  this  subject  is  almost  wholly  erroneous.

Let  us  consider  the  sort  of  argument  by  which  it  may  be
supposed  the  opinion  in  question  would  be  supported.  It
would,  I  apprehend,  run  in  some  such  form  as  the  following:
taking,  for  example,  the  case  of  wheat  imported  into  Victoria
from  South  Australia  or  from  the  nearest  South  American
ports,  it  would  be  argued  that  this  was  owing  to  the  inability
of  Victoria  to  compete  with  these  latter  countries,  owing  to
the  high  price  of  her  labor.  Let  the  price  of  labor  in  Victoria
only  fall  to  the  same  level  as  in  the  countries  from  which  it
imports  its  wheat,  it  would  be  plausibly  urged,  and  it  will  at
once  become  profitable  to  raise  wheat  in  Victoria  from  soils
from  which  it  can  not  now  be  raised  with  profit.  What  would
be  the  reply  of  Eicardo  to  this  argument?  He  would  answer
that  if  wages  fell  in  agriculture,  they  would  also  fall  in  gold-
mining,  in  sheep-farming,  and  in  all  the  other  industries  of  the
colony.  The  relative  attractiveness  of  the  several  occupations,
as  investments  for  capital,  would  not  be  altered,  and  there
would  be  no  reason  that  capital  should  be  distributed  among
them  in  other  proportions  than  at  present.  It  is  true  indeed
that,  with  a  reduced  rate  of  wages,  the  cultivation  of  wheat
would  yield  a  profit  where  it  would  not  yield  one  now,  but
that  is  not  the  question.  The  question  is,  would  it  yield  the
rate  of  profit  current  in  the  colony?  Now  it  must  not  be  for-
gotten that  the  change  which  we  suppose  to  have  taken  place
— a  fall  in  general  wages  while  the  conditions  of  production
remain  in  other  respects  unaffected — would  imply  a  rise  in
general  profits.  Australian  farmers,  therefore,  would  not  be
satisfied  with  the  rate  of  profit  which  they  now  receive ;  they
would  expect  as  high  a  return  upon  their  capital  as — allow-
ance made  for  the  special  circumstances  of  different  pursuits —
could  be  got  in  other  occupations;  and  this  they  could  only


THE  COMMERCIAL  VIEW.  327

obtain  bj  confining  their  operations  to  lands  of  equal  fertility
with  those  which  they  now  cultivate.  In  a  word,  the  change
in  the  rate  of  wages  being  general,  and  affecting  all  occupa-
tions alike,*  there  would  be  no  more  reason  for  extending  the
employment  of  capital  in  agriculture  than  for  doing  so  in  any
other  branch  of  production.  The  capital  at  the  disposal  of  the
colony,  under  a  low,  as  under  a  high,  rate  of  wages,  would,
therefore,  continue  to  be  distributed  among  the  various  indus-
tries pretty  much  as  it  now  is ;  and  Victoria  would  have  pre-
cisely the  same  reasons  as  at  present  for  importing  a  portion
of  her  food.f  It  need  scarcely  be  added  that  this  reply,  what-
ever its  merit,  would  be  not  less  valid  against  the  same  argu-
ment whether  urged  in  Melbourne,  New  York,  or  London.

§  4.  It  is  evident  that  the  reply  which  I  have  attributed  to

*  As  has  been  pointed  out  by  Eicardo  and  others,  it  is  not  strictly  true  that  a
fall  or  rise  in  general  wages  would  affect  all  industries  alike.  Industries  in  which
fixed  capital  was  largely  employed  would  be  less  affected  by  the  change  than  those
in  which  the  outlay  consisted  mainly  of  wages,  and  the  result  would  be  made  man-
ifest by  a  change  in  the  relative  values  of  the  products  of  the  respective  industries.
These  are  details,  however,  into  which  it  is  scarcely  necessaiy  to  enter  in  arguing
the  general  question  of  the  effect  of  wages  on  foreign  trade.  So  far  as  they  took
effect,  however,  the  course  of  foreign  trade  would  no  doubt  undergo  more  or  less
modification,  but  by  no  means  necessarily  in  the  direction  which  the  common
opinion  supposes.  A  fall  in  wages,  for  example,  might  easily  have  the  effect  of
checking  instead  of  promoting  the  exportation  of  an  article  if  it  happened  to  be
one  in  the  production  of  which  fixed  capital  was  largely  employed ;  as,  on  the
other  hand,  a  rise  in  wages  might  lead  to  the  exportation  of  a  commodity  which
it  had  not  previously  been  profitable  to  export.  In  the  particular  instance  dis-
cussed in  the  text  the  circumstance  in  question  would  have  scarcely  any  practical
operation,  the  industries  of  a  new  country  like  Australia  standing  pretty  much  on
the  same  footing  as  regards  tlie  use  of  fixed  capital.

1 1  shall  be  told,  perhaps,  that  for  some  time  past  Victoria  has,  as  a  matter  of
fact,  year  after  year  extended  her  agriculture  and  curtailed  her  importation  of
food  from  abroad  ;  and  that  this  has  been  synchronous  with  a  fall  of  wages  in  the
colony.  The  fact  is  so,  and  I  shall  presently  have  oecasion  to  point  out  the  real
connection  between  the  two  phenomena.


328  WAGES  AND  FOREIGN  TRADE.

Eicardo  is  valid  on  the  assumption  which  he  constantly  makes,
that  industrial  competition  is  effective  over  the  entire  range  of
a  country's  industry ;  but  it  is  equally  plain  that  it  ceases  to
be  cogent  just  in  the  degree  in  which  this  assumption  ceases
to  be  true  in  fact.  In  old  countries  like  England,  as  I  have
pointed  out,  the  regime  of  industrial  monopoly  covers  a  con-
siderable area,  but  even  in  new  communities  like  the  Austra-
lian colonies  competition  is  not  quite  universal.  I  shall  now
advert  to  an  example  of  this  failure  of  industrial  competition
furnished  by  the  industry  of  Australia  which  will  set  the  point
at  issue  in  a  clear  light.

As  all  the  world  knows,  the  colonies  of  Australia  have  been
mainly  peopled  by  immigrants  from  this  country  and  their
descendants.  Among  the  population  as  thus  constituted  in-
dustrial competition  would,  I  should  apprehend,  be  nearly,  if
not  quite  universally,  effective.  No  one  would  be  excluded
by  law,  by  social  circumstances,  or,  after  he  had  been  a  short
time  in  the  colony,  by  want  of  means,  from  taking  part  as  a
laborer  in  any  industrial  occupation.  If  this  be  so,  wages
throughout  the  principal  industries  of  the  country  would  fol-
low the  law  which  apportions  remuneration  to  sacrifice,  as  as-
sumed by  Eicardo;  and  a  rise  or  fall  of  wages  would  conse-
quently within  this  range  have  no  effect  upon  the  distribution
of  capital  among  the  various  industries,  nor,  therefore,  upon
its  foreign  trade.  But  into  the  ordinary  population  a  small
infusion  of  alien  races  has  found  entrance ;  in  particular,  the
Chinese  have  found  their  way  into  Victoria  and  New  South
Wales,  and  for  some  years  a  considerable  importation  of  Poly-
nesian laborers  into  Queensland  has  been  in  progress.  These
people  do  not  take  part  in  the  general  industrial  competition
of  the  country;  but  partly  through  the  prejudices  existing
against  them,  partly  through  physical  or  intellectual  inability,
are  confined  to  a  few  of  the  simple  and  cruder  industries.  It
results  that  the  rate  of  remuneration  in  their  case  fails  to  fol-


ILLUSTRATIVE  EXAMPLES.  329

low  the  same  rule  which  holds  among  the  Anglo-Saxon  popu-
lation. A  rise  or  fall  of  wages  may  occur  among  those  alien
races  without  affecting  wages  generally  in  the  colony,  and  con-
sequently may  affect  the  relative  attractiveness,  as  investments
for  capital,  of  the  particular  industries  in  which  they  are  em-
ployed. In  this  way  the  course  of  foreign  trade  may  come
to  depend  upon  the  price  at  which  a  particular  kind  of  labor
may  be  obtained.  The  most  decisive  example  in  point  is  that
of  the  Polynesian  laborers  in  Queensland.  Sugar  cultivation
has  been  started  in  that  colony,  and  it  is  asserted — so  far  as
I  can  gather,  with  good  reason — that  the  prosperity  and  even
the  continuance  of  the  industry  depends  upon  the  possibility
of  obtaining  cheap  labor  from  Polynesia.  The  immigrant
from  this  country  is  but  ill  fitted  to  endure  the  exposure  to
the  extreme  heat  of  that  region  which  labor  in  the  sugar  fields
demands,  and  consequently  can  not  be  drawn  to  that  work
unless  by  the  inducement  of  a  proportionally  high  reward.
But  the  Polynesian  can  expose  himself  without  detriment  to
a  tropical  climate ;  the  processes  of  sugar  cultivation  are  of  a
simple  mechanical  sort  such  as  the  rudest  laborer  may  per-
form ;  and,  his  expectation  of  reward  not  being  pitched  high,
he  is  easily  induced,  for  a  rate  of  pay  considerably  under  that
prevailing  in  the  colony,  to  hire  himself  for  the  work.  On
the  other  hand,  the  Polynesian  is  unfitted,  from  his  habits,  and
to  some  extent  from  his  inferior  physique,  for  taking  part,  ex-
cept in  a  quite  subordinate  way,  in  the  ordinary  mining,  pas-
toral, and  agricultural  occupations.  It  results  from  all  this
that  the  possibility  of  cultivating  sugar  in  Queensland  with
the  ordinary  profits  of  the  place  depends  almost  entirely  on
the  presence  there  of  these  Polynesian  laborers ;  and  sugar  be-
ing mainly  used  as  an  article  of  export,  it  comes  to  pass  that
the  course  of  foreign  trade  in  this  article  turns  almost  entirely
upon  a  question  of  wages.

The  case  I  have  taken  for  illustration  affords  a  somewhat


330  WAGES  AND  FOREIGN  TRADE.

exaggerated  example  of  the  consequences  which  may  arise  in
the  foreign  trade  of  a  country  from  an  interruption  to  the  free
play  of  industrial  competition.  But  though  the  results  may
be  less  conspicuous,  they  are  in  character  and  principle  the
same,  wherever  a  similar  interruption,  in  whatever  degree,  is
experienced.  In  Australia  the  obstacle  to  free  competition
lies  in  difference  of  race.  In  Great  Britain  the  impediments
are  of  a  social  and  material  kind;  but  the  economic  effects  are
identical.  In  each  case  alike  partial  and  limited  movements
in  the  wages  of  labor  are  rendered  possible;  and,  in  the  man-
ner I  have  explained  in  a  former  chapter,*  such  partial  and
limited  movements  are  always  attended  by  corresponding
changes  in  the  relative  prices  of  commodities.  But,  as  we
have  seen,  the  relative  prices  of  commodities  are  the  proxi-
mate condition  on  which  the  course  of  foreign  trade  depends.

So  far,  therefore,  the  theory  of  foreign  trade,  modified  in  the
manner  I  have  proposed,  finds  room  for  the  common  notion,
at  least  to  the  extent  of  admitting  the  existence  of  cases  in
which  international  trade  may  be  affected  by  changes  in  the
rate  of  wages — a  view  which  the  theory,  as  it  came  from  the
hands  of  Eicardo,  absolutely  excludes.  The  nature  and  ex-
tent, however,  of  the  results  which  may  accrue  from  occur-
rences of  this  kind  are  by  no  means  of  that  simple  and  obvi-
ous character  which  is  commonly  supposed.  It  will  serve  to
clear  our  ideas  upon  this  point  if  we  consider  the  possible  con-
sequences involved  in  the  following  hypothetical  case.

Let  us  suppose  a  fall  of  wages  to  take  place  in  some  leading
branch  of  English  manufacture — say  Sheffield  cutlery — what
would  be  the  effect  of  this  on  the  external  trade  of  England?
It  has  been  alread}^  seen  that,  if  the  change  supposed  were  ac-
companied by  a  corresponding  change  over  the  whole  field  of
English  industry,  the  effect  would  be  nil  upon  the  distribution

t  *  Part  ii.,  chap.  ii.


ILLUSTRATIVE  EXAMPLES.  3S1

of  capital  in  the  country,  and  therefore  upon  the  course  of  our
external  trade ;  but  the  same  conclusion  may  easily  be  reached
by  another  path. For  example,  the  common  notion  is  that  a
general  fall  of  wages  would  lead  to  a  general  fall  of  prices,  and
this  again  to  an  immense  extension  of  the  export  trade  of  the
country. Now,  supposing  this  result  to  happen,  it  is  at  least
evident  that  there  would  be  nothing  in  the  case  to  cause  a  cor-
responding extension  of  our  import  trade. Observe  then  what
would  ensue. Foreign  nations  would  become  heavily  our  debt-
ors, and  a  great  flow  of  gold  would  set  in  from  all  quarters  to-
ward England,  which,  becoming  the  basis  of  new  creations  of
credit,  would  quickly  reproduce  the  former  state  of  wages  and
prices,  when  our  export  trade  would  at  once  return  to  its  for-
mer limits. We  are  thus,  though  by  a  different  route,  con-
ducted to  the  same  conclusion  as  before,  that  a  movement  of ,
wages,  where  it  is  general,  can  have  no  effect  upon  foreign^
trade. Let  us  now  consider  what  the  result  would  be,  sup-
posing the  fall  in  wages  not  to  extend  beyond  the  group  of
trades  in  effective  competition  with  the  principal  industries  of
Sheffield. It  is  evident  that  it  is  only  in  so  far  as  the  fall  in
wages  is  followed  by  a  fall  in  prices  that  it  can  affect  foreign
trade  at  all. I  will  assume,  then,  that  the  prices  of  Sheffield
manufactures  fall  in  proportion  to  the  fall  in  Sheffield  wages;
and  on  this  assumption  any of  three  possible  consequences .
might  ensue. The  increased  demand  of  foreign  countries  for |
Sheffield  wares  might  be  in  proportion  to  their  increased  cheap- '
ness,  or  it  might  be  in  less  proportion  or  in  greater. In  the
first  case,  while  sending  a  greater  quantity  of  cutlery  abroad,
we  should  only  send  the  same  value :  foreign  nations  would  be
in  our  debt  as  regards  this  item  in  the  international  account  to
no  greater  extent  than  now,  and — no  change  having  occurred
in  the  price  of  foreign  commodities — we  should  consequently//  \
receive  from  them  the  same  quantity  of  the  produce  of  their  '
industry,  neither  more  nor  less,  than  they  now  send  us. The


1/


332  WAGES  AND  FOREIGN  TRADE.

net  result,  therefore,  of  what  had  happened  would  be  a  gain
for  all  consumers  of  Shef3S.eld  wares,  whether  living  in  this
country  or  abroad,  obtained  at  the  expense  of  the  workmen
of  Sheffield.  Sheffield  employers  might  reap  some  temporary
gains,  but  competition  would  quickly  reduce  their  profits  to
the  usual  rate:  as  a  permanent  result,  they  would  be  no  bet-
ter off  than  before;  while  the  foreign  trade  of  England  would
not  be  extended.  Take  now  the  second  case,  and  let  us  sup-
pose that  the  increased  demand  from  abroad  is  less  than  in
proportion  to  the  fall  in  price  of  Sheffield  wares.  In  this  case,
also,  the  consumers  of  those  wares  would  everywhere  be  ben-
efited, but  the  foreign  trade  of  the  country,  so  far  as  Sheffield
contributed  to  it,  would,  at  least  in  the  first  instance,  be  pos-
itively curtailed.  This,  however,  would  be  merely  the  initial
effect.  The  reader  must  remember  that,  by  hypothesis,  the
export  of  Sheffield  manufactures,  though  greater  in  point  of
quantity,  has,  through  the  fall  in  price,  become  smaller  in  value
than  formerly.  It  follows  that  our  exports — assuming  the  state
of  things  previously  in  existence  to  have  been  one  of  commer-
cial equilibrium,  and  that  other  things  remain  the  same — would
be  insufficient  to  discharge  our  foreign  liabilities.  An  efflux  of
gold  from  England  to  foreign  countries  would,  therefore,  set  in,
and  would  continue  so  long  as  prices  here  and  in  foreign  coun-
tries remained  at  the  same  relative  level  which  had  rendered
the  drain  necessary.  This,  however,  could  not  be  for  long.
The  transfer  of  gold  from  England  to  foreign  countries  would,
in  the  usual  way,  lead  to  a  re-adjustment  of  relative  prices,
and,  as  a  consequence  of  this,  to  a  re-adjustment  of  reciprocal
demand.  What  the  exact  character  of  this  re-adjustment
would  be  it  is  impossible  a  priori  to  say.  English  demand  for
foreign  products  might  fall  off,  which  would  imply  a  contrac-
tion of  English  foreign  trade,  or  foreign  demand  for  English
products  might  increase,  which  would  imply  an  augmentation ;
or  both  consequences  might  in  different  degrees  be  realized,


ILLUSTBATIVE  EXAMPLES.  333

•

which  would  be  consistent  with  either  diminution  or  increase.

All  that  is  certain  is  that,  in  the  definitive  result,  commercial
equilibrium  would  be  restored — the  exports  of  England,  that !
is  to  say,  would  be  brought  into  due  relation  to  her  foreign  li-
abilities.* The  third  possible  case  is  that  the  foreign  demand
for  Sheffield  wares  should  increase  in  a  proportion  beyond  that
of  their  cheapness.  In  this  event  foreign  nations  would,  in  the
first  instance,  become  our  debtors  to  a  greater  extent  than  the
proceeds  of  their  ordinary  trade  would  cover.  An  efflux  of
gold  would  now  set  in  from  them  to  us ;  and  the  necessity
would  again  arise  of  a  change  in  the  reciprocal  demand  of  En-
gland and  foreign  nations.  Commercial  equilibrium  would
here,  too,  ultimately  be  re-established;  but,  as  in  the  former
case,  the  end  might  be  reached  by  any  of  the  same  three
methods,  and  the  definitive  result  would  be  equally'  compati-
ble with  a  contraction  or  an  expansion  of  international  trade.

In  the  foregoing  example  I  have  argued  on  the  assumption
of  a  fall  in  wages  occurring  in  some  leading  branch  of  English
industry.  If  instead  of  a  fall  we  supposed  a  rise,  and  this
rise  to  be  confined  to  some  particular  departments  of  trade,  we
should  find  ourselves  conducted,  by  a  similar  course  of  reason-
ing, to  precisely  the  same  conclusion.  In  the  first  instance  the
advance  in  price  would  check  foreign,  demand  for  the  English
commodities  which  had  risen,  but  this  would  lead  to  a  re-dis-
tribution of  the  precious  metals  between  England  and  the
countries  with  which  she  traded,  and  this  again  to  a  change
in  relative  prices,  which  would  issue  in  a  restoration  of  the
equilibrium  of  trade  —  a  result,  in  this  case  also,  compatible
alike  with  augmentation  or  decrease.

We  may,  then,  sum  up  the  results  of  this  part  of  our  in-
vestigation :  Partial,  as  opposed  to  general,  movements  in  the


*  I  am  here  obliged  to  anticipate  a  portion  of  the  theory  of  international  values
to  be  set  forth  in  the  next  chapter.


334  WAGES  AND  FOREIGN  TRADE.

wages  of  labor  affect  the  foreign  trade  of  a  country,  but  it  is
impossible  to  say  a  priori  in  what  direction,  whether  of  expan-
sion or  of  contraction.  To  know  this  it  would  be  necessary
to  know  what  the  definitive  result  would  be  as  regards  rela-
tive prices  in  the  country  in  which  the  change  of  wages  had
occurred,  and  those  with  which  it  trades.  If  this  were,  on  the
whole,  to  augment  the  difference  in  relative  prices  in  the  two
places,  an  extension  of  international  trade  would  be  the  conse-
quence; but  in  the  contrary  event,  which  is  equally  possible
and  probable,  the  opposite  effect — a  contraction  of  trade — is
that  which  would  be  realized.

§  5.  Let  me  now  state  the  point  to  which  the  general  argu-
ment has  been  carried.  I  have  endeavored  to  show  that  a  rise
or  fall  of  wages  in  a  countrj'-,  so  far  forth  as  it  is  general,  has
no  tendency  to  affect  the  course  of  foreign  trade :  a  fall  in  the
general  rate  does  not  tend  to  an  extension  of  foreign  trade,  any
more  than  a  rise  in  that  rate  necessitates  a  contraction.  On
the  other  hand,  I  have  pointed  out  that,  where,  owing  to  the
existence  of  impediments  to  the  action  of  free  industrial  com-
petition, partial  movements  in  the  rate  of  wages  occur,  inas-
much as  these  issue  in  a  change  of  relative  prices,  the  course
of  foreign  trade  is  in  this  case  affected,  though  it  is  impossible,
previous  to  experience,  to  say  in  what  direction  the  change
may  take  place.  So  far  the  argument  has  been  carried.  I
desire  now  to  consider  a  problem  which,  except  upon  its  nega-
tive side,  has  not  yet,  so  far  as  I  know,  received  the  attention
of  economists — I  mean  the  nature  of  the  connection  that  exists
between  general  wages  and  foreign  trade.  We  have  seen  that
that  connection  is  not  one  of  cause  and  effect;  but  we  have  yet
to  discover  what  its  nature  is.  General  wages  do  not  determine
foreign  trade,  but  it  by  no  means  follows  that  the  two  phenom-
ena are  not  intimately  connected ;  and  this  we  shall  find  to  be,
in  point  of  fact,  the  case.


FLUCTUATION  IN  PRICE  OF  LABOR.  335

•
I  recur  once  again  to  that  rich  repertory  of  economical  expe-
rience, the  recent  historj^  of  our  Australian  colonies.  As  we
have  already  seen,  the  discovery  of  gold  in  those  colonies  in
1851  was  the  signal  for  a  sudden  and  extraordinary  develop-
ment of  foreign  trade,  which  was  accompanied  by  an  equal-
ly sudden  and  extraordinary  advance  in  the  wages  of  labor.
This  remarkable  movement  reached  its  culmination  about  the
year  1852  or  1858,  when  the  rate  of  wages  in  the  rougb  work
of  gold  mining  was,  for  some  time,  maintained  at  the  very
high  point  of  205.  a  day.  We  have  unfortunately  no  exact
commercial  statistics  previous  to  1856  ;  but  in  that  year  the
total  external  trade  of  the  principal  gold  colony,  Victoria,
amounted  to  over  £30,000,000  sterling.  From  1856  to  the
present  time  the  history  of  the  colony  has  been  one  of  extraor-
dinary prosperity;  but  coincidently  with  this  prosperity  we
notice  two  remarkable  facts — a  pretty  steady  decline  through-
out the  whole  of  the  period  at  once  in  the  M^ages  of  labor  and
in  the  dimensions  of  external  trade.  As  I  have  just  said,  that
trade  in  1856  had  attained  the  large  aggregate  of  £30,000,000
sterling.  In  1870,  after  fourteen  years  of  sucb  prosperity  as
I  have  referred  to,  it  stood  at  less  than  £25,000,000.  The  foil
in  wages  has  not  been  less  striking.  It  had  risen  to  205.  a
day :  it  has  now  fallen  for  the  same  mining  labor  to  about
half  that  rate.  Wages  and  foreign  trade  have  thus  declined
pari  passu;  every  step  in  the  descent  of  wages  having  been
accompanied  by  the  dropping  off  of  some  former  import,  and,
as  a  consequence  of  this,  a  corresponding  extension  of, domestic
industry  in  the  colony.  The  facts,  it  will  be  observed,  nega-
tive most  decisively  the  prevalent  commercial  opinion  on  the
subject  under  consideration.  Dear  labor  in  1852  did  not  pre-
vent the  sudden  and  extraordinary  expansion  of  Yictorian
trade,  any  more  than  comparatively  cheap  labor  in  1870  has
been  able  to  prevent  its  contraction.  On  the  other  hand,  it
must  be  allowed  that  the  power  of  Victoria  to  compete  with


336  WAGES  AND  FOREIGN  TRADE.

foreign  nations,  evidenced  as  this  has  been  by  an  extension  of
her  domestic  industry  which  has  been  coincident  with  a  fall  in
the  price  of  labor,  seems  to  furnish  corroboration  of  the  popu-
lar notion  at  the  root  of  the  commercial  doctrine.  It  is  indeed
very  evident  that  all  three  facts — the  decline  of  foreign  trade,
the  fall  in  the  rate  of  wages,  and  the  extension  of  domestic
production  —  are  intimately  connected;  but  the  question  is,
what  is  the  nature  of  the  tie  that  binds  them  ?  The  true  an-
swer is  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that  the  several  occurrences  are
co-ordinate  effects  of  a  common  cause ;  that  cause  being  the
gradual  exhaustion  of  the  richer  and  more  accessible  gold  de-
posits. As  industry  became  less  productive  in  raising  gold,
the  amount  to  be  divided  between  laborer  and  capitalist  be-
came less,  and  money  wages  therefore  fell.  As  gold,  with  the
increased  difficulty  of  production,  became  more  costly,  it  be-
came, just  in  the  same  degree,  a  less  profitable  means  of  ob-
taining the  various  conmiodities  which  Victoria  required:  she
ceased,  therefore,  to  employ  this  means  to  the  same  extent  as
formerly,  and  began  instead  to  produce  commodities  directly
from  her  own  resources:  in  other  words,  her  foreign  trade  un-
derwent contraction,  and  her  domestic  industry  was  extended.
And  as  these  results  have  been  the  consequence  of  a  decline  in
the  productiveness  of  the  gold  mines,  so,  it  might  be  confident-
ly predicted,  a  new  discovery  of  auriferous  deposits  equal  in
abundance  and  richness  to  those  of  the  earlier  period  would
have  the  effect  of  reversing  the  present  course  of  development,
and  by  a  single  stroke  send  up  money  wages,  give  a  fresh  im-
pulse to  external  trade,  and  arrest  the  extension  of  miscellane-
ous industries  in  the  colony.  Such  is  the  nature  of  the  con-
nection between  the  rate  of  wages  in  a  country  and  the  course
of  its  external  trade  and  domestic  industry.  They  are  co-or-
dinate effects  of  a  common  cause,  and  are  consequently  symp-
toms and  indications  of  each  other.

In  the  illustration  just  given  the  condition  on  which  the  sev-


ILLUSTRATIVE  EXAMPLES.  337

eral  results  depended  was  the  changing  cost  of  gold  ;  and — the
change  being  great  in  point  of  degree,  and  gold  being  also  the
material  of  money — the  results  have  been  more  palpable  and
striking  than  they  would  have  been  had  the  cheapened  com-
modity been  one  of  ordinary  consumption.  But  the  effect,
though  less  palpable,  would  not  really  be  different  in  this  lat-
ter case — provided  only  the  article  affected  were  of  a  kind  in
tolerably  extensive  demand  and  suited  for  exportation  to  for-
eign countries.  I  am  unfortunately  unacquainted  with  any
actual  occurrence  sufficiently  simple  and  decisive  to  enable  me
to  exhibit,  in  a  perfectly  unequivocal  light,  the  operation  of
the  principle  in  this  more  general  form,  and  I  must,  therefore,
have  recourse  for  this  purpose  to  hypothesis.  I  will  then  sup-
pose that,  as  the  result  of  some  mechanical  invention  not  known
to  other  nations,  a  great  improvement  has  been  effected  in  the
manufacture  of  woolen  goods  in  England  —  an  improvement
which  would  reduce  the  cost  of  manufacturing  this  class  of
goods  in  as  great  a  proportion  as  the  cost  of  gold  in  Australia
was  reduced  by  the  discovery  of  gold — what  would  be  the  ef-
fect of  such  an  occurrence  on  the  external  trade  of  Ensrland
and  on  the  remuneration  of  labor  in  the  country  ?  In  the  first
instance,  it  is  evident,  there  would  be  an  extensive  diversion
of  English  capital  into  the  branch  of  manufacture  thus  benefi-
cially affected ;  and  the  increased  production  of  woolen  goods
would  lead  to  a  fall  in  their  price,  which  would  only  stop  when
brought  into  the  usual  relation  with  their  now  diminished  cost
of  production.  With  the  fall  in  price  a  large  increase  would
take  place  in  the  foreign  demand  for  English  woolens.  As,
however,  there  would  be  nothing  in  the  case  to  cause  a  corre-
sponding increase  in  the  demand  of  England  for  the  commodi-
ties of  foreign  countries,  a  transfer  of  gold  from  the  latter  to
the  former  in  payment  of  the  enlarged  exportations  would  be
necessary,  and  this  would  continue  until,  through  a  rise  of
prices  in  England  and  a  fall  of  prices  abroad,  the  equilibrium

22


338  WAGES  AND  FOREIGN  T2ADE.

of  trade  was  re-established.  At  this  point  many  articles
which  had  formerly  been  produced  in  England,  and  perhaps
produced  for  exportation,  would  now  be  selling  at  lower  prices
in  foreign  countries.  Such  articles  would  cease  to  be  produced
in  England,  or  at  all  events  to  be  produced  on  the  same  scale
as  formerly,  and  would  in  greater  or  less  quantity  begin  to  be
imported  from  abroad.  Ultimately  we  should  arrive  at  this
definitive  result :  a  larger  proportion  than  formerly  of  the  ag-
gregate capital  of  England  would  be  devoted  to  the  production
of  woolen  goods,  a  smaller  proportion  to  her  other  miscellane-
ous industries;  while  the  things  formerly  produced  by  the  dis-
placed industries  would  now  be  obtained  from  abroad  through
an  exchange  for  woolen  goods.  In  other  words,  England
would  avail  herself  of  her  great  comparative  superiority  in  the
production  of  woolens  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  more
cheaply  than  before  all  commodities  in  the  production  of
whibh  her  superioritj'-  was  relatively  less.  The  result,  so  far
as  foreign  trade  was  concerned,  would  thus  be  exactly  anal-
ogous to  what  happened  on  the  discovery  of  gold  in  Austra-
lia. But  I  shall  be  asked  how  as  regards  the  wages  of  labor?
The  gold  discoveries,  as  we  saw,  had  the  effect  of  raising  the
rate  of  money  wages  in  Australia  in  proportion  to  the  fall
in  the  cost  of  money.  Would  a  similar  consequence  follow
on  the  hypothesis  we  are  now  considering?  Beyond  ques-
tion, yes ;  that  is  to  say,  as  wages  in  Australia  rose,  measured
in  the  commodity  of  which  the  cost  had  been  cheapened,  so
wages  in  England  would,  in  the  supposed  case,  rise,  and  in  a
corresponding  proportion,  measured  in  the  commodity  similar-
]}'■  affected.  In  the  one  case  that  commodity  was  gold,  in  the
other  woolen  goods.  English  laborers,  so  far  as  they  were
consumers  of  woolen  goods,  would,  in  the  supposed  case,  ob-
tain that  commodity  more  cheaply ;  so  far  as  they  were  con-
sumers of  foreign  goods,  procured  through  an  exchange  for
woolens,  would  also  obtain  those  commodities  more  cheaply;


CO-ORDINATE  PHENOMENA.  339

SO  far,  again,  as  they  were  consumers  of  commodities  produced
ill  England  other  than  woolen  goods,  would  gain  nothing  by
what  had  occurred.  It  may  be  added  that  those  other  com-
modities of  English  production,  inasmuch  as  they  were  not  af-
fected by  the  same  cause  which  had  cheapened  English  wool-
ens, would  be  represented  in  exchange  by  a  larger  quantity  of
the  cheapened  article  than  before,  just  as  the  products  of  Aus-
tralia were  represented  by  higher  gold  prices  in  proportion  as
the  cost  of  gold  fell.  To  state  the  result  in  a  single  phrase,
the  wages  of  English  laborers,  measured  in  woolen  goods,  would
rise  in  proportion  as  the  cost  of  those  goods  had  fallen ;  in  ex-
act analogy  with  what  happened  in  Australia.  Here,  then,  we
find,  in  the  case  of  a  commodity  of  general  consumption,  as  we
had  before  found  in  the  case  of  gold,  the  course  of  foreign
trade  and  the  rate  of  wages  intimately  bound  together  through
the  link  of  a  common  cause  in  the  state  of  productive  indus-
try. It  is  rare  indeed  that  changes  in  the  cost  of  production
take  place  on  so  great  a  scale  as  that  realized  or  assumed  in
our  illustrations;  but  where  such  changes  do  occur,  be  the
scale  large  or  small,  the  results  which  follow,  though  different
in  point  of  magnitude,  are  in  character  such  as  I  have  described.
Every  new  invention,  every  happy  discovery,  that  cheapens
the  cost  of  producing  particular  commodities,  and  so  alters
their  comparative  cost,  sets  in  action  forces  which  operate  in
the  directions  I  have  indicated,  however  slight  and  even  im-
perceptible may  be  the  actual  results  which  flow  from  each.

The  real  nature  of  the  connection  between  the  rate  of  wages
prevailing  in  a  country  and  the  character  and  course  of  its  ex-
ternal trade  ought  now,  I  think,  to  be  tolerably  clear.  They
are  co-ordinate  effects  of  a  common  cause,  that  cause  being  the
degree  and  direction  in  which  a  nation's  industry  happens
to  be  productive.  Whatever  be  the  articles  with  respect  to  /
which  the  industry  of  a  nation  is  specially  productive,  these
are  the  articles  which  will  form  the  staple  of  its  external  trade,


\/'


340  WAGES  AND  FOREIGN  TRADE.

and,  measured  in  these,  the  wages  of  labor  will  be  high.  If
wages  are  high,  measured  in  money,  this  will  indicate  either
rich  mines  of  gold  or  silver,  or  a  high  productiveness  of  indus-
try in  some  commodities  in  large  demand  abroad  with  which
gold  or  silver  may  be  purchased  on  favorable  terms.  If  they
be  high,  measured  in  food,  clothing,  and  other  necessaries  and
comforts,  we  may  infer  similarly  a  high  productiveness  of  in-
dustry, direct  or  indirect,  with  regard  to  those  commodities.
Thus  the  commodities,  whatever  they  are,  measured  in  which
wages  are  high,  will  either  form  the  staples  of  her  foreign  trade,
or  will  be  such  as  may  be  obtained  at  small  cost  through  those
staples  The  notion,  therefore,  which  prevails  both  here  and
in  the  United  States  that  the  high  rate  of  general  wages  ob-
taining in  each  country  is  a  hinderance  to  the  extension  of  its
foreign  trade  must  be  pronounced  to  be  absolutely  without
foundation.  Supposing  a  fall  in  wages  to  occur  in  either  coun-
try, the  other  conditions  of  production  remaining  as  at  present,
and  supposing  the  fall  to  be  general,  this  circumstance  would
not,  as  I  have  shown,  affect  the  relative  attractiveness  of  the
different  branches  of  industry  as  investments  for  capital.  Cap-
ital would,  therefore,  be  distributed  among  them  as  at  present,
and  nothing  would  occur  to  alter  the  course  of  its  foreign
trade.  The  sole  result  would  be  a  general  rise  of  profits:
capitalists  would  gain  what  laborers  had  lost.  A  fall  of  gen-
eral wages,  on  any  other  assumption,  would  inevitably  imply
diminished  productiveness  in  some  of  the  great  departments
of  productive  industry;  and  such  diminished  productiveness
involving,  as  it  would,  changes  in  the  comparative  cost  of  com-
modities, would  no  doubt  entail  changes  in  external  commercCo
But  the  point  to  be  borne  in  mind  is  that  the  latter  result,
though  coincident  with,  would  not  be  the  effect  of  the  fall  in
general  wages,  but  that  both  would  be  co-ordinate  effects  of
the  decline  in  the  productiveness  of  industry;  and  further,  that
the  changes  in  external  commerce,  occurring  under  the  cir-


CO-OBDINATE  FHENOMENA.  341

CLimstances  supposed,  would  not  necessarily  be  in  the  direction
of  extended  trade.  Quite  as  probably  in  either  case,  in  the
case  of  the  United  States  much  more  probabl}'-,  the  movement
would  involve  a  contraction  of  dealings  with  foreign  countries.
Thus,  supposing  a  general  fall  of  wages  in  the  United  States,
measured,  let  us  say,  in  gold  and  provisions,  or,  what  comes  to
the  same  thing,  supposing  money  wages  to  fall,  the  prices  of
provisions  remaining  as  at  present,  let  us  consider  what  this
would  imply.  Would  it  not  imply  that  industry  in  the  United
States  was  less  productive  than  it  now  is  in  procuring  the  com-
modities in  question;  and,  therefore,  more  nearly  on  a  par  than
at  present,  in  the  case  of  such  products,  with  industry  in  other
countries?  Would  it  not,  in  a  word,  imply  that  the  compara-
tive cost  of  producing  commodities  there  and  elsewhere  had
been  brought  into  closer  approximation,  and  that  consequent-
ly the  possible  field  for  international  exchange  had  been  nar-
rowed? The  rate  of  wages  and  the  course  of  foreign  trade
are  thus  intimately  connected;  but  that  connection  (except
within  the  limited  range  within  which  reciprocal  demand  gov-
erns domestic  values)  is  not  one  of  cause  and  effect,  but  of  co-
ordinate phenomena  depending  upon  identical  conditions.


CHAPTER  III.

INTERNATIONAL VALUES.

§  1.  We  have  now  ascertained  the  circumstances  under
"which  international  trade  arises,  and  the  nature  of  the  advan-
tages that  flow  from  it.  These  advantages,  as  we  have  seen,
are,such  as  result  from  a  more  effective  distribution  of  the  pro-
ductive forces  of  the  world.  Supposing  a  universal  freedom
of  trade,  it  would  not  indeed  follow  that  every  product  of  in-
dustry would  be  raised  precisely  in  that  part  of  the  world  in
which  it  could  be  raised  with  greatest  advantage;  for  this
would  require  that  population  and  capital  should  be  distributed
with  no  other  view  than  to  economical  gain.  The  course  of
population  and  capital,  however,  it  is  needless  to  say,  is  influ-
enced by  many  other  considerations  as  well;  and  what  inter-
national trade,  so  for  as  it  is  allowed  free  scope,  accomplishes
for  mankind  is,  that  the  industry  of  the  world  is  carried  on,
not  indeed  with  the  utmost  possible  advantage,  but  with  the
utmost  advantage  practicable,  regard  being  had  to  the  manner
in  which  the  world  is  peopled  and  to  the  condition  of  its  in-
habitants.

Such  is  the  nature  of  the  gain;  but  here  another  question,
arises:  On  what  principle  is  the  increase  of  wealth  which  re-
sults shared  among  the  nations  which  co-operate  in  producing
it?  To  put  the  same  point  in  a  different  form — What  causes
/  determine  the  proportions  in  which  trading  nations  exchange
their  products?  These  proportions  may  conceivably  be  such
as  to  give  all  the  advantage  to  one  only  of  the  exchanging
parties,  or  such  as  to  share  it  among  a  few  to  the  exclusion  of


STATEMENT  OF  THE  PROBLEM.  343

tne  rest,  or  such,  again,  as  to  distribute  it  in  any  ratio  what-
ever amono;  them  all.  Accordino-  as  one  result  or  the  other  is
attained,  will  be  the  quantum  of  advantage  which  each  nation
derives  from  its  commercial  dealings  with  others.  We  are
thus  conducted  by  the  course  of  our  investigation  from  the
doctrine  of  international  trade  to  the  special  problem  of  inter-
national values.

§  2.  It  may  be  well,  perhaps,  to  remind  the  reader  that  the
subject  of  our  present  inquiry  is  normal,  not  market,  values —
the  proportions  in  which  nations  exchange  their  products  as  a
rule,  or  when  trade  is  in  a  state  of  equilibrium,  not  those  in
which  the  exchange  may  take  place  on  a  particular  occasion,
or  under  the  influence  of  exceptional  conditions.  Now  we
have  already  seen  that  normal  values  depend  on  one  or  other
of  two  principles:  where  industrial  competition  prevails,  on
cost  of  production ;  and  in  the  absence  of  effective  industrial
competition,  on  reciprocal  demand.  Inasmuch,  however,  as  the
condition  of  effective  industrial  competition  (in  the  sense  de-
fined) is  not  satisfied  in  the  intercourse  of  independent  nations,
it  is  at  once  evident  that  the  ruling  principle  of  international
values  is  not  cost  of  production,  and  can  only  be  that  other  in-
fluence which  prevails  in  the  absence  of  effective  competition.
So  much  is  recognized  in  the  received  text-books  of  Political
Economy.  But  here  I  must  call  attention  to  an  inconsistency
in  which  those  text-books  are  involved,  to  which,  indeed,  in-
cidental reference  has  been  already  made.  It  will  be  remem-
bered that  in  a  former  portion  of  this  work  I  criticised  at  some
length  the  received  doctrine  of  Cost  of  Production,  which,  as
expounded  by  Mr.  Mill  and  others,  is  represented  as  consisting
in,  and  varying  with,  the  wages  and  profits  of  producers.  I
stated  then  that  this  conception  of  cost  was  not  reconcilable
with  the  doctrine  of  international  values  upheld  by  the  same
authorities,  which  refers  these  phenomena,  not  to  cost  of  pre


tX


ly


344  INTERNATIONAL VALUES.

duction,  but  to  the  reciprocal  demand  of  exchanging  nations.
I  now  propose  to  justify  that  criticism  by  showing  that,  re-
garding cost  of  production  in  the  sense  assigned  to  it,  inter-
national values  do,  in  point  of  fact,  in  all  cases  correspond  with
this  principle ;  in  other  words,  that,  while  they  are  said  not  to
be  governed  by  cost,  they  nevertheless  invariably  conform  to
it.  A  simple  illustration  will  enable  me  to  make  good  this
position.

Let  us  suppose  two  commodities,  one  the  product  of  English
industry,  the  other  produced  in  the  United  States,  and  selling
for  the  same  sum  of  money,  say  £1000  each.  These  commod-
ities will  (cost  of  carriage  being  omitted  on  both  sides)  ex-
change for  each  other,  and  will,  therefore,  represent  equal
values  in  international  trade.  This  being  so,  how  stands  the
case  as  to  their  respective  costs  of  production?  Assuming
these  to  consist  in  wages  and  profits,  the  answer  must  be  that
their  costs  of  production  are  equal  also;  for,  as  I  have  else-
where shown,  the  wages  and  profits  of  producers  are,  where  in-
dustry is  continuous,  in  effect  the  outcome  of  the  values  they
produce.  The  former,  therefore,  must  be  constantly  propor-
tional to  the  latter;  and  accordingly,  where  the  values  of  com-
modities are  equal,  as  these  values  resolve  themselves  into
wages  and  profits,  the  wages  and  profits  of  their  producers —
that  is  to  say,  according  to  the  view  we  are  now  considering,
their  costs  of  production — must  be  equal.  Now  it  is  obvious
that  this  argument  admits  of  being  applied  to  every  instance
whatever  of  international  exchange;*  and  we  are  thus  con-
fronted with  this  singular  result,  that,  while  cost  of  production,
according  to  our  text-books,  has  no  place  in  determining  inter-
national values,  international  values,  nevertheless,  according  to
principles  supplied  by  the  same  authorities,  invariaV)ly  corre-

*  It  will  be  seen  that  the  case  would  not  be  altered  if,  instead  of  money,  we  take
any  othei-  article,  the  subject  of  international  exchange,  for  example  food,  as  the
measure  of  cost  and  value.


INCONSISTENT  POSITIONS.  345

spond  to  it.  I  must  leave  those  who  accept  both  doctrines  of
the  received  Political  Economy  to  reconcile  the  two  positions
as  they  best  can.

On  the  other  hand,  if  we  take  as  our  conception  of  cost  that
view  of  it  for  which  I  have  contended,  according  to  which  it
consists  in  labor  and  abstinence,  the  truth  of  the  accepted  doc-
trine on  its  nefj:ative  side  follows  as  a  matter  of  course.  To
establish  this  we  need  not  go  beyond  the  illustration  just  given.
Two  commodities  respectively  of  English  and  American  pro-
duction, each  worth  £1000,  exchange  for  each  other,  and  there-
fore represent  equal  values  in  international  trade.  Further,  as
I  have  just  pointed  out,  their  values  being  equal,  they  consti-
tute equal  aggregates  of  wages  and  profits  for  the  producers  on
each  side.  The  American  scale  of  remuneration,  however,  is
much  more  liberal  than  the  English,  and  the  proceeds  of  those
equal  values  will  therefore  be  distributed  in  higher  wages  and
larger  profits  on  one  side  than  on  the  other.  It  follows  that
they  will  not  be  distributed  in  proportion  to  the  labor  and  ab-
stinence remunerated  :  in  other  words,  the  costs,  to  which  they
correspond,  will  not  be  equal.  The  sacrifice  will  be  less  on
the  American  than  on  the  English  side.  English  and  Ameri-
can commodities,  therefore,  do  not  exchange  for  each  other  in
proportion  to  their  costs  of  production,  as  consisting  in  the
real  sacrifices  undergone  by  the  producers.  The  negative  side
of  the  received  doctrine  respecting  international  values  is  thus
found  to  be  true,  but  only  on  the  condition  of  understanding
cost  of  production  in  the  sense  for  which  I  have  contended.

§  3.  The  argument  just  stated  brings  into  view  a  principle
already  more  than  once  referred  to  in  these  pages,  which,  as
it  will  be  found  to  have  important  bearings  on  some  problems
of  international  value,  may  conveniently  be  set  forth  with  some
distinctness  here.  The  principle  to  which  I  refer  is,  that  the
relative  rates  of  wages  and  profits  in  the  different  branches  of


346  INTERNATIONAL  VALUES.

industry  afford  an  indication,  in  an  inverse  sense,  of  tlie  relation
in  which  the  exchange  values  of  the  commodities,  proceeding
from  such  branches  of  industry,  stand  to  their  costs  of  pi'oduc-
tion.  It  will  of  course  be  understood  that  I  use  the  term  *'  cost
of  production"  here  in  the  sense  which  I  hold  to  be  the  right
one.  Thus,  to  revert  to  a  former  illustration,  supposing  that
in  the  manufacture  of  scientific  instruments  wages  and  profits
ranged  considerably  higher  than  in  ordinary  handicraft  trades,
let  us  say,  carpentry,  the  fact  would  show  that,  in  the  exchange
of  the  products  of  the  former  for  those  of  the  latter  industry-,
the  sacrifices  involved  in  the  production  of  mathematical  in-
struments bore  a  smaller  proportion  to  the  values  of  those  in-
struments than  the  sacrifices  involved  in  producing  common
tables  and  chairs,  for  example,  bore  to  their  values.  The  cost
would  be  low  relatively  to  the  value  in  the  trades  in  which
wages  and  profits  were  high,  high  in  the  trades  in  which  they
were  low,  while  the  relation  would  be  one  of  equality  where
the  rates  of  wages  and  profits  were  equal  on  each  side.  We
are  thus  furnished  with  an  easv  means  of  determining  the  re-
lation  in  which  the  exchange  values  of  any  two  compared  com-
modities stand  to  their  costs  of  production.  If  the  rates  of
wages  and  profits  obtained  by  the  respective  producers  of  the
two  commodities  be  equal — that  is  to  say,  in  proportion  to  the
sacrifices  undergone — it  is  matter  of  demonstration  that  the
commodities  in  question  exchange  in  proportion  to  their  costs.
If  they  are  unequal,  the  contrary  conclusion  not  less  certainly
follows ;  and  further,  the  difference  in  the  relative  rates  of  re-
muneration will  indicate  the  degree  in  which  the  exchange
values  of  the  commodities  deviate  from  the  proportion  existing
between  their  costs  of  production.  But  this  simple  criterion
may  be  made  simpler  still.  For  practical  purposes,  we  shall
not  lose  appreciably  in  point  of  accuracy  if,  instead  of  making
it  consist  in  wages  and  profits,  we  confine  our  attention  to
washes  alone. Profits  form  but  a  small  element  in  the  value


FE ACTIO AL  CBITJEIilOJSr.  347

of  most  commodities,  and  the  divergence  of  the  rates  of  profit
in  different  occupations  and  in  different  countries  is  (owing  to
the  greater  mobility  of  capital  than  labor)  much  less  consider-
able than  that  of  the  rates  of  wages.  We  may,  therefore,  with-
out danger  of  serious  error,  substitute  "  wages  "  for  "  wages
and  profits,"  and  we  are  at  once  provided  with  an  easy  means
of  determining  the  relation  of  exchange  value  to  cost  of  pro-
duction in  all  cases  whatever.

To  give  now  some  examples  of  the  application  of  our  cri-
terion to  the  transactions  of  international  trade,  I  find  that,  ac-
cording to  investigations  made  by  Mr.  Wells,*  the  United
States  Commissioner,  which  on  the  whole  have  been  confirmed
by  the  Eeports  lately  received  from  our  agents  in  foreign
countries,  the  relative  rates  of  wages  for  similar  kinds  of  labor
in  the  leading  manufacturing  indusuies  in  the  United  States,
England,  Belgium,  France,  and  Germany  range  nearly  as  fol-
lows: As  compared  with  England,  wages  in  the  United  States
are  from  25  to  50  per  cent,  higher;  as  compared  with  Belgi-
um, from  48  to  70  per  cent,  higher;  while,  as  compared  with
France  and  German}'-,  the  difference  rises  to  nearly  100  per
cent.f  I  need  hardly  say  that  if  the  comparison  were  extend-
ed so  as to  include  Oriental  states,  for  example,  India  and


*  See  his  Eepovt  for  1868,  pp.  67-69.

t  It  is  true  that  the  returns  quoted  represent  the  rates  of  wages  per  day ;  and  a
day's  labor,  even  in  the  same  occupations,  does  not  alwaj^s  represent  equal  exer-
tion undergone,  since  men  work  harder  and  longer  in  some  countries  than  in  oth-
ers. This  consideration,  however,  if  taken  account  of,  as  no  doubt  it  should  be,
would  only  have  the  effect  of  strengthening  the  grounds  of  the  argument  in  the
text — at  all  events  so  long  as  the  comparison  is  confined  to  the  United  States  and
Europe ;  for  from  the  parliamentary  reports  recently  published  upon  tliis  subject
it  appears  to  be  almost  a  rule  that,  comparing  different  countries,  the  laboring  day
is  long  nearly  in  propoition  as  the  rate  of  wages  is  low.  Thus  it  is  generally
shorter  in  the  United  States  than  in  England,  in  England  than  in  Belgium  and
France,  and  in  Belgium  and  France  than  in  Germany  ;  the  i-ates  of  wages  in  these
several  countries,  as  we  have  seen,  declining  in  a  corresponding  order.


348  INTERNATIONAL  VALUES.

China,  the  differences  in  the  scales  of  remuneration  would  be-
come still  more  striking,  the  remuneration  of  a  day's  labor  in
the  United  States  being  probably  equivalent  to  that  of  four  or
five  in  the  latter  countries.  Now  what,  according  to  our  cri-
terion, do  these  differences  indicate  as  regards  the  terms  of  in-
ternational exchange?  They  indicate  this — in  the  first  place^
that  the  several  nations  named  do  not  exchange  their  products
with  the  United  States  in  proportion  to  their  costs  of  produc-
tion; and,  secondly,  that  the  proportion  in  which  the  exchange
takes  place  deviates  from  the  principle  of  cost  in  the  degree
marked  by  the  differences  between  the  rates  of  wages  in  each
country  and  in  the  United  States;  in  other  words,  our  crite-
rion shows  us  this — that,  in  the  commercial  dealings  of  those
several  nations,  the  product  of  a  day's  labor  in  the  United
States  enables  the  workman  to  command  the  product,  in  round
numbers,  of  a  day  and  a  third's  labor  in  Great  Britain,  the
product  of  a  day  and  a  half's  labor  in  Belgium,  the  product
of  from  one  and  three-quarters  to  nearly  two  days'  labor  in
France  and  Germany ;  while  it  probably  would  command  the
product  of  four  or  five  days'  labor  in  China  and  India,  Such,
or  nearly  such,  are  the  proportions,  measured  by  the  standard
of  cost,  in  which  the  leading  commercial  nations  of  the  world,
at  the  present  time,  exchange  their  productions ;  and  so  very
far  is  it  from  being  true  that  international  values,  in  the  actual
dealings  of  commerce,  correspond  with  that  standard,*


4.  So  far  as  to  the  negative  side  of  our  argument. The


*  The  position  here  contended  for  is  very  clearly,  though  incidentally,  establish-
ed in  Mr.  Senior's  essay  on  the  "  Cost  of  obtaining  Money,"  and  by  the  applica-
tion of  the  same  criterion.  Mr.  Senior,  nevertheless,  held  tlie  current  doctrine  as
to  cost  of  production ;  for  though  defining  it  in  his  treatise  as  consisting  of  "  labor
and  abstinence,"  he  at  once  abandons  this  definition,  and  substitutes  for  it  "wages
and  profits,"  as  equivalent  and  more  convenient  expressions!  In  the  essay  just
referred  to  ha  speaks  of  the  question  as  one  of  nomenclature.


INDUSTRIAL  MONOPOLIES.  '349

products  of  trading  nations  do  not  exchange  for  each  other  in
proportion  to  their  costs  of  production.  There  is  no  reason
that  thej  should  do  so,  inasmuch  as  industrial  competition  is."
not  effective  in  the  intercourse  of  nations;  and  the  evidence'
just  adduced  proves  that  they  do  not  do  so  in  point  of  fact.
The  principle,  therefore,  which  determines  international  values
must  be  that  one  which  operates  in  the  absence  of  effective  in-
dustrial competition,  namely,  Reciprocal  Demand  ;  and  this,  asi^
I  have  already  said,  is  the  received  doctrine  of  Political  Econ-
omy. But  though  Cost  of  Production  is  not  in  this  case  the
determining  cause,  it  does,  nevertheless,  exercise  an  important
influence  in  international  trade  by  controlling  the  aberrations  ^
of  value  which  are  possible  under  a  regime  where  monoply  is
tlie  presiding  principle.  This,  indeed,  is  implied  in  the  ordi-
nary expositions  of  the  doctrine;  but  I  do  not  think  the  fact
has  hitherto  been  brought  out  with  as  much  distinctness  and
prominence  as  it  deserves.

To  aid  toward  this  result,  it  may  be  observed  that  industrial
monopoly  may  exist  under  various  conditions  involving  a  cor-
responding variety  in  the  results  which  flow  from  it.  It  may
exist,  in  the  first  place,  in  an  absolute  form,  as  where  an  indi-
vidual or  a  nation  possesses  the  exclusive  power  of  producing
certain  commodities;  or,  secondly,  it  may  be  qualified,  spring-
ing from  the  possession  of  certain  special  facilities  of  produc-
tion not  shared  by  others,  as  in  the  case  of  those  peculiarities
of  soil  and  climate  which  give  an  advantage  to  some  districts
and  countries  over  others  in  the  production  of  certain  articles,
which  it  is  still  possible  for  the  latter  to  produce,  though  under
less  favorable  conditions;  while  again,  in  commercial  dealings,
monopoly  may  be  either  one-sided  or  reciprocal — confined  to
one  of  the  trading  parties,  or  extending  to  both  with  regard  to
their  respective  staples.  Examples  of  monopoly  in  all  these
forms  will  be  found  in  international  trade,  and  the  power  of
reciprocal  demand  over  value  will  be  greater  or  less,  accord-


350  INTEBNATIOXAL  VALUES.

ing  to  the  form  which  the  monopoly  in  any  given  case  may
assume.

For  example,  where  the  monopoly  is  at  once  strict  and  re-
ciprocal— a  case  not  frequent  in  international  trade,  but  which
sometimes  does  occur,  as  in  the  traffic  which  takes  place  be-
tween the  tropical  and  the  frozen  zones,  in  the  exchange,  sup-
pose, of  spices  for  ice — in  this  case  the  influence  of  reciprocal
demand  on  value  is  unqualified  and  absolute,  since  under  such
circumstances  there  is  nothing  but  the  desires  on  each  side,
supported  by  such  means  as  are  available  to  give  them  effect,
to  determine  the  bargain.

A  more  frequent  and  important  case  is  that  in  which  the
monopoly  is  strict,  but  one-sided,  or,  if  existing  on  both  sides,
only  strict  on  one  side,  while  it  is  qualified  on  the  other.  This
species  of  monopoly  is  largely  exemplified  in  the  trade  between
tropical  and  temperate  countries,  and  again  in  that  between  the
gold-producing  districts  of  the  earth  and  the  countries  which
trade  with  them.  Reciprocal  demand  here  operates,  but  sub-
ject to  a  limit  on  the  side  of  the  country  which  has  the  power
of  producing  both  the  commodities,  or  classes  of  commodities,
forming  the  subject  of  exchange.  To  give  an  example:  in  the
trade  between  England  and  Australia  (for  simplicity  of  illus-
tration, I  suppose  all  other  gold  countries  to  be  excluded  from
the  commerce)  there  is  no  limit  to  the  possible  rise  which
might  take  place  in  the  value  of  gold — to  the  possible  quan-
tit}'',  that  is,  of  her  products  which  England  might  give  in  ex-
change for  gold — save  in  the  desire  of  England  for  gold  and
her  ability  to  pay  for  it;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  the  fall  in  the
value  of  gold — the  price  in  gold  which  Australia  will  consent
to  pay  us  for  our  goods — has  a  very  definite  limit  short  of
Australian  needs  for  what  we  produce — ilie  limit,  namely,  set
by  the  cost  at  which  Australia  can  produce  those  articles  for
herself  So  soon  as  prices  in  gold  have  reached  the  point  at
which  Australia  can  satisfy  her  requirements  more  easily  by


INDUSTRIAL  MONOPOLIES.  351

the  direct  production  of  the  commodity  than  by  producing
gold  to  be  exchanged  for  it,  the  fall  of  gold,  in  relation  to  that
commodity,  has  reached  its  limit,  and  no  increasing  require-
ments on  the  Australian  side  will  have  any  further  effect  on  its
international  value.

But  again,  there  is  a  third  case,  the  most  frequent  and  im-
portant of  all  in  international  trade — that,  namely,  in  which  /  /
monopoly  exists  on  both  sides,  but  is  qualified  on  both.  This
occurs  when  each  of  the  trading  nations  is  in  the  possession,
not  of  an  exclusive  power  of  production,  but  of  a  comparative
superiority  (in  tlie  sense  in  which  this  phrase  has  been  explain-
ed) with  reference  to  the  articles  which  constitute  its  staples
in  the  trade.  Here  reciprocal  demand  still  determines  interi
national  values,  but  the  range  of  its  influence  finds  a  limit  oq
both  sides.  This,  I  say,  is  the  most  frequent  and  important
case  of  all  in  international  commerce.  It  is  largely  exemplified
in  the  trade  between  the  various  countries  of  Europe,  and  still
more  strikingly  in  that  between  Europe  and  ISTorth  America.
In  the  exchange,  for  example,  of  wheat  for  cotton  yarn,  or  of
timber  for  iron,  each  of  the  exchanging  countries  has  a  compar-
ative advantage  in  its  own  staple ;  and  any  terms  of  interna-
tional exchange  which  are  within  the  limits  of  that  advantage
will  imply  a  gain,  though  not  necessarily  an  equal  gain,  for
both  countries.  Within  these  limits,  therefore,  reciprocal  de-
mand will  operate  to  determine  what  the  precise  terms  of  the
exchange  shall  be;  but  beyond  those  limits  on  either  side  in-
ternational values  can  not  permanently  remain,  since  the  mo-
ment the  limits  thus  set  are  transcended  the  resources  of  the
country  so  placed  at  disadvantage  can  be  brought  into  requisi-
tion, and  the  motive  for  the  trade  ceases.

These  limitations  on  the  action  of  reciprocal  demand  in  in-
ternational exchange  are  such  as  would  exist  if  each  country
only  traded  with  one  other.  But  when  we  take  into  account
the  actual  state  of  things,  and  consider  that  the  external  trade


352  INTEBNATIOXAL  VALUES.

of  eacli  country  comprises  dealings  with  many  others,  we  find
that  the  limits  to  the  deviations  of  value  under  the  action  of
demand  are  considerably  narrower  than  we  might  at  first  have
supposed.  For  example,  reverting  to  the  illustration  already
given  of  the  trade  between  certain  parts  of  the  United  States
and  Barbados,  it  is  probable  that  the  difference  in  the  compar-
ative costs  of  sugar  and  flour  in  those  two  countries  is  very  con-
siderable; and  that  consequently  a  very  considerable  latitude
would  exist  for  possible  vai'iations  in  the  terms  on  which  the
staples  are  exchanged  under  the  influence  of  American  demand
for  sugar  and  Barbadian  demand  for  flour.  But  before  the  ex-
treme limit  could  be  reached  on  either  side,  the  resources  of
other  countries  would  come  into  requisition.  Any  considera-
ble advance  of  sugar  in  relation  to  flour,  or  of  flour  in  relation
to  sugar,  or,  let  us  say  (since  money  is  the  medium  through
which  the  transactions  would  be  efibcted),  any  considerable  ad-
vance of  United  States  prices  in  relation  to  prices  in  Barba-
dos, or  the  reverse,  would  bring  other  countries  into  the  field,
and  make  their  resources  available  for  controlling  the  advan-
cing price,  on  whichever  side  it  might  happen  to  be.  The  ce-
real capacities  of  Canada  and  South  America  would  control  the
aberrations  on  the  side  ftivorable  to  the  United  States;  while
those  on  the  side  favorable  to  Barbados  would  be  kept  in  check
by  the  competition  of  the  sugar  producers  of  Jamaica  and  Cuba.
It  thus  appears  that  it  is  not  the  difference  in  the  comparative
costs  of  production  in  each  pair  of  trading  countries  that  fixes
the  limits  to  the  possible  variations  of  international  values  un-
der the  influence  of  reciprocal  demand,  but,  among  all  coun-
tries mutually  accessible  for  commercial  intercourse,  the  dififer-
ence  of  comparative  costs,  as  it  exists  in  the  particular  coun-
tries in  which  that  difference  is  least.  The  limits  of  variation
are  thus  set  by  the  minimum,  not  by  the  maximum,  difference
in  comparative  cost  among  the  various  exchanging  and  com-
peting countries.


CONTROLLED  BY  COST.  353

Sucli  is  the  nature  of  the  influence  exercised  respectively  by
reciprocal  demand  and  by  cost  of  production  in  international
exchange.  The  former  determines;  the  latter  only  controls.
The  distinction  between  these  two  functions  will  be  made
clear  by  comparing  the  action  of  cost,  as  just  described,  with
its  action  in  domestic  trade.  In  domestic  trade  cost  of  pro-
duction, within  the  limits  of  effective  competition,  not  merely
controls,  but  determines  normal  value — not  merely  sets  limits
to  the  variations,  but  establishes  a  point  toward  which  they
converge.  It  has  accordingly  been  aptly  represented  by  Adam
Smith  as  a  central  point  about  which  market  values  move,  and
toward  which  they  gravitate.  In  the  instance  of  international
trade,  the  correct  figure  by  which  to  describe  its  action  would
be,  not  a  point  about  which  values  move,  but  a  circle  within
which  they  move.  Accordingly,  it  must  be  carefully  remark-
ed that,  even  in  those  cases  in  which  its  influence  is  operative,
there  is  no  correspondence — at  all  events  no  necessary  corre-
spondence— between  values  and  costs.  The  examples  I  have
already  given  of  the  relative  rates  of  remuneration  prevailing
in  different  countries  sufficiently  establish  this  point.

§  5.  As  regards  the  mode  of  operation  by  which  interna-
tional values  are  determined  under  the  action  of  international
demand,  I  do  not  propose  to  attempt  any  detailed  illustration
here.  The  subject  will  be  found  very  fully  treated  in  text-
books in  every  one's  hands.  There  is  one  point,  however,  on
which  it  seems  to  me  the  correct  doctrine  has  not  been  quite
clearly  laid  down,  and  on  this  it  may  be  well  here  to  attempt
a  few  remarks.

The  transactions  of  international  trade  are  of  course  carried
on  through  the  medium  of  money — that  is  to  say,  of  gold  and
silver;  and  Eicardo  has  shown  that  the  effect  of  the  play  of
international  demand  is  to  produce  such  a  distribution  of  the
precious  metals,  and  such  a  relative  scale  of  prices  in  commer-

23


x^'


^  INTERNATIONAL  VALUES.

cial  countries,  as  on  the  whole  to  cause  the  trade  of  each  coun-
try with  all  others  to  be  carried  on  upon  the  same  terms  as  it
would  be  if  conducted  by  barter.  When  this  state  of  things  is
realized,  the  precious  metals  (so  far  as  they  are  employed  as  a
medium  of  exchange,  and  not  as  a  staple  of  commerce)  cease
to  pass  from  country  to  country ;  and  international  trade  is  in
a  condition  of  equilibrium  *  The  point  I  desire  now  to  call
attention  to  is  the  condition  of  international  demand  which  is-
sues in  this  result.

The  solution  commonly  given  of  this  problem  is  that  com-
mercial equilibrium  is  attained  when  the  value  of  the  imports
into  a  country,  measured  in  gold  or  silver,  the  universal  mon-
ey of  commerce,  is  equal  to  the  value  of  the  exports  from  that
country.  In  the  language  of  Mr.  Mill,  "the  produce  of  a  coun-
try exchanges  for  the  produce  of  other  countries  at  such  values
as  are  required  in  order  that  the  whole  of  her  exports  may
exactly  pay  for  the  whole  of  her  imports."f  Now,  as  a  mat-
ter of  fact,  it  very  rarely  happens  that  the  whole  exports  of
a  country,  even  if  we  take  an  average  of  many  years,  exactly
pay  for  the  whole  of  its  imports ;  nor  can  it  be  truly  said  that
there  is  any  tendency  in  the  dealings  of  nations  toward  this
result. The  evidence  of  this  is  to  be  found  in  any  statistical


*  The  equilibrium  of  commerce  may,  accordingly,  be  defined  for  all  countries,
not  being  themselves  producers  of  the  precious  metals,  as  that  state  of  trade  which
results  in  maintaining  the  real  exchanges,  one  year  with  another,  at  par.  Where
it  happens,  however,  that  a  country  produces  gold  or  silver  for  export,  a  premium
on  the  exchange  is,  in  this  case,  the  normal  state  of  things.  During  the  last  twen-
ty years  the  commercial  equilibrium  has  been  extensively  disturbed  in  most  coun-
tries— the  necessary  consequence  of  the  large  additions  now  being  made  to  our
stock  of  money.

t  In  a  later  passage  at  the  end  of  the  chapter  on  the  ' '  Distribution  of  the  Pre-
cious Metals,"  Mr.  Mill  recognizes  that  there  are  other  causes  than  commercial
which  affect  the  relation  of  imports  and  exports,  and  the  equilibrium  of  commerce.
But  the  recognition,  only  introduced  at  the  end  of  the  discussion,  and  iu  quite  a
summary  way,  seems  scarcely  adequate  to  the  requirements  of  the  case.


COMMERCIAL  EQUILIBRIUM.  355

table  sliowing  the  exports  and  imports  of  different  countries.
An  examinatic^n  of  such  a  table  will  show  that  there  are  coun-
tries which  constantly,  and  as  a  normal  state  of  things,  import
largely  in  excess  of  their  exportations,  while  there  are  others
of  which  the  exports  as  regularly  exceed  the  imports.  In
other  cases,  again,  the  imports  will  be  found  for  a  time  to  have
exceeded  the  exports,  after  which  the  relation  is  inverted,  and
the  exports  begin  to  outstrip  the  imports.  With  such  facts
before  us  we  can  not  easily  admit  that  an  equalization  of  im-
ports and  exports  is  the  necessary  condition  of  a  staple  trade ;
and  this  being  so,  we  have  to  consider  what  that  condition  is.

To  elucidate  this,  a  better  example  can  not  be  found  than
the  external  trade  of  the  United  Kingdom.  I  take  it  as  set
forth  in  the  Statistical  Abstract  for  the  years  between  1856
and  1870  inclusive.  During  the  whole  of  this  time  the  im-
ports remained  constantly  and  largely  in  excess  of  the  exports.
At  the  commencement  of  the  period  the  exports  stood  at,  in
round  numbers,  £115,000,000,  the  imports  at  £172,000,000;
the  imports  thus  exceeding  the  exports  by  the  amount  of
£57,000,000  sterling.  At  the  end,  that  is  to  say  in  the  year
1870,  the  exports  were  £199,000,000,  while  the  imports  reach-
ed £303,000,000,  showing  a  difference  in  favor  of  imports  of
£104,000,000 ;  and  the  returns  of  the  intervening  years  ex-
hibit a  constant  predominance  on  the  same  side,  and  nearly  in
the  same  proportion.  The  question  arises,  How  has  this  large
excess  of  imports  been  paid  for?  The  answer  is,  to  a  small
extent  it  has  been  paid  for  in  services,  principally  in  the  serv-  \J
ices  of  our  mercantile  marine,  performing  as  it  does  a  Urge
proportion  of  the  carrying  trade  of  the  world,  but,  in  the  main,
it  has  not  been  paid  for  at  all.  It  came  to  us  from  foreign  na-
tions, as  all  our  imports  have  come,  in  the  ordinary  course  of
trade,  but  the  proceeds  on  sale  have  never  been  returned  in
any  form  to  those  from  whom  the  goods  came:  they  were
applied  instead  to  the  discharge  of  debts  owing  to  ns — debts,*''^


356  INTERNATIONAL  VALUES.

however,  incurred  on  account  of  transactions  wholly  apart
from  our  export  trade.  In  point  of  fact,  what  has  happened
has  been  this:  Great  Britain  has  for  a  long  time  occupied  the
position  of  a  lender  of  capital  to  other  nations ;  she  has  invest-
ed her  capital  freely  in  her  own  colonies ;  she  has  lent  money
to  many  countries  for  industrial  undertakings,  and  has  been  a
large  purchaser  of  foreign  stocks.  On  all  these  accounts  for-
eign nations,  including  under  this  term  our  own  colonies,  have
become  her  debtors,  and,  in  discharge  of  their  obligations  ac-
cruing in  the  form  of  profits,  interest,  and  dividends  on  stock,
are  compelled  to  send  her,  year  by  year,  value  to  a  large  ex-
tent for  which  no  payment  in  return  is  required.  Here  we
find  the  explanation  of  the  large  normal  excess  of  our  imports
over  our  exports.  But  an  examination  of  the  facts  will  fur-
ther evince  that  this  excess  is,  in  the  case  of  Great  Britain,
the  indispensable  condition  of  commercial  equilibrium;  that
under  any  other  circumstances  the  present  relation  of  prices
between  her  and  foreign  countries,  or,  what  amounts  to  the
same  thing,  the  present  proportion  in  which  they  exchange
their  products,  could  not  be  maintained.  This  will  be  evident
if  we  consider  what  would  be  the  consequence  of  an  equali-
ty of  value  being  established  between  British  imports  and  ex-
ports, the  financial  relations  of  the  country  with  the  rest  of
the  world  being  such  as  they  are.  Foreign  nations  would
have  to  pay  us,  as  now,  for  what  we  export,  and  for  this,  bills
drawn  against  the  goods  they  send  us,  that  is,  our  imports,
would  exactly  suffice.  But  they  owe  us  besides,  say  a  hun-
dred millions,  on  account  of  dividends,  interest,  and  other  obli-
gations. How  are  they  to  discharge  this  latter  liability?  It
is  evident  they  could  do  so  only  in  one  way,  namely,  by  send-
ing us  gold  tO'  the  value  of  the  amount  in  question.  An  ex-
tensive influx  of  gold  from  foreign  countries  to  Great  Britain
would  thus  set  in,  and — so  long  as  the  state  of  international
prices,  and  therefore  of  international  demand,  remained  at  the


COMMERCIAL  EQUILIBRIUM.  357

point  which  had  produced  the  equality  of  imports  and  exports
—  would  continue.  It  is  plain,  however,  that  international
prices  and  demand  could  not  long  remain  steady  under  the  cir-
cumstances supposed.  The  large  and  continued  influx  of  gold
into  England  would  necessarily  be  attended  by  a  rise  of  prices
here,  and  a  foil  in  foreign  countries;  and  this  would  quickly
lead  to  a  change  in  the  demand  of  England  and  of  foreign
countries  for  their  respective  products.  England,  in  possession
of  enlarged  monetary  resources,  and  finding  prices  falling
abroad,  would  extend  her  demand  for  foreign  commodities ;
while,  for  precisely  opposite  reasons,  foreign  countries  would
curtail  their  demand  for  the  commodities  of  England.  En-
glish imports  would  thus  increase,  and  English  exports  dimin-
ish; and  this  would  go  on,  year  by  year,  so  long  as  gold  con-
tinued to  flow.  But  the  question  arises  at  what  point  would
the  process  terminate,  and  trade  find  its  equilibrium?  The
answer  is :  precisely  when  the  excess  of  imports  over  exports
had  attained  its  present  dimensions — when  the  former,  that  is
to  say,  had  exceeded  the  latter  by  a  hundred  millions  sterling ;
for  it  would  only  be  then  that  foreign  countries  could  discharge
all  their  liabilities  to  us  without  remitting  gold.  Gold  would,
therefore,  at  this  point  cease  to  flow,  and  prices  would  remain
at  the  level  they  had  reached.  In  a  word,  the  trade  between
England  and  the  world  would  once  more  have  attained  equi-
librium.

And  now  we  are  enabled  to  answer  the  question  propound-
ed a  few  pages  back.  The  answer  may  be  formulated  thus:
The  state  of  international  demand  which  results  in  commercial
equilibrium  is  realized  when  the  reciprocal  demand  of  trading
countries  produces  such  a  relation  of  imports  and  exports
among  them  as  enables  each  country  by  means  of  her  exports
to  discharge  all  her  foreign  liabilities — a  position  from  which
the  following  corollary  may  be  deduced,  that  all  payments,  due
from  one  country  to  another  or  to  other  countries  on  other  ac*


358  INTERNATIONAL  VALUES.

counts  fban  that  of  imports,  of  a  permanent  character — for  ex-
ample, an  annual  tribute,  interest  on  bori-owed  capital,  divi-
dends on  stock,  and  so  forth  —  and  in  excess  of  similar  pay-
ments due  from  these  latter  to  the  former,  will  be  represented
in  the  foreign  trade  of  that  country  by  an  excess  of  exports
over  imports ;  while,  conversely,  an  excess  of  payments  of  this
character  to  be  received  over  payments  due  will  find  its  com-
mercial expression  in  an  excess  of  imports  over  exports.  This
is,  in  truth,  merely  to  say  that  the  foreign  trade  of  each  coun-
try will  adapt  itself  to  the  pecuniary  requirements  of  that
country  in  relation  to  the  countries  with  which  it  trades.  If  a
country  has  been  a  large  borrower  of  foreign  capital,  and  so  is
indebted  to  foreign  nations  in  annual  interest,  or  if,  again,  her
people  are  much  given  to  traveling  in  foreign  countries,  and  so
have  occasion  to  remit  annually  large  sums  abroad  for  which
no  return  is  required,  under  such  circumstances  her  exports
will  tend  to  exceed  her  imports ;  while,  under  an  opposite  state
of  things,  that  is  to  say,  if  a  country  has  been  a  large  foreign
lender,  or  if  it  be  the  scene  of  travel  for  the  inhabitants  of  oth-
er countries — the  imports  will  tend  to  exceed  the  exports.  With
many,  indeed  with  most  countries,  it  will  happen  that  they  are
debtors  to  foreign  countries  upon  one  score  and  creditors  upon
another ;  and  the  state  of  the  import  and  export  trade  will  be
such  as  the  state  of  the  balance  in  each  case  may  prescribe.
For  example,  Great  Britain  makes  large  remittances  abroad
every  year  to  meet  the  expenses  of  Englishmen  residing  or
traveling  in  foreign  countries.  This  would  tend  to  make  her
exports  exceed  her  imports,  and  would  actually  produce  this
effect,  if  it  were  not  that  the  debts  due  on  this  account  to  for-
eign nations  are  more  than  balanced  by  larger  debts  due  on
other  accounts  by  them  to  us.  The  balance  of  such  non-com-
mercial payments  being,  on  the  whole,  largely  in  favor  of  Great
Britain,  it  results,  as  we  have  seen,  that  her  imports  are,  as  a
rule,  largely  in  excess  of  her  exports. An  illustration  of  the


COMMERCIAL  EQUILIBRIUM.  359

same  principle  in  an  opposite  sense  is  afforded  by  the  foreign
trade  of  the  United  States  previous  to  1860.  As  all  the  world
knows,  the  people  of  the  United  States  had  long  been,  as  they
are  still,  much  addicted  to  foreign  travel :  they  had  also  for  a
long  time  been  extensive  borrowers  in  European  money  mar-
kets. Both  these  practices  combined  to  place  them  under  the
necessity  of  remitting  annually  large  sums  to  Europe  over  and
above  what  they  owed  on  commercial  account;  and  this  obli-
gation was  discharged  in  the  only  way,  in  the  long  run,  pos-
sible, namely,  through  the  medium  of  United  States  products
exported.  Accordingly,  if  we  turn  to  the  Keports  on  the  ex-
ternal trade  of  the  United  States  for  the  period  previous  to
1860,  we  find,  as  the  normal  state  of  things  in  that  trade,  a
pretty  steady  excess  of  exports  over  imports — an  excess  which
in  her  dealings  with  Europe  assumes  very  large  proportions.*

§  6.  The  foregoing  examples  show  the  effects  of  internation-
al lending  and  borrowing  on  the  external  trade  of  nations  after
these  practices  have  issued  in  monetary  relations  of  a  defini-
tive kind.  At  the  commencement,  however,  and  for  so  long
as  the  process  of  incurring  debt  is  still  in  actual  operation,  the
effect  of  such  practices  on  the  foreign  trade  of  a  country  is  ex-
actly the  reverse  of  that  which  is  subsequently  realized.  The
nations  which  have  engaged  to  lend  are,  during  this  period,
those  which  have  pecuniary  obligations  to  discharge ;  the  na-

*  The  total  excess  of  exports  over  imports  on  the  aggregate  external  trade  of
the  United  States  in  the  ten  years  from  1851  to  1860  (inclusive)  was  60,200,000  dol-
lars, that  is  to  say,  an  annual  average  of  about  6,020,000  dollars ;  but  the  excess
of  that  portion  of  it  which  was  carried  on  with  Europe  was  immensely  greater.
The  excess  of  exports  over  imports,  for  example,  in  the  trade  with  Great  Britain
for  the  single  year  1860,  amounted  to  57,600,000  dollars.  This  large  excess,
however,  was  compensated  by  an  excess  the  other  way  in  her  trade  with  several
countries,  chiefly  American,  in  reference  to  which  she  holds  much  the  same  posi-
tion financially  which  Great  Britain  holds  toward  her.  (See  "Wells's  Essay:"
"  Cobden  Club  Essays,"  pp.  513  and  515.)


360  INTERNATIONAL  VALUES.

tions  which  borrow,  those  which  are  entitled  to  receive  pay-
ments in  excess  of  what  is  due  to  them  on  their  ordinary  trade :
and  for  a  time  the  external  trade  of  both  tends  to  adapt  itself
to  this  state  of  things.  The  subject  is  perhaps  of  sufficient  im-
portance to  deserve  some  detailed  illustration.

Let  us,  then,  suppose  an  industrial  colony,  starting  on  its
career,  to  become  a  borrower  of  capital  from  its  mother-coun-
try; and,  for  simplicity  of  illustration,  we  will  assume  that
neither  is  a  producer  of  the  precious  metals,  which,  therefore,
would  only  pass  between  them  in  discharge  of  pecuniary  debts.
The  amount  which  the  mother-country  undertakes  to  lend,  and
the  colony  to  receive,  we  will  set  down  at  one  million  sterling
annually.  This  being  the  position  of  affairs,  it  becomes  neces-
sary that  the  sura  to  be  lent  should  be  remitted  each  year  from
the  mother-country  to  the  colony,  and  this,  it  is  manifest,  can
only  be  done,  either  by  a  remittance  of  gold  to  the  amount  re-
quired, or  by  an  exportation,  in  addition  to  that  ordinarily
taking  place,  of  commodities  to  the  same  value,  or  by  a  com-
bination of  both  these  methods.  If  the  colony  is  content  to
take  the  entire  amount,  or  any  portion  of  it,  in  commodities,
this  would  imply  a  corresponding  increase  in  colonial  imports
over  colonial  exports  ;  for  it  would  only  be  in  the  event  of  the
increased  importation  being  unbalanced  by  exports  from  the
colony  to  the  mother-country  that  the  proceeds  arising  from  it
would  be  available  for  the  mother-country  in  discharge  of  the
loan,  and  there  would  obviously  be  nothing  in  what  had  oc-
curred to  lead  the  latter  to  increase  her  demand  for  colonial
products.  But  it  is  probable  that  at  least  a  portion  of  the  loan
would  be  sent  in  gold ;  and  this  would  operate  indirectly  to-
ward the  same  result.  For  the  flow  of  gold  into  the  colony
year  by  year  would  necessarily  raise  colonial  prices,  while  it
would  tend  in  the  opposite  direction  in  the  mother-country;
and  this,  through  a  play  of  forces  I  have  already  more  than
once  described,  would  be  followed  by  an  increase  of  colonial


LENDING  AND  BOBBOWING.  361

importations,  and  a  corresponding  decline  in  the  exportation
of  colonial  products — a  process  which  would  manifestly  con-
tinue, until  at  length  the  excess  of  commodities  sent  from  the
mother-country  to  the  colony  over  those  received  from  t]ience
would  enable  the  former  to  pay  the  whole  annual  loan  by
means  of  her  commodities  alone.  At  this  point  the  trade  be-
tween them  would  be  in  equilihrioj  the  exportations  from  the
mother-country  having  become  sufficient  to  enable  her  to  dis-
charge by  this  means  all  her  liabilities  to  the  colony.  Up  to
this  stage,  then,  the  effect  of  foreign  borrowing  on  the  colony
would,  so  far  as  we  have  yet  traced  it,  tend  toward  an  excess
in  her  importations  from  the  mother- country  over  her  expor-
tations thither.  This  would  be  the  initial  effect*  But  dur-
ing the  continuance  of  the  process  just  described,  the  grounds
of  an  opposite  state  of  things  would  be  steadily  developed.
With  every  million  sterling  annually  remitted,  the  colony
would  become  indebted  to  the  mother-country  for  the  interest
on  the  amount.  Supposing  the  rate  of  interest  to  be  five  per
cent,  per  annum,  at  the  end  of  the  first  year  the  debt  of  the
colony  to  the  mother-country  would  be  £50,000 :  consequent-
ly, in  making  her  next  remittance  on  account  of  capital,  the
mother-country  would  only  need  to  send  value  to  the  amount,
whether  in  commodities  or  gold,  of  £950,000.  In  the  follow-
ing year,  the  colony  would  owe  on  account  of  interest  £100,000,
which,  still  supposing  the  same  amount  of  capital  to  be  lent,
would  reduce  the  liabilities  of  the  mother  -  country  on  this
score  to  £900,000,  and  this  process  of  gradual  diminution  of
the  mother-country's  extra  commercial  liabilities  to  the  colony
would,  at  the  end  of  twenty  years,  issue  in  this  result,  that  the
sum  due  by  the  colony  on  account  of  interest  would  equal  the

*  If  the  reader  desires  to  verify  the  soundness  of  the  position  thus  far,  he  has
only  to  turn  to  the  statistics  of  the  external  trade  of  some  of  the  leading  colonies
of  Great  Britain,  in  which  the  imports  will  be  found  steadily  and  systematically  to
exceed  the  exports-


362  INTEBNATIONAL  VALUES.

entire  amount  of  the  annual  loan.  What  would  be  the  eflfect
on  the  external  trade  of  the  colony  of  this  growing  indebted-
ness to  the  mother- country  ?  Manifestly  to  neutralize  that  pro-
duced by  the  operation  of  the  influences  developed  in  the  ear-
ly stages  of  these  transactions.  The  obligation  of  the  mother-
country  to  remit  value  to  the  colony,  in  addition  to  what  she
owed  on  account  of  goods  imported  thence,  gave  an  impulse
to  her  export  trade,  and  caused  the  importations  of  the  colony
to  exceed  her  exportations.  The  obligation  of  the  colony  to
discharge  its  growing  liability  to  the  mother-country  would
now,  year  by  year,  operate  to  reduce  the  excess,  until  at  length
the  liabilities  incident  to  the  loans  on  each  side  balancing  each
other,  the  equilibrium  of  trade  would  be  found  in  such  a  rela-
tion of  exports  and  imports  as  would  balance  their  remaining  ob-
ligations— on  the  supposition  that  these  latter  should  consist  ex-
clusively of  commercial  debts,  then  in  an  equality  of  imports  and
exports.  This  state  of  things,  however,  would  be  but  momentary.
We  have  supposed  the  colony  to  have  continued  borrowing
at  the  rate  of  £1,000,000  sterling  annually  for  twenty  years.
At  this  stage,  let  us  make  the  supposition  that  she  suddenly
ceases  to  borrow,  and  observe  what,  on  this  hypothesis,  would
be  her  financial  position  in  relation  to  the  mother-country.  In
the  first  place,  she  would  be  bound  to  pay  £1,000,000  sterling
annually  on  account  of  interest;  but,  no  longer  receiving  the
proceeds  of  the  loan  as  formerly,  she  could  not  set  off  one  obli-
gation against  the  other.  It  would,  therefore,  be  necessary  for
her  to  remit  value  to  the  amount  required — in  other  words,
her  position  relatively  to  the  mother-country  at  this  stage  of
affairs  would  be  financially  identical  with  that  of  the  mother-
country  toward  her  at  the  outset,  with  this  difference,  that  no
new  indebtedness  would  be  growing  up  on  the  side  of  the
mother-country  to  neutralize  the  permanent  obligations  incur-
red by  the  colony.  The  financial  conditions  of  the  case  be-
ing thus  changed,  the  external  commerce  of  the  two  countriea


LENDING  AND  BOEBOWING.  363

would  adapt  itself  to  the  altered  state  of  their  reciprocal  liabil-
ities. Gold  would  once  again  begin  to  flow,  but  the  tide  would
this  time  be  directed  from  the  colony  to  the  mother-country,
and  it  would  be  followed  by  a  series  of  effects  similar  in  char-
acter, though  opposite  in  direction,  to  what  we  have  already
traced.  Year  by  year  the  exports  from  the  colony  to  the
mother-country  would  exceed  its  imports  thence,  until  at  length
the  excess  became  sufficient  to  enable  the  former  to  discharge
its  financial  liability  in  the  products  of  its  own  industry.  The
efiiux  of  gold  would  at  this  point  cease,  and  the  trade  between
the  two  countries  would  be  in  equilibrio  once  more.

We  may  make  yet  another  supposition.  The  colony,  in-
stead of  suddenly  ceasing  to  borrow  at  the  end  of  the  twentieth
year,  might  continue  her  borrowings  on  the  former  scale  of
£1,000,000  annually.  On  this  supposition,  her  debt  to  the
mother-country,  on  account  of  interest,  at  the  end  of  the  twen-
ty-first year  would  be  £1,050,000 ;  but  £1,000,000  of  this  could
now  be  set  off  against  the  annual  loan.  In  other  words,  the
net  balance  due  to  the  mother-country  would  be  £50,000 ;  but,
on  the  supposition  that  the  borrowing  continued,  this  balance
would  grow  year  by  year  in  arithmetical  proportion,  and  would
act  upon  her  external  trade,  in  proportion  to  its  amount,  in  the
manner  already  shown.  In  course  of  time  we  may  assume
that,  as  wealth  increased  in  the  colony,  she  would  have  less
need  of  foreign  capital,  and  would  borrow  less  or  not  at  all,
but  she  would  still  be  liable  to  send  abroad  value  in  excess  of
her  commercial  obligations  to  the  amount  of  the  interest  due
on  all  debts  previously  incurred.  The  normal  state  of  the  ex-
ternal trade  of  the  colony  would,  therefore,  under  the  circum-
stances supposed,  be  one  in  which  her  exports  largely  exceed-
ed her  imports ;  and  such  it  would  continue  to  be  until  either
the  original  debt  was  paid  off,  or  the  colony  herself  had  be-
come a  lender,  and  by  this  means  imposed  a  similar  tribute
upon  other  countries


364  INTEENATIONAL  VALUES.

§  7.  Such  is  the  nature  of  the  influences,  immediate  and  re-
mote, exerted  on  the  external  trade  of  countries  by  the  practice
of  foreign  borrowing.  In  order  to  render  the  principle  clear,
it  was  necessarj'-,  in  the  first  place,  to  exhibit  its  operation  un-
der very  simple  conditions;  and  I,  therefore,  had  recourse  to  a
hypothetical  case.  But  so  much,  it  is  hoped,  having  now  been
accomplished,  it  may  be  well  to  turn  from  our  imaginary  moth-
er-country and  colony  to  an  actual  instance  of  international
lending  and  borrowing  on  a  vast  scale.  During  the  last  thir-
teen years  the  financial  transactions  of  the  United  States  with
Europe  have  far  exceeded  all  former  examples  of  the  same
kind,  and  the  effects  which  they  have  produced,  both  on  her
external  trade  up  to  the  present  time,  and  still  more  on  her
commercial  and  financial  position  with  reference  to  the  future,
have  been  of  a  magnitude  correspondingly  great.  As  furnish-
ing, therefore,  a  striking  practical  illustration  of  the  principles
we  have  been  considering,  and  in  particular  of  the  modes  in
which  international  settlements  on  a  great  scale  are  effected,
it  will,  I  think,  be  profitable  to  consider  here  in  some  detail
the  character  and  scope  of  those  transactions.

It  has  been  already  seen  that  previous  to  1860  the  normal
condition  of  the  external  trade  of  the  United, States  was  one
in  which  the  exports  steadily  exceeded  the  imports,  this  being
the  natural  commercial  outcome  from  the  state  of  her  finan-
cial relations  with  Europe.  But  the  advent  of  the  Civil  War
brought  with  it  a  series  of  events,  each  of  potent  influence,  and
which  in  their  combination  have  sufficed  to  shake  American
trade  to  its  centre,  and  to  render  the  financial  position  of  the
Union  in  presence  of  Europe  unprecedented  and  critical  in  the
extreme.  Of  these  events  the  most  important  were  (1),  the
enactment  of  the  Morrill  tariff  in  1861,  by  which  the  United
States  passed  from  what  was  substantially  a  free  trade  com-
mercial regime  to  one  of  high  protection;  (2),  the  sudden  ces-
sation of  cotton  cultivation,  and,  as  a  consequence  of  this  and


TRADE  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES.  365

of  the  Civil  War,  the  temporary  collapse  of  the  cotton  trade
with  Europe;  (3),  the  creation  of  an  enormous  national  debt,
simultaneously  with  considerable  additions  made  to  State  and
other  debts  previously  contracted,  a  large  proportion  of  the
funds  in  both  cases  being  furnished  by  foreigners ;  and,  lastly,
the  issue  of  an  inconvertible  paper  currency  to  take  the  place
of  the  mixed  system  of  coin  and  convertible  credit  which
formerly  prevailed.  The  passing  of  the  Morrill  tariff  and  the
present  rigidly  protective  system  of  the  United  States  will  be
the  subject  of  special  examination  in  a  future  chapter.  For
our  present  purpose  it  will  be  suflBcient  if  we  attend  to  the
three  last  of  the  occurrences  named,  and  mainly  to  the  conse-
quences involved  in  the  sudden  increase  in  foieign  indebted-
ness, taken  in  connection  with  the  collapse  of  the  cotton  trade.
Let  us  first  observe  the  scale  on  which  the  new  debt  was
created.  It  amounted — we  may  say  in  round  numbers — to
about  five  hundred  millions  sterling,  of  which  some  two  hun-
dred millions  were  taken  by  foreigners.*  In  addition  to  this,
numerous  other  loans  were  effected  on  State,  railway,  mining,
and  other  securities,  reaching  in  the  aggregate  a  very  large
sum,  of  which  the  amount  that  found  its  way  to  Europe  was,
according  to  Mr.  Wells,  not  less  than  one  hundred  millions
sterling.  These  transactions  were  spread  over  several  years —
we  may  say  broadly,  over  the  last  three  years  of  the  war,  and
the  two  or  three  immediately  succeeding.  Eegarding  them  as
they  affected  the  financial  relations  of  Europe  and  the  United
States,  the  result  may  be  thus  stated :  Europe  undertook  to
send  immediately,  that  is  to  say,  as  fast  as  the  several  obliga-
tions were  incurred,  some  £300,000,000  sterling  to  the  United
States;  while  the  United  States  on  her  side  engaged  to  pay
the  interest  on  this  sum  to  Europe  for  all  time,  or  until  the
principal  was  discharged. The  transactions,  as  I  have  said,

*  See  Wells's  Report,  1869.


366  INTEBNATIOXAL  VALUES.

were  spread  over  some  five  or  six  years,  and,  making  allow-
ance for  the  dividends  wliich  would  be  accruing  on  the  invest-
ments from  the  time  they  were  effected,  and  which  might  be
used  as  a  set-oS"  against  the  principal  sums  still  becoming  due
as  new  investments  were  made,  the  amount  required  to  be  sent
from  Europe  to  the  United  States  during  the  period  under  re-
view would  not  be  less  than  some  £40,000,000  sterling  annu-
ally. Under  ordinary  circumstances — in  such  a  state  of  ex-
ternal trade,  for  example,  as  had  existed  previous  to  1860 — so
enormous  and  sudden  an  increase  of  payments  from  one  con-
tinent to  the  other  could  only  have  been  effected  through  the
medium  of  bullion.  The  ordinary  flow  of  gold  from  New
York  to  Europe  would  have  been  suddenly  checked,  and  a
counter-current  would  have  set  in  from  Europe  to  New  York
• — operations  which  could  not  fail  to  produce  a  profound  fer-
ment in  the  money  markets  of  the  two  continents.  As  it  was,
however,  the  settlement  of  these  vast  transactions  occasioned
very  little  disturbance  of  any  kind.  The  explanation  is  main-
ly to  be  found  in  another  of  the  circumstances  to  which  I  have
called  attention,  the  collapse  of  the  cotton  crop ;  for  the  effect
of  this  was  suddenly  to  leave  the  United  States  without  the
means  of  paying  Europe  for  her  ordinary  importations  thence,
swollen  as  these  had  recently  been  by  large  purchases  of  ma-
terial of  war.  In  the  result  the  United  States  stood  largely  a
debtor  to  Europe  on  commercial  account;  while  on  financial
account  the  balance  was  not  less  decidedly  against  Europe;
and,  the  amounts  on  both  sides  nearly  corresponding,  the  set-
tlement of  the  complex  transactions  became  possible  by  the
simple  expedient  of  setting  off  one  class  ,of  obligations  against
the  other.  This,  in  effect,  is  what  was  done.  The  reciprocal
obligations  of  Europe  and  the  United  States  were  thus  adjust-
ed for  the  time,  though  by  a  sort  of  financial  coup  de  main  that
could  not  well  be  repeated ;  and  now  I  invite  the  reader  to
contemplate  the  state  of  things  which  has  supervened.


TRADE  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES.  367

§  8.  On  the  termination  of  the  war  the  cultivation  of  cotton
was,  of  course,  resumed,  and  already  that  staple,  as  an  article
in  the  trade  of  the  United  States  with  Europe,  has  attained  its
former  proportions,  if  not  in  quantity  at  least  in  value.  On
her  other  domestic  exports  (in  which,  be  it  remembered,  specie
is  included)  there  has  been  an  increase,  though  not  a  large  one,
and  only  during  the  last  two  years.  But  while  this  has  been
the  case  as  regards  exports,  her  imports  have  risen  from
835,200,000  dollars,  at  which  they  stood  in  1860,  the  year  pre-
vious to  the  war,  to  617,000,000  dollars,  their  amount  accord-
ing to  the  latest  returns."'^  The  reader  will  remember  that
previous  to  the  war  the  exports  of  the  United  States  had,  as
a  normal  state  of  things,  exceeded  the  imports ;  the  excess  on
this  account  during  the  ten  years  between  1851  and  1860  (in-
clusive) having  amounted  to  an  average  sum  of  6,000,000  dol-
lars annually.  Now,  however,  the  balance  is  on  the  other  side.
It  is  the  imports  which  are  in  excess  of  the  exports. In  the

*  The  following  table  shows  the  state  of  the  external  trade  in  the  years  immedi-
ately preceding  the  Civil  War,  and  will  enable  the  reader  to  compare  the  Import
and  export  trade  of  that  time  with  the  import  and  export  trade  of  the  five  years
ending  1872.  The  earher  figures  I  have  taken  from  Mr.  Wells's  Essay  in  the
Cobden  Club  volume :  for  the  later,  I  am  indebted  to  the  kindness  of  my  friend
Mr.  Horace  White,  of  Chicago :

Imports  (less  re-exports).  Domestic  exports

(including  specie)..-

1858  $251,700,000  $293,700,000

1859  317,800,000  335,800,000

1860  335,200,000  373,100,000

1868  351,200,000  .352,700,000

1869  412,200,000 318,000,000

1870  431,900,000  420,500,000

1871  513,100,000  513,000,000

1872  617,600,000  501,100,000


Annual  average) „  ,

oflastSyearsI^'^''''"''''  $421,060,000

Average  annual  excess  of  imports  over  exports  during  last  6  years,  $44,140,000.


368  INTERNATIONAL  VALUES.

five  years,  1868-1872  (inclusive),  the  excess  amounted  on  an
average  to  44,000,000  dollars  annually ;  while  in  the  last  year
of  the  period  (1872)  it  grew  to  no  less  a  sura  than  116,000,000
dollars.  Now,  from  the  explanations  already  given,  the  reader
will  understand  that  such  a  state  of  external  trade,  assuming  it
be  sound  and  normal,  would  imply  a  state  of  financial  relations
between  the  United  States  and  Europe  in  which  the  former
country  was  largely  a  creditor  of  the  latter;  for  it  is  only  on
this  supposition  that  a  large  excess  of  imports  over  exports
could  continue  consistently  with  national  solvency.  So  far,
however,  from  the  facts  being  in  accordance  with  this  supposi-
tion, they  are  exactly  the  reverse  of  this.  The  United  States
is  largely  a  debtor  to  Europe  on  financial  account,  while  her
exports  are  not  even  sufficient  to  cover  her  commercial  liabili-
ties. It  will  be  worth  while  to  consider  this  position  of  affairs
somewhat  more  in  detail.

As  I  learn  from  figures  given  by  Mr.  Wells  in  his  Report
for  1868,  the  dividends  due  to  European  holders  of  United
States  stocks  of  various  kinds  amounted  in  that  year  to
80,000,000  dollars.  This,  however,  is  but  a  portion  of  her  ex-
tra commercial  obligations  to  Europe.  Her  remittances  to  for-
eign countries  to  meet  the  expenses  of  her  citizens  residing  or
traveling  abroad  reached  in  the  same  year,  according  to  the
same  authority,  so  large  a  sum  as  25,000,000  dollars,  and  it
does  not  appear  that  there  was  any  thing  exceptional  in  this
expenditure.  Lastly,  we  learn  from  Mr.  Wells  that  an  annual
debt  to  foreign  countries  of  24,000,000  dollars  more  is  incur-
red on  account  of  freights  carried  in  foreign  bottoms.  The  ag-
gregate of  these  various  suras  is  129,000,000  dollars,  in  round
numbers  we  may  say  about  £26,000,000  sterling;  and  this
sum  the  United  States  has  to  pay  annually  to  foreign  coun-
tries, over  and  above  what  she  owes  on  account  of  her  impor-
tations. Now,  as  I  have  already  explained,  there  is  but  one
means  by  which  a  nation  can  in  the  last  resort  discharge  her


TRADE  OF  THE UNITED  STATED.  369

liabilities  to  other  nations — namely,  through  the  value  of  her
products  exported.  We  have  seen,  however,  that  the  exports
of  the  United  States,  as  things  now  stand,  iar  from  being  ad-
equate to  the  liquidation  of  her  annual  aggregate  liabilities,
are  insufficient  to  meet  those  incurred  on  commercial  account
alone ;  the  deficiency,  taking  the  average  of  the  last  five
years,  having,  as  I  have  just  shown,  reached  the  large  sum
of  44:,000,000  dollars  —  let  us  say  in  round  numbers  about
£9,000,000  sterling.  We  have  thus  a  balance  of  £9,000,000
on  commercial  account,  plus  a  further  sum  of  £26,000,000  on
extra-commercial  accou.nt — in  all  £35,000,000  sterling — due,
year  by  year,  by  the  United  States  to  foreign  countries,  in  ex-
cess of  what  the  value  of  her  exported  goods  enables  her  to
discharge.  The  question  arises.  How  is  this  liability  to  be  met?
How  it  has  been  met  up  to  the  present  time  I  have  no  means
of  accurately  determining;  but  one  expedient,  we  know,  has
been  brought  extensively  into  requisition.  During  the  period
since  the  war  the  sale  of  American  securities  in  the  markets
of  Great  Britain  and  the  Continent  has  been  large  and  increas-
ing. The  United  States  has  ceased,  indeed,  to  add  to  her  pub-
lic debt,  and  has  even  made  some  progress  in  reducing  it,  but  it
is  probable  that  the  proportion  of  this  debt  in  the  hands  of  Eu-
ropean, holders  has  of  late  increased,  and  it  is  certain  that  the
amount  of  European  capital  which  now  finds  its  way  to  private
investment  in  America  is  immensely  greater  than  it  has  ever
been  at  any  former  period.  Here,  then,  is  a  resource  which,  so
far  as  it  goes,  and  so  long  as  it  lasts,  the  United  States  may
employ  in  liquidation  of  her  uncovered  liabilities;  the  sums
'  payable  by  Europe  in  purchase  of  American  securities  being
as  much  available  in  discharge  of  American  debts  as  if  they
were  obtained  in  payment  of  exports.* Whether  those  sums

*  The  mechanism  through  which  these  international  transactions  are  carried
into  eiFect  is  the  Foreign  Exchanges.  I  have  not,  however,  thought  it  necessary
to  enter  into  this  part  of  the  subject,  as  it  has  been  ah-eady  so  fully  and  lucidly

24


370  INTERNATIONAL  VALUES.

have  hitherto  proved  sufficient  for  the  purpose  required,  must,
for  the  moment,  remain  matter  for  conjecture,  but  it  may  be
confidently  asserted  that,  in  any  case,  they  can  only  be  regard-
ed as  a  temporary  make-shift.  No  nation  can  continue  to  pay
its  foreign  debts  by  the  process  of  incurring  new  debts  to  meet
a  balance  yearly  accruing  against  it ;  yet  this,  in  truth,  is  the
nature  of  the  financial  operation  by  which  of  late  years  the
United  States  has  contrived  to  settle  accounts  with  the  rest  of
the  world.  Even  on  the  supposition  that  European  invest-
ment is  to  continue  on  its  present  scale,  the  interest  upon  it
would,  as  I  have  shown,  come  in  time  to  exceed  the  principal
annually  invested;  while  the  balance  uncovered  by  exports
would  still  remain  absolutely  unprovided  for.  These  consid-
erations lead  me  to  the  conclusion  that  the  present  condition
of  the  external  trade  of  the  United  States  is  essentially  abnor-
mal and  temporary.  If  that  country  is  to  continue  to  discharge
her  liabilities  to  foreigners,  the  relation  which  at  present  ob-
tains between  exports  and  imports  in  her  external  trade  must
be  inverted.  Her  exports  must  once  again,  as  previous  to  1860,
be  made  to  exceed  her  imports,  and  this  by  an  amount  greater
than  the  excess  of  that  former  time  in  proportion  as  her  finan-
cial obligations  to  foreign  countries  have  in  the  interval  in-
creased. This,  it  seems  to  me,  is  a  result  which  may  be  pre-
dicted with  the  utmost  confidence.  The  end  may  be  reached
either  by  an  extension  of  exportation,  or  by  a  curtailment  of
importation,  or  by  combining  both  these  processes,  but  by  one
means  or  otlier  reached  it  will  need  to  be.  It  is  simply  the
condition  of  her  remaining  a  solvent  nation.  The  people  of
that  country  ma}^,  therefore,  if  I  am  right  in  this  speculation,
look  forward  to  witnessing  a  result  for  which  the  promoters
of  their  present  commercial  policy  have  often  sighed  —  they


expounded  by  Mr.  Goschen  ia  his  work  on  the  "Foreign  Exchanges,"  to  which
the  reader  is  referred.


TRADE  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES.  371

may  expect,  before  many  years,  to  see  United  States  com-
modities selling  in  foreign  countries  in  vastly  greater  quanti-
ties than  the  commodities  of  foreign  countries  in  the  markets
of  the  United  States.  How  far  their  estimate  of  this  condition
of  their  trade  will  be  affected  by  the  circumstance  that  a  large
proportion  of  the  proceeds  from  those  augmented  foreign  sales
will  find  its  way  into  European  pockets,  is  a  point  on  whicli  it
would  be  scarcely  becoming  in  the  present  writer  to  offer  an
opinion.*

The  conclusion  just  stated  suggests  a  further  reflection.  A
change  in  the  relation  of  exports  and  imports  in  the  trade  of
a  country  can  only  be  effected  through  a  change  in  relative
prices  (measured  in  gold  or  silver)  as  they  exist  in  that  coun-
try and  in  those  with  which  it  trades.  To  establish,  therefore,
an  excess  of  exports  over  imports  in  the  trade  of  the  United
States,  in  lieu  of  the  balance  the  other  way  which  now  exists,
prices  there  must  be  lowered  in  relation  to  prices  in  Europe,
This  may  be  accomplished  partly  by  an  advance  in  prices
here  not  shared  by  the  United  States,  as  in  fact  has  already
happened  in  the  case  of  some  important  commodities;  but  it

*  In  the  Times's  Philadelphia  Con-espondent's  letter  of  October  17,  1873,  it  is
stated  that  the  imports  from  the  United  States  had  at  that  time  begun  to  decline,
the  diminution  for  the  first  nine  months  of  1873,  as  compared  with  the  same  pe-
riod for  1872,  having  amounted  to  nearly  $35,000,000.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is
observed  that  the  exports  from  New  York  during  the  same  time  have  increased  by
$32,000,000.  The  writer  goes  on  to  remark  :  "  This  decrease  in  imports  and  in-
crease in  exports  shows  a  balance  of  ti'ade  in  our  favor,  and  explains  the  decline
in  sterling  exchange.  The  New  York  Journal  of  Commerce  is  jubilant  at  the
prospect ;  declares  that  the  tide  of  gold  must  flow  toward  America,  and  announces
that  the  balance  of  trade  being  in  our  favor  the  '  sovereigns  of  Great  Britain  must
melt  their  pride  in  the  crucibles  of  the  American  mint.'"  The  New  York  Jour-
nal  of  Commerce  is  overhasty  in  its  conclusions.  In  its  exultation  it  overlooks
the  circumstance  that  the  favorable  balance  will  be  all  too  small  to  discharge  the
liabilities  of  the  United  States  to  Europe  on  account  of  interest  and  dividends  on
American  securities  held  on  this  side.  The  sovereigns  of  Great  Britain,  there-
fore, will  have  no  need  to  melt  their  pride  in  American  crucibles  for  the  present.


372  INTERNATIONAL  VALVES.

is  probable  that  the  end  will  be  reached  mainly  through  a  de-
cline of  prices  on  the  other  side.  A  considerable  fall  of  gen-
eral prices,  however,  is  a  remedy  to  which  manufacturers  and
merchants  will  only  submit  when  pushed  to  extremity.  It
will,  therefore,  only  come  when  credit  has  been  strained  to
the  utmost,  and  a  catastrophe  is  seen  to  be  inevitable;  and
then  it  will  probably  come  with  a  crash.  For  these  reasons
I  should  be  disposed  to  look  forward  to  the  immediate  future
of  American  trade  as  a  period  of  much  disturbance  and  fluctu
ntion,  culminating,  it  is  possible,  from  time  to  time  in  commer-
cial crises.*

In  offering  these  remarks  on  the  prospective  character  of  the
external  commerce  of  the  United  States,  I  have  deliberately
abstained  from  adverting  to  some  contingencies,  and  in  partic-
ular to  two,  which  can  not  fail,  more  or  less  seriously,  to  affect
it— I  mean  the  course  that  country  may  adopt  with  regard  to
Protection,  as  well  as  with  regard  to  the  redemption  of  her  pa-
per money.  I  have  thus  far  avoided  these  topics,  because  I  do
not  conceive  that  any  decision  she  may  come  to  with  reference
to  either — powerfully  operative  as  no  doubt  it  will  be  on  her
future  commercial  fortunes  in  various  directions — can  possibly
affect  the  particular  issue  to  which  the  preceding  remarks  have
been  addressed.  A  persistent  policy  of  Protection  will,  no
doubt,  have  the  effect  of  preventing  the  due  expansion  of  her
external  trade  in  the  future  as  it  has  done  in  the  past,  if  it  does
not  lead  to  its  positive  curtailment ;  while  the  adoption  of  free
trade  would  as  certainly  tend  to  its  rapid  development,  and
thus  greatly  relieve  the  extreme  tension  of  the  situation.  But,
under  all  circumstances,  if  the  United  States  is  to  remain  a

*  As  I  write,  the  news  of  the  commercial  crisis  in  New  York  (19th  September,
1873)  has  reached  me.  From  the  accounts  M'e  have  yet  received  it  would  seem
to  have  had  its  immediate  origin  in  railway  speculation :  hoAV  far  the  collapse  may
be  connected  with  the  causes  to  which  I  have  been  calling  attention,  the  sequel
will  probably  show.


TRADE  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES.  373

solvent  nation,  she  must  contrive  to  send  a  larger  value  out  of
tiie  country  than  is  received  into  it,  and  this  larger  value  can
take  no  other  form  than  the  products  of  her  industry.  Free-
trader or  protectionist,  therefore,  an  excess  of  exports  over  im-
ports in  her  foreign  trade,  sufficient  in  amount  to  discharge  her
international  liabilities,  is  a  condition  she  can  not  evade.

I  may  venture  on  a  further  remark.  It  appears  to  me  that
the  influence,  attributed  by  many  able  writers  in  the  United
States  to  the  depreciation  of  the  paper  currency  as  regards  its
effects  on  the  foreign  trade  of  the  country,  is,  in  a  great  degree,
purely  imaginary,  founded,  as  I  conceive  it  to  be,  upon  an  erro-
neous view  of  the  circumstances  which  determine  international
demand.  An  advance  in  the  scale  of  prices,  measured  in  gold^
in  a  country,  if  not  shared  by  other  countries,  will  at  once  af-
fect its  foreign  trade,  giving  an  impulse  to  importations,  and
checking  the  exportation  of  all  commodities  other  than  gold.
A  similar  effect  is  very  generally  attributed  by  American
writers  to  the  action  on  prices  of  the  greenback  inconvertible
currency.  But  it  may  be  easily  shown  that  this  is  a  complete
illusion.  Foreigners  do  not  send  their  products  to  the  United
States  to  take  back  greenbacks  in  exchange.  The  return  which
they  look  for  is  either  gold  or  the  commodities  of  the  country ;
and  if  these  have  risen  in  price  in  proportion  as  the  paper
money  has  been  depreciated,  how  should  the  advance  in  paper
prices  constitute  an  inducement  for  them  to  send  their  goods
thither?  The  nominal  gain  in  greenbacks  on  the  importation
is  exactly  balanced  by  the  nominal  loss  when  those  greenbacks
come  to  be  converted  into  gold  or  commodities.  To  put  the
argument  in  a  still  more  practical  shape:  Whatever. the  im-
porting merchant  gains  in  the  increased  price  at  which  he  sells
his  goods,  precisely  the  same  amount  he  looses  when  he  comes
to  purchase  a  bill  by  which  to  remit  the  proceeds  of  the  sale  to
the  country  whence  the  goods  came.  The  nominal  premium
on  the  bill  will  just  neutralize  what  he  had  appeared  to  gain


374  INTERNATIONAL  VALUES.

on  the  sale  through  the  depreciation  of  the  paper  money.  It
is  true  the  gain  may,  in  particular  cases,  exceed  the  loss,  but  if
it  does,  the  loss  will  also,  in  other  cases,  exceed  the  gain.  On
the  whole,  and  on  an  average,  they  can  not  but  be  the  equiva-
lents of  each  other.  In  making  these  remarks  the  reader  will
not  understand  me  as  contending  that  a  depreciated  currency
is  absolutely  without  influence  on  the  foreign  trade  of  a  coun-
try. So  far  as  it  introduces  uncertainty  and  risk  into  commer-
cial transactions  it  no  doubt  affects  foreign  as  well  as  domestic
trade,  and  affects  both  injuriously ;  but  this  is  an  entirely  dif-
ferent thing  from  acting  as  an  encouragement  to  importation,
and  a  check  upon  exportation — the  effect  attributed  to  a  de-
preciated currency  by  the  writers  to  whose  views  I  have  re-
ferred.


CHAPTER  IV.

FREE  TRADE  AND  PROTECTION.

§  1.  The  foregoing  discussions  have. exhibited  the  conditions
under  which  international  trade  arises,  and  the  nature  of  the
advantages  that  flow  from  it.  It  has  been  seen  that  nations
only  trade  with  one  another  when  by  doing  so  they  can  satisfy
their  desires  at  smaller  sacrifice  or  cost  than  by  direct  pro-
duction of  the  commodities  which  minister  to  them.  The  es-
tablishment of  this  position  is  the  justification  of  the  doctrine
of  free  trade ;  since  it  is  manifest  that,  if  nations  only  engage
in  trade  when  an  advantage  arises  from  their  doing  so,  any  in-
terference with  their  free  action  in  trading  can  only  have  the
effect  of  debarring  them  from  an  advantage.  For  those,  there-
fore, who  accept  the  economic  theory  of  international  trade,
no  further  proof  of  the  essential  soundness  of  this  fundamental
principle  of  commercial  policy  is  needed.  Nevertheless,  I  am
unwilling  to  leave  the  subject  of  these  chapters  without  some
fuller  consideration  than  has  yet  been  given  to  it  of  the  great
controversy,  not  yet,  unfortunately,  extinct,  of  Free  Trade  ver-
sus Protection.  I  have  said,  "not  yet  extinct:  perhaps  I  should
rather  liave  said,  even  now  active  and  glowing  with  something
of  its  pristine  fervor;  for  we  have  only  to  turn  our  eyes  to
France,  or  to  the  United  States,  not  to  speak  of  our  own  col-
onies, to  see  with  what  vigor,  and  I  regret  to  say  with  what
success,  the  venerable  sophism  still  maintains  itself,  alike  in  the
public  press  and  in  national  legislatures.  Under  such  circum-
stances an  examination  of  the  specific  doctrine  of  Protection
will  even  yet,  perhaps,  not  seem  altogether  out  of  date;  and,


376  FREE  TBABE  AND  PROTECTION.

thanks  to  Mr.  Wells,  the  United  States  Commissioner,  we  are
not  without  abundant  illustrations  of  the  recent  working  of
the  principle,  which  have  only  to  be  duly  pondered  in  the  light
of  economic  theory,  to  teach  a  lesson  such  that  he  who  runs
may  read.

§  2.  The  system  of  Protection  naturally  grew  out  of  the  sys-
tem of  the  Balance  of  Trade.  They  were  not,  indeed,  so  much
distinct  systems  as  different  aspects  of  the  same  system.  As
the  Balance  of  Trade  doctrine  began  to  give  way,  that  of  Pro-
tection was  gradually  inserted  in  its  place,  as  it  were  to  under-
pin the  tottering  edifice.  The  aim  of  the  former  was  to  enrich
the  country  by  drawing  to  it  the  precious  metals;  that  of  the
latter  to  do  so  by  encouraging  native  industry;  but  the  means
adopted  were  identical,  as  was  also  the  point  of  view  from
which  the  supporters  of  the  two  theories  regarded  commercial
problems.* Consistently  carried  out,  the  Balance  of  Trade


*  And  I  may  add  the  criterion  by  which  they  tested  results.  This  has  been
quite  unequivocally  evinced  by  the  recent  controversies  in  France.  In  a  statement
made  before  a  commission  of  inquiry,  appointed  just  before  the  war,  M.  Pouyer-
Quertier  maintained  that  French  agriculture  in  a  period  of  twelve  years,  from  1858
to  1869,  had  suffered  a  loss  of  300,000,000  francs.  And  what  was  the  process  of
reasoning  by  which  he  arrived  at  this  conclusion  ?  Simply  this.  It  appeared  that
during  the  period  in  question  French  imports  had  exceeded  French  exports  by  the
amount  stated,  and  from  this  fact  M.  Pouyer-Quertier  drew  the  inference  that
France  was  a  loser  to  this  amount  on  her  foreign  trade.  Why  he  supposes  the
loss  to  have  fallen  exclusively  on  agriculture  I  do  not  quite  perceive.  A  reply  to
this  statement  was  made  by  M.  De  Kergolay  in  a  speech  delivered  by  him  a  few
months  since  as  President  of  the  French  Central  Agricultural  Society.  That  re-
ply is  perhaps  sufficiently  conclusive  as  against  M.  Pouyer-Quertier,  but  coming
as  it  does  from  a  free-trader  certainly  does  not  give  one  a  high  idea  of  the  present
state  of  economic  science  in  France.  M.  De  Kergolay  first  objects  to  the  period
selected  by  the  protectionist  advocate  for  comparison ;  he  next  challenges  the  cor-
rectness of  the  calculations  on  which  the  result  is  based ;  lastly,  he  asks  what  does
the  fact  prove.  "The  importation  of  products  foreign  to  the  soil  can  not  be  re-
garded as  a  loss  to  the  country.  Coffee  and  cocoa,  tea  and  spices,  woods  for  dye-
I


MODIFIED  DEMANDS.  377

system  must  have  extinguished  foreign  trade,  since  it  is  demon-
strable that  the  permanently  favorable  bahmce  which  it  aimed
at  producing  is  not  capable  of  realization ;  and  consistently
carried  out,  Protectionism  would  put  an  end,  if  not  to  all  for-
eign trade,  at  least  to  all  such  as  furnished  us  with  commodities
capable  of  being  produced  in  the  protected  country ;  for  the
essence  of  the  doctrine  is,  to  encourage  native  industry  by  ex-
cluding the  products  of  foreign  industry,  wherever  these  come
into  competition  with  commodities  which  native  industry  can
produce.  Protectionists,  however,  rarely  now  attempt  to  carry
out  their  doctrine  in  its  rigor,  and,  instead  of  requiring  an  ab-
solute exclusion  of  foreign  products,  are  commonly  content  to
demand  such  a  measure  of  protection  as,  to  borrow  their  lan-
guage, shall  put  the  home  producer  on  a  footing  of  equality
with  his  foreign  rival.  If  the  latter  possesses  no  advantage
over  the  former,  then  the  trade,  as  the  phrase  goes,  "  can  stand
alone,"  and  no  protective  duty  is  asked  for ;  but  if  the  foreign-
er possesses  an  advantage,  this  must  be  neutralized  by  a  coun-
tervailing duty.  The  reader  who  has  followed  the  foregoing
exposition  of  the  grounds  of  international  trade  will  perceive
that  this  more  modest  form  of  the  doctrine  would,  in  its  prac-
tical issue,  be  entirely  tantamount  to  the  former,  since,  as  was
there  shown,  the  existence  of  international  trade  rests  on  the
different  productive  capacities  with  respect  to  particular  com-
modities of  different  countries :  if,  therefore,  each  nation  is  to

ing  or  working  pui-poses,  are  not  indigenous  to  the  soil  of  France.  They  must
be  imported,  but  how  can  the  necessary  cost  be  set  down  as  a  national  loss  ?"  Ap-
parently, if  the  imported  articles  were  indigenous,  the  validity  of  the  protectionist's
conclusion  would  be  admitted  by  this  champion  of  free  trade.  As  I  have  shown
in  the  last  chapter,  the  relation  of  imports  to  exports  is  determined  by  causes  quite
independent  of  the  character  of  the  tariff.  Protection  will  indeed  diminish  the
aggregate  amount  of  exports  and  imports  taken  together,  but,  whatever  be  the
commercial  regime,  the  relation  between  them  will  be  such  as  the  position  of  the
country,  taking  all  her  international  credits  and  obligations  into  account,  shall  re-
quire.— See  Times,  September  18,  1873.


378  FBEE  TRADE  AND  PROTECTION.

set  itself  to  neutralize  this  difference,  wherever  it  appears,  by
means  of  countervailing  duties,  it  is  plain  that  the  triumph  of
the  system  would  be  the  annihilation  of  foreign  trade.  If  in-
deed equality  in  productive  conditions  could  be  attained  by
what  might  be  described  as  a  process  of  "  leveling  up ;"  if
Protection  could  contrive  that  every  commodity  should  be  pro-
duced in  every  country  with  the  same  facility  with  which  it  is
produced  on  the  spot  of  the  globe  most  suitable  to  its  produc-
tion —  though  even  so  it  would  annihilate  foreign  trade  —  there
would  yet  be  something  to  be  said  for  this  mode  of  attain-
ing equality.  It  may,  however,  be  doubted  if  the  gain  which
might  accrue  in  material  comforts  from  the  increased  produc-
tiveness of  the  earth  would  not  be  more  than  counterbalanced
by  the  intellectual  and  moral  loss  which  would  result  from  the
withdrawal  of  the  principal  motive  to  the  intercourse  of  man-
kind. Protectionists,  however,  not  being  able  to  "  level  up,"
propose  to  "level  down,"  and  aim  at  reaching  equality  by,  so
to  speak,  handicapping  commercial  countries  against  each  oth-
er, making  each  carry  weight  in  the  markets  of  the  others  ex-
actly sufficient  to  counterpoise  its  special  advantages.  Such  is
the  theory  of  trade  which  now,  it  seems,  finds  favor  on  the  oth-
er side  of  the  Atlantic*  In  the  proposal,  however,  to  sacrifice
the  very  ends  of  industry  and  commerce  in  order  to  promote
equality,  we  may,  perhaps,  detect  the  savor  rather  of  a  French
than  of  an  American  origin.  A  theory  essentially  the  same
was  propounded  a  few  years  ago  by  M.  Alby,  in  the  Bevue  des
Deux  Mondes,  in  an  essay  written  with  much  elaboration  and
parade  of  scientific  precision,  and,  it  must  be  presumed,  with
skill  and  effect,  since  the  exposition  was  accepted  by  protec-
tionists in  the  United  States  as  a  triumphant  statement  of  their
argument,  and  met  with  consideration  from  even  free -trade
journals  in  that  country. Under  these  circumstances  I  shall

*  See  Mr.  Wells's  Keports  and  Essays  passim.


M.  ALBY'S  THEORY.  879

make  no  apology  for  devoting  a  brief  space  to  the  considera-
tion of  the  protectionist  case  as  stated  by  M.  Alby.

§  3.  The  position  taken  by  M.  Alby  in  his  article  in  the
Revue  des  Deux  Mondes"^  is,  that  the  doctrine  of  Protection  is
in  theory  sound,  though  he  admits  that  in  old  countries  like
France  it  is  not  possible  fairly  to  carry  it  into  effect.  For  this
reason  he  is  in  favor  of  a  modified  free  trade  for  France  in  her
actual  circumstances.  But,  while  taking  this  line  as  a  practi-
cal politician,  he  strenuously  contends  for  the  theoretic  sound-
ness of  the  protectionist's  view.  According  to  M.  Alby,  the
apparent  triumph  which  free-traders  commonly  gain  over  their
opponents  arises  from  the  imperfect  way  in  which  the  protec-
tionist case  is  put.  Free-traders  attack  the  system  in  detail,
joining  issue  on  each  particular  duty ;  whereas  the  strength  of
the  protectionist  case  lies  in  its  ensemble,  in  its  completeness  as
a  whole.

"  Let  us  take,  for  instance,"  says  M.  Alby,  "  the  case  of  mining  indus-
try. Every  one  needs  iron,  and  iron  is  produced  in  France  by  a  very  re-
stricted number  of  furnaces ;  and  here  is  the  way  free-traders  put  the
case.  '  The  price  of  iron,'  say  they,  '  is  raised  by  the  customs'  duty  on
foreign  iron.  Is  it  just  that  thirty-eight  millions  of  Frenchmen  should
pay  more  for  iron  than,  in  the  absence  of  duty,  it  is  worth,  in  order  to
enrich  a  few  iron-masters  ?'  If  we  go  no  further  than  this — if  the  case
remains  isolated,  only  one  answer  is  possible.  With  the  exception  of  the
iron  -  masters,  every  one  will  exclaim,  '  No,  it  is  not  just,  it  is  an  odious
monopoly !'  Very  good ;  but  let  us  put  a  similar  case  for  another  indus-
try, the  manufacture  of  cloth.  The  answer  will  be  the  same.  Only  this
time  the  cloth  manufacturer  will  turn  round  on  the  iron-master  and  say,
'Where  is  your  grievance?  I  pay  more  for  your  iron  than  I  should
have  to  pay  for  foreign  iron  if  it  entered  free.  Is  it  not  just  that  you  pay
me  a  higher  price  for  my  cloth  than  it  might  be  purchased  at  abroad  ?'
The  argument  is  unanswerable.  The  iron-master  will  be  forced  to  ac-
knowledge this. As  we  run  successively  the  entire  circle  of  industrial

*  See  the  number  for  16th  October,  1869.


380  FREE  TRADE  AND  PROTECTION.

and  agricultural  production,  with  each  new  industry  that  we  take  ac-
count of,  the  area  of  the  apparent  injustice  will  be  continually  narrowing
till  we  end  by  finding  ourselves  in  presence  of  a  series  of  people  paying
dearer  for  what  they  purchase,  but  making  others  pay  dearer  for  what
they  sell.  They  have  no  ground  for  mutual  reproach.  Well,  such,"  con-
tinues M.  Alby,  "  is  the  system  of  Protection  in  its  ensemble.  It  is  a  sort
of  mutual  assurance  against  foreign  competition,  an  associative  pact
which  embraces  the  entire  country.  Each  consents  to  pay  for  all  the
products  he  requires  a  price  augmented  by  the  customs'  tariff,  on  the
condition  of  obtaining  for  his  own  products  in  the  home  market  a  price
equally  augmented  by  the  same  means,  so  that  they  shall  return  him  a
profit."

M.  Alby  apparently  overlooks  the  fact  that  it  is  only  those
industries  which  are  carried  on  under  a  relative  disadvantage
that  stand  in  need  of  protection  ;  and  that  consequently — since
in  no  country  are  all  industries  equally  favored  by  nature —
the  consummation  he  contemplates  with  so  much  satisfaction
is  incapable  of  realization  in  any  part  of  the  world,  daring  any
stage  of  commercial  progress.  How,  for  example,  could  the
wine-growers  or  silk-weavers  of  France,  or  again,  how  could
the  Western  farmers  or  Southern  cotton-planters  of  the  United
States,  be  compensated,  under  M.  Alby's  system,  for  the  price
they  pay  for  foreign  imports  in  consequence  of  a  protective
tariff?  By  obtaining  in  return,  forsooth,  a  protective  duty,  in
France  on  wine  and  silk,  and  in  the  United  States  on  wheat
and  cotton!  But  passing  by  this  "little  rift  within  the  lute,"
let  us,  in  order  to  exhibit  the  radical  absurdity  of  this  pretty
theory,  assume  that  all  branches  of  production  in  France  stand
equally  in  need  of  protection.  The  argument  is,  that,  provided
each  person  receives  in  his  capacity  of  producer  a  price  for  his
commodity  as  much  higher  than  its  price  under  free  trade  as
that  which  he  pays  in  his  capacity  of  consumer  for  what  he
requires,  no  harm  will  be  done.  Accepting  this  view,  a  per-
fect system  of  Protection  might  seem  to  be  tantamount  simply
to  a  general  depreciation  of  money. All  persons  would  re-


M.  ALBY'S  THEORY.  381

ceive  higher  money  remuneration  than  under  free  trade,  and
would  pay  this  away  in  higher  prices — a  consummation,  the
advantage  of  which  to  native  industry  is  not  apparent.  This
mode  of  conceiving  the  case,  however,  implies  a  most  inade-
quate appreciation  of  the  consequences  involved  in  M.  Alby's
scheme,  M.  Alby  fails  to  perceive  that  the  high  price  which
Protection  secures  is  rendered  necessary  in  consequence  of  the
more  onerous  conditions  under  which  native  industry,  tempted
by  its  inducements,  is  encouraged  to  work.  Frenchmen  are
encouraged  to  produce  iron  from  ores  of  inferior  quality  by
the  high  price  secured  to  them  through  their  protective  tariff.
In  the  absence  of  Protection  they  would  obtain  their  iron  on
more  favorable  terms — at  a  smaller  sacrifice  of  labor  and  ab-
stinence— by  exchanging  for  it  their  wines  and  silks  with  En-
gland. A  similar  remark  applies  to  every  protective  duty
that  is  really  effective  for  its  purpose.  It  necessarily  implies
production  carried  on  under  more  onerous  conditions.  On  the
supposition,  therefore,  that  M.  Alby's  system  were  feasible,  the
practical  result  would  be,  not  simply  a  general  rise  of  prices,
but  an  increase  in  the  cost  —  cost,  be  it  remembered,  in  the
sense  not  of  mere  money  outlay,  but  of  actual  difficulty,  of  real
sacrifice  —  of  producing  every  article  the  creation  of  French
industr}'-.  All  Frenchmen  would  be  compelled  to  labor  half
as  hard  again,  and  to  save  half  as  much  again,  in  order  to
procure  every  necessary  and  comfort  they  enjoy.  But  then
equality  and  justice  would  be  realized.  No  doubt,  just  as
they  might  be  realized  by  compelling  every  one  to  move
about  with  a  weight  attached  to  his  leg.  The  weight  would,
indeed,  be  an  impediment  to  locomotion,  but  provided  it  were
in  each  case  exactly  proportioned  to  the  strength  of  the  limb
which  drew  it,  no  one,  according  to  M.  Alby's  way  of  looking
at  things,  would  have  any  reason  to  complain.  No  one  would
walk  as  fast  as  if  his  limbs  were  free,  but  then  his  neighbor
would  be  equally  fettered,  and  if  it  took  him  twice  as  long  to


883.  FREE  TRADE  AND  PROTECTION.

reach  his  destination  as  before,  he  would  at  least  have  com-
pany on  his  journey.  Strange  that  such  speculation  should
find  acceptance  in  the  country  of  Say  and  Bastiat  I

§  4.  Such  is  the  theory  of  Protection  in  its  most  general
form,  as  set  forth  by  one  of  its  latest  expositors,  £ind  accepted
in  the  country  in  which  its  influence  is  at  present  supreme,  al-
most to  the  degree  of  absolutely  controlling  legislation.  But
it  will  be  instructive  to  enter  into  the  argument  in  somewhat
more  of  detail.  As  I  have  said,  the  position  taken  in  the
United  States  is,  that  Protection  is  only  needed  and  only  asked
for  where  American  industry  is  placed  under  a  disadvantage
as  compared  with  the  industry  of  foreign  countries.  What,
then,  we  have  to  ask,  in  the  first  place,  is  the  criterion  by  which
the  alleged  disadvantage  attaching  to  American  industry  is  es-
tablished ?  As  we  learn  from  Mr.  Wells,*  the  criterion  taken  is
the  cost  of  production  of  the  articles  claiming  protection,  which
again,  he  informs  us,  is  estimated  almost  exclusively  by  refer-
ence to  the  money  price  of  labor.  The  rates  of  wages  meas-
ured in  money  are  higher  in  the  United  States  than  in  Europe,
and  therefore,  it  is  argued,  the  cost  of  producing  commodities
is  higher  there  than  here.  It  is  strange  that  those  who  em-
ploy this  argument  should  not  have  perceived  that  it  proves
too  much.  The  high  rates  of  wages  in  the  United  States
are  not  peculiar  to  any  branch  of  industry,  but  are  universal
throughout  its  whole  range. If,  therefore,  a  high  rate  of  wages

*  "In  most  of  the  tariflf  discussions  that  have  taken  place  of  late  in  the  United
States,  the  question  of  the  necessity  and  extent  of  Protection  is  made  to  turn  al-
most wholly  upon  the  difference  in  the  cost  [price]  of  labor  employed  in  domestic
as  compared  with  foreign  industry — which  differences,  as  already  shown,  are  cer-
tainly very  considerable.  And  it  is  also  very  generally  taken  for  granted  in  such
discussions  that  the  nominal  rate  paid  for  wages,  of  itself  alone,  or  at  least  in  a
very  great  degree,  determines  both  the  cost  of  production  and  the  social  condition
and  prosperity  of  the  laborer." (Wells's  Report  for  1868,  pp.  69,  70.)


COST  OF  PRODUCTION.  383

proves  a  higb.  cost  of  production,  and  a  high  cost  of  produc-
tion proves  a  need  for  Protection,  it  follows  that  the  farmers
of  Illinois  and  the  cotton-planters  of  the  Southern  States  stand
in  as  much  need  of  fostering  legislation  as  the  cotton-spinners
of  New  England.or  the  iron-masters  of  Pennsylvania  I  A  cri-
terion.which  leads  to  such  results  must,  I  think,  be  regarded
as  sufficiently  condemned.  The  fallacy  is,  in  truth,  the  same
as  that  which  so  awkwardly  marred  the  pretty  theory  of  M.
Alby,  who,  as  we  saw,  in  carrying  the  boon  of  Protection  with
impartial  hand  round  the  whole  circle  of  the  industries,  unfor-
tunately overlooked  the  trifling  circumstance  that  all  indus-
tries are  not  in  each  country  equally  favored  or  disfavored  by
nature,  and  have  not,  therefore,  equal  need  of  his  protecting
care.  If  American  protectionists  are  not  prepared  to  demand
protective  duties  in  favor  of  the  Illinois  farmer  against  the
competition  of  his  English  rival,  they  are  bound  to  admit  ei-
ther that  a  high  cost  of  production  is  not  incompatible  with  ef-
fective competition,  or  else  that  a  high  rate  of  wages  does  not
prove  a  high  cost  of  production  ;  and  if  this  is  not  so  in  Illi-
nois, then  I  wish  to  know  why  the  case  should  be  different  in
Pennsylvania  or  in  New  England.  If  a  high  rate  of  wages  in
the  first  of  these  States  be  consistent  with  a  low  cost  of  produ-
cing corn,  why  may  not  a  high  rate  of  wages  in  Pennsylvania
be  consistent  with  a  low  cost  of  producing  coal  and  iron?  or  a
high  rate  of  wages  in  New  England  be  consistent  with  a  low
cost  of  producing  calico?  I  must  own  that  Mr.  Wells's  treat-
ment of  this  branch  of  the  argument  is,  to  my  mind,  eminently
unsatisfactory.  It  is  true  he  objects  to  the  protectionist  cri-
terion of  cost  of  productions-money  wages,  but  only  on  the
ground  that  it  fails  to  take  account  of  the  varying  efficiency
of  labor,  and  of  the  varying  purchasing  power  of  money  in  re-
lation to  the  laborer's  requirements.* The  fallacy,  however,


*  See  his  Report  for  1868,  page  70. I  must  acknowledge,  too,  that  his  reply


384  FREE TRADE  AND  PROTECTION.

involved  in  that  criterion  goes  far  deeper  than  this,  and  is
only  fully  exposed  when  exhibited  as  inverting  the  real  rela-
tion of  facts.  As  I  have  already  proved,*  the  rate  of  wages,
whether  measured  in  money  or  in  the  real  remuneration  of  the
laborer,  affords  an  approximate  criterion  of  the  cost  of  produc-
tion, either  of  money  or  of  the  commodities  that  enter  into  the
laborer's  real  remuneration,  hut  in  a  sense  the  inverse  of  that  in
which  it  is  understood  in  the  argument  under  consideration:  in
other  words,  a  high  rate  of  wages  indicates  not  a  high  but  a
low  cost  of  production  for  all  commodities,  measured  in  which
the  rate  of  wages  is  high  ;  as,  on  the  other  hand,  a  low  rate  of
wages  indicates  a  high  cost  for  all,  measured  in  which  the  rate
is  low.  Thus  in  the  United  States  the  rate  of  wages  is  high,
whether  measured  in  gold  or  in  the  most  important  articles  of
the  laborer's  consumption — a  fact  which  proves  that  the  cost
of  producing  gold,  as  well  as  that  of  producing  those  other  com-
modities, is  low  in  the  United  States.  On  the  other  hand,  the
rates  of  wages  in  Europe  measured  by  the  same  standards  are
— at  least  as  compared  with  rates  in  the  United  States — low,

founded  on  these  exceptions  wholly  fails,  in  my  judgment,  to  meet  the  protection-
ist argument.  "What  he  shows  is  that  labor  in  England,  though  much  higher
priced  than  in  most  European  countries,  and  in  particular  than  in  Russia,  is  still
so  much  more  eiRcient  here  than  there,  that  the  high  English  rates  are  practically
cheaper  for  the  English  capitalist  than  the  lower  Continental  rates  for  the  capi-
talist of  the  Continent.  What  is  the  bearing  of  this  upon  the  American  demand
for  protection  against  England?  Will  Mr.  Wells  maintain  that,  as  the  efficiency
of  English  labor  is  to  that  of  Russian,  so  is  the  efficiency  of  American  labor  to
that  of  English  ?  If  not,  how  does  his  objection  to  the  protectionist  criterion  of
cost,  founded  on  the  different  degrees  of  industrial  efficiency,  affect  the  argument  ?
And  as  little  does  he  seem  to  me  to  make  good  the  pertinency  of  liis  objection  on
the  other  ground  taken.  It  is  possible  that  in  a  few  manufacturing  districts  in  the
United  States  the  rent  of  an  artisan's  dwelling  is  liigher  than  in  some  manufactur-
ing districts  in  England,  but  in  the  most  important  articles  of  the  laborer's  con-
sumption, in  the  whole  list  of  "provisions,"  for  example,  the  advantage  in  respect
to  price  is  unquestionably  with  the  American  consumer.
*  See  ante,  p.  336,  et  seq.,  and  pp.  345-347.


AS  MEASUBED  BY  WAGES.  385

which  again  merely  proves  j^bat  the  cost  of  producing  the  com-
modities constituting  those  standards  is  high  in  Europe,  as  com-
pared with  their  cost  in  the  United  States.  This  elementary
truth  is  so  far  from  being  generally  appreciated  that  I  should
not  be  surprised  if  its  simple  statement  should  appear  to  some
persons,  and  possibly  even  to  some  economists,  as  paradoxical.*
I  would  ask  such  to  consider  what  are  the  true  causes  of  the
high  remuneration  of  American  industry.  It  will  surely  be
admitted  that,  in  the  last  resort,  these  resolve  themselves  into
the  one  great  fact  of  its  high  productive  power.  Capitalists
and  laborers  receive  large  remuneration  in  America  because
their  industry  produces  largely.  That  is  the  simple  and  patent
fact  which  all  must  acknowledge.  But  what  is  the  meaning
of  a  highly  productive  industry,  if  it  be  not  a  liberal  industrial
return  as  compared  with  the  sacrifice  undergone?  And  what,
again,  does  this  mean  if  not  a  low  cost  in  relation  to  the  thing
produced  ?  I  must,  therefore,  contend  that  the  high  scale  of
industrial  remuneration  in  America,  instead  of  being  evidence
of  a  high  cost  of  production  in  that  country,  is  distinctly  evi-
dence of  a  low  cost  of  production — of  a  low  cost  of  production,
that  is  to  say,  in  the  first  place,  of  gold,  and,  in  the  next,  of  the
commodities  which  mainly  constitute  the  real  wages  of  labor —
a  description  which  embraces  at  once  the  most  important  raw
materials  of  industry  and  the  most  important  articles  of  general
consumption.  As  regards  commodities  not  included  in  this
description,  the  criterion  of  wages  stands  in  no  constant  rela-
tion of  any  kind  to  their  cost,  and  is,  therefore,  simply  irrele-
vant to  the  point  at  issue.  And  now  we  may  see  what  this
claim  for  protection  to  American  industry,  founded  on  the
high  scale  of  American  remuneration,  really  comes  to :  it  is
a  demand  for  special  legislative  aid  in  consideration  of  the  pos-

*  And  yet  it  ought  not  to  do  so.  The  doctrine  was  very  clearly  enunciated
nearly  half  a  century  ago  in  Mr.  Senior's  Essay,  already  frequently  referred  to,  Olj
the  "  Cost  of  obtaining  Money."

25


386  FBEE  TRADE  AND  PECTECTION.

session  of  special  industrial  facili-ties — u  complaint,  in  short,
against  the  exceptional  bounty  of  nature.

§  5.  Perhaps  I  shall  here  be  asked  how,  if  the  case  be  so —
if  the  high  rate  of  industrial  remuneration  in  America  be  only
evidence  of  a  low  cost  of  production — the  fact  is  to  be  explain-
ed, since  fact  it  undoubtedly  is,  that  the  people  of  the  United
States  are  unable  to  compete  in  neutral  markets,  in  the  sale
of  certain  important  wares,  with  England  and  other  European
countries. No  one  will  say  that  the  people  of  New  England,
New  York,  and  Pennsylvania  are  deficient  in  any  industrial
qualities  possessed  by  the  workmen  of  any  country  in  the
world. How  happens  it,  then,  that,  enjoying  industrial  ad-
vantages superior  to  other  countries,  they  are  yet  unable  to
hold  their  own  against  them  in  the  general  markets  of  com-
merce? I  shall  endeavor  to  meet  this  objection  fairly,  and,  in
the  first  place,  let  me  state  what  my  contention  is  with  regard
to  cost  of  production  in  America. I  do  not  contend  that  it  is
low  in  the  case  of  all  commodities  capable  of  being  produced
in  the  country,  but  onl}'-  in  that  of  a  large,  very  important,
but  still  limited  group. With  regard  to  commodities  lying
outside  this  group,  I  hold  that  the  rate  of  wages  is  simply
no  evidence  as  to  the  cost  of  their  production,  one  way  or  the
other. But,  secondly,  I  beg  the  reader  to  consider  what  is
meant  by  the  alleged  "inability"  of  New  England  and  Penn-
sylvania to  compete,  let  us  say,  with  Manchester  and  Sheffield
in  the  manufacture  of  calico  and  cutlery. What  it  means,  and
what  it  only  can  mean,  is  that  they  are  unable  to  do  so  consist-
ently with  obtaining  that  rate  of  remuneration  on  their  industry
which  is  current  in  the  United  States. If  only  American  laborers
and  capitalists  would  be  content  with  the  wages  and  profits  cur-
rent in  Great  Britain,  there  is  nothing  that  I  know  of  to  prevent
them  from  holding  their  own  in  any  markets  to  which  Man-
chester and  Sheffield  send  their  wares. And  this  brings  us  to


EUROPE  AN  COMPETITION.  387

the  heart  of  the  question.  Over  a  large  portion  of  the  great
field  of  industry  the  people  of  the  United  States  enjo}^,  as
compared  with  those  of  Europe,  advantages  of  a  very  ex-
ceptional kind;  over  the  rest  the  advantage  is  less  decided,
or  they  stand  on  a  par  with  Europeans,  or  possibly  they
are,  in  some  instances,  at  a  disadvantage.  Engaging  in  the
branches  of  industry  in  which  their  advantage  over  Europe
is  great,  they  reap  industrial  returns  proportionately  great;
and,  so  long  as  they  confine  themselves  to  these  occupations,
they  can  compete  in  neutral  markets  against  all  the  world,
and  still  secure  the  high  rewards  accruing  from  their  ex-
ceptionally rich  resources.  But  the  people  of  the  Union
decline  to  confine  themselves  within  these  liberal  bounds.
They  would  cover  the  whole  domain  of  industrial  activity,
and  think  it  hard  that  they  should  not  reap  the  same  rich
harvests  from  every  part  of  the  field.  They  must  descend
into  the  arena  with  Sheffield  and  Manchester,  and  yet  secure
the  rewards  of  Chicago  and  St.  Louis.  They  must  employ  Eu-
ropean conditions  of  production,  and  obtain  American  results.
What  is  this  but  to  quarrel  with  the  laws  of  nature?  These
laws  have  assigned  to  an  extensive  range  of  industries  carried
on  in  the  United  States  a  high  scale  of  return,  far  in  excess  of
what  Europe  can  command,  to  a  few  others  a  return  on  a  scale
not  exceeding  the  European  proportion.  American  enterprise
would  engage  in  all  departments  alike,  and  obtain  upon  all  the
high  rewards  which  nature  has  assigned  only  to  some.  Here
we  find  the  real  meaning  of  the  "inability"  of  Americans  to
compete  with  the  "  pauper  labor  "  of  Europe.  They  can  not  do
so,  and  at  the  same  time  secure  the  American  rate  of  return
on  their  work.  The  inability  no  doubt  exists,  but  it  is  one
created,  not  by  the  drawbacks,  but  by  the  exceptional  advan-
tages of  their  position.  It  is  as  if  a  skilled  artisan  should  com-
plain that  he  could  not  compete  with  the  hedger  and  ditcher.
Let  him  only  be  content  with  the  hedger  and  ditcher's  rate  of


388  FREE  TRADE  AND  PROTECTION.

pay,  and  there  will  be  nothing  to  prevent  him  from  entering
the  lists  even  ao-ainst  this  rival.

The  end  here  proposed  by  American  enterprise  is,  it  must
be  owned,  unattainable  under  free  trade ;  for  free  trade  is  con-
tent to  turn  natural  laws  to  the  best  account:  it  does  not  seek
to  transcend  them.  But,  though,  unattainable  under  free  trade,
protectionists  assure  us  that  the  thing  may  be  done  by  means
of  their  system.  It  is  only  necessary,  say  these  authorities,  to
exclude  foreign  competition  by  laying  high  import  duties  on
the  products  in  which  American  superiority  over  Europe  is
not  assured,  and  the  same  high  returns  whicb  attend  on  Ameri-
can industry  in  its  most  productive  fields  will — the  laws  of  na-
ture notwithstanding — be  realized  throughout  its  entire  range.
And  this  is,  in  fact,  the  undertaking  in  which  those  who  guide
the  commercial  policy  of  the  Union  have  been  engaged  since
1861.  Let  us  for  a  moment  pause  and  consider  how  this  bold
attempt  to  override  the  laws  of  nature  has  fared.

§  6.  And  here  we  are  confronted  at  once  with  the  difficul-
ty of  interpreting  an  industrial  experiment.  The  system  of
American  Protection,  in  its  present  exaggerated  form,  may  be
regarded  as  dating  from  1861,  when  the  Morrill  tariff  became
law.  If  all  the  other  conditions  of  tbe  case  had  remained  sub-
stantially the  same  since  that  time,  we  might  now,  by  a  mere
inspection  of  results,  pronounce  without  hesitation  on  the  ef-
fect of  the  policy  then  inaugurated ;  but  instead  of  this  observe
how  the  facts  stand.  In  the  same  year  the  great  Civil  War-
commenced,  in  the  course  of  which  the  destruction  of  human
life  and  of  wealth  in  every  form  probably  exceeded  any  thing
which  had  before  occurred  within  the  same  time  in  the  history
of  human  affairs.  This  was  soon  followed  by  the  creation  of
an  immense  national  debt,  entailing  a  large  permanent  increase
of  taxation,  and  by  the  issue  of  an  inconvertible  paper  curren-
cy, circulating  throughout  the  Union,  and  affecting  alike  prices


A  TEN  TEAMS'  EXPERIMENT.  389

and  wages  in  every  branch  of  trade.  On  the  other  hand,  oc-
currences of  a  very  different  kind  marked  the  course  of  the  pe-
riod under  review.  Mineral  resources  were  discovered  which
are  now  yielding  vast  wealth,  and  oil  springs  which  have  be-
come the  source  of  an  entirely  new  and  rapidly  increasing
trade.  Eailway  enterprise,  again,  during  the  same  time  ap-
pears to  have  taken  on  a  new  activity,  while  the  progress  of
invention  in  the  mechanical  arts  has  never  for  a  moment  flao;-
ged.  In  presence  of  influences  so  numerous,  so  novel,  and  so
vast,  each  affecting  industry  in  its  own  fashion  so  powerfully,
who  shall  say  what  portion  of  what  we  now  find  existing  can
properly  be  attributed  to  any  one  of  them?  The  problem,
in  its  mere  statement,  brings  into  striking  relief  the  utter  futil-
ity of  that  so-called  "inductive  method"  which  some  writers
hold  to  be  the  proper  one  in  social  and  economic  inquiries —
the  method,  that  is  to  say,  which  would  proceed  by  drawing
general  conclusions  as  to  the  operation  of  particular  causes
from  the  summarized  results  of  statistical  tables.  For,  assum-
ing that  we  have  taken  accurate  stock  of  the  present  industrial
condition  of  the  United  States,  as  well  as  of  that  which  was  in
existence  previous  to  1861,  so  long  as  we  confine  our  view  to
the  mere  statistical  aspect  of  the  case,  what  warrant  have  we
for  attributing  any  portion  of  the  change  that  has  taken  place
to  one  cause  rather  than  to  another?  Manifestly  we  have
none ;  nor  can  we  advance  a  single  step  toward  the  solution  of
any  problem  involved  in  the  facts,  till  we  pass  from  the  mere
tabulation  of  results  to  an  examination  of  the  nature  and  tend-
encies of  the  causes  in  operation.  When  we  have  ascertained
these,  and  shown  by  deductive  reasoning  from  them  the  effects
they  are  fitted  to  produce,  we  are  then  for  the  first  time  in  a
position  to  attempt  an  interpretation  of  the  varied  and  com-
plex phenomena.

Now  this  is  the  vantage  ground  on  which  a  student  of  Po-
litical Economy  in  dealing  with  such  a  problem  stands. He


390  FREE TRADE  AND  PROTECTION.

has  ascertained  the  direction  in  which  the  various  industrial
forces,  operating  in  the  field  of  the  experiment,  Work;  he
knows,  for  example,  that  in  the  present  instance  the  destruc-
tion caused  by  the  Civil  War  must  have  left  a  large  gap  in
the  then  existing  wealth  of  the  United  States;*  but  he  knows
also,  what  is  not  so  obvious,  the  extraordinary  rapidity  with
which  countries  devastated  by  war,  but  in  which  the  indus-
trial habits  of  the  people  have  not  been  broken  through,  so
soon  as  peace  and  security  are  restored,  recover  from  the  havoc
which  war  has  made.  He  knows,  again,  that  the  meaning  of
a  national  debt  is  the  necessity  of  submitting,  so  long  as  it
remains  unpaid,  to  a  known  amount  of  taxation,  tantamount
in  its  effects  to  an  equivalent  deduction  from  the  general  earn-
ings of  the  community.  He  knows,  further,  the  consequences
likely  to  flow  from  the  issue  of  an  inconvertible  currency;
that,  once  depreciated  below  the  par  of  gold,  it  results  in  a
scale  of  nominal  prices,  having  for  its  effect  to  derange  the
monetary  relations  of  the  community,  to  relieve  debtors  from
their  obligations  at  the  expense  of  their  creditors,  and  to  intro-
duce much  risk  and  uncertainty  into  general  business,  but  not,
as  is  commonly  supposed,  to  affect  in  any  serious  manner  the
external  trade  of  a  country. f  At  the  same  time,  the  econo-
mist can  take  account  of  the  immense  addition  made  to  the
material  resources  of  the  United  States,  by  those  mineral  and
other  discoveries  to  which  reference  has  been  made,  as  well  as
by  the  progress  of  mechanical  invention,  the  extension  of  the

*  This,  one  would  think,  would  be  sufficiently  obvious,  but  in  arguing  with  pro-
tectionists it  is  difficult  to  know  what  to  take  for  granted.  According  to  the  ex-
treme zealots  of  the  protectionist  school  the  Civil  War,  it  seems,  is  to  be  regarded
as  among  the  most  potent  causes  of  the  recent  prosperity  of  the  Union.  "The
conclusion,"  says  Mr.  Wells,  "was  pointed  at  by  some,  and  even  soberly  main-
tained on  the  floor  of  Congress  by  the  advocates  of  the  system  of  high  Protection,
that  the  war,  regarded  from  a  merely  material  point  of  view,  was  in  reality  a
blessing."  ("Cobden  Club  Essays,"  Second  Series,  p.  487.)
.  t  This  point  has  been  dealt  with  ante,  p.  373.


A  TJEN  YEARS'  EXPERIMENT.  391

railway  system,  and  the  other  industrial  improvements  which
have  marked  recent  years.  Now  these — putting  aside  for  a
moment  the  protectionist  tarijGf— are  the  main  and  capital  oc-
currences affecting  the  economic  career  of  the  United  States
since  1861;  and,  in  order  to  judge  experimentally  of  the  ac-
tion of  Protectionism  on  the  interests  of  the  country  since  that
date,  it  becomes  necessary  to  effect  some  rough,  elimination  of
so  much  of  the  general  result  as  may  properly  be  attributed  to
those  other  causes.  In  other  words,  we  must  endeavor  to  de-
termine in  what  direction,  on  the  whole,  has  been  the  net  bear-
ing of  their  influence;  whether  in  the  direction  of  an  abridg-
ment of  the  productive  power  and  commercial  resources  of  the
United  States,  or  in  that  of  their  enlargement.  For  my  part,
I  have  no  hesitation  in  accepting  upon  this  point  what  appears
to  be  the  nearly  universal  opinion  of  Americans,  that,  the  pe-
riod of  actual  warfare  once  passed,  the  influences  favoring  in-
dustrial progress  have,  on  the  whole,  largely  preponderated
over  those  tending  to  retard  it;  and  that  consequently,  if  there
were  nothing  else  in  the  matter^  we  should  be  justified  in  expect-
ing, at  all  events  since  1866,  a  more  rapid  expansion  of  Amer-
ican commerce,  and  a  more  liberal  return  on  American  indus-
try, than  prevailed  in  the  period  previous  to  1861.

Well,  how  do  the  facts  tally  with  this  reasonable  expecta-
tion ?  I  will  allow  Mr.  Wells  to  answer  this  question.  In  his
two  Eeports  to  Congress,  and  in  his  Cobden  Club  Essay,  he
has  gone  very  fully  and  in  great  detail  into  the  whole  subject,
and  those  who  desire  particulars  must  be  referred  to  those
writings.  It  suffices  here  to  state  in  summary  the  results  of
his  investigations;  and  these  are  to  the  effect  that,  comparing
the  decade  1860-70  with  the  previous  decade,  the  commercial
progress  of  the  United  States  has,  in  the  later  period,  suffered
a  serious  check;  that  the  commercial  tonnage  has  during  the
same  period  positively  declined;  that  the  business  of  ship-
building has  undergone  an  almost  complete  collapse ;  that  the


392  FREE  TRADE  AND  PROTECTION.

rate  of  increase  in  the  external  trade  which  during  the  de-
cade 1850-60  had  been  represented  bv  eighty-one  per  cent.
on  the  trade  of  the  preceding  decade,  lias  fallen  to  one  rep-
resented by  nineteen  per  cent. ;  and,  lastly,  and  on  this  point
I  am  content  to  rest  the  entire  case,  that — having  regard,  on
the  one  hand,  to  the  nominal  rise  in  wages  reckoned  in  a
depreciated  currency,  and,  on  the  other,  to  the  nominal  rise
of  prices  measured  in  the  same  medium — the  real  remunera-
tion of  the  United  States  laborer  in  all  the  leading  depart-
ments of  industry  has  during  the  nine  years  ending  1868  pos-
itively fallen  in  a  proportion  not  less  than  twenty  per  cent,  on
his  previous  earnings.*  These  are  singular  results  to  have
accrued  from  a  still  unlimited  command  of  rich  virgin  soil,
from  enlarged  mineral  resources,  ever  progressing  mechanical
invention,  and  an  industrial  energy  and  enterprise  which  have
certainly  suffered  no  abatement.  To  what  cause  are  they  to
be  ascribed,  and  more  particularly  how  are  we  to  account  for
this  lowered  rate  of  return  upon  American  industry?  It  is
possible  the  ravages  of  the  war  may  not  even  yet  have  been
wholly  repaired ;  the  gap  made  in  the  national  capital  may  not
be  even  now  quite  filled  up.  The  increased  taxation  certainly
remains,  and  constitutes  a  deduction,  let  us  say  of  some  five  or
six  per  centf  from  American  earnings. The  depreciated  cur-

*  On  tins  point  Mr.  Wells's  conclusion  is  as  follows:  while  "the  average  in-
crease of  all  the  elements  which  constitute  the  food,  clothing,  and  shelter  of  a
family  has  been  about  seventy-eight  per  cent.,  as  compared  with  the  standard
prices  of '60-'61,"the  increase  which  took  place  during  the  same  time  in  wages
was  only  in  the  proportion,  "for  imskilled  labor  of  fifty  per  cent.,  for  skilled  me-
chanical labor  of  sixty  per  cent."  ....  (Report  for  1868,  pp.  14,  15.)  With-
out knowing  the  proportions  in  which  the  several  enhanced  articles  enter  into  the
laborer's  consumption,  accurate  deductions  as  to  the  effect  of  this  change  on  his
well-being  can  not  of  course  be  made ;  but  it  is  at  least  certain  that  the  facts  stated
imply  a  deterioration  and  a  considerable  one  in  his  condition.  In  stating  it  at
about  twenty  per  cent,  it  seems  to  me  that  I  am  well  within  the  mark.

t  The  revenue  of  the  United  States  before  the  war  stood  at  about  ^12,000,000i


A  TEN  YEARS'  EXPERIMENT.  393

rency  has,  no  doubt,  caused  much  individual  hardship,  and  in-
troduced more  or  less  derangement  into  commercial  affairs.
But  who  will  say  that  any  of  these  occurrences,  or  all  of  them
taken  together,  suffice  to  account  for  the  facts  which  Mr.  Wells
has  brought  to  light — the  slackened  rate  of  progress,  the  ar-
rested commercial  growth,  and,  above  all,  the  diminished  re-
ward for  the  workman  ?  The  problem,  I  must  own,  is  for  me
insoluble,  until  I  take  account  of  that  one  influence  which,  for
the  moment,  I  had  put  aside.  I  turn  to  the  Morrill  tariff,  and
to  the  aggravations  of  that  code  which  have  since  been  enacted.
I  find  there  duties  amounting,  on  an  average,  to  forty-seven
per  cent,  ad  valorem^  imposed  on  nearly  all  articles*  of  any  im-
portance imported  into  the  United  States ;  on  such  raw  prod-
ucts as  coal,  timber,  iron,  hides,  and  sugar;  on  such  manufac-
tures as  clothing  in  every  form,  cottons,  woolens,  and  every
kind  of  textile  fabric,  on  manufactured  iron — in  a  word,  on
nearly  all  the  raw  materials  of  industry,  and  many  of  the  most
important  articles  of  general  consumption.  And  with  these
facts  before  me,  the  slackened  rate  of  progress,  the  arrested
commercial  growth,  and  the  workman's  diminished  reward  be-
come at  once  intelligible ;  for  these  are  the  precise  results  which
such  a  system  of  protection  is  fitted  to  engender.  With  such
a  barrier  as  duties  amounting  to  forty-seven  per  cent,  ad  va-
lorem erected  against  foreign  importation,  what  else  could  hap-

its  amount  since  the  war  has  fluctuated  between  =£65,000,000  and  £70,000,000:
the  increase,  therefore,  has  been,  we  may  say  in  round  numbers,  some  £55,000,000,
representing  so  much  of  the  produce  of  the  land  and  labor  of  the  country,  former-
ly left  with  the  producers,  now  taken  for  the  purposes  of  the  State,  According  to
Mr.  Wells's  estimate  (Report  for  1869,  p.  xiii.),  the  value  of  the  total  annual  pro-
duction of  the  United  States  in  1868  amounted  to  £1,365,000,000,  from  which  a
deduction  of  £55,000,000  would  represent  a  proportion  of  about  four  per  cent.
To  this  there  would  have  to  be  added  the  increase  of  the  local  taxation  of  the  sev-
eral States,  of  which  I  have  no  statistics.

*  So  nearly  so,  that  if  we  substitute  for  "articles  paying  duty"  the  entire  Idi-
ports,  the  proportion  is  only  reduced  to  forty-four  per  cent.


394  FREE  TRADE  AND  FROTECTION.

pen  than  a  retardation  of  the  growth  of  external  trade?  While
coal,  timber,  iron  are  loaded  with  heavy  duties,  can  ship-birild-
ing  be  expected  to  prosper?  and,  as  with  ship-building,  so  with
some  scores  of  other  trades,  the  details  of  whose  decline  will  be
found  in  Mr.  Wells's  repertory.  But  I  prefer  to  rest  the  case
upon  the  simple  fact  of  the  reduced  real  wages  of  the  work-
men ;  for  here  the  symptom  may  be  regarded  as  specific.  As
I  have  already  had  occasion  to  explain,  the  direct  effect  of  a
protective  duty,  when  it  is  really  operative,  is  to  compel,  on
the  part  of  the  community  employing  this  expedient,  a  resort  to
more  onerous  conditions  of  production  for  the  protected  article.
Every  article,  therefore,  produced  in  the  United  States,  which
would  not  have  been  produced  there  but  for  the  protective
tariff,  represents  an  expenditure  of  labor  and  capital  greater
than  would  have  been  necessary  to  obtain  the  same  article  had
it  been  obtained  under  free  trade.  In  a  word,  American  labor
and  capital,  as  a  whole,  have,  effort  for  effort  and  outlay  for
outlay,  been  producing  smaller  results  since  1861  than  former-
ly ;  and  this  being  so,  what  other  explanation  do  we  need  of
the  actual  facts  which  we  encounter — of  diminished  returns
on  American  industry,  of  a  fall  in  the  real  wages  of  labor?

But,  say  the  protectionists,  though  measured  in  products  the
returns  on  the  protected  industries  may  be  less,  we,  by  exclud-
ing foreign  competition,  secure  for  the  producers  a  proportion-
ally higher  price ;  the  effect  of  which  is  that,  though  working
at  a  disadvantage,  they  nevertheless  obtain  the  rate  of  profit
current  in  the  country.  Let  us  observe  the  precise  significance
of  this  repl}'-.  It  may  be  conceded  that  a  small  return  upon
industry  in  the  form  of  products  may  be  compensated  to  the
producers  by  a  proportional  increase  in  the  price;  but  then
it  is  at  the  expense  of  those  who  pay  the  increased  price  ;  and
the  question  remains,  by  whom  are  the  higher  prices  paid  in
the  present  instance?  There  is  only  one  possible  answer — by
the  citizens  of  the  United  States. In  effect  these  higher  prices


TEE  POLITICAL  ARGUMENT.  395

are  the  machinery  through  which  the  real  rewards  of  Ameri-
can industry  have  been  reduced.  Consider,  for  example,  the
case  of  an  Illinois  farmer:  it  is  tolerably  plain  that  if,  pro-
ducing corn  under  the  same  conditions  as  previous  to  1861,
and  getting  for  it  the  same  price  in  foreign  markets,  he  has  to
pay  a  higher  price  for  every  article  of  his  clothing,  and  for  ev-
ery article  into  the  composition  of  which  coal,  timber,  iron,  or
hides  enter,  his  real  remuneration  can  not  but  be  considerably
less  than  if  all  these  things  could  be  obtained  at  free-trade
prices.  And  the  case  of  the  farmer  is  not  isolated :  it  is  that
of  the  workers  in  every  department  of  industry,  and  exhibits
unequivocally  the  net  outcome  of  the  protectionist  experiment
which  commenced  with  the  passing  of  the  Morrill  tariff.  Pro-
tectionists then  undertook  to  secure  for  the  protected  interests
of  their  country  as  high  industrial  rewards  as  are  reaped  in  the
most  flourishing  branches  of  United  States  production — and,
it  may  be  allowed,  they  have  succeeded  in  their  venturous  en-
terprise. But  how  ?  Simply  by  lowering  universally  the  level
of  those  rewards ;  by  enforcing,  through  the  medium  of  arti-
ficially enhanced  prices,  a  huge  deduction  from  the  income  of
the  community  at  large,  and  handing  over  the  proceeds  to  the
protected  trades.  Such  is  the  upshot  of  this  notable  attempt
to  transcend  physical  laws,  and  to  secure  by  legislation  what
nature  has  denied.

S  7.  In  the  foresfoing  examination  of  the  working  of  Pro-
tection  in  the  United  States,  tlie  argument  has  been  confined
to  what  may  be  considered  its  purely  economic  side.  It  is  not
uncommon,  however,  to  hear  the  system  defended  on  social
and  political  grounds ;  and  it  may,  therefore,  be  well,  before
taking  leave  of  the  subject,  to  make  some  brief  reference  to
this  other  aspect  of  the  case.  For  example,  the  position  is
sometimes  taken  that,  admitting  all  that  can  be  urged  econom-
ically in  favor  of  free  trade,  a  nation  has  yet  other  interests  to


396  FREE  TBABE  AND  FBOTECTION.

take  account  of  than  the  production  and  distribution  of  wealth;
it  has  to  consider  its  moral,  social,  and  political  advancement
— ends  to  which  the  working  of  free  trade,  it  is  alleged,  is  not
always  favorable.  For  the  tendency  of  free  trade,  even  on  the
showing  of  its  supporters,  it  is  argued,  is  to  turn  the  industry
of  a  nation  mainly  into  a  few  channels — those  channels,  name-
ly, in  which  it  happens  to  enjoy,  in  relation  to  competing  na-
tions, exceptional  advantages,  so  that,  in  the  practical  result,  the
nation  adopting  it  is  compelled  to  confine  its  industry  within
comparatively  narrow  bounds.  Free  trade  thus  tends  to  cir-
cumscribe industrial  experience;  and,  by  doing  so,  to  interfere
with  that  practical  education  which  a  nation  derives  from  the
prosecution  of  industry.  Far  better,  it  is  urged,  deliberately
to  sacrifice  some  of  the  results  of  material  prosperity,  if  by  this
means  we  can  secure  scope  for  a  wider  and  more  diversified
cultivation,  such  as  is  furnished  by  an  industry  branching  in
numerous  directions  and  offering  to  enterprise  a  varied  field.

I  can  not  deny  that  there  is  a  certain  basis  of  truth  in  the
considerations  just  stated ;  and  that  circumstances  may  even
be  imagined  in  which  they  would  possess  real  cogency.  In-
deed, the  United  States  themselves  at  one  time  presented  the
world  wnth  a  remarkable  example  in  point.  Free  trade,  as  I
had  once  occasion  to  point  out,  constituted  undoubtedly  one
of  the  main  supports  of  slavery  in  the  South ;  for  by  its  means
Southern  slave -masters  were  enabled,  while  employing  their
thralls  in  the  few  crude  industries  in  which  alone  their  labor
was  efficient,  to  command  all  the  comforts  and  luxuries  of  civ-
ilized existence.  Free  trade  thus  undoubtedly  favored,  and
rendered  possible,  the  low  state  of  civilization  which  up  to  1860
was  characteristic  of  the  southern  portion  of  the  United  States.
Had  that  part  of  the  country  been  dependent  exclusively  or
mainly  on  its  own  industry  for  the  direct  supply  of  its  material
wants,  a  greater  variety  of  industrial  occupations  would  have
been  necessary. At  the  least  a  considerable  portion  of  the


TRE  POLITICAL  ARGUMENT.  397

negro  population  must  have  been  educated  and  trained  to  me-
chanical pursuits,  and  a  foundation  would  thus  have  been  laid
tor  social  progress.  It  must  be  owned,  tlierefore,  that  the  line
of  argument  we  are  considering  is  not  without  a  certain  sup-
port in  the  facts  of  past  experience;  an  admission,  however,
which  amounts  to  no  more  than  this,  that  barbarism  and  tyran-
ny have  sometimes  gained  in  strength  by  availing  themselves
of  the  expedients  of  civilization.  But  the  practical  question
is,  not  whether  under  extraordinary  and  exceptional  circum-
stances free  trade  may  be  made  to  serve  the  purposes  of  des-
potism, but  whether  in  a  country,  such  as  the  United  States,
of  great  and  varied  resources,  peopled  by  free  men  in  posses-
sion of  all  the  most  advanced  industrial  knowledge  and  trained
in  the  usages  of  civilization — whether  in  such  a  country,  arti-
ficial restraint  upon  the  freedom  of  trade  is  needed,  in  order  to
secure  for  the  people  that  variety  of  occupations  which,  it  may
be  freely  conceded,  is  favorable  to  national  development.

And  here,  in  the  first  place,  it  must  be  remembered  that  the
capacity  possessed  by  a  country  of  yielding  particular  elements
of  wealth  is  never  of  a  uniform  character,  but  exists  in  general
in  very  great  variety,  according  to  the  fertility,  accessibility,  or
other  incidents  of  the  natural  agents  from  which  such  elements
are  derived.  As  a  consequence  of  this,  commodities  obtained
directly  from  natural  agents,  that  is  to  say,  raw  products,  are
raised  in  all  countries  at  various  costs,  and  as,  in  conformity
with  the  well-known  economic  principle,  it  is  the  cost  of  the
most  costly  portion  raised  that  governs  the  price  of  the  whole,
it  follows  that  the  actual  price  at  which  a  commodity  of  this
description  sells,  depends  not  simply  on  the  inherent  fertility
of  the  sources  of  supply,  but  on  this  taken  in  connection  with
the  total  quantity  of  the  commodity  produced  in  the  country.
As  the  richest  and  most  accessible  natural  agents  are  those
which  are  first  resorted  to,  the  supply,  up  to  a  certain  point,
is  obtained  at  the  lowest  cost  at  which  the  country,  in  the  act-


398  FREE  TRADE  AND  PROTECTION.

ual  state  of  its  industry,  can  yield  it;  but  as  the  requirements
of  the  community  increase,  recourse  is  had  to  natural  agents
of  inferior  capacity,  and,  as  population  progresses,  to  agents
of  capacity  inferior  still ;  the  cost  of  production  rising  with
each  extension  of  the  area  of  cultivation,  and  the  price  with
the  cost  of  production,  Now,  from  this  law  governing  the  cost
of  raw  products,  it  results  that,  however  superior  one  country
may  be  to  others  in  its  natural  capacity  of  yielding  particular
elements  of  wealth,  it  yet  rarely  happens  that  these  latter  are
not  able  to  encounter  its  competition  in  raising  even  those
products  in  respect  to  which  its  capacity  is  greatest,  and  this
under  the  most  perfect  freedom  of  trade.  Great  Britain,  for
example,  would  be  said  to  have  a  natural  superiority  over  the
United  States  in  the  production  of  coal  and  iron,  just  as  the
United  States  would  be  said  to  have  a  natural  superiority  over
Great  Britain  in  producing  corn ;  but  in  neither  case  is  the
superiority  of  a  kind  to  cause  the  United  States,  under  a  per-
fectly free  trade,  to  give  up  producing  iron  and  coal,  any  more
than  to  cause  Great  Britain  to  give  up  producing  corn.  The
effect  of  free  trade  would  not  be  to  extinguish  any  of  those
branches  of  production  in  either  country,  but  merely  to  alter
the  proportions  in  which  they  are  carried  on.  Great  Britain
would  continue,  as  she  does  now,  to  produce  corn  so  far  as  it
was  profitable  for  her  to  do  so,  and  would  satisfy  her  remain-
ing requirements  by  importation,  while  the  United  States
would  follow  a  like  course  in  the  case  of  iron  and  coal.  And
so  also  it  would  be  with  such  products  as  lumber  and  leather.
It  may  be  that  Canada  has  in  these  products  greater  resources
than  the  United  States;  and  it  is  probable  that  the  abolition
of  the  high  import  duties  now  imposed  by  the  latter  country
would  lead  to  some  more  or  less  considemble  re-adjustment  of
the  proportions  in  which  the  industries  they  occasion  are  now
carried  on  ;  but  this  is  a  very  different  thing  from  the  extinc-
tion of  those  industries. Probably  the  utmost  that  under  the


THE  POLITICAL  AEGUMENT.  399

freest  tariflf  would  occur  is  the  abandonment  in  the  United
States  of  some  of  the  least  productive  sources  of  suppl}',  com-
bined with  a  corresponding  extension  of  the  area  of  production
in  Canada,  while  the  capital  now  employed  in  the  United
States  in  developing  resources  which  would  be  better  reserved
for  another  day  would  not  be  slow  in  finding  employment  in
more  profitable  channels.  It  is  unnecessary  to  pursue  further
this  line  of  illustration.  The  same  argument,  it  is  evident,
may  be  applied  in  turn  to  every  branch  of  production  employ-
ed in  extracting  commodities  directly  from  the  store-house  of
nature.  Within  this  circle  of  industries,  at  all  events,  it  may
be  confidently  asserted  that  Protection  does  not  maintain  in.
the  United  States  a  single  one  which  would  not  exist  equally
under  free  trade.  It  is  only  when  her  people,  not  content
with  cultivating  their  magnificent  resources  in  the  degree  in
which  nature  has  endowed  them,  seek  to  disturb  the  natural
proportion  and  to  push  enterprise  in  certain  directions  beyond
the  profitable  point,  that  the  need  arises  for  artificial  support.
The  tendency  of  Protection,  therefore,  at  least  within  this  par-
ticular department  of  industrial  activity,  is  not  to  create  new
industries,  not  to  diversify  industrial  pursuits,  but  to  disturb
the  natural  development  of  the  country,  and  to  turn  capital
from  profitable  to  unprofitable  fields.

So  far,  however,  the  argument  applies  only  to  the  industries
of  raw  produce — as  they  are  called,  the  "extractive  indus-
tries;" and,  it  will  be  urged,  that  it  is  especially  in  manufac-
tures that  scope  would  be  sought  for  the  cultivation  of  indus-
trial intelligence  and  skill.  Carried,  however,  even  thus  far,  I
may  observe,  the  argument  at  least  suffices  to  destroy  the  rai-
son  d^etre,  so  far  as  it  rests  on  the  ground  we  are  now  consid-
ering, of  a  large  portion  of  the  present  tariff  of  the  United
States,  which  makes  no  distinction  between  raw  and  manu-
factured products,  but  loads  alike  both  classes  with  heavy  du-
ties. But  though  the  particular  considerations  that  are  appli-


<100  FREE TRADE  AXD  PROTECTION.

cable  to  the  industries  of  raw  produce  do  not  apply  to  those  of
manufacture,  it  will  not  be  difficult  to  show  that  here  also  the
policy  of  Protection  is  wholly  unnecessary  as  a  means  of  se-
curing for  a  nation  that  help  to  its  general  progress  which  is
furnished  by  variety  in  its  industry.

At  the  utmost,  it  must  be  remembered,  all  that  Protection
can  do  for  producers  is  to  secure  for  them  a  monopoly  of  the
home  market.  But,  in  supplying  the  home  market,  manufac-
turers in  a  country  like  the  United  States,  or  in  any  new  coun-
try rich  in  varieties  of  raw  material,  have,  for  a  large  circle  of
productions,  very  substantial  advantages,  even  when  matched
against  countries  of  long  established  and  highly  organized  in-
dustry such  as  Great  Britain,  In  the  first  place,  most  kinds
of  raw  material  will  in  the  former  class  of  countries  be  cheap,
much  cheaper  for  the  most  part  than  in  old  countries — suppos-
ing, that  is  to  say,  that  the  price  is  not  artificially  raised  by
protective  tariffs.  In  the  next,  the  manufacturer  is  close  to
the  source  of  supply,  and  is  thus  saved  the  cost  of  transport  on
the  raw  material,  always  a  considerable  item;  and, lastly,  he  is
also  saved  the  cost  of  transport,  which  falls  on  his  foreign  com-
petitor, in  sending  to  market  the  manufactured  article.  On  all
these  accounts,  manufacturers  in  old  countries  like  those  of
Western  Europe  lie  under  heavy  disadvantages  in  competing
in  the  home  markets  of  countries  like  the  United  States— dis-
advantages which  constitute  for  the  latter  countries  a  sort  of
natural  protection,  which  can  not  fail  to  secure  for  them  under
all  circumstances  a  considerable  field  for  the  cultivation  of
manufacturing  industry.

But  it  will  be  urged  that,  the  disadvantages  in  question  not-
withstanding, experience  has  proved  that,  over  a  considerable
area  of  manufacturing  industry,  European  manufacturers  are
capable,  under  free  trade,  of  underselling  those  of  the  United
States  even  in  their  own  home  markets.  The  fact  is  undenia-
ble; and  I  can  only  meet  the  objection  founded  on  it  by  ask«


THE  POLITICAL  ABGUMENT  401

ing  those  who  urge  it,  whether  their  object  is  to  produce  a
state  of  things  in  which  foreign  nations  shall  be  excluded  from
the  markets  of  the  United  States  in  the  sale  of  all  commodities
whatever-  for  if  this  be  their  object,  its  attainment  must,  let
them  well  understand,  be  tantamount  to  the  extinction  of  the
foreign  trade  of  their  country.  If  foreign  merchants  can  find
a  sale  for  no  product  whatever,  raised  in  the  countries  from
which  they  come,  in  United  States  markets,  they  are  deprived
of  the  means  by  which  a  trade  with  that  country  is  permanent-
ly possible.  It  must  be  remembered  that  the  point  we  are  now
considering  is  the  utility  of  Protection  as  a  means  of  helping
the  social  and  political  progress  of  peoples,  and  supposing  those
who  advocate  this  view  are  prepared  to  go  the  lengths  just  de-
scribed, it  comes  to  this,  that  their  scheme  for  promoting  civ-
ilization amounts  to  a  plan  for  putting  an  end  to  international
trade  —  putting  an  end  to  the  chief  occasion,  and  main  and
most  enduring  motive,  for  the  intercourse  of  mankind !  Now
it  must  bj  freely  admitted  that  this  mode  of  advancing  human
interests  is  not  compatible  with  the  maintenance  of  free  trade
— nay,  that  it  is  precisely  on  the  ground  of  its  tendency  to  pro-
mote the  interchange  of  commodities  among  nations  that  free
trade  claims  for  itself  the  credit  of  being  one  of  the  principal
and  most  powerful  of  civilizing  agencies.  It  can  not,  there-
fore, be  denied  that  under  free  trade  American  manufacturers
would  not  improbably  have  to  undergo  the  patriotic  anguish
of  finding  themselves  undersold  in  some  kinds  of  goods  by
foreign  merchants  in  their  own  markets.  But  there  would  be
no  need  for  them,  therefore,  to  despair.  It  by  no  means  fol-
'lows  that  the  range  of  their  manufacturing  industry  would
suffer  contraction :  it  is  even  exceedingly  probable — I  am  in-
clined to  add,  certain — that  it  would,  on  the  whole,  be  large-
ly extended.  Particular  branches  of  manufacture  now  car-
ried on  would  probably  be  brought  within  narrower  limits,
or  might  altogether  disappear ;  but  on  the  other  hand,  others,

26


402  FREE  TRADE  AND  PROTECTION.

now  barely  existing,  would  quite  certainly  take  fresh  root,
and  in  all  probability  become  the  staples  of  a  new  export
trade;  for,  be  it  well  observed.  Protection  is  not  less  effica-
cious— I  would  say,  is  far  more  efficacious — to  circumscribe
and  crush,  than  to  sustain  and  encourage.  Once  recognized  as
governing  the  policy  of  a  country,  every  industry  which  can
make  out  a  plausible  case  becomes  entitled  to  its  supposed
benefits,  and  industries  engaged  in  raising  raw  material  are  as
anxious  to  be  protected  as  others.  Accordingly,  in  the  United
States,  as  we  have  seen,  coal,  iron,  lumber,  and  leather  are  all
loaded  with  heavy  import  duties.  But  what  is  the  conse-
quence ?  Just  this,  that  American  manufacturers  are  thus  de-
prived of  the  advantage  they  would  naturally  possess  of  ob-
taining their  raw  material  cheap.  They  are  placed  at  a  dis-
advantage in  relation  to  manufacturers  in  Europe  precisely
where  under  free  trade  their  position  would  be  strongest:  a
necessity  for  Protection  is  created  which  could  never  arise
under  natural  conditions  of  trade :  in  this  way  Protection  in
the  end  becomes  its  own  Nemesis,  and  the  vicious  circle  is
complete.

I  have  now,  I  trust,  shown  that,  at  all  events  in  such  coun-
tries as  the  United  States,  Protection  is  not  needed  to  secure
an  extensive  diversity  in  the  national  industries.  And  when
we  further  take  account  of  an  influence  to  which  I  have  not
yet  referred — an  influence  inseparable  from  the  maintenance
of  a  protective  system — I  think  I  may  even  venture  to  ques-
tion whether  a  single  industry  of  importance  is  kept  alive  by
Protection  in  the  United  States  which  would  not  equally  ex-
ist there  in  a  healthier  condition  in  its  absence.  I  refer  now
to  the  effect  of  Protection  on  the  morale  of  industry.  When
once  the  industrial  classes  of  a.  country  have  been  taught  to
look  to  the  legislature  to  secure  them  against  the  competition
of  rivals,  they  are  apt  to  trust  more  and  more  to  this  support,
and  less  and  less  to  their  own  skill,  ingenuity,  and  economy  in


THE  POLITICAL  ARGUMENT.  403

conducting  their  business.  The  inevitable  result  is  that  indus-
try becomes  unprogressive  wherever  it  is  highly  protected.*
It  was  so  in  France  in  the  days  previous  to  the  commercial
treaty,  and  it  is  so  now  in  the  United  States,  as  may  be  learn-
ed from  Mr.  Wells's  Keports.  "  The  French  manufacturers,"
says  M.  Chevalier,  "if  not  all,  at  least  a  large  number  of  them,
had,  anterior  to  the  treaty  of  commerce,  a  serious  disadvantage
— that  of  old  and  defective  machinery,  which  augmented  the
cost  of  production.  This  was  due  to  prohibition,  which  pre-
vented the  manufacturers  from  feeling  the  spur  of  foreign
competition,  and  dispensed  them  from  the  necessity  of  perfect-
ing indefinitely,  and  without  delay,  their  machinery  and  their
processes.  The  treaty  of  commerce  aroused  them  from  this
apathy  as  if  an  alarm-bell  had  sounded. There  was  a  general

*  This  is  the  conclusive  reply  to  the  plea  sometimes  urged  in  favor  of  Protec-
tion in  young  communities  as  supplying  a  shelter  to  nascent  industries  until  they
have  struck  root  and  are  able  to  endure  foreign  competition.  We  all  know  the
passage  in  which  Mi-.  Mill  has  given  a  sanction  to  Protection  when  employed
under  such  circumstances,  and  the  use  that  has  been  made  of  it  in  some  of  our
colonies.  It  would  have  been  well  at  least  if  those  who  had  relied  on  this  obiter
dictum  of  a  great  writer  had  taken  note  of  the  strict  limitations  with  which  he  ac-
companied its  utterance.  With  or  without  such  limitations,  however,  I  can  not
but  think  that  the  position  is  untenable.  If  Protection  tended  to  develop  indus-
trial virtues,  and  thus  to  qualify  for  independence,  one  could  understand  that  it
might  be  usefully  employed  for  a  time  under  the  strict  limitations  laid  down  by
Mr.  Mill ;  but  inasmuch  as  its  tendency  is  exactly  the  reverse  of  this,  inasmuch  as
Protection  invariably  begets  a  need  for  Protection,  it  is  not  easy  to  see  how  its
adoption  could  under  any  circumstances  forward  the  object  in  view.  How  little
those  in  the  United  States  who  have  once  placed  themselves  in  the  leading-strings
of  Protection  are  inclined  to  dispense  with  these  helps  may  be  seen  from  the  fol-
lowing remark  of  Mr.  Wells:  "There  has  never  been  an  instance  in  the  history
of  the  country  where  the  representatives  of  such  [infant]  industries,  who  have  en-
joyed Protection  for  a  long  series  of  years,  have  been  willing  to  submit  to  a  re-
duction of  the  tariff,  or  have  proposed  it.  But,  on  the  contrary,  their  demands  for
still  higher  and  higher  duties  are  insatiable  and  never  intermitted."  And  he  pro-
ceeds to  illustrate  his  remark  by  some  striking  examples.  ("Cobden  Club  Es-
says," Second  Series,  p.  533.)


404  FBEE  TRADE  AND  PROTECTION.

renewing  of  machinery  in  the  numeroud  factories  which  were
badly  or  imperfectly  furnished.  Each  wished  to  place  himself
in  this  respect  on  a  level  with  England.  The  treaty  of  com-
merce encouraged  this  renovation  by  the  lowering  of  duties
upon  every  thing  which  enters  into  the  composition  of  work-
shop machinery ;  and  the  Treasury  even  advanced  to  a  certain
number  of  establishments  considerable  sums,  in  all  40,000,000
of  francs,  or  $8,000,000.  French  industry  has  drawn  from
this  transformation  of  its  machinery  {materiel)  a  new  force,  of
which  it  makes  proof  every  day,  and  this  is  a  reason  why  to-
day, face  to  face  with  foreign  competition,  it  has  a  confidence
which  it  did  not  know  before."*

To  this  statement  of  M.  Chevalier's  I  will  only  add  a  single
example,  taken  from  Mr.  Wells's  Report:  "In  the  summer  of
1867,  while  studying  the  industries  of  Europe,  the  Commis-
sioner visited  a  factory  the  products  of  which  had  for  many
years  found  an  extensive  market  in  the  United  States.  The
product  being  staple,  and  the  industry  one  that  it  was  exceed-
ingly desirable  should  be  extended  in  the  United  States,  the
Commissioner  studied  the  process  of  manufacture  with  great
care,  from  the  selection  of  the  raw  material  to  the  packing  of
the  finished  product;  the  rates  of  wages;  the  intelligence  of
the  operatives,  and  the  hours  of  labor.  When  his  investiga-
tion was  completed,  the  Commissioner  said  to  the  foreign  man-
ufacturer— a  man  whose  name  is  a  household  word  in  his  own
country  for  integrity  and  philanthropy — '  The  duty  on  the  im-
port of  these  articles  into  the  United  States  is,  respectively,  35
per  cent,  od  valorem,  and  30  per  cent,  ad  valorem  and  20  cents
per  pound ;  if  you  have  given  me  your  prices,  products  of  ma-
chinery, and  cost  of  labor  correctlj^,  I  do  not  well  see  how  you
could  export  your  fabrics  to  the  United  States,  even  if  there
was  substantially  no  duty,  as  the  advantage  of  raw  material  is

*  Quoted  from  a  letter  in  the  New  York  World,  November  28,  1873.


TRE  POLITICAL  ARGUMENT.  405

mainly  upon  our  side.'  'I  am  sometimes  at  a  loss  myself  to
account  for  the  course  of  trade,'  was  the  reply;  'but  perhaps
it  will  help  you  to  a  conclusion  if  I  tell  you  that  some  time
ago,  finding  ourselves  pressed  with  German  competition,  we
threw  out  our  old  machinery,  and  replaced  it  with  a  new  and
imoroved  pattern ;  and  the  machinery  by  us  rejected  was  sold
to  go  to  the  United  States.'  To  complete  the  story,  it  is  only
necessary  for  the  Commissioner  to  add  that  the  owners  of  this
second-hand  machinery  have  since  its  importation  demanded
and  received  an  increased  protection  on  its  products."*

I  may  now  sum  up  the  general  result  of  this  latter  portion
of  my  argument:  (1)  As  regards  the  industries  of  raw  prod-
uce, Protection  does  not  call  into  existence  a  single  branch  of
production  which  would  noj;  equally  have  existed  under  free
trade ;  it  merely  alters  the  proportions  in  which  such  indus-
tries are  carried  on,  hindering  their  natural  and  healthy  devel-
opment: (2)  in  the  domain  of  manufacturing  industry  it  is
equally  inefficacious  as  a  means  of  creating  variety  in  industri-
al pursuits ;  for  if  on  the  one  hand  it  secures  a  precarious  exist-
ence for  certain  kinds  of  manufactures,  on  the  other,  by  artifi-
cially enhancing  the  price  of  raw  material,  it  discourages  other
kinds  which  in  its  absence  would  grow  and  flourish:  while  (3)
over  and  above  all  these  injurious  effects,  it  vitiates  the  indus-
trial atmosphere  by  engendering  lethargy,  routine,  and  a  reli-
ance on  legislative  expedients,  to  the  great  discouragement  of
those  qualities  on  which,  above  all,  successful  industry  mainly
depends — energy,  economy,  and  enterprise.

To  conclude,  having  regard  to  the  geographical  position,
extent  of  territory,  and  extraordinary  natural  resources  of  the
United  States,  as  well  as  to  the  character  of  its  people,  trained
in  all  the  arts  of  civilization,  and  distinguished  beyond  others
by  their  eminent  mechanical  and  business  talents,  there  seems

*  Mr.  Wells's  Report  for  1868,  p.  74.


406  FREE  TRADE  AND  PROTECTION.

no  reason  that  thej  should  not  take  a  position  of  commanding
influence  in  the  world  of  commerce — a  position  to  which  no
other  people  on  earth  could  aspire.  But,  to  do  this,  they  must
eschew  the  miserable  and  childish  jealousy  of  foreign  competi-
tion which  is  now  the  animating  principle  of  their  commercial
policy.  If  they  desire  to  command  a  market  for  their  products
in  all  quarters  of  the  world,  they  must  be  prepared  to  admit
the  products  of  other  countries  freely  to  their  own  markets,
and  must  learn  to  seek  the  benefits  of  international  trade,  not
in  the  vain  ambition  of  underselling  other  countries,  and  so
making  them  pay  tribute  in  gold  and  silver  to  the  United
States,  but  in  that  which  constitutes  its  proper  end  and  only
rational  purpose — the  greater  cheapening  of  commodities  and
the  increased  abundance  and  comfort  which  result  to  the  whole
family  of  mankind.


CHAPTER  V.

ON  SOME  IimOE  TOPICS.

§  1.  I  PROPOSE  to  devote  this  concluding  chapter  on  Inter-
national Trade  to  the  consideration  of  some  topics  which  seem
to  fall  more  easily  under  this  than  under  other  headings  —
topics  more  or  less  involved,  and  in  general  tacitly  decided  in
one  sense  or  another,  in  most  commercial  and  monetary  dis-
cussions, but  the  current  ideas  respecting  "which  are  by  no
means  in  accordance  with  the  main  principles  of  international
trade  as  these  have  been  developed  in  the  foregoing  pages.

The  first  of  those  questions  to  which  I  would  ask  the  read-
er's attention  is  the  following:  What  is  the  interest  of  a  coun-
try in  the  scale  of  its  general  prices?  Is  it  for  the  advantage
of  the  people,  as  a  whole,  that  the  scale  should  be  high  or  low  ?
and,  assuming  that  they  have  an  interest  in  either  alternative,
what  is  the  nature  of  the  advantage,  and  what  are  its  limits?
A  moment's  reflection  will  enable  us  to  take  at  least  one  step
toward  the  solution  of  our  problem :  the  interest  involved,
whatever  be  its  character  and  extent,  can  only  be  real  so  far
forth  as  the  high  or  low  scale  of  prices  is  oiot  universal — so  far
forth,  that  is  to  say,  as  it  is  not  shared  in  the  same  degree  by
all  countries.  A  country  can  have  no  permanent  interest  in
an  advance,  or  in  a  fall  of  prices,  which  embraces  the  whole
commercial  world.  Such  a  change  leaves  the  purchasing
power  of  each  country  in  relation  to  every  other  precisely
where  it  was  before ;  reciprocal  demand,  therefore,  would  con-
tinue unaffected,  and,  by  consequence,  international  values,  and
all  interests  that  depend  on  that  relation. But  where  the


408  ON  SOME  MINOR  TOPICS.

advance  or  fall  is  not  general — \Yhere  the  high  or  low  scale  of
prices  is  confined  to  one,  or  to  a  few  countries  —  it  is  not  at
once  apparent  how  it  may  affect  the  interest  of  tliose  concerned.
I  ought  here,  perhaps,  to  refer  to  a  maxim  advanced  by
some  writers  on  monetary  questions  which,  if  well  founded,
would  seem  to  preclude  the  existence  of  the  phenomenon,  the
character  of  which  I  propose  to  discuss.  It  is  held  hy  the
writers  to  whom  I  refer  that  the  value  of  gold  is,  and  must
ever  be,  "  the  same  all  the  world  over."*  Now  if  this  be  so,
as  the  value  of  gold  is  merely  another  expression  for  the  gold
prices  of  commodities,  it  must  follow  that  a  high  or  a  low  scale
of  general  prices  existing  in  any  country,  and  not  shared  by
every  other,  is  an  impossible  occurrence.  As  there  is  no  local
value  of  gold,  so  there  can  be  no  local  scale  of  prices.  I  have
no  hesitation,  however,  in  expressing  my  opinion  that  the
doctrine  in  question,  with  whatever  confidence  advanced,  is
absolutely  destitute  of  foundation. f The  truth  on  the  subject

*  It  is  probable  that  by  "the  value  of  gold"  the  Avriters  in  question  mean  to
designate  its  value  on  loan  as  well  as  its  exchange  value.  But  a  reference  to  the
rates  of  interest  prevailing  at  any  given  time  in  the  principal  money  markets  of
the  world  will  suffice  at  once  to  refute  this  part  of  the  doctiine.

t  It  has  certainly  no  support  from  any  writer  of  authority.  Eicardo  says
broadly:  "The  value  of  money  is  never  the  same  in  any  two  countries,  depend-
ing as  it  does  on  relative  taxation,  on  manufacturing  skill,  on  the  advantages  of
climate,  natural  productions,  and  many  other  causes."  He  adds  —  and  the  re-
mark may  possibly  help  to  clear  up  the  confusion  of  thought  in  which  the  maxim
I  am  combating  has  originated— "  This  higher  value  of  money  [in  a  country  ex-
celling in  manufactures]  Avill  not  be  indicated  by  the  exchange ;  bills  may  con-
tinue to  be  negotiated  at  par,  although  the  prices  of  corn  and  labor  should  be  10,

20,  or  30  per  cent,  higher  in  one  country  than  in  another When  each

country  has  precisely  the  quantity  of  money  which  it  ought  to  have,  money  will
not,  indeed,  be  of  the  same  value  in  each,  for  with  respect  to  many  commodities
it  may  differ  5,  10,  or  even  20  per  cent.,  but  the  exchange  will  be  at  par.  One
hundred  pounds  in  England,  or  the  silver  which  is  in  £100,  will  purchase  a  bill
of  £100,  or  an  equal  quantity  of  silver  in  France,  Spain,  or  Holland." — "Ricar-
do's  "Works,"  pp.  81-84.


HIGH  AND  LOW  PRICES.  409

seems  to  me  to  be  as  follows :  among  countries  commercially
connected  there  is  a  large  class  of  commodities — all  those,
namely,  which  constitute  the  great  staples  of  commerce,  such
as  corn,  flour,  tea,  sugar,  metals,  and  most  raw  materials  of
industry — of  which  the  prices  can  not  vary  much  in  different
localities.  As  a  rule  the  difference  of  prices  will  not  be  great-
er than  the  cost  of  carriage  between  the  countries  of  produc-
tion and  consumption,  always,  of  course,  excepting  the  case
where  such  articles  come  under  the  operation  of  local  fiscal
laws.  In  the  exchange  for  commodities  of  this  description,  the
value  of  gold,  though  not  the  same  all  the  world  over,  does
not  greatly  vary  within  the  range  of  general  commerce.  But
besides  the  commodities  which  form  tY.fe  staples  of  commerce,
there  are  those  which,  through  unsuitableness  for  distant  traf-
fic, or  owing  to  same  other  obstacle,  do  not  enter  into  inter-
national trade.  With  regard  to  these,  there  is  nothing  to  pre-
vent the  widest  divergence  in  their  gold  prices,  or,  therefore,
in  the  value  of  gold  in  relation  to  them,  not  merely  in  remote
quarters  of  the  world,  but  sometimes  even  in  localities  within
the  same  country  ;  and  the  class  of  goods  to  which  this  descrip-
tion applies — it  will  vary  in  extent  with  the  situation  of  each
country  and  the  means  of  communication  at  its  command — far
from  being  insignificant,  must  under  all  circumstances  include
some  of  the  most  important  articles  of  general  consumption.
To  perceive  this,  it  is  only  necessary  to  remember  that  the
group  includes  the  items  of  house  accommodation,  meat,  and  a
large  proportion  of  those  things  which  fall  under  the  head  of
"provisions" — a  list  which  would  have  to  be  greatly  enlarged
if  we  had  to  deal  with  countries  lying  aside  from  the  leading
thoroughfares  of  commerce,  or  in  which  the  means  of  commu-
nication have  been  imperfectly  developed.

It  is  not  true,  therefore,  that  gold  is  of  the  same  value  "  all
the  world  over."  On  the  contrary,  it  varies  in  value  in  differ-
ent countries,  and  sometimes  in  different  localities  within  the


410  ON  SOME  MINOR  TOPICS.

same  country,  in  some  degree  in  relation  to  almost  all  conv
modities,  but,  in  relation  to  a  numerous  and  important  class  of
commodities,  in  a  very  considerable  degree,  and  this,  not  mere-
ly as  a  temporar}^  fluctuation,  but  permanently,  as  a  normal
state  of  things ;  and  the  problem  we  have  now  to  consider  is,
whether,  the  case  being  so,  it  is  advantageous  for  the  inhabit-
ants of  a  country  that  the  scale  of  its  prices,  within  the  possible
limits  of  permanent  divergence,  should  be  high  or  low  in  rela-
tion to  the  cosmopolitan  level.

The  majority  of  those  who  write  or  speak  on  commercial
questions  would,  I  imagine,  have  little  hesitation  in  pronoun-
cing in  favor  of  the  former  alternative;  and  plainly  the  most
obvious  appearances  support  this  view.  A  high  scale  of  prices
and  large  accumulated  wealth  for  the  most  part  go  together,
while  low  prices  are  the  incident  of  districts  remote  from  the
main  current  of  civilization,  and  in  general  poor  and  barbar-
ous. If  we  inquire,  however,  as  to  the  nature  of  the  connection
between  the  phenomena  in  each  case,  the  answer  does  not  by
any  means  lie  upon  the  surface.  Let  it  be  remembered  that
a  difference  in  local  prices,  if  considerable  and  permanent,  can
only  exist  in  the  case  of  commodities  which  can  not  be  made
the  subject  of  foreign  commerce.  High  prices,  therefore,  can
not  serve  us  in  our  dealings  with  foreign  nations,  and  it  is  not
by  any  means  clear  how  the  people  of  a  country  can  be  profit-
ed by  exchanging  their  goods  among  themselves  on  a  high
pecuniary  scale.  Moreover  it  is  evident  that,  with  regard  to
those  commodities  which  do  enter  into  foreign  commerce,  it  is
the  interest  of  each  competing  nation  that  their  prices  should
be  relatively  as  low  as  possible;  this  being  the  condition  of
commanding  a  sale  for  them  in  neutral  markets.  Granting,
therefore,  that  high  prices  and  accumulated  wealth  on  the  one
hand,  and  low  prices  and  poverty  on  the  other,  are  generally
coincident  phenomena,  we  have  yet  to  discover  wherein  con-
sists the  bond  that  connects  them.


CHEAP  GOLD.  411,

The  solution  of  the  problem  is  contained  in  the  following
statement:  What  a  nation  is  interested  in  is,  not  in  having  its
prices  high  or  low,  but  in  having  its  gold  cheap — understand-
ing by  cheapness*  not  low  value,  but  loiu  cost — a  ^mall  sacri-
fice of  ease  and  comfort ;  and  it  generally  happens  that  cheap
gold  is  accompanied  by  a  high  scale  of  prices.  I  say  "gener-
ally happens,"  because  it  by  no  means  follows  as  a  necessary
consequence  that  the  two  phenomena  should  go  together.
Gold  may  be  cheap,  and  prices,  at  the  same  time,  low,  as  a  lit-
tle reflection  will  easily  convince  us.  The  range  of  prices  that
actually  prevails  in  a  country  is,  speaking  broadly,  the  result-
ant of  two  conditions — the  cost  at  which  that  country  produces
or  obtains  its  gold,  and  the  cost  at  which  it  produces  or  obtains
commodities.  Fluctuations  and  disturbing  causes  apart,  the
gold  and  the  commodities  will  exchange  for  each  other  in  pro-
portion to  their  costs ;  and  cheap  gold,  therefore,  will  be  the
concomitant  of  high  prices,  only  in  so  far  as  the  cheapness  in-
cident to  the  gold  is  not  shared  by  the  other  products  of  in-
dustry. The  cheapness  of  gold,  for  example,  in  Australia  does
not  occasion  a  high  price  of  meat,  of  flour,  of  wool,  of  tallow,
of  hides,  or  of  many  other  articles  in  that  country,  because  the
cost  of  producing  those  articles  there  is  also  very  low.  Any
of  them  can  be  purchased  in  Australia  at  as  low  a  price  as  in
Europe :  many  of  them,  meat  and  wool,  for  example,  at  consid-
erably lower  prices.  It  is  thus  evident  that  cheap  gold  is  no
necessary  concomitant  of  a  high  scale  of  prices.  We  must,
therefore,  distinguish  between  the  two  things ;  and,  so  distin-
guishing, I  have  now  to  show  that  the  interest  of  a  nation  lies,

*  This  is,  I  admit,  a  departure  from  ordinary  usage,  "cheap"  being  more  com-
monly applied  to  price  or  value  than  to  cost  of  production.  But  we  much  need  a
word  to  express  low  cost  as  distinguished  from  low  price  or  value,  and  it  seems  to
me  that  "cheapness"  may  conveniently  be  appropriated  to  this  purpose.  At  all
events,  having  had  notice  of  the  sense  in  which  I  use  the  word,  the  reader  will  not
be  misled.


412  ON  SOME  MINOR  TOPICS.

not  in  having  its  prices  higb,  but  in  having  its  gold  cheap',
and  that  it  is  only  in  so  far  as  high  prices  are  an  indication  of
cheap  gold,  and  low  prices  an  indication  of  dear  gold,  that  ei-
ther can  be  considered  as  furnishing  any  presumption  wheth-
er in  favor  of  or  against  the  wealth  or  well-being  of  a  com-
munity.

As  I  remarked  just  now,  the  problem  we  are  considering
can  only  arise  with  reference  to  relative  prices.  A  rise  or  fall
of  prices  shared  by  all  nations  equally  can  not  aflPect  the  inter-
est of  any  ;  and  similarly  the  cheapness  or  dearness  of  gold —
considered  in  the  capacity  in  which  we  are  now  regarding  it,
as  the  instrument  of  general  commerce,  not  as  a  commodity
intended  for  consumption — is  only  of  importance  in  so  far  as
it  is  not  universal.  Gold  cheapened  everywhere  and  in  the
same  degree,  would  mean,  other  things  being  the  same,  an
equal  and  universal  rise  of  prices,  and  there  would  obviously
be  no  advantage  in  obtaining  our  gold  at  a  lower  cost  if  we
were  compelled  to  give  proportionally  more  of  it  for  all  that
we  required.  But  assuming — what  is  simple  matter  of  fact —
that  the  cost  at  which  different  nations  obtain  their  gold  is  dif-
ferent— that  the  cost  may  be  reduced  in  some  countries  with-
out undergoing  a  corresponding  reduction  in  others — then  a
manifest  advantage  arises  to  a  nation  from  the  cheapness  of  its
gold;  for  just  in  proportion  as  it  obtains  its  gold  at  small  cost
— by  a  small  expenditure  of  labor  and  abstinence — it  will  ob-
tain at  small  cost  all  its  imported  commodities.  The  advantage
would.,  indeed,  be  confined  to  its  foreign  trade.  In  domestic
exchanges  prices  would  adapt  themselves  to  the  cheapened
.cost  of  money,  and  in  this  field  of  its  activity  neither  good  nor
evil  would  result  for  the  nation  as  a  whole ;  but  in  its  deal-
ings with  foreign  nations  it  would  be  otherwise.  In  relation  to
them,  its  position,  as  commanding  gold  on  terms  of  exception-
al cheapness,  would  be  one  of  vantage,  and  would  enable  it
through  this  cheapened  medium  to  obtain  from  them,  on  terms


CHEAP  GOLD.  413

correspondingly  advantageous,  all  that  they  are  capable  of  sup-
plying.

Such  is  the  nature  of  the  advantage  which  a  country  derives
from  the  relative  cheapness  of  its  gold;  and,  as  I  have  already
remarked,  in  old  countries  cheap  gold  is  generally  accom-
panied by  a  high  scale  of  prices  for  all  commodities  not  fall-
ing within  the  range  of  international  trade.  To  exhibit  the
grounds  of  this  connection  we  may  take  the  case  of  Great
Britain,  The  cost  of  gold  is  lower  in  Great  Britain  than  in
any  country  in  Europe,  or,  we  may  say  broadly,  than  in  any
in  the  world,  America  and  Australia  excepted.  The  evidence
of  this  is  to  be  found  in  the  scale  of  our  industrial  remunera-
tion measured  in  gold.*  To  what  is  the  fact  to  be  attributed?
To  this,  that  we  possess  in  our  coal,  iron,  and  other  mineral
fields,  combined  with  the  skill  and  energy  of  our  inhabitants,
superior  resources  to  those  possessed  by  other  countries  for
the  production  of  certain  manufactures  in  extensive  demand
throughout  the  world.  Producing  such  manufactures  at  less
cost  than  they  can  be  produced  at  by  other  nations,  and  find-
ing for  them  an  extensive  demand  throughout  the  world,  we
are  enabled  at  once  to  undersell  other  nations  in  neutral  mar-
kets, and  yet  at  the  same  time  to  obtain  for  our  products  a
price  which  bears  a  larger  proportion  to  their  cost  of  produc-
tion— to  the  labor  and  abstinence  employed  in  producing  them
— than  the  price  obtained  by  foreign  nations  for  their  products
bears  to  the  cost  of  such  products.  A  given  expenditure  of
labor  and  abstinence  in  this  country  thus  enables  us  to  com-
mand  a  larger  result  in  gold  than  the  same  expenditure  would
enable  foreign  nations  to  command.  In  other  words,  we  ob-
tain our  gold  cheaper,  while,  as  involved  in  this  result,  the
scale  of  industrial  remuneration,  measured  in  gold,  is  higher

*  This  part  of  the  problem  has  been  ably  worked  out  by  Mr.  Senior,  in  his  well-
known  Essay,  already  referred  to,  "On  the  Cost  of  obtaining  Money."


414  ON  SOME  MINOR  TOPICS.

with  US  than  with  them.  All  this,  I  say,  is  the  consequence  of
the  great  and  exceptional  advantages  possessed  by  this  coun-
try in  certain  departments  of  industr3\  We  have  here  the
explanation  of  our  cheap  gold,  but  not  of  our  high  scale  of
prices.*  The  explanation  of  the  latter  phenomenon  lies  in  the
fact  that  those  industrial  advantages  are  not  general,  but  con-
fined to  a  few  departments  of  production.  Supposing  that
they  extended  over  the  whole,  or  the  greater  portion,  of
our  industrial  field,  our  position  would  resemble  that  of  some
of  the  Australian  colonies;  and  we  should,  along  with  cheap
gold,  have  a  low  scale  of  general  prices.  In  fact,  however,  the
case  is  otherwise.  We  are  in  the  position  of  an  old  country.
Our  land  has  all  long  since  been  appropriated,  and,  to  sup-
ply us  with  food,  even  very  inferior  qualities  of  soil  have
been  brought  under  the  plow,  and  are  cultivated  at  high  cost.
Food  and  provisions  of  all  sorts,  consequently,  are  dear ;  so  also
is  house  accommodation,  and  in  general  all  those  things  which
can  not  easily  be  made  the  subject  of  international  commerce.
In  these  respects  we  enjoy  no  special  advantages  over  other
nations :  in  obtaining  gold,  however,  as  has  been  shown,  we  do
possess  such  advantages.  Gold,  therefore,  with  us  exchanges
in  larger  proportion  against  all  this  class  of  commodities  than
in  other  countries ;  but  this  is  only  in  other  words  to  say  that
the  scale  of  prices  over  this  area  of  exchange  is  higher  here
than  in  them.  High  prices,  thus,  in  England  are  a  conse-
quence of  cheap  gold ;  and  our  cheap  gold  enables  us  to  com-
mand, on  terms  proportionally  favorable,  the  products  of  other
countries.  But  we  should  equally  enjoy  this  advantage,  while
we  should  also  enjoy  others  in  addition,  if,  having  our  gold  as
cheap  as  now,  our  scale  of  prices  was  at  the  same  time  as  low
as  in  other  countries ;  for  this  would  imply  that  our  industry


*  Points  which  Mr.  Senior  omitted  to  discriminate,  as  Mr.  Mill  has  pointed  out.
See  "Principles  of  Political  Economy,"  vol.  ii.,  p.  167.


GAIN  ON  FOREIGN  IBADK  4lS

was  as  productive  in  all  its  departments  as  in  those  through
which  we  obtain  our  gold.  It  can  not,  therefore,  be  said  that
high  prices  are  in  themselves  advantageous  to  a  country;
nevertheless,  in  so  far  as  they  are  an  indication  of  cheap  gold,
they  are  an  evidence  that  the  country  in  which  they  exist  oc-
cupies a  position  of  vantage  in  the  world  of  commerce,  and
high  prices  will  therefore,  under  such  circumstances,  generally
be  accompanied  with  commercial  prosperity  and  large  accumu-
lated wealth.  There  is  just  one  exception  to  this  statement.
It  occurs  where  the  scale  of  prices  is  raised  through  the  oper-
ation of  a  protective  tariflP.  Gold  might,  in  this  case,  be  cheap,
and  yet  none  of  the  advantages  of  cheap  gold  would  follow;
for,  as  I  have  explained,  it  is  only  through  foreign  trade  that
those  advantages  are  realized,  and  just  in  so  far  as  Protection
is  operative,  the  country  maintaining  it  will  be  excluded  from
foreign  trade.  Countries,  therefore,  in  which  prices  are  kept
high  by  Protection,  are  in  the  singular  position  of  securing
cheap  gold,  subject  to  the  condition  that  it  shall  not  be  spent
in  the  only  market  where  advantage  would  arise  from  its
cheapness.

§  2.  So  much  I  have  thought  it  worth  while  to  say  on
the  subject  of  high  and  low  prices.  I  now  turn  to  another
topic,  also  much  implicated  in  commercial  discussions,  and  on
which  some  strange  notions  would  seem  to  be  afloat.  That  a
nation  is  enriched  by  its  foreign  trade  is  mostly  taken  for
granted,  and  with  good  reason ;  but  what  is  the  nature  of  the
gain?  and  by  what  standard  are  we  to  measure  its  amount?
We  are  all  familiar  with  the  doctrine  of  the  Balance  of  Trade,
according  to  which  celebrated  theory  the  gain  on  foreign  trade
was  measured  by  the  excess  of  exports  over  imports,  and  con-
sisted in  the  gold  and  silver  which  were  supposed  to  come
from  foreign  countries  in  liquidation  of  the  balance.  That
view  is  now,  I  suppose,  pretty  generally  abandoned. But  I


416  ON  SOME  MINOR  TOPICS.

have  observed  of  late,  both  in  the  press  and  among  parlia-
mentary speakers,  a  curious  modern  inversion  of  the  ancient
doctrine.  I  have  seen  it  laid  down,  with  much  exultation  over
the  ignorance  of  our  ancestors,  that  the  gain  in  our  foreign
commerce,  instead  of  being  measured,  as  was  formerly  thought,
by  the  excess  of  exports  over  imports,  is,  on  the  con trarj?-,  meas-
ured by  the  excess  of  imports  over  exports.  A  contributor
to  an  important  provincial  paper,  writing  some  time  since  un-
der the  influence  of  this  notion,  calculated  that  the  gain  of  En-
gland from  her  foreign  trade  amounted  to  about  £100,000,000
sterling;  this  being  about  the  amount  by  which  her  imports
in  that  year  exceeded  her  exports.  If  I  mistake  not,  it  was  a
part  of  the  doctrine  that  this  sum  represented  the  profits  of  our
merchants  engaged  in  foreign  trade.  The  reader  who  has  fol-
lowed the  explanations  given  in  a  former  chapter  of  the  causes
governing  the  relation  of  exports  and  imports  in  the  external
trade  of  countries  will  not  need  any  further  refutation  of  this
extravagant  notion.  I  may  just  add,  as  a  sufficient  reductio  ad
ahsurdum^  that,  inasmuch  as  the  external  trade  of  many  pros-
perous communities  exhibits  a  constant  excess  of  exports  over
imports,  it  would  follow  from  this  view  that  all  such  communi-
ties are  undergoing  a  steady  course  of  impoverishment,  and
that  those  of  their  inhabitants  who  engage  in  foreign  trade
only  incur  losses  on  their  investments.  Such  speculations
show  how  little  the  Political  Economy  of  some  among  us  is  in
advance  of  the  ideas  of  the  seventeenth  century.

Another  method  by  which  it  is  frequently  attempted  to  es-
timate the  gain  on  foreign  trade  proceeds  on  the  assumption
that  such  gain  is  identical  with  the  mercantile  profits  accruing
upon  the  capital  thus  invested.  This  view  is  only  less  absurd
than  the  former  in  not  identifying  the  nraount  of  mercantile
profit  with  the  balance  on  the  external  trade.  According  to  it,
if  we  suppose  the  total  capital  embarked  in  the  foreign  trade
of  Great  Britain  to  be  £500,000,000,  and  the  rate  of  profit  £10


GAIN  OX  FOREIGN  TRADE.  417

per  cent.,  it  would  follow  that  the  gain  to  the  country  upon
her  foreign  trade  would  be  represented  by  £50,000,000  ster-
ling. This  way  of  regarding  the  subject  is,  I  imagine,  suffi-
ciently prevalent  among  our  mercantile  classes ;  but  it  only  af-
fords a  proof  the  more  how  very  little  those  classes  have  yet
contrived  to  appropriate  of  the  elementary  truths  of  the  sci-
ence in  whose  name  they  so  often  speak.  The  notion  betrays
a  fundamental  misconception  of  the  nature,  not  merely  of  for-
eign trade,  but  of  all  trade,  and  of  the  end  and  purpose  for
which  it  exists.  "Consumption,"  says  Adam  Smith,  "is  the
end  and  purpose  of  all  production."  ....  "The  maxim,"  he
observes,  "  is  so  perfectly  self-evident  that  it  would  be  absurd
to  attempt  to  prove  it."  Not  less  self-evident  is  it  that  the  end
and  purpose  of  all  trade  is  to  cheapen  production,  and  so  to
niinister  more  effectually  to  the  ultimate  end — the  need  of  the
consumer.  But  the  gain  upon  trade  must  surely  consist  in  the
degree  in  which  it  fulfills  its  proper  end — must,  therefore,  con-
sist, not  in  the  profits  of  traders,  but  in  the  advantage  which  it
brings  to  those  for  whose  behoof  the  trader  exists.  It  is  true
the  trader's  motive  when  engaging  in  trade  is  to  make  a  profit;
but  not  the 'less  is  his  raison  d^etre  as  a  trader  to  minister  to  the
wants  of  others.  He  must  have  his  profit,  or  he  will  cease  to
trade ;  but  his  profit,  though  an  incident  of  the  good  resulting
from  his  office,  is  not  the  measure  of  it.  The  measure  of  the
service  which  he  renders — of  the  importance  of  his  function —
is  not  this,  but  the  benefit  he  confers  on  the  community  whose
servant  he  is;  and  this  benefit  is  great  in  proportion  to  his
success  in  serving  the  consumer ;  in  other  words,  in  cheapening
commodities — in  diminishing  the  obstacles  which  exist  to  the
satisfaction  of  human  wants.  Nothing,  therefore,  can  betray  a
more  profound  misconception  of  the  true  nature  of  trade  and
the  purpose  for  which  it  exists  than  to  represent  the  advan-
tages derivable  from  it  as  measured  by  the  profits  of  the  agents
who  carry  it  on. It  would  be  just  as  reasonable  to  represent

27


418  ON  SOME  MINOR  TOPICS.

the  advantages  of  learning  as  measured  by  the  salaries  of
teachers.

What,  then,  is  the  true  criterion  of  the  gain  on  foreign  trade?
I  reply,  the  degree  in  which  it  cheapens*  commodities,  and  ren-
ders them  more  abundant.  Foreign  trade  not  merely  supplies
us  with  commodities  more  cheaply  than  we  could  produce
them  from  our  own  resources,  but  supplies  us  with  many  com-
modities which,  without  it,  we  could  not  obtain  at  all.  The  cie-
gree  in  which  it  does  this  is  the  true  criterion  and  measure  of
the  gain,  but  it  is  a  measure  which  palpably  does  not  admit  of
being  applied  in  practice.  To  determine  the  amount  or  extent
of  the  advantage  derivable  from  foreign  trade  is,  and,  I  venture
to  say,  must  ever  be,  an  absolutely  insoluble  problem — a  truth
which  will  be  sufficiently  apparent  if  we  advert  to  some  of  the
data  on  wdiich  its  solution  depends.

As  I  have  just  said,  one  portion  of  the  gain  derived  from
foreign  trade  consists  in  the  supply  it  yields  us  of  commodities
not  capable  of  being  produced  in  our  own  country.  Great
Britain,  for  example,  obtains  in  this  way  her  tea  and  sugar;
and  it  will,  perhaps,  be  thought  that  the  satisfaction  derived
from  the  consumption  of  these  articles  constitutes  the  gain  to
the  British  consumer  upon  so  much  of  our  foreign  trade.
Even  if  this  were  so,  it  is  pretty  evident  that  the  satisfaction
in  question  is  not  capable  of  quantitative  mensurement.  But,
in  point  of  fact,  the  problem  is  far  more  complicated  than  such
a  solution  supposes;  for  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that,  in  the
event  of  our  being  excluded  from  the  countries  which  furnish
us  with  tea  and  sugar,  we  should  have  at  our  disposal  all  the
capital  now  employed  in  producing  the  commodities  in  ex-
change for  which  tea  and  sugar  are  now  obtained.  This  capi-
tal would  then  be  available  for  the  production  of  substitutes,

*  The  reader  will  bear  in  mind  the  sense  in  which  I  use  "cheapen" — viz.,  as
equivalent  to  lowering  cost,  to  reducing  the  sacrifices  involved  in  procuring  a  com-
moditv.


GAIN  ON  FOREIGN  TRADE.  419

or,  in  case  none  were  forthcoming,  for  the  production  of  other
things;  and  the  gain  upon  this  portion  of  our  foreign  trade
would  be  represented  by  the  difference  between  the  advantage
conferred  on  the  community  by  its  present  supply  of  tea  and
sugar,  and  that  which  it  would  receive  from  the  substitutes,  or
other  things,  whatever  these  might  be,  which,  in  their  absence,
we  might  produce  from  our  own  resources.  But,  as  we  have
no  means  of  measuring  accurately  the  satisfactions  which  we
at  present  enjoy  from  the  consumption  of  the  articles  in  ques-
tion, and  still  less  of  measuring  those  which  we  might  derive
from  such  things  as  in  their  absence  we  might  provide  our-
selves with,  it  is  evident  that  an  accurate,  or  even  an  approxi-
mate, determination  of  the  advantages  accruing  to  us  from  our
foreign  commerce,  so  far  at  least  as  its  function  is  to  furnish  us
with  articles  we  can  not  ourselves  produce,  is  absolutely  be-
yond our  reach.  All  we  can  say  with  confidence  is  that  the
tastes  and  wants  which  are  now  satisfied  through  this  service
of  foreign  commerce  are  of  a  more  imperious  kind  than  any
which  our  labor  and  capital,  employed  upon  the  materials  fur-
nished to  us  by  our  own  country,  are  capable  of  satisfying;
since,  if  it  were  not  so,  so  much  of  our  foi'eign  trade  as  it  rep-
resents would  not  exist.  We  are  thus  justified  in  concluding
that  there  is  a  real  gain,  but  beyond  this  our  data  do  not  car-
ry us.  We  are  absolutely  without  the  means  of  estimating  its
amount.

So  much  for  one  portion  of  our  foreign  trade.  With  regard
to  that  more  important  part  of  it,  of  which  the  function  is,
not  to  supply  us  with  commodities  which  we  are  incapable  of
producing,  but  to  cheapen  those  which  we  might  produce,  the
case  might  here  seem  to  be  more  manageable.  In  order  to  as-
certain the  gain  on  this  part  of  our  trade,  the  data  necessary
would  be,  first,  a  determination  of  the  cost  at  which  we  actual-
ly obtain  our  imported  articles  of  the  class  under  consideration ;
and,  secondly,  a  determination  of  that  at  which  we  could  pro-


420  ON  SOME  MINOR  TOPICS.

duce  them  if  thrown  upon  our  owr/  resources.  The  difference
would  represent  what  we  gain  by  importation,  and  the  data
might  seem  to  be  not  beyond  our  reach.  When,  however,  we
come  to  look  closely  at  the  problem,  we  find  ourselves  once
more  estopped  by  insuperable  diflficulties ;  for,  to  take  a  sim-
ple illustration— on  the  supposition  that  we  impoit  from  for-
eign countries  10,000,000  quarters  of  wheat,  how  are  we  to
estimate  the  gain  which  the  nation  derives  from  obtaining  so
much  of  its  food  in  this  way  ?  We  know,  indeed,  or  we  may
ascertain,  at  least  approximately,  the  cost  in  labor  and  absti-
nence of  the  10,000,000  quarters  of  wheat  which  we  import,
It  would  be  represented  by  the  cost  of  the  commodities  which
we  export  to  pay  for  them.  We  know  again,  or  we  may  as-
certain; the  cost  at  which  wheat  is  now  raised  in  this  country,
when  grown  under  conditions  which  determine  its  average
selling  price.  But  what  we  do  not  know,  and  what  we  have
no  possible  means  of  ascertaining,  is  the  cost  at  which  an  addi-
tion of  10,000,000  quarters  to  our  present  home  sujDpl}^  could
be  produced  from  the  soil  of  Great  Britain.  Inasmuch  as,  in
order  to  produce  this  quantityj  it  would  be  necessary  to  bring
under  cultivation  for  wheat  soils  far  inferior  to  any  now  de-
voted to  that  purpose,  we  may  be  quite  confident  that  the  cost
would  be  immensely  greater  than  any  portion  of  our  home
supply  is  now  raised  at;  immensely  greater,  therefore,*  than
that  at  which  we  obtain  the  quantity  now  imported;  but  by
how  much  greater  we  are  absolutely  without  the  means  of  de-
termining— I  might  almost  say,  of  conjecturing  ;  and  it  is  evi-
dent that  the  same  argument  applies  with  equal  force  to  every
article  of  raw  produce  that  we  import.  It  follows  that,  with
regard  to  commodities  capable  of  being  produced  in  the  coun-

*  Home  and  imported  wheat,  quality  for  quality,  selling  in  the  same  market  at
the  same  price,  and  the  average  price  of  home  wheat  being  governed  by  the  cost
of  producing  the  most  costly  portion,  it  follows  that  this  cost  will  represent  to  us
the  cost  of  the 'imported  portion  of  our  wheat  supply.


GAIN  ON  FOREIGN  TRADE.  421

try,  no  less  than  with  regard  to  those  which  can  only  be  ob-
tained from  foreign  sources,  the  data  for  ascertaining  the  quan-
tum of  gain  accruing  to  us  from  foreign  trade  are  absolutely
wanting.  We  know  the  nature  of  the  gain:  it  consists  in  ex-
tending the  range  of  our  satisfactions,  and  in  cheapening  the
cost  at  which  sucli  as  in  its  absence  would  not  be  beyond  our
reacli  are  obtained;  and  we  know  that  the  amount  which  it
bring-s  to  us  under  each  of  these  categories  can  not  but  be  very-
great;  but  bej'ond  this  indefinite  and  vague  result  our  data  do
not  enable  us  to  pass.


THE  ENR


VALUABLE  AND  mXERESTOG  WORKS

FOR

PUBLIC  &  PRIVATE  LIBRARIES,

PcBLiSHED  BY  HARPER  &  BROTHERS,  New  York.


1^~  For  a  fall  List  of  Books  suitable  for  Libraries  published  by  Habpeb  &  Beotu-
EEB,  see  Hakpek'b  Cataloquk,  which  may  be  had  gratuitously  on  application
to  the  publishers  personally,  or  by  letter  enclosing  Ten  Cents  in  postage  stamps.

tW  IIaiipkb  &  Bkotueks  will  send  their  publications  by  mail,  postage  prepaid,  on
receipt  of  the  price.


MACAUIiAY'S  ENGLAND.  The  History  of  p:ngland  from  the  Ac-
cession of  James  II.  By  Thomas  Babington  Macaulay.  New
Edition,  from  New  Elocirotype  Plates,  5  vols.,  in  a  Bo.x,  8vo,  Cloth,
with  Paper  Labels,  Uncut  Edpes  and  Gilt  Tops,  $10  00;  Sheep,
$12  50;  Half  Calf,  $21  25.  Sold  only  in  Sets.  Cheap  Edition,
5  vols.,  12mo,  Cloth,  $2  50.

MACAULAY'S  MISCELLANEOUS  WORKS.  The  Miscellaneous
Works  of  Lord  Macaulay.  From  New  Electrotype  Plates.  5  vols.,
in  a  Box,  8vo,  Cloth,  with  Paper  Labels,  Uncut  Edges  and  Gilt
Tops,  $10  00;  Sheep,  $12  50;  Half  Calf,  $21  25.  Sold  only  in
Sets.

HUME'S  ENGLAND.  History  of  England,  from  the  Invasion  of
Julius  Caesar  to  the  Abdication  of  James  II.,  1688.  By  David
Hume.  New  and  Elegant  Library  Edition,  from  New  Electrotype
Plates.  6  vols.,  in  a  Box,  8vo,  Cloth,  with  Paper  Labels,  Uncut
Edges  and  Gilt  Tops,  $12  00;  Sheep,  $15  00;  Half  Calf,  $25  50.
Sold  only  in  Sets.  Popular  Edition,  G  vols.,  in  a  Box,  12mo,  Cloth,
$3  00.

GIBBON'S  ROME.  The  History  of  the  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Ko-
maii  Empire.  By  Edwakd  Gibbon.  With  Notes  by  Dean  Mil-
man,  M.  GuizoT,  and  Dr.  William  Smith.  New  Edition,  from
New  Electrotype  Plates.  G  vols.,  8vo,  Cloth,  with  Paper  Labels,
Uncut  Edges  and  Gilt  Tops,  $12  00;  Sheep,  $15  00;  Half  Calf,
$25  50.  Sold  only  in  Sets.  Popular  Edition,  6  vols.,  in  a  Box,
12mo,  Cloth,  $3  00  ; Sheep,  $4  50.

GOLDSMITH'S  WORKS.  The  Works  of  Oliver  Goldsmith.  Edited
by  Peter  Cunningham,  F.S.A.  From  New  Electrotype  Plates.
4  vols.,  8vo,  Cloth,  Paper  Labels,  Uncut  Edges  and  Gilt  Tops^
$8  00;  Sheep,  $10  00;  Half  Calf,  $17  00


2  Valuable  Woi'lcs  for  Puhlic  and  Private  Libraries.

MOTLEY'S  LETTERS.  The  Correspondence  of  John  Lothrop  Moiley,
D.C.L.,  Author  of  "  The  United  Netherlands,"  "John  of  Barneveld,"
"The  Rise  of  the  Dutch  Republic,"  etc.  Edited  by  George  Wil-
liam Curtis. With  Portrait. Two  Volumes,  8vo,  Cloth,  $7  00.

MOTLEY'S  DUTCH  REPUBLIC.  The  Rise  of  the  Dutch  Republic.
A  History.  By  John  Lothrop  Motley,  LL.D.,  D.C.L.  With  ;i
Portrait  of  William  of  Orange.  Cheap  Edition,  3  vols.,  in  a  Box.
8vo,  Cloth,  with  Paper  Labels,  Uncut  Edges  and  Gilt  Tops,  $6  00;
Sheep,  $7  50;  Half  Calf,  $12  7.5.  Sold  only  in  Sets.  Original
Library  Edition,  3  vols.,  8vo,  Cloth,  $10  50.

MOTLEY'S  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  History  of  the  United
Netherlands :  From  the  Death  of  William  the  Silent  to  the  Twelve
Years'  Truce— 1 58-4-1 G09.  With  a  full  View  of  the  English-Dutch
Struggle  against  Spain,  and  of  the  Origin  and  Destruction  of  the
Spanish  Armada.  By  John  Lothrop  Motley,  LL.D.,  D.C.L.
Portraits.  Cheap  Edition,  4  vols.,  in  a  Box,  8vo,  Cloth,  with  Paper
Labels,  Uncut  Edges  and  Gilt  Tops,  $8  00;  Sheep,  $10  00;  Half
Calf,  $17  00.  Sold  only  in  Sets.  Original  Library  Edition,  4  vols,,
8vo,  Cloth,  $14  00.

MOTLEY'S  JOHN  OF  BARNEVELD.  The  Life  and  Death  of  John
of  Barneveld,  Advocate  of  Holland.  With  a  View  of  the  Primary
Causes  and  Movements  of  the  "Thirty  Years'  War."  By  John
Lothrop  Motley,  LL.D.,  D.C.L.  Illustrated.  Cheap  Edition,
2  vols.,  in  a  Box,  8vo,  Cloth,  with  Paper  Labels,  Uncut  Edges  and
Gilt  Tops,  $4  00 :  Sheep,  $5  00 ;  Half  Calf,  $8  50.  Sold  only  in
Sets. Original  Library  Edition,  2  vols.,  Svo,  Cloth,  $7  00.

HILDRETH'S  UNITED  STATES.  History  of  the  United  States.
First  Series  :  From  the  Discovery  of  the  Continent  to  the  Or-
ganization of  the  Government  under  the  Federal  Constitution.  Sec-
ond Series  :  From  the  Adoption  of  the  Federal  Constitution  to  the
End  of  the  Sixteenth  Congress.  By  Richard  Hildreth.  Popular
Edition,  G  vols.,  in  a  Box,  8vo,  Cloth,  with  Paper  Labels,  Uncut
Edges  and  Gilt  Tops,  $12  00 ;  Sheep,  $15  00 ;  Half  Calf,  $25  50.
Sold  only  in  Sets.

TREVELYAN'S  LIFE  OF  MACAULAY.  The  Life  and  Letters  of
Lord Macaulay. By his Nephew, G.  Otto Trevelyan, M.Pc

,  With  Portrait  on  Steel.  2  vols.,  8vo,  Cloth,  Uncut  Edges  and  Gilt
Tops,  $5  00 ;  Sheep,  $6  00 ;  Half  Calf,  $9  50.  Popular  Edition,
2  vols,  in  one,  12mo,  Cloth,  $1  75-

TREVELYAN'S  LIFE  OF  FOX.  The  Early  History  of  Charles
James  Fox.  By  George  Otto  Trevelyan.  Svo,  Cloth,  Uncm
Edges  and  Gilt  Tops,  $2  50 ; Half  Calf,  $4  75.


Valuable  Works  for  Puhlio  and  Private  Libraries.  3

WRITINGS  AND  SPEECHES  OF  SAMUEL  J.  TILDEN.  Edited
by  John  Bigei.ow.  2  vols.,  8vo,  Cloth,  Gilt  Tops  and  Uncut  Edges,
$6  00  per  set.

GENERAL  DIX'S  MEMOIRS.  Memoirs  of  John  Adams  Dix.  Com-
piled by  his  Son,  Morgan  Dix.  With  Five  Steel-plate  Portraits.
2  vols.,  8vo,  Cloth,  Gilt  Tops  and  Uncut  Edges,  $5  00.

HUNT'S  MEMOIR  OF  MRS.  LIVINGSTON.  A  Memoir  of  Mrs.
Edward  Livingston.  With  Letters  hitherto  Unpublished,  By  Lou'
iSE  Livingston  Hunt. I2mo,  Cloth,  ^I  25.

GEORGE  ELIOT'S  LIFE.  George  Eliot's  Life,  Related  in  her  Let-
teis  and  Journals.  Arranged  and  Edited  by  her  Husband,  J.  W.
Cross.  Portraits  and  Illustrations.  In  Three  Volumes.  12mo,
Cloth,  $3  75.  New  Edition,  with  Frosli  Matter.  (Uniform  with
"Harper's  Library  Edition"  of  George  Eliot's  Works.)

PEARS'S  FALL  OF  CONSTANTINOPLE.  The  Fall  of  Constan-
tinople. Being  the  Story  of  the  Fourth  Crusade.  By  Edwin
Pears,  LL.B. 8vo,  Cloth,  $2  50.

RANKE'S  UNIVERSAL  HISTORY.  The  Oldest  Historical  Group
of  Nations  and  the  Greeks.  By  Leopold  yon  Ranke.  Edited  by
G.  W.  Protiikro,  Fellow  and  Tutor  of  King's  College,  Cambridge.
Vol.  I. 8vo,  Cloiii,  $2  50.

LIFE  AND  TIMES  OF  THE  REV.  SYDNEY  SMITH.  A  Sketch
of  the  Life  and  Times  of  the  Rev.  Sydney  Smith.  Based  on  Family
Documents  and  the  Recollections  of  Personal  Friends,  By  Stuart
J.  Reid.  With  Steel-plate  Portrait  and  Illustrations.  8vo,  Cloth,
Ig3  00.

STORMONTH'S  ENGLISH  DICTIONARY.  A  Dictionary  of  the
English  Language,  Pronouncing,  Etymological,  and  Explanatory-,
embracing  Scientific  and  other  Terms,  Numerous  Familiar  Terms,
and  a  Copious  Selection  of  Old  English  Words.  By  the  Rev.  James
Stormonth. The  Pronunciation  Revised  by  the  Rev.  P.  H.  Piielp,

.  M.A.  Imperial  8vo,  Cloth,  $5  00;  Half  Roan,  $6  50;  Full  Sheep,
$6  50. (New  Edition.)

.l^ARTON'S  CARICATURE.  Caricature  and  Other  Comic  Art,  in
All  Times  and  Many  Lands.  By  James  Parton.  203  Illustrntious.
8vo,  Cloth,  Uncut  Edges  and  Gilt  Tops,  $5  00  ;  Half  Calf,  $7  25.

DU  CHAILLU'S  LAND  OF  THE  MIDNIGHT  SUN.  Summer
and  Wiii'er  Journeys  in  Sweden,  Norway,  Lapland,  and  Northern
Finland.  By  Paul  B.  Du  Chaillu.  Illustrated.  2  vols.,  8vo,
Cloth,  $7  50; Half  Calf,  $12  00.


4  Valitaile  Works  for  Public  and  Private  Libraries.

ENGLISH  MEN  OF  LETTERS. Edited  by  John  Moklet.
The  following  volumes  are  now  ready. Others  will  follow :

JoHSfsox.  By  L.  Stephen.— Gibbon.  By  J.  C.  Xlorison.— Scott.  By  R.  H.  Hut-
ton.— Siielley.  By  J.  A.  Symonds.— Goldsmith.  By  W.  Black.— Hume.  By  Pro-
fessor Huxley.— Defoe.  By  W.  Minto.— Burns.  By  Principal  Shairp.— Spbxser.
By  R.  W.  Church.- Thackeray.  By  A.  Trollope.— Burke.  By  J.  Morley— Milton.
By  M.  Pattison.— Southey.  By  E.  Dowden.— Chaucer.  By  A.  W.  Ward.  — Bunyan.
By  J.  A.  Froude.  — Cowper.  By  G.  Smith.- Pope.  By  L.  Stephen.- Byron.  By
J.  Nichols.— Locke.  By  T.  Fowler.— Wordsworth.  By  F.  W..H,  Myers.— Haw-
thorne. By  Henry  James,  Jr.— Drydkn.  By  G.  Saiutsbury.— Landor.  By  S.  Col-
vin. — Db  Quincey.  By  D.  Masson.— Lamb.  By  A.  Aiuger.— Bkntley.  By  R.  C.
Jebb.— Dickens.  By  A.  W.Ward. —Gray.  By  E.W.  Gosse.— Swift.  By  L.  Stephen.
-Sterne.  By  H.  D.  Traill.— Macaulay.  By  J.  C.  Morison.— Fielding.  By  A.  Dob-
son.— Sheridan.  By  Mrs.  Oliphant.— Addison.  By  W.  J.  Courthope.— Bacon.  By
R.  AV.  Church.— Coleridge.  By  H.  D.  Traill.— Sir  Philip  Sidney.  By  J.  A.  Sy-
tnonds.— Keats. By  Sidney  Colvin. 12mo,  Cloth,  75  cents  per  volume.

Popular  Edition,  36  volumes  in  12,  $12  00.

IlEBER'S  HISTORY  OF  ANCIENT  ART.  History  of  Ancient  Art.
Bv  Dr.  Franz  von  Reber.  Revised  by  the  Author.  Translated
and  Augmented  by  Joseph  Thacher  Clarke.  With  310  Illustrations
and  a  Glossary  of  Technical  Terms. 8vo,  Cloth,  $3  50.

IlEBER'S  MEDI:ffiVAL  ART.  History  of  Medieval  Art.  By  Dr.
FitANZ  VON  Reber.  Translated  and  Augmented  by  Joseph  Thacher
Clarke.  With  422  Illustrations,  and  a  Glossary  of  Technical  Terms.
8vo,  Cloth,  $5  00.

NEWCOMB'S  ASTRONOMY.  Popular  Astronomy.  By  Simon
Newcomb,  LL.D.  With  112  Engravings,  and  5  Maps  of  the  Stars.
8vo,  Cloth,  $2  50 ; School  Edition,  12mo,  Cloth,  $1  30.

DAVIS'S  INTERNATIONAL  LAW.  Outlines  of  International  Law,
with  an  Account  of  its  Origin  and  Sources,  and  of  its  Historical  De-
velopment. By  Geo.  B.  Davis,  U.S.A.,  Assistant  Professor  of  Law
at  the  United  States  Military  Academy. Crown  8vo,  Cloth,  $2  00.

CESNOLA'S  CYPRUS.  Cyprus  :  its  Ancient  Cities,  Tombs,  and
Temfles.  A  Narrative  of  Researches  and  Excavations  during  Ten
Years'  Residence  in  that  Island.  By  L.  P.  m  Cesnola.  With
Portrait,  Maps,  and  400  Illustrations.  8vo,  Cloth,  E.xtra,  Uncut
Edges  and  Gilt  Tops,  $7  50;  Half  Calf,  $10  00.

TENNYSON'S  COMPLETE  POEMS.  The  Complete  Poetical  Works
of  Alfred,  Lord  Tennyson.  With  an  Introductory  Sketch  by  Anne
Thackeray  Ritchie.  With  Portraits  and  Illustra.ions.  8vo,  Extra
Cloth,  Bevelled,  Gilt  Edges,  $2  50.

LEA'S  HISTORY  OF  THE  INQUISITION.  History  of  the  Inqui-
sition of  the  Middle  Ages.  By  Henry  Charles  Lea.  Tliree  Vol-
umes. Svo,  Cloth,  Uncut  E.lges  and  Gilt  Tops,  $3  00  per  volume.


Valuable  Works  for  Pnblic  and  Private  Libraries.  5

LOSSING'S  CYCLOPAEDIA  OF  UNITED  STATES  HISTORY.
From  the  Aboriginal  Period  to  1876.  By  B.  J.  Lossikg,  LL.D.
Illustrated  by  2  Steel  Portraits  and  over  1000  Engravings.  2  vols.,
Roytil  8vo,  Cloth,  $10  00;  Sheep,  $12  00;  Half  Morocco,  $15  00.
(Sold  by  Subscription  only.)

LOSSING'S  FIELD-BOOK  OF  THE  REVOLUTION.  Pictorial
Field-Book  of  the  Revolution ;  or,  Illustrations  by  Pen  and  Pencil
of  the  History,  Biography,  Scenery,  Relics,  and  Traditions  of  the
War  for  Independence.  By  Benson  J.  Lossing.  2  vols.,  8vo,
Cloth,  $14  00;  Sheep  or  Roan,  $15  00;  Half  Calf,  $18  00.

LOSSING'S  FIELD-BOOK  OF  THE  WAR  OF  1812.  Pictorial
Field-Book  of  the  War  of  1812  ;  or.  Illustrations  by  Pen  and  Pencil
of  the  History,  Biograpliy,  Scenery,  Relics,  and  Traditions  of  the
last  War  for  American  Independence.  By  Benson  J.  Lossing.
With  several  hundred  Engravings.  1088  pages,  8vo,  Cloth,  $7  00;
Sheep  or  Roan,  $8  50;  Half  Calf,  $10  00.

MULLER'S  POLITICAL  HISTORY  OF  RECENT  TIMES  (1816-
1875).  With  Special  Reference  to  Germany.  By  William  Mul-
LER.  Translated,  with  an  Appendix  covering  the  Period  from  1876
to  1881,  by  the  Rev.  John  P.  Peters,  Ph.D. 12mo,  Cloth,  $2  00.

STANLEY'S  THROUGH  THE  DARK  CONTINENT.  Througl?
tlie  Dark  Continent ;  or,  T'^e  Sources  of  the  Nile,  Around  the  Great
Lakes  of  Equatorial  Africa,  and  Down  the  Livingstone  River  to  the
Atlantic  Ocean.  149  Illustrations  and  10  Maps.  By  H.  M.  Stan-
ley. 2  vols.,  8vo,  Cloth,  $7  50;  Sheep,  $9  50;  Half  Morocco,
$12  00.

STANLEY'S  CONGO.  The  Congo  and  the  Founding  of  its  Free
State,  a  Story  of  Work  and  Exploration.  With  over  One  Hundred
Full-page  and  smaller  Illustrations,  Two  Large  Maps,  and  several
smaller  ones.  By  H.  M.  Stanley.  2  vols.,  8vo,  Cloth,  $7  60;
Sheep,  $9  50 ; Half  Morocco,  $12  00.

GREEN'S  ENGLISH  PEOPLE.  History  of  the  English  People.
By  John  Richard  Green,  M.A.  With  Maps.  4  vols.,  8vo,  Cloth,
$10  00;  Sheep,  $12  00;  Half  Calf,  $19  00.

GREEN'S  MAKING  OF  ENGLAND.  The  Making  of  England.
By  John  Richard  Green.  With  Maps.  8vo,  Cloth,  $2  50 ;  Sheep,
$3  00 ; Half  Calf,  $3  7.5.

GREEN'S  CONQUEST  OF  ENGLAND.  The  Conquest  of  England.
By  John  Richard  Green.  With  Maps.  8vo,  Cloth,  $2  60;  Sheep,
$3  00 ;  Half  Calf,  $3  75.


6  Valuahle  Works  for  Public  and  Private  Libraries.

GROTES  HISTORY  OF  GREECE.  12  vols.,  12mo,  Cloth,  $18  00;
Sheep,  $22  80 ; Half  Calf,  $39  00.

FLAMMARION'S  ATMOSPHERE.  Translated  from  the  French
of  Camille  Flammarion.  With  10  Chronio-Lit]iogra])hs  and  8G
Wood-cuts. 8vo,  Cluth,  $G  00  ;  Half  Calf,  $8  25.

liAKER'S  ISMAILIA:  a  Narrative  of  the  Expedition  to  Central  Af-
rica for  the  Suppression  of  the  Slave-trade,  organized  hy  Isniail,
Khedive  of  Egypt.  By  Sir  Samuel  W.  Bakkk.  With  Maps,  Por-
traits, and  Illustrations. 8vo,  Cloth,  $5  00; Half  Calf,  $7  25.

LIVINGSTONE'S  ZAMBESL  Narrative  of  an  Expedition  to  tlie
Zambesi  and  its  Tributaries,  and  of  the  Discovery  of  the  Lakes
Shirwa  and  Nyassa,  1858  to  18G4:.  By  David  and  Ciiakles  Living-
stone. lU'd. Svo,  Cloth,  $5  00;  Sheep,  $5  50  ;  Half  Calf,  $7  25.

LIVINGSTONE'S  LAST  JOURNALS.  The  Last  Journals  of  Da-
vid Livingstone,  in  Central  Africa,  from  J8C5  to  his  Death.  Con-
tinued by  a  Narrative  of  his  Last  Moments,  obtained  from  his
Faithful  Servants  Chuma  and  Susi.  By  Horack  W^aller.  With
Portrait,  Maps,  and  Illustrations. 8vo,  Cloth,  $5  00; Sheep,  $6  00.

CHARNAY'S  ANCIENT  CITIES  OF  THE  NEW  WORLD. The

Ancient  Cities  of  the  New  World:  Being  Voyages  and  Explorations
in  Mexico  and  Central  America,  from  1857  to  1882.  By  Desire
CiiARNAY.  Translated  by  J.  Gonino  and  Helen  S.  Conant.  Illus-
trations and  Map.  Royal  Svo,  Ornamental  Cloth,  Uncut  Edges,  Gilt
Tops,  $6  00.

•'  THE  FRIENDLY  EDITION  "  of  Shakespeare's  Works.  Edited  by
W.  J.  RoLFE.  In  20  vols.  Illustrated.  IGino,  Gilt  Tops  and  Un-
cut Edges,  Sheets,  $27  00  ;  Cloth,  $30  00  ;  Half  Calf,  $60  00  per  Set.

GIESELER'S  ECCLESIASTICAL  HISTORY.  A  Text-Book  of
Church  History.  By  Dr.  John  C.  L.  Gieseler.  Translated  from
the  Fourth  Revised  German  Edition.  Revised  and  Edited  by  Rev.
Henrv  B.  Smith,  D.D.  A^ols.  I.,  II.,  III.,  and  IV.,  Svo,  Cloth,
$2  25  each;  Vol.  V.,  Svo,  Cloth,  $3  00.  Complete  Sets,  5  vols..
Sheep,  $14  50;  Half  Calf,  $23  25.

CURTIS'S  LIFE  OF  BUCHANAN.  Life  of  James  Bnchanan,  Fif-
teenth President  of  the  United  States.  By  George  Ticknor  Cur-
tis. With  Two  Steel  Plate  Portraits.  2  vols.,  Svo,  Cloth,  Uncut
Edges  and  Gilt  Toi)s,  $G  00.

COLERIDGE'S  WORKS.  The  Complete  Works  of  Samuel  Taylor
Coleridge.  With  an  Introductory  Essay  upon  iiis  Philosophical  and
Theological  Opinions.  Edited  by  Professor  W.  G.  T.  Shedd.  With
Steel  Portrait,  .ind  an  Index.  7  vols.,  12mo,  Clorli,  $2  00  per  vol-
ume ;  $12  00  per  set;  Half  Calf,  $24  25.

'3  i:--^o
