Google


This is a digital copy of a book thaï was prcscrvod for générations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project

to make the world's bocks discoverablc online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject

to copyright or whose légal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other maiginalia présent in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journcy from the

publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we hâve taken steps to
prcvcnt abuse by commercial parties, including placing lechnical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use thèse files for
Personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do nol send automated queries of any sort to Google's System: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character récognition or other areas where access to a laige amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for thèse purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogX'S "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informingpcoplcabout this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it légal Whatever your use, remember that you are lesponsible for ensuring that what you are doing is légal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countiies. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can'l offer guidance on whether any spécifie use of
any spécifie book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps rcaders
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full icxi of ihis book on the web

at |http: //books. google .com/l


^


ESSAYS.


ESSAYS


\


IN


POLITICAL ECONOMY


t
I
I


i


THEORETICAL AND APPLIED.


JP^Ey CAIRiNES, M. A.


Emtrititt Prvftttor ef PôlHical Eeonowy in Vnivtnity CoUe^e, LonJon.


MACMILLAN AND CO.

1873-


ê

f


[jf^r jffjpi^ y lyansiaiioH and Reproduction w r€U>\td.\


lokdon:

r. clav, sons, and tavlor, pkintkks

isrbad strkkt hill.


•v^


PREFACE.


The foUowing Essays hâve appeared în various
perîodîcals at întervals în the course of the last
fourteen years. They consîst în part of attempts
to apply the princîples of économie scîence, as that
science has been understood by the ablest writers
in this country and în France, to the solution of
actual problems, of which those presented by the
Califomian and Australian gold discoveries, and by
the State of land tenure in Ireland, are the most
important. So much of the volume may not
improperly be described as Essays în Applied
Political Economy. The remaining Essays deal
mostly with topics of a theoretical kind ; one —
Political Economy and Laissez-faire — is expository
of the character of économie science, and two —
those on Comte and Bastiat — are critical and to
some extent controversial. To two of the Essays
relating to the Gold Question I haye appended


vi PREFACE.

postscripts, in which the principal facts involved in
the particular aspect of the movement treated in
each are traced down to the présent time. I hâve
aiso in some instances subjoined notes, where later
events hâve served to throw light on the questions
discussed.

Thèse remarks will sufficiently indicate the gênerai
character of the présent volume. On one portion
of its contents, howe ver,— that which relates to the
gold discoveries and their effects, — it has seemed to
me that something further in the way of comment
and elucidation would be désirable. The problem
there discussed is one of which the practical solution
is still in process of being worked out ; and since
the papers which attempt to deal with it were written,
a considérable period of time has elapsed, in which
the movement forming the object of the inquiry
has continued to unfold itself. Such an expérience
offers an opportunity of bringing the views therein
advanced to the test of experiment. I venture to
think that, fairly judged, they will be found capable
of standing this test, and that in the main the
anticipations formed respecting the course of wages
and priées under the action of the new gold hâve
been sustained by the event. But in order to apply
the criterion fairly, the conditions under which the
experiment has proceeded ought to be taken account


PRE^FACE, vii

of. I hâve therefore thought it well to prefix to thîs
portion of the volume an introductory chapter, in
which the subject is discussed from the advanced
standpoînt we hâve now attained, and the reader
is fumished wîth the data requisite for a just esti-
mate of the spéculation.

I take this opportunity of acknowledging with
thanks the courtesy of the proprietors of the several
periodicals in which thèse Essays originally appeared
in consenting to their re-appearance in the présent
form ; and, at the same time, I am anxious to express
my deep obligations to my valued friend Professor
Fawcett, at whose suggestion it was that they were
collected, and by whose kind encouragement and
effective aid I hâve profited largely in preparing
them for the press.

J. E. C.

KiDBROOK Park Road, S.£.


CONTENTS.


ESSAYS TOWARDS A SOLUTION OF THE GOLD

QUESTION,

RSSAY PACB

INTRODUCTORY l

I. The Australian Episode 20

Postscript 50

IL The Course op Dépréciation 53

III. International Results 77

IV. SUMMARY OP THE MOVEMENT. M. CHEVALIER'S VIEWS . I09

Postscript 159


V. CO-OPERATION IN THE SLATE QUARRIES OF NORTH WALES i66

VI. POLITICAL ECONOMY AND LAND 187

Note 230

VII. POLITICAL ECONOMY AND LAISSEZ-FaIRE 232

VIII. M. Comte and Political Economy 265

Note 308

IX. Bastiat 312


CONTEATTS.


APPENDICES.

A. Products of Victoria ' 347

B. Products of the United Kingdom . 348

C. Products of North America 351

D. Products of Continental Europe 352

E. Products of Asia 354

F. Articles subject to exceptional Influences .... 356

G. Ratio of présent Prices to the average Prices of

1849, 1850, and 1851 357

H. Abstract of Dr. Soetbeer's Tables 359

I. Statement of the Conclusions arrived at by M.

Lavasseur 360

K. Extracts from Dr. Strang's Paper on Wages in

Glasgow and the West of Scotland 361


ESSAYS


E s s A Y s.


ESSAYS ON THE GOLD QUESTION,

INTRODUCTORY.

In submîtting to the judgment of the public that
portion of the présent volume which relates to the
économie aspects of the Gold Question, I am desirous
at the outset to guard myself against two possible
misapprehensions. In the first place I désire ît to be
understood that the question discussed in the Essays
on that subject is, not the gold dîscoveries and their
conséquences, but the much narrower one involved in
the economical effects of the increased supplies of
gold. The two problems, though to some extent
mutually implicated, are substantially distinct. To
the one belongs the impulse given to the movement of
population, which has resulted in the rapid peopling
and définitive settlement of districts that without this
stimulus might long hâve continued the slow and
chequered career which up to that time had charac-
terized their march, together with ail the social and
political conséquences which hâve flowed from that

B


2 lîiSSAyS ON [INTROD.

movement both in Europe and in the scènes of the
discoveries ; to the other, the effects resulting from
the' increased abundànce of money on the industry
and trade of nations and the fortunes of individuals :
and it is to the solution of this latter problem alone
that the Essays on the Gold Question are addressed.
And, secondly, the reader will do me the favour to
remember that the views expressed on the subject of
the future of trade and price are to be understood,
not as prédictions of the actual course which events
would take, but only as an attempt to forecast the
directions in which that course would be modified
by the increased supplies of gold ; in other words, to
trace the conséquences which would resuit from this
cause, supposing ail other things to remain the same.
The conditions of productive industry and the needs
of human beings are constantly undergoing change,
and, wholly irrespective of the increased supplies of
money, a variety of powerful agencies hâve during
the period under considération been acting upon
trade and priées. The actual course which the
phenomena hâve taken, therefore, has not been the
conséquence of any single influence, such as that
proceeding from the increased production of gold,
but the composite resuit of the combined action of
many ; so that to judge of the opérations of any
particular cause it becomes necessary, as far as
possible, to eliminate, and, in mercantile phrase,
discount what is due to the action of other contem-
poraneous causes. Thèse points being premised, I
proceed to consider how far the views advanced
in the Essays on the Gold Question hâve been


/


INTROD.] THE GOLD QUESTION. 3

borne out by the test whîch an expérience of some

fourteen years since they were written has furnîshed.

On one point the opinion alike of economists and

of the public seems now to be at one. It is now

generally agreed that within twenty years a sub-

stantial advance in gênerai priées has taken place.

But beyond this gênerai conviction there is little

accord. People differ as to the extent of the advance,

and as to its cause. The former point is one on

which the opinion of even the best informed statis-

tician cannot be regarded as more than conjecture.

The data for anything approaching to exactness in

such an estimate do not exist; and I shall certainly

not attempt now, as I hâve not attempted in what

I hâve formerly written, to offer any estimate pre-

tending to exactness. I content myself with the

gênerai admission that a substantial advance has

occurred, and that so far my anticipations hâve been

borne out by events. But priées having risen, to

what is the rise to be attributed ? Hère too, as I

hâve said, there is a divergence of opinion, Amongst

economists I think it is pretty well agreed that the

advance is, at least in large measure, due to the effects

of the gold discoveries. But, on the other hand, there

is, on the part of commercial writers, and in gener&l

of ail who view the question from the standpoint of

practical business, a strong disposition to ignore, or

altogether to deny, the influence of this cause in

determining the results. The enhanced scale of

wages and priées is not disputed, but it is referred

to such causes as "the récent great development of

trade," ''changes in supply and demand," or *'the

B 2


4 £SSAyS ON [iNTROD.

efifect of strîkes ; " and the facts seeming in each given
instance to be traceable to one or more of such influ-
ences, the incident of an increased abundance of gold
is regarded as something superfluous and irrele-
vant, and which need not be taken account of in
seeking their explanation. Such a mode of argument,
however, I do not hesitate to say, impHes a funda-
mental misconception as to the nature of the problem
to be solved. For to show that an advance of priées
is connected with a development of trade,* with
changes in supply and demand, or with the action of
strikes, is not to prove that it is not due to the gold
discoveries. An increased supply of money does not,
and cannot, act upon priées, or upon the value of the
métal composing it, in any other way than by being
made the instrument of trade, by affecting demand
and supply, or by furnishing employers with the
means and the motives for advancing the wages of
their workmen ; and, consequently, however clearly
the advance may be traceable in each given case to
an occurrence of this nature, the problem still lies
opcn : nothing has been done towards determining the
question whether the increased monetary supplies may
not hâve been an indispensable condition to the

* I may hère remark that " a development of trade," which is so fre-
quently assigned in explanation of a high régime of priées, not only is
inadéquate in itself to explain this resuit, but, so far as it opérâtes at ail
upon gênerai priées, tends to lower them, partly by cheapening the cost
of commodities, and partly by increasing their quantity ; for the cflfect of
having more commodities to exchange is to crcate an increased need
for circulating médium, which must, in the absence of an increased
supply, tend to raise îts value — i.e. to lower priées. In point of fact, the
increased development of trade since 1850 has been one of the causes
which has helped to neutralize to some extcnt the effects of the increased
supplies of gold.


iNTROD.] THE GOLD QUESTION, 5

realîzatîon of the advance. I hâve said the problem
still lies open ; but in sayîng thîs I hâve conceded too
much. It sometimes happens that the proximate
occurrence to which the rise in price is referred is of
a kind which necessarily implies an increased supply
of money as the remote cause. I will illustrate my
meaning by an example. In the sixth volume of
the " History of Priées," ♦ Mr. Newmarch had shown
that an advance of priées on an extensive scale had
taken place between 1851 and '56; and the question
arose, whether this was to be referred to the action
of the new supplies of gold. Mr. Newmarch décides
in the négative, on the ground that the results were
traceable to an increase in the demand for commodities
relatively to the supply ; to an increase, that is to say,
in the demand for commodities in gênerai, for nothing
less than this would suffice to explain the facts. Now
I maintain that, had Mr. Newmarchs object been to
establish the contradictory of the conclusion he had
in view, had he aimed to show that the high priées
then prevailing were the resuit of the increased money
supplies, no more effectuai line of argument could
hâve been taken for this purpose than the one he has
adopted; for, putting aside the case of an increased
demand resting on an undue inflation of crédit (un-
doubtedly one of the causes in opération in 1856,
though it is not referred to in Mr. Newmarch's ex-
planation), an increase in the demand for commodities
relatively to the supply can mean nothing else than an
increase of money demand in relation to commodities ;
and to show that priées generally hâve risen from this

* Pp. 224, 225.


6 £SSAVS ON [iNTROD.

cause îs simply to show that money has become depre-
cîated. Mr. Newmarch's argument, so far as he made
his position good, was thus a complète démonstration
of the monetary dépréciation which it was his purpose
to disprove.

And a nearly similar criticism may be made on
that explanation which refers the high scale of priées
to the effects of strikes . The argument commonly
takes thîs form. The men, it is said, having enforced
their demands for increased wages, their employers
are obliged to raise the priées of their commodities
in order to secure their profits. But this being équi-
valent to a withdrawal of a portion of the advance —
since the same money no longer purchases the same
goods — the workmen, to make good their position,
strike again, and obtain a further advance, which is
followed on the employer's part by a further rise in
priées, and so the cycle is repeated. Such was the
explanation offered a little time since in the leading
columns of an influential journal. It did not occur
to the writer, that, if the prînciple of his argument
was Sound, there is no reason why the upward move-
ment in priées should ever stop. It is, however,
beyond question that an advance in price has in some
instances been established in the way described, that
is to say through a successful strike issuing in a higher
price for the commodity ; but those who hâve perceived
this much, hâve failed to perceive what rendered this
consummation possible. How has it happened that
the capitalist producer has been enabled to maintain
the advance in price urged on him by the action of
his workmen ? In many instances the commodities so


INTROD.] THE GOLD QUESTION. 7

raîsed in price are produced for foreign markets.
How cornes it that our foreign customers acquiesce
in the demand ? In the energetic compétition which
English products hâve now to encounter on ail sides,
why do they not rather turn to other markets, or

tbecome producers of the commodity themselves ?
There are but two possible modes of explaining the^
resuit : either priées in other markets hâve risen \
proportionally with priées in our own, in which case
we hâve to consider whence comes the money which
supports those priées ; or money has become a cheaper
commodity with our foreign customers, so that they
find it more profitable to pay the increased price
demanded by the English producer, than to divert
their capital from its actual investment — an investment
which enables them, directly or indirectly, to procure
gold on those cheaper terms. Adopt which hypo-
thesis you please, and the same fact will in the end
confront you — an increased supply of money rendering
possible an advance in gênerai priées, which, but for
this condition, could never hâve occurred.

I venture to lay down broadly this proposition, that,
when an advance in the price of any of the great Sta-
ples of industry becomes définitive (monopoly apart),
there are two, and only two, adéquate explanations
of the fact : either the cost of producing the article
(understanding by cost, not the money outlay, but
the real difficulties of production) has increased ; or
the cost of producing or obtaining money has dimîn-
ished. A change in supply and demand will indced
produce temporary effects on priées, but apart from the
conditions just stated it is incapable of pcrmanently


8 ESSAYS ON [introd.

altering them. For example, the présent hîgh priée

pf coal îs certaînly due to an increased demand for

the commodîty as its proxîmate cause ; * but will this

hîgh price become définitive ? Only on one or other

or both of the conditions I hâve stated beîng satisfied.

If the increased demand can only be met by incurring

increased physical difiiculties of production so great

as to need the présent high rates to compensate them,

then the présent rates will become the normal rates

for coal. Or again, the cost of producing coal remain-

îng the same, if the présent priées, in conséquence

of the increased abundance of money, do not represent

a greater real cost than the lower priées of former

years, in this case too the présent scale of priées will

be maîntained. Or once more, if both thèse conditions

are partially satisfied, — if the real cost of producing

coal be raised in some degree, and the real cost of

obtaining money reduced in some degree, — on this

assumption also, the altérations in cost being suffi-

ciently great, we should be justified in expecting a

continuance of présent rates. It thus appears that

the question of an advance in price, where the ad-

vance becomes established and normal, is in ail cases

(monopoly apart) a question of cost of production : it

îs due either to an increased cost of producing the

commodities, or to a diminished cost of producing or

obtaining money, or to a combination of both thèse

conditions. Ail explanations which fail to trace the


♦ The two latest returas of the quantity raised, Professor Jevons informs

me, are as follows : —

1870. iio,430,cxx> tons.

1871. 117,439,000 „


iNTROD.] THE GOLD QUESTION. 9

phenomenon to one or other, or to some combinatîon of
thèse, are of the kind which would place the earth upon
an éléphant, and the éléphant on a tortoise, leaving
the tortoise to find his footing as best he may.

The doctrine advanced in the followîng Essays not
merely asserts a prospective dépréciation of gold as a
conséquence of the gold discoveries, but attempts to
State the modus operandi of dépréciation ; in other
words, the order of advance by which the ultimate
higher level of priées would be reached. At the time
the Essays were written, the opinion was nearly
universal, and indeed it would seem still to be far
from extinct, that a dépréciation of money could only
show itself in a uniform action upon ail priées — not,
I présume, that it was supposed that the priées of ail
commodities would necessarily T^dvdincQ pari passti, but
that, in so far as they were affected by the increase
of money, this would be the nature of their progress ;
and, accordingly, no such uniform movement being dîs-
coverable in the actual phenomena, it was invariably
concluded that such enhancement of price as was
found to exist must be due to some other cause than
the increased supplies of gold. This view I ventured
to combat; and, as just intimated, not content with
recording a mère gênerai déniai of the current doctrine,
and with asserting a définitive dépréciation of gold as
even then accomplished, I attempted further to state
the mode and order in which the monetary movement,
as it proceeded, would be developed. As regards
the first portion of my thesis, I need not hesitate now
to say that it has been fully verîfied by events. A


lo £SSAVS ON [iNTROD.

gênerai rise of priées has admittedly occurred ; but
in this gênerai advance there are no traces of that
uniformîty in the march which the prevailing view
anticipated. What has happened has been a great
rise in the priées of some commodities, a more mode-
rate rise in those of others, in the case of some
a very slight rise or none at ail. Further, up to a
certain point, I am entitled to claim a substantial
vérification of the views I put forward as to the order
of the advance of priées. For example, I had said
that, resolving commodities in général into the two
grand classes of crude products and manufactured
goods, the rise in priée would be more rapid in the
former than in the latter class ; whîle, as amongst
commodities of the former class, I asserted that
animal products would advance more rapidly than
those of vege table growth. Now I think I shall
not need to go into détails to prove that, speaking
broadly, this has in fact been the course which
priées hâve followed. The articles of which the
advance in priée has been most marked hâve been
such as butcher's méat, butter, bacon, and other pro-
visions of the animal kind. Minerai products and
agricultural products of the vegetable kind hâve
come next in order; while manufactured goods,
unless where, as in the case of cotton, the raw
material has been affected by causes of a very
exceptional nature, hâve shared but slightly in the
upward movement, or not at ail. So far, I say, I
can claim for the views advanced a substantial véri-
fication from the course of events. With regard, how-
ever, to that part of my spéculation which attempted


iNTROD.] THE GOLD QUESTION, ii

to describe the order of the movement in priées
as ît would be felt in différent countrîes, only a
more qualified claim to vérification can be advanced.
Not that I am disposed to make any retractation as
regards the économie principles on whieh the spécu-
lation rests : so far as I am aware, the ténor of events
has only tended to corroborate and fortify thèse ; but
in some instances, the action of the cause I was in-
vestigating has been overborne by influences of a
violently disturbing kind, not foreseen at the time the
Essays were written, and of course, therefore, not
taken account of in my spéculation. This has been
espeeially the case with what I hâve said respecting
the probable course of priées in the United States
and in India. The civil war in the former country
causing a sudden cessation in the supply of cotton,
and leading to a large inerease of taxation and to
the issue of an inconvertible paper currency, operated
powerfully upon the whole course of commercial and
monetary affairs ; nor was its influence by any means
confined to the immédiate scène of its occurrence.
Its effect in the United States was to accelerate
powerfully the upward movement of priées, already
sufiiciently marked,* not merely as measured in the
deprecîated paper currency, but as measured in gold ;
for the enlarged issue of paper currency had the
effect of setting free a large quantity of gold formerly
required for the maintenance of cash payments; and
the increased taxation, so far as it fell upon com-
modities, acted on priées direetly in proportion to its
amount. The resuit has been that priées in the

* See Appendix G.


12 ESSAYS ON [INTROD.

United States, înstead of advancing, as I expected
would happen, nearly pari passti with priées in
England, hâve progressed with much greater rapi-
dity.* On the other hand, the civil war in the
United States caused a large diversion of the
demand for cotton from that country to India.
This would of course lead to an increase of
specie remittances to the latter country ; and other
causes, more particularly a sudden development of
railway enterprise, resulting in an investment of
upwards of 60,000,000/. sterling, acted powerfully in
the same direction. At the same time, while gold
and silver were thus pouring into India in an excep-
tionally large stream, the crédit system of the country
was, by the establishment of numerous banks of issue
and deposit, undergoing rapid extension. Ail thèse
occurrences hâve conspired to give an impulse to the
movement of priées in India, far beyond what it was
possible to anticipate fourteen years ago. Accordingly,
the exceptional slowness, which I was led to expect
would characterize the advance of priées in Asiatic
countries, has certainly, so far as India is concerned,
not been realized. At the same time I am not pre-
pared to admit, even as regards India, that the dévia-
tion from the course I had ventured to trace is by
any means as great as the round assertions frequently
made about Indian priées would seem to imply. Thèse
assertions may be true, so far as they go ; but India,
it must be remembered, îs a country of vast extent ;
the means of communication over the greater part
of it are still very imperfect; and, consequently, the

♦SecMr. WcUs' Reports.


iNTROD.] THE GOLD QUESTION, 13

wîdest dîscrepancîes in the scale of priées prevail in
différent districts. Some interesting évidence of this
will be found in Mr. Ollerenshaw's paper on " The
Export Trade in Cotton to India" (Manchester Statis-
tical Society, April 1870), in which he remarks that,
"even in the same presidencies, priées hâve been
in one place double those in another, and that this
is not exeeptional, but constant." And I find in Mr.
Brassey's récent work the following striking différ-
ences in the rates of wages recorded as prevailing
in Bombay and Bengali* —


In


Bcngal pcr month.


In Bombay per month.


Rupees.


Rupees.


Carpenters .


•


9


• «5


Masons


•


21


Labouring Coolies


•


6


. . 9Îil


Horse-keepers


•


5


• . 8A


I believe the truth to be that a great advance in wages
and priées has taken place in and around particular
localities ; for example, the cotton districts north and
east of Bombay, and in gênerai wherever railway or
public Works are being carried on. The reports which
come to us in this country respecting Indian priées
are derived mostly, if not entirely, from observation
of what is taking place in those districts; but that
the State of things in those favoured centres of
activity is no safe crîterion of the gênerai condition
of priées throughout Indîa, we need only refer to the
priées of her leading staples in the great commercial
markets to satisfy ourselves. Of thèse a considérable
number, including Rice, Sugar, Tea, Rum, and Sago,

♦ " Work and Wages," p. 6a


14 ESSAYS ON [introd.

hâve posîtîvely fallen since 1850; whîle of the rest,
though a few, such as cotton and hemp, that hâve
been subject to exceptional influences, hâve risen very
greatly, the larger portion show but a moderate
advance.* I niay hère add that I hâve been not a
little fortified in my conviction of the essential sound-
ness of the view which I took as to the bcaring
of the increased money suppHes upon the relation
of priées in Europe and in the East, by the remark-
able corroboratîon which that view has since received
from the independent investigations of my friend
Professor Jevons. In a paper read before the London
Statistical Society in 1865,! Professor Jevons showed,
in an elaboràte séries of tables, not only that the
course of Oriental and European priées down to that
year had in the main been coincident with the course
foreshadowed in my essay, but that a similar pheno-
menon — namely, a divergence of priées as between
Europe and tropical countries — had manifested itself
in the early part of the présent century, when various
causes — partly economical and partly political — had
led to a temporary redundancy of the precious metals
in Europe. In a word, it appears from Professor
Jevons' investigations that, on two distinct occasion
within the présent century, an exceptional abundance
of the precious metals was followed by the same
results — those results being what theorj- applied to
the facts had led me to anticipate.

Another incident which I was led to expect would

* I am indebted for thcsc facts to information kindly funiished me
by Professor Jevons.

t Sce London Statistical Society's Journal for 1865.


INTROD.] THE GOLD QUESTION, 15

accompany the course of monetary dépréciation was a
more rapid advance of priées and rates of wages in
England than on the Continent of Europe. In effect
I had placed the Continent, as regards the order of
advance in priées, in an intermediate position between
England and the United States on the one hand, and
Asiatic coun tries on the other. In the main I .believe
the results hâve been in accordance with my forecast ;
though it would seem that the gênerai coincidence has
not been without some serious exceptions. As I
learn from Mr. Brassey's work, just referred to, the
rates of wages in the engineering trades and other
branches of industry which minis^er to railway con-
struction hâve, within twenty years, risen much more
rapidly in France and Germany than with us ; and,
what is a noteworthy feature of the phenomenon,
while thèse particular industries are those in which the
rise in wages has been greatest on the Continent, they
are those in which it has been least in this country ;
indeed, it appears from Mr. Brassey's tables that in
some of those trades no sensible advance at ail had
been established in England up to 1869,* though I
apprehend the case would be différent if the figures
were carried on to the présent year. Both facts —
the exceptional rapidity of the rise in engineering
and other ancillary trades on the Continent, and
the exceptional slowness of their advance hère — are,


♦ "Work and Wages,'* p. 157. It is pertinent to my purpose to
obseire that Mr. Brassey's tables commence with 1854 — three years,
that is to say, after the occurrence of the gold discoveries, and when that
ascending movement in wages and priées which culminated in 1857 had
already made considérable progress.


i6 ESSAYS ON [introd.

I hâve no doubt, maînly due to the cause to which
Mr. Brassey assîgns them. " The real explanation îs
to be found in the circumstance that, as the railway
System was first estabh'shed in this country, so we
were the first in the field as locomotive engine
builders" (p. 192); — that is to say, in the period
between 1840 and '50 England had a practical
monopoly of the engineering business of the world.
" The science of building locomotives was an occult
science on the Continent;" and during the period of
Continental apprenticeshîp which foUowed, the rates of
pay in that calling would naturally be low. But as
skill and knowledge were acquired with expérience, a
portion of the world's demand was naturally trans-
ferred from us to them. It necessarily folio wed that
engineering wages suffered abatement hère just as
they were beginning to advance abroad, and the
impulse then given has not yet spent îtself. I may
add to Mr. Brassey's explanation, that a succession of
great wars on the Continent during the period under
review must hâve brought into spécial and excep-
tional réquisition the products of engineering skill ;
and this, I hâve no doubt, has also contributed to the
resuit we are considering. It has thus happened,
comparing the Continent with England, that the move-
ment in wages in the callings in question has been in
opposite directions in relation to the gênerai movement
of prices. It has shot in advance there while hère it
has lagged behind. If, however, we hâve regard, not
to particular employments, but to the gênerai progress
of industry hère and abroad, I tbink it will be found
that the évidence goes on the whole to support the


INTROD.] THE GOLD QUESTION. 17

vîew whîch I had advanced. I rest thîs opinion
chiefly on the gênerai ténor of the reports from our
agents in foreign countries, published in the early part
of this year. Taking thèse reports as a whole, they
seem to me to speak in that sensé. But I think the
same conclusion may be deduced from facts furnished
by Mr. Brassey, though it would seem that his own
opinion favours the opposite view. For example, I
find it stated (pp. 18, 19) that "inquiries in Spaîn
and France, Belgium and Prussia, show that pro-
visions in those countries are from 20 to 30 per cent,
dearer than twenty years ago." Now, though I do
not prétend to hâve gone of late minutely into the
question, I will venture to assert that the advance in
the priées of provisions in England during the same
time has been very considerably greater than this.
To take a few important items, I find that, comparing
1851 with the présent year, the advance in the price
of mutton has been 58 per cent. ; of beef, 68
per cent; of butter, 42 per cent; of bacon, 60
per cent* And I hâve little doubt that, omitting the
article of flour (the movements in which since 1851
bave been substantially uniform over Western Europe),
the less important articles of provisions, such as
potatoes, poultry, cheese, fresh vegetables, &c., hâve
experienced a rise little, if at ail, short of that shown
by thèse figures. Acceptîng then Mr. Brassey 's state-
ment as to the advance in the priées of this class
of articles in the leading Continental countries, I am
justified in sayîng that the rise has been considerably
greater hère than there. But thîs fact, duly weighed,

♦ See Economisa Priées current for those years.

C


i8 ESSAYS ON [introd.

will be found to go far to décide the whole question ;
for, if we consider what the commodities are in which
a serious déviation of local prices from the common
standard is possible, we shall find that, with the ex-
ception of houses, they consist mainly of provisions.
Of dry goods and articles of gênerai manufacture — of
ail commodities, in a word, not quickly perishable
and easily portable — the prices in différent European
countries, allowance being made for the effect of tariffs,
will, as a rule, not differ by more than the cost of
carriage between the compared localities. A more
rapid advance, therefore, in the price of provisions
in England than on the Continent, means a more
rapid advance of local prices hère than there. And
it means more than this. The great consumers of
provisions are the masses, whose expenditure it is
that must in the main détermine for this class of goods
the fluctuations of price. Where, therefore, the prices
of provisions hâve in a given period advanced more
rapidly in one country than in another, the reasonable
inference is that the movement in prices has been
preceded by a parallel or nearly parallel movement in
wages.

On no other hypothesis, so far as I can see, îs the
phenomenon explicable. I am inclined, therefore, ndt-
withstanding the évidence Mr. Brassey has brought
forward of a more rapid rise of wages in engineering
and kindred trades abroad than with us, to abide by
the view taken in the Essays. Comparing prices and
wages hère and on the Continent of Europe, and
making allowance for disturbing causes, they appear,
on the whole, to hâve progressed, under the influence


INTROD.] THE GOLD QUESTION, 19

of the increased supplies of money, much as I
ventured to predîct they would progress ; that is
to say, they hâve advanced more rapîdly hère than
there. Such at least seems to me to be the ténor
of the évidence down to the présent time.

With thèse remarks I now submit thèse spécu-
lations to the judgment of the reader.


c 2


I.

ESSAY TOWARDS A SOLUTION OF THE

GOLD QUESTION.

THE AUSTRALIAN EPISODE*

In the discussions whîch hâve taken place respecting
the probable conséquences of the Californîan and
Australîan gold discoveries, there is a branch of the
gênerai question which has not yet receîved from
economîsts that degree of attention, to which from its
scientific importance it seems to be entitled. I allude
to the effects produced by those events in the countries
which hâve been the scène of their occurrence. In
the great world of commerce, the action of the new
money for the most part escapes notice amid the
variety and complexity of the phenomena in which
it is involved. The area over which the increasing
supplies hâve to act is immense, the extraneous inci-
dents affecting the course of their diffusion are nume-
rous, and the real tendency of the movement is thus
in thèse cosmopolitan transactions not easily discover-
able. But within the more limited sphère of the auri-
ferons countries this is not the case. The gold

♦ Frazet^ s Magazine^ September 1859.


ESSAY I.] THE A USTRALIAN EPISODE. s i

discoveries hâve there been the prédominant influence»
and beîng less controUed by circumstances, the real
character of the new agencies and the results to. which
they are leadîng corne dîstinctly and promînently into
view. Califomia and Australia, during the perîod
of theîr auriferous history, furnîsh us with what
Bacon would call "an ostensive or prédominant in-
stance " of the action of such agencies, showing their
nature (to borrow his language) " naked and palpable,
and even in its exaltation, or in the highest degree
of its power — that is to say, emancipated or freed.
from impediments, or at least, by force of its native
energy, dominating over thèse, suppressing and
coercing them." * Hence, by studying the effects
of the gold discoveries in thèse countries, we may
gain a clearer and steadier view of the real nature
of the causes which are at work than we are likely
to obtain from the more extended and complicated
transactions of gênerai commerce. By tracing the
events which are there presented, we may be guided
to conclusions which (if the illustration be allowed)
may serve as a sort of économie chart of the
new monetary influences — a chart which, though it
may be drawn upon an exaggerated scale, will ail the
more clearly indicate the true direction of the currents,
and the ultimate goal whither they are bearing us.

With this view, I propose in the foUowing paper
to examine the effects of the gold discoveries ii«
Australia on its trade, industry, and pecuniary rela-
tions. The course of events in California during its
auriferous history has been extremely similar, and the

♦ '* Novum Organon," Lib. il Aph. 24.


2 2 THE A USTRALJAN EPISODE. [essay

description of the movement in the former country will
in its main features be found applicable to the latter.

Regarded in its économie aspects, the discovery

of gold in Australia may be thus briefly described :

It was an occurrence by which a common labourer

was enabled, by means of a simple process requiring

for its performance little capital or skill, to obtain

about a quarter of an ounce of gold — in value about

£i sterling — on an average in the day.* This is the

fundamental fact from which the remarkable séries of

events which we hâve lately been contemplating took

îts rise, and to which the whole movement foUow-

ing upon the gold discoveries is ultimately traceable.

The immédiate effect was a gênerai disorganization

of industry throughout the Australian colonies. The

ordinary pursuits of the place were for a time entirely

suspended ; and the imaginations and hopes of the

community outstripping even the marvellous realities

of the case, the whole industrial population rushed

as by a single impulse to the gold-fields. The gold

fever, however, in this its first and fuU întensity, was

not of long duration. Actual trial soon reduced the

•

extravagant expectations raised by the first announce-
ments to a more sober and correct appréciation of
the true conditions of the discovery. Those who had
overrated the gain, as well as those whose constitution
and habits unfitted them for the toils and exposure
of gold-digging, and who did not fall victîms to theîr
mistake, retumed after a short trial to their former
occupations. The extraordinary excitement subsided ;

♦ " Correspondence relative to the late Discoveries of Gold in
Australia." Presented to Parliament, February 1852. Pages 32, 51.


I.] THE A USTRALJAN EPISODE, 23

but în the meantîme a change had taken place în the
conditions of Australian industry, a new and vigorous
branch of production had struck root, overshadowing
ail the old occupations of the country and entirely
supersedîng many of them, and a new monetary
régime had been inaugurated.

The immédiate resuit of the change was a gênerai
rise of money wages throughout the country. For-
merly the wages of common labour in Australia had
ranged from 3^. to 5^. a day. The same labour was
now, by washing the auriferous sand, capable of
producing gold worth 20^. a day. It followed as a
necessary conséquence that, other things being equal,
hired labourers would not work for less. Other things
indeed were not equal. The toil of gold-digging was
severe, its results were precarious, and the further the
removal from the coast the higher was the price of
provisions. AU thèse circumstances influenced wages
in différent occupations and in différent localities;
but, making allowance for thèse, the standard of
pecuniary rémunération in Australia was henceforth
the rate of eamings on the gold-fields.

During the two years immediately following the
first discoveries, this standard continued at the high
point above indicated — namely, about a quarter of
an ounce of gold per man each day, equal to about
£1 sterling; but towards the close of 1853 a great
décline in the proceeds of gold-digging took place.
The cream of the richest auriferous deposits had by
this tîme been skimmed away ; and it was henceforth
necessary to dig deeper for materials which, when
reached, proved of inferior quality. The Commis-


24 THE AUSTRALIAN EPISODE. [essay

sioners appointée! în the following year to report on
the gold-fields accordîngly describe a great falHng ofif at
this time from the richness of the early returns ; * and
although many new gold-fields hâve since been opened
the high average standard of the early discoveries has
not again been reached.t During the two years just
passed (1857 and 1858), the rate of gold earnîngs per
man has not exceeded on an average ten shillings
a day — a décline of one-half from the early returns.
On the whole, we may say that during the first and
most productive period of gold-digging, the standard
of money wages in Australia rose in rather more than
a fourfold proportion as compared with the pre-gold
times, and that during the last five years this pro-
portion has been reduced by one-half; so that money
wages in Australia are at the présent time (1859) rather
more than double those which formerly prevailed.J

But this rise in the pecuniary rémunération of the
labourer învolved further conséquences. The Aus-
tralian employer could not continue to pay quadruple
or double rates to his workmen while the commodities
which he sold remained at their former price. In
order to the maintenance of his profit, it was neces-
sary that the price of Australian productions should
rise in proportion as wages had risen; and this
resuit accordingly followed in due course.^

♦ " Further Papers relative to the Discovery of Gold in Australia.''
Prescnted to Parliament, February 1856. Page 55.

t Westgarth's "Victoria" (1857), p. 171.

X Ibid. p. 150. [Since 1859 the rates, with occasional variations, hâve
on the whole slightly declined, following the course of gold production
(1872).]

§ As to the connection between wages and priées when money is
falling in value, see/^x/, pp. 58^60, and note * to latter.


I.] THE AUSTRALIAN EPISODE. 25

The advance, however, in money wages and priées
which thèse circumstances necessîtated, though rapid,
was not instantaneous.* For more than a year
after the gold discoveries had occurred, it was held
sensibly in check by the peculiar state of the local
currencies. For there was at this time no mint in
Australia; the increased requirements for coin could
only be met by a transmission of buUion to London,
there to be coined, and afterwards re-îmported ; and
this process required from six to eight months at the
least for its accomplishment. Pending the arrivai
of the new coins, priées were not indeed prevented
absolutely from rising ; for numerous expédients were
in their absence freely resorted to for supplying the
place of the ordinary currency ; t but neverthelcss
priées were, by the straitness of the circulation, kept
very considerably under their natural level, as deter-
mined by the cost of gold, — a fact which was suffi-
ciently proved by a remarkable fall in the price of
gold throughout the whole of this period.J The
arrivai, however, of sovereigns in large quantities from
England, în the winter of 1852-53, quickly put an end
to this exceptional state of the markets. The price
of gold, and with it the priées of other things, rose
to their natural level ; and pecuniary rates generally
throughout the country were brought permanently

♦ See the Table of Priées contained in Mr. Westgarth's "Addrcss to
the Melbourne Chambers of Council," given in the Appendix to his
" Victoria, or Australia Félix.** 1853.

f Of which expédients the passing of the BuUion Act by the Goverp-
ment of South Australia was the most important.

X A fall from ;^3 17J. \o\d, per ounce, the London Mint price, to 6ar.,
50f., and, it is stated, in some instances to 40?. per ounce. See the
Appendix to Westgarth's " Victoria, or Australia Félix." 1853.


26 THE AUSTRALIAN EPISODE. [essay

înto conformity wîth the new conditions of producing
gold.

But the advance in gênerai priées, which was thus
easily and rapidly effected wîthin the limited area of
the gold districts, could by no means be accomplished
wîth the same facîlity amongst the great commercial
populations of the world. The disturbance of indus-
trial pursuîts in the larger théâtre, though resulting
în an extensive émigration, was yet, in comparison
wîth the gênerai business of the world, înconsîderable,
whîle the supply of gold required, in order to render
possible a fall in its value over so large an area of
transactions, was immense. The necessary condi-
tions, therefore, to a rise în gênerai priées not being
susceptible of speedy fulfilment, money rates through-
out the world at large did not, and could not, advance
wîth the same rapidity wîth which they advanced în
the gold countries. A divei^nce of local priées and
rates în Australîa from the gênerai level of commer-
cial countries has been the necessary conséquence, —
a divergence which has altered fundamentally her
commercial position în relation to the rest of the
world, and has been followed by a séries of changes
în her domestic industry and foreîgn trade which I
shall now attempt to describe.

The great staple industry of Australîa has, from an
early period în the history of the colony, been her
cattle-farmîng ; the advantages which the country pos-
sesses for this pursuit în her extensive open plains,
covered wîth rich natural grass, being unsurpassed în
any part of the world. The fruits of this industry
are the usual pastoral products, of which butcher's méat,


I.] THE AUSTRALIAN EPISODE, 27

wool, and tallow are the principal. Untîl the occur-
rence of the remarkable events we are consîderîng,
the two latter of thèse constituted the leadîng com-
modîtîes of the foreîgn trade of the country. For the
former — butcher's méat — as ît was unfit for a distant
traffic, she was compelled to trust for a market to the
local population, which beîng extremely limited, the
supply of méat was with difficulty disposed of, and
the article was consequently often a drug in the
colonial markets. The difficulty, however, thence
arising to the pastoral interest, was met by the con-
version of a large portion of their méat into tallow,
and by the starting of an export trade in this corn-
modity. By this means the several branches of trade
connected with pastoral farming in Australia were
placed upon a sound foundation, and by the beginnîng
of 1851 they were in a hîghly flourishing condition.
But in the summer of that year the gold discoveries
occurred, and the conséquences which hâve ensued
in this leading department of her îndustry hâve been
not a little remarkable.

On the first outbreak of the gold mania in 185 1,
the pastoral interest was subjected to the same incon-
venience which was felt by ail other occupations in
Australia. The minds of shepherds and shearers were
not proof to the attractions which had acted so power-
fuUy on workmen in every other walk of industry, and
the " squatting " stations were for a time abandoned for
the more enticing pursuits of the gold-fields. As the
ônly means of obtaining the requîsite supply of labour,
the squatters were obliged to submit to the same
advance in wages which at this time took place in ail


28 THE A USTRALIAN EPISODE. [essay

other occupations. But, as has been pointed out, a
rîse in money wages requîres (if profits are to be
maintained) a corresponding rise in the price of the
commodities which the more highly-priced labour pro-
duces. This necessary rise was effected without diflfi-
culty in articles produced in Australia for domestic
consumption ; but the chief product of the pastora]
îndustry was wool, and the chief market for wool was
Europe, in which a fourfold or a twofold rise in price —
such a rise, that is to say, as would hâve indemnified
the Australian farmer for the advance in his labour
rates — was simply impossible, or at the least could
only hâve been obtained by a curtailment of supply,
which, as Europe had other resources for this material
besides the Australian sheep farms, it was not in the
power of Australia to effect. On the news, therefore,
of the gold discoveries reaching this country, great
alarm was felt for the stability of this trade. Mr.
Lalor, in his work on " Money and Morals," strongly
urged upon Government the duty of assisting the
émigration of shepherds, with a view to supply the
necessary labour. But supposing this were done,
what security was there that the emigrating shep-
herds would not follow their predecessors to the
gold-fields ? In truth the wool trade was at this time
in serious jeopardy. It has been saved from the
danger that was împending through a circumstance
which, in the first excitement of the movement,
escaped the attention of observers— through the influ-
ence, namely, which the same event that endangered
the supply of wool has exercised on other branches
of the industry to which wool belongs. The immense


1.] THE AUSTRALIAI^ EPISODE. 29

immigration which foUowed the gold discoveries cre-
ated a sudden demand for butcher's méat; a more
than quadruple rise in the price of méat in Australia
has been the conséquence, — a rise which has covered
the increased outlay on sheep-farming, thus providîng
the necessary inducement for the continuance of the
supply of sheep, and therefore of wool. The wool
trade of Australia has thus been preserved from
extinction; but it is important to observe that it
îs now upon a différent footing from that on which
it formerly stood. Previous to the gold discoveries,
while wool formed the leading product of pastoral
îndustry, the extension of sheep-farming depended
principally on the extension of the demand, chiefly
in Europe, for this article. But since that event,
wool has, in the calculation of the farmer's profits,
become subordinate to méat, which is now the
great support and mainstay of his trade. The pro-
gress of pastoral farming will therefore in future be
govemed, not by the requirements of Europe for wool,
but by those of Australia for méat, — in other words,
by the increase of the colonial population ; and as this
cannot be expected to keep pace with the gênerai
demand for wool, a falling off in the rate of increase
at which this branch of industry was formerly pro-
gressing may accordingly be looked for; indeed, the
décline has already become very apparent.*

So far as to the pastoral industry of Australia.
Let us now trace the influence of the gold discoveries

♦ See Wcstgarth's " Victoria " ( 1 857), p. 1 18 ; and " Statistical Abstract
of the United Kingdom" (1858), p. 17. [Since this was written, the trade
in preserved méats has sprung up, and this will of course enlarge, and
already has perceptibly enlarged, the limits of the wool production (1872).]


30 THE A USTRALIAN EPISODE. [essay

upon the occupation which, along with pastoral pur-
suîts, forms in gênerai the principal resource of young
communitîes — agriculture.

If we are to accept the very high authority of
Humboldt, the discovery of the Australian gold-fields
should rather assist than hinder the progress of its
agriculture. In his ** Political Essay upon the Kingdom
of New Spaîn," that eminent writer thus observes : —

'' It cannot be doubted that, under improved social institu-
tions, the countrîes which most abound with minerai produc-
tions will be as well if not better cultivated than those in
which no such productions are to be found. But the désire
natural to man of simplifying the causes of everything has
introduced into works on political economy a species of rea-
soning which is perpetuated because it flatters the mental
indolence of the multitude. The dépopulation of Spanish
America, the state of n^lect in which the most fertile lands
are found, and the want of manufacturing îndustry, are attri-
buted to the metallic wealth, to the abundance of gold and
silver ; as, according to the same logic, ail the evils of Spain
are attributed to the discovery of America, or the wander-
ing race of the Mérinos, or the religious intolérance of the
clergy !

" We do not observe that agriculture îs more neglected in
Peru than in the province of Cumana or Gugana, in which,
however, there are no mines worked. In Mexico the best
cultivated fields, those which recall to the mind of the
traveller the beautiful plains of France, are those which
extend from Salamanca towards Silao, Guanaxuato, and
the Villa de Léon, and which surround the richest mines of
the known world. Wherever metallic seams hâve been dis-
covered in the most uncultivated parts of the Cordilleras,
on the isolated and désert table lands, the working of mines,
far from impeding the cultivation of the soil, has been sing^-
larly favourable to it. Travelling along the ridge of the
Andes, or the mountainous parts of Mexico, we everywhere


I.] THE A USTRALIAN EPISODE. 3 1

see the most striking examples of the bénéficiai influence
of the mines on agriculture. Were it not for the establish-
ments formed for the working of the mines, how many places
would hâve remaîned désert ? how many districts uncultivated
in the four intendancies of Guanaxuato, Zacatecas, San Luis
Potosi, and Durango, between the parallels of 21° and 2 s**,
where the most considérable metallîc wealth of New Spain
îs to be found ? If the town îs placed on the arid side or
the crest of the Cordilleras, the new colonists can only draw
from a distance the means of their subsistence and the main-
tenance of the great number of cattle employed in drawing
ofT the water, and raising and amalgamating the minerai
produce. Want soon wakens industry. The soil begins to
be cultivated in the various ravines and declivities of the
neighbouring mountains wherever the rock îs covered with
earth. Farms are established in the neighbourhood of the
mine. The high price of provisions, from the compétition
of the purchasers, indemnifies the cultivator for the privations
to whîch he is exposed from the hard life of the mountains.
Thus from the hope of gain alone, and the motives of mutual
interest, which are the most powerful bonds of society, and
without any interférence on the part of the Government in
colonization, a mine, which at fîrst appeared insulated in
the midst of wild and désert mountains, becomes in a short
tîme connected with the lands which hâve long been under
cultîvation." *

It seems unquestîonable that, in the manner de-
scribed by Humboldt in the above passage, a dis-
covery of the precious metals, by attractîng people
to a locality otherwîse undesirable, or of which the
other recommendations were prevîously unknown, may
hasten the progress of agriculture over the earth, or
may lead to the cultîvation of districts which, but for
such dîscoveries, might for ever hâve remaîned barren ;

♦ Vol. il. pp. 405-8


3 2 THE A USTRALIAN EPISODE, [essay

nor will anyone dispute the opinion of so compétent a
witness that the neglect of agriculture in some of the
States of Spanish America was due in a large degree
to defects in their social institutions; but, accepting
thus far the opinion of Humboldt, I yet venture to
question the doctrine (for to this length does the
passage I hâve quoted seem to go) that, speaking with
référence to a country in which occupation has been
effected and society established, the possession of minerai
treasures îs favourable, or can be otherwise than un-
favourable, to the cultivation of the soil. It is one of
the best established principles of économie science —
the principle on which the whole theory of foreign
trade is based — that the possession by a country of
any extraordinary advantage in production opérâtes,
in proportion to the extent of the advantage, as a
premium against ail other industrial pursuits. And
the grounds of the principle are sufficiently obvions ;
for the possession of exceptional facilities in production
makes it clearly the interest of the country which
enjoys them to satisfy îts wants for othcr things, rather
through the médium of an exchange with other nations
of the article to which such spécial facilities apply,
than by the direct production of commodities in raising
which the country has no spécial advantage. And
this being the gênerai principle which régulâtes foreign
exchange, it is one which, from their portability and
the universality of the demand for them, applies to
the precious metals in an especial degree. I therefore
find it impossible to believe that the minerai resources
of the Spanish American States did not exercise on
thèse countries an influence prejudicial to the progress


I.] THE A USTRALIAN EPISODE. 33

of theîr agriculture, and that thèse were not among
the causes whîch contributed to that backward state of
cultîvatîon which Humboldt notices and describes.

And thîs conclusion is entirely confirmed by the
récent expérience of Australia. It is not indeed
contended that the discovery of minerai treasures in
that country has not given an impulse to cultivation by
hastening its gênerai settlement, in the same manner
as in the metalliferous districts of America. What
I contend for is, that, the country being once occupîed
and settled, the présence of rich gold-fields must
operate unfavourably upon its agriculture, or, to put
the same point differently, that the area of cultivation,
under the influence of this cause, will be confined
within limits short of those which it would hâve
attained, had the community reached the same stage of
advance under différent économie conditions ; and this,
I think, is sufïiciently proved by the récent history of
Australia, — a history which exhibits the strange, and
I believe unprecedented, spectacle of a country, pos-
sessing an immense unoccupied territory, and a soil
of more than average fertility, importing more than
one-half its food.*

I am quite aware, indeed, that other causes besides
the gold discoveries are responsible for the past history
of agriculture in Australia — more particularly a land
System contrived with singular ingenuity to cramp and
pervert the natural development of the country. But
injurions in many respects as may hâve been, and may
stîll be, the opération of this System, — amongst others,
în excluding from the possession of land, and in fact

♦ The Times (Melbourne Correspondent), February 3rd, 1858,

D


34 THE A USTRALI AN EPISODE, [kssay

driving from the colony, a class of small proprîetors
whom on social grounds it would be most désirable to
retain, — it can scarcely be maintained that this is at
présent the principal cause of the failure of Australian
agriculture, when we find that of the land which has
been sold only a small portion has been brought under
actual cultivatîon.* If the quantity offered in the
market is insufficient for the agricultural wants of the
country, this circumstance would only give an increased
value for this purpose to the land which has been sold ;
and yet the greater portion of this remains as yet
untilled. It appcars to me that this state of things
can only be explained by référence to other causes than
the restraints of the land system ; and what thèse
causes are our former reasonings sufficiently indicate.
Obviously they are to be found in the new money
régime introduced by the gold discoveries. The high
rate of wages thus established, being peculiar to the
gold countries, places the Australian farmer, in common
with other employers of Australian labour, under an
exceptional disadvantage in competing in the markets
of the world, and compels him, therefore, to confine
cultivation to soils in which the superior richness of
the natural agent compensâtes the cultivator for the
high pecuniary charges with which he has to contend.
It is thus that the gold-fields of Australia présent a
barrier to the development of its agricultural resources
— a barrier which, after ail the restrictions of the land
System are removed, must continue to operate, and

* Westgarth's " Victoria " (1857), p. 81. Further Papers, &c., February
1856, p. 33. Australian and Ntiv Zealand Gazette^ Deccmber i ith, 1858,
p. 568.


I. ] THE A USTRALIAN EPISODE. 3 5

whîch will probably for many years to comc render
îts rîchest provinces a drain upon the subsistance of
over-peopled Europe, instead of what under happier
conditions they might become, — libéral contributors
towards our already heavily-tasked resources.

Against this reasoning it will perhaps be urged that
agriculture has made considérable progress in Cali-
fomia^ which has already become an exporter of food.
This is true, and is a striking proof of the fact to
which every traveller in that country has borne testi-
mony, the extraordinary fertility of the Californian
soils, — a fertility which enables agriculture to hold its
own even against the compétition of the gold mines.
The fact, however, in no degree invalidâtes the prin-
ciple above stated ; it only proves that California
enjoys over other countries an advantage in raising
food, up to a certain point, as great as she e^tjoys in
obtaining gold.

The extension of agriculture in Australia has thus,
though stimulated for the moment, suffered a real
check from the gold discoveries ; and the same
influence has been felt throughout every branch of
îndustry in that country, gold mining alone excepted.
The premium which has operated against sheep-
farming and tillage has operated against ail other
industrial pursuits. Many districts in the northem
portion of New South Wales are represented as
favourable to the growth of cotton. '* In Moreton
Bay," says a colonial writer, " the cotton-tree grows
most luxuriantly, and appears more inclined to assume
a perennial form than in even the most favoured
districts of America. But," he adds, "up to the

D 2


36 THE AUSTRALIAN EPISODE. [essay

présent tîme the cost [prîce] of cultîvation has been
found too high to make the business of cotton-growîng
profitable." Tin and antimony, we are told by ânother
authority, abound în many parts of Victoria. Some
of the richest tin ores în the Ovens districts hâve,
it seems, been worked to some profit ; but although
antimony ore ** appears to be unlimited in quantity,"
" the value în the home market [more properly the
prîce of raîsing it in Australia] will not admit of îts
being touched as y et by the eager fingers of com-
merce." * Such has been the effect on the îndustry
of raw produce ; and în manufacturing îndustry the
influence of the gold discoveries has been still more
complète and sweeping, nothîng în the nature of a
manufactured product, even of the coarsest kînd, being
now made în the colony, which can by any possibilîty
be imported.f

As a proof of the soundness of our économie know-
ledge, it is interesting to observe that ail this has
happened în strict conformîty with the established
principles of économie science. According to thèse
principles, the exchange of commodities among différ-
ent nations is regulated, not by the absolute, but by
the comparative, cost of the commodities exchanged { —
not by the circumstance that the commodity imported

♦ Westgarth's "Victoria" (1857), pp. 11 2-1 3.

f " We ail wear imported boots and shoes," says the Times' Corres-
pondent, " and it is cheaper to buy new than to get the old mended."

î See chapter on " Foreign Trade," Ricardo's Works, pp. 76-7 ; also
Mill's "Principles of Political Economy,' Book III. chap. xvii. The
reader must observe that by " cost '* is meant the real difficulty involved
in the production of a commodity, not the amount of money necessary to
remunerate the labour by which this difficulty is overcome. The only
commodity of which the cost was affected by the gold discoveries was
gold ; but the price of producing everything was altered.


1.] THE A USTRALIAN EPISODE. 3 7

from a foreign country may be produced with less
labour in the country from whîch it is obtained than in
the country which îmports it, but by this, that it may
be produced by comparattvely less labour than some
oiher commodity, which is also made the subject of
exchange. Thus the essence of the gold discoveries,
regarded economically, consisted, as has been said, in
the réduction in the cost of raising gold which was
thereby effected, — a réduction which, not being shared
by other countries, involved a change in the com-
parative costs of Australian and foreign productions.
The conséquence of this change has been a corre-
sponding change in the character of her foreign trade,
brought about, as we hâve seen, through an action on
money wages. Thus Australia, instead of raising her
own corn, as under ordinary circumstances she would
do, îmports the greater portion of it. If we ask why
is this ? we shall be told that the price of labour is
there so high that she cannot afford to compete with
foreign countries. This is true ; but why is the price
of labour so high in Australia ? The answer is,
because the cost of gold is so low ; the rate of money
wages, as we hâve seen, always rising and falling as
the facilities of producing gold increase or diminish.*
The true explanation, therefore, of the importation of
corn into a country possessing abundant resources for

* Which shows, by the way, the absurdity of attempting to measure the
cost of gold, as some writers hâve done (see Tooke's " History of Priées,"
vol. vi. p. 226), by the pecuniary outlay necessary to its production. The
iaxX is that this (so far as gold is the money employed) scarcely ever
varies ; the gold price of producing gold representing merely the ratio of
the outlay to the retum, or the rate of profit, so that if price be taken as
the criterion of cost^ the cost of gold would never vary unless so far as the
rate of profit varies.


33 THE A USTRALIAN EPISODE, [essay

agriculture is, that she possesses comparatively still
greater resources for the production of gold ; so that
she finds ît profitable to obtaîn her corn rather through
the médium of her cheap gold, than by its direct
production. And the same explanation applies to
every circumstance of her récent trade : e.g,, previous
to the gold discoveries Australia produced her own
cheese and butter; she now largely imports thèse
articles.* To what is this change due ? The pastures
of New South Wales and Victoria offer unusual
facilities for dairy-farming, and thèse facilities hâve not
deteriorated since 1851 : the cost of butter now is the
same as then ; f and yet, with thèse resources at her
disposai, Australia draws her chief supplies of butter
from Ireland, — an old and densely peopled country.
The explanation of this singular commerce is that
which has just been given. The natural facilities
possessed by Australia for raising butter, superior
though they are to those which we in this country
possess, are yet not so much superior as her facilities
of raising gold are superior to our means of command-
ing it. It therefore manifestly becomes her interest to
turn her capital and labour to gold-mining, rather than
to dairy-farming, and to satisfy her requirements for
butter through the médium of that commodity in which
her advantage is pre-emînent By followîng this
course she enjoys the same, or nearly the same, advan-
tage over other countriH^^in obtaining her butter,

♦ The sum paid by the colony of Vrctoria alone to Great Britain on
this account in the last year reached the large amount of ;£8oo^ooo. —
Australian and New Zeaiand Gazette,

t The reader will bear in mind the distinction between the côst and the
price Qf production. S^ ante, p. 36, note î.


I.] THE A USTRALIAN EPISODE, 39

whîch she enjoys in obtaînîng her gold, and, strange as
it may seem, secures this commodity at less cost — at
a smaller sacrifice of ease and leisure — than its pro-
duction exacts from the Irish farmer who raîses it.*

The importance of thus conceiving the commercial
effects of the gold discoveries is, that it ena^bles us at
once to perceive the précise nature and bounds of the
advantage which Australia and California reap from
their gold-fields. By means of them they are enabled
to obtain their gold at rather less than one-half the
sacrifice formerly necessary ; and, therefore, unless so
far as the purchasing power of the métal has since
declined, they can, through the médium of it, obtain ail
their other commodities on terms proportionally easier.
We hâve seen that, as regards domestic productions,
thèse hâve ail risen in price in the same proportion as
gold has fallen in cost, whence it follows that, so far as
this portion of their consumption is concerned, the gold
countries dérive no advantage from their cheap gold.
They obtain in return for a given sacrifice, twice as
much gold as formerly, but they also pay twice as
much for every domestic production. With their
foreign trade, however, it is other wise. Prices through -
out the world hâve not risen in the same degree as the
cost of gold has been reduced ; and consequently upon
this portion of their dealings Australia and California
are gainers, — gainers directly in proportion to the
reduced cost of their gold, modified by the rise, so far
as it has taken place, in foreign prices. A given
exeltion of labour enables them to command, not only

♦ A possibility which was foreseen and pointed out by Ricardo. See
hîs Works, p. ^^,


40 THE AUSTRAL! AN EPISODE. [essay

more gold, but more of every other thing which
foreign countrîes can supply. It îs thus exclusively in
the foreign branch of their trade that the advantage of
theîr cheap gold résides : it is only in so far as they part
with their money that they dérive from it any benefit ;
and yet, so completely in Political Economy is the
ostensible at variance with the real, and so inveterate,
consequently, are the préjudices of mère expérience,
that the cry of * Protection ' has been heard even in
Victoria. It might, perhaps, shake the Victorian pro-
tectionist's faith in hîs doctrine, if he would reflect
that his most effectuai protection against the foreigner
would be the exhaustion of his own gold-fields.

Such hâve been the results of the discovery of gold
on the industry, trade, and gênerai interests of Aus-
tralîa. Let us now observe the light which thèse
conclusions throw on the more gênerai questions con-
nected with this occurrence. And, in the first place, as
to the extent of the prospective dépréciation. We
hâve seen that, in the disturbance in the value of gold,
or, what comes to the same thing, in the gold prices of
commodities, which followed the di-scoveries, there was
a point about which the fluctuations moved, and be-
yond which the advance or décline did not permanently
pass. Prices were in the first instance forced upwards
through an increased demand for commodities; the
increase of demand led to an increase of supply, and
this to a reaction in prices towards their former level.
In the case of imported commodities this reaction was
carried to the full extent of the previous rise, but in
domestic products the décline was arrested at a higher
point, the further fall being prevented by the check


1.] THE A USTRALIAN EPISODE, 4 1

gîven to production through the hîgh rate of money
wages. The natural level of Australian priées, and
therefore the value of gold in Australîa, was thus
determined by the rate of wages measured in gold,
and this, as we hâve seen, was regulated by average
earnings on the gold-fields. The rate of gold earn-
ings, or, as this is in technical language expressed, ** the
cost of gold," is therefore the circumstance which, in
the final resort, régulâtes the value of the métal, and
sets the limit beyond which dépréciation cannot per-
manently pass. Now we hâve seen that in Australia
gold wages hâve, in conséquence of the gold dis-
coveries, risen in rather more than a twofold pro-
portion ; and since, whether gold is raised from mines
or imported in exchange for commodities, gold wages,
or the return to labour in gold, will always represent
the cost of the métal,* it follows that the cost of gold
has been reduced in Australîa by the gold discoveries
to the extent of about fifty per cent. Fifty per
cent, therefore, — équivalent to a twofold advance in
priées, — gives the maximum beyond which (on the
supposition that no more productive mines are dis-
covered) the gênerai value of gold cannot permanently
fall. Further, it has appeared that, although a réduc-
tion in the cost of gold tends to cause a corresponding
fall in its value, the actual realization of this resuit
dépends upon the possibility of so enlargîng the cir-
culation as to render this fall possible. Thus we hâve
seen that the price of gold in Australia fell, pending
the enlargement of the currency, by the importation of
sovereigns from England, which is, in other words, to

* See on this point Senior's Essay '' On the Cost of obtaining Money."


43 THE A USTRALIAN EPISODE. [essay

say that the value of the currency was, durîng this
period, maîntaîned above its natural cost level. This
severance of value from cost was îndeed in Australia
of brief continuance, because, the local circulation
being small, ît requîred but a short time to double;
quadruple, or otherwise augment it as the occasion
mîght render necessary. But throughout the world at
large, the process of augmentation, owing to the vast
dimensions of its currencies, is one necessarily of slow
accomplishment, and, pending its fulfilment, the value
of gold is of necessity maintained above the level
prescribed by its cost. It is this whîch at présent
sustains the value of gold in the gênerai markets of
commerce, notwithstanding the cheapening of its pro-
duction effected by the gold discoveries. Whether
that value will ever be lowered in the same proportion,
whether gold will ever fall throughout the world at
large as it has fallen in Australia and California,
dépends upon whether the conditions which hâve
lowered its value in them can be generally satisfied —
that is to say, dépends upon whether the increased
supply which such a fall would retider necessary can be
obtained at the présent co^. Into the further discussion
of this question I do not now enter,* the object of this
paper being to point out the principal issues which the
gênerai problem învolves, not to attempt their solution.
But from the facts which hâve been stated, we are
justified in concluding that, so long as the présent
want of conformity between the cost and the value of
gold continues, so long a constant premium will exist

♦ The reader will find some remarks on this aspect of the question in
the Fourth Essay, /é?j/, p. 109 et seq.


I.] THE A USTRALIAN EPISODE. 43

on its production, and so long our supply of gold
wîll continue to increase.

But, secondly, let us consîder what lîght our con-
clusions respecting the gold countries throw upon
a question whîch has been much discussed, — I mean
the effect of this movement on the real wealth, the
substantial well-being, of the world. That the gold
discoveries hâve added to the real wealth of the
înhabitants of Australia and California is indeed
exceedingly apparent ; but what has been their effect
upon the interests of other nations ? Has the cheap-
ness of Australian or Californian gold added equally
to the effectiveness of their industry, and extended
their command over the comforts and enjoyments of
life ? The answer of some writers to this question
has been very strongly in the affirmative ; but, with
the light derived from the previous discussion, we may
perhaps see grounds for arriving at a différent con-
clusion. We hâve seen that the gain of Australia and
California from their gold-fîelds is confîned to that
portion of their trade which they carry on with foreign
countries ; that it is only in so far as they part with
their gold that they dérive from it any benefît. Now
the world, as a whole, has no foreign trade ; it has
no means of exchanging for the productions of other
planets the gold which it produces; from which it
seems to foUow that, regarded as a single community,
the world is incapable of realizing those conditions on
which the benefit to be derived from cheap money
dépends. The conclusion to which this considéra-
tion points is, that the opération of the new
gold wiil be confîned to causing a new distribution c^


44 THE A USTRALIAN EPISODE. [essay

reàl weaith în the world wîthout affectîng its aggre-
gate amount; and that, consequently, the gain of
the gold countries must be reaped at the expense of
other nations.

This conclusion îs no doubt much at variance with
prevailing notions, and with the deep-seated préjudices
of the " mercantile System ; " and will not, therefore,
be easily admitted. Nevertheless, if we reflect on the
character of the commerce which has arisen out of
thèse discoverîes, we may see reason for accepting its
truth. The trade between the gold countries and the
rest of the world is one in which consumable commo-
dities on one side are exchanged against money, or
the materials of money, on the other, A large portion
of the îndustry of the world îs, through the médium
of this trade, employed in ministering to the real wants
— the appetites, tastes, and other human needs — of
Australia and California. Let us inquire what is the
want to which thèse countries minister in return. It
will be said to the want of more gold — the want of an
enlarged circulating médium. True ; but what is the
foundation of this want ? and in what way does its
satisfaction promote human happiness ? Human in-
dustry is not rendered more efficient, nor human hap-
piness more full, by the use of two coins instead of
one. Why, therefore, may not the business of produc-
tion and exchange be carried on upon the former terms ?
I apprehend that the correct answer to this question
îs that gold — the great médium of exchange and uni-
versal équivalent — having been cheapened in Australia
and California, thèse countries of necessity possess an
exceptîonal advantage în their commercial dealîngs


1. J THE A USTRALIAN EPISODE. 45

with the rest of the world, untîl the gold priées of
commodîtîes in other countries are proportîonally raîsed,
and that to effect this object — to raîse the priées of
theîr produetions în proportion to the dîminîshed eost
of gold— the quantity of their gold cireulation must
be inereased. The nations of the world hâve thus by
the gold diseoverîes been plaeed under the necessîty
of enlarging theîr eurreneîes ; and thîs ean only be
aceomplished by parting with their produetions in ex-
ehange for the required supply. Henee the eharaeter
of the traffie whieh we are now witnessîng, — a traffic
in whieh eonsumable goods are exehanged for money,
and real for nominal wealth. It îs therefore no natural
want to whieh this one-sided trade is subservient, no
désire, the satisfaetion of whieh adds an iota to human
enjoyment : it is merely an artîfieial requirement, a
disagreeable and unprofitable neeessity, originating in
the gold diseoveries, and satisfied at the expense of
eommereial nations.

I am aware indeed that there are writers who regard
gold not simply as a eonvenient médium for the ex-
ehange of eommodities independently produeed, but
as in itself a souree of produetive energy, as "the
motive power of ail industry and eommeree," * and
who aeeordingly eonsider "an addition to the quan-
tity of money to be the same thing as an addition to
the fixed eapital of a eountry^f — as équivalent în its
effeets upon industry to "improved harbours, roads,
and manufaetories." { Aeeording to sueh views the
influenee of the gold diseoveries must be universally

* Seyd's " Califomia and its Resources/' p. 5.

t Tooke's " History of Prices," vol. vi. p. 46. { Ibid.


46 THE A USTRALIAN EPISODE. [essay

bénéficiai, — ^bénéficiai, not merely in relation to the
countries which produce the cheap money, but in a
still more eminent degree in relation to those which
permanently retain it. But in spite of the plausibilities
of the mercantile theory, common sensé, no less than
économie science, will continue to ask how the world
is enriched by parting with its real wealth ? — how the
well-being of Europe and Asia is promoted by parting
with the materials of well-being, receiving in return
not materials of well-being, not augmented supplies of
wool and tallow, corn and provisions, not those com-
modities which new countries are specially fitted to
produce, and of which old countries are pressingly in
need, but what ? — increased supplies of the precious
metals, a more cumbrous médium of exchange !

So singular and abnormal indeed has been the
course of industrial affairs hitherto in the gold coun-
tries, — so strange has been the spectacle of a country
abounding in resources which she dares not touch, and
drawing from other countries commodities which she is
specially fitted to produce, — that it has not failed to
attract the attention of thoughtfui observers, and to
suggest the pertinent inquiry, how long is this state of
things to continue ? Is the development of the great
and varied resources of Australia and California to be
perpetually subordinated, if not indefinitely postponed,
to the single pursuit of gold-mining ? Are the other
nations of the world destined to continue for ever
labouring in the service of the gold countries, for no
other than the barren reward of an addition to their
circulation ? Thèse questions hâve been frequently put,
but I am not aware that they hâve as yet been satis-


I.] THE A USTRALIAN EPISODE. 4 7

factorily answered. The writers who hâve started them
hâve indeed, correctiy enough, connected the présent
condition of Australian industry with the high price of
labour in that country, but they do not seem to perceive
very clearly upon what the maintenance of this high
price of labour dépends. It is commonly spoken of
as resulting from the scarcity of workmen, and the
înference appears to be made that it will gradually
disappear as population increases ; but this mode of
reasoning arises from confounding the temporary with
the permanent causes which regulate wages. India
is a less densely peopled country than Great Britaîn,
but the rate of wages in India is many times less than
the rate of wages in Great Britaîn. The fact is, the
average rate of money wages in a country is regulated,
not by the movements of population, but by the causes
which détermine for it the cost of its money.* In the
gold countries, as we hâve seen, thèse causes are the
productivene.ss of industry in raising gold : and, there-
fore, so long as the présent productiveness of the
gold-fields is maintained, the rate of money wages in
Australia and California cannot fall permanently below
its présent level. How long this rate of productive-
ness is likely to last, is a question the discussion of
which would carry me entirely beyond the necessary
limits of this paper; but on the supposition of its
being maintained, we can hâve no difficulty in dis-
covering the condition on which the industrial deve-
lopment of the gold countries dépends.

That condition is briefly this — that priées throughout
the world should rise in proportion as the cost of gold

♦ Sec Senior's Essay " On the Cost of obtaining Money."


48 THE A U^TRALIAN EPISODE, [essay

în the gold countries has fallen. So long as the présent
pecunîary rates of the gold countries are exceptional,
so long Australian and Californian producers of other
commodîties than gold will labour under a disadvantage
in their compétition with gold miners ; and so long the
non-monetary exports of those countries will be limited
to that small class of commodities, in which their
advantage over other countries is as great as it is in
their command of gold. But with the advance of gold-
prices in foreign markets, this class of commodities will
be extended. With the fall in the value of money, it
will become less profitable to raise and export money;
with the rise in the price of other things, it will become
more profitable to raise and export them ; and a larger
share of the whole labour and capital of the country
will consequently be turned to the latter purposes.
We may illustrate the principle by an actual case.
For several years subséquent to the gold discoveries
timber was largely imported into Australia from the
Baltic; and I perceive that it is still upon the list of
her imports. But during ail this time there hâve been
within a few miles of the localities where this Baltic
timber has been used, extensive forests of gum-trees,
inviting the axe of the pioneer, capable of afibi'ding
timber perfectly suited to the purposes for which tim-
ber in the mining districts is principally required.
Indeed this gumtree timber has been freely employed
where it could be obtained close to the spot where it
was wanted, but rather than go fifty miles, to eut it, the
Australian workman prefers to import it from the other
side of the globe. The explanation of this conduct is
the low comparative cost of Australian gold. A day's


I. ] THE A USTRALIAN. EPISODE. 49

labour employed în crushîng quartz or în diggîng
auriferous clay, enables the Australian to obtain more
timber than the same labour employed in fellîng trees.
Every rîse in priées, however, in foreîgn markets, will
diminish the cost of gold to the foreigner, and thus
lessen the comparative advantage of gold dîgging :
the domestic production will gradually gain upon the
foreign trade, and the area over which timber-cutting is
profitable will be extended. This process has already
taken place to some extent, partly through the rise in
the cost of gold, with the exhaustion of some of the
richer deposits, partly through the advance in the price
of timber in foreign markets ; and it will doubtless
continue. It is obvious that the same principle will
operate equally in the case of every commodity which
the gold countries are capable of producing. With
every rise în gold prices throughout the world, gold

will become a less profitable remittance ; other com-

•

modities will become more profitable ; and this will
continue, until either prices throughout the world
rise in proportion to the réduction in the cost of gold
— that is to say, to double their présent amount —
or until through the exhaustion of the présent
gold-fields, gold can no longer be produced at its
présent cost*

It will not be till one or other of thèse contingencies
happens, that the industrial development of the gold
countries can be fully accomplished, or that the world
can dérive from their commerce that contribution to its
real well-being and happiness, which their great and
varied resources render them so compétent to yield.

♦ See Postscript, p. 50.
£


50 THE A USTRALIAN EPISODE. [essay


POSTSCRIPT.

The history of the Australian trade sînce this essay
was written furnishes so striking an illustration of the
views put forward in this paragraph, that perhaps I
may be pardoned for referring to it. Du ring the whole
of this time, the double process referred to — the gra-
duai exhaustion of the richer gold-fields, and the simui-
taneous rise in priées throughout the world external to
the gold countries—has been in opération; and every
step in the movement has witnessed some new deve-
lopment of Australian industry. Thus, while between
1856* and 1870 the production of gold in Victoria had
fallen from 11,943,000/. to 6,119,000/., or to a little more
than one-half of its former amount, the non-monetary
exports of the colony had increased from 3,546,000/.
in 1856 to 6,351,000/. in 1870; the increase taking
place chiefly in wool, tallow, and preserved méats.
But the effect of the double process of failing gold
mines and rising priées in foreign countries has been
felt, up to the présent, far less in increasing the number
and the amount of exports than in curtailing those of
X îmports, and in developing domestic productiony^ The
foreign trade of Victoria présents the singuiar and
almost unique spectacle of a steady décline in its
amount over a period marked by an extraordinarily
rapid growth of population and gênerai wealth. I
hâve no returns of the population of that colony for
1856 (the date at which the commercial statistics begin),

* I commence with 1856, this being the first year of the publication
of " The Statistical Abstract for the Colonies," from the last number of
which (1872) the figures in the text are taken.


I.] THE A USTRALIAN EPISODE. 5 1

but it was probably between 300,000 and 400,000 ;
în 1861, it was 541,000, and in 1870, 729,000; in
other words the population must hâve nearly doubled
itself in thèse sixteen years ; the gênerai prosperity
of the country during the same time being almost un-
exampled. But the noteworthy circumstance is, that
while the country was thus prospering, its external
trade was undergoing constant contraction, falling
from a total of 15,489,000/. in 1856, to 12,470,000/.
in 1870. The .fact, I may mention in passing, shows
how little the foreign trade of a country, as measured
by its exports and imports, furnishes a correct criterion
of its industrial progress orgrowth in real wealth. The
explanation of the phenomenon îs that which I hâve
given in the foregoing essay : with every décline in the
productiveness of the mines, and with every advance
în foreign priées, the gain on importation decreased and
home production became relatively more profitable.
The resuit has been that, from being a large importer
of breadstuffs, butter, béer, boots and shoes, pro-
visions, spirits, &c., Victoria has either discontinued
altogether or greatly curtailed her importation of ail
thèse commodities, which she now produces from her
own internai resources. ^Is this course of development
for the advantage of Victoria ? Plainly, I thînk, if we
hâve regard to her gênerai interests, social and political
as well as pecuniary, we must answer in the affirmative ;
though, as economîsts, we must also recognize that,
looking at the question from a purely material stand-
point, this affirmation cannot be made good ; since it
is certainly a fact that the dimînishing returns of her
gold-mines hâve deprived her of that command of

£ 2


sa THE A USTRALIAN EPISODE. [essay i.

foreign markets which she formerly possessed ; while
the resort to her own fields of production in lieu of
foreign markets, being as it is a dernier ressort, cannot
but indicate a diminishing productiveness of her
gênerai industry. But whatever may be the interests
of Victoria herself in this matter, as regards the
interests of other countries the case is clear. Had
her gold-mines continued as rich and productive as
they were during the first few years following the
discoveries, and had gold prices through the world
remained at the then level, Victoria would hâve con-
tinued to export gold in quantities ever increasing as
her population and capital increased, for which the
world would hâve had to pay in the commodities of
real wealth. In return for the products of their labour
in the form of the conveniences and comforts of life,
foreign countries would hâve gained an addition to
their circulation. Instead of this, their industry is
now being gradually relieved from this task of adding
to their currencies, while the returns on their trade,
no longer consisting of barren métal, take the form of
increasing supplies of wool, tallow, and méat.


IL

ESSAY TOWARDS A SOLUTION OF THE

GOLD QUESTION.»

THE COURSE OF DEPRECIATION.

No one, I think, who has attended to the discussions
ôccasioned by the récent gold discoverîes, can hâve
failed to observe, on the part of a large number of
those who engage in them, a strange unwillingness to
recognize, amongst the inévitable conséquences of those
events, a fall in the value of money. I say, a strange
unwillingness, because we do not find similar doubts
to exist in any corresponding case. With respect to
ail other commodities, it is not denied that whatever
facilitâtes production promotes cheapness — that less
will be gîven for objects when they can be attained
with less trouble and sacrifice : it is not denied, e.g.y
that the steam-engine, the spinning-jenny, and the
mule hâve lowered the value of our manufactures ;
that railways and steamships hâve lessened the
expense of travelling : or that the superior agricultural
resources of foreign countries, made available through
free-trade, keep down the price of our agricultural

* Read before the British Association, September 1858.


54 THE COURSE OF DEPRECIATION. [essay

products. It îs only in the case of the precîous
metals that it .is supposée! that a diminution of cost
has no tendency to lower value, and thaf, however
rapîdly supply may be increased, a given quantity
will continue to command the same quantity of other
things as before.

Amongst persons unacquainted with économie
science, the prevalence of this opinion is doubtless
princîpally due to those ambiguities of language, and
conséquent confusion of ideas, with which our mone-
tary phraseology unfortunately abounds, many of which
tend to encourage the notion of some peculiar and
constant stability in the value of the precious metals.
Thus, the expression " a fixed price of gold " has led
some people to imagine that the possibility of a
dépréciation of this métal is precluded by our Mint
régulations. The double sensé, again, of the phrase,
" value of money," has countenanced the same error ;
for people, perceiving the rate of interest (which is the
measure of the value of money in one sensé of the
phrase) remaining high, while the supply of gold was
rapidly increasing — perceiving money still scarce ac-
cording to this criterion, notwithstanding the increase
in its production — hâve asked whether this did not
afford a presumption that its value would be per-
manently preserved from dépréciation ; a bank rate of
discount at 6, 8, or lo per cent., as they remarked,
affording small indication of money becoming too
abundant

It appears to me, however, that misconceptions
respecting the influence of an increased supply of gold
upon its value and upon gênerai priées are by no means


II.] THE COURSE OF DEPRECIATION. 55

confined to the class who could be misled by such
fallacies, but that even among economîsts (at least
among economists in this country) we may observe the
same indisposition to believe in an actual and pro-
gressive dépréciation of this métal. It is not indeed
denied — at least, I présume it is not denied — by any-
one pretending to économie knowledge, that the
enlarged production of gold now taking place has a
tendency to lower its value ; but it seems to be very
generally supposed that the same cause — the increased
gold production — has the effect, through its influence
on trade, of calling into opération so many tendencies
of a contrary nature, that, on the whole, the dépré-
ciation must proceed with extrême slowness, the
results being dispersed over a period so great as to
take from them any practical importance, and that, at
ail events, up to the présent time no sensible effect
upon priées proceeding from this cause has become
perceptible.

The existence of this opinion amongst economists
îs, I apprehend, to be attributed in some degree to
the circumstance that so few hâve taken the pains to
compare the actual priées of the présent time with
those of the period previous to the gold discoveries,
but much more to the fact, that the character of the
new agency and the mode of its opération are not in
gênerai correctly conceived. I believe the most gênerai
opinion with référence to the action of an increased
supply of money upon its value is, that it is uniform —
takes place, that is to say, in the same degree in
relation to ail commodities and services, and that
therefore priées, so far as they are influenced by an


56 THE COURSE OF DEPRECIATION. [essay

increase of money, must exhîbit a unlform advance ; *
and, no such uniformity being observed in the actual
movements of priées, the inference has not unnaturally
been drawn, that such enhancement as has taken
place is not due to this cause ; that it is not money
which has fallen, but commodities which hâve risen
in value.

Now I am quite prepared to admît that an increase
of money tends ultimately, where the conditions of
production remain in other respects the same, to affect
the priées of ail commodities and services in an equal
degree ; but before this resuit is attained a period of
time, longer or shorter according to the amount of the
augmentation and the gênerai circumstances of com-
merce, must elapse. In the présent instance the addi-
tions which are being made to the monetary Systems
of the world are upon an enormous scale, and the dis-
turbance effected in the relation of priées is propor-
tionally great. Under such circumstances it is very
possible that the inequalities resulting may not find
their correction throughout the whole period of pro-
gressive dépréciation ; a period which, even with our
présent facilities of production and distribution, may
easily extend over some thirty or forty years. During
this transitionary term the action of the new gold on
priées will not be uniform, but partial. Certain classes

* ** In relation to the influence of the gold discoveries on the priées of
agricultural produce, it is plain that it could be only the same upon them
as upon those of any other class of commodities. If it has caused a rise
of 20 per cent, in their favour^ it must hâve caused a rise of 20 per cent'
in everything else^ — Tintes^ City article, August 6, 1852. And the same
assumption, either expressed or implied, runs through most of the reason-
ing which I hâve seen on this qiiestion.


II.] THE COURSE OF DEPRECIATION. 57

of commodîtîes and services will be affected much
more powerfully than others. Priées generally will
rise, but with unequal steps. Nevertheless there will
be in thèse apparent irregularities nothing either
capricious or abnormal. The movement will be
govemed throughout its course by économie laws;
and it is the purpose of the présent inquiry to
ascertaîn the nature of thèse laws and the mode
of their opération.

The process by which an increased production of
gold opérâtes in depreciating the value of the métal
and raising gênerai prices appears to be twofold :
it acts, first, directly through the médium of an
enlarged money demand, and, secondly, indirectly
through a contraction of supply.*

When an increased amount of money comes into
existence, there is, of course, an increased expenditure
on the part of those into whose possession it comes,
the immédiate effect of which is to raise the prices of
ail commodities which fall under its influence. It is
obvious, however, that the advance in price which thus
occurs will be, in its full extent, temporary only ; since
it is immediately followed by an extension of pro-
duction to meet the increased demand, and this must
again lead to a fall in price. Some writers who hâve
treated this question, observing this effect, hâve some-
what hastily concluded that under the opération of this

* According to Mr. Newmarch (" History of Prices," vol. vi. pp. 224-25)
the dépréciation of money may occur by a process which is neither of
thèse, when money opérâtes upon prices neither through demand nor yet
through supply, but " by reason of augmented quantity. ' I must confess
myself wholly unable to conceive the process hère indicated.


5» THE COURSE OF DEPRECIATION. [essay

princîple the level of priées would never permanently
be altered, since, as they hâve urged, each addition to
the circulating médium, formîng the basis of a corre-
sponding increase of demand, gives a corresponding
impetus to production ; every increase of money thus
calls into existence an équivalent augmentation in the
quantity of things to be circulated ; and the proportion
between the two not being ultimately disturbed, priées,
it may be presumed, will return to their original level.*
The least reflection, however, will show that this
doctrine has been suggested by a very superficial view
of the phenomena.

For — not to press the obvions redtutio ad absurdum
to which this argument is liable — how is this extension
of production to be carried out ? In the last resort
it is only possible through a more extended employ-
ment of labour. But, when once ail the hands in a
community are employed, the effect of a further
compétition for labour can only be to raise wages ;
and, wages once being generally raised, it is plain
(supposing ail other things to remain the same) that
profits can only be maintained by a corresponding
élévation of priées. When, therefore, the influence

* [It may be worth while to préserve a spécimen of the sort of Political
Economy that was talked and written on this subject some fifteen years
ago. A leading article in the Examiner (December 13, 1856) contains
the following ; — " The additional supply of the precious metals has stimu-
lated the industry of the world, and in fact produced an amount of wealth
in representing which they hâve been themselves, as it were, absorbed."
. . . . " But the produce of the Australian and Califomian gold, as well
as that of silver which has accompanied it, is likely to go on ; and it may
be asked if this must not in course of time produce dépréciation. We
think it certainly is not likely to do so ; . . . . on the contrary, it will
surely be absorbed by increasing wealth and population as fast as it is
produced."]


II.] THE COURSE OF DEPRECIATION. 59

of the new money has once reached wages, it îs
évident that there will be no motive to continue
production to that point which would bring priées
to their former level, and that consequently an élé-
vation of price must, at this stage of the proceeding,
be permanently established.

So far as regards articles which fall directly under
the action of the new money. With respect to those
which do not happen to come within the range, of
the new demand, price is, I conceive, in their case
raised by an indirect action of the new money in
curtailing supply.

We hâve seen that the effect of the efforts to
extend production in the directions indicated by
the new expenditure must be to raise wages ; but
ît is plainly impossible that wages should continue to
advance in any of the principal departments of in*
dustry without affecting their rates in the rest ; whence
ît will happen that, under the opération of the new
monetary influence, some departments of îndustry will
expérience a rise of wages before any advance takes
place in the priées of the commodities produced by
the labourers whose wages hâve risen. It is évident
that in ail departments of industry which may be thus
affected — in which priées will not hâve shared the
advance which has affected wages— profits will fall
below the gênerai average ; the effect of which must
be to discourage production until, by a contraction in
the supply of the articles thus furnished, the price
shall be raised up to that point which will place the
producers on the same footing of advantage as those
în other walks of industry.


6o THE COURSE OF DEPRECIATION, [essay

An increased supply of money thus tends, by one
mode of its opération, to raise priées in advance
of wages, and thus to stimulate production ; by
another, to raise wages in advance of priées, and
thus to check it; in both, however, to raise wages,
and thus ultimately to render necessary, in order
to the maintenance of profits, a gênerai and perma-
nent élévation of price.*

This being the process by which increased supplies
of money operate in raising priées, in order to ascer-
tain the laws of their advance we must attend, first,
to the direction of the new expenditure; secondly,
to the facilities for extending the supply of différent
kinds of commodities ; and, thirdly, to the facilities
for contracting it.

With regard to the first point — the direction of the
new expenditure — this will naturally be determined
by the habits and tastes of the persons into whose
possession the new money comes. Thèse persons
are the inhabitants of the gold countries, and, after
them, those in other countries who can best supply
their wants. Speaking broadly, we may say that
the persons who will chiefly benefit by the gold

♦ It must not be supposed that this is inconsistent with the funda-
mental doctrine maintained by Ricardo, that " high wages do not make
high priées/' That doctrine assumes the value of money to be constant.
Ricardo was quite aware of the exception to the gênerai principle, and
points it out in the following passage : —

" Money, being a variable commodity, the rise of money-wages will be
frequently occasioned by a fall in the value of money. A rise of wages
from this cause will, indeed, be invariably accompanied by a rise in the
price of commodities ; but in such cases it will be found that labour and
ail commodities hâve not varied in regard to each other, and that the
variation has been confined to money."— Ri cardo*s Works (Second
Edition), p. 31.'


II.] THE COURSE OF DEPRECIATION, 6i

dîscoveries belong to the middie and lower ranks
of Society ; in a large degree to the lowest rank, the
class of unskilled labourers. The direction of the
new expenditure will consequently be that indicated
by the habits and tastes of thèse classes, and the
commodities which will be most affected by it will
be those which fall most largely within their con-
sumption.

With respect, secondly, to facilities for extending
supply, thèse will be found to dépend principally
upon two circumstances : first, on the extent to which
machinery is employed in production ; and, secondly,
on the degree in which the process of production
is independent of natural agencies which require time
for accomplishing their ends. The distinction ttiarked
by thèse two conditions, it will be found, corresponds
pretty accurately with two other distinctions — with
the distinction, namely, between raw and manufac-
tured products ; and, amongst raw products, with that
between those derived from the animal and those
derived from the vegetable kingdom. An article of
finished manufacture, in the production of which
machinery bears a principal part, and which is inde-
pendent, or nearly so, of natural processes, may after
a short notice be rapidly multiplied to meet any prob-
able extension of demand. An article of raw produce,
being in a less degree under the dominion of machinery,
and depending more upon natural processes which
require time for their accomplishment, cannot be
increased with the same facility ; and production will
consequently, in this case, be comparatively slow in
overtaking an extension of demand. But of raw


62 THE COURSE OF DEPRECIATION. [essay

products, those derîved from the anîmal are still less
under the dominion of machinery than those derived
from the vegetable kîngdom, and still more dépendent
on the slow processes of nature, and, consequently,
production must in their case be still more tardy in
overtaking demand. Supposing, then, the extension
of demand to be in ail three cases the same, the immé-
diate rise of price will, cceteris paribtis, be in ail the
same ; but in the case of articles of finished manu-
facture, this rise will be quickly corrected by the
facilities available for increased production, while in
raw vegetable products the correction will take place
more slowly, and in raw animal products more
slowly still.*

But, thirdly, I said that the progress of priées under

* The foUowing passage occurs in the " History of Priées," vol. vi.
p. 170: — "The groups of commodities which exhibit the most important
instances of a rise of price are the raw materials most extensivcly used
in manufactures, and the production of which does not admit of rapid
extension ; and, second, the groups of commodities in which there is little,
if any, rise of price in 1857, as compared with 185 1, are articles of colonial
and tropical produce, the supply of which drawn from a variety of sources
does admit of being considerably and expeditiously enlargcd." The fact
of the rise of price in raw materials is hère admitted, though, in ascribing
that rise, as by implication the passage does, to the paucity of the sources
of supply, the explanation is, as I conceive, erroneous. The sources, e,g.^
from which tea and sugar are drawn are not more various than, nor
indeed so various as, those from which beef and mutton, butter and
provisions, timber, tallow, and leather are drawn ; yet ail thèse latter
articles hâve very considerably advanced in price. Again, amongst
colonial and tropical produce Mr. Ncwmarch includes rum and tobacco,
and he might also hâve included cotton ; yet thèse articles, though
falling within the class which he says admits of being expeditiously cnlarged,
and which thercfore, according to his theory, should not hâve risen in
price, hâve in fact risen in a very marked manner. It appears to me that
thèse phenomena can only be understood by référence to the principle
which I hâve endeavoured to explain further on — namely, ihe efficacy of
the currency of différent countries in determining local priées.


II.] THE COURSE OF DEPRECIATION. 63

the influence of the gold supplies would be governed
by the facility with which supply can be contracted.
Everyone who bas practical expérience of manu-
facturing opérations is aware that, when capital bas
once been embarked in any brancb of production,
it cannot at once be removed to a différent one the
moment the needs of society may require a change ;
whence it happens that, on any sudden change taking
place in the direction of a nation s expenditure, or
when from miscalculation production bas been extended
beyond existing wants, producers frequently choose
to continue their business at diminished profits, or
even at a positive loss, rather than incur still greater
damage by suffering their capital to lie idle, or by
attempting to transfer it suddenly into some new
brancb of production. The supply of a commodity is
not therefore always, or generally, at once contracted
on the demand for it falling off, or on its production
becoming less profitable, and, where this is so, it is
évident that prices must at times continue depressed
below the normal level ; the duration of the dépression
depending on the length of time required to effect
a transference of the unproductive capital to some
more lucrative investment. Now the difficulty of
accomplishing this will generally be in direct pro-
portion to the amount of fixed capital employed ; and
the principal form in which fixed capital exists is that
of machinery. It is, therefore, in articles in the pro-
duction of which machinery is extensively employed —
that is to say, in the more highly finished manu-
factures — that the contraction of supply will be most
difficult ; and this, it will be observed, is also the kind


64 THE COURSE OF DEPRECIATION, [essay

of commodities for extending the .supply of whîch
the facilities are greatest. While, therefore, manu-
factured articles can never be very long in advance
of the gênerai movement of priées, they may, of ail
commodities, be the longest in arrear of it.

The opération of this princîple will be shown chiefly
in that class of articles which feels the effect of the new
gold only through its indirect action — that is to say,
through its action upon wages. With respect to such
articles there is no extension of demand, and the price
consequently can only be raised through a contraction
of supply. It is évident that of ail commodities this
is the class in which the rise of price must proceed
most slowly.

From the foregoing considérations, then, I arrive
at the following gênerai conclusions : —

First, — That the commodities, the price of which
may be expected first to rise under the influence of the
new money, are those which fall most extensively
within the consumption of the productive classes, but
more particularly within the consumption of the
labouring and artisan section of thèse.

Secondly, — That of such commodities, that portion
which consists of finished manufactures, though their
price may in the first instance be rapidly raised, cannot
continue long in advance of the gênerai movement,
owing to the facilities available for rapidly extending
the supply ; whereas, should the production, from over-
estimation of the increasing requirements, be once
carried to excess, their priées, in conséquence of
the difificulty of contracting supply, may be kept for
some considérable time below the normal level.


II.] THE COURSE OF DEPRECIATION, 65

Thirdly, — That such raw products as fall wîthin
the consumption of the classes indicated, not being
susceptible of the same rapid extension as manu-
factures, may continue for some time in advance of
the gênerai movement, and that, among raw products,
the effects will be more marked in those derived
from the animal than in those derived from the vege-
table kingdom,

Fourthly. — That the commodities last to feel the
effects of the new money, and which may be expected
to rise most slowly under its influence, are those articles
of finished manufacture which do not happen to fall
within the range of the new expenditure ; such articles
being affected only by its indirect action, and this action
being in their case obstructed by impediments to the
contraction of supply.

This is one class of laws by which I conceive the
ascending movement in prices will be governed ; and
up to this point I hâve the satisfaction of finding my
conclusions very fully coVroborated by the independent
investigations of a French economist, M. Levasseur,
who, in some articles lately contributed by him to the
yournal des Economistes, has, by an entirely différent
line of investigation from that which I havefollowed —
namely, by generalizing on the statistics of prices in
France during the period of 1847 to 1856 — arrived at
conclusions in the main points identical with those
which I hâve now advanced.*

There is, however, another principle to which I
venture to call attention, which has not, so far as I
know, been noticed by any of the economists who hâve

* See Appendix, for a summary of M. Levasseur's conclusions. . ^


66 THE COURSE OF DEPRECIATION, [essay

treated thîs question, but whîch, ît appears to me, must
exercise a powerful influence on the course of the
movement. The principle to which I refer is that
efficacy which résides in the currency of each country,
into which any portion of the new money may be
received, for determining the effect of this infusion on
the range of local prices.

It is évident that the quanti ty of metallic money
necessary to support any required advance of prices
throughout a given range of business will vary with
the character of the currency into which it is received ;
that the quantity required will be greater in proportion .
as the metallic élément of the currency is greater ; and,
on the other hand, less in proportion as the crédit
élément prevails. If the currency of a country be
purely metallic, a given addition of coin will increase
the aggregate médium of exchange in that country only
by the same amount ; if, on the other hand, the currency
consist largely of crédit contrivances, each addition
to its coin becomes the basis of a new superstructure
of crédit in the form of bank-notes and crédits, bills of
exchange, chèques, &c., and the aggregate circulation
is increased not simply by the amount of the added
coin, but by the extent of the new fabric of crédit of
which this coin is made the foundation. Applying
this principle to the différent countries of the world, it
follows that a given addition to the metallic stock of
Great Brîtain or the United States, in whose monetary
Systems crédit is very efficacious, will cause a greater
expansion of the total circulation, and therefore will
support a greater advance in général prices, than the
same addition to the currency of countries like France,


II.] THE COURSE OF DEPRECIATION. 67

in which crédit is less active; and that, agaîn, the
effect in countries like France will be greater than in
countrîes like India or China, in which the currencies
are almost purely metallic, and where crédit is com-
paratively little used.

Now, this being so, if we consider further that the
countries which receive in the first instance the largest
share of the new money — namely, England and the
United States — are also those in which from the
character of their currencies a given amount of coin
will produce the greatest effect ; and, on the other
hand, that Asiatic communities, in which from the
weakness of the crédit élément the currencies are least
expansible, receive but a small portion of their share
of the new money direct from the gold countries ; *
being compelled to wait for the remainder till it has
flowed through the principal markets of Europe and
America, affecting priées in its transit ; — if, I say, we
consider thèse facts in connection with the principle
to which I hâve adverted, I think we must recognize
in that principle — in the influence of the currency of

* [From statistics recently fumished by the Economiste I leam that the
facts hâve not been as I hère assumed, at least since 1858 (the date from
which full retums of specie imports hâve been published by the Board
of Trade) ; and it is probable I was mistaken in my supposition with
regard to what had occurred before that time. Since 1858, of 90,000,000/.
of gold received and retained by India and the East, some 49,000,000/.,
more than a half of the whole, appear to hâve gone there direcily from
Australia, the remainder only having corne through Europe. This crror
as to matter of fact will, no doubt, affect to some extent the conclu-
sion contended for. The causes tending to a divergence of European
from Asiatic priées hâve not been, it seems, as powerful as I had sup-
posed ; and, in point of fact, this feature in the movement has bet n
less marked than I sketched it ; but for this, other causes besides that
noticed hère hâve been responsible (1872). See Introductory Chapter,
p. 12.]

F 2


68 THE COURSE OF DEPRECIATION. [essay

each country on the range of its local priées — an
agency whîch must modify în no small degree the
gênerai character of the movement which is now în
progress.

In speaking of the influence of the currency of a
country on the range of its local priées, I should
explain that I use the words ** local priées " in a some-
what restricted sensé — namely, with référence to the
locality in which commodities are prodnced, not to that
în which they are sold, their priée in the latter place
being always determined by their priée in the former.
Thus, when I speak of Australian, English, or Indian
priées, I shall be understood to mean the priées of their
several produets in Australia, England, or India.

Understanding the words, then, in this sensé, let us
see how far local priées are likely to be affeeted by the
cause to which I hâve adverted.

In the first place, then, let it be observed that a very
remarkable divergence of local priées from the range
previously obtaining în the international scale has
already taken place.* The priées of ail articles pro-
duced in Australia and California are at présent on
an average from two to three times higher than those
which prevailed previous to the gold discoveries ; thèse
rates hâve now been maintained for several years, and
are likely to continue : but, while this advanee has taken
place în the gold countries, in no part of the world
external to those régions hâve priées advaneed by so
much as one-third. The possibility of a divergence of
local priées is thus, as a matter of fact, established ;
and the explanation of the phenomenon I take to be

* See an te y pp. 24, 25.


il] THE course OF DEPRECIATION. 69

thîs. The sudden cheapenîng of gold în Australia
and Calîfornia quickly led, through the actîon of com-
pétition amongst the différent departments of industry,
to a corresponding advance in the priées of everything
produced in those countries ; this advance being in tkeir
case possible, because, from the limited extent of the
transactions, the local circulation was quickly raised
to the point sufficient to sustain a double or triple
élévation ; but it was impossible that the currencies of
ail countries should be expanded in the same pro-
portions in the same time ; and, consequently, priées in
other countries hâve not risen with the same rapidity.
The cause, therefofe, of this divergence of local pricçs
— the circumstance which keeps gênerai priées in
arrear of that élévation which they hâve attained in
Australia and California — is the difificulty of expanding
the currencies of the world to those dimensions which
such an advance would require. This expansion, how-
ever, is being gradually effected by the process we
are now witnessing, — the increased production of the
precious metals, and their diffusion throughout the
world. But, as I hâve said, the diffusion is not
uniform over the various currencies, nor are the
currencies receiving the new supplies of uniform
susceptibility ; and the inequalities are such as to
aggravate each other; the currencies which are the
most sensitive to an increase of the precious metals
receiving in the first instance nearly the whole of ihe
new gold ; while the least sensitive currencies are the
last to receive their share. And thèse, it appears to
me, are grounds for expecting amongst other countries
further examples of that phenomenon of local diver-


70 THE COURSE OF DEPRECIATION. [essay

gence, of whîch one has already been aflforded by the
gold countrîes.

To judge, however, of the extent to whîch such local
variations of prîce can be carried, we must advert to
the corrective influences which the play of international
dealings calls into action ; and thèse appear to me to
resalve themselves into the two following : — namely,
^ first, the corrective which is supplîed by the compétition
of différent nations, producers of the same commodities,
in neutral markets ; and, secondly, that which exists
in the reciprocal demand of the différent commercial
countries for each other's productions.

The first form of the corrective is obviously the
most powerful, and must, so far as its opération
extends, at once impose a check upon any serious
divergence. Thus it is évident that prîces in Eng-
land and the United States could not proceed very
much in advance of priées on the continent of Europe,
since the certain effect of such an occurrence would
be to send consumers from the dearer to the cheaper
markets, and thus to divert the tide of gold from
the currencies of England and America to the cur-
rencies of France, Germany, and other continental
States, — a process which would be continued until
priées were restored to nearly the same relative level
as before. But it is only amongst nations which are
competitors in the same description of commodities
that this equalizing process comes into opération : as
between countries like England and America on the
one hand, and India and China on the other — in which
the climate, soil, and gênerai physical conditions differ
widely, in which consequently the staple industries


II.] THE COURSE OF DEPRECIATION. 71

are différent, and whose productions do not, therefore,
corne into compétition in the markets of the world —
this corrective influence would be feit slightly or not at
ail. The only check which could be counted on in
this case would be that far weaker one which is fur-
nished by the action of reciprocal demand in inter-
national dealings. Thus, supposing priées to rise more
rapidly in England than in India, this must lead, on
the one hand, to an increased expenditure in England
on Indian commodities, and, on the other, to a dimin-
ished expenditure in India on English commodities,
with this resuit — a steady efflux of the precious metals
from the former to the latter country. Such an efflux,
as commercial men are well aware, has long been a
normal phenomenon in our Eastem trade, but it has
lately assumed dimensions which constitute ît a new
fact needing a spécial explanation. I believe that ex-
planation îs to be found in the circumstances to which
I am calling attention.

English and American priées, and with them money
încomes in England and America, hâve, under the
action of the new gold, been advancing more rapidly
than priées and încomes in Oriental countries; and the
resuit has been a change in the relative îndebtedness of
those two parts of the world, leading to a transfer to
the creditor country of corresponding amounts of that
material which forms the universal équivalent of com-
merce. It îs true, indeed, that other causes hâve also
contributed to this resuit, and in particular I may men-
tion the failure of the silk crop in Europe, which has
largely thrown us upon China, as a means of supple-
mentîng our déficient supplies. But the main cause


72 THE COURSE OF DEPRECIATION, [essay

of the phenomenon în îts présent proportions is, I
conceive, to be found, not in any such mère temporary
disturbances, but in the natural overflowîng (conséquent
upon the increase of the precious metals) of the redun-
dant currencies of Europe and America into the more
absorbent and impassive Systems of Asia.* This, then,
I say, is the only substantial corrective afforded to the
advance of priées in Europe and America beyond
their former and normal level in relation to priées in
the East ; and the question is, will this corrective be
sufficient to neutralize the tendency to a divergence ?
Will the flow of the precious metals from West to East
suffice to keep priées in England and America within
the range prescribed by the inelastic metallîc Systems
of Asia ? I do not conceive that the corrective will
be adéquate to this end, and I rest this conclusion
upon the facts and principles which I hâve stated- — the
vast proportion of the whole gold production which
finds its way in the first instance into the markets of
England and America, the comparatively small portion
which goes direct to the markets of Asia,t the highly
elastic and expansible currencies of the former coun-

♦ Accordingly we find that the drain which, during the révulsion of
trade following on the commercial crisis of 1857, had for a while ceased,
has, with the revival of trade, recommenced. As a proof how little mère
practical sagacity is to be trusted in a question of this kind, it may be
worth while to mention that, only three months since, mercantile writers
were confidently predicting the turning ofthe tide ofsilverfrom the East
to England, The following is from a circular of Messrs. Ellisen & Co.,
qucted in the Time^ City article, July 28th, 1858, apparently with the
editor's approval : — " The time is rapidly approaching when silver will
also be shipped from hère (China) to England." So far from this being
the case, the drain to the East has again set in, and gives every indication
of assuming its former dimensions. Every mail to India during the
présent month (November it>s8) has taken out large amounts of silver.

f .See ante^ p. 67, note *.


îi.] THE COURSE OF DEPRECIATION, 73

tries, and the extremely împassîve and înexpansîble
currencies of the latter.

We find, therefore, two sets of laws by which the
progress of priées, or (which cornes to the samc thîng)
the dépréciation of gold under the action of an in-
creased supply, is regulated : . first, those which I
explained in the earlier portion of this paper, which
dépend chiefly on the facility with which the supply
of commodities can be adjusted to such changes in
demand as the new money expenditure may occasion ;
and, secondly, those which resuit from the action
of the new money on the currencies into which it is
received. According to the former principle, the rise
în price follows the nature of the commodity affected ;
thus it will in gênerai be greater in animal than în
vegetable productions — in raw produce than in finished
manufactures. According to the latter principle, the
advance follows the économie conditions of the locality
în which the commodity is produced. Thus the rise
în price has been most rapid in commodities produced
în the gold countries ; having in thèse at a single
bound reached its utmost limit — the limit set by the
cost of procuring gold. After commodities produced
în the gold régions, the advance I conceive will pro-
ceed most rapidly in the productions of England and
the United States ; after thèse, at no great interval,
în the productions of the continent of Europe, whîle
the commodities the last to feel the effects of the
new money, and which will advance most slowly
under its influence, are the productions of India
and China, and, I may add, of tropical countries
generally, so far as thcse share, as regards their


74 THE COURSE OF DEPRECIATION. [essay

économie conditions, the gênerai character of the
former countries.

Such appear to be the gênerai principles according
to which a dépréciation of the precious metals, under
the action of an increased supply, tends to establish
îtself. With a view to ascertain how far, in the
progress of priées up to the présent time (1858), any
trace of their opération can be discerned, I hâve drawn
up some statistical tables;* and, although from the
împerfect nature of the materials which I hâve been
able to collect, I cannot claim for the resuit a complète
vérification of the theoretic conclusions which I hâve
ventured to advance, I think they are such as to
justify me in placing some confidence in the gênerai
soundness of those views. Before, however, stating
the results of the tables, two or three remarks must
be premised.

First, I would crave attention to this fact, that the
présent time [1858] is one singularly free from dis-
turbing influences, and that such as do exist are of a
kind rather to conceal than to exaggerate the effects
of dépréciation. Thus, we hâve had three harvests
in succession, of, I believe, more than average pro-
ductiveness (the last year of deficiency being 1855);
and this cause of abundance has been assisted by free
trade, which has opened our ports to the produce of ail
quarters of the world. Again, although in the period
under review we hâve passed through a European
war, yet we hâve now enjoyed two years and a half
of peace, during which, I think, the économie influences
of the war may be taken to hâve exhausted themselves.

* See Appendix.


il] THE COURSE OF DEPRECIATION. 75

It 13 true, îndeed, that we hâve an Indian revolt still
on hands, besîdes havîng but just concluded some
hostile opérations in China. But thèse disturbances
hâve not been of a kind to interfère seriously wîth the
gênera! course of trade, except in some few Oriental
commodities in which their effects are slightly
apparent.

But what renders the présent time peculiarly impor-
tant as a point of comparison with former periods,
îs its being in immédiate séquence to a severe com-
mercial crisis. The effect of the crisis of last wînter
has been effectually to eliminate one great disturbing
élément from those causes to which a rise of price
might be attributed — the élément of crédit Trade is
now suffering dépression in almost ail its branches ;
and priées, after a period of undue inflation, hâve,
through an ordeal of bankruptcy, been brought to the
test of real value. In the fluctuations of commerce
we hâve reached the lowest point of the wave ; what-
ever, therefore, be the range of priées at the présent
time, we may at least be sure that no commercial
convulsion is likely to lower it.

We hâve further to remember that in an âge like
the présent, in which science and its applications to the
arts are in ail civilized countries making rapid strides,
there exists in most articles of gênerai consumption
(but more particularly in the more finished manu-
factures) a constant tendency to a décline of price,
through the employment of more efficient machinery
and improved processes of production. Now, taking
ail thèse circumstances together, — the propitiousness
of the seasons, the action of free-trade, the absence


76 THE COURSE OF DEPRECIATION. [essay ii.

of war, the contraction of crédit, and the gênerai
tendency to a réduction of cost proceeding from
the progress of knowledge, — it appears to me that,
were there no other cause in opération, we should
hâve reason to look for a very considérable fall of
priées at the présent time, as compared with (say) eight
or ten years ago. Priées, however, as the following
tables will show, hâve not fallen ; they hâve on the
contrary very decidedly risen, and the advance has
moreover, as the same tables will also show, on the
whole proceeded in conformity with the principles
which I hâve in this paper endeavoured to establish.
And this îs my ground for asserting that the dépré-
ciation of our standard money is already, under the
action of the new gold, an accomplished fact.


III.

ESSAY TOWARDS A SOLUTION OF THE

GOLD QUESTION.

INTERNA TIONAL RESULTS*

In a former essayt it was attempted, from a revîew
of the industrial history of Australia sînce the late
dîscovery of gold, to make some gênerai déductions
respecting the character of that event, and of its
influence upon national interests. Among other con-
clusions ît was maintained that the tendency of the
gold dîscoverîes, or, to speak with more précision, the
tendency of the increased production of gold, was
rather to alter the distribution of real wealth in the
world than to increase its amount ; the benefit derived
by some countries and classes from the event being
for the most part obtained at the expense of others.
It was shown, for example, that the gain to Australia
and California from their gold-fields accrued to them
exclusively through their foreign trade — their cheap
gold enabling them to command on easier terms than
formerly ail foreign productions ; while, on the other
hand, the only resuit to foreign nations of the traffic

♦ Fraser" s Afagazim^ January 1860.
t Essay I. of this Séries.


78 INTERNATIONAL RESULTS, [essay

thence arisîng was an increase în theîr stock of money
— a resuit rendered necessary indeed by the new
conditions of raîsing gold întroduced by the gold
discoveries, but în itself destitute of any real utility.
It was shown, in short, that, as regards commercial
nations, the effect of the gold discoveries was to place
them under the necessity of enlarging their currencies,
compelling them to pay for the requîsite increase by
an increased export of their productions.

To this conclusion I was led by direct inference
from the facts presented in the gold countries. In the
présent paper it is proposed to follow up the inquiry,
with a view to a more particular ascertainment of the
conséquences formerly described ; the object being to
discover in what manner the loss arising from the goki
movement is likely to be distributed among com-
mercial nations, and how far this loss may in particular
cases be neutralized or compensated by other influ-
ences which the same movement may develop.

In the discussions which hâve hitherto taken place
upon this question, the inquiry into the conséquences
of the gold discoveries lias been confined almost ex-
clusively to that aspect of the event in which it is
regarded as affecting fixed contracts through a dépré-
ciation of the monetary standard.* As soon as the
probability of dépréciation is settled, and the effects of

* See Stirling*s " Gold Discoveries and their probable Conséquences ; "
Chevalier " On the probable Fall in the Value of Gold ; " Levasseur^s
contributions to the Journal des Economistes^ 1858 ; M*Culloch's article
* Precious Metals,' in the " Encyclopœdia Britannica." In ail thèse,
and in many other minor productions on the same subject, almost the
only conséquences of the gold discoveries which are taken account of
are those which occur in fîxed contracts through a dépréciation of the
stjmdard.


m.] INTERNATIONAL RESULTS. 79

thîs upon the dififerent classes of society, according as
they happen to be debtors or creditors under fixed
contracts, explained, the subject for the most part is
consîdered as exhausted. I venture, however, to think
that this mode of treatment îs very far from exhaust-
ing the question. It seems to me that, independently
altogether of the existence of fixed contracts, inde-
pendently even of gold being a standard of value,
the încreased production of this métal which is now
taking place will be attended — indeed has already been
attended — with very important results. Let us observe
for a moment the movement which is now in progress.
Australia and California hâve during the last eight
or ten years sent into gênerai circulation some two
hundred millions sterling of gold. Of this vast sum
portions hâve penetrated to the most remote quarters
of the world ; but the bulk of it has been received
into the currencies of Europe and the United States,
from which it has largely displaced the silver formerly
circulating ; the latter métal, as it has become free,
flowing ofî into Asia, where it is permanently absorbed.
Viewing the effect as it occurs in the mass of the
two metals combined, it may be said that the stream
which rises in the gold régions of Australia and Cali-
fornia flows through the currencies of the United
States and Europe, and, after saturating the trade of
thèse countrîes, finally loses itself in the hoards of
China and Hindostan. The tide which comes to
light in the sands and rocks of the auriferous régions,
disappears in the accumulations of the East. In
conjunction, however, with this movement there has
been a counter one. With every advance in the


8o INTERNATIONAL RESULTS. [essay

metallic tide, a stream of commodities has set in
in the opposite direction along the same course, —
a stream which, issuing from the ports of Europe,
America, and Asia, and depositing as it proceeds a
portion of the wealth with which it is charged, finds
its termination in the markets of the gold countries.
Hère, then, we find a vast disturbance in the con-
ditions of national wealth,— a disturbance originating
in the gold discoveries, and resulting in a transfer,
on an enormous scale, of consumable goods — the
means of well-being — from one side of the globe to
the other. This disturbance, it is évident, is entirely
îndependent of the accident that gold happens to be
în some countries a standard of value, as well as of
the existence of fixed money-contracts ; for it includes
within the range of its influence countries in which
gold is not, no less than those in which it is, the
monetary standard ; and it affects alike persons
whose bargains are made from day to day, and those
who engage in contracts extending over centuries.
The fact is, the movement in question is the resuit,
not of gold*s being a standard of value, but of its
being a source of purchasing power ; and the influence
of the gold discoveries having been hitherto regarded
almost exclusively with référence to the former func-
tion, the vast effects which they are producing through
the action of the latter — that is to say, by altering the
distribution of purchasing power in the world — hâve
been almost wholly overlooked. It has indeed been
perceived that a great influx of the precious metals
is taking place, accompanied with certain consé-
quences on the trade of the world ; but so far


III.] INTERNATIONAL RESULTA. 8i

as I know, beyond some gênerai phrases respectîng
the stimulus g^ven to production by an încrease of
money, and the great development of commerce which
it is causing, no attempt has yet been made to state
the principles by which the movement is govemed,
or the effects which may flow from it. It is to thèse
questions, then, that I would now solicit the reader's
attention, and towards their solution the following
remarks are offered as a contribution.

Those who hâve followed the course of this con-
troversy are aware that, by most persons who hâve
taken part in it, it has been assumed, almost as an
axiom, that no dépréciation of gold in conséquence of
the gold discoveries has, up to the présent time, taken
place.* As a matter of fact, however, we know that
the gold prices of ail commodities produced in Aus-
tralia and California hâve risen in at least a twofold
proportion ; t while we hâve seen that (so long as the
conditions of producing gold remain as at présent) this
rise must be permanent. To express the same thing
differently : — in the purchase of every commodity
raised in the gold countries two sovereigns are now
required, and (the above conditions being fulfilled)
will continue to be required, where one was formerly
sufficient ; and if this does not amount to a fall in the

♦ The principal exceptions to this statement are M. Levasseur (who, in
an article in the Journal des Économistes^ March 1858, estimâtes the
rise of prices in France since 1847 at 20 per cent, on ail commodities),
and Dr. Soetbeer of Hamburg, who, in his table of prices given in his
"Contributions to the Statistics of Prices in Hamburg," arrives at a
similar resuit (sec Appendix). Many other writers, indeed, acknowledge
that prices hâve risen, but the rise is always attributed to causes distinc
from the increased production of gold.

t Sec ante^ p. 24.


82 INTERNATIONAL RESULTS. [essay

value of gold, I must confess myself unable to under-
stand the meanîng of that expression. It is not to be
supposed that so remarkable a fact as this should hâve
escaped the attention of those who hâve written on
t^is question : it seems to me rather that the ignoring
of it in the discussion is to be attributed to a want of
definite ideas respecting value in the precious metals,
as well as respecting the mode in which changes in
their value are accomplished. The language which is
commonly used on the subject would seem to imply
that gold and silver possess throughout the world a
uniform value, and that ail changes therein proceed in
a uniform manner, showing themselves at the same
time in ail countries, and in respect to ail commodities.
But nothing can be further from the truth than such a
notion. Gold and silver, like ail other things which
are the subjects of international exchange, possess local
values ;* and it is by a succession of opérations on the
local values of gold of an unequal and fluctuating
character, that its dépréciation is being effected, and
that (the conditions of production remaining as at
présent) its value will continue to décline. The two-
fold rise of priées in the gold countries forms the first
step in this progress ; and it will be through a séries
of similar partial advances in other countries, and not
by any gênerai movement, that the dépréciation of the
métal throughout the world will be accomplished, if
that consummation is indeed to take place. With the
question of dépréciation, however, I am at présent no

♦ See on the subject of the local values of the precious metals,
Ricardo's "Works,»' pp. 77—86, and MilPs " Principles of Political
Economy," Book iii., chaps. xix. and xxi.


III.] INTERNATIONAL RESULTS, 83

further concerned than may be necessary to show the
bearing of thèse changes in the local values of gold
upon the movements of trade, and, through thèse, upon
national interests.

There is no need hère to resort to argument to
prove that a gênerai rise or a gênerai fall of priées,
provided it be simultaneous and uniform, can be
attended — always excluding the case of fixed incomes
and contracts already entered into — with no important
conséquences either to nations or to individuals. It is
évident that such a change would merely alter the
terms in which transactions are carried on, not the
transactions themselves. But when the rise or fall of
priées is not gênerai — in other words, when the change
în the values of the precious metals is merely local- it
will be seen that important conséquences must resuit.
Supposing, e,g.y the priées of ail commodities produced
în England to be doubled, while priées throughout the
rest of the world remained unchanged, it is évident
that half the commodities exported from England
would, under thèse circumstances, be sufficient to dis-
charge our foreign debts. With half the capital and
labour now employed in producing goods for the
foreign markets, we should attain the same resuit as
at present^^ — the procuring of our imports ; while the
remaining half would be set free to be applied to other
purposes — to the further augmentation of our wealth
and well-being. England would, therefore, in the case
we hâve supposed, be benefited in ail her foreign
dealîngs to the full extent of the rise în priée. On the
other hand, foreign countries would, in exchange for
the commodities whîch they send us, receive .in return

G 2


«4 rXTERNATIONAL RESULTS. [essay

of our commoditîes but half their présent supply.
Their labour and capital would go but half as far as
at présent in commanding our productions, and they
would be losers in proportion. It is évident, therefore,
that while nations hâve not, any more than individuals,
any interest in the positive height which priées may
attain, every nation, as well as every individual trader,
is interested in raisîng, in relation to otkers, the price
of its own productions. The lower the local value,
therefore, of the precious metals in any country, the

1 greater will be the advantage to that country inj

i foreign markets.

'; This being the manner in which nations are inter-

^ ested in changes in the value of gold, let us now
observe the efïect which the gold discoveries are pro-
ducing in this respect. As has been already stated,
the local value of gold in Australia and California has
fallen to one-half, — the priées of their productions
having risen in a twofold proportion ; * and priées in
other parts of the world having undergone no corre-
sponding change, thèse countries realize the position
which we hâve just been considering in our hypo-
thetical case. A given quantity of their capital and
labour goes twice as far as formerly in commanding
foreîgpi productions, while a given quantity of foreign
labour and capital goes only one-half as far in com-


♦ This statement is not given as strictly accurate. On the whole, the
advance of local prices in the gold countries is at présent (1859) consi-
derably more than this, some leading articles, as house-rent, méat, &c,
having risen in a fourfold proportion and upwards. I adopt the pro-
portion of two to one, because money wages hâve risen in about this
ratioy and money wages, under a dépréciation of the precious metals,
iiltimately govem money prices.


m] INTERNATIONAL RESULTS, 85

manding theirs. The world has thus, through the
gold discoveries, been placed in îts dealings with
Califomia and Australia at a commercial disadvantage ;
and from this disadvantage it can only escape (always
supposing the présent conditions of producing gold to
continue) by raîsing the priées of its productions in a
corresponding degree. Every country, therefore, is
interested in raîsing as rapidly as possible the priées
of its productions, — in other words, in the most rapid
possible dépréciation in the local value of its gold,*
The sooner this is effected, the sooner will the country
be restored to its natural commercial footing in relation
to Australia and California ; while in relation to coun-
tries where priées do not rise with the same rapidity, it
will possess the same kind of advantage which is now
enjoyed by the gold countries.

This conclusion, I find, is directly at variance with
the opinion of some economists of eminence. Mr.
M'Culloch, for example, in his récent contribution to
the " Encyclopaedia Britannica," f maintains " that the
mischievous influence resulting from a fall in the value
of the precious metals dépends in a great measure
on the rapidity with which it is brought about/'
But I apprehend the différence between Mr. M*Cul-
loch and myself arises from his attending exclusively
to a single class of conséquences, — those, namely,
which resuit, in the case of fixed contracts, from a
dépréciation of the standard. With respect to this

* For the gênerai ground of this assertion the reader is referred to
Mr. Mill's chapters on ' International (Values,' and on *Money as an
imported Ccnnmodity,' in his '' Principles of Political Economy ;" also to
Mr. Senior's Essay " On the Cost of obtaining Money.*

\ Article ' Precious Metals.'


86 INTERNATIONAL RESULTS. [essay

class of effects, it is quite true that the evils which
they involve will be increased by the rapîdity of the
dépréciation ; but as I hâve shown, the new gold is
producing effects quite independently of its opération
upon fixed contracts; and it is to those other effects
that the statement I hâve just made is intended to
apply. The distinction which I hâve in view will be
best exemplified by recurring to the expérience of the
gold countries. In thèse the value of gold fell by more
than 50 per cent, in a single year, the dépréciation
involving a proportional loss to creditors with a corre-
sponding gain to debtors, and entailing in addition those
numerous incidental evils which always resuit from a
sudden disturbance of social relations. No one, however,
on this account, will say that the sudden dépréciation
of gold in Australia and California was not for thèse
countries a great gain. The nature and extent of that
gain I endeavoured on a former occasion to estimate.*
It consisted, as I showed, in the increased command
conferred by the cheapness of their gold over markets
in which gold priées had not proportionally risen. With
every rise in the price of Australian and Californian
products, or, what comes to the same thing, with every
fall in the local value of their gold, their power of
purchase in foreign markets increased, — an increase
of purchasing power which, as we know, was imme-
diately followed by a sudden and extraordinary influx
of foreign goods. Now, precisely the same principle
applies in the case of other countries. A fall in the
value of gold will, where gold is the standard, lead to
à disturbance in fixed contracts, wîth the concomitant

* See ante^ p. 39.


/


m.] INTERNATIONAL RESULTS. 87

evils ; but it will at the saine time, as in the case just
considered, place the countries in which it occurs in a
better position commercially in the markets of the
world. Supposing, e,g,y a rise in priées to take place
în ail commercial countries équivalent to that which
has occurred in California and Australia, the consé-
quence would be what I endeavoured to explain in the
paper just referred to : the export of gold from Cali-
fornia and Australia, at least on its présent scale, would
at once cease, and the world would receive instead an
increased supply of agricultural and pastoral products,
and of other commodities which those countries are
fitted to produce, — a resuit which, I venture to think,
would be a gain for the world. On the other hand,
supposing the rise in price to be confined to a single
country — say to England — then England would at once
be placed on a footing of commercial equality with
California and Australia, while as regards other coun-
tries she would occupy the same vantage-ground which
California and Australia now possess. She would, in
short, obtain her gold at half its présent cost (for she
would receive twice as much as at présent in return
for the same expenditure of labour and capital), while
the gold thus obtained would be expended on foreîgn
commodities of which, according to the hypothesis,
the priées had not risen. Notwithstanding, therefore,
the evils which undoubtedly attend variations in the
standard of value, more especially in an old and
highly artificial community like ours, it is nevertheless,
I maintain, for the interest of every country, that, a
fall in the cost of gold having been effected, the pro-
gress of dépréciation should in it be as rapîd as pos-


88 INTERNATIONAL RESULTS, [essay

sible. Untîl, by a dépréciation of gold corresponding
to that which has occurred in California and Australia,
the value of that métal is brought into harmony with
its cost, we must continue to receive from those coun-
tries lîttle more than a barren addition to our stock of
money. But with each successive step in the progress
of dépréciation, there will be for the nation in which
ît occurs a nearer approach to the footing of commer-
cial equality with the gold countries from which it
has been temporarily displaced ; while in its dealings
with other places where the décline has been less rapid,
the nation so circumstanced will, during the period
of transition, enjoy a commercial superiority. As a
gênerai conclusion, therefore, we may say, that in
proportion as in any country the local dépréciation
of gold is more or less rapid than the average rate
elsewhere, the effect of the monetary disturbance
will be for that country bénéficiai or injurious.

This conclusion, I may in passing remark, throws
Hght upon a practical question of some interest at the
présent time, — I mean the question of introducing
a gold currency into India. The measure has been
advocated by Mr. M*Culloch, on the ground that, by
providing a new market for the increased supplies of
gold, its effect would be to " counteract that fall in its
value which is so generally apprehended." * There
can be no doubt that the effect of the measure would
be what Mr. M'Culloch describes ; but, if the above
reasoning be sound, this circumstance, instead of being
a reason for introducing gold into the currency of
India, affords {so far as the interests of India are con-

* " £nc>xlopaedia Britannica ; " article * Precious Metals,' p. 473.


1 1 1 ] INTERNA TIONAL RES UL TS. 89

cerned) a strong reason agaînst the adoption of this
course. Mr. M*Culloch does not state whether the
effect whîch he anticipâtes upon the value of gold
would be gênerai or local ; whether extending over
the whole commercial world, or confined to the
markets of India, — a point of vital importance in
determining the character of the. resuit. If the
effect were gênerai — if, while counteracting déprécia-
tion in India, it influenced the value of gold propor-
tionately in other parts of the world — then it must be
conceded that the resuit would be entirely, bénéficiai.
The evils incident to a disturbance of fixed contracts
would be avoided, and no others would be incurred.
But this is just the point which I venture to deny.
The adoption of gold as the monetary standard of
India would certainly not affect the local value of gold
in Australia and California; for, as I proved on a
former occasion, the value of gold in thèse countries
is determined by its cost, and its cost dépends on the
productiveness of the gold-fields. Nor, for reasons
which will be hereafter stated, would it influence more
than in a slight degree the range of gold-prices in
England and the United States. The opération,
therefore, of the measure would be to depress gold-
prices in India, or at least to prevent them from
rising in that quarter as rapidly as they otherwise
would ; while in California and Australia, in England
and the United States, it left their course substantially
unaffected. Now this resuit would tend undoubtedly
to the advantage of California and Austrialia, of Eng-
land and the United States, but, as it seems to me,
would as clearly be tnjurious to India. The purchas-


90 INTERNATIONAL RESULTS, [essay

ing power of the former countrîes over the markets
of India would, through the relative superîority of
theîr priées, be increased, but the purchasîng power
of India over t/ieir markets would, for the opposite
reason, be diminished. An English or American
merchant, instead of discharging his debts as at
présent through the médium of silver which he has
to purchase with gold at 62d. per ounce (and may
soon hâve to purchase at a higher rate), mîght dis-
charge the same debts with gold directly; and gold
being by hypothesis more valuable in India than
before, the same amount would of course go further.
But an Indian purchaser of English or American com-
modities would hâve the same sum in gold to pay as if
no change had taken place in the currency of India ;
while the gold priées of his native productions being
lower, his ability to pay would of course be less. It
seems to me, therefore (and the considérations hère
adduced are entirely independent of the reasons which
exist on the score of good faith — the Indian debt
havîng been contracted in a silver currency), that,
viewîng the matter from the side of Indian interests,
the introduction of a gold currency into India must
be regarded as a measure decidedly detrimental.*

* Referring to the adoption of a silver standard by Holland in 185 1,
Mr. M'CuUoch characterizes it as a measure "in opposition to ail sound
principles." I confess I am at a loss to conjecture what sound principle
was violated in preferring as the standard of value that métal, the value
of which there was every reason to believe would be the steadier of the
two. [l may say now (1872) that I am disposed to assign much less im-
portance to this question of a change in the monetary standard of India
than I did when the above passage was written. The reasoning assumes the
possibility of a serions divergence in the relative values of gold and silver;
but I now believe that such a divergence is practically out of the question,


m.] INTERNATIONAL RESULTS, 91

Retuming once more to the gênerai question, we
may consîder the followîng conclusions as established :
— ist, that the effect of the cheapening of gold upon
commercial countries being to compel them to enlarge
their metallic currencies, for which enlargement they
must pay by an export of their productions, each
country will endure a loss upon this head to the extent
of the additional sum which may be requisite for each :
and 2ndly, that while there'will be a gênerai loss from
this cause, yet the progress of dépréciation over the
world not being uniform or simultaneous, the primary
loss may, through the disturbance in international
values thence arising, in particular cases, be com-
pensated, or even converted into a positive gain ; the
loss or gain upon the disturbance being determined
according as the rise of priées in any country
is in advance or in arrear of the gênerai average.
To ascertain, therefore, the effect of the movement
upon any particular nation, we must consider the
manner in which, in its case, thèse two principles
will operate.

With respect to the first, I am aware that, in
speaking of the loss imposed on a country by the
necessity of enlarging its currency — by the necessity
of receiving and keeping increased supplies of gold

the grounds for which opinion will be found furthcr on {post, p. 141).
This circumstance, however, does not affect the thcoretic point argued
with Mr. M'Culloch. 1/ the exchange of the existing silver for a gold
standard in India were calculated to produce the eflfects Mr. M^Culloch
expected from it, the measure, it still seems to me, would be open to the
objections 1 hâve urged against it. But I do not believe that the effects
in question would resuit ; and I can well conceive that, having regard to
the gênerai convenience of conmierce, the change might on the whole
be advantageous.]


92 INTERNATIONAL RESULTS, [essay

and silver — I am using language which, notwith-
standing what was said on a former occasion în its
justification, and notwithstanding that it is merely in
strict conformity with the most elementary principles
of économie science, will still appear paradoxical to
many. I would therefore, before proceeding further
with this branch of the argument, ask the reader to
consider the case of a private merchant who is com-
pelled to increase the stock of cash with which he
carries on his business. The metallic circulation of a
country performs in relation to the community func-
tions precisely analogous to those which are discharged
for a merchant by his cash reserve. If a merchant
can safely dispense with a portion of his ready cash,
he is enabled, with the money thus liberated, either
to add to his productive capital, or to increase his
private expenditure. On the other hand, if he finds
ît necessary to increase his reserve of cash, his pro-
ductive capital must be proportionally encroached
upon, or his private expenditure proportionally cur-
tailed. And precisely the same may be said of the
currency of a nation. Where a country does not itself
yield gold or silver,* every increase of its metallic
circulation must be obtained — can only be obtaîned —
by parting with certain éléments of real wealth — élé-
ments which, but for this necessity, might be made
conducive to its well-being. It is in enabling a nation

* Even where it does yield thèse metals, the necessity of augmenting
the currency is not the less an evil, since the opération will occupy, with
no resuit but that of avoiding an inconvenience, a portion of the labour
and capital of the country, which, but for this, might hâve contributed to
its positive welfare.


III.] INTERNATIONAL RESULTS. 93

to reduce within the narrowest limits this unproductîve
portion of its stock, that the chief advantage of a good
banking System consîsts ; and if the augmentation of
the metallic currency of a country be not an evil, then
it is difficult to see in what way the institution of
banks is a good. In regarding, therefore, the neces-
sity imposed upon commercial countries of enlarging
their metallic currencies as injurious to their interests,
I make no assumption which is not in perfect keeping
with the best known and most generally recognized
facts of commercial expérience.

An increase in the metallic currency of a country,
then, being an evil, let us consider what the cir-
cumstances are by which the augmentation rendered
necessary by the gold discoveries will be determined.
This, it is évident, will principally dépend — the amount
of business to be carried on being given — on the
extent to which substitutes for metallic money are in
use ; in other words, on the degree of perfection which
the banking System of each country has attained. To
illustrate this, let us suppose a given sum of metallic
money — say a million sterling — to be introduced into
two countries in which the currencies are differently
constituted — e.g,^ into England and India. In India
coin is the principal médium of circulation* — in many

* [The reader will bear in mind that this was written in 1859. The
State of the Indian currency at that time may be gathered from the follow-
ing extracts from a paper on " The Trade and Commerce of India," read
bcfore the British Association in 1859.] "Intimately connected with
Indian trade and commerce is a sound System of banking. At présent
thcre are only three banks of importance in India — the banks of Bengal,
Bombay, and Madras. Thèse hâve no branches, the absence of which
constitutes one of the main defects of the System. The few other banks
in India do not issue notes, and employ their capital in making advances


94 INTERNATIOJSFAL RESULTS. [essay

parts the only one, and consequently a million sterling
introduced into the currency of India would represent
only an equal, or little more than an equal, addition to
its total médium of circulation — to the whole monetary
machinery by which the exchange of commodities is
efifected and priées maintained. But in England,
where the currency is differently constituted, the resuit
would be différent. The great bulk of the circulating
médium of this country consists of certain forms of
crédit; and the amount of thèse crédit média standing
in a certain large proportion to the coin in the country,

on bills of ladingy in exchange opérations, and in some instances in
loans to members of the Service, at high rates of interest ; but afford
no banking facilities for conducting the internai trade of the country."
The writer then refers to a table, showing the state of the three leading
banks (Bengal, Bombay, and Madras) in the preceding June, from
which it appears that the bullion at that time in the coffers of the
banks was in excess of the notes in circulation, the amount of thèse
latter being, for the whole of India, 2,241471/., or about one-tenth of
the amount issucd by the Bank of England alone ; while the total
amount of "accounts current" was only 1,855,000/. — about one-sixth
of those held by some of the private banks of London, and not one-
fifteenth of those of the Bank of England. The total amount of commer-
cial bills discounted in thèse three leading banks of India is set down at
278,906/. ! " And this," it is observed, " in a country where the gross
annual revenue is 34,000,000/. ; the export trade, on an average of
the last îi\Q. years, 2j^,ooofiool. ; the import trade, on the same average,
23,000,000/., with an internai trade to an extent almost impossible to
estimate." ("The Trade and Commerce of India," by J. T. Mackcnzie,
read before the British Association, 1859, pp. 15, 16.) In the évidence
taken before the late Committee " On Colon ization and Settlement in
India," Mr. Alcxander Forbes, when questioned with référence to the large
absorption of silver in India, expressed his opinion that the silver was ail
required for current coin. " It has often been said that the natives hoard
silver : now my expérience is that they do not hoard silver ; they hoard
gold ; and that the silver is actually required for the commerce of the
country." And this he traces (Answers 2,222, 2,223, 2,372-80) to the want
of banking accommodation and the imperfect means of communication
generally in the country. See also the évidence of Mr. Mangles (Answers
1,625—1,633}.


iii] INTERNATIONAL RESULTS, 95

the effect of îrttroducing a million sterling into our
currency would be to increase the médium of cir-
culation by an amount very much greater than that
of the added coin. Let us consider for a moment
what becomes of a sum of coin or bullion received into
England. I do not now speak of that moving mass of
métal which passes (so to speak) through the currency
of the country — which, received to-day into the vaults
of the Bank of England, is withdrawn to-morrow for
foreign remittance — but of gold which is permanently
retained to meet our genuine morietary requirements.
Of such gold a portion — greater or less, according to
circumstances — will always find its way into the
channels of retail trade ; and so far as it folio ws this
course, its effect in augmenting the circulation will be,
as in India, only to the extent of its actual amount.
But a portion will also be received into the banks of
the country, where, either in the form of coin, or of
notes issued against coin, it will constitute an addition
to their cash reserves. The disposable cash of the
banks being thus increased, an increase of crédit ope-
rations throughout the country would in due time
follow. The new coin would become the foundation
of new crédit advances, against which new chèques
would be drawn, and new bills of exchange put in
circulation, and the resuit would be an expansion of
the whole cîrculating médium greatly in excess of the
sum of coin by which the new média were supported.
Now crédit, whatever be the form which it assumes,
so long as it is crédit, will operate in purchases, and
affect priées in precisely the same way as if it were
actually the coin which it represents. So far forth,


g6 INTERNATIONAL RESULTS. [essay

therefore, as the new money enables the country to
support an încrease of such crédit média — to support
them, I mean, by cash payments — so far it extends the
means of sustaining gold-prices in the country; and
this extension of the circulating médium being much
greater than in proportion to the amount of added
coin, the means of sustaining gold-prices will be in the
same degree increased. Thus, supposing the ratio of
the crédit to the coin circulation of the country to be
as four to one (and the proportion is greatly in excess
of this), the addition of one million sterling of coin
would be équivalent to an increase in the aggregate
circulation of four millions sterling,* and one million
sterling of gold would consequently, in England, for a
given extent of business, support the same advance
in gold-prices as four times that amount in India. It
follows from thèse considérations, that, in order to raise
priées throughout a given range of transactions to any
required level, the quantity of metallic money which
will be necessary will vary in différent countries,
according to the constitution of their currencies ; the
requirements of each increasing generally in an inverse
ratio with the efficiency of its banking institutions.


♦ Strictly speaking, this conclusion would not foUow on the above
supposition, the efficiency of différent forms of crédit in performing
the work of circulation being (as pointed out by Mr. Mill, " Principles of
Political Econoniy," vol. ii., pp. 58 — 61) différent, and only some of them
being in this respect equal to coin. But such distinctions do not affect
the gênerai tnith of the principle contended for in the text, that the
necessity for coin varies inversely with the use of crédit Résides, as
I intimated, the proportion of crédit to coin in our circulation is much
greater than I hâve assumed ; and a million of coin takcn into our
currency would really be équivalent to more than four millions added to a
purely metallic one.


m.] INTERNATIONAL RESULTS, 97

We may thus see how very unequal will be the
opération of the gold discoveries wîth respect to
commercial communities. The réduction in the cost
of gold to which they hâve led has, as we hâve seen,
produced in the gold countries a twofold rise of gold-
prices ; and supposing the présent conditions of raising
gold to continue, the same cause must ultimately lead
to the same resuit throughout the world ; imposing
upon each country the necessity of so enlarging its
currency as to admit of this advance. But we hâve
seen that the quantity requisite for this purpose varies
according to the monetary status of the country for
which it is required ; and inasmuch as the new money
must be paid for by commodities, the abstraction of
commodities, and therefore the loss of the means of
well-being, to which each country must submit, will
vary with the same circumstance. On the supposi-
tion, therefore, on which we are arguing, the quantity
of new money which England would require would
be, when compared with the extent of her business, ex-
tremely small, and her loss of real wealth small pro-
portionally. The same would be true of the United
States, where crédit institutions hâve also attained
a high degree of efficiency, and whose paper conse-
quently forms a large proportion of the whole circu-
lation. In France, the use of crédit being more
restricted, the requirements for coin would be greater,
and consequently also the loss of consumable com-
modities; while in India and China, and indeed in
Asiatic communities generally, the circulatîng médium
being almost purely metallic, the requirements for
coin would, in proportion to the business in which

H


98 INTERNATIONAL RESULTS, [essay

it was employed, attaîn theîr maximum, wîth a
correspondîng maximum of loss in the éléments of
well-beîng.*

The opération of this principle is indeed, in the
actual circumstances of the world, in some degree
concealed by the complex conditions under which it
comes înto play. Thus Great Britain and the United
States, instead of obtaining the smallest shares, receive
in the first instance nearly the whole of the new gold.
On the other hand, the quanti ty which goes to India
and China from the gold countries is comparatively
triflingit and although a large drain of treasure has
set in thither from Europe, yet this consists chiefly of
silver. If, however, passing by the accidents of the
movement, we attend to its essentials, we shall find
that the results are entirely conformable to the prin-
ciple I hâve endeavoured to describe. For though
the bulk of the new gold comes in the first instance to
England and the United States — determined thither
by the course of international demand — yet England

* It is curious to observe the contradictions in which persons are
involved who, still under the influence of the mercantile theory of wealth
(and there are few even among professed economists who are free from its
influence), are nevertheless sensible from expérience of the advantages of
a System with which it is incompatible. Thus several witnesses before
the late Committee on Indian Colonization reter to the large influx of
silver into India in récent years as a sure indication of the increasing
prosperity of that country ; yet, almost in the same breath, they speak of
the deflciency of banking accommodation as among its most pressing wants.
Now it is certain that, just in proportion as banking accommodation is
extended, the absorption of silver by India will décline ; whence it would
foUow, if the reasoning of the witnesses be sotmd, that the effect of the
extension of banks would be to check the growing prosperity of the
country. See "Minutes of Evidence,** Questions 1,625-1,633, 2,221-2,223.

t This order in the diffusion of the new gold has not been sustained
Sec ante^ p. 67. note.


m.] INTERNATIONAL RESULTS. .^™-, ^-. ,

and the Unîted States do not form its ultîmate des-
tination. The monetary requirements of thèse coun-
tries being easily satisfied, the mass of the métal, on
reaching thèse markets, becomes immediatejy dis-
posable for foreign purchases ; by which means the
United States and England are enabled to transfer to
other countries this unprofitable stock, the commodities
with which in the first instance they parted being
replaced by others which they more require. So also,
although the metallic drain to the East is composed
principally of silver, the efflux — at least in its présent
proportions — is not the less certainly the conséquence
of the increased production of gold ; for the silver
of which it consists has been displaced from the
currencies of Europe and America by the gold of
Australia and California ; and the drain to the East is
only not a golden one, because silver alone is in that
région the recognized standard. As the final resuit of
the whole movement, we find that, while the metallic
Systems of England and the United States are
receiving but small permanent accessions, those of
India and China are absorbing enormous supplies.
The former countries, though the first récipients of the
treasure, yet, not requiring it for domestic purposes,
are enabled to shift the burden to others, whose real
wealth they command in exchange; while the latter,
requiring what they receive, are compelled to retain it.
Having parted with their commodities for the new
money, they are unable afterwards to replace them.
As their stock of coin increases, their means of well-
being décline, and they become the permanent victims
of the monetary disturbance.

H 2


£00 INTERNATIONAL RESULTS. [essay

But, secondly, we concluded that the loss of real
wealth resulting from the augmentation of theîr cur-
rencîes would in partîcular countries be compensated,
and might în some be even converted înto positive
gain, by the disturbance which, during the period of
transition, would take place in international values.
As has been already remarked, a gênerai rise of
priées in ail countries, if simultaneous and uniform —
since it leaves the proportions in which commodities
are exchanged undisturbed — leads to no change in
international values, and produces no efFect upon
national interests. But where priées rise unequally,
international values, and through thèse, national in-
terests, are aflfected. We hâve therefore to consider
how far, in the actual circumstances of the world, a
rise of priées in particular countries, unaccompanied
by a corresponding advance in others, is possible, and,
in so far as it is possible, in what order the several
changes may be expected to occur.

As regards the question of possibility, this is placed
beyond controversy by the example of Califomia and
Australia. It is a matter of fact that priées in those
régions hâve advanced in a twofold proportion, while
no corresponding rise of priées has occurred through-
out the world. The circumstances, however, of the
gold countries will probably be thought of too excep-
tional a character to form the basis of any gênerai
conclusion ; and it will therefore be désirable to advert
for a moment to the causes which produced in Cali-
fornîa and Australia that local élévation of priée, with
a view to consider how far the same conditions are
capable of being realized else where.


III.] INTERNATIONAL RESULTS. loi

Thèse causes, as was formerly shown,* were the
spécial facilities for producîng gold enjoyed by Calî-
fomia and Australia, combîned with the limîted range
of theîr domestîc transactions. The sudden cheapen-
îng of gold, învolving a corresponding încrease in
money eamings, placed an extraordînary premium on
the production of the métal, whîle the limîted range
of their domestic trade rendered the necessary enlarge-
ment of their monetary Systems an easy task. On the
other hand, the immense extent of the aggregate com-
merce of the world required, in order to secure a similar
advance, a proportional increase in its aggregate stock
of money, an augmentation which could only be accom-
plished after the lapse of a considérable tîme. Priées
therefore rose rapidly in the gold countries, while over
the area of gênerai commerce the rise has been but slow.

Such being the circumstances which produced the
local divergence of priées to which I hâve called
attention, it will at once be seen that of the two con-
ditions which I hâve stated, the latter — the necessary
enlargement of the local currency — may in most
countries, though not in ail at the same time, be
fulfiUed, if not with the same rapidity as in Australia
and Califomia, still after no very long delay. It has
been computed,t for example, that the total quantity
of gold coin circulating in Great Britain amounts to
75,ooo,cxx)/. sterling. Assuming this to be correct,
it would follow (ail other conditions being supposed"

♦ See antey pp. 25, 26.

t "History of Priées," vol. vi. app. xxiL This also is Mr. M*Culloch's
estimate: " Encyclopaedia Britannica," article * Precious Metals,' p. 465.
[It will be borne in mind that thèse estimâtes apply to the period
immediately preceding the iîrst publication of thcse Essays (1859-60).]


102 INTERNATIONAL RESULTS. [essay

îdentical) that an addition of 75,ooo,cx>o/. would be
sufficient to effect an élévation of our local priées
équivalent to that which has occurred in Australia.
Now at the présent rate of production, the quantity
of gold which arrives annually in Great Britain cannot
fall much short of 30,000,000/. sterling ; * so that
were we merely to retain ail that we receive, we
should at the end of two years and a half be in a
position, so far as the augmentation of our currency
is concerned, to maintain the same advance in price
as has occurred in the gold coun tries. If, then, priées
in Great Britain hâve not risen in the same degree,
the resuit, it is évident, cannot be due to the difificulty
of procuring the supply of gold necessary for the
enlargement of our currency. It remains, therefore, to
be considered hovv far those spécial facilities for pro-
curing gold which hâve operated in the gold countries
may corne into play in other parts of the world.

The extraordinary facilities for procuring gold
enjoyed by Australia and California dépend, of course,
on the possession of their gold mines ; and this being
so, it might seem as if ail countries, not being like
them auriferous, were by the nature of the case pre-
cluded from fulfilling this condition of the problem ;
but this by no means necessarily follows, as will be
évident if we reflect that there are other modes of
obtaining gold than by direct production, of which
modes the efficiency enjoyed by différent countries
differs almost as much as the degrees of fertility in

♦ [20,000,000/. would hâve been nearer the mark, but, at the time
this paper was written, no trustworthy statistics of gold imports existed.
Either amount, however, answers equally well the purpose of the
argument (1872).]


ni.] INTERNAIIONAL RESULTS, 103

différent gold mines. Where countries do not them-
selves produce gold, the mode by whîch they obtaîn
ît is through their foreign trade. Now it îs a fact
well known to economîsts * that, wîth référence to
the cost of commodities, the terms on which foreign
trade is carrîed on differ greatly in différent countries,
the labour of some going much further in commanding
foreign productions than that of others. According,
however, to the conditions on which foreign produc-
tions generally are obtainable, will be those on which
gold may be obtained. If a country possess spécial
facilities for supplying markets where gold can be
given in exchange, it will obtain its gold more
cheaply — at a less sacrifice of labour and capital —
than countries which do not share thèse facilities, and
amongst such countries it will therefore occupy pre-
cisely the same position as an auriferous country whose
mines are of more than the usual richness among
the countries which yield gold. It is thus possible
for a non-auriferous, no less than for an auriferous,
country to possess exceptional facilities in the means
of procuring gold, and therefore to fulfil the second of
the conditions by which a divergence of local priées
from the ordinary level of the world may be effected.

Now, it appears to me there are two countries

which possess in an eminent degree the qualifications

requisite for attaining this resuit — I mean Great

Britain and the United States : the former, as being

par excellence the great manufacturer among civilized

♦ Sec Ricardo's " Works "—chap. vii., od Foreign Trade. Mill's
" Principles of Political Economy," chaps. xvii., xix. Also Senior's Essay,
*' On tliÂe Cost of ohtaining Money."


104 INTERNATIONAL RESULTS. [essay

nations — the manufacturer more partîcularly of de-
scriptions of goods — as cotton, wooUen, lînen, and
iron— which enter largely into the consumption of
the classes by whom chiefly the gold countries are
peopled ; and the latter, as the principal producer of
raw material, as well as of certain commodities — as
grain, tobacco, sugar, and rice — which are also largely
consumed by the same classes. In thèse circum-
stances, Great Britain and the United States enjoy
peculiar advantages in the markets of the gold-
countries, and thèse advantages are extended and
confirmed by other important incidents of their posi-
tion. Thus they possess the greatest mercantile
marine in the world, by which they are enabled to
give the fullest scope to their manufacturing and
agricultural superiority, while by race, language, and
religion they are intimately connected with the pro-
ducers of the new gold, — a connection from which
spring ties, moral, social, and political, to strengthen
and secure those which commerce créâtes. Great
Britain and the United States thus possess in their
foreign trade a rich mine,* worked by their manu-
facturers, planters, and farmers, tended by their
mercantile marine, and protected by their naval
power, — a mine by means of which they are enabled
to obtain their gold on terms more favourable than
other nations. The effect of this, in ordinary times,
is shown by a scale of money rates, wages, salaries,
and incomes, permanently higher than that which

♦ "The mine worked by England is the gênerai market of the world :
the miners are those who produce those commodities by the exportation
of which the precious metals arc obtained." — Senior's Essay " On the
Cost of obtain inq Money^^ P- ' 5-


ni.] INTERNATIONAL RESULTS. 105

elsewhere prevails; but, in times of monetary dis-
turbance like the présent, when the cost oi" gold
having been reduced îts value is falling, thèse
advantages, it seems to me, must tell, as analogous
advantages hâve told in the gold countries, in a
more rapid realization of the results which are in
store — in a quicker ascent towards that hîgher level
of priées and incomes, which the cheapened cost of
gold is destined ultimately to produce.

There is reason, therefore, on considérations of
theory, to expect a répétition in England and America
of that phenomenon which has been already exhibited
in Australia and Califomia, — a divergence of local
money-rates from the average level of surrounding
countries. On a future occasion I shall endeavour
to ascertain how far, in the case of Great Britain, thèse
à priori conclusions are supported by facts — how far
priées and incomes hâve hère, under the influence of
the gold discoveries, outstripped the corresponding
movement in other countries.* Having settled this
point, we shall be in a position to form a gênerai
estimate of the benefit which may thence accrue to us.
Meanwhile, however, I may, in conclusion, point out
the mode in which the advantages incident to the mone-
tary position we shall occupy are likely to be realized.

And hère it may be well to call the reader's attention

♦ [Some évidence on the point will be found in the Appendix ; but the
inquiry hère contemplated was never carried into effect. A very interest-
ing and carefuUy prepared paper on the subject, however, was read some
years later by my friend Professor Jevons bcfore the London Statistical
Society, when I had the satisfaction to Bnd that the results of his entirely
independent investigations to a very large extent corroborated the con-
clusions at which I had arrived, mainly by way of déduction from the
gênerai principles of the science.]


io6 INTERNATIONAL RKSULTS, [essay

to the distinction, sometimes overlooked, between a fall
in the value of gold and a rise in the price of commo-
ditîes. A rise in the price of commodities, if gênerai,
împlies commonly a fall in the value of money ; but,
according to the ordinary use of language, alike by
economists and in common speech, money would, I
apprehend, in certain circumstances be said to hâve
fallen in value, even though the priées of large classes
of commodities remained unaffected. For example,
supposing improvements to hâve been effected in some
branch of production resulting in a diminished cost of
the commodity, the value of money remaining the same,
priées would fall : if under such circumstances priées
did not fall, that could only be because money had not
remained the same, but had fallen in value. The con-
tinuance of priées unaltered would, therefbre, under
such circumstances amount to proof of a fall in the
value of gold. Now when, in connection with this
considération, we take account of the fact that over the
greater portion of the field of British industry improve-
ment is constantly taking place, it is obvious that the
mère movements of priées hère, taken without référence
to the conditions of production, are no sure criterion
of changes in the value of gold.

The truth is, in a large class of commodities — in
ail those to which mechanical or chemical inventions
are extensively applicable — even on the supposition of
a very great dépréciation of gold, no considérable
advance in price is probable. Gold, for example,
might hâve fallen since the begînning of the présent
century to tlie extent of 75 per cent. — that is to say,
four sovereigns now might be equal to no more than


ni.] INTERNATIONAL RESULTS, 107

one sovereîgn at the commencement of thé perîod — and
yet in a large class of manufactured goods no advance
in prîce would be apparent, the réduction in the cost of
production being in more than an equal proportion.
In ordinary times, agricultural opérations escape in a
great degree the influence of industrial progress ; but
within the last ten years — that is to say, since the
repeal of the Corn Laws, which nearly synchronized
with the gold discoveries — the spirit of improvement
has been as busy in agriculture as in any other depart-
ment of industry, and, in conjunction with importations
from foreign countries, has acted, and must for some
time at least continue to act, powerfully upon the price
of raw products in this country.

The dépréciation of gold, therefore, may be realized
eîther in a corresponding advance of priées, or in the
neutralization of a fall which in the absence of dépré-
ciation would hâve occurred ; but in whatever form it
may come to us, our gain or loss as a nation will be
the same, and will dépend upon the condition I hâve
stated — the more or less rapid dépréciation of our cur-
rency as compared with the currencies (convertible,
like ours, into gold) of other countries. Whether,
the conditions of production remaining unaltered, the
dépréciation be indicated by a corresponding advance
of priées, or, those conditions undergoing improvement,
the fall in the value of gold merely opérâtes in neutra-
lizing, as regards price, the effects of the cheapened
cost of commodities — in either case tlu gold price of the
products of English labour and abstinence will rise, A
given exertion of English industry will reap a larger
gold reward than before ; and foreign commodities not


io8 INTERNATIONAL RESULTS. [essay m.

risîng în price în the same degree, the larger gold
reward will indicate, over so muc/t of Sur exienditure as
is dirccted to foreign prodiutions^ a real augmentation of
well-beîng. As regards that portion of our expendi-
ture which falls upon the products of our own industry,
îndividuals and classes will, according to circumstances,*
be benefited or injured by the change ; but as a nation,
we shall neither gain nor lose, sînce hère the increased
cheapness of gold will be exactly neutralized either by
a corresponding advance in price, or by the prévention in
the same degree of a fall which would otherwise hâve
taken place. It is in this way — by the increased com-
mand which she obtains over foreign markets by her
cheap gold — and not, as is commonly supposed, by
finding an outlet for her wares in California and
Australia, that England will benefit by the gold dis-
coveries. That outlet for her productions — were the
movement to stop hère — however it might benefit
individuals, would for the country at large be an injury
and not a boon ; it would deprive her of that which
might conduce to her comfort and happiness, and
would give her ** a breed of barren métal " in exchange.
But the movement does not stop hère. The money
which she obtains from the gold countries, instead of
absorbing, like India or China, she employs in purchas-
ing the goods of other nations. It is in the enlarged
command which she acquires over such goods that her
gain consists, and it is thus that she indemnifies herself,
though at the expense of the nations who ultimately
retain the new gold, for the loss — the indubitable loss
— which she is called on in the first instance to sustain.

♦ On this point stepost^ p. 147 et seq.


IV.

ESSAY TOWARDS A SOLUTION OF THE

GOLD QUESTION.

SU M MARY OF THE MO VE ME NT. M. CHEVAUER'S

VIEW S*

It îs now rather more than three centuries sînce the
conquest of Mexico and Peru by the Spanîards, and the
discovery of rich mines of the precîous metals în those
régions, excited the cupîdîty of Europe and opened a
new epoch in human affairs. Of the numerous occur-
rences which conspired about that tîme to break the
spell of old ideas, and to carry the world rapidly ovèr
the border line of mediaevalism into the full movement
of modem civilization, this was certainly not the least
powerful. The subséquent dépréciation of gold and
silver, and the révolutions in private property, though
the most conspîcuous, were by no means the sole, nor
even the most important, conséquences of that event.
The rage for gain — the auri sacra famés — awakened
by the golden visions of the new Eldorado, hurried
across the Atlantic those numerous and daring adven-
turers who laid the foundation of the Transatlantic
States. The vast sums of gold and silver liberated

♦ Tke Edinburgk RevieWy July 1860.


iio SUMMARY OF THE MOVEMENT. [essay

by their exertîons supplîed, and rendered possible, the
remarkable expansion of Oriental trade which forms
the most striking commercial fact of the âge that
followed. Less directly, but still intimately, connected
with the same event, were the sudden growth and
temporary splendour of the Spanish monarchy, as well
as its rapid décline; the establishment of the Poor
Laws in England ; the financîal embarrassments of
Charles I., which resulted in the Long Parliament and
the Révolution ; and the rise and progress of British
maritime power.

Once more after the lapse of three centuries, the
world has witnessed another great discovery of the
precious metals. The auriferous sands and rocks of
California and Australia are as much superior, in rich-
ness and abundance, to those which rewarded the
industry of the Spanish adventurers, as thèse latter
were superior to ail which had been previously known ;
and gold has now for eight years been pouring into
Europe in an exubérant tide of wealth beyond ail
former expérience. What, then, will be the resuit of
thèse Californian and Australian discoveries ? and
how far will they resemble in their scope and influence
their prototypes of the sîxteenth century ? Thèse are
questions which, in the présence of such facts, cannot
but force themselves upon every thoughtful mind.

But since the epoch of which we hâve spoken —
sînce the day when the sparkling veins on the sides of
Potosî attracted the eye of the Indian shepherd — a
mighty change has come upon the world. Society in
ail its constituents has been profoundly modified.
Commerce has grown to dimensions of which the


IV.] M. CHEVALIER' S VIEIVS. m

merchants of the sîxteenth century could hâve formed
no conception. The entire foreîgn trade of the greatest
commercial nation then in existence probably did not
much exceed that which is now carried on in a single
English or American port. The total tonnage of the
united galleons which constituted the Spanish mercan-
tile marine only amounted a century later, as we are
informed by Robertson, to 27,500 tons — little more
than the tonnage of the Great Eastern steam-ship.
Some of the most populous and wealthy communities
of the présent day had not yet begun to exist; and the
whole quantity of the precious metals then in use was
probably less than that which now circulâtes in some
second-rate European kingdoms. The conditions
under which the experiment of the sîxteenth century
was tried are no longer those with which we hâve now
to deal, and the précédents of that period may
therefore be thought to hâve little application to
the présent time.

But, on the other. hand, if we examine the détails of
this change, we shall find that the facts of which it
consists are of a nature, in relation to the influence of
the gold discoveries, in a great degree to counteract
and neutralize each other; some of them tending not
less powerfully to enhance, and give increased efficacy
to that influence, than others tend to impair it The
stability of trade has increased with the increase of
its mass ; but, on the other hand, the agencies at our
disposai for acting upon trade hâve increased in a still
greater proportion. The quantity of the precious
metals now in existence may be twenty or thirty times
greater than when Columbus made his mémorable


1 1 2 SUMMAR Y OF THE MO VEMENT. [essay

voyage, and the dîfficulty of afFectîng theîr value may
be proportîonably greater ; but against thîs we hâve to
consider, that for one Spanîard who in the sîxteenth
century engaged in mînîng, twenty or thîrty EngUsh
or Amerîcans are now thus employed, and that thèse
latter are equîpped wîth means and appliances of pro-
duction far superîor to any whîch theîr predecessors
could command: The area of commercial intercourse
has been greatly enlarged, and commercial relations
indefinitely multiplied : but not more so than the
means of locomotion and the facilities of postal com-
munication; while we hâve further to note, that
commerce possesses now, în the agency of crédit, an
auxiliary to metallic money of wondrous potency,
which in the earlier period was entirely unknown.
Notwithstanding, therefore, the changes which hâve
taken place in the trade and wealth of the world, the
circumstances of the présent time are not such as to
preclude the possibility of a récurrence of events
similar or analogous to those which the first American
discoveries drew after them. Those events were, as
we hâve said, of the greatest moment to mankind :
they included the rapid colonization of America by
European races ; great and lasting changes in the
channels of trade ; striking vicissitudes in the fortunes
of nations ; and a monetary révolution the effects of
which hâve been felt in every quarter of the globe.

The précédents of history, then, no less than the
character of the facts, give to the Califomian and
Australian gold discoveries an interest of no ordinary
kind, and we hâve therefore to tender our thanks to
M. Michel Chevalier and his translator, for having


IV.] M. CHEVALIER' S VIEWS. 113

brought to the notice of the public the momentous
questions which those discoveries involve. The sub-
ject îndeed bas not been entirely overlooked in this
country, but it has not yet been treated, either hère
or elsewhere, by any writer whose opinions command
the same respect as those of M. Chevalier; and we
therefore welcome the appearance of his volume as
undoubtedly the most important contribution which
has yet been made to this discussion.

But, while we gladly bear testimony to the ability
and learning with which M. Chevalier has treated
this subject, and to the logical acuteness with which
he has dissected and expounded many of its pro-
blems, it certainly seems to us that he has failed to
seize fully the nature and the extent of the prin-
ciples which the increased production of gold has
brought into play. In the work before us, the dis-
cussion is confined to a single aspect of the gold
question — "the probable fall in the value of gold,"
and the effects of this on our pecuniary relations : to
another, and not less important view of the move-
ment — the changes which the new gold, by altering
the distribution of purchasing power in the world, may
produce in the movements of trade and the fortunes
of nations, changes of which some striking illustrations
hâve already been afforded, — to this aspect of the case
M. Chevalier scarcely alludes.

And yet the distinction on which it rests is real.*
If, to borrow the illustration of Hume, the world
should awake some morning, every one finding in his
pocket an additional sovereign, or (modifying slightly

* As has been shown in the preccding essays.

I


1 1 4 SUMMAR Y OF THE MO VEMENT. [essay

the supposition) every one jfinding his money income
increased in some certain proportion, — such an occur-
rence would tend to lower the value of money, but
(unless so far as it affected fixed contracts) would not
alter the relative purchasing power of îndividuals, nor
therefore the distribution of commodities, nor the in-
terests of mankind. But if, instead of being dispensed
with this impartiality, the entire addition of new sove-
reigns should fall to the lot of a few persons, the
money incomes of the rest remaîning as before, this
-f-supposing the amount of the addition to be in each
case the same — would tend, equally as in the former
case, to lower the value of money ; but îts effects
would not end hère : while increasing the total
quantity of money, it would at the same time alter
the relative purchasing power of individuals — a resuit
which would be followed by a corresponding change in
the distribution of real wealth amongst them, and con-
sequently of gênerai well-being. This view of the
case M. Chevalier has neglected to expound. He has
discussed with considérable fulness the effects of a
dépréciation of money ; but he has altogether over-
looked the results which may foUow from a redistri-
bution of purchasing power over the world. We
hâve in the outset called attention to this incom-
pleteness (as we deem it) in his mode of treating the
gold question, because we think he has thus been led,
not only to omit from his considération an interesting
range of topics, but to attribute to a dépréciation
of money results which are due to a différent cause.
The justification and pertinence of this criticism will
appear in the course of the foUowing observations.


nr.] M. CHEVALIER' S VIEW S. 115

The facts which form the ground for expectîng
a fall in the value of gold are thus stated by M.
Chevalier. At the beginning of the présent century
the quantity of gold which arrived every year to aug-
ment the metallic wealth of Christendom amounted, in
round numbers, to about 2,500,000/. sterling. By
the year 1848 this supply had increased to upwards
of 8,000,000/. ; the field of production having been
in the meantime extended by the opening of new
mines in the Ural Mountains, and the discovery of
auriferous sands in Siberia. In 1848 the Californian
discoveries occurred, which were followed in 185 1 by
those in Australia. The resuit of the whole has been
to raise the rate of production from 2,500,000/., the
annual yield at the commencement of the century, to
38,000,000/. sterling, the présent annual yield ; being
an increase, as compared with that time, in the pro-
portion of 15 to I, or, as compared with the period
îmmediately preceding 1848, of 5 to i.

Or the facts of the case may be thus represented.
The région which, until the discovery of the mines
of Siberia, was the chief seat of gold production for
European nations, was America. Now the total quan-
tity of gold raised throughout the whole continent of
America during the interval from the first voyage of
Columbus to the discovery of the mines of Califomia
— that is to say, during a period of 356 years —
amounted in round numbers to about 400,000,000/.
sterling. At the présent time (as has been stated
above) the anntial supply has reached 38,000,000/.
sterling. It thus appears that the civilized world
receîves now in a single year nearly one-tenth of ail

I 2


1 16 SUMMAR Y OF THE MO VEMENT. [essay

the gold obtaîned in the principal field of supply
throughout the whole period from the discovery of
America down to the year 1848.

Or, once more, the altered conditions of producing
gold may be presented through the médium of the
average produce of a day s work. M. Chevalier has
not furnished us with any standard with which to
compare the présent rate of gold earnings, except the
returns of the gold-washers of the Rhine, which
scarcely afford a fair basis of comparison. We learn,
however, from Humboldt that, at the commencement
of the century, when he visited New Spain, the
Mexican miner, " who was the best paid of ail miners,"
" gained at least from twenty-five to thirty francs per
week of six days." * This would be équivalent to
from 35. dd. to 45. 2d, a day of our money, which
amount, since the rate of wages in mining always
folio ws the average returns to mining labour, t we may
take as representing the average earnings of miners
at the commencement of the century. Now, accord-
ing to some authorities quoted by M. Chevalier, and
which are fuUy confirmed by statements which we
hâve seen, as well as by the current rate of wages
in the country, the average earnings of gold miners
in California at présent are at the rate of nineteen
francs per man daily, equal to about 15^. 2d. The
earnings in Australia he sets down at the same
amount ; but we are convinced that this is an over-
estimate. From officiai accounts, confirmed by pri-
vate information, we hâve no hésitation in saying

* " Political Essay on New Spain,** vol. iil pp. 237 — 240.
t See anU^ p. 23.


IV.] M. CHEVALIERES VIEIVS. 117

that gold eamîngs in Australia at présent do not
exceed on an average 10^. a day per man. Even,
however, reducing to thîs amount M. Chevalier's
estimate, we hâve still an average produce for the
two countries of i ^s. per man daîly, a rate of return
nearly four tîmes greater than that which was obtaîned
from the best mînes of Mexico half a century since.
When, in connection with this fact, we consider the
greater accessibility — arising partly from political
causes, partly from the progress of the art of navi-
gation — of the présent gold countries, the superior
enterprise and skill of the miners, and the larger
capital at their disposai, we may form some conception
of the immense increase which has taken place in the
world's means of obtaining gold.

Such is the présent state of gold production. But
before thèse facts can be made the data for conclusions
respecting the future, it is important to ascertain the
extent of our existing resources. What are the auri-
ferous capabilities of California and Australia, and of
those other régions from which gold is now derived }
Will the golden tide now pouring in continue with
perennial flow ? or will it, after inundating us for a
while, suddenly disappear, like the Australian streams
whence it is extracted ? Thèse are questions on
which geology should be able to enlighten us, and
some eminent authorities in that science are of opinion
that the présent extraordinary production cannot long
continue. We are reminded, that auriferous forma-
tions are for the most part superficial ; that the richest
deposits are those which lie nearest the surface ; that
the countries which were once the chief seats of supply,


1 1 8 SUMMAR Y OF THE MO VEMENT. [essay

as Spain and Lusîtanîa, are aurîferous no longer ; and
that, consequently, in proportion to the energy and
skill with which the new gold fields are worked, will
be the rapidity of theîr exhaustion.

•

" Judging from expérience," says Sir Roderick Murchison,
"ail gold veins in the solid crust of the earth diminish and
deteriorate downwards, and can rarely be followed to any
great depth except at a loss in working them. Agaîn, as
the richest portions of the gold ore hâve been aggregated
near the upper part of the original veinstones, so the heaps
of gravel or détritus resultîng either from former powerful
abrasion, or from the diurnal wear and tear of âges, and
derived from the surface of such gold-bearing rocks, are, with
rare exceptions, the only materials from which gold has been,
or can be, extracted to great profit. Thèse postulâtes, on
which I hâve long insisted, in spite of the opposition of
theorists and schemers, hâve every year received further con-
firmation, and seem on the whole to be so well sustained as
matters of fact, that the real problem we hâve now to solve is,
how much time will elapse before the gold of Australia is
finally riddled out of thèse heaps or basins, or extracted from
a few superficial veinstones ? " *

And with respect to the prospects of quartz mining,

Sir Roderick adds : —

** So long as the miner is near the surface, thèse veinstones
will unquestionably repay the cost of working them. When,

♦ "Address to the Geographical Society, 1857," pp. 453—455. In
referring to Sir Roderick Murchison's opinion, it is proper to add that his
views respecting the practical results of gold mining hâve référence to the
State of mechanical science, as applied to mining opérations, at the time
when he wrote. In a note to the first édition of his " Siluria " (p. 436), he
expressly guards himself on this point : " I would further guard any
nferences I hâve drawn from our previous state of knowledge, by saying
that my opinions were formed irrespective of the new discovenes in
mechanical science, cnishing machines, &c. The improved application
of mcrcury may indecd liberate a notable quantity of ore from a matrix of
apparently slight value, and thus set at nought the expérience of âges."
And see also the récent édition of the same work, pp. 489 et seq.


IV.] M. CHEVALIERES VIEWS. 119

however, they are followed downwards înto the body of the
rock, they hâve usually been found impoverished, either
thinning out into slender filaments, or graduatîng into silver
or other ores; so that thèse însulated thîn courses of
auriferous quartz — mère threads in the mountain masses —
wîU soon be exhausted for ail profitable purposes, when the
upper portions shall hâve been quarried out." *

To thîs vîew of the case M. Chevalîer opposes the
considération of the vast extent of Californîa and
Australîa, and the great richness of the alluvium
which has been hitherto worked.

" The conditions in which deposits are found in Californîa
and Australia are such, that it is not a very sanguine
view to suppose that in each of thèse countries alluvial
ground will be found equal to 60,000 hectares of deposits
of a mètre in thickness, and of the richness of i to 100,000"
(P. 65) :

conditions which, he says, would give an annual yield
for each country of 1 6,000,000/. sterling for a hundred
years. We think it, however, more to the purpose to
quote the folio wing passage from the report of Mr.
Selwyn, who lately conducted the geological survey of
Victoria, and who is referred to by Sir Roderick
Murchison as a compétent witness. ** The trap-plains,"
says Mr. Selwyn, "to the westward are very extensive ;
and there is every probability of gold deposits existing
underneath the trap over the greater portion of them.
The limit, therefore, to the period during which thèse
tertiary gold deposits of Victoria may be profitably
worked, may be regarded as indefinitely remote."*
We may add, that the accounts received from practical

♦ " Address to the Geographical Society, 1857."

+ " Quarterly Journal of the Geological Society," p. 534.


I20 SUMMARY OF THE MOVEMENT. [essay

persons in the gold countries are far from supportîng
the opînion that the gold formations are extremely
superficial. On the contrary, we hear on ail hands
of digging being carried on with profit at a very
considérable depth, rangîng frequently from loo to 300
feet below the surface, and of quartz veins improving
as they descend.* But, besides such statements,
which may not be free from exaggeration, there are
undisputed facts which it seems difficult to reconcile
with the theory of speedy exhaustion. For example,
the most extensive gold fields in Victoria are those of
Ballarat and Mount Alexander ; they were amongst
the earliest discovered ; they hâve been worked with-
out intermission for eight years ; and it is from them
that the principal portion of the Australian supply is
still derived.t Nor ought we, in estimating the pro-
spects of the future, to overlook the probability of
improvements in the means of production. The
modes of extraction at présent in use are generally of
a very crude description. Fréquent interruptions of
work occur from want of water; and, though this
obstacle has been overcome in California by the
érection of extensive water-works, this obvions remedy
has still to be applied in Australia. There is thus
great room for improvement in the business of pro-
ducing gold, and, with Anglo-Saxon enterprise and


* See " Further Papers relative to the Gold Discoveries," presented
to Parliament, February 1856, pp. 47, 48, 56. See also Westgarth's

Victoria," pp. 178, 185; Seyd's "California/' pp. 30—44; and Tintes^
February 16, 1858, San Francisco Correspondence.

f The Brazils also fumish instances of gold fields which hâve main-
tained their productiveness for a long period, as well as (as Sir Roderick
Murchison admits) of " successful subterraneous mining."


IV.] M. CHEVALIER' S VIEWS. ,121

intelligence directed to the task, we cannot doubt that
improvement will be effected. On the whole, if we
might venture an opinion respectîng a matter on whîch
we make no pretensîon to practical knowledge, we
should say that, in speculating upon the aurîferous
resources of the new gold countries, too împlîcit a
reliance has been placed on mère expérience. It is
admitted that the détritus of California and Australia
greatly exceeds in richness any aurîferous material
hîtherto known : why then may it not exceed any
former material in extent as well as in quality ? The
history of gold dîgging in those countries up to the
présent time, and the accounts we continue to receive
from a succession of travellers of the great auriferous
tracts whîch are stîll untouched, certaînly affordground
for this presumption ; and we are therefore disposed
to concur with M. Chevalier în the opinion, that the
présent extraordinary supply of gold is likely to be
continued for, at least, some considérable period.

We assume, then, that the présent production of
gold will continue ; and what we hâve now to con-
sider is the probable effect of this upon the value of
the métal. The tendency of an increased production
of any commodity is to lower its value, and this
tendency will be realized în fact, unless the demand
for the commodity at the original value încrease în a
corresponding degree. On the supposition, therefore,
that the production of gold continues at its présent
rate, the maintenance or décline of its value will
dépend upon the extension whîch may contempo-
raneously take place in the means of employing it.
This is the position of M. Chevalier, and it is one


122 SUMMARY OF THE MOVEMENT. [essay

which wîll, we belîeve, be accepted by ail compétent
reasoners as the true ground on whîch the question
should be argued.

By those who deny the probability of an impending
fall in the value of gold we are reminded of the
numerous circumstances which are likely to occur to
occasion an increased demand for it. We are told of
the extraordinary rapidity with which cosmopolitan
commerce is now expanding ; of the increased require-
ments for money incident to an increase of population ;
of enlarged consumption of gold in plate, jewelry, and
décoration ; of countries now circulating inconvertible
paper which will soon adopt a metallic standard; of
the loss from hoarding and shipwrecks ; of the loss
from *' wear and tear ; " and of other possible purposes
and occasions which may create a need for an increased
supply of gold. Thèse various requirements, it is
maintained, will generate a demand for the new métal
as fast as it is sent forth from the mines, and will
thus prevent any fall in its value. This argument
M. Chevalier has met by a comprehensive review
of the various incidents hère enumerated, in which
he endeavours, by a careful analysis of the facts
of each, to estimate the probable amount which it
may be able to absorb. The resuit of this inves-
tigation is the conclusion, that the utmost quantity
which can be disposed of in the modes suggested,
after allowing in the most libéral manner for every
contingency that may arise, will not at the end of
ten years exceed 1,275,000 kilogrammes of gold, or
about 178,000,000/. sterling. On the other hand, on
the supposition of the présent rate of production


IV.] M. CHEVALIER' S VIEWS. 123

contînuîng, the încrease of supply at the end of ten
years wîU not be less than 2,500,000 kilogrammes,
or 350,000,000/. sterling. The resuit of the com-
parison carried over a period of ten years is thus
to show an încrease in the supply of gold greatly in
excess of the probable requirements of the world
at îts présent value; the inévitable conséquence of
which, as M. Chevalier contends, must be a gênerai
fall in the value of the métal. Such îs the conclusion
of this eminent economîst — a conclusion full of warning
to this and every other civilized community, and which
has been adopted certainly on no slight or unconsidered
grounds. For the extensive and interesting array of
facts and reasonings by which this opinion is supported,
we must refer our readers to M. Chevalier's volume.
We shall confine ourselves hère to some remarks on
those branches of the argument which appear to us
of most importance.

And hère, before engaging in the discussion, it may
be well to enter a caveat against an ambiguity of
language which has introduced much confusion into
popular reasonings upon this subject. We allude to
the expression so frequently used in the controversy —
*'a demand for gold." With référence to this phrase,
it must always be understood that the demand spoken
of îs a demand at some given value of the métal ; since,
without this qualification, an inquiry into the probable
extension of the demand for gold would be an inquiry
without an object, and indeed destitute of ail signifi-
cance. There can be no doubt that the increased
supplies, however great, will find a market somehow,
and be absorbed in the commerce and consumption


124 SUMMARY OF THE MOVEMENT, [essay

of the world ; but the question îs, upon wfiat conditions ?
upon the condition of retaining its value as at présent,
or of submitting to a réduction ? 1600 millions sterling
of gold and silver hâve been supplied to the world by
America since the time of Columbus, and this vast
amount has been absorbed ; but observe upon what
terms. On the terms of a fall in the value of silver
in the proportion of 6 to i, and in that of gold of
4 to I.* *'The présent essay," therefore, says M.
Chevalier, " is not written to prove that this extra-
ordinary production of the precious metals cannot be
employed on any terms, whîch woûld be absurd," but
to prove that it cannot be absorbed consistently with
maintaining its présent value in relation to other com-
modities. ** Mankind is not rich enough, nor will it
soon be, to pay at so dear a rate for so large a mass/'
Such is the question to be solved ; let us now consider
some of the facts on which the solution dépends.

Of the numerous causes which hâve been suggested
as likely to afford a vent for the new gold, none seems
at first sight to présent so large a field for absorption
as the expanding dimensions of commerce ; and yet
there is none on which so little expectation in this
respect can be legitîmately founded. The expansion
of gênerai commerce in the last half-century has indeed
been enormous. In the United Kingdom, in the
United States, throughout the continent of Europe,
in California and Australia, even in India and China,
the progress has been rapîd beyond ail précèdent

* Thèse are M. Chevalier's estimâtes. We are inclined to think they
are excessive, but they are used hère mercly in illustration of the principle
in question.


IV.] M. CHEVALIERES VIEWS. 125

This rapid expansion, moreover, has been more espe-
cîally remarkable during the last ten years, and the
causes of it (among whîch the adoption of a free-trade
policy by this country must be considered the prin-
cipal), so far from having exhausted themselves, are
not considered as having yet yielded more than their
first-fruits. Instead, therefore, of any slackening of
commercial progress, we hâve rather to look for an
accélération of its pace. The wealth of the world is
thus rapidly increasing, and the augmented wealth, it
is urged, will require for its circulation a médium of
exchange proportionately large. Hère, then, is a field
for the new gold of almost boundless extent Hère
is an outlet înto which tlie rising tide may flow ofï
without any danger of surcharging those channels of
circulation which are already full.

To this argument we might object, that the încrease
of international transactions (by which it is customary
to estimate the progress of trade), although it always
îndicates an increase in the éléments of real wealth,
by no means indicates a corresponding increase, still
less a corresponding increase in the vali4e of such
éléments, or therefore in the need for a circulating
médium. But, without entering into the somewhat
complicated considérations connected with this point,
and admitting, as we do, the probability of a considér-
able increase in the requirements of the world for a
circulating médium, the question remains, Is gold the
material by which such requirements will be met ?
M. Chevalier contends, and we think with good reason,
that it is noL The proportion of the trade of the
world which is carried on with metallic money is daîly


1 26 SUMMAR Y OF THE MO VEMENT. [essay

diminîshîng, and constantly tends to dimînish ; and the
probability is, that the future expansions of trade will
be chiefly supported, not with coin, but with those
contrivances of crédit and of paper currency, the
immense advantages of which over metallic money we
hâve already learned to appreciate.

Few persons, who are not practically engaged in busi-
ness on a large scale, hâve an adéquate conception of
the extent to which crédit expédients of one kind or
another are now employed in the conduct of commer-
cial affairs. In the principal commercial countries it
may with little exaggeration be said, that the great
wholesale transactions of trade are effected exclusively
through this médium. Perhaps the most striking ex-
ample of what can be accomplished by this means îs
afforded by the, London Clearing House — the insti-
tution in which the accounts of the London bankers
are daily settled.

"In 1839 this establishment had already attaîned such
efficiency that for the annual liquidation of 950,000,000/.
sterling, or 3,000,000/. daily, it only requîred, on an average
each day, 200,000/ in sovereigns, or rather in bank-notes.
At présent, with a mass of transactions amounting to
1,500,000,000/ or 2,000,000,000/. sterling annually, instead
of a proportionate addition to the 200,000/ required for
the daily balance being necessary, not a shilling is wanted ;
the Clearing House now dispenses completely with the
use of bank-notes ; ail is settled by the transfer of sums
from one account to another in the books of the Bank of
England." (P. 84.)

To such perfection has the System of crédit been
brought in this country. But, to appreciate the fuU
force of the argument founded on the resources of


IV.] M. CHEVALIERES VIEWS. 127

crédit, we should consider that, besides the field opened
for its employment in the future expansions of trade,
a large one exists in much of that which is now carried
on. In Great Britain and the United States, the use
of crédit may indeed be thought to hâve reached its
maximum; but this cannot be supposed of other por-
tions of Europe and America, and still less of the vast
communities of Asia. In India, though more than a
century under British rule, the advantages of crédit,
as a médium of exchange, are only beginning to be
understood. The circulation of bank-notes is exceed-
ingly limited, and is still confined to some of the
Presidency towns ; chèques, by which so large a portion
of the business of this country is carried on, are but
slightly used ; and the great mass of transactions is
effected by a transfer of rupees bodily in every sale.
The magnitude of the transactions conducted in this
manner may be estimated by the fact stated by Sir
Charles Napier, that the escort of treasure consti-
tuted one of the severest duties of the late Bengal
army ; from 20,cm30 to 30,000 men being constantly
occupied in this manner. The quantity of the precious
metals employed in thus carrying on the internai
traffic of India has been variously estimated between
150,000,000/. and 300,000,000/. sterling. But this
State of things is evidently not destined to be of
long continuance. Mr. Wilson's récent minute gives
grounds for believing that the Indian Government
are alive to this subject, and that India will soon
enjoy the advantages of an effective paper System.
Such an event cannot fail to be attended with im-
portant conséquences on the trade and industry of


X 28 SUMMAR Y OF THE MO VEMENT. [essay

that country ; and among thèse conséquences we may
expect this, that, înstead of requîrîng, as now, con-
tinuous large additions to her présent enormous stock
of metallic money, she wîU not only be enabled to
dispense with thèse, but will find it for her interest to
part with a large portion of what she now employs :
the coin thus liberated will form a new tributary to
swell the increasing supplies, and the influences tend-
ing to depress the value of gold will be increased.

Thèse observations apply to the wholesale transac-
tions of commerce : they are not, in the same degree,
applicable to the retail dealings of individuals. We
say, not in the same degree, because they are applicable
to a certain extent even to them. Amongst the upper
and middle classes, at least in this country, the practice
îs becoming every day more gênerai of paying private
accounts through the médium of bankers' chèques, in
which way retail transactions, in the aggregate of very
large amount, are settled without the employment
either of bank-notes or of metallic money. This prac-
tice, however, is confined to that comparatively limited
portion of society whose private dealings assume
dimensions sufficiently large to render the employment
of crédit convenienL For the mass of the population,
who live mostly from hand to mouth, and whose
dealings are on a very small scale, crédit accounts are
obviously unsuitable, and their purchases are accord-
ingly effected almost whoUy with coin. In this depart-
ment of business, therefore, we find a field for the
employment of gold which crédit cannot well occupy,
and which will increase with the increase of population.
It becomes, therefore, important to ascertain the extent


IV.] M CHEVALIERES VIEWS, 129

of the outlet whîch may be afforded in this direction
for the increasing supplies.

With a view to this, M. Chevalier has instituted a
comparison between the rate at which population is
now advancing and that at which gold is increasing ;
the resuit of which is to show that, while population
in civilized countries is advancing at the rate of one
and a half per cent, per annum, gold — at least that
portion which goes into gênerai circulation — is increas-
ing by more than 10 per cent per annum.* Or, to
put the same point differently, that while to satisfy
the requirements of population an annual production
of 3,000,000/. would be sufficient, the amount actually
applicable to this purpose will, supposîng the présent
scale of production to continue, not fall short of
20,000,000/. annually. It would seem, therefore, that
the mère growth of population promises but an inadé-
quate market for the new gold. And this conclusion
is further confirmed by the fact, of which M. Chevalier
reminds us, that in the dealings of the masses the meta!
which is principally employed is not gold, but silver or
copper. The lowest gold pièce in this country is
worth ten shillings, the lowest in France is worth four
shillings, and the inconvenience which would resuit
from a smaller coin sets a limit to further réduction.
It is, therefore, among a portion only of the working
classes — those whose purchases are sufficiently large
to make the use of such coin possible — that gold
circulâtes at ail, or can be expected to circulate ; and
this circumstance, he argues, must reduce within very

* This proportion is not given by M. Qievalier, but may be deduced
from his statements.

K


130 SUMMARY OF THE MO VE MENT, [essay

narrow limits the field for its employment in this
direction.

Thèse considérations would seem to settle the
question, so far as the requirements of the masses are
concerned. Nevertheless there is an élément of the
case, not included in M. Chevalier's reasonings, which
leads us to assign greater importance to this applica-
tion of the new gold than the facts which he has
stated would seem to warrant. The îndustrial history
of Great Britain since the gold discoveries supplies us
with a fact but little in accordance with the above cal-
culations; the fact, namely, that since the year 1851
the population of this country, which at the utmost
has not increased in the interval by more than 10 per
cent, has absorbed into its retail circulation (according
to the best estimate which we hâve been able to form)
an addition to its gold currency of not less than 40
per cent* — an addition which, though not wholly
unaccompanied by an advance of priées, has not been
productive of any effect in this respect commensurate
with its amount. Now to what are we to attribute this
anomalous circumstance ? How are we to explain the
fact that the gold currency of this kingdom has in-
creased in a degree entirely out of proportion to
the apparent requirements of its population, without
undergoing any corresponding dépréciation in its value f
It appears to us that the explanation is to be found
in the opération of a princîple to which we adverted
in the opening of this article, and to which we shall

* See on this point the facts and estimâtes given in Appendix xxii. to
the sixth volume of the " History of Priées ; " also the statistics of gold
coinage given in the same volume, p. 154.


ly.] M. CHEVALIERES VIEW S. 131

hâve occasion again to ad vert, — the tendency of the
încreased production of gold to alter the distribution
of wealth throughout society. This principle, operating
through our trade with the gold countries, has for the
last eight years been acting upon the pecuniary
relations of différent classes in this country ; and the
resuit has been a change in the distribution of our
national wealth sensibly in favour of the industrial
portion of the social body. We do not hère enter into
the grounds of this opinion, which would involve us in
économie discussions of an inconvénient length. But,
în illustration of the gênerai tendency of the gold dis-
coveries to favour the industrial classes, we may refer
to the triple and quadruple wages now enjoyed by
those amongst them who hâve emigrated to California
and Australia, and to the remarkable advance which
during the last eight years has taken place in the
wages of almost every class of labourers at home,* —
an advance which has been accompanied by no corre-
sponding movement in the incomes of other classes.
A large increase has thus taken place in that portion
of the gênerai wealth which circulâtes among the
industrial population ; and this is just the portion in
which the circulation of coin is most extensive. It is
évident therefore (assuming, as we do, this fact to re-
present a gênerai tendency) that, under the influences
engendered by the new discovery, the demand of the
population for gold coin may augment much more
rapidly than a mère regard to the increase of its
numbers would lead us to suppose. As the produc-

♦ Sce Dr. Strang's "Papers on Wages," published in the London
Statistical Journal.

K 2


i3t SUMMARY OF THE MOVEMENT. [essaie

tîon of gold continues, the proportion of the aggregate
wealth of the world which goes to the industrial
classes wîU încrease; and, the field for crédit con-
tractîng as we descend in the scale of society, the
necessity for coin will increase also. In this way, it
seems to us, a market may be opened for the new
gold greatly more extensive than the considérations
adduced by M. Chevalier would lead us to suppose ;
and a large amount of the new supplies may be thus
disposed of, without involving the necessity of a fall,
or at least of a correspondîng fall, in their value. At
the same time we are far from thinking that the
demand thence arising will be sufficient to prevent the
ultîmaté dépréciation of the métal ; though, as the
example of this countrj^ proves, it may sensibly retard
this resuit. At ail events, the principle is one which
should not be overlooked in an examination of the
causes which may neutralize the direct tendencies of
the gold movement.

So far as to the demand afforded to the gold sup-
plies by the progress of trade and population. Let us
now consider briefly another mode of disposing of the
new gold, on which some writers hâve laid much
stress : we mean the employment of it in the arts, in
plate, and for décorative purposes. And hère, as in
the case we hâve just been considering, an exami-
nation of the facts shows upon what slight grounds
they proceed who anticipate a large absorption of
gold by thèse uses. The désire for display, at least
in that gross form of the propensity which finds
satisfaction in the possession of gold plate or in
the wearing of massive omaments, is an attribute


IV.] M. CHEVALIERES VIEWS. 133

of semi-barbarous life, which, instead of increasing,
déclines wîth the advance of society.

"The dîsplay of gold in utensils more or less massive
îs the luxury of the less refined part of the community,
whose eye is înstînctively attracted by the glare of a daz-
zling métal, and whose désire is excited for an object to
which there is vulgarly attached the idea of great riches. It
îs a species of magnificence which was reserved for the
sovereigns of primitive nations ; it constituted the splendour
of the Incas, and that of Attila and of Genseric ; it was the
pride of the savage races whom the Europeans dîscovered
in America." (P. 98.)

The same passion for ornaments is a powerful
instinct amongst the native races of Hindostan, with
whom they serve at once as a mode of investment
and a means of décoration. But, as civilization makes
progress, tastes of a différent order are developed.
Vanity perhaps loses nothing of its power, but it
exhibits itself under a différent guise, and is directed
to différent objects. Luxury, in its modes of display,
as in other respects, undergoes refinement, and man-
kind seek enjoyment, less in the gratification of ex-
ternal sensé, and more in the cultivation of the higher
faculties. The superfluous expenditure of a nation
advancing in civilization is accordingly devoted less
and less to objects which absorb mère masses of gold
and silver, and more and more to purposes of a higher
order — to the beautifying of its domains, the embel-
lishing of its houses, the gênerai cultivation of its
tastes ; and parks and mansions, pictures, sculpture»
and books, take the place of accumulations of plate
and collections of jewelry.

This tendency of civilization to check the consump-


134 'S UMMAR Y OF THE MO VEMENT, [essay

tîon of the precîous metals is very strikingly shown by
some figures quoted by M. Chevalier. From returns
gîven in Porter s *' Progress of the Nation," it appears
that the consumptîon of gold plate in England during
the first half of the présent century has not kept pace
even with the progress of population. Notwithstand-
ing the great increase whîch has taken place in the
means of ail classes during the interval, the average
Englishman of the présent day consumes less gold
than the Englishman of fifty years back.

" From the first quinquennial period of the century to
that which closed in 1850, the increase in the quantity
of gold which paid duty was 50 per cent. ; during the
same time the increase of population was much greater : it
doubled. Then if we take into account the quantity of gold
required for this manufacture, we are amazed at its small-
ness. It is an atom in comparison with the total production.
During the last quinquennial period of the half-century, the
annual average has only been 7,636 ounces." (Pp. 92, 93.)

For the two years 1855 and 1856 the average
consumption in this form was ten thousand ounces.
For the same years the total production was nearly
ten millions — that is to say, nearly a thousand times
greater! In France a similar state of things is ex-
hibited. There aiso the consumption of the precious
metals proceeds more slowly than the increase of
population.

But it will be said, îf the fashion of usîng gold in
plate and ornaments is declinîng, other forms of this
kind of expendîture hâve amazingly increased.

" Paris gilds îtself not a little, and is surprisingly addicted
to gold lace. Is there not in thèse two employnjents a


IV.] M. CHEVALIER 'S VJEWS, 135

consumption large enough to enable the producers of gold
to dispose of their precious commodity, almost indefinitely,
without any réduction in its value ? To reply to this ques-
tion, let us calculate the quantity of métal which is required
to gild a given surface. Gold, as is known, is the most mallé-
able of metals ; it is so to a degree of which it would be
difficult, without ocular illustration, to form an idca. The
goldbeater makes it into leaves which, thanks to the progress
of his art, are now so thin that i^ooo form only the thickness
of a millimètre, and, consequently, i4,CXX),ooo of lejLves laid
one upon another would make a thickness of only a mètre
(about 39 înches). A cubic mètre of solid gold, which would
not weigh less than 68o,44p ounces, would suffice to gild a
surface of 3,450 acres, and 35,300 oimces would cover with
gold 179 acres. It is a resuit which quite confounds the
imagination. And yet the métal used in the manufacture of
gold lace is spread over a much larger surface. The sub-
stance of the threads of which this lace is made consists of
silver, the surface alone being gold, and one gramme of gold,
worth 2s, lOûf., suffices to gild a thread 120 miles in length.
In a pièce of 20 francs (i6j.), there is gold enough to
cover a thread which would extend from Calais to Marseilles.

Let us now suppose that a room, suitably gilded,

consumes five square mètres of gold leaf, which is, I believe,
sufficient. At this rate 35,300 ounces would gild 144,000
saloons or apartments ; that is to say, at least twenty times
the number which are thus embellished in one year in ail
those cities where the houses are of a character to require
their interiors to be gilded. With the remainder, what a
multitude of picture-frames, books, kettle-drums, cloths, epau-
lettes, and ail kinds of objects, might be clothed in a dazzling
covering of gold ! Let the number of gold leaves required
for each apartment be multiplied, let the number of books
and picture-frames be augmented, and still we shall arrive at
no resuit which deserves a moment's considération. At Paris,
where nearly ail the gold leaf is beaten which is consumed in
France and a part of Europe, the quantity of gold operated
upon does not exceed 40^650 to 42,400 ounces." (Pp

95—97)


r
I


K


136 SUMMARY OF THE MOVEMENT. [essay

It would therefore seem that not much is to be ex-
pected from the extending use of gold in manufactures
as a means of disposîng of the new supplies. No
doubt, as dépréciation sets in, the fall in the value of
the métal will, as in the case of other commoditîes,
hâve some effect in înducîng a larger consumption ;
but, with the facts before us which hâve just been
cited, thîs can scarcely be expected to occur to an
extent which would materially retard the fall.

And hère we may mention an incident of the
décline in the value of gold, which is strangely at
variance with popular anticipations, and will probably
be cited as a proof that no dépréciation has taken
place. People generally imagine that as gold déclines
in value gold manufactures of ail kinds will become
cheaper. In one sensé they will ; they will be obtain-
able at a less outlay of labour ; but they will not
become cheaper in the sensé în which the word is
commonly understood — that is to say, they will not be
obtainable at a lower price. On the contrary, in ail
countries where, as in this, gold is the standard métal,
as its value déclines the price of gold manufactures will
rise. A little reflection will make this plain. Suppose
the exchange- value of gold to fall, let us consîder what
will be the effect of thîs upon the price of a gold snuff-
box. So far as the ntaterial of the article is concerned,
ît is évident that the fall in the value of gold will hâve
no effect, will be simply nugatory, since the same cause
which will reduce the value of the material will reduce
also the value of the coin (or notes convertible înto
coin) with which it is procured ; the relation between
money and raw gold will continue the same as before,


IV.] M. CHEVALIER' S VJEWS. 137

and the price of the material of the box will therefore
continue unaltered. But the material is only one élé-
ment of the cost ; there îs, besides this, the labour ex-
pended in the making, and this also must be included
in the price of the snufï-box. Now the effect of a
fall in the exchange-value of gold will be to raise the
money-price of labour in common with other things ;
whence it is plain that, with the progress of this fall,
the price of the snuff-box, which must cover the cost
of labour as well as that of raw material, must con-
stantly rise. The effect may not be very perceptible
in gold articles of much solidity ; but in such manu-
factures as gold lace, in which the value of the
workmanship greatly exceeds the value of the mate-
rial, the rise in price will be nearly as remarkable
as if gold did not enter into their composition.

Such are the two principal outlets which hâve been
suggested as likely to create a market for the new
gold ; and, considérable as they at first sight appear,
this examination of them has shown how entirely
inadéquate they must prove to sustain its value, sup-
posing the production of the métal to continue at its
présent rate. The facts of the case thus distinctly
point to a gênerai dépréciation of gold as the inévitable
resuit of the causes now in action.

Against this conclusion, however, will be urged our;
expérience of the movement up to the présent time.
Already, it will be said, for eight years the golden
stream has been flowing : not less than 200,000,000/. \.
sterling of métal hâve already been added to the com-
mon stock ; and yet we look in vain for those signs of
dépréciation which, if there be any foundation for the


13S SUMMARY OF THE MOVEMENT. [essay

appréhensions which hâve been expressed, should
surely by this time hâve displayed themselves. No
perceptible change, it is asserted, has yet taken place
in the gênerai level of priées, no disturbance has been
experienced in our pecuniary relations. If, then, under
the weight of this large augmentation, the value of the
métal has been sustained, there is clearly some fact
or principle at work which has been overlooked in the
reasonings on the subject ; and if this fact or principle
(whatever it may be) has been hitherto efficacious in
preventing a fall, may we not expect that it will con-
tinue to be so ? If no sensible efïect has up to the
présent been produced, why, with only the same
influences to contend against, need we be apprehensive
for the future ?

This argument is to be met by a twofold answer :
first, by a déniai of the fact which is assumed, that no
change has taken place in the value of gold ; and
secondly, by pointing to a circumstance which has
hitherto retarded its décline, but the influence of which
must soon diminish.

With respect to the first point it should be observed,
that it must always be a matter of considérable diffi-
culty to ascertain whether, in point of fact, gold has
during a given time fallen in value or not, unless the
fall happens to be of a very marked and unequivocal
kind. This must be so from the absence of any
independent standard of value by which its variations
can be measured, as well as from the variety of causes
which, besides the value of money, affect the priées of
commodities, and thus complicate the problem. There
is, moreover, a principle in constant opération which,


IV.] M. CHEVALIERES VIEWS, 139

in a large class of cases, tends to conceal any fall
whîch may occur în the value of the precious me tais —
we mean, the progress of the îndustrial arts. Every
improvement în productive îndustry tends to promote
cheapness and to lower price ; and, as such improve-
ments are constantly occurring, a fall in the value of
gold wîU be as often shown in preventing a fall in the
price of other things as in causing a rise. To ascer-
tain, therefore, whether a change in the value of gold
has really occurred must always be a difficult problem,
requiring for its solution not only an extensive collec-
tion and accurate analysis of priées, but also a careful
examination of the varions causes afîfecting production
on the one hand and consumption on the other : and
it is a problem which, applied to the last ten years,
présents, owing to the numerous causes of powerful
disturbance which hâve been in action during that
time, even more than the usual difficulty. We do not,
therefore, propose to enter into this question hère, but
shall content ourselves with referring in a note* to
some publications, in which it has been discussed with
considérable fulness. By référence to thèse the reader
will find that the facts of the case, far from being
favourable to the assumption that the value of gold
has been unafîfected by the increased supply, lead
rather to the conclusion, that there are grounds for
believing that a définitive dépréciation of the métal
has already taken place.

♦ Sec tables of priées from 1851 to 1857 ("History of Priées," vol. vi.
pp. 160—167); also an arliele by M. Levasseur in the Journal des
Economistes^ March 1858; also tables published by Dr. Soetbeer of
Hamburg, giving retums of priées from 1831 to 1857; also the Appendix
to this volume.


Ï40 SUMMARY OF THE MOVEMENT, [essay

But, secondly, the above reasonîng îs to be answered
by poîntîng to a circumstance which has undoubtedly
acted up to the présent tîme în counteraction of the
causes tending to depress the value of gold, but the
efficacy of which îs dimînishîng, and may soon be
entirely exhausted. This circumstance is the displace-
ment of silver by gold in some currencies, and more
particularly in that of France — a circumstance to which
M. Chevalier very forcibly directs our attention, and
which ranks unquestionably as of primary importance
amongst the causes which hâve modified the gold
movement up to the présent time.

In the controversies which hâve taken place on this
question, it has been almost uhiformly assumed on the
one side and conceded on the other, that, for the pur-
pose of detecting variations in the value of gold, no
better test can be selected than the price — that is, the
gold-price — of silver;* and the price of silver not
having risen more than 3 or 4 per cent, in the last ten
years, it is argued that this ratio represents the utmost
extent of the dépréciation which can hâve taken place
in gold. Indeed some writers hâve pressed this argu-
ment so far, as to maintain that gold has not fallen
even to this extent ; the rise in the price of silver, as
they allège, being due rather to the increase in the
demand for it than to the fall in the value of gold.

* Strange to say, even M. Chevalier makes this concession, although
the facts which he adduces effectually expose its fallaciousness. " The
only good measure of the rise or fall occurring in the value of gold, is
that which takes place in its price in silver money." He adds: "Then
it must be premised that no disturbance shall hâve arisen to cause a
sudden change in the value of silver.'' But such a disturbance is pro-
duced ipso facto by a change in the value of gold.


IV.] M. CHEVALIER' S VIEIVS. 141

But surely nothîng can be more fallacious than the test
of value whîch îs thus set up. If anything unfits one
commodity for measuring the value of another, ît îs the
circumstance that they may both be applied to common
purposes. No one would think of measurîng the
fluctuations in wheat by comparîng ît with oats,
because, both grains beîng employed for the same or
sîmîlar purposes, any change in the value of one îs
sure to extend to the other. When, e,g.y the wheat
crop îs în excess while the oat crop îs an average one,
it always happens that a portion of the consumption,
whîch în ordinary years falls upon oats, îs thrown upon
wheat ; the effect of which îs at once to check the fall
în the price of the more abundant grain, while, by
dimînîshîng the need for the other, ît causes ît to partî-
cipate in the décline. The influence of the increased
abundance of one commodity îs thus distributed over
both ; the fall in price beîng less intense in degree în
proportion as ît îs wider in extent Now this îs
precisely what îs happening în the relations of gold and
silver. The crop of gold has been unusually large ;
the increase în the supply has caused a fall în its
value ; the fall în its value has led to its beîng substî-
tuted for silver ; a mass of silver has thus been
disengaged from purposes which it was formerly
employed to serve, and the resuit has been that
both metals hâve fallen în value together; the
depth of the fall beîng diminished as the surface
over whîch ît has taken place has been enlarged.
The scène on whîch this interchange of gold and
silver has hitherto been exhibited on the largest scale
is the currency of France, in which, owing to the


142 SUMMARY OF THE MOVEMENT. [essav

existence of a double standard, — or (if M. Chevalier
prefers the phrase) a double légal tender, — one or the
other métal is employed according as its worth in the
markets of the world happens to vary in relation to its
valuation at the French Mînt. Until a récent period,
the métal which formed the staple of the French
çurrency was silver, but, owing to the fall in the value
of gold conséquent upon the discoveries, gold is now
rapidly taking its place, and becoming the principal
médium of circulation. Up to the year 1852 the
importation of silver into France was always largely
in excess of its exportation ; but in that year the tide
turned, and has sînce continued flowîng outward with
încreasing volume. M. Chevalier states that by the
end of 1857 France had parted with 45,000,000/.
sterling of silver. On the other hand, during thîs
time she had coined more than 100,000,000/. sterling
of gold. The çurrency of France has thus, to borrow
the curions but not unapt figure of our author, played
towards gold the part of a parachute to moderate its
descent. But in proportion as gold has thus found a
market, silver has been deprived of one; and the
45,000,000/. of silver liberated from the çurrency of
France is as much an addition to the dîsposable supply
in the world, and tends as effectually to lower its value,
as if ît had been raised immediately from the mines.
The fall in the value of gold has thus, up to the
présent time, been at once checked and concealed, —
checked by being substituted for silver, and concealed
by being compared with it*

* We are aware it has been maintained that the value of silver, so far
from having fallen, has'really risen during the last few years ; in proof of


IV.] M, CHEVALIERES VJEWS. 143

Thîs substitution, however, of gold for silver in
French circulation is not a process which can be
carried on indefinitely, and M. Chevalier shows that
it has already nearly reached its natural termination.
When this has happened, the new gold will be
deprived of that which has hitherto constituted its
best market, the parachute which has moderated its
descent will no longer be available ; and what will be
the conséquence ?

" From that moment," says M. Chevalier, " the fall in
gold will be rapid. In a word, if, down to the présent
time, the immense production, of which Australia and
California hâve been the théâtre, has not produced a
greater fall in gold, it is France which is the cause."
(P. 62.)

which we are referred to the increased demand for it for Oriental remit-
tancc. That silver has risen in its ^o/^f-pnce owing to this circum-
stance, we admit, but we deny that this is a proof of a rise in its value^
any more than a rise in the gold-price of any othcr commodity would
prove a rise in its value at a time when the supply of gold was rapidly
increasing. During the last two years (1858 and 1859) the demand for
silver for the East has been affected a good deal by requirements con-
nected with the Indian Mutiny ; but if we investigate the causes of the
extraordinary demand which has characterized the last four or five years,
we shall find that they are in a principal degree traceable to the increased
production of gold, operating through the expenditure of enlarged money
incomes in England and the United States on Oriental productions ;
and that thus the increased demand for silver, which is allcgcd as a proof
that silver has risen in value, is in reality a conséquence of the larj^e
amount of gold available for its purchase, Now if a disturbancc in the
relative values of the precious metals, arising from this cause, is to be
taken as a proof, not that gold has fallen, but that silver has risen in
value, then it would be quite impossible ever to prove a dépréciation of
gold. The same argument might be applied to ail other commodities ; in
each case it could be shown that the rise in price was the resuit of an
increased demand for the article, and every advance in gênerai priées
would be attributed, not to the dépréciation of money, but to the enhance-
ment of commodities. In short, since money can only fall in value by
being made the instrument of demand, the value of money could, accord-
ing to this mode of reasoning, never fall.


1 44 S UMMAR Y OF THE MO VEMENT. [essa y

We are disposed to qualify in some degree our
assent to thîs opînîon. We think that, on the occur-
rence of the contîngency in question — the exhaustion
of silver from the French currency — the dépréciation
of gold will be more rapid, but we question if the
accélération of the décline will be as great as the
words we hâve quoted seem to imply. M. Chevalier
appears to assume that, when the process now going on
in France is completed, ail further substitution of one
métal for the other will be at an end, and that the
action of future supplies, concentrated on gold alone,
will tell in the dépréciation of this métal with pro-
portionate effect. But we question the correctness of
this assumption. We are inclined to think that the
substitution of gold for silver in France is only a very
striking example of a process which has been in unob-
served opération over a much wider area, and which
will continue after the French movement has ceased.
In India, where there is an immense silver currency,
the process has already begun, and signs are not want-
ing that it will soon assume more important dimensions.
The Indian Government, for reasons set forth in Mr.
Wilson's Minute on the introduction of a gold currency,
hâve indeed refused to establish a double standard in
that country ; and we cannot, therefore, count upon a
contingency of this kind as likely to carry on in the
East the process which must ère long be complète in
France : still, considering the great suitability of gold
for the purposes of ornamental manufacture, and of
hoarding — purposes which prevail so extensively in
India, and for which gold is much better adapted than
silver — we cannot doubt but that, as, in the course of


iv.J M. CHEVALIER' S F/EIVS. 145

dépréciation, the métal becomes obtaînable on more
favourable terms, it will gradually find îts way, if not into
the circulation, at least into the ornaments and hoards,
and eventually displace sîlver to a considérable extent.
Thèse considérations do not apply to India alone :
they are applicable more or less extensively to other
countries where silver is the currency, and more par-
ticularly to China, where there is a large silver circula-
tion, and where the habits of the people are in many
respects similar to those of the people of Hindostan.
For thèse reasons, we cannot concur in the assumption,
that, when the movement in the French currency is
concluded, the future action of the new gold must be
concentrated upon the gold currencies of the world.
We think that its effect will still continue to be shared,
though probably in a less degree than heretofore, by
the other precious métal ; and that consequently the
fall in gold, though accelerated, will not proceed with
that rapidity which M. Chevalier seems to anticipate,*

* [The writer can now (1872) claim the verdict of cvents in favour of
the view which he hère ventured to maintain against that taken by M.
Che^'alier. Indeed, the course of dépréciation has been even less affected by
the completion of the process of substituting gold for silver in the currency
of France than he anticipated. That process would seem to hâve been
completed about the year 1861, when the coinage of gold in France fell from
27,000,000/. and 18,000,000/. — the amounts which it had reached in the
years 1859 and i86o^to less than 4,000,000/. (See Economisa, 29th June,
1872, article "On the Coinage of Gold.") But he is not aware that any
sensible change in the rapidity of the dépréciation of gold can be traced
to that period. It would be difficult indeed to détermine this question by
référence to gênerai priées ; but if any effect, such as M. Chevalier
anticipated, occurred, it would hâve shown itself in a rise in the price of
silver. In point of fact, the price of silver has undergone little change
over the whole of this period, and is now rather lower than when M.
Chevalier wrote. This may be partly due to the increased production of
silver in récent years, which would more or less counteract any tendency
to an advance in its price ; but I hâve no doubt the principal cause is that

L


1 46 5 UMMAR Y OF THE MO VEMENT, [essay

But, although for thèse reasons we do not antîcipate
that rapid and sudden fall in the value of gold which
M. Chevalier regards as the sure resuit of the exhaus-
tîon of silver from France (or more correctly, of the
repletîon of the French currency with gold), we never-
theless fuUy admît, supposing the présent production
to continue, that the contingencîes to which we hâve
adverted can at the utmost delay, they cannot prevent,
this catastrophe. Regarding therefore, with him, an
extensive dépréciation of gold as probable, we shall
conclude this article by adverting to some of the con-
séquences which this resuit is likely to entail.

Thèse conséquences are at once so numerous and so
complicated, they will be felt in such large and in such
minute transactions in life, that to develop them fully
would require a volume instead of a few pages. As
we hâve already intimated, there is a wide department
of this question on which M. Chevalier does not
enter at ail * — of the existence of which indeed he
scarcely seems to be aware ; but even within the range
to which he has confined hîmself, the questions which
arise are both numerous and important.

One of the most important aspects of every social
change is its effect on the working classes — those who

assigncd in the text — the extensive substitution of gold for silver, not only
in various currcncies in différent countries, but in ail those uses in which
the two metals may be indifferently employed. In truth, so complctcly
are gold and silver idcntiiied as économie agencies by this capacity for
mutual substitution, that in judging of the probable effect of increased
supplies of either métal, the safest course would probably be to consider
them as one commodity, and to compare, not gold with gold and silver
with silver, but the aggregate additions made to both metals with ihe
2Lgpregate quantitics of both prcviously existing.]

* That discusscd in Essay III. of this volume.


IV. J M. CHEVALIER' S VIEWS. 147

live by the sweat of their brow, and who în every
country form the bulk of the population. Let us then
înquire, What will be the cffect of the gold discoveries
on the interests of this large section of mankind ?
Will the event tend on the whole to improve or to
deterîorate, to raise or to depress, their condition ?
The opinion of M. Chevalier is that, during the period
while dépréciation îs in progress — a period which may
extend over ten or twenty, or possibly over thirty or
forty years — the effect may be prejudicial. As soon
indeed as the movement shall hâve reached its lowest
point, and gold shall hâve found its natural level, then
he conceives the wages of the workman will rise in
the same proportion as the price of his food, so that,
while paying and receiving larger sums of money, he
will be placed substantially in the same position as at
présent ; but,pending the attainment of this resuit, the
ordeal of dépréciation will, as he thinks, be for the
working classes a disastrous one.

" Expérience shows that, when provisions rise, wages are
net necessarily raised in the ' same proportion. Not that an
upward movement of wages does not follow a continued dear-
ness of provisions, but in the majority of employments it
foUows far behind. The working population are of ail classes
of Society the most dépendent, because they are the most
necessitous. Being the least able to wait, owing to the
pressure of want, they are the more apt to resign themselves
to the terms offered them. Hence it is that the benefits
which they expect to dérive from a rise of wages are only
yielded to them after many delays. It were easy to cite
examples în proof of this assertion. It has been the subject
of rcmark by Mr. Tooke in his important work on the
' History of Priées.' In his historical inquiry respecting
the precious metals, Mr. Jacob has several remarks in

I. 2


1 48 5 UMMAR Y OF THE MO VEMENT. [essay

the same sensé, and among others he states his opinion
that the institution of the Poor Law, which it is known
dates from the reîgn of Elizabeth, was in England the
effect of the changes caused by the fall in the precious
mctals." (Pp. 117, 118.)

From this opinion of M. Chevalier (whîch îs en-
dorsed by Mr. Cobden in his préface) we venture to
dissent. We do not belîeve that the working classes,
as a body — whatever may be the case with particular
sections of them or in particular countries — will be
injured by the dépréciation of gold. We hold, on the
contrary, that the gênerai effect of the gold discoveries
will be to alter the distribution of wealth in their
favour, and on the whole to benefit them.

According to M. Chevalier, the industrîal classes
will suffer during the progress of the dépréciation of
gold, because the priées of the commodities they con-
sume will constantly rise in advance of the rise in
their wages. Now this we conceive to be, as a gênerai
proposition, essentîally impossible. If the priées of
the labourer s provisions and clothing rise, this resuit
can only happen (assuming that the rise proceeds from
an abundance of money) because more money is spent
on those commodities ; and, inasmuch as the labouring
clas3es themselves immensely outnumber ail classes
who consume the same commodities, ît îs plain that it
is their expenditure, and consequently titeir wages,
which must substantially regulate the rise. The rise
in wages, in short, îs (where ît proceeds from an
abundance of money) the cause of the rise în the
price of commodities, and consequently cannot be
preceded by îts own effect


IV.] M. CHEVALIERES VIEWS. 149

The circumstance which misled M. Chevalier appears
from hîs référence to the remark of Mr. Tooke ; for
the case whîch Mr. Tooke had in view was the rise
în the priées of corn and provisions which occurred
during the last French wars — a rise due indeed in
some shght degree to the dépréciation then existing
in the English currency, but, according to the opinion
of Mr. Tooke, and we believe of ail persons who
hâve examined the facts of that time, due principally
to the unusual number of déficient harvests whîch
then occurred, aggravated as this circumstance was by
the interruption of supplies from abroad during the
war. The rise in priées at that time proceeded, in
short, from a dearth of commoditics, not from an
abundance of money; and the rise in wages which
followed, as a matter of necessity, fell short of the
advance in provisions, since it was only thus that con-
somption could be kept within the limits of supply.
It îs by confounding the effects of thèse two very
différent cases that M. Chevalier has fallen into the
error of supposing that the labouring classes, as a
body, must suffer from the dépréciation of gold.

But the view thus suggested has probably been con-
firmed by another circumstance. It would seem, as a
matter of fact, that priées in France hâve up to the
présent time advanced more rapidly than wages.*

♦ See the articles by M. Levasseur, published in the Journal des
Economistes^ Febniary and March 1858. [Since 1858 the relative
advance in wages and prices, at least in some important trades, would
seem to be in an opposite sensé. The following I quote from Mr. Brasse/s
récent work (pp. 158, 159): — "Mr. Fane says, in his report to Lord
Stanley, that * the gênerai rate of money wages in France has increased
about 40 per cent, in the last fifteen years, in those industries which


150 SUMMARY OF THE MOVEMENT. [essay

This, however, is not a necessary or gênerai consé-
quence of the dépréciation of gold, but, like the case
of England in the sixteenth century to which Jacob
refers, is to be attributed to that othcr opération of the
gold movement, of which wc hâve more than once
spoken — the change it is causing in the distribution of
national wealth. In the sixteenth century this disturb-
ance was in favour of the Spanish, the Portuguese,
and the Dutch ; while the English, further removed
from the spring-head of the new métal, received their
supplies more slowly and in scantier streams. Money
incomes in England thcrefore rose less rapidly ihan
priées in common markets, and the population of Eng-
land sufifered accordingly. We hâve no doubt that
this was a leading cause -of the industrial distress
which prevailed throughout a portion of the reign of
Queen Elizabcth,* and which led to the introduction
of the Poor Law. In the présent gold movement,
however, the tables hâve been turned, and the mone-
tary disturbance is now in favour of the Anglo-Saxon.
It is now England and the United States that hâve
their hands in the till, and the money which they
extract is employed in raising priées against the nations


compete with foreigncrs in the ncutral markcts. This rise in the money
wagcs has been accompanied by a considérable rise in ihc price of food
and clothing; still, the relative proportions in which money wagcs and
the priées of commcdities hâve riscn, leave a margin in favour of the
former.' "]

* See on this point a curious work, entitled " A Briefe Conceipte touch-
ing the Common Weale of this Rcalme of England," published in 1581
and attributed to William Staflford. Of this work Anderson, in his
"Annals," conjectures that it was written by direction of the Quecn's
ministers, " sincc scarcely any ordinary person in those early days could
be fumished with so copious a fund of excellent matter."


IV.] M, CHEVALIERES VIEIVS. 151

which în the sîxteenth century were gainers at theîr
expense. It is to this cause — the disturbance created
by the gold dîscoverîes in the distribution of purchasing
power in the world — that the movement of priées in
France in advance of incomes (so far as this is a fact)
is to be attributed, and not to any tendency in priées
during a dépréciation of money to rise more rapidly
than the incomes by the expenditure of which alone
they can be raised.

And hère we may remark, as bearing on the prac-
tical purpose which M. Chevalier had in view in this
discussion — the change of the monetary standard in
France from gold to silver — that the considération
hère urged goes directly to the root of his argument.
If the sufferings of the French workmen during the
period of transition be the resuit of a dépréciation
of the standard, then of course the disaster may be
avoided by substituting for gold, as our author recom-
mends, a métal such as silver, of which the value is
steady ; but if, as we contend, the evil in question be
the resuit of the increased purchasing power of other
nations, it is plain that the proposed remedy must be
futile. No change in the Mint régulations of France
will prevent the nations which are in possession of the
new gold from appropriating an increased proportion
of the aggregate wealth of the world. To effcct this,
ît would be necessary not merely to deprive gold of
îts character as a standard, but to annihilate its pur-
chasing power altogether, to dethrone it from its
position as the universal équivalent of commerce.

As we hâve already intimated, we conceive that the
gold movement, whatever may be its effect in particular


152 s UMMAR Y OF THE MO VEMENT. [essay

cases, will, on the whole, operate favourably for the
industrial classes of society, by throwing înto their
hands an increased share of the purchasîng power of
the world. It is this whîch we regard as the great
redeeming incident of the gold discoveries. In almost
every other aspect in whîch we contemplate the occur-
rence, ît is fraught with inconvenience, hardship, and
injustice, întroducing uncertainty into mercantile deal-
ings, disturbing contracts which were designed to be
fixed, stimulating the spirît of commercial spéculation,
already too strong, and bringing unmerited loss upon
classes who hâve the strongest claims on our sympathy,
and whom upon social grounds it is most désirable to
sustain.

If we inquire who the people are who will suffer by
the impending monetary changes, the answer is, in the
first place and principally, those whose incomes consist
in fixed sums of money, or whose property dépends
on fixed contracts expressed in the current gold coin of
the realm. Adopting the assumption of M. Chevalier
(which with him we make for the sake of distinctness,
and not as expressing a matured opinion), that the fall
in the value of gold will be 50 per cent., then the loss
to the holders of ail such incomes will be to the extent
of one-half of their means. They will receive the
same nominal amount as at présent, the same number
of bank-notes, which will be exchangeable for the
same number of sovereigns of the same weight and
fineness ; but thèse bank-notes or sovereigns will only
procure one-half as much of the necessaries, comforts,
and luxuries of life as they would do in the absence
of a dépréciation of money." This is surely a serions


IV.] M. CHEVALIERES VIEWS. 153

matter, and its gravity is not diminished when we
consîder who the persons are that by the course of
events (always supposing the production of gold to
continue) will be placed in this position. They are,
in the first place, fundholders and mortgagees, a class
who, whatever may be the popular idea upon the
subject, really deserve as much considération and
sympathy as any other in the community. For
of what is a large portion of funded property, and of
property lent on mortgage, composed ? To a very
large extent, as is well known, of trust money,
constituting as such, the provision made for widows
and orphans, for younger chiidren and minors, and
others who from their âge, sex, or circumstances are
incapacitated for taking part in the active pursuits of
life. The persons thus provided for are also very fre-
quently persons whose social rank is rather in advance
of their pecuniary means of supporting it, with whom,
therefore, a réduction of income will frequently neces-
sitate, not merely a curtailment of physical enjoyment,
but a descent in the social scale, a loss of caste and
position, with the many distressing mortifications which
such a loss involves. Again, trust money includes the
property of endowed bodies, of charitable and bene-
volent institutions, schools, hospitals, and churches, ail
which, with the fall in the value of gold, will be
deprived of a correspond ing proportion of their income,
and thus find abridged their means of public useful-
ness. Further, the dépréciation of money will fall
heavily on those, not confined to any class, but in
gênerai the most deserving of ail classes, who seek
to provide against the precariousness of uncertain


154 SUMMARY OF THE MOVEMENT. [essay

incomes, by adoptîng the practice of life assurance.
Ail contracts of this kind are purely monetary contracts,
and as siich based ultimatcly upon gold ; and wîth the
fall in the value of gold, every person in whose favour
a life is însured will bc damnificd to the full extent of
the dépréciation. He will receive indeed the same
nominal sum for which he bargained ; but this sum
will be worth less to him for ail the practical pur-
poses of life. Instead of representing, as is commonly
îmagined, secure affluence, and pensioned idleness —
interests which may well bear some additional pressure
— the interests at stake in funded or mortgage property,
as well as those at stake in life assurance, are among
the most helpless as well as the most important which
Society comprises. It would be nearer the truth to
say that they represent the classes on whom a pecu-
niary loss will inflict the maximum of harm.

But the loss from the dépréciation of money will
not be confined to the récipients of fixed money
incomes. Those also will be sufierers by the change,
though in a less degree and for a temporary period,
whose rémunération is determined more by custom
than by compétition ; and this description includes a
much larger number of persons than is commonly sup-
posed, It includes, e,g.^ two of the three learned
professions, the médical and the légal, and a not
unimportant portion of the third. It includes also the
large number of officiais, whether civil or military,
whether in public or private employment, who are
hired on yearly salaries. With respect to this large
class, al though their rémunération will probably in the
end be brought into harmony with the altered state


IV.] M. CHEVALIERES VIEWS. 155

of pecuniary affaîrs, yet during the perîod of transition
the adjustment will always be in arrear of e vents ;
and those who are comprised in it will suffer accord-
ingly, The rise in priées will be very palpable before
a doctor's or barrister s fee will be increased, or salaries
in the Civil Service raised.

On the other hand, it must be remembered (and
although M. Chevalier lias not overlooked this side of
the question, he has scarcely, we thînk, given it its
due weight) that for every loss of this kind there is,
from the nature of the case, a corresponding gain. If
the national creditor be muicted to the extent of one-
half of his property, the tax-paycr pockets an equal
sum ; if the mortgagee loses, the mortgagor gains ;
if the professional classes are curtailed in their earn-
ings, the public who employ them obtain their services
so much the more cheaply. There is thus in ail cases
a set-off ; and this being so, it might seem as if, what-
ever were the case with individuals, with the corn-
munity as a whole there would be neither loss nor
gain, neither benefit nor injury. But we must not
lightly acquiesce in so indiscrîminate a conclusion ; for,
putting aside entirely the substantial injustice involved
în the discharge of obligations in a sensé différent from
that in which they were incurred ; putting aside ail
the dangers of a change afifecting deeply an extensive
mass of interests, and opening to society an ordeal
which M. Chevalier thinks sufificîently formidable to
deserve the epithet * revolutionary ; ' putting thèse
considérations aside, and considering solely the efifect
of the pecuniary transfer, the question still remains,
whether the changes of condition thus produced are,


I s6 5 UMMAR Y OF THE MO VEMENT. [es6ay

on the whole, salutary or the reverse ; whether they
conduce to the çaîn or loss — social and moral as well
as purely economical — of the nation in whîch they
occur. We hâve already stated our opinion that the
effect of the gold dîscoveries will be to improve the
physical status of the great body of the people ; and
this we regard as a gain on the whole sufficient to out-
weîgh ail the concomitant evils. Yet we are far from
thinking those evils either trifling or few. It affords
slight matter for congratulation that a large number of
respectable people in narrow circumstances, many of
them old and helpless, should be deprived of one-half
of their livelihood in order that tax-payers may be
discharged from a portion of their fair liabilities; or
that the récipients of charitable endowments, widows
and orphans, the sick and infirm, the needy in mind
and in body, should be stinted in their supplies for the
purpose of relieving landlords of their encumbrances :
and as little do we think it a matter for rejoicing that
the mercantile and manufacturing classes should be
aggrandized at the expense of physicians, barristers,
and members of the Civil Service. It may be said,
indeed, that such a transfer of property tends to
strengthen the motives to enterprise and accumulation,
and thus to promote the growth of national wealth.
But, before conceding much weight to this argument,
we may ask if the strengthening of such motives be
at présent such a social desideratum, either in Great
Britain or in the United States (the countries which
will reap the largest profit from the movement), as
to be worth procuring at such a cost.

It seems to us that the instincts of commercial


IV.] M. CHEVALIER' S VIEWS. 157

enterprise are already sufficîently strong în the Anglo-
Saxon race, and that it îs not so much more wealth
that we want, as a higher sensé of the respon-
sibilities of wealth, and that more judicîous expen-
diture of it which would accompany more just per-
ceptions. If this be so, we may well doubt if the
pecuniary disturbances with which we are threatened,
are likely to prove as purely bénéficiai as those whose
faith in progress is more robust than our own are
accustomed to describe them. The mode in which
wealth is distributed is always of more importance
than its aggregate amount; and a process which
increases the aggregate amount of wealth only by
operating on its distribution, is therefore, at best, a
questionable spécifie. We hâve seen what the nature
of the impending changes is. They will in many
instances increase, instead of mitîgating, existing in-
equalities of condition. They will enrich the cosmo-
politan merchant at the expense of the petty trader.
They will enrich the commercial classes, as a whole,
at the expense of possessors of fixed incomes, of the
professional classes, and of salaried employés. Land-
lords will probably, on the whole, be gainers; they
will lose temporarily where the outstanding leases
are long, but they will gain permanently through the
lightening of their fixed encumbrances ; the balance
of gain being obtained by encroaching on the incomes
of their mortgagees. The tendency of the movement,
as amongst the middle and higher portions of society,
will thus be to aggrandize the wealthy at the expense
of the indigent ; to tax the more libéral and enlight-
ened for the benefit of the more narrow-minded and


î 5 8 ^ UMMAR y OF THE MO VEMENT. [essay

selfish ; to enrich tliose whose command of wealth is
perhaps already somewhat in advance of their sensé
of its responsibilîties, from the means of classes at
once more necessitous and more cultivated. Thèse
are the evils of the change, and against thèse we hâve
to set the benefit to the working classes, and the
ultimate gain to the world from the opening of new
and fertile régions to man's industry, and the extension
of his dominion over the earth.

That good will on the whole predominate, we
belîeve; but let us not, on this account, close our
eyes to the serions cost at which this prépondérance
of good will be obtained. To a very great extent
the cost is inévitable and must be met, but some-
thing may be done towards lessening the evils of
the crisis by giving timely warning of its approach.
Means may be found in the framing of settlements
and leases, and in the sélection of investments, to
mitîgate its severity ; the grand rule being, to avoid
as much as possible purely monetary securities, such
as the funds, mortgages, préférence shares, and, in
gênerai, investments the rcturns on which do not rise
with the advance in priées and salaries. The fore-
sight of Lord Burleigh, warned by the changes which
he saw around him, effected in the sixteenth century
the partial substitution of corn for money rents, and
in this way the incomes of collèges and other insti-
tutions hâve been preserved, which but for this
précaution would hâve long since dwindled into
insignificance.* The plan adopted under the Tithe

* [The cxample of Lord Burleigh may be commended to the wise people
who are now, in the full flow of dépréciation, recommending the compul-


IV.] M. CHEVALIERES VIEWS, 159

Commutation Act, for regulatîng rcnt-charge by the
price of agricultural prodiice, suggcsts another*means
by which the crisîs may be moderated. A permissive
law, facilitating arrangements of this kînd, would be
free from ail objection on the score of justice, and
mîght be attended with public advantage. But, after
ail is said, I fcar it must be confessed that the great
evils of the transition are not of a kind that can
be largely alleviated. In the main they must be
borne, and the sufiferers must endeavour to console
themselves with the reflcction, that while " the indi-
vidual withers," ** the world is more and more."

POSTSCRIPT.

The reader will probably be interested to learn the
course of the gold movement since the foregoing
essays were written. To enable him to appreciate
this in connection with what had gone before, it will
be well to state hcre the Icading facts of the pro-
duction and distribution of the new gold from the
outset down to the présent time. Thèse I am
enabled to set forth in a form at once brief and
authentic, thanks to a séries of carefully prepared

sory sale of corporate propcrty in land and the invcstment of the proceeds
in the funds, and this /*// the uiterest of the corporations ! Lord Burleigh
was no political économiste but he was an cxtrcmely shrewd man, and
knew what he was about. The supporters of the above proposai no doubt
consider themselves strong in political cconomy, and would gladly makc
the science rcsponsible for their projccts. Whatcvcr may be thought of
their économie prctensions, onc can at least hâve no difïiculty in admitting
that they too may knovv what they are about. Some very large fortunes
hâve becn made williin the last fcw years ; and it would, no doubt, be
cxtrcmely convcnient for some peoplc that land in largo quantities should
suddcnly be thrown upon the market.


1 6o SUMMA RY OF THE MO VEMENT. [essav^

articles whîch hâve been recently publîshed on thîs
subject în the EcofiomùL*

The first facts to be noted are (i) the total stock
of gold in the world at the date of the Californian and
Australian discoveries, and (2) the rate at whîch the
production of gold was taking place in the perîod
immediately preceding. Thèse were as follows : —

The total (estimated) stock of gold in the world
in 1848, was 560,000,000/.

As for the annual production, it had varied con-
siderably since the beginning of the century. In 1800
it was, according to the best estimâtes, rather over
3,000,000/. But at a later perîod important discoveries
of gold were made in Asîatic Russia, and for the five
or six years ending 1848 the annual produce would
seem to hâve varied from 5/. to about 8,000,000/.

Such was the state of things immediately preceding
1848. In that year the Californian discoveries took
place, and thèse were followed by the discoveries in
Australia in 1851. For thèse three years the annual
average production îs set down by the Economist at
9,000,000/., but from thîs date the production suddenly
rose to, for 1852, 27,000,000/., and continued to rise till
1856, when it attained its maximum of 32,250,000/.
At thîs stage a décline in the retums occurred, the
lowest point reached being in 1860, when they fell to
18,683,000/., but from thîs they rose again, and for
the last ten years hâve maintained an average of
about 20,500,000/.; the retums for the year 1871
being 20,811,000/.

The total amount of gold added to the world s

* See the Economiste June 29th, Aug^st 3rd and 3ist, 1872.


IV.] M. CHEVALIERES VIEIVS. i6i

Stock by this twenty years' production has been about
500,000,000/., an amount ncarly equal to that existing
in the world at the date of the discoverîes : in other
words, the stock of gold in the world has been nearly
doubled since that time.

As regards the distribution of this enormous sum,
those who désire détails will find them very fully and
carefully tabulated in the articles of the Econo^nist to
which référence has just been made. For my présent
purpose it will sufîice to indicate the main currents of
the movement ; and thèse can only be gîven for the
period since 1858, that being the year when specie
imports began to be regularly publishcd by the Board
of Trade. Since that year the production of gold
has been about 300,000,000/., and this has been dis-
tributed through three principal channels. The first
and largest is that of which the tributaries, flow-
ing from Australia and California, and in the latter
case passing through the United States, converge on
England, whence the body of the stream passes
on to the Continent of Europe, and in large part
finally to the Hast. About 190,000,000/, out of the
300,000,000/ produced since 1858, hâve been thus
disposed of The stream of next importance îs that
which passes from the new gold countries direct
to the Hast, and chiefly to India, by which way
some 50,000,000/ hâve been carried off. This dis-
poses of the whole of the Californian and Australian
production, with the exception of 26,000,000/, retained
by Australia for her own purposes. Lastly, there
îs the Russian supply, which appears to hâve passed
in large part to France, whence, in greater or less

M


1 6 2 SUMMAR Y OF THE MO VEMENT. [essay

amount, it has been transferred to other Continental
countrîes.

Thèse hâve been the principal channels of dis-
tribution ; but an important considération remains — in
what proportions hâve the varions countries per-
manently absorbed the gold thus flowing through
the channels of commerce ? The following are the
results arrived at by the Eco7iomist, still, the readef
will recollect, for the period bctween 1858 and the
présent : —

Rctained in England ;Ê^68,ooo,ooo

„ in Continental Europe (chicfly in France) 105,000,000
„ in Portugal and some other countries

not included in the last entry . . 12,000,000

„ in South America 8,000,000

„ in India and the East 90,000,000

„ in Australia 26,000,000

* Total production since 1858 ;^309,ooo,ooo

The only other point connected with the movement
which it will be needful hère to refer to is the net
addition which, as the resuit of the whole, has accrued
to our own currency. As has been seen, it follows
from the figures given by the Economiste that of tlie
whole amount of gold passing through England since
1858 (about 190,000,000/.) 68,000,000/. hâve been
retained in the country. The question arîses, how has
this sum been disposed of ? The Economist answers
that 28,000,000/. hâve been absorbed by our currency ;

* So the figures are set down by the Economist ; yet no place is given
in the table tô the United States; which, including Califomia, must
surely (notwithstanding the existence of an inconvertible currency) hâve
retained some portion of the supplies.


nr.] Af. CHEVALIERES VIEWS. 163

60,000,000/. having been coîned from the new gold,
and 32,000,000/. of this having gone abroad. The
28,000,000/. thus added to our gold circulation would,
as the Economist remarks, of course be a maximum
sum. Taking it at 25,000,000/., and accepting Mr.
Newmarch's estimate of the coin in circulation in
1857 as 75,000,000/., this would bring our gold currency
at the présent time up to 100,000,000/ — rather more
than double the amount estimated by Mr. Newmarch
as in circulation a few years previous to 1848. As-
suming the facts to stand thus, our gold circulation
would hâve been about doubled since the gold dis-
coveries. This, however, only accounts for, at most,
28,000,000/ out of the 68,000,000/ retained in one
form or another in the country since 1858 ; and hcrc a
question arises as to what has become of the rcmaining
40,000,000/ retained at home, but not entcring into
the circulation } The answer given to this question
by the Economist appears to me, I confess, the least
satisfactory part of its statement. It in efl'ect amounts
to this, that, allowing for 12,000,000/ as probably
existing in the form of foreign coin, partly in the
reserves of the Bank of England, and partly in the
hands of exchange dealers, the remainder — 28,000,000/.
— has been used up for purposes of art and manu-
facture ; in other words, that the United Kingdom
has, in this way, consumed about 2,000,000/ ol" gold
annually since 1858. As far as appears, there are no
grounds for supposing such a consumption except the
difficulty of otherwise accounting for the gold. For
my part, in présence of M. Chevalier's facts and argu-
ments on this subject, I find it quite impossible to

M 2


x64 SUMMARY OF THE MOVEMENT. [essay

accept this explanation, and should even prefer tp
believe, were there no other alternative, that a con-
sidérable portion of the mîssing sum had somehow
escaped from the country without getting into the
Government returns.

The foregoing statements give an outline of the
movement during the period under review, so far as
gold is concerned ; but the real character of its effects
on the monetary Systems of the world cannot be under-
stood without taking into account the simultaneous
opérations in silver. For example, one of the most
important considérations connected with the subject
is the proportions in which the additions made to the
monetary stock hâve been absorbed by the différent
commercial countries. From the table given above
it would seem as if the Continent of Europe was the
largest absorbent — larger even than India and the
East ; but in point of fact the greater portion of the
105,000,000/. of new gold retained by Continental
Europe has been employed in substitution for silver
formerly existing in her currencies, the silver thus
parted with having in the main been passed on to the
East The addition therefore made to the metallic
currencies of the Continent, as the resuit of the gold
movement, is greatly less than the mère gold statistics
would indicate ; while the addition made to Oriental
currencies is very much greater. I hâve no data from
which to estimate the précise amount thus transferred,
nor is there any need hère to go into détails. A
single fact will suffice to give an idea of the scale on
which this silver movement has been proceeding. I
find that the amount of silver which passed to the


IV.] M. CHEVALIERES F/EÏVS, 165

East by way of Eg>'pt alone durîng the last fifteen
years has amounted to no less than 95,ooo,cxx)/. ; of
thîs the greater portion was taken from the currencies
of Europe, and principally from that of France, and
the whole has been added, over and above the
90,000,000/. of gold stated above, to the currencies of
India and the East. The largest absorbents, there-
fore, of the vast additions now being madc to the
monetary stock of the world hâve not been the coun-
tries of Continental Europe, but Oriental countrics,
mainly India and China. We thus find, in conformity
with the mode of distribution described in the third of
the foregoing essays, that, although England and the
United States receive the chief portion of the new
supplies in the first instance, yet of thèse only a small
part is retained permanently in their currencies. The
rest îs passed on to the Continent of Europe and to
Asia ; while, again, of the portion sent to the Continent
probably the largest part finds its way ultimately to
the East, not indeed always in the form in which it
entered the Continent, — not, that is to say, as gold, —
but in that of silver, into which it has been transmutcd
on the way.


V.

COOPERATION IN THE
SLATE QUARRIES OF NORTH WALES.*

The public must now be tolerably familiar wîth the
story of the Rochdalc Equitable Pîoneers, and of
the numerous societies, founded upon the same prin-
ciplcs, which in various parts of the country hâve
alrcady accomplished such great things for the working
pcoplc, and given earnest for the future of still
grcater achievements in their behalf. It has heard
soniething also of other and more genuine examples
of ** co-operation/' — where associâtes not only trade
but " work " together, where the labourers are also
tlic capitalists, and wages and profits return to the
same hands ; experiments which, small as hâve been
the actual fruits they hâve hitherto yielded, form
yet, in the opinion of thosc who hâve most deeply
pondercd the problem of industrial rcform, the most
solid grounds of hope for the future permanent éléva-
tion of the labouring class.f But there is, besides

* Macmillan^s Magazine^ January 1865.

t Sce an article of great interest in the Westminster Revicw for April
1S64., cntitlcd ** Strikes and Industrial Co-operation," in which the whole
subjcct is handlcd with remarkable ability and knowlcdge.


COOPERATION IN NORTH WALES, 167

thèse, a third specîes of ** co-operation," prevailîng
throughout some large industries in Great Britaîn,
which has not, so far as I am aware, received any con-
sidération in the numerous and instructive discussions
which hâve within the last few years taken place upon
this subject, but which is nevertheless well worthy
of attention. I refer to the method of employîng
labour which prevails extensively in mîning and other
analogous occupations, and is known as the ** bargain "
or ** con tract " System. Having lately had an oppor-
tunity of witnessing this System in the slate quarries
of North Wales, I propose to describe briefly the
method and its results. It will, I think, be seen that
ît is a genuine instance of ** co-operation '* — one, more-
over, which exhibits the bénéficiai tendencies of that
plan in some respects in even a more striking light
than other and bettcr known examples.

The mountains of North Wales, as is well known,
constitute the principal source of the wealth of that
région. They are extremely metalliferous, containing
lead and copper ore, besides sulphur ; but their most
important constituent is the slate formation. Veins
of this rock, varying in thickness from four and five
to four and five hundred yards, and traceable, in
some instances, for a length of many miles, traverse
the country, but more especially the mountain ranges
of Caernarvon and Merioneth. The importance of the
industry to which they give occasion may be judgcd
from the fact, that three slate quarries — those of Pen-
rhyn,. Llanberis, and Festinog — give employment to
not fewer than 7,000 men, representing a population
of perhaps 20,000 persons. Thèse are, indeed, by


i68 CO-OPERATION IN THE [essay

much the most extensive of the slate quarries in that
région, but they form but a small fraction of the whole
number. It is impossible to wander in any direction
over the mountains of those two counties without
finding abundant évidence how widely the popular
enterprise is engaged in this branch of production.
No mountain side is so inaccessible that the slate pro-
spector has not reached it, and the most secluded glens
and passes are heard to écho the thunder of the
quarrier s blast.

The great majority of the slate quarries are worked
by companies — either private co-partneries or joint
stock companies ; but a few, and notably the two
largest — the quarries of Penrhyn and Llanberis — are in
the hands of individuals, the proprîetors of the moun-
tains where the slate-formation occurs. In the former
case the capitalist or capitalists workîng the quarry pay
a royalty, which is generally one-twelfth of the produce.
It must be observed that the slate does not, as is
frequently supposed, and as might be inferred from a
cursory glance at a slate quarry, constitutc the mass of
the mountain in which the quarry is eut. It runs in
distinct veins which, on rîsing towards the surface, de-
teriorate, — a circumstance to which is due the risk
which this mode of employing capital so largely in-
volves ; for it is always difficult to say from the
appearance of the vein at the surface what may be
its quality at a lower depth. Before this can be
known, a mass of from two or three to sometimes
twenty or even thîrty yards in vertical depth must be
removed — a tedious and costly opération, which must
be completed before slate-quarrying, properly so called,


v] SLA TE QUARRIES OF NORTH WALES. 169

begîns, and which îs often performed to no purpose ;
the quality of the rock, when thus ascertained, not
proving such as to justîfy the further prosecutîon of
the work. Cases hâve been mentioned to the writer
of quarries havîng been abandoncd after 20,cxx)/., of
others havîng been given up after 8o,cxx)/., had been
expended on prelîminary opérations. This incident
of slate-quarrying serves to explaîn what will be pre-
sently referred to — the unwillingness of the workîng
quarriers to embark their savings in this kind of
spéculation.

The business of making slates is an exceedingly
simple opération — one, however, which not the less
demands from the workman no small amount of intelli-
gence, exactness, and dexterity, besides a good deal of
practical acquaintance with the nature of the matcrials
with which lie has to deal. It consists in detaching
the slate formation in blocks from the mountain sidc ;
in sawing the blocks whcn thus detached into suitable
sizes ; lastly, in splitting and dressing, so as to bring
them into proper shape — a process which is performed
sometimes by machincry, but more generally by hand
labour. It is to the industrial arrangements by which
this opération is carried out that it is desired now to
invite the rcader's attention. They are as follows : —
The portion of the slate which it is proposed to work
is divided into sections carefully marked out, which
are let out as "bargaîns" to as many small co-part-
neries, consisting generally of three or four working men.
Thèse co-partneries **contract" to produce slates —
each from the section of the rock assigned to it —
according to sizes and shapes at so much per thousand.


I70 CO'OPERATION IN THE [essay

The men who take part dîrectly in thèse contracts
form, perhaps, a third of the whole quarrying popula-
tion ; they are, as mîght be expected, the older, more
experienced, and better-off portion ; "the remainder
are employed by them as labourers at fixed wages
under the name of **germyns," apparently the Welsh
équivalent for " navvies." The capital employed in
the undertaking is furnished principal ly by the pro-
prietors or lessees, as the case may be, of the quarry ;
but a portion is also provided by the *' contractors."
Thus the former supply the larger and more expensive
machinery, such as the tramways, waggons, steam-
engine, if there be one, pumps, slate-saws and planes,
&c., while the latter furnish the smaller tools, as well
as the gunpowder used in blasting. The practice,
moreover, being to pay wages monthly, this supposes,
on the part of the workmen — unless so far as they
may hâve recourse to the pernicious aid of the tally-
shop — an amount of saving sufficient, at least, to
support them during this intcrval of dclay. The
relations of the actual workcrs having been established
on this footing, and the contracts entered into, the
functions of the principal capitalist or capitalists are
thenceforward of an extremely limited kind ; they
consist chiefly in keeping the machinery in proper
order, and seeing to the number and quality of the
slates turned out. As for the rest — the plan of opéra-
tions adopted, the distribution of the labour, its super-
întendence and reward — of ail this the " contractors "
undertake the sole and entire charge. It should be
added that the " contracts " are supplemented by an
understanding, doubtless originating in the felt neces-


▼. J SLA TE Q UA RJ^IES OF NOR TH WALES. 1 7 1

sîty of mitigating for the working men the inévitable
risks of such undertakings, to the effect that, where
from the înferior quality of the rock, as ascertained on
trial, the returns fall below a certain standard, the
reduced earnings of the " contractors " shall be aided
by a " poundagc," or additional allowance, varying
înversely with the amount of their gains. This
poundage, so far as I could make out, though for the
most part regulated by custom, is also in some degree
discretionary on the part of the owncr of the qiiarry,
and is not the same for ail districts. It applies, how-
ever, only to the less fortunate class of ** bargains ; *'
the better " bargains '' are amply remunerated within
the terms of the contract.

Such, in bricf, are the arrangements under which
îndustry in the Welsh slate quarries is carried on. I
think it will be seen at once that this ** contract
System '' constitutes a truc case of ** co-operatîon.*' It
îs at least certain that it fulfils what I venture to think
are the most important conditions of that method of
industry : there is associatcd effort ; there is common
înterest in the results of the work ; and thèse rcsults
dépend, subject to the natural conditions of the case,
and the customary qualification of the strict contract
just indicated, directly on the energy, skill, and mutual
good faith with which the workers pcrform their part.
It has also been said that the ** contractors " advance a
portion of the capital ; but I should not be disposed to
attach much importance to this as a distinctive feature
of the ** contract System f ' for, though as a matter of
fact the men who take part in contracts hâve generally
accumulated some little capital, and though this cir-


172 CO- OPERA TION IN THE [ess a y

cumstance no doubt facilitâtes in some degree their
proceedings in carrying out the undertaking, still the
possession of capital does not by any means constitute
an indispensable condition to becoming a contractor,
ît being alvvays easy for a man of good character to
obtain the requisite tools and materîals on crédit from
small shopkeepers established in the quarrying dis-
tricts, and established chîefly with a vîew to supplying
such needs. The only item of capital which in prac-
tice the contractor is in the habit of advancing is the
money expended on his own support during the
monthly interval that elapses before the returns to his
industry corne in ; and, so far as this is concerned, the
" germyn " whom he employs — a labourer at fixed
wages — has an equally valid tîtle to take rank as a
capitalist ; the earnings of the ** germyn " being also
postponed for the same period of tîme. The value
of the experiment, therefore, and that which entitles it
to be regarded as an example of " co-operative "
industry, lies, in my opinion, in the other conditions to
which I hâve referred — in the fact that the System
enlists working men in a joint undertaking, of which
the results for them dépend in large part on the skill,
energy, and conscientious zeal with which it is carried
through.

And now let us endeavour to appreciate the bearing
of thèse conditions on the well-being of the quarrying
community. We shall consider in the first place the
position of the contractor, who, as I hâve already said,
represents about a third of the whole quarrying popu-
lation. He will not, of course, for a moment be con-
founded with the important and generally wealthy


V.] SLATE QUARRIES OF NORTH WALES. 173

personage by whom our raîlways and great public
Works are carried on. The latter, a capitalist pure
and simple, bas no other relations wîth the actual
workers than that of paymaster. But the contractor
of the slate quarrîes îs himself a manual worker —
generally, îndeed, a skîlled worker, taking to himself
the more difficult processes of the undertaking, but
stîU in the strictest sensé a working man — working in
the same place, and often at the same opération, as the
labourer whom he employs, and socially in no respect
his superior. But, though a manual labourer, our
contractor is also something very différent from the
ordinary labourer for hire. His rémunération is no
fixed sum, but dépends upon the success of his
exertions, which he has therefore the strongest interest
to increase to the utmost. Nor, again, is he to be
confounded with the labourer at task-work. In the
first place, the undertaking in which he embarks is of
an altogether more important character than any that
falls to the lot of the ordinary task-work labourer.
Before he commits himself to his engagements, a
calculation, not altogether free from complication —
requiring, besides an acquaintance with arithmetic,
and a tincture of mathematics, some practical know-
ledge of the différent qualities of certain rocks —
must be performed. Then the undertaking itself com-
prises several distinct opérations — quarrying, cleav-
ing, dressing — the carrying out of which, effectively
and economically, calls for délibération, forethought,
and organizing skill. Again, the contractor, while a
labourer himself, is also a purchaser of the labours of
others, holding towards his "germyn" the position


174 CO- OPERA TION IN THE [ess a Y

of a capîtalîst proper, and is thus lecl to look at the
business of production in some degree from the point
of view of an employer, — a circumstance which may
go some way in accounting for the notcworthy fact,
that in the districts of the slate quarries strikes are
Unknown. Lastly, and to this I attach the greatest
importance of ail, the contractor îs a member of a
partnership, acquiring rights and incurring respon-
sibilities in relation to his fellow-contractors, taking
part in their labours on cqual terms, sharing their
anxieties, and interested in common with them in the
ultimate resuit of their common efforts.

But the influence of the arrangements I hâve
described is not limited to the class which comes
îmmediately under their opération. A circumstance
which gives especial importance to the status of the
contractor in the slate quarry is that, placed as nearly
as possible midway between the position of the
ordinary labourer and that of the capital ist pure and
simple, it forms an easy stepping-stone for the éléva-
tion of the masses from the precarious position of
dependence upon the gênerai labour-market, — a
position which, if there be value in expérience, is
absolutely incompatible with any substantial and per-
manent improvement of their state.

The mode in which the ascent is made will be illus-
trated by a remark made to the writer by the lessee of
the Dolwydellan slate quarry — a gentleman to whose
kindness he is indebted for most of the information
contained in this paper. In reply to a question with
référence to a différence in the rates of wages pre-
vailing in différent localities, he observcd that the men


V.] SLATE QUARRIES OF NORTH WALES, 175

before us would be very slow to leave their présent
occupation even for the prospect of a considérable
advance in their wages — ** because," he explained,
pointing to a large quarry hole filled with water, ** so
soon as this îs pumped dry, there is nota man amongst
them who does not know that he will hâve a chance
of a share in the new contracts which will then
be opened." Thus the labourers who hâve not yet
attained to the rank of contractors are ever working in
full view of an early promotion to this position, their
attainment of which, however, dépends entirely on their
success in recommendîng themselves to the favourable
considération of the owner of the quarry, as well as to
that — an equally important condition — of their own
fellow-workmen, without whose approval and co-
opération they would hope" in vain to take advantage
of the opportunities which are daîly opening. Even
the less important class of workmen, who are employed
în clearing away refuse, also pass occasionally into the
ranks of the quarriers proper, and ultimately into those
of the contractors, and thus feel in some degree the
stimulus which such prospects supply. The whole
Society is thus kept constantly under the incentive of
the public opinion of the élite among its own members
— a State of things which serves to diffuse throughout
the entire organization an influence of the healthiest
kind.

Nor has the beneficent tcndency of thèse arrange-
ments failed to become effectuai in the actual condition
of the population of the slate quarries. Their ordinary
earnings, according to information supplied to me from
varions sources, may be set down as follows : —


176 CO- OPERA TION IN THE [essay

For carters of refuse, from \2s, to 17J. per week.
For " germyns " (quarricrs at fixed wages, many of whom are
mère boys), I2j. to 20s. per week.

In the case of the contractors the variations are
much more considérable ; the results ranging from 3/.
to 8/., and occasîonally to 10/. per month. In a small
quarry near Dolwydellan which I visited, three con-
tractors had just concluded a ** bargain," in which they
had netted for the month of July the sum of 9/. each.
On the whole, so far as I could make out, the
earnings of the contractors average something like
5/. monthly.

Thèse rates are, I should suppose, about equal to
those prevailing in corresponding occupations — I mean
occupations in which the toil, risk, and skill are about
the same — in the most favoured industrial districts in
England; and such a resuit is surely very creditable
to the industrial System of Wales. For it must be re-
membered that capital is very far from increasing with
the same rapidity in Caernarvonshire and Merioneth-
shire as in (say) Lancashire and Staffordshire ; while,
*on the other hand, owing to the gênerai ignorance of
the English language which prevails in the former
counties, — a circumstance which cannot but operate
in some degree as an impediment to émigration, —
the relief afforded by this safety-valve to the labour
market there is likely to be considerably less than
in other portions of the United Kingdom. The ex-
ternal conditions affecting wages in the Welsh counties
are therefore decidedly less favourable than they are
in the more progressive districts of Hngland ; and yet
the labouring classes in the former localities are, ît


T.] SLATE QUARRIES OF NORTH WALES, 177

seems, comparîng analogous modes of labour, equally
well off. The explanatîon, as will be anticipated, is
to be found in the slower movements of population in

•

the Welsh districts. In Caernarvonshire population
advanced in the décade 1851 to 1861 at the rate of
9 per cent. ; in Merionethshîre at the rate of 3 per
cent. ; in both counties at an average rate of 6 per
cent. ; while over the whole of England and Wales
population durîng the same period went forward at
the average rate of 12 per cent., and in the more
prosperous parts of the country — for example in Lan-
cashire and Staffordshîre~at the rates respcctively of
20 per cent, and 23 per cent*

The comparatively slow growth of capital in those
counties of North Wales is thus, as regards its effect
on the condition of the people, neutralized by a growth
of population proportionately slow ; and the practical
resuit is a rate of rémunération fully up to the English
level. The defect in respect to material conditions is
compensated by greater vigour in the moral. Now, I
think it is impossible not to connect this satisfactory

♦ I do not give thèse figures as accurate exponents of the relative
growth (by way of natural increase) of population in the several districts.
No doubt the results in ail instances hâve been much modified both
by émigration and by migration within the limits of Great Britain. So
far as the former cause is concerned, the probability is, for the reason
stated, that, could its effect be ascertained (unfortunatcly the Emigration
Reports do not distinguish the natives of Wales), the rcsult would con-
siderably strengthen my case. And as regards the latter, though there
is no doubt a considérable Welsh movement towards the manufacturing
centres of England, this proceeds in the main from the agricultural dis-
tricts ; while, to be set against this, there is an Irish immigration into
Wales. On the whole, I think the figures I hâve given may bc accepted
for the purpose for which they are adduccd, as corroborative illustra-
tions of tendencies which there arc independent grounds for believing
to exist

N


178 CO- OPERA TION IN THE [essay

State of things with the régime of industry under
which it has come to pass. Indeed, to what else can
it be ascribed ? Relîgious influences, no doubt, are
powerful in North Wales. Nothing apparently can
exceed the actîvity and zeal of the Dissenting bodies ;
and the good effect on the morals and gênerai de-
meanour of the people is very observable. But, how-
ever compatible a strong sensé of religion may be
with worldly prudence in those matters on which the
growth of population dépends, the mundane virtue
can yet scarcely be regarded as a spécifie religions
resuit : certainly it is not one which it is usual to hear
inculcated from the pulpit. Nor can the fact be attri-
buted to éducation in the ordinary sensé of the word ;
for, notwithstanding the strongly pronounced literary
instincts of the Welsh people, literary éducation in
North Wales seems to be in a decidedly backward
State. Improvements, it is said, of an important kind
hâve in récent years been effected in the primary
schools ; but this has occurred since the mass of the
présent génération of Welshmen havc entered upon
active life. It is rare, out of the principal towns, to
find working people over the âge of thirty who can
exchange more than a few words of English: hundreds
of thousands cannot accomplish even this little : and
even in the towns it is not uncommon to meet sub-
stantial shopkeepers who are unable to sign theîr
names to their own bills. In one quarry I was told
that some considérable number of the workmen were
unable to read and write. It is therefore not to the
superiority of their school instruction that the indus-
trial population of thèse Welsh counties are indebted


V.] SLATE QUAREIES OF NORTH WALES. 179

for the remarkable circumspection and self-control
which they display in their most important social
relations. I can only regard this phenomenon, there-
fore, as the fruit of that practical training in habits
of thrift and wise foresight which is provided for
them in the industrial System under which they live.
It thus appears that, in point of pecuniary returns,
the position of the Welsh quarriers does not suffer by
comparison with that of workmen in analogous occu-
pations even in the most prospérons districts of Eng-
land — districts far more favourably circumstanced, as
regards the physical conditions affecting the rémunéra-
tion of the labourer, than those of the slate quarries.
But mère pecuniary return affords after ail but an
inadéquate criterion of the labourer's condition. Fully
as important as the amount which he earns is the
mode in which his earnings are spent ; and it is hère
that the peculiar strength of the co-operative principle
cornes into play. Those who hâve watched the work-
îng of ** co-operative stores" hâve been struck with
their effect in awakening and stimulating the saving
spirit among the working classes — a resuit which has
been attributed to the strong temptations to frugality
presented by those establishments, in the opportunities
they afford for investing small sums at a fair rate of
profit In the particular form of co-operation, how-
ever, to which I hâve in this paper called attention,
this incident of the co-operative plan as it is conducted
elsewhere — the provision, that is to say, for small
investments —does not exist. As I hâve already inti-
mated, to qualify a man for taking part in a " bargain,"
no capital is needed beyond the moral capital of a

N 2


i8o COOPERATION IN THE [essay

good character. Even should he be in a position to
décline the crédit which is readily extended to him,
the amount required for the purchase of such imple-
ments and tools as it falls to his share of the bargain
to provide would be exceedingly small. Nor does
he find in the other branches of industry flourishing
around him those spécial opportunîties which are
wanting in his own. Co-operative stores hâve indeed,
as I hâve been informed, been established in one or
two localities in North Wales, and with excellent
results : but they do not yet exist on such a scale that
they can be supposed to hâve sensibly affected the
habits of the people. As regards the larger opérations
of slate quarrying, they are, as it happens, peculiarly
inéligible as a field for small investments. This will
at once be understood if regard be had to what has
been already stated — that the amount of capital re-
quired to start a slate quarry is very large, while the
risk of the spéculation is very greaL The former
obstacle might indeed be overcome by recourse to the
joint-stock expédient, were the joint-stock plan capable
of being applied with advantage to this branch of
production ; but this seems not to be the case ; at
least, so think the workîng quarriers, and theîr opinion
would seem to be borne out by facts.* In the case of

♦ Numerous joint-stock companies are at présent (1864) working
quarries in North Wales ; but, as a rule, I understand they are not
flourishing concems ; ail the most prosperous undertakings being in the
hands of individuals or private co-partneries. The reasons for the
supcriority of the latter are apparent enough. There is no need that the
business organizations of such an undertaking should be other than
extremely siipple. In Penrhyn Quarry, for example, where the opérations
are on an immense scale, the entire business of keeping the accounts, &c.
is performcd by two derks. This cannot but give a great advantage to


V.] SLATE QUARRIES OF NORTH WALES. i8i

the population of the slate quarries, therefore, there
seems to be an entire absence of those spécial incen-
tives to frugalîty and providence which hâve been
incidents of the co-operative plan in its better-known
forms. Nevertheless frugal ity and providence are
found to characterîze thîs population in a remarkable
degree. The mère fact that, according to the prevail-
ing custom, wages are paid at so long an interval as
once a month, implies of itself a considérable fund of
accumulated savings existing among the body of the
people. But this would give but an inadéquate îdea
of their saving disposition. It is, I am assured, quite
common to find in the ranks of the contractors men
who hâve laid by from one to three and four hundred
pounds. In one quarry which I visited, a man was
pointed out to me — a manual labourer — who was
known to be in receipt of between 80/. and 100/. a
year, independently altogether of his current earnings
— the return on capital saved and invested. Thîs, no
doubt, was an extraordinary case, but not, I was
assured, by any means without a parallel. Well,
where is the field for the investment of thèse consi-
dérable accumulations ? A portion goes into agricul-


individuals and small co-partneries over the necessarily more cumbrous
organization of a joint-stock company. Again, the spécial knowledge and
sîngleness of design which are so essential in this branch of industry are
much more Hkely to be realized by individuals, or associations consisting of
a few partners, than by a more numerous body. In addition to the reasons
mentioned in the text, it is probable that some distrust of the Saxon
enters into the Welsh workman's reluctance to commit his savings to
undcrtakings which are carricd on largely by Saxon capital : this seems
to be expressed in his proverb : " Os byth y gweli sais ac eng^ne yn
dyfod ir gwaith pacia dy bethan." [When you see an Englishman with
his engine coming to the work, pack and be off.]


i82 CO'OPERATION IN THE [essay

ture ; prosperous quarrymen turnîng farmers in their
latter days, or sometîmes combining with farmîng pur-
suits occasional adventures in their old line. Retail
trade agaîn absorbs some. But probably the largest
part of the funds finds its way into the associations
known as " building societies." Thèse ** building so-
cieties " might with more propriety be called loan
societies ; their functions consisting in advancing
money to be invested in building spéculations, which,
though for the most part undertaken by the members,
are yet carried on on individual account, resembling in
this respect the ** Vorschussvereine " described by Pro-
fessor Huber in his interesting paper on ** Co-opera-
tion."* Thèse societies are extremely popular with
the workmen ; and as to their range of opérations, the
reader will be able to form some notion when I state
that several considérable towns in North Wales hâve
been almost entirely built by the capital supplied
through this agency. Thus the pretty town of Beth-
esda, within five miles of Bangor, is almost entirely
the création of the enterprise of working men deriving
their funds from this source. Llandudno, Rhyll, and
Upper Bangor owe their existence in large part to the
same cause. As to the substantial comfort in which
the people of the quarry districts live, no one who has
visited thèse districts will, I think, feel any doubt.
Nor îs it comfort merely. The style and finish of the
workmen's houses are very remarkable, more particu-
larly in Bethesda and the neighbourhood of the Pen-
rhyn quarries, where the élégant model furnished by
Colonel Pennant in his own village has been turned to

* Published in the " Social Science Transactions" for 1862.


V.] SLATE QUARRIES OF NORTH WALES. 183

exœllent account. A feature in the architecture îs
the variety of modes in whîch the staple materîal is
brought into réquisition. Roofing is but a small part
of the purposes to which the slate is applied : there
are slate door-posts, slate window-settings ; the ground
story is generally flagged with slate, which makes its
appearance besides in many places where one would
little expect to find it. I know not whether the
extrême cleanliness of the Welsh is to be attributed in
any degree to the advantages of this material; but
they are certainly pre-eminent in this virtue. The
exquisite neatness of some of the cottages in Bethcsda
and Trefriw is such as I imagine would not easily
be matched out of Holland. The kitchen-parlour is
quite a marvel of cleanliness, tidiness, and order —
with its slate floor swept till it shines, its " varnished
clock " clicking " behind the door," and its furniture,
though mostly made of common wood, polished to
such brightness that it does not pale even before the
constellations of brass knobs which glitter ail around.
In the village where I was staying I hâve watched an
old woman who lived on the opposite side of the
Street come out in showery weather to scrub her door-
slab clean as fast as it was soiled by the footsteps of
each careless passer-by : the apparition would follow on
the clearing away of a shower almost with the regu-
larity of the lady in the toy barometer. Nor should
we omit to say that some attempt at a library is rarely
absent from thèse quarriers' cottages. The sélection
may not contain the newest publications, and is not
perhaps very choice; but at least it shows literary
aspirations — a soûl for something above the quarry.


i84 CO'OPERATION IN THE [essay

The Bîble, generally în Welsh, I observed, held a
constant and honoured place in the literary store.

The sîmplîcity of character and kindness of heart
among the poorcr classes of Welsh people are very
striking and attractive. In illustration of thèse
qualities I may mention an admirable trait, which
may, I think, be fairly connected with their co-opera-
tive System.

The occupations of the slate quarry involve, as may
readily be believed, no small amount of risk to the
limbs and lives of those who engage in them ; the
accidents from blasting, falling in of rocks, &c. being
unfortunately very numerous, and frequently fatal ;
and, as mîght be expected, there is no lack of provision
against such disastrous contingencies. Besides the
ordinary friendly societies which flourish in immense
numbers ail over the country, no quarry of any im-
portance is without its sick club. Numerous associa-
tions exist framed with a spécial view to compensate
for the losses incident to mutilation and death. But
such machinery does not satisfy the cravings of the
fraternal feeling that subsists among the workmen.
The assistance from this source is almost invariably
supplemented, where the accidents are of a serions
nature involving calamitous conséquences to the
family of the injured man, by voluntary contributions
raised among his fellow-workmen. " As a class,"
writes a correspondent, himself extensively engaged
in this business, to whom I hâve already expressed
my obligations, — " As a class, quarriers are very libéral.
If by accident a father of a family is killed, the wife
will go through the quarry and frequently gets (if


V.] SLA TE QUARRIES OF NORTH WALES, 185

her husband has been a man of good character) from
10/. to 20/. At other times collections are made in
the chapels, and almost in every instance they show
great liberality." He adds that thèse occurrences are
unfortunately very fréquent ; several such calls on the
workman's pocket having quite recently been made in
a single quarry in the short space of a few months.

Such, then, is the " contract system " of the slate
quarries, and such are its fruits. Divested as it is of
certain extraneous advantages which accompany other
forms of ** co-operation/' it sets, as it seems to me, in
ail the stronger light the inhérent virtue of the prin-
ciple itself — the principle of combining the exertions of
labourers towards a common resuit in which they hâve
a joint interest — an interest varying with the success
of their common efforts. The results hère obtained
are obtained not so much through the increased force
of the external inducements to prudent or righteous
conduct, as by strengthening the character of the
workman, calling into action qualitîes of minfd which
in the ordinary condition of the labourer's life lie
dormant, enlarging his mental horizon, stimulating his
reflective powers, widening his sympathies — in a word,
developing those principles and habits which furnish
the only solid basis for any permanent improvement of
his State.

How far the partîcular arrangement which I hâve
described admits of being extended to other depart-
ments of production is what actual experiment can
alone détermine. Prima facie, it would seem that
one condition only was indispensable to its adoption —
the possibility of splitting up the work to be done into


i86 COOPERATION IN NORTH IV A LE S. [essay v.

a number of small and independent tasks. It is at ail
events certain that the success of the plan in the
instances in which it has been tried has been remark-
ably great ; and this, considered with référence to
commercial, no less than to social results. As an
expédient for the practical solution of the labour-
problem, the weakness of the " contract System '' seems
to me to lie in the fact that under it the labourer and
the capitalist are still distinct persons ; the two capa-
cities do not coalesce in the same man. The difficulty
which, under the ordinary relations of labour and
capital, occurs in settling the rate of wages might
equally occur under the ** contract System " in settling
the terms of the contract. That it does not in prac-
tice arise is to be ascribed, I imagine, chiefly to the
circumstance to which I hâve already adverted — the
double capacity in which the contractor acts, as at
once employer and employed ; and, for the rest, to
the gênerai intelligence which the System engenders.


VI.


POLITICAL ECONOMY AND LAND.*

Various as hâve been the schemes recently offered
to public notice for the settlement of the Irish land
question, one feature is noticeable as more or less
promînently characterizing them ail — a profound dis-
trust of Political Economy. Just in proportion as a
plan gives promise of being effective, does the author
feel it necessary to assume an attitude, if not of
hostility, then of apology, towards this science. It
îs either sneered at as unpractical and perverse, or
its authority is respectfully put aside as of no account
"in a country so exceptîonally situated as Ireland."
This State of opinion is perfectly intelligible. In
its earlier applications to practical affairs Political
Economy found itself inevitably in collision with
numerous regulative codes, partly the remuants of
feudalism, partly the products of the commercial doc-
trines of a later âge, but ail founded on the principle
of substituting for individual discrétion the control
of those in power. It thus came naturally to be

* Forini^htiy Rcview^ January 1870.


i88 POLITICAL ECONOMY AND LAND. [essay

identified with the opposite princîple ; and was known
to the gênerai public mainly as a scientific develop-
ment of the doctrine of laisscz-faire. The Free-trade
controversy of course gave great prominence to this
side of the System, and of late the idca that ail
Politîcal Economy is summed up in laissez-faire has
been much fostered by the utterances of some public
men and writers, who hâve acquired a certain répu-
tation as politîcal economists, chiefly, it would seem,
through the pertinacity with which they hâve enforced
this formula, insisting on its sufficiency, not merely in
the domain of material interest, but over the whole
range of human life. If laissez-faire is to be taken
as the sum and substance of économie teaching, it
follows evidently enough that intervention by the
State to détermine the relative status of those holding
interests in the soil involves an économie heresy of
the deepest dye ; and it is not strange, therefore, that
those who accept or defer to this idea of the science
should, in attempting to deal with the Irish problem,
évince some susceptibility in référence to Political
Economy. In effect, it is very évident that two
courses only are open to economists of this hue.
Either they must hold by their maxims, and, doing
so, remit the solution of the Irish difficulty to civil
war and the arbitrament of armed force ; or, accepting
the plea of Ireland's exceptional condition, they must
be content to put aside their science for the nonce,
and legislate as if it were not. The latter is the
course that fortunately has for the most part been
taken. Economie laws — so it seems now to be agreed
upon by thinkers of this school — do not act except


VI.] POLI TIC AL ECONOMY AND LAND, 189

where circumstances are favourable, and hâve no
business in a country so unfortunately situated as
Ireland. Thîs is one view of the relation of Political
Economy to such questions as that presented by the
présent state of Ireland. In my opinion, it is a
radically false, and practically a most mischievous
view; one, therefore, against which, alike in the
interest of the peace of Ireland and for the crédit
of économie science, I am anxious with ail my energy
to protest. I deny that économie doctrine is summed
up in laisseZ'faire ; I contend that it has positive
resources, and is efficacious to build up as well as
to pull down. (^Sustained by some of the greatest
names — I will say by every name of the first rank
in Political Economy, from Turgot and Adam Smith
to Mill — I hold that the land of a country présents
conditions which separate it economically from the
great mass of the other objects of wealth,-^conditions
which, if they do not absolu tely and under ail circum-
stances impose upon the State the obligation of con-
trolling private enterprise in dealing with land, at least
explain why this control is in certain stages of social
progress indispensable, and why in fact it has been
constantly put in force, wherever public opinion or
custom has not been strong enough to do without it.
And not merely does économie science, as expounded
by its ablest teachers, dispose of à priori objections
to a policy of intervention with regard to land, it even
furnishes principles fitted to inform and guide such
a policy in a positive sensé. Far from being the
îrreconcilable foe, it is the natural ally of those who
engage in this course, at once justifying the principle


iço POLI TIC AL ECONOMY AND LAND. [essay

of theîr undertakîng, and lending itself as a minîster
to the élaboration of the constnictive design.

As regards the main ground on which the distinction
between land and other forms of wealth dépends,
little more needs be done than unfold the argument
contained in a few weighty sentences in which Mr.
Mill has summed up the case : — ** Moveable property
can be produced in indefinite quantîty, and he who
disposes as he likes of anything which, it can be fairly
argued, would not hâve existed but for him, does no
wrong to anyone, It is otherwise with regard to land,
a thing which no man made, which exists in limited
quantity, which was the original inheritance of ail
mankind, and which whoever appropriâtes keeps others
out of its possession. Such appropriation, when there
îs not enough left for ail, îs, at the first aspect, an
usurpation on the rights of other people." Where
wealth is provided by human industry, its having value
is the indispensable condition to its existence — to its
existence at least in greater quantity than suffices for
the producer s own requirements ; and the most ob-
vious means of rendering this condition efficacious as a
stimulus to industry is to recognize in the producer a
right of property in the thing he has produced. This,
I take it, is, economically speaking, the foundatîon on
which private property rests, and is, if I mistake not,
the most solid and important of ail the reasons for the
institution. It is one which applies to ail the products
of human industry — a category comprising (with some
unimportant exceptions) moveable wealth in every form,
as well as some form^ of immoveable wealth, but which
obviously can hâve no application to a commodity


VI.] POLITICAL ECONOMY AND LAND. 191

which "no man has made/'* It has been urged,
indeed, that this reasoning is not rigorous, and that
strict logic would require us to extend the description
given of land to every form of wealth, moveable as
well as immoveable, elaborated by the hand of industry
or stilllying crude in the.earth, since, in the last resort,
ail is traceable alike to materials furnished by nature —
which ** no man has made/' But this is to fall into the
error of the Physiocrates, and to confound wealth with
matter. The street and palace, the corn and cotton,
the goods that fill our warehouses, whatever be the
form împarted to them by industry, ail, no doubt,
dérive theîr material existence in the last resort from
things which no man has made : no man has made the
matter of which they are composed ; but, as wealth^
as things possessing exchange value, they exist, not
through the liberality of nature, but through the
labour and enterprise of man. According to the
économie formula, their value (omitting the, in most

* [To guard against misapprehensîon, it may be as well to state that
I do not recognize in this argument any proof of a "natural right" to
property in anything, even in that which our hands hâve just made. If it
is right it should bclong to us, it is not (if we go to the root of things)
because wc hâve made it, but because it is expédient that property so
acquired should belong to him who so acquires it. The distinction is ail-
important. If the product belonged to us in virtue of the fact of our
having produced it, that fact being past and unalterable, there could be
no limitation to our right in the absence of voluntary cession upon our
part, and we should in strict justice be entitled to prescribe its destination
to ail future âges. On the other hand, belonging to us only in virtue of
considérations of expediency, our right to the product will be limited by
the expediency from which our right springs. The distinction, thcn,
between landcd property and property in the products of industry is not
that in the latter case there is a "natural right" to property which does
not exist in the former, but that there are grounds of expediency for
recQgnizing the right in the one case which hâve no place in the other.]


192 POLITICAL ECONOMY AND LAND. [essay

instances, infinitésimal portion of it which covers rent)
corresponds to their cost of production. It is not so
with land, which possesses value, and often high value,
even in its crudest form ; with respect to which, there-
fore, whatever other reasons may be urged in favour
of giving it up to private ownership, that reason cannot
be urged which applies to the mass of the other objects
of wealth — namely, that this mode of proceeding forms
the natural and most effective means of encouraging
industry useful to man.

It will be said, however, that the fact in question
îs after ail pertinent to the controversy only while land
remains in a state of nature, and that my argument
ceases to hâve practical force as soon as the soil of
a country has been brought under cultivation and is
împroved by industry. This exception, I admit, is
to a certain extent well founded — only let us carefully
note to what extent. Of the labour employed on land,
ail that is directed to the raising of the immédiate
produce, and of which the results are realized in this
produce — that is to say, the great bulk of ail the
labour applied to the land of a country — finds its
natural rémunération in thèse results, in this immédiate
produce. Such labour, recompensed as it is by the
immédiate returns, and leaving the soil substantially as
it found it, cannot form a ground for rights of property
in the soil itself No more can labour employed, not
upon the cultivated soil at ail, but in extrinsic opéra-
tions — in making roads, bridges, harbours, in building
towns, and in gênerai in doing things which, directly
or indirectly, facilitate the disposai of agricultural
produce. It is very true indeed that labour thus


vi] POUTICAL ECONOMY AND LAND. 193

employed affects the value of land ; and there are
writers who hâve relied upon this fact, as identifying
in principle landed with other property, showing as
it does a connection between the value of land and
labour expended.* Unfortunately for the analogy
they seek to establish, the labour that is expended is
expended, not upon the land whose value it affects,
but upon other thîngs ; an J the property which results
accrues, not to those who exert or employ the labour,
but to other persons. The fact, instead of making
good the analogy, brin js into h/: irp contrast the things
compared. A baie c' cloth, a nvichine, a house, owes
its value to the labour expend'jd upon it, and belongs
to the person who expends or employs the labour : a
pièce of land owes its value, so far as its value is
affected by the causes I am now considering, not to
the labour expended upon it, but to that expended upon
something else — to the labour expended in making a
railroad, or building houses in an adjoining town; and
the value thus added to the land belongs, not to the
persons who hâve made the railway or built the houses,
but to some one who may not even hâve been aware
that thèse opérations were being carried on — nay, who
perhaps has exerte4 ail his efforts to prevent their
being carried on. How many landlords hâve had their
rent-rolls doubled by railways made in their despite ?t
In considering the above exception, therefore, we must

♦ [In particular Mr Carey, the American economist, and M. Hastiat,
who has borrowed his doctrine of rcnt from Mr. Carey. That doctrine
owes such plausibility as.it possesses entirely to overlooking the distinc-
tion hère pointed out.]

t [" Pourrait-on sérieusement considérer cette rente, qui est exclusive-
ment attribuée aux propriétaires, comme la rémunération d'avances et de
travaux auxquels les propriétaires n'ont contribué que pour une part, et


194 POLITICAL ECONOMY AISTD LAND, [essay

put aside as irrelevant to the question ail the industry
expended upon land of which the effects are limited to
the immédiate crop, as well as ail that employed in
the gênerai material development of the country, apart
from the cultivatiôn of the soil ; and we thus narrow
the argument to the effects of the labour directed to
the permanent improvement of the cultivated soil
itself — to rendering this a more efficient instrument
for productive purposes than nature gave it to us. So
far as this has been done — so far as the productive
qualities of the soil hâve been permanently improved
— so far, undoubtedly, the value added to the soil by
such opérations, and property in this value, when it
vests in the producer, rests economically upon the
same foundation as property in corn, or wine, or
houses. . The transformation of the Lincolnshire fens
and the la^oons of Holland into tracts of golden
wheat land has been referred to by Lord Dufferin :
the réclamation of bog and hill-side by Irish peasant
occupiers equally illustrâtes the principle ; and the
mention of this last instance will at once indicate what
a very short way the analogy in question will carry
those who hâve urged it towards the goal they seek.
On the assumption that property in land were mea-
sured by the value added to land by human labour —
to land as distinct from its products — and that this
property vested in the person who created the value,
landed property would, thus conditioned, be assimi-
lated in principle to property in other things. As

qui avait un but tout autre que celui d'accroître la valeur des propriétés
foncières." — Précis de la Science Économique et de ses principales Applica-
tions^ par A. E. Cherbuliez : 1862. An admirable treatise, too little known
in this country.]


VI.] POLITICAL ECO NO M Y AND LAND. 195

matters actually stand, I need scarcely say none of
thèse conditions is fulfilled. Property in land is
not measured by the value which industry has added
to the land, but is co-extensive with the whole value
of the commodity, from whatever causes arising ; while
the property in such results as human labour has
fixed in the soil does not pass to him whose ex-
ertions hâve produced them, but to him who happens
at the moment to be légal owner of the improved
ground. The fact, in short, does not advance us a
step towards the required assimilation : it merely
shows us this, that there is a portion of landed pro-
perty which man has made, which is strictly the
product of human industry ; which, therefore, would
rest on the same footing as property in other industrial
products, were only the laws of landed property some-
thing wholly différent from what they are.

It follows, then, that the distinction drawn between
property in land and property in other things, founded
on the fact that " no man made the land," by no means
terminâtes (as might at first be supposed) with land in
a State of nature : unless so far as the existing value
of land is due altogether to the industry expended
upon it — unless in such rare instances as the lagoons
of Holland or the fens of Lincolnshire, or réclama-
tions of waste land previously valueless — the distinc-
tion applies equally to ail lands, cultivated or wild.
Property in cultivated, no less than in wild land,
consists largely in value which no human industry
employed upon the land has created. The ordinary
économie considérations, therefore, which apply to and
justify property in other forms of wealth, do not aççUj

o 2


?


196 POLI TI CAL ECO NO M Y AND LAND. [essay

hère. There may be good reasons for the institution
of property in land — on that I am not for the moment
concerned to express an opinion — but they are not the
reasons which support the institution in its other forms ;
in particular, landed property is wanting in that foun-
datîon— in the judgment of most people, I apprehend,
the strongest of ail those on which property rests —
the expediency of securing the labourer in the fruit of
his toil.

The argument, as thus far conducted, carries me, I
admit, no further than to this négative conclusion. It
rebuts an à /avc^W objection to législative action in such
cases as Ireland présents, founded upon an assumed
analogy between land and other kinds of wealth. To
exhibit the positive reasons which explain and vindi-
cate a policy in the direction contemplated we must go
a step further, and bring into view the causes which
détermine the existence and growth of agricultural
rent, and, in relation to thèse causes, the position
occupied by the owners oi land on the one hand, and
by the gênerai community on the other.

The phenomenon of agricultural rent, let me briefly
explain, is, economically considered, of this nature : —
it consists of the existence in the returns to agricultural
industry of a value over and above what is sufficient
to replace the capital employed in agriculture with the
profit customary in the country. This surplus value
arises in this way. The qualitîes of différent soils
being différent, and the capital applied even to an area
of uniform fertility not being ail cqually productive —
farms differing besides in respect of their situation,
proximity to market, and other circumstances — it hap-


VI.] POLITICAL ECONOMY AND LAND. 197

pens that agricultural produce îs raised at var^'ing
costs ; but it is évident that when brought to common
markets ît will, quality for quality, command the same
prîce. Hence arises, or rather hence would arise in
the absence of rent, a vast différence in the profits
upon agricultural industry. The produce raised on the
best soils, or under other circumstances of exceptional
advantage, will bear a much larger proportion to the
outlay than that raised under less favourable circum-
stances ; but as it is clear that, in a community where
people engage in agriculture with a view to profit, even
this latter portion would need to carry such a price as
would gîve the producer the same profits which he
might obtain in other occupations (for otherwise he
-would. not engage in its production), it follows that ail
the produce exccpt this, sold as it is, quality for quality,
at the same price, must yield a profit over and above
the customary profit of the country. This surplus
profit is known to political economists as ** rent," and
we may henccforth conveniently distinguîsh it from
the rent actually paid by cultivators as " économie
rent." Arising in the manner described, " économie
rent" cannot properly be said to owe its existence to
either labourer, capitalist, or landlord. It is rather a
factitious value incident to the progress of society
under external physical conditions which necessitate
the raising of raw produce at différent costs.* This
being its essential nature, it is plain that, so long as
the rent paid by the cultivator of a farm does not
exceed what the amount of " économie rent " would
be, so long those engaged in agricultural industry will

♦ Sec Note at the end of this Ess.iy.


içS POLITICAL ECONOMY AND LAND. [essay

be on neither a better nor a worse footing than those
engaged in other occupations. The labourer will hâve
the ordinary wages, the capitalist the ordinary profit of
the country.* On the other hand, it js évident that if
the cultivator be required to pay more than thîs — if
the rent exacted from him encroach upon the domain
of wages and profits — he is so far placed at a dis-
advantage as compared with other producers, and is
deprived of the ordinary inducements to industry. It
thus becomes a question of capital importance, what
provision exists in the conditions of an industrial corn-
munity to prevent this resuit ; what security we hâve
that — the land of a country being once given up to
private spéculation — the limits set by ** économie rent "
shall, in the main, be observed in the actual rent
which landlords obtain. Does the principle of laissez-
faire-^ÛidX play of interests developed by compétition
which in manufacturing and trading opérations main-
tains the harmony of individual with gênerai interests
— does this suffice to secure, under ordinary circum-
stances, the same harmony in the transactions of which
land is the subject ? If it shall appear that it does not,
then, I think, a case will hâve been made out for the
interposition of some other agency — public opinion,
custom, or, failing thèse, direct State action — to supply
that which the principle of unrestricted compétition has
failed to supply — to secure an end which cannot but
be regarded as among the legitimate ends of govern-
ment — the coïncidence in an important field of human
activity of the individual with the gênerai welF-being.

♦ This position, to be accurate, needs a qualification which it will receive
further on. As it stands it is correct for the purposes of the argument.


VI.] POLITICAL ECONOMY AND LAND, 199

The influence which is ordînarily supposed to suffice
for this purpose is the compétition with agriculture of
other modes of investing capital. The farmer, we are
told, before taking a farm, will consider what rent he
can pay consistently with obtaining the usual returns
upon his industry ; if the landlord demands more than
is consistent with this, he will décline the bargain, and
embark his means in some other occupation. Rent, it
is said, can thus never rise for any length of time, or,
as a gênerai rule, above the level prescribed by the
économie conditions of the case. But, as has often
been pointed out, and as is obvious at the first blush,
this argument supposes a state of things which exists
in but few countries in the world, if indeed it exists,
or ever can exist, in any. It supposes ail farmers to
be capitalists — capitalists on a scale implying the pos-
session of disposable wealth in substantial amount;
and it supposes a variety of occupations other than
agriculture, soliciting investment, into any of which —
a landlord proving unreasonable — farmers can turn
their capital. The countries in which thèse conditions
are realized in the highest degree — rather, I should
say, in which the nearest approximation to their reali-
zation has been attained — are England and Scotland ;
and yet it is very évident that in England and Scot-
land the uncontrolled play of the principle of com-
pétition in dealing with land is not found sufficient for
keeping the relations of landlord and tenant in a
satisfactory state. If it be, then what is the meaning
of the current language upon this subjcct } of " good "
and " bad " applied to landlords in a sensé in which
the same epithets are never applied to traders in


200 POLITICAL ECOyOMY AND LAND. [essay

other ccmmodities than land ; of siich phrases as
*' what a good landlord would do " — this being
assumed to be something quite différent from what
hîs pecuniary interest would lead hîm to do ; of the
constant appeal to the morab'tîes of the landlord and
tenant relation ?* What is the meaning of landlords,
of English landlords, boasting that they do not let
their lands at a compétition rent ? f What, again,
is the mçanîng of courts of law deferring to local
customs, and overriding and modifying the strict
terms of ^ contract ? The whole state of feeling
and ail the current language in référence to this sub-
ject imply a deeply-felt conviction that the exigencies
of this relation are not, even in England and Scotland,
satisfactorily met by mère commercial motives, but
that public opinion and custom, custom in some in-
stances enforçed by law, are needed to supplément
and qualify the mère commercial rule.

In England and Scotland the interposition of thèse
agencîes to qualîfy the action of compétition in trans-
actions of which land is the subject is more or less
masked ; in almost ail other fully-peopled countries
it is open and undisguised. In Asia the land has
never, as a gênerai rule, been giyen up to private
spéculation : it has remained in the h^nds of the

* It will bc said, perhaps, that the phrase "good and bad employers*
is used with a similar connotation, Ifi général, I think the words mean
no more than persons cmploying largely or scantily at the market rates.
If they mean more than this, it is ^iieti ùsed by those who regard labour
as an exceptional cbmmddity, the rcmùncratibn of which should not be
left to the play of compétition. The exception thus proves the rule.

t [" Farms in England," says Lord Derby in a récent speech, " are
habitually let at a lower rent than they would fetch if competed for in
open market,"]


VI.] POLITICAL ECONOMY AND LAND, 2 o

State; and the condition of the agricultural popula-
tion has accordingly varied with the greater or less
degree of enlîghtenment or of sound moral feeling
existing in the rulers. Over Europe, wherever the
land is not owned by the cultivators, custom or law
very generally régulâtes or largely modifies the rela-
tions of landlord and tenant. The position of the
cultivators is one not determined by contract, but, to
a large extent, resting on status. In fact it would be
intolérable were it otherwise ; for nowhere in Europe,
England and Scotland excepted, has an approximation
ever been made towards a state of society in which
are fulfilled the conditions that alone render tolerable
the commercial treatment of land — in which the culti-
vators are capitalists, and a practical alternative to
rural occupation exists for large masses of the people.
The soil is over the greater portion of the inhabited
globe cultivated by very humble men, with very little
disposable wealth, and whose career is practîcally
marked out for them by irrésistible circumstances as
tillers of the ground. In a contest between vast
bodies of people so circumstanced and the owners
of the soil — between the purchasers without reserve,
constantly increasing in numbers, of an indispensable
commodity, and the monopolist dealers in that com-
modity — the negotiation could hâve but one issue,
that of transferring to the owners of the soil the whole
produce, minus what was sufficient to maintain in the
lowest State of existence the race of cultivators. This
is what has happened wherever the owners of the soil,
discarding ail considérations but those dictated by self-
interest, hâve really availed theraselves of the full


202 POL/TICAL ECONOMY AND LAND. [essay

strength of their position. It is what has happened
under rapacious governments in Asia ; it is what has
happened under rapacious landlords in Ireland ; it is
what now happens under the bourgeois proprietors of
Flanders ; * it is, in short, the inévitable resuit which
cannot but happen in the great majority of ail societies
now existing on earth where land is given up to be
dealt with on commercial principles unqualified by
public opinion, custom, or law.

It seems to me that I hâve made out my case, and
shown that the incidents attaching to land not only
separate it economically from weaith in other forms,
not only therefore rebut à priori objections to spécial
land législation founded on assumed économie ana-
logies, but — regard being had to the conditions of
industrial society actually prevailing in the world —
furnish positive reasons for this course, — for setting
limits, where public opinion and custom are not effica-
cious for the purpose, — for setting limits by law to the
free action of compétition in dealing with this com-
modity. So far as to the gênerai principle. I turn
now to consider its application to Ireland.

The discussions on the Irish question, whatever
différences of opinion they may hâve disclosed, hâve
at least made one point clear : no settlement of Irish
land can be effectuai which still leaves with landlords
the power of indefinitely raising rent I think it may
be said that amongst those who know the country,
and hâve seriously grappled with the problem, there
is a very gênerai agreement upon this point. The end

* See M. Lavcleycs Ess.iy, *'Cobden Club Essays," vol. i. pp. 255, 256.


vl] POLITICAL ECO no m y AND LAND. 203

may be approached by différent paths and realized
in différent forms. Compulsory leases, récognition
and extension of tenant-right, simple fixity of tenure,
are amongst the modes ; arbitration courts, the opinion
of officiai experts, the priées of produce, hâve been
suggested as the methods of procédure ; but in
whatever manner, through whatever machînery, the
plans that really promise to be effectuai involve at
bottom the principle of depriving landlords of the
power of raising rent — the principle, therefore, of
imposing on the State the obligation of saying what
a **fair rent" is. It is very évident that this niust
be so — that the landlord, with the power still left him
of raising his rent at will, could easily defeat the most
stringent provisions of the most apparently drastic
land code. Of what avail to the cultivator would be
a right of occupancy if the landlord can attach to that
right impossible conditions ? Of what advantage the
right of selling the good-will of his farm, if the rent
can be raised at the landlord's discrétion against the
incoming tenant ? Where would be the gain from
leases if the limits of the rent are not known ? The
régulation of rent is thus of the very essence of the
case ; it is felt to be so by ail who hâve really grasped
the problem ; and yet it will be found that this topic
has in gênerai been kept rather carefully in the back-
ground. The reason for this hesitancy it is not
difficult to guess. Few Englishmen can hear without
something of a cold tremor a proposai to fix rent by
law. And yet the conséquences are perhaps unfor-
tunate. For ail the reserve, it is felt that the efificacy
of the several compcting schcmes really dépends


204 POLITICAL ECONOMY AND LAND. [essay

in the last resort upon thîs condition. Oinne ignotum
pro tniri/ico. Imagination magnifies the difficulty
which is kept so carefully out of sight. Conscious
that it lies behind, people hesitate to venture into
what they expect will prove an économie culde-sac ;
or, if they must choose, the danger is they will choose
the scheme, not which is most eflficacious, nor even
which is least revolutionary, but which best contrîves
to veil this terrible bugbear. Now, if the fixing of
rent by State authority be really indispensable to an
effective settlement of this question, it is surely well
that the fact be frankly accepted. I hâve already
shown that Political Economy furnishes no presumption
against the propriety of this course. Let us now
see if it cannot practically help the solution.*

According to some who pass for authorities, Poli-
tical Economy has very little to say upon this subject
The worth of land is so much money as it will bring ;
and to seek a criterion for rent — nay, to attempt to
conceive rent at ail — otherwise than as it is determined
by the market, is in the opinion of thèse wise persons
a hopeless, if not an absurd undertaking. Had they
reflected that what they pronounce to be an impossi-
bility is, in point of fact, performed by not a few land-
lords in Ireland — by every landlord there who does not
let his lands on the admittedly ruinons principle of
compétition — they might hâve seen reason to distrust

* [Throughout the discussions on the Irish Land Act the Government
agiiin and again dcnied their intention to interfère with the landlord*s
power of raising his rent ; but nothing is more certain than that the Act
does interfère, though in a circuitous and indirect way, with this power ;
and further, that it owes whatever success it has achieved to the know-
ledgc shared alike by tenants and landlords that this power résides in the
new law.]


VI.] POLITICAL ECONOMY AND LAND. 205

the accuracy of scientific knowledge which led to
conclusions so flagrantly at variance with fact. Unless,
however, in what I hâve said above on the doctrine
of rent I hâve very grossly misrepresented économie
teaching, Political Economy is involved in no such
conflict with fact as the view in question would imply.
On the contrary, it recognizes in the returns from land
the existence of an élément — that which I hâve desi^r-
nated ** économie rent" — which is no other than the
"fair valuation rent*' of good landlords.* It not only
recognizes this élément, but can state the conditions
determining its amount and the laws of its growth.
The **fair valuation rent" of the popular pîatform
admits, in short, of being reduced to strictiy scientific
expression. The only point really debatable is as to
the means of practically determining the entity in
question in given cases. But, as I hâve just said,
the thing is in fact done every day, with sufficient
accuracy for practical purposes, by those who manage
Irish estâtes ; and that can scarcely be an insoluble
problem which scores of landlords and land-agents
solve every year.

In approaching the practical problem, there are two
parts that will need to be kept distinct— the first
starting of the new System, and the keepîng it going
after it lias becn started. Over and above the déter-
mination of a fair rent, the former will involve the
much more serions practical difficulty of appraising
tenants' past improvements. Some able writers hâve

• The " fair valuation rent " plus the returns on permanent improve-
ments of the soil, as will presently be more particularly explained post,
pp. 211, 212.


2o6 POLITICAL ECOISrOMY AISTD LAND. [essay

expressed themselves as if thîs latter difficulty might
be evaded by permitting to occupiers the sale of their
good-will. This would no doubt be so, were the
question of rent once settled; but with this still open,
the vaUie of the occupation right would be uncertain,
while the settlement of the rent plainly cannot take
place till the abatement in considération of tenants'
împrovements is known. Thus the necessity of an
independent valuation of tenants' improvements, wher-
ever landlord and tenant cannot themselves corne to
an agreement, is inhérent in the case. Questions of
this kind, involving, as they often will, disputes about
minute détails, can obviously only be satisfactorily
dealt with by authorities adjudicating in the localities,
and taking évidence in disputed cases from compétent
persons who hâve inspected the farms. Complicated
and délicate questions no doubt they will be, demand-
ing from those to whom the settlement is entrusted no
small amount* of patience, sagacity, and firmness ; but
questions not less complicated and délicate hâve already
been unravelled by Englishmen in India; and it is
hard to see why the same qualities of mînd which hâve
threaded their way through the mazes of H indu
customary law to results of order and substantial justice
should not be equal to dealing with the problem, ana-
logous, but less complicated, and less remote from
English modes of thought, presented by Irish land.

Thèse will be the initiatory difficulties ; but thèse
once surmounted, past improvements once ascertained,
existing rents once adjusted to existing circumstances,
there is no reason that the future working of the status
principle should not be brought under gênerai rules,


VI.] POLITICAL ECONOMY AND LAND, 207

and reduced to a system. Confinîng our attention to
rent, with whîch alone I am at présent concerned, the
problem, as I conceive it, will then lie in such an
adjustment of this élément from time to time as shall
satisfy and reconcile the tvvo foUowing conditions : —
(i) to secure to the cultivators, so long as they fulfil the
conditions of their tenure, the due reward of their
îndustry ; and (2) to do substantial justice to the reason-
able expectations of those who, on the faith of Acts of
Parliament and the past policy of the country, hâve
embarked their fortunes in Irish land.

And hère we must endeavour to attain to some
definite conception of what constitutes the due reward
of the îndustry of the cultivator. I hâve already
stated what I conceive to be the économie basis of
property — the right of the producer to the thing he
has produced. Accepting this as our principle, the
point to be determined will be the amount of the
produce which is properly referable to the industry of
the cultivator. To bring the question to a clear issue,
I will take an extrême, but not absolutely impossible,
case : I will suppose a farm which owes nothing of
any kind to the landlord*s outlay, on which the whole
capital, fixed and circulating, in buildings, fences,
manure, and wages, has been advanced by the cul-
tivator ; and I will suppose, further, that the soil of
this farm is of the worst quality compatible w^ith
profitable cultivation. Thèse conditions being sup-
posed, how much of the wealth produced from the
farm lepresents the due reward of the cultivators
exertions ? I answer, the whole ; and for this reason,
that less than the whole would, according to the terms


2o8 POLIT/CAL ECONOMY AND LAMD, [essay

of the hypothesis, leave the cultivator without that
ordinary rémunération which the conditions of indus-
trial production in the country warrant — without,
therefore, such an adéquate motive for his industry,
as cultivator of the soil, as in a healthy condition of
Society would exist. In short, my imaginary farm
represents the possible case in which, in conformity
with Ricardo's theory, land under a régime of capi-
talist farmers would yield no rent. Passing from this
peculiar case, I will vary the hypothesis by supposing
the farm to be no longer entirely composed of the
worst cultivable land, but to be, we will say, of average
natural fertility, while the other conditions remain as
before ; the entire capital and labour being supplied
by the farmer. Under such circumstances, — and still
recognizing the principle that the producer is entitled
to what he produces, — how far will the tenants' claim
to the produce extend ? Many people would say, on
my principle, to the whole, and would regard the
resuit as a rcductio ad absjirdum of the principle. But
I hold this conclusion to be unwarrantable.

In a Society constituted according to the principles
of modem industrial civilization, in which each member
enjoys the gênerai advantages arising from séparation
of employment and exchange, we are bound, I think,
in estimating the effect of a man's labour, to distinguish
the value from the commodity. In a state of patri-
archal isolation the goods which the labour of a family
produces are wholly unaffected by anything which
other people do, and therefore rîghtly belong in abso-
lute property to the family. But when the producer is
a member of an industrial society, the commodity he


VI.] POLIT/CAL ECONOMY AND LA AD. 209

makes may acquîre a value — a power of commanding
the labour and goods of other people — not by reason of
what he has donc, but through an importance gîven to
hîs industrîal function by the circumstances of Society.
Social circumstances may cause what he produces to
bear a higher value than his labour would naturally
give it, were others free to take advantage of the situa-
tion which Society has permitted him to occupy. He
may, in short, be the monopolist of a favoured situa-
tion, in the advantages arising from which, as they
are no part of the fruit of his toil, he can, on the prîn-
ciple on which we proceed, hâve no right to property.
Such advantages, so far as they are peculiar to the
situation, are not properly the resuit of his labours, but
of the social circumstances which hâve made the situa-
tion specially advantageous, and, on the principle we
hâve recognized, would belong not to him, but to
Society at large. Now the case I hâve put will be
found to fall within this reasoning. The corn and
roots and grass which constitute the agricultural
return, no doubt resuit, nature assisting, from the
labours of the cultivator ; but the value of thèse
things— the power they confer of commanding the re-
sources of society— is not measured by those labours,
but dépends on causes extrinsic to the cultivator s
opérations. The produce bears the prîce it does, not
în virtue of what the farmer has done, but because
society needs food — needs food in quantities which
can only be obtained by bringing lands under culti-
vation inferior to the best on his farm. That portion
of the value of his produce which îs due to thîs
circumstance is, so far as he is concemed, an accident ;

p


210 POLITICAL ECONOMY AND LAND. [kssay

something to which he lias no more rîght than anyone
else. As it does not resuit from hîs exertîons, so it
offers no encouragement to his îndustry ; his claim to
it is therefore wanting in that basis which constitutes
the justification of property from the économie point
of view. My conclusion, then, is that the due reward
of the cultivator's industry, even where he supplies
the entire labour and capital employed in production,
is not necessàrily co-extensive with the whole produce
of his farm. It is only so on the supposition that he
enjoys in raising it no exceptional advantages arising
out of his relations with other people. But where
he enjoys such exceptional advantages, — that is to
say, where he farms land better than the worst that
yields the current profit of the country, — the prin-
ciple of property, economically considered, is satisfied
by his retaining so much of the produce as shall
give him the average rémunération, leaving to
Society the remainder to be disposed of as it shall
think fit.

The other élément of the problem is to do substan-
tial justice to the reasonable expectations of the land-
lord. I say " reasonable " expectations, because if
the State is to be bound, not by what landlords might
reasonably expect when investing their money in land,
but by what they actually expected, or do now expect,
there is an end to the question ; nothing remains but
to recognize their right of property in its most absolute
sensé, and lend the power of the empire to its main-
tenance. Risu solvuntur tabula. But if this extrême
ground is not to be maintained, then the claims of the
landlord and tenant are reconciled, become in fact the


VI.] POLI TIC AL ECONOMY AND LAND. 211

corrélatives of each other ; for " reasonable " expec-
tations must be bounded by the considérations set by
public polîcy ; and public policy manifestly requires
that agriculture should enjoy the advantages common
to other industries in the country, — a resuit which îs
only attained when the ordinary rewards of industry
are left with the cultivators of the soil. So much as
to the nature of the problem.

Let me hère recall to the reader the nature of
** économie rent," and the causes to which it owes its
existence. It is that portion of the value of the
returns from land which remains after the outlay of
production has been replaced with customary profit ;
and its existence results from a permanent discrepancy
between the price of agricultural produce and the cost
of ' production of a large portion, the price being
regulated by the highest standard of cost, and being
consequently more than sufficient to remunerate the
outlay on ail produce raîsed at a cost less than this.
Thèse being the causes which détermine ** économie
rent," the amount will evidently be measured by the
extent of the discrepancy ; and consequently will vary,
the price of produce being given, with the productive-
ness of the soil, or, the productiveness of the soil
being given, with the price of produce. Now thèse
phenomena — the priées of agricultural produce and
the productiveness of the soil as indicated by its ave-
rage yield — are already made the subject of record
in our officiai statistical returns. Hère then we hâve
two available criteria which measure the growth of
" économie rent/' Let us see how far they will help
us in the solution we are in search of.

p 2


212 POLITICAL ECONOMY AND LAND. [essay

The definitîon of ** économie rent " as being so
much of the value of the produce as exceeds the due
rémunération of the cultivator's industry, might seem
to identify this élément with that which is properly, on
the principle of distribution just laid down, the land-
lords share; and the inference would be just, if we
were to include in the cultivator's industry, not merely
the capital and labour employed in raising the annual
crops, but also that employed in adding to the pro-
ductive qualities of the soil. But, as economists are
aware, when the results of labour and capital are once
made a part of the land itself, the returns upon them
are governed, not by the laws of profit, but by those
of rent, and become în practice inextricably blended
with the rent due to natural fertility ; while for the
same reason they are distinguished from the returns
which accrue on the ordinary annual outlay. In
describing, therefore, "économie rent" as the value
which remains in excess of what is needful for the due
rémunération of the cultivator s industry, it must be
understood that that industry only is spoken of which
is employed in the direct production of the annual
returns. Bearing this in mind, and havîng regard to
what the tenant may do in the way of permanent
improvement of the soil, it will be seen that the future
growth of the landlord's share will not be commen-
surate with the future growth of " économie rent," and
will not consequently follow the same indications.
"Economie rent" gîves us the maximum which the
landlord's share can possibly attain ; but in determining
the amount which in the actual circumstances is pro-
perly his, we must discriminate the causes on which


VI.] POLITICAL ECONOMY AND LAND. 213

the productiveness of agriculture dépends. What we
want, în short, îs some test which shall enable us to
detach from the gênerai value of the raw produce of
the country that portion of it which is the resuit of
causes external to the cultivator*s opérations. It îs
this portion only which society, in sanctioning private
property in land, has consented to give up to the
landlord.

Of the two criteria just mentioned — priées of pro-
duce and the productiveness of the soi! — the former,
agricultural priées,* plainly cannot be affected (at least
in a way to raise rent) by any conduct on the tenantes
part An advance of price of a durable kind can only
arise from one or both of two conditions — either
from a fall in the value of money, or from such an
augmentée demand for food as should necessitate for
its satisfaction the bringing under cultivation, without
contemporaneous improvement in the art of agriculture,
less fertile soils than any now cultivated. The latter con-
tingency is one exceedingly unlikely to occur ; but the
former is at the présent moment in process of realîzation,
and amongst the causes îmmediately affecting the
pecuniary interests of landlords is perhaps the most
important. Changes in the price of produce can thus
only occur as the resuit of causes operating through
society at large ; it follows that ail such changes
would indicate grounds for a corresponding change
in the pecuniary amount of the landlord's share. This

♦ [Which should of course include the price of ail that is raised from
the soil — butcher s méat for example. M. Laveleye mentions (Cobden Club
Essays, p. 245) that in Belgium, where rents havc doubled in thirty ycars,
the price of corn has hardly mcreased. The advance is due to othcr
products, and in a large degree to the advance in livc stock.]


214 POLITICAL ECONOMY AND LAND. [essay

has been generally recognized by the advocàtes of
fixity of tenure in Ireland, and may be taken as a
settled point in the controversy. It remains to con-
sider whether this criterion alone adequately satisfies
the justice of the case.

The only other cause which can affect économie
rent being the productiveness of the soil, Tt might
seem as if — unless where the landlord undertakes or
concurs with the tenant in undertaking improvements
of a permanent kind (cases which might easily be
provided for by spécial arrangements between the
parties) — I say it might seem, excluding such cases,
as if ail future increase of productiveness in the soil
must necessarily be the resuit of the action of the
tenant, and that consequently ail future augmentation
of économie rent, not referablc to an advance in priées,
should properly be assigned to him. But plausible
as this inference is, I think it may be shown to be
unwarrantable.

Let us consider the following case. Suppose some
country village, at présent of small account, to grow
into a town of some importance. It would naturally
soon be connected by railways with the chief industrial
centres of the country, and, as an inévitable consé-
quence, agricultural rent in the neighbourhood would
greatly rise : it would rise for two reasons. First,
because the local demand would raise the local priées,
and, thus far, the criterion of priées would assign the
increase to the landlord ; but it would rise, second ly,
because the proximity of a town and the facilities
offered by railway communication would greatly
cheapen production, The farmer would now be able


r


VI.] POLITICAL ECONOAfY AND LAND, 215

to procure hîs ploughs and harrows, his threshîng
and reaping machines, his artificial manures, hîs tiles
for draining, on greatly cheaper terms than before.
Farming at greater advantage, he would be able (and
that irrespective of any advance of price) to cultivate
soils which formerly it would not hâve paid to culti-
vate, and in gênerai to employ with profit a larger
capital on his farm.* The soil, without supposing any
change in its physical properties, would now yield a
larger return, and in effect become more productive.
The larger capital employed upon it would yield a
larger return, while of this increase a portion would
be obtained at a lower cost than the current priées
(without supposing any advance beyond what had
previously prevailed) would suffice to remunerate.
Thèse are conditions which imply an advance in
" économie rent " — an advance not due to priées, and
not indicated by priées ; and the question is, to what
cause is this resuit to be attributed — to the industry
of the tenant, or to the progress of society in the
locality ? The tenant is very evidently a co-operator
in the resuit. Without his capital and industry the
increased produce could not be obtained ; but that
capital and industry would find their due reward in
a corresponding augmentation of wages and profits ;
and the fact we hâve to deal with is the existence
of a new incrément over and above this due rému-
nération. It is with this part of the phenomenon only
that we are concerned ; and the point to be deter-
mined is its proper cause. Now it seems to me, for

♦ I hâve to thank my friend Professer Waley for having called my
attention to the importance of this aspect of the case.


2i6 POLIT/CAL ECONOMY AND LAND. [essay

the same reasons which apply to the phenomenon of
rent in other cases, that it is properly referable, not
to the action of the cultivator, but to the progress
of Society.

The principle involved in this illustration is of very
great importance, since it represents an influence that
is constantly operating in ail progressive countries,
and which cannot but operate in Ireland if it is not to
remain for ever in the slough of despond. Every
fresh invention in the arts of productive industry
applicable to agriculture, every extension of railway
communication, every new development of internai
trade, of external commerce, would be attended with
conséquences analogous in character to those which
happened in the rural environs of our imaginary town.
If Englishmen désire an illustration on a grand scale,
they hâve only to look around them. The immense
growth of rent in England and Scotland within a
century is wholly unexplained by any corresponding
rise in the price of produce, and is far from being
adequately explained by the improvements effected in
the permanent qualities of the soil, considérable as
thèse hâve been. The phenomenon only becomes
intelligible when we take account of the influence of
indus trial and commercial progress generally in cheap-
ening agricultural production. Hère, then, we find a
source of growth for " économie rent," born of circum-
stances extrinsic to the tenants sphère, and which
should, therefore, on the principle of discrimination we
hâve adopted, properly accrue to swell the landlord's
share. But augmentations of rent thus arising would
not be accompanied with any corresponding advançe,


VI.] POLITICAL ECONOMY AND LAND. 217

nor, necessarily, with any adVance at ail in agrîcul-
tural priées.

I am, therefore, brought to the conclusion that the
criterion of priées, taken sîmply, and without référence
to other cireumstanees, would fail to furnish an adé-
quate basis for the periodieal adjustment of rent.
Its adoption would, in effect, transfer to the tenant
that for vvhieh the State has permitted and eneouraged
the landlord to pay. I own the considérations just
addueed, not to mention others that might be urged
in the same sensé, go strongly — at least so it seems
to me — to show the fundamental impolicy of giving
up land to private spéculation. But that is not the
question hère. Land in Ireland has been given up
to be thus dealt with ; and, this being the poliey of
the country, those who hâve embarked their fortunes
in this venture are entitled to be protected in its
legitimate fruits.

There is, therefore, need of some criterion to supplé-
ment that of priées, some criterion whieh shall mark
the growth of rent proeeeding from causes not em-
braced by price, nor yet identieal with the opérations
of the tenant in improving the soil. In a word, we
want a test whieh shall discriminate so much of the
increased productiveness of the soil as arises from
enhanced efifieacy of the productive instrument itself,
from that increased productiveness whieh is, so to
speak, the agricultural expression of the progress of
the âge. After some considération I am inclined to
think that such a test may be found in the average
yield per acre of the staple produce of the soil over
the whole country — information supplied already by


2i8 POLITICAL ECONOMY AND LÂND. [essay

Irish agricultural statistîcs. This average productive-
ness would not, I think, in the main, be very seriously
affected by the permanent outlay of tenants, for it
must be remembered that a large portion of their
improvements are in the nature of réclamations of
waste land ; and such land will, from the nature of
the case, be the least productive in the country.
Thus the effect of tenants' improvements would
largely be to bring down the average level of pro-
ductiveness throughout Ireland. On the other hand,
there would be improvements, such as thorough
draining, effected in the better lands, which would
tend to raise the level. As between the two modes
of influence I strongly inclme to think that the
tendency to depress the level would prevail ; though
I do not believe the prépondérance in this direction
would be so great as seriously to affect the correctness
of the test.* This, however, might be matter for
investigation. But proceeding on the assumption
that, so far as tenants* improvements are concerned,
an equilibrium would resuit, any positive advance in
the average yield per acre over the country could
only be referred to causes of that gênerai kind which

* Applied to land under tillage in Ireland since 1S47 — the period from
which the présent System of statistics dates— the criterion shows a very
great décline in the productiveness of the soil ; but the explanation of
this is to be found in the fact of its being partially applicd. The newly-
reclaimed land is always, at least in the first instance, brought under
tillage ; and since 1847 a large portion of the soil of Ireland, as is well
known, has bcen converted from tillage to pasture ; the portion so con-
verted being, as a gênerai rule, land of superior quality. Thus the test,
confined to tillage land, would necessarily show a décline of productive-
ness. Were the returns from the grass lands, as measured by the increase
of stock, taken into account, I hâve no doubt the balance would be more
than redressed.


VI.] POLITICAL ECONOMY AND LAND. 219

are incident to the progress of socîety.* I would,
therefore, be disposed to combine this index with
that of prices in seeking a ruie for periodical readjust-
ments of rent. Not that I would propose to fix those
who might be charged with the duty of re-valuation
absolu tely to the results obtained from thèse data.
It would obviously be necessary, particularly at first,
to apply any gênerai rule with discrimination and
regard to local circumstances. But, I believe, the
data in question constitute the main éléments of a
Sound rule, the perfecting of which could only be
the work of time and expérience.

If thèse conclusions possess any value, they are
applicable to ail plans for the settlement of Ireland,
which partially or generally, directly or indirectly,
involve control by the State of the landlord s power
over rent But the plan which I hâve had mainly

* Those who hâve not firmly seized the doctrine of rent will probably
see in the proposai to deprive the cultivator of any portion of the results
accruing from the increased efficiency of his labours, a violation of
equality as between him and those engaged in other industrial occupa-
tions. I will ask those who think so to consider what would be the effect
of increased efficiency of industry, say in some manufacturing opération.
Would it not be a proportional fall in the price of the commodity
aflected by^he improvement ? Now if a similar fall took place under
simil^ circumstances in agriculture, the cultivator of the soil and the
manufacturer would be on a footing of equality. But, in point of fact,
this does not happcn ; and why ? Simply bccause, owing to the limited
extent of the better soils, compétition cannot be brought to bear in the
one case as in the other. Notwithstanding the immense progress made
in the art of agriculture, assisted as this has been by the action of free
trade, no serious impression hasbeen made on agricultural prices, while
the prices of manufacturcd arflUcs steadily fall as new improvements
corne into opération, The déduction, therefore, made from the cultivator's
profits of what is due to the exceptional position he occupies, so far
from disturbing equality as between him and those engaged in other
industries, is the necessary condition towards establishing equality.


220 POLITICAL ECONOMY AND LAND, [essay

în vîew in thîs spéculation is that which has been
propounded by Mr. George Campbell in hîs work on
Irish land.* In thîs work Mr. Campbell has unfolded
a scheme for the solution of the Irish problem incom-
parably (in the writer's judgment) the best deserving
of attention of any that hâve solicited public notice — a
scheme of which the characteristic and peculiar merits
are that, at the cost of a minimum of disturbance
to the actual machinery of Irish society, it would
accomplish what would be a real and effective
security of tenure for the Irish Tenant — would accom-
plish this in a manner suited to the ideas and habits
of the country, while combining with this end the
further considérable advantage of reserving for land-
lords under the new System a place and functîon în
the national ecônomy. Mr. Campbell's proposai pro-
ceeds upon the plan of distinguishing those parts
of the country, or more properly those farms, where
tenants now hold their land under definite contracts —
where, in effect, the English system of managing
property prevails — from those on which what may
be called the Irish practice is followed : that of
lettîng land from year to year, the task of pro-
vîding for the permanent requirements of the farm
being left to the occupier. With the state of things

* "The Irish Land," by George Campbell, Chief Commissioner of
the Central Provinces of India. (Triibner & Co.) 1869. [I hâve allô wed
my remarks on Mr. Campbell's proposai to remain, partly because the
principle of his scheme, though not its form or modes of procédure, has
been embodied in the Irish Land Act, and therefore the comments which
I hâve made on it are to a large cxtentapplicable to that measure ; and
partly also because the objections urged against Mr. CampbeH's plan
continue still to be urged against ail législation with similar aim, and
their réfutation consequently cannot yet be considered as out of date
or supcrfluous.]


VI.] POLITICÂL ECO NO M Y AND LAND. 221

existing on farms in the former category Mr. Campbçll
does not propose to interfère. But the tenants occu-
pying under the latter, conditions — a description whîch
it îs scarcely necessary to say covers the mass of the
cultivators of Ireland — he would place upon a new
footing, constituting them tenants under status, in
contradistinction to those in the other category who
would be regarded as tenants under contract. Once
upon the footing of status, no tenant would be evicted
except for defined reasons, of which the non-payment
of rent, subdivision or sub-letting without the land-
lords permission, are the chief; nor could his rent
be raised against him except with the sanction of an
authority representing the State. With a view to
the working of the System, Mr. Campbell proposes the
création of a court or commission with large discre-
tionary powers under an A et of Parliament prescribing
its duties and mode of procédure. It would be the
business of this court, in the first place, to settle
the présent position of tenants under status, to con-
sider their claims on the score of past outlay on their
farms, and, due allowance made for thèse, to setçle
the rent ; and it would fall to the same commission
to readjust the rent from time to time in conformity
with the changing circumstances of the country, either
at periodical re-valuations or on the requirement of
either landlord or tenant. By such provisions security
of tenure at fair rents would be realized for the cul-
tivators of Ireland. But ît is very far from Mr.
CampbeH's aï m that his plan should work as a cast-
iron System, stereotyping Irish society in its existing
form. He would permit, where circumstances rendered


2 22 POLITICAL ECONOAÏY AND LAND, [essay

this advîsable, the re-approprîatîon by landlords of
land in possession of tenants, but only on the terms
of compensating the dîspossessed tenant for hîs im-
provements, and indemnifying him for the inconve-
nience he sustained by dispossession ; while, subject
to the sanction of the landlord, the transference of
farms from tenant to tenant would take place wîth
perfect freedom. In provîding for transactions of this
kind, Mr. Campbell takes custom and Irish ideas
as his guide ; indeed, the récognition of custom as at
once the outcome of history and the surest starting-
point of reform may be said to be the idée mère of
his whole scheme. He, therefore, naturally has re-
course to the tenant-right of Ulster, in the legalization
and extension of which he finds the practical solution
of the thorny question of compensation for tenant's
improvements. By a most ingenious argument Mr.
Campbell shows that, on any view of the case which
does not amount to practical confiscation of the tenant s
înterests, this is what compensation in the case of small
farmers, as those under status would almost unîver-
sally be, must come to. In this opinion those who
look closely into the matter will be apt to agrée with
Mr. Campbell. When we hâve to deal with improve- ^
ments on a substantial scale, carried on upon farms
of considérable extent, there would be little practical
difficulty in arriving at a tolerably correct estimate
of their value ; but when the problem is to ascertain
the worth of a thatched shed, or a gateway, or of a
rood of reclaimed bog in a farm of ten acres, there is
really no other criterion possible than this — how much
will another tenant give for them ?


VI.] POLITICAL ECONOMY AND LAND, 223

I venture to offer two suggestions in the way of
corollary to Mr. Campbeirs plan. It would only be in
keeping with the whole principle of his scheme, that,
where the State has once charged itself with deter-
mining the tenants' rent, no higher rent than that
named by the State should be recoverable in a court
of law. A provision to this effect would effectually
prevent sub-letting, at least in the usual form of
that practice. The occupier, it is true, could sell his
rîght of occupancy ; and it will no doubt be urged
against Mr. Camphclls plan that the sum paid for this
by the incoming tenant would, in effect, amount to an
increased rent — the objector will doubtless add, on
the authority of Adam Smith and Lord Dufferin —
of the worst kind. The value of this objection I
shall presently consider ; but, before doing so, let
me State my second suggestion, which is that the
occupancy right should only be disposable to an in-
coming tenant I believe that this restriction would
be attended with very bénéficiai conséquences. It
would, in the first place, render impossible the mort-
gaging of the good-will ; and sccondly, it would in-
directly, but I believe vcry effectually, restrain
compétition for land within healthy limits. The in-
tending purchaser of the occupancy of a farm might,
of course, still raise the money for the purchase of the
tenant-right on his personal crédit This is a use of
his position and circumstances with which it would be
neither possible nor proper to interfère ; but, in order
to obtain the farm, one of two things he must hâve —
either cash to pay for the good-will, or crédit to induce
some capitalist to lend him the money necessary for'


2 24 POLITICAL ECONOMY AND LAND. [essay

that purpose ; either, that is to say, he must already be
the master of realîzed property, or hîs character must
be such as to make those who know him believe that
he is likely to be a prosperous man. The restriction
of compétition for land to persons satisfying thèse con-
ditions would render absolutely impossible, under the
System of status-tenancy, anything at ail resembling,
or in any respect analogous to, the impossible rents
promised by pauper peasants when the whole popula-
tion enter the list of compétition.

It appears then that, even conceding the argument
that the purchase of the occupancy right would for the
incoming tenant be équivalent to an increase of rent,
still this increase — supposing the practîce limited by
the restriction I hâve indicated — would fall greatly
short of what rents may attain under the présent
ré^me. But then we are told that the vice of the
practîce lies in the form, that the sale of the good-will
is in effect a fine paid on entry, and that this has been
condemned by Adam Smith. The use so constantly
made of Adam Smith's authority in this connection,
I must plainly say, does him flagrant injustice — in-
justice which it is difficult to conceive how anyone
should commit who had really studied his excellent
remarks on the tenure of land. The ruling thought of
ail that he has said on this subject is the suprême
importance of security of tenure for the tenant, as the
essential foundatîon and mainspring of ail agrîcultural
progress. He eulogizes leases, and, failing leases,
customs, or whatever conduces to realizing this indis-
pensable condition. " It is those laws and customs/'
he tells us, *' which hâve perhaps contributed more to


VI.] POLITICAL ECONOMY AND LAND. J25

the présent grandeur of England than ail theîr boasted
régulations of commerce taken together." What he
says upon the subject of fines îs whoUy irrelevant to
the issue in the présent case. He is comparing leases
at full rent with leases in which a portion of the rent
îs fined down — that is to say, alternatives either of
which offers equal security to the tenant — -and his
décision is in favour of that one in which no fine
is paid. What relevancy has a judgment on such
a point to the question involved in the tenant-right
controversy, where the alternative lies, not between
différent modes of attaining equal security, but between
absolute security obtained through a fine accompanied
by a moderate rent, and no security accompanied by a
high rent without a fine ? H ad the issue in the Irish
controversy really come under Adam Smith's review,
no one, who knows anything of the spirit pervading
the ** Wealth of Nations," can doubt what his décision
would hâve been. At ail events, his authority would
need to be greater even than it is to outweigh the
overwhelming force of the argument from Irish
expérience. The universal testimony borne to the
prosperity of the tenant farmers in Ireland, wherever
the custom of Ulstef prevails — a prosperity ail the
more conspicuous from its contrast with the gênerai
wretchedness of the same classes in other parts of
the country, — and the almost equally universal récog-
nition of the connection between the System and
the results, are facts which no statesman can overlook.
Mr. Caird, with ail his strong and undisguised pre-
possessions in favour of Scotch farming, was unable
to resist the évidence; and the Times Commissioner,

Q


226 POLTTICAL ECONOMY AND LAND, [essay

în hîs sîngularly impartial descriptions wrîtten from
direct observation, has recently confirmed the most
favourable accounts of the System. In présence of
such facts it is idle to talk of Adam Smith, or any
other authority. Ail that has been said, or that can
be said, against the practice of tenant-right really
amounts to this — that the incoming tenant would be
better off if he could get the farm with the advantages
of the custom while keeping the money which is the
price of those advantages. No doubt he would ; and
so, and in a still greater degree, would be the pur-
chaser of a peasant property if he had not to pay
the purchase - money ; and yet peasant proprietors,
working at this disadvantage, hâve contrived notwith-
standing to cultivate their farms to some purpose.
In neither case can a man spend his capital and hâve
his capital ; but he may in cither case hâve that which
is worth to him more than capital — the peace of mind
that is born of security, the enterprise inspired by
the prospect of reaping where he has sown.

[There is a mode of reasoning on this question
which, if it is not positively fallacious, at least suggests
a fallacy against which it may be well to insert a
warning hère. It is said * that a farmer at a full rent
will, with a given capital, be able to work a larger farm
than he would were he to employ a portion of his
capital in purchasing his farm or in fining down the
rent; and that, havîng regard to the existing price of
land, he will, by adopting the former course, dérive a
larger income from his whole capital. The fact fnay

♦ See Judge Longfield's Essay on * The Tenure of Land in Ireland,'
" Cobden Club Essays," vol. i.


VI.] POLITICAL ECONOMY AND LAND. 227

be so ; but, înasmuch as there are farmers, nevertheless,
who prefer a smaller farm whîch is their own property
to a larger one at a full rent, this only shows that the
position of proprîetor is regarded by some as suffi-
ciently advantageous to compensate for a certain loss
on annual revenue. Of this, affecting as it does the
person concerned only, farmers may be allowed to be
themselves the best judges ; and true policy will lie in
removing ail obstacles to their making the freest pos-
sible choice. But the line of reasonîng to which I
hâve referred implies that there is more than this in
the matter ; that, looking at the question from the
point of view of public interest, an économie gain
results from the farmer's remaining a tenant at a full
rent, an économie loss from his becomîng a proprietor.
What is suggested is that the capital of the community
available for agriculture is diminished by the adoption
of the latter course, and hère it is that the fallacy
intrudes itself The farmer who purchases his farm no
doubt reduces thereby the amount of his own capital
available for cultivation, but he does not curtail in any
degree the capital of the community applicable for this
purpose ; for the purchase-money of his farm, in pass-
ing from his hands, at once becomes in the hands of
the vendor a fund disposable for productive purposes.
He will seek to dérive an interest from it, and he
can do this in no other way than by investing it. One,
and not an improbable mode of investment, would
be to lend it on mortgage, in which way, it is conceiv-
able, the same capital might come back to the hands
of the very farmer who had parted with it. It will
perhaps be said that the farmer proprietor would be

f> 2


2 28 POLITICAL ECONOMY AND LAND. [essay

thus brought under a rent în another form ; but there
would be this distinction between his position now and
formerly ; that, whereas he was formerly a tenant pay-
ing rent and subject to ail the insecurity of that posi-
tion, he is now an owner subject to a fixed rent-charge.
I hâve supposed the capital rendered disposable by
the farmer's purchase to be invested on mortgage ;
but it is of no conséquence what supposition we make
with regard to the mode of investment. Suppose it
were invested in the Funds, it would still be disposable
în the hands of the vendor of stock, and, however it
might for a time pass from hand to hand, must ulti-
mately, if it is to yield a revenue, find its way to the
sustenance of some branch of production — doubtless
to the sustenance of whatever branch had most need
of it. If agriculture were that branch, then, in the
absence of artificial obstacles, to the support of agri-
culture it would go. If it did not go back to agri-
culture this would only be because the interests of
the community were better served by a différent dis-
position of the fund.]

Perhaps the greatest danger of the présent moment
is that on which so much English législation has made
shipwreck — the danger that our statesmen, meaning
well but embarrassed by their position, will be drawn
into the middle course of a weak compromise — a
compromise which will solve nothing, but embroil
everything. The plan recommended by Mr. Caird,
a high authority in practical agriculture, fulfils in a
remarkable manner the conditions of such a settle-
ment. The inducements which he holds out to land-
lords to grant leases would be simply inappréciable.


VI.] POLIT/CAL ECO NO M Y AND LAND. 229

when weîghed agaînst the reasons which would stîll
remaîn, from their point of view, for refusing them ;
and what would be the value of leases without some
guarantee against an indefinîte rise of rent ? But
while his plan would wholly fail to give a sensé of
security to the tenant, it would be very effectuai in
hampering the action of the landlord. What landlord
would care to take an active part in working his estate
when he could only do so by passing his transactions
with his tenants through the ordeal of public advertise-
ment in leading newspapers, and waiting for the
expiration of a five years' notice to quit before .gettîng
possession of his land ? Of two things, one. The
material development of the country may, on plau-
sible grounds, be entrusted to the initiative either of
landlord or of tenant. There is something to be
said for both plans. The landlord has naturally the
advantage of the tenant-farmer — at least of the Irish
tenant-farmer" as he now exists— in enterprise and
command of capital. On the other hand, enterprise
and capital mày, as others think, be developed in
a far higher degree by giving real security to the
tenant. But a System for which there is absolutely
nothing to be sâid is that which would fail to evoke
either of thèse motive powers; which would shackle
the landlord without freeing the tenant, and under a
net of inducements and counter-inducements, of checks
and counter-checks, would stifle ail ^igorous life.
Such, I venture to think, would be the effect of
the solution of the Irish problèm recommended by
Mr. Caird. But such a fesiilt could scarcely prove
définitive. Things hâve gone toc far for that The


230 POUTICAL ECONOMY AND LAND, [essay

attempt to accomplish it would, however, immensely
aggravate ail the dangerous éléments of the situation,
and probably in the end involve us in extrême courses,
which might now be avoided.


NOTE TO p. 197.

[This is what Mr. Mill has since, in the programme of the Land Tenure
Rcform Association, designated " the unearned increase " from land, ail
future additions to which he proposes on certain conditions to appropriate
to the State, The discussions which hâve arisen on this proposai of
Mr. MilPs hâve, by the flagrant weakness of the arguments employed
against it, brought into strong light the essential soundness of Mr. MilFs
position. Thus,' one of the principal of those arguments is derived
from a supposed analogy between Land and Stocks — €.g, the public funds.
It is urged that the public funds, like land, rise in value with the progress
of Society ; that the advarice in their price which has occurred since they
were first created has been "unearned" by the fundholder; and that
therefore the same princi pie which applies to the "unearned increase"
from land would require us to mulet the fundholder of this portion of his
property. The argument is founded upon a gross confusion, which
perhaps it may be well to clear up. A rise in the price of stocks, where
it is due to the progress of society, represents a larger capitalized value
of the same annual sum ; it merely indicates a change in the relation of
capital to interest But land rises in value, not merely from this cause,
but also because rent, the annual return, rises. A rise in the price of
stocks, so far as it is due to the progpress of society, would be shared by
ail stocks in an equal degree. The stockholder, consequently, unless so
far as the advance gives him greater confidence in the stability of his
property, dérives no advantage from the change. His income remains as
before. He may indeed sell it for a higher price ; but, on reinvesting the
price, he would hâve to pay proportionally higher for whatever productive
fund he chose to buy. To deprive stockholders of the increase in the
capitalized value of their stock would not be to keep their means of living
at the same point at which it stood before the advance in price took
place, but to reduce it below that point just in proportion to the amount
abstracted. In other words, the récognition of their right to ail increase
in the capitalized value of their income is the condition of leaving
that income unimpaired. The case of land is totally différent. The
capitalized value of a given rent rises with the progress of society
precisely as the price of stocks rises. So far the landlord stands on
the same footing with the fundholder. But then his rent rises also; and
this makes ail the différence. "^Tiile the fundholder*s income remains the
same as society progresses, the landlord's steadily rises : his means of


VI.] POLITICAL ECONOMY AND LAND. 231

living steadily increarse. The capitalizcd value of his estate consequently
increases not €\vci^\y pari passu with the increase in the price of stock,
that is to say with the increase in the capitalized value of a given yearly
sum, but in this proportion compounded with the increase in his annual
rents. Now, it is to the increased value of land incident to the increase
of annual rent, and to this alone, that Mr. Mill's proposai applies.

Another argument relied upon by Mr. MilFs opponents is the analogy to
the case of land supposed to be furnished by the advance in the price of
works of art and objects of vertu which also occurs with the progress of
Society. But surely the case must be felt to be desperate when such an
argument is seriously put forward. Conceding the analogy to be perfect,
is it not sufficicnt to reply de mittimis non curât Uxf Spécial législation
on such a subject as the land of a country may surely be permissible
where it would not be worth the legislator's while to regulate by spécial
enactment the irregular gains of a few picture-dealers. But in truth the
cases are not analogous. In the first place picture coUectors perform a
useful social function by cultivating the public taste in the direction of art ;
the increase in the value of their property is therefore not altogether
" imeamed." And, secondly, pictures differ from land in this, that they
do not as a ruU rise in value with the progress of society. A few rise in
value, and a great many more fall. The picture-dealer takes his chance :
and it would be gross injustice, while compelling him to bear his losses,
to compel him also to relinquish the occasional gains which form their
natural compensation.]


VIL

POLITICAL ECONOMY AND
LAISSEZ-FAIRE.»

Great Britain, if not the birthplace of Political
Economy, has at least been its early home, as well
as the scène of the most signal triumphs of its man-
hood. Every great step in the progress of économie
science (I do not thînk an important exception can be
named) has been won by English thinkers ; and while
we hâve led the van in économie spéculation, we hâve
also been the first to apply wîth boldness our théories
to practice. Our foreign trade, our colonial policy,,
our poor-laws, our fiscal System, each has in tum been
reconstructed from the foundation upwards under the
inspiration of économie ideas ; and the population and
the commerce of the country, responding to the im-
pulse given by the new prînciples operatîhg through
those changes, hâve within a century multiplied them-
selves manifold. This London, in the mîdst of which
we find ourselves, what îs it but a mighty monument
of économie achievement ? — the greatest practical illus-

* An Introductory Lecture delivered in University Collège, November
J870.


EssAYvii.] POLITICAL ECONOMY, ETC. 233

tration which the world has seen of the potent influ-
ence of those principles which it is the business of the
political economist to expound ? In vîew of such facts,
one might expect that, if there was on the globe a spot
where a keen interest would be felt in the study of
Political Economy — where the science which unfolds
the laws of industry and commerce would be held in
honour — it would be London. Now I wish to call
your attention to a singular fact, for singular it surely
is. In this vast London, so energetic, so enterprising,
so enlightened ; in this great centre of the world's
commerce ; in this metropolis of the country which
has produced(Adam Smith, Ricardo, Malthus, Mill ^
which has produced, again,^itt and Huskisson, Peel,
Cobden and Gladstone j)Qn this focus of économie
activity and power ; the systematic study of économie
science is almost without practical récognition^ I wish
to be accurate, and I therefore say ** almost," and
I use the qualification " practical " ; for in London
there are, I believe, three chairs from which Political
Economy, or matter connected with Political Economy,
is taught — two in King's Collège and one hère. But
what is the number of students attraçted from this
great population to study Political Economy under
those chairs ? I hâve no exact statistics upon the
point, and the subject is perhaps of too délicate a
nature to warrant me in going into détails. But I
am certainly not overstating the case when I say,
that the aggregate number of students attending ail
the public économie schools in London falls very
much sh ort of a h undred indiv iduals — one hundred
individuals, that is to say, out of a population of


234 POLITICAL ECONOMY [essav

three millions ! I wish I could say that \ve in this
collège could claim one-half, or even a quarter, of
this not very overwhelming grand total.

I do not know whether it is necessary to go into
comparîsons in order to point the significance of thèse
figures ; but I will venture to mention one other case,
as it has come under my own personal observation.
In the not vcry flourishing town of Gahvay, with
which I hâve had till latcly an officiai connection,
there is a chair of Political Economy. The number
of students who during my time attended the lectures
from that chair varied ordinarily from six to ten
persons. Now, if \ve compare the proportion which
thèse numbers bear to the population from which
they were drawn with the proportion which, let us
say, the sixty or one hundred students attendîng
London chairs bear to the population of this metro-
polîs, and if we take this proportion as an indication
of the interest felt in économie studies in the two
places, we arrive at this rather surprising resuit — that
in that remote, and I regret to say decaying^: Irish
town, the degree of interest taken in économie science
is many times, perhaps five or six times, greater than
hère — greater, that is to say, in the ** ultima ThuW of .
Connaught than in this metropolis of modem industrial
civilization.

Now it seems to me that this is a very remarkable
fact, and one that deserves the attention of those who,
in this country, hâve charged themselves with this
branch of spéculation. I hâve called attention to it, -
partly in the hope that those who hâve better oppor-
tunities of acquainting themselves with the opinions


vil.] AND LAISSEZ.FA1KE. 235 ' -^

of the London public than I hâve may take it into
considération, and partly with a view to brîng under
your notice such a partial explanation of the pheno-
menon as occurs to myself. Let me say hère, in
passing, that there is one explanation of the fact,
which to many people will seem the sufficient and
obvions one, which, nevertheless, I cannot allow to
be either a satisfactory or a complète account of the
matter. I shall possîbly be told that the reason the ;
people of London are not attracted to the lectures
delivered from its économie chairs is simply that those
lectures are not attractive ; that, in short, the fault
lies, not with the people of London, but with those
who fail to set Political Economy before them in an
înteresting light. The facts may be as this explanation
suggests, at least I hâve no désire to deny them, so far
as my own particular share in the transaction is con-
cerned : but I submit that the allégation fails to meet
the point. The professors of Political Economy in /
London are not the creators, but the créatures, not the
cause, but the effect, of the requirements of the people
of London with respect to this subject. I do not deny
that there îs a^ connection between the mode in which
a subject îs taught and the interest taken in it, that the
public taste may be sensibly influenced by the quality
of those who occupy the seats of learnirig in a country.
<(But, concedin^ this, I still hold that the public cannot
escape from its responsîbilities towards science and
learning by sheltering itself under an alleged incompe-
tency on the part of those to whcAn it has intrusted
their interests. \ If the teachers of Political Economy
in London are not up to the mark, why does not


^'^.


f


/


236 POLITICAL ECONOMY [essay

London supply itself with better ? Why is London
content to hâve Politîcal Economy înadequately taught?
And thus I am brought back to the fact which I hâve
proposed for considération : that, in this great centre
of English commercial and political life, Political
Economy, the one science which is pre-eminently an
English product, which has been built up by English
thinkers, and applied, with most striking effect, by
English statesmen, is, as a branch of libéral éducation,
ail but practically ignored.

<Xhere are those who would probably explaîn this
singular state of things by référence to a supposed
distaste or inaptitude for abstract spéculation character-
istic of the average English mind; I will not under-
take to say that there may not be some slender basis
of truth in this view. Englishmen are' apt to value
themselves on being a practical people ; and, as every
excellence is said to hâve its compensating defect, it
is conceivable that this English virtue may hâve a ten-
dency to run to excess, and that it may hâve îssued
in a mental habit unfavourable to the cultivation of
économie science, which, it must be admitted, shares
the attributes common to ail scientific knowledge.
Certainly, the very slender attention bestowed in
London on some other branches of philosophical spé-
culation — I may instance mental philosophy and juris-
prudence — affords some countenance to this view.
Still, I cannot admit this to be a complète account of
the matter. English distaste for abstract spéculation,
assuming it to exist, îs, at ail events, not so strong
that it may not be overcome by the prospect of prac-
tical advantage. What do we see ift the Universitîes ?


VII.] AND LAISSEZ'FAIRE. 237

Branches of leaming of the most abstract character,
others, if not abstract, at ail events as far removed
as learning can conceivably be from utîlîtarian ends,
but nevertheless pursued wîth extraordinary eagerness.
And why ? For no other reason, that I know of,
than because certain large pecuniary prizes are attached
to success in them. But this is perhaps a somewhat
coarse illustration of the facility with which the
practical English mind may be drawn contrary to
îts natural bent./More credîtable évidence may be
found in the large and încreasing attention now given
to the physical sciences ; for physical science, though
deriving its data from particular facts, nevertheless, as
science, consists, not in statements regarding particular
facts, buf in abstract doctrines^ What is a law of
nature but a relation between phenomena considered '
apart from ail particular exemplifications of the rela-
tion ?-^that is to say, an abstract doctrine. Yet this
has not prevented the keenest possible pursuit of
physical knowledge. In short, let it once be made
clear that abstract spéculation is not barre n spécula tion,
that scientific doctrines hâve a real bearing on the
practical concems of life — ^and by practical concerns
of life I do not mean simply making money, but ail that
concerns human beings in shaping their conduct in the
world — let this only be made clear, and I think we hâve
no reason to suppose that a faîr proportion of the com-
munity will not be drawn to their cultivation. And
this brings me to what, it seems to me is the true
explanation, or at least one principal cause, of that
indifférence towards économie studies of which the
limited attention giveh'to them in the seats of learning


238 POLI TIC AL ECONOMY [essay

în London affords so remarkable an indication. I
seem to observe în the literature and social discussions
of the day signs of a belief that Political Economy
has ceased to be a fruîtful spéculation. Nay, I fear
I must go further, and admit that it is even regarded
by some energetîc minds in this country as even
worse than unfruitful — as obstructive, a positive hin-
drance in the path of useful reform. I am anxious to
State, as accurately as I can, what I understand to
be the précise nature of those injurions prepossessîons.
Before attempting to prescribe remédies, ît will be
well to make a careful diagnosis of the disease.

Few persons of décent éducation will now deny
that vast benefits hâve accrued to the world, and in
an especial degree to this country, from the study of
économie science. I hâve already referred to the great
^ practical reforms that hâve been accorn^lished in obé-
dience to its teaching in the principal qepîirtments of
our public life. And over and above such tangible
achievements, candid people will acknowledge that its
influence has been felt throughout the whole range of
our législative and administrative Systems, and with
largely bénéficiai cffect. ^Ve are ail now very familiar
with such commonplaces as that individuals are the
best judges of their own înterests ; that monopoliâs
should not be permitted in trade ; that contracts
should be free ; that taxation should be equal, and
should be directed to the maintenance of the revenue,
not to the guidance of commerce ; and the like^
Thèse seem now to be very trite maxims, but a
century ago they were paradoxes ; and, în truth, they
represent nothing less than a révolution in the modes


VII.] AND LAISSEZ-FAIRE. 239

of governîng and admînîsterîng the country, the resuit
of the new modes of thought întroduced by économie
study. Well, the benefits conferred by économie
science being thus évident and palpable, it may seem
surprising that opinions such as I hâve just hinted at
should obtain, and obtain not merely amongst the
ignorant, but among well-informed and instructed
people. How are we to reconcile the récognition
which must be accorded to the past achievements of
this science with the beliefs in its présent unfruitfulness,
still more with the opinion held by some of our more
advanced social thinkers, that it has become an obstacle
in the forvvard path of reform ? ^

I put the question thus broadly, because it îs only

when thèse impressions are brought into juxtaposition

with the admitted facts of the case that the attitude

of a large portion of the educated classes towards this

study can be ^oftderstood. It is too easily assumed by

economists'that, the past services o( their science once

established, its importance asf! à! branch of modem

éducation must be forthwith acknowledged. But this

by no means folio ws. Not a few schemes of doctrine

may be named which hâve been useful in their time,

but which, having served their purpose, hâve ceased to

possess interest for those who désire to take part in

the working life of the world ; nay, the burthen of

which on the memory might even be felt by such as

an encumbrance and a drag. The rules of chivalry

once served a very useful purpose. The doctrines of

the scholastic logic for many centuries greatly aided

the progress of the spéculative intellect. Numerous

Systems of dogmatic theology, now extinct or becoming


240 POLITICAL ECO NOM Y [essay

so, have for a tîme served as scaffoldîng for moral
îdeas more or less valuable. The theory of the social
contract, fancîful and barren as it may now seem to us,
was potent among the active forces which produced
the great întellectual ferment of the last century in
France. Yet a knowledge of ail or of any of thèse
phases of thought would scarcely be consîdered as an
indispensable part of the mental equipment of an
educated man in the présent day. Now this considéra-
tion may help us to understand the attitude taken
towards Political Economy by a large number of in-
structed and actîve-minded people. It is not denied
that the science has done some' good;'^only it is
thought that its task is pretty well • fulfilled. The
process of abolishing monopolies and removing îm-
pèdiments to industry is thought to have well-nigh
reached its natural termination ; or, if there is work to
be done, then it is held to be work of a différent
order from most of that which has been hitherto
accomplîshed — work, in the carryîng out of which the

^ maxims of économie science not only cannot help us,
but may even prove an obstruction. Thèse opinions,
it is évident, mïïst connect themselves with the îdea
entertained of économie science by thosig who hold
them ; and this brings me to what I regard as the.
root of the matter — the noticn prevaîling among the
great majority of educated people respecting the nature

\) and functîons of Political Economy.

<^hat notion, I imagine, takes somewhat this shape.
Political Economy has of course to do with wealth ; so
far there is no question in dispute. But what is th
problem concerning wealth which it undertakes to


VII.] AND LAISSEZ'FAIRE. 241

solve? I thînk the prevaîling notion îs that ît under;
takes to show that wealth may be most rapidly
accumulated and most fairly distribjited— rthat is to
say, that human well-beîng may oeimost] effectually
promoted — by the simple process ot leavîng people to
themselves; leavîng îadividuals, that is to say, to
follow the promptirigs of self-intérest unrestrained
either by the State or' by publie opinion, so long as
they abstaîn from force and fraud. This is the doctrine
^commonly known as laissez- faire ; and, accordingly,
Political Economy is, I think, very generally regarded
as a sort of scientific rendering of this maxim, — a
vindication of freedom of industrial enterprise and of
contract, as the one and sufficient solution of ail
industrial problems./Such, I apprehend, is the current
notion ; and it must be owned that ît falls in very well
wîth most of what is known respecting the practical
applications of the science. How far this view is well
founded I shall presently examine ; but I wish first to
show how it has produced that indifférence towards the
study amongst a large proportion of educated people,
and that hostility on the part of a few, to which I
hâve in fhc preccding remarks called your attention.

You will observe, then, that, taking the foregoing
as a correct description of the scope and functions
of économie science, its utility, with a view to the
practical requirements of a ^ountry, will entirely
dépend upon what those requirements happen to be.
If the industrial System of a country be of that cha-
racter which was uni versai in Europe eîghty or a
hundred years ago, if trade and industry-be hampere
in ail directions by artificial rules - and restrictvya& ^


242 POLITICAL ECONOMY [t:ssAY

obviously there will be great scope for a scheme of
doctrine embodying and expounding the principle
of laissez-faire. But if this is not the c'^'-e, if ail, or
nearly ail, the reforms covered by this maxim hâve
been already carried, then Political Economy, as its
scientific expression, can, it is évident, hâve little
relevancy to the practical work of the country. How,
then, stands the case with regard to ourselves ? Do
we find State action hère in the sphère, f industry
greatly overdone ? Are the légal restraints on indi-
vidual enterprise, still unremoved, of a serions kind ?
Is our trade still in shackles ? Is our freedom of
contract injuriously restricted ? I think rnost candid
people will acknowledgc that, while something may still
be needed in some or ail of thèse directions, it is not of
a very formidable character, and that this little may
safely be trusted for its accomplishment to the impetus
which still remains from the movement which carried
the greater économie reforms. Looking around us
on the social needs of the time, we are bov*ftd, I think,
to confess that we do not find much work of a merely
négative sort to do ; and we must therefore acknow-
ledge that, if Political Economy be merely what a
widely prévalent opinion supposes it to be, if the
sum and outcome of its teaching be laissez-faire, the
iield for its activity, în this country at least, must
henceforth be a narrow one. Under thèse circum-
stances, it îs not strange if the interest felt in the
study îs of a languîd sort Where the opinion prevails
that laissez-faire marks the limit of îndustrial reform,
that when we havc set individual enterprise free we
haye donc ail that in such matters can be done,


VII.] AND LAISSEZ-FAIRE. 243

Polîtical Economy will naturally be regarded wîth a
good-natured tolérance in considération of its past
services, coiBlpined with a profound indifférence, based
on the conviction that it has become in the course of
events a practically obsolète scheme of thought. Such,
it seems to me, is in point of fact the state of feeling
on this subject amongst a large number of educated
people in this country at the présent time.

Amongst 0^ large number, but not universally; for
there are those whose fàith ivélaisscz-faire is not quite
so absolute as that of the majority ; who hold that
there are ends to be compassed in social and industrial
life which can only be reached through the action of
Society as an organizcd whole ; and that, while the
mère négative and destructive part of industrial reform
has been well-nigh completed, a work of positive and 7
reconstructive reform still lies before us. What will
be the attitude of this section of thinkers towards a
spéculation putting itself forward as a scientific vindi-
cation of t^e principle of ** letting things alone"?
Inevitably one of hostility. When people think they
see before them a field for useful action, in which
good may be done by measures of a positive kind,
they naturally feel impatient of a System propounding
iaissez-faire as the last word of human wisdom.
Thus, if I hâve correctly seized the current impression
respecting this branch of spéculation, we hâve found
at least a partial explanation of the phenomenon
which I hâve proposed for considération. People
neglect Political Economy because they regard it as
practically obsolète, as out of relation to * the actual
work of the time; or they oppose it because they

R 2


244 POLITICAL ECONOMV [essay

thînk ît has begiin to be obstructîve ; and the vîew
takeu by deprcciators and opponents is in each case
the natural resuit of the conception they hâve formed
of the study. And hère it is that I join issue with
both classes. I altogcthcr deny the correctness of
theîr vicw of the science ; and, as the most effectuai
pieans of exploding it, I shall now endeavour to show
' l'that the maxim of laisscz-fairc has no scientific basîs
' whatever, but is at best a mère handy rule of practicc,
useful, perhaps, as a reminder to statesmen on which
side the presumption lies in questions of îndustrîal
législation, but totally destitute of ail scientific au-
thority.

In procceding to argue this point, I must ask you,
in the first place, to note what this doctrine of laissez^
faire, if it is to be taken as a scientific principle, really
raeans. The împlied assertion, as I understand ît,
is this ^hat, taking human beings as they are, in the
actual State of moral and intellectual development they
hâve reached ; taking account, further, of the physîcal
conditions with which they are surrounded in the
world ; lastly, accepting the institution of prîvate
property as understood and maintained in most
modem statcs, — the promptings of self-interest will
lead individuals, in ail that range of their conduct
^vhich has to do with their material well-being, spon-
taneously to foUow that course which is môsl for
their own good and for the good of ail. Such is
the assertion with which we hâve now to deal ; and
jou will at once see that it involves the two following
assumptions : ftrst, that<ïhe interests of human beings
arc fundamontally the same)-that what is most for


vri.] AND LAISSEZ-FAIRE. 245

my înterest is also most for thc interest of other
pcople; and, secondly, that^^^dividuals know theîr
interests în the sensé in which they are coïncident
with the interests of others, and that, in the absence
of coercîon, they will, in this sensé, follow them.^ If
thèse two propositions be made out, the policy of
laisseZ'faire — the policy, that is to say, of absolutç
abstention on the part of the State în ail that concerns
material well-bcing — follows with scientific rigour.
But can they be made out ? For my part I am
disposed to accept the first one ; I am disposed to
believe that human interests, well understood, are
fundamentally at one : only let me in passing suggest
a caution. Let us not confound the statement that
human interests arc at one with the statement that
class interests are at one. : The latter I believe to
be as false as the former is true, and, moreover, to
be one of those plausible optimist falsities against
which it especially behoves us in the présent day to
be on our guard. But accepting the major premîss
of the syllogism, that the interests of human beîngs
are fundamentally the same, how as to the minor ? —
how. as to the assumption that lîeople know theîr
interests in the sensé in which they are identical with
the interests of others, and that they spontaneously
follow them in this sense'^ \It is a remarkable thing
that Bastiat, the great apostle of laisscz-faire, in the
work he has devoted to the glorification of this
principle, absolutely overlooks this indispensable step
of the argument — wholly fails to prove his minor
premiss^He thus states the case : — " Human inter-
ests/' he says, are either "naturally harmonîous," or


^ \


w


246 POLITICAL ECONOMY [essay

\ *'naturally antagonistîc." * If antagonîstîc, then the
solution of the social problem miist lie in some form
of constraint. But if human intcrests be harmonious,
then, he argues, the solution must lie in leaving
people free to follovv them — in the ùnqualified adop-,
tion, that is to say, of the principle of laisscz-fairc,
Now I bcg you to mark the strange assumptions
that underlie this reasoning. Human interests are
naturally harmonious : thcrcfore we hâve only to leave
people free, and social harmony must resuit ; as if it
were an obvious thi ng that people knew their inter-
ests în the scnse in which they coincide with the
interests of others, and that, knowing them, they
must follow them ; as if there wcrc no such things
in the world as passion, préjudice, custom, esprit de
corps, class interest, to draw people aside from the
pursuit of their interests in the largest and highest
sensé ! Hère is a fatal flaw on the very threshold of
Bastiat's argument ; and it is a flaw which n# follower
of Bastiat has repaired — which, for my pafC I believe
to be irréparable. ^Jothing is easier than to show
that people follow their interest, in the sensé in
which they understand their interest. But .between
this and followûng their interest in the sénse in which
it is coincident with that of other people, a chasm
yawns. This chasm in the argument of the laissez-
faire school has never been bridged. The advocates
of the doctrine shut their eyes and leap over it^

For, to examine the question more nearly, and to |l
corne at once to the important point — granting that

* As if even this werc neccssarily true ; as if it might not be that some
human interests were in harmony and some opposed.


VII.] AND LAISSEZ-FAIRE. 247

people may, în a certain sensé, be trusted to seè most
clearly their own interest, and to pursue wîth avidity
what they so regard, what is ît that people under-
stand to be their interest ? What did landlords, as
a class, understand to be their interest down to
1846, when they maintained the Corn Laws as in-
dispensable to their rents, and the prop of their
political power ? What do the same class now under-
stand as their interest, when they avail themselves
of the power given them by the law to put their
estâtes in settlement, create life-înterests, entails, col-
latéral charges, interposing endless artificial obstacles
between the land of the country and the livîng people
who inhabit it, to the practical exclusion from the
possession of land of the enormous majority of
Englishmen ? What do Irish landlords understand
to be their interest when they are only wîthheld by
fear of assassination, or by law, from evicting their
tenants in order to consolidate their estâtes ? What
did employers in former days understand to be their
interest when they enacted statutes of labourers ?
or, in more récent times, when a ten hours' Act has
become necessary to protect women and children
against the conséquences of an unscrupulous pursuît
of gain ? What is the notion those farmers form of
their interest who employ the gang system as de-
scribed in récent parlîamentary reports ? or, again»
those members of trades-unions, who pass rules against
task-work and in favour of uniform wages for the
skilful and the înept, the idle and the industrious,
rules against machinery and in favour of inefficient
methods of manual labour, rules against the admission


248 POLITICAL ECONOMY [essay

of theîr fellows to sharîng wîth themselves the oppor-
tunities of a Hvelihood offered by the market, rules,
in a word, against the most efficacious use of man*s
power over nature, and the faîr distribution of the
proceeds of toil — what, in the idea of thèse tradcs-
unionists, is theîr înterest ? To give one instance
more, what was the notion of their interest entertained
by the slaveholding arîstocracy in the Southern
States of the American Union, who, seeing with their
own eyes the exhausting and ruinous effects of the
System they upheld ; seeing its influence in pre-
venting the rise of a skilled industrîal class, and
in thus ahnost wholly excluding manufacturing in-
dustry from the States where it prevailed ; seeing its
effects in consîgning to lawless barbarism more than
a half of the entire rural population, — nevertheless
rose in arms to maintaîn it, and not merely to
maintain, but to extend it far and wide over the
continent of America? Or, turning from particular
examples to broad results,^can any one seriously
consider the présent condition of the inhabîtants of
thèse islands — thèse islands where îndustrial freedom
bas for nearly half a century had greater scope than
în any previous âge or in any other country, but
where also the extrêmes of wealth and poverty are
found in harsher contrast than they hâve been ever
found elsewhere; where one man consumes more
value in a single meal than goes to feed and clothe
the family of another for a month ; where the entire
land of the country is owned by less than a hundred
thousand persons out of a population of thirty
millions ; where one in every twenty persons is a


/ i/if. j i \


VIL] AND LAISSEZ-FAIRE, 249

pauper ; where the great bulk of the agrîcultural
population look forward with calm resîgnatîon to
spending theîr old âge in a workhouse ; while the
artisan population of the towns find themselves about
once in ten years in the midst of a frightful com-
mercial catastrophe, which consigns hundreds of
thousands to ruin — I ask if any one can seriouSîy
consider this state of things, and yet repose in
absolute satisfaction and confidence on hîs maxim of
laissez-/atre?\ Nor is it merely the co-existence of
this state of things with an unparalleled freedom in
ail directions of industrial and commercial enterprîse
that we hâve to consider. The truly significant
circumstance is that the policy in question, the policy
expressed by laissez-faire, has been steadily progressive
for nearly half a century, and yet we hâve no sign
of mitigation in the harshest features of our social
state. I beg of you to consider the lesson taught
by the repeal of the Corn Laws. That was one of
the most important steps ever taken in carrying out
the policy of laissez-faire — as ail economîsts believe
a thoroughly sound anH^'wîse step. Well, now,
observe what the, repeal of the Corn Laws has donc
for us, and also wfiat it has not done for us. It has
given an immense impulse to our gênerai trade ; our
exports and îmports hâve, since the passing of the
measure, enormously încreased ; our wealth and popu-
lation hâve advanced with unexampled rapidity.
But the able men who led the agitation for the repeal
of the Corn Laws promised much more than this.
They told us that the Poor Laws were to follow the
Corn Laws; that pauperism would disappear with


250 POLIT/CAL ECONOMY [essav

the restrictions upon trade, and the workhouses ère
long become obsolète institutions. I fcar this part
of the programiHe has scarcely becn fulfillcd. Those
iigly social features, those violent contrasts of poverty
and wealth, that strike so unpleasantly the eye of
every foreign observer in this country. are still pain-
fully proniînent. The sîgns of the extinction of
pauperism are not y et very apparent. \In a word,
" the grand final resuit " promised by Bastiat as the
double goal towards which laissez-fairc conducts man-
kind — ** the indefinite approximation of ail classes
towards a level which is always rising ; the equaliza-
tion of individuals in the gênerai amélioration" —
seems as yet, with ail our freedom of trade, scarce
perceptibly nearer— nay, one might be tempted to
say, seems further off than ever. I say this is a
sîgnificant fact, and one fitted, it seems to me, to
abate our confidence in mère laissez-faire as the
panacea for industrial îlls. \

y( There îs then no evideifce, eîther in what we know
of the conduct of men in the présent stage of their
development, or yet in the large expérience we hâve
had of the working of laissez-faire^ to warrant the
assumption that lies at the root of this doctrine.

. ' Human beincrs know and follow their interests accord-
-4ng to their lights and dispositions; but not necessarily,
nor in practice always, in that sensé în which the
interest of the individual is coincident with that of
others and of the whole. It follows that there îs no
securifey that the économie phenomena of socîety, as at
présent constitutcd, will always arrange themselvcs
spontaneously in the way which îs most for the


vn] AND LAISSEZ-FAIRE. 251

common good. In other words, laissez-faire falls to
the ground as a scientific doctrine. I say as a scientîfic
doctrine ; for let us be carcful not to overstep the
lîmits of oiir argument. It is one thing to repudiate
the scientific authority of laissez-fat re, freedom of con-
tract, and so forth ; it is a totally différent thing to set
up the opposite principle of State control, the doctrine
of paternal government. For my part I accept
neither one doctrine nor the other ; and, as a practical
ruie, I hold laissez-faire to be imcomparably the safer
guide. Only let us remember that it is a practical
riik, and not a doctrine of science ; a rule in the
main sound, but like most other sound practical rules,
liable to numerous exceptions ; above ail, a rule which
must never for a moment be allowed to stand în
the way of the candid considération of any promising
proposai of social or industrial reform. It is from
this point of view that the argument I hâve been
urging assumes a practical aspect. Laissez-faire^
freedom of contract, and phrases of like import, hâve
of late bçcome somewhat of bugbears wîth a large
number of people. It is enough to niention them,
to distredit by anticipation the most useful practical
scheme. What did we hear during the discussions
on the Irish Land Bill ? Political Economy again
and again appealed to as having pronounced against
that mcasure. Now, what did this mean ? Simply
that the Bill înterfered with freedom of contract,
violated the rule of laisscz-faire — charges perfectly true,
and which would hâve been décisive against the
Bill had thèse phrases really possessed the scientific
authority which ^m^bers of Parliament supposed


^l^iil


252 POLI TIC AL ECO NOM Y [essay

them to possess. Now, ît îs against thîs understanding
of the doctrine that my argument îs directed. So
understood, I hold it to be a prétentions sophism, des-
tîtute of foundation in nature and fact, and rapidly be-
comîng an obstruction and nuisance in public afîfaîrs.
'^-^'Well, if Political Economy is something else than
the doctrine of lai ssez-f aire, wh^t is it ? If it pos-
sesses capabilities in relation to positive and recon-
structive, no less than in relation to négative and
destructive, reform, I may fairly be required to point
them out. And this is what, in the further remarks
I hâve now to offer you, I shall attempt to do. If
then I am asked what îs Political Economy, I say
ît îs the Science of Wealth ; and for those who clearly
apprehend what science, in the modem sensé of the
term, means, thîs ought sufficiently to indicate at once
its province, and what it undertakes to do. Unfortu-
nately, many who perfectly understand what science
means when the word is employed with référence to
physical nature, allow themselves to slide into a
totally différent sensé of it, or rather into acquiescence
in an absence of ail distinct meaning in its use, when
they employ it with référence to social existence. In
the mînds of a large number of people everything îs
Socîal Science which proposes to deal with social
' facts, either in the way of remedying a grievance,
or in promoting order and progress in society. Now
I am anxious hère to insist upon thîs fundamental
point : whatever takes the form of a plan aiming at
. definîte practical ends — it may be a measure . for
1 the diminution of pauperism, for the reform of land-
' tenure» for the extension of co^M^tive îndustry, for


vu.] AND LAISSEZ-FAIRE. 253

the împrovement of the coînage ; or ît may assume a' 1
more ambîtîous shape, and aîm at reorganîsîng society /
under spiritual and temporal powers, represented by a \
high priest of humanity and three bankers — it matters 1
not what the proposai be, whether wide or narrow în \
îts scope, severely judicious or wildly imprudent — if |
îts object be to accomplish definite practical ends, then y
I say it has none of the characteristics of a science,
and has no just claim to the name. Consider the
case of any recognizcd physical science — Astronomy,
Dynamics, Chemistry, Physiology — does any of thèse
aim at definite practical ends ? at modifying in a
definite manner, it matters not how, the arrangement
of things in the physical uni verse ? Clearly not. In
each case the object is, not to attain tangible results,
not to prove any definite thesis, not to advocate any
practical plan, but simply to givc light, to reveal laws
of nature, to tell us what phenomena are found to-
gether, what effects follow from what causes. Does
ît resuit from this that the physical sciences are with-
out bearing on the practical concérns of mankind ? I
think I need not trouble myself to answer that
question. Well, then, Polîtical Economy is a science /
in the same sensé in which Astronomy, Dynamics, /
Chemistry, Physiology, are sciences. Ils subject-matter \
îs différent; it deals with tlie phenomena of-wealth, \
while they deal with the phenomena of the physical 1
universe ; but its methods, its aims, the character oiJ
its conclusions, are the same as thcirs. What Astro-
nomy does for the phenomena of the heavenly bodies ;
what Dynamics does for the phenomena of motion ;
what Chemistry does for the phenomena of chemical


1


I
V


25 4 POUTICAL ECONOMY [kssay

combînatîon ; what Physiology cloes for the phenomcna
of the functions of organic life ; that Politîcal Eco-
nomy does for the phenomena of wealth : it expounds
the laws according to which those phenomena co-
exîst with or succced each other; that is to say, it
expounds the laws of the phenomena of wealth. —

Let me hère briefly explain what I mcan by this
expression. It is one in very fréquent use ; but, like
many other expressions in fréquent use, it does not
always perhaps carry to the mind of the hearer a very
definite idea. Of course I do not mean by the laws
of the phenomena of wealth, Acts of Parliament. I \
mean the natural laws of those phenomena. Now\
what are the phenomena of wealth ? Simply the \
facts of wealth ; such facts as production, exchange, '
price ; or again, the varions forms which wealth
assumes in the process of distribution, such as wages,
profits, rent, interest, and so forth. Thèse are the
phenomena of wealth ; and the natural laws of thèse
phenomena are certain constant relations in which 1
they stand towards each other and towards theîr '
causes. For example, capital grows from year to \
year in this country at a certain rate of progress ; in
the United States the rate is considerably more
rapid ; in China considerably slower. Now thèse
facts are not fortuitous, but the natural resuit of
causes ; of such causes as the external physical cir-
cumstances of the countries in question, the intelli-
gence and moral character of the people inhabiting
them, and their political and social institutions ; and
so long as the causes remain the same, the results
will remain the same. Similarly, the priées of com-


VII.] AND LAISSEZ-FAIRE. 255

moditîes, the rent of land, the rates of wages, projfits,
and ititerest, differ in différent countries ; but hère
agaîn, not at random. The particular forms whîch
thèse phenomena assume are no more matters of
chance than the température or the minerai produc-
tions of the countries in which thev occur are matters
of chance ; or than the fauna and flora which flourish
on the surface of those countries are matters of chance.
Alike in the case of the physical and of the économie
world, the facts we find existing are the results of
causes, betvveen which and them the connection is
constant and invariable. It is, then, the constant
relations exhibited in économie phenomena that we
hâve in view, whcn we speak of the laws of the
phenomena of weaith ; and in the exposition of thèse
laws consists the science of Political Economy. — 1/
you ask me wherein lies the utility of such an ex-
position of économie laws, I answer, in precisely the
same circumstance which constitutes the utility of ail
scientific knowledge. It teaches us the conditions of
our power in relation to the facts of économie existence,
the means by which, in the domain of material well-
being, to attain our ends. It is by such knowledge
that man becomes the minister and interpréter of
Nature, and learns to control Nature by obeying lier.

And now I beg you to observe what follows from
thîs mode of conceiving our study. In the jfirst place,
then, you will remark that, as thus conceived, Political
Economy stands apart from ail particular Systems of
social or îndustrial existence. ^ has nothing to do
with laisseZ'faire any more than with communism ;
with freedom of contract any more than with paternal


25 6 POLITICAL ECO NO M Y [essay

government, or wîth Systems of status. It stands
apart from ail particular Systems, and is moreover
absolutely neutral as between ail. Not, of course, that
the knowledge which ît gîves may not be employed to
recommend some and to discrédit others. This îs
inévitable, and is only the proper and legitîmate use of
économie knowledge. But this notwithstanding, the
science îs neutral, as between social schemes, in this
important sensé. It pronounces no judgment on the
worthiness or dcsirableness of the ends aimed at in
such Systems. It tells us what their effects will be as
regards a spécifie class of facts, thus contributing data
towards the formation of a sound opinion respecting
them. But hère jts functîon çnds. The data thus
furnished may indeed go far to détermine our judg-
ment, but they do not necessarily, and should not in
practice always, do so. For there are few practical
problems which do not présent other aspects than the
purely economical — political, moral, educational, artistic
aspects — and thèse may învolvc conséquences so
weîghty as to turn the scale against purely économie
solutions. On the relative importance of such conflîct-
îng considérations Political Fconomy offers no opinion,
pronounces no judgment, thus, as I said, standing
neutral between competing social schemes ; neutral, as
the science of Mechanics stands neutral between
competing plans of railway construction, in which
expense, for instance, as well as mechanical efficiency,
is to be considered ; neutral, as Chemistry stands
neutral between competing plans of sanitary improve-
ment ; as Physiology stands neutral between opposing
Systems of medicine. It supplies the means, or, more


VII.] AND LAISSEZ-FAI RE, 257

correctly, a portion o£..tlie^mp?iras, for estimating ail ; l
ît refuses to îdentify itself with any.

Now I désire to call particular attention to this
characterîstic of économie science, because I do not
think it is at ail generally appreciated, and because
some serions and indeed lam^ itable conséquences
hâve arisen from overlooking it. For example, it is
sometimes supposed that, because Political Economy
comprises in its expositions théories of wages, profits,
and rent, the science is thcrefore committed to the
approval of our présent mode of industrial life, under
which three distinct classes, labourers, capitalists, and
landlords, receive rémunération in those forms. Under
this impression, some social reformers, whose idéal of .
industrial life involves a modification of our existing '\
System, hâve thought themselves called upon to
denounce and déride économie science, as forsooth '
seeking to stéréotype the existing forms of industrial
life, and of course therefore opposcd to their views.
But this is a complète mistake. Economie science has
no more connection with our présent industrial System
than the science of mechanics has with our présent
System of railways. Our existing railway lines hâve
been laid down according to the best extant mechanical
knowledge ; but we do not think it necessary on this
account, as a preliminary to împroving our railways, to
denounce mechanical science. If wagcs, profits, and
rent find a place in économie théories, this is simply
because thèse arc the forms which the distribution of
wealth assumes as socîety is now constituted. ^^But it
comes equally withîn the province of the economist to
exhibit the workîng of any proposed modification of

s


258 POLIT/CAL ECONOMY [essay

this System, and to set forth the opération of the laws
of production and distribution under such new con-
ditions. And, in connection with this point, I may
make this remark, that, so far from its bcing true that
économie science has done its work, and thus become
obsolète for practical purposes, an object of mère
historical curiosity, it belongs, on the contrary, to a
class of sciences whose work can never be completcd,
never at least so long as human beings continue to
progress ; for the most important portion of the data
from which it reasons is human character and human
institutions, and everj'thing conseqiicntly which affects
that character or those institutions must create new
problems for économie science. ^ Unlike the physicist,
who deals with phenomena incapable of development,
ahvays essentially the same, the main facts of the
économistes study — man as an industrial being, man as
organized in society — are ever undergoing change.
The économie conditions of patriarchal life, of Greek
or Roman life, of feudal life, are not the économie
conditions of modem commercial life; and had Political
Economy been cultivated in those primitive, ancient, or
mediceval times, while it would doubtless hâve contained
some expositions which we do not now fmd in it, it must
also hâve wanted many which it now contains. One
has only to turn to the discussions on currency and
crédit which hâve accompanied the great development
of our commerce during the last half-century, to see
how the changing needs of an advancing society evolve
new problems for the economist, and call forth new
growths of économie doctrine. At this moment one
may see that such an occasion îs imminent. Since


\


vil] AND LAISSEZ^FAIRE. 259

the économie doetrines now holding theîr place in our
text-books were thought out, a new mode of indus-
trial organization has established itself in this and
other countries. Co-operatîon is now a reality, and,
if the sîgns are not ail deceptive, bids fair to trans-
form much of our industry. Now the characterîstic \
feature of co-operation, looked at from the économie
point of view, is, that it combines in the same person
the two capacities of labourer and capîtalist ; whereas
our présent théories of industrial rémunération pré-
suppose a division of those capacities between distinct
persons. Obviously, our existing théories must fail
to elucidate a state of things différent from that con-
templated in their élaboration. We hâve thus nced of
a new exposition of the law of industrial rémunération
— an exposition suited to a state of things in which
the gains of producers, instead of taking the form of
wages, projfits, and rent, are realized in a single com-
posite sum. I give this as an example of the new
developments of économie theory which the progress
of Society will constantly call for. Of course it is an
open question whether this is the direction in which
industrial society is moving; and there are those,
I know, who hold that it is not towards co-operation,
but rather towards ** captains of industry " and organi-
zation of workmen on . the military plan, that the
current is setting. It may be so ; and in this case the
économie problem of the future will not be that which
I hâve suggested above ; nevertheless, an économie
problem there still will be. If society were organ-
ized to-morrow on the principles of M. Comte, so long
as physical and human nature remain what they are^

s 2


\


26o POLITICAL ECONOMY [essay

the phenomena of wealth would exhibît constant
relations, would still be governcd by natural laws ;
and those relations, those laws, it would still be im-
portant to know. The function of the economist would
be as needful as ever.

A far more serious conséquence, however, of
ignoring the neutral attitude of this study in relation
to questions of practical reform is the effect it has had
in alienating from it the minds of the working classes.
Instead of appearing in the simple guise of an ex-
positor of truths, the contributor of certain data to-
wards the solution of social problems — data which of
themselves commît no man to any course, and of
which the practical cogency can only be determined
after ail the other data implicated in the problem are
known — instead of prcsenting itself as Chemistry,
Physiology, mechanical science présent themselves,
Political Economy too often makes its appearance,
especially in its approaches to the working classes, in
the guise of a dogmatic code of cut-and-dried rules, a
System promulgating decrees, *'sanctionîng" one social
arrangement, **condemning" another, requiring from
men, not considération, but obédience. Now when
we take into account the sort of decrees which . are
ordinarily given to the world in the name of Political
Economy — decrees which I think I may say in the
main amount to a handsome ratification of the existîng
form of Society as approximately perfect — I thînk we
shall be able to understand the répugnance, and even
violent opposition, manîfested towards it by people who
hâve their own reasons for not cherishîng that un-
bounded admiration for our présent industrial arrange-


VII.] AND LAISSEZ-FAIRE. 261

ments whîch îs felt by some popular expounders of so-
called économie laws. When a workîng man îs told
that Politieal Eeonomy "eondemns" strikes, hésitâtes
about co-operation, looks askance at proposais for limit-
ing the hours of labour, but "approves" the accumula-
tion of capital, and "sanctions" the market rate of wages,
it seems not an unnatural response that ** since Politieal
Eeonomy is against the working man, it behoves the
working man to be against Politieal Eeonomy." It
seems not unnatural that this new code should come
to be regarded with suspicion, aô a System possibly
contrived in the interest of employers, which it is the
workmen's wisdom simply to repudiate and disown.
Economie science js thus placed in an essentially false
position, and the section of the community, which is
most vitally interested in taking to heart its truths,
is effectually prevented from eveft giving them a
hearing. I think it, therefore, a matter not merely of
theoretic, but of the utmost practical importance, that
the strictly scîentific character of this study should be
insisted on. It is only when so presented that its true
position in relation to practical reforms, and itë really
benevolent bearing towards ail sorts and conditions of
men, will be linderstood, and that we can hope to
overcome those deep-seated but perfectly natural pré-
judices with whîch the most numerous class in the
community unfortunately regard it.

And now I trust I hâve made it clcar that the
branch of knowledge, with whose interests I am
charged în this collège, possèsses other claîms upon
our attention thari those which rest upon its past
services ; that ît has a real and vital connection with


.S


<i


262 POLITICAL ECONOMY [essay

ail existing problems which învolve the material
interests of huinan bcîngs, as well as a field for deve-
lopment in new directions, which can never fail so
lonij as Society continues to progress. Above ail, I
trust 1 hâve placed it beyond doubt that, rightly
conceived, économie science can never be an obstacle
to the fair considération and discussion of any plan
of human improvement. Those schemes only need
fear Political Economy which arc conceived in igno-
rance of human nature, or of the laws of the physical
universe. And surely ît is a singular position which
those social reformers take up who deliberately slîght
or neglect this study. They désire, they tell us, to
improve the condition of their fellow-creatures. They
hâve perhaps drawn up elàborate and highly complex
plans for achieving this end ; but they object to hâve
their proposais tested by scientific methods. Better
they thînk to take a leap in the dark, than to examine
beforehand by the lamp of science the ground to
which they invite us to commit ourselves. In a
striking passage of an admirable address, Professor
Huxley has pointed out how ail true éducation, so far
as éducation is an art, is but a mode of acquiring
j knowledge which Nature herself, where we omit this
means of acquiring it, is pretty sure to bring home
to us after her own rude fashion. The teaching of
0( Nature, says Professor Huxley —

** Is harsh and wasteful in its opération. Ignorance is
visitcd as sharply as wilful disobcdience — incapacity meets
with the same punishment as crime. Naturc's discipline
is net even a word and a blow, and the blow first ; but the
blow without the word. It is Icft to you to find out why
y.our cars arc boxed.

)


VII.] AND LAISSEZFAlRE. 263

"The object of what we commonly call éducation — that
éducation in which man intervenes, and which I shall dis-
tinguish as artificial éducation — is to make good thèse defccts
in Naturels methods; to prépare the child to receive Nature's
' éducation, neither incapably, nor ignorantly, nor with wilful
disobedience ; and to undcrstand the preliminary symptoms
of her displeasurc without waiting for the box on the ear.
In short, ail artificial éducation ought to be an anticipation
of natural éducation. And a libéral éducation is an artificial
éducation which has not only prepared a man to escape the
great evils of disobedience to natural laws, but has traîned
him to appreciate and to seize upon the rewards, which
Nature scatters with as free a hand as her penalties."

What îs it then that those persons ask us to do who
would dispense with the study of Political Economy ?
Simply to deprîve ourselves of the aids of artificial
éducation in the most 'complicated, most difïicult, and
most momentous concerns of life. Rather than take
the trouble to understand ** the preliminary symptoms
of Nature's displeasure'' in the government of her
économie kingdom, they think ît better we should
rush into action and learn — by having our ears boxed.
I do not know whether you wîll feel inclined to
hearken to their advice. But I pray you to under-
stand that the soufflets administered by Nature in
punishment of économie ignorance are by no means
trifling penalties. They are known by the names of
bankruptcies, commercial crises, conflicts of capital and
labour, Sheffield outrages, excess of population, pau-
perism, internai insurrections, international jealousies
often issuing in foreign wars. This metropolis in its
eastern quarter could just now supply some striking
illustrations. Ireland, with its wretched peasantry,
demoralized by centuries of industrial insecurity, could


264 POLITJCAL ECONOA/y. [essay vu.

furnish a few more. What is it that led France to
surrender her liberties înto the hands of a saviour
of Society ? What but the spectre of socialism —
thaï rank j p rrowt h of e cnnomir îg-norance ? Thus
économie ignorance, when it has conceived, brings
forth socialism, and socialism breeds despotism, and
despotism, when it is finîshed, issues in war, misery,
and ruin. Other causes, no doubt, hâve contributed
to the terrible catastrophe which we now witness
and déplore ; but most assuredly économie ignorance
is deeply responsible in the matter. Thèse horrors,
then, are some of the chastisements which Nature
administers to those who choose to remain in igno-
rance of the signs of her displeasure in économie
affairs. Would it not be as well to avoid them ?
Nay, would it not be even worth while to seize on
some of the rewards which hère, no less than in
her physical realm. Nature scatters with as free a
hand as her penalties ?


VIII.»
M. COMTE AND POLITICAL ECONOMY.

Of the writers who during the last half century
hâve contributed to place Social Philosophy on the
footing which ît now holds, none deserve more
déférence on questions of classification and method
than Auguste Comte. Opinions will differ as to the
value of his views on the régénération and reorganiza-
tîon of Society, but M. Comte has rendered services
to the cause of social and historîcal spéculation which
are quite independent of the System of doctrines
distinctively cbnhected with his name. Even those
who reject what are knowh as' Positivist doctrines,
and who ftcl themselves in imperfect sympathy with
the spirit of Positivism, may gratefully acknowledge
that social studies havc taken a new place in the
domain of spéculative thought since M. Comte
devoted tb them his mind and life, and may recognize
in his work an achievement not without analogy to
that accomplished by Bacon in a différent though
neighbouring field. In neîther case, they will prbbably

* Forinightfy Rt'vicWy May 1870.


266 J/. COMTE AND POLIT/CAL ECONOMY. [essay

think, diJ tlie value of the performance consîst in
the positive contributions made to our knowledge,
whether of physical nature by Bacon, or of the
principles of social union by M. Comte, — though it
will be allowed that our obligations to M. Comte on
this score are vastly greater than any which can be
credited to the author of the " Novum Organum," —
but in the distinctness and vividness of the conception
which each alike had formed of the path of investiga-
tion to be followed in the pursuit of that knowledge
which each had taken for his spécial goal, and in what
was the conséquence of this : the strength of convic-
tion and the unfaltering faith with which each delivered
his message. Bacon's dreams of a New Atlantis
to bc reached by experiment and induction were not
more in advance of the current spéculation of his
time than were the analogous dreams of M. Comte
of a Society regenerated by' Positive Philosophy.
While the poet was singing that —

"Through the âges one incrcasing purpose runs,"

the French philosopher believed that he had divined
that purpose, and could lay bare îts scope. And he
not only conceived the design, but, in the opinion of
eminent judges, took important steps towards its
realization.

The high authority, then, of M. Comte in the
domain of Social Philosophy will scarcely be dis-
puted — certainly will not be disputed by the présent
writer ; and it must therefore be allowed that the
absolute proscription by him of a branch of social
inquîry carries with it a certain presumption — some
will think a weighty presumption — again3t the legiti-.


vin.] ^f. COMTE AND POLITICAL ECONOMY. 267

macy of the spéculation fallîng under this ban. Now
thîs presumption, whatever may be its weîght, lies,
it must be frankly admîtted, against the brandi of
study which it is the purpose of the following pages
to promote.* It was M. Comte's opinion that Political
Economy, as cultivated by the school of Adam Smîth's
successors in this country and in France, failed to
fulfil the conditions required of a sound theory by
Positive Philosophy, and was not properly a science.
He pronounces it to be defective in its conception,
**profoundIy irrational" in its method, and **radically
stérile" as regards results. Such an opinion, pro-
ceeding from a philosopher of M. Comte's eminence,
is a fact which ought not to be lightly passed by.
M. Comte, moreover, bas supported this unfavourable
judgment by a train of elaborate argumentation ; but,
so far as I know, his arguments hâve not yet been
seriously grappled with. I am very sensible to what
an ext^nt I shall leave myself open to the imputation
of presumption in venturing on a task which has been
avoided by so many incomparably better fitted than I
am for its effective discharge. Nevertheless, the task
is one which I feel bound to undertake ; for it seems
to me that I should be guilty of even greater presump-
tion were I to enter upon an investigation such as I
propose to make the subject of the présent volume,
without, at ail events, attempting to do justice, so far
as my abilities permit, to M. Comte's views. As a
preliminary step, therefore, to an examination of the

* [It should be stated that the présent Essay was intendcd as the
preliminary chapter of a work on ''The Logical Method of Political
Economy."]


268 M. COMTE AND POLIT/CAL ECONOMY, [essay

character and method of Political Economy, I hâve
to ask the reader to follow me in an examinatîon of
the groimds of M. Comte's judgment against the
scientific prctcnsîons of this study.

And, in the first place, let me endeavour to state
the précise question on which M. Comte is at issue
with the student of économie science. M. Comte
does not deny that the phenomena of wealth are
important cléments in determining the condition and
progress of society ; still less does he deny — on the
contrary, it is his emphatic assertion — that thèse
phenomena, like ail others which in the aggregate
constitute the social state, are subject to invariable
law. On the other hand, political economists — those
political economists, at least, whose views the présent
writer shares — maké no pretension to constitute Poli-
tical Economy as the science of society. It is fully
admitted that the subject-matter of their science is
but one among many éléments which go to form the
aggregate social condition ; and they are consequently
bound to acknowledge, as they do acknowledge, that
the most complète acquaintance with économie facts
and laws furnishes of itself no adéquate basis for
gênerai social spéculation. But agreeing thus far,
M. Comte and the political economists differ hère : —
whiie admitting that économie phenomena are subject
to law, M. Comte dénies that the law can be ascer-
tained by study of the phenomena. His position is,
that the facts of wealth are, in th'^ form in which they
actually présent themselves to our observation, so
inextricably interwoven with facts of a différent order
— with facts, for example, of the intellectual, moral,


VIII.] M. COMTE AND POLITICAL ECONOMY. 269

and politîcal order — that the determinatîon of the
laws which govern them is only possible when they
are consîdered in connection with such associated
facts; that consequently a science of Political Economy
is impossible ; just as for the same reason a science
of Psychology, or of Jurisprudence, or of any distinct
and separate order of social relations is impossible.
It was accordingly with him a fundamental canon of
philosophical method, that ail investigations into the
structure and laws of society should proceed on the
principle 6f dealing with social facts, to use M. Comte s
language, in the ensemble, Society, he said, should be
contemplated in the totality of its éléments; and no'
investigation should be undertaken into any portion
of those éléments except in constant connection with
parallel investigations carried on contemporaneously
into ail co-existing portions of the complex whole.
Ail isolated study of a single aspect of social life, of a
particular order of its relations apart from the rest, he
regarded as essentially vicious and doomed to failure
in advance.* Such a view is, of course, altogether
înconsistent with the existence of a science of wealth ;
and hère, accordingly, the studènt of Political Economy
comes into collision with the teaching of M. Comte.
Instead of proceeding by the method of the ensemble^
and studying society in ail its éléments at once, the
political economist proceeds by an opposite rule : he
breaks up the aggregate social phenomenon into the
elementary groups of which it is composed, and, select-

* " Philosophie Positive," Leçons 47 and 48. See also the "Politique,**
vol iii. p. 585 (1853), from which it will be seen that M. Comte's views 00
this point underwent no change in his later years.


270 M. COMTE AND POLITICAL ECONOMY. [essay

ing one of thèse, studies it apart from ail the others.
He does not indeed, as lias been already intîmated,
confound the laws at which he thus arrives, the laws
of tl>is detached group, with the laws of socîety ; but
the laws of society itself, he holds, are only to be.
ascertained by working on the plan which he lias
adopted, — by making, that is to say, each distinct order
of relations involved in the composite phenomenon
of society the subject of a distinct and separate investi-
gation, leaving it to the social philosopher properly
so called — the speculator on society as a whole, — to
combine the results of the labours of students of
spécial branches in elucidation of the gênerai problem.*
S'uch is the question at issue between the student
of Political Economy and M. Comte. Now, adverting
to the history of inductive research, it will at once
be secn that the view taken by the political economist
has this weighty prcsumption in its favour : it is in
strict analogy with the course followed by ail fruitful
investigation from the dawn of scientific discovery to
the présent time.

♦ " Notwithstanding the univcrsal consensus of the social phcnomena,
whercby nothing which takes place in any part of the opérations of
society is without its share of influence on every other part ; and not-
withstanding the paramount ascendancy which the gênerai state of
civilization and social progress in any given society must hence exercise
over ail the partial and subordinate phenomcna ; it is not the less true
that diiTerent spccies of social facts are in the main dépendent, imme-
diately and in ihc first resort, on difTcrent kinds of causes ; and there-
fore not only may with advantage, but must, be studied apart : just as in
the natural body we study separately the physiology and pathology of
each of the principal organs and tissues, though every one is acted upon
by the state of ail the others ; and though the peculiar constitution and
gênerai state of healih of the organism co-operates with, and often pre-
ponderates over, the local causes, in determining the state of any.
pirticular organ."~Mil.L's System of Lo^ric^ vol. ii. p. 480. 3rd Ed.


VIII.] M, COMTE AND POLITICAL ECONOMY, 271

When men first began to speculate on the facts
of the unîverse, the line of investigation they fell
into was precisely that which M. Comte holds to be
the proper one in sociological inquiry. They contem-
plated nature in the enseinble^ and propounded the
question, What is the origin of ail things ? But so
long as the problem remained in this form, nothing
valuable issued from the efforts to solve it beyond
the discipline afforded to the minds thus employed —
nothing but a séries of vague guesses more or less
ingénions, yielding, it may be, some satisfaction to the
spéculative intellect, but incapable of throwing any
light on the real relations of objective existence. In
time, however, and by slow degrees, the spirit of the
ensemble gave way to another spirit — that of specializa-
tion and détail. Influenced mainly by the practical
necessities of life, in some degree also by the
exceptional conspicuousness of certain phenomena,
people turned from spéculation on the universe as a
whole to observation and reasonîng upon certain
limited orders of facts. Thus geometry arose out of
the practical requirement of measuring the earth ; and,
beginning as an art, grew into a science, taking as
its subject-matter the particular class of relations
brought into view in that practical opération. The
order followed in the genesis of the science of
geometry is typical of the whole course of scientific
development. In each case practical exigencies, or
exceptional conspicuousness, hâve called attention to
phenomena of a spécial kind — to the movements of
the heavenly bodies, to the play of mechanical forces,
to the composition of material substances, to the


272 M. COMTE AND POLITICAL ECO NO M Y, [essay

structure or functîons of the human body — from the
investigation of which hâve arisen the sciences of
Astronomy, of Mechanics, of Chemistry, of Anatomy,
of Physiology. Each science, called into existence by
the anxiety to explain striking expériences, or to
provide and justify practical expédients, has taken in
charge some spécial and limited order of relations,
has detached thèse from the mixeJ and heterogeneous
body of physical phenomena, and has made them the
subject of isolated and spécial study. The laws of the
various orders of physical relations hâve thus been
determined ; and the rays of scientific light emanating
from the separate investigations of perfectly inde-
pendcnt workers hâve been made to converge in
elucidation of the actual composite facts of the outer
world.

This has been the course of development in
physical science, the method by which the secrets
of external nature hâve been unlocked. It has been
a method, not of study in the ensemble^ but of study
through the éléments — of analysis followed by syn-
thesis. In perfect analogy with this mode of proceed-
ing is the political économistes conception of the path
of inquiry to be followed in dealing with the facts of
social life. He proposes to break them up into their
elementarygroups, and he takes one of thèse groups —
the phenomena of wealth — as the subject of his
spécial investigation. It may be rcmarked, more-
over, that, in selecting this particular group of pheno-
mena, he has been influenced by considérations in ail
respects analogous to those which hâve determined the
separate treatment of the various classes of physical


VMI.] M, COMTE AND POLITICAL ECOXOMV. 273

phenomena. Political Economy, like Geometry,
Astronomy, Mechanics, Chemistry, had its origîn in
practîcal exigencies, and made its dèbiii as an art. It
aimed at the practical object of enriching particular
nations by means of trade. For this purpose highly
complicated machînery — encouragements for particular
industries, prohibitions of others, bountres, drawbacks,
in a Word the whole body of commercial régulations
known as the Colonial and Mercantile Systems —
was brought into play. Thèse expédients, if they
favoured some interests, damaged others : the conflict
of interests brought on discussion ; and the argument
rapidly passed from attack and defence of practical
plans to examination of the natural laws governing
the order of relations which it was the purpose of
thèse plans to control. The limits of the debate were
not at first, perhaps, very distinctly defined, but by
degrees they grew clear. The facts of wealth became
detached for the purposes of discussion from the other
classes of facts with which in actual existence they were
blended ; and Political Economy, as the science of
those facts, emerged. As regards origin and mode
of development, therefore, the parallel between Poli-
tical Economy and the physical sciences is complète ;
nor hâve I any reason to suppose that M. Comte
would dispute the gênerai correctness of the descrip-
tion I hâve given : indeed, he frankly admits that the
précédents of physical science are against him.* What,
then, is his Une of argument ? It is this: he contends
that the cases are not similar; that the problems
presented, on the one hand by physical nature, on the

* " Philosophie Positive,*' vol. iv. pp. 353-54. Edit. 1839.

T


274 ^f' COMTE AND POLITICAL ECONOMY, [essay

other by social life, are so radîcally discrepant that
the method applicable to the one must be, not only
modified, but reversed, în dealing with the other.
To follow in social inquiry the précédents of physîcal
research is, according to M. Comte, in oblivion of
essential distinctions, to practise a *'blind imitation."
This is the position which we are now called upon to
consider.

Most people who take an interest in questions of
the kind we are now discussing are familiar with
M. Comte s classification of the sciences. As is known,
it proceeds upon the plan of arranging the varions
branches of scienlîfic knowledge in the order indicated
by the relative complexîty of their subject-matter.
Thus it places first in the scale the sciences which deal
with the most simple order of relations — number and
extension. After thèse cornes Mechanics, as involving
relations one degree more complex; next to Mechanics,
Astronomy, which is followed by Physics, and so on
through the whole circle of scientific knowledge ;
each science, according to its place in the scale,
representing a degree of complexity greater than those
preceding and less than those following it. It résulta
from the principle of the arrangement that the organic
sciences, having for their subject matter the- complex
phenomena of the vegetable and animal world, should
occupy the later portion of the scale, and that Socî-
ology, or the science of human society, as concerned
with the most complex of ail phenomena, should con-
clude and crown the whole. As regards the merîts
or demerits of this classification — a question on which
the highest authorities are not agreed — it would be


vuh] Jf, COMTE AND POLITICAL ECONOMY, 275

•

unbecomîng in me to prétend to express an opinion.
I only refer to it in order to render M. Comte's argu-
ment against Political Economy intelligible. As bas
been said, then, the sciences are arranged in the order
indicated by the degree of complexity in their subject-
matter ; those occupying the first or lower portion of
the scale embracing phenomena but little complex,
while the phenomena embraced by the sciences in the
later portion are complex in a high degree. It is on
this distinction that M. Comte grounds his argument
for disregarding in sociological spéculation the pré-
cédents furnished by physical research. According to
him, the method of investigation that has been followed
in the study of physical nature — the method, that is to
say, which proceeds by breaking up composite phe-
nomena into the elementary groups composing them,
studying apart the elementary groups, determining
their laws, and afterwards combining thèse laws in
explanation of the original aggregates, — this method,
according to M. Comte, owes its efficacy to the un-
complex character of the phenomena submitted to the
process. As phenomena become more complex, the
method, he contends, becomes less suitable, less effica-
cious, till at length a point is reached at which it fails
altogether, and it becomes necessary to adopt a con-
trary mode of procédure, the mode of procédure,
namely, which he describes as investigation through
the €7tsemble. This point in the scale of the sciences
coincides, he tells us, with that at which the transition
is made from inorganic to organic nature. The method
of investigation by disîntegration and separate study
should thenceforth gîve way to that which proceeds h^

T 2


276 M. COMTE AND POLITICAL ECONOMY, [essay

treatment in the ensemble. Accordingly, he holds that
the organic sciences generally should be cultivated in
conformity with this principle ; but în the study of
social phenomena, the most' complex and intricate of
ail, the rule becomes absolute and imperative.*

And hère one is led to ask why the method of
specialization should lose its efficacy as problems be-
come more complex ? The very opposite is what one
would naturally expect. If a problem involving no
more than two or three distinct éléments can only be
resolved by the process of analysis and separate con-
sidération of the parts, the necessity for this would
seem to be still more urgent as the éléments engaged
became more numerous. M. Comtes reason for
reversing this inference is very peculiar.f He says
that as phenomena become more complex, the éléments
, composing them become more solidaires. In the
.■ physical universe, the complexity of the phenomena is
not great, and consequently their ** solidarity " is but
" slightly pronounced :" " the éléments are hère better
known to us than the ensemble^ But the reverse is
the case with the organic world, and more especially

* As to the nature of the complexity of social phenomena see MilVs
" Logic," vol. ii. p. 475 et seç, yd Edit.

t This argument has appeared to me so weak — indeed, M. Comte's
wholc case against Political Economy is, as it seems to me, so weak — that
I hâve felt it difficult at times to repress the suspicion that his reasons
for rejecdng it wcrc not purcly and simply of a philosophical kind.
" Il s'agit malheureusement," he says in one passage, " et sans que rien
puisse m'en dispenser, de tenter une création philosophique qui n*a
jamais été jusqu'ici ébauchée ni convenablement conçue par aucun de
mes prédécesseurs." " Sociology " could not be constructed in its entirety
by M. Comte if Political Economy were a legitimate spéculation. But
M. Comte felt it to be his mission to constnict Sociology in its entirety.
The conclusion seems évident.


VIII.] M. COMTE AND FOLITICAL ECONOMY. 277

with that portion of the organic world which consti-
tutes the social organism. The phenomena are hère
characterized by a very hîgh degree of complexity, and
therefore, says M. Comte, by a very high degree of
solidarity : " the ensemble oi the subject is better known
to us and more accessible than the parts." On the
fundamental principle, then, of inductive logic, which
requires us to proceed from the known to the unknown,
from the better to the less known, we are bound, in
dealing with the phenomena of organic nature, but more
especially with the phenomena of society, to begin our
investigations with the study of aggregates, and only
after we hâve determined their laws to address ourselves
to those of the less known éléments. lil. Comte admits
that this mode of proceeding must **gravely augment"
the fundamental difficulties already incident to the
extrême complication of the subject-matter ; but this,
he conceives, is only a reason for reserving the study
of society for ** the highest scientific intelligences."

In attempting to criticise this argument, it becomes
necessary to assign a distinct meaning to its several
propositions. We encounter, in the first place, the
expression, " the e^isemble of society," and the state-
ment that this is better known to us than the
"éléments." In the most obvious meaning of the
Word the statement is manifestly not true. By the
efîsemble of society most people would^ I think, under-
stand the aggregate of the human beings composing
society — of those human beings considered in their
social relations ; and by the ** éléments," the individual
social men and women. In this sensé I say it is
manifestly untrue that we know society better in its


278 M. COMTE AND POLITICAL ECONOMY. [essay

ensemble than in its " éléments," — so manifestly so,
that it cannot for a moment be supposed that this
was M. Comte's meanîng. When, for example, an
Englishman travels in France, it is not with the
ensemble of French society that lie cornes into contact,
but with certain railway officiais and hôtel proprietors,
exemplifying a very lîmited range of French social
existence. As he prolongs his résidence he may
extend his knowledge ; but the course which his
acquisitions take will, I need scarcely say, be in the
opposite direction to that which M. Comte's maxim
affirms. Nor can a French philosopher attain a know-
ledge of French social existence by any différent
path ; he, too, must proceed from individuals to classes,
and from classes to the social whole. But there is
another sensé in which M. Comte's language may be
understood. Social phenomena, like ail other phe-
nomena, meet us not simple, but composite. We do
not encounter purely religions, or purely industrial, or
purely political men and women. Social acts, social
situations, can rarely be referred to any single in-
fluence. Human beings, as they exist, are not
abstract, but historical, human beings, in a greater
or less degree under the influence of ail the causes
that hâve been afîecting the race from its origin down
to the présent time. Thus regarded, society, or more
properly social phenomena, may be said to présent
themselves to us in the ensemble ; and thus understood,
the statement that we know society through its
ememble, not through its éléments, is undoubtedly
true. If this be M. Comte's meaning, the pro-
position cannot be dispiîted; but then it must be


VIII.] M, COMTE AND POLITICAL ECONOMY. 279

remarked that the assertion is equally true as applied
to the phenomena of the physîcal uni verse. Physical
forces also act in constant conjunction. Unless we
effect the séparation by artîficial means we encounter
no purely chemical, or purely optical, or purely
mechanical phenomena, but phenomena in the pro-
duction of which a variety, greater or less, of physical
forces concur — that is to say, we know physical nature
also through its ensemble. We are thus brought back
to the point from which we started : why are we
— the phenomena of social life and those of physical
nature being made known to us under sîmilar condi-
tions — to reverse in our study of society the method
of investigation which has been found efificacious in
dealing with the physical world ?

M. Comte's reply at this stage of the argument
résolves itself into the doctrine I hâve already stated,
that the solidarity of phenomena varies directly with
their complexity. It is true, he seems to admit, that
we know physical nature equally with social through its
efisemôle ; but the ensemble, in the former case, is com-
posed of fewer éléments, and thèse, in proportion as
they are fewer, are less solidaires — are therefore more
easily broken up and submitted to separate examina-
tion. Hence arises an increased facility of applying
the method of disintegration and separate study in
their case. But, in the first place, this does not meet
the difficulty, sînce the answer admits that physical
nature is known to us through its e?isemble — an admis-
sion which, on M. Comte's principles, seems to draw
with it the obligation of studying physical nature
through this, its most familiar manifestation* Waiving,


28o M. COMTE AND POLITICAL ECONOMY. [essay

however, thîs point, I wish to examine M. Comte's
position, which is really the root of his whole argument
against Political Economy, that phenomena in propor-
tion as they are more complex are more solidaires.
If thîs assumption be not well founded, there is ab-
solutely nothing for his reasoning to rest upon.

To test the doctrine, let us consider it in a con-
crète case. I take the instance of water, a compo-
site physîcal phenomenon exemplîfying a variety of
physîcal laws. Considcred chemîcally, its complexity
is of the lowest degrce, contaîning as it does but two
éléments, oxygen and hydrogen. According to M.
Comte's doctrine, water, being chemically of the lowest
degree of complexity, ought to exhibit, in the relation
of its chemical éléments, the lowest degree also of
solidarity. The fact, I need scarcely say, is exactly
the reverse. As everyone knows, the solidarity — by
which I understand intimacy of relationship, closeness
of interdependence — existing between the éléments
composing water is of an extremely intense kind, so
much so that the analysis of water constituted an
epoch in chemical history. On the other hand, if we
take a phenomenon of greater complexity, say water
in combination with lime, we find the solidarity
dîminish as the number of the éléments is increased ;
the water or the lime being much more easily detached
from the hydrate of lime than the éléments composing
the water, or than those composing the lime, are from
each other. Nor is this a solitary example : rather it
represents a rule holding extensively throughout
chemical combination. In inorganic chemistry the
salts are in gênerai easily decomposed, while the less


VIII.] M, COMTE AND POLITICAL ECONOMY, 281

complex éléments composing them — the oxîdes of the
metals and the acids — are mostly of very difficult
analysîs. And in organîc compounds a similar rule
prevails. So far, therefore, the relation between com-
plexity and solidarîty appears to be the reverse of that
for which M. Comte contends. The case just con-
sidered illustrâtes the incidents of complexity within
the range of a single order of relations. How stands
the fact when the orders of relation exemplified in
the phenomena are différent ? For example, water
possesses — besides chemical — mechanical, optical, elec-
trical, and other physical properties. Is it true that, as
between thèse several orders of physical phenomena,
the solidarity is, as M. Comte asserts, " little pro-
nounced " — that the chemical, mechanical, optical,
and electrical attributes of water are but slightly inter-
dependent — less interdependent than, for example,
physiological and moral qualities in a human being, or
political and industrial conditions in a body politic ?
No one dénies that hère also there is solidarity ; but
the question is, not as to the existence of solidarity, but
as to the degree. What M. Comte had to show was
that the solidarity of co-operating agencies was greater
in the case of the phenomena of society than in that of
the phenomena of the physical world— so much greater
as to necessitate in their case an inversion of the
method of investigation practised in the study of
physical nature ; but to establish this he has not
advanced a particle of proof For my part, I can
imagine no more eminent example of the solidarity
of forces than that presented by the most ordinary
phenomena of the physical world — the ebb and flow of


282 M. COMTE AND POLITICAL ECONOMY. [essay

the tîdes, the successîon of the seasons, the freezing
and thawing of water, a shower of rain, a drop of dew.
Yet thîs has been no bar in the study of thèse pheno-
mena to the employment of methods which M. Comte
would nevertheless exclude from the domain of social
science on the ground that its phenomena are solidaires.

So much for the grounds of gênerai philosophy on
which M. Comte relies in refusing to recognize Poli-
tical Economy as a science ; and he finds, as he
conceives, corroboration of the soundness of the view
he has taken in the history and actual condition of
économie spéculation. M. Comte opens his criticisms
on the history and existing state of Political Economy
with the remark, that its scientific pretensions could
not well hâve been otherwise than inane, considering
the sort of persons by whom it has been cultivated.
Thèse hâve, he tells us, nearly ail proceeded **from
the ranks of advocates and li itéra leur s:''* — **Strangers
by their éducation, even with regard to the least
important phenomena, to every idea of scientific obser-
vation, to every notion of natural law, to every senti-
ment of true démonstration, it was impossible for them,
whatever might hâve been the intrinsic force of their
intelligence, to apply duly to the complicated problems
of Society a method of reasoning the simplest appli-
cations of which they werc wholly ignorant of, —
destitute, as they were, of any other philosophical
préparation than certain vague and inadéquate pfecepts
of gênerai logic." From this sweeping characterization
he excepts Adam Smith, and Adam Smith alone,

* " Philosophie Positive," vol. iv. p. 2C6.


VIII.] M. COMTE AND POLITICAL ECONOMY. 283

whose judgment îs commended in havîng avoîded
the "vaîn pretension" of founding a spécial science,
and in confining the aim of his work to the elucidation
of some detached points of social philosophy. But
with the single exception of the " Wealth of Nations/'
the whole dogmatic portion of the pretended science
présents, according to M. Comte, the simple metaphy-
sical character — a phrase which, as M. Comte's readers
are aware, supplies the strongest form of réprobation
known to the Comtian vocabulary. Of the truth of
this conclusion, if further évidence were needed, ample
is found in ** the avowal, spontaneous and décisive, of
the respectable Tracy," implied " in the insertion of
his treatise on Political Economy between Logics and
Ethics, as a fourth part of his gênerai treatise on
Ideology."

The impression which thèse comments will leave on
readers acquainted with the leading economical writers
of France and England, will scarcely, I should think,
be favourable to M. Comtes candour and sagacity.
It is, in fact, quite évident that M. Comte had no
effective knowledge of the brandi of science which
he denounced ; and it is scarcely crédible that he
could even hâve remembered, as he wrote the passage
from which I hâve niade the above extracts, who its
cultivators had been ; for the list includes, to mention
no othcrs, the names of Turgot, Hume, Bentham,
Ricardo, and the two Mills. There need be no hésita-
tion in saying — and the remark implies no disrespect
to M. Comte — that any one of thèse wTiters had quite
as accuratc a conception of what constitutes a law of
nature, and of the sort of proof by which a law of


284 ^^. COMTE AND POLITICAL ECONOMY. [essav

nature is established, as M. Comte himself. It would
seem, indeed, as if M. Comte's mind lost its proper
balance and edge on coming into contact with Political
Economy. Not only does he forget what is due to the
able thinkers who preceded him, and who — could he
hâve believed ît — were his fellow-labourers in building^
up that science of society of which he wished to
constitute himself the sole and exclusive founder, but
his sensé of logical cogency seems to fail him : I know
not how else to account for his référence to the collo-
cation of topics adopted by M. Destutt de Tracy in
his treatise on Ideology, as *' décisive" évidence of
the unpositive character of Political Economy. What
M. Comte s reasons were for excepting Adam Smith
from the gênerai condemnation passed upon the
cultivators of économie science, it is not easy to
surmise. One is almost tempted to believe that his
acquaintance with the eminent masters in the science
was confined to the author of the "Wealth of Nations."
Had he known, for example, and to mention no other
instances, Turgot's brief but pregnant " Essai sur la
Formation et la Distribution des Richesses" — a work
for which his biographer Condorcet, not unreasonably,
prefers the claim of being ** the germ of the * Wealth
of Nations'" — or Ricardos ** Principles of Political
Economy and Taxation," it is not easy to believe
that he could hâve committed himself to a distinc-
tion not less unjust than in vidions. Two works more
thoroughly saturated with the sévères t spirit of the
Positive Philosophy would not easily be found in the
literature of scientific spéculation.

But, passing from the personal question, M. Comte


viii.] M. COMTE AND POLITICAL ECONOMY, 285

proposes to try the Positive character of economîcal
spéculation by two tests, **contînuity" and "fecundity."
Thèse qualities, he remarks, are the least equivocal
symptoms of really scientific conceptions. ** When
the work of the présent time, instead of presenting
îtself as the spontaneous sequel and graduai consum-
mation of former work, takes, in the case of each
new author, a character essentially personal, and the
most fundamental notions are incessantly brought înto
question ; when the dogmatic constitution of a science,
far from engendering any sustained progress, results
habitually.in the stérile reproduction of illusory con-
troversies, ever renewed, never advancing ; when
thèse indications are found, there we may be certain
we hâve to do, not with positive science, but with
theological or metaphysical dissertation. Now is not
this the spectacle which Political Economy has
presented for half a century ? If our economists are
in reality the scientific successors of Adam Smith,
let them show us in what particulars they hâve efifec-
tively improved and completed the doctrine of that
immortal master, what discoveries really new they
hâve added to his original felicitous aperçus f

The tests proposed are indubitably sound. The
challenge is a fair one. If Political Economy cannot
make good its pretensions by the criteria of continuity
and fecundity, it deserves to be relegated to the
limbo to which M. Comte consîgns it.

But in proceeding to the ordeal it is necessary to
distinguish. There would, it must at once be ad-
mitted, be no diflficulty in showîng that a great deal
of writîng on economîcal subjects, now no less than


286 M. COMTE AND POLITICAL ECONOMY. [essay

when M. Comte published hîs crîtîcîsms, îs of the
sort which he describes as " metaphysical," — that is to
say, vague, ** personal/' full of ** stérile and illusory
controversîes ; " it must further be acknowledged that
this style of writing prevaîls to a far larger extent in
the discussions of Political Economy than in those of
any physical science. The least reflection, however,
will show, what has often been pointed out, that this
incident of économie spéculation is quite inévitable.
It results from two circumstances : first, the intimate
relation in which social questions, économie included,
stand to personal and class concerns, and through
them to gênerai politics, and the keen interest conse-
quently felt in such questions by the gênerai public ;
and, secondly, the absence of a technical nomenclature,
and the necessity which hence arises for employing
popular language in the exposition of the doctrines
of social and économie science. The inévitable consé-
quence of this State of things has been to attract to
the discussion of such topics a crowd of unqualified
persons. The incident, however, is not peculiar to
Political Economy; and, if a science is to be made
responsible for ail the unscientific and superficial argu-
mentation to which it gives occasion, Sociology would
hâve quite as much, perhaps rather more, to answer
for than économie science. The question, therefore,
cannot be decided by extracts drawn at random from
the miscellaneous literature of économie discussion :
it is not by extracts from such sources, but by the
doctrines of the science as expounded in the works
of acknowledged masters, that the issue must be
determined. From the writings of M. Comte's avocats


vin.] M. COMTE AND POLITICAL ECONOMY. 287

and littérateurs I must appeal to those of Malthus,
of Say, of Ricardo, of Tooke, of Senior, of Mill.
•Thèse I take to be the véritable scîentific successors
of Adam Smith — after him and Turgot, the true
founders and accredited expositors of économie doc-
trine. Limiting the controversy to this arena, I
venture to assert that a more remarkable example
of continuity of doctrine, of development of séminal
ideas, of original aperçus extended, corrected, occa-
sionally re-cast, of new discoveries supplementing,
sometimes modifying, the old — in short, of ail the
indications of progressive science — will not easily be
found even in the history of physical spéculation.*

The portion of économie science which Adam Smith
carried furthest, and in which he left least for hîs
successors to correct or supplément, is probably the
theory of production. With true instinct, he fixed on
labour and land as the great original sources of wealth.
Of thèse agencies, that furnished by nature being
a constant force, he saw that the progress of wealth
must dépend on the progressive efficiency of that
other which man contributed. The problem of pro-
duction thus resolved itself into ascertaining the
conditions determining the efficiency of human in-
dustry. Thèse conditions he grouped under three
leading catégories — division of labour, machinery, and

* " L'économie politique," says M. Courcelle-Scneuil, " bien que jeune
encore, présente une suite de travaux dont l'objet, le but et la méthode,
sont les mêmes, qui forment un corps, établissent une tradition et des
croyances communes, une science enfin dans laquelle les conceptions,
même fautives et imparfaites, servent à élever des théories moins fautives
et moins imparfaites ; dans laquelle chaque vérité découverte est recueil-
lie et conservée et chaque erreur signalée comme un écueil à éviter."


288 Af. COMTE AND POUTICAL ECO NO M W [essay

the accumulation of capital. Such, stated in a few
words, is the theory of production propounded in the
** Wealth of Nations." It has been submitted by his
successors to a searching criticîsm ; but it has emerged
from the ordeal, in the main, unaffected as regards the
essence of the doctrines, though more or less modi-
fied in détail. Land — though, without doing much
violence to language, we may extend the term to cover
ail that the land contains, ail the material objects,
therefore, which form the subject-matter of wealth,
and even those productive powers résident in the
earth — can yet scarcely be understood as comprising
the forces in gênerai of physical nature. Adam Smith,
at ail events, did not so employ the term ; and, accord-
ingly, his gênerai ization of the sources of wealth into
land and labour is defective in not paying sufficient
regard to the part performed in production by thèse
latter agencies. As he overlooked their co-operation,
so he necessarily failed to perceive the conditions on
which it was rendered, and the consecjuences involved
in the varying efficacy of those conditions — an
omission which has been supplied by his successors,
with important conséquences in the général theory
of économie development. Again, his conception of
capital has been carefully sifted by more than one
later writer, and has been cleared in the process
of discussion of some extraneous éléments which
obscured the true nature of the functions performed
by that agent of production. Division of labour,
again, which he regarded mainly in its more obvious
applications, has been shown to be a particular case of
a larger principle, co-operation, which embraces not


VIII.] M, COMTE AND POUTICAL ECONOMY. 289

merely the class of phenomena adverted to by Adam
Smîth, but the great transactions of înternatîonal
commerce, and industrîal organîzatîon în îts most
extended sensé. Subject to modifications of this
minor kind, however, the doctrines of Adam Smîth,
in the theory of production, hâve been retained, and
remain an intégral portion of the existing body of
économie science.

Passing to another field, and turnîng to his spécula-
tions on the phenomena of exchange value, one may
with great truth apply to them what M. Say has said
of his entire work : ** The more we extend our know-
ledge of Political Economy, the more hîghly we shall
appreciate both what he has done and what he has
left for others to do." There are passages in the
" Wealth of Nations " which touch the very core of
the true theory of value. When, for example, he
says : " The real price of everything, what every-
thing really costs to the man who wants to ac-
quire it, îs the toil and trouble of acquiring ît.
What everything is really worth to the man who
has acquired it, and who wants to dispose of it, îs
the toil and trouble which ît can save to himself,
and which it can impose upon other people : " — when,
again, he says : ** Labour was the first price — the
original purchase-money that was paid for ail things," *
he expressed truths which had only need to be firmly
grasped to unravel for him the complications of this

* Turgot also saw in industrial production the original act of exchange :
" L'homme est encore seul ; la nature seule fournit à ses besoins, et déjà
il fait avec elle un premier commerce où elle ne fournit rien qu'il ne paie
par son travail, par l'emploi de ses facultés et de son temps."— Valeurs et
Monnaies y quoted by M. Courcelle-Seneuil, vol. i. p. 504, note.

U


290 M. COMTE AND POLITICAL ECONOMY. [essay

most întricate order of phenomena. But he has hardly
laid hold on the due when he lets it go, and proceeds
to exclude from the opération of the principle he had
enunciated ail stages of social existence except the
earliest — that " rude state of society which précèdes the
accumulation of stock and the appropriation of land."
The doctrine of value, as he finally developed ît,
though vitiated by a defective analysîs of the éléments
of cost, nevertheless had the great merit of Connecting
the phenomena with cost as its governing principle,
and the further still higher merit — in which I think he
was entirely original — of bringing into view the con-
ception of " natural," as distinguished from " market "
values — that ** central price towards which the priées
of ail commodities are continually gravîtating." Thèse
were considérable achievements, as those will acknow-
ledge who are acquainted with the failure of even the
most able of his predecessors to get beyond superficial
gênerai ization s — one might say the commonplaces of
the subject — in this fundamental branch of Political
Economy,* or who observe the futile efforts to excogî-

♦ Turgot's exposition of the doctrine of value {Formation et Distribu-
tion des Richesses, §§ 33 — 35) does not go beyond proximate causes, namely,
the reciprocal wants and mcans of buyers and sellers in a given market ;
in modem phrase, demand and supply. But incidcntally in another part
of his work (§ 61), he falls into a groove of thought which ail but leads
him up to the principle of " natural price" and "cost of production.'*
" C'est lui " [the capitalist], he writcs, " qui attendra que la vente des cuirs
lui rende, non seulement toutes ses avances, mais encore un profit suffisant
pour le dédommager de ce que lui aurait valu son argent s'il Tavait em-
ployé en acquisition de fonds ; et de plus du salaire dû à ses travaux, à
ses soins, à ses risques, à son habileté même ; car sans doute, à profit
égal, il aurait préféré vivre sans aucune peine d'un revenu d'une terre
qu'il aurait pu acquérir avec le même capital." But having thus touched
on the true solution, he afterwards (§ 67) recurs to his former position :


VIII.] M. COMTE AND POLITICAL ECONOMY. 291

tate a theory of the numerous modem writers who
rush înto économie spéculations wîth no better guidance
than the light of nature. In this form the theory was
accepted by Say * without substantial change, but in
the hands of Ricardo it underwent important modifica-
tions, and in effect was recast. Startîng from Adam
Smith's conception of " natural price," and of cost as
the regulator of this, he did much to elucidate the
position by simply excluding from his exposition of the
subject ail that was inconsistent with thèse primary
assumptions. But he did more than this. His
clearer view of the nature of exchange value, and the
firmer grasp he had attained of the bearing of that
** first price," that " original purchase-money," on ail
the secondary results in the play of industrial exchange
flowing from the necessity of its payment, enabled him
to show that the same principle which govemed
exchanges in primitive societies, and which Adam
Smith imagined was peculiar to such societies, obtained
equally, though masked by xhe more complicated
machinery of advanced civilization, in ail stages of
industrial development; and finally enabled him to
bring within the scope of his gênerai theory a class of
phenomena of which the theory, as left by Adam

" Ce sont toujours les besoins et les facultés qui mettent le prix à la
vente," &c.

♦ M. Sa/s doctrine of value — so far as a distinct doctrine can be
elicited from his very contradictory statements — differed in some respects
from Adam Smith's ; but Ricardo bas sbown (Works, p. 172) that where
he differed, it was to go wrong. The essentials of Adam Smith's doc-
trine, that value was govemed by cost of production, and that cost of
production consisted of wages, profits, and rent, in such sensé that a rise
or fall of any of thèse éléments necessitated a corresponding rise or fall
of value — ail this M. Say fully held.

U 2


292 M. COMTE AND POLITICAL ECONOMY. [essay

Smith, faîled to gîve any intelHgîble account — the
phenomena of agricultural priées ; — a generalization
from which he was immediately led to his celebrated
doctrine of rent From the facts of value, as presented
within the limits of a single industrial community,
Ricardo advanced to the more complicated phenomena
presented by international exchange ; and hère, again,
with unfailing instinct, he laid his hand on the salient
éléments of the problem ; though it was reserved for
Mr. Mill, by his theory of the " équation of inter-
national exchange," first propounded in his " Essays on
Unsettled Questions in Political Economy,"* to com-
plète this portion of the docrine. In the more impor-
tant and fundamental spéculation, however, on the
governing principle of ** natural value" in domestic
transactions, Ricardo left little for his successors
to supply. Mr. Senior improved the exposition by
giving a name — Abstinence — to an élément of cost,
not unrecognized by Ricardo, and implied in his exposi-
tion, but not brought into sufficient prominence by
him ; and Mr. Mill, in his chapter on the " ultimate
éléments of cost of production," has effected some
modifications in détail, and given greater précision to
some of the conceptions involved ; but in essentials the
doctrine remains as it came from the master's hand.

In the field of foreign trade, Adam Smith achieved
important results, though mainly of a négative kind.
His onslaught on the mercantile theory of wealth, and
his advance from the destruction of that fetish to the

♦ " Un travail," says M. Cherbuliez of Geneva, " le plus important et
le plus original dont la science économique se soit enrichie depuis une
vinj^aine d'années."


VIII.] M. COMTE AND POLITICAL ECONOMY. 293

establishment of the doctrine of Free Trade, are among
hîs best-known exploits. Yet it is nevertheless true
that Adam Smith wholly failed to gîve a rational
account of the principle which occasions and governs
the înterchange of commodities between nations, and
by conséquence to explain in what consists, or what
measures, the gain of foreign trade. His language on
this subject, in not a few passages, exhïbits ail the
vacillation and contradiction of the mercantile school.
While alive to the important and fundamental truth
that ** consumptîon is the sole end and purpose of
production," and drawing the sound inference that
** the interests of producers ought to be attended
to only so far as they promote the interests of
çonsumers," the main ténor of his exposition of
the nature and effects of foreign trade is nevertheless
conceived dîstinctly from the producer's stand-point.
Foreign markets are regarded as bénéficiai, because
affording a **vent for surplus productions," and the
gain of commerce is supposed to lie mainly in its
conducing to maintain a hîgh range of mercantile
profit On the whole, it must be said, in spite of some
admirable maxims and pregnant hints which occur
throughout the discussion, that the theory of foreign
trade, as developed in the ** Wealth of Nations," con-
stitutes a mass of confused thought and misappre-
hended fact. The whole of this portion of the science
was still essentîally chaotic, and, notwithstanding the
partial elucidations effected by M. Say in his exposition
of the doctrine that " products are the markets for
products," remained in this condition until hère again
the genius of Ricardo, by a few masterly generaliza-


>


294 ^. COMTE AND POLITICAL ECONOMY. [essay

tions, întroduced order and light into the jarring
éléments. One of thèse, known to economists as the
doctrine of *' comparative cost," set forth, for the
first time, the fundamental conditions whîch détermine
the profitableness of international exchange. Adam
Smith's négative conclusions were not only corrobo-
rated but supplied with a basis in the gênerai theory
of the subject, while the small élément of truth con-
tained in the doctrine of the Mercantile school was
ascertained and discriminated. Phenomena, moreover,
which Adam Smith had wholly overlooked, and which
his doctrine would hâve been powerless to explain —
for example, the continued importation of a commodity
produced under less favourable conditions than those
available for its production in the împorting country —
were brought into view, and shown to be the necessary
conséquences of the fundamental law which govemed
this province of exchange. The theory of foreign
trade, thus for the first time placed upon a rational
foundation, has since been taken up by Mr. Mill, at
whose hands it has received important additions and
modifications, but additions and modifications, as Mr.
Mill himself is careful to point out, which are ail in the
nature of developments of the original doctrine — ail,
therefore, of that kind which are the natural incidents
and best évidence of progressive science.

Let me briefly trace the history of one(^mportant
économie doctrine more.^ The true nature and func-
tions of money, as employed within the limits of a
single country, were apprehended with great clearness
by Adam Smith. When he distinguished the coin of
a country — " the great wheel of circulation " — from the


VIII.] M. COMTE AND POLITICAL ECONOMY, 295

goods which it circulâtes ; when he Hkened the use of
paper money to the substitution for this wheel of
another, less costly and more convenient; and, by a
still more apt image, to a road through the air which
should enable the people of the country to turn to the
purposes of cultivation the space previously occupîed
by the ordinary highway; when, following out this
illustration, he showed how the conversion was effected
through the substitution, by means of interchange with
foreign countries, of productive capital for the barren
gold ; when he set the subject of a mixed currency in
this light, — he supplied or suggested principles adéquate
to explain the most important phenomena of domestic
circulation. Thèse principles hâve ail been accepted
by his successors, and are to be found in ail good text-
books of Political Economy : some of their consé-
quences, too, hâve been embodied in législative
measures. But the same weakness of his gênerai doc-
trine on the side of international exchange which
excluded him from clear insight into the movements of
cosmopolitan commerce, disabled him also in his
attempt to deal with the phenomena of international
money. On thie causes regulating the distribution of
gold and silver throughout the world, and the relative
range of prices amongst commercial nations, Adam
Smith has thrown little or no light ; but, as the reader
will anticipate, his shortcomings were hère again sup-
plemented by the same able thinker who had solved
the gênerai problem of international trade — a problem
of which the question of international money was but
a part. In other directions, also, monetary doctrines
hâve progressed since the time of Adam Smith. It


296 M, COMTE AND FOLITICAL ECONOMY. [essay^

would be strange indeed were it otherwîse. The
dîsturbance of monetary relations caused by the great
wars following on the French Révolution, the suspen-
sion of cash payments for twenty years by the Bank of
England, the immense development of crédit which
has signalized the last half-century, hâve brought to
lîght monetary phenomena of a range and complexity
unknown in the earlier perîod. The investigations of
the Bullion Committee of 1810, and the admirable
labours of Mr. Tooke, preserved in his '* History of
Priées," hâve turned thèse opportunities to excellent
account, and shed new light over the whole of this ex-
tended and intricate field ; which has been still further
elucidated by the discussion arising out of the contro-
verted question of the policy of the Bank Act of 1844.
Such, then, in four capital departments of Political
Economy, has been the course of spéculation sînce
the publication of the "Wealth of Nations;"* and
there would be no difficulty in extending the illustra-
tion to other doctrines of the science. But I think I
may stop hère, and ask if there is nothing in ail this
but *' the reproduction of stérile controversies, ever
renewed, never advancing?" Is this a spectacle of
purely theological and metaphysical dissertation "i Is ît

* In the foregoing argument I hâve dra^'n my illustrations mainly from
the Works of English economists ; not that I hâve any wish to ignore what
has been done by other schools, but because the capital discoveries in
the science havc, so far as I know, been made by Englishmen. This, I
observe, is freely admitted byone of the most cminent of récent contribu-
ors to économie spocuLition on the Continent. M. Cherbuliez, of Gencva,
writes : — " On peut considérer Adam Smith comme le fondateur d'une
école, de cette école Anglaise, à laquelle la science est redevable de presque
tous les théorèmes importants dont elle s*est enrichie depuis le commence-
ment de ce siècle." — Préris de la Science Éionot/iique, voî. i. p. 3a


viii.] M. COMTE AND POLITICAL ECONOMY. 297

true that the successors of Adam Smith hâve nothîng
to show of effective contribution to the doctrines of
their master, no really new discoveries to add to his
" felicitous aperçus'' "^ Are we not, on the contrary,
justified in affirming that Political Economy présents,
and that in a very eminent degree, one at least of
those symptoms which M. Comte has declared to be
among the least equi vocal évidences of really scîen-
tific conceptions — continuity of doctrine ?

The other criterion by which M. Comte proposes to
try Political Economy is fecundity, or the test of
fruit And hère it is probable many people would
meet his challenge by adducing the gênerai results
of modem industrial and commercial législation — such
results, for example, as the extinction of trade corpora-
tions, the abolition of usury laws, the more or less
extensive adoption by the leading nations of Europe
of the principle of free trade, Englîsh colonial policy,
Englîsh financial, monetary, and poor-law reforms —
achievements which, it will scarcely be denied, may
be fairly credited to Political Economy. They are
unquestionably in gênerai conformity with its prin-
ciples ; and they were carried into effect by men more
or less under the influence of, some of them deeply
imbued with, the spirit of its teaching. Nevertheless
I must demur to the test of fecundity as thus under-
stood. More than one even of the physical sciences
might find themselves in straits if requîred to make
good their pretensions by a criterion of this sort.
Geology is counted a science, yet amongst practical
miners, whether in Wales and Cornwall or in California
and Australia, empirical expérience, coupled with


298 M. COMTE AND POLITICAL ECONOMY. [essav

native sagacîty, stands, îf I hâve not been misîn-
formed, for much more than the most profound geo-
logîcal knowledge. Zoology, Botany, perhaps also
Biology, if brought to the same test, might find them-
selves in similar dîfficultîes ; and I rather think Pro-
fessor Max Millier would find it no easy matter to
establish the scîentific character of those philological
studies of which he is the learned advocate, by the
criterion of fruit in this sensé of the word. Are we
then to say that thèse several branches of scientific
knowledge hâve borne no fruit — that they hâve no
results to show in évidence of their scientific preten-
sions ? Rather, I think, it behoves us to consider
whether such results as those of which examples hâve
been given above — applications, that is to say, of
scientific principles to the practical arts of life —
constitute the proper fruit of a science. It is in this
sensé that M. Comte applies the test to Political
Economy, and even in this sensé, as has been seen,
Political Economy émerges triumphant from the
ordeal ; but the criterion, as thus understood, is vicious,
and ought not to be accepted. Practical applications
of scientific principles are, I submit, not the proper
fruit, but the accidentai conséquences of scientific
knowledge; or if fruit, then fruit of the kind typi-
fied by the apple of Atalanta, against the attrac-
tions of which Bacon warns the aspirant in the
scientific race as apt to draw him aside from the
nobler pursuit. It is not in such tangible results that
we shall find the genuine fruit of science ; thèse may,
and in the end generally will, come in abundant supply,
but they are not of the essence of the plant ; it is not


VIII.] M. COMTE AND POLITICAL ECONOMY. 299

in thèse, but in that power which îs the end and aim
of scientîfic knowledge — the power of interpreting
nature, of explaining phenomena. This is a test from
which no true science will shrink, and by the resuit
the scientific claims of Political Economy, as of ail
other subjects of spéculation, must stand or fall. Now
the question is, has Political Economy given évidence
of fecundity as thus understood ? Has it increased
our power of interpreting the facts of industrial and
commercial life ? To deny this would, it seems to me,
be as futile as to make a similar déniai respecting any
of the physical sciences. M. Comte, indeed, does not
go this length. On the contrary, he admits, if not in
terms, at least by implication, that Political Economy
is equal to the interprétation of économie phenomena.
But his objection is, that it has not succeeded in pre-
venting the injurions conséquences which are incident
to some of the laws it expounds. To state, for
example, the effects of the extended use of machinery
in the production and distribution of wealth, if the
exposition be unaccompanied by the suggestion of
practical remédies for the industrial evils incident to
the process, is, according to M. Comte, a proceeding
"vraiment dérisoire," équivalent to proclaiming "the
proper social impotency " of économie science — a
complaint which, it seems to me, is about as philo-
sophical as if we were to condemn the science of
electricity, because, in spite of lîghtning-conductors,
houses are sometimes struck by lightning, or to re-
proach mechanical science because railway-trains come
into collision, or to denounce astronomy because it is
powerless to prevent éclipses. Political Economy, it


. j


300 M. COMTE AND POLIT ICA L ECO NOM Y, [essaV

must be owned, has no panacea to offer for the cure
of socîal evils, but ît has that to offer which it îs
in the nature of science to furnish — h'ght as to the
causes on whîch those evils, so far as they proceed
from économie agencies, dépend. It reveals the laws
accordîng to which wealth is produced, accumulated,
and distributed ; according to which capital increases,
and profit déclines, and rent grows, and wages, prices,
and interest fluctuate ; according to which, in a word,
économie phenomena are governed ; ît thus extends
our power of interpreting nature, and, **by obeying,
of conquering her;" and, in doing so, it has given
évidence of fecundity in the only sensé in which
fecundity can be properly required of a science.

A great deal has been made by M. Comte of the
divergence of view on fundamental points revealed by
the discussions of économie science. The fact, whether
to be regretted or not, cannot be denied ; but it may
be asked what there is in the controversies of
economists that has not been paralleled again and
again in the history of every physrical science ?
What, for example, has been the history of chemieal
progress but a succession of controversies upon points
of the most fundamental character; controversies
which hâve not yet been closed ? There is, indeed,
no little analogy between the course of Chemistry
in this respect and that of Political Economy. While
Adam Smith and the French Physiocrats were dis
cussing the fundamental problem as to the nature
and ultimate sources of wealth, a parallel controversy
was ragîng between the followers of Stahl in England,
and those of Lavoisier in France, on the most funda-


VIII.] M. COMTE AND POLITICAL ECONOMY. 301

mental of chemîcal problems — the nature of combus-
tion. Both controversies, after periods of about equal
duration, were closed by the définitive triumph of
English views in Political Economy, of French views
in Chemîstry ; but closed only to be opened again on
new, but still fundamental issues. There are French
economists who refuse to accept the doctrines of popu-
lation and rent propounded by Malthus and Ricardo.
And there are chemists, English and French, who,
holding by the theory of Lavoisier as to the primary
character of chemical combinations, reject the subtle
spéculations of a more modem school. At the présent
moment, as I learn from a récent article in the Revue
des deux Mondes, there are no less than three distinct
positions taken by chemists on the question of the
molecular constitution of bodies : —

"Can it be said," asks the writer, "that the theory of
atomicity reigns now without challenge in chemical science ?
No, we hâve not reached that point. There are still amongst
savans of the highest authority some declared partisans of
the theory of Lavoisier. There are chemists who, while
abandoning the ancient doctrines, refuse to accept the new,
and for the moment acknowledge no gênerai idea of a kînd to
guide investîgators. One may foresee, however, that the prin-
ciple of atomicity will, at no distant day, rise superior to
opposition and doubt." *

With such facts before us it will scarcely be main-
tained that divergence of view amongst the cultivators
of a science on even fundamental points is inconsistent
with its positive character; and we can, therefore,

♦ See an article in the Revue des deux Mondes^ I5th July, 1869,
by M. Edgar Savenez : ' UÉvolution des Doctrines chimiques depuis
Lavoisier.'


302 M. COMTE AND POLIT/CAL ECO NO M Y. [essay

afford to admît the existence of English and French
schools of PoUtical Economy, without being forced to
take rank as outcasts from the Positive pale, among
metaphysîcal and theological dissertators. We may
even go further than this, and contemplate the possi-
bility of économie generalizations which shall supersede
some now holding their place in our text-books.
Whatever may ultimately become of our existing
doctrines of value, of rent, of profits, of international
trade, they can scarcely meet a harder fate than befell
the phlogistic theory of combustion, or than seems
likely to befall the binary theory of chemical combîna-
tîon. Those doctrines, as they stand, do in fact explain
a vast number and varîety of the phenomena of wealth
presented by modem industrial societies. This alone,
on Positive principles, constitutes a valid title, at ail
e vents, to the claim of provisional acceptance. Sub-
séquent examination will show whether they do not
also satisfy the second condition required for their
definite récognition as natural laws.

The above considérations will probably be deemed
a sufïicient answer to M. Comte on the criterion of
fecundity as applied to Political Economy ; but in con-
nection with this topic, that philosopher has some
remarks on the subject of scientific prévision as prac-
ticable in the social sciences, the bearing of which on
Political Economy it may be well hère briefly to
examine.

M. Comte has laid it down as the attribute of a
true social science, that it be able to establish a
** rational filiation in the succession of events, so as to
permit, as for every other order of phenomena, and


viii.] M. COMTE AND POLITICAL ECONOMY. 303

wîthin the gênerai lîmîts împosed by a superîor compli-
cation, a certain systematic prévision of their ulterior
succession." The point to whîch I wish to call atten-
tion is the extent to which Political Economy satisfies
the condition hère required of a social science.

That in a certain sensé '' prévision " is attainable in
the phenomena treated by Political Economy will be
at once seen if we consider that îts principles hâve
been frequently taken as a guide in practical législa-
tion. It is true the rules by which a practical art is
conducted may be empirical ; but this character cannot
be attributed to the conclusions of Political Economy :
the common objections to it lie, indeed, ail in the
opposite direction. It cannot be denied, for example,
that the doctrine of Free Trade is a product of
systematic reasoning : true or false, it is at least no
rule of thumb. We had no expérience of Free Trade
when Adam Smith and Turgot preached it. The
announcement, then, that free trade would enrich a
country, like the announcement that water would
ascend in the exhausted tube of a pump, formed a
distinct prédiction — a prédiction that certain effects
would follow from certain causes ; and a prédiction
which, wherever the experiment has been tried,* has
been verified by the event. It is clear, therefore, that
to this extent Political Economy lays claim, and not
without valid grounds, to the power of prediction.f

♦ Using the term * experiment ' in the loose sensé in which alone ex-
periments in social science are possible. See Mill's " Logic," ii. p. 456, &c.

f " Elle peut prévoir les conséquences de tel ou tel acte, et c'est dans
cette faculté de prévoir les fruits à venir qu'elle trouve, comme la physique,
la contre-épreuve de la théoi ie, le signe de leur certitude."- Traité
{f Économie Politique^ par J. G. Courcelle-Sencuil, vol. i. p. 10,


304 M. COMTE AND POLITICAL ECONOMY. [essay

But the faculty contemplated by M. Comte, in the
passage I hâve quoted, would seem to comprehend
something more than thîs. It was to be a power of
foreseeîng, not merely a single conséquence, however
gênerai and wide-reaching, but a train of conséquences
depending by " rational filiation " on an original cause.
Can it be said that Political Economy satisfies thîs
requîrement ? Before answering this question, let us
observe what the requirement involves.

We hâve seen that Political Economy has pre-
dicted certain results as flowing from the policy of
Free Trade ; but it is not more certain that freedom
of trade favours the best distribution of industrial
forces, and thus conduces to the augmentation of
wealth, than it is that an accelerated growth of capital
promotes an accelerated increase of population ; while
it is equally certain that, where other things are
equal, density of population is attended with certain
économie advantages — advantages which in their tum
converge to the same resuit, intensifying the original
impulse towards augmented wealth and population.
Further it might be shown, remembering that the
material well-being of a people dépends in the last
resort upon their habits as afïecting their disposition
and power to keep their numbers within the limits of
the means of support ;— remembering again that the
habits of a people are liable to be modified by changes
in its condition if thèse be sufficiently long continued ;
— I say it might be shown, having regard to thèse
considérations, that a Free-trade policy would hâve a
tendency, not merely to enrich a country and augment
the number of its people. Lut also, through an action


VIII.] M. COMTE AND POLITICAL ECONOMY. 303

upon their habits, to raîse permanently the standard of
well-being among the population whose numbers it had
contributed to increase. This, perhaps, will sufïice for
the purpose of illustration ; but if the reader desires
to see examples of this mode of reasoning on social
affairs applied to actual questions of momentous
interest, he has only to turn to Mr. Mill's celebrated
chapters in the second volume of his "Political Eco-
nomy" on the " Influence of the Progress of Society
on Production and Distribution." In such instances,
then, we find a " rational filiation " established in the
succession of économie influences.

But does it amount to prévision of the actual order
of économie events, and would it justify a distinct pré-
diction of a remote économie resuit ? At this point I
think the answer must be in the négative ; and for
this reason : the realization of the results described is
contingent in each case on the action of contem-
poraneous agencies influencing the course of events,
but not included in the économie prémisses. In short,
the économie prévision is a prévision, not of events,
but of tendencies — tendencies which would be liable,
in a greater or less degree, or even completely, to be
counteracted by others of which it takes no account.*

♦ " It is évident, in the first place, that Sociology, considered as a System
of déductions à priori^ cannot be a science of positive prédictions, but
only of tendencies. We may be able to conclude, from the laws of human
nature applied to the circumstances of a given state of society, that a
particular cause will operate in a certain manner unless counteracted ;
but we can never be assured to what extent or amount it will so operate,
or affirm witli certainty that it will not be counteracted, because we can
seldom know, even approximatively, ail the agencies which may co-exist
with it, and still less calculate the collective resuit of so many combined
éléments. The remark, however, must hère be once more repeated, that

X


3o6 Af. COMTE AND POUTICAL ECONOMY, [essay

This incapacity, however, of forecasting events, let it
be noted, argues no imperfection in économie science ;
the imperfection is not hère, but in those other cognate
sciences to which belongs the détermination of the non-
economic agencies which are the unknown quantities
in the problem. When thèse cognate social sciences
shall hâve been brought up to the same stage of
advancement which has been attained by Political
Economy, something approaching to that systematic
prévision of events contemplated by M. Comte will
be possible. Meanwhile it is no slight gain, in specu-
lating on the future of society, to hâve it in our power
to détermine the direction of an order of tcndencîes
exercising so wide, constant, and potent an influence
on the course of human development as the conditions
of wealth. It isto hold in our hand one, and that not
the weakest, of the threads of destin y.

So much for that highest form of scîentific fruit —
" forecast of the future." The principle, however, of
establishing a filiation in events may take the more
modest form of explaining the past ; and hère, it
seems to me, we hâve a field in which if abundant
fruit has not been reaped, it is only because the ground

knowledge insuflficicnt for prédiction may be most valuable for guidance.
It is not necessary for the wise conduct of the affairs of society, no more
than of anyone's private concerns, that we should be able to foresee
infallibly the results of what we do. We must seek our objects by mcans
which may perhaps be defeated, and take précautions against dangers
which possibly may never be realized. The aim of practical politics is
to surround any given society with the greatest possible number of cir-
cumstances of which the tendencies are bénéficiai, and to rcmovc or
counteract, as far as practicable, those of which the tendencies are
injurious. A knowledge of the tendencies only, though without the power
of accurately predicting their conjunct resuit, gives us to a certain extent
this power.* — Mii-lAs System of Logic^ vol. ii. p. 477, Third édition.


VIII.] M, CO^fTE AND POLITICAL ECONOMY, 307

has not been adequately cultîvated. That Political
Economy — assuming that it fulfils its lîmîted purpose
of unfolding the natural laws of wealth — îs capable
of throwing light on the évolutions of history, will
scarcely be denied, îf only ît be considered how large
a proportion of ail human existence is absorbed in the
mère pursuit of physical well-being, how extensively
the material interests of men prevail in determining
their political opinions and conduct, and in how many
subtle ways worldly considérations gain an entrance
into the heart and conscience, and help to give the eue
to moral and religions ideas. It îs scarcely possible, I
say, to reflect on this, and not perceive that to the right
interprétation and correct exposition of the conduct of
men in past times— that conduct which makes history
— a knowledge of the laws of wealth, a knowledge of
the direction in which, in a given epoch, material
interests draw the men who live in it, forms an indis-
pensable qualification. Obvions, however, as this re-
flection îs, the truth (except in a few eminent instances)
has been ail but wholly ignored. Speaking generally,
it is not yet supposed — notwithstanding Mr. Buckle's
admirable efforts to raise the standard of requirement
on this point — that a knowledge of Political Economy
is any necessary part of the equipment of an hîstorian.
It is impossible to doubt that the conséquences of this
view of things to historié study hâve been very
serions ; that many precîous indications, which to a
student fumished with the économie key would hâve
opened light through not a few of the dark but impor-
tant crises of history, hâve been wholly lost to us —
thrown away upon învestîgators who, however rich in

X 2


3o8 M. COMTE AND POLITJCAL ECONQMY. [essay

érudition, perhaps embarrassed with theîr riches, were
unprovîded wîth this potent instrument. Our his-
torians hâve but rarely been economîsts, and I fear it
must be acknowledged that our economîsts hâve quîte
as rarely been profound students of hîstory ; and it
has thus come to pass that this important field of
économie research has as yet produced but scanty fruit.


Note on an Essay by Frédéric Harrison, written
in reply to the foregoing, whiciï appeared in

THE "FORTNIGHTLY ReVIEW" FOR JULY 1870.

I quîte agrée wîth Mr. Harrison that the comparing of
opinions by the disciples of tvvo parallel schools of thought,
" where there is mutuaj respect, no spirit of rivalry, and an
active sensé of a common purpose," may bc as useful in
eliciting truth, as controversy, in the theological sensé of the
term, îs generally efficacîous in hiding it ; and I trust I shall
not be thought oblivious of this, or unapprcciative of the
gracious and highly flatterîng terms in which he has recog-
nized my attempts to deal with a difficult problem, if I
désire to append some observations in vindication of my own
accuracy on some points on which he has impugned it. I am
quite content that the arguments I hâve used in defence of
the scîentific pretensions of Political Economy against the
attacks of Comte should be taken subject to whatever modi-
fication of their force or scope Mr. Harrison's strictures may
be thought to hâve shown that they require ; but on one or
two points his criticisms amount to a challenge of my ac-
curacy in stating Comte's doctrine. On a question of this
kind those only are qualified to judgc who arc students] of
Comte's writings, and even they may not find it convenient to
verify at once the passages on which the issue turns. I am
anxious, therefore, to lay before the readers of Mr. Harrison s
Essay and mine the means of judging between us upon this
part of the case.


vin.] M. COMTE AND POLITICAL ECONOMY. \ vJ^
At p. 40 Mr. Harrison corrects me în thèse terms : — ^^^iSl/lf ^*


"Comte {foes not *contend that the problems presented, on the one
hand, bj' physical nature, and, on the other, by social life, are so radically
discordant that the method applicable to Ihe one must be, not only
modifîcd, but reversed, in dealing with the other/ He is speaking of the
inor^anic^ not of the physical world. Comte insists that the organic
phenomena of ail sorts — 2oologicaI, physiological, moral, and social —
cannot be pursued by a method which is very useful in the inorganic,"
&c. (The italics are Mr. Harrison's.)

It seems to me that most readers would by " physical," in
the passage quoted from my Essay, understand " inorganic."
Those sciences which deal with the physical phenomena of
the organic world, as zoology, botany, &c., are, I think, more
commonly called " natural sciences ; " the term " physical "
being rather reserved for the sciences dealing with inorganic
nature, such as astronomy, dynamics, chemistry, &c. But
however this may be, it was, I submit, scarcely open to Mr.
Harrison to fix upon this passage and proceed to comment
upon it in language which implied that I was ignorant of the
true character of Comte's distinction, when the page from
which he quoted contained the foUowing:- —

" As has been said, then, the sciences are arranged in the order indicated
by the degree of complexity in their subject-matter. ... As phenomena
become more complex, the method [of disintegration and separate study],
he contends, becomes less suitable, less efïicacious, till at length a point
is reached at which it fails altogether, and it becomes necessary to adopt
a contrary mode of procédure, the mode of procédure, namely, which he
describes as investigation through the ensemble, This point in the scale
of the sciences coïncides, he tells us, with that at which the transition is
madefrom inorganic to organic nature. The method of investigation by
disintegration and separate study should thenceforth give way to that
which proceeds by treatment in the ensemble, Accordingly he holds that
the organic sciences generally should be cultivaled in conformity with
this principle."

Agaîn, at p. 45, Mr. Harrison writes : —

" I tum to the reasoning of Professor Caimes against what he says is
M. Comte's position — * that phenoniena, in proportion as they are more
complex, are more solidaires^ For my own part, I cannot find in Comte
any such doctrine, at Icast so stated.''


3IO M. COMTE AND POLITICAL ECONOMY. [essay

Now I beg to call Mr. Harrison*s attention to the follow-
ing passage :* —

" Mais on doit, à ce sujet, reconnaître, en principe, que le consensus
deinent toujours d* autant plus intime et plus prononcé quHl Rapplique à
des phénomènes graduellement plus complexes et moins généraux ; en sorte
que, suivant ma hiérarchie scientifique élémentaire, l'étude des phéno-
mènes chimiques forme, par sa nature, à ce titre, comme à tout autre, une
sorte d'intermédiaire fondamental entre la philosophie inorganique et la
philosophie organique, ainsi que chacun peut aisément s'en convaincre.
D'après ce principe, il reste néanmoins incontestable que, conformément
aux habitudes philosophiques prépondérantes, c*est surtout aux systèmes
organiques f en vertu de leur plus grande complication^ que conviendra
toujours essentiellement la notion scientifique de solidarité et de consensus^
malgré son universalité nécessaire."

If M. Comte does not hère state that " phenomena, in pro-
portion as they are more complex, are more solidaires^* I
must confess myself incompétent to înterpret him. I may
add that the same doctrine is implied (as I read his words)
in the wliole ténor of his exposition of sociological method.

The passage just quoted supplies an answer to another of
Mr. Harrison's criticisms. At p. 41 he writes : —

" * But why,* says Professor Caimes, * the method of ensemble in studying
the organic world t ' Why } Because the organic world is an eftsemàle,
Every organism is an ensemble, Every organic System and order is an
ensemble. The organic means something which lias a complex function
over and above that of any of its éléments. The study of the organic is
simply the study of this complex function (z>. of an ensemble)^

Now, whatever be the merit of this answer, what I am
concerned hère to show is that it is not Comte's : not only îs
it not Comte's answer, it is inconsistent with Comte*s answer.
Mr. Harrison says the organic world must be studied in the
ensemble, " because it îs an ensemble, Every organism is an
ensemble ;" but according to M. Comte (as will be seen by
référence to the passage just quoted), the reason for this is
that the phenomena comprised in the organic world are
" more complex," and, ** in virtue of their greater complica-
tion," more " solidaires^' than those of the inorganic world —
a reason which, a little reflection will show, by no means runs

♦ " Philosophie Positive," vol. iv. p. 350. Edit. 1839.


viii] M. COMTE AND POLITICAL ECONOMY. 311

on ail fours with the former. For example, as M. Comte
States the case, one can see why the study of chemical phe-
nomena should occupy an intermediate position between
organic and inorganic philosophy. It is intermediate, because
— the whole distinction turning on a question of degree — ^the
phenomena it deals with are more complex than other in-
organic phenomena, less complex than organic. But how
does this accord with Mr. Harrison*s rendering of the argu-
ment } Where is the room for a middle term between
organic and inorganic if the distinction turns upon the con-
sidération of the présence or absence of organic character,
of " complex function " ? Are chemical phenomena semi-
organic } Do they exhibit " complex function " in a rudimen-
tary form } If not, how is Mr. Harrison*s statement of the
argument consistent with assîgning chemical studies an
intermediate place }

Further, if the fact of "organic character," of "complex
function," be the ground of the distinction, the reasons for
the method of the ensemble will be strong or weak according
as the phenomena to be dealt with partake of this character,
manifest this "complex function/' Now does Mr. Harrison
contend that a society is an organîsm in a stricter sensé than
an individual man ; that the adaptation of structure to func-
tion is viore complète in the case of a nation than in that
of a human being } I hardly think he will say so ; nay, I am
sure he will admit that the reverse is the fact ; but, if so, his
reason for the method of the eftsentble has less force in relation
to social investigations than in relation to the study of îndi-
vidual life — is less applicable to sociology than to biology —
a conclusion which exactly reverses one of Comte's most
frequently reiterated opinions. Comte held that the reasons
for studying social facts in the efisemble are incomparably
stronger than those which apply to biological investigations.
This is entirely in harmony with his doctrine as I hâve stated
it ; social phenomena being " more complex " than biological;
but, as it seems to me, absolutely irreconcilable with Mr.
Harrison's exposition.


IX.

BASTIAT.*

Science belongs to no country; yet the method of
cultîvatîng a science cannot but be affected by the
habits of philosophie thought which prevail among
its cultivators ; and thîs influence will obviously be
stronger in proportion as the subject-matter of science
cornes more directly into contact with human intelli-
gence and will. I hâve lately pointed out in this
Reviewt that, even in a spéculation so eminently
positive as Chemistry, there is room for différence
of opinion on problems of a fundamental kind, and
that in England and France opposing schools hâve
ranged themselves round conflicting théories from
the infancy of chemical science down to the présent
hour. It îs not, then, strange that similar phenomena
should manifest themselves in Political.Economy, so
much more closely connected than Chemistry with
human conduct and pursuits ; and we need not be
surprised if we find in France modes of thinking on
this subject more or less out of relation with those

♦ Fortnightly Review^ October 1870. f Ante^ p. 301.


EssAY IX.] B ASTI AT, 313

•

which prevail among oiirselves. The fact unquestion-
ably is so ; but it is important that we should not
overrate its extent or sîgnificance. Indeed, I thînk,
it must be considered as no slight testimony to the
influence of the scientific point of view in keepîng
spéculation straight, that, in spite of the divergent
tendencies of national philosophies, the most charac-
teristic doctrines of the English school of Political
Economy should hâve found some of their most
powerful champions and most skilful expositors on
the other side of the Channel ; and that such men
as Say, Duchâtel, Garnier, Courcelle-Seneuil, and
Cherbuliez, while contributing not a few original and
important developments to économie doctrine, should
hâve been the interpreters to their countrymen of
Adam Smith and Malthus, Ricardo and Mill. In
efiect, the main stream of économie thought has in
both countries flowed in the same channels; while
the idiosyncrasies of the national mind hâve, on each
side, made themselves felt in producing certain eddies
of spéculation apart from the main current. No one
can be at any loss in finding examples of aberrations
due to this cause among ourselves. Among French
political thinkers one of the most noteworthy is pre-
sented by the writings of Bastiat.

The name of Bastiat is, perhaps, the most familiar
in this country of ail French economîsts ; a resuit to
which several circumstances hâve contributed besides
the merit of his writings. At a critical period of our
reforming career he threw himself wîth extraordinary
ardour into our contests, and lent effective assistance
to the side that has triumphed. He is known on


314 '^-'^ STIA T. [ Ess A Y

more than one occasion to hâve made himself the
generous defender of English policy and character
against the unreasoning préjudices of his countrymen.
He was, moreover, the friend of Cobden — in itself, in
the judgment of most, a sufïîcient voucher for écono-
mie acquirement; and he has been fortunate enough
to find excellent translators for his principal works.
This last circumstance cannot, indeed, be fairly sepa-
rated from the merits of the writings themselves ; and
ît must be owned that thèse were in some respects of
a high and rare order. As examples of dialectical
skill in reducing an opponent to absurdity, of simple
and felicitous illustration, of délicate and polished
raillery, attaining occasionally the pitch of a refined
irony, , the **Sophîsmes Economiques" might almost
claim a place beside the ** Provincial Letters." The
pétition of the candle-makers and other manufac-
turers of light to the Législative Body, praying the
exclusion by législative enactment of the light of the
sun, is alone almost enough to make a réputation in
this line ; and Swift himself has hardly shown greater
art in the logical conduct of an absurd proposition
than that with which the reader, in this modest pro-
posai, is led, step by step, from the avowed
prémisses of Protection, through a séries of the most
natural and irréfragable déductions, straight to the
preposterous conclusion advocated by the petitioners.

" What we pray for is, that it may please you to pass a law
ordering the shutting up of ail Windows, skylights, dormer-
windows, outsîde and insîde shutters, curtains, blinds, buH's-
eyes — în a word, of ail openings, holes, chinks, clefts, and
fissures, by or through which the light of the sun has been


IX.] B ASTI AT. 315

allowcd to enter hoiises, to the préjudice of the meritorious
manufactures with which we flatter ourselves we hâve accom-
modated our country — a country which, in gratitude, ought

not to abandon us now to a strife so unequal

" And, first, if you shut up as much as possible ail access to
natural light, and create a demand for artificial light, which of
our French manufactures will not be encouraged by it ?

" If more tallow is consumed, then there must be more
oxen and sheep ; and, consequently, we shall behold the
increase of artificial meadows, méat, wool, hîdes, and, above
ail, manure, which is the basis and foundation of ail agri-
cultural wealth.

"If more oil is consumed, then we shall hâve an extended
cultivation of the poppy, of the olive, and of colewort. Thèse
rich and exhausting plants will come at the right tîme to
enable us to avail ourselves of the increased fertility which
the rearîng of additional cattle will impart to our lands.

"Our heaths will be covered with résinons trees. Numerous
swarms of bées will, on the mountains, gather perfumed
trcasures, now wasting their fragrance on the désert air, like
the flowers from which they are derived. No branch of

agriculture but will then exhibit a cheering development

"If you urge that the light of the sun is a gratuitous gift of
nature, and that to reject such'gifts is to reject wealth îtself
under pretcnce of encouragîng the means of acquiring it, we
would caution you against giving a death-blow to your own
policy. Remember that hitherto you hâve always repelled
foreign products, because they approximate more nearly than
home products to the character of gratuitous gifts. To com-
ply with the exactions of other monopolists, you hâve only
half a motive ; and to repuise us simply because we stand on
a stronger vantage-ground than others, would be to adopt the
équation + X + = — ; in other words, it would be to heap
absurdity upon absurdity,

"Make your choice, but be logical; for as long as

you exclude, as you do, coal, iron, corn, foreign fabrics, /;/
proportion as their price approximates to zero^ what inconsis-


3i6 BASTIAT. [essay

tency would it be to admit the light of the sun, the price
of whîch is already at zéro during the entire day!"

But ît was not on the **Sophîsmes Economiques"
that Bastiat would hâve been content to take the ver-
dict of posterity as to his pretensîons as an economist.
Indeed, whatever might be the controversial and
literary merits of thèse admirable tracts, they added
nothing to already familiar économie truths. The
theory of Free Trade had been fully thought out by a
succession of able writers before Bastiat took it in
hand, and ail that he hère could do was what, in fact,
he did — furnish new and apt illustrations of a familiar
doctrine, or, by well-selected instances, reduce oppo-
nents to glaring absurdity. But in 1848 the advent
of the démocratie republic brought other questions to
the front, and stirred controversies more fitted to try
the métal of a philosophie thinker. Socialism had
raised its grim visage, and was propounding those
solutions of the social problem, the mère recollection
of which has since so often sufficed to frighten France
from lier propriety. Louis Blanc, Considérant, Leroux,
Proudhon, were thundering against the existing in-
dustrial order; and for those who cared to maintain
that order the need of the hour was a philosophy
adapted to the popular appréhension, which should
be capable of furnishing a plausible reply to their
attacks. At this time Bastiat was at the height of
his réputation in Paris. He had frankly and sincerely
accepted the Révolution, though sensible of the unpre-
paredness of the country for the new régime^ and
alive to the inévitable dangers incident to this state
of thîngs. His views, however, did not extend beyond


IX. J B ASTI A T. 3ï7

political changes, and while recognîzîng the generous
aims of the Socialists, he shrank with horror from their
subversive proposais. He accordingly came forward
eagerly to défend the menaced social structure. In a
séries of clever brochures — ** Propriété et la Loi,"
** Propriété et Spoliation," " Justice et Fraternité,"
** Capital et Rente," ''Maudit Argent," — he propounded
his reply to the "despotic organizers" — "ces pétrîsseurs
de l'argile humaine." As he wrote,his îdeas took
firmer hold of his mind, and gradually shaped them-
selves into a System. The needed philosophy was, he
thought, to be found in a recast of Political Economy,
and the ** new exposition" he undertook to furnish in
his ** Harmonies Économiques." Unfortunately, Bastiat
did not live to complète this work ; but enough was
accomplished to render perfectly clear the essential
character of the conception and the gênerai scope of
his design. The English reader has now an oppor-
tunity of studying it in Mr. Stirling's excellent
Translation.

Political Economy, as treated by the predecessors
of Bastiat — by Adam Smith and his successors in this
country, by Say and his successors in France — aimed at
unfolding the natural principles — natural in the sensé
of having their foundation in the nature of man and
of his environments — which govern the facts of material
well-being. Those economists did not, indeed, hold
themselves precluded from pointing out, when occasion
offered, the moral and social bearing of their doctrines ;
but, in gênerai, they recognized the distinction between
such practical lessons as they believed deducible from
their expositions and the doctrines of the science


31 8 B ASTI AT, [essay

which they taught In effect, Political Economy, in
their hands, was a positive science, in the modem
sensé of that expression ; îts methods were combîned
induction and déduction ; its conclusions embodied
hypothetical truths of precisely the same character as
those of any of the deductive physical sciences ; and
its purpose was to explain phenomena. As thus con-
stituted, however, Political Economy did not meet
the need which it was the object of Bastiat to satisfy.
What he aimed at supplying was, not a positive
science, not a body of doctrines which should simply
explain the facts of wealth, but one which, while
explaining, should also justify those facts, — should
justify them, that is to say, as manifested in the results
of those fundamental institutions of modem society,
private proparty, freedom of industry, of contract, and
of exchange. As his biographer, M. de Fontenay,
puts it, his aim was —

"To combine together and fuse înto one the two distinct
aspects of Fact and of Rîght ; to recur to the formula of the
Physîocrats — * La science des faits au point de vue du droit
naturel ;' to prove that that which is, in its actual ensemble^
and stîU more in its progressive tendency, is conformable
to t/uit which ought to be, according to the aspirations of
the universal conscience."

In Bastiat s own words, he sought —

" To demonstrate the Harmony of those laws of Providence
which govern human society," by showing " that ail principles,
ail motives, ail springs of action, ail interests, co-operate
towards a grand final resuit, .... the indefinite approxi-
mation of ail classes towards a level which is always rising ;
in other words, the equalization of individuals in the gênerai


IX.] BAST/AT, 319

amélioration"* " The conclusion of the Economîsts," he says
in another place, **is for liberty. But, in order that this con-
clusion should take hold of men*s minds and hearts, ît must
be solidly based on this fundamental principle : — Interests,
left to themselves, tend to harmonious combinations, and to
the progressive prépondérance of the gênerai good."t

Such was the scheme of renovated economîc
science propounded by Bastiat ; and the question
which I désire hère to consîder îs, how far this con-
ception of the inquiry represents a legitîmate philo-
sophical spéculation, and, more particularly, how far
the actual treatment of economîc questions from this
point of view by Bastiat has resulted în what ail will
allow to be among the primary and main ends of
economical investigation — the elucidation of the facts
of wealth.

And hère the first remark that occurs is, that, as set
forth in the above extracts, the problem of Political
Economy is not properly the problem of a science at
ail. Not only is it not the problem of a science, it is
not even a scientific problem ; for I apprehend it is of
the essence of ail scientific investigation that the
conclusion be left free to shape itself according to
the results of the inquiry. Science has no foregone
conclusions ; but to prove a foregone conclusion is
the problem of Political Economy, as propounded by
Bastiat What Bastiat proposes to do is, not to
ascertain what the conséquences of a given set of
social arrangements are — that would hâve been a
scientific investigation — but to prove that they are of a
certain kind; to prove that ** left to themselves, human

♦ Stirling's " Translation," p. 105. f Ibid p. 7.


320 B ASTI AT, [essay

interests are harmonious." By the very form în which
he States his case, he constitutes hîmself the advocate
of a System, instead of the exposîtor of a science.

But his conception of the problem involves a stîll
graver error : as we hâve seen, it weis of the essence
of his scheme to "fuse together the two distinct
aspects of Fact and Right." The **harrtiony" of
human interests which he undertook to establish was
not a mère coincidence of certain manifestations of
material well-being with certain others, but extended
to the moral conséquences învolved — an extension of
view which, according to his biographer, constituted
the great merit of his spéculation. In effect, Bastiat,
however widely separated from his opponents on the
question of practical policy, was thoroughly at one
with them on the most fundamental article of his
philosophie creed : he and they alike accepted the
doctrine of **natural rights.*' They differed, indeed,
in their interprétation of the code of nature, but they
were quite agreed as to its existence, and as to the
obligation of bringing their doctrines to the test of its
maxims. A new order of ideas thus found entrance
among the prémisses of économie science ; and the
appeal, which had formerly been to facts, — to facts
exclusîvely, mental or physical, — as the ground and
évidence of doctrine, was henceforth extended to
** rights," ** les plus simples élémefits de la justice''
** bo7tfie équité y' and phrases of similar import.* It was

♦ His Essay on Free Trade opens with this announcement : — " Ex-
change is a natural right, like Property. Every citizen who has created
or acquircd a product, oughi to hâve the option either of applying it
immediately to his own use, or of ceding it to whosoever, on the surface
of the globe, consents to give him in exchange the object of his desires.


IX.] B ASTI AT, 321

thus that Fact and Right were fused. The princîple
of value, as understood by Bastlat, was not sîmply
the law to whîch the facts of value conform, but such
a présentation of that law as should reconcîle the
facts with what the exposîtor held to be the dictâtes
of natural justice. The problem involved in the
payment of înterest on capital was not simply the
détermination of the physical and mental conditions
which render possible the permanent payment of
interest, and which govern its amount and fluctuations,
but such a mode of presenting the practice as should
amount to îts moral vindication, — to show that it îs
** natural, just, legitimate, as useful to him who pays
as to him who receives ît."* And so of the other
problems of the science. Politlcal Economy, in short,
became in Bastiat's hands one more example of that
style of reasoning on political and social affairs which
flourished so luxuriantly in France during the latter
half of the last century, and is not yet quite extinct,
of which the " Social Contract '' may be taken as the
type, and the " Déclaration of the Rights of Man " as
the best known practical outcome — a species of hybrid
philosophy, consisting, to borrow the language of Mr.
Mill, " of attempts to treat an art like a science, and
to hâve a deductive art" " I speak," says Mr. Mill,
" of those who deduce political conclusions, not from
laws of nature, not from séquences of phenomena,
real or imaginary, but from unbending practical maxims.

To deprive him of this feiculty, while he makes no use of it contrary to
public order or good morals, and solely to satisfy the convenience of
another citiien, is to legalize spoliation, is to do violence to the law of
justice."

* " Œuvres Complètes/ vol. v. p. 26.

Y


322


BASTIAT. [essay


Such are ail who found theîr theory of polîtics on
what îs called abstract right."*

Now is such a mode of spéculation philosophîcally
legitimate ? It seems to me not, and for thîs reason
— that, from the very form in which the problem îs
stated, the argument is involved from its outset in
a petitio prificipii. The question, What is ? and the
question, Wl^^t ought to be ? are distinct questions.
It may be that the answers to them coincide ; that
tfiat which is, is also that which ought to be; but, then,
thîs îs a thing to be proved, not to be taken for
granted; and it can only be proved by working out
each problem îndependently of the other. Instêad of
thîs, Bastiat formally identifies them — "fuses" them
into one. But fusion of the questions implies fusion
of the answers ; — that is to say, it îs assumed that
the same form of words which tells us what is, wîll tell
us also what ought to be. Such a scheme of spécula-
tion, ît îs obvions, could only be worked out in one
way — namely, through the instrumental ity of terms
capable of lending themselves at need to either poînt
of vîew — capable either of simply expressing a matter
of fact, or of connoting wîth the fact expressed a moral
judgment. And such, in truth, îs Bastiat's method of
proceedîng. Avaîling himself of the double meaning
of such "passionate" terms as "principle," "value,"
" worth," " service," and the like, he has produced a
theory which affects to cover both solutions — at once
to explaîn and to justify the facts to which ît applîes.
The économie vocabulary unfortunately lends îtself
only too readîly to this sort of theorizing, and few

♦ " System of Logic," vol. ii. p. 466. Third éd.


IX.] B ASTI AT. 323

writers hâve entirely escaped illusion from this cause.
Bastîat's distinction is that he has contrived so to
propound the problem of Political Economy that it
can only be answered by an équivoque.

It may be added, that even though the questions of
Fact and Right, of Science and Morality, were con-
ceived and argued as distinct, there would still be
strong, and, I venture to think, décisive reasons against
combining them in the same scheme of spéculation.
To mention one reason only : such a mode of investi-
gation would présent the constant temptation to sacri-
fice one solution to the other, the scientific to the
moral, or the moral to the scientific. The student
would be constantly solicited to overlook or ignore, or,
on the other hand, to strain or overrate, data, accord-
ing a^they might seem to involve conclusions in one
branch of the spéculation in conflict with, or corrobora-
tive of, conclusions deemed to be of more importance
in the other. Investigation, thus pursued, would no
longer be disinterested ; science would lose its single-
ness of purpose. This objection would lie against
the combined treatment of the two problems even
if they were conceived and discussed as distinct.
But the objection to Bastîat's method goes far deeper
than this : that method not merely combines science
and morality, it confounds them.

Passing from the question of the logical legitimacy
of Bastiat's conception of Economie Science, let us
consider now the results which hâve accrued from this
mode of conceiving and dealing with the problems of
wealth. What, in a word, hâve been the scientific
fruits of Bastiat's method ? What new light hâve his

Y 2 \


324 B ASTI AT. [essay

spéculations shed on the facts which form the subject-
matter of his inquîry ?

The doctrine on which Bastiat founded his preten-
sîons as an original thinker in Political Economy was
his Theory of Value. According to him this theory
comprised potentially the whole of Economie Science ;
and, in point of fact, ail that is peculiar to his views
flows directly from this source : his conception of
value is the idée mère of his entire scheme. It is, then,
in this doctrine that we shall find the fairest évidence
of his work as an economist, and I shall make no
apology for examining it at some length.

The following passages from Mr. Stirling's Trans-
lation of the "Harmonies" set forth with sufficîent
fulness the salient features of the doctrine.

,^ " Let us analyse the co-operatîon of nature of whîch I hâve
spoken. Nature places two things at our disposai — maierials
and forces.

" Most of the material objects whîch contribute to the satis-
faction of our wants and desires, are brought into the state of
utility whîch renders them fit for our use only by the interven-
tion of labour, by the application of the human faculties. But
the éléments, the atoms, if you will, of whîch thèse objects
are composed, are the gîfts — I will add, the gratuitous gifts —
of nature. Thîs observation îs of the very highest importanice,
and will, I believe, throw a new lîght upon the theory of wealth.

" It is very évident, that, if man in an îsolated state must,
so to s^tzk, purc/iase the greater part of his satisfactions by an
exertîon, by an effort, it is rigorously exact to say that, prior
to the intervention of any such exertion, any such effort, the
materials which he finds at his disposai are the gratuitous gifts
of nature. After the first effort on his part, however slight ît
may be, they cease to be gratuitous ; and if the language of
Political Economy had been always exact, it would hâve been


IX.] B ASTI A T.


3^5


to material objects in this state, and before human labour had
been bestowed upon them, that the term raw materials
(matières premières) would hâve been exclusîvely applied.

" I repeat that thîs gratuitous qualîty of the gîfts of nature»
anterior to the intervention of labour, is of the very highest
importance. I said in my second chapter that Political
Economy was the theory of value ; I add now, and by antici-
pation, that things begin to possess value only when it is given
to them by labour. I intend to demonstrate afterwards that
everything which is gratuitous for man in an isolated state is
gratuitous for man in his social condition, and that the gratuitous
gifts of nature, whatever be their UTILITY, hâve no value. I say
that a man who receives a benefit from nature, directly and
without any effort on hîs part, cannot be considered as render-
îng himself an onerous service^ and, consequently, that he
cannot render to another any service with référence to things
which are common to ail. Now, where there are no services
rendered and received, there is no value,

'* Ail that I hâve said of materials is equally applicable to
the forces which Nature places at our disposai. Gravitation,
the elasticity of the air, the power of the winds, the laws of
cquilibrium, vegetable life, animal life, are so many forces
which we learn to turn to account. The pains and intelligence
which we bestow in this way always admit of rémunération,
for we are not bound to dévote our efforts to the advantage of
others gp-atuitously. But thèse natural forces, in themselves,
and apart from ail intellectual or bodily exertion, zx^ gratuitous
gifts of Providence, and in this respect they remain destitute
of value through ail the complications of human transactions.
This is the leading idea of the présent work.

" Thîs observation would be of lîttle importance, I allow,
if the co-operation of Nature were constantly uniform ; if
each man, at ail times, in ail places, in ail circumstances,
received from Nature equal and invariable assistance. In
that case, science would be justifîed in not taking into account
an élément which, remaining always and everywhere the
same, would affect the services exchanged in equal propor-
tions on both sides. As in geometry we eliminate portions of
lines common to two figures which we compare with each


326 B ASTI AT. [essay

other, we might neglect a co-operation which is învariably
présent, and content ourselves with saying, as we hâve donc
bitherto, * There is such a thing as natural wealth ; Politîcal
Economy acknowledges it, and has no more concern with it'
" But this is not the true state of the matter. The irrésis-
tible tendency of the human mind, stimulated by self-interest,
and assisted by a séries of discoveries, is to substitute natural
and gratuitous co-operation for human and onerous concur-
rence ; so that a given utility, although remaining the same
as far as the resuit and the satisfactions which it procures us
are concerned, represents a smaller and smaller amount of
labour. In fact, it is impossible not to perceive the immense
influence of this marvellous phenomenon on our notion of
value. For what is the resuit of it ? This, that in every
product the gratuitous élément tends to take the place of the
onerotis ; that utility, being the resuit of two collaborations y of
which one is remunerated and the other is not, value, which has
relation only to the first of thèse un'ted forces, is diminished,
and makes room for a utility which is identically the same,
and this in proportion as we succeed in constraining nature to
a more efficacious co-operation. So that we may say that
mankind hâve as many more satisfactions, as much more
wealth, as they hâve less value, Now the majority of authors
having employed thèse three terms, utility, wealth, value, as
synonyms, the resuit has been a theory which is not only
not true, but the reverse of true. I believe sincerely that a
more exact description of this combination of natural forces
and human forces in the business of production — in other
words, a juster définition of value — ^would put an end to
inextricable thcoretical confusion, and would reconcile schools
which are now divergent."

♦ ' ♦ ♦ ♦ « «

** Thus, the définition of the word value, in order to be
exact, must hâve référence not only to human efforts, but
likewise to those efforts which are exchanged or exchange-
able. Exchange does more than exhibit and measure
values — it gives them existence. I do not mean to say
that it gives existence to the acts and the things which


IX.] B ASTI A T. 327

are exchanged, but ît imparts to ^heîr existence the notion
of value,

" Now, when two men transfer to each other theîr présent
efforts, or make over mutually the results of theîr anterîor
efforts, they serve each other; they render each other reci-
procal service,

" I say, then, VALUE IS THE RELATION OF TWO SERVICES

EXCHANGED." * [The îtalîcs and capitals are the author's.]

To appreciate this, Bastiat's principal contribution
to économie science, we must endeavour to separate
in the above exposition the doctrines which he held
in common with the most eminent economists who
preceded him from the élément or éléments whîch
he has himself added to the theory. It may be at
once stated that in the main positions taken by Bastîat
there is nothing at issue between him and the lead-
îng economists of England and France. He appears,
indeed, not to hâve been of this opinion himself, and
to hâve thought that, in asserting the " gratuitousness
of the gîfts of nature," he was announcing a truth
which had hîtherto escaped uni versai observation ; and,
strange to say, this claim seems to be admitted by
some who hâve commented on his works in this
country. But ît is certain that on this point he
deceîved himself. Adam Smith has indeed expressed
himself in some passages as if it were in agriculture
only that nature gave anything to man except on the
terms of what Bastiat would call " onerous services" —
an error which Smith shared with the Physiocrats;
but Ricardo has called particular attention to this
erroneous limitation of an important principle, and

♦ Stirling*s " Translation," pp. 61-63.


328 B ASTI AT. [essay

has shown that, so far from thîs beîng true, it îs, on
the contrary, in agriculture only, or at ail events
maînly, that nature in her co-operatîon wîth man has
set any lîmit to her munificence.

"Does nature," Ricardo asks, "nothîngfor man în manu-
facture? Are the powers of wînd and water, which move
our machînery, and assist navigation, nothing ? The pressure
of the atmosphère and the elasticity of stcam, which enable
us to work the most stupendous engines — are tbey not the
gifts of nature ? To say nothing of the matter of heat in
softening and melting metals, of the décomposition of the
atmosphère in the process of dyeing and fermentation, there
is not a manufacture which can be mentioned, in which
nature does not give her assistance to man, and give it^ too^
generously and gratuitotislyy^

Say, agaîn, though dîffering from Ricardo in many
points, is at one with him hère. In language quite as
emphatic as any that Bastiat has used, he insists
on the point : —

*' It is thus that nature is almost always in partnership of
labour with man and his instruments ; and in this partner-
ship, we gain so much the more in proportion as we succeed
in saving our labour and that of our capital, which is neces-
sarily costly, and get performed, through tJu gratuitous
services of nature^ a larger portion of what is to be done."
And again he observes, " Of those wants, some are satisfied
by the use which we make of certain tbings wîth which
nature has fumished us gratuitously^ such as the air. water,
the light of the sun. We may name thèse things natural
wealihf since nature alone is at the cost of them. So far
as she gives them indifferently to ail, no one is obliged to
obtain them at the cost of any sacrifice whatever. They
hâve, therefore, no exchangeable value/'f

* Works, p. 40, twie. f Traité d'Économie Politique, vol. i. p. 36.


IX.] B ASTI AT 329

It would be îdle to multîply quotatîons from later
wrîters, who hâve, so far as I know wîthout an
exception, followed on thîs point the teachîng of
Rîcardo and Say. Nor can ît be alleged that, while
recognîzing the fact, there was any failure to appreciate
its due significance. So far from this, it has been
taken as the basis of no less fundamental a doctrine
than that of cost of production — a doctrine whîch
merely asserts in other words that exchange- value in
commodîties, susceptible of îndefinite production at
a uniform cost, finds its determining princîple in the
efforts of man ; the utility den'ved from nature going
for nothing in the result

It îs not, therefore, in the récognition of the gratuî-
tous charac^er of nature's services in her co-operation
with the îndustiy of man, that what îs peculiar to
Bastiat's views on value îs to be found. It îs not în
this, but in an assumptîon with whîch he accompanies
hîs récognition of this circumstance. Ricardo, Say, and
the great majority of succeeding economîsts hâve held
that, however gratuîtous may be the gifts of nature,
such gifts are not necessarily on that account incapable
of acquiring value. In order to thîs, they must
be not only gratuîtous, but also in such abundance,
and so accessible to ail, that none who désire them
need be wîthout them. Water, they would say, when
not produced by artificial process, îs a g^ratuitous gîft
of nature ; but water — spring water for example — may
or may not hâve value according to cîrcumstances. If
în sufficîent abundance for the wants of a neighbour-
hood, and also accessible to ail who lîve there, ît can
hâve no value — none at least beyond what would


330 B ASTI AT. [essay

represent the labour employée! in drawing ît from the
spring ; but water în insufficîent supply, though a g^ft
of nature, may hâve value, and this value will hâve no
'necessary relation to the human exertion employed în
obtaining it. And what is true of water is true, they
would say, of ail natural objects : în particular ît is
true of the natural productive forces resîding în the
materials of the earth. Thèse, though to the persons
who are at liberty to take advantage of them ** gratuî-
tous gifts of nature," yet not being bestowed on man în
unlimited quantity, not being after the appropriation of
the soîl of a country accessible to ail, may and do
acquîre value, and enter as éléments into the causes
which give value to land. Now ît is this position
which Bastiat dénies ; and of which his déniai, together
with the conséquences which he draws from ît, forms
the ground of his claim to having reconstituted éco-
nomie science. According to him, a gift once obtained
gratuîtously from nature — a spring of water, a field of
natural fertility, a pearl picked up on the sea-shore —
can never afterwards acquire value except in virtue of
human effort bestowed upon it " The materials and
forces given by God to man gratuîtously at the be-
ginning hâve continued gratuitous, and are and must
continue to be so through ail our transactions ; for* în
the estimâtes and appréciations to which exchange
gives rise, the équivalents are human services^ and not
t\\ftgi/ts of God!' t This was the capital assumptîon
of Bastiat's économie philosophy, that alone în which
his theory of value differed from that generally

♦ The rcader will note the begging of the question in this " for," &c.

t Stirling's ** Translation,** p. 221.


IX.] B ASTI A T. 331

accepted. On ît ail that is peculiar to hîs scheme of

spéculation rests ; and, this failing, the entîre fabric

inevîtably coUapses.*

Perhaps the most sîngular cîrcumstance about the

spéculation is that Bastiat should hâve thought the

prînciple just stated self-evîdent. He was whoUy un-

able to conceive that a gift of nature should be at once

•* gratuitous '' and not **common to ail." A gratuitous

gift limited in supply, and capable of acquiring value,

was for him an impossible thought Again and again

throughout his writings he rings the changes on the

grotesqueness of such a supposition. " Who," he asks,

"can hâve the audacity to exact payment for this

portion of superhuman value ? " " The purchaser of

corn must pay for it, though it has cost nothing to

anybody, not even labour ! Who then dares to corne

forward to demand this pretended value f'* Accord-

îngly, in speaking of gratuitous gifts of nature, Bastiat

always assumes that such gfifts are " common to ail."

" It îs that portion only of utility," he says, " which is due
to human labour that becomes the object of exchange, and,
by conséquence, of rémunération. This latter varies doubtless
much in proportion to the intensîty of the labour, of its skill,
promptitude, and suitability to the circumstances of the case
{son à-propos)^ of the need which is felt for ît, of the momen-
tary absence of compétition, &c. But it is not the less true
that the concurrence of natural laws, belonging to ally enters
for nothing into the price of the product" f

Where natural laws, or forces, or objects ** belong to
ail," the conclusion is irréfragable. No one will pay

* It should be stated that Bastiat's originality in this, the capital
élément of his theory, has been challenged by Mr. Carey in his work on
Social Philosophy — it seems to me on good grounds.

t ** Œuvres Complètes,* vol. iv. p. 41. The italics are mine.


33 « B ASTI A T. [essay

for what he can get from nature wîthout payment; but
the question îs, do natural laws, forces, and objects in
ail cases " belong to ail " ? Those natural laws and
forces of the soîl in particular, whîch constitute îts
fertili'ty, are they incapable of appropriation by some
to the exclusion of others ? Are they incapable, in
virtue of such appropriation, of acquiring value în
exchange ? This îs the gist of the whole argument ;
and it is, I repeat, in assuming this point in the sensé
I hâve described, that Bastiat's spécial contribution to
the économie theory of value consists.

Bastiat s doctrine, then — keepîng in view the facts
which it expressed, the form apart — ^resolved itself
înto the statement that exchange-value under ail cir-
cumstances is due to human effort as its sole and
exclusive cause — to human effort as distinguished from
natural gift and endowment, material or mental. What
was given to man by nature was not only, he con-
ceived, gratuitous in îts origin, but must, în ail cases,
and (so long as exchange îs free) under ail circum-
stances, be incapable of acquiring value. Stated thus
nakedly, however, the doctrine îs not easily recon-
cilable with some very obvious facts. For example,
the value of a pear! picked up accidentally on the
sea-shore ; the high rémunération obtained by persons
endowed with natural gifts of an exceptional kind —
painiers, singers, and artistes generally; above ail,
the value of land possessing natural fertility or
peculiar advantages of situation ; — value în thèse and
other sîmilar instances does not seem to lend itself
very easily to the doctrine that ail value consists în
and represents human effort To give the theory


IX.] BASTIAT. 333

plausibility, ît needed to be cîothed in other words.
A term, în short, was wantîng, whîch, while desîgna-
tîng "effort," should be capable a!so of suggestîng
other considérations fitted to meet cases of the above
kînd. More than thîs, ît was necessary (bearlng în
mind the moral side of the problem as conceived by
Bastîat) that the term, while satîsfyîng the conditions
indicated, should also be capable of conveying a moral
judgment on the facts to which it was applicable.
Such a term Bastîat found in the word " service ; " and
ît îs in the uses to whîch he turns thîs word — as at
once uni versai sol vent of économie difficultîes, and
what Bentham would call a '' sacramental " term în the
warfare with Socialîsm — that the peculîar character of
his spéculation reveals itself.

In propriety of speech the term "servîce" should,
I apprehend, be limited to personal exertions made în
another's behalf. It îs in thîs sensé that it is commonly
used in économie writings, and, so understood, it is
a convenient économie term. But it is obviously pos-
sible, wîthout doing any great violence to language,
to give it a wider signification. Thus, for example, if
a friend were to wam me that I was about to drink
poison, he mîght be said to render me a service,
though the effort involved in the announcement would
be quite inappréciable. Similarly, a musician mîght
be said to render a service to an audience whom he
gratified by the performance of a pièce of music,
however slight the effort incident to the performance
mîght happen to be. And so, again, mîght the owner
of an island just risen from the sea, on which no
human being had ever set foot, be said to render a


334 B ASTI AT, [essay

" service '* to the person to whom he should consent
to transfer hîs property so circumstanced. Service,
in short, may be understood to mean, not exclusively
Personal effort in another s behalf, but any act whereby
another is served, i.e, benefited, wholly irrespective
of whether the act consist in onerous exertion, in the
passive surrender of property to another s use, or in
a mère utterance of words from which some useful
or pleasant conséquence may flow. " Service " thus
fulfilled the first of the conditions required ; and it is
accordingly substituted by Bastiat for ** human effort '*
in the exposition of his theory. ** Value" is said to
dépend upon ** service," and to vary with the magni-
tude of the *' service ; " and ail exchange is described as
an ** exchange of services." In a word, what Bastiat
did was this : having been at infinité pains to exclude
gratuîtous gifts of nature from the possible éléments
of value, and pointedly identified the phenomenon
with " human effort " as its exclusive source, he désig-
nâtes human effort by the term " service," and then
employs this term to admit as sources of value those
very gratuitous natural gifts the exclusion of which
in this capacity constituted the essence of his doc-
trine. I acknowledge ît seems scarcely crédible that
a writer of Bastiat's distinguished réputation should
put forward an elaborate spéculation, purporting to
be " a new exposition of économie science," in which
prînciples established or accepted by a succession
of eminent predecessors are challenged, and which
should after ail résolve itself into so gross a fallacy
as this; but a few quotations will show whether I
hâve overstated the case.


IX.] B ASTI AT. 335

** To make an effort în order to satîsfy another's want is
to render hîm a service. If a service is stipulated in return,
there is an exchange of services .... If the exchange is
fcee, the two services exchanged are worth each other ....
Less effort implies less service, and less service implies less
value." *

So far he îs propounding (doubtless in vague and
somewhat equivocal terms, and without the due
lîmitations) the doctrine of cost of production, and
to thîs he for some time adhères ; but, further on, we
find this passage :—

** I take a walk along the sea-beach, and I find by chance
a magnificent diamond. I am thus put in possession of a
great value. Why } Am I about to confer a great benefit
on the human race } Hâve I devoted myself to a long and
laborious work } Neither the one nor the other. Why then
does this diamond possess so much value } Undoubtedly
because the person to whom I transfer it considers that I
hâve rendered him a great service — ail the greater that many
rich people désire it, and that I alone can render it."

Hère, it will be observed, he wholly abandons the
îdea of ** effort'' as the fundamental considération.
It is no longer "effort in satisfying another's want"
that créâtes and measures the "service," but the
capacity of the natural abject in this respect in con-
nection with the limitation set by nature to objects
possessing thîs capacity. Further on, having to deal
with the case of the high rémunération obtained by
eminent artistes, he has thèse remarks : —

" Among the amusements which the people of Paris relish
most is the pleasure of hearing the music of Rossini sung by
Malibran or the admirable poetry of Racine interpreted by
Rachel. There are in the world only two women who can

* Stirling's *' Translation," pp. 44, 45.


■_.J


336 B ASTI AT [essay

furnish thèse noble and délicate kmds of entertauiments, and
unless we subject ibem to the torture, whîch would probably
not succeed, we hâve no other way of procuring theîr services
but by addressîng oursèlves to thtir good-wîll. Thus tlie
services which we expect from Malibran and Rachel are pos-
sessed of great value." *

The reason assîgned, ît wlll be observcd, beîng the
same as în the case of the diamond — the power of
satîsfyîng a widely felt désire, coupled with the limita-
tion of the number of persons possessing the natural
endowments which gîve the power.

Thèse, however, are rather " fancy" cases : the real
hîtch lies in the application of the theory to value
in the case of land. I beg the reader's attention to
Bastiat's mode of dealîng with thîs point : —

" Land," he says, " has value, because it can no longer be
acquired without givîng in exchange the équivalent of thîs
labour [the labour expended upon it]. But what I contend
for is that this land, on which its natural productive powers
had not originally conferred any value, has still no value in
thîs respect This natural power which was gratuitous then
is gratuitous now, and will be always gratuitous. We may
say that the land has value^ but when we go to the root of
the matter we find that what possesses value is the human
labour which has improved the land, and the capital which
has been expended on it" f

But then comes the question, which he puts înto the
mouth of an objector, how is this doctrine reconcilable
with the fact of the value attaching to natural fertilîty ?

"Everyone," says the objector, "who purchases a land
estate examines its quality, and pays for it accordingly. If of
two properties which lie alongside each other, the one consista

* Stirling's " Translation,'' p. 121. t Pp. 249, 250.


IX.] B ASTI AT, 337

of rich alluvîum, and the other of barren sand, the first is
surely of more value than the second, although both may
hâve absorbed the same capital, and, to say truth, the pur-
chaser gives himself no trouble on that score."*

The objection îs fairly stated ; and now mark the
answer : —

" The answer to the objection now under considération îs
to be found in the theory of value cxplained in the fifth
chapter of this work. I thcrc said that value does not
essentially imply labour ; still less is it necessarily proportion-
ate to labour. I hâve shown that the foundation of value is
not so much the pains taken by the person who transfers it as
the pains savcd to the person who receives it ; and it is for
that reason that I hâve made it to réside in something which
embraces thèse tvvo éléments — in service, I hâve said that a
person may render a great service with very little effort, or
that with a great effort one may render a very trifling service.
The sole resuit is that labour does not obtain necessarily a
rémunération which is in proportion to its intensity, in the
case either of man in an isolated condition, or of man in
the social state."t

In other words, the difficulty îs surmounted through
the equîvocal meanîng of "service,'' which, with
curious naïveté, we are informed in this passage was
selected by the philosopher expressly because its
meaning was equivocal.

Now what is the significance and what the worth
of a theory, of which the efficacy, as a means of
elucidating phenomena, lies entirely in the shifting
uses of an ambiguous term ? After the concessions
made in thèse passages, it is évident that there is no
longer any question of fact between Bastîat and the

♦ Stirling's " Translation," p. 255. f P- 256.

7.


33» BASTIAT. [essay

economists whose vîews he controverts. In entire
disregard of what he had contended for as a funda-
mental principle, he hère admits that value dépends
upon other conditions than human effort — upon such
condition as the degree of satisfaction which the
valuable object or act is capable of conferring; upon
such condition, again, as the degree of limitation set
to the supply of natural objects or of acts depending
upon natural endowment ; lastly, upon such condition *
as the natural superiority of some agents furnished by
nature over others — for this is what the explanatîon
in the passage last quoted obviously cornes to. After
thèse concessions, I say, there is no longer between
Bastiat and those whom he so vehemently controverts
anything that can be called a question of fact ; and
yet the issue is very far from being verbal merely.
The real différence is not as to the facts, nor yet as
to the names by which the facts are to be called, but
as to the method of dealing with them — a différence
again which résolves itself into the différent aims with
which Bastiat and those whom he opposes hâve gone
into the inquiry. Thus Ricardo, seeking to ascertain
the laws to which exchange-value in its varions mani-
festations conforms, analyses the varions conditions
under which the phenomenon is found to présent
itself, classifies them according to their essential
distinctions, marking thèse distinctions by distinct
names, and is thus enabled to show in what way and
under what circumstances each class contributes to the
ultimate resuit — the phenomenon of value. Bastiat,
aiming, not at the interprétation of facts, but at the
defence of a system, proceeds by a wholly différent


IX.] B ASTI AT. 339

course — répudiâtes analysis, classification, dîstinctive
nomenclature ; nay, avowedly sélects as the central
term of hîs doctrine a word which désignâtes combi-
nations of facts of the most diverse character. The
différence of aim leads to différence of method, and
issues in a -différent resuit; for whereas Riqardos
doctrine docs succeed in explaining a vast variety of
the most important and most complicated facts of
exchange-value, Bastiat's, I hâve no hésitation in as-
serting, fails to solve even the simplest case. Let us
test it by an example : — I désire to know if the récent
gold discoveries will lower the value of gold. How
am I helped to this by being told that value represents
** service/' and is in proportion to '* service'' ? ** Ser-
vice " may import half-a-dozen things — effort exerted,
effort saved, satisfaction conferred by the possession
of natural objects, limitation of supply, and various
combinations of thèse — and its import in the case
in hand I havc no means of determining. Gold, it is
true, is now obtaîned by less ** effort " than formerly.
With Ricardo's doctrine before me I know what
interprétation to place upon that circumstance.
Enlightened by Bastiat's, I am precluded from draw-
ing any inference whatever; for though the effort
of production lias been diminished, it may not be on
effort that " service " in this case dépends : " On peut
rendre un grand service avec un très-léger effort,
comme avec un grand effort on peut ne rendre qu'un
très-médiocre service." Take a simpler case still. A
machine is invented which cheapens the production of
cloth : — will this lower the value of cloth ? It would
be quite consistent with Bastiat's theory that it should

z 2


340


B ASTI A T. [essay


not do so, because ît would be open to hîm to say, as
he does say in the case of the diamond and of Madame
Malibran's singing, that though the effort of produc-
tion was diminished, the satisfaction which the com-
modity was capable of conferring remained unaffected.
To tell me then that value represents " service " and
varies with " service " îs to tell me nothing, unless I
am told further the éléments of ** service " which are
operative in the given case. This is what Ricardo's
theory in effect does : this is what Bastiat's theory
fails to do ; and in this différence lies the entire dif-
férence between the two doctrines. It is much as if
a chemist were to propound as a solution of the
problem of the composition of bodies, that matter is
composed of elementary atoms, omîtting to classify
the varions forms of matter accord ing to their ele-
mentary constitution, or to say in what proportion in
each class the éléments combine. Such a generaliza-
tion is no generalization in the scientific sensé of the
term : it is a mère confounding of a crowd of unana-
lysed phenomena under an ambiguous word.

So utterly, so glaringly inadéquate is Bastiat's
Theory of Value as a means of explaining phenomena,
that its enunciation by a reasoner of Bastiat's remark-
able acuteness would be altogether inexplicable had
économie explanation been his principal object. But
this, as we hâve seen, if an object with Bastiat at
ail, was quite secondary in his scheme. His para-
mount aim was, in truth, not économie, but moral ; he
sought, not simply to explain, but also, and mainly, to
justify the social facts which he undertook to expound.
And this brings me to the second and more important


IX.] B ASTI AT, ; 341

rôle played by the term " service " în hîs theory.
For service not merely désignâtes a fact, but connotes
a moral judgment. No one will deny that a man's
services are properly hîs own — that he has a rîght to
be remunerated for hîs services by him who requires
to hâve them rendered to him ; if, therefore, property
is resolvable into the right to certain values, and values
in ail cases represent, and vary with, services, we hâve
the moral sentiment at once enlisted in the support
of property. To maintain property — property, let us
say, în the ground-rent of houses in the centre of
London — is to maintain the right of a man to the
product of ** services " — of " services " rendered to
Society by himself or by those from whom he has
derived. To maintain freedom of contract is to main-
tain the right of one who has rendered " services" to
exchange those " services " on such terms as he pleases
against the ** services" of others who are equally free.
Thus ail industrial and commercial opérations under a
re^me of freedom were resolved by Bastiat into in-
stances of the reciprocity of services — ^^ services pour
services r than which, he asks, what can be more just ?
^^ Services pour services'^ — the phrase has the unmistake-
able ring of an axiom of " natural justice." Like the
" droit du travail," " a fair day's wages for a fair day s
work," and other kindred expressions, it, so to speak,
sounds in equity. Whatever can be brought under
the formula of ^' servues pour services'' has already
received its moral ratification. We see, then, what
Bastiat really accomplished. By dînt of such explana-
tions as I hâve given examples of, he succeeded în
bringing the principal phenomena of value wîthîn the


342 B ASTI AT, [essay

compréhension of a single term ; this term being one
which, from its etymological associations, connoted a
moral judgment on the facts to which it was applied.
Armed with the shibboleth of services pour services^
Bastîat felt himself strong to encoiinter Communists
on their own ground, and was able to return in kind
the bolts launched at him from the arsenal of the
Rights of Man.

So much for the ** ncw exposition of Political
Economy/' by which Bastîat proposed to défend social
order menaced by socialistic attacks. The degree
of faîth which he placed in his spécifie is certainly
surprising; for, however he may hâve failed to con-
vince others, it is beyond question that he succeeded
in fully convincing himself He entirely believed
that the Theory of Value set forth above contained
the key to the social problem — furnished the sufficîent
foundation for a policy of the most rigid laissez-faire.
Considered with référence to the practical purpose
for which it was designed — as a corrective to the
întoxicating appeals of socialistic writers — the antidote
must, I think; be pronounced to be extraordinarily
weak, a véritable pill to cure an earthquake. Nor
would it seem that Bastiat*s writings hâve produced
any sensible impression upon the gênerai course of
économie thought in France, He has left no school,
and even those who yîeld a gênerai assent to hîs
System for the most part qualify their adhésion by
réservations on essential points. The most important
of récent French treatises on Political Economy —
those, e,g., of M. Cherbuliez and of M. Courcelle-
Seneuil — scarcely refer to him, and, when they do, it


rx.] B ASTI A T. 343

is for the purpose of réfutation. It wîll, perhaps,
occur to the reader that there was little need, under
thèse cîrcumstances, for the somewhat elaborate
examination of hîs System of economîc philosophy
attempted in the foregoîng pages. It may be
said of Bastiat, however, as of some other eminent
French thinkers, that Englishmen seem disposed
to attach greater weight to his authorîty than it finds
amongst his own countrymen ; and it happens that
his capital doctrine is in immédiate contact with
one of the most urgent of our own social ques-
tions — that of land-tenure reform. Since the free-
trade controversy was settled, no question has come
up for political discussion on whîch économie theory
has a more direct and décisive bearing than on
this. It is évident that the nature and extent of the
prospective reform will mainly be determined by the
économie standpoint from which the question is
regarded — according, that is to say, as it is regarded
from the standpoint of absolute property and com-
mercial contract, or from that whîch recognizes a
fundamental distinction between land and the ordinary
products of industry. The latter view flows as an
immédiate corollary from the theory of rent pro-
pounded by Ricardo — one of those ** pretty problems,"
by the way, which some eminent authorîties would
rank, as regards its social importance, with "the
resolution of double stars," and " théories of îrregular
verbs." The former — the absolute property and com-
mercial contract view of the case — can, on the other
hand, only find its justification in some theory tanta-
mount to Bastiat'si of which the capital feature is the


344 B ASTI AT. [essay ix.

îdentificatîon of value, and, therefore, of property, în
ail its forms, as a phenomenon depending on the same
causes, a product of the same essentîal conditîons.
Accept Bastiat's theory of value, and for any reform
in land beyond the assimilation of real and personal
property (for thus far it does carry us) we are without
scientific warrant. The principle which governs con-
tracts in the case of moveable wealth must be allowed
to govern them in the case of land. The Irish Land
Act, and ail législation in the same direction, are, of
course, in this view, an injustice and a blunder. Such
is one of the practical bearings of Bastiat's doctrine ;
and Bastiat's réputation in this country being what it
is, it has seemed to me not out of place — more espe-
cîally in the présence of fresh translations of his
principal work — to attenipt some estimate of the
scientific value of his spéculation.


APPENDICES.


I
i

o

H
U


O

co
H
U

Û
O

pu


•tpw 'saSeqqr-)


ipanq jad
'qounq Jdd


•qijad


-afoqM •saoïBjOjI


^ o


«• 00


»no co ♦♦O'C


•^ ,-» t«»oo *^ « «*» r* o «^


'dfdnoo Jdd


H-^"^


O o« o« o o o
o ^

. t! •*> ♦ o\ ♦^O « M o\ o>

•• W M M H M


*9tdno3 Jdd


•I


H ««3


O o Oeo 0« O O


«TJOflQ


*qii9d


•qijad


S*


o lo : j


r*« o» ^r o» o» "O
♦ ♦ «f ^ »*» r^


O


•«M : f^>o 00 1/) m H. iH


>i-


*qi jad


•jTOfqi^
X9d *\ve%9i 'pvajg


>i«


>«* Ô!


*ao) iad 'Xe{{


^?ri


'qova 'uajiaH
pae SM03


Sîrnn


<U9qid4i *dd9qs


o .. :


•^00


•c g

2^000000000000 «X


S^


H •*


>i O.


• tI«'>»'>0"fN00<OO»*< ' .0


*t O O •• N <noo m «r ^ N 1 h m


s:?


>»«


*• M


'^^rS ooooooeo


H 10


•4twIj.-Kl j ^-3, 000. ««g®


00
00


•*= o.

'sa
3


ï

•5

J


rj


r«

.9

.2 8

ig

il

V

^^

■••»

^ V

•si a

a*» c 3
r. e s


.« ro


V s a

iij

Isa

5*2

Ht

lu

lu

in

U


I


o

Q
O

55

I— «

U

Q

H

X
H

O

co

H
U

D

Q

O

o.


H


'UOl I3>i


^ao o^ r% rvos oo i>iui3 M oo jo <a:


-UOl isd


»; 1/) r«oo r<«r«00<->0^<Oci ;


^^mir. mminoouo r«.r*t^t^r%


830 moo KQro-OOr^t»»""!-!


QS **> ^ W

^ M •» »«


t^O o o o mOO >n'nt« f^mr^o OOO

>0 t^ ■^ r^ n-i 't fi ^ >f\u^'r,-^\r)tn'. t* ** *m

••••CiNCiMN'iNPiNeiCtMnCICin


'UO} J9d


»^o


0000 o sO o


^ •« M * » » *

lit itnO t^I«»r<»«/»iA

M •« MM M >4


M


MOCiiA OOOmo

M M M •«


O- ^ ^ »^ Otoo 00 ch rv r^oo
MOOO 00«n «o^

^ «« ^ «h » ^ * * » ^

tn tn O Oi Ooooo ^00

n i^M r^>/)t«0 «OOOOO

M ►• M M

o> 00000000 00 r« rs r« ts>


•UOl JOl


.000000000000

^ — M M M »•

«; t^oo r^70oou)oo tN,oocoooao


U

<


<


-i.%o J9d


• • •

• o» c^co oo>o» 0^0*


•o o o

M


00000000


^^ ^ ^ * * « •« » ^ »

«;oomIIoooooooo

M »M M M M M

SJO« MWNmro^^»*)

^•"M mmmmmmmm


■^ o o 00 M ^O r» "^ o

• • •

• • •

Ji ■^ ' C 000 ' 00 o r' * Q ?


^2


s?» i
I

. >î o

! W.C


Sî2 .


000000000000000000

»4»«MM M >« P«M

g M r« tv>o «£>>0<0\Q r^mi/tfkM ^«r«^>9
00 0r««ci««0P^''»»"C«0000


o >ooo n^c vo vo H fn u^o «000 m tn
** : ;

X 00 00 » O^OO OOOO^O'O^ o -> o^ ' o o


000


oooooooocooo c

m " " Mm

«r »/".oo 00 O ** **» •*■ "«ao M w •* ♦ irj'C

mmmmm>«mmmmC<IC«qCiO**mm

^ M

> 000


OCOOOOOOCOOO


'*>'*t^rvi«c«<S'*^r^MM '^♦t/v'

MMMMMMMMMMCld « MMMI


ro^\O00vO C C NO O'C^O «00 00


00 ^ ts. r» ♦ "100 vO f r^oo o (7»0 « c» »; »•»
»»>'*■«»• «O'C 10 «oO «/"lUii/^ \S *ri^ v>i/ï to


m


•qi jnd •♦«•91 *s«na


"^ 0»0^0^0>C^O*C^^3>^ « 6 O

M M "^ »«

xfOOOOOOOOOOOO


• • •

• • •

• • •


O O <*> m fO
o o o •" •• ••


r« r^«0 r>) f* o o ^

M M

Mt^CINMMMM

^ M «h «k * » » »
OOmONONC^M

M M

MNmmmmmm


>»^


a "3 ù S

<« c 5 ••


*qi J9d
•uoiinjV[


. • tw-^9t I » »n «i >rc » trM i t Ht m


^ 10 tnvo ■o>o t'ivo tA<o Ot^^omi/tiTiinir. ^m


'qi Jod


'^1'^ ^^'^io>o>oiomioioi/)k'>mmi<-i^min *ttiO


CD


•y)

O


>
o

a.


'sqi g jdd*3svoi«3
aqi Xq 'neuis '^t-iod


>S>no>OMONO>OtMOOk r^oo

r^ M


>l O »0 r« O 00 00

M '

I


•■ O Wl M NkOO \0


O -^"^


').%i3 J9d

•pjojjdic^ *uo3vg


I *» m «o\0 *> ^ ^o 10 * iT, ih m I ^.


•« ^"C «* ** ^00 »«vc w O *» >?>


>i


PO


1000 M PO M
^ m 10 «O

* - jf i : :


: :2


•♦00 Q

r<«i^oO

• • •
•» •» *


00


* •

m «k


S«


H
1


M *•

•♦ «n ir>


000
\0 >n


s?


(«« rv t^ io u-kc


■iS


'1AO Jdd


.00 Q o o CNQ«O000 ♦NO
H t»o t> IN IN r^o t>>oo t>> r« rv

Q ^* MttMah«k*««k«k

. o<:oo^C^vQ '•■p«oo>o N •♦
*« r» «no «o>o<oo rof^rNtNtN


•^ 00 « Ç Q tt ^ tt\Q

spaovO o O M Oc«>-mmO

F«^ 00 *• M M iHMMMMM

2 î î<??2 3'8 2 3"2^2 1 : ? -- î

Cl ^0 ** Q " " ï " O "*<»s?Sî **°? 3"

tNO 00 o o •• OvSO»uO


..y


L


Pc «i


O -


i. >«


I

00


I

.a
-oo


C >*2 e''5±'2


4) 00
u


rt î?


L IL


8 •


, fS rj r» T w n»^ J2 "— V

» «artSPSS ■3t3rt5'3«a^3V

•■ "T*— t'7»'~»"T^~>T*'~»'~»~ T^^ ^»^ •~»^ '"^'^

09


m
00


• I I

ro ^ i/t o

, j^ ■ in • >o » m

•00 "00 *00 «00


2%


'00


► «o
>oo


%t 00


M «


*vîx i»a


• ■


>: -


fc» r»


N O


«m ««m ♦i^ « 'T


« I


« n


sudurj ^


04 ■'^"!>I^''J.4 I


■^«oio«nio»oi/>«»o«n«i/iiril *^«n| v^ •*


^ lotn^^^^ • «om • IO.O


>! m I 1/) «


^ ♦ ^ m '«•. ro I


•o lo


uj m


• lO


i*ï -*


- I 1


• I/) •


m I/) • m • m


•^ ^ • f, ro •♦


">

^

3


r


3

lJ


o

o


oo O^ 9^ O^ O^


«• »• *•


, OO O^ ^ 00 o^


>â2


ù

c


J


•jsj.%1 [^ ■'^i*'.V\


3^

H

Ci]

*5


•spj«.t 09 'sausauiof] ■ "^
I o€ ■

'6z


• • • •

• • • •


• •


• • * • ■


00


•**


"♦


• • • •

• • • •


• e •


* * A * *


I 00 09 00 t«> 06

I

"»- -<r f** -tm -r*

t>. «j t>> r« uo


•s: •« !


00


M


T*%


t*%


»-•


!■«! ••* t-OS


spjrC ^B


o


S'


rc rn fo m m


• • . M •

ro r*ï fO w f♦^


PO


P33J 99 -SuiujHS ?


s


00

o


o
o


o

00


00


0^0


-


«<i ^


00 00


00 00 00


"» *o **> o


00


00


H»


V
U

3

■ i

V


c

■c

9


•spnîX 6c
•paaj 99 s.jaiuuj f


fo


3 rn c


O


m


>o


■o >n m

3 : r


▼ o "O


•o ^ o


m


I*»


PO


•Xnprnb pue jny


•< f. o> Ô •• "*


■^s


*qi J3<I
*XlTirn» pus Ji'j


^ t^oo 00 oo-xN-avo»


I c


■ ? C- 2 ■?. i> JO C^ C. O *« M P«


^

^


Ji I


00


00 co


Gi:5 I' I r I 1 I i c^s»

aîjsco N PO ^ 10 \0 t^ 06 Soo

Z Wî '00 *« *00 *00 "00 • • «00 • « * ^


■(pnoq) -iMi nd
'sug puv pool
■J'fl-Jitàns


"ST'"n'S''s!?n8' iï-SBsS"'''SSSft!r!


■ - ■ ,


i


giiuduiud
■HUBIlb

-JSlicnh
lejjjJmnd


■•i*"-":*"'-"-:' ■ t


".«.-.".-.-.-...as


.■iBMM j - s, s 5 "S, 5 -S. (


îi'ftS.3WE:^:^K;&5-''ft 's:


yy |îii f

h:i..:|:..|'


■sBs:s rîssKgg!


■"^Hr


■iX


1


■i»prt(i m

•u«p.u.O pm

IIOU3XV i"a


"^'RE.fi.e. i : : : : :
j&:3«,85 ï: : : : :


j .... .... ... .1

" j:::: :::: :.: :


■ainii i3d
'unpgm;) pm


■iô^£Z&&&&&ZS.&


■^«


- 'ë????ï?I'I*'!'' ■ ■ '£


riS


^io«"K^»3To = -= ;


=3'5£ = £=?T= = = = : = = = :


.7,.' ■ - Y " ° ' - " "


^


s»


<


t,-.-..»»..^.,,T


^ -ponq q[»d

a ■puri.ÙTK -«Biqoj.


*«,«-; . . ;*'^***^**


^■s


O
Û

S


1^'" ™'-


i

J


pgj Biipnii3

■jïqillii


■*■" 2 ::=":": : : = : t : .- :


sn T^d ""S


^K'ftSÎS'S.S.SliMftî


1


•i!;


1
1


■iiirsiiO J|ej


s^


''"■'■°-"°" '-'"""


■


•-


'"UPPIW


■tt* "'J. ■■:.!." gs 'j.^ '.jj: ".;•>:? iA'.;jy f.T:


-it


d


I

I

I
eu

O

ç<
\A

<
H
Z

u

H

O
U

Cb
O

co

H
U

Q
O

Pi


vd<0>0 000^ lA^


•suo[ic3 cSs jsd


i»0'*COC«-0 Q oo 00 30 r^


*suoi(c8 sSs i3d
*»I«a l«»s *l!0


|{ ^ M MM

^ M ''ï ^^ '^ ^ ^ ^ '^ f^ï ''^ ''^ ''^


■SQ0|i«8 eSe iad


*qi i9d
*S«-9i


M *« MM M

S^ N M M ^00 t^ M <^ rn ^ 00 o

• ^ ^ -^ >- ^- .- .^^ ^^ >. .^^ _

S O^OO'OOtOOk^ o o

P4 P« M M

•iOOOOOOOOOOOO


•sapjH


.ki-«« w»!»» gi <;■ g i g

>lo\ oooo»o^c^o»<^o>

M M M

HO oooooooco

H O


00 O^ ^ O^ 9 Ok o» ^00

ooooo oooo


*aoi jdd

*UK»p


• m «nOO OOOO

"* MM M M M

»_* Q. CO*"** mOOO

M o m O

O O.. o»>.

m^'m*' •■ "O** • * •'»

H O ooo oooo

M M

V.» 2.Ç22.Î1 oooo


•^ O


hs:


o^oooooooo** ooo «>


•^''^, r.


« «rtiotoioo O O O •'■•n«n«nt. «rm»«


U^ I


<o


ooo «ro «ooo ••ooflotN, M-o o o» ?>.» o»


1 « CI f'i ♦ ♦ ♦


fO


aO •• OOCp t^ tr-i


^*«*îï^«nr»> S^S»


mtntni^t* i/)iniomio«nioc< mo tnirio


•»; o» I


00

I pq


O o *oo inomiomw^mo O O O «o


^O o^ t^ "^ M r^o ''»o««*oo tvN M ^tnm
^ ♦ •'".O \c «/> «o m «o ^o lo »o»o «A * «r V


O


^


%


>!


f


H


«


: *^


^ M


M M n 1/) m m


• • • •


♦ ^mo O oo>»


C C o (*) « N

M M M

o o O >« M M


fIfiNMeiMMM


M M M ^o n f« c<


•s^


0>co 00 O O »«


O O O O O O


«nrrmei »« 0\0^»
mmmmmOOO


00 00 00 O O

o o o o O o


iw ti i r « p
(«fiClOMOOOOOO

M

mmmmOOOO


>« O»


H


<*>


00Oi/)0000OO000O

M MM M

M o oo w "«00 t^ m irt e^o ^ r»

OOi/)OO0OOO0OOOO
M O Qf) v^ M N i/^o f^ f«0 wï ^ r»


OOOO

M


(4

H

A4


mo] Jt9d


v^QO Ooo evooooQooooo

V-* i i ♦ ♦ ♦00 00 00 00 o» "• w


>»2


oo'nm •Ncioo^'*'*'^ f^O O


«


y; O ' O » •


. . . . . .1. . ^i^'î^o Vijï;

oo


L


= .^ v,0


^ î î îl î


£3— ^ rt^ JJ

^%< *-\0 --»< •— »o


I


-00 •


c 5


Cl

u >
CÎ?


b t b b b b

fi n n rt rt n_^
^ ^3 ^— >\3 ^3 ^3>?


- rtr-î = -3«3rt3<«


I I I

00 "00 -00 "


X o 3


:r


E


• «00


'UOI J9d

vbS»^ at


S M M M M M


> r^OOOOOOOOOOOOmtoOOO


H


^8


. irt o o o

H M MM


N< M M


tA


^ M ^

2 =«2 r « ■


o o o o r^ o o

M

♦30 00 r* t^ en tx


O O O O


M M «^ M M M

S S - « »"
H w)0 o


^0 o «


f* M


I M M («

I O O O O

I M M N Ci

SiS oo*'o*''*'*ooooooo


* «^ * A


s ••


; '^ ••


•pxivq J9d
'uiioqsfdois


m o m o (*kO o <o o o j
r^oo t^o rv r« IV. 9i M onoo r<«


O 2


. 0O« O C^9«0 OO ONO Ot


. (^ t>>vO >0 ^0 >0 *^ ^ fi


OMH*0


vOO^OOOt OO^OVO OO

^ 0\ O O vO

** m\o ^vo>o ^<O00 OO

«A ♦ mm (^ eo r«i mO m •/>

MMMMM nneiM mm


O mo
« mvO m


• «k — •> ^*


QXO OO

M M M M


O

o


o ^


'«païuds
XueuudQ
iu9quo|S[
(.sdwqs)


'^O^Or^r^mcicinfieicin

ljMMMM(1Clf««C«tlCI(i


>ï'î" it«nei000000««»»«e«««
4(f I («fit«ciciciMcic««(««««eic*(ici


H CI


*qi idd 'v>3|a

pus ptns m

'ueuudQ


^ o>o o oo <*>«•>«•*><•>«*>«

M M M

ti « e« Cl Cl mm'npOfOPOfnr»»


^ 00


2» M — * M
« «k «k » W

•*> m m fo M M

fO f»| f*> <*> f*> Cl


• • •

• • •


SC««0<0 0>0«00


• • t

• •» •»


^ M


• • •

• • •


fnrofOfororncïf^


I


■(pnoq) pcoi jad

puv 3tZlU«Q

'iaquiij.


••^ooooodoooooo
. o mmo mmo mmm

W •»»«»» A«k* m ^ ^ mt

■^Oooooooooooo

kDOOOO*'>i'i*'>0000
^^^ooO mm mO «o m m


S-*


6000000000>0«0>OOvOvOvO
^ \0 t>»a5 0« a« Ov O^ 00 rv fH r^ r^ t>>\0 <o «

oooeooooo o>ONOv>o«o««


*Xinqsja)aj jg


•^ o e><0 o 0N0« r^OsO
^ a» »« ^ ^ K r*oo tv Q 1^ I».

>: vo vo cn\o CkO»0>«neoO»0 «*>

^ M 00 00 t^aovo^Qoo i<« O t« t>
■» ♦ f» fi f»> f» In w «n f» ▼ fk f*»


O O O «^


O


mS


mm


o «o « ^ o m«oo o« _o
ooosgî 2"

« ^O 0« 9>0


'ft '^ ^>?


«100

mS


mm


*8*


-C
H


00 •« » -co


m


• m a
-oo -


& ? & r & L IL

llllldlAillîlll
i A. t i. 4 l i

m .m .m «m «m «^ ? i ••T


I


00 ~co


■00 * 00 **


>ao


A A


O

n


o


•(paoq) nM3 iad
pire 4*011»^


:l
1

a


en

<

O

co

H
U

Q
O


•(paoq) -)M3 J9d


■(pnoa) 'Of J9d


«^oooooooooooo

2 S i 2 r S S î 1 î r S

S o^o o>o o o« o o« o

^ O ooo o« o>o o o o o

•« ■•»

>S o o o o 0\O 0«
•: f>0 00 00 e«. M «o t^. OMO «o ro

•^ rs rv r« rv e«. t^.^ \o O vo >o ^
^ rn f^ fo fo fO ro r^ ro ro ro f^ r^

^0000'0'*W'0'^<*>C««

•ÎMMMMMMMMMMMM


>t»


•*î?


«00 OvO«0 o o ONOO o o o

m'^O^OO • * * •Qmo^iai>>w><^w%


O OO 0O«
« « N M N


OOOOOOOO

y> t^. ^00 Q ^ Ok >■

fO fO ^ co C'^ €• W f^


>»'


oooooo ooo o« o«o

ininCtMMd • > • «m <«-oo <* »* O c<


O O o O O


O O^O O O 0«O O


•

-H


n


00

M


OVO 0\0« oo^o o o
M w O '^ '^ ^ ♦ »'>>o ««o«o^« *w ^ m


•fpuoq) -qi t9d
*no9iK>3 '««x


■^ o^0\00^0'0r*t^0 oooo

>i 00 00 00 00 o 0> o o o O o 00

MM M

•iOOOOOOOHMMOO


«OOOOOOC^^^ViiA ift«0 ^<0 vt ^

»• »" K


M •-■ C« CI H

M » «k » «^


ClfiCtMMMMMM»*»*


. i-^-r


^.*0 o — <* ** O»00 oSo M'oMfiwOkO»^ *•
0000»«O0000m».m*'O0OO


(paoq)

*)M3 jad *poo9

O] Xjnniipjo un[X93

«aAiiej^ '99i)03


•^«O OOO 0>O<O 0<0 000
• n^mor^Ncn m^o «noe et


*>îvOvO«vOvO O O O O OvO
li M » Qoo •/>« mr^tnc» inO


i*>


0\0 0« O ONO O o>o o^o o

Q ^ r««o o • * • • 'roMinnn^tstQ

♦ '♦• «e ♦ lo lo^o \0 *0 *n\n ^ wn

*• ^ «00 OVO O o o« o o« o


%;f^î?$


\0 M ^ ** >* Q ooo
ir>\o « vo m wS '^ «r


>;o»
• 2


•ub ox jo 3sv{ iad
•ad»^


Sî t* o •♦ o *'>*0 r^vp *o O ** «


>,«


. - ♦oo N 00 o M n ^ *o « o\ c


** M


00


« « (« n en ro


2^88^?.?»


» A «^


*qi iad
'aaip «X »u»qO


•^>o o« o<o o o o o o O o

ttMMnilMNCinNNflCi

*^\0 o 0<0>0 OvOnO«nO«


! ii « e« («i m ♦xo »n i>oo oo oo «r


•v"*"
^ t*


vC>C« O O c«o>o«vo«vc o o o« o o
o«o o C'Oooouoo <f>*f* t^eo o<o Q o- o Q


! 2


I

! "^ »


««« ovoooooo«« o« oy>oo

♦« « « o r*.oo 00 o»ONN « ^"'mr<.M^i#>

MMMhM CiMCtnMMMM


'no iad
'ainf 'dniau


4000OOO0000O0


1^0


OOOOOOOO


>:«


. . «n ?i « M M M H M


>i«


•i^


O : : S : S


-2


s?r


o • •

• •


. .OOOOOOOO

M M M


s?^


MO
»■ M M N n e*


«r t«.eo o «r *n r»» en


•qi jad «jeans

pu« *:iupi!)^ '(Ufaag

•001103


>s «


UJJ


c o .
co


00 ** "■


5-3 •?


Su.'


o


5- ^

2'C xo


ri rt rt s d cj_ X g^ S

« • 2 >»2 >»2 >»2 >»2 >»2c >»2 SX >*«


•00 -


'00 " »


Sis; l JL. l i. i L A

•» 12 00 "00 '00 "CO "00 '00 " • "OO •■ • •>

^ MHMMMM M


00
00


s


(•^eoooooeoooo^
>toooooooooooo

• ^r\»>»»^0>0>0»^ 9-O0 <0 "■-


>J M


« o o o o o
f * ■♦ «^f *

C« « M N « M


o I : s I :

0«>O


O O o>o o o o

t»00 ♦!».*«»« •«

««NciNneici
«0«0 oo '


NNCICtMMHM


a»


I 'poi)9 oi Xjvuipio
1 *V9uSyj «iwo


•(piioq) -qi Jdd

*ua[oo3U3q

pue vu\oquiy

•saAOQ


soiiiienb

pj£ pu« 'pus ')8I

'uouivauQ


I


Ypnoq) 'qfjrad
'()i{Mir pue AAVdq)


')M3 jad


X

'f


I <


*(paoq) -1.M3 Jdd
auij pue pooQ


-(puoq) •jMTjo-.I


g i

5 I


M H M


'^OOOOmmoOOOO^C^^
««nntrtnciMMMMMM

>St««NMN«00000(x-

M »« n

i{»mmmmmmmOOOC


I


>t o O fn «no C o o «c « «

'^'«0^0^0 ^O'C^OsO^^O^O Os
.{mmmOOOOOOOOO


«AVir^OOt^ lAionw^OOQiA

iîO»M^*fo« • • «Mci^i/tMmNO

M MMMM • * • «MMMMMMMM

<%•«•>>>•> •••••«••

O ^^ Q.Q.Q* * * •Qvt'^nQOOO

m MMMM MM^MMMMM

n Ci w •* ►« O ♦»< M 6 M M «

• • • •

• • • •

• • • •
000000 OOOOOOOO

mOSOOO^M MMMMMMQOQO

>« •••• MMMM

mCINCiNn * * *ft«MMI-IMMM

Q m m » » m m^mm^^^m

Om^^mm mmmmOO**C^

Mp* »a«*>iMM M

• • • •

OQmmmO OOmmmmOO

.■> M !■ lo «no m» i w i< •«*•««

f*> ^ ^ lA m m lo trno **^ •'^

2ik»M«kM* * ' * •>••>•>•«•"•


•^0^0 OOO OOO 0^>O
• r«)<>tNMMMN(«MMOO


O :


» » » I


00


<'0 O-O O CO O OOO r^m

. ?^ ^00 90 00 00 ^ o 900 00 00

4.


V0^O O OO o
O O n «A\o vO

M M M M M M

A * * • ik •

3 « « • « «
o>o o>o o o


00 00 o> M m f*t

* » M M M


>S O O O O O o oo o o o o
■ lox eooeeovCNOoo m oo^tv

•^ o o o o« o o<o o o o«o

n n vi n


«•NNnnnnciN


N


•^vo


o^ o«>o o o o<o o o o o

• • • •

o 0>0 0^0 O o 0« O^CO O O


-^"^


• • •


ovo\o OVO o


• • ■


*Wn^trtMO««


o •n^O OVOVO


w»


• • •

• • •


• O» M o rH\C ^C \0


>JM


•i

s
i

9

Q


31


•vj 0vO»O« O^O 0^0^0


o\ovo o 0«O

• •


OVO« o OVO

• •


«;Nnf«(ic<i(«r«nr(fic««


• •

O^ Ci f^ fO '*ï fï
M Ci M N C« n


e«.N0 « «n «n »A ^o
m m ^ f*>« M s» «


•4


hs


2 - — —


•V; o^O 0v0>O O


o OO o«


0>C>0^ O O O


U «fl •'^ o^oo 00 »v f». 0» •• M a.-c

"■mm. MX «.mmNCIMm


, ♦ 9>0 »^00 t* • •

!


• • «Q o M m t^^o voo


«-»<


I


ni


•ig'


So.


*.'8


• •


A A 2


I


:5


(fi

U

y.

D

lu

y.


y.

o


U

X

O
H

U

ç/5

U

H
PC

<


I


*1inq jdd
j Xinp; Xjuaqs


o •» •» * •


• » ^ * » •


t*ettiftrtnc*»t*n'^r*


'ddid jad
(uo||cî! J9d-/>9 -sS
Amp) uoj


^oooooooooooo


I


'q[ jad

Swpr|\[ pue apnQ

'[eSu^lI 'o<ftpU|


I


•qi jad
Suoinij-Kip \]V


• x00000000000>0
. M '^ •«« \o -M 'X V» ao eo •*> i^.

I

>i ooo ooooooooo


•1M3 idd

'[69u9({ '3Ji9d)ies


.^>C»COOOOOO<OVOOC
. rs ^« oî 10 00 r».'* o> cvoo o>

.^«O\C0000C'C000O

*tt*tit%C*ettit*t<it*t*C*t*


*^'00000000«O000


•U01 Jdd

'sfiVMqino^ 'jajtjrejc
apisjajr AV i« (MuaS w K i 8. ÎQ S^i'* ÎC<2 S;c8 8 8.


^5


^«oo o o o
â e : S S S

N (« M o 000


• a6aoooaoaoBejb«e


• 00 00 00 o Q. r»-oo lA


I o OO O O O

>i o

^w I'oMnOOO
•O «ri lo m «o «o

H o :

Q » » «k «k «k "

X «h » ^ » «^

^ '^ ^ * J ♦ ♦«

n Ci t% 9i t4 ti


t •
• « •


ooooooo:

o \/\ in **% m tr: u , ir-


moo t* t* t* t* t* o
m ic ♦ * •♦ ^ ■♦■ ro


H M


^:s


>j ir»'û vô «0«'»»/ït^ô OO f**ro


^ lA m m m 1/) >o ln^C vO >0 <o o


S


»«


MM M


H


fO


HMMMMMMMfOmCtMM


m n iOM m>0 OO t«.9s000 O O O OO


yO\o


O^oo 00 ; ^•"<«


0> Ov ^ 0««C OOkr«)OOOroOOO»«MM

M M M

mmMmmmmhmmmmmMNOOO

oooooooooooooooooo

M^^^^^O>'>•'»Q♦ t^oo fn to m O t^^ r* »o

OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

rs o> 9'30 o>» 00 cioo N mnoo ^ t*> -^ m
MM>4Mei»<»<Mfir«cnrr)cnmNNC4N


m


sT


o OVO r^vO 0*000«000000

oo^C\0»"\CooMr^*"'<«*«ir>pi t<»oo 09
Cl « w fomr^N cifîfo*^ ^\C ♦ rr. ^ «♦


S»


«^ «k tt «


O o OVO oc« oooooooooo

^m'4-mt^M M N O' O OMOVO m •* oo ^HÛ


-'ft


>!sO 000>000^0000«00«000 ><M

I ■

.<*» Ot^^f^OOw ♦^O ooOf*«f>Oe«v»o«A .m

«•0 t> ON Cl M «00 M r^oo (^ M « o « Mi>o vto H (*t

M MMMH MnMMMMm n


§•_ IL iL ii


r


A


'00 -


M lO » • •

•00 •••«•■


O rf'
00

M

8.-

V

Ei:

<


m


%


B
fi


00


^ 53 S 3 53 §3 Sj5-3 w §0.3 S"

■ I ' i ' I

^ m « r^ 00

"00 '00 ''OO ^00 *' * *ao •>•'•>


I

•OO


APPENDIX G.


357


G.

RATIO OF PRESENT PRICES TO THE AVERAGE PRICES

OF 1849, 1850, AND 1851.

(The latter beingtaken as 100) deduced from theforegoing Tables.


• • •

• ••

• • •


PRODUCTS OF VICTORIA.
Cattle — Sheep, Cows, Bullocks

Xa £1 jf **• ••• *** ••• •** *"

J^A WuU ••• ••• ••• ••• •••

Butcher's Méat — Beef, Mutton ...
15utter ... ••• ... •••

Farm-yard Produce — Eggs,Turkeys,Ducks, Fowl
X oiaioes ••• ... ... ... ... ...

Potatoes, retail ...

Garden Vcgetables— Carrots, Turnips, Cabbages

PRODUCTS OF THE UNITED KINGDOM


Provisions — Butter, Bacon, Pork

Butcher's Méat— Beef, Mutton

Leather

Tallow

Wool ...

Soda Ash

Copper

Iron

Lead ...

Tin

Wheat

Barley...

Oats ...

Rye ...

Beans ...

Peas ...

Cotton Manufactures ^8 articles)

Linen Manufactures (o articles)

Whiskey

Turpentine ...

Cofiee

Rum ... •..

Logwood

Sugar (2 qualities)


1849,


'50, and


1858.


'51.


100


327-1


100


192*8


100


161*5


100


474--9


100


240*0


100


3128


100


i86*3


100


6oo*o


100


3491


100


123-1


100


122*2


100


148*0


100


133*6


100


110*2


100


102*0


100


129*1


100


124*4


100


131*8


100


141-5


100


104*7


100


135-1


100


141-5


100


127*8


100


145*4


100


143*4


100


io3'3


100


105*8


100


123*3


100


120*5


100


133-5


100


142*0


ICO


128*3


100


1047


35»


AFFENDIX G.


1849,


PRODUCTS OF NORTH AMERICA.
Cotton Wool— Middling Orléans, Fair Orléans ...


•So,««i


1858.


100


iiS'S


Ashcs


100


1.4-8


Timber


I20-I


Resin


i52'6


Tobacco — Maryland, Vii^nian


1I7-8


Provisions— Bcef, Pork


100


13010

Il8>3


IndianCom


100


Rice


108-9


PRODUCTS OF CONTINENTAL EUROPE.


Flax

H«np


;~


I3S-6
101-5


Hides


Leather


100


iii

92-8
.038
83^

117-8


Tallow (2 qualities)


100


Timber


Wool {2 qualities)

Tar

Oils—GaUipoli, Palm, Seal


100


Iron


100


II8-2


Steel

Wheat ...

Barley

Oats

Râpe


100

100


I44-S
1047
1351
141-5
124-2


PRODUCTS OF ASIA.


Cotton


100


11


Hcmp


100


Silk


100


CoSfce'" ".'.. "... ".'.. ".'.. '.'.'. '.'.'.
Tea— Congou, Hyson


124-2


Sugar— Bcng.il (ï qualilies),;Mauritius {3 qualities)


100


104-8


Rice


100


88-6


Spices— Black Pepper, Cinnamon, Qoves, Cassia


Lignea

Sago


;s


97-2
947


COMMODITIES SUBJECT TO EXCEP-


TIONAL INFLUENCES.


Potatoes

Saltpctre

suk : ..;

Indigo

Wine— Port, Sherry ;;;


100
100

100


122-2

130-0
138-1


H


ABSTRACT OF DR. SOETBEER'S TABLES.
Given in his Contributions to the Statistics of Priées in Hamburg.


1831—40


Coflee

,, Domingo

„ Java
Cocia
Tca

Unrefined Sugar
Relincd do.
Tobacco
Rlce
Peppcr

Alinond^

KaisiiiA

Cuirants

Wlne
Rum
Cicncva

Whrat

Rye

llaricy

Wheatenmeal

Hcrrings

Ham

Beçf

Hticter

Cheese

Indigo
Lo^wood
Sa'tpetre
Soda

f lover Sced
KapcMcd

Kapcseed Oil

Tar

l'allow

Wool

Cotion

Hcmp

I.inen

Rags

Skin<
Calf Skin

Iran

Zinc

I^ad

Couper

Tin

PitCoal


Percenuge rates compared with the average of the years 1831— 4a


iSïè


i8iè


lOO'O


68-5


lOO'O


71-3


■ ■

lOO'O


100*0


iio'7


lOO'O


«3-3


100 "O


824


lOO'O


f^


lOO'O


lOO'O


8a-3


XOO'O
lOO'O
lOO'O

100*0

I lOO'O
ICOO

; ICOO

\JOQ
lOu'O

100 o


1000
1000
looo

ICO'Q

Il 00
100 'O

lOO'O

100 o


xoo o

lOoO

xco'o
100 o

lOO'O

xoo'o
100 o

• •

XOO'O
lOO'O

XOO'O
lOO'O

XOO'O
XOO'O
XOO'O
XOOO
XOO'O

XOO'O


950

995
7^*9


£


s

o
90' a


lao o
Tia'V
113 I
III 7

XOO'O

798

io<> o
xî>'5
1084

lOl'I

839
97 9


95.1


lOT'O

106 a
968

878

706

1000

65-4
1^5 o

763
980

9t*a

1394

1077

96'a

xoi'3

XOO'O


185I 1852


75-6
773

88-4
86'5
758

747

II2'0
651

84 B

59 7

984

568

»3*o

108 3
iiU a
11^ 8

ÏI74
90 o

675

93 7
113-4
i05"o
I03'6

9' '5
68 8
89' X


io6'7


989

iia'5

846

856

8^3

704
«75'9

79'a
838

7a 'o

983

943

io3'o

857


744
727

• •

xox'o

798

7i"4
7a'a

94'4
709
87-6

89'a
847
671

xoi 6

57 5

«37 5

116 7

I4'j Q

1340

iio'9

929

1079
1273
1247
xos-S
I03'6

Sq'o
66'7

894


"3"4


943
X031

8g'9

909

73'
967

65s
X93'x

800
784

74 'a
«04'7

960
X086
xxa'7

857


1853


838
831

• •

xo5'o

85-8

83 3

77'a

857

77 9
986

94't
»37'9
164-5

, Ï20S

. 788
1470

i^ o
i6r'8

»574

1435
xao 7

"3'5
141*0
X4J'9

»3»'4
ixj'a

89'a
9'"3


1x8*1


1854


103 'x

XOO'O

xi3'8

?p'3
1-8
xo5'6
61-6
I75"9

96'o
87'6

X097
X4o'7
129-5

X3I 9
X52'3

"4'3


£8- s
784

983
897
85.5

797
846

930
1095

99*7
163' 5

1735

X48 I

94'3

1700

X93X

>'A4
178-7
167-4

154-3

984

«476
149-8
1404

137'0

86-6

978

140*8


1390


134*1

164 X
»343

917

778

138-9
6o'o

X73-4

113*0
95-a

X33'6
1487
1370

ia3'6
X55X

138 6


1855


83'7
865

• •

135-1
848

?68
3 3
846
1035

xo9'5

IIO'X

127-6
184'a

1730

X06 3
1890

315-3

ao9 X
aoo'o
X67.0
X65.7

xo4'8
x6o'o

1745
X46'3
X440

87'8

935
xsa's


148'a


159-3
I7i'9
xa9'o

99'7

770

1x5-6

H\
X58'6

XX 8*4
loa'i

xxo'8

iSi'3
153*0
X38'9
X5i'4

xa8-6


1856 1857


r6*a
55*5

• «

149-9
83-4

133*6

XX3'6

087

£6*0

X30'4

XXX 6

1833
aoo'3

«89*7
xoo*o
x66's

9o6'9
ao3'6

3X3'8

X91.3
x6o'7

1x8*3
X56'5
173*9
X540
153*7

976

XOOO

164*1


i76'6


148*7
xi8-7
1x89

X03'9

84-1

987

56-1

«48-3

«43 '3
xo9'a

ii4'o
1633
1376
1360
X7X'5

X38'6


95*4
105*8

• •

265*0
94*0
137*8
ii6*s
xao*7

767
\\%'^

xao'S

«54*7
135*0

X97-8
107*1
i6x*o

«44 '4
i40'o
i8o'9
1696
129*3

132*5

159-4
175*3
155*5


xo3*7

957

145 •«


X59'3

• ■

X4a'8
104*7
130*0

109*9
105*6

997

64*9
X37-9

185*7
135*1

ixa'9
X9i'3
138 '9
«5'o
i86'4

100*0


The above table is fîamed on a baûi of the arerage priées of 1831-40. Thi» is reprefented by xoo xn tb«
first column ; the second column repre<ients the average of prîces «itn référence to this basis, dunng i84x-50,
and the remaining columns the averagea, with référence to the same basis« of each yearfrom 1851 to 1857,
inclusive. By comparing the firrt and second columns it will be seen that, on the whole, the priées of 184X-50
had fallen as compared with those of 1831-40. while by carrying the ey^ forward, the reader wUl find that
after 1850 there is in the great msgority of cases a ri^ which in 1857 rcaches a very high point, not odIv in
relation to x84x-50t but in relation to x 831-40. The rise in priées thus shown is very much greater tnaa
that indicated by my ubles, which is aceounted for by the drcumstance. that mine hav« bccn carried Cn to
1858. when the full effect of thè reaction fmm the crisit rf 1857 >ad hceti felt.


36o APPENDIX I.


I.

STATEMENT OF THE CONCLUSIONS ARRIVED AT BY

M. LAVASSEUR.

("Journal des Économistes," March 1858.)

[Frotn the officiai statistics of French Priées y ituîuding ail commodities
produced or consumed in France from 1847 to 1856, inclusi-ue^

Natural Products.

Per cent. Pcr cent.

Actual increase in priées during the above period . . . 67*19

Proportion of increase due to war and scarcity .... 20

Ditto to spéculation 5 25*00

Increase in price of natural products 42*19


Manufactured Products.

Per cent. Pcr cent.

Actual increase in priées during the above period . . . I4'94

Proportion of increase due to war and scarcity .... 2

Ditto due to spéculation 5 7*00


Increase in price of manufactured products 7*94

By adding thèse results together and dividing by two, the average increase
in priée of ail commodities is made out to be 25 per cent., from which 5
per cent, is deducted as an allowance " for the development of industry
and the increase of consumcrs," thus bringing the advance in price, due to
the dépréciation of gold, to 20 per cent.

Exception might, 1 think, be taken to some of the principles by which
M. Lavasseur arrives at this resuit ; e,g, the plan of averages is very apt
to be deceptive, unlcss the commodities from which the averages are
taken, are of equal or nearly equal importance ; and the principle of the
last déduction of 5 per cent as an allowance for " the development of
industry and the increase of consumers," appears to me to be fallacious ;
the development of industry and the increase of consumers having, except
in the case of agricultural produce, a tendency to lower, instead of raising,
price. But, passing by thèse considérations, the important fact remains,
that French priées, comprehcnding those of ail articles produced or con-
sumed in France, hâve, after making libéral allowance for the effects of
war, scarcity, and undue spéculation, undergone since 1847 a marked rise,
and that this rise has taken place (so far as the classification has been


AFPENDIX K.


361


carried) in the manner according to which, siipposing it to hâve proceeded
from an increase of money, it might be expected to take place ; a fact
which, I submit, aiTords a strong corroboration of the gênerai truth of the
views which I hâve advanced


K.


EXTRACTS FROM DR. STRANG'S PAPER ON WAGES IN
GLASGOW AND THE WEST OF SCOTLAND.

[Rend at the Meeting of the British Association in 1858.]

AvERÀGE Rate of Wages of Workkrs in Factories (numbers net

less than 30,000 in 1851, 1856, and 1858).


1851.


1856.


1858.


s, d.


s, d.


s, d.


Power-loom Weavers


8 9


10 9


9 9


Spinners


25


30


27


Winders


8


• 9


9


Warpers


12


17


16 6


D ressers


32


40


35


Tenters


30


40


38


Twisters


9


12


12


Mechanics


24


27


26


Labourers

1


>•• <


12


17


iS


WoRKMEN IN Mines and Iron Works (in number 31,900, total wages

paid in 1854-5 1,976,000/., ten hours a day).


1852.


1854.


1856.


1858.


s. d.


s, d.


s, d.


s, d.


Miners ... ••• •••


2 6


5


S


3


Blast fumace keepers ...


5


6 8


7 9


5


Do. assistants-


3 2


4 2


4 2


3 3


Do. fillers


2 8


3 10


• 4 2


3 9


Puddlers, including under


hands ••• ... •••


7 6


10 6


10


9


Rollers (chief rollers) ...


10


14 6


13 6


12


Labourers


I 6


2 I


2


2


362


APPENDIX K.


Engineers and Mechanics (per day).


Year.


Shillings.


Year.


Shillings.


185I ...


••• ••• •••


343


1855


t • •


■ • •


3'99


1852 ...


••• ••• •••


3-52


1856


• • •


• • •


• •• ... 4 ^^


1853 ...


•«• ••• •••


3*82


1857


• ••


• ••


397


1854 ...


■•• ••• ••■


3*97


1858


• • •


• • •


3*92


WORKMEN ENGAGED IN THE BUILDING Trade (ten hours a day).


quarriers.


1


QUARRIERS.


Year.


Shillings.


1

_ i


Year.


Shillings.


185I ...


16 per week. '


i8s5..


1


...


... 20 per week.


1852...


... .». 10


»


1856..


■


• « •


... 22 „


1853...


... ... 17


»>


1857..


■


...


22 „


1854...


... ... IQ


Mas


1858..
»ONS.


J.


... 19-20 „


Summer of


1850 and '51


• • • • •


21


per


week of 60 hours.


Winter


do. do.


• • • • •


18


ditto.


Summer of


1852


• • • * *


21


o& I


8j. ditto.


Do.


1853


• • • • •


23


9


ditto.


Do.


1854


25


ditto.


Do.


1855


• ■ • • •


25


ditto.


Do.


1856


• • • • •


25


ditto.


In September 1856, a change was made, and the rate fixed per hour,
as foUows ; —

d, s. d.

Sk per hour or 26 11 i per week of 57 hours.


»


September I9th, 1856
December I2th,
May isth, 1857
July 24th,
Aug. 7th,
Nov. 6th
March ist, 1858
August ist, „


si


»>


^ 1.
24 II


ditto.


s


ï»


23 9


ditto.


^i


î>


24 II


ditto.


5i


))


26 li


ditto.


M
y


»


23 9


ditto.


4f


J9


22 6è


ditto.


41


»


*22 6; :


ditto.


Carpenters and Joiners.


s.


1851 21 per week of 60 hours.

1852 24 ditto.

1853 23 ditto.

1854 24 ditto of 57 hours.


s.


1855 24 per week of 57 hours.

1856 24 ditto.

i857toNov. 26 ditto.

1858 t24 ditto.


COMMON Labourers (connccted with ail matters of house construction).


1850, '51, and *52

I053 ••• ••• "•• *** •

ios4~S"^ *** *** ***

1057 ••• ** *** *** *

loso ... ... ••• ..* •

• Eqtial to 23*. 8}</. per week of 60 hours.


S, d,

... 12 o per week of 57 hours,

... 14 o ditto.

... 17 o ditto.

... 16 o ditto.

... 15 9 ditto.

» Equal to 251. yf. per week of 60 h<nir«.


APPENDIX K. 363


Hand-loom Weavers (per week, for men, boys, and g^rls).

s. d.


losi ••• ••• ••• *■* 3

Io^2 ■•• ••• ••• ••• O 9

10S3 *** *** *** *** 7


S, d»

X030 ■•• «•• ••• %»% f 1

lo^/ ••• ••• *•• ••• o 1^

1050 ••• ... <*. ... 5 9


Hand-loom Weavers (fancy work).

s, d, s» d*
1856 9 3 to 14 o per week.

1858 ... ... ... 7 o to 5 9 99

Dr. Strang remarks that there has been a graduai diminution of hand-
loom weavers during the last few years.

It will be désirable to add a few words in the way of explanation and
comment on the tables now presented. And first, as to the standard of
comparison which has been adoptcd. It appeared to me that, in selecting
this, three leading considérations should be kept in view : first, that it
should be taken from a period sufficicntly long to allow, by the use of
averages, of the élimination, as far as possible, of what is casual and
exceptional ; secondly, that this period should exclude occasions of violent
commercial agitation ; thirdly, that it should be continued to a point of
time coinciding as nearly as possible with that at which the action of the
new supplies of gold began to be fclt. The period extending over 1849,
1850, and 1851, though not free from objection, appears to me, on the
whole, to fulfU thèse conditions with tolerable fairness. It is in respect to
the first that it principally errs, but the necessity of complying with the
second and third (which I thought the more important conditions) left
me no choice on this point ; for, had I extended the period from which
the average is taken further back than 1849, it would hâve been brought
under the influence of the powerfully disturbing occurrences of the years
1845, 1846, and 1847, including the Rail way spéculation of 1845 ^^d 1846,
the Irish famine of 1846 and 1847, and the commercial crisis of the last
year ; while, on the other hand, to hâve carried it to a date later than
185 1 would hâve been to bring it under the influence of the gold
discoveries — that is to say, subjected that which was to be our standard of
comparison to the action of the agency, the charactcr of which it was our
object to investigate. Indeed, with a view to American priées, the year
1851 is too late; the demand springing up in California conséquent on
the gold discoveries, having previous to the close of that year produced a
very decidcd eflfcct on the American markets ; a circumstance which
prevents the rise in American priées, as shown in the tables, from being as
marked as it otherwise would be. If it be said thàt thèse objections
might be obviated by taking a longer period anterior to 1845, this is true ;
but, by doing so, we should hâve incurred others of a more serious kindi
In the first place, there was to this course the practical objection arising
from the difficulty of obtaining extensive retums of prices from so distant


364 APPENDIX K.

a period — ^a difficulty of which no one who has attempted to construct a
table of priées on a large scale will think lightly ; while it would hâve
been furthcr objectionable as not fulfilling the third of the three conditions
which I hâve stated above — that of taldng the standard of comparison
from a period as close as possible to the epoch of the gold discoveries.
To disregard this condition would be in no small degree to conceal the
opération of the agency in question ; there being a constant tendency
in the progrcss of the mcchanical arts and applied sciences to cheapen
production, and thus, when any considérable period of time is allowed to
elapse, to neutralize the effect of any cause, which, like the new gold, tends
to rai se priées. But, though not free from objection, I conceive the years
1849, 1850, and 1851 to form on the whole a fair basis of comparison; and
this I think will appcar from the following extracts from the Trade
Reports of that time, which hâve been taken partly from the Economiste
and partly from the 5th volume of the " History of Priées."

During the whole of 1848 the country was suflfering from the dépres-
sion conséquent upon the reaction from the crisis of 1847, but by the
close of that year and the opening of 1849 its prospects became more
cheering. This is shown by the following extracts from the Economiste
January 6th, 1849. I-i'^^ Street^ London, — "At the close of this year,
which has been so sadly eminent for dulness in the produce market,
I hâve the pleasure to announce a decided improvement, which is
more important for being so very unusual just at this period, The reports
from our manufacturing districts are more favourable." Manchester. —
" We hâve the satisfaction, at the termination of another remarkable and
eventful year, of communicating to you the continuance of a decided
improvement in the trade of this district." Liverpool, — "The wool-
market continued in a state of great dépression till the end of Octobcr.
. . . During the past two months, however, we are glad to notice a con-
sidérable change for the better ; a large business has been done both for
the home trade and for export, and priées both of foreign and domestic
wools hâve an upward tendency." On the other hand, the corn market is
reported as at this time in a very depressed condition, " ail classes holding
back for the period of free trade becoming a great act ; anticipating a still
further réduction in value under its dreaded influence ; " as were also the
markets for colonial produce.

The anticipations, however, expressed in the passages I hâve extracted,
of a gênerai revival of commercial activity, were not realized during the
first half of 1849, which must be regarded as a time of more than ordinary
dépression. About the middle of 1849, however, a decided improvement
took place, as appears from the following report, dated October 3ist,
1849 : — " With the single exception of some branches of the cotton trade,
I hâve the satisfaction of reporting a continued improvement up to a late
period, and with every appearance of continued activity, at least for some
months to come, to the extent to which it has now reached. The worsted
stuff trade has been the one most active; this trade has never before


APPENDIX K. 365

reached anything like the extent to which it bas now attained. Plain and
fancy woollens hâve varied, .... but on the whole tbey bave been verj'
satisfactory. Tbe silk trade bas been brisk and prospérons." At the
close of October (1849), the historian of priées informs us (" History of
Prices," vol. V. p. 244) — that " there sprung up in the colonial markets
a marked disposition to a spéculative rise of priées. The tendency first

manifested itself in coffce From coffee the spéculation gradually

spread to several other articles." This buoyant state of the market, it
appears, continued till the end of January 1850, at which time the reports
announce that " the spéculations in colonial produce appear to bave in
some measure subsided.'' The commercial character of 1849 appears
thus to bave been orc of dépression during the first half of the year,
followcd by a gênerai revival of trade in the latter half, accompanied by a
spéculative rise of priées of certain markets : on the whole, we may
consider the range of priées during this year as somewhat under the
normal leveL

At the opening of 1850 we are told, *'the trade of the country was
modcrately active" (" History of Priées," voL vi. p. 249) : and this repré-
sentation is fuUy supported by quotations from the Trade Reports. Thus
from Yorkshire the accounts say : — " I continue to receive very satisfactory
reports as to the state of trade in ail branches of manufactures throughout
my district, except that portion cngaged in spinning low numbers of
cotton yarns, or manufacturing heavy cotton goods. The gênerai con-
dition of the factory workers, as regards employment and thcir ability, by
good wages and low priées, to obtain food and clothing, is also satisfactor>'.^
(Ibid. p. 25a) The principal complaints at this time appear to bave been
in the cotton trade respccting the high priée of raw cotton, which we are
told "were gênerai throughout 185a" In April 1850, the account from
Lancashire was as follows : — " Ail the accounts I receive represent the
woollen, worsted, flax, and silk mills to be in an active and prospérons
state, and I hâve received similar good accounts of the largei portion of
the différent branches'of trade in print works." (Ibid. pp. 250-1.) On July
6, 1850, the following reports appear in the Economist : — "Nothinghas
occurred during the past month to disturb the even and satisfactory course in
which the commerce of the country appears to be now steadily proceeding.
. . . The low priées of many foreign articles might bave been expectcd
to offer a sufficient inducement to spéculative investment ; but such has
not been the case, business having been in most instances restricted
to the supply of the actual consumptive and export dcmand ; so g^eat,
however, is this demand at présent for many of our silk, cotton, and
woollen fabrics, that higher rates are obtainable than hâve been current
for some years past ; and so far from the stocks of manufactured goods
increasing, there is difficulty in getting orders exccuted except for forward
delivery. From Liverpool the account at the same time was as follows : —
«* Throughout the manufacturing districts there is fiill employment, and
trade is in the highest degrec flourishing. At this season of the year


366 APPENDIX K.

therc is generally a large business doing in domestic wools, but the trans-
actions hâve been to a greater extent than usual." From Manchester,
owing to the cause already adverted to, the scarcity and dearness of raw
cotton which continued throughout this year, the accounts were less favour-
able. In the review of this year*s cotton trade (December 1850) given in
the "History of Prices," vol. v. pp. 255, 256, the following statements
appear : — "On the ist of January, 1850, this quality (Middling Orléans)
was worth 6\d. per pound, being 50 per cent, higher than at the commence-
ment of 1849, and also of 1848. Speculators came freely into the market
early in 1850, basing their opérations on the promising appearance of
trade in the manufacturing districts, and the unfavourable prospects of

the crop of American cotton There was a trifling reaction in

August ; in Scptember and October a recovery ; but in November a con-
sidérable fall, arising in appréhension of a war on the Continent. In
December, more activity ; and the year 1850 closed with a price of ^\d,
per pound, or nearly 20 per cent, higher than at the opening.** "In coffee,"
we are told, "therc were considérable fluctuations during the year;
the price in January 1850 having risen very considerably, under the
influence of bad crops from Brazil, and spéculative purchases," faliing in
June and rising again in September, from which time it rose steadily till
the end of the year. "In indigo and silk there were also some fluctua-
tions arising out of reports of déficient crops." "In the sugar market the
year 1850 has bcen marked, on the whole, by a very steady maintenance of
prices." Of the ship-building trade we are told that " new British ships
hâve fuUy maintaincd our last quotations ; indced, we hâve felt the want of
a larger supply of good vessels, which would hâve met with a ready sale
at fair prices if at hand." The review of this year is thus summcd up : —
"As a gênerai rule there was a disposition in the latter half of 1850, in ail
the great markets of produce, to look forward to considerably higher
prices, on the twofold ground of increasing consumption, and of the
probable failure of the usual supplies." (Ibid. p. 258.)

The opening of the year 185 1 is thus chronicled : — "The year 1851

opened with fair prospects Prices of colonial produce were fimi

and rising ; and already the export trade to the United States began to
exhibit the influence of the large consumption in Califomia.** (Ibid.
p. 258.) A reaction, howevcr, from this favourable condition of things
occurred in the spring, and on April 3, 1851, there was the following
report from Yorkshire : — " In various branches therc has been a consi-
dérable quantity of machinery either unemployed or working for a shorter
period than for many previous monîhs. This has not been extended to

ail branches of trade at the same time or in the same degree In

the neighbourhood of Huddcrsfield nearly ail branches of the wooUen
trade are represented to be at this moment very flat and depressed."
(Ibid.) At Livcrpool the price of cotton had fallen at the end of May to
a point as much as 60 or 70 per cent, below the prices current in the
previous January. "Throughout July, August, and Scptcmter there was


APPENDIX K, 367

#

great dépression in the produce markets of London and Liverpool.
Prices had failed to correspond \vith expectations formed, and had fallen
considerably instead of having risen. . . . About the end of September,
however, the markets began to revive. The reports from Manchester
represent the home trade as decidedly better." (Ibid. p. 261.) "When
the period arrived for taking a review of the twelve months, the retrospect
was of a mixed character. « . 4 But, as a genci:al rule, the close of 1851
was dîstinguished by a range of prices in almost every branch of trade
and manufacture lower than had prevailed for a very long period."

On a survey of the three years we may say that they embraced a
period of chequered character, not free from commercial vicissitudes, but
undisturbed by commercial convulsion. The range of prices in 1849 was
perhaps rather under the usual level, but on the other hand "in 1850
prices had in most cases risen considerably above their ordinary level."
(" Hist. of Prices," voL v. p. 265.) This high range of prices appears to
havc culminatcd in January 1851, from which point there was a décline,
which appears to hâve touched its lowest range about August of this year,
after which a revival set in ; prices, however, at the end of the year
remaining still grcatly depressed when compared with the high level they
had attaincd at its opening. There is one important class of articles,
indced, which throughout the whole of this period continued at a low
range, namely agricultural produce : this was owing principally to two
causes, viz. favourable scasons and free trade which had at this timc
just come into force : but, on the other hand, there were others scarcely
Icss important, which ruled throughout at prices much above what had
been their usual level for many years previously, e,g. raw cotton and
wool ; the former of thèse articles being maintaincd throughout the
great er portion of the whole period at from 50 to 80 pcr cent, above what
had for many years been the prevailing price ; and the latter also at
what were considered very high rates.

Such being the grounds on which the years 1849, '^So» a^n^ 1851 hâve
been takcn as a standard of comparison, it remains that I should explain
the principlcs on which the tables hâve been constructed, and the
significance of the results which they embody.

And first as to the sources from which the foregoing returns hâve been
taken : thèse are as follows, viz, — for agricultural produce, the Gazette
returns, as given eithcr in the Statistical Abstract publishcd by Govern-
ment, or in the Economist; for butcher's méat and potatoes, the Registrar-
GeneraPs quarterly returns ; for cotton (American), a séries of tables^
publishcd lately by Mr. Spcnce of Manchester, entitled, "The Course of
Corn, Cotton, and Money ; " the figures in the columns marked P in the
tables hâve been furnishcd to me by private merchants extensively
cngaged in transactions with the articles to. which they relate ; a few
columns hâve been takcn from the tables in the sixth volume of the
" History of Prices," and the rcmainder from the Prices Current published
wcekly in the Economist, The prices are, as a gênerai rule, the prices of


368 APPENDIX K.

thc London markcts, though in somc instances thcy refer to othci's, but
the locality of thc markct is evidcntly unimportant, providcd the quota-
tions for any j;iven article rcfcr throu):hout the whole period to the saMf
markct, and this rule has bcen ahvays observed. The saine principle
obviously applics to forcign as wcll as to home commodities. Thc prices>
e.g, of cotton wool, of tobacco, of toa, or of sugar, will ahvays be highcr
(I spcak of bond priées) in London than in the countries of their produc-
tion, by thc cost of transmission pins the profit on the capital invested
in thc trade, and thèse cléments, it is truc, viill vary for short inter\-als,
but taken ovcr long periods they will on an average be the same. The
variations of priées therefore in thc London markets will on an average
show thc variations of priées in the markcts of the producing countries.

Of articles subjcct to import dutics, thc priées quoted are, with one
or two unimportant exceptions which aro duly notified in a footnote, the
bofui priées.

From thc commodities comprised in the tables silver has bcen de-
signedly cxeluded, bceause, contrary to what is somctimcs supposed,
silver, of ail articles, forms thc most fallacious critcrion of changes in the
value of gold, owin^ to the cireumstancc that silver and gold, whcrever a
double standard of value exists, and to some cxtcnt even wherc it docs
not, are made to pcrform thc samc functions, and can be reciprocally
substituted onc for thc othcr ; thc eficct of which is that a fall in the
value of gold is always atiended with a fall in thc value of silver, though
not necessarily to thc samc cxtcnt.

Thc tables hâve becn construeted with a view to exhibit the opération
of thc princii)lcs which in thc preceding paper I hâve cndcavoured to
cstablish ; thc classification being made according to the countries in
which thc commodities are prodiiced, and thc mode of their production.
To thc complète carrying out of this principlo scveral practical diflîculties
occur. Thus therc is an important group of commodities which are not
produccd in any of thc Icading commercial countries of thc world, and
wlîich do not ihcreforc properly fall under any of the abovc hcads—
West Indian commodities. Thtsc arc obviously too important to be
omitted from any table purporting to reprcscnt the progrcss of priées^
but, on the other hand, they do not convcnicntly fit into any of the de-
partments laid down. As on thc wholè the least objectionable plan, I
hâve addcd them as a distinct group to thc productions of the United
Kingdom ; for, although tropical commodities, they arc thc producc for
the most part of Hritish capital, and arc more under thc influence of our
monctary System than that of any olher countr>'. Agajn, it will be found
that thcre are many commodities which are common to sevcral classes.
Of thèse grain is by far the most important ; the othcrs being cotton,
rice, tallow, oils, râpe, and a few more. It is, as I hâve pointed out
{ante, pp. 70, 71), through thc médium of such commodities that thc most
powcrful corrcctivc is supplicd to that local divergence of priées which
it is the object of thèse tables to illustrate. In proportion therefore as


APPENDIX K. 369

such commocUtics arc found in the several tables, will the opération of
the principlcs to which I call attention be neutralized, and the pheno-
menon in question be Icss striking.

The tables, though containing altogether about one hundred com-
modities, 1 must admit to bc in a very incomplète state. It will be
remembcred, howcver, that / do not base any theoty upon thcm, The
theor)' which I hâve advanced stands on entirely independent grounds,
namely, the conditions of production affecting différent classes of com-
modities, the peculiar character of the monctar>' Systems existing in
différent countries, the commercial channels by which the new gold is
diffused, and lastly the principles of monetarj' science. In thcir présent
form I cannot evcn claim for thèse tables a vérification of that theor>' :
ail that I assume for them is that they afford so extensive an illustration
of the principles which I hâve advanced as to warrant me in feeling con-
sidérable confidence in their gênerai soundness. Thus, if the reader will
glance over Table G, which shows at one view the resuit of the comparison
instituted in the prcvious returns, he will find that out of the whole
number of commoditics included in it, which amounts to nearly one
hundred, only six havc fallen sincc the epoch of 1849-51 : the remainder
hâve ail riscn, and the greater number in a ver}' marked manner ; and
he will find further, that in ihis progress of priées the advance has
on the whole taken place in the order in which, as I hâve endca-
voured to show, priées may be expectcd to advance under an increase
of the precious metals. Thus he will find Victorian priées to hâve
advanced in the proportion of about 200 per cent., or rather more. He
will find the movement in English and American priées on the whole
greater than in the priées of Continental Europe, while thèse latter
show a greater advance than priées in Asia. This local divergence of
priées will bc verj' remarkable if we take some leading commodities of
British and American produce, and contrast them with some of the
leading products of Asia. Thus, if we take provisions and butcher's méat,
the metals, agricultural produce, raw cotton, and tobacco, and compare
thèse with some principal Asiatic products, as cotton, silk, coffee, tea,
sugar, rice, and spices, we shall find that while the priées of the former
articles bave riscn from 15 to 45 per cent, as comparcd with their priées
in 1849-51, the priées of the latter hâve in no case riscn more than 15
per cent., and hâve in several cases positively fallen — in one important
article, rice, by so much as 11 per cent. The only important Asiatic
products in which a marked rise in priée has taken place are sallpetrc
and indigo, and in both thèse cases the rise is owing to causes of an
cxceptional nature — in saltpetre to a greatly increased consumption
during the last four years, conséquent upon causes too numerous hère to
mention, combined with the obstacles presented to a rapid extension
of the supply by the scarcity of the peculiar clays from which this article
is principally obtained ; and in indigo owing to the interruption given to
the opérations of the indigo planters by the Mutiny, and to the spéculative

B B


370 APPENDIX K.

transactions to which this event gave occasion. It will be seen, toc, that,
on the whole, the other doctrines of the papcr are pretty well borne out
Thus the advance in raw materials is much greater than in manufactiired
articles, while amongst raw materials the advance is more marked in
animal than in vegetable products ; such articles, e.^.y as leather, tallow,
provisions, and butcher's méat showing a very remarkable rise.

I hâve appended to my own tables an abstract of the results arrived at
by Dr. Soetbeer of Hamburg, in his " Beitràge zur Statistik der Preise,**
for which I am indebted to the kindness of the Archbishop of Dublin, as
well as a statement of M. Levasseur's conclusions as to the progress of
priées in France during the period of 1847 to 1856. It will be seen that
the conclusions of both thèse writers, derived from independent data, and
reached by modes of investigation entirely différent from mine, concur in
supporting not only the gênerai position of a rise in priées, but also, sofar
as they go, the particular doctrines which I hâve ventured to advance
respecting the mode in which this rise must take place. On the other
hand Mr. Newmarch (the author, in conjunction with the late Mr. Tooke,
of the fifth and sixth volumes of the " History of Priées"), in a communi-
cation made to the British Association at its meeting in Leeds in
September, 1858, maintained that priées were then rather lower than
i>revious to the gold discoverieSy and that no dépréciation in the value
of money had up to that time taken place; resting his conclusions
on certain tables which he then produced. To account, however,
for the discordance of Mr. Newmarch's conclusions as well with mine
as with those of others who hâve investigated the same problem, it is
only necessary to state, Rrst, that the tables on which he based his conclu-
sions contained not more than twenty commodities^ and excluded almost
ail those in which the advance has been most marked ; and secondly, that
the standard of comparison which he adopted was a single çuotation in
January, 1851 ; that being, as I hâve shown above, as well from Mr.
Newmarch's own writings as from other authorities, the culminaiing point
of an ascending movement in priées which had commenced in the begin-
ning of the preceding year. Under thèse circumstances, the standard et
comparison being exceptionally high, the object of comparison — ^that
is to say, the priées in September, 1858 — being (owing to the reaction
conséquent on the commercial crisis of the previous autumn) exceptionally
low, and the comparison being limited to a sélect nimiber of com-
modities, it is not strange that the conclusion should hâve been différent
from that of other writers who proceeded upon différent principles.

For the retums of wages in Glasgow and the West of Scotland, given
in Table K, I am indebted to Dr. Strang, who kindly allowed me to copy
them from the valuable paper on that subject which he read before the
British Association in September last. I had hoped to hâve extended
this portion of the subject by adding to thèse some retums of wages in
Ireland, but the materials which I hâve yet obtained for this purpose
are not -suffîciently extensive to be worth publication. It will be seen,


APPENDIX K. 37 1

however, that Dr. Strang's tables, so far as they go, fîilly support the
général views advanced.

I cannot conclude without gratefully acknowledging the assistance I hâve
received, while compiling thèse tables, firom several gentlemen, both in
this country (Ireland) and in England, to whom I hâve had occasion to
apply for information, and who, as well by procuring me retums as by
the observations with which in some instances they hâve accompanied
them, hâve afTorded me very material aid. I shall only further add that,
as I cannot but fear that many inaccuracies may hâve found their way into
the foregoing tables notwithstanding my anxiety to avoid them, I shall
feel obliged to anyone who will do me the favour of pointing out any
error he may detect, whether in the way of omission or of commission,
and still more so if he will afibrd me the means of correcting it Such
criticism will be the more acceptable, as I purpose carrying on thèse
tables with a view to exhibit the future progress of dépréciation, and
hope on some future occasion to be able to publish them in a form less
incomplète and fragmentary than that in which, owing to unavoidable
circumstances, they at présent appear. [This intention the writer has
been prevented from carrying into effect.]


THE END.


LONDO.N :

I< CLAV, SONS, AND TAYLOR, l'KINTKKS.

UKRAD STKBET ilILL.


Bedford Street, Covent Garden, London.

July, 1872.


Macmillan &» Co.'s Catalogue of Works in
Belles Lettres^ including Poetry^
Fiction, Works on Art, Critical and
Literary Essays, etc.


AUingham LAURENCE BLOOMFIELD IN IRELAND ;

or, the New Landlord. By William Allingham. New and
Cheaper Issue, with a Préface. Fcap. 8vo. doth. 4;. td,

The aim of this little book is to do somdhingf konvever small^ towards
making Ireland, yet so little huntm to the gênerai British public ^
better understood. Several of the most important problems of life,
Irish life and human life, are dealt tirith in their principles^
according to the author^s best lights. In the new Préface, the
state of Irdand, with spécial référence to the Church measure, is
discussed, ** It is zntal Tvith the national character. .... It has
something of Popis point and Goldsmith^s simplicity^ touched to a
more modem issue" — ATHENiCUM.

Arnold. — Works by Matthew Arnold : —

THE COMPLETE POETICAL WORKS. VoL I. Narrative
AND Elegiac Poems. Vol. II. Dramatic and Lyric Poems.
Extra fcap. 8vo. Price dr. each.

The two volumes comprehend the First and Second Séries of the
Poems, and the New Poems, **Thyrsis is a poem of perfect
ddight, exquisitein grave tendemess of réminiscence, rich in breadth
of western light, breathing full the spirit of gray and ancient Ox-
ford,*^ ^ShTV'BiTiKt Review. **The noblest in it is clothed in
clearest words, There is no obscurùy, no useless omament: every*
thing is simple, finished, and perfect "SQQrrviiAXi,

A


BELLES LETTRES.


Arnold— ^^'f^'VfK^v/.

ESSAYS IN CRITICISM. New Edition, with Additions. Extra
fcap. 8vo. df.

7%e Essays in this Volume are — ^*The Function oj Criticism at
the Présent Time;" **Thê Literary Influence of Académies;"
*^ Maurice de Guerin ;" ** Eugénie de Guerin ;" ** Heinrieh
Heine;" '* Pagan and Mediaeval ;" ''Rcligicms SettHment;"
^'Jmbert;" ''Spinoza and the Bible ;" '' Marcus Aurelius."
Both fram the suhjects dealt with and mode of treatnient^ frw
books are more calculaied to delight^ inform^ and stimulate than
thèse charming Essays.

Bacon's Essays. — See Golden Treasury Séries.

Baker. — {^or other Works by the same Author, see Catalogue ok
Travels.)

CAST UP BY THE SEA ; OR, THE ADVENTURES OF
NED GREY. By SiR Samuel Baker, M.A., F.R.G.S., With
Illustrations by HuARD. Fourth Edition. Crown Svo. cloth
gilt. 7^. 6/.

** An admirable taie of advctUure^ of mamelloit:^ tnchlentSy i^'ilU
exploits, atîd terrible dhiùucmcfits" — Daily News. ''A stoiy oj
adventure by sea and land in the good old style." — Pall Malt
Gazette.

Ballad Book. — See Golden Treasury Séries.

Baring-Gould. — Works by s. Barinc-Gould, M.A. : —
IN EXITU ISRAËL. An Historical Novel. Two Vols. Svo.

21^.


il


S^-m; of ils most p07verful passages — and froJigiously fn/iuerfiu
ihcy are — are descriptions oj familiar r.enfs in the earlicr days
cf the Re: ';\^ntio H. "—LlTEKARY Churchmax. ** Frtll of the
m -^sf e.\r:fing incidents and ably poîirayed charr.cftrSy alounding in
hw.iUfit'.^y attractive legends^ and relirred by descriptions frsh^
invil, and truth'lihc" —Westminster Review.


BELLES LETTRES.


Baring-Gould— ^<^«««^'^-

LEGENDS OF OLD TESTAMENT CHARACTERS, from the
Talmud and othcr sources. Two vols. Crown 8vo. i6f.
Vol. I. Adam to Abraham. Vol. II. Melchizedek to Zachariah.

Afr. Baring'Gould lias hère coUecled from the Talmud and other
sources^ Jeivish and Mohamtnedan^ a large number of airious
and interesting Ugends concerning the principal characters of the
Old Testament ^ comparing thèse frequently with simiîar legends
current among many of the nations^ savage and civilized^ ail <rver
the woi'ld. ** Thèse volumes contain much that is very strange,
amly to the ordinary English reader, verynovel." — Daily News.

Barker. — Works by Lady Barker:—

*^Lady Barker is an unrivalled story-teller.*^ — GUARDiAN.

STATION LIFE IN NEW ZEALAND. New and Chcaper
Edition. Crown 8vo. 3^. dd.

Thèse letlcrs are the exact account oj a lady* s expérience of the brighter
and Icss practical side of eolonization. Tliey reco^'d the expedi-
iixws, adventures^ and anergencies diversifying the daily life cf the
linfe of a Nc7u Zealaftd sheep-farmer ; and, as each ivas written
lohile the norjelty and excitement of the scènes it describes 'verefresh
npon hcr, the)' niay succecd in giving hère in Engïand an adéquate
impression ofthe dclight afid frcedom of an existence sofar remcrjed
from our oivn highly-wronght ciznlization. ** IVe hâve ftever read
a more truthfui or a pleasanter little book^ — ATHEN^tUM.

SPRING COMEDIES. Stories.

Contents : — A Wedding Story — A StupidStory — A Scotch Story
— A Man's Story. Cro\vn 8vo. 7^". 6</.

''^ Lady Barker is endowed ivith a rare and délicate gif t for nar-
ratiftg stories^ — she lias the faculty of thraivin^ even into her
printed narrative a soft and plcasant tone, which gocs far to make
the reader think the subject or the mattcr immatériel y so long as the
aiithor rcill go on tdîing stories for his benefit" — ATHENitUM.

STORIES ABOUT:— With Six Illustnitions. Second 'Edition.

Extra fcap. 8vo. 4J. 6d

A 2


BELLES LETTRES.


Barker — conHnued.

T%is vdume contains stveral etUertmmng stories about Monhys^
yamaka^ Camp Lift, Dogs, Boys^ &'c. ** 7>l/r^ ù not a taie in
the book whick canfail to pUase chUdren as wdl as their dders.^*
— Pall Mall Gazette.

A CHRISTMAS CAKE IN FOUR QUARTERS. With Dlus-
trations by Jellicoe. Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. doth gilt.
\s, dd.

fn this little volume^ Lady Barker ^ whose réputation as a delightful
stary-teller is established, narrâtes four pleasant stories shcwing
hcnvthe ''Great Birth-day" is kept in the ^'Four Quarters" oj
the globe, — in England, yamaica, India^ and New Zealand, T^e
volume is illustrated by a number of wdl-executed cuts, ' ' Contains
just the stories that chiidren should be told, *Christmas Cake* is
a delightful Christmas book" — GLOBE.

Bell.— ROMANCES AND MINOR POEMS. By Henry
Glassford Bell. Fcap. 8yo. 6f.

" Full of life and genius.^^—Cov'RT CIRCULAS.

Be'sant.— STUDIES IN EARLY FRENCH POETRY. By
Walter Besant, M.A. Crown. 8vo. 8x. 6d.

A sort oJ impression rests on most minds that French literature begins
with the ^^ siècle de Louis Quatorze ;^^ any previous literature
being for the most part unknown or ignored, Few know anything
of the enormous literary actiinty that began in the thirteenth
century, tvas carried on by Rulebeuf, Marie de France, Gaston
de Foix, Thibault de Champagne, and Lorris ; was fostered by
Charles of Orléans, by Margaret of Valois, by Francis the First ;
that gave a crowd of versifiers to France, enriched, strengthened,
developed, and Jixed the French language, and prepared the way
for Corneille and for Racine. The présent work aims to afford
information and direction touching the early efforts of France in
poeticcd literature. " In one moderatdy sited volume he has eon-
trived to introduce us to the very best, if not to ail o/ the early
French poets, " — ATHENiEUM.

Book of Golden Deeds. — Sec Golden Treasury Séries.


BELLES LETTRES.


Book of Golden ThoughtS. — Sec Golden Treasury
Séries.

Book of Praise. — See Golden Treasury Séries.

Brimley.— ESSAYS BY THE LATE GEORGE BRIMLEY,
M. A. Edited by the Rev. W. G. Clark, M. A. With Portrait.
Cheaper Edition. Fcap. 8vo. 2j. 6^.

George Brimley was regarded by those who knew him as "one oj the
finest criiics of the day,^^ The Essays contained in this volume
are ail more or less criHcal^ and were contributed by the author
to some of the leading periodicals of the day. The subjects are,
'' Tennyson's Poems" ^* Wordsworth's Poems,'' ** Poetry and
CrÙiasm," " The Angel in the House,'' CarlyUs ''Life of
Sterling;' ''Esmond," '' My Novell' ''Bleak House," '' West-
ward Hol" lVilson*s "Nbetes Ambrosiana," Comtes ''Positive
Philosophy" "Itwili;* JoHN BuLL says, " be a satisfaction to
the admirers of sound critiHsm and unassuming common sensé to
fiftd that the Essays of the late George Brimley hâve reappeared in
a mw and poptdar form. They will give a healthy stimulus to
that spirit ofinquiry into the reai value of our lUerary men whose
names we too often révère without sufficient investigation. '


j>


Broome. — the STRANGER of SERIPHOS. a Dramatîc

Poem. By Frederick Napier Broome. Fcap. 8vo. Ss.

Founded on the Greek legend of Danaë and Perseus. "Grâce and
beauty of expression are Mr. Broome* s characteristics ; and thèse
qualities are displayed in many passages " — Athen^UM. ** The
story is renderedwith consummate beauty J*' — Literary Church-
MAN.

Btinyan's Pilgrim's Progress. — See Golden Treasury
Séries.

Burke.— EDMUND BURKÊ, a Historical Study. By John
MORLEY, B. A., Oxon. Crown 8vo. 7j. (hI,

" The style is terse and incisive, and brilliant with epigram and
point, Its susiained Power of reasoning, its wide sweep of observa'
tion and refUction, its eUvated ethical and social tone^ stamp it as


BELLES LETTRES.


a work of high excelUnce." — Saturday Review. ^*A fnodd of
compact condensation, IVe hâve seldom met "wiih a book in ivhich
sa much niatter unis compressed inio so limited a spucc,** — Pall
M ALL Gazette. *'An essay ofunusnal effort, '*— Westminster
Review.

Burns' ^VorkSt — See Golden Treasury Séries and Globe

LiBRARY.

Carroll. — Works by " Lewis Carroll : "—

ALICE'S ADVENTURES IN WONDERLAND. With Forty-
two Illustrations by Tenniel. 33rd Thousand. Crown 8vo.
cloth. 6j.

A GERMAN TRANSLATION OF THE SAME. With Ten-
niel's Illustrations. Crown 8vo. gilt. ts,

A FRENXH TRANSLATION OF THE SAME. With Ten-
niel's Illustrations. Crown 8vo. gilt. 6j.

AN ITALIAN TRANSLATION OF THE SAME. By T. P.
RubSETTE. With Tenniel's Illustrations. Crown Svo. 6j.

^' Bcyond question suprême among modern books for chiidren." —
Si'ECTATOR. ** One of the choicest and most charming books
n'er composai for a child*s reading^ — Pall Mall Gazette.
*' -4 very pretty and highly origiftal book^ sure to ddight the littU
luorld of wondering mindsj and which may well please those wko
hâve uiifortuncUely passed the years of wondering." — TiMES.


THROUGH the LOOKING-GLASS, and WHAT ALICE
FOUND THERE. With Fifiy Illustrations by Tenniel. Cro>vn
Svo. 6s. 23rd Thousand.

/// the présent volume is described^ with inimitabîy clei'er and
laughter-moviug nottsettse, the further Adventures of the fairy-
faioured Alice^ in the grotesque world which she found to exist on
the cther side of Ji^ mother's drawing-room looking-gbiss^ through
which she maiMged to viake lier way. The work is profusely
cmbcllishcd with illustrations by Tenniel ^ cxhibiting as great an
a mon fit of humour as those to which ^^Alic/s Adyefttures in
IVouderlafui" oived so much ofUs poptilarity.


BELLES LETTRES,


Carroll — cofUinwid,

PHANTASMAGORIA, AND OTHER POEMS. Fcap. 8vo.
gilt edges. 6j.

**Those who hâve not viade (uquaintance with thèse poems already
hâve a pleasure ta corne, The comical is so comicalf and the
grave so reaify âeaMti/u/,"~~hiTEKASiY CUURCHMAN.

Chatterton : a BIOGRAPHICAL STUDY. By Daniel
WiLSON, LL.D., Professer of Histor>' and English Literature in
University Collège, Toronto. Crown 8vo. df. ôd.

The auihor here'jregards Chatterton as a Poet^ not as a ^*fHere
resOter and de/acer oj stolcn literary ireasures," Revùwed in this
lightf he hasfound mtich in the old materials capable of being
turned to tiew account : and to thèse niaterials research in varions
directions heu enabled him to rnake some additiens, He believes
that the boy-Jtoet has been misjudgedj and thcU the biographies
hitherto loritten of him are not only impcrfect but untrtie, While
dealing tenderly, the author has sought to deal truthfully with the
failings as well as the virtnes of the boy: bearing always in
remeffibrance, what heu been too frequenliy lost sight of that he
7oas but a boy; — a boy^ and y et a poet of rare power, The
Examiner thinks this ^^ the most complète and the purest bûh
graphy ofthepœt which has y et appeared.^


»»


Children's Garland from the Best Poets. — See

Golden Treasury Séries.

Church (A. J.)—HORiî: TENNYSONIAN.*:, Sive Eclogae
e Tennysono Latine redditae. Cura A. J. Church, A.M.
Extra fcap. 8vo. ts.

Latin versions of Sélections from Teftnyson. Among the authors
are the Editor, the late Professor Conington, Professor Sedey^
Dr. Ifcssey, Mr, Kebbely and other gentlemen. ** OfMr, Church* s
oiic we may speak in almost umjualificd praise, and the same may
bc said ofthe contributions gencrally.** — Pall Mall Gazette.

Clough (Arthur Hugh).— THE POEMS AND PROSE
REMAINS OF ARTHUR -HUGH CLOUGH. With a


8 BELLES LETTRES.

Clough (Arthur Hugh) — continued.

Sélection from his Letters and a Memoir. Edited by his Wife.
With Portrait. Two Vols, Crown 8vo. 21/. Or Poems sepa-
rately, as below.

The îate Professer Clough ts well known as a gracefiU^ Under
poetf and as thc scholarly translator of Plutarch» The Utters
possess highUnterest, not hiographical 07dy, but literary — discuss-
ing, as they do, the most' important questions of the time, ahvays
in a génial spirit, The " Remains " include papers on ^^Retrenck-
ment at Oxford;" on Professor F, JV. Neuman^s àook, " The
Soûl; " on Wordsworth ; on the Formation of Classical English ;
on some Modem Poems {Matthew Arnold and the Iate Alexander
Smith), ôfc, âr*c. " Tahen as a whole" the Spectator says^
" thèse volumes can9tot fait to be a lasting monument of one of the
most original men of our âge." " Full of charming letters front
RoniCy'' says the MoRNiNG Star, "from Greece, from Amtrica,
from Oxford, and from Rugby,"

THE POEMS OF ARTHUR HUGH CLOUGH, sometime FeUow
of Oriel Collège, Oxford. Third Edition. Fcap. Svo. df.

" From the higher mind of cultivated, all-questioning, but stillconser»
vative England, in this our puzzled génération, we do not know
of any utterance in literature so characteristic as the poems of
Arthur Hugh Clough," — Fraser's Magazine.

CluneS.— THE STORY OF PAULINE: an Autobiography.
By G. C. Clunes. Crown Svo. dr.

^^ Both for vivid delineation of character and fluent lucidity of style^
* The Story of Pauline* is in the first rank of modem fiction^ —
Globe. ^^Told with delightful vivaàty, thorough appréciation of
life, and a complète knowledge of character," — MANCHESTER
Examiner.

CoUects of the Church of England. With a beautifully

Coloured Floral Design to each Collect, and Illuminated Cover.
Crown Svo. ils. Also kept in various styles of morocco.

In this richly embellished édition of the Church CoUects, the paper is
thick and handsome and the type large and beauHful, each Collect,
with afew exceptions, being printed on a separate page, The dis'


BELLES LETTRES,


tincivve characterisHc of this édition is tke floral design which oc-
companies each Collecta and which is generalîy emblernatical of the
character of the day or saint to which it is assigned ; theflowers
which hâve been selected are such as are likeîy to be in bloom on the
day to which the Collect bdongs, Each flower is richly but taste-
ftdly and naturaUy printed in colours, and from the tniriety 0/
plants sdected and the faithfidness of the illustrations to nature^
the volume shouldfomi an instructive and interesting companion
to ail devout Christians, who are likely tofind their dévotions assisted
and guided by harving thus brought before them theflowers in their
seasons^ Gods beautiful and never-failing gifts to fuen. The Pré-
face explains the cdlusion in the case ofall those illustrations which
areintended to be emblematical of the day s to which they belong, and
the Table of Contents fortns a complète botanical index j grving both
the poptdar and scientiflc name of each plant. There are at least
one hundred separate plants figured, ** This is beyond question "
the Art Journal says^ ** the most beautiful book of the season^
** Carefully^ indeed livin^ly drawn and daintily coloured" says the
Pall Mall Gazette. The Guardian thinks it ** a successful
attempt to associate in a natural and unforced manner theflowers
ofour fields and gardens with the course ofthe Christian y car. ^^


Cowper's Poetical Works. — See Globe Library.

COX. — RECOLLECTIONS OF OXFORD. By G. V. Cox, M.A.,

late Esquire Bedel and Coroner in the University of Oxford.
Second and cheaper Edition. Crown 8vo. dr.

Mr, Coj^s Recollections date from the end of last ccntury to cuite
récent times. They arefull of old stories and traditions^ epigrams
and Personal traits of the distinguished men who hâve been at
Oxford during that period. The TlMES says that it *^will
pleasanily recall in many a country parsonage the memory 0/
vouthful days."

Dante.— DANTE'S COMEDY, the HELL. Translated by
W. M. RossKTTL Fcap. 8vo. cloth. $s,

** The aim of this translation of Dante may be summed up in one
word—Literality, To follcw Dante sentence for sentence^ Une
for Une, word for word — neither more nor less, has been my
strenuous endeavour,*' — Author's Préface.


lo BELLES LETTRES.

DayS Of Old ; STORIES FROM OLD ENGLISH HISTORY.

By the Author of **Ruth and her Friends." New Edition.
iSmo. cloth, gilt leaves. y. 6d.

TTie Contents of this interesHng and instructive volume are, ** Cara-
doc and Deva^^^ a story of British life in the first century ;
** Wolfgan and the Earl ; or, Poiuer" a story of Saxon Eng-
land : and ** Hotand,*' a story ofthe Crusaders. ** FuU oftruih-
fui and charming historié pictur es, is everywhere vUal^with moral
and religions principles, and is written with a brightness of de-
scription, and with a dramatic force in the représentation of
character, that hâve mode, and will always make, ii one of the
greatest favourites with reading boys.** — NONCONFORMIST.

De Vere.— THE infant BRIDAL, and other Pocms. By
AuBREY De Vere. Fcap. 8vo. 7x. 6d.

*^ Mr. De Vere has taketi his place among the poets of the day.
Pure and teftder feeling, and that polished restraint of style which
is called classical, are the charms of the volume** — Spectator.

Doyle (Sir F. H.) — Works by Sir Francis Hastings Doyle,
Professor of Poetry in the University of Oxford : —

THE RETURN OF THE GUARDS, AND OTHER POEMS.
Fcap. 8vo. 7^.

" Good wine needs no bush, nor good verse a préface; and Sir Francis
DoyUs verses run bright and clair, and stnack of a classic vintage,
. . . His chief characteristic, as it is his greatest charm, is the
simple matîliness w/Uch gives force to ail he loritcs. It is a cha-
racteristic in thèse day s rare enough** — Examiner.

LECTURES ON POETRY, delivered before the University of
Oxford in 1868. Crown 8vo. y. 6d.

Three Lectures : — (i) Inaugural, in which the nature of Poetry
is discusscil ; (2) Provituial Poetry ; (3) Dr. Nhunian*s *^ Dream
of Gcroutius!' " Full of thoughtful discrimination and fine in-
sîght: the lecture on ^ Provincial Poetry* seetns to us singularly
true, cloquent^ and instructive** — Spectator. ''^ AU thèse dis-
sci'tnttous lire markcd by a scholarly spiri/y dcUcate taste, and the
disc-rituinatini^ po^vers of a trained judgniefit.** — Daily News.


BELLES LE TTRES. 1 1


Dryden's Poetical Works. — See Globe Library.
Diirer, Albrecht.— HISTORY OF TIIE LIFE OF AL-

BRECHT DURER, of Niimberg. With a Translation of his

Letters and Journal, and some account of his Works. By Mrs.

Charles Heaton. Royal 8vo. bevelled boards, extra gilt. 31J. 6d.

This work contains about Thirty Illtistrations, tôt ofwhich are pro»

ductions by the autotype [carbofi) process, and are printed in per-

mancnt tints by Messrs. Cundaîl and Fleming^ under licence from

the Autotype Company^ Limited ; the rest are Photographs and

Woodcuts.

Estelle RuSSell. — By the Author of **The Private Life of
Galileo." Crown 8vo. , dr.

Ftdl of brighi pictures of French life, The Engîish famiiy, whose
fortunes form the main driftofthe story^ réside mostly in France^ but
theri are aJso many English characters and scènes ofgreat interest,
It is certainîy the work of a fresh^ vigorous, and most interesting
wriier, with a dash of sarcastic humour which is refreshing and
not too bit ter. ** îVe can send our readers to it with confidence.^*
— Spectator.

Evans. — BROTHER FABIAN'S MANUSCRIPT, AND

OTHER POEMS. By Sébastian Evans. Fcap. 8vo. cloth. ds,

" In this volume we havefull assurance that he has * the vision and
the faculty divine,* . . . Clever and full of kindîy humour** —
Globe.

Fairy Book. — The Best Popular Fairy Stories. Sclected and
Rendered anew by the Author of "John Halifax, Gentleman."
With Coloured Illustrations and Omamental Borders by J. E.
RoGERS, Author of " Ridicula Rediviva." Crown 8vo. cloth,
extra gilt. 6j. (Golden Treasury Edition. i8mo. ^. 6d.)

** A de/ightfui se/ection, in a dclightful extemalform** — Spectator.
Hère are reprodtued in a new and charming dress many old
favouriies^ as ** Hop-d-my-Thumb,** *^ Cifiderclla" ^^ Beauty and
theBeast,'' '' Jack the Giant-kUlcr;* *' Tovi Thumb," '' Rumpel^
stilzchen;* '"Jack and the Bcan-stalk," ''Red Riding-Hood,"
** The Six Sztfans,*' and a great many others. "A book which
will prove delightful to chiîdren alltheyear round." — Pall Mall
Gazette.


12 BELLES LETTRES.

Fletcher — THOUGHTS FROM a GIRL'S LIFE. By LucY
Fletcher. Second Edition. Fcap. 8vo. 4J. 6d,

^^Sweet and earnest verses^ especially addressed to girls, by ane who
can sympathise with them, andwhokasendeavouredtogiz^^articula/^
utterance to the vague aspiralions after a better life ofpious endeavour^
which accompany the unfolding consciousness of the inner life in
girlhood. The pœms are ail graceful; they are marked throughout
by an accent o/reality; the thoughts and émotions are genuine." —
ATHENi€UM.

Freeman (E. A., Hon. D.C.L.) — historical

ESSAYS. By Edward Freeman, M. A., Hon. D.C.L^ late
Fellow of Trinity Collège, Oxford. Second Edition. 8vo. lOf. 6d,

This volume coniains twdve Essays sdected from the auihar's contri"
butions to various Reviews. The principle on which they ^oere
chosen w'as that of selecting papers which referred to comparativdy
modem timeSy or, at least^ to the existing states and nations of
Europe, By ajort of accident a number of the pièces chosen hâve
thrown themselves into something like a continuous séries bearing
on the historical causes ofihe great events of 1 870 — 7 1 . Notes hâve
bcen added whenever they seemed to be called for; and whenever
he could gain in accuracy of statement or in force or cleamess of
expression^ the author has freely changed^ added to, or left out^
what he originally wrote. To many of the Essays has been added
a short note of the circumstances under which they were ivritten,
It is needless to say that any productof Mr, FreetnafCs pen is toorthy
of attentive perusal; and it is helieved that the contents of thh
Zfolume will throio light on several subjects of great historical im-
portance and the widest interest, The following is a list of the
subjects :^L ^* The Mythical and Romantic Eléments in Early
English History ;'' IL '' The ConHnuity of English History ;''
III. **77i.e Relations between the Crorwns of England and Scot'
land;" IV. "St. Thomas of Canterbury and his Biographers ;**
V. ''The Reignof Edward the Third;'' VI '' The Holy Roman
Empire;'' VII, ''The Franks and the Gauls;'' VIII "The
Early SUges of Paris ;'' IX. " Frederick the First, Ring of Italy ;'*
X. "The Emperor Frederick the Second;'' XI. "Charles the
Bold;" XII. " Presidential G(rvernment."—" AU of them are
well worth readiug^ and very agreecd)îe to read, He never touches a


BELLES LETTRES. 13

question without adding to our compréhension ofit^ without leaving
the impression of an ample knowledge, a righteous purpose^ a clear
andpowerful understandingj* — Saturday Revikvv.

Garnett. — IDYLLS and EPIGRAMS. Chiefly from the Greek
Antholc^. By Richard Garnett. Fcap. 8vo. 2s. 6d,

**A ckarming liitle book. For English readers^ Mr, Garnett* s
translations will open a new world of thought" — WESTMINSTER
Review.

Geikie.— SCENERY OF SCOTLAND, viewed in Connexion

with its Physical Gcology. By Archibald Geikie, F.R.S.,
Director of the Geological Snrvey of Scotland. With Illustrations
and a New Geological Map. Crown 8vo. lar. 6d,

**Be/ore long, we doubt noty it will be oneo/the travelling companions
ofevery cultvvated tourist in Scotland.'' — Edinburgh Courant.
*^Amusingf picturesque^ and instructive." — TiMES. ^'There is
probably no one who has so thoroughly mastered the geology of
Scotland as Mr. Geikie." —Vkll Mall Gazette.

Gladstone.— JUVENTUS MUNDI. The Gods and Men of the

Heroic Age. By the Right Hon. W. E. Gladstone, M. P.
Crown 8vo. cloth extra. With Map. lar. td. Second Edition.

** This new work of Mr. Gladstone deals especially with the historic
élément in Homer, expounding that élément and fumishing by its
aid afull account of the Homeric men and the Homeric religion.
It startSf afler the introductory chapter^ with a discussion of the
several races then existing in Hellas^ including the influence of the
Phanicians and Egyptians. It cantains chapters * * On the Olympian
System f with its several Deities ; " **Onthe Ethics and the Polity of
the Heroic Age ;" '* On the Geography qf Homer ;" ''OntheCha-
racters ofthe Poems ; " presenting, infne, a view of primitive life and
primitive Society as found in the pœms of Homer. To this New
Edition various additions hâve been mode. * * To read thèse brilliant
détails" says the Kl\ie^iM\3Uy ^^is like standing on the Olympian
threshold and gazing at the ineffable brightness within. " According
to the Westminster Review, **f^ would be difficult to point out
a book that contains so much fulness of knowledge along Tvith so
much freshness of perception and clearness of présentation."


14 BELLES LETTRES.


Globe Library. — See end of this Catalogue.

Golden Treasury of the best Songs and Lyrical

POEMS IN THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE.— See Golden
Treasury Séries.

Golden Treasury Séries. — See end of this Catalogue.

Goldsmith's Works. — See Globe Library.

Guesses at Truth. — By fTwo Brothers. With Vignette
Title, and Frontispiece. New Edition, with Memoir. Fcap. 8vo. 6j.
Also see Golden Treasury Séries.

Thise " Guesses at Truth " are not tntetided to tcU thc reader what
to think. They are ratJier meant to serve the purpose of a quarry
in luhichy if one is building up his opinions for himself, afid on/y
ivants to be provided ivith fnateîialsj hc viay vicet 7vith vuifty
things to suit him. To very piany, since its publication, lias this
'iwk pro7:ed a stimulus to carnest thoui^Iit and noble action ; and
thuSy to no small extcnt^ it is beliez^ed^ lias it infîuenccd the général
current of thinking during the last forty years. It is no^o no
secret that the authors loere AuGUSTUS and JULIUS Charles
I Iare. " They — living as they didin constant and free interchange
oj thought on questions o/ philosophy and literature and art :
delighting, each of thetn^ in the epigrammatic terseness which is the
charm oj the * Pensées ' of Pascal, and the * Caracth-es * of La
Bruyhe — agreed to utter thctnselves in this form^ and tlie book
appeared, anonytnously^ in t'ioo volutnes, in 1827."

Hamerton. — Works by Philip Giliœrt IIamerto.n :—

A PAINTER'S CAMP. Second Edition, rcvised. Extra fcap.
8vo. 6/.

Book T. ht I-lugland ; BooK II. /;/ Scotland; Bock III. /// France.

This is the story cf an Artist'^s encampments and adventures, The
hcadings of a frdf chapters may semé to convey a notion of the
Chirac ter of the book: A Walk on the Lança shire Moors ; thi
Anihor Lis e::';i Ilousekctper ami Cook ; Tents and Boats for the


BELLES LETTRES, 15


Hamerton — contimud.

Highlands ; The Author encamps on an uninhahited Island ; A
Lake Voyage ; A Gipsy Joumey to Glencoe ; Concerning Moon-
light and Old Castles ; A lUile French City ; A Farm in the
AtUunoiSf &*c, &*c. ** Thèse pages^ writUn luith infinité spirit and
humour^ bring int0 close rooms, bock upofi tired fieads^ the breezy
airs of Lancashire nioors and Highland lochs, with a freshness
which no rccent navelist has succeeded in presennng," — NONCON-
l'ORMlST. *^ His pages sparkle with many turns of expression^
not a few wdl-told anecdotes^ and many observations which are the
fruit of attentive study and wise reflection on the compliccUed phe-
notnena of human life^ as 7vell as ofunconsciotis naturel — WEST-
MINSTER Review.

ETCHING AND ETCHERS. A Treatise Critical and Practical.
Wiih Original Plates by Rembrandt, Callot, Dujardin,
Paul Potter, &c Royal 8vo. Half morocco. 31J. 6^.

** The lih-trk is one which descrves to be constilted by ncry iniclîi-
gmt admirer of the fine arts, whether lie is an etchcr or not" —
Guardian.

** // is not often we get anything like the combined intellectual and
tvsthdic treat r<'hich is supplicd us by Mr. Ilamcrton^s ably zrn'ttefi
cud haudsoine volume. It is a work of which author^ frintet^ and
puhlisher luay aîikc fccl proud. It is a work, too, of which noue
but a ^ciîuinc ariist coidd hy possibility Jiav: bccn the eut h or.'' —
Saturdav Review.

Hervey. — Worl;.> hy Rosamund Hervey :—

THE AARIŒRGS. Two vols. Crown 8vo. cloth. 21.;.

"y^// r.'//c' Clin vcîish the more délicate flavour if thoughifidue^s ein-i
seniiîHcut eunehing the quiet tone of common life will aeee/i with
.gratitude c story so refiued and whoîescme.^' — Gu\RDlAN. **-/
siiï'nlarîvtL\'t^ant ^î.»y^."— Daily Nkws.

«

IH'KE ERNEST, a Tmi^cdy ; 'and other Pocms. Fcai). 8vo. 61.

*• C \niccived in purctaste and triie hisfoj-ie fù/i/i^\ aud presenied z.'tth
vnieh dramaiic force. .... Thoroughly ori^^inal.^^ — ÎÎRiriS!(
Qcarterly.


i6 BELLES LETTRES.

Higginson. — MALBONE : An Oldport Romance. By T. W.
HiGGiNSON. Fcap. 8vo. 2s, 6d.

This is a story of American U/e, so told as to be interesting and
instructive to ail En^ish readcrs, Tkc Daily News says :
** IV^ likcs a quiet story^ fuU of mature thought, of cltar
humorous surprises^ of artistic studious design? * Maibone* is
a rare work^ possessing thèse characteristics^ and rejfieU^ tco, witk
honest literary effort,^*

Home. — BLANCHE LISLE, and other Poems. By Cecil
Home. Fcap. 8vo. \s, 6d,

Hood (Tom).— THE PLEASANT TALE OF PUSS AND
ROBIN AND THEIR FRIENDS, KITTY AND BOB.
Told in Pictures by L. Frôlich, and in Rhymes by ToM Hood.
Crown 8vo. gilt. 3j. 6d,

This is a pleasant little taie oj wee Bob and his Sister, and their
attempts to rescue poor Robin from the cruel cknvs of Pussy. It
vrill be intelligible and interesting to the meanest capacity, and is
illustra ted by thirteen graphie cuts drawn by Frolich, ** The
volume is prettilygot up^ andis sure to be afavourite in the nursery. "
— ScoTSM AN. * * J/err Frolich has outdone himself in his pictures
of this dramatic chase, " — MoRNING PoST.

Jebb.— THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. An
English Translation from a Revised Text. With Introduction and
Notes. By R. C. Jebb, M. A., Fellow and Assistant Tutor of
Trinity Collège, Cambridge, and Public Orator of the University.
Extra fcap. 8vo. 6j. td.

The first obicct of this book is to make thèse livdy pictures of old
Greck manners better known to English readers. But as the Editer
and Translater has been at considérable pains to procure a r diable
text^ and has rccorded the results ofhis critical labours in a lengthy
Introduction, in Notes and Appendices^ it is hoped that the work
wîll prcrceof value even to thescholar, " We must not omit to give
due honour to Mr. Jebb^s translation, which is as good as trans-
lation can be. . . . Not less commendable are the exécution of the
Notes and the critical handîing ofthe text. " — Spectator. " Mr.
yebb*s little volume is more easily taken up than laid down.^* —
Guardian.


BELLES LETTRES. 17

Jest Book. — By Mark Lemon.— Sce Golden Treasury
Séries.

Keary (A.) — Works by Miss A. Keary : —

JANET'S HOME. Cheap Edition. Globe 8vo. 2J. 6d.

** Never did a more charming famUy appear upon th€ canvas ; and
most skilfuJfy and ftliciUmsly hâve iheir characters been portrayed,
Each individual of the fireside is a finished portrait ^ distinct and
lifelike, . . . The future before her as a navelist is that of becoming
the Miss Austin of her génération " — SUN.

CLEMENCY FRANKLYN. Globe 8vo. 2s. 6d,

^^ Full ofwisdom and goodnesSy simple^ truthful^ a{id artistic, . . //
is capital as a story; better still in its pure tone and wholesome
influence. " — Globe.

OLDBURY. Three vols. Cro\%ii 8vo. 31J. dd.

^^This is a very pawerfulty written story. ''^ — GLOBE. **This is a
realfy excellent nove/."—lLLVSTRAT^I> LONDON News. "The
sketches of socidy in Oldbury are excellent. Thepictura ofchild
life arefull of truth.^^ — WESTMINSTER Review.

Keary (A. and E.)— Works by A, and E. Keary :—

THE LITTLE WANDERLIN, and other Fairy Taies. i8nio.
3/. dd.

" Tlie taies are fanciful andwell written^ and they are sure to win
favour amongst little readers. " — Athen^EUM .

THE HEROES OF ASGARD. Taies from Scandinavian My-
thology. New and Revised Edition, illustrated by Huard. Extra
fcap. 8vo. 4J. 6d,

** Told in a light and amusing siyle^ which, in its drcllery and
quaintnesSf reminds us ofour oldfavourite Grimm.** — Times.

Kingsley. — Works by the Rev. Charles Kingsley, M. A..
Rector of Eversley, and Canon of Chester : —

Mr. Canon Kingsley s navels, most will culmit, hâve ftot only coni-
manded for themselves a foremost place in literalure, as artistic

B


i8 BELLES LETTRES,


Kingsley {C,y—£ontinu€d,

productions of a high class^ but hâve cxercised ttpon tke âge an
ifualculable influence in the direction of the highest Christian
manliness. Mr, Kingsley has donc niare perhaps than ahnost any
other writer of fiction tofashion the génération iftto zuhose /laftds the
destinies of i/ie worîd are naw being committed, His works will
therefore be read by ail who wish to hâve their hearts cliecrcd and
their soûls stirred to noble eiideavour ; they must be read by ail
who wish to know the influences which nioulded the men of this
century.

"WESTWARD IIO!'\ or, The Voyages and Adventures of
Sir Amyas Lcigh. Sixth Edition. Crown 8vo. 6s.

No other luork conveys a more vivid idea of the surging, adventurous^
nobly inquisitive spirit of the générations which immediately fol-
laïued tlie déformation in England, The dariug deeds of the
Elizabethan heroes are told with a freshness^ an enthusiasm, and a
truthfulness that can belong oftly to one who wishcs he had bcen
their leader, His descriptions of the luxuriant sccnery ofthe then
fiew-found Western land are achunvledged to be unmatchcd.
Fraser's Magazine calls it **almo5t the best historical mn'cl oj
theday"

TWO YEARS AGO. Fourth Edition. Crown 8vo. 6s,

" Mr, Kingsley 'has providedus ail alongwith suc h pleasant diversions
— such rich and brightly tinted glimpses of natural àlsiory^ such
suggestive rcnmrks on nuinkind, society, and ail sorts of tapies^
that amiiist tJie pleasure of the way, the circuit to be viadc zvill be by
most forgottcn. " — GUARDIAN.

HYPATIA ; or, New Foes with an Old Face. Fifih EdiUon.
Crown 8vo. 6s,

The work is from beginning to end a séries of Jasànating piciurcs
of strangc phases of that strange primitive society ; and no finer
portrait has yct bccn given oj the ^wblc-vtinded Uidy ivho was
faithftd to fuartyrdom in her aitachmeni to the classical crceJs.
No ii.H)rk ajjfords a clearer notion of the viany intei'cstiug probltms
luhich agiiatcd the minds of mai in those days^ and i^^hich^ in
varions phases^ are again coming np for discussion at the prcscnt
tlme.


BELLES LETTRES, 19

Kingsley {C)—continu€d.

HEREWARD THE WAKE— LAST OF THE ENGLISH.
" Crown 8vo. 6j.

Mr. Kingsley hère tells the story of tke final conjlict of the two
racesy Saxons and Normans^ as if he himself had borne a part in it,
While as a work of fiction ^* Hereward" cannot fail to delight ail
readers^ no better supplément to the dry history of the time could be
put into the hands of the youngy containing as it does so vvvid a
picture oj the social and poliiical life of the period,

YEAST : A Problem. Fifth Edition. Crown 8vo. ^s.

In this production the autJwr* shows ^ in an interesting dramatic form^
the State of fermentation in which the minds 0/ inany earnest
men are ivith regard to some of the most important religious and
social problem s of the day.

ALTON LOCKE. New Edition. With a New Préface. Crown 8vo.
4J. 6d.

This fwvel, 7vhich shows forth tht evils arisingfrom modern ^^caste^*
has donc much to remove the unnatural harriers which existed
bctween the various classes of society, and to establish a sympaihy to
some extent between the higher and lower grades of the social scale,
Tlwugh written luith a pur pose, it isfull of^haracter and interest;
the author sho^vs, to quote the Spectator, ^*what it is that con-
stitutes the true Christian, Godfearing, man-living gcfttleman, "

AT LAST : A CHRISTMAS IN THE WEST INDIES. With
numerous Illustrations. Second and Cheaper Edition. Crown
8vo. loj. 6d,

Mr. Kingsley^ s dream of forty ycars was at last fulfilled, when
he startcd on a Christmas expédition to the West Indies, for the
purpose of becoming personally acquainted with the scènes which
he has so vividly described in ** Westward ho i^^ ^^ In this book
Mr. Kingsley revels in the gorgeous wealth of West Indian végéta-
tion, bringifig before us one marvel after another, alternately sating
and piquing our curiosity, Whether we climb the cliffs with him,
orpeer over into ttarrow bays which are being hollowed out by the
t rade- surf or wander through impénétrable forests, where the tops
of the trees form a green cloud orverïiead^ or gaze dcrwn glens whtch

B 2


20 BELLES LETTRES.


KingSley (C.) — contimud,

are wcUered by the clearest brooks^ running tkrougk nuuses o/paJfn
and banana and ail the rich 'variety offoliagey we are equally
ddighUd and amazedy — Athen^EUM.

THE WATER BABIES. A Fairy Taie for a Land Baby. New
Edition, with additional Illustrations bySir Noël Paton, R.S.A.,
and P. Skelton. Crown 8vo. cloth extra gilt. 5^.

' * /;/ /un, in humour, and in innocent imagination, as a child*s
book loe do not know ils eqtmiy — London Review. "A/r.
Kingsley must hâve the crédit ofreuealing tous a new order oflife,
. . . There is in the * Water Babies * an abundance of wit, /un,
good humour, geniality, élan, go" — TiMES.

THE HEROES; or, Greek Fairy Taies for my Chiidren. With
Coloured Illustrations. New Edition. i8mo. 4r. 6d,

" U^e do not think thèse heroic stories hâve ever been more attrac-
tri'ely told, . . . There is a deep under-current of religions feding
traccable throughout ils pages which is sure to influence young
rcadcrs powerfully." — LONDON Review. ** Ofie ofthe chiidren^ s
books that will surely become a classic." — NONCONFORMIST.

PHAETHON ; or, Loose Thoughts for Loose Thinkers. Third
Edition. Crown 8vo. 2s.

" The dialogue of * Phctethon^ has striking bcatUies, and its sugges-
tions may meet half-way ttiany a latent doubt, and, like a light
brecze, lift from the soûl clouds that are gathering heavily, and
threatening to settle daum in misty gloom on the summer of many
a fuir and promising young life^ — Spectator.

POEMS ; including The Saintes Tragedy, Andromeda, Songs,
Ballads, etc. Complète Collected Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. 6x.

Canon Kingsley^s poetical works hâve gained for thàr auihor,
indcpefidently of his other ivorks, a high and enduring place
in literature, and are much sought afler. The publishers hâve
hcre collected the whole of them in a moderately-priced and handy
volume, The Spectator calls ** Andromeda " " the finest pièce
of English hexameter verse that has ever been 7uritten, It is a
volume whtch many readers will be glcul to possess,"


BELLES LETTRES, 21


Kingsley (H.) — Works by Henry Kingsley :—

TALES OF OLD TRAVEL. Re-narrated. With Eight full-page
Illustrations by Huard. Fourth Edition. Crown 8vo. cloth,
extra gilt. 5^.

In this volume Mr. Henry Kingsley re-narrates^ at the sa vie Urne

preserving much ofthe quaintness of the original^ some ofthe most

fascinaiing taies of travel contained in the collections of Hakluyt

and others. The Contents are: — Marco Polo ; The Shi/nureck

of Pelsart ; The Wonderful Adventures of Andrew Battel ; The

Wanderings of a Capuchin ; Peter Carder ; The Préservation oj

the " Terra Nova ;" Spitzbergen ; V Erntenoftvillé' s Acclimatiza-

tion Adventure ; The Old Slave Trqde ; Miles Philips; The

Sufferings of Robert Everard ; John Fox ; Alvaro Nunez ; The

Foundation of an Empire. *^We know no betier book for those

who want knowledge or seek to refresh it. As for the ' sensationàî^ '

most norvels are tame compared with thèse narratives^'' — Athe-

NiïUM. *^ Exactly the book to interest and to do good to intelligent

and htgh-spirited boys.'' — LiTERARY Churchman.

THE LOST CHILD. With Eight lUustrations by Frolich.
Crown 4to. cloth gilt. Jj. dd.

This is an interesting story of a little boy^ the son of an Australian
shepherd and his ivife^ who lost himself in t/te bush, and who zvas,
after much searching, found dead far up a mountain-side. Il
contains many illustratiotts from the well-known pencil of Frolich,
** A pathetic story ^ and told so as to give children an interest in
Australian ways andscenery."- Globe. **Very chartningly and
very touchingly told'' — Saturday Review.

Knatchbull-HugeSSen. — Works by E. H. Knatchbull-
Hugessen, m. p. : —

Mr. Knatchbull'Hugessen has won for himself a réputation as an
inimitable tel 1er of fairy-tales, *^ His powers,^* says the TiMES,
^^are of a very high order ; light and brilliant narrative flows
from his peny and isfed by an invention as graceful as it is inex-
haustible.'^ ** Children reading his storieSf" the Scotsman says^
" or hearing them recui, will hâve their minds refreshed and invi^
gorated as much as their bodies would be by abundance of fresh
air and exercise, "


22 BELLES LETTRES.

Knatchbull-Hugessen— ^''^«««a/.

STORIES FOR MY CHILDREN. With Illustrations. Thini
Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. 5j.

" The stories are charming^ and full oflije andjun" — Standard.
** TTie atUhor has an imagination as fanciftd as Grimm hinuel/,
whiie soffie of his stories are superior to anything ihat Hans Chris-
tian Andersen has written.*' ^NoifCOSFOKlilST.

CRACKERS FOR CHRISTMAS. More Stories. With lUustra-
tions by Jellicoe and Elwes. Fourth Edition. Crown 8vo. 5^.

*\A fascifiating little volume, which wUl make him friends in every
household in which there are chUdrett." — Daily News.

MOONSHINE: Fairy Taies. With Illustrations by W. Brunton.
• Fourth Edition. Crown 8vo. cloth gilt. 51.

Herewill befound " an Ogre, a Dwarf, a Wizard, quantities 0/ Elvcs
and Pairies, and several animais who speak îike mortai men and
women. " There are tioeîvc stories and nine irrésistible illustrations,
" A volume of fairy taies, written not only for ungrown children,
but for bigger, and if you are nearly wom ont, or sick, or sorry,
you will find it good reading. " — Graphic. * * The most charming
volume of fairy taies which ive hâve ever read. . . . We cannot
quit ihis very pleasant book tuithout a tuord ofpraise to its illus-
trator. Mr, Bruntoft from first to last has donc admirably.** —
Times.

Lia Lyre Française. — See Golden Trrasury Séries.

Latham.— SERTUM SHAKSPERIANUM, Subnexis aliquot

aliunde excerptis floribus. Latine reddidit Rev. H. Latham,

M. A. Extra, fcap. 8vo. ^s.

Besides versions of Shakespeare, this volume contains, among other
pièces, Grafs '' Elegy;' CampbelVs *' Hohcnlitiden,'' IVolfe's
" Burial of Sir John Moore,^^ and sélections from Cozvpcr and
George Herbert.

Lemon.— -THE LEGEXDS of NUMUER Nir. By Mark

Lemon. With Illustrations by C. Kei-.ne. New Edition. Extra
fcap. 8 vu. 2s. 6d.


BELLES LETTRES. 23


Life and Times of Conrad the Squirrel. A Story

for Children. By the Author of "Wandering WiUie," "Effie's
Friends," &c With a Frontispiece by R. Farren. Crown 8vo.
3J. 6d.

It is sufficUnt to commend this story oj a Squirrel to tJu aUentùm of
r coder s ^ that it is by the author 0/ the beautiful stories of **PVàn-
dering IVi/tie" and *'^ Effiés Friends.^* It is well calcuîated to
make children take an intelligent and tender interest in the lower
animais.

Lrittle K Stella, and other Fairy Taies for the Young. Royal

i6mo. 3^. 6f/.

This is a fine story ^ and we thank hearven for not bdng too wise to
enjoy it.'' — Daily News.


n


Little L#ucy*s Wonderfui Globe. — See Yonge, c. m.

Lowell. — AMONG MY BOOKS. Six Essays. Dryden— Witch-
craft — Shakespeare once More — New England Two Centuries Ago
— Lessing — Rousseau and the Sentimentalists. Crown 8vo. 7j. dd.

" We may safely say the volume is one of which our chief complaint
must be tJiat there is not more of it. There are good sensé and livcly
fccling forcibly and tersely expressed in every page of his iirriting.'^
— Pall Mall Gazette.

Lyttelton. — Works by Lx)RD Lyttelton :—

THE "COMUS" OF MILTON, rendered into Greek Verse.
Extra fcap. 8vo. 5^.

THE *'SAMSON AGONISTES" OF MILTON, rendered into
Verse. Extra fcap. Svo. 6j. dd,

^^ Classical in spirit^ full of force, and true to the original."
— Guardian.

Macmillan's Magazine. — PubHshed Monthly. Trice IS.
Volumes I. to XXV. are now ready. *js. 6d. each.

Macquoid. — PATTY. By K/VTHERINE s. Macquoid. Two
vols. Crown Svo. 21^.,


24 BELLES LETTRES.

The AxHENiEUM ** congratulâtes Mrs, Macquoid on having mode
a grecU step since the publication of her lasi ncvel,*^ and says
this ^* is a graceful aftd eminently readable story" T7u Globe
considers it ** well-written^ amusing, and interesting^ and has the
merit of beingout ofthe ordinary run of novels,^*

m

Malbone. — See Higginson.

Marlitt (E.)— THE COUNTESS GISELA. Translated froa

the German of E. Marlitt. Crown 8vo. 7j. 6d.

** A very beauti/ul story of German country life^ — LiTERARY
Churchman.

Masson (Professer). — Works by David Masson, m. a.,
Professor of Rhetoric and English Literature in the University
of Edinburgh. (See also Biographical and Philosophical
Catalogues.)

ESSAYS, BIOGRAPHICAL AND CRITICAL. Chiefly on the
British Poets. 8vo. \2s. 6d,

" Distinguished by a remarkable power of analysis^ a clear state-
nient of the actual facts on which spéculation is based^ and an
appropriate beauty of language. Thèse Essays should be popular
with serions men.^^ — ATHENiEUM.

BRITISH NOVELISTS AND THEIR STYLES. Being a Critical
Sketch of the History of British Prose Fiction. Crown 8vo. *js, 6</.

** Valuablefor its lucid analysis offiindamental principles, its breadth

ofvie7v, and sustained animation of stylet — Spectator. " Afr,

Masson sets before us xvith a bewilching case and clearness whûh

nothing but a perject mastery of hts subject couîd fueve rendered

possible^ a large body of both deep and sound discriminative criticism

on ail the moit mémorable of our British novelists f/is

brilliant and instructive book" — ^JOHN BuLL.

Merivale.— KEATS' HYPERION, rendered into Latin Verse.
By C. Merivale, B.D. Second Edition. Extra fcap. Svo.
3J. (>d.

Milner.— THE LILY OF LUMLEY. By Edith Milner,
Crown Svo. 7s. 6</.


BELLES LETTRES. 25


** The furvel is a good one and decidedly wortk ihe reading,^* —
Examiner. ^^ A pretiy, brigktly-written story,^' — Literary
Churchman. *M taU possessing the deepest in/eres^."— Court
Journal.

Mistral (F.) — MIRELLE, a Pastoral Epie of Provence. Trans-

lated by H. Crichton. Extra fcap. 8vo. 6s,

" // would be hard to arverpraise the rujeetness and phasing freshness
of this charming epic." — ATHENitUM. **AgPod translation qf
a poeni that deserves to be kncwn by ail students of litcrature and
friends of old-world simplicity in story-telling." — Noncon-
FORMIST.

Brown, M. P.— MR. pisistratus brown, m.p., in

THE HIGHLANDS. Reprinted from the Daily Nr.us, with»
Additions. Crown 8vo. 5^.

Thèse papers appeared at intervais in the Daily News during
the sumnier of 187 1. They narraie in light and jocular style
the adventures *^by flood and feld" of Mr. Bro^vn, M.P. and
his friend in their tour through the West Highlands^ and will be
found well adapted to while aivay a plcasant Iiour either by the
winter fireside or during a summer holiday.

Mrs. Jerningham's Journal, a Poem purporting to be the

Journal of a newly-married Lady. Second Edition. Fcap. 8vo.
3J. 6d,

** It is nearly a perfect gem. We hâve Jiad nothing so good for a
long time, and those who neglect to read il are neglccting one of
the jewels of contemporary history." — Edinburgh Daily Re-
VI EW. ** Ofte quality in the piecey sujficient of itself to claim a
niomenfs attention^ is that it is unique — original^ indeed^ is not too
strong a word — in the manner of ils conception and execution.^^
— Pall Mall Gazette.

Mitford (A. B.)— TALES OF OLD JAPAN. By A. B.
MiTFORD, Second Secretary to the British Légation in Japan.
With Illustrations drawn and eut on Wood by Japanese Artists.
Two Vols. Crown 8vo. 21J.

The old Japanese civilization is fast disappcaring^ and will, in a
feiv years, be completely extinct. It was important, therefore, to


. I


*1

l
I

i


I


26 BELLES LETTRES,


préserve as far as possible trustworthy records of a staU of society
whichy although venerMe from Us antiquUy^ heu for Européens
the charm of navelty ; nence the séries of narratives and legends
1: translated by Mr, Mitford^ and iti whieh the Japantse are very

\ ' judiciotisly Uft to tdl their onvn taie, The two volumes comprise

not oftly stones and épisodes illustrative of Asiatic superstitions^

but also thrce sermons, The Préface^ Appendices^ and Notes explain

ï a numbcr of local peculiarities ; the thirty-one woodcuts are the

^i^etiuiiie 7i'ork of a native artist, Tvho, unconsciously of course^ has
Oilopted the proccss first introduced by the early Gcrman masters.
^^They will ahoays bc intcresting as mémorial s ofa most exceptional
sociiiy ; iohiU\ rcgarded simply as taies, they are sparkling^ sensa^
tiofiolj and dramatic, and t/ie originality of their ideas and the
tjuaintmss of their language grve thetn a most captivating piquancy,
The illustrations are extremely intercsting^ and for the curious in
sur h maitcrs haz'C a spécial and particular 7'alue, " — Pall Mali.
Gazette.

Morte d'Arthur. — See Globe Library.

Myers (Ernest). — TIIE PURITANS. By Ernest Myers.

Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth. 2s. 6d.

**// is not too mue h to call it a rcally grand poeniy stately and dig-
niftedf and sJurwiug' not only a high poetic mind, but also grgat
power over poetic expression,^'' — Literary Churchman.

Myers (F. 'W. H.)— POEMS. By F. W. H. Myers. Con-
taining "St. Paul," "St. John," and others. Extra fcap. 8vo.
\s. 6d.

"// is rare tofind a turiter who combims to suc h au cxtcnt the faculty
of communicatiug feclings ivith the ficulty of cuphonious expres-
sion ^ — Stectator. ** * .S"/. Paul ' stands tvithoiU a rival as the
uoblcst rcligious pocm ivhi<fi has been writtcu in an âge luhich
bcyoud any othcr has bcen prolific in this class of poetry. The sub-
lipucsi conceptions are cxpresscd in languagc zohich, for richness,
taste^ and purity, TiV ha-:\ nrrer scni exwlL'd.'" — JollN BULL.

Nina YearS Old.— l>y tî»c Authorof "St. Olave's," "When I
was a Liltle Girl,*' cS:c. Illustrated by FkoLICH. Second Edition.
Extra fcap. Svo. clolh gill. 4J'. (>d.


i


BELLES LETTRES, 27

// is believed that this stary^ by tkt favourabîy kncnvn auihor 0/
** St, Olave^s^^* will be found both kighly interesting and instructive
to the young. The volume contains eight graphie illustrations by
Mr. Z. Frolieh, The EXAMINER says : ** Whether the readers
are nine years old^ or twice, or scven tintes as old^ they must enjoy
this pretty volume, ' '

Noël.— BEATRICE, AND OTHER POEMS. By the Hon,
RODEN NoEL. Fcap. 8vo. 6s,

**It is impossible to read the pœm through withaut being powerftdly
moved. There are passages in it which for intensity and tender-
nesSf clear and vivid vision^ spontaneous and délicate sympathy^
niay be compared wUh the best efforts 0/ our best living writers.^^
— Spectator. ** // is long since we hâve seen a volume of poems
which has seemed to us so full of the real stuff of which we are
îfiadc, and uttering so freely the dcepest wants of this complicated
âge." — British Quarterly.

Norton. — Works by the Hon. Mrs. Norton : —

THE LADY OF LA GARAYE, With Vignette and Frontispiece.
New Edition. Fcap. 8vo. 4^. 6d,

** A pœm entirely unaffectcd^ perfectly original^ so true and y et so
fanciful, so strong and y et so womanly, with painting so exquisite^
a pure portraiture of the highest affections and the dceepest sorrowSj
afid instilling a tesson true^ simple^ and sublime.^* — DUBLIN
University Magazine. * * Full of thouglu wcllexpressed, and
may be classed among her best efforts." — TiMES.

OLD SIR DOUGLAS. Cheap Edition. Globe 8vo. 2s. 6d.
" This varied and Irvcly navel — this clei>er navel sofull of charcuter y
and of fine incidental rcmark." — ScoTSMAN. ^^ One of the
plcasantcst ami healthiest stories of modem fiction," — Globe.

Oliphant. — Works by Mrs. Oliphant : —

AGNES HOPETOUX'S SCHOOLS AND HOLIDAYS. New
Edition with Illustrations. Royal i6mo. gilt leaves. 4J. 6</.

* * llicre arc fcio l>ool:s of laU y car s more fittcd to touch the heart^
purify the fceling^ and quicken and sustain right principles. " —
NoNCONFORMiST. '* A moïc graccfully lurittcn sfory it is impos-
sibh' to dcsirc," — Daily News.


É


28 BELLES LETTRES.

Oliphant — ^onlintud.
A SON OF THE SOIL. New Edition. Globe 3vo.
" It U a very liiffrrmt laori from the ordinary mn
The Tukole lifi ofa man is perirayed ih it, TBorhtd <mt î
itiié ituigAl." — Athen«um. " tyitli entire frtedoin
siusatienal plut, Ihtre il enoagh ef incident ta give iax
the narratk't, and make tu /cfl as 7it rtad il that ic
sfending a fna hours tailA friends win u-UI maie au
btti(r ir thtir mim noble purpases and holy Iriing."
QlFARTKRLY REVIEW.

Our Year. A Child's Book, in Prose and Verse. By
of " John Halifax, Gentleman." illastrated by
DoHKU.. Koyal l6mo. 3/. CoL
"Il il jusl Ihc book uvcimld -.msh lo see in the hamh ofe
— Emjiish Chdrchman.

Olrig Grange. Ediiedby Hermann Kusst, Philol
Exlra fcap. 8vo. 6r. (xi.

This isapoem in lix parts, eaeh the ultirance- 0/ a distine,
ii the story ef a young Scolchman ef neMe aimi desi^
minittry, but-jiho "rentthe Crecil Irying ta fit it on,"
Londan lo setkfame and ferlant in literalwe, and who
faitcd lo his eld home in the narth lo die. The XoRT
Daily Mail, i» rerieicing the leort, speaii of il e
" aboHiiding r.idence ùf génial andgenei-alivefatulty war
dareeii modes. A mastrrly and original pawer of imfre.
ing ilsdf forth in elear, rweil, slnng rhythm. . . . 1
rcmartaUe iuitances of thrilling ferveur, oj glmuing
scalhing and trenehant leorn, to point ont the fine and _
mination oftharaeler ii'hieh prevads throughoHi, lo dw
ethieal pmuer and psychological Inith vdtieh an exhOitei
iHll vÂth whi.h the diverse parts of lie poem art ut
rdation. . . . /I is a fae poem, fu// of iife, of musie, <

Oxford Spectator, the. — Beprinted, Extra fcap. 8

Thae paperi, after the manner of Addison's "Spectaloi

ia Oxford from November 1867 lo December t868,


BELLES LETTRES, 29

varying front two days to a week. They attempt to sketch several
features of Oxford life from an undergraduaté s point of zne7i\ and
to give modem readings of books whùh uftder graduai es study,
^'There is," ihe Saturday Review says^ ** ail the old fun, the
old sensé of social ease and brightness and freedonty the old medley
of work and indolence, of jest and earnest, that made Oxford life
so pictiiresque.^^

Palgrave. — Works by Francis Turner Pai.grave, M. A., late
Fellow of Exeter Collège, Oxford : —

ESSAYS ON ART. Extra fcap. 8vo. 6j.

Mulready — Dyce — Holman Hunt — Herbert — Poetry, Prose, and Seti-
sationalism in Art — Sctdpturein Englaftd — The Albert Cross, ôt*c.
Most of thèse Essays hâve appeared in the Saturday Review
and elsewhere : but they hâve been minutdy revised, and in sonie
cases almost re-ivritten, unth the aim mainly of cxcluding mat ter s of
teniporary interest, and softening down ail asperities of censure.
The main object of the book is, by examples taken chiefly from the
7vorks of contemporaries, to illustrate the trtU/ts, that art has fixed
principles, of which any one may attain the kneioledge who is net
ivanting in natural taste. Art, like poetry, is addresscd to the
UH>rld at large, not to a spécial jury of professional masters. ** In
many respects thetruest critic wehave.^^ — Literary Churchman.

THE FIVE DAYS* ENTERTAINMENTS AT WENTVVORTH
GRANGE. A Book for Children. With Illustrations by Arthur
Hughes and Engraved Title-page by Jeens. Small 4to. cloth
extra. 6s.

''^ If y ou want a really good book for both sexes and ail âges, buy
this, as handsome a volume of taies as you*ll find in ail the
market, " — Athen^EUM. * ^Exquisite both inform and substance."
— Guardian.

LYRICAL POEMS. Extra fcap. 8vo. 6x.

*^ A volume of pure quiet verse, sparkling with tender mélodies, and
alive with thoughts of genidne poetry, . . , Tum where we will
throughout the volunu, we find traces of beauty, tenderness, and
truth ; truepoefs work, touched and refined by the master-Jiand oj
a real artist, who shows his genius even in trifles.^' — Standard.


30 BELLES LETTRES.


Palgra ve — continued.
ORIGINAL HYMNS. Third Edition, enlarge<l, iSmo. \s. 6c/.

** So choici^ 50 perfcct^ and so refincd^ so tender in fcding, atui so
schûlarly in expression, that we look with spécial inierest to every-
thing thai lie ^ves us." — Literary Churchman.

GOLDEN TREASURY OF THE BEST SONGS AND LYRICS.
Edited by F. T. Palgrave. See Golden Treasury Séries.

SHAKESPEARE'S SONNETS AND SONGS. Edited by F. T.
Palgrave. Gem Edition. With Vignette Title byjEENS. y. 6d.

" Eor minute élégance no volume could possibly excel the * Gem
Edition' " — ScoTSMAN.

Palmer's Book Of Praise.— See Goldex Treasury
Séries.

Parables.— TWELVE p arables of our lord, iuus-

trated in Colours from Sketches taken in the East by McEniry,
with Frontispiece from a Picture by John Jellicoe, and lUumi-
natedTexts and Borders. Royal 4to. in Omamental Binding. i6s.

The ScoTSMAN cal! s this **one oj the most super b books of the
seasoN. " The Hchly and tastefully illuminated bordas arejrom
the Brevario Grimani, in St. Mark^s Library, Vcnice. The
Times calls it **one of the most beautiful of modem pictorial
7uorks ;" 7i'hile the Graphic says ^* nothing in this style, so goi\/j
luis n'cr bt'fore beat published, "

Patmore.— THE ANGEL in the HOUSE. By CovENTRY
Patmore.

Book L The Bctrothal ; BoOK IL The Espousals ; BooK IIL
Faiihful for Ever. The Victories of Lai'e. Tamerton Church
Tower. Two Vols. Fcap. 8vo. I2J.

** A style combîning much of the homelifiess oJ Crabbc, unlh szveeter
music and a far higher range of thought.^^ — TiMES. **//j merit
is more than sufficient to accountjor ils suecess. . . . In ils mattly
and healthy chccr, the *Angel in the House ' is an effectuai protest
açaiust the morbid poetry of the âge.'" — EdinbuRGH Review.


BELLES LETTRES. 31


** We think his ^Angel in the House * Tvûuld be a good luedding-gifi
to a bridegraom frofît hisfriends; though^ tvhenez'er it is readwitk
a right view of ils aim, we believe it will be found itself^ more or
lesSf ofan angcl in the kouse.'''—YKAS,Y.K's Magazine.

*^ A New and Cheap Edition in One Vol. iSmo., beautifuîly
printed on toned paper^ price 2s. 6d,

Pember.— THE TRAGEDY of LESBOS. a Dramatic Poem.
By E. H Pember. Fcap. 8vo. 4J. 6^.

Fûunded upon the story of Sappho, * *//<? tdls his story rcUh dramatic
force, and in language that often rises almost to grandeur." —
ATHEN/EUM.

Poole.— PICTURES OF COTTAGE LIFE IN THE WEST

OF ENGLAND. By Margaret E. Poole. Xew and Cheaper
Edition. With Frontispiece by R. Farren. Crown 8vo. 3^. 6d.

" Chartning stories of peasant îife, written in something of George
Eliot^s style, . . . Her stories cotdd not be other ihan t/tey arcj as
/itérai as tnith^ as romantic as fiction, fulî of pathetic touches
and strokes of genuine humour, . . . Ail the stories are studies
of actual tifcy executcd with no meanjart." — TiMES.

Pope's Poetical AVorks. — See Gloue Library.
Population of an Old Pear Tree. From the French

of E. Van Bruyssel. Edited by the Author of "The Heir of
Redclyffe." With Illustrations by Becker. Second Edition.
Crown 8vo, gilt edges. 6s.

** This is not a regular book of natural history, but a description oj
ail the living créatures that came and wetit in a summer^s day
beueath an old pear tree^ observed by eyes that had for the nonce
becovie microscopiCy recorded by a peu that finds dramas in ciery-
thiitgy and illustrated by a dainty pcncil. ... We can hardly
fancy anyone ivith a moderate iurji for the curiositics of insect
life, or for délicate French esprit, iiot bciitg takcti by thèse clcjer
sketches.'''' — GUARDiAN. **^ 7ohimsicaI and charming Utile book.^^
— ATHEN.€UM.


32 BELLES LETTRES,


Portfolio of Cabinet Pictures.— oblong folio, pnce 42J.

This is a handsome portfolio containing faithfuUy cxecuted and
beauti/ully coloured reprodttctions of five well-known pictures : —
" ChiJde Haroîd's Pilgrintage" and ''The FighHng Téméraire;'
by y. M. \V. Turner; ** CrosHng the Bridge,'' by Sir m A.
Caîlcott ; ** The Cornfield," by John Constabîe ; and ** A Land-
scape" by Birket Poster. The Daily News says of them,
** They are very beauHfuîly executedj and might be framed and
hung up on the zvall, as creditable substitutes for the originals."


Raphaël of Urbino and his Father Giovanni

SANTI.— By J. D. Passavant, fonnerly Director of the
Muséum at Frankfort. Illustrated. Royal 8vo. cloth gilt, gilt
edges. 31J. 6d.

To the enîargcd Freftch édition of Herr Passavant' s Life of Raphaël ,
that paintcr' s admirers hâve turned whenever they hâve sought for
information ; and it luill doubtless remain for many years the best
book of rcf crème on ail questions pertaining to the great painter.
The présent 7uork eonsists of a translation ofthose parts of Passa -
vant's vobimcs which are most likely to interest the gênerai reader.
Besides a eomplete life of Raphaël it eontains the Tjaluable descrip-
tions of ail his knorwn paintings, and the Chronological Index,
luhieh is of so much service to amateurs who wish to study the pro-
grcssive eharacter of his works. The illustrations, twenty in
numbcr, by Woodbury's new permaneftt process of photography,
arefrom thefinest engravings that could beprocured, and hâve been
chosen ivith the intention of giving examples oj Raphaël' s varions
styles ofpainting. ** There will befound in the volume al most ail
that the ordinary studettt or critic would require to learn."— Art
Journal. **// is most beautifully and profusdy illustrated." —
Saturday Review.

Realmah. — By the Author of *• Friends in Council." Crown 8vo.

es.

Rhoades. — POEMS. By James Rhoades. Fcap. 8vo. ^. 6d.

Contents : — Ode to Harmony ; To the Spirit of Unrest ; Ode to
Winter; The Tunnel; To the Spirit of Beauty ; Song ofa Leaf;


BELLES LETTRES. 33

By the Rother ; An Old Orchard; Love atid Rest ; The Flowers
Surprised; On the Death of Artemus Word; The Two Paths ;
The Baîlad of LUtle Maisie ; Sonnets.

Richardson.— THE ILIAD OF THE EAST. A Sélection of

L^;ends drawn firom Valmiki's Sanskrit Poem, **The Ramayana."
By Frederika Richardson. Crown 8vo. ^s. 6d.

" // is impossible to read it ivithout recogftising the vcdue and interest
of the Eastern epic. It is as fascinoHng as a fairy taie, this
romanHc poem of India. " — Globe. * * A charming volume which
at once enmeshes the reader in ils snares.^^ — Athen^eum.

Robinson Cnisoe. — See Globe Library and Golden
Treasury Séries.

Roby.— STORY OF A HOUSEHOLD, AND OTHER POEMS.
By Mary K. Roby. Fcap. 8vo. 5^.

Rogers. — Works by J. E. RoGERS :—

RIDICULA REDIVIVA. Old Nursery Rhymes. Illustrated in
Colours, with Omamental Cover. Crown 4to. 6/.

" TTie most splendidy and at the same lime the most really meritorions
of the books specially intendedfor children, that ?oe have'secn.** —
Spectator. ** Thèse large bright pictures will attract children to
really good and honest artistie work, and that ought not to be an
indiffèrent considération with parents who propose to educate their
children.^* — Pall Mall Gazette.

MORES RIDICULI. Old Nursery Rhymes. lUustrated in Colours,
with Omamental Cover. Crown 4to. 6s.

" Thèse world-old rhymes hâve never had and need never wish for
a better pictorial setting than Mr. Rogers has given them,^^ —
Times. *^ Nothing could be quainter or more absurdly comical
than most of the pictures, which are ail carefully executcd and
beauttfully coloured,^^ — Globe.

Rossetti. — Works by Christina Rossetti :—

GOBLIN MARKET, AND OTHER POEMS. With two Designs
by D. G. Rossetti. Second Edition. Fcap. 8vo. ^s.


34 BELLES LETTRES,

**She handîes her little marvdwith ihat rarepœtic discrimincttiott
ivhich nàther exhatuts it of its simple xvonders by pushing sym-
holism too/ar, ttor ketps thost wonders in the mereîy fabulous and
capricious stage, In/aet, ske has produced a true childretCs poeniy
•ivhich is/ar more delightjul to the mature than to childrat, ikou^h
it UH>uld be delightful to a//."— Spectator.

THE PRINCFS PROGRESS, AND OTHER POEMS. With
two Designs by D. G. RossETTi. Fcap. 8vo. dr.

" Miss Rossetti^ s poems are of the kittd^vhich recalîs Shelley*s défini-
tion of Poeiry as the record of the best and happiest momctiis of the
best and happiest minds. , , , They are like the piping of a bird
on the spray in the sunshine^ or the quaint singing with which a
child amuses itseîf when it forgets that anybody is listefting^ —
Saturday Review.

Rossetti (W. M.)— DANTE'S HELL. See ** Dante."

Ruth and her FriendS. A Story for Girls. With a Frontis-

piece. Fourth Edition. Royal i6mo. 3/. 6d.

** We tvish a!i the school girls and home-taught girls in the land had
tJie opportunity of reading it^ — Nonconformist.

Scott's Poetical Works. — See Globe Library.

Scouring of the White Horse; or, the Long

VACATION RAMBLE OF A LONDON CLERK. UliistnittKl
by DoYLE. Imp. i6mo. Cheaper Issue. 3/. 6d.

** A glorions talc of summer joy. " — Freeman. " Thcrc is a ^u nidl
heatiy lijc about the book." — JOHN Bi:ll. ** The exécution /o
excellent, . . . Like * Tom Brffiim^s School Days,* the * //7//A-
I/orse* givcs the rcader a feeling of gratitude and Personal estccn:
taiLHirds the a u thor.*^ —S aturday Review.

Seeley (Professor). — LECTURES and essays. lîy

J. R. Seeley, M. A. Professor of Motîem Ilistory in tlic
University of Cambridge. 8vo. lar. 6d.


r\


BELLES LETTRES. 35

Contents r^ — Roman Imperialism : i. The Great Roman Révolu-
. tion ; 2. The Proximate Cause ofthe Fall oftke Roman Empire ;
3. The Later Empire, — Aiilton*s Poîitical Opinions — MUton^s
Poetry — Elementary PrincipUs in Art — Libéral Education in
Universities^ English in Schooh — The Church as a Teacher 0/
Moraliiy — llie Tea^hing of Politics: an Inaugural Lecture de-
livered at Cambridge, " He is the master of a cîear and pleasant
style, great facility of expression, and a considérable range of illus-
tration. . . . TTie criticism is always acute, the description always
graphie and continuous, and the matter of each essay is carefully
arranged unth a view to unity of effect.^^ — Spectator. ** His
book loill be fuit of interest to ail ihoughtful readers.*^ — Pall
Mall Gazette.

Shairp (Principal). — KILMAHOE, a Highland Pastoral, with

other Poems. By John Campbell Shairp, Principal of the

United Collège, St. Andrews. Fcap. 8vo. 5j.

** Kilmahoe is a Highland Pastoral, redolent of the warm soft air

of the western lochs and moors, sketched oui with remarkable

grâce and picturesquenessj*^ — Saturday Review.

Shakespeare. — The Works of William Shakespeare. Cam-
bridge Edition. Edited by W. George Clark, M. A. and W.
Aldis Wright, M.A. Nin« vols. 8vo. Cloth. 4/. 14?. 6d.

This, nc7u acktunuledged to be the standard édition of Shakespeare, is
the requit of viany years^ study attd research on the part of the
accomplishcd Editors, assistcd by the suggestions atid contributions
of Shakespearian students in ail parts ofthe country, Thefollo7ving
are the distinctive eharacteristics of this édition : — l. The text is
based on a thorough collation of the four Folios ^ and of ail the
Quarto éditions ofthe separate plays, and of subséquent éditions and
commentaries. 2. AU the results ofthis collation are given in notes
at the foot oj the page, together 7oith the conjectural emendaiions
collée ted and suggested by the Editors, or furnished by their cor-
respondcnts, so as to give the reader a complète zie7v of the existing
materials out of ivhich the text has been constructed, or may be
aviendcd. 3. WJiere a quarto édition dij/ers materially from the
received text, the text ofthe quarto is printed literatim in a smalhr
type after the received text. '4. 77ie Unes in each scène are num-
hcrcd separately, so as tofaeilitate référence. 5. At the end of each

C 2


36 BELLES LETTRES.


play afeo) notes ^ criticàl^ explanatory, and Ulusirative^ are addtd,
6. The PoemSf edited on a similar plan, are prinied ai tke end
of the Dramatic Works, Tke Préface contains some notes on
Skakespearian Grammar, Spelling, Metre^ and Punetuation^ and
a kistory of ail tke ckief éditions from tke Poefs time to tke présent.
Tke Guardian calls U an **excellentf and, to tke student, almost
indispensable édition ;" and tke Examiner calls il **an unrivalled
édition:*

Shakespeare, Globe. — See Globe Library.

Shakespeare'S Tempest. Edited with Glossanal and Ex-
planatory Notes, by the Rev. J. M, Jephson. Second Edition.
iSmo. IX.

Tkis is an édition for use in sckools. Tke introduction treats briefly
of tke value of language, tke fable of tke play and otker points.
Tke notes are intended to teack tke studcnt to analyse every obscure
sentence and trace out tke logical séquence of tke poeCs tkougkts ;
to point out tke rules of Skctkespearé s versification ; to explain
obsolète words and meanings ; and to guide tke studenfs taste by
directing his attention to suck passages as seem especiaUy tvortky
of note for tkeir pœtical beauty or trutk to nature, Tke tcxt is in
the mainfounded upon tkat of tke first collecied édition of Shake-
speare s play s.

Smith. — POEMS. By Catherine Barnard Smith. Fcap.
8vo. 5x.

^* IVealtky in feelingf meaningffnisky and grâce; notwitkout passion^
wkick is suppressed, but tke keenerfor tkcd" — ATHENiEUM.

Smith (Rev. Walter).— HYMNS OF CHRIST AND TUE
CHRISTIAN LIFE. By the Rev. Walter C Smith, M. A.
Fcap. 8vo. 6s.

•* Thèse are among tke sweetest sacred poems we kave read for a long
time, IVitk no profuse imagery, expressing a range of fcding
and expression by no means uncommon, tkey are true and devated^
and tkeir patkos is profound and xfVw//^."— Nonconformist.

Song Book, the. — See Golden Treasury Séries.


BELLES LETTRES. S7

Spenser's Works. — See Globe Library.

Spring SongS. By a West Highlander. With a Vignette
Illustration by Gourlay Steele. Fcap. 8vo. is. 6d.

** IVithoui a trace of affectation or sentimentalisme thèse utterama
are perfectly simple and natural, profoundly human and pro-
foundly trueJ** — Daily News.

Stephen (C. E.)— THE service of THE POOR ; beiiig
an Inquiry into the Reasons for and against the Establishment of
Religions Sisterhoods for Charitable Purposes. By Caroline
Emilia Stephen. Crown 8vo. 6s, (>d.

Aliss Stephen defines religions Sisterhoods as *^ associations ^ the prgaui-
zation of which is based upon the assumption that zuorks of charity
are either acts of worship in themselves^ or meatis to an end^
that end being the spiritual welfare of the objects or the pérfbrmers
of those ivorks?' Arguingfrom that point of vie7Cy she dévotes the
ftrst part of her volume to a brief history of religious associations y
taking as spécimens — /. The Deaconesses ofthe Primitive C hure h ;
IL the Béguines; III. the Third Order oj S, Francis; IV. the
Sisters of Charity of S. Vincent de Paul ; V. the Deaconesses oj
Modem Germany. In the second part^ Miss Stephen attcmpts to
show what are the real wants met by Sisterhoods, to ivhat extent the
same wants may be effcxtually met by the organization of coîtc-
sponding institutions on a s^ular basis, and what are the reasons
for endeavouring to do so, * *It touches incidentally and nn'th mufh
wisdom and tenderness on so many of the relations of women, par-
ticularly of single women, with society, that it may be read with
advantage by many who hâve never thought of entering a Sistcr-
hood. "— Spectator.

Stephens (J. B.)— CONVICT once, a Poem. By J. Bkun-
TON Stephens. Extra fcap. 8vo. ^s. 6d.

A taie of sin and sorrozo, purporting to be the confession cf Mag-
dalen Power , a conviet Jirst, ami then a teacher in one of the Aus-
tralian Settlements ; the narrative is supposed to be written by
Hycuinth, a pupil of Magdalen Power^ and the victim of her
jecdousy, The mètre of the poem is the same as that of Long-
fellcTijds ** Evangeline,** " It is as far more interesHng than


38 BELLES LETTRES.


ninety-nine noveh <nU of a humired, as it is sttpcrior to them in
pinverf luorth^ and beauty, IVe should most strongly advisi n'oy-
body to read * Convict Once.' "—WESTMINSTER Review.

Storehouse of Stories.— See Yonge, c. m.

StreetS and Lanes of a City : Being the Réminiscences
of Amy Dutton. With a Préface by the Bishop of Salis-
BURY. Second and Cheaper Edition. Globe 8vo. zs. 6d,

This littlc volume records,, to me the luords of the Bishop of Sei/is-
bitrvj ^^11 portion of the expérience^ sclected out of cvcrfiinving
viiUiTÎatSj of tivo ladieSf during serrerai years of dc^'otcd 7i*ork as
district parochial visitors in a tarife population in the north of
EugLindy Every incident narratcd is absolutcly true, and cnly
the namcs of the persons itttroduced fuive becn(necessarily) chani^ed.
The ^^Réminiscences of Amy Dutton" serve to illustrate the Une
of avi^umcnt adoptai by Miss Stephen in her work on **the Scrz'ice
ofthe Poor^" because they show thcU as in onc aspect the lady visilor
viay be said to be a îink bctioeen rich andpoor^ in another she heîps
to hhnd the ^* religions^* life n'ith the ''*secuîar,^' and in boîh docs
sc'-iiw of extrême ztjlue to the Church and Nation, ** Onc of the
most really stnking books that has ez'er corne before us," — Litkrary

Cm RCIIMAN.

Sunday Book of Poetry. — See Golden Treasiry

Sekiks.

Symonds (J. A., M.D.)--MISCELLANIES. By John
Adimngton Symonds, M.D. Selected and Edited, wiih an
Iniiudiiclory Mcmoir, by his Son. 8vo. 7j. 6<l,

The la te Dr. Symonds^ of Bristol^ vas a man of singularly versatile
and th^ant as well as pawerful and scientific intellect. In ordcr
to make this sélection from his many works generally intcresting, the
cditor lias confined himself to works of pure literature^ and to siuh
scientific studics as htid a getieral philosophical or sivùil interest.
Amon^ the gênerai subjects are articles on the Principles of Beaiêty,
on /Cno7vlcdge, and a Life of Dr, Pritchard ; among tlie Sciefttific
Studies are papers on Sleep and Dreams^ Apparitions, the Relations
between Mind and Muscle^ Habit^ etc. ; there are several papers on


BELLES LETTRES. 39

the Social and PolUkal Aspects rfMedkint ; and a/ew Fotms and
Translations , sdected from a gréai number ofequa mérita hâve been
inscried at t/ie end, as speciniem of the lighUr îiUrary récréations
7vhich occupied the intervais of leisure in a long attd laboriotis life,
** Mr. Symonds has certainly doneright in gathering together what
hisfather îejt behind him" — Saturday K£VI£W.

Theophrastus, Characters of. — SccJebb.

Thring.— SCHOOL SONGS. A CoUection of Songs for Schools.

With the Music arranged for four Voices. Edited by the Rev. E.
Thring and H. Riccius. . Folio, ^s. 6d.

Thcre is a iendcticy in schools to stéréotype the forms of life. Any
:^inial solvent is valuable. Games do much ; but games do not
peneirate to domestic life^ and are much limited by âge. Music
supplies the wani. The collection includes the **Agnus Dei,"
Tennyson^s *"* Lig ht Brigade " Aîacaulays"Ivry,^* etc. among other
pièces.

Tom Brown*s School Days. — By An Old Boy.

Golden Treasury Edition, 4J. td. People*s Edition, zs.

With Sixty Illustrations, by A. Hughes and Sydney Hall,

Square, cloth extra, gilt edges. lOx. 6</.
With Scvcn Illustrations by the same Artists, Crown 8vo^ ds.

** VVe haz>e read and re-read this bock with unmingled pleasure. . . .
We hâve carefully guarded ourselves against any tampering with
our critical sagtuity^ and yet hcrve been compelled again and again
toexclaim, Bene! Optime!^' — London] QuARTERLY Review.
** ^/« exact picture of the bright side of a Rugby boy^s expérience^
told ivith a lifCy a spirii^ and a fond minuteness of détail and recol'
Icction which is infiniiely honourable to the author.^* — Edinburgh
Review. ** The most famous boy s book in the language." —
Daily News.

Tom Brown at Oxford.—- New Edition. With Illustrations.
CroiMi 8vo. df.

'* /;/ no othcr work that we can call to mind are the finer qualities of
the English gentleman more happily portrayed^ — DailY Nbws.
**A book of greatpcwer and truth."^NATiovAL Review.


40 BELLES LETTRES.

Trench. — Worki by R. Chenevix Trench, D.D., Archbishop

of Dublin. (For other Works by this Author, see Theological,
HisTORicAL, and Philosophical Catalogues.)

POEMS. Collecled and arranged anew. Fcap. 8vo. *js, 6d.

ELEGIAG POEMS. Third Edition. Fcap. 8vo. 2s. 6d,

CALDERON'S LIFE'S A DREAM : The Great Théâtre of the
World. With an Essay on his Life and Genius. Fcap. 8yo.

HOUSEHOLD BOOK OF ENGLISH POETRY. Selected and
arranged, with Notes, by Archbishop Trench. Second Edition.
Extra fcap. 8vo. $s. 6d,

This volume is called a ** Homehold Book^^* by this natne implying
that it is a book for ail — that there is nothing in it to prevetU ii
from being confidently placed in the hands oj every member of the
househûld, Speâmens of ail classes ofpœtry are given^ including
sélections from living auihors. The editor has aimed to produce
a book ^^which the emigrant, findin^ roomfor Utile not absoluieiy
necessary^ might y et find roomfor in his trunk, and the trcn/eHer
in his kftapsack, and that on some narrow sheives where there are
few books this might bc one,'' ** The Archbishop has conferrcd in
this dclightful volume an important gift on the whole Engiish-
speaking population of the luorld, " — Pall Mall Gazette.

SACRED LATIN POETRY, Chiefly Lyrical. Selected and
arranged for Use. By Archbishop Trench. Second Edition,
Corrected and împroved. Fcap. 8vo. 7^.

" The aim of thepresettt volume is to offer to metnbers of our Engiish
Church a collection of the best sacred Latin poetry, such as they
shali be able entirely andheartiiy to accept andapprove — a collection^
thaiiSf in which they shall not be ez/ermore liabie to beoffettded^ and
to hâve the current of tiieir sympathies checked^ by comitig upon thcU
whichf however beauiifui as poetry, oui ofhigher respects they must
rejcct andcondemn — in which^ too, they shaU not fear that snares
are being laid for them, to entangle them unawares in adtniration
for aught which is inconsistent wiih their faiih andfeaity to their
own spiritual mother,^* — Préface.

JUSTIN MARTYR, AND OTHER POEMS. Fifth Edition.
Fcap. 8vo. 6s.


BELLES LETTRES. 41


Trollope (Anthony). — siR harry hotspur oi

HUMBLETHWAITE. By Anthony Trollope, Author of
"Fraraley Parsonage," etc. Cheap Edition. Globe 8vo. 2s. (k/.

The Times says : ^* In this novfl we are gîad to rccognize a rcturn
ta what we must call Mr. Trollope s old form. The characters
are drawn with vigotir and boldness^ afid ihe book may do good
to many readers of both sexes.'* The ATHENi^UM remarks : ** Al»
reader w/io begins to read this book is Ukely to lay it dou>n until
tJie îast page is turned. This brilliant novel appears to us decidedly
more successful than any other of Mr. Trollope- Junte*- siories.''

Turner. — Works by the Rev. Charles Tennyson Turm k •

SONNETS. Dedicated to his Brother, the Poet Launte. Kcap.
8vo. 4J. 6d.

" The Sonnets are dedicated to Mr. Teftnyson by his brot/ier, and hâve ^
independatily of their meriis, an interest of association, Tluy both
love to Write in simple expressive Saxon ; both lave to touch their
imagery in epithets rcUher than in formai similes ; both hâve a
délicate perception of rhythmical mffvement^ and thus Mr. Turner
has occasional Unes which^ for phrase atid musiCf might be ascribad
to his brother. . . He knows the haunts of the wild rose, theshady
nooks where light çuivers through the leaves^ the ruralities^ in short y
of the land of imagif talion." — Athen>eum.

SMALL TABLEAUX. Fcap. 8vo. 4f. td.

** Thèse brirf pœms hâve not only a pccuiiar kind oj interest for
the student of English pœtry, but are intrinsically delightful, and
will reward a careful and fréquent perusal. Full of nàivetéy piety,
love, and knowledge ofnatural objects, and ecuh expressing a single
atui gencrally a simple subfect by means of minute and original
pictorial touches, thèse Sonnets hâve a place of their own." — Pall
Mall Gazette.

Virgirs AVorks. — Sec Globe Library.

Vittoria Colonna.— LIFE and POEMS. By Mrs. Henry

Roscoe. Crown 8vo. 9^.

The life of Vittoria Colonna, the cdebrated Marchesa di Pescara,
has received but tursory notice from any English writer, ihough


42 BELLES LETTRES.

in ruery history of Italy her name is nuntioned wUh great honour
among the poets of the sixtettith cefUury. " In three kundred afuî
fi/iy ycars" says lier biographtr^ Visconti^ "thcre has beeft no othcr
Italian lady who can be compared to her,** ** It is wn'tten with
good tasCtf with qtdck and intelligent sympathy^ occasionally with
a real freshness and charm of style** — Pall Mall Gazette.

Volunteer*S Scrap Book. By the Author of "The Cam-
bridge Sciap Book." Crown 4to. Ts. (kl.

** A gcnial and cliTi'er caricaturist in w/tom we may often pcncive
through s mall dctails that lie has as propt'r a sensé of the graccful
as of the ludicrous. T7ie author might be ami probably is a
rduntcir himsclf so kindly is the mirth he makes of ail the inci-
iiaits and phrases oj the dn'll'gronnd.'*—Ex\yiîîi^lSi.

Wandering AVillie. By the Amhor of " Effie's Friends," and
•*Joliii Halherton." Third Edition. Crown 8 vo. 6s.

^*' Thisis anidyll of raretntth and beauty. . . . The story is simple
and touching, the style of e.xtraordinary delicaey^ preeision^ and
picturesqneness, . . . A charmîng ^ift-book for young ladies not
yet promoted to ntrcels^ and ilhU amply repay those of thcir elders
ic'ho may give an hour to its pcrusal.^* — Daily News.

Webster. — Works by AuGUSTA Webstkr : —

"•* If Mrs. Webster only remains trne to hersclf she will assuredly
iake a higher rank as a poet than any wonmn has yet done. " —
Westminster Review.

DRAMATIC STUDIES. Extra fcap. 8vo. S/,
"/f volume as strongly marked by perfect taste as by poelie power." —

NONCONFORMIST.

A WOMAN SOLD, AND OTHER POEMS. Crown 8vo. Jx. 6./.

^* Mrs. Webster has shoîun us that she is able to draw admirably
from the lije ; that she can observe with subllety^ and render her
obserz'ations with delicacy ; that she can impersonate complex con-
ceptions and venture into whichfew Ivvmg writers can follofw lier**
—Guardian.


BELLES LETTRES, 43

Webste v^^couHnued,

PORTRAITS. Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. 3^. 6*/.

** Mrs, IVSsta^s poems exhibit simplicity and Underftess , , . Aer
tusU is p<rfKt . . . This simplicity is conibined with a subtltty oj
thought^feeling^ and observation which deinand that atteniionwhich
onîy real lovers of poetry are apt to bestow." — Westminster
Review.

PROMETHEUS BOUND OF iESCHYLUS. Literally translated
into English Verse. Extra fcap. 8vo. 31. td,

" Closeness and simplicity combined with literary skill^ — Athe-
N-/EUM. '* Mrs, Webster' s *^ Dramatic Studies* and * Tramlatton
of Prometheus ' harje won for her an honourable place among ottr
fenuile poets, She writes with remarkaàle vigour and dramatic
recdizatiorty and bidsfair to be the viost success/ul claimant of Mrs,
Brownings mantle'^ — British Quarterly Review.

MEDEA OF EURIPIDES. LiteraUy translated into English
Verse. Extra fcap. 8vo. y. 6d,

** Mrs, Webster s translation surpasses our utmost expectations. It is
a photograph of the original wUhout any of tJuU /larshness which
so often accompanies a photograph,'*— \^^STUlîiSTE.K Review.

THE AUSPICIOUS DAY. A Dramatic Poem. Extra fcap.
8vo. 5j.

AA^eStminSter PlayS. Lusus Alteri Westmonastenenses, Sive
Prologi et Epilogi ad Fabulas in S" Pétri Collegio : actas qui Ex-
stabant collecti et justa quoad licuit annorum série ordinati, quibus
accedit Declamationum quce vocantur et Epigrammatum Del«ctus.
Curantibus J. Mure, A.M., H. BuLi-, A.M., C. B. Scott, B.D.
8vo. 12^. 6d,
Idem. — Pars Seoinda, 1820 — 1864. Quibus accedit Epigrammatum
Delectus. 8vo. i^s,

When I was a Littlc Girl. STORIES FOR children.

By the Author of **St. Olave's." Third Edition. Extra fcap.
8vo. 4f. 6d. With Eight Illustrations by L. Frolich.

** At the head, and a long way ahead^ of ail books for girls^ we


44 BELLES LETTRES.

place * When Iwas a lÀttle Giri: "— TlMES. ** // // one ofthe
êhoicest rnorsds of chUd-biography which wt hâve met with, " —
NONCON FORMIST.

Wollaston.— LYRA DEVONIENSIS. By T. V. Woixasto.n,

M. A. Fcap. 8vo. y. 6d.

**/t is tke work a/a man of refintd taste^ ofdeep religiûus sentiment^
a triie artist, and a good Christian" — Church Times.

Woolner.-— MY BEAUTIFUL LADY. By Thomas Woolner.
With a Vignette by Arthur Hughes. Third Edition. Fcap.
8vo. 5j.

" // is clearly the product ofno idle haur, but a highty-coucerved and
faithJully'CxecuUd taskj sd/'imposedy and prompted by that imuard
yeaming to utter great thoughts, and a wealth of passionate feeling,
which is pœtic genius. No vian can read this poem without being
struck by the fitness and finish of the workmanship, so to speaky as
well as by the chastcned and unpretcnding loftincss of thought
which pervades the whole!* — Globe.

Words from the PoetS. Selected by the Editor of «* Rays
of Sunlight" With a Vignette and Frontispiece. i8mo. limp., \s.
** The sélection aims cU poptdariiy, and deserves it" — GUARDIAK.

Wyatt (Sir M. Digby).— FINE ART ; a Sketch of its

liistory, Theory, Practice, and application to Industry. A Course
of Lectures delivered before the Univcrsity of Cambridge. By
Sir M. Digby Wyatt, M. A. Slade Profcssor of Fine Art.
8vo. loj. 6d.

** An excellent handbook/or the student of «ft. "— Graphic. " The
book abounds in valuable matter^ and will therefore be read with
pleasure and profit by laver s of art." — Daily News.

Yonge (C. M.) — Works by Charlotte M. Yonge. (See also

Catalogue of Works in History, and Educatiokal
Catalogue. )

THE HEIR OF REDCLYFFE. Eightccnth Edition. With lUus-
trations. Crown 8vo. 6s,


BELLES LETTRES. 45

Yonge (C. M.) — continutd,

HEARTSEASE. Eleventh Edition. With Illustrations. Crown
8yo. df.

THE DAISY CHAIN. Tenth Edition. With Illustrations.
Crown 8vo. 6^.

THE TRIAL: MORE LINKS OF THE DAISY CHAIN.
Fifth Edition. With Illustrations. Crown 8vo. df.

DYNEVOR TERRACE. Fourth Edition. Crown 8vo. 6s.

HOPES AND FEARS. Third Edition. Crown 8vo. 6s.

THE YOUNG STEPMOTHER. Third Edition. Crown 8vo. 6s.

CLEVER WOMAN OF THE FAMILY. Second Edition.
Crown 8vo. 6s.

THE DOVE IN THE EAGLE'S NEST. Second EdiUon.
Crown 8vo. 6s.

** We think the authoress of * Tlie ffnr 0/ Redclyffe'' has surpassfd
h^ prez'ious efforts in this illuminated chronicU of the oiden time.*^
— British Quarterly.

THE CAGED LION. lUustrated. Crown 8vo. 6s.

** Prdt'dy and tenderîy written^ aftd will luîth young peopU especially
be a grcat favourite'^ — Daily News. ^^ Everybody should rend
Mw."— LiTERARY CHURCHMAN.

THE CHAPLET OF PEARLS ; OR, THE WHITE AND
BLACK RIBAUMONT. Crown 8vo. 6s.

** Miss Yonge has brought a lofiy ai m as weîl as kigh art to the eon-
struction of a story which may claim a place among the best efforts
in Jùstorical romance."— MoRNlNG POST. " Thep/ot, in trutA,
is 0/ the very first order oj merit." — Spectator. ** IVe hâve
seîdom read a more char ming story.'''' — Guardian.

THE PRINCE AND THE PAGE. A Taie of the La.^ Crusade.
Illuslrated. iSmo. 35. 6d.


46 BELLES LETTRES,

Yonge (C. M.) — continued.

" A taie which^ we are sure, will gh*e pleasure to mafiy others besides
theyoufig people for 7ohom it is specially intended. . . . This
extremely prettily-told story does not require thc gttarantee affordea
by the fiante of ihe author of * Tlie Heir of Redclyffe'* on the ti/le-
pagc to ensurc its beconiing a unvversal favouritej*^ — Dublin
EvENiNG Mail.

THE LANCES OF LYNWOOD. New Edition, vAx\i Coloured
Illustrations. i8mo. 4j. 6</.

" The illustrations are very spirited and rich in colour, and the
story ean hard/y/ail to charm theyouthfulrcader " — Manchester
Examiner.

THE LTTTLE DUKE : RICHARD THE FEARLESS. New
Edition. Illustrated. iSmo. 3j. 6^.

A STOREHOUSE OF STORIES. First and Second Séries.
Globe 8vo. 3j. 6</. each.

Contents of First Séries : — History of Philip Quarll —
Goody Twoshocs — The Governcss — ^Jemima Placid — The Perambu-
lations of a Mouse — Thc Villafje School — Thc Little Queen —
History of Little Jack.

*' Miss Yongi h as done great service to the infantry of this génération
ly puttiug ilu'sc eïruen stories of sage sifnplieity unthin their reaéh.^*
— British Quarterly Review.

Contents r>F Second Séries: — Family Stories — Eléments of
Morality — A Puzzle îor a Curions Girl — Blossoms of Morality.

A P,OOK OF GOLDEN DEEDS OF ALL TIMES AND ALL
COUNTRIES. Gathered and Narrated Anew. New Edition,
with Twenty Illustrations by Frôlich. Crown 8vo. cloth gilt. 6s.
(Sec also Golden Treasury Séries). Cheap Edition, is.

** JVt haz'c sivn nx> pretticr gift-hook for a longtinte„ and none ivhich,
h^-'th for its cheapness and the spirit in zohieh if h as been compiled,
is more deserving ofpraise" — Athen^EUM.

A BOOK OF WORTHIES.—See Golden Treasury Séries.


BELLES LETTRES, 47


YongC (CM.) — cmtinued.

LITTLE LUCY'S WONDERFUL GLOBE. Pictured by
Frolich, and narrated by Charlotte M. Yonge. Second
Edition. Crown 410. cloth gilt. ts.

Miss Yo figes loonderful ** kftack" 0/ instructive stoiy-teUitig to
chiîdren is weîî knmun. In this volume, in a manner ivhich
cannot but prcrjc interesting to ail boys onci girls, she manages
to com'ey a wonderftd amount of information conccrning most of
the l'Ole nt ries of the worid ; in tkis shc is considcrably aided by thc
t70cnty-fotir telling pictures of Mr. Frolich. " ' Lucy^s Wofiderful
Globe ' is capital f and ivill give ils youthful readers more idea of
foreign countries and cnsioms than any number of bocks ofgeograpJiy
or travd.'" — Graphic.

CAMEOS FROM ENGUSII HISTORY. From Rollo to
Edward II. Extra fcap. 8vo. 5^. Second Edition, enlarged.

A Second Seriks. THE WARS IN FRANXE. Extra fcap.
Svo. 5^^.

Thc endcavour has not been to chronicle facts, but to put to^cthcr a
séries ofpictures ofpersons and clients, so as to arrest the attention^
and give soîue individuality and distinctness to the recolleetion, by
gathering togethcr détails at tJie most mémorable moments. Tlie
*' Ca?neos" are intcnded as a bookfor young people just beyomi the
cJementary historiés of England, and ablc to enter in some degree
into the real spirit of n'cnts, and to be striuk li'iik characters and
scènes pj-esented in some relief. ^^ Instead ofdry detailsy'' says tlie
NoNCONFORMiST, ^^ 7ve havc living pictures^ faithfuly z'ivid, and
striking."

Young. — MEMOIR OF CHARLES MAYNE YOUNG,
Tragedian. \Vith Extracts from his Son 's Journal. By Jri.iAN
Charles Young, M. A., Rectorof llmington. New and Cheapcr
Edition. Cro\\n Svo. ^s. 6d. With Portraits and Sketchc*;.

'* There is hardiy a page ofit rohich ivas not 70orth printing. Theie
is hardiy ^ //«^' li^hieh has not some kind of in'erest atta-hitig


4^ BELLES LETTRES.


to U" — Guardian. **/« thû budget of anecdotes, fables, and
.t^ossip, old and new, relative to Scott, Moore, Chalmers, Coleridge,
\Vords7vorth, Croker, Mathervs, the Third and Fourtk Georges,
Boivles, Beckford, Lockhart, Wellington, Ped, Louis Napoléon,
D'Orsay, Dickens, Thackeray, Louis Blanc, Gibson, Constable,
and Stanfield {the list might be much extended), the reader must be
hard indecd to please whê cannot find entertainmeni^ — Pall
M AU. Gazette.


MACMILLAN'S

GOLDEN TRBASURY SERIES.

Uniformly printed in iSmo., with Vignette Titles by Sir
Noël Paton, T. Woolner, W. Holman Hunt, J. K
MiLLAis, Arthur Hughes, &c Engraved on Steel by
Jeens. Bound in extra cloth, 4s, 6d, each volume. Also
kept in morocco and calf bindings.

" Messrs. Macmillan hâve, in their Golden Treasury Séries, especially
prçvided éditions of standard works, volumes 0/ selected poetry, and
original compositions, which entitle this séries to be called classical,
Nothing can he better than the literary exécution, nothing more
élégant than the material zuorhmanship "^British Quarterly
Rrview.

The Golden Treasury of the Best Songs and

LYRICAL POEMS IN THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE.
Selected and arranged, with Notes, by Francis Turner
Palgravb.

** This ddightful little volume, the Golden Treasury, which contains
many qfthe best original lyrical pièces and songs tn our language,
grouped with care and skill, so as to illustrate each other like the
pietures in a weU-arrangtd gallery,** — Quarterly Revibw.

The Children's Garland from the best Poets.

Selected and arranged by Coventry Patmors.

" // includes spécimens of ail thegreat masters in the art of poetry,
selected with the matured judgment of a man concentrated on
obtaining insight into the feelings and tastes of childhood, and

P


50 GOLDEN TREASURY SERIES.

dêsiroui to awaken Us fimst impulses^ to adtivatf Us kêenest sênsi-
bUUUs^* — MORNING POST.

The Book Of Praise. From the Best English Hymn Writers.
Selected and arranged by Sir Roundkll Palmer. A New and
EtUargtd Edition,

" AU prevùms compilations of this kind must undeniably for the
pruentgive place to the Bookof Praise . . . The sélection heu
heen mode throughout with sound jtidgment and critical taste. The
pains involved in this compilation must hâve been immense, em-
bracingt eu iidoes, every writer of note in this spécial province of
English literature, and ranging over the most widefy divergent
tracks of rdigious thought?^ — Saturday Rkvisw.

The Faîry Book ; the Best Popular Fairy Stories. Selected and
rendered anewby the Author of "John Halifax, Gentleman."

** A delightful sélection, in a delightful externat form ; fuU of the
physical splendour and vast opulence of proper fairy tales,^* —
Spectator.

The Ballad Book. A Sélection of the Choicest British Ballads.

Edited by William Allingham.

** Ilis taste as a Judge of old poetry willbefound, by ail acçuainted with
the various readings of old English ballads, true enough to justify
his undertaking so critical a task^ — Saturday Review.

The Jest Book. The Choicest Anecdotes and Sayings. Selected
and arranged by Mark Lemon.

" The fuUest and best jest book that has yet appeared^ — Saturday
Review.

Bacon's Essays and Colours of Good and Evil.

With Notes and Glossarial Index. By W. Aldis Wright, M.A.

** The beautiful little édition of Bacon* s Essays, nota before us, docs
crédit to the taste and scholarship oj Mr, Aldis Wright. , , , It
puts the reader in possession of ail the essential literary facts and
chronology necessary for reading the Essays in connection with
Bacon* s life and times, " — S pectator. * * By far the most complète
as well as the most élégant édition we possess" — Westmin«ter
Review,


GOLDEN TREASURY SERIES. 51

The Pilgrim's Progress from this World to that which is to
corne. By John Bunyan.

*• A heauti/ul and scholarh reprint.^* — Spectator.

The Sunday Book of Poetry for the Young.

Selected and arranged by C. F. Alexander.

*' A wdl-sdeeUd voîumt c/Sacred Poetry,** — Spectator,

A Book of Golden Deeds of AU Times and Ail Countries.

Gathered and nanated anew. By the Author of " The Heir op
Redclyffe."

"... To the youHgf for whom it is especially intended, as a most
interesting collection of thrilling taies well told; and to their dders^
as a useful handbook of référence, and a pUasant ont to take up
when their wish is to while away a weary halfhour, We hâve
seen no prettier gift-hock for a long time" — ATHENiEUM.

The Poetical Works of Robert Bums. Edited, with

Biographical Memoir, Notes, and Glossary, by Alexander
Smith. Two Vols.

" Beyond ail question this is the most beautiful édition of Bums
yet <7M/."— Edinburgh Daily Review.

The Adventures of Robinson Crusoe. Edited from

the Original Edition by J. W. Clark, M. A., Fellow of TrinUy
Collège, Cambridge.

" MtUilated and modified éditions of this English classic are so much
the mU, that a chtaf and pretty copy of it, rigidly exact to the
original^ will be a prixe to many book-buyersP — Examiner.

The Republic of Plato. Translated into English, with
Notes by J. LL Davies, M. A. and D. J. Vaughan, M. A.
*M dainty and cheap little édition** — Examiner.

The Song Book. Words and Tunes from the best Poets and
Musidans. Selected andarranged byJOHN Hullah* Profeasor

of Vocal Music in King's Collège, London.

D 2


{


52 GOLDEN TREASURY SERIES.


" A choice colUction oj the steriing songs of Engiand^ Scatiand^ and
Irelandf with ihe music oj each prefixed te the wards, Horw mtuk
trui whoîesome pleasure such a book can diffuse^ and will diffuse^
we trusta ihrough mattv tfumsand families,** — Examiner.

La Lyre Française. Selected and arranged, with Notes, by
Gustave Masson, Frencb Master in Harrow School

A sélection ofthe bat French songs and îyrical pièces,

Tom Brown's School Days. B/AnOldEoy.

" A perfect gem oJ a book, The best and most healthy book nhout
boys for boys thai ever tuas written,** — Illustrated Times.

A Book of WorthieS» Gathered from the Old Historiés and

written anew by the Author of "The Heir of Redclyffe.*'
With Vignette.

**An admirable addition to an admirable séries** — Westminster
Review.

A Book of Golden Thoughts. By Henry Attwell,

Knight of the Order of the Oak Crown.

** Mr. Attwell has produced a book of rare value .... HappUy it
is small enough to becarried about in the pocket^ andoj such a corn-
panion it would be dijkult to weary.** — Pall Mall Gazette.

Guesses at Truth, By Two Brothers. New Edition.


MACMILLAN'S

GLOBE LIBRARY.

BetmHfuîly printed on toned paper and hound in doth extra^ giit
edges^ price \s, 6d. eack ; in doth plain, 3J. 6d, Also kept in a
variety 0/ cai/and morocco bindings at moderate priccs.

BooKS, Wordsworth says, are

**the spirit breathcd
6y dead men to their kind ; "

and the aim of the publishers of the Gïobe Library bas
been to make it possible for the universal kin ot English-
speaking men to hold communion with the loftiest " spirits
of the mighty dead ; ** to put within the reach of ail classes
complète and accuraie éditions, carefully and clearly printed
upon the best paper, in a convenient fonn, at a moderate
price, of the works of the master-minds of English
LiTERATURE, and occasionally of foreign literature in an
attractive English dress.

The Editors, by their scholorshrp and spécial study oi
their authors, are compétent to afford every assistance to
readers of ail kinds : this assistance is rendered by original
biographies, glossaries of umisual or obsolète words, and
critical and explanatory notes.


54 GLOBE LIERA R Y,

The publishers hope, therefore, that thèse Globe Editions
may prove worthy of acceptance by ail classes wherever the
English Language is spoken, and by their universal circula-
tion justify their distinctive epithet ; while at the same time
they spread and nourish a common sympathy with naturels
most "finely touched" spirits, and thus help a little to
^'make the whole world kin."

Thâ Saturday Review says: ** Tke Glohe Editions are admirable
for their scholarly editing^ thdr typographical excellence^ their corn-
pendùms form^ and their cheapness." The British Quarterly
Review says: *^ In compendiousneis^ élégance^ and scholarliness,
the Globe Editions of Messrs. Macmillan surpass any popular séries
of our classics hitherto given to the publie. As near an approaeh
to miniature perfection as has ever been made.^^

Shakespeare's Complète Works.' Edited by w. g.

Clark, M. A., and W. Aldis Wright, M. A., of Trinity Collège,
Cambridge, Editors of the ** Cambridge Shakespeare." With
Glossary. pp. 1,075. Price 3^. 6d,

This édition aims at presenting a perfectly reliable text of the complète
loorks of " theforemost man in ail literature.** The text is essen^
tially the same as that ofthe ^* Cambridge Shakespeare. ** Appended
is a Glossary containing the meaning ofevery wordin the text whick
is eiiher obsolète or is used in an antiçuated or unusual sensé,
This, combined with the method usea to indicate corrupted readit^s^
serves to a grcat extent the purpose oj notes. The AxHENiBUM says
this édition is **a vtarvel of beauty, cheapness, and compactness,
. . . For the busy man, abave ail for the Vforking student, this is
the best of ail existing Shakespeares,** And the Pall Mall
Gazette observes: ** To hâve produced tht Complète u*orks of
the 7vorlds greatest poet in such a form, and at a price unthin the
reach ofevery one, is of iiself almost sufficieni to gvve the publishers
a daim to be considered public Jfenefactor s. ^^

Spenser's Complète Works. Edited from the Original

Editions and Manuscripts, by R. MoRRis, with a Memoir by J.
W. Hales, m. a. With Glossary. pp. Iv., 736. Price 3J. 6c^


GLOBE LIBRARY. 55

The iext 0/ ihe potms has bien repHnted frotn the earlùst knawn
éditions^ carefully collated wiik subséquent ones, most ofwhich were
published in the poet's lifetime. Spenset's only prose tvork^ his
sagaciûus and interesting '* View ofthe State of Irdand^^ has been
re-edited front three manuscripts belonging to the British Muséum,
A complète Gîossary and a list 0/ ail the most important various
readings serve to a large extent the purpose 0/ notes explanatory
and critical. An exhaustive gênerai Index and a useful ** Index
of first Unes" précède the poems ; and in an Appendix are given
Spensef^s Letters to Gabriel Harvey. * * Worthy — and higherpraise
U needs not — 0/ the beautiful * Globe Séries.^ The work is aiiied
with cdl the care so noble a poet deserves." — Daily News.

Sîr Waltcr Scott' s Poetical Works. Edited with a

Biographical and Critical Memoir by Francis Turner Palgrave,
and copious Notes, pp. xliii., 559. Price ys, 6d.

m

" Scott,'* says Heine, ** in his every book, gladdens, tranquillizes, and
strengthens my Aeart.'' This édition contains the wholc of Scotfs
poétisai Works, with the exception ofone or t7vo short poems. While
most of Scott' s own notes hâve beett retained, others hâve been addea
explaining many historical and topographiccU allusions ; and ori'
ginal introductions from the pen of a gentleman familiar ivith
Scotch literature and sceftery, contai ning mue h interesting Infor-
motion, antiquarian, historical, and biographical, are prefixed to
the principal poems. " IVe can almost sympathise with a middlc'
aged grumbler, who, after reading Mr. Palgrave s memoir and in-
troduction, should exclaim — * Whywas there notsuch an édition of
Scott when I was a schoolboy ? ' "—Guardian.

Complète Works of Robert Burns.— THE POEMS,

SONGS, AND LETTERS, edited from the best Printcd and
Manuscript Authorities, with Glossarial Index, Notes, and a
Biographical Memoir by Alexander Smitu. pp. Ixii., 636.
Price 3J. 6d.

Burnis poems and songs tued not circulate exclusively among Scotch-
men, but should be rcad by ail who wish to know the multi-
tudinous capabiliiies of the Scotch lan^uage, and who hâve the
capacity of appreciating the exquisite expressiott of ail kinds of
human feeling — rich pawky humour, keen wU, withering satire.


S6 GLOBE LIERA RY.


genuine pathos^ pure passionate love. The exhaustive giossanal
index and the copwus notes wiU make ail the purdy Scotch pcems
intelligible even to an Englishman. Burnis letters must be read
by ail who désire fuUy to apprecicUe the pœCs character, to see ii
on ail its many sides, Explanatory notes are prefixed to most
of thèse letters^ and Burnis Joumals kept during his Border
and Highland Tours, are appended, Folloiving the prefixed
biography by the editor, is a Chronological Table of Bums's Ltfe
and Works, ''Admirable in ail respects."— S VECTATOK. ** The
châapest, the most perfect, atul the most interesting édition which has
ever been published.'^ — Bell's Messenger.

Robinson CruSOe. Edited after the Original Editions, with a
Biograpbical Introduction by Henry Kingsley. pp. xxxi., 607.
Pricc y. 6d.

Of this matchless truth-like story, it is scarcely possible to find an
unabridged édition. This édition may be rdied upon as containing
the whole of ''Robinson Crusoe" as it came from the pen of its
author, without mutilation^ and with ail peculiarities rdigiously
preserved. Thèse points^ contbintd with its handsome paper, large
elear type, and moderate price, ought to render this par excellence
the "Globe,^' the Universal édition of Defois fascinating narrative,
"A most excellent and in every way désirable édition," — Court
CiRCULAR. '' Macmillan*s * Globe' Robinson Crusoe is a book to
hâve and to keep" — MoRNiNG Star.

Goldsmith's Miscellaneous Works. Edited, with

Biographical Introduction, by Professor Masson. pp. Ix., 69$.

Globe 8vo. 3^. dd.

This volume comprehends the whole oj the prose and pœtical works
of this most génial of English atUhors, those only being excluded
which are mère compilations. They are ail accuratdy reprinted
from the most rdiable éditions. The faithfidness, fulness, and lite-
rary merit of the biography are suffûiently attested by the name oj
its author, Professor Masson. It contains many interesting anec-
dotes which will give the reader an insight into Goldsmith's
character, and many graphie pictures ofthe literary life of London
durtng the middle of last century. ' ' Such an admirable compen-
dium of thefacts of Goldsmith's lifc, and so careful and minute a
delineation of the mixed traits of his peculiar character as to be
a very model ofa literary biography in Utile." — ScOTS\lAN.


GLOBE LIBRARY, $7

Pope* S Poetical Works. Edited, with Notes and Intro-

ductory Memoir, l>y Adolphus William Ward, M.A., Fellow

of St. Pcter's Collège, Cambridge, and Professor of History in

Owens Collège, Manchester, pp. lii., 508. Globe 8vo. 3J. ôJ,

Tkis édition contains ail Popés poems^ translations^ and adaptatùms^

— hii n<nu mpersedec* Honieric translations alone being omitted,

77ie lexif carefiilly -eTnsed^ Is laken front ihe best éditions ; Pop^s

own use of capital letlers and apostrophised syllablesy frequently

mcessary to an understandin^ oj his meaning, has been preserved ;

while his uncertain spdling and his fréquent ' > perplexing inter»

punctuation hâve beeti JMliciously amended. Abundant notes are

addedy including Popés own, thé best of those of preidous editors,

and many which are Ihe resuit of the study and research of the

présent editor. The introductory Memoir will be found to shed

considérable light on the political^ socialy and literary life of the

t>eriod in 'vhich Pope fiiled so large a space, The LiTERARY

Churchman remarki : " The editor^ s own notes and intro^

ductory memoir ar' excellent , the menudr alonc would be cheap and

well worth buying at the priée of the whole volume.*^

Dryden's Poetical Works. Edited, with a Memoir,

Revised Text, and Notes, by W. D. Christie, M.A., ol Trinity
Collège, Cambridge, pp. Ixxxvii., 662. Globe 8vo. y. 6d,
A study Oj Dryden's works is absolut ely mcessary to anyone who
vnshes to understand îhoroughly^ not only the literature, but also
the political and religious history of the eveniful period whtn he
lived and feigned as literary dictator. In this édition ofhis works,
ivhich comprises several spécimens ofhis vigorous prose, the text has
been thoroughly corrected and purified from many misprints and
small changes often mcUerially affecting the sensé, which had been
allowed to slip in by previous editor s. The old spelling has been
retained where It l> not altogether strange or répulsive. Besides an
exhaustive Glossary, there are copious Notes, criticcd, historical, bio"
graphical, and explanatorv ; and the biography contains the results
of considérable original research, which has served to shed lighi on
several hitherto obscure circumstances connected with the life and
parentage of the poet. " An admirable édition, the resuit ofgreat
research and 0/ a careful revision of the text, The memoir prefixed
contains, within less than ninety pages, as much Sound criticism
and as comprehensive a biography as the student of Drydm need
désire,**— Y KLL Mall Galette.


Il

f


s» GLOBE LTBRARY.

Cowper'8 Poetical Works. Edit«d, with Notes and
Biographical Inlroduction, by William Benham, Vicar of
Addinglon and Prolcssor of Modem Histocy in Queen's CoU^e^
London. pp. Ixxiîi., 536. Globe Svo. 31. 6d.

Tiii velume conlaitii, arraHgrd undrr irvtn headi, Uu vikele ef
Covjpet'i mun fotmi, includiag snieral nrvrr befort pHilUked, and
ail his Irans/atùms fxcipt Ihai of Homtr's " lliad." T^ittxtù
tattMfnmi lit original tditiiitu, and Cowper's mm nolei artgntn
at Iht foot of Iht fage, while many txflaiiatory nota by Iht edilor
kimsHJ are appinded lo tht volumt. In ihe vfry fiill Manoir ît
•uiiU bt found that mtidt nem Hghl liaj bttn Ihrtrwn on nrmi of
Ou tnost JiffIndI pattaga of Cirmfa'i ifiirihially ckeçn^nd ^t,
"Mr. Benhawis idition of CoTofir is ont of permanent value.
Tht biographital irUroduciiim is excellent, full of information,
tingularly neal and readaéle and modeil — indttd too modtsi in
ils commeitli. T/u noies are eontise and aceurale, and tkt edilor
kas heen able lo diseover and tntroduce stnne hitkerio unprintid
matler. Attogither the beok is a very excellent one." — Satukday

S.EVIBW.

Morte d'Arthur.— SIR Thomas malorvs book of

KING ARTHUR AND OF HIS NOBLE KNIGHTS OF
THE ROUND TABLE. The original Edition of Caxton,
rcvised for Modem Use. With an Introduction by Sir Edwakd
RTrachey, Bart. pp. «xvii., 509- Globe Svo. 3/. W.

Tkis volume eeiilaim lie rream of Iht Itgtnds of ekivalry wkich
bave galhertii round Iht shadowy King ArtAnr and kii JCnighIt
oflht Round Tablt. Tennyign ias drtmm largdy on Ihem in Âis
eytlt of Arihurian Idylls. Tht ianguage is simple and qnaint as
that of the Bible, and tht many slories ef knightly adoenlure ef
which tht book is mode up, an fasiinating ai lÂoseof the "Arabian
Kighls." Thegreat moral of Ihe booh is lo "do afttr Ihtgood, and
Imve Iht tvil." There vms a Tciant of an édition of Iht luerk al a
mederate priée, suUable for ordinary rtadtrs, and espetioUy for

. boys : tuch an édition Ihe présent professa la be. The Introduetion
eentaini an actonnl of the Origin and Matler of Ihe book, the Text
and ils several Editions, and an Essay en Chivalry, iraring ils
hislory from Us origin te ils dtcay. Notes art appended, and a


3I


?l'


t
