MORE WONDERS OF THE INVISIBLE WORLD
London: Printed for Nath. Hillar, 1700. Collected by Robert Calef, merchant, of Boston in New-England.
Public domain.
Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/morewondersofinv1700cale).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

WONDERS,

OF T  H  E

INVISIBLE WORLD:

Or,  The  Wonders  of  the

3rntriribte  isaojlfc,

Display 'd  in  Five  Parts.

Parti.  An  Account  of  die  Sufferings  of  Margaret t$jfo,^fiEty  by

the  Reverend  Mr.  C.  Af.
P.  II,  Several  Letters  to  the  Author,  &c> And  his  ^egly  relating

to  Witchcraft.
P.  III.  The  Differences  between  the  Inhabitants  of  $4#m -Village^  and

Mr.  Parris  their  Minifter,  in  Neve- England.
P.  IV.  Letters  of  a  Gentleman  uninterefted,  Endeavouring  to  prove

the  received  Opinions  about  Witchcraft  to  be  Orthodox.  Withjfhort

Eflays  to  their  Anfwers.
P.  V.  A  ihort  Hiftorical  Accout  of  Matters  of  Fad  in  that  Affair.

To  which  is  added, A  Poitfcript  relating  to  a  Book  intirlcdj  The
Life  of  Sir  W  I  L  L  I  A  M P  H  I  P  S.


Collected  by  Robert  Calef,  M&cfesr.t;  of  Bo  (Ion  in.4few-£fg&
Licenfed  and  Entred  according  to  Order.

LONDON:

Printed  for  Natl\  ffillar%  at  the  Princes- Arms,  in  Leaden-HaH-ftreet,
over  againft  St.  Mary- Ax*  and  fofefb  CoSyer,  at  the  Goldcn-Bit?le<
on  London-  Bridge. 1700.


y '  *  •  \


/


3


fj?%rf~^,t '£mf& / ;f ■'-'•'


M


"


The  Epiftle  to  the  R  M  D  E  R,

And  more  efpecially  to  the  Noble  Bereans  of  mis  .4>v;iv|rerever  Refiding.

Gentlemen,  ^\0

YO  IV  fto  rtre  freed  from  the  Slavery  of  a  corrupt  Education  ;  and  that  in
fpite  of  human  Precepts,  Examples  and  Prcjicknts,  can  hearken  to  tie
Delates  of  Scripture  and  iteafini

For  your  fakes  I  am  content,  that  thefe  Collections  of  mine,  as  alfo  my  Sen-
timents focuid  be  expofed  to  publicl^view,  In  hopes  that  having^cllconjiderecTl/
and  compared  them  with  Scripture,  you  will  fee  reafon,as  I  do,to  qv.efihri  ahelief
fo  prevalent  (as  that  here  treated  of )  as  alfo  the  pratlice  flowing  fro7tt  thence;
they  (landing  as  nearly  eonnsxt  as  caufi  and  effcti ;  it  being  found  who!?)  im-
practicable, to  extirpate  the  latter  without  fir]}  curing  the  former.

And  if  the  Buffoon  or  Saty<ical  will  be  exercifing  their  Talents,  or  if  the
Biggots  wilfully  and  blindly  rcjeB  the  Teflimonies  of  their  own  i^cafon,  and
morefiire  word,  it  is  no  more  than  what  I  cxpcBcd  from  thorn,

But  you  Gentlemen,  I  doubt  not  arc  willing  to  Diftinguiflo  between  Truth  and
Error. and  if  this  may  be  any  furtherance  to  you  herein,!  f hall  not  mifsmyAim.
But  if  you  find  the  coitrary,and  that  my  belief  herein  is  any^  way  Heterodox*,
J  (halt  be  thankful  for  the  Information  to  any  Learned  or  Kcverend  Perfon,  or
others,  that  fo  all  take  that  pains  to  inform  me  better  by  Scripffirfy  or  found
i\eafon, which  is  what  I  have  been  long  feekjng  for  in  this  Country  in  vain.

In  a  time  when  not  only  England  in  particular,  but  almoft  all  Europe  had
been  labouring  again  ft  the  Vfurpations  of  Tyranny  and  Slavery,  The  Englifii,
America,  has  not  been  behind  i?i  a  fhare  in  the  Com?non  calamities  ;  more
efpecially  New-England,  has  met  not  only  with  fuch  calamities  as  are  common
to  the  reft,  but  with  fever al  aggravations  enhanfing  fuch  Afflictions,  by  the  Dc~
vaftations  and  Cruelties  cf  the  Barbarous  Indians  in  their  Eaftern  borders,  Sec, >

But  this  is  not  ail,  they  have  been  harraft  (on  many  accounts)  by  a  more
dreadful  Enemy,  as  will  herein  appear  to  the  confideratc.

P.  66,  Were  k  as  we  are  told  in  Wonders  of  the  Inviftble  World,  that -
the  Devils  were  walking  about  our  Strees.  with  lengthned  Chains  making
a  dreadful  noife  in  our  Ears,  and  Brimftone,  even  without  a  Metaphor,
was  making  a  horrid  and  a  heiiifh  ftench  in  our  Noftrils.

P.  49.  And  that  the  Devil  "exhibiting  himfelf  ordinarily  as  a  black-
Man,  had  decoy'd  a  fearful  knot  of  Proud,  Froward,  Ignorant,  Envious
and  Malicious  Creatuies,  to  lift  themielves  in  his  horrid  Service,  by  en-
tring  their  Name's  in  a  Book  tendered  unto  them  ;  and  that  they  have
had  their  Meetings  and  Sacraments,  and  aflbciated  themfelves  to  deftroy
the  Kingdom  of  our  Lord  Jems  Chrift,  in  thefe  parts  of  the  World ;  ha-
ving each  of  them  their  Spectres,  or  Devils  CommuTionated  by  them.and

A  2  repre*


THE PREFACE.

reprefenting  of  them  to  be  the  Engines  of  their  Malice,  by  thefe  wicM
Spe&res,  fiezing  poor  People  about  the  Country,  with  various  and  bloody
Torments.  And  of  thofe  evidently  preternatural  Torments  fome  to  have
died.  And  that  they  have  bewitched  fome  even  fo  far,  as  to  make  them
felf  dcftroyers,  and  others  in  many  Towns,  here  and  there  languifVd  under
their  Evil  hands.  The  People  thus  Affli&ed  miferably  fcratch'd  and  bit-
ten ;  and  that  the  fame  Invifibte  Furies  did  ftick  Pins  in"  them,  and  fcaj'd
them.diftort  and  difjoint  them>  with  a  Thoufandother  Plagues;  andfome-
times  drag  them  out  of  their  Chambers,  and  carry  them  over  Trees,  and
Hills  Miles  together ,many  of  them  being  tempted  to  Sign  the  Devils  Laws.

P.  7.  Thofe  furies  whereof  fevera!  have  kitted  more  People  perhaps  than  would
ferve  to  make  ^Village.  Tf  this  be  the  true  ft  ate  of  the  Affliftions  of  this  Country  ,
it  is  very  deplorable, and  beyond  all  other  outward  Calamities  miferable*

But  if  on  the  other  Jidet  the  Matter  be  as  others  do  under  ft  and  it,  That  the
Devil  has  been  too  hard  for  us  by  his  Temptations,  figns,  and  lying  Wonder %
with  the  help  of  pernicious  notions ,  formerly  imbibed  and  prof effed  ;  together
with  the  Accusations  of  a  parcel  of  pojfeffed,  dift rafted,  or  lying  Wenches ,
decufing  their  Innocent  Neighbours,  pretending  they  fee  their  SpcElrcs  (\.  e.j,
De-vi!s  in  their  Hkenefs  Afflitting  of  them,  and  that  God  in  righteous  Judg-
ment (after  Men  had  afcribed  his  Povter  to  Hatches,  of  Commiffionating  De-
vils to  do  thefe  things)  may  have  given  them  over  to  flrohg  deluficns  to  believe
lyes,  &C  And  to  let  locfc  the  Devils  of  Envy,  Hatred,  Pride,,  Cruelty,  and
Malice  again  ft  each  other  ;  yet  ft  ill  difguijed  under  the  Masl^of  T^eal  for  God,
and  left  them  to  the  branding  one  another  with  the  odious  Name  of  Witch  -
and  upon  the  Accufation  of  thofe  above  mentioned,  Brother  to  Accufe  and  Pro-
ft  cute  Brother  ,  Children  their  Parents,  Paftors  and  Teachers  their  immediate
Ficck_  tpito  death ;  Shepherds  becoming  Wolves,  Wife  Men  Infatuated  ;  People
hawed  to  Prifms,  with  a  bloody  noife purfuing  to,  and  iyifulting  over,hhe  (true).
Sufferers  at  Execution,  while  fome  are  fleeing  from  that  call  d  Juftice,Ju(lice
it  felf  fleeing  before  fuch  Accufitions,.  when  once  it  did  but  begin  to  refrain
further  proceedings  ;  and  to  queflion  fuch  Pratt  ifes,  fome  making  their  Efcape
out  of  Prifons,  rather  than  by  an  obftinate  Defence  of  their  Innocency,  to  run
fo  apparent  hazard  of  their  Lives  ;  Eft ates  foiled,  Families  of  Children  and
ethers  left  to  the  Mercy  of  the  Wildernefs  (not  Jo  mention  here  the  Numbers
pnferibed,  dead  in  Prifons,  or  Executed^  &cj

All  which  Tragedies^,  tho  begun  in  one  Towny  or  rather  by  one  Parifh,  has
^Plague -tike  f pre  ad  more  than  through  that  Country, And  by  its  Eccho  giving
a.. brand  of  Infamy  to  this,  whole  Country  throughout  the  World.

If  this  were  the  Mi fer able  cafe  of  this  Country  in  the  time  thereof. \  and
that  the  Devil  hadfofarprevailed.jtpan  us  in  our  Sentiments  and  Acliom,  as.
to  draw  us  from  fo  much  as  looking  into  the  Scriptures  for  our 'guidance  intlwfe
pretended  Intricacies,  leading  us  to  a  trufting  in  blind  guides,  fuch  as  the  cor-
rupt pratlices  of  fome  other  Countries,  or  the  bloody  Experiments  of  Bod'm,

and


THE PREFACE.

<wd  rnch  other  Authors. Then  tho  our  Cafe  be  mofi  mifcrab'e,  yet  it  muft  h»
"J aid  of  New-England,  Thou  haft  defiroyed  thyjelf,  and  breught  this  great-fi
of  Mifcries  upon  thee.

And  now  whether  the  Hatches  (fuch  as  have  made  a  cempatt  by  Explicit  Co-
venant with  the  Devil,  having  thereby  obtained  a  power  to  Cvmmijficnate  him)
have  been  the  caufe  of  our  mifcries.

Or  whether  a  %cal  governed  by  blindnefs  and  paffion,  and  led  by  prefidcnt,
has  not  herein  precipitated  us  into  far  greater  wickednefs  (if  not  Witchcrafts )
than  any  have  been  yet  proved  againft  thofe  that  fuffered.
■  To  be  able  to  diftinguifh  aright  in  this  matter ,  to  which  of  thefe  two  to  re-
fer oiff  Mifcries  is  the  prefent  Wor%  As  to  the  former y  I  /{now  of  no  J obex
Man,  much  lefs  Reverend  Chrifiian,  that  being  asl(d  dares  aff.rm  and  abide
by  it  that  Witches  have  that  power  ;  viz.  to  Commijficnate  Devils  to  kjll
and  deftroy.  And  as  to  the  latter,  it  were  well  if  there  were  not  too  much  of
truth  m  it,  which  remains  to  be  demo7iftrated,

But  here  it  will  be  f aid,  what  need  of  Baking  in  the  Coals  that  lay  buried
in  Oblivion.  We  cannot  recall  thofe  to  Life  again  that  have  puff  ore  d,  fippo-
fuig  it  were  unjuft'y ;  it  tends  but  to  the  cxpcfvig  the  AHors,  as  if  they  had
proceeded  irregularly.

Truly  I  take  this  to  be  juft  as  the  Devil  would  have  it,  fo  much  to  fear  difi
obliging  men,  as  not  to  endeavour  to  det?R  his  Wiles,  that  fo  he  may  thefconer,.
and  with  the  greater  Advantages  fet  the  fame  on  foot  again  {either  here  or  elf e
where)  fo  dragging  ttS  'hrough  the  Pond  twice,  by  the  fame  Cat.  And  if  Reports
do  not  (herein)  deceive  us,  much  the  fame  has  been  a  fling  this  prefent  Tear  in
Scotland.  And  what  Kingdom  or  Cmntiy  is  it,  that  has  not  had  their  bloody
fits  and  tur.ns  at  it. And  if  this  is  fuch  a  catching  difeafe,  and  fo  univerfai*.
Iprefume  I  need  make  no  Apology  for  my  Endeavours  to  prevent,  as  far  as  in
my  power,  any  more  fuch  bloody  VlHims  or  Sacrifices  ;  tho  indeed  I  bad  rather
any  other  would  have  undertaken  fi  offenfroe,  tho  neceffary  a  task, ;  yet  ail
things  weighed,  I  had  rather  thus  Expofi  ?ny  felf  to  Cenfurey than  that  it
(hould  be  wholly  omitted. Were  the  ?iotions  in  que  ft  ion,  innocent  and  harmlejs,
rcfieBing  the  Glory  of  God,  and  well  being  of  Men,  Ifhould  not  have  engaged
in  them,  but  finding  them  in  my  efieem,  fo  intollcrably  deftruHive  of  both.
This  together  with  my  being  by  Warrant  called  before  the  Jufiices,  i?i  my  own
'ftift  Vindication?  1  took,  it  to  be  a  call  from  Gcd,  to  my  Power,  to  Vindicate
his  Truths f  againft  the  Pagan  and  Popifh  Affertions,  which  arefo  prevalent  5.
for  tho  Chrijiians  in  general  do  own  the  Scriptures  to  be  their  only  Ityle  of  Faith
and  DoHrine,  yet  thefe  Notions  will  tell  us,  that  the  Scriptures  have  not  fuf-
ficiently,  nor  at  all  defcribed  the  crime  of  Witchcraft,  .  whereby  the  culpable
might  be  detecied,  tho  it  be  pofitivc  in  the  Command  to  punifh  it  by  Death  ^
hence  the  World  has  been  from  time  to  time  perplext  in  the  profecution  of  the
fever al  Diabolical  mediums  of  Heathenifh  and  Popifh  Invention,  to  deteft  an
Imaginary  Crime  {not  butjhat  there  are  Witches ,  fuch  as  the  £aw  of  God

de~


THE PREFACE.

Jcjcrifaf) which  has  produced  a  doing?  of 'Bleed  -,  hereby  rendering  the  Can-
minds  of  God  not  only  void  but  dangerous,

So  aljh  they  own  Gods  Providence  mid  Government  of  the  PVor/dt  and  that
TemPefts  and  Storms,  Affile  ions  and  Difiafis  are  of  his  fending  ;  yet thefi
Notions  tell  us,  that  the  Devil  has  the  power  of  all  thefi,  and  can  perform
them  when  csmmi/fwtfd  by  a  l-Pitch  thereto,  .and  that  he  has  a  power  at  the
Witches'  call  to  atl  and  do,  without  and  againfi  the  cowfi  of  Nature ,  and  alt
mtmnl  caifis}  m  ajfUBing  and  killing  of  Innocents  ?  and  this  is  that  fi  many
have  died  fir,

A IJ 'u  it  is  generally  believed,  that  if  any  Man  has  jfcength,  it  is  from  God
iks  Almighty  bsiffg  ;  But  thefi  notions  will  tcV  us,  that :  the  Devil  can  ma \q
m§  Man  asfirong  as  many^  which  was  one  of  the  hefi  pretfi,  as  it  was  count-
ed, againfi  Mh  Burroughs  theMhtiihr$  the- Us  contemporaries  in  the  Schools
duHn^  his  Mimrity  ceuld  have  teftifud,  that  kit  jlrength  was  then  as  much
fiikmmr  to  theirs  as  ever  (fitting  ajide  incredible  Romances)  it  was  dif cover-
ed to  hfmc§:Thi4s  rc-mbing  the  pmwr  of  G$d,  and  his  providence  ofnoneEffcfh

Thef?  avefimeafthe  dcftmclive  notions  of this  Age%  and  however  the  offer-
trrs  of  them  ficm  fhmoHmes  to  valm  themfihes  much  upon  Jheltring  their
Ne'gbbours  from  Spectral  Aceufations.  They  may  defirve  as  much  thanks  ds
that  'Tyrant,  that  having  indufirioufly  obtained  an  unintelligible  charge  a^ainf}
lis  Subjects,  in  matters  wherein  it  was  impojjible  theyfooufd  be  Guilty,  having
thueby  their  lives  in  his  power,  yet  fpffers  them  of  his  mcer  Grace  to  live,
find  will  be  called  gracicus  Lord.

It  were  too  Icarian  a  tasl^for  one  unfumifti d  with  necejfary  learning,  and
Libra  y,  to  give  any  Juft  account,  from  wheyicefo  great  dclujions  have  Jprungy
and  jo  long  continued.  Jet  as  an  Effay  from  thefef craps  of  reading  that  I  have
bad  opportunity  of  i  it  will  be  no  great  venture  to  fay ,  that  Signs  and  Lying
Winders  have  been  one  principal  caufc.

It  is  written  of  Juft  in  Martyr,  who  lived  in  the  fecond  Century,  that  he
was  before  his  sonverficn  a  great  Philqfipher  ;  firfi  in  the  way  of  the  Stoicks,
and  after  of  the  Peripatcticks,  after  that  of  the  Pythagorean,  and  after  that
of  the  Piatonifts  SeHs  ;  and  after  all  proved  of  Eminent  ufe  in  the  Church  of
Chrift  :  Tet  a  certain  Author  fpcaking  of  one  Apollonius  Tyaneus,  has  thefi
-words  [That  the  moft  Orthodox  themfelves  began  to  deem  him  vefted  with
power  lufficient  for  a  Deity  ;  which  occafioned  that  fo  ftrange  a  doubt  from
'jujhn  Martyr,  aS  cited  by  the  Learned  Gregory,  Fol.  37.  £i  BiosKii,  &c.  If  God
be.rhe  Creator  and  Lord  ofthe  World,  how  comes  it  to  paPs  that  Aftl/onius  his
Tdifms,  have  fo  much  over-ruled  the  courfe  of  things  I  for  we  fee  that  they
alio  have  {lilted  the  Waves  of  the  Sea ;  and  the  raging  ofthe  Winds,  and  pre-
vailed againft  the  Noifome  Flies,  and  Incurfions  of  wild  Beafts,  &c.  if  fa
Eminent  and  Early  a  Chriftian  were  by  thefe  falfe  fbe*>s  in  fueh  doubt,  it  is  the  lefs  won-
der in  our  depraved  times,  to  meet  with  what  is  Equivalent  thereto  ;  Be  fides  this  a  cer*
tain  Author  informs  me,  that  [Julian  (afterwards  called  the  Apoftate)  being  Jw-
(iruWfd  inthtPhHofiphy  and  Difciplines  of  the  Heathen  by  Libarius  his  Tutor>  by  this

mean


THE PREFACE.

'  we  Am  he  came  to  hve  Philofophy  better  then  the  Gofpel,  and  fo  by  degrees  iumUfom
Cmiftianity  to  Heathenijmj.

This  fame  Julian  did  when  Apoftate,  forbid  that  Chrijliems  Jhould  be  mjirubtjd  in
the  Difcipline  of  the  Gentiles,  which  {it  jeems)  S'ccrate,  *  Writer  of  the  EeJjiaftical
Hilhry,  does  acknowledge  to  be  by  the  fingular  Providence  oj  God;  Chrijtians  having
then  begun  to  degenerate  from  the  Gofpel,  and  to  betake  themj  elves  to  Heathenijh  learning.
And  in  the  Mercury  for  the  Month  c/l;ebruary ,  1 <5o  5 ,  there  is  this  Account  £That
the  Chriftian  Doctors  converting  much  with  the  writings  of  die  Heaf.Ku  for
the  gaining  of  Eloquence.  A  Counlel  was  held  at  Carthage,  which  forbad  the
reading  of  "the  Books  of  the  Gentiles,]

'  Prim  ail  which  it  may  be  eafily  perceived,  that  in  the  Primitive,  times  of  Chri fixity,
when  not  or.ly  many  Heathen  of  the  Vulgar  ;  but  aljo  many  learn  d  Men  and  Philojiphas
had  imbraced  the  Chrijlian  Faith  ;  they  JitU  retained  a  love  to  their  Heathen-learning,
owkich  as  one  obferves  being  tranf planted  into  a  Chrifian  Soile,  joon  proved  productive
of  pernicious  Weeds,  which  over -ran  the  face  of  the-  Church,  hence  it  was  Jo  deformed
as  the  Reformation  found  it.

Among  other  Pernicious  Weeds  arifmg  from  this  Root,  the  Doctrine  of  the  power  oj  Be-
vils,  and  Witchitaft  as  it  is  now,  and  long  has  been  under  food,  is  net  the  leaf;  the
Fables  of  Homer,  Virgil,  Horace  and  Ovid,  Sec.  being  for  the  Eiegamy  of  their
Language  retained  then  (and  fo  are  to  this  Day)  in  the  Schools  ;  have  net  only  introdu-
ced, but  eftablifbtd  fitch  Doctrines  to  the  poipning  the  Chrifian  World.  A  certain  Au-
thor Expreffes  it  thus  [that  as  the  Chrijlian  Schools  at  fir  ft  brought  Men  fremHeathenijm
to  the  Gofpel,  fo  theje  Schools  cany  Men  from  the  Gofpel  to  Hi&thernfm.  as  to  their  gnat
prfcBion]  and  Mr.  I.M.  in  his  Remarkable  Providences,  gives  an  decouns  that  (as
he  calls  it)  an  Old  Counfel  did  Anathematize  all  thofe  that  believed  juch  power  of  ths
Devils,  accounting  it  a  Damnable  Detirine.  But  as  other  Evils  did  afterwards  increafe
in  the  Church  (partly  by  fuch  Education)  fo  this  inftnfihly  grew  up  with  them,  tho  not
to  that  degree,  as  that  any  Gcunjel  J  have  ever  heard  or  Read  of,  has  to  this  day  taken
off  thofe  Anathema' J" ;  yet  after  this  the  Church  jo  jar  declined,that  Witchcraft  became
a  Principal,  Ecclefiaftical  Engine  (as  alfo  that  of  fcrejie  was)  to  root  tip  all  that  fiood
iniheiY  way;  andbeftdes  the  ways  ofTryal  that  we  have  fill  in  practice,  they  invented
fome,which  were  peculiar  to  themfelves  ;  which  when- ever  they  were  minded  to  improve
againft  any  Orthodox  believer , they  could  eafJy  raakeEffeclual.ThatDeluge  ofBlood  which
that  Scarlet  Whore  has  to  anfwer  for,jhed  under  this  notion, hew  amazing  is  it.

The  prfl  in  England  that  I  have  read  ofT  of  any  note  fmce  the  Reformation,  that  aj~
fertsthis  DeUrine,  is  the  famous  Mr.  Perkins,  he  (as  alfo  Mr.  Gaul,  and  Mr.  Bernard,
fkz.fetms  all  of  them  to  have  undertaken  one  Task,  they)  taking  notice  of  the  Multipli-
city of  irregular  ways  to  try  them  by,  invented  by  Heathen  and  Papijls,  made  it  their
bufnefs  and  main  work  herein  to  ofpefefuch  as  they  j aw  to  be  pernicious.  And  if  they
did  not  look  more  narrowly  into  it,  bttt  followed  the  fir  ft,  viz.  Mr.  Perkins  whofe  Edu-
cation (as  theirs  alfo)  had  fire ft  a  ltd  him  into  fuch  belief,  whom  they readily  follow ecT; .
it  cannot  be  wondered  at :  And  that  they  were  men  liable  to  Err, and  fo  not  to  be  tritfted
to  as  perfect  guides,  will  manif eft ly  appear  to  him  that  jball  fee  their  fever al  receits  laid
down  t9  deteB  them  by  ther  Prefumftivt  and  Pofitive  ones.  And  eonftder  how  few  of
either  have  any  foundation  in  Scripture  or  Reafin  ;  and  how  vaftlythey  differ  from  each
other  in  both,  each  having  his  Art  by  himfelf  which  Forty  or  an  Hundred  more  mayas~
well  imitate,  and  givt  theirs,  ad  infinitum,  being  without  all  manner  of  proof But


THE PREFACE.

But  tho  this  be  their  main  deftgn  to  take  off  People  from  thofe  Evil  and  bloody  ways  of
trial  which  theyjpeakjo  much  again ft.  Tet  this  does  not  hinder  to  this  day%  but  th*
fame  Evil  ways  or  as  bad  are  fill  ufedto  deteB  them  by,  and  that  even  among  Prote-
ft  ants ;  and  isfo  jar  Jttflificd  that  a  Reverend  Perfon  has  f aid  lately  here,  how  eifi  Jhali
we  dctscl  Witches.  And  another  being  urged  to  prove  by  Scripture  jueb  a  fort  of  Witch
as  has  power  to  J  end  Devils  to  kill  ?nm ,  replied,  that  he  did  as  firmly  believe  it  as  any
Article  or  his  Faith.  And  that  he  (the  inquirer)  did  not  go  to  the  Scripture  j  to  ham
the  Myjf  cries,  of  his  trade  or  Art.  Moat  can  befaidmm  to  Eftablijh  thsre  Usathtnijh  no-
tions and  to  Fillifie  the  Serpt?ires,  our  only  Rule  5  and  that  after  we  have  J  ecu  fuch  dire
effects  thereof  as  has  threatned  tin  utter  Extirpation  of  this  whole  Country.

And  mioinoft  of  the  Aiters  in  thefe  Tragedies ,  tho  they  are  fi  far  from  Defending
their  Athens  that  they  will  Readily  oa>n,that  undue  ft eps  have  been  taken,  &c.  Tet  it
turns  they  chafe  that  the  fame  Jbould  be  Acted  over  again  informed  by  their  Example?**.
tlur  than  that  it  jhtJJ  Remain  as  a  Warning  to  Poflmty  ,ushmm  they  have  mift  it*
80  far  are  thy  from  giving  Glory  to  God,  and  taking  the  due  jhamt  to  themfelves.

And  now  to  fum  up  all  in  a  few  wordsy  we  have  fien  a  Biggotted  Zeal  ftirrivg  tip
a  Blind  and  moft  Bloody  rage,  not  again®  Enemies,  or  Irreligious  Pnffiigate  Perfons,
But  (in  Judgment,  of  Charity,  and  to  view)  againfl  as  Pertueus  and  Religious  as  any
they  have  left  behind  thtm  in  this  Country,  which  have  filtered  as  Evil  doers  (with
the  utmfi  extent  of  rigour,  not  thatfo  high  a  Character  is  dm  to  nil  that  Suffered,  and
this  by  the  Teftimony  of  Fit*  Fdrlets  as  not  only  were  known  before,  but  have  been  further
apparent  face  by  their  Mamfeft  Lives,  Whordoms,  Incefi,  &e.  The  Atenfaiiws  of  thefe,
■£&m  their  SpeeJral  Sight,  being  the  chief  Evidence  againfi  thofe  that  Suffered,  In  whkh
Mcufhkens  they  were  upheld  by  both  Magiftrates  and  Minifters,  fo  Img  as  they  Appre*
hmdid  chifnfdves  in  ns  Danger,

And. then  tho  they  could  defend  neither  the  Doctrine,  nor  the  Pra&ice,  yet  none  of
them  have  in  juch  a  fuhliek  manner  as  the  cafe  Requires,  teflified  again  ft  either;  tbQ
at  the  fame  time  they  conld  not  but  be  fenfible  what  a  Stain  and  lofting  Infamy  they
have  brought  upon  the  whole  Country,  to  the  Indangering  the  future  welfair  not  only  of
this  but  of  ether  places,  induced  by  their  Example  ;  if  not,  to  an  int ailing  the  Guilt  of
all  the  Righteous  £lood  that  has  been  by  the  fame  means  Shed,  by  Heathen  or  Fapifts,
Sec.  upon  themfelves,  whofe  deeds  they  have  fo  far  juftified,  occafioning  the  great  Dijho*
nour  and  Blafphemyofthe  Name  of  God,  Scandalizing  the  Heathen,  hardning  ofEne*
mies  j and  as  a  Natural!-  effect  thereof,  to  the  great  Increafe  of  Athtifm.

I  Jhall  conclude  only  with  acquainting  the  Reader  that  of  thefe  Collections,  the  firfl
containing  more  Wonders  of  the  Invifible  World,  I  received  of  a  Gentleman,  who  had  it
of  the  Author  and  communicated  it  to  me,  with  his  exprejs  confent,  of  which  this  is  a
true  Copy  \  as  to  the  Letters,  they  are  for  Subflance  the  fame  I  fent,  tho  with  feme  fmaS
Variation,  or  Addition.  Touching  the  two  Letters  from  a  Gentleman  at  his  requefi,  I
have  forhorn  naming  him.  It  is  great  Pity  the  matters  of  Fa  ft,  and  indeed  the  whole,
had  not  been  done  by  fome  abler  hand  better  Accomplijhed  and  Adnantages  with  both
natural  and  acquired  Jndgments,  but  others  not  Appearing^  I  have  inforcd  my  f elf  to  do
what  is  done,  my  oth  ■  cccafions  Will  not  admit  any  further  Scrntiny  therein.

Boflea  in  N^vOigiUnd,  Aug.  11.  1697.  #  R.  C.

THE


THE


INDEX.


A


PART I.

Notker  Brand  -plucked  out  of  the  Burning,  or,  More  Wonders  of  the
Invifible  World',  Written  by  Mr  C.  M.  relating  to  the  Afflictions  of
Margaret  Rule.  Page  x

PART II.

A  Letter  to  Mr.  CM.  containing  a  Narrative  of  two  Viji'ts  ghen  by  him

**  and  others  to  Margaret  Rule.  p.  1 3

With  a  repetition  of  a  former  Letter  font  to*  him,  to  offer  a  Meeting  with
him,  p*  16

As  aifo  the  repetition  of  a  former  Letter,  requeuing  Information  infome  Da-
ftrinalls  relating  to  Witchcraft.  Ibid,

A  Letter  of  Mr.  C.  M.  wherein  he  declines  Speaking  to  thofe  DoBrinaHs^
Denying  feme  parts  of  the  Narrative,  and  defending  others.  The  feeling
the  Imp  owned,  &c.  p.  19

The  Copy  of  a  Paper  Subfcribed  by  fever  at ,  teftifying  Margaret  Rules  be*
ing  held  uf  by  Invifible  Hands  from  the  Bed,  p.  22

A  Letter  to  Mr.  C.  M.  relating  to  the  Narrative,  again  Praying,  an  An*
fwer  to  the  DoBrinalls.  p,  23

The  Copy  of  a  paper  Jhewing  what  Senfe  the  Indians  had  of  the  Acl ions  her e9
and  what  efteem  they  had  thereby  taken  up  of  qw  Minifters.  p.  25

A  Letter  to  Mr.  C.  M.  again  repeating  fever al  Fundamental  DoBrinalls  9
oppofite  to  the  Doftrine  of  Witchcraft,  as  now  underjlood,  praying  his  Con-
firmation or  Confutation  thereof  p*  16

A  Letter  to  Mr.C  M.  (after  minding  him  of  his  promifi,  viz.  T»  give  an
Anfwer  about  Doclrinalls)  feveral  Pajfages  quoted  in  bis,  and  hi*  Relation*
Books*  *h*t  need  explaining  »*  27  ,-

A  Letter  to  Mr.  B,  relating  to  $e  belief  sf  Mr.  C.  M.  which  he  forbad  $9
be  Copped.  f*  to

*  -  £


The  Index.

A  Letter  to  the  Miniflert  repeating  thofe  DoHrinalls,  fent  to  Mr.  C.  M*
for  his  Explanation,  with  the  Summary  of  his  Belief  contained  in  thofe
Papers ',  forbidden  to  be  Coppied ;  as  alfo  orher  DoElrinalls  oppqfite  thereto
befeeching  them  to  give  their  Confirmation  or  Confutation  thereof, p.  3  3

A  Letter  to  Mr.  S.  W.  relating  to  a  Dialogue  Written  by  him  about  Witch-
crafty  and  to  a  Paper  fet  forth  by  the  Prefulent,  &C.  of  the  XJniverfuy^  a-
bcut  Poffcffwns  and  Enchantments.  p.  ^g

A  Letter  to  Mr.  C.  M.  relating  to  the  Dotlrinalls  contained  in  a  Bool^  of
Mr.  R.  B.  Printed  in  London  1691.  Ssme  of  the  Heathen  Poets  quoted
as  the  Fountain  or  Original  offuch  Dotlrinalls.  p, a?

A  Letter  to  the  Minifters  mentioning  the  DoBrine  of  the  Manichees,  Demon-
ftrating  that  the  prefent  Age  is  not  free  from  that  Infection,  repeating  ne-
ceffary  Articles  of  Faith  oppoflte  thereto.  p.  ^3

A  Letter  to  Mr.  B.  W.  relating  to  the  Witches  Covenant.  P-  52

PART III.

^fHe  T{eafons  given  by  fome  of  the  People  why  they  withdrew  from  Communis
*> on,  &c.  with  the  Church  at  Salem- Village,  and  from  hearing  Mr.  Parris
their  Minifter,  in  whofe  Houfe  the  Tragedies  of  Witchcraft  begun, p.  55
Mr.  Samuel  Parris'j  Acknowledgement.  p. 57

The  Advice  and  Determination  of  the  Elders  and  Meffengers,  met  at  Salem-
Village,  to  Compofe  the  Differences  there.  P«  59

A  Letter  from  the  People  of  the  Village  to  thofe  Elders  and  Meffengers  of  the
fever  at  Churches.  p.  6 1

A  ft  ate  of  the  Controverfie  between  Mr.  Parris  and  his  People.  p.  62

A  Rgmonftrance,  with  further  f^eafons  given  in  by  the  Attorneys  for  the  Peo-
ple of  the  Village  to  the  Arbitrators,  againfb  Mr.  Parris.  \ p.  63


PART IV.

A  Letter  ef  a  Gentleman  endeavouring  to  prove  the  received  opinions  a~

^*  bout  Witchcraft.  p.  64

An  Effay  to  the  Anfwer  thereof  P«  77

A  Second  Letter  of  the  Gentlemans  further  urging  fuch  Doftrines.  p.  83

A  Rgjoyndcr  to  the  former  Anfwer.  p.  87

PART V.

/jfN  Account  of  the  matters  of  FaB  at  Salem- Villagei  <8cci  p.  90

The  Examination  of  Mrs.  Cary.  p.  95

The  Examination  of  Mr.  John  Aldin.  p.  98

Bifhop  alias  Oliver  Condemned.  p.  100

.4»  AbftraB  of  the  Minifters  Advice  to  the  Govermur*  p.  1  o  l

Sarah


The  Index

Sarah  Good,  Rebecca  Nurfe,  Suf.  Martin, Eliz.  How, and  Sarah
Wildes  Condemned.  p. 101

The  Declaration  of  the  Foreman  of  the  Jury,  relating  to  words  fpokm  ^Re-
becca Nurfe.  p.  i  ox
Rebecca  Nurfes  Interpretation  of  thefe  words. p.  1 05
Mr.  George  Burroughs  John  Procter,  Eliz.  Procter,  John  Willard>Georgc
Jacobs  and  Marrha  Carryer  Condemned.  Ibid.
A  Letter  0/ John  Pro&er  to  the  Minifters% p. 104.
A  Letter  of  Margaret  Jacobs  to  her  Father. p.  105
Martha  Cary,  Mary  Eafty,  Alice  Parker,  Ann  Pudeater,  Dorcas  Hore,
Mary  Bradbery,  Margaret  Scot,  W.  Red, Samuel  Wardwel,  Mary
Parker,  Abigail  Falkner,  Rebecca  Ernes,  Mary  Lacy,  Ann  Fofter,  and
Abigail  Hobs  Condemned. p. 106*
Giles  Cary  Prefl  to  Death. Ibid,
A  Petition  of  Mary  Eafty  to  the  Judge. p.  107
A  Declaration  offome  that  had  confeft  themfehes  Guiity(at  Andover.)  p. 1 1 1
The  Preface  of  Mr.  C.  M.  in  Wonders  of  the  Invifible  World,  to  his  Ac-
count of  the  Tryals  of  five  of  thofe  that  were  Executed  at  Salem. p.  1 1 5

The  whole  of  his  faid  Account,  with  one  Indictment  added  to
each  Tryai,  vi%.

The  Try al  of  Mr.  Burroughs.  p.  114

The  Tryal  of  Bridget  Biihop.  p.  120

The  Tryal  of  Sufanna  Martin.  p. 1 26

The  Tryai  of  Elizabeth  How,  P>  - 1 3  2

The  Tryal  of  Martha  Carryer.  p.  136

The  Tryal  of  Wardwels  Wife  at  the  firft  Superior  Court  in  Salem,  p.  14 1
The  Tryal  of  Sarah  Dafton  at  Charles  Town,  Ibid.

The  Tryal  of 'Mary  Watkins  at  Bofton.  p. 142

The  Tryal  of  Mr.  Bennom  at  Hartford,  in  the  Collony  of  C  onnetticut.  Ibid*
A  Proclamation  for  a  Faji  in  the  Province  o/Maflachufet.  p:  14}

The  acknowledgement  of  fever  al  Jury-Men,  relating  to  the  Condemning  of
fome  for  Witches.  p, 144

A  Poftfctift  relating  to  a  Bool^Intituled,  The  Life  of  Sir  W.  Phips. p.  14s
Therein  an  Objection  Anfwercd,  vi%>  But  what  are  there  no  Witches}  p.  1 5  5


3  I  Rf


Pm  /*W  -sr'N  /s*rV  ,-s^T  /»=V  »«  «r\  cw^,  -srK  <vr?Z  «rs  #r?A  <arNf


^  £^  ^  ***V  P^i  P^  &$  P^i  ^  '^  ^  ^  0^  tO  &%


SIR,

1M>u>  /^  lefore  you  a  very  Entertaining  Story,  a  Story
which  relates  yet  more  Wonders  of  the  fnviftbte  World,
a  Story  which  tells  the  Remarkable  Afflictions  and  De-
liverance of  one  that  had  he  en  Prodigioufly  handled  by  the
Evil  Angels.  /  was  my  [elf  a  daily  Eye  Witnefs  to  a  large
part  of  thefe  Occurrences,  and  there  may  be  produced  Scores
of  Subflantial  Witnefles  to  the  moft  of  them;  yea,  I  know
not  of  any  one  Paffage  of  the  Sforys  but  what  may  be  fuffi-
ciently  Attefled.  I  do  not  Write  it  with  a  defign  of  throw-
ing it  prefently  into  the  Prefs,  but  only  to  prefer ve  the  Me-
mory of  fuch  Memorable  things ,  the  forgetting  whereof
would  neither  be  pleafing  to  God,  nor  ufefal  to  Men  ;  as  alfb
to  give  you,  with  fome  others  of  peculiar  and  obliging
Friends ,  a  fight  of  fome  Curiofities,  and  I  hope  this  Apo*
togie  will  ferve  to  Excufe  me,  if  I  mention,  as  perhaps  I  may,
when  J  come  to  a  tenth  Paragraph  in  my  Writing ,  fome
things  which  I  would  have  omitted  in  a  farther  Publication.

Cotton  Mather*


Charles!  wn  Branch,
PUBLIC  LIBRARY.

BOSTON, MASS.


ANO-


2i£a


ANOTHE

B  R  A

Piuckt  out  of

B  U  R  NTM  G

Or,  more  Wonders  of  the  Invifible  World.


Part  I. Setlion  I.
The  JfflUlions  ef  MARGARET RULE.


W


Ichin  thefe  few  years  there  died  in  the  Southern  Parts  a  Chri-
ftian  Indian,  who  notwithstanding  feme  of  his  IndUn-W^k*
fiefs,  had  fomething  of  a  better  Character  of  Verrue  and
Goodnefs,  thaa  many  of  rfur  People  can  allow  to  molt  of
their  Countrey-Men  that  profeis,  the  Chriftian  Religion.  He  had  been  a.
Zealous  Preacher  of  the  Gofpel  to  his  Neighbour-  hood  ,  and  a  fort  of
Overfeer  or  Officer,  to  whofe  Conduct  was  Gwing  very  much  of  what  good
'order  was  maintained  among  thofe  Profelited  Savages:  Tins  Man  re-
turning home  from  the  Funeral  of  his  Son,  was  Complemented  by  an
Engujh'Man,  expreffing  Sorrow  for  his  Lcfs;  noWjtho'  the  India?;  s  ufe,  upon
the  Death  of  Relations,  to  be  the-tnoft  Paflionate  and  Outrsgious  Crea-
tures in  the  World,  yet  this  Converted  Indian,  Handiomly  and  Chear-
fully  replfd  ,  Truly  I  am  for  ry,  and' I  am  not  forty ;  I  am  (br.y  that  I  bavj
Buried  a  dear  Son;  hut  I  am  not  firry  that  the  -will  of  God  is  donc.Ikjwwtbat
without  the  wiH  of  God  my  Son  could  not  havs  Dicd} and!  know  that  the  w%

B  j '  ef


%  An  Apparition  to  an  Indian.  Part  x,

of  God  is  allways  jujl  and  good «  and  fo  I  am  fatisfied.  Immediately  upon
this,  even  within  a  few  hours,  hefellhimfelf  Sick  of  aDiieafc  that  quickly
kill'd  him ;  in  the  time  of  which  Difeafe  he  call'd  his  Folks  about  him,
carneilly  perfwading  them  to  be  Sincere  in  their  Praying  unto  God,  and
beware  of  the  Drunkenncfs,  the  Idlenefs,  the  Lying,  whereby  fo  many  of
that  Nation  difgrae'd  their  Profeffion  of  Chriftianity;  adding,  that  he  was
afhamed  when  he  thought  how  little  Service  he  had  hitherto  done  for
God-  and  that  if  God  would  prolong  his  Life  he  would  Labour  to  do
better  Service,  but  that  he  was  fully  lure  he  was  now  going  to  the  Lord'
Jefus  ChriflfV/ho  had  bought  him  with  his  own  Precious  Blood;  and  for  his
part  he  long'd  to  Die  that  he  might  be  with  his  Glorious  Lord  ±  and  in
the  mid'ft  of  fuch  paffages  he  gave  up  the  Ghoft,  but  in  fuch  repute,  that
the  Englifk  People  of  good  Fafhion  did  not  think  much  of  Travelling  a
great  way  to  his  Interment.  Left  my  Reader  do  now  wonder  why  I  have
related  this  piece  of  a  Story,  I  will  now  haften  to  abate  that  Wonder,  by
telling  that  whereto  this  was  intended,  but  for  an  Introduction  :  Know
then  that  this  remarkable  Indian  being  a  little  before  he  Died  at  work  in  ;
the  Wood  making  of  Tarr,  there  appeared  unto  him  a  Black^Man,  of  a
Teirible  afpe<St,and  more  than  humane  Dimenfions,  thrcatning  bitterly  to
kill  him  if  he  would  not  promife  to  leave  off  Preaching  as  he  did  to  his
Countrey-Men,  and  promife  particularly//;^  if  he  Preached  any  wore,  he
would  fay  nothing  of  Jefus  Chrift  unto  them}  The  Indian  amaz'd,  yet  had
the  courage  toanfwer,  I  will  infptc  of  you  go  on  to  Preach  Qhn^morc  than
ever  I  did,  and  the  God  whom  Iferve  will  keep  me  that  you  fo  all  never  hurt  me.
Hereupon  the  Apparition  abating  fomewhat  of  his  riercenefs,  offered  to
the  Indian  a  Book,  of  a  confiderable  thicknefs  and  a  Pen  and  Ink,  and  faid,
that  if  he  would  now  fet  his  hand*unto  that  Book  he  would  require  no-
thing further  of  him  ;  but  the  Man  refufed  the  motion  with  indignation,
and  fell  down  upon  his  knees  into  a, Fervent  and  Pious  Prayer  unto  God
for  help  againft  the  Tempter  t  whereupon  the  Damon.  Vanittf  t.

This  is  a  Story  which  I  would  never  have  tendered  unto  my  Reader,
if  I  had  not  Received  it  from  an  honeft  and  ufeful  Englifo  Man,  who  is  !
at  this  time  a  Preacher  of  the  Gofpel  to  the  Indians,  nor  would  the  pro-
bable Truth  of  it  have  encouraged  me  to  have  tendered  it,  if  this  alio  \
had  not  been  a  fit  introduction  unto  yet  a  further  Narrative.

Setl  2.  'T was  not  much  above  a  year  or  two,  after  this  Accident  (of
which  no  manner  of  Noife  has  been  made)  that  there  was  a  Prodigious
delcent  of  Devils  upon  divers  places  near  the  Center  of  this  Province  ,'
wherein  fome  fcores  of  Miferable  People  were  Troubled  by  horrible  ap-
pearances of  a  Blacl^Many  accompanied  with  SpeElres,  wearing  thefe  and
thofe  Humane  Shapes,  who  ofFer'd  them  a  Book  to  be  by  them  fign'd,  in
token  of  their  being  /Lifted  for  the  Service  of  the  Dw7,  and  upon  the  r

deny-


Part  i.  Margaret  Rule  AfflifcJ.  j

denying  ro  do  it, they  were  Dragoon  d  with  athouland  Preternatural  Tor-
ments, which  gave  no  little  terror  to  the  beholders  of  thefe  unhappy  En-
erguments.  There  was  one  in  the  North  part  of  Boflon  feized  by  the  Evil-
Angels  many  Months  after  the  General  Storm  of  die  late  Inchantments
was  over,  and -when  the  Countrey  had  long  lain  pretty  quiet,  both  as  to
Moleftations  and  Accufations  from  the  INVISIBLE  IVQ\L  D,  her
Name  was  Margaret  Ride,  a  Young  Woman,  She  was  born  of  fober  and
honeft  Parents,  yet  Living,  but  what  her  own  Character  was  before  hef
Vifitation,  lean  fpeak  with  the  lefs  confidence  of  exactnefs,  becaufe  I
obferve  that  wherever  the Devils  have  been  Jet  loofe  to  worry  any  Poor
Creature  amongft  us,  a  great  part  of  the  Neighbourhood  prefently  fee
themfelves  to  inquire  and  relate  all  the  little  Vanities  of  their  Childhood,
with  fuch  unequal  exaggerations, as  to  make  them  appear  greater  Sinners
than  any  whom  the  Pilate  of  Hell  has  not  yet  Preyed  upon:  But  k  is  affirm 'd,
that  for  about  half  a  year  before  her  Vifitation,  fhe  was  obfervabjy  im-
proved in  the  hopeful  fymptoms  of  a  new  Creature;  She  was  become
jjirioufly  concerned  for  the  everlafting  Salvation  of  her  Soul,  and  careful
to  avoid  the  fnares  of  Evil  Company.  This  Young  Woman  had  never  fcen
the  affliction  of  Mercy  Short,  whereof  a  Narrative  has  been  already  given,
and  yet  about  half  a  year  after  the  glorious  and  fignal  deliverance  of  that
poor  Damfel,  this  Margaret  fell  into  an  affliction,  marvellous,  refembiing
hers  in  almoft  all  the  circum fiances  of  it,  indeed  the  Afflictions  were  to
much  alike,  that  the  relation  I  have  given  of  the  one, would  almoif.  ferve
as  the  full  Hiftory  of  the  other,  this  was  to  that,  little  mure  than  the  fc~
con  d  part  to  the  J  ante  Tune,  indeed  Margerets  cafe  was  in  feveral  points
lefs  remarkable  than  Mercies,  and  in  fome  other  things  the  Entertainment
did  a  little  vary.

Set~l  3.  'T was  upon  the  Lords  Day  the  icth  of  s?ptcmb?r,  in  the  Year
1693.  that  Margaret  fyilc,  after  fome  hours  of  previous  disturbance  in
the  Publick  Aflembly,fell  into  odd  Fits,  which  caufed  her  Friends  :o  car-
ry her  home,  where  her  Fits  in  a  few  hours  grew  into  a  Figure  that  fa-
tisfied  the  Spectators  of  their  being  preternatural;  fome  or  the  Neigh-
bours were  forward  enough  to  fufpect  the  rile  of  this  Mifchief  in  an
Houfe  hard-by,  where  lived  a  Miferable  Woman,  who  had  been  for-
merly Imprifoned  on  the  fufpicion  of  iVitchcraft,  and  who  had  frequent-
ly Cured  very  painfull  Hurts  by  muttering  over  them  certain  Charms,
which  Ifhall  not  indanger  the  Peyfoning  of  my  Reader  by  repeating.
This  Woman  had  the  Evening  before  Margaret  fell  into  her  Calamities
v*iy  bitterly  treated  her,  and  threatn'd  her-  but  the  hazard  of  hurting  a
poor  Woman  that  might  be  innocent,  notwithstanding  Surmitjs  that
might  have  been  more  ftrongiy  grounded  than  thofe,  causd  the  pious1
People  in  the  Vkinity  to  try  rather  whether  incefla-nc  Supplication  to  Gad

B  %  *lm:i


4  the  Black  Man  Defer  He  J.  part  r.

alone,  might  not  procure  a  quicker  and  fafer  Eafc  to  the  slfjlicled,  than  haf-
ty  Profecution  of  any  fuppos'd  Criminal,  and  accordingly  that  unexecp-
tionable  courfe  was  all  that  was  ever  followed;  yea,  which  I  look't  on  as
a  token  for  good  ,  the  Afflicted  Family  was  as  averfe  as  any  of  us  all
to  entertain  thoughts  of  any  other  courfe.

ScH  4.  The  Young  Woman  was  affaulted  by  Eight  cruel  speclres,
whereof  fhe  imagin'd  that  (he  knew  three  or  four,  but  the  reft  came  ft  ill
with  their  Faces  covered,  fo  that  (he  could  never  have  adiftinguifhing  view
of  the  countenance  of  thofe  Whom  fhe  thought  fhe  knew;  fhe  was  very
careful  of  my  reitterated  charges  to  forbear  blading  the  Names,  left  any
good  Perfon  Ihould  come  to  fuffer  any  blaft  of  Reputation  thro'  the  cun-
ning Malice  of  the  great  Accufer ;  .  never  thelefs  having  fince  privately  na-
med them  to  my  felfj  will  venture  to  fay  this  of  them,  that  they  area  fort
of  Wretches  who  for  thefe  many  years  have  gone  under  as  Violent  Pre-
fumptions  of  Witchcrafts  2s  perhaps  any  creatures  yet  living  upon  Earth ;
altho'  I  am  farr  from  thinking  that  the  Vifions  of  this  Young  Woman
were  Evidence  enough  to  prove  them  fo.  Thefe  curled  Speclres  now
brought  unto  her  a  Boo^  about  a  Cubet  long,  a  Book,  J^ed  and  thick,  but
not  very  broad,  and  they  demanded  of  her  that  fhe  would  let  her  Hand
to  that  Book,  or  touch  it  at  leaft  with  her  Hand,  as  a  Sign  of  her  becoming
a  Servant  of  the  'Devil,  upon  her  peremptory  refufal  to  do  what  they  ask-
ed,they  didliot  after  renew  the  profers  of  the  Boc^/unto  her, but  inftead
thereof,  they  fell  to  Tormenting  of  her  in  a  manner  too  Hellifh  to  be
fu&ciently  defcribed,  in  thofe  Torments  confining  her  to  her  Bed,  for  juft
Six  weeks  together,

Sect-,  5.  Sometimes,  but  not  always  together  with  the  Speclres,  there
look't  in  upon  the  Young  Woman  ( according  to  her  account)  nflwt  and
a  Black.  Man,  whom  they  cali'd  their  Mafter,  a  Wight  exactly  of  the
fame  Dimenfions  and  Complexion  and  voice,  with  the  Dhel  that  has
exhibited  himfelf  unto  other  infefted  People,  not  only  in  otlicr  parts  of
this  Country  but  alfo  in  other  Countrys,even  of  the  European  VVcrld,  as
the  relation  of  the  Enchantments  there  inform  us,  they  all  profeft  them-
felves  VafTals  of  this  Devil,and  in  obedience  unto  him  they  addrefs  them-
felves  unto  various  ways  of  Torturing  her ;  accordingly  fhe  was  cruelly
finch"1 't  with  Jnvifible  Hands  very,  often  in  a  Day,  and  the  black  and  blew
marks  of  the  pinches  became  immediately  viiible  unto  the  ftanders  by.
Befides  this,  when  her  attendants  had  left  her  without  fo  much  as  one  pin  |
about  her,thatfo  they  might  prevent  fome  fear'd  inconveniencies;  yet  (he
Would  ever  now  and  then  be  miferabiy  hurt  with  Pins  which  were  found
ftuckinto  her  Neck,  Back  and  Arms,  however,the  Wounds  made  by  the
Pms  would  in  a  few  minutes  ordinarily  be  cured;  (he  would  allol>e  ftrange-.
ly  diftorted  in  her  Joynts,  and  thrown  into  fuck  exorbitant  Comtiljions  m


Part  i.  If  he  dayi  Faft.  5;

were  aftoniflung  unto  the  Spectators  in  General ;  They  that  could-  behold-
the  doleful  condition  of  the  poor  Family  without  fenfible  companions
taught  have  Intrals  indeed  ,  but  I  am  lure  they  could  have  no.  true  Bo-
wels in  them.

Sett.  6  It  were  a  moft  Unchriftian  and  uncivil,  yea  a  moft,  ur.realo-
nable  thing  to  imagine  that  the  Fitt'-s  of  the  Young  Woman  were  but
meer  Impojl  tires:  And  I  believe  fcarce  any,  but  People  cf  a  particular.
Dlrtinefs,  will  harbour  fuch  an  Uncharitable  Cenfure;  however, becaufe
I  know  not  how  far  the  Devil  m-xy  drive  the  Imagination  of  poor  Crea-
tures when  he  has  pofTeilion  of  them,  that  at  another  time  when  they  are;
tbsmfihes  would  (corn  to  Dijjemble  any  thing,  Ifhali  now  confine  my
Narrative  unto  paflages,  wherein  there  could  be  no  room  left  for  any.
DifTi  mutation.  Of  thefe  the  firft  that  I'll  mention  (hall  be  this ;  Frpm.
the  time  that  Margaret  Jftufe  firft  found  her  felf  to  be  formally  befieged
by  the  spcRrcs  until!  the- Ninth  Day  following,  namely  from  the  Tenth.
of  September  to  the  Eighteenth,  (he  kept  an  entire,  Faft,  and  yet  (he  was  un-
to all  appearance  as  Frefh,  as  Livery,  as  Hearty, at  the  Nine  Days  End,
a$  before  they  began;  in  ail  this  time,  tho'  fhe  had  a  very  eager  Hunger
upon  her  Stomach,  yet  if  any  refrelhment  were -brought  unto  her,  her.
Teeth  would  be  fet,  and  ihe  would  be  thrown  into  many  Miferies,  In-
deed once  or  mice  or  fo  in  all  this  time,  her  Tormentors  permitted  her  tc^
fwallow  a  Mouthful  of  fomewhat  that  might  encreafe  lier  Mlferies,
whereof  a  Spoonful  of  Riim  was  the  moft  confiderable ;  but  otherwife,
as  I  faid,  her  Faft  unto  the  Ninth  day  was  very  extream  and  rigid  :  How-
ever, afterwards  there  fcarce  paffed  a  day  wherein  (lie  had  hot  liberty  to
take  fomething  or  other  for  her  Siftcntation.  And  I  muft  add  this  further,'
that  this  bufinefs  of  her  Faft  was  carried  fo,  that  it  was  impoffible  to  be
d'iffembled  without  a  Combination  of  Multitudes  of  People  unacquainted
with  one  another  to  flippoct  the  Juggle,  but  he  that  can  imagine  Inch  a
thing  of  a  Neighbourhood,  ib  fili'd  with  Vertuous  People  is  a  'Safe  Man
I  cannot  call  him  any  other.

S  c7»  7«  But  if  the  Sufferings  of  this  Young  Woman  were  not  tmpor
fture,  yet  might  .they  not  be  pure  Diftcrnper?  I  will  not  here  inquire  of
our  SAducceis,  whatlort  of  Diftempcr  'tis  fliail  ftick  the  Body  full  of  Pin's,
without  any  Hand  that  could  be  feen  to  ftick  them;  or  whether  all  the  Pin-
mak$rs  in  the  World  would  be  willing  to  be  Evaporated,  into  certain  ill
habits  of  Body  producing  a  DlPrcmper,  but.  of  the  Diftempr  my  Reader
fhall  be  Judge  when  L'have  told  him  fomething  further  of  thole  unufual
Sufferings.  1  do  believe  that  the  Evil  An£tls  do  often  take  Advantage
from  Natural  Diftempcr s  in  the  Children  of  Men  to  annoy  them  with  fuch
further  Mifchiefs  as  we  call  preternatural*  The  Malignant  Vapours  and
Humw:*  of  our  Difealed  Bodies  may  be  u fed  by  Devih,  thereinto  iniimi-

atin^


6  An  Tnvifihle  wbitijb  Powder.  Part  St-

ating as  engine  of  the  Execution  of  their  Malice  upon  thofe  Bodies ;  and
perhaps  for  this  reafon  one  Sex  may  fufTer  more  Troubles  of  fome  kinds
from  die  Invifible  World,  than  the  otlper,  as  well  as  for  that  reafon  for  which
the  Old  Serpent  made  where  he  did  his  firft  Addrefs. But  I  Pr^iy  what
xvill  you  fay  to  this ,  Margaret  j^ule  would  fometimes  have  her  Jaws  for-
cibly pulled  open,  whereupon  fomething  Invifible  would  be  poured  down
her  Throat;  we  all  fawher  fwallow,and  yet  we  faw  her  try  all  (he  could
by  Spitting,  Coughing and  Shriking  , that  fhe  might  not  iwalow,  but
one  time  the  ftauders  by  plainly  faw  fomething  of  that  odd  Liquor  it  felf
on  the  outfide  of  her  Ncc\ ; She  cried  out  of  it  as  of  Scalding  Brimftone
poured  into  her,and  the  whole  Houfe  would  Immediately  {cent  fo  hot  of
Brimftone  that  we  were  fcarce  able  to  endure  it,  whereof  there  are  fcores
of  WitnefTes;  but  the  Young  Woman  her  felf  would  be  fo  monftroully
Inflam'd  that  it  would  have  broke  a  Heart  of  Stone  to  have  feen  her  A-
gonies,/1/^  was  a  thing  that  feveral  times  happen'd  and  feveral  times  when
her  Mouth  was  thus  pulPd  open,  the  ftanders  by  clapping  their  Hands
clofe thereupon  the  diftrefTes  that  otherwife followed  would  be  diverted.
Moreover  there  was  a  whitifh  Powder  to  us  Invifible  fomtimes  caft  upon
the  Eyes  of  this  Young  Woman,  whereby  her  Eyes  would  be  extreamly
incommoded,  but  one  time  fome  of  this  Powder  was  fallen  actually  Vifi-
ble  upon  her  Cheek,  from  whence  the  People  in  the  Room  wiped  it  with
their  Handkerchiefs,  and  fomtimes  the  Young  Woman  would  alfo  be  fo
bitterly  fcorched  with  the  unfeen  Sulphur  thrown  upon  her,that  very  (en-
able B lifters  would  be  raifed  upon  her  Skin,  whereto  her  Friends- found
it  neceffary  to  apply  the  0>/'s  proper  for  common  Burning,  but  the  moft
of  thefe  Hurts  would  be  cured  in  two  or  three  days  at  farrheft :  I  think  I
may  without  Vanity  pretend  to  have  read  not  a  few  of  the  beft  Syftem's  of
Phyficl^thzt  have  been  yet  feen  in  thefe  American  Regions,  but  I  mull  con-
fefs  that  I  have  never  yet  learned  the  Name  ef  the  Natural  Diftemper,
whereto  thefe  odd  fymptoms  do  belong :  However  I  might  fuggeft  perhaps
many  a  Natural  Medicine,  which  would  be  of  lingular  ufe  againlt  many
■  of  them.

Se&+ ;■%  But  there  fell  out  fome  other  matters  farr  beyond  the  reach  of
'Natural  &$ftempcr:  This  Margaret  I^ule  once  in  tne  middle  of  the  Night
Lamented  fadly  that  the  Speclres  ih reamed  the  Drowning  of  a  Young
Man  in  the  Neighbourhood,  whom  fhe  named  unto  the  Company:  well
it  was  afterwards  found  that;  at  that  very  time  this  Young  Man,  having
been  preft  on  Board  a  Man  of  War  then  in  the  Harbour,  was  out  of  fome
diflatisfadtion  attempting  to  lwim  alhoar,and  he  had  been  Drowned  in  the
attempt,  if  a  Boat  had  not  feaibnabiy  taken  him  iip^it  was  by  computati-
on a  minute  or  two  after  the  Young  Womans  difcourfe  of  the  Drowning,
that  the  Young  Man  took  the  Water; At  another  time  (he  told  us  that

tfee


Parti.  An  Invisible  Animal  felt.  y

the  SpcSlres  bragg'd  and  laughed  in  her  hearing  about  an  exploit  they  had
lately  done,  by  dealing  from  a  Gentleman  his  Will  foon  after  he  had
written  it;  and  within  a  few  hours  after  fhe  had  fpoken  this  there  came
to  me  a  Gentleman  with  a  private  complaint,that  having  written  his  Will
it  was  unaccountably  gone  out  of  the  way,  how  or  where  he  could  not  I-
magine;and  befides  ail  this,  there  were  wonderful  No ifes  every  now  and
then  made  about  the  Room,  which  our  People  could  Afcribe  to  no  other
Authors  but  the  spectres,  yea,  the  Watchers  affirm  that  they  heard  thofe
fiends  clapping  of  their  hands  together  with  an  Audiblcncfs,  wherein  they
could  not  be  Impofed  upon :'  And  once  her  Tormentors  pull'd  her  up  to
the  deling  of  the  Chamber,  and  held  her  there  before  a  very  Numerous
Company  of  Spectators,  who  found  it  as  much  as  they  could  all  do  to  pull
her  down  again.  There  was  alfo  another  very  furpriiing  circumftance
about  her,  agreeable  to  what  we  have  not  only  Read  in  feveral  Hiftories
concerning  the  Imps  that  have  been  Imployed  in  Witchcraft ;  but  alfo
Known  in  fome  of  our  own  afflidted  :  iVe  once  thought  we  perceived  ferns-
thing ft ir  upon  her  Pillow  at  a  little  diftanccfrom  her,  whereupon  one  prefeht
laying  his  hand  there,  he  to  his  horror  apprehended  that  he  felt,  tho'  none
could  fee  k,a  living  Creature,not  altogether  unlike  a  I{at, which  nimbly  efcafd
from  him  :  and  there  were  direrfe  other  Perfons  who  were  thrown  into
a  great  confternationby  feeling,  as  they  Judgd,at  other  times  the  fame  In-
vijible  Animal.  ,

S:cl.  9,  As  it  has  been  with  a  Thoufand  other  Inchanted  People,  fo  it
was  with  Margaret  Rule  in  this  particular.that  there  were  feveral  words
which  her  Tormentors  would  not  let  her  hear,efpecially  the  word  Pray  .or
Prayer.and  yerfhe  could  fo  hear  the  letters  of  thofe  words  diftindHy  men-
tioned as  to  kaow  what  they  ment.  The  (landers  by  were  forced-fometimes
thus  in  difcourfe  to  fpell  a  word  to  her,  but  becaufe  there  were  fome  (o
ridiculous  as  to  count  it  a  fort  of  Spell  or  zCharm  for  any  thus  to  accom-
modate rhemfelves  to  the  capacity  of  the  Sufferer,  little  of  this  kind  was
done.  But  that  which  was  more  lingular  in  this  matter,  was  that  (he  could
not  ufe  thefe  words  in  thofe  penetrating  difcourfes,  wherewith  (he  would
iomctimes  addrefs  the  Spectres  that  were  about  her.  She  would  fometimes
for  a  long  while  together  apply  her  felf  to  the  Spectres,  whom  (he  fuppo-
led  the  WkchtS,with  fuch  Exhort  of  ions  to  Repentance  as  would  have  mel-
*cd  an  Heart  of  Adamtnt  to  have  heard  them;  her  {trains  of  Expre/iion
and  Argument  were  truly  Extraordinary ;  A  Perfon  perhaps  of  the  belt
Education  aad  Experience  and  of  Attainments  ninth  beyond  hers  could
not  have  exceeded  them;  r.everthelefs  when  (he  came  to  tfidc  Words  God,
Lord,  Chrifi,  Good,  Repent  and  fome  other  fuch,  her  Mouth  could  riot
utter  them,  whereupon  Hie  would  fomtimes  in  an  Angry  Parcnthefi?  cpm-
plain  of  their  Wickednefs  in  flopping  that  kVord,  but  lie  would  then  go

on


8  A  White  Spirit.  Part r.

on  with  ibrne  other  Terms  that  would  ferve  to  tell  what  (he  ment.  And  X
.believe  that  if  the  moft  fufpicious  Perfon  in  the  world  had  beheld  all  the
Circumftances  cf  this  matter, he  would  have  faid  it  could  not  have  been,
dhlembled,

Seel.  10.  Not  only  in  the  Swedifo,  but  alfo  in  the  Salem  Witchcraft
the  Inchanted  People  have  talked  much  of  a  Wnte  Spirit  from  whence
they  received  marvellous  Affiftanecs  in  their  Miferies;  what  lately  befel
Mercy  Shorn  from  the  Communications  ©f  fucha  spirit,  hath  been  the  juft
Wonder  of  us  all,  but  by  fuch  a  Spirit  Was  Margaret  I{ule  now  alio  viii-
ted.  She  fays  that  flie  could  never  fee  his  Face;  but  that  flie~had  a  fre-
quent view  of  hjs  bright,  Shining  and  Glorious  Garments;  heftood  by  her  '
'Bed-fide  continually  heartning  and  Comforting  of  her  and  counfelling  her
to  maintain  her  Faith  and  hope  in  God,  and  never  comply  with  the  temp-
tations of  her  Adverfaries ;  fhe  fays  he  told  her  that  God  had  permitted  her
Afflictions  to  befall  her  for  the  everlafting  and  unfpcakable  good  of  her  own
Soul,  *tnd  for  the  good  of  many  others,  and  for  his  own  Immortal  Glory >  and
that  (he  fhould  therefore  be  of  good  Chear  and  be  ajfured  of  a  fpeedy  deliver
ranee ;  And  the  wonderful  refolution  of  mind  wherewith  {he  encoun-  .
rered  her  AfHiclions  were  but  agreeable  to  fuch  expectations.  Moreover
a  Minifter  having  one  Day  with  fome  Importunity  Prayed  for  the  deli-  \
verance  of  this  Young  Woman,  and  pleaded  that  fhe  belong'd  to  his  Flock  ,
and  charge;  he  had  fo  far  a  right  unto  her  as  that  he  was  to  do  the  part  j
of  a  Minifter  of  our  Lord  for  the  bringing  of  her  home  unto  God ;  on-  *
ly  now  the  Devil  hindred  him  in  doing  that  which  he  had  a  right  thus  tq
do,  and  whereas  He  had  a  better  Title  unto  her  to  bring  her  home  to  God
than  the  Divel  could  have  unto  her  to  carry  her  away  from  the  Lord,  he
therefore  humbly  applied  himfelf  unto  God,  who  alone  could  right  this
matter, with  a  fuit  that  ihe  might  be  refcued  out  of  Satans  Hands  ;  Im-
mediatly  upon  this,tho'  fhe  heard  nothing  ®f  this  tranfaction  fhe  began  to
call  that  Minifter  her  Father,  and  that  was  the  Name  whereby  fhe  every
day  before  all  forts  of  People  diftinguifhed  him  :  the  occaflon  of  it  Ihe
fays  was  this,  the  white  Spirit  prefently  upon  this  tranfa&ion  did  after
this  manner  fpeak  to  her,  Margaret,  you  now  are  to  takf  notice  that  (fuch
a  Man)  is  your  Father,  God  has  given  you  to  him,  do  you  from  this  time  lool{
upon  him  as  your  Father,  obey  him,  regard  him  as  your  Father,  follow  his  duti-
Jcls  and  you- fio all  do  well ;  And  tho'  there  was  one  pafTage  more,  which  I
do  as  little  know  what  to  make  of  as  any  of  the  Reft,  I  am  now  going
to  relate  it;  mere  than  three  times  have  J  feen  it  fulfilled  in  the  Delive-
rance of  "Inchanted  and  Polfeft  Perfons,whom  the  Providence  of  God  has
tiait  it:t<3  my  way.that  their  Deliverance  could  not  be  obtained  before  the
third  Fafi  kept  fqr  them,  and  the  third  day  Mil  obtain'd  the  Deliverance,
aI:;ho'  I  B^VC  thought  g'i  fofeecbtng  of  the  l-crd  thrieftwkw  kuffered  by  Sad


Part  i.  The  Black  Man  teats  the  Spectres.  9

tan,  yet  I  muft  earneftly  Intreat  all  my  Readers  to  beware  of  any  fuper-
ftirious conceits  upon  the  Number  Three,  if  our  God  will  hear  us  upon
once  Praying  and  Falling  before  him  'tis  well,  and  if  he  will  not  vouch-
fafe  his  Mercy  upon  our  thrice  doing  fo,yet  we  muft  not  befo  difcouraged
as  to  throw  by  our  Devotion  but  if  the  Soveraign  Grace  of  our  Gcd  will
in  any  particular  Inftances  count  our  Patience  enough  tryed  when  we
have  Solemnly  waited  upon  him  for  any  determinate  Number  of  times,
who  fhall  fay  to  him,  what  doeft  thou,  and  if  there  (hall  beany  Number
of  Inftances,  wherein  this  Grace  of  our  God  has  exactly  hoiden  the  fame
courfe,  it  may  have  a  room  in  our  humble  Obfervations,  I  hope,  without
any  Superftition  ; I  fay  then  that' after  Margaret  fyt'e  had  been  more
than  five  weeks  in  her  Miseries,  this  tViHti  Spirit  faid  unto  her.  iVcll  this
day  Juch  a  Man  ('whom  he  named )  has  keep  a  third  day  for  you,  delive-
rance, now  be  of  good  char  you  foall  fpeedilybe  delivered. I  inquired  whe-
ther what  had  been  {aid  of  tha:Man  were  true,  and  I  gained  exa£fcand
certain  Information  that  it  was  precilely  fo,  but  I  doubt  left  in  relating
this  PafTage  that  I  have  i&fed  more  opennefs  than  a  Friend  fliould  be  treat-
ed with,  and  for  that  caufe  I  have  concealed  feveral  of  the  moft  memo-
rable things  that  have  occurred  not  only  in  this  but  in  fome  former  Ha-
tories,  altho  indeed  I  am  not  fo  well  fatisfied  about  the  true  nature  of
this  white  Spirit,  as  to  count  that  I  can  do  a  Friend  much  Honour  by  re*
porting  what  notice  this  white  Spirit  may  have  thus  taken  of  him.

Sett.  1 1.  On  the  laftday  of  the  Week  her  Tormentors, as  fhe  thought
and  faid, approaching  towards  her, would  be  forced  ftiil  to  recoil  andu*e-
tire  as  unaccountably  unable  to  meddle  with  her,  and  they  would  retice
to  the  Fire  fide  with  their  Poppets  ;  but  going  to  flick  Pins  into  thofe
Poppets;  they  could  not  (according  to  their  vifions )  make  the  Pins  to  en-
ter, (he  infulted  over  them  with  a  very  Proper  derifion,  daring  them  now
to  do  their  worft,  whilft  flie  had  the  fatisfaction  to  fee  their  Bltcl^  Moft-
er  ftrike  them  arid  kick  themjikean  Over  fee  r  of  fo  many  Negro' s>  to  make
them  to  do  their  work,  and  renew  rhe  marks  of  his  vengeance  on  them,
when  they  failed  of  doing  of  it. .  At  laft  being  as  it  were  tired  with  their
inefFecluai  Attempts,  to  mortifie  her  they  furioufly  (aid,  Well  you  fo  ant
be  the  laft.  And  after  a  paufe  theyadded,  Go,  and  the  Devil  go  with  you,  ws
can  do  no  more  ;  whereupon  they  flew  out  of  the  Room  and  (he  returning
perfectly  to  her  felf  molt  affectionately  gave  dianks  to  God  for  her  deli-
verance^ her  Tormentors  left  her  extream  wed\  and  fnnttziid  overwhel-
med with  Vapours, which  would  not  only  caufe  her  fomctimes  to  Swoen
away,  but  alio  now  and  then  for  a  little  while  difcompofe  the  reafona-
blenefs  of  her  Thoughts;  Nevertheleis  her  former  troubles  returned  not,
but  We  are  now  waiting  to  lee  the  good  effects  of  thofe  troubles  upon  the
Souls  of  ail  concerned f  And  now  I  iupnofe  that  fome  of  our  Learned  wit*

C  *V


io  An  Evidence  of  the  being  of  a  Go  J.  Part U

lings  of  the  Coffee-Houfe,for  fear  left  tliefe  proofs  of  an  Invifibic-wcrld  fhould
fpoil  fotiie  of  their  fport,  will  endeavour  to  turn  them  all  into  fport,  for
which  Buffdonary  their  only  pretence  will  be,  they  cant  underjtand  how
fitch  things  as  t he fe could  be  done,  whereas  indeed  he  that  is  but  Philofo-
pher  enough  to  have  read  but  one  Little  Tre'atife,  Published  in  the  Year
1656.  by  no  other  Man  than  the  Chyrurgion  of  an  Army,  or  but  one  \
Chap,  of  Belmont,  which  I  will  not  quote  at  this  tjme  too  particularly,
may  give  a  far  more  intelligible  account  of  thefe  Appearances  than  moit
of  thefe  Blades  can  give  why  and  how  their  Tobacco  makes  'em  Spit ;  or
which  way  the  flame  of  their  Candle  becomes  illuminating,  as  for  that
cavil,  the  VVorld  would  be  undone  if  the  Devils  could  have  fuch  power  as  they
feem  to  have  in  fever al  of  our  Jlories,  it  may  be  Anfwered  that  as  to  many
things  the  Lying  Devils  have  only  known  them  to  be  done,  and  then
pretended  unto  the  doing  of  ■  thofe  things,  but  the  true  and  beft  Anfwer
is,  that  by  thefe  things  we  only  fee  what  the  Devils  could  have  powers  to
do,  if  the  great  God  fhould  give  them  thofe  powers,  whereas  now  cur
Hiftories  affords  a  Glorious  Evidence  for  the  baling  of  a  God,  the  World
would  indeed  be  undone^nd  horribly  undone,  if  thefe  Devils,whonow  and .
then  get  liberty  to  pky  fome  very  mifchievous  pranks,  were  not  under  a
daily  reftraint  of  fome  AlmightySuperior  from  doing  more  of  fuch  Mifchiefs.
Wherefore  infeead  of  ail  Apiln  flouts  and  jeers  at  Hiftories,  which  have
fuch  undoubted  confirmation,  as  that  no  Man  that  has  breeding  enough
to  regard  the  Common  Laws  of  Humane  Society,  will  ofrer  to  doubt  of  J
'em;  it  becomes  us  rather  to  adore  the  Goodnefs  ol  God,  who  does  not
permit  fuch  things  every  day  to  befall  us  all,  as  he  fometimes  did  permit
to  befall  feme  few  of  our  miferable  Neighbours.

Sect,  12.  And  what  after  all  my  unwearied  Cares  and  Pains,  to  ref~
cue  the  Miferable  from  the  Lions  and  Bears  of  Hell,  which  had  fiezedthem,, ,
and  after  all  my  Studies  to  difappoint  the  Devils  in  their  defigns  to  con-
found my  Neighbourhood,  muft  I  be  driven  to  the  neceffity  of  an  Apo--
logic}  Truly  the  hard  reprefentati&ns  where  with  fome  III  Aden  have  reviled
my  conduct,  and  the  Countenance  which  other  Men  have  given  t©  thefe  re-s
prefentatiens,  oblige  me  to  give  Mankind  fome  account  of  my  Behavi-
our ;  No  Chriftian  can,  I  fay  none  but  evil  workers  can  criminate  my
viiiting  fuch  of  my  poor  flock  as  have  at  any  time  fallen  under  the  terri-
ble and  feniible  moleftations of  Evil-Angels;  let  their  Afflictions  have  been
what  they  will, I  could  n6t  have  anfwered  it  unto  my  Glorious  Lord,  if
I  had  withheld  my  juft  Ccunfcls  and  Comforts  from  them ;  and  if  1  have  a£J
fo  with  fome  exadlnefs  obferv'd  the  methods  of  the  InvifMe-World,  when
they  have  thus  become  obfervable,  I  have  been  but  a  Servant  of  Mankind
in  doirg  fo;  yea  no  lefs  a  Perfon  than  the.  Venerable  Baxter,  has  more
•  than  once  or  twice  in  the  moft  Publick  manner  invited  Mankind  to  thank

Hid


Part  i.  Glorious Advantages,  H

mc  for  that  Service.  I  have  not  been  infenfible  of  a  greater  danger  at-
tending me  in  this  fulfilment  of  my  Miniftry,  than  if  1  had  been  to  take
Ten  Thoufand  fteps  over  a  Rocky  Mountain  fill'd  with  Rattle-Snails,
but  I  have  confider'd,he  that  is  wile  will  obferve  things,  and  the  Surpri-
sing Explication  and  confirmation  of  the  biggeft  part  of  the  Bible,  which
J  bavjfeen  given  in  thefe  things  fas  abundantly  paid  mc'fov  obferving  them.
Now  in  my  vifiting  of  the  Miserable,  I  was  always  of  this  opinion  that
we  were  Ignorant  of  what  Powers  the  Devils  might  have  to  do  their  mif-
ehiefs  in  the  fnapes  of  fome  that  had  never  been  explicitly  engaged  in  Di-
abolical Confederacies,  and  that  therefore  tho'  many  Witchcrafts  had  been
fairly  detected  on  Enquiries  provoked  and  begun  by  Specter al  Exhibitions^
yet  we  could  not  eafily  be  too  jealous  of  the  Snares  laid  for  us  in  the  de-
vices of  Satan ;  the  World  knows  how  many  Pages  I  have  Compofed  and
Publifhed,  and  particular  Gentlement  in  the  Government  know  how  many
Letters  I  have  written  to  prevent  the  exceflive  Credit  of  Specteral  Accu-
sations, wherefore  I  have  itill  charged  the  Afflicted  that  they  (hould  Cry
out  of -no  body  for  Afffi&ing  of  'em.  But  if  that  this  might  be  any  Advan-
tage they  might  privately  tell  their  minds  to  fome  one  Perfon  of  difcretion
enough  to  make  no///  uje  of  their  communications,  accordingly  there  has
been  this  eftecl  of  it,  that  the  Name  of  No  one  good  Perfon  in  the  World
ever  come  under  any  blemilh  by  means  of  any  Afflicted,  Perfon  that  fell
under  my  particular  cognilance,  yea  no  one  Man,  Woman  or  Child  ever
came  into  any  trouble  for  the  fake  of  any  that  were  Afflicted  after  I  had
once  begun  to  look  after  em;  how  often  hate  I  had  this  thrown  into  my
difh,that  many  years  ago  I  had  an  opportunity  to  have  brought  forth  fuch
People  as  have  in  the  late  ftorm  of  Witchcraft  been  complain'd  of,  but
that  I  fmother'd  all,  and  after  that  ftorm  was  rais'd  at  Salem,  I  did  my
.  lelf  offer  to  provide  Meat,  Drink  and  Lodging  for  no  lefs  than  Six  of
the  Afflicted, that  fo  an  Experiment  might  be  made,  whether  Prayer  with
Tafting  upon  the  removal  of  the  diftrefted  might  not  put  a  Period  to  the
trouble  then  riling,  without  giving  the  Civil  Authority  the  trouble  of  pro-
secuting thofe  things  which  nothing  but  a  Conicientious  regard  unto  the
cries  of  Miferabie  Families,  could  have  overcome  the  Reluciancies  of
the  Honourable  Judges  to  meddle  with  •  In  fhort  I  do  humbly  but  free-
ly affirm  it,there  is  not  that  Man  living  in  this  World  who  has  been  more
defirous  than  the  poor  Man  I  to  jhelter  my  Neighbours  from  the  Incon-
veniencies  of  Specveral  Outcries,  yea  I  am  very  jealous  I  have  d one  fo  much
that  way  as  to  Sin  in  what  I  have  done  ,fuchhave  been  the  Co  ward  ize  and
Fearfulnefs  whereunto  my  regard  unto  the  diifatisfadllons*of  other  Peo-
ple has  precipitated  me.  I  know  a  Man  in  the  World,  who  has  thought
he  has  been  able  to  Convict  fome  fuch  Hatches  as  ought  to' Dye,  but  his
?*efpe&  unto  the  Publick  Peace  has  caufed  him  rather  to  try  whether  He

C  2  cou'.d


ti%  Oppofsrs  explained  of.  Part  i.

^ottld  not  renew  them  by  Repentance: And  as  I  have  been  Studious  to  de-
feat the -Devils  of  their  expectations  to  fet  people  together  by  the  Ears,
rhus,  I  have  alfo  checked  and  quell' d  thofe  forbidden  curiofities,  whii;h
would  have  given  the  Devil an  invitation  to  have  tarried  amongft  us,
when  I  have  leen  wonderful  Snares  laid  Jor  Curious  People,  by  the  fecret
and  future  things  difcovered  from  the  Mouths  of  Damjels poffeft  with  a
Spirit  of  divination ; Indeed  I  can  recoiled:  but  one  thing  wherein  there
could  be  given  fo  much  as  a  Shadow  of  Realbn  for  Exceptions,  and  that
is  my  allowing  of  fo  many  to  come  and  fee  thole  that  were  Afflicted,  now
for  that  I  have  this  to  fay,  that  I  have  almoft  a  Thcufand  tim-s  in  treated
the  Friends  of  the  Miferable,  that  they  would  not  permit  the  Intrufion  of
any  Company,  but  fuch  as  by  Prayers  or  other  ways  might  be  helpful  to
them ;  Neverthelefs  I  have  not  absolutely  forbid  all  Company  from  com-
ing to  your  Haunted  Chambers,  partly  becaufe  the  Calamities  of the
Families  were  fuch  as  required  the  Affiftance  of  many  Friends;  partly  be-
caufe I  have  been  willing  that  there  fhould  be >  difintincfiea ]  Witneffcs  of  all
forts,  to  confute  the  Calumnies  of  fuch  as  would  fay  all  was  but  Impofiwe;
and  partly  becaufe  I  law  God  had  Sanctified,  the  Spectacle  of  the  Mife-
ries  on  the  Afflicted  unto  the  Souls  of  many  that  were  Spectators ,  and
it  is  a  very  Glorious  thing  that  I  have  now  to  mention  —  The  Devils
have  with  moft  horrendousoperations  broke  in  upon  our  Neighbourhood,
and  God  has  at  fuch  a  rate  over-ruled  all  the  Fury  and  Malice  of  thole
Devils,  that  all  the  Afflicted  have  not  only  been  Delivered,  but  I  hope  al-
fo favingly  brought  home  unto  God,  and  the  Reputation  of  no  one  good.  |
Perfon  in  the  World  has  been  damaged,  but  inftead  thereof  the  Souls  of  ■
many,efpecially  of  the  rifing  Generation,  have  been  thereby  awaken'd  un-  ;
to  fome  acquaintance  with  Religion,  our  young  People  who  belonged  un-|
to  the  Praying  Meetings, of  both  Sexes,  a  part  would  ordinarily  fpend  J
.  whole  Nights  by  the  whole  Weeks  together  in  Prayers  and  Pfalms  upon  1
thefe  occasions,  in  which  Devotions  the  Devils  could  get  nothing  but  like  j
Fools  a  Scourge  for  their  own  Backs,  and  ibme  fcores  of  other  young  Peo-
ple, who  were  ftrangers  to  real  Piety, were  now  (truck  with  the  lively  de-
monstrations of  Hell  evidently  fet  forth  before  their  Eyes,  when  they  faw  j
Perfons  cruelly  Frighted,  Wounded  and  Starved  by  Devils  and  Scalded  J
with  burning  Brimftone,  and  yet  fo  prcferved  in  this  tortured  Eftate  asj
that  at  the  end  of  one  Months  wretchednefs  they  were  as  able  ftill  to  un- 1
dergo  another,  fo  that  of  thefe  alio  it  might  now  be  laid,  Behold  they
Pray  in  the  whole  -  The  Devil  got  juft  nothing  -3 but  God  got  praifes,
Chrift  got  Subjects,  the  Holy  Spirit  got  Temples,  the  Church  got  Addi-
tion, and  the  Souls  of  Men  got  everlafting  Benefits;  I  nil  not  fo  vain  as
to  fay  that  any  IVlfdome  or  Vertue  of  mine  did  contribute  unto  this  good
erder  of  things  ;  But  I  am  lb  juft,  as  to  fay  I  did  not  hinder  this  Good;

• When


Part  2.  A  Letter  to  Mr.  C.  M-  ij

When  therefore  there  have  beenthofe  that  pickt -up  little  incoherent  fcraps
and  bits  of  my  Difcourfes  in  this  fruitful  difcharge  of  my  Miniftry, and
fo  traverfted  'em  in  their  abufive  Pamphlets,  as  to  perfwade  the  Town
that  I  was  their  common  Enemy  in  thole  very  points,  wherein,  if  in  any
one  thing  whatfocver  I  have  fenfibly  approved  my  felf  as  true  a  Servant
unto  'em  as  poiTibly  I  could,  tho  my  Life  and  Soul  had  been  at  Stake
for  it. Yea  to  do  like  Satan  himfelf,  by  fly,  bafe,  unpretending  Infinua-
tlon.\  as  if  I  wore  not  theMcdefty  and  Gravity  which  became  a  Minifter
of  the  GofpeJ ,  I  could  not  but  think  my  felf  unkindly  dealt  withal,  and
the  ntgle&s  of  others  to  do  mejuft-ice  in  this  affair  has  caufed  me  to  con-
clude this  Narrative  with  complaints  in  another  hearing  of  fuch  Mon-
ftrous  Injuries.


PART II.

A  Letter  to  Mr.  C.  M.

Mr.  Cotton  Mather,  Bqftonjan. llth. 1693.

7?  Ever  end  Sir,  I  finding  it  needful  on  many  accounts,  I  here  prefent  you
**-  with  the  Copy  of  that  Paper,  which  has  been  fo  much  Mifrepreien-
ted,to  the  End  that  what  fhall  be  found  defective  or  not  fairly  Reprefen-
ted,  if  any  fuch  (hall  appear,  they  may  be  fet  right,  which  Runs  thus.

September  the  j  ^th.  1693:

JN  the  Evening  when  the  Sun  was  withdrawn,  giving  place  to  Darkticfs  to
*•  fuccced,  I  with  fame  others  were  drawn  by  curiofity  to  fee  Margaret  Rule,
and  fo  much  the  rather  becaufe  it  was  reported  M\  M  -  •  -  -  would  be  there
that  Night:  Being  come  to  her  Fathers  Houfe  into  the  Chamber  wherein  foe
was  in  Bed,  found  her  of  a  healthy  countenance  of  about  f event e en  Tears  Old,
lying  very  ft  ill, and  [peaking  very  little,  what  Jhe  did  fay  feem  d  as  if /he  were
Light-Headed.  Then  Mr.  M-  --  Father  and  Son  came  up  and  others  with
them,  in  the  whole  were  about  30  or  40  Perfons,  they  being  fat ,  the  Father
on  a  Stool \  and  the  Son  upon  the  Bedfide  by  her,  the  Son  began  to  queftion  her,
Margaret/Jlule,  bow  do  you  do?  then  a  paufe  without  any  anfwer.  Quef-
tion. H?hat  do  there  a  great  many  Hatches  fit  upon  you}  Anfwer.  Yes.  Q.
Do  you  not  \now  that  there  is  a  hard  Mafier  ?  Then  lhe  was  in  a  Fit ;  He
laid  his  hand  up»n  her  Face  and  Nqfe,but,as  he  faid,  without  perceivingBreath  .
then  he  brujtid  her  on  the  Face  with  his  Glove,  and  rubb'd  her  Stomach  {her
Br e aft  not  covered  with  the  Bed-chaths)  and  bid  others  do  fo  too,  and  faid

it


14  ^  Letter  to  Mr.  C.  M.  Part  2.

it  edfcd  her,  then  foe  revived.  Q.  Don't  ysu  know  there  is  a  hard  Mafler  ?
A.  Yes,  Reply  j  Don' 't  ferve  that  hard  Maftcr,  yoit  tyim  who.  Q.  Do  you
believe?  Then  again Jhe  was  in  a  Fit,  and  he  again  rid?  d  her  Breaft,  8cc.  (a-
bout  this  time  Margaret  Perd  an  attendant  ajffted  him  in  rubbing  of  her.  The
Afftifted-fpa\e  anger ely  to  her  faying  don't  you  meddle  with  me,  and  haftily
put'  away  bet  hand)  he  wrought  his  Fingers  before  her  Eyes  and  asked  her  if
Jhe  favp  the  Witches}  A.  Not  Q.  Do  you  believe  ?  A.  Yes;  Q.  Do  you
believe  in  you  know  who  ?  A*  Yes,  Q.  Would  you  have  other  People  do  Jo
too,  io  believe  in  you  know  who?  A.  Yes,  Q.  Who  is  it  that  AffliHs  you  ?
A.  I  kjiow  not,  there  is  a  great  many  of  them  {about  this  lime  the  Father
queftion'd  if  ftje  knew  the  Speflres?  An  Attendant  J aid,  if  fie  did  floe  would
not  tell;  The  Son  -proceeded)  Q.  You  havejeen  the  Blacl^man  bant  you?  A:
No,  Reply;  1  hope  you  never  fh  all.  Q.  You  have  had  a  Book,  offered  you,
h  ant  you?  A.  No,  Q.  The  brufloing  of  you  gives  you  cafe,  don t  it  ?  A.fYcs.
She  turned  her  felfe,  and  a  little  Groan  d.  (J  Now  the  Witches  Scratch  you
and  Finch  you,  and  Bite  you,  don  t  they?  A.  7es,  then  he  put  his  Ha?  id  up-
on her  Breaft  and  Belly,  viz.  en  the  deaths  over  her,  and  felt  a  Living  thing.
as  he  faid,' which  moved  the  Father  alfo  to  feci,  andjome  ethers-,  Q.  Don't
ycu  feel  the  Live  thing  in  the  Bed}  A.  No.  Reply,  flat  is  only  Fancie.  Q.
the  great  company  of  People  increafe  your  Torment,  don  t  they}  A.  Yes.  The
Pc(p:e  about  were  dejired  to  withdraw.  One  Woman  faid^I  am  fur  e  I  am  no
Witch,  I  will  not  go  $  fo  others,  fo  none  withdrew.  Q^  Shall  we  go  to  Prayers,
Thenfhe  lay  in  a  Fit  as  before.  But  this  time  to  revive  her,  they  waved  a  Hat
and  brufloed  her  Bead  and  Pillow  therewith  ,  Q.  Shall  we  go  toPi\AY,  &c.
Spelling  the  Word.  A.  Yes,  The  Father  went  to  Prayer  for  pahaps  half  an
Hour,  .chiefly  againfl  the  Power  of  the  Devil  and  Witchcraft,  and  that  Cod
would  bring  out  the  Afftitlers:  during  Prayer-time,  the  Son  flood  by \  and  when
they  thought  Jhe  was  in  a  Fit,  rub'd  her  and  brufh 'dher  as  before,  and  beckr
ned  to  others  to  do  the  like,  after  Prayer  he  proceeded ;  Q.  You  did  not  hear
when  we  were  at  Prayer ,  did  you?  A.  Yes.  You  dent  hear  always  ?  ycu
dent  hear fotne  times  pa  ft  a  Word  or  two,  d»  yon  ?  A,  'N»«.  Then  turning  him
abetttfaid,  this  is  jifl another  Mercy  Short:  Margaret  Perd  reply 'd,  (he
was  net  like  her  in  her  Fits*  Q."  What  does  foe  eat  or  drink,  ?.  A.  Not  cat
at  ally  but  drink,  Rurru  Then  he  udmonifhed  the  younz  People  to  take  war-
'ning,  8cc  Saying  it;  was" a  fad  thing  to  be  fo  Tormented  by  the  Devil  and:
his  Inftruments:  A  Young- m an  prcfent  in  the  habit  of  a  Seaman,rcplyd  this
is  the  Devil  all  over,  Than  the  Miniflers  withdrew.  Soon  after  they  were  gon
the  Afflitled  defired  the  Women  to  he  gone,  faying,  that  the  Company  of  the
\Nlen  was  mt  offenfive  to  her,  and  having  held  of  the  hand  of  a  Young-man,
faid  to  have  been  her  Sweet-heart  formerly,  who  was  withdrawing ;  She  pull'  d
him  again  into  his  Seat,  faying  he  Jhoiddnop  go  te  Night.

Set


A  Later  to  Mr*  C.  M.  i  5

September  the  1 9th. I693.

rills  Night  I  return?  a  my  Vifit\  and  found  her  rather  of  a  frefloer  Course-
name  than  before,  about  eight  Perfons  prefent  with  her,  fhe  was  in  a  Fit
Scrccming  and  making  a  Noife :  Tiorec  or  four  Perfons  rub\i  and  bruftid  her
with  their  hands,  they  (aid  that  the  bufning  did  pit  them  away,;f  they  brufo\l
or  rub'd  in  the  right  place  $  therefore  they  brujtid  and  rub\!  in  [ever at  'pla-
ces, and  f aid  that  when  they  did  it  in  the  right  place  fie  could  fetch  her  Breath,
and  by  that  they  knew.  She  being  come  to  her  felf  was  fcon  in  a  merry  tally-
ing; Fit.  A  Young-man  cams  in  and  asl£d  her  how  foe  did}  She  anfvered  ve-
ry bad,  but  at  prefent  a  little  better  ;  he  fcon  told  her  he  muft  be  g&n  and  bid
her  good  Night,  at  which  foe  fcem  d  troubled  faying,that  fros  Uk?d  his  Company ;
and  [aid  fhe  would  not  have  him  go  till  fhe  was  well;  adding,  for  If  hall  Die
when  you  are  gon.  Then  foe  complained  they  did  not  put  her  en  a  clean  Cap,
but  let  her  lyfo  like  a  Be  aft,  faying,  fhe  fhould  lofe  her  Fellows.  She  J aid  fhe
wondered  any  People  fhould  be  fo  Wicked  as  to  think  foe  was  not  Afflicted,
but  to  think,,  fhe  Diffembled,  a  Young-woman  anfwercd  Yes,  if  they  were  to
fee  you  in  this  merry  Fit,  they  would  fay  you  Diffembled  indeed ;  She  reply'' d
Mr.  M — faid  this  was  her  laughing  time,  foe  muft  laugh  now:  She  (aid
Mr.  M  —  had  been  there  this  Evening,  and  foe  enquired,  how  long  he  had
been  gon  ?  She  faid,  he  ftafd  alone  with  her  in  the  room  half  an  Hour,  a?id
faid  that  he  told  her  there  were  feme  that  came,  for  Sf'es,  and  to  report  abcu*
Town  that  foe  was  not  Afflitlcd*  That  during  the  faid  time  fhe  had  no  Fit y
that  he  asked  her  if  foe  knew  hew  many  times  he  had  Frayed  for  her  to  Day  ?
And  that  poe  anfwercd  that  fhe  cculdnot  tell  ;  and  that  he  replyed  he  had -Pray-
ed for  her  Nine  times  to  Day;  the  Attendantsfaid  that  foe  was  femetimes  in
a  Fit  that  none  could  open  her'Jvynts^  and  that  there  came  an  Old  Ircn-jawd
Woman  and  try'd,  but  could  not  do  it ;  they  iikpwije  faid,  that  her  Plead  could
net  be  moved  fr  0771  the  Pillow;  1  try  d  to  move  her  Heads  and  found  no  more
difficulty  than  another  Bedies  (andfo  did  others)  but  wis  not  willijfg  to  offend
by  lifting  it  up,  one  being  reproved  for  endeavouring  it,  they  faying  3$ngri:y
you  will  break,  her  Necl^;  The  Attendants  faid  Mr.  M  —  vou'd  nkt  go  t)
Prayer  with  her  when  People  were  in  the  [{od??i,  as  they  did  me  Nigut,  that
Night  he  felt  the  Live  Creature.  Margaret  Perd  and  another,  fid  theyfmeii
Brirnftcne  ;  I  emd  others  faid  we  did  not  j 'moll  any.  then  they  faid  they  did
not  knew  what  it  was :  This  M^Q^xctjaid,  foe  w;fhfd  fhe  had  been  here  when
Mr.  M —  was  here,  another  Attendant  faid 3  if  y-.u  had  been  here  ym  might
net  have  been  permitted  in,  for  her  own  Mother  was  rvt  fu'feredto  be  prcjfjii.
Sir,  after  the  foreft  Adlldrion  and  greateit  Blemith  to  Religion  that  tv
ver  befel  this  Countrcy,  and  after  molt  Men  began  to  Fear  that  tome  un-
due fteps  had  been  taken,  and  after  His  Excellency  ( wirhthelr  Majeftks
Approbation  as  is  faidy  had  put  a  flop  re  Executions,  and  Men  began


i 6  A  Letter  t$  Mr.  C.  M.  Part

to  hope  there  would  never  be  a  return  of  the  like ;  finding  thele  Accounts
to  contain  in  them  ibmething  extraordinary,  I  writ  them  down  the  fame
Nights  in  order  to  attain  the  certainty  of  them,  and  loon  found  them  fo
confirmed  that  I  have  (befides  other  Demonftracions)  the  whole,  under
the  I  lands  of  two  Perfons  are  ready  to  atteft  the  Truth  of  it,  but  not  fa-
tisfied  herewith;  I  (hewed  them  to  fome  of  your  particular  Friends  that
fo  I  might  have  the  greater  certainty :  But  was  much  furprized  with  the
MefTage  you  fent  me,  that  I  fliould  be  Arretted  for  Slander,  and  at  your
calling  me  one  of  the  worft  of  Lyars,  making  it  Pulpit  news  with  the
Name  of  Pernicious  Libels,  &c. This  occafion'd  my  firft  Letter.

September  the  iytht  1693.
Reverend  SIR,
J  Having  written  fiom  the  "Mouths  of  fever al  Perfons,  who  affirm  they  were
*-  prefent  with  Margaret  Rule,  the  1 3th,  Inftant,  her  Anfwers  and  'Beha-
viours, &c. And  having  /hewed  it  u  fever  al  of  my  Friends,  as  alfo  yours,
and  underfttnding  you  are  offended  at  it  y This  is  to  acquaint  you,  that  if
you  and  any  one  particular  Friend,  will  pleafe  to  meet  me  and  fome  other  In-
different Perfon  with  me,  at  Mr.  Wilkins,  or  at  Ben.  HarrisV,  you  inti
mating  the  time,  ifhiU  be  ready  there  to  read  it  to  you,  as  a'fo  a  further  Ac**
count  of  proceedings  the  19th, Infiant,  which  may  be  needful  to  prevent
Groundlefs  prejudices,  and  let  deferved  blame  be  eaft  where  it  ought  -y  From, ,
Sir,  ytiirs  in  what  I  may9  R*  C.

The  effe&s  of  which,  Sir  fnot  to  mention  that  long  Letter  only  once
read  to  me)  was,  you  fent  me  word  you  would  meet  me  at  Mr.  Wilkins
but  before  that  Anfwer,  at  yours  and  your  Fathers  complaint,  I  was
brought  before  their  Majefties  Juftice,  by  Warrant,as  for  Scandalous  Li-
bels againft  your  Mf,  and  was  bound  over  to  Anfwer  at  SeiTions;  I  do
not  remember  you  then  objected  againft  the  Truth  of  what  I  had  wrote,
but  aflerted  it  was  wronged  by  omiflions,  which  if  it.  were  fo  was  paft
any  Power  of  mine  to  remedy,  having  given  a  faithful  account  of  all
that  came  to  my  knowledge;  And  Sir,  that  you  might  not  be  with-
out fome  Cognifance  of  the  reafons  why  Ttook  fo  much  pains  in  it,  astt
alfo  for  my  own  Information,  if  it  might  have  been,  I  wrote  to  you  my  1
fecond  Letter  to  this  effed.

November  the  14th,  1693.
Reverend  SIR,

HAvivg  expetted  fome  Week§,  your  meeting  me  at  Mr.  Wilkins  according]
to  what  ycu  intimated  to  me,  J.  M  —  and  the  time  drawing  near  for\
cur  meeting  elfewhere  ,  I  thought  it  not  amlfs  to  give  you  a  Summary  ofmy\
thoughts  in  the  great  concern,  which  as  ycu  fay  hat  been  agitated  with  fo  mttchi

heat.l


Part  i.  A  Letter  to  Mn  CM.  17

hcati  That  there  are  Witches  is  not  the  doubt ;  the  Scriptures  elfe  were  in
vain,  which  ajftgn  their  Punifhment  to  be  by  Death  ;  Bnt  what  this  Witch-
\  craft  is,  or  wherein  it  does  confift,  fecms  to  be  the  whole  difficulty :  And  as  it
may  be  eafily  demonftrated,  that  all  that  bear  that  Name  cannot  be  juftly  fh
accounted,  fo  that  foms  things  and  Actions  not  fo  efteemed  by  the  moft,  yet
upon  due  Examination  will  be  found  to  merit  no  better  Char  after.

In  your  late  Book,  you  lay  down  a  brief  Synods  of  what  has  been  written  on
that  Sub/eft,  by  a  Triumvirate  of  as  Eminent  Men  as  ever  handled  it  (at
I  you  are  pleas' d  to  call  them)  Viz. Mr.  Perkins,  Gaule,  and  Bernard  con-
fift ing  of  about  30  Tokens  to  know  them  by,  many  of  them  di ft  in ft  from,  if
not thwarting each  other : Among  all  of  which  I  can  find  but  one  deci-
five,  Viz. That  of  Mr*  Gaule,  Head  IV.  and  runs  thus ; Among  the  moft
unhappy  Ci  cumftances  to  convift  a  Witch,  one  is  a  maligning  and  oppugning
!  the  Word,  Works  or  Worftoip  of  God,  and  by  any  extraordinary  Sign  feekjng
to  feduce  any  frefn  it ,  fee  Deu. 13. 1,  2. Mat.  24.  24. ,Aci>v 13.  3,
10. 2  Tim*  3.8. Do  but  mai\  well  the  places,  and  for  this  very  poper-
i  ty  of  thus  oppftng  and  perverting,  they  are  aH  there  concluded  Arrant  and  ab-
folute  fVitches.

This  Head  as  here  laid  down  and  inferted  by  you,  either  is  a  Truth  or  not,
\  if  not,  why  is  it  here  inferted  from  one  of  the  Triumvirate,  ij  it  be  a  Truth.
as  the  Scriptures  quoted  will  abundantly  teftifie,  whence  is  it  that  it  is  fo  lit-
tle regarded,  the  it  be  the  only  Head  weU  proved  by  Scriptwc.or  that  the  reft  of
the  Triumvirate  fto&uld  fo  far  j  or  get  their  fporl^  as  not  to  mention  it. It
were  to  be  unjnft  to  the  Memory  of  thofe otherwife  Wife  Ment to  fuppoje
them  to  have  any  Sinifrer  deftgn; But  perhaps  the  force  of  a vrev  ailing  o-
pinion  together  with  an  Education  thereto  Suited,might  over/hadow  their  Judg-
ments, as  being  wont  to  be  but  too  prevalent  in  many  other  cafes. But  if
the  above  be  Truth, then  the  Scripture  is  full  and  plain  i  Wo  at  is  0/ltch~
craft  ? And  if  fo,  what  need  of  his  next  Head  of  Hangirigof  People  with*
out  as  full  and  clear  Evidence  as  in  other  Cafes} Or  what  need  of  the  reft  of
the  Receipts  of  the  Triumvirate?  what  need  of  Praying  that  the  Affiitled
may  be  able  to  difcover  who  'tis  that  Afflicts  than  ?  cr  wont  need  of  Searching
for  Teis  for  the  Devil  to  Suck,  in  his  Old  Age,  or  the  Experiment  of  faying
the  Lords  Prayer,  &c. Which  a  multitude  more  p-aftifed  in  fome  places  Su-
perftitioufly  inclin'd. Other  Aft  tons have  been  praotifed  for  eafing  the  Af-
flicted, lefts  fuftifiable,  if  not  ftrongly  favouring  of  Witchcraft  it  f elf ,  viz.
Fofidly  Imagining  by  the  Hand,  &C. to  drive  off  Spectres,  or  to  knock,  off
Jnvifible  Chains, or  by  ftrikjng  in  the  Air  to  Wound  either.-  the  Afflicted  or
ethers,  &c. I  write  not  this  to  accufe  any,  but  that  all  may  beware  believing,
That  the  Devils  bounds  are  fety  which  he  camiot  pafs,  That  the  Devils  are -jo
full  of  Malice, That  it  cant  be  added  toby  MankjncfThat  where  he  hath  Power
4-  ne'tker  can  nor  will  smit  Executing  it,  That  "'tis  only  the  Almighty  that  jet *

D  Lcunds


j  8  A  Letter  to  Mr.  C.  M.  Part  2.

hounds  to  his  rag?,  and  that  only  can  Commiffionate  him  to  hurt  or  deft  roy  any.

Thefe  laft,  Sir,  are  fuch  Foundations  of  Truth,  in  my  efteem,  that  I  cannot
hut  own  it  to  be  my  duty  to  afcert  them,  when  ealPd,  the  with  the  hazard  of
my  Ail:  And  confequcntly  to  detect  fuch  as  thefe  ,  That  a  Witch  can  Commif^
fionate  Devils  to  Afflict  Mortals,  That  he  can  at  his  or  the  Witches  p  leaf ure
Affumc  any  Shape,  That  Hanging  or  Drawing  of  Witches  can  leffen  his  Pow-
er of  Afflicting,  or  reftore  thoje  that  were  at  a  diftanceTormented,  with  many
others  depending  on  thefe ;  all  tending,  in  my  eft  tern,  highly  to  the  Difhonour
ofGqd,  and  the  Indangering  the  well-being  of  a  People,  and  do  farther  add,
that  as  the  Scriptures  are  full  that  there  is  Witchcraft,  fut  (up.)  fo  'tis  as
plain  that  there  are  Poffejfwns,  and that  theBodies  of the  P  off  eft  have  hence  been
not  only  Affiled,  but  ftrangely  agitated,  if  not  their  Tongues  improved  to
foretell  futurities,  &C.  and  why  not  to  ac;ufe  the  Innocent,  as  bewitching
them ;  having  pretence  to  Divination  to  gain  credence.  This  being  rea-
fonable  to  he  expefled,  from  him  who  is  the  Father  of  Lies,  to  the  end  he  may
thereby  involve  a  Countrey  in  Blood*  Mallice,  and  Evil,  furmifing  which  he
greedily  feeks  after ;  and  fo  finally  lead  them  from  their  fear  and  de pendancy
upon  God  to  fear  him,  and  afiippofed  Witch  thereby  attaining  his  end  upon
Mankind;  and  not  only  fo,  but  Natural  Diftemper,  as  has  been  frequently
cbfewed  by  the  Judicious,  have  fo  operated  as  to  deceive,  more  than  the  Vul^
gar,  as  is  teftified  by  many  Famous-  Phyfcians9  and  others.  And  as  for  that
fro&f  of  Multitudes  of  Confejfwns ,  this  Countrey  may  be  by  this  time  thought
Competent  Judges,  what  credence  we  ought  to  give  themt  having  had  fuch  nu-
merous Inftances,  as  alfo  how  obtain'd*

And  now  Sirt  if  herein  be  any  thing  in  your  efteem  valuable,  let  me  intreat
you,  not  to  account  it  the  worfe  for  coming  from  fo  mean  a  hand  j  which  how-
ever you  may  have  received  Prejudices,  &c.  Am  ready  to  ferve  you  to  my
Power  ;  but  if  you  Judge  othermfe  hereof,  you  may  take  your  own  Methods  for
my  better  Infcrmatfan.  Who  am,  Sir,  yours  to  command,  in  what  I  may,  P.  C,

In  Anfwer  to  this  laft,  Sir,  you  replyed  to  the  Gentleman  that  prefent?
ed  it,  that  you  had  nothing  to  Profecute  againft  me ;  and  faid  as  to  you?
Sentiments  in  your  Books,  you  did  not  bind  any  to  believe  them,  anc|
then  again  renew'd  your  promife  of  meeting  me,  as  before,  tho'  not  yet
performed.  Accordingly,  tho'  I  waited  at  Seilions,  there  was  none  tq
object  ought  againft  me,  upon  which  I  was  difmifTed*  This  gave  me
feme  reafon  to  believe  that  you  intended  all  fhould  have  been  forgocten ;
Bur  inftead  of  that,  I  find  the  Coals  are  frefh  blown  up,  I  being  fuppofed
to  be  -reprefented,  in  a  late  Manufcript ,  Mor-e  Wonders  of  the,  f^c.  as
Traverfing  your  Difcourfe  in  your  Faithful  difcharge  of  your  Duty,  &c.
And  fuch  as  fee  not  with  the  Authors  Eyes  ,  rendred  Sadducees  and
WitUm\  &c, and  the  Arguments  that. Cjuare  not  with  the  .Sentiments

there*


Part  i.  A  Letter  of  Mr.  C.  M.  ig

herein  contain  d,  Buffoonary  ;  n. rely  no  dcubt,  agreeing  with  the  Spirit
fChrift,  and  his  dealings  with an  unbelieving  Thtmas,  yet  whofe  infi-


llelity  was  without  compare  lels  excufabie,  but  the  Author  having  refol-
ded long  fince,  to  have  no  more  than  one  fingle  Grain  of  Patience,  with
them  that  deny,  &c.  the  Wonder  is  the  k($.  It  rhuft  needs  be  that  offen-
ces come,  but  wo  to  him  by  whom  they  come.  To  vindicate  my  felf
therefore  from  fuch  falfe  Imputations  ,  of  Satan-like  infinuations  ,  and
rnifreprefenting  your  Actions,  CJV.  and  to  vindicate  your  felf,  Sir,  as
much  as  is  in  my  Power  from  thole  Suggeftions,  faid  to  be  Infinuated,
as  if  yoa-wore  not  the  Mcdefty,  and  Gravity,  that  becomes  a  Minifter
of  the  Gofpel-,  which  it  feems,  fome  that  never  faw  the  faid  Narratives,
report  them  to  contain ;  I  fay,  Sir,  for  thefe  reafons,  I  here  prefent  you
with  theflrft  Coppy  that  ever  was  taken,  &c.  And  purpofe  for  a  Weeks
time  to  be  ready,  if  you  fhall  intimate  your  pleafure  to  wait  upon  you,
either  at  the  place  formerly  appointed,  or  any  other  that  is  indifferent  to
the  End ;  that  if  there  fhall  appear  any  defects  in  that  Narrative,  they
rnay  be  amended*

Thus,  Sir,  I  have  given  you  a  genuine  account  of  my  Sentiments  and
Actions  in  this  Affair ;  and  do  requeft  and  pray,  that  if  I  err,  I  may  be
fhewed  it  from  Scripture,  or  found  I^eafon ,  and  not  by  quotations  out  of
Virgil,  nor  Spanifh  Rhetoric!^  For  I  find  the  Witlings  mentioned,  are  fo
far  from  anfwering  your  profound  queftions,  that  they  cannot  fo  much  as
pretend  to  (hew  a  diftinction  between  Witchcraft  in  the  Common  no-
tion of  it,  and  Poffeflion;  Nor  fo  much  as  to  demonftrate  that  ever  the
Jews  or  primitive  Chriftians  did  believe,  that  a  Witch  could  fend  a  Devil
to  Afflict  her  Neighbours  ;  but  to  all  thefe,  Sir»  (ye  being  the  Salt  of  the
Eearth,  &c+)  I  have  reafon  to  hope  for  a  Satisfactory  Anfwer  to  him,
who  is  one  that  reverences  your  Perfon  and  OfSce  *  And  am,  Sir,  yours
to  Command  in  what  I  may,  i^.  C.

Bofan,  January  the  15th,  16 $p
' Mr. !{.  C.


!

and  felf  to  an  Affticted  Young  woman,  whom  we  apprehended  to  be  un-
der a  Diabolical  Poffeflicn,  might  be  rectified  :  I  have  this  to  fay,  as  I  have
often  aUfcady  faid,  that  do  I  fcarceiy  find  any  one  thing  in  die  whole  Pa-
per, whether  reflecting  my  Father  or  felf,  either  fairly  or  truly  repre-
sented. Nor  can  I  think  that  any  that  know  my  Parents  Cirajmftanees,
but  muft  think  him  deferving  a  better  Character  by  far,  than  this  Narra-
tive can  be  thought  to  give  him. When  the  main  defign  we  rnana;;

Di  V


io ■'„  A  Letter  of  Mr.  C.  hi.  Part  z.

Vifiting  the  poor  Afflicled  Creature,  was  to  prevent  the  Accufations
of  the  Neighbourhood  ;  can  it  be  fairly  reprefented  that  cur  dciign  was
to  draw  out  fnch  Accufations,  which  is  the  reprefentation  of  the  Paper.
Wre  have  Teftimonies  of  the  beft  WitneiTes  and  in  Number  not  a  few,
That  when  we  asked  Rale  whether  (lie  thought  The  knew  who  Tormented
her?  the  Queftion  was  but  an  Introduction  to  the  Solemn  charges  which
we  then  largely  gave,  that  fhe  fliould  rather  Dye  than  tell  the  Names  of
any  whom  fhe  might  Imagine  that  (he  knew,. Your  Informers  have  reported
the  Queftion,  and  report  nodiing  of  what  follows,  as  eflential  to  the
giving  of  that  Queftion :  And  can  this  be  termed  a  piece  of  fairnefs  ?
Fair  it  cannot  be,  that  when  Minifters  Faithfully  and  Carefully  difcharge
their  Duty  to  the  Miferable  in  their  Flock,  little  bits,  fcraps  and  fhreds
of  their  Difcourfes,  fliould  be  tackt  together  to  make  them  contemt  ble,
when  there  {hall  be  no  notice  of  alt  the  NecefTiry,  Sealbnabie,  and  Pro-
fitable things  that  occur'd  in  thofe  Difcourfes ;  And  without  which,  rhe.
occafion  of  the  lefler  Paflages  cannot  be  underftcod ;  And  yet  I  am  fur-  1
nifhed  with  abundant  Evidences, ready  to  be  Sworn,  that  will  positively
prove  this  part  of  unfairnefs,  by  the  above  mention 'd  Narrative  ,  to  be
done  both  to  my  Father  and  felh  Again,  it  feems  not  fair  orreafonable
that  I  fliould  be  exposed,  for  which  "your  felf  (not  to  fay  fome  others)
might  have  expos'd  me  for ,  if  I  had  not  done,  Vi$*  for  difcouraging
io  much  Company  from  flocking  about  the  PofTeft  Maid,  and  yet,  as  I
perfwade  my  Ielf,  you  cannot  but  think  it  to  be  good  advice,  to  keep
much  Company  from  fuch  haunted  Chambers ;  be  tides  the  unfairneis  doth,
more  appear,  in  that  I  find  nothing  repeated  of  what  I  fa'id  about  the  ad-
vantage, which  the  Devil  takes  from  too  much  Obfervation  and  Curiolity.

In  that  feveral  of  the  Queftions  in  the  Paper  are  fo  Worded,  as  to
carry  in  them  a  prefuppofal  of  the  things  inquired  after,  to  fay  the  beft
of  it  is  very  unfair :  But  this  is  not  ail,  the  Narrative  contains  a  num-
ber of  Miftakes  and  Falfhoods;  which  were  they  willful  and  defign'd,
might  juftly  be  termed  grofs  Lies.  The  representations  are  far  from
true,  when  'tis  affirm'd  my  Father  and  ielf  being  come  into  the  Room,  I
began  the  Difcourfe ;  I  hope  I  underftand breeding  a  little  better  than  f© :
For  proof  of  this,  did  occafion  Verve,  fundry  can  depofe  the  contrary.

'Tis  no  lefs  untrue,  that  either  my  Father  or  ieif  put  the  Queftion,
How  many  Witches  fit  upon  you?  We  always  cautiouily  avoided  that
expreffion ;  It  being  contrary  to  our  inward  belief:  All  the  ftanders  by
will  /I  believe)  Swear  they  did  not  hear  us  ufe  it  (your  Wit#efles  ex-j
ceptedj  and  I  tremble  to  think  how  hardy  thofe  wofui  Creatures  muft
be,  to  call  the  Almighty  by  an  Oath,  to  fo  falfe  a  thing.  As  falfe  a  re-
prefentation 'tis,  that  I  rulVd  little's  Stomachjier  Breaft  not  being  covered.
The  Oath  of  the'  neareft  Spectators,  giving  a  true  account  of  that  matter

will


Part  i  A  Letter  of  Mr.  CM.  yz&<y ii

will  prove  this  to  be  little  lefs  than  a  grofs  (\i  not  a  doubled)  Lie ;  and
to  be  fomewhat  plainer,  it  carries  the  Face  of  a  Lie  contrived  on  purpofe
(by  them  at  leaft,  to  whom  you  are  beholden  for  the  Narrative)  Wick-
edly and  Bafely  tO  expofe  me. For  you  cannot  but  know  how  much
this  Reprelentation  hath  contributed,  to  make  People  believe  a  Smutty
thing  of  me ; I  am  far  from  thinking,  but  that  in  your  own  Conference
you  believe,  that  no  indecent  Action  of  that  Nature  could  then  be  done
by  me  before  fuch  obfervers , had  I been  fo  Wicked  as  to  have  been
inclined  to  what  isBafe.  It  looks  next  to  impoflible  that  a  reparation  flioud
be  made  me  for  the  wrong  done  to,  I  hope,  as  to  any  Scandal  , an  un-
bleiriiuYd, tho'  weak  and  fmall  Servant  of  the  Church  of  God. Nor  is
what  follows  a  lefs  untruth,  that  'twas  an  Attendant  and  not  my  lelf  who
faid,  if  R^l*  knows  who  Afflicts  her,  yet  (he  wont  tell. 1  therefore  fpoke
it  that  I  might  incourage  her  to  continue  in  that  concealment  of  all  Names
whatfoever  ; to  this  I  am'  able  to  furnifh  my  felt  with  the  Atteftation  of
Sufficient  Oaths.Tis  as  far  from  true,  that  my  apprehenfion  of  the  Imp,
about  Utile*  was  on  her  Belly,  for  the  Oaths  of  the  Spectators,  and  even
of  thofe  that  thought  they  felt  it,  can  teftify  that  'twas  upon  the  Pillow,
ar,  a  diftancc  from  her  Body. As  untrue  a  Reprefentation  is  that  which
follows,  Vi%. That  it  was  faid  unto  her,  that  her  not  Apprehending  of
that  odd  palpable,  tho*  not  vifible,  Mover  was  from  her  Fancy,  for  I  en-
deavoured to  perfwade  her  that  it  might  be  but  Fancy  in  others,  that
[there  was  any  fuch  thing  at  all. WitnefTes  every  way  fufficient  can  be
|  produced  for  this  alio. ?Tis  falfcly  reprefented  that  my  Father  felt  on
the  Young-woman  after  the  appearance  mentioned,  for  his  hand  was  ne-
ver near  her  ; Oath  can  fufficiently  vindicate  him. 'Tis  very  untrue,
j  that  my  Father  Prayed  for  perhaps  half  an  Hour,  againft  the  power  of
J  the  Devil  and  Withcraft,  and  that  God  would  bring  out  the  Afflictors.
■  WitnefTes  of  the  beft  Credit,  can  depofe, that  his  Prayer  was  not  aqtiar-
i  ter  of  an  Hour,  and  that  there  was  no  more  than  about  one  claule  to-
|  wards  theclofeof  the  Prayer,  which  was  of  this  import;  And  this  claufe
alfo  was  guarded  with  a  lingular  warinefs  and  modefty,  y*\* It  there
were  any  evil  Inftruments  in  this  matter  God  would  pleafe  to  difcover
them : And  that  there  was  more  than  common  reafon  for  that  Petition
I  can  fatisfie  any  one  that  will  pleafe  to  Inquire  of  me.  And  ftrange  it  is,
that  a  Gentleman  that  from  1 8  do  "54  hath  been  an  Exemplary  Minifter
I  of  the  Gofpel;  and  that  befides  aftation  in  the  Church  of  God,  as  confi-
dcrable  as  any  that  his  own  Country  can  afford  ,  hath  for  divers  years
;  come  off  with  Honour,  in  his  Application  to  three  Crown'd  Heads ,  and
the  chiefeft  Nobility  of  three  Kingdoms,  Knows  not  yet  hew  to  make
one  fliort  Prayer  of  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  but  in  Nm- England  he  muft  be
Libeli'd  for  it. There  are  divers  other  down- right  miitakes,  which  ydu

have


zz  Teftimonials*  Part  %

have  permitted  your  felf,  I  would  hope,  not  knowingly,  and  with  a  Ma-'
licious  defign,  t©  be  receiver  or  Compiler  of,  which  I  fhall  now  forbear
to  Animadvert  upon.  As  for  the  Appendix  of  the  Narrative^  do  find  my
felf  therein  Injuriously  treated,  for  the  utmoft  of  your  proof for  what
you  fay  of  me,  amounts  to  little  more  than,  vi\.  Some  People  told  you,
that  others  told  them,  that  fuch  and  fuch  things  did  pafs,  but  you  may
affure  your  felf,  that  1  am  not  unfumiih'd  with  Witneffes,  that  can  con-  j
vicT:  the  fame. Whereas  you  would  give  me  to  believe  the  bottom  of
thefe  your  Methods,  to  be  fome  diffatisfaclion  about  the  commonly  re-
ceiv'd  Power  of  Devils  and  Witches ; I  do  not  only  with  all  freedom
offer  you  the  ufe  of  any  part  of  my  Library,  which  you  may  fee  caufe
to  perufe  on  thatSubjedfc,  but  alio  if  you  and  any  elfe,  whom  you  pleafe,
will  vifit  me  at  my  Study,  yea,  or  meet  me  at  any  other  place,,  lefs  in-  I
convenient  than  thofe  by  you  propos'd  ;  1  will  with  all  the  fairnefs  and-
calmnefs  in  the  World  diipute  the  point. I  beg  of  God  that  he  would
bellow  as  many  Bieilings  on  you,  as  ever  on  my  felf,  and  out  of  a  fincere
wifli,  that  you  may  be  made  yet  more  capable  of  thefe  Bleflings3  '  I  take
this  occafion  talay  before  you  the  faults  (not  few  nor  fmallones  neither)!
which  the  Paper  contained,  you  lately  fent  me  in  order  to  be  Examined
by  me.  In  cafe  you  want  a  true  and  full  Narrative  of  my  Vifit,  whereof
fuch  an  indecent  Traverfty  (to  fay  the  bed)  hath  been  made, I  am  not
unwilling  to  communicate  it,  in  mean  time  mult  take  liberty  to  fay, 'Tis  I
fcarcely  confident  with  Common  Civility,  much  lefs  Chriftian  Charity,  j
to  offer  the Narrative,  now  with  you,  for  a  true  one,  till  you  have  a  I
truer,  or  for  a  full  one,  till  you  have  a  fuller. Your  Sincere ( tho  In-  '
.jur'd)  Friend  and  Servant,  C.  Mather.

The  Cop  of  a  Paper  j{eceivd  with  the  above  Letter.

I  Do  Teftifie  that  I  have  feen  Margaret  J^ule  in  her  Afflictions  from  the
Invifible  World*  lifted  up  from  hcrJScd,  wholly  by  an  Invifible  force;
a  great  way  towards  the  top  of  the  Room  where  (he,  lay  ;  in  her  being
fo  lifted,  fhe  had  no  Afififtance  from  any  ufe  of  her.  own  Arms  of  Hands,
or  any  other  part  of  her  Body,  not  fo  much  as  her  Heels  touching  her
Bed,  or  refting  on  any  fupport  whatfoever.  And  I  have  feen  her  thus
lifted,  when  not  only  a  ftrong  Perfon  hath  thrown  his  whole  weight  a
crofs  her  to  pull  her  down  ;  but  feveral  other  Perfons  have  endeavoured,
with  all  their  might,  to  hinder  her  from  being  fo  railed  up,  which  I A
fuppoie  that  feveral  others  will  teftifie  as  well  as  my  felf,  whea  calFd
unto  it. Witnefs  my  Hand,  Samuel  Aves.


W


E  can  alfo  Teftifie  to  the  fubftance  of  what  is  above  Written,  and
have  feveral  times  feen  Margaret  Jtyle  fo  lifted  up  from  her  Bed,  as

that


Part z  Teftimcmats.  %$

that  (he  had  no  ufe  of  her  own  Lims  to  help  her  up,  but  it  was  the  de-
clared appreheniion  of  us,  as  well  as  others  that  faw  it,  impoflible  for
any  hands,  but  fome  of  the  Invisible  World  to  lift  her,

Robert  Earle.
. Copia*  JohnWilkins.

Dan,  Williams*

WE  whofe  Names  are  under-writted  do  "fceftifie,  That  one  Evening
when  we  were  in  the  Chamber  where  Margaret  Baile  then  lay,  in
her  late  Affliction,  we  obferved  her  to  be,  by  an  Invifible  Force,  lifted
up  from  the  Bed  whereon  (he  lay,  fo  as  to  touch  the  Garret  Floor,  while
yet  neither  her  Feet,  nor  any  other  part  of  her  Body  refted  either  on  the
Bed j  or  any  other  fupport,  but  were  alio  by  the  fame  force,  lifted  up
from  all  that  was  under  her  ,  and  all  this  for  a  confiderable  while,  we
judg'd  it  feveral  Minutes ;  and  it  was-as  much  as  feveral  of  us  could  do,
with  all  our  ftrength  to  pull  her  down.  All  which  happened  when  there
was  not  only  we  two  in  the  Chamber,  but  we  fuppoie  ten  or  a  dozen
more,  whofe  Names  we  have  forgotten,  Thomas  Thornton.

Copia.

William  Hudfon  Tejtifies  to  thefubftance  of  Thorntons  TefiU
mony%  to  which  he  alfo  hath  fit  his  Hand.

Mr.  Cotton  Mather,  B  oft  on  Jan.  18  1693

Reverend S  I  2^,

TOurs  of  the  1  $tb,  Inftant,  I  received  yefterday ; and  foqn  found  I

-  had  promifed  my  felf  too  much  by  it,  Vi^  Either  concurrence
with,  or  a  denial  of  thofe  Fundamentals  mentioned  in  mine,  of  Novem.
the  i^th.  finding  this  waved  by  an  Invitation  to  your  Library,  &c.  I
thank  God  I  have  the  Bible,  and  do  Judge  that  fufUcient  to  demonftrate
that  cited  Head  of  Mr.  Gauk,  to  be  a  Truth,  as  alfo  thofe  other  Heads
mentioned,  as  the  Foundations  of  Religion. And  in  my  apprehenfion,

it  be  asked  any  Chriftian,  whether  God  governs  the  World,  and  whe-
ther it  be  he  only  can  Commifiionate  Devils,  and  (uch  otheir  Fundatnen*
rals  ,  He  ought  to  be  as  ready  as  in  the  Queftion,  who  made  him  r>  '(  a
little  Writing  certainly  might  be  of  more  ule,  ro  clear  up  the  centre ver-
ed  points,  than  either  looking  over  many  Books  in  a  well  furniftfd  Li-
brary, or  than  a  difpute, if  I  were  qualified  fork.;  the  inconveniences
of  Paflion  being  this  way  bell  avoided  J  And  am  not  without  hopes  that
you  will  yet  oblige  me  To  far,  as  to  confider  that  Letter,  and  if  I  Err,
to  let  me  fee  it  by  Scripture,  &c.

Yours,  almoft  the  whole  of  it,  is  concerning  the  Narrative  I  lent  to
i'OUj  and  you  feem  to  intimate  as  if  I  were  giving  Characters,  Reflecti-
ons ?


2.4  A  Letter  to  Mr- CM,  Part  i#

bns,  and  Libelfs,  &c. concerning  your  felf  and  Relations  ;  all  which
were  as  far  from  my  thoughts, as  ever  they  were  in  writing  after  either
your  felf,  or  any  other  Minifter. In  the  front  you  declare  your  appre-
henfion  to  be,  that  the  Afflicted  was  under  a  Diabolical  Poflefllon,  and
if  fo , I  fee  not  how  it  ihould  be  occafion'd  by  any  Witchcraft  (unlels
we  afcribe  that  Power  to  a  Witch,  which  is  only  the  Prerogative  of  the
Almighty, of  Sending  or  Commiflionaring  the  Devils  to  Afflict  her.)  But
to  your  particular  Objections  againft  the  Narrative;  and  to  the  firft  my
intelligence  not  giving  me  any  furtherj  could  not  infert  that  I  knew  not.
And  it  feems  improbable  that  a  Queftion  (hould  be  put,  whether  (lie  knew
for  rather  who  «hey  were)  and  at  the  lame  time  to  charge  her,  and  that
upon  her  Life,  hot  to  tell,  and  if  you  had  done  fo,  I  fee  but  little  good
you  could  promife  your  felf  or  others  by  it,  (he  being  Pofleft,  as  alfo  hav-
ing it  inculcated  io  much  to  her  of  Witchcraft. And  as  to  the  next  Ob-
jection about  company  flocking, (3c, 1  do  profefs  my  Ignorance,  not
knowing  what  you  mean  by  it. And  Sir,  that  molt  of  the  Question's
did  carry  with  them  a  prefuppofing  the  things  inquired  after,  is  evident,
if  there  were  fbch  as  thofe  relating  to  the  BUc^-man. and  a  Book,  and  a-
bout  her  hearing  the  Prayer,  (3c ( related  in  the  faid  Narrative,  which
1  find  no  Objection  againft. JAs  to  that  which  is  faid  of  mentioning  your
felf  firft  difcourfings  and  your  hopes  that  your  breeding  was  better  (I
doubt  it  not)  nor  do  I  doubt  your  Father  might  firft  apply  himfelf  to  o-
thers ;  but  my  intelligence  is,  that  you  firft  fpake  to  the  Afflicted  or  Pofj
fefled,  fot  which  you  had  the  advantage  of  a  nearer  approach. Th<
next  two  Objections  are  founded  upon  mtftakes :  J  find  not  in  the  Na.r
tative  any  fuch  Queftion,  as  how  many  Witches  fit  upon  you  ?  and  that
her  Breaft  was  not  covered,  in  which  thofe  material  words,  (with  the
Bed-Cloaths)  are  wholly  omited ; I  am  not  willing  to  retort  here  your
own  Language  upon  you  ;  but  can  tell  you,  that  your  own  difcourle  of
it  publickly,  at  Sir  W.  P's  Table* has  much  more  contributed  to,  (3  c
As  to  the  Reply,  if  (he  could  (he  would  not  tell,  whether  either  or  both
fpake  it  it  matters  not  much. Neither  does  the  Narrative  fay  you  fek
the  live  thing  on  her  Belly  ;  tho  I  omit  now  to  lay  what  further  demon- 1
ftrations  there  are  of  it*  As  to  that  Reply,  that  is  only  her  fancy,  I  fmdl
the  word  (her J  added.  And  as  to  your  Fathers  feeling  for  the  live  Crea
tnre  after  you  had  felt  it,  if  it  were  on  the  Bed  it  was  not  fo  very far
from  her. And  for  the  length  of  his  Prayer, poflibly  your  Witnefie
might  keep  a  more  exact  account  of  the  time  than  thofe  others, and
ftand  not  for  a  few  Minutes. For  the  reft  of  the  Objections  Ifuppo:
them  of  iefs  moment,  if  lefs  can  be  (however  (hall  be  ready  to  receiv
them,  thofe  matters  of  greatefiTconcefn  I  find  no  Objection  againft)  the'
teing  all  that  yet  appear,  k  may  be  thought  that  if  the  Narrative  be  rj

m


Parr  2.  A  Letter  of  Mr.  CM.  2  j

fully  exact,  it  was  as  near  as  Memory  could  bear  away;  but  fhould  be
glad  to  fee  one  more  perfect  (which  yet  is  not  to  be  expected,  feeing
none  writ  at  the  time)  You  mention  the  appendix,  by  which  I  under-
ftand  the  Second  Vifit,  and  if  you  be  by  the  poffeffed  belyed  fas  being

I  half  an  hour  with  her  alone  (excluding  her  own  Mother,)  and  as  telling
f  her  you  had  Prayed  for  her  Nine  times  that  day,  and  that  now  was  her
Laughing  time,  fhe  muft  Laugh  now,)  I  can  fee  no  Wonder  in  it, ;  what
can  be  expected  lefs  from  the  Father  of  Lies,  by  whom,  you  Judge,  fhe
was  pofTeft.

And  befides  the  above  Letter,  you  were  pleafed  to  fend  me  another
Paper  containing  feveral  Teftimonies  of  the  PofTefTed  being  lifted  up,and
held  a  fpace  of  ieveral  Minutes  to  the  Garret  floor,  £3c.  but  they  omit
giving  the  account,  whether  after  (he  was  down  they  bound  her  down  ;
or  kept  holding  her :  And  relate  not  how  many  were  to  pull  her  down,
which  hinders  the  knowledge  what  number  they  fnuft  be  to  be  ftronger
than  an  Inyifible  Force*  Upon  the  whole,  I  fuppofe  you  expect  I  fhould
believe  it;  and  if  fo,  the  only  advantage  gain'd,is  that  which  has  been
fo  long  controverted  between  Proteftants  and  Papifls,  whether  Miracles
are  ceaftJ will  hereby  feemtobe  decided  for  the  latter;  it  being,  for  ought
I  can  fee,  if  fo,  as  true  a  Miracle  as  for  Iron  to  fwim,  and  that  the  Devil
can  work  fuch  Miracles.

But  Sir,  leaving  thefe  little  difputable  things,7do*  gain  pray  that  you
would  kt  me  have  the  happinefs  of  your  approbation  or  confutation  of .
that  -Letter  before  referred  to.

And  now,.  Sir,  that  the  God  of  all  Grace  may  enable  us  Zealoufly
to  own  his  Truths,  and  to  follow  thofe  things  that  tend  to  Peace,
and  that  your  felf  may  be  as  an  ufefui  Inftrument  in  his  hand,  effec-
tually to  ruin  the  remainders  of  Heathen ifh  and  Popifh  Superftitions,
is  the  earneft  defire  and  prayer  of  yours  to  command,  in  wlia:  I  may,
..  *•  c.

Pqftfcript.

, Sir,  I  here  fend  you  the  Coppy  of  a  paper  that  lately  came  to  my.

Hands,  which  tho'  it  contains  no  Wonders,  yet  is  remarkable,  and  Runs

thus.

An  account  of  what  an  Indian  told  Captain  Hill,  at  Saco-Port.
HTRE  Indian  told  him  that  the  French  Miniftcr  s  were  better  than  the  Eng-
Hfh,  for  before  the  French  came  among  them  there  were  a  great  many,
Witches  among  the  Indians,  but  now  there  weri  none;  and  there  were  much
Witches  among  the  Englifli  Miniftcr s,  as  Burroughs,  who  was  Hang d  for  it,,
Were  Idifpofed  to  make  reflections  upon  it,  I  fuppofe  you  will  Judge?
the  Field  large,  enough,  but  I  forbear,  as  above,  ._ ,,  Q  C\

E  '  S&CQttm


%6  A  Letter  to  Mr.  C.  M.  Part  >*j

Mr.  Cotton  Mather.  Bofton  Feb.  the  19/h. 1693.

REverend  Sir,  Having  received  as  yet  no  Anfwer  to  mine  of  Novem.
the  24th. except  an  offer  to  perufe  Books, ?3o. relating  to the
Doctrinals  therein  contaln'd  : Nor  to  my  laft  of  January  the  lSth* In
which  I did  again  pray  that  if  Ierr"d  /might  be fhewed  it  by  Scripture,
Viq.  in  believing  that  the  Devils  bounds  are  fett, which  he  cannot  pal's;,
That  the  Devils  are  fo  full  of  Malice  that  it  cant  be  added  to  by  Man-
kind : That  where  he  hath  power  he  neither  can  nor  will  omit  Execut-
ing it; That  \Cs  only  the  Almighty  that  fets  bounds  to  "his  rage,  and;
that  only  can  commifllonate  him  to  hurt  or  deftroy  any  ;  Andconfequent--
ly  to  deteftas  erroneous  and  dangerous,  the  belief  that  a  Witch  can  Ccm--
imirTionate  Devils  to  Afflict  Mortals ; That  he  can  at  his  or  the  Witches,
pleafure afTume  any  fhape  : That  Hanging. or  Chaining  of  Witches  can
lefTen  his  Power  of  Afflicting,  and  reftore  thofc  that  were, at  a  diftance,,
Tormented  by  him. And  whether  Witchcraft  ought  to  be  underftoodi
now  in  this  Age, to  be  the  fame  that  it  was  when  the  Divine  Oracles;
were  given  forth,  particularly,  -  thofe  quoted  by  Mr.  Gaule  in  that  cited!
Head {Wonders  of  the  hwlfible  World ; Mr.  G aides  IV.  Head,  to  dis-
cover Witches )  which  do  fo  plainly  {hew  a  Witch,  in  Scripture-ienfe  too
be  one  that  malign^,  &c. And  that  pretend  to  give  a  Sign  in  order  to,
ieduce, &c. For  I  have  never  uhderitood  in  my  time,  any  fuch  havl
Suffered  as  Witches,  tho'  fuiRcienrly  known  ; But  the  only  Witch  noyw
inquired  after,  is  one  that  is  faid  to  become  io  by  making  an  Explicit  Co-
venant with  the  Devil,  u  e.  the  Devil  appearing  to  them,  and  making  a
compact  mutually, promifing  each  to other, -teftified  by  their  figning
his  Book,  a  material  Book,  which  he  is  laid  to  keep, and  that  thereby
they  are  Intituled  to  a  power,  not  only  to  Afflict -others, but  fuch  as  isp
truly  exorbitant,  if  not  highly  intrenching  upon  the  prerogative  of  him
who  is  the  Soveraign  being ; For  who  is  he  that  faith,  and  it  cometh  to
pals, when  the  Lord  commandeth  is  not.

? Such  explicit  Covenant  being  as  is  faid  in  this  Age  reckoned  eflential  to;
compleat  a  Witch: Yet  landing  nothing  of  fuch  covenant  for  power
thereby  obtain'dj  in  Scripture,  and  yet  a  Witch  therein  fo  fuily  deicrib'd,
do  pray  that  if  there  be  any  fuch  Scriptures  I  may  be  directed  to  them,-
for  as  to  the  many  Legends  in1  this  ca.i'c  I  make  no  account  of  them  ; I!
Read  indeed  of  a  Covenant  with  Death  and  with  Heil,  bar  fuppofe  thai
to  be  in  the  Heart  (or  Mental)  only,  and  fee  not  what  ufe  fuch  explicidfcl
one  can  be  of  between  Spirits,  any  further  than  as 'tis  a  Copy  of  thacrj
Mental  which  is  in  the  Heart. The  dire  effects  and  confequences  of  I
fuch  notions  may  be  found  written  in  indeilible  Roman  Characters  of
j&Jood  in  all  Coanweys  where  they  have  prevail'd,  and  what  can  icis  be  j


•  Part  i.  A  Letter  to  Mr.  C.  M.  27

expected  when  Men  are  Indi&ed  for  that,  which,  as  'tis  impoffible  to
r  rove  fo,  for  any  to  clear  himfelf  off,  Vify  Such  explicit  Covenant  with"
the  Devil,  and  then  for  want  of  better  Evidence,  muft  take  up  with
fuch  as  the  Nature  of  fuch  fecret  Covenant  can  bear,  as  Mr.  Gaufe  hath
it,  i.  e.  Diftra&ed  Stories,  and  ftrange  and  Foreign  Events,  ££e._  There-
by endeavouring  to  find  it,  tho  by  it's  butfuppoied  effects';  By  the  fame
Rules  that  one  is  put  to  purge  himfelf  of  fuch  Compact,  by  the  fame
may  all  Mankind.  ,  ^  . i

This  then  being  fo  Important  a  cafe,  it  concerns  all  to  know  whau
^Foundations  in  Scripture  is  laid  for  futh  a  Structure;  For  if  they  are
m  deficient  of  that  Warrant,  the  more  Eminent  the  Architects  are  the  more
11  dangerous  are  they  thereby  rendered,  (3c,  Thefe  are  fuch  confidera-
3  tions  as  I  think  will  vindicate  me  in  the  efteem  of  all  Lovers  of-Huma-
it  nity,  in  my  endeavours  to  get  them  cleared.  And  to  that  End,  do  once
ejimore  pray,- that  you  would  fo  farr  oblige  me  as  to  give  your  Approba-
tion or  Confutation  of  the  above  Dodfcrinals  ;  But  if  you  think  filence  a
iVertuc  in  this  cafe,  I  fhall  ( i  fuppofej  fo  far  comply  with  it  as  not  tor
ifooofe  you  any  more  time  to  look  over  my  papers.  And  if  any  others  will
Mo  far  oblige  me,  I  fhall  not  be  ungrateful  to  them ;  Praying  God  t6
iguide  and  profper  you,  I  am,  Sir,  yours  to  my  power,
■m .  [He  tuat  doth  Truth,  coffieth  to  the  Light.  J  Jj| C,

J Mr.  Cotton  Mather.  Bo'fton  April  the  16th.  i'6 94.

j'T)  Everend  Sir, Having  as  yet  Received  no  Anfwer  to  my  J  a  ft, touch-
|F^"  ing  the  Do&rinals  therein  referred  to, tho'  at  the  delivery  of  it,
■tyou  were  pleafed  to  promife  the  Gentleman  that  prefented  it*  that  I
J-fhould  have  it,  and  after  that  you  acquainted  the  fame  Gentleman  that
jjyou  were  about  it. The  length  of  time  fince  thofe  prcmifes,  makes  me
fuppofe  you  are  preparing  fomething  for  the  Prefs  (for  I  would  not  que  1-
tion  your  veracity  do  think  it  may  not  be  amifs,  when  you  do  any  thing
of  that  Mature  for  the  publick  view,  that  you  alfo  explain  fome  para-
ges of  fome  late  Books  of  yours  and  your  Relations,  which  are  hard  t<s
be  underftood,  to.Inftance  in  a  few'  of  many  Wonders,  of  .the'  Invifibk-
PVorld,  pag, 17.  £  Plagues  ate  fome  of  thefe  woes  with  which  the  Devil  caw
Ces  guy  Trouble,  pag.  1.8. Hence  come  fuch  Plagiies  as  that  btfpfe  of  deft  ruc-
tion which  within  our  Memory  Jwept  away  fuch  a  throng  of  People  frmn  en?
Englilh  City,  in  one  Viftation. Wars  are  feme  of  thofe  woes  with  which
the  Devil  caufet  our  Trouble,  pag.  16.  Hence  'tis  that  the  Devil  life  a  Dra-
gon keeping  a  Guard  upon  fuch  Fruits  as  would  refrefh  a  Lariguijhing  World,
has  hindered  Mankind  for  many  Ages  from  hitting  upon  thofe  ufefuli  Inven-
tions. The 'Benighted  World  muft  [jogg  on  for  thoufands  of  Years?  without
knowledge  of  the  Load-JIcne ,' Printing  and  Spxjacles.  pag.  ic,- It  U

k  i  ndl


i8  A  Utter  to  81r\  CM-  Part  x

wof  //t*/y  that  every  Devil  does  know  every  Language.  Tis  prjjlble  the  Expe-
rience, or  if  I  may  call  it  fo,  the  Education  of  all  Devils  is  not  alike ;  Cafes
of  Confcience,  pag,  63.  The  Devil  has  infliclcd  on  many  the  Difeafe  calld
Lycanthropia.

;  Ivtemor.  provid.  Relat. To  Witch  Difc.  on  Wit.  pag,  24. I  am  al-

fo  apt  to  think,  that  the  Devils  are  feldom  able  to  hurt  us  in  any  of  our  cxte-

riour  concerns,  without  a Commiflion  from  f  me  of  our  fellow  Worms, when

foul  Moutlfd  MenfhaR  wifh  harm  to  their  Neighbours,  they  give  a  Commif-

fion  to  the  Devil  to  perform  what  they  defire,  and  if  God  fhould  not  Mercm

fully  prevent,  they  would  go  thro''  with  it  • Hear  this  you  that  in  wilde  Paf-

fion  will  give  every  thong  to  the  Devil  -y Hear  it  fou  that  befpeal^  a  %pt,

Pox,  or  a  Plague, on  all  that  (hall  provoke  you ; I  here  IndiH  you  as  Guili

cfHellifh  Witchcraft  in  the  Sight  of  God. More  Wonders  of  the  Invifr

ble  World,  pag,  49. They  each  of  them  have  their  SpeFtrcs  or  Devils  Gem

miffioned  by  them  and  reprejenting  of  them,  pag. 14. But  fuch  a  permij

fionfrom  God  for  the  Devil  to  come  down  and  breaks  in  upon  Mankind,  mu^

often  times  be  accompanied  with  a  Commiffion  from  fome.of  Mankjnd  if  je\

Inchantments  Encountered.  Thefe  Witches  have  driven  a  Trade  of  Commi

jionating  their  confederate  Spirits,  to  do  all  forts  of  Mi/chiefs  to  their  Neigh

hours,  pag. 50+ They  have  bewitched  fome  even  fo  farr, as  to  make thcr

Self  deftr oyer s,  pag. 1 44. As  I  am  abundantly  fatisfied, that  many  of  th

Self-murders  committed  here,  have  heen  the effecls  of  a  cruel  and  Bloo,

Witchcraft,  letting  fly  Daemons  upon  the  Miferable  Seneca  s,  pag, 51.

have  feen  fome  of  their  Children  fo  Dedicated  to  the  Devil,  that  in  their  I

fancy  the  Imps  have  Sucked  them. Cafes  of  Confcience,  pag.  24. Th

bequeath  their  Daemons  to  their  Children  as  a  Legacy,  by  whom  they  are  oJ

ten  affifted  to  fee  and  do  things  beyond  the  Power  of  Nature,  pag.  21. The*

Are  in  Spain  a  fort  of  People  calPd  Zahurs,  that  can  fee  into  the  Bowels

the  Earth. On  Tuefdays  and  Fridays]  fAnd  to  add) that  in pag. 4

The  words  are  \_For the Law  of  God  allows  of  no  Revelation  from  t

other  Spirit  but  himfelf,  Ifa.  8.  1 9. It  is  a  Sin  againft  God  to  make

of  the  Devils  help,  to  ktiow  that  which  cannot  be  otherways  known ;  And  It

tify  againft  it  as  a  great  tranfgreffion,  which  may  Juftly  provoke  the  Holy  0:

of  Ifrael,  to  let  loofe  Devils  on  the  whole  Land.. Altho  the  Devils  Accu'

tion  may  be  fo  far  regarded,  as  to  caufe  an  inquiry  into  the  Truth

things,  Job. 1.  11, 12.  and  2, 5, 6. Yet  not  fo  as  to  be  an  Evidence

Ground  of  ConviHion,  for  the  Devils Teftimmy ought  not  to  be  taken

WHOLE  Nor  In  PARJ} It  is  a  known  Truth,  that  fome  unwary

prefllons  of  the  primitive  Fathers,  were  afterwards  improved  for

Introducing  and  eftablifhing  of  Error,  as  their  calling  the  Virgin  Mi

the  Mother  of  God,  &c. Hence  occafion  and  Advantage  was  tak

to  propagate  the  Jdolizing  of  her  (the  like  might  be-faid  of  the.  But,


Part  i.  4  Letter  to  Mr.  C.  M.  2,9

-aft, thefe  aftertions  ,  above rchearfcd, being apparently  liable  to  a
iike  Male  Conftruction,  and  no  lefs  dangerous,  are  therefore  as  I  laid
highly  needful  to  be  explained,  and  that  in  amoftpublick  manner. For
were' they  to  be  underftood  Litteraily  and  as  they  are  fpoken,  it  muft
ieem  as  if  the  Authors  were  Introducing  among  Chriftians  very  dange-
rous Doctrines, fuch ,  as  were  they  afferted  by  the  beft  of  Men«,  yet
ought  to  be  rejected  by  all,  &c. Vi%+ That  'tis  the  Devil  that  brings
the  moft  of  Evils  upon  Mankind,  by  way  of  Infliction,  that  do  befall
|  chem  ;  And  that  the  Witch  can  Commiffionate  him  to  the  performance
of  thefe,  with  many  others  as  dangerous  Doctrines,  and  fuch  as  feem  in
their  tendency  to  look  favourably  upon  the  Antient Pagan  Doctrine  of
this  Countrey,  who  did  believe  that  God  did  hurt  to  none,  but  Good  to
I  all,  but  that  the  Devil  muft  be  pleas'd  by  Worshipping,  £fc.  From  whom
!  came  all  their  Miferies,  as  they  believed*  For  what  were  all  this  but  to
Rob  God  of  his  Glory  in  the  higheft  manner,  and  giving  it  to  a  Devil
and  a  Witch; Is  it  not  he  that  has  faid  (hall  there  be  Evil  in  a  City  and
the  Lord  hath  not  done  it? But  if  any  are  fond  of  their  own  notions
becaufe  fome  Eminent  Men  have  before  now  afferted  them ; they  may
!(do  well  to  compare  them  with  that  excellent  Saying,  Wonders,  of  the  In-
v'-fible  World, pag.  7. About  this  Demi  there  are  many  things, whereof
we  may  raifonably  and  profitably  be  incfuifiHvc, fuch  things  I  mean  as  are
in  our  Bibles  rcveafd  to  us ;  according  to  which  if  we  do  not  fpea\  on  fo  darl^
/t  Subfetl,  but  according  to  our  own  uncertain  and  'perhaps  Humour  J  cm  Con-
jeSlurej,  there  is  no  Light  in  us.  Or  that  other,  pag.  75. At  every  other
Weapon  the  Devil  will be too  hard  for  us] For  'tis  moft  certain  that  o-
ther  Notions, Weapons  and  Practices  have  been  taken  up  with; And
that  the  event  has  been  anfwerable,  the  Devil  has  been  too  hard  for  fuch
as  have  fo  done. I  fhall  forbear  to  inftance  from  the  Dogmatical  part,
and  fhall  mention  fome  practices  that  as  much  need  explaining. Mem.
provid.  Rglat.  to  Witch,  pag.  29,  30,  31. Where  account  is  given  that
it  was  Pray'td  for  that  the  afflicted  might  be  able  to  declare,  whom  flic
apprehended herfelf  Afflicted  by,  together  with  the  Immediate  Anfwgr
of  fuch  Prayer-  -To.  this  you  once  RepJy'd  when  it  was  mentioned  to
you,  that  yon  did  not  then  underftand  the  wiles  of  Satan! '• 5

To  which  I  have  nothing  to  object,  but  it  might  be  a  good  Acknow-
ledgment;; 'But  considering  that  the  Book  is  gone  forth'  into  all  the
World,  cannot -but  think  the  Salve  ought  to  be  proportion 'd  to  the  Sore,
and  the  notice  of -the  Devils  wiles  as  Universal,  as  the  means  recommen-
ding them.  Another  Practice  is  pag.  2©,  2  r.  [there  was  mefmgular  paf-
fion  that  frequently  attended  her,  aji  Jnvijible  Chat?;  wculd  be  clap;  abbut
her,  and  (he  in  much  pain  and  fear  cry  cut  when  they  began  to  put  it  on%
.  once  I  did  wkh  myomi'kand  kriocl^jt  off  as  it  begin  to  be  fafinbi  (hut  he>rj


jo  A  Letter  to  Mr.  B.  Part  z.

Xi  this  were  done  by  the  Power  or  Vcrtue  of  any  ordnance  of  Divine
Tnftitution,  it  is  well,but  would  have  been  much  better  if  the  Inftitution
had  been  demonftrared,  or  was  there  any  Phy Ileal  Vertue  in  that  parti-
cular Hand.  But  fuppoiing  that  neither  of  thefe  will  be  afTerted  by  the
Author,  /do  think  it  very  requifite,  that  the  World  may  be  acquainted
with  the  Operation,  and  to  what  Art  or  Graft  to  refer  their  Power  of
Knocking  off  of  Invifiblc  Chains.

And  thus,  Sir,  I  have  Faithfully  difcharged  fwhat  in  this  I  took  to  be
my  Duty)  and  am  foo  far  from  doing  it  to  gain  applauie,  or  from  a  Spirit
of  Contradiction,  that  I  expect  to  procure  me  many  Enemies  thereby,
(but  as  in  cafe  of  a  FireJ  where  the  Glory  of  God,  and  the  Good  and
Wellfare  of  Man-kind  are  fo  nearly  concern'd,  I  thought  it  my  duty  to
be  no  longer  an  Idle  Spectator  ;  And  can,  and  do  fay,  to  the  Glory  of
God,  in  this  whole  Affair,/ have  endeavoured  a  Confcicnce  voide  of  of-
fence, both  towards  God  and  towards  Man  ;  And  therein  at  the  lea#
have  the  advantage  of  fuch  as  are  very  Jealous  they  have  done  fo  much
herein,  as  to  Sin  in  what  they  have  done,  vifc  In  (hettring  the  Accufed^  j
fuch  have  been  the  Cowardice  and  Fearfulnefs,  whereunto  the  regard  to
the  Diflatisfa&lon  of  other  People  have  precipitated  them  •  Which  by
the  way  mull  needs  acquaint  all,  that  for  the  future  other  meafures  are
refolved  upon  (by  fuch )  which  how  Bloody  they  may  prove  when  op-
portunity fhall  offer,  is  with  him  who  orders  all  things,  according  to  the
counfel  of  his  own  Will :  And  now  that  the  Song  of  Angels  may  be  the
Emulation  of  Men,  is  the  earneft  Defire,  and  Prayer,  of  Sir,  Yours  to'
Command  in  what  I  may,

Glory  to  God  in  the  Highcft,  and  on  Earth  i^. C.

Peace  and  Good  Will  towards  Men.

Mr.  2?;  B  oft  on,  March  the  ift.  1694.

Worthy  Sir,

AFter  more  th'ari  a  Years  waiting  for  the  performance  of  a  reiterated
prbmife  from  one  under  fingular  obligations,  and  a  multitude  of  ad-
vantages to  have  done  it  fooner,'  The  utmoft  compliance  I  have  mett
with, is  (by  your  HandsJ  the  fight  of  four  Sheets  of  recinded  Papers,  but
I  muft  fir  ft  be  obliged  to  return  them  in  a  Fortnight,  and  not  Copied  J
Which  I  have  now  complied  with  :  And  having  read  them  am  not  at  alf
Surprized  at  the  Authors  Caution  in  it,  nor.  to  admit  of  fuch  crude  mat-
ter and  impertinent  absurdities,  as  are  to  be  found  in  it  to  fpread.  He
feems  concern'd  that  I  take  no  notice  of  hisfeveral  Books,  wherein,  as  he
faith,  he  has  uriarifweraWy  proved  things  to  which  I  might  reply,  that  I
nave  lent  him  Letters  of  quotations  cut  of  thole  Books,  to  know  hew
fiiuch  of them  hfe will abide  WK  tor  I  thought  it  hard  to  affix  their


Part  i.  A  Letter  to  Mr;  B.  31

Natural  confequences  till  he  had  opportunity  to  explain  them.  And
faith  that  he  had  lent  n\e  (Mr*  Baxters  Worlds  of  Spirits)  an  ungainfay-
able  Book,  &c  (tho  I  know  no  ungainfayable  Book,  but  the  Bible)
which  Book  I  think  no  Man  that  has  read  it  will  give  fuch  a  Title  to
bur  the  Author,  he  fpeaks  of  my  reproaching  his  publick  Sermons,  of
which  I  am  not  confeious  to  my  felf,  unlefs  it  be  about  his  interpretation
of  a  Thunder  Storm  (that  broke  into  his  HoufeJ  which  favoured  fo  much
,ot  Enthuiiafm.

As  to  thofe  papers,  I  have  (as  I  read  them )  noted  in  the  Margin  where,
in  a  hafty  reading,  I  rhought  it  needful,  of  which  it  were  unreafonabie
for  him  to  complain  j  feeing  I  might  not  take  a  Copy,  thereby  to  have
been  inabled,  more  at  leafure  to  digeft  what  were  needfull  to  be  faid  on
fo  many  Heads ;  and  as  I  have  not  flatter* d  him  ,  fo  for  telling  what
was  lo  needful,  with  the  hazard  of  making  fo  many  Enemies  by  it,  I
have  approved  my  felf  one  of  his  beft  Friends :  And  befides  his  own
•fenfe  of  the  weaknefs  of  his  Anfwer,  teftified  by  the  prohibition  above,
he  has  wholly  declined  anfwering  to  moft  of  thofe  things  that  I  had  his
.promife  for,  and  what  he  pretends  to  fpeak  to,  after  mentioning,withcut
the  needful  Anfwer  or  Proof  drops ir>

His  ftrft  main  Work  is  after  liis  definition  of  a  Witch,  which  he  never
proves  (without  faying  any  thing  to  Mr.  Gauls  Scriptural  deicriprion,
ino'  fo  often  urged  to  it,  and  thoJ  him  felf  has  in  his  Book  recommended
and  quoted  it;  is  to  magnifie  the  Devils  Power,  and  that  as  I  think  be-
yond and  againft  the  Scripture,  this  takes  him  up  about  1 1  Pages,  and
yet  in  Page  22  again  returns  to  it,  and  as  I  underiland  it,  takes  part
with  the  P',,ari[ccs  againft  our  Saviour  in  the  Argument^or  they  charge
fiim  that  he  caft  out  Devils  thro'  Beelzebub,  .Our  Saviours  Anfwer  1?,
Mat.  12,  25.  Every  Kjngdom  divided  againft  it  felf  is  brought  to  dejoia-
Ifion;  and  every  City  or  lioufe  divided  againft  it  felf  ,  fhall  not  ft  and,  and
}f  Satan  caft  out  Sztan,  he  is  divided  againft  hir/ffelf,  hew  fhall  then  his  king-
dom ft  and:  And  yet  notwithstanding  this  Anfwer  together  with  what
follows,  for  further . I Jlu(tration,our  Author  is  it  feems  refolved  to  a.fferca
that  our  Saviour  did  not  in  this  Anfwer  deny  that  many  did  fo,  Vi^f)
call  out  Devils  by  Beelzebub,  and  Page  23  .grants  that  the  Devils  have  a
Miraculous  Power,  but  yet  mud  not  be  caifd  Miracles,  and  yet  can  be
liftinguiihed,  as  he  Intimites,  only  by-thc  Confcienc?  or  Light  within,
:o  the  nofmall  fcandal  of  the.Chniban  Religion.

Tho'  our  Snviour  and  his  A poftles  accounts  this  the  chief  or  principal
proot  of  his  Godhead,  John  20/30,  31.  John  10.  .37,  3S.  John  5.  '%%
Mar!^i6.  17,  18.  Acts  2.  2=*.  and  4,  30.  with  many  othcis  and  than:
Miracles  belong  only  to  God,  who  alio  ..Governs  the  World,  Pi.:1.  1^6.
I Jcr. 14.  22.' Ift.  38,  S.  PjaL  6z, II.  ktfnh  3. 37. 'Avrju 3.  ^;>


j  z  A  Letter  to  Mr*  B.  Part  i  \

But  to  forbear  quoting  that  which  the  Scripture  is  moft  full  in,  do
only  fay  that  he  that  dares  alien:  the  Devil  to  have  fuch  a  Miraculous
Power  had  need  have  other  Scriptures  than  ever  I  have  feen.  In  Page
12.  our  Author  proceeds  and  ftates  a  queftion  to  irhis-effecl",  If  the  De-
vil has  fiich  Powers,  and  cant  exert  them  without  permiiTion  from  God,
what  can  the  Witch  contribute  thereunto?  Inftead  of  an  Aniwer,  to  this
weighty  objection,  our  Author  firft  concedes,  that  the  Devil  do's  ordina-
rily exert  their  Powers,  without  the  Witches  contributing  to  it,  but  yet
that  to  the  end  to  increafe  their  guilt  he  may  cheat  a  Witch,  by  making
her  believe  her  felf  the  Author  of  them.  His  next  is,  if  Witchcraft  be,
as  Ifuppofe  it  is;  the  skill  of  applying  the  Plaftick  Spirit  of  the  "World,-
J&c.  then  the  confent  of  the  Witch  doth  naturally  contribute  to  that
snifchiefs  that  the  Devil  does.  And  his  laft  anfwer  runs  to  this  cffecl:,  Is'
it  not  the  Ordination  of  God,  that  where  the  Devil  can  get  the  confent.
of  a  Witch  for  the  hurting  of  others,  the  hurt  {hall  as  certainly  be  as  if
they  had  fet  MaftifY  Dogs  upon  them,  or  had  given  them  Poyfon  into'.
their  Bowels  ;  and  Gods  Providence  mull  be  as  great  in  delivering  from
One  as  from  the  other,  and  this  it  feems  is  not  only  his  Belief,  but  the
moft  Orthodox  and  moil  learned  anfwer  that  our  Author  could  pitch
upon.  It  Witchcraft  be  as  I  fuppofe  it  is,&c.  and  is  it  not  the  Ordinatiort
of  God,  that,  &c.  What  is  all  this  but  precarious,  and  begging  the  que-
ftion, and  a  plain  dropping  the  Argument  he  cannot  manage;  however,',
to  amufe  the  Ignorant,  and  to  confound  the  Learned,  he  hooks  in  d
cramp  word,  if  not  a  nonentity,  (vi%.)  Plaftick  Spirit of  the  Worlds
for  who  is  it  either  knows  that  there  is  a  Plafticl^  Spirit,  or  what  it  is,'
or  how  this  can  any  way  ferve  his  purpofe.

He  then  proceeds  to  Scripture  Jnftances  of  Witches,  &c  arid  where  JJ
thought  it  needful,  I  have,  as  I  faid,  (hewed  my  diffent  from  his  Judg-j
ment .  He  accounts  it  unreafenabie  to  be  held  to  the  proof  of  his  defini-
tion of  a  Witch,  which  he  makes  to  confift  in  a  Covenant  with  the  DevilA
and  chuffs  rather  a  tedious  procefs  about  a  Piftol  to  defend  him  from  it,1
wiiich  indeed  is  One  particular  way  whereby  Murder  has  been  Commit-1
ted,  and  fo  the  Dore  becomes  Culpable ;  But  his  definition  of  a  Witch;
which  as  1  faid,  ftill  remains  to  be  proved,is  to  this  effed:,  That  a  Witch
is  one  that  Covenants  with,  and  Commiffions  Devils  to  do  mifchiefs,  that
fne  is  one  in  Covenant,  or  that  by  Vertue  of  fuch  Covenant  (he  cart
CommiiTionate  him  to  Kill.  The  not  bringing  Sculpture  to  prove  thefd
two,  is  a  fufiicient  demonftration  there  is  nonej  and  fo  that  our  Authol
leaves  off  jult  where  he  began,  vpt^  in  a  bare  AfTertion,  together  wi'djl
fiis  own  Big  gored  experiences,  hinting  al-fo  at  multitudes  of  Hiftories t<3t
confirm  Mm  in  the  belief  of  his  definition:'  Here  being  all  that  I  takd
ivadcoof  to  be  ccnfkicrabK

An<j


P^rt  x.  A  Letter  to  the  Minifters.  33

And  now,  Sir,  If  you  think  fir  improve  your  Fn'endfliip  with  the  Au-
|  thor  for  the  Glory  of  God,  the  Soveraign  Being  ,  the  good  and  welfare
of  Min-kjndy  and  for  his  real  and  true  Intereft,  as  you  lee  it  convenient,
put  hhn  in  mind  ,  That  the  Glory  of  God  is  the  End  why  Man- kind
was  made,  and  why  He  hath  fo  many  Advantages  to  it.  That  the  Flames
we  have  leen  threatning  the  utter  extirpation  of  the  Country,  muft  own
their  Original  to  thefe  dangerous  Errors  (if  not  Herelies)  which  if  they
remain  Unextinguished,  may  and  moft  likely  will  be  adfced  over  again.
That  'tis  more  Honour  to  own  an  Error  in  time,  than  tenacioufly  af-
ter full  Conviction  to  retain  it.  But  if  our  Author  will  again  Vindicate
fuch  matters,  pleafe  to  acquaint  him,  that  I  (hall  not  any  more  receive
his  Papers,  if  I'may  not  Copy  and  ufe  them  ;  and  that  when  he  does,
inftead  of  fuch  abftrufe  matters,  I  ftill  pray  his  determination  in  thofe
things  I  have  his  promife  for.  And  thus  begging  Pardon  for  thus  long
detaining  of  you,  i  am,  Sir,  yours  to  Command,

K- c.

Bofton.  To  the  Minifters,  whether  Englifh,  French,  or  Dutch,

March  18.  1694;

I  Having  had  not  only  Occafion,  but  renewed  provocation  to  take  a
view  of  the  Myfterious  Doctrines,  which  have  of  late  been  fo  much
contefted  among  us,  could  not  meet  with  any  that  had  fpoken  more,  or
more  plainly  the  fenfe  bf  thofe  Doctrines  (relating  to  ■  the  Witchcraft)
than  the  Reverend  Mr.  C.  M»  but  how  clearly  and  confiftent,  either
with  himielf  or  the  truth.  I  medle  not  now  to  fay,  but  cannot  but  fiippofe
his  ^Strenuous  and  Zealous  aiferting  his  opinions,  has  been  one  cauie  of
the  difmal  Convulfions  we  hare  here  lately  fallen  into  ;  Suppofing  that
his  Books  of  Memo- able  Providences,  relating  to  Witchcraft  as  alfo  his
Wonders  of  the  Invifible  World,  did  contain  in  them  things  not  warrant-
ablet  and  very  dangerous ,  I  fent  to  him  a  Letter  of  Quotations  out  of
thofe  Books,  fi£c.

That  ib  if  it  might  have  been,  I  might  underfbnd  what  tolierable
Senfe  he  would  put  upon  his  own  words,  which  I  took  to  be  a  better
%/ay  of  Proceeding,  than  to  have  affixed  what  I  thought  tc  be  the'r  na-
tural coniequences,  and  left  I  might  be  Judged  a  Sceptic  I  gave  him  a
full  and  free  account  of  my  belief  relating  to  thofe  Doctrines,  together
with  the  grounds  thereof;  And  prayed  him  that  if  I  crr'd  I  might  be
(hewed  it  by  Scripture,  and  this  I  had  his  reiterated  promife  for."  But
after  more  than  a  Years  waiting  for  the  performance  thereof,  sli  that  is
done  in  compliance  therewith,  is  that  in  Feb.  lalt,  he  lent  me  four  fheets
of  his  writing  as  his  belief,  but  before  I  might  receive  it  I  mufr  engage
to  deliver  it  back  in  a  Forrnighc  and  not  CopyYl. A  Summary  accourir

F -  of


34  A  Letter  to  the  Minifiers.  Parti.

*  of  which  I  (hall  give  you,  when  I  have  firft  acquainted  you  what  the
Dodfcrines  were  which  I  fent  to  him  for  his  concurrence  with,  or 'confu-
tation of and  to  which  1  had  his  promile,as  above.

Theis  jy  way  of  Queftion,  {Vi\.)  whether  that  fourth  Head  cited  and
recommended  by  himfelf  (In  Wonders  of  fix  Invifible  World,  of  Mi*.  Gauls)
ought  to  be  believed  as  a  truth,  which  runs  thus ;  Among  the  molt  un-
happy ciicurnftances  to  Convid  a  Wirch,~  one  is  a  Maligning  and  Op-
pugning the  Word,  Work,  and  Worfiiip  of  God,  and  feeking  by  any
•Extraordinary  fign  to  {educe  any  from  it,  Deu.  13.  1,  2.  '  -Mat.  24,
24.  Atts  1%.  8,  10.  zTim.  3,  8.  do  but  mark  well  the  places,  an4
for  this  very  property  of  thus  oppugning  and  perverting ,  they  are  all
there  concluded  arrant  and  abfolute  Witches.

And  if  in  Witchcraft  the  Devil  by  means  of  a  Witch  does  the  Mif-
chief,  how  'tis  porTible  to  diftinguifn  it  from  Poflfeflion,  both  being  laid
to  be  performed  by  the  Devil,  and  yet  without  an  Infallible  diftindion
there  can  be  no  certainty  in  Judgment.  And  whether  it  can  be  proved
that  the  Jewifh  Church  in  any  Age  before,  or  in  our  Saviours  time,  even
in  the  time  of  their  greateft  Apoftacy  did  believe  that  a  Witch  had  power
to  CommhTionate  Devils  to  do  Mifchief.

§0  much  to  the  Queftions.  Thefe  were  fent  as  my  belief:  That  the
Devils  bounds  are  fett,  that  he  cant  pafs;  That  the  Devils  are  fo  full  of
Malice,  that  it  cant  be  added  to  by  Mankind  ;  That  where  he  hath  po-
wer he  neither  can  nor  will  omit  executing  it  ;*  That  'tis  only  the  Al-
mighty that  lets  bounds  to  hisrage,and  that  only  can  CommhTionate  him
to  hurt  or  deftroy.  And  now  I  fhall  give  you  the  Summary  account  of
his  four  fheets  above  mention'd,  as  near  as  memory  Could  recoiled:,  in
Ten  Particulars.  '''.■■•

1 .  That  the  Devils  have  in  their  Natures  a  power  to  work  Wonders
and  Miracles:  particularly  that  the  Pbarifies  were  not  miftaken in  afTert-
ing  that  the  Devils  might  be  caft  out  by  Beelzebub;  and  that  our  Saviours
Anfwer  does  not  oppole  that  AiTertion;  and  that  he  hath  the  Power  of
Death ',  that  he  can  make  the  moft  Solid  things  Invifible-  and  can  In-
yifibly  bring  Poyfon  and  force  it  down  Peoples  Throats.

1.  That  to  aflert  this  Natural,  wonderful  Power  of  the  Devil,  makes
moft  for  the  Glory  of  God ,  in  preferring  Man  from  its  efFeds,
' 3.  Yet  this  Power  is  restrained  by  the  Almighty,  as  pleaieth  him.

4.  That  a  Witch  is  one  that  makes  a  Covenant  with  the  Devil.

5.  That  by  vertue  of  fuch  a  Covenant,  ihe  arrives  at  a  Power  to  Com-
mifftonate  him,  * .

6.  That  God  has  ordain'd,that  when  the  Devil  is  call'd  upon  by  the
Witch,  tho'  he  were  before  reftrained  by  the  Almighty,  the  defired  mif-
chiefs  ordinarily  lhall  as  certainly  be  performed , as  if  the  Witch  had

Todged


Part  2.  A  Letter  to  the  Minifters.  ^

lodged  Poyfoh  in  the  Bowels  of  her  Neighbour, or  had  fee MaftifF
Dogs  on  them.

7.  That  the  Witches  Art  of  applying  the  Plaftic  Spirit  of  the.  World
to  unlawful  purpofes,  does  Naturally  contribute  to  the  milchicfs  done
by  the  Devil.

8.  That  thatGod  which  reftrain'd  an  Abirnclich  and  a  Laban from  hurt-
ing, does  alfo  reftrain  the  Witch  from  Calling  upon  or  Improving  the
Devil,  when  he  will  not  have  his  Power  fo  exerted.

9.  That  to  have  a  Familiar  Spirit,  is  to  be  able  to  caufe  a  DeviJ  to
take  bodily  fliapes,  whereby  either  to  give  refponfes,  or  to  receive  of-
fers for  .doing  miichief.

10.  That  this  is  the  Judgment  of  moft  of  the  Divines  in  the  Coun-
trey,  whether  Englifh,  Dutch  or  French,

This  as  I  faid,  I  took  to  be  moft  material  in  the  four  fheets  lent  to  me
as  his  belief,  and  is  alfo  all  the  performance  he  has  yet  made  of  his  fe-
veral  promifes$  which  ten  Articles  being  done  only  by  memory  ,  left
thro'  miftake  or  want  of  the  Original,  I  might  have  committed  any  er-
rors, I  lent  them  to  him  that,  if  there  were  any,  they  might  be  rectified:
But  inftead  of  iuch  an  Anfwer,  as  might  be  expected  from  a  Minifter
and  a  learn'd  Gentleman,  one  Mr.  W —  fhewed  me  a  Letter  writ  by
Mr*  C.  M —  to  himfelf,  which  I  might  read,  but  neither  borrow  nor
Copy, and  fo,  if  I  were  minded,  could  give  but  a  fhort  account  of  it.

And  palling  over  his  hard  Language,  which,  as  I  am  confeious  t6  my
felf;  I  never  deferv'd  (relating  to  my  wilting  in  the  margin  of  the  four"
fheets ;  and  to  thefe  ten  Articles)  fo  I  hope  I  underftand  my  Duty,  bet-
ter than  to  imitate  him  in  retorting  rhe  like.  Among  his  many  words1
in  his  faid  Letters,  I  meet  with  two  fmall  Objections ;  one  is  againft  the  N
frord  (Miracle)  in  the  ftrft  Article,  the  word,  I  fay,  not  the  matter,  for
£he  works  he  attributes  to  the  Devil  are  the  fame  in  their  being  above
or  againft  the  Courfe  of  Nature  and  all  Natural  caufes,  yet  he  will  not
admit  of  thefe  to  be  call'd  MiracleSjand  hence  he  reckon'*  it  the  greateft
difficulty  he  meets  with  in  this  w^icle  affair,  to  diftinguifh  the  works  of
the  Devil  from  Miracles.  And  hence  alfo  he  concedes  to  the  Devil  the'
Power  to  make  the  moft  Solid  things  Invifibie,  and  Invidbly  to  bring
Poyfon  and  force  it  down  Peoples  Throats,  &c:  Which  I  look  upon  to:
be  as  true  Miracles  as  that.  2  Kjngs  6.  18.  and  this  is  rhe  fenfe  I  un-
derftand the  word  in,  and  in  this  knk,  he  himfelf  in  the  four  foeets  ad-
mits it  j  for  he  has  an  objection  to  this  efFedfc,  Vi%.  [If  the  Devils  have
fuch  power,  &c.  then  Miracles  are  not  ceas'd;  and  where  are  we  then  ?
(his  Anfwer  is)  Where!  even  iuft  where  we  were  before,  fay  I J  fo  that
it  feems  the  only  offence  here  is  at  my  uiing  his  words.  H.s  fecorid
febjec^ion-  ("for  weight)  is  againft  the  whole  ninth  Article, end  wonders'

F  $  Bow1


%6  A  Letter  to  the  Mimften*  Part  x\

how  'tis  po/Tible  for  one  Man  fo  much  to  mifunderftand  another;  Ye*
as  I  remember,  he  fpeaking  of  the  Witch  of  Endor  in  the  faid  four  fheet$
fays,  (he  had  a  familiar  Spirit,  and  that  [a  Spirit  belonging  to  the  Invi-
fible  World,  upon  her  calling  appear'd  to  SauQ  &c.  and  if  fo  'tis  cer-
tain he  gave  refponfes,he  alfo tells  of  Balaamfthaz  it  was  kn  own  that  he
could  fet  Devils  on  People  to  deftroy  them,  and  therefore  how  this  ob-
jection fhould  bear  any  Force  I  fee  not;  The  reft  of  the  objections  are
of  fo  frnall  weight  that  once  reading  may  be  fufficient  to  clear  them  up*
and  if  this  be  notfo,  he  can,  when  he  pleafes,  by  making  it  Publick  to-
gether with  the  Margins  I  writ,  Convince  all  People  of  the  truth  of
what  he  aflferts;  But  here  'tis  to  be  noted,  that  the  id.  3d.  4^.  and
$tk  Articles  he  concedes  to,  as  having  nothing  to  object  againft  them,
but  that  they  are  his  belief;  and  that  the  6th.  and  jth.^  he  puts  for  An-
fwer  to  an  objection  which  he  thus  frames,  tfi\.  If  the  Devil  have
fuch  powers  but  cannot  exert  them  but  by  permifilon  from  God,  what
can  the  Witch  contribute  thereto.  And  thus  I  have  faithfully  performed
what  I  undertook,  and  do  folemnly  declare,  I  have  not  intentionally  in  ri
the  leaft  wronged  the  Gentleman  concern 'd,nor  defign'd  the  leaft  blemifh  1
to  his  Reputation;  but  if  it  ftands  in  competition  With  the  Glory  of  God,
the  only  Almighty  Being!  his  truths  and  his  Peoples  welfare  ,  I  fuppofe
thefe  too  valuable  to  be  trampled  on  for  his  fake,  tho'  in  other  things  I  j
Sm  ready  to  my  power  (tho'  with  denying  ibme  part  of  my  own  inte-l
reft  J  to  ferve  him.  Had  this  Gentleman  declin'd  or  detracted  his  four  I
(heets,  I  fee  not  but  he  might  have  done  it,  and  which  I  think  there  was
cauie  enough  for  him  fo  to  have  done,  but  to  own  the  four  ftieets,  and
at  the  fame  time  to  4  if  own  the  Doctrine  contain'd  in  them,  and  this
knowing  that  I  have  no  Copy,  renders  the  whole  of  the  worfe  afpect;

And  now  I  (hall  give  you  a  further  account  of  my  Belief,  when  I  have
firft  premifed,that  'tis  a  prevailing  Belief  in  thisCountrey,andelfewhere,
that  the  Scriptures  are  not  full  in  the  Defcription  of,  and  in  the  way  and  J
means  how  to  detect  a  Witch,  tho  poffitive  in  their,  Puniihment  to  be  byjl
Death  ;  and  that  hence  they  have  thought  themfelves  under  a  neceiTity  I
of  taking  up  with  the  Sentiments  of  fuch  Men or  Places  that  zrejl
thought  worthy  to  give  rules  to  detect  them  by; And  have  accordingly  I
practifed,  vi%.  In  fearching  for  Tets  for  the  Devil  to  fuck; Trying  whe-  |
ther  the  fuipected  can  fay  the  Lords  Prayer;  And  whether  the  Afflicted
falls  at  the  fight,  and  rifes  at  the  totich  of  the  fuppofed  Witch  ;  As  alfo|
by  the  Afflicted  or  PoIMed  giving  account  who  is  the  Witch.

Touching  thefe  my  belief  is,  that  'tis  highly  Derogatory  to  the  wii
dome; the Wife  Lawgiver,  to afceft,  That  he  has  given  a  Law  byi
Mofcs,  the  Penalty  whereof  is  Death; and  yet  no  direction  to  his  Peo^Jj
J>!e,  whereby  to  know  and  detect  the  culpable,  till  our  Triumvirate  Mrt


Part  i.§  A  Letter  to  the  Minifters.  37

Perkins,  Gaul,  and  Bernard,  had  given  us  their  receits,  and  that  that  fourth
Head  of  Mr;  Gauls,  being  fd  well  prov'd  by  Scripture  is  a  truth,  and
contains  a  full  and  clear  Teftimony,  who  are  Witches  culpable  of  Death,
and  that  plainly  and  from  Scripture,  yet  not  excluding  any  other  branch,
When  as  well  proved  by  that  infallible  rule.  And  that  the  going  to  the
Afflided  or  PolTefTed,  to  have  them  Divine  who  are  Witches  by  their
Specteral  fight,  is  a  great  wickednefs*  even  the  Sin  of  Saul  (for  which  he
alfo  Died  J  but  with  this  difference,  the  one  did  it  for  Augury,  or  to
know  future  Events,  the  other  in  order  ro  take  away  Life;  and  that  the
fearching  for  Tets;  the  experiment  of  their  faying  the  Lords  Prayer;
the  falling  at  the  right  and  rifing  at  the  touch  of  the  luppoied  Crimi-
nal, being  all  of  them  foreign  from  Scripture,as  well  as  reaion,  are  abo-
minations to  be  abhor'd  and  repented  of.  And  that  our  Salem  Witch-
craft, either  reflecting  the  Judges  and  Juries,  their  tendernefs  of  Life,
or  the-Multitude  and  pertinency  of  witnefles5both  Afflicted  and  Confeflbrs,
or  the  Integrity  of  the  Hiftorians,  are  as  Authentic, and  made  as  certain
as  any  ever  of  that  kind  in  the  World;  and  yet  who  is  it  that  now  fees
not  through  it,  and  that  thefe  were  the  Sentiments  that  have  procured
the  foreft  Aifliclion,  and  iiioft  lafting  infamy  that  ever  befel  this  Coun-
trey,  and  moftlike  fo  to  do  again,  if  the  lame  notions  beftill  entertain'd
and  finally  that  thefe  are  thofe  laft  times,  of  which  the  Spirit  fpeaks  ex-
prefly,  Tim.  4.  1 .  And  now  ye  that  are  Fathers  in  the  Churches^  Guides
to  the  People,  and  the  Salt  of  the  Earth

I  befeech  you  eonfider  thefe  things;  and  if  you  find  the  Glory  of  God
diminifht  by  afcribing  fuch  power  to  Witches  and  Devils;  His  truth*
oppos'd  by  thefe  notions;  and  his  People  afperled  in  their  Docrrines  and
Reputations,  and  indangered  in  their  Lives;  I  dare  not  dictate  to  you,
you  know  your  duty  as  Watchmen,  and  the  Lord  be  with  you;

But  if  you  find  my  belief  contrary  to  found  Doctrine,  I  intreat  you
to  fhew  it  me  by  the  Scripture ;  And  in  the  mean  time  blame  me  not  if  I
cannot  believe  that  there  are  feveral  Almighties  ;  for  to  do  all  forts  c't'
wonders,  beyond  and  above  the  Courfe  of  Nature,  is  certainly  the  work
of  Omnipotence.  So  alfo,  he  that  fhal!  Commiflionate  or  Impower  to
thefe,  muft  alfo  be  Almighty  ;andl  think  it  not  a  fufficierit  Salvo,  to  fay
they  may  be  reftrain'd  by  the  moft  High  ;  and  hope  you  will  not  put  any
hard  Conftruction  on  thefe  my  Endeavours  to  gee  information  (all  other
ways  failing),  in  things  fo  needful  to  be  known;  praying  the  Almigh-
ties Guidance  and  projection,  I  am  Yours  to  the  utmoft  of  my  Power.


Pv  C.


Mr,  Sam-


3S  A  Letter  to  Mr.  S,  W.  Part  %.

Mr.  Samuel  Wi  Hard,  Bolton,  Sept.  the  loth,  1695;

Reverend  Sir,

MY  former  of  March  the  T8th.  directed  to  the  Ministers  (and  which
was  lodg'd  with  your  felf)  containing  feveral  Articles,  which  I
fent  as  my  belief,  praying  then)  if  Jererd  to  (hew  it  me  by  Scripture ,  I
have  as  yet  had  no  Anfwer  to,  either  by  word  or  writing,  which  makes
me  gather  that  they  are  approved  of  as  Orthodox,  or  at  leaft  that  they
have  fuch  Foundations,  as  that  none  are  willing  to  manifeft  any  oppo-
fition  to  them;  And  therefore  with  fubmiflion,  &c.  1  do  think  that
that  late  feafonable  and  well-defign  d  Dialogue  intituled,  Seme  mifcellany
Observations,  &c.  of  which,  your  felf  is  the  luppos'd  Author  fand  which
was  fo  ferviceabie  in  the  time  of  it)  is  yet  liable  to  a  male  conftruction,
even'to  the  endangering  to  revive  what  it  moft  oppofes,  and  to  bring
thole  practices  again  on  Foot,  which  in  the  day  thereof  were  fo  terrible
to  this  whole  Country;  The  words  which  /  fh ppofe  f©  liable  to  Mifcon-
ftruction,  are  Pag.  1 4.  B.  Who  informed  them  ?  S.  The  Spetlre,  B„  very
good,  and  that's  the  Devil  turned  Informer.  How  ate  good  Men  like  to  fare
againft  whom  he  hath  particular  Malice  I

It  is  hut  a  Prefumption,  and  Wife  Men  will  weigh  Preemptions  againft
jprefumfttions. There  is  to  he  no  Examination  without  grounds  of  Sufpicion*
Some  Perfons  Credit  ougljt  to  be  accounted  too  good  to  he undermined  fo  far
as  to  be  fufpeHed  on  fo  flight  a  ground:  and  it  is  an  Injury  done  them  to  bring
them  upon  Examination,  which  renders  them  openly  SufpeBed.  I  will  not  de-
ny but  for  Perfbns  already  fufpeHed  and  of  III  fame,  it  may  cccafion  their  be-
i?ig  examin'd.  In  which  thefe  words  ('tis  but-  a  prefumption,  c9c.)  (and
fome  Perfons  credit,  &c.)  (and  J  will  not  deny  but  for  Perfbns  already
fufpected, &c.) this  I  take  to  be  waving  to  diicnfs  tbofe  points.  the:
fpeaking  to  which  might  at  that  time  have  hindered  the  ufefulneis  and
fuccefs  of  that  Book,  rather  than  any  declaring  the  Sentiments  of  th<?
Auchor. But  notwithstanding  many  Perfons  will  be  ready  to  underftand
this,  as  if  the  Author  did  wholly  leave  it  with  the  Jufbice,  to  Judge  whd:
•  are  111  Perfons,  fuch  as  the  Devils  Accuiations  may  faften  upon  ; And
that  the  Devils  Accufation  of  a  Perfon,  is  a  Bremmption  againft  them  of
their  guilt ; and  that  upon  fuch  preiumptions,  they  may  be  -had  to  Ex-
amination, if  the  Juftiee  counts  them  Perions  of  ill  fame  (for  the  Author"
I  fuppofe  knows  that  the  bear  Examination  will  leave  fuch  a  ftain  upon
them,  and  well  if  their  Pofterity  efcape  ill)  as  the  length  of  a  Holy  and
imblameable  Life  will  be  found  too  lhort  to  Extirpate. And  if  the  Juf-.
tice  may  go  thus  far  with  the  Devils  Evidence, then  the  addition  of  a
jftory  or  two  of  fome  Cart  overfet,  or  perfon  taken Sick  after  a  quarre],
might  as  well  be  thought  fufneient  for  their  Commitment,  in  order  to

their


Part  2.  . Tropofals  to  the  PrefiJent.  39

their  Tryal  as  'tis  call'd  (tho'  this  too  often  has  been  more  like  a  Stage
Play,  or  a  Tragicomical  Scene)  and  fo  that  otherways  ufeful  Book,  may
prove  the  greatcft  Snare  to  revive  the  fame  practices  again.
■  Thefe  things  being  fo  liable,  as  I  fa  id ,  to  fuch  male  conftrudtion,  it
were  needful  that  Men  might  be  undeceiv"d,  and  the  matter  more  fuily
demon  ftra  ted,  (Vi%.)  That  the  Devils  Accufation  is  not  fo  much  as  any
nrelumption  againit  the  Life  or  Reputation  o£  any  perfoh,  for  how  are
good  Men  like  to  fare,  if  his  malicious  accufations  may  be  take\i  as  a  pre-
emption of  their  Guilt;  and  that  his  acufations  as  they  are  no  prelum  prion
igainft  perfons  of  unfpotted  Fame,  fo  neither  are  they  to  be  heard,
)r  any  ways  regarded,  againft  perfons  rho'  otherways  of  ill  Life,  much  lefs
:or  their  having  long  fincehad  their  Names  abufed  by  his  outcries,6r  by
he  Malice  of  111  Neighbours ;  and  that  Juftice knows  no  difference  of  Per-
ons;  that  if  this  Evidence  be  fufHcient  to  bring  one  perfpn'ds  fo  to  bring
mv  other  to  Examination,  and  confequendy  to  the  utmoft  extent  of  odium,
vhiehfuch  Examination  will  certainly  ex pofe  them  to,  for  who  canknoW1
ny  other,  but  that  as  theone  may  be  Malic ioufly  accufed  by  Devilsanda
'  Dcvilifli  repprt  gone  before  it ;  lo  that  another  who  has  not  6een  fo  much
s  accufed  before,  being  more  Cunning  or  more  feeming  Religious,  might
et  be  more-guilty ;  the  whole  depending  upon  Invifible  Evidence,  of  which
nvifible  ftuff  tho"  we  have  had  more  than  fufficient,  yet  I  find  ( among  other
Leverend  Perfons)  your  Names  to  acertain  Printed  Paper,  which  runs  thus,

'crtain  Propofals  made  by  the  Prefident  and  Fellows  of  Harvard  College,
To  the  Reverend  Minifiersof  the  Gofpel,  in  the  fever dl Churches  0/New-
1  England.

7  Irft,  To  obferye  and  record  the  more  liuflrious  Difcoveries  of  the  Divine
Providence,  in  the  Government  of  the  World, is  a  defignfo  holy,  fo-ufe-
l,  fo  jufily  approved,  that  the  too  general ncgleft  ef  it  in  the  Churches  of
od4  is  as  juftiy  to  be  Lamented.

2.  For  the  redrefs  of  that  negkH ,  alt  ho?  /til  Chrifiians  have  a  Duty  in-
mbent  en  them,  yet  it  is  in  a  peculiar  manner  te  be  recommended  unto  tit
Unifiers  of  the  Gofpel,  to  improve  the  fpeciai  advantages  which  are  in  their
ands,  to  obtain  and  prcferve  the  kne-wledge  of  fuch  notable  occurrences  as
e  fought  out  by all  that  have  f  leaf  me-  in  the  great  Works  of  the  L&rd.

3.  The  things  to  be  cfteemed  Memorable ,are  efpecially  all  umfiial  accidents
the  Heaven  jr  Earth,  or  Water  f  All  wonderful  Deliverances' .of  the  Dj/-
fjed,  Mercies  to  the  Godly  ,  Judgments  on  the  Wicked,  and  more  Glorious^
fillments  of  either  the  Prcmijes  or  Threat nings  in  the  Scriptures  of  Truth,
fh  Apparitions ,  Poffefilons,  Enchantments,  and  all  extraordinary  things^
ere  hi  the  Exiftence  and  Agency  of  the  Invifible  World  is  more  fen  fib  ly  d^
nfiratcd.

•  4#'


40  A  Letter  to  Mr-  S.  W.  Part  2 J

4.  It  is  therefore  Propofed,  That  theMinifiers  throughout  this  Land,  would
manif"(l  their  Pious  regards  unto  the  Worlds  of  the  Lord,  and  the  Operation
of  his  hands, by  reviving  their  cares  to  take  Written  Accounts,  of fuchRemark-
ables :  But  (fill  well  Attefled,  with  credibled  andfujfcient  Witncfs.

5.  It  is  defiredthat  the  Accounts  thus  taken  of  thefe  F{emarkables,  way  he
fent  in  unto  the  Prefident,  or  the  EeJlows  of  the  Collqdge,  by  whom?  they  fh  all
be  carefully  referved  for  Juch  a  ufi  to  he  made  of  them\  as  may  by  fome  fit  Af-

fembly  of  Minifters  be  Judged  moft  conducing  to  the  G I  fry  of  God,  and  the  Ser-
vice of  his  People.

6.  Tho  we  doubt  not,  that  love  to  the  Name  of  God  miff  be  motive  enough
unto  all  good  Men,  to  Contribute  what  Affiftance  they  can  unto  this  Un-
dertaking-, yet  for  further  Incouragement,  fume  fmgular  Markj  of  Ref peels
fhall  be  ftudied  for  fuch  good  Mm,  as  will  atluatly  affift  it,  bv  taking  painsr
to  Communicate  any  Important  Paffages  proper  to  be  infer  ted  in  this  Collection,

Increafc  Mather,  Prefident.
Cambr.  March  5.  169  J  James  Allen, ~)  John  Leverett,  J

Char.  Morton, (  PPiL  Brattle, Ct?  11
Sam.WUlard, f  Neh.  Walter, Tallows,
Cotton  Mather,  3  -^

Here  being  an  Encouragement  to  all  good  Men,  to  (end  in  fuch  re-jl
markables  as  are  therein  expreiTed  , I  have  fertt  in  the  following,  nocjl
that  I  think  them  a  more  fenfible  demonftration  of  the  being  of  a  future
State  (with  rewards  and  Punifhments)  or  of  Angels  good  and  bad, &c.
than the  Scriptures  of  truth  hold  forth,  &c. Or  than  any  of  thofe  o-
ther  dernonftrations  God  has  given  us  -, for  this  were  Treacheroufly  and
Perfidionfly  to  quit  the  Poft  to  the  Enemy;  the  Saducee,  Deift,  and  Atheift
would  hereby  be  put  in  a  condition  fo  Triumphantly  to  deny  the  Exif-
tence  and  Agency  thereof.  As  that  a  few  Sones  told  ("which  at  belt  muf
be  owned  to  be  fallible  and  liable  to  mifreprefentations-  could  not  b
tbcughr  Infallibly  fufScient  to  demonftrate  the  truth  againft  them.  I  hav
heard  that  in legick a  falfe  Argument  is  reckon'd much  worfe  tha
none-,  Yet  fuppoting  chat  a  Collection  of  Inftanccs  may  be  many  way
ufeful,  not  only  to  the  prefent  but  Succeeding  Ages, I  have  lent  you  th<
fr.  owing remarkabies,  which  have  lately  occurred,  the certainty  o:
wh n,  if  any  fcruple  it,  will  be  fpund  no  hard  matter  to  get  fatisfaclio:
therein : But  here, not  to  infill  on  thofe  lefs  oecurrentf, as  the  fudde:
Derrh  or' one  of  our  late  Juftices,  and  a  like  Mortallity  that  fell  u
the  two  Sons  of  another  of  them,  with  the  Fall  of  a  Man  that  was  ins
ing  provifion  to  raife  the  New  Northern  Bell? which,  when  it  was  upJI  Ik
the  firft  perfon,  whofe  death  it  was  to  fignifie,  was  faid  to  be  a  Child*  oil  fj
him,  who  by  Printing  and  fpeaking,  had  had  as  great  hand  in  procurj|  ife

' ■  m


Pih  L  A  Letter  to  Mr.  W.  41

ihg  the  late  Actions  as  any,if  not  the  greateft;  And  the  Splitting  the  Gun
'at  Salem,  where  that  furious  Marfhal,  and  his  Father,  &c,  was  rent  to
pieces,  &o»  As.  to  aJI  thefe  itmuft  he  owned,  that  no  man  knows  love  or
hatred  by  all  that  is  before  him,  much  lefs  can  they  be  more  fenfible  de-
monstrations of  the  Exiftence  and  Agency  of  the  InvifiblelVorld,  than  the
Scriptures  of  Truth  afford,  ®h,  tho'  the  Rich  Man  in  the  Parable
S  might  think  otherwiie,  c#c.  who  was  feeking  to  fend  fome  more  fenfible
DemCwuTauons  thereof  to  his  Brethren,  &c.  In  that  Tremendous  judg-
ment of  God  upon  this  Countrey,  by.  the  late  amazing  Profecution  of
the  People  here,  under  the  Notion  of  Witches ;.  whereby  20  Suffered  as
Evil  doers  (  befides  thofe  that  died  in  PrifonJ  about  ten  more  Condem-
ned, and  a  hundred  Imprifoncd,  and  about  two  hundred  more  Accufed»
and  the  Countrey  generally  in  fears,  when  it 'would  come  to  their  turn  to
to  be  Accufed  ;#and  the  Profecution  and  manner  of  Tryal  mch,  that  moll
would  have  ehofen  to  have  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  BarbarousEnemy;
rather  than  (under  that  notion )  into  the  hands  of  their  Brethren  in  Church
Fellowship;  and  in  fhort,  was  fuch  an  Arflielion  as  far  exceeded  all
that  ever  this  Countrey  hath  laboured  under.

Yet  in  this  Mount,  God  is  feen  .5  when  it  was  thus  bad  with  this  dif-
treffed  People,  a  full  and  a  fudden  flop  is  put,  not  only  -without,  but  a-
I  gainfl  the  Inclination  of  many,  for  out  of  the  Eater  came  forth  Meat :
Thofe  very  Accufers  which  had  been  improved  as  WitnefTes  again  (lib
many, by  the  Providence  of  the  molt  High,  and  perhaps  blinded  with'
Malice,  are  left  to  accufe  thofe  in  moll  High  efteem,  both  Magiftrates
and  Minifters, as  guilty  of  Witchcraft,  which  fhewed  our  Rulers,  that
neceflity  lay  upon  them,  to  confound  that  which  had  lb  long  confounded
the  Countrey,  as  being  unwilling  themfelves  to  run  the  fame  rifque  ;  this
that  was  in  the  Event  of  it  to  this  Countrey,  %as  Lite  from  the  Dead,  is
moll  eafie  with  him,  in  whole  Hands  are  the  Hearts  of  all  Men,ar.d  was
a  very  fignal  deliverance  to  this  whole  Countrey.  No  leis  Obfcr.  able  war
it,  that  tho'  at  the  time  when  the  Devils  Teftunony,  by  the  Affl  eltd,  was
firft  laid  alide,  there  were  great  Numbers  of  (real  or  pretended,)  Alifcl.
fed  : Yet  when  this  was  once  not  Judged  of  Validity  "enough  to  be  any
I  longer  brought  into  the  Court  againil  the  Accufed  as  Evidence,  the  Ar-
fliction  generally  ceafed,  and  only  ibine.  remainder's  of  it  in  fuch  place*/
where  more  Encouragement  was  given  to  the  Adoi's  Gcdfceming  there-
by plainly  to*  Decypher  that  Sin  of  going to  the  Devil,  ?$ci  as  the  rile
and  foundation  of  thofe  Punifhinents,

And  thus,  Reverend  Sir,  I  have,  as  I  underftahd  it/performed  my  Dutf
herein,  for  the  Giory  of  Gcd,  and  the  well  being  or  Men  .  And  ibr  irij
Freedome  ufed  in  this,  and  former  Writings,  feiatirg  to  the  Actors  iri
this  Tragedy,  J  frail  net  Apologize,  but  give  you  the  words  of  one  to


4i  A  Letter  to  Mr.  C.  M-  Part  i

whom  fome  can  afford  the  title  of  Venerable  (when  he  is  arguing  fo:
that  which  they  have  undertaken  to  alcert,  tho'  at  other  times,  mod
Diminitive  Eplthite  muftlervej  it  is  theRevcrend  Mr.R.Baxter  in  his'Book
The  Cure  of  Church  Divifons,  p.  257,  258.  But  (  T  pray  you  mark  h)  tk
way  of  God  is  to  fhame  the  Sinner.,  how  goodfocver  in  other  refpecis,  That  tin
fin  may  have  the  greater  fhame,  and  Religion  may  not  be  foamed,  as  if  it  al-
lowed men  to  fin  ;  Nor  God  the  Author  of  Religion- be  Di'fhoncurcd;  Nor  otheri
be  without  the  Warning  ;  But  the  way  of  the  Devil  is,  to  hide  or  jttfh'fie  tb\
fin,  Hs  tf  it  were  for  fear  of  Difpar aging  the  goodnefs  of  the  Pcrfcns  thai
committed  it ;  that  fo  he  may  hereby  Difhonour  Religion  and  Godlinefs  it  [elf-
'and  make  men  believe  it  is  but  a  Cover  for  any  PVickcdnefs,  and  as  confiftem
with  it,  as  a  loofer  Life  is,  and  that  he  may  keep  the  Sinner  from  Repenting-
and  blot  cut  the  Memory  of  that  warning,  which Jhould  have  prefcrved  After
Ages  from  the  like  falls.  Scripture  floameth  the  ?rofeffors%  (tho  a  David,  *
Solomon,  Peter,  Noah,  or  Lot)  that  the  Religion  prof  eft  may  not  be  fha-
med  but  vindicated :  Satan  would  preferve  the  Honour  of  Pro  fejjors,  that  thi
Religion  prof effed  may  bear  the  fhame  ;  andfo  it  may  fall  on  God  bimjeif.

And  now  that  all  that  have  had  a.  hand  in  any  horrid  and  blood)
practices  may  be  brought  to  give  glory  to  God,  and  take  the  due  fhama
to  themfelves;  And  that  our  Watchmen  may  no  longer  feek  to  palliate
(much  lefs  give  thanks  for )  fuch,  £&.  (thereby  making  them  their  own
and  that  the  people  may  no  longer  perifh  for  want  of  knowledge  in  thi
midft  of  luch  means  or  light  ;  Nor  God  be  any  longer  difhonoured  by
falfe  fentiments  in  thefe  matters,  is  the  earneft  deflre  and  prayer  of,  Sirr
yours  to  my  power*  R^  c,

Mr.  Cotton  Mather-.

Reverend  Sin,

HAving  long  fince  fent  you  fome  do&rinais  as  to  my  belief,  together
with  my  requeftto  you,  that  if  I  erred  you  would  be  pleafed  to  (hew
it  me  by  Scripture,  vi^  That  the  Devils  bounds  are  fet  which  he  cart-i
not  pals ;  That  the  Devils  are  fo  full  of  malice  that  it  cannot  be  addec(
k>  by  mankind  ;  That  where  he  hatn  power  he  neither  can  nor  will  tomr
executing  it-  That  'tis  only  the  Almighty  that  fets  bounds  to  his  rage
and  that  only  can  commhTionate  him  to  hurt  and  deliroy,  &c.  But  in-
ftead  or  fuch  an  Aniwer  as  was  prornifed,  and  juftly  expect ed,  yoei
were  pleafed  ro  fend  me  a  Book,  which  you  fince  cali'd  an  ungainfayabk
one  ■  which  Book  till  lately  I  have  not  had  opportunity  fo  fully  to  con-
Ikks.  And  to  the  end  you  may  fee  I  have  now  done  it,  I  have  fent  tc
you  fome  of  the  rumtkabie.s  contained  in  the  faid  Book*  Intituled*

The


.rt  ft".  4  Letter  to  Mr.  C.  M.


43


f/jc Ccrta.'nty  of  the  Wcrli  of  Spirits,  written  by  Mrt  R.  B. London,
Printed. 1691.

fT  is  therein  conceded  (Preface)  That  ro  fee  Devils  and  Spirits  ordinarily
would  not  be  enough  to  convince  Atheifts.  P.  88.  Atheifts  are  not  to
je  convinced'  by  ftories,  their  own  fenfes  are  not  enough  to  convince
fiem  any  more  than  fenfe  will  convince  a  PapiftfromTranfubftantiation.
D.  Laderd.)  P.  4.  No  Spirit  can  do  any  thing  but  by  God's  will  and
ermiflion.  (Preface)  'Tis  the  free  will  of  Man  that  gives  the  Devils  their
kirting  power  ■  And  without  our  own  confent  they  cannot  hurt  us.  {It
afjertcd.  P.  22,2,  223.  'I  hat  it  is  a  perverfe  oppofition  of  Popery
hich  caufes  many  Proteftants  not  to  regard  the  benefits  we  receive  by
;ngels.  And  Minifters  are  faulty,  that  do  not  pray  and  give  thanks  to
od  for  their  Miniftry  •  and  that  neglect  to  teach  Believers,  what  love  and
tot  thanks  they  owe  to  Angels.  P.  225.  Moftgood  people  look  fomuch
God  and  to  Minifters,  that  they  take  little  notice  of  Angels,  which
:  God's  great  Minifters.  P.  234.  The  Author  dares  not.as  fome  have
Dne,  judge  the  Catholick  Church  to  become  Anti- Chriftian  Idolaters,
oon  as  they  gave  too  much  Worfhip  to  Saints  and  Angels.  P.  7.  The
iefled  Souls  ftiall  be  like  the  Angels,  therefore  may  appear  here,  P.  3,  4.
^is  hard  to  know  whether  it  be  a  Devil  or  a  human  Soul  that  appears,
r  whether  the  Soul  of  a  good  pr.a  b2d  perfpn.  'Pr:(i.  or  the  Soul  of
ime  dead  friend  that  "fuffers,  and  yet  retains  love,  &c.  P.  222*.  No
3ubt  the  Souls  of  the  wicked  carry  with  them  their  former  inclinations
~  Covetoulnefs,  Revenge,  (3c.  P.  7.  When  Revengeful  things  are  done,
[  on  Murderers,  Defrauders,  &c.  it  feerrs  to  be  from  the  revengeful
rath  of  fome  bad  Soul,  if  it  be  about  Money  or  Lands,  then  from  a
'orldly  minded  one  ;  fome  fignifkations  of  God's  mercy  to  wicked  Souls
ter  this  Life.  P.  4.  Tis  a  doubt  whether  befides  the' Angels  fgoed
jd  bad )  and  the  Souls  of  men ,  there  is  not  a  third  fort;  cail'd  Faries
id  Goblins.  It  is  unfearchable  to  us  ho\y  far  God  leaves  "Spirits  to  free-
fill  in  fmall  things,  fufpending  his  predetermining  motion.  -:

P.  246.  The  Devils  have  a  Marvellous  power,-  if  but  a  fifty  wretched
'"itch  content.  P.  1  o.  2.02. The  ftories  cfWitches  apdSpirits  are  many  win  s
JefuJ,  particularly  to  convince  Atheifts,  ai# confirm  Believers,  and  to
rove  the  Operation  of  Spirits.  P.  232.  To  help  men  to  underftarid  that  .
♦evils  make  no  fmall  number  of  Laws,  and  Rulers  in  the  World,  and
re  Authors  of  meft  of  the  Wars,  and  of  many  Sermons,  and  of  Bocks
tat  adorn  the  Liberaries  of  learned  men.  P.  6.  ic2.  The  Devil's  lying
ith  the  Witch  is  not  to  be  denied,  and  is  more  to  Exerciic  the  Luft  of
e  Witch  than  of  the  Devil,  who  can  alio  bring  in  another  Witch  v^iih-

a  i  * •  ■' o  a-


44  A  Letter  to  Mr.  G  M.  Part  zl

out  opening  the  door,  and  fo  perform  it  by  one  Witch  with  another.
P. 105,  Witches  can  raife  Storms,  fell  Winds,  £?c.  as  is  commonly  af-
firmed. ?♦  1 07.  In  Amrrica  'tis  a  common  thing  to  fee  Spirits  day  and
P.  95.  96,  97,  1 10.  Stories  of  a  Child  that  could  not  be  cured  of,
Kraft,  becaufe  the  Ember-Weeks  were  paft, Vomited  a,  Knife  a
i  long,  Cart  Nails,  &c.  and  neither  eat  nor  drank  fifteen  days  and

g  ?.$  together  :  a  long  piece  of  Wood,  four  Knives,  and  two  fnarp
3  .eces  of  Iron,  ev'ry  one  above  a  fpan  long,  taken  out  of  the  Stomach,
<Sfa  Hair,  Stones,  Bones,  Vomited,  &c.  loco  I.  of  Blood  loft  by  one;
perfen!  in  a  years  time.

P.  250.  A  ftory  that  makes  the  Author  think  it  pofTiblethat  fuch  great
things  (as  he  mentions)  fhould  be  gotten  down  and  up  Peoples  Throats^

P.  if  4.  Partial  credibility  fpoils  many  a  good  ftory.

J\ 125.  The  Devil's  fubftance  enters  into  the  pofteffed.

P.  174.  Diftracted  are  pofTHTed,  V

P.  I49.  A  fick  Woman  while  (lie  lay  in  bed  went  to  fee  her  Children.

P.  1 53. A  Dog  appeared  like  a  Fly  or  a  Flea.

P.  165.  Some  knowing  Agents  directs  Thunder  ftorms,  tho'  the  Au-
thor knows  not  who,  and  that  they  fo  often  fall  on  Churches  he  knows
not  why.

P.  2,  80.  Mr.  J.  M.  and  Mr.  C.  M.  Recommended  together  with
Bod.'n,  &c.c.

P.  237.  A  Crifpian,  if  through  Ignorance  he  believes  not  what  he  faith,
may  be  a  Chriftian.

In  this,  Sir,  I  fuppofe  that  if  I  have  not  wronged  the  fenfe  of  the  Au-
thor in  the  places  quotedf  which  Itruft  you  (hall  not  find  I  have  done) I  can't
be  thought  accountable  for  the  Errors  or  Contradictions  to  him- (elf  or  to
the  truth,  if  any  fuch  be  found,  particularly  what  he  grants  in  the  Preface
(of  the  free-will  of  Man  giving  the  Devil  his  hurting  powerJThis  being
not  only  more  than  thofe  calFd  Witch- Advocates  would  defire  to  be  con-
ceded to  them  :  But  i>  a  palpable  and  manifeft  overturning  the  Authors
defign  in  all  his  Witch  ftories.  For  who  would  confent  to  have  the  De-
vil afflict  himfelf  ?  As  alfo  his  conceffion  [that  no  Spirit  can  do  any  thing
but,  by  God's  will  and  permifTion ,]  I  cannot  perfwade  my  felf  but  you
muft  be  fenfible  of  their  apparent  contradictor  nets  to  the  reft.  Others
there  are  of  a  very  ill  afpect,as  p.  234.  the  Ca'tholicks  are  much  encour-
aged in  their  Adoration  of  Angels  and  and  Saints.  If  that  were  fo  In-
nocent  as  not  to  render  them  Anti-chriftlan  Idolaters ;  and  that  p.  4.  i£
admitted,  will  feem  to  lay  an  ungain  fay  able  foundation  for  the  P.igan,
Indian^  and  -Diabblifts  Faith  •  by  telling  us  it  is  beyond  our  fearch  to
know  how  far  God  leaves  the  Devils  to  free-will,  to  do  what  they  plcafe,
|n  this  World,  'with  a  fufpenfiqn  of  God's  Predetermination  -3  which  if  it


were


Part  %.  A  Letter  to  Mr.  C.  M.  4?

were  a  truth,  what  were  more  rational  than  to  oblige  him  that  has  fuel*
power  over  us.  TheAtheifts  alio  would  take  encouragement  if  it  were
granted  that  we  cannot  know  how  far  God  fufpends  his  predetermining
motion,  he  would  thence  affirm,  we  as  little  know  that  there  is  a  pre-
determining motion,  and  confequently  whether  there  be  a  God,  and  p
165.  woul4  abundantly  ftrengthen  them,  when  fuch  a  Learned,  expe~
rienccd,and  highly  effeemed  Chriftian  fhall  own  that  he  knows  not  whq
pis  that  governs  the  Thunder  ftorms  ;  for  it  might  as  well  difcover  igno-
rance, who  'tis  that  difpofes  of  Earthquakes,  Gun-fhot,  and  Afflictions  •
that  befall  any  ,  with  the  reft  of  Mundane  Events.  I  defign  not  to
remark  all  that  in  the  Book  is  remarkable,  fuch  as  the  departed  Souls
wand1  ring  again  hither  to  put  men  upon  revenge,  &c.  favouring  fo  much
of  Pkhagoras  his  Transmigration  of  Souls,  and  the  Separation  of  the  Soul
from  the  Body  without  death,  as  in  the  cafe  of  her  that  went  to  fee  her
Children,  while  yet  (he  did  not  ftir  out  of  her  Bed,  which  feems  to  be
a  new  fpeculation  ;  uhlefs  it  determins  in  favour  of  Tranfubftantiation,
that  a  Body  may  be  at  the  fame  time  in  feveral  places.  Upon  the  whole
it  is  ungainfayable,  That  that  Book,  though  fo  highly  extoFd,  may  be
juftly  expected  to  occafion  the  ftaggering  of  the  weak,  and  the  harden-
ing of  unbelievers  in  their  Infidelity.  And  it  feems  amazing,  that  you
fhouid  not  only  give  it  fuch  2  recommend,  but  that  you  fhould  fend  it
to  me,  in  order  as  I  take  it)  to  pervert  me  from  the  belief  of  thofe  fun-
damental Do&rinals  (above  recited)  Though  I  account  them  more  firm
than  Heaven  and  Earth.  But  that  which  is  yet  more  ftrange  to  me,  is
that  Mr.  £-  his  Friends  did  not  advife  him  better,  than  in  his  declined
Age  to  emir  fuch  crude  matter  to  the  publick.  As  to  the  fometime  Re-
verend Author,  let  his  works  praife  the  Remembrance  of  him;  but  for
fuch  as  are  either  Erroneous  and  foifted  upon  him,  or  the  effect  or  an
aged  Imbecillity,  let  them  be  detected  that  they  may  proceed  no  further.
I  .  I  an  not  ignorant  that  the  manner  of  Education  of  Youth  in,  I  think,
almoft  all  Chriftian  Schools  hath  a  natural  tendency  to  propagate  thole
Doctrines  of  Devils  heretofore  (folely)  profeft  among  Ethnkkj,  and
t>articularly  in  matters  of  Witchcraft,^.  For  notwithstanding  the  Coun-
cil of  Carthage  their  taking  notice  that  the  Chriftian  Doctors  did  con-
*verfe  much  with  the  writings  of  the  Heathens  for  the  gaining  of  Elo-
quence, forbad  the  reading  of  the  Books  of  the  Gentiles  ;  yet  it  feems
this  was  only  a  Bill  without  a  penalty,  which  their  SuccefTors  did  net
look  upon  to  be  binding.  He  that  fhould  in  this  age  take  a  view  of  the
Schools,  might  Be  induced  to  believe  that  the  ages  fince  have  thought,
that  without  fuch  Heathen  Learning  a  man  cannot  be  fo  accompliih'd,
as  to  have  any  pretence  to  Academick  Literature  :  and  that  the  vuJg.rr
Ipighi  not  be  without  the  benefit  of  inch  Learning fome  of  their  D'a-


C.pfCi


A$  A  Letter  to  Mr.  Q.  M.  ^rt %,

ciples  have  taught  them  to  fpeak  Englifh,  which  has  given  me  the  op-
portunity to  fend  you  thefe  following  Verfes.

Virg.  Bucolicks; Sure  love  is  not  the  caufe  their  bones  appear.

Eclog. ^3, »  Some  eyes  bewitch  my  tender  Lambs  1  fear.

Eclog.  8.-* For  me  thefe  Herbs  in  Pbntus  Mseris  chofe,

There  ev'ry  powerful  Drug  in  plenty  grows  ;
Transform  d  to  a  Wolf,  1  often  Maoris //zip,
. Then,  into  floady  Woods  himfelf  withdraw :
Oft  he  from  decpefl  Scpulchers  would  Charm
Departed  Souls. And  from  another  s  Farm,
Into  his  own  ground  Corn  yet  ft  anding  take.
Now  from  the  Town  my  Charms  £r/w£Daphn!s  bacJfc
Vanquifht  with  charms  from  Heaven  thcMoondcfcends
Circe  with  Charms  transformed  Ulyffes  friends  :
Charms  in  the  Field  will  bwft  a  feyfinus  Snakfr
I  Now  from  the  Town,  &c.

pvids  Meta- Her  Arms  thrice  turns  about,  thrice  wets  her  crown
morphofis. Wkh  gather  d  dew,  thrice  yawns,  and  kneeling  down  •
Lib.  7. Oh  Night  I  thou  friend  to  fecrets  you  clear  fires,
That  with  the  Moonfucceed  when  day  retires.
Great  Hecate,  thai  kpicyvft  and  aid  Imparts,
To  cur  defign,  you  Charms  and  Magic  1^  Arts :
And  thou, oh  Earth, that  to  Magicians  yields
Thy  powerful  simples  :  Airs,  Winds,  Mountains, Fieldst
Soft  murmuring  Springs,  ft  ill  Lak^s^and  Rjvers  clear,
You  Gods  of  Woods,  you  Gods  of  night  appear  •  '
By  you  at  will,  I  make  fwift  Streams  retire,
To  their  firft  Fountain,  while  their  Banks  admire.
Seas  tofs  and  fmooth  ;.  clear  Clouds  with  Clouds  deform^
Storms  titm  to  Qalms,  and  make  a  Calm  a  Storm.
iVith  Spells  and  Charms,  I  breaks  the  Vipers  Jaws*
Qleave  folid  Rgckj,  Oaks  from,  their  Jifure s  draw  ;
Whole  Woods  remove,  the  Airy  Mountains  floakp  ;
Earth  fore 4  to  groan,  and  Ghofts  from  Graves  awa\e,
„,-._ -toy  journey  takes,

Lib.  14.* To  Rhegium  oppofite  to  Zanle's  floor e,

And  treads  the  troubled  Waves:, that  loudly  roar  $
: Running  with  unwet  Feet  on  that  profound,
As  if  S If  had  trod  upon  the  folid  ground.


Part  i.  A  Letter  to  Mr,  G  M.  47

This  with portentous  poyfons  fhe  pollutes,
Bcfprinkjed  with  the  juice  of  wicked  roots,  .
In  words  dark,  and  perplext .  nine  times  thrice,
Inchantments  mutters  with  her  wicked  voice, &C. '

Thefe  Fables  of  the  Heathens  ftho'  in  themfelves  of  no  more  Validity
than  the  idleTales  of  an  Indian,  or  theDifcourfes  of  a  known.  Romancer)
are  become  the  School-learning,  not  to  fay  the  Faith  of  Chriftians,  and
are  the  Scriptures  brought  (inftead  of  that  moft  fare  Word]  if  not  co
prove  po6lrine,yet  as  illuftrations  thereof.  Cafes  of  Confcience  concern-
ing Witch,  pag.  25.  Remarkable  Providences,  pag.  150.  (This  perhaps
might  be  the  caufe  that  in  England  a  people  otherways  fober  and  Religi-
ous have  for  fbme  ages  fin  a  manner  wholly)  refufed  the  admitting
thofe  fo  educated  to  the  work  of  the  Miniftry.  Such  education  and  practi-
ce, have  fo  far  prevailed  that  it  has  been  a  means  of  corrupting  die
Chriftian  World,  almoft  to  that  degree  as  to  be  ungainfayabie  ;  for  tho'
there  is  Reafon  to  hope  that  thefe  Diabolical  principles  have'  not  fo  pre-
vail'd  (with  multitudes  of  ChriftiansJ  as  that  they  afcribe  to  a  Witch
and  a  Devil  the  Attributes  peculiar  to  the  Almighty  ;  yet  how  few  are
willing  to  be  found  oppoiing  iiich  a  torrent,  as  knowing  that  in-fo  doing
they  (hall  be  fure  to  meet  with  oppoution  to  the  utmoft,  from  the  many,
both  of  Magiftrates,  Miniiters  and  People  ;  and  the  name  of  Sadducee^A-'
theift,  and  perhaps  Witch  too  cait  upon  them  moll  liberally,  by  men  of
the  higheft  prof eifion  in  Gpdlinefs.  And  if  not  fo  learned- as  fome  of
themfelves,  then  accounted  only  fit  to  be  trampled  oh,  and  their  Argu-
ments (tho  both  Rational  and  Scriptural  J  as  fit  only  for  contempt.  But
tho  this  be  the  deplorable  Dilemma  ;  yet  fome  have  dared  from  time  id'
time  (for  the  glory  of  God,  and  the  good  and  fafety  of  Mens  lives,  &c.\
to  run  all  thefe  Rifques.  And  that  God  who  has  faid ,  My  glory  I  will
not  give  to  another,  is  able  to  protect  thofe  that  are  found  doing  their
duty  herein  againft  all  oppoiers  ;  and  however  other  ways  contemptible
can  make  them  ufeful  in  his  own  hand,  who  has  fomedmes  chofen  die
weaken:  Inftruments,  that  his  power  may  be  the  more  Illuftrious.

sbid  now3  Reverend  Sir,  if  you  are  conjeious  to  your  J elf,  that  you  have  in
your  principles,  or  practices  been  abetting  to  fuch  grand  Errors,  1  'cannot  fee
how  it  can  confift  with  fine  crity  to  be  fo  convinced  in  matters  jo  nearly  rela-
ting to  the  glory  of  God,  and  lives  of  Innocents  ;.  and  at  the  Jaiiie  time  Jp
much' to  fear-  disparagement  among  Men,  ai  tofiifle  Qov.fc\ncc3  and  dif-
.{cmble  an  approving  of  former  fentiments  -,  you  ktiow  that  word,  he  that  ho~-
noureth  me  I  will  honour,  and  he  that  defpifeth  me  fhall  be  lighirf
cfteemed.  But  if  you  thinly  that  i?i  thefe  matters  yen  have  done  your  duty;
and  taught  people  theirs  • and  that  the  Doclrwes  cited  from  the  mentioned-

Beck


48  A  Letter  to  the  Mnifiert.  Part  U

Book.'dre  ungainfayable :  I  fhaA  conchide  in  almoft  his  words.  He  that  tenches
(uch  Dotlrine,  if  through  Ignorance  he  believes  not  what  he  faith,  may  be  £
Chriftian  :  But  if  he  believes  them,  he  is  in  the  broad  path  to  Heathenifm^
Devilifm,  Popery  or  Atheifm.  It  is  a  folemn  caution,  Gal.  1.8.  But  thO
we  or  an  Angel  from  Heaven  preach  any  other  Gofpel  unto  ycii  thari
that  which  Ave  have  preached  unto  you,  let  him  be  accurfecL  I  hope  you
will  not  niifconftrue  my  Intentions  herein,  who  am,  Reverend  Sir,  lours  to
command,  in  what  I  may*,  R.  C,

To  the  Minifters  in  and  near  Bcfton. January, 12.  1696.

f^ilriftianity  had  been  but  a  Jhort  time  in  the  World)  when  there  was  raifdd
^  againft  it,  not  oily  open  profefi  Enemies  ;  but  fecret  and  imbred  under-
miners,  who  fought  thereby  to  effetl  that  which  open  force  had  beenfo  often
bafled  in.

And  notwithftanding  that  primitive  purity  and  fmcerity,  which  in  fomi
good  meafure  was  ftill  retained ;  yet  the  cunning  deceivers  and  Afoftate  He-
ret icks  found  opportunity  to  beguile  the  unwary,  and  this  in  fundamentals.

Among  others  which  then  fprung  up,  with  but  toj  much  advantage  in  the
third  Century,  the  Maniche  didfpread  his  Peftifcrous  fentiments,  and  taught
the  Exiftence  of  two  Beings,  or  Caufes  of  all  things,  viz*  a  good  and  a  bad ;
but  theft  were  foon  filenced-  by  the  more  Orthodox  DoHors,  and  Anathematized
by  General  Councels*  A?id  at  this  day  the  American  Indians,  another  fort  of
Maniche  entertaining,  (thus  far)  the  fame  belief  ,  hold  it, their  prudence
and  intereft  to  pleafe  that  evil  Being,  as  well  by  perpetrating  other  Murders,*
as  by  their  Bloody  Sacrifices,  that  fo  he  may  not  harm  them.  The  Iron  teeth
of  time  have  now  almoft  devoured  the  name  of  the  former,  and  as  to  the
latter,  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  as  Chriftianity  prevails  among  them,  they  will
abhor  fuch  abominable  belief.

And  as  thofe  primitive  times,  were  not  priviledged  againfi  the  fpreading
of  dangerous  Herefie,  (0  neither  can  any  now  pretend  to  any  fuch  Immunity \
tUo  pf  of effng  the  enjoyment  of  a  primitive  purity.

Might  a  Judgment  be  made  from  the  Books  of  the  modem  learned  Divines  $
or  from  the  practice  of  Courts,  or  from  the  Faith  of  many,  who  call  themfehei
Chriftians,  it  might  be  modeftly,  tho  fadly  concluded  that  the  DoHrine  of  the\
Maniche,  at  hall  great  part  of  it,  is  fd  far  from  being  forgotten  that  ''tis
almoft  every  wlrere  prof  eft.  We  in  thofe  ends  of  the  Earth  need  ?iotfeel{  far
for  tnftdnces>  in  each  refpeel  to  demonftrate  this.  The  Bookj  here  Printed^
and recommended  not  only  by  the  re/petlive  Authors ,-  hut  by  many  of  theii

(*)  Wonders  of  the  Invisible  Br^e\f°  f",^,tb*eh{b  n£!I  '

World,  p.  17.  18.  (b)p.  18.  (c)  l!lAlds Hlpei  {«>  H'ars  (*) V'WiV

ftfes  of  Ctinfciencc.  p.  6$:  (J)  <c> ^mpefts (a) and cm render  -the

jRwmsrkab^pro^idsnccs.  f>.  iif  mofl fi!ld  tblnZs  tnvifible  f\) and  can

0  Wonders of die Invifibfe  & '  tbingi above  and  agahft  she  ccurfe  of

^ari&.js.  i±i.  Nature,  uttd^aH  natural  Cwjes^  Ami


Part  i.  A  Letter  to  the  Minifters\  89

'  Arc  theft  the  Exprcjjions  of  Oi  thodox  believers  ?  or  are  they  not  rather  ex-
prejjlons  becoming  a  Maniche,  or  a  Heathen,  as  agreeing  far  better  with
theft  than  with  the  facred  Oracles  our  only  rule ;  the  whole  current  whereof
is  ft  Diametrically  oppc fit e  thereto,  that  it  were  almoft  endlcfs  to  mention  all
the  Divine  cautions  againft  fuch  abominable  belief;  he  that  runs  may  read,
Pfal.  62.  n.  and  136.  4.  Lam.  3.  37.  Amos  3.  6.  Jer.  4.  22.  Pfal.  78.
%6. and  148.  6,  8. Job ^3 8.  22.  to  the  34.  v.

Theft  places  with  a  Multitude  more,  do  abundantly  teftifie  that  the  Affer-
tors  of  juch  power  to  be  in  the  e&il  Being,  dofpeal^  i?i  a  di  ale  ft  different
from  the  Scriptures,  (laying  a  firm  foundation  for  the  Indians  adorations,
which  agrees  well  with  what  A.Kofe  ftets  forth,  in  his  Miftag.  Poetic,  p.  116.
that  iheir  ancients  did  *Ufurp  the  furies  and  their  Gcd  Averinci,  that  the;
might  forbear  to  hurt  them.)

And  have  not  the  Courts  in  fome  parts  of  the  World  by  their  praftice,
teftified  their  concurrence  with  fuch  belief  prof  c  curing  tt  Death  many  people
upon  that  notion,  of  their  improving  fuch  power  of  the  Evil  one,  to  the  rai-
fin%  of  Storms-,  affifting  and  killing  of  others ,  tho  at  great  di fiance  from
them  ;  doing  things  in  their  own  per f on s  above  humane  jlrength,  deftroying
of  Cattle,  flying  in  the  Air,  turning  them} elves  into  Cats  or  Dogs,  &c.
VfA'Ach  by  the  way  muft  needs  imply  Jomething  of  goodnefs  to  be  in  that  evil
Being,  who,  tho  he  has  fuch  power,  would  not  exert  it,  were  it  not  for  this
people, or  clft  that  they  can  fome  way  add  to  this  mighty  power*

And  are  the  people  a  whit  behind  in  their  beliefs  }  is  there  any  thing  (a-
bovementioned,)  their  Jlrong  Faith  lookjupon  to  be  too  hard  for  this  evil  Being
to  effeft  ?

Here  it  will  be  anfwered, God  permits  it. Which  anfwer  is  fo  far  an  own*
ing  the  Doftrine,  that  the  Devil  has  in  his  nature  a  power  to  do  all  theft
things, and  can  exert  this  power,  except  when  he  is  refhah  ed, which  is  in
effect  to  fay  that  God  has  made  Nature  to  fight  againft  it  f elf. That  he  has
made  a  Creature,  who  has  it  in  the  power  of  his  Nature  to  overthrow  Nature,
and  to  aft  above  and  againft  it. Wuich  he  that  can  believe  may  as  well  be-
lieve the  greatcft  contradiction. That  Being  which  can  do this  in  the  ftmal-
left  thing,  can  do  it  in  the  greateft. If  Mofes  with  a  bare  permifjhn  might
ftretch  forth  his  i\odt  yet  he  was  not  able  to  bring  Plagues  upon  tie  Egypti-
ans, or  to  divide  the  Waters,  without  a  Comnuffwn  from  the  mcfl  high ;  fo
neither  can  that  evil  Being  perform  any  of  this  without  a  CommiJJion  from
the  fame  power.  The  Scripture  recites  more  Miracles  wrought  by  Men  than  by
Angels  good  and  bad: Tho  this  DoBrine  be  fo  di  [honour  able to  the  only  Al-
mighty Being,  as  to  after  ibe  Inch  At  tributes  to  the  Evil  one,  as  are  the  Incom-
municable prerogative  of  him,  fthp  is  the alone  Sovereign  Being  ;  yet  here
is  not  all : But  as  be  that  Steers  by  a  falft  Compafs,  the  further  he  Sails
the  more  he  is  out  of  his  way  5  ft  though  there  is  in  feme  things  a  variation

^H  *  ffcm9


9o  A  fetter  to  the  Minifins. * Part  ik

from, there  is  in  ethers  a  further  pregreffion  in, or building  upon  the  [aid
po&riik  of  the  Maniche.

Me?i  in  this  Age  arc  not  content  barely  to  believe  filch  an  exorbitant  power
to  be  in  the  nature  of  this  evil  Being  »  but  have  imagined  that  he  prevails1
with  many  to  fign  a  Bool^,  oy  make  a  contra  el  with  him,  whereby  they  are  in-
abled  to  perform  a/t  the  things  abcvcmcntiencd.-  Another  Account  is  given
hereof s  viz.  that  by  vcrtuc  of  Juch  a  Covenant  they  art ain  power  to  Ccm-
mfftonate  hifn*  And  though  the  two  parties  are  not  agreed  which  to  put  it  up-
on, whether  the  Devil  impowers  the  flitch,  or  the  Witch  cemmijjionnte  him  ;
yet  both  parties  are  agreed  in  this,  That  one  way  or  ether  the  m'J chief  ii
cjfetlcd,  andfo  the  Criminal  becomes  culpable  of  Death,  In  thefearch  after
Juch  a  fort  of  Criminals,  how  many  Countries  have  fallen  into  juch  Convul-
fiens.  That  the  Deviations  made  by  a  Conquering  Enemy,  nor  the  Plague
it  felf  has  not  beenfo  formidable.

That  not  only  good  perfons  have  thus  been  blemiOVd  in  their  Reputa-
tions, but  much  innocent  Blood  hath  been  ihed  ,  is  teftificd  even  by  thole
very  Books,,  Cafes  of  Conicience,  p.  33,  Remarkable  provid.  p.  179.
Memor.  provid.  £.28.

And  (to  add;  what  Ms  can  be  expected,  when  Men  having  taken  up
fuch  a  belief,  of  a  covenanting.  afflicting  and  killing  Witch  ;  and  com-
paring it  with  the  Scripture,  finding  no  footfteps  therein  of  Inch  a  fort  of
Witch,  have  thereupon  defperately  concluded  ;  that  tho  the  Scripture  is
full  in  it,  that  a  Witch  fliould  not  live;  yet  that  it  has  not  at  all  delcri-
bed  the  crime,  rior  means  whereby  the  culpable  might  be  detected.

And  hence  they  are  fallen  fofar  as  to  reckon  it  neceffary  to  make  ufe  of
thole  Diabolical  and  Bloody  ways,  always  heretofore  practiced  for  their
Difcovery.  .^s  finding  that  the  Rules  given  to  detect  other  crimes,  are'
wholly  uielefs  for  the  Difcovery  of  fuch;

This  is  that  which  has  produced  that  deluge  of  Blood  mentioned,  and
mull-  certainly  do  fo  again,  the  fame  belief  remaining.

And  who  can  wonder,  if  Chriftians  that  are  fo  eaiily  prevailed  with
to  lay  afide  their  Sword  as  ufelel's,  and  fo  have  loft  their  Strength  ( if
with  Samfon)  they  are  led  blindfold  into  an  Idol  Temple,  to  make  fpore
for  Enemies  and  Infidels,  and  to  do  abominable  actions,  hot  only  not
Chriftian,  but  againft  even  the  light  of  Nature  and  Reafon.  And  now
Reverend  Fathers,  you  who  are  appointed  as  Guides  to  the  People,  and
whole  Lips  fhould  preierve  Knowledge  ;  who  are  let  as  Shepherds,  and
ss  Watchmen,  this  matter  appertains  to  you.  I  did  write  to  ycu  for-
merly upon  this  head,  and  acquainted  you  with  my  Sentiments,  requeu-
ing that,  if  I  erred,  you  would  be  pieafed  to  ftiew  it  me  by  Scripture  ;
feat  from  yo:ir  fjknc.Cf  I  gather  that  you  approve  thereof.  For  I  may
*c«uOiKib!y  preiume,  that  you  would  have  teen  it  your  duty  to  have  in-  -

formed


Part  *.  A  Letter  to  the  Miniflers.  9«

formed  me  better,  if  you  had  been  fenfible  of  any  Error.  But  if  in  thi*
matter  you  have  acquitted  your  felves,  becoming  the  Titles  you  are  d.g-
riified  with,  you  havecaufe  of  rejoycing  in  the  midft  of  the  calamines  :
that.  afS'cI:  a  finning  World-

Particularly,  if  you  have  taught  the  People  to  fear  God,  and  truft  in
him,  and  not  to  fear  a  Witch  or  a  Devil.  That  the  Devil  has  no  power
to  afHicT:  any  with  Difeafes,  or  lofs  of  Cattle,  &c.  without  a  CcmmuTt-
on  from  chc  mpft  high.  That  he  is  fo  filled  with  malice,  that  whatever
Commiflionhe  may  have  againft  any,  he  will  not  fail  to  execute,  it. That
po  mortal  ever  was,  or  can  be  able  to  Commiflionate  him,  or  to  length-
en his  Chain  in  the  leaft,  and  that  he  who  can  CommifTionate  him  is
God  ;  and  that  the  Scriptures  of  truth  not  only  aflign  the  punifhment  of
a  Witch  ;  but  give  fufiicient  Rules  to  detect  them  by,  and  that  (accord-
ing to  Mr.  Gauls  fourth  headj  a  Witch  is  one  that  hates  and  oppofes  the
word,  work,  and  worfhip  of  Gcd,  and  leeks  by  a  fign  to  feduce  there -
irom.  That  they  who  are  guilty  according  to  that  head,  are  guilty  of
Witchcraft,  and  by  the  Law  given  by  Mofcsj  were  tp  be  put  to  Death.
If  you  have  taught  the  People  the  necefTity  of  Charity,  and  the  evil  of
entertaining  fo  much  as  a  jeaJourle  againft  their  Neighbours  for  fuch
crimes,  upon  the  Devils  fuggeftions  to  a  perfon  pretending  to  a  Spe&ral
(or  Diabolical}  fight  •  who  urrer  their  Oracles  from  malice,  frenfie,  or
a  Satanical  Delufion  ;  that  to  be  inquifitive  of  fuch,  whofe  Spedtres  they
fee,  or  who  it  is  that  afflicts  ?  In  order  to  put  theaccufed  perions  life  in
queftion,  is  a  wickedneis  beyond  what  Saul  was  guilty  of  in  going  to  the
Witch.  That  toconfult  with  the  dead,  by  the  help  of  fuch  as  pretend  to
this  Spectral  fight,  and  fo  to  get  Information  againft  the  life  or  any  per-
fon, is  the  worft  fort  of  Necromancy.  That  the  pretending  to  drive  a-
way  Spectres,  i.e.  Devils,  with  the  hand,  or  byftrikingthefetowound  a
pcrion  at  a  diftance,  cannot  be  without  Witchcraft,  as  pretending  to  Al-
lien in  eider  to  deceive  in  matters  of  fo  high  a  Nature.  -That  'tis  Ridicu-
lous to  think  by  making  Laws  againft  feeding,  imploying,  or  rewarding
of  evil  Spirits,  thereby  to  get  rid  of  than.  That  their  natures  require
not  fucking  to  fupport  it.

That  it  is  a  horrid  Injury  and  Baibarity  to  fearch  thofe  parts,  which
even  Nature  it  feif  commands  the  concealing  of,  to  find  fome  Excrefcencc
"to  be  called  a  Tet  for  thefe  ro  fuck  ;  whlcfi  yet  is  faid  (omctimes  to  ap-
pear as  a  Flea-bite.  Finally  if  you  have  taught  the  People-  what  to  be-
lieve and  practice,  as  to  the  probation  of  the  Accuied,  by  their  faying,
or  not  laying  the  Lord's  Prayer  ;  and  as  to  praying  that'  the  Afitictcd
may  be  able  to  Accufe."  And  have  not  fhunned  in.  thefe  matters  to  de-
clare the  whole  mind  of  God.  You  have  then  well  acquitted  y  cur  felves
(in  a  time  of  General  Defection  J  as  faithful  Watchman. But  if  infteai

H2  ; Of


92,  A  Letter  to  Mr*  B.  W.  Part  i\

of  this,  yon  have  fome  by  word  and  writing  propagated  ;  others  recom-
mended fuch  writings,  and  abetted  the  falie  Notions,  which  are  io  pre-
valent in  this  Apoftate  Age,  it  is  high  time  to  confider  it.  If  when  Au-
thority found  themfelves  almoft  nonplnft  in  fuch  proiecutions,  and  lent;
to  you  for  your  Advice  what  they  ought  to  do,

Cafes  of  Conference , and  you  have  then  thanked  them  for  what  they

Vft,  had  already  done  (and  thereby  encouraged  them

to  proceed  in  thofe  very  by  Paths  already  fal-
len into)  it  fo  much  the  nearly  concerns  you,  £^,.33.  2.  to  8.

To  conclude,this  whole  People  are  invited  and  commanded  to  humble
their  Souls  before  God,  as  for  other  caufes,  lo  1
Vid.  The  Proclamation  for  the  Errors  that  may  have  been  fallen  in-
for  a  Fa  ft,  to  be  the  to  in  thefe  *profecutions  en  either  hand,  and  to
14..  Infant,  as fet forth  pray  that  God  would  teach  us  what  we  know
by  Authority.  not,  and  help  us  wherein  we  ;have  done  ami  Is, ,

that  we  may  do  fo  no  more.

This  more  immediately  concerns  your  fefves,  for  'tis  not. mppofed  to.
be  intended,  that  God  would  (hew  us  thele  things  by  Inlpiration. But
that  fuch  who  are  called  to  it,  fhould  ihew  the  mind  of  God  in  thele
things  on  both  hands,  i.  c.  whether  there  has  been  any  Error  in  Excefs  1
or  Deficiency,  or  neither  in  the  one  nor  the  other. And  if  you  do  not
thus  far  ierve  the  publick,  you  need  not  complain  of  great  Sufferings  and
unrighteous Difcouragemcncs  ; if  People  do
Vid. The  Declaration, not  applaui  your  conduct,  as  you  might  cther-
-&s  drawn  by  the  Deputies ways  have  expected.  But  if  you  altogether  held
1oith  the Affflance  of your  peace  at  iuch  a  time  as  this  is  ;  your  filence
the  Minifies ; but  re- at  leaft  Jeemingly  will  lpeak this  Language"  J
ceivd a  Noncmcurrence. that  you  are  not  concerned  tho  Men  aicribe  thcl
power  and  providence  of  the  Almighty to the
worft  of  his  Creatures.  "That  if  other  Ages  or  Countries  improve  the
Doctrines  and  Examples  given  them,  either  to  the  taking  away of  the-
Life  or  Reputations  of  Innocents  you  are  well  fatisfied. \Vhich  that-
there  may  be  no  fhadow  of  a  Reaicn  to  believe,  but  that  your  Conduct-
herein  may  remove  all  fuch  Jealoufies; and  that  God  would  be  with*"
you  in  declaring  his  whole  mind  to  the  People,  is  the  earneft  defire  ar-i
prayer  of,  Reverend  Sirs,  Yours  to  my  utmoft,  j^  c,

Mr.  Benjamin  FPadfworth^
I{evercnd  Sir,

A  Fter  that  dreadful  and  fevere  Perfecution  of  fuch  a  Multitude  of  Peo-
?-*  pie,  under  the  notion  of  Witches,  which  in  the  day  thereof,  wa|
the  fofeft  trval  and  affliction  that  ever  hefel thk  Frmnrrv AmA  ^fr.M.


the  fofeft  tryal  and  affliction  that  ever  befel  this  Country. An


LCI;


part  z.  A  Letter  to  Mr,  B  W.  9  j

many  of  the  principal  Adlors,  had  declared  their  fears  and  jealoufa,
that  they  had  greasy  erred  in  thoie  Proiecutions.  And  after  a  Solemn
day  of  Falling  had  been  kept,  with  Prayers  that  God  would  fhew  us  what
we  knew  not ;  vi%.  what  errors  might  therein  have  been  fallen  into,  &c.
And  after  moft  People  were,  con  vine'd  of  the  Evil  of  fome,  if  not  of  moft
of  rhofe  Actions.  At  fiich  a  time  as  this,  it  might  have  been  juftly  ex-
peeled  that  the  Minifters  would  make  it  their  work  to  Explain  the  Scrips
tures  to  the  People  ;  and  from  thence  to  have  fhown  them,  the  evil  and
dinger  of  thofe  falie  Notions,  which  not  only  gave  fome  occaMon  ;  but
in  a  blind  Zeal  hurried  them  into  thoie  unwarrantable  practices,  fo  to
prevent  a  falling  into  the  like  for  the  future.

But  inftead  of  this,  for  a  Minifter  of  the  Gofpel  (Paftcr  of  the  old
Meeting )  to  abet  iuch  Notions  ;  and  to  ftir  up  the  Magiftranes  to  fuch
Proiecutions,  and  this  without  any  cautions  given,  is  what  is  truly  ama-
zing, and  of  moft  dangerous  conlequence.

It  is  a  truth,  Witchcraft  is,  in  the  Text  then  infilled  on,  reckon 'd  up
as  a  manifeft  work  of  the  Fielh.  Vi^.  Gal-  5.  19,  But  it  is  as  true,  that
in  recounting  thofe  other  Works  (which  are  indeed  Manifeft  Flefhly
Works)  the  Magiftrate  was  not  flirred  up  againft  thofe  others ;  but  as  if
the  reft  were  either  not  ro  be  taken  notice  of  by  him,  or  as  if  all  Zeai
againft  Murder,  Adulteries,  &c.  was  fwallowed  up,  and  over-fhadowed
by  this  againft  Witchcraft.

The  deicription  that  was  then  given,  was  that  they  were  fuch  as  made
a  Covenant  with  the  Devil,  and  fold  themfelves  to  the  evil  Angels.  It
ieems  faulty,  that  when  fuch  Min.iler  is  inquired  of,  and  requefted  to
give  the  Reafons,  or  Grounds  in  Scripture  of  fuch  Defcription  ;  for  fuch
Minifter  to  afTert  that  it  is  the  Inquirers  work  to  difprove  it,  And  his
faying  further,  in  anfwet-  that  there  are  many  things  true,  that  are  not
aflferted  in  Scripture  j  leems  to  fpeak  this  Language,  vify  that  the  Law
of  God  is  imperfedt,  in  not  defcribing  this  Crime  of  Witchcraft,  though
it  be  therein  made  Capital,

Thefe  perfedl  Oracles  inform  us,  concerning  Abab,  that  he  fold  him-
felf  to  work  Wickednefs  •  which  may  fignifie  to  us,  that  great  height  of
Wickednefs  he  had  arrived  at;  which  yet  might  be,  without  his  being
properly,  or  juftly  accounted  a  Witch  ;  any  more  than  rhofe  that  are
laid  to  have  made  a  Covenant  with  Death,  and  with  Hell,  &s.  Can
|t  be  thought  that  a,  1  thole,  or  fuch  as  arc  there  fpoken  of,  are  Witches,
and  ought  to  fuffer  as  Witches  ?

As  the  Servants  and  People  of  God,  have  made  a  Solemn  explicit  Co* ,
venant  with  him,  -fcjh.  24.  25. Nehcm.  9.  3-8,  &c.  So  no  doubt  a  Co-,
venant  has  been made  by  He.ithen  Indian  Nations, , to  ferve, and  adore
rthe  Devil ;  yereven  for  tivsj  it  were  very  hard  to  affix  the  Chancer  at


94  A  Letter  to  Mr,  B.  W.  Part  %\

a  Witch  upon  each  of  thofe  Heathen  that  fo  do  : And  accordingly  to
Execute  them  as  fuch. It  is  alfo  pofljble, that  fame  that  have been
called  Chriftians,  have  fealed  a  Writing,  fign?d  with  their  own  Blood,
or  otherways, thereby  Covenanting  w  be  the  Devil's  Servants,  &c.  but
from  far  other  grounds, or  inducements  than  what  fways  with  the  In-
dians ;  thefe  Heathen  hoping  to  pleafe  him,  that  fq  he  may  not  harm
them. But  thefe  having b,een  Educated  and  Continued  in  the  Belief,
that  by venue of  fuch  Covenant, they  (hall  have  a  Knowledge  and
Power  more  than  Humane,  aflifting  of  them  ; this  may  have  prevail'd
with  fome  to  fo  horrible  a  wicked nefs;  for  none  can  ieek  Evil  for  Evils  .
fake  ;  but  as  the  Serpent  in  his  firft  tempting  of  Man,  made  ufe  of  this  ;
pf  the  knowledge  of  Good  and  Evil  ;  fo  to  reach  Men  that  (uch  effects  ;
jdo  ufually  io/Iow  fuch  Covenant,  is  properly  the  work  of  the  Serpent  •
for  without  this, what  inducenienti  or !  temptati.qn  could  they  have  to I
make  fuch  a  Covenant  ?

Thefe  having  thus  chofen  a  falfe  God,  may  well  be  accounted  of  the
worft  fort  of  Idolaters.  Yet  it  does  not  hence  follow  that  in  a  Scripture
fenfe  ,  they  are  thereby  become  Witches,  till  they  have,  or  rather  till
they  pretend  to  have  affiftances  anfwerable  :  and  do  thereby  endeavour
to  deceive  others,  which  endeavours  to  deceive,  by  a  fign  may  be  with-
out any  previous  Covenant.  ' ' *'■ "

But  fuppofing  none  of  all  thpfe  fevera!  forts  of  Covenants  was  intended,
it  remains  that  the  Covenant,  that  was  underftood  to  be  intended,  irj
that  Diicourfe  at  Old  Meeting,  is  agreeable  to  the  late  dangerous  Notion
that  has  fo  much  prevailed.  VI ^  That  the  Devil  appears  to  tr/e  perform,
that  they  and  the  Devil  make  mutual  encasements  each  to  other,  con-
firmed by  figning  to  the  Devil's  Book  ;  and  are  from  hence  inabled,  net
only  to  know  futurities,  and  things  done  at  diftance  ;  but  are  slfo  there-
by impowered  to  do  harm  to  the  Neighbours,  to  raife  Storms,  and  do  ,
things  above  and  againft  a  courfe  of  Nature:  This  being  the  notion  than
has  occafioned  the  (heddingio  much  Blood  in  the  World,it  may  be  thought
to  need  explaining.

For  as  Rea (on  knows  nothing  of  an  Articling,  Covenanting  Witch  4
fo  it  feems  asForreign  from  Scripture  in  general,  as  it  is  from  the  ''Text*
then  in  fitted  on  ;  which  fpeaks  or  fuch  wickednefles'as  are  mahifeftlf  th^-
works  of  the  flefh.-buc  fachCommunication  withSpirits,tl)e  flefodoth  mani~v
feftly  dread  even  as  death  it  felf.  Therefore  the  ufual  Salvation  of  ;
the  Holy  Angels  to  the  beft  pf  Men  was,  fear  not  ;  and  experience  ;
fhews,  that  the  moft  wicked,  'are  moft  afrighted  at  the  apprehenfions  of.
the  appearances  of  Devils  ;  therefore  fuch  an  explicit  Covenanting  can-
not be  a  maxufeft  work  of  the  FleHi.


Part  j.  Differences  at  Saleni  §tf

Yet  rhis  is  manifefi, that  the  belief  of  the  Witches  power  to  do  the
things  above  mentioned,  is  an  ancient  belief  of  the  Heathen., And  that
trom  them  it  was  received  by  the  Papifts,  as  a  part  of  their  Faith,  who
have  fince  improved  upon  it,  and  brought  in  the,  notion  of  a  Covenant.
But  it  teems  yet  a  further  improvement  lately  made  by  Protcftants, that
fuch  Witches  can  Gommiflionate  Devils  to  do  thofe  mifchiefs,  thereby
L  jetting  the  Witch  in  the  place  of  God; for  tho  few  of  the  Papifts  are
ijknown  to  be  thift  abiurd  ;  yet  when  fuch  Db&rines  have  been  Preached,
jimd  Printed  in  New  England,  they  have  met  with  none  to  bppofe  ;  but
nany  to  incourage  them. Other  considerable  additions  or  new  improve-
ments have  been  made  here;  as  the  art  to  knock  ofFinvifible  chains  with
:he  hand,  to  drive away  Speeches  (i.  e.  Devils)  by  brufbing, fpelling
^vords  to  the  Afflicted,  Fjc, What  has  followed  upon  thefe  notions,  and
ipon  fuch  improvements,  is  needlefs  here  to  repeat, it  were  unaccount-
able to  recount  that  erTuuon  of  Blood  that  has  been  hereby  occafioned,
uch  remaining  Scars,  and  fuch  yet  bleeding  wounds  as  are  to  be  found  }
which  none  can  wholly  pretend  ignorance  of.

And  if  Blood  (hall  be  required  of  diat  Watchman  that  feeth  the  Sword '
i  coming,  and  gives  not  the  needful  warning  •  how  much  more  of  fuch
is  join  with  the  Enemy* to  bring  in  the  Sword  to deftroy  them,  over
vhom  he  was  placed  a  Watchman.

And  if  the  law  of  God  be  perfect,  and  exceeding  broad,  as  being
liven  forth  by  theOmnilcient  Law-giver -,  it  is  exceeding  high  Prefump-
ton  and  arrogance,  and  highly  deftrucTrve  to  the  lives  of  Innocents,  for
rty  to  pretend  to  give  another,  and  a  pretended  better  delcription  of  a
rime  made  thereby  Capital,  with  new  rules  to  try  fuch  offenders  by,
Reverend  Sir,  the  matter  being  of  fuch  high  concern  requires'  (and  it
is  again  prayed)  that  you  would  be  f leafed  to  confider,  and  give  the
grounds  from  Scripture ,  or  PKeafon  of  fuch  Definition,  or  elfe  that
yoU  would  explode  it,  as  inconjiftent  with  both.  From,  Reverend  SJrj
Tours  to  my  utmofl,  R. C.


PART III

An  Account  of  the  Differences  ift  S  A  JL  E  M  Filiate.

rH  E  Reafons  why  we  withdraw  from  Communion  With  the  ChurcH
of  Salem  Village,  both  as  to  hearing  the  word  Preached,  and  i:/cm
making  with  them  at  the  Lord's  Table,  are  as  followerh,


Why  we  astefci  not  on  "publick  Prayer,  and  preaching  tfc  wcfd,there


96  Reafon  of  Withdrawing.  Part  3.

1.  The  Diftrafring,  and  Difiurbing  tumult s,  andnoifis  made  by  the  per/ens
umler  Diabolical  Power  and  deiujicns  ,  ^eventing f onetimes  cur  heating,  w.-
derftanding,  and  profiling  by  the  word  preached.  l<Ve  having  after  many  Trials
and  Experiences  found  no  redrefs  in  this. matter,  accounted  cur  [elves  under  1
necejfity  to  go  where  we  might  hear  the  word  in  quiet,

2.  The  apprehenfion  of  danger  of  cur  /elves,  being  accufed  as  the  Devil's'
Jnftruments,  tc  afflict  the  perjons  complaining,  we  feeing  ,rho/e  that  we  have
reafon  to  cfleem  better  than  our  /elves  thus  >%ccujed,  blemifhed,  and  of  their
lives  bereaved  ;'  for  feeing  this,  thought  it  our  prudence  to  withdraw.

3.  We  found fi  frequent  and  pofitivc  preaching  up  fime  Principles  andn
Practices  by  Mr.  Parris,  referring  to  the  darf{  and  di/mal  myftery  of  Iniquity
working  among  us,  was  not  profitable,  but  offenfive.

4.  Neither  could  we  in  Con/cience  join  with  Mr.  Parris,  in  many '  of  th$t
^equefts  which  he  made  in  Prayer,  referring  to  the  trouble  than  among  us  and
upon  us  ; therefore  thought  it  our  moft/afe  and  peaceable,  way  to  withdraw^

The  Reafins  why  we  hold  not  Communion  with  them  at  the  Lord's  Table,  art
becau/e  we  find  r.ur  f elves  juftly  agrieved,and  offended  with  the  Officer,  wH
does  admlnifier,  for  the  J^eajh is  following*

•  1.  From,  his  declared  and  publijhed  Principles,  referring  to  our  mclcftati
ens  from  the  Invifible  World  :  Differing  f rem  the  Opinion  of  the  generality  c
the  Orthodox  Mmifters  of  the  Country.

2.  His  eafie,  and  ftrong  Faith  and  Belief  of  the  before-mentioned  Accufi
tions, made  by  tho/e  call  the  Afflicted.

3.  His  laying  afide  that  grace  (which  'above  all  we  are  to  put  on,)  vii
Charity  towards  his  Neighbours,  and  e/pscially  tho/e  of  his  Church,  when  t  her
is  no  apparent  reafon,  but  for  the  contrary,

4.  His  approving  and  practicing  unwarrdntable  and  ungrounded  niethom
for  difcovering  what  he  was  defirous  to  know,  referring  to  the  bewitched,  \  \
poffeffedperfins,  as  in  bringing  fime  to  others,  and  by  them  pretending  to  it  I
form  him/elf  and  others,  who  were  the  Devil's  inftruments  to  afflift  the  fid
and  maimed,

5.  Bis  un/afe  unaccountable  Oath,  given  by  him  againft  fundry  of  the  a\
cu/ed.

6.  His  not  rendring  to  the  World  fi  fair  (if  fi  true)  account  of  what  \
Wrote  on  Examination  of  the  afflicted.

7.  Sundry  un/afe  (if  film d  points  of  DcHrine  delivered  in  his  PreachiA
which  we  find  not  warrantable  (if  Chri/tian.)

8.  His  per/fiing  in  thc/e  Principles,  ana ljuftifying  his Practice;  not  A
dmng  any  fit isf ad  ion  to  us,  when  regularly  defire.d,  but  rather  offendingk
dffatisfying  qm./cwcj*


Pdit  5-  iWr.Pa/risV  Acknowledgment*.  57

We  whofe  Names  are  under  written,  heard  this  Paper  read  to  our
fraftor,  Mr.  Samuel  Parrisj,'  thrift:  of  Afril,  16930

Nathaniel  Jigarftwfjkr  Peter  Cloy <ce,  Senibuh
Edward  Puhnan, f  ^S  Samuel  Nmxe,
Aaron  Way\  £  j  John  Jar  boll,

tyillia  mWar,  jC  Thomgs  Wilkini,

Mr.  PartisV  Acknowledgment1.

tjO  R  as  much  as  it  is  the  undoubted  duty  of  ail  Chriftians  to  purfue
*?  peace*  Pfal.  34.  14.  even  to  a  teaching  of  it,if  it  be  poflible.  Amos
12.  18,  1$.  And  Whereas  through  the  righteous,  Soveraign,  and  awful
Providence  of  God,  the  grand  Enemy  to  all  £hriftian  Peace,  has  been
of  late  tremendoufly  let  loofe  in  divers  places  hereabout,  and  more  ef-
pecially  among  our  finfiil  felves,  not  only  to  interrupt  that  partial  peace
which  we  did  fometimes  enjoy,  but  alio  through  his  wiles  and  ternptatir
Ons,  and  our  weaknefs,  and  corruptions,  to  make  wider  breaches,  and
raife  more  bitter  Animofitfes  between  too  ihany  of  us.  In  which  dark
and  difficult  difpenfations,  we  have  been  all  or  moft  of  us  of  one  mind
For  a  time ;  arid  afterwards  of  differing  apprehensions;  And  at  Jaft  we
iare  but  in  the  dark,  upon  feribus  thoughts  of  all ;  andt  after  many  Prayers;
I  have  been  moved  to  preferit  to  you  (my  beloved  Flock)  the  fbllowiag
particulars,  in  Way  of ,  Contribution  towards  a  regaining  bf  Chriftiari
Concord  ;  if  fo  be  we  be  not  altogether  unappeafeable,  irreconlileable,
and  fo  deftitute^  bf  that  good  Spirit;  which  is  firft  pure>  then  peaceable,
gentle,  and  eaiie  to  be  intreated, James%  3^  1 7. Viz;

i.  In  that  the  Lord  ordered  the  late  Horrid  calamity  /which  afterward
plague-like  fpread  in  many  other  places)  to  break  out  firft  in  my  Family;
I  cannot  but  look  upon  as  a  very  fore  rebuke,  and  humbling  providence ^
both  to  my  felf  dnd  mine,  and  detire  fome  may  improve  it.  .

%.  In  that  alfo  in  my  Family  were  fome  bf  both  parties,  vj%.  AccuferS
and  Accufea\,I  look  alfo  upon  as  an  aggravation  bf  that  rebuke,  as  an
addition  of  Wormwood  to  the  Gall.  (

3.  In  the  meaAs  Were  ufed  in  my  Family,  though  totally  unknown  td
me  Or  mine  ('except  Servants)  till,  afterwards,  to  raife  Spirits  and  Ap-
paritions in  a  no  better  than  a  Diabolical  way; '  I  do  alfo  look  iipon  as  a
further  rebuke  of  Divine  Providence.  Arid  by  all,  Ido  humbly  owri
this  day  before  the  Lord,  and  his  People,  that  God  has  been  rigfeeoufiy
fpitting  in  my  face,  Nnmb,  12.14.  And  I  deiire  to  lye  low  under  ail  tBii
Reproach,  and  to  lay  my  hand  on  my  mouth.


5  8  Mr.  PatYist  Acknowledgment.  Part  j

.  4.  As  to  the  management  of  theie  Mylteries,  as  far  as  concerns  my  feif,
I  am  very  defirous  upon  further  light  to  own  any  errors  I  have  therein
fallen  into,  and  can  come  to  a  decerning  of  ;  in  the  mean  while  I  do  ac-
knowledge upon  after-conftde  rations,  that  were  the  fame  troubles  again
(which  the  Lord  of  his  rich  mercy  for  ever  prevent)  I  fnould  not  agree
With  my  former  apprehenfions  in  all  points. As  for  Inftance,

1 .  I  queftion  not  but  God  fometimes  fuffers  the  Devil,  as  of  lare,to  af-
flict, in  fhape  of  not  only  Innocent,  but  Pious  perfons,  or  fo  to  delude  the
Senfes  of  the  afHJded.  that  they  ftrongly  conceit  their  hurt  is  from  fucli.;
perfons,  when  indeed  it  is  not.

2.  The  improving  of  one  afBicfred  to  inquire  by  who  afflicts  the  other  I
I  fear  may  be,  and  has  been  unlawfully  ufed  to  Satan's  great  Advantage,

3.  As  to  my  writing,  it  was  put  upon  me  by  Authority,  and  therein  I
have  been  very  careful  to  avoid  the  wronging  of  any.

4.  As  to  my  Oath  I  never  meant  it,  nor  do  I  know  how  it  can  be  e?
therwife  conftrued,  than  as  vulgarly,  and  every  one  underftood,  yea  anil
upon- inquiry  it  may  be  found  io  worded  alfo.

5.  As  to  any  paffage  in  preaching,  or  praying  81  the  fore  hour  of  di-
ftrefs  and  darknefs,  I  aiways  intended  butdue  Juftice  on  each  hand,  and
that  not  according  to  Men  but  God  ;  who  knows  all  things  moft  perfedt-
ly  ;  however  through  weaknefs,  or  fore  exercife,  I  might  fometimes,  yea

s  and  pofUbiy  iuridry  times  unadvifedly  exprefs  my  feif.

6.  As  to  ieveral  that  have  conferTed  againft  themfelves,  they  being
wholly  ftrangers  to  me,  but  yet  of  good  account  with  better  Men  thari
my  feif,  to  whom  alfo  they  are  Well  known,  I  do  not  pais  fo  much  as  m
iecret  condemnation  upon  them.  Bur  rather  feeing  God  has  ib  amazing-
ly lengthened  out  Satan's  Chain,  in  this  moft  formidable  outrage,  1
much  more  incline  to  fide  with  the  Opinion  of  thofe  that  have  grounds  to
hope  better  of  them.

7.  As  to  ail  that  have  unduly  fufTefed  in  thefe  matters,  either  in  their
•  Perfons  or  PveJations,  through  the  clouds  of  humane  weaknefs,  and  Sa-
tan's wiles  and  fophiftry,  I  do  truly  fympathize  with  them,  taking  it  for
granted,  that  luch  as  know  themfelves  clear  of  this  great  tranfgrefliorif
or  that  have  fufHcient  grounds  fo  to  look  upon  their  dear  Friends,  have
hereby  been  under  thofe  fore  tryals  and  temptations,  that  not  an  ordfe
nary  meafure  of  true  .grace  would  be  fufHcient  to  prevent  a  bewraying  of
remaining  corruption.

8.  I  am  very  much  in  the  mind,  and  abundantly  perfwaded  that  Gof-
fer holy  ends  (though  for  what  in  particular,"  is  beft  known  to  himfelf )
has  fullered  the  Evil  Angels  to  delude  us  on  both  hands  ;  but  how  far  onr
"the  one  lid e,  or  the  other,  is  much  above  me  to  lay,  and  if  we  cannot
reconcile  till  we  come  to  a  full  difcerning  of  thefe  things,  I  fear  We  (half  ■
^£vgt come  to  agreement,  or  at  iboncil  no;  in  this  World-,  t • 9.


Part?.  7  he  Councils  at  Sakm.  f$

9.  Therefore  in  fine,  the  matrer  being  fo  dark  and  perplexed,  as  thai
there  is  no  prefent  appearance,  that  all  God's  Servants  thouid'be  altoge-
ther of  one  mind  in  all  circumftances,  touching  the  frme;  I  do  moft
heartily,  fervently,  and  humbly  befeech  pardon  of  the  merciful  Gcd,
through  the  Blood  of  Chrift  for  all  my  miftakes.a.nd  trefpaffes  in  fo  weigh-
ty a  matter.  And  alfo  all  your  forgivenefs  of  every  offence,  in  this  or
other  affairs,  vyherein  you  fee  or  conceived  that  I  have  erred  and  offend-
ed, prcferTing  in  the  prefence  of  the  Almighty  God,  that  what  I  have
clone  has  been  as  for  lubltance  as  I  apprehended  was  duty,  however  thro'
weaknefs.  Ignorance,  &c.  I  may  have  bebq  miftaken.  I  alio  thro*  grace
promiung  each  of  you  the  like  of  me  •  fo  again  I  beg,  intreat,  and  be-
feech you,  that  Satan,  the  Devil,  the  roaring  Lion,  the  old  Dragon,  the
Enemy  of  all  Righteoufnefs',  may  no  longer  be  fer'ved  by  us,  by  our  En-
vy and  Strifes,  where  every  evil  work  prevails  whilft  thefe  bear  fway,
games,  3.  1 4,  15,-  J  6,  But  that  all  from  this  day  forward  may  be  covered
with  the  mantle  of  love,  and  we  may  on  all  hands  forgive  each  other
heartily,  fincerely  and  thoroughly,  as  we  do  hope  and  pray,  that  God  for
Chrift's  fake  would  forgive  each  of  our  felves,  Mat.  18.  21.  to  the  endo
Colef.  3 .  12,  13.  Put  on  therefore  (as  the  elect  of  God,  holy  and  beloved)  '
bowels  of  mercies,  kindnefs,  humblenefs  of  mind,  meshpefs,  long-fuffering  ;
Forbearing  one  another,  and  forgiving  one  another,  if  any  man  have  a  quarrel
againft  any,  even  as  Chrift  forgave  you,  fo  aljo  do  ye.  Eph.  4.  31,  32.  Let
/ill  bitternefs  ,  and  anger,  and  clamour,  and  evil-fpe  aiding  be  pit  away  from
you  with  all  malice.  '  And  'be  ye  kjndonejj  another,  tender-hearted,  for-
giving  one  another,  even  as  God  fir  Chrifts  fake  hath  forgiven  ydu9  Amen,
•Amen.  ' Samuel  Parris.

Given  to  the  DifTcnting  Brethren,  for  their  consideration  of; as  their
requert Nov.  26.  '  1694.

Jhe  Elders  and  Mejfengers  of  the  Churches  met  at  Salem  Village,  April,!,
1695.  to  confidcr  and  dete,  mine  what  is  to  be  do7ie,  for  the  compfure  of
fee  prefent  and  imhajipy  differences  in  tlJat  place.  After  folemn  invocation,
vf  God  in  Chrift  for  hi:  difcHian,  do  unanimoufly  declare,  as  followeth,  viz*

\.  \IJ£  judge  that  all  be  it  in  the  late  and  dark  time  of  the  confufions,
\.  **  wherein  Satan  had  obtained  a  more  than  ordinary  liberty,  to  be
fitdng  of  this  Plantation,  there  were  fnndry  unwarrantable,  and  uncom-
fortable (reps,  taken  by  Mr".  Srinwel  Parris,  the  Paftor  of  the  Church  in
Salem  Village,  then  tinder  the  hurrying  diftradtions  of  amazing  A fP/icTri-
ons  ;  yet  the  laid  Mr,  Parris,  by  the  good  hand  of  God  brought  unto  a
better  knfe 'of  things,  hath  fo  fully  expreft  it,  that  a  Chriftian  char:r/
rnay  and  HiqvM  receive  fetisfadHqn  therewith. '  I  2  z>  fcf


go  the  Councils  at  Salem.  Part  } .  $

t.  In  as  much  as  diverfe.  Chriftian  Brethren,  in  the  Church  of  Salem
Village,  have  been  offended  at  Mr.  Parris,  for  his  conp'ue'r.  in  the  time  of
their  difficulties,  which  have  diftreflepl  them  ;  we  now  advife  them  Cha-
ritably tq  accept  the  fatisfa&ion  which  he  hath  tendered  in  his  Chriftian
acknowledgment  of  the  Errors  therein  committed  ;  yea  to  endeavour,  as
far  as  it  is  pofTible,  the  fulleft  recpnciliatiprj  of  their  minds  unto  commu-
nion with  him,  in  the  whole  Exercife  of  his  Ministry,  and  with  the  reft
of  the  Church,  Matth.  6.  U.  14.  Luke  17.  3*  James  5.  16.

3.  "ponfidering  the  extream  tryals  and  troubles,  which  thedhTatisfiedl
Brethren  in  the  Church  of  Salem  Village  have  un4ergone,  in  the  day  off
fore  temptation,  which  rjath  been  upon  them  ;  we  cannot  but  advife  thg
phurch  Xp  treat  them  with  bowels  pf  much  companion, inftead  of  all
more  critical,  or  rigorous  proceedings  againft  them  for  the  Infirmities  dill
covered  by  them,  in  fuch  an  heart  breaking  day  ;  and  if  after  2  patient;
waiting  for  jt,  the  laid  Brethren  cannot  fp  far  overcome  the  uneafinefs  oft
their  Spirits,  in  the  remembrance  of  the  ^ifafters  that  have  hapned,  as  tp
fit  under  his  lVfiniftry ; '  we  advife  the  Church  with  all  tender  neis  to  grant
them  admiflion  to  any  other  Society  pf  the  Faithful,  whereuntpthey  mayh
bedefired  to fce  difmift.  Gal.  6.  1,  i.  PfiL  103.  13,  14.  Job  19.  21.

4.  Mr.  Harris  haying  "'(as  we  underftarifl)  with  much  fidelity  and  in-
tegrity acquitted  himfelf ,  in  the  main  courfe  of  his  Miniftry,  fince  he
hath  been  Paftor  of  the  Church  of  Sa\:m  Village  ;  about  his  firft  call
whereunto*  we  look  upoq  all  contestations  now  ip  be  both  unreaibnable
and  unfeafonable  :  4n4  out  Lord  haying  made  him  a  blefling  to  th$
Souls  of  riot  a  few,  both  old  and  young  in  this  place*  we  aflvile  that  hg
be  accordingly  refpe&ed,  honour'd  and  fuppOrted,  with  all  the  regards,
that  are  due  to  a  painful  Minifter  of  the  Gofpel.  ilhcf.  5.  1 2,  13.  1  Tim.

5.  Having  obferved  that  there  is  in  Salem  Village,  a  Spirit  full  of  con-
tention and  animofity,  too  fadly  verifying  the  blemifti  which  hath  hereto-
fore lain  qpon  them  :  And  that  fqme  complaints  againft  Mr.  Parris  have.
been  either  ca'ufelefs  or  groundiefs,  or  "unduly  aggravated  ;  we  do  in  the
name  and  fear  of  the  Lord  folemnly  warn  them  to  confide?,,  whether  if
they  continue  to  devour  pne  another  it  will  not  be  bitternels  in  the  lattei
end  ,  and  beware  left  the  Lord  be  provoked  thereby  utterly  to  deprive
them  of  thofe  (which  they  Ihould  count)  their  precious  and  "pleaianr.
things,and  abandon  them  to  all  the  deflations  of  a  people  that  fin  away
the  Mercies  of  the  Gofpel,  James  3.  i<5.  Gal.  5.  15:  %  Sam.  2.  i'&
Ifa.  5.^5. M*t>  Zi-43-

6*  If  the  Diftempers  in  Salem  Village  thould  be  (which  God  forbid;  (pt
incurable,  that  Mr,  Parris  after  all  find  that  he  c^nngt  with  any  com  fori
and  fervice  continue  in,  his  prefent  Station,  his  removal  from  thence  will

; ■'"' " "  Vj-'  , '"" "'  '"'''  " ''  ■  " '"  "  ;" ~%  um


&rt  3 .  A  Letter  to  the  Bidets.  6 1

jot  expofe  him  to  any  hard  Character  with  us  ;  nor  wc  hop€  with  the
•eft  or  the  People  of  God,  among  whom  we  live.  Mat.  lo.  14.  A8s
;i2.  18.  All  which  advice  we  follow,  with  our  Prayers  that  the  God  of
peace  would  brufe  Satan  under  ©ur  Feet;  now  the  Lord  of  Peace  him-
jfelf  give  you  Peace  always  by  all  means.


Jof.  Boynton,
Richard  Middlccutt,
John  Walley,


Jof.  Bridgham,
Samuel  Chickjey,


Jer.  Dummer, I  James  Allen,
Neh.  Jewitt, I  Samuel  Tory,


iViUiamTory,  Ephr,  Hunt, I  Samuel  Hollar d.


Natl),  Williams,  j  Edward  Paifon,
Incr,  Mather, I  Cottop  Mather.
Samuel  Phillips t |


To  the  Reverend  Elders  of  the  Three  Churches  of  Chrift,  at  Boftonytixh
others  the  Elders  and  Brethren  of  other  Churches,  late  of  a  Council  at
Salem  Village.


W


E  whofe  Names  are  hereunto  Subjeribed,  are  bold  once  more  to  trouble
you  tfith  our  humble  Propofals.  That  whereas  there  has  been  long  and
uncomfortable  differences  among  us,  chiefly  relating  to  Mr.  Parris;  and  we:
having,  as  we  apprehend  attended  all  probable  ?neans  for  aeampofure  of  cur
troubles  -,  and  whereas  we  had  hopes  of  an  happy  IJfue,  by  your  endeavours  a-
i\p?ong  us,  but  now  are  utterly  fruftr at ed  of  our  Expectations,  and  that  infiead
\f  uniting,  current  is  mide  worfe,  and  our  breach  made  wider.

We  humbly  Query,  Wljether  your  felves  being  ftreightned  of  time,  might
not  omit  fuch  farisfaciory  liberty  of  debating  the  whole  of  our  C  ontr  over  fie  y
whereby  your  j  elves  had  not  fo  large  an  opportunity  ofunderflandingtheCafe;  nor
\hc  offended  Jo  much  reafon  to  be  fatisfed  inywr  advice  •  We  therefore  hum-
\ly  pofpfc,  and  give  full  liberty  of -proving  and  defending  of  what  maybe
:harged  on  either  hand,  leaving  it  to  your  felves  to  appoint  both  time  and  f  lace*
1.  That  if  your  felves  pie  afetq  take  the  trouble  with  patience  once  more  to
hear  the  whole  Cafe.  '  •

%i  Or  that  you  will  n\ore  plainly  advife Air.  Parris, (the  Cafe  being  fo

c  or  others,'  a-

andfecl^tq

and  that  your

(elves  would  plea  fe  to  help  us  in  advifin^ to  fuch  a  choice,  wherein  we  may  be
piore  unanimous;  wjjich  we  hope  would  tend  much  to  a  compofure  of  our  dif-
ferences.

34  Or  that  we  may  without  any  offence  take  the  liberty  of  calling  fome  other
^proved  Mintfler  of  the  Gofpcl^  to  Preach  the  word  of  God  to  m  an4  011  *'s


$%  CoHtroverfie  Stated.  Part  m

and  that  we  may  not  be  denied  our  proportionable  priviledge,in  our  publick  Oif-
burfments  in  the  place.

So  leaving  the  whole  cafe  with  the  Lord  and  your  felves,  vre.
Subfcribe  our  jslames.  Signed  by 16  young  Men,  from  i6t
upwards;  and  52  Houfholders,  and  18  Church-Members,!
This  was  delivered  to  the  Minhters,  May,  3. 1695.

T£e  Cfl/^  of  rt  Paper  that  was  handed  about  touching  thofe  differences.

AS  to  the  conteft  between  Mr.  Parris  and  his  Hearers,  &c.  it  may  beil
compofed  by  a  Satisfactory  Anfwer,  to  Levit.  20.  6.  ytoi  the  ScUl,\
that  turneth  after  juth  as  havefamil'ar  Spirits,  and  after  IJrf^ards,  to  go  a  '
whoring  after ,  them,  I  will  even  fet  my  face'  againft  that  Scul  ;  and  will  cut
him  off  from  amo?ig  Ms  People.  1  Chron.  10.  J3/14,  So  Saul  died  for  hi 'A
tranfgrejjion,  which  he  coirtrmtted  agahft  the  Lord,' even  agahft  the  word  of  I
the  Lord,  which  he  kept  not,  and  alfb  for  asking  Qoknjil  of  one  that  had  a  fa-\
miliar  Spirit  to  inauire  of  it,  And  inquired  not  of  the  Lord,  therefore  h&\
flew  him>  &c.

Some  part  of  the  Determination of  the  Eiders  and MefFengers  of  the]
Churches,  met  at  Salem  Village,  April,  3.  1695.  relating  to  the  Dif-
ferences there.

Tf  the  Diftemper  in  *Salem  Village  fioould  he  ( which  God  forbid)  fo  in-

curable  that  Mr. Parris  after  all, find  that  he  cannot  with  any  comfort  .
and  fer  vice  continue  in  this  p'efent  ftation  ,  his  removal  from  thence  w>  11  not  ,
expofe  him  to  any  hard 'character  with  us,  (nor  we  hope)  with  the  reft  of  the  '
People  of  God,  among  whom  we  live,  'Mat.  10.  14;  And  whofoever  fhn.II
not  receive  you,  nor  hear  your  words  H  when  you  depart  out  of  that  •
lioufe,  or  city,  {hake  off  the  dull  of  your  feet,  &c.  Acts  z%.  18.  All  which]
Advice  we  follow  with  our  Prayers,  that  the  God  of  Peace*  would  brttife  Satan  ,
under  our  feet,  Now  the  Lord  of  Peace  give  you  Peace  always,  by  allmcans.Scci
Queft.  Whether  Mr.  Parris  his  going  x.6' Abigail  Vf^illi ami fand  others)
whom  he  fuppofed  to  have  a  Spectral  fight  (to  be  informed  who  were
Witches,  and  who  afflicted  thofe  pretended  fufferers  by  Witchcraft )  in  '
order  to  their  being  queftioned  upon  their  lives  for  it,  were  not  a  turning
after  fuch  as  had  familiar  Spirits  ;  and  a  greater  wickednefs  than  Saul*
wasgu  ky  of  (in  that  he  did  not  intend  thereby  bodily  hurt  to  any  others.)'!

And  whether  in  a  crime  of  fuch  a  high  nature,  the  making  a  nender
and  general  corifefllon,  without  any'propofajs  of  reparations,  or  due  time
of  probation,  ought  fo  far  to  be  accounted  '(uSkienr.y  from  fucha  Pafto/
$0  his  People, !  -.-  -  ■ '-  ■ '*''  ■  -  —  ••  •'•■-• :' -And-


Part  % .  To  the  A  r  hit  raters.  6  5

And  whether  fuch  as  were  accufed,  or  the  furviving  Friends  and  Re-
asons of  thofe  that  were  any  ways  iurTerers,  by  Accufations  fo  by
iiim  proved,  are  in  duty  and  confeience  bound  to  continue  their  refpecl:,
honour  and  fupport  to  him,  in  the  Miniftry,  after  fuch  known  departures
(from  the  Rule  of  Gods  word,  and  after  fuch  dire  effects-  as  followed
hereupon,  under  the  penalty  of  the  diifi  fh aken  from  his  feet,  teftifying  a-
rainft  them,  even  fo  as  to  render  them  in  a  work  cafe  than  thofe  of  Sodofn
:ind  Gomorrah,

■
fo  the  Honourable  Wait  "VVinthrop, Eliiha  Cook, and  Samuel  Sewall,

Efjuires,  Arbitrators indifferently  chofen, between Mr,  Samuel  Parris,

and  the  Inhabitants  of  Salem  Village.  >

Tp  H  E  Remonftrances  of  feveral  agrieved  perfons  in  the  faid  Village,
*•  with  further  reaforis  why  they  conceive  they  Ought  not  to  hear  Mr.
Harris,  nor  to  own  him  as  a  Minifter  of  the  Gofpel,  nor  to  contribute
ny  fupport  to  him  as  fuch,  for  feveral  Years  pall:  ;  humbly  Offered  as
for  confideratibm

We  humbly  conceive  that  having  in  Apilyl6 93 ,  given  Our  Reafons

|/hy  we  could  not  join  with  Mr.  Parris  in  Prayer,  Preaching,  or  Sacra-

jiencs. It  thefe  Reafons  are  found  fufficient  for  bur  withdrawing,  ('and

fe  cannot  yet  find  but  they  arej  Then  we  conceive  Our  felves  virtually

Ifcharged,  not  only  in  Confeience, but  alio  in  Law  ;  which  requires

Maintenance  to  be  given  to  fuch  as  are  Orthodox,  and  blamelefs. Ihe

lid  Mr.  Parris  having  been  teaching  fuch  dangerous  Errors,  and  preach-

i  fuch  fcandalous  Immoralities,  as  ought  to  difcharge  any  (thb  ever  fo

fted  other  ways)  from  the  work  of  the  Miniftry.

Particularly  in  hisQath  againft  the  lives  of  feveral,  wherein  he  fwears

at  the  Prifoners  with  their  looks  knock  down  thofe  pretended  fufrerers.

re  humbly  conceive,  that  he  tfcat  Swears  to  more  than  he  is  certain  of;

equally  guilty  of  Perjury,  with  him  that  Swears  to  what  is  falfe Ana

they  did  fall  at  fuch  a  time,  yet  it  could  not  be  known  that  they  did

much  lefs  could  they  be  certain  of  it;  yet  did  Swear  pcfitiveiy  againll

lives  of  fuch,  as  he  could  not  have  any  knowledge  but  they  might  be

nocent.

His  believing  the  E>evil's  Accusations,  and  readily  departing  from  all
jarity  to  perfons,  tho  of  blamelefs  and  godly  lives,upon  fuch  fuggeitions,
:  promoting  fuch  Accufations,  as  alio  his  partiality  therein,  in  ftifiing
:  Accufations  of  fome,  and  the  fame*time  vigilantly  promoting  others  ,*
we  conceive  are  juft  caufes  for  Our  refufal,  eje

That  Mr.  P arris's  going  to  Mary  Walut.,  or  Abigail  H?illiams\  and  di-
cing others  to  them,  to  know  whoaiflic-ted  the  People  in  their  liberies;

we


&4  'A  Letter  albut  Witchcraft.  Part  4;

we  undefftand  this  to  be  a  dealing  with  them  that  have  a  familiar  fpirit,
and  an  implicit  denying  the  providence  of  God,  which  alone> as  we  be-|
lieve,  can  fend  Afflictions,  or  caufe  Devils  to  Afflict  any  ;  this*  we  aifd
conceive  fufficient  to  juftifie  fuch  refufal.

That  Mr.  Parris  by  thefe  Practices  and  Principles,  has  been  the  begin-
ner and  procurer  of  the  foreft  Afflictions,  not  to  this  Village  only,  but  td
this  whole  Country*  that  did  ever  befai  them.

We  the  Subfcribers,  in  behalf  of  our  felves,  and  of  ieveral  others  of  the
fame  mind  with  us  ( touching  thefe  things;  having  fome  of  us  had  our-
Relations  by  thefe  practices  taken  off  by  ah  untimely  Death  -y  others*
have#been  imprifoned,  and  fuffered  in  our  Perfons,  Reputations,  and  E
ftates  ;  fubmit  the  whole  to  your  Honours  derifion,  to  determine  whe-
ther we  are  or  ought  to  be  any  ways  obliged  to  honour,  refpect  and  fup-
port  fuch  an  Itiftrument  of  our  miferies  ;  praying  God  to  guide  your
Honours,  to  act  herein  -,  as  may  be  for  his  Glory*  and  the  future  fettle-
ment  of  our  Village,  in  Amity  and  Unity,

r  John  Tarball,  J
__  n T  ,  J  Samuel  NurJe,C  Attorney  s  for  the  people  of  thi

Eofton,  July  ai.  ilVl-JJoC  Putman,  C Village.

C  Dan.  Andrew,  3

According  to  the  order  of  the  aforefaid  Arbitrators,  the  faid  Mh  ParA
had  fome  of  his  Arrears  paid  him,  as  alfo  a  Sum  of  Money  for  his  Re
pairs  of  the  Minifterial  Houfe  of  the  faid  Village,  and  is  difmhTed  there*<
from.


PART IV*

A  Letter  #f  a  Gentleman,  endeavouring  to  pnvt  the  ret
seived  Opinions  aiout  Witchcrajth


I  Told  you,  I  had  fome  thoughts  cbricerhing  Witchcraft,  and  an  ihtef
tiori  of  conferring  with  the  Gentleman,  Who  has  publilhed  fevefii
Treatifes  about  Witchcraft,  and  jperfons  afflicted  by  them,  lately  hefef
New-England  ;  but  fince  you  have  put  thole  three  Books  into  my  hand
1  find  my  felf  engaged  in  a  very  hard  Province;  to  give  you  my  opinit
of  theiru I  plainly  fbfeie?}  that  fliould  this  feriblihg  of  mine  come  i

public


Part  4.  A  Letter  aloui  Witchcrafts  6$

publick  view,  it  would  difpleafe  alJ  Parties,  but  that  is  the  leaft ;  more-
over it  is  fo  far  out  of  my  Road  to  fet  my  thoughts  to  confider  a  matter
i  on  every  fide,  which  in  it  leif  is  fo  abftruee,  and  every  ftep  I  advance
therein,  if  I  mifs  truth  f which  is  a  narrow  and  undivided  line ;  Imuft
tumble  down  headlong  into  the  Gulph  of  dangerous  error  ;  yet  notwith-
ftanding  I  have  forced  my  felf  to  fend  thefe  few  lines,  if  fo  be  I  may  clear
to  you  a  truth,  you  now  feem  to  be  offended  at,  becaufe  of  the  ill  confe-
quences,  which  fyou  thinkj lately  have  and  again  may  be  flrawn  from
Jt,  by  the  ill  conduct  of  fome  Men, I  am  not  ignorant  that  the  pious
frauds  of  the  Ancient,  and  the  inbred  fire  (I  do  not  call  it  pride;  of  many
'.of  our  Modern  Divines  have  precipitated  them  to  propagate, and  main-
tain truth  as  wella?falihoods?  in  fuchan  unfair  manner,  as  has  given  ad~
vantage  to  the  Enemy,  to  fufpect  the  whole  Doctrine, thefe  Men  have
profeft  ro  be  nothing  but  a  meet*  tricl^. But  it  is  certain,  that  as  no  lover
of  truth  will  judufie  an  Illegitimate  Corollary, tho  drawn  from  a  true
propolition  ; fo  neither  will  he  reject  a  truth, becaufe  fome  or many
Men  take  unfair  mediums  to  prove  it,  or  draw  falfe  confequences  from
it ;  The  many  Herefies  among  Chriftians,  muft  not  give  a  mortal  wound
to  the  Eflence  of  the  Chriftian  Religion  ;  neither  muft  any  one  Chriftian
Doctrine  be  exterminated, becaufe  Evil  Men  make  ufe  of  it,  as  a  Cloak
to  cover  their  own  (elf-ends ;  particularly,  becaufe  fpme  men  perhaps  a-
mong  all  forts  of  Cjiriftians,  have  under  pretence  of  Wicchcrait  coloured
their  own  Malice, Pride  and  Popularity  ;  we  muft  not  therefore  conr
icjude  (firft;  that  there  are  no  Witches (-2)  or  that Witches cannot  be
(Tonvicted  by  fuch  dear  and  undeniable  proof  as  the  Law  of  God  re-
quires in  the  cafe  of  Death  f  3.)  Or  that  a  Witch  fo  Convicted  ought  not
to  be  put  to  death. I.  That  there  are  Witches  is  manifeft  from  the  pre-
cept Gt  M.ifcs,  Thou /halt  notfuffcr  a  Witch  to  live. Exod.  22.  1 8. for  ic
^certain  God  would  nor.  have  given  a  vain  and  unintelligible  Law,  as-
this  muft  be  of  putting  Witches  to  death, if  there  are  no.  Witches. But
tfpu  object  tfr.t  this  doth  net  anfwer  oar  Cale, for  we  have  formed  ano-
ther Idea  of  Witches  than  what  can  be  gathered from  Scriptures  ; you
quote  four  place,  vi$ D:ut.  13. M.it.  24. Acts  13.  %  Tim.  3. from all
which  you  infer  that  Witchcraft  is  a  maligning  and  opugning  the  Word,
i^orks,  and  Worfliip  of  God  ;  and  by  an  extraordinary  fign,  feeking  to
fed uce  any  from  it,  and  this  you  readily  grant. But  then  you  fay, What
i| this  to  Witches  now  a  days? who are  laid  to  have  made  an  explicit
■Covenant  with  the  Devi],  anckio  be  im powered  by  him,  to  the  doing  of
jthings  ftrange  in  thernfelves,  ami  be.'ides  their  natural  courle. This  you
fay  does  not  follow,  and  hcre-in^ndeed  coniifts  the whole  Controveriie.
Fhcrefbre  it  is  neceflary,  that  firft  of  all.  we  clear  this  point,  laying  aJide
lav  have  from  the  fatal  application  of  this  Doctrinc\


■thofe  prejudices  we  m


to


66  A  Letter  ahout  Witchcraft.  Part  4.

to  iomc  (who  were  in  your  judgment)  really  at  leaftin  Law,  and  before
Men  Innocent.  In  a  word,  we  are  feeking  after  truth,  and  truth  (halt
and  will  be  truth,  in  fpite  of  Men  and  Devils.  I  do  not  repeat  this  cau-
tion co  fbreftall  you,  to  believe  the  Doctrine  of  Witchcraft,  as  it  is  above
defined,  without  inquiring  into  the  rcaibn  and  truth  of  it ;  only  I  defire
you  to  enquire  into  it,  as  a  thing  doubtful.  For  no  Man  can  be  certain
of  a  Negative,  unleis  either  the  Affirmative  imply  a  co.htradiclion  ,  or
he  can  prove  it  by  certain  teftimony,  to  neither  of  which  you  pretend;
only  you  alledge  it  cannot  be  proved  by  Scripture,  /.  c.  you  cannot  prove
it,  nor  have  {ccn  it  proved  by  any  other  you  have  read  on  that  Subject.
I  am  not  fo  vain  to  think  I  can  do  better  than  the  Learned  Authors  you
have  confulted  with  (tho  I  know  hot  what  they  have  done,  for  I  had  no
•other  Book  but  the  Bible,  to  make  ufc  of  on  this  occalion  ;}  but  becaufc
I  am  fatisfied  my  M^  I  am  willing  to  communicate  my  Reafons,  which
I. divide  into  Three  heads.  1.  The  appearance  of  Angels.  %.  The  nature
of  Poffeffion.  3.  And  the  Scripture  notion  of  Witchcraft.  1.  Good  An-
gels did  appear  co  Abraham^  and  did  oat,  Gen.  1 5.  it  feems  he  wafti'd
their  Feet,  it  is  certain  he  faw  and  heard  them,  therefore  there  is  no  iml
poffibility  in  Angels  being  converfant  with  men.  God  is  true,  and  what-
ever is  contained  in  Sacred  Writ  is  true  ;  If  we  poor  (hallow  Mortals  do
riot  comprehend  the  manner  how,  that  argues  only  our  weakness  and
ignorance  in  this  dark  Prifon  of  Fiefh,  wherein  we  are  inclofcd,  during
.©ur  abode  in  this  vale  of  mifery,  but  doth  not  in  the  leaft  infringe  the
verity  of  the  Scripture  ;  it  is  fufficient  that  we  undoubtedly  know  they
frave  appeared  unto  Men  in  bodily  lliape,  and  done  their  Errand  they
were  font  on  from  God.  Now  if  good  Angels  have  appeared,  why  may
Hot  bad  ?  Surely  the  Devils,  becaufe  fallen  and  Evil,  have  not  therefore
loll  the  Nature  of  Angels,  neither  is  there  any  contradiction  in  their  ap-
pearing in  a  bodily  fhape,  now  after  any  more  than  before  their  Fall;
But  you  will  fay,  you  muft  allow  of*  the  appearances  of  Good  Angels,
becaufe  of  the  .Scripture  teftimony ;  but  not  of  bad,  feeing  rhere  }s  no
place  of  Scripture  that  clearly  pro/yes  it,  Mat.  4.  The  words  in  the  Gpf-
pel  do  as  plainly  fig  nine  the  Devils  outward  appearance  to  our  Saviour,
when  he  was  tempted,  as  can  be  exprefs'd,  and  when  the  tempter  canie  to
him  he  J aid—  but  he  anfwercd—  the  fame  form  St.  Luke  ufeth  to  fignifie
the  appearance  of  Mcfes  and  Ettas,  in  the  transfiguration,  And  behold
there  tailed  with  hirti  two  men  ;  for  what  folio Ws,  v.  31,  who  appeared
is  ufed  to  fignifle  (not  their  appearance,  but)  the  manner  of  their  appear-
ance in  great  Glory.  But  you'l  urge  that  'tis  very  eafic  to  be  underitood,
that  Mofis  and  Ulias  did  appear,  becaufe  they  had  human  bodies  ;  but
that  it  is  unintelligible  to  you, how  the  Devil  being  a  Snirit  can  appear,  a

§plrir,  l  c*  a  iubftancc  void  of  all  dimenlions  5 therefore  the  words  trt

:?.  :  .  ■■:■  .;.:V .-:  ..  ..'  .J  •  r»:.  tjie


Part  4  A  Letter  alout  Witchcraft:  67

the  Hiftory  muft  not  be  taken  in  &  literal  Scnfe.  Do  not  miftakc  ; thq
fome  Philofophcrs  are  of  opinion  ( which  whether  true  or  falfe,  is  all  one
to  our  prefent  Argument)  that  a  Spirits  fubftance  is  extended,  and  hath
!  belides  length,  breadth  and  depth,  a  fourth  dimehlicn,  iw'^.  effcmial  fpif-
iitude  j  yet  the  fame  do  not  fay,  that  pure  fubftance  is  perceptible  by  our
bodily  Senfes ; on  the  contrary,  they  tell  us, thar  Spirits  are  cloathed
with  vehicles,  /.  e.  they  are  united  to  certain  portions  of  matter, which
they  inform,  move  and  actuate. Now  this  we  rauft  not  reject  as  impeili-
ble,  becaule  we  cannot  comprehend  the  formal  reafon,  hew  a  Spirit  acts
upon  matter  :  For  who  can  give  the  Reafon, that  upon  the  Volition  6t
the  human  Soul,  the  Handihould  be  lifted  up,  or  any  ways  moved?  for
to  fay  the  Contraction  of  the  Mufcles  is  the Mechanic!:  caufe  of  vo-
luntary motion,  is  not  to  folve  the  Queftion  which  recurs,  why  upon  Vo-
lition fhould  that  Contraction  enfue which  caufes  that  motion.-3  all  that
I  know  the  wifeft  Man  ever  faid  upon  this  head  ,  is,  that  it  is  the  will  of
the  Creator  ;  who  hath  ordered  fuch  a  f pedes  of  thinking  Creatures,  by
a  Catholick  Law  to  be  united  to  fuch  portions  of  matter,  fo  and  fo  dif-
pofed,  or,  if  you  will  in  the  vulgar  Phraie^o*  Organized .  bodies,  and  that
there  fhould  be  between  them  and  the  feveral  bodies,  they  are  united  to,
a  mutual  re-action  and  painon  : Now  you  fee  how  little  we  know  of
the  reafon,  of  that  which  ismeft  near  to  us,  and  molt  certain,  vi$.  Tbo
Souls  informing  the Body,  yet  yoii  would  think  it  a  bad  Argument,  if
6nc  ihould, as  fome  have  done,  include  from  this  cur  jgnorar.ee,  that
(there  was  nothing  in  us  but  matter,  it  is  no  othcrways  to  deny  a  Spirit:;
! acting,  a  Vehicle. . The  plained  and' inert  certain  things  when  denied  arc
hardeft  to  be  proved,  therefore  the  Axiom  faith  well,  centra  prmtift  a, &*,
There  are  forrie  certain  truths  which  are  rather  to  be  explained  to  young
Deginners"  than  proved,  upon  which  -\et  all  Science is  built,  .as  every
whole  is  mere  than  his  parr,  and  of  this  fort  I  take  thefe  two  following,
jr.  That  there  are  two  iubitances,  Cor  jus &  Mens,  Ecdy  and  Spirit,  al-
together  different,  for  the  Ideas  we  have  of  them  are  quite  diftin<9L
2.  That  a  Spirit  can  Actuate,  Animate, or  inform  a  certain  portion  of
matter, and  be  united  to  it : from  whence  it  is  very  evident, that  the
Pevil  united  to  a  portion  of  matter  {which  hereafter  I'll  call. a  Vehicle)
may  fall  under  the  cognizance  of  our  Senles,  and  be  converiant  with  us
in  a  bodily  fhape.  Where  then  is  the.  reaion  or  need  to  run  to  a  Metapho-
rical,  and  forced  Interpretation,  when  the  words  are  fo  plain, and  the
literal  fenfe  implieth  no  contradiction, nor  any  greater  difficulty  than
(as  has  been  hid)  what  arifeth  from  the  Union  ot  the  Soul  and  Body,'
which  is  moft  certain. Now  after  ail  to  fay,  God  m;t;  pet  permit the
Devil  fo  to  appear,  is  to  beg  the  queftion  without  faying  any  thing  ce  the
.preceeding  Argument,  and  it  is  sgainft  the  fenfe  of  alnaoft  all -marikir-'d  ;

3t"  3T  for


gS  A  Letter  alout  Witchcraft.  Part  4,,

for  in  all  Ages,  and  all  places  there  have  been  many  Witncflcs  of  the  ap-
pearances  of  Demons ,  all  of  whom  that  taught  any  thing  contrary  to  the
right  Worlliip  of  the  true  God,  were  certainly  evil  ones  :  and  it  Were
moft  prefumptuous,  barely  to  afTert  that  all  thefe  witncflcs  were  always
deceived,  and  it  is  impoflible  they  could  all  agree  to  deceive.  2.  We
conae  to  confider  the  nature  of  Pofleflion.  The  Man  pcfleft,  Lukf  8.  27.
had  a  Power  more  than  Natural,  for  he  brake  the  bands,  which  he  could
no:  have  done  by  his  own  ftrength  ;  Now  from  whom  had  he  this  Power  ?
The  Scripture  faith,  He  had  Devils  a  long  time,  and  often  times  it  had  I
caught  him,  (3c  he  was  kept  bound  with  Chains,  and  in  Fetters,  and!
he  brake  the  bands,and  was  driven  of  the  Devil  into  the  Wiidernels ;  this
Power  then  was  immediately  from  the  Devil,  and  whaticever  poflcfledi
perfons  does,  or  fufters  things  beyond  his  natural  power  ;  he  is  inabled  i
by  the  D canon  fo  to  do  :  or  to  fpeak  more  properly,  it  is  the  Daman  who
adfceth  the  fame,  as  is  plain  from  St.  Marf(s>  Relation  of  this  paffage,  v.
5.  2.  A  Man  with  an  unclean  Spirit,  v.  3.  2.  and  no  Man  could  bind i
him,  no  not  with  Chains,  6.  v.  but  when  he  faw  Jefns  afar  off  he  r?ni
and  worfhiped  him, and  the  fame  He  t£  7.  faid.I  adjure  thee  by  Gcd  thatt
thou  torment  me  not,  and  v-  10.  My  name  is  Legion,  for  we  are  many,,
v.  1 1,  and  he  befought  him  much,  that  he  would  not  fend  them  awaj^r
out  of  the  Countrey  ;  it  is  manifeft  from  hence,  that  it  was  not  the  poof  1
Man  who  was  pofJeft,  but  the  Devils  who  pofleiTed  him,  by  whom  the
Chains  had  been  pluck'd  afunder.,  and  the  Fetters  broken  in  pieces  ;  now?
here  is  Divine  teitimony,  that  the  Devils  have  actuated  a  Humane  bedf
to  the  doing  of  things  beyond  the  Natural  ftrength  of  that  Body,  as  in
was  (imply  united  to  its  humane  Soul ;  how  much  more  then  can  the  De-
vil actuate  any  other  proportion  of  Ample  Matter,  Earth,  Air,  Fire  of  i
Water  ;  and  make  it  a  fit  Organ  for  himfelf  to  a<5r,  in*

But  enough  of  this  already,  let  us  rather  enquire  how  the  Devil  enters  info
the  body  of  the  pojfeft,  to  wove  it  at  his  pleafure  ;  this  I  think  he  cannot  do  as-
a  meer  Spirit*  or  by  ayiy  never  foftrici  XJnion  with  the  Humane  Soul,  J  or  in
that  cafe  he  is  only  a  tempter  or  Jcducer  -y  and  nothing  .above  humane  ftiength
can  be  done  :  But  there  there  being  femething  performed  (the  bonds  broken)'
by  a  force  which  could  not  proceed  from  humane  ftrength,  it  neceffarily  follows
that  the  Devils  entrcd  into  the  poffeft ,  otherways  qualified  than  as  a  meer  Spir
rit,  he  did  not  enter  without  feme' portion  of  matter,  to  which  he  was  united
by  the  Intermedium,  whereof  he  acicd  upon  and  actuated  the  humane  bedy.-
Again  if  it  is  f aid  that  the  Devil  entrcd  as  a  meer  Spirit,  .and  immediately
atted  upon  and  moved  that  Body  ;  it  follows  the  Devil  bstb  a  Vehicle,  a  cer-
tain portion  of  matter  (that  Body)  to  atluate  anddlffcfe  of  at  will ;  which  is
abfurd,  i.  Mccakfc  it  aj] errs  what  it  feeins  to  deny,  viz.  the  Devils  having  a-
Vekid?  to  a&  immsdiat'efy  upon,  and  t»  be  unite  A  to  d  p'*tim  of  matter  txas

has


?drt  4.  A  Letter  ahout  Witchcraft.  69

his  be  en  fid d  before)  is  the  fame  thing,  z.  It  fights  againfl  the  Citholich-
taw  of  the  'Union  of  Sad  and  Body,  by  which  the  Omntfottxt  hath  ordained
(he  voluntary  motion  of  a  Lnhnanc  body  to  depend  upon  the  Will  of  its  humane
Sold,  and  thofc  that  are  not  'voluntary  to  proceed  cither  fnm  its  own  Ivlechd-
iiifcn,  or  material  force,  hence  we  may  certainly  conclude,  that  it  is  by  the
Intervening  of  the  Devils  Vehicle,  that  he  enters  into  the  Body  of  the pofjeft.
But  wh  at  if  you  and  I  cannot  agree  about  this  Notion  of  poffcffwn,  muft  we
therefore  rej'ctl  the  truth  it  felf\  and  run  to  a  far  fetched  and  int  oiler  able  fen fe
of  the  words  ;  Noy our  opinions  do  not  alter  the  Nature  of  things,  it  is  certain

j  there  were  perfons  pffefty  and  it  is  as  certain  that  the  Devil  entred  into  theiii,

I  cither  with  or  without  a  Vehicle,  it  is  all  one  which  part  of  the-  contradict  ion
fcu  take,  the  confequence  is  the  fame. Viz.

That  the  Devil  doth  ad  immediately  upon  matter,  there  is  another  acccMa-
uon  of  the  word  poffcffim  in  Scripture,  Adfcs  16.  i'£.  where  one  is  faid  to  be
'loff  eft  with  a  Spirit  of  Divination  {yrnv  [J.&  Uv-^vo^)  the  word  commonly  tifed
■0  the  Prieftefs  of  Apollo,  who  gave  refponfes  ;  and  it  feems  this  Damfci  was
isch  an  one,  for  fine  brought  her  Mfters  much  Mmey,  or  gain  by  foothfayingt

\l\i&vrzv9'j8}JiL  Nov  'iff he  Hiftory  of  them  be  true  that  they  were  demented;
ind  knew  net  themf elves  what  they  uttered,  donee  erant  Deo  pienx  (as
"hey  word  it)  their  cafe  is  not  different, but  the  fame  with  the  foregoing^

J  but  if  they  underftood  what  they  /poke,  then  had  they  familiar  Spirits,  wherc-
ff  there  is  frequent  -mention  made  in  the  Old  Tefi anient,  and ''one  good  Kfrg
commended  for  having  cut  off  them  thru  uadjuch,  therefore  I  thinly  the
meaning  of  the  word  was  vtry  obvious  in  his  time,  neither  was  it  ever  con-
troverted, being  joy nd  with  any  otuer  name  than  j  pint  Familiar,  one  of  our
mn  Family,  that  is  oft,  every  day  convefant  mfh  us,  and  almqft  ever  ready
>tpon  call  to  attend  us.  But  the  confide  ration  or  than,  W/.o  have  j  ami  liar  Spl-
its, falleth  under  the  head  of  Witchcraft,  which  we  are  to  corfider  in  the
hird  flace.  3.  vVitchcraft^  to  iuau.re  into  tie  Scripture  Notion  of  it,  mid
■'ompare  whether  it  be  the  fame  v;drh  that  above  d  fined  ;  the  Cabaliftick,
seami?ig  would  be  of  great  ufe  in  this  fear ch,  and  afford  us  much  H&ht'.  there
s  little  doubt  but  that  there  are  many  great  truths  ?tot  commonly  kruwn,  fXoii"
*ft  Religio  ubt  omnia  parent)  Jlnd  our  Saviour  exprejly  cautions  -his  Dijciphs
hat  they  do  not  throw  their  Pearl 'before  Swine  \  therefore  it  is  no  wc/td-r  that
lime  Doclrines,  tho  Unquestionably  true  are  not'fo  fully  dejeribed,  becauje  the
Authors  who  treat  of  them  are  afraid,  hfi  evil  Men  frjould  be  the  mare  de-
praved by  being  informed  •  but  I  am  in  no  fitch  fear;  nor  can  I  give  you  any
yt.her  thoughts  but  v?h at  are  obvious  to  any  Man,  from  the  plain  Jcnjz  offim
1-cripture.  Our  definition  we* I  divide  into  two  Prnpojithvs,  and-  hmdte  them'
Severally.  i>  Proportion.  7b s  I  Fitch  is  impower  d  by  the  Devd  to  do-  things
Grange  in  themf elves  y  and  befnie  their  natural  courje.  2.  Prop.-  Tue  manner
now  thg  VPltch  is  empowered  to  do  thofc  jirangs  thingy  is  hy Explicit  (tynfr-


jo  A  Letter  about  Witchcraft.  Part  4

Jtadt  or  Ccvenant  with  the  Devil. For  clearing  ef  the  .fir ft,  we.  will  confide?
the  four  f  laces  above  cited, wherein  a Witch  is  called  a  falfe  Prophet,  a
falfe  Chriftr A  Sorcerer,  a  refiftcr  of the  truth,  and  is  J  aid  to  flxw  figns to
feduce  the  People  to  feel^  after  other  Geds: whence let  us  note, 3  things^
I .  That  thofe  terms  Witoh,  falfe  Chrifl,  falfe  Pnfhct, and  Sorcerer,  are
all  Synonimous  ; i.  e.  fignifie  the  fame  thing. 2.  That  a  Witch  doth  do
things  fir  angc  in  themf elves  t  and  beyond  their  Natural  courfe  : for  it  were
mod  ridiculous,  to  a  fledge  that  our  blcffed  Saviour,  whenhefid,  there  (hall
arife  falfe  Chrifts,  and  fhalJ  Ihew  great  figns  and  wonders,  in  fo  much
that  (if  it  were  poffible)  they  fhould  deceive  the  veryEle&, meant  that
cunning  cheats  fheidd  arife  and  floew  Legerdemain  tricks  ;  the  words  will  in
?io  -wife  hear  ity  and  I  believe  ycu  arc  f rem  interpreting  them,  fo  it  is  mani-
feft,  they  figni fie  not  a  feign  d,  but  a  real  doing  df  things  y  beyond  their  Na-
tural courfe ;  therefore  the  Sorceries  of  EJimas  and  Simon  were  not  jhnyle  de-
hifions,  but  real  effctfs  that  could  not  have  been  produced  by  Phyfical  caufes'hu
the  ordinary  courje  of  nature. 3.  That  the  end  of  the  Witches  fhewing  thefm
figns,  is  to  feduce  the  People  to  feck  After  other  Godsr  from  which  premifes
I  infer,  that  the  Witches  have  the  power  of  doing  thofe  wonders,  or  fir  angc
things  immediately  from  the  Devil ;  they  are  without  the  reach  of Nature ,and
therefore  above  humane  power,  and  no  mecr  Man  can-  effcB  them ;  the  Witch
then  who  does  them  muft  have  the  power  of  doing,  them  from  another  ; but
wli$  is  the  ether?  God  will' not  give  his  tcftimony  to  a  lye,  and  to  fay  GckI  diet"
at  any  time  impower  a  Whch  to  worl^  wonders  to  gain  belief  to  the  DcHrine
of  Devils,  were  with  one  breath  to  dejlroy  rest  And  branch  of  aft  revealed  Re-
ligion 'y  no,  it  cannot  be,  it  is  only  Godys  permijfon,  who  provcth  his  People^
whether  they  love  him  with  ail  their  heart,  and  with  all  their  Soul. There-
fore the  Witch  has  a  power  of  doing  Wonders,  or  ftrange  things  immediately
from  the  Devil. 1.  Propofit*  wc U fub divide  into  thefe  two. I.  That  there
is  an  exprefs  Covenant  between  the  Witch  and  the  Devil. 2.  That  "'tis  nc? ,
reafonabletofappofe  this  Covenant  to  be  transacted  mentally. J.  The  Devil'
cannot  communicate  this  power,  by  never  fiftritl  a  Vnion  with  the  Soul  of  the-
Witch  ;  for  in  that  cafe  he  is  only  a  tempter, and  nothing  above humane'
power  can  be  done,  as  has  been  already  proved ;  therefore  the  Devil  who im-
proves the  Witch  to  do  things  above  humane  power,  mufl  cither  appear  in  an-
External  fh ape, and  irflrucl  him  how,  and  upon  what  terms  he  witt  iriabie
him  to  do  thofe  Wonders  5  or  elf c  he mufl enter  -into  the  body  of  the  Witch'
and  poffefs  it. The  Dencminacs  in  the  Gcffel  arefuch  whem  the  Dcvilt  in-
vade, by  ynain  force, their  Soul  having,  no  further  command  of  their  bodies*
which  are  fub j  eel  ed  to  the  If^tll  of  the  Dsviis.{;  whefe  end  is  to  wound  and  tor-  .
vicnt  thofe  miferrMe  Creatures,  to  throw  them  info  the  fire,  and  into  the  wa-
ter '-but  thcWit-ch,who  Hf^Vvifc  is  poffeffe-d,  is  not  treated  in  fuck  an  outragi-
qhi  m/uincr^.  hu  D-mion  is.  tame  nndfamilixr  unto  him,  aridfufftrs  him  lot

or


Part  4.  A  Letter  about  Witchcraft.  31

a  time  to  live  quietly,  without  any  further  moleftation,  then  prompting  him
to  do  his  utmofi  endeavour  to  withdraw  Men  from  God ;  he  is  mt  bereaved  of
Ins  Senfes  as  the  poor  lunatic^,  hut  is  confeious  of  all  he  does,  and  willeth  alt
his  crimes,  he  rccciveth  power  from  the  Devil  to  do  wonders,  and  doth  them
foferve  the  Devils  turn.  Therefore  there  mufl  he  a  Covenant,  an  exprefs
Covenant,  between  the  Devil  a>rd  him,  viz.  that  he  foall  obey  the  Devil  and
fsrve  him,  and  that  the  Devil /kail  both  enable  him  Jo  to  do,  and  aljo  reward
him  for  fo  doing  ;  for  if  there  is  no  contract  between  them,  How  comes  the
Witch  to  J^now  he  has  a  fupematural  power  r  or  how  can  he  fo  peremptorily
pretend  to  do  that  which  is  fo  much  above  his  natural  power,  not  knowing
he  has  a  fvper  natural  one  inabling  him  to  do  the  fame :  There  can  be  no  doubt
but  there  was  a  very  intimate  commerce  between  Satan  and  him  •  who  is  caWd
by  St.  Paul  thou  Child  of  the  Devil  (not  as  other  unholy  men  but)  in  an  cf-
pecial  manner,  as  bei?ig  the  Enemy  of  all  righteoufiiefs,  who  would  not  ceafe
p  pervert  the  right  ways  of  the  Lord,  it  is  not  to  be  fuppofed  that  he  enter' d
into  this  fo  near  a  Relation  with  Satan,  with  which  he  is  fligmati^ed,  that
jthcrs  may  beware  of  him,  without  his  own  knowledge  and  confent;  and  is  net
bis  a  Covenant,  an  Exprefs  Co:  enant  on  his  part  to  ferve  the  Devil  inceffantly,
aid  on  the  Devils,  to  impower  him  to  aft  his  Sorceries  wherewith  he  bewitched
he  People  ;  now  I  think,  I  have  from  Scripture  fully  fatisfied  you  of  the
truth  of  whit  I  offered,  in  a  Difccurfe  at  ■  but  fince  you  have  told  me  an
Explicit  Covenant  with  the  Devil,  fgnifying  the  Devil'' \s  appearing  in  a  bodily
foape  to  the  Witch,  and  their  figning  an  exprefs  Covenant,  which  you  fay
annot  be  proved  from  Scripture.  It  were  moft  unreafonable  to  imagine  that
'he  ceremonies  of  this  hclli/h  myflcry  are  particularly  fct  down  in  the  word  cf
7od  ;  therefore  we  mufl  gather  by  Analogy  and  Rcafon  the  manner  how  this
'xprefs  Covenant  is  tranj acted:  and  to  that  end  fie  fct  down  thefe  following
Zonfid&ations.

i.  Under  the  Law,  God  did  ordain  his  People  in  all  their  matters  tg
iavc  rccourfe  immediately  to  himfclf,  and  depend  upon  him  for  CouniiT,
.vhich  they  were  ready  to  obey,  with  full  alfurancc  of  aid  and  pro-
eCticn  from  him  againft  their  Enemies;  this  the  Devil  imitateth  by  fet-
ing upof  Oracles  among  the  Kpathen,to  which  alhhe  Kings,  Nations,
ind  mighty  Conquerors  upon  Earth  did  come  and  paid  their  humbler!  A-
icration  to  the  Gcd  (as  the  Devil  blafphemouily  ealfd  h'mfclf )  of  the
Temple,  in  which  they  were  imploring  his  direA.cn  and  aftiftancc  in
heir  doubtful  and  prosperous  affairs.  Again,  God  inilituted  Sacrifices
o  put  Men  in  mind  of  their  duty  to  their  Creator,  to  whom  they  owe  all
hings,  even  tliemfeljes  ;  but  die  Devil  is  not  contented  with  the  bare
mitation  hereof;  the  acknowledgment  and  worfliip  he  rcceivcih  from
he  deluded  World  is  not  enough,  tho  they  otfer  up  unto  him  innumcr^
.blc  Hecatombs,  unlcis  they  caufc  their  Children,  to  pais  through  the
■■ :'  '  > iire


7i  A  Letter  alout  Writcheraft.  Part  J

fire  unto  him,  to  whom  no  facrificc  is  fo  well  pleafing,  as  that of  hu-
mane Blood.  And  there  is  no  rcaibn  to  think,  that  now  under  the.  OEco-
nomy  of  theGofpel,  the  Devil  hath  left  off  to  vie  with  God,  and  thereby
to  enfnare  Men. No,  it  is  rather  to  be  feared  that  his  Kingdom  dott|
now' more  prevail,  for  by  how  much  the  light  is  gi eater ;  lo  much  greater
is  their  condemnation,  who  do  not  receive  it:  it  is  reafcnable  to  liippofc
that  (feeing  the  Son  of  God,  when  he  came  to  tranfacl;  with  Men,  the
wonderful  Covenant  of  their  Redemption,  took  upon  him  their  Nature, ,
and  was  perfect  Man)  the  Devil  like  wife  doth  counterfeit  the  fame,  in.  ,
appearing  in  an  humane  fhape  to  them,  wjio  receive  him, and  confeder  •
rate  themfelves  with  him,  and  become  his  Vafjfals.

2.  Confider,  It  is  not  probable that thole  falfe Apoftlcs  mention  "df ,
2,  Cor.  Ir.  13.  erred  only  in  Ceremonies  or  Circumftances,  or  that  their
Errors,  tho  great,  did  proceed  rather  from  their  Ignorance,  than  from  the
perverfenefs  of  their  minds. 1  Cor.  3.  x  5.  For, for  fuch  we  may  have
charity  and  hope,  that  God  will  be  merciful  unto  them,  if  they  fincerely
do  the  belt  they  know,  tho  they  differ)  t  in  fome,  nay  many  things,  froi3
the  practices  and  belief  of  the  Chriitian  Church  ; but  thofe  St.  Pau\\
threatens  with  a  heavy  curfe,  that  their  end  (hall  be  according to  their
works  ;  therefore  it  feems  they immediately  ftruck  at  the  very  root  and
being  of  the  Chriftian  Religion,  and  were  the  fame  with  them  fpoken  of,
2,  Tim.  3.  6.  but  wirh  this  difference,  that  they  did  not  reiift,  but  behold
ing  the  Miracles  and  Signs  Which  were  done  by  the  true  Apoftle  of  ouil
Lord,  wondered  and  believed  alfo,  and  were  Baptized  j  yet  being  Sor-
cerers they  were  unwilling  to  loofc  that  great  eftcem  they  had  ohtain'd
as  it  is  related  of  simon,  who  had  bewitched  the  People  ot  Sawarix. giving
out  that  he  himlelf  was  fome great  one,  to  whom they  all  gave  heed  J,
from  the  leaft  to  the  greateft, laying,  this  Man  is  the  great  Power  oi;
God, therefore he  couM  not brook that  Peter  or  John  fnouJd  have  a
greater  Power  than  himfelf ;  but  offered  them  Money,  tjiat  on  whqmfca
ever  he laid  hands  he  (that  perfonj  fnould  receive  the Holy  Pho't;
which  (hews- him, who  thus  defigned  to  make Merchandize oftheBJ
Spirit,  tho  Baptized,  to  have  been  no  true  believer,  but  ilill  a  Sorcerer  jl
the  Gall  of  bitt,ernefs,  and  in  the  bond  of  Iniquity; fuch  were  thofe  da
ceitful  workers,  who  not  being  able  barefaced  to  refill,  did  put  on  Chrjj
ilianity  as  a  Mask,  that  they  might  undermine  the  truth,  and  intrcduea
the  Doctrines  of  Devils. Samaria  and  Paphcs,  were  not  the  only  twi
places  where  the  Devil  had  fuch  Agents,  there,  was  no  part  of  the  Ears
where  his  Kingdom  was  not  Eftat>lifhed,  and  where  he  had  not  his  E
mhTaries  before  the  preaching  of  the  Gofpel ;  and  fince  the  Text  tellea
us,  he  hath  his  Minifters,  who  do  imitate,  their  Mafter,  by  being  tranw
formed  into  the  Apoftles  of  Chrift,  as  he  himfelf  is  transformed  into  an

:/ "" '  '  '' 'Angel


Part  4.  A  Letter  alout  Witchcraft.  73

AngeL  of  light : whofe  defign,  in  being  thus  transformed,  cannot  be  to

impofe  upon  the  Almighty  ;  for  whatever  (hape  he  appears  in,  he  cannon

i  hide  his  uglinefs  from  the  Eyes  of  him  who  is  Omnifcent, therefore  he

appeareth  thus  in  the  ftiape  of  an  Angel  of  light,  either  to  tempt  and  fe-

duce  the  blelTed  Spirits  to  rebel  againft  God,  or  to  enfnare  wicked  Men,

who  by  their  hainous  crimes  (being  lovers  of  themfelves,  covetous,  boaft-

ers,  proud  blafphemers) were  before  difpofed  to  be  fit  Inftruments  to

ferve  him,  and  to  enter  into  league  with  him.  Surely  I  who  am  ignorant

of  the  Laws  by  which  the  Intellectual  World  is  govern'd,  dare  not  affirm

that  it  is  impoffible  for  Satan  fo  to  appear,  as  to  hide  his  deformities  from

Jthe  good  Angels, and  under  that  vail  to  tempt  them  : But  certain  I  am

[that  it  is  more  confonant  to  Reafon,  to  think  that  the  Apoftles  intention.

here  was  to  teach  that  the  Devil  appear'd  as  a  glorified  Angel  unto  Men

to  gain  Minifters,  wliom  he  might  imbue  with  the  Poylon  of  his  Black-

Arr,  and  (when  he  had  gotten  full  pofTeiTion  of  them) inftrucSt  them  by

his  own  Example  to  transform  themfelves  into  the  Apoftles  of  Chrift,

that  under  that  Vizard  they  might  with  the  greater  Advantage  promote

this  ends,  and  join  with  him  in  doing  the  utmoft  defpite  to  the  Spirit  of

Grace. •

3.  Consideration,  It  is  againft  the  Nature  of  this  Covenant,  that  is
hould  be  contaminated  by  a  mental  Colloquy,  between  the  Devil  and
the  Witch.  I  know  not  how  many  Articles  it  eonfifts  of,  but  it  is  certain
from  what  has  been  already  proved,  that  the  renouncing  of  Chrift  to  be
the  Son  of  God,  and  owning  the  Devil  to  be,and  worshipping  him  as  Godv
are  the  two  chief,  to  which  our  Saviour  who  was  accuied  of  calling  otic
Devils  by  Beelzebub  (i.  e.)  of  being  confederated  with  Beelzebub;  was
tempted  to  confent :  If  then  be  the  Sen  of  God  command  that  thefe  Jlones  be
made  bread  :  And  again,  throw  thy  J  elf  down  f rem  hence,  for  it  is  Written,
be  will  give  his  Angels  charge  over  rhee ;  and  again  all  thefe  things  will  X
live  thee,  if  thou  wilt  fall  down  and  woifkip  me  :  Whence  it  is  evident  that
icre  the  Devil  laboured  to  insinuate  into  our  Lord,  either  to  do  things
ra&  and  unwarrantable,  or  to  fufpedf.  his  Son-ihip,  revolt  from  God  his
Father,  and  worship  Satan,  that  he  might  obtain  the  glory  of  the  World,
Now  it  has  been  already  faid,  that  when  Jefus  was  tempted,  the  Devil
appeared  unto  him  in  a  bodily  fhape ;  therefore  it  is  agreeable  to  Reafon,
that  he  doth  appear  in  the  fame  manner  to  all  them, whom  he  alio  tern pteth
to  worfhip  him  :  moreover  the  form  of  renouncing  a  Covenant  ought
to  bear  refemblarce  to  the  form  of  entring  into  the  fame  Covenant  ;
therefore  Men  who  are  received  into  trie  Mvftical  Body  of  Chrift  by
God's  Minifter,  who  in  God's  ftead  exprefly  covenantcth  with,  and  ihcn
Adminiftrerh  the  Sacrament  of  Baptifm  unto  them,  muft  in  the  like  n  vsn-
u;r  go  out  of,  or  renounce  the  laid  Covenant' 3 and  of  than  cheit  are

L  tvw


74  <d  Letter  alout  Witchcraft.  Part  4*

two  forts  one  who  through  the  perverfenefs  of  their  own  hearts,the  lucre
of  the  World,  the  fear  of  Men  more  than  of  Gcd  abjure  their  Saviour,
turn  Apoftates,  Turks,  or  Pagans  ; The  other  fort  is  of  them  who  do
contract  with  the  Devil  to  be  his  Subjects,  in  the  imitation  of  whom, -it,
is  not  to  be  fuppofed  that  the  Devil  will  omit  any  materiaLCircumftances,
which  tend  both  to  bring  them  into  and  confirm  them  in his  Service,
To  effect  which  his  outward  appearance,  when  he  receives  his  Catechu-
mens is  of  greater  force  than any mental  contract:, for  many  wicked
men  who  have  denied  Gcd  andChrift  not  only  in  their  practice,  but  alio
blafphemoully  in  profeiTicn, yet  have  repented, and  at  laft  obtained  fome
hope  of  mercy  j  I  dare  not  fay  it  is  impolTible  for  a  WitcK  ro  repent  and
find  mercy,  the  fecrets  of  the  Almighty  are  too  high  for  me; but  it  ij
certain, thefe  wretches  are  ftrangely  hardned,  by  what  palTes  between
them  and  the  Devil  in  a  bodily* fhape,  particularly  their  worshipping  himr
which  necelTarily  implies  his  outward  appearance  unto  them  ;  tor  no  man
can  apete  Evil  as  Evil, becaufe th. Law  of  felf-prefervation deeply
rooted  in  all  men,  determineth  their  wills  to  purfue  that  which  feems
good,  and  fly  from  that  which  feems  evil  unto  them  ,  but  the  inbred  no  J
rions  that  every  man  has  of  the  Devil, is  that  he  is  an  Enemy and  de-  1
ilroyer  of  mankind,  therefore  every  man  hath  a  Natural  averfion  from
him,  and  confequently  cannot  formally  worfhip  him  as  fuch,  becaufe  the!
object  of  worfiupmuft  be  efteemed  to  be  propitious  and  placable  by  the]
>ruiippers,otherwile  if  fear  alone  be  the  adequate  caufeof  Adoration,)
follows  that  the  Devils  and  damned  in  Hell  do  worlhip  God,  Which  vA
contrary  to  Scripture, which  faith  they  blaiphemed, becaule  of  their  '
pains,  whence  it  follows, that  they  who  worfhip  the  Devil  mull:  have
changed  the  innate  Idea  that  they  had  of  him,  vi\. that  he  is  an  impla-
cable Worrier  of  Men,  and  take  him  to  be  benign  at  leaft  to  his  own  ;
but  this  change  cannot  be  wrought  by  any  fuggeftion  of  Satan  unto  thj
minds  of  Men, whom  indeed  he  mentally  tempteth  to  Luft, Pride  an^
Malice  ;  but  it  is  his  greateft  Artifice  to  cauie  his  Infinuations  to  arifa
in  the  hearts  of  Men, as  their  own  natural  thoughts, and  if  confeience
difcovers  their  Author  and  oppofes  them,  then  he  varnifhes  them  over-,
with  the  fpecious  colours  of  pleafure,  honour  and  glory ; and  fo  repre-
fents  them  as  really  good,  to  be  willed  and  defired  by  the  Soul,  which.
jndgeth  of  all  things  without  according  to  the  Jdeas  the  hath  of  them  jl|
but  becaufe  moil:  objects  have  two,  and  lome  many  faces, and  (he  nos
always  attends, therefore  fhe  often  errs  in  her  choice* neverthelefs  it  is.
impolFible  for  her  to  apete  an  object,  whofe  fimple  Idea  is  Evil ; bus
the  Idea  we  have  of  the  Devil  is  lucfa, for  we  cannot  reprefent  him  in.
pur  minds  any  Otherwife  than  as  the  great  deftroyer  of  Men,  therefore
•:u  mental  icmptation  can  make  us.  believe  this  our  grand  Enemy  to  be

ever


IW  4.  A  Letter  about  Witchcraft.  ??

ever  Exorable  by,  or  in  any  meafure  favourable  to  us,  whence  it  evi-
dently follows,  that  the  Devil  to  work  this  change  of  opinion  his  wor*
fhippers  have  of  him, mutt  appear  unto  them  in  a  bodily  fhape,  and  impofe
Upon  them,  whom  becaufe  of  their  great  Corruption  and  Sinfulnefs,  God
hath  wholly  left,  and  given  up  ftrong  delufions  that  they  (hould  believe  a
lye,  and  the  Father  of  lyes  $  who  now  appearing  in  a  humane  fhape,
telleth  them  that  he  is  no  fuch  Monfter,  as  he  has  been  reprefented  to
them  by  his  Enemy,  who  calls  himfelf  God ,  which  Title  of  right  be-
longs to  him,  and  that  he  (if  they  be  contracT:  to  be  his  Servants,)  will
both  amply  reward  them, by  giving  them  power  to  do  many  things  very
fuitable  to  their  abominable  depraved  Nature)  that  the  Chriftians,  what-
ever opinion  -hey  may  pretend  to  have  of  their  God,  cannot  fo  much  as
pretend  to,  and  alfo  that  he  will  protect  and  defend  them  againft  him,
whom  heretofore  they  have  miftaken  for  the  Almighty,  and  his  pretend-
ed Son  Chrift,  whom  they  muft  abjure  ere  they  can  be  received  by  or
expecl:  any  benefit  from  him.  Upon  no  other  confederation  is  it  porfible
for  any  Man  to  worfhip  the  Devil  ?  for  the  Atheifts,  who  deny  the  Be-
ing of  a  God,  do  likewife  deny  the  Exiftence  of  any  Spirit  good  or  bad ;
tlieiefore  their  drinking  the  Devils  health,  even  upon  their  knees  ftho  a
moft  horrid  Crime)  cannot  be  conftrued  any  part  of  worfhip  paid  to  him,
whom  they  affert  to  be  a  Chimera,  a  meer  figment  of  States  men  to
keep  the  vulgar  in  awe.  Now  I  have  evinced  to  you  that  there  are
Witches,  that  the  Witch  receiveth  power  from  the  Devil  to  do  ftrange
things,  that  there  is  art  exprefs  Covenant  between  the  Devil  and  the
Witch,  that  this  Covenant  cannot  be  tranfacted  mentally,  but  that  the
Devil  muft  appear  in  a  bodily  fhape  to  the  Witch  ;  therefore  1  conclude,
jhat  a  Witch  in  the  Scripture  is  fuch,  who  has  made  an  Explicit  Cove-
nant with  the  Devil,  and  is  impowered  by  him  to  do  things  ftrange  in
themfelves,  and  befide  their  natural  courfe,

IL  S.  I  perfwade  my  ieif  you  do  not  expect  from  me  any  ErTay  con-
cerning the  methods,  how  Witches  may  or  ought  to  be  convinced  j  I
,wi(h  thatthofe  Gentlemen,  whofe  Eminent  ftation  both  inables  them  to
perform  it,  and  likewife  makes  it  their  duty  fo  to  do,  may  take  this
province  upon  them,  and  handle  it  fb  fully  as  to  iatisfie  you  herein.  I
jonce  intended  to  have  provided  forne  materials  for  this  Work,  by  de-
fining four  principal  things  relating  to  Witchcraft,  vi%  \,  Witch-fits.
1.  The  Imps  that  are  (aid  to  attend  on  the  Witch.  3.  The  tranfportati-
on  of  the  Witch  through  the  Air.  4.  Laftly,  the  lnvifibilityof  the  Witch ;
but  upon  fecond  thoughts  that  it  was  foreign  from  my  purpofe,  who  am
not  concerned  to  compofe  a  juft  Treatife  of  Witchcraft,  which  would
require  more  vacant  rime,  than  my  prefent  Circumflances  will  allow,
pnly  I  did  promife  you  to  give  you  my  Opinion  privately  •  therefore  Tie


j  6  A  Letter  about  Witchcraft.  Part  4

venture  to  make  ufe  of  an  Argument, which (heweth  neither  Art  nor
Learning  in  the  Author,  and  it  is  this,  that  feeing  there  are  Witches,  and;
that  the  Law  of  God  doth  command  them  to  be  put  to  death  • there-
fore there  muft  be means to  Convict them, by  clear  and  certain
Proof,  otherwife  the  Law  were  in  vain  ;  for  no  Man  can  be  juftly  con-
demned, who  is  not  fairly  convicted  by  full  and  certain  Evidence.
. Ill  S+  In  the  laft  place  we  are  to  inquire  whether  a  Witch  ought  to
be  put  to  death  or  no  ? you  Anfwer  in  the  Negative  j becaufe.)cu  fay;
that  that  Law,  thou  (halt  not  fufFer  a  Witch  to  live,  is  Judicial^  and  ex-
tended! only  to  the  People  of  the  Jews  ;  but  our  Saviour,  or  his  Apcftles
have  not  delivered  any  where  any  fuch  command,  therefore  they  oughrtl
to  be  fuffered  to  live,  this  indeed  feems  fomewhat  planfible  at  firft  view,,
but  upon  throughExamination  hath  no  weight  in  it  at  all  for  thefeReafcn?,,

1.  All  Penal  Laws  receive  their  Sanction  from  him  or  them,  who  have
the  foveraign  Power  in  any  ftate,as  thou  (halt  not  commit  Adultery,  is  a.
Moral-law, and  obligatory  over  the  Confciences  of  Men in  all  plaec5<
and  Ages  ;  but  the  Adulterers  (hall  be  put  to  death  is  a  judicial  law,,
and  in  force  only  in  that  ftate,  where  it  is  ena&ed  by  the  Soveraign.

2.  The  Government  of  the  Jews  was  a  Theocracy,  and  Gcd  h'mfelf  did  I
condefcend  to  be  their  King,  not  only  as  he  is  King  of  Kings  ;  for  in  1
that  fenfe  he  is,  always  was,  and  ever  will  be  luprecm  Lord,  and  Go-
vernor of  all  his  Creatures;  but  in  an  efpecial  manner  to  give  themi
Laws  for  the  Government  of  their  State,  and  to  protccl  them  againftt
their  Enemies  ;  in  one  word' to  be  immediately  their  Soveraign.  3.  Our
Saviour's  Kingdom  was  not  of  this  World,  he  was  no  Judge  to  divide:
fo  much  as  an  Inheritance  between  two  Brethren  ; nay, he  himfelf  fub-

titted  patiently  to  the  unjuft  Sentance  of  the  Governour  of  the  Country
in  which  he  lived;  therefore  both  the  rewards  and  punifhments  annexed  1
to  his  Laws  are  Spiritual,  and  then  (hall  have  their  full  accompli(hmerit,
when  the  Son  of  Man  at  the  laft  day  (hall  pronounce,  Ccme  unto  me  ye
blejfed,  and  depart  ye  curfed  Into  Ever  laft wg  fire.  4.  That  Soveraigns  who
have  received  the  Gofpelof  our  Lord,  have  net  therefore  loft  their  Power
of  enacting  Laws  for  the  ruling  and  preferring  their  People,  and  punifh-
ing  Malefactors  even  with  Death  ;  io  that  the  Criminal  is  as  juftly  con-
demned to  die  by  our  Municipal,  as  he  was iieretofore  by  the  Judicial
Law  among  the  Jews :  How  much  more  then  ought  our  Law  to  advert
againft  the  higheft  of  all  Criminals,  thofe  execrable  Men  and  Women,
who  tho  yet  alive,  have  lifted  themfelves  under  Satan's  banner,  and  ex-
plicitly Sworn  Allegiance  to  him,  to  fight  againft  God  and  Chrift  ;  in-
deed all  unholy  Men  afford  great  matter  to  the  Devils  of  Blafpheming,
but  thefe  wretches  have  confederated  themfelves  with  the  Devils,  to
|>lafpheme  anddeftroy  all  they  can  5  and  do  you  thiqk  that  thefe  common

Enemies


Part  4. A  Reply  to  the  Letter  ahout  Witchcraft. 77

Enemies  of  God  and  Mankind  ought  to  be  fuffered  to  live  in  a  Chriftian
Common  wealth,  elpecially  confidering  that  we  have  a  President  of  put-
ting them  to  death  from  God  himfelf,  when  he  a&ed  as  King  over  his
own  peculiar  People.  But  methinks  I  hear  you  faying,  all  this  doth  not
fatisfie  me/or  lam  fure  nothing  can  be  added  to  the  DevilsMalice,and  if
he  could,  he  certainly  would  appear  and  frighten  all  Men  out  of  their
Wits.  I  Anfwer,  1.  We  mud  not  reject  a  truth,  becaufe  we  cannot  re-
folve  all  the  Queftions  that  may  be  propofed  about  it }  otherwife  all  our
Science  mull  be  turned  into  Sceptifm,  for  we  have  not  a  Comprehenflve

\i  knowledge  of  any  one  thing,  z.  When  you  fay,  that  if  the  Devil  could
he  would  appear  and  frighten  all  Men  ;  the  Lawful  confequence  is  not

■.?,  that  he  cannot  appear  at  all,  for  we  have  undoubtedly  proved  the  con-
trary ;  but  that  we  are  Ignorant  of  the  bounds  that  the  Almighty  hath
hath  fet  to  him,  whofe  malice  indeed,  if  he  were  not  reftrain'd,  is  fo
great  as  to  deftroy  all  Men  ;  but  the  goodnefs  of  our  God  Is  greater,  wha

D  hath  given  us  means  to  efcape  his  fury,  if  we  will  give  earneft  heed  to
the  Gofpel  of  our  Saviour,  which  only  is  able  to  comfort  us  againft  the
fad  and  miferable  condition  of  our  prefent  ftate,  for  not  only  the  Devils,
but  likewife  all  do  confpire  againft  us  to  work  our  mine :  The  deluge
came  and  fwept  away  all  the  race  ffave  eight  perfonsj  of  mankind:  the

$  Fire  will  in  time  devour  what  the  Water  has  left,  and  all  this  cometh  to
pafs  becaufe  of  Sin  ;  but  we  who  have  received  the  Lord  Jefus,  look  for
new  Heavens,  and  a  new  Earth,  wherein  dwelleth  Righteoufnefs.
Therefore  he,  if  we  purifie  our  felves  as  he  is  pure,  will  fave^us  (Tor
when  he  appears  we  (hall  be  made  like  unto  him  ;  to  whom  be  Glory
for  ever,  Amen)  from  the  great  deftru&ion  that  rauft  come  upon  all  the
World,  and  the  Inhabitants  thereof. Farewell,

March,  %tk 1 69 J.

Bofton,  March  %o. 1693.

Worthy  Sir,
iT" '  H  A  T  great  pains  you  have  taken  for  my  Inform ation  and  Satisfaction  hi
"*■  tbofe  controverted  points  relating  to  fPitchcraft,  whether  it  attain  the
end  or  not,  cannot  require  lefs  than  fuitable  acknowledgments  and  gratitude,
ejpeciaUy  confidering  you  had  no  particular  obligation  of  cffce  to  it,  andwbdn
ethers \whofe  prop:r  Province  it  was  had  declined  it.  It  is  a  great  truth,  [that
t!?e  many  Herefies  among  the  Chrifiians  [nor  the  lying  Miracles,  or  Witch-
crafts ufed  byfome  to  induce  to  the  worfhip  of  Images,  &c.)  muft  not  give  4
Mortal  wound  to  Chrijlianity  or  Truth  j3  but  the  great  qucfion  in  thej'e  con-

trov:rt?d


;8 '-  A  keply  to  the  Fart  4.

t  r  over  ted  point) fi  ill  is  ywh  at  is  truth.  Andin  this  fearch  being  agreed  in  thejudge-
rr  Rule,  there  is  great  hopes  of  the  Ijjue.  That  there  are  Witches  is  plaint
from  that  Rule  of  Truth ^  the  Scriptures,  which  commands  their  punifhmenit
by  Death.  But  what  that  Witchcraft  is,  or  wherein  it  does  confift  is  thdt
whole  difficulty.  That  head  cited  from  Mr.  Gaule,  and  jo  well  proved  there-
by (not  denied  by  any)  makes  the  workjyet  fhorter  ;  fo  that  it  is  agreed  ta^
confift  in  a  Malignity ,  &G  and  feckjng  by  afign  to  f educe ,  &c.  not  exclud-
ing any  other  forts  or  branches,  when  as  well  proved  by  that  infallible  Rule.,
That  good  Angels  have  appeared,  is  certain,  tho  that  inftance  of  thoje  tai
Abraham  may  admit  of  a  various  conftrutlion  ;  fome  Divines  fuppofing  thcrrtt
to  be  the  Trinity  >  others  that  they  were  Men-mcjfengers,  as  Judges  2.  I.  and  I
others  that  they  were  Angels  ;  but  tho  this  as  If  aid  might  admit  of  a  debate ', ,

.yet  I  fee  no  queftion  of  the  Angel  GabrielV  appearance,  particularly  to  the  B. ,
Virgin  •  for  tho  the  Angels  are Spirits,  andfo  not  perceptible  by  our 'bodily,
Eyes,  without  the  Appointment  of  the  moft  high,  yet  he  who  made  all  tilings  by  \
his  word  in  the  Creation-,  can  with  a  word  fpedl{_  things into  Being. And  \
whether  the  Angels  did  affume  matter  (or  a  Vehicle)  and  by  that  appear  to
the  bodily  Eye  ;  or  whether  by  the  fame  word  there  were  an  Idea  framed  in  the
mind,  which  needed  no  Vehicle  to  reprefent  them  to  the  Intellects,  is  with  the-
All-wife* and not for  me  to difpute. If  we  poor  floallow  Mortals  do  not
comprehend  the  manner  ho®,  that  argues  only  our  wealQiefs, Two  other  times
did  this  glorious  Angel  appear.  Daft.  8.  16.  Dari  9.  21. The  firft  of  thefe'
times  was  in  Vifion,  as  by  the  text  and  context  will  appear. The  fecond  was
the  fame  as  at  the  firft  • which  being  confidered, as  it  will  afecrtain  that

-Angels  have  appeared  ;  fo  that  ''tis  at  the  will  of  the  Sender  how  they  (hall  ap-
pear, whether  to  the  bodily  Eye,  or  Intellect  only.  Mat.  1.  20.  The  appear-
ance  of  the  Angel  to  Jofeph  was  in  a  Dream,and  yet  a  real  appearance ;  Jo  was
there  a  real  appearance  to  the  Apoftle,  but  whether  in  the  body  or  out  of  the
body  he  could  not  tell  ;  and  that  they  are  fent  and  tome  not  of  their  own  mo-
tion. Luk.  I.  26.  And  in  the  flxth  Month  the  Angel  Gabriel  was  fent
from  God.  Dan.  9.  23.  At  the  beginning  of  thy  fupplication  the  cove*
mandment  came  forth,  and  I  am  come,  v»  2 1 .  Being  canfed  to  fly  fwift-
ly,  &c.  but  frmn  thefe  places  may  be  fet  down  as  undoubted  truths  or  conclu-

fions,

1 .  That  the  glorious  Angels  have  their  Miffion  and  Commiffion  from  the
moft  high.

2.  That  without  this  they  cannot  appear  to  mankind.  And  from  thefe  two
will  neceffarily  flow  a  third,

3.  That  if  the  glorious  Angels ,  have  not  that  power  to  go  till  commijfwncd-,
ar  to  afpear  to  Mortals^  then  not  the  fallen  Angels  -y  who  arc  held  in  Chains
vf  darkriefs-)  H  the  Judgment  of  the  great  day.  Therefore  to  argue,  that  hs-
taiife  the  good  Angels  have  appeared,  the  evil  may  or  can  $  is  to  me  as  jf^i

•'  :  bcejufe


*art  4.  Letter  about  Witchcraft,  y$

ecaufe  the  dead  have  been  rat  fed  to  life  by  Holy  Prophets,  therefore  Men
ricked  Men  can  raife  the  dead.  As  the  fufferings,  fo  the  temptations  of  cur
Saviour  were  (in  degree)  beyond  thofe  common  to  Man  ;  he  being  the  fecond
\cham,  or  publicly  head,  the  Jlrongefl  ajfaults  were  novo  improved  j  and  we*
cad  that  he  was  tempted,  that  he  might  be  able  to  fuccour  them  that  arc
cmfted,  as  alfo  that  he  was  led  of  the  Spirit  into  the  H^ildcrnefs,  that  he
night  be  tempted,  Sec.  But  how  the  tempter  appeared  to  him  who  was  God  Om-
lifcient;  whether  to  the  bodily  Eye,  or  to  the  Intellect,  is  as  far  beyond  my,
og?7i\ance,  as  for  a  Blind  Man  to  judge  of  Colours.  But  fron}  the  whole  fit
(own  this  fourth  conclufion,  <

4.  That  when  the  Almighty  free  Agent  has  a  work,  to  bring  about  for  his
wn  glory,  or  Man's  good ;  he  can  imploy  not  only  Bleffed  Angels,  but  the
vil  ones  in  it,  as  2  Cor.  12.  7.  And  left  I  fhould  be  exalted  above  mea-
ure,  there  was  given  to  me  a  thorn  in  the  flefli,  the  Meffenger  of  Satan.
o  buffet  me.  1  Sam,  10.  14,  15.23.  An  evil  Spirit  from  the  Lord  troubled
im.  It  is  a  great  truth,  we  tinder  [land  little,  very  little,  and  that  in  com-;
ion  things,  how  much  le/s  then  in/pirituals,  fuch  as  are  above  humane  cog-
i^ance.  But  tho  upon  the  firitleft  Scrutiny  in  fome  natural  things,  we  can
nly  dijecver  our  own  Ignorance,  yet  we  tnuft  not  hence  deny  who/  we  da
now,  or  fujfer  a  I\ape  to  be  committed  upon  our  I{eafon  and  Senfcs  in  the
Xzr/j.;  and  fay,  that  the  Devil  by  his  ordinary  Power  can  acl  aYehlclc  ffc&J
)me  matter  diftincl  from  himfelf,  who  is  wholly  a  Spirit,  and  yet  this  matter
ot  to  be  felt  nor  heard,  and  at  the  fame  time  to  befcen-;  or  may  be  felt,  and
ot  heard  nor  fcen,  &c.  feems  to  me  to  he  a  Chimera,  invented  at  firfl  to.
•tftle  the  belief  of  reajonable  Creatures,  and  fince  Calculated  to  a  Roman
latitude,  to  uphold  the  Doftrine  ofTranfubftantiation;  who  teach,  that  un-
rr  the  Accidents  of  Bread,  is  contained  the  Body  of  our  Saviour,  his  humane
■ody,  as  long,  and  as  broad,  &c.  for  here  the  Power  of  the  Almighty  muft
ot  be  con  fined,  to  be  left  than  the  Devils,  and  'tis  he  that  has  [aid,  hoc  eft
leum  Corpus,  As  to  the  confers  of  abnoft  all  *iges,  I  meddle  not  now  with

but  ccmc  to  the  fifth  Conclufion,

5.  That  when  the  Divine  Being  will  imp'oy  the  Agency  of  Evil  Spirits  for
ny  jervice,  "'tis  with  him  the  manner  how  they  /hall  exhibit  them/elves  %
>hether  to  the  bodily  Eye,  or  Intellect  only  ;  and  whether  it  /hall  be  more  or
•ft  formidable  «—- p—  X?  deny  thc/e  three  lafl,  were  to  make  the  Devil  an  In-
zpendent  Power,  and  confequently  a  God.  As  to  the  nature  of  Poffcffions  by
\vil  Spirits,  for  the  better  underfianding  of  it,  it  m.ay  be  need  fid  to  cempare
■  with  its  contraries  ;  and  to  inftance  in  Samfon,  of  whom  it  was  foretold,
'rat  hs  floouid  begin  to  deliver  IfraeJ,  and  how  was  he  inabled  to  this  work>
udges  13.  25.  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  began  to  move  him  at  times  iq
ye  Camp,  &c.  ch.  15,  13,  14.^.  and  they  bound  him  with  two  ncvy
oixls,  and  brought  him  up  from  thg  rock,  and  when  they  came  to  Lchi

the


Bo  A  Reply  to  the  Part  4;

the  Philiftines  (homed  againft  him,  and  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came
mightily  upon  him,  and  the  cords  that  were  upon  his  Arms  becsme  as
Flax,  that  was  burnt  with  fire,  and  his  bands  looied  from  his  hands,  &m
I  might  inftancc  further,  but  this  may  fuffice  to  Jkow  that  he  had  more  tlttn
a  natural  jirength,  as  alfo  whence  his  Jirength  was,  viz.  he  was  impawned
by  the  Spirit  from  God,  And  now  will  any  Jay,  tlat  it  was  net  Sr.  m!cn,  but
the  Spirit  that  did  thefe  things,  or  that  there  being  things  done,  bonds  broken,
See.  by  a  force  that  could  not  proceed  from  humane  fir  en gt  hi  and  that  therm
fore  the  Sprit  entered  into  him,  otherwife  qualified  than  as  metr  Spi*
rit$  Or  that  the  Spirit  entred  not  without  feme  Portion  of  Matter,  and  by
the  Intermediation  thereof  acled  Samfons  body.  If  any  fay  this  and  meret
too,  this  doth  not  alter  the  truth,  which  remains,  viz.  that  the  Sprit  cf  God
did  inable  Samfon,  to  the  doings  of  things  beyond  his  Natural  firength.  And
now  what  remains  but  upon  parity  of  t^eafen,  to  affly  this  to  the,  cafe  of  pof-
fefpon,  which  may  be  funnrfd  up  inthisfixth  Conclusion,

6.  That  God  for  wife  ends,  only  known  to  himfelf,  may  and  has  impowered]  L
Devils  to  Poffefs  andftrangely  to  aBlumaic  Bodies,  even  to  the  doing  of  'things  j  i
beyond  the  Natural  firength  of  that  body.  And  for  any  to  tell  of  a  Vehicle,  'om
Matter  ufed  in  it,  I  muft  obferve  that  General  Rule,  Colof.  2.8.  Be  ward
left  any  fpoil  you  through  Philofophy,  and  vain  deceit,  after  the  tradi-i
tion  of  Men,  after  the  Rudiments  of  the  World,  and  not  after  Chrift.t
To  come  next  to  that  of  Witchcraft,  and  here  taking  that  cited  head  of  Mr
Gaul,  to  be  uncontr  overt  ed,  jet  it  as  a  feventh  Conclufwn,

7.  That  Witchcraft  ccnjifts  in  a  maligning  and  afpugning  the  Wordii
Worl^and Wbrjhip-of '  God, and feckjng  by  any  extraordinary  fign  tojeduce  any
from  it.  Deut,  13.  12.  Mat.  24.  24.  Ads  13. 8,  10.  2 Tim.  3.  8.  Dc
but  mai\  well  the  places,  and  for  this  very  property  of thus  ofpofing  and  pervert*
ing,theyare  all  there  concluded  arrant  andabjolute  Witches  ;  and  it  will  be  cafd)
granted,  that  the  fame  that  is  called  Witch,  is  call'd  a  falfe  Chrifi,  a  fam
Prophet,  and  a  Sorcerer,  and  that  the  tarns  are  Synonimcus  ;  and  that  what
the  Witehes  aim  at  is  tojeduce, the  Pecple  to  fcel^  after  other  Gods.  Bm
here  tht  Qjuefiion  will  be,  whether  the  Witch  do  really  do  things  ft.range  m  «
tbcmf elves,  and  beyond  their  natural  ccurfe  %  and  all  this  by  a  Power  immedi-
ately from  the  Devil.  In  this  inquiry,  as^we  have  nothing  to  do  with  un-
written verities,  Jo  but  little  with  Cabalifiicl^  Learning,  which  might  perhaps
but  lead  us  more  afiray,  as  in  the  In  fiance  of  their  charging  our  Savicur  witl

c  a  fling  out  Devils  by  Beelzebub,  his  Arifwer  is,  if  Satan  be  divided  again]}  him
J:  If  his  Kingdom  hath  an  end  1  But  feeing  all  arc  agreed  fet  this  eighth
Ccncltijhw,

8.  That  God  will  not  give  his  tefihnony  to  a  lye.  To  fay  that  God  did  4,
any  time  itvpower  a  H'it'cb  to  woi\  Wonders, to  gain  belief  to  the  Dec}}  in j
t>j  Devils,  were  with  one  breath  to  d:jhoy  root  and branci) all  revealed  l{s


h


Part  4.  Letter  about  Witchcraft.  8i

ligion.  And  hence  "'tis  clear  the  Witch  has  no  fuch  wonder-  working  Power
from  God  ;  and  mufi  we  then  conclude  foe  has  fuch  a  Miraculous  Power  from
the  Devil ;  iffo,  then  it  follows  that  either  God  gives  the  Devil  leave  to  i  rA
power  the  Witch  to  make  ufe  of  this  Seal,  in  order  to  deceive,  or  elfc  that
the  Devil  has  this  Power  independent  of  himfelf ;  to  ajfert  the  firft  of  thcfi
were  in  effecl  to  fay,  that  tho  God  will  not  give  his  teftimcny  to  a  lye,  yet  that
be  may  impower  the  Devil  to  jet  to  Gods  own  Seal,  in  order  to  deceive  ;  and
vhat  were  this  but  to  overthrow  all  revealed  Religion.  The  lafl  if  ajferted
\7iuft  be  to  own  the  Devil  to  be  an  unconquered  Enemy,  and  conjequently  a  So-
ber aign  Deity,  and  defetving  much  thanks,  that  he  exerts  his  "Power  no  more,

■  therefore  in  this  Dilemma  it  is  Wifdorh  for  fh allow  Mortal's  to  have  recourfe
\o  their  only  guides and  impartially  to  inquire,  whether  the  Hitches  really

jj  have  fuch  a  Miraculous  or  Wonder-working  Power  ?  And  'ti's  remarkable,
hat  the  Apoftle,  Gal.  5,  20.  Reckons  up  Witchcraft  among  the  Worlds  of  the
lefh,  which  were  it  indeed  a  Wonder-working  Power,  received  immediately
row  the  Devil,  and  wholly  beyond  the  Power  of  "Nature  •  it  were  very  im-
proper to  place  .'t  with  Drunkennefs,  Murthers,  Adulteries  &e.  all  manifcft
]efoly  works.  'Tis  alfo  remarkable,  that  Witclxraft  is  generally  in  Scripture
oined  with  fpiritual  Wrjoredom,  i.e.  Idolatry.  This  thence  will  plainly  ap^
ear  to  be  the  fame,  only  pretending  to  afgn,  in  order  to  deceive,  Jeems  to  be
it  a  fin  tier  degree,  and  in  this  Senfe  ManafFeh  and  Jezebel,  2  Chron."
3,  6.  2  Kings  9.  22.  ufed Witchcraft  and  Wwrcdoms, Nahum.  3.  4.  The

®  iolatrous  City  is  called,  Miftrefs  of  Witchcrafts.  But  to  inftance  in  one
Vdace  inftead  of  many,  that  2  Th'ef.  z.frcm  the  3  to  the  12.  V.'  particularly
,  and  10.  v.  Even  him,  whofe  coming  is  after  the  working  of  Satan,
/1th  all  power  and  figns,  and  lying  wonders,  and  with  all  deceivable-
t[s.  And  for  this  caufe  God  fhaii  i<rii  them  ftrong  dekifions  that  they
ould  believe  a  lye,  that  they  all  mighc  be  damned,  who  belief  e  not  the
k.ith,  &c<  This,  that  then  was  fpoken  in  the  Prophcfie  of  that  Man  of  Sin,
at  was  to  appear,  how  abundantly  does  Hiftory  teftifie  the  fulfilment  of  it  ?
irticuUrly  to  feduce  to  the  Worjhip  of  "Images  :  Have  not  the  Images  been
tde  to  move?  to  jmile,$kc.  too  tedious  were  it  to  mention  the  hundredth  pari
what  undoubted  Hiftory  doth  abundantly  teftifie.  And  hence  do  fet  down
bis  nineth  Conclufion.

9.  That  the  Man  of  Sin,  or  Seducer,  &e.  makes  ufe  of  lying  wonders  to  the
id  to  deceive,  and  that  God  in  Righteous  Judgment  may  lend  ftrong  de-
tfions  that  they  Ihould  believe  a  lye,  that  they  mighi  be  damn'd,  who
elieve  not  the  truth,  ©V.
"17/  certain,  that  the  Devil  is  a  p  -cud  Being,  and  would  be  thought  to  have
Power  equal  to  the  Almighty  ;  and  it  cannot  but  be  very  grateful  to  him  to
\g  Mortals  charging  one  another  of  doing  fuch  works  by  the  DcvlCs  Pcvter,:  ai
tytruth  is  the  proper  prerogative  rf the  Ahnighty,  O '  mi  potent  Being. The


8x  A  Reply  to  the,  Set.  fart  4^

next  head/hould  have  been  about  an  Explicit  Covenant,  between  the  Witch
and  the  Devil,  &e.  Hut  in  this,  the  whole  of  it  I  cannot  f erf  wade  my  J "elf  but
you  muft  befenfible  of  an  apparent  leaning  to  Education  (or  tradition)  the
Scriptures  being  whoHyfilent  in  it  ;  and  fuppofing  this  to  fall  in  as  a  depend*
ent  on  what  went  before  jhall  fay  the  left  to  it  ;  for  if  the  Devil  I: as  net
fuch  Power  to  communicate,  upon  fuch  compact,  then  the  whole  is  a  Fiction  $
tho  I  cannot  but  acknowledge  you  have  J aid  fo  much  to  uphold  that  Doctrine^
that  I  kpownot  how  any  c&tdd have  donemore ;  however , as  I  fitid,  I  find  notmyfelf
ingaged  (unlcfs  Scripture  proof  were  offered)  to  meddle  with  it.  For  as  you%
have  in  fuch  cafes  your  Reafon  for  your  guide,  fo  Imuft  be  allowed  to  ufe  that
little  that  I  have,  do  only  fay,  that  as  God  is  a  Sprit,  fo  he  muft  be  worfhi/d
infpirit  and  truth.  So  dlfo  that  the  Devil  is  a  Spirit,  and  that  his  rule  is  in?
the  hearts  of  the  Children  of  Difobedience,  and  that  an  Explicit  Covenant  of
*%e  nature  or  another  can  have  little  force,  any  further  than  as  the  heart  is
engaged  in  it.  Andfo  I  pafs  to  the  laft,  viz.  Whether  a  Witch  ought  to  be
fUt  to  deaths  And  without  accumulation  of  the  offence  do  Judge,  that  where
the  Law  of  any  Countrey  is  to  puniflo  by  death  fuch  as  feduce  and  tempt  to
*Jje  worfhip  of  ft  range  Gods  (or  Idols,  or  Statues}  by  as  good  Authority  may
(hey  (no  douht)  punifb  thefc  as  Capital  Offenders,  who  are  diftmguifhed  m
that  one  remove,  viz.  to  their J educing  is  added  a  fign,  i.e.  they  pretend  to
ajign  in  order  to  feduce \  And  thus  worthy  Sir,  I  have  freely  given  you  my
thoughts  upon  your  1,  which  you  fo  much  obliged  me  with  the  fight  of  andupom
the  whole,  tho  I  cannot  in  the  general  but  commend  your  Caution  in  not
off erting  many  things  contended  for  by  others;  yet  muft  fay,  that  in  my  cfiecm
there  is  retained  fo  much  as  will  fecure  all  the  reft  (to  inftance)  if  a  Spirit*
has  a  Vehicle,  i.  c,  fome  portion  of  matter  which  it  acts,  &c.  hence  as  necef-
farily  may  be  inferred  that  Doctrine  of  Incubus  and  Succubus,  and  why  no?t
alfo  that  of  Procreation  by  Spirits  both  good  and  bad  ?  Thus  was  Alexandef  i
the  Great,  the  Brittifh  Merlin,  and  Martin  Luther,  and  many  others  fai&
to  be  begotten.Again  if  the  Witch  has  fuch  a  Wonder-working  Power, why  not  ton
afflict?  will  not  the  Devil  thus  far  gratifie  he  ?  And  have  none  this  Mirac*-
suhus  Power,  but  the  Covenanting  Witch  ?  then  the  offence  lyes,  in  the  Cove-,
nant,  then  'tis  not  only  hard,  but  Impoffiblc  to  to  find  a  Witch  by  fuch  Evi-
dence asi  the.  Law  of  God  requires  ;  for  it  wiU  not  be  fuppofed  that  they  call I
Witnefs  to  this  Covenant  ^therefore  it  will  here  be  neceffary  to  admit  of  fuch-
as  the  nature  of  fuch  Covenant  wiU  bear  (as  JVf?\/€*aul  hath  it  in  bis  5th.
had,  u  ej  the  teftmwny  of  the  afflittcd,  with  their  Spectral  fight,  to  tell  wm
afflifts  themfelves  or  others  ;  the  experiment  of  faying  the  Lords  Prayer •,  film
ing  at  the  fight,  and  rifing  at  the  touch,  fearching  for  Ttts  ( i.  e.  Excre-
fcencies  of  Nature)  ft  range  Aid  foreign  ftories  of  the  Death  of  feme  Cattle*.
%r.  over -fitting  fome  Cart;  and  what  c  ark.  Juries  have  better  to  guide  them  to,
find  mt  this  Gsycnanj-  by,

m


i


Part  4.  A  Second  Letter  about  Witchcraft.  8  j

?Tis  matter  tf  lamentation*  and  let  it  be  for  a  lamentation,  to  conjider  how
thefc  things  have  opened  the  Floodgates  of  Malice >,  Revenge,  Vncharitablenefs,
and  Bbodjhed,  what  Multitudes  have  beenfwept  away  h  this  Torrent.

In  Germany  Countries  depopulated ;  In  Scotland  no  lefi  than  4000  have
[aid  to  havefuffcred  by  Fire  and  Halter  at  one  heat*

That  w?  may  fay  with  the  Prophet,  Ifa.  59.  10.  We  grope  for  the  Wall
like  the  Wind,  and  we  grope  as  if  we  had  no  Eyes  ;  weftumble  at  Noon-
day as  in  the  Night,  we  are  in  defolate  places  as  dead  Men  ;  and  this  by
feeking  to  be  wife  above  what  is  written,  in  framing  to  our  felves  fuch  crime  t
and  fetch  Or  dels  (or  ways  of  Try  at)  as  are  whoffy  foreign  from  the  direfiion  of
our  only  guide,  which  fhouid  be  a  light  to  our  feet,  and  a  Lanthorn  to  our  paths;
but  inflead  of  this,  if  we  have  not  followed  the  direction  we  have  followed  the
Example  of  Pagan  and  Papal  Rome,  thereby  rendering  us  contemptible,  and
bafe  before  a%  People^  according  as  we  have  not  kept  his  ways,  but  have  been
fartial  in  his  Law*

And  now  that  we  may  in  all  our  fentiments  and  ways,  have  re-
gard to  his  teftimonies,  and  give  to  the  Almighty  the  glory  due  to
his  Name,  is  the  earneft  defire  and  Prayer  of, Sir,

Yours  to  Command,  %  C.


A  fecond  Letter  of  a  Gentleman,  endeavouring  to  prove  the
received  Opinions  about  Witchcraft.


Clnct  your  defign  of  giving  Copies  of  our  Papers  (if  not  to  the  publick
&  at  leaftj  out  of  your  hands,  I  find  my  (elf  obliged  tp  make  a  Reply  to
your  Anfwer,  left  filence  fhouid  be  conftrued  an  AiTent  to  the  politionS
whereby  I  think)  truth  would  be  fcandaliz'd.  I  remember  that  fome
have  taught  that  it  is  not  certain  there  is  any  fuch  thing  really  in  being
as  matter  ;  becaufe  the  Ideas  which  we  have  of  our  own,  and  all  other
bodies,  may  be  caufed  to  arife  m  us  by  God,  without  the  real  extftence
of  the  objects  they  reprefent. But  this  opinion  is  not  only  abfurd  and

L*  falfe,  but  likewife  Atheiftical,  deftroying  the  veracity  of  the  Almighty,
whom  it  afleits  no  have  determined  us  by  a  fatal  necefltty  to  believe  thing?

n  %o  be  which  are  not  ;  and  I  wonder  that  you  fhouid  allude  unto  it,  be-
caule -that  Angels  have  appeared  in  a  Dream,  in  a  Vif?6n  ;  for  we  dream
alio  ofTrees,Birds,&c. are  there  therefore  no  iuch  things  in  nature, becaufe
we  fometimes  Dream  to  fee  and  hear  t^em,  when  We  are  afieep^  Sipay!
in  his  Vifion  was  fo  far  from  believing  the  Objecls  that  Were  reprefented
to  him,  to  come  by  the  intermedium  of  his  Senles,  that  he  declares, he

M  %  does


1


84  A  Second  Letter  about  Witchcraft.  Part  4,

does  not  know  whether  he  was  in  the  body,  or  out  of  the  body;  there-
fore the  Inftance  is  in  no  wife  proper.  For  Abraham  and  the  B  Virgin
did  fee  and  hear;  and  if  there  were  not  fuch'things  really,  as  were  re-
prefented  to  them  by  their  Senfes,  they  were  deluded,  by  being  made  ro
believe  they  faw  and  heard  what  was  not.  There  is  none  who  denierh
God  caullng  thoughts  to  arife  in  Mens  minds ;  but  thence  to  infer  he  maketh
Objects  which  are  not,  by  forming  their  Ideas  in  our  minds,  to  appear  ro
us  through  the  Miniftry  of  our  Senfes  as  tho  they  were,  is  a  piece  not
only  of  vain,  but  very  dangerous  Philofophy.  It  is  true,  the  good  Angels
will  not  appear  without  the  appointment  of  God,  they  will  not  do  any
one  Adtion,  but  according  to  the  laws  he  has  preicribed  to  them.  But
you  fay  they  cannot  fwhich  does  not  follow  from  your  premifesj  fup-
poflng  their  not  appearing  ro  proceed  from  the  defedt  of  their  power,
and  not  the  rectitude  of  their  will,  which  fallacy  has  deceived  ycu  into
a  third  Conclufion.  For  the  fallen  Angels  are  not  fo  held  under  Chains
of  darknels  •  but  that  they  can,  and  do  go  to  fro  on  the  earth  feeking
whom  they  may  devour.  Before  their  fall  they  could  have  appeared  if  J
fent,  and  would  not  then  do  any  thing  without  a  Divine  Comma rd  But:  i
now  they  have  rebelFd  againft  God,  and  do  all  they  can  ro  defpiie  him,  .j
therefore  their  not  appearing  now  .(iff  it  were  true  they  never  did,  they
never  (hall  appear  J  muft  proceed  from  a  reftraint  they  are  under,  which  }
is  accidental  not,  EiTentiaf  to  their  nature  5  fo  that  the  true  Conclufion  is,  ]
the  fallen  Angels,  while  they  are  under  forcible  reftraint  from  Gcd  to  the
contrary  cannot  appear.  But  what  this  (being  clear  d  from  the  Am-]
biguity  you  expreis  it  in)  maketh  to  the  purpoie  I  know  not,  unlefs  Gcd
had  promifed  for  a  determinate  time  to  detain  them  under  this  reftraint.^
I  do  not  underftand  what  you  intend  by  the  dead  being  railed  by  Holy
Men  ;  the  moft  natural  inference  is,  that  in  imitation  of  them  wicked
men  by  their  Inchantments,,  calling  on  a  Damon  to  appear  in  the  fhape
of  the  dead,  will  pretend  that  they  alio  can  raife  the  dead.  The  I{cmam
ifts  are  much  obliged  to  you  for  making  Tranfubftantiaticn  (fo  much
contended  for  by  them)  to  be  of  as  old  a  date  as  the  appearance  of  De-
vils, and  that  the  one  implieth  no  more  contradiction  than  the  other  :  If
fo  we  do  well  to  think  ferioufly  whether  we  are  not  guilty  of  great  fin  in
leparating  from  them;  for  certainly  whatever  private  Mens  Notions  in
this  Age  may  be,  yet  it  is  matter  of  great  moment,  tharall  Antiquity
(the  Sadmf:s  the  Elder  Brethren  of  our  Hobbifts  excepted^  hath  believed
the  appearance  of  Evil  Spirits  and  their  Illufions.  I  Ihould  be  too  effici-
pus  if  r offered  to  explain,  how  matter,  real  matter  may  fall  under  the
cbgnifance  of  one  of  our  fenfes,  and  not  the  reft.  It  is  for  you  to  fhew
the  impoffibility  thereof,  if  you  will  build  any  thing  upon  your  AlTertion,
to  prove  which  your  firft  Argument  is  (it  feems  to  me,)  a  Chimera,  which

is


part  4.  A  Second  Letter  alout  Witchcraft.  8  ^

is  nor  enough,  when  there  are  many  to  whom  it  feems  to  be  a  truth  '
Your  fecond  is  very  dangerous,  and  highly  derogatory  oi'  the  honour  of
God,  between  whom  and  the  Devil  you  make  companion  more  than
once  as  rhe  power  of  the  Almighty  muft  not  be  confined  to  be  lefs  than
the  Devils.  And  again,  to  deny  thefe  three  laft  were  to  make  the  Devil
an  Independent  Power  and  cbnfequently  a  God.  Thefe  exprelTions
f  which  cannot  but  be  very  pleafing  to  the  Devil,  who  vainly  boafts.h*m-
felf  to  be  a  Being  without  dependence,)  are  altogether  groundlefs,  and
very  unmeet  to  proceed  from  aChriftiari  :  Confider  what  you  are  a  doing,
to  eftablifh  a  Dodlrine  (the  contrary  whereof  the  greater!  part  of  man-
kind does  believej  you  run  upon  fuch  precipices,  as  if  you  arerriiftaken,
and  that  is  not  impoffible,muft  totally  deftroy  all  Religion,  Natural  and
Revealed  ;  for  fuppofe  it  were  generally  believed  according  to  you,  that
the  Devil  cannot  appear,  becaufe  if  he  could  he  muft  be  a  God,  indepen-
dent, an  unconquer'd  Enemy,  and  he  doth  appear  to  us  as  we  hear  he
hath  to  multitudes,  both  of  the  paft  and  preient  ages  :  In  fuch  a  cafe
what  remains  for  us  to  do  ;  bur  to  fall  down  and  worfhip  him.  Upon
the  head  of  pofTerTion,  you  have  recourfe  to  that  inftance  of  Samjbn,  who
was  impowered  by  God,  to  the  doing  of  things  beyond  the  Natural
ftrength  of  common  Men,  and  thence  you  fay,  we  may  lead  learn
the  Nature  of  PoiTeiTion  by  evil  Spirits,  this  comparifon  is  indeed  very
odious,  and  I  had  rather  think  you  have  fallen  into  it  unawares;  for
what  greater  Blafphemy  than -that  God  and  the  Devil  do  ad  the  bodies
which  die  one-and  the  other  do  pofTefs  in  the  fame  manner  ;  if  the  hypo-
thecs I  laid  down  had  not  plealed  you,  yet  you  ought  not  fior  fear  of
being  deceiv'd  by  vain  Philolophy,  to  have  run  lb  horrible  an  extream,
as  to  Ailimulate  God's  manner  of  working  to  the  Devils,  which  necef-
farily  implies,  that  either  their  Powers  are  equal,  or  at  leaft  that  they  do
not  differ  in  kini  but  in  degree  only ;  than  which  nothing  can  be  more
impious  or  abfurd  :  for  the  moft  polfibly  perfect  Creature,  is  infinitely
diftantfrom  the  Creator,  and  there  can  be  no  Comparifon  between  them.
On  the  head  of  Witchcraft,  you  acknowledge  the  Witch  has  not  his
Wonder-working  Power,  from  God;  but  then  you  fay,  the  Devil  has  no

fuch  Power  to  give  5 for  if  he  had,  he  irmft  be This  way  of  rea-

foning  as  I  noted  before,  is  very  dangerous,  and  I  think  ought  not  to  be
uied  ;  befides  there  is  a  great  fallacy  in  your  Dilemma  ;  which  becaufe  I
perceive,  you  lay  the  whole  weight  of  the  matter  upon  it,  I -will  evince
unto  you.  The  Devil  rho  fupcrladveiy  Arrogant  and  Proud,  neverthc-  .
lefs  depends  on  the  firft  caufe  for  his  Being,  and  ail  his  Powers,  without
whole  Influx  he  or  any  other  Creature  cannot  iubfift  a  moment,  but  muft
either  return  to  their  primitive  Nothing,1  or  be  continually  preiervcd  by
the  lame  Power,  by  the  which  they  were  at  firft  produced  ;  therefore  the

Bejhes


86  A  Second  Letter  almt  Witchcraft.  Part  4.

Beings  add  Powers  of"  all  Creatures  fbec&ufe  they  immediately  flowfron?
God)  ate  good,  and  confequently  the  fimple  Anions,  as  they  proceed
fromthofe  Powers,  are  in  their  own  nature  like  wife  good,  the  Evil  pro-
ceeding only  from  the  Rebellious  will  of  the  Creature,  wherefore  'tis  no
Paradox,  but  a  certain  truth,  that  the  fame  Action  in  refped:  of  the  flrft
caufe  is  good,  but  in  refpejft  of  the  fecond  is  Evi!|  for  inftance,  the  acifc
of  population  is  in  it  Mr  good,  inftituted  by  God,  and  may  be  explicit-
ly willed  and  defired  fey  the  Soul,  which  finrteth  not  for  exerting  the
iimple  A<$  •  but  for  exerting  it  contrary  to  the  Laws  prefcrib*d  by  God  ;
as  in  Wedlock  and  Adultery  there  is  the  fame  fpecirtcal  natural  Action,
Jwhich  confider'd  Cmprf ,  as  flowing  from  a  Power  given  to  Man  by  Gqd
is  certainly  good  ;  but  confidered  with  relation  to  the  rebellious  will  of
the  Adulterer  (who  lieth  with  his  Neighbours  Wife,  whom  he  is  forbid
to  touchj  is  a  very  great  Evil.  We  may  fay  the  fame  of  all  humane
Actions, « the  lExecutionef  and  the  Murtherer  do  the  fame  natural  Adr.  of
ftriking  and  killing  :  The  difference  confirts  in  the  re&itudeof  the  ones
and  depravation  of  the  others  will.  Thefe  things  prftnifed,  what  more
reafon  have  we  to  conclude  that  the  Devil  (becauie  he  (hews  figns  and
wonders  to  gain  belief  to  lyes,  which  is  very  contrary  to  the  will  of  God)
muft  be  therefore  an  Independent  Power ;  than  that  the  Adulterer,  the
Murtherer,  or  any  other  finner  (becaufe  their  Actions  being  Evil,  of
Which  God  cannot  be  the  caufe)  muft  be  Independent  Beings :  The  de-
ceit of  the  laft  is  very  palpable,  and  I  doubt  not  but  you  will  readily  ac-
knowledge it,  for  it  is  obvious  from  what  has  been  faid  to  the  meancft
Capacity,  to  diftinguifh  between  the  A&ion  it  felf,  which  is  good,  and
lows  from  God,  andtheCircumftancesof  the  Action,  the  choice  where-
of proceeds  from  the  Iniquity  of  the  Will,  wherein  doth  folely  con-
fift  the  Sinj  the  paral'el  is  fo  exa<&,  that  I  cannot  fee  the  ieaft  fhadow  of
reafon,  why  we  ought  not  in  like  manner  to  diftinguifh  whatever  effect
is  produced  by  the  Devil ;  To  whom  (as  to  Man)  God  having  given
towers,  and  a  Will  to  Rule  them  Powers,  is  truly  and  properly  the
caufe  of  all  the  Actions  fin  a  Natural,  but  not  Moral  Senfe)  that  flow
From  the  Powers  he  has  given.  Therefore  the  Wonder-working  Power  ot
the  Devil,  and  the  effects  thereof,  confidered  as  Ads  of  one  of  God's
fcreatures,  are  not  Evil  but  Good  5  the  ufing  that  Power  (which  proceeds
from  the  Rebellion  of  Satan)  to  bear  teftimony  to  a  lye,  is  that  one,
Which  conftitutes  the  Evil  thereof.  L

*  And  now  I  have  done  with  your  Argument,  wherein  you  have  indeed
piewn  great  skill  and  dexterity  in  turning  to  your  Advantage,  what  being
fairly  fltated  makes  againft  you,  as  the  Appearance  of  Angels,  (3c  ob-
ferving  nicely  the  rules  of  Art,  and  particularly  that  grand  one  of  con-
baling,  nay  diffemblxng  the  fame  Art,  as  when  you  quote  that  Scripture
1  / s : :i  '■  > . ,  concerning


art  4-  kejotnJer.  87

Dncernirig  vain  Philofopfoy  (of  which  tho  altogether  foreign  from  the
latter  in  hand  yet)  you  intend  to  ferve  your  felf  with  the  Unthinking,
/ho  meafure  the  Senfe  of  words  by  their  Jingle,  not  knowing  how  to
/eigh  the  things  they  fignifie,  and  truly  herein  your  end  is  very  Arti-
cial  ;  for  you  intend  both  to  throw  dirt  at  them  that  differ  from  you,
nd  at  the  fame  time  to  cover  your  felf  with  fuch  a  iubtle  web,  through
vhich  you  may  fee,  and  not  be  feen.  What  follows,  is  rather  a  Rhetori-
:al  Lecture,  fuch  as  the  Patriots  of  Sects  (who  commonly  Explain  the
-loly  Scriptures  according  to  their  own  Dogma's,  and  fo  obtrude  hu-
nane  Invention  for  the  pure  word  of  God)  ufe  with  their  Auditors,  to
ecommend  any  Principle  they  have  a  mind  to  eftablifh,  than  an  Impar-
ial  and  through  difquifition  of  a  controverted  point;  wherefore  I  do  not
hink  my  felf  obliged  to  take  any  further  notice  of  it :  efpecially  feeing
ruth,  which  for  the  moft  part  is  little  regarded  in  fuch  florid  Difcourfes,
md  not  any  prejudice  of  Education,  Intereft,  or  Party,  did  fet  me  about
:his  fubject.  I  have  never  been  ufed  to  Complement  in  points  of  Con-
:roveriie,  therefore  I  hope  you'l  not  be  angry,  becaufe  I  have  given  you
my  thoughts  naked  and  plain.  I  have  not  the  leaft  motion  in  my  mind
at  accufing  you  of  any  formal  defign  to  injure  Religion ;  I  only  obfervp
unto  you,  that  your  over  eager  contention  to  maintain  your  Principle,
has  hurried  you  to  afTerr  many  things  of  much  greater  danger,  both  in
the»ielves  and  their  coniequences,  than  thofe  you  would  feem  to  avoid  ;
which  do  amount  to  no  more  then  that, Men  being  (in  the  ordinary  courf§
of  Providence)  the  Depolitories  of  both  Divine  and  Humane  Laws,  may
(inftcad  of  ufing  them  to  preferve)  pervert  them  to  deftroy  -3  which  in-
deed is  very  lamentable.

But  it  is  the  inevitable  confequent  of  our  depraved  nature,  and  cannot
be  wholly  remedied,  till  Sin,  and  the  grand  Author  of  Sin,  the  Devil,  be
[ntirely  conquered,  and  God  be  all  in  all  ->  tp  whom,  with  the  Son>  an4
Holy  Ghoft,  be  Glory  for  ever,  An?en.

Sir,  Your  Affectionate  Friend  to  ferve  yc»,
Bojtw,  &tt{?>  15. 1694.

Boftcn,  Jtupift, 17, 1694,
mnhy  Sir, .

Y'OURS  of  July,  25.  being  in  feme-  fort  furprifing  to  me,  I  'could  do
-*•  no  lefs  than  fay  fomewhat,  as  well  ro  vindicate  my  felf  from  thole
many  Reflections,  miftakes  and  hard  fen  lures  therein  ;  as  alfo  to  vindi-
cate what  I  conceive  to  be  Important  truth,  and  to  th  u  end  find  it  need-
ful to  repeat  fome  part  of  mine,  Vi%,  Conclusion.

ft".  That


§8  Rejoinder.  Part  4*!  '

1.  xnat  tne  glorious  Angels  have  their  Miffion  and  CcmmirTion  frcri||j
the  moftHigh.

2.  That  wichout  this  they  cannot  appear  to  mankind.

3.  That  if  the  glorious  Angels  have  not  that  power  to  go  till  commif.
fion'd,  or  to  appear  to  Mortals,  then  not  the  fallen  Angels,  who  are  held
in  Chains  of  Darknefs  to  the  Judgment  of  the  great  Day.

4.  That  when  the  Almighty  free  Agent  has  a  work  to  bring  about  for;
his  own  glory,  or  Mans  good,  he  can  imploy  not  only  the  BJefled  Angelsj
but  evil  ones  in  it.

5.  That  when  the  Divine  Being  will  imploy  the  Agency  of  Evil  Spiri
-for  any  fervice, 'tis  with  him  the  manner  how  they  fhall  exhibit  them

felves,  whether  to  the  bodily  Eye,  or  Intellect  only,  or  whether  it  ihal
be  more  or  lefs  formidable.

To  deny  thefe  three  laft, were  to  make  the  Devil an  Independen
Power,  and  confequently  a  God.

The  bare  recital  of  thefe  is  fuflscient  to  vindicate  me  from  that  rekte-i
rated  charge,  of  denying  all  appearances  of  Angels  or  Devils.

That  the  good  Angels  cannot  appear  without  Miflion  and  Commir7io:
from  the  moft  high,  is  you  fay  more  than  follows  from  the  premifes
but  if  you  like  not  fuch  Negative  deducTon,  though  fo  natural,  it  con
cerns  you  (if  you  will  alien  this  Power  to  be  in  their  Natures,  and  thei
-  non  appearance  only  to  proceed  from  the  rectitude  of  their  Wills,  an
that  without  fuch  Commiffion  they  have  a  Power  to  appear  to  Mortal
and  upon  this  to  build  lo  prodigious  a  Structure,  &c.)  very  clearly  t
prove  it  by  Scripture,  for  Chriftians  have  good  reafon  to  take  the  Ape
ftles  warning  (if  fome  Philofophers  have  taught  that  Man  is  nothing  bu
Matter.  And  others  .that 'tis  not  certain  there  is  any  Matter  at  all)  to
take  hded  lea.fi  they  be  [piled  through  vain  Philofoply,  Sec.  but  that  this
fhould  be  alluded  to  by  fuch  as  never  heard  of  either  Notion,  or  that  it
was  aflerted  that  thofe  real  appearances  to  Jofeph,  and  to  the  Apoftle
was  through  the  Miniftry  of  the  Senfes,  is  as  vain-as  fuch  Philoibphy
As  to  the  Dead  being  raifed,  had  I  uled  Art  or  Rlietorick  enough  to  ex
p lain  my  meaning  to  you,  I  needed  not  now  to  rejoin.  That  'tis  as  gocd
an  Argument  to  fay,  that  becaufe  Holy  Prophets  have  raifed  the  dead,
therefore  wicked  Men  have  a  Power  to  raile  the  dead.  As  'tis  to  lay,
becaufe  good  Angels  have  appeared,  therefore  the  Evil  have  a  Power  to)
appear  ;  for  who  can  doubt,  but  if  the  Almighty  fhall  Commiiitonate  a
wicked  Man  to  it*  he  alio  (hall  raife  the  dead,as  is  intimated,  Mat.  7.22*
And  in  thy  name  done  many  wondcrfiil  Works.  As  to  companions  being
dious,"  particularly  that  concerning  $amfmt\  think  it  needful  here  to  "a
thefe  .Scriptures  further  to  confirm  the  fourth  Conclufjon,  2  Sam.  24.
Compared  with  1  Qhrsn,  2 1 1.  In  one  'tis  God  moved \  &:,  mid  in  thc%

t  cr


RejpbtJer.  89

ther Satan  provoked  David  to  number  the  People. 2  Chron. 18.  2r.  And
the  Lord /aid,  thou  (halt  inticc  htmt  and  thou  [halt  alfo  prevail,-  go  out  and
do  even  jo  ;  all  which,  with  many  more  that  might  be  produce! ,  as  they
will  fhew  the  truth  of  the  Conclufion  •  To  that  'tis  no  odious  Companion
to  lay,  that  as  the  Almighry  can  make  ufe  of  Good,  fo  alfo  of  Evil  Spi-
rits, for  the  accomplifhing  of  his  own  wife  ends,  and  can  im  power  either^
without  the  help  of  a  Vehicle. For  pofTeirions  muft  be  numbred  among
GodsarBi&ivedifpenfations,  who  alfo  orders  all  the  Circumftances-thereof.
But  if  any  object  God  is  not  the  Author  of  Evil,.  &c.  you  have  furniflfd
me  with  a  very  learned  Anfwer,  by  diftinguilhing  between  the  Acl:  and
the  Evil  of  the  iAcl:,  and  to  which  'tis  adapt,  but  will  no  wife  fute  where
it  is  placed,  till  it  be firft  proved  that  the  Devil  hath  of  himfelf  fuck
Power  not  only  of  appearing  at  pleaiure,  but  of  working  Miracles, and  to
the  Almighty  referved  only the  Power  of  reftraining  ; for  till  this  be
proved  the  Dilemma  muft  remain  liable.  He  that  arlerts  that—  Became
good  Angels  have  appeared,  that  therefore  the  fallen  Angels  have  a  Pow-
er of  themfelves  to  appear  to  Morcals;  And  that  they  cannot  be  imployed
by  the  Aimighty  ; nor  that  he.  does  not  order  the  manner  and  Crrcun>
ftancer.  of  fuch  appearance,  what  doth  he  lefs  than  make  the  Devil  an  In-
dependent Power ,  and  confequentiy  a  God ! So  he  that  afferts  that  the
Devil  has  a  Power  of  himfelf,  and  Independent  to  work  Wonders,  and
Miracles,  and  to  impower  Witches  to  do  the  like  in  order  to  deceive,^?.
!  What  doth  he  lefs  than  own  him  to  be  an  unconquered  Enemy,  and  con-
sequently a  Soveraign  Deity  ! and  who  is  it  that  is  culpable? he  that
afcribes  fuch  Attributes  to the  Evil  one  , or  he  that  arTerts  that  the  fo
doing  gives  him  (or  afcribes  to  him,)  fuch  Power  as  is  the  prerogative  of
him  only  who  is  Almighty  ? And  here  Sir,  it  highly  concerns  you  to
confider  your  foundations,  what  proof  from  Scripture  is  to  be  found  for
your  AfTertions,  and  who  it  is  you  are  contending  for. For  hitherto  no-
thing like  a  proof  hath  been  orFer'd  from  Scripture,  which  abounds fo
with  the  contrary,  that  he  that  runs  may  read,  As  (hall  there  be  evil  in  the
City,  and  the  Lord  hath  not  done  it}  who  is  he  that  faith,  and  it-  cometh  to
fafs  when  the  Lord  commandeth  it  not. Who  among  the  Gods  of  the  Hea-
then (of  which  the  Devil  is  one)  can  give  Rain,  &c.

But  I  (hall  not  be  tedious  in  multiplying  proofs,  to  that  which  all  feem
to  own.  For  as  to  that  ftale  plea  of  Univerfality,  do  lay  that  I  have
read  of  one,  if  not  feveral,  general  Councels,  that  have  not  only  difap-
proved,  but  Anathematiz'd  them  that  have  afcribed  fuch  Power  to  the
Devils.  And  feveral  National  Proteftant  Churches  at  this  day  in  their
Exhortation  before  the  Sacrament  (among  other  Enormous  Crimes)  ad-
monifh  all  that  believe  any  fuch  Power  in  the  Witch,  &<;.  to  withdraw
as  unmeet  to  partake  at  the  Lords  Table.

. "  N  ■  And


^o  Matters  of  Fait.  Part  5.

And  I  believe  Chrlftians  in  general,  if  they  were  asked,  would  own
that  what  Powers  the  Devil  may  at  any  time  have  to  appear,  ro  afflict,
deftroy,  or  caufe  tempefts,  &c  muft  be  by  Power  or  Commi/Tion  from
the  Soveraign  Being.  And  that,  having  fuch  a  Commiflion,  not  only
Hail,  but  Frogs,  Lice,  or  Flies  (hall  be  impowercd  to  plague  a  great
King  and  ||ingdom.  And  if  fo,  this  Sandy  Structure  of  the  Devils  ap-
pearance, and  working  Wonders  at  pleafure,  and  of  Impowering  Witches
to  afflict,  &c.  (for  to  this  narrow  Crifis  is  that  whole  Doctrine  redue'd)
the  whole  difappears  at  the  firfi  fhaking.

Thus  worthy  Sir,  I  have  given  you  my  fentiments,  and  the  grounds
thereof,  as  plainly  and  as  concife  as  I  was  able,  tho  'tis  indeed  a  fubject
that  calls  for  the  ableft  Pens  to  difcuis  ,  acknowledging  my'  felf  to  be
infufficient  for1  thefe  things  $  however  I  think  I  have  done  but  my  duty
for  the  glory  of  God,  the  Soveraign  Being  ;  and  have  purpofely  avoided
inch  a  reply  as  fome  parts  of  yours  required.

And  pray  that  not  only  you  and  I,  but  all  mankind  may  give  ,to  the
Almighty  the  glory  due  unto  his  name.  From, Sir,  Yours  to  command,

Witchcraft  is  manifeftly  a  Work^  of  the  Fiefh.


PA  R  T V.

An  Impartial  Account  of  the  moft  Memorable  Matters  of  Facl,  touching  the
fiqpfed  Witchcraft  in  New  England,

MR.  Parris  had  been  fome  years  a  Minifter  in  sdem-Village,  when  this
fad  Calamity  (as  a  deluge}  overflowed  them,  fpreading  it  felf  far  and
near:  He  was  a  Gentleman  of  Liberal  Education,  and  not  meeting  with  any
great  Encouragement,  or  Advantage  in  Merchandizing,  to  which  for  fome
time  he  apply'd  himfelf,  betook  himfelf  to  the  work  of  the  Miniitry  ;  this
Village  being  thm  vacant,*he  met  with  fo  much  Encouragement,  as  to  fet-
tle in  that  Capacity  among  them.  :.

After  he  had  been  thers  about  two  years,  he  obtained  a  Grant  from  a  pare
of  the  Town,  that  the  Houfe  and  Land  he  Occupied,  and  which  had  been
Alotted  by  the  whole  People  to  the  Miniftry,  mould  be  and  remain  to  jiim,
&c.  as  his  own  Eftate  in  Fee  Simple.  This  occaiioned  great  Divifiont  both  be-
tween the  Inhabitants  themfelves,  and  between  a  confiderable  part  of  them
and  their  faid  Minifter,  which  Di virions  were  but  as  a  beginning  or  Fraludi*
mn  to  what  immediately  followed.

It  was  the  Jatr'er  end  of  February  169 1.  when  divers  young  Perfons  belong-
ing to  Mr.  PamYs  Family,  and  one  or  more  of  the  Neighbourhood,  began  to

Act


Part  5*. «{V Matters  of  EicL  gt

A&  after  a  ftrange  &  unufualmanneiyi//*.  as  by  getting  into  Ho'es,and  creep-
ing under  Chairs  and- Stools,  and  to  ufe  fundry  odd  Poftures  and  Antick  Ge-
ftures,  uttering  foolifh,  ridiculous  Speeches,  which  neither  they  themfelves
nor  any  others  could  make  fenfe  of ;  the  Phyflcians  that  were  sailed  could  af-
flgn  no  reafon  for  this;  but  it  feems  one  of  them,  having  recourfgto  the  old
fhift,  told  them,  he  was  afraid  they,  were  Bewitched  ,-upon  fuchfuggeftion-,
they  that  were  concerned,  applyed  themfelves  to  Fairing  and  Prayer,  which
was  attended  not  only  in  their  own  private  Families,  but  with  calling  in
the  help  of  others.

March  the  n  th.  Mr.  P  arris  invited  feveral  Neighbouring  Minifrers  to  join
with  him  in  keeping  a  Solemn  day  of  Prayer  at  his  own  Houfe;  the  time  of
the  exercife  thofe  Perfons  were  for  the  mod  part  filent,  but  after  any  one
Prayer  was  ended  ,  they  would  A3:  and  Speak  ftrangely  and  Ridiculoufly,
yet  were  fuch  as  had  been  well  Educated  ani  of  good  Behaviour,  th.t  one  a
Girl  of  1 1  or  12  years  old,  would  fometim.es  feem  to  be  in  a  Convulfion  Fa,
her  Limbs  being  twifted  feveral  ways,  and  veiy  ftifF,  hut  presently  her  Fit
would  be  over.

A  few  days  before  this  Solemn  day  of  Prayer,  Mr.  P arris's  Indian  Man  and
Woman  made  a  Cake  of  Rye  Meal,  with  the  Childrens  Water,  and  Baked  it
in  the  Afhes,  and  as  is  faid,  gave  it  to  th^  Dog;  this  was  done  as  a  means  to
Difcover  Witchcraft;  foon  after  which  thofe  ill  aire&ed  or  ami&ed  Perfons
named  feveral  that  they  faid  they  faw,  when  in  their  Fts,affli£Hng  of  them.

The  rlrfr  complain'd  of,  was  the  faid  Indian  Woman,  named  Tituba,  fhe
confefled  that  the  Devil  urged  her  to  fign  a  Book,  which  he  prefented  to  her,
and  alfo  to  work  Mifchief  to  the  Children,  &*,  She  was  after  wards  Com-
mitted to  Prifon,  and  lay  there  till  Sold  for  her  Fees.  The  account  fhe  lince
gives  of  it  is,  thather  Matter  did  beat  her  andotherways  abufe  her,  to  make
her  confefs  and  accufe  (fuch  as  hecalfdj  her  Sifter-Witches,  and  that  what-
(bever  fhe  faid  by  way  of  confe  fling  oraccufing  others,  was  the  effect  of  fuch
ufage ;  her  Mafter  refufed  to  pay  her  Fees,  unlefs  fhe  would  fland  to  what
fhe  had  faid.

The  Children  complained  likewife  of  two  other  Women,  to  be  the  Au-
thors of  their  Hurt,  Viz,.  Sarah  Good,  who  had  long  been  counted  a  Mdan-
chdy  or  Diftra&ed  Woman,  and  one  Orburn,  an  Old  Bed-rid  Woman;  whick
two  were  Perfons  fo  ill  thought  of,  that  the  accufation  was  the  more  readi-
ly believed  ;  and  after  Examination  before  two  Salem  Magiftrates,  were  com-
mitted: Manh  the  igth*  Mr.  Lawfin  (who  had  been  formerly  a  Preacher
at  the  laid-  Village,)  came  thither,  and  hath  fince  fet  fourth  in  Print  an  ac-
count of  what  then  pafTed,  about  which  time,  as  he  faith,  they  complained
of  Goodwife  Cory,  and  Goodwife  Nurfe,  Members  of  the  Churches  at  the  Vi-
lage  and  at  Salem,  many  others  being  by  that  time  Accufed.

March  the  aij£,  Goodwife  Cory  was  examined  before  the  Magiftrates  of  Sa-
/tffij,  at  the  Meeting  Houfe  in  the  Village ;  a  throng  of  Spe&asors  being  pre-
feir  i. to  fee  the  Novelty.  Mr.  Noyss  one  of  the  Minifters  of  Salem  began  with
grayer,  after  which  the  Prifoner  being  calfd,  in  order  to  anfwer  t©  what:

N  2  fhould


$z  Matters  of  Fatt.  Part  5,

mould  be  Alledged  againft  her,  fhe  delired  that  Hie  might  go  to  Prayer,  and
was  anfwered  by  the  Magiftrates,  that  they  did  not  come  to  hear  her  pray,
but  to  examine  her.

The  number  of  the  Afflicted  were  at  that  time  about  Ten,  Viz,.  Mrs.  Pope,
Mvs.Put7nan,  Goodwife  Bibber,  and  Good  wife  Goodall,  Mary  Wohott,  Mercy  Lewes  '
(nThomas  Putmans)  and  Dr.  Griggs  Maid, and thres  Girls, Piz.Elizabeth  P  arris,
Daughter  to  the  Minifter,  Abigail  Williams  his  Neice,^  and  AmPutman,  which
lad  three,  were  not  only  the  beginners,  but  were  alio  the  chief  in  thefe  Ac*
cufations. Thefe  Ten  were  mofr.  of  them  prefent  at  the  Examination,  and
did  vehemently  accufeher  of  Afflicting  them,  by  Biting,  Pinching,  Strang-
ling, &c. And  they  faid,  they  did  in  their  Firs  fee  her  likenefs  coming"  to
them,  and  bringing  a  Book  for  them  to  Sign; Mr.  Uathom  a  Magiilrate  of  .
Salem,  asked  her,  why  fhe  Affli&ed  thofe  Children?  Hie  faid, fhe  did  not  Affiift
them,  he  asked  her,  who  did  then  ?  me  faid,  I  do  not  know, how  fhould  I
know  ?  (he  faid,  they  were  Poor  Diflracted  Creatures,and  no  heed  to  be  given
tb  what  they  faid; Mr.  Hatkcrn  and  Mr.  Noyes  replied  that  it  was  the Judg-
meat  of  all  that  were  there  prefent,  that  they  were  bewitched,  and.only  fhe  >
(the  Accused)  faid  they  were  Diftra&ed  :  She  was  Accufed  by  thfrn,  that  the
Black  Man  Whifpered  to  her  in  her  Ear  now  (while  fhe  was  upon  Examina-
tion,) and  that. fhe  hada  Yellow  Bird,  that  did  ufe  to  Suck  between  her  Fin-
gers, and  that  the  faid  Bird  did  Suck  nowin  the  Aflembly;  order  being  given
to  look  in  that  place  to  fee  if  there  were  any  figsi,  the  Girl  that  pretended  :
to  fee  it  faid,  that  it  was  too  late  now>  for  fhe  had  removed  a  Pin,  and  put  j
it  on  her  Head,  it  was  upon  fearch  found,  that  a  Pin  was  there  flicking  up-
right. When  the  Accufed  had  any  motion  of  their  Body.,  Hands  or  Mouth,
the  Accufers  would  cry  out,  as  when  fhe  bit  her  Lip,  they  would  cry  out  of
being  bitten,  if  fhe  grafpedone  hand  with  the  other,  they  would  cry  outof^'
being  Pinched  by  her,  and  would  produce  marks^  fo  of  the  other  motions  off!
her  Body,  as  complaining  of  being  Preft, when  fhe  lean'd  to  the  feat  next?
her,  if  fhe  flirred  her  Feet, they  would  fhmp  and  cry  out  of  Pain  there,  j
After  the  hearing  the  faid  Gory  was  committed  to" Salem  Prifon,  and  then  their i
crying  out  of  her  abated.

•  March  the  i+th,  Good  wife  Nurfe  was  brought  before  Mr.  Hathorn  and  Mr.
Cwmn  (Magiftrates)  in  the  Meeting  Houfe,  Mr.  Hale  Minifrer  of  Bever.ty,  •
fccgan  with  Prayer,  after  which  fhe  being  Accus'd  of  much  the  fame  Crimes
made  the  like  anfwers,  afTerting  her  own  Innocence  with  earneftnefs.  The
Accufers  were  moPdy  the  fame,  Tho.  Putmans  Wife,  &f.  complaining
much.  The  dreadful  Shreiking  from  her  and  others,  was  very  amazing,
which  was  heard  at  a  great  diftance;  fhe  was  alfo  Committed  to  Prifon.

A  Child  of  Sarah  Goods,  was  likewife  apprehended,  being  between  4  and  $
years  Old,  the  Accufers  faid  this  Child  bit  them,  and  would  fhew  fuch  like
marks,  as  thofe  of  a  fmall  Sttt  x)f  Teeth  upon  their  Arms,  as  many  of  the
Afflicted  as  the  Child  can:  its  Eye  upon,  would  complain  they  were  in  Tor-
ment: which  Child  they  alfo  Committed.

Concerning  thefe  that  had  been  hitherto  Examined  and  Committed,  frf&

amonjp


?art  y.  Matters  of  Fact.  93

jmong  other  things  observed  by  Mr.  Lawfon  (in  Print)  that  they  were  by
the  Accufers  charged,  to  belong  to  a  Company  that  did  mutter  in  Arms,  and
were  reported  by  them  to  keep  Days  of  Faft,  Thankfgiving  and  Sacraments;
and  that  thofe  Afflifted  (or  Accufers  J  did  in  the  AilembJy,  Cure  each  c-
thers,  even  with  a  touch  of  their  Hand,  when  irrangl&l  and  other  ways  tor-
tured, and  would  endeavour  to  get  to  the  Airlifted  to  relieve  them  th^rzby
(for  hitherto  they  had  not  ufed  the  Experiment  of  bringing  the  Accufed  to
touch  the  Afflicted,  in  order  to  their  Cure)  and  could  foretel  one  another?
tits  to  be  coming,  and  would  fay,  look  to  fuch  a  one,  (he  will  have  a  Fit
prefently  and  fo  it  happened,  and  that  at  the  lame  time  when  the  Accufed
perfon  was  prefent,  the  Afni&ed  faid  they  faw  her  Spectre  or  iikenefs  in  other
places  of  the  Meeting  Houfe  Sucking  of  their  Familiars.

The  faid  Mr.  Lawfon  being  to  Preach  at  the  Village,  after  the  Pfalm*^
was  Sung,  Abigail  Williams  hid,  Now  ft  and  up  and  name your Text,  after  it  was
read,  Ihe  faid,  It  is  a  long  Text,  Mrs.  Po  e  in  the  beginning  of  Sermon  laid  to
him,  Now  there  is  enough  of  that.  In  Sermon,  he  referring  to  his  Doctrine,  A-
higail  WiUiams  faid  to  him,  I  know  no  Docirine  you  had,  if  you  did  name  one,  J  ha  w
forgot  it.  Ann  Putman  ail  afflicf  ed  Girl,  faid,  There  waf  a  yellow  Bird  fate  on  his
Hat  as  it  hung  on  the  Pin  in  the  Pulpit.

March  31.  1692, Was  fet  apart  as  a  day  of  Solemn  Humiliation  at  Salem,
upon  the  Account  of  this  Bufinefs,  on  which  day  Abigail  Williams  laid  j  That
fbe  jaw  a  great  number  of  Perfons  in  the  Village  at  the  Adminifi lration  of  a  Mock  Sa-  ■
crament.  where  they  had  Bread  as  red  as  raw  Flejhj  and  red  Dnnk.
t JLpfii,  Mercy  Lewis  affirmed,  That  Jhe  faw  a  man  in  White,  with  whom  fhe  went  ,
into  a  Glorious  Place,  viz.  In  her  fits,  ivhere  torn  no  Light  of  the  Sun,  much  lefs  of-
Candles,  yet  was  full  of  Light  and  Brighmefs ,  with  *  great  Multitude  in  White  Glit-  -
j tering  Robes,  who  Saxg  the  Song  in  5.  Rev.  9.  and  the  Ho-  and  149  Pfalms; And
was  grieved  that  fhe  might  tarry  no  longer  in  this  place. This  White  Man  is  faid  to  «
have  appeared  feveral  times  to  others  of  thenar?  and  to  have  given  them  no-
tice how  long  it  fhould  be  before  they  mould  have  another  Fit.

April  the  3d.  Being  Sacrament  Day  at  the  Village,  Sarah  Cloys  Sifter  to
Goodwife  tfurfe,  a  Member  to  one  of  the  Churches,  was  (tho*  it  feems  with
difficulty  prevailed  with  to  be)  prefent ;  but  being  entred  the  place,  and  Mr,  $
F arris  naming  his  Text,  6  John,  70..  Have  not  Ichofen  you  Twelve,  and  one  of
\  you  is  a  Devil  (for  what  caufe  may  reft  as  a  doubt  whether  upon  the  ac-
count of  her  Sifters  being  committed,  or  becaufe  of  the  choice  of  that  Text)
flie.rofe  up  and  went  out,  the  wind  fhut ting  the  Door  forcibly,  gave  occa-
fien  to  fome  to  fuppofe  fhe  went  out  in  Anger,  and  might  occalion  a  fufpi-
cionofherj  however  fhe  was  foon  after  complain  d  of,  examind  and  Com-
mitted..

April  the  1  \th.^  By  this  time  the  number  of  the  Accufed  and  Accufers  be-
ing much  encreafed,  was_a  Publick  Examination  at  Salem,  Six  of  the  Magi-
strates with  feveral  Minifters  being  prefent,there  appeared  feveral  who  com-
plain1 d  againft  others  with  hidious  clamours  and  Screechings.  Goodwife
Proclor  was  brought  thither,  being  Accufed  or  cryed  out  againft  j  her  Hus-
band


c^4  -  >  Matters,  of  Faff.  , Part  $■

band  coming  to  attend  and  affid  her,  as  there  might  oe  need,  the  Accufer;
cryed  out  of  hirprfKo,  and  that  with  fo  mneh  earneitnefs,  that  he  was  Com
irikted  with  his' Wife.  About  this  time  befides  the  Experiment  of  the  Afflift
ed  falling  at  the  iig'ot,  &c. they  put  the  Accufed  upon  faying  the  Lords:
Prayer,  which  one  among  them  performed,  except  in  that  petition  \_Ddi<ver
us  from  Evil]  (he  exprelt  iz  thus  \D  diver  us  from  all  Evil]  this  was  lookt  upon;
as  i£  flie  Prayed  againft  what  flie  was  now  juftly  under,  and  being  put  upon'
it  again,  and  repeating  thofe  words  [Hallowed  h  thy  Na?ne]  fhe  exprellit  [ffoU,
lo&ed  be  thy  Name]  this  was  counted  a  depraving  the  words,  as  iignifying  toi
make  void,  and  fo  a  Curie  rather  then  a  Prayer,  upon  the  whole  it  was  con-
cluded that  fhe  alfo  could  not  fay  if,  &c. Proceeding  in  this  work  of  exa-*
mimtion  and  Commitment,  many  were  fent  to  Prifon.  As  an  Infcance,  fee .
ths  following  Mittimus.

To  Their  Ma jefties  Goal-keeper  in  Sahm.

m\Jr  OXJ  are  in  2  heir  Majefties  Names  hereby  required  to  take  into  your  care,  and  fpfe  j
J[  cuftody,  the  Bodies  of  William  Hobs,  and  Deborah i?/V  Wife,  Mary  Eafty,
the  Wife  $f  i!  aac  Eafty,  and  Sarah  Wild,  the  Wife  of  John  Wild,  all  of  Topf-
field  ;  and  Edward  Bifhop  e/Salem-Village,  Hufbandman,  and  Sarah  his  Wife,
andM?..vy  Black,  a  "Negro- of  Lieutenant  Nathaniel  Putmans  of  Salem-  Vilage ;
alfo  Mary  Englilh  the  Wife  of  Philip  Engiifh,  Merchant  in  Salem  ;  who  fland
charged"&'i;h  H;gh  Sufpicion of Sundry  ABs  of  Witchcraft,  done  or  committed  by  them
lately  upi  ths  Bodies  of Ann  Putman,  Mary  Lewis  and  Abigail  Williams,  of  Sa-
lam- Village,  whereby  great  Hurt  and  Damage  hath  been  done  to  the  Bodies  if  the
Jaid  Per  font,  according  to  the  complaint  of  Thomas  Putman  and  John  Buxton  if
Salem- Village,  Exhibited,  Salem  Apr.  2 r.  1692.  appears,  whim  you  are  tofe-
tun  in  order  to  their  further  Examination. Fail  not,

John  Hathorn,  ? -.
Dated  Salem  Ap.  22.  165  a.  Jona.  Curwin,  5  "M*"**

To  Marfktl  George  Herrick  0/ Salem  Eilex, Ton  are 'in  their  Majeflies  Names
hereby  required  to  cmvty  the  absve^named  to  the  Goal  at  Salem.  Wail  not,

John  Hathorn/?
Dated  Salem  Apr.  22.  1692.  Jona.  Curwin,  5

The  occalion  of  Bijhops  being  cry'd  out  of,  was  he  being  at  an  Ex-
amination in  Salem,  when  at  the  Inn  an  affli&ed  Indian  was  very  unruly,
whom  he  undertook,  and  fo  managed  him,  that  he  was' very  orderly,
after  which  in  riding  home,  in  company  of  him  and  other  Accufers,  the
Indian  tell  into  a  fit,  and  clapping  hold  with  his  Teeth  on  the  back  of
the  Man  that  rode  before  him,  thereby  held  himfelf  upon  the  Horfe ,
bat  faid,  Bi/locp  linking  him  with  his  ftick, .  the  Indian  foon  recovered, ;
and  promifed  he  would  do  fo  no  more  j  to  which  'Bifhojp  replied,  that  he

doubted


•art  5-.  Matters  of  Fati,  vj

bubted  not,  but  he  could  aire  them  all,  with  more  to  the  lame  eSlciy
^.mediately  after  he  was  parted  from  them,  he  was  cried  out  of,  &c
'[.May,  14. 1692. Sir  William  Pbips arrived  with.  Com  million  from
'heir  Majefties  to  be  Governour,  purfuant  to  the  New- Charter  ;  whirh
1  now  brought  with  him  ; the  Ancient  Charter  having  been vacatR
"  v  King  Charles,  and  King  James  f  by  which  they  had  a  power  not  only
j  ■>  make  their  own  Laws  :  but  alfo  to  chufe  their  own  Governour  and
.'Officers;  and  theCpuntrey  for  fome  years  was  put  under  an  abfolute  Com-
\  lifTion-Government, till  the Revolution, at  which time, tho more
,:ian  two  thirds  of  the  People  were  for  reaffuming  their  ancient  Covern-
ient  (to  which  they  had  encouragement by  His  then  Royal  Highneis's
roclamarion)  yet  fome  that  might  have  been  better  imploycd  (in  another
ation)  made  it  their  bufinefs"  (by  printing,  as  well  as  fjpeaking)  to  their
1110ft  to  divert  them  from  fuch  a  fectlement • and  fofar  prevailed,  that
r  about  feven  Weeks  after  the  Revolution,  here  was  not  fo  much  as  a
be  of  airy  Government  \ but  fome  few  Men  upon  their  own  Nomina-
>n  would  be  called  a  Committee  of  Safety  ;  but  at  length  the  Afle-mbly
:evailed  with  tbofe  that  had  been  of  the  Government,  to  prcmife  than
ey  would  realTumej  and  accordingly  a  Proclamation  was  drawn, but
-fore  publifhing  it,itwas  underwritten,thai:  they  would  not  have  it  .ujp-der-
)od  that  they  did  reafliime  Charter-Government;  fo  that  between  Co-
mment and  no  Government,  this  Countrey  remained  till Sir  William
rived  ; Agents being  in  this  time  im powered in  England,  which  no
ubt  did  not  all  of  them  act  according  to  the  Minds  erln*:erefts  of  thdfe,
it  impowered  them, which  is  imnifeft  by  their  not  acting  jointly  in
lat  was  done  ;  fo  that  this  place  is  perhaps  a  fingle  Inftance  (even  in
\  beft  of  Reigns,)  of  a  Charter  not  reftored  after  fo  happy  a  Revolu-
n.

This  fettlement  by  Sir  William  Phips  his  being  come  Governour  put'
end  to  ail  difputes  of  thefe  things,  and  being  arrived,  and  having  read
CommifTion,  the  firft  thing  he  exerted  his  Power  in,  was  faid  to  be
giving  Orders  that  Irons  fhouid  be  put  upon  thofe  in  Prifon  ;  for  tho
fome  time  after  thefe  were  Committed,  the  Accufers  ceafed  to  cry
of  them  ;  yet  now  the  cry  againft  them  was  renewed,  which  occafi-
d  fuch  Order;  and  tho  there  was  partiality  in  the  executing  it  (fome
ing  them  taken  off  almoft  as  foon  as  put  on)  yet  the  cry  of  thefe  Ac-
ers  againft  fuch  ceafed  after  this  Order.

May,  24.  Mrs.  Cary  of  Charleftown,  was  Examined  and  Committed.
:  Husband  Mr,  Nathaniel  Cury  has  given  account  thereof,  as  alfo  of
Efcape,  to  this  Effect,

having  heard  fome  days,  that  my  Wife  was  accufed  of  Witchcraft,  being
h  difturbed  at  it,  by  advice,'  we  went  to  Sztem-Vtlfage,  to  fee  if  the  af~,

flitted


9?  Matters  of  fall.  Part  1

fli&cd  cla  ',;•?»>  for  {we  arrived  there,  24.  May, ;7  happened  to  be  a  da)

ap  tinted  for  Exdmhikticn ;  accordingly  ftcon  after  our  arrival, Mr.  Hathom

'W  Mr.  Curwin,  &c. w<?»f  fo  the  Meeting-houfe, which  was  the  place  ap*

Jointed  for  that  iVcrkj  the  Mininifter  began  with  Prayer, and  having  tafen

■  tare  tc  get  a  convenient  place ,  I  ebferved,  that  the' 'affiicled  were  two  Girls  oj

r.b'jiii  Ten  Tears  old,  and  about  two  or  three  other, of  about  eighteen,  one  oj

/,  e  Gin's  talked  mcfi,  and  could  difcern  more  thayi  the  reft. The  PrifoncA

wehp  called  in  one  by  cne,  and  as  they  came  in  were  cried out  of,  &c.  The

r^  if  oner  was  placed  about  7  or  8  foot  from  the  Juftices,  and  the  Accufcrs  be*

1  aeon  the  juftices  and  them  ;  the  Pr  if  oner  was  ordered  to  ft  and  right  before

the  Jufiices,  with  an  Officer  appointed  to hold  each  hand, leaft  they  fhoim

iheiewhh  xffici  them,  and  the  Prifoners  Eyesmvft  beconftantlyonthejuftices

for  if  they  locked  on  the  xfjlicled,  they  would  either  fall  into  their  Fits,  or  cr

cut  of  being  hurt  by  them  ;  after  Examination  of  the  Prifoners,  who  it  wa

afflicted  tiefe  GUIs,  &c.  they  were  put  upon  faying  the  Lords Prayer,  asi

ny.il  of  theii  guilty  after  the  affiled  feem'd  to  be  cut  of  their  Fits,  they  wouh

Icok'feadfffiiy  on  feme  cne  per/en, and  frequently  not  fpeat^;  and  then  th

j  ufl ices  j 'aid  they  were ftruck,  dumb,  and  rfter  a  little  time  would  jfeal^agaii

then  'the  fifliccsfaid  to  the  Accufers,  which  of  you  will  go  and  touch  the  Pri

jener  at  the  Bar  ?  then  the  meft  couragious  would  adventure,  but  before  thi

had  made  three  ft  eps  would  ordinarily  fall  down  as  in  a  Fit  ; the  %'uftices  cm

dered  that  they  fxculd  be  taken  up  and  carried  to  the  Prifcner,  that/he  migl,

touch  them  1  and  as  f  con  as  they  were  touched  by  the  accufed,  the  Juftice  sworn

fay,  they  are  well, before  I  could  difcern  [any  alteration  ; by  which  I  cbfervt

t  .at-  the  jufticcs  under  feed  the  manner  of  it.  'Thus  far  1  was  only  as  a  Spefttl

tr,r,  my  Wife  dlfo  was  there  part  of  the  time,  but  no  notice  taken  of  her  by  tl

affiicled  %  except  ence  or  twice  they  cam&  to  her  and  asked  her  name.

But  I  having  an  opportunity  to  Difccurfe  Mr,  Hale  (with  whom  I  had  fit
merly  acquaintance)  I  tock^  his  advice,  what  I  had  beft  to  do,  and  defired  I
vim  1  hat  I  might  have  an  opportunity  toftpeakwith  her  that  accufed  my  Wif
which  he  prcmijed  fhculd  be,  I  acquainting  him  that  I  repefed  my  truft  in  hi
Accordingly  he  came  to  me  after  the  Examination  was' over,  and  told i
I  had  now  a?i  opportunity  to  fpcal^with  the  faid  Accufer,  Viz.  Abigail  Willian
a  Girl  of  1 1,  or  12  Tears  eld-,  but  that  we  could  net  be  in  private  at  JV
Parris'-'  Hcufe,  as  he  had  prcmifed  me ;  we  went  therefore  into  the  Alehou
where  an  Indian  Man  attended  m,  who  it  feems  was  cne  of  tl?  affiicled:
him  we  gavefome  Cyder,  he  /hewed  Jeveral  Scars,  that  fe erne d  as  if  they  h
been  long  there,  and  Jhewed  them  as  done  by  Witchcraft,  and  acquainted
that  his  Wif  e,  who  off  0  was  a  Slave,  was  imprifon'd  for  I 'Vitc^ craft.  Andn
in/lead  of  cne  Accufer,  they  all  came  in,  who  began  to  tumble  dam  life  Svei.
and  then  three  Women  were  called  in  to  attend  them.  We  in  the  P^oom  w>
all  at  a  ft  and,  to  fee  who  they  would  cry  out  of  ^  but  in  ajhort  time  they  en


Part  5.  Matters  of  Fail.  97

)  out,  Cary ;  and  immediately  After  a  Warrant  was  Jent  from  the  Jvftices  to
bring  m)  Wife  before  them,  who  were  fitting  in  a  Chamber  m ar  by,  waiting
|  for  this.

Being  brought  before  the  Juftices, her chief  accufers  were  two  Girls; my
Wife  declared  to  the  Juftices,  that  Jhe  never  had  any  knowledge  of  them  be-  >
fore  that  day  ;  Jhe  was  forced  to  ft  and  with  her  Arms  ftr  etched  out. I  did  re-
qucft  that  I  might  hold  one  of  her  hands,  but  it  was  denied  me-,  then  /he  de-
fired  me  to  wife  the  Tears  from  her  Eyes,  and  the  Sweat  from  her  Face,  which
I  did;  then  Jhe  deftred Jhe  might  lean  her  fe If  on  me,  faying,  Jhe  fhould  faint,
Juftice  Hathorn  replied,  Jhe  had  ftrength  enough  to  torment  thofc  perjens,
ana*  foe  Jhould  have  ftrength  enough  toftand, I J  peaking  fomething againft
their  cruel  proceedings, they  commanded  me  to  be  filent,  or  elfe I  fhould  be
turned  out  of  the  I{oom. The  Indian  before  mentioned,  was  a  (ft  brought  in,  to
be  one  of  her  Accufers:  being  come  in, he  now  (when  before  the  Juftices) fell
down  and  tumbled  about like  a  Hog,  but  faid  nothing. The  Jujlices  as  lied
the  Girls,  who  afflitled  the  Indian  ? they  anfwered  jhe  (meaning  my  Wife)
and  now  lay  upon  him;  the  Juftices  ordered  her  to  touch  him,  in  order  to  His
cure,  but  her  head  muft be  turned  another  way,  leaft  inftead  of  curing,  [he
fhould  mak^  him  worfe,  by  her  looking  on  him,  her  hand  being  guided  to  tak?
hold  of  his  ;  but  the  Indian  took,  hold  on  her  hand,  and  pulled  her  down  en  the
Floor, in  a  barbarous  manner ; then  his  hand  was  taken  off,  and  her  hand
futon  hiSy  and  the  cure  was  quickly  wrought. I  being  extreamly  troubled  at
their  Inhumane  dealings,  uttered  a  hafty  Speech  [That  God  would  take  yen-
igeance  on  them,  and  defired  that  God  would  deliver  us  out  of  the  hands
of  unmerciful men.] Then  her  Mittimus  wis  writ, I  did  with  difficult?
andcharge  obtain  the  liberty  of  a  ^pom,  but  no  Beds  in  it ;  if  there  had,  could
have  taken  but  little  reft  that  Night,  floe  was  committed  to  Bofton  Prifbn  ;
but  I  obtained  a  Habeas  Corpus  to  remove  her  to  Cambridge  Prifon, which
is  in  our  County  of  Midldefex.  Having  been  there  one  Night,  next  Morning
the  J  ay  lor  put  Irons  on  her  legs  (having  received  fuch  a  command)  the  weight
of  them  was  about  eight  punds  ;  theft  Irons  and  her  other  Afflicljons, Joost
brought  her  into  Convulfion  Fits,  fo  that  I  thought  Jhe  would  have  died  that
Night,  lfent  to  intreat  that  the  Irons  might  be  taken  off, but  all  inireaties
were  in  vain,  if  it  would  have  faved  her  Life,  fo  that  in  this  condition  jhe
muft  continue. The  Tryals  at  Salem  coming  on,  I  went  thither, to  fee  how
things  were  there  managed;  and  finding  that  the  Spectre-Evidence  was  there
received ,  together  with  Idle,  if  not  malicious  Stories,  againft  Peoples  Lives  ,
I  did  eafily  perceive  which  way  the  reft  would  go  ;  for  the  fame  Evidence  that
fervedfor  one,  would  ferve  for  all  tJjc  reft,  I  acquainted  her  with  her  danger  ;
and  that  if  Jhe  were  Carried  to  Salem  to  be  tried,  I  feared  fhe  would  never
return.  I  did  my  utmoft  that  fhe  might  have  her  Tryal  in  our  own  County,  I
with  fever  al  others  petitioning  the  Judge  for  it7  and  were  put  in  hopes  of  it  ;

O  but


98  Matters  of  Fail.  Part  5-.

but  I  foon  fawfo  much,  that  I  under -flood  thereby  it  was  not  intended,  which
fut  me  upon  confulting  the  means  of  her  efcape ;  which  thro  the  goodncfs  of
God  was  effeHed,  and  (he  got  to  Road-Ifland.,  but  fobn  found  her  fclfr.ot  \
fife  when  there,  by  reafun  of  the  purfuit  after  her ;  from  thence  jhe  went  to
New-York,  along  with  fome  others  that  had  efcaped  their  cruel  hands ;  when  "
we  found  his  Excellency  Benjamin  Fletcher  Efq-y  Governtur,  who  was  very
court  ems  to  us.  After  this  feme  of  ?}iy  Goods  were  fci^cd  in  a  Friends  hands,
with  whem  I  had  left  them,  and  my  felf  "imprifoned  by  the  Sheriff,  and  kept  in
Cufiody  half  a  day,  and  then  difmifi  ;  but  to /peak,  of  their  ufage  of  the  P*i-
foners,  and  their  Inhumanity  fljewn  to  them,  at  the  time  of  their  Execution,
no  fiber  Chriftian  could  bear  •  they  had  alfo  try  ah  of  cruel  mockings  ;  which  is
the  more,  confidering  what  a  Pccp'e  for  Religion,  I  mean  the  jrfeffion  of  it,
we  have  been-,  thofe  that  fuff ere  d  being  many  of  them  Church -Members,  and,
moft  of  them  unfpotted  in  their  Converfation,  till  their  Adverfary  the  Devil
tool^up  this  Method  for  accufing  them.

Per  Jonathan  Cary.

May,  31.  Captain  John  Aldin  was  Examined  at  Salem,  and  Committed
to  Bofton  Prifon  ,  the  Prifon-Keeper  feeing  fuch  a  Man  Committed,  of
whom  he  had  a  good  efteem,  was  after  this  the  more  Companionate
to  thofe  that  were  in  Prifon  on  the  like  account ;  and  did  refrain  from
fuch  hard  things  to  the  Prifoners,  as  before  he  had  ufed.  Mr.  Aldin
himfelf  hasjgiven  account  of  his  Examination,  in  thefe  Words.

An  Account  how  John  Aldin,  Senior,  was  dealt  with  at  Salem- Village.

ffOhn  Aldin  Senior,  of  Bofton,  in  the  County  of  Suffolk,  Marriner  ;  on  the
/  .  z%th.  Day  of  May  1692,  wasfentfor  by  the  Magiflrates  of  Salem,  in-
the  County  e/EffeXj  upon  the  Accufation  of 'a  company  offior  diftratled,  or
foifcffed  Creatures  or  ^Pitches  ;  and  being  fent  by  Mr.  Stoughton,  arrived
there  the  31  ft  of  May,  and  appeared  at  Siitem-Vittage,  before  Mr.  Gidney
Mr.  Hathorn,  and  Mr.  Curwin.

Thofe  Hunches  being  prefent,  who  plaid  their  jugling  tricks,  faMitig  down,  ■■
crying  out,  and  faring  in  Peoples  Faces  ;  the  Magiflrates  demanded  of  them
fever al  times,  who  it  was  of  all  the  People  in  the  Rgom  that  hurt  them  ?  one
of  thefe  Accufers  pointed  fever  al  times  at  one  Captain  Hill,  there  prefent,  but
fpakc 'nothing  •  the  fame  Accufer,  had  a  Man  Jianding  at  her  back,  to' hold  her
up  ;  he  ftooped  down  to  her  Ear,  then  /he  cried  out+  Aldin,  Aldin  afflified
her  ;  one  of  the  Magiflrates  asked  her  if  (he  had  ever  feen  Aldin,  floe  anfuer-
cd  no,  he  asked  how  Jhe  l^new  it  was  Aldin  ?  She  J aid,  the  Man  told  her  fi.

Then  alt  were  ordered  to  go  down  into  the  Street,  where  a  Hjng  was  made  j
And  the  fame  Accufer  cried  out,  there  ft ands  Aldin,  a  bold  fellow  with  his  Hat
#i  befee  the  Judges, he  fells Powder  and  Shot  to  the  Indians  and  French,

•  -  " an  I


Part j.  Matters  of  Part.  99

and  lies  with  the  Indian  Squaes,  and  has  Indian  Papoofes.  Then  w*s  Aldin
committed  to  the  MarfhaPs  Cuflody,  and  his  Sword  taken  from  him  ;  for  they
faid  he  aff.icl.ed  them  with  his  Sword.  After  fome  hours  Aldin  was  fcnt  for
to  the  Mseting-houfe  in  the  Village  before  the  Magiftrates  -y  who  required
Aldin  to  ft  and  upon  a  Chair,  to  the  open  view  of  all  the  People.

The  Accufers  cried  out  that  Aldin  did  finch  them,  then,  when  he  flood  upon
the  Chair,  in  the  fight  of  all  the  People,  a  good  way  dift ant  from  them,  one  of
the  Magi  fir  ate  s  bid  the  Mar fhal  to  hold  open  MAm  s  hands,  that  he  mi^htr
not  pwch  thofe  Creatures.  Aldin  asked  them  why  they  fhould  think,,  tb**  h*
Jhould  come  to  that  Village  to  afflitl  thofe  perfons  that  he  never  kjzcw  or  ftw
before?  Air.  Gidney  bid  Aldin  confefs,md  give  glory  to  God  ;  Aldin  faid  he
hcped  he  fhould  give  glory  to  God,  and  hoped  he  fhould  never  gr  at  i fie  the  Devil;
but  appealed  to  all  that  ever  krtew  him,  if  they  ever  fufpecled  him  to  be  fuch  a
perfon,  and  challenged  any  one,  that  could  bring  in  any  thing  upon  their  own
knowledge,  that  might  give  fufpicion  uf  his  being  fuch  an  one.  Mr.  Gidney
faid  he  had  known  Aldin  many  Tears,  and  had  been  at  Sta  with  him,  and  al-
ways lool£d  upon  him  to  be  an  hone  ft  Man,  but  now  he  did  fee  caufe  to  alter  bis
judgment :  Aldin  anfwered,he  was  firry  for  that,  but  he  hcpzd  God  would  clear
up  his  Innocency,  that  he  would  recall  that  judgment  again,  and  added  that  he
hcp?d  that  he  fhould  with  Job  maintain  his  Integrity  till  he  died.  They  bid
Aldin  look,  upon  the  Aecufers,  which  he  did,  and  then  they  fell  down.  Aldin
asked  Mr.  Gidney,  what  Reafbn  theye  could  be  given,  why-  Aiding  looking
upon  him  did  not  ftrike  him  down  as  welt ;  but  no  reafon  was  given  that  I
heard.  But  the  Accufers  were  brought  to  Aldin  to  touch  them,  and  this  touch
they  faid  made  theni  well.  Aldin  began  to  Jpeaf^  of  the  Providence  of  God,  in
fuffering  thefe  Creatures  to  accufe  Innocent  perfons,  Mr.  Noyes  asked  Aldin
why  he  would  offer  to  ffeak.  of  the  Providence  of  God,  God  by -his  Providence
(faid  Mr.  Noyes)  governs  the  World,  and  keeps  it  in  peace  ;  and  jo  went  on
with  Difcourfe,  and  ftopt  Aldin V  mouth,  as  to  that.  Aldin  told  Mr.  Gidney,
that  he  could  affure  him  that  there  was  a  lying  Spirit  in  them,  for  I  can  affure
you  that  there  is  not  a  word  of  truth  in  4.7  thefe  fay  of  me.  But  Aldin  was  a-
gain  committed  to  the  Marjhat,  and  his  Mittimus  written^  which  was  as
follows.

To  Mr.  John  Arnold,  Keeper  of  the  Prifon  in  Bofton,  in  the  County  of

Suffolk-

IXTHereas  Captain  John  Aldin  of  Bofton,  Marrinery  and  Sarah  'Rice,
Wife  of  Nicholas  Rice  of  Reding,  Husbandman^  have  been  this  day
brought  before  ut,  John  Hathorn,  and  Jonathan  Cur  win,  Efijuires  ;  being
accufed  and  fufpe&ed  of  perpetrating  divers  atls  of  Witchcraft,  contrary  t$
the  form  of  the  Statute ,  in  that  Cafe  made  and  provided  ;  Thefe  are  therefore

O  z  in


tco  Matters,  cf Fa£l»  Part  5,

in  Their  Majefties,  Kjng  William  and  Qlieen  Marys  Names,  to  Will  and
require  you,  to  take  into  your  Citftody,  the  bodies  of  the  [aid  John  Aldin,  and
Sarah  Rice,  and  themfafely  keep,  until  they  fhall  thence  be  delivered  by  due
courfe  of  Law,  as  you  will  anfwer  the  contrary  at  your  feril ;  and  this  fhall  be
your  fujjicicnt  Warrant*  Given  wider  our  hands  at  Salem  Village,  the  ^ifl»of
May,  in  the  Fourth  Tear  cf  the  Reign  of  our  Sovereign  Lord  and  Lady\
William  and  Mary,  now  Kjng  and  Q$icen  over  England,  &c.  Anno  Dom.
1692.


&^&„IA^-


To  Bofton  Aldin  was  carried  by  a  Conftable,  no  Bail  would  be  taken  for
him ;  but  was  delivered  to  the  Prifbn-keeper,  where  he  remained  Fifteen
Weeks  ;  and  then  obferving  the  manner  of  Tryals,  and  Evidence  then  taken,
was  at  length  prevailed  with  to  make  his  Efcape,  and  being  returned,  was
bound  over  to  Anfwer  at  the  Superiour  Court  at  Bofton,  the  loft  Tuefday  in
April,  Anno,  1693.  And  was  there  cleared  by  Proclamation,  nci.e  appearing
againft  him.

Per.  John  Aldin.

At  Examination,  and  at  other  times,  'twas  ufual  for  the  Accufers  to  tell
of  the  black  Man,  or  of  a  Spe&re,  as  being  then  on  the  Table,  £#c.  The
People  about  would  ftrike  with  Swords,  or  fticks  at  thofe  places. One
Juftice  broke  his  Cane  at  this  Exercife,  and  fometimesthe  Accufers  would  I
lay,  they  ftruckthe  Spe&re,  and  it  is  reported  fe veral  of  the  accu fed  were:
hurt  and  wounded  thereby,  though  at  home  at  the  fame  time.

The  Juftices  proceeding  in  thele  works  of  Examination,  and  Commit-
ment, to  the  end  of  May  ;  there  was  by  that  time  about  a  Hundred  per-
fons  Imprifoned  upon  that  Account.

June.  1.  Afpecial  Commiflion  of  Oyer  and  Terminer,  having  been  If-
fued  out,  to  Mr.  Stoughton,  the  New  Lieutenant  Governour  •  Major
Saltonfiall,  Major  Richards,  Major  Gidny,  Mr.  Wait  Winthrop,  Captain
Sewall,  and  Mr.  Sergeant  ;  Thefe  fa  Qyorum  of  them)  fat  at  Salem  this
day,  where  the  moft  that  was  done  this  Week,  was  the  Tryal  of  one
Bifhop,  alias  Oliver,  of  Salem  ;  who  having  long  undergone  the  repute  of
a  Witch,  occafioned  by  the  Accufations  of  one  Samuel  Gray :  he  about  a o
Years  fince,  having  charged  her  with  fuch  Crimes,  and  though  upon  his
Death- bed,  he  teftified  his  forrow  and  repentance  for  fuch  Accufations,
as  being  wholly  groundlefs  ;  yet  the  report  taken  up  by  his  means  con-
tinued, and  fhe  being  accufed  by  thofe  affli&ed,  and  upon  fearch  a  Tet,
as  they  call  it,  being  found,  fhe  was  brought  in  guilty  by  the  Jury  ;  Die

received


Part  5.  Matters  of  Faff;  ic^

received  her  Sentence  of  Death,  and  was  Executed,  June  10. but  made
not  the  leaft  ConfeiTion  of  any  thing  relating  to  Witchcraft.

June  1  5.  Several  Minifters  in  and  near  Bofton,  having  been  to  that  end
confulted  by  his  Excellency,  espreft  their  minds  to  this  effect,  vi%

That  they  were  affected  with  the  deplorable  ftate  of  the  afflicted;  That
they  were  thankful  for  the  diligent  care  of  the  Rulers,  to  detect  the  abomi-
nable Witchcrafts,  which  have  been  committed  in  the  Country,  praying
for  a  perfect  difcovery  thereof.  But  adviled  to  a  cautious  proceeding,
leaft  many  Evils  infue,  &c.  And  that  tendernefs  be  ufed  towards  thole
accufed,  relating  to  matters  preemptive  and  convictive,  and  alio  to  pri-
vacy in  Examinations,  and  to  confult  Mr.  Perkjns^and  Ms.  Bernard ,yvhzt
tefts  to  make  ufe  of  in  the  Scrutiny:  That  Preemptions  and  Convictions
ought  to  have  better  grounds,  than  the  Accufers  affirming  that  they  lee
fuch  perfons  Spectres  afflicting  of  them:  And  that  the  Devil  may  afflict
in  the  fhape  of  good  Men  •  and  that  falling  at  the  fight,  and  riling  at
the  touch  of  the  Accufed,  is  no  infallible  proof  of  guilt ;  That  feeing  the
Devils  ftrength  confifb  in  fuch  Accuiations,  our  disbelieving  them  may  be
a  means  to  put  a  period  to  the  dreadful  Calamities  -,  Nevertheless  they
humbly  recommend  to  the  Government,  the  fpeedy  and  vigorous  proiecu-
tion  of  fuch  as  have  rendered  themfeives  obnoxious,  according  to  the  di-
rection given  in  the  Laws  of  God,  and  trie  wholefome  Statutes  of  the
Englifh  Nation,  for  the  Detection  of  Witchcraft.

This  is  briefly  the  fubftance  of  what  may  be  feen  more  at  large  in
Cafes  of  Confcicnce.  (u!t.)  And  one  of  them  fince  taking  occalion  to  repeat
fome  part  of  this  advice,  Wonders  cf  the  Ihmfibls  World,  p.  83.  declares,
(notwithstanding  the  Diflatisfaction  of  others,  that  if  his  laid  Book  may
conduce  to  promote  .tkrnkfuinefs  to  God  for  fuch  Executions,  he  ihall
re  Joyce,  &'c.

The  30th.  of  June;  the  Court  according  to  Adjournment  again  fat ;  five
more  were  tried,  vi%.  Sarah  Good,  and  Rebecca  Nurfe,  of  Salem-VilhgQ;
Sufanna  Martin  of  Amsbury ;  Elizabeth  How  of  Ipfvich  *  and  Sarah  Pftldss
of  Topsfield ;  thefe  were  all  condemned  that  Seiiions,  and  were  all  Exe-
cuted on  the  1 9th.  of  July,

At  the  Tr^al  of  Sarah  Good,  one  of  the  afflicted  fell  in  a  Fit,  and  after
coming  out  of  it,  fhe  cried  out  of  the  Prifoner,  for  ftabing  her  in  thebreaft
with  a  Knife,  and  that  fhe  had  broken  the  Knife  in  ftabbing  of  her,  ac-
cordingly a  piece  of  the  blade  of  a  Knife  was  found,  about  her.  Imme-
diately information  being  given  to  the  Court,  a  young  Man  was  called,
who  produced  a  Haft  and  part  of  the  Blade,  which  the  Court  having
viewed  and  compared,  faw  it  to  be  the  fame.  And  upon  inquiry  the
young  Man  affirmed,  that  yefterday  he  happened  to  break  that  Knife,
and  that  he  caft  away  the  upper  pare  ,  this  afflicted  perfon  being  then

prefers,


ioi .  Matters* of  FaB.  Part  j.

prefenr,  the  young  Man  was  difmift,  and  fhe  was  bidden  by  the  Court
not  to  tell  lyes  ;  and  was  improved  after  (as  fhe  had  been  before,)  to
give  Evidence  againft  the  Prifoners.

At  Execution,  Mr.  Noyes  urged  Sarah  Good  to  Confefs,  and  told  her  fhe
was  a  Witch,  and  (he  knew  ftie  was  a  Witch,  to  which  fhe  replied, you.
are  a  Iyer  ;  I  am  no  more  a  Witch -than  you  are  a  Wizard,  and  if  you
take  away  my  Life,  God  will  give  you  Blood  to  drink.

At the Tryal of  {{ebecka  Nurfi,  this  was remarkable  that  the  Jury.
brought  in  their  Verdict  not  Guilty,  immediately  all  the  accufers  in  the
Court,  and  Hidden  I  y  after  all  the  afflicted  out  of  Court,  made  an  hideous*
out-cry,  to  the  amazement,  not  only of  the Spectators,  but  the  Court !
alio  feemed  ftrangely  furprized ;  one  of  the  Judges  expreft himfelf  not
iad'-fxed,  another  of  them  as  he  was  going  off  the  Bench,  faid  they  would
have  her  Indicted  anew. The  chief  Judge  faid  he  would  not  Impofe  up-
on the  Jury  ;  but  intimated,  as  if  they  had  not  well  conlidered  one  Ex-
preffion  of  the  Prifoners,  when  fhe  was  upon  Tryal,  vi\.  That  when  one
Hobbs,  who  had  confefled  her  felf  to  be  a  Witch, was  brought  into  the
Court  to  witnefs  againil  her,thePrifoner  turning  her  head  to  her, faid  [fVfjaf
do  you bring  her  >  fhe  is  one  of  us~\  or  to  that  effect,  this  together  with  i
the  Clamours  of  the  Accufers,  induced  the  Jury  to  go  out  again, after'
their  Verdict,  not  Guilty. But  not  agreeing,  they  came  into  the  Court,
and  (he  being  then  at  the  Bar,  her  words  were  repeated  to  her,  in  order
to  have  had  her  explanation  of  them  ,  and  (he  making  no  Reply  to  them,
they  found  the  Bill,  and  brought  her  in  Guilty  ; thefe  words  being  the
Inducement  to  it,  as  the  Foreman  has  fignified  in  writing,  as  follows.

July,  4.  1692.  I  Thomas  Fisk,  the  Subfcriber  hereof,  being  one  of  them 1
that  were  of  the  Jury  the  IdflVPeeJ^at  Salem-Coiirt,  upon  the  Trytf/sf  Rebeckai
Nur^e,  &c»  being  defired  byfome  of  the  Relations  to  give  a  Rgafon  why  the
Jury  brought  her  in  Guilty,  after  her  Verdicl  not  Guilty ;  I  do  hereby  give  my  1
l\eafons  to  be  as  fellows,  viz.

i'Vijen  the  Verdicl:  not  Guilty  was,  the  honoured  Court  was  pleafed  to  objetl
againft  it,  faying  to  them,  that  they  think,  they  let  flip  the  words ,  which  the  •
P  if  oner  at  the  Barfpake  againft  her  felf f  which  were  fpokpn  in  reply  to  Good-
wife  Hobbs  and  her  Daughter,  who  had  been  faulty  infetting  their  hands  to
the  Devils  Book,  as  they  have  confeffed  formerly ;  the  Words  were  [What  do
thefe  perfons  give  in  Evidence  agairtft  me  now,  they  ufed  to  come  among
us.]  -After  the  honoured  Court  had  manifefted  their  dijfatisfaclion  of  the  Ver-
dict, fever  al  of  the  Jury  declared  themfelves  defirous  to  go  out  again ,  and  there-
upon the  honoured  Court  gave  leave;  but  when  we  came  to  confider  of  the  Cafe,
I  could  not  tell  hm  to  take  her  words,  as  an  Evidence  againft  her,  till  (he  had
a  further  opportunity  to  put  her  Senfe  upon  them,  if  fhe  would  take  it ;  and
then  going  into  Court,  I  mentioned  the  words  aforefaid,  which  by  one  of  the

Court


I

Purt  5.  Matters  of  Fact.  103

kCourt  were  affirmed  to  have  beenfpoken  by  her,  /he  being  then  at  the  Bar,  btit
{made  no  reply,  nor  interpretation  of  them, whereupon  thefc  words  were  to  me  a
Principal  Evidence  againft  her,

Thomas  Fisk.

When  Good  wife  Nurfe  was  informed  what  life  was  made  of  thefe  words,
fhe  put  in  this  following  Declaration  into  the  Court.

tjHefe  prefents  do  humbly  Jhcw*  to  the  honoured  Court  and  Jury,  that  I  being
<*  informed,  that  the  Jury  brought  rne  in  Guilty,  up:n  my  faying  that  Gced-
wifj  Hobbs  and  her  Daughter  were  of  our  Company  •  but  I  intended  no  ether-
\ways,  then  as  they  were  Pr  if  oners  with  us,  and  therefore  did  then,"  and  yet  do
iudge  them  not  legal  Evideyice  againft  their  fellow  prifoncrs.  And  I  being
fomething  hard  of  hearing,  and  full  of  grief \  none  informing  mo  how  the  Court
tcok^  up  my  words,  and  therefore  had  not  opportunity  to  declare  what  1  intend*
»d,  when  If  aid  they  were  of  cur  Company.  Rebecka  Nurie.

After  her  Condemnation  fhe  was  by  one  of  the  Minifters  of  Salem  ex-
communicated ;  yet  the  Governour  faw  caufe  to  grant  a  Reprieve,which
when  known  (and  fome  fay  immediately  upon  granting)  the  Accufers  re-
newed their  difmal  outcries  againft  her,  infomuch  that  the  Governour
A^as  by  fome  Salem  Gentleman  prevailed  with  to  recall  the  Reprieve,  and
"he  was  Executed  with  the  reft.

The  Teftimonials  of  her  Chriftian  behaviour,  both  in  thecourfe  of  her

fe,  and  at  her  Death,  and  her  extraordinary  care  in  educating  her  Chil-
Jren,  and  fetting  them  good  Examples,  &c.  under  the  hands  of  fo  many,
ire  fo  numerous,  that  for  brevity  they  are  here  omitted.

It  was  at  the  TryaLof  thefe  that  one  of  the  Accufers  cried  out  publick-
y  of  Mr.  Willard  Mimfter  in  Bofton,  as -afflicting  of  her,  the  was  fent
mt  of  the  Court,  and  it  was  told  about  (he  was  miftaken  in  the  perfon.

Auguft,  5.  The  Court  again  fitting,  fix  more  were  tried  on  the  fame
\ccount,  vi\.  Mr,  George  Burroughs,,  fometime  Minifter  of  Wells,  John
Softer,  and  Elizabeth  ^Proffer  his  Wife,  with  John  Willard  of  Salem-Nil-
age,  George  Jacobs  Senior,  of  Salem,  and-  Martha  Carryer  of  Andover  ;
hefe  were  all  brought  in  Guilty  and  Condemned  ;  and  were  all  Execu-
ed,  Aug,  1 9.  except  Protlers  Wife,  who  pleaded  Pregnancy.

Mr.  Burroughs  was  carried  in  a  Cart  with  the  others,  through  the  Streets
>f  Salem  to  Execution ;  when  he  was  upon  the  Ladder,  he  made  a  Speech
or  the  clearing  of  his  Innocency,  with  fuch  Solemn  and  Serious  Expref-
[ons,  as  were  to  the  Admiration  of  all  prefent ;  his  Prayer  (which  he
oncluded  by  repeating  the  Lord's  Prayer,)  was  fo  well  worded  and  ut-
ired  with  fuch  compofednefs, and  fuch  (at  leaft  feeming)  fervency  of

Spirit,


104  Matters  of  Fall.  Part  jv

Spirit^  as  was  very  affc&ing,  and  drew  Tears  from  many  ( fo  that  it
teemed  to  Tome,  that  the  Spectators  would  hinder  the  Execution)  the  ac-
cufers  faid  the  black  Man  ftood  and  dictated  to  him  ;  as  foon  as  he  was
turned  off,  Mr.  Cotton  Mather,  being  mounted  upon ,  a  Horfe,  addreffed
himfelf  to  the  People,  partly  to  declare,  that  he  was  no  ordained  Mini-
fter,  and  partly  to  pcifeis  the  People  of  his  guilt ;  faying,  That  the  Devil
has  often  been  transformed  into  an  Angel  of  Light ;  and  this  did  fome-
what  appeafe  the  People,  and  the  Executions  went  on  ;  when  he  was  cut
down,  he  was  dragged  by  the  Halter  to  a  Hole,  or  Grave,  between  the
Rocks,  about  two  Foot  deep,  his  Shirt  and  Breeches  being  pulled  off, and
an  old  pair  of  Troufers  of  one  Executed,  put  on  his  lower  parts,  he  was  fo
put  in,  together  with  Willard  and  Carryer,  one  of  his  Hands  and  his  Chin,
and  a  Foot  of  one  them  being  left  uncovered.

John  Willard.  had  been  im ployed  to  fetch  in  feveral  that  were  accufed  ;
but  raking  diflatisfacxion  from  his  being  fent,  to  fetch  up  fome  that  he
hcxd  better  thoughts  of,  he  declined  the  Service,  and  prefently  after  hei
himfelf  was  accufed  of  the  fame  Crime,  and  that  with  fuch  vehemency,]
that  they  fent  after  him  to  apprehend  him  ;  he  had  made  his  Efcape  as
far  as  Nxfioawag,  about  40  Miles  from  Salem  ;  yet  'tis  laid  thofe  Accufers
did  then  prefently  tell  the  exact  time,  faying,  now  Willard  is  taken.

John  Procter  and  his  Wife  being  in  Prifon,  the  Sheriff-came  to  his  Houfe
and  feized  ail  the  Goods,  Provisions,  and  Cattle  that  he  could  come  at,;
and  fold  fome  of  the  Cattle  at  half  price,  and  killed  others,  and  put  them
up  for  the  Weft-Indies  ;  threw  out  the  Beer  out  of  a  Barrel,  and  carried!
away  the  Barrel ;  emptied  a  Pot  of  Broath,  and  took  away  the  Pot,  and]
"efx  nothing  in  the  Houfejfor  the  fupport  of  the  Children  :  No  part  of
the  faid  Goods  are  known  to  6e  returned.  Fritter  earneftly  requefted
Mr.  Noyesxo  pray  with  and  for  him,  but  it  was  wholly  denied,  becaufe
he  would  not  own  himfelf  to  be  a  Witch.


During  his  Imprifonment he  fent  the  following  Letter,  in  behalf  of  him

felf  and  others.  * .

Mr.  Mather, Mr:  Allen, V

Mr.  Moody,  Mr.  Willard,  and  >  Sztem* Prifon,  July,  23. 1 692 .

Mr.  Bailey. f,  }

Reverend  Gentlemen.

r'Re  Jnnocsney  of  our  Caff  with  the  Enmity  of  tur  Auufen  and  tur  Judges,  mi  J&
ry,rohom  nothing  but  out  Innocent  Blood  will '  ferve  their  turn,  having  CtndemneA
us  already  before  our  Iryals,  being  fo  much  ineenfed  *nd  engaged  againfus  by  th
Devil,  makes  m  fold  to  Big  md  Imfhrt  Jw  Ftimrfibk  Affift&metfthUw  IhtmJiU

Pttitm


Part  5.  Matters  of  Fatt.  \o$

Petition  to  his  Excellency,  That  if  it  bepoffible  our  Innocent  Blood  may  be  fpared,  which
undoubtedly  otherwije  will  be  jhed,  if  the  Lord  doth  not  mercifully  ftcp  in.  The  Ma-
gftrates,  Miniflers,  Jewries,  and  all  the  People  in  gentral,  being  fo  much  imaged  and
incenjed  againft  us  by  the  Delufwi  of  the  Devil,  which  we  can  term  no  other,  by  reajon
we  know  in  our  Own  Confidences,  we  are  all  Innocent  Perfons,  Here  are  fve  Perfons  whu
have  lately  confejfed  themjelves  to  be  Witches,  and  do  accv.je  (ome  of  us,  of  being  along
with  them  at  a  Sacrament  fine  e  we  were  committed  into  clofe  Pri 'Jon, which  we  know  t%
be  Lies.Tws  of  the  5  are(Ca.rrier£ons)Toung-men,who  would  not  confejs  any  thing  tilt
thty  tyedthtm  Neck  andHeels  till  the  Blood  was  ready  to  come  out  of  their  Nof:s,and  'tis
credibly  believed  and  reported  this  was  the  occafion  of  making  them  confejs  that  they
never  did,  by  reafon  they  J aid  one  had  been  a  Witch  a  Mmth,  and  another  fve  Weeks,
and  that  their  Mother  had  made  themfo,  who  has  been  confined  here  this  nine  Weeks,
My  Son  William  Pro&er,  when  he  was  examirid,  becauje  he  would  net  confefs  that
h  e  was  Guilty,  when  he  was  Innocent,  they  tyed  him  Neck  and  Heels  till  the  Blood
gujbedout  at  his  Nofe,  and  would  have  kept  him  fo  24  Hours,  if  o-ae  more  Merciful
then  the  reft,  had  not  taken  pity  on  him,  and  caujed  him  to  be  unhand.  Thefe  Alii*
cms  are  very  like  the  Popiih  Cruelties.  Toey  have  already  undone  us  in  our  Eftates,
and  that  will  not  ferve  their  turns,  without  our  Innocent  Bloods.  If  it  cannot  be  gran-
ted that  we  can  have  our  Trials  at  Cotton,  we  humbly  beg  that  you  would  endeavour
to  have  thefe  MagiflraUs  changed,  and  others  in  their  rooms,  begging  alfo  and  befeech-
ing  you  would  be  pleafcd  to  be  here,  if  not  all,  fome  of  you  at  our  Trials,  hoping  there
by  you,  may  be  the  means  offaving;  the  jhedding  our  Innocent  Bloods, defiring  your  Prayers
to  the  Lord  in  Our  behalf,  we  rtfi  your  Poor  Affliffed  Servants , John  Procter,  &c.

He  pleaded  very  hard  at  Execution,  for  a  little  refpite  of  time,  faying
that  he  was  not  fit  to  Die  ;  but  if  was  not  granted.

Old  Jacobs  being  Condemned,  the  Sheriff  and  Officers  came  and  feized  all
he  had,  his  Wife  had  her  Wedding  Ring  taken  from  her,  but  with  great  dif-
ficulty obtained  it  again.  She  was  forced  to  buy  Provisions  of  the  Sheriff,  fach
as  he  had  taken,  towards  her  own  iupport,  which  not  being  fufficient,  the
Neighbours  of  Charity  relieved  her.

Margaret  Jacobs  being  one  that  had  confeffed  her  own  Guilt,  and  teftified  a-
gainft  her  Grand-Father  Jacobs,  Mr.  Burroughs,  and  John  Willard,  She  the  -day
before  Executions,  eame  to  Mr.  Burroughs,  acknowledging  that  fhe  had  be-
lyed  therm  and  begged  Mr.  Burroughs^  otgwenzft,  who  not  only  forgave  her,
but  alfo  Prayed  with  and  for  her.  She  wrote  the  following  Letter  to  her  Father.

From  the  Dungeon  in  Salem-Piifon,  Auguft  .20.  92.
Honoured  Father,

After  my  Humble  Duty  Remembred  to  you,  hoping  in  the  Lord  of  your  good  Health,  as

•*  Blejfedbe  God  I  enjoy,  thoin  abundance  of  Affliction, being  clofe  confined  hen  in

a  loathfime  Dungeon,  the  Lord  look  dawn  in  tsiercy  upon  me,  not  knowing  howfoon

\  I  jhall  be  put  to  Death,  by  means  of  the  Afflicted  Perfons  ;  my  Grand-Father  having

Suffered  already,  and  all  his  Ejfate  Seized  for  the  King,'  life  reafon  of  my  Confinement

it  this)  1  having,  thnugh  the  Magiftrates  Threatnings,  and  my  own  Vilt  and  Wretched

P  He  an,


io6  Matters  of  Fail.  Part  5*.

Heart,  confeffed  fiev  erat  things  contrary  so  my  Confidence  and  Knowledge  tho  to  the
Wounding  of  my  own  Soul,  the  Lord  pardon  me  for  it;  but  Oh\  the  terrors  of  a  wound-
ed Confidence  who  can  bear.  But  blejfed  be  the  Lord,  he  would  not  let  me  go  on  in  my
Sifis,  but  in  mercy  I  hope  fio  my  Soul  would  not  fitter  me  to  keep  it  in  any  longer,  but  I
was  forced  to  confefi  the  truth  of  all  before  the  Mag'ftrates,  who  would  not  believe  me,
but  tis  their  pltafure  to  put  me  in  here ,  and  God  knows  how  fioon  Ijhall  be  put  to  Death.
Dzar  Father  1  let  me  beg  your  Prayers  to  the  Lord  on  my  behalf,  and  find  us  a  Joyful
dnd  Happy  meeting  in  Heaven,  My  Mother  poor  Woman  is  very  Crazsy,  and  remem-
bers her  kind  Love  to  you,  and  to  Uncle,  viz.^  D.  A.  So  leaving  you  to  the  protection
of  the  Lord,  I  reft  your  Dutiful  Daughter,  Margaret  Jacobs.

At  the  time  appointed  for  her  Tryal,  lhe  had  an  Impofthume  in  her
head,  which  was  her  Efcape.

September  9.  Six  more  were  tried,  and  received  Sentance  of  Death,
viz.  Martha  Cory  of  Mew-Village,  Mary  Eafly  of  Topsfield,  Alice  Parker
and  Ann  Pudeater  of  salem,  Dorcas  Hoar  of  Beverly,  and  Mary  Bradberry
of  Salisbury. September  16.  Giles  Cory  was  preft  to  Death.

September  1 7.  Nine  more  received  Sentance  of  Death,  viz.  Margaret  j
Scot  of  fywly,  Goodwife  Redd  of  Marblehe ad, Samuel  War  dwell,  and  Mant
Parker  of  Andover,  alfo  Abigail  Falkner  of  Andover,  who  pleaded  Preg-'
nancy,  I^ebecka  Eames  of  Boxford,  Mary  Lacy,  and  Ann  Fcfie-  of  Andover,  \
and  Abigail  HobbsofTopsfield.  Of  thefe  Eight  were  Executed,  September
21.  viz.  Martha  Cory,  Mary  Eafty,  Alice  Parker,  Ann  Pudeater,  Margaret
Scot,  Willmet  Rgdd,  Samuel  Wardwell,  and  Mary  Parker.

Giles  Gory  pleaded  not  Guilty  to  his  Indictment,  but  would  not  put
himleif  upon  Tryal  by  the  Jury  (they  having  cleared  none  upon  Tryal  J
and  knowing  there  would  be  the  fame  Witnefles  againft  him,  rather  cfrofe
to  undergo  what  Death  they  would  put  him  to.  In  preffing  his  Tongue
being  preft  out  of  his  Mouth,  the  SherifTwith  his  Cane  forced  it  in  again,
when, he  was  dying.  He  was  the  flrft  in  New  England}that  was  ever  preft
to  Death.

The  Cart  going  go  the  Hill  with  thefe  Eight  to  Execution,  was  for
fome  time  at  a  fett-  the  afflicted  and  others  faid,  that  the  Devil  hindred!
it,  &.e.

Martha  Cory,  Wife  to  Giles  Cory,  protefting  her  Innocency,  concluded
her  Life  with  an  Eminent  Prayer  upon  the  Ladder.

PVardwell  having  formerly  confeffed  himfelf  Guilty,  and  after  denied  it,:
was  foon  brought  upon  his  Tryal;  his  former  Confeflion  and  Spedtrq
Teilimony  was  all  that  appeared  againft  him.  At  Execution  while  he  was
fpeaking  to  the  People,  protefting  his  Innocency,  the  Executioner  being
at  the  fame  time  fmoalung  Tobacco,  the  fmoak  coming  in  his  Face,  in-
terrupted his  Difconrfe,  thofe  Accufers  faid,  the  Devil  hindred  him  with
fmoak.  Mary


Part  J%  Matters  of  Fall. -  107

Mary.Eafty,  Sifter  alfo  to  ^ebec^a  Nurfe,  when  (he- took  her  Jaft  fare-
well of  her  Husband,  Children  and  Friends,  was,  as  is  reported  by  them
prefent,  as  Serious,  Religious,  DiftincT:,  and  Affectionate  as  could  well
be  expreft,  drawing  Tears  from  the  Eyes  of  almoft  alJ  prefent.  It  feems
befides  the  Teftimony  of  the  Accufers  and  ConfeiTors,  another  proof,  as  it
was  counted,  appeared  againft  her.,  it  having  been  ufuai  to  fearch  the  Ac-
cufed  for  Tets  ;  upon  fome  parts  of  her  Body, not  here  to  be  named,  was
found  an  Excrefcence,  which  they  called  a  Tet.  Before  her  Death  (he  put
up  the  following  Petition,

To  the  Honourable  Judge  and  Bench  now  fitting  in  judicature  in  Salem,
and  the  Reverend  Minifiers,  humbly  fioewcth,  That  wheraas  your  humble  poor
Petitioner  being  Condemned  to  die,  doth  humbly  beg  of  you,  to  take  it  into  your
Judicious  and  Pious  Qcmfideration,  that  your  poor  and  humble  Petitioner  'know-
ing my  own  Innocency  (blefTed  be  the  Lord  for  it  J  and  feeing  plainly  the
Wiles  and  Subtilty  of  my  Accufers,  by  my  felf  ,  cannot  but  judge  charitably  of
others,  that  are  going  the  fame  way  with  my  felf,  if  the  Lord  fi  ep  not  mighti-
ly in.  I  was  confined  a  whole  Month  on  the  fame  account  that  I  am  now  con-
demned for,  and  then  cleared  by  the  Afflicted  perfons,  as  fome  of  your  Honours
know,  and  in  two  days  time  I  was  cried  out  upon  by  them,  and  have  been  con-
fined, and  now  am  condemned  to  die.  The  Lord  above  knows  my  Innocency
then,  and  likewife  doth  now,  as  .at  the  great  day  will  be  known  to  Men  and
Angels.  I  Petition  to  your  Honours  not  for  my  own  Life,  fori  know  I  muft
die;  and  my  af  pointed  time  is  fet  ;  but  the  Lord  he  kjiows  it  is,  if  it  be  poffi-
ble,  that  no  more  Innocent  Blood  befhed,  which  undoubtedly  cannot  be  avoided
in  the  way  and  courfe  you  go  in.  I  quejiion  not,  but  your  Honours  do  to  the
utmoft  of  your  powers,  in  the  difcovery  and  detecting  of  Witchcraft  and  Witches,
and  would  not  be  guilty  of  Inm  cent  Blood  for  the  World;  but  by  my  ownlnnocency
I  know  you  are  in  the  wrong  way,  the  Lord  in  his  infinite  Mercy  direct  you  in
this  great  work^  if  it  be  his  bleffed  will,  that  Innocent  Blood  be  net  foed  ;  I
would  humbly  beg  of  you,  that  your  Honours  would  be  pleafed  to  Examine  fome
of  thofe  conf effing  Witches,  I  being  confident  then  are  fever  al  of  them  have  be-
lyed  themfelves  and  others,  as  will  appear,  if  not  in  this  World,  lamfurein
the  World  to  come,  whither  I  am  going  ;  and  I  quejiion  not,  bat  your  felves
will  fee  an  alteration  in  thefe  things  :  They  fay,  my  felf  and  others  have  made
a  league  with  the  Devil,  we  cannot  confefs,  Lk^iow  and  the  Lord  he  knows  (as
will  fhortly  appear)  they  belye  me,  andfo  I  que  ft  ion  not  but  they  do  others  ;
the  Lord  alone  who  is  the  fearcher  of  all  hearts,  knows  that  as  Ifhall  anfwer  it
at  the  Tribunal  Seat,  that  I  know  not  the  leaffl  thing  of  Witchcraft,  therefore
I  cannot,  I  durji  not  belye  my  own  Soul.  I  beg  pur  Honours  not  to  deny  this
my  humble  Petition,  from  a  poor  dying  Innocent  perforu  and  I  queflion  not  but
the  Lord  will  give  a  bleffing  to  your  Endeavours.  ,

Mary  Efty.
P  2  After


io8  Matters  of  Fail.  Part  5.

After  Execution  Mr.  Koyes  turning  him  to  the  Bodies,  faid,  what  a  fad
thing  it  is  to  lee  Eight  Firebrands  of  Hell  hanging  there.

In  Otlober,  1692,  One  of  Wenham  complained  of  Mrs.  Hale,  whofe
Husband,the  Minifter  'of  Beverly,  had  been  very  forward  in  thefe  Profe-
cutions,  but  being  fully  fatisficd  of  his  Wives  fincere  Chriftianity,  cauled
him  to  alter  his  Judgment ;  for  it  was  come  to  a  Mated  Controveriie,  a-
mong  the  New-England  Divines,  whether  the  Devil  could  Afflidfc  in  a  good
Man's  fhape;  it  feems  nothing  elfe  could  convince  him:  yet  when  it  came
fo  near  to  himfelf,  he  was  foon  convine'd  that  the  Devil  might  fo  AfR'&.
Which  fame  reafon  did  afterwards  prevail  with  many  others  ;  and  much
influenced  to  the  fucceeding  change  at  Tryals.

O&ober,  7.  (EdwardBiJhop  and  his  Wife  having  made  their  Efcapeout
of  Prilon)  this  day  Mr.  Cor  win  the  Sheriff,  came  and  Seiz  d  his  Goods,
and  Cattle,  and  had  it  not  been  for  his  fecond  Son  ( who  borrowed  Ten
Pound  and  gave  it  him}  they  had  been  wholly  loft,  the  Receipt  follows;
but  it  feems  they  muff  be  content  with  fuch  a  Receipt  as  he  would  give
them.

Pxeceived  this  jth.  day  o/O&ober, 1 692.  of  Samuel  Bifhop,  of  the  TcwH
of  Salem,  of  the  County  o/Effex,  in  New-England,C<Wn?rf/«e?r,  infull  fatif-
jaEiion,  a  valuable  %umm  of  Money,  for  the  Goods  and  Chattels  of  Edwaidi
Bifhop,  Senior,  of  the  Town  and  County  aforefaid,  Husbandman,  which  Goods  \
iivd  Chattels  being  fei^ed, for  that  the  f aid  Edward  Bifhop, and  Sarah  lis)
Wife,  having  been  committed  for  Witchcraft  and  Felony,  have  made  their  E-
Jcape  ;  and  their  Goods  and  Chatties  were  forfeited  unto  their  Majeflies, and  |
now  being  in  Pojfejpon  of  the  fdid  Samuel  Bifhop  ;  and  in  behalf  of  Their)
Ivjajeftics,  I  do  hereby  difcharge  the  J  aid  Goods' and  chatties,  the  day  and year <
above  written,  as  witnefs  my  hand3  George  Corwin,  sheriff.

But  before  this  the  faid  Bi/hofrEldeft  Son,havingMarried  into  that  Family*
01  the  Purmans,  who  were  chief  Profecutors  in  this  buiuiefs  ;  he  holdings
a  Cow  to  be  branded  left  it  fhould  be  feiz'd,  and  having  a  Pufh  or  Boyll
upon  his  Thigh,  with  his  ftraining  it  broke  ;  this  is  that  that  was  pretended!
to  be  burnt  with  the  faid  Brand  ;  and  is  one  of  the  bones  thrown  to  thee
Dogmatical  to  pick,  in  Wonders  of  the  Invifible  World,  P.  143.  the  other:
of  a  Corner  of  a  Sheet,  pretended  to  be  taken  from  a  Spedtre,  it  isknowm
that  it  was  provided  the  day  before,  by  that  Afflidted  perfon,  and  thee
third  bone  of  a  Spindle  is  almoft  as  eafily  provided,  as  the  piece  of  the'
Knife  $  fo  that  Apollo  needs  not  herein  be  confulted,  &c,

Mr.  Philip  Englifh,  and  his  Wife  having  made  their  Efcape  out  of  Pri-
fon,  Mr.  Corwin  the  Sheriff  feiz'd  his  Eftate,  to  the  value  of  about  Fifteeri
Hundred  Pound,  which  was  wholly  loft  to  him,  except  about  Three
H  .indrcd  Pound  value,  (which  was  afterward  reftored^.


Part  5.  Matters  of  Fatt.  109

After  Good  wife  Hiar  was  Condemned,  her  Eftate  was  feiz'd,  and  was
alio  bought  again  for  Eight  Pound.

George  Jacobs,  Son  to  old  Jacobs  being  accufed,he  fled,  then  the  Off-
icers came  to  his  Houfe,  his  Wife  was  a  Woman  Crazy  in  her  Sen fes  and
(had  been  fo  feveral  Years  She  it  feems  had  been  alio  accufed,  there  were
I  in  the  Houfe  with  her  only  four  fmall  Children,  and  one  of  them  fuck'd
iher  Eldeft  Daughter,  being  in  Priion  ;  the  Officer  peri  waded  her  out  of
the  Houfe,  to  go  along  with  him,  telling  her  fhe  fhould  fpeedily  return,
the  Children  ran  a  great  way  after  her  crying. .

When  (he  came  where  the  Afflicted  were,  being  asked,  they  faid  they
did  not  know  her,  at  length  one  faid,  don't  you  know  Jacobs  the  old
Witch,  and  then  they  cry'd  out  of  her,  and  fell  down  in  their  Fits;  fhe
was  fent  to  Prifon,  and  lay  there  Ten  Months,  the  Neighbours  of  pitey
took  care  of  the  Children  to  prefer ve  them  from  perifhing.

About  this  time  a  New  Scene  was  begun,  one  Jofcph  Ballard  of  Andover,
whole  Wife  was  ill  (and  after  died  of  a  Fever)  fent  to  Salem  for  fome  of
thofe  Accufers,to  tell  him  who  afflicted  h;s  Wife  *,  others  didthe  like:  Horie
and  Man  were  fent  from  feveral  places  to  fetch  thofe  Accufers  who  had
the  Spectral  light,  that  they  might  thereby  tell  who  affli&ed  thofe  that
were  any  ways  ill.

When  chefe  came  into  any  place  where  iuch  were,  ufually  they  fen\
into  a  Fit;  after  which  being  asked  who  it  was  that  afflkfted  the  perfon,
they  would,  for  the  molt  part,  name  one  whom  they  faid  fat  on  the  head,,
and  another  that  fat  on  the  lower  parts  of  the  afflicted.  Soon  after
Ballard's  fending  (as  above)  more  than  Fifty,  of  the  People  of  Andover
were  complained  of,  for  afflicting  their  Neighbours.  Here  it  was  that
many  accufed  themfelves,  of  Riding  upon  Poles  through  the  Air;  Many-
Parents  believing  their  Children  to  be  Witches,  and  many  Husbands  their
Wives,  &c.  When  thefe  Accufers  came  to  the  Houfe  of  any  upon  fuch
account,  it  was  ordinary  for  other  young  People  to  be  taken  in  Fits,  and
to  have  the  fame  Spectral  fight.

Mr.  Dudley  Bradjheet,  a  Juftice  of  Peace  in  Andover  t  having  granted
out  Warrants  againft,  and  Committed  Thirty  or  Forty  to  Prifons,  for
the  fuppoled  Witchcrafts,  at  length  faw  caufe  to  forbear  granting  out  any
more  Warrants.  Soon  after  which  he  and  his  Wife  were  cried  out  of,,
himfelf  was  (by  them)  faid  to  have  killed  Nine  perfons  by  Witchcraft,
and  found  it  his  fafeft  courfe  to  make  his  Efcape.

A  Dog  being  affli&ed  at  S^/ew-Village,  thofe  that  had  the  Spectral  fight
being  fent  fori  they  accufed  Mr.  John  Bradftreet  (Brother  to  the  Juftice)
that  he  afflicted  the  faid  Dog,  and  now  rid  upon  him :  He  made  his  E-
fcape  into  PefcattequarGovemment,  and  the  Dog  was  put  to  death,  and
was  all  of  the  Afflicted  thatfuffered  death.  >

At


no  Matters  of  Faft.  Part  d

At  Andcver,  the  Afflicted  complained  of  a  Dog,  as  afflicting  of  them,
and  would  fall  into  their  Fits  at  the  Dogs  looking  upon  them  $  the  Dog
was  put  to  death.

A  worthy  Gentleman  of  Boflon,  being  about  this  time  accufed  by  thofe
•  at  Andover,  he  lent  by  fome  particular  Friends  a  Writ  to  Arreft  thofe
Accufers  in  a  Thoufand  Pound  Action  for  Defamation ,  with  inftructions
to  them,  to  inform  themfelves  of  the  certainty  of  the, proof,  in  doing
which  their  bufinefs  was  perceived,  and  from  thence  forward  the  Accu-
fations  at  Andover  generally  ceafed.

In  October  fome  of  thefe  Accufers  were  fent  for  to  Glocefter,  and  oc-
casioned four  Women  to  be  fent  to  Prifon,  but  Salem  Prifon  being  lo  full
it  could  receive  no  more ;  two  were  fent  to  Ipfwich  Prifon.  In  November
they  were  fent  for  again  by  Lieutenant  Stephens,  who  was  told  that  a
Sifter  of  his  was  bewitched  ;  in  their  way  paffing  over  Ipfwic h-Bridge,
they  met  with  an  old  Woman,  and  inftantly  fell  into  their  Fits :  But  by  this
time  the  validity  of  fuch  Accufations being  much  queftioned,  they  found
not  that  Encouragement  they  had  done  elfewhere,  and  foon  withdrew.

Thefe  Accufers  fwore  that  they  faw  three  perfons  fitting  upon  Lieute-
nant Stephens's  Sifter  till  (he  died ;  yet  Bond  was  accepted  for  thofe  Three. ,

And  now  Nineteen  perfons  having  been  hang'd,  and  one  preft.to  death,
and  Eight  more  condemned,  in  all  Twenty  and  Eight,  of  which  above  a
third  part  were  Members  of  fome  of  the  Churches  in  N.England,  and  more
than  half  of  them  of  a  good  Converfation  in  general,  and  not  oneclear'd.
.About  Fifty  having  confeft  themfelves  to  be  Witches, of  which  not  one
Executed  ;  above  an  Hundred  and  Fifty  in  Prifon,  and  above  Two  Hun-
dred more  accufed.  The  Special  Commiflion  of  Oyer  and  Terminer  comes
to  a  period,  which  had  no  other  foundation  than  the  Governours  Com-
miiTion,  and  had  proceeded in  the  manner  of  fwearing  Wicneffes,  ■&$
By  holding  up  the  hand,  (and  by  receiving  Evidences  in  writing )  accord-
ing to  the  Ancient  Ufage  of  this  Countrey  3*  as  alio  having  their  Indict-
ments in  Englijh. In  the  Tryals,  when  any  were  Indicted  for  Afflicting,
Pining, and  wafting  the  Bodies  of  particular  perfons  by  Witchcraft  ?  it-
was  ufal  to  hear  Evidence  of  matter  foreign, and  of  perhaps  Twenty  or
Thirty  Years  ftanding,  about  over-fetting  Carts,  the  death  of  Cattle,  un-
kindnels  to  Relations,  or- unexpected  Accidents  befalling  after  fome  quar-
rel. Whether  this  was  admitted  by  the  Law  of  England,  or  by  what  o-
ther  Law,  wants  to  be  determined  ;  the  Executions  teemed  mixt,  in  pref-
fing.  to  death  for  not  pleading,  which  moft  agrees  with  the  Laws  of  Eng-
land, and  Sentencing  Women  to  be  hanged  for  Witchcraft,  according  to
the  former  practice  of  this  Country,  and  not  by  burning,  as  is  faid  to  have
been  the  Law  of  England. And  though  the  confeiling  Witches  were
many  ;  yet  not  one  of  them  that  confeiTed  their  own  guilt,  and  abode  by
•heir  Confeflion  were  put  to  Death:

Here


';;:


Part  5,  Matters  of  Fail.  1 1  r

j  Here  followeth  what  account  fome  of  thofe  miferable  Creatures  give
of  their  Confefllon  under  their  own  hands.
.  We  whcje  Names  are  under  written.  Inhabitants  of  Andover,  when  as  that
horrible  and  tremendous  Judgment  beginning  at  S&lem-Vijlage,  in  the  Tear,
1692.  {by  feme)  caTd Witchcraft ;  firft  breaking  for that  Mr.  ParrisV  Houfe,
fiver al  Young  -perfons  being  feemingly  affiifled,  did  accufc  fever al  per  fins  for
afflitling  them,  and  many  there  believing  it  fo  to  be  ;  we  being  informed
that  if  a  perfin  werefick  that  the  afflicled  perfons  could  tell,  what  or  who  was
the  caufe  of  that  fclyiefs.  Jofeph  Ballard  of  Andover  (his  Wife  being  fick  at
the  fame  time)  he  either  from  himfelf  or  by  the  advice  of  others,  fctctid  two
of  the  perfons  calf 'd  the  afflicled  per  fins,  from  Sakm-Village  to  Andover.
Which  was  the  beginning  of  that  dreadful  Calamity  that  befel  us  in  Andover.
And  the  Authority  in  Andover,  believing  the  /aid  Accusations  to  be  true,  first
for  the  f aid  ferfons  to  come  together,  to  the  Meeting- houfe  in  Andover  (the  af-
fiifled perfons  being  there.)  After  Air.  Bernard  had  been  at  Prayer,  we  were
blindfolded,  and  cur  hands  were  laid  upon  the  afflicled  perfons,  they  being  in
their  Fits,  and  falling  into  their  Fits  at  our  coming  into  their  pref en ce  (as  they
faid)  and  fome  led  us  and  laid  our  hands  upon  them,  and  then  they  faid  they
were  well,  and  that  we  were  guilty  of  afflicting  of  them  ;  whereupon  we  were
all  fei^ed  as  Prifoners,  by  a  Warrant  from  the  Juftice  of  the  Peace ,  and  forth-
with carried  to  Salem.  And  by  re  of  on  of 'that fuddain  fur  primal,  we  knowing
our  felves  altogether  Inr,ocent  of  that  Crimey  we  were  all  exceedingly  afionifh-
ed  and  amazed,  and  confer  nated  and  affrighted  even  out  of  our  J^eafon;  and
our  neareft  and  deareft  Relations,  feeing  us  in  that  dreadful  condition,  and
knowing  our  great  danger,  apprehending  that  there  was  no  other  way  to  fave
our  lives,  as  the  cafe  was  then  circumftantiated  but  by  our  conf effing  our  f elves
to  be  fiich  and  fitch  perfons,  .as  the  afflicted  reprefented  us  to  be  ,  they  out  of
tender  love  and  pitty  perfwaded  us  to  confefs  what  we  did  confefs.  And  indeed
that  Conf ejfion,th at  is  faid  we  made,  was  no  other  than  what  was  fugge fled  to
us  by  fome  Gentlemen  ;  they  telling  us,  that  we  were  Witches,  and  they  knew
it,  and  we  knew  it,  and  they  knew  that  we  knew  it,  which  made  us  thinkjhap
it  wasfo  ;  and  our  under/landing,  our  reafin,  and  our  faculties  almoft  gone  ;
we  were  not  capable  of  judging  our  condition;  as  alfo  the  hard  meafiires  they
ufed  with  us,  rendred  us  uncapable  of  making  our  Defence  ;  but  faid  any  thing
and  every  thing  which  they  defvred,  and  mqft  of  what  we  faid,  was  put  in  ejfeft
«  confinting  to  what  they  faid.  Sometime  after  when  we  were  better  compqfed,
they  telling  of  us  what  we  had  confeffed,  we  did  pvofefs  that  we  were  Innocent,
tnd  Ignorant  of  fuch  things.  And  we  hearing  that  Samuel  WardwelHwdf
-enounced  his  Confeffion,  and  quickly  after  Condemned  and  Executed,  fime  of
%s  were  tcld  that  we  were  going  after  Wardwell.

Mary  Ofgood,  Mary  Tiler,  Deliv.  Dane,  Abigail  Barker,
Sarah  Wilibn,  Hannah  Tiler. "  It


1 12  Matters  of  Fall.  Part 5-

It  may  here  be  furthtr  added  concerning  thoie  that  did  Confefs,  that
befides  that  powerful  Argument,  of  Life  (and  freedom  from  hardfhips,
and  Irons,  not  only  proniifed,  but  alfo  performed  to  all  that  owned  their
guilt.)  There  are  numerous  Inftances,  too- many  to  be  here  inferted  ,  oi
the  tedious  Examinations  before  private  perfons,  .many  hours  together
they  all  that  time  urging  them  to  Confeis  (and  taking  turns  to  perfwade<
them)  till  the  accufed  were  wearied  out,by  being  forced  to  (land  fo  Jong,
or  for  want  of  Sleep,  £?c.  and  fo  brought  to  give  an  Affent  to  what  the)
{aid  ;  they  then  asking  them,  Were  you  at  fuch  a  Witch  meeting,  or
have  you  figned  the  Devil's  Book,  &c.  upon  their  replying,yes,  thewhok
was  drawn  into  form  as-  their  Confeffion.

But  that  which  did  mightily  further  fuch  Confeflions,  was  their  nearer5
arid  deareft  Relations  urging  them  to  ir.  Thefe  feeing  no  other  way  o
efcape  for  them,  thought  it  the  beft  advice  that  could  be  given  ;  hence  i
was  that  the  Husbands  of  fome,  by  counfel  often  urging,  and  utmof
earneftnefs,  and  Children  upon  their  Knees  intreating,  have  at  lengrj
prevailed  with  them,  to  fay  they  were  guilty-

AS  to  the  manner  of  Tryals,  and  the  Evidence  taken  for  Conviction
at  Salem,  it  is  already  fet  forth  in  Print,  by  the  Reverend  Mr.  Cotta
Mather,  in  his  Womders  of  the  Invifible  World,  at  the  Command  of  hi
Excellency,  Sir  William  Phips;  with  not  only  the  Recommendation,  bi
thanks  of  the  Lieutenant  Governour  ;  and  with  the  Approbation  of  tr
iteverend  Mr.  J.  M.  in  his  Poftfcript  to  his  Cafes  of  Confcience;  whic
lafc  Book  was  fet  forth  by  the  confent  of  the  Minifters  in  and  ne;
Boflon.

Two  of  the  Judges  have  alfo  given  their  Sentiments  in  thefe  words^P.i^
The  Reverend  and  worthy  Author,  having  at  the  direction  of  his  Excelled

the  Governour  j  Jo  far  obliged  t  foe  Publicly  as  to  give  fome  account,  of  the  fuffet

ingSy  brought  upon  the  Countrej  by  Witchcrafts  ,  and  of  the  Tryals  which  ha>

"faffed  upon  fiver  a  I  executed  for  the  fame,

Vpon  pcrufal  thereof  We  find  the  matters  of  FaB  and  Evidence truly i

ported, and  a  profpetl  given  of  the  Methods  of  Convitlion,  ufed  in  the  fi

feedings  of  the  Court  at  Salem.

Bofton,  Oclober  1 1.  William  Stoughu

1692.  Samuel  Sewall.

And  confidering  that  this  may  fall  into  the  hands  of  fuch  as  never  h
thofe  Wonders,  it  may  be  needful  to  tranferibe  the  whole  account  he  J
given  thereof,  without  any  variation  ( but  with  one  of  the  Indi&me;
snnext  to  the  Tryal  of  each,)  which  is  thus  prefaced,  P.  81, 82,  83.

J


B1


Mr.  Mathers  Preface  to  the  try  ah.  1 1 3

Uc  I  (hall  no  longer  detain,  my  Reader  from  his  expected  entertain -
ment,in  a  brief  account  of  the  Tryals, which  have -paffed  up(3n  fome  0/
:he  Malefactors,  lately  Executed  at  Salem,  for  the  Witchcrafts  whereof
they  ftood  convicted.  For  my  own  part  I  was  not  prefenr  at  any  of  them;
aor  ever  had  I  any  pgrfonal  prejudice  at  the  perions  thus  brought  upon
:he  Stage  ;  much  lefs,  at  the  furviving  Relations  of  thofe  perfons,  with
md  for  whom,  I  would  be  as  hearty  a  mourner,  as  any  Man  living  in
!:he  World  :  "The  Lord  comfort  th?m  !  But  having  received  a  command  fo
p  do,  I  can  do  no  other  than  fhortly  relate  the  chief  Matters  of  Fact,
which  occurr'd  in  the  Tryals  of  fome  that  were  Executed ;  in  an  Abridg-
nent  collected  out  of  the  Court- Papers,  on  this  occafion  put  into  my
lands.  You  are  to  take  the  truth,  juft  as  it  was ;  and  the  truth  will
}Mtz  no  good  Man.  There  might  have  been  more  of  thefe,  if  my  Book
would  not  thereby  have  been  fwelled  too  big;  and  if  lome  other  Worthy
lands  did  not  perhaps  intend  fomething  further  in  thefe  Collections  •  for
which  caufe  I  have  only  fingled  out  four  or  live,  which  may  ferve  to  II-
uftrate the  way  of  dealing, wherein  Witchcrafts  uie  to  be  concerned  ;

r;  md  I  report  matters  not  as  an  Advocate,  but  as  an  Hiftorian.

They  were  fome  of  the  Gracious  words  infertcd  in  the  Advice,  wrhich
j-nany  of  the  Neighbouring  Minifters  did  this  Summer  humblylay  before

b  pur  Honourable  Judges,  We  cannot  but  with  all  thankfulnefs,  acknowledge

t|  he  fuccefs,  which  the  merciful  God  has  given  unto  the  Sedulous  and  Af-
iduous  Endeavours  of  our  Honourable  Rulers,  to  detect  the  Abominable

eJVitchcrafts,  which  have  been  committed  in  the  Country;  Humbly  pray-
lg  that  the  difcovery  of  thofe  Myfterious,  and  Mifchievous  wickedneiTes ,
lay  be  perfected.  If  in  the  midft  of  the  many  DifTatis  factions  among  us,
le  publication  of  thefe  Tryals,  may  promote  fuch  a  Pious  thankfulnefs
ntoGod,  for  Juftice  being  fo  far  executed  among  us,  I  Ihall  rejoyce  that
rod  is  glorified  ;  and  pray  that  no  wrong  fteps  of  ours  may  ever  fully  any

4>f  his  glorious  works.

The  Ind'tttment  of  George  Burroughs.

ifTex  ff.  Anno  I{egni  ISggis  &  ^egin.e  Willielmi  &  Mar  tie,  nunc

Anglic,  &c.  quarto —

rHE  Jurors  for  our  Soveraign  Lord  and  Lady  the  King  and  Queen
prefent,  That  George  burroughs ,  late  of  Falmouth,  in  the  Province  of
%he  Majjachufetts-Bay,  in  New-England,  Clerk.

!The  9th.  Day  of  May,  in  the  fourth  Year  of  the  Reign  of  our  Sove-
:aign  Lord  and  Lady  William  and  Mary,  by  the  Grace  of  God,  of  £«£-;
\and,  Scotland,  France  and  Ireland,  King  and  Queen  Defenders  of  the"

Q. '  Faith,


t  r  *  George  Burroughs'*  tryal  Part  5-.

Faith,  &c.  And  divers  other  days  and  times,  as  well  before  as  after,  cer-
tain deteftable  Arts,  called  Witchcrafts,  and  Sorceries,  Wickedly  and  Fel-
lonioufly  hath  ufed,  pra&ifed,  and  cxercifed,  at  and  within  the  Townfhip
of  Salem,  in  the  County  of  EJfex  aforefaid,  in  upon,  and  againft  one
M.irylVokott  of  S  alcm-  Village,  in  the  County  of  Effex,  Single  woman,,
by  which  faid  wicked  Arts  the  faid  Mary  Wclcott,  the  Ninth  day  of  May,
in  the  fourth  Year  abovelaid,  and  divers  other  days  and  times,  as  well
before  as  after,  was  and  is  Tortured,  Afflicted,  Pined,  Confumed,  Wa-
ited and  Tormented,  againft  the  Peace  of  our  Soveraign  Lord  and  Lady,
the  King  and  Queen,  and  againft  the  Form  of  the  Statute  in  that  Cale
made  and  provided.

Wimeffes,  Mary  Wolcott,  Sarah  Vibber,  Endorfed  by  the  Grand-

Mrrcy  Lewis,  Ann  Putnam,  Eli  %.  Hubbard,  Jury,  Bill  a  Vera,

There  was  aifo  a  fecond  Indictment  for  afflicting  Elizabeth  Hubbardr,
the  Witnefles  to  the  faid  Indictment  were  Elizabeth  Hubbard,  MaiyWokott,
Ann  Putnam.

The  third  Indictment was  for  afflicting  Mercy  Lewis ;  the  WitnefTes,.,
the  laid  Mercy  Lewis,  Mary  Wokott,  Elizabeth  Hubbard,  and  Ann  Putnam*

The  fourth  for  acts  of  Witchcraft  on  Ann  Putnam,  the  WitnefTes,  the
laid  Ann  Putnam ,  Mary  TVokot,  Elizabeth  Hubbard,  Mary  JVarren.

The  Tryal  of  G.  B. as  Printed  in  Wonders  of  the  Invjfible  World.,  from*

p.  94.  m  104.  -

GLad  Ihould  I  have  been,  if  I  had  never  known  the  name  of  this  Man;  1
or  never  had  this  oecafion  to  mention  fo  much  as  the  firft  Letters  of;
his  name.  But  the  Government  requiring  fome  Account  of  his  Tryal,  tat
be  inferred  in  this  Book,  it  becomes  me  with  all  obedience  to  fubmit  unto»>
the  Order.

1.  This  G.  B.  was  Indicted  for  Witchcrafts ;  and  in  the  Profecution  of
the  Charge  againft  him,  he  was  Accufed  by  five  oriSx  of  the  Bewitched,
as  the  Author  of  their  Miieries  ;  he  was  accufed  by  Eight  of  the  ebnfef-
firtg  Witches,  as  being  an  head  Actor  at  fbme  of  their  Hellifh  Randez-
vouzes,  and  who  had  the  promife  of  being  a  King  in  Satan's  Kingdom,
now  going  to  be  erected  ;  he  was  accufed  by  Nine  perfons,  for  extraor-
dinary lifting,  and  fuch  feats  of  ftrength  as  eould  not  be  done  without  a
Diabolical  AfTiftance.  And  for  other  fuch  things  he  was  accufed,  until
about  Thirty  Teftimonies  were  brought  in  againft  him  ;  nor  were  thefe,
judg'd  the  half  of  what  might  have  been  confider'd,  for  his  Conviction  :
however  they  were  enough  to  fix  the  Character  of  a  Witch  upon  him,
according  to  the  Rules  of  Reafoning,  by  the  Judicious  Gaule,  in  that  cafe
directed,  The'


Part 5*.  George  Burroughs'*  Try  ah  if  5*

The  Court  being  fenfible,  that  the  Teftimonies  of  the  Parties  Bewitch-
ed,  ufe  to  have  a  Room  among  the  Sufpicions,  or  Prefumptions,  brought
In  againft  one  Indicted  for  Witchcraft,  there  were  now  heard  the  Testi-
monies of  feveral  Perfbns,  who  were  molt  notorioufly  bewitched,  and
every  day  tortured  by  Invifible  hands,  and  thefe  now  ail  charged  the
Spectres  of  G.  B.  to  have,  a  (hare  in  their  Torments.  At  the  Examina-
tion of  this  G.  B.  the  bewitched  People  were  grievoufly  harraffed,  with
preternatural  Mifchiefs,  which  could  notpoflibly  bediflembled  ;  and  they
ftiil  afcribed  it  unto  the  Endeavours  of  G.  B.  to  kill  them.  And  now  upon
■his  Tryal,  one  of  the  bewitched  perfons  teftlSed,  That  in  her  Armies  a  lit*
tleBiack-haired-Man  came  to  her,faying  his  name  was  B.  and  bidding  her
fetU'er  hand  unto  a  Book,  which  he  (hewed  unto  her;  and  bragging  that
he  was  a  Conjurer  above  the  ordinary  Rank  of  Witches;  that*' he  often
perfecuted  her,  w'.th  the  offer  of  that  B^ok,  faying,  (he  (hould  be  well,
and  need  fear  no  body,  if  (he  would  but  (ign  it;  but  he  inflicted  cruel
pains  and  hurts  upon  her,  becaule  of  her  denying  lb  to  do.  The  Tcfti-
monies  of  the  other  Sufferers  concurred  with  the(e;and  it  was  remarkable,
that  whereas  Biting,  was  one  of  the  ways,  which  the  Witches  ufed,  for
the  vexing  of  the  Sufferers,  when  they  cry'd  out  of  G.  B.  biting  them,
the  print  of  his  Teech  would  be  feen  on  the  Fieih  of  the  Complainers-
and  juft  fuch  a  lett  of  Teeth  as  G.  ITs.  would  then  appear  upon  them,
which  could  be  diftingutihed  from  thofe  of  fome  other  Mens.

Others  ot  them  teftified,  that  in  their  Torments  G.  B.  tempted  them
to  go  unto  a  Sacrament,  unto  which  they  perceived  him  with  a  found  of
Trumpet  fummoning  of  other  Witches ;  who  quickly  after  the  found
would  come  from  all  quarters  unto  the  Randezvouz.  One  of  them  fall-
ng  into  a  kind  of  Trance,  afterwards  affirmed,  that  G.  B,  had  carried
ler  into  a  very  high  Mountain,  where  he  (howed  her  mighty  and  glorious
Kingdoms,  and  (aid  he  would  give  them  all  to  her,  if  (he  would  write
11  his  Book  •  but  (he  told  him,  They  were  none  of  his  to  give  -,  and  re-
ufed  the  Motions  ;  enduring  of  much  mifery  for  that  refufaL

It  colt  the  Court  a  wonderful  deal  of  trouble  to  hear  the  Teftimonies
of  the  Sufferers  •  for  when  they  were  going  to  give  in  their  Depofitions,
chey  would  for  a  long  while  be  taken  with  Fits,  that  made  them  unca-
pable  of  faying  any  thing.  The  chief  Judge  asked  the  Prifoner,  Who  he
thought  hindred  thefe  WitnefTes  from  giving  their  Teftimonies  ?  and  he
anfwered,  He  fuppofed  it  was  the  Devil.  That  Honourable  perfon  then
fepHed,  How  comes  the  Devil  fo  loath  to  have  any  Teftimony  born  a  •
gamft  you  ?  Which  caft  him  into  very  great  confufion.

3.  It  hath  been  a  frequent  thing  for  the  bewitched  People,  to  be  enter-
tained with  Apparitions  ot  Ghofts  of  murdered  People,  at  the  fame  time
chat  the  Speftres  of  the  Witches  trouble  them, Thefe  Ghofts  do  always

Q,  2  affright


i\6  George  Burroughs'*  Tryal  Parts,

affright  the  beholders,  more  than  all  the  other  Spe&ral  Reprefentations
and  when  they  exhibit  themfelves,  they  cry  out  of  being  murdered  by.
the  Witchcrafts,  or  other  Violences  of  the  perfons  who  are  then  in  Spectre;
prefent. It  is  further  con(Iderablct  that  once  or  twice  thefe  Apparition:
have  been  (cen  by  others,  at  the  very  fame  rime  they  have  frown  them'
ielvcs  to  the  bewitched  ;  and  feldom  have  there  been  thefe  Apparition^
but  when  femething  unufal  and  fufpecxe'd  hath  attended  the  death  of  the
Party  thus  appearing. Some  that  have  been  accufed  by  thele  Apparitions,;
accofting  of  the  bewitched  People,  who  had  never  heard  a  word  of  any)
inch  perfons ever  being  in the  World, have  upon  a  fair  Examination,
freely  and  fuiiy  confeffed  the  Murders  of  thofe  very  perfons,  although1
thefe  alio  did  not  know  how  the  Apparitions  had  complained  of  them.
: Accordingly  ieveral  of  the  bewitched  had  given  in  their  Teftimony,  that
they  had  been  troubled  with  the  Apparitions  of  two  Women,  who  laid
they  were  G.  B\.  two  Wives  •  and  that  he  had  been  the  death  of  them  ;
-and  that  the  Magiflxates  muft  be  told  of  it,  before  whom,  if  B.  upon  his
Tryal  denied  it,  they  did  not  know  but  that  they  fliould  appear  again  inti
the  Court. Now  G.B.  hzd  been  infamous,  for  the  barbarous  ufage  oft
his  two  fucceffive  Wives,  all  the  Countrey  over.  Moreover,  it  was  terri-
fied, the  Spectre  of  G.  B.  threatning  of  the  Sufferers  told  them  he  hadl
killed  (  befides  others)  Mrs.  Law/on  and  her  Daughter  Ann. And  it  was:
noted,  that  thefe  were  the  Vertuous  Wife  and  Daughter  of  one,  at  whom:
.this  G.  B.  might  have  a  prejudice,  for  being  ferviceable  at  Salem-  Village,
from  whence  himfelf  had  in  ill  terms  removed  fome  Years  before,  and  that
when  they  dy'd, which  was  long  fince,  there  were  fome  odd  circumftances
about  them,  which  made  fome  of  the  Attendants  there  fufpect  fomething,
of  Witchcraft,  though  none  imagined  from  what  quarter  it  ihould  come.
Weli  G.  B.  being  now  upon  his  Tryal,  one  of  the  bewitched  perfons
was  caft  into  horror  at  the  Ghofts  of  B's.  two  deceafed  Wives,  then  ap-
pearing before  him, and  crying  for  vengeance  againft  him. Hereupon
ieveral  of  the  bewitched  perfons  were  fuccefltvely  called  in,  who  all,  nor
knowing  what  the  former  had  feen  and  faid,  concurred  in  their  horror  ofi
the  Apparition,  which  they. affirmed,  that  he  had  before  him. But  he,
though  much  appalled, utterly  denied  that  he  difcerned  any  thing  of  it,
nor  was  it  any  part  of  his  Conviction.

*  4.  judicious  writers  have  afligned  it  a  great  place,  in  the  Conviction
of  vVicches,  when  perfons  are  Impeached  by  other  notorious  Wkches  to
be  as  ill  as  themfelves,  efpecially  if  the  perfons  have  been  much  noted
xor  neglecting  the  Worihip  of  God.  .  Now  as  there  might  have  been  Tef-
timonies enough  of  G.  B%s.  Antipathy  to  Grayer,  and  the  other  Ordinances
of  God,  though  by  his  Profeflion  Angularly  obliged  thereunto  ;  fo  there
now  came  in  againil  the  Prifoner,  the  Teftimonies  of  feveral  perfons, who

confeiTcd


mind

■Mhc

4t;


:■'


j 'art  j.  George  Burroughs'*  7rv#/.  117

■i  onfefTed  their  own  having  been  horrible  Witches, and  ever  fince  their
Jonfeflions,  had  been  themlelves  terribly  tortured  by  the  Devils  and  other
cC<n  (Witches,  even  like  the  other  Sufferers  -3  and  therein  undergone  the  pains
•^jpf  many  deaths  for  their  Confefllons.  -

Thefe  now  teftified,  that  G.  B.  had  been  at  Witch-meetings  with  the:n,-
md  that  he  was  the  perfon  who  had feduced  and  compelled  them  into
he  Snares  of  Witchcraft  : that  he  promifed  them  fine  Cloaths  for  doing
that  he  brought  Poppets  to  them,  and  thorns  to*  ftick  into  thole  Pop-
'ijoets,  for  the  afflidting  of  other  People  :  And  t;hat  he  exhorted  them,  with
'  he  reft  of  the  Crue,  to  bewitch  all  Salem  Village  ,-  but  be  fure  to  do  it
<^tradnally  ;  if  they  would  prevail  in  what  they  did.

When  the  Lancajljire  Witches  were  Condemned, I  don't  remember

[hat  there  was  any  considerable  further Evidence,than  that  of  the  be  witch-

d,  and  than  that  of  fome  that  had  confefled. We  fee  fo  much  already

igainft  G.  B.  But  this  being  indeed  not  enough,  there  were  other  things

iii  :o  render  "what  had  already  been  produced  credible.

5.  A  famous  Divine,  recites  this  among  the  Convictions  of  a  Witch  ;
:he  Teftimony  of  the  party  bewitched, whether  pining  or  dying  ;  toge-
ther with  the  Joint  Oaths  of  fuificient  perfons,  that  have  feen  certain  pro-
digious pranks  or  feats,  wrought  by  the  party  accufed. Now  God  had
been  plea  fed  fo  to  leave  this  G.  B.  that  he  had  enfnared  himfelf, by  fe-
dveral  inftances  which  he  had  formerly  given  of  a  preternatural  ftrength;
|and  which  were  now  produced  againft  him. He  was  a  very  puny  Man,
yet  he  had  often  done  things  beyond  the  Strength  of  a  Giant. A  Gun  of
about  7  Foot  barrel,  and  fo  heavy  that  ftrong  Men  could  not  fteadily  hold
it  out,  with  both  hands  j  there  were  feveral  Teftimonies  given  in  by  per-
fons of  Credit  and  Honour,  that he  made  nothing  of  taking  up men  a
3-un  behind  the  Lock  with  but  one  hand,  and  holding  it- out  like  a  Piftol,
at  Arms-end. G.  B.  In  his  vindication  was  fo  fooliih,  as  to  fay,  that  an
Indian  was  there,  and  held  it  out,  at  the  fame  time  : whereas,  none  of
the  Spectators  ever  faw  any fuch  Indian ;  but  they  fuppofed  the  black
Man  (as  the  Witches  call  the  Devil  ;  and  they  generally  fay  he  refembles
an  Indian)  might  give  him  that  Aflfiftance. There  was  Evidence  likewife
brought  in,  that  he  made  nothing  of  taking  up  whole  Barrels  filPd  with
MellafTes,  or  Cyder,  in  very  disadvantageous  Poftures, and  carrying  of
them  thro'  the  difficulteft  places,  out  of  a  Canoa  to  the  Shore.

Yea,  there  were  two  Teftimonies,  that  G.  B.  with  only  putting  the
Fore-finger  of  his  right  hand  into  the  Muzzel  of  an  heavy  Gun,  a  fowl-
ing piece  of  about  fix  or  feven  foot  Barrel  ;  did  lift  up  the  Gun,  and  hold
it  out  at  Arms-end  ;  a  Gun  which  the  Deponents,  though  ftrong  men,
could  not  with  both  hands  lift  up,and  hold  out  at  the  Butt-end,as  is  ufuaL
ladeed  one  of  thtle  Witnefies,  was  over-perfwaded  by  fome  perfons  to
±-  r  be


Ti8  George  Burroughs'*  Tpz%  Part  5

be  out  of  way  upon  G.  B's.  Tryal ;  but  he  came  afterwards,  with  forrow.
for  his  withdraw,  and  gave  in  his  Teftimony.  Nor  were  either  of  theft
Witnefles  made  ufe  of  as  Evidence  in  the  Tryal.

6.  There  came  infeveral  Teftimonies,  relating  to  the  Domeftick  affair?
of  G.  B.  which  had  a  very  hard  Afpecl:  upon  him  ;  and  not  only  proved
him  a  very  ill  Man,  but  alfo  confirmed  the  belief  of  the  Character,  which
had  been  already  faftned  on  him,

'Twas  Teftified,  That  keeping  his  two  fuccefTive  Wives  in  a
ftrange  kind  of  flavery,  he  would  when  he  came  home  from  abroad  pre-
tend to  tell  the  talk  which  any  had  with  them.  That  he  has  brought
them  to  the  point  of  Death,  by  his  harlh  dealings  with  his  Wives,  and
then  made  the  People  about  him  to  promile  that  in  cafe  Death  ihould
happen  they  would  fay  nothing  of  it.  That  he  uled  all  means  to  make  his
VVives  Write,  Sign,  Seal,  and  Swear  a  Covenant  never  to  reveal  any  of
his  Secrets.  That  his  Wives  hadprivately  complained  unto  the  Neighbours
about  fhghtly  Apparitions  of  Evil  Spirits,  with  which  their  Houfe  was
fometimes  iniefted  ;  and  that  many  fuch  things  have  been  whifpered  a-
mong  the  Neighbourhood.  There  were  alfo  lbme  other  Teftimonies,  re-
lating to  the  death  of  People,  whereby  the  Confciences  of  an  impartial
Jury  were  convinced,  that  G.  B.  had  bewitched  the  perfons  mention'd  in
the  Complaints.  But  I  am  forced  to  omit  feveral  fuch  paflages  in  this:
as  well  as  in  all  the  fucceeding  Tryals,  becaufe  the  Scribes  who  took
notice  of  them,  have  not  fupplied  me.

7.  One  Mr.  Ityckj  Brother  in  Law  to  this  G.  B.  teftified  that  G.  B.
and  he  himfelf,  and  his  Sifter,  who  was  G.  B's.  Wife,  going  out  for
two  or  three  Miles,  to  gather  Strawberries,  %uck  with  his  Sifter,  the  Wife
of  G.  B.  rode  home  very  foftly,  with  G.  B.  on  foot  in  their  company  ,
G.  B.  ftept  afide  a  little  into  the  Bufhes ;  whereupon  they  halted  and
hollow'd  for  him.  He  not  anfwering,  they  went  away  homewards,  with
a  quickened  pace  ;  without  any  expectation  of  feeing  him  in  a  confider-
abie  while:  and  yet  when  they  were  got  near  home,  to  their aftonilhment
they  found  him  on  foot,  with  them,  having  a  Basket  of  Strawberries.
G.  B.  immediately  then  fell  to  chiding  his  Wife,  on  the  account  of  what
fhe  had  been  fpeaking  to  her  Brother  of  him  on  the  Road  :  which  when
they  wondered  at,  he  faid,  He  knew  their  thoughts.  Ityc^  being  ftart-
Jed  at  that,  made  fome  reply,  intimating  that  the  Devil  himfelf  did  not
knowfofsr;  but  G.  B.  anfwered,  my  god,  makes  known  your  thoughts
unto  me.  The  Prifoner  now  at  the  Barr  had  nothing  to  anfwer^unto
what  was  thus  witneiTed  againft  him,  that  was  worth  confidering.  O^ly
he  laid,  fyic^  and  his  Wife  left  a  man  with  him,  when  they  left  him.
V Vhich  Huck  now  affirm'd  to  be  falfe ;  and  when  the  Court  ask'd  G.  B.
What  the  mans  name  was  ? His  countenance  was  much  altered  ;  nor

~ coukL


*art  5-.  Bridget  Bifliop's  InJUlment  ,  n9

:ou!d  he  fay  who  it  was.  But  the  Court  began  to  think  fbat  he  then
tcpt  afide,  only  that  by  the  AfTiftance  of  the  black  Man,  he  might  put
,m  his  invifibility,  and  in  that  fafcinating  Mift,  gratifie  his  own  jealous
lumour,  to  hear  what  they  faid  of  him.  Which  trick  of  rendering  them-
elves  invifible,  our  Witches  do  in  their  Confcflions  pretend  that  they
bmetimes  are  matters  of  ;  and  it  is  the  more  credible,  becaufe  there  is
lemonftration  that  they  often  render  many  other  things  utterly  invifible.

8.  Faultring,  Faulty,  Unconftant,  and  contrary  Anfwers  upon  Judicial
md  deliberate  Examination,  are  counted  fome  unlucky  fymptoms  of  Guilt
n  all  Crimes,  efpecially  in  Witchcrafts.  Now  there  never  was  a  Prifoner
nore  Eminent  for  them,  than  G.  B.  both  at  his  Examination  and  on  his
fryal.  His  Tergiverfations ,  Contradictions,  and  Falfehoods,  were  very
enfible  :  he  had  little  to  fay,  but  that  he  had  heard  fome  things  that  he
:ouid  not  prove,  Reflecting  upon  the  Reputation  of  fome  of  the  Witnefles.
Dnly  he  ^ve  in  a  Paper  to  the  Jury  >  wherein,  altho*  he  had  many  times
>efore  granted,  not  only  that  there  are  Witches,  but  alio  that  the  pre-
ent  Sufferings  of  the  Countrey  are  the  Effects  of  Horrible  Witchcrafts ,
r-et  he  now  goes  to  evince  it,  that  there  neither  are,  nor  ever  were,
Witches,  that  having  made  a  compact  with  the  Devil,  can  fend  a  Devii
:o  torment  other  People  at  a  diftance.  This  Paper  was  transcribed  out  of
Ady  ;  which  the  Court  prefently  knew,  as  foon  as  they  heard  it.  But  he
aid,  he  had  taken  none  of  it  out  of  any  Book  ;  for  which  his  evafion  aft-
erwards was,  that  a  Gentleman  gave  him  the  Difcourfe  in  a  Manufcript,
rom  whence  he  tranfcribed  it.

9.  The  Jury  brought  him  in  Guilty ;  but  when  he  came  to  dye,  he  ut-
erly  deny'd  the  Fact,  whereof  he  had  been  thus  Convi&ed.

The  Indi&ment  of  Bridget  Bijbop.

Anno  Hegni  Regis  &  Regina  Willi  elmi  &  Maria  ,nunc  Anglicc,  (3  c  quarto.

EJJex  fT.pT*HE  Jurors  for  our  Soveraign  Lord  and  Lady,  the  King  and
-*•  Queen  prefent,  That  Bridget  Bifhop,  alias  Oliver,  the  Wife
)f  Edward  Bifhop  in  salem,  in  the  County  of  Effex,  Sawyer,  the  Nine-
:eenth  day  of  April,  in  the  Fourth  Year  "of  the  Reign  ot  our  Soveraign
Lord  and  Lady,  William  and  Mary,  by  the  Grace  of  God,  of  England*
kotland,  France  and  Ireland,  King  and  Queen,  Defenders  of  the  Faith,
p.  and  divers  other  days  and  times,  as  well  before  as  after,  certain  de-
eftable  Arts,  called  Witchcrafts,  and  Sorceries,  wickedly  and  Felloni-
mfly  hath  ufed,  practiced,  and  exercifed  £:,  and  wkhin  the  Tovtnfhip
>f  Salem,  in  the  County  of  Effex  aforcfaid,  in,  upon,  afod  againft  one

Mercy


no  Bridget  Bifliop's  tryal.  Part  5

Mercy  Lewis,  of  Salem-V  ilizge,  in  the  County  aforefaid,  (ingle  Woman
by  which  laid  wicked  Arts,  the  laid  Mercy  Lewis,  the  faid  Nineteenth  dai
of -April,  in  the  Fourth  Year  abovefaid,  and  divers  other  days  and  times
as  wsli  before  as  after,  was  and  is  Hurt,  Tortured,  Afflicted,  Pined,  Con-
fumed,  Wafted  and  Tormented,  againft  the  Peace  of  our  Soveraign  Lord
and  Lady,. the  King  and  Queen,  and  againft  the  form  of  the  Statute,  ir
that  cafe  made  and  provided.

Endorfed  Billa  Vera.

WitnefTes,  Mercy  Lewis,  Nathaniel  Ingarfoll,  Mr.  Samuel  Parris,  Thcmai
Putnam,  junior,  Mary  Wakott,  Junior,  Ann  Putnam,  Junior,  Elizabeth
Hubbard,  Abigail  Williams.

There  was  alfo  a  Second  Indictment,on  the  faidB*y&cp,for  afficSting  anc
practifing  Witchcraft  on  Abigail  Williams.  WitnefTes  to  the  faid  Indicts
mcnt,were  the  faid  Abigail  Williams  ,Mx.  Parr  is, Nathaniel  IngarfolllThoma»
Putnam,  Ann  Putnam,  Mary  Wakott,  Elizabeth  Hubbard.

The  Third  Indictment  was  for  afflicting  Mary  Wakott,  WitnefTes  tc
which  faid  Indictment,  were  Mary  Wakott,  Mercy  Lewis,  Mr.  Samue
P arris \  Nathaniel  Ingarfoll,  Thomas  Putnam,  Ann  Putnam,  Elizabeth
Hubbard,  Abigail  Williams.

The  Fourth  Indictment  was  for  afflicting  Elizabeth  Hubbard,  WitnefTes
to  which  faid  Indictment,  were  the  faid  Elizabeth  Hubbard,  Mercy  Lewis 1
Mr.  Parris,  Nathaniel  Ingarfoll,  Thomas  Putnam,  Ann-  Putnam,  Mary
Wakstt,  Abigail  Williams.

The  Fifth  Indictment  was  for  afflicting  Ann  Putnam,  WitnefTes  to
which  faid  Indictment,  were  the  faid  Ann  Putnam,  Mr.  Samuel  Parris^
Nathaniel  Ingarfoll,  Thomas  Putnam,  Mercy  Lewis,  Mary  Wokatt ,  Abigail
Williams,  Elizabeth  Hubbard.

The  Tryal  of  Bridget  Bifhop  as Printed,  In  Wonders  of  Invifible  World,
.  June  2.  1692.  p. 104,  to  114.

1;  $HE  was  Indi  tied  for  bewitching  of  fever  al  per  fins  in  the  Neighbourhood %
^  The  IndiHment  being  drawn  up, according  to  the  form  infuch  cafes ufual
and  pleading  not  guilty,  there  were  brought  in  fever  al  perfons,  who  had  long,
undergone  many  kinds  ofjniferies,  which  were  preternatural ly  inflitled,  and
generally  afcribed  unto  an  horrible  Witchcraft.  There  was  little  occajicn  to
prove  the  Witchcraft,  it  being  evident  and  notorious  to  all  beholders,  Now\
to  fix  the  Witchcraft  on  the  Prifoner  at  the  Bar,  the  firft  thing  ufed  was,  thtt
teftimonyof-  the  bewitched  5 whereof  fever  al  teflified, that  the  fhape  of  thct

Prifoner


Part  5-. * Bridget  Bi (hops  TryaL  ixi

Prifoner  did  oftentimes  very  grievoufly  finch  them,  choal^  them,  bite  them*
and  affiiH  them  ;  urging  them  to  write  their  names  in  a  Book^  which  tlejaid
Spectre  called,  Ours.  One  of  them  did  further  tcfiifie,  that  it  was  the  flape
of  this  Prifoner,  with  another,  which  one  day  tool^  her  fircm  her  Wheel,  and
carrying  her  to  the  River  fide,  threatned  there  to  drown  her,  if  fee  did  net
fign  the  Book_  mention  d,  which  yet  [he  refufed.  Others  of  them  did  alfo  teftijtey
that  the  faidfioape^  did  in  her  threats,  brag  to  them,  that  fije  had  been  the
death  of  fundry  perfo?is,  then  by  her  named.  Another  teflified,  the  appariti-
on of  Ghofts  unto  the  Speftrc  of  Bifhop,  crying  out,  You  murdered  us.  About
the  truth  whereof,  there  was  in  the  matter  of  Fati,  but  too  much  fufpicibn.

2.  It  was  teftified,  that  at  the  Examination  of  the  Prifoner,  before  the
,  Magiflrates,  the  bewitched  were extreamty  tortured. If  jhe  did  but  caft  her

Eyes  on  them,  they  were  prefentiy  ftruck^  docrn  ;  and  this  in  fuch  a  mariner
as  there  could  be  no  collufion  in  the  bufinefs.  But  upon  the  touch  of  her  hand
upon  themy  when  they  lay  in  their  fwoons,  they  would  immediately  revive  ;  and
net  upon  the  touch  of  any  ones  elfe.  Moreover  upon  fome  fpecial  Actions  of  her
Body9  as  the  Jhaking  of  her  head,  or  the  turning  of  her  Eyes,  they  prefentiy
and  painfully  fell  into  the  like  poftures.  And  many  of  the  -like  accidents  now
fell  out,  while  Jhe  was  at  the  Bar.  One  at  the  fame  time  tcflifying,  that  fhe
faid,  She  could  not  be  troubled  to  fee  the  Afflicted  thus  tormented.

3.  There  was  Teftimony  likewife  brought  in,  that  a  Manflriking  once  at
the  place,  where  a  bewitched  perfon  faid,  the  fhape  of  this  Bifhop  flood,  the
^bewitched  cryed  out,  that  he  had  tore  her  Coat,  in  the  place  then  particularly
fpecified  ;  and  the  Womans  Coat  was  found  to  be  torn  in  the  very  place.

4.  One  Deliverance  Hobbs,*  who  had  confejfed  her  being  a  Witch,  was
now  tormented  by  the  Spetlres  for  her  ConfeJJion.  And  Jhe  now  teftified  that
this  Bifhop  tempted  her  to  fign  the  Book,  again,  and  to  deny  what  fi:-e  had
confefs'd.  She  affirmed,  that  it  was  the  floats  of  this  Prifoner,  which  whipped  her
with  Iron  P{ods,to  compel  her  thereunto.  And  fhe  affirmed,  that  this  Bilhop
was  at  a  General-meeting  of  the  Witches  in  a  Field,  at  S&lem- Village ,  and
there  partook^  of  a  Diabolical  Sacrament,  in  Bread  and  Wine  then  admini-
ftred.

5.  To  render  it  further  unqueftionable ,  that  the  Prifoner  at  the  Bar,  was
the  Perfon  truly  charged  in  this  Witchcraft ;  there  were  produced  many  Evi-
dences of  other  Witchcrafts,  by  her  perpetrated.  For  inflame,  John  Cook
testified,  that  about  five  or  fix  Tears  ago,  one  morning  about  $un-Rjfe,  he.
was  in  his  Chamber,  ajjaulted  by  the  fhape  of  this  Prifoner  ;  which  hcl£d  on
him,  grinnd  at  him,  and  very  much  hurt  him,  with  a  blow  on  the  fide  of  the
head  ;  and  that  on  the  fame  day  about  Noon,  the  fame  JJiape  walked  in  the
Rgom  where  he  waj,  and  an  Apple  ftrangely  flew  out  of  his  hand,  into  the  lap
of  his  Mother,  fix  or  eight  foot  from  him.

R  6.  Samuel


i  sa  Bridget  Bifli  ops  Try  at  m Part  j.

^6.  Samuel  Gray  tefilfyd,  that  ah  out  fourteen  Tears  ago,  he  wal^d  on  a
Night,  and  f "aw the  E{ocm  where  he  lay  full  of  light  ;  and  that  he  then  f'aw
plainly  a  Woman  between  the  Cradle,  and  the  Bed-fide,  which  looked  upon  him.
lie  rofe,and  it  vanifhed  ;  tho  he  found  the  Doors  all  fafi  :  Looking  out  at  the
Entry  door,  hefaw  the  fame  Woman  in  the  fame  gaib  .'gain  ;  and  [aid, In
God's  name,  what  do  you  come  for  r  He  went  to  Bed,  and  had  the  fame
Woman  again  affaulting  him. The  Chi  id  in  the  Cradle  gave  a  great  Sctreech,
and  the  Woman  difip peared. It  was  long  before  the  Ci.  ild  could  be  quieted  ; ,
and  tho  it  were  a  very  likely  thriving  Child,  yet  from  this  time  it  pined  awaytl
and  after  divers  Months  died  in  a  fad  condition. He  knew  net  Bifhop,  nor'
her  nam*;  but  when  hefaw  her  after  this,  he  knew  by  her  countenance,  and:
apparel, and  all  drcumflances,  that  it  was  the  apparition  of  this  Bifhop,
which  had  thus  troubled  him.

7.  John  BJy  and  his  Wife,  tefiified,  that  he  bought  a  Sow  of  Ed  ward  Bi-
fhop, the  Husbmd  of  the  Pr  if  oner  ;  and  was  Jo  pay  the  price  agreed  unto  ano-
ther perfon*  This  Prifoner  being  angry  that  fhe  was  thus  kindred  from,
fingring  the  Money y  quarrelTd  with  Bly,  foon  after  which  the  Sow  was  faken
with  fir ange  Fitts,  jumping,  leaping,  and  knocking  her  head  aga:nft  the
Fence,  fije  feemed  blind  and  deaf,  and  would  neither  eat  nor  be  fucked.  Where*
upon  a  Neighbour  faid,  (he  believed  the  creature  was  over  looked  ;  and
fundry  other  circumftances  concurred^  which  made  the  Deponents  believe  that
Bifhop  /W  bewitched  it*

8.  Richard  Coman  tefiified,  that  Eight  Tears  ago,  as  he  lay  aw>a%e  in  his
Bed,  with  a  light  burning  in  the  Room,  he  was  annoyed  with  the  Apparition
of  this  Bifhop;,  and  of  two  more  that  were  ft  rangers  to  him  ;  who  cams  and
ofpreffed  him,  fo  that  he  could  neither  fiir  himfelf,  nor  wake  any  one  elje  :
and  that  he  was  the  Night  after  molefied  again  in  the  like  manner  ;  thefaid*
Bifhop  taking  him  by  the  Throat,  and  pulling  him  almoft  out  of  the  Bed.  His
Kjnfman  offered  for  this  caufe  to  lodge  with  him  ;  and  that  nighty  as  they
were  awake  difcourfing  together  ^  this  Coman  wis  once  more  vifited  by  the
Guefis  which  had  formerly  been  fo troublefome,  his  Kjnfman  being  at  the

fiime  time  finicky  fpeechlcfs*  and  unable  to  move  hand  or  foot.  He  had  laid
bis  Sword  by  him  ;  which  thofe  unhdppy  SpeBres,did  flrive  much  to  wrefi  from  jj
him,  only  he  held  too  fafi  for  them.  He  then  grew  able  to  call  the  People  of  his
houfe  ;  but  altho  they  heard  him,. yet  they  had  not  power  tofpeak,  or  fiir,  until
a>t  iaft,  one  of  the  People  crying  out,  What's  the  matter  I  the  Speftres  ah
'uanifhed.

9.  Samuel  sbattock,  teftified,  that  in  the  Year,  1 680.  This  Bridget
Bi/bcfy.  often  came  to  his  houfe  upon  fuch  frivolous  and  foolifh  Errands,
that  they  fufpedied  fhe  came  indeed  with  a  purpofe  of  Mifchief.  Pre*.
fently  whereupon  his  Eideft  Child,  which  was  of  as  promifing  health  and
fenle, as  any  Child  of  its  Age, began  to  droop  exceedingly  $ and  th<

oftn©


Part  f.  Bridget BiJhops  Tryal  12?

oftner  that  Bifhop  came  to  the  houfe,  the  worfe  grew  the  Child.  As  th-
Child  would  be  ftanding  at  the  Door,  he  would  be  thrown  and  bruifed
againft  the  Stones,  by  an  Invisible  hand,  and  in  like  fort  knock  his  face
againft  the  (ides  of  the  houfe,  and  bruife  it  after  a  mifcrable  manner.
Afterwards  this  Bifhop  would  bring  him  things  to  Dye,  whereof  he  ccn'd
not  Imagine  any  ufe  ;  and  when  (he  paid  him  a  peice  of  Money,  the
Purfe  and  Money  were  unaccountably  conveyed  out  of  a  lock 'd  Box,
and  never  feen  more.  The  Chlid  was  immediately  hereupon  taken  with
terrible  Fits,  whereof  his  friends  thought  he  would  have  died  :  Indeed
he  did  almoft  nothing  but  cry  and  fleep,  for  feveral  Months  together  r
and  at  length  his  underftanding  was  utterly  taken  away.  Among  other
Symptoms  of  an  Inchantment  upon  him  one  was,  that  there  was  a  Board
in  the  Garden,  whereon  he  would  walk  ;  and  all  the  Invitations  in  the
world  could  never  fetch  him  off.  About  feventeen  or  eighteen  Years  af-
ter, there  came  a  ftranger,  to  Shattockj  houfe,  who  feeing  the  Child  laid,
This  poor  Child  is  bewitched ;  and  you  have  a  Neighbour  living  not  far  off
voho  is  a  Witch.  He  added,  Tour  Neighbour  has  had  a  falling  out  with  your
Vl^ife;  and  /he  faid  in  her  hearty  your  Wife  is  a  proud  Woman,  and  fhe
Would  bring  down  her  pride  in  this  Quid :  He  then  remembred,  that  BifJoop
had  parted  from  his  Wife  in  muttering,  and  menacing  terms,  a  little  be-
fore the  Child  was  taken  ill.  The  abovefaid  ftranger  would  needs  carry
the  bewitched  Boy  with  him,  to  Bifhcps  Houfe,  on  pretence  of  buying  a
Pot  of  Cyder.  The  Woman  entertained  him  in  furious  manner ;  and
flew  alfo  upon  the  Boy,  fcratching  his  face  till  the  Blood  came,  and  fay-
iking,  Thou  JRogue,  what  ?  dofl  thou  bring  this  fellow  here  to  plagus  me  r  Now
it  feems  the  Man  had  faid  before  he  went,  that  he  would  fetch  Blood  of
her. ,  Ever  after  the  Boy  was  followed  with  grievous  Fits,  which  the
Doctors  themfelves  generally  afcribed  unto  Witchcraft ;  and  wherein  he
would  be  thrown  {kill  into  the  Fire  or  Water,  it  he  were  not  conftantly
looked  after  3  and  it  was  verily  believed  that  Bifhcf  was  the  caufe  of  it.

Io.  John  Louder  teftified,  that  upon  fome  little  controverfie  with  Bfhop
about  her  Fowls,  going  well  to  bed,  he  did  awake  in  the  Night  by  Moon-
light, and  did  fee  clearly  the  likenefs  of  this  Woman  grievously  oppref-
fmg  him. In  which  miserable  condition  (he  held  him  unable  to  help  him-
1  felf,  till  near  day. He  told  Bifhcp  of  this ;  but  ftie  utterly  denied  it,  and
threatned  him  very  much. Quickly  after  this,  being  at  home  on  a  Lord's
Day,  with  the  doors  (hue  about  him,  he  law  a  black  Pig  approach  him  ;
at  which  he  going  to  kick,  it  vanifhed  away. Immediately  after  fitting
1  down  he  fawa  black  thing  jump  in  at  the  Window,  and  come  and  ftand
before  him. The  body  was  like  that  of  a  Monkey,  the  feet  like  a  Cocks,
but  the  face  much  like  a  Mans. He  being  fo  extremely  affrighted,  thai
:  he  could  notfpeak$  this  Monfter  (poke  to  him  and  faid,  I  am  a  Mcffengcr

R  Z  Jtnt


H4  Bridget  Bifliops  TryaU  Part  5,

fent  unto  you,  for  I  tmJerfland  that  you  are  in  fome  trouble  of  Mind, and  if
you  will  be  ruled  by  me,  you  /hall  want  for  nothing  in  this  World. Where-
upon he  endeavoured  to  clap  his  hands  upon  it  ; but he  could  feel  no
jubilance,  and  it  jumped  out  of  the  Window  again  ,• but  immediately
came  in  by  the  Porch,  though  the  doors  were  fhut,  and  faid,  Ton  had  bet-
ter tal^e  my  ccun/ell  He  then  ftruck  at" it  with  a  ftick, but  ftruck  only  the:
Groundfel,  and  broke  the  ftick. The  Arm  with  which  he  ftruck  was  pre-
fcnrly  difenabled^  and  it  vanifhed  away. He  prcfently  went  out  at  the
back  door, and  fpied  this  Bijhcp, inner  Orchard,  going  toward her
Houfe  ;  but  he  had  not  power  to  fet  one  foot  forward  unto  her. Where-
upon returning  into  the  Houfe,  he  was  immediately  acccfted  by  the  Men-.,
iter  he  had  feen  before; which  Goblin  was  new  going  to  fly  at  him  :
whereat  he  cried  out,  The  whole  Armour  of  God  be  between  me  and  ycu  !.  fo
it  iprang  back,  and  flew  over  the  Apple-tree  ;  fhaking  many  Apples  offf
the  Tree  in  its  flying  over. At  its  leap,  it  flung  dirt  with  its  Feet,  againft  I
the  Stomach  of  the  Man  ; whereon  he  was  then  ftruck dumb,  and  fo
continued  for  three  Days  together. Upon  the  producing  of  this  left;—
mony,  Bifhop  denied  that  fhe  knew  this  Deponent. Yet  their  two  Gich-  ■
ards  joined, and  they  had  often  had  their  little  quarrels  for  fome  Years,1
together.

11.  William  Stacy  teftified, that  receiving  Money  of  this  Bifhop,  fere
.  work  done  by  him,  he  was  gone  but  a  matter  of  three  Roods  from  her„,
and  looking  for  his  Money,  found  it  unaccountably  gone  from  him. Some".
rime  after,  Bifhcf  asked  him  whether  his  Father  would  grind  her  Grift;
for  her  ? He  demanded  why  ? fhe  replied, becaufe  folks  count  me  a4
Witch. He  anfwered,  no  queftion,  but  he  will  grind  it  for  you  j  being'
then  gone  about  fix  Roods  from  her,  with  a  fmall  load  in  his  Cart,  fad--
d ainly  -the  off  Wheel  flumpt, and  funk  down  into  an hole, upon  plain'
ground,  fo  that  the  Deponent,  was  forced  to  get  help  for  the  recovering]
or  the  "Wheel. But  ftepping  back  to  look  for  the  hole  which  might  give
him  this  difafter,  there  was  none  at  all  to  be  found. Some  time  after  he:
was  waked  in  the  Night;  but  it  feemed  as  light  as  day,  and  he  perfeclly '
law  the  fhape  of  this  Bifhop,  in  the  .Room  troubling  of  him,  but  upon  her
going  out,  all  was  dark  again. He  charged  Bifhcp  afterwards  with  ir,ard ;
fhe  denied  it  not ; but  was  very  angry. Quickly  after,  this  Deponent.
having  been  threatned  by  Bijhcp,  as  he  was  in  a  dark  Night  going  to  the
Barn,  he  was  very  fuddainly  taken  or  lifted  from  the  ground,  and  thrown,
againft  a  Stone-wall ;  after  that  he  was  again  hoifted  up,  and  thrown
down  a  bank,  at  the  end  of  his  Houle. After  this,  again  paffing  by  this
Bifaop,  his  Horfe  with  a  fmall  load,  ftriving  to  draw,  all  his  Gears  flew
to  pieces,  and  the  Cart  fell  down  ;  and  this  Deponent  going  then  to  lift  a
bag  of  Corn?  of  about  two  Buftels, could  not  budge  it  with  all  his
might.  Many


Jpart  5.  Sudmna  Martins  IndiElmnt.  \i^

Many  other  pranks  of  this  Bi/hcps,  this  Deponent  was  reaiy  to  tcftifie.
IHe  alio  teftified,  that  he  verily  believed,  the  laid  Bijh&p  vvas  the  Inltru-
Imenr  of  his  Daughter  PrifcilW*  death  ;  of  which  iufpicion,  pregnane
|reafons  were  aligned.

12.  To  crown  all,  John  Bly,  and  William  Eh  teftifiel,  that  being  im-
ploy'd  by  Bridget:  Bijhcf,  to  help  take  down  the  Cellar-wall,  of  che  old
Houfe,  wherein  ftie  formerly  lived,  they  did  in  holes  of  the  faid  old  Wall,
find  feveral  Poppets  made  up  of  Rags,  and  Hogs  Bridles,  with  headlefs
Pins  in  them;  the  points  being  outward.  Whereof  (he  could  now  give  no
Account  unto  the  Court,  that  was  reafonable  or  tolerable.

13.  One  thing  that  made  againft  the  Prifoner  was,  her  being  evident-
ly convicted  of  Grofs  lying  in  the  Court,  feveral  times,  while  .(he  was
making  her  Plea  But  bend es  this,  a  Jury  of  Women,  found  a  preter-
natural Tet  upon  her  Body  ;  but  uponaiecond  fearch,  within  three  or  four
hours,  there  was  no  fuch  thing  to  be  feen.  There  was  alfo  an  Account
of  other  People,  whom  this  Woman  had  Affli&ed.  And  there  might  have
been  many  more,  if  they  had  been  enquired  for.  But  there  was  no  need
of  them.

14.  There  was  one  very  ftrange  thing  more,  with  which  the  Court  was
newly  entertained.  As  this  Woman  was  under  a  guard,  palling  by  the,
great  and  fpacious  Meeting  Houfe  of  Salem,  (he  gave  a  look  towards  the.
Houfe;  and  immediately  a  Dxmon  invifibly  entring  the  Meeting  Houfe,
Tore  down  a  part  of  it;  lb  that  tho  there  were  no  pcrfon  to  be  feen  there,
yet  the  People  at  theNoife  running  in,  found  a  board  which  was  ftrongly
faftned  with  feveral  Nails,  tranfported  unto  another  quarter  of  the  _
Houfe.

The  Indictment  of  Sufanna  Martin*

Eflex  {£  Anno  B^gni  I{egis  {£  I^eginj  Willielmi  &  Maria,  nunc

Anglice,  &ct  quarto--*-

*"pHE  Jurors  for  our  Soveraign  Lord  and  Lady,  the  King  and  Queen,
-*•  prefent,  That  Sufanna  Martin  of  Amesbury,  in  the  County  of  Ejjex  f
Widow,  The  fecond  Day  of  May,  in  the  fourth  Year  of  the  Reign  of
our  Soveraign  Lord  and  Lady  William  and  Mary,  by  the  Grace  of  God,
of  England,  Scotland,  France  and  Ireland,  King  and  Queen,  Defenders
of  the  Faith,  iSc.  And  divers  other  days  and  times,  as  well  before  as  after,
certain  deteftable  Arts,  called  Witchcrafts,  and  Sorceries,  Wickedly  and
Fellonioufly  hath  ufed,  pra&ifed,  and  exercifed,  at  and  within  theTown-
{h\p  of  Salem,  in  the  County  of  Ejfex  aforefaid,  in,  upon,  and  againft,
one  Mary  Wolcott  of  Salem- Village,  in  the  County  of  Ejfex,  Single  Wo>
man,  by  which  faid  wicked  Arts  the  faid  Mary  Wolcott,  theftecond  Day

'  of


ixS  Sufanna  Martins  Try  at  Part  5!

of  May ,  in  the  fourth  Year  aforeiaid,and  at  divers  other  days  and  times,
as  well  before  as  after,  was  and  is  Tortured,  Afflicted,  Pined,  Confumed,
Wafted  and  Tormented ;  as  alio  lor  fundry  other  Acts  of  Witchcraft,  byk
faid  Sufanna  Martin,  committed  and  done  before  and  fince  that  time,  a~
gainft  the  Peace  of  our  Soveraign  Lord  and  Lady,  William  and  Mary9
King  and  Queen,  of  England ;  Their  Crown  and  Dignity,  and  againft I
the  Form  of  the  Statute,  in  that  Cafe  made  and  provided.

. Return 'd by  the  Grand- Jury,  Bilia  Vera.

WitnefTes, Sarah  Fibber, Mary  Wolcott, Mr.  Samuel  P arris, Elizabeth)
Hubbard,  Mercy  Lewis,

The  Second  Indictment  was  for  afflicting  Mercy  Lewis.  WitnefTes,
Samuel  Parris,  Ann  Putnam,  Sarah  Fibber,  Elifr  Hubbard,  Mary  Wolcott,
Mercy  Lewis,

The  T/ya!  of  sufanna  Martin,  June,  29. 1692.  As  is  Printed,  In  Winders

of  Invifibie  World,  from  P. 1 1 4,  to  P.  I 1 6.
1.  CUfanna  Martin,  pleading  not  GuiIty,to  the  Indictment  of  Witchcrafts  1

*^  brought  in  againft  her;  there  were  produced  the  Evidences  of  many
perfons  very  fenfibly  and  grievoufly  bewitched  ;  who  all  complained  of
the  Prifoner  at  the  Bar,  as  the  perlon  whom  they  believed  the  caufe  of
their  Miferies.  And  now  as  well  as  in  the  other  Trials,  there  was  an
extraordinary  endeavour  by  Witchcrafts,  with  cruel  and  frequent  Fits, ,
to  hinder  the  poor  Sufferers,  from  giving  in  their  Complaints ;  which  the
Court  was  forced  with  much  patience  to  obtain,  by  much  waiting  and
watching  for  it.

There  was  now  alfo  an  Account  given,  oY  what  had  palled  at  her  firft
Examination  before  the  Magiftrates.  The  caft  of  her  Eye,  then  ftriking
the  Afflicted  People  to  the  Ground,  whether  they  faw  that  caft  or  no  :
There  were  thefe  among  other  Paffages  between  the  Magiftrates  and  the
Examinate.

Magi/irate,  Pray,  What  ails  thefe  People  ?

Martin.  I  don't  know.

Magift.  But,  What  do  you  think  ails  them  ?

Man -in.  I  don't  defire  to  fpend  my  Judgment  upon  it.

Magift.  Don't  you  think  they  are  bewitched  ?

Martin.  No,  I  do  not  think  they  are.  v

Magift,  Tell  us  your  thoughts  about  them  then.

Martin.  No,  my  thoughts  are  my  own  when  they  are  in,  but  when
they  are  out,  they  are  anothers. Their  Mafter—

Magift.  Their  Mafter  ;  Who  do  you  think  is  their  Mafter  ?

Martin.  If  they  be  dealing  in  the  black  Arc,  you  may  know  as  well
as  I.  MAgift.


Party.  Sufanna  Martins  Tryal.  i%7

Magift,  Well,  what  have  you  done  towards  this  ?

Martin.  Nothing  at  all.

Magifi.  Why,  'tis  you  or  your  appearance  ?

Martin,  I  can't  help  it.

Magift.  Is  it  not  your  Mafter  ?  How  comes  your  appearance  to  hurt
thefe  ?

Martin.  How  do  I  know  ?  He  that  appeared  in  the  fhape  of  Samuel,  a
Glorified  Saint  may  appear  in  any  ones  fhape.

It  was  then  alfo  noted  in  her,  as  in  others  like  her,  that  if  the  Afflicted
went  to  approach  her,  they  were  flung  down  to  the  ground.  And,  when
fhe  was  asked  the  reafonofit,  fhe  faid,  I  cannot  tell,  "it  may  be,  the
Devil  bears  me  more  Malice  than  another

The  Court  accounted  themfelves  Alarm'd  by  thefe  things,  to  inquire
further  into  the  Converfation  of  the  Prifoner  ;  and  fee  what  there  might
occur,  to  render  thefe  Accufanions  further  credible.  Whereupon  John
Alien*  of  Salisbury  teftified,  that  he  refufing,  becaufe  of  the  weaknefs  of
his  Oxen,  to  Cart  fome  Staves  at  the  requeft  bf  this  Martin,  fhe  was  dif-
pleafed  at  it,  and  fa  id,  It  had  been  as  good  that  he  had  ;  for  this  Oxenjhould
never  do  him  much  more  fer  vice.  Whereupon  this  Deponent  faid,  Dojl  thou
threaten  me,  thou  oldtVitch  ;  I'll  throw  thee  into  theBrool^  :  which  to  avoid,
(he  flew  over  the  Bridge  and  elcaped.  But  as  he  was  going  home,  one
of  his  Oxen  tired,  fo  that  he  was  forced  to  unyoke  him,  that  he  might
get  him  home.  He  then  put  his  Oxen  with  many  more,  upon  Salisbury-
Beach,  where  Cattle  did  ufe  to  get  Flefh.  In  a  few  Days,  all  the  Oxen
upon  the  Beach  were  found  by  their  Tracks,  to  have  run  unto  the  mouth
of  Merrimack:  RJver  and  not  returned ;  but  the  next  day  they  were  found
come  afhore  upon  PlumJjland.  They  that  fought  them,  ufed  all  imagin-
able gentlenefs,  but  they  would  ftill  run  away  with  a  violence,  that  feem-
ed  wholly  Diabolical,  till  they  came  near  the  mouth  of  Merrimack: Rjier;
when  they  ran  right  into  the  Sea,  iwimming  as  far  as  they  could  befeen.
One  of  them  then  fwam  back  again,  with  a  fwiftnefs  amazing  to  the  be^
holders,  who  flood  ready  to  receive  him,  and  help  up  his  tired  Carcafs,:
but  the  Beaft  ran  furioufly  up  into  the  Ifland,  and  from  thence  thorough
the  Marifhes,  up  into  Newbury  Town,  and  fo  up  into  the  Woods  ;  and
there  after  a  while  found  near  Amesbury.  ,So  that  of  Fourteen  good  Oxen,
there  was  only  this  faved  :  the  reft  were  all  caft  up,  fome  in  one  place,
and  fome  in  another,  Drowned.

4.  John  Atkjnfon  teftified,  that  he  exchanged  a  Cow,  with  a  Son  of
ufanna  Martins,  whereat  lhe  muttered,  and  wss  unwilling  he  fhould  have
:.  Going  to  receive  this  Cow,  tho  he  Hamftring'd  her,  and  halter'd  her,
heof  a  tame  Creature  grew  fo  mad,  that  they  could  fcarce  get  her  along,
ihe  broke  all  the  Ropes  that  were  feftned  unto  her,  and  tho  (he  was  tied

faft


X2,8  fufanna  Martins  Tryal.  Part  5*.

faft  unto  a  Tree,  yet  (he  made  her  efcape,  and  gave  them  fuch  further
trouble,  as  they  could  afcribe  to  no  caufe  but  Witchcraft.

'  5.  Bernard  P cache  terrified,  that  being  in  Bed,  on  a  Lords  Day  Night,
he  heard  a  fcrabbling  at  the  Window,  whereat  he  then  faw,  Sufanna
'* Minin  come  inland  jump  down  upon  the  Moor.  She  took  hold  of  rhis
Deponents  Feet,  and  drawing  his  body  up  into  an  heap, "(he  lay  upon
him  near  two  hours;  in  all  which  time  he  could  neither  fpeak  nor  flir.
At  length  when  he  could  begin  to  move,  he  laid  hold  on  her  hand,  and
'pulling  it  up  to  his  mouth,  he  bit  three  of  her  Fingers  as  he  judged  to  thee
■Bone. "Whereupon  (he  went  from  the  Chamber,  down  the  Stairs,  out  at
the  door.  This  Deponent  thereupon  called  unto  the  people  of  the  Houfe
to  advife  them,  of  what  paflfed';  and  he  himfelf  did  follow  her.  The
People  few  her  not;  but  there  being  a  Bucket  at  the  Left-hand  of  the
door,  there  was  a  drop  of  Blood  on  it  \  and  feveral  more  drops  of  Blood
upon  the  Snow,  newly  fallen  abroad.  There  was  hkewife  the  print  oi
her  two  Feet,  juft  without  the  Threfhold  ;  but  no  more  fign  of  any  foot-
ing farther  off.

At  another  time  this  Deponent  was  defired  by  the  Prifoner,  to  comes
unto,  a  husking  of  Corn,  at  her  Houfe  ;  and  (he  faid,  If  he  did  not  come
it  were  better  that  he  did  \  He  went  not  ;  but  the  night  folio  win  g>Sufanm
Martin,  as  he  judged,  and  another  came  towards  him.  One  of  them  faid!
-here  he  is  I  but  he  having  a  QuarterftafF,  made  a  blow  at  them.  The
Roof  of  the  Barn,  broke  his  blow  ;  but  following  them  to  the  Window
he  made  another  blow  at  them,  and  (truck them  down;  yet  they  got  up
"and  got  out,  and  he  faw  no  more  of  them.

About  this  time,  there  was  a  Rumour  about  the  Town,  that  Mar  tit
had  a  broken  head ;  but  the  Deponent  could  fay  nothing  to  thar.

The  faid  Peachs  alfo  teftified,  the  bewitching  of  Cattle  to  Death,  upot
Martins  diicontents.

6.  Robert  Downer  teftified,  that  this  Prifoner  being  (bme  years  agi
profecuted  at  Court  for  a  Witch,  he  then  faid  unto  her,  He  believed  fb
Teas  a  Witch.  Whereat  (he  being  difTatisfied,  faid,  That  feme  fhe  Devi
would  jhertly  fetch  him  away  ;  which  words  were  heard  by  others,  as  we;
as  himfelf;  the  night  following,  as  he  lay  in  nis  Bed,  there  came  in  a
the  Window,  the  likenefs  of  a  Cat,  which  flew  upon  him,  and  took  fai
hold  of  his  Throat,  lay  on  him  a  .  confiderable  while,  and  almoft  kille.
him;  at  length  he  remembred  what  Sufanna  Martin  had  threatned  th
Day  before,  and  with  much  driving,  he  cried  out,  Avoid  thou  /he  Devi
In  the  n  'me  of  God  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghofiy  avoid  :  When
upon  it  Mt  him,  leaped  on  the  Floor,  and  flew  out  at  the  Window.  .

And  there  alfo  came  in  feveral  Teftimonies  that  before  ever  Dowm
fpoke  a  word  of  this  Accident ,  Sufanna  Martm.avA  heiS-Family  had  r<
lated,  how  this  Downer  had  been  handled,  v*  \  7*  Jo!:


I  Parr  {*  Sufanna  Martins  Tryal,  up

7.  John  Ksmhal  teftified,  that  Sufa?ma  Martin,  upon  a  caufclefs  difguft
i  had  threatned  him  about  a  certain  Cow  of  his,  that  (he  fhouid  never  do
'  rhim  any  more  good,  and  it  came  to  pafs  accordingly ;  for  focn  after  the
\  Cow  was  found  ftark  dead  on  the  dry  ground,  without  any  Diftempor
to  be  difcerned  upon  her. Up#n  which  he  was  followed  with  a  ftrange
I  death  upon  more  of  his  Cattie. Whereof  he  loft  in  one  Spring, to  the
I  value  of  30  /. But the  faid  John  K^mbul,  had  a  further  Teftimcny  to
give  in  againft  the  Prifoner,  which  w?s  truly  admirable. Being  defirous
\  to  furnifh  himfelf  with  a  Dog,  he  applied  himielfto  buy  one  of  this  Martin,
j  who  had  a  Bitch  with  Whelps  in  her  Houfe,  but  (lie  not  letting  him  have
'his  choice  ; he  (aid,  He  would  fupply  himfelf  then  at  ew^Blezdels Having
f  mark'd  a  Puppy which  he  liked  at  Bfe^dels,  he  met  George  Martin,  the
j  Husband  of  the  Prifoner  going  by, who  asked whether  he  would  not
I  have  one  of  his  Wives  Puppy's  ;  and  he  anfwered,  No. The  fame  day
one  Edmond  Eliot, being  at  Martins  houfe  heard George  Martin,  relate
where  this  Kembal  had  been,  and  what  he  had  faid ; whereupon  Sufanna
Martin  reply  *d,  If  Hive  I'll  give  him  Puppies  enough. Within  a  few  Days
after  this,  Kjtmbal  coming  out  of  the  Woods,  there  .arpfe  a little  black
Cloud, in the N.  W. and Kjmbal  immediately  felt  a  force  upon  him,
which  made  him  not able  to  avoid  running  upon  the  flumps  of  Trees
that  were  before  him,  albeit  he  had  a  broad  plain  cart  way  before  him  -
but  tho  he  had  his  Axe  alfo  on  his  Shoulder  to  endanger  him  in  his  falls,
he  could  not  forbear  going  out  of  his  way  to  tumble  over  them. When
he  came  below  the  Meeting- houfe,  there  appeared  unto  him  a  little  thing
like  a  Puppy  of  a  darkifh  Colour,  and  itfhot  backwards  and  forwards  bc-
:ween  his  .Legs. He  had  the  Courage  to  ufe  all  pofTible  endeavours  of
cutting  it  with  his  Axe,  but  he  could  not  hit  it;  the  Puppy  gave  a  jump
from  him  and  went,  as  to  him,  it  ieem'd  into  the  Ground. Going  a  little
iurthsr  there  appeared  unto  him  a  black  Puppy,  fomevvhat  bigger  than
he  Firft,  but  as  black  as  a  Coal. It's  motions  were  quicker  than  thofe
)f  his  Axe. it flew  at  his  Belly,  and  away  at  his  Throat,  io  over  his
Shoulders  one  way,  and  then  over  his  Shoulders  another  way,  his  heart
now  began  to  fail  him3 and  he  thought  the  Dog  would  have  tore  his
Throat  out. But  he  recovered  himfe!c,  and  called  upon  God  in  his  dif-
(fcrefs,  and  naming  the  name  of  Jefus  Chrift  it  vanifhed  away  at  once.  The
JDeponent  fpoke  not  one  word  of  thefe  Accidents,  for  fear  of  affrighting
liis  Wife, But  the  next  morning,  Edmond  Eliot  going  into  Martins  houfe,
j  this  Woman  asked  him,  where  Kembal  was  ?  He  replied,  at  home  a  Qed,
efor  ought  he  knew. She  returned ;  they  fay  he  was  frighted  laft  night,
Eliot  asked  with  what  ? She  anfwered  with  Puppies. Eliot  asked,  where
,fhe  heard  of  it,  for  he  had  heard  nothing  of  it ! She  rejoined,  about  the
I  Town. Akho'  J^embal  had  mentioned  the  matter  to  no  creature  living.

S  .  8.  mill  am


i;o  Sufanna Martins  Tryal  Part  j.

8.  William  Brown  certified ',' that  Heaven  having  blefs'd  him  with a
moft  Pious  and  Prudent  Wife,  this  Wife  of  his,  oneday  met  with  Sufanna
Martin  ;  but  when/he  approached  juft  unto  her, Martin  vaniftied  out  off
%hr,  and  left  herextreamly  affrighted. After  which  time  the  fa&Martin
often  appeared  unto  her,  giving  her  no  little  trouble  ;  and  when  (he  did
come, (he  was  vifited  with  Birds  that  forely  peckM  and  pf  ick'd  her ;  and
lometimes  a  bunch  like  a  Pullets  Egg  would  rife  en  her  Throat,  ready  to
choak  her,  till  (he  cry'd  out,  Witch,  ycu  fhant  clonk,  me  !  While  this  good;
Woman  was  in  this  Extremity,  the  Church  appointed  a  Day  of  Pray  en
on  her  behalf ; whereupon  the  trouble  ceas'd  ; (he  faw  not  Martin  as
formerly ;  and  the  Church  inftead  of  their  Faft,  gave  thanks  for  her  de-
liverance. But  a  considerable  while  after,  (he  being  fummoned  to  givei
in  fome  Evidence  at  the  Court, againft  this  Martin,  quickly  this  Martin,
came  behind  her,  while  (he  was  Mjlking  her  Cow, and  fa  id  unto  her,
For  thy  defaming  me  at  Court  >  TU  make  thee  the  miferabkft  Creature  in  the
iVorld. Soon  after  which  (he  fell  into  a  ftrange  kind  of  Diftemper,  and
became  horribly  Frantick,  and  uncapable  of  any  Reafonable  Action ;  the
Phyficians  declaring*  that  her  Diftemper  was  preternatural, and  that
fome  Devil  had  cercainly  bewitched  her  ; and  in  that  condition  (he  now  j
remained.

9.  Sarah  Atkjnfon  teftified,  that  Sufanna  Mirtin  came  from  Amesbury
to  their  Houfe  at  Newbury,  in  an  extraordinary  Sealon,  when  it  was  no;
fit  for  any  one  to  Travel.  She  came  fas  (he  faid,  unto  Atklnfon)  all  thai
long  way  on  foot.  She  brag'd  and  (how*d,  how  dry  (he  was;  nor  could
it  be  perceived  that  fo  much  as  the  Soles  of  her  Shoes  were  wer.  Atkjnft
was  amazed  at  it,  and  profefled,  that  (he  (hould  her  (elf  have  been  wet
up  to  the Knees, if  (he  had  then  came  fo  far  ;  but  Martin  reply 'd,  Sh

f comed  to  be  drabbled !  It  was  noted,  that  this  Teftimony  upon  her  Tryal  I
caft  her  into  a  very  lingular  confufion.

o. John  Prejfy  teftified,  tha:  being  one  Evening  very  unaccountably


hew  i  Id  red  near  a  Field  of  Martins ,and  feveral  times  as  one  under  an  En
chantmen^  returning  to  the  place  he  had  left,  at  length  he  faw  a  Marvel
lous  light,  about  the  bignefs  of  an  half  Bufiiel,  near  two  Rood  out  of  the
way.  He  went,  and  ftruck  at  it  with  a  Stick,  and  laid  it  on  with  al
his  might.  He  gave  it  near  Forty  blows ;  and  felt  it  a  palpable  fubftance
But  going  from  it,  bis  heels  were  ftruck  up,  and  he  was  laid  with  hi
back  on  the  ground  :  Aiding  as  he  thought,  into  a  Pit  ;  from  whence  hi
recovered,  by  taking  hold  on  the  Bu(h  ;  altho  afterwards  be  could  jfin<  L
no  fuchPit  in  the  place.  Having  after  his  recovery,  gone  five  or  fix  Rooc  <  ,


fee  law  Sufanna  Martin  ftanding  on  hts  Left -band,  as  the  Light  had  don 'J


-  c  - — —  -0— - — -- -r

before  ;  but  they  changed  no  words  with  one  another. He  could  fcarc


§nd  Ms  Houfe  in  his  return  j  but  at  length  he  got  home,  extrearoly  a

frightec


Part  jf.  Sufanna  Martins  TryaL  *  ? *

frighted. The  next  Day  it  was  upon  enquiry  understood, that  Martin
was  in  a  miferable  condition,  by  pains  and  hurts  that  were  upon  her.

It  was  further  teftified  by  this  Deponent,  that  after  he  had  given  la
fbme  Evidence  againft  Sufanna  Mirtin  many  Years  ago,  (lie  gave  hire
foul  words  about  it,  and  faid,  He  ftould  never  proffer*  more  partic!u.ny>
that  he  Jhould  never  have  more  than  two  Coves  ;  that  tho  he  were  never  fo
likely  to  have  more,  yet  he  (hould  never  have  them.  And  that  from  that  very
day  to  this  ;  namely  for  Twenty  Years  together,  he  couJd  never  exceed
that  number  ;  but  fome  ftrange  thing  or  other  ftill  prevented  his  having
of  any  more.

ii.  Jarvis  Rjng  teftified,  that  about  Seven  Years  ago,  he  was  often-
times grievoufly  oppreffed  in  the  Night  ;  but  faw  not  who  troubled  him,
until  at  laft  he  lying  perfectly  awake,  plainly  faw  Sufanna  Martin  ap-
proach him.  She  came  to  him  and  forcibly  bit  him  by  the  Finger  -y  fo  that
the  print  of  the  bite  is  now  fo  long  after  to  be  feen  upon  him.

1 2.  But  beiides  ail  thefe  Evidences,  there  was  a  meft  wonderful  Ac-
count of  one  Jefeph  I{ing  produced  on  this  occafion.  This  Man  has  been
ftrangely  carried  about  by  Dx?nons.  From  one  Witch- meeting  to  another ,
for  near  two  Years  together ;  and  for  one  quarter  of  this  time  they  made
him  and  kept  him  Dumb,  tho  he  is  now  again  able  to  (peak.  There  was
one  T.  H.  who  having  as 'tis  judged,  a  defign  of  Engaging  this  Jofeph
I{ule,  in  a  fnare  of  Deviiifm,  contrived  a  while,  to  bring  this  %ing  two
Shillings  in  Debt  unto  him.  Afterwards  this  poor  Man  would  be  vifitcd
with  unknown  lhapes,  and  this  T.  H.  fometimes  among  them  ;  which
would  force  him  away  with  them,  unto  unknown  places,  where  he  law-
:  Meetings,  Feaftings,  Dancings  $  and  after  his  return  wherein  they  hur-
'ried  him  along  thro  the  Air,  he  gave  demonstrations  to  the  Neighbour?,
that  he  had  indeed  been  fo  tranfported.  When  he  was  brought  unto  thefe
hellifh  meetings,  one  of  the  firft  things  they  ftill  did  unto  him,  was  to  give
him  a  knock  on  the  back,  whereupon  he  was  ever  as  if  bound  with
Chains,  uncapable  of  ftirring  out  of  the  place,  till  they  (hould  releafehim.
He  related,  that  there  often  came  to  him  a  Man,  who  preiented  him  a
Book,  whereto  he  would  have  him  fet  his  hand  ;  promifing  :o  him,  that
he  (hould  then  have  even  what  he  would  ;*  and  prefenting  him  with  all
the  deledtable  things,  perfons,  and  places,  that  he  could  imagine.  But
he  refufing  to  fubferibe,  the  bufinefs  would  end  with  dreadful  ihapes,
noifes  and  fcreetches,  which  almoft  feared  him  out  of  1  is  wits.  Once
with  a  Book,  there  was  a  Pen  ofTer'd  him,  and  an  Inkhorn,  with  liquor  in
it,  that  feemM  like  Blood  :  but  he  never  touched  it.

This  Man  did  aow  affirm,  that  he  faw  thePriloner,  at  feyeral  of  thofe
hetfifti  Randezvouzes.

Si  - .  Note


t$%  Elizabeth  Hows  IndSment.  Part  5.

Note,  This  Woman  was  one  of  the  mod  Impudent,  Scurrilous,  wicked
Creature  in  the  World  ;  and  fhe  did  now  throughout  her  whole  Tryal
difcover  her  felf  to  be  fuch  an  one. Yet  when  (he  was  asked  what  fhe
had  to  fay  for  her  felf,  her  chief  plea  was,  that  Ihe  had  led  a  moft  verttt-
ous  and  holy  life,.

The  Iridi&ment  of  ElhaSeth  Horn.

Effcx  C  Amo  j\egni  [{egis  £?  i\egina  Willielmi'& ''Maria,  nunc.

Anglia,  £fc.  quarto —

THE  Jurors  for  our  Sovereign  Lord  and  Lady,  the  King  and  Queen
prefent,  That  Elizabeth  Bbw,  Wife  of  'James  How,  of  Ipfmch,  the
Thirty  firflr  Day  of  May,  in  the  Fourth  Year  of  the  Reign  of  our  Sove^
raign  "Lord  ami  Lady,  William  and  Mary,  by  the  Grace  of  God,  or*
England,  Scotland,,  France  and-  Ireland,  King  and  Queen,  Defenders  of
the  Faith,  (3c.  and  divers  other  days  and  times,  as  well  before  as  after,
certain  deteftable  Arts,  called  Witchcrafts,  and  Sorceries,  wickedly  and'
FellOnioufly  hathufed,  practiced,  and  exercifed  at,  and  within  theTown-
fliip  of  Salem,  in  the  County  of  EJfex  aforefaid,  in,  upon,  and  aga'nft
one  Mary  Wblcctt,  of  Salem  Village,  in  the  County afore faid,  fingle  Wo-
man ;  by  which  laid  wicked  Arts,  the  faid  Mary  Wolcott,  the  faid  Thirty,
firft  Day  of  May,  in  the  Fourth  Year  as  abovefaid,  and  divers  other  days
and.  times,  as  w«ll  before  as  after,  was  and  is  Tortured,  Afflicted,  Pined,
Con  fumed,  Wafted  and  Tormented  ;  and  alfo  for  fundry  other  Ads  of.
Witchcrafts,  by  faid  Elizabeth  How  ;  committed  and  done  before  and  fince
that  time,  againft  the  Peace  of  our  Soveraign  Lord  and  Lady,  the  King
and  Queen,  and  againft  the  form  of  the  Statute,,  in  that  caie  made  and
provided..

WitnefTes,  Mary  JVolcott,,  Ann  Putnam,  Abigail  Williams,  Samuel  Pearly
and  his  Wife  Rgth,  Jofeph  Andrews,  and  Wife  Sarah,  John  Sherrin,
Jcjcph  S/ifford,  Francis  Lane,  Lydia  Fofter,  Ifaac  Cummins,  Junior.

There  was  alfo  a  fecond  Indictment  for  afflicting  of  Mercy  Lewis*

WitnefTes,  Mercy  Lewis,  Mary  Wolcott,,  Abigail  Williams,  Ann  Putnam ,...
Samuel  Pearly  and  Wife,  Jofeph  Andrews  and  Wife,  John  Sherrin",
Jofeph  S'afford,  F/anis  Lane,  Lydia  Fofter,


The


Part  5%  E!i2abeth  Hows  Try  ah  133

The  Tryal  of  Elizabeth  How,  June, 30. 1692.  As  is  Printed,  InfVonders
of  the  Invifible  World,  from  P. 126.  to  P.  132,  inclusively.

1.  TjLi^abstk  How,  pleading,  not  Guilty,  to  the  Indictment  of  Witch-
*-'  crafts,  then  charged  upon  her ;  the  Court,  according  to  the  ufual
proceeding  of  the  Courts  in  England-^  in  fuch  Cafes,  began  with  hearing
the  Depolition  of  feveral  Afflicted  People,  who  were  grievoufly  torment-
ed by  lenfible  and  evident  Witchcrafts,  and  all  complained  of  thePrifoner,
as  the  caufe  of  their  trouble.  It  was  alfo  found  that  the  Suffers  were  not
able  to  bear  her  look,  as  likewife,  that  in  their  greateft  fwoons,  they  di-
itinguifhed  her  touch  from  other  Peoples,  being  thereby  railed  out  of
them.

And  there  was  other  Teftimcny  of  People  to  whom  the  fhape  of  this
How,  gave  trouble  Nine  or  Ten  Years  ago.

2.  It  has  been  a  moft  ufual  thing  for  the  bewitched  perfons  at  the  fame
time  that  the  Spectres  representing  the  Witches,  Troubled  them  to  be
vifited  with  Apparitions  of  Ghefts,  pretending  to  have  been  murdered  by
the  Witches  then  reprefented.  And  iometimes  the  con  fefTions  of  the  Witches
afterwards  acknowledged  thofe  very  Murders,  which  thefe  Apparitions-
charged  upon  them  ;  altho  they  had  never  heard  what  Information  had
been  given  by  the  Sufferers.

There  were  fuch  Apparitions  of  Ghofts  teftificd  by  fome  of  theprefent-
Sufferers,  and  the  Ghofts  affirmed,  that  this  How  had  murdered  them  :
which  things  were  fearM,  but  not  proved.

3.  This  Hew  had  made  fome  attempts  of  Joining  to  the  Church,  at  Ipf-
wicb,  feveral  Years  ago  ;  but  fhe  was  denied  an  Admiflion  into  trjat  holy
Society,  partly  thro  a  fufpicion  of  Witchcraft,  then  urged  agalnft  her*
And  there  now  Game  in^Teftimony,  of  preternatural  Mhchiefs,  prefently
befalling  fome  that  had  been Ihftrumental  to  debar  her  from  the  Com-
munion whereupon  fhe  was  intruding.

4.  There  was  a  particular  DepOfition  of  Jofcph  Sajford,  that  his  Wife
had  conceived  an  extream  Averfion,  to  this  How,  on  the  reports  of  her
Witchcrafts  •  but  How%  one  day  taking  her  by  the  hand,  and  faying,  I
believe  you  are  not  Ignorant  of  the  great  fcandal,  that  I4ye  under ,  by  an  Evil
report  raifed  upon  me..  She  immediately,  unreasonably,  and  unperfwade-
ably,  even  like  one  Inchanted,  began  to  take  this  Womans  part.  How
being  foon  after  propounded,  as  defiring  an  Admiflion  to  the  Table  of.
the  Lord,  fome  of  the  Pious  Brethren  we#e  unfatisfied  about  her.  The
Elders  appointed  a  meeting,  to  hear  matters  objected  againft  her-;  and  no
arguments  in  the  World  could  hinder  this  Good  wife  $ajfordr  from  going
to  the  Le&ure.  She  did  indeed  promile  with  much  ador  that  fhe  would
not  gatothe  Ghwdhmeeting ;  yet  flie  could  not  refrain  going  thither  alfo0


j  34  Elizabeth  Hows  Tryal  Part  5.

How's  affairs  there  were  fo  canvafed,  that  fhe  came  off  rather  Guilty,
than  cleared  ;  ncverthelefs  Good  wife  Safford  could  not  forbear  taking  her
by  the  Hand,  and  faying,  lh»  you  are  condemned  before  Men,  ycu  are  jufti-
fed  before  God.  She  was  quickly  taken  in  a  very  ftrange  manner  ;  Fran-
rick,  Raving,  Raging,  and  crying  out,  Goody  How  muft  come  into  the
Church  ;  Jloe  is  a  precious  Saint ,  and  t ho  fhe  be  condemned  before  Men,  fhe  is
jiiftifie.it  before  God.  So  fhe  continued  for  the  fpace  of  two  or  three  hours ;
and  then  fell  into  a  Trance.  But  coming  to  her  felf,  (he  cried  out,  Ha  !
f  was  miftak$n  \  and  afterwards  again  repeated,  Ha  !  I  was  miftaken  \
being  asked  by  a  ftander  by,  Wherein  ?  (he  replied,  I  thought  Goo dy  How,
had  been  a  precious  Saint  of  God,  but  now  J  fee  is  a  Witch  $  fine  has  bewitched
me  and  my  Child,  and  we  Jhall  never  be  well,  till  there  be  Teftimony  for  her,
th.it  floe  may  be  taken  into  the  Church.

And  How  fa  id  afterwards,  That  fhe  was  very  forry  to  fee  Safford  at  the
Church-rnzcting  mentioned.  Safford  after  this,  declared  her  felf  to  be  Affiled
by  the  fh-.p  of  How,  and  from  that  fhape  fhe  endured  many  miferies.

5.  John  How,  Brother  to  the  Hufbandof  the  Prifoner  teftifiedrthat  he  re-
filling to  accompany  the  Prifoner  unto  her  Examination,  as  was  by  her
dciired,  immediately  fome  of  his  Cattle,  were  bewitched  to  Death,  leap-
ing Three  or  four  Foot  high,  turning  about,  fqueaking,  falling,  and  dy-
ing at  once  ;  and  going  to  cut  off  an  Ear,  for  an  ufe,  that  might  as  well
perhaps  have  been  omitted,  the  Hand  wherein  he  held  his  Knife,  was
taken  very  Numb ;  and  fo  it  remained,  and  full  of  pain  for  feveralDays;
being  not  well  at  this  very  time.  And  he  fufpe&ed  this  Prifoner,  for  the
Author  of  it.

6.  Nehcmiah  Abbot  teftified,  that  unufual  and  mifchievous  accidents
would  befall  his  Cattle,  whenever  he  had  any  difference  with  this  Prifoner.
Once  particularly,  (he  wifhed  his  Ox  choaked,  and  within  a  little  while,
that  Ox  was  choaked  with  a  Turnip  in  his  Throat.  At  another  time,  re-
futing to  lend  his  Horfe,  at  the  requeft  of  her  Daughter,  the  Horfe  was
in  a  preternatural  manner  abufed.  And  feveral  other  odd  things  of  that
kind  were  teftified.

,  7.  There  came  in  Teftimony,  that  one  Goodwife  Sherwin,  upon  fome
difference  with  How  was  bewitched,  and,  that  (he  died,  charging  this
How  of  hiving  an  hand  in  her  Death.  And  that  other  People  had  their
Barrels  of  Drink  unaccountably  mifchiev'd,  fpoiled,  and  fpilt  upon  their
difplea£ng  of  her.

The  things  in  themfelves  were  trivial ;  but  there  being  fuch  a  courfe
of  them,  it  made  them  the  more  to  be  oonlidered.  Among  others,
Martha  Wood  gave  her  teftimony,  that  a  little  after,  her  Father  had  been
employed  in  gathering  an  account  of  this  How's  Converfation,  they  once
and  again  loft  great  quantities  of  Drink,  put  of  their  Velfels,  in  fuch  a


Part  j.  Elizabeth  Hows  Tryal.  \\$

manner,  as  they  could  afcribe  to  nothing  but  Witchcraft.  As  alfo  that
How  giving  her  fOme  Apples,  when  the  had  eaten  of  them,  (he  was  taken
with  a  very  ftrange  kind  of  a  maze,  in  fo  much  that  (he  knew  not  what
(he  faid  or  did.

8.  There  was  likewileaCluftercf  Depofitions,that  one  Ifaac  Cummlngs,
refufing  to  lend  his  Mare,  unto  the  Husband  of  this  How  ;  the  Mare  was
within  a  Day  or  two,  taken  in  a  ftrange  condition.  The  beaft.  feemed
much  abufed  ;  being  bruifed,  as  if  (he  had  been  running  over  the  Rocks,
and  marked  where  the  Bridle  went,  as  if  burnt  with  a  red  hot  Bridie.
Moreover  one  ufing  a  Pipe  of  Tobacco  for  the  cure  of  the  Beaft,  a  blew
flame  ifTued  out  of  her,  took  hold  of  he  hair,  and  not  only  fpread  and
burnt  on  her,  but  it  alfo  flew  upwards  towards  the  Roof  of  theBirn,and
had  like  to  have  let  the  Barn  on  fire^ And  the  Mare  dy'd  very  fuddenly.

9.  Timothy  Perly  and  his  Wife,  teftided,  not  only  that  unaccountable
Mifchiefs  befel  their  Cattle,  upon  their  having  of  differences  with  this
Prifoner  ;  but  alfo  that  they  had  a  Daughter  deftroyed  by  Witchcrafts ;
which  Daughter  ftill  charged  How,  as  the  caufe  of  her  Affliction  :  and  it
was  no'-ed,  that  (he  would  be  ftruck  down,  whenever  How  were  fpoken
of.  She  was  often  endeavoured  to  be  thrown  into  the  Fire,  and  into  the
Water,  in  her  ftrange  Fitts;  tho  her  Father  had  corrected,  for  charging
How  with  bewitching  her,  yet  (as  was  teftified  by  others  alfo  J  (he  faid  (he
was  fure  of  it,  and  muft  d\e  (landing  to  it.  Accordingly  (he  charged  How
to  the  very  death  ;  and  faid,  Tho  How  could  AjjliEl  and  Torment  her  Body,
yet  fhe  could  not  hurt  her  Soul,  and  that  the  truth  of  this  matter  would  appear,
when  fhe  fhould  be  dead  and  gone.

io«  Francis  Lane  teftified,  that  being  hired  by  the  Husband  of  this  How,
to  get  him  a  parcel  of  Pofts  and  Rails,  this  Lane  hired  John  Pearly  to  affift
him.  This  Prifoner  then  told  Lane,  thar.  (he  believed  the  Pofts  and  Rails
would  not  do,  becaufe  John  Pearly  helped  him  ;  but  that  if  he  had  got
them  alone,  without  John  Pearly  shelp,  they  might  have  done  well  enough.
When  J  arms  How  came  to  receive  bis  Pofts  and  Rails  of  Lane,  How  taking
them  up  by  the  Ends,  they,  tho  good  and  found  yet  unaccountably  broke
off,  fo  that  Lane  was  forced"  to  get  Thirty  or  Forty  more.  And  this  Pri-
foner being  informed  of  itt  (he  faid,  She  told  him  fo  before  ;  becaufe  Pearly
helft  ^bout  them.

11.  Afterwards  there  came  in  the  Confeflions,  of  feveral  other  (peni-
tenr)  Witches,  which  affirmed  this  How  to  be  one  of  thofe,  who  with
them  had  been  baptized  by  the  Devil  in  the  River,  at  Newberry-Falls  :
before  which  he  made  them  there  kneel  down  by  the  B*ink  of  the  River,
and  Worihip  him,


the


136  Martha  Carry ers  Indidment.  Part  5.

The  Inxlidment  of  Martha  Carryer.

EtTex  ff  Anno  I{egni  Rggis  &  I{egin£  Willielmi  &  Mar  id,  nunc

Angli<e,  &c.  quarto*—

THE  Jurors  for  our  Soveraign  Lord  and  Lady  xhe  King  and  Queen,
prei'ent,  That  Martha  Carryer ;  Wife  of  Thomas  Carryer  of  Andover,  in
the  County  of  Ejfex,  Husbandman,  The  Thirty  firft  Day  of  May,  in
the  fourth  Year  of  the  Reign  of  our  Soveraign  Lord  and  Lady  William
and  Mary,  by  the  Grace  of -God,  otEngland,  Scotland,  France  and  Ireland,
King  and  Queen,  Defenders  of  the  Faith,  &c.  And  divers  -other  days  and
Limes,  as  well  before  as  after,  certain  deteftable  Arts,  called  Witchcrafts,
and  Sorceries,  Wickedly  and  Felionioufly  hath  uled,  pradifed,  and  exer-
cifed,  at  and  within  the  Town-fhip  of  Salem,  in  the  County  of  Ejfex
aforefaid,  in,' upon,  and  againft  one  Mary  Wolcott  of  Salem- Village,
Single  Woman,  in  the  County  of  Ejfex  aforefaid;  by  which Laid  wicked
Arts  the  faid  Mary  Wolcott,  the  Thirty  firft  Day  of  May,  in  the  fourth
Year  aforeiaid,  and  at  divers  other  days  and  times,  as  well  before  as  after,
was  and  is  Tortured,  Afflided,  Pined,  Confumed,  Wafted  and  Torment-
ed ;  againft  the  Peace  of  our  Soveraign  Lord  and  Lady,  William  and
May,  King  and  Queen,  of  England ->  Their  Crown  and  Dignity,  and
againft  the  Form  of  the  Statute,  in  that  Cafe  made  and  provided.

WitnefTes,  Mary  Wolcott, Elizabeth  Hubbard,  Ann  Putnam.

:  There  was  alfo  a  Second  Indidment  for  aiHiding  of  EU%.  Hubbard,
by  Witchcraft.  Witneflfes,  Elizabeth  Hubbard,  Mary  Wolcott,  Ann  Putnam,
Mary  Warrin.

IheTryab'of  Martha  Carryer, Auguft  2.  169a.  As  may  be  [ten  in  Won-
ders of  the  Invisible  World,  from  P.  132, to  138.

1.  "AAArtha  Carryer,  was  Indided  for  the  bewitching  of  certain  perfons,
*  "**  according  to  the  form  ufual  in  fuch  Cafes  :  Pleading  not  Guilty
to  her  Indidment ;  there  were  firft  brought  in  a  confiderable  number  of
the  Bewitched  perfons  j  who  not  only  made  the  Court  fenfible  of  an  hor-
rid Witchcraft  committed  upon  them,  but  alio  depofed,  That  it  was  j
Martha  Qarryer,  or  her  fhape,  that  grievoufly  tormented  them,  by  biting, '
pr' eking,  pinching  and  choaking  them.  It  was  further  depofed,  .that'
while  this  Carryer  was  on  her  Examination  before  the  Magiftrates,  the
poor  People  were  fo  tortured,  that  every  one  expeded  their  Death  upon
the  very.ipotj  but  that  upon  the  binding  of  Carryer  they  were  eafed.

Moreover  J


Parr  5T.  Martha  Carryers Trjal.  137

Moreover  the  looks  of  Carrier  then  laid  the  Affli&cd  People  for  dead,  and
her  Touch,  if  her  Eyes  at  the  lame  time  were  off  them,  railed  them  again.
Which  things  were  alfo  now  ieen  upon  her  Tryal.  And  it  was  teftified,
that  upon  the  mention  of  feme  having  their  Kecks  twlfted  aimed  round
by  the  fhape  of  this  Carreer,  fhe  replied,  Its  no  matter,  tho  their  Nccfyftad
been  twiftcd  quite  off.

z.  Before  the  Tryal  of  this  Prifoner,  feveral  of  her  own  Children, had
frankly  and  fully  confefTed  not  only  that  they  were  Witches  themlelves,
but  that  this  their  Mother  had  made  them  fo.  This  ConfeiTion  the)  made
j  with  great  fhows  of  Repentance,  and  with  much  Demonftration  of  Truth.
They  related  Place,  Time,Occafion  ;  they  gave  an  Account  of  Journeys,
Meetings,  and  Mifchiefs  by  them  performed  ;  and  were  very  credible  in
what  they  laid.  Neverthelefs,  this  Evidence  was  not  produced  againft
the  Prifoner  at  the  Bar,  in  as  much  as  there  was  other  Evidence  enough
to  proceed  upon.

3.  Btnj.  Abbot  gave  in  his  Teftimony,  That  la  ft  March  was  a  Twelve
Month,  this  Carryer  was  very  angry  with  him,  upon  laying  out  feme
Land  near  her  Husbands.  Her  expreflions  in  th  s  Anger  were,  That  floe
would  fticl^  as  cloje  to  Abbot,  as  the  Bay\  (luck,  to  the  Tree  ;  and  that  he
[hould  repent  of  it  afore  feven  Tears  came  to  an  end  Jo  as  Doctor  \?refcot  fiioufd
never  cure  him.  Thefe  words  were  heard  by  others,  befides  Abbot  him-
felf,  who  alfo  heard  her  lay,  She  would  hold  his  Nofe  as  clvfe  to  the  Grind-
(tone,  as  ever  it  was  held\fince  his  name  was  Abbot.  Prefently  after  this,
he  was  taken  with  a  fwelling  in  his  Foot,  and  then  with  a  Pain  in  his
Side,  and  exceedingly  tormented.  It  bred  unto  a  Sore,  which  was  lanced.
oy  Dr.  Prefcot,  and  feveral  Gallons  of  Corruption  ran  out  of  it.  For  fm
Weeks  it  continued  very  badj  and  then  another  Sore  bred  in  his  Groin,
which  was  alio  lanced  by  Dr.  Pre/cot.  Another  Sore  bred  in  his  Groin
which  was  likewise  Cut,  and  put  him  to  very  great  mifery.  He  was
wrought  unto  Death's  door,  and  fo  remained  until  Carryer  was  taken,  and
:arried  away  by  the  Conftable.  From  which  very  day  he  began  to  mend,
md  fo  grew  better  every  day,  and  is  well  ever  fince.

Sarah  Abbot  alfo  his  Wife  teftified,  that  her  Husband  was  not  only  alt
this  while  Afflicted  in  his  Body  J  but  alfo  that  ftrange,  extraordinary  and
jnaccountable  calamities  befel  his  Cattle;  their  Death  being  fuch  as  they
could  guefs  at  no  Natural  Reafon  for.

4.  Aliin  Toothaker  teftified,  that  i\ichard  the  Son  of  Martha  Carryer,  ha-
ving fome  difference  with  him,  pull'd  him  down  by  the  Hair  of  the  Head,
when  he  rofe  again,  he  was  going  to  ftrike  at  Richard  Carrier  ,  but  fell
down  flat  on  his  back  to  the  ground,  and  had  not  power  j;o  ftir  Hand  or
foot,  until  he  told  Carryer  he  yielded ;  and  then  he  faw  the  ftape  of
Martha  Carreer,  go  orT  his  Breaft.

T  Thi*


j  38  Martha  Carryers*  TryaL  Part  5-*

This  Tooihxksr  had  received  a  wound  in  the  Wars,  and  he  now  teftiikdJ
that  Martha  Carreer  told  him,  He  fhallrtcier  be  cured. Jr.ft  afore  the  ap-
prehending of  Carryer,  he  could  thruft  a  Knitting-Needle  into  his  wound
four  Inches  deep ;  but  prefently  after  her  being  feized,  he  was  thoroughly
healed.

He  further  teftified,  that  when  Carryer  and  he  fome times  were  at  vari-
ance, fhe  would  clap  her  Hands  at  him  and  fay.  He  floeuld  get  nothing  by
it.  Whereupon  he  feveral  times  left  his  Cattle,  by  ftrangeDeaths,where-
cf  no  natural  caufes  could  be  given.

5.  Joh?i  Rgger  alfo  teftified,  that  upon  the  threatning  words  of  this  ma-
licious Carryer,  his  Cattle  would  be  ftrangely  bewitched  j  as  was  more
particularly  then  defcribed.

6.  Samuel  Pre  ft  on  teftified,  that  about  two  Years  ago,  having  feme  dif-
ference with  Martha  Carryer,  he  loft  a  Cow  in  a  ftrange,  preternatural,
unufual  manner  ;  and  about  a  Month  after  this,  the  (aid  Carryer,  having
again  fome  difference  with  him,  (he  told  him,  He  had  lately  left  a  Cow,
and  it  fhiould  not  be  long  before  he  left  another  !  which  accordingly  came  to
pafs  ;  for  he  had  a  thriving  and  Well  kept  Cow,  which  without  any
Jkaown  caufe  quickly  fell  down  and  died.

7.  Phebe  Chandler  teftified,  that  about  a  Fortnight  before  the  Appre-
henfion  of  Martha  Cairyer,  on  a  Lords  Day,  while  the  Pfalm  was  finging,
i«  she  Church,  this  Carryer  then  took  her  by  the  Shoulder,  and  flaking
her,  asked  her,  Where  floe  lived  ?  fhe  made  her  no  Anfwer>altho  as  Carryer  %
who  lived  next  door  to  her  Fathers  Houfe,  could  not  in  Reafon  but  know
who  fnewas.  Quickly  after  this,  as  the  was  at  feveral  times  crofting  the
Fields  fhe  heard  a  Voice,  that  fhe  took  to  be  Martha  Carryers,  and  itfeem'd,
as  if  it  were  over  her  head.  The  Voice  told  her,  She  foeuld  vpithin  two
tY  three  Days  be  Pcifond  :  Accordingly  within  fuch  a  little  time,  one  halt
of  her  Right  Hand  became  greatly  fwollen  and  very  painful;  as  alfo  part,
of  her  Face ;  whereof  fhe  can  give  no  Account  how  it  came.  It  continu-
ed very  bad  for  fome  days  ;  and  feveral  times  flnce  fhe  has  had  a  great
pain  "in  her  Breaft  ;  and  been  fo  feized  on  her  Legs,  that  fhe  has  hardly
been  able  to.  go.'  She  added  that  lately,  going  well  to  the  Houfe  of
God,  fychard  the  Son  of  Martha  Carryer,  look'd  very  earneftiy  upon  her,
and  immediately  her  Hand  which  had  formerly  been  Pojfoned,  as  is  a-
Ikrvefaid,  began  to  pain  her  greatlyy  and  fhe  had  a  ftrange  burning  at  her
Stomach;  bat  was  then  ftruck  deaf.Wo  that  fhe  could  not  hear  any  of
the  Prayer,  or  Singing,  till  the  two  or  tJree  laft  words  Of  the  Pfalm.

8.  One  Fofter, who  confeffed  her  own  (hare  in  the  Witchcraft, foc-T
which  the  Prifoner  ftood  Indicted,  affirmed,  that  fhe  had  ken  the  Prifoner  I
at  fome  of  their*Wltch~meetings,.  and  that  it  was  this  Carryer, who  per-
vaded her  t<^  be  a  Witch, She  confeffed  that  the  Devil  carried,  them  on


Part  5*.  Martha  Carryers  Tryal  *  }  9

a  Pole,  to  a  Witch-meeting,  but  the  Pole  broke,  and  (he  hanging  about
Carryers  Neck,  they  both  fell  down,  and  Are  then  received  an  hurt  by  the
fall, whereof  fhe  was  not  at  this  very  time  recovered.

9,  One  Lacyi  who  likewife  confefled  her  (hare  in  this  Witchcraft,  now
teftified  that  (he  and  the  Prifoner,  were  once  bodily  prefent,  at  a  Wirch-
meeting  in  Saletn-Vilhge,  and  that  (he  knew  the  Prifoner  to  be  a  Witch,
and  to  have  been  at  a  Diabolical  Sacrament,  and  that  the  Prifoner  was
the- undoing  of  her  and  her  Children,  by  enticing  them  into  the  Snare  of
doe  Devil.

io.  Another  Lacy,  who  alfo  confefTed  her  (hare  in  this  Wjtchcraft,now
teftified,  that  the  Prifoner  was  at  the  W>tch-meeting,  in  &«/««- Village,
where  they  had  Bread  and  Wine  admmiftred  unto  them.

ii.  In  the  time  of  this  Prifoners  Tryal, one  Sufana  Shclden, in  open/
Court,  had  her  Hands  unaccountably  tied  together,  with  a  Wheel- band,
fo  faft,  that  without  cutting,  it  could  not  be  loofed. It  was  done  by  a
Spectre  ;  and  the  Sufferer  aiErm'd,  it  was  the  Prifpners.

Memorandum.  This  Rampant  Hag,  Martha  Q-rryer,  was  the  perfon  of
whom  the  Confeflions  of  the  Witches,  and  of  her  own  Children,  among
the  reft,agreed,that  theDevil  had  promifed  her,(he  (hould  be  Queen  of  Hell.

Thus  far  the  Account  given  in  Wonders  of  the  Invifihfe  World \  in  which
fetting  afidefuch  words  as  thefe,  in  the  Tryal  of  G.  B.  viz.  fjlfc^,  (^-)
the  Witnejfes  were  enough  to  fix  the  charatter  of  a  Witch  upon  him.

In  the  Tryal  of  Bijhop,  thefe  words,  [but  there  was  no  need  ofthem^  i.e.
of  further  Teftimony.

In  the  Tryal  of -How,  where  it  is  fa  id,  [and  there  came  in  Teftimony
of  preternatural  Mifchiefs,  prefently  befalling  fome  that  had  been  inftru-
menral  to  debar  her  from  the  Communion,whereupon  (he  was  intruding.]
Mirtin  iscairdfone  of  the  moft  impudent,  fcurrilous,  wicked  Creatures
in  the  World.]  In  his  Account  of  Martha  Carryer,  he  is  pleafed  to  call  her
[a  i\ampant  Hagf]  &c.

Thefe  ExpreSions  as  they  manifeft,  that  he  wrote  more  like  an  Advo-
cate than  an  Hiftorian  ;  fo  alfo  that  thofe  that  were  his  Imployers,  were
not  miftaken  in  their  choice  of  him  for  that  work,  however  he  may  have
mift,  it  in  other  thing?.

As  in  his  owning  (in  the  Tryal  of  G.  B.)  That  the  Teftimony >  oj r  the >be-
witehed,  and  confejfors  was  not  enough  again  ft  the  Accufed,  for  it  is  known,
that  not  only  in  New-England,  fuch  Evidence  has  been  taken  for  fufficient,
but  alfo  in  England,  as  himfelf  there  owns,  and  will  alfo  hold  true  of
Scotland,  &c.  they  having  proceeded  upon  fuch  Evidence,  to  the  taking
away  of  the  Lives  of  many,  to  afTert  that  this  is  not  enough,  is  to  tell  th-
World,  that  fuch  Executions  were  but  fo  many.  Bloody  Murders;  whicir  '
furely  was  not  his  intent  to  fay.  • ,,T,i  Ha*


J  4°  Law  emfted  agafofl  Wmhcraft*  Part  5.

His  telling  that  the  Court  began  to  think  that  Burrough  ftept  afide  to
put  on  Invisibility,  is  a  rendring  them  (o  mean  Philbiophers,  and  fuch
weak  Chriftians,,  as  to  be  fit  to  be  im poled  upon  by  any  filly  pretender.

Hs  calling  the  Evidence  againft  ftouivial,and  others  againft  Bitmngh,
he  accounts  no  part  of  his  Conviction  ;  and  that  of  lifting  a  Gun  with
©ie  Finger,  its  being  not  msdeuic  of  as  Evidence,  rerders  the  whole  but
the  tnots£  perplext.  (Not  :o  mention  the  many  raiftakes  therein  contained).

Yet  all  this  f  and  more  that  might  have  been  hinted  at  5  does  not  hinder,
fern  that  his  Account  of  the  manner  of  Tryais  of  thole  for  Witchcraft,  is
as  fekhfn!  Iy  related  as  any  Tiyals  of  that  kind,  that  was  ever  yet  made
$ui>Iidc£  ami  it  may  alto  be  reatonably  thought  that  there  was  as  eareroi
m  Saaanyi  and  as  iinc|uelrioncI  Evidences  improved,  as  had  been  for-
merly ufed  in  the  Tryais  of  others,  for  fuch  crimes  in  other  places.  Tbo
indeed  a  fecond  part  might  be  very  ufeful,  to  fct  forth  which  was  the  Evi-
dence Ccnvi&ive  in  thefe  Tryais,  for  it  is  not  fuppofed,  that  Rcmantick
/&r  Ridiculous  ftories  fhould  have  any  influence,  iuch  as  biting,  a  Spc&rcs
lunger,  fo  that  the  Blood  flowed  out,  or  fuch  as  Sbattocl£s  Story  of  1 2
Tears  ftanding,  which  yet  was  prefJftly  18  Years  or  more,  and  vera
iisti  of  that  excellent  Memory,  as  to  be  able  to  recall  a  fmall  difference
his  Wife  had  with  another  Woman,  when  Eighteen  Years  were  paft.

As  it  is  not  to  be  fuppofed)  that  fuch  as  thefe  could  Influence  any  judge
or  Jury  v  lb  notunkindnefs  to  relations,  or  God's  having  given  to  one  Man
more  ftrengch  than  ro  fome  others,  the  over-fetting  of  Carts,  or  the  death
of  Cattle,  nor  yet  Excrefcencies  (cali'd  Tets-^  nor  little  bits  of  Rags  tied
sogether  (c&\Y&  Poppets.)  Much  lefs  any  perfons  illnefs,  or  having  their
Cioaths  rent,  when  a  Spe&re  has  been  well  banged,  much  Jefs  die  burn-
ing the  Marcs  Fart,  mentioned  in  the  Tryal  of  How,

None  of  thefe  being  in  the  leaft  capable  of  proving  the  Indictment ;
The  luppofed  Criminals  were  frd  idled  for  Afflicting,  (3c.  fuch  and  fuch
particular  perfons  by  Witchcraft,  to  which  none  of  thefe  Evidences  have
one  word  to  fay,  and  the  Afflicted  and  Confeffors  being  declared  not
enough,  the  matter  needs  yet  further,  explaining.

But  to  proceed,  the  General  Court  having  fat  and  enacted  Laws,  par-
ticularly one  againft  Witchcraft,  affigning  the  Penalty  of  Death  to  any
that  fhail  feed,  reward,  or  imptoy,  &p.  Evil  Spirits,  tho  it  has  not  yet
been  explained  what  is  intended  thereby,  or  what  it  is  to  feed,  reward,
or  implo^'  Devils,  &e~  yet  fome  of  the  Legiflators  have  given  this  inftead
«f  an-  Explanation^  that  they  had  therein  but  Copied  the  Law  of  another  ■
Country .

January,  3.  By  vertue  of  an  Adr.  of  the  General  Court,  the  firft  Superi-
or Court  was  held  at  Salem*  for  the  County  of  EJfex,  the  Judges  ap-
pointed were,  Mr.  fVMZamStougbton  (the  Lieutenant  GovernourJ  Thmas

Danfortbi


Part  $.  Sarah  Daftons  TryaL  141

Duiforth,  John  I{jcbzrds%  Wait Winthorf,  and  Sinmel  Sew  all,  Efq  aires.
Where  Ignoramus  Was  found  upon  the  feveral  Bills  of  Indidtrnent  againft
Thirty,  ana  Biff*  Vera  againft  Twenty  fix  more  ;  of  all  thefe  Three  only
were  found  Guilty,  by  the  Jewry  upon  Tryal,  two  of  which  were  fas
appears  by  their  Behaviour,)  the  raoft  Senfelefs  and  Ignorant  Creatures
that  could  be  found ;  befides  which  it  does  not  appear,  what  came  in  a-
gainft  thole  more  than  againft  the  reft  that  were  acquitted.

The  Third  was  the  Wife  of:  Wardwctl,  who  was  cne  of  the  Twenty
Executed,  and  it  ieemsthey  hsd  both  confefled  themfelves  Guilty;  but  he
retracling  his  laid  Confcfiion,  was  tried  and  Executed ;  it  is  fuppoied
that  this  Woman  fearing  her  Husbands  fate,  was  not  fo  ftifF  in  her  deny-
a!s  of  her  former  Ccnfcfiion,  fuch  as  it  was.  Theie  Three  received  Sen-
tence of  Death.

At  thefe  Tryals  feme  of  the  Jewry  made  Inquiry  of  the  Court,  .what
Account  they  ought  to  make  of  the  Spectre  Evidence  r  and  received  for
Ahfwer  [as  much  as  of  Chips  in  Wort.]

January^  31.  1 693.  The  Superior  Court  began  at  CbariejtcT%nr  for
the  County  of  Middfefew  Mr.  Stougbton,  Mr.  Danforrh>  Mr.  Winthorpy
and  Mr.  Scwalt  Judges,  where  feveral  had  Ignoramus  returned  upon  their
Bills  of  Indi&ment,  and  BHU  Vera  upon  others.

In  the  time  the  Court  fat,  word  was  brought  in,  that  a  Reprieve  was
fent  to  Salcm>  and  had  prevented  the  Execution  of  Seven  ot  thofe  that
were  there  Condemned,  which  fo  moved  the  chief  Judge,  that  he  faid
to  this  effect,  We  were  in  a  way  to  have  cleared  the  Land  of  thefe,  Sx.  who
it  is  obftrufti  the courfe of Jufiice  I  know  not  ;  the  Lord  be  merciful  to  the
Countrcy, and  fo  went  orF  the  Bench,  and  came  no  more  that  Court  :
The  moft  remarkable  of  theTryals,  was  of  Sarah  Dafton,  (he  was  a  Wo-
man of  about  70  or  80  Years  of  Age,  To  uflier  in  her  Tryal,  a  report
went  before,  that  if  there  were  a  Witch  in  the  World  fhe  was  one,  as
having  been  fo  accounted  of, for  20  or  30  Years;  which  drew  many
People  from  Bo(ion,  &?>.  to  hear  her  Tryal.  There  were  a  multitude  of
WitnefTes produced  againft  her; but  what  Teftimony  they gave  irt
feemed  wholly  forreign,  as  of  accidents,  illnefs,  £?c.  befalling  them>  or
theirs,  after  fome  Quarrel;,  what  thefe  teftified,  was  much  of  it  of  Actions
faid  to  be  done  20  Years  before  that  time. The  Spedtre  Evidence  was*
not  made  ufe  of  in  thefe  Tryalsr  fo  that  the  Jewry  foon  brought  her  irv
not  Guilty,  her  Daughter  and  Grand- daughter, and  the  reft  that  iwere
then  tried  were  alfo  acquitted. After  (he  was  cleared  Judge  Danforth
Admoni(hed  her  in  thefe  words, Woman*  Woman,  repent,  there  are  Jhrewd
things  come  in  againft  you  ;  (he  was  remanded  to  Prilon  for  her  Fees,  and
there  in  a  Ihort  time  expired. One  of  Bofton  that  had  been  at  the  Tryal
of  Dajlon,  being  the  fame  Evening  in  company  with  one  of  the  Judges

in.


*42<  Mary  Watkins  Tryal  Part  5-.

in  a'publick  place,  acquainted  him  that  Tome  that  had  been  both  at  the
Tryals  at  Salem^  and  at  this  at  Cbaricftown,  had  aflerted  that  there  was
more  Evidence  againft  the  faid  'Daflcn,  than  againft  any  at  Sale???,  to
which  the  faid  Judge  conceeded,  faying,  That  it  was  Jo.  It  was  replied
by  that  peribn,  that  he  dare  give  it  under  his  hand  that  there  was  not  enough
come  in  againft  her  to  bear  a  juft  reproof.

Aprils  25.  1695,  The  firft  Superiour  Court  was  held  at  Bofton,  for
the  County  of  Suffolk*  the  Judges  were  the  Lieutenant  Governour,  Mr,
Danforth,  Mr.  Richards  and  Mr.  Sewall,  Elcjuires.

Where  ( beiides  the  acquitting  Mr.  John  A!din  by  Proclamation)  the
moft  remarkable  was,  what  related  to  Mary  Watkins >  who  had  been  a
Servant,  and  lived  about  Seven  Miles  from  Boftony  having  formerly  Ac-
cufed her  Miftrefs  of  Witchcraft,  and  was  fuppofed  to  be  diftradted,  fhe
was  threatned  if  (he  perfifted  in  fuch  Accusations  to  be  pun ifhed,  this
with  the  neceffary  care  to:  recover  her  Health,  had  that  good  efFed:,  that
fie  not  only  had  her  Health  reftored, but  alfo  wholly,  acquitted  her
Miftrefs  of  any  fuch  Crimes,  and  continued  in  Health  till  the  return  of
the  Year,  and  then  again  falling  into  Melancholly  humours  (he  was
found  ftrangling  her  felf ;  her  Life  being  hereby  prolonged,  flie  immedi-
ately accufed  her  feif  of  being  a  Witch  ;  was  carried  before  a  Magiftrate
and  committed.  At  this  Court  a  Bill  of  Indictment  was  brought  to  the
Grand  Jury  againft  her,  and  her  eonfeffion  upon  her  Examination  given
in  as  Evidence,  but  thMe  not  wholly  fatisfied  herewith,  fent  for  her, who
gave  fuch  account  of  her  Cclf,  that  they  f after  they  had  returned  into  the.
Court  to  ask  fome  Queftionsj  Twelve  of  them  agreed  to  find  Ignoramus,
but  the  Court  was  pieafed  to  fend  them  out  again,  who  again  at  coming
in  returned  it  as  before.

She  was  continued  for  fome  time  in  Prifon,  &c..  and  at  length  was
Sold  to  Virginia,  About  this  time  the  Prifoners  in  all  the  Prifons  were
releafed.

To  omit  here  the  mentioning  of  feveral  Wenches  in  Bofton,  &c,  who
pretended  to  be  Afflicted,  and  accufed  feveral,  the  Minifters  often  viiiting
them,  and  praying  with  them,  concerning  whofe  Affliction,  Narratives
are  in  being.  In  Manufcript  not  only  thele,  but  the  generality  of  thofe
Acculers  may  have  fince  convinced  the  Minifters  by  their,  vicious  icourfes,
thac  they  might  err  in  extending  too  much  Charity  to  them. • ■;*; ,

The  conchiflon  of  the  whole-  in  the  Mdffathnfbtts:  Colony  was,. !  Sir
Wiiiiani  Phips  Governour  being  calfd  home,  before  hewent  he  pardori'd
fuch  as  had  been  condemned,  for  which  they  gave  about :%o  ■ Shillings
each  to  the  Kings  Attorney.  : .'

In  Augutt -"1697.  The  Superiour  Cburtiat  at  Ha nford,  in  the  Colony

ofCQwieftkut,  where  one  Miftrefs  Ben&m  was  tr4eri  for  'Witchcraft,  (he

-  •■■> .  ... .. ...u,  -  ■  -had


Part  5?*  A  Faft  ? reclaimed. ;  14}

had  been  accufed  by  feme  Children  that  pretended- to  the  Spectral  fight ;
they  fetched  her  federal  rime*  for  Tecs ;  they  tried  the  Experiment  of
calling  her  into  the  Water,  and  after  this  fhe  was  Excommunicated  by
the  Minifter  of  iValUnsford.  Upon  her  Tr/al  nothing  material  appear-
ing againft  her,  fave  Spectre  Evidence,  (he  was  acqu -tted ■•,  as  alio  her
Daughter,  a  Girl  of  Twelve  or  Thirteen  Years  old,  who  had  been  like-''
w*lc  Accufed  ;  but  upon  renewed  Complaints  againft  them,  they  both
flew  into  N?w-Tot\  Government.
*  Before  this  the  Government  Iffued  forth  the  following  Proclamation.

■'  ' "  '  '  • . '  "  "

By  the  Honourable  the  Lieutenant  Govemour, Council  and  Apmbly  of  his  Ma-

jefties  Province  of  the  MaiTachufetts  Bay,  in  General  Court  Ajjcmbled,

WHereas  the  Anger  of  God  is  not  yet  turned  away,  but  his  Hand  is
{iili  ft  retched  our  againft  his  People  in  manifold  Judgments,  par-
ticularly in  drawing  put  to  fuch  a  length  the  troubles  of  Europe>.  by  a
perplexing  War  ;  and  more  efpecially,  refpecVing  our  feives  in  this  Pro-
vince, in  that  God  is  pleafed  ftill  to  go  on  in  diminiihing  our  Subftance,
cutting  fhort  our  Ha  r  veil,  blading  our  molt  promiiing  undertakings  more
ways  than  one,  un  feci  in  g  of  us,  and  by  his  more  Immediate  hand.fnatch-
ing  away  many  out  of  our  Embraces,  by  fudden  and  violent  Deaths,  even
at  this  time  when  the  Sword  is  devouring  fo  many  both  at  home  and  a-
broad,  and  that  after  many  days  of  pubiick  and  Solemn  addre/Ting  of
him.  And  altho  considering  the  many  $ins  prevailing  in  the  midft  of  us,
we  cannot  but  wonder  at  the  Patience  and  Mercy  moderating  thefe  Re-
bukes. ;  yet  we  cannot  but  aifo  fear  that  there  is  fomething  (till  wanting
to  accompany  our  Supplications.  And  doub-tlefs  there  are  fome  particu-
lar Sins,  which  God  is  Angry  with  our  If-ael  for,  that. have  not  been  duly^
feen  and  refented  by  us,  about  which  God  expects  to  be  fought,  if  ever
he  turn  again  our  Captivity.

Wherefore  it  is  Commanded  and  Appointed,  that  Ihii'fdaj  the  Four-
teenth  of  January  next,  be  obferyed  as  a  Day  of  Prayer,  with  Falling
throughout  this  Province,  ftrictly  forbidding  all  Servile  labour  thereon ;
that  fo  ail  Gods  People  may  offer  up  fervent  Supplications  unto  him,  for
the  Prefervation,  and  Profperity  of  his  Maj eft y's  Royal  Perfon  and  Go-
vernment, and  Succefs  to  attend  his  Affairs  both  at  home  and  abroad  ;
that  all  iniquity  may  be  put  away  which  hathftirred  Gods  Holy  jpalpufie
againft  this  Land  ;  that  he  would  (hew  us  what  we  know  not,  and.  help
us  wherein-  we  have  done  amifs  to  do  fo  rio  more  ;  and  efpecially  that
whatever  miftakes  on  either  hand  have  been  fallen  into,either  by  the  body
of  this  People,orany  orders  of  men,  referring  to  the  late  Tragedy,  raifed
among  us  by  Satan  and  his  Inftriu^Cftts,  thso  the  awful  Judgment^  of  God,

he


144  Jury-mens  Acknowledgment.  Part  £.

would  humble  us  therefore  and  pardon  all  the  Etrors  of  his  Servants  and
People,  that  defire  to  love  his  Name,  and  be  attoned  to  his  Land  ;  that
he  would  remove  the  Rod  of  the  wicked  from  off  the  Lot  of  the  Righte-
ous ;  that  he  would  bring  the  American  Heathen,  and  caufe  them  to  hear
and  obey  his  Voice.

Given  at  Bofton,  Decemb.  17.  i6$6,  in  the  %th  Tear  of  his  Majefties
%fign.  Ifaac  Addington,  Secretary.

Upon  the  Day  of  the  Fall  in  the  full  Aflembly,  at  the  South  Meeting-
Houte  in  Bofton,  one  of  the  Honourable  Judges,  who  had  fat  in  Judica-
ture in  Salem,  delivered  in  a  Paper,  ani  while  k  was  in  reading  ftood
up,  But  the  Copy  being  not  to  be  obtained  at  prefent,  It  can  only  be  re-
ported by  Memory  to  this  erTecl:,  vi\.  It  was  to  defire  the  Prayers  of  God's
People  for  him  and  his ,  and  that  God  having  vifited  his  Family,  &c.  he  was
aPprehenfive  that  he  might  have  fallen  into  feme  Errors  in  the  Matters  at
Salem,  and  fray  that  the  Guilt  of  Juch  Mijcarriages  may  not  he  imputed
cither  to  the  Country  in  general,  or  to  him  or  his  family  in  particular.

Some  that  had  been  of  feveral  Jewries,  have  given  forth  a  Paper,  Sign'd

with  their  own  hands-  in  thefe  words.
T/T/E  whpfe names  are  underwritten, being  in  the  Tear 1691,  called  to
** feme  as  Jurors,  in  Court  at  Salem, on  Tryal  of  many ; who  were  by
feme  fujpecied  Guilty  of  doing  AH  s  of  Witchcraft  upsn  the  Bodies  of fundry
psrjons:

We  confefs  that  we  our  felves  were  not  capable  to  underftand,  nor  able  to
withftand  the  myfterious  delufions  of  the  Powers  of  Darkpefstand  Prince  of  the
Air  ;  but  were  for  want  of  knowledge  in  our  felves ;  and  better  Information
from  others,  prevailed  with  to  take  up  withfuch  Evidence  agaitift  the  Accufed,
as  on  further  confederation,  and  better  Information,  we  juftly  fear  was  in-
efficient for  the  touching  the  Lives  of  any,  Deut.  i  7.-  6.  whereby  we  fear
we  have  been  inftrumental  with  others,  tho  Ignorantly  and  unwittingly y  to
bring  upon  our  felves,  and  this  People  of  the  Lord,  the  Guilt  of  Innocent
Blood  $  which  Sin  the  Lord  faith  in  Scripture,  he  would  not  pardon,  2  Kings
24.  4.  that  is  we  fuppofe  in  regard  of  his  temporal  Judgments.  We  do  there-
fore hereby  ftgnifie  to  all  in  general  (and  to  the fiirviving  Sufferers  in  efpecial)
our  deepjbife  of,  and  forrow  for  our  Errors,  in  atling  on  fuch  Evidence  to  the
condemning  of  any  per/on.

And  do  hereby  declare  that  we  juftly  fear  that  we  were  fadly  deluded  and
miftaken,  for  which  we  are  much  difauieted  and  diftreffed  in  our  minds  ;  and
do  therefore  humbly  beg  forgivenefs,  fir  ft  of  God  for  chriftys  fal(e  for  this  our
Error  j Andp ray  that  God  would  not  impute  the  guilt  tf  it  to  our  felves,  nor

others  j


Poflfcript.  145-

ethers  ;  and  we  alfo  pray  that  we  may  be  confldered  candidly,  and  aright  by
the  living  Sufferers,  °as  being  then  under  the  power  of  a  ftrong  and  general
Delufion,  utterly  unacquainted  with,  and  not  experienced  in  matters  cf  that
Nature.

We  do  heartily  asl^  jorgivenefs  of  you  ally  wham  we  have  jufth  offendedt
and  do  declare  according  to  cur  prefent  minds,  we  would  ncne  of  us  do  fuch
things,  again  on  fuch  grounds  for  the  whole  World  ;  praying  ycu  to  accept  of
this  in  way  of  Satisfaction  fir  our  Offence  ;  and  that  ycu  would  blefs  the  In-
hsritance  of  the  Lord, that  he  may  be  intreated  for  the  Land.

Foreman, Thomas  Fisk,  \ Thomas  Perly,  Senior.

William  Fisk,  /  \ John  Pebod y\

John  Batcheler,  x  JThomas  Perkins,

Thomas  Fisk,  Junior.x jSamuel  Sayer,
John  Dane, .  \(  Andrew  Elliott,

Jofeph  Evelith,  * Henry  Herrick,  Senior.


POSTSCRIPT.

Since  the  making  the  foregoing  Collections  of  Letters,  to  the  Reverend  Mr.
Cotton  Mather,  and  others,  Sec.  (which  as  yet  remain  unanfwered  )  a
Book  is  come to  hand  Intituled,

"T*HF.  Life  of  Sir  William  Phips,  Printed  in  London,  1697,  Which
*  Book,  tho  it  bears  not  the  Authors  name,  yet  the  Stile,  manner  and
natter  is  fuch,  that  were  there  no  other  demonftration  or  token  to  know
lim  by,  it  were  no  Witchcraft  to  determine  that  the  faid  Mr.  CM.  is
:he  Author  of  it.  But  that  he  that  has  encountred Enchantments,  and  gone
hro  the  Wonders  of  the  Tnvifible  World,  and  dij covered  the  Devil,  that  he
hould  ftep  afide  into  a  Remote  Country  to  put  on  Invifibility !  Tho  the
reafon  of  this  be  not  fo  manifeft,  yet  it  may  be  thought  to  be  to  gratifie
Come  peculiar  fancies  ;  and  why  may  not  this  be  one,  that  he  might  with
che  better  grace  extol  the  Actions  of  Mr.  Mather,  as  Agent  in  England,
or  as  Prefident  of  Harvard  College,  not  forgetting  his  own.

As  to  Sir  William,  it  will  be  generally  ackjiowledgcd,  that  notwith Hand-
ing the  meannefs  of  his  Parentage  and  Education,  he  attained  to  be  Mafter
of  a  Ship,  and  that  he  had  the  good  hap  to  find  a  Spanifo  Wreck,  not
only  fufficient  to  repair  his  Fortunes,  but  to  raiie  him  to  a  confiderable
Figure  ;  which  King  James  did  fo  far  accommodate,  as  to  make  him  a
Knight.  U  And


j  46  Pofifcript.

And  that  after  this,  -in  the  Reign  of  his  Prefent  Majefty,  hetoo!{  up  with
thnfe  sf  the  Agents,  that  were  for  accepting  the  New  Ci.atter,  whereby  him-
felf  became  Governour.

It  is  not  doubted,  but  that  he  aimed  at  the  gocd  of  the  Pec  pie,  ar.d
great  Pitry  it  is  that  his  Government  was  fo  fullicd  (for  want  of  better
Information  and  Advice,,  firm  thofe  whofe  duty  it  was  to  have  given  1)
by  that  II  bgcblin  Monficr  Witchcraft •,  whereby  this  Countrey  was  Night-
Mar'd,  and  harraft  at  fuch  a  rate,  as  is  not  eafily  imagined.

After  which  fame  complaints  going  to  England,  about  Male  /dmini-
Oration,  in  the  leaft  matters  comparatively  :  yet  were  fuch,  that  he  wrs
cail'd  home  to  give  account  thereof,  where  he  fecn  after  expired,  ioi
.finishing  his  Life  and  Government  together.

Death  having  thus  drawn  the  Curtain,  forbidding  any  further  Scere,
it  might  have  been  prudence,  to. let  his  dull  remain  without  diflui banco.

But  the  laid  Book  endeavouring  to  raife  a  Statue  to  him  (Le.)  to  afcribc
to  him  fuch  Achievements,  as  either  were  never  performed  by  him,  creile
unduly  aggravated,  this  has  opened  the  Mouth,  both  of  Friends  ar.d  Ene-
m'es,  to  recount  the  miitakes  in  the  faid  Book;  as  alio  thofe  mifcarriages^
\a herewith  Sir  William  was  charge  ble;  fuch  as  hsd  it  not  been  for  this
Book,  had  been  buried  with  him.

In  P.  3.  fearch  is.  made  over  the  World,  to  whom  to  compare  him  in
his  Advancement  j  and  moft  unhappily  Pi^arro%  is  pitched  upon,  as  a,
match  for  him,  who  was  a  Baftard,  dropt  in  a  Church- Porch,  put  to  &yri
of  a  Sow,  and  being  grown,  ran  away,,  and  Shipc  h'mfelf  for  America ;
there  fo  profpered,  as  to  Command  an  Army  ;  and  therewith  did  mighty.}
th'ngs,  particularly  took  Attaballipa,  one  of  the  Kings  of  Peru  Prifoner,
and  having  received  for  his  Ranfom,  in  Gold  and  Silver  to  the  value  o£i
Ten  Millions,  perfidioufly  put  him  to  Death  ;  and  was  the  Death  of  no
Man  knows  how  many  Thoufands  of  Innocents,  and  is  certainly  one  of;
the  worft  that  could  have  beenpitch'd  upon  for  fuch  comparifon.

Tho  this  Together  with  the  Rhetorical  flourilhes,  and  aflre&ed  ftra'ns
therein,  are  instances  of  the  Authors  variety  of  Learning  ;  for  which  he  is
recommended  by  thefe  Three  Venerable  Ferfon,  in  the  entrance  to  the  faid-
Bock,  Yet  the  Integrity,  Prudence,  and  Veracity  thereof,  is  not  fo  manir
feftty  to  be  feen.  Palling  over  a  multitude  of  Mifreprelentatiens  that  are
therein,  relating  to  the  Ads  of  Sir  William,  as  not  defigning  to  rake  in
the  Grave  of  the  Dead,  Who  is  it  can  fee  the  Veracity  of  thofe  words  ?  £.40*
[He  lay  within  Piftohshat  of  the  Enemies  Cannon,  and  beat  them  from
thence,  and  much  bartered  the  Town,  having  his  Ship  ["hot  thro  in  an  hun-
dred places,  with  Fow  and  twenty  Pounder sf\  When  in  the  Judgment
of  thole  prefent,  they  were  not  nearer  to  the  Enemy,  than  about  half  or
Hfee  quarter's  of  a,  Mi-le  ; that  there  might  be  in  all  about  Seven  Shot  that'

ftruck.


Pofl-fiript.  f47

ftruck  the  Hull  of  the  VefTel,  none  of  them  known  to  be  bigger  tlian  18
Pounders,  the  Enemy  having  but  one  Gun  that  could  carry  io  big  as  an
18  pound  Ball.

It  were  a  fondnefs,  after  fuch  alTerc'ions,  to  take  any  notice  of  this  be-
deck'd  Statue,  when  there  was  fo  much  tie  Icfs  need  of  erecting  one  (as  is
aflerted  P.  108.)  having  already  been  donefo  well,  that  even  this  Author
himfelf  defpairs  of  doing  it  better;  and  that  by  one,  a  Man  of  fuch  dif-
fufed  and  Embalm'd  a  Reputation,  as  that  his  Comm?ndaticns  are  aflerted
to  be  enough  to  Immortalize  the  Reputation  of  Sir  William,  ©r  whomfo-
ever  elfe  he  jhould  pleafe  to  btftow  them  upon,  vi^.  That  Reverend  per-
fon  who  was  the  Prefident  of  the  only  Univerfity,  then  in  the  E-iglipo
Sjnurica>  P.  1 09.  Which  by  the  way,  is  a  much  fairer  Statue,  in  honour
of  the  Prefident  of  the  Univerfity,  than  that  erected  for  Sir  V&tUthm.

For  notwithstanding  all  this  noife  of  Erecting  Statues,  and  the  great
danger  in  plucking  them  down,  £?c.  yet  in  P.  89.  'tis  faid,  that  even  Sir
William  (hewed  Choler  enough,  leaving  it  open  for  others,  thereby  to  un-
derstand, that  he  was  wholly  given  over  to  Paflion  and  "Choler.  And  in
P.  92.  'tis  faid  he  did  not  affect  any  mighty  (hew  of  Devotion  ;  thefe  ex-
pressions with  others  may  prevail  with  the  unbiaft  Reader,  to  think  that
thefe  builders  of  Statues,  had  fome  further  defign  in  it,  than  to  blazen
the  Achievements  of  Sir  William  Phips,  vi%,  To  fct  forth  Mr.  J.  Mathers
Negotiation  in  England,  his  procuring  the  New-Charter  for  Sir  William
to  be  Governcur,  and  himfelf  EStabliSh'd  Prefident  of  the  College,  are  the
things  principally  driven  at  in  the  Book.

Another  principal  thing  is  to  fet  forth  the  fuppofed.  Witchcrafts  in  New-
England*  and  how  well  Mr.  M^r  the  Younger  therein  acquitted  himfeJf.

As  to  the  New  Charter,  for  the  right  understanding  that  Affair,  it  will
be  needful  to  fay,  that  the  People  that  afterwards  fettled  in  New  England,
being  about  to  leave  their  Native  foil,  and  to  feek  fas  the  Providence  of
God  (hould  direct  them)  a  fettlement  in  remote  Regions,  wherein  they
might  beft  fecure  their  Civil  and  Religious  Inrerefts,  before  they  "entered
upon  this,  considering  it  might  be  needful  on  many  accounts  for  their  fu-
ture well-being,  they  obtain'd  a  Charter  to  be  in  tie  nature  of  a  prime  a-
greement,  fetting  forth  the  Soveraigns  Prerogative,  and  the  Peoples  Pri-
viledges  ;  in  the  enjoyment  whereof  they  long  continued,  after  having
jnirchas'd  the  Title  to  their  Lands,  of  the  Natives  of  the  Country,  and
iettled  themfelves  therein,  without  any  charge  to  the  Crown.

That  Claufe  in  their  Charter  for  this  Country,  vi\.  ( Provided  that  no
other  Chriftian  Prince  be  prepofTeft  of  iO  being  a  tacit  acknowledgment,
that  before  fettlement  no  one  Christian  Prince  had  any  right  thereto  more
than  another.  During  this  time  of  New- England*  Prosperity,  the  Govern-
ment here  were  very  fparing  of  Granting  Freedoms,  except  to  fuch  as

U  %  were


1 48  Tofifcrift.

were  (o  and  fo  qualified.  Whereby  the  number  of  Arow-Freemen  being
much  increased,  they  were  very  uneafie,  by  their  being  fhut  out  ftcm  ha-
ling any  ihare  in  the  Government,  or  having  any  Votes  for  their  Rcprc-
ieotatives,  &c.  it  rendrcd  many  of  them  ready  to  join  with  fuch  as  were
undermining  the  Government,  not  duly  considering  that  it  h*d  teen  far
more  fafe  to  have  endeavoured  to  prevail  with  the  Icgidators  for  an  en-
largement.

5o  that  it  will  not  be  wonder  d  at  that  in  the  latter  end  of  the  Reign
of  King  Charles  the  II.  and  of  King  James,  (when  moft  of  the  Charters
in  England  were  vacated)  that  this  was  quo  warrant  (I'd,  and  finally  Judg-
ment entered  up  againft  it,  and  the  Country  put  into  fuch  a  iorm  of  Go-
vernment, as  was  moft  agreeable  to  thofe  times,  -vi^.  A  Legillative  pow'r
was  ledg'd  in  the  Governour  Cor  Prefident,)  and  fome  few  appointed  to
be  of  his  Couniel,  without  any  regard  therein,  either  to  the  Laws  of
England^  or  thole  formerly  of  this  Colony  :  Thus  rendring  the  Circum-
itances  of  this  Country  beyond  companion  worfe  than  thoieof  any  Cor-
poration in  England.  The  People  of  thoie  Corporations  being  acknow-
ledged ilill  to  have  a  right  to  Magna  Chart ay  when  the^r  particular  Char-
ters were  made  void.  But  here  when  Magna  Charta  has  been  pleaded,
the  People  have  been  anfwered,  that  they  nmft  not  expect  that  Magna
Charta  would  follow  them  to  the  end  of  the  World  :  not  only  their  Eitates,
but  their  Lives  being  thereby  rend  red  wholly  precarious.  And  Judge
f aimer  has  let  forth  in  Print,  that  the  King  has  power  to  grant  iuch  a
.Commifilon  over  this  People.

It  is  not  hard  to  imagin,  that  under  luch  a  Commifilon,.  not  only  the
People  were  liable  to  be  oppreft  by  Taxes,  but  alio  by  Confiscations,  and
Siezing  of  Lands,  unlefs  Patents  were  purchafed  at  Exceffive  prizes, with
many  other  Exorbitant  Innovations.

The  firft  that  accepted  this  Commifilon  was  Mr.  Dudley,,  a  Gentleman
born  in  this  Countiy,  who  did  but  prepare  the  way  for  Sir  Edm.  Andres.
Jn  whofe  time  things  being  grown  to  fuch  Extremities,  not  only  here,  but
m  England^  as  rendered  the  lucceeding  Revolution  absolutely  neceffary,
the  Revolution  here  being  no  other  than  an  ading  according  to  the  Prece-
dent given  by  England.

During  the  time  of  Sir  Edtnonds's  Government,  Mr.  Incrcafe  Mather ,
Teacher  of  the  North  Church  in  Boflon ;  having  undergone  fome  trouble
by  Fchb-Adrions  laid  upon  him,  £2c.  (tho  with  fome  difficulty)  he  made
|fis  EJcnpe,  and  got  paflage  for  England,  being  therein  afiiited  by  fome
particular  Friends ;  where  being  arrived,  he  applied  himfelf  to  King
j nmes  for  redrefs  of  tfnfe  Evils  the  Country  -then  groaned  under  ;  and
fitting,  with  a  feeming  kind  reception,  and  fome  promifes,  it  was  as  much
&>  might  at  that  lime  be  reafonably  expe&ed

Upon


Pofifcript.  i.|9

Upon  the  Day  of  the  Revolution  here,  tho  for  the  greateft  part  of  the
People  were  for  reaffaming  their  Ancient  Government,  purfuant  to  his
Royal  Highneis's  Proclamation  ;  yet  matters  were  to  clog'd,  that  the
People  were  difmift  without  it,  who  did  not  in  the  leait  miftrutt,  but
that  thofe,  who  were  put  out  of  the  Government  by  Mr.  Dudley,  weuid
reafurne  :  Mr.  Broadjheet  who  had  been  then  Governour,  being  heard  to
lay  that  Evening,  when  returned  home,  That  had  not  he  though  they  would
have  rcaljumd,  he  would  nut  have  fiin'd  out  of  his  Honfe  that  Day.  But
after  this,  feme  that  were  driving  at  other  matters,  had  opportunities  by
Threats  and  other  ways,  not  enly  to  prevail  with  that  good  Old  Gentle-
man, but  with  the  reft  of  the  Government  wholly  to  decline  it ;  which
fome  few  obferving,  they  took  the  opportunity  to  call  themfelves  a  Com-
mittee of  Safety,  and  fo  undertook  to  Govern  fuch  as  would  be  govern'd
by  them.

It  has  been  an  Cbfervaticn  of  long  continuance,  that  matters  of  StMtw
fsldcm  pro[pcr\  when  managed  by  the  Clsigy.  Among  the  oppofers  of  the
rcaiTanurig  few  to  ftrenuous  as  fome  of  the  Miniiters,  and  among  the
Mmifters  none  more  vehement  than  Mr.  Cotton  Mather,  Pallor  of  the
AV/-/>Church  in  Bofton,  who  has  charged  them  as  they  would  anfwer  it
another  day  not  to  reaffurne.  Anting  his  Arguments  againfi  it,  one  was  that
it  would  be  to  put  a  light  upon  his  Father,  who,  he  laid,  was  in  England?
labouring  for  a  com  pleat  Reiteration  of  Charter  Priviledges,  not  doubt-
ing ,  but  they  would  be  Ipeedily  obtain'd.  Any  Man  that  knows  isfrw-
England  cannot  but  be  ienfibie,  that  fuch  Difcourfes  from  fuch  Men,
have  always  been  very  prevalent.  And  hence  it  was  that  even  thofe  that
would  think  themielves  wronged,  if  they  were  not  numbred  among  the
bell' Friends  to  New-Etigland,  and  to  its  Charter,  would  not  fo  much  as
floop  torake  it  up,  when  there  was  really  nothing  to  hinder  them  from
the  EnjofRent  thereof.

After  tffe  -Committee  of  Safety  had  continued  about  feven  Weeks,  or
rather  after  Anarchy  had  been  fo  long  Triumphant ,  an  Aflembly' ha-
ving been  caii'd,  came  to  this  refolve,  and  laid  it  before  thofe  Gentlemen
that  had  been  of  the  Government,  that  if  they  would  not  ad:  upon  the
Foundation  of  the  Charter,  that  periuant  to  it,  the  Aflembly  would  ap-
point fome  others  in  that  Station.  The  Anfwer  to  which  was,  that  they
would  accept,  &c.  And  when  a  Declaration  fignifying  fueh  a  reaffuming,-
was  prepared  with  the  good  liking  of  the  Deputies,  in  order  to  be  pub-
liflied,  fome  that  were  oppofers,  fo  terrified  thofe  Gentlemen,  that  before
publishing  it  was  underwritten  [that  they  would  not  have  it  underftood
that  they  did  reaffume  Charter  Government]  to  the  no  fmall  amazement
of  the  People,  and  disappointment  of  the  Deputies,  who  if  thefe  had  nor
promifed  fo  to  ad,  had  taken  other  care,  and  put  in  thole  that  would.

The


J  $G  Poftfcript.

The  next  principal  thing  ddne  was,  they  chofe  two  of  their  Members,
r- Y  One  of  the  upper  Houfe,  the  other  of  the  lower,  both  of  them  Gen  -
rlemcn  of  known  Integrity.,  as  well  as  ability,  to  go  to  England,  in  order
to  obtain  their  Refettlement  ;  And  in  regard  Mr.  J.  Mather  was  already
there,  they  joined  him,  as  alfo  a  certain  Gentlemen  inXcndon  with  thefc
other  two  :  Thofe  from  hence  being  arrived  in  London,  they  all  united
for  the  common  Intereft  of  the  Countrey,  tho  without  the  defined  effecT.
They  were  in  doubt,  whether  it  were  beft  to  Improve  their  Uunoft  for  a
rcverfal  of  the  Judgment  in  a  Courl'e  of  Law,  or  to  obtain  it  in  a  Parlia-
mentary way,  or  to  Petition  his  Majefty  for  a  New  Grant  of  former
Priviledges;  And  confidering  that  the  two  firft  might  prove  Dilatory  and
Expeniive,  as  well  as  for  other  reafons,  they  refolved  upon  the  latter.and
Petition Vi  his  Majefty  for  the  Countries  Refettlement,  with  former  Privi-
ledges,  and  what  further  additional  his  Majefty  in  his  Princely  Wifdcm
1'hould  think  fit.  Accordingly  it  pleafed  his  Majefty  to  declare  in  Counfcl
his  Determination,  vfe.  That  there  (hould  be' a  Charter  granted  to  New-
England,  But  the  Minutes  then  taken  thereof, and  a  Draught  of  the  New-
Charter  being  feen,  it  was  the  Opinion  of  the  two  Gentlemen  fent  from
hence,  that  it  were  beft  to  tarry  his  Ma  jetties  return  from  Flanders  ;  in
hopes  then  to  obtain  eafe  in  fiich  things,  as  might  be  any  ways  deemed
to  be  grievous.  And  this  was  the  refult  of  the  Advice  of  fuch  as  were
beft  able  to  give  it,  that  they  could  meet  with,  and  accordingly  they
wholly  defined  taking  it  out" of  the  Offices.

But  Mr.  Mather ,  and  that  other  Gentl^lnan  had, as  it  is  faid,  other  ad-
vice given  them,  which  they  ftrenuoufly.g^rfued,  and  his  Majefty  having
left  it  as  is  aflerted  in  this  of  the  Life  or  Sir  William,  P*  57,  to  them
to  nominate  a  Governour,  they  pitcht  upon  Sir  William  Phips,  who  was
then  in  England.  [As  the  moft^iikely  and  able  to  ferve  the  King's  In-
terefts  among  the  People  there  •  sfmder  the  changes  in  fome  things  unac-
ceptable now  brought  upon  them,  P.  62.]  and  without  tarrying  for  the
concurrence  of  thofe  other  Agents,  the  Charter  was  taken  out, G?c.

But  Mr.  Mather  perhaps  fearing  he  fhould  have  but  fmall  thanks  here,
for  his  having  fo  far  an  hand  in  bringing  upon  them  thofe  unacceptable
Changes,  wrote,  and  caufed  to  be  Printed,  an  Account  of  his  Negotiati-
on, but  furely  by  fome  Error  in  the  Conception,  it  proved  only  an  Entirrio%
and  was  ftifled  as  foon  as  born.  One  indeed,  defigned  to  be  as  it  were  a
Poflhimms-  was  left  with  Mr.  Bailey,  formerly  of  Bofion,  and  a  Member
of  the  .NW>Church,  with  a  charge  not  to  fufrer  it  to  be  feen,  rill  he  were
gone  to  New-England  ;  yet  it  feems  fome  other  perfon  got  a  fight  of  it,
which  was  the  occafion  of  Mr.  Mather's  fending  him  that  Minatory  £-
ptftlfr,  by  fome  call'd  a  Bull.  But  befidesthis,  for  fear  of  the  worft,Mr.
Ml  got  ieveral'  Non-con  Minifters  to  give  him  a  Testimonial,  or  Letters  of
Commendations  for  his  great  Service  herein.  In


Poflfcript.  tfi

In  the  mean  time  Mr.  Cotton  Mather,  being  in  fome  doubt  of  the  fame
thing,  handed  about  a  Paper  or'  F?bles  ;  wherein  his  Father  under  the
Name  of  MercuriusAnd  himfelf  under  rhe  Name  of  Orpheus, are  cxtolPd  and
the  great  Actions  of  Mercurius  magnified  ;  the  prefcnt  Charter  exalted,
by  trampling  on  the  former,  as  being  very  defective,  and  all  thofe  caJl'd
unreafonable  that  did  not  readily  agree  with  the  New  one  :  And  indeed
♦the  whole  Country  are  compared  to  no  better  than  Beafts,  except  Mcr-
curi us  and  Orpheus,  the  Governour  himfelf  muft  not  Efcape  being  termed
an  Elephant,  tho  as  good  as  he  was  great,  and  the  Infcriours  told  by  Or-
fheus  that  rhe  quiet  Enjoyment  of  their  Lands,  &c.  they  were  beholding
to  Mcrcurius  for.  Tho  this  Paper  was  judged  not  convenient  ot  be  Printed,
yet  fome  Copies  were  taken,  the  Author  having  ftiown  variety  of  Heathen
Learning  in  ir.

This  is  in  (liort  that  eminent  Service  for  which  the  faid  Mr.  J.  M.  is  in
the  prefent  Book  fo  highly  extel'd.  In  fo  many  Pages,  that  to  repeat
them  were  to  tranferibe  a  conliderable  part  of  the  faid  Pock.

And  no  doubt  he  deferves  as  much  thanks  as  Dr.  Sharp  did,  when  he
was  lent  by  the  Presbytery  of  Scotland,  to  procure  the  fettlement  of  their
Kirk  by  King  Charles  II.  at  his  Reftauration.

Not  but  that  the  .prefent  Charter  of  Ncxv-Evgla?id,  is  indeed  truly  valu-
able, as  containing  in  it  peculiar  Priviledges,  which  abundantly  Engages
this  People  to  pay  the  tribute  of  thankfulnefs  to  his  Majeity,  and  all  due
fiibjedfcion  to  whom  it  fhall  pleafe  him  to  fubftitute  as  Governour  over  us ;
and  to  pray  that  the  King  of  Kings  would  pour  out  of  his  richeftbleiliij^s'
upon  him,  giving  him  a  long  and  profperous  Reign  over  the., }&&jjg$£??
under  the  benign  Influences  whereof,  Oppreifion  and  Tyranny'  rj^ySee
away.  y~

And  if  his  Majefty  hath  put  this  People  into  the  prefent  form  of  Go-
vernment, to  the  end  they  might  be  in  the  better  condition  of  Defence  in
a  time  of  War;  or  that  they  might  the  better  underftand  the  Priviledge
of  ehoohng  their  own  Governour  by  the  want  of  it,  and  fhould  be  graci-
oufly  pleaied  (the  War  being  over,)  to  reftore  to  thefe,  as  has  been  al-
ready granted  to  the  reft  of  his  Majefties  Subjects,  the  full  enjoyment  of
their  Ancient  Priviledges,  it  would  be  fuch  an  obligation  upon  them  to
thankfulnefs  and  Duty,  as  could  never  be  forgotten,  nor  fumciently  ex-
preft,  and  would  rather  abate  than  increafe  charge  to  the  Crown.

As  to  the  fuppofed  Witchcrafts  in  New-England,  having  already  faid  fo
much  thereof,  there  is  the  lefs  remains  to  be  added.

In  the  times  of  Sir  Ed,  Andros  his  Government,  Goody  Glover,  a  de-
fpifed,  crazy,  ill-conditioned  old  Woman,  an  Irijhl^man  Catholick,  was
tried  for  Afflicting  Goodwins  Children;  by  the  Account  of  which  TryaJ,
taken  in,  Short- hand,  for  the  ufe  of  the  Jury,  it  may  appear  that  the  ge-
nerality


1 $%  Poftfcript.

nerality  of  her  Anfwers,  were  Ncnfenfe,  and  her  behaviour  like  that  of
one  drib-acted.  Yet  the  Drs.  finding  her  as  fhe  had  been  for  many  Years,
brought  her  in  Compos  M:ntis  ;  and  fetting  afide  her  crazy  Anivvers  to
fome  infnaring  queftions,  the  proof  againft  her  was  wholly  deficient :  The
fury  brought  her  Guilty.

Mr.  Cotton  Mither,  was  the  moft  active  and  forward  of  any  Minifter
in  the  Country  in  thofe  matters,  taking  home  one  of  the  Children,  and
managing  fuch  Intreagues  with  that  Child,  and  after  printing  fuch  an  Ac-
count of  the  whole,  in  his  Memorable  Providences,  as  conduced  much  co
the  kindling  thofe  Flames,  that  in  Sir  Williams  time  threatned  the  de-
vouring this  Country.

King  Saul  in  his  deftroying  the  Witches  out  of  Ifrael,  is  thought  by
many  to  have  exceeded, and  in  his  Zeal  to  have  flain  the  Gibconites
wrongfully  under  that  notion  : Yer  went  after  th^  to  a  Witch  to  know
his  Fortune.  For  his  wrongful  deftroying  the  Gibeonites{  befides  the  Judg-
ments of  God  upon  the  Land  J  his  Sons  were  hanged  ;  and  for  his  goin<* j
to  the  Witch,  himfelf  was  cut  off. Our  Sir  William  Phips  did  not  do  this,
but  as  appears  by  this  Book,  had  firft  his  Fortune  told  him  (by  inch  as  the1
Author  counts  no  better) and  tho  he  put  it  off  (to  his  Paftor, who  he
knew  approved  not  thereof  j  as  if  it  were  brought  to  him  in  writing.with-
out  his  feeking,  0c.  Yet  by  his  bringing  it  fo  far,  and  fafe  keeping  it  fo
many  Years,  it  appears  he  made  fome  Account  of  it ; for  which  he  gave  -
the  Writer,  after  he  had  found  the  Wreck,  as  a  reward,  more  than  Two
hundred  Pounds. His  telling  his  Wife  (P.  6.)  that  he  ifrould  be  a  Com-
mander ;  (hould  have  a  Brick-Houfe  in  Green  Lane,  &c.  might  be  in  con-
fidence of  fome  fuch  Prediction,  and  that  he  could  foretel  to  him  (P.  90. )
that  he  (hould  be  Governour  of  New-England,  was  probably  fuch  an  one
(the  Scriptures  not  having  revealed  it)  Such  Predictions  would  have  been
counted  at  S  km,  pregnant  proofs  of  Witchcraft,  and  much  better  than
what  were  againft  feveral  that  fuffered  there.  But  Sir  William,  when  the
Witchcrafts  at  Salem  began  (\n  his  Efteem)  to  look  formidable,  that  he  J
might  Act  fafely in  this  Affair,  he  asked  the  Advice  of  the  Minifters  in  ]
and  near  Boflm  ;  the  whole  of  their  Advice  and  Anfwer  is  Printed  in  Cafes
ofConfcicnce  thelaft  Pages. But  left  the  World  ihould  be  Ignorant  who
it  was  that  drew  the  faid  Advice,  in  this  Book  of  the  Life  of  Sir  William
Phips,  P.  77.  are  thefe  words,  the  Minifters  made  unto  his  Excellency  and
the  Counfel  a  return,  drawn  up  at  their  defire,  by  Mr,  Mather  the  Tcunger,
as  I  have  been  informed.  Mr,  C.  M.  therein  intending  to  beguile  the  World, ?
and  make  them  think  that  another,  and  not  himfelf  had  taken  that  notice
of  his  (fuppofed,)  good  Service  done  therein,  which  other  wife  would  have
been  afcribed  to  thofe  Minifters  in  General,  tho  indeed  the  Advice  then
given,  looks  moft  like  a  thing  of  his  Compofing,  as  carrying  both  Fire

to


Poflfcript.  I  j  3

to  increafe,  and  Water  to  quench  the  Conflagration.  Particularly  after  the  Devils
Teftimony,  by  the  fuppofed  Afflicted  had  fo  prevailed,  as  to  take  away  the  Life  of
one,and  the  Liberty  ofan  Hundred,  and  the  whole  Countiy  fet  into  a  molt  dread-
ful confternation, then  this  Advice  is  given,  uftiered  in  with  thanks  for  what
was  already  done,  and  in  concluiion,  putting  the  Government  upon  a  fpeedy  and
vigorous  profecution  according  to  the  Laws  of  God,  and  the  wholfome  Statutes
of  the  Englijh  Nation,  fo  adding  Oyl  rather  than  Water  to  the  Flame  ;  for  who  fo
little  acquainted  with  proceedings  of  England,  as  not  to  know  that  they  have  taken
fome  methods,  with  thofe  here  ufed  to  difcover  who  were  Witches. The  reft  of
the  Advice  confiding  of  cautions  and  directions,  are  inferted  in  this  of  the  Lifeof
Sir  William,  So  that  if  Sir  William,  looking  upon  the  thanks  for  what  was  pair,  and
Exhortation  to  proceed,  went  on  to  take  away  the  Lives  cf  Nineteen  more,  this  is
according  to  the  Advice  faid  to  be  given  him  by  the  Minifters,  and  if  the  Devil
after  thofe  Executions  be  affronted,  by  disbelieving  his  teftimony,  and  by  clearing
and  Pardoning  all  the  reft  of  the  Accufed  ; yet  this  alfo  is  according  to  that  Ad-
vice, but  to  call:  the  Scale;  the  fame  that  drew  this  Advice,  faith,  in  Wonders  of  the
Invijihl*  World,  Enchantments  Encountred;  [that  to. have  a  hand  in  any  thing  that  may
(tin's  or  obftruct  a  regular  direction  of  that  Witchcraft,  is  what  we  may  well  with
a  Holy  fear  avoid: Their  Majesties,  good  Subjects  muft  not  every  day  be  torn  to
pieces  by  horrid  Witchcraft, and  thole  b:oody  Felons  be  wholly  left  unprofecuted.
The  Witchcraft  is  a  bufinefs  that  wiilnor  be  fhamm'd]  ThePaftor  of  that  Church,
>f  which  Sir  William  was  a  Member,being  of  this  Principle,  and  thus  declaringi  t,
ifter  the  former  advice;  no  wonder  tho  it  call:  the  Scale  againft  thofe  Cautions.  Ic
is  rather  a  Wonder  that  no  more  Blood  was  fhed,  for  if  that  Advice  of  his  Paftors
could  ftill  have  prevaii'd  with  the  Governour, Witchcraft  had  not  been  fo  fham-
med  off  as  it  wa.^. Yet  now  in  this  Book  of  the  Life  of  Sir.  William^  the  fardopbtg
thePrifoners  when  Condemn'd,  and  c  earing  the  Goals,  is  callM  (P.  Bi.)  a  Van-
|uifhing  the  Devil,  adding  this  Conqueft  to  the  reft  of  the  Noble  Atchievements
jf  Sir  William, tho  Performed  not  only  without,  but  directly  againft  his  Paftors
Advice. But  this  is  not  all,  tho  this  Book  pretends  to  raife  a  Statue  in  Honour  of
Sir  William,  yet  it  apearsitwas  the  leaft  part  of  thedefign  of  theAuthor  to  Honour
tiim,  but  it  was  rather  to  Honour  himfelf,  and  the  Minifters;  It  being  fo  unjuft  to
Sir  William*  as  to  give  a  full  Account  of  the  cautions  given  him, but  defignedly
biding  from  the  Reader  the  Incouragements  and  Exhortations  to  proceed,  that
ivere  laid  before  him  ( under  the  name  of  the  Minifters  Advice)  in  effect,  telling
the  World  that  thofe  Executions  at  Salem, were  without,  and  againft.  the  Advice
;>f  the  Minifters,  eXpreft  in  thofe  Cautions,  purpofely  hiding  their  giving  thanks
for  what  was  already  done,  and  exhorting  to  proceed  ;  thereby  rendring  Sir  William
of  fo  fanguin  a  Complexion,  that  the  Minifters  had  fuch  caufe  to  fear  his  going  on
with  the  Tragedy,  tho  againft  their  Advice ;  that  they  deftred  the  Prefident  to
write  his  Cafes  ofconfcience,&c.  To  plead  mfinformation  will  not  falve  here,however
it  may  feemto  pallitate  other  things,  but  is  a  manifeft,  defignedtraverfty,  or  mi&
representation  of  the  Minifters  Advice  to  Sir  William,  a  hiding  the  truth,  and  z
wronging  the  dead,  whom  the  Author  fo  much  pretends  to  honour  ;  for  which
the  Acknowledgments  ought  to  be  as  Univerfal  as  the  Offence.  But  tho  the  Mi-
nifters Advice,  or  rather  Mr.  C  Mathers  was  perfectly  Ambidexter, giving  as  great
or  greater  Encouragement  to  proceed  in  thole  dark  methods,  then  cautions  againft

X  them;


154  To^fcript.

them  ;  yetmrmy  Eminent  perfons  being  accufed,  there  was  a  rteceftity  of  a  ftop  to  I
be  put  to  it.  If  it  be  true  what  was  laid  at  the  CounfeI-bcard,in  anfwer  to  the  com-
mendations of  Sir  Wi'ttiamyfor  his  Hopping  the  proceedings  about  Witchcraft,  viz.
Tint  it  was  high  time  for  him  to  Hop  it,  his  own  Lady  being  accufed;  if  that
After  tion  were  a  truth,  then  Niw-E??glnnd  may  feem  to  be  more  beholden  to  rhe
accufersfor  a  ecu  (In  g  of  her,  and  thereby  neceilitating  a  Hop,  than  to  Six  William,
cr  to  the  Advice  that  was  .given  him. by  his  Paftor.

Mr.  C.  M.  having  been  very  forward  to  write  Books  of  Witchcraft*  has  not  been  .
•fo  forward  .d;h;r  ro  explain  or  defend  the  Doctrinal  part  thereof,  and  his  belief
(which  he  bad  a  Years  time  to  Compofe)  he  durft  not  venture  fo  as  to  be  copied.
Ye:  in  this  of  the  Life  of  Sir  William-,  he  fufrkiently  teftifies  his  retaining  that
Heterodox  belief,  fee-king  by  frightful!  ftories  of  the  fufferings  of  foxiie,  and  the
refined  light  of  others,  &c.  P.  69  to  obtrude  upon  the  World,  and  confirm  it  in  1
fkah  a  belief,  as  hitherto  he  either  cannot  or  will  not  defend,  as  if  the  Blood
already  fhed  thereby  were  not  iufficient.  »

Mr.  I.  Mather,  in  his  Cafes  of  Conscience  P.  25.  tells  of  a  Bewitched  Eye,  and  that
fuch  can  fee  more  than  others.  They  were  certainly  bewitched  Eyes  that  could,  fee  -
as  well  Hint  as  oprn,  and  that  could  fee  what  never  was that  could  fee  the  Priib-  •
ners  upon  the  Afflicted,  harming  of  them, when  thofe  whofe  Eyes  were  not  be-
witched could  have  iworn  that  they  did  not  ftir  from  the  Bar.  The  Accufers  are  I
faid  to  have  fuffered  much  by  biting,  P.  73. And  the  printsof  juft  ftich  a  fet  oft
Teeth,  as  thofe  they  Accufed, had,  but  fudh  as  had  not  fuch  bewitch' d  Eyes
have  feen  the  Accufers  bite  themfelves,  and  then  complain  of  the  Accufed.  It  has
alio  been  feen  when  the  Accnfedjinftead  of  having  juft  fuch  a  fet  of  Teeth, has  not
had  one  in  his  head. They  were  fuch  bewitched  Eyes  that  could  fee  the  Poifon-
ous  Fowder  (brought  by Spectres  P.70.)  And  that  could  fee  in  the  Allies  the  print
of  the  Brand,  there  inviiibly  heate  to  torment  the  pretended  Sufferers  with,  &c.  ,

Thefe  with  the  reft  of  fuch  Legends  have  this  direct  tendency,  vk,.  To  tell  thei
Wot  Id  that  the  Devil  is  more  ready  to  ferve  his  Votaries,  by  his  doing  for  them
things  above  or  againft  the  courfe of  Nature,  fhewing  himfelf  to  them,  and  making
explicit  contia-cf  with  them,^.  than  the  Divine  Being  is  to  his  faithfulServants,
and  that  -as  he  is  willing,  fp  alfo  able  to  perform  their  defires.  The  way  whereby
thefe  People.are .believed  to  arrive  at  a  power  to  Afflict  their  Neighbours,  is  by
compact  with  the  Dsvil,  and  that  they  have  a  power  to  CommiJJhnate  him  to  thol
•EvilsyP.  72.  However  Irrational ,or  Infer  iptural  fuch  Aflertions  are,  yet  they  feemji
a  necafiSry  partof  the  Faith  of  fuch  as  maintain  the  belief  of  inch  a  fort  of  Witches.)

As  the  Scriptures  know  nothing  of  a  covenanting,or  commiflioning  Witch,  &
.Reafon, cannot  conceive  how  Mortals  fhould'by  their'Widkednefs.  arrive  at  apowl
ev  to  ConimiiFionare  Angels,  Fallen  A ugels,  againft  their  Innocent  Neighbours.;
But  the  Scrjpture&are  full  in  it,  and  the  Lnftances  numerous,that>the  Almighty,!
Divine  Being  has  this  prerogative  to  make  ufeof  Whatlriftrument  he  pleafeth,  iiii
^ArHifting  any, and  confequen.tly  to  com  mifficnate  Devils:  Andtho  this  word  com-)
:miflioning,  in  the  Authors  former  Books,  mightbethought  to  beby  inadvertene
yet  now  afcer  he  hath  been  caution' d  of  it,  ftill  to.perfift  in  itfeems  highly  Ci
^niinal.  And  therefore  in 'the  name  of  God,  I  here  charge  fuch  belief  as  guilty
'S'tcriledge  in  tae  big  heft  Nature,  and  fo  much  wor'fe  than  ftealing  Church  Pla
#<.-. As  it  is  a  'higher  "Offence  to  fteal  any  of  the  glorious  'Attributes  of  the  A]

mighty


PoflfcripK  *55

mighty, to  bellow  them  upon  Mortals,  than  it  is  to  ileal  the  Uteadjs  appro-
priated to  his  Service.  And  whether  to  afcribe  fuch  power  of  commiflioning
Denis  to  the  worft  of  Men,  be  not  direct  Blafphemy,  I  leave  to  others  bet-
ter able  to  determine.  When  the  Pharifees  were  fo  wicked  as  to  afcribe  to
Beelzebub, the  mighty  works  of  Chrifr  (whereby  he  did  manifefrly  fliew  forth
his  Power  and  Godhead)  then  it  was  that  our  Saviour  declar  a  the  Sin  a-
gainil  the  Koly  Ghoft  to  be  unpardonable.

When  the  Righteous  God  is  contending  with  Apoftate  Sinners,  for  their
departures  from  him,  by  his  Judgments,  as  Plagues,  Earthquake.5;,  Storms
-and  Tempefts,  Sicknefies  and  Difeafes,  Wars,  lofs  of  Cattle,  &c.  Then  not
only  to  afcribe  this  to  the  Devil,  but  to  charge  one  another  with  fending  or
commiflionating  thofe  Devils  to  thefe  things,  is  fo  abominable  and  fo  wicket?,
that  it  requires  a  better  Judgment  than  mine  to  give  it  its  juft  denomination.

But  that  Chriftians  fo  called  fhou''d  not  only  charge  their  fellow  Chriftians
therewith  ,  but  proceed  to  I  ryals  and  Executions  ;  crediting  tli3t  JEnemy
to  alI-Goodnefs,and  Accufer  of  the  Brethren,  rather  than  believe  their  Neigh-
bours in 'their  own  Defence  ;  This  is  fo  Diabolical  a  Wickednefs  as  cannot
proceed,  but  from  a  Doctrine  of  Devils  ;  how  far  damnable  it  is  let  others
difcufs.  Thofuch  things  were  ailing  in  this  Country  in  Sir  Willuims-  time,
yet  £.65.  There  is  a  Difcourfe  of  a  Guardian  Angel,  ss  then  over-feeing  it,
which  notion  however  it  may  fuit  the  Faith  ot  EtlmUhy  or  the  fancies  of
Trithetnius  ;  it  is  certain  that  the  Omnipre.fer.it  Being,  (rands  not  in  need  as
Earthly  Potentates  do,  of  governing  the  World  by  Vicegerents.  And  if  Sir
William  had  fuch  an  InviilbJe  pattern  to  imitate,  no  wonder  tho  fome  ^h)s
Actions  were  unaccountable,  efpecially  thofe  relating  to  Witchcraft :  For  if
there  was  in  thofe  Actions  an  Angel  fuper-intending  , .  there  is  little  reafon
to  think  it  was  Gabriel  or  the  Spirit  of  Mercury,  nor. R&hul  the  Angel  or  Spi-
rit of 'Venus ',  nor  yet  Sctmml  the  Angel  or  Spirit  of  Mars;  Names  feigned  by
the  faid  Trithemw,  &c.  It  may  rather  be  thought  to  btApollpn,  or  Abandon",

Obj.  But  here  it  will  be  <faid,  What  are  there  no  Witches  ?  Do  s  not  the
Law  of  God  command  that  they  mould  be  extirpated  ?  Is  the  Command  vain
and  Unintelligible?  So/.  For  any  to  -fay, that  a  Witch  is  one  that  makes  a  corn-
pad  with,  and  Commiflions  ?Devils,  &c.  is  indeed  to, render  the  Law  of  God
vain  and  Unintelligible,  as  having  provided  no  way  whereby  they  might  be
dete&ed,  and  proved,  to  be  fuch ;  And  .how  thtjevos  waded  thro  this  difficulty
for  fo  many  Ages,  without  the  Supplement  of  Mr.  Perkins  and  Bernard  there-
!to,  would  be  very  myfterious.  But  to  him  that  can  readthe  Scriptures  with-
out prejudice  from  Education,  &c.  it  will  manifeftiy  appear  that  the  Scrip-
ture is  full  and'IntelJigible,  both  as  to  theCrime  and  means  to  detect  the  cul-
pable. He  that  (hall  hereafter  fee  any  peribn,  who  to  .-confirm  People  in  a
falfe  belief,  about  the  power  of  Witches  and  .Devils,  (p-retending  to  a  lign  to
confirm  it ;  fuch  as  knocking  offof  invifible<Ghains  with  the  hand,  driving
away  Devils  by  briihing,  (hiking  with  a  Sword  or  Stick,  to  wound  a  perfoa
atagreatdiltance,  &c.  may  (according  to  that  head  of  Mr.  Gauls,  quoted  by
Mr.  C.  M.  and  fo  often  herein  before  recited,  and  fo  well  proved  by  Scripture)
Conclude  that  he  his  Jem  Witchcraft  performed.

If


1

ij6  •  P&jlfcript*

If  Bmiam  became  a  Sorcerer  by  Sacrificing  asd  Praying  to  the  true  God  a- ]
tgabft  his  vifible  people  5  Then  he  that  lhall  pray  that  the  affii&ed  (by  their \
Spelm!  Sight)  may  aecufe  fome  other  Peribn  (whereby  their  reputations  and ]
lives  may  be  indangereef)  fuch  will  juftly  deftrve  the  Name  of  a  Sorcerer. If  ?
any  Perfon  pretends  to  knof?  more  then  can  be  known  by  humane  means,  and
profei&th  at  the  fame  time  that  they  have  it  from  the  Black-Man,  1,  e.  tke  Devil,
and  fhali  from  hence  giveTeftimony  againft  theLives  of  others,  they  are  ma-
nifeltiy  fuch  as  have  a  familiar  Spirit;  and  if  any,  knowing  them  to  have  their
Information  from  the  Btmk-Manjlmll  btinquultive  of  them  for  their  Tefrimo-
»y  againfl  others,  they  therein  are  dealing  with  fuch  as  have  a  Familiar* spirit.

And  if  thefe  lhall  pretend  ttfie  tfo  imd  by  their  SpeSral  sight ,  and  others
fhall  be  inquifitiveof  them,  and  receive  their  Anfwers  what  it  is  the  dead  fay,
and  who  it  is  they  aecufe,  both  the  one  and  the  other  are  by  Scripture  Gnuty
of  Nurmmef*

Thefe  are  all  of  tkzm  crimes  as  ealily  proved  as  any  what  fbever,  and  that
by  fuch  proof  as  the  Law  of  God  requires,  fo  that  it  is  no  Unintelligible  Law.

But  if  the  Iniquity  of 'the  times  be  fuch,  that  thefe  Criminals  not  only  E*
feape  Indemnified  >  but  are  Incouraged  in  their  Wickednefs, and  made  ufe
of  to  take  away  the  Lives  of  others,  this  is  worfe  than  a  making  the  Law  of  /
God  Fain,  it  being  a  rendring  of  it  dangerous,  againft  the  Lives  of  Innocents,
and  without  all  hopes  of  better,  fo  long  as  thefe  Bloody  Principles  remain.

As  long  as  Chriitians  do  Efteem  the  Law  of  Cod  to  be  lmpcrfft,  as  not  de-
ferring that  crime  that  it  requires  to  be  PuniiVd  by  De«ith.

As  long  as  men  fuffer  themfelves  to  be  Poifon'd  in  their  Education,  and
be  grounded  in  a  Fafe  Belief  by  the  Books  of  the  Heathen.

As  long.as  the  D^vil  lhall  be  believed  to  have  a  Natural  Power,  to  All  above
andagainfl  a  courjt  of  Nature.

As  long  as  the  Witches  lhall  be  believed  to  have  a  Power  to  Cemmijjim  him.

As  long  as  the  Devils  lefiimon}*  by  the  pretended  afflicted,  lhall  be  received
as  wore  valid  to  Condemn,  than  their  Pea  of  No;  Guilty  to  acquit.

As  long  as  the  JccufedftizU  have  their  Lives  and  Liberties  confirmed  and  re-
ftored  to  them,  «£ow  their  Confjfing  them-felve*  Guilty,

As  long  as  the  decufed  Ihail  be  forc't  to  nnderg*  Hardjhips  and  Torments  for
their  not  Confefling.

As  long  as  Tets  for  the  Devil  n  Suck  are  fearched  for  upon  the  Bodies  oi
the  acculed,  as  a  token  of  guilt.  I

As  long  as  the  Lords  Prayer  lhall  be  profaned,  by  being  made  a  Teft,  who
are  cu1pable.

As  long  as  Witchcraft,  Sorcery,  Familiar  Spirits,  and  Necromancy,  lhall  be  im-
proved to  dilcover  who  are  Witches,  &c.

£0  long  it  may  be  expected  that  Innocents  will  fuffer  as  Witches^

So  long  God  ml)  be  Daily  dishonoured,  And  Jo  long  his  Judgments^  mujl  be  Mpefteq
t»  be  continued.


finis.


i


ERRATA.

THE  Pages  front  48  to  57?  may  be  Corre&ed  wi'fc
Pen*  as  alfo  in  the  Pf  eface  7  tines  from  'fee  end*  in
of  1**  read  me. p*  J  1.  i?f.  ftKwufiy  ?♦  fertouffe p.  13
f.  fruitful  ir. faithful  p.  1  €•  1 1>  from  the  bottdfct  f«  me
p*  1.  j,l.  6/  drawing  r.  chaining.  i5.il  L  1 $  the  wor
to  be  left  out  p*  49I.  i  %j  the  tments  did  nor  (kip*
I  9  r.  the  more  nearly* p.  55  L  14  j.  una^eouoiabk
comfortable.  p«  61  I.  Z&.  atttr  the  woti  proptfe  r.

I.  Hytf  tfyowtfehes  p&tfe  to  tgfe  the  treubte  mtk
9*6*  mere  tebtat  the  Qaje  and  give  full  Ubertyfprwiwg
the  word  place*  •

P.  f  3  1*  ;  f.  proved  s.  procwed.  p„rn  I  15  t  daar  r*
p.  8s.L*«r.bcftleann p ,*|_..i  nj jadfifog*  ft  fiidt
P%94  1  xx  r«  M?r^  lemj._  p.  98  I, i6>  r.  Ktfbimd  88
Ik "m£J.  ii*.  a  uptheHSk,  pli^j  U  8;h  §SWvf>Ji
P*  if iJi  2,6. f.  that  he  r*  he,  that,
