The Phantom World (Dom Augustin Calmet (trans. Henry Christmas), 1850)
==========================================================
Christmas' 1850 translation of Calmet's great treatise on apparitions, vampires and revenants. Public domain. Digitized from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/phantomworldorph01calm).

Mi-


V


(  >


#v


*


THE


PHANTOM  WOELD:

OR,

THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  SPIEITS,  APPARITIONS,

BY    AUGUSTINE;  CALMET.


EDITED

WITH  AN  INTEODUCTION  AND  NOTES

BY    THE

REV.  HENRY  CHRISTMAS,  M.A.  F.R.S.  F.S.A.

LIBRARIAN  AND  SECRETARY  OF  SION  COLLEGE,
AUTHOR  OF  ''THE  CRADLE  OF  THE  TWIN  GIANTS,"  ETC.  ETC.


Quemadmoiium  roult.a  fieri  non  posse,  prinsquam  fact&  sunt,  judi-
cantur  ;  ita  multa  quoque,  quie  antiquitus  facta,  quia  nos  ea  non
vidimus,  neque  ratione  assequiiaur,  ex  iis  esse,  quae  fieri  non
potuerunt,  judicamus.  Quse  cert6  summainsipientiaest. — Plin.  Hisl.
A'at.  lib.  vii.  c.  1.


IN   TWO  VOLUMES.,.,.
VOL.  I.

LONDON :

RICHARD  BENTLEY,  NEW  BURLINGTON  STREET,

^ufilis^er  in  ©rtrinarg  to  j^jt  iHajegtg.

1850.


rKL


INDIANA  UM  ry  LIBRABY


LOJJDON  ;
-R.  CLAY,    PRIXTER,    BREAD    STKEKT   HILI.


TO


^^^        HENRY  JAMES  SLACK,  Esq.  E.G.S.

^  ^c.  8fc.  ^c.


My  deak  Henry,

I  inscribe  these  Volumes  with  your  name,
to  record  a  friendship  which  has  lasted  from  our
infancy,  tainted  by  no  suspicion,  and  darkened  by
no  shadow.

So  long  as  eminent  talents  can  challenge  admira-
tion, varied  and  extensive  acquirements  command
respect,  and  unfeigned  virtues  ensure  esteem  and
regard,  so  long  will  you  have  no  common  claim
to  them  all ;  and  none  will  pay  the  tribute  more
gladly  than  your  affectionate

Eriend  and  Cousin,

HEMIY  CHRISTMAS.
SioN  College,  May  1850.


Digitized  by  tine  Internet  Arciiive

in  2010  witii  funding  from

Indiana  University


http://www.archive.org/details/phantomworldorph01calm


INTRODUCTION.


Among  the  many  phases  presented  by  human
credulity,  few  are  more  mteresting  than  those
which  regard  the  reahties  of  the  invisible  world.  If
the  opinions  which  have  been  held  on  this  subject
were  written  and  gathered  together  they  would
form  hundreds  of  volumes — if  they  were  arranged
and  digested  they  would  form  a  few,  but  most
valuable  volumes.  It  is  not  merely  because  there  is
in  almost  every  human  error  a  substratum  of  truth,
and  that  the  more  momentous  the  subject  the  more
important  the  substratum,  but  because  the  investi-
gation will  give  almost  a  history  of  human  aberra-
tions, that  this  otherwise  unpromising  topic  assumes
so  high  an  interest.  The  superstitions  of  every
age,  (for  no  age  is  free  from  them,)  will  present  the
popular  modes  of  thinking  in  an  intelligible  and
easily   accessible   form,    and   may  be   taken  as  a

VOL.  I.  b


VI  INTRODUCTION.

means  of  gauging  (if  the  expression  be  permitted)
the  philosophical  and  metaphysical  capacities  of  the
period.  In  this  light,  the  Volumes  here  presented
to  the  reader  will  be  found  of  great  value,  for  they
give  a  picture  of  the  popular  mind  at  a  time  of
great  interest,  and  furnish  a  clue  to  many  diffi-
culties in  the  ecclesiastical  affairs  of  that  era.

In  the  time  of  Calmet,  cases  of  demoniacal  pos-
session, and  instances  of  returns  from  the  world  of
spirits,  were  reputed  to  be  of  no  uncommon  occur-
rence. The  Church  was  continually  called  on  to  exert
her  powers  of  exorcism ;  and  the  instances  gathered
by  Calmet,  and  related  in  this  Work,  may  be  taken
as  fair  specimens  of  the  rest.  It  is  then,  first,  as
a  storehouse  of  facts,  or  reputed  facts,  that  Calmet
compiled  the  Work  now  in  the  reader's  hands —
as  the  foundation  on  which  to  rear  what  super-
structure of  system  he  pleases;  and  secondly,  as
a  means  of  giving  his  own  opinions,  in  a  detached
and  desultory  w^ay,  as  the  subjects  came  under  his
notice.  The  value  of  the  first  will  consist  in  their
evidence, — and  of  this  the  reader  will  be  as  capable
of  judging  as  the  compiler ;  that  of  the  second  will
depend  on  their  truth, — and  of  this,  too,  we  are  as
well,  and  in  some  respects  better,  able  to  judge
than  Calmet  himself.

Those  accustomed  to  require  rigid  evidence  will
be  but  ill  satisfied  with  the  greater  part  of  that


INTRODUCTION.  Vli

which  will  be  found  in  this  Work  ;  simple  assertion
for  the  most  part  suffices — frequently  made  long
after  the  facts,  or  supposed  facts,  related,  and  not
seldom  at  a  distance  from  the  places  where  they  were
alleged  to  have  taken  place.  But  these  cases  are
often  the  best  authenticated,  for  in  the  more  modern
instances  there  is  frequently  such  an  evident  mis-
take in  the  whole  nature  of  the  case,  that  all  the
spiritual  deductions  made  from  it  fall  to  the  ground.
Not  a  few  cases  of  so-called  demoniacal  posses-
sion are  capable  of  being  resolved  into  cataleptic
trance,  a  state  very  similar  to  that  produced  by
mesmerism,  and  in  which  many  of  the  same  phe-
nomena seem  naturally  to  display  themselves ;  the
well-known  instance  of  the  young  servant  girl,
related  by  Coleridge,  who,  though  ignorant  and
uneducated,  could  during  her  sleep-walking  dis-
course learnedly  in  rabbinical  Hebrew,  would  fur-
nish a  case  in  point.  The  circumstance  of  her  old
master  having  been  in  the  habit  of  walking  about
the  house  at  night,  reading  from  rabbinical  books
aloud  and  in  a  declamatory  manner ;  the  impression
made  by  the  strange  sounds  upon  her  youthful
imagination ;  their  accurate  retention  by  a  memory,
which,  however,  could  only  reproduce  them  when  in
an  abnormal  condition, — all  teach  us  many  most  in-
teresting psychological  facts,  which,  had  this  young
girl  fallen  into  other  hands,  would  have  been  useless

h  2


viu  INTRODUCTION.

in  a  philosophical  point  of  view,  and  would  have
been  only  used  to  establish  the  doctrine  of  diabo-
lical possession  and  ecclesiastical  exorcism.  We
should  have  been  told  how  skilled  was  the  fallen
angel  in  rabbinical  traditions,  and  how  wholesome
a  terror  he  entertained  of  the  Jesuits,  the  Capu-
chins, or  the  Fratres  Minimi,  as  the  case  might  be.
Not  a  few  of  the  most  remarkable  cases  of  sup-
posed modern  possession  are  to  be  accounted  for
by  involuntary  or  natural  mesmerism.  Indeed  the
same  view  seems  to  be  taken  by  a  popular  minister
of  the  Church  in  our  own  day,  viz.  that  mesmerism
and  diabolical  possession  are  identical.  Our  dif-
ference with  him  is,  that  we  should  consider  the
cases  called  by  the  two  names  as  all  natural,  and  he
would  consider  them  as  all  supernatural.  And  here,
to  avoid  misconception,  or  rather  misrepresentation,
let  me  at  once  observe,  that  I  speak  thus  of  modern
and  recorded  cases  only,  accepting  literally  all  related
in  the  New  Testament,  and  not  presuming  to  say
that  similar  cases  might  not  occur  now.  Calmet,
however,  may  be  supposed  to  have  collected  all  the
most  remarkable  of  modern  times,  and  I  am  com-
pelled to  say  I  believe  not  one  of  them.  But  when
we  pass  from  the  evidence  of  truth,  in  which  they
are  so  wanting,  to  the  evidence  of  fraud  and  collu-
sion by  which  so  many  are  characterised,  we  shall
wonder  less  at  the  general  spread  of  infidelity  in


INTRODUCTION.  IX

times  somewhat  later,  on  all  subjects  not  suscep-
tible of  ocular  demonstration.  Where  a  system
claimed  to  be  received  as  a  whole,  or  not  at  all,
it  is  hardly  to  be  wondered  at,  that  when  some
portion  was  manifestly  wrong,  its  own  requirements
should  be  complied  with,  and  the  whole  rejected.

The  system  which  required  an  implicit  belief  in
such  absurdities  as  those  related  in  these  volumes,
and  placed  them  on  a  level  with  the  most  awful
verities  of  religion,  might  indeed  make  some  inte-
rested use  of  them  in  an  age  of  comparative  dark-
ness, but  certainly  contained  within  itself  the  seeds
of  destruction,  and  which  could  not  fail  to  germi-
nate as  soon  as  light  fell  upon  them.

The  state  of  Calmet's  own  mind,  as  revealed  in  this
book,  is  curious  and  interesting.  The  belief  of  the
intellect  in  much  which  he  relates  is  evidently  gone,
the  belief  of  the  will  but  partially  remains.  There  is
a  painful  sense  of  uncertainty  as  to  whether  certain
things  ou(^ht  not  to  be  received  more  fully  than  he
felt  himself  able  to  receive  them;  and  he  gladly
follows  in  many  cases  the  example  of  Herodotus
of  old,  merely  relating  stories  without  comment,
save  by  stating  that  they  had  not  fallen  under  his
own  observation.

The  time,  indeed,  had  hardly  come  to  assert  free-
dom of  belief  on  subjects  such  as  these.  Theology
embraced   philosophy,    and   the    Holy    Inquisition


X  INTRODUCTION.

defended  the  orthodoxy  of  both ;  and  if  the  investi-
gators of  Calmet's  day  were  permitted  to  hold,  with
some  hmitations,  the  Copernican  theory,  it  was
far  otherwise  with  regard  to  the  world  of  spuits,
and  its  connexion  with  our  own.  The  rotundity  of
the  earth  affected  neither  shrines  nor  exorcisms ;
metaphysical  truth  might  do  both  one  and  the
other ;  and  the  cry  of  "  Great  is  Diana  of  the  Ephe-
sians!"  was  not  raised  in  the  capital  of  Asia  Minor,
till  the  "  craft  by  which  we  get  our  wealth"  was
proved  to  be  in  danger.

Reflections  such  as  these  are  painfully  forced  on
us  by  the  evident  fraud  exhibited  by  many  of  the
actors  in  the  scenes  of  exorcism  narrated  by  Calmet,
the  vile  purposes  to  which  the  services  of  the
Church  were  turned,  and  the  recklessness  with
which  the  supposed  or  pretended  evil,  and  equally
pretended  remedy,  were  used  for  political  intrigue
or  state  oppression.

Independent  of  these  conclusions,  there  is  some-
thing lamentable  in  a  state  of  the  public  mind,
which  was  so  little  prone  to  examination  as  to
receive  such  a  mass  of  superstition  without  sifting
the  wheat,  for  such  there  undoubtedly  is,  from  the
chaff.  Calmet's  Work  contains  enough,  had  we  the
minor  circumstances  in  each  case  preserved,  to  set
at  rest  many  philosophic  doubts,  and*  to  illustrate
many  physical  facts ;  and  to  those  who  desire  to


INTRODUCTION.  Xl.

know  what  was  believed  by  our  Christian  fore-
fathers, and  why  it  was  beheved,  the  narrative  is
absolutely  invaluable.  Calmet  was  a  man  of  natu-
rally cool,  calm  judgment,  pious  and  truthful,  and
possessed  of  singular  learning.  A  short  sketch
of  his  life  will  not,  perhaps,  be  unacceptable  to  the
reader.

Augustine  Calmet  was  born  in  the  year  1672,
at  a  village  near  Commerci,  in  Lorraine.  He  early
gave  proofs  of  aptitude  for  study,  and  an  oppor-
tunity was  speedily  offered  of  devoting  himself  to  a
life  of  learning.  In  his  sixteenth  year  he  became
a  Benedictine  of  the  Congregation  of  St.  Vannes,
and  prosecuted  his  theological  and  such  philosophi-
cal studies  as  the  time  allowed  with  great  success.
He  was  speedily  appointed  to  teach  the  younger
portion  of  the  community,  and  gave  in  this  employ-
ment such  decided  satisfaction  to  his  superiors,  that
he  was  soon  marked  for  preferment.  His  chief
study  was  the  Scriptures ;  and  in  the  twenty-second
year  of  his  age,  a  period  unusually  early  at  a  time
when  all  benefices  and  beneficial  employments  were
matters  of  sale,  he  was  appointed  to  be  sub -prior  of
the  monastery  of  Munster,  in  Alsace,  where  he  pre-
sided over  an  academy.  This  academy  consisted
of  ten  or  twelve  monks,  and  its  object  was  the
investigation  of  Scripture.  Calmet  was  not  idle  in
his  new  position.    Besides  communicating  so  much


XU  INTRODUCTIOX.

valuable  information  as  to  make  his  pupils  the  best
biblical  scholars  of  the  country,  he  made  extensive
collections  for  his  Commentary  on  the  Old  and  New
Testaments,  and  for  his  still  more  celebrated  work,
the  History  of  the  Bible.  These  materials  he  sub-
sequently digested  and  arranged.  The  Commen-
tary, a  work  of  immense  value,  was  published  in
separate  volumes  from  1707  to  1716.  His  labours
attracted  renewed  and  increased  attention,  and  the
offer  of  a  bishopric  was  made  to  him,  which  he
unhesitatingly  declined.

In  1718,  he  was  elected  to  the  abbacy  of
St.  Leopold,  in  Nancy ;  and  ten  years  afterwards,
to  that  of  Senones,  where  he  spent  the  remainder
of  his  days.  His  writings  are  numerous  :  two  have
been  already  mentioned;  and  so  great  was  the
popularity  of  his  Commentaries,  that  they  were
translated  into  no  fewer  than  six  languages  Vvdthin
ten  years.  They  exhibit  a  favourable  aspect  of  the
author's  mind,  and  give  a  very  high  idea  of  his
erudition.  One  cause  which  tended  greatly  to  the
universal  acceptability  of  this  Work,  was  its  sin-
gular freedom  from  sectarian  bitterness.  Pro-
testants as  well  as  Romanists  may  use  it  with
equal  satisfaction  ;  and  accordingly,  it  is  considered
a  work  of  standard  authority  in  England  as  much
as  on  the  Continent.

In    addition   to   these    Commentaries,    and   his


INTRODUCTION.  Xlll

History  of  the  Bible,  and  Eragments,  (the  best
edition  of  which  latter  work  in  English  is  by
Isaac  Taylor,)  he  wrote  the  "Ecclesiastical  and
Civil  History  of  Lorraine  \'  "A  Catalogue  of  the
Writers  of  Lorraine  ;"  "  Universal  History,  Sacred
and  Profane  ;"  a  small  collection  of  Reveries  ;  and
a  work  entitled,  "  A  Literal,  Moral,  and  Historical
Commentary  on  the  Rule  of  St.  Benedict,"  a  work
which  is  full  of  curious  information  on  ancient
customs,  particularly  ecclesiastical.  He  is  among
the  few,  also,  w^ho  have  written  on  ancient  music.
He  lived  to  a  good  old  age  ;  and  died  regretted
and  much  respected  in  1757.

Of  all  his  Works,  that  now  presented  to  the
reader  is  perhaps  the  most  popular  ;  it  went
rapidly  through  many  editions,  and  received  from
the  author's  hand  continual  corrections  and  addi-
tions. To  say  that  it  is  characterised  by  uniform
judgment,  would  be  to  give  it  a  praise  somewhat
different  as  well  as  somewhat  greater  than  that
which  it  merits.  It  is  a  vast  repertory  of  legends,
more  or  less  probable ;  some  of  which  have  very
little  foundation, — and  some  which  Calmet  him-
self would  have  done  well  to  omit,  though  now,  as
a  picture  of  the  belief  entertained  in  that  day,  they
greatly  add  to  the  value  of  the  book.  Eor  the
same  reasons  which  have  caused  the  retention  of
these  passages,  no  alterations  have  been  made  in

b  3


XIV  INTRODUCTION.

the  citations  from  Scripture,  which  being  trans-
lations from  the  Vulgate,  necessarily  differ  in
phraseology  from  the  version  in  use  among  our-
selves. The  apocryphal  books  too  are  quoted,  and
the  story  of  Bel  and  the  Dragon  referred  to  as  a
part  of  the  prophecy  of  Daniel ;  but  what  is  of
consequence  to  observe,  is,  that  doctrines  are
founded  on  these  translations,  and  on  those  very
points  in  which  they  differ  from  our  own.

If  the  history  of  Popery,  and  especially  that  form
and  development  of  it  exhibited  in  the  monastic
orders,  be  ever  written,  this  Work  will  be  of  the
greatest  importance : — it  will  show  the  means  by
which  dominion  was  obtained  over  the  minds  of
the  ignorant ;  how  the  most  sacred  mysteries  were
perverted ;  and  frauds,  which  can  hardly  be  termed
pious,  used  to  support  institutions  which  can
scarcely  be  called  religious.  That  the  spirits  of
the  dead  should  be  permitted  to  return  to  earth,
under  circumstances  the  most  grotesque,  to  support
the  doctrines  of  masses  for  the  dead,  piirgatory
and  propitiatory  penance ;  that  demons  should  be
exorcised  to  give  testimony  to  the  merits  of  rival
orders  of  monks  and  friars;  that  relics,  many  of
them  supposititious,  and  many  of  the  most  disgust-
ing and  blasphemous  character,  should  have  power
to  affect  the  eternal  state  of  the  departed;  and
that  all,  saints,  angels,  demons,  and  the  ghosts  of


INTRODUCTION.  XV

the  departed,  should  support,  with  great  variations
indeed,  the  corrupt  dealings  of  a  corrupt  priest-
hood,— form  a  creed  worthy  of  the  darkest  and
most  unworthy  days  of  heathenism.

There  is,  however,  one  excuse,  or  rather  pallia-
tion, for  the  superstition  of  that  time.  In  periods  of
great  public  depravity — and  few  epochs  have  been
more  depraved  than  that  in  which  Calmet  lived —
Satan  has  great  power.  With  a  ruler  like  the
Regent  Duke  of  Orleans,  with  a  Church  governor
like  Cardinal  Dubois,  it  would  appear  that  the  civil
and  ecclesiastical  authority  of  France  had  sold  itself,
like  Ahab  of  old,  to  work  wickedness ;  or,  as  the
Apostle  says,  "  to  work  all  uncleanness  with  greedi-
ness." In  an  age  so  characterised,  it  does  not  seem
at  all  improbable  that  portentous  events  should
from  time  to  time  occur ;  that  the  servants  of  the
devil  should  be  strengthened  together  with  their
master ;  that  many  should  be  given  over  to  strong
delusions  and  to  believe  a  lie;  and  that  the  evil
part  of  the  invisible  world  should  be  permitted  to
ally  itself  more  closely  with  the  men  of  an  age  so
congenial.  Real  cases  of  demoniacal  possession
might,  perhaps,  be  met  with,  and  though  scarcely
amenable  to  the  exorcisms  of  a  clergy  so  corrupt  as
that  of  France  in  that  day,  they  would  yet  justify
a  belief  in  the  reality  of  those  cases  got  up  for  the
sake  of  filthy  lucre,  personal  ambition,  or  private


XVI  INTRODUCTION.

revenge.  If  the  public  mind  was  prepared  for
a  belief  in  such  cases,  there  were  not  wanting  men
to  tarn  it  to  profitable  account ;  and  the  quiet
student,  who  believed  the  efficacy  of  the  means
used,  and  was  scarcely  aware  of  the  wickedness  of
the  age  in  which  he  lived,  might  easily  be  induced
to  credit  the  tales  told  him  of  demons  expelled  by
the  power  of  a  Church,  to  which  in  the  beginning
an  authority  to  do  so  had  undoubtedly  been  given,
and  whose  awful  corruptions  were  to  him  at  least
greatly  veiled.

Calmet  was  a  man  of  great  integrity  and  consi-
derable acumen  :  he  passed  an  innocent  and  ex-
emplary life  in  studious  seclusion,  mixing  of  course
little  with  the  world  at  large,  resided  remote  "  from
courts,  and  camps,  and  strife  of  war  or  peace ;"  and
there  appears  occasionally  in  his  writings  a  kind  of
nervous  apprehension  lest  the  dogmas  of  the  Church
to  which  he  was  pledged  should  be  less  capable
than  he  could  wish  of  satisfactory  investigation.
When  he  meets  with  tales  like  those  of  the  vam-
pires or  vroucolacas,  which  concern  only  what  he
considered  an  heretical  Church,  and  with  which,
therefore,  he  might  deal  according  to  his  owm  w^ill —
apply  to  them  the  ordinary  rules  of  evidence,  and
treat  them  as  mundane  affairs — there  he  is  clear-
sighted, critical  and  acute;  and  accordingly  he
discusses  the  matter  philosophically  and  logically.


INTRODUCTION.  XVll

and  concludes,  without  fear  of  sinning  against  the
Church,  that  the  whole  is  delusion.  When,  on  the
other  hand,  he  has  to  deal  with  cases  of  demoniacal
possession,  in  countries  under  the  rule  of  the
Roman  hierarchy,  he  contents  himself  with  the
decisions  of  the  scholastic  divines  and  the  opinions
of  the  fathers,  and  makes  frequent  references  to  the
decrees  of  various  provincial  parliaments.  The
effects  of  such  a  state  of  mind  upon  scientific  and
especially  metaphysical  investigation,  may  be  easily
imagined,  and  are  to  be  traced  more  or  less
distinctly  in  every  page  of  the  Work  before  us.

Books  like  this — the  "  Disquisitiones  Magicae"
of  Delrio,  the  "  Demonomania "  of  Bodin,  the
"  Malleus  Maleficarum  "  of  Sprengel,  and  the
like,  are  at  no  time  to  be  regarded  merely  as
subjects  of  amusement :  they  have  their  philoso-
phical value ;  they  have  a  still  greater  historical
value ;  and  they  show  how  far  even  upright  minds
in  ay  be  warped  by  imperfect  education,  and  slavish
deference  to  authority.

The  edition  here  followed  is  that  of  1751,  which
contains  the  latest  corrections  of  the  author,  and
several  additional  pieces,  which  are  all  included  in
the  present  Volumes.

SioN  College,  London  Wall,
May  1850.


CONTENTS


OP


THE     FIRST     VOLUME.


FACE

Preface xxiii

CHAPTER

I.  The  Appearance  of  Good  Angels  proved  by  the  Books  of

the  Old  Testament 3

II.  The  Appearance  of  Good  Angels  proved  by  the  Books  of

the  New  Testament 6

III.  Under  what  form  have  Good  Angels  appeared  1  .     ...  11
IV.  Opinions    of   the  Jews,    Christians,   Mahometans,   and
Oriental  Nations,  concerning  the  Apparitions  of  Good

Angels 17

V.  Opinion  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans  on  the  Apparitions  of

Good  Genii 22

VI.  The  Apparition  of  Bad  Angels  proved  by  the   Holy

Scriptures— Under  what  Form  they  have  appeared  .     .  29

VII.  Of  Magic 41

VIII.  Objections  to  the  Reality  of  Magic 48

IX.  Reply  to  the  Objections 61

X.  Examination  of  the  Affair  of  Hocque,  Magician  ....  58

XL  Magic  of  the  Eg}'ptians  and  Chaldeans 64

XII.  Magic  among  the  Greeks  and  Romans 70

XIII.  Examples  which  prove  the  Reality  of  Magic 75

XIV.  Effects  of  Magic  according  to  the  Poets 86


XX  CONTENTS.

CHAPTF.a.  PAGE

XY.  Of  the  Pagan  Oracles 90

XVI.  The  Certainty  of  the  Event  predicted,  not  always  a

proof  that  the  Prediction  conies  from  God    ....     95
XVII.  Reasons  which  lead  us  to  believe  that  the  greater  part
of  the  Ancient  Oracles  were  only  Impositions  of  the
Priests  and  Priestesses,  who  feigned  that  they  were

inspired  by  God 101

XVIII.  Of  Sorcerers  and  Sorceresses,  or  AVitches 108

XIX.  Instances  of  Sorcerers  and  "Witches  being,  as  they  said,

transported  to  the  Sabbath 117

XX.  Story  of  Louis  Gaufredi  and  Magdalen  de  la  Palud,

owned  by  themselves  to  be  a  Sorcerer  and  Sorceress  .  124
XXI.  Reasons  which  prove  the  Possibility  of  Sorcerers  and

Witches  being  transported  to  the  Sabbath   .     .     .     .132
XXII.  Continuation  of  the  same  Subject      .    ' 142

XXIII.  Obsession  and  Possession  of  the  Devil 147

XXIV.  The  Truth  and  Reality  of  Possession  and  Obsession  by

the  Devil  proved  from  Scripture 153

XXV.  Examples  of  Real  Possessions  caused  by  the  Devil  .     .156

XXVI.  Continuation  of  the  same  Subject 163

XXVII.  Objections  against  the  Obsessions  and  Possessions  of

the  Demon — Reply  to  the  Objections 173

XXVIII.  Continuation  of  Objections  against  Possessions^  and

some  Replies  to  those  Objections 181

XXIX.  Of  Familiar  Spirits 191

XXX.  Some  other  Examples  of  Elves 200

XXXI.  Spirits  that  keep  watch  over  Treasure 212

XXXII.  Other  instances    of   Hidden    Treasures,   which   were

guarded  by  Good  or  Bad  Spirits 220

XXXIII.  Spectres  which  appear,  and  predict  things  unknown

and  to  come 225

XXXIV.  Other  Apparitions  of  Spectres 230

XXXV.  Examination  of  the  Apparition  of  a  pretended  Spectre  237

XXXVI,  Of  Spectres  which  haunt  Houses 241


CONTENTS.  xxi

CHAPTER  PAGE

XXXYIL  Other  Instances   of   Spectres  which    haunt    certain

Houses 249

XXXYIII.  Prodigious  effects  of   Imagination  in  those  Men  or
Women  who  believe  they  hold  Intercourse  with  the

Demon 254

XXXIX.  Eeturn  and  Apparitions  of  Souls  after  the  Death  of  the

Body,  proved  from  Scripture 261

XL.  Apparitions  of  Spirits  proved  from  History    ....  268

XLI.  More  Instances  of  Apparitions 278

XLII.  On   the   Apparitions   of   Spirits  who    imprint  their

Hands  on  Clothes  or  on  Wood 286

XLIII.  Opinions  of  the  Jews,  Greeks,  and  Latins,  concerning

the  Dead  who  are  left  unburied 296

XLIV.  Examination  of  what  is  required  or  revealed  to  the

Living  by  the  Dead  who  return  to  Earth      ....  306
XLV.  Apparitions  of  Men  still  alive,  to  other  living  Men,

absent,  and  very  distant  from  each  other      ....  313

XLVI.  Arguments  concerning  Apparitions 334

XLVII.  Objections  against  Apparitions,  and  Keplies  to  those

Objections 343

XLVIII.  Some  other  Objections  and  Replies 349

XLIX.  The  Secrets  of  Physics  and  Chemistry  taken  for  super-
natural things 358

L.  Conclusion  of  the  Treatise  on  Apparitions 364

LI.  Way  of  explaining  Apparitions 371

LII.  The  difficulty  of  explaining  the  manner"  in  which
Apparitions  make  their  appearance,  whatever  system
may  be  proposed  on  the  subject 374


PREFACE.


The  great  number  of  authors  who  have  written  upon
the  apparitions  of  angels,  demons,  and  disembodied
souls  is  not  unknown  to  me;  and  I  do  not  presume
sufficiently  on  my  own  capacity  to  believe  that  I  shall
succeed  better  in  it  than  they  have  done,  and  that
I  shall  transcend  their  knowledge  and  their  discoveries.
I  am  perfectly  sensible  that  I  expose  myself  to  criti-
cism, and  perhaps  to  the  mockery  of  many  readers,  who
reo-ard  this  matter  as  done  with,  and  settled  in  the
minds  of  philosophers,  learned  men,  and  many  theo-
logians. I  must  not  reckon  either  on  the  approbation
of  the  people,  whose  want  of  discernment  prevents  their
being  competent  judges  of  this  same.  My  aim  is  not
to  foment  superstition,  nor  to  feed  the  vain  curiosity  of
visionaries,  and  those  who  believe  without  examination
everything  that  is  related  to  them  as  soon  as  they  find
therein  anything  marvellous  and  supernaturaL  I  write
only  for  reasonable  and  unprejudiced  minds,  which
examine  things ' seriously  and  coolly;  I  speak  but  for
those  who  assent  even  to  known  truth  only  after  mature
reflection,  who  know  how  to  doubt  of  what  is  uncer-
tain, to  suspend  their  judgment  on  what  is  doubtful,
and  to  deny  what  is  manifestly  false.

As  for  pretended  freethinkers,  who  reject  everything
in  order  to  distinguish  themselves,  and  to  place  them-
selves above'  the  common  herd,  I  leave  them  in  then*
elevated  sphere ;  they  will  think  of  this  work  as  they


XXIV  PRErACE.

may  consider  proper,   and  as  it  is  not  calculated  for
them,  will  not  probably  take  the  trouble  to  read  it.

I  undertook  it  for  my  own  information,  and  to  form
to  myself  a  just  idea  of  all  that  is  said  on  the  appari-
tions of  angels,  of  the  demon,  and  of  disembodied
souls.  I  wished  to  see  how  far  that  matter  was  certain
or  uncertain,  true  or  false,  known  or  unknown,  clear  or
obscure.

In  this  great  number  of  facts  which  I  have  collected
I  have  endeavoured  to  make  a  choice,  and  not  to  heap
together  too  great  a  multitude  of  them,  for  fear  that
in  the  too  numerous  examples  the  doubtful  might
harm  the  certain,  and  in  wishing  to  prove  too  much
I  might  prove  absolutely  nothing.  There  will,  even
amongst  those  I  have  cited,  be  found  some  which  will
not  easily  be  credited  by  many  readers,  and  I  allow
them  to  regard  such  as  not  related.

I  beg  those  readers,  nevertheless,  to  discern  justly
amongst  these  facts  and  instances ;  after  which  they  can
with  me  form  their  opinion — affirm,  deny,  or  remain  in
doubt.

From  the  respect  which  every  man  owes  to  truth,
and  the  veneration  which  a  Christian  and  a  Priest  owes
to  religion,  it  appeared  to  me  very  important  to  unde-
ceive people  respecting  the  opinion  which  they  have  of
apparitions,  if  they  believe  them  all  to  be  true ;  or  to
instruct  them  and  show  them  the  truth  and  reality
of  a  great  number.  If  they  think  them  all  false.  It
is  always  shameful  to  be  deceived  ;  and  dangerous,
in  regard  to  religion,  to  believe  on  light  grounds,
to  remain  wilfully  in  doubt,  or  to  maintain  oneself
without  any  reason  in  superstition  and  illusion ;  it  is
already  much  to  know  how  to  doubt  wisely,  and  not  to
form  a  decided  opinion  beyond  what  one  really  knows.


PREFACE.  XXV

I  never  had  any  idea  of  treating  profoundly  the
matter  of  apparitions ;  I  have  treated  of  it,  as  it  were,
by  chance,  and  occasionally.  My  first  and  principal
object  was  to  discourse  of  the  vampires  of  Hungary.
In  collecting  my  materials  on  that  subject,  I  found
many  things  concerning  apparitions  ;  the  great  number
of  these  embarrassed  this  treatise  on  vampires.  I  de-
tached some  of  them,  and  thus  have  composed  this
treatise  on  apparitions :  there  still  remains  a  large
number  of  them,  which  I  might  have  separated  for  the
better  arrangement  of  this  treatise.  Many  persons  here
have  taken  the  accessory  for  the  principal,  and  have
paid  more  attention  to  the  first  part  than  to  the  second,
which  was,  however,  the  first  and  the  principal  in  my
design.  For  I  own  I  have  always  been  much  struck  with
what  was  related  of  the  vampires  or  ghosts  of  Hungary,
Moravia,  and  Poland;  of  the  vroucolacas  of  Greece ;  and
of  the  excommunicated,  who  are  said  not  to  be  subject  to
decomposition  after  death.  I  thought  I  ought  to  bestow
on  it  all  the  attention  In  my  power;  and  I  have  deemed
it  right  to  treat  on  this  subject  in  a  particular  disserta-
tion. After  having  deeply  studied  it,  and  obtaining  as
much  information  as  I  was  able,  I  found  little  solidity
and  certainty  on  the  subject  ;  which,  joined  to  the
opinion  of  some  prudent  and  respectable  persons  whom  I
consulted,  had  induced  me  to  give  up  my  design  entirely,
and  to  renounce  labouring  on  a  subject  which  is  so  con-
tradictory, and  embraces  so  much  uncertainty.

But  looking  at  the  matter  in  another  point  of  view,
I  resumed  my  pen,  decided  upon  undeceiving  the  public,
if  I  found  that  what  was  said  of  it  was  absolutely  false ;
to  show  that  what  Is  uttered  on  this  subject  is  uncer-
tain, and  that  we  ought  to  be  very  reserved  in  pro-
nouncing on  these  vampires,  which  have  made  so  much


XXvi  PREIACE.

noise  in  the  world  for  a  certain  time,  and  still  divide
opinions  at  this  day,  even  in  the  countries  vrhich  are  the
scene  of  their  pretended  return,  and  where  they  appear;
or  to  show  that  what  has  been  said  and  written  on  this
subject  is  not  destitute  of  probability,  and  that  the
subject  of  the  return  of  vampires  is  worthy  the  atten-
tion of  the  curious  and  the  learned,  and  deserves  to  bf
seriously  studied,  to  have  the  facts  related  of  it  ex-
amined, and  the  causes,  circumstances,  and  means
sounded  deeply.

I  am  then  about  to  examine  this  question  as  a  histo-
rian, philosopher,  and  theologian.  As  a  historian,  I
shall  endeavour  to  discover  the  truth  of  the  facts;  as
a  philosopher,  I  shall  examine  the  causes  and  circum-
stances ;  lastly,  the  knowledge  or  light  of  theology  will
cause  me  to  deduce  consequences  as  relating  to  religion.
Thus  I  do  not  write  in  the  hope  of  convincing  free-
thinkers and  pyrrhonians,  who  will  not  allow  the  exist-
ence of  ghosts  or  vampires,  nor  even  of  the  apparitions
of  angels,  demons,  and  spirits;  nor  to  intimidate  those
weak  and  credulous,  by  relating  to  them  extraordinary
stories  of  apparitions.  I  do  not  reckon  either  on  curing
the  superstitious  of  their  errors,  nor  the  people  of  their
prepossessions ;  not  even  on  correcting  the  abuses  which
arise  from  this  unenlightened  belief,  nor  of  doing  away
all  the  doubts  which  may  be  formed  on  apparitions;
still  less  do  I  pretend  to  erect  myself  as  a  judge  and
censor  of  the  works  and  sentiments  of  others,  nor  to
distinguish  myself,  make  myself  a  name,  or  divert  my-
self, by  spreading  abroad  dangerous  doubts  upon  a
subject  which  concerns  religion,  and  from  which  they
might  make  wrong  deductions  against  the  certainty  of
the  Scriptures,  and  against  the  unshaken  dogmas  of
our  creed.     I  shall  treat  it  as  solidly  and  gravely  as  it


PREFACE,  XXVll

merits;  and  I  pray  God  to  give  me  that  knowledge
which  is  necessary  to  do  it  successfully.

I  exhort  my  reader  to  distinguish  between  the  facts
related,  and  the  manner  in  which  they  happened.  The
tact  may  be  certain,  and  the  way  in  which  it  occurred
unknown.  Scripture  relates  certain  apparitions  of
ansels  and  disembodied  souls ;  these  instances  are  indu-
bitable  and  found  in  the  revelations  of  the  holy  books ;
but  the  manner  in  which  God  operated  the  resurrec-
tions, or  in  which  he  permitted  these  apparitions  to  take
place,  is  hidden  among  his  secrets.  It  is  allowable  for
us  to  examine  them,  to  seek  out  the  circumstances,  and
propound  some  conjectures  on  the  manner  in  which
it  all  came  to  pass ;  but  it  would  be  rash  to  decide  upon
a  matter  which  God  has  not  thought  proper  to  reveal
to  us.  I  say  as  much  in  proportion,  concerning  the
stories  related  by  sensible,  contemporary,  and  judicious
authors,  who  simply  relate  the  facts  without  entering
into  the  examination  of  the  circumstances,  of  which,
perhaps,  they  themselves  were  not  well  informed.

It  has  already  been  objected  to  me,  that  I  cited  poets
and  authors  of  little  credit,  in  support  of  a  thing  so
grave  and  so  disputed  as  the  apparition  of  spirits :  such
authorities,  they  say,  are  more  calculated  to  cast
a  doubt  on  apparitions,  than  to  establish  the  truth  of
them.

But  I  cite  those  authors  as  witnesses  of  the  opinions
of  nations ;  and  I  count  it  not  a  small  thing  in  the
extreme  licence  of  opinions,  which  at  this  day  predomi-
nates in  the  world,  amongst  those  even  who  make
a  profession  of  Christianity,  to  be  able  to  show  that  the
ancient  Greeks  and  Romans  thouo;ht  that  souls  were
immortal,  that  they  subsisted  after  the  death  of  the
body,  and  that  there  was  another  life, ,  in  which  they


XXVm  PREFACE.

received  the  reward  of  their  good  actions,  or  the  chas-
tisement of  their  crimes.

Those  sentiments  which  we  read  in  the  poets,  are
also  repeated  in  the  fathers  of  the  Church,  and  the
Pagan  and  Christian  historians;  but  as  they  did  not
pretend  to  think  them  weighty,  nor  to  approve  them  in
repeating  them,  it  must  not  be  imputed  to  me  either,
that  I  have  any  intention  of  authorizing  them.  For  in-
stance, what  I  have  related  of  the  manes,  or  lares;  of  the
evocation  of  souls  after  the  death  of  the  body ;  of  the
avidity  of  these  souls  to  suck  the  blood  of  the  immolated
animals;  of  the  shape  of  the  soul  separated  from  the
body ;  of  the  inquietude  of  souls  which  have  no  rest
until  their  bodies  are  under  ground ;  of  those  supersti-
tious statues  of  wax  which  are  devoted  and  consecrated
under  the  name  of  certain  persons  whom  the  magicians
pretended  to  kill  by  burning  and  stabbing  their  effigies ;
of  the  transportation  of  wizards  and  witches  through
the  air,  and  of  their  assemblies  on  the  Sabbath ;
all  these  things  are  related  both  in  the  works  of  the
philosophers  and  pagan  historians,  as  well  as  in  the
poets.

I  know  the  value  of  one  and  the  other,  and  I  esteem
them  as  they  deserve ;  but  I  think  that  in  treating  this
matter,  it  is  important  to  make  known  to  our  readers
the  ancient  superstitions,  the  vulgar  or  common  opinions,
and  the  prejudices  of  nations,  to  be  able  to  refute
them,  and  bring  back  the  figures  to  truths,  by  freeing
them  from  what  poesy  had  added  for  the  embellishment
of  the  poem,  and  the  amusement  of  the  reader.

Moreover,  I  generally  repeat  this  kind  of  thing,  only
when  it  is  apropos  of  certain  facts  avowed  by  historians,
and  by  other  grave  and  rational  authors;  and  some-
times rather  as  an  ornament  of  the  discourse,  or  to


PREFACE.  XXIX

enliven  the  matter,  than  to  derive  thence  certain  proofs
and  consequences  necessary  for  the  dogma,  or  to  certify
the  facts  and  give  weight  to  my  recital.

I  know  how  little  we  must  depend  on  what  Lucian
says  on  this  subject;  he  only  speaks  of  it  to  ridi-
cule it.  Philostratus,  Jamblicus,  and  some  others,  do
not  merit  more  consideration ;  therefore  I  quote  them
only  to  refute  them,  or  to  show  how  far  idle  and  ridicu-
lous credulity  has  been  carried  on  these  matters,  which
were  laughed  at  by  the  most  sensible  among  the
heathens  themselves.

The  consequences  which  I  deduce  from  all  these
stories,  and  these  poetical  fictions,  and  the  manner  in
which  I  speak  of  them  in  the  course  of  this  dissertation,
sufficiently  vouch  that  esteem,  and  give  as  true  and
certain  only  what  is  so  in  fact ;  and  that  I  do  not  wish
to  impose  on  my  reader,  by  relating  many  things  which
I  myself  regard  as  false,  or  as  doubtful,  or  even  as
fabulous.  But  this  ought  not  to  be  prejudicial  to  the
dogma  of  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  and  to  that  of
another  life,  nor  to  the  truth  of  certain  apparitions
related  in  Scripture,  or  proved  elsewhere  by  good  testi-
mony.

The  first  edition  of  this  work  having  been  printed  in
my  absence,  and  upon  an  incorrect  copy,  several  mis-
prints have  occurred,  and  even  expressions  and  phrases
displeasing  and  interrupted.  I  have  tried  to  remedy
this  in  a  second  edition,  and  to  cast  light  on  those
passages  which  they  noticed  as  demanding  explanation,
and  correcting  what  might  offend  scrupulous  readers,
and  prevent  the  bad  consequences  which  might  be
derived  from  what  I  had  said.  I  have  even  done  more
in  this  third  edition.  I  have  retrenched  several  pas-
sages ;  others  I  have  suppressed ;  I  have  profited  by

VOL.  I.  c


XXX  PREFACE.

tlie  advice  which  has  been  given  me;  and  I  have
replied  to  the  objections  which  have  been  made.

People  have  complained  that  I  took  no  part,  and  did
not  come  to  a  decision  on  several  difficulties  which  I
propose,  and  that  I  leave  my  reader  in  uncertainty.

I  make  but  little  defence  against  this  reproach;  I
should  require  more  justification  if  I  decided  without  a
perfect  knowledge  of  causes,  for  one  side  of  the  question,
at  the  risk  of  embracing  an  error,  and  of  falling  into  a
still  greater  impropriety.  There  is  wisdom  in  suspend-
ing our  judgment  till  we  have  succeeded  in  finding  the
very  truth.

I  have  also  been  told,  that  certain  persons  have  made
a  joke  of  some  facts  which  I  have  related.  If  I  related
them  as  certain,  and  they  aiFord  just  cause  for  plea-
santry, let  the  condemnation  pass ;  but  if  I  cited  them
as  fabulous  and  false,  they  present  no  subject  for
pleasantry  ;   Falsiim  non  est  de  ratione  facet i.

There  are  certain  persons  who  delight  in  jesting  on
the  most  serious  things,  and  who  spare  nothing,  either
sacred  or  profane.  The  histories  of  the  Old  and
New  Testament,  the  most  sacred  ceremonies  of  our
religion,  the  lives  of  the  most  respectable  saints,  are
not  safe  from  their  dull,  tasteless  pleasantry.

I  have  been  reproached  for  having  related  several
false  histories,  several  doubtful  facts,  and  several
fabulous  events.  This  is  true ;  but  I  give  them  for
what  they  are.  I  have  declared  several  times,  that  I
did  not  vouch  for  their  truth,  that  I  repeated  them  to
show  how  false  and  ridiculous  they  were,  and  to  deprive
them  of  the  credit  they  might  have  with  the  people ;
and  if  I  have  not  gone  at  length  into  their  refutation,  I
thought  it  right  to  let  my  reader  have  the  pleasure  of
refuting  them,  supposing  him  to  possess  enough  good


PREFACE.  XXXI

sense  and  self-sufficiency  to  form  his  own  judgment
upon  them,  and  feel  the  same  contempt  for  such  stories
that  I  do  myself.  It  is  doing  too  much  honour  to  cer-
tain things  to  refute  them  seriously.

But  another  objection,  and  a  much  more  serious  one,
is  said  to  be,  what  I  say  of  the  illusions  of  the  demon,
leading  some  persons  to  doubt  of  the  truth  of  the
apparitions  related  in  Scripture,  as  well  as  of  the  others
suspected  of  falsehood.

I  answer,  that  the  consequences  deduced  from  princi-
ples are  not  right,  except  when  things  are  equal,  and
the  subjects  and  circumstances  the  same  ;  without  which
there  can  be  no  application  of  principles.  The  facts  to
which  my  reasoning  applies,  are  related  by  authors  of
small  authority,  by  ordinary  or  common-place  historians,
bearing  no  character  which  deserves  a  belief  of  any
thing  superhuman.  I  may,  without  attacking  their
person  or  their  merit,  advance  that  they  may  have  been
badly  informed,  prepossessed,  and  mistaken ;  that  the
spirit  of  seduction  may  have  been  of  the  party ;  that
the  senses,  the  imagination,  and  superstition,  may  have
made  them  take  that  for  truth,  which  was  only  seeming.

But,  in  regard  to  the  apparitions  related  in  the  Holy
Scriptures,  they  borrow  their  infallible  authority  from
the  sacred  and  inspired  authors  who  wrote  them ;  they
are  verified  by  the  events  which  followed  them,  by  the
execution  or  fulfilment  of  predictions  made  many  ages
previously ;  and  which  could  neither  be  done,  nor  fore-
seen, nor  performed,  either  by  the  human  mind,  or  by
the  strength  of  man,  not  even  by  the  angel  of  darkness.

I  am  but  little  concerned  at  the  opinion  passed  on
myself  and  my  intentions  in  the  publication  of  this
treatise.  Some  have  thought  that  I  did  it  to  destroy
the  popular  and  common  idea  of  apparitions,  and  to


XXXU  PREFACE.

make  it  appear  ridiculous;  and  I  acknowledge  that
those  who  read  this  work  attentively  and  without  pre-
judice, will  remark  in  it  more  arguments  for  doubting
what  the  people  believe  on  this  point,  than  they  will
find  to  favour  the  contrary  opinion.  If  I  have  treated
this  subject  seriously,  it  is  only  in  what  regards  those
facts  in  which  religion  and  the  truth  of  Scripture  is
interested ;  those  which  are  indifferent,  I  have  left  to
the  censure  of  sensible  people,  and  the  criticism  of  the
learned,  and  of  philosophical  minds.

I  declare  that  I  consider  as  true  all  the  apparitions
related  in  the  sacred  books  of  the  Old  and  j^ew  Tes-
tament ;  without  pretending,  however,  that  it  is  not
allowable  to  explain  them.  On  this  point  I  may  apply
the  principle  of  St.  Paul :  ^  "  The  letter  killeth,  and  the
Spirit  giveth  life."

As  to  the  other  apparitions  and  visions  related  in
Christian,  Jewish,  or  heathen  authors,  I  do  my  best
to  discern  amongst  them,  and  I  exhort  my  readers  to
do  the  same;  but  I  blame  and  disapprove  the  outrageous
criticism  of  those  who  deny  everything,  and  make  diffi-
culties of  everything,  in  order  to  distinguish  themselves
by  their  pretended  strength  of  mind,  and  to  authorize
themselves  thus  to  deny  everything,  dispute  the  most
certain  facts,  and  in  general  all  that  savours  of  the
marvellous.  St.  Paul  permits  us  to  examine  and  prove
everything ;  but  he  desires  us  to  hold  fast  that  which
is  o'ood.''

"  2  Cor.  iii.  16.  ^1  Thess.  v.  21.


ADVERTISEMENT.


Every  body  talks  of  apparitions  of  angels  and  demons,
and  of  souls  separated  from  the  body.  The  reality
of  these  apparitions  is  considered  as  certain  by  many
persons,  while  others  deride  them  and  treat  them
as  altogether  visionary.

I  have  determined  to  examine  this  matter,  just  to
see  what  certitude  there  can  be  on  this  point;  and
I  shall  divide  this  Dissertation  into  four  parts.  In
the  first,  I  shall  speak  of  good  angels ;  in  the  second,
of  the  appearances  of  bad  angels;  in  the  third,  of
the  apparitions  of  souls  of  the  dead ;  and  in  the
fourth,  of  the  appearance  of  living  men  to  others
living,  absent,  distant,  and  this  unknown  to  those
who  appear.  I  shall  occasionally  add  something  on
magic,  wizards,  and  witches ;  on  the  Sabbath,  oracles,
and  obsession  and  possession  by  demons.


VOL.  I.


THE   PHANTOM  WORLD.


CHAPTER  I.


THE   APPEARANCE   OP   GOOD   ANGELS    PROVED   BY   THE    BOOKS   OF   THE   OLD

TESTAMENT,


The  apparitions  or  appearances  of  good  angels  are
frequently  mentioned  in  the  books  of  the  Old  Testa-
ment. He  who  was  stationed  at  the  entrance  of  the
terrestrial  Paradise/  was  a  cherub,  armed  with  a  flam-
ing sword;  those  who  appeared  to  Abraham,  and  who
promised  that  he  should  have  a  son;^  those  who
appeared  to  Lot,  and  predicted  to  him  the  ruin  of
Sodom,  and  other  guilty  cities ;''  he  who  spoke  to
Hagar  in  the  desert,'^  and  commanded  her  to  return
to  the  dwelling  of  Abraham,  and  to  remain  submissive
to  Sarah,  her  mistress ;  those  who  appeared  to  Jacob,
on  his  journey  into  Mesopotamia,  ascending  and
descending  the  mysterious  ladder;^  he  who  taught
him  how  to  cause  his  sheep  to  bring  forth  young  dif-
ferently marked ;  ^  he  who  wrestled  with  Jacob  on  his

"  Gen.  iii.  24.  ^  Gen.  xviii.  1—3.  «=  Gen.  xix.

•^  Gen.  xxi.  17.  ^  Gen.  xxviii.  12.  ^  Gen.  xxxi.  10,  11.

b2


4  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

return  from  Mesopotamia/ — were  angels  of  light,  and
benevolent  ones;  the  same  as  he  who  spoke  with
Moses  from  the  burning  bush  on  Horeb,^  and  who
Sfave  him  the  tables  of  the  law  on  Mount  Sinai.  That
Angel  who  takes  generally  the  name  of  God,  and  acts
in  his  name,  and  with  his  authority ;  ^  who  served  as  a
guide  to  the  Hebrews  in  the  desert,  hidden  during  the
day  in  a  dark  cloud,  and  shining  during  the  night;
he  who  spoke  to  Balaam,  and  threatened  to  kill  his
she-ass  ;  ^  he,  lastly,  who  contended  with  Satan  for  the
body  of  Moses ;  ^ — all  these  angels  were  without  doubt
good  angels.

We  must  think  the  same  of  him  who  presented  him-
self armed  to  Joshua  on  the  plain  of  Jericho,"^  and  who
declared  himself  head  of  the  army  of  the  Lord ;  it  is
believed,  with  reason,  that  it  was  the  angel  Michael.
He  who  showed  himself  to  the  wife  of  Manoah,'^  the
father  of  Samson,  and  afterwards  to  Manoah  himself.
He  who  announced  to  Gideon  that  he  should  deliver
Israel  from  the  power  of  the  Midianites.°  The  angel
Gabriel,  who  appeared  to  Daniel,  at  Babylon;?  and
Raphael  who  conducted  the  young  Tobias  to  Rages,
in  Media.i

The  prophecy  of  the  Prophet  Zechariah  is  full  of
visions  of  angels/  In  the  books  of  the  Old  Testament,
the  throne  of  the  Lord  is  described  as  resting:  on
cherubim;    and  the  God  of   Israel   is   represented  as

s  Gen.  xxxii.  ^  Exod.  iii.  6,  7.        '  Exod.  iii.  iv.

^  Numb.  xxii.  xxiii.  ^  Jude  9.  ""  Josh.  v.  13.

"  Judges  xiii,  °  Judges  vi.  vii.        p  Dan.  viii.  16 ;  ix.  21.

1  Tobit  V.  '  Zech.  v.  9, 10, 11,  &c.


GOOD  ANGELS.


having  before  his  throne^  seven  principal  angels,  always
ready  to  execute  his  orders,  and  four  cherubim  sing-
in  o-  his  praises,  and  adoring  his  sovereign  holiness;
the  whole  making  a  sort  of  allusion  to  what  they  saw
in  the  court  of  the  ancient  Persian  kings,*  where  there
were  seven  principal  officers  who  saw  his  face,  ap-
proached his  person,  and  were  called  the  eyes  and  ears
of  the  king.

*  Psalm  xvii.  10 ;  Ixxix.  2,  &c.

*  Tobitxii.    Zech.iv.  10.   Rev.  i.4.


CHAPTER  11.


THE  APPEAEANCE   OF   GOOD  ANGELS   mOVED   BY   THE   BOOKS   OF  THE   KEW

TESTAMENT.


The  books  of  the  New  Testament  are  In  the  same
manner  full  of  facts  wMcli  prove  the  apparition  of  good
angels.  The  angel  Gabriel  appeared  to  Zachariah,  the
father  of  John  the  Baptist,  and  predicted  to  him  the
future  birth  of  the  Fore-runner.^  The  Jews,  who  saw
Zachariah  come  out  of  the  temple,  after  having  remained
within  it  a  longer  time  than  usual,  having  remarked
that  he  ^vas  struck  dumb,  had  no  doubt  but  that  he
had  seen  some  apparition  of  an  angel.  The  same
Gabriel  announced  to  Mary  the  future  birth  of  the
Messiah.^  When  Jesus  was  born  in  Bethlehem,  the
angel  of  the  Lord  appeared  to  the  shepherds  in  the
nio-ht,*^  and  declared  to  them  that  the  Saviour  of  the
world  was  born  at  Bethlehem.  There  is  every  reason
to  believe  that  the  star  which  appeared  to  the  Magi  in
the  East,  and  which  led  them  straight  to  Jerusalem,
and  thence  to  Bethlehem,  w^as  directed  by  a  good
angel. ^  St.  Joseph  was  warned  by  a  celestial  spirit  to
retire  into  Egypt,  with  the  mother  and  the  infant
Christ,  for  fear  that  Jesus  should  fall  into  the  hands  of

^  Luke  i.  10  -12,  &c.  ^  Luke  i.  26,  27,  &c.

«=  Luke  ii.  9,  10.  «•  Matt,  ii.  13, 14,  20.


GUARDIAN  ANGELS.  7

Herod,  and  be  involved  in  the  massacre  of  the  Inno-
cents. The  same  angel  informed  Joseph  of  the  death  of
King  Herod,  and  told  him  to  return  to  the  land  of  Israel.

After  the  temptation  of  Jesus  Christ  in  the  wilder-
ness, angels  came  and  brought  him  food.^  The  demon
tempter  said  to  Jesus  Christ,  that  God  had  commanded
his  angels  to  lead  him,  and  to  prevent  him  from  stum-
bling against  a  stone ;  which  is  taken  from  the  92d
Psalm,  and  proves  the  belief  of  the  Jews  on  the
article  of  guardian  angels.  The  Saviour  confirms  the
same  truth  when  he  says  that  the  angels  of  children
constantly  behold  the  face  of  the  celestial  Father.^
At  the  last  judgment,  the  good  angels  will  separate  the
just,"  and  lead  them  to  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  while
they  will  precipitate  the  wicked  into  eternal  fire.

At  the  agony  of  Jesus  Christ  in  the  garden  of  Olives,
an  an2:el  descended  from  heaven  to  console  him.^  After
his  resurrection,  angels  appeared  to  the  holy  women
who  had  come  to  his  tomb  to  embalm  him.^  In  the
Acts  of  the  Apostles,  they  appeared  to  the  Apostles
as  soon  as  Jesus  had  ascended  into  heaven ;  and  the
angel  of  the  Lord  came  and  opened  the  doors  of  the
prison  where  the  Apostles  were  confined,  and  set  them
at  liberty.^  In  the  same  book  St.  Stephen  tells  us  that
the  law  was  given  to  Moses  by  the  ministration  of
angels  ;^  consequently,  those  were  angels  who  appeared
on  Sinai  and  Horeb,  and  who  spoke  to  him  in  the  name
of  God,  as  his  ambassadors,  and  as  invested  with  his

*  Matt.  iv.  6,  11.        '  Matt,  xviii.  16.  s  Matt.  xiii.  45,  46.

*"  Luke  xxii.  43.         '  Matt,  xxviii.    John.       ^  Acts  v.  19.
1  Acts  yii.  30,  35.


8  THE   PHANTOM  WORLD.

authority ;  also^  the  same  Moses,  speaking  of  the  angel
of  the  Lord,  who  was  to  introduce  Israel  into  the  Pro-
mised Land,  says  that  "  the  name  of  God  is  in  him."  °^
St.  Peter,  being  in  prison,  is  delivered  from  thence  by
an  angel,^  who  conducted  him  the  length  of  a  street,
and  disappeared.  St.  Peter,  knocking  at  the  door  of
the  house  in  which  his  brethren  were,  they  could  not
believe  that  it  was  he;  they  thought  that  it  was  his
angel  who  knocked  and  spoke.  St.  Paul,  instructed  in
the  school  of  the  Pharisees,  thought  as  they  did  on  the
subject  of  angels;  he  believed  in  their  existence,  in
opposition  to  the  Sadducees,°  and  supposed  that  they
could  appear.  When  this  Apostle,  having  been  arrested
by  the  R-omans,  related  to  the  people  how  he  had  been
overthrown  at  Damascus,  the  Pharisees,  who  were  pre-
sent, replied  to  those  who  exclaimed  against  him —
"How  do  we  know,  if  an  angel  or  a  spirit  hath  not
spoken  to  him  ? "  St.  Luke  says,  that  a  Macedonian,
(apparently  the  angel  of  Macedonia,)  appeared  to
St.  Paul,  and  beo^s^ed  him  to  come  and  announce  the
Gospel  in  that  country.

St.  John,  in  the  Apocalypse,  speaks  of  the  seven
angels,  who  presided  over  the  Churches  in  Asia.  I
know  that  these  seven  angels  are  the  Bishops  of  these
Churches,  but  the  ecclesiastical  tradition  will  have  it,
that  every  Church  has  its  tutelary  angel.  In  the  same
book,  the  Apocalypse,  are  related  divers  appearances  of
angels.     All  Christian   antiquity  has  recognised  them,

'^  Exod.  xxiii.  21.  °  Acts  xii.  8,  9.

0  Eom.  i.  18.  1  Cor.  iv.  9  ;  vi.  3  ;  xii.  7.  Gal.  iii.  19.  Acts  xvi.  9  ;
xxiii.  9.    Eev.  i.  11.


GUAEDIAN  ANGELS.  9

the  Synagogue  also  has  recognised  them;  so  that  it
may  be  affirmed  that  nothing  is  more  certain  than  the
existence  of  good  angels  and  their  apparitions.

I  place  in  the  number  of  apparitions,  not  only  those
of  good  or  bad  angels,  and  the  spirits  of  the  dead  who
show  themselves  to  the  living,  but  also  those  of  the
livino^  who  show  themselves  to  the  ang-els  or  souls  of
the  dead ;  whether  these  apparitions  are  seen  in  dreams,
or  during  sleep,  or  awaking;  whether  they  manifest
themselves  to  all  those  who  are  present,  or  only  to  the
persons  to  whom  God  judges  proper  to  manifest  them.
For  instance,  in  the  Apocalypse,?  St.  John  saw  the
four  animals,  and  the  four-and-twenty  elders,  who  were
clothed  in  white  garments  and  wore  crowns  of  gold
upon  their  heads,  and  were  seated  on  thrones  around  that
of  the  Almighty,  who  prostrated  themselves  before  the
throne  of  the  Eternal,  and  cast  their  crowns  at  his  feet.

And,  elsewhere  :  "I  saw  four  angels  standing  at  the
four  corners  of  the  world,^  who  held  back  the  four
winds  and  prevented  them  from  blowing  on  the  earth ;
then  I  saw  another  angel,  who  rose  on  the  side  of  the
east,  and  who  cried  out  to  the  four  angels  who  had
orders  to  hurt  the  earth.  Do  no  harm  to  the  earth,  or
the  sea,  or  the  trees,  until  we  have  impressed  a  sign  on
the  foreheads  of  the  servants  of  God.  And  I  heard
that  the  number  of  those  who  received  this  sign  (or
mark)  was  a  hundred  and  forty-four  thousand.  After-
wards I  saw  an  innumerable  multitude  of  all  nations,
tribes,  people  and  languages,  standing  before  the  throne

p  Rev.  iv.  4,  10.  i  Eev.  vii.  1—3,  9,  &c.

B    3


10  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

of  the   Most  High,  arrayed   in   white   garments,  and
having  palms  in  their  hands."

And  in  the  same  book''  St.  John  says,  after  having
described  the  majesty  of  the  throne  of  God,  and  the
adoration  paid  to  him  by  the  angels  and  saints  prostrate
before  him,  one  of  the  elders  said  to  him, — "  Those
whom  you  see  covered  with  white  robes,  are  those  who
have  suffered  great  trials  and  afflictions,  and  have
washed  their  robes  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb;  for  which
reason  they  stand  before  the  throne  of  God,  and  will  do
so  night  and  day  in  his  temple ;  and  He  who  is  seated
on  the  throne  will  reign  over  them,  and  the  angel  which
is  in  the  midst  of  the  throne  will  conduct  them  to  the
fountains  of  living  water."  And,  again,^  "I  saw  under
the  altar  of  God  the  souls  of  those  who  have  been  put
to  death  for  defending  the  word  of  God,  and  for  the
testimony  which  they  have  rendered ;  they  cried  with  a
loud  voice,  saying,  When,  0  Lord,  wilt  thou  not  avenge
our  blood  upon  those  who  are  on  the  earth  ?  "  &c.

All  these  apparitions,  and  several  others  similar  to
them,  which  might  be  related  as  being  derived  from  the
holy  books  as  well  as  from  authentic  histories,  are  true
apparitions,  although  neither  the  angels,  nor  the
martyrs,  spoken  of  in  the  Apocalypse,  came  and  pre-
sented themselves  to  St.  John;  but,  on  the  contrary,
this  Apostle  was  transported  in  spirit  to  heaven,  to  see
there  what  we  have  just  related.  These  are  apparitions
which  may  be  called  passive  on  the  part  of  the  angels
and  holy  martyrs,  and  active  on  the  part  of  the  holy
Apostle  who  saw  them.

'  Eev.  vii.  13, 14.  •  Rev.  vi.  9,  10.


CHAPTER  III.

UNDER   WHAT   FORM    HAVE   GOOD   ANGELS   APPEARED  1

The  most  usual  form  in  which  good  angels  appear,
both  in  the  Old  Testament  and  the  New,  is  the  human
form.  It  was  in  that  shape  they  showed  themselves  to
Abraham,  Lot,  Jacob,  Moses,  Joshua,  Manoah  the  father
of  Samson,  to  David,  Tobit,  the  Prophets ;  and  in  the
New  Testament  they  appeared  in  the  same  form  to  the
Holy  Virgin,  to  Zachariah  the  father  of  John  the
Baptist,  to  Jesus  Christ  after  his  fast  of  forty  days,
and  to  him  again  in  his  agony  in  the  Garden  of  Olives.
They  showed  themselves  in  the  same  form  to  the  holy
women  after  the  resurrection  of  the  Saviour.  The  one
who  appeared  to  Joshua^  on  the  plain  of  Jericho,  ap-
peared apparently  in  the  guise  of  a  warrior,  since  Joshua
asks  him,  "  Art  thou  for  us,  or  for  our  adversaries  ?  "

Sometimes  they  hide  themselves  under  some  form
which  has  resemblance  to  the  human  shape,  like  him
who  appeared  to  Moses  in  the  burning  bush,^  and  who
led  the  Israelites  in  the  desert  in  the  form  of  a  cloud,
dense  and  dark  during  the  day,  but  luminous  at  night.''
The  Psalmist  tells  us,  that  God  makes  his  angels  serve
»  Josh.  V.  29.  ^  Exod.  iii.  3,  44.  <^  Exod.  xiii,  xiv.


12  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

as  a  piercing  wind  and  a  burning  fire,  to  execute  his
orders.*^

The  cherubim,  so  often  spoken  of  in  the  Scriptures,
and  who  are  described  as  serving  for  a  throne  to  the
majesty  of  God,  were  hieroglyphical  figures,  something
like  the  sphinx  of  the  Egyptians;  those  which  are
described  in  Ezekiel^  are  like  animals  composed  of  the
figure  of  a  man,  having  the  wings  of  an  eagle,  the  feet
of  an  ox ;  their  heads  were  composed  of  the  face  of  a
man,  an  ox,  a  lion,  and  an  eagle,  two  of  their  wings
were  spread  towards  their  fellows,  and  two  others
covered  their  body ;  they  were  brilliant  as  burning
coals,  as  lighted  lamps,  as  the  fiery  heavens  when  they
send  forth  the  lightning's  flash — they  were  terrible  to
look  upon.

The  one  who  appeared  to  DanieF  was  different  from
those  we  have  just  described;  he  was  in  the  shape  of
a  maUj  covered  with  a  linen  garment,  and  round  his
loins  a  gh'dle  of  very  fine  gold ;  his  body  was  shining
as  a  chrysolite,  his  face  as  a  flash  of  lightning ;  his  eyes
darted  fire  like  a  lamp  ;  his  arms  and  all  the  lower  part
of  his  body  was  like  brass  melted  in  the  furnace ;  his
voice  was  loud  as  that  of  a  multitude  of  people.

St.  John,  in  the  Apocalypse,^  saw  around  the  throne
of  the  Most  High  four  animals,  which  doubtless  were
four  angels ;  they  were  covered  with  eyes  before  and
behind.  The  first  resembled  a  lion,  the  second  an  ox,
the  third  had  the  form  of  a  man,  and  the  fourth  was
like  an  eagle  with  outspread  wings ;  each  of  them  had

<!  Psalm  civ.  4.  •*  Ezek.  i.  4,  6.

^  Dan.  X,  5.  s  Kev.  iv.  7,  8.


rOKM   OF  APPEARANCE.  13

six  wings,  and  they  never  ceased  to  cry  night  and  day,
"  Holy,  holy,  holy.  Lord  God  Almighty,  who  was,  and
is,  and  is  to  come/'

The  angel  who  was  placed  at  the  entrance  of  the
terrestrial  paradise  was  armed  with  a  shining  sword,^
as  well  as  the  one  who  appeared  to  Balaam,^  and  who
threatened,  or  was  near  killing,  both  himself  and  his
ass  ;  and  so,  apparently,  was  the  one  who  showed  him-
self to  Joshua  in  the  plain  of  Jericho,'^  and  the  angel
who  appeared  to  David,  ready  to  smite  all  Israel.  The
angel  Raphael  guided  the  young  Tobias  to  Rages
under  the  human  form  of  a  traveller.^  The  angel  who
was  seen  by  the  holy  woman  at  the  sepulchre  of  the
Saviour,  who  overthrew  the  large  stone  which  closed
the  mouth  of  the  tomb,  and  who  was  seated  upon  it,
had  a  countenance  which  shone  like  lightning,  and
garments  white  as  snow.^

In  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,^  the  angel  who  ex-
tricated them  from  prison,  and  told  them  to  go  boldly
and  preach  Jesus  Christ  in  the  temple,  also  appeared
to  them  in  a  human  form.  The  manner  in  which  he
delivered  them  from  the  dungeon  is  quite  miraculous ;
for  the  chief  priests  having  commanded  that  they
should  appear  before  them,  those  who  were  sent  found
the  prison  securely  closed,  the  guards  wide  awake ;
but  having  caused  the  doors  to  be  opened,  they  found
the  dungeon  empty.  How  could  an  angel,  without
opening,  or  any  fracture  of  the  doors,  thus  extricate
men   from   prison  without   either  the   guards  or  the

^  Gen.  iii.  24.  >  Numb.  xxii.  22,  23,  ^  1  Chron.  xxi.  16.

'  Tobit  V.  5.  "»  Matt,  xxyiii.  3.  °  Acts  ii.


14  THE  PHAIs^TOM  WORLD.

gaoler  perceiving  anything  of  the  matter  ?  The  thing
is  beyond  any  known  powers  of  nature ;  but  it  is  no
more  impossible  than  to  see  our  Saviour  after  his
resurrection,  invested  with  flesh  and  bones,  as  he
himself  says,  come  forth  from  his  sepulchre,  without
opening  it,  and  without  breaking  the  seals,*^  enter  the
chamber  wherein  were  the  Apostles  without  opening
the  doors,P  and  speak  to  the  disciples  going  to  Em-
maus  without  making  himself  known  to  them;  then,
after  having  opened  their  eyes,  disappear  and  become
invisible."!  During  the  forty  days  that  he  remained
upon  earth  till  his  ascension,  he  drank  and  ate  with
them,  he  spoke  to  them,  he  appeared  to  them ;  but  he
showed  himself  only  to  those  witnesses  who  were  pre-
ordained by  the  eternal  Father  to  bear  testimony  to
his  resurrection.

The  angel  who  appeared  to  the  centurion,  Cornelius,
a  pagan,  but  fearing  God,  answered  his  questions,  and
discovered  to  him  unknown  things,  which  things  came
to  pass.

Sometimes  the  angels,  without  assuming  any  visible
shape,  give  proofs  of  their  presence  by  intelligible
voices,  by  inspirations,  by  sensible  effects,  by  dreams,
or  by  revelations  of  things  unknown,  whether  future
or  past.  Sometimes  by  striking  with  blindness,  or
infusing  a  spirit  of  uncertainty  or  stupidity  in  the
minds  of  those  whom  God  wills  should  feel  the  effects
of  his  wrath ;  for  instance,  it  is  said  in  the  Scriptures
that  the  Israelites  heard  no  distinct  speech,  and  beheld

°  Matt,  xxviii.  1,  2.        p  John  xix.  20.        "i  Luke  xxiii.  15—17,  &c.


rORM   or  APPEARANCE.  15

no  form  on  Horeb  when  God  spoke  to  Moses,  and
cfave  him  the  Law/

The  angel,  who  might  have  killed  Balaam's  ass,
w^as  not  at  first  perceived  by  the  prophet;^  Daniel
was  the  only  one  who  beheld  the  angel  Gabriel,  who
revealed  to  him  the  mystery  of  the  great  empires
which  were  to  succeed  each  other.*

When  the  Lord  spoke  for  the  first  time  to  Samuel,
and  predicted  to  him  the  evils  which  he  would  inflict
on  the  family  of  the  High-priest,  Eli,  the  young  pro-
phet saw  no  visible  form ;  he  only  heard  a  voice,  which
he  at  first  mistook  for  that  of  the  High-priest,  Eli,
not  being  yet  accustomed  to  distinguish  the  voice  of
God  from  that  of  a  man.

The  angels  who  guided  Lot  and  his  family  from
Sodom  and  Gomorrah  were  at  first  perceived  under  a
human  form  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  city ;  but  after-
wards, these  same  angels  struck  the  men  with  blind-
ness, and  thus  prevented  them  from  finding  the  door
of  Lot's  house,  into  which  they  would  have  entered  by
force.

Thus,  then,  angels  do  not  always  appear  under  a
visible  or  sensible  form,  nor  in  a  figure  uniformly  the
same;  but  they  give  proofs  of  their  presence  by  an
infinity  of  different  ways — by  inspirations,  by  voices,
by  prodigies,  by  miraculous  effects,  by  predictions  of
the  future,  and  other  things  hidden  and  impenetrable
to  the  human  mind.

St.  Cyprian  relates,  that  an  African  Bishop,  falling
ill  during  the  persecution,  earnestly  requested  to  have
'  Deut.  iv.  15.  ^  Numb.  xii.  22,  23.  '  Dan.  x.  7,  8.


16  THE   PHANTOM  WORLD.

the  viaticum  administered  to  him ;  at  the  same  time
he  saw,  as  It  were,  a  young  man,  with  a  majestic  air,
and  shining  with  such  extraordinary  lustre,  that  the
eyes  of  mortals  could  not  nave  beheld  him  without
terror ;  nevertheless,  the  Bishop  was  not  alarmed.
This  angel  said  to  him  angrily,  and  in  a  menacing  tone,
"  You  fear  to  suffer.  You  do  not  wish  to  leave  this
Avorld.  What  would  you  have  me  do  for  you?"  (or
"  What  can  I  do  for  you  ? ")  The  good  Bishop  com-
prehended that  these  words  alike  regarded  him  and
the  other  Christians  who  feared  persecution  and  death.
The  Bishop  talked  to  them,  encouraged  them,  and
exhorted  them  to  arm  themselves  with  patience  to  suji-
port  the  tortures  with  which  they  were  threatened.
He  received  the  communion,  and  died  in  peace.  We
shall  find  in  different  histories  an  infinite  number  of
other  apparitions  of  angels  under  a  human  form.


CHAPTER  IV.


OPINIONS   OP   THE   JEWS,   CHRISTIANS,   MAHOMETANS,  AND  ORIENTAL  NATIONS,
CONCERNING   THE   APPARITIONS   OP   GOOD   ANGELS.


After  what  we  have  just  related  from  the  books  of  the
Old  and  New  Testament,  it  cannot  be  disavowed  that
the  Jews  in  general,  the  Apostles,  the  Christians,  and
their  disciples,  have  commonly  believed  in  the  appari-
tions of  good  angels.  The  Sadducees,  who  denied  the
existence  and  the  apparition  of  angels,  were  commonly-
considered  by  the  Jews  as  heretics,  and  as  supporting
an  erroneous  doctrine.  Jesus  Christ  refutes  them  in
the  Gospel.  The  Jews  of  our  days  believe  literally
what  is  related  in  the  Old  Testament,  concerning  the
angels  who  appeared  to  Abraham,  Lot,  and  other
patriarchs.  It  was  the  belief  of  the  Pharisees  and  of
the  Apostles  in  the  time  of  our  Saviour,  as  may  be
seen  by  the  writings  of  the  Apostles  and  by  the  whole
of  the  Gospel.

The  Mahometans  believe,  as  do  the  Jews  and  Chris-
tians, that  good  angels  appear  to  men  sometimes,  under
a  human  form;  that  they  appeared  to  Abraham  and
Lot ;  that  they  punished  the  inhabitants  of  Sodom ;
that  the  archangel  Gabriel  appeared  to  Mahomet,  and
revealed  to  him  all  that  is  laid  down  in  his  Koran :  that


18  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

the  Genii  are  of  a  middle  nature,  between  man  and
angel  f  that  they  eat,  drink,  beget  children,  that  they
die,  and  can  foresee  things  to  come.  In  consequence
of  this  principle  or  idea,  they  believe  that  there  are
male  and  female  Grenii;  that  the  males,  whom  the
Persians  call  by  the  name  of  Dives,  are  bad,  very  ugly,
and  mischievous,  making  war  against  the  Peris,  who
are  the  females.  The  Kabbis  will  have  it  that  these
Genii  were  born  of  Adam  alone,  without  any  concur-
rence of  his  wife  Eve,  or  of  any  other  woman,  and  that
they  are  what  we  call  ignis  fatuii  (or  wandering  lights).

The  antiquity  of  these  opinions  touching  the  corpo-
rality  of  angels,  appears  in  several  old  writers,  who,
deceived  by  the  apocryphal  book  which  passes  under
the  name  of  the  Booh  of  Enoch,  have  explained  of  the
angels  what  is  said  in  Genesis,^  "  That  the  children  of
God,  having  seen  the  daughters  of  men,  fell  in  love  with
their  beauty,  wedded  them,  and  begot  giants  of  them^'"'
Several  of  the  ancient  Fathers'^  have  adoj3ted  this
opinion,  which  is  now  given  up  by  every  body,  with
the  exception  of  some  new  writers,  who  desu'ed  to
revive  the  idea  of  the  corporality  of  angels,  demons,
and  souls — an  opinion  which  is  absolutely  incompatible
wdth  that  of  the  Catholic  Church,  which  holds  that
angels  are  of  a  nature  entirely  distinct  from  matter.

I  acknowledge  that,  according  to  their  system,  the
affair  of  apparitions  could  be  more  easily  explained;

=  D'Herbelot,  Bibl.  Orient.  Peritli.  Dives,  785.     Idem,  243,  p.  85.
^  Gen.  vi.  2.

•=  Joseph.  Antiq.  lib.  i.  c.  4.     Philo,  De  Gigantibus.     Justin.  Apol.
Tertul.  de  Anima.     Vide  Commentatores  in  Gen.  iv.


OPINIONS.  19

it  Is  easier  to  conceive  that  a  corporeal  substance  should
appear,  and  render  itself  visible  to  our  eyes,  than  a
substance  purely  spiritual ;  but  this  is  not  the  place  to
reason  on  a  philosophical  question,  on  which  different
hypotheses  could  be  freely  grounded,  and  to  choose
that  which  should  explain  these  appearances  in  the
most  plausible  manner,  even  though  it  answer  in  the
most  satisfactory  manner  the  questions  asked,  and  the
objections  formed  against  the  facts,  and  against  the
proposed  manner  of  stating  them.

The  question  is  resolved,  and  the  matter  decided.
The  Church  and  the  Catholic  schools,  hold  that  angels,
demons,  and  reasonable  souls,  are  disengaged  from  all
matter;  the  same  Church  and  the  same  school  hold
it  as  certain,  that  good  and  bad  angels,  and  souls
separated  from  the  body,  sometimes  appear  by  the  will
and  with  the  permission  of  God :  there  we  must  stop ;
as  to  the  manner  of  explaining  these  apparitions,  we
must,  without  losing  sight  of  the  certain  principle  of
the  immateriality  of  these  substances,  explain  them
according  to  the  analogy  of  the  Christian  and  Catholic
faith,  acknowledge  sincerely  that  in  this  matter  there
are  certain  depths  which  we  cannot  sound,  and  confine
our  mind  and  information  within  the  limits  of  that
obedience  which  we  owe  to  the  authority  of  the  Church,
that  can  neither  err  nor  deceive  us.

The  apparitions  of  good  angels,  and  of  guardian
angels,  are  frequently  mentioned  in  the  Old  as  in  the
New  Testament.  When  the  Apostle  St.  Peter  had
left  the  prison  by  the  assistance  of  an  angel,  and  went
and  knocked  at  the  door  where  the  brethren  were,  they


30  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

believed  that  it  was  his  angel  and  not  himself  who
knocked.'^  And  when  Cornelius  the  Centurion  prayed
to  God  in  his  own  house,  an  angel  (apparently  his
good  angel)  appeared  to  him,  and  told  him  to  send  and
fetch  Peter,  who  was  then  at  Joppa.^

St.  Paul  desires  that  at  Church  no  woman  should
appear  among  them  without  her  face  being  veiled,
because  of  the  angels,^  doubtless  from  respect  to  the
good  angels  who  presided  in  these  assemblies.  The
same  St,  Paul  reassures  those  who  were  with  him  in
danger  of  almost  inevitable  shipwreck,  by  telling  them
that  his  angel  had  appeared  to  him,^  and  assured
him  that  they  should  arrive  safe  at  the  end  of  their
voyage.

In  the  Old  Testament  we  likewise  read  of  several
apparitions  of  angels,  which  can  hardly  be  explained
but  as  of  guardian  angels ;  for  instance,  the  one  who
appeared  to  Hagar  in  the  wilderness,  and  commanded
her  to  return  and  submit  herself  to  Sarah  her  mistress  ;^^
and  the  angel  who  appeared  to  Abraham,  as  he  was
about  to  immolate  Isaac  his  son,  and  told  him  that  God
was  satisfied  with  his  obedience ;  ^  and  when  the  same
Abraham  sent  his  servant  Eleazer  into  Mesopotamia,
to  ask  for  a  wife  for  his  son  Isaac,  he  told  him  that  the
God  of  heaven,  who  had  promised  to  give  him  the
land  of  Canaan,  would  send  his  angel  ^  to  dispose  all
things  according  to  his  wishes.  Examples  of  similar
apparitions  of  tutelary  angels,  derived  from  the  Old

"1  Acts  xii.  15.  «  Acts  x.  2,  3.  M  Cor.  xi.  10.

«  Acts  xxvii.  21,  22.  ^  Gen.  xvi.  9.  •  Gen.  xxii.  11,  17.

^  Gen.  xxiv.  7.


UPINIOKS.  21

Testament,  might  here  be  multiplied,  but  the  circum-
stance does  not  require  a  greater  number  of  proofs.

Under  the  new  dispensation,  the  apparitions  of  good
angels,  of  guardian  spirits,  are  not  less  frequent  in  most
authentic  stories ;  there  are  few  Saints  to  whom  God
has  not  granted  similar  favours:  we  may  cite  in  par-
ticular St.  Frances,  a  Roman  lady  of  the  sixteenth
.entury,  who  saw  her  guardian  angel,  and  he  talked  to
her,  instructed  her,  and  corrected  her.


CHAPTEE  y.


OPINION   OF   THE   GREEKS   AND   KOJIANS   ON   THE  APPARITIONS   OP
GOOD   GENII.


Jamblichus,  a  disciple  of  Porphyry/  has  treated  the
matter  of  Genii  and  their  apparition  more  profoundly
than  any  other  author  of  antiquity.  It  would  seem,  to
hear  him  discourse,  that  he  knew  both  the  Genii  and
their  qualities,  and  that  he  had  with  them  the  most
intimate  and  continual  converse.  He  affirms  that  our
eyes  are  delighted  by  the  appearance  of  the  gods,  that
the  apparitions  of  the  archangels  are  terrible ;  those  of
angels  are  milder;  but  when  demons  and  heroes  appear,
they  inspire  terror;  the  archontes,  who  preside  over
this  world,  cause  at  the  same  time  an  impression  of
grief  and  fear.  The  apparition  of  souls  is  not  quite  so
disagreeable  as  that  of  heroes.  In  the  appearance  of
the  gods  there  is  order  and  mildness,  confusion  and
disorder  in  that  of  demons,  and  tumult  in  that  of  the
archontes.

When  the  gods  show  themselves,  it  seems  as  if  the
heavens,  the  sun  and  moon,  were  all  about  to  be
annihilated ;  one  would  think  that  the  earth  could  not
support  their  presence.  On  the  appearance  of  an  arch-
angel, there  is  an  earthquake  in  every  part  of  the
*  Jamblic.  lib.  ii.  cap.  3  &  5.


OPINIONS.  23

world;  it  is  preceded  by  a  stronger  light  than  that
which  accompanies  the  apparition  of  the  angels ;  at  the
appearance  of  a  demon  it  is  less  strong,  and  diminishes
still  more  when  it  is  a  hero  who  shows  himself.

The  apparitions  of  the  gods  are  very  luminous ;  those
of  angels  and  archangels  less  so ;  those  of  demons  are
dark,  but  less  dark  than  those  of  heroes.  The  archontes
who  preside  over  the  brightest  things  in  this  world,  are
luminous ;  but  those  which  are  occupied  only  with  what
is  material,  are  dark.  When  souls  appear,  they  resem-
ble a  shade.  He  continues  his  description  of  these
apparitions,  and  enters  into  tiresome  details  on  the
subject ;  one  would  say,  to  hear  him,  that  there  was  a
most  intimate  and  habitual  connexion  between  the
gods,  the  angels,  the  demons,  and  the  souls  separated
from  the  body,  and  himself.  But  all  this  is  only  the
work  of  his  imagination ;  he  knew  no  more  than  any
other  concerning  a  matter  which  is  above  the  reach  of
man's  understanding.  He  had  never  seen  any  appari-
tions of  gods,  or  heroes,  or  archontes ;  unless  we  say
that  there  are  veritable  demons  which  sometimes  appear
to  men.  But  to  discern  them  one  from  the  other,  as
Jamblichus  pretends  to  do,  is  mere  illusion.

The  Greeks  and  Romans,  like  the  Hebrews  and
Christians,  acknowledged  two  sorts  of  genii,  some  good
and  beneficent,  the  others  bad  and  causing  evil.  The
ancients  even  believed,  that  every  one  of  us  received  at
our  birth  a  good  and  an  evil  genius ;  the  former  pro-
cured us  happiness  and  prosperity,  the  latter  engaged
us  in  unfortunate  enterprises,  inspired  us  with  unruly
desires,  and  cast  us  into  the  worst  misfortunes.     They


24  THE    PHANTOM  WOELD.

assigned  genii,  not  only  to  every  person,  but  also  to
every  house,  every  city,  and  every  province.''  These
genii  are  considered  as  good,  beneficent '^  and  worthy
of  the  worship  of  those  who  invoke  them.  They
were  represented  sometimes  under  the  form  of  a
serpent,  sometimes  as  a  child  or  a  youth.  Flowers,
incense,  cakes,  and  wine  were  offered  to  them.*^  Men
swore  by  the  names  of  the  genii. ^  It  was  a  great  crime
to  perjure  one's  self  after  having  sworn  by  the  genius
of  the  emperor,  says  TertuUian;^  Citius  apud  tos  per
omnes  Deos,  quam  per  unicum  Genium  Ccesaris  perjuratur.

We  often  see  on  medals  the  inscription,  Genio
POPULi  E-OMANi;  and  when  the  Romans  landed  in  a
country,  they  failed  not  to  salute  and  adore  its  genius,
and  to  offer  him  sacrifices.^  In  short,  there  was  neither
kingdom,  nor  province,  nor  town,  nor  house,  nor  door,
nor  edifice,  whether  public  or  private,  which  had  not
its  genius.^

We  have  seen  above,  what  Jamblichus  informs  us
concerning  apparitions  of  the  gods,  genii,  good  and  bad

*>  "  Quod  te  per  Genium,  dextramque  Deosque  Penates,

Obsecro  et  obtestor." — Horat.  lib.  i.  Epist.  7.  94.

• "  Dum  cunctis  supplex  advolveris  aris,

Et  mitem  Genium  Domini  prsesentis  adoras."

Stac.  lib.  V.  Syl.  I.  73.

«  Antiquit^e  expliquge,  torn.  i.  •*  Perseus,  Satire  ii.

e  Senec.  Epist.  12.  f  Tertull.  Apol.  c.  23.

%  " Troj a  vale,  rapimur,  clamant;  dant  oscula  terrse

Troades." — Ovid.  Metam.  lib.  xiii.  421.

i»  "  Quamquam  cur  Genium  Romse,  mihi  fingitis  unum  ?

Ciim  portis,  domibus;  thermis,  stabulis  soleatis,
Assignare  suos  Genios?" — Pnident.  contra  Symmach.


OPINIONS.  25

anjrels,  heroes,  and  the  archontes  who  preside  over  the
jrovernmeut  of  the  world.

Homer,  the  most  ancient  of  Greek  writers,  and  the
most  celebrated  theologian  of  Paganism,  relates  several
apparitions  both  of  gods  and  heroes,  and  also  of  the
dead.  In  the  Odyssey,^  he  represents  Ulysses  going  to
consult  the  sorcerer  Tiresias;  and  this  diviner  having
prepared  a  grave  or  trench  full  of  blood  to  evoke  the
manes,  Ulysses  draws  his  sword  to  prevent  them  from
coming  to  drink  this  blood,  for  which  they  thirst,  but
which  they  were  not  allowed  to  taste  before  they  had
answered  the  questions  put  to  them.  They  believed
also,  that  the  souls  of  the  dead  could  not  rest,  and  that
they  wandered  around  their  dead  bodies  so  long  as
the  corpse  remained  uninhumed.

Even  after  they  were  Interred,  food  was  offered  them;
above  every  thing  honey  was  given,  as  if  leaving  their
tomb  they  came  to  taste  what  was  offered  them.^  They
were  persuaded  that  the  demons  loved  the  smoke  of
sacrifices,  melody,  the  blood  of  victims,  and  intercourse
with  women;  that  they  were  attached  for  a  time  to
certain  spots  and  certain  edifices  which  they  infested.
They  believed  that  souls  separated  from  the  gross  and
terrestrial  body,  preserved  after  death  one  more  subtile
and  elastic,  having  the  form  of  that  they  had  quitted ;
that  these  bodies  were  luminous,  and  like  the  stars;
that  they  retained  an  inclination  for  those  things  which

•  Odyss,  XL  sub  fin.     Vid.  Horat.  lib.  i.  Satire  7,  &c.
•*  Virgil,  ^neid.  1.  6.     August.  Serm.  15.  de  SS.  et  Qu£est.  5.  in
Dent.  i.  5.  c.  43.     Vide  Spencer,  de  Leg.  Hebreeor.  Eitual.
VOL.  I.  C


26  THE  PHA^sTOM   WORLD.

they  had  loved  during  their  life  on  earth,  and  that
often  they  appeared  gliding  around  their  tombs.

To  bring  back  all  this  to  the  matter  here  treated  of,
that  is  to  say,  to  the  appearance  of  good  angels,  we  may
note,  that  in  the  same  manner  that  we  attach  to  the
apparitions  of  good  angels  the  idea  of  tutelary  spirits
of  kingdoms,  provinces,  and  nations,  and  of  each  of  us
in  particular  —  as  for  instance,  the  Prince  of  the
kingdom  of  Persia,  or  the  angel  of  that  nation,  who
resisted  the  Archangel  Gabriel  during  twenty-one
days,  as  we  read  in  Daniel;^  the  angel  of  Macedonia,
who  appeared  to  St.  Paul,"^  and  of  whom  we  have
spoken  before  ;  the  archangel  St.  Michael,  who  is
considered  as  the  chief  of  the  people  of  God,  and  the
armies  of  Israel ;  ^  and  the  guardian  angels  deputed  by
God  to  guide  us  and  guard  us  all  the  days  of  our  life ;
so  we  may  say,  that  the  Greeks  and  Komans  being
Gentiles,  believed  that  certain  sorts  of  spirits,  w^hich
they  imagined  were  good  and  beneficent,  protected
their  kingdoms,  provinces,  towns,  and  private  houses.

They  paid  them  a  superstitious  and  idolatrous  wor-
ship, as  to  domestic  divinities;  they  invoked  them,
offered  them  a  kind  of  sacrifice  and  ofierings  of  incense,
cakes,  honey,  and  wine,  &c. — but  not  bloody  sacrifices.'^

The  Platonicians  taught,  that  carnal  and  voluptuous

1  Dan,  X.  1 3.  "^  Acts  xvi.  9.

^  Josh.  V.  13.     Dan.  x.  13,  21 ;  xii,  1.     Judg.  v.  6.     Eev.  xii.  7.

°  Forsitan  quia  qucerat,  quid  causce  sit,  ut  merum  fundendum  sit
genio,  non  hostiam  faciendam  putaverint  ....  Scilicet  ut  die  natcdi
munus  annale  genio  solverent,  manum  h  ccede  ac  sanguine  abstinerent.
— Censorin.  de  Die  Natali,  c.  2.    Yide  Taffin  de  Anno  Saecul.


OPINIONS.  27

men  could  not  see  their  genii,  because  their  mind  was
not  sufficiently  pure,  nor  enough  disengaged  from
sensual  things ;  but  that  men  who  were  wise,  moderate,
and  temperate,  and  who  applied  themselves  to  serious
and  sublime  subjects,  could  see  them;  as  Socrates,  for
instance,  who  had  his  familiar  genius,  whom  he  con-
sulted, to  whose  advice  he  listened,  and  whom  he
beheld,  at  least  with  the  eyes  of  the  mind.

If  the  oracles  of  Greece  and  other  countries  are
reckoned  in  the  number  of  apparitions  of  bad  spirits,  we
may  also  recollect  the  good  spirits  who  have  announced
things  to  come,  and  have  assisted  the  prophets  and
inspired  persons,  whether  in  the  Old  Testament  or  the
New.  The  angel  Gabriel  was  sent  to  Daniel,?  to
instruct  him  concernins;  the  vision  of  the  four  sreat
monarchies,  and  the  accomplishment  of  the  seventy
weeks,  which  were  to  put  an  end  to  the  captivity.
The  prophet  Zechariah  says  expressly,  that  the  angel
iL'Jio  appeared  unto  Mm,^  revealed  to  him  what  he  must
say — he  repeats  it  in  five  or  six  places;  St.  John,  in
the  Apocalypse,^  says  the  same  thing,  that  God  had
sent  his  angel  to  inspire  him  with  what  he  was  to  say
to  the  Churches.  Elsewhere  ®  he  again  makes  mention
of  the  ano-el  who  talked  with  him,  and  who  took  in  his
presence  the  dimensions  of  the  heavenly  Jerusalem.
And  again,  St.  Paul  in  his  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,^
*' If  what  has  been  predicted  by  the  angels  may  pass  for
certain."

p  Dan.  viii.  16 ;  ix.  21.

1  Zech.  i.  10, 13,  14, 19 ;  ii.  3,  4 ;  iv.  1,  4,  5  ;  v.  5,  10.

'  Rev.  i.  1.         ^  Rev.  x.  8,  9,  &c. ;  xi.  1,  2,  3,  &c.         '  Heb.  ii.  2.

c  2


28  '  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

From  all  we  have  just  said,  it  results,  that  the
apparitions  of  good  angels  are  not  only  possible,  but
also  very  real;  that  they  have  often  appeared,  and
under  diverse  forms;  that  the  Hebrews,  Christians,
Mahometans,  Greeks,  and  Romans,  have  believed  in
them ;  that  when  they  have  not  sensibly  appeared,  they
have  given  proofs  of  their  presence  in  several  different
ways.  We  shall  examine  elsewhere  how  we  can  ex-
plain the  kind  of  apparition,  whether  of  good  or  bad
angels,  or  souls  separated  from  the  body.


CHAPTER  VI.

THE  APPAKITION  OF  BAD  ANGELS  PROVED  BY   THE  HOLY   SCRIPTURES — UNDER
WHAT  FORM   THEY   HAVE  APPEARED.

The  books  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament,  together
with  sacred  and  profane  history,  are  full  of  relations  of
the  apparition  of  bad  spirits.  The  first,  the  most
famous,  and  the  most  fatal  apparition  of  Satan,  is  that
of  the  appearance  of  this  evil  spirit  to  Eve,  the  first
woman,^  in  the  form  of  a  serpent,  which  animal  served
as  the  instrument  of  that  seducing  demon  in  order  to
deceive  her  and  induce  her  to  sin.  Since  that  time  he
has  always  chosen  to  appear  under  that  form  rather  than
any  other ;  so  in  Scripture  he  is  often  termed  the  Old
Serpent ;  ^  and  it  is  said,  that  the  infernal  dragon  fought
against  the  woman  who  figured  or  represented  the
Church ;  that  the  archangel  St.  Michael  vanquished
him  and  cast  him  down  from  heaven.  He  has  often
appeared  to  the  servants  of  God  in  the  form  of  a
dragon,  and  he  has  caused  himself  to  be  adored  by  un-
believers in  this  form,  in  a  great  number  of  places  :  at
Babylon,  for  instance,  they  worshipped  a  living  dragon,"^
which  Daniel  killed  by  making  it  swallow  a  ball  or
bolus,  composed  of  ingredients  of  a  mortally  poisonous
nature.  The  Serpent  was  consecrated  to  Apollo,  the  god
of  physic  and  of  oracles,  and  the  pagans  had  a  sort  of

*  Gen.  iii.  1,  23.  ''  Kev.  xii.  9.  <=  Bel  and  the  Dragon.


30  THE   PHANTOM  WORLD.

divination  by  means  of  serpents,  which  they  called
Ophiomantia»

The  Egyptians,  Greeks,  and  Romans  worshipped
serpents,  and  regarded  them  as  divine.''^  They  brought
to  Home  the  serpent  of  Epidaurus,  to  which  they  paid
divine  honours.  The  Egyptians  considered  vipers  as
divinities.^  The  Israelites  adored  the  brazen  serpent
elevated  by  Moses  in  the  desert,^  and  which  was  in
after  times  broken  in  pieces  by  the  holy  king  Hezekiah.s

St.  Augustine  ^  assures  us  that  the  Manichteans  re-
garded the  serpent  as  the  Christ,  and  said  that  this  ani-
mal had  opened  the  eyes  of  Adam  and  Eve,  by  the  bad
roQusel  which  he  gave  them.  We  almost  always  see
the  form  of  the  serpent  in  the  magical  figures^  Abraxas
and  Abrachadabra,  which  were  held  in  veneration  among
the  Basilidian  heretics,  who  like  the  Manichseans  ac-
knowledge two  principles  in  all  things — the  one  good,
the  other  bad ;  Abraxas  in  Hebrew  signifies  that  bad
principle,  or  the  father  of  evil ;  ab-ra-achad-ab-ra,  the
father  of  evil,  the  sole  father  of  evil,  or  the  only  bad
principle.

-St.  Ausrustine^  remarks  that  no  animal  has  been  more
subject  to  the  effects  of  enchantment  and  magic  than
the  serpent,  as  if  to  punish  him  for  having  seduced  the
first  woman  by  his  imposture.

^  Wisd.  xi.  16.  ^  iElian.  Hist.  Animal.

^  Numb.  xxi.     2  Kings  xviii.  4.

&  On  this  subject,  see  a  work  of  profound  learning,  and  as  interesting
as  profound,  on  "The  Worship  of  the  Serpent,"  by  the  Rev.  John
Bathurst  Deane,  M.A.  F.S.A.

''  Aug.  torn.  viii.  pp.  28,  284.    •  Ah-racha,  ^^XQi^mali,  or  pater  malus.

^  August,  de  Gen.  ad  Lit.  1.  ii.  c.  18.


BAD  ANGELS.  31

However,  the  demon  has  usually  assumed  the  human
form  when  he  would  tempt  mankind ;  it  was  thus  that
he  appeared  to  Jesus  Christ  in  the  desert;^  that  he
tempted  him  and  told  him  to  change  the  stones  into  bread
that  he  might  satisfy  his  hunger ;  that  he  transported
him,  the  Saviour,  to  the  highest  pinnacle  of  the  temple,
and  showed  him  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world,  and
offered  him  the  enjoyment  of  them.

The  ans^el  who  wrestled  with  Jacob  at  Peniel"^  on
his  return  from  his  journey  into  Mesopotamia,  was  a
bad  angel  according  to  some  ancient  writers  ;  others,  as
Severus  Sulpicius^  and  some  Rabbis,  have  thought  that
it  was  the  ano;el  of  Esau,  who  had  come  to  combat  with
Jacob ;  but  the  greater  number  believe  that  it  was  a
o-ood  ano;el.  And  would  Jacob  have  asked  him  for  his
blessino;  had  he  deemed  him  a  bad  ansfel  ?  But  how-
ever  that  fact  may  be  taken,  it  is  not  doubtful  that
the  demon  has  appeared  in  a  human  form.

Several  stories,  both  ancient  and  modern,  are  related,
which  inform  us  that  the  demon  has  appeared  to  those
whom  he  wished  to  seduce,  or  who  have  been  so  un-
happy as  to  invoke  his  aid,  or  make  a  compact  with  him,
as  a  man  taller  than  the  common  stature,  dressed  in
black,  and  with  a  rough  ungracious  manner ;  making  a
thousand  fine  promises  to  those  to  whom  he  appeared,
but  which  promises  were  always  deceitful,  and  never
followed  by  a  real  effect.  I  can  even  believe  that  they
beheld  what  existed  only  in  their  own  confused  and
deranged  ideas.

'  Matt.  iv.  9,  10,  &c.  ■"  Gen.  xxxii.  24,  25.

"  Sever.  Sulpit.  Hist.  Sac.


32  THE  PHA^'TOM  TTOKLD.

At  Molsheim/  in  the  chapel  of  St.  Ignatius  in  the
Jesuits'  Church,  may  be  seen  a  celebrated  inscription,
which  contains  the  history  of  a  young  German  gentle-
man, named  Michael  Louis,  of  the  honse  of  Boubenhoren,
who  having  been  sent  by  his  parents  when  very  young
to  the  court  of  the  Duke  of  Lorraine,  to  learn  the
French  language,  lost  all  his  money  at  cards ;  reduced
to  despair,  he  resolved  to  give  himself  to  the  demon,  if
that  bad  spirit  would  or  could  give  him  some  good
money ;  for  he  doubted  that  he  would  only  furnish  him
with  counterfeit  and  bad  coin.  As  he  was  meditatins
on  this  idea,  suddenly  he  beheld  before  him  a  youth  of
his  own  age,  well  made,  well  dressed,  who  having  asked
him  the  cause  of  his  uneasiness,  presented  him  with
a  handful  of  money,  and  told  him  to  try  if  it  was
good.  He  desired  him  to  meet  him  at  that  place  the
next  day.

Michael  returned  to  his  companions,  who  were  still  at
play,  and  not  only  regained  all  the  money  he  had  lost,
but  won  all  that  of  his  companions.  Then  he  went  in
search  of  his  demon,  who  asked  as  his  reward  three
drops  of  his  blood,  which  he  received  in  an  acora-cup  ;
after  which,  presenting  a  pen  to  Michael,  he  desired
him  to  write  what  he  should  dictate.  He  then  dictated
some  unknown  words,  which  he  made  him  write  on
two  different  bits  of  paper,?  one  of  which  remained  in
the  possession  of  the  demon,  the  other  was  inserted  in

°  A  small  city  or  town  of  the  Electorate  of  Cologne,  situated  on  a
river  of  the  same  name.

p  There  were  in  all  ten  letters,  the  greater  part  of  them  Greek,  but
which  formed  no  (apparent)  sense:  They  were  to  be  seen  at  Molsheim,
in  the  tablet  which  bore  a  representation  of  this  miracle.


BAD  ANGELS.  33

Michael's  arm,  at  the  same  place  whence  the  demon  had
drawn  the  blood.  And  the  demon  said  to  him,  "  I
engage  myself  to  serve  you  during  seven  years,  after
which  you  will  unreservedly  belong  to  me."

The  young  man  consented  to  this,  though  with  a
feeling  of  horror ;  and  the  demon  never  failed  to  appear
to  him  day  and  night  under  various  forms,  and  taught
him  many  unknown  and  curious  things,  but  which
always  tended  to  evil.  The  fatal  termination  of  the
seven  years  was  approaching,  and  the  young  man  was
then  about  twenty  years  old.  He  returned  to  his
father's  house,  when  the  demon  to  whom  he  had  given
himself  inspired  him  with  the  idea  of  poisoning  his
father  and  mother,  of  setting  fire  to  their  chateau,  and
then  killing  himself.  He  tried  to  commit  all  these
crimes,  but  God  did  not  allow  him  to  succeed  in  these
attempts.  The  gun  with  which  he  wished  to  kill
himself  missed  fire  twice,  and  the  poison  did  not  take
effect  on  his  father  and  mother.

More  and  more  uneasy,  he  revealed  to  some  of  his
father's  domestics  the  miserable  state  in  which  he  found
himself,  and  entreated  them  to  procure  him  some
succour.  At  the  same  time  the  demon  seized  him,  and
bent  his  body  back,  so  that  he  was  near  breaking  his
bones.  His  mother,  who  had  adopted  the  heresy  of
Suenfeld,  and  had  induced  her  son  to  follow  it  also,  not
finding  in  her  sect  any  help  against  the  demon  that
possessed,  or  obseded  him,  was  constrained  to  place  him
in  the  hands  of  some  monks.  But  he  soon  withdrew
from  them  and  retired  to  Islade,  from  whence  he  was
brought  back  to  Molsheim  by  his  brother,  a  canon  of

c3


34  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

Wurzburg,  who  put  him  again  into  the  hands  of
fathers  of  the  society.  Then  it  was  that  the  demon
made  still  more  violent  efforts  against  him,  appearing
to  him  in  the  form  of  ferocious  animals.  One  day,
amongst  others,  the  demon,  wearing  the  form  of  a
hairy  savage,  threw  on  the  ground  a  schedule,  or
compact,  different  from  the  true  one  which  he  had
extorted  from  the  young  man,  to  try  by  means  of  this
false  appearance  to  withdraw  him  from  the  hands  of
those  who  kept  him,  and  prevent  his  making  his  general
confessioD.  At  last  they  fixed  on  the  20th  of  October,
1603,  as  the  day  for  being  in  the  Chapel  of  St.  Ignatius,
and  to  cause  to  be  brouo;ht  the  true  schedule  containino;
the  compact  made  w^ith  the  demon.  The  young  man
there  made  profession  of  the  Catholic  and  orthodox
faith,  renounced  the  demon,  and  received  the  holy
sacrament.  Then,  uttering  horrible  cries,  he  said  he  saw
as  it  were  two  he-goats  of  immeasurable  size,  which,
holding  up  their  fore-feet,  (standing  on  their  hind-legs,)
held  between  their  claws,  each  one  separately,  one
of  the  schedules  or  agreements.  But  as  soon  as  the
exorcisms  were  begun,  and  the  priests  invoked  the
name  of  St.  Ignatius,  the  two  he-goats  fled  away,  and
there  came  from  the  left  arm  or  hand  of  the  young  man,
almost  without  pain,  and  without  leaving  any  scar^  the
compact,  which  fell  at  the  feet  of  the  exorcist.

There  now  wanted  only  the  second  compact,  which
had  remained  in  the  power  of  the  demon.  They  re-
commenced their  exorcisms,  and  invoked  St.  Ignatius,
and  promised  to  say  a  mass  in  honour  of  the  saint ;  at
the  same  moment  there  appeared  a  tall  stork,  deformed


BAD   ANGELS.  35

and  badly  made,  who  let  fall  the  second  schedule  from
his  beak,  and  they  found  it  on  the  altar.

The  pope,  Paul  V.,  caused  information  of  the  truth
of  these  facts  to  be  taken  by  the  commissary-deputies,
M.  Adam,  Suffragan  of  Strasburg,  and  George,  Abbot
of  Altorf,  who  were  juridically  interrogated,  and  who
affirmed  that  the  deliverance  of  this  young  man  was
pricipally  due,  after  God,  to  the  intercession  of  St.
Ignatius.

The  same  story  is  related  rather  more  at  length  in
Bartoli's  Life  of -St.  Ignatius  Loyola.

Melancthon  owns  ^  that  he  has  seen  several  spectres,  and
conversed  with  them  several  times ;  and  Jerome  Cardan
affirms,  that  his  father,  Fassius  Cardanus,  saw  demons
whenever  he  pleased,  apparently  in  a  human  form.
Bad  spirits  sometimes  appear  also  under  the  figure  of
a  lion,  a  dog,  or  a  cat,  or  some  other  animal — as  a  bull,
a  horse,  or  a  raven;  for  the  pretended  sorcerers  and
sorceresses  relate  that  at  the  (witches')  sabbath  he  is
seen  under  several  different  forms  of  men,  animals,  and
birds ;  whether  he  takes  the  shape  of  these  animals,  or
whether  he  makes  use  of  the  animals  themselves  as
instruments  to  deceive  or  harm,  or  w^hether  he  simply
affects  the  senses  and  imao;ination  of  those  whom  he
has  fascinated  and  who  give  themselves  to  him ;  for  in
all  the  appearances  of  the  demon  we  must  always  be
on  our  guard,  and  mistrust  his  stratagems  and  malice.
St.  Peter '^  tells  us  that  Satan  is  always  roaming  round
about  us,  like  a  roaring  lion,   seeking  whom  he  may

1  Lib.  de  Anima.  '  1  Pet.  iii.  8.


36  THE  PHANTOM   WORLD.

devour.  And  St.  Paul,  in  more  places  than  one,^  warns
us  to  mistrust  the  snares  of  the  devil,  and  to  hold
ourselves  on  our  guard  against  him.

Sulpicius  Severus,*  in  the  life  of  St.  Martin,  relates
a  few  examples  of  persons  who  were  deceived  by
apparitions  of  the  demon,  who  transformed  himself
into  an  angel  of  light.  A  young  man  of  very  high
rank,  and  who  was  afterwads  elevated  to  the  priesthood,
having  devoted  himself  to  God  in  a  monastery,  imagined
that  he  held  converse  with  angels ;  and  as  they  would
not  believe  him,  he  said  that  the  following  night  God
would  give  him  a  white  robe,  with  which  he  would
appear  amongst  them.  In  fact,  at  midnight  the
monastery  was  shaken  as  with  an  earthquake,  the  cell  of
the  young  man  was  all  brilliant  with  light,  and  they
heard  n  noise  like  that  of  many  persons  going  to  and
for,  and  speaking.

After  that,  coming  forth  from  his  cell,  he  showed
to  the  Brothers  (of  the  convent)  the  tunic  with  which
he  was  clothed :  it  was  made  of  a  stuff  of  admirable
whiteness,  shining  as  purple,  and  so  extraordinarily
fine  in  texture,  that  they  had  never  seen  any  thing
like  it,  and  could  not  tell  from  what  substance  it  was
woven.

They  passed  the  rest  of  the  night  in  singing  psalms
of  thanksgiving,  and  in  the  morning  they  wished  to
conduct  him  to  St.  Martin.  He  resisted  as  much  as  he
could,  saying  that  he  had  been  expressly  forbidden  to
appear  in  his  presence.     As  they  were  pressing  him  to

^  Eph.  vi.  11.     1  Tim.  iii.  7.

t  Sulpit.  Sever.  Yit.  St.  Martin,  h.  xv.


BAD   AKGELS.  ST

come,  the  tunic  vanished,  which  led  every  one  present
to  suppose  that  the  whole  thing  was  an  illusion  of  the
demon.

Another  solitary  suffered  himself  to  be  persuaded
that  he  was  Eli ;  another,  that  he  was  St.  John  the
Evangelist.  One  day,  the  demon  wished  to  mislead
St.  Martin  himself,  appearing  to  him,  having  on  a  royal
robe,  wearing  on  his  head  a  rich  diadem,  ornamented
with  gold  and  precious  stones,  golden  sandals,  and  all
the  apparel  of  a  great  prince.  Addressing  himself  to
Martin,  he  said  to  him,  "  Acknowledge  me,  Martin ; —
I  am  Jesus  Christ,  who,  wishing  to  descend  to  earth,
have  resolved  to  manifest  myself  to  thee  first  of  all."
St.  Martin  remained  silent  at  first,  fearing  some  snare  ;
and  the  phantom  having  repeated  to  him  that  he  was  the
Christ,  Martin  replied: — "My  Lord  Jesus  Christ  did
not  say  that  he  should  come  clothed  in  purple,  and  decked
with  diamonds.  I  shall  not  acknowledge  him  unless  he
appears  in  that  same  form  in  which  he  suffered  death,
and  unless  I  see  the  marks  of  his  cross  and  passion."

At  these  words  the  demon  disappeared ;  and  Sulpi-
cius  Severus  affirms  that  he  relates  this  as  he  heard  it
from  the  mouth  of  St.  Martin  himself.  A  little  before
this,  he  says  that  Satan  showed  himself  to  him  some-
times under  the  form  of  Jupiter,  or  Mercury,  or  Venus,
or  Minerva ;  and  sometimes  he  was  to  reproach  Martin
greatly  because,  by  baptism,  he  had  converted  and
regenerated  so  many  great  sinners.  But  the  saint
despised  him,  drove  him  away  by  the  sign  of  the  cross,
and  answered  him,  that  baptism  and  repentance  effaced
all  sins  in  those  who  were  sincere  converts.


38  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

All  this  proves  the  malice,  envy,  and  fraud  of  the
devil  against  the  saints,  on  the  one  side;  and  on  the
other,  the  weakness  and  uselessness  of  his  efforts  against
the  true  servants  of  God,  and  that  it  is  but  too  true  he
often  appears  in  a  visible  form.

In  the  histories  of  the  saints  we  sometimes  see  that
he  hides  himself  under  the  form  of  a  woman,  to  tempt
pious  hermits,  and  lead  them  into  evil ;  sometimes  in
the  form  of  a  traveller,  a  priest,  a  monk,  or  an  angel  of
lights  to  mislead  simple-minded  people,  and  cause  them
to  err;  for  every  thing  suits  his  purpose,  provided  he
can  exercise  his  malice  and  hatred  ao-ainst  men.

When  Satan  appeared  before  the  Lord  in  the  midst
of  his  holy  angels,  and  asked  permission  of  God  to
tempt  Job,^  and  try  his  patience  through  every  thing
that  was  dearest  to  that  holy  man,  he  doubtless  pre-
sented himself  in  his  natural  state,  simply  as  a  spirit,
but  full  of  ra2:e  ao-ainst  the  saints,  and  in  all  the
deformity  of  his  sin  and  rebellion.

But  when  he  says,  in  the  Books  of  Kings,  that  he  will
he  a  hjing  spirit  in  the  mouth  of  false  prophets^  and  that
God  allows  him  to  put  in  force  his  ill-will,  we  must  not
imagine  that  he  shows  himself  corporeally  to  the  eyes
of  the  false  prophets  of  king  Aliab ;  he  only  inspired
the  falsehood  in  their  minds, — they  believed  it,  and
persuaded  the  king  of  the  same.  Amongst  the  visible
appearances  of  Satan  may  be  placed  mortalities,  wars,
tempests,  public  and  private  calamities,  which  God  sends
upon  nations,  provinces,  cities,  and  families,  whom  the
Almighty  causes  to  feel  the  terrible  effects  of  his  wmth
"  2  Cor.  xi.  14.  »  Job  i.  6—8.  ^  1  Kings  xxii.  21.


BAD  ANGELS.  39

and  just  vengeance.  Thus  the  exterminating  angel
kills  the  first-born  of  the  Egyptians/  The  same  angel
strikes  with  death  the  inhabitants  of  the  guilty  cities  of
Sodom  and  Gomorrah,^  He  does  the  same  with  Onan,
who  committed  an  abominable  action.^  The  wicked  man
seelis  only  division  and  quarrels,  says  the  sage ;  and  the
cruel  angel  shall  he  sent  against  him.^  And  the  Psalmist,
speaking  of  the  plagues  which  the  Lord  inflicted  upon
Egypt,  says,  that  he  sent  evil  angels  among  them.

When  David,  in  a  spirit  of  vanity,  caused  his  people
to  be  numbered,  God  showed  him  an  angel  hovering
over  Jerusalem,  ready  to  smite  and  destroy  it.  I  do
not  say  decidedly  whether  it  was  a  good  or  a  bad  angel,
since  it  is  certain  that  sometimes  the  Lord  employs
good  angels  to  execute  his  vengeance  against  the  wricked.
But  it  is  thought  that  it  was  the  devil  who  slew  eighty-
five  thousand  men  of  the  army  of  Sennacherib.  And  in
the  Apocalypse,  those  are  also  evil  angels  who  pour  out
on  the  earth  the  phials  of  wrath,  and  caused  all  the
scourges  set  down  in  that  holy  book.

We  shall  also  place  amongst  the  appearances  and
works  of  Satan,  false  Chris  ts,  false  prophets.  Pagan
oracles,  magicians,  sorcerers,  and  sorceresses,  those  w^ho
are  inspired  by  the  spirit  of  Python,  the  obsession  and
possession  of  demons,  those  who  pretend  to  predict  the
future,  and  whose  predictions  are  sometimes  fulfilled ;
those  who  make  compacts  with  the  devil,  to  discover
treasures  and  enrich  themselves ;  those  who  make  use
of  charms ;   evocations  by  means  of  magic ;   enchant-

^  Exdti.  ix.  6.  a  Gen.  xviii.  13,  14.

^  Gen.  xxxviii.  <=  Prov.  xvii.  11.


4^  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

ment;  the  being  devoted  to  death  by  a  vow;  the
deceptions  of  idolatrous  priests,  who  feigned  that  their
gods  ate  and  drank  and  had  commerce  with  women; —
all  these  can  only  be  the  work  of  Satan,  and  must  be
ranked  with  what  the  Scripture  calls  the  depths  of
Satan.^  We  shall  say  something  on  this  subject  in  the
course  of  the  Treatise.

^  Rev.  ii.  24.


CHAPTER  VII.


OP  MAGIC.


Many  persons  regard  magic,  magicians,  witchcraft,
and  charms,  as  fables  and  illusions,  the  effects  of  ima-
gination in  weak  minds,  who,  foolishly  persuaded  of
the  excessive  power  possessed  by  the  devil,  attribute  to
him  a  thousand  things  which  are  purely  natural,  but
the  physical  reasons  for  which  are  unknown  to  them,  or
which  are  the  effects  of  the  art  of  certain  charlatans,  who
make  a  trade  of  imposing  on  the  simple  and  ignorant.
These  opinions  are  supported  by  the  authority  of  the
principal  parliaments  of  the  kingdom,  who  acknowledge
neither  magicians  nor  sorcerers,  and  who  never  punish
those  accused  of  magic,  or  sorcery,  unless  they  are
convicted  also  of  some  other  crimes.  As,  in  short,  the
more  they  punish  and  seek  out  magicians  and  sorcerers,
the  more  they  abound  in  a  country ;  and,  on  the  con-
trary, experience  proves  that  in  places  where  nobody
believes  in  them,  none  are  to  be  found,  the  most
efficacious  means  of  uprooting  this  fancy  is  to  despise
and  neglect  it.

It  is  said  that  magicians  and  sorcerers  themselves,
when  they  fall  into  the  hands  of  judges  and  inquisitors,
are  often  the  first  to  maintain  that  magic  and  sorcery


42  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

are  merely  imaginary,  and  the  effect  of  popular  pre-
judices and  errors.  Upon  that  footing,  Satan  would
destroy  himself,  and  overthrow  his  own  empire,  if  he
were  thus  to  decry  magic,  of  which  he  is  himself  the
author  and  support.  If  the  magicians  really,  and  of
their  own  good  will,  independently  of  the  demon,  make
this  declaration^  they  betray  themselves  most  lightly,
and  do  not  make  their  cause  better ;  since  the  judges,
notwithstanding  their  disavowal,  prosecute  them,  and
always  punish  them  without  mercy,  being  well  per-
suaded that  it  is  only  the  fear  of  execution  and  the
hope  of  remaining  unpunished  which  makes  them
say  so.

But  would  it  not  rather  be  a  stratagem  of  the  evil
spirit,^  who  endeavours  to  render  the  reality  of  magic
doubtful,  to  save  from  punishment  those  who  are
accused  of  it,  and  to  impose  on  the  judges,  and  make
them  believe  that  magicians  are  only  madmen  and
hypochondriacs,  worthy  rather  of  compassion  than
chastisement  ?  TVe  must  then  return  to  the  deep
examination  of  the  question,  and  prove  that  magic  is
not  a  chimera,  neither  has  it  aught  to  do  with  reason.
We  can  neither  rest  on  a  sure  foundation,  nor  derive
any  certain  argument  for  or  against  the  reality  of  magica
either  from  the  opinion  of  pretended  esprits  forts,  who
deny  because  they  think  proper  to  do  so,  and  because
the  proofs  of  the  contrary  do  not  appear  to  them  suffi-
ciently clear  or  demonstrative ;  nor  from  the  declaration
of  the  demon,  of  magicians  and  sorcerers,  who  maintain
that  magic  and  sorcery  are  only  the  eifects  of  a  disturbed
*  Vide  Bodin,  Preface.


OF  MAGIC.  43

imagination ;  nor  from  minds  foolislily  and  vainly  preju-
diced on  the  subject,  that  these  declarations  are  produced
simply  by  the  fear  of  punishment ;  nor  by  the  subtilty
of  the  malignant  spirit,  who  wishes  to  mask  his  play,
and  cast  dust  in  the  eyes  of  the  judges  and  witnesses,
by  making  them  believe  that  what  they  regard  with  so
much  horror,  and  what  they  so  vigorously  prosecute,
is  anything  but  a  punishable  crime,  or  at  least  a  crime
deserving  of  punishment.

We  must  then  prove  the  reality  of  magic  by  the
Holy  Scriptures,  by  the  authority  of  the  Church,  and
by  the  testimony  of  the  most  grave  and  sensible  writers  ;
and,  lastly,  show  that  it  is  not  true  that  the  most
famous  parliaments  acknowledge  neither  sorcerers  nor
magicians.

The  teraphim  which  Kachel  the  wife  of  Jacob  brought
away  secretly  from  the  house  of  Laban,  her  father,^
were  doubtless  superstitious  figures,  to  which  Laban's
family  paid  a  worship,  very  like  that  which  the  Komans
rendered  to  their  household  gods,  Penates  and  Lares,
and  whom  they  consulted  on  future  events.  Joshua'^
says  very  distinctly,  that  Terah  the  father  of  Abraham
adored  strange  gods  in  Mesopotamia.  And  in  the
prophets  Hosea  and  Zechariah,'^  the  Seventy  translate
teraphim  by  the  word  oracles.  Zechariah  and  EzekieP
show  that  the  Chaldeans  and  the  Hebrews  consulted
these  teraphim  to  learn  future  events.

Others  believe  that  they  were  talismans  or  preserva-
tives ;  everybody  agrees  as  to  their  being  superstitious

^  Gen.  xxxi,  19.  <=  Josh.  xxiv.  2 — 4.

''  Hosea  ii.  4,  &c.    Zech.  v.  2.  «  Zech.  x.  2.    Ezek.  xxi.  21.


44  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

figures  (or  idols),  which  were  consulted  in  order  to  find
out  things  unknown,  or  that  were  to  come  to  pass.

The  patriarch  Joseph,  speaking  to  his  own  brethren
according  to  the  idea  which  they  had  of  him  in  Egypt,
says  to  them :  ^  "  Know  ye  not  that  in  all  the  land  there
is  not  a  man  who  equals  me  in  the  art  of  divining  and
predicting  things  to  come  ?  "  And  the  oflScer  of  the  same
Joseph,  having  found  in  Benjamin's  sack,  Joseph's  cup,
which  he  had  purposely  hidden  in  it,  says  to  them:  =
^'  It  is  the  cup  of  which  my  master  makes  use  to  dis-
cover hidden  things."

By  the  secret  of  their  art,  the  magicians  of  Pharaoh
imitated  the  true  miracles  of  Moses ;  but  not  being  able
like  him  to  produce  gnats  (English  version  lice),  they
were  constrained  to  own  that  the  finger  of  God  was  in
what  Moses  had  hitherto  achieved.''

After  the  departure  of  the  Hebrews  from  Egypt,
God  expressly  forbids  his  people  to  practise  any  sort  of
magic  or  divination.^  He  condemns  to  death  magicians,
and  those  who  make  use  of  charms.

Balaam  the  Diviner,  being  invited  by  Balak  the  king
to  come  and  devote  the  Israelites  to  destruction,  God
put  blessings  into  his  mouth  instead  of  curses ;''  and
this  bad  prophet,  amongst  the  blessings  which  he
bestows  on  Israel,  says,  there  is  among  them  neither
augury,  nor  divination,  nor  magic.

In  the  time  of  the  Judges,  the  Idol  of  Micah  was
consulted  as  a  kind  of  oracle.^     Gideon  made,  in  his

^  Gen.  xliv.  15.  g  Gen.  xliv.  5.

^  Exod.  vii.  10—12.    Exod.  viii.  19.  >  Exod.  xxii.  18.

^  Numb.  xxii.  xxiii.  23.  *  Judg.  xvii.  1,  2.


OF  MAGIC.  45

Iiouse  and  his  city,  an  Ephod,  accompanied  by  a  super-
stitious image,  which  was  for  his  family,  and  to  all  the
people,  the  occasion  of  scandal  and  ruin.°^

The  Israelites  went  sometimes  to  consult  Beelzebub,
god  of  Ekron,°  to  know  if  they  should  recover  from
their  sickness.  The  history  of  the  evocation  of  Samuel
by  the  witch  of  Endor°  is  well  known.  I  am  aware
that  some  difficulties  are  raised  concerning  this  history.
I  shall  deduce  nothing  from  it  here,  except  that  this
woman  passed  for  a  witch,  that  Saul  esteemed  her  such,
and  that  this  prince  had  exterminated  the  magicians  in
his  own  states,  or,  at  least,  that  he  did  not  permit  them
to  exercise  their  art.

Manasses,  king  of  Judah,?  is  blamed  for  having  in-
troduced idolatry  into  his  kingdom,  and  particularly  for
having  allowed  there  diviners,  aruspices,  and  those
who  predicted  things  to  come.  King  Josiah,  on  the
contrary,  destroyed  all  these  superstitions.^

The  prophet  Isaiah,  who  lived  at  the  same  time,  says
that  they  wished  to  persuade  the  Jews  then  in  captivity
at  Babylon  to  address  themselves,  as  did  other  nations,
to  diviners  and  magicians ;  but  they  ought  to  reject
these  pernicious  counsels,  and  leave  those  abominations
to  the  Gentiles,  who  knew  not  the  Lord.  DanieP  speaks
of  the  magicians,  or  workers  of  magic  among  the
Chaldeans,  and  of  those  amongst  them  who  interpreted
dreams,  and  predicted  things  to  come.

In  the  New  Testament,  the  Jews  accused  Jesus  Christ

">  Judg.  viii.  27.  "  .2  Kings  i.  2,  3.

°  1  Sam.  xxviii.  7,  et  seq.  p  2  Kings  xxi.  16.

1  2  Kings  xxii.  24.  '  Dan.  iv.  6,  7.


46  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

of  casting  out  devils  in  the  name  of  Beelzebub^  tlie
prince  of  the  devils ;  ®  but  he  refutes  them  by  saying,
that  being  come  to  destroy  the  empire  of  Beelzebub,  it
was  not  to  be  believed  that  Beelzebub  would  work
miracles  to  destroy  his  own  power,  or  kingdom.*  St.
Luke  speaks  of  Simon  the  sorcerer,  who  had  for  a  long
time  bewitched  the  inhabitants  of  Samaria  with  his
sorceries;  and  also  of  a  certain  Bar- Jesus  of  Paphos,
who  professed  sorcery,  and  boasted  he  could  predict
future  events.^  St.  Paul,  when  at  Ephesus,  caused  a
number  of  books  of  magic  to  be  burned.^  Lastly,  the
Psalmist  ^  and  ,the  author  of  the  Book  of  Ecclesiasticus,^
speak  of  charms  with  which  they  enchanted  serpents.

In  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,^  the  young  girl  of  the
town  of  Philippi,  who  was  a  Pythoness,  for  several
successive  days  rendered  testimony  to  Paul  and  Silas,
saying  that  they  were  "  the  servants  of  the  Most  High,  and
that  they  announced  to  men  the  way  of  sahation.''^  Was
it  the  devil  who  inspired  her  with  these  words,  to
destroy  the  fruit  of  the  preaching  of  the  Apostles,  by
making  the  people  believe  that  they  acted  in  concert
with  the  spirit  of  evil  ?  Or  was  it  the  Spirit  of  God
which  put  these  words  into  the  mouth  of  this  young
girl,  as  he  put  into  the  mouth  of  Balaam  prophecies
concerning  the  Messiah  ?  There  is  reason  to  believe
that  she  spoke  through  the  inspiration  of  the  evil  spirit,
since  St.  Paul  imposed  silence  on  her,  and  expelled  the

*  Matt.  X.  25  ;  xii.  24, 25.  '  Luke  xi.  15, 18,  19.

'^  Acts  viii.  11 ;  xiii.  6.  ^  Acts  xix.  19.

y  Psalm  Ivii.  ^  Ecclus.  xii.  1 3.
»  Acts  xvi.  16,  17.


OF   MAGIC.  47

spirit  of  Python,  by  which  she  had  been  possessed,  and
which  had  inspired  the  predictions  she  uttered,  and  the
knowledge  of  hidden  things.  In  what  way  soever  we
may  explain  it,  it  will  always  follow  that  magic  is  not
a  chimera,  that  this  maiden  was  possessed  by  an  evil
spirit,  and  that  she  predicted  and  revealed  things  hidden
and  to  come,  and  brought  her  masters  considerable  gain
by  soothsaying ;  for  those  who  consulted  her  would,
doubtless,  not  have  been  so  foolish  as  to  pay  for  these
predictions,  had  they  not  experienced  the  truth  of  them
by  their  success  and  by  the  event.

From  all  this  united  testimony  it  results  that  magic,
enchantments,  sorcery,  divination,  the  interpretation  of
dreams,  auguries,  oracles,  and  the  magical  figures  which
announced  things  to  come,  are  very  real,  since  they
are  so  severely  condemned  by  Grod,  and  that  He  wills
that  those  who  practise  them  should  be  punished  with
death.


CHAPTER  VIIL

OBJECTIONS   TO   THE   REALITY   OF   MAGIC.

I  SHALL  not  fail  to  be  told  that  all  these  testimonies
from  Scripture  do  not  prove  the  reality  of  magic,
sorcery,  divination,  and  the  rest ;  but  only  that  the
Hebrews  and  Egyptians,  I  mean  the  common  people
among  them,  believed  that  there  were  people  who  had
intercourse  with  the  Divinity,  or  with  good  and  bad
angels,  to  predict  the  future,  explain  dreams,  devote
their  enemies  to  the  direst  misfortunes,  cause  maladies,
raise  storms,  and  call  forth  the  souls  of  the  dead ;  if
there  was  any  reality  in  all  this,  it  was  not  in  the
things  themselves,  but  in  their  imaginations  and  pre-
possessions.

Moses  and  Joseph  were  regarded  by  the  Egyptians
as  great  magicians.  Rachel,  it  appears,  believed  that
the  teraphim  of  her  father  Laban  were  capable  of
giving  her  information  concerning  things  hidden  and  to
come.  The  Israelites  might  consult  the  idol  of  Micah,
and  Beelzebub  the  god  of  Ekron ;  but  the  sensible  and
enlightened  people  of  those  days,  like  similar  persons  in
our  own,  considered  all  this  as  the  sport  and  knavery
of  pretended  magicians,  who  derived  much  emolument
from  maintaining  these  prejudices  among  the  people.


OBJECTIONS  AGAINST  MAGIC.  49

Moses  most  wisely  ordained  the  penalty  of  death
ao-ainst  those  persons  who  abused  the  simplicity  of  the
iornorant  to  enrich  themselves  at  their  expense,  and
turned  away  the  people  from  the  worship  of  the  true
God,  in  order  to  keep  up  among  them  such  practices  as
were  superstitious  and  contrary  to  true  religion.

Besides,  it  was  necessary  to  good  order,  the  interests
of  the  commonwealth  and  of  true  piety,  to  repress
those  abuses  which  are  in  opposition  to  them,  and  to
punish  with  extreme  severity  those  who  draw  away
the  people  from  the  true  and  legitimate  worship  due  to
God,  lead  them  to  worship  the  devil,  and  place  their
confidence  in  the  creature,  in  prejudice  to  the  right  of
the  Creator;  inspiring  them  with  vain  terrors,  where
there  is  nothing  to  fear,  and  maintaining  their  minds
in  the  most  dangerous  errors.  If  amongst  an  infinite
number  of  false  predictions,  or  vain  interpretations  of
dreams,  some  of  them  are  fulfilled,  either  this  is  occa-
sioned by  chance,  or  it  is  the  work  of  the  devil,  who  is
often  permitted  by  God  to  deceive  those  whose  foolish-
ness and  impiety  lead  them  to  address  themselves  to  him
and  place  their  confidence  in  him,  all  which  the  wise
Ij^wgiver,  animated  by  the  divine  Spirit,  justly  repressed
by  the  most  rigorous  punishment.

All  histories  and  experience  on  this  subject,  demon-
strate that  those  who  make  use  of  the  art  of  mao^ic,
charms,  and  spells,  only  employ  their  art,  their  secret,
and  their  power,  to  corrupt  and  mislead ;  for  crime  and
vice ;  thus  they  cannot  be  too  carefully  sought  out  or  too
severely  punished.

We  may  add,  that  what  is  often  taken  for  black  or

VOL.  I.  D


50  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

diabolical  magic,  is  nothing  but  natural  magic,  or  art
and  cleverness  on  the  part  of  those  who  perform  things
which  appear  above  the  force  of  nature.  How  many
marvellous  effects  are  related  of  the  divining  rod,  sym-
pathetic powder,  phosphoric  lights,  and  mathematical
secrets !  How  much  knavery  is  now  well  known  in  the
priests  of  idols,  and  in  those  of  Babylon,  who  made  the
people  believe  that  the  god  Bel  drank  and  ate ;  that  a
large  living  dragon  was  a  divinity ;  that  the  god  Anubls
desired  to  have  certain  women,  who  were  thus  deceived
by  the  priests;  that  the  ox  Apis  gave  out  oracles,  and  that
the  serpent  of  Alexander  of  Abonotiche  knew  the  sick-
ness, and  gave  remedies  to  the  patient  without  opening
the  billet  which  contained  a  description  of  the  illness  !
We  may  possibly  speak  more  fully  on  this  subject  here-
after.

In  short,  the  most  judicious  and  most  celebrated  par-
liaments have  recognised  neither  magicians  nor  sorcerers,
at  least,  they  have  not  condemned  them  to  death  unless
they  were  convicted  of  other  crimes,  such  as  theft,  bad
practices,  poisoning,  or  criminal  seduction ;  for  instance,
in  the  affair  of  Gofredl,  a  priest  of  jNIarseilles,  who  was
condemned  by  the  parliament  of  Aix  to  be  torn  with
hot  pincers,  and  burnt  alive.  The  heads  of  that  com-
pany, in  the  account  which  they  render  to  the  chan-
cellor of  this  their  sentence,  testify  that  this  cure  was
in  truth  accused  of  sorcery,  but  that  he  had  been  con-
demned to  the  flames  as  guilty  and  convicted  of  spiritual
incest  with  his  penitent,  Madelaine  de  la  Palu.  From
all  this  it  is  concluded  that  there  is  no  reality  in  what
is  called  magic.


CHAPTER  IX.


KEPLT   TO   THE  OBJECTIONS.


In  answer  to  these,  I  allow  that  there  Is  indeed  very
often  a  great  deal  of  illusion,  prepossession,  and  imagi-
nation in  all  that  is  termed  magic  and  sorcery ;  and
sometimes  the  devil  by  false  appearances  combines  with
them  to  deceive  the  simple;  but  oftener,  without  the
evil  spirit  being  any  otherwise  a  party  to  it,  wicked,
corrupt,  and  interested  men,  artful  and  deceptive,  abuse
the  simplicity  both  of  men  and  women,  so  far  as  to
persuade  them  that  they  possess  supernatural  secrets
for  interpreting  dreams  and  foretelling  things  to  come,
for  curing  maladies,  and  discovering  secrets  unknown
to  any  one  ;  I  can  easily  agree  to  all  that.  All  kinds  of
histories  are  full  of  facts  which  demonstrate  what  I
have  just  said.  The  devil  has  a  thousand  things  im-
puted to  him  in  which  he  has  no  share ;  they  give  him
the  honour  of  predictions,  revelations,  secrets,  and  dis-
coveries, which  are  by  no  means  the  effect  of  his  power,
or  penetration  ;  as  in  the  same  manner  he  is  accused  of
having  caused  all  sorts  of  evils,  tempests,  and  maladies,
which  are  purely  the  effect  of  natural  but  unknown
causes.

It  is  very  true  that  there  are  really  many  persons
who  are  persuaded  of  the  power  of  the  devil,  of  his

d2


52  '  THE   PHANTOM  WORLD.

influence  over  an  infinite  number  of  things,  and  of  the
effects  which  they  attribute  to  him ;  that  they  have
consulted  him  to  learn  future  events,  or  to  discover
hidden  things ;  that  they  have  addressed  themselves
to  him  for  success  in  their  projects,  for  money,  or
favour,  or  to  enjoy  their  criminal  pleasures.  All  this
is  very  real.  Magic,  then,  is  not  a  simple  chimera,
since  so  many  persons  are  infatuated  with  the  power  of
charms  and  convicted  of  holding  commerce  with  the
devil,  to  procure  a  number  of  effects  which  pass  for
supernatural.  Now  it  is  the  folly,  the  vain  credulity,
the  prepossession  of  such  people  that  the  law  of  God
interdicts,  that  Moses  condemns  to  death,  and  that  the
Christian  Church  punishes  by  its  censures,  and  which  the
secular  judges  repress  with  the  greatest  rigour.  If  in
all  these  things  there  was  nothing  but  a  diseased  imagi-
nation, weakness  of  the  brain,  or  popular  prejudices,
would  they  be  treated  with  so  much  severity  ?  Do
we  put  to  death  hypochondriacs,  maniacs,  or  those
who  imagine  themselves  ill  ?  No,  they  are  treated
with  compassion,  and  every  effort  is  made  to  cure
them.  But  in  the  other  case,  it  is  impiety,  or  super-
stition, or  vice,  in  those  who  consult,  or  believe  they
consult  the  devil,  and  place  their  confidence  in  him,
against  which  the  laws  are  put  in  force  and  ordain
chastisement.

Even  if  we  could  deny  and  contest  the  reality  of
augurs,  diviners,  and  magicians,  and  look  on  all  these
kind  of  persons,  as  seducers,  who  abuse  the  simplicity
of  those  who  betake  themselves  to  them,  could  we  deny
the  reality  of  the  magicians  of  Pharaoh,  that  of  Simon,


REPLY  TO  THE  OBJECTIONS.  53

of  Bar-jesus,  of  the  Pythoness  of  the  Acts  of  the
Apostles  ?  Did  not  the  first  mentioned  perform  many
wonders  before  Pharaoh  ?  Did  not  Simon  the  magician
rise  into  the  air  by  means  of  the  devil  ?  Did  not  St.
Paul  impose  silence  on  the  Pythoness  of  the  city  of
Philippi  in  Macedonia  ?  ^  Will  it  be  said  that  there  was
any  collusion  between  St.  Paul  and  the  Pythoness  ?
Nothing  of  the  kind  can  be  maintained  by  any  reason-
able argument.

A  small  volume  was  published  at  Paris  in  1732,  by
a  new  author,  who  conceals  himself  under  the  two
initials  M.  D. ;  it  is  entitled.  Treatise  on  Magic,  Witch-
crafty  Possessions,  Obsessions  and  Charms ;  in  which  their
truth  and  reality  are  demonstrated.  He  shows  that  he
believes  there  are  magicians;  he  shows  by  Scripture,
both  in  the  Old  and  New  Testament,  and  by  the
authority  of  the  ancient  fathers,  some  passages  from
whose  works  are  cited  in  that  of  Father  Debrio,  entitled
Disquisitiones  Magicce.  He  proves  it  by  the  rituals  of  all
the  dioceses,  and  by  the  examinations  which  are  found
in  the  printed  "  Hours,"  wherein  they  suppose  the
existence  of  sorcerers  and  magicians.

The  civil  laws  of  the  emperors,  whether  pagan  or
christian,  those  of  the  kings  of  France,  both  ancient
and  modern,  jurisconsult,  physicians,  historians  both
sacred  and  profane,  concur  in  maintaining  this  truth.
In  all  kinds  of  writers  we  may  remark  an  infinity  of
stories  of  magic,  spells,  and  sorcery.  The  parliaments
of  France,  and  the  tribunals  of  justice  in  other  nations,
have  recognised  magicians,  the  pernicious  effects  of  their

*  Acts  xvi,  10.


54  THE  PHANTOM  WOELD.

art,  and  condemned  them  personally  to  the  most  rigorous
punishments.

He  relates  at  full  length^  the  remonstrances  made  to
king  Louis  XIV.  in  1670  by  the  parliament  at  Kouen,
to  prove  to  that  monarch,  that  it  was  not  only  the
parliament  of  Rouen,  but  also  all  the  other  parliaments
of  the  kingdom,  which  followed  the  same  rules  of  juris-
prudence in  what  concerns  magic  and  sorcery,  that  they
acknowledged  the  existence  of  such  things,  and  condemn
them.  This  author  cites  several  facts,  and  several  sen-
tences given  on  this  matter  in  the  parliaments  of  Paris,
Aix,  Toulouse,  Rennes,  Dijon,  &c.  &c.;  and  it  was  upon
these  remonstrances  that  the  same  king  in  1682  made
his  declaration  concerning  the  punishment  of  various
crimes,  and  in  particular,  of  sorcery,  diviners  or  sooth-
sayers, magicians,  and  similar  crimes.

He  also  cites  the  treaty  of  M.  de  la  Marre,  com-
missary at  the  cliatelet  of  Paris,  who  speaks  largely  of
magic,  and  proves  its  reality,  origin,  progress,  and
effects.  Would  it  be  possible  that  the  sacred  authors,
laws  divine  and  human,  the  greatest  men  of  antiquity,
jurisconsults,  the  most  enlightened  historians,  bishops  in
their  councils,  the  Church  in  her  decisions,  her  practices
and  prayers,  should  have  conspired  to  deceive  us,  and  to
condemn  those  who  practise  magic,  sorcery,  spells,  and
crimes  of  the  same  nature,  to  death,  and  the  most  rigorous
punishments,  if  they  were  merely  illusive,  and  the  effect
only  of  a  diseased  and  prejudiced  imagination  ?  Father
le  Brun,  of  the  Oratoire,  who  has  written  so  well  upon
the  subject  of  superstitions,  substantiates  the  fact  that

*>  Page  31,  et  seq.


BEPLY  TO  THE   OBJECTIONS.  55

the  parliament  of  Paris  recognises  that  there  are  sor-
cerers, and  that  it  punishes  them  severely  when  they
are  convicted.  He  proves  it  by  a  decree  issued  in
1601  against  some  inhabitants  of  Champagne  accused  of
witchcraft.  The  decree  wills  that  they  shall  be  sent  to
the  Conciergerie  by  the  subaltern  judges  on  pain  of
being  deprived  of  their  charge.  It  supposes  that  they
must  be  rigorously  punished,  but  it  desires  that  the  pro-
ceedings against  them  for  their  discovery  and  punish-
ment may  be  exact  and  regular.

M.  Servin,  advocate  general  and  councillor  of  state,
fully  proves  from  the  Old  and  New  Testament,  from
tradition,  laws  and  history,  that  there  are  diviners,
enchanters,  and  sorcerers,  and  refutes  those  who  would
maintain  the  contrary.  He  shows  that  magicians  and
those  who  make  use  of  charms,  ought  to  be  punished
and  held  in  execration ;  but  he  adds  that  no  punishment
must  be  inflicted  till  after  certain  and  evident  proofs
have  been  obtained ;  and  this  is  what  must  be  strictly
attented  to  by  the  parliament  of  Paris,  for  fear  of
punishing  madmen  for  guilty  persons,  and  taking  illu-
sions for  realities.

The  parliament  leaves  it  to  the  Church  to  inflict  ex-
communication, both  on  men  and  women  who  have
recourse  to  charms,  and  who  believe  they  go  in  the
night  to  nocturnal  assemblies,  there  to  pay  homage  to
the  devil.  The  Capitularies  of  the  kings °  recommend
the  pastors  to  instruct  the  faithful  on  the  subject  of
what  is  termed  the  Sabbath ;  at  any  rate  they  do  not
command  that  these  persons  should  receive  corporeal
•^  Capitular.  R.  xiii.  de  Sortilegiis  et  Sorciariis,  2.  col.  36.


56  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

punishment,  but  only  that  they  should  be  undeceived
and  prevented  from  misleading  others  in  the  same
manner.

And  there  the  parliament  stops,  so  long  as  the  case
goes  no  further  than  simply  misleading ;  but  when  it
goes  so  far  as  to  injure  others,  the  kings  have  often
commanded  the  judges  to  punish  these  persons  with  fines
and  banishment.  The  Ordonnances  of  Charles  VIII.
in  1490,  and  of  Charles  IX.  in  the  states  of  Orleans  in
1560,  express  themselves  formally  on  this  point,  and
they  were  renewed  by  King  Louis  XIV.  in  1682.
The  third  article  of  these  Ordonnances,  bears,  that  if  it
should  happen  "  there  were  persons  to  he  found  icicked
enough  to  add  impiety  and  sacrilege  to  superstition,  those
teho  shall  be  convicted  of  these  crimes  shall  be  punished  icith
deatlu''

When,  therefore,  it  is  evident  that  some  person  has
inflicted  injury  on  his  neighbour  by  malpractices,  the
parliament  punishes  them  rigorously,  even  to  the  pain
of  death,  conformably  to  the  ancient  Capitularies  of  the
kingdom,^  and  the  royal  Ordonnances.  Bodin,  who
wrote  in  1680,  has  collected  a  great  number  of  decrees,
to  which  may  be  added  those  which  the  reverend
Father  le  Brun  reports,  given  since  that  time.

He  afterwards  relates  a  remarkable  instance  of  a  man
named  Hocque,  who  was  condemned  to  the  galleys,  the
2d  of  September  1687,  by  sentence  of  the  high  court
of  justice  at  Passy,  for  having  made  use  of  malpractices
towards  animals,  and  having  thus  killed  a  great  number
in  Champagne.  Hocque  died  suddenly,  miserably,  and
^  Capitular,  in  872,  x.  2.  col.  230.


REPLY  TO   THE  OBJECTIONS.  57

'  in  despair,  after  having  discovered,  wten  drunken  with
wine,  to  a  person  named  Beatrice,  the  secret  which  he
made  use  of  to  kill  the  cattle ;  he  was  not  ignorant  that
the  demon  would  cause  his  death,  to  revenge  the  dis-
covery which  he  had  made  of  this  spell.

Some  of  the  accomplices  of  this  wretched  man  were
condemned  to  the  galleys  by  divers  decrees;  others
were  condemned  to  be  hanged  and  burnt,  by  order  of
the  Bailie  of  Passy,  the  26th  of  October  1691,  which
sentence  was  confirmed  by  decree  of  the  parliament
of  Paris,  the  18th  of  December  1691.  From  all  which
we  deduce  that  the  parliament  of  Paris  acknowledges
that  the  spells  by  which  people  do  injury  to  their
neighbours  ought  to  be  rigorously  punished ;  that  the
devil  has  very  extensive  power  which  he  too  often
exercises  over  men  and  animals,  and  that  he  would  ex-
ercise it  oftener,  and  with  greater  extension  and  fury,  if
he  were  not  limited  and  hindered  by  the  power  of  God,
and  that  of  good  angels,  who  set  bounds  to  his  malice.
St.  Paul  warns  us®  to  put  on  the  armour  of  God,  to
be  able  to  resist  the  snares  of  the  devil :  for,  adds  he,
"we  have  not  to  war  against  flesh  and  blood:  but
against  princes  and  powers,  against  the  bad  spirits  who
govern  this  dark  world,  against  the  spirits  of  malice


who  reign  in  the  air."


Eph.  vi.  12.


d3


*


CHAPTER  X.

EXAMINATION   OF   THE  AFFAIR   OF   HOCQUE,   MAGICIAN.

Monsieur  de  St.  Andre,  consulting  physician  in
ordinary  to  the  king,  in  his  sixth  letter  ^  against  magic,
maintains  that  in  the  affair  of  Hocque  which  has  been
mentioned,  there  was  neither  magic,  nor  sorcery,  nor
any  operation  of  the  demon ;  that  the  venomous  drug
which  Hocque  placed  in  the  stables,  and  by  means  of
which  he  caused  the  death  of  the  cattle  stalled  therein,
was  nothing  but  a  poisonous  compound  which,  by  its
smell  and  the  diffusion  of  its  particles,  poisoned  the
animals  and  caused  their  death ;  it  required  only  for
these  drugs  to  be  taken  away,  for  the  cattle  to  be  safe,
or  else  to  keep  the  cattle  from  the  stable  in  which  the
poison  was  placed.  The  difficulty  laid  in  discovering
where  these  poisonous  drugs  were  hidden;  the  shep-
herds, who  were  the  authors  of  the  mischief,  taking  all
sorts  of  precautions  to  conceal  them,  knowing  that
their  lives  were  in  danger  if  they  should  be  discovered.

He  further  remarks,  that  these  gogues  or  poisoned

drugs  lose  their  effects  after  a  certain  time,  unless  they

are  renewed  or  watered  with  something  to  revive  them

and  make  them  ferment  again.     If  the  devil  had  any

*  M.  de  St.  Andre,  Letter  VI.  on  the  subject  of  Magic,  &c.


HOCQUE  THE  MAGICIAN.  59

share  In  this  mischief,  the  drug  would  always  possess
the  same  virtue,  and  it  would  not  be  necessary  to  renew
it  and  refresh  it,  to  restore  it  to  its  pristine  power.

In  all  this,  M.  de  St.  Andre  supposes  that  if  the
demon  had  any  power  to  deprive  animals  of  their  lives,
or  to  cause  them  fatal  maladies,  he  could  do  so  inde-
pendently of  secondary  causes ;  which  will  not  be  easily
srranted  him  by  those  who  hold  that  God  alone  can
give  life  and  death  by  an  absolute  power,  independently
of  all  secondary  causes  and  of  any  natural  agent.  The
demon  might  have  revealed  to  Hocque  the  composition
of  this  fatal  and  poisonous  drug— he  might  have  taught
him  its  dano^erous  effects,  after  which  the  venom  acts
in  a  natural  way ;  it  recovers  and  resumes  its  pristine
strength  when  it  is  watered ;  it  acts  only  at  a  certain
distance,  and  according  to  the  reach  of  the  corpuscules
which  exhale  from  it.  All  these  effects  have  nothing
supernatural  in  them,  nor  which  ought  to  be  attributed
to  the  demon :  but  it  is  credible  enough,  that  he  in-
spired Hocque  with  the  pernicious  design  to  make  use
of  a  dangerous  drug,  which  the  wretched  man  knew
how  to  make  up,  or  the  composition  of  which  was
revealed  to  him  by  the  evil  spirit.

M.  de  St.  Andre  continues,  and  says,  that  there  is
nothing  in  the  death  of  Hocque  which  ought  to  be  attri-
buted to  the  demon ;  it  is,  says  he,  a  purely  natural
effect,  which  can  proceed  from  no  other  cause  than  the
venomous  effluvia  which  came  from  the  poisonous  drug
when  it  was  taken  up,  and  which  were  carried  towards
the  malefactor  by  those  which  proceeded  from  his  own
body  while  he  was  preparing  it,  and  placing  it  in  the


60  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

ground,  which  remained  there  and  were  preserved  In
that  spot,  so  that  none  of  them  had  been  dissipated.

These  effluvia  proceeding  from  the  person  of  Hocque,
then  finding  themselves  liberated,  returned  to  whence
they  originated,  and  drew  with  them  the  most  malig-
nant and  corrosive  particles  of  the  charge  or  drug,
which  acted  on  the  body  of  this  shepherd  as  they  did
on  those  of  the  animals  who  smelled  them.  He  con-
firms what  he  has  just  said,  by  the  example  of  sympa-
thetic powder  which  acts  upon  the  body  of  a  wounded
person,  by  the  immersion  of  small  particles  of  the  blood,
or  the  pus  of  the  wounded  man  upon  whom  it  is
applied,  which  particles  draw  with  them  the  spirit  of
the  drugs  of  which  it  (the  powder)  is  composed,  and
carry  them  to  the  wound.

But  the  more  I  reflect  on  this  pretended  evaporation
of  the  venomous  effluvia  emanating  from  the  poisoned
drug,  hidden  at  Passy  en  Brie,  six  leagues  from  Paris,
which  are  supposed  to  come  straight  to  Hocque,  shut
up  at  la  Tournelle,  borne  by  the  animal  effluvia  pro-
ceeding from  this  malefactor's  body  at  the  time  he
made  up  the  poisonous  drug  and  put  it  in  the  ground,
so  long  before  the  dangerous  composition  was  dis-
covered ;  the  more  I  reflect  on  the  possibility  of  these
evaporations,  the  less  I  am  persuaded  of  them  ;  I  could
wish  to  have  proofs  of  this  system,  and  not  instances  of
the  very  doubtful  and  very  uncertain  effects  of  sympa-
thetic powder,  which  can  have  no  place  in  the  case  in
question.  It  is  proving  the  obscure  by  the  obscure,
and  the  uncertain  by  the  uncertain ;  and  even  were  we
to  admit  generally  some   effects   of  the   sympathetic


HOCQUE  THE  MAGICIAN.  61

powder,  they  could  not  be  applicable  bere ;  the  distance
between  the  places  is  too  great,  and  the  time  too  long ;
and  what  sympathy  can  be  found  between  this  shep-
herd's poisonous  drug  and  his  person,  for  it  to  be  able
to  return  to  him  who  is  imprisoned  at  Paris,  when  the
gogue  is  discovered  at  Passy  ?

The  account  composed  and  printed  on  this  event,
bears,  that  the  fumes  of  the  wine  which  Hocque  had
drank,  having  evaporated,  and  he  reflecting  on  what
Beatrice  had  made  him  do,  began  to  agitate  himself,
howled,  and  complained  m.ost  strangely,  saying  that
Beatrice  had  taken  him  by  surprise,  that  it  would  occa-
sion his  death,  and  that  he  must  die  the  instant  that
Bras-de-fer,  another  shepherd,  to  whom  Beatrice  had
persuaded  Hocque  to  write  word  to  take  off  the  poisoned
drug,  which  he  had  scattered  on  the  ground,  at  Passy,
should  take  away  the  dose.  He  attacked  Beatrice,
w^hom  he  wanted  to  strangle,  and  even  excited  the
other  felons  who  were  with  him  in  prison,  and  condemned
to  the  galleys,  to  maltreat  her,  through  the  pity  they
felt  for  the  despair  of  Hocque,  who,  at  the  time  the
dose  was  taken  off  the  land,  had  died  in  a  moment,  in
strange  convulsions,  and  agitating  himself  like  one
possessed.

M.  de  St.  Andre  would  again  explain  all  this,  by  sup-
posing Hocque's  imagination  being  struck  with  the  idea
of  his  dying,  which  he  was  persuaded  would  happen  at
the  time  they  carried  away  the  poison,  had  a  great  deal
to  do  with  his  sufferings  and  death.  How  many  people
have  been  known  to  die  at  the  time  they  had  fancied  they
should,  when  struck  with  the  idea  of  their  approaching


G2  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

death.  The  despair  and  agitation  of  Hocque  had  dis-
turbed the  mass  of  his  blood,  altered  the  humours,
deranged  the  motion  of  the  effluvia,  and  rendered  them
much  susceptible  of  the  actions  of  the  vapours  pro-
ceeding from  the  poisonous  composition.

M.  de  St.  Andre  adds,  that  if  the  devil  had  had  any
share  in  this  kind  of  mischievous  spell,  it  could  only  be
m  consequence  of  some  compact,  either  expressed  or
tacit,  that  as  soon  as  the  poison  should  be  taken  up,  he
who  had  put  it  there  should  die  immediately.  Now
what  likelihood  is  there  that  the  person  who  should
make  this  compact  with  the  devil,  should  have  made
use  of  such  a  stipulation,  which  would  expose  him  to  a
cruel  and  inevitable  death  ?

1.  We  may  reply,  that  fright  can  cause  death ;  but
that  it  is  not  possible  for  it  to  produce  it  at  a  given
time,  nor  can  he  who  falls  into  a  paroxysm  of  grief,
say  that  he  shall  die  at  such  a  moment :  the  moment
of  death  is  not  in  the  power  of  man  in  similar  circum-
stances.

2.  That  so  corrupt  a  character  as  Hocque,  a  man
who  without  provocation,  and  to  gratify  his  ill-will,
kills  an  infinite  number  of  animals,  and  causes  great
damage  to  innocent  persons,  is  capable  of  the  greatest
excess,  may  give  himself  up  to  the  evil  spirit,  by  impli-
cated or  explicit  compacts,  and  engage,  on  pain  of  losing
his  life,  never  to  take  off  the  charge  he  had  thrown
upon  a  village.  He  believed  he  should  risk  nothing  by
this  stipulation,  since  he  was  free  to  take  it  away  or  to
leave  it,  and  it  was  not  probable  that  he  should  ever
lightly  thus  expose  himself  to  certain  death.     That  the


HOCQUE   THE  MAGICIAN.  63

(lemon  had  some  share  in  this  virtue  of  the  poisonous
composition  is  very  likely,  when  we  consider  the  circum-
stances of  its  operations,  and  those  of  the  death  and
despair  of  Hocque.  This  death  is  the  just  penalty  of
his  crimes,  and  of  his  confidence  in  the  exterminating
angel  to  whom  he  had  yielded  himself.

It  is  true  that  impostors,  weak  minds,  heated  imagi-
nations, ignorant  and  superstitious  persons,  have  been
found,  who  have  taken  for  black  magic,  and  operations
of  the  demon,  what  was  quite  natural,  and  the  effect  of
some  subtilty  of  philosophy  or  mathematics,  or  even
an  illusion  of  the  senses,  or  a  secret  which  deceives  the
eye  and  the  senses.  But  to  conclude  from  thence  that
there  is  no  magic  at  all,  and  that  all  that  is  said  about
it  is  pure  prejudice,  ignorance,  and  superstition,  is  to
conclude  what  is  general  from  what  is  particular,  and
to  deny  what  is  true  and  certain,  because  it  is  not  easy
to  distinguish  what  is  true  from  what  is  false,  and
because  men  will  not  take  the  trouble  to  examine  into
causes.  It  is  far  easier  to  deny  everything  than  to  enter
upon  a  serious  examination  of  facts  and  circumstances.


CHAPTER  XI.

MAGIC   OF   THE  EGYPTIANS   AKD   CHALDEANS,

All  Pagan  antiquity  speaks  of  magic  and  magicians,
of  magical  operations^  and  of  superstitious,  curious,  and
diabolical  books.  Historians,  poets,  and  orators,  are
full  of  thino;s  which  relate  to  this  matter  ;  some  believe
in  it,  others  deny  it ;  some  laugh  at  it,  others  remain  in
uncertainty  and  doubt.  Are  they  bad  spirits,  or  de-
ceitful men,  impostors  and  charlatans,  who,  by  the  sub-
tilties  of  their  art,  make  the  ignorant  believe  that
certain  natural  effects  are  produced  by  supernatural
causes  ?  That  is  the  point  on  which  men  differ.  But
in  general,  the  name  of  magic  and  magician  is  now
taken  in  these  days  in  an  odious  sense,  for  an  art  which
produces  marvellous  effects,  that  appear  above  the
common  course  of  nature  ;  and  that  by  the  operation  of
the  bad  spirit.

The  author  of  the  celebrated  Book  of  Enoch,  which
had  so  great  a  vogue,  and  has  been  cited  by  some
ancient  writers^  as  inspired  Scripture,  says  that  the
eleventh  of  the  watchers,  or  of  those  angels  who
were  in  love  with  women,  was  called  Pharmacius  or

»  Apud  Syncell.


MAGIC   OF  THE  EGYPTIANS.  65

Pharmaclins ;  that  he  taught  men,  before  the  flood,
enchantments,  spells,  magic  arts,  and  remedies  against
enchantments.  St.  Clement  of  Alexandria,  in  his
Recognitions,  says  that  Ham  the  son  of  Noah  received
that  art  from  heaven,  and  taught  it  to  Misraim  his  son,
the  father  of  the  Egyptians.

In  the  Scripture,  the  name  of  Mage  or  Magus  is
never  used  in  a  good  sense  as  signifying  philosophers
who  studied  astronomy,  and  were  versed  in  divine  and
supernatural  things,  except  in  speaking  of  the  Magi
who  came  to  adore  Jesus  Christ  at  Bethlehem.^  Every-
where else  the  Scriptures  condemn  and  abhor  magic
and  magicians.'^  They  severely  forbid  the  Hebrews  to
consult  such  persons  and  things.  They  speak  with
abhorrence  of  Simon  and  of  Elymas,  well-known  ma-
gicians, in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles ;  ^  and  of  the
magicians  of  Pharaoh,  who  counterfeited  by  their
illusions  the  true  miracles  of  Moses.  It  seems  likely
that  the  Israelites  had  taken  the  habit  in  Egypt,  where
they  then  were,  of  consulting  such  persons,  since  Moses
forbids  them  in  so  many  different  places,  and  so  severely,
either  to  listen  to  them,  or  to  place  confidence  in  their
predictions.

The  Chevalier  Marsham  shows  very  clearly  that  the
school  for  magic  among  the  Egyptians,  is  the  most
ancient  ever  known  in  the  world  ;  that  from  thence  it
spread  amongst  the  Chaldeans,  the  Babylonians,  the
Greeks  and  Persians.  St.  Paul  informs  us  that  Jannes
and  Jambres,  famous  magicians  of  the  time  of  Pharaoh,
••  Matt.  iii.  1,  7,  36.       •=  Lev.  xix.  31 ;  xx:       ^  Acts  viii.  9 ;  xiii.  8.


66  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

resisted  Moses.  Pllnj  remarks,  that  anciently,  there
was  no  science  more  renowned,  or  more  in  honour,  than
that  of  magic  :  Summam  litterarum  claritatem  gloriamque
ex  ea  scientia  antiquitus  et  penh  semper  petitam.

Porphyry^  says  that  Bang  Darius,  son  of  Hystaspes,
had  so  high  an  idea  of  the  art  of  magic,  that  he  caused
to  be  engraved  on  the  mausoleum  of  his  father  Hystaspes,
''^That  he  had  been  the  chief  and  the  master  of  the  magi  of
Persia,^'

The  embassy  that  Balak,  king  of  the  Moabites,  sent
to  Balaam  the  son  of  Beor,  who  dwelt  in  the  moun-
tains of  the  East,  towards  Persia  and  Chaldea,^  to
entreat  him  to  come  and  curse  and  devote  to  death
the  Israelites,  who  threatened  to  invade  his  country,
shows  the  antiquity  of  magic,  and  of  the  magical
superstitions  of  that  country.  For  will  it  be  said  that
these  maledictions  and  inflictions  were  the  effect  of
the  inspiration  of  the  good  Spirit,  or  the  work  of  good
angels?  I  acknowledge  that  Balaam  was  inspired  by
God  in  the  blessings  which  he  gave  to  the  people  of
the  Lord,  and  in  the  prediction  which  he  made  of  the
coming  of  the  Messiah  ;  but  we  must  acknowledge,  also,
the  extreme  corruption  of  his  heart,  his  avarice,  and  all
that  he  would  have  been  capable  of  doing,  if  God  had
permitted  him  to  follow  his  bad  inclination  and  the
inspiration  of  the  evil  spirit.

Diodorus  of  Sicily,^  on  the  tradition  of  the  Egyptians,

«  Porph.  de  Abstinent,  lib.  iv.   §  16.    Vid.  et  Ammian.   Marcell.
lib.  xxiii.
^  Numb,  xxiii.  1 — 3.  i  Diodor.  Sicul,  lib.  i.  p.  5.


MAGIC   OE   THE  CHALDEANS.  67

says,  that  the  Chaldeans  who  dwelt  at  Babylon  and
in  Babylonia,  were  a  kind  of  colony  of  the  Egyptians,
and  that  it  was  from  these  last  that  the  sages,  or  magi
of  Babylon,  learned  the  astronomy  which  gave  them
such  celebrity.

We  see,  in  Ezekiel,^  the  king  of  Babylon,  marching
against  his  enemies  at  the  head  of  his  army,  stop  short
where  two  roads  meet,  and  mingle  the  darts,  to  know  by
magic  art,  and  the  flight  of  these  arrows,  which  road  he
must  take.  In  the  ancients,  this  manner  of  consulting
the  demon  by  divining  wands  is  known — the  Greeks
call  it  Rhahdomanteia,

The  prophet  Daniel  speaks  more  than  once  of  the
magicians  of  Babylon ;  king  Nebuchadnezzar  having
been  frightened  in  a  dream,  sent  for  the  magi,  or
magicians,  diviners,  aruspices,  and  Chaldeans,  to
interpret  the  dream  he  had  had.

Kino;  Belshazzar  in  the  same  manner  convoked  the
magicians,  Chaldeans,  and  aruspices  of  the  country,  to
explain  to  him  the  meaning  of  these  words  which  he
saw  written  on  the  wall  :  Mene,  Tekel,  Perez.  All
this  indicates  the  habit  of  the  Babylonians  to  exercise
magic  art,  and  consult  magicians,  and  that  this
pernicious  art  was  held  in  high  repute  among  them.
We  read  in  the  same  Prophet,  of  the  trickery  made  use
of  by  the  priests  to  deceive  the  people,  and  make  them
believe  that  their  gods  lived,  ate,  drunk,  spoke,  and
revealed  to  them  hidden  things.

I  have  already  mentioned  the  magi  who  came  to
i*  Ezek.  xxi.  21.


68  THE   PHANTOM  "WORLD.

adore  Jesus  Christ ;  there  is  no  doubt  that  they  came
from  Chaldea  or  the  neighbouring  country,  but  differing
from  those  of  whom  we  have  just  spoken,  by  their  piety,
and  havino*  studied  the  true  reliojion.

We  read  in  books  of  travels,  that  superstition,  magic,
and  fascinations,  are  still  very  common  in  the  East,
both  among  the  fire-worshippers,  descended  from  the
ancient  Chaldeans,  and  among  the  Persians,  sectaries
of  Mahomet.  St.  Chrysostom  had  sent  into  Persia  a
holy  bishop,  named  Maruthas,  to  have  the  care  of  the
Christians  who  were  in  that  country ;  the  king
Isdegerde  having  discovered  him,  treated  him  with
much  consideration.  The  magi,  who  adore  and  keep  up
the  perpetual  fire,  which  is  regarded  by  the  Persians
as  their  principal  divinity,  were  jealous  at  this,  and
concealed  underground  an  apostate,  who,  knowing  that
the  king  was  to  come  and  pay  his  adoration  to  the
(sacred)  fire,  was  to  cry  out  from  the  depth  of  his
cavern,  that  the  king  must  be  deprived  of  his  throne
because  he  esteemed  the  Christian  priest  as  a  friend  of
the  gods.  The  king  was  alarmed  at  this,  and  wished
to  send  Maruthas  away;  but  the  latter  discovered
to  him  the  imposture  of  the  priests :  he  caused  the
ground  to  be  turned  up  where  the  man's  voice  had
been  heard,  and  there  they  found  him  from  whom  it
proceeded.

This  example,  and  those  of  the  Babylonish  priests
spoken  of  by  Daniel,  and  that  of  some  others,  who,  to
satisfy  their  irregular  passions,  pretended  that  their  God
required   the  company  of  certain  women,  prove  that


MAGIC   OE  THE   CHALDEANS.  69

what  is  usually  taken  for  the  effect  of  the  black  art,  is
only  produced  hy  the  knavishness  of  priests,  magicians,
diviners,  and  all  kinds  of  persons  who  impose  on  the
simplicity  and  credulity  of  the  people ;  I  do  not  deny
that  the  devil  sometimes  takes  part  in  it,  but  more
rarely  than  is  imagined.


CHAPTER  XIL

MAGIC   AMONG   THE   GREEKS   AND    ROMANS.

The  Greeks  liave  always  boasted  that  they  received
the  art  of  magic  from  the  Persians,  or  the  Bactrians.
They  affirm  that  Zoroaster  communicated  it  to  them ;
but  when  we  wish  to  know  the  exact  time  at  which  Zoro-
aster lived,  and  when  he  taught  them  these  pernicious
secrets,  they  wander  widely  from  the  truth,  and  even
from  probability;  some  placing  Zoroaster  600  years
before  the  expedition  of  Xerxes  into  Greece,  which
happened  in  the  year  of  the  world  3523,  and  before
Jesus  Christ  477  ;  others  500  years  before  the  Trojan
war  ;  others  5000  years  before  that  famous  war ;  others
6000  years  before  that  great  event.  Some  believe  that
Zoroaster  is  the  same  as  Ham,  the  son  of  Noah.  Lastly,
others  maintain  that  there  were  several  Zoroasters
What  appears  indubitably  true,  is,  that  the  worship  of
a  plurality  of  gods,  as  also  magic,  superstition,  and
oracles,  came  from  the  Egyptians  and  Chaldeans,  or
Persians,  to  the  Greeks,  and  from  the  Greeks  to  the
Latins.

From  the  time  of  Homer,^  magic  was  quite  common
among  the  Greeks.     That  poet  speaks  of  the  cure  of

»  Homer,  Iliad,  IV.


MAGIC  AMONG   THE   GEEEKS.  71

wounds,  and  of  blood  staunched  by  the  secrets  of  magic,
and  by  enchantment.  St.  Paul,  when  at  Ephesus,
caused  to  be  burned  there  books  of  magic  and  curious
secrets,  the  value  of  which  amounted  to  the  sum  of
50,000  pieces  of  silver.^  We  have  before  said  a  few
words  concerning  Simon  the  magician,  and  the  magi-
cian Ely  mas,  known  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.^
Pindar  says,*^  that  the  centaur  Chiron  cured  several
enchantments.  When  they  say  that  Orpheus  rescued
from  hell  his  wife  Eurydice,  who  had  died  from  the  bite
of  a  serpent,  they  simply  mean  that  he  cured  her  by
the  power  of  charms."^  The  poets  have  employed
magic  verses  to  make  themselves  beloved,  and  they
have  taught  them  to  others  for  the  same  purpose ;  they
may  be  seen  in  Theocritus,  Catullus,  and  Virgil.
Theophrastus  affirms  that  there  are  magical  verses
which  cure  sciatica.  Cato  mentions  (or  repeats)  some
against  luxations.^  Varro  admits  that  there  are  some
powerful  against  the  gout.

The  sacred  books  testify  that  enchanters  have  the
secret  of  putting  serpents  to  sleep,  and  of  charming
them,  so  that  they  can  never  either  bite  again,  or  cause
any  more  harm.s  The  crocodile,  that  terrible  animal,
fears  even  the  smell  and  voice  of  the  Tentyriens.'^  Job,
speaking  of  the  leviathan,  which  we  believe  to  be  the
crocodile,    says,    "  Shall  the   enchanter  destroy  it  ? "  ^

*•  Acts  xix.  19.  *^  Actsviii.  9;  xiii.  8.

^  Find.  Od.  IV.  «  Plin.  I,  28.

^  Cato  de  Eerustic.  c.  160.

K  Psalm  Ivii.    Jer.  vii.  17.  Eccles.  s.  11.

^  Plin.  lib.  viii.  c.  50.  *  Job  xl..25.


72  THE  PHANTOM   WORLD.

And  in  Eccleslasticus,^  "  Who  will  pity  the  enchanter
that  has  been  bitten  by  the  serpent  ?"  ^

Everybody  knows  what  is  related  of  the  Marsi,
people  of  Italy,  and  of  the  Psyllas,  who  possessed  the
secret  of  charming  serpents.  One  would  say,  says
St.  Augustine,"^  that  these  animals  understand  the  lan-
guages of  the  Marsi,  so  obedient  are  they  to  their
orders ;  we  see  them  come  out  of  their  caverns  as
soon  as  the  Marsian  has  spoken.  All  this  can  only  be
done,  says  the  same  Father,  by  the  power  of  the  malig-
nant spirit,  whom  God  permits  to  exercise  this  empire
over  venomous  reptiles,  above  all,  the  serpent,  as  if  to
punish  him  for  what  he  did  to  the  first  woman.  In
fact,  it  may  be  remarked,  that  no  animal  is  more  ex-
posed to  charms,  and  the  effects  of  magic  art,  than  the
serpent.

The  laws  of  the  Twelve  Tables  forbid  the  charming
of  a  neighbour's  crops,  qui  fruges  excantdsset.  Valerius
Flaccus  quotes  authors  who  affirm,  that  when  the
Romans  were  about  to  besiege  a  town,  they  employed
their  priests  to  evoke  the  divinity  who  presided  over
it,  promising  him  a  temple  in  Rome,  either  like  the
one  dedicated  to  him  in  the  besieged  place,  or  on  a
rather  larger  scale,  and  that  the  proper  worship  should
be  paid  to  him.  Pliny  says,  that  the  memory  of  these
evocations  is  preserved  among  the  priests.

'  Ecclus.  xii.  13.

"  Frigidus  in  pratis  cantando  rumpitur  anguis."

Virgil,  Eel.  VIII.

"  Yipereas  rumpo  verbis  et  carmine  fauces." —  Ovid.
""  Plin.  lib.  xxviii.


MAGIC  AMONG  THE  EOMANS.  73

If  that  whicli  we  have  just  related,  and  what  we  read  in
ancient  and  modern  writers,  is  at  all  real,  and  produces
the  effects  attributed  to  it,  it  cannot  be  doubted  that
there  is  something  supernatural  in  it,  and  that  the  devil
has  a  great  share  in  the  matter.

The  Abbot  Trithemius  speaks  of  a  sorceress  who,
by  means  of  certain  beverages,  changed  a  young  Bur-
gundian  into  a  beast.

Everybody  knows  the  fable  of  Circe,  who  changed
the  soldiers  or  companions  of  Ulysses  into  swine.  We
know  also  the  fable  of  the  Golden  Ass,  by  Apuleius,
which  contains  the  account  of  a  man  metamorphosed
into  an  ass.  I  bring  forward  these  things  merely  as
what  they  are,  that  is  to  say,  simply  poetic  fictions.

But  it  is  very  credible  that  these  fictions  are  not
destitute  of  some  foundation,  like  many  other  fables,
which  contain  not  only  a  hidden  and  moral  sense,  but
which  have  also  some  relation  to  an  event  really  his-
torical :  for  instance,  what  is  said  of  the  Golden  Fleece
carried  away  by  Jason ;  of  the  Wooden  Horse,  made
use  of  to  surprise  the  city  of  Troy ;  the  Twelve  Labours
of  Hercules;  the  metamorphoses  related  by  Ovid.  All
fabulous  as  those  things  appear  in  the  poets,  they  have,
nevertheless,  their  historical  truth.  And  thus  the
Pagan  poets  and  historians  have  travestied  and  dis-
guised the  stories  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  have
attributed  to  Bacchus,  Jupiter,  Saturn,  Apollo,  and
Hercules,  what  is  related  of  Noah,  Moses,  Aaron,
Samson,  and  Jonah,  &c.

Origen,  writing  against  Celsusj  supposes  the  reality
of  magic,  and  says,  that  the  magi  who  came  to  adore

VOL.  I.  E


74  THE  PJEANTOM  WORLD.

Jesus  Christ  at  Bethlehem,  wishing  to  perform  their
accustomed  operations,  not  being  able  to  succeed,  a
superior  power  preventing  the  effect  and  imposing
silence  on  the  demon,  they  sought  out  the  cause,  and
beheld  at  the  same  time  a  divine  sign  in  the  heavens,
whence  they  concluded  that  it  was  the  Being  spoken  of
by  Balaam,  and  that  the  new  King  whose  birth  he  had
predicted  was  born  in  Judea,  and  immediately  they
resolved  to  go  and  seek  him.  Origen  believes  that
magicians,  according  to  the  rules  of  their  art,  often
foretell  the  future,  and  that  their  predictions  are  fol-
lowed by  the  event,  unless  the  power  of  God,  or  that
of  the  angels,  prevents  the  effect  of  their  conjurations,
and  puts  them  to  silence."

"  The  fables  of  Jason  and  many  others  of  the  same  class  are  said  by
Fortuitus  Comes  to  have  a  reference  to  alchemy.


CHAPTER  XIIL

EXAilPLES   WHICH    PE07E   THE    REALITY   OF    MAGIC.

St.  Augustine^  remarks,  that  not  only  the  poets,
but  the  historians  even,  relate  that  Dlomede,  of  whom
the  Greeks  have  made  a  divinity,  had  not  the  happiness
to  return  to  his  country  with  the  other  princes  who  had
been  at  the  siege  of  Troy ;  that  his  companions  were
changed  into  birds,  and  that  these  birds  have  their
dwelling  in  the  environs  of  the  Temple  of  Diomede,
which  is  situated  near  Mount  Garganos;  that  these
birds  caress  the  Greeks  who  come  to  visit  this  temple,
but  fly  at  and  peck  the  strangers  who  arrive  there.

Varro,  the  most  learned  of  Romans,  to  render  this
more  credible,  relates  what  everybody  knows  about
Circe,  who  changed  the  companions  of  Ulysses  into
beasts ;  and  what  is  said  of  the  Arcadians,  who,  after
ha^dng  drawn  lots,  swam  over  a  certain  lake,  after
which  they  were  metamorphosed  into  wolves,  and  ran
about  in  the  forests  like  other  wolves.  If  durino;  the
time  of  their  transmutation  they  did  not  eat  human
flesh,  at  the  end  of  nine  years  they  repassed  the  same
lake,  and  resumed  their  former  shape.

*  Aug.  de  Civit.  Dei,  lib.  xviii.  c.  16 — IS.
E  2


76  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

The  same  Varro  relates  of  a  certain  Demenotas,  that,
having  tasted  the  flesh  of  a  child  which  the  Arcadians
had  immolated  to  their  god  Lyc£ea,  he  had  also  been
changed  into  a  wolf,  and  ten  years  after  he  had  resumed
his  natural  form,  had  appeared  at  the  Olympic  games,
and  won  the  prize  for  pugilism.

St.  Augustine  testifies,  that  in  his  time  many  believed
that  these  transformations  still  took  place,  and  some
persons  even  affirmed  that  they  had  experienced  them
in  their  own  persons.  He  adds,  that  w^hen  in  Italy,  he
was  told  that  certain  women  gave  cheese  to  strangers
who  lodged  at  their  houses,  when  these  strangers  were
immediately  changed  into  beasts  of  burden,  without
losino-  their  reason,  and  carried  the  loads  which  were
placed  upon  them ;  after  which  they  returned  to  their
former  state.  He  says,  moreover,  that  a  certain  man,
named  Prasstantius,  related  that  his  father,  having
eaten  of  this  magic  cheese,  remained  lying  in  bed,
without  any  one  being  able  to  av>'aken  him,  for  several
days,  when  he  awoke,  and  said  that  he  had  been  changed
into  a  horse,  and  had  carried  victuals  to  the  army ;  and
the  thing  was  found  to  be  true,  although  it  appeared  to
him  to  be  only  a  dream.

St.  Augustine,  reasoning  on  all  this,  says,  that  either
these  things  are  false,  or  else  so  extraordinary  that  we
cannot  sfive  faith  to  them.  It  is  not  to  be  doubted  that
God,  by  his  almighty  power,  can  do  anything  that  he
thinks  proper,  but  that  the  devil,  who  is  of  a  spiritual
nature,  can  do  nothing  without  tlie  permission  of  God,
w^hose  decrees  are  always  just ;  that  the  demon  can
neither  change  the  nature  of  the  spirit  or  the  body  of


EXAJIPLES   IN   TROOF  OF  MAGIC.  11

a  man,  to  transform  him  into  a  beast ;  but  that  he  can
only  act  upon  the  fancy  or  imagination  of  a  man,  and
persuade  him  that  he  is  what  he  is  not,  or  that  he  appears
to  others  different  from  what  he  is  ;  or  that  he  remains
in  a  deep  sleep,  and  believes  during  that  slumber  that
he  is  bearing  loads  which  the  devil  carries  for  him ;  or
that  he  (the  devil)  fascinates  the  eyes  of  those  who
believe  they  see  them  borne  by  animals,  or  by  men
metamorphosed  into  animals.

If  we  consider  it  only  a  change  arising  from  fancy  or
imagination,  as  it  happens  in  the  disorder  called  lycan-
thropy,  in  which  a  man  believes  himself  changed  into  a
wolf,  or  into  any  other  animal,  as  Nebuchadnezzar,  who
believed  himself  changed  into  an  ox,  and  acted  for
seven  years  as  if  he  had  really  been  metamorphosed
into  that  animal,  there  would  be  nothing  in  that  more
marvellous  than  what  we  see  in  hypochondriacs,  who
persuade  themselves  that  they  are  kings,  generals,
popes,  and  cardinals ;  that  they  are  snow,  glass,  pot-
tery, &c.  Like  him  who,  being  alone  at  the  theatre,
believed  that  he  beheld  there  actors  and  admirable
representations ;  or  the  man  who  imagined  that  all
the  vessels  which  arrived  at  the  port  of  Pireus,  near
Athens,  belonged  to  him;  or,  in  short,  what  Ave  see
every  day  in  dreams,  and  which  appear  to  us  very  real
during  our  sleep.  In  all  this,  it  is  needless  to  have
recourse  to  the  devil,  or  to  magic,  fascination,  or
illusion ;  there  is  nothing  above  the  natural  order  of
tilings.  But  that,  by  means  of  certain  beverages,
certain  herbs,  and  certain  kinds  of  food,  a  person
may  disturb   the  imagination,    and  persuade   another


78  THE  PHANTOM  WOULD.

tliat  he  is  a  wolf,  a  horse,  or  an  ass,  appears  more  diffi-
cult of  explanation,  although  we  are  aware  that  plants,
herbs,  and  medicaments  possess  great  power  over  the
bodies  of  men,  and  are  capable  of  deranging  the  brain,
constitution,  and  imagination.  We  have  but  too  many
examples  of  such  things.

Another  circumstance,  which,  if  true,  deserves  much
reflection,  is  that  of  Apollonius  of  Tyana,  who,  being
at  Ephesus  during  a  great  plague  which  desolated  the
city,  promised  the  Ephesians  to  cause  the  pest  to  cease
the  very  day  on  which  he  was  speaking  to  them,  and
which  was  that  of  his  second  arrival  in  their  town.  He
assembled  them  at  the  theatre,  and  ordered  them  to  stone
to  death  a  poor  old  man,  covered  with  rags,  who  asked
alms.  "  Strike,""  cried  he,  "  that  enemy  of  the  gods !
heap  stones  upon  him."  They  could  not  make  up  their
minds  to  do  so,  for  he  excited  their  pity,  and  asked
mercy  in  the  most  touching  manner.  But  Apollonius
pressed  it  so  much,  that  at  last  they  slew  him,
and  amassed  over  him  an  immense  heap  of  stones.
A  little  while  after  he  told  them  to  take  away  these
stones,  and  they  would  see  what  sort  of  an  animal  they
had  killed.  They  found  only  a  great  dog,  and  were
convinced  that  this  old  man  was  only  a  phantom  who
had  fascinated  their  eyes,  and  caused  the  pestilence  in
their  town.

We  here  see  five  remarkable  things:  —  1st,  The
demon  who  causes  the  plague  in  Ephesus ;  2d,  This
same  demon,  who,  instead  of  a  dog,  causes  the  appear-
ance of  a  man;  3d,  The  fascination  of  the  senses  of
the  Ephesians,  who  believe  that  they  behold  a  man


EXAMPLES  IN  PROOF  OF  MAGIC.  79

instead  of  a  dog ;  4:thf  The  proof  of  the  magic  of  Apol-
lonius,  who  discovers  the  cause  of  this  pestilence ;
5th,  and  who  makes  it  cease  at  the  given  time.

^neas  Sylvius  Picolomini,  who  was  afterwards
Pope  by  the  name  of  Pius  II.  writes,  in  his  History  of
Bohemia,  that  a  woman  predicted  to  a  soldier  of  King
Wratislaus,  that  the  army  of  that  prince  would  be  cut
in  pieces  by  the  Duke  of  Bohemia,  and  that,  if  this
soldier  wished  to  avoid  death,  he  must  kill  the  first
person  he  should  meet  on  the  road,  cut  off  their  ears,
and  put  them  in  his  pocket;  that  with  the  sword  he
had  used  to  pierce  them  he  must  trace  on  the  ground
a  cross  between  his  horse's  legs ;  that  he  must  kiss  it,
and  then  take  flight.  All  this  the  young  soldier  per-
formed. Wratislaus  gave  battle,  lost  it,  and  was  killed.
The  young  soldier  escaped  ;  but  on  entering  his  house,
he  found  that  it  was  his  wife  whom  he  had  killed  and
run  his  sword  through,  and  whose  ears  he  had  cut  off.

This  woman  was,  then,  strangely  disguised  and
metamorphosed,  since  her  husband  could  not  recognise
her,  and  she  did  not  make  herself  known  to  hmi  in  such
perilous  circumstances,  when  her  life  was  in  danger.
These  two  were,  then,  apparently  magicians ;  both  she
who  made  the  prediction,  and  the  other  on  whom  it  was
exercised.  God  permits,  on  this  occasion,  three  great
evils.  The  first  magician  counsels  the  murder  of  an
innocent  person;  the  young  man  commits  it  on  his  own
Avife  without  knowing  her ;  and  the  latter  dies  in  a
state  of  condemnation,  since  by  the  secrets  of  magic  she
had  rendered  it  impossible  to  recognise  her.

A  butcher's  wife  of  the  town  of  Jena,  in  the  duchy


80  THE  PHANTOM   WOKLD.

of  Wiemar  in  Thuringia,  ^  having  refused  to  let  an  old
woman  have  a  calf's  head  for  which  she  offered  very-
little,  the  old  woman  went  away  grumbling  and
mutterino;.  A  little  time  after  this  the  butcher's  wife
felt  violent  pains  in  her  head.  As  the  cause  of  this
malady  was  unknown  to  the  cleverest  physicians,  they
could  find  no  remedy  for  it :  from  time  to  time  a
substance  like  brains  came  from  this  woman's  left  ear,
and  at  first  it  was  supposed  to  be  her  own  brain.  But
as  she  suspected  that  old  woman  of  having  cast  a  spell
upon  her  on  account  of  the  calf's  head,  they  examined
the  thing  more  minutely,  and  they  saw  that  these  were
calf  s  brains  ;  and  what  strengthened  this  opinion  was,
that  splinters  of  calf's-head  bones  came  out  with  the
brains.  This  disorder  continued  some  time ;  at  last  the
butcher's  wife  was  perfectly  cured.  This  happened  in
1685.  M.  Hoifman,  who  relates  this  story  in  his  dis-
sertation on  the  Power  of  the  Demon  over  Bodies,  printed
in  1736,  says  that  the  woman  was  perhaps  still  alive.

One  day  they  brought  to  St.  Macarius  the  Egyptian
a  virtuous  woman  who  had  been  transformed  into  a
mare,  by  the  pernicious  arts  of  a  magician.  Her
husband,  and  all  those  who  saw  her,  thought  that  she
really  was  changed  into  a  mare.  This  woman  remained
three  days  and  three  nights  without  tasting  any  food,
proper  either  for  man  or  horse.  They  showed  her  to
the  priests  of  the  place,  who  could  apply  no  remedy.

Then  they  led  her  to  the  cell  of  St.  Macarius,  to
whom  God  had  revealed  that  she  was  to   come  ;  his
disciples  wanted  to  send  l\er  back,  thinking  that  it  was
''  Frederici  Hoffman,  de  Dialjoli  Potentia  in  Corpora,  p.  382.


EXAIUPLES   IN   PKOOF  OF  MAGIC.  81

a  mare.  They  informed  the  saint  of  her  arrival,  and
the  subject  of  her  journey.  "  He  said  to  them,  You  are
downright  animals  yourselves,  thinking  you  see  what
is  not ;  that  woman  is  not  changed,  but  your  eyes  are
fascinated.  At  the  same  time  he  sprinkled  holy  water
on  the  woman's  head,  and  all  present  beheld  her  in  her
former  state.  He  gave  her  something  to  eat,  and  sent
her  away  safe  and  sound  with  her  husband.  As  he
sent  her  away  the  saint  said  to  her.  Do  not  keep  from
church,  for  this  has  happened  to  you  for  having  been
five  weeks  without  taking  the  Sacrament  of  our  Lord,
or  attendinsf  divine  service."

St.  Hilarion,  much  in  the  same  manner,  cured  by
virtue  of  holy  water  a  young  girl,  w^hom  a  magician  had
rendered  most  violently  amorous  of  a  young  man.     The

demon  who  possessed  her  cried  aloud  to  St.  Hilarion,

It

"  You  make  me  endure  the  most  cruel  torments,  for  I
cannot  come  out  till  the  young  man  who  caused  me  to
enter  shall  unloose  me,  for  I  am  enchained  under  the
threshold  of  the  door  by  a  band  of  copper  covered  with
magical  characters,  and  by  the  tow  which  envelopes  it."
Then  St.  Hilarion  said  to  him,  "  Truly  your  power  is
very  great,  to  suffer  yourself  to  be  bound  by  a  bit  of
copper  and  a  little  thread ; "  at  the  same  time,  without
permitting  these'  things  to  be  taken  from  under  the
threshold  of  the  door,  he  chased  away  the  demon  and
cured  the  girl.

In  the  same  place,  St.  Jerome  relates  that  one
Italicus,  a  citizen  of  Gaza  and  a  Christian,  who  brought
up  horses  for  the  games  in  the  Circus,  had  a  pagan
antagonist  who  hindered  and  held  back  the  horses  of

e3


82  THE  PHANTOM  WOBU).

Italicus  in  their  course,  and  gave  most  extraordinary
celerity  to  his  own.  Italicus  came  to  St.  Hilarion,  and
told  him  the  subject  he  had  for  uneasiness.  The  saint
laughed  and  said  to  him,  "  Would  it  not  be  better  to
give  the  value  of  your  horses  to  the  poor,  rather  than
employ  them  in  such  exercises?" — "  I  cannot  do  as  I
please,"  said  Italicus;  "it  is  a  public  employment  which
I  fill,  because  I  cannot  help  it,  and  as  a  Christian  I
cannot  employ  malpractices  against  those  used  against
me."  The  brothers,  who  were  present,  interceded  for
him ;  and  St.  Hilarion  gave  him  the  earthen  vessel  out
of  which  he  drank,  filled  it  with  water,  and  told  him
to  sprinkle  his  horses  with  it.  Italicus  not  only
sprinkled  his  horses  with  this  water,  but  likewise  his
stable  and  chariot  all  over ;  and  the  next  day  the  horses
and  chariot  of  this  rival  were  left  far  behind  his  own  ;
which  caused  the  people  to  shout  in  the  theatre,
"  Marnas  is  vanquished — Jesus  Christ  is  victorious  !"
And  this  victory  of  Italicus  produced  the  conversion  of
several  persons  at  Gaza.

Will  it  be  said  that  this  is  only  the  effect  of  ima-
gination, prepossession,  or  the  trickery  of  a  clever
charlatan  ?  How  can  you  persuade  fifty  people  that  a
woman  who  is  present  before  their  eyes  can  be  changed
into  a  mare,  supposing  that  she  has  retained  her  own
natural  shape  ?  How  was  it  that  the  soldier  mentioned
by  ^neas  Sylvius  did  not  recognise  his  wife,  whom  he
pierced  with  his  sword,  and  whose  ears  he  cut  off?
How  did  Apollonius  of  Tyana  persuade  the  Ephesians
to  kill  a  man,  w^ho  really  was  only  a  dog  ?  How  did  he
know  that  this  dog,  or  tliis  man,  was  the  cause  of  the


EXAMPLES   IN   PROOf  OF  MAGIC.  83

pestilence  which  afflicted  Ephesus  ?  It  is  then  very
credible  that  the  evil  spirit  often  acts  on  bodies,  on  the
air,  the  earth,  and  on  animals,  and  produces  effects
which  appear  above  the  power  of  man.

It  is  said  that  in  Lapland  they  have  a  school  for
magic,  and  that  fathers  send  their  children  to  it,  being
persuaded  that  magic  is  necessary  to  them,  that  they
may  avoid  falling  into  the  snares  of  their  enemies,
who  are  themselves  great  magicians.  They  make  the
familiar  demons,  whose  services  they  command,  pass  as
an  inheritance  to  their  children,  that  they  may  make  use
of  them  to  overcome  the  demons  of  other  families  who
are  adverse  to  their  own.  They  often  make  use  of  a
certain  kind  of  drum  for  their  magical  operations ;  for
instance,  if  they  wish  to  know  v/hat  is  passing  in  a
foreign  country,  one  amongst  them  beats  this  drum,
placing  upon  it  at  the  part  where  the  image  of  the  sun
is  represented,  a  quantity  of  pewter  rings  attached
together  with  a  chain  of  the  same  metal;  then  they
strike  the  drum  with  a  forked  hammer  made  of  bone,
so  that  these  rings  move ;  at  the  same  time  they  sing
distinctly  a  song,  called  by  the  Laplanders  Jonh ;  and  all
those  of  their  nation  who  are  present,  men  and  women,
add  their  own  songs,  expressing  from  time  to  time  the
name  of  the  place  whence  they  desire  to  have  news.

The  Laplander  having  beaten  the  drum  for  some
time,  places  it  on  his  head  in  a  certain  manner,  and
falls  down  directly  motionless  on  the  ground,  and
without  any  sign  of  life.  All  the  men  and  all  the
women  continue  singing,  till  he  revives ;  if  they  cease
to  sing,  the  man  dies,  w^hich  happens  also  if  any  one


84  THE  PHANTOM  WOEXD.

tries  to  awaken  him  by  touching  his  hand  or  his  foot.
They  even  keep  the  flies  from  him,  which  by  their
humming  mio;ht  awaken  him  and  brino;  him  back  to
life.

When  he  is  recovered  he  replies  to  the  questions
they  ask  him  concerning  the  place  he  has  been  at.
Sometimes  he  does  not  awake  for  four-and- twenty
hours,  sometimes  more,  sometimes  less,  according  to
the  distance  he  has  gone ;  and  in  confirmation  of  what
he  says,  and  of  the  distance  he  has  been,  he  brings
back  from  the  place  he  has  been  sent  to,  the  token
demanded  of  him,  a  knife,  a  ring,  shoes,  or  some  other
object.*'

These  same  Laplanders  make  use  also  of  this  drum,
to  learn  the  cause  of  any  malady,  or  to  deprive  their
enemies  of  their  life  or  their  strength.  Moreover,
amongst  them  are  certain  magicians,  who  keep  in  a  kind
of  leathern  game-bag  magic  flies,  which  they  let  loose
from  time  to  time  ascainst  their  enemies  or  asrainst  their
cattle,  or  simply  to  raise  tempests  and  hurricanes.
They  have  also  a  sort  of  dart  which  they  hurl  into  the
air,  and  which  causes  the  death  of  any  one  it  falls  upon.
They  have  also  a  sort  of  little  ball  called  tyre,  almost
round,  which  they  send  in  the  same  way  against  their
enemies  to  destroy  them ;  and  if  by  ill  luck  this  ball
should  hit  on  its  way  some  other  person,  or  some
animal,  it  will  inevitably  cause  its  death.

Who  can  be  persuaded  that  the  Laplanders  who  sell

"  See  John  Schesser,  Laponia,  printed  at  Frankfort  in  4to.  an.  1673,
chap.  xi.  entitled,  De  sacris  Magicis  et  Magia  Laponia,  p.  119,  and
following.


EXAMPLES  IN  PEOOP  OP   MAGIC.  85

fair  winds,  raise  storms,  relate  what  passes  in  distant
places,  where  they  go,  as  they  say,  in  the  spirit,  and
bring  back  things  which  they  have  found  there, — who
can  persuade  themselves  that  all  this  is  done  without
the  aid  of  magic  ?  It  has  been  said  that  in  the
circumstance  of  ApoUonius  of  Tyana,  they  contrived  to
send  away  the  man  all  squalid  and  deformed,  and  put
in  his  place  a  dog  which  was  stoned,  or  else  they  sub-
stituted a  dead  dog.  All  which  would  require  a  vast
deal  of  preparation,  and  would  be  very  difficult  to
execute  in  sight  of  all  the  people  :  it  would  perhaps  be
better  to  deny  the  fact  altogether,  which  certainly  does
appear  very  fabulous,  than  to  have  recourse  to  such
explanations.


CHAPTER  XIV.

EFFECTS    OE   MAGIC   ACCORDING    TO    THE    POETS.

Were  we  to  believe  what  is  said  by  the  poets  con-
cerning  the  effects  of  magic,  and  what  the  magicians
boast  of  being  able  to  perform  by  their  spells,  no-
thing would  be  more  marvellous  than  their  art,  and
we  should  be  obliged  to  acknowledge  that  the  power  of
the  demon  was  greatly  shown  thereby.  Pliny'^  relates,
that  Appian  evoked  the  spirit  of  Homer,  to  learn  from
him  which  was  his  country,  and  who  were  his  parents.
Philostratus  says,^  that  Apollonius  of  Tyana  went  to
the  tomb  of  Achilles,  evoked  his  manes,  and  implored
them  to  cause  the  figure  of  that  hero  to  appear  to  him ;
the  tomb  trembled,  and  afterwards  he  beheld  a  young-
man,  who  at  first  appeared  about  five  cubits,  or  seven
feet  and  a  half  high — after  which,  the  phantom  dilated
to  twelve  cubits,  and  appeared  of  a  singular  beauty.
Apollonius  asked  him  some  frivolous  questions,  and  as
the  young  man  jested  indecently  with  him,  he  compre-
hended that  he  was  possessed  by  a  demon ;  this  demon
he  expelled,  and  cured  the  young  man.  But  all  this  is
fabulous.

"  Plin.  lib.  iii.  c.  2.  ^'  riiilost.  Yit-  Apollon.


EFFECTS   OF  MAGIC.  87

Lactantius/  refuting  the  philosophers  Democritus,
Epicurus,  and  Dicearchus^  who  denied  the  immortality
of  the  soul,  says,  they  would  not  dare  to  maintain  their
opinion  before  a  magician,  who,  by  the  power  of  his
art,  and  by  his  spells,  possessed  the  secret  of  bringing
souls  from  Hades,  of  making  them  appear,  speak,  and
foretell  the  future,  and  give  certain  signs  of  their
presence.

St.  Augustine,^  always  circumspect  in  his  decisions,
dare  not  pronounce  whether  magicians  possess  the
power  of  evoking  the  spirits  of  saints  by  the  might  of
their  enchantments.  But  Tertullian  ^  is  bolder,  and
maintains  that  no  magical  art  has  power  to  bring  the
souls  of  the  saints  from  their  rest ;  but  that  all  the  ne-
cromancers can  do,  is  to  call  forth  some  phantoms  with
a  borrowed  shape,  which  fascinate  the  eyes,  and  make
those  who  are  present  believe  that  to  be  a  reality
which  is  only  appearance.  In  the  same  place  he  quotes
Heraclius,  who  says,  that  the  Nasamones,  people '  of
Africa,  pass  the  night  by  the  tombs  of  their  near
relations  to  receive  oracles  from  the  latter ;  and  that
the  Celts,  or  Gauls,  do  the  same  thing  in  the  mauso-
leums of  great  men,  as  related  by  Meander.

Lucan  says,^  that  the  magicians  by  their  spells
cause  thunder  in  the  skies  unknown  to  Jupiter ;  that
they  tear  the  moon  from  her  sphere,  and  precipitate  her
to  earth;  that  they  disturb  the  course  of  nature,
})rolong  the   nights,   and  shorten  the  days;    that  the

"  Lactant,  lib.  vi.  Divin.  Instit.  c.  13.

^  Aug.  ad  Simplic.  •=  Tertull.  de  Anima,  c.  57.

^  Lucan.  Pharsal.  lib.  vi.  450,  et  scq.


88  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

universe  is  obedient  to  their  voice,  and  that  the  world
is  chilled  as  it  were  when  they  speak  and  command. «
They  were  so  well  persuaded  that  the  magicians  pos-
sessed power  to  make  the  moon  come  down  from  the
sky,  and  they  so  truly  believed  that  she  was  evoked
by  magic  art  whenever  she  was  eclipsed,  that  they
made  a  great  noise  by  striking  on  copper  vessels,  to
prevent  the  voice  which  pronounced  enchantments  from
reaching  her.^

These  popular  opinions  and  poetical  fictions  deserve
no  credit,  but  they  show  the  force  of  prejudice/  It  is
affirmed  that,  even  at  this  day,  the  Persians  think  they
are  assisting  the  moon  when  eclipsed,  by  striking
violently  on  brazen  vessels,  and  making  a  great  uproar.

Ovid^  attributes  to  the  enchantments  of  magic,  the
evocation  of  the  infernal  powers,  and  their  dismissal
back  to  hell ;  storms,  tempests,  and  the  return  of  fine
weather.     They  attributed  to  it  the  power  of  changing

e  "  Cessavere  vices  rerum,  dilataque  longa,

Hsesit  nocte  dies ;  legi  non  paruit  aether ;
Torpuit  et  preeceps  audito  carmine  mundus ;
Et  tonat  ignaro  coelum  Jove."

^  "  Cantat  et  e  curro  tentat  deducere  Lunam

Et  faceret,  si  non  gera  repulsa  sonent."

Tibull  lib.  i.  Eleg.  ix.  21.

'  Pietro  della  Valle,  "Voyage.

^  " .  . . .  Obscurum  verborum  ambage  novorum

Ter  novies  carmen  magico  demurmurat  ore.  '
Jam  ciet  infernas  magico  stridore  catervaSj
Jam  jubet  aspersum  lacte  referre  pedem.
Ciim  libet,  base  tristi  depellit  nubila  coelo  ;
Cum  libet;  sestivo  provocat  orbe  nives."

Ovid.  Metamorpli.  14.


EFEECTS   OF  MAGIC.  89

men  into  beasts  by  means  of  certain  herbs,  the  virtues
of  which  are  known  to  them.^

Virgil  ^  speaks  of  serpents  put  to  sleep  and  enchanted
by  the  magicians.  And  Tibullus  says,  that  he  has
seen  the  enchantress  bring  down  the  stars  from  heaven,
and  turn  aside  the  thunderbolt  ready  to  fall  upon  the
earth — and  that  she  has  opened  the  ground  and  made
the  dead  come  forth  from  their  tombs.

As  this  matter  allow^s  of  poetical  ornaments,  the
poets  have  vied  with  each  other  in  endeavouring  to
adorn  their  pages  with  them,  not  that  they  were  con-
vinced there  was  any  truth  in  what  they  said;  they
were  the  first  to  laugh  at  it  when  an  opportunity  pre-
sented itself,  as  well  as  the  gravest  and  w^isest  men  of
antiquity.  But  neither  princes  nor  priests  took  much
pains  to  undeceive  the  people,  or  to  destroy  their
prejudices  on  those  subjects.  The  Pagan  religion
allowed  them,  nay,  authorized  them,  and  part  of  its
practices  were  founded  on  similar  superstitions.

'  "  [N'a'is  nam  ut  cantu,  nimiumque  potentibus  herbis

Yerterit  in  tacitos  juvenilia  corpora  pisces."

»*  "  Vipereo  generi  et  graviter  spirantibus  bydris

Spargere  qui  somnos  cantuque  manuque  solebat."


CHAPTER  XV.


OF     THE     PAGAN     ORACLES.


If  it  were  well  proved  that  tlie  oracles  of  Pagan
antiquity  were  tlie  work  of  the  evil  spirit,  we  could
give  more  real  and  palpable  proofs  of  the  apparition  of
the  demon  among  men  than  these  boasted  oracles,
which  were  given  in  almost  every  country  in  the  world,
among  the  nations  which  passed  for  the  wisest  and
most  enlightened,  as  the  Egyptians,  Chaldeans,  Per-
sians, Syrians,  even  the  Hebrews,  Greeks,  and  Romans.
Even  the  most  barbarous  people  were  not  without  their
oracles.

In  the  Pagan  religion,  there  was  nothing  esteemed
more  honourable,  or  more  complacently  boasted  of.

In  all  their  great  undertakings  they  had  recourse  to
the  oracle;  by  that  was  decided  the  most  important
affairs  between  town  and  town,  or  province  and  pro-
vince. The  manner  in  which  the  oracles  were  rendered,
was  not  everywhere  the  same.  It  is  said,'^  the  bull
Apis,  wdiose  worship  was  anciently  established  in
Egypt,  gave  out  his  oracles  on  his  receiving  food  from
the  hand  of  him  who  consulted.  If  he  received  it,
say  they,  it  was  considered  a  good  omen ;  if  he  refused
«  Plin.  lib.  viii.  e.  48.


OF   THE  PAGAN   ORACLES.  91

itj  this  was  a  bad  augury.  When  this  animal  appeared
in  public,  he  was  accompanied  by  a  troop  of  children,
who  sang  hymns  in  his  honour ;  after  which  these  boys
were  filled  with  sacred  enthusiasm,  and  began  to  predict
future  events.  If  the  bull  went  quietly  into  his  lodge,
it  was  a  happy  sign ;  ^'  if  he  came  out,  it  was  the  contrary.
Such  was  the  blindness  of  the  Egyptians.

There  were  other  oracles  also  in  Egypt :  ^  as  those  of
Mercury,  Apollo,  Hercules,  Diana,  Minerva,  Jupiter
Ammon,  &c.,  which  last  was  consulted  by  Alexander
the  Great.  But  Herodotus  remarks,  that  in  his  time
there  were  neither  priests  nor  priestesses  who  uttered
oracles.  They  were  derived  from  certain  presages,
which  they  drew  by  chance,  or  from  the  movements  of
the  statues  of  the  gods,  or  from  the  first  voice  which
they  heard  after  having  consulted.  Pausanias  says,^
that  he  who  consults  whispers  in  the  ear  of  Mercury
what  he  requires  to  know,  then  he  stops  his  ears,  goes
out  of  the  temple,  and  the  first  words  which  he  hears
from  the  first  person  he  meets,  are  held  as  the  answer
of  the  god.

The  Greeks  acknowledge  that  they  received  from
the  Egyptians  both  the  names  of  their  gods  and  their
most  ancient  oracles ;  amongst  others  that  of  Dodona,
which  was  already  much  resorted  to  in  the  time  of
Homer,^  and  which  came  from  the  oracle  of  Jupiter  of
Thebes:  for  the  Egyptian  priests  related  that  two
priestesses  of  that  god  had  been  carried  off  by
Pha^nician  merchants,  who   had  sold  them,   one  into

''  Herodot.  lib.  ix.  '^  Vide  Joa.n.  Marsliam,  S^c.  iv.  pp.  62,  63.

''  Pausau.  lib.  vii.  p.  111.      «  Homer,  Iliad,  XII.  2,  235.


92  THE  PHANTOM  WOULD.

Libya  and  the  other  into  Greece/  Those  of  Dodona
related^  that  two  black  doves  had  flown  from  Thebes  of
Egypt — that  the  one  which  had  stopped  at  Dodona
had  perched  upon  a  beech-tree,  and  had  declared  in  an
articulate  voice  that  the  gods  willed  that  an  oracle  of
Jupiter  should  be  established  in  this  place ;  and  that
the  other,  ha\^ng  flown  into  Libya,  had  there  formed
or  founded  the  oracle  of  Jupiter  Ammon.  These
origins  are  certainly  very  frivolous  and  very  fabulous.
The  oracle  of  Delphi  is  more  recent  and  more  cele-
brated. Phemonoe  was  the  first  priestess  of  Delphi,
and  began  in  the  time  of  Acrisius,  twenty-seven  years
before  Orpheus,  Musebus,  and  Linus.  She  is  said  to
have  been  the  inventress  of  hexameters.

But  I  think  I  can  remark  vestiges  of  oracles  in
Egypt,  from  the  time  of  the  patriarch  Joseph,  and
from  the  time  of  Moses.  The  Hebrews  had  dwelt
for  215  years  in  Egypt,  and  having  multiplied  there
exceedingly,  had  begun  to  form  a  separate  people
and  a  sort  of  republic.  They  had  imbibed  a  taste  for
the  ceremonies,  the  superstitions,  the  customs,  and  the
idolatry  of  the  Egyptians.

Joseph  was  considered  the  cleverest  diviner  and  the
greatest  expounder  of  dreams  in  Egypt.  They  believed
that  he  derived  his  oracles  from  the  inspection  of  the
liquor  which  he  poured  into  his  cup.  Moses,  to  cure
the  Hebrews  of  their  leaning  to  the  idolatry  and  super-
stitions of  Egypt,  prescribed  to  them  laws  and  ceremo-
nies which  favoured  his  design ;  the  first,  diametrically
opposite  to  those  of  the  Egyptians ;  the  second,  bearing
f  Herodot.  lib.  ii.  c.  52,  55.


OF  THE  PAGAN   ORACLES.  93

some  resemblance  to  theirs  in  appearance,  but  differing
both  in  their  aim  and  circumstances.

For  instance,  the  Egyptians  were  accustomed  to
consult  diviners,  magicians,  interpreters  of  dreams,  and
augurs ;  all  Avhich  things  are  forbidden  to  the  Hebrews
by  Moses,  on  pain  of  rigorous  punishment ;  but  in
order  that  they  might  have  no  room  to  complain  that
their  religion  did  not  furnish  them  with  the  means  of
discovering  future  events  and  hidden  things,  God,  with
condescension  worthy  of  reverential  admiration,  granted
them  the  Urim  and  Thummim,  or  the  Doctrine  and  the
Truth,  with  which  the  high  priest  was  invested  accord-
ing to  the  ritual  in  the  principal  ceremonies  of  religion,
and  by  means  of  which  he  rendered  oracles,  and  dis-
covered the  will  of  the  Most  High.  AYhen  the  ark  of
the  covenant  and  the  tabernacle  were  constructed,  the
Lord,  consulted  by  Moses/  gave  out  his  replies  from
between  the  two  cherubim  which  were  placed  upon  the
mercy-seat  above  the  ark.  All  which  seems  to  in-
sinuate, that  from  the  time  of  the  patriarch  Joseph,
there  had  been  oracles  and  diviners  in  Egypt,  and  that
the  Hebrews  consulted  them.

God  promised  his  people,  to  raise  up  a  prophet  ^^
among  them,  who  should  declare  to  them  his  will :  in
fact,  we  see  in  almost  all  ages  among  them,  prophets  in-
spired by  God ;  and  the  true  prophets  reproached  them
vehemently  for  their  impiety,  when  instead  of  coming
to  the  prophets  of  the  Lord,  they  went  to  consult  strange
oracles,^  and  divinities  equally  powerless  and  unreal.

K  Exod.  sxv.  22.  ^  Deut.  xviii.  13.

>  2  Kings  i.  2,  3, 16,  &c.


94<  THE  PHANTOM   WORLD.

We  have  spoken  before  of  the  teraphim  of  Laban,
of  the  idols  or  pretended  oracles  of  Micah  and  Gideon.
King  Saul,  who,  apparently  by  the  advice  of  Samuel,
had  exterminated  diviners  and  magicians  from  the  land
of  Israel,  desired  in  the  last  war  to  consult  the  Lord,
who  would  not  reply  to  him.  He  then  afterwards
addressed  himself  to  a  witch,  who  promised  him  she
would  evoke  Samuel  for  him.  She  did,  or  feigned  to
do  so,  for  the  thing  offers  many  difficulties,  into  which
we  shall  not  enter  here.

The  same  Saul  having  consulted  the  Lord  on  another
occasion,  to  know  whether  he  must  pursue  the  Philis-
tines whom  he  had  just  defeated,  God  refused  also  to
reply  to  him,^  because  his  son  Jonathan  had  tasted
some  honey,  not  knowing  that  the  king  had  forbidden
his  army  to  taste  any  thing  whatever  before  his  enemies
were  entirely  overthrown.

The  silence  of  the  Lord  on  certain  occasions,  and  his
refusal  to  answer  sometimes  when  He  was  consulted,
are  an  evident  proof  that  He  usually  replied,  and  that
they  were  certain  of  receiving  instructions  from  Him,
unless  they  raised  an  obstacle  to  it  by  some  action  which
was  displeasing  to  Him.

"  1  Sam.  xiy.  24.


CHAPTER  XVI.

THE    CERTAINTY   OF   THE    EVENT    PREDICTED,    IS    NOT    ALWAYS   A    PROOF
THAT   THE    PREDICTION   COMES    FROM   GOD.

Moses  had  foreseen,  that  so  untractable  and  super-
stitious a  people  as  the  Israelites  would  not  rest
satisfied  with  the  reasonable,  pious,  and  supernatural
means  which  he  had  procured  them  for  discovering
future  events,  by  giving  them  prophets  and  the  oracle  of
the  high  priest.  He  knew  that  there  would  arise  among
them  false  prophets  and  seducers,  who  would  endea-
vour by  their  illusions  and  magical  secrets  to  mislead
them  into  error;  whence  it  was  that  he  said  to  them:^
"If  there  should  arise  among  you  a  prophet,  or  any
one  who  boasts  of  having  had  a  dream,  and  he  foretells
a  wonder,  or  any  thing  which  surpasses  the  ordinary
power  of  man,  and  what  he  predicts  shall  happen;
and  after  that  he  shall  say  unto  you.  Come,  let  us  go
and  serve  the  strange  gods,  which  you  have  not  known ;
you  shall  not  hearken  unto  him,  because  the  Lord  your
God  will  prove  you,  to  see  whether  you  love  Him  with
all  your  heart  and  with  all  your  soul."

Certainly,  nothing  is  more  likely  to  mislead  us,  than
to  see  what  has  been  foretold  by  any  one  come  to  pass.

"  Shew  the  things  that  are  to  come,"  says  Isaiah,'*
»  Deut.  xili.  1,  2.  *»  Isaiah  xli.  22,  23.


96  THE  PHANTOM  WOULD.

"  that  we  may  know  that  ye  are  gods.  Let  them  come,
let  them  foretell  what  is  to  happen,  and  what  has  been
done  of  old,  and  w^e  will  believe  in  them,"  &c.  Idoneum
testimonium  divinationis,  says  Tertullian,*^  Veritas  divina-
tionis.  And  St.  Jerome,'^  Confitentur  magi,  conjitentur
arioU,  et  omnis  scientia  scBcularis  litteratura;,  prcescientiam
futurorum  non  esse  hominum^  sed  Dei.

Nevertheless,  we  have  just  seen  that  Moses  acknow-
ledges that  false  prophets  can  predict  things  which  will
happen.  And  the  Saviour  warns  us  in  the  Gospel,
that  at  the  end  of  the  world  several  false  prophets  will
arise,  Avho  will  seduce  many  ^ — "  They  shall  shew  great
signs  and  wonders,  insomuch  that,  if  it  were  possible,
they  shall  deceive  even  the  elect."  It  is  not,  then,
precisely  either  the  successful  issue  of  the  event,  which
decides  in  favour  of  the  false  prophet — nor  the  default
of  the  predictions  made  by  true  prophets,  which  proves
that  they  are  not  sent  by  God.

Jonah  was  sent  to  foretell  the  destruction  of  Nineveh,^
'which  did  not  come  to  pass ;  and  many  other  threats  of
the  prophets  were  not  put  into  execution,  because  God,
moved  by  the  repentance  of  the  sinful,  revoked  or  com-
muted his  former  sentence.  The  repentance  of  the
Ninevites  guaranteed  them  ascalnst  the  last  misfortune.

Isaiah  had  distinctlv  foretold  to  Kino-  Hezekiah,"  that
he  would  not  recover  from  his  illness :  "  Set  thine  house
in  order,  for  thou  shalt  die,  and  not  live."  Nevertheless
God,  moved  with  the  prayer  of  this  prince,  revoked  the

•=  Tertull.  Apolog.  c.  20.  ^  Hieronym.  in  Dan.

«  Matt.  xxiv.  11,  24.  ^  Jonah  i.  2.

^  2  Kings  XX.  1.     Isai.  xxxviii.  1.


SOURCE   OF   THE   PREDICTION.  97

sentence  of  death ;  and  before  the  prophet  had  left  the
court  of  the  king's  house,  God  commanded  him  to
return  and  tell  the  king,  that  God  would  add  yet
fifteen  years  to  his  life.

Moses  assigns  the  mark  of  a  true  prophet  to  be,
when  he  leads  us  to  God  and  his  worship — and  the
mark  of  a  false  prophet  is,  when  he  withdraws  us  from
the  Lord,  and  inclines  us  to  superstition  and  idolatry.
Balaam  was  a  true  prophet  inspired  by  God,  who  fore-
told things  which  were  followed  up  by  the  event ;  but
his  morals  were  very  corrupt,  and  he  was  extremely
self-interested.  He  did  every  thing  he  could  to  deserve
the  recompense  promised  him  by  the  king  of  Moab,
and  to  curse  and  immolate  Israel.^  God  did  not  permit
him  to  do  so,  he  put  into  his  mouth  blessings  instead
of  curses ;  he  did  not  induce  the  Israelites  to  forsake
the  Lord ;  but  he  advised  the  Moabites  to  seduce  the
people  of  God,  and  cause  them  to  commit  fornication,
and  to  worship  the  idols  of  the  country,  and  by  that
means  to  irritate  God  against  them,  and  draw  upon
them  the  effects  of  his  vengeance.  Moses  caused  the
chiefs  among  the  people,  who  had  consented  to  this
crime,  to  be  hung ;  and  caused  to  perish  the  Midianites
who  had  led  the  Hebrews  into  it.  And  lastly,  Balaam,
who  was  the  first  cause  of  this  evil,  was  also  punished
with  death.^

Li  all  the  predictions  of  diviners  or  oracles,  when
they  are  followed  by  fulfilment,  we  can  hardly  disavow
that  the  evil  spirit  intervenes,  and  discovers  the  future
to  those  who  consult  him.     St.  Augustine  in  his  book

*"  Numb.  xxii.  xxiii.  xxiv.  '  Numb.  xxxi.  8.

VOL.  I.  F


98  TRE  PHAIsTO]l[  WORLD.

de  Divlnatione  Dwmonum^  or  of  predictions  made  by

the  evil  spirit,  when  they  are  fulfilled,  supposes  that  the

demons  are  of  an  aerial  nature,  and  much  more  subtile

than  bodies  in  general;  insomuch,   that  they  surpass

beyond  comparison  the  lightness  both  of  men  and  the

swiftest  animals,  and  even  the  flight  of  birds,  which

enables  them  to  announce  things  that  are  passing  in

very  distant  places,  and  beyond  the  common  reach  of

men.     Moreover,  as  they  are  not  subject  to  death  as

we  are,  they  have  acquired  infinitely  more  experience

than  even  those  who  possess  the  most  among  mankind,

and  are  the  most  attentive  to  what  happens  in  the

world.  By  that  means  they  can  sometimes  predict  things

to  come,  announce  several  things  at  a  distance,  and  do

some  wonderful  things  ;  which  has  often  led  mortals  to

pay  them  divine  honours,   believing  them  to  be  of  a

nature  much  more  excellent  than  their  own.

But  when  we  reflect  seriously  on  what  the  demons

predict,  we   may  remark,    that   often   they    announce

nothing  but  what  they  are  to  do  themselves.^    For  God

permits  them  sometimes  to  cause  maladies,  corrupt  the

air  and  produce  in  it  qualities  of  an  infectious  nature,

and  to  incline  the  wicked  to  persecute  the  worthy.

They  perform  these  operations  in  a  hidden  manner,  by

resources  unknown    to  mortals,  and   proportionate  to

the  subtilty  of  their  own  nature.     They  can  announce

what   they   have    foreseen    must   happen,    by    certain

natural  tokens  unknown  to   men,  like  as  a  physician

foresees  by  the  secret  of  his  art,  the  symptoms  and

•'  Aug.  de  Divinat.  Daemon,  c.  3.  pp.  507,  508,  et  seq.
'  Idem,  c.  5.


SOURCE   OF  THE  PREDICTION.  99

the  consequences  of  a  malady  which  no  one  else  can.
Thus,  the  demon,  who  knows  our  constitution  and
the  secret  tendency  of  our  humours,  can  foretell  the
maladies  which  are  the  consequences  of  them.  He
can  also  discover  our  thoughts  and  our  secret  wishes,
by  certain  external  motions,  and  by  certain  expres-
sions we  let  fall  by  chance,  whence  he  infers  that
men  would  do  or  undertake  certain  things,  consequent
upon  these  thoughts  or  inclinations.

But  his  predictions  are  far  from  being  comparable
with  those  revealed  to  us  by  God,  through  his  angels,
or  the  prophets ;  these  are  always  certain  and  in-
fallible, because  they  have  for  their  principle  God,
who  is  truth ;  while  the  predictions  of  the  demons  are
often  deceitful,  because  the  arrangements  on  which
they  are  founded  can  be  changed  and  deranged,  when
they  least  expect  it,  by  unforeseen  and  unexpected
circumstances,  or  by  the  authority  of  superior  powers
overthrowing  the  first  plans,  or  by  a  peculiar  disposi-
tion of  Providence,  who  sets  bounds  to  the  power  of  the
prince  of  darkness.  Sometimes  also,  demons  purposely
deceive  those  who  have  the  weakness  to  place  con-
fidence in  them.  But  usually,  they  throw  the  fault
upon  those  who  have  taken  on  themselves  to  interpret
their  discourses  and  predictions.

So  says  St.  Augustine;™  and  although  we  do  not
quite  agree  with  him,  but  hold  the  opinion  that
souls,  angels,  and  demons  are  disengaged  from  all
matter  or  substance,  still  we  can  apply  his  reasoning  to

•"  S.  August,  iu  his  Eetract.  lib.  ii.  c.  30,  owns  that  he  advanced  this
too  lightly.

F    2


100  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

evil  spirits,  even  upon  the  supposition  that  they  are
immaterial — and  own  that  sometimes  they  can  predict
the  future,  and  that  their  predictions  may  be  fuljQlled ;
but  that  is  not  a  proof  of  their  being  sent  by  God,  or
inspired  by  his  Spirit.  Even  were  they  to  work
miracles,  w^e  must  anathematize  them,  ^3  soon  as  they
turn  us  from  the  worship  of  the  true  God,  or  incline  us
to  irregular  lives.


CHAPTER  XVII.

REASONS  WHICH  LEAD  US  TO  BELIEVE  THAT  THE  GREATER  PART  OP  THE
ANCIENT  ORACLES  "WERE  ONLY  IMPOSITIONS  OF  THE  PRIESTS  AND
PRIESTESSES,    WHO    FEIGNED    THAT    THEY    WERE    INSPIRED    BY    GOD.

If  it  is  true,  as  has  been  thought  by  many,  both  among
the  ancients  and  the  modern  s^  that  the  oracles  of  Pagan
antiquity  were  only  illusions  and  deceptions  on  the
part  of  the  priests  and  priestesses,  who  said  that  they
were  possessed  by  the  spirit  of  Python,  and  filled  with
the  inspiration  of  Apollo,  who  discovered  to  them
internally  things  hidden  and  past,  or  present  and  future,
I  must  not  place  them  here  in  the  rank  of  evil  spirits.
The  devil  has  no  other  share  in  the  matter  than  he  has
always  in  the  crimes  of  men,  and  in  that  multitude
of  sins  which  cupidity,  ambition,  interest,  and  self-love
produce  in  the  world ;  the  demon  being  always  ready
to  seize  an  occasion  to  mislead  us,  and  draw  us  into  irre-
gularity and  error,  employing  all  our  passions  to  lead  us
into  these  snares.  If  what  he  has  foretold  is  followed  by
fidfilment,  either  by  chance,  or  because  he  has  foreseen
certain  circumstances  unknown  to  men,  he  takes  to  him-
self all  the  credit  of  it,  and  makes  use  of  it  to  gain  our
confidence  and  conciliate  credit  for  his  predictions ;  if
the  thing  is  doubtful,  and  he  knows  not  what  the  issue
of  it  will  be,  the  demon,  the  priest  or  priestess,  will


103  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

pronounce  an  equivocal  oracle,  in  order  that  at  all
events  they  may  appear  to  have  spoken  true.

The  ancient  legislators  of  Greece,  the  most  skilful
politicians,  and  generals  of  armies,  dexterously  made  use
of  the  prepossession  of  the  people  in  favour  of  oracles,
to  persuade  them  that  what  they  had  concerted  was
approved  of  by  the  gods,  and  announced  by  the  oracle.
These  things  and  these  oracles  were  often  followed  by
success,  not  because  the  oracle  had  predicted  or  ordained
it,  but  because  the  enterprise  being  well  concerted  and
well  conducted,  and  the  soldiers  also  perfectly  persuaded
that  God  was  on  their  side,  fought  with  more  than
ordinary  valour.  Sometimes  they  gained  over  the
priestess  by  the  aid  of  presents,  and  thus  disposed  her
to  o^ive  favourable  replies.  Demosthenes  harano-uino;
at  Athens  against  Pliilip,  king  of  Macedon,  said,  that
the  priestess  of  Delphi  Philippised,  and  only  pronounced
oracles  conformable  to  the  inclinations,  advantage,  and
interest  of  that  prince.

Porphyry,  the  greatest  enemy  of  the  Christian  name,^
makes  no  difficulty  of  owning  that  these  oracles  were
dictated  by  the  spirit  of  falsehood,  and  that  the  demons
are  the  true  authors  of  enchantments,  philtres,  and
spells ;  that  they  fascinate  or  deceive  the  eyes  by  the
spectres  and  phantoms  which  they  cause  to  appear ;  that
they  ambitiously  desire  to  pass  for  gods ;  that  their
aerial  and  spiritual  bodies  are  nourished  by  the  smell
and  smoke  of  the  blood  and  fat  of  the  animals  which
are  immolated  to  them ;  and  that  the  office  of  uttering
oracles  replete  with  falsehood,  equivocation,  and  deceit,
■*  Porphyr.  apud  Euseb.  de  Praspar.  Evang.  lib.  iv.  c.  5,  6.


ORACLES^   PRIESTLY  IMPOSITIONS.  103

has  devolved  uj)oii  them.  At  the  head  of  these  demons
he  places  Hecate  and  Serapis,  Jamblichus,  another  pagan
author,  speaks  of  them  in  the  same  manner,  and  with
as  much  contempt.

The  ancient  fathers  who  lived  so  near  the  times  when
these  oracles  existed,  several  of  whom  had  forsaken
paganism  and  embraced  Christianity,  and  who  conse-
quently knew  more  about  the  oracles  than  we  can,
speak  of  them  as  things  invented,  governed,  and
maintained  by  the  demons.  The  most  sensible  among
the  heathens  do  not  speak  of  them  otherwise,  but  also
they  confess  that  often  the  malice,  imposition,  servility
and  interest  of  the  priests  had  great  share  in  the  matter,
and  that  they  abused  the  simplicity,  credulity  and
prepossessions  of  the  people.

Plutarch  says,'^  that  a  governor  of  Cilicia  having  sent
to  consult  the  oracle  of  Mopsus,  as  he  was  going  to
Malle  in  the  same  country,  the  man  who  carried  the
billet  fell  asleep  in  the  temple,  where  he  saw  in  a  dream  a
handsome  looking  man,  who  said  to  him  the  single  word
blacJc.  He  carried  this  reply  to  the  governor,  whose
mysterious  question  he  knew  nothing  about.  Those
who  heard  this  answer  laughed  at  it,  not  knowing  what
was  the  in  billet:  but  the  governor  having  opened  it
showed. them  these  words  written  in  it;  Shall limmolate
to  thee  a  black  ox,  or  a  ichite  one  ?  and  that  the  oracle
had  thus  answered  his  question  without  opening  the  note.
But  who  can  answer  for  their  not  having;  deceived  the
bearer  of  the  billet  in  this  case,  as  did  Alexander  of
Abonotiche,  a  town  of  Paphlagonia,  in  Asia  Minor.
^  Plutarcli.  de  Defectu  Oracul.  p.  434.


101  THE  PHANTOM   WORLD.

This  man  had  the  art  to  persuade  the  people  of  his
country,  that  he  had  with  him  the  god  Esculapius,  in
the  shape  of  a  tame  serpent,  who  pronounced  oracles,
and  replied  to  the  consultations  addressed  to  him  on
divers  diseases,  without  opening  the  billets  they  placed
on  the  altar  of  the  temple  of  this  pretended  divinity ;
after  which,  without  opening  them,  they  found  the  next
morning  the  reply  written  below.  All  the  trick  con-
sisted in  the  seal  being  raised  artfully  by  a  heated
needle,  and  then  replaced  after  having  written  the  reply
at  the  bottom  of  the  note,  in  an  obscure  and  enigmatical
style,  after  the  manner  of  other  oracles.  At  other
times  he  used  mastic,  which  being  yet  soft,  took  the  im-
pression of  the  seal,  then  when  that  was  hardened  he  put
on  another  seal  with  the  same  impression.  He  received
about  ten  sols  (five-pence)  per  billet,  and  this  game
lasted  all  his  life,  which  was  a  long  one ;  for  he  died  at
the  age  of  seventy,  being  struck  by  lightning,  near  the
end  of  the  second  century  of  the  Christian  era:  all  which
may  be  found  more  at  length  in  the  book  of  Lucian
entitled,  Pseiido  Manes,  or  the  false  Diviner.  The  priest
of  the  oracle  of  Mopsus  could  by  the  same  secret  open
the  billet  of  the  governor  who  consulted  him,  and
showing  himself  during  the  night  to  the  messenger,
declare  to  him  the  above-mentioned  reply.

Macrobius'^  relates  that  the  Emperor  Trajan,  to  prove
the  oracle  of  Heliopolis  in  Phoenicia,  sent  him  a  well
sealed  letter  in  which  nothing  was  written ;  the  oracle
commanded  that  a  blank  letter  should  also  be  sent  to
the  emperor.  The  priests  of  the  oracle  were  much
=  Macrob.  Saturnal.  lib.  i.  c.  23.


OflACLES^   PRIESTLY  IMPOSITIONS.  105

surprised    at    this,    not    knowing    the   reason    of    it.
Another  time  the  same  emperor  sent  to  consult  this
same  oracle,  to  know  whether  he  should  return  safe
from  his  expedition  against  the  Parthians.     The  oracle
commanded  that  they  should  send  him  some  branches
of  a  knotted  vine,  which  was  sacred   in  his  temple.
Neither  the  emperor  nor  any  one  else  could  guess  what
that  meant ;   but  his  body,  or  rather  his  bones,  having
been  brought  to  Rome  after  his  death,  which  happened
during  his  journey,  it  was  supposed  that  the  oracle  had
intended  to  predict  his  death,  and  designate  his  fleshless
bones,  which  somewhat  resemble  the  branches  of  a  vine.
It  is  easy  to  explain  this  quite  otherwise.     If  he  had
returned  victorious,  the  vine  being  the  source  of  wine
which  rejoices  the  heart  of  man,  and  is  agreeable  to
both  gods  and  men,  would  have  typified  his  victory, —
and  if  the  expedition  had  proved  fruitless,  the  wood  of
the  vine,  which  is  useless  for  any  kind  of  work,  and
only  good  for  burning  as  firewood,  might  in  that  case
signify  the  inutility  of  this  expedition.     It  is  allowed
that  the  artifice,  malice,  and  inventions  of  the  heathen
priests  had  much  to  do  with  the  oracles,  but  are  we
to  infer  from  this  that  the  demon  had  no  part  in  the
matter?

We  must  allow  that  as  by  degrees  the  light  of  the
gospel  Avas  spread  in  the  world,  the  reign  of  the  demon,
ignorance,  corruption  of  morals,  and  crime,  diminished.
The  priests  who  pretended  to  predict,  by  the  inspiration
of  the  evil  spirit,  things  concealed  from  mortal  know-
ledge, or  who  misled  the  people  by  their  illusions  and
impostures,  were  obliged  to  confess  that  the  Christians

ff  3


106  TKS  PHANTOM  WORLD.

imposed  silence  on  them,  either  by  the  empire  they
exercised  over  the  devil,  or  else  by  discovering  the
malice  and  knavishness  of  the  priests,  which  the  people
had  not  dared  to  sound,  from  a  blind  respect  which  they
had  for  this  mystery  of  iniquity.

If  in  our  days  any  one  would  deny  that  in  former
times  there  were  oracles  which  were  rendered  by  the
inspiration  of  the  demon,  we  might  convince  him  of  it
by  what  is  still  practised  in  Lapland,  and  by  what
Missionaries'^  relate,  that  in  India  the  demon  reveals
things  hidden  and  to  come,  not  by  the  mouth  of
idols,  but  by  that  of  the  priests,  who  are  present  w^hen
they  interrogate  either  the  statues  or  the  demon.  And
they  remark  that  there  the  demon  becomes  mute  and
powerless,  in  proportion  as  the  light  of  the  gospel  is
spread  among  these  nations.  Thus  then  the  silence  of
the  oracles  may  be  attributed — 1.  To  a  superhuman
cause,  which  is  the  power  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  the
publication  of  the  gospel.  2.  Mankind  are  become
less  superstitious,  and  bolder  in  searching  out  the  cause
of  these  pretended  revelations.  3.  To  their  having
become  less  credulous,  as  Cicero  says.^  4.  Because
princes  have  imposed  silence  on  the  oracles,  fearing
that  they  might  inspire  the  nation  with  rebellious
principles.  For  which  reason  Lucan  says,  that  princes
feared  to  discover  the  future.^


•'  Lettres  edifiantes,  torn.  x.
*=  Cicero,  de  Divinat.  lib.  ii.  c.  57.
^  "  Reges  timent  futura

Et  superos  vetant  loqui."'

Lucan.  Pharsal.  lib.  v.  p.  112.


OilACLES,   PRIESTLY  IMPOSITIONS.  107

Strabo=  conjectures  that  the  Komans  neglected  them,
because  they  had  the  Sibylline  books,  and  their  auspices
(aruspices  or  haruspices,)  which  stood  them  instead  of
oracles.  M.  Vandale  demonstrates  that  some  remains
of  the  oracles  might  yet  be  seen  under  the  Christian
emperors.  It  was  then  only  in  process  of  time  that
oracles  were  entirely  abolished,  and  it  may  be  boldly
asserted  that  sometimes  the  evil  spirit  revealed  the
future,  and  inspired  the  ministers  of  false  gods,  by
permission  of  the  Almighty,  w^ho  wished  to  punish  the
confidence  of  the  infidels  in  their  idols.  It  w^ould  be
going  too  far,  if  we  affirmed  that  all  that  w^as  said  of
the  oracles  was  only  the  effect  of  the  artifices  or  the
malice  of  the  priests,  who  always  imposed  on  the  credu-
lity of  mankind.  Read  on  this  subject,  the  learned
reply  of  Father  Balthus  to  the  treatises  of  MM.
Vandale  and  Fontenelle.

^  Strabo,  lib.  xvii.


CHAPTER  XVIII.

ON  SORCERERS  AND   SORCERESSES,   OR  WITCHES,

The  empire  of  the  devil  nowhere  shines  forth  with
more  lustre  than  in  what  is  related  of  the  Sabbath
(witches'  sabbath  or  assembly),  where  he  receives  the
homage  of  those  of  both  sexes  who  have  abandoned
themselves  to  him.  It  is  there,  the  wizards  and  witches
say,  that  he  exercises  the  greatest  authority,  and  ap-
pears in  a  visible  form,  but  always  hideous,  misshapen,
and  terrible;  always  during  the  night  in  out-of-the-
way  places,  and  arrayed  in  a  manner  more  gloomy
than  gay,  rather  sad  and  dull,  than  majestic  and  bril-
liant. If  they  pay  their  adoration  in  that  place  to
the  prince  of  darkness,  he  shows  himself  there  in  a
despicable  posture,  and  in  a  base,  contemptible  and
hideous  form;  if  people  eat  there,  the  viands  of  the
feast  are  dirty,  insipid,  and  destitute  of  solidity  and
substance,  they  neither  satisfy  the  appetite,  nor  please
the  palate;  if  they  dance  there,  it  is  without  order,
without  skill,  without  propriety.

To  endeavour  to  give  a  description  of  the  infernal
sabbath,  is  to  aim  at  describing  what  has  no  existence
and  never  has  existed,  except  in  the  craving  and  deluded


THE  witches'  sabbath.  109

imagination  of  sorcerers  and  sorceresses ;  the  paintings
we  have  of  it  are  conceived  after  the  reveries  of  those
who  fancy  they  have  been  transported  through  the  air
to  the  sabbath,  both  in  body  and  soul.

People  are  carried  thither,  say  they,  sitting  on  a
broom-stick,  sometimes  on  the  clouds  or  on  a  he-goat.
Neither  the  place,  the  time,  nor  the  day  when  they
assemble  is  fixed.  It  is  sometimes  in  a  lonely  forest,
sometimes  in  a  desert,  usually  on  the  Wednesday  or
the  Thursday  night ;  the  most  solemn  of  all  is  that  of
the  eve  of  St.  John  the  Baptist :  they  there  distribute
to  every  sorcerer,  the  ointment  with  which  he  must
anoint  himself  when  he  desires  to  go  to  the  sabbath,
and  the  spell-powder  he  must  make  use  of  in  his
magic  operations.  They  must  all  appear  together  in
this  general  assembly,  and  he  who  is  absent  is  severely
ill-used  both  in  word  and  deed.  As  to  the  private
meetings,  the  demon  is  more  indulgent  to  those  who
are  absent  for  some  particular  reason.

As  to  the  ointment  with  which  they  anoint  them-
selves, some  authors,  amongst  others,  John  Baptista
Porta,  and  John  Wierius,^  boast  that  they  know  the
composition.  Amongst  other  ingredients  there  are
many  narcotic  drugs,  which  cause  those  who  make  use
of  it  to  fall  into  a  profound  slumber,  during  which  they
imagine  that  they  arc  carried  to  the  sabbath  up  the
chimney,  at  the  top  of  which  they  find  a  tall  black  man,^
with  horns,  who  transports  them  where  they  wish  to  go,

*  Joan.  Yier.  lib.  ii.  c.  7.

^  A  remarkably  fine  Print  on  this  subject  was  published  at  Paris
some  years  ago  ;  if  we  remember  right,  it  was  suppressed.


110  THE  PHANTOM  WOELD.

and  afterwards  brings  them  back  again  by  the  same
chimney.  The  accounts  given  by  these  people,  and
the  description  which  they  give  of  their  assemblies,  are
wanting  in  unity  and  uniformity.

The  demon,  their  chief,  appears  there,  either  in  the
shape  of  a  he-goat,  or  as  a  great  black  dog,  or  as  an
immense  raven ;  he  is  seated  on  an  elevated  throne,
and  receives  there  the  homage  of  those  present  in  a
way  which  decency  does  not  allow  us  to  describe.  In
this  nocturnal  assembly  they  sing,  they  dance,  they
abandon  themselves  to  the  most  shameful  disorder;
they  sit  down  to  table,  and  indulge  in  good  cheer ;
while  at  the  same  time  they  see  on  the  table  neither
knife  nor  fork,  salt  nor  oil ;  they  find  the  viands  devoid
of  savour,  and  quit  the  table  without  their  hunger  being
satisfied.

One  would  imagine  that  the  attraction  of  a  better
fortune,  and  a  wish  to  enrich  themselves,  drew  thither
men  and  women;  the  devil  never  fails  to  make  them
magnificent  promises,  at  least  the  sorcerers  say  so,
and  believe  it,  deceived,  without  doubt,  by  their
imagination ;  but  experience  shows  us  that  these
people  are  always  ragged,  despised,  and  wretched,  and
usually  end  their  lives  in  a  violent  and  dishonourable
manner.

When  they  are  admitted  for  the  first  time  to  the
sabbath,  the  demon  inscribes  their  name  and  surname
on  his  register,  which  he  makes  them  sign ;  then  he
makes  them  forswear  cream  and  baptism,  makes  them
renounce  Jesus  Christ  and  his  Church;  and,  to  give
them  a  distinctive  character   and  make  them  known


THE  witches'  saebath.  Ill

for  his  own,  he  imprints  on  their  bodies  a  certain
mark  with  the  nail  of  the  little  finger  of  one  of  his
hands;  this  mark,  or  character,  thus  impressed,  renders
the  part  insensible  to  pain.  They  even  pretend  that  he
impresses  this  character  in  three  different  parts  of  the
body,  and  at  three  different  times.  The  demon  does
not  impress  these  characters,  say  they,  before  the
person  has  attained  the  age  of  twenty-five.

But  none  of  these  things  deserve  the  least  attention.
There  may  happen  to  be  in  the  body  of  a  man,  or  a
woman,  some  benumbed  part,  either  from  illness,  or
the  effect  of  remedies,  or  drugs,  or  even  naturally ;
but  that  is  no  proof  that  the  devil  has  anything  to
do  with  it.  There  are  even  persons  accused  of  magic
and  sorcery,  on  whom  no  part  thus  characterised  has
been  found,  nor  yet  insensible  to  the  touch,  however
exact  the  search.  Others  have  declared  that  the
devil  has  never  made  any  such  marks  upon  them.
Consult  on  this  matter  the  second  letter  of  M.  de
St.  Andre,  Physician  to  the  King,  in  which  he  well
develops  what  has  been  said  about  these  characters  of
sorcerers.

The  word  Sabbath,  taken  in  the  above  sense,  is  not  to
be  found  in  ancient  writers ;  neither  the  Hebrews  nor
the  Egyptians,  the  Greeks  nor  the  Latins,  have
known  it.

The  thing  itself,  I  mean  the  sabbath  taken  in  the
sense  of  a  nocturnal  assembly  of  persons  devoted  to  the
devil,  is  not  remarked  in  antiquity,  although  magicians,
sorcerers,  and  witches  are  spoken  of  often  enough —
that  is  to  say,  people  who  boasted  that  they  exercised


113  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

a  kind  of  power  over  the  devil,  and  by  his  means,  over
animals,  the  air,  the  stars,  and  the  lives  and  fortunes  of
men.

Horace  ^  makes  use  of  the  word  coticia  to  indicate
the  nocturnal  meetings  of  the  magicians — Tii  riseris
coticia ;  which  he  derives  from  Cotys  or  CottOf  Goddess  of
Vice,  who  presided  in  the  assemblies  which  were  held
at  nighty  and  where  the  Bacchantes  gave  themselves
up  to  all  sorts  of  dissolute  pleasures ;  but  this  is  very
different  from  the  witches'  sabbath.

Others  derive  this  term  from  Sabbatius,  which  is  an
epithet  given  to  the  god  Bacchus,  whose  nocturnal
festivals  were  celebrated  in  debauchery.  Arnobius,  and
Julius  Firmicus  Maternus,  inform  us  that  in  these  festi-
vals they  slipped  a  golden  serpent  into  the  bosoms  of
the  initiated,  and  drew  it  downwards ;  but  this
etymology  is  too  far-fetched  ;  the  people  who  gave  the
name  of  sabbath  to  the  assemblies  of  the  sorcerers,
wished  apparently  to  compare  them  in  derision  to  those
of  the  Jews,  and  to  Avhat  they  practised  in  their  syna-
gogues on  sabbath  days.

The  most  ancient  monument  in  which  I  have  been
able  to  remark  any  express  mention  of  the  nocturnal
assemblies  of  the  sorcerers  is  in  the  Capitularies/
wherein  it  is  said  that  women  led  away  by  the  illusions

<=  Horat.  Epodon,  xviii.  4.

^  "Qusedam  sceleratse  mulieres  daemonum  illusionibus  et  phantas-
matibus  seductse,  credunt  se  et  profitentur  nocturnis  horis  cum  Diana,
Pdganorum  dea  et  innumerS,  multitudine  mulierum  equitare  super
quasdam  bestias  et  multa  terrarum  spalia  intempestge  noctis  silentio
pertransire  ejusque  jussionibus  veluti  domino  obedire." — Baluz.  Capi-
tular, fragment,  c.  13.   Vide  et  Capitul.  Herardi,  Episc.  Turon.


SOJICERERS  AND   SOECERESSES.  113

of  the  demons,  say  that  they  go  In  the  night  with  the
goddess  Diana  and  an  infinite  number  of  other  women,
borne  through  the  air  on  different  animals,  that  they
go  in  a  few  hours  a  great  distance,  and  obey  Diana
as  their  queen.  It  was  therefore  to  the  goddess  Diana,
or  the  Moon,  and  not  to  Lucifer,  that  they  paid
homage.  The  Germans  call  witches'  dances  what  we
call  the  sabbath.  They  say  that  these  people  assemble
on  Mount  Bructere.

The  famous  Agobard,^  Archbishop  of  Lyons,  who
lived  under  the  Emperor  Louis  the  Debonair,  wrote  a
treatise  against  certain  superstitious  persons  in  his  time,
who  believed  that  storms,  hail,  and  thunder  were
caused  by  certain  sorcerers  whom  they  called  tem-
pesters,  {tempestarios,  or  storm-brewers,)  who  raised
the  rain  in  the  air,  caused  storms  and  thunder,  and
brought  sterility  upon  the  earth.  They  called  these
extraordinary  rains  aura  lai'atitia)  as  if  to  indicate  that
they  were  raised  by  magic  power.  In  this  place  the
people  still  call  these  violent  rains  ahace.  There
were  even  persons  sufficiently  prejudiced  to  boast
that  they  knew  of  tempetiers,  who  had  to  conduct  the
tempests  where  they  chose,  and  to  turn  them  aside
when  they  pleased.  Agobard  interrogated  some  of
them,  but  they  were  obliged  to  own  that  they  had
not  been  present  at  the  things  they  related.

Agobard  maintains  that  this  is  the  work  of  God
alone ;  that  in  truth,  the  saints,  with  the  help  of  God,
have  often  performed  similar  prodigies  ;  but  that  neither
*  Affobard  de  Grandine.


114  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

the  devil  nor  sorcerers  can  do  anything  like  It.  He
remarks  that  there  were  among  his  people,  superstitious
persons,  who  would  pay  very  punctually  what  they
called  canonicum,  which  was  a  sort  of  tribute  which  they
offered  to  these  tempest-brewers,  {tempttiers,)  that  they
might  not  hurt  them,  while  they  refused  the  tithe  to  the
priest,  and  alms  to  the  widow,  orphan,  and  other  indigent
persons.

He  adds,  that  he  had  of  late  found  people  sufficiently
foolish  enough  to  spread  a  report  that  Grimaldus,  Duke
of  Benevento,  had  sent  persons  into  France,  carrying
certain  powders  which  they  had  scattered  over  the  fields,
mountains,  meadows  and  springs,  and  had  thus  caused
the  death  of  an  immense  number  of  animals.  Several
of  these  persons  were  taken  up,  and  they  owned  that
they  carried  such  powders  about  with  them,  and  though
they  made  them  suffer  various  tortures,  they  could  not
force  them  to  retract  what  they  had  said.

Others  affirmed  that  there  was  a  certain  country
named  Mangonia,  where  there  were  vessels  which  were
borne  through  the  air  and  took  away  the  productions ;
that  certain  wizards  had  cut  down  trees  to  carry  them
to  their  country.  He  says,  moreover,  that  one  day  three
men  and  a  woman  were  presented  to  him,  who  they
said  had  fallen  from  these  ships  which  floated  in  the
air.  They  were  kept  some  days  in  confinement,
and  at  last  havins;  been  confronted  with  their  accusers,
the  latter  were  obliged,  after  contesting  the  matter,
and  making  several  depositions,  to  avow  that  they
knew  nothino;  certain  concernino;  their  belno^   carried


SORCEEERS  AND  SORCERESSES.  115

away,  or  of  their  pretended  fall  from  the  ship  in
the  sky.

Charlemagne^  in  his  Capitularies,  and  the  authors  of
his  time,  speak  also  of  these  wizard  tempest-brewers,
enchanters,  &c.,  and  commanded  that  they  should  be
reprimanded  and  severely  chastised.

Pope  Gregory  IX.  s  in  a  letter  addressed  to  the
Archbishop  of  Mayence,  the  Bishop  of  Hildesheim,  and
Doctor  Conrad,  in  1234,  thus  relates  the  abominations
of  which  they  accused  the  heretic  Stadingians.  "  When
they  receive,"  says  he,  "  a  novice,  and  when  he  enters
their  assemblies  for  the  first  time,  he  sees  an  enormous
toad,  as  big  as  a  goose,  or  bigger.  Some  kiss  it  on  the
mouth,  some  kiss  it  behind.  Then  the  novice  meets
a  pale  man  with  very  black  eyes,  and  so  thin  that  he  is
only  skin  and  bones.  He  kisses  him,  and  feels  that  he
is  cold  as  ice.  After  this  kiss,  the  novice  easily  forgets
the  Catholic  faith  ;  afterwards  they  hold  a  feast
together,  after  which  a  black  cat  comes  down  behind
a  statue,  which  usually  stands  in  the  room  where  they
assemble.

"  The  novice  first  of  all  kisses  the  cat  on  the  back,
then  he  who  presides  over  the  assembly,  and  the  others
who  are  worthy  of  it.  The  imperfect  receive  only
a  kiss  from  the  master ;  they  promise  obedience  ;  after
Avhich  they  extinguish  the  lights,  and  commit  all  sorts
of  disorders.  They  receive  every  year,  at  Easter,  the
Lord's  Body,  and  carry  it  in  their  mouth  to  their
own  houses,  when  they  cast  it  away.     They  believe  in

f  Vide  Baluzii  in  Agobard.  pp.  68,  69.

^  Fleury,  Hist.  Eccles.  torn.  xvii.  p.  58.  ann.  1234.


116  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

Lucifer,  and  say  that  the  Master  of  Heaven  has  un-
justly and  fraudulently  thrown  him  into  hell.  They
believe  also  that  Lucifer  is  the  creator  of  celestial
things,  that  will  re-enter  into  glory,  after  having
thrown  down  his  adversary,  and  that  through  him
they  will  gain  eternal  bliss."  This  letter  bears  date
the  13th  of  June,  1233.


CHAPTER  XIX.

INSTANCES    OF   SORCERERS    AND    WITCHES    BEING,    AS    THEY    SAID,
TRANSPORTED   TO   THE   SABBATH.

All  that  is  said  about  witches  going  to  the  sabbath  is
treated  as  a  fable,  and  we  have  several  examples  which
prove  that  they  do  not  stir  from  their  bed  or  their
chamber.  It  is  true  that  some  of  them  anoint  them-
selves with  a  certain  grease  or  unguent,  which  makes
them  sleepy,  and  renders  them  insensible;  and  during
this  swoon  they  fancy  that  they  go  to  the  sabbath,  and
there  see  and  hear  what  every  one  says  is  there  seen
and  heard.

We  read  in  the  book  entitled  Malleus  Maleficorum,  or
the  Hammer  of  the  Sorcerers,  that  a  woman  who  was  in
the  hands  of  the  Inquisitors  assured  them  that  she
repaired  really  and  bodily  whither  she  would,  and  that
even  were  she  shut  up  in  prison  and  strictly  guarded,
and  let  the  place  be  ever  so  far  off.

The  Inquisitors  ordered  her  to  go  to  a  certain  place,
to  speak  to  certain  persons,  and  bring  back  news  of
them ;  she  promised  to  obey,  and  was  directly  locked
up  in  a  chamber,  where  she  laid  down,  extended  as  if
dead;  they  went  into  the  room,  and  moved  her;  but  she
remained  motionless,  and  without  the  least  sensation,
so  that  when  they  put  a  lighted  candle  to  her  foot  and


118  THE   PHANTOM   WORLD.

burnt  it  she  did  not  feel  it.  A  little  after,  she  came  to
herself,  and  gave  an  account  of  the  commission  they
had  given  her,  saying  she  had  had  a  great  deal  of
trouble  to  go  that  road.  They  asked  her  what  was  the
matter  with  her  foot ;  she  said  it  hurt  her  very  much
since  her  return,  and  knew  not  whence  it  came.

Then  the  Inquisitors  declared  to  her  what  had  hap-
pened; that  she  had  not  stirred  from  her  place,  and
that  the  pain  in  her  foot  was  caused  by  the  application
of  a  lighted  candle  during  her  pretended  absence.  The
thing  ha\dng  been  verified,  she  acknowledged  her  folly,
asked  pardon,  and  promised  never  to  fall  into  it  again.

Other  historians  relate,^  that,  by  means  of  certain
drugs  with  which  both  wizards  and  watches  anoint
themselves,  they  are  really  and  corporally  transported
to  the  sabbath.  Torquemada  relates,  on  the  autliority
of  Paul  Grilland,  that  a  husband  suspecting  his  wife  of
being  a  witch,  desired  to  know  if  she  went  to  the  sab-
bath, and  how  she  managed  to  transport  herself  thither.
He  watched  her  so  narrowly,  that  he  saw  her  one
day  anoint  herself  with  a  certain  unguent,  and  then
take  the  form  of  a  bird  and  fly  away,  and  he  sa\v^  her
no  more  till  the  next  morning,  when  he  found  her  by
his  side.  He  questioned  her  very  much,  without
making  her  own  anything ;  at  last  he  told  her  what  he
had  himself  seen,  ^nd  by  dint  of  beating  her  with  a
stick,  he  constrained  her  to  tell  him  her  secret,  and  to
take  him  with  her  to  the  sabbath.

Arrived  at  this  place,  he  sat  down  to  table  with  the
others ;  but  as  all  the  viands  which  were  on  the  table
*  Alpbons.  a  Castro  ex  Pelro  Grilland.  Tract,  de  H^resib.


OF  WITCHES  GOING  TO  THE  SABBATH.      119

were  very  insipid,  he  asked  for  some  salt ;  they  were
some  time  before  they  brought  any;  at  last,  seeing
a  salt-cellar,  he  said, — "  God  be  praised,  there  is  some
salt  at  last ! "  At  the  same  instant  he  heard  a  very
great  noise,  all  the  company  disappeared,  and  he  found
himself  alone  and  naked  in  a  field  among  the  mountains.
He  went  forward  and  found  some  shepherds ;  he  learned
that  he  was  more  than  three  leagues  from  his  dwelling.
He  returned  thither  as  he  could,  and  having  related
the  circumstance  to  the  Inquisitors,  they  caused  the
woman  and  several  others,  her  accomplices,  to  be  taken
up  and  chastised  as  they  deserved.

The  same  author  relates  that  a  woman  returning
from  the  sabbath  and  being  carried  through  the  air  by
the  evil  spirit,  heard  in  the  morning  the  bell  for  the
Angelus.  The  devil  let  her  go  immediately,  and  she
fell  into  a  quickset  hedge  on  the  bank  of  a  river,  her
hair  fell  dishevelled  over  her  neck  and  shoulders.  She
perceived  a  young  lad,  who  after  much  entreaty  came
and  took  her  out  and  conducted  her  to  the  next  village,
where  her  house  was  situated ;  it  required  most  pressing
and  repeated  questions  on  the  part  of  the  lad,  before
she  would  tell  him  truly  what  had  happened  to  her ;
she  made  him  presents,  and  begged  him  to  say  nothing
about  it,  nevertheless  the  circumstance  got  spread
abroad.

If  we  could  depend  on  the  truth  of  these  stories,  and
an  infinite  number  of  similar  ones,  w^hich  books  are  full
of,  we  might  believe  that  sometimes  sorcerers  are  carried
bodily  to  the  sabbath ;  but  on  comparing  these  stories
with  others  which  prove  that  they  go  thither  only  in


120  THE   PHANTOM   WORLD.

mind  and  imagination,  we  may  say  boldly,  that  what  is
related  of  wizards  and  witches  who  go  or  think  they  go
to  the  sabbath,  is  usually  only  illusion  on  the  part
of  the  devil,  and  seduction  on  the  part  of  those  of  both
sexes  who  fancy  they  fly  and  travel,  while  they  in
reality  do  not  stir  from  their  places.  The  spirit  of
malice  and  falsehood  being  mixed  up  in  this  foolish
prepossession,  they  confirm  themselves  in  their  follies
and  engage  others  in  the  same  impiety ;  for  Satan  has
a  thousand  ways  of  deceiving  mankind  and  of  retaining
them  in  error.  Magic,  impiety,  enchantments,  are
often  the  effects  of  a  diseased  imagination.  It  rarely
happens  that  these  kind  of  people  do  not  fall  into  every
excess  of  licentiousness,  irreligion,  and  theft,  and  into
the  most  outrageous  consequences  of  hatred  to  their
neisrhbours.

Some  have  believed  that  demons  took  the  form  of
the  sorcerers  and  sorceresses  who  were  supposed  to  be
at  the  sabbath,  and  that  they  maintained  the  simple
creatures  in  their  foolish  belief,  by  appearing  to  them
sometimes  in  the  shape  of  those  persons  who  were  re-
puted witches,  while  they  themselves  were  quietly
asleep  in  their  beds.  But  this  belief  contains  difficulties
as  great,  or  perhaps  greater,  than  the  opinion  we  would
combat.  It  is  far  from  easy  to  understand  that  the
demon  takes  the  form  of  pretended  sorcerers  and
witches,  that  he  appears  under  this  shape,  that  he  eats,
drinks,  and  travels,  and  does  other  actions  to  make  sim-
pletons believe  that  sorcerers  go  to  the  sabbath.  What
advantage  does  the  devil  derive  from  making  idiots  be-
lieve these  things,  or  maintaining  them  in  such  an  error?


OF  WITCHES  GOING  TO  THE   SABBATH.  121

Nevertheless  it  is  related,^  that  St.  Germain,  Bishop
of  Auxerre,  travelling  one  day,  and  passing  through  a
village  in  his  diocese,  after  having  taken  some  refresh-
ment there,  remarked  that  they  were  preparing  a  great
supper,  and  laying  out  the  table  anew ;  he  asked  if  they
expected  company,  and  they  told  him  it  was  for  those
good  women  who  go  by  night.  St.  Germain  well
understood  what  was  meant,  and  resolved  to  watch  to
see  the  end  of  this  adventure.

Sometime  after  he  beheld  a  multitude  of  demons  who
came  in  the  form  of  men  and  women,  and  sat  down  to
table  in  his  presence.  St.  Germain  forbade  them  to
withdraw,  and  calling  the  people  of  the  house,  he  asked
them  if  they  knew  those  persons :  they  replied,  that
they  were  such  and  such  among  their  neighbours :  Go,
said  he,  and  see  if  they  are  in  their  houses :  they  went,
and  found  them  asleep  in  their  beds.  The  saint  con-
jured the  demons,  and  obliged  them  to  declare  that  it
is  thus  they  mislead  mortals,  and  make  them  believe
that  there  are  sorcerers  and  witches  who  go  by  night
to  the  sabbath ;  they  obeyed,  and  disappeared,  greatly
confused.

This  history  may  be  read  in  old  manuscripts,  and  is
to  be  found  in  Jacques  de  Yarasse,  Pierre  de  Noels,
in  St.  Antonine,  and  in  old  Breviaries  of  Auxerre,  as
well  printed,  as  manuscript.  I  by  no  means  guarantee
the  truth  of  this  story;  I  think  it  is  absolutely
apocryphal;  but  it  proves  that  those  who  wrote  and
copied  it,  believed  that  these  nocturnal  journeys  of
sorcerers  and  witches  to  the  sabbath,  were  mere  illu-

b  Bolland,  5  Jul.  p.  2S7.
VOL.  I.  G


122  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

sions  of  the  demon.  In  fact  it  is  hardly  possible  to
explain  all  that  is  said  of  sorcerers  and  witches  going  to
the  sabbath,  without  having  recourse  to  the  ministry  of
the  demon ;  to  which  we  must  add  a  disturbed  imagi-
nation, with  a  mind  misled,  and  foolishly  prepossessed,
and,  if  you  w411,  a  few  drugs  which  affect  the  brain,
excite  the  humours,  and  produce  dreams  relative  to
impressions  already  in  their  minds.

In  John  Baptist  Porta  Cardan,  and  elsewhere,  may
be  found  the  composition  of  those  ointments  with  which
witches  are  said  to  anoint  themselves,  to  be  able  to  trans-
l)ort  themselves  to  the  sabbath ;  but  the  only  real  effect
they  produce  is  to  send  them  to  sleep,  disturb  their
imagination,  and  make  them  believe  they  are  going
long  journeys,  while  they  remain  profoundly  sleeping
in  their  beds.

The  fathers  of  the  council  of  Paris,  of  the  year  829,
confess  that  magicians,  wizards,  and  people  of  that  kind,
are  the  ministers  and  instruments  of  the  demon  in  the
exercise  of  their  diabolical  art;  that  they  trouble  the
minds  of  certain  persons  by  beverages  calculated  to
inspire  impure  love ;  that  they  are  persuaded  they  can
disturb  the  sky,  excite  tempests,  send  hail,  predict  the
future,  ruin  and  destroy  the  fruit,  and  take  away  the
milk  of  cattle  belonging  to  one  person,  in  order  to  give
it  to  cattle  the  property  of  another.

The  bishops  conclude,  that  all  the  rigour  of  the  laws
enacted  by  princes  against  such  persons  ought  to  be  put
in  force  against  them,  and  so  much  the  more  justly,
that  it  is  evident  they  yield  themselves  up  to  the  service
of  the  devil.


WITCHES,    THE   DEMON^S   MINISTEKS.  123

Spranger,  in  the  Malleus  Malejicorum,  relates,  that  In
Suabia,  a  peasant  who  was  walking  in  his  fields  with
his  little  girl,  a  child  about  eight  years  of  age,  com-
plained of  the  drought,  saying,  Alas  !  when  will  God
give  us  some  rain  ?  Immediately  the  little  girl  told
him  that  she  could  bring  him  some  down  whenever  he
wished  it.  He  answered, — "  And  who  has  taught  you
that  secret?"  "  My  mother,"  said  she,  "  who  has
strictly  forbidden  me  to  tell  any  body  of  it."

"  And  what  did  she  do  to  give  you  this  power  ?"

"  She  took  me  to  a  master,  who  comes  to  me  as
many  times  as  I  call  him."

"  And  have  you  seen  this  master?"

"  Yes,"  said  she,  "  I  have  often  seen  men  come  to
my  mother's  house;  she  has  devoted  me  to  one  of
them."

After  this  dialogue,  the  father  asked  her  how  she
could  do  to  make  it  rain  upon  his  field  only  ?  She
asked  but  for  a  little  water ;  he  led  her  to  a  neighbour-
ing brook,  and  the  girl  having  called  the  water  in  the
name  of  him  to  whom  she  had  been  devoted  by  her
mother,  they  beheld  directly  abundance  of  rain  falling
on  the  peasant's  field.

The  father,  convinced  that  his  wife  was  a  sorceress,
accused  her  before  the  judges,  who  condemned  her  to
be  burnt.  The  daughter  was  baptized  and  vowed
to  God,  but  she  then  lost  the  power  of  making  it  rain
at  her  will.


g2


CHAPTER  XX.

SXOEY    OF    LOUIS    GAUFREDI   AND   MAGDALEN   DE   LA    PALUD,    OWKED
BY    THEMSELVES   TO    BE   A   SORCERER   AND   SORCERESS.

This  Is  an  unheard-of  example  ;  a  man  and  woman
who  declared  themselves  to  be  a  sorcerer  and  sorceress.
Louis  Gaufredi,  Cure  of  the  parish  of  Accouls,  at
Marseilles,^  was  accused  of  magic,  and  arrested  at  the
beginning  of  the  year  1611.  Christopher  Gaufredi,
his  uncle,  of  Pourrieres,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Beau-
versas,  sent  him,  six  months  before  he  (Christopher)
died,  a  little  paper  book,  in  16mo,  with  six  leaves
written  upon;  at  the  bottom  of  every  leaf  were  two
verses  in  French,  and  in  the  other  part  were  characters
or  ciphers,  which  contained  magical  mysteries.  Louis
Gaufredi  at  first  thought  very  little  of  this  book,  and
kept  it  for  five  years.

At  the  end  of  that  time,  having  read  the  French
verses,  the  devil  presented  himself  under  a  human
shape,  and  by  no  means  deformed,  and  told  him  that  he
was  come  to  fulfil  all  his  wishes,  if  he  would  give  Mm
credit  for  all  his  good  works.  Gaufredi  agreed  to  the
condition.  He  asked  of  the  demon  that  he  might  enjoy
a  great  reputation  for  wisdom  and  virtue  among  per-
sons of  probity,  and  that  he  might  inspire  with  love  all
*  Causes  Cel^brcs,  torn.  vi.  p.  192.


GAUTREDI  AND   DE  LA  PALIJD.  125

the  women   and  young   girls   he   pleased,  by  simply
breathing  upon  them.

Lucifer  promised  him  all  this  in  writing,  and  Gau-
fredi  very  soon  saw  the  perfect  accomplishment  of  his
designs.  He  inspired  with  love  a  young  lady  named
Magdalen,  the  daughter  of  a  gentleman  whose  name
was  Mandole  de  la  Palud.  This  girl  was  only  nine
years  old,  when  Gaufredi,  on  pretence  of  devotion
and  spirituality,  gave  her  to  understand  that,  as  her
spiritual  father,  he  had  a  right  to  dispose  of  her,  and
persuaded  her  to  give  herself  to  the  devil ;  and  some
years  afterwards,  he  obliged  her  to  give  a  schedule,
signed  with  her  own  blood,  to  the  devil,  to  deliver
herself  up  to  him  still  more.  It  is  even  said,  that
he  made  her  give  from  that  time  seven  or  eight  other
schedules.

After  that,  he  breathed  upon  her,  inspired  her  with
a  violent  passion  for  himself,  and  took  advantage  of
her;  he  gave  her  a  familiar  demon,  who  served  her
and  followed  her  every  where.  One  day  he  transported
her  to  the  witches'  sabbath,  held  on  a  high  mountain
near  Marseilles;  she  saw  there  people  of  all  nations,
and  in  particular  Gaufredi,  who  held  there  a  distin-
guished rank,  and  who  caused  characters  to  be  im-
pressed or  stamped  on  her  head  and  in  several  other
parts  of  her  body.  This  girl  afterwards  became  a  nun
of  the  order  of  St.  Ursula,  and  passed  for  being  pos-
sessed by  the  devil.

Gaufredi  also  inspired  several  other  women  with  an
irregular  passion,  by  breathing  on  them ;  and  this
diabolical   power   lasted   for   six   years.      For   at   last


12^  THE   PHANTOM   WORLD.

they  found  out  that  he  was  a  sorcerer  and  magician ;  and
Mademoiselle  de  Mandole  having  been  arrested  by  the
Inquisition,  and  interrogated  by  father  Michael  Jacobin,
owned  a  great  part  of  what  we  have  just  told,  and
during  the  exorcisms  discovered  several  other  things.
She  was  then  nineteen  years  of  age.

All  this  made  Gaufredi  known  to  the  Parliament
of  Proven9e.  They  arrested  him;  and  proceedings
against  him  commenced  February,  1611.  They  heard
in  particular  the  deposition  of  Magdalen  de  la  Palud,
who  gave  a  complete  history  of  the  magic  of  Gau-
fredi, and  the  abominations  he  had  committed  with
her.  That  for  the  last  fourteen  years  he  had  been
a  magician,  and  head  of  the  magicians;  and  if  he
had  been  taken  by  the  justiciary  power,  the  devil
would  have  carried  him  body  and  soul  to  hell.

Gaufredi  had  voluntarily  gone  to  prison ;  and  from
the  first  examination  which  he  underwent,  he  denied
every  thing  and  represented  himself  as  an  upright  man.
But  from  the  depositions  made  against  him,  it  was
shown  that  his  heart  was  very  corrupted,  and  that  he
had  seduced  Mademoiselle  de  Mandole,  and  other
women  whom  he  confessed.  This  young  lady  was
heard  juridically  the  21st  of  February,  and  gave  the
history  of  her  seduction,  of  Gaufredi's  magic,  and  of
the  sabbath  whither  he  had  caused  her  to  be  trans-
ported several  times.

Some  time  after  this,  being  confronted  with  Gaufredi,
she  owned  that  he  was  a  worthy  man,  and  that  all
which  had  been  reported  against  him  was  imaginary,
and  retracted  all  she  herself  had  avowed.     Gaufredi


GAUFREDT  AND  DE  LA  PALUD.         127

on  his  part  acknowledged  his  illicit  connexion  with
her,  denied  all  the  rest,  and  maintained  that  it  was  the
devil,  by  whom  she  was  possessed,  that  had  suggested
to  her  all  she  had  said.  He  owned  that  having  re-
solved to  reform  his  life,  Lucifer  had  appeared  to  him,
and  threatened  him  with  many  misfortunes;  that  in
fact  he  had  experienced  several ;  that  he  had  burnt  the
magic  book  in  which  he  had  placed  the  schedules  of
Mademoiselle  de  la  Palud  and  his  own,  which  he  had
made  with  the  devil;  but  that  when  he  afterwards
looked  for  them,  he  was  much  astonished  not  to  find
them.  He  spoke  at  length  concerning  the  sabbath,
and  said  there  was  near  the  town  of  Nice,  a  magician,
who  had  all  sorts  of  garments  ready  for  the  use  of  the
sorcerers ;  that  on  the  day  of  the  sabbath,  there  is  a
bell  weighing  a  hundred  pounds,  four  ells  in  width,
and  with  a  clapper  of  wood,  which  made  the  sound  dull
and  lugubrious.  He  related  several  horrors,  impieties,
and  abominations,  which  were  committed  at  the  sab-
bath. He  repeated  the  schedule  which  Lucifer  had
given  him,  by  which  he  bound  himself  to  cast  a  spell  on
those  women  who  should  be  to  his  taste.

After  this  exposition  of  the  things  related  above,  the
attorney -general  drew  his  conclusions:  As  the  said
Gaufredi  has  been  convicted  of  having  divers  marks  in
several  parts  of  his  body,  where  if  pricked  he  has  felt
no  pain,  neither  has  any  blood  come  ;  that  he  has  been
illicitly  connected  with  Magdalen  de  la  Palud,  both  at
church  and  in  her  own  house,  both  by  day  and  by
night,  by  letters  in  which  were  amorous  or  love
characters,  invisible  to  any  other  but  herself;  that  he


128  THE  PHA.KTOM  WOELD.

had  induced  her  to  renounce  her  God  and  her  Church —
and  that  she  had  received  on  her  body  several  diabohcal
characters ;  that  he  has  owned  himself  to  be  a  sorcerer
and  magician ;  that  he  had  kept  by  him  a  book  of  magic,
and  had  made  use  of  it  to  conjure  and  invoke  the  evil
spirit ;  that  he  has  been  with  the  said  Magdalen  to  the
sabbath,  where  he  had  committed  an  infinite  number
of  scandalous,  impious,  and  abominable  actions,  such  as
having  worshipped  Lucifer : — for  these  causes,  the  said
attorney-general  requires,  that  the  said  Gaufredi  be
declared  attainted  and  convicted  of  the  circumstances
imputed  to  him,  and  as  reparation  of  them,  that  he  be
previously  degraded  from  sacred  orders,  by  the  Lord
Bishop  of  jMarseilles,  his  diocesan,  and  afterwards  con-
demned to  make  honourable  amends  one  audience  day,
having  his  head  and  feet  bare,  a  cord  about  his  neck,
and  holding  a  lighted  taper  in  his  hands — to  ask  pardon
of  God,  the  king,  and  the  court  of  justice — then,  to  be
delivered  into  the  hands  of  the  executioner  of  the  high
court  of  law,  to  be  taken  to  all  the  chief  places  and
cross-roads  of  this  city  of  Aix,  and  torn  with  red-hot
pincers  in  all  parts  of  his  body ;  and  after  that,  in  the
Place  des  Jacobins,  burned  alive,  and  his  ashes  scattered
to  the  wind;  and  before  being  executed,  let  the  question
be  applied  to  him,  and  let  him  be  tormented  as  grievously
as  can  be  devised,  in  order  to  extract  from  him  the
names  of  his  other  accomplices.  Deliberated  the  18th
of  April,  1611,  and  the  decree  in  conformity  given  the
29th  of  April,  1611.

The  same  Gaufredi  having  undergone  the  question
ordinary  and  extraordinary,  declared  that  he  had  seen


GAUTREDI  AKD  DE  LA  PALUD.         129

at  the  sabbath  no  person  of  his  acquaintance  except
Mademoiselle  de  Mandole ;  that  he  had  seen  there  also
certain  monks  of  certain  orders,  which  he  did  not  name,
neither  did  he  know  the  names  of  the  monks.  That
the  devil  anointed  the  heads  of  the  sorcerers  with
certain  unguents,  which  quite  effaced  every  thing  from
their  memory.

Notwithstandlnor  this  decree  of  the  Parliament  of
Proven9e,  many  people  believed  that  Gaufredi  was  a
sorcerer  only  in  imagination;  and  the  author  from
whom  we  derive  this  history  says,  that  there  are  some
parliaments,  amongst  others  the  Parliament  of  Paris,
which  do  not  punish  sorcerers,  when  no  other  crimes
are  combined  with  magic;  and  that  experience  has
proved,  that  in  not  punishing  sorcerers,  but  simply
treatins:  them  as  madmen,  it  has  been  seen  in  time
that  they  were  no  longer  sorcerers,  because  they  no
longer  fed  their  Imacrination  with  these  ideas ;  while  in
those  places  where  sorcerers  were  burnt,  they  saw
nothing  else,  because  everybody  was  strengthened  in
this  prejudice.     That  is  what  this  writer  says.

But  we  cannot  conclude  from  thence,  that  God  does
not  sometimes  permit  the  demon  to  exercise  his  power
over  men,  and  lead  them  to  the  excess  of  malice  and
impiety,  and  shed  darkness  over  their  minds  and  cor-
ruption in  their  hearts,  which  hurry  them  into  an  abyss
of  disorder  and  misfortune.  The  demon  tempted  Job  ^
by  the  permission  of  God.  The  messenger  of  Satan
and  the  thorn  in  the  flesh  wearied  St.  Paul ;  ^  he  asked
to  be  delivered  from  them ;  but  he  was  told  that  the

^  Job  i.  12, 13,  22.  ^  2  Cor.  xii.  7,  8.

G  3


130  THE   PHANTOM   WORLD.

o-race  of  God  would  enable  him  to  resist  his  enemies,
and  that  virtue  was  strengthened  by  infirmities  and
trials.  Satan  took  possession  of  the  heart  of  Judas,
and  led  him  to  betray  Jesus  Christ  his  Master  to  the
Jews  his  enemies.'^  The  Lord  wishing  to  warn  his
disciples  against  the  impostors  who  would  appear  after
his  ascension,  says,  that  by  God's  permission,  these
impostors  would  work  such  miracles  as  might  mislead
the  very  elect  themselves,^  were  it  possible.  He  tells
them  elsewhere/  that  Satan  has  asked  permission  of
God  to  sift  them  as  wheat,  but  that  He  has  prayed  for
them  that  their  faith  may  be  steadfast.

Thus  then  with  permission  from  God,  the  devil  can
lead  men  to  commit  such  excesses  as  we  have  just  seen
in  Mademoiselle  de  la  Palud  and  in  the  priest  Louis
Gaufredi,  perhaps  even  so  far  as  really  to  take  them
through  the  air  to  unknown  spots,  and  to  what  is  called
the  witches'  sabbath ;  or,  without  really  conducting
them  thither,  so  strike  their  imagination  and  mislead
their  senses,  that  they  think  they  move,  see,  and  hear,
when  they  do  not  stir  from  their  places,  see  no  object
and  hear  no  sound.

Observe  also,  that  the  Parliament  of  Aix  did  not
pass  any  sentence  against  even  that  young  girl,  it  being
their  custom  to  inflict  no  other  punishment  on  those
who  suffered  themselves  to  be  seduced  and  dishonoured,
than  the  shame  with  which  they  were  loaded  ever  after.
In  regard  to  the  cure  Gaufredi,  in  the  account  which
they  render  to  the  chancellor  of  the  sentence  given  by
them,  they  say  that  this  cure  was  in  truth  accused  of
^  John  xiii.  2.  «  Matt.  xxiv.  5.  ^  Luke  xxi.


GAUFREDI  AND  DE  LA  PALUD.         131

sorcery ;  but  that  he  had  been  condemned  to  the  flames,
as  being  arraigned  and  convicted  of  spiritual  incest  with
Magdalen  de  la  Palud,  his  penitent.^

«  The  attentive  reader  of  this  horrible  narrative  will  hardly  fail  to
conclude  that  Gaufredi's  fault  was  chiefly  his  seduction  of  Mademoiselle
de  la  Palud,  and  that  the  rest  was  the  efiect  of  a  heated  imagination.  The
absurd  proportions  of  the  "  Sabbath "  bell  will  be  sufficient  to  show
this.  If  the  bell  were  metallic,  it  would  have  weighed  many  tons,  and
a  wooden  bell  of  such  dimensions,  even  were  it  capable  of  sounding,
would  weigh  many  hundred  weight.


CHAPTER  XXL

REASONS   WHICH   PROVE  THE   POSSIBILITY   OF   SORCERERS   AND   WITCHES
BEING   TRANSPORTED    TO   THE   SABBATH.

All  that  has  just  been  said  is  more  fitted  to  prove,
that  the  going  of  sorcerers  and  witches  to  the  sabbath
is  only  an  illusion  and  a  deranged  imagination  on  the
part  of  these  persons,  and  malice  and  deceit  on  that
of  the  devil,  who  misleads  them,  and  persuades  them
to  yield  themselves  to  him,  and  renounce  true  religion,
by  the  lure  of  vain  promises  that  he  will  enrich  them,
load  them  with  honours,  pleasures,  and  prosperity,
rather  than  to  convince  us  of  the  reality  of  the  cor-
poreal transportation  of  these  persons  to  what  they
call  the  sabbath.

Here  are  some  arguments  and  examples  which  seem
to  prove,  at  least,  that  the  transportation  of  sorcerers  to
the  sabbath  is  not  impossible ;  for  the  impossibility  of
this  transportation  is  one  of  the  strongest  objections
which  is  made  to  the  opinion  that  supposes  it.

There  is  no  difficulty  in  believing  that  God  may
allow  the  demon  to  mislead  men,  and  carry  them  on  to
every  excess  of  irregularity,  error,  and  impiety;  and
that  he  may  also  permit  him  to  perform  some  things
which  to  us  appear  astonishing,  and  even  miraculous ;
whether  the  devil  achieves  them  by  natural  power,  or


INSTANCES  OF  SUPERNATURAL  TRANSPORTATION.      133

by  the  supernatural  concurrence  of  God,  who  employs
the  evil  spirit  to  punish  his  creature,  who  has  willingly
forsaken  Him  to  yield  himself  up  to  his  enemy.  The
prophet  Ezekiel  was  transported  through  the  air  from
Chaldea,  where  he  was  a  captive,  to  Judea,  and  into
the  temple  of  the  Lord,  where  he  saw  the  abominations
which  the  Israelites  committed  in  that  holy  place ;
and  thence  he  was  brouo;ht  back  ao-ain  to  Chaldea
by  the  ministration  of  angels,  as  we  shall  relate  in
another  chapter.

We  know  by  the  Gospel  that  the  devil  carried  our
Saviour  to  the  highest  point  of  the  temple  at  Jeru-
salem.^ "VYe  know  also  that  the  prophet  Habakkuk'^
w^as  transported  from  Judea  to  Babylon,  to  carry  food
to  Daniel  in  the  lions'  den.  St.  Paul  informs  us  that
he  was  carried  up  to  the  third  heaven,  and  that  he  heard
ineifable  things;  but  he  owns  that  he  does  not  know
whether  it  was  in  the  body  or  only  in  the  spirit.  He
therefore  doubted  not  the  possibility  of  a  man's  being
transported  in  body  and  soul  through  the  air.  The
deacon  St.  Philip  w^as  transported  from  the  road  from
Gaza  to  Azotus  in  a  very  little  time  by  the  Spirit  of
God.''  We  learn  by  ecclesiastical  history,  that  Simon
the  magician  was  carried  by  the  demon  up  into  the
air,  whence  he  was  precipitated,  through  the  prayers  of
St.  Peter.  John  the  Deacon,"^  author  of  the  Life  of
St.  Gregory  the  Great,  relates,  that  one  Farold  having
introduced  into  the  monastery  of  St.  Andrew,  at  Rome,
some  women  who  led  disorderly  lives,  in  order  to  divert

^  Matt.  iv.  5.  ^  Dan.  xiv.  33,  34.    Douay  Yersion.

*=  Acts  viii.  40.  ^  Joan.  Diacon.  Yit.  Gregor.  Mag.


134  THE  PHANTOM   WORLD.

himself  there  with  them,  and  offer  insult  to  the  monks,
that  same  night  Farold,  having  occasion  to  go  out,  was
suddenly  seized  and  carried  up  into  the  air  by  demons,
who  held  him  there  suspended  by  his  hair,  without  his
being  able  to  open  his  mouth  to  utter  a  cry,  till  the
hour  of  matins,  when  Pope  St.  Gregory,  the  founder
and  protector  of  that  monastery,  appeared  to  him,  re-
proached him  for  his  profanation  of  that  holy  place,  and
foretold  that  he  would  die  within  the  year — which  did
happen.

I  have  been  told  by  a  magistrate,  as  incapable  of
being  deceived  by  illusions,  as  of  imposing  any  such  on
other  people,^  that  on  the  16th  of  October,  1716,  a
carpenter,  who  inhabited  a  village  near  Bar,  in  Alsace,
called  Heiligenstein,  was  found  at  five  o'clock  in  the
morning  in  the  garret  of  a  cooper  at  Bar.  This  cooper
having  gone  up  to  fetch  the  wood  for  his  trade  that  he
might  want  to  use  during  the  day,  and  having  opened
the  door,  which  was  fastened  with  a  bolt  on  the  outside,
perceived  a  man  lying  at  full  length  upon  his  stomach,
and  fast  asleep.  He  recognised  him,  and  having  asked
him  what  he  did  there,  the  carpenter  in  the  greatest
surprise  told  him  he  knew  neither  by  what  means,  nor
by  whom,  he  had  been  taken  to  that  place.

The  cooper,  not  believing  this,  told  him  that
assuredly  he  was  come  thither  to  rob  him,  and  had  him
taken  before  the  magistrate  of  Bar,  who  having  interro-
gated him  concerning  the  circumstance  just  spoken  of,  he
related  to  him  with  great  simplicity,  that  having  set  off
about  four  o'clock  in  the  morning  to  come  from  Heili-
«  Lettre  de  It.  G.  P.  E.,  5th  October,  1746.


STORY  OF  A   CARPENTER.  135

genstein  to  Bar — there  being  but  a  quarter  of  an  hour's
distance  between  those  two  places — he  saw  on  a  sudden,
in  a  place  covered  with  verdure  and  grass,  a  magnificent
feast,  brightly  illuminated,  where  a  number  of  persons
were  highly  enjoying  themselves  with  a  sumptuous
repast  and  by  dancing;  that  two  women  of  his  acquain-
tance, inhabitants  of  Bar,  having  asked  him  to  join  the
company,  he  sat  down  to  table  and  partook  of  the  good
cheer,  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour  at  the  most ;  after  that,
one  of  the  guests  having  cried  out  '^  Cito,  cito,^''  he  found
himself  carried  away  gently  to  the  cooper's  garret,
without  knowing  how  he  had  been  transported  there.

This  is  what  he  declared  in  presence  of  the  magistrate.
The  most  singular  circumstance  of  this  history  is,  that
hardly  had  the  carpenter  deposed  what  we  read,
than  those  two  women  of  Bar  who  had  invited  him
to  join  their  feast  hung  themselves,  each  in  her  ovv^n
house.

The  superior  magistrates,  fearing  to  carry  things  so
far  as  to  compromise  perhaps  half  the  inhabitants  of
Bar,  judged  prudently,  that  they  had  better  not  inquire
further ;  they  treated  the  carpenter  as  a  visionary,  and
the  two  women  who  hung  themselves  were  considered
as  lunatics ;  thus  the  thing  was  hushed  up,  and  the
matter  ended.

If  this  is  what  they  call  the  witches '  sabbath,
neither  the  carpenter,  nor  the  two  women,  nor  appa-
rently the  other  guests  at  the  festival,  had  need  to  come
mounted  on  a  demon ;  they  were  too  near  their  own
dwellings  to  have  recourse  to  superhuman  means  in
order  to  have  themselves  transported  to  the  place  of


136  THE   PHANTOM  WORLD.

meeting.  We  are  not  informed  how  these  guests
repaired  to  this  feast,  nor  how  they  returned  each  one
to  their  home  ;  the  spot  was  so  near  the  town,  that  they
could  easily  go  and  return  without  any  extraneous
assistance.

But  if  secrecy  was  necessary,  and  they  feared  dis-
covery, it  is  very  probable  that  the  demon  transported
them  to  their  homes  through  the  air  before  it  was  day,
as  he  had  transported  the  carpenter  to  the  cooper's
garret.  Whatever  turn  may  be  given  to  this  event,  it
is  certainly  difficult  not  to  recognise  a  manifest  work  of
the  evil  spirit  in  the  transportation  of  the  carpenter
through  the  air,  who  finds  himself,  without  being  aware
of  it,  in  a  well-fastened  garret.  The  women  who  hung
themselves,  showed  clearly  that  they  feared  something
still  worse  from  the  law,  had  they  been  convicted  of
magic  and  witchcraft.  And  had  not  their  accomplices
also,  whose  names  must  have  been  declared,  as  much
to  fear?

William  de  Neubridge  relates  another  story,  which
bears  some  resemblance  to  the  preceding.  A  peasant
having  heard,  one  night  as  he  was  passing  near  a  tomb,
a  melodious  concert  of  different  voices,  drew  near,  and
finding  the  door  open,  put  in  his  head,  and  saw  in  the
middle  a  grand  feast,  well  lighted,  and  a  well-covered
table,  round  which  were  men  and  women  making
merry.  One  of  the  attendants  having  perceived  him,
presented  him  with  a  cup  filled  with  liquor ;  he  took  it,
and  having  spilled  the  liquor,  he  fled  with  the  cup  to  the
first  village,  where  he  stopped.  If  our  carpenter  had
done  the  same,  instead  of  amusing  himself  at  the  feast


ECSTASIES.  137

of  the  witches  of  Bar,  he  would  have  spared  himself
much  uneasiness.

We  have  in  history  several  instances  of  persons  full
of  religion  and  piety,  who,  in  the  fervour  of  their
orisons,  have  been  taken  up  into  the  air,  and  remained
there  for  some  time.  We  have  known  a  good  monk,
who  rises  sometimes  from  the  ground,  and  remains  sus-
pended without  wishing  it,  without  seeking  to  do  so,
especially  on  seeing  some  devotional  image,  or  on  hearing
some  devout  prayer,  such  as  "  Gloria  in  excelsis  Deo.^''
I  know  a  nun  to  w^hom  it  has  often  happened  in  spite
of  herself,  to  see  herself  thus  raised  up  in  the  air  to
a  certain  distance  from  the  earth ;  it  was  neither  from
choice,  nor  from  any  wish  to  distinguish  herself,  since
she  was  truly  confused  at  it.  Was  it  by  the  ministra-
tion of  angels,  or  by  the  artifice  of  the  seducing  spirit,
who  wished  to  inspire  her  with  sentiments  of  vanity
and  pride  ?  Or  was  it  the  natural  effect  of  Divine  love,
or  fervour  of  devotion  in  these  persons  ?

I  do  not  observe  that  the  ancient  fathers  of  the
desert,  who  were  so  spiritual,  so  fervent,  and  so  great
in  prayer,  experienced  similar  ecstasies.  These  risings
up  in  the  air  are  more  common  among  our  new  saints,
as  we  may  see  in  the  Life^  of  St.  Philip  of  Xeri,
where  they  relate  his  ecstasies  and  his  elevations  from
earth  into  the  air,  sometimes  to  the  height  of  several
yards,  and  almost  to  the  ceiling  of  his  room,  and  this
quite  involuntarily.  He  tried  in  vain  to  hide  it  from
the  knowledge  of  those  present,  for  fear  of  attracting
their  admiration,  and  feeling  in  it  some  vain  compla-
^  On  the  26th  of  May,  of  the  BoUandists,  c.  sx.  n.  356,  357.


138  THE   PHANTOM   WORLD.

cency.  The  writers  Avho  give  us  these  particulars  do
not  say  what  was  the  cause,  whether  these  ecstatic
elevations  from  the  ground  were  produced  by  the
fervour  of  the  Holy  Spmt,  or  by  the  ministry  of  good
angels,  or  by  a  miraculous  favour  of  Grod,  who  desired
thus  to  do  honour  to  his  servants  in  the  eyes  of  men.
God  had  moreover  favoured  the  same  St.  Philip  de
Neri,  by  permitting  him  to  see  the  celestial  spirits  and
even  the  demons,  and  to  discover  the  state  of  holy
spirits,  by  supernatural  knowledge.

St.  John  Columbino,  teacher  of  the  Jesuits,  made  use
of  St.  Catherine  Columbina,=  a  maiden  of  extraordinary
virtue,  for  the  establishment  of  nuns  of  his  order.  It
is  related  of  her,  that  sometimes  she  remained  in  a
trance,  and  raised  up  two  yards  from  the  ground,
motionless,  speechless,  and  insensible.

The  same  thing  is  said  of  St.  Ignatius  de  Loyola,^
who  remained  entranced  by  God,  and  raised  up  from
the  ground  to  the  height  of  two  feet,  while  his  body
shone  like  light.  He  has  been  seen  to  remain  in  a
trance  insensible,  and  almost  without  respiration,  for
eight  days  together.

St.  Robert  de  Palentin^  rose  also  from  the  ground,
sometimes  to  the  height  of  a  foot  and  a  half,  to
the  great  astonishment  of  his  disciples  and  assistants.
We  see  similar  trances  and  elevations  in  the  Life  of
St.  Bernard  Ptolomei,  teacher  of  the  cons-reg-ation  of
Notre  Dame  of  Mount  Olivet  '^  of  St.  Philip  Benitas,
of  the  order  of  Servites;  of  St.  Cajetanus,  founder  of

g  Acta  S.  J.  Bolland.  3  Jul.  p.  95.  ^  Ibid.  31  Jul.  pp.  432,  663.

^  Ibid.  18  Aug.  p.  503.  '  Ibid.  21  Aug.  pp.  469,  481.


ECSTASIES.  139

the  Theatlns ;  ^  of  St.  Albert  of  Sicily,  confessor,  who,
during  his  prayers,  rose  three  cubits  from  the  ground ;
and  lastly  of  St,  Dominic,  the  founder  of  the  order  of
Preaching  Brothers."^

It  is  related  of  St.  Christina,^  Virgin  at  S.  Tron,
that  being  considered  dead,  and  carried  into  the  church
in  her  coffin,  as  they  were  performing  for  her  the  usual
service,  she  arose  suddenly,  and  went  as  high  as  the
beams  of  the  church,  as  lightly  as  a  bird.  Being  re-
turned into  the  house  with  her  sisters,  she  related  to
them  that  she  had  been  led  first  to  purgatory,  and
thence  to  hell,  and  lastly  to  paradise,  where  God  had
given  her  the  choice  of  remaining  there,  or  of  returning
to  this  world  and  doing  penance  for  the  souls  she  had
seen  in  purgatory.  She  chose  the  latter,  and  was
brought  back  to  her  body  by  the  holy  angels.  From
that  time  she  could  not  bear  the  effluvia  of  the  human
body,  and  rose  up  into  trees  and  on  the  highest  towers
with  incredible  lightness,  there  to  watch  and  pray.
She  was  so  light  in  running,  that  she  outran  the
swiftest  dogs.  Her  parents  tried  in  vain  all  they  could
do  to  stop  her,  even  to  loading  her  with  chains,  but  she
always  escaped  from  them.  So  many  other  almost
incredible  things  are  related  of  this  saint,  that  I  dare
not  repeat  them  here.

M.  Nicole,  in  his  letters,  speaks  of  a  nun  named
Seraphina,  who,  in  her  ecstasies,  rose  from  the  ground
with  so  much  impetuosity,  that  five  or  six  of  the  sisters
could  hardly  hold  her  down.

•  Acta  S.  J.  Bolland.  17  Aug.  p.  255.  "  Ibid.  4  Aug.  p.  405.

"  Vita  S.  Christina.    24  Jul.    Bolland.  pp.  652,  653.


140  THE  PHANTO:\I  WORLD.

This  doctor,  reasoning  on  the  fact,"  says,  that  it
proves  nothing  at  all  for  Sister  Seraphina;  but  the
thing  well  verified  proves  God  and  the  devil — that  is  to
say,  the  whole  of  religion ;  that  the  circumstance  being
proved,  is  of  very  great  consequence  to  religion;  that
the  world  is  full  of  certain  persons  who  believe  only
what  cannot  be  doubted ;  that  the  great  heresy  of  the
world  is  no  longer  Calvinism  and  Lutheranism,  but
Atheism.  There  are  all  sorts  of  Atheists — some  real,
others  pretended;  some  determined,  others  vacillating,
and  others  tempted  to  be  so.  We  ought  not  to  neglect
this  kind  of  people  ;  the  grace  of  God  is  all-powerful ;
we  must  not  despair  of  bringing  them  back  by  good
arguments,  and  by  solid  and  convincing  proofs.  Now,
if  these  facts  are  certain,  we  must  conclude  that  there
is  a  God,  or  bad  angels  who  imitate  the  works  of  God,
and  perform  by  themselves  or  their  subordinates  works
capable  of  deceiving  even  the  elect.

One  of  the  oldest  instances  I  remark  of  persons  thus
raised  from  the  ground  without  any  one  touching  them,
is  that  of  St.  Dunstan,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  who
died  in  988,  and  who,  a  little  time  before  his  death,  as
he  was  going  up  stairs  to  his  apartment,  accompanied
by  several  persons,  was  observed  to  rise  from  the
ground ;  and  as  all  present  were  astonished  at  the  cir-
cumstance, he  took  occasion  to  speak  of  his  approaching
death.P

Trithemius,  speaking  of  St.  Elizabeth,  Abbess  of
Schonau,  in  the  diocese  of  Treves,  says,  that  sometimes

"  Nicole,  torn.  i.  Letters,  pp.  203,  205.  Letter  XLV.
p  Vita  Sancti  Dunstani,  xi,  42.


ECSTASIES.  141

she  was  in  an  ecstatic  trance,  so  that  she  would  remain
motionless  and  breathless  during  a  long  time.  In  these
intervals  she  learned,  by  revelation  and  by  the  inter-
course she  had  with  blessed  spirits,  admirable  things ;
and  when  she  revived,  she  would  discourse  divinely,
sometimes  in  German,  her  native  language,  sometimes
in  Latin,  though  she  had  no  knowledge  of  that  language.
Trithemius  did  not  doubt  her  sincerity  and  the  truth  of
her  discourse.     She  died  in  1 165.

St.  Richard,  Abbot  of  S.  Vanne  de  Verdun,  ap-
peared in  1036  elevated  from  the  ground  while  he  was
saying  mass  in  presence  of  the  Duke  Galizon,  his  sons,
and  a  great  number  of  lords  and  soldiers.

In  the  last  century,  the  reverend  Father  Dominic
Carme  Dechaux  was  raised  from  the  ground  before  the
King  of  Spain,  the  Queen,  and  all  the  court,  so  that
they  had  only  to  blow  upon  his  body  to  move  it  about
like  a  soap-bubble.i

^  It  is  worthy  of  remark,  that  in  the  cases  which  Calmet  refers  to  of
persons  in  his  own  time,  and  of  his  own  acquaintance,  being  thus  raised
from  the  ground,  he  in  no  instance  states  himself  to  have  been  a  witness
of  the  wonder.


CHAPTER  XXII.


CONTINUATION   OP    THE   SAME    SUBJECT.


We  cannot  reasonably  dispute  the  truth  of  these  ecstatic
trances  and  elevations  of  the  body  of  some  saints,  to  a
certain  distance  from  the  ground,  since  these  circum-
stances are  supported  by  so  many  witnesses.  To  apply
this  to  the  matter  we  here  treat  of,  might  it  not  be  said
that  sorcerers  and  witches  by  the  operation  of  the
demon,  and  with  God^s  permission,  by  the  help  of  a
lively  and  subtile  temperament,  are  rendered  light  and
rise  into  the  air ;  where  their  heated  imagination  and
prepossessed  mind  lead  them  to  believe  that  they  hare
done,  seen,  and  heard,  what  has  no  reality  except  in
their  own  brain  ?

I  shall  be  told  that  the  parallel  I  make  between  the
actions  of  saints,  which  can  only  be  attributed  to  angels
and  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  or  to  the  fervour
of  their  charity  and  devotion,  with  what  happens  to
wizards  and  witches,  is  injurious  and  odious ;  I  know
how  to  make  a  proper  distinction  between  them:  do
not  the  books  of  the  Old  and  Xew  Testament,  place  in
parallel  lines  the  true  miracles  of  Moses,  with  those
of  the  magicians  of  Pharaoh ;  those  of  antichrist  and


SUPERNATURAL  RAPIDITY   IN   TRAVELLING.  143

his  subordinates,  with  those  of  the  saints  and  apostles ;
and  does  not  St.  Paul  inform  us,  that  the  angel  of
darkness  often  transforms  himself  into  an  angel  of  light?
In  the  first  edition  of  this  work,  we  spoke  very  fully
of  certain  persons,  who  boast  of  having  what  they  call
"the  garter,"  and  by  that  means  are  able  to  perform
with  extraordinary  quickness  in  a  very  few  hours,  what
would  naturally  take  them  several  days  journeying.
Almost  incredible  things  are  related  on  that  subject,
nevertheless  the  details  are  so  circumstantial,  that  it  is
hardly  possible  there  should  not  be  some  foundation  for
them  ;  and  the  demon  may  transport  these  people  in  a
forced  and  violent  manner,  which  causes  them  a  fatigue
similar  to  w^hat  they  would  have  suffered,  had  they
really  performed  the  journey  with  more  than  ordinary
rapidity.

For  instance,  the  two  circumstances  related  by
Torquemada:  the  first  of  a  poor  scholar  of  his  ac-
quaintance, a  clever  man,  who  at  last  rose  to  be  phy-
sician to  Charles  V. ;  when  studying  at  Guadalupe,
was  invited  by  a  traveller  who  wore  the  garb  of  a
monk,  and  to  whom  he  had  rendered  some  little  service,
to  mount  up  behind  him  on  his  horse,  w^hich  seemed  a
sorry  animal  and  much  tired  ;  he  got  up  and  rode  all
night,  without  perceiving  that  he  went  at  an  extra-
ordinary pace,  but  in  the  morning  he  found  himself
near  the  City  of  Granada ;  the  young  man  went  into
the  town,  but  the  conductor  passed  onwards.

Another  time,  the  father  of  a  young  man,  known  to
the  same  Torquemada,  and  the  young  man  himself,
were  going  together  to  Granada,  and  passing  through


144  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

the  village  of  Almeda,  met  a  man  on  horseback  like
themselves  and  going  the  same  way ;  after  having
travelled  two  or  three  leagues  together,  they  halted,
and  the  cavalier  spread  his  cloak  on  the  grass,  so  that
there  was  no  crease  in  the  mantle ;  they  all  placed  what
provisions  they  had  with  them  on  this  extended  cloak,
and  let  their  horses  graze.  They  drank  and  ate  very
leisurely,  and  having  told  their  servants  to  bring  their
horses,  the  cavalier  said  to  them.  Gentlemen,  do  not
hurry,  you  will  reach  the  town  early — at  the  same  time
he  showed  them  Granada,  at  not  a  quarter  of  an  hour's
distance  from  thence.  .

Something  equally  marvellous  is  said  of  a  canon  of
the  cathedral  of  Beauvais.  The  Chapter  of  that  church
had  been  charged  for  a  long  time  to  acquit  itself  of  a
certain  personal  duty  to  the  Church  of  Rome ;  the
canons  having  chosen  one  of  their  brethren  to  repair  to
Rome  for  this  purpose,  the  canon  deferred  his  de-
parture from  day  to  day,  and  set  off  after  matins  on
Christmas  Day — arrived  that  same  day  at  Rome,  ac-
quitted himself  there  of  his  commission,  and  came  back
from  thence  with  the  same  despatch,  bringing  with  him
the  original  of  the  bond,  which  obliged  the  canons  to
send  one  of  their  body  to  make  this  offering  in  person.

However  fabulous  and  incredible  this  story  may
appear,  it  is  asserted  that  there  are  authentic  proofs  of
it  in  the  archives  of  the  cathedral ;  and  that  upon  the
tomb  of  the  canon  in  question,  may  still  be  seen  the
fisiures  of  demons  eng-raved  at  the  four  corners  in
memory  of  this  event.  They  even  affirm,  that  the
celebrated  Father  Mabillon  saw  the  authentic  voucher.


SUPERNATURAL  RAPIDITY  IN   TRAVELLING.  145

Now,  if  this  circumstance  and  the  others  like  it  are
not  absolutely  fabulous,  we  cannot  deny  that  they  are
the  effects  of  magic,  and  the  work  of  the  evil  spirit.

Peter,  the  venerable  Abbot  of  Cluny,^  relates  so
extraordinary  a  thing  which  happened  in  his  time,  that
I  should  not  repeat  it  here,  had  it  not  been  seen  by
the  whole  town  of  Macon.  The  count  of  that  town,  a
very  violent  man,  exercised  a  kind  of  tyranny  over  the
ecclesiastics,  and  against  whatever  belonged  to  them,
without  troubling  himself  either  to  conceal  his  violence,
or  to  find  a  pretext  for  it ;  he  carried  it  on  with  a  high
hand  and  gloried  in  it.  One  day  when  he  was  sitting
in  his  palace  in  company  with  several  nobles  and  others,
they  beheld  an  unknown  person  enter  on  horseback,
who  advanced  to  the  count  and  desired  him  to  follow
him.  The  count  rose  and  followed  him,  and  having
reached  the  door,  he  found  there  a  horse  ready  capari-
soned; he  mounts  it,  and  is  immediately  carried  up
into  the  air,  crying  out  in  a  terrible  tone  to  those  who
were  present.  Here,  help  me  !  All  the  town  ran  out  at
the  noise,  but  they  soon  lost  sight  of  him;  and  no
doubt  was  entertained  that  the  devil  had  flown  away
with  him  to  be  the  companion  of  his  tortures,  and  to
bear  the  pain  of  his  excesses  and  his  violence.

It  is  then  not  absolutely  impossible,  that  a  person
may  be  raised  into  the  air  and  transported  to  some  very
high  and  distant  place,  by  order  or  by  permission  of
God,  by  good  or  evil  spirits ;  but  we  must  own  that  the
thing  is  of  rare  occurrence,  and  that  in  all  that  is  re-
lated of  sorcerers  and  witches,  and  their  assemblins^s  at

"  Petrus  Venerab.  lib.  ii.  de  Miraculis,  c.  1.  p,  1299.
VOL.  I.  H


146  THE   PHANTOM   WORLD.

the  witches'  sabbath,  there  is  an  infinity  of  stories,
which  are  false,  absurd,  ridiculous,  and  even  destitute
of  probability.  M.  Remi,  attorney-general  of  Lorraine,
author  of  a  celebrated  work,  entitled  Demonology,  who
tried  a  great  number  of  sorcerers  and  sorceresses,  with
which  Lorraine  was  then  infested,  produces  hardly  any
proof  whence  we  can  infer  the  truth  and  reality  of
witchcraft,  and  of  wizards  and  witches  being  transported
to  the  sabbath.


CHAPTEFv  XXIII.

OBSESSION    AND    POSSESSION   OF    THE    DEVIL.

It  Is  with  reason  that  obsessions  and  possessions  of
the  devil  are  placed  in  the  rank  of  apparitions  of  the
evil  spirit  among  men.  We  call  it  obsession  when  the
demon  acts  externally  against  the  person  whom  he  be-
sets, ^udi possession  when  he  acts  internally,  agitates  them,
excites  their  ill-humour,  makes  them  utter  blasphemy,
speak  tongues  they  have  never  learnt,  discovers  to
them  unknown  secrets,  and  inspires  them  with  the
knowledge  of  the  obscurest  things  in  philosophy  or
theology.  Saul  was  agitated  and  possessed  by  the  evil
spirit,^  who  at  intervals  excited  his  melancholy  humour,
and  awakened  his  animosity  and  jealousy  against  David,
or  who  on  occasion  of  the  natural  movement  or  impul-
sion of  these  dark  moods,  seized  him,  agitated  him,  and
disturbed  from  his  usual  tenor  of  mind.  Those  whom
the  Gospel  speaks  of  as  being  possessed,^  and  who  cried
aloud  that  Jesus  was  the  Christ,  and  that  he  was  come
to  torment  them  before  the  time,  that  he  was  the  Son  of
God,  are  instances  of  possession.  But  the  demon  Asmo-
deus,  who  beset  Sara,  the  daughter  of  Raguel,'^  and  who
killed  her  first  seven  husbands  ;  those  spoken  of  in  the

»  1  Sam.  xvi.  23.  ^  Matt.viii.16  ;  x.  11 ;  xviii.28.

"  Tob.  iii.  8.

h2


Ii8  THE  THANTOM   WORLD.

Gospel,  who  were  simply  struck  with  maladies  or
incommodities  which  were  thought  to  be  incurable;
those  whom  the  Scripture  sometimes  calls  lunatics,
who  foamed  at  the  mouth,  who  were  convulsed,  who
tied  the  presence  of  mankind,  who  were  violent  and
dangerous,  so  that  they  were  obliged  to  be  chained  to
prevent  them  from  striking  and  maltreating  other
people ;  these  kinds  of  persons  were  simply  beset,  or
obseded  by  the  devil.

Opinions  are  much  divided  on  the  matter  of  obsessions
and  possessions  of  the  devil.  The  hardened  Jews,  and
the  ancient  enemies  of  the  Christian  religion,  convinced
by  the  evidence  of  the  miracles  which  they  saw  worked
by  Jesus  Christ,  by  his  Apostles,  and  by  Christians,
dared  neither  dispute  their  truth  nor  their  reality  ;  but
they  attributed  them  to  magic,  to  the  prince  of  the
devils,  or  to  the  virtue  of  certain  herbs,  or  of  certain
natural  secrets.

St.  Justin,'^  Tertullian,  Lactantius,  St.  Cyprian,
Minutius,  and  the  other  fathers  of  the  first  ages  of  the
church,  speak  of  the  power  which  the  Christian  exor-
cists exercised  over  the  possessed,  so  confidently  and  so
freely,  that  we  can  doubt  neither  the  certainty,  nor  the
evidence  of  the  thing.  They  call  upon  their  adversaries
to  bear  witness,  and  pique  themselves  on  making  the
exj^eriment  in  their  presence,  and  of  forcing  to  come
out  of  the  bodies  of  the  possessed,  to  declare  their
names,  and  acknowledge  that  those  they  adore  in  the
Pagan  temples  are  but  devils.

^  Justin.  Dialog,  cum  supplem.  TertuU.  de  Corona  Militis,  c.  11 ;  and
Apolog.  c.  23  ;  Cyp.  ad  Demetriam,  &c. ;  Minutius,  in  Octavio,  &c.


OBSESSION  AND   POSSESSION   OE   THE  DEVIL.         149

Some  opposed  to  the  true  miracles  of  the  Saviour
those  of  their  false  gods,  their  magicians,  and  their
heroes  of  paganism,  such  as  those  of  Esculapius,  and
the  famous  Apollonius  of  Tyana.  The  pretended  free-
thinkers dispute  them  in  our  days  upon  philosophical
principles ;  they  attribute  them  to  a  diseased  imagina-
tion, the  prejudices  of  education,  and  hidden  springs  of
the  constitution  ;  they  reduce  the  expressions  of  Scrip-
ture to  hyperbole ;  they  maintain  that  Jesus  Christ
condescended  to  the  understanding  of  the  people,  and
their  prepossessions  or  prejudices ;  that  demons  being
purely  spiritual  substances  could  not  by  themselves  act
immediately  upon  bodies;  and  that  it  is  not  at  all
probable  God  should  work  miracles  to  allow  of  their
doing  so.

If  we  examine  closely  those  who  have  passed  for
being  possessed,  we  shall  not  perhaps  find  one  amongst
them,  whose  mind  had  not  been  deranged  by  some
accident,  or  whose  body  was  not  attacked  by  some
infirmity  either  known  or  hidden,  which  had  caused
some  ferment  in  the  blood  or  the  brain,  and  which,
joined  to  prejudice,  or  fear,  had  given  rise  to  what  was
termed  in  their  case  obsession  or  possession.

The  possession  of  King  Saul  is  easily  explained  by
supposing  that  he  was  naturally  an  atrabilarian,  and
that  in  his  fits  of  melancholy  he  appeared  mad,  or
furious ;  therefore  they  sought  no  other  remedy  for  his
illness  than  music,  and  the  sound  of  instruments  proper
to  enliven  or  calm  him.  Several  of  the  obsessions  and
possessions  noted  in  the  New  Testament  were  simple
maladies,  or  fantastic  fancies,  which  made  it  believed


150  THE   PH AXIOM    WORLD.

that  sucli  persons  were  possessed  by  the  devil.  The
ignorance  of  the  people  maintained  this  prejudice,  and
their  being  totally  unacquainted  with  physics  and
medicine  served  to  strengthen  such  ideas.

In  one  it  was  a  sombre  and  melancholy  temper,  in
another  the  blood  was  too  fevered  and  heated ;  here  the
bowels  w^ere  burnt  up  with  heat,  there  a  concentration
of  diseased  humour,  which  suffocated  the  patient,  as  it
happens  with  those  subject  to  epilepsy  and  hypochon-
dria, who  fancy  themselves  gods,  kings,  cats,  dogs,  and
oxen.  There  were  others  who,  disturbed  at  the  remem-
brance of  their  crimes,  fell  into  a  kind  of  despair,  and
into  fits  of  remorse,  which  irritated  their  mind  and
constitution,  and  made  them  belicA^e  that  the  devil
pursued  and  beset  them.  Such,  apparently,  were  those
women  who  followed  Jesus  Christ,  and  Avho  had  been
delivered  by  him  from  the  unclean  spirits  that  possessed
them,  and  partly  so  Mary  Magdalen,  from  whom  he
expelled  seven  devils.  The  Scripture  often  speaks  of
the  spirit  of  impurity,  of  the  spirit  of  falsehood,  of  the
spirit  of  jealousy;  it  is  not  necessary  to  have  recourse  to
a  particular  demon  to  excite  these  passions  in  us ;  St.
James  ^  tells  us  that  we  are  enough  tempted  by  our
own  concupiscence  which  leads  us  to  evil,  without
seekino;  after  external  causes.

The  Jews  attributed  the  greater  part  of  their  mala-
dies to  the  demon :  they  were  persuaded  that  they
were  a  punishment  for  some  crime  either  known  or
unrevealed.  Jesus  Christ  and  his  Apostles  wisely  sup-
pased  these  prejudices,  without  wishing  to  attack  them

^  James  i.  14.


OBSESSION   AND  POSSESSION   OE   THE  DEVIL.         151

oi)enly  and  reform  the  old  opinions  of  the  Jews  ;  they
cured  the  diseases,  and  chased  away  the  evil  spirits  who
caused  them,  or  who  were  said  to  cause  them.  The
real  and  essential  effect  was  the  cure  of  the  patient ;
no  other  thing  was  required  to  confirm  the  mission  of
Jesus  Christ,  his  divinity,  and  the  truth  of  the  doctrine
which  he  preached.  Whether  he  expelled  the  demon,
or  not,  is  not  essentially  necessary  to  his  first  design  .
it  is  certain  that  he  cured  the  patient  either  by  ex-
pelling the  devil,  if  it  be  true  that  this  evil  spirit  caused
the  malady,  or  by  replacing  the  inw^ard  springs  and
humours  in  their  regular  and  natural  state,  which  is
always  miraculous,  and  proves  the  Divinity  of  the
Saviour.

Although  the  Jews  were  sufficiently  credulous  con-
cerning the  operations  of  the  evil  spirit,  they  at
the  same  time  believed  that  in  general  the  demons
who  tormented  certain  persons  were  nothing  else  than
the  souls  of  some  wretches,  who  fearing  to  repair  to
the  place  destined  for  them,  took  possession  of  the  body
of  some  mortal  whom  they  tormented  and  endeavoured
to  deprive  of  life.^

Josephus  the  historian  ^  relates  that  Solomon  com-
posed some  charms  against  maladies,  and  some  formulae
of  exorcism  to  expel  evil  spirits.  He  says  besides,  that
a  Jew  named  Eleazar  cured  in  the  presence  of  Vespa-
sian some  possessed  persons  by  applying  under  their
nose  a  ring,  in  which  was  enchased  a  root,  pointed  out
by  that  prince.  They  pronounced  the  name  of  Solo-
mon with  a  certain  prayer,  and  an  exorcism;  directly,
^  Joseph.  Antiq.  lib.  vii.  c.  25.  ^  Ibid.  lib.  viii.  c.  2.


153  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

the  person  possessed  fell  on  the  ground,  and  the  devil
left  him.  The  generality  of  common  people  among  the
Jews  had  not  the  least  doubt  that  Beelzebub,  prince  of
the  devils,  had  the  power  to  expel  other  demons,  for
they  said  that  Jesus  Christ  only  expelled  them  in  the
name  of  Beelzebub.^  We  read  in  history  that  some-
times the  pagans  expelled  demons  ;  and  the  physicians
boast  of  being  able  to  cure  some  possessed  persons,
as  they  cure  hypochondriacs,  and  imaginary  disorders.
These  are  the  most  plausible  things  that  are  said
against  the  reality  of  the  possessions  and  obsessions  of
the  devil.

h  ITatt.  xii.  24.


CHAPTER  XXIV.

THE   TRUTH   AND   REALITY   OF   POSSESSION   AND   OBSESSION   BY   THE   DEVIL
PROVED    FROM    SCRIPTURE.

But  tlie  possibility,  the  verity  and  reality  of  the
obsessions  and  possessions  of  the  devil  are  indubitable,
and  proved  by  the  Scripture,  and  by  the  authority  of
the  Church,  the  Fathers,  the  Jews,  and  the  Pagans.
Jesus  Christ  and  the  Apostles  believed  this  truth,  and
taught  it  publicly.  The  Saviour  gives  us  a  proof  of
his  mission  that  he  cures  the  possessed  ;  he  refutes  the
Pharisees,  who  asserted  that  he  expelled  the  demons
only  in  the  name  of  Beelzebub ;  and  maintains  that
he  expels  them  by  the  virtue  of  God.^  He  speaks  to
the  demons ;  he  threatens  them,  and  puts  them  to
silence.  Are  these  equivocal  marks  of  the  reality  of
obsessions?  The  Apostles  do  the  same,  as  did  the  early
Christians  their  disciples.  All  this  was  done  before  the
eyes  of  the  heathen,  who  could  not  deny  it,  but  who
eluded  the  force  and  evidence  of  these  things,  by
attributing  this  power  to  other  demons,  or  to  certain
divinities,  more  powerful  than  ordinary  demons ;  as  if
the  kingdom  of  Satan  were  divided,  and  the  evil  Spirit
could  act  against  himself,  or  as  if  there  were  any  col-
lusion between  Jesus  Christ  and  the  demons  whose
empire  he  had  just  destroyed.

»  Luke  viii.  21.

h3


154  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

The  seventy  disciples  on  their  return  from  their
mission  came  to  Jesus  Christ^  to  give  him  an  account
of  it,  and  tell  him  that  the  demons  themselves  are
obedient  to  them.  After  his  resurrection/  the  Saviour
promises  to  his  Apostles  that  they  shall  work  miracles
in  his  name,  that  they  shall  cast  out  devils,  and  receive
the  gift  of  tongues.  All  which  was  literally  fulfilled.
•  The  exorcisms  used  at  all  times  in  the  Church  against
the  demons  are  another  proof  of  the  reality  of  posses-
sions ;  they  show  that  at  all  times  the  Church  and  her
ministers  have  believed  them  to  be  true  and  real,  since
they  have  always  practised  these  exorcisms.  The
ancient  fathers  defied  the  heathen  to  produce  a  demo-
niac before  the  Christians ;  they  pride  themselves  on
curing  them,  and  expelling  the  demon.  The  Jewish
exorcists  employed  even  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  to
3ure  demoniacs ;  '^  they  found  it  eflScncious  in  producing
this  effect ;  it  is  true  that  sometimes  they  employed
the  name  of  Solomon,  and  some  charms  said  to  have
been  invented  by  that  prince,  or  roots  and  herbs  to
which  they  attributed  the  same  virtues,  like  as  a  clever
physician  by  the  secret  of  his  art  can  cure  a  hypochon-
driac or  a  maniac,  or  a  man  strongly  persuaded  that  he
is  possessed  by  the  devil,  or  as  a  wise  confessor  will
restore  the  mind  of  a  person  disturbed  by  remorse,  and
agitated  by  the  reflection  of  his  sins,  or  the  fear  of  hell.
But  we  are  speaking  now  of  real  possessions  and  obses-
sions which  are  cured  only  by  the  power  of  God,  by  the
name  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  by  exorcisms.     The  son  of

*>  Luke  X.  17.  "  Markxvi.  27.

«!  Mark  ix.  36—38.     Acts  xi.  14.


REALITY    or   POSSESSION    AND    OBSESSION.  155

Sceva,  the  Jewish  priest/  having  undertaken  to  expel
a  devil  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,  w^honi  Paul
preached,  the  demoniac  threw  himself  upon  him,  and
would  have  strangled  him,  saying  that  he  knew  Jesus
Christ,  and  Paul,  but  that  for  him,  he  feared  him  not.
We  must  then  distinguish  well  between  possessions  and
possessions,  exorcists  and  exorcists.  There  may  be
found  demoniacs  who  counterfeit  the  possessed,  to  excite
compassion  and  obtain  alms.  There  may  even  be
exorcists  who  abuse  the  name  and  power  of  Jesus
Christ  to  deceive  the  ignorant;  and  how  do  I  know  that
there  are  not  even  impostors  to  be  found,  who  would
place  pretended  possessed  persons  in  the  way,  in  order
to  pretend  to  cure  them,  and  thus  gain  a  reputation  ?

I  do  not  enter  into  longer  details  on  this  matter ;  I
have  treated  it  formerly  in  a  particular  dissertation
on  the  subject,  printed  apart  with  other  dissertations
on  Scripture,  and  I  have  therein  replied  to  the  objec-
tions which  were  raised  on  this  subject.

«  Acts  xix.  14,


CHAPTEE  XXV.

EXAMPLES   OF   REAL   POSSESSIONS   CAUSED   BY   THE  DEVIL,

We  must  now  report  some  of  the  most  famous  in-
stances of  the  possession  and  obsession  of  the  demon.
Every  body  is  talking  at  this  time  of  the  possession  (by
the  devil)  of  the  nuns  of  Loudun,  on  which  such  dif-
ferent opinions  were  given,  both  at  the  time  and  since.
Martha  Brossier,  daughter  of  a  weaver  of  Romorantin/
made  as  much  noise  in  her  time ;  but  Charles  Miron,
Bishop  of  Orleans,  discovered  the  fraud,  by  making
her  drink  holy  water  as  common  water;  by  making
them  present  to  her  a  key  wrapped  up  in  red  silk,
which  was  said  to  be  a  piece  of  the  true  cross ;  and  in
reciting  some  lines  from  Yirgil,  which  Martha  Brois-
sier's  demon  took  for  exorcisms,  agitating  her  very
much  at  the  approach  of  the  hidden  key,  and  at  the
recital  of  the  verses  from  Virgil.  Henri  de  Gondi,
Cardinal  Bishop  of  Paris,  had  her  examined  by  five  of
the  faculty ;  three  were  of  opinion  that  there  was  a
great  deal  of  imposture  and  a  little  disease.  The  par-
liament took  notice  of  the  affair,  and  nominated  eleven
physicians,  who  reported  unanimously  that  there  was
nothing  demoniacal  in  this  matter.

'*  Jean  de  Lorres,  sur  I'an  1599.    Thuan.  Hist.  1.  xii.


EXAMPLES  OP  POSSESSIONS   BY   THE  DEVIL.  157

In  the  reign  of  Charles  IX.,^  or  a  little  before,
a  young  woman  of  the  town  of  Yervins,  fifteen  or
sixteen  years  of  age,  named  Nicola  Aubry,  had  dif-
ferent apparitions  of  a  spectre,  who  called  itself  her
grandfather,  and  asked  her  for  masses  and  prayers
for  the  repose  of  his  soul.''  Very  soon  after,  she  was
transported  to  different  places  by  this  spectre,  and
sometimes  even  was  carried  out  of  sight,  and  from  the
midst  of  those  who  watched  over  her.

Then,  they  had  no  longer  any  doubt  that  it  was  the
devil,  which  they  had  a  great  deal  of  trouble  to  make
her  believe.  The  Bishop  of  Laon  gave  his  power  (of
attorney)  for  conjuring  the  spirit,  and  commanded  them
to  see  that  the  proces-verbaux  were  exactly  drawn  up
by  the  notaries  nominated  for  that  purpose.  The  exor-
cisms lasted  more  than  three  months,  and  only  serve
to  prove  more  and  more  the  fact  of  the  possession.
The  poor  sufferer  was  torn  from  the  hands  of  nine  or
ten  men,  who  could  hardly  retain  their  hold  of  her:
and  on  the  last  day  of  the  exorcisms  sixteen  could  not
succeed  in  so  doing.  She  had  been  lying  on  the  ground,
w^hen  she  stood  upright  and  stiff  as  a  statue,  without
those  who  held  her  being  able  to  prevent  it.  She  spoke
divers  languages,  revealed  the  most  secret  things,  an-
nounced others  at  the  moment  they  were  being  done,
although  at  a  great  distance  ;  she  discovered  to  many
the  secret  of  their  conscience,  uttered  at  once  three

^  Charles  IX.  died  in  1574.

"=  This  story  is  taken  from  a  book  entitled,  "  Examen  et  Discussion
Critique  de  THistoire  des  Diables  de  Loudun,  &c.,  par  M.  de  la  Menar-
daye.     A  Paris,  chez  de  Bure  I'Aing,  1749.


158  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

dliFerent  voices,  or  tones,  and  spoke  with  her  tongue
hanging  half  a  foot  out  of  her  mouth.  After  some
exorcisms  had  been  made  at  Vervins,  they  took  her  to
Laon,  where  the  Bishop  undertook  her.  He  had  a
scaifolding  erected  for  this  purpose  in  the  cathedral.
Such  immense  numbers  of  people  went  there,  that  they
saw  in  the  church  ten  or  twelve  thousand  persons  at
a  time;  some  even  came  from  foreign  countries.  Con-
sequently France  could  not  be  less  curious  ;  so  the
princes  and  great  people,  and  those  who  could  not  come
there  themselves,  sent  persons  who  might  inform  them
of  what  passed.  The  Pope's  nuncios,  the  parliamentary
deputies,  and  those  of  the  university  were  present.

The  devil,  forced  by  the  exorcisms,  rendered  such
testimony  to  the  truth  of  the  Catholic  religion,  and,
above  all,  to  the  reality  of  the  holy  eucharist,  and  at
the  same  time  to  the  falsity  of  Calvinism,  that  the  irri-
tated Calvinists  no  longer  kept  within  bounds.  From
the  time  the  exorcisms  were  made  at  Vervins,  they
wanted  to  kill  the  possessed,  with  the  priest  who  exor-
cised her,  in  a  journey  they  made  her  take  to  Xotre
Dame  de  Liesse.  At  Laon  it  was  still  worse ;  as  they
were  the  strongest  in  numbers  there,  a  revolt  was
more  than  once  apprehended.  They  so  intimidated  the
Bishop  and  the  magistrates,  that  they  took  down  the
scaiFold,  and  did  not  have  the  general  procession  usually
made  before  exorcisms.  The  devil  became  prouder
thereupon,  insulted  the  Bishop,  and  laughed  at  him.
On  the  other  hand,  the  Calvinists  having  obtained  the
suppression  of  the  procession,  and  that  she  should  be
put  in  prison  to  be  more  nearly  examined,  Carlier,  a


EXAMPLES   OF   POSSESSIONS   BY  THE  DEVIL.  159

Calvlnlst  doctor,  suddenly  drew  from  his  pocket  some-
thing which  was  averred  to  be  a  most  violent  poison,
which  he  threw  into  her  mouth,  and  she  kept  it  on  her
stomach  whilst  the  convulsion  lasted,  but  she  threw
it  up  of  herself  when  she  came  to  her  senses.

All  these  experiments  decided  them  on  recommencing
the  processions,  and  the  scaffold  was  replaced.  Then
the  outraged  Calvinists  conceived  the  idea  of  a  writing
from  M.  de  Montmorency,  forbidding  the  continuation
of  the  exorcisms,  and  enjoining  the  King's  officers  to
be  vigilant.  Thus  they  abstained  a  second  time  from
the  procession,  and  again  the  devil  triumphed  at  it.
Nevertheless,  he  discovered  to  the  Bishop  the  trick  of
this  suppositious  writing,  named  those  who  had  taken
part  in  it,  and  declared  that  he  had  again  gained  time
by  this  obedience  of  the  Bishop  to  the  will  of  man
rather  than  that  of  God.  Besides  that,  the  devil  had
already  protested  publicly  that  it  was  against  his  own
will  that  he  remained  in  the  body  of  this  woman  ;  that
he  had  entered  there  by  the  order  of  God;  that  it  was
to  convert  the  Calvinists  or  to  harden  them,  and  that
he  was  very  unfortunate  in  being  obliged  to  act  and
speak  against  himself.

The  Chapter  then  represented  to  the  Bishop  that  it
would  be  proper  to  make  the  processions  and  the  con-
jurations twice  a  day,  to  excite  still  more  the  devotion,
of  the  people.  The  prelate  acquiesced  in  it,  and  every
thing  was  done  with  the  greatest  eclat,  and  in  the  most
orthodox  manner.  The  devil  declared  again  more  than
once  that  he  had  gained  time ;  once  because  the  Bishop
had  not  confessed  himself ;  another  time  because  he


160  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

was  not  fasting ;  and  lastly,  because  it  was  requisite
that  the  chapter  and  all  the  dignitaries  should  be  pre-
sent, as  well  as  the  court  of  justice  and  the  king's
officers,  in  order  that  there  might  be  sufficient  testi-
mony ;  that  he  was  forced  to  warn  the  Bishop  thus  of
his  duty,  and  that  accursed  was  the  hour  when  he
entered  into  the  body  of  this  person  ;  at  the  same  time
he  uttered  a  thousand  imprecations  against  the  Church,
the  Bishop,  and  the  clergy.

Thus  at  the  last  day  of  possession,  everybody  being
assembled  in  the  afternoon,  the  Bishop  began  the  last
conjurations,  when  many  extraordinary  things  took
place ;  amongst  others,  the  Bishop  desiring  to  put  the
holy  eucharist  near  the  lips  of  this  poor  woman,  the
devil  in  some  way  seized  hold  of  his  arm,  and  at  the  same
moment  raised  this  woman  up,  as  it  were,  out  of  the
hands  of  sixteen  men  who  were  holding  her.  But  at
last,  after  much  resistance,  he  came  out,  and  left  her
perfectly  cured,  and  thoroughly  sensible  of  the  goodness
of  God.  The  Te  Deum  was  sung  to  the  sound  of  all
the  bells  in  the  town ;  nothing  was  heard  among  the
Catholics  but  acclamations  of  joy,  and  many  of  the
Calvinists  were  converted,  whose  descendants  still
dwell  in  the  town.  Florimond  de  Raimond,  counsellor
of  the  parliament  of  Bordeaux,  had  the  happiness  to
be  of  the  number,  and  has  written  the  history  of  it.
For  nine  days  they  made  the  procession,  to  return
thanks  to  God ;  and  they  founded  a  perpetual  mass,
which  is  celebrated  every  year  on  the  8th  of  February,
and  they  represented  this  story  in  bas-relief  round  the
choir,  where  it  may  be  seen  at  this  day.


EXAMPLES  OF  POSSESSIONS  BY   THE  DEVIL.  161

In  short,  God,  as  if  to  put  the  finishing  stroke  to  so
important  a  work,  permitted  that  the  Prince  of  Conde,
who  had  just  left  the  Catholic  religion,  should  be  mis-
led on  this  subject  by  those  of  his  new  communion.
He  sent  for  the  poor  woman,  and  also  the  Canon
d'Espinois,  who  had  never  forsaken  her  during  all  the
time  of  the  exorcisms.  He  interrogated  them  sepa-
rately, and  at  several  different  times,  and  made  every
effort,  not  to  discover  if  they  had  practised  any  artifice,
but  to  find  out  if  there  was  any  in  the  whole  affair.
He  went  so  far  as  to  offer  the  canon  very  high  situa-
tions if  he  would  change  his  religion.  But  what  can
you  obtain  in  favour  of  heresy  from  sensible  and  up-
right people,  to  whom  God  has  thus  manifested  the
power  of  his  Church  ?  All  the  efforts  of  the  prince
were  useless ;  the  firmness  of  the  canon,  and  the  sim-
plicity of  the  poor  woman,  only  served  to  prove  to  him
still  more  the  certainty  of  the  event  which  displeased
him,  and  he  sent  them  both  home.

Yet  a  return  of  ill-will  caused  him  to  have  this
woman  again  arrested,  and  he  kept  her  in  one  of  his
prisons  until  her  father  and  mother  having  entreated  an
inquiry  into  this  injustice  to  King  Charles  IX.,  she  was
set  at  liberty  by  order  of  his  majesty.'^

An  event  of  such  importance,  and  so  carefully
attested,  both  on  the  part  of  the  Bishop  and  the  chap-
ter, and  on  that  of  the  magistrates,  and  even  by  the
violence   of  the   Calvinistic   party,    ought   not   to   be

^  Tr§sor  et  entifere  Histoire  de  la  Victime  du  Corps  de  Dieu,  pre-
sentee au  Pape,  au  Eoi,  au  Chancelier  de  France,  au  Premier  President.
A  Paris,  4to,  chez  Chesnau.    1578.


162  THE  PHANTOM   WORLD.

buried  in  silence.  King  Charles  IX.,  on  making  his
entry  into  Laon  some  time  after,  desired  to  be  informed
about  it  by  the  dean  of  the  cathedral,  who  had  been  an
ocular  witness  of  the  affair.  His  majesty  commanded
him  to  give  publicity  to  the  story,  and  it  was  then
printed,  first  in  French,  tlien  in  Latin,  Spanish,  Italian
and  German,  with  the  approbation  of  the  Sorbonne,
supported  by  the  rescripts  of  Pope  Pius  V.  and  Gre-
gory XIII.  his  successor.  And  they  made  after  that
a  pretty  exact  abridgment  of  it,  by  order  of  the  Bishop
of  Laon,  printed  under  the  title  of  Le  Triomphe  du
S.  Sacrament  sur  le  Dlahle.

These  are  facts  wdiich  have  all  the  authenticity  that
can  be  desired,  and  such  as  a  man  of  honour  cannot
with  any  good  breeding  affect  to  doubt,  since  he  could
not  after  that  consider  any  facts  as  certain  without
beins:  in  shameful  contradiction  with  himself.^

«  This  account  is  one  of  tlie  many  in  wliich  the  theory  of  possession
was  made  use  of  to  impugn  the  Protestant  faith.  The  simplicity  and
credulity  of  Calmet  is  very  remarkable. — Editor.


CHAPTER  XXVI.


CONTINUATION    OF   THE   SAJIE   SUBJECT.


Theue  was  in  Lorraine,  about  the  year  1620,  a  woman,
possessed  (by  the  devil),  who  made  a  great  noise  in  the
country,  but  whose  case  is  much  less  known  among
foreio;ners.  I  mean  Mademoiselle  Ehzabeth  de  Kanfaino;,
the  story  of  whose  possession  was  written  and  printed
at  Nancy  in  1622,  by  M.  Pichard,  a  doctor  of  medicine,
and  physician  in  ordinary  to  their  highnesses  of  Lor-
raine. Mademoiselle  de  Ranfaing  was  a  very  virtuous
person,  through  whose  agency  God  established  a  kind
of  order  of  nuns  of  the  Refuge,  the  principal  object  of
wliich  is  to  withdraw  from  profligacy  the  girls  or  women
Avho  have  fallen  into  libertinism.  M.  Pichard's  work
was  approved  by  doctors  of  theology,  and  authorized  by
M.  de  Porcelets,  Bishop  of  Toul,  and  in  an  assembly  of
learned  men  whom  he  sent  for  to  examine  the  case,  and
the  reality  of  the  possession.  It  was  ardently  attacked
and  loudly  denied  by  a  monk  of  the  Minimlte  order,
named  Claude  Pithoy,  who  had  the  temerity  to  say  that
he  would  pray  to  God  to  send  the  devil  into  himself,
in  case  the  woman  w^hom  they  were  exorcising  at  Nancy
was  possessed ;  and  again,  that  God  was  not  God,  if  he
did  not  command  the  devil  to  seize  his  body,  if  the
woman  they  exorcised  at  Nancy  was  really  possessed.


164  THE  PHANTOM   WORLD.

M.  PIchard  refutes  him  fully ;  but  he  remarks  that
persons  who  are  weak  minded,  or  of  a  dull  and  melan-
choly character,  heavy,  taciturn,  stupid,  and  who  are
naturally  disposed  to  frighten  and  disturb  themselves,
are  apt  to  fancy  that  they  see  the  devil,  that  they  speak
to  him,  and  even  that  they  are  possessed  by  him  ;  above
all,  if  they  are  in  places  where  others  are  possessed,
whom  they  see,  and  with  whom  they  converse.  He
adds,  that  thirteen  or  fourteen  years  ago,  he  remarked
at  Nancy  a  great  number  of  this  kind,  and  with  the
help  of  God  he  cured  them.  He  says  the  same  thing
of  atrabilarians,  and  women  who  suffer  from  furor
uterine,  who  sometimes  do  such  things  and  utter  such
cries,  that  any  one  would  believe  they  were  possessed.

Mademoiselle  Ranfaing  having  become  a  widow  in
1617,  was  sought  in  marriage  by  a  physician  named
Poviot.  As  she  would  not  listen  to  his  addresses,  he
first  of  all  gave  her  philtres  to  make  her  love  him,
which  occasioned  strange  derangements  in  her  health.
At  last  he  gave  her  some  magical  medicaments;  (for
he  was  afterwards  known  to  be  a  magician,  and  burnt
as  such  by  a  judicial  sentence.)  The  physicians  could
not  relieve  her,  and  were  quite  at  fault  with  her  extra-
ordinary maladies.  After  having  tried  all  sorts  of  reme-
dies, they  were  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  exorcisms.

Now  these  are  the  principal  symptoms  which  made
it  believed  that  Mademoiselle  Panfaing  was  really  pos-
sessed. They  began  to  exorcise  her  the  2d  September,
1619,  in  the  town  of  Remiremont,  whence  she  was
transferred  to  Nancy ;  there  she  was  visited  and  inter-
rogated by  several  clever  physicians,  who  after  having


EXAMPLES   OF  POSSESSIONS   BY   THE   DEYIL.         165

minutely  examined  the  symptoms  of  what  happened  to
her,  declared  that  the  casualties  they  had  remarked  in
her  had  no  relation  at  all  with  the  ordinary  course
of  known  maladies,  and  could  only  be  the  result  of
diabolical  possession.

After  which,  by  order  of  M.  de  Porcelets,  Bishop  of
Toul,  they  nominated  for  the  exorcists  M.  Viardin,
a  doctor  of  divinity,  counsellor  of  state  of  the  Duke  of
Lorraine,  a  Jesuit  and  capuchin.  Almost  all  the  monks
in  Nancy,  the  said  lord  bishop,  the  Bishop  of  Tripoli,
suffragan  of  Strasburg,  M.  de  Sancy,  formerly  ambas-
sador from  the  most  Christian  king  at  Constantinople,
and  then  priest  of  the  Oratoire,  Charles  de  Lorraine,
Bishop  of  Verdun ;  two  doctors  of  the  Sorbonne  sent
on  purpose  to  be  present  at  the  exorcisms,  often  exor-
cised her  in  Hebrew,  Greek,  and  Latin,  and  she  always
replied  pertinently  to  them,  she  who  could  hardly  read
Latin.

They  report  the  certificate  given  by  M.  Nicolas  de
Iiarley,  very  well  skilled  in  the  Hebrew  tongue,  who
avowed  that  Mademoiselle  Banfaing  was  really  pos-
sessed, and  had  answered  him  from  the  movement  of
his  lips  alone,  without  his  having  pronounced  any
words,  and  had  given  several  proofs  of  her  possession.
The  Sieur  Garnier,  a  doctor  of  the  Sorbonne,  having
also  given  her  several  commands  in  Hebrew,  she  replied
pertinently,  but  in  French,  saying  that  the  compact  was
made  that  he  should  speak  only  in  the  usual  tongue.
The  demon  added,  "  Is  it  not  enough  that  I  show  thee
that  I  understand  what  thou  sayest?"  The  same
M.  Garnier,  speaking  to  him  in  Greek,  inadvertently


166  THE  PHANTOM   WORLD.

put  one  case  for  another ;  the  possessed,  or  rather  the
devil,  said  to  him,  "  Thou  hast  committed  an  errorT  The
doctor  said  to  him  in  Greek,  "  Point  out  my  fault ;"
the  devil  replied,  "  Ltt  it  suffice  thee  that  I  point  out  an
error ;  I  shall  tell  thee  no  more  concerning  it.''"'  The  doctor
telling  him  in  Greek  to  hold  his  tongue,  he  answered,
**  Thou  commandest  me  to  hold  my  tongue,  and  I  will
not  do  so."

M.  Midot  Ecolatre  de  Toul  said  to  him  in  the  same
language,  "  Sit  down ;"  he  replied,  "  I  will  not  sit  down."
M.  Midot  said  to  him  moreover  in  Greek,  "  Sit  down
on  the  ground  and  obey ; "  but  as  the  demon  was  going
to  throw  the  possessed  by  force  on  the  ground,  he  said
to  him  in  the  same  tongue,  "  Do  it  gently;"  he  did  so.
He  said  in  Greek,  "  Put  out  the  right  foot ;"  he  ex-
tended it ;  he  said  also  in  the  same  language,  "  Cause
her  knees  to  be  cold,"  the  woman  replied  that  she  felt
them  very  cold.

The  Sieur  Mince,  a  doctor  of  the  Sorbonne,  holding
a  cross  in  his  hand,  the  devil  whispered  to  him  in  Greek,
"  Give  me  the  cross,"  which  was  heard  by  some  persons
who  were  near  him.  M.  Mince  desired  to  make  the
devil  repeat  the  same  sentence;  he  answered,  "I  will
not  repeat  it  all  in  Greek;"  but  he  simply  said  in
French,  "  Give  me,"  and  in  Greek,  "  the  cross."

The  Reverend  Father  Albert,  capuchin,  having
ordered  him  in  Greek  to  make  the  sign  of  the  cross
seven  times  with  his  tongue,  in  honour  of  the  seven
joys  of  the  Virgin,  he  made  the  sign  of  the  cross  three
times  with  his  tongue,  and  then  twice  Avith  his  nose  ;
but  the  holy  man  told  him  anew  to  make  the  sign  of


EXAMPLES   OE  POSSESSION  BY  THE  DEVIL.  167

the  cross  seven  times  with  his  tongue ;  he  did  so ;  and
having  been  commanded  in  the  same  language  to  kiss
the  feet  of  the  lord  Bishop  of  Toul,  he  prostrated  him-
self and  kissed  his  feet.

The  same  father  having  observed  that  the  demon
wished  to  overturn  the  Benitier,  or  basin  of  holy  water
which  was  there,  he  ordered  him  to  take  the  holy  water
and  not  spill  it,  and  he  obeyed.  The  Father  com-
manded him  to  give  marks  of  the  possession  ;  he  an-
swered, "The  possession  is  sufficiently  known;"  he
added  in  Greek,  "  I  command  thee  to  carry  some  holy
water  to  the  governor  of  the  town."  The  demon
replied,  "  It  is  not  customary  to  exorcise  in  that
tongue."  The  father  answered  in  Latin,  "  It  is  not
for  thee  to  impose  laws  on  us ;  but  the  Church  has
power  to  command  thee  in  whatever  language  she  may
think  proper."

Then  the  demon  took  the  basin  of  holy  water  and
carried  it  to  the  keeper  of  the  Capuchins,  to  the  Duke
Eric  of  Lorraine,  to  the  Counts  of  Brionne,  Bemonville,
la  Yaux,  and  other  lords.

The  physician,  M.  Pichard  having  told  him  in  a
sentence,  partly  Hebrew,  and  partly  Greek,  to  cure  the
head  and  eyes  of  the  possessed  woman ;  hardly  had  he
finished  speaking  the  last  words,  when  the  demon
replied :  '^  Faith,  we  are  not  the  cause  of  it ;  her  brain
is  naturally  moist :  that  proceeds  from  her  natural  con-
stitution ;"  then  M.  Pichard  said  to  the  assembly,  "  Take
notice,  gentlemen,  that  he  replies  to  Greek  and  Hebrew
at  the  same  time." — "  Yes,"  replied  demon,  "  you  dis-
cover the  pot  of  roses,  and  the  secret ;  I  will  answer


168  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

you  no  more."  There  were  several  questions  and
replies  in  foreign  languages,  which  showed  that  he
understood  them  very  well.

M.  Viardin  having  asked  him  in  Latin,  "  Ubi  cense-
baris  quando  mane  oriebaris?  "  He  replied,  '•  Between
the  seraphim."  They  said  to  him,  "  Pro  signo  exhibe
nobis  patibulum  fratris  Cephas  ;"  the  devil  extended  his
arms  in  the  form  of  a  St.  Andrew's  cross.  They  said
to  him,  "  Applica  carpum  carpo ;"  he  did  so,  placing  the
wrist  of  one  hand  over  the  other ;  then,  "  Admove  tar-
sum  tarso  et  metatarsum  uietatarso ;"  he  crossed  his
feet  and  raised  them  one  upon  the  other.  Then  after-
wards he  said,  "  Excita  in  calcaneo  qualitatem  congre-
gantem  heterogenea ;"  the  possessed  said  she  felt  her
heel  cold  ;  after  which,  •'  Kepraesenta  nobis  labaiTim
Venetorum  ;"  he  made  the  figure  of  the  cross.  After-
wards they  said,  "  Exhibe  nobis  videntum  Deum  bene
precantem  nepotibus  ex  salvatore  Egypti ;"  he  crossed
his  arms  as  did  Jacob  on  giving  his  blessing  to  the  sons
of  Joseph ;  and  then,  "  Exhibe  crucem  conterebranteni
stipiti,"  he  represented  the  cross  of  St  Peter.  The
exorcist  having  by  mistake  said,  "  Per  eum  qui  adversus
te  praeliavit,"  the  demon  did  not  give  him  time  to  correct
himself;  he  said  to  him,  ''  O  the  ass !  instead  of  proe-
liatus  est.''''  He  was  spoken  to  in  Italian  and  German,
and  he  always  answered  accordingly.

They  said  to  him  one  day,  "  Sume  encolpium  ejus
qui  hodie  functus  est  officio  illius  de  quo  cecinit  Psaltes :
pro  patribus  tuis  nati  sunt  tibi  filii ;"  he  went  directly
and  took  the  cross  hanging  round  the  neck  and  resting
on  the  breast  of  the  Prince  Eric  de  Lorraine,  who  that


EXAMPLES   OE   POSSESSIONS   BY   THE  DEVIL.  169

same  day  had  filled  the  office  of  Bishop  in  giving  orders,
because  the  Bishop  of  Toul  was  indisposed.  He  dis-
covered secret  thoughts,  and  heard  words  that  were
said  in  the  ear  of  some  persons  which  he  was  not  pos-
sibly near  enough  to  overhear,  and  declared  that  he  had
known  the  mental  prayer  that  a  good  priest  had  made
before  the  holy  sacrament.

Here  is  a  trait  still  more  extraordinary.  They  said
to  the  demon,  speaking  Latin  and  Italian  in  the  same
sentence :  "  Adi  scliolastrum  seniorem  et  osculare  ejus
pedes,  la  cui  Scarpa  ha  piu  di  sugaro ;"  that  very  moment
he  went  and  kissed  the  foot  of  the  Sieur  Juillet,  ecolatre
of  St.  George,  the  Elder  of  M.  Viardin,  ecolatre  of  the
Primitiale.  M.  Juillet's  right  foot  was  shorter  than  the
left,  Avhich  obliged  him  to  wear  a  shoe  with  a  cork  heel,
(or  raised  by  a  piece  of  cork,  called  in  Italian  sugaro.)

They  proposed  to  him  very  difficult  questions  con-
cerning the  Trinity,  the  Incarnation,  the  holy  sacra-
ment of  the  altar,  the  grace  of  God,  free  will,  the
manner  in  which  angels  and  demons  know  the  thoughts
of  men,  &c.,  and  he  replied  with  much  clearness  and
precision.  She  discovered  things  unknown  to  every
body,  and  revealed  to  certain  persons,  but  secretly  and
in  private,  some  sins  of  which  they  had  been  guilty.

The  demon  did  not  obey  the  voice  only  of  the  exor-
cists ;  he  obeyed  even  when  they  simply  moved  their
lips,  or  held  their  hand,  or  a  handkerchief,  or  a  book
upon  the  mouth.  A  Calvinist  having  one  day  mingled
secretly  in  the  crowd,  the  exorcist,  who  was  warned
of  it,  commanded  the  demon  to  go  and  kiss  his  feet ;
he  went  immediately,  rushing  through  the  crowd.

vol..  I.  I


170  THE   PHANTOM   WORLD.

An  Englishman  having  come  from  curiosity  to  the
exorcist,  the  devil  told  him  several  particulars  relating
to  his  country  and  religion  ;  he  was  a  puritan ;  and  the
Englishman  owned  that  every  thing  he  had  said  was
true.  The  same  Englishman  said  to  him  in  his  lan-
guage, *'  As  a  proof  of  thy  possession,  tell  me  the  name
of  my  master  who  formerly  taught  me  embroidety ;"
he  replied,  "  William."  They  commanded  him  to  recite
the  Ave  Maria ;  he  said  to  a  Huguenot  gentleman  who
was  present,  "  Do  you  say  it,  if  you  know  it ;  for  they
don't  say  it  amongst  your  people."  M.  PIchard  relates
several  unknown  and  hidden  things  which  the  demon
revealed,  and  that  he  performed  several  feats  which
it  is  not  possible  for  any  person,  however  agile  and
supple  he  may  be,  to  achieve  by  natural  strength  or
power ;  such  as  crawling  on  the  ground  without  making
use  of  hands  or  feet,  appearing  to  have  the  hair  standing
erect  like  serpents.

After  all  the  details  concerning  the  exorcisms,  marks
of  possession,  questions  and  answers  of  the  possessed,
M.  PIchard  reports  the  authentic  testimony  of  the
theologians,  physicians,  of  the  bishops  Eric  of  Lorraine,
and  Charles  of  Lorraine,  Bishop  of  Verdun,  of  several
monks  of  every  order,  who  attest  the  said  possession
to  be  real  and  veritable ;  and  lastly,  a  letter  from  the
Rev.  Father  Cotton,  a  Jesuit,  who  certifies  the  same
thino;.  The  said  letter  bears  date  the  5th  of  June,  1621,
and  is  in  reply  to  the  one  which  the  Prince  Eric  of
Lorraine  had  written  to  him.

I  have  omitted  a  great  many  particulars  related  In
the  recital  of  the  exorcisms,  and  the  proofs  of  the  pos-


EXAMPLES   OF  POSSESSIONS  BY   THE  DEVIL.  171

session  of  Mademoiselle  de  Ranfaing.  I  think  I  have
said  enongh  to  convince  any  persons  who  are  sincere
and  unprejudiced,  that  her  possession  is  as  certain  as
these  things  can  be.  The  affair  occurred  at  Nancy,  the
capital  of  Lorraine,  in  the  presence  of  a  great  number
of  enlightened  persons,  two  of  whom  were  of  the  house
of  Lorraine,  both  bishops,  and  well  informed ;  in  pre-
sence and  by  the  orders  of  my  Lord  de  Porcelets,  Bishop
of  Toul,  a  most  enlightened  man,  and  of  distinguished
merit ;  of  two  doctors  of  the  Sorbonne,  called  thither
expressly  to  judge  of  the  reality  of  the  possession ;  in
presence  of  people  of  the  so-called  Reformed  religion,
and  much  on  their  guard  against  things  of  this  kind.
It  has  been  seen  how  far  Father  Pithoy  carried  his
temerity  against  the  possession  in  question ;  he  has
been  reprimanded  by  his  diocesan  and  his  superiors,
who  have  imposed  silence  on  him.

Mademoiselle  de  Ranfaing  is  known  to  be  personally
a  woman  of  extraordinary  virtue,  prudence,  and  merit.
No  reason  can  be  imagined  for  her  feigning  a  possession
which  has  pained  her  in  a  thousand  ways.  The  con-
sequence of  this  terrible  trial  has  been  the  establishment
of  a  kind  of  religious  order,  from  which  the  Church  has
received  much  edification,  and  from  which  God  has
providentially  derived  glory.

M.  Nicolas  de  Harlay  Sancy  and  M.  Viardin,  are
persons  highly  to  be  respected  both  for  their  personal
merit,  their  talent,  and  the  high  offices  they  have  filled ;
the  first  having  been  French  ambassador  at  Constan-
tinople, and  the  other  resident  of  the  good  Duke  Henry
at  the  Court  of  Rome  ;  so  that  I  do  not  think  I  could

I  2


172  THE  PHANTOM   WORLD.

have  given  an  instance  more  fit  to  convince  you  of
there  being  real  and  veritable  possessions  than  this
of  Mademoiselle  de  Ranfaing.

I  do  not  relate  that  of  the  nuns  of  Loudun,  on  which
such  various  opinions  have  been  given,  the  reality  of
•which  was  doubted  at  the  very  time,  and  is  very  pro-
blematical to  this  day.  Those  ^vho  are  curious  to  know
the  history  of  that  affair  will  find  it  very  w^ell  detailed
in  a  book  I  have  already  cited,  entitled,  "  Examen  et
Discussion  Critique  de  I'Histoire  des  Diables  de  Loudon,
&;c.,  par  M.  de  la  Menardaye,"  a  Paris,  chez  de  Bure
Aine,  1749.


CHAPTER  XXVII.

OBJECTIOIJS   AGAINST    THE    OBSESSIONS     AND     POSSESSIONS    OF     THE     DEMON —
REPLY    TO    THE    OBJECTIONS.

Several  objections  may  be  raised  against  the  obses-
sions and  possessions  of  demons ;  nothing  is  subject  to
greater  difficulties  than  this  matter,  but  Providence
constantly  and  uniformly  permits  the  clearest  and  most
certain  truths  of  religion  to  remain  enveloped  in  some
degree  of  obscurity ;  that  facts  the  best  averred  and  the
most  indubitable  should  be  subject  to  doubts  and  con-
tradictions ;  that  the  most  evident  miracles  should  be
disputed  by  some  incredulous  persons,  on  account  of
circumstances,  which  appear  to  them  doubtful  and
disputable.

All  religion  has  its  lights  and  shadows ;  God  has  per-
mitted it  to  be  so  in  order  that  the  just  may  have  some-
what to  exercise  their  faith  in  believing,  and  the
impious  and  incredulous  persist  in  their  wilful  impiety
and  increduhty.  The  greatest  mysteries  of  Christianity
are  to  the  one  subjects  of  scandal,  and  to  the  others
means  of  salvation ;  the  one  regarding  the  mystery  of
the  Cross  as  folly,  and  the  others  as  the  work  of  sub-
llmest  wisdom,  and  of  the  most  admirable  pov>^er  of
God.  Pharaoh  hardened  his  heart  when  he  saw  the
wonders    wrought   by   Moses;    but  the   magicians   of


174  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

Egypt  were  at  last  obliged  to  recognise  in  them  tlie
hand  of  God.  The  Hebrews  on  sight  of  these  wonders
take  confidence  in  Moses  and  Aaron,  and  yield  them-
selves to  their  guidance,  without  fearing  the  dangers  to
which  they  may  be  exposed.

We  have  already  remarked,  that  the  demon  often
seems  to  act  against  his  own  interest,  and  destroy  his
own  empire,  by  saying  that  everything  which  is  related
of  the  return  of  spirits,  the  obsessions  and  possessions
of  the  demon,  of  spells,  magic,  and  sorcery,  are  only
tales  wherewith  to  frighten  children ;  that  they  all
have  no  existence  except  in  weak  and  prejudiced  minds.
How  can  it  serve  the  demon  to  maintain  this,  and
destroy  the  general  opinion  of  nations  on  all  these
things  ?  If  in  all  there  is  only  falsehood  and  illusion,
what  does  he  gain  by  undeceiving  people  ?  and  if  there
is  any  truth  in  them,  why  decry  his  own  work,  and
take  away  the  credit  of  his  subordinates  and  liis  own
operations  ?

Jesus  Christ  in  the  Gospel  refutes  those  who  said
that  he  expelled  devils  in  the  name  of  Beelzebub;^  he
maintains  that  the  accusation  is  unfounded,  because  it
was  incredible  that  Satan  should  destroy  his  OAvn  work,
and  his  own  empire.  The  reasoning  is  doubtless  solid
and  conclusive,  above  all  to  the  Jews,  who  thought  that
Jesus  Christ  did  not  differ  from  other  exorcists  who
expelled  demons,  unless  it  was  that  he  commanded  the
prince  of  devils,  while  the  others  commanded  only  the
subaltern  demons.  Now,  on  this  supposition,  the  prince
of  the  demons  could  not  expel  his  subalterns  Avitbout
»  Matt.  xii.  24—27.     Luke  xi.  15—18.


REPLY   TO   DEJECTIONS.  175

destroying  his  own  empire,  without  decrying  himself,
and  without  ruining  the  reputation  of  those  who  only
acted  by  his  orders.

It  may  be  objected  to  this  argument,  that  Jesus
Christ  supposed,  as  did  the  Jews,  that  the  demons
whom  he  expelled  really  possessed  those  whom  he
cured,  in  whatever  manner  he  might  cure  them ;  and
consequently  that  the  empire  of  the  demons  subsisted,
both  in  Beelzebub  the  prince  of  the  demons,  and  in  the
other  demons,  who  were  subordinate  to  him,  and  who
obeyed  his  orders;  thus  his  empire  was  not  entirely
destroyed,  supposing  that  Jesus  Christ  expelled  them
in  the  name  of  Beelzebub ;  that  subordination,  on  the
contrary,  supposed  that  power  or  empire  of  the  prince
of  the  demons,  and  strengthened  it.

But  Jesus  Christ  not  only  expelled  demons  by  his
own  authority,  without  ever  making  mention  of  Beel-
zebub ;  he  expelled  them  in  spite  of  themselves,  and
sometimes  they  loudly  complained  that  he  was  come  to
torment  them  before  the  time.^  There  was  neither
collusion  between  him  and  them,  nor  subordination
similar  to  that  which  might  be  supposed  to  exist
between  Beelzebub  and  the  other  demons.

The  Lord  pursued  them,  not  only  in  expelling  them
from  bodies,  but  also  in  overthrowing  their  bad  maxims,
by  establishing  doctrines  and  maxims  quite  contrary  to
their  own ;  he  made  war  upon  every  vice,  error,  and
falsehood ;  he  attacked  the  demon  face  to  face,  every-
where, unflinchingly ;  thus  it  cannot  be  said  that  he
spared  him,  or  was  in  collusion  with  him.     If  the  devil

^  Matt.  viii.  29.


176  THE  PRAXTOM  WORLD.

will  sometimes  pass  off  as  chimeras  and  illusions  all
that  is  said  of  apparitions,  obsessions  and  possessions,
magic  and  sorcery ;  and  if  he  appears  so  absolutely  to
overthrow  his  reign,  even  so  far  as  to  deny  the  most
marked  and  palpable  effects  of  his  own  power  and
presence,  and  impute  them  to  the  weakness  of  mind  of
men,  and  their  foolish  prejudices;  in  all  this  he  can  only
gain  advantage  for  himself:  for  if  he  can  persuade
people  of  the  truth  of  what  he  advances,  his  power  will
only  be  more  solidly  confirmed  by  it,  since  it  will  no
longer  be  attacked,  and  he  will  be  left  to  enjoy  his  con-
quests in  peace,  and  the  ecclesiastical  and  secular  powers
interested  in  repressing  the  effects  of  his  malice  and
cruelty  will  no  longer  take  the  trouble  to  make  war
upon  him,  and  caution  or  put  the  nations  on  their
guard  against  his  stratagems  and  ambuscades.  It  will
close  the  mouth  of  Parliaments,  and  stay  the  hand  of
judges  and  powers;  and  the  simple  people  will  become
the  sport  of  the  demon,  who  will  not  cease  continuing  to
tempt,  persecute,  corrupt,  deceive  and  cause  the  perdi-
tion of  those  who  shall  no  longer  mistrust  his  snares  and
his  malice.  The  world  will  relapse  into  the  same  state
as  when  under  Paganism,  given  up  to  error,  to  the
most  shameful  passions,  and  will  even  deny  or  doubt
those  truths  which  shall  be  the  best  attested,  and  the
most  necessary  to  our  salvation.

Moses  in  the  Old  Testament  well  foresaw  that  the
evil  spirit  would  set  every  spring  to  work,  to  lead  the
Israelites  into  error  and  unruly  conduct;  he  foresaw
that  in  the  midst  of  the  chosen  people  he  would  insti-
gate seducers,  who  would  predict  to  them  the  hidden


REPLY  TO   OBJECTIONS.  177

future,  which  predictions  would  come  true  and  be
followed  up.  He  always  forbids  their  listening  to  any
prophet  or  diviners  who  wished  to  mislead  them  to
impiety  or  idolatry.

TertuUian,  speaking  of  the  delusions  performed  by
demons,  and  the  foresight  they  have  of  certain  events,
says,^  that  being  spiritual  in  their  nature,  they  find
themselves  in  a  moment  in  any  place  they  may  wish,
and  announce  at  a  distance  what  they  have  seen  and
heard.  All  this  is  attributed  to  the  Divinity,  because
neither  the  cause  nor  the  manner  is  known;  often,
also,  they  boast  of  causing  events,  which  they  do  but
announce ;  and  it  is  true  that  often  they  are  themselves
the  authors  of  the  evils  they  predict,  but  never  of  any
good.  Sometimes  they  make  use  of  the  knowledge
they  have  derived  from  the  predictions  of  the  prophets
respecting  the  designs  of  God,  and  they  utter  them  as
coming  from  themselves.  As  they  are  spread  abroad
in  the  air,  they  see  in  the  clouds  what  must  happen,
and  thus  foretel  the  rain  which  they  were  aware  of
before  it  had  been  felt  upon  earth.  As  to  maladies,  if
they  cure  them,  it  is  because  they  have  occasioned
them;  they  prescribe  remedies  which  produce  effect,
and  it  is  believed  that  they  have  cured  maladies  simply
because  they  have  not  continued  them.  Quia  desinunt
Icedere,  curasse  credentur.

The  demon  can  then  foresee  the  future  and  what  is
hidden,  and  discover  them  by  means  of  his  votaries ;
he   can   also   doubtlessly  do   wonderful   things  which

*  Tertullian  does  not  say  so  much  in  the  passage  cited;  on  the  contrary,
he  a.ffirms  that  we  are  ignorant  of  their  nature  :  substantia  ignoratur.

I  3


178  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

surpass  the  usual  and  known  powers  of  nature ;  but  it
is  never  done  except  to  deceive  us,  and  lead  us  into
disorder  and  impiety.  And  even  should  he  wear  the
semblance  of  leading  to  virtue  and  practising  those
things  which  are  praiseworthy  and  useful  to  salvation,
it  would  only  be  to  win  the  confidence  of  such  as
would  listen  to  his  suggestions,  to  make  them  afterward
fall  into  misfortune,  and  engage  them  in  some  sin  of
presumption  or  vanity :  for  as  he  is  a  spirit  of  malice
and  lies,  it  little  imports  to  him  by  what  means  he
surprises  us,  and  establishes  his  reign  among  us.

But  he  is  very  far  from  always  foreseeing  the  future,
or  succeeding  always  in  misleading  us ;  God  has  set
bounds  to  his  malice.  He  often  deceives  himself,  and
often  makes  use  of  disguise  and  perversion,  that  he  may
not  appear  to  be  ignorant  of  what  he  is  ignorant  of,  or
he  will  appear  unwilling  to  do  what  God  will  not  allow
him  to  do ;  his  power  is  always  bounded,  and  his  know-
ledge limited.  Often,  also,  he  will  mislead  and  deceive
through  malice,  because  he  is  the  father  of  falsehood.
He  deceives  men,  and  rejoices  when  he  sees  them  doing
wrong;  but  not  to  lose  his  credit  amongst  those  who
consult  him  directly  or  indirectly,  he  lays  the  fault  on
those  who  undertake  to  interpret  his  words,  or  the
equivocal  signs  which  he  has  given.  For  instance,  if
he  is  consulted  whether  to  begin  an  enterprise,  or  give
battle,  or  set  off  on  a  journey,  if  the  thing  succeeds,
he  takes  all  the  glory  and  merit  to  himself;  if  it  does
not  succeed,  he  imputes  it  to  the  men  who  have  not
well  understood  the  sense  of  his  oracle,  or  to  the
aruspices,  who  have  made  mistakes  in  consulting  the


REPLY   TO   OBJECTIONS.  179

entrails  of  the   immolated   animals,    or    the  flight    of
birds,  &c.

We  must  not,  then,  be  surprised  to  find  so  many-
contradictions,  doubts,  and  difficulties,  in  the  matter  of
apparitions,  angels,  demons  and  spirits.  Man  naturally
loves  to  distinguish  himself  from  the  common  herd,  and
rise  above  the  opinions  of  the  people ;  it  is  a  sort  of
fashion  not  to  suffer  one's  self  to  be  drawn  along  by  the
torrent,  and  to  desire  to  sound  and  examine  every-
thing. We  know  that  there  is  an  infinity  of  prejudices,
errors,  vulgar  opinions,  false  miracles,  illusions  and
seductions  in  the  world ;  we  know  that  many  things
are  attributed  to  the  devil  which  are  purely  natural,  or
that  a  thousand  apocryphal  stories  are  related.  It  is
then  right  to  hold  one's  self  on  one's  guard,  in  order
not  to  be  deceived.  It  is  very  important  for  religion  to
distinguish  between  true  and  false  mii'acles,  certain  or
uncertain  events,  and  works  wrought  by  the  hand  of
God,  from  those  which  are  the  work  of  the  seducing
spirit.

In  all  that  he  does,  the  demon  mixes  up  a  great
many  illusions  amid  some  truths,  in  order  that  the
difficulty  of  discerning  the  true  from  the  false  may
make  mankind  take  the  side  which  pleases  them  most,
and  that  the  incredulous  may  always  have  some  points
to  maintain  them  in  their  incredulity.  Although  the
apparitions  of  spirits,  angels,  and  demons,  and  their
operations,  may  not,  perhaps,  always  be  miraculous,
nevertheless,  as  the  greater  part  appear  above  the  com-
mon course  of  nature,  many  of  the  persons  of  whom
we  have  just  spoken,  without  giving  themselves  the


180  THE  PHANTOM  WOELD.

trouble  to  examine  the  things,  and  seek  for  the  causes
of  them,  the  authors,  and  the  circumstances,  boldly
take  upon  themselves  to  deny  them  all.  It  is  the
shortest  way,  but  neither  the  most  sensible,  nor  the
most  rational ;  for  in  what  is  said  on  this  subject,  there
are  effects  which  can  be  reasonably  attributed  to  the
Almighty  power  of  God  alone,  who  acts  immediately,
or  makes  secondary  causes  act  to  his  glory,  for  the
advancement  of  religion,  and  the  manifestation  of  the
truth ;  and  other  effects  there  are,  which  bear  visibly
the  character  of  illusion,  impiety,  and  seduction,  and  in
which  it  would  seem  that  instead  of  the  finger  of  God,
we  can  observe  only  the  marks  of  the  spirit  of  deceit
and  falsehood.


CHAPTER  XXVIII.

CONTINUATION    OF    OBJECTIONS    AGAINST    POSSESSIONS,    AND    SOME    REPLIES    TO

THOSE   OBJECTIONS.

We  read  in  works,  published  and  printed,  composed
by  Catholic  authors  of  our  days,^  that  it  is  proved  by
reason,  that  possessions  of  the  demon  are  naturally
impossible,  and  that  it  is  not  true  in  regard  to  ourselves
and  our  ideas,  that  the  demon  can  have  any  natural
power  over  the  corporeal  world;  that  as  soon  as  we
admit  in  the  created  wills  a  power  to  act  upon  bodies,
and  to  move  them,  it  is  impossible  to  set  bounds  to  it,
and  that  this  power  is  truly  infinite.

They  maintain  that  the  demon  can  act  upon  our
souls  simply  by  means  of  suggestion ;  that  it  is  impos-
sible the  demon  should  be  the  physical  cause  of  the
least  external  effect ;  that  all  the  Scripture  tells  us  of
the  snares  and  stratagems  of  Satan  signifies  nothing
more  than  the  temptations  of  the  flesh  and  concupiscence;
and  that  to  seduce  us,  the  demon  requires  only  mental
suggestions.  His  is  a  moral,  not  a  physical  power ;  in
a  word,  that  the  demon  can  do  neither  good  nor  harm ;  that
his  might  is  nought ;  that  we  do  not  know  if  God  has

*  See  the  letter  of  the  Bishop  of  Senez,  printed  at  Utrecht,  in  1736,
and  the  works  that  he  therein  cites  and  refutes.


182  THE  PHANTOM   WOELD.

given  to  any  other  spirit  than  the  soul  of  man  the
power  to  move  the  body;  that  on  the  contrary,  we
ought  to  presume  that  the  wisdom  of  God  has  willed
that  pure  spirits  should  have  no  commerce  with  the
body ;  they  maintain  moreover  that  the  pagans  never
knew  what  we  call  bad  angels  and  demons.

All  these  propositions  are  certainly  contrary  to  Scrip-
ture, to  the  opinions  of  the  Fathers,  and  to  the  tradition
of  the  Catholic  Church.  But  these  gentlemen  do  not
trouble  themselves  about  that ;  they  affirm  that  the
sacred  writers  have  often  expressed  themselves  accord-
ing to  the  opinions  of  their  time,  whether  because  the
necessity  of  making  themselves  understood  forced  them
to  conform  to  it,  or  that  they  themselves  had  adopted
those  opinions.  There  is,  says  they,  more  likelihood
that  several  infirmities  which  the  Scripture  has  ascribed
to  the  demon  had  simply  a  natural  cause ;  that  in  these
places  the  sacred  authors  have  spoken  according  to
vulgar  opinions ;  the  error  of  this  language  is  of  no
importance.

The  prophets  of  Saul,  and  Saul  himself,  were  never
what  are  properly  termed  Prophets ;  they  might  be
attacked  with  those  (fits)  which  the  pagans  call  sacred.
You  must  be  asleep  when  you  read,  not  to  see  that  the
temptation  of  Eve  is  only  an  allegory.  It  is  the  same
with  the  permission  given  by  God  to  Satan  to  tempt
Job.  Why  wish  to  explain  the  w^hole  book  of  Job
literally,  and  as  a  true  history,  since  its  beginning  is
only  a  fiction  ?  It  is  anything  but  certain  that  Jesus
Christ  w^as  transported  by  the  demon  to  the  highest
pinnacle  of  the  temple.


EEPLY  TO   OBJECTIONS.  183

The  Fathers  were  prepossessed  on  one  side  by  the
reigning  Ideas  of  the  philosophy  of  Pythagoras  and
Plato  on  the  influences  of  mean  Intelligences,  and  on
the  other  hand  by  the  language  of  the  holy  books,
which  to  conform  to  popular  opinions  often  ascribed
to  the  demon  effects  which  were  purely  natural.  We
must  then  return  to  the  doctrine  of  reason  to  decide  on
the  submission  which  we  ought  to  pay  to  the  authority
of  the  Scriptures  and  the  Fathers  concerning  the  power
of  the  demons.

The  uniform  method  of  the  Holy  Fathers  in  the
interpretations  of  the  Old  Testament  is  human  opinion,
whence  one  can  appeal  to  the  tribunal  of  reason.  They
go  so  far  as  to  say  that  the  sacred  authors  were  informed
of  the  Metempsychosis,  as  the  author  of  the  Book  of
Wisdom,  chap.  viii.  19,  20 :  "I  was  an  innocent  child,
and  I  received  a  good  spirit ;  and  as  I  was  already
good,  I  entered  into  an  uncorrupted  body."

Persons  of  this  temper  will  certainly  not  read  this
work  of  ours,  or,  if  they  do  read  it,  it  will  be  with
contempt  or  pity.  I  do  not  think  it  necessary  to  refute
those  paradoxes  here ;  the  Bishop  of  Senez  has  done  it
with  his  usual  erudition  and  zeal,  in  a  long  letter
l^rinted  at  Utrecht  in  1736.  I  do  not  deny  that  the
sacred  writers  may  sometimes  have  spoken  in  a  popular
manner,  and  in  accordance  with  the  prejudice  of  the
people.  But  it  is  carrying  things  too  far  to  reduce  the
power  of  the  demon  to  being  able  to  act  upon  us  only
by  means  of  suggestion ;  and  it  is  a  presumption
unworthy  of  a  philosopher,  to  decide  on  the  power  of
spirits   over   bodies,   having  no  knowledge,  either  by


184  THE  PHANTOM   WORLD.

revelation  or  by  reason,  of  the  extent  of  the  power  of
angels  and  demons  over  matter,  and  human  bodies.
We  may  exceed  due  measure  by  granting  them  exces-
sive power,  as  well  as  in  not  according  them  enough.
But  it  is  of  infinite  importance  to  Religion  to  discern
justly  between  what  is  natural,  or  supernatural,  in  the
operations  of  angels  and  demons,  that  the  simple  may  not
be  left  in  error,  nor  the  wicked  triumph  over  the  truth,
and  make  a  bad  use  of  their  own  wit  and  knowledge,  to
render  doubtful  what  is  certain,  and  deceiving  both
themselves  and  others  by  ascribing  to  chance  or  illusion
of  the  senses,  or  a  vain  prepossession  of  the  mind,  what
is  said  of  the  apparitions  of  angels,  demons,  and  deceased
persons  ;  since  it  is  certain  that  several  of  these  appari-
tions are  quite  true,  although  there  may  be  a  great
number  of  others  that  are  very  uncertain,  and  even
manifestly  false.

I  shall  therefore  make  no  diflSculty  in  owning  that
even  miracles,  at  least  things  that  appear  such,  the
prediction  of  future  events,  movements  of  the  body
which  appear  beyond  the  usual  powers  of  nature,  to
speak  and  understand  '  foreign  languages  unknown
before,  to  penetrate  the  thoughts,  discover  concealed
things,  to  be  raised  up,  and  transported  in  a  moment
from  one  place  to  another,  to  announce  truths,  lead
a  good  life  externally,  preach  Jesus  Christ,  decry
magic  and  sorcery,  make  an  outward  profession  of
virtue ;  I  readily  own  that  all  these  things  may  not
prove  invincibly  that  all  who  perform  them  are  sent  by
God,  or  that  these  operations  are  real  miracles  ;  yet  we
cannot  reasonably  suppose  the  demon  to  be  mixed  up


KEPLY   TO   OBJECTIONS.  185

in  them  by  God's  permission,  or  that  the  demons  or  the
angels  do  not  act  upon  those  persons  who  perform  pro-
dio-les,  and  foretel  things  to  come,  or  who  can  penetrate
the  thoughts  of  the  heart,  or  that  God  himself  does
not  produce  these  effects  by  the  immediate  action  of
his  justice  or  his  might.

The  examples  which  have  been  cited,  or  which  may
be  cited  hereafter,  will  never  prove  that  man  can  of
himself  penetrate  the  sentiments  of  another,  or  discover
his  secret  thoughts.  The  wonders  worked  by  the
magicians  of  Pharaoh  were  only  illusion;  they  appeared,
however,  to  be  true  miracles,  and  passed  for  such  in  the
eyes  of  the  King  of  Egypt  and  all  his  court.  Balaam,
the  son  of  Beor,  was  a  true  Prophet,  although  a  man
whose  morals  were  very  corrupt.

Pomponatlus  writes,  that  the  wife  of  Francis  Maigret,
savetler  of  Mantua,  spoke  divers  languages,  and  was
cured  by  Calderon,  a  physician,  famous  in  his  time,  who
gave  her  a  potion  of  Hellebore.  Erasmus  says  also^
that  he  had  seen  an  Italian,  a  native  of  Spoletta,  who
spoke  German  very  well,  although  he  had  never  been  in
Germany ;  they  gave  him  a  medicine  which  caused  him
to  eject  a  quantity  of  worms,  and  he  was  cured  so  as
not  to  speak  German  any  more.

Le  Loyer,  in  his  Book  of  Spectres^  avows  that  all
those  things  appear  to  him  much  to  be  doubted.  He
rather  believes  Fernel,  one  of  the  gravest  physicians  of
his  age,  who  maintains  '^  that  there  is  not  such  power

^  Erasm.  Orat.  de  Laudibus  Medicinse.
«=  Le  Loyer,  lib.  de  Spec.  cap.  ii.  p.  288.
^  Fernel,  de  abditis  Rerum  Causis,  lib.  ii.  c.  26.


186  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

in  medicine,  and  brings  forward  as  an  instance  the
history  of  a  young  gentleman,  the  son  of  a  Knight  of
the  Order,  who  being  seized  upon  by  the  demon,  could
be  cured  neither  by  potions,  by  medicines,  or  by  diet,
{i.e,  fasting,)  but  who  was  cured  by  the  conjurations
and  exorcisms  of  the  Church.

As  to  the  reality  of  the  return  of  souls,  or  spirits,
and  their  apparitions,  the  Sorbonne,  the  most  celebrated
school  of  theology  in  France,  has  always  believed  that
the  spirits  of  the  defunct  returned  sometimes,  either  by
the  order  and  power  of  God,  or  by  his  permission.  The
Sorbonne  confessed  this  in  its  decisions  of  the  year
1518,  and  still  more  positively  the  23d  of  January,
1724.  Nos  respondemiis  testrce  petitioni  animas  defunc-^
torum  divinitus,  seu  dimnd  'cirtute,  ordinatione  aut  per-
missione  interdum  ad  vivas  redire  exploratum  esse.  Several
jurisconsults  and  several  sovereign  companies  have
decreed  that  the  apparition  of  a  deceased  person  in  a
house  could  suffice  to  break  up  the  lease.  TTe  may
count  it  for  much,  to  have  proved  to  certain  persons
that  there  is  a  God  whose  providence  extends  over  all
things  past,  present,  and  to  come ;  that  there  is  another
life,  that  there  are  good  and  bad  spirits,  rewards  for
good  works,  and  punishments  after  this  life  for  sins ;
that  Jesus  Christ  has  ruined  the  power  of  Satan ;  that
he  exercise'd  in  himself,  in  his  Apostles,  and  continues
to  exercise  in  the  ministers  of  his  Church,  an  absolute
empire  over  the  infernal  powers  ;  that  the  devil  is  now
chained ;  he  may  bark  and  threaten,  but  he  can  bite
only  those  who  approach  him,  and  voluntarily  give
themselves  up  to  him.


KEPLY   TO   OBJECTIONS.  187

We  have  seen  in  these  parts  a  woman  who  followed
a  band  of  mountebanks  and  jugglers,  who  stretched  out
her  legs  in  such  an  extraordinary  manner,  and  raised
up  her  feet  to  her  head,  before  and  behind,  with  as
much  suppleness  as  if  she  had  had  neither  nerves  nor
joints.  There  was  nothing  supernatural  in  all  that ;
she  had  exercised  herself  from  extreme  youth  in  these
movements,  and  had  contracted  the  habit  of  performing
them.

St.  Augustine^  speaks  of  a  soothsayer  whom  he  had
known  at  Carthage,  an  illiterate  man,  who  could  dis-
cover the  secrets  of  the  heart,  and  replied  to  those  who
consulted  him  on  secret  and  unknown  affairs.  He  had
himself  made  an  experiment  on  him,  and  took  to  witness
St.  Alypius,  Licentius,  and  Trygnius,  his  interlocutors
in  his  Dialogue  against  the  Academicians.  They,  like
him,  had  consulted  Albicerius,  and  had  admired  the
certainty  of  his  replies.  He  gives  as  an  instance,  a
spoon  which  had  been  lost.  They  told  him  that  some
one  had  lost  something;  and  he  instantly,  without
hesitation,  replied  that  such  a  thing  was  lost,  that  such
a  one  had  taken  it,  and  had  hid  it  in  such  a  place,  which
was  found  to  be  quite  true.

They  sent  him  a  certain  quantity  of  pieces  of  silver  ;
he  who  was  charged  to  carry  them  had  taken  away
some  of  them.  He  made  the  person  return  them,  and
perceived  the  theft  before  the  money  had  been  shown
to  him.  St.  Augustine  was  present.  A  learned  and
distinguished  man,  named  Flaccianus,  wishing  to  buy
a  field,  consulted  the  soothsayer,  who  declared  to  him
«  August,  contra  Academic,  lib.  ii.  art,  17,  18.


188  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

the  name  of  the  land,  which  was  very  extraordinary,
and  gave  him  all  the  details  of  the  affair  in  question.
A  young  student,  wishing  to  prove  Albicerius,  begged
of  him  to  declare  to  him  what  he  was  thinking  of;  he
told  him  he  was  thinking  of  a  verse  of  Virgil,  and,  as
he  then  asked  him  which  verse  it  was,  the  diviner
repeated  it  instantly,  though  he  had  never  studied  the
Latin  lano^uaoce.

This  Albicerius  was  a  scoundrel,  as  St.  Augustine
says,  who  calls  him  flagitiosum  hominem.  The  know-
ledge which  he  had  of  hidden  things  was  not,  doubtless,
a  gift  of  heaven,  any  more  than  the  Pythonic  spirit
which  animated  that  maid  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles
whom  St.  Paul  obliged  to  keep  silence.^  It  was  then
the  work  of  the  evil  spirit.

The  gift  of  tongues,  the  knowledge  of  the  future,
and  power  to  divine  the  thoughts  of  others,  are  always
adduced,  and  with  reason,  as  solid  proofs  of  the  presence
and  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Spirit;  but  if  the  demon  can
sometimes  perform  the  same  things,  he  does  it  to  mislead
and  induce  sin,  or  simply  to  render  true  prophecies
doubtful :  but  never  to  lead  to  truth,  the  fear  and  love
of  God,  and  the  edification  of  those  around.  God
may  allow  such  corrupt  men  as  Balaam,  and  such
rascals  as  Albicerius,  to  have  some  knowledge  of  the
future,  and  secret  things,  and  even  of  the  hidden
thoughts  of  men;  but  he  never  permits  their  crimi-
nality to  remain  unrevealed  to  the  end,  and  so  become
a  stumbling-block  for  simple  or  worthy  people.  The
malice  of  these  hypocritical  and  corrupt  men  will  be

^  Actsxvi.  16.


KEPLY   TO   OBJECTIONS.  189

made  manifest  sooner  or  later  by  some  means;  their
malice  and  depravity  will  be  found  out,  by  which  it
will  be  judged,  either  that  they  are  inspired  only  by
the  evil  spirit,  or  that  the  Holy  Spirit  makes  use  of
their  agency  to  foretel  some  truth,  as  he  prophesied  by
Balaam,  and  by  Caiphas.  Their  morals  and  their  con-
duct -will  throw  discredit  on  them,  and  oblige  us  to  be
careful  in  discerning  between  their  true  predictions
and  their  bad  example.  We  have  seen  hypocrites  wha
died  with  the  reputation  of  being  worthy  people,  and
who  at  bottom  were  scoundrels,  as,  for  instance,  that
cure,  the  director  of  the  nuns  of  Louviers,  whose  pos-
session w^as  so  much  talked  of.

Jesus  Christ  in  the  Gospel  tells  us  to  be  on  our
guard  against  wolves  in  sheep's  clothing ;  and,  else-
where, he  tells  us  that  there  will  be  false  Christs  and
false  prophets,  who  will  prophesy  in  his  name,  and
perform  wonders  capable  of  deceiving  th  every  elect
themselves,  were  it  possible.  But  he  refers  us  to  their
works  to  distinguish  them.

To  apply  all  these  things  to  the  possessed  nuns  of
Loudun,   and  to  Mademoiselle  de  Kanfaing,   even  to
that  girl  whose  hypocrisy  was  unmasked  by  Mademoi-
selle Acarie,  I  appeal  to  their  works,  and  their  conduct
both  before  and  after.

God  will  not  allow  those  w^ho  sincerely  seek  the
truth  to  be  deceived.

A  juggler  will  guess  which  card  you  have  touched,
or  even  simply  thought  of;  but  it  is  known  that  there
is  nothing  supernatural  in  that,  and  that  it  is  done  by


190  THE   PHA^'TOM  WOKLD.

the  combination  of  the  cards  accordins;  to  mathematical
rules.  We  have  seen  a  deaf  man  who  understood  what
they  wished  to  say  to  him  by  simply  observing  the
motion  of  the  lips  of  those  who  spoke.  There  is
nothing  more  miraculous  in  this  than  in  two  persons
conversing  together  by  signs  upon  which  they  have
agreed.


CHAPTER  XXIX,


OF   FAMILIAR   SPIRITS.


If  aU  that  is  related  of  spirits  whicli  are  per-
ceived in  houses,  in  the  cavities  of  mountains^  and  in
mines,  is  certain,  we  cannot  disavow  that  they  also
must  be  placed  in  the  rank  of  apparitions  of  the  evil
spirit ;  for  although  they  usually  do  neither  wrong  nor
violence  to  any  one,  unless  they  are  irritated  or  receive
abusive  words ;  nevertheless  we  do  not  read  that  they
lead  to  the  love  or  fear  of  God,  to  prayer,  piety,  or  acts
of  devotion ;  it  is  known,  on  the  contrary,  that  they
show  a  distaste  to  those  things,  so  that  we  shall  place
them  in  earnest  among  the  spirits  of  darkness.

I  do  not  find  that  the  ancient  Hebrews  knew  any-
thing of  what  we  call  esprits  follets,  or  familiar  spirits,
which  infest  houses,  or  attach  themselves  to  certain
persons,  to  serve  them,  watch  over  and  warn  them,  and
guard  them  from  danger;  such  as  the  demon  of
Socrates,  who  warned  him  to  avoid  certain  misfor-
tunes.  Some  other  examples  are  also  related  of
persons  who  said  they  had  similar  Genii  attached  to
their  persons.

The  Jews  and  Christians  confess  that  every  one  of
us  has  his  good  angel,  who  guides  him  from  his  early


192  THE  PHANTOM   WOKLD.

youth.^  Several  of  the  ancients  have  thought  that  we
have  also  our  evil  angel,  who  leads  us  into  error.  The
Psalmist^'  says  distinctly,  that  God  has  commanded  his
angels  to  guide  us  in  all  our  ways.  But  this  is  not
what  we  understand  here  under  the  name  of  esprits
follets.

The  prophets  in  some  places  speak  of  fauns,  or
hairif  men,  or  satyrs,  who  have  some  resemblance  to
our  elves.

Isaiah,^  speaking  of  the  state  to  which  Babylon  shall
be  reduced  after  her  destruction,  says  that  the  ostriches
shall  make  it  their  dwelling,  and  that  the  hairy  men,
jnlosi,  the  satyrs,  and  goats,  shall  dance  there.  And
elsewhere  the  same  prophet  says,'^  Occurrent  dcemonia
onocentauris  etpilosus  clamabit  alter  ad  alterum,  by  which
clever  interpreters  understand  spectres  which  appear  in
the  shape  of  goats.  Jeremiah  calls  them  fauns — the
dragons  with  the  fauns,  which  feed  upon  figs.  But
this  is  not  the  place  for  us  to  go  more  fully  into  the
signification  of  the  terms  of  the  original ;  it  suflSces  for
us  to  show,  that  in  the  Scripture,  at  least  in  the  Vul-
gate, are  found  the  names  of  lamice,  fauns,  and  satyrs,
which  have  some  resemblance  to  esprits  follets.

Cassian,^  who  had  studied  deeply  the  lives  of  the
fathers  of  the  desert,  and  who  had  been  much  with
the  hermits  or  anchorites  of  Egypt,  speaking  of  divers
sorts  of  demons,  mentions  some  which  they  commonly
called /a  WW5  or  satyrs,  which  the  pagans  regard  as  kinds

*  Matt,  xviii.  10.  *  Psalm  xc.  11.

^  Isai.  xiii.  22.  Pilosi  saltabunt  ibi.  ''  Isai.  xxxiv.  15.

«  Cassian,  Collat.  vii.  c.  23.


ANECDOTES  OF  SPIRITS.  193

of  divinities  of  the  fields  or  groves,  who  delighted,  not
so  much  in  tormenting  or  doing  harm  to  mankind,  as  in
deceiving  and  fatiguing  them,  diverting  themselves  at
their  expense,  and  sporting  with  their  simplicity/

Pliny  s  the  younger  had  a  freed-man  named  Marcus,
a  man  of  letters,  who  slept  in  the  same  bed  with  his
brother,  who  was  younger  than  himself.  It  seemed  to
him  that  he  saw  a  person  sitting  on  the  same  bed,  who
was  cutting  ofi"  his  hair  from  the  crown  of  his  head.
When  he  awoke,  he  found  his  head  shorn  of  hair,  and
his  hair  thrown  on  the  ground  in  the  middle  of  the
chamber.  A  little  time  after,  the  same  thing  happened
to  a  youth  who  slept  with  several  others  at  a  school.
This  one  saw  two  men  dressed  in  white  come  in  at  the
window,  who  cut  off  his  hair  as  he  slept,  and  then  went
out  by  the  same  window:  on  awaking,  he  found  his
hair  scattered  about  on  the  floor.  To  what  can  these
things  be  attributed,  if  not  to  an  elf  ?

Plotinus,^  a  Platonic  philosopher,  had,  it  is  said,  a
familiar  demon,  who  obeyed  him  from  the  moment  he
called  him,  and  was  superior  in  his  nature  to  the  com-
mon genii ;  he  was  of  the  order  of  gods,  and  Plotinus
paid  continual  attention  to  this  divine  guardian.  This
it  was  which  led  him  to  undertake  a  work  on  the
demon  which  belongs  to  each  of  us  in  particular.  He
endeavours  to  explain  the  difference  between  the  genii
which  watch  over  men.

^  "Quos  seductores  et  joculatores  esse  manifestum  est,  ciim  nequa-
quam  tor  mentis  eorum,  quos  prtetereuntes  potuerint  decipere,  oblec-
tentur,  sed  de  risu  tantum  modd  et  illusione  contenti,  fatigare  potiiis,
studeant,  qu£lm  nocere."

^  Plin.  i.  7.  Epist.  27,  suiv.  •>  Life  of  Plotin.  art.  x.

VOL.  I.  K


194  THE  PHANTOM  WOULD.

Trlthemlus,  in  his  Chronicon  Hirsaugijise/  under  the
year  1130,  relates,  that  in  the  diocese  of  Hildesheim,  in
Saxony,  they  saw  for  some  time  a  spirit  which  they
called  in  German  heideki7id,  as  if  they  would  say,  rural
geniusy  heide  signifying  vast  country,  hind,  child  (or  boy).
He  appeared  sometimes  in  one  form,  sometimes  in
another;  and  sometimes  without  appearing  at  all,  he
did  several  things  by  which  he  proved  both  his  presence
and  his  power.  He  chose  sometimes  to  give  very  im-
portant advice  to  those  in  power;  and  often  he  has
been  seen  in  the  Bishop's  kitchen,  helping  the  cooks
and  doing  sundry  jobs.

A  young  scullion,  who  had  grown  familiar  with  him,
having  offered  him  some  insults,  he  warned  the  head
cook  of  it,  who  made  light  of  it,  or  thought  nothing
about  it ;  but  the  spirit  avenged  himself  cruelly.  This
youth  having  fallen  asleep  in  the  kitchen,  the  spirit
stifled  him,  tore  him  to  pieces,  and  roasted  him.  He
carried  his  fury  still  further  against  the  officers  of  the
kitchen,  and  the  other  officers  of  the  prince.  The
thing  went  on  to  such  a  point,  that  they  were  obliged
to  proceed  against  him  by  (ecclesiastical)  censures,
and  to  constrain  him  by  exorcisms  to  go  out  of  the
country.

I  think  I  may  put  amongst  the  number  of  elves  the
spirits  which  are  seen,  they  say,  in  mines  and  moun-
tain caves.  They  appear  clad  like  the  miners,  run  here
and  there,  appear  in  haste  as  if  to  work  and  seek  the
veins  of  mineral  ore,  lay  it  in  heaps,  draw  it  out,  tum-

*  Chron.  Hirsang.  ad  ann.  1130.


ANECDOTES   OF   SPIRITS.  195

ing  the  wheel  of  the  crane ;  they  seem  to  be  very  busy
helping  the  workmen,  and  at  the  same  time  they  do
nothing  at  all.

These  spirits  are  not  mischievous,  unless  they  are
insulted  and  laughed  at ;  for  then  they  fall  into  an  ill
humour,  and  throw  things  at  those  who  offend  them.
One  of  these  genii,  who  had  been  addressed  in  injurious
terms  by  a  miner,  twisted  his  neck,  and  placed  his
head  the  hind  part  before.  The  miner  did  not  die,
but  remained  all  his  life  with  his  neck  twisted  and
awry.  •

George  Agricola,^  who  has  treated  very  learnedly  on
mines,  metals,  and  the,  manner  of  extracting  them  from
the  bowels  of  the  earth,  mentions  two  or  three  sorts  of
spirits  which  appear  in  mines.  Some  are  very  small,
and  resemble  dwarfs  or  pygmies  ;  the  others  are  like  old
men  dressed  like  miners,  having  their  shirts  tucked  up,
and  a  leathern  apron  round  their  loins ;  others  perform,
or  seem  to  perform,  what  they  see  others  do,  are  very
gay,  do  no  harm  to  any  one,  but  from  all  their  labours
nothing  real  results.

In  other  mines  are  seen  dangerous  spirits,  who  ill-
use  the  workmen,  hunt  them  away,  and  sometimes  kill
them,  and  thus  constrain  them  to  forsake  mines  which
are  very  rich  and  abundant.  For  instance,  at  Anne-
berg,  in  a  mine  called  Crown  of  Rose,  a  spirit  in  the
shape  of  a  spirited,  snorting  horse,  killed  twelve  miners,
and  obliged  those  who  worked  the  mine  to  abandon  the
undertaking,  though  it  brought  them  in  a  great  deal.

^  Geo.  Agricola,  de  Minei-al.  Subterran.  p.  504.
K  2


196  THE  PHAJs^TOM  WOELD.

In  another  mine,  called  St.  Gregory,  in  Siveberg,  there
appeared  a  spirit  whose  head  was  covered  with  a  black
hood,  and  he  seized  a  miner,  raised  him  up  to  a  con-
siderable height,  then  let  him  fall,  and  hurt  him
extremely.

Olaus  Magnus^  says,  that  in  Sweden  and  other
northern  countries,  they  saw  formerly  familiar  spirits,
which,  under  the  form  of  men  or  women,  waited  on
certain  persons.  He  speaks  of  certain  nymphs  dwelling
in  caverns  and  in  the  depths  of  the  forest,  who  announce
things  to  come ;  some  are  good,  others  bad ;  they  appear
and  speak  to  those  who  consult  them.  Travellers  and
shepherds  also  often  see  during  the  night  divers
phantoms  which  bum  the  spot  where  they  appear,
so  that  henceforward  neither  grass  nor  verdure  are
seen  there.

He  says,  that  the  people  of  Finland,  before  their  con-
version to  Christianity,  sold  the  winds  to  sailors,  giving
them  a  string  with  three  knots,  and  warning  them  that
by  untying  the  first  knot  they  would  have  a  gentle  and
favourable  wind,  at  the  second  knot  a  stronger  wind,
and  at  the  third  knot  a  violent  and  dangerous  gale.  He
says  moreover,  that  the  Bothnians,  striking  on  an  anvil
hard  blows  with  a  hammer,  upon  a  frog  or  a  serpent  of
brass,  fall  down  in  a  swoon,  and  during  this  swoon  they
learn  what  passes  in  very  distant  places.

But  all  those  things  have  more  relation  to  magic  than
to  familiar  spirits ;  and  if  what  is  said  about  them  be
true,  it  must  be  ascribed  to  the  evil  spirit.

1  Olaus  Mag.  lib.  iii.  Hist.  5,  9—14.


ANECDOTES  OF   SPIRITS.  197

The  same  Olaus  Magnus  °^  says,  that  in  mines,  above
all  in  silver  mines,  from  which  great  profit  may  be
expected,  six  sorts  of  demons  may  be  seen,  who  under
divers  forms  labour  at  breaking  the  rocks,  drawing  the
buckets,  and  turning  the  wheels  ;  who  sometimes  burst
into  laughter,  and  play  different  tricks ;  all  of  which  are
merely  to  deceive  the  miners,  whom  they  crush  under
the  rocks,  or  expose  to  the  most  imminent  dangers,  to
make  them  utter  blasphemy,  and  swear  and  curse.
Several  very  rich  mines  have  been  obliged  to  be  disused
through  fear  of  these  dangerous  spirits.

Notwithstanding  all  that  we  have  just  related,  I  doubt
very  much  if  there  are  any  spirits  in  mountain  caves  or
in  mines.  I  have  interrogated  on  the  subject  people  of
the  trade  and  miners  by  profession,  of  whom  there  is
a  great  number  in  our  mountains,  the  Yosges,  who  have
assured  me,  that  all  which  is  related  on  that  point  is
fabulous ;  that  if  sometimes  they  see  these  elves  or
grotesque  figures,  it  must  be  attributed  to  a  heated  and
prepossessed  imagination ;  or  else  that  the  circumstance
is  so  rare,  that  it  ought  not  to  be  repeated  as  something
usual  or  common.

A  new  "  Traveller  in  the  Northern  Countries,"
printed  at  Amsterdam  in  17(38,  says,  that  the  people  of
Iceland  are  almost  all  conjurors  or  sorcerers ;  that  they
have  familiar  demons,  whom  they  call  troles,  who  wait
upon  them  as  servants,  and  warn  them  of  the  accidents
or  illnesses  which  are  to  happen  to  them ;  they  awake
them  to  go  a-fishing  when  the  season  is  favourable,  and

«"  Olaus  Mag.  lib.  vi.  c.  9.


198  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

if  they  go  for  that  purpose  without  the  advice  of  these
genii,  they  do  not  succeed.  There  are  some  persons
among  these  people  who  evoke  the  dead,  and  make
them  appear  to  those  who  wish  to  consult  them :  they
also  conjure  up  the  appearance  of  the  absent  far  from
the  spot  where  they  dwell.

Father  Vadingue  relates,  after  an  old  manuscript
legend,  that  a  lady  named  Lupa,  had  had  during
thirteen  years  a  familiar  demon,  who  served  her  as  a
waiting-woman,  and  led  her  into  many  secret  irregu-
larities, and  induced  her  to  treat  her  servants  with
inhumanity.  God  gave  her  grace  to  see  her  fault,  and
to  do  penance  for  it,  by  the  intercession  of  St.  Francois
d' Assise  and  St.  Anthony  of  Padua,  to  whom  she  had
always  felt  particular  devotion.

Cardan  speaks  of  a  bearded  demon  of  Niphus,  who
gave  him  lessons  of  philosophy.

Agrippa  had  a  demon  who  waited  upon  him  in  the
shape  of  a  dog.  This  dog,  says  Paulus  Jovius,  seeing
his  master  about  to  expire,  threw  himself  into  the
E-hone.

Much  is  said  of  certain  spirits^  which  are  kept
confined  in  rings,  that  are  bought,  sold  or  exchanged.
They  speak  also  of  a  crystal  ring,  in  which  the  demon
represented  the  objects  desired  to  be  seen.

Some  also  speak  highly  of  those  enchanted  mirrors,"
in  which  children  see  the  face  of  a  robber  who  is  sought
for ;  others  will  see  it  in  their  nails ;  all  which  can  only
be  diabolical  illusions.

"  Le  Loyer,  p.  474.  <>  Ibid.  liv.  ii,  p.  258.


ANECDOTES   OE   SPIRITS.  199

Le  Loyer  relates,?  that  when  he  was  studying  the
law  at  Thoulouse,  he  was  lodged  near  a  house  where
an  elf  never  ceased  all  the  night  to  draw  water  from
the  well,  making  the  pulley  creak  all  the  while;  at
other  times  he  seemed  to  drag  something  heavy  up  the
stairs ;  but  he  very  rarely  entered  the  rooms,  and  then
he  made  but  little  noise.

p  Le  Loyer,  p.  550.


CHAPTER  XXX.


SOME  OTHER  EXAMPLES   OF   ELVES.


On  the  25th  of  August,  1746,  I  received  a  letter
from  a  very  worthy  man,  the  cure  of  the  parish  of
Walsche,  a  village  situated  in  the  mountains  of  Voges,
in  the  county  of  Dabo,  or  Dasburg,  in  Lower  Alsatia,
diocese  of  Metz.  In  this  letter  he  tells  me,  that  the
10th  of  June,  1740,  at  eight  o'clock  in  the  morning,
he  being  in  his  kitchen,  with  his  niece  and  the  servant,
he  saw  on  a  sudden  an  iron  pot  that  was  placed  on  the
ground  turn  round  three  or  four  times,  without  its
being  set  in  motion  by  any  one.  A  moment  after,  a
stone,  weighing  about  a  pound,  was  thrown  from  the
next  room  into  the  same  kitchen,  in  presence  of  the
same  persons,  without  their  seeing  the  hand  which
threw  it.  The  next  day,  at  nine  o'clock  in  the  morn-
ing, some  panes  of  glass  were  broken,  and  through
these  panes  were  thrown  some  stones,  with  what
appeared  to  them  supernatural  dexterity.  The  spirit
never  hurt  any  body,  and  never  did  any  thing  in  the
night  time,  but  always  during  the  day.  The  cure
employed  the  prayers  marked  out  in  the  ritual  to  bless
his  house,  and  thenceforth  the  genius  broke  no  more


EXAMPLES   OF  ELVES.  201

panes  of  glass ;  but  he  continued  to  throw  stones  at
the  cure's  people,  without  hurting  them,  however.  If
they  fetched  water  from  the  fountain,  he  threw  stones
into  the  bucket ;  and  afterwards  he  began  to  serve  in
the  kitchen.  One  day,  as  the  servant  was  planting
some  cabbages  in  the  garden,  he  pulled  them  up  as
fast  as  she  planted  them,  and  laid  them  in  a  heap.  It
was  in  vain  that  she  stormed,  threatened,  and  swore  in
the  German  style ;  the  genius  continued  to  play  his
tricks.

One  day,  when  a  bed  in  the  garden  had  been  dug
and  prepared,  the  spade  was  found  thrust  two  feet  deep
into  the  ground,  without  any  trace  being  seen  of  him
who  had  thus  stuck  it  in ;  but  they  observed  that  on
the  spade  was  a  ribbon,  and  by  the  spade  were  two
pieces  of  two  soles,  which  the  girl  had  locked  up  the
evenino;  before  in  a  little  box.  Sometimes  he  took
pleasure  in  displacing  the  earthenware  and  pewter,  and
putting  it  either  all  round  the  kitchen,  or  in  the  porch,
or  even  in  the  cemetery,  and  always  in  broad  daylight.
One  day  he  filled  an  iron  pot  with  wild  herbs,  bran,
and  leaves  of  trees,  and,  having  put  some  water  in  it,
carried  it  to  the  alley  or  walk  in  the  garden ;  another
time  he  suspended  it  to  the  pothook,  over  the  fire.
The  servant  having  broken  two  eggs  into  a  little  dish
for  the  cure's  supper,  the  genius  broke  two  more  into
it  in  his  presence,  the  maid  having  merely  turned  to
get  some  salt.  The  cure  having  gone  to  say  mass,  on
his  return  found  all  his  earthenware,  furniture,  lineo,
bread,  milk,  and  other  things,  scattered  about  over
the  house.

K  3


202  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

Sometimes  tlie  spirit  would  form  circles  on  the  paved
floor,  at  one  time  witli  stones,  at  another  with  corn  or
leaves,  and  in  a  moment,  before  the  eyes  of  all  present,
all  was  overturned  and  deransred.  Tired  with  these
games,  the  cure  sent  for  the  mayor  of  the  place,  and
told  him  he  was  resolved  to  quit  the  parsonage  house.
Whilst  this  was  passing,  the  cure's  niece  came  in,  and
told  them  that  the  genius  had  torn  up  the  cabbages  in
the  garden,  and  had  put  some  money  in  a  hole  in  the
ground.  They  went  there,  and  found  things  exactly
as  she  had  said.  They  picked  up  the  money,  which
was  what  the  cure  had  put  away  in  a  place  not  locked
up ;  and  in  a  moment  after  they  found  it  anew,  with
some  liards,  two  by  two,  scattered  about  the  kitchen.

The  agents  of  the  Count  de  Linange  being  arrived
at  Walsche,  went  to  the  cure's  house,  and  persuaded
him  that  it  was  all  the  effect  of  a  spell ;  they  told  him
to  take  two  pistols,  and  fire  them  off  at  the  place
where  he  might  observe  there  were  any  movements.
The  genius  at  the  same  moment  threw  out  of  the
pocket  of  one  of  these  officers  two  pieces  of  silver ;  and
from  that  time  he  was  no  longer  perceived  in  the
house.

The  circumstance  of  two  pistols  terminating  the
scenes  with  which  the  elf  had  disturbed  the  good  cure,
made  him  believe  that  this  tormenting  imp  was  no
other  than  a  certain  bad  parishioner,  whom  the  cure
had  been  obliged  to  send  away  from  his  parish,  and
who  to  revenge  himself  had  done  all  that  we  have
related.  If  that  be  the  case,  he  had  rendered  himself
invisible,  or  he  had  had  credit  enough  to  send  in  his


EXAMPLES  OF  ELVES.  203

stead  a  familiar  genius  who  puzzled  the  cure  for
some  weeks ;  for  if  he  were  not  bodily  in  this  house,
what  had  he  to  fear  from  any  pistol  shot  which  might
have  been  fired  at  him  ?  And  if  he  was  there  bodily,
how  could  he  render  himself  invisible  ?

I  have  been  told  several  times  that  a  monk  of  the
Cistercian  order  had  a  familiar  genius  who  attended
upon  him,  arranged  his  chamber,  and  prepared  every
thing  ready  for  him  when  he  was  coming  back  from
the  country.  They  were  so  accustomed  to  this,  that
they  expected  him  home  by  these  signs,  and  he  always
arrived.  It  is  affirmed  of  another  monk  of  the  same
order,  that  he  had  a  familiar  spirit,  who  warned  him,
not  only  of  what  passed  in  the  house,  but  also  of  what
happened  out  of  it ;  and  one  day  he  was  awakened
three  times,  and  warned  that  some  monks  were  quar-
relling, and  were  ready  to  come  to  blows ;  he  ran  to
the  spot,  and  put  an  end  to  the  dispute.

St.  Sulpicius  Severus*  relates,  that  St.  Martin  often
had  conversations  with  the  Holy  Virgin,  and  other
saints,  and  even  with  the  demons  and  false  gods  of
paganism ;  he  talked  with  them,  and  learned  from  them
many  secret  things.  One  day,  when  a  council  was
being  held  at  Mmes,  where  he  had  not  thought  proper
to  be  present,  but  the  decisions  of  which  he  desired  to
know,  being  in  a  boat  with  St.  Sulpicius,  but  apart
from  others,  as  usual  with  him,  an  angel  appeared,
and  informed  him  what  had  passed  in  this  assembly  of
bishops.  Inquiry  was  made  as  to  the  day  and  hour
when  the  council  was  held,  and  it  was  found  to  be  at
»  St.  Sulpit.  Sever.  Dialog,  ii.  c.  14,  15.


204  THE  PHAI^TOM   WORLD.

the  same  hour  at  which   the  angel  had  appeared  to
Martin.

We  have  been  told  several  times  that  a  young  eccle-
siastic, in  a  seminary  at  Paris,  had  a  genius  who
waited  upon  him,  and  arranged  his  room  and  his
clothes.  One  day,  when  the  superior  was  passing  by
the  chamber  of  this  seminarist,  he  heard  him  talkino-
with  some  one;  he  entered,  and  asked  who  he  was
conversing  with.  The  youth  affinned  that  there  was
no  one  in  his  room,  and,  in  fact,  the  superior  could
neither  see  nor  discover  any  one  there.  Nevertheless,
as  he  had  heard  their  conversation,  the  young  man
owned  that  for  some  years  he  had  been  attended  by  a
familiar  genius,  who  rendered  him  every  service  that
a  domestic  could  have  done,  and  had  promised  him
great  advantages  in  the  ecclesiastical  profession.  The
superior  pressed  him  to  give  some  proofs  of  what  he
said.  He  ordered  the  genius  to  set  a  chair  for  the
superior  ;  the  genius  obeyed.  Information  of  this  was
sent  to  the  archbishop,  who  did  not  think  proper  to
give  it  publicity.  The  young  clerk  was  sent  away,
and  this  singular  adventure  was  buried  in  silence.

Bodin^  speaks  of  a  person  of  his  acquaintance,  who
was  still  living  at  the  time  he  wrote,  which  was  in
1588.  This  person  had  a  familiar,  who  from  the  age
of  thirty-seven  had  given  him  good  advice  respecting
his  conduct,  sometimes  to  correct  his  faults,  sometimes
to  make  him  practise  virtue,  or  to  assist  him;  resolving
the  difficulties  which  he  might  find  in  reading  holy
books,  or  giving  him  good  counsel  upon  his  own  affairs.
^  Bodin  Demonomania,  lib.  ii.  c.  2.


EXAMPLES  or  ELVES.  205

He  usually  rapped  at  his  door  at  three  or  four  o'clock
in  the  morning  to  awaken  him;  and  as  that  person
mistrusted  all  these  things,  fearing  that  it  might  be  an
evil  angel,  the  spirit  showed  himself  in  broad  day,
striking  gently  on  a  glass  bowl,  and  then  upon  a  bench.
When  he  desired  to  do  any  thing  good  and  useful,  the
spirit  touched  his  right  ear;  but  if  it  was  anything
wrong  and  dangerous,  he  touched  his  left  ear  ;  so  that
from  that  time  nothing  occurred  to  him  of  which  he
was  not  warned  beforehand.  Sometimes  he  heard  his
voice ;  and  one  day,  when  he  found  his  life  in  imminent
danger,  he  saw  his  genius,  under  the  form  of  a  child
of  extraordinary  beauty,  who  saved  him  from  it.

William,  Bishop  of  Paris, <=  says  that  he  knew  a  rope-
dancer  who  had  a  familiar  spirit,  which  played  and
joked  with  him,  and  prevented  him  from  sleeping,
throwing  something  against  the  wall,  dragging  off  the
bed-clothes,  or  pulling  him  about  when  he  was  in  bed.
We  know  by  the  account  of  a  very  sensible  person,
that  it  has  happened  to  him  in  the  open  country,  and
in  the  day  time,  to  feel  his  cloak  and  boots  pulled  at,
and  his  hat  thrown  down ;  then  he  heard  the  bursts  of
laughter  and  the  voice  of  a  person  deceased  and  well
known  to  him,  who  seemed  to  rejoice  at  it.

The  discovery  of  things  hidden  or  unknown,  which
is  made  in  dreams,  or  otherwise,  can  hardly  be  as-
cribed to  any  thing  but  to  familiar  spirits.  A  man
who  did  not  know  a  word  of  Greek  came  to  M.  de
Saumaise,  senior,  a  counsellor  of  the  parliament  of
Dijon,  and  showed  him  these  words,  which  he  had
<=  Guillelm.  Paris.  2  Part,  qusest.  2.  c.  8.


306  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

heard  in  the  night,  as  he  slept,  and  which  he  wrote
down  in  French  characters  on  awaking :  '^  Apithi  ouc
osphraine  ten  sen  apsychian.^^  He  asked  him  what  that
meant.  M.  de  Saumaise  told  him  it  meant,  "  Save
yourself;  do  you  not  perceive  the  death  with  which
you  are  threatened?"  Upon  this  hint,  the  man  re-
moved, and  left  his  house,  which  fell  down  the  following
night.  ^

The  same  story  is  related,  with  a  little  difference,  by
another  author,  who  says  that  the  circumstance  hap-
pened at  Paris  f  that  the  genius  spoke  in  Syriac,  and
that  M.  de  Saumaise  being  consulted,  replied,  "Go
out  of  your  house,  for  it  will  fall  in  ruins  to-day,  at
nine  o'clock  in  the  evening.''  It  is  but  too  much  the
custom  in  recitinsr  stories  of  this  kind  to  add  a  few  cir-
cumstances  by  way  of  embellishment.

Gassendy,  in  the  Life  of  M.  Peiresch,  relates,  that
M.  Peiresch,  going  one  day  to  Nismes,  with  one  of  his
friends,  named  M.  Rainier,  the  latter,  having  heard
Peiresch  talking  in  his  sleep  in  the  night,  waked  him,
and  asked  him  what  he  said.  Peiresch  answered  him,
"I  dreamed  that,  being  at  Nismes,  a  jeweller  had
offered  me  a  medal  of  Julius  Caesar,  for  which  he  asked
four  crowns,  and  as  I  was  going  to  count  him  down  his
money,  you  waked  me,  to  my  great  regret."  They
arrived  at  Nismes,  and  going  about  the  town,  Peiresch
recognised  the   goldsmith  whom   he  had  seen  in  his

d  Grot.  Epist.  Part  ii.  Ep.  405.

^  They  affirm  that  it  happened  at  Dijon,  in  the  family  of  the  MM.
Surmin,  in  which  a  constant  tradition  has  perpetuated  the  memory  of
the  circumstance.


EXAMPLES  OP  ELVES.  207

dream;  and  on  tis  asking  him  if  he  had  nothing
curious,  the  goldsmith  told  him  he  had  a  gold  medal,  or
coin,  of  Julius  Cassar.  Peiresch  asked  him  how  much
he  esteemed  it  worth;  he  replied,  four  crowns.  Peiresch
paid  them,  and  was  delighted  to  see  his  dream  so  hap-
pily accomplished.

Here  is  a  dream  much  more  singular  than  the  pre-
ceding, although  a  little  in  the  same  style.^  A  learned
man  of  Dijon,  after  having  wearied  himself  all  day  with
an  important  passage  in  a  Greek  poet,  without  being
able  to  comprehend  it  at  all,  went  to  bed  thinking  of
this  difficulty.  During  his  sleep,  his  genius  transported
him  in  spirit  to  Stockholm,  introduced  him  into  the
j)alace  of  Queen  Christina,  conducted  him  into  the
library,  and  showed  him  a  small  volume,  which  was
precisely  what  he  sought.  He  opened  it,  read  in  it  ten
or  twelve  Greek  verses,  which  absolutely  cleared  up
the  difficulty  which  had  so  long  beset  him ;  he  awoke,
and  wrote  down  the  verses  he  had  seen  at  Stockholm.
On  the  morrow,  he  wrote  to  M.  Descartes,  who  was
then  in  Sweden,  and  begged  of  him  to  look  in  such  a
place,  and  in  such  a  division  of  the  library,  if  the  book,
of  which  he  sent  him  the  description,  were  there,  and
if  the  Greek  verses  which  he  sent  him  were  to  be  read
in  it.

M.  Descartes  replied,  that  he  had  found  the  book  in
question,  and  also  the  verses  he  had  sent  were  in  the
place  he  pointed  out ;  that  one  of  his  friends  had  pro-
mised him  a  copy  of  that  work,  and  he  would  send  it
him  by  the  first  opportunity.

'  Continuation  of  the  Count  de  Gabalis,  at  the  Hague,  1708,  p.  65.


208  THE  PHANTOM  WOELD.

We  have  already  said  something  of  the  spirit,  or
familiar  genius  of  Socrates,  which  prevented  him  from
doing  certain  things,  but  did  not  lead  him  to  do
others.  It  is  asserted  ^  that  after  the  defeat  of  the
Athenian  army,  commanded  by  Laches,  Socrates,  flying
like  the  others,  with  this  Athenian  general,  and  being
arrived  at  a  spot  where  several  roads  met,  Socrates
would  not  follow  the  road  taken  by  the  other  fugitives,
and  when  they  asked  him  the  reason,  he  replied,  be-
cause his  genius  drew  him  away  from  it.  The  event
justified  his  foresight.  All  those  who  had  taken  the
other  road  were  either  killed  or  made  prisoners  by  the
enemy's  cavalry.

It  is  doubtful  whether  the  elves,  of  which  so  many
things  are  related,  are  good  or  bad  spirits ;  for  the  faith
of  the  Church  admits  nothing  between  these  two  kinds
of  genii.  Every  genius  is  either  good  or  bad  ;  but  as
there  are  in  heaven  many  mansions,  as  the  Gospel
says,^  and  as  there  are  among  the  blessed  various
degrees  of  glory,  diifering  from  each  other,  so  we  may
believe  that  there  are  in  hell  various  degrees  of  pain
and  punishment  for  the  damned  and  the  demons.

But  are  they  not  rather  magicians,  who  render  them-
selves invisible,  and  divert  themselves  in  disquieting
the  living?  Why  do  they  attach  themselves  to  certain
spots  and  certain  persons  rather  than  to  others  ?  Why
do  they  make  themselves  perceptible  only  during  a
certain  time,  and  that  sometimes  a  short  space  ?

I  could  willingly  conclude  that  what  is  said  of  them
is  mere  fancy  and  prejudice  ;  but  their  reality  has  been
s  Cicero,  de  Divinat.  lib.  i.  ^  John  xiv.  2.


EXAMPLES  OE  ELVES.  209

SO  often  experienced  by  the  discourse  they  have  held,
and  the  actions  they  have  performed  in  the  presence  of
many  wise  and  enlightened  persons,  that  I  cannot  per-
suade myself  that  among  the  great  number  of  stories
related  of  them,  there  are  not  at  least  some  of  them
true.

It  may  be  remarked  that  these  elves  never  lead  one
to  any  thing  good,  to  prayer,  or  piety,  to  the  love  of
God,  or  to  godly  and  serious  actions.  If  they  do
no  other  harm,  they  leave  hurtful  doubts  about  the
punishments  of  the  damned,  on  the  efficacity  of  prayer
and  exorcisms ;  if  they  hurt  not  those  men  or  animals
which  are  found  on  the  spot  where  they  may  be  per-
ceived, it  is  because  God  sets  bounds  to  their  malice
and  power.  The  demon  has  a  thousand  ways  of
deceiving  us.  All  those  to  whom  these  genii  attach
themselves  have  a  horror  of  them,  mistrust  and  fear
them;  and  it  rarely  happens  that  these  familiar  demons
do  not  lead  them  to  a  dangerous  end,  unless  they
deliver  themselves  from  them  by  grave  acts  of  religion
and  penance.

There  is  the  story  of  a  spirit,  'Svhich,"  says  he  who
wrote  it  to  me,  "  I  no  more  doubt  the  truth  of,  than  if
I  had  been  a  witness  of  it."  Count  Despilliers,  the
father,  being  a  young  man,  and  captain  of  cuirassiers,
was  in  winter  quarters  in  Flanders.  One  of  his  men
came  to  him  one  day,  to  beg  that  he  would  change  his
landlord,  saying,  that  every  night  there  came  into  his
bedroom  a  spirit,  which  would  not  allow  him  to  sleep.
The  Count  Despilliers  sent  him  away,  and  laughed  at
his  simplicity.     Some  days  after,  the  same  horseman


210  THE  PHANTOM  WOELD.

came  back  and  made  the  same  request  to  him;  the  only-
reply  of  the  captain  would  have  been  a  volley  of  blows
with  a  stick,  had  not  the  soldier  avoided  them  by  a
prompt  flight.  At  last,  he  returned  a  third  time  to  the
charge,  and  protested  to  his  captain  that  he  could  bear
it  no  longer,  and  should  be  obliged  to  desert  if  his
lodging  was  not  changed.  Despilliers,  who  knew  the
soldier  to  be  brave  and  reasonable,  said  to  him,  with
an  oath,  "  I  will  go  this  night  and  sleep  with  you,  and
see  what  is  the  matter."

At  ten  o'clock  in  the  evening  the  captain  repaired  to
his  soldier's  lodging,  and  having  laid  liis  pistols  ready
primed  upon  the  table,  he  laid  down  in  his  clothes,  his
sword  by  his  side,  with  his  soldier,  in  a  bed  without
curtains.  About  midnight  he  heard  something  which
came  into  the  room,  and  in  a  moment  turned  the  bed
upside  down,  covering  the  captain  and  the  soldier
with  the  mattrass  and  paillasse.  Despilliers  had  great
trouble  to  diseno:ao:e  himself  and  find  again  his  sword
and  pistols,  and  he  returned  home  much  confounded.
The  horse-soldier  had  a  new  lodging  the  very  next  day,
and  slept  quietly  in  the  house  of  his  new  host.

M.  Despilliers  related  this  adventure  to  any  one  who
would  listen  to  it.  He  was  an  intrepid  man,  who  had
never  known  what  it  was  to  fall  back  before  danger.
He  died  field-marshal  of  the  armies  of  the  Emperor
Charles  VI.  and  governor  of  the  fortress  of  Segedin.
His  son  has  confirmed  this  adventure  to  me  within  a
short  time,  as  having  heard  it  from  his  father.

The  person  who  writes  to  me  adds:  "I  doubt  not
that  spirits  sometimes  return ;  but  I  have  found  myself


EXAMPLES  OE  ELVES.  211

in  a  great  many  places  whicli  it  was  said  they  haunted.
I  have  even  tried  several  times  to  see  them,  but  I  have
never  seen  any.  I  found  myself  once  with  more  than
four  thousand  persons,  who  all  said  they  saw  the
spirit ;  I  was  the  only  one  in  the  assembly  who  saw
nothing."  So  writes  me  a  very  worthy  officer,  this
year  1745,  in  the  same  letter  wherein  he  relates  the
affair  of  M.  Despilliers.


CHAPTER  XXXL

SPIRITS   THAT   KEEP   WATCH   OVER  TREASURE.

Every  body  acknowledges  that  there  is  an  infinity
of  riches  buried  in  the  earth,  or  lost  under  the  waters
by  shipwrecks  ;  they  fancy  that  the  demon,  whom  they
look  upon  as  the  god  of  riches,  the  god  Mammon,  the
Pluto  of  the  Pagans,  is  the  depositary,  or  at  least  the
guardian,  of  these  treasures.  He  said  to  Jesus  Christ,*
when  he  tempted  him  in  the  wilderness,  showing  to  him
all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth,  and  their  glory :  "  All
these  things  will  I  give  thee,  if  thou  wilt  fall  down  and
worship  me."  We  know  also,  that  the  ancients  very
often  interred  vast  treasures  in  the  tombs  of  the  dead ;
either  that  the  dead  might  make  use  of  them  in  the
other  world,  or  that  their  souls  might  keep  guard  over
them  in  those  gloomy  places.  Job  seems  to  make
allusion  to  this  ancient  custom,  when  he  says,^  "  Would
to  God  I  had  never  been  born:  I  should  now  sleep
with  the  kings  and  great  ones  of  the  earth,  who  built
themselves  solitary  places ;  like  unto  those  who  seek
for  treasure,  and  are  rejoiced  when  they  find  a  tomb ;"
doubtless  because  they  hope  to  find  great  riches  therein.
»  Matt.  iv.  8.  ^  Job  iii.  IS,  14,  22.


SPIRITS  THAT  KEEP  WATCH  OYER  TEEASUEE.        213

There  were  very  precious  things  in  the  tomb  of
Cyrus.  Semiramis  caused  to  be  engraved  on  her  own
mausoleum,  that  it  contained  great  riches.  Josephus'^
relates,  that  Solomon  placed  great  treasures  in  the
tomb  of  David  his  father ;  and  that  the  High  Priest
Hyrcanus,  being  besieged  in  Jerusalem  by  King
Antiochus,  took  thence  three  thousand  talents.  He
says,  moreover,  that  years  after,  Herod  the  Great
having  caused  this  tomb  to  be  searched,  took  from  it
large  sums.  We  see  several  laws  against  those  who
violate  sepulchres  to  take  out  of  them  the  precious
things  they  contain.  The  Emperor  Marcianus  ^  forbade
that  riches  should  be  hidden  in  tombs.  If  such  things
have  been  placed  in  the  mausoleums  of  worthy  and
holy  persons,  and  if  they  have  been  discovered  through
the  revelation  of  the  good  spirits  of  persons  who  died
in  the  faith  and  grace  of  God,  we  cannot  conclude  from
those  things,  that  all  hidden  treasures  are  in  the  power
of  the  demon,  and  that  he  alone  knows  any  thing  of
them ;  the  good  angels  know  of  them ;  and  the  saints
may  be  much  more  faithful  guardians  of  them  than  the
demons,  who  usually  have  no  power  to  enrich,  or  to
deliver  from  the  horrors  of  poverty,  from  punishment
and  death  itself,  those  who  yield  themselves  to  them
in  order  to  receive  some  reward  from  them.

Melancthon  relates,^  that  the  demon  informed  a
priest  where  a  treasure  was  hid;  the  priest,  accom-
panied by  one  of  his  friends,  went  to  the  spot  indi-
cated ;  they  saw  there  a  black  dog  lying  on  a  chest.

•=  Joseph.  Ant.  lib.  xiii.  ^  Martian,  lib.  iv.

*  Le  Loyer,  liv.  ii.  p.  495.


214  THE   PHANTOM  WORLD.

The  priest,  having  entered  to  take  out  the  treasure,
was  crushed  and  smothered  under  the  ruins  of  the
cavern.

M.  K,emy/  in  his  Demonology,  speaks  of  several
persons  whose  causes  he  had  heard  in  his  quality  of
Lieutenant-General  of  Lorraine,  at  the  time  when  that
country  swarmed  with  wizards  and  witches ;  those
amongst  them  who  believed  they  had  received  money
from  the  demon,  found  nothing  in  their  purses  but  bits
of  broken  pots,  coals,  or  leaves  of  trees,  or  other  things
equally  vile  and  contemptible.

The  Reverend  Father  Abram,  a  Jesuit,  in  his  manu-
script History  of  the  University  of  Pont  a  Mousson,
reports,  that  a  youth  of  good  family  but  small  fortune,
placed  himself  at  first  to  serve  in  the  army  among
the  valets  and  serving  men ;  from  thence  his  parents
sent  him  to  school,  but  not  liking  the  subjection  which
study  requires,  he  quitted  the  school  and  returned  to
his  former  kind  of  life.  On  his  way  he  met  a  man
dressed  in  a  silk  coat,  but  ill-looking,  dark,  and  hideous,
who  asked  him  where  he  was  going  to,  and  why  he
looked  so  sad ;  "  I  am  able  to  set  you  at  your  ease,"
said  this  man  to  him,  "  if  you  will  give  yourself  to  me."

The  young  man,  believing  that  he  wished  to  engage
him  as  a  servant,  asked  for  time  to  reflect  upon  it;
but  beginning  to  mistrust  the  magnificent  promises
which  he  made  him,  he  looked  at  him  more  narrowly,
and  having  remarked  that  his  left  foot  was  divided  like
that  of  an  ox,  he  was  seized  with  affright,  made  the

^  Kemy,  Demonol.  c.  iv.    Ann.  1605.


SPIRITS   THAT  KEEP  WATCH  OVEE  TEEASUEE.        215

slofn  of  the  cross,  and  called  on  the  name  of  Jesus,
when  the  spectre  directly  disappeared.

Three  days  after,  the  same  figure  appeared  to  him
again,  and  asked  him  if  he  had  made  up  his  mind ;  the
young  man  replied  that  he  did  not  want  a  master.  The
spectre  said  to  him,  "  Where  are  you  going ? "  "I  am
going  to  such  a  town,"  replied  he.  At  that  moment
the  demon  threw  at  his  feet  a  purse  which  chinked,
and  which  he  found  filled  with  thirty  or  forty  Flemish
crowns,  amongst  which  were  about  twelve  which  ap-
peared to  be  gold,  newly  coined,  and  as  if  from  the
stamps  of  the  coiner.  In  the  same  purse  was  a  powder,
which  the  spectre  said  was  of  a  very  subtile  quality.

At  the  same  time  he  gave  him  abominable  counsels
to  satisfy  the  most  shameful  passions ;  and  exhorted
him  to  renounce  the  use  of  holy  water,  and  the  adora-
tion of  the  host— which  he  called  in  derision  that  little
cake.  The  boy  was  horrified  at  these  proposals,  and
made  the  sign  of  the  cross  on  his  heart ;  and  at  the
same  time  he  felt  himself  thrown  roughly  down  on  the
ground,  where  he  remained  for  half-an-hour,  half  dead.
Having  got  up  again,  he  returned  home  to  his  mother,
did  penance,  and  changed  his  conduct.  The  pieces  of
money  which  looked  like  gold  and  newly  coined,  hav-
ing been  put  in  the  fire,  were  found  to  be  only  of
copper.

I  relate  this  instance,  to  show  that  the  demon  seeks
only  to  deceive  and  corrupt,  even  those  to  whom  he
makes  the  most  specious  promises,  and  to  whom  he
seems  to  give  great  riches.

Some  years  ago,  two  monks,  both  of  them  well-


216  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

informed  and  prudent  men,  consulted  me  upon  a  cir-
cumstance which  occurred  at  Orbe,  a  village  of  Alsatia,
near  the  Abbey  of  Pairis.  Two  men  of  that  place  told
them,  that  they  had  seen  come  out  of  the  ground  a
small  box  or  casket,  which  they  supposed  was  full  of
money,  and  having  a  wish  to  lay  hold  of  it,  it  had
retreated  from  them  and  hidden  itself  again  under-
ground.    This  happened  to  them  more  than  once.

Theophanes,  a  celebrated  and  grave  Greek  historio-
grapher, under  the  year  of  our  era,  408,  relates  that
Cabades,  King  of  Persia,  being  informed  that  between
the  Indian  country  and  Persia  there  was  a  castle  called
Zubdadeyer,  which  contained  a  great  quantity  of  gold,
silver,  and  precious  stones,  resolved  to  make  himself
master  of  it ;  but  these  treasures  were  guarded  by
demons,  who  would  not  permit  any  one  to  approach  it.
He  employed  some  of  the  magi  and  some  Jews  who
were  with  him,  to  conjure  them  and  exorcise  them ;
but  their  efforts  were  useless.  The  kins;  bethousfht
himself  of  the  God  of  the  Christians — prayed  to  him,
and  sent  for  the  bishop  who  was  at  the  head  of  the
Christian  Church  in  Persia,  and  begged  of  him  to  use
his  efforts  to  obtain  for  him  these  treasures,  and  to
expel  the  demons  by  whom  they  were  guarded.  The
prelate  offered  the  holy  sacrifice,  participated  in  it,
and  going  to  the  spot,  drove  away  the  demons  who
were  guardians  of  these  riches,  and  put  the  king  in
peaceable  possession  of  the  castle.

Relating  this  story  to  a  man  of  some  rank,s  he  told
me,  that  in  the  Isle  of  Malta,  two  knights  having  hired
K  M.  le  Chevalier  Guiot  de  Marre.


SPIRITS  THAT  KEEP  WATCH  OVER  TREASURE.        217

a  slave,  who  boasted  tliat  he  possessed  the  secret  of
evoking  demons,  and  forcing  them  to  discover  the  most
hidden  secrets,  they  led  him  into  an  old  castle,  where  it
was  thought  that  treasures  were  concealed.  The  slave
performed  his  evocations,  and  at  last  the  demon  opened
a  rock  whence  issued  a  coffer.  The  slave  would  have
taken  hold  of  it,  but  the  coffer  went  back  into  the  rock.
This  occurred  more  than  once ;  and  the  slave,  after
vain  efforts,  came  and  told  the  knights  what  had  hap-
pened to  him;  but  he  was  so  much  exhausted,  that  he
had  need  of  some  restorative ;  they  gave  him  refresh-
ment, and  when  he  had  returned,  they  after  a  while
heard  a  noise.  They  went  into  the  cave  with  a  light,
to  see  what  had  happened,  and  they  found  the  slave
lying  dead,  and  all  his  flesh  full  of  cuts  as  of  a  penknife,
in  form  of  a  cross ;  he  was  so  covered  with  them,  that
there  was  not  room  to  place  a  finger  where  he  was  not
thus  marked.  The  knights  carried  him  to  the  shore,
and  threw  him  into  the  sea  with  a  great  stone  hung
round  his  neck.  We  could  name  these  persons  and
note  the  dates,  were  it  necessary.

The  same  person  related  to  us  at  that  same  time,
that  about  ninety  years  before,  an  old  woman  of  Malta
was  warned  by  a  genius  that  there  was  a  great  deal  of
treasure  in  her  cellar,  belonging  to  a  knight  of  high
consideration,  and  desired  her  to  give  him  information
of  it ;  she  went  to  his  abode,  but  could  not  obtain  an
audience.  The  following  night  the  same  genius  re-
turned, and  gave  her  the  same  command;  and  as  she
refused  to  obey,  he  abused  her  and  again  sent  her  on
the  same  errand.     The  next  day  she  returned  to  seek

VOL.  I.  L


218  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

this  lord,  and  told  the  domestics  that  she  would  not  go
away  until  she  had  spoken  to  the  master.  She  related
what  had  happened  to  her  ;  and  the  knight  resolved  to
go  to  her  dwelling,  accompanied  by  people  with  the
proper  instruments  for  digging ;  they  dug,  and  very
shortly  there  sprung  up  such  a  quantity  of  water  from
the  spot  where  they  inserted  their  pickaxes,  that  they
were  obliged  to  give  up  the  undertaking.

The  knight  confessed  to  the  Inquisitor  what  he  had
done,  and  received  absolution  for  it ;  but  he  was  obliged
to  inscribe  the  fact  we  have  recounted  in  the  Kegisters
of  the  Inquisition.

About  sixty  years  after,  the  canons  of  the  Cathedral
of  Malta,  wishing  for  a  wider  space  before  their  church,
bought  some  houses  which  it  was  necessary  to  pull
down,  and  amongst  others  that  which  had  belonged  to
that  old  woman.  As  they  were  digging  there,  they
found  the  treasure,  consisting  of  a  good  many  gold
pieces  of  the  value  of  a  ducat,  bearing  the  effigy  of  the
Emperor  Justinian  the  First.  The  Grand  Master  of
the  Order  of  Malta  affirmed  that  the  treasure  belonged
to  him  as  sovereign  of  the  isle;  the  canons  contested
the  point.  The  affair  was  carried  to  Kome ;  the  grand
master  gained  his  suit,  and  the  gold  was  brought  to
him,  amounting  in  value  to  about  sixty  thousand
ducats ;  but  he  gave  them  up  to  the  cathedral.

Some  time  afterwards,  the  knight  of  whom  we  have
spoken,  who  was  then  very  aged,  remembered  what
had  happened  to  himself,  and  asserted  that  the  treasure
ought  to  belong  to  him ;  he  made  them  lead  him  to  the
spot,  recognised  the  cellar  where  he  had  formerly  been.


spmrrs  that  keep  watch  oyer  treasure.     219

and  pointed  out  in  the  Register  of  the  Inquisition
what  had  been  written  therein  sixty  years  before.
They  did  not  permit  him  to  recover  the  treasure ;  but
it  was  a  proof  that  the  demon  knew  of  and  kept  watch
over  this  money.  The  person  who  told  me  this  story
has  in  his  possession  three  or  four  of  these  gold  pieces,
having  bought  them  of  the  canons.


L  2


CHAPTER  XXXII.

OTHER  INSTANCES  OP   HIDDEN  TREASTTRES,  WHICH   WERE   GUARDED   BY   GOOD

OR  BAD   SPIRITS.

"We  read  In  a  new  work,  that  a  man,  Honore
Mirable,  having  found  in  a  garden  near  Marseilles
a  treasure  consisting  of  several  Portuguese  pieces  of
gold,  from  the  indication  given  him  by  a  spectre,  which
appeared  to  him  at  eleven  o'clock  at  night,  near  the
Bastide,  or  country  house  called  dii  Paret,  he  made  the
discovery  of  it  in  presence  of  the  woman  who  farmed  the
land  oiihi^Bastide,  and  the  farm-servant  named  Bernard.
When  he  first  perceived  the  treasure  buried  in  the
earth,  and  wrapt  up  in  a  bundle  of  old  linen,  he  was
afraid  to  touch  it,  for  fear  it  should  be  poisoned  and
cause  his  death.  He  raised  it  by  means  of  a  hook
made  of  a  branch  of  the  almond-tree,  and  carried  it
into  his  room,  where  he  undid  it  without  any  witness,
and  found  in  it  a  great  deal  of  gold;  to  satisfy  the
wishes  of  the  spirit  who  had  appeared  to  him,  he  caused
some  masses  to  be  said  for  him.  He  revealed  his  good
fortune  to  a  countryman  of  his,  named  Anquier,  who
lent  him  forty  livres,  and  gave  him  a  note  by  which  he
acknowledged  he  owed  him  twenty  thousand  livres,
and  receipted  the  payment  of  the  forty  livres  lent;
this  note  bore  date  the  27th  September,  1726.


SPIRITS  THAT  KEEP  WATCH  OVER  TEEASURE.        221

Some  time  after,  Mirable  asked  Anquier  to  pay  tlie
note.  Anquier  denied  every  thing.  A  great  lawsuit
ensued;  informations  were  taken  and  perquisitions
held  in  Anquier's  house ;  sentence  was  given  on  the
10th  of  September,  1727,  importing  that  Anquier
should  be  arrested,  and  have  the  question  applied  to
him.  An  appeal  was  made  to  the  Parliament  of  Aix.
Anquier's  note  was  declared  a  forgery.  Bernard,  who
was  said  to  have  been  present  at  the  discovery  of  the
treasure,  was  not  cited  at  all ;  the  other  witnesses  only
deposed  from  hearsay;  Magdalen  Caillot  alone,  who
was  present,  acknowledged  having  seen  the  packet
wrapped  round  with  linen,  and  had  heard  a  ringing  as
of  pieces  of  gold  or  silver,  and  had  seen  one  of  them,
a  piece  about  as  large  as  a  piece  of  two  liards.

The  Parliament  of  Aix  issued  its  decree  the  17th  of
February,  1728,  by  which  it  ordained  that  Bernard,
farming  servant  at  the  Bastide  du  Paret,  should  be
heard;  he  was  heard  on  different  days,  and  deposed
that  he  had  seen  neither  treasure,  nor  rags,  nor  gold
pieces.  Then  came  another  decree  of  the  2d  of
June,  1728,  which  ordered  that  the  Attorney  General
should  proceed  by  way  of  ecclesiastical  censures  on  the
facts  resulting  from  these  proceedings.

The  indictment  was  published,  fifty -three  witnesses
were  heard;  another  sentence  of  the  18th  of  February,
1729,  discharged  Anquier  from  the  Courts  and  the
lawsuit ;  condemned  Mirable  to  the  galleys  to  perpe-
tuity after  having  previously  undergone  the  question ;
and  Caillot  was  to  pay  a  fine  of  ten  francs.  Such  was
the  end  of  this  grand  lawsuit.    If  we  examine  narrowly


222  THE  PIUNTOM  WORLD.

ttese  stories  of  spectres  who  watch  over  treasures,  we
shall  doubtless  find,  as  here,  a  great  deal  of  superstition,
deception  and  fancy.

Delrio  relates  some  instances  of  people  who  have
been  put  to  death,  or  who  have  perished  miserably  as
they  searched  for  hidden  treasures.  In  all  this  we  may
perceive  the  spirit  of  lying  and  seduction  on  the  part  of
the  demon,  bounds  set  to  his  power,  and  his  malice
arrested  by  the  will  of  God ;  the  impiety  of  man,  his
avarice,  his  idle  curiosity,  the  confidence  which  he
places  in  the  angel  of  darkness,  by  the  loss  of  his
wealth,  his  life,  and  his  soul.

John  Wierus,  in  his  work  entitled  "  De  Prcestigiis
Dcemonum,^  printed  at  Basle  in  1577,  relates  that  in  his
time,  1430,  the  demon  revealed  to  a  certain  priest  at
IS^uremberg  some  treasures  hidden  in  a  cavern  near  the
town,  and  enclosed  in  a  crystal  vase.  The  priest  took
one  of  his  friends  with  him  as  a  companion ;  they  began
to  dig  up  the  ground  in  the  spot  designated,  and  they
discovered  in  a  subterranean  cavern  a  kind  of  chest,
near  which  a  black  dog  was  lying ;  the  priest  eagerly
advanced  to  seize  the  treasure,  but  hardly  had  he
entered  the  cavern,  than  it  fell  in,  crushed  the  priest,
and  was  filled  up  with  earth  as  before.

The  followino;  is  extracted  from  a  letter,  written
from  Kirchheim,  January  1st,  1747,  to  M.  Schopfflein,
Professor  of  History  and  Eloquence  at  Strasburg.  "  It
is  now  more  than  a  year  ago,  that  M.  Cavallari,  first
musician  of  my  Serene  master,  and  by  birth  a  Venetian,
desired  to  have  the  ground  dug  up  at  Rothenklrchen,
a  league  from  hence,  and  which  was  formerly  a  re-


SPIRITS   THAT  KEEP  WATCH  OVER  TEEASUEE.        223

nowned  abbey,  and  was  destroyed  in  the  time  of  the
Reformation.  The  opportunity  was  afforded  him  by
an  apparition,  which,  showed  itself  more  than  once  at
noon-day  to  the  wife  of  the  Censier  of  Rothenkirchen,
and  above  all,  on  the  7th  of  May  for  two  succeeding
years.  She  swears,  and  can  make  oath,  that  she  has
seen  a  venerable  priest  in  pontifical  garments  embroi-
dered with  gold,  who  threw  before  her  a  great  heap  of
stones;  and  although  she  is  a  Lutheran,  and  conse-
quently not  very  credulous  in  things  of  that  kind,  she
thinks  nevertheless  that  if  she  had  had  the  presence  of
mind  to  put  down  a  handkerchief  or  an  apron,  all  the
stones  would  have  become  money.

"  M.  Cavallari  then  asked  leave  to  dig  there,  which
was  the  more  readily  granted,  because  the  tithe  or
tenth  part  of  the  treasure  is  due  to  the  sovereign.  He
was  treated  as  a  visionary,  and  the  matter  of  treasure
was  regarded  as  an  unheard-of  thing.  In  the  meantime
he  laughed  at  the  anticipated  ridicule,  and  asked  me
if  I  would  go  halves  with  him.  I  did  not  hesitate  a
moment  to  accept  this  offer ;  but  I  was  much  surprised
to  find  there  were  some  little  earthen  pots  full  of  gold
pieces,  all  these  pieces  finer  than  the  ducats  of  the
fourteenth  and  fifteenth  century  generally  are.  I  have
had  for  my  share  666,  found  at  three  different  times.
There  are  some  of  the  Archbishops  of  Mayence,
Treves,  and  Cologne,  of  the  towns  of  Oppenheim,
Baccarat,  Bingen,  and  Coblentz ;  there  are  some  also  of
the  Palatine  Bupert,  of  Frederic,  Burgrave  of  Nurem-
berg, some  few  of  Wenceslaus,  and  one  of  the  Emperor
Charles  IV.  &c."


224  THE  PHANTOM  WOKLD.

This  shows  that  not  only  the  demons,  but  also  the
saints,  are  sometimes  guardians  of  treasure ;  unless  you
will  say  that  the  devil  had  taken  the  shape  of  the  pre-
late. But  what  could  it  avail  the  demon  to  give  the
treasure  to  these  gentlemen,  who  did  not  ask  him  for
it,  and  scarcely  troubled  themselves  about  him?  I  have
seen  two  of  these  pieces  in  the  hands  of  M.  Schop-
fflein.

The  story  we  have  just  related  is  repeated,  with
a  little  difference,  in  a  printed  paper,  announcing
a  lottery  of  pieces  found  at  Rothenkirchen,  in  the
province  of  Nassau,  not  far  from  Donnersberg.  They
say  in  this,  that  the  value  of  these  pieces  is  twelve
livres  ten  sols,  French  money.  The  lottery  was  to  be
publicly  drawn  the  first  of  February,  1750.  Every
ticket  cost  six  livres  of  French  money.  I  repeat  these
details  only  to  prove  the  truth  of  the  circumstance.

We  may  add  to  the  preceding,  what  is  related  by
Bartholinus  in  his  book  on  the  cause  of  the  contempt
of  death  shown  by  the  ancient  Danes,  (lib.  ii.  c.  2.)  He
relates  that  the  riches  concealed  in  the  tombs  of  the
great  men  of  that  country  were  guarded  by  the  shades
of  those  to  whom  they  belonged,  and  that  these  shades
or  these  demons  spread  terror  in  the  souls  of  those  who
wished  to  take  away  those  treasures,  either  by  pouring
forth  a  deluge  of  water,  or  by  flames  which  they  caused
to  appear  around  the  monuments  which  enclosed  those
bodies  and  those  treasures.


CHAPTER  XXXIII.

SPECTRES   WHICH   APPEAR,    AND   PREDICT   THINGS   UNKNOWN   AND   TO   COME.

Both  in  ancient  and  modern  writers,  we  find  an
infinite  number  of  stories  of  spectres.  We  have  not
the  least  doubt  that  their  apparitions  are  the  work  of
the  demon,  if  they  are  real.  Now,  it  cannot  be  denied
that  there  is  a  great  deal  of  illusion  and  falsehood  in  all
that  is  related  by  them.  We  shall  distinguish  two
sorts  of  spectres :  those  which  appear  to  mankind  to
hurt  or  deceive  them,  or  to  announce  things  to  come,
fortunate  or  unfortunate  as  circumstances  may  occur ;
the  other  spectres  infest  certain  houses,  of  which  they
have  made  themselves  masters,  and  where  they  are
seen  and  heard.  We  shall  treat  of  the  latter  in  another
chapter ;  and  show  that  the  greater  number  of  these
spectres  and  apparitions  may  be  suspected  of  falsehood.

Pliny  the  younger,  writing  to  his  friend.  Sura,  on
the  subject  of  apparitions,  testifies  that  he  is  much
inclined  to  believe  them  true ;  and  the  reason  he  gives,
is  what  happened  to  Quintus  Curtius  Rufus,  who,
having  gone  into  Africa  in  the  train  of  the  queestor  or
treasurer  for  the  Romans,  walking  one  day  towards
evening  under  a  portico,  saw  a  woman  of  uncommon

L  3


226  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

height  and  beauty,  who  told  him  that  she  was  Africa,
and  assured  him  that  he  would  one  day  return  into
that  same  country  as  proconsul.  This  promise  inspired
him  with  high  hopes ;  and  by  his  intrigues,  and  help  of
friends,  whom  he  had  bribed,  he  obtained  the  quaestor -
ship,  and  afterwards  was  praetor,  through  the  favour  of
the  Emperor  Tiberius.

This  dignity  having  veiled  the  obscurity  and  base-
ness of  his  birth,  he  was '  sent  proconsul  to  Africa,
where  he  died,  after  having  obtained  the  honours  of  the
triumph.  It  is  said  that,  on  his  return  to  Africa,  the
same  person  who  had  predicted  his  future  grandeur
appeared  to  him  again  at  the  moment  of  his  landing  at
Carthage.

These  predictions,  so  precise,  and  so  exactly  followed
up,  made  Pliny  the  younger  believe  that  predictions
of  this  kind  are  never  made  in  vain.  This  story  of
Curtius  Rufus  was  written  by  Tacitus,  long  enough
before  Pliny's  time,  and  he  might  have  taken  it  from
Tacitus.

After  the  fatal  death  of  Caligula,  who  was  massacred
in  his  palace,  he  was  buried  half  burnt  in  his  own
gardens.  The  princesses,  his  sisters,  on  their  return
from  exile,  had  his  remains  burnt  with  ceremony,  and
honourably  inhumed ;  but  it  was  averred  that  before
this  was  done,  those  who  had  to  watch  over  the
gardens  and  the  palace  had  every  night  been  disturbed
by  phantoms  and  frightful  noises.

The  following  instance  is  so  extraordinary,  that  I
should  not  repeat  it  if  the  account  were  not  attested
by  more  than  one  writer,  and  also  preserved  in  the


APPEARANCES   AND   PREDICTIONS   OP   SPECTRES.       227

public  monuments  of  a  considerable  town  of  Upper
Saxony ;  this  town  is  Hamelin  in  the  principality  of
Kalenberg,  at  the  confluence  of  the  rivers  Ham  el  and
Weser.

In  the  year  1384,  this  town  was  infested  by  such  a
prodigious  multitude  of  rats,  that  they  ravaged  all  the
corn  which  was  laid  up  in  the  granaries ;  every  thing
was  employed  that  art  and  experience  could  invent  to
chase  them  away,  and  whatever  is  usually  employed
against  this  kind  of  animals.  At  that  time  there  came
to  the  town  an  unknown  person,  of  taller  stature  than
ordinary,  dressed  in  a  robe  of  divers  colours,  who
engaged  to  deliver  them  from  that  scourge,  for  a  cer-
tain recompense  which  was  agreed  upon.

Then  he  drew  from  his  sleeve  a  flute,  at  the  sound
of  which  all  the  rats  came  out  of  their  holes  and
followed  him ;  he  led  them  straight  to  the  river,  into
which  they  ran  and  were  drowned.  On  his  return  he
asked  for  the  promised  reward,  which  was  refused  him,
apparently  on  account  of  the  facility  with  which  he  had
exterminated  the  rats.  The  next  day,  which  was  a
fete  day,  he  chose  the  moment  when  the  elder  in-
habitants of  the  burgh  were  at  church,  and  by  means
of  another  flute  which  he  began  to  play,  all  the  boys  in
the  town  above  the  age  of  fourteen,  to  the  number  of  a
hundred  and  thirty,  assembled  round  him :  he  led  them
to  the  neighbouring  mountain,  named  Kopfelberg,
under  which  is  a  sewer  for  the  town,  and  where
criminals  are  executed  ;  these  boys  disappeared  and
were  never  seen  afterwards.

A  young  girl,  who  had  followed  at  a  distance,  was


228  THE   PHANTOM  WORLD.

witness  of  the  matter,  and  brought  the  news  of  It  to
the  town.

They  still  show  a  hollow  in  this  mountain,  where
they  say  that  he  made  the  boys  go  in.  At  the  corner
of  this  opening  is  an  inscription,  which  is  so  old  that  it
cannot  now  be  deciphered ;  but  the  story  is  represented
on  the  panes  of  the  church  windows ;  and  it  is  said,
that  in  the  public  deeds  of  this  town  it  is  still  the
custom  to  put  the  dates  in  this  manner : — Done  in  the
year ,  after  the  disappearance  of  our  children.^

If  this  recital  is  not  wholly  fabulous,  as  it  seems  to
be,  we  can  only  regard  this  man  as  a  spectre  and  an
evil  genius,  who,  by  God's  permission,  punished  the
bad  faith  of  the  burghers  in  the  persons  of  their
children,  although  innocent  of  their  parents'  fault.  It
might  be,  that  a  man  could  have  some  natural  secret  to
draw  the  rats  together  and  precipitate  them  into  the
river;  but  only  diabolical  malice  would  cause  so  many
innocent  children  to  perish,  out  of  revenge  on  their
fathers.

Julius  Caesar  ^  having  entered  Italy,  and  wishing  to
pass  the  Rubicon,  perceived  a  man  of  more  than  ordinary
stature,  who  began  to  whistle.  Several  soldiers  having
run  to  listen  to  him,  this  spectre  seized  the  trumpet  of
one  of  them,  and  began  to  sound  the  alarm,  and  to  pass
the  river.  Caesar  at  that  moment,  without  further
deliberation,  said.  Let  us  go  where  the  presages  of  the

*  See  Vagenseil,  Opera  liborum  Juvenil.  torn.  ii.  p.  295,  the  Geo-
graphy of  Hubner,  and  the  Geographical  Dictionary  of  la  Martinifere,
under  the  name  Hamelen.

•>  Sueton.  in  Jul.  Cresar.


APPEAEANCES   AND   PREDICTIONS   OE   SPECTRES.      229

gods  and  the  injustice  of  our  enemies  call  upon  us  to
advance.

The  Emperor  Trajan  '^  was  extricated  from  the  town
of  Antioch  by  a  phantom,  which  made  him  go  out  at
a  window,  in  the  midst  of  that  terrible  earthquake
which  overthrew  almost  all  the  town.  The  philosopher
Simonides'^  was  warned  by  a  spectre  that  his  house
was  about  to  fall ;  he  went  out  of  it  directly,  and  soon
after  it  fell  down.

The  Emperor  Julian,  the  apostate,  told  his  friends,
that  at  the  time  when  his  troops  were  pressing  him  to
accept  the  empire,  being  at  Paris,  he  saw  during  the
night  a  spectre  in  the  form  of  a  woman,  as  the  genius
of  an  empire  is  depicted,  who  presented  herself  to  re-
main with  him  ;  but  she  gave  him  notice  that  it  would
be  only  for  a  short  time.  The  same  emperor  related,
moreover,  that  writing  in  his  tent  a  little  before  his
death,  his  familiar  genius  appeared  to  him,  leaving  the
tent  with  a  sad  and  afflicted  air.  Shortly  before  the
death  of  the  Emperor  Constans,  the  same  Julian  had  a
vision  in  the  night,  of  a  luminous  phantom,  who  pro-
nounced and  repeated  to  him,  more  than  once,  four
Greek  verses,  importing  that  when  Jupiter  should  be
in  the  sign  of  the  water-pot,  or  Aquarius,  and  Saturn
in  the  25th  deo^ree  of  the  Yiro;in,  Constans  would  end
his  life  in  Asia  in  a  shocking  manner.

The  same  Emperor  Julian  takes  Jupiter  ®  to  witness
that  he  has  often  seen  Esculapius,  who  cured  him  of  his
sicknesses.

'^  Dio.  Cassius.  lib.  Ixviii.

^  Diogen.  Laert.  in  Simon.  Valer.  Maxim,  lib.  xxiii.

*  Julian,  apud  Cyrill.  Alex.


CHAPTER  XXXIY.

OTHER     APPARITIONS     OF     SPECTRES.

Plutarch,  whose  gravity  and  wisdom  are  well
known,  often  speaks  of  spectres  and  apparitions.  He
says,  for  instance,  that  at  the  famous  battle  of  Marathon
against  the  Persians,  several  soldiers  saw  the  phantom  of
Theseus,  who  fought  for  the  Greeks  against  the  enemy.

The  same  Plutarch,  in  the  life  of  Sylla,  says,  that
that  general  saw  in  his  sleep  the  goddess  whom  the
Komans  worshipped  according  to  the  rites  of  the
Cappadocians,  (who  were  fire -worshippers,)  whether
it  might  be  Bellona  or  Minerva,  or  the  moon.  This
divinity  presented  herself  before  Sylla,  and  put  into  his
hand  a  kind  of  thunder-bolt,  telling  him  to  launch
it  against  his  enemies,  whom  she  named  to  him  one
after  the  other ;  at  the  same  time  that  he  struck  them,
he  saw  them  fall  and  expire  at  his  feet.  There  is
reason  to  believe  that  this  same  goddess  was  Minerva,
to  whom,  as  to  Jupiter,  Paganism  attributes  the  right
to  hurl  the  thunder-bolt;  or  rather,  that  it  was  a
Demon.

Pausanias,  general  of   the  Lacedemonians, '^  having
inadvertently  killed  Cleonice,  a  daughter  of  one  of  the
»  Plutarch  in  Cimone.


OTHEE  APPAEITIONS  OF   SPECTRES.  231

first  families  of  Byzantium,  was  tormented  night  and
day  by  the  ghost  of  that  maiden,  who  left  him  no  re-
pose, repeating  to  him  angrily  a  heroic  verse,  the  sense
of  which  was.  Go  before  the  tribunal  of  justice,  which
punishes  crimes  and  awaits  thee.  Insolence  is  in  the  end
fatal  to  mortals.

Pausanias,  always  disturbed  by  this  image,  which
followed  him  everywhere,  retired  to  Heraclea  in  Elis,
where  there  was  a  temple  served  by  priests  who  were
magicians,  called  Psychagogues,  that  is  to  say,  who  pro-
fess to  evoke  the  souls  of  the  dead.  There,  Pausanias,
after  having  offered  the  customary  libations  and  funeral
effusions,  called  upon  the  spirit  of  Cleonice,  and  con-
jured her  to  renounce  her  anger  against  him.  Cleonice
at  last  appeared,  and  told  him  that  very  soon,  when
he  should  be  arrived  at  Sparta,  he  would  be  freed  from
his  woes,  wishing  apparently  by  these  mysterious  words
to  indicate  that  death  which  awaited  him  there.

We  see  there  the  custom  of  evocations  of  the  dead  dis-
tinctly pointed  out,  and  solemnly  practised  in  a  temple
consecrated  to  these  ceremonies ;  that  demonstrates  at
least  the  belief  and  custom  of  the  Greeks.  And  if
Cleonice  really  appeared  to  Pausanias  and  announced
his  approaching  death,  can  we  deny  that  the  evil  spirit,
or  the  spirit  of  Cleonice,  is  the  author  of  this  prediction,
unless  indeed  it  were  a  trick  of  the  priests,  which  is
likely  enough,  and  as  the  ambiguous  reply  given  to
Pausanias  seems  to  insinuate.

Pausanias   the   historian  ^   writes,   that   400   years
after  the  battle  of  Marathon,  every  night  a  noise  was
^  Pausanias,  lib.  i.  c.  324.


232  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

heard  there  of  the  neio-hino;  of  horses,  and  cries  like  those
of  soldiers  exciting  themselves  to  combat.  Plutarch
speaks  also  of  spectres  which  were  seen,  and  frightful
howlings  that  were  heard  in  some  public  baths,  where
they  had  put  to  death  several  citizens  of  Chaeronea,  his
native  place ;  they  had  even  been  obliged  to  shut  up
these  bathsj  which  did  not  prevent  those  who  lived  near
from  continuing  to  hear  great  noises,  and  seeing  from
time  to  time  spectres.

Dion  the  philosopher,  the  disciple  of  Plato,  and
general  of  the  Syracusans,  being  one  day  seated,  to-
wards the  evening,  very  full  of  thought,  in  the  portico
of  his  house,  heard  a  great  noise,  then  perceived  a
terrible  spectre  of  a  woman  of  monstrous  height,  who
resembled  one  of  the  furies,  as  they  are  depicted  in
tragedies ;  there  was  still  daylight,  and  she  began  to
sweep  the  house.  Dion,  quite  alarmed,  sent  to  beg  his
friends  to  come  and  see  him,  and  stay  with  him  all
night;  but  this  woman  appeared  no  more.  A  short
time  afterwards,  his  son  threw  himself  down  from  the
top  of  the  house,  and  he  himself  was  assassinated  by
conspirators.

Marcus  Brutus,  one  of  the  murderers  of  Julius  C^sar,
being  in  his  tent  during  a  night  which  was  not  very
dark,  towards  the  third  hour  of  the  night,  beheld  a
monstrous  and  terrific  figure  enter.  ^'  Who  art  thou  ?
a  man  or  a  god  ?  and  why  comest  thou  here  ? "  The
spectre  answered,  "  I  am  thine  evil  genius.  Thou  shalt
see  me  at  Phillppi ! "  Brutus  replied  undauntedly,
"  I  will  meet  thee  there."  And  on  going  out,  he  went
and  related  the  circumstance  to  Cassius,  who  being  of


OTHER  APPAEITIONS  OE  SPECTEES.  233

the  sect  of  Epicurus,  and  a  disbeliever  In  that  kind  of
apparition,  told  him  that  it  was  mere  imagination;
that  there  were  no  genii  or  other  kind  of  spirits  which
could  appear  unto  men,  and  that  even  did  they  appear,
they  would  have  neither  the  human  form  nor  the
human  voice,  and  could  do  nothing  to  harm  us.
Although  Brutus  was  a  little  reassured  by  this  rea-
soning, still  it  did  not  remove  all  his  uneasiness.

But  the  same  Cassius,  in  the  campaign  of  Philippi,
and  in  the  midst  of  the  combat,  saw  Julius  Caesar,
whom  he  had  assassinated,  who  came  up  to  him  at  full
gallop ;  which  frightened  him  so  much,  that  at  last  he
threw  himself  upon  his  own  sword.  Cassius  of  Parma,
a  different  person  from  him  of  whom  we  have  spoken
above,  saw  an  evil  genius,  who  came  Into  his  tent,  and
declared  to  him  his  approaching  death.

Drusus,  when  making  war  on  the  Germans  ( AUemanl)
during  the  time  of  Augustus,  desiring  to  cross  the  Elbe,
in  order  to  penetrate  farther  into  the  country,  was
prevented  from  so  doing  by  a  woman  of  taller  stature
than  common,  who  appeared  to  him  and  said,  "  Drusus,
whither  wilt  thou  go?  wilt  thou  never  be  satisfied?
Thy  end  is  near — go  back  from  hence.''  He  retraced
his  steps,  and  died  before  he  reached  the  Khine,  which
he  desired  to  recross.

St.  Gregory  of  Nicea,  In  the  Life  of  St.  Gregory
Thaumaturgus,  says,  that  during  a  great  plague,  which
ravaged  the  city  of  Neocesarea,  spectres  were  seen  In
open  day,  who  entered  houses,  Into  which  they  carried
certain  death.

After  the  famous  sedition  which  happened  at  Antloch,


234  THE  PHANTOM  WOULD.

in  the  time  of  the  emperor  Theodosius,  they  beheld  a
kind  of  fury  running  about  the  town,  with  a  whip,
which  she  lashed  about  like  a  coachman  who  hastens
on  his  horses.

St.  Martin,  Bishop  of  Tours,  being  at  Treves,  entered
a  house,  where  he  found  a  spectre  which  frightened  him
at  first.  Martin  commanded  him  to  leave  the  body
which  he  possessed :  instead  of  going  out  (of  the  place),
he  entered  the  body  of  another  man  who  was  in  the
same  dwelling ;  and  throwing  himself  upon  those  who
were  there,  began  to  attack  and  bite  them.  Martin
threw  himself  across  his  way,  put  his  fingers  in  his
mouth,  and  defied  him  to  bite  him.  The  demoniac
retreated,  as  if  a  bar  of  red-hot  iron  had  been  placed  in
his  mouth,  and  at  last  the  demon  went  out  of  the  body
of  the  possessed,  not  by  the  mouth  but  behind.

John,  Bishop  of  Atria,  who  lived  in  the  sixth  century,
in  speaking  of  the  great  plague  which  happened  under
the  Emperor  Justinian,  and  which  is  mentioned  by
almost  all  the  historians  of  that  time,  says,  that  they
saw  boats  of  brass,  containing  black  men  without  heads,
which  sailed  upon  the  sea,  and  went  towards  the  places
where  the  plague  was  beginning  its  ravages ;  that  this
infection  having  depopulated  a  town  of  Egypt,  so  that
there  remained  only  seven  men  and  a  boy  ten  years  of
age,  these  persons,  wishing  to  get  away  from  the  town
with  a  great  deal  of  money,  fell  down  dead  suddenly.

The  boy  fled  without  carrying  any  thing  with  him,
but  at  the  gate  of  the  town  he  was  stopped  by  a
spectre,  who  dragged  him,  in  spite  of  his  resistance,
into  the  house  where  the  seven  dead  men  were.     Some


OTHER  APPARITIONS  OP   SPECTRES.  235

time  after,  the  steward  of  a  rich  man  having  entered
therein,  to  take  away  some  furniture  belonging  to  his
master,  who  had  gone  to  reside  in  the  country,  was
warned  by  the  same  boy  to  go  away — but  he  died
suddenly.  The  servants  who  had  accompanied  the
steward  ran  away,  and  carried  the  news  of  all  this  to
their  master.

The  same  Bishop  John  relates,  that  he  was  at  Con-
stantinople during  a  very  great  plague,  which  carried
off  ten,  twelve,  fifteen,  and  sixteen  thousand  persons
a-day,  so  that  they  reckon  that  two  hundred  thousand
persons  died  of  this  malady, — he  says,  that  duriug  this
time  demons  were  seen  running  from  house  to  house,
wearing  the  habits  of  ecclesiastics  or  monks,  and  who
caused  the  death  of  those  whom  they  met  therein.

The  death  of  Carlostadt  was  accompanied  by  frightful
circumstances,  according  to  the  ministers  of  Basle,  his
colleagues,  who  bore  witness  to  it  at  the  time.  They  '^
relate,  that  at  the  last  sermon  which  Carlostadt  preached
in  the  temple  of  Basle,  a  tall  black  man  came  and  seated
himself  near  the  consul.  The  preacher  perceived  him,
and  appeared  disconcerted  at  it.  When  he  left  the
pulpit,  he  asked  who  that  stranger  was  who  had  taken
his  seat  next  to  the  chief  magistrate ;  no  one  had  seen
him  but  himself.  When  he  went  home,  he  heard  more
news  of  the  spectre.  The  black  man  had  been  there,
and  had  caught  up  by  the  hair  the  youngest  and  most
tenderly  loved  of  his  children.  After  he  had  thus
raised  the  child  from  the  ground,  he  appeared  disposed
to  throw  him  down  so  as  to  break  his  head ;  but  he
<=  Moshovius,  p.  22.


236  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

contented  himself  with  ordering  the  boy  to  warn  his
father  that  In  three  days  he  should  return,  and  he  must
hold  himself  In  readiness.  The  child  having  repeated
to  his  father  what  had  been  said  to  him,  Carlostadt  was
terrified.  He  went  to  bed  in  alarm,  and  in  three
days  he  expired.  These  apparitions  of  the  demons,  by
Luther's  own  avowal,  were  pretty  frequent,  in  the  case
of  the  first  reformers.

These  instances  of  the  apparitions  of  spectres  might
be  multiplied  to  infinity  ;  but  if  we  undertook  to
criticise  them,  there  is  hardly  one  of  them  very  certain,
or  proof  against  a  serious  and  profound  examination.
Here  follows  one,  which  I  relate  on  purpose  because  It
has  some  singular  features,  and  its  falsehood  has  at  last
been  acknowledged."^

^  See  tlie  following  chapter.


CHAPTER  XXXV.

EXAMINATION   OF   THE   APPARITION   OF   A   PRETENDED   SPECTRE-

BusiNEss^  having  led  the  Count  d'Alais''  to  Marseilles,
a  most  extraordinary  adventure  happened  to  him
there:  he  desired  Neure  to  write  to  our  philosopher
(Gassendi),  to  know  what  he  thought  of  it ;  which  he
did  in  these  words : — The  Count  and  Countess  being
come  to  Marseilles,  saw,  as  they  were  lying  in  bed,  a
luminous  spectre;  they  were  both  wide  awake.  In
order  to  be  sure  that  it  was  not  some  illusion,  they
called  their  valets  de  chambre ;  but  no  sooner  had  these
appeared  with  their  flambeaux,  than  the  spectre  disap-
peared. They  had  all  the  openings  and  cracks  which
they  found  in  the  chamber  stopped  up,  and  then  went
to  bed  again ;  but  hardly  had  the  valets  de  chambre
retired,  than  it  appeared  again.

Its  Hght  was  less  shining  than  that  of  the  sun ;  but  it
was  brighter  than  that  of  the  moon.  Sometimes  this
spectre  was  of  an  angular  form,  sometimes  a  circle,  and
sometimes  an  oval.     It  was  easy  to  read  a  letter  by  the

^  Vie  de  Gassendi,  torn.  i.  p.  258.

^  Alais  is  a  town  in  Lower  Laiiguedoc,the  lords  of  whicTi  bear  the
title  of  prince,  since  this  town  has  passed  into  the  House  of  Angouleme
and  De  Conty.


238  THE    PHANTOM  WORLD.

light  it  gave';  it  often  changed  its  place,  and  sometimes
appeared  on  the  count's  bed.  It  had,  as  it  were,  a
kind  of  little  bucklers,  above  which  were  characters
imprinted.  Nevertheless,  nothing  could  be  more
agreeable  to  the  sight ;  so  that  instead  of  alarming,  it
gave  pleasure.  It  appeared  every  night  whilst  the
count  stayed  at  Marseilles.  This  prince,  having  once
cast  his  hands  upon  it,  to  see  if  it  was  not  something
attached  to  the  bed  curtain,  the  spectre  disappeared
that  night,  and  reappeared  the  next.

Gassendi  being  consulted  upon  this  circumstance,
replied  on  the  13th  of  the  same  month.  He  says,  in
the  first  place,  that  he  knows  not  what  to  think  of  this
vision.  He  does  not  deny  that  this  spectre  might  be
sent  from  God,  to  tell  them  something.  What  renders
this  idea  probable,  is  the  great  piety  of  them  both,  and
that  this  spectre  had  nothing  frightful  in  it,  but  quite
the  contrary.  What  deserves  our  attention  still  more
is  this,  that  if  God  had  sent  it,  he  would  have  made
known  why  he  sent  it.  God  does  not  jest ;  and  since
it  cannot  be  understood  what  is  to  be  hoped  or  feared,
followed  up  or  avoided,  it  is  clear  that  tliis  spectre
cannot  come  from  him ;  otherwise  his  conduct  would  be
less  praiseworthy  than  that  of  a  father,  or  a  prince,  or  a
worthy,  or  even  a  prudent  man,  who  being  informed  of
somewhat  which  greatly  concerned  those  in  subjection
to  them,  would  not  content  themselves  with  warning
them  enigmatically.

If  this  spectre  is  any  thing  natural,  nothing  is  more
difficult  than  to  discover  it,  or  even  to  find  any  con-
jecture which  may  explain  it.     Although  I  am  well


APPARITION   OF  A  PRETENDED   SPECTRE.  239

persuaded  of  my  ignorance,  I  will  venture  to  give  my
idea.  Might  it  not  be  advanced,  that  this  light  has
appeared  because  the  eye  of  the  count  was  internally
affected,  or  because  it  was  so  externally  ?  The  eye  may
be  so  internally  in  two  ways.  First :  if  the  eye  was
affected  in  the  same  manner  as  that  of  the  Emperor
Tiberius  always  was  when  he  awoke  in  the  night  and
opened  his  eyes;  a  light  proceeded  from  them,  by  means
of  which  he  could  discern  objects  in  the  dark  by
looking  fixedly  at  them.  I  have  known  the  same  thing
happen  to  a  lady  of  rank.  Secondly :  if  his  eyes  were
disposed  in  a  certain  manner,  as  it  happens  to  myself
when  I  awake :  if  I  open  my  eyes,  they  perceive  rays
of  light  though  there  has  been  none.  No  one  can
deny,  that  some  flash  may  dart  from  our  eyes,  which
represents  objects  to  us — which  objects  are  reflected  in
our  eyes,  and  leave  their  traces  there.  It  is  known
that  animals  which  prowl  by  night  have  a  piercing
sight,  to  enable  them  to  discern  their  prey  and  carry
it  off;  that  the  animal  spirit  which  is  in  the  eye,  and
which  may  be  shed  from  it,  is  of  the  nature  of  fire,
and  consequently  lucid.  It  may  happen  that,  the  eyes
being  closed  during  sleep,  this  spirit  heated  by  the
eyelids  becomes  inflamed,  and  sets  some  faculty  in
motion,  as  the  imagination.  For,  does  it  not  happen
that  wood  of  different  kinds,  and  fish  bones,  produce
some  light  when  their  heat  is  excited  by  putrefaction ;
why  then  may  not  the  heat  excited  in  this  confined
spirit  produce  some  light  ?  He  proves  afterwards  that
imagination  alone  may  do  it.

The  Count  d'Alais  having  returned  to  Marseilles,


240  THE  PHANTOM  WOELD.

and  being  lodged  in  the  same  apartment,  the  same
spectre  appeared  to  him  again.  Neure  wrote  to
Gassendij  that  they  had  observed  that  this  spectre
penetrated  into  the  chamber  by  the  wainscot;  which
obliged  Gassendi  to  write  to  the  count  to  examine
the  thing  more  attentively ;  and  notwithstanding  this
discovery,  he  dare  not  yet  decide  upon  it.  He  con-
tents himself  with  encouraging  the  count,  and  telling
him,  that  if  this  apparition  is  from  God,  he  will  not
allow  him  to  remain  long  in  expectation,  and  will  soon
make  known  his  will  to  him ;  and  also,  if  this  vision
does  not  come  from  him,  he  will  not  permit  it  to
continue,  and  will  soon  discover  that  it  proceeds  from
a  natural  cause.  Nothing  more  is  said  of  this  spectre
any  where.

Three  years  afterwards,  the  Countess  d'Alais  avowed
ingenuously  to  the  count  that  she  herself  had  caused
this  farce  to  be  played  by  one  of  her  women,  because
she  did  not  like  to  reside  at  Marseilles ;  that  her
woman  was  under  the  bed,  and  that  she  from  time  to
time  caused  a  phosphoric  light  to  appear.  The  Count
d'Alais  related  this  himself  to  M.  Puger  of  Lyons,  who
told  it,  about  thirty-five  years  ago,  to-M.  Falconet,  a
medical  doctor  of  the  Royal  Academy  of  Belle-Lettres,
from  whom  I  learnt  it.  Gassendi,  when  consulted
seriously  by  the  count,  answered  like  a  man  who  had
no  doubt  of  the  truth  of  this  apparition ;  so  true  it  is,
that  the  greater  number  of  these  extraordinary  facts
require  to  be  very  carefully  examined,  before  any
opinion  can  be  passed  upon  them.


CHAPTER  XXXVI.


OF   SPECTRES   WHICH   HAUNT   HOUSES.


There  are  several  kinds  of  spectres  or  ghosts,  which
haunt  certain  houses,  make  noises,  appear  there,  and
disturb  those  who  hve  in  them :  some  are  sprites,  or
elves,  which  divert  themselves  by  troubling  the  quiet
of  those  who  dwell  there ;  others  are  spectres  or  ghosts
of  the  dead,  who  molest  the  living  until  they  have  re-
ceived sepulture  :  some  of  them,  as  it  is  said,  make  the
place  their  purgatory ;  others  show  themselves  or  make
themselves  heard,  because  they  have  been  put  to  death
in  that  place,  and  ask  that  their  death  may  be  avenged,
or  that  their  bodies  may  be  buried.  So  many  stories
are  related  concerning  those  things,  that  now  they  are
not  cared  for,  and  nobody  will  believe  any  of  them.
In  fact,  when  these  pretended  apparitions  are  thoroughly
examined  into,  it  is  easy  to  discover  their  falsehood  and
illusion.

Now,  it  is  a  tenant  who  wishes  to  decry  the  house  in
which  he  resides,  to  hinder  others  from  coming  who
would  like  to  take  his  place ;  then  a  band  of  coiners
have  taken  possession  of  a  dwelling,  whose  interest  it  is
to  keep  their  secret  from  being  found  out ;  or  a  farmer
who  desires  to  retain  his  farm,  and  wishes  to  prevent
others  from  coming  to  offer  more  for  it ;  in  this  place

VOL.  I.  M


212  THE  PHA^'TOM   WOKLD.

it  will  be  cats  or  owls,  or  even  rats,  which  by  making
a  noise  frighten  the  master  and  domestics,  as  it  hap-
pened some  years  ago  at  Mosheim,  where  large  rats
amused  themselves  in  the  night  by  moving  and  setting
in  motion  the  machines  with  which  the  women  bruise
hemp  and  flax.  An  honest  man  who  related  it  to  me,
desiring  to  behold  the  thing  neaiTr,  mounted  up  to  the
garret  armed  with  two  pistols,  with  his  servant  armed
in  the  same  manner.  After  a  moment  of  silence,  they
saw  the  rats  begin  their  game ;  they  let  fire  upon  them,
killed  two,  and  dispersed  the  rest.  The  circumstance
was  reported  in  the  country  and  served  as  an  excellent
joke.

I  am  about  to  relate  some  of  these  spectral  appa-
ritions upon  which  the  reader  will  pronounce  judgment
for  himself.  Pliny  ^  the  younger  says  that  there  was
a  very  handsome  mansion  at  Athens,  which  was  forsaken
on  account  of  a  spectre  which  haunted  it.  The  philo-
sopher Athenodorus,  having  arrived  in  the  city,  and
seeing  a  board  which  informed  the  public  that  this
house  was  to  be  sold  at  a  very  low  price,  bought  it  and
went  to  sleep  there  with  his  people.  As  he  was  busy
reading  and  Avriting  during  the  night,  he  heai'd  on  a
sudden  a  great  noise,  as  if  of  chains  being  dragged
along,  and  perceived  at  the  same  time  something  like
a  friohtful  old  man  loaded  with  iron  chains,  who  drew
near  to  him.  Athenodorus  continuing  to  write,  the
spectre  made  him  a  sign  to  follow  him  ;  the  philosopher
in  his  turn  made  signs  to  him  to  wait,  and  continued  to
write  ;  at  last  he  took  his  light  and  followed  the  spectre,
"  Plin.  junior,  Epist.  ad  Suram.  lib.  vii.  cap.  27.


OE  SPECTRES  WHICH   HAUNT  HOUSES.  243

who  conducted  him  into  the  court  of  the  house,  then
sank  into  the  ground  and  disappeared.

Athenodorus,  without  being  frightened,  tore  up  some
of  the  grass  to  mark  the  spot,  and  on  leaving  it,  went
to  rest  in  his  room.  The  next  day  he  informed  the
magistrates  of  what  had  happened ;  they  came  to  the
house  and  searched  the  spot  he  designated,  and  there
found  the  bones  of  a  human  body  loaded  with  chains.
They  caused  him  to  be  properly  buried,  and  the  dweliing-w
house  remained  quiet.

Lucian^  relates  a  very,  similar  story.  There  vras,
says  he,  a  house  at  Corinth,  which  had  belonged  to  one
Eubatides,  in  the  quarter  named  Cranaiis ;  a  man  named
Arignotes  undertook  to  pass  the  night  there,  without
troubling  himself  about  a  spectre  which  was  said  to
haunt  it.  He  furnished  himself  with  certain  magic
books  of  the  Egyptians  to  conjure  the  spectre.  Having
gone  into  the  house  at  night  with  a  light,  he  began  to
read  quietly  in  the  court.  The  spectre  appeared  in
a  little  while,  taking  sometimes  the  shape  of  a  dog,
then  that  of  a  bull,  and  then  that  of  a  lion.  Arignotes
very  composedly  began  to  pronounce  certain  magical
invocations,  which  he  read  in  his  books,  and  by  their
power  forced  the  spectre  into  a  corner  of  the  court,
where  he  sank  into  the  earth  and  disappeared.

The  next  day  Arignotes  sent  for  Eubatides,  the
master  of  the  house,  and  having  had  the  ground  dug
up  where  the  phantom  had  disappeared,  they  found
a  skeleton,  which  they  had  properly  interred,  and  from
that  time  nothing  more  was  seen  or  heard.
*»  In  Philo-pseud.  p.  8i0.
M  2


244  THE  PHANTOM  WOULD.

It  is  Luclan,  that  is  to  say  the  man  in  the  world  the
least  credulous  concerning  things  of  this  kind,  who
makes  Arignotes  relate  this  event.  In  the  same  passage
he  says  that  Democritus,  who  believed  in  neither  angels,
nor  demons,  nor  spirits,  having  shut  himself  up  in
a  tomb  without  the  city  of  Athens,  where  he  was
writing  and  studying,  a  party  of  young  men,  who
wanted  to  frighten  him,  covered  themselves  with  black
garments,  as  the  dead  are  represented,  and  having
taken  hideous  disguises,  came  in  the  night,  shrieking
and  jumping  around  the  place  where  he  was ;  he  let
them  do  what  they  liked,  and  without  at  all  disturbing
himself,  coolly  told  them  to  have  done  with  their
jesting.

I  know  not  if  the  historian  who  wrote  the  life  of
St.  Germain  i'Auxerrois  ^  had  in  his  eye  the  stories  we
have  just  related,  and  if  he  did  not  wish  to  ornament
the  life  of  the  saint  by  a  recital  very  much  like  them.
The  saint  travelling  one  day  through  his  diocese,  was
obliged  to  pass  the  night  with  his  clerks  in  a  house
forsaken  long  before  on  account  of  the  spirits  which
haunted  it.  The  clerk,  who  read  to  him  during  the
night,  saw  on  a  sudden  a  spectre  which  alarmed  him
at  first ;  but  having  awakened  the  holy  bishop,  the
latter  commanded  the  spectre  in  the  name  of  Jesus
Christ  to  declare  to  him  who  he  was,  and  what  he
wanted.  The  phantom  told  him  that  he  and  his  com-
panion had  been  guilty  of  several  crimes ;  that  having
died  and  been  interred  in  that  house,  they  disturbed
those  who  lodged  there  until  the  burial  rites  should
*  Bolland,  31  Jul.  p.  211.


OE   SPECTRES   WHICH  HAUNT  HOUSES.  245

liave  been  accorded  them.  St.  Germain  commanded
him  to  point  out  where  their  bodies  were  buried,  and
the  spectre  led  him  thither.  The  next  day  he  assem-
bled the  people  in  the  neighbourhood;  they  sought
amongst  the  ruins  of  the  building^  where  the  brambles
had  been  disturbed,  and  they  found  the  bones  of  two
men  thrown  in  a  heap  together,  and  also  loaded  with
chains  ;  they  were  buried,  prayers  were  said  for  them,
and  they  returned  no  more.

If  these  men  were  wretches  dead  in  crime  and  impe-
nitence, all  this  can  be  attributed  only  to  the  artifice
of  the  devil,  to  show  the  living  that  the  reprobate  take
pains  to  procure  rest  for  their  bodies  by  getting  them
interred,  and  to  their  souls  by  getting  them  prayed  for.
But  if  these  two  men  were  Christians  who  had  expiated
their  crimes  by  repentance,  and  who  died  in  communion
with  the  Church,  God  might  permit  them  to  appear,
to  ask  for  clerical  sepulture,  and  those  prayers  which
the  Church  is  accustomed  to  say  for  the  repose  of
defunct  persons,  who  die  while  yet  some  slight  fault
remains  to  be  expiated.

Here  is  a  fact  of  the  same  kind  as  those  which  pre-
cede, but  which  is  attended  by  circumstances  which
may  render  it  more  credible.  It  is  related  by  Antonio
Torquemada,  in  his  work  entitled  Flores  Curiosas,
printed  at  Salamanca  in  1570.  He  says  that  a  little
before  his  own  time,  a  young  man  named  Vasquez
de  Ayola,  being  gone  to  Bologna  with  two  of  his
companions  to  study  the  law  there,  and  not  having
found  such  a  lodging  in  the  town  as  they  wished
to  have,  lodged  themselves  in  a  large  and  handsome


243  THE  PHANTOM   YrORLD.

house,  which  was  abandoned  by  everybody,  because  it
was  haunted  by  a  spectre  which  frightened  away  all
those  who  wished  to  live  in  it;  they  laughed  at  such
discourse,  and  took  up  their  abode  there.

At  the  end  of  a  month,  as  Ayola  was  sitting  up
alone  in  his  chamber,  and  his  companions  sleeping
quietly  in  their  beds,  he  heard  at  a  distance  a  noise  as
of  several  chains  dragged  along  upon  the  ground,  and
the  noise  advanced  towards  him  by  the  great  staircase ;
he  recommended  himself  to  God,  made  the  sign  of  the
cross,  took  a  shield  and  sword,  and  having  his  taper  in
his  hand,  he  saw  the  door  openetl  by  a  terrific  spectre
that  was  nothing  but  bones,  but  loaded  with  chains.
Ayola  conjured  him,  and  asked  him  what  he  wished
for :  the  phantom  signed  to  him  to  follow,  and  he  did
so ;  but  as  he  went  down  the  stairs,  his  light  blew  out ;
he  went  back  to  light  it,  and  then  followed  the  spirit,
which  led  him  along  a  court  where  there  was  a  well.
Ayola  feared  that  he  might  throw  him  into  it,  and
stopped  short.  The  spectre  beckoned  to  him  to  con-
tinue to  follow  him ;  they  entered  the  garden,  where
the  phantom  disappeared.  Ayola  tore  up  some  hand-
fals  of  grass  upon  the  spot,  and  returning  to  the  house,
related  to  his  companions  what  had  happened.  In  the
morning:  he  2;ave  notice  of  this  circumstance  to  the
Principals  of  Bologna.

They  came  to  reconnoitre  the  spot,  and  had  it  dug
up ;  they  found  there  a  fleshlcss  body,  but  loaded  with
chains.  They  inquired  who  it  could  be,  but  nothing
certain  could  be  discovered,  and  the  bones  were  interred
with  suitable  obsequies,  and  from  that  time  the  house


OF  SPECTRES   WHICH   HAUNT  HOUSES.  247

was  never  disquieted  by  such  visits.  Torquemada
asserts  that  in  his  time  there  were  still  living  at  Bologna
and  in  Spain  some  who  had  been  witnesses  of  the  fact ;
and  that  on  his  return  to  his  own  country,  Ayola  was
invested  with  a  high  office,  and  that  his  son,  before
this  narration  was  written,  was  President  in  a  good
city  of  the  kingdom  (of  Spain).

Plautus,  still  more  ancient  than  either  Lucian  or
Pliny,  composed  a  comedy  entitled  "  Mostellaria,"  or
"  Monstellaria,"  a  name  derived  from  '^Monstrum,"  or
"  Monstellum,"  from  a  monster,  a  spectre,  which  Avas
said  to  appear  in  a  certain  house,  and  which  on  that
account  had  been  deserted.  We  agree  that  the  founda-
tion of  this  comedy  is  only  a  fable,  but  we  may  deduce
from  it  the  antiquity  of  this  idea  among  the  Greeks
and  Romans.

The  poet*^  makes  this  pretended  spirit  say,  that
having  been  assassinated  about  sixty  years  before  by
a  perfidious  comrade  who  had  taken  his  money,  he  had
been  secretly  interred  in  that  house ;  that  the  god  of
Hades  would  not  receive  him  on  the  other  side  of
Acheron,  as  he  had  died  prematurely ;  for  which  reason
he  was  obliged  to  remain  in  that  house  of  which  he  had
taken  possession.

"  Haec  mihi  dedita  habitatio ;
l^am  me  Acherontem  recipere  noluit,
Quia  prsematur)^  vit&,  careo."

The  Pagans,  who  had  the  simplicity  to  believe  that
the  Lamiae  and  evil  spirits  disquieted  those  who  dwelt
in  certain  houses  and  certain  rooms,  and  who  slept  in
^  Plaut.  Mostell.  act.  ii.  v,  67.


248  THE  PHANTOM   WORLD.

certain  beds,  conjured  them  by  magic  verses,  and  pre-
tended to  drive  them  away  by  fumigations  composed
of  sulphur  and  other  stinking  drugs,  and  certain  herbs
mixed  with  sea  water.  Ovid,  speaking  of  Medea,  that
celebrated  magician,  says/ —

*'  Terque  senem  fiaminS,,  ter  aqu&,,  ter  sulphure  lustrat."

And  elsewhere  he  adds  eo:o:s : —

"  Adveniat  quas  lustret  anus  lectumque  locumque,
Deferat  et  tremul^  sulphur  et  ova  manu."

In  addition  to  this  they  adduce  the  instance  of  the
Archangel  Raphael,^  who  drove  away  the  devil  Asmo-
deus  from  the  chamber  of  Sarah,  by  the  smell  of  the
liver  of  a  fish  which  he  burnt  upon  the  fire.  But  the
instance  of  Raphael  ought  not  to  be  placed  along  with
the  superstitious  ceremonies  of  magicians,  which  were
laughed  at  by  the  Pagans  themselves ;  if  they  had  any
power,  it  could  only  be  by  the  operation  of  the  demon
with  the  permission  of  God  ;  whilst  what  is  told  of  the
archangel  Raphael  is  certainly  the  work  of  a  good  spirit,
sent  by  God  to  cure  Sarah  the  daughter  of  Raguel,
who  was  as  much  distinguished  by  her  piety  as  the
magicians  are  degraded  by  their  malice  and  super-
stition.

*  Vide  Joan.  Vier.  de  Curat.  Malific.  c.  215.  ^  Tob.  viii.


CHAPTEK  XXXYII.

OTHER  INSTANCES   OF   SPECTRES   WHICH   HAUNT   CERTAIN   HOUSES.

Father  Pierre  Thyree,^  a  Jesuit,  relates  an  infi-
nite number  of  anecdotes  of  houses  haunted  by  ghosts,
spirits,  and  demons;  for  instance,  that  of  a  tribune
named  Hesperius,  whose  house  was  infested  by  a  demon
who  tormented  the  domestics  and  animals,  and  who
was  driven  away,  says  St.  Augustin,^  by  a  good  priest
of  Hippo,  who  offered  therein  the  divine  sacrifice  of
the  body  of  our  Lord.

St.  Germain,^  bishop  of  Capua,  taking  a  bath  in  one
particular  quarter  of  the  town,  found  there  Paschasius,
a  deacon  of  the  Poman  Church,  who  had  been  dead
some  time,  and  who  began  to  wait  upon  him,  telling
him  that  he  underwent  his  purgatory  in  that  place  for
having  favoured  the  party  of  Laurentius  the  anti-pope,
against  Pope  Symachus.

St.  Gregory  of  Nicea,  in  the  life  of  St.  Gregory  of
NeocaBsarea,  says  that  a  deacon  of  this  holy  bishop,
bavins:  ffone  into  a  bath  where  no  one  dared  go  after
a  certain  hour  in  the  evening,  because  all  those  who
had  entered  there  had  been  put  to  death,  beheld  spectres

^  Thyrsei  Demoniaci  cum  locis  infestis.
^  S.  Aug.  de  Civ.  lib.  xxii.  8.
*  S.  Greg.  Mag.  Dial.  cap.  39.

M    3


250  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

of  all  kinds,  which  threatened  him  in  a  thousand  ways,
but  he  got  rid  of  them  by  crossing  himself  and  invoking
the  name  of  Jesus.

Alexander  ab  Alexandro/  a  learned  Neapolitan
lawyer  of  the  fifteenth  century,  says  that  all  the  world
knows  that  there  are  a  number  of  houses  at  Rome  so
much  out  of  repute  on  account  of  the  ghosts  which
appear  in  them  every  night,  that  nobody  dares  to
inhabit  them.  Nicholas  Tuba,  his  friend,  a  man  well
known  for  his  probity  and  veracity,  who  came  once
with  some  of  his  comrades  to  try  if  all  that  was  said  of
those  houses  was  true,  would  pass  the  night  in  one  of
them  with  Alexander.  As  they  were  together,  wide
awake,  and  with  plenty  of  light,  they  beheld  a  horrible
spectre,  wliich  frightened  them  so  much  by  its  terrific
voice  and  the  great  noise  which  it  made,  that  they  hardly
knew  what  they  did,  nor  what  they  said ;  "  and  by
degrees,  as  we  approached,"  says  he,  "with  the  light,
the  phantom  retreated ;  at  last,  after  having  thrown  all
the  house  into  confusion,  it  disappeared  entirely."

I  might  also  relate  here  the  spectre  noticed  by
Father  Sinson  the  Jesuit,  which  he  saw,  and  to  which
he  spoke  at  Pont-a-Mousson,  in  the  cloister  belong-
ing to  those  fathers ;  but  I  shall  content  myself  with
the  instance  which  is  reported  in  the  Causes  CtUhres,^
and  which  may  serve  to  undeceive  those  who  too  lightly
ofive  credit  to  stories  of  this  kind.

At  the  Chateau  d'Arsillier  in  Picardy,  on  certain
days  of  the  year,  towards  November,  they  saw  flames

•*  Alexander  ab  Alexandre,  lib.  v.  cap.  23.
^  Causes  Celfebres,  torn.  xi.  p.  374.


OF  SPECTRES   WHICH  HAUNT  HOUSES.  251

and  a  horrible  smoke  proceeding  thence.  Cries  and
frightful  howlings  were  heard.  The  bailiff,  or  farmer
of  the  chateau,  had  got  accustomed  to  this  uproar,
because  he  himself  caused  it.  All  the  village  talked
of  it,  and  everybody  told  his  own  story  thereupon.
The  gentleman  to  whom  the  chateau  belonged,  mis-
trustinoj  some  contrivance,  came  there  near  All-saints'
day  with  two  gentlemen  his  friends,  resolved  to  pursue
the  spirit,  and  fire  upon  it  with  a  brace  of  good  pistols.
A  few  days  after  they  arrived,  they  heard  a  great  noise
above  the  room  where  the  owner  of  the  chateau  slept ;
his  two  friends  went  up  thither,  holding  a  pistol  in  one
hand  and  a  candle  in  the  other ;  and  a  sort  of  black
phantom  with  horns  and  a  tail  presented  itself,  and
besfan  to  gambol  about  before  them.

One  of  them  fired  off  his  pistol ;  the  spectre,  instead
of  falling,  turns,  and  skips  before  him :  the  gentleman
tries  to  seize  it,  but  the  spirit  escapes  by  the  back  stair-
case ;  the  gentleman  follows  it,  but  loses  sight  of  it,  and
after  several  turnings,  the  spectre  throws  itself  into
a  granary,  and  disappears  at  the  moment  its  pursuer
reckoned  on  seizing  and  stopping  it.  A  light  w^as
brought,  and  it  was  remarked  that  where  the  spectre
had  disappeared,  there  was  a  trap-door  which  had  been
bolted  after  it  entered ;  they  forced  open  the  trap,  and
found  the  pretended  spirit.  He  owned  all  his  artifices,
and  that  what  had  rendered  him  proof  against  the  pistol
shot,  was  buffalo's  hide  tightly  fitted  to  his  body.

Cardinal    de    Retz^   in    his   Memoirs   relates  very
agreeably  the  alarm  which  seized  himself  and  those
'  M6m.  de  Cardinal  de  Eetz,  torn.  i.  pp.  43,  44.


252  THE  PHANTOM  WOELD.

witli  him,  on  meeting  a  company  of  black  Augustine

friars,  wlio  came  to  bathe  in  the  river  by  night,  and

whom  they  took  for  a  troop  of  quite  another  description.

A  physician,  in  a  dissertation  which  he  has  given  on

spirits  or  ghosts,  says  that  a  maid  servant  in  the  Rue

St.  Victor,  who  had  gone  down  into  the  cellar,  came

back   very    much    frightened,    saying    she    had    seen

a  spectre  standing  upright  between  two  barrels.     Some

persons  who  were  bolder  went  down,  and  saw  the  same

thing.      It  was  a  dead  body,   which  had  fallen  from

a  cart  coming  from  the  Hotel-Dieu.     It  had  slid  down

by  the  cellar  window  (or  grating),   and  had  remained

standing  between  two  casks.    All  these  collective  facts,

instead  of  confirming  one  another,  and  establishing  the

reality  of  those  ghosts  which  appear  in  certain  houses,

and  keep   away  those  who  would  willingly  dwell  in

them,  are  only  calculated,  on  the  contrary,  to  render

such   stories  in   general  very  doubtful ;    for    on  what

account  should  those  people  who  have  been  buried  and

turned  to  dust  for  a  long  time  find  themselves  able  to

walk  about  with  their  chains?  How  do  they  drag  them?

How  do   they  speak  ?     "What  do  they  want  ?     Is  it

sepulture?  Are  they  not  interred?  If  they  are  heathens

and  reprobates,  they  have  nothing  to  do  with  prayers.

If  they  are  good  people,  who  died  in  a  state  of  grace,

they  may  require  prayers  to  take  them  out  of  purgatory;

but  can  that  be  said  of  the  spectres  spoken  of  by  Pliny

and  Luclan?     Is   it  the   devil,   who   sports  with  the

simplicity  of  men?     Is  it  not  ascribing  to  him   most

excessive  power,  by  making  him  the  author  of  all  these

apparitions,  which  we  conceive  he  cannot  cause  with-


OE   SrECTRES    WHICH    HAUNT  HOUSES.  253

out  the  permission  of  God?  And  we  can  still  less
imao-ine  that  God  will  concur  in  the  deceptions  and
illusions  of  the  demon.  There  is  then  reason  to  be-
lieve that  all  the  apparitions  of  this  kind,  and  all  these
stories,  are  false,  and  must  be  absolutely  rejected,  as
more  fit  to  keep  up  the  superstition  and  idle  credulity
of  the  people  than  to  edify  and  instruct  them.


CHAPTES  XXXYIIL

PKODIGIOtrS   EFFECTS   OF  IMAGINATION    IN   THOSE   MEN   OR   WOilEN   WHO
BELIEVE    THET   HOLD    INTERCOURSE   WITH    THE    DE2I0N.

As  soon  as  we  admit  it  as  a  principle  that  angels  and
demons  are  purely  spiritual  substances,  we  must  con-
sider, not  only  as  chimerical,  but  also  as  impossible,  all
personal  intercourse  between  a  demon  and  a  man,  or
a  woman,  and  consequently  regard  as  the  eifect  of  a
depraved  or  deranged  imagination  all  that  is  related  of
demons,  whether  incubi  or  succubi,  and  of  the  epMaltes
of  which  such  strange  tales  are  told.

The  author  of  the  Book  of  Enoch,  which  is  cited  by
the  fathers,  and  regarded  as  canonical  Scripture  by
some  ancient  writers,  has  taken  occasion  from  these
words  of  Moses, ^ — *'  The  children  of  God,  seeing  the
daughters  of  men,  who  were  of  extraordinary  beauty,
took  them  for  wives,  and  begat  the  giants  of  them," —
of  settino;  forth  that  the  angels,  smitten  with  love  for
the  daughters  of  men,  wedded  them,  and  had  by  them
children,  which  are  those  giants  so  famous  in  antiquity.^
Some  of  the  ancient  fathers  have  thought  that  this

"  Gen.  vi.  1,  2,

•»  Athenagorus  and  Clem.  Alex.  lib.  iii.  &  v.  Strom.  &  lib.  iL  Pedagog.


EIIECTS   OF  IMAGINATION.  255

irregular  love  of  the  angels  was  the  cause  of  their  fall,
and  that  till  then  they  had  remained  in  the  just  and  due
subordination  which  they  owed  to  their  Creator.

It  appears  from  Josephus,  that  the  Jews  of  his  day
seriously  believed^  that  the  angels  were  subject  to  these
weaknesses  like  men.  St.  Justin  Martyr'^  thought  that
the  demons  were  the  fruit  of  this  commerce  of  the
angels  with  the  daughters  of  men.

But  these  ideas  are  now  almost  entirely  given  up,
especially  since  the  belief  in  the  spirituality  of  angels
and  demons  has  been  adopted.  Commentators  and  the
fathers  have  generally  explained  the  passage  in  Genesis
which  we  have  quoted  as  relating  to  the  children  of
Seth,  to  whom  the  Scripture  gives  the  name  of  children
of  God,  to  distinguish  them  from  the  sons  of  Cain,  who
were  the  fathers  of  those  here  called  the  daughters  of
men.  The  race  of  Seth  having  then  formed  alliances
with  the  race  of  Cain,  by  means  of  those  marriages
before  alluded  to,  there  proceeded  from  these  unions
powerful,  violent,  and  impious  men,  who  drew  down
upon  the  earth  the  terrible  effects  of  God's  wrath,
which  burst  forth  at  the  universal  deluge.

Thus,  then,  these  marriages  between  the  children  of
God  and  the  daughters  of  men  have  no  relation  to  the
question  we  are  here  treating;  what  we  have  to  ex-
amine is — if  the  demon  can  have  personal  commerce
with  man  or  woman,  and  if  what  is  said  on  that  subject
can  be  connected  with  the  apparitions  of  evil  spirits
amongst  mankind,  which  is  the  principal  object  of  this
dissertation.

'  Joseph.  Antiq.  lib,  i.  c.  4.  ^  Justin.  Apolog.  utroque.


256  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

I  win  give  some  instances  of  those  persons  who  have
believed  that  thej  held  such  intercourse  with  the
demon.  Torcjuemada  relates,  in  a  detailed  manner,
what  happened  in  his  time,  and  to  his  knowledge,  in
the  town  of  Cagliari,  in  Sardinia,  to  a  young  lady,  who
suiFered  herself  to  be  corrupted  by  the  demon ;  and
having  been  arrested  by  the  Inquisition,  she  suffered
the  penalty  of  the  flames,  in  the  mad  hope  that  her
pretended  lover  would  come  and  deliver  her.

In  the  same  place  he  speaks  of  a  young  girl  who  was
sought  in  marriage  by  a  gentleman  of  good  family;
when  the  devil  assumed  the  form  of  this  young  man,
associated  with  the  young  lady  for  several  months,
made  her  promises  of  marriage,  and  took  advantage  of
her.  She  was  only  undeceived  w^hen  the  young  lord
who  sought  her  in  marriage  informed  her  that  he  was
absent  from  town,  and  more  than  fifty  leagues  off,  the
day  that  the  promise  in  question  had  been  given,  and
that  he  never  had  the  slightest  knowledge  of  it.  The
young  girl,  thus  disabused,  retired  into  a  convent,  and
did  penance  for  her  double  crime.

We  read  in  the  life  of  St.  Bernard,  Abbot  of  Clair-
vaux,^  that  a  woman  of  Nantes,  in  Brittany,  saw,  or
thought  she  saw  the  demon  every  night,  even  w^hen
lying  by  her  husband.  She  remained  six  years  in  this
state  ;  at  the  end  of  that  period,  having  her  disorderly
life  in  horror,  she  confessed  herself  to  a  priest,  and
by  his  advice  began  to  perform  several  acts  of  piety,
as  much  to  obtain  pardon  for  her  crime,  as  to  deliver
herself  from  her  abominable  lover.  But  when  the
«  Vita  St.  Bernard,  torn.  i.  lib.  20.


EFFECTS   OF   IMAGINATION.  257

husband  of  this  woman  was  informed  of  the  circum-
stance, he  left  her,  and  would  never  see  her  again.

This  unhappy  woman  was  informed  by  the  devil
himself,  that  St.  Bernard  would  soon  come  to  Nantes,
but  she  must  mind  not  to  speak  to  him,  for  this  abbot
could  by  no  means  assist  her ;  and  If  she  did  speak  to
him,  it  would  be  a  great  misfortune  to  her ;  and  that
from  being  her  lover,  he  who  warned  her  of  it  would
become  her  most  ardent  persecutor.

The  saint  reassured  this  woman,  and  desired  her  to
make  the  sign  of  the  cross  on  herself  on  going  to  bed,
and  to  place  next  her  in  the  bed  the  staff  which  he  gave
her.  "  If  the  demon  comes,"  said  he,  "  let  him  do  what
he  can."  The  demon  came;  but,  without  daring  to
approach  the  bed,  he  threatened  the  woman  greatly,
and  told  her  that  after  the  departure  of  St.  Bernard  he
would  come  again  to  torment  her.

On  the  following  Sunday,  St.  Bernard  repaired  to
the  Cathedral  Church,  with  the  Bishop  of  Nantes  and
the  Bishop  of  Chartres,  and  having  caused  lighted
tapers  to  be  given  to  all  the  people,  who  had  assembled
in  a  great  crowd,  the  saint,  after  having  publicly  re-
lated the  abominable  action  of  the  demon,  exorcised  and
anathematised  the  evil  spirit,  and  forbade  him,  by  the
authority  of  Jesus  Christ,  ever  again  to  approach  that
woman,  or  any  other.  Every  body  extinguished  their
tapers,  and  the  power  of  the  demon  was  annihilated.

This  example  and  the  two  preceding  ones,  related  in
so  circumstantial  a  manner,  might  make  us  believe  that
there  is  some  reality  in  what  is  said  of  demons  incubi
and  succubl;  but  if  we  deeply  examine  the  facts,  we


258  THE  PHANTOM   WORLD.

shall  find  that  an  imagination  strongly  possessed,  and
violent  prejudice,  may  produce  all  that  we  have  just
rej^eated.

St.  Bernard  begins  by  curing  the  woman's  mind,  by
giving  her  a  stick,  which  she  was  to  place  by  her  side
in  the  bed.  This  staff  sufficed  for  the  first  impression ;
but  to  dispose  her  for  a  complete  cure,  he  exorcises  the
demon,  and  then  anathematises  him,  with  all  the  eclat
he  possibly  could :  the  bishops  are  assembled  in  the
cathedral,  the  people  repair  thither  in  crowds ;  the  cir-
cumstance is  recounted  in  pompous  terms;  the  evil
spirit  is  threatened;  the  tapers  are  extinguished — all
of  them  striking  ceremonies  :  the  woman  is  moved  by
them,  and  her  imagination  is  restored  to  a  healthy  tone.

Jerome  Cardan^  relates  two  singular  examples  of  the
power  of  imagination  in  this  way ;  he  had  them  from
Francis  Pico  de  Mirandola.  "  I  know,"  says  the  latter,
"  a  priest,  seventy-five  years  of  age,  who  lived  w^ith  a
pretended  woman,  whom  he  called  Hermeline,  with
whom  he  slept,  conversed,  and  conducted  in  the  streets
as  if  she  had  been  his  wife.  He  alone  saw  her,  or
thought  he  saw  her,  so  that  he  was  looked  upon  as  a
man  who  had  lost  his  senses.  This  priest  was  named
Benedict  Beina.  He  had  been  arrested  by  the  Inquisi-
tion, and  punished  for  his  crimes  ;  for  he  owned  that  in
the  sacrifice  of  the  mass  he  did  not  pronounce  the
sacramental  words,  that  he  had  given  the  consecrated
wafer  to  women  to  make  use  of  in  sorcery,  and  that  he
had  sucked  the  blood  of  children.  He  avowed  all  this
while  undergoing  the  question.

*  Cardan,  de  Variet.  lib.  xv.  c.  Ixxx.  p.  290.


EFFECTS   OF  IMAGINATION.  259

Another,  named  Pineto,  held  converse  with  a  demon,
whom  he  kept  as  his  wife,  and  with  whom  he  had  inter-
course for  more  than  forty  years.  This  man  was  still
livinof  in  the  time  of  Pico  de  Mirandola.

Devotion  and  spirituality,  when  too  contracted  and
carried  to  excess,  have  also  their  derangements  of  hna-
gination.  Persons  so  affected  often  believe  they  see,  hear,
and  feel,  what  passes  only  in  their  brain,  and  which
takes  all  its  reality  from  their  prejudices  and  self-love.
This  is  less  mistrusted,  because  the  object  of  it  is  holy
and  pious ;  but  error  and  excess,  even  in  matters  of
devotion,  are  subject  to  very  great  inconveniences,  and
it  is  very  important  to  undeceive  all  those  who  give
way  to  this  kind  of  mental  derangement.

For  instance,  we  have  seen  persons  eminent  for  their
devotion,  who  believed  they  saw  the  Holy  Virgin,  St.
Joseph,  the  Saviour,  and  their  guardian  angel,  who
spoke  to  them,  conversed  with  them,  touched  the
wounds  of  the  Lord,  and  tasted  the  blood  which  flowed
from  his  side  and  his  wounds.  Others  thought  they
were  in  company  with  the  Holy  Virgin  and  the  Infant
Jesus,  who  spoke  to  them  and  conversed  with  them ;
in  idea,  however,  and  without  reality.

In  order  to  cure  the  two  ecclesiastics  of  whom  we
have  spoken,  gentler  and  perhaps  more  efficacious
means  mio-ht  have  been  made  use  of  than  those  em-
ployed  by  the  tribunal  of  the  Inquisition.  Every  day
hypochondriacs,  or  maniacs,  with  fevered  imaginations,
diseased  brains,  or  with  the  viscera  too  much  heated,
are  cured  by  simple  and  natural  remedies,  either  by
cooling   the   blood,   and   creating   a   diversion   in   the


260  THE  PHANTOM   WORLD.

humours  thereof,  or  by  striking  the  imagiuation  through
some  new  device,  or  by  giving  so  much  exercise  of
body  and  mind  to  those  who  are  afflicted  with  such
maladies  of  the  brain,  that  they  may  have  something
else  to  do  or  to  think  of,  than  to  nourish  such  fancies,
and  strengthen  them  by  reflections  daily  recurring,  and
having  always  the  same  end  and  object.


CHAPTER  XXXIX.


RETURN   AND    APPARITIONS    OF    SOULS   AFTER   THE    DEATH    OF    THE    BODY,
PROVED    FROM    SCRIPTURE.


The  dogma  of  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  and  of  its
existence  after  its  separation  from  the  body  which  it
once  animated,  being  taken  for  indubitable,  and  Jesus
Christ  having  invincibly  established  it  against  the
Sadducees,  the  return  of  souls  and  their  apparition  to
the  living,  by  the  command  or  permission  of  God,  can
no  longer  appear  so  incredible,  nor  even  so  difficult.

It  was  a  known  and  received  truth  among  the  Jews
in  the  time  of  our  Saviour ;  he  assumed  it  as  certain,
and  never  pronounced  a  word  which  could  give  any
one  reason  to  think  that  he  disapproved  of,  or  con-
demned it ;  he  only  warned  us  that  in  common  appari-
tions, spirits  have  neither  flesh  nor  bones,  as  he  had
himself  after  his  resurrection.  If  St.  Thomas  doubted
of  the  reality  of  the  resurrection  of  his  master,  and  the
truth  of  his  appearance,  it  was  because  he  was  aware
that  those  who  suppose  they  see  apparitions  of  spirits
are  subject  to  illusion;  and  that  one  strongly  pre-
possessed, will  often  believe  he  beholds  what  he  does
not  see,  and  hear  that  which  he  hears  not ;  and  even
had  Jesus  Christ  appeared  to  his  Apostles,  that  would


262  THE  PHANTOM  WOELD.

not  prove  that  he  was  resuscitated,  since  a  spirit  can
appear,  while  its  body  is  in  the  tomb  and  even  cor-
rupted or  reduced  to  dust  and  ashes.

The  Apostles  doubted  not  of  the  possibility  of  the
apparition  of  spirits :  when  they  saw  the  Saviour  coming
towards  them,  walking  upon  the  waves  of  the  Lake
of  Gennesareth,^  they  at  first  believed  that  it  was  a
phantom.

After  St.  Peter  had  left  the  prison  by  the  aid  of  an
angel,  and  came  and  knocked  at  the  door  of  the  house
where  the  brethren  were  assembled,  the  servant  whom
they  sent  to  open  it,  hearing  Peter's  voice,  thought  it
was  his  spirit,  or  an  angel ''  who  had  assumed  his  form
and  voice.  The  wicked  rich  man,  being  in  the  flames
of  hell,  begged  of  Abraham  to  send  Lazarus  to  earth,
to  warn  his  brothers  ^  not  to  expose  themselves  to  the
danger  of  falling  like  him  in  the  extreme  of  misery :
he  believed,  without  doubt,  that  souls  could  return  to
earth,  make  themselves  visible,  and  speak  to  the  living.

In  the  transfiguration  of  Jesus  Christ,  Moses,  who
had  been  dead  for  ages,  appeared  on  j\Iount  Tabor
with  Elias,  conversing  with  Jesus  Christ  then  trans-
fioured.*^  After  the  resurrection  of  the  Saviour,  several
persons,  who  had  long  been  dead,  arose  from  their
graves,  went  into  Jerusalem  and  appeared  unto  many.^

In  the  Old  Testament,  King  Saul  addresses  himself
to  the  witch  of  Endor,  to  beg  of  her  to  evoke  for  him
the  soul  of  Samuel  f  that  prophet  appeared  and  spoke

^  Matt.  xi.  16.     Mark  vi.  43.  ^  Acts  xii.  13,  14.

<=  Luke  xxi.  14,  15.  ^  Luke  ix.  32.

^  Matt,  xxvii.  34.  ^  1  Sam.  xxviii.  7,  ad  finem.


RETURN   AND   ArPARITIONS   OF   SOULS.  263

to  Saul.  I  know  that  considerable  difficulties  and
objections  have  been  formed,  as  to  this  evocation  and
this  aj^parition  of  Samuel.  But,  whether  he  appeared
or  not, — whether  tlie  pythoness  did  really  evoke  him,  or
only  deluded  Saul  with  a  false  appearance, — I  deduce
from  it,  that  Saul  and  those  with  him  were  persuaded
that  the  spirits  of  the  dead  could  appear  to  the  living,
and  reveal  to  them  things  unknown  to  men.

St.  Augustine,  in  reply  to  Simplicius,  who  had  pro-
posed to  him  his  difficulties  respecting  the  truth  of  this
apparition,  says  at  first,"  that  it  is  no  more  difficult  to
understand  that  the  demon  could  evoke  Samuel  by  the
help  of  a  witch,  than  it  is  to  comprehend  how  that
Satan  could  speak  to  God,  and  tempt  the  holy  man  Job,
and  ask  permission  to  tempt  the  Apostles ;  or  that  he
could  transport  Jesus  Christ  himself  to  the  highest
pinnacle  of  the  Temple  of  Jerusalem.

We  may  believe  also,  that  God,  by  a  particular  dis-
pensation of  his  will,  may  have  permitted  the  demon  to
evoke  Samuel,  and  make  him  appear  before  Saul,  to
announce  to  him  what  was  to  happen  to  him,  not  by
virtue  of  magic,  not  by  the  power  of  the  demon  alone,
but  solely  because  God  willed  it,  and  ordained  it  thus
to  be.

He  adds,  that  it  may  be  advanced  that  it  is  not
Samuel  who  appears  to  Saul,  but  a  phantom,  formed
by  the  illusive  power  of  the  demon,  and  by  the  force  of
magic ;  and  that  the  Scripture,  in  giving  the  name  of
Samuel  to  this  phantom,  has  made  use  of  ordinary
language,  which  gives  the  name  of  things  themselves,
«  Augustin  de  Diversis  Quaest.  ad  Simplicium,  QusBst.  cxi.


264  THE   PHATsTOM   WORLD.

to  that  which  is  but  their  image  or  representation  in
painting  or  in  sculpture.

If  it  should  be  asked,  how  this  phantom  could  dis-
cover the  future,  and  predict  to  Saul  his  approaching
death :  we  may  likewise  ask,  how  the  demon  could  know
Jesus  Christ  for  God  alone,  while  the  Jews  knew  him
not, — and  the  girl  possessed  with  a  spirit  of  divination,
spoken  of  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,^  could  bear  witness
to  the  Apostles,  and  undertake  to  become  their  advocate
in  rendering  good  testimony  to  their  mission.

Lastly ;  St.  Augustine  concludes  by  saying,  that  he
does  not  think  himself  sufficiently  enlightened  to  decide
whether  the  demon  can,  or  cannot,  by  means  of  magical
enchantments,  evoke  a  soul  after  the  death  of  the  body,
so  that  it  may  appear  and  become  visible  in  a  corporeal
form,  which  may  be  recognised,  and  capable  of  speak-
ing; and  revealino'  the  hidden  future.  And  if  this
potency  be  not  accorded  to  magic  and  the  demon,  we
must  conclude  that  all  which  is  related  of  this  appari-
tion of  Samuel  to  Saul,  is  an  illusion  and  a  false
apparition  made  by  the  demon  to  deceive  men.

In  the  books  of  the  Maccabees,^  the  High  Priest
Onias,  who  had  been  dead  several  years  before  that
time,  appeared  to  Judas  Maccabeeus,  in  the  attitude  of
a  man  whose  hands  were  outspread,  and  who  was
praying  for  the  people  of  the  Lord  :  at  the  same  time
the  Prophet  Jeremiah,  long  since  dead,  appeared  to  the
same  Maccabajus ;  and  Onias  said  to  him,  "  Behold  that
holy  man,  who  is  the  protector  and  friend  of  his
brethren ;  it  is  he  who  prays  continunlly  for  the  Lord's
h  Acts  xxvi.  17.  '2  Mace.  x.  29.


RETURN   AND   APPARITIONS    OF   SOULS.  265

people,  and  for  the  Holy  City  of  Jerusalem."  So
saying,  he  put  into  the  hands  of  Judas  a  golden  sword,
saying  to  him,  "  Receive  this  sword  as  a  gift  from
heaven,  by  means  of  which  you  shall  destroy  the
enemies  of  my  people  Israel."

In  the  same  second  book  of  the  Maccabees,'^  it  is
related,  that  in  the  thickest  of  the  battle  fought  by
Timotheus,  general  of  the  armies  of  Syria,  against
Judas  Maccabaeus,  they  saw  five  men  as  if  descended
from  heaven,  mounted  on  horses  with  golden  bridles,
who  were  at  the  head  of  the  army  of  the  Jews,  two  of
them  on  each  side  of  Judas  Maccabaeus,  the  chief
captain  of  the  army  of  the  Lord ;  they  shielded  him
with  their  arms,  and  launched  against  the  enemy  such
fiery  darts  and  thunder-bolts,  that  they  were  blinded
and  mortally  afraid  and  terrified.

These  five  armed  horsemen,  these  combatants  for
Israel,  are  apparently  no  other  than  Mattathias,  the
father  of  Judas  Maccabasus,^  and  four  of  his  sons,  who
were  already  dead ;  there  yet  remained  of  his  seven  sons,
but  Judas  Maccabaius,  Jonathan,  and  Simon.  We  may
also  understand  it  as  five  angels,  who  were  sent  by
God  to  the  assistance  of  the  Maccabees.  In  whatever
Avay  we  regard  it,  these  are  not  doubtful  apparitions,
both  on  account  of  the  certainty  of  the  book  in  which
they  are  related,  and  the  testimony  of  a  whole  army  by
which  they  were  seen.

Whence  I  conclude,  that  the  Hebrews  had  no  doubt
that  the  spirits  of  the  dead  could  return  to  earth,  that
they  did  return  in  fact,  and  that  Ihey  discovered  to  the

^  2  Mace.  X.  29.  i  1  Mace.  xi.  1.

VOL.  I.  N


266  THE  PHANTOM   WOULD.

living  things  beyond  our  natural  knowledge.  Moses
expressly  forbids  the  Israelites  to  consult  the  dead."^
But  these  apparitions  did  not  show  themselves  in  solid
and  material  bodies ;  the  Saviour  assures  us  of  it  when
he  says,  "  Spirits  have  neither  flesh  nor  bones."  It
was  often  only  an  aerial  figure  which  struck  the  senses
and  the  imagination,  like  the  images  which  w^e  see  in
sleep,  or  that  we  firmly  believe  we  hear  and  see.  The
inhabitants  of  Sodom  were  struck  with  a  species  of
blindness,^  which  prevented  them  from  seeing  the  door
of  Lot's  house,  into  which  the  angels  had  entered.
The  soldiers  who  sought  for  Elisha,  were  in  the  same
way  blinded  in  some  sort,°  although  they  spoke  to  him
they  were  seeking  for,  who  led  them  into  Samaria
without  their  perceiving  him.  The  two  disciples  who
went  on  Easter-day  to  Emmaus,  in  company  with
Jesus  Christ  their  Master,  did  not  recognise  him  till
the  breaking  of  the  bread.?

Thus,  the  apparitions  of  spirits  to  mankind  are  not
always  in  a  corporeal  form,  palpable  and  real ;  but  God,
who  ordains  or  permits  them,  often  causes  the  persons
to  whom  these  apparitions  appear,  to  behold,  in  a  dream
or  otherwise,  those  spirits  which  speak  to,  warn,  or
threaten  them ;  who  makes  them  see  things  as  if
present,  which  in  reality  are  not  before  their  eyes,  but
only  in  their  imagination ;  which  does  not  prove  these
visions  and  warnings  not  to  be  sent  from  God,  who,
by  hhnself,  or  by  the  ministration  of  his  angels,  or  by
souls  disengaged  from  the  body,  inspires  the  minds  of

'"  Deut.  xviii.  11.  ^  Gen,  xix.  11.

"  2  Kini^s  vi.  19.  p  Luke  xxvi.  IG.


EETUEN   AND   APPARITIONS   OF   SOULS.  267

men  with  what  he  judges  proper  for  them  to  know,
whether  in  a  dream,  or  by  external  signs,  or  by  words,
or  else  by  certain  impressions  made  on  their  senses,  or
in  their  imagination,  in  the  absence  of  every  external
object.

If  the  apparitions  of  the  souls  of  the  dead  were
things  in  nature  and  of  their  own  choice,  there  would
be  few  persons  who  would  not  come  back  to  visit  the
things  or  the  persons  which  have  been  dear  to  them
during  this  life.  St.  Augustine  says  it  of  his  mother,
St.  Monica,  1  who  had  so  tender  and  constant  an
affection  for  him,  and  who,  while  she  lived,  followed
him  and  sought  him  by  sea  and  land.  The  bad  rich
man  would  not  have  failed,  either,  to  come  in  person  to
his  brethren  and  relations,  to  inform  them  of  the
wretched  condition  in  which  he  found  himself  in  hell.
It  is  a  pure  favour  of  the  mercy  or  the  power  of  God,
and  which  he  grants  to  very  few  persons,  to  make  their
appearance  after  death ;  for  which  reason  we  should  be
very  much  on  our  guard  against  all  that  is  said,  and  all
that  we  find  written  on  the  subject  in  books.

1  Aug.  de  Cur^  gerenda  pro  Mortuis,  c.  xiii.


n2


CHAPTER  XL.

APPARITIONS    OF   SPIRITS    PROVED   FROM    HISTORY,

St.  Augustine^  acknowledo^es  that  the  dead  have
often  appeared  to  the  living,  have  revealed  to  them  the
spot  where  their  body  remained  unburied,  and  have
shown  them  that  where  they  wished  to  be  interred.  He
says,  morever,  that  a  noise  was  often  heard  in  churches
where  the  dead  were  inhumed,  and  that  dead  persons
have  been  seen  often  to  enter  the  houses  wherein  they
dwelt  before  their  decease.

We  read  that  in  the  Council  of  Elvira,^  which  was
held  about  the  year  300,  it  was  forbidden  to  light
tapers  in  the  cemeteries,  that  the  souls  of  the  saints
might  not  be  disturbed.  The  night  after  the  death  of
Julian  the  Apostate,  St.  Basil  ^  had  a  vision  in  which
he  fancied  he  saw  the  martyr,  St.  Mercurius,  who
received  an  order  from  God  to  o-o  and  kill  Julian.
A  little  time  afterwards  the  same  saint  Mercurius
returned  and  cried  out, — "  Lord,  Julian  is  pierced  and
wounded  to  death,  as  thou  commandedst  me."  In  the
morning  St.  Basil  announced  this  news  to  the  people.

'  Aug.  de  Cur.l;  gercnd.  pro  Mortiiis,  c.  x.

^  Concil.  Eliber,  anno  circiter  300.

•^  Amplilo.  vita  S.  Basil,  and  Chronic.  Alex.  p.  692.


APPARITIONS  PROVED  FROM  HISTORY.  269

St.  Ignatius,  Bishop  of  Antloch,  who  suffered  mar-
tyrdom in  107/  appeared  to  his  disciples,  embracing
them,  and  standing  near  them ;  and  as  they  persevered
in  praying  with  still  greater  fervour,  they  saw  him
crowned  with  glory,  as  if  in  perspiration,  coming  from
a  great  combat,  environed  with  light.

After  the  death  of  St.  Ambrose,  which  happened  on
Easter  Eve,  the  same  night  in  which  they  baptized
neophytes,  several  newly  baptized  children  saw  the
holy  Bishop,^  and  pointed  him  out  to  their  parents,  who
could  not  see  him  because  their  eyes  were  not  purified,
at  least  says  St.  Paulinus,  a  disciple  of  the  saint,  and
who  wrote  his  life.

He  adds,  that  on  the  day  of  his  death  the  saint  appeared
to  several  holy  persons  dwelling  in  the  East,  praying
with  them  and  giving  them  the  imposition  of  hands ;
they  wrote  to  Milan,  and  it  was  found,  on  comparing
the  dates,  that  this  occurred  on  the  very  day  he  died.
These  letters  were  still  preserved  in  the  time  of  Paulinus,
who  wrote  all  these  things.  This  holy  Bishop  was  also
seen  several  times  after  his  death  praying  in  the  Am-
brosian  Church  at  Milan,  which  he  promised  during
his  life  that  he  would  often  visit.  During^  the  sieire  of
Milan,  St.  Ambrose  appeared  to  a  man  of  that  same
city,  and  promised  that  the  next  day  succour  would
arrive,  which  happened  accordingly.  A  blind  man
having  learnt  in  a  vision  that  the  bodies  of  the  holy
martyrs  Sicineus  and  Alexander  would  come  by  sea  to
Milan,  and  that  Bishop  Ambrose  was  going  to  meet

^  Acta  sincera  Mart.  pp.  11,  22.  Edit.  1713.
*  Paulin.  vit.  S.  Ambros.  n.  47,  48.


270  .  THE   PHANTOM  WORLD.

tliem,  he  prayed  the  same  Bishop  to  restore  him  to
sight,  in  a  dream  •  Ambrose  replied,  "  Go  to  Milan ;
come  and  meet  my  brethren ;  they  will  arrive  on  such
a  day,  and  they  will  restore  you  to  sight."  The  blind
man  went  to  Milan,  where  he  had  never  been  before,
touched  the  shrine  of  the  holy  martyrs,  and  recovered
his  eyesight.  He  himself  related  the  circumstance  to
Paulinus.

The  Lives  of  the  Saints  are  full  of  apparitions  of
deceased  persons;  and  if  they  were  collected,  large
volumes  might  be  filled.  St.  Ambrose,  of  whom  we
have  just  spoken,  discovered  after  a  miraculous  fashion
the  bodies  of  St.  Gervasius  and  St.  Protasius,^  and  those
of  St.  Nazairius  and  St.  Celsus.

Evodius,  Bishop  of  Upsal  in  Africa,"  a  great  friend
of  St.  Augustine,  was  well  persuaded  of  the  reality  of
apparitions  of  the  dead,  from  his  own  experience,  and
he  relates  several  instances  of  such  things,  which  hap-
pened in  his  own  time ;  as,  that  of  a  good  Avidow  to
whom  a  deacon  appeared,  who  had  been  dead  for  four
years.  He  was  accompanied  by  several  of  the  servants
of  God,  of  both  sexes,  who  were  preparing  a  palace  of
extraordinary  beauty.  This  widow  asked  him  for  w^iom
they  were  making  these  preparations ;  he  replied  that
it  was  for  the  youth  who  died  the  preceding  day.  At
the  same  time  a  venerable  old  man,  who  w^as  in  the
same  palace,  commanded  two  young  men,  arrayed  in
white,  to  take  the  deceased  young  man  out  of  his  grave,
and  conduct  him  to  this  place.     As  soon  as  he  had  left

^  Ambros.  Epist.  22,  p,  874  :  vid.  notes,  ibid.

s  Evod.  Upsal.  apud  Aug.  Epist.  clviii.  Idem,  Aug.  Epist.  clix.


APPARITIONS  PPtOVED   FKOM  HISTORY.  271

the  grave,  fresh  roses  and  rose-beds  sprang  up,  and  the
young  man  appeared  to  a  monk,  and  told  him  that  Grod
had  received  him  into  the  number  of  his  elect,  and  had
sent  him  to  fetch  his  father,  who  in  fact  died  four  days
after  of  slow  fever.

Evodius  asks  himself  diverse  questions  on  this  recital :
If  the  soul  on  quitting  its  (mortal)  body  does  not
retain  a  certain  subtile  body,  with  which  it  appears,  and
by  means  of  which  it  is  transported  from  one  spot  to
another  ?  If  The  Angels,  even,  have  not  a  certain  kind
of  body ;  for  if  they  are  incorporeal,  how  can  they  be
counted  ?  And  if  Samuel  appeared  to  Saul,  how  could
it  take  place  if  Samuel  had  no  members  ?  He  adds,
"I  remember  well  that  Profuturus,  Privatus  and  Ser-
vitius,  whom  I  had  known  in  the  monastery  here,
appeared  to  me,  and  talked  with  me  after  their  decease ;
and  what  they  told  me,  happened.  Was  it  their  soul
which  appeared  to  me,  or  was  it  some  other  spirit  which
assumed  their  form?"  He  concludes  from  this  that  the
soul  is  not  absolutely  bodiless,  since  God  alone  is  incor-
poreal.^^

St.  Augustine,  who  was  consulted  on  this  matter  by
Evodius,  does  not  think  that  the  soul,  after  the  death
of  the  body,  is  clothed  with  any  material  substantial
form ;  but  he  confesses  that  it  is  very  difficult  to  explain
how  an  infinite  number  of  things  are  done,  which  pass
in  our  minds,  as  well  in  our  sleep  as  when  we  are
awake,  in  which  Ave  seem  to  see,  feel,  and  discourse,
and  do  things  which  it  would  appear  could  be  done

^  "  Animam  igitur  omni  corpore  carere  omnino  non  posse,  illud,  ut
puto,  ostendit  quia  Deus  solus  omni  corpore  semper  caret."


273  THE  PHANTOM  WOKLD.

only  hj  the  body,  although  it  is  certain  that  nothing
bodily  occurs.  And  how  can  we  e>; plain  things  so
unknown,  and  so  far  beyond  anything  that  we  expe-
rience every  day,  since  we  cannot  explain  even  what
daily  experience  shows  us/  Evodius  adds,  that  several
persons  after  their  decease  have  been  goino;  and  coming
in  their  houses  as  before,  both  day  and  night ;  and
that  in  churches  where  the  dead  were  buried,  they
often  heard  a  noise  in  the  night,  as  of  persons  praying
aloud.

St.  Augustine,  to  Avhom  Evodius  writes  all  this,
acknowledges  that  there  is  a  great  distinction  to  be
made  between  true  and  false  visions,  and  that  he  could
wish  he  had  some  sure  means  of  discerning;  them  cor-
rectly.  The  same  saint  relates  on  this  occasion  a
remarkable  story,  which  has  much  connexion  with  the
matter  we  are  treating  upon.  A  physician  named
Gennadius,  a  great  friend  of  St.  Augustine's,  and  well
known  at  Carthage  for  his  great  talent  and  his  kindness
to  the  poor,  doubted  whether  there  was  another  life.
One  day  he  saw,  in  a  dream,  a  young  man  who  said  to
him,  "  Follow  me  ;"  he  followed  him  in  spirit,  and  found
himself  in  a  city,  where,  on  his  right  hand,  he  heard
most  admirable  melody ;  he  did  not  remember  what  he
heard  on  his  left.

Another  time  he  saw  the  same  young  man,  who  said
to  him,  "  Do  you  know  me?"  "Very  well,"  answered
he.  "  And  whence  comes  it  that  you  know  me?"  He
related  to  him  what  he  had  showed  him  in   the  city

'  "  Quid  se  praecipitat  de  rarissimis  aut  inexpertis  quasi  definitam
ferre  sententiam,  cum  quotidiana  et  continua  non  solvat  ? "


APPAEITIONS  PEOVED  FEOM  HISTORY.  273

whither  he  had  led  him.  The  young  man  added,
*'  Was  it  in  a  dream,  or  awake,  that  you  saw  all  that?"
"  In  a  dream,"  he  replied.  The  young  man  then  asked.
"  Where  is  your  body  now  ? "  "  In  my  bed,"  said  he.
"  Do  you  know  that  now  you  see  nothing  with  the  eyes
of  your  body?"  "I  know  it,"  answered  he.  "Well,
then,  with  what  eyes  do  you  behold  me?"  As  he
hesitated,  and  knew  not  what  to  reply,  the  young  man
said  to  him,  "  In  the  same  way  that  you  see  and  hear
me  now  that  your  eyes  are  shut,  and  your  senses
asleep ;  thus  after  your  death  you  will  live,  you  will
see,  you  will  hear,  but  with  eyes  of  the  spirit ;  so  doubt
not  that  there  is  another  life  after  the  present  one."

The  great  St.  Anthony,  one  day  when  he  was  wide
awake,  saw  the  soul  of  the  hermit,  St.  Ammon,  being
carried  into  heaven  in  the  midst  of  choirs  of  angels.
Now  St.  Ammon  died  that  same  day,  at  five  days'
journey  from  thence,  in  the  desert  of  Nitria.  The  same
St.  Anthony  saw  also  the  soul  of  St.  Paul  Hermit  us
ascending  to  heaven  surrounded  by  choirs  of  angels  and
prophets.  St.  Benedict  beheld  the  spirit  of  St.  Germain,
Bishop  of  Capua,  at  the  moment  of  his  decease,  who
was  carried  into  heaven  by  angels.  The  same  saint
saw  the  soul  of  his  sister,  St.  Scholastica,  rising  to
heaven  in  the  form  of  a  dove.  We  might  multiply
such  instances  without  end.  They  are  true  apparitions
of  souls  separated  from  their  bodies.

St.  Sulpicius  Severus,  being  at  some  distance  from
the  city  of  Tours,  and  ignorant  of  what  was  passing
there,  fell  one  morning  into  a  light  slumber;  as  he
slept  he  beheld   St.  Martin,  who  appeared   to  him   in

n3


274  THE  phaxto:m  wokld.

a  white  garment,  his  countenance  shining,  his  eyes
sparkHng,  his  hair  of  a  purple  colour ;  it  was,  never-
theless, very  easy  to  recognise  him  by  his  air  and  his
face.  St.  Martin  showed  himself  to  him  with  a  smiling
countenance,  and  holding  in  his  hand  the  book  which
St.  Sulpicius  Severus  had  composed  upon  his  life.
SuJpicius  threw  himself  at  his  feet,  embraced  his  knees,
and  implored  his  benediction,  which  the  saint  bestowed
upon  him.  All  this  passed  in  a  vision ;  and  as  St.
Martin  rose  into  the  air,  Sulpicius  Severus  saw  still  in
the  spirit  the  priest  Clarus,  a  disciple  of  the  saint,  who
went  the  same  way  and  rose  towards  heaven.  At  that
moment  Sulpicius  awoke,  and  a  lad  who  served  him,
on  entering,  told  him  that  two  monks  who  were  just
arrived  from  Tours,  had  brought  word  that  St.  Martin
was  dead.

The  Baron  de  Coussey,  an  old  and  respectable  magis-
trate, has  related  to  me  more  than  once,  that  being  at
more  than  sixty  leagues  from  the  town  where  his
mother  died,  the  night  she  breathed  her  last,  he  was
awakened  by  the  barking  of  a  dog  which  laid  at  the
foot  of  his  bed  ;  and  at  the  same  moment  he  perceived
the  head  of  his  mother  environed  by  a  great  light,  who,
entering  by  the  Avindow  into  his  chamber,  spoke  to  him
distinctly,  and  announced  to  him  various  things  con-
cernino:  the  state  of  his  affairs.

St.  Chrysostom,  in  his  exile,^  and  the  night  preceding

his  death,  saw  the  martyr,   St.  Basilicus,  who  said  to

him, — "  Courage,   brother  John ;   to-morrow  we  sliall

be  together."    The  same  thing  was  foretold  to  a  priest

^  Palladius,  Dialog,  de  Vita  Chrysost.  c.  xi.


APPAPvITIONS   PHOVED  PEOM   HISTORY.  275

who  lived  in  the  same  place.  St.  Basilicus  said  to  him,
"  Prepare  a  place  for  my  brother  John  ;  for,  behold,  he
is  coming."

The  discovery  of  the  body  of  St.  Stephen,  the  first
martyr,  is  very  celebrated  in  the  Church :  this  occurred
in  the  year  415.  St.  Gamaliel,  who  had  been  the  master
of  St.  Paul  before  his  conversion,  appeared  to  a  priest
named  Lucius,  who  slept  in  the  Baptistery  of  the
Church  at  Jerusalem,  to  guard  the  sacred  vases,  and
told  him  that  his  own  body  and  that  of  St.  Stephen  the
proto-martyr  were  interred  at  Caphargamala,  in  the
suburb  named  Dilagabis ;  that  the  body  of  his  son
named  Abibas,  and  that  of  Nicodemus,  reposed  in  the
same  spot.  Lucius  had  the  same  vision  three  times
following,  with  an  interval  of  a  few  days  between.
John,  the  Patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  who  was  then  at  the
Council  of  Dioscopolis,  repaired  to  the  spot,  made  the
discovery  and  translation  of  the  relics,  which  were
transported  to  Jerusalem,  and  a  great  number  of  mira-
cles were  performed  there.

Licinius,  being  in  his  tent,^  thinking  of  the  battle  he
was  to  fight  on  the  morrow,  saw  an  Angel,  who  dictated
to  him  a  form  of  prayer  ^which  he  made  his  soldiers
learn  by  heart,  and  by  means  of  which  he  gained  the
victory  over  the  Emperor  Maximian.

Mascezel,  general  of  the  Roman  troops  which  Stili-
cho  sent  into  Africa  against  Gildas,  prepared  himself
for  this  war,  in  imitation  of  Theodosius  the  Great,  by
prayer  and  the  intervention  of  the  servants  of  God.
He  took  with  him  in  his  vessel  some  monks,  whose
^  Lactant.  de  Mort.  Persec.  c.  46.


276  THE   PHANTOM   WORLD.

only  occupation  during  tlie  voyage  was  to  pray,  fast,
and  sing  psalms.  Gildas  had  an  army  of  seventy
thousand  men;  Mascezel  had  but  five  thousand,  and
did  not  think  he  could  without  rashness  attempt  to
compete  with  an  enemy  so  powerful,  and  so  far  superior
in  the  number  of  his  forces.  As  he  was  pondering
uneasily  on  these  things,  St.  Ambrose,  who  died  the
year  before,  appeared  to  him  by  night,  holding  a  staff
in  his  hand,  and  struck  the  ground  three  times,  crying,
"Here,  here,  here!"  Mascezel  understood  that  the
saint  promised  him  the  victory  in  that  same  spot  three
days  after.  In  fact,  the  third  day  he  marched  upon  the
enemy,  oflPering  peace  to  the  first  whom  he  met ;  but
an  ensign  having  replied  to  him  very  arrogantly,  he
gave  him  a  severe  blow  with  his  sword  upon  his  arm,
which  made  his  standard  swerve ;  those  who  were  afar
off  thought  that  he  was  yielding,  and  that  he  lowered  his
standard  in  sign  of  submission,  and  they  hastened  to  do
the  same.  Paulinus,  who  wrote  the  life  of  St.  Ambrose,
assures  us  that  he  had  these  particulars  from  the  lips
of  Mascezel  himself;  and  Orosius  heard  them  from
those  who  had  been  eye-witnesses  of  the  fact.

The  persecutors  having  indicted  martyrdom  on  seven
Christian  virgins,™  one  of  them  appeared  the  following
night  to  St.  Theodosius  of  Ancyra,  and  revealed  to  him
the  spot  where  herself  and  her  companions  had  been
thrown  into  the  lake,  each  one  with  a  stone  tied  round
her  neck.  As  Theodosius  and  his  people  were  occupied
in  searching  for  their  bodies,  a  voice  from  heaven
warned  Theodosius  to  be  on  his  g-uard  aix^inst  the
"  Acta  sincera  Martyr,  passion.  S.  Thcodos.  M.  pp.  343,  Mi.


APPiUlITIONS   PROVED  PPtO^I  HISTORY.  277

traitor,  meaning  to  indicate  Polycronius,  who  betrayed
Theodosius,  and  was  the  occasion  of  his  being  arrested
and  martyred.

St.  Potamienna,^  a  Christian  vii'gin  who  suffered
martyrdom  at  Alexandria,  appeared  after  her  death  to
several  persons,  and  was  the  cause  of  their  conversion
to  Christianity.  She  appeared  in  particular  to  a  soldier
named  Basilidus,  w'ho,  as  he  was  conducting  her  to  the
place  of  execution,  had  protected  her  from  the  insults
of  the  populace.  This  soldier,  encouraged  by  Pota-
mienna,  who  in  a  vision  placed  a  garland  upon  his  head,
was  baptized,  and  received  the  crown  of  martyrdom.

St.  Gregory  Thaumaturgus,  Bishop  of  N^eocoBsarea  in
Pontus,  being  greatly  occupied  with  certain  theological
difficulties,  raised  by  heretics  concerning  the  mysteries
of  religion,  and  having  passed  great  part  of  the  night
in  studying  those  matters,  saw  a  venerable  old  man
enter  his  room,  having  by  his  side  a  lady  of  august  and
divine  form ;  he  comprehended  that  these  were  the
Holy  Yirgin  and  St.  John  the  Evangelist.  The  Virgin
exhorted  St.  John  to  instruct  the  Bishop,  and  dissipate
his  embarrassment,  by  explaining  clearly  to  him  the
m}'stery  of  the  Trinity,  and  the  Divinity  of  the  Verb
or  Word.  He  did  so,  and  St.  Gregory  wrote  it  down
instantly.  It  is  the  doctrine  which  he  left  to  his  Church,
and  which  tliey  have  to  this  very  day.

°  Euseb.  Hist.  Eccles.  lib.  vi.  c.  8.


CHAPTER  XLI.


MORE   INSTANCES   OF   APPARITIONS.


Peter  the  Venerable,  Abbot  of  Cluny,  relates,
tbat  a  good  priest  named  Stephen,  having  received  the
confession  of  a  lord  named  Guy,  who  was  mortally
wounded  in  a  combat,  this  lord  appeared  to  him  com-
pletely armed  some  time  after  his  death,  and  begged
of  him  to  tell  his  brother  Anselm,  to  restore  an  ox
which  he,  Guy,  had  taken  from  a  peasant,  whom  he
named,  and  to  repair  the  damage  which  he  had  done  to
a  village  which  did  not  belong  to  him,  and  which  he
had  taxed  with  undue  charges ;  that  he  had  forgotten
to  declare  these  two  sins  in  his  last  confession,  and  that
he  was  cruelly  tormented  for  it.  "  And  as  assurance  of
the  truth  of  what  I  tell  you,"  added  he,  "when  you
return  home,  you  will  find  that  you  have  been  robbed
of  the  money  you  intended  for  your  expenses  in  going
to  St.  Jacques."  The  cure,  on  his  return  to  his  house,
found  his  money  gone,  but  could  not  acquit  himself  of
his  commission,  because  Anselm  was  absent.  A  few  days
after,  Guy  appeared  to  him  again,  and  reproached  him
for  having  neglected  to  perform  what  he  had  asked  of
him.     The  cure  excused  himself  on   account  of  the


APPARITIONS   PROVED   FROM   HISTORY.  279

absence  of  Anselm;  and  at  length  went  to  him  and
told  him  what  he  was  charged  to  do.  Anselm  answered
him  harshly,  that  he  was  not  obliged  to  do  penance  for
his  brother^s  sins.

The  dead  man  appeared  a  third  time,  and  implored
the  cure  to  assist  him  In  this  extremity ;  he  did  so,  and
restored  the  value  of  the  ox ;  but  as  the  rest  exceeded
his  power,  he  gave  alms,  and  recommended  Guy  to
the  worthy  people  of  his  acquaintance;  and  he  ap-
peared no  more.

Richer,  a  monk  of  Senones,^  speaks  of  a  spirit  which
returned  in  his  time,  in  the  town  of  Epinal,  about  the
year  1212,  In  the  house  of  a  burgess  named  Hugh
de  la  Cour,  and  who,  from  Christmas  to  Midsummer,
did  a  variety  of  things  in  that  same  house,  in  sight  of
every  body.  They  could  hear  him  speak,  they  could
see  all  he  did,  but  nobody  could  see  him.  He  said,  he
belonged  to  Clexentelne,  a  village  seven  leagues  from
Epinal ;  and  what  Is  also  remarkable  is,  that  during
the  six  months  he  was  heard  about  the  house,  he  did  no
harm  to  any  one.  One  day,  Hugh  having  ordered  his
domestic  to  saddle  his  horse,  and  the  valet  being  busy
about  something  else,  deferred  doing  it,  when  the  spirit
did  his  work,  to  the  great  astonishment  of  all  the
household.  Another  time,  when  Hugh  was  absent,
the  spirit  asked  Stephen,  the  son-in-law  of  Hugh,  for  a
penny,  to  make  an  offering  of  it  to  St.  Groeric,  the
patron  saint  of  Epinal.  Stephen  presented  him  with
an  old  denier  of  Provence;  but  the  spirit  refused  it,
saying,  he  would  have  a  good"  denier  of  Thoulouse.
*  Eiclier  Senon.  in  Chronic,  m.  (Hoc  non  exslat  in  impresso.)


280  THE   PHAXTOM   WORLD.

Stephen  placed  oq  the  threshold  of  the  door  a  Thou-
lousian  denier,  which  disappeared  immediately ;  and
the  following  night,  a  noise,  as  of  a  man  who  was  walk-
ing therein,  w^as  heard  in  the  Church  of  St.  Goeric.

Another  time,  Hugh  having  bought  some  fish  to
make  his  family  a  repast,  the  spirit  transported  the
fish  to  the  garden  which  was  behind  the  house,  put
half  of  it  on  a  tile,  (^scandula,)  and  the  rest  in  a  mortar,
where  it  was  found  ag-ain.  Another  time,  Huo-h  desir-
ing  to  be  bled,  told  his  daughter  to  get  ready  some
bandages.  Immediately  the  spirit  went  into  another
room,  and  fetched  a  new  shirt,  Avhich  he  tore  up  into
several  bandages,  presented  them  to  the  master  of  the
house,  and  told  him  to  choose  the  best.  Another  day,
the  servant  having  spread  out  some  linen  in  the  garden
to  dry,  the  spirit  carried  it  all  up  stairs,  and  folded
them  more  neatly  than  the  cleverest  laundress  could
have  done.

A  man  named  Guy  de  la  Torre,^  who  died  at  Verona
in  1306,  at  the  end  of  eight  days  spoke  to  his  wife  and
the  neighbours  of  both  sexes,  to  the  prior  of  the
Dominicans,  and  to  the  professor  of  theology,  who
asked  him  several  question  in  theology,  to  wdiich  he
replied  very  pertinently.  He  declared  that  he  was  in
purgatory  for  certain  unexpiated  sins.  They  asked
him  how  he  could  possibly  speak,  not  having  the
organs  of  the  voice ;  he  replied,  that  souls  separated
from  the  body  have  the  faculty  of  forming  for  them-
selves instruments  of  the  air  capable  of  pronouncing
words ;  he  added,  that  the  fire  of  hell  acted  upon
*•  Herman  Contract.  Chronic,  p.  1006,


APPARITIONS  PROVED   FROM  HISTORY.  281

spirits,  not  by  its  natural  virtue,  but  by  the  power  of
God,  of  which  that  fire  is  the  instrument.

Here  follows  another  remarkable  instance  of  an
apparition,  related  by  M.  d'Aubigne.  "  I  affirm  upon
the  word  of  the  king'^  the  second  prodigy,  as  being  one
of  the  three  stories  which  he  reiterated  to  us,  his  hair
standing  on  end  at  the  time,  as  we  could  perceive.
This  one  is,  that  the  queen  having  gone  to  bed  at  an
earlier  hour  than  usual,  and  there  being  present  at  her
coucher,  amongst  other  persons  of  note,  the  King  of
Navarre,*^  the  Archbishop  of  Lyons,  the  Ladies  de  Retz,
de  Lignerolles,  and  de  Sauve,  two  of  whom  have  since
confirmed  this  conversation.  As  she  was  hastening  to
bid  them  orood  nio;ht,  she  threw  herself  with  a  start
upon  her  bolster,  put  her  hands  before  her  face,  and
crying  out  violently,  she  called  to  her  assistance  those
who  were  present,  wishing  to  show  them,  at  the  foot
of  the  bed,  the  cardinal,  (de  Lorraine,)  who  extended  his
hand  towards  her ;  she  cried  out  several  times,  '  M.  the
Cardinal,  I  have  nothing  to  do  with  you.'  The  King
of  Navarre  at  the  same  time  sent  one  of  his  gentlemen,
who  brought  back  word  that  he  had  expired  at  that
same  moment."

I  take  from  Sully's  Memoirs,^  which  have  just  been
reprinted  in  better  order  than  they  were  before,
another  singular  fact,  which  may  be  related  with  these.
We  still  endeavour  to  find  out  what  can  be  the  nature


•=  D'Aubigne,  Hist,  Univ.  lib.  ii.  c.  12.  Ap.  1574.
^  Henry  I V".

«  Mem.  de  Sully,  in  4to.  torn.  i.  liv.  x.  p.  562,  note  26.     Or  Edit,  in
12mo.  torn.  iii.  p.  321,  note  26.


282  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

of  that  illusion,  seen  so  often  and  by  the  eyes  of  so
many  persons  in  the  Forest  of  Fontainebleau ;  it  was
a  phantom  surrounded  by  a  pack  of  hounds^  whose
cries  were  heard,  while  they  might  be  seen  at  a  dis-
tance, but  all  disappeared  if  any  one  approached.

The  note  of  M.  d'Ecluse,  editor  of  these  Memoirs,
enters  into  longer  details.  He  observes,  that  M.  de
Perefixe  makes  mention  of  this  phantom ;  and  he  makes
him  say,  with  a  hoarse  voice,  one  of  these  three  sen-
tences :  Do  you  expect  me  ?  or.  Do  you  hear  me  ?  or,
Amend  yourself.  "  And  they  believe,"  says  he,  "  that
these  were  sports  of  sorcerers,  or  of  the  malignant
spirit."  The  Journal  of  Henry  IV.,  and  the  Septenary
Chronicle,  speak  of  them  also,  and  even  assert  that  this
phenomenon  alarmed  Henry  IV.  and  his  courtiers  very
much.  And  Peter  Matthew  says  something  of  it  in
his  History  of  France,  torn.  ii.  p.  68.  Bongars  speaks
of  it  as  others  do,^  and  asserts  that  it  was  a  hunter,
who  had  been  killed  in  tliis  forest  in  the  time  of
Francis  I.  But  now  we  hear  no  more  of  this  spectre,
though  there  is  still  a  road  in  this  forest  which  retains
the  name  of  the  Grand  Veneur,  in  memory,  it  is  said,
of  this  visionary  scene.

A  Chronicle  of  Metz,?  under  the  date  of  the  year
1330,  relates  the  apparition  of  a  spirit  at  Lagni  sur
Marne,  six  leagues  from  Paris.  It  was  a  good  lady,
who  after  her  death  spoke  to  more  than  twenty  people,
her  father,  sister,  daugliter,  and  son-in-law,  and  to
her  other  friends, — asking  them  to  have  said  for  her


'  Bongars,  Epist.  ad  Camerarium.
i  Chronic.  Metens.  Anno,  1330.


APPARITIONS  PROVED   PROM   HISTORY.  283

particular  masses,  as  being  more  efficacious  than  the
common  mass.  As  they  feared  it  might  be  an  evil
spirit,  they  read  to  it  the  beginning  of  the  Gospel  of
St.  John ;  and  they  made  it  say  the  Pater ^  credo,  and
confiteor.  She  said,  she  had  beside  her  two  angels,  one
bad  and  one  good ;  and  that  the  good  angel  revealed  to
her  what  she  ought  to  say.  They  asked  her,  if  they
should  go  and  fetch  the  Holy  Sacrament  from  the
altar ;  she  replied,  it  was  with  them,  for  her  father,
who  was  present,  and  several  others  among  them,  had
received  it  on  Christmas-day,  which  was  the  Tuesday
before.

Father  Taillepied,  a  Cordelier,  and  professor  of  theo-
logy at  Rouen,^  who  composed  a  book  expressly  on  the
subject  of  apparitions,  which  was  printed  at  Kouen  in
1600,  says,  that  one  of  his  fraternity  with  whom  he  was
acquainted,  named  Brother  Gabriel,  appeared  to  several
monks  of  the  convent  at  Nice,  and  begged  of  them  to
satisfy  the  demand  of  a  shop-keeper  at  Marseilles,  of
whom  he  had  taken  a  coat  he  had  not  paid  for.  On
being  asked  why  he  made  so  much  noise,  he  replied,
that  it  was  not  himself,  but  a  bad  spirit  who  wished  to
appear  instead  of  him,  and  prevent  him  from  declaring
the  cause  of  his  torment.

I  have  been  told  by  two  canons  of  St.  Diez,  in  our
neighbourhood,  that  three  months  after  the  death  of
M.  Henri,  canon  of  St.  Diez,  of  their  brotherhood,  the
canon  to  whom  the  house  devolved,  going  with  one
of  his  brethren,  at  two  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  to
look  at  the  said  house,  and  see  what  alterations  it
•»  Taillepied,  Traite  de  1' Apparition  des  Esprits,  c.  xv.  p.  173.


284  THE   PHANTOM  WORLD.

might  suit  him  to  make  in  it,  they  went  into  the
kitchen,  and  both  of  them  saw  in  the  next  room,  which
was  large  and  very  light,  a  tall  ecclesiastic  of  the  same
height  and  figure  as  the  defunct  canon,  who,  turning
towards  them,  looked  them  in  the  face  for  two  minutes,
then  crossed  the  said  room,  and  went  up  a  little  dark
staircase  which  led  to  the  garret.

These  two  gentlemen,  being  much  frightened,  left
the  house  instantly,  and  related  the  adventure  to  some
of  the  brotherhood,  who  were  of  opinion  that  they
ought  to  return  and  see  if  there  was  not  some  one
hidden  in  the  house ;  they  went,  they  sought,  they
looked  every  where,  without  finding  any  one.

We  read  in  the  History  of  the  Bishops  of  Mans,^
that  in  the  time  of  Bishop  Hugh,  who  lived  in  1135,
they  heard,  in  the  house  of  Provost  Nicholas,  a  spirit,
who  alarmed  the  nei2;hbours  and  those  who  lived  in
the  house,  by  uproar  and  frightful  noises,  as  if  he  had
thrown  enormous  stones  against  the  walls,  with  a  force
which  shook  the  roof,  walls,  and  ceilings  ;  he  trans-
ported the  dishes  and  the  plates  from  one  place  to
another,  without  their  seeing  the  hand  which  moved
them.  This  genius  lighted  a  candle,  though  very  far
from  the  fire.  Sometimes,  when  the  meat  was  placed
on  the  table,  he  would  scatter  bran,  ashes,  or  soot,  to
prevent  them  from  touching  any  of  it.  Amica,  the
wife  of  the  Provost  Nicholas,  having  prepared  some
thread  to  be  made  into  cloth,  the  spirit  twisted  and
ravelled  it  in  such  a  way,  that  all  who  saw  it  could  not
sufficiently  admire  the  manner  in  which  it  was  done.
'  Anecdote  Mabill.  p.  320.    Edition  in  fol.


APPARITIONS  PROVED   FROM   HISTORY.  285

Priests  were  called  in,  who  sprinkled  holy  water
every  where,  and  desired  all  those  who  were  there  to
make  the  sign  of  the  cross.  Towards  the  first  and
second  night,  they  heard  as  it  were  the  voice  of  a  young
girl,  who,  with  sighs  that  seemed  drawn  from  the  bottom
of  her  heart,  said  in  a  lamentable  and  sobbing  voice,
that  her  name  was  Gamier ;  and  addressing  itself  to  the
provost,  said,  "  Alas  !  whence  do  I  come  ?  from  what
distant  country,  through  how  many  storms,  dangers,
through  snow,  cold,  fire,  and  bad  weather,  have  I
arrived  at  this  place !  I  have  not  received  power  to
harm  any  one — but  prepare  yourselves  with  the  sign
of  the  cross  against  a  band  of  evil  spirits,  who  are
here  only  to  do  you  harm ;  have  a  mass  of  the  Holy
Ghost  said  for  me,  and  a  mass  for  those  defunct ;  and
you,  my  dear  sister-in-law,  give  some  clothes  to  the
poor,  for  me."

They  asked  this  spirit  several  questions  on  things
past  and  to  come,  to  which  it  replied  very  pertinently ;
it  explained  even  the  salvation  and  damnation  of
several  persons  ;  but  it  would  not  enter  into  any  argu-
ment, nor  yet  into  conference  with  learned  men,  who
were  sent  by  the  Bishop  of  Mans ;  this  last  circum-
stance is  very  remarkable,  and  casts  some  suspicion  on
this  apparition.


CHAPTER  XLII.

ON   THE    APPARITIONS   OP    SPIRITS   "WHO    IMPRINT    THEIR    HANDS   ON    CLOTHES

OR   ON   WOOD.

Within  a  short  time,  a  work  composed  by  a  Father
Premontre,  of  the  Abbey  of  Toussaints,  in  the  Black
Forest,  has  been  communicated  to  me.  His  work  is  in
manuscript,  and  entitled,  "Umbra  Humberti,  hoc  est
historia  memorabilis  D.  Humberti  Birkii  mira  post
mortem  apparitione,  per  A.  Gr.  N."

This  Humbert  Birck  was  a  burgess  of  note,  in  the
town  of  Oppenheim,  and  master  of  a  country  house
called  Berenbach ;  he  died  in  the  month  of  November,
1620,  a  few  days  before  the  feast  of  St.  Martin.  On
the  Saturday  which  followed  his  funeral,  they  began  to
hear  certain  noises  in  the  house  where  he  had  lived
with  his  first  wife ;  for  at  the  time  of  his  death  he  had
married  again.

The  master  of  this  house,  suspecting  that  it  was  his
brother-in-law  who  haunted  it,  said  to  him,  "  If  you
are  Humbert,  my  brother-in-law,  strike  three  times
against  the  wall."  At  the  same  time  they  heard  three
strokes  only,  for  ordinarily  he  struck  several  times.
Sometimes,  also,  he  was  heard  at  the  fountain  where
they  went  for  water,  and  he  frightened  all  the  neigh-
bourhood ;  he  did  not  always  utter  articulate  sounds,


MARKS   LEFT  BY  APPARITIONS.  287

but  he  would  knock  repeatedly,  make  a  noise,  or  a
groan,  or  a  shrill  whistle,  or  sounds  as  a  person  in
lamentation ;  all  this  lasted  for  six  months,  and  then
it  suddenly  ceased.  At  the  end  of  a  year  he  made
himself  heard  more  loudly  than  ever.  The  master
of  the  house,  and  his  domestics,  the  boldest  amongst
them,  at  last  asked  him  what  he  wished  for,  and  in
what  they  could  help  him  ?  He  replied,  but  in  a
hoarse  low  tone,  "  Let  the  cure  come  here  next
Saturday  with  my  children."  The  cure  being  indis-
posed, could  not  go  thither  on  the  appointed  day,  but
he  went  on  the  Monday  following,  accompanied  by  a
good  many  people.

Humbert  received  notice  of  this,  and  he   answered
in  a  very  intelligible  manner.     They  asked  him  if  he
required  any  masses  to  be  said  ?    He  asked  for  three.
They  then  wished  to  know  if  alms  should  be  given  in
his  name  ?     He  said,  "  I  wish  them  to  give  eight  mea-
sures of  corn  to  the  poor,  and  that  my  widow  may  give
something  to  all  my  children."     He  afterwards  ordered
that  what  had  been  badly  distributed  in  his  succession,
which  amounted  to  about  twentv  florins,  should  be  set
aside.     They  asked  why  he  infested  that  house  rather
than  another  ?     He  answered,  that  he  was  forced  to  it
by  conjuration  and  maledictions.     Had  he  received  the
sacraments  of  the  Church  ?     "I  received  them  from
the  cure,  your  predecessor."     He  was  made  to  say  the
Pater  and  the  Ave ;   he  recited  them  with  difficulty,
saying,  that  he  was   prevented  by  an  evil  spirit,  who
would  not  let  him  tell  the  cure  many  other  things.
The  cure,  who  was  named  Premontre,  of  the  abbey


288  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

of  Toussaints,  came  to  the  monastery  on  Tuesday  the
12  th  of  January,  1621,  m  order  to  take  the  opinion  of
the  Superior  on  this  singular  affair ;  they  let  him  have
three  monks  to  help  him  with  their  counsels.  They
all  repaired  to  the  house  wherein  Humbert  continued
his  importunity  ;  for  nothing  that  he  had  requested  had
as  yet  been  executed.  A  great  number  of  those  who
lived  near  were  assembled  in  the  house.  The  master
of  it  told  Humbert  to  rap  against  the  wall ;  he  knocked
very  gently :  then  the  master  desired  him  to  go  and
fetch  a  stone  and  knock  louder ;  he  deferred  a  little,
as  if  he  had  been  to  pick  up  a  stone,  and  gave  a
stronger  blow  upon  the  wall :  the  master  whispered  in
his  neighbour's  ear  as  softly  as  he  could  that  he  should
rap  seven  times,  and  directly  he  rapped  seven  times.
He  always  showed  great  respect  to  the  priests,  and  did
not  reply  to  them  so  boldly  as  to  the  laity ;  and  when
he  was  asked  why — "  It  is,"  said  he,  "  because  they
have  with  them  the  Holy  Sacrament."  However,  they
had  it  no  otherwise  than  because  they  had  said  mass
that  day.  The  next  day  the  three  masses  which  he
had  required  were  said,  and  all  was  disposed  for  a  pil-
grimage, which  he  had  specified  in  the  last  conversation
they  had  with  him ;  and  they  promised  to  give  alms
for  him  the  first  day  possible.  From  that  time  Humbert
haunted  them  no  more.

The  same  monk,  Premontre,  relates  that  on  the  9  th
of  September,  1625,  a  man  named  John  Steinlin  died
at  a  place  called  Altheim,  in  the  diocese  of  Constance.
Steinlin  was  a  man  in  easy  circumstances,  and  a  com-
mon-councilman  of  his    town.     Some   days  after  his


MARKS   LEFT  BY  APPARITIONS.  289

death  he  appeared  during  the  night  to  a  tailor,  named
Simon  Bauh,  in  the  form  of  a  man  surrounded  by
a  sombre  flame,  like  that  of  lighted  sulphur,  going  and
coming  in  his  own  house,  but  without  speaking.  Bauh,
who  was  disquieted  by  this  sight,  resolved  to  ask  him
what  he  could  do  to  serve  him.  He  found  an  oppor-
tunity to  do  so,  the  17th  of  November  in  the  same
year,  1625  ;  for,  as  he  was  reposing  at  night  near  his
stove,  a  little  after  eleven  o'clock,  he  beheld  this  spectre
environed  by  fire  like  sulphur,  who  came  into  his  room,
going  and  coming,  shutting  and  opening  the  windows.
The  tailor  asked  him  what  he  desired.  He  replied,  in
a  hoarse  interrupted  voice,  that  he  could  help  very
much,  if  he  would;  "  but,"  added  he,  "do  not  promise
me  to  do  so,  if  you  are  not  resolved  to  execute  your
promises."  "  I  will  execute  them,  if  they  are  not
beyond  my  power,"  replied  he.

"  I  wish,  then,"  replied  the  spirit,  "  that  you  would
cause  a  mass  to  be  said,  in  the  chapel  of  the  Virgin  at
Rotembourg ;  I  made  a  vow  to  that  intent  during  my
life,  and  I  have  not  acquitted  myself  of  it.  Moreover,
you  must  have  two  masses  said  at  Altheim,  the  one  of  the
Defunct  and  the  other  of  the  Virgin ;  and  as  I  did  not
always  pay  my  servants  exactly,  I  wish  that  a  quarter
of  corn  should  be  distributed  to  the  poor."  Simon
promised  to  satisfy  him  on  all  these  points.  The  spectre
held  out  his  hand,  as  if  to  ensure  his  promise ;  but
Simon,  fearing  that  some  harm  might  happen  to  himself,
tendered  him  the  board  which  came  to  hand,  and  the
spectre  having  touched  it,  left  tlie  print  of  his  hand
with  the  four  fingers  and  thumb,  as  if  fire  had  been

VOL.  I.  O


290  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

there,  and  had  left  a  pretty  deep  impression.  After
that,  he  vanished  with  so  much  noise  that  it  was  heard
three  houses  off.

I  related  in  the  first  edition  of  this  dissertation  on
the  return  of  spirits,  an  adventure  which  happened  at
Fontenoy  on  the  Moselle,  where  it  was  aflSrmed  that
a  spirit  had  in  the  same  manner  made  the  impression
of  its  hand  on  a  handkerchief,  and  had  left  the  impress
of  the  hand  and  of  the  palm,  well  marked.  The  hand-
kerchief is  in  the  hands  of  one  Casmer,  a  constable
living  at  Toul,  who  received  it  from  his  uncle,  the
cure  of  Fontenoy ;  but,  on  a  careful  investigation  of
the  thing,  it  was  found  that  a  young  blacksmith,  who
com'ted  a  young  girl  to  whom  the  handkerchief  be-
longed, had  forged  an  iron  hand  to  print  it  on  the
handkerchief,  and  persuade  people  of  the  reality  of  the
apparition.

At  St.  Avoid,  a  town  of  German  Lorraine,  in  the
house  of  the  cure,  named  M.  Royer  de  Monelos,  there
was  something  very  similar  which  appears  to  have  been
performed  by  a  servant  gu'l,  sixteen  years  of  age,  who
heard  and  saw,  as  she  said,  a  woman  who  made  a  great
noise  in  the  house ;  but  she  was  the  only  person  who
saw  and  heard  her,  although  others  heard  also  the  noise
which  was  made  in  the  house.  They  saw  also  the
young  servant,  as  it  were  pushed,  dragged,  and  struck,
by  the  spirit,  but  never  saw  it,  nor  yet  heard  his  voice.
This  contrivance  began  on  the  night  of  the  31st  of
January,  1694,  and  finished  about  the  end  of  February
the  same  year.  The  cure  conjured  the  spirit  in  Ger-
man and  French.     He  made  no  reply  to  the  exorcisms


MAUKS  LEFT  BY  APPAEITIONS.  291

in  French  but  sighs ;  and  as  they  terminated  the
German  exorcism,  saying,  "  Let  every  spirit  praise  the
Lord,"  the  girl  said  that  the  spirit  had  said,  '^  And  me
also ;"  but  she  alone  heard  it.

Some  monks  of  the  abbey  were  requested  to  come
also  and  exorcise  the  spirit.  They  came,  and  with  them
some  burgesses  of  note  of  St.  Avoid ;  and  neither  before
nor  after  the  exorcisms  did  they  see  or  hear  any  thing,
except  that  the  servant  girl  seemed  to  be  pushed
violently,  and  the  doors  were  roughly  knocked  at.
By  dint  of  exorcisms  they  forced  the  spirit,  or  rather
the  servant  who  alone  heard  and  saw  it,  to  declare  that
she  was  neither  maid  nor  wife ;  that  she  was  called
Claire  Margaret  Henri ;  that  a  hundred  and  fifty  years
ago  she  had  died  at  the  age  of  twenty,  after  having
lived  servant  at  the  cure  of  St.  Avold's  first  of  all  for
eight  years,  and  that  she  had  died  at  Guenvillier  of
grief  and  regret  for  having  killed  her  own  child.  At
last,  the  servant  maintaining  that  she  was  not  a  good
spirit,  she  said  to  her,  "  Give  me  hold  of  your  petticoat
(or  skirt).""  She  would  do  no  such  thing ;  at  the  same
time  the  spirit  said  to  her,  "  Look  at  your  petticoat ;
my  mark  is  upon  it."  She  looked  and  saw  upon  her
skirt  the  five  fingers  of  the  hand  so  distinctly  that  it
did  not  appear  possible  for  any  living  creature  to  have
marked  them  better.  This  affair  lasted  about  two
months,  and  at  this  day,  at  St.  Avoid,  as  in  all  the
country,  they  talk  of  the  spirit  of  St.  Avoid  as  of  a
game  played  by  that  girl,  in  concert,  doubtless,  with
some  persons  who  wished  to  divert  themselves  by
puzzling  the  good  cure  with  his  sisters,  and  all  those

o2


292  THE  PHANTOM  WOKLD.

who  fell  into  the  trap.  They  printed  at  Cusson's,  at
Nancy,  in  1718,  a  relation  of  this  event,  which  at  first
gained  credence  with  a  number  of  people,  but  who
were  quite  undeceived  in  the  end.

I  shall  add  to  this  story  that  which  is  related  by
Philip  Melancthon,^  whose  testimony  in  this  matter
ought  not  to  be  doubted.  He  says  that  his  aunt  having
lost  her  husband  when  she  was  enceinte  and  near  her
time,  she  saw  one  day,  towards  evening,  two  persons
come  into  her  house ;  one  of  them  wore  the  form  of
her  deceased  husband,  the  other  that  of  a  tall  Franciscan.
At  first  she  was  frightened,  but  her  husband  reassured
her,  and  told  her  that  he  had  important  things  to  com-
municate to  her;  at  the  same  time  he  beo:o:ed  the
Franciscan  to  pass  into  the  next  room,  whilst  he  im-
parted his  wishes  to  his  wife.  Then  he  begged  of  her
to  have  some  masses  said  for  the  relief  of  his  soul,  and
tried  to  persuade  her  to  give  her  hand  without  fear ;
as  she  was  unwilling  to  give  it,  he  assured  her  she
would  feel  no  pain.  She  gave  him  her  hand,  and  her
hand  felt  no  pain  when  she  withdrew  it,  but  was  so
blackened  that  it  remained  discoloured  all  her  life.
After  that,  the  husband  called  in  the  Franciscan ;  they
went  out,  and  disappeared.  Melancthon  believes  that
these  were  two  spectres ;  he  adds,  that  he  knows  several
similar  instances,  related  by  persons  worthy  of  credit.

If  these  two  men  were  only  spectres,  having  neither

flesh  nor  bones,  how  could  one  of  them  imprint  a  black

colour  on   the  hand   of  this  widow  ?     How  could  he

who  appeared  to  the  tailor  Bauh  imprint  his  hand  on

»  Philipp.  Melancth.  Theolog.  c.  i.  Oper.  fol.  326,  327.


MAEKS  LEET  BY   APPAEITIOXS.  293

the  board  which  he  presented  to  him  ?  If  they  were
evil  genii,  why  did  they  ask  for  masses  and  order  resti-
tutions ?  Does  Satan  destroy  his  own  empire,  and  does
he  inspire  the  living  with  the  idea  of  doing  good  actions
and  of  fearing  the  pains  with  which  the  sins  of  the
wicked  are  punished  by  God  ?

But  on  looking  at  the  affair  in  another  light,  may
not  the  demon  in  this  kind  of  apparitions,  by  which  he
asks  for  masses  and  prayers,  intend  to  foment  super-
stition, by  making  the  living  believe  that  masses  and
prayers  made  for  them  after  their  death  would  free
them  from  the  pains  of  hell,  even  if  they  died  in  habitual
crime  and  impenitence?  Several  instances  are  cited
of  rascals  who  have  appeared  after  their  death,  asking
for  prayers  like  the  bad  rich  man,  and  to  whom  prayers
and  masses  can  be  of  no  avail,  from  the  unhappy  state
in  which  they  died.  Thus,  in  all  this,  Satan  seeks  to
establish  his  kingdom,  and  not  to  destroy  It  or  di-
minish it.

We  shall  speak  hereafter,  in  the  Dissertation  on
Vampires,  of  apparitions  of  dead  persons  who  have  been
seen,  and  acted  like  living  ones  in  their  own  bodies.

The  same  Melancthon  relates  that  a  monk  came  one
day  and  rapped  loudly  at  the  door  of  Luther's  dwelling,
asking  to  speak  to  him  ;  he  entered  and  said,  "  I  enter-
tain some  popish  errors  upon  which  I  shall  be  very  glad
to  confer  with  you."  "  Speak,"  said  Luther.  He  at
first  proposed  to  him  several  syllogisms,  to  which  he
easily  replied  ;  he  then  proposed  others,  that  were  more
difficult.  Luther,  being  annoyed,  answered  him  hastily,
'^  Go,  you  embarrass  me  ;   I  have  something  else  to  do


294  THE  PHAKTOM  WORLD.

just  now  besides  answering  you."  However,  he  rose
and  replied  to  his  arguments.  At  the  same  time,  having
remarked  that  the  pretended  monk  had  hands  like  the
claws  of  a  bird,  he  said  to  him,  "  Art  not  thou  he  of
whom  it  is  said,  in  Genesis,  '  He  who  shall  be  born  of
woman  shall  break  the  head  of  the  serpent?'"  The
demon  added,  "  But  thou  shalt  engulf  them  all."  At
these  words  the  confused  demon  retired  angrily  and  with
much  fracas ;  he  left  the  room  infested  with  a  very  bad
smell,  which  was  perceptible  for  some  days.

Luther,  who  assumes  so  much  the  esj)rit  fort,  and
inveighs  with  so  much  warmth  against  private  masses
wherein  they  pray  for  the  souls  of  the  defunct,^  main-
tains boldly  that  all  the  apparitions  of  spirits  which  we
read  in  the  lives  of  the  saints,  and  who  ask  for  masses
for  the  repose  of  their  souls,  are  only  illusions  of  Satan,
who  appears  to  deceive  the  simple,  and  inspire  them
with  useless  confidence  in  the  sacrifice  of  the  mass.
Whence  he  concludes  that  it  is  better  at  once  to  deny
absolutely  that  there  is  any  purgatory.

He,  then,  did  not  deny  either  apparitions  or  the
operations  of  the  devil ;  and  he  maintained  that  Eco-
lampadius  died  under  the  blows  of  the  devil,''  whose
efforts  he  could  not  rebut ;  and,  speaking  of  himself,
he  affirms  that  awaking  once  with  a  start  in  the  middle
of  the  night,  the  devil  appeared,  to  argue  against  him,
when  he  was  seized  with  mortal  terror.  The  arguments
of  the  demon  were  so  pressing  that  they  left  him  no
repose  of  mind;  the  sound  of  his  powerful  voice,  his

^  Martin  Luther,  cle  Abroganda  Missa  Privata,  part.  ii.
'  Ibid,  tom.vii.  226.


MARKS  LEFT  BY  APPARITIONS.  295

overwhelming  manner  of  disputing  when  the  question
and  the  reply  were  perceived  at  once,  left  him  no
breathing  time.  He  says  again  that  the  devil  can  kill
and  strangle,  and,  without  doing  all  that,  press  a  man  so
home  by  his  arguments  that  it  is  enough  to  kill  one ;
"as  I,"  says  he,  "have  experienced  several  times."
After  such  avowals,  what  can  we  think  of  the  doctrine
of  this  chief  of  the  innovators  ?


CHAPTER  XLIII.

OPIKIONS   OF   THE   JEWS,  GREEKS,  AND   LATINS,  CONCERNING   THE   DEAD   WHO
ARE    LEFT    UNBtTRIED.

The  ancient  Hebrews,  as  well  as  the  greater  number
of  other  nations,  were  very  careful  in  burying  their
dead.  That  appears  from  all  history;  we  see  in  the
Scripture  how  much  attention  the  patriarchs  paid  in
that  respect  to  themselves  and  those  belonging  to
them ;  we  know  what  praises  are  bestowed  on  the  holy
man  Tobit,  whose  principal  devotion  consisted  in  giving
sepulture  to  the  dead.

Josephus  the  historian^  says,  that  the  Jews  refused
burial  only  to  those  w^ho  committed  suicide.  Moses
commanded  them''  to  give  sepulture  the  same  day  and
before  sunset  to  any  who  were  executed  and  hanged
on  a  tree  ;  "  because."  says  he,  "  he  who  is  hung
upon  the  tree  is  accursed  of  God,  you  w^ill  take  care
not  to  pollute  the  land  which  the  Lord  your  God  has
given  you."  That  was  practised  in  regard  to  our
Saviour,  who  was  taken  down  from  the  cross  the  same
day  that  he  had  been  crucified,  and  a  few  hours  after
his  death.

»  Joseph  Bell.  Jud.  lib.  iii.  c.  25.  '''  Deut.  xxi.  23.


THE   UNBL'RIED   DEAD.  297

Homer/  speaking  of  the  inhumanity  of  Achilles,  who
dragged  the  body  of  Hector  after  his  car,  says  that  he
dishonoured  and  outraged  the  earth  by  this  barbarous
conduct.  The  Kabbis  write,  that  the  soul  is  not
received  into  heaven  until  the  gross  body  is  interred,
and  entirely  consumed.  They  believe,  moreover,  that
after  death  the  souls  of  the  wicked  are  clothed  with
a  kind  of  covering,  with  which  they  accustom  them-
selves to  suffer  the  torments  which  are  their  due  ;  and
that  the  souls  of  the  just  are  invested  with  a  resplen-
dent body  and  a  luminous  garment,  with  which  they
accustom  themselves  to  the  glory  which  awaits  them.

Origen'^  acknowledges  that  Plato,  in  his  Dialogue  of
the  Soul,  advances  that  the  images  and  shades  of  the
dead  appeared  sometimes  near  their  tombs.  Origen
concludes  from  that,  that  those  shades  and  those  images
must  be  produced  by  some  cause ;  and  that  cause,
according  to  him,  can  only  be,  that  the  soul  of  the
dead  is  invested  with  a  subtile  body  like  that  of  light,
on  which  they  are  borne  as  in  a  car,  where  they
appear  to  the  living.  Celsus  maintained  that  the  appa-
ritions of  Jesus  Christ  after  his  resurrection  were  only
the  effects  of  an  imagination,  smitten  and  prepossessed,
which  formed  to  itself  the  object  of  its  illusions  accord-
ing to  its  wishes.  Origen  refutes  this  solidly  by  the
recital  of  the  evangelists,  of  the  appearance  of  our
Saviour  to  Thomas,  who  would  not  believe  it  was
truly  our  Saviour  until  he  had  seen  and  touched  his
wounds;  it  was  not,  then,  purely  the  effect  of  his
imagination.

^  Homer,  Iliad  XXIY.  ^  Origenes  contra  Celsum,  p.  97.

o  3


298  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

The  same  Orlgen/  and  Theophylact  after  him,  assert
that  the  Jews  and  Pagans  believe  that  the  soul  re-
mained for  some  time  near  the  body  it  had  formerly
animated  ;  and  that  it  is  to  destroy  that  futile  opinion
that  Jesus  Christ,  when  he  would  resuscitate  Lazarus,
cries  with  a  loud  voice,  "  Lazarus,  come  forth ; "  as  if  he
would  call  from  a  distance  the  soul  of  this  man  who
had  been  dead  three  days.

TertulHan  places  the  angels  in  the  category  of  exten-
sion,^ in  which  he  places  God  himself,  and  maintains
that  the  soul  is  corporeal.  Origen  believes  also  that
the  soul  is  material,  and  has  a  form;°  an  opinion  which
he  may  have  taken  from  Plato.  Arnobius,  Lactantius,
St.  Hilary,  several  of  the  ancient  fathers,  and  some
theologians,  have  been  of  the  same  opinion ;  and  Grotius
is  displeased  with  those  who  have  absolutely  spiritual-
ized the  angels,  demons,  and  souls  separated  from  the
body.

The  Jews  of  our  days^  believe  that  after  the  body
of  a  man  is  interred,  his  spirit  goes  and  comes,  and
departs  from  the  spot  where  it  is  destined  to  visit  his
body,  and  to  know  what  passes  around  him ;  that  it  is
wandering  during  a  whole  year  after  the  death  of  the
body,  and  that  it  was  during  that  year  of  delay  that  the
Pvthoness  of  Endor  evoked  the  soul  of  Samuel,  after
which  time  the  evocation  would  have  had  no  power
over  his  spirit.

The  Pagans  thought  much  in  the  same  manner  upon

'  Origenes  in  Joan.  ix.  &c.     Theophylac.  ibid.

^  Tertull.  lib.  de  Anima.

?  Origenes  contra  Gels.  lib.  ii.

^  Bereseith  Rabbee.  c.  22.    Vide  Menasse  de  Resurrect.  Mort.


THE  UNBURIED  DEAD.  299

it.  Lucan  introduces  Pompey,  who  consults  a  witch,
and  commands  her  to  evoke  the  soul  of  a  dead  man
to  reveal  to  him  what  success  he  would  meet  with
in  his  war  against  Caesar ;  the  poet  makes  this  woman
say,  "  Shade,  obey  my  spells,  for  I  evoke  not  a  soul
from  gloomy  Tartarus,  but  one  which  hath  gone  down
thither  a  little  while  since,  and  which  is  still  at  the
gate  of  hell."i

The  Egyptians^  believed  that  when  the  spirit  of  an
animal  is  separated  from  its  body  by  violence,  it  does
not  go  to  a  distance,  but  remains  near  it.  It  is  the  same
with  the  soul  of  a  man  who  has  died  a  violent  death ;  it
remains  near  the  body — nothing  can  make  it  go  away  ;
it  is  retained  there  by  sympathy;  several  have  been
seen  sighing  near  their  bodies  which  were  interred.
The  magicians  abuse  their  power  over  such  in  their
incantations ;  they  force  them  to  obey,  when  they
are  masters  of  the  dead  body,  or  even  of  part  of  it.
Frequent  experience  taught  them  that  there  is  a  secret
virtue  in  the  body,  which  draws  towards  it  the  spirit
which  has  once  inhabited  it ;  wherefore  those  who  wish
to  receive  or  become  the  receptacles  of  the  spirits  of
such  animals  as  know  the  future,  eat  the  principal
parts  of  them,  as  the  hearts  of  crows,  moles,  or  hawks.
The  spirit  of  these  creatures  enters  into  them  at  the
moment  they  eat  this  food,  and  makes  them  give  out
oracles  like  divinities.

'  "  Parete  precanti

ISTon  in  Tartareo  latitantem  poscimus  antro,
Assuetamque  diii  tenebris ;  mod6  luce  fugatS,
Descendentem  animam  primo  pallentis  liiatu
Hseret  adhuc  orci."  Lucan.  Pharsal.  16.

''  Porphyr.  de  Abstin.  lib.  ii.  art.  47.


300  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

The  Egyptians  believed^  that  when  the  spirit  of
a  beast  is  delivered  from  its  body,  it  is  rational  and  pre-
dicts the  future,  gives  oracles,  and  is  capable  of  all  that
the  soul  of  man  can  do  when  disengaged  from  the  body
— for  which  reason  they  abstained  from  eating  the  flesh
of  animals,  and  worshipped  the  gods  in  the  form  of
beasts.

At  Kome  and  at  Metz  there  were  colleges  of  priests
consecrated  to  the  service  of  the  manes, "^  lares,  images,
shades,  spectres,  Erebus,  Avernus  or  hell,  under  the  pro-
tection of  the  god  Sylvanus;  which  demonstrates  that  the
Latins  and  the  Gauls  recognised  the  return  of  souls  and
their  apparition,  and  considered  them  as  divinities  to
whom  sacrifices  should  be  offered  to  appease  them  and
prevent  them  from  doing  harm.  Nicander  confirms  the
same  thing,  when  he  says  that  the  Celts  or  the  Gauls
watched  near  the  tombs  of  their  great  men,  to  derive
from  them  knowledo;e  concernino;  the  future.

The  ancient  northern  nations  were  fully  persuaded
that  the  spectres  which  sometimes  appear  are  no  other
than  the  souls  of  persons  lately  deceased,  and  in  their
country  they  knew  no  remedy  so  proper  to  put  a
stop  to  this  kind  of  apparition,  as  to  cut  off  the  head
of  the  dead  person,  or  to  impale  him,  or  pierce  him
through  the  body  with  a  stake,  or  to  burn  it,  as  is  now
practised  at  this  day  in  Hungary  and  Moravia  with
regard  to  vampires.

The   Greeks,  who  had  derived   their   religion   and

theology  from  the  Egyptians  and  Orientals,  and  the

Latins,  who  took  it  from  the  Greeks,  believed  that  the

'  Demet.  lib.  iv.  art.  10.

"'  Gruter,  p.  Ixiii.     ]\Iauric.  Hist,  de  Metz,  preface,  p.  15.


THE  UNBURIED  DEAD.  301

souls  of  the  dead  sometimes  appeared  to  the  living ;
that  the  necromancers  evoked  them,  and  thus  obtained
answers  concerning  the  future,  and  instructions  relating
to  the  time  present.  Homer,  the  greatest  theologian,
and  perhaps  the  most  curious  of  the  Grecian  writers,
relates  several  apparitions,  both  of  gods  and  heroes,  and
of  men  after  their  death.

In  the  Odyssey^  Ulysses  goes  to  consult  the  diviner
Tyresias;  and  this  sorcerer  having  prepared  a  grave
full  of  blood  to  evoke  the  manes,  Ulysses  draws  his
sword,  and  prevents  them  from  coming  to  drink  this
blood,  for  which  they  appear  to  thirst,  and  of  which
they  would  not  permit  them  to  taste  before  they  hud
replied  to  what  was  asked  of  them ;  they  (the  Greeks
and  Latins)  believed  also  that  souls  were  not  at  rest,
and  that  they  wandered  around  their  corpses,  so  long  as
they  remained  uninhumed."  When  they  gave  burial
to  a  body,  they  called  that  animam  condere^  to  cover
the  soul,  put  It  under  the  earth,  and  shelter  It.  They
called  it  with  a  loud  voice,  and  offered  it  libations  of
milk  and  blood.  They  also  called  that  ceremony,  hiding
the  shades, ^1  sending  them  with  their  body  under  ground.

"  Homer.  Odyss.  sub  finem.  Horat.  lib.  i.  satyr.  8.     Aug.  de  Cmt.
Dei,  lib.  vii.  c.  35.     Clem.  Alex,  Paedag.  lib.  ii.  c.  1.     Prudent,  lib.  iv.
contra  Symmach.    TertuU.  de  Anim.    Lactantius,  lib.  iii.
°   Virgil,  iEn.  iii.  150,  et  seq.

"  Proptere^  jacet  exanimum  tibi  corpus  amici,
Heu  nescis  !  totamque  incestat  funere  classem.
Sedibus  hunc  refer  ante  auis  et  conde  sepulcre."

p  Animamque  sepulcbro

Condimus,  et  magna  supremum  voce  ciemus."

'  "Eomuliis  ut  tumulo  fraternas  condidit  umbras,

Et  mal^  veloci  justa  soluta  Eemo."


302  TUB  PHANTOM  WORLD.

The  sybil,  speaking  to  -^neas,  shows  him  the  manes
or  shades  wandering  on  the  banks  of  the  Acheron ;
and  tells  him  that  they  are  souls  of  persons  who  have
not  received  sepulture,  and  who  w^ander  about  for  a
hundred  years.'^

The  philosopher  Sallust,^  speaks  of  the  apparitions  of
the  dead  around  their  tombs  in  dark  bodies ;  he  tries
to  prove  thereby  the  dogma  of  the  metempsychosis.

Here  is  a  singular  instance  of  a  dead  man,  who
refuses  the  rite  of  burial,  acknowledging  himself  un-
worthy of  it.  Agathias  relates,*  that  some  Pagan
philosophers,  not  being  able  to  relish  the  dogma  of  the
unity  of  a  God,  resolved  to  go  from  Constantinople  to
the  court  of  Chosroes,  King  of  Persia,  who  was
spoken  of  as  a  humane  prince,  and  one  who  loved
learning.  Simplicius  of  Silicia,  Eulamius  the  Phrygian,
Protanus  the  Lydian,  Hermenes  and  Philogenes  of
Phoenicia,  and  Isidorus  of  Gaza,  repaired  then  to  the
court  of  Chosroes,  and  were  well  received  there ;  but
they  soon  perceived  that  that  country  was  much  more
corrupt  than  Greece,  and  they  resolved  to  return  to
Constantinople,  where  Justinian  then  reigned.

As  they  were  on  their  way,  they  found  an  unburied
corpse,  took  pity  on  it,  and  had  it  put  in  the  ground
by  their  own  servants.  The  following  night  this  man
appeared  to  one  of  them,  and  told  him  not  to  inter  him,
who  was  not  worthy  of  receiving  sepulture ;   for  the

^        "  Haec  omnis,  quam  cemis,  inops  inhumataque  turba  est.

Centum  errant  annos,  volitantque  haec  littora  circum.
«  Sallust.  Philos.  c.  19,  20.
'  Stolust,  lib,  ii.  de  Bella  Persico,  sub  fin.


THE  tJNBXJRTED  DEAD^  303

earth  abhorred  one  who  had  defiled  his  own  mother.
The  next  day  they  found  the  same  corpse  cast  out  of
the  ground,  and  they  comprehended  that  it  was  defiled
by  incest,  which  rendered  it  unworthy  of  the  honour  of
receiving  burial,  although  such  crimes  were  known  in
Persia,  and  did  not  excite  the  same  horror  there  as  in
other  countries.

The  Greeks  and  Latins  believed,  that  the  souls  of
the  dead  came  and  tasted  what  was  presented  on  their
tombs,  especially  honey  and  wine ;  that  the  demons
loved  the  smoke  and  odour  of  sacrifices,  melody,  the
blood  of  victims,  commerce  with  women ;  that  they
were  attached  for  a  time  to  certain  spots  or  to  certain
edifices,  which  they  haunted,  and  where  they  appeared ;
that  '^souls  separated  from  their  terrestrial  body,  re-
tained after  death  a  subtile  one,  flexible,  aerial,  which
preserved  the  form  of  that  they  once  had  animated
during  their  life;  that  they  haunted  those  who  had
done  them  wrong  and  whom  they  hated.  Thus  Virgil
describes  Dido,  in  a  rage,  threatening  to  haunt  the
perfidious  ^neas.^

When  the  spirit  of  Patroclus  appeared  to  Achilles,^
it  had  his  voice,  his  shape,  his  eyes,  his  garments,  but
not  his  palpable  body.  When  Ulysses  went  down  to
the  infernal  regions,  he  saw  there  the  divine  Hercules,^
that  is  to  say,  says  Homer,  his  likeness ;  for  he  himself
is  with  the  immortal  gods,  seated  at  their  feast.    -<3Eneas

"  "  Sequar  atris  ignibus  absens ;

Et  cum  frigida  mors  animge  subduxerit  artus,
Omnibus  umbra  lecis  adero :  dubis,  improbe,  poenas."

'^  Homer,  Iliad  XXIIL  r  Ibid.  Odyss.  V.


304  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

recognised  his  wife  Creiisa,  who  appeared  to  him  in  her
usual  form,  only  taller  and  more  majestic.^

We  might  cite  a  quantity  of  passages  from  the
ancient  poets,  even  from  the  fathers  of  the  Church,
who  believed  that  spirits  often  appeared  to  the  living.
Tertullian^  believes  that  the  soul  is  corporeal,  and
that  it  has  a  certain  figure.  He  appeals  to  the  ex-
perience of  those  to  whom  the  ghosts  of  dead  persons
have  appeared,  and  who  have  seen  them  sensibly,
corporeally,  and  palpably,  although  of  an  aerial  colour
and  consistency.  He  defines  the  soul,^  a  breath  sent
from  God,  immortal,  and  having  body  and  form.
Speaking  of  the  fictions  of  the  poets,  who  have
asserted  that  souls  were  not  at  rest  while  their  bodies
remain  uninterred,  he  says,  all  this  is  invented  only
to  inspire  the  living  with  that  care  which  they  ought
to  take  for  the  burial  of  the  dead  and  to  take  away
from  the  relations  of  the  dead  the  sight  of  an  object
which  would  only  uselessly  augment  their  grief,  if
they  kept  it  too  long  in  their  houses ;  ut  instantid
funeris  et  honor  corporum  servetur  et  mcercr  affectuum
temper  etur,

St.  Irenaeus  *^  teaches,  as  a  doctrine  received  from  the
Lord,  that  souls  not  only  subsist  after  the  death  of  the
body, — without  however  passing  from  one  body  into
another,  as  those  will  have  it  who  admit  the  metempsy-
chosis,— but  that  they  retain  the  form  and  remain  near

«  "  Infelix  simulacrum  atque  ipsius  umbra  Creiisae

Yisa  mill!  ante  oculos,  et  notu  major  imago."

Virgil,  ^neid  I.
»  Tertull.  de  Anim.  ^  Ibid.  <^  Iren.  lib.  ii.  c.  34.


THE   UNBURIED   DEAD.  305

this  body,  as  faithful  guardians  of  it,  and  remember
nought  of  what  they  have  done  or  not  done  in  this  life.
These  fathers  believed,  then,  in  the  return  of  souls,
their  apparition,  and  their  attachment  to  their  body ;
but  we  do  not  adopt  their  opinion  on  the  corporeality  of
souls;  we  are  persuaded  that  they  can  appear  with
Grod's  permission,  independently  of  all  matter  and  of
any  corporeal  substance  which  may  belong  to  them.

As  to  the  opinion,  of  the  soul  being  in  a  state  of
unrest  while  its  body  is  not  interred,  that  it  remains
for  some  time  near  the  tomb  of  the  body,  and  appears
there  in  a  bodily  form ;  those  are  opinions  which  have
no  solid  foundation,  either  in  Scripture,  or  in  the
traditions  of  the  Church,  which  teach  us  that  directly
after  death  the  soul  is  presented  before  the  judgment-
seat  of  God,  and  is  there  destined  to  the  place  that  its
good  or  bad  actions  have  deserved.


CHAPTER  XLIV.

EXAMINATION    OF    WHAT   IS    REQUIRED    OR   REVEALED    TO    THE    LIVING    B?
THE  DEAD   WHO   RETURN   TO   EARTH.

The  apparitions  which  are  seen  are  those  of  good
angels,  or  of  demons,  or  the  spirits  of  the  dead,  or  of
living  persons  to  others  still  living.

Good  angels  usually  bring  only  good  news,  and
announce  nothing  but  what  is  fortunate ;  or  if  they  do
announce  any  future  misfortunes,  it  is  to  persuade  men
to  prevent  them,  or  turn  them  aside  by  repentance,  or
to  profit  by  the  evils  which  God  sends  them  by  exer-
cising their  patience,  and  showing  submission  to  his
orders.

Bad  angels  generally  foretell  only  misfortune ;  wars,
the  effect  of  the  wrath  of  God  on  nations ;  and  often
even  they  execute  the  evils,  and  direct  the  wars  and
public  calamities  which  desolate  kingdoms,  provinces,
cities  and  families.  The  spectres  whose  appearance  to
Brutus,  Cassius,  and  Julian  the  Apostate  we  have  re-
lated, are  only  bearers  of  the  fatal  orders  of  the  wrath
of  God.  If  they  sometimes  promise  any  prosperity  to
those  to  whom  they  appear,  it  is  only  for  the  present
time,  never  for  eternity,  nor  for  the  glory  of  God,  nor
for  the  eternal  salvation  of  those  to  whom  they  speak.
It  only  extends  to  a  temporal  fortune,  always  of  short
duration,  and  very  often  deceitful.


REVELATIONS  OE  THE  HETUHNED  DEAD.     307

The  souls  of  the  defunct,  if  these  be  Christians,  ask
very  often  that  the  sacrifice  of  the  body  and  blood  of
Christ  should  be  offered,  according  to  the  observation
of  St.  Gregory  the  Great  ;^  and,  as  experience  shows,
there  is  hardly  any  apparition  of  a  Christian  that  does
not  ask  for  masses,  pilgrimages,  restitutions,  or  that
alms  should  be  distributed,  or  that  they  would  satisfy
those  to  whom  the  deceased  died  indebted.  They  also
often  give  salutary  advice,  for  the  salvation  or  cor-
rection of  the  morals,  or  good  regulation  of  families.
They  reveal  the  state  in  which  certain  persons  find
themselves  in  the  other  world,  in  order  to  relieve  their
pain,  or  to  put  the  living  on  their  guard,  that  the  like
misfortune  may  not  befall  them.  They  talk  of  hell,
paradise,  purgatory,  angels,  demons,  of  the  supreme
Judge,  of  the  rigour  of  his  judgments,  of  the  goodness
he  exercises  towards  the  just,  and  the  rewards  with
which  he  crowns  their  good  works.

But  we  must  greatly  mistrust  those  apparitions
which  ask  for  masses,  pilgrimages  and  restitution.
St.  Paul  warns  us  that  the  demon  often  transforms
himself  into  an  angel  of  light  ;^  and  St.  John*'  warns  us
to  distrust  the  "  depths  of  Satan,"  his  illusions,  and
deceitful  appearances.  That  spirit  of  malice  and  false-
hood is  found  among  the  true  prophets,  to  put  into  the
mouth  of  the  false  prophets  falsehood  and  error.  He
makes  a  wrong  use  of  the  text  of  the  Scriptures,  of  the
most  sacred  ceremonies,  even  of  the  sacraments  and
prayers  of  the  church,  to  seduce  the  simple,  and  win

^  Greg.  Mag.  lib.  iv.  Dialog,  c.  55.  ^  2  Cor.  xi.  14.

^  Kev.  xxi.  14.


308  THE  PHANTOM  TTORLD.

their  confidence,  to  share  as  mucli  as  in  liim  lies  the
glory  which  is  due  to  the  Almighty  alone,  and  to
appropriate  it  to  himself.  How  many  false  miracles
has  he  not  wrought  ?  How  many  times  has  he  fore-
told future  events  ?  What  cures  has  he  not  operated  ?
How  many  holy  actions  has  he  not  counselled  ?  How
many  enterprises,  praiseworthy  in  appearance,  has  he
not  inspired,  in  order  to  draw  the  faithful  into  his
snare  ?

Bodin,  in  his  Demonology,'^  cites  more  than  one
instance  of  demons  who  have  requested  prayers,  and
have  even  placed  themselves  in  the  posture  of  persons
praying  over  a  grave,  to  point  out  that  the  dead
person  wanted  prayers.  Sometimes  it  will  be  the
demon  in  the  shape  of  a  wretch  dead  in  crime,  who
will  come  and  ask  for  masses,  to  show  that  his  soul
is  in  purgatory,  and  has  need  of  prayers,  although
it  may  be  certain  that  he  finally  died  impenitent,  and
that  prayers  are  useless  for  his  salvation.  All  this  is
only  a  stratagem  of  the  demon,  who  seeks  to  inspire
the  wicked  with  foolish  and  dangerous  confidence  in
their  being  saved,  notwithstanding  their  criminal  life
and  their  impenitence  ;  and  that  they  can  obtain  salva-
tion by  means  of  a  few  prayers,  and  a  few  alms,  which
shall  be  made  after  their  death;  not  regarding  that
these  good  works  can  be  useful  only  to  those  who  died
in  a  state  of  grace,  although  stained  by  some  venial
fault,  since  the  Scripture  informs  us  ^  that  nothing  im-
pure will  enter  the  kingdom  of  heaven.

It  is    believed   that   the   reprobate   can   sometimes
^  Bodin,  Dsemon.  torn.  iii.  c.  6.  *   Kev.  xxi.  27.


REVELATIONS  01  THE  RETURNED  DEAD.     309

return  to  earth  by  permission,  as  persons  dead  in
idolatry,  and  consequently  in  sin,  and  excluded  from
the  kingdom  of  God,  have  been  seen  to  come  to  life
again,  be  converted,  and  receive  baptism.  St.  Martin
was  as  yet  only  the  simple  abbot  of  his  monastery  of
Liguge,^  when,  in  his  absence,  a  catechumen  who  had
placed  himself  under  his  discipline  to  be  instructed  in
the  truths  of  the  Christian  religion,  died  without  having
been  baptized.  He  had  been  three  days  deceased  when
the  saint  arrived.  He  sent  everybody  away,  prayed
over  the  dead  man,  resuscitated  him,  and  administered
to  him  the  baptismal  rite.

This  catechumen  related  that  he  had  been  led  be-
fore the  tribunal  of  the  Supreme  Judge,  who  had
condemned  him  to  descend  into  the  darkness  with  an
infinity  of  other  persons  condemned  like  himself ;  but
that  two  angels  having  represented  to  the  Judge  that
it  was  this  man  for  whom  St.  Martin  interceded,  God
commanded  the  two  angels  to  bring  him  back  to  earth,
and  restore  him  to  Martin.  This  is  an  instance  which
proves  what  I  have  just  said,  that  the  reprobate  can
return  to  life,  do  penance,  and  receive  baptism.

But  as  to  what  some  have  affirmed  of  the  salvation
of  Falconila,  procured  by  St.  Thecla,  of  that  of  Trajan,
saved  by  the  prayers  of  St.  Gregory,  pope,  and  of  some
others  who  died  heathens,  this  is  all  entirely  contrary
to  the  faith  of  the  church  and  to  the  holy  Scripture,
which  teach  us  that  without  faith  it  is  impossible  to
please  God,  and  that  he  who  believes  not  and  has  not
received  baptism,  is  already  judged  and  condemned.
^  Sulpit.  Sever.  Vita  St.  Martin,  c.  5.


310  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

Thus,  the  opinions  of  those  who  accord  salvation  to
Plato,  Aristotle,  Seneca,  &c.,  because  it  may  appear  to
them  that  they  lived  in  a  praiseworthy  manner,  accord-
ing to  the  rules  of  a  merely  human  and  philosophical
morality,  must  be  considered  as  rash,  erroneous,  false,
and  dangerous.

Philip,  Chancellor  of  the  Church  of  Paris,  maintained
that  it  was  permitted  to  one  man  to  hold  a  plurality  of
benefices.  Being  on  his  death  bed,  he  was  visited  by
William,  Bishop  of  Paris,  who  died  in  1248.  This
prelate  urged  the  chancellor  to  give  up  all  his  benefices
save  one  only ;  he  refused,  saying  that  he  wished  to  try
if  the  holding  a  plurality  of  livings  was  so  wrong  as  it
was  said  to  be ;  and  in  this  disposition  of  mind  he  died
in  1237.

Some  days  after  his  decease.  Bishop  WiUiam,  or
Guillaume,  praying  by  night,  after  matins,  in  his  ca-
thedral, beheld  before  him  the  hideous  and  frightful
figure  of  a  man.  He  made  the  sign  of  the  cross,  and
said  to  him,  "  If  you  are  sent  by  God,  speak."  He
spoke,  and  said :  "  I  am  that  wretched  chancellor,  and
have  been  condemned  to  eternal  punishment."  The
bishop  having  asked  him  the  cause,  he  replied,  "  I  am
condemned,  first,  for  not  having  distributed  the  super-
fluity of  my  benefices ;  secondly,  for  having  main-
tained that  it  was  allowable  to  hold  several  at  once  ;
thirdly,  for  having  remained  for  several  days  in  the
guilt  of  incontinence."

This  story  was  often  preached  by  Bishop  William
to  his  clerks.  It  is  related  by  the  Bishop  Albertus
Magnus,  who  was  a  contemporary,  in  his  book  on  the


REVELATIONS  OF  THE  EETUKNED  DEAD.     311

sacraments ;  by  William  Durand,  Bishop  of  Mande,  in
his  book  De  Modo  celehrandi  Concilia  ;  and  in  Thomas  de
Cantimpre,  in  his  work  Des  Aheilles.  He  believed,  then,
that  God  sometimes  permitted  the  reprobate  to  appear
to  the  living.

Here  is  an  instance  of  the  apparition  of  a  man  and
woman  who  were  in  a  state  of  reprobation.  The  Prince
of  Ratzivil, »  in  his  Journey  to  Jerusalem,  relates  that
when  in  Egypt  he  bought  two  mummies,  had  them
packed  up,  and  secretly  as  possible  conveyed  on  board
his  vessel,  so  that  only  himself  and  his  two  servants
were  aware  of  it ;  the  Turks  making  a  great  difficulty
of  allowing  mummies  to  be  carried  away,  because  they
fancy  that  the  Christians  make  use  of  them  for  maglci.l
operations.  When  they  were  at  sea  there  arose  at
sundry  times  such  a  violent  tempest  that  the  pilot
despaired  of  saving  the  vessel.  A  good  Polish  priest,
of  the  suite  of  the  Prince  de  Ratzivil,  recited  the
prayers  suitable  to  the  circumstance ;  but  he  was  tor-
mented, he  said,  by  two  hideous  black  spectres,  a  man
and  a  woman,  who  were  one  on  each  side  of  him,  and
threatened  to  take  away  his  life.  It  was  thought  at
first  that  terror  disturbed  his  mind.

A  calm  coming  on,  he  appeared  tranquil ;  but  very
soon,  the  storm  beginning  again,  he  was  more  tor-
mented than  before,  and  was  only  delivered  from  these
haunting  spectres  when  the  two  mummies,  which  he
had  not  seen,  were  thrown  into  the  sea,  and  neither
himself  nor  the  x^Hot  knew  of  their  being  in  the  ship.

^  Eatzivil,  Peregrin.  Jerosol.  p.  218.


312  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

I  will  not  deny  the  fact,  which  is  related  by  a  prince
incapable  of  desiring  to  impose  on  any  one.  But  how
many  reflections  may  we  make  on  this  event !  Were
they  the  souls  of  these  two  pagans,  or  two  demons  who
assumed  their  form  ?  What  interest  could  the  demon
have  in  not  permitting  these  bodies  to  come  under  the
power  of  the  Christians  ?


CHAPTEK  XLV.

APPARITIONS   OF   MEN   STILL   ALIVE,   TO    OTHEP.    LIVING     MEN,     ABSENT,   AND
VERT   DISTANT   FROM   EACH   OTHER.

We  find  in  all  history,  both  sacred  and  profane,  ancient
and  modern,  an  infinite  number  of  examples  of  the
apparition  of  persons  alive  to  other  living  persons.
The  prophet  Ezekiel  says  of  himself,^  '^_  I  was  seated  in
my  house,  in  the  midst  of  the  elders  of  my  people,  when
on  a  sudden  a  hand,  which  came  from  a  figure  shining
like  fire,  seized  me  by  the  hair ;  and  the  spirit  trans-
ported me  between  heaven  and  earth,  and  took  me  to
Jerusalem,  where  he  placed  me  near  the  inner  gate,
which  looks  towards  the  north,  where  I  saw  the  idol  of
jealousy  "  (apparently  Adonis),  "  and  I  there  remarked
the  majesty  of  the  Lord,  as  I  had  seen  it  in  the  field ;
he  showed  me  the  idol  of  jealousy,  to  which  the
Israelites  burned  incense ;  and  the  angel  of  the  Lord
said  to  me  :  Thou  seest  the  abominations  which  the
children  of  Israel  commit,  in  turning  away  from  my
sanctuary ;  thou  shalt  see  still  greater.

"  And  having  pierced  the  wall  of  the  temple,  I  saw
figures  of  reptiles  and  animals,  the  abominations  and
idols  of  the  house  of  Israel,  and  seventy  men  of  the
elders  of  Israel,  who  were  standing  before  these  figures,

^  Ezek.  viii.  1,  2,  &c.
VOL.  I.  P


314  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

each  one  bearing  a  censer  in  his  hand ;  after  that  tlie
angel  said  to  me,  Thou  shalt  see  yet  something  yet  more
abominable ;  and  he  showed  me  women  who  were
mourning  for  Adonis.  Lastly,  having  introduced  me
into  the  inner  court  of  the  temple,  I  saw  twenty  men
between  the  vestibule  and  the  altar,  who  turned  their
back  upon  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  and  stood  with  their
face  to  the  east,  and  paid  adoration  to  the  rising
sun."

Here  we  may  remark  two  things ;  first,  that  Ezekiel
is  transported  from  Chaldjea  to  Jerusalem  through  the
air  between  heaven  and  earth  by  the  hand  of  an  angel ;
which  proves  the  possibility  of  transporting  a  living
man  through  the  air  to  a  very  great  distance  from  the
place  where  he  was.

The  second  is,  the  vision  or  apparition  of  those  preva-
ricators who  commit  even  within  the  temple  the  greatest
abominations,  the  most  contrary  to  the  majesty  of  God,
the  sanctity  of  the  spot,  and  the  law  of  the  Lord.  After
all  these  thino;s  the  same  ang-el  bring-s  back  Ezekiel
into  Chaldsea ;  but  it  was  not  until  after  God  had  showed
him  the  vengeance  he  intended  to  exercise  upon  the
Israelites.

It  will,  perhaps,  be  said,  that  all  this  passed  only  in
a  vision :  that  Ezekiel  thought  that  he  was  transported
to  Jerusalem  and  afterwards  brought  back  again  to
Babylon ;  and  that  what  he  saw  in  the  temple,  he  saw
only  by  revelation.  I  reply,  that  the  text  of  this  prophet
indicates  a  real  removal,  and  that  he  was  transported
by  the  hair  of  his  head  between  heaven  and  earth.  He
was  brought  back  from  Jerusalem  in  the  same  way.


APPAEITIONS   or  MEN   STILL  ALIYE.  315

I  do  not  deny  that  the  thing  might  have  passed  in
a  vision,  and  that  Ezekiel  might  have  seen  in  spirit  what
was  passing  in  the  temple  of  Jerusalem.  But  I  shall
still  deduce  from  it  a  consequence  which  is  favourable
to  my  design,  that  is,  the  possibility  of  a  living  man
being  carried  through  the  air  to  a  very  great  distance
from  the  place  he  was  in,  or  at  least  that  a  living  man
can  imagine  strongly  that  he  is  being  carried  from  one
place  to  another,  although  this  transportation  may  be
only  imaginary  and  in  a  dream  or  vision,  as  they
pretend  it  happens  in  the  transportation  of  sorcerers  to
the  witches'  sabbath.

In  short,  there  are  true  appearances  of  the  living,  to
others  who  are  also  alive.  How  is  this  done?  The
thing  is  not  difficult  to  explain  in  following  the  recital
of  the  prophet,  who  is  transferred  from  Chaldtea  into
Judea  in  his  own  body  by  the  ministration  of  angels ;
but  the  apparitions  related  in  St.  Augustine  and  in  other
authors  are  not  of  the  same  kind :  the  two  persons  who
see  and  converse  with  each  other  go  not  from  their
places;  and  the  one  who  appears  knows  nothing  of
what  is  passing  in  regard  to  him  to  whom  he  appears,
and  to  whom  he  explains  several  things  of  which  he  did
not  even  think  at  that  moment.

In  the  third  book  of  Kings,  Obadiah,  steward  of
king  Ahab,  having  met  the  prophet  Elijah,  who  had  for
some  time  kept  himself  concealed,  tells  him  that  king
Ahab  had  him  sought  for  everywhere,  and  that  not
having  been  able  to  discover  him  anywhere,  had  gone
himself  to  seek  him  out.  Elijah  desires  him  to  go  and
tell  the  king  that  Elijah  had  appeared ;  but   Obadiah

p  2


316  THE  PHANTOM  WOULD.

replied,  "  See  to  Avhat  you  expose  me;  for  if  I  go  riid
announce  to  Ahab  that  I  have  spoken  to  you,  the  spirit
of  God  will  transport  you  into  some  unknown  place,
and  the  king,  not  finding  you,  will  put  me  to  death."

There  again  is  an  instance  which  proves  the  possi-
bility of  the  transportation  of  a  living  man  to  a  very
distant  spot.  The  same  prophet,  being  on  Mount
Carmel,  was  seized  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  which  trans-
ported him  thence  to  Jezreel  in  very  little  time,  not
through  the  air,  but  by  making  him  walk  and  run  with
a  promptitude  that  was  quite  extraordinary.

In  the  Gospel,  Elias^^  appeared  with  Moses  on  Mount
Tabor,  at  the  transfiguration  of  the  Saviour.  Moses
had  long  been  dead;  but  the  Church  believes  that
Elijah  (or  Elias)  is  still  living.  In  the  Acts  of  the
Apostles,^  Ananias  appeared  to  St.  Paul,  and  put  his
hands  on  him  in  a  vision  before  he  arrived  at  his  house
in  Damascus.

Two  men  of  the  court  of  the  Emperor  Valens,
wishing  to  discover  by  the  aid  of  magical  secrets  who
would  succeed  that  emperor,*  caused  a  table  of  laurel-
wood  to  be  made  into  a  tripod,  on  which  thej'-  placed
a  basin  made  of  divers  metals.  On  the  border  of  this
basin  were  engraved,  at  some  distance  from  each  other,
the  twenty-four  letters  of  the  Greek  alphabet.  A  magi-
cian with  certain  ceremonies  approached  the  basin,  and
holding  in  his  hand  a  ring  suspended  by  a  thread,
suffered  it  at  intervals  to  fall  upon  the  letters  of  the
alphabet  whilst  they  were  rapidly  turning  the  table ;       j

^  Matt.  xvii.  3.  <=  Acts  ix.  10.

^  Acts  ix.  2.


APrAHITIONS   OF  MEN   STILL  ALIVE.  317

the  ring  falling  on  the  dilFerent  letters  formed  obscure
and  enigmatical  verses  like  those  pronounced  by  the
oracle  of  Delphi.

At  last  they  asked  what  was  the  name  of  him  who
should  succeed  to  the  Emperor  Yalens?  The  ring-
touched  the  four  letters  ©EOA.  which  they  interpreted
of  Theodosius,  the  second  secretary  of  the  Emperor
Valens.  Theodosius  was  arrested,  interrogated,  con-
victed, and  put  to  death ;  and  with  him  all  the  culprits
or  accomplices  in  this  operation ;  search  was  made  for
all  the  books  of  magic,  and  a  great  number  were  burnt.
The  great  Theodosius,  of  whom  they  thought  not  at  all,
and  who  was  at  a  great  distance  from  the  Court,  was
the  person  designated  by  these  letters.  In  379,  he  was
declared  Augustus  by  the  Emperor  Gratian,  and  in
coming  to  Constantinople  in  380,  he  had  a  dream,  in
which  it  seemed  to  him  that  Melitus,  Bishop  of  Antioch,
whom  he  had  never  seen,  and  knew  only  by  reputation,
invested  him  with  the  imperial  mantle  and  placed  the
diadem  on  his  head.

They  were  then  assembling  the  Eastern  bishops  to
hold  the  Council  of  Constantinople.  Theodosius  begged
that  Melitus  might  not  be  pointed  out  to  him,  saying
that  he  should  recognise  him  by  the  signs  he  had  seen  in
his  dream.    In  fact  he  distinguished  him  amono-st  all  the

O  CD

other  bishops,  embraced  him,  kissed  his  hands,  and
looked  upon  him  ever  after  as  his  father.  This  was
a  distinct  apparition  of  a  living  man.^

St.  Augustine  relates,^  that  a  certain  man  saw,  in  the

^  Ammian.  Marcell.  lib.  xix.     Sozonieii.  lib.  vL  c.  35.
^  Aug.  lib.  viii.  de  Civit.  c.  18.


318  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

night,  before  he  slept,  a  philosopher  who  was  known  to
him,  enter  his  house,  and  who  explained  to  him  some  of
Plato's  opinions  which  he  would  not  explain  to  him
before.  This  apparition  of  the  Platonician  was  merely
fantastic ;  for  the  person  to  whom  he  had  appeared
having  asked  him  why  he  would  not  explain  to  him  at
his  house  what  he  had  come  to  explain  to  him  when  at
home,  the  philosopher  replied,  "  I  did  not  do  so,  but
I  dreamt  I  did  so."  Here,  then,  are  two  persons  both
alive,  one  of  whom,  in  his  sleep  and  dreaming,  speaks
to  another  who  is  wide  awake,  and  sees  him  only  in
imasiination.

The  same  St.  Augustine^  acknowledges  in  the  pre-
sence of  his  people  that  he  has  appeared  to  two  persons
who  had  never  seen  him,  and  knew  him  only  by  repu-
tation, and  that  he  advised  them  to  come  to  Hippo,
to  be  there  cured  by  the  merit  of  the  martyr  St.
Stephen  :  — they  came  there,  and  recovered  their  health.

Evodius  teaching  rhetoric  at  Carthage,^  and  finding
himself  puzzled  concerning  the  sense  of  a  passage  in
the  books  of  the  Rhetoric  of  Cicero,  which  he  was  to
explain  the  next  day  to  his  scholars,  was  much  disquieted
when  he  went  to  bed,  and  could  hardly  get  to  sleep.
During  his  sleep  he  fancied  he  saw  St.  Augustine,  who
was  then  at  Milan,  a  great  way  from  Carthage,  who
was  not  thinking  of  him  at  all,  and  was  apparently
sleeping  very  quietly  in  his  bed  at  Milan,  who  came  to
him  and  explained  the  passage  in  question.  St.  Augus-
tine avows  that  he  does  not  know  how  it  happens ;  but


h


Aug.  Serin,  cxxiii.  pp.  1277,  1278.

Aug.  de  cura,  gercndfl  pro  Mortuis,  c.  11,12.


APPARITIONS   0?  MEN  STILL   ALIVE.  319

in  whatever  way  it  may  occur,  it  is  very  possible  for  us
to  see  in  a  dream  a  dead  person  as  we  see  a  living  one,
without  either  one  or  the  other  knowing  how,  when,
or  where,  these  images  are  formed  in  our  mind.  It  is
also  possible  that  a  dead  man  may  appear  to  the  living
without  being  aware  of  it,  and  discover  to  them  secret
and  hidden  things,  the  result  of  which  reveals  their
truth  and  reality.  When  a  living  man  appears  in
a  dream  to  another  man,  we  do  not  say  that  his
body  or  his  spirit  have  appeared,  but  simply  that  su  ch
a  one  has  appeared  to  him.  Why  can  we  not  say  that
the  dead  appear  without  body  and  without  soul,  but
simply  that  their  form  presents  itself  to  the  mind  and
imagination  of  the  living  person  ?

St.  Augustine,  in  the  book  which  he  has  composed
on  the  care  which  we  ought  to  take  of  the  dead,^  says,
that  a  holy  monk,  named  John,  appeared  to  a  pious
woman,  who  ardently  desired  to  see  him.  The  saintly
doctor  reasons  a  great  deal  on  this  apparition  ;  —
whether  this  solitary  foresaw  what  would  happen  to
him ;  if  he  went  in  spirit  to  this  woman;  if  it  is  his  angel
or  his  spirit  in  his  bodily  form  which  appeared  to  her  in
her  sleep,  as  we  behold  in  our  dreams  absent  persons
who  are  known  to  us.  We  should  be  able  to  speak  to
the  monk  himself,  to  know  from  himself  how  that
occurred,  if  by  the  power  of  God,  or  by  his  permission ;
for  there  is  little  appearance  that  he  did  it  by  any
natural  powder.

It  is  said  that  St.  Simeon  Stylites  ^  appeared  to  his

'  Aug.  de  cura,  gerend.  pro  Mort.  c.  xxvii.  p.  529.
•^  Yita  Daniel  Stjlit.  xi,  Decemb.


320  THE  PHANTOM  TV'OKLD.

disciple  St.  Daniel,  who  had  undertaken  the  journey  to
Jerusalem,  where  he  would  have  to  suffer  much  for
Jesus  Christ's  sake.  St.  Benedict^  had  promised  to
comply  with  the  request  of  some  architects,  who  had
bec!:2:ed  him  to  come  and  show  them  how  he  wished
them  to  build  a  certain  monastery;  the  saint  did  not
go  to  them  bodily,  but  he  went  thither  in  spirit,  and
gave  them  the  plan  and  design  of  the  house  which  they
were  to  construct.  These  men  did  not  comprehend
that  it  was  what  he  had  promised  them,  and  came  to
him  a2;ain  to  ask  what  were  his  intentions  relative
to  this  edifice :  he  said  to  them,  "  I  have  explained  it
to  you  in  a  dream ;  you  can  follow  the  plan  which  you
have  seen."

The  Caesar  Bardas,  who  had  so  mightily  contributed
to  the  deposition  of  St.  Ignatius,  patriarch  of  Constan-
tinople, had  a  vision,  which  he  thus  related  to  Philothes
his  friend.     "  I  thousiht  I  was  that  nlg-ht  ofolns;  in  pro-

O  O  O  !D  1.

cession  to  the  high  church  with  the  Emperor  Michael.
When  we  had  entered  and  were  near  the  ambe,  there
appeared  two  eunuchs  of  the  chamber,  w^Ith  a  cruel
and  ferocious  mien,  one  of  whom,  having  bound  the
emperor,  dragged  him  out  of  the  choir  on  the  right
side  ;  the  other  dragged  me  In  the  same  manner  to  the
left.  Then  I  saw  on  a  sudden  an  old  man  seated  on
the  throne  of  the  sanctuary.  He  resembled  the  image  of
St.  Peter,  and  two  terrific  men  were  standing  near
him,  who  looked  like  provosts.  I  beheld,  at  the  knees
of  St.  Peter,  St.  Ignatius  weeping,  and  crying  aloud, —
*  You  have  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ;  if  you
^  Gresror.  lib.  ii.  Dialoir.  c.  xxii.


APPARITIONS   OF  MEN   STILL  ALIVE.  321

knovv^  the  injustice  which  has  been  done  me,  console  my
afflicted  old  ao-e/

"  St.  Peter  replied,  '  Point  out  the  man  who  has  used
you  ill.'  Ignatius,  turning  round,  pointed  to  me,  saying,
'  That  is  he  who  has  done  me  most  wrong.'  St.  Peter
made  a  sign  to  the  one  at  his  right,  and  placing  in  his
hand  a  short  sword,  he  said  to  him  aloud,  '  Take  Bardas,
the  enemy  of  God,  and  cut  him  in  pieces  before  the
vestibule.'  As  they  were  leading  me  to  death,  I  saw
that  he  said  to  the  emperor,  holding  up  his  hand  in  a
threatening  manner,  'Wait,  unnatural  son  ! '  after  which
I  saw  them  cut  me  absolutely  in  pieces."

This  took  place  in  866.  The  year  following,  in  the
month  of  April,  the  emperor  having  set  out  to  attack
the  Isle  of  Crete,  was  made  so  suspicious  of  Bardas,
that  he  resolved  to  get  rid  of  him.  He  accompanied
the  Emperor  Michael  in  this  expedition.  Bardas,  seeing
the  murderers  enter  the  emperor's  tent,  sword  in  hand,
threw  himself  at  his  feet  to  ask  his  pardon ;  but  they
dragged  him  out,  cut  him  in  pieces,  and  in  derision
carried  some  of  his  members  about  at  the  end  of  a  pike.
This  happened  the  29th  of  April,  867.

Roger,  Count  of  Calabria  and  Sicily,  besieging  the
town  of  Capua,  one  named  Sergius,  a  Greek  by  birth,
to  whom  he  had  given  the  command  of  200  men,
having  suffered  himself  to  be  bribed,  formed  the  design
of  betraying  him,  and  of  delivering  the  army  of  the
count  to  the  Prince  of  Capua,  during  the  night.  It
was  on  the  1st  of  March  that  he  was  to  execute  his
intention.  St.  Bruno,  Avho  then  dwelt  in  the  Desert
of  Squilantia,  appeared  to  Count  Boger,  and  told  him

p3


322  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

to  fly  to  arms  promptly,  if  he  would  not  be  oppressed
by  Ills  enemies.  The  count  starts  from  his  sleep,  com-
mands his  people  to  mount  their  horses  and  see  what  is
going  on  in  the  camp.  They  met  the  men  belonging
to  Sergius,  with  the  Prince  of  Capua,  who  having
perceived  them  retired  promptly  into  the  town ;  those
of  Count  Roger  took  162  of  them,  from  whom  they
learned  all  the  secret  of  the  treason.  Roger  went,  on
the  29th  of  July  following,  to  Squilantia,  and  having
related  to  Bruno  what  had  happened  to  him,  the  saint
said  to  him,  "It  was  not  I  who  warned  you,  it  was
the  angel  of  God,  who  is  near  princes  in  time  of  war."
Thus  Count  Roger  relates  the  affair  himself,  in  a
privilege  granted  to  St.  Bruno.

A  monk  ™  named  Fidus,  a  disciple  of  St.  Euthymius,
a  celebrated  abbot  in  Palestine,  having  been  sent  by
Martyrius,  the  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  on  an  important
mission  concerning  the  affairs  of  the  Church,  embarked
at  Joppa,  and  was  shipwrecked  the  following  night;
he  supported  himself  above  water  for  some  time  by
clinging  to  a  piece  of  wood,  which  he  found  by  chance.
Then  he  invoked  the  help  of  St.  Euthymius,  who
appeared  to  him  walking  on  the  sea,  and  who  said  to
him,  "  Know  that  this  voyage  is  not  pleasing  to  God,
and  will  be  of  no  utility  to  the  mother  of  the  Churches,
that  is  to  say,  to  Jerusalem.  Return  to  him  who  sent
you,  and  tell  him  from  me  not  to  be  uneasy  at  the
separation  of  the  schismatics — union  will  take  place
ere  long ;  for  you,  you  must  go  to  my  laurel  grove,  and
you  must  build  there  a  monastery."

"'  Vita  Sancti  Euthym.  pp.  86,  87.


APPARITIONS   OF  MEN  STILL  ALIYE.  '323

Having  said  this,  lie  enveloped  Fidus  in  his  mantle,
and  Fidus  found  himself  immediately  at  Jerusalem,
and  in  his  house,  without  knowing  how  he  came  there ;
he  related  it  all  to  the  Patriarch  Martyrius,  who
remembered  the  prediction  of  St.  Euthymius,  concern-
ing the  building  in  the  laurel  grove  a  monastery.

Queen  Margaret,  in  her  memoirs,  asserts  that  God
protects  the  great  in  a  particular  manner,  and  that  he
lets  them  know,  either  in  dreams  or  otherwise,  what  is
to  happen  to  them.  "  As  Queen  Catherine  de  Medicis,
my  mother,"  says  she,  "who  the  night  before  that
unhappy  day  dreamt  she  saw  the  king,  Henry  II.,
my  father,  wounded  in  the  eye,  as  it  really  happened ;
when  she  awoke  she  several  times  implored  the  king
not  to  tilt  that  day.

"  The  same  queen  being  dangerously  ill  at  Metz,  and
having  around  her  bed  the  king,  (Charles  IX.,)  my
sister  and  brother  of  Lorraine,  and  many  ladies  and
princesses,  she  cried  out  as  if  she  had  seen  the  battle  of
Jarnac  fought :  '  See  how  they  fly  !  my  son  has  the
victory !  Do  you  see  the  Prince  of  Conde  dead  in  that
hedge  ? '  All  those  who  were  present  fancied  she  was
dreaming ;  but  the  night  after,  M.  de  Losse  brought
her  the  news.  *  I  knew  it  well,'  said  she  ;  *  did  I  not
behold  it  the  day  before  yesterday  ?  '  "

The  Duchess  Philippa  of  Gueldres,  wife  of  the  Duke
of  Lorraine,  Kene  II.,  being  a  nun  at  St.  Claire  du
Pont-a-Mousson,  saw,  during  her  orisons,  the  unfor-
tunate battle  of  Pavia.  She  cried  out  suddenly,  "  Ah !
my  sisters,  my  dear  sisters,  for  the  love  of  God,
say  your  prayers;  my  son  De  Lambesc  is  dead,  and


324  '  THE   PHA^'TOM   WORLD.

the  king  (Francis  I.)  my  cousin  is  made  prisoner."
Some  clays  after,  news  of  this  famous  event,  which
happened  the  day  on  w^hich  the  duchess  had  seen
it,  was  received  at  Nancy.  Certainly,  neither  the
young  Prince  de  Lambesc,  nor  the  king,  Francis  I.,
had  any  knowledge  of  this  revelation,  and  they  took  no
part  in  it;  It  was,  then,  neither  their  spirit  nor  their
phantoms  which  appeared  to  the  princess  :  it  was
apparently  their  angel,  or  God  himself,  who  by  his
power  struck  her  imagination,  and  represented  to  her
what  was  passing  at  that  moment.

Mezeray  affirms,  that  he  had  often  heard  people  of
quality  relate,  that  the  duke  Charles  the  Illd.  of  Lor-
raine, who  was  at  Paris  when  King  Henry  II.  was
wounded  with  the  splinter  of  a  lance,  of  which  he  died,
told  the  circumstance  often,  of  a  lady  who  lodged  in
his  hotel,  having  seen  in  a  dream,  very  distinctly,  that
the  king  had  been  struck  and  brought  to  the  ground
by  a  blow  from  a  lance.

To  these  instances  of  the  apparition  of  living  persons
to  other  living  persons  in  their  sleep,  we  may  add  an
infinite  number  of  other  instances  of  apparitions  of
angels  and  holy  personages,  or  even  of  dead  persons,
to  the  living  when  asleep,  to  give  them  instructions,
warn  them  of  dangers  which  menace  them,  inspire
them  with  salutary  counsel  relative  to  their  salvation,
or  to  give  them  aid ;  thick  volumes  might  be  composed
on  such  matters.  I  shall  content  myself  with  relating
here  some  examples  of  those  apparitions  drawn  from
profane  authors.

Xerxes,  king  of  Persia,  when  deliberating  in  council


APPARITIO^^S   OF  MEN   STILL  ALIVE.  325

whether  he  should  carry  the  war  Into  Greece,  was
strongly  dissuaded  from  it  by  Artabanes,  his  paternal
uncle.  Xerxes  took  offence  at  this  liberty,  and  uttered
some  very  disobliging  words  to  him.  The  following
night  he  reflected  seriously  on  the  arguments  of  Arta-
banes,  and  changed  his  resolution.  When  he  was  asleep,
he  saw  in  a  dream  a  man  of  extraordinary  size  and
beauty,  who  said  to  him,  "  You  have  then  renounced
your  intention  of  making  war  on  the  Greeks,  although
you  have  already  given  orders  to  the  Persian  chiefs  to
assemble  your  army.  You  have  not  done  well  to  change
your  resolve,  even  should  no  one  be  of  your  opinion.
Go  forward ;  believe  me :  follow  your  first  design."
Having  said  this,  the  vision  disappeared.  The  next  day
he  again  assembled  his  council,  and,  without  speaking
of  his  dream,  he  testified  his  regret  for  what  he  said  in
his  rage  the  preceding  day  to  his  uncle  Artabanes,  and
declared  that  he  had  renounced  his  design  of  making
war  upon  the  Greeks.  Those  who  composed  the  coun-
cil, transported  with  joy,  prostrated  themselves  before
him,  and  congratulated  him  upon  It.

The  following  night  he  had  a  second  time  the  same
vision,  and  the  same  phantom  said  to  him,  "  Son
of  Darius,  thou  hast  then  abandoned  thy  design  of
declaring  Avar  against  the  Greeks,  regardless  of  what  I
said  to  thee.  Know  that  If  thou  dost  not  Instantly
undertake  this  expedition,  thou  v/ilt  soon  be  reduced  to
a  situation  as  low  as  that  In  which  thou  now  findest
thyself  is  elevated."  The  king  directly  rose  from  his
bed,  and  sent  in  all  haste  for  Artabanes,  to  whom  he
related  the  two  dreams  which  he  had  had  two  nights


326  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

consecutively.  He  added,  "  I  pray  you  to  put  on  my
royal  ornaments,  sit  down  on  my  throne,  and  then  lie
down  in  my  bed.  If  the  phantom  w^hich  appeared  to
me  appears  to  you  also,  I  shall  believe  that  the  thing  is
ordained  by  the  decrees  of  the  gods,  and  I  shall  yield
to  their  commands."

Artabanes  would  in  vain  have  excused  himself  from
putting  on  the  royal  ornaments,  sitting  on  the  king's
throne,  and  lying  down  in  his  bed,  alleging  that  all
those  thino-s  would  be  useless  if  the  o:ods  had  resolved
to  let  him  know  their  will ;  that  it  would  even  be  more
likely  to  exasperate  the  gods,  as  if  he  desired  to  deceive
them  by  external  appearances.  As  for  the  rest,  dreams
in  themselves  deserve  no  attention,  and  usually  they  are
only  the  consequences  and  representations  of  what  is
most  strongly  in  the  mind  when  awake.

Xerxes  did  not  yield  to  his  arguments,  and  Arta-
banes did  what  the  king  desired,  persuaded  that  if  the
same  thing  should  occur  more  than  once,  it  would  be
a  proof  of  the  will  of  the  gods,  of  the  reality  of  the
vision,  and  the  truth  of  the  dream.  He  then  laid  down
in  the  king's  bed,  and  the  same  phantom  appeared  to
him,  and  said,  "  It  is  you,  then,  who  prevent  Xerxes
from  executing  his  resolve,  and  accomplishing  what  is
decreed  by  fate.  I  have  already  declared  to  the  king
what  he  has  to  fear  if  he  disobeys  my  orders."  At  the
same  time  it  appeared  to  Artabanes  that  the  spectre
would  burn  his  eyes  with  a  red-hot  iron.  He  directly
sprang  from  the  couch,  and  related  to  Xerxes  what  had
appeared  to  him  and  what  had  been  said  to  him,  adding,
"  I  now  absolutely  change  my  opinion,  since  it  pleases


APPAEITIONS   OP  MEN   STILL  ALKE.  327

the  gods  that  we  should  make  war,  and  that  the  Greeks
be  threatened  with  great  misfortunes ;  give  your  orders
and  dispose  every  thing  for  this  war :  " — which  was
executed  immediately.

The  terrible  consequences  of  this  war,  which  was  so
fatal  to  Persia,  and  at  last  caused  the  overthrow  of  that
famous  monarchy,  leads  us  to  judge  that  this  apparition,
if  a  true  one,  was  announced  by  an  evil  spirit,  hostile
to  that  monarchy,  sent  by  God  to  dispose  things  for
events  predicted  by  the  prophets,  and  the  succession  of
great  empires  predestined  by  the  decrees  of  the  Al
mi2:htv.

Cicero  remarks  that  two  Arcadians,  who  were  travel-
ling together,  arrived  at  Megara,  a  city  of  Greece,
situated  between  Athens  and  Corinth.  One  of  them,
who  could  claim  hospitality  in  the  town,  was  lodged  at
a  friend's,  and  the  other  at  an  inn.  After  supper,  he
who  was  at  a  friend's  house  retired  to  rest.  In  his  sleep
it  seemed  to  him  that  the  man  whom  he  had  left  at  the
inn  appeared  to  him,  and  implored  his  help,  because  the
innkeeper  wanted  to  kill  him.  He  arose  directly,  much
alarmed  at  this  dream,  but  having  reassured  himself,
and  fallen  asleep  again,  the  other  again  appeared  to
him,  and  told  him  that  since  he  had  not  had  the  kind-
ness to  aid  him,  at  least  he  must  not  leave  his  death
unpunished ;  that  the  innkeeper,  after  having  killed
him,  had  hidden  his  body  in  a  wagon,  and  covered  it
over  with  dung,  and  that  he  must  not  fail  to  be  the
next  morning  at  the  opening  of  the  city  gate,  before
the  wagon  went  forth.  Struck  with  this  new  dream,
he  went  early  in  the  morning  to  the  city  gate,  saw  the


328  TKE  PlIAXTOM  WORLD.

wagon,  and  asked  the  driver  what  he  had  got  under
the  manure.  The  carter  took  flight  directly,  the  body
was  extricated  from  the  wagon,  and  the  innkeeper
arrested  and  punished.

Cicero  relates  also  some  other  instances  of  similar
apparitions  which  occurred  In  sleep ;  one  is  of  So-
phocles, the  other  of  Simonides.  The  former  saw
Hercules  in  a  dream,  who  told  him  the  name  of  a
robber  vv^ho  had  taken  a  golden  patera  from  his  temple.
Sophocles  neglected  this  notice,  as  an  effect  of  disturbed
sleep;  but  Hercules  appeared  to  him  a  second  time,
and  repeated  to  him  the  same  thing,  which  induced
Sophocles  to  denounce  the  robber,  who  was  convicted
by  the  Areopagus,  and  from  that  time  the  temple  was
dedicated  to  Hercules  the  Revealer.

The  dream  or  apparition  of  Simonides  was  more  use-
ful to  himself  personally.  He  was  on  the  point  of
embarking,  when  he  found  on  the  shore  the  corpse  of
an  unknown  person,  as  yet  without  sepulture.  Simo-
nides had  him  interred,  from  humanity.  The  next
night  the  dead  man  appeared  to  Simonides,  and,
through  gratitude,  counselled  him  not  to  embark  in
the  vessel  then  riding  in  the  harbour,  because  he  would
be  shipwrecked  if  he  did.  Simonides  believed  him,
and  a  few  days  after,  he  heard  of  the  wreck  of  the
vessel  in  which  he  was  to  have  embarked.

John  Pico  de  la  Mirandola  assures  us  in  his  treatise,
De  Auto,  that  a  man,  who  was  not  rich,  finding  him-
self reduced  to  the  last  extremity,  and  without  any
resources  either  to  pay  his  debts  or  procure  nourish-
ment for  a  numerous  ftimily '  in   a  time   of  scarcity.


APPARITIOKS   OF   MEN    STILL  ALIVE.  329

overcome  with  grief  and  uneasiness,  fell  asleep.  At
the  same  time  one  of  the  blessed  appeared  to  him  in  a
dream,  taught  him  by  some  enigmatical  words  the
means  of  making  gold,  and  pointed  out  to  him  at  the
same  moment  the  water  he  must  make  use  of  to  suc-
ceed in  it.  On  his  awaking,  he  took  some  of  that
w^ater,  and  made  gold  of  it,  in  small  quantity,  indeed,
but  enough  to  maintain  his  family.  He  made  some
twice  with  iron  and  three  times  with  orpiment.  "  He
has  convinced  me  by  my  own  eyes,"  says  Pico  de  la
Mirandola,  "  that  the  means  of  making  gold  artificially
is  not  a  falsehood,  but  a  true  art."

Here  is  another  sort  of  apparition  of  one  living  man
to  another,  which  is  so  much  the  more  singular,  because
it  proves  at  once  the  might  of  spells,  and  that  a  magi-
cian can  render  himself  invisible  to  several  persons,
while  he  discovers  himself  to  one  man  alone.  The  fact
is  taken  from  the  Treatise  on  Superstitions,  of  the
reverend  father  Le  Brun,°  and  is  characterised  by  all
which  can  render  it  incontestible.  On  Friday,  the  first
day  of  May,  1705,  about  five  o'clock  in  the  evening,
Denis  Misanger  de  la  Richardiere,  eighteen  years  of
age,  was  attacked  with  an  extraordinary  malady,  which
began  by  a  sort  of  lethargy.  They  gave  him  every
assistance  that  medicine  and  surgery  could  aflPord.  He
fell  afterwards  into  a  kind  of  furor  or  convulsion,  and
they  v/ere  obliged  to  hold  him,  and  have  five  or  six
persons  to  keep  watch  over  him,  for  fear  that  he  should
throw  himself  out  of  the  windows,  or  break  his  head
against  the  wall.  The  emetic  which  they  gave  him
^  Le  Brun,  Traite  des  Superstit.  torn.  i.  pp.  281,  2S2,  et  seq.


330  THE  PHAIsTOM  WOrvLD.

made  him  throw  up  a  quantity  of  bile^  and  for  four  or
five  days  he  remained  pretty  quiet.

At  the  end  of  the  month  of  May,  they  sent  him  into
the  country,  to  take  the  air ;  and  some  other  circum-
stances occurred,  so  unusual,  that  they  judged  he  must
be  bewitched.  And  what  confirmed  this  conjecture
was,  that  he  never  had  any  fever,  and  retained  all  his
strength,  notwithstanding  all  the  pains  and  violent
remedies  which  he  had  been  made  to  take.  They  asked
him  if  he  had  not  had  some  dispute  with  a  shepherd,
or  some  other  person  suspected  of  sorcery  or  mal-
practices.

He  declared  that  on  the  18th  of  April  preceding,
when  he  was  going  through  the  village  of  Noysi  on
horseback  for  a  ride,  his  horse  stopped  short  in  the
midst  of  the  Rue  Feret^  opposite  the  chapel,  and  he
could  not  make  him  go  forward,  though  he  touched
him  several  times  with  the  spur.  There  was  a  shep-
herd standing  leaning  against  the  chapel,  with  his  crook
in  his  hand,  and  two  black  dogs  at  his  side.  This  man
said  to  him,  "  Sir,  I  advise  you  to  return  home,  for
your  horse  will  not  go  forward."  The  young  La  Rich-
ardiere,  continuing  to  spur  his  horse,  said  to  the  shep-
herd, "I  do  not  understand  what  you  say."  The
shepherd  replied,  in  a  low  tone,  "  I  will  make  you
understand."  In  effect,  the  young  man  was  obliged  to
get  down  from  his  horse,  and  lead  it  back  by  the  bridle
to  his  father's  dwelling  in  the  same  village.  Then  the
shepherd  cast  a  spell  upon  him,  which  was  to  take
effect  on  the  1st  of  May,  as  was  afterwards  known.

During  this  malady,  they  caused  several  masses  to


APPAUITIONS  OF  MEN   STILL    ALIVE.  331

be  said  in  clifFerent  places,  especially  at  St.  Maur  des
Fosses,  at  St.  Amable,  and  at  St.  Esprit.  Young  La
Richardiere  was  present  at  some  of  these  masses  which
were  said  at  St.  Maur  ;  but  he  declared  that  he  should
not  be  cured  till  Friday,  the  26th  of  June,  on  his
return  from  St.  ^laur.  On  entering  his  chamber,  the
key  of  which  he  had  in  his  pocket,  he  found  there  that
shepherd,  seated  in  his  arm-chair,  with  his  crook,  and
his  two  black  dogs.  He  was  the  only  person  who  saw
him  ;  none  other  in  the  house  could  perceive  him.  He
said  even  that  this  man  was  called  Damis,  although  he
did  not  remember  that  any  one  had  before  this  revealed
liis  name  to  him.  He  beheld  him  all  that  day,  and  all
tlie  succeedinfT  nio;ht.  Towards  six  o'clock  in  the  even-
ing,  as  he  felt  his  usual  suiFerings,  he  fell  on  the
ground,  exclaiming  that  the  shepherd  was  upon  him,
and  crushino;  him ;  at  the  same  time  he  drew  his  knife,
and  aimed  five  blows  at  the  shepherd's  face,  of  which
he  retained  the  marks.  The  invalid  told  those  who
were  Avatching  over  him  that  he  was  going  to  be  very
faint  at  five  different  times,  and  begged  of  them  to  help
him,  and  move  him  violently.  The  thing  happened  as
he  had  predicted.

On  Friday,  the  26th  of  June,  M.  de  la  Richardiere,
havins:  o;one  to  the  mass  at  St.  Maur,  asserted  that  he
should  be  cured  on  that  day.  After  mass,  the  priest
put  the  stole  upon  his  head,  and  recited  the  Gospel  of
St.  John,  during  which  prayer  the  young  man  saw
St.  Maur  standing,  and  the  unhappy  shepherd  at  his
left,  with  his  face  bleeding  from  the  five  knife-wounds
which  he  had  given  him.     At  that  moment  the  youth


333  THE  phanto:m  "^orld.

cried   out,  unintentionally,    "  A  miracle  !   a  miracle !  "
and  asserted  that  he  was  cured,  as  in  fact  he  was.

On  the  29th  of  June,  the  same  M.  de  la  Richardiere
returned  to  Noysi,  and  amused  himself  with  shooting.
As  he  was  shooting  in  the  vineyards,  the  shepherd  pre-
sented himself  before  him ;  he  hit  him  on  the  head
with  the  butt-end  of  his  gun.  The  shepherd  cried  out,
"  Sir,  you  are  killing  me ! "  and  fled.  The  next  day
this  man  presented  himself  again  before  him,  and  asked
his  pardon,  saying,  "  I  am  called  Damis ;  it  was  I  who
cast  a  spell  over  you  which  was  to  have  lasted  a  year.
By  the  aid  of  masses  and  prayers  which  have  been  said
for  you,  you  have  been  cured  at  the  end  of  eight  VN^eeks.
But  the  charm  has  Mien  back  upon  myself,  and  I  can
be  cured  of  it  only  by  a  miracle.  I  implore  you  then
to  pray  for  me."

During  all  these  reports,  the  marQ  cliausce  had  set
off  in  pursuit  of  the  shepherd  ;  but  he  escaped
them,  having  killed  his  two  dogs  and  thrown  away  his
crook.  On  Sunday,  the  13th  of  September,  he  came
to  M.  de  la  Richardiere,  and  related  to  him  his  adven-
ture ;  that  after  having  passed  twenty  years  without
approaching  the  sacraments,  God  had  given  him  grace
to  confess  himself  at  Troyes  ;  and  that  after  divers
delays  he  had  been  admitted  to  the  holy  communion.
Eight  days  after,  M.  de  la  Richardiere  received  a  letter
from  a  woman  who  said  she  was  a  relation  of  the  shep-
herd's, informing  him  of  his  death,  and  begging  him  to
cause  a  requiem  mass  to  be  said  for  him,  which  was
done.

How   many  difficulties    may   we   make   about  this


APPAEITIONS   OF  MEN   STILL  ALIVE.  333

story  !  How  could  this  wretched  shepherd  cast  the
spell  without  touching  the  person?  How  could  he
introduce  himself  into  young  M.  de  la  Richardiere's
chamber  without  either  opening  or  forcing  the  door  ?
How  could  he  render  himself  visible  to  him  alone,
whilst  none  other  beheld  him  ?  Can  one  doubt  of  his
corporeal  presence,  since  he  received  five  cuts  from  a
knife  in  his  face,  of  which  he  afterwards  bore  the
marks,  when,  by  the  merit  of  the  holy  mass  and  the
intercession  of  the  saints,  the  spell  was  taken  off?  How
could  St.  Maur  appear  to  him  in  his  Benedictine  habit,
having  the  wizard  on  his  left  hand  ?  If  the  circum-
stance is  certain,  as  it  appears,  who  shall  explain  the
manner  in  which  all  passed  or  took  place  ?


CHAPTER  XLVI.


ARGUMENTS   CONCERNING   APPARITIONS.


After  having  spoken  at  some  length  upon  appari-
tions, and  after  having  established  the  truth  of  them,
as  far  as  it  has  been  possible  for  us  to  do  so,  from  the
authority  of  the  Scripture,  from  examples,  and  by
arguments,  we  must  now  exercise  our  judgment  on  the
causes,  means,  and  reasons  for  these  apparitions,  and
reply  to  the  objections  which  may  be  made  to  destroy
the  reality  of  them,  or  at  least  to  raise  doubts  on  the
subject.

We  have  supposed  that  a2:)paritions  were  the  work
of  angels,  demons,  or  souls  of  the  defunct ;  we  do  not
talk  of  the  appearance  of  God  himself;  his  will,  his
operations,  his  power,  are  above  our  reach ;  we  acknow-
ledo-e  that  he  can  do  all  that  he  wills  to  do,  that  his
will  is  all-powerful,  and  that  he  places  himself,  when
he  chooses,  above  the  laws  which  he  has  made.  As  to
the  apparitions  of  the  living,  to  others,  also  living,
they  are  of  a  different  nature  from  what  we  propose
to  examine  in  this  place ;  we  shall  not  fail  to  speak  of
them  hereafter.

Whatever  system  we  may  follow  on  the  nature  of
angels,  or  demons,  or  souls  separated  from  the  body ;


ARGUMENTS   CONCERNING  APPARITIONS.  335

whether  we  consider  them  as  purely  spiritual  sub-
stances, as  the  Christian  Church  at  this  day  holds;
whether  we  give  them  an  aerial  body,  subtile,  and
invisible,  as  many  have  taught ;  it  appears  almost  as
difficult  to  render  palpable,  perceptible,  and  thick,
a  subtile  and  aerial  body,  as  it  is  to  condense  the  air,
and  make  it  seem  like  a  solid  and  perceptible  body ;
as,  when  the  angels  appeared  to  Abraham  and  Lot,  the
angel  Raphael  to  Tobias,  whom  he  conducted  into
Mesopotamia ;  or  when  the  demon  appeared  to  Jesus
Christ,  and  led  him  to  a  high  mountain,  and  on  the
pinnacle  of  the  Temple  at  Jerusalem ;  or  when  Moses
appeared  with  Elias  on  Mount  Tabor :  for  those  appa-
ritions are  certain  from  Scripture.

If  you  will  say  that  these  apparitions  were  seen  only
in  the  imagination  and  mind  of  those  who  saw^,  or
believed  they  saw,  angels,  demons,  or  souls  separated
from  the  body,  as  it  happens  every  day  in  our  sleep,
and  sometimes  when  aAvake,  if  we  are  strongly  occupied
with  certain  objects,  or  struck  with  certain  things
which  Ave  desire  ardently,  or  fear  exceedingly, — as  w^hen
Ajax,  thinking  he  saw  Ulysses  and  Agamemnon,  or
Menelalis,  threw  himself  upon  some  animals,  which  he
killed,  thinking  he  was  killing  those  two  men  his
enemies,  and  w4iom  he  was  dying  with  the  desire  to
wreak  his  vengeance  upon, — on  this  supposition,  the
apparition  will  not  be  less  difficult  to  explain.  There
was  neither  prepossession  nor  disturbed  imagination,
nor  any  preceding  emotion,  which  led  Abraham  to
figure  to  himself  that  he  saw  three  persons,  to  whom
he  gave  hospitality,  to  whom  he  spoke,  who  promised


333  THE   PHAXTOM   WORLD.

liim  the  birth  of  a  son,  of  which  he  was  scarcely
thinking  at  that  time.  The  three  Apostles  who  saw
Moses  conversing  with  Jesus  Christ  on  Mount  Tabor,
were  not  prepared  for  that  appearance ;  there  was
no  emotion  of  fear,  love,  revenge,  ambition,  or  any
other  passion  which  struck  their  imagination,  to  dispose
them  to  see  Moses ;  as  neither  was  there  in  Abraham,
when  he  perceived  the  three  angels  who  appeared  to
him.

Often  in  our  sleep  we  see,  or  we  believe  we  see,
what  has  struck  our  attention  very  much  when  awake ;
sometimes  we  represent  to  ourselves  in  sleep  things  of
which  we  have  never  thought,  which  even  are  repug-
nant to  us,  and  which  present  themselves  to  our  mind
in  spite  of  ourselves.  None  bethink  themselves  of
seeking  the  causes  of  these  kinds  of  representations ;
they  are  attributed  to  chance,  or  to  some  disposition
of  the  humours  of  the  blood  or  of  the  brain,  or  even  of
the  way  in  which  the  body  is  placed  in  bed ;  but
nothing  like  that  is  applicable  to  the  apparitions  of
angels,  demons,  or  spirits,  wdien  these  apparitions  are
accompanied  and  followed  by  converse,  predictions,
and  real  effects  preceded  and  predicted  by  those  which
appear.

If  we  have  recourse  to  a  pretended  fascination  of  the
eyes  or  the  other  senses,  which  sometimes  make  us
believe  that  we  see  and  hear  what  we  do  not,  or  that
we  neither  see  nor  hear  what  is  passing  before  our
eyes,  or  which  strikes  our  ears ;  as  when  the  soldiers
sent  to  arrest  Elisha  spoke  to  him  and  saw  him  before
they  recognised  him,  or  when  the  inhabitants  of  Sodom


ARGUMENTS   CONCERNING  APPARITIONS.  337

could  not  discover  Lot's  door,  although  it  was  before
their  eyes,  or  when  the  disciples  of  Emmaus  knew  not
that  it  was  Jesus  Christ  who  accompanied  them  and
expounded  the  Scriptures ;  they  opened  their  eyes  and
knew  him  only  hy  the  breaking  of  bread.

That  fascination  of  the  senses  which  makes  us  believe
that  we  see  what  we  do  not  see,  or  that  suspension  of
the  exercise  and  natural  functions  of  our  senses  which
prevents  us  from  seeing  and  recognising  what  is  passing
before  our  eyes,  is  all  of  it  hardly  less  miraculous  than
to  condense  the  air,  or  rarefy  it,  or  give  solidity  and
consistence  to  what  is  purely  spiritual  and  disengaged
from  matter.

From  all  this  it  follows  that  no  apparition  can  take
place  without  a  sort  of  miracle,  and  without  a  concur-
rence, both  extraordinary  and  supernatural,  of  the
power  of  God  who  commands,  or  causes,  or  permits  an
angel,  or  a  demon,  or  a  disembodied  soul,  to  appear,
act,  speak,  walk,  and  perform  other  functions  which
belong  only  to  an  organised  body.

I  shall  be  told  that  it  is  useless  to  recur  to  the
miraculous  and  the  supernatural,  if  we  have  acknow-
ledged in  spiritual  substances  a  natural  power  of  show-
ing themselves,  whether  by  condensing  the  air,  or  by
producing  a  massive  and  palpable  body,  or  in  raising
up  some  dead  body,  to  which  these  spirits  give  life  and
motion  for  a  certain  time.

I  own  it  all ;  but  I  dare  maintain  that  that  is  not
possible  either  to  angel  or  demon,  nor  to  any  spiritual
substance  whatsoever.  The  soul  can  produce  in  herself
thoughts,  will,  and  wishes  ;  she  can  give  her  impulsion

VOL.  I.  Q


338  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

to  the  movements  of  her  body,  and  repress  its  sallies
and  agitations  ;  but  how  does  she  do  that  ?  Philosophy
can  hardly  explain  it,  but  by  saying  that  by  virtue  of
the  union  between  herself  and  the  body,  God,  by  an
effect  of  his  wisdom,  has  given  her  power  to  act  upon
the  humours,  its  organs,  and  impress  them  with  certain
movements  ;  but  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  soul
performs  all  that  only  as  an  occasional  cause,  and  that
it  is  God  as  the  first,  necessary,  immediate  and  essen-
tial cause,  which  produces  all  the  movements  of  the
body  that  are  made  in  a  natural  way.

Neither  angel  nor  demon  has  more  privilege  in  this
respect  over  matter  than  the  soul  of  man  has  over  its
own  body.  They  can  neither  modify  matter,  change
it,  nor  impress  it  with  action  and  motion,  save  by  the
power  of  God,  and  with  his  concurrence  both  necessary
and  immediate :  our  knowledge  does  not  permit  us  to
judge  otherwise;  there  is  no  physical  proportion  be-
tween the  spirit  and  the  body ;  those  two  substances
cannot  act  mutually  and  immediately  one  upon  the
other;  they  can  act  only  occasionally,  by  determining
the  first  cause,  in  virtue  of  the  laws  which  wisdom  has
judged  it  proper  to  prescribe  to  herself  for  the  reci-
procal action  of  the  creatures  upon  each  other,  to  give
them  being,  to  preserve  it,  and  perpetuate  movement
in  the  mass  of  matter  which  composes  the  universe,
in  himself  giving  life  to  spiritual  substances,  and  per-
mitting them  with  his  concurrence,  as  the  First  Cause,
to  act,  the  body  on  the  soul,  and  the  soul  on  the  body,
one  on  the  other,  as  secondary  causes.

Porphyry,  when  consulted  by  Anebo,  an  Egyptian


ARGUMENTS   CONCERNING   APPARITIONS.  339

priest,  if  those  who  foretel  the  future  and  perform
prodigies  have  more  powerful  souls,  or  whether  they
receive  power  from  some  strange  spirit,  replies,  that
according  to  appearance  all  those  things  are  done  by
means  of  certain  evil  spirits  that  are  naturally  knavish,
and  take  all  sorts  of  shapes,  and  do  every  thing  that
one  sees  happen,  whether  good  or  evil ;  but  that  in  the
end  they  never  lead  men  to  what  is  truly  good.

St.  Augustine,^  who  cites  this  passage  of  Porphyry,
lays  much  stress  on  his  testimony,  and  says  that  every
extraordinary  thing  which  is  done  by  certain  tones  of
the  voice,  by  figures  or  phantoms,  is  usually  the  work
of  the  demon,  who  sports  with  the  credulity  and  blind-
ness of  men ;  that  everything  marvellous  which  is
transacted  in  nature,  and  has  no  relation  to  the  worship
of  the  true  God,  ought  to  pass  for  an  illusion  of  the
devil.  The  most  ancient  Fathers  of  the  Church,  Minu-
tius  Felix,  Arnobius,  St.  Cyprian,  attribute  equally  all
these  kinds  of  extraordinary  effects  to  the  evil  spirit.

Tertullian  ^  had  no  doubt  that  the  apparitions  which
are  produced  by  magic,  and  by  the  evocation  of  souls,
which,  forced  by  enchantments,  come  out,  say  they,
from  the  depth  of  hell  (or  Hades),  are  but  pure  illusions
of  the  demon,  who  causes  to  appear  to  those  present
a  fantastical  form,  which  fascinates  the  eyes  of  those
who  think  they  see  what  they  see  not ;  "  which  is  not
more  difficult  for  the  demon,"  says  he,  "  than  to  seduce
and  blind  the  souls  which  he  leads  into  sin.  Pharaoh
thought  he  saw  real  serpents  produced  by  his  magicians:

*  Aug,  de  Civit.  Dei,  lib.  x.  c.  11,  12.
^  Tertull.  de  Anima,  c.  57.

q2


340  THE  PHA?s'TOM  ■WORLD.

it  Avas  mere  illusion.     The  truth  of  Moses  devoured
the  falsehood  of  these  impostors."

Is  it  more  easy  to  cause  the  fascination  of  the  eyes
of  Pharaoh  and  his  servants  than  to  produce  serpents,
and  can  it  be  done  without  God's  concurring  thereto  ?
And  how  can  we  reconcile  this  concurrence  with  the
wisdom,  independence,  and  truth  of  God?  Has  the
devil  in  this  respect  a  greater  power  than  an  angel  and
a  disembodied  soul?  And  if  once  we  open  the  door
to  this  fascination,  everything  which  appears  super-
natural and  miraculous  will  become  uncertain  and
doubtful.  It  will  be  said  that  the  wonders  related  in
the  Old  and  New  Testament  are  in  this  respect,  in
regard  both  to  those  who  were  witnesses  of  them,  and
those  to  whom  they  happened,  only  illusions  and  fascj-
nations:  and  whither  may  not  these  premises  lead?
It  leads  us  to  doubt  everything,  to  deny  everything ;
to  believe  that  God,  in  concert  with  the  devil,  leads
us  into  error,  and  fascinates  our  eyes  and  other  senses,
to  make  us  believe  that  we  see,  hear,  and  know,  what
is  neither  present  to  our  eyes,  nor  known  to  our  mind,
nor  supported  by  our  reasoning  powers,  since  by  that
the  principles  of  reasoning  are  overthrown.

We  must,  then,  have  recourse  to  the  solid  and  un-
shaken principles  of  religion,  which  teach  us —

1.  That  angels,  demons,  and  souls  disembodied,  are
pure  spirit,  free  from  all  matter.

2.  That  it  is  only  by  the  order  or  permission  of  God
that  spiritual  substances  can  appear  to  men,  and  seem
to  them  to  be  true  and  tangible  bodies,  in  which  and
by  which  they  perform  what  they  are  seen  to  do.


AEGUMENTS   CONCERIsING  APPARITIOXS.  341

3.  That  to  make  these  bodies  appear,  and  make  them
act,  speak,  walk,  eat,  &c.,  they  must  produce  tangible
bodies,  either  by  condensing  the  air,  or  substituting
other  terrestrial,  solid  bodies,  capable  of  performing  the
functions  we  speak  of.

4.  That  the  way  in  which  this  production  and  appa-
rition of  a  perceptible  body  is  achieved,  is  absolutely
unknown  to  us ;  that  we  have  no  proof  that  spiritual
substances  have  a  natural  power  of  producing  this  kind
of  change  when  it  pleases  them,  and  that  they  cannot
produce  them  independently  of  God.

5.  That  although  there  may  be  often  a  great  deal  of
illusion,  prepossession,  and  imagination  in  what  is
related  of  the  operations  and  apparitions  of  angels,
demons,  and  disembodied  souls,  there  is  still  some
reality  in  many  of  these  things,  and  we  cannot  reason-
ably doubt  of  them  all,  and  still  less  deny  them  all.

6.  That  there  are  apparitions  which  bear  about  them
the  character  and  proof  of  truth,  from  the  quality  of
him  who  relates  them;  from  the  circumstances  which
accompany  them;  from  the  events  following  those
apparitions  that  announce  things  to  come ;  which  per-
form things  impossible  to  the  natural  strength  of  man,
and  too  much  in  opposition  to  the  interest  of  the
demon,  and  his  malicious  and  deceitful  character,  for
us  to  be  able  to  suspect  him  to  be  the  author  or  con-
triver of  them.  In  short,  these  apparitions  are  certified
by  the  belief,  the  prayers,  and  the  practice  of  the
Church,  which  recognises  them,  and  supposes  their
reality.

7.  That  although  what  appears  miraculous  is  not  so


342  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

always,  we  must  at  least  usually  perceive  in  it  some
illusion  and  operation  of  the  demon ;  consequently,  that
the  demon  can,  with  the  permission  of  God,  do  many
things  which  surpass  our  knowledge,  and  the  natural
power  which  we  suppose  him  to  have.

8.  That  those  who  wish  to  explain  them  by  fascina-
tion of  the  eyes  and  other  senses,  do  not  resolve  the
difficulty,  and  throw  themselves  into  still  greater  em-
barrassment than  those  who  admit  simply  that  appa-
ritions appear  by  the  order  or  the  permission  of  God.


CHAPTER  XLVII.

OBJECTIONS  AGAINST   APPARITIONS,   AND   REPLIES  TO   THOSE   OBJECTIONS.

The  greatest  objection  that  can  be  raised  against  the
apparitions  of  angels,  demons,  and  disembodied  souls,
takes  its  rise  in  the  nature  of  these  substances,  which,
being  purely  spiritual,  cannot  appear  with  evident,
solid,  and  palpable  bodies,  nor  perform  those  functions
which  belong  only  to  matter,  and  living  or  animated
bodies.

For,  either  spiritual  substances  are  united  to  the
bodies  which  appear,  or  not.  If  they  are  not  united
to  them,  how  can  they  move  them,  and  cause  them  to
act,  walk,  speak,  reason,  and  eat  ?  If  they  are  united
to  them,  then  they  form  but  one  individual ;  and  how
can  they  separate  themselves  from  them,  after  being
united  to  them  ?  Do  they  take  them  and  leave  them
at  will,  as  we  lay  aside  a  habit  or  a  mask?  That
would  be  to  suppose  that  they  are  at  liberty  to  appear
or  disappear,  which  is  not  the  case,  since  all  apparitions
are  solely  by  the  order  or  permission  of  God.  Are
those  bodies  which  appear,  only  instruments  which  the
angels,  demons,  or  souls,  make  use  of  to  affright,  warn,
chastise,  or  instruct  the  person  or  persons  to  whom


344  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

tliey  appear  ?  This  is,  in  fact,  the  most  rational  thing
that  can  be  said  concerning  these  apparitions ;  the
exorcisms  of  the  Church  fall  directly  on  the  agent  and
cause  of  these  apparitions,  and  not  on  the  phantom
which  appears,  nor  on  the  first  author,  which  is  God,
who  orders  and  permits  it.

Another  objection,  both  very  common  and  very  strik-
ing, is  that  which  is  drawn  from  the  multitude  of  false
stories  and  ridiculous  reports  which  are  spread  amongst
the  people,  of  the  apparitions  of  spirits,  demons,  and
elves,  of  possessions  and  obsessions.

It  must  be  owned  that,  out  of  a  hundred  of  these
pretended  appearances,  hardly  two  will  be  found  to  be
true.  The  ancients  are  not  more  to  be  credited  on
that  point  than  the  moderns,  since  they  were,  at  least,
equally  credulous  as  people  are  in  our  own  age,  or
rather  they  were  more  credulous  than  we  are  at  this
day.

I  grant,  that  the  foolish  credulity  of  the  people,  and
the  love  of  every  thing  that  seems  marvellous  and
extraordinary,  have  produced  an  infinite  number  of
false  histories  on  the  subject  we  are  now  treating  of
There  are  here  two  dangers  to  avoid :  a  too  great
credulity,  and  an  excessive  difficulty  in  believing  what
is  above  the  ordinary  course  of  nature ;  as  likewise,  we
must  not  conclude  what  is  general  from  what  is  par-
ticular, or  make  a  general  case  of  a  particular  one,  nor
say  that  all  is  false  because  some  stories  are  so ;  also,
Ave  must  not  assert  that  such  a  particular  history  is  a
mere  invention,  because  there  are  many  stories  of  this
latter  kind.     It  is  allowable  to  examine,  prove,  and


OBJECTIONS  AND  REPLIES.  345

select ;  we  must  never  form  our  judgment,  but  with
knowledge  of  the  case ;  a  story  may  be  false  in  many
of  its  circumstances,  (as  related,)  but  true  in  its
foundation.

The  history  of  the  deluge,  and  that  of  the  passage
across  the  Red  sea,  are  certain  in  themselves,  and  in
the  simple  and  natural  recital  given  of  them  by  Moses.
The  profane  historians,  and  some  Hebrew  writers,
and  even  Christians,  have  added  some  embellishment
which  must  militate  against  the  story  in  itself.  Jose-
phus,  the  historian,  has  much  embellished  the  history  of
Moses ;  Christian  authors  have  added  much  to  that  of
Josephus  ;  the  Mahometans  have  altered  several  points
of  the  sacred  history  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament.
IMust  we,  on  this  account,  consider  these  histories  as
problematical  ?  The  life  of  St.  Gregory  Thaumaturgus
is  full  of  miracles,  as  are  also  those  of  St.  Martin
and  St.  Bernard ;  St.  Augustine  relates  several  miracu-
lous cures  worked  by  the  relics  of  St.  Stephen.  Many
extraordinary  things  are  related  in  the  life  of  St.  Am-
brose. Why  not  give  faith  to  them  after  the  testimony
of  these  great  men,  and  that  of  their  disciples,  who  had
lived  with  them,  and  had  been  witnesses  of  a  good  part
of  what  they  relate  ?

It  is  not  permitted  us  to  dispute  the  truth  of  the
apparitions  noted  in  the  Old  and  New  Testament ;  but
we  may  be  permitted  to  explain  them.  For  instance,
it  is  said  that  the  Lord  appeared  to  Abraham  in  the
valley  of  Mamre ;  ^  that  he  entered  Abraham's  tent,
and  that  he  promised  him  the  birth  of  a  son ;  also,  it

*  Gen.  xviii.'lO.
q3


346  THE  THANTOM  WORLD.

is  allowed,  that  he  received  three  angels,  who  went
from  thence  to  Soclom.  St.  Paul  ^  notices  it  expressly
in  his  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  ;  angelis  Jiospitio  receptis.
It  is  also  said,  that  the  Lord  appeared  unto  Moses,
and  gave  him  the  law ;  and  St.  Stephen,  in  the  Acts,^
informs  us,  that  it  was  an  angel  who  spoke  to  him
from  the  burning  bush,  and  on  Mount  Horeb ;  and
St.  Paul,  writing  to  the  Galatians,  says,  that  the  law
was  given  by  angels.*^

Sometimes,  the  name  of  angel  of  the  Lord  is  taken
for  a  prophet,  a  man  filled  with  his  Spirit,  and  deputed
by  him.  It  is  certain,  that  the  Hebrew  malae  and  the
Greek  angelos,  bear  the  same  signification  as  our  envoy.
For  instance,  at  the  beginning  of  the  Book  of  Judges,^
it  is  said,  that  there  came  an  angel  of  the  Lord  from
Gilgal  to  the  place  of  tears,  (or  Bochim,)  and  that  he
there  reproved  the  Israelites  for  their  infidelity  and
ino;ratitude.  The  ablest  commentators  ^  think,  that  this
angel  of  the  Lord  is  no  other  than  Phineas,  or  the  then
high  priest,  or  rather  a  prophet,  sent  expressly  to  the
people  assembled  at  Gilgal.

In  the  Scripture,  the  prophets  are  sometimes  styled
angels  of  the  Lord.^  "  Here  is  what  saith  the  envoy
of  the  Lord,  amongst  the  envoys  of  the  Lord,"  says
Haggai,  speaking  of  himself.

The  prophet  Malachi,  the  last  of  the  lesser  prophets,
says,  that  "the  Lord  will  send  his  angel,  who  will
prepare   the   way  before   his   face."  ^     This   angel  is

b  Heb.  xiii.  2.  -^  Acts  vii.  30,  33.  ^  Gal.  iii.

*  Judges  ii.  1.  '  Vide  commentar.  in  Judic.  ii.

?  Hagg.  i.  13.  ^  Malac.  iii.  1.


OBJECTIONS  AND  REPLIES.  347

St.  John  the  Baptist,  who  prepares  the  way  for  Jesus
Christ,  who  is  himself  styled  the  Angel  of  the  Lord —
"And  soon  the  Lord  whom  ye  demand,  and  the  so
much  desired  Angel  of  the  Lord,  will  come  into  his
temple."  This  same  Saviour  is  designated  by  Moses
under  the  name  of  a  prophet:^  "The  Lord  will  raise
up  in  the  midst  of  your  nation,  a  prophet  like  myself."
The  name  of  angel  is  given  to  the  prophet  Nathan,
who  re^^roved  David  for  his  sin.  I  do  not  pretend,  by
these  testimonies,  to  deny  that  the  angels  have  often
appeared  to  men ;  but  I  infer  from  them,  that  some-
times these  angels  were  only  prophets  or  other  persons,
raised  up  and  sent  by  God  to  his  people.

As  to  apparitions  of  the  demon,  it  is  well  to  observe,
that  in  Scripture  the  greater  part  of  public  calamities
and  maladies  are  attributed  to  evil  spirits ;  for  example,
it  is  said,  that  Satan  inspired  David  ^  with  the  idea  of
numbering  his  people  ;  but  in  another  place  it  is  simply
said,  that  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was  inflamed^  against
Israel,  and  led  David  to  cause  his  subjects  to  be  num-
bered. There  are  several  other  passages  in  the  Holy
Books,  where  they  relate  what  the  demon  said  and
what  he  did,  in  a  popular  manner,  by  the  figure  termed
prosopopoeia  ;  for  instance,  the  conversation  between
Satan  and  the  first  woman,"^  and  the  discourse  which
the  demon  holds  in  company  with  the  good  angels
before  the  Lord,  when  he  talks  to  him  of  Job,"  and
obtains  permission  to  tempt  and  afflict  him.  In  the
New  Testament,  it  appears  that  the  Jews  attributed  to

•  Deut.  xyiii.  18.  ^  1  Chron.  xxi.  1.  '  2  Sam.  xxiv.  1.

"  Gen.  iii.  2,  3.  °  Job  i.  7—9.


348  THE   PHANTO^I  "WORLD.

the  malice  of  the  demon  and  to  his  possession  almost
all  the  maladies  with  which  they  were  afflicted.  In
St.  Luke,°  the  woman  who  was  bent  and  could  not
raise  herself  up,  and  had  suffered  this  for  eighteen
years,  "had,"  says  the  evangelist,  "a  spirit  of  in-
firmity;" and  Jesus  Christ,  after  having  healed  her,
says,  "  that  Satan  held  her  bound  for  eighteen  years ;"
and  in  another  place  it  is  said,  that  a  lunatic  or  epileptic
person  was  possessed  by  the  demon.  It  is  clear  from
what  Is  said  by  St.  Matthew  and  St.  Luke,?  that  he  was
attacked  by  epilepsy.  The  Saviour  cured  him  of  this
evil  malady,  and  by  that  means  took  from  the  demon
the  opportunity  of  tormenting  him  still  more ;  as  David,
by  dissipating  with  the  sound  of  his  harp  the  sombre
melancholy  of  Saul,  delivered  him  from  the  evil  spirit,
who  abused  the  power  of  those  inclinations  which  he
found  In  him,  to  awaken  his  jealousy  against  David.
All  this  means,  that  we  often  ascribe  to  the  demon
things  of  which  he  is  not  guilty,  and  that  we  must  not
lightly  adopt  all  the  prejudices  of  the  people,  nor  take
literally  all  that  is  related  of  the  works  of  Satan.

"  Luke  xiii.  16.  p  Matt,  xvii,  14.    Luke  ix.  37.


CHAPTER  XL VIII.

SOME  OTHER  OBJECTIONS  AND   REPLIES.

In  order  to  combat  the  apparitions  of  angels,  demons,
and  disembodied  souls,  we  still  bring  forward  the  effects
of  a  prepossessed  fancy,  struck  with  an  idea,  and  of  a
weak  and  timid  mind,  which  imagine  they  see  and  hear
what  subsists  only  in  idea ;  we  advert  to  the  inventions
of  the  malignant  spirits,  who  like  to  make  sport  of  and
to  delude  us ;  we  call  to  our  assistance  the  artifices  of
the  charlatans,  who  do  so  many  things  which  pass  for
supernatural  in  the  eyes  of  the  ignorant.  Philosophers,
by  means  of  certain  glasses,  and  what  are  called  magic
lanterns,  by  optical  secrets,  sympathetic  powders,  by
their  phosphorus,  and  lately  by  means  of  the  electrical
machine,  show  us  an  infinite  number  of  things  which
the  simpletons  take  for  magic,  because  they  know  not
how  they  are  produced.

Eyes  that  are  diseased,  do  not  see  things  as  others
see  them,  or  else  behold  them  differently.  A  drunken
man  will  see  objects  double ;  to  one  who  has  the  jaun-
dice, they  will  appear  yellow ;  in  the  obscurity,  people
fancy  they  see  a  spectre,  when  they  see  only  the  trunk
of  a  tree.


350  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

A  mountebank  will  appear  to  eat  a  sword ;  another
will  vomit  coals  or  pebbles ;  one  will  drink  wine  and
send  it  out  again  at  his  forehead ;  another  will  cut  off
his  companion's  head,  and  put  it  on  again.  You  will
think  you  see  a  chicken  dragging  a  beam.  The  mounte-
bank will  swallow  fire  and  vomit  it  forth,  he  w^ill  draw
blood  from  fruit,  he  will  send  from  his  mouth  strings  of
iron  nails,  he  will  put  a  sword  on  his  stomach  and  press
it  strongly,  and  instead  of  running  into  him,  it  will  bend
back  to  the  hilt ;  another  will  run  a  sword  through  his
body  w^ithout  wounding  himself;  you  will  sometimes
see  a  child  without  a  head,  then  a  head  without  a  child,
and  all  of  them  alive.  That  appears  very  wonderful ;
nevertheless,  if  it  were  known  how  all  those  things  are
done,  people  would  only  laugh,  and  be  surprised  that
they  could  w^onder  at  and  admire  such  things.

What  has  not  been  said  for  and  against  the  divining-
rod  of  Jacques  Aimar?  Scripture  proves  to  us  the
antiquity  of  divination  by  the  divining-rod,  in  the  in-
stance of  Nebuchadnezzar,^  and  in  what  is  said  of  the
prophet  Hosea.^  Fable  speaks  of  the  wonders  wrought
by  the  golden  rod  of  Mercury.  The  Gauls  and  Ger-
mans also  used  the  rod  for  divination;  and  there  is
reason  to  believe  that  often  God  permitted  that  the  rods
should  make  known  by  their  movements  what  was  to
happen ;  for  that  reason  they  were  consulted.  Every
body  knows  the  secret  of  Circe's  wand,  which  changed
men  into  beasts.  I  do  not  compare  it  with  the  rod
of  Moses,  by  means  of  which  God  worked  so  many
miracles  in  Egypt ;  but  we  may  compare  it  with  those
•  Ezck,  xxi.  21.  *•  Hosca  iv.  12.


OBJECTIONS  AND  EEPLIES.  351

of  the  magicians  of  Pharaoh,  which  produced  so  many
marvellous  effects.

Albertus  Magnus  relates,  that  tliere  had  been  seen
in  Germany  two  brothers,  one  of  whom  passing  near  a
door  securely  locked,  and  presenting  his  left  side,  would
cause  it  to  open  of  itself;  the  other  brother  had  the
same  virtue  in  the  right  side.  St.  Augustine  says,  that
there  are  men^  who  move  their  two  ears  one  after
another,  or  both  together,  without  moving  their  heads ;
others,  without  moving  it  also,  make  all  the  skin  of
their  head  with  the  hair  thereon  come  down  over  their
forehead,  and  put  it  back  as  it  was  before  ;  some  imitate
so  perfectly  the  voices  of  animals,  that  it  is  almost
impossible  not  to  mistake  them.  We  have  seen  men
speak  from  the  hollow  of  the  stomach,  and  make  them-
selves heard  as  if  speaking  from  a  distance,  although
they  were  close  by.  Others  swallow  an  incredible
quantity  of  different  things,  and  by  tightening  their
stomachs  ever  so  little,  throw  up  whole,  as  from  a  bag,
whatever  they  please.  Last  year,  in  Alsatia,  there  was
seen  and  heard  a  German  who  played  on  two  French
horns  at  once,  and  gave  airs  in  two  parts,  the  first  and
the  second,  at  the  same  time.  Who  can  explain  to  us
the  secret  of  intermitting  fevers,  of  the  flux  and  reflux
of  the  sea,  and  the  cause  of  many  effects  which  are
certainly  all  natural  ?

Galen  relates,*^  that  a  physician  named  Theophilus,
having  fallen  ill,  fancied  that  he  saw  near  his  bed  a  great
number  of  musicians,  whose  noise  split  his  head,  and
augmented  his  illness.     He  cried   out  incessantly  for

«  Aug.  lib.  xiv.  de  Civit.  Dei,  c.  24.         ^  Galen,  de  Differ.  Sympt.


352  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

them  to  send  those  people  away.  Having  recovered
his  health,  and  good  sense,  he  perfectly  well  remem-
bered all  that  had  been  said  to  him,  but  he  could  not
get  those  players  on  musical  instruments  out  of  his
head,  and  he  affirmed  that  they  tired  him  to  death.

In  1629,  Desbordes,  valet-de-chambre  of  Charles  IV.,
Duke  of  Lorraine,  was  accused  of  having  hastened  the
death  of  the  Princess  Christina  of  Salms,  wife  of  Duke
Francis  IL,  and  mother  of  the  Duke  Charles  IV.,  and
of  having  inflicted  maladies  on  different  persons,  v/hich
maladies  the  doctors  attributed  to  evil  spells.  Charles  IV.
had  conceived  violent  suspicions  against  Desbordes,
since  one  day  when  in  a  hunting-party  this  valet-de-
chambre  had  served  a  grand  dinner  to  the  Duke  and  his
company,  without  any  other  preparation  than  having  to
open  a  box  with  three  shelves ;  and  to  wind  up  the
v/onders,  he  had  ordered  three  robbers,  who  were  dead
and  hung  to  a  gibbet,  to  come  down  from  it,  and  come
and  make  their  bow  to  the  Duke,  and  then  to  go  back
and  resume  their  place  at  the  gallows.  It  was  said,
moreover,  that  on  another  occasion  he  had  commanded
the  personages  in  a  piece  of  tapestry  to  detach  them-
selves from  it,  and  to  come  and  present  themselves  in
the  middle  of  the  room.

Charles  IV.  was  not  very  credulous  ;  nevertheless,  he
allowed  Desbordes  to  be  tried.  He  was,  it  is  said,  con-
victed of  magic,  and  condemned  to  the  flames;  but
I  have  since  been  assured^  that  he  made  his  escape,
and  some  years  after,  on  presenting  himself  before  the
Duke,  and  clearing  himself,  he  demanded  the  restitu-
«  By  M,  Fransquin  Chanoine  dc  Taul.


X

OBJECTIONS  AND   REPLIES.  353

tion  of  his  property,  which  had  been  confiscated ;  but
he  recovered  only  a  very  small  part  of  it.  Since  the
adventure  of  Desbordes,  the  partisans  of  Charles  IV.
wished  to  cast  a  doubt  on  the  validity  of  the  baptism  of  .
the  Duchess  Nichola,  his  wife,  because  she  had  been
baptized  by  Lavallee,  Chantre  de  St.  George,  a  friend
of  Desbordes,  and  like  him  convicted  of  several  crimes,
which  drew  upon  him  similar  condemnation.  From  a
doubt  of  the  baptism  of  the  duchess,  they  wished  to
infer  the  invalidity  of  her  marriage  with  Charles,  which
was  then  the  grand  business  of  Charles  lY.

Father  Delrio,  a  Jesuit,  says  that  the  magician  called
Trois-Echelles,  by  his  enchantments,  detached  in  the
presence  of  King  Charles  IX.  the  rings  or  links  of  a
collar  of  the  Order  of  the  King,  worn  by  some  knights
who  were  at  a  great  distance  from  him ;  he  made  them
come  into  his  hand,  and  after  that  replaced  them,  with-
out the  collar  appearing  deranged.

John  Faust  Cudlingen,  a  German,  was  requested,  in
a  company  of  gay  people,  to  perform  in  their  presence
some  tricks  of  his  trade ;  he  promised  to  show  them  a
vine  loaded  with  grapes,  ripe  and  ready  to  gather.
They  thought,  as  it  was  then  the  month  of  December,
he  could  not  execute  his  promise.  He  strongly  recom-
mended them  not  to  stir  from  their  places,  and  not  to
lift  up  their  hands  to  cut  the  grapes,  unless  by  his  ex-
press order.  The  vine  appeared  directly,  covered  with
leaves  and  loaded  with  grapes,  to  the  great  astonishment
of  all  present ;  every  one  took  up  his  knife,  awaiting
the  order  of  Cudlingen  to  cut  some  grapes ;  but  after
having  kept  them  for  some  time  in  that  expectation,  he


354  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

suddenly  caused  the  vine  and  the  grapes  to  disappear ;
then  every  one  found  himself  armed  with  his  knife,  and
holding  his  neighbour's  nose  with  one  hand,  so  that  if
they  had  cut  off  a  bunch  without  the  order  of  Cudlingen,
they  would  have  cut  off  one  another's  noses.

We  have  seen  in  these  parts  a  horse  which  appeared
gifted  with  wit  and  discernment,  and  to  understand
what  his  master  said.  All  the  secret  consisted  in  the
horse's  having  been  taught  to  observe  certain  motions
of  his  master ;  and  from  these  motions  he  was  led  to  do
certain  things  to  which  he  was  accustomed,  and  to  go
to  certain  persons,  which  he  would  never  have  done,
but  for  the  sign  or  motion  which  he  saw  his  master
make.

A  hundred  other  similar  facts  might  be  cited,  which
might  pass  for  magical  operations,  if  we  did  not  know
that  they  are  simple  contrivances  and  tricks  of  art,  per-
formed by  persons  well  exercised  in  such  things.  It
may  be  that  sometimes  people  have  ascribed  to  magic
and  the  evil  spirit  operations  like  those  we  have  just
related,  and  that  what  have  been  taken  for  the  spirits
of  deceased  persons,  were  often  arranged  on  purpose
by  young  people  to  frighten  passers-by.  They  will
cover  themselves  with  white  or  black,  and  show  them-
selves in  a  cemetery  in  the  posture  of  persons  requesting
prayers ;  after  that  they  will  be  the  first  to  exclaim
that  they  have  seen  a  spirit:  at  other  times  it  will
be  pick-pockets,  or  young  men,  who  will  hide  their
amorous  intrigues,  or  their  thefts  and  knavish  tricks,
under  this  disguise.

Sometimes  a  widow,  or  heirs,  from  interested  motives.


OBJECTIONS  AND  REPLIES.  355

win  publicly  declare  that  the  deceased  husband  appears
in  his  house,  and  is  in  torment ;  that  he  has  asked  or
commanded  such  and  such  things,  or  such  and  such
restitutions.  I  own  that  this  may  happen,  and  does
happen  sometimes;  but  it  does  not  follow  that  spirits
never  return.  The  return  of  souls  is  infinitely  more
rare  than  the  common  people  believe ;  I  say  the  same
of  pretended  magical  operations  and  apparitions  of  the
demon.

It  is  remarked  that  the  greater  the  ignorance  which
prevails  in  a  country,  the  more  superstition  reigns  there;
and  that  the  spirit  of  darkness  there  exercises  greater
power,  in  proportion  as  the  nations  are  plunged  in
irregularity,  and  into  deeper  moral  darkness.  Louis
Vivez^  testifies,  that  in  the  newly-discovered  countries
in  America,  nothing  is  more  common  than  to  see  spirits
which  appear  at  noonday,  not  only  in  the  country,  but
in  towns  and  villages,  speaking,  commanding,  some-
times even  striking  men.  Olaiis  Magnus,  Archbishop
of  Upsal,  who  has  written  on  the  antiquities  of  the
northern  nations,  observes,  that  in  Sweden,  Norway,
Finland,  Finmark,  and  Lapland,  they  frequently  see
spectres  or  spirits,  which  do  many  wonderful  things ;
that  there  are  even  some  amongst  them  who  serve  as
domestics  to  men,  and  take  the  horses  and  other  cattle
to  pasture.

The  Laplanders  even  at  this  day,  as  well  those  who
have  remained  in   idolatry   as   those   who   have   em-
braced Christianity,  believe  the  apparition  of  the  manes
or  ghosts,  and  offer  them  a  kind  of  sacrifice.     I  believe
^  Ludov.  Yives,  lib.  i.  de  Veritate  Fidei,  p.  540.


356  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

that  prepossession,  and  the  prejudices  of  childhood,  have
much  more  to  do  with  this  belief  than  reason  and  ex-
perience. In  effect,  among  the  Tartars,  where  bar-
barism and  ignorance  reign  as  much  as  in  any  country
in  the  world,  they  talk  neither  of  spirits  nor  of  appari-
tions, no  more  than  among  the  Mahometans,  although
they  admit  the  apparitions  of  angels  made  to  Abraham
and  the  patriarchs,  and  that  of  the  Archangel  Gabriel
to  Mahomet  himself.

The  Abyssinians,  a  very  rude  and  ignorant  people,
believe  neither  in  sorcerers,  nor  spells,  nor  magicians ;
they  say  that  it  is  giving  too  much  power  to  the  demon,
and  by  that  they  fall  into  the  error  of  the  Manichseans,
who  admit  two  Principles,  the  one  of  good,  which  Is
God,  and  the  other  of  evil,  which  is  the  devil.  The
Minister  Becker,  in  his  work  entitled  "  The  Enchanted
World,"  (Le  Monde  Enchante,)  laughs  at  apparitions
of  spirits  and  evil  angels,  and  ridicules  all  that  is  said
of  the  effects  of  mamc :  he  maintains  that  to  believe  in
magic  is  contrary  to  Scripture  and  religion.

But  whence  comes  it,  then,  that  the  Scriptures  for-
bid us  to  consult  magicians,  and  that  they  make  mention
of  Simon  the  magician,  of  Ely  mas,  another  magician,
and  of  the  works  of  Satan  ?  What  will  become  of  the
apparitions  of  angels,  so  well  noted  in  the  Old  and  New
Testaments  ?  What  will  become  of  the  apparitions  of
Onias  to  Judas  Maccabeus,  and  of  the  devil  to  Jesus
Christ  himself,  after  his  fast  of  forty  days  ?  What  will
be  said  of  the  apparition  of  Moses  at  the  Transfigura-
tion of  the  Saviour ;  and  an  infinity  of  other  appear-
ances made  to  all  kinds  of  persons,  and  related  by  wise,


OBJECTIONS  AND   REPLIES.  357

grave,  and  enlightened  authors?  Are  the  apparitions
of  devils  and  spirits  more  difficult  to  explain  and  con-
ceive than  those  of  angels,  which  we  cannot  rationally
dispute  without  overthrowing  the  entire  Scriptures,  and
practices  and  belief  of  the  Churches  ?

Does  not  the  Apostle  tell  us,  that  the  angel  of  dark-
ness transforms  himself  into  an  angel  of  light  ?  Is  not
the  absolute  renunciation  of  all  belief  in  apparitions
assaulting  Christianity  in  its  most  sacred  authority,  in
the  belief  of  another  life,  of  a  Church  still  subsisting
in  another  world,  of  rewards  for  good  actions,  and  of
punishments  for  bad  ones;  the  utility- of  prayers  for  the
dead,  and  the  efficacy  of  exorcisms  ?  We  must  then
in  these  matters  keep  the  medium  between  excessive
credulity  and  extreme  incredulity ;  we  must  be  prudent,
moderate  and  enlightened ;  we  must,  according  to  the
advice  of  St.  Paul,  test  everything,  examine  every-
thing, yield  only  to  evidence  and  known  truth.


CHAPTER  XLIX.

THE   SECRETS   OF   PHYSICS   AND   CHEMISTRY   TAKEN   FOR   SUPERNATTTRAL

THINGS.

It  is  possible  to  allege  against  my  reasoning  the
secrets  of  physics  and  chemistry,  which  produce  an
infinity  of  wonderful  effects,  and  appear  beyond  the
power  of  natural  agency.  We  have  the  composition
of  a  phosphorus,  with  which  they  write ;  the  characters
do  not  appear  by  daylight,  but  in  the  dark  we  see  them
shine;  with  this  phosphorus  figures  can  be  traced
which  would  surprise  and  even  alarm  during  the  night,
as  has  been  done  more  than  once,  apparently  to  cause
maliciously  useless  fright.  La  poiidre  ardente  is
another  phosphorus,  which,  provided  it  is  exposed  to
the  air,  sheds  a  light  both  by  night  and  by  day.  How
many  people  have  been  frightened  by  those  little
worms  which  are  found  in  certain  kinds  of  rotten  wood,
and  which  give  a  brilhant  flame  by  night.

We  have  the  daily  experience  of  an  infinite  number
of  things,  all  of  them  natural,  which  appear  above  the
ordinary  course  of  nature,^  but  which  have  nothing
miraculous  in  them,  and  ought  not  to  be  attributed  to
angels  or  demons ;  for  instance,  teeth  and  noses  taken
from  other  persons,  and  applied  to  those  who  have
"  M.  de  S.  Andre,  Lett.  iii.  sur  les  Mal^fices.


SECRETS   OF  PHYSICS  AND   CHEMISTHY.  359

lost  similar  parts ;  of  this  we  find  many  instances  in
authors.  These  teeth  and  noses  fall  off  directly  the
person  from  whom  they  were  taken  dies,  however  great
the  distance  between  these  two  persons  may  be.

The  presentiments  experienced  by  certain  persons  of
what  happens  to  their  relations  and  friends,  and  even  of
their  own  death,  are  not  at  all  miraculous.  There  are
many  instances  of  persons  who  are  in  the  habit  of
feeling  these  presentiments,  and  who  in  the  night,  even
when  asleep,  will  say  that  such  a  thing  has  happened,
or  is  about  to  happen;  that  such  messengers  are
coming,  and  will  announce  to  them  such  and  such
things.

There  are  dogs  that  have  the  sense  of  smelling  so
keen,  that  they  scent  from  a  good  distance  the  approach
of  any  person  who  has  done  them  good  or  harm.    This
lias   been  proved  many  times,  and   can  only  proceed
from  the  diversity  of  organs  in  those  animals,  some  of
which  have  the  scent  much  keener  than  others,  and
upon  which  the  spirits  which  exhale  from  other  bodies
act    more   quickly  and  at  a  greater  distance  than  in
others.     Certain  persons  have  such  an  acute  sense  of
hearing,  that  they  can  hear  what  is  whispered  even  in
another  chamber,  of  which   the   door  is   well  closed.
They  cite  as  an  example  of  this,  a  certain  Marie  Bu-
caille,  to  whom  it  was  thought  that  her  guardian  angel
discovered  what  was  said  at  a  great  distance  from  her.

Others  have  the  smell  so  keen  that  they  distinguish
by  the  odour  all  the  men  and  animals  they  have  ever
seen,  and  scent  their  approach  a  long  way  off.  Blind
persons  pretty  often  possess  this  faculty  as  well  as  that


360  THE  PHANT03I  "WORLD.

of  discerning  the  colour  of  different  stuffs  by  the  touch,
from  horsehair  to  playing-cards.

Others  discern  by  the  taste  everything  that  composes
a  ragout,  better  than  the  most  expert  cook  could  do.
Others  possess  so  piercing  a  sight  that  at  the  first
glance  they  can  distinguish  the  most  confused  and
distant  objects,  and  remark  the  least  change  which
takes  place  in  them.

There  are  both  men  and  women  w4io,  without  in-
tending to  hurt,  do  a  great  deal  of  harm  to  children,
and  all  the  tender  and  delicate  animals  which  they  look
at  attentively,  or  which  they  touch.  This  happens
particular!}?-  in  hot  countries ;  and  many  examples  might
be  cited  of  it ;  from  which  arises  what  both  ancients
and  moderns  call  fascination  (or  the  evil  eye) ;  hence
the  precautions  which  were  taken  against  these  effects
by  amulets  and  preservatives  which  were  suspended  to
children's  necks.

There  have  been  known  to  be  men  from  whose  eyes
there  proceeded  such  venomous  spirits  that  they  did
harm  to  every  body  or  thing  they  looked  at,  even  to
the  breasts  of  nurses,  which  they  caused  to  dry  up, —
to  plants,  flowers,  the  leaves  of  trees,  which  were  seen
to  wither  and  fall  off.  They  dare  not  enter  any  place
till  they  had  warned  the  people  beforehand  to  send
away  the  children  and  nurses,  new-born  animals,  and,
generally  speaking,  every  thing  which  they  could  infect
by  their  breath  or  their  looks.

We  should  laugh,  and  with  reason,  at  those,  who,  to
explain  all  these  singular  effects,  should  have  recourse
to  charms,  spells,  to  the  operations  of  demons,  or  of


SECRETS   OF  PHYSICS  AND   CHEMISTRY.  361

good  angels.  The  evaporation  of  corpuscles,  or  atoms,
or  the  insensible  perspiration  of  the  bodies  which  pro-
duce all  these  effects,  suffices  to  account  for  it.  We  have
recourse  neither  to  miracles,  nor  to  superior  causes,
above  all  when  these  effects  are  produced  at  once,  and
at  a  short  distance ;  but  when  the  distance  is  great,
the  exhalation  of  the  spirits,  or  essence,  and  of  insen-
sible corpuscles,  does  not  equally  satisfy  us  any  more
than  when  we  meet  with  things  and  effects  which  go
beyond  the  known  force  of  nature,  such  as  foretelling
future  events,  speaking  unknown  languages,  i,  e.  lan-
guages unknown  to  the  speaker,  to  be  in  such  ecstasy
that  the  person  is  beyond  earthly  feeling,  to  rise  up
from  the  ground,  and  remain  so  a  long  time.

The  chemists  demonstrate  that  the  palingenesis,  or
a  sort  of  restoration  or  resurrection  of  animals,  insects,
and  plants,  is  possible  and  natural.  AVhen  the  ashes
of  a  plant  are  placed  in  a  phial,  these  ashes  rise,  and
arrange  themselves  as  much  as  they  can  in  the  form
which  was  first  impressed  on  them  by  the  Author  of
Nature.

Father  Schol,  a  Jesuit,  affirms  that  he  has  often  seen
a  rose  which  was  made  to  arise  from  its  ashes  every  time
they  wished  to  see  it  done,  by  means  of  a  little  heat.

The  secret  of  a  mineral  water  has  been  found  by
means  of  wliich  a  dead  plant  which  has  its  root  can  be
made  green  again,  and  brought  to  the  same  state  as  if
it  were  growing  in  the  ground.  Digby  asserts  that
he  has  drawn  from  dead  animals,  which  were  beaten
and  bruised  in  a  mortar,  the  representation  of  these
animals,  or  other  animals  of  the  same  species.

VOL.  I.  R


363  THE  PHANTOM   WORLD.

Ducliesne,  a  famous  chemist,  relates  that  a  physician
of  Cracow  preserved  in  phials  the  ashes  of  almost  every
kind  of  plant,  so  that  when  any  one  from  curiosity
desired  to  see,  for  instance,  a  rose  in  these  phials,  he
took  that  in  which  the  ashes  of  the  rose-bush  were  pre-
served, and  placing  it  over  a  lighted  candle,  as  soon  as
it  felt  a  little  warmth,  they  saw  the  ashes  stir  and  rise
like  a  little  dark  cloud,  and,  after  some  movements,
they  represented  a  rose  as  beautiful  and  fresh  as  if
newly  gathered  from  the  rose-tree.

Gaffard  assures  us  that  M.  de  Cleves,  a  celebrated
chemist,  showed  every  day  plants  drawn  from  their
own  ashes.  David  Vanderbroch  affirms  that  the  blood
of  animals  contains  the  idea  of  their  species,  as  well  as
their  seed;  he  relates  on  this  subject  the  experiment
of  M.  Borelli,  who  asserts,  that  the  human  blood,  when
warm,  is  still  full  of  its  spirits  or  sulphurs,  acid  and
volatile,  and  that  being  excited  in  cemeteries,  and  in
places  where  great  battles  are  fought,  by  some  heat
in  the  ground,  the  phantoms  or  ideas  of  the  persons
who  are  there  interred  are  seen  to  rise  ;  that  we  should
see  them  as  well  by  day  as  by  night,  were  it  not  for
the  excess  of  light  which  prevents  us  even  from  seeing
the  stars.  He  adds,  that  by  this  means  we  might
behold  the  idea,  and  represent  by  a  lawful  and  natural
necromancy  the  figure  or  phantom  of  all  the  great  men
of  antiquity,  our  friends  and  our  ancestors,  provided
we  possess  their  ashes.

These  are  the  most  plausible  objections  intended  to
destroy  or  obviate  all  that  is  said  of  the  apparitions
of  spirits.    Whence  some  conclude  that  these  are  either


SECRETS  OF  PHYSICS  AND   CHEMISTEY.  363

very  natural  phenomena  and  exhalations  produced  by
the  heat  of  the  earth  imbued  with  blood  and  the  volatile
spirit  of  the  dead,  above  all,  those  dead  by  violence ;
or  that  they  are  the  consequences  of  a  stricken  and
prepossessed  fancy,  or  simply  illusions  of  the  mind^
or  sports  of  persons  who  like  to  divert  themselves  by
the  panics  into  which  they  terrify  others;  or,  lastly,
movements  produced  naturally  by  men,  rats,  monkeys,
and  other  animals ;  for  it  is  true  that  the  oftener  we
examine  into  what  have  been  taken  for  apparitions,
the  more  satisfied  must  we  be  that  nothing  is  found
real,  extraordinary,  or  supernatural;  but  to  conclude
from  hence  that  all  the  apparitions  and  operations
attributed  to  angels,  spirits  or  souls,  and  demons,  are
chimerical,  is  carrying  things  to  excess ;  it  is  to  con-
clude that  we  mistake  always,  because  we  mistake
often.  <


R


CHAPTER  L.

CONCLTTSIO^-S    OF    THE   TREATISE    OK   APPAKITIOXS.

After  having  made  this  exposition  of  my  opinion
concerning  the  apparitions  of  angels,  demons,  souls  of
the  dead,  and  even  of  one  living  person  to  another,  and
having  spoken  of  magic,  of  oracles,  of  obsessions  and
possessions  of  the  demon;  of  sprites  and  familiar  spirits;
of  sorcerers  and  witches  ;  of  spectres  which  predict  the
future ;  of  those  which  haunt  houses, — after  having
stated  the  objections  which  are  made  against  appari-
tions, and  having  replied  to  them  in  as  weighty  a  man-
ner as  I  possibly  could,  I  think  I  may  conclude  that
although  this  matter  labours  still  under  very  great  dif-
ficulties, as  much  respecting  the  foundation  of  the
thing, — I  mean  as  regards  the  truth  and  reality  of  ap-
paritions in  general, — as  for  the  way  in  which  they  are
made,  still  we  cannot  reasonably  disallow  that  there
may  be  true  apparitions  of  all  the  kinds  of  which  we
have  spoken,  and  that  there  may  be  also  a  great  number
very  disputable,  and  some  others  which  are  manifestly
the  work  of  knavery,  of  maliciousness,  of  the  art  of
charlatans,  and  flexibility  of  those  who  play  sleight  of
hand  tricks.

I  acknowledge,  moreover,  that  imagination,  prepos-


CONCLUSIONS.  365

session,  simplicity,  superstition,  excess  of  credulity,
and  weakness  of  mind  have  given  rise  to  many  stories
which  are  related  ;  that  ignorance  of  pure  philosophy
has  caused  to  be  taken  for  miraculous  effects,  and  un-
lawful magic,  what  Is  the  simple  effect  of  natural  magic,
or  the  secrets  of  a  philosophy  hidden  from  the  ignorant
and  common  herd  of  men.  Moreover,  I  confess  that  I
see  insurmountable  difficulties  in  explaining  the  man-
ner or  properties  of  apparitions,  whether  we  admit  with
several  ancients  that  angels,  demons  and  disembodied
souls  have  a  sort  of  subtile  transparent  body  of  the
nature  of  air,  whether  we  believe  them  purely  spi-
ritual and  disengaged  from  all  matter,  visible,  gross,  or
subtile.

I  lay  down  as  a  principle  that  to  explain  the  philo-
sophy of  apparitions,  and  to  give  on  this  subject  any
certain  rules,  we  should, —

1st.  Know  perfectly  the  nature  of  spirits,  angels
and  souls,  and  demons.  We  should  know  whether
souls  by  nature  are  so  spiritualized  that  they  have  no
longer  any  relation  to  matter ;  or  if  they  have,  again,
any  alliance  with  an  aerial,  subtile,  invisible  body,  which
they  still  govern  after  death ;  or  whether  they  exert
any  power  over  the  body  they  once  animated,  to  impel
it  to  certain  movements,  as  the  soul  which  animates  us
gives  to  our  bodies  such  impulsions  as  she  thinks  proper ;
or  whether  the  soul,  as  occasional  or  secondary  cause,
determines  simply  by  Its  will,  the  first  cause  which  is
God,  to  put  in  motion  the  machine  which  it  once
animated.

2d.  If  after  death  the  soul  still  retains  that  power


366  THE   PHANTOM   WORLD.

over  its  own  body,  or  over  others ;  for  instance,  over  the
air  and  other  elements.

3d.  If  angels  and  demons  have  respectively  the  same
power  over  sublunary  bodies, — for  instance,  to  thicken
air,  inflame  it,  produce  in  it  clouds  and  storms;  to  make
phantoms  appear  in  it ;  to  spoil  or  preserve  fruits  and
crops ;  to  cause  animals  to  perish,  produce  maladies,
excite  tempests  and  shipwrecks  at  sea ;  or  even  to  fas-
cinate the  eyes  and  deceive  the  other  senses.

4th.  If  they  can  do  all  these  things  naturally,  and  by
their  own  virtue,  as  often  as  they  think  proper ;  or  if
there  must  be  a  particular  order,  or  at  least  permis-
sion from  God,  for  them  to  do  what  we  have  just
said.

5th.  And,  lastly,  we  should  know  exactly  what  power
is  possessed  by  these  substances  which  we  suppose  to  be
purely  spiritual,  and  how  far  the  power  of  the  angels,
demons,  and  souls  separated  from  their  gross  bodies,
extends,  in  regard  to  the  apparitions,  operations  and
movements  attributed  to  them.  For  whilst  we  are
ignorant  of  the  power  which  the  Creator  has  given  or
left  to  disembodied  souls,  or  to  demons,  we  can  in  no
w^ay  define  what  is  miraculous,  or  prescribe  the  just
bound  to  which  may  extend,  or  within  which  may  be
limited,  the  natural  operations  of  spirits,  angels  and
demons.

If  we  accord  the  demon  the  faculty  of  fascinating
our  eyes  when  it  pleases  him,  or  of  disposing  the  air  so
as  to  form  the  appearance  of  a  phantom,  or  phenome-
non ;  or  of  restoring  movement  to  a  body  which  is
dead  but  not  entirely  corrupted ;  or  of  disturbing  the


CONCLUSIONS.  367

living  by  ill  dreams,  or  terrific  representations, — we
should  no  longer  wonder  at  many  things  which  astonish
us  at  present,  nor  regard  as  miracles  certain  cures  and
certain  apparitions,  if  they  are  only  the  natural  effects
of  the  power  of  souls,  angels  and  demons.

If  a  man  invested  with  his  body  produced  such
effects  of  himself,  we  should  say  with  reason  that  they
are  supernatural  operations,  because  they  exceed  the
known  ordinary  and  natural  power  of  the  living  man  ;
but  if  a  man  held  commerce  with  a  spirit,  an  angel,
or  a  demon,  whom  by  virtue  of  some  compact,  explicit
or  implicit,  he  commanded  to  perform  certain  things
which  would  be  above  his  natural  powers,  but  not
beyond  the  powers  of  the  spirit  whom  he  commanded,
would  the  effect  resulting  from  it  be  miraculous  or
supernatural  ?  No,  without  doubt,  supposing  that  the
spirit  which  produced  the  result  did  nothing  that  was
above  his  natural  powers  and  faculties.

But  would  It  be  a  miracle  if  a  man  had  anything:  to
do  with  an  angel  or  a  demon,  and  that  he  should  make
an  explicit  and  Implicit  compact  with  them,  to  oblige
them  on  certain  conditions,  and  with  certain  cere-
monies, to  produce  effects  which  would  appear  exter-
nally, and  in  our  minds,  to  be  beyond  the  power  of
man?  For  instance,  in  the  operations  of  certain  magi-
cians who  boast  of  having  an  explicit  compact  with  the
devil,  and  who  by  this  means  raise  tempests,  or  go  with
extraordinary  haste  when  they  walk,  or  cause  the  death
of  animals,  and  to  men  incurable  maladies;  or  who
enchant  arms;  or  in  other  operations,  as  in  the  use  of  the


368  THE  PHAXTOM   WORLD.

divining  rod,  and  in  certain  remedies  against  the  mala-
dies of  men  and  horses,  which  having  no  natural  propor-
tion to  these  maladies  do  not  fail  to  cure  them,  although
those  who  use  these  remedies  protest  that  they  have
never  thought  of  contracting  any  alliance  with  the
devil.

To  reply  to  this  question,  the  difficulty  always  recurs
to  know  if  there  is  between  living  and  mortal  man
a  proportion  or  natural  relation,  which  renders  him
capable  of  contracting  an  alliance  with  the  angel  or
the  demon,  by  virtue  of  which  these  spirits  obey  him,
and  exert,  under  his  empire,  by  virtue  of  the  preceding
compact,  a  power  which  is  natural  to  them ;  for  if  there
is  nothing  beyond  the  ordinary  force  of  nature,  either
on  the  side  of  man,  or  on  that  of  angels  and  demons,
there  is  nothinsr  miraculous  in  one  or  the  other :  neither
is  there  in  God's  permitting  secondary  causes  to  act
according  to  their  natural  faculties,  of  which  he  is
nevertheless  always  the  principle,  and  the  absolute
master,  to  limit,  stop,  suspend,  extend,  or  augment
them,  according  to  his  good  pleasure.

But  as  we  know  not,  and  it  seems  even  impossible
that  we  should  know  by  the  light  of  reason,  the  nature
and  extent  of  the  power  of  angels,  demons,  and  disem-
bodied souls,  it  seems  that  it  would  be  rash  to  decide
in  this  matter,  as  we  derive  consequences  from  causes
by  their  effects,  or  effects  by  causes.  For  instance,  to
say  that  souls,  demons,  and  angels  have  sometimes  ap-
peared to  men — then  they  have  naturally  the  faculty  of
returning  and  appearing,  is  a  bold  and  rash  proposition.


CONCLUSIONS.  369

For  it  is  very  possible  that  angels  and  demons  appear
only  by  the  particular  will  of  God,  and  not  in  conse-
quence of  his  general  will,  and  by  virtue  of  his  natural
and  physical  concurrence  with  his  creatures.

In  the  first  case,  these  apparitions  are  miraculous,  as
being  above  the  natural  power  of  the  agents  in  ques-
tion ;  in  the  second  case,  there  is  nothing  supernatural
in  them  except  the  permission  (which  God  rarely  grants)
to  souls  to  return,  to  angels  and  demons  to  appear,  and
to  produce  the  effects  of  which  we  have  spoken.

According  to  these  principles  we  may  advance  with*
out  temerity — •

1st.  That  angels  and  demons  have  often  appeared  unto
men,  that  souls  separated  from  the  body  have  often
returned,  and  that  both  the  one  and  the  other  may  do
the  same  thino*  as^ain.

2d.  That  the  manner  of  these  apparitions,  and  of  these
returns  to  earth,  is  perfectly  unknown,  nor  given  up  by
God  to  the  discussions  and  researches  of  mankind.

3d.  That  there  is  some  likelihood  that  these  kinds  of
apparitions  are  not  absolutely  miraculous  on  the  part  of
the  good  and  evil  angels,  but  that  God  allows  them
sometimes  to  take  place,  for  reasons  the  knowledge  of
which  is  reserved  to  himself  alone.

4th.  That  no  certain  rule  on  this  point  can  be  given,
nor  any  demonstrative  argument  formed,  for  want
of  knowing  perfectly  the  nature  and  extent  of  the
power  of  the  spiritual  beings  in  question.

5th.  That  we  should  reason  upon  those  apparitions
which   appear  in  dreams  otherwise   than   upon   those

r3


370  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

which  appear  when  we  are  awake ;  differently  also  upon
apparitions  wearing  solid  bodies,  speaking,  walking,
eating,  and  drinking,  and  those  which  seem  like  a
shade,  or  a  nebulous  and  aerial  body.

6th.  Thus  it  would  be  rash  to  lay  down  principles,
and  raise  uniform  aro:uments,  on  all  these  things  in
common,  every  species  of  apparition  demanding  its  own
particular  explanation.


CHAPTER  LI.


WAY   OF    EXPLAINING   APPARITIONS.


There  have  been  real  apparitions  in  dreams ;  as  for
instance,  that  of  the  angel,^  who  told  St.  Joseph  to
carry  the  infant  Jesus  into  Egypt  because  king  Herod
wished  to  put  him  to  death.  There  are  two  things
appertaining  to  this  apparition  worthy  of  note :  the
first  is,  the  impression  made  on  the  mind  of  St.  Joseph
that  an  angel  appeared  to  him  ;  the  second  is,  the  pre-
diction or  revelation  of  the  ill-will  of  Herod.  Both
these  are  above  the  oi"dinary  powers  of  our  nature,  but
we  know  not  if  they  be  above  the  power  of  angels :  it
is  certain  that  it  could  not  have  been  done  except  by
the  will  and  command  of  God.

There  have  been  apparitions  of  a  spirit,  or  of  an  angel
and  a  demon,  which  show  themselves  clothed  in  an  ap-
parent body,  and  only  as  a  shadow  or  a  phantom,  as  that
of  the  angel  who  showed  himself  to  Manoah  the  father
of  Samson,  and  vanished  with  the  smoke  of  the  sacrifice ;
and  of  him  who  extricated  St.  Peter  from  prison,  and
disappeared  in  the  same  way  after  having  conducted
him  the  length  of  a  street.  The  bodies  which  these
angels  assumed,  and  which  we  suppose  to  have  been
only  apparent  and  aerial,  present"  great  difficulties ;  for
»  Matt.  ii.  13,  14.


372  THE   PHANTOM   WORLD.

either  those  bodies  were  their  own,  or  they  were
assumed  or  borrowed.

If  those  forms  were  their  own,  and  we  suppose,  with
several  ancient  and  some  new  writers,  that  angels,
demons,  and  even  human  souls  have  a  kind  of  subtile,
transparent,  and  aerial  body,  the  diflSculty  lies  in
knowing  how  they  can  condense  the  transparent  body,
and  render  it  visible  when  it  was  before  invisible ;  for
if  it  were  always  and  naturally  evident  to  the  senses  and
visible,  there  would  be  another  kind  of  continual
miracle  to  render  it  invisible,  and  hide  it  from  our
sight ;  and  if  of  its  nature  it  is  invisible,  what  might
can  render  it  visible  ?  On  whatever  side  we  regard
this  object  it  seems  equally  miraculous,  whether  to
make  evident  to  the  senses  that  which  is  purely  spiri-
tual, or  to  render  invisible  that  which  in  its  nature  is
palpable  and  corporeal.

The  ancient  fathers  of  the  Church,  who  gave  to
angels  subtile  bodies  of  an  airy  nature,  explained,
according  to  their  principles,  more  easily  the  predictions
made  by  the  demons,  and  the  wonderful  operations
which  they  cause  in  the  air,  in  the  elements,  in  our
bodies,  and  which  are  far  beyond  what  the  ablest  and
the  most  learned  men  can  know,  predict,  and  per-
form. They  likewise  conceived  more  easily  that  evil
angels  can  cause  maladies,  render  the  air  impure  and
contagious,  that  they  inspire  the  wicked  with  wrong
thoughts  and  unjust  desires,  that  they  can  penetrate
our  thoughts  and  our  wishes,  that  they  foresee  tempests
and  changes  in  the  air,  and  derangements  of  the
seasons ;  all  which  can  be  explained  with  much  more


WAY   OF   EXPLAINING   APPARITIONS.  373

facility  on  the  hypothesis  that  demons  have  bodies  com-
posed of  very  fine  and  subtile  air.

St.  Augustine '^  had  written  that  they  could  also
discover  what  is  passing  in  our  mind,  and  at  the  bottom
of  our  heart,  not  only  by  our  words,  but  also  by  certain
signs  and  movements,  which  escape  from  the  most
circumspect ;  but  reflecting  on  what  he  had  advanced
in  this  passage,  he  retracted,  and  owned  that  he  had
spoken  too  affirmatively  upon  a  subject  but  little  known,
and  that  the  manner  in  which  the  evil  angels  penetrate
our  thoughts  is  a  very  hidden  thing,  and  very  difficult
for  men.  to  discover  and  explain ;  thus  he  preferred
suspending  his  judgment  upon  it,  and  remaining  in
doubt.

''  S.  Aug.  lib.  ii.  Retract,  c.  30.


CHAPTER  LIL

THE  DIFFICULTY  OF  EXPLAINING  THE  MANNER  IN  VTHICH  APPARITIONS
MAKE  THEIR  APPEARANCE,  WHATEVER  SYSTEM  MAY  BE  PROPOSED  ON  THE
SUBJECT.

The  difficulty  is  much  greater,  if  we  suppose  that  these
spirits  are  absolutely  disengaged  from  any  kind  of
matter ;  for  how  can  they  assemble  about  them  a  certain
quantity  of  matter,  clothe  themselves  with  it,  give  it
a  human  form,  which  can  be  discerned,  is  capable  of
acting,  speaking,  conversing,  eating  and  drinking,  as
did  the  angels  who  appeared  to  Abraham,^  and  the  one
who  appeared  to  the  young  Tobias,'*  and  conducted  him
to  Rages?  Is  all  that  accomplished  by  the  natural
power  of  these  spirits  ?  Has  God  bestowed  on  them
this  power  in  creating  them,  and  has  he  engaged  him-
self, by  virtue  of  his  natural  laws,  and  by  a  consequence
of  his  acting  intimately  and  essentially  on  the  creature,
in  his  quality  of  Creator,  to  impress  on  occasion,  at  the
will  of  these  spirits,  certain  motions  in  the  air,  and  in
the  bodies  which  they  would  move,  condense,  and  cause
to  act,  in  the  same  manner  proportionally  that  he  has
willed  by  virtue  of  the  uqion  of  the  soul  with  a  living
body,  that  that  soul  should  impress  on  that  body
motions  proportioned  to  its  own  will,  althougli,  natu-
"  Gen.  xviii.  ''  Tob.  xii.  19.


DIFEICULTY  OF  EXPLAINING  APPARITIONS.  375

rally,  there  Is  no  natural  proportion  between  matter
and  spirit,  and,  according  to  the  laws  of  physics,  the  one
cannot  act  npon  the  other,  unless  the  First  Cause,  the
Creator,  has  chosen  to  subject  himself  to  create  this
movement  and  to  produce  these  effects  at  the  will  of
man,  movements  which  without  that  would  pass  for
superhuman,  (supernatural.)

Or  shall  we  say  with  some  modern  philosophers,*'  that
although  we  may  have  Ideas  of  matter  and  thought,
perhaps  we  shall  never  be  capable  of  knowing  whether
a  being  purely  material  thinks  or  not,  because  It  Is
Impossible  for  us  to  discover  by  the  contemplative  powers
of  our  own  minds  without  revelation,  whether  God  has
not  given  to  some  collections  of  matter,  disposed  as  he
thinks  proper,  the  power  to  perceive  and  to  think,  or
whether  he  has  joined  and  united  to  the  matter  thus
arranged,  an  Immaterial  substance  which  thinks  ?  Now
in  relation  to  our  notions.  It  is  not  less  easy  for  us  to
conceive  that  God  can  add  to  our  Idea  of  matter  the
faculty  of  thinking,  since  we  know  not  In  what  thought
consists,  and  to  what  species  of  substance  that  Almighty
being  has  judged  proper  to  grant  this  faculty,  which
could  exist  In  no  created  being  except  by  virtue  of  the
goodness  and  the  will  of  the  Creator.

This  system  certainly  embraces  great  absurdities,
and  greater  to  my  mind  than  those  it  would  fain  avoid.
We  conceive  clearly  that  matter  Is  divisible,  and  capable
of  motion ;  but  we  do  not  conceive  that  It  Is  capable  of
thought,  nor  that  thought  can  consist  of  a  certain  confi-
guration or  a  certain  motion  of  matter.  And  even
•-■  Locke  on  the  Human  Understanding,  book  iv.  c.  3.


376  THE  PHANTOM  WORLD.

could  thought  depend  on  an  arrangement,  or  on  a  certain
subtility,  or  on  a  certain  motion  of  matter,  as  soon  as
that  arrangement  should  be  disturbed,  or  the  motion
interrupted,  or  this  heap  of  subtile  matter  dispersed,
thought  would  cease  to  be  produced,  and  consequently
that  which  constitutes  man,  or  the  reasoning  animal,
would  no  longer  subsist ;  thus  all  the  economy  of  our
religion,  all  our  hopes  of  a  future  life,  all  our  fears  of
eternal  punishment  would  vanish ;  even  the  principles
of  our  philosophy  would  be  overthrown.

God  forbid  that  we  should  wish  to  set  bounds  to  the
almighty  power  of  God ;  but  that  all-powerful  Being
having  given  us  as  a  rule  of  our  knowledge  the  clear-
ness of  the  ideas  Avhich  we  form  of  everything,  and  not
being  permitted  to  affirm  that  which  we  know  but
indistinctly,  it  follows  that  we  ought  not  to  assert  that
thouo;ht  can  be  attributed  to  matter.  If  the  tliino-  were
known  to  us  throuo:h  revelation,  and  taug-ht  bv  the
authority  of  the  Scriptures,  then  we  might  impose
silence  on  human  reason,  and  make  captive  our  judg-
ment in  obedience  to  faith ;  but  it  is  owned  that  the
thing  is  not  at  all  revealed ;  neither  is  it  demonstrated,
either  by  its  cause,  or  by  its  eifects.  It  must,  then,  be
considered  as  a  simple  system,  invented  to  do  away
certain  difficulties  which  result  from  the  opinion  opposed
to  it.

If  the  difficulty  of  explaining  how  the  soul  acts  upon
our  bodies  appears  so  great,  how  can  we  comprehend
that  the  soul  itself  should  be  material  and  extended  ?
In  the  latter  case  will  it  act  upon  itself,  and  give  itself
the  impulsion  to  think,  or  will  this  movement  or  impul-


DIFFICULTY  OF   EXPLAINING  APPARITIONS.  377

slon  be  thought  itself,  or  will  it  produce  thought?  Will
this  thinking  matter  think  on  always,  or  only  at  times ;
and  when  it  has  ceased  to  think,  who  will  make  it  think
anew?  Will  it  be  God,  will  it  be  itself?  Can  so
simple  an  agent  as  the  soul  act  upon  itself,  and  repro-
duce itself  in  some  sort  by  thinking,  after  it  has  ceased
to  think?

My  reader  will  say  that  I  leave  him  here  embarrassed,
and  that  instead  of  giving  him  any  light  on  the  subject
of  the  apparition  of  spirits,  I  cast  doubt  and  uncer-
tainty on  the  subject,  I  own  it ;  but  I  better  like  to
doubt  prudently,  than  to  affirm  that  which  I  know  not.
And  if  I  hold  by  what  my  religion  teaches  me  con-
cerning the  nature  of  souls,  angels,  and  demons,  I  shall
say  that  being  purely  spiritual,  it  is  impossible  that
they  should  appear  clothed  with  a  body  except  througli
a  miracle ;  always  supposing  that  God  has  not  created
them  naturally  capable  of  these  operations,  with  subordi-
nation to  his  sovereignly  powerful  will,  which  but  rarely
allows  them  to  use  this  faculty  of  showing  themselves
corporeally  to  mortals.

If  sometimes  angels  have  eaten,  spoken,  acted,
walked,  like  men,  it  was  not  from  any  need  they  had
to  drink  or  eat  to  sustain  themselves  and  to  be  able  to
live,  but  to  execute  the  designs  of  God,  whose  will  it
was  that  they  should  appear  to  men  acting,  drinking,
and  eating,  as  the  angel  Raphael  observes,'^ — ^^Wlien
I  was  staying  with  you,  I  was  there  by  the  will  of
God ;  I  seemed  to  you  to  eat  and  drink,  but  for  my

^  Tob.  xii.  18,  19.


378  THE   PHANTOM  WORLD.

part  I  make  use  of  an  invisible  nourishment  which  is
unknown  to  men."

It  is  true  that  we  know  not  what  may  be  the  food  of
angels  who  are  substances  which  are  purely  spiritual,
nor  what  became  of  that  food  which  Raphael  and  the
angels  that  Abraham  entertained  in  his  tent,  took,  or
seemed  to  take,  in  the  company  of  men.  But  there  are
so  many  other  things  in  nature  which  are  unknown  and
incomprehensible  to  us,  that  we  may  very  well  console
ourselves  for  not  knowing  how  it  is  that  the  apparitions
of  angels,  demons,  and  disembodied  souls  are  made  to
appear.


END   OE  VOL.   I.


R.  CLAY,    PKINTER,    BKEA1>   STKKET    HILL.


r


♦1ft


^


vA


'''■  e^


Ki^kv'


THIS  BOOK  DOES  NOT
CIRCULATE


¥^/2
